Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta 


Thesis- 

Busheikin, Judah Cyril, 

The adrenal gland of the house 
house sparrow (Passer aomesticus) 
ana its seasonal changes. 

Department of Zoology, 






(3x ISBBIS 

»w«naais 

BWIMJtlMJS 

















Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/adrenalglandofhoOOjuda 





THE ADRENAL GLAND 


OF THE HOUSE SPARROW ( PASSER DOMESTIC US) 
AND ITS SEASONAL CHANGES 

~ by - 


Judah Cyril Busheikin, B.Sc. 

Department of Zoology 
University of Alberta 


A THESIS 

submitted to the University of Alberta 
in partial fulfillment of the require¬ 
ments for the degree 
of 

MASTER OF SCIENCE 


Edmonton, Alberta 


April, 1951 


■ c i 0.0 u.r I..'. [C.Iit .! i 

(' X - v • •Atoi ' ) Oi . ... ci .•.t L ‘01 iir.'j. -iQ 

< -i: a . J cl.i i iiOoi , .[ l c.f c'.i.I CX,i, 


< J j ■ ; 1 " n ■' • V 

' C-T.O'C.. lo , ; J T ;• 

1,, 1 c C-lL r ! 


X T: JO 


1 vj i i i' j oa »e.i . j •ujjr« 
"■ j’ST t.J 0 XXI J _ jj : J 

&o'xze[i 9 i j tc : |dmm 
c 

XI IXX [0 X?j 


*x ;\-x 


-XtOCIXj ; ? I'lCXilOB . \ 



THE ADRENAL GLAND 


OF THE HOUSE SPARROW ( PASSER DOMESTICUS ) 
AND ITS SEASONAL CHANGES 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


P age 


Abstract .......... .. 1 

Acknowledgements .. 3 

Introduction. ........ 4 

Adrenal Cortex. ....... 6 

Adrenal Medulla. 9 

Review of Literature. .. 13 


Materials and Method.. 25 

Illumination Experiment....................... 26 

Method.. 28 

Histological Study of the Sparrow Adrenal........ 31 

General Description of the Adrenal of the 

House Sps.rrow, , .. 31 

Histological Observations of a Series of Adrenals 36 

Illumina-ted Birds.. 36 

Wild Birds^ 42 


Testis Development in Experimental Birds......... 49 

Testes of Wild Birds/.... 53 

Observations on Osmicated Adrenals............... 5^ 

Adrenals of Experimental Birds................ 5^ 

Adrenals of Wild Birds. . ... ... .. 58 


Examination of Adrenal Glands for Change in Per- 

centage Volume of Cortex and Medulla... 

Table I.. 

Table II.. 

Table III..... 

Table IV.____ ............ 


58 

62 

63 

64 

65 



































■ 



























TABLE OF CONTENTS (Continued) 


Page 


Graph I.. .......... .. 66 

Graph II. 67 

Conclusions. 68 

Summary. , .. ...... 7^ 

Bibliography.. .. 75 
















1 


ABSTRACT 


The present paper is the study of the adrenal 
glands of the house sparrow ( Passer domesticus ) with 
special emphasis on seasonal changes. Prior to this paper 
hardly any investigations have been made to determine the 
relationship between the avian adrenals and the breeding 
cycle. A number of birds were trapped and subjected to 
artificial illumination, in addition to which birds were 
shot just outside of Edmonton. All sections were fixed 
in a bichromate solution and stained with Delafield’s 
haematoxylin and eosin. In addition, a representative 
number of adrenals were fixed in osmic acid to determine 
the fat concentration and thus the physiological activity 
of the glands. 

A general description is given of the adrenal 
gland of Passer domesticus, the first account (to my 
knowledge) of an adrenal gland of the house sparrow. A 
complete histological survey Is also given of a. series of 
experimental and wild birds, including the osmicated glands. 
In addition, a histological description of the testes of 
the experimental birds is given to correlate the investi¬ 
gation done on adrenal glands in relation to the breed¬ 
ing cycle. 


By a ** paper-weight** method the volume of 







medullary and cortical tissues of a series of experi¬ 
mental and wild birds was calculated, tabulated (Table 
III and IV) and graphically presented (Graph I) 

Conclusions are drawn from the histological, 
physiological and volumetric data obtained, and a sum¬ 
mary given at the end of this thesis. 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


The writer wishes to take this opportunity of 
thanking Dr. W. Rowan, under whose supervision this work 
has been pursued, for his help, encouragement and advice. 
In addition the writer is grateful to Mr. Robert Lister 
of the Zoology Department and Mr. Burt Fa.rreil of the 
Anatomy Department for their invaluable technical assis¬ 
tance, and to Robert Spevakow for his aid in getting the 
wild birds. He is appreciative also of the assistance 
given to him by Mrs. R. Gelfand in typing this thesis and 
to Israel Switzer for producing the necessary photomicro¬ 
graphs. A great debt is acknowledged to Dr. 0. Hohn for 
material obtained, the Anatomy Department for the use of 
their microprojector and to all those friends whose 
interest and helpful suggestions have made each stage of 
this study less arduous. 






4 


INTRODUCTION 

In recent years the extreme importance of the 
adrenal gland in the general metabolic and physiologi¬ 
cal processes of all higher animals is becoming more and 
more apparent. Especially in the last few years when the 
full significance of the adreno-cortical hormone, cortisone, 
and its stimulating hormone secreted by the anterior pit¬ 
uitary gland, ACTH, is being uncovered., investigators 
are becoming more aware of the incompleteness of their 
knowledge concerning the endocrine processes and. their 
general relationship with the body processes. At the pre¬ 
sent time the whole of medical science is being revolution¬ 
ized by the find.ings being disclosed about the connection 
between disease in general, both psychosomatic and. organic, 
and the endocrine system. 

The adrenals of all animals consist of two 
distinct tissues, the cortical and the medullary or 
chromaffin tissue. Each has its own pre-embryonic and post- 
embryonic history, histological structure and physiolo¬ 
gical functions. Just why these two entirely different 
types of tissue should be found together is quite ob¬ 
scure. Indeed, in certain fishes (Elasmobranchs) the 
analogues of these two tissues are separate. 























• c •• ' 








The presence of the adrenalin - containing 
chromaffin cells has been demonstrated in invertebrates 
(most Annelids, Cephalopods, Cyclostomata and Molluscs) 
where they are in most cases situated in close connec¬ 
tion with large vessels and nerve tracts. Cortical 
cells do not appear in these lower forms of life, being 
found only in animals higher than invertebrates. In 
Salaceons, unlike most other animals, the adreno-cortex 
(or HInter-renal 15 body) is anatomically distinct from 
the chromaffin accumulation. In amphibia there is no 
distinct demarcation between cortical and medullary cells, 
the two being intimately mixed. In Reptilia and Aves the 
cortical and chromaffin cells are also irregularly mingled, 
there being no obviously distinct layers of cortex or 
medulla as in higher vertebrates. In Mammalia and other 
higher vertebrates the adrenal is arranged with the chrom¬ 
affin tissue in the centre of the gland (hence the term 
iiMedulla 51 ) and the cortex and outer enveloping, rim of 
tissue. 


Embryologically, the medullary cells and the 
sympathetic ganglion cells have a common origin in all 
animals. 

The following is quoted from «Physiological 
Basis of Medical Practice 55 ( 2 ) by Best and. Taylor: 













. 





















































11 They develop from primitive cell masses which have 
separated from the neural crest. Migrating from their 
sites of origin these masses of ectoderm cells undergo 
differentiation along two paths, some into sympathetic 
ganglion cells, others into chromaffin tissue. In the 
abdomen on either side of the midline a relatively large 
mass of chromaffin tissue becomes enveloped by cortical 
cells to constitute the adrenal medulla. Other smaller 
masses persist as accessory chromaffin tissue in associ¬ 
ation with the ganglia and plexuses of the sympathetic. 
Such chromaffin collections are called paraganglia. On 
the other hand, sympathetic ganglion cells may be found 
scattered among the cells of the adult adrenal medulla. 
The cortex is developed from the mesoderm. It arises 
as a bud from the coelomic epithelium covering the inner 

side as the fore part of the mesonephros. The coelomic 

< ■ 

epithelium immediately behind this area gives rise to the 
germinal epithelium from which in turn the sex glands 
develop. 

Adrenal Cortex 

The cortex in a mammal is differentiated into 
three distinct zones. From the outside of the gland 
inward they are: 


1. The zona, glomerulosa - these cells are 




arranged in a circular or oval pattern, i.e., 
cells are arranged in blocks; the cells are 
not frothy, therefore believed to be young 
cells. 

2. The zona fasciculata - here the cells are 
arranged in long columns usually two cells 
thick. The columns are separated one from 
the other by blood sinuses x*rhich empty into 
a large central sinus in the centre of the 
medulla. These cells are frothy indicating 
an extremely active physiological function. 

3* The zona reticularis - is composed of a net¬ 
work of cell cords. These cells are larger 
and stain more heavily than the cells in 
the zona fasciculata. 

In castrated males and often in normal female 
mammals there appears between the zona reticularis and the 
medulla another zone referred to as Zone X. This zone is 
quite different from the cortical tissue or the chromaffin 
tissue and is believed to be due to a compensatory action 
of the adrenal gland to overcome a deficiency of androgen 
secretion. 

The physiological activity of the cortical cells 
is indicated by lipoid granules which are clearly brought 
out by specific fixing and staining methods involving 






' , .. : • ... ' • 
- 

. 

. 


















■ 


i 





. 






: •? • 


































fresh-frozen sectioning and fat stains, or by fixing in 
an osmium tetroxide solution. In a paper written by 
A. B. Kar ( 22 ) > the author quotes Flexner and G-rollman 
(9) as suggesting that the lipoid content is low when 
the functional activity of the cortex is low and is in¬ 
creased when the secretory activity is supposed to be 
increased. Kar, in a later paper (23)» concurs with the 
view that the increase in the lipoid material of the cortex 
is suggestive of a greater secretory activity on the part 
of the cortex. Although the proof of this statement is 
lacking, it is suggestive, but until further experimenta¬ 
tion is conducted, it will remain unsubstantiated. Selye 
believes that 11 the lipoid granules in the cortical cells 
are not the hormones of the cortex, but consist mainly 
of cholesterol and neutral fats. Since, however, the 
cortical hormones are highly fat soluble (much more soluble 
in fats than in plasma) it is possible that the visible 
lipoid granules act as solvents in which the cortical hor¬ 
mones are stored.” 

The cortex of the adrenal, unlike the medulla, 
is essential to life. Removal of more than about five- 
sixths of this part of the adrenal causes dearth within a 
few days. Some twenty crystalline steroid compounds have 
been isolated from the adrenal cortex which exhibit in 
greater or less degree the physiological properties of 
crude cortical extracts. Corticosterone is related to 



9 


glyconeogenesis and muscle efficiency. Desoxycortico- 
sterone (which has lost the oxygen atom on C-^ found in 
corticosterone) is involved in the control of ss.lt and 
water metabolixm, that is, the conservation of water and 
electrolytes in the body. Besides these compounds, with 
actions specific for the adrenal cortex, steroids with 
actions of estrone, progesterone, and the male hormone 
such as testosterone respectively, h*ve been isolated 
from the adrenal cortex. The ls.st mentioned principle 
has been named adrenosterone. 

Adrenal Medulla. 

The medulla is composed of closed packed groups 
of polyhedral cells with extremely ragged cytoplasm con¬ 
taining chromaffin granules which are looked upon as the 
mother substance of the medullary secretion. The cell 
groups are separated by blood sinuses which empty into a 
central vein. 

It remains unexplained why, in all vertebrates 
except the elasmobranchs, the primordial cells of the 
medulla tra.vel a long distance in order to unite with those 
of the cortex. All the blood reaching the medulla has to 
travel through the cortical sinusoids first; this suggests 
that products of the cortical cells may ha,ve to go through 
further transformation in the medulla, but such a possibility 





, ' ' ■y'i ^ ' r: 

' 

, 

. 

( 

■' 'r ■ ■ . 


- ' t ■ F 

’'•■ytoi* / • ; x ' ■■ j ■ 

. 

■ 

. 







' 





• 





: V .f 





. 


.■■ • 








10 


is entirely conjectural. Since both cortical and medullary 
hormones play an important role in the general-adaption- 
syndrome (see Footnote), the demand for both types is es¬ 
sentially great during exposure to non-specific damage. 


Footnote - The definition of the general-adaption-syndrome 
as given by Hans Selye in his text “Endocrinology” is as 
follows: 

“Experimental and clinical observations have shown that 
in addition to the specific adaptive reactions (e.g. 
serological reactions to specific antigens, muscular 
hypertrophy subsequent to physical work, prolifera¬ 
tion of the epidermis where the skin is exposed to 
pressure or friction) there are certain physiological 
mechanisms which help to raise resistance to damage 
as such. In these latter reactions the endocrine 
system plaj^s a prominent part and they occur ir¬ 
respective of the specific nature of the evocative 
damaging agent. 

The sum of all these non-specific system 5 s re¬ 
actions of the body which ensue under long continued 
exposure to stress has been termed the 5 genera,l-adap¬ 
tive-syndrome 5 , It is characterized by a number of 
morphological and functional changes. Among the most 
prominent of these are: enlargement of the adrenal 





. 

; ■ • ■ « ' 

. ( . 


■ -I' !• .f ■ l ■ "" ' ■' ' 

















. 

* 



" 





11 


Perhaps the anatomic union of these tissues is advantageous 
because, during emergencies, relaxation of the sphinctors 
in the adrenal veins suddenly supplies the general circu¬ 
lation with large amounts of both cortical and medullary 
hormones stored in the gland's spacious sinusoids. Stimu¬ 
lation of the adrenal nerves elicits an immediate release 
of chromaffin granules into the bloodstream, without causing 
any detectable secretion of cortical lipoid granules. Con¬ 
versely, denervation of the adrenals prevents the secretion 
of adrenalin, without interfering with cortical function, 
therefore secretions of cortical hormones are not signifi¬ 
cantly influenced by specific motor nerves, while that of 
adrenalin is almost entirely dependent upon nervous stimuli. 

The medulla., as far as is known, secretes only 
adrenalin. In times of stress, for example, fright, rage, 
pain, asphyxia, exposure to cold etc., the medullary sec¬ 
retion, it is believed, reinforces the sympathetic nervous 
system. Through this hormonal-nervous co-operation of the 
several bodily reactions associated with such states of 
emergency are raised to maximum efficiency. This involves 


"cortex with increased corticoid-hormone secretion, 
involution of the thymus and of other lymphatic 
organs, and certain metabolic changes and variations 
in the resistance of the organism." 








a rise in general blood pressure accompanied by a dilation 
of the vessels of the contracting skeletal muscles, hyper¬ 
glycemia which indicates demobilization of the carbohydrate 
stored in the liver, discharge of more erythrocytes from 
the spleen and thus a greater oxygen capacity, and other 
general conditions suitable for an emergency reaction® 


■ ' 

, t . ■ t -■ ' ■ ' ■■ ' 




1 ' " ' - , ’ ■ ■’ 1 

. 



















*- 



' 



REVIEW OF LITERATURE 


It seems necessary, at this point, to review all 
investigation done on avian adrenals, which is very slight. 
Indeed, that is one of the chief reasons for undertaking 
this investigation. N 0 work has been done on wild birds., as 
all previous investigations were confined to pigeons a.nd 
domestic fowl. As very little has been done on a possible 
adrenal cycle (to my knowledge), this outline will be very 
general and will include investigations carried out on 
adrenals from the embryological, histological, physiological 
and other a-spects. 

E. 0. Hohn (18), while investigating the seasonal 
changes In the gonads and adrenals of the malla.rd, no ted 
that the adrenafL gla.nds of both sexes show no significant 
seasona.1 variations as regards weight. Histologically the 
fenmles show a rela.tive increase of cortical tissue at the 
height of the breeding season, while in males no signifi¬ 
cant season variations are observed. 

V. J. Hays (15) investigated the origin and dev¬ 
elopment of the adrenal gland in birds. His work showed 
that the origin of bird adrena-ls is similar to that of a. 
mammalian adrenal, i.e. that the anlagen which gives rise 
to the cortical substance of the bird adrenal appear as 
groups of cells which migrate dorsally from the peritoneal 













-.c 







■■ ’? 







\\: .1 


: : 


. 




- 







i 
















'I 







epithelium. The chromaffin substance is derived from in- 
different cells which wander in from the anlagen of the 
prevertebral sympathetic plexus. He found that the vessels 
of the arterial system are found almost entirely in the 
cortical substance, and that the entire venous system is 
derived from the subcardinal veins, the vessels inside the 
gland itself being sinusoid in character. 

An investigation has been made by Miller and 
Riddle (29) into the cytology of the pigeon adrenal 
cortex. They state that the tendency for the cortical 
strands is to be composed of a double row of cells with 
their long axis in the transverse plane of the strand. 

One end of each columner-like cell faces on the blood 
channels.. In the midst of the large masses the cells are 
usually longer in one axis than the other, but the orienta¬ 
tion is not as clear. In this same paper they also try to 
show that since the cortics.1 tissue of the pigeon adrenal 
is not a single, homogeneous structure, it is not surprisin 
that it does not show the distinct zonation commonly found 
in the mammalian adrenal. However, the usual histological 
fixatives show certain gross differences between areas of 
the cortex. At the periphery the cells are large, contain 
considerable cytoplasm and full, round or slightly oval 
nuclei; the chromatin network is thin and diffuse, and 
there are usually two nucleoli, one taking the acid stain, 




* 

■ / •- ■ :■ 





■ • 




the other basic. Towards the middle of the gland the cells 
elongate and eventually become smaller. With the decrease 
in cell volume the nucleus decreases somewhat and the 
chromatin is more compact. Shrunken dying cells with pycnotic 
nuclei and cytoplasm can be seen in the centre of the gland. 
Because cell proliferation occurs at the periphery of the 
glands and cell death occurs at the centre, and because 
of further cj^tological evidence given in this paper, the 
authors believe that the current view of the life history 
of mammalian cortical cells as propounded by Salmon and 
Swemer (41), Walton and Zwemer (49) and others is valid 
also for the adrenals of pigeons. Following hypoph 2 /sectomy 
they found that there was a loss of weight in the bird 
adrenals chiefly due to the reduced volume of cortical 
cells, and a smaller total number, diminished by death 
and a lower rate of replacement. 

Sauer and Latimer (42) investigated sex differ- 
ences in the proportion of the cortex and the medulla, in 
the chick adrenal. They indicated that the female chickens 
have approximately thirty percent more adrenal cortex, in 
proportion to its bodjr weight, than the male, although 
the gross weight of the glands is about the same in the 
two sexes. The amount of adrenal cortex is much more 
variable in the female than in the male, suggesting a 
physiological variation. 











- 





. 

. 






■ 































. 

* 










. 

































* 





• 





























James C. Perry ( 36 ) doing research on the 


English sparrow, showed that birds brought to breeding 
conditions by artificial illumination, and normally 
breeding birds, if given adrenalin injections in one-half 
minim daily doses, would result in a regression to the 
resting juvenile condition of the gonads, accessory and 
secondary sex characteristics. The evident antagonism 
is interpreted as being directed against the secretion, 
release or activity of the gonadotrophic hormones of the 
anterior pituitary. The mode of action of the adrenalin 
antagonism, whether directly or indirectly through the 
nervous system or indirectljr through changes in the metabolic 
rate has not been determined. As a possible explanation, 
Perry states that increased daily exposure to the spring 
daylight in the English sparrow brings about increased 
physiological activity. This increased physiological 
activity diminishes the available adrenalin in the blood, 
and as it falls below its gonadal antagonistic value, the 
anterior pituitary-gonad mechanism is suppressed. This 
explanation is quite unsound from a physiological viewpoint 
because only in a state of emergency are significant amounts 
of adrenalin secreted by the chromaffin tissue, and its 
physiological effects last only a short duration because 
of the rapid oxidation of this hormone in the tissue. This 
evidence of adrenalin gonadal antagonism is further sub¬ 
stantiated by Perry (37) and by Wheeler, Searcy and Andrews 









. 

' 








+ 


. 


. 




■- 


■ .1 








\ 



“ " V ‘ ' 

. 




17 


(51)* Perry showed that subcutaneous daily injections of 
adrenalin given to female rats caused prolonged and repeated 
diestrus, follicular atrophy, reduction in absolute and 
relative ovarian weight, reduction in weight and size of 
the uterus and vagina and a decrease in the pituitary 
weight, Wheeler et, al investigated the effect of adrenalin 
upon semen production in domestic fowl. Intramuscular 
injections of adrenalin was followed by an almost immediate 
decrease in semen volume with a forty-eight percent reduc¬ 
tion at the end of a thirty day injection period. Volume 
rose to pre-injection levels following the cessation of 
treatment. The total number of sperm per ejaculation de¬ 
creased fifty to seventy percent by adrenalin injection. 

Marked disintegration of the cells of the seminiferous 
tubules was present seven weeks after cessation of injections. 

The relation between size of testes and require¬ 
ment of cortical extract in adrenalectomized drakes was in¬ 
vestigated by Bulbring (4). In adrenalectomized drakes, 
it was found that the sensitiveness of the bird to cortical 
deficiency changes. In spring much more extract is needed 
to keep operated birds alive than at other times of the 
year. The size of the testis at that time is also much 
greater. Average weight of the testis was determined for 
the different months and it was found that the weight of 
both testes in the winter is about three g. In February 
the weight increases, is considerably more in April and 







reaches a maximum of 78 g in May, after which there is a 
rapid decrease to the lowest figure in July. When for 
each month the dose was calculated which kept adrenalectom- 
ized drakes alive for sixteen hours, it was found that the 
dose was low for winter ( 0.07 cc's per hour), while in 
April as much as 0.3 cc's per hour was needed, in May 
and June less and in July 0.05 cc's was usually suffic¬ 
ient. If these amounts of extract are plotted together 
with the weights of testes for different months, two 
parallel curves result. The weight curve of the testes 
reaches its peak in May, whereas the dose curve reaches 
its maximum one month earlier. 

Parkes and Selye (35) showed in sub-total ad- 
renalectomized birds, the feathers which grew back on the 
spot the operation was made were abnormal, much like the 
capon type of feather. This temporary change of the 
feather to capon type after sub-total adrenalectomy is 
evidence, in their view,of testes disturbance and may be 
taken to indicate that the adrenals, possibly by gonado- 1 
trophic hormones, play some part in maintaining testis 
activity. 

Hartman and Knouff (13) have examined chromaffin 
patterns in bird adrenals. They found that in young birds, 
the chromaffin tissue cells formed only a few cell groups 
which were connected by means of almost imperceptable bridges 







. 




- 

. 








- 









, 

. 

- 




' 

. 

. 

. 

. 

■ • • 














. 


















' 




- 
















, 






■ 

























19 


With increasing age the chromaffin tissue increased and 
showed a strand-like arrangement. In old birds the 
chromaffin cells might form a more or less distinctly 
connected peripheral border due to their increased number. 
The pattern of the chromaffin tissue depends somewhat on 
the relative amounts of this tissue in the gland. When 
small it is arranged in distinct islets scattered through 
the interrenal tissue. As it increases in amount, the 
islets become larger and often elongated, tending to unite. 
If a relatively large proportion of chromaffin tissue is 
present, it may form a meshwork throughout and also cover 
appreciable amounts of the surface of the gland. Char¬ 
acteristic patterns may be found in certain species. How¬ 
ever, there may be considerable variation in the amount 
of chromaffin material among species of the same genus. 

Kar ( 22 ) investigated the action of male and fe¬ 
male sex hormones on the adrenals of fowl. Injections of 
diethylstilbestrol into adult female fowl failed to produce 
any effect on the adrenal weight. This treatment caused 
an increase in size of the vacuoles of the cortex. Tes¬ 
tosterone propionate treatment was without any effect on 
the adrenal weight of adult female fowl. A decrease in 
the size of the vacuoles of the cortex ensued as a result 
of this treatment. 

Herrick and Torstveit (16) did research on the 
effects of adrenalectomy in fowl. The glands were destroyed 



by cauterizing. Operated birds were maintained for eighty 
days by giving injections of cortical hormone and continued 
treatment with sodium chloride. Birds receiving no treat¬ 
ment died in six to fifteen hours after complete adrenal¬ 
ectomy. The combs of adrenalextomized chickens became 
greatly reduced in size. Changes appear as early as the 
second day after complete adrenalectomy. The testis of 
operated birds also became smaller. The histological 
structure of the testis was altered, indicating marked 
degeneration, and the walls of the tubules were so broken 
down that the lamina were obscure. The authors believe 
that the adrenal glands have an important influence in 
maintaining the testes of chickens. Experiments have not 
as 3^et indicated the nature of this influence, or whether 
it reaches the testis directly or indirectly. Likewise, 
it has not been determined whether the influence on the 
comb is due to lack of adrenal secretion directly, to 
reduced testicular activity, or to some other indirect 
effects of adrenalectomy. The changes in the comb begin 
so soon after adrenalectomy, at which time the testis is 
still large, that it is questionable whether reduced 
testicular activity is the entire answer. 

Hewitt (1?) found that bilateral adrenalectomy 
in the adult chicken produces atrophy and degeneration of 
the testis and the external apuearance of the bird tends 


. 













. 

- 






. ' 




. ■ 










, 




H ■ 







towards that of a capon. In the hen of the same species 
and variety the presence of the adrenal cortex seems nec¬ 
essary for the conversion of the rudimentary right gonad 
to a testis-like organ following ovariectomy. In bilater¬ 
ally adrenalectomized birds this conversion did not take 
place. 


Uotila (48) noted that two C 3 rtomorphic states 
—the fuchsinophile and pale cells respectively can be 
regularly and clearly differentiated in the adreno¬ 
cortical tissue of fowl when stained with Broster and 
Vine's ponceau fuchsin or Masson trichrome stain after 
Orth's fixation. Oytological criteria suggest that the 
pale cells are precursors of active fuchsinophile cells 
which in turn become converted into degenerating fuch¬ 
sinophile cells. The number of fuchsinophile cells and 
the strength of the fuchsinophile reaction is greater in 
males than in females, and greater in immaturity than in 
adult animals. Androsterone (and to a lesser extent 
estrin) suppress this reaction in males but not in females. 
Several anterior pituitary extracts failed to produce any 
definite changes in the fuchsinophile reaction. These 
observations afford no definite proof that the fuchsino¬ 
phile reaction is specifically correlated with the alleged 
masculinizing function of the adrenal cortex. 


A. Gr. Kar, in another paper (24) again connected 








• '■ 















with the adrenal cortex-testicular relations in the fowl 
indicated that the adrenal cortex is greatly hypertrophied 
after castration. This hypertrophy can be prevented by 
administration of testosterone propionate or diethylstu¬ 
bes trol. The sex difference in proportion to the adrenal 
cortex is neutralized by castration. Further, castration 
increa.ses the lipoid content back to normal again. The 
cytological evidence shows that the so called fuchsino- 
philia are nothing but mitochondria. The mitochondria do 
not take any part in the formation of the cortical lipoid. 
The result of histo-chernical tests indicate an increase 
in the cortical hormone level in hypertrophied cortex, 
and it is suggested that the increased amount of mitochon¬ 
dria in the castrated cortex plays some unknown role in 
transforming the cortical sterols into androgens. Kar 
finally advances a hypothesis according to which one of 
the functions of the hypertrophied cortex in the castrated 
fowl is to provide a greater amount of androgen in order 
to take over the extra-sexual functions of the gonad. 

Miller and Riddle ( 28 ) investigated the cellular 
response to insulin in adrenals of pigeons. In tests made 
on forty-one normal white Carneau pigeons, daily injections 
of one to sixty units of insulin during ten hours to ten 
days, enlarged the adrenal, produced mitosis and cellular 
activity. These cytological effects were more pronounced 



>' \ ■ ' 















' 






. 






23 


in cortical than in medullary cells. Wholly comparable 
effects were produced in the adrenals of sixteen other 
birds, previously deprived of their anterior pituitary 
glands. The cytological changes in the cortex following 
insulin are identical with those produced by adrenotrophic 
pituitary extracts. 

The relationship of these results to the 11 alarm 
reaction 11 is discussed by the authors. They pointed out 
that the work of others has shown that the mammalian adrenal 
reacts to toxic substances and various operative procedures 
by enlarging, one part of a syndrome which Selye calls the 
“alarm reaction”. On Selye ! s view, (45) such adrenal en¬ 
largement is a secondary result of the action of the alarm¬ 
ing stimulus upon the pituitary. He obtained no adrenal 
enlargement in hypophysectomized animals subjected to 
” alarming” stimuli. In the studies of Miller and Riddle 
cortical enlargement and loss of chromaffin granules in 
the medulla., duplicate changes associated with the “alarm 
syndrome”. It is entirely certain, however, that following 
insulin these particular changes occur in pigeons deprived 
of their anterior pituitary with the same facility as in 
the intact animals. Thyroxins and estrogens are also ef¬ 
fective in stimulating adrenals in both normal and hypo¬ 
physectomized pigeons—-but insulin has marked ability to 
enlarge the adrenal, notably in hypophysectomized birds. 













. 




















■ 



- 








Since the adrenal is involved in carbohydrate metabolism, 
it seems more than coincidental that this gland, parti¬ 
cularly cortex, responds especially well to insulin, which 
suggests that both cortical and medullary parts of the 
adrenal actively oppose the abilitjr of insulin to decrease 
the blood sugar, and that this occurs in hypophysectoralzed 
pigeons. 



25 


MATERIALS AND METHOD 


This investigation was prompted by research done 
by W. Rowan (40) and others, on the sexual cycle of juncos 
and Starlings and the induction of a complete sex cycle 
prematurely by the use of artificial illumination. Little 
work has been done on bird adrenals in general, and nothing 
at all on the problem of a possible cycle in the adrenals 
of wild birds analogous to the sexual cycle. Nothing has 
been done to try to integrate the activity of the bird 
adrenal with the functions and activities of the other 
endocrine glands. Therefore, the problem arose-~is there 
a cycle in the adrenal of the resident wild bird and if 
so what relationship has it to the breeding cycle and to 
the endocrine system of the bird as a whole? Because of 
the necessary delimitation involved in any investigation 
only the cyclic aspect of this problem will be emphasized. 

The bird chosen for this investigation was the 
house sparrow ( Passer domesticus ). The reasons for this 
selection were twofold. Firstly, a wild bird was desired 
in contrast to domesticated or semi-domesticated birds 
such as chickens and pigeons used in most experiments 
cited. Secondly, the house sparrow, being a permanent 
resident of this area, is thus much more easily accessible 
to capture or shooting. These birds are quite well suited 
for this type of experiment because of their size, because 





of their hardiness and their feeding habits, although they 
have one serious drawback which was clearly manifested, 
and that is their extreme nervousness and irritability. 

^his objection was outweighed by their availability. 

A very primitive arrangement was used to capture 
these birds. The trap was a simple wooden frame covered 
with wire which was propped up by a stick to which was 
attached a long piece of string. In this way, the trap 
was dropped on sparrows feeding underneath. About twenty- 
five sparrows were captured in this manner and placed in 
four cages, approximately six birds to each cage. 

Illumination experiment 

The procedure used in this experiment is very 
simile.r to that used by ¥. Rowan (40) in his migration and 
breeding experiments. The purpose in using this procedure 
was to create the complete breeding cycle prematurely by 
increasing each day the amount of light to which the birds 
were exposed. 

The illumination experiment was commenced in 
January, 1950. The cages in which the birds were kept were 
covered in front and on top by wire, the sides and back 
being of wood. Ihe illumination was produced by 100 watt 
fluorescent bulbs which were about two feet above the cages. 



























. 


- 










. ' 


■ 





■ 










■ . ' .. 




* 




. 


■ 










. 

. 
















The temperature in the room remained constant at 2^ 
degrees Centigrade and the birds were kept well fed on 
millet, oats and rape. 

Lighting was commenced on January 9» For the 
first several days the birds were exposed to ten hours of 
light, after which the illumination time was increased by 
ten minutes per day. Under normal conditions the daj 7, 
lengths at this time of the year are increasing at the 
rate of about three minutes per day, so that these birds 
were getting an abnormal increase in illumination of 
approximately seven minutes per day. This was kept up 
until the fifteen hour limit was reached. At this time 
the birds were kept at fifteen hours for about two weeks, 
following which the lighting was cut down by fifteen min¬ 
utes each day. A bird was sacrificed twice a week or 
after an increase in illumination of approximately one- 
half hour. Due to the fact that it was very difficult to 
trap sparrows because of their nervous nature, not enough 
birds were trapped to be able to keep a large enough batch 
of both experiments.! birds and controls. Therefore, all 
the birds were kept as experimen.tals. As a substitute 
for this lack of a control batch, birds were shot in the 
open at fairly regular intervals. Wild birds can be con¬ 
sidered to be legitimate controls, except that they were 
not confined to cages. 


























. 


. 






- 






- 


’ 

v 




















* 

. 

■ 


■ 








t 

* 


. 




. 


. 






Method 


The adrenals from both experimental individuals 
and the wild birds were removed immediately after killing 
so that degeneration of these glands after death was kept 
to a minimum. Also removed with the adrenals T*rere the 
gonads, thyroid and pituitary glands. After removal the 
adrenals were fixed in Regaud ! s fluid. This fixative con¬ 
sists of four parts of three percent potassium bichromate 
with one part of forty percent formalin (formaldehyde). 
After twenty-four hours in this solution, the glands x^ere 
put in a three percent potassium bichromate solution for 
seventy-two hours. This was followed by washing in running 
water for twenty-four hours. Regaud recommended four days 
fixation followed with eight days further chromation in 
three percent potassium bichromate for mitochondria., but 
this is excessive because it interferes with nuclear 
staining. Dehydration was next carried out by moving the 
material from fifty percent to one-hundred percent alcohol 
and then into chloroform, and finally into wax. It was 
soon found that the chloroform hardened the tissue too 
much, particularly the testes, so that chloroform was re¬ 
placed by xylol which was found much more satisfactory. 

The wax blocks were then cut on the microtome 
into sections ten mu thick and mounted on slides. Serial 


sections were made in all cases. 


All sections were stained 







‘ 


. 


* 
































' 

. 

. 

* 

* 


. 




.. f - 












29 


with DelafielcL 1 s haematoxylin and eosin to produce a uni¬ 
form set of slides, therefore any differences cannot be 
attributed to a varied method of staining. 


Some of the glands were fixed for fat staining. 

The method chosen in this case was used by Flexner and 
G-rollman ( 9 )* The fixing solution consisted of one part 
twenty-five percent neutral formalin, nine parts Zenkers 
without acetic acid and one and one-half parts of two 
percent osmic acid. The tissue was kept in this fixative 
for forty-eight hours (renewing it after twenty-four hours), 
rinsed in six changes of distilled water, put in the two 
percent osmic acid for twenty-four hours, and then washed 
in water for one-half hour with numerous changes. Dehydra¬ 
tion was then effected by the usual method, although the 
tissue was kept in each change of alcohol for a very short 
time so that the fat should not be washed out. After the 
alcohols, the tissue was put through a solution of one 
half absolute alcohol and one half xylol (for fifteen 
minutes) then xylol (for fifteen minutes) and finally em¬ 
bedded in paraffin. Serial sections were cut at six mu 
and mounted on slides. Several slides were stained with 
Vine’s Ponceau stain as a trial (Archives of Pathology 
1939 » 27 •1030). Ihis method proved to be unsatisfactory 
because when the sections were washed with xylol and the 
cover slips fixed over them, the fat was completely dissolved 
out of the sections. As a result, the following method 















- 








, 





















































,.c 






























* 













■ 




30 


was used; the wax was dissolved out by placing the slide 
in xylol for thirty seconds and following this, the sec¬ 
tions were run through the alcohols very quickly and into 
water, the cover slips being mounted on the slides with 
glycerine jelly. In this way the fat concentration was 
well preserved due to the absence of fat solvents in the 
process. The effects of xylol were very slight as the 
sections were kept in this solution for a very short period 
of time, and the weak effect it did have was cancelled out 
because all slides were similarly treated. 



31 


HISTOLOGICAL STUDY OF THE SPARROW ADRENAL 

General Description of the Adrenal of the House Sparrow 

As has been stated before, the adrenal gland of 
all higher vertebrates is composed of two distinct types 
of tissue, the cortical and medullary (or chroma.ffin) 
tissue. In birds, these terms do not refer to the posi¬ 
tion of these tissues in the gland. In the sparrow, the 
cortical tissue is found throughout the gland, with the 
groups of medullary tissue interspersed everywhere (See 
Plates I to 7). Generally speakMg, the medullary tissue 
lies more to the centre of the gland with the cortical 
masses usually larger at the periphery. In some cases 
the medullary tissue lies in thin strands immediately 
adjacent to the capsule except at scattered places where 
a strand of cortex touches the capsule. The capsule itself 
is a very loose and poorly constituted sheath of connective 
tissue around the gland. In man 3 ^ cases it is poorly de¬ 
fined and is not clearly distinguishable from the peri¬ 
pheral cortical cells. It is generally accepted that there 
is a differentiation of capsular cells into cortical cells, 
but special techniques would be required to demonstrate 
this in the present case, e.g., by trypan blue injections 
(41) and not enough material was available to investigate 
this line of study. 





* 



, 

























































- 










































32 


The blood vessels in general are distributed along 
the periphery of the gland—in the capsule or just at the 
edge of the cortical tissue. From these, capillaries are 
given off which form an intricate network throughout the 
whole gland, between the strands of cortical and medullary 
cells. These capillaries finally radiate in the direction 
of a central sinus situated approximately in the centre 
of the gland., which in turn forms the efferent vein. 

The cortical cells are found in several con¬ 
figurations, but there is a tendency for the cortical 
strands towards the centre of the gland to be composed, of 
a double row of cells with their long axis in the trans¬ 
verse plane of the strand. One end. of each columnar-like 
cell faces on the blood, channels. In many cases the cell 
walls are very difficult to distinguish and the cells are 
usually longer in one axis than the other in these large 
masses. Around the periphery the cortical cells have a 
more glomerular configuration, that is they form a circu¬ 
lar group of cells like an acenous without the inside 
lumen. 'These cells do not have such a long axis as those 
cells found in the long strands. Some cortical cells are 
not found in any set configuration but are an amorphous 
group of cells. 

In many of the glands a large number of mitotic 
figures were seen at the periphery just underneath the 






. 









- 























■ 



capsule, while few mitotic figures were observed internally 
It is now generally accepted that mammalian cortical cells 
arise in the peripheral portion of the gland, migrate in¬ 
ward towards the medulla, become senescent and disappear 
in the inner zone of the zona reticularis. Mew cortical 
cells are formed by mitosis and by the differentiation of 
certain cells in the capsule. Thus the observation of 
many mitotic figures at the periphery tends to confirm 
this hypothesis. 

Since the adrenal cortical tissue of a bird is 
not a homogeneous area, as in mammals, it is not surprising 
that it does not show the distinct zonations found in the 
mammalian adrenal. However, in the sparrow the usual 
histological fixatives show certain gross differences be¬ 
tween areas of the cortex. At the periphery the cells are 
large, contain considerable cytoplasm and full, round or 
slightly oval nuclei with usually two nucleoli. The 
chromatin network in the nuclei is thin and diffuse. This 
area I refer to as Zone Y. In this area there is usually 
little medullary tissue present and when found is only a 
thin strand one to two cells deep just inside the capsule, 
^he Zone Y does not usually run all the way round the gland 
Quite often it is crescent shaped or may be found only in 
one corner of the gland. Towards the middle of the gland 
the cells elongate and eventually become smaller. With 















. 

. 

. 

- 

. 


















■ 






, 



the decrease in cell volume the nucleus decreases somewhat 


and the chromatin is more compact. Shrunken, dying cells 
with pycnotic nuclei and thin diffuse cytoplasm can "be 
seen in the centre of the gland. 

The medullary cells are quite irregular in shape 
arranged in rounded groups or short cords in an anastomos¬ 
ing network "beside which is usually found a capillary. 

The cells are polygonal and are smaller than those of the 
cortex. When the tissue is fixed in a fluid containing 
potassium bichromate, very fine brown granules may be seen 
distributed throughout the cell bodies. This constitutes 
the »chromaffin tl reaction character!stic of chromaffin 
tissue, which elaborates adrenalin. In the mammal these 
cells are closely associated with amyelinated nerve fibres, 
but in the sparrow very few nerve cells were observed, 
although a large nerve tract adjoining the adrenal was seen 
in practically all cases. 

As to the average volume of the medullary and 
the cortical tissues, an attempt will be made later in 
this paper to show that these vary with the seasons. Mille 
and Kiddle (29) took the average of a number of measurement 
in the pigeon adrenal which indicated that sixty-five per¬ 
cent of the gland is cortex, thirty-two percent medulla 
and three percent blood space, lymphoid tissue etc. In 
that paper they did not even consider seasonal changes, 















1 ■ 














- 























; 






and I will try to show that this ratio of volumes change 
with the seasons. They also did not find any difference 
between males and females such as Sauer and Latimer (42) 
reported for adult fowl. 



36 


HISTOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS OF A SERIES OF ADRENALS 

The glands from illuminated birds will be des¬ 
cribed separately from those of the birds shot outside. 

Illuminated Birds 

Bird #11 - Eleven Hours - Female 

No marked Zone Y seen. The cortica.1 cells are quite 
small and closely packed together. The c 2 ^topla.sm 
is not frothy and there is no regular arrangement of 
the cells, i.e. they are not arranged in columns. 

The nuclei a.re quite pale and open. The medullary 
cells are irregularly shaped, with nuclei quite obscure. 
The blood sinuses are not noticeable except for a few 
small ones at the periphery just under the connective 
tissue capsule. 

#114 - Eleven Hours and Forty Minutes - Male 

No marked Zone Y is clearly discernable. The corti¬ 
cal cells are arranged in columns while those cells 
near the periphery are more in glomerular bundles. 

The blood sinuses at the side of each bundle are 
quite noticeable—they lead into the large central 
sinus found typically in most of the glands examined. 

The cortical cells are small and closely packed, but 
the cytoplasm is more frothy than the eleven hour 
gland. The medullary cells are polygonal with light 


nuclei. 









37 


#115 - Twelve Hours - Male 

No Zone Y seen. The peripheral cortical cells are 
not arranged in columns as are the more central 
cells. Also the latter cells are larger and frothier 
than the peripheral cortical cells. There is no 
change in the medullary cells. 

#119 - Twelve Hours and Forty Minutes - Male 

Zone Y is clearly distinguishable. The cortical 
cells at the periphery are arranged in an indif¬ 
ferent manner, ^hey are longer than the internal 
cells, stain deeper and the cytoplasm is much less 
frothy than those cells found closer to the centre 
of the gland. The nuclei in general seem to be deeper 
staining than those in the previous specimens. The 
nuclei of the Y Zone cells are more pale, less 
granular than the nuclei of the more active cells. 

#122 ~ Thirteen Hours and Thirtj^ Minutes - Fema,le 
Similar to #119* 

#123 - Fourteen Hours - Male 

Zone Y is clear and distinct. The cells in this area 
are larger, deeper staining (c 3 rtoplasm) and not 
frothy. Nuclei are also not granulo„r. This raises 
the possibility that these ceils are young, which 
when 3 rounger cells are formed peripherally to them 
are pushed in towards the centre, and as they mature 















































, < V . 



















38 


they become physiologically active. Another pos¬ 
sibility is that they have a different physiological 
function from the other cortical cells. There are 
numerous blood sinuses present in this gland, peri¬ 
pherally and internally. 

#12^ - Fifteen Hours - Female 

The cortical cells in the Y Zone are thoroughly 
permeated with large vacuoles. The cells in the 
centre are frothy but not vacuolated. The blood 
sinuses are very prominent with the capillaries 
observable all through the gland, and the drainage very 
marked by radiating towards the central sinus. This 
gland has thus every sign of being physiologically 
active. 

#133 - Fifteen Hours - Male 

Zone Y is very clear. There are no large vacuoles 
anywhere, the centra,! cells of the cortex are very 
frothy and the numerous capillaries radiate towards 
the central sinus, ^he medulla is in smaller patches 
than before. 

#13^ “ Fifteen Hours - Female 

Zone Y distinctive. Vacuolization is quite wide¬ 
spread throughout most of the cortex except in most 
of Zone Y. The nuclei of the vacuolated cells are 
smaller and quite granular in contrast to the larger 

























, 






■ 
















' 









■ 

. 








- 






* 

' 


. 


■ 

















39 


and paler nuclei of the Zone Y cells. The medullary 
patches in these sections (not quite as positive in 
the other fifteen hour glands) are largely pushed in 
towards the centre of the gland. Thus it seems to 
take on more the configuration of a mammalian adrenal 
gland, although the central area in these sections 
are still permea.ted with cortical tissue. Very little 
medulla is found in the Zone Y, which in this case 
extends all the way around the gland. As in #129 > 
the blood capillaries are very conspicuous. 

#140 - Fifteen Hours - Male 

This bird died during the night and the adrenal glands 
were removed in the morning, approximately eight hours 
after death. Large vacuoles are seen throughout the 
whole of the outer portion of the cortex. The Y Zone 
is not clearly demarcated from the rest of the cortex, 
probably because of vacuolization. The inner cortical 
cells are not very frothy. 

#lAl - Fourteen Hours and Forty-five Minutes - Male 

In this specimen the Y Zone is not very prominent. 

The cytoplasm of the cells is very frothy and capil¬ 
laries are very prominent all through the gland. The 
medulla seems to be broken up into smaller patches 
than in previous specimens. The capillaries here are 
most prominent close to medullary patches and seem to 



' 










* 






















■ 



■ 

. 








40 


radiate out from these patches, through the strands 
of cortical cells, to the central sinus. This is 
probably because the active cortical cells crowd out 
the capillaries which look like slits between the 
columns of cells. 

#155 ~ Twelve Hours - Male 

There is slight vacuolization, or frothiness, in the 
area just inside, and partially including Zone Y, 
which is clearly differentiated. There are.little 
or no medullary cells found in this area. Frothiness 
in the inside cells not as noticeable as in the fif¬ 
teen hour glands. 

#157 - Eleven Hours and Thirty Minutes - Male 

Zone Y is very evident and heavily vacuolated, while 
the central cells are froth 2 r. The cells in the Y 
Zone are more regularly arranged (i.e. in columns) than 
in the other previous specimens. The nuclei are 
pushed up against the back walls of the cells. In 
some areas the Y Zone cells are perfectly normal. 

In these latter cells the nuclei are normal, i.e. 
quite pale and open, while in the vacuolated (active) 
cells the nuclei have become granular (Pycnotic) in 
many cases, much the same as the cells in the central 
area. This may be an indication that the Y Zone is an 
area of largely immature cells which become more mature 
as they move towards the centre of the gland. 




41 


#158 - Ten Hours and Thirty Minutes - Male 

A layer of medullary cells one to three cells thick 
runs as a sort of capsule around the outside of the 
gland just inside the connective tissue capsule. A 
great number of arterioles are also seen just outside 
the capsule, some long and narrow, others relatively 
small. Internal cortical cells are quite frothy in 
one area, but general frothiness not as prevalent as 
in previous glands. The Y Zone is distinct. Except 
for the thin layer of cells on the outside, the med¬ 
ullary tissue is in patches radiating towards the 
centre of the gland. 

#159 - Ten Hours and Fifteen Minutes - Female 

Vacuolization is seen in the Y Zone. Internally the 
cells are frothy and the capillaries are very prominent. 

#160 - Ten Hours - Male 

Cells in all areas extremely frothy and even vacuolated 
in spots, except in one large area of the Y Zone. Froth 
is even all through the gland except in the Y Zone. 

#161 - Ten Hours - Female 

Y Zone quite wide and cells arranged strikingly in 
columns. Central area slightly frothy. Medulla 
radiates towards centre of gland. Extremely vascular, 
but not so in Y Zone which is found only on one side 
of the gland. 



























' 
































, 

























' 

* 






























42 


#162 - Ten Hours - Female 

Frothiness quite marked and vacuolization prevalent 
in peripheral regions other than Y Zone, which is not 
prominent. Capillaries very evident. 

The above histological description of experimen¬ 
tal birds indicates a general trend, in the adrenal glands 
of both the male and female, towards physiological activity 
paralleling the breeding cycle. 

Wild Birds 


The majority of these birds were shot in the 
vicinity of Edmonton, while some were caught in a mouse 
trap. The date indicates the day these birds were killed 
and the number of hours indicates the day length of those 
specific dates. These day lengths were obtained from the 
Edmonton Meteorological Station and were calculated from 
the daily sunrise and sunset. In most cases the adrenal 
glands were removed within an hour after the bird was shot. 
All the glands were treated in the manner described pre¬ 
viously. 

Histological Observations 

#107 - December 14 - Seven Hours and Thirty Minutes - Female 
The cortical cells are not frothy. No Zone Y is 











































’ 














. 
















. 














. 












- 


































43 


evident and the cell arrangement is indifferent ex¬ 
cept in one corner where the cells are arranged in 
columns. The nuclei are large and quite pale, no 
sharp granulation being present. The capillary 
system is completely lacking. 

#108 - January 8 - Seven Hours and Forty Minutes - Female 
Cortical cells are the same as in #107. The medulla 
is in large masses throughout the gland. These masses 
are in long outstretched shapes. 

#112 - January 2l -Eight Hours and Twenty Minutes - Male 
Similar to the two specimens above. 

#116 - January 2l - Eight Hours and Twenty Minutes - Male 
No Y Zone visible. The cortical cells are the same 
as above with slight frothiness in the central regions. 
The medulla is in large masses especially along the 
edge of the gland. The capillary system is becoming 
more prominent than previously. 

#117 “ January 29 - Eight Hours and Forty Minutes - Female 

Zone Y has appeared in small areas around the periphery. 
The central cortical cells are much more frothy than 
in #ll6,and the nuclei are pycnotic. Most of the medulla 
is at or near the edge of the gland, and very little 
of it is in the central area. 





















. 











, 





































- 




* 

















. 

















44 


#125 “ February 15 - Nine Hours and Forty-five Minutes - Female 
Cortical cells frothy in central area and no Y Zone 
is apparent. 

#127 - February 15 - Nine Hours and Forty-five Minutes - Male 
The medulla is extensive and lengthy, large patches 
appear prominently. The Y Zone is absent. G-enerallv 
the cortical cells are in a glomerular configuration, 
although some are in the columnar arrangement. 

#131 - February 22 - Ten Hours and Fifteen Minutes - Male 
The Y Zone is definite in this gland. Central cells 
are not in columns but more glomerular in arrangement. 
Frothiness not too apparent, with the capillaries 
mostly at the periphery. The medulla is in small 
patches scattered throughout the whole of the gland 
except in the Y Zone. 

#137 ~ March 1 - Ten Hours and Forty-five Minutes - Male 

Zone Y present along one side. Fuzziness not extensive 
in inside cortical cells - similar to #131® 

#138 - March 1 - Ten Hours and Forty-five Minutes - Female 
Cortical cells not frothy but gland very vascular. 

The medulla is in small patches. 

#144 - March 8 - Eleven Hours and Fifteen Minutes - Male 
Y Zone clearly distinguishable from the rest of the 
cortical cells. The central cells are quite frothy 























45 


and the nuclei are becoming pycnotic. These cells are 
arranged in long columns or in a type of syncitium, 
i.e. nuclei with no cell walls visible. The medulla 
is in very large masses, the cells being more granular 
than usual possibly indicating physiological activity. 

#149 - March 15 - Eleven Hours and Forty-five Minutes - Female 

Y Zone quite clearly distinguishable. Medulla is 
fairly extensive. The gland in general is very vascular. 
The central cells are conspicuous in long two-celled 
columns and appear frothy. 

#150 - March 15 - Eleven Hours and Forty-five Minutes - Male 
Very similar in nature to $149. The medullary groups 
of cells are smaller in the centre of the gland than 
further towards the periphery, probably because the 
central cells are active physiologically. 

#156 - March 22 - Twelve Hours and Forty-five Minutes - Male 
Central cells are very frothy with some slight vacuoli¬ 
zation in the Y Zone which is not too clearly distinguish¬ 
able from the other cortical cells. The medulla is in 
small patches hardly discernable at the extreme periphery. 
The capillaries are quite prominent. 

#165 - June 1 - Sixteen Hours and Thirtj' Minutes - Female 
Vacuolization quite marked. What appears to be the 

Y Zone runs across one end of the gland, i.e. does 
not run along the edge of the gland. The medulla is 


♦ 


. 















. 

< 









. 

. 

■ 


' 




. 



« 


„ 

















. 





* • 

. 





generally in long strands a few cells deep. The gland 
is very highly vascular. Vacuolization is most marked 
around the edge of thq gland. 

#167 - June 9 - Sixteen Hours and Fifty Minutes - Male 

The Y Zone is not clear and the gland in general does 
not appear to be physiologically active. The central 
cortical cells are very slightly frothy, if at all. 

No capillaries are visible at all. 

#168 - June 20 - Seventeen Hours - Male 

Zone Y distinct in several areas of periphery. This 
specimen is quite vascular although the cells do not 
indicate a great deal of activity. Only in one area, 
are the cortica.1 cells comparatively frothy. 

#170 - June 28 - Seventeen Hours - Female 

This gland is very vascular. The cortical cells are 
similar throughout the whole gland, i.e. there is no 
Y Zone as distinguished from the inner cells. These 
cells do not appear to be active at all. The medulla 
is in large patches. 

#171 - July 6 - Sixteen Hours and Fifty Minutes - Juvenile 
There is an unusual amount of medulla in this gland. 
One small area of the cortex, triangular in shape, 
is the Y Zone. In general this specimen is very 
vascular and the cortical cells are quite frothy. 













. 





' 


; 

■ 



















■ 






. 

>•' ' ’ ' 4 ■ ' 









, 




* 














♦ ' ' : v ■ -.i• - • 

. 






4 ? 


The cells in these frothy areas are similar to those 
in the adult, i.e. the cell walls are not visible, 
the cytoplasm is stringy and the nuclei, pushed up 
against the back of the cell, is quite pycnotic. The 
cells in the Y Zone resemble those in the adult. 

#1?2 - July 6 - Sixteen Hours and Fifty Minutes - Male 

Very similar to the juvenile described above. It is 
very vascular and the medulla is quite extensive, but 
the cortical cells appear very inactive. 

#173 - July 19 - Sixteen Hours and Twenty-five Minutes - Female 
Y Zone is at one end of the gland and the cortical 
cells in the centre are in long columns and are quite 
widely separated one from the other. This gland ap¬ 
pears to be quite active although very few capillaries 
are visible. 

#174 - July 19 “ Juvenile 

The Y Zone along one edge of the gland clearly shows 
the differentiation between these cells and those 
closer to the centre. There is quite a large amount 
of medulla, but not as much as that found in #172, and 
the capillaries are not very obvious. 

#176 - July 22 - Sixteen Hours and Fifteen Minutes - Male 
The medulla is very extensive and found in large 
groups. This gland is quite vascular and the central 





48 


cortical cells, arranged in long narrow columns in 
some places, appear fairly active. These central cells 
are not as spread out as those in the female of July 
19* A Y Zone is clear although these cells are smaller 
than those in other glands. 

#180 - August 29 - Fourteen Hours - Female 

This gland is fairly vascular hut inner cortical cells 
do not appear active. The medulla is in large, stringy 
groups, with rows four to five cells thick running 
along the periphery of the.gland. The Y Zone is present. 

#182 - October 4 - Eleven Hours and Thirty Minutes - Female 
Medulla is in large masses. The peripheral cortical 
cells are in columns and in acenous arrangements while 
the central cells, which are not active, are in an 
indifferent arrangement. Most of the cells in this 
gland resemble the Y Zone cells in previous specimens. 

These observations are similar to those made on 
the experimental birds, i.e. that a general physiological 
cycle is present in wild birds, with the cycle reaching 
its peak approximately at the same time that the apex of 
the breeding cycle is reached. 




49 


Testis Development In Experimental Birds 

The close relationship between the breeding cycle 
in the sparrow and the variation in day-length, naturally 
or artifically produced, has been adequately proven by ¥• 
Rowan. In this Illumination experiment the procedure used, 
closely follows that used by the above investigator in his 
papers (40). As this description of the seasonal develop¬ 
ment of the gonads is placed in this thesis to show the 
parallel between the breeding cycle and adrenal changes, 
a complete account will only be given of the testis dev¬ 
elopment in the experimental birds. The testes were fixed 
in a formol saline, cut in sections ten mu thick and stained 
with Delafield's haematoxylin and eosin. 

Observations of Testis 

Eleven Hours and Forty Minutes 

The testis was about 0.9 mms in diameter, (measured 
along the long axis). This specimen is essentially 
in the winter stage. The tubules are small and sperma¬ 
togonia are seen along the basement membrane. The 
lumina are full of debris. No interstitial cells are 
observed and the interstices are entirely filled with 
thick connective tissue fibres arranged in layers 
around the tubules. 

Twelve Hours 

The testis has started the process of recrudescence, 

























































. 













50 


having a diameter of just over 1 mm. The tubules are 
still small and lumina largely with debris. The 
spermatogonia are more numberous and a few have moved 
towards the centre of the tubule. These spermatogonia 
are larger than those against the basement membrane. 

A few mitotic divisions were observed. The connective 
tissue in the intertubular spaces is thinner than that 
in the Eleven hours and forty minute testis, but in¬ 
terstitial. cells were not observed. 

Twelve Hours and Forty Minutes 

The testis is much the same stage as the twelve hour 
testis. The interstices are more open but it is hard 
to distinguish interstitial cells in these sections, 
although a few were observed. There, are more sperma¬ 
togonia near the centre of the tubules and they are 
conspicuously larger than those adjacent to the tubule 
wall. Debris in the lumina is still prominent. 

Fourteen Hours 

The testis is considerably larger than the twelve hour 
and forty minute specimen, having a. diameter of about 
2*5 mms. The tubules are much enlarged and the inter¬ 
stitial tissue is greatly developed.. Many degenerat¬ 
ing spermatogonia are observed in the centre of the 
tubules. Spermatocytes can be observed farther in 
from the basal layer of spermatogonia. Mitotic fig¬ 
ures are seen in this area. 


































. 














51 


Fourteen Hours and Twenty Minutes 

The diameter of the testis is 3 mms. It is similar 
to the fourteen hour testis, but spermatocytes are 
more plentiful and a few spermatids are observed. 
Tubules are much enlarged and the interstitial tissue 
seems to be pushed more towards the triangles between 
the tubules. 

Fifteen Hours 

The testis diameter is 5*5 mms. The tubules are so 
large that most of the interstitial tissue is almost 
completely crowded out. All the stages of the germ 
cells are observed except that there are few mature 
sperm. The metamorphosing spermatids can be clearly 
seen. The cells of Sertoli are very vague. 

Later Fifteen Hour Testis 

The diameter is about 6.8 mms. Tubules are very large 
and no interstitial tissue is seen. Mature sperm are 
very conspicuously arranged in groups and the sperma¬ 
tids are also numerous. The cells of Sertoli are still 
not very distinct. The lumina of the tubules are now 
quite large with no debris present. Before these birds 
were killed a smear was taken of the extruded cloaca 
and no sperm were manifested. When these same birds 
were killed minutes later and smears made, the sperm 
was voluminous. Perhaps by killing them a certain 
nervous mechanism was set off which enabled the sperm 


to be ejected. 





52 


Illumination Decreasing 

Fourteen Hours and Forty-five Minutes 

The testis measured 4 mms. Signs of degeneration are 
quite clear. Mature spermatozoa, in a. degenerating 
condition can be seen in the lumina together with 
metamorphosing spermatids. 

Thirteen Hours and Fifteen Minutes 

The diameter is 3*5 mms. Spermatocytes are observed 
in active degeneration and the lumina. are being 
clogged with debris. 

Twelve Hours 

The diameter is about 2*5 mms. Disintegration is gen¬ 
eral. throughout the whole tubule. The lumina of the 
tubules are choked with waste material, degenerate 
cells etc. These degenerate cells seem to agglutinate. 

Eleven Hours and Thirty Minutes 

Much the same as the twelve hour testis. Tubules 
are smaller and becoming like & winter testis. 

Ten Hours and Thirty Minutes 

About 1.8 mms in diameter. Very much like winter 
testis. Interstitial tissue becoming more prominent. 
Tubules are much smadler than before. 
























■ 








, 















* 










* 












■ 































> 

■ 






















53 


Ten Hours 

About 1.5 mms in size. Similar to ten hour and 

thirty minute testis. 

Testes of Wild Birds 

These testes underwent essentially the same cycle 
as that described in the experimental birds, so that it 
will not be repeated here. But the development of the 
testis of the wild birds during the later winter and early 
spring seems to be a step ahead of the experimental birds. 
For example, the size of the fourteen hour and twenty-five 
minute testis of the wild bird is about Only after 

the experimental birds were kept at fifteen hours for about 
two weeks did the testis reach its maximum size. This 
indicates that there was a lag in development of the experi¬ 
mental testis due to the abnormal increase in illumination, 
i.e. the testes did not develop fast enough to keep up 
to the increase in illumination per day. 







OBSERVATIONS ON OSMICATED ADRENALS 


The process used in treating these adrenals has 
been described previously (page 28). These adrenals were 
cut at 6 mu. The medulla remained colorless while the 
cortical tissues stained densely. 

Adrenals of Experimental Birds 

#115 “ Twelve Hours 

Droplets heaviest at the centre of the gland and quite 
light around the periphery. The droplets in central 
cells are mostly discrete and in general fat concen¬ 
tration is not very heavy (see Plate VI). 

#122 - Thirteen Hours and Thirty Minutes 

The osmicated fat concentration is very thin at the 
centre and heavier at the periphery. In general this 
gland is quite lightly impregnated. The fat granules 
are mostly discrete but around the edges they tend 
to run together into larger masses of fat (see Plate VI). 

#128 - Fifteen Hours 

This gland is very heavily impregnated with fat. In 
the central cells the fat globules have amalgamated 
to form large masses. Going towards the periphery 
the particles become more distinct and discrete, never¬ 
theless large masses are also observed near the per¬ 
iphery. The concentration of osmic-reactive steroids 
is heaviest in the central area of the gland (see 
Plate VI). 
















■ 
















■ 
















' ' 




■ ' ' ' ‘ ' ' 

■ 

- 












■ 














' ' *v * . 




. 

. 














. 





. 




. 






#133 - Fifteen Hours 

The concentration of fat in this specimen is also very 
heavy. At the extreme periphery fat globules are thin 
and discrete. This area is no doubt the Y Zone. 

Illumination Decreasing 

#152 - Thirteen Hours and Fifteen Minutes 

Heavy concentration in the centre of the gland. As ' 
in all other sections examined, at the periphery the 
fat droplets thin out considerably to the point where 
it is found in very small specks at the extreme per¬ 
iphery (see Plate VI). 

#155 - Twelve Hours 

The concentration of fat in central cortical cells is 
medium and falls off considerably towards the periphery 
where the fat droplets are mere specks. In the central 
area of the gland some of the fat droplets have merged, 
but most of them are discrete (see Plate VII). 

#160 - Ten Hours 

The concentration of fat droplets in this gla,nd is 
quite evenly distributed over most of the gland. In 
general the fat concentration is quite thin throughout. 
In one area of the periphery the droplets are very 
few and fine. This area is most likely the Y Zone. 

The rest of the periphery is perhaps more heavily in¬ 
vested with steroid than are the internal cortical 
cells (see Plate VII). 







. 

' ;. r : ' ' ; ' . - ’ , 






Adrenals of Wild Birds 


In the case of the wild birds, unfortunately some 
of the fixing did not take properly, due probably to the 
fact that the osmic acid became ineffective. Consequently 
only the initial part of this stage of the work was satis¬ 
factory. 

#127 - Nine Hours and Forty-five Minutes 

The central area has a medium concentration of fat 
droplets. Again towards the periphery the concentra¬ 
tion drops (see Plate VII). 

#131 - Ten Hours and Fifteen Minutes 

The concentration is much the same as in #l2?> but 
more cells seem to be impregnated with droplets and 
the concentration extends farther to the periphery. 
Only at the extreme periphery do the fat droplets 
fade in number. 

#136 - Ten Hours and Forty-five Minutes 
Much the same as #131. 

#147 - Eleven Hours and Forty-five Minutes 

Concentration is thinner in the centre, and fades out 
along one side of the gland which probably is the Y 
Zone (See Plate VII). 

#156 - Twelve Hours and Forty-five Minutes 
Much the same as in #131. 





. ■ 






















The osmicated glands thus give further evidence 
in support of the belief that there is a hypertrophy of 
the adrenal cortex of the house sparrow at the time that 
the gonads have become active. 



EXAMINATION OF ADRENAL GLANDS FOR CHANGE 


IN PERCENTAGE VOLUME OF CORTEX AND MEDULLA 

Because of the extreme intermingling of the 
medullary cells in the cortical tissue, the ordinary 
methods of determining percent volumes were considered to 
be extremely Inadequate if not technically impossible to 
carry out. The method adopted in this thesis was intro¬ 
duced by Hammar who used it extensively in the study of 
thymus, and dealt with in detail in a special paper 
(described by Scammon and Scott (43)). He sectioned the 
thymus serially, projected the sections on heavy, well-made 
paper, traced them, cut out their various areas and weighed 
them. He then computed the area from the weight of the 
paper by determining a weight-area ratio by weighing a sample 
of the paper of known area. 

There are three chief sources of error in the 
area-by-weight method when paper is employed: 

1. Thhse involved in cutting out the elaborate out¬ 
lines of various structures. 

2 . The variability in moisture content and therefore 
in the weight-area ratio of the paper. 

3. Variation in the thickness of the individual sheets 
of the paper stock used in the study. 































• 




































• 








' 1 

























• 



The first error is small in the hands of a care¬ 
ful operator and can hardly be avoided by any method. The 
error of moisture content is a very real one and should be 
taken into consideration whenever this method is employed. 

It has been shown that there is a rapid, though not con¬ 
stant absorption of water by both ledger and bond papers 
with increasing atmospheric humidity. There is also a 
change in the area of the paper due to its expansion with 
the increased moisture in the air. 

Part of the difficulty of moisture absorption 
can be avoided by using Atwell a,nd Woodworth’s technique 
of storing the paper cuttings in a desiccator for a week 
and weighing upon removal. Weighing should be carried out 
immediately a.fter removal of the paper from the desiccator 
because it absorbs a large percentage of its final moisture 
content within twenty minutes after exposure to the air. 

The variability in the thickness in various parts 
of sheets of commercial bond paper is also hardly negligible 
To test this factor, Scammon and Scott (43) used large sheet 
of paper employed in their laboratory for the area-weight 
method. These sheets were placed on a film surface, and 
fifty discs having a diameter of approximately 1.8 cms were 
punched from them at random with a hollow steel cylinder 
whose lower margin was ground to a knife edge. A similar 
set of discs, fifty in number, approximately 4 mms in 




. 




■ 




. 





















* 








■ 
















, 








- 

* 












■ 




. 1 ■. . 













diameter, were cut in the same manner. These discs were 
then weighed on a delicate analytical balance. To eliminate, 
as far as possible the psychological element in this experi¬ 
ment, two observers were employed in making the weighings, 
one adjusting the analytical balance used, while the other, 
a totally disinterested party, recorded each weight. A 
coefficient of variability was found to be quite consider¬ 
able. 


Since absolute values are not necessary in this 
investigation, these errors do not take on the same import¬ 
ance as indicated in the above papers in which the determina¬ 
tions required quantitative results as. an essential factor. 

In the case of this study, relative values are the most 
important thing, and not absolute values. 

The use of heavy paper was at first thought 
desirable for this work with adrenals. Because of the 
delicate configuration of the medullary groups of tissue, 
however, it was deemed inadvisable from a mechanical stand¬ 
point to use this heavy paper, i.e. the cutting out of the 
pieces would be inaccurate. Therefore, two types of paper 
were considered for this purpose, ordinary bond paper and 
foolscap. In order to determine which one to use, a num¬ 
ber of sheets of uniform style of both types were weighed 
piece by piece and the average taken of both groups sep¬ 
arately. The deviation of each sheet from the average was 























’ ■ 


























• 











• 


















































61 


obtained and the mean deviation calculated. The percentage 
error was determined on the basis of the mean deviation 
(see Tables I and II). The foolscap showed a much smaller 
percentage error, and for this reason was chosen as the 
best paper of the two to be used. 

The sections of each gland were projected through 
a microprojector and reflected by a mirror on to an adjust¬ 
able stand. As each gland was serially sectioned, to get 
a representative number of sections, every tenth section 
was used. 



TABLE I 



WEIGHTS OF 

BOW PAPER 

Weight of 

Average 


Paper (gms) 

Weight 

Deviation 

3.5819 

3.5199 

* 0.0620 

3.5173 


-0.0026 

3.5412 


♦ 0.0213 

3.5212 


*0.0013 

3.4916 


- 0.0213 

3.4910 


-0,0219 

3.5162 


-0.0037 

3.4852 


-0.0347 

3.4855 


-0.034V 

3.4952 


-0.02V7 

3.5486 


*0.0287 

3.5634 


*0.0435 

42.2383 


0.3001 


Mean Deviation - G.0250 

Percent of Greatest Deviation « 1*73# 

Percent of Mean Deviation a 0*71% 













TABLE II 


WEIGHTS OF FOOLSCAP 


Weight of 

Average 


Paper (gms) 

Weight 

Deviation 

3A985 

3.5197 

-0.0212 

3.5218 


♦0.0021 

3.517V 


-0.0023 

3.5173 ' 


-0.0024 

3.563V 


♦0.0437 

3.5V86 


♦0.0289 

3.V952 


-0.0245 

3.V855 


-0.0342 

3.V852 


-0.0345 

3.5162 


-0.0035 

3.4910 


-O .0287 

3.V916 


-0.0281 

3.5221 


♦0.0024 

3.5V12 


♦0.0215 

3.5570 


♦0.0373 

3.5380 


♦0.0183 

3.5V42 

- 

♦0.0245 

59.8342 


0.3581 


Mean Deviation s 0.0211 

Percent of Greatest Deviation g 1.2b% 

Percent of Mean Deviation s 0.60 % 










64 


TABLE III 



PERCENT VOLUME OF 

MEDULLA 

AND CORTEX 


Sex & 

IN 

Duration of 

EXPERIMENTAL BIRDS 

Weight of Paper $ of 

% of 

Number 

Illumination 

Medulla 

Cortex 

Medulla 

Cortex 

lll-F 

11 hours 

2.0806 

8.5231 

19.62 

80.38 

115-M 

12 

2.2591 

9.5379 

19.15 

80.85 

119 -M 

12 s 40 

2.3540 

7.5505 

23.77 

76.23 

122-F 

13:30 

2.0628 

7.8532 

20.80 

79.20 

129-F 

15 

1.5333 

10.1793 

13.09 

86.91 

133-M 

15 

1.5056 

11.0419 

11.98 

88.02 

134-F 

15 

1.3375 

11.1990 

10.67 

89.33 

I52-M 

13:15 

2.5111 

11.5492 

17.86 

82.14 

155-M 

12 

1.9845 

10.3250 

16.12 

83.88 

157-M 

11:30 

1.7605 

8.0787 

17.89 

82.11 

158-m 

10:30 

2.4030 

9.5160 

20.16 

79.84 

162-F 

10 

2.4372 

10.9680 

18.18 

81.82 


















0 o 


'10 


.000 


;;;c 

xej : ic 


‘fir/'jsn ; c j 


j:. c., >■; u 
loO. . ... 0 nl. 

a c JI 


& xsi 
eel's i..i 

-HI 


I- * ' 


* v \ 

fi> I 


\«M 01-:' .... 

V‘ » - r ! - * 0.1 

-V- " - .j- 

H*:_C ■ 

oyi v -V ■* 
&U i ' c. M,- v 


. j 

\L^± 

I'f.P'i 


■V.I 
^ OC -0„K 


II 


CO sOI 


Bt<-->i be \ .ci t $\o-, 


oi 


•l';i 
• I 
*S 5 CI 
•I 01 



TABLE IV 



PERCENT VOLUME OF 

MEDULLA 

AND CORTEX 




IN WILD 

BIRDS 



Sex & 

Duration of 

Weight ( 

of Paper 

% of 

% of 

Number 

Illumination 

Medulla 

Cortex 

Medulla 

Cortex 

116 -m 

8:4? 

2.2316 

7.3150 

23.37 

76.63 

132-F 

10:15 

2.2043 

8.3340 

20.91 

79.09 

137-M 

10:45 

2.7477 

n.9543 

18.69 

81.31 

138 -M 

10:45 

2.2351 

10.3311 

17.78 

82.22 

142-M 

11:15 

2.3616 

6.9222 

25.44 

74.56 

149-F 

11:45 

3.7551 

9.5862 

28.15 

71.85 

150 -M 

11:45 

2.9550 

7.2540 

28.94 

71.06 

154-M 

12:15 

2.6910 

8.4035 

24.25 

75.75 

156-M 

12:45 

1.5445 

9.3843 

14.13 

85.87 

165-F 

16:40 

1.5337 

10.4818 

12.76 

87.24 

I 67 -M 

16:55 

1.8120 

9.9114 

15.46 

84.54 

16 8-M 

17 

2.1198 

10.2412 

17.15 

82.85 

[171 

J uvenile 

3.6115 

8.8734 

28.93 

71.07] 

173-F 

16:25 

2.1771 

11.9862 

15.37 

84.65 

[174 

J uvenile 

3.4826 

11.0012 

24.04 

75.96] 

176-M 

16:15 

1.9823 

9.8475 

16.75 

83.24 

180-M 

14 

2.5349 

IO.OO 76 

20.21 

79.79 

182-F 

11:30 

2.2245 

8.0471 

21.59 

78.41 

185»M 

9:35 

2.8475 

11.0121 

20.55 

79.45 


Juveniles Not Included in Graphs. 












1 






PERCENT VOLUME of CORTICAL 
TISSUE in EXPERIMENTAL BIRDS 


66 



% ? /0 II w 13 tcf. /S' /*/• 13 1/ /o 9 8 

Hooks of Illommaf/On 

PERCENT VOLUME of CORTICAL 
TISSUE in WILD BIRDS 











































































































































































































































67 



yayo^ j.o 9Lun|o/\ 


c 

o 



c 


E 

D 

1-1 

<~4- 

O 

05 

\_ 

=> 


































































































































































































































































CONCLUSIONS 


An examination of the medulla-cortical configu¬ 
ration of the series of both experimental and wild birds 
shows a great deal of variation. In some cases the medul¬ 
lary tissue is found in large masses in the central area 
of the gland, while some have medullary tissue in long 
strands. Others again have the medullary cells.in small 
discrete masses. Some have thin strands of these cells 
running along the edge of the gland and generally the 
medulla is spread throughout the whole gland, while in 
others the peripheral regions are largely devoid of chro¬ 
maffin cells. Plates I to V give a representative cross- 
section of adrenal glands. 

Regardless of this, a general pattern can be dis¬ 
cerned through the whole series, in both experimental and 
wild birds. In the winter condition the medullary tissue 
is in large masses which is also found at the periphery. . 
As spring conditions are approached, the medullary bodies 
seem to be broken up into smaller groups and are generally 
pushed away from the periphery towards the centre. This 
is partially due to the emergence of Zone Y at the time 
of the breeding season as a prominent area at the periphery 
of the gland. These cells are large and compact, thus 
pushing the medullary cells towards the central area of the 
gland. Also, the central cells become activated and in 








69 


some cases push the chromaffin tissue into long, string¬ 
like groups which radiate towards the central sinus. Also, 
the gland becomes more vascular, a natural result of, or 
prerequisite to, an increased physiological activity of 
the cortical cells. After the breeding season the gland 
tends to return to its winter stage, but this process is 
very gradual. There are of course many variations and in¬ 
termediate configurations, but this general over-all pat¬ 
tern is definite. F. A. Hartman, R. A. Knouff & Co. (13) 
have attempted to show that every Avian species has a 
characteristic chromaffin pattern. I believe that they 
have completely overlooked the possibility of seasonal 
changes and that there is no characteristic chromaffin 
pattern in individual species, but that there is a general 
tendency for the chromaffin pattern to change with the 
seasons. The general chromaffin pattern is also dependent 
largely on the amount of medullary tissue present in the 
gland; as the amount of medullary tissue varies, the pat¬ 
tern will vary. Plates I to V will indicate the great 
variability of the adrenal gland in one species of bird. 
Plate III shows that even in a number of representative 
sections taken from one adrens.1 a certain amount of varia,- 
tion in configuration is shown. 

From the study of the percentages of medullary 
and cortical cells in both series, there is definitely a 
clear indication of a cycle. These results have been tabu- 




70 


lated in tables III and IV from which graphs have been drawn. 
From the graphs it will be seen that there is a cycle in 
both the experimental and the wild birds which closely 
parallel each other and which approximately follows the 
breeding cycle. 

The increase in the volume of the cortical tissue 
may not be an actual increase in the number of cortical 
cells, but they may have merely increased in size, crowding 
out the medullary tissue and cutting it up into smaller 
bundles. It may be a combination of the two, but the histo¬ 
logical examination of the series seems to corroborate the 
latter contention as being the more plausible explanation. 

An examination of the graph shows that the ex¬ 
perimental birds seem to lag behind the wild birds in the 
cycle. For example, the peak of the graph is reached in 
the experimental birds at the illumination of fifteen hours, 
while in the wild birds the peak of the cycle is reached 
at approximately fourteen hours. I think the probable ex¬ 
planation is that the experimental birds, due to the ab¬ 
normally rapid increase in illumination, are several steps 
behind in their development than the wild birds in their 
natural environment. 

The dip in both graphs may be connected with the 
development of the gonads. Further study along this line 
would no doubt shed more light on this problem. 
























































' 

. 
















. 


. 






* 
















. 

































71 


Several investigators have noted a difference in 
the amount of medullary tissue found in both sexes. In 
this study no difference has been noted in the sexes which 
could not be attributed to individual variability. The 
juveniles show a greater volume of medullary tissue than 
do the adults shot at the same period. 

The histological and physiological examination 
of both series supports the belief that a cycle is present. 
An examination of the cortical cells of a winter adrenal 
gland show that they are comparatively inactive. As the 
spring breeding conditions are approached the cells appear 
to become more active and the peak is reached during the 
breeding season. This is quite natural because of the sex 
hormones known to be elaborated by the adrenal cortical 
cells. After the short breeding season the cortical cells 
in the centra,! area of the gland, which during the breeding 
season are the most active, become degenerate and die, to 
be replaced by younger and less active cells being pushed 
in from the periphery by proliferation. Thus after the 
period of recrudescence of the gonads the cortical cells 
of the adrenals generally take on an inactive appearance. 
This process is much more gradual than the building up 
of activity. 

This study indicates that the life cycle of the 
cortical cells generally accepted is substantially true. 

It is apparent throughout the whole serj.es of glands by 














. 






















. 








* 

* 





. 








' 




72 


the appearance of the cortical cells that the young cells 
are at the periphery and that the older degenerating cells 
are in the central area. To determine whether new cortical 
cells are elaborated by the capsule would require special 
techniques and is beyond the scope of this thesis. 

The osmicated adrenal glands show a definite 
activity cycle. In general the central cortical cells show 
a greater concentration of lipoid than the peripheral corti¬ 
cal cells. It is believed by Flexner and Oroilman, Kar 
and others, that the cells which show little or no stainable 
lipoid are the youngest type and that in the course of their 
migration inward the droplets incree.se both in number and 
in size. As the breeding season is approached the concen¬ 
tration of osmicated fats increased greatly in some of the 
peripheral areas. With the passing of the breeding season 
there is a gradual recession in the amount of lipoid present. 
It is generally believed that when the lipoid content is 
low the functional activity of the cortex is low and is in¬ 
creased when the secretory activity is supposed to be in¬ 
creased. This study tends to substantiate this contention. 

Thus from these various studies there is suggestive 
evidence that a cycle correlated to the breeding cycle is 
present in the adrenal gland of the house sparrow. In the 
light of this positive evidence it seems that there should 






















f 










■ 







































- • 





















. 


-■ 


■ 






















73 


be a revaluation of many investigations which have already 
been carried out on the Avian adrenal gland. More investi¬ 
gations along other lines are required to establish more 
exact relationship between the pituitary gland, the adrenal 
cycle and the gonadal cycle in the house sparrow. 



74 


SUMMARY 

In the present survey twenty-four experimental 
and.- about sixty wild bird adrenal glands of the house sparrow 
( Passer domesticue ) were examined microscopically. 

1. A general description of the adrenal gland of 
the house sparrow was made. 

2. No typical medullary tissue configuration was seen, 
but a general pattern of change was observed. 

This change was d_ue to the amount of medullary 
tissue found in the gland, the emergence of the Y 
Zone and the physiological activation of the cen¬ 
tral cortical cells with the approach of the breed¬ 
ing season. 

3. Histological examination of both series showed a 
general activity cycle of the cortical cells. 

This was substantiated by the investigation of 
adrenal glands fixed in an osmic acid solution 
to bring out the steroid content of the glands. 

4. An area-by-weight method, was used to determine 
changes in volume of medulla, and cortex and. it 
was shown that during the breeding season the 
volume of medullary tissue cLecreanes considerably. 



































- 



























































, 







































BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(1) BAKER, D. D. - 1939 - Differential stain for the nuclei 

of the Suprarenal Cortical Cells. Anat. Rec. 

Vol. 74, pp 401-408. 

( 2 ) BEST & TAYLOR - The Physiological Basis of Medical 

Practice - 4th Edition Williams & Wilkins. 

(3) BLUMFELD, C. M. - 1939 - The Effect of Ovariectomy 

on the Adrenal Glands of the Albino Rat. Endoc. 
Vol. 24, p 723- 

(4) BULBRING, E. - 1937 - Relation between size of Testes 

and Requirement of Cortical Extra,ct in Adrenal- 
ectomized Drakes. Jnl. Physiol. (Proc.) 18P. 

(5) CHIDESTER, F. E., EATON, A. G. and THOMPSON, G. P. - 

1929 ” The influence of Desicca.ted Suprarenal 
Cortex and Medulla on the Growth and Maturity 
of Young Rats. Am. Jnl. of Physiology, Vol. 

88, p 191. 

(6) DAVIDS, A. M., BINDER, M. B. - 1940 - Effects of Adren¬ 

alin on Tubular Contractions of the Rabbit in 
Relation to the Sex Hormones. (Studies in Vivo 
by Rubin Method). Am. Jnl. of Physiol. Vol. 

129, PP 259-263. 

(7) DOSNE, C. and DALTON, A. J. - 1941 - Changes in Lipoid 

Content of Adrenal Glands of the Rat under 
conditions of Activity and. Rest. Anat. Rec. 

Vol. 80, p 2ll. 

(8) EMERY, F. E., and ATWELL, W. J. - 1933 - Hypertrophy 

of Adrenals after Pituitary Extract. Anat. 

Rec. Vol. 58, p 17. 

(9) FLEXNER, L. B. and GROLLMAN, A. - 193^ - The Reduction 

of Osmic Acid as an Indicator of Ad-renal Corti- 
cs.l Activity in the Rat. Anat. Rec. Vol. 75, 
pp 207-216. 

(10) GROLLMAN, A., and HOWARD, E. - 1933 - The Effects of 
Adrenal Cortex Extract on the Reproductive 
System. Am. Jnl. Physiol. Vol. 105, P ^2* 



























76 


(11) GRUENWALD, P. - 1946 - Embryonic and Postnatal Develop¬ 

ment of the Adrenal Cortex, Particularly the 
Zona Glomerulosa and Accessory Nodules. Anat. 

Rec. Vol. 95, PP 391-413. 

( 12 ) GRUENWALD, P. and KORNIKOV, W. M. - 1944 - Cell Re¬ 

placement and its Relation to the Zona Glom- 
erulosa in the Adrenal Cortex of Mammals. 

Anat. Rec. Vol. 89, pp 1-16. 

(13) HARTMAN, F. A., KNOUFF, R. A., McNUTT, A. W. and 

CARVER, J. E. - 1947 - Chromaffin Patterns in 
Bird Adrenals. Anat. Rec. Vol. 97, P 211. 

(14) HASHIMOTO, E. I. - 1941 - The Effect of the Duration 

of the Post-operative Interval on the Quanti¬ 
tative Changes in the Adrenal G-lands of Ovari- 
ectomized Albino Rats. Anat. Rec. Vol. 81, p 205* 

(15) HAYS, V. J. - 1914 - The Development of the Adrenal 

G-lands of Birds. Anat. Rec. Vol. 8, pp 451-473. 

(16) HERRICK, E. H. and TORSTVEIT, 0. - 1938 - Some Effects 

of Adrenalectomy in Fowls. Endocrinology, Vol. 

22, PP 469-474. 

(17) HEWITT, H. F. Jr. - 1947 - The Essential Role of the 

Adrenal Cortex in the Hypertrophy of the Ovitestis 
Following Ovariectomy in the Hen. Anat. Rec. 

Vol. 98, p 159. 

(18) HOHN, E. 0. - 1947 - Proc. Zool. Soc. Vol. 117, Parts 

II and III pp 281-304. 

(19) KUSELY, R. A. and HALL, Z. B. - 1945 - A Study of the 

G-enesis of Histological Changes Produced by 
Caloric Restrictions in Portions of the Endocrine 
and Reproductive Systems of Strain ff A ft Female 
Mice. Anat. Rec. Vol. 92, P 135* 

(20) INGLE, D. J., HIGGINS, G. M. and KENDALL, E. C. - 1938 

- Atrophy of Adrenal Cortex in the Rat Produced 
by Administration of Large Amounts of Cortin. 

Anat. Rec. Vol. 71, PP 363-371. 

(21) JAILER, J. W. and BOAS, N. F. - March, 1950 - The 

Inability of Epinephrine or ACTE to Deplete 
the Ascorbic Acid Content of the Chick Adrenal. 
Endoc. 


















77 


(22) KAR, A. B. - 1947 - The Action of Male and. Female Sex 

Hormones on the Adrenals in the Fowl. Anat. 

Rec. Vol. 97, p 551. 

(23) 19^7 - The Adrenal Cortex - Testicular Relations 
in the Fowl: the Effect of Castration and Re¬ 
placement therapy on the Adrenal Cortex. Anat. 
Rec. Vol. 99, PP 177-197. 

(24) Studies in Distribution and Concentration of 
Alkaline Phosphatase in Adrenal Cortex of Normal 
and of Sex Hormoned Treated Pigeons. Endocrin¬ 
ology, Vol. 46 , pp 363-366. 

(25) KNOUFF, R. A., BROWN, J. B. and SCHNEIDER, B. M. - 1941 

- Studies of Adrenal Lipids in the G-uinea Pig - 
Effect of Extreme Muscular Activity on the 
Adrenal Lipids. Anat. Rec. Vol. 79 PP 15-36. 

( 26 ) MacFARLAND, W. E. - 1945 - The vital necessity of the 

Adrenal Cortical Tissue in a. Mammal and the 
Effects of Proliferation of Cortical Cells from 
Dormant Coelomic Mesothelium. Anat. Rec. Vol. 

93, P 233- 

(27) MARTIN, S. J. - 1938 - The Effect of Complete Supra- 

renalectomy on the Oestrus Cycle of the White 
Rat with Reference to Adrenals - Pituitary 
Relationships - Am. Jnl. Physiol. Vol. 100, p 180. 

( 28 ) MILLER, R. A. and RIDDLE, 0. - 1941 - Cellular response 

to Insulin in Adrenals. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. 

Vol. 47, pp 449-453. 

(29) Cytology of the Pigeon Adrenal Cortex. Am. Jnl. 
of Anatomy Vol. 71-72, P 311. 

(30) Cellular Response to Insulin in Suprarenals 
of Pigeons. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Vol. 47, 

pp 449-453* 

( 31 ) 1939 - Stimulation of Adrenal Cortex of Pigeons 
by Anterior Pituitary Hormones and by their 
Secondary Products. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. 

Vol. 41, pp 518-522* 

(32) 1943 - Effects of Prolactin and Cortical Hormones 
on Body Weight and Food Intake of Adrenalectom- 
ized Pigeons. Proc. Soc. Exu. Biol. Vol. 52-53 
pp 131-133* 

( 33 ) 1939 - Rest, activity and Repair in Cortical Cells 
of Pigeon Adrenals. Anat. Rec. Vol. 75, P 103* 














(3*0 MOELIG - The Pituitary Gland and the Suprarenal Cortex. 
Arch. Int. Med. Vol. 44 pp 339-343. 

(35) PARKES, A. S. and SELYE, H. - 1936 - Adrenalectomy of 

Birds. Jnl. Physiol. (Proc.) Vol. 86 35P> 

(36) PERRY, J. C. - 1941 - Adrenal - Gonadal Antagonism in 

the Sparrow, Passer domesticus (Linnaeus). Anat. 
Rec. Vol. 79, PP 57-71. 

(37) 1943 - Gonad and Related Endocrine Response of 
Female Rats to Experimental Hyperadrenalism. 
Anat. Rec. Vol. 87 , pp 415-425* 

(38) RIDDLE, 0., HONEYWELL, H. F. and FISHER, W. S. - 1924 - 

Suprarenal Enlargement in Pigeons under heavy- 
insulin dosage. Am. Jnl. Physiol. Vol. 68, pp 
461-476. 

(39) RIDDLE, 0., SMITH, G. C. and MILLER, R. A. - 1944 - 

The effect of adrenalectomy on heat Production 
in Young Pigeons. Am. Jnl. Physiol. Vol. l4l, 

P 157. 

(40) ROWAN, W. - Experiments in Bird Migration, Proc. Boston 

Soc. Natural History Vol. 39, No. 5 PP 151-208. 

(41) SALMON, T. N. and ZWEMER, R. L. - 1941 - A Study of 

the Life History of Cortico-Adrenal Gland Cells 
of the Rat by Means of Trypan Blue Injections. 
Anat. Rec. Vol. 80, p 421. 

(42) SAUER, F. C. and LATIMER, H. B. - Sex Differences in 

the Proportion of the Cortex and the Medulla 
in the Chicken Suprarenal. Anat. Rec. Vol. 

50, pp 289-298. 

(43) SCAMMON, R. E. and SCOTT, G. H. - 1927 - The Technique 

of Determining Irregular Area.s in Morphological 
Studies. Anat. Rec. Vol. 35 • PP 269-277* 

(44) SCHOOLSY, J. P., RIDDLE, 0. and BATES, R. W. - 1937 7 

Effective Stimulation of Crop-sacs by Prolactin 
in Hypophysectorn!zed and Adrenalectomized Pigeon 
Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Vol. 3 8 , pp 408-411. 

(45) SELYE, Hans. - Endocrinology. 

(46) SELYE, H. & C0LLIP, J. B. - 1936 - Fundamental Factors 

in the Interpretation of Stimuli influencing 
Endocrine Glands. Endocrinology, Vol. 20, pp 

667 - 672 . 






. 



79 


(47) SWINYARD, C. A. - 1943 - Growth of the Human Supra¬ 

renal Gland. Anat. Rec. Vol. 87 , pp 141-151. 

(48) UOTILA, V. V. - 1939 - On the Fuchsinophile and Pale 

Cells in the Adrenal Cortex Tissue of the Fowl. 
Anat. Rec. Vol. 75, pp 439-447. 

(49) WALTON, R. M. and ZWEMER, R. L. - 1943 - A Study of 

the Cytogenesis of Cortico-Adrenal Cells in the 
Cat. Anat. Rec. Vol. 86 , p 409* 

(50) WEAVER, H. M. and Nelson, W. 0. - 1943 - Changes in 

Birefringent Material in the Adrenal Cortex 
of the Rat Following Administration of Adreno- 
trophic Hormone. Anat. Rec. Vol. 85 pp 51-64. 

(51) WHEELER, N. C., SEARCY, G-. L. and ANDREWS, F. N. - 

1942 - Effect of Adrenalin upon Semen Production 
in the Domestic Fowl. Endoc. Vol. 30 pp 369-374. 

(52) ZWEMER, R. L., WALTON, R. M. and NORKIJS, M. G-. - 1938 - 

A Study of Cortico-Adrenal Cells. Anat. Rec. 

Vol. 72> PP 449-458. 





PLATE I 


CONFIGURATION OF ADRENAL GLANDS 
OF EXPERIMENTAL BIRDS 


Figure I 

Bird #111 

11 hours 

Female 

Figure II 

#114 

11 hours *+0 mins* 

Male 

Figure III 

#115 

12 hours 

Male 

Figure IV 

#119 

12 hours kQ mins* 

Male 

Figure V 

#123 

14 hours 

Male 

Figure VI 

#124 

15 hours 

Female 


Explanations 

Medullary groups of cells* 



Blood sinusoids* 


O 


Cortical Tissue 




















LI L „ . .. .V. G i 1 X , Ou 


IG 


siOi ' .1 . Y'i 


Cm 


!'. oi gJ; 



\ 



o,( • CJ. < 1 


i. C- • . j ’_L ' 


* ill; ,*o p ;utj c %■: .. X, 


* l ' ioc: J L, GC-' 


:cG 





PLATE II 


CONFIGURATION OF ADRENAL GLANDS 



OF EXPERIMENTAL BIRDS 


Figure I 

Bird #13 1 + 

15 hours 

Female 

Figure II 

#152 

12 hours 40 mins 

Male 

Figure III 

#155 

12 hours 

Male 

Figure IV 

#157 

11 hours 30 mins 

Male 

Figure V 

#158 

10 hours 30 mins 

Male 

Figure VI 

#160 

10 hours 

Male 


Explanation! 


Medullary groups of cells 


O 


Blood sinusoids* 
Cortical Tissue, 
















:.l_. ic ii; i /■ 

r:, :ir& r i¥.c ho. 


G 


£cX 



. 


G 


c • s: ; . 


!. ")J C L S . - L beef 

J. ci oj :> -.of 


GilOr 










PLATE III 


CONFIGURATION OF ADRENAL GLANDS 
OF EXPERIMENTAL BIRDS 


Figures I to VI Bird #133 fifteen hours 
Explanations 



Medullary groups of cells 
Blood sinusoids 

Cortical tissue 


Male 


Y Zone 










V 


VI 




















J. I J.-' L‘, 


iO ..Oil. .11 a. .. C 

.1 l;.l. W .0 


J.. . o' 


‘ - - r C'.'. v 

ji £ l a c... 

1 O '-: C". . • 1 

: o. C, : 'J. 

•;X i"LiJC0, II 

X s-it or II 


)• 


U I 


II go lo o ; C'O 


i. i. 0 - ■ 


<3 i.).LQG >. x._£3 . .OCX- 


• L 1 G G jl £o O-i J ' L 0 ■ 


PLATE IV 


CONFIGURATION OF ADRENAL GLANDS 



OF WILD 

BIRDS 


Figure I 

Bird #108 

7 hours bO mins. 

Female 

Figure II 

#116 

8 hours 20 mins. 

Male 

Figure III 

#131 

10 hours 15 mins. 

Male 

Figure IV 

#138 

10 hours 45 mins. 

Female 

Figure V 

#144 

11 hours 15 mins. 

Male 

Figure VI 

#150 

11 hours ^5 mins. 

Male 

Explanations 





Medullary groups of cells 



Blood sinusoids 


O 


Cortical tissue 







V 


VI 










PLATE V 


CONFIGURATION OF ADRENAL GLANDS 




OF WILD 

BIRDS 




Figure 

I 

Bird # 167 

16 hours 

50 

mins* 

Male 

Figure 

II 

# 173 

16 hours 

25 

mins. 

Female 

Figure 

III 

# 175 

Juvenile 




Figure 

IV 

# 176 

16 hours 

15 

mins. 

Male 


Explanations 


Medullary groups of cells 



Blood sinusoids 


O 


Cortical tissue 










PLATE VI 


PHOTOMI C ROGRAPHS OF OSMICATED 
ADRENAL GLANDS 


Experimental 

Birds 




Figure I 

Bird #115 

12 hours 


Male 

Figure II 

#122 

13 hours 

30 mins* 

Female 

Figure III 

#128 

15 hours 


Female 

Figure IV 

#152 

12 hours 

40 mins* 

Male 







VV 



III 


IV 





















































X 


cJ ' Ci 


J 



V.i C \f 


-X ; . »oi J .. Xl ^ i- 0 ^ \-X XjIi - - X 

C X.. : H L . or XX • ’ ^X ' X ■ -O - 




PLATE VII 


PHOTOMICROGRAPHS 

OF OSMICATED 



ADRENAL GLANDS 


Experimental Birds 



Figure I 

Bird #155 

12 hours 

Male 

Figure II 

#160 

10 hours 

Male 

Wild Birds 




Figure III 

#127 

9 hours 45 mins* 

Male 

Figure IV 

#156 

12 hours 45 mins* 

Male 









Ill 


rv 























































B29761 







