w 


For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 



Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta 


Aylesworih, Nellie Margaret 

A history of the high school courses 
of study for Alberta. 1936. 


















©X IJBBIS 

Mrawwaw 





















Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/aylesworth1936 


A HISTORY OF THE HIGH SCHOOL 
COURSES OF STUDY FOR ALBERTA 

Ly 

Ifellie Margaret Aylesworth, B.A., 
Department of History 

University of Alberta, 

A thesis submitted to the 
University of Alberta 

In Partial Fulfilment of the Requirements 
For the Degree of Master of Arts 
Under the Direction of: 

G. M* Smith, M*A, 
and 

M* H« Long, M«A« 


Edmonton, Alberta 


April 1936 






< * * 1 


- - 1, .L 




j -L 



0 


o 


; 



J 




UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have 
read, and recommend to the Committee on Graduate 
Studies for acceptance, a thesis on, "A History of 
the High School Courses of Study for Alberta", 
submitted by Nellie Margaret AyJ.esworth,i B.A., in 
partial fulfilment of the requirements for the 
degree of Master of Arts* 



Professor H 



















ACEH OWL ED 0 EMEUT S 


I wish to take this opportunity to thank 
Professors 0 . M. Smith and M. H. Long, under whose 
direction this work was carried out, for the valuable 
criticisms and suggestions which they have given me 
throughout the study of this subject* 

I am also greatly indebted to a number of 
educationists in the Province for furnishing me with 
records and statistics* I am especially indebted to; 

G* F. McHally, M.A., Deputy Minister of Education 

Dr. A# C. Rutherford, Chancellor of the University 

of Alberta. 

J. C. Taggart, Minister of Agriculture, Regina 

Dr. H. C. Howland, Supervisor of Schools for 

Alberta. 

Dr. M. E. Lazerte, University of Alberta. 

Dr. Ceneva Misener, University of Alberta. 

Dr. H. E. Smith, University of Alberta. 

Donald Cameron, Librarian, University of Alberta. 

J. A. Fife, B.A. 

F.G . Buchanan, M. A. Superintendent of Schools, 

Calgary. 


v * . 

: - it ' . 

. 

- 



• i 0- )'■' • n 





* ’ * 



A. McKee, B.A., Superintendent of Schools, 
Edmonton • 

W. 2* Payne, Barrister, Red Beer* 

Miss A* R, McKee, Provincial library. 







PREFACE 


I have written this thesis entirely from the 
standpoint of history, not philosophy of education. I 
wished to assemble the high school courses, which have 
been taught in Alberta from the beginning of schools, 
and relate them as far as I could with the progress 
and social conditions in the Province# I thought 
this should be done while the Territorial records were 
still readily available; and while it was still possible 
to consult some of the pioneer educationists in our own 
Province# 

While the new course of Studies for Secondary 
Schools is well under way, I have refrained from making 
any detailed or positive statements in regard to it, 
because, on account of the uncertainty of the larger 
school unit being introduced, many changes may be made 
before it is finally authorized# 


H.M#A 


April 1936 









* 


f 

u 

f 

•! iR '• P 

' 









>■ 

. 


■ 




J 


■ 1 
















v_ ; . . . J V-/ 










- 















TABXE OF CONTENTS 


Chapter 

I. Introduction - Clashing Ideals in Secondary 

Education in Canada*-- 1 

II. Union Schools in the North West Territories - 7 

III. Advancement in Secondary Education in the 

Forth West Territories up to 1902 ---— 14 

IV The Revision of the Course of Studies for 

Secondary Schools in the Forth West Territories 

1902—.........?2 

V• The Alberta Revision of the Course for 

Secondary Schools 1912* 27 

VI. The Revision of 1924- 38 

VII. Some Details of the 1924 Course --—--47 

VIII. The 1924 Course in Operation —--6l 

IX. Possible Trends of the New Course —-73 

Bibliography ——--------8'2 

Appendix 1.- Programme of Studies in Grammar 

Schools of Upper Canada 1855 -—86 

Appendix 11. Provisional Regulations with respect 
to Union Schools in the North West 

Territories, 1889 ---90 

Appendix 111 Programme of Studies of Union Schools 




















Nor*tii ¥§st Territories, 1889 --- 92 

Appendix IV High School Course of Studies 

Ontario, 1891 —----- 96 

Appendix V Courses of Studies, North West 

Territories; I89I -- 102 

Appendix VI Regulations of the Council of Public 

Instruction I898 —--- m 

Appendix VII Course of Studies for the North West 

Territories, 1902 ----— 119 

Appendix VIII Coarse of Studies and Subjects of 

Examination, Alberta, 1913-128 

Appendix IX Subjects of Study, Alberta, 1924- 144 















? 









A HISTOBY OP THE HIGH SCHOOL COURSES 


OP STUDY POB ALBEBTA 
CHAPTEB I 

Clashing Ideals in Secondary Education in Alberta 


Por the last twenty years educationists on the Horth 
American Continent have been seeking a suitable programme 
of studies for secondary schools. Programmes of studies 
must not be rigid but change with conditions, and keep in 
step with the progress of the country. The history of 
the programme of studies mil then in some measure reflect 
the history of commercial and industrial progress, social 
concepts, educational and spiritual ideals of the country. 

A hundred years ago,.the time when America was first 

A 

becoming interested in secondary education, the curriculum 
for secondary schools in England consisted largely of 
Greek and Latin, with mathematics holding a slightly 
secondary place. The first Protestant schools on this 
continent copied the English schools. 

There are however within Canada two nationalities, 

■ 

speaking different languages and opposed to each other 


I 











' 


r 




a 




on the fundamental issues of education and religion. 

The people of Quebec are French and Homan Catholic, 
vshile the rest of Canada is English speaking and largely 
Protestant. 

Quebec drew her inspiration from Old France, and 

V 

traditional culture forms the basis of her system; there 
must be a thorough knowledge of the classics, not so 
much for the understanding of the church ritual, as for 
the formation of a standard of culture to enable the 
student to see into his own environment, and en^oy in 
it, what he finds best. The social life in the Quebec 
schools is never neglected; much more important are the 
festival days and the gorgeous church pageants, than 
market days or the busy hum of factories. Dear to the 
hearts of the people, are the villages with the quaint 
houses clustering around the spired church, and their 
hearts respond to the beauty of the hills and valleys 
which surround their homes. Early in history the 
Catholic Church grasped the idea that people are guided 
less by their minds than they are moved by their feelings, 
hopes and passions, so by means of religion, the schools 
cultivate the emotions, which in turn find an outlet 
in religion fervour. 














* 


- 




If 


■ 



. 



. 



■J' 1 ■ h 






■ 



, 





3 


In Quebec the schools are under two committees, 
one Catholic and the other Protestant* As Quebec is so 
overwhelmingly Catholic, I shall merely refer to the 
Catholic section throughout* The Catholic committee 
administers the vast number of schools and colleges 
within the Province. The multiplicity of educational 
institutions has been made possible by the services of 
the various religious and teaching orders of the church# 3 
Thus through both administration and teaching the schools 
are closely bound tot;he mother church, and so fulfil 
the Catholic ideal of education that the schools should 
be, "flowing streams making glad the city of God"# 

Until fairly recent years, we have been prone to 
look upon Quebec as backward in educational progress, 
spending too much time on effete classical subjects whose 
usefulness is dead, devoting too much attention to 
religious observances, and neglecting those studies which 
lead to national prosperity and advancement* 

Let us take Ontario as typical of British Protestant 
Canada before the settling of the West. Ontario has no 
artistocratic background; the aristocracy of Britain did 
not come to Canada in any appreciable numbers, except 
in government or military service. These returned when 



0 





r 


L 






;o v 




o 




'i 


0 











4 


their term of exile was completed. It was those with 
pioneerhlood coursing in their veins who came to settle 
Ontario• 

They were of many Protestant denominations, and as 
they were unahle to agree on church control of education, 
the government took charge of both primary and secondary 
schools and made them powerful instruments in the 
service of the state. The schools were to he democratic. 
While the old countries have a strong class basis, 

Ontario followed the lead of the United States in the 
tendency to offer a free general education to all her 
adolescent population. 

The first course of studies for secondary schools 

n ■ 

framed by Dr. Ryerson in 1845 (Appendix 1.) took cognizance 
of traditional culture as in England at that time, and 
made the courses in Greek and Latin compulsory. The 
educationists feared to leave out religious instruction 
entirely, so sought to teach some religiou^ truths 
through the medium of text books, and the "examples and 
precepts" of the teachers. 

As time went on, Ontario adopted a middle course 
between that of England and her prosperous neighbor to the 






- 

• ; . .. •• • . ' ■ ■ ' 

; ' . ' i :- '• v.- i ' ;6 

’■ 





» 

. 




■ 








* 

, 

. 

t 

t 

» 




5 


south• By 1891 # the period at which the Territories 
were becoming interested in secondary education, cultural 
subjects had been relegated to a minor or optional place 
on the programme (Appendix IV) • Scientific subjects 
and those thought to develop the reasoning faculties 
were made prominent* Religious instruction gev£ way 
to the teaching of ethics; finally casting aside all 
emotional training as empirical, the state directed 
education along the lines of reason and light, having 
in mind the building up of a prosperous country peopled 
with reasonable and intelligent beings. 

Quebec has not changed her mind, and there have 
been many clashes of opinion between Catholic Quebec, 
and Protestant Ontario on the subject of education. 

The Catholic mind can s ee no possibility of separating 
religion and education, and so, as Western Canada was 
opened up, and Catholic people came westward, the church 
fought to secure religious privileges for her people. 
Ontario on the other hand, satisfied with the results of 
her educational programme has made herself champion of 
Protestantism and a secular school system, and set her 

















' 

- • 


; ; ' 

<■' ’ 


. 

' • 

* 

t 

J. 

, f 

v 

J*. ■ 










6 * 

face against Catholic encroachment in the west* Our 
school system in Alberta has been influenced all along 
by this clash of opinion; it is felt strongly today 
as the idea of larger administrative units is being 
so thoroughly canvassed* The question arises, what 
about the Catholic schools? 

1* Putman, J* H., Senior Inspector of Schools, Ottawa, 
and Weir, Q# M*, Professor of Education, University 
of British Columbia, Survey of the School System 
of British Columbia; (Victoria 1925 ) 

2* Moore, William Henry, The Clash; Ch* Vll (1918, J* M 
Bent & Sons, ltd*, Toronto*) 

3 * Bovey, 7/ilfrid, Canadian,Gh»s Till - IX, (1933, J* M 
Bent & Sons, Bid#, Toronto) 

4 # Burwash, Nathaniel, Makers of Canada* Yol* Xlll, 

Egerton Hyerson; (1910, Movey & Co*, Toronto) 

5* Moore, William Henry . - * 













f * * 7 




1 


t 



T. 


V 


? 



0 


7 - 




CHAPTER II 

Union Schools in the Forth West Territories. 

In 1870, the Dominion Government acquired from the 
Hud son »s Bay Company the territory now known as Alberta 
and Saskatchewan. As there were then very few white 
people living in this area it was merely public domain. 

Five years later under the Premiership of 3ir Alexander 
MacKenzie, the Forth West Territories Act was passed 
giving to the Forth West Territories a resident lieutenant- 
Governor and Territorial Council. Among other things this 
Act authorized the Council to establish a system of 
schools. However the Hen. Edward Blake in the course of 
the debate on the Forth lest Territories Bill had called 
attention to the fact that it made no provision for 
separate schools. Accordingly an amendment had been 
adopted which authorized a dual system of schools — Pro¬ 
testant and Catholic — at the instance of the ratepayers. 

A majority of ratepayers in a school district might 
establish such schools therein as they saw fit, and if 
the minority objected to the kind of school maintained, 
they could establish their own school, in which case they 
paid taxes for its support, and were relieved of the 







r 

* 

















- 






- 


■* 





















8 . 

obligation to support the majority school* Under this law 
a majority in a school district could create a Catholic 
school* In a school district, where the Catholic rate¬ 
payers were in the minority, they could create a school. 
Catholic in character* As population increased there 
would then tend to be two schools in each populous 
district, and in those districts where it was possible to 
maintain only one school, the majority would hesitate to 
establish a school which might be objectionable to the 

i 

| minority. 

In 1875 there were still only some five hundred white 
inhabitants in the North West territories and as a result 
for some time little thought was given to educational 

j 

matters* It was not until I 883 that Mr* Prank Oliver, 
j member of the North West Council from Kdmonton, introduced 
the first bill to organize a Territorial system of educetiai. 
This measure met with serious difficulties and it was not 
until the f 0 llowing year that the first school ordinance 

V 

was passed by the North West Council. In I 885 this measure 
was amended in important respects. The result was a 
system very similar to that of the province of Quebec. It 
provided for a Board of Education to administer the 
School Law. This board was to consist of two sections. 






9 * 

one Catholic and one Protestant* The first Board met 
in 1886; it was composed of five members* At the first 
meeting were present Lieutenant Governor Dewdney, Chairman, 
Father Lacombe, Messrs, Second, and Marshallsay, together 
with James Brown, the Secretary, who continued for a long 
time to be the real Board of Education* 

The completion of the Canadian Pacific Railway 
brought more settlers into this area, and tales of the 
ease with which land was brought under cultivation lured 
many to the prairies. By 1886 people began to clamor 
for secondary education, other than that provided by 
church schools* Thomas Grover, Inspector of Schools for 
the Territories, recommended this in his report of that 
year* He thought that in a year’s time from two to six 
pupils might be sent to secondary schools from the 
larger elementary schools. H His report was supplemented 
by James Brwwn, and was adopted in 1886* 

Hot only were secondary schools needed, but also 
schools for teacher training, as there was a great scarcity 
of trained teachers within the Territories. The problem 
was solved by the organization of what were known as 
union schools* That is "where there were two or more 












■ ■> 


: 


' 

r 

c 


T 



f 





10 . 


adjacent schools with an aggregate daily attendance 
of not less than sixty pupils, where not less than three 
teachers were employed and where not less than fifteen 
pupils from such schools had passed the High School 
Entrance Examination, the trustees were to furnish 
accomodation f or a High School Qourse, and the Board 
of Education might authorize the establishment of a 
Normal course"• These regulations were adopted in 1889 
and our first state secondary schools in the Territories 
were thereupon established. It is interesting to note 
that one of these was a high school in Calgary, opened 
in 1889, with Mr. James Shortt as principal, and about 
thirty students in attendance. 

The first course in union schools (Appendix III) 
was really a continuation of public school work. 

Standard V was made a high school grade, and with normal 
training the student might qualify for a third class 
certificate. Standard VI with normal training gave the 
student a second cla. ss certificate. Hot much thought 
was expended on this course, the idea being merely to 
give the student an extra year f s grounding before 
allowing him to teach; composition, writing and history 
were either reviews or continuations. 








■ \ - 

• '' : to ix 

■ 





v,t : ' 


















11 


This course (Appendix III) did not remain in use 
long# Since students of the age of thirteen to fifteen 
years were able to cope successfully with examinations 
for third class certificates, it was easy to see that it 
was too simple to constitute a satisfactory high school 
course* It was revised in 1889-90, an<i "became a separate 
course, distinct from the public school* An examination 
of this course (Appendix Y) with the Ontario courses of 
approximately the same date (Appendix IY) shows that it 
follows the Ontario pattern, and draws a number of text 
books from Ontario, though it is meagre in outline. 

The course was revised and enlarged in 1891, giving us 
our first detailed course for the Territories* (Appendix 3FI) 
Some of the Regulations passed in 1889 “90 are very 
interesting, especially to the teachers of the present 
days "The maximum salary of the Principal of a Union 
School shall not exceed $1800.00 per annum." neither was 
the Government modest in its demands for high qualifications 
The principal of a union school must be a graduate of some 

university within Her Majesty f s Dominions or have a 

u 

standing equivalent. 







/ 











T 


r 











12 . 


Another regulation of interest to teachers was 
the list of hooks and apparatus which the School Board 
was required to purchase (Appendix 11). Outside the 
large cities, few of our modern Sigh schools are 
equipped with an Encyclopedia Britannica, a Biographical 
Dictionary, an Encyclopedia of English Literature, with 
hooks of reference in English literature such as Taine 
or Dowden. in classics and geography the teacher had 
a wealth of reference material which fills the teacher 
of today with envy. Our modern high schools, outside the 
large cities, have few if any worth-while reference 
hooks, These hooks required in 1889 were well chosen, 
for in spite of the extent of modern research many of 
them still constitute our most reliable reference works. 

Undoubtedly the union school served an excellent 
puxpose in its time. It helped supply the Territories 
with teachers, as well as provide some secondary educa¬ 
tion for hoys and girls of the time. There was however 
a great deal of dissatisfaction over the division of 
the principalis time between teacher training and the 
teaching of academic subjects. It was merely a primitive 
organizationdiesigned to bridge a gap between the first 






pioneer conditions and well established settlement 
in the Territories and as such, served a useful 
purpose and laid a foundation for our modern system in 
Alberta* 


1* Dafoe, John 7/*, Clifford Sifton and his Times, 1931 
MacMillan Pub* Co*, Toronto. 

2* Jaffary, J.A*, Pamphlet, Outline of the History of 
Education in the Forth West Territories; (Provincial 
library, Edmonton*) 

3* Forth flest Territories; Education, Annual Report 
1886, Regina* 

4* North West Territories, Education, Annual Report; 
.1886, Regina. 

5* North West Territories, Education, Annual Report; 
(1889, Regina.) 

• North West Territories, 

(1889*) 


6 


Education, Annual Report; 





% 




' 












14 


CHAPTER III 

Advancement in Secondary Education in the Horth. 

West Territories. 

As a result of the Horth West Territories Act of 
1875, there was considerable friction between the 
Catholic and Protestant sections of the Board of 
Education for the Territories. The Territorial Council 
took matters into their own. hands in 1892, and made a 
new school law more in keeping with the needs of the 
people. This law is generally known as the "Haultain 
School Ordinances". It defined accurately what the 
privileges of the minority were to be with respect to 
separate schools. The Roman Catholic minority felt their 
rights to be impaired and appealed to the Federal 
Government, but Sir John Thompson who was then Minister 
of Justice declined to interfere and the Ordinances 
remained as law. All schools, both public and private 
were brought under the control of the government from 
9.00 A.M* until 3«30 P.M. Religious instruction was 
thus limited to the half hour from 3*30 4*00 o’clock. 

Another step designed to prevent future friction was 
in 1892 when a School Ordinance abolished the dual 










• 



s 



i 

. 

, 


• ■ 

. 



: • 




• 

■ 


f 



• . . J..l/l UK"; 

- 








. 



• ■ ' . '■ ' . 

*■■■••■ ■ 














16 


language system in the Territories. This probably 
caused no great hardship at the time since it seems to 
have been used merely by the French speaking Fathers in 
a few schools. 1 " At this same time the Board of Education 
was abolished and a change made to a Council of Public 
Instruction, composed of members of the Executive 
Committee of the Legislative Assembly with four appointed 
members, two Protestant and two Catholic, to act in an 
advisory capacity only# In 1893 four other members were 
appointed to the Board, His Lordship, the Bishop of 
Saskatchewan, Calgary; Rev. Father Caron, Regina; A# E. 
Forget, and Principal Smith of Moosomin. 

One of the first Acts of the new Council was to 
appoint D. J. Goggin as Superintendent of Education for 
the North West Territories. He was born in Durham, 
Ontario, 1849# He trained for teaching, and became 
successively assistant in Whitby High School and principal 
of Millbrook and Port Hope Schools. He was appointed 
principal of the Manitoba Normal School, and entered 
the University of Manitoba, where he secured both B.A# 
and M.A* degrees. In 1900 Trinity University, Toronto 
conferred on him the honorary degree, D.C.L* He was a 




' 

















17. 

member of the Council of Manitoba University, and a 
member of the Advisory Board of Education! In 1893 
D. J* Groggin was given entire charge of the educational 
affairs of the Territories* During the next decade, to 
his energy, tact, administrative capacity and broad 
knowledge of educational problems, the Territories are 
largely indebted for their advanced educational system, 
and the absence of friction which to a large measure 
has marked its working* Thus it was-Dr® Goggin who laid 
the real foundation for our present educational system 

Vj 

in Alberta and Saskatchewan* 

The state having secured control of education made 
it serve her interests. In the Territorial Ordinance 
of 1898 D. J. Goggin outlined the purpose of a high 
School which he said is, "to teach those subjects, a 
knowledge of which is helpful in the transaction of 
business, the duties of citizenship, the care of the 
body and the formation of moral character." 

Again in his report of 1901 to P* W. T. Haultain, 
Chairman of the Council of Public Instruction he 
explained just how education serves the need of the state 
"the State recognizes that the educated man is capable of 
higher service than the uneducated one, that the broader 



: 








18 


a man’s views, and the more liberal his culture, the more 
intelligent will be his grasrp of state needs and the 
more effective his labours in its behalf* The local com¬ 
munity and the family recognize that the enrichment of the 
individual through liberal instruction and training along 
cultural, social and vocational lines, means an improved 
home and community life.” 

The high school, he says elsewhere, "except 
incidentally is not a fitting school for University or 
College or Formal School; it is not a select school for 
the wealthy or well born, or the intellectually gifted. 

It is for all who feel the need, and believe in the 
benefits of education* It supplements and simplifies 
the work of the elementary school and gives a more 
adequate, because a broader preparation for life." Under 
the impulse of these ideas the high school in the 
Territories became not only a state institution, but 
a democratic one* 

In I89O there were not many registered high school 
students in v/hat is now the Province of Alberta. For 
the non-professional examinations of I89O, Calgary sent 
eight candidates, Lethbridge nine. Red Deer five. 



















i 



; 




T ' < 



, 

. 




, 







* 

. 




V 

' 1 1 ' 


’ 

\ 









' ' 








t 












* 












~ 







19 


Strathcona twenty-four. Medicine Hat six, making a 
total of fifty-two candidates. The standard was still 
low, and so the Council fixed an age limit for receiving 
certificates. The Edmonton Bulletin, May 24 , 1897, 
under the heading, "Granting Certificates to Candidates" 
says, "Males under eighteen years of age and females under 
sixteen years of age, may, upon payment of a f$e of five 
dollars, write with the candidates for non-professional 
certificates. A statement of the marks will he given them, 
hut this statement will not he accepted as the equivalent 
of a certificate when the age limit has been attained". 

While there was a great dearth of teachers in the 
Territories, so great that the Government had protected 
itself by a "maximum salary" law, yet there was present 
the feeling that if the courses could he mastered by hoys 
of seventeen and girls of sixteen, it would he generally 
held that the curriculum was too easy in comparison with 
that of other provinces. The West, conscious of its 
newness, was trying to present an imposing appearance in 
education to the rest of the Dominion without having a 
solid basis of merit. It is one of the hits of shoddy 
that we have clung to with considerable pertinacity 
throughout our checkered career. 








. 

t * x 






< 





* 

, 

< 



-' 

■ 


■ 

T 


' 

* 




. } 


- 


. 







< 


■ , 





« 












20 


In 1898, B. J. Goggin reviewed and expanded the 
course, making the outline in physics and "botany very 
complete. In this new country a knowledge of the plant 
life added great interest to the settler. There was 
another reason; several enthusiasts in hotany had found 
their way westward and were eager to he the first to find 
new specimens of plant life and relate them to known 
forms. Their enthusiasm was contagious, and influenced 
educational circles. 

As the main industry of the Territories was faming, 
the course in agriculture was overhauled, and an attempt 
made to make it of practical value hy correlating chemistry 

jr 

physics, and botany with agriculture. Suitability of 
soils for different crops, content of soil, fertilization 
and nitrogen fixation were real problems, requiring a 
knowledge of chemistry, while irrigation projects and 
various inventions of the time brought physical science 
into the foreground. 

In 1901 the Council of Public Instruction was replaced 
by a Department of Education with the Hon. P. W. T. Haultain 
as Commissioner. 






21 


1# Armstrong, W. H. Op Separate Schools in the New 
Provinces; 1918, Saskatoon, 

2, Jaffary, J. A* Outline of the History of Education 
in the North West Territories; (Provincial library, 
Edmonton) 

3« Morgan, Henry James, Canadian Men and Women of the 
Time; William Briggs, Toronto 1912. 

4# Black, Norman Fergus, A History of Saskatchewan and 
the Old North West, Regina C ( 1913 } 

5* North Y/est Territories, Education, Annual Report, 
1898 , Regina. 

6 • Appendix YI 




j 


1 





t . , 





22 


CHAPTER IV. 

Tli© Revision of 1902 in the North 7/est 
Territories* 

In 1902, Dr* Goggin thoroughly revised the course 3 
of studies for the Territories, widening it and "bringing 
it up to date* A study of it shows that Dr* Goggin had 
come to realize that Western Canada was very primitive, 
and that the high school course must be framed to meet 
frontier conditions* The very existence of the people 
was dependent on their ability to cope with the difficulties 
of a new prairie country* It was not a time for cultural 
tra£nihg, yet tradition was still strong, and old cultural 
subjects could not be entirely excluded from the 
programme* 

Dr. Goggin*s own comment on the purpose of the course 
is; ft Our course has been framed to meet actual rather 
than ideal conditions ———»• The great majority of 
high school pupils do not go to college, and should not 
prepare for teachers* examinations. It is the needs of 
the pupils, and not the entrance requirements of colleges 
and professional schools that must shape the high school 




. 


••Sv ~ y* 


' 

* 

- 

- . . - 

. ; ^ v r-fy 


... V 0 

. 


' J\ X± 




T 











23 



courses of studies --—• The training undergone, the 

habits formed, the knowledge of Literature, History, 

Math63Mtics and Science must surely he a good foundation 
on which to face the higher studies of Colleges and 

i 

Professional Schools”# 

High school education was to he reduced to the 
elements Is; nobody yet thought of higher mathematics 
as superfluous for the average student# Educationists 
still believed in the transfer of training, and that 
business acumen was developed by training in mathematics# 
Students intending to train for teachers might offer 
French, Latin or German as the equivalent of certain 
portions of mathematics# This action was probably taken 
on behalf of those students, especially girls, who found 
it impossible to master senior mathematics, but whose 
services were needed as teachers in the Territories# 

The amount of English was increased very considerably 
and made to include representative selections from many 
of the great English authors. A few American authors, 
such as Longfellow, found their way into our English course. 

The amount of general history to be read was 
increased. The supplementary reading for Standard VII must 





V t t 

- 

■ 

* 

: 



. 

. 

' ft, 


< 





. 





. 

t 

* 







24 


have been rather appalling to the average student. The 
history of Canada and ®reat Britain was brought up to 
date and the amount of general history in Standard 711 
was lessened; Swint on* s, n Outlines of World History", an 
American publication, was introduced* 

In this course there was the first real attempt to 
adapt the studies to the Western part of the world. As 
it was idle for a student of the prairies to memorize 
the counties and county towns of Ontario and know nothing 
of his own surroundings, a North West edition of the 
New Canadian Geography was introduced. A further attempt 
to master conditions at home, was the introduction of 
the Manitoba edition of Spotton*s High School Botany. 

At this time the courses in la tin and French were 
revised to meet the matriculation requirements of the 
University of Manitoba* That institution also agreed to 
accept certain other of the Territorial examinations. 

The hard and fast rule of promotion by standards was 
re-emphasised. The regulations state, "Before being 
permitted to write on the examinations prescribed for a 
given Standard, Candidates intending to enter the Normal 
School must have passed that prescribed for the next 















< T ; 


, 

- 

- 

. 

- 

t 

, • 





25. 

lower standard or have submitted satisfactory evidence 

i 

of scholar ship equivalent there to If a student failed 

in any one subject of a standard, he was required to 
cover the entire work of the standard again* Students, 
however, were only required to make 34 f° on each subject 
and have an average of 50$* 

Summary of important points in the 1902 Revision; 

1* A definite attempt was made to adapt the course to 
the conditions peculiar to the North - West* 

2# The purpose of the course was practical, rather then 
idealistic* 

3. The elective principle was introduced, 

4* Languages were made optional with certain portions of 
mathematics and science, 

5« The amounts of English and history were increased. 

6* The courses in Latin and French, were arranged to 
meet the requirements of the University of Manitoba, 

7# The necessity of passing the examination in one 

standard before proceeding to the next was recognized, 
8* No vestige of religious training was left* 

1* North West Territories, Education, Annual Report 
(1902, Regina) 





. . 

. ' ' 

- 













Z. North West territories, iTbid* 
3 . Appendix YII 







2 7 


CHAPTER V 

The Alberta Revision of the Course 
for Secondary Schools 1912. 

By 1900 the population of the Territories had so 
greatly increased that the legislative Assembly voted an 
address to the Governor-General-in-Council, praying for 
the erection of a new province in the Territories* Again 
the separate school question was raised, and again there 
was a clash of opinion* The Catholics of Quebec wanted 
to impose separate schools on the new provinces, and to 
make such a system permanent by embodying it in their 
constitution. For five years there was a great deal of 
intrigue, and public feeling ran high* The drafting of 
the Act was in the hands of Sir Charles Fitzpatrick, a 
Catholic, and some cla imed that the Pope had been 
consulted in the drafting of it. It gave the new 
provinces the dual system of education that had been 
authorized in 1875• 

The English speaking provinces spok© out in no 

uncertain terms, and when the Hon* Clifford Sifton 

- 

designed from the Cabinet, the Government amended this 





, :/ ... . ' ' 

_ _ ; -• , ' idi 

. 

x Ifcil 111 \ - ' ' I '/:> . • J" : • . •.: U'X 

■ 

.) N. ' ;XC . 

: 

, 

■t 

. ’ 1 ' f o timi ■ >o 


v;«,•■■■ .f" fr, fifr- 



* 


j- ■: 




i 




28 . 

section of the Act to conform with the Haultain 
Ordinances the Territories had passed in 1901. After 
five years of wrangling, the Alberta and Saskatchewan 
Acts were passed in 1905* 

V/hen the Province of Alherta was formed, the school 
system, the history of which we have already traced, was 
in operation. There were six hundred and two authorized 
school districts, and four hundred and eighty-five pupils 
doing high school work. The School Ordinances of the 
North West Territories became the school law, and the 
course of studies automatically came into use. 

Educational affairs in Alberta were to he administered 
by a Department of Education under a Minister of the Grown. 
The first Minister of Education was the Honorable Alexander 
Gamer on Rutherford, Prime Minister of the Province. He was 
a man of vision and boundless optimism. At the first 
session of the Legislature in 1906, he sponsored an Act 
for the establishment of a provincial University, and by 
1908 the University had actually started with between 
thirty-five and forty students in attendance. Nor did he 
centre his entire attention on higher education, but tried 
to bring the elementary school within the reach of every 
hoy and girl in the province. In the years from 1910 to 





■ 


' 

<r 

_ : ■ 

' 

. 

' 


* 












29 


1912, a new school district was organized, and a new 
school built almost every day in the year. 

Not only had Dr* Rutherford boundless optimism 
but a genius for getting things done* In 1908, he began 
to take steps for a new course of studies for Alberta. 
While it was t he consensus of opinion among educationists 
that the territorial course of 1902 was a good one, they 
were looking forward to a general balancing and strength- 
ing of it. then too Alberta, proud of her provincial 
status, was eager to have a course bearing her own 
provincial stamp. Dr. Rutherford requested the advice and 
assistance of a committee representing the elementary 
schools, secondary schools, normal schools, inspectors 

of schools and the university. This committee under the 

I 

general chairmanship of Dr. Tory, President of the 
University divided itself into sub-committees to work out 
the details of the scheme, while the whole committee saw 
to it that the courses were properly graded from the 
primary class to the university matriculation. After the 
resignation of the Hon* A* G* Rutherford as Minister of 
Education, the work of the revision was c ontinued by the 
Hon* C* R. Mitchell, Minister of Education. 











,a: ; 

v ‘ i ' - ■' 

' 

: 

' 

, ' * ' • 

t ■ ‘ 

* 

, • , 

* " 

- 

f 

t » 








30 


The following is a list of the members selected for 
a Committee to revise the Programme of Studies for pub lie 
and high schools. 

University 

Dr. H. M. Tory, Strathcona. 

Professor 1. A* H. Kerr, Strathcona. 

Inspectors. 

J. A. Fife, B.A., Edmonton. 

J. W. Brown, B.A., Macleod. 

J. A* Smith, B.A*, Calgary. 

J. F. Boyce, B.A*, Bed Deer. 

Sup e rint endent s. 

... . _ _ 

j Jas. McGaig, M.A., Edmonton. 

A. M. Scott, B.A., Ph.D., Calgary. 

| W. A* Hamilton, Lethbridge. 

teachers * 

j ------ • 

HSfia* Bea, M.A., Edmonton, 
j A. C. Hewcombe, B.A., Qalgary. 

G. A. McKee, B.A., Strathcona. 

H. E. Carruthers, La combe. 

F. S. Carr, B.A., Edmonton. 

E. w. Coffin, B.A., Ph. D., Calgary. 

W. E. Hay, Calgary. 
















. 










31 


J. J. Le Blanc, B.A., Edmonton. 

J. A. Connelly, Calgary. 

Miss E. M. Burnett, Calgary. 

Miss Kate Chegwin, Edmonton. 

Mrs. Ida E. Terry, fetaskiwin. 

This committee was entirely drawn from those bodies 
actively connected with the work of education within the 
Province. The demand for revision had come from the 
educationists themselves. It was characteristic of the 
paternal government of the time, that those in authority 
should anticipate the needs of the people and provide 
for them, before the people realized the need themselves. 
Er. Tory was chairman of this committee of revision; he 
was not only President of the University, but was fast 
becoming an outstanding figure in the educational affairs 
of the Dominion. As he is so intimately connected with 
the educational life of the Province, I shall pause to 
give the main facts of his educational career. 

HENRY MARSHALL TORY, M.A., D.Se., IL.E, E.R.S.C. 

E.R.H.S. 

President University of Alberta I 9 O 8 -I 928 . 

Er. H. M. Tory a native of Nova Scotia, a graduate 



* 






7 








32 


of McGill University, gold medallist in mathematics and 
physics, later having received the degreesof M.A., 

D*Sc. and LID*, was appointed President of the University 
of Alberta in 1908; or to be more accurate the prospective 
University of Alberta, for on his arrival in Alberta, he 
had to seek both class-rooms and students* He was 
appointed Chairman of the Committee for the Revision of 
the High School Course of Studies in 1910 * 

Dr. lory has held many important positions in the 
educational world. Among the most outstanding of these 
are: 

Member, Executive Committee, Universities f Bureau, 

| British Empire, 19 12 - 1926* 

Member of the Royal Conservation Commission for Canada, 
1919-26 } 

Member of the .American Commission for the study of 
Agricultural Credit in Europe, 1913 $ 

Col. Director of Educational Services, Canadian Overseas 
Force 1917-195 

Member Imperial Educational Committee; 

President University of Alberta, 1908-28; 

Special Commissioner for Canadian Government to Panama- 

j . ■ . 

Pacific Science Conference, Japan 1926; 









- 



4 













33 


President league of Nations* Society for Canada since 

19295 

President of the National Research Council, and Director 
of the National Research laboratories 1928 - 1935 * 

Such was the man who guided the framing of our 
first course of studies in Alberta* According to our 
Education Act, there is no special provision for 
secondary education. Our schools had consisted of 
eight standards; the three highest constituting the high 
school course. In this revision, it was decided to adopt 
the system of grading in very general use in most of the 
Eastern Provinces, and in practically all the states of 
the American Union, whereby the public school course is 
divided into eight grades, approximately corresponding 
with the eight years of public school life, while four 
additional grades constitute the high school course. 

This was the major change in the course. The lengthening 
of the high school course by a year was a wise provision, 
for the amount of work formerly required to be done in 
the three years made the course very heavy indeed. 

Moreover the university was anxious to have the students 


1 

» 

■ 




' 

. 


«' • ’ 


. 






■ 


; 








. 












j..noi &jLj;nw 


. 

i ' 





































34 • 

enter with as thorough a foundation as possible for the 
more advanced work. 

The committee adhered to the system of fully cdelet¬ 
ing the work of one grade before proceeding to a higher one 
This did not work the grave injustice which many people 
suppose. In order to pass a departmental examination, 
a student was required to obtain 50$ of the total number 
of marks, 40$ on the paper in English Composition and 
only 34 $ on every other paper • The student would be 
weak indeed who could not make 34 $* and would be unfit to 
study a more advanced unit. 

In addition to "revitalizing” the course, the 
Committee effected an elaboration of the work in music 
and art, and a skilful correlation of geograjiy, nature 
study and agriculture. A complete course of physical 
culture and military training based upon the syllabus 
provided by the Strathcona Trust was adopted. 

In chemistry, physics, and biology, there was a 
general feeling that no experimental work was being done 
by the pupils, that is the pupil themselves did not handle 

the apparatus under expert supervision, and an effort 



. ' . 

•. '■ l 0 

1 






■ 




• 


■ 

* 

{ 

. 

. 

■ 





35 


was made to make these subjects experimental as far as 
possible, That this was not really successful was not 
the fault of the course but due rather to the lack of 
sufficient equipment in the schools, and to the dearth 
of trained enthusiastic teachers in this department# 

The course was ready by 1912 , and there was a general 
feeling that it compared favorably with the courses of 
the other Provinces of the Dominion# There were now one 
thousand, six hundred school districts in operation in 
Alberta, and a high school population of two thousand, 
seven hundred and forty-three. The university and 
normal school both furnished new incentives to students 
to seek a secondary education. The people of the 
Province were looking eagerly to the future; there 
seemed boundless opportunity stretching in front of 
everybody, especially boys and girls with an advanced 
educati on. 

But the new curriculum was just fairly launched 
when the Great War broke out. Public attention was 
turned abroad to the war in Europe; and at home it was 
focused on expeditionary contingents, the Patriotic Fund 
and the work of the Red Cross. Education did not lag. 












. 










' 

*. 

. 

« 

. 

' * 

■ 

. 







' 








- 

, 























3 6 * 

though there was a great scarcity of teachers and salaries 
went up from $ 6 ( 50.00 for public school teachers to a 
minimum of $840.00, and for teachers in secondary schools 
from $ 900.00 to $ 1700 . 00 . The Hon. J. H. Boyle, 

Minister of Education, made it an objective to bring 
a Grade Till education within the reach of every boy and 
girl within the Province. By 1918, 6 . 22 fo of pupils 
were in high school as compared with 4.09$ in 1912.' 

During these war years, all German schools within 
the Province were closed, and German was seldom taught 
in the high schools. 

Women’s organizations such as the Women’s Institute, 
and the Women’s Christian Temperance Union became 
actively interested in the problem of the new Canadians 
and pressure was brought to bear by several patriotic 
societies for the more rapid Canadianization of our 
foreign population. 

During these years in the schools there was a great 
development of student activities; school Journals were 
started, and year books were gotten out. All forms 
of athletics came to take on a tremendous importance. 
Dancing became general in the high schools. The trend 



' , , - ' ; ■ - 

, . . 

' 

t . 

t . 




1 















37 * 


of the time was to turn away from traditional 
activities and launch out into basket-hall, football, 
hockey and physical training* 

1* Armstrong, W* H. 0*; Separate Schools in the New 
Provinces; |Saskatoon, 1918) 

2* Canada, Who f s Who, 1933-34 

3* Alberta, Province of. Annual Report, Department of 
Education; (1913, Edmonton) passim* 

4* Alberta, Province of; Report of the Legislative 

Committee on Rural Education, Sessional Paper 136 

{1935, Bdmonton) 

5* Appendix Till 





\ -i t T .j e 




(-■ 













3 


CHAPTER VI. 

The Revision of 1924 . 

The Great War destroyed many of our old traditions, 
and brought about a general social disturbance; many 
people formerly well-to-do found themselves in 
straightened circumstances, a, nd others recently poor 
had accumulated fortunes. 

During the War the farmers had received a high 
price for wheat, and stock, and many of them were prosper¬ 
ous beyond their wildest dreams. The high prices could 
and must be made to continue, they were (convinced; the 
farmer was king. The farmer»s increased wealth gave him 
the time andmeans to travel about, and gave him a sense 
of importance, which as a class he had not hitherto 
enjoyed. locals of the United Farmers of Alberta and 
the United Farm Women of Alberta were organized through¬ 
out the Province. The farmers entered politics and 
swung into power in 1921 on an enormous wave of 
enthusiasm. 

They came into power firmly believing in the efficacy 
of *|roup government". Their political ideals, new to them. 
























' 












: T 














« 


, 

■ 












39 


loomed up on their horizon with magnified dimensions* 

The machinery of government became s©mewhat of an 
obsession to them* In short group government was on the 
nerves of the people, and waiting to be unloaded on the 
high schools of the Province* 

During the Great War Canadians played their part 
and when the War was over, we were conscious of our 
nationhood* We were no longer merely a part of the British 
Pknpire but a nation among the nations of the world* We 
were anxious to make this thoroughly understood, and have 
the idea incorporated in our high school teaching in 
history and in English. 

One of the lessons learned in the years from 1914 to 
1918 was the Importance of the command of national 
resources* The people of Canada learned that in future, 
victory will come to the nation which has control of, 
and has made the best use of natural endowments, whether 
of food supplies or of economic materials. Alberta 
feeling the importance of natural resources, immediately 
set up a claim for control of her resources, which she 
later obtained from the Dominion Government. 

Although theoretically there was to be no more war. 






' 

* 

£ j 

* 

, 



. 

' 

- 








* 

' ■: 

■ 








if there should be one, the chemical laboratories 
would play a large part in its success• That nation 
which could keep in advance of the others in scientific 
research would have the best chance of winning • Thi s 
fact, but to a much greater extent the normal demands of 
industry and agriculture in times of peace, gave a 
stimulus to science and scientific research in the 

university, and this in turn was reflected in the attitude 

■ 

towards high school work, which lays the foundation for 
the later work of the university* 

Concurrent with these forces was the awakening 
consciousness of the dignity and importance of teaching, 
and a consequent desire on the part of the teachers to 
present an imposing front, to make a declaration of 
independence and to secure professional status* The 
Alberta Teachers 1 Alliance, established during the war 
years, was pushing hard to have a new programme of studies 
which might reflect the importance of its work to society 
and the need of adjusting the content and methods of 
education to the changing times* 

The University of Alberta had just initiated courses 
in education, and Dr* J* MacDonald and Mr* E• D* McPhee 





■ . ■ ; i'l 1 . ■ 






' 


. 







T ' 


« 

* 

t 

, 

-* ■ 


* 






, 




: 




rv" 










. 










41 


had been appointed to the staff to give instruction in 
the work. There was a great deal of thinking in regard 
to educational measurement and "the placing of studies 
on a sound psychological basis"; the University was 
striving to bring both content and methodology of the 
high school course in line with the most advanced stage 
of educational thought. 

G* IP. McNally, M.^L., Supervisor of Schools, was 
Chairman of the revision committee. The following is a 
short sketch of his educational career; 

G. F. McNally is a native of Fredericton, N.B., and 
an Honor Graduate in Classics from the University of 
New Brunswick. He came West in 1906 to accept a position 
on the staff of the Stratheona High School. He became 
a member of the first convocation of the University of 

I Alberta, and shor% afterwards received the degree of 
M.A. from this University. 

In I909 he was appointed Public School Inspector of 

the Wetaskiwin District, and three years later was 

* 

transferred to the Calgary Inspectorate. In 1913 he was 
appointed Principal of the Camrose NormalSchool, which 
position he held until 1918 , when he became Supervisor 










' 














, 

, 



42 . 


of Schools for the Province, having under his supervision 
the Formal Schools, the Summer School, curricula and 

i 

text hooks# 

Mr# McNally was eminently qualified for the difficult 
task of evolving a course in accord with the new 
psychological principles, national ideals, and social 
concepts, and one which would meet with the approval of 
the teaching body of Alberta# 

A spirit of optimism pervaded the whole enterprise. 
The regeneration of the world was at hand, and all were 
eager to have a part in framing the new course# 

The Personnel of the general committee was as follows 
G# Fred McNally 
Mrs. R# B# Gunn 
Mrs# A# H. Rogers 
Dr. Geneva Misner 
Walter Smitten 
J. G. Taylor 
W. A. Hamilton 
E# £>• MaoPhee 
H. C. Newland 
J# H. Hanna 

Rev# W# E# Gameron Roman Catholic Separate Schools. 


Supervisor of Schools, Chairman. 
U.F.A. & U.F.W.A. 

Women’s Institutes. 

Foments University Club. 

Alberta Federation of labour 
Alberta Education Association. 
Alberta School Trustees. 

Alberta University 
Alberta Teachers’ Alliance. 
Associated Boards of Trade. 







, 

. 

. 

, 

■ 











43 


J. E. Hodgson Superintendent of Schools, Lethbridge. 

G. A* McKee Inspector of High Schools, Edmonton. 

y 

J. A. Smith Inspector of High Schools, Oalgary. 

This committee representing so many varied 
organizations indicates the forces moving to influence 
our high school course of studies. The most amazing fact 
is the representation of so many interests outside the 
realm of those generally recognized as belonging to 
education. The U. E. A.„ and U.E.W.A. and Womens 
Institutes have usually been considered organizations 
for social welfare, and only incidentally connected with 
education. One might expect the School Trustees 1 
Association, then quite recently organized, to be 
interested in the operation and general management of 
schools, rather than concerned with the course itself. 

The Alberta Federation of labour and Associated Boards 
of Trade might also be expected to have merely a 
general interest. But many of these organizations 
clamoured to have their pet hobbies in the course, and 
met with some degree of success. Paternalism in 
education was for the time being dead, and the voice of 
democracy was loud and insistent. 

American influence too was felt. Ever since the time 



T 









- 

- 4, - * A * 

' 

n 

r 

' 





■ 









44 - 

of President Eliot of Harvard University, there had been 
in the United States a tendency to throw overboard the 
old Hew England traditions in secondary education, and 
to launch out into a broader curriculum with many 
optional subjects. This movement has grown until the 
American high school has developed a curriculum of 
studies, probably more comprehensive and elastic than 

3 

that of any other secondary school in the world. 

By 1924, a number of our Alberta educationists 
were studying American secondary schools, others were 
doing post graduate work in education in American 
universities, such as Columbia, Chicago or Island 

! 

j Stanford, or had already completed their training. They 
had come in touch with ideas in educational psychology 
promulgated by Thorndike, and were eager to try out in 

| Alberta those features which were meeting with a 
measure of success in the United Spates of America. 

As a result, one of the cardinal principles of 
of the new course was to provide greater diversity of 
studies. For the attainment of these new aims six 
alternative courses were provided: Normal.Entrance, 
Matriculation, Agricultural, Commercial, technical and 








i"'.; ; ;i • 


* 








, 

, 

, 


. 






. 


' 










>v. ) 

>• 

# ■ ■ 

r ; ‘ 

r • * r 






45. 

General. The only limitations as to what might he 
offered, would he those imposed hy economic conditions. 

The multiple curricula had an obligatory core, thus 
allowing students to transfer from one course to another 
without serious handicap. 

The new regulations may he summarized as follows: 

1. Instead of a single-track curriculum with designated 
options, there were now outlined six curricula. 

2. The number of subjects to be taken concurrently was 

reduced. Under the previous course a student would 

take five in his first year, nine in his second, eight 

in his third, and eleven in his fourth. Under the 

19^4 revision, a student was required to carry five 
courses 

or six/in the first, six in the second, six or seven 
in the third and seven or eight in the fourth. 

3 . Promotion was made by subject and not by grade. 

4 . Provincial examinations were to be held for all 
subjects in every grade. 

5 . Diplomas were to be granted at the close of the 
high school course, not at the close of each year. 

6 . local authorities were granted some freedom in 
regard to the programme of studies; for example. 







, 






- 1 


. 

. 


< 














. 








46 


they might suggest optional courses of local interest. 
It was understood that every unit was to have 
approximately the same value, and the same time, the 
average amount of time to be from one hundred and 
eighty to two hundred minutes per week. 

Alberta teachers* AssoeiaticnMagazine, Sept. 1935* 

Edmonton 1935* 

Alberta, Province of; Second Interim Report of the 
Committee on High School Education; ( 1923 , Edmonton^ 
Putman, J. H*, Senior Inspector of Schools for Ottawa, 
and Weir, G* M«» Professor of Education, University 
of British Columbia; Survey of the School System of 
British Columbia; (Victoria 1921) 












;-*J© 03 ' 














; ' • % 

: 

i : 












47 . 


CHAPTER VII 

Details of the 1924 Course. 

A detailed analysis of the coiirse* reflects the 
forces to which I have called attention above. The 
course outlined in English was ambitious indeed, and 
in its scope reflects the attitude of the high school 
teachers of the Province, their desire to have a course 
which might compare favorably with those in use in 
other provinces of the Dominion. The result has been 
that the excessive amount of English required has 
produced a distaste for this subject in the sub-average 
and even in the average student. Had part of the 
prescribed English been more modem and less academic, 
students might have developed a real liking for literature, 
but when, as in Grade XII, they were confronted with 
two plays of Shakespeare, selections from Milton, essays 
by Carlyle, and lectures by Ruskin, they turned away 
from literature in digust. 

In the post-war period, also, various new trends 
and problems presented themselves in connection with 
the teaching of English literature in high schools. 




























■ 






' 




















t . 


, 

- 


, 


< 
















48 . 

There was the question of war literature; as we had 
just concluded a war to end war, all literature glorify¬ 
ing heroes of war had to he eliminated as far as possible• 
The new spirit of nationalism also brought about the 
inclusion of Canadian authors in both prose and poetry 
texts in use in Grade IZ. A feeling of greater 
friendliness towards the United States following her 
contribution to the Great War paved the way for the 
introduction of several .American authors into the junior 
literature courses* The American influence also crept 
into the composition course$ the text for Grade ZII was 
by Rhodes, an American, and contained both American 
methods and illustrative material. Throughout the 
course, the idea of "common practice" was prevalent, 
that is, to give everybody a set of rules which they 
might follow, and all would turn out superior work. 

The history of literature for Grade ZII by Roy Bennett 
Pace was also an American production. This took the 
place of the "Hand Book on Poetics", by Gunmere, 

Halleck T s "History of English Literature", and Lounsbury's 
"English Language". 









. 

«• 

4 

■ ■ 

. 

f 

7 










49 . 

An actual change of some importance was that 
supplementary reading became related to literature, 
rather than to composition as heretofore* Formerly 
the essay question on the composition paper was based 
on supplementary reading, but in the new course 20 fo 
of the marks in literature on the final examination 
were to be assigned to questions on supplementary reading 
Formal grammar also as a separate subject, unallied 
with composition, disappeared from the course* The idea 
of language "being caught, not taught" recurs throughout 
the directions to teachers regarding the English subjects 
In the review of classics, the modern psychologists 
waged war on, "the effete rubbish, every scrap of which", 
they declared ^Lould be removed from the modem 
programme* Dr# Geneva Misener of the department of 
classics in the University staunchly championed the 
traditional culture. Her opponents contended, H that pre¬ 
war culture had somehow missed fire", since that age had 
culminated in the tragedy of a World War, a universal 
and crushing burden of debt and incalculable human 
suffering# Moreover they claimed that weighed in the 












, 

. 

' « ■ 



' 






, ' 






t 

c • - < 

* 


. 

















50 . 

"utility balance", it had been found wanting, and 
finally that its efficacy in mental training could not 
be proven. 

The result was somewhat of a compromise, Latin and 
Greek being placed on the optional list. Courses were 
to be less difficult, so Caesar, Yergil and Cicero were 
removed from the programme of the junior years. A 
reading rather than a decyphering method of translation 
was to be encouraged. 

There was to be a change in the technique of 
teaching the classics, " a modified foim of the direct 
method" being used. Where possible time was to be given 
to the study of the social, political and religious 
institutions of Greece and Rome. As students however, 
were not to be tested on these in final examinations, 
little attention has been paid to them in our high schools. 

Since Greek is so little taught in Alberta, it is un¬ 
necessary to discuss it in a short work. 

French too came in for an overhauling, but the 
attitude towards this subject differed widely from the 
feeling in regard to classics. "The War had demonstrated 
the interdependence of nations, and the need for a more 




{ 

. 

- 

* 

f 





' 








51 


: 

intimate acquaintance in this country with European 
peoples". So French was in much greater favour. 

A modified form of the "direct method" had been 

■ 

in use for the three previous years, but had not been 
found wholly successful through lack of highly trained 
teachers and because of large classes. The oral exam¬ 
ination it was now decided was to be done away with, and 
the stress was to be placed on training pupils to read 
and to write fluently. In the nev/ curriculum a two-unit 
course was offered in the first three years of high school, 
and in addition a one-unit course in the fourth year. The 
new course resulted in a vast increase in the number of 
pupils taking a language option. 

The dominant idea in the minds of the history committee 
was to revitalize the course, "To make the great human 
drama of the ages live again with a wealth of meaning to 
our own times". There was -also the idea of developing the 
course in accordance with the progress of the pupils. 

The 1924 course was to be "informational and developmental", 
"Along with other subjects, history should expand the 

9. 

imagination, and engender worthy personal and social ideals". 


















. 








. 







' 

; : ■ .. • fil 






, 








. 




. 






. 

. 

. 

. 





. 








■ 








r 

, 


















52 


General history to 800 A.D# was to he taught to 
Grade I£ both that it might form a general plan from which 
the details of the history of various countries might he 
evolved, later, and that by its freshness after a surfeit 
of British and Canadian history in public school, "it might 
capture the imagination of the student, and form a study 
of delight and rapture, rather than one of labour and 
weariness". 

British history from 1485 to the present day was 
placed in the second year, to provide the necessary 
setting for the study of Canadian history and civics in 
the next year. Movements were to be stressed; details of 
wars and battles were to be suppressed, and only 
principles and issues at stake taught. 

The course in Canadian history was placed later in the 

i! 

syllabus to enable the student to approach the controversial 
problems of Canadian history with the background of knowledge 
gained from previous study. It was to be taught in such a 
way as to bring about a sympathetic under standing between 
the English speaking and French speaking Canadians. To 
meet this need a new text; "^History of Oanada" by W. L. 

Grant was adopted. 




. 

, 

. 




, 

. 

' 










■ 

. 




53- 

The course in history for the fourth year was 
intended to continue the study of mankind, to lead young 
Canadians from the idea of nationalism or even imperial¬ 
ism to internationalism. Some dissatisfaction has arisen 
over the choice of an American text for this work* The 
section on the World War was particularly displeasing 
to Canadians, and some revision was necessary. 

The study of the British Constitution remained part 
of this course, hut a change was made in text, Bagehot's 
English Constitution being displaced by Marriott T s 
English Political Institutions. 

To the Canadian history was attached a course in 
civics to give our students a clear idea of the governing 
bodies of our country. A preliminary outline was at 
first issued by the Department of Education, but this was 
soon replaced by a text written by A. X. Burt, professor 
of history at the University of Alberta. 

A course in economics was also introduced in Grade XI. 
It was designed for the purpose of "describing our 
economic institutions and to exp lain the working of our 

2L 

economic organization". Attention was to be called to 
questions designed to evoke interest in our Canadian 



f • 

' 
















* , ' ' ■ . 

T ' ' 1 

' 

t - ' ’ ■ - 

- v.i. J;.:. : 












. 

» ' 





54 


problems. This was a new course and required a new text; 
one was prepared by Professor MacGibbon of the University. 

The courses in high school art were completely 
revised and revitalized under the direction of W. E. 
Hadley. "The type of art was broadened and adapted to the 
needs of the majority of students who may not follow the 
arts professionally but desire a finer taste and a 

.3 

greater capacity for appreciation". 

Art included a study of one or two pictures 
belonging to each of the great schools of art; the pupil 
to be taught to observe the composition, arrangement of 
forms, colour and harmony of these. In architecture a 
study of the characteristics of the main periods, and 
some knowledge of the buildings of each type was made 
necessary• 

Special courses in high school art have been offered 
during the Summer Sessions at the University. Many 
teachers have availed themselves of these, and in those 
schools where the work is done by trained teachers, art 
h$s become not only a delightful study, but one capable 
of developing the aesthetic side of the child’s nature, 
and carrying over into the home ideals of rhythm and 
harmony. 






* 

■ ' 

4 

■ 

o : .... 1 7 / 

' 

• ■ " f ’ : 

: 

. : . J 

. : ; -:C . '.... .. 0 .V Iv u ; > 

; 

l 

. 

: O : : 1 y y/'i .1 |: 1 j 7 .). 





55 


The junior algebra work, hitherto taught from Grades 
IZ to XI was divided into two sections, each a one-year 
unit. The first year*s work was made obligatory in many 
of the courses, while the second was left optiohal in all 
except the matriculation course. 

Practical and theoretical geometry was also offered 
as a two-year course on much the same basis as algebra. 
Arithmetic for students other than commercial was limited 
to one year. 

The advanced work in mathematics was to be taken in 
the students* fourth year. This consisted of algebra III, 
geometry III, and trigonometry I. A change was made in 
geometry III making it consist entirely of analytical 
work. These were made optional subjects. 

Music received a place on the programme, but as it 
cannot be said to have been taught in our high schools, 
deserves little attention. 

There have been three stages of development of 
science teaching in the high schools. At first science 
courses were taught as informational subjects, with little 
laboratory work and with but slight reference to the . 
economic, social and hygienic applications. In the second 
















T 


* 




. 









56 . 

stage, science was studied as an end in itself; a 
laboratory technique was developed, and the student was 
expected to be interested in the work, because it was a 
recognized field of research. In the third stage the 
student continued his laboratory practice, but gave 
more attention to the^plications of the scientific 
knowledge acquired to the problems of every-day life. 
This, however, involved the danger of his receiving too 
many ready-made explanations of facts, thus inhibiting 
any tendency to discover facts for himself. In order to 
prevent this, the new course of 1924 called for lab¬ 
oratory and experimental treatment. 

The science courses were divided as follows: 

1 . General Science - one couise. 

2 . Physics - two courses. 

3. Chemistry - two courses 

4 * Agriculture - two courses. 

5 * Biology - one course. 

6 . Geography - one course. 

7 * Physiology and Hygiene - one course. 

The general science course in the first year took 
place of the course in elementary physics. This was a 
brand new course, and was designed as an introduction to 






' 

■I • • •' 

' 

* 

. 

, ■ ' t:i: v 


■ 











57 


all the regular scientific courses. A text in general 
science by Caldwell and Eikenberry was at first used but 
later replaced by one by M* J# Hilton. 

A two year course in agriculture was outlined, but 
this has been taught in very few schools; a number of 
students have prepared this course from outlines for 
examination purposes. 

The course in physics was drafted for the second 
year, and the one in chemistry for the third year. 

Geography covered one year and became predominantly 
an industrial and commercial course. Physical geography 
was discontinued except as it might be taught incidentally 
in connection with the elementary science. After 
searching in vain for a suitable text book in geography, 
the Department commissioned M. J. Hilton of the Edmonton 
Technical School to prepare a suitable manual for use 
in the schools. 

Health was coming to be an important consideration. 
Physiology and hygiene were to be given forty minutes a 
week throughout the first two years of the high school, 
but as Departmental examinations were not set in this 
subject it has very seldom found a place on the high 












. . 

. 








' 




< 

. 


' 

' 




- 










; 


58 


school timetables* 

The course in biology was postponed until the fourth 
year, so that an intensive course in pure science might be 
given. 

In no department was the influence of the war 
stronger than in respect to physical training; the 
committee went on record as opposed to cadet corps training 
Still there were difficulties in the way of abolishing it* 
There was the grant of i5 0 » 000 * from the Strathcona Trust 
to the Provincial Department of Education for approved 
work. The committee did not feel like giving up this 
grant* Major MiHer, Director of Cadet Corps Instruction, 
Military District Ho. 1J, Province of Alberta, expressed 
his willingness to try to effect a compromise, but the 

matter was left in abeyance. 

' 

The result has been that cadet training has been 

, 

given in few schools, and physical training in those only 
where there is adequate accomodation. For physical 
training a syllabus was prepared. But again, as it is 
not an examination subject its success has been dependent 

t ot only on accomodation, but on the presence of trained, 
nthusiastic teachers in the schools. 












, : 



59 


People wanted to forget the war and military discipline 
Discipline la, gged in the higher institutions of 
learning, to which the overseas men returned. There 
was a corresponding tendency in the high schools to get 
away from discipline, to discontinue marching in and 
out of school, and to do away with cadet corps training* 
Pol lowing the 19 24. course, the schools became 
instruments solely in the service of the democratic state* 
Industry was served by the courses in geography, science 
and economics. Civics and government were taught in 
conjunction with history. An attempt was made to "put 
real teeth" in the course of agriculture. The foreign 
languages, were crowded into an optional place on the 
programme. Mathematics retained its place partly because 
it was needed for advanced work in the universities, and 
partly because some of the members of the committee 
championed its cause so loudly that they worsted their 
opponents* 

1 . Alberta, Department of Education; Second Interim 
Report of the Committee on High School Education; 

(I923, Edmonton) passim* 

2 . Ibid 
3 * Ibid 













4 * Information furnished by Members of the Committee. 
5 # Appendix IX 


I 

] 












6i 


CHAPTER YIII 

The 1924 Course in Operation. 

The 1924 course was introduced with much enthusiasm 
on the part of the educationists of the Province. As we 
have state control of education in Alberta, all the 
schools reacted in the same way at the same time. The 
teachers were at first loud in their praises of the new 
course, hut it was soon evident that they had not fully 
solved their educational problem. Even after shortening 
the courses in French I, la tin I, and history I, the work 

was still too burdensome and too academic for the average 

. 

student. 

The high school population had doubled since 191J, and 
8*29$ of all school pupils were in high school grades.* 

There were several reasons for this great increase. There 
was the levelling tendency follov/ing the War, which I 
referred to above, and the consequent determination of 
parents to secure for their children that type of 
education which until that time, had carried with it 
certain social advantages. 

Owing to the depression many young people were 
crowded out of employment, and rather than stay home and 


, 

, 


' 

i 


* 


. 


, 

. 

- 


- 














1 















- 




















62 


do nothing, they returned to high school* 

The Department of Education made promotion from 
Grade VIII to Grade IX a matter for the judgment of the 
teacher. This was done, not only as a measure of depart¬ 
mental economy, hut because the educationists were 
protesting against the retardation of pupils* The door 
to the high school was thus thrown wide open. The policy 
introduced in 1918, of compelling all children to attend 
school until fifteen years of age crowded still more 
pupils into the high school. By 1928, 11*44$ of the 

1 

school population were in the high school. 

The social level of our high school population has 
changed; 67$ of the students do not belong to that social 
class which considers high school and more advanced 
education a matter of social necessity. Many of our 
students have neither the native ability, nor the desire 
to master abstract or academic subjects. There has also 
been a change in the student attitude towards high school 
mrrk. The average student sees no adequate reason why 
he should spend the evening in home study, when such a 
feast of entertainment has been spread before him, as the 
picture show, the automobile, the radio, all of which are 













, 

■ 

, 

, 

■ 




, 






_ 




■ 

* 












* 




. 

- 


' 












63 - 

inf initely more attractive than study after five hours 
a day of school work. 

The I924 curriculum was presented not only to an 
increased high school population, but to one which had 
not necessarily a solid foundation of public school 
training# The students were of a different calibre from 
pre-war days; their attention was turned more towards 
athletics and amusement than in pre-war days. 

We provided a six course curriculum but students 
have largely followed one groove, that of training to 
be teachers; our high schools have developed into, "teacher 
factories"# Owing to the scarcity of qualified teachers 
during the war period, the Provincial Government made 
provision for loans to needy students who wished to enter 
the Normal Schools. While in 1924 there were enough 

*r 

teachers in the Province to meet the demand, the Government 
found it difficult to discontinue its policy of loans. 

In 1931, one-half the students in the normal schools 
received loans, the average loan being $345.00. Students 
in high school, who had no definite idea of what they 
might do on leaving high school took normal entrance, 
secured loans, and trained for teachers. 






















■ 












7 O i i 


■ 

- t 

* 

- 

, 








Since in every high school there are many students 
who look forward to attending either the normal schools or 
the university, all schools prepare for the entrance 
examinations to these institutions. Consequently 
school hoards in all hut the larger centres, being unwilling 
to incur the additional expense of adding other courses 
have made provision for these two only. There has also 
been a strong feeling among the people that the Province 
is as yet too new to break away from traditional lines, 
and that with our very mixed population experiments in 
education would be very dangerous* 

Mother unforeseen situation developed. The Hon* 
Perren Baker, former Minister of Education, wished to go 
a step farther than the Hon* J. R. Boyle had done, and 
bring a high school education within the reach of every 
boy and girl within the Province* I must digress to 
explain the number of different ways by which he sought 
to achieve this end. To induce pupils to attend town 
high schools, the government made the rural school boards 
responsible for the fees of pupils attending high school, 
outside of their own districts, when the work was not being 
taight in the district. 















' 

r 














■ 


* 





. 

* 

a 






t 




-t 









65. 

The sixty-two consolidated schools within the Province 
teach all grades from I to XII. Sixteen rural high 

■ f 

schools were established to serve seventy-eight districts 

if 

of the Province. To both the consolidated and the rural 
high schools, students are generally conveyed in vans. 

There are also two hundred and fifty rural districts 
operating two or more rooms where high school work is 
done. In these three ways, the rural demand for 
secondary education has been met. The course selected 
for teaching in these schools is almost invariably the 
normal entrance course, thus increasing the "teacher- 
factories” throughout the Province , 

The clamour for increased educational facilities 
for the rural population remained insistent. There 
were not enough schools of the foregoing types to reach 
the people, and conveyance of pupils is not popular in 
Alberta. Our land survey, while making convenient square 
farms, has placed homes too far apart, with the result 
that each road serves so few people that it is too 
expensive to keep them all in good condition. Poor 
roads, long distances, and severe weather make transport¬ 
ation of pupils unpopular. The people were not asking 
for conveyance to high schools, they were demanding that 
high school facilities be brought to them. The Minister 






- 












* 






' 

. 

, 

. 

- 





« 


- 




* 


, 









* 

_ 








, 

- 










66 


was urged to allow the teaching of Grades IX, X, XI and 
even XII, in the rural schools, where the teacher was 
capable, and there was sufficient accomodation. This was 
done, and to encourage this work, the Department gave 
special grants to the schools doing high school work with 
the approval of the Inspector. By 1933 » out a total 
ot two thousand, nine hundred and seventeen one-room 
districts in the Province, one thousand four hundred 
and seventy did some high school work,mainly Grades IX 

Ip 

and X. 

The extension of high school facilities to the rural 
districts was in itself a laudable enterprise, giving to 
the rural student one or two years 1 training beyond 
public school. The examinations. Grade IX and part of 
Grade X were made by promotion. Rural students took 
these promotion subjects in the country and came into town 
for Grade XI without having passed a single departmental 
examination. They went to normal school after one year 
in this town high school, and then returned to the country 
to teach. In these different ways, the rural students 
were being trained for teachers. 

Our 1924 course as it has actually worked out, has 
driven the bulk of students ino the n teacher-making groove 0 . 






r 






i. 



T 











1 






67. 

while the other five grooves have in them only a few 
city students. We have overcrowded the teaching profession, 
and lowered the social and academic status of the profession 
In the schools of agriculture at Olds and Vermilion, 
provision was made for the teaching of some high school 
subjects, especially English, along with the specific work 
of scientific agriculture, The high school course in 
agriculture might he taken in these schools, and together 
with the diploma from the school would admit the student 
to the second year work of the University in agriculture 
or domestic science. As there are only two schools of 

agriculture in the Province, few students are served. 

. 

In addition to the courses leading to normal school 
and the university the curriculum of 1924 made provision 
for a technical high school course. This‘course has not 
really functioned at all outside the two large cities 
of (Hgary and Edmonton. Some technical high school 
training was introduced in Calgary and Edmonton as early 
as 1913* This was largely of a pre-vocational type, and 
in 1914 was brought under the direction of Ur. J. C. Miller 
who was at that time appointed Director of Technical 
Education for Alberta. Pupils from Grades VII to XII 



















' 








- 






t 


. 


♦ 


■ . 

’ 

* 

. 


, ■ - ■ ■" 
J - * 







68 


inclusive were admitted to these schools* In Grades VII 
and VIII the technical work was pre-vocational, hut in the 
higher grades was vocational* In 1920 D* A. Campbell be¬ 
came Director of Technical Education for the Province, 
and framed a uniform course of studies for the technical 
schools* 

In 1919 the Dominion Government, convinced of the 
value of technical education, voted to the Province 
for its promotion the sum of $10,000,000. to be expended 
over a period of ten years. In 1931, an additional 
annual sum of $ 750 * 000 * for fifteen years was voted for 
the same purpose. This second grant however was passed 
to become effective when proclaimed, but unfortunately for 
technical education, it has not yet been proclaimed, and 
in such provinces as Alberta, where the original grant 
has all been used, the progress of technical education 
has received a serious setback. 

Previous to 1924, was considerable social 

prejudice against the technical training, but from 1925 
to 1929 * there was a much more enthusiastic attitude. 
Graduates from academic high schools were unable to obtain 
positions, and many people looked to the technical 





■ 

- 

- 

. 






■ 




« ' 

. 

. 

' 






. 










. 





6 9 


curriculum to solve this problem. As a result of this 
optimism the Technical High School was opened in Calgary 
in 1929 with an attendance of 136 pupils. 

It was not only the problem of unemployment they 
hoped to solve; many looked to the technical school to 
solve the problem of the large percentage of students 
who find academic work too abstract. 

We have become disillusioned in regard to both 
expectations. Students trained in the technical high 
school have not been able to step into positions more 
readily than the academically trained students, since 
industrial plants find it necessary to give the same 
training to all beginners, and the student with the 
technical training has had no real advantage. 

Technical training was very expensive to the 
community, even with heavy grants, and must justify its 
existence. It was disappointing to find that a large 
percentage of the students who were not adapted for 
academic work were equally misfits in technical work. 

The attitude towards technical education has changed. 
Calgary*s attitude is typical. In 1935 the Technical High 
School and ?/estern Canada Academic HighSchool were 














■ ■ 


. 

. . / ' ■" 00- V. ; ■ V.: : < 

. 






■ 

, 

. • 

■ 

, 




7 

■ 





70 . 

amalgamated under one principal to form a composite 
high school. This amalgamation was possible since both 
these schools were located on the same grounds, and 
connected by a tunnel. The technical work was not 
discontinued, and a very wide diversification of subjects 
was provided. In addition to the technical and academic 
courses, students might take the high school arts, 
dramatics, music and commercial courses. The popularity of 
this type of school is indicated by the fact that at 
the end of 1935 this composite school had an attendance 
of one thousand two hundred and fifty students, one-half 
of whom were enrolled in technical classes. 

On account of the expense, the commercial courses 
provided for in the revision of 1924 never functioned 
outside of Galgary, Edmonton, Xethbridge and Medicine 
Eat. In 1935 , there were one thousand, one hundred and 
twenty-eight students who w±ote departmental examinations 
in the commercial course. 

As for the general course outlined in 1924 which 
ought to have solved the problem for a large number of 
students, it might just as well have been omitted. 





' 




* 


* . 



, 


/ 

' 

8 


















' 

' 






. . 

- 


. 

- 

; 







71 


Nobody wanted it* In 1934 , eleven thousand, one 
hundred and eleven students wrote third and fourth year 
departmental examinations; one thousand, six hundred and 
eighty-four students qualified for second class normal 
entrance and three hundred and fourteen for the fourth 
year general course. The major portion of the three 
hundred and fourteen students have taken the matriculation 
course. 

Despite our multiple curricula, forces have operated 
to lure the majority of the students into the normal 
school entrance course. Both technical and commercial 
high school courses are too expensive for any but the 
cities to attempt for years to come. Bew people are 
interested in either the agricultural or the general 
course. 

1 . Alberta, Department of Education, Statistics furnished. 

2 . Ibid. 

3. Minutes of Meeting of General Committee of Revision of 
the Secondary Schools Course of Studies 1935 * Depart¬ 
ment of Education, Edmonton. 

4. Alberta; Department of Education, Annual Report, 1924. 
5 * Alberta; Department of Education: Report of the 





' 







72 . 


Legislative Commit tee on Bural Education, (1935 
Edmonton) 

6 . Statistics furnished "by Department of Education, 
Edmonton. 

7. Canada; Annual Survey of Education in Canada: 

(Ottawa 1931) 

8 . Statistics furnished by P. G. Buchanan, Superintendent 
of Schools, Calgary. 

9 . Ibid. 




1 
















73 


CHAPTER IX 

Possible Trends of the New Course• 

Partly owing to the defects which time has 
revealed in the curricula of 1924 a demand has developed, 
particularly among educationists, for a further revision* 
For the last two years this work has "been in progress. 

The personnel of the general committee in charge of it 
at the "beginning of 1935 was as follows; 

Hon* Perren Baker, Minister of Education. 

Dr. R. C. Wallace, President of the University of Alberta. 

G. W. Goman, Deputy Minister of Education. 

j 

Dr. M* E. Lazerte, Director of the School of Education. 

. 

Dr. John MacDonald, Professor of Philosophy, University 

of Alberta. 

Dr. H. 0. Newland, Chief Inspector of Schools. 

E. I. Fuller, High School Inspector. 

H. E. Balfour, High School Inspector. 

Mrs. A. M* Rogers, representing the Trustees’ Association. 

j 

E. J. Thorlakson, Alberta Teachers’ Alliance. 

G. F. McNally, Supervisor of Schools - Chairman of the 

Committee 

The committee was drawn almost exclusively from among 
those bodies directly representing educational interests 

I 


' 

* 












74- 

in the Province, and not as in 1924 , from the many 
organizations only incidentally connected with education. 
Dr. Ransom representing the Educational Progress Club, and 
. W. G. Black, Assistant Professor of Education of the 
University of British Columbia have also conferred with 
the committees. 

The School of Education in the University under the 
direction of Dr# M# E. L azerte has "been a major force in 
creating and directing educational opinion in the Province. 
A great deal of research work has been done in this 
department, along lines similar to those in the large un¬ 
iversities of the United States, and as a result in the 
| last few years there has been a considerable change 
in the way of thinking along educational lines. 

There has been a departure from the traditional way 
of looking at school work. It was formerly held that 
distasteful work had a disciplinary value and strengthened 
' character. It is now believed to cramp the initative and 
to destroy individuality, and we need both of these 
qualities in a democratic country. We are seeking 

I 

therefore a course which may provide a great diversification 
of options, especially in the junior years. Some of these 

I 



* 

■ . . 




» 

« 

* 




* 



















_ 














- 













, 















75- 

may be found to give pleasure, and train the student 
in independent thinking and usefulness. 

The University for its part is trying to meet the 
demand for a more varied curriculum, and at the same 
time is insisting on the maintenance and gradual 
raising of the standards of academic efficiency. 

The normal school is loud in its protests against 
the inadequate training in English, and is asking for 
a course providing a more thorough grounding in this 
subject. Probably the future course may have less 
das sical English and more of the modern authors. 

The machine age has undoubtedly come to stay, and 

,l 

if the time ever comes when all may work again, the 

| hours of labor will be fewer; therefore the students 

| 

must be taught some subjects which they may pleasurably 
pursue after leaving school. It is a reconstruction 
period in secondary education which confronts us. 

We must also consider the course in regard to the 
students 1 social behaviour after leaving high school* 

He is after all moved in a great degree by his emotion^, 
his hopes, fears, and prejudices. He feels first and 
may think afterwards. We have up to the present neglected 





' 






. 


• T 

■ 

- 










o 






' 









76 

the emotional side of education. Religion which is 

the "greatest solvent for our emotional nature that 
i 

exists", we have eliminated from our schools, "both 
on account of our fear of Catholic encroachment, and 
our own inability to agree on church dogma. Our 
position in regard to religion in the schools has not 
changed. We are hoping for some solution of the 
problem of training the emotions in drama, in organized 
games, and in choral music; for music still "has power 
to soothe the savage breast", and choral music could be 
introduced into the schools without any great additional 
expense. 

Dramatics is also a valuable course. The successful 
production of a play correlates with many other studies, 
literature, history, costuming, art and voice culture. 

For the student who takes no work beyond the high 
school, the study of higher mathematics is wasted effort; 
he cannot use it to fill in his leisure hours, while the 
"little theati# affords an excellent opportunity for 
self expression and further education. 

In spite of all our vaunted theories of democracy 
and peace and a dawning millenium at the close of the 













- 

. t 

' 

' 

. 

. * 


; 


, 


, 




' 

" T 

. ' t x 

■ 







77 


war, we have lapsed into a period of financial 
depression and in wide regions of the earth dictatorship 
and impending war. We are now asking ourselves, is it 
not possible to teach the next generation to live together 
like social beings, and not, as is too often the case, 
like greedy monsters, grabbing from one another, and then 
turning to rend each other? 

Might not a well planned course in social studies 

. 

help to remove some of the unsocial tendencies we find 
among us today? Many of our educationists are of this 
opinion and social studies may be the pivot around which 
the other studies in the next course will turn. I quote 
Br. Hewland, Supervisor of Schools, Alberta,who thinks 
this end may be achieved. ”If a course in Social Studies 
defines the goals of social endeavour that is, sets forth 
the social purpose of education, and if it is definitely 
stated that the aim of education is the preparation for a 

new social order, based on justice for the common man, and 

: 

if we apply science to the solution of social problems, 
we shall have a curriculum which will in a considerable 









. 









, 





' 

, 

, ■ < • • 










, 








■: ' ih' 

■ 






■ 












78 


culture in vacuo; all learning and all education will 
have a direct hearing on the social purpose which is to 
he achieved. There will also he a very close relation 
between the activities of the classroom, and the economic 
activities outside of the classroom." 

Science will probably continue to hold a prominent 
place on the programme, on account of its synchronization 
with the great industrial development of the country. 

The problem of secondary education for the rural 
schools may find its solution in a modified form of the 
larger unit plan. The separate school regulation will 
prevent a complete division of the Province into "the 
larger units", but many portions of the Province might 
be selected and organized on a basis similar to "Berry 
Creek", and rural high school facilities provided, as 
well as residential schools for the isolated students. 

The courses taught will have to correspond very closely 
with those of the towns and cities; the rural people 
seem quite decided on this point. 

In our modern attitude towards secondary education, 
we have drawn closer to the ideals of Old Quebec, an 
education not primarily for the advancement of industry 


: 

\ ■ 

. . • 


r 

* 

T 

. 

' 

♦ 


' 


* 

■ 

' 

* 


' 









79 


and commerce, "but an education which, may make living 
more enjoyable for the individual; an education not 
merely for the acquiring of individual wealth, but an 
education which may train us to live like social beings 
with our fellow creatures; an education which brings 

together the people in participation, not of religious 

■ 

festivals or church parades but in dramatic or musical 
festivals* 

■ 

Y/hatever scheme is evolved will probably include a 
change to the 6-3-3 organization, including the 
elementary schooj, the intermediate school, and the high 
school* The programme for the intermediate school will 
be richly varied, while the high school will be more 
academic* 

A possible arrangement might be, provision of a 
junior school of three years having a minimum number of 
required subjects and a generous offering of options, 
in which all pupils would be carried along together. At 
the end of the third year there would be a comprehensive 
examination* On the basis of performance in the junior 
school and the results of this examination some pupils 
would be directed into the more specialized course 






- 





5 


i 

. 

* 

■ 




' 





80 


preparatory to advanced study and the others would be 
directed into a general course continuing the opportunity 
for wide choices* In the senior school, there would he 
three years of academic work. 

For the widely diversified curriculum, some of the 
new courses offered may then quite possibly be social 
studies, dramatics^, bookkeeping, shop-work, sewing, choral 
music and domestic science* A liberal provision will 
undoubtedly be made for health, while physical training 
will be less rigid in discipline and take the form of 
organized games. Everything points'to a curriculum 
from which the student may select the subjects he likes, 
jand enjoy them. 

I 

The success of a curriculum with widely diversified 
‘options will depend in a great measure upon a re¬ 
organization of school territory into units of larger 
area. Under the present organization of rural territory 
it would be impossible to finance such a system; not only 
more teachers, but teachers with special training would 
be required, and both the equipment of schools and the 
accomodation would have to be increased. Alberta is a new 
















i; . ' ■ v‘ > 'i 

. 

' 

; • ? 

* 

>,.L I i 

■ aM- 

■ 

t 

















81 


new province and will have to advance carefully, 
step by step in order to bring in a sound and 
progressive reform in our programme of secondary 
education. 

1* Wallace, Dr. R. 0., Address to Canadian Club, Marehll 
1935* Calgary Herald. 

2. Alberta, Department of Education; Minutes of Meeting 
of General Committee on Revision of Secondary 
Schools 1S35* 














' 








•* - * 


. 


- 






* 

f 









. 









82 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Alberta, Province of, Annual Reports of the Department 
of Education; (1908-1927 Edmonton.) 

Alberta, Province of. Regulations of the Department of 
Education; (1924-35 Edmonton) 

Alberta, Province of. Second Interim Report of the 

Committee on High School Education; (I923, Edmonton) 
Alberta, Handbook for Secondary Schools, Department of 
Education, Edmonton 1925. 

Alberta - Sessional Papers, Correspondence, Education, 
1911-12. 

Alberta, Report of the Legislative Committee on Rural 
Education (Sessional Paper 136, 1935 , Edmonton) 

|Alexander, W.H.; Ihe University of Alberta. 

A Retrospect 1908 - 1929 ; (1929, Edmonton) 

Armstrong, W* H. C.; Separate Schools in the Hew 
Provinces; Saskatoon, 1918 * 

Blue, John; Provincial Librarian; 

Alberta Past and Present, Vol* 1 Ch# XVI; (Chicago, 
1924 ) 

Bleak, Norman Fergus; History of Sasha tchewan and the 
Old North West; (Regina 0(1913) 












K 








, 

















83 


English for the Ron~English; Regina 0(1913) 

Burt, A. L.; Romance of the Prairie Provinces; 

Gage, Toronto, I93O. 

Bulletin, Edmonton; Teachers’ Examinations (May 24, 1897 , 
Edmont onj 

Bovey, Wilfrid; Oanadien; (1933 J* M* Dent & Sons, Toronto.) 
Burwash, Nathaniel; Makers of Canada, Yol. XIII, Egerton 
Ryerson; ( 1910 , Morang & Go., Toronto) 

Canada, Sixty Years of Canadian Progress, 1867 - I9Z7, 
(Ottawa 1927) 

Canada, Annual Survey of Education in Canada, (Ottawa, 1931) 

Canada, Journals of the Legislative Assembly I845, 1853, 

- 

1865. 

Canada, Who’s Who, 1933 — 34 -• 

Correspondence re - Report of the Legislative Committee on 
Rural Education; W. E. Payne, Red Deer. 

Dafoe, John ¥•; Clifford Sifton in Relation to his Times, 
Macmillan Co. of Canada, Ltd., Toronto, 1931 * 

Dewey, John; Schools of To-Morrow, J. M. Dent & Sons, Ltd.; 
New York, 1915) 

Dyde, W. F.; Public Secondary Education in Canada. 

Grant, W. L.; History of Canada; (1916 Renouf Publishing 
Co., Montreal) 



T 






84. 


Hamilton, James 0 .; The Prairie Province, Belford Brothers, 
Toronto, (1876.} 

Hopkins, CasteII; Canada, An Encyclopedia of the Country. 

Canadian Annual Review of Public Affairs I9Q2-I903. 
Journal, Edmonton; Sketch of the History of Alberta, Feb. 
19th, 1916, Edmonton. 

Jaffary, Pamphlet,; Outline of the History of Education in 
the North West Territories. (Provincial Library 
Edmonton.) 

Long, M. H., B.A. (Oxon) Aims and Methods of History 
Teaching, { 19 l6, EdmontonJ 

Magazines, The Alberta Teachers 1 Association, May 1935 * 

( 1935 , Edmonton.) 

Moore, William Henry; The Clash; (1918 J. M. Dent & Sons, 
Ltd., Toronto.) 

Minutes of Meetings of the General Committee of Revision 
of the Seconday School Course of Studies. 1935-36, 
Department of Education, Edmonton. 

MaoEaohran, Dr. John M.; Canada and its Provinces; Alberta, 
Education. Vol. 20 , pp. 477-506, Toronto, I9I4-I7. 
Morgan, Henry James; Canadian Men and Women of the Time; 
William Briggs, Toronto, 1912 . 























- 

T 






85 - 

Horth We 3 t Territories, School Ordinances 1889 - 1902 , 

h ■ 

Reg ina• 

Ontario, Annual Reports of the Department of Education 

1888. 

Putman, J. H.; Senior Inspector of Schools, Ottawa, and 
Weir, Gf. M#, Professor of Education, University of 
British Columbia; (Victoria, I925O 
Survey of the School System of British Columbia; 
(Victoria, 1925) 

Statistics, unpublished; see acknowledgements. 
Territories, ITorth West, Annual Reports on Education; 
(1886 - 1904 , Regina.) 





J 




f 













V 


■). r -■ 


t 













} 
















APPENDIXES 






















86. 

APPENDIX I 


PROGRAMME OF STUDIES IN THE GRAMMAR SCHOOLS 


OF UPPER CANADA 1835 

IS 

Class 

or 

Form 

I 

Latin 

II 

Gree k 

First 

or 

Lowest 

Arnold 1 s First Latin 
Book; Latin Grammar; 
Cornelius Nepos 

None 

Second 

Latin Grammar and 
Exercises; Caesar’s 
Commentaries 

Arnold’s First 
Greek. Book* 

Third 

Ovid and Virgil 

Latin Prasody and 
Exercises, 

Greek Grammar 
and Exercises; 
Xenophon* s 
Anabasis, 


Virgil and Cicero Homer 1 8 Iliad 

Fourth Exercises and Composition Greek Testament 
in prose and verse. Lucin; 

Greek Prasodv 

and exercises. 


Fifth 


Horace; Composition 
in prose and verse; 

Previous subjects 
reviewed* 


Homer® s Odyssey 
ureek Prasody; 
Previous Greek 
subjects reviewed. 






























01nar III 

87. 

IV 

Form 

French 

English 

First 

or 

Lowe st 

None 

English Grammar 
and Composition 

Heading and Sullivanb 
Spelling Book 

Superseded, 

Second 

None 

Grammar continued; 
Etymology of words 
and versification 

Art of Heading; 

National Series* and 
Sullivan 1 s Dictionary 
of derivations. 

Third 

'Elements of Frenah 
Grammar to the end of 
Irregular verbs, with 
exercises and written 
translations. 

Elementary?*rinciples 
of Rhetoric and Logic 

Art of Reading 

Fifth Bool National 
series*. 

1 

Fourth 

Rules of the use of 

Pronouns and Participles, 
and exercises. Oral and 
written translation* 

Christian Morals 
, and Evidences; 

Readings in Sullivan’s 
Literary class book* 

Fifth 

Syntax and Idioms; Comp- Outlines of English 
csition, oral and writtenLiterature; composition 
Translations; Fenelon, Elements of civic 

dialogues Des Morts; Policy; Political 

Holiers-Les Fourherles Economy; Fifth 

de Scapin; Previous National Header; 

subjects reviewed. Previous subjects 

reviewed. 





























. 


' 






■ 















88 . 

Class 

V 

VI 

Form 

Mathematics 

(*eog.& History. 

First 

Lowest 

Arithmetic 

Algebra; Fisst four 
Kules 

Outlines of u-eography 
and u-eneral history. 

Second 

Practical Arithmetic; 
Algebra; Simple 
Equations* 

Outlines of Ancient 
geography; History of 
Home; History of (Treat 
Britain and Ireland. 

Third 

Commercial Arithmetic 
Algebra, Quadratics; 
Euclid .cooks I & II. 

; Ancient -eography; 

Koman Antiquities; 
History of u-reece. 

Fourth 

Algebra; Euclid 

-books III & Iv* 

Euclid definitions 

hooks V & VI. 

Ancient and Mediaeval 
c-e o grap hy; G-re c i an 

Antiquities; history 
of France; History 
of teanada. 

Fifth 

Elements of Plane 
Trigonometry; 
Mensurationand 
Surveying; Previous 
subjects reviewed. 

Outlines of Egyptian 
History to the death 
of ulebpatra; history 
of Spain and Portugal 
in the reign of 

Ferdinand and Isabella. 





























89 


Class 

or 


Form 


First 

or 

Lowest 


VII 

Physical Science 

None 


VIII 

Miscellaneous 


Writing, Drawing 
Vocal Music. 


Elements of Natural 
nietory, as far as 
Second contained in the 
Third & Fourth 
Nat ional Headers. 

Elements of Natural 


Writing, drawing 
and vocal Music. 


Third 


Fourth 


£ if th 


Philosophy and {Drawing and vocal 

G-eology as containedMusic* 


in the Fifth 

National Keader. 

Physiology as 
contained in the 
Fifth National 
Keader. Elements of 
uhemistry* 

^rawing 
Book-keeping 
vocal &usic. 


1 - 

Previous subjects 
reviewed. 

drawing 
vocal Music 
























90 


APPEHDIK II 

Provisional Regulations with respect to Union Schools, 
adopted 14th March I889 

The head teacher of every high school branch of a Union 
School shall be styled the Principal of such school# 

2 # The Principal shall be a graduate of some university 
in Her Majesty’s Dominions, or have attainments which in 
the opinion of the Board of Education, are equivalent 
there-to, and must be able to satisfy the Board as to his 
knowledge and ability to conduct such a school, and to train 
teachers according to the most approved methods of teaching. 

3. The maximum salary for the Principal of any Union school 
shall hot exceed eighteen hundred dollars per annum. 

4. The following books and apparatus shall be provided for 
each Union School by the trustees; 

-An Encyclopedia - Britannica, Chambers or International. 
In unabridged dictionary - Webster, Worcester or Imperial; 
A Gazetteer - Tdppineott. 

A Biographical Dictionary - lippincott. 

English History - Green and Knight’s History of the 

English People, or Lingard. 

General History - E. A. Freeman, Merivale *s General 


History of Rome from the foundation of 
the City to the fall of Agustulus". 









■ 


c 
















I 


91 


II 

natural Science - Deschanel; Fowne’s and Hoscoe’s 

Chemistry; Gray’s Hew Manual of Botany; 
Physiological Charts {White’s). 

English Literature - Chamber’s ^ncylopedia of English 

Literature; Spalding or Taine; 

Minto f s Manual of Prose Literature; 
Characteristics of English Poets - Minto; 
Shakespeare T s Life, Art and Characters - 
Hudson; 

Bowden’s Art of Shakespeare; 

Rolfe’s Shakespeare; 

Victorian Poets - Steelman; 

Classics - Andrew’s Lexicon Lat.- Eng.; Liddell and 

Scott’s Lexicon (Greek-Eng• ),(larger 

. 

editions); Smith’s Classical Dictionary; 
Butler’s Classical Atlas and SMch of 
Ancient Geography; 

! Geography - Hitter; Guyot’s Earth and Man; Guyot’s 

Physical Geography; Guyot’s Common 
School Geography; Xing’s Aims and Methods 
in Geography; 

Maps - Classical Maps of Italia, Graecia, Asia Minor and 
GaIlia• 

The necessary apparatus for teaching Botany, Chemistry and 
Physics. 











t ■ 














T 


T 






92 . 


.APPENDIX III. 

Report of the Board of Education North West Territories 
13th Dec. 1888 to 17th September 1889. 

The following shall he the course of studies in the 
High School Branch of Union Schools: 

(a) For Protestant Schools 

Standard VI 

Reading - Sixth Reader with recitations. 

Spelling - Prom Reading, lessons and Dictation. 

Composition - Further extension of the subject from 
Standard Y. 

Writing - The subject continued. 

Arithmetic - The whole of Kirkland and Scott’s Arithmetic 
Grammar - A thorough knowledge of Mason’s Outline of 
English Grammar. 

Geography - Map Geography generally, with Canada and the 
British Empire more particularly; map drawing 
History - A review of English and Canadian History; 

Canadian literature. 

Bookkeeping - Single and Doubel entry. 

Drawing - Reading’s High School course commenced. 
Calisthenics and Drill - the subject continued* 













i 

■ 




















* 








93 - 

II 

Algebra - to the end of simple equations. 

Geometry - Euclid, Definitions and Book I. 

Latin - Smith’s Principia Latina, Part I or Harknes 
Introductory Latin BOok. 

French - Fasquelie’s Lessons in French. 

Standard YI 

(b) For Homan Getholic Schools. 

Review of Intermediate Course. 

I Superior Course commenced and continued. 

Geography - General; Canada and the British Empire 
more particularly; map drawing. 

| Canadian Literature - Withrow and Adam. 

Calistenics and Drill continued. 

: French - Fasquelie’s Lessons in French. 

Latin - Smith’s Principia Latina Part I or Harkness 
Introductory’Latin Book. 


I 










94 * 


Examination Subjects 

j 44. The subjects of examination for third class certificates 
shall he the subjects prescribed in Standard V of the 
Programme of Studies for Schools under the control of 
the Protestant section of the Board, or in the intermediate 
Course of the Programme of Studies for schools under the 
control of the Roman Catholic section of the Board, 

The following books are prescribed for the use of 

candidates for third class certificates* 

I 

By the Protestant Section: 

Ontario Public School English Grammar; Morrison’s English 
:Composition; Canada Publishing Co 1 # Geography; Collier’s 
School History of the British Empire; Withrow and Adam’s 
[History of Canada; Hamblin Smith’s Arithmetic; Ontario 
High School Algebra (part I); Mackay’s Euclid; Mclean’s 
[Bookkeeping; literature: selections prescribed in High 
School Reader; Ontario Public School Agriculture; 

Balwin’s Art of School Management; Browing’s Educational 
Theories; Hughes’ Brill and Calisthenics. 

By the Roman Catholic Section: 

As published and amended by adding to the list of books 
for English candidates the ^Ontario Public School Agriculture !l 




- 

. 

. 

j- - f ; . ■ ' . 

: 

: 

. i 

; 

r 

f . ; , 

; 

T 

, 















I 

95 - 

Section 4-6 is hereby amended substituting the following 
for the list of books prescribed for the use of candidates 
for first class certificates by the Protestant section in 
lieu of the list published: 

Spalding f s History of English literature; Ontario High 
School Grammar; Bain’s Rhetoric and Composition; Green 1 s 
Shorter History of the English People; Withrove 1 s Canadian 
History (large edition); Kirkland’s Elementary Statics; 
Hamblin Smith’s Elementary Hydrostatics; Balfour’s 
Stewart’s Elementary Physics; Spotton’s Botany; Huxley’s 
Elementary Physiology; Buckton’s Health in the House; 
Roscoe’s Elementary Chemistry; Todhunter’s Advanced 

| Algebra; Ontario High School Algebra (parts I & II); 

- 

Geikie’s Physical Geography; MacKay’s Eyelid; Baldwin’s 
Art of School Management; Browning’s Educational Theories; 
Hughes’ Brill and Calisthenics. 












96 


APPENDIX IV 

HIGH SCHOOL COUKSES OF STUDY 
ONTARIO 1891 


HEADIN G:;- The principles of orthoepy and elocution; 
Heading; Spelling ana Syllabication. 

ENGLIS H BKAMMA R*-:Etymology and Syntax; exercises 
chiefly on passages from authors not prescribed. 

ENGLISH COMPOSITION AND RH ETORIC:- The structure of 
sentences and paragraphs; paraphrasing of prose; 
expansion and contraction od? prose passages;synonyms; 
correction of errors; rhetorical analysis of passages 
from prose authors not prescribed; themes on familiar 
subjects and the prescribed texts; familiar and 
business letters. 

ENGL I SH POETIC AL LITERATURE !* Intelligent comprehension 
of, and familiarity with the prescribed texts; 
memorisation of the finest passages; oral reading of 
the texts; supplementary reading from authors provided 
in the High School Library, or -supplied by the pupils 
under the authority of the High School Board* 

HISTORY A ND GEOG RAPHY:- The leading events of Canadian 
and British History- the nineteenth century more 
particularly. Commercial,Physical, and Mathematical 
Geography. Geography of Canada,and the British Empire 
more particularly. 

ARI THMETIC AND ELEMENTARY MENSURATION* - Arithmetic in 
theory and practice; special attention to uommercial 
Problems; areas of rectilinear figures, and volumes of 
right parallelepipeds and prisms; the circle,sphere 
cylinder and cone". 

ALGEBRA :- Elementary rules; factoring; greatest common 
measure;leaot common multiple; simple equations of one 
unknown quantity; simple problems. 













" i 





























97 


COMMERCI AL COURSE:- Writing;precis writing and indexing; 
book-keeping, single and double entry;commercial forms; 
general business transactions. 

EUCLID; - Book I, Propositions I-XXVl; easy deductions. 

Drawing : - RreehandjPractical u-eometry; Perspective; 

Object ^rawing, and Industrial Designs* 

PHYSJCS:- An experimental course designed as follows:” 

TaT”Properties of matter:- sensations and things; causes 
and effects; absence of chance in the order of nature; 
matter; the molecule; constitution of matter;physical 
and chemical changes; inertia;force; energy (as 
defined in sections88-92 of the High School Physics); 
three states of matt^r;phenomena of attraction; 
cohesion; compressibility; elasticity etc. 

(b) Sound- vibrations and waves; velocity; reflection; 
echoes; refraction;intensity; pitch;difference 
between noise and music. 

( c) Light- Propogation; reflection;images formed by plane 
and spherical mirrors; refraction; lenses; dispersion; 
selective absorption;colour. 

( D) Electricity:- voltaic cells,polarization;heating, 
luminous, chemical, and magnetic effects produced 
by the electric current; the elect4ic bell; telegraph; 
telephone; the electric light; magnetism* 

BOTANY :- The practical study of representatives of the 
following natural orders of ilowering plants:Ranunculaceae; 
urueiferae;Malvaceae;Leguminosae;nosaceae;Sapindaceae; 
Unbellifereae;compositae; Laoitae; oupupiferae;Araceae; 
Llliceae; Iridaceae; uoniferae; and u-ramineae( types 
contained in text book) A knowledge of structure obtained 
with the use of the compound microscope.Drawing ana 
description of plants rupilied and their classiiieation. 
oomparison or airrerent organs, morphology of roots,stem, 
leaves and hairs, parts of the flowers; reproduction of 
flowering plants; pollination;fertilisation;the nature 
of fruits and seeds. 














J 









98 


GREEK ;-The Elementary Greek book, and sight-reading* 

LATIN: - The Elementary Latin Book,grammar, composition, 
translation and sight-reauing* 

FRENCH;- The Elementary French Book,Grammar,Composition, 

Conversation, Dictation, the prescribed texts, and 
sight-reading. 

German :- The Elementary merman Book, grammar,composition, 
conversation, dictation, the prescribed texts, and 
sight-reading. 


FORM III 

ENGLISH GRAMMAR :- A course consisting chiefly of ecercise 
on passages from authors not. prescribed. 

ENGLISH COMPOSITION AND RHETORI C:- Course in Form II 
continued, and including themes based upon the prescribed 
texts. 

E NGLISH POETICAL LITERATURE :-The course in Form II 
continued, and including intelligent comprehensionof 
and familiarity with the prescribed texts. 

H ISTORY ANP GEOGRAP HY:- Great Britain and her Colonies 
from the Revolution of 1688 to the peace of 1815, and 
the Geography relating thereto. Outlines of Roman History 
to the death of Augustus, and the Geography relating 
thereto. Outlines of Greek History to the Battle of 
Chaeronaea, and the Geography relating thereto, 

A RITHMETIC AND MENSURATION :- Course in Form II completed 

ALGEBRA :- Elementary rules; easy factoring; highest 
common measure; lowest com on multiple; square root; 

ratio;simple equations of one,two and three 

indices;surds; easy quadratic equations of 
one and two unknown quantities. 


















99 


EUQUID : - Books I,II,and III, deductions. 

PHYSICS :- An experimental course defined as follows 
and including and acquaintance with the Metric System 
of units;- 

(a) Dynamics: Definitions of velocity acceleration 
mass momentum, force, moment, couple,energy,work, 
centre of inertia, statement of Newton’s laws of 
motion; composition and resolution of forces; 
conditions for equilibrium of forces in one plane. 
Definitions of a fluid, fluid pr ssure at a point, 
transmission of fluid pressure, resultant fluid 
pressure, specific gravity. Boyle* Law,the 
barometer, air-*pump,water-pump, siphon* 

(b) Heat:- Effects of heat; temperature; diffusion of 
heat; specifis heat; latent heat;Law of Charles* 

(c) Electricity: voltaic cells** chemical action in the 
cells; magnetic effect of the current;electric 
light; current induction; dynamo and motor; 
electric bell;telegraph; telephone. 

CHEMISTRY ?- Definition of the object of the science. 
Relation of the Physical Sciences to Biology and of 
Chemistry to Physics.Chemical change, elementary 
composition of matter. Laws of combination of the element 
atomic theory, molecules, Avogadro*s Law.The determination 
of atomic weight, specific heat, atomic heat,nomenclature, 
classification.The preparation, characteristic properties, 
and principal compounds of the following elements: 

Hydrogen,Chi orine,Bromine,Iodine,Oxygen, Sulphur,Nitrogen, 
Phosphorus, Carbon, Silicon. 

GREEK : -G-rammar,Composition,prescribed texts and sight¬ 
reading. 

Latin :- Grammar, Composition,prescribed texts, and sight¬ 
reading* 








' 

. 


. 

■ 




■ 


ICO. 


FRENCH: -grammar,Composition,Conversation,Dictation, the 
prescribed texts and sight-reading. 

GERMAN :- Grammar,Composition,Conversation,Dictation,the 
prescribed texts, and sight-reading. 


FORM IV 

GRAMMAR AND PHILO LOGY:- A course consisting chiefly of 
exercises or passages from authors not prescribed* 

ENGLISH COMPO S ITION?RHETORIC AND PROSODY :- Essay-writing, 
a course in Rhetoric and Prosody, consisting chiefly of 
exercises on passages from authors not prescribed. 

ENGLISH P O ETICAL L IT ERATURE: - Course in Form III 
continued, and including intelligent comprehensionof 
and familiarity with the prescribed texts. 

HISTORY AND GEOGRAPH Y:- British History from the Discovery 
of America to the Revolution of 1688. Geography to 
illustrate the history read. 

A LGEBRA :- More thorough knowledge of the subjects of 
Form III, together with variations, progressions, 
permutations and combinations, binomial theorem,interest 
forms with annuities. 

Euclid :- More thorough knowledge of the subjects of 
Form III, together with Euclid Books IV and VI and 
definitions of Book v; deductions. 

PLA NE TRIGONOMETRY :-Trignometrical ratios, with their 
relations to each other; sines etc., of the sum and 
difference of angles, with deduced formulas;solution 
of triangles; radii of circumscribed, inscribed and 
escribed circles. 























- : 

, 

■ t ' • ■ . f r ' 

. 








101 


PH YSICS; ~ Course In Form III continued* 

CH EMISTR Y:-The practical study of the following elements 
with their most characteristic compounds, in illustration 
of the outlines of MeneleJeff*s classification of the 
elements* Hydrogen;Sodlura;Potasslum; Magneslum,Zinc, 
ualcium, Strentium,Barium,Borax,Aluminum,Carbon,Silicon, 
Tin, Lead,Nitrogen,Phosphorus,Ar senic,Antimony,Bismuth; 
Oxygen,Sulphur; Fluorine,uhlorine,Bromine,Iodine; 

Manganese,iron,uold,Platinum* 

BOTANY:- The practical study of representatives of 
the flowering plants of the locality in which the High 
School is situated, and of the representatives of the 
chief sub-divisionsof the cryptograms, such as fern, 
a licopod, a horse-tail,a liver-wort, a moss,a lichen, 
a mushroom, a chara. A knowledge of the structure such 
as can he obtained,with the use of the compound micros¬ 
cope. Drawing and description of parts of plants supplidd, 
and their classification* Comparison of different organs, m 
norphology of root, stem, leaves, and hair, parts of the 
flower, reproduction of flowering plants, pollination, 
fertilization, and the nature of fruits and seeds* 

Z OOLOGY :The practical study of the subject, as defined 
in the High School ZOOlogy, but limited by the author’s 
syllabus of the work* 

GREEK: Grammar, Composition,the prescribed texts,and 
sight-reading, 

LATIN: - Grammar,Composition^ the prescribed texts, and 
sight-reading* 

FRENCH:- Grammar, Composition,Conversation, Dictation 
and' the prescribed texts, and sight-reading, 

GERMAN Grammar, Composition, Conversation,Dlctation, 
the prescribed texts and sight-reading* 









i 







102 


APPENDIX ' v 

Course of Studies for the North West Territories 

1891 


TH IRD CLASS 

Twenty percent of the marks attached to e ach of 
the subjects of examination; thirty-five percent of the 
marks attached to each group of subjects; and fifty 
percent of the total number of marks* 

FIRST or S ECOND CLASS- GRA DE "B" 

Twenty percent of the marks attached to each of the 
subjects of examination; thirty-five percent of the 
marks attached to each group of subjects; and fifty 
percent of the total number of marks* 

FIRST or SEC OND CLASS- QKADE 

Thirty-five percent of the number of marks attached 
to each of the subjects of examination;fifty percent of 
the marks attached to each group of subjects; and 

seventy percent of the total number of marks* 

SUBJECTS OF E XAMIN ATION FOR THIRD CLASS CANDIDATE S 

with pre s cribed tex t books 

READIN 0- To be able to read any passage selected from 
the Reader with proper pronunciation, expression, 
emphasis, inflection and force* 

T ext b ooks - Protestant candidates; High School Reader; 
Roman Catholic candidates:Metropolitan Fifth Reader. 

DICTATION - to be able to write correctly any passage 
from the Reader; the papers written on the other subjects 
must also be rree from orthographical errors* 

Text books - as xor Reading* 






























. 

- 






- 


, 


- 




■ 





103. 

COMPOSITION and PROSE LITER ATURE - to oe acquainted 
with the construction of sentences, the rendering of 
poetry into prose, the forms of business and general 
correspondence, the writing of themes, and the rules 
of punctuation. 

TEXT BOOK- For all candidates: William’s composition; 
Literature selections to be prescribed* 

WkItINu- to be able to write legibly and neatly* 

ARITHMETIC - to oe thoroughly acquainted with the subject 
as rar as percentage, including Interest ana discount* 

TEXT BOOK - For all candidates: Hamblin* s Smith* s 
Arithmetic* 

GRAMMAR » To be acquainted with the elements of English 
Grammar,Etymology and Syntax,Exercises, correction of 
false syntax* 

TEXT BOOK -* For all candidates: Ontario Public School 
Grammars 

GEOGRAPHY - To be acquainted with the general geography 
of the world, and of North America and the British 
Empire in particular; to have a good general knowledge 
of the form and motions of the earth, and their connection 
with climate, the seasons, and the divisions of time* 

TEXT BOOK" For all candidates: The Canada Publishing 
Company T ir Geography* 

HIMOag -To have a good general knowledge of the history 
of England and Canada* 

T EXT BOOK - For all candidates: Buckley and Robertson’s 
High School History of England and Canada* English 
History;Chapters XIX-XXVI inclusive;Canadian History; 
Chapters I^vIII inclusive* 

HISTORY OF LITSRSTURE and POETICAL SELECTIONS - To be 
familiar with the selections prescribed for study, and to 
have a knowledge of the life and works of their authors* 


















(• f 



I 




' 






V 


, 









r 









i 



- 











104 


TEXT BOOKS For Protestant candidates: High School Header, 
for Roman Catholic candidates: Metropolitan Fifth Header. 

DRAWING -To have a general knowledge of Freehand Drawing, 
and to be familiar with the books of the High School 
Course: Walter Smith*s Intermediate Freehand Drawing 
Book, pages 1-70* 

ALGEBRA - To have a knowledge of the subject to the end of 
simple equations* 

TEXT BOOK - For all candidates: Ontario High School 
Algebra Part I, pages I-I40* 

GEOMETRY -Euclid, Book I with easy deductions* 

TEXT BOOK - For all candidates:McKay*s Elements of Euclid 

AGHICULTURE -Chapters I***XL inclusive. 

TEXT BOOK - For all candidates: Ontario Public School 
Agriculture* 

SCIENCE and ART of TEACHING - as contained in the prescrib¬ 
ed text books. 

TEXT BOOKS - For all candidates: Baldwin*s Art of School 
Management : Browning*s Educational Theories: Hughes* 

Drill and Calisthenics* 

N*B* Agriculture and Drawing shall be optional “bonus'* 
subjects for candidates for Third class Certificates* 

S UBJECTS OF EXAMINATION FOR S ECOND CLASS CA NDIDAT ES 
WITH TEXT BOOKS PRESCRIBED 


READI NG- To be able to read any extract in prose or verse 
with proper pronunciation, expression,emphasis, and 
force« 

TEXT BOOKS -Protestant candidates: High School Reader; 
Roman catholic candidates: Metropolitan Fifth Reader* 

























— 

' r ' ’• ' f 

' 

- 

. 

“ 

* ' - 

■ 

•: 1 • ^ . hi • i »i - 

. 

- 

, 

- 

, 


- 











105 


DICTATI ON - To be able to write correctly an extract 
from an author* The papers written on other subjects 
must also be free from orthographical errors. 

C OMPOS ITIO N AND PROSE LITERATURE - In addition to the 
work for third class, to show by the composition of 
Abstracts,Paraphrases or assays, an acquaintance with 
the rules of Punctuation, and a fair mastery of the art 
of writing good English; themes based upon the Prose 
Literature prescribed* 

T EXT BOOK - For all candidates** William* s Compositioh 
and Practical English. Literature-Selections to be 
prescribed* 

WRITING- - To be thoroughly acquainted with the principles 
of penmanship, and to be able to write a good running 
hand. 

ARITHMETIC - To have a thorough knowledge of the subject. 
TEXT BOOK - For all candidates:Hamblin Smith’s Arithmetic 


GR AMMA R- To have an elementary knowledge of the High 
School Grammar* 

T EXT BOO K- For all candidates: Ontario High School 
(Grammar, the larger text in the book. 

Geography « To have a thorough knowledge of Map 
Geography, with Canada and the British Empire more 
particularly; map drawing* 

T EXT BOOK - Fo all candidates: The Canada Publishing 
CompanyHs Geography. 

HISTORY - To be thoroughly acquainted with the History 
of England and Canada. 

TEXT BOOK - For all candidates: Buckley and Robertson* s 
High School History of England and Canada* 


















106. 


HIS TORY OF LITERATURE AND POETI C AL SELECTIONS - To be 
acauainted with the outlines ~of‘~the History of English 
Literature, from the time of Q,ueen Anne to the present, 
and to be familiar with the works prescribed for study. 
TE XT BOOK -For all candidates: Stopfordfe History of 
English Literature.Poetical Selections to be prescribed. 

BOO K-KEEPING - To be acquainted with book-keeping by 
Single and Double Entry. 

TEXT BOOK - For all candidates:McLean*s High School 
Book-keeping. 

DRAWING - To be acquainted with Hreehand Drawing, 
Practical Geometry, Perspective and Object Drawing. 

TEX T B OOK - For all candidates: Walter Smith* s 
Intermediate freehand Drawing Book, pages L **238. 

AL GEBRA - To be thoroughly acquainted with the subject 
to the end of Quadratic Equations in the prescribed 
text book. 

T EXT BOOK - For all candidates: Ontario High School 
Al gebra ,Part I, 

GEOMETRY - Euclid, Books I and II with Deductions. 

TEXT BOOK - For all candidates: McKay*s Elements of 
Euclid* 

AGRICULTURE -Chapters I -XIV inclusive* 

TEXT BOOK - For all candidates: Ontario Public School 
Agriculture. 

PHYSIOLOGY A ND HYGIENE - Elementary; to be acquainted 
with the process of digestion, circulation and 
respiration, and to be fami 1 iar with the ordinary 
laws of health. 

TEXT BOOKS - For all candidates: Huxley* s Elementary 
Physiology; Buckton*s Health in the House* 
























107 


SCHOO L LAW - To be familiar with the provisions of the 
School Ordinance, and the Regulations of the Board of 
Education. 

SCIENCE A ND ART OF TEACHING- - To have a thorough 
Inowledge of the subject as treated in prescribed 
Text books* 

TEXT BOOKS - a'or all candidates:Baldwin* s Art of School 
Management,Browning*s Educational Theories,Hughes 1 
Drill and Calisthenics. 

J|?B. Agriculture and Drawing shall be optional "bonus'* 
subjects for candidates for second class certificates. 

SUBJECTS OF EXAMINATION FOR THE FIRST CLASS CAN DIDATES 
WITH PRESCRIBED TEX T BOOKS . 

READING- - To be able to read an extract in prose or 
verse, from any author, with proper pronunciation, 
expression, emphasis, inflectionand force* 

DICTATION - To be able to write vorrectly an extract 
from any author. The papers written on other subjects 
must also be free from orthographical errors. 

COMPOSITION A ND PROSE LITERATUR E - In addition to the 
work for Second Class,to show, by passing an examination 
on this subject, and by the character of the answers on 
other subjects, an acquaintance with the Rules of 
Rhetoric, and a habit of writing English with clearness, 
force, and taste; themes based upon Prose Literature 
prescribed. 

TEXT B OOK - For all candidates: William*s Composition 
and Practical English.Literature- Selections to be 
prescribed. 

WRITING - To be throroughly acquainted with the principles 
of Penmanship, and to write a good running hand. 






















- 


- 


- 

. 



































108 


ARITHMETIC AND MENSURAT ION “To have a thorough 
knowledge 'of Arithmetic', and the Mensuration of surfaces 
and solids, 

TEXT BOOK - Fop all candidates: HamblInSmith*s 
Arithmetic. 

G RAMM AR - To have a thorough knowledge of the High School 
Grammar, and to be acquainted with the origin and 
construction of the English Language, and to show 
Familiarity with its correct use in speaking and writing. 
TEXT BOO K - For all candidates: Ontario High School 
Grammar. 


GEOGRAPHY - To have a thorough knowledge of the Mathem¬ 
atical,Physical and Political Geography of the World* 

T EXT BOOKS - For all candidates: The Canada Publishing 
Company*s Geography,Geikie*s Physical Geography. 

HI STORY * To be thoroughly acquainted with the History 
of England and Canada 

TEXT BOOK - For all candidates: Buckley and Robertson*s 
High School History of England and Canada. 

HISTORY O F L ITER AT URE AN D POETICAL SELECTIONS- To have 
a thorough knowledge of English Literature, and its 
history, and to be able to give a critical analysis 
of a play from Shakespeare, or a work of some other 
author prescribed for examination, 

T EXT BO OK For all candidates: Stopford Brook*s History 
of English Literature, Poetical selections to be 
prescribed. 

B OOK-KEE P ING- To be thoroughly acquainted with Book-keeping 
by Single and by Double Entry. 

TEXT BOO K - For all candidates: McLean* s High School 
Book-keeping, 
























* 

* 

- 






109 


DRAWING- - To have a thorough knowledge of Freehand 
Drawing , Practical Geometry,Perspective,Object Drawing, 
and Industrial Designs, and to have an acquaintance 
with the general directions, principles and methods 
of teahing this subject* 

TEXT BOOK -For all candidates: Walter Smith's 
Intermediate Free Hand Drawing Book* 

ALGEBRA € To have a thorough knowledge of the subject 
to the end of the Binomial Theorem* 

TEXT BOO K- For all candidates: Ontario High School 
Algebra Parts I and II* 

GEOMETRY - Euclid, Books I,II,II,and V and VI with 
Deductions, and the Definitions of Book V* 

TEXT B OOK - For all candidate s:McKay 1 s Elements of 
Euclid,. 

PHYSIOL OG Y AN D HYGIENE -To have a thorough knowledge 
of the subject as t re cited in pro scribeu texts*. 

TEXT BOOKS - For all candidates:Huxley 1 s Elementary 
Physiology, Buckton 1 s Health in the House* 

AGRICULTURE - To have a thorough knowledge of the 
subject, as treated in the prescribed text book* 

TEXT BOOK -For all candidates: Ontario Public School 
Agriculture* 

STATI CS,HYDROSTA TICS AND P HYSICS - To have a thorough 

knowledge of these subjects, as treated in the prescribe 

id. books. 

TEXT BOOKS - : For all candidates; Kirkland’s Elementary 
Statics, Hamblin Smith’s Elementary Hydrostatics, 

Balfour Sterart’s Elementary Physics, 

CHiM IS T My AND BOTA NY - To have a thorough knowledge of 
these subjects as treated in the prescribed texts, 

TEXT BOOKS - For all candidates: Koscoe’s chemistry, 
Spott orf* s“Botany* 



























\ 


t 


I « 




T 








110 


LATIN- Caesar de Bello Galileo* ,Virgil* ,Latin Pro.se 
Compost t»ion(Arnold),Exercises 1-24 inclusive. 

* Special bo ks or works to be prescribed# 

SCHOOL LAW - To be familiar with the provisions of 
the School Ordinance, and the Regulations of the Board 
of Education. 

FRENCH Grammar{)Fasquelle«-Sykes); Composition; Trans¬ 
lation into French or short English sentences; 
translation of easy passages from English into French, 
and translation of passages from easy French authors*# 

SCI E NCE AN D ART OF TEACHING - To have a thorough knowledge 
of the subject as treated in prescribed texts# 

TEXT BOOKS - For all candidates: Baldwin*s Art of 
School Management, Browning*s Educational Theories. 

Hughes' Drill and Calisthenics. 

N#B«- "Agriculture", "Latin", and "FRENCH" shall be 
optional "Bonus" subjects, for candidates for First 
Class certificates# 

* - Special books to be prescribed# 












E 











' 













111. 


APPENDIX VI 

REGULATIONS OP THE 

COUNCIL OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION 
1898 


T HIRD CLAS S 

R EADING : - The principles of ortheopy and. elocution; 
oral reading* 

T EXT BOOK :- The introductory chapters in the Readers, 

SPELLING: - WR ITIN G:-Judged on all papers, 

ENGLISH GRAMMAR :- A general knowledge of the H$gh SchdiDl 
Grammar* 

COMPOSITION AND PROSE LITERATURE :- The structure of 
sentences and paragraphs;expansion and contraction of 
prose passages; synonyms; correction of errors;critical 
study of the prescribed prose literature in connection 
with the study of the principles of composition;letter¬ 
writing; punctuation. 

An essay, from thirty to sixty lines in length, on 
one of a number of assigned subjects, based upon the 
prescribed prose literature*This essay will be considered 
a test of the candidate’s power to write English, 
rather than a proofof his knowledge of the subject 
written upon. Legible writing, and correct spelling, 
punctuation and paragraphing, will be regarded as indis¬ 
pensable* 

T EXT BOOK :- Welsh’s M English Composition”. 

P ROSE L I TERATURE ;* 1899- Goldsmith: The Vicar of 
Wakefield, The novel like the poem is to be studied 
as a criticism of life, and as an artistic whole* 

^POETICAL LITERATURE Intelligent comprehensionof 
a ncT 'T ami XT a r 1 1 y with the prescribed selections; memor¬ 
ization of the finest passages; oral reading* 

















* 

- 

- 

' 

■ 

. 


r 

, 








112. 


PRESCRIBED SELEC T IONS :- 1899; Tennyson; Morte D 1 Arthur, 
Elaine, Recollect ions, of the Ararian Nights, To Virgil, 
Early Spring, Ulysses, "You ask Me Why", "Of Old Sat 
Freedom", "Love Thou Thy Land", Freedom, Oeonone, The 
Lotus Raters, Crossing the Bar, The Lady of Shallott, 

St* Agnes* Eve, Sir Balahad, The six Interlude Songs 
in the Princess, and "Tears,Idle rears". 

The following selections from Palgrave*s Bolden ireasurey 
Bray:Ode on Vicissitude; Ode to the Spring; Elegy 
Written in a Country Churchyard; Ode on Eton Collage. 

HI STORY :- The leading events of Canadian and British 
history. 

TEXT BOOK S:- Clement*s History of Canada; Buckley and 
Robertson r s High School History. 

C-EOBRAPHY : - The general geography- physical, commercial 
and mathematical- of the world; Beography of ujgpada 
and the British Empire more particularly. 

TEXT BOOKS The High School Beography; Beography 
of the British Colonies by Dawson and Sutherland* 

ARITHMETIC AND MENSURATION :-Pure Arithmetic; commercial 
Arithmetic. 

T EXT BOOKS :~ Hamblin Smith*s Arithmetic to the end 
of chapter xvi. also chapters XXXIII & XXXIV. 

For mensuration, consult Hill*s Lessons in Beometry, 
chapters VII-IX inclusive. 

ALGEBRA: Definitions, elementary rules, simple 

equations of one two and three unknown quantities, 
problems. 

~ TEXT BOOK: -C»Smith* s Elementary Algebra, chapters 
I-VIII inclusive. 

BSOMETRi:- Euclid-Book I, with easy Deductions, 

TEXT BO OK:- McKay 1 s Elements of Euclid. 

BO OK*KEEPIN b:- McLean* s High School Book-keeping 
chapters*'I - V inclusive, and chapters vIII-X* 
















113 


BOTANY: - Elements of structural botany. 

The course in Third Glass Botany shall he entirely 
practical and descriptive, and cover the following:- 
The flower 5 ; its parts, their functions and relations 
as observed in the actual study of specimensof the 
following orders: Kanunculaeeae,Cruciferae,Leguminosa§, 
ttosacae, and Liliacaea. 

'The classification of members of these orders as to 
their genera- Spotton*s Botany. 

The leaf in vernation,venation,phyllotaxis, surface, 
margin,outline,base,apex, and function. 

Inflorescence- determinate and indeterminate aestivation. 
'The simple study of fruits, and their classif ication- 
as apocarpous,syncarpous,dehiscent and indehiscent. 

The simple study of the root and stetm, with drawings 
of cross-sections, and branch systems* 

Pollination;-’" ertilization and the development of the 
seed from the ovule. 

The study of hairs,tendrils,runnders, and such 
modification of parts* 

termination, illustrating the growth of the seed and 
conditions. Plant food, assimilation, respiration, 
and transpiration. Simple drawings of all the parts. 

A plant shall be submitted at the examination, not 
necessarily for the purposes of Identification, but as a 
means of testing the candidate*s practical knowledge 
of this subject. 

TEXT BOO K:- Spotton*s High School Botany, Manitoba Edit¬ 
ion". 


AOk I CULtUkE :- definitions,plants, soils,tillage, 
crops and weeds; insects. 

T EXT BOOK ;- Ontario Public School Agriculture 
chapters I-XIX Inclusive* 


PHYSICS :- The course in this subject shall cover the 
following: 


1# Metric and English systems of measure* 

2* fa§||;§£ : fluidC liquid,gas); constitution of 









3a j 


. & I -•Uurdilj 

yxxjo a 


lo n x .7 

rolXoa- 



X.8J XI ■. X . 

. . x 1 - X - X 

: : ' xnX lii -j ■ XX - • -* , - x r « . - 

:.<lo ilerIX xi, .olXuil to y.bufs Tq 



l . JX-’08l'.r J t • iJ ; 07 •' , 7- 

- a- Xn.o Xoox xit lx y_jjr .a -CqxXR 

. . 7 : V J. -■ t •'* ~ 

* 

t H ■ i Xu. , i 17.., 7 € ,rX iiJil' < ' 


10 i 7 0 OCX 7 u J - il X J •- 

x ? 77 £ tsix lx, • t X)C 

18 10 xqix,. .X X1.< IqfflX 

. 

i 1 X .j X 'iii : • •- >'• x ■ XX J 

yi: :.' J 7: Y lX .u " X, X X ; - 


Xai/IIX t r 'Xi 
* 





JO-7 ■ C X 

. 


. 

f.l . 11*0 0 



• ■ ~ - 4 . - 

« . J 7 7 J: - X ■ ‘ 

r ••• r: o i >x J. - r ' * ; • - . - 

. L ■ ■ -i >' 

; ■ . > f j . , X x “ v - - 

V ,,J v . rretf- ••• . tf'QO # .»< • •: 1 

( 


114 


3. Properties and laws of solids: hardness, ductility, 
malleability, plasticity, cohesion,adhesion,elasticity 
st.ructure( crystal! ine , amorphous) . 

4. Properties and Laws of Liquids:- Fluidity,viscosity, 
cohesion, adhesion; capillary phenomena; surface 
tension; transmission of pressure by fluids; pressure 
due to weight; surface of a liquid at rest, under the 
action of gravity; buoyancy. 

5. Properties and Laws of oases: -Pressure due to weight; 
expansive force( tension or elastic force); buoyancy; 
measurements of the pressure of the atmosphere, 
barometer; compressibility; Boyle*s or Mariotte*s Law* 

6. uonstruction ana action of the following instruments:- 
and Machines:- Air Pump (common and Spremgel) , 

condenser, common pump, force pump,siphon,hydrostatic 
press. 

7* Specific u-ravity:- density of a solid,liquid and gas* 
8. tcelative motion and absolute rest:- 
(Force:- definition, recognition,manifestations; 
(measurement; stress, action, reactioR;molar and 
(molecular forces; moment of a force;unit of force 
9(and mass. 

(Energy:** definition; relation to force; various 
(forms; potential and kinetic* 

(Work:- definition; relation to energy and force; 
(wasted work;unit; estimation of work done* 

( 

10:- Newton’s Three Laws of Motion, and their 

application to universal gravitation; equilibrium 
of bodies. 

11. Machines:- Uses, advantages,lawsa;levers,balance, 
inclined plane ,pulleys* 

12. Heat:- Nature and sources;expansion of solids, 
liquids, gases;measurement of heat; construction 
and use of thermometers; maximum density of water, 
uhange of state- solid to liquid and liquid to solid; 
vaporization and liquefaction;ebullition,evaporation, 
dew point, ransmission of heat- conduction, 
convectionand radiation. 

13. iransformation, correlation and conservation of 
energy. 

TEXT BOCK:- u-age* s"Introduction of Physical Science'.* 





. ' ... r i 

* - ; < 


{ ( 

,r 1 L.: t / {, . ' "1 J '■ J .' • -' : 


• < ;• on " , v ' f V't ' ‘ ^ 1 ' 

rj vrjT orfrr > >ff ^ ir>. T - >V ' ~ f 7 ' t + ; 7 " .f."» 7 ' t 

v j - ■•,;n ‘ f ■ , v : ' .n ' ' ! 

,'? >•>'• .= ''•' f 1 :-- t r ir*'.'■*/' i ’ 

r . > v' i - : ' j ' 5 ' ' ' ■ : 

,^|0 ) T f'.f .r> IS r . *rfs ,-r- f ^ ~''?0 * 

Tl ^ i f lO " f f f ,v ■ ' r ' 1 , 

' 

r O ! o ’ \ t- "'n n M • ■ r ’ , '^ !f r '■■ • 

i. ; qm./q t r : r :r 'J nt -- ' • • • 


o|fr>e ^ 1. ■yd'/rm* ■ 

- 

;nc t a " f •-'••• t " r 

. L r; 9 --;f ( y- ■ ‘r-. tr, 


•5r 4 rr f> CN- I ! «-> j < e\ '~l , \ 

r\ Y-'" --■V.i; : , 

star ■ -eo-iC . ) 
‘tj-ig Jn.? ’ 

p • ft* f /to«I on’) 

. , ; ' • 1 I • V *1 ' 

. • *• ‘ 

X + • [■- - ' •' ' 1 - *" •' 

, - . . ' ' fw .'t'■ ♦ > l - r • r ! 

+C ' ’ 

. :riC ? t ■ f •: r**;^rfp.*r f * rv .f.t, i.i. 1 •q 

r : ^ 79 r > • *v ; . - - ;T - : ' ; ' - 

4 ■' r r Tr t • T 1 r • 

- -T- •• ; • ,r- •• f ' '• » 

o : .}• . ^0 + ' - T- : s : 

o n ' muriT-fx -r :^Tforn r -; f + " 

" 

• ^ .] r ,M' >• , • ' • 


6noo 




•-■-9 xr.t;> jf rr; 1 . - 1 r ; 

t r , f + -• t •' 1 r '*T " f 1 (X ? •' " r ' 

■, : . [ .• ■ c ^ ' ’ - . 1 





SECOND CLASS 


HEADING :- lhe principles of elocution; oral reading* 
S PELLING AND WRITING-: -Judged on all papers* 

ENGLISH GRAMMAk : ■ The High School Grammar. 

CO MPOSITION AN D PkQSE L IT ERATURE :- 

a- The,structure "of sentences and paragraphs, expansion 
and contraction of prose passages, choice of words, 
figures or speech, critical study or rhe prescribed 
prose literature, in connection with the study of 
the principles of composition,rhetorical analysis 
of passages from prose authors not prescribed, 
b- An essay about sixty lines in length, on one of the 
number of as igned subjects based upon the prescribed 
prose literature. 

c- Prose Literatur 1899* Scott 1 s“Waverley*. The novel 
like the poem, is to be studied as a criticism or 
life, and as an artistic whole. 

TEXT B00K : B-enung 1 s Outlines of Khetoric* 

POETI CAL LITERATURE :-Inteliigent and appreciative 
comprehension of, and familiarity with the prescribed 
selections; memorisation of the finest passages;oral 
reading. 


SELECTIONS FOR 1899 :- 
Scot t-Lady of the Lake. 

Wordsworth -Michae1, To a Daisy,To my Sister,Expostulation 
and Meply,The Tables Turned,0 Nightingale,Thou Surely Art, 
At the Grave of Burns,Thoughts Suggested the Day Following, 
The Solitary reaper, The Primrose of the Hock, Ode to Duty; 

Sonnets ;* Fair Star of the Evening,Splendour of the West; 
It is not to be Thought of that the Flood; Scorn not the 
Sonnet; I am no One Who Much or oft Delight; Wings Have 
We ahd as Far as We ^an Go;Nor can I not Believe; It Is 
=? beauteous Evening Calm and Free; I Thought of Thee 
ny Partener and my Guide; A Trouble not of Clouds, or 






















. 

■ 

. 



* 









116 


Weeping Kain; A Poet l He hath Put His Heart to School; 
Influence of Natural Objects; Nutting; Character of the 
Happy Warrior;Elegiac Stanzas, suggested by a picture 
of Peele castle;To the Rev. Dr. Wordsworth* 

HISTORY : - British: G reat Britain from the Revolution 
of 1655 to the present, with the outline of the previous 
periods of British History, 

TEXT BOOK : - Green’s Short History of the English People, 

Canadian: Clement* s History of Canada 

General:Swinton*s Outlines of the World’s History. 

Sections I II & III, 

GEOGRAPHY :- The commercial and physical geography 
of America and Europe. The Geography of the British 
Empire, 

TEXT BOCKS :-Geogaph.y of the British Colonies by Dawson 
and Sutherland. Elementary Pyhsical Geography by 
R.S. Tarr. 

ARITHMETIC AND MENSURATION :- Arithmetic in theory ana 
practice; area and volume of rectilineal figures; 
circle; sphere; cylinder; cone, 

T EXT BOOK :* hamblin Smith’s Arithmetic. For Mensuration 
refer to Thompson,Ballard and McKay’s High School 
Arithmetic™ Ontario Series* 

ALGEBRA :- Definitions, elementary rules, simple 
equations of one two and three uninown quantities, 
proolems, factoring, highest common factor,lowest 
common multiple, fractions, eouati ns with fractions, 
quadratic equations, eimultaneousequations of the 
second degree, powers and roots, indices and surds. 

TEXT BOOK :- G. Smirh* s Elementary Algebra, chapters 
I- XIX. 


GEOMETRY :- Euclid- Books I,II,& III. reductions 
t ext BQ K:- McKay’s Elements of Euclid. 













r - : t r ' 


I ^ 

•Ui. 




■j * ■■■ "+ 

tMtlSsj' 


, | * • ■ O 4 - r** * r{ , : 

•' ! ‘ .in ~ r 

4 W rfrs f f 


4 t 'to v*to 

' ; ; t ’& 


. ’rT'" 

+.f 1 - 1 1 


> - •> • 

<r "'P J;'-'-" 


f t - -j 4- ■ ■■ r> 1 + j ■ 1 " .' 

. r;:: p j. l 








. e •" ‘' • 

. - t.: qn? 

, - , ‘ - . " 


t r a 

T«Of 


T 1 \ ■ T ■’ " f; 


' 


" J $ f f - ' 'T 

- 


•; l 0 f j* ^ .TCl' + M ' 

I-vvniilloot lo ojaSuxov 

, r 

•>./r * ^ ( + f '■ ‘ 

f ’ - . -r / r . - • 


* 3 - 


[ r n t 


v - . ■; r r> pf ft • f t 


_ . f . u c . ;.; l > 




. 


, 4- rtr\ ; f t -.ri ^ ■ : : f Ofi "XC 


. t .i ■ t t r. f • . >(4 f ' “ ; fp ^ fn 

n,.J • - . . 


• • o r t , •? t ■■ :t -f ' 


■ jX (, 


, 


f v - .f r 

r f 


•vr 




117- 


BOCK-KEEP INi* :- As for Third class 
PHY SICS: - The elements of Physics. 

TEXT.BOOK :- Cage's Introduction to Physical science. 

AG-KICULtUkE. s -Plants, soils, tillage, crops, weeds, 
insects, birds, seeding, care and management or animals, 
dairying and cultivation of trees. 
tbXt-BQQK .; - Ontario Puolic Scnool Agriculture, 

bOtANi :- Topics as ror Third class. 


F IRST CLAS S 

SPELLING- Ai:r RrIxINu-;- Judged on all papers. 

T HE ENGLISH LANu-UA CrFi: - 

T EXT BOOKS: - Lounsbury* s English Language; Part I 
The Hi go. School Grammar; Gunmerefe. Hand Book of Poetics 

RHETORIC AND COMPOSITION : - 

Style; invention;” the reading of prescribed prose 
selections in connection with the study of Rhetoric* 

An essay about sixty lines In length; one of a number 
of assigned subjects, based upon the prescribed prose 
selections. 

TEXT BOOK :-Genung* s Practical Elements of Rhetoric* 

PROBE LITERS TORS : Selections I * XXVI inclusive 
in the Hand book of rhetorical analysis; Genung* s; 
Scott 1 s, Waverley. The novel like the poem is to be 
studied as a criticismof life, and as an artistic 
whole* 

POETICAL LITERATU RE: -Pre scribed selections 1899. 
Shakespeare;- The Merchant of venftve; Richard II. 
Milton:- L*Allegro,Il Pensoroso,Comus, Lycidas, 

On His Being Arrived to the Age of Twenty-three, 



















* 











- 

- 

t . - : ■ 


i • : 1 - '■ 

, 

* 


■ 











118. 


To the Lora General Fairfax, To the Lord general 
Cromwell, To Sir Henry Vane, the Younger, On His 
Own Blindness. 

Wordsworth:- As for Second Class. 

HISTO RY:- Swinton - Outlines of the World’s History. 
Bagehot- The English constitution. 

Bourinot - Constitutional history of Canada. 

BIOLOGY:- General Biology; Sedgewick and Wilson. 

A LGEBRA :- C. Smith’s Elementary Algebra* 

GEOMETRY :- Books I,II, III, IV; Definitions of Book V. 

Propositions; i,2, 3, A, 4, 33* of Book vlReductions. 
TEXT BOOK :- McKay or Todhunter* 

TRIGONOMETRY :- Up to and inclusive of the solution 
of plane triangles. 

TEXT BOOK:- Hamblin Smith. 

CHEMISTRY :- 

TEXT•BOOK :- Kirkland’s Experimental Chemistry* 

BOTANY :- Elements of structural Botany. 

TEXT BOOK :- Spotton 1 s High School Botany; Manitoba 
Edition.. 

PHYSICS :- The elements of Physics. 

TEXT BOOK :- Gage’s Introduction to Physical Science* 
MARKS REQUIRED TO PAS S 

Candidates must obtain at least 34 % on each subject 
and 50^ on the total number of marks. 

If any subject is divided for the purpose of 
examination, candidates must obtain at least 34^. on 
each subdivision* 



















:*•.* v \.: - ' v ♦ : / 

T 


1 -< f 

. r - t . r,t I- 

. . 


r p. *v 



pc 


- ■■ 

' 




, 

.. -;JTI 

0:jeX ? 

• 



t ? ,f r- n 

; V J 

T t T , 

c ■ 

* 


: i /* 0.8 10 

< c - 

- t 

n • r r! bo ‘ • 

t r *. ?' r. r 

- * 



d? 

1 f ; 0 

;T f ; fV ’ 

. -1 

, -■ r V ' ■ T ! , v ’ 



- 


. ' 4 ' 







^ * V , V. : T 1 





nr ■ 

! jy - r . ' !»' * ■ — • 


, v ' -.t - ■ r ■'.t '■ r ; :v ' ' i_ 1 - ‘1 ■ " ^ ‘ 

rr- ■ ' - ' I' ' • • > - 1 -■ ~ : .1 - - : 

~rr tJT. 


! 

... / 

c " t /■ ’ " - ' T T/ " ' 









no < • >■; : -T 


. - 

T*iurr rli ic? 
r , ' +ffr- 









119 


APPENDIX VII 


COURSE OF STUDIES NORTH WEST TERRITORIES 
1902 


STANDARD VI 

READING- : ° A general knowledge of the subject matter of 
the books prescribed for rearing. These bocks are for 
independent supplementary reading rather than for study; 
Fractice in Oral Reading. 

Prescribed 1903-4; Longfellow’s Evangeline; Scott’s 
Lay of the Lake; Dickens’ Christmas °arol; u-oldsmith's 
•tear of Wakefield; Lamb’s Tales from bhakespeare. 

ENGLISH uOMPOSIIION :- Letter Writing; Short compositions 
basedon subjects chosen from the books prescribed for 
general reading. Knowledge of these subjects is regarded 
as less important than the ability to write good English. 
Work notably defective in point of spelling, writing, 
punctuation or division into paragraphs, will not be 
accepted at examinations. Instruction in the fundamental 
principles of rhetoric should be given in connection 
with this study. 

ENGLISH LITERATURE: - A thorough study of the subject 
matter, structure and languageof each prescribed 
selection. Memorization of fine passages* 

Prescribed Poetical literature1903*4. 

Prescribed Prose Literature.1903-4; Scott’s Ivanhoe. 

ENGLISH GRAMMAR AND RHETORIC :- A general knowledge of the 
High School Grammar, definite instruction in the choice 
of words, in the structure of sentences and of 
paragraphs, and in the simple forms of narration, 
description and exposition. 

TEXT BOOK :- Sykes' Elementary Composition. 
















120. 


HISTOKY :- The leading events of Canadian and British 
History* Examinations in History will be son framed 
as to require comarison ana the use of judgement on 
the student’s part, rather than the mere use of memory* 
TEXT BOOKS :- Clement’s History of Canada; Buckley 
and "Robertson’s High School History* 

G EOGRAPHY :- The general geography of the World; 
geography of Canada, and the -oritish Empire more 
particularly. 

TEXT B OOKS: *" The he?/ Canadian Geography- North-West 
Edition; Geography or the British colonies- cawson 
ana Sutherland* 

A RITHMETIC AN D MENSURATION :-Pure Arithmetic; Commercial 
Arithmetic- omitting annuities* 

TEXT BOOKS :Hamb1in Smith’s Arithmetic-Twentieth century. 
For additional Mensuration, consul#, consulyt Hill’s 
Lessons in Geometry; chapters VII- IX inclusive. 

ALGEBRA :- Definitions, elementary rules, simple 
eouations of one, t?ro and threee unkno?m quantities, 
problems, factors, highest common factor,least common 
multiple, fractions and easy quadratics* 

TEXT BOOK :- C. Smith’s Elementary Algebfcs; chapters 
I-XIV inclusive* 

GEOMETRY: - Euclid’s Elements Book I; easy ©eductions. 
T EXT BOOK :-Todhunte r and Loney. 

BOOK-KEEPING :A knowledge of business forms,usages, 
and correspondence; Book-keeping by Single and Double 
entry. 

TEXT BOOK :- Black’s Public School Book-keeping* 

BOTANY AND AGR I CULTURE :- As in Bergen’s Foundations of 
Botany, without &ey and Flora ( omitting chapters VI, 

XII,XIV,XIX,XX,XXI,XXII,XXIII*) 

A knowledge of the structure, function and relationof 




















121 


root, stem, leaf, and flowerof typical plants belong¬ 
ing to the orders ; Ranunculaceae, orucifereae, 
Laguminoseae, Rosaceae,Liliaceae* Determination of plants 
belonging to these orders. Field work by each student is 
essential* 

REFERENCES:- Spotton®s High School Botant; Manitoba 
Edition; Coulter’s Plant Relations. 

AGRICULTURE :- A~ in C.C. James' Agriculture. Recommended 
for j-eachers® Reference- Bailey's Principles of 
Agriculture* 

PHYSICS :- As in Merchant and Fessenden's High School 
Fhysical Science; Part I. 

DRAWING :- Representation, construction,decoration; as 
in Prang® s New (traded Course in Drawing for Canadian 
Schools; Books X,II,&III. 

Teachers' Reference- The Manual* 

LATIN : - Grammar; Reading; composition. 

TEXT BOOK :-Henderson and Fletcher's First Latin Book, 
pages 1-191 inclusive* 

FRENCH :- Grammar; Reading; Composition; Conversation* 

TEXT BOO KFraser* and Squair* s French Grammar and Reader* 

GERMAN: - Grammar;reading; Composition; Conversation* 

TEXT B OOK :High ^School German Grammar and Reader to 
page 142, together with a knowledge of the conjugation 
of strong verbs. 

OBLI GAT OR Y SUBJSCT S:- Reading, English Composition, 
English Literature/"English Grammar and Rhetoric, 

History, Geography, Arithmetic and Mensuration,Algebra, 
Geometry, Botany and ^rawing* 

OPTIONAL SUBJECTS :- Book-keeping, Agriculture,Physics, 
Latin, French and German* 




















122 


For students Intending to become teach er s, or to 
enter a profession, an axamination of the following 
subjects of standard VI will be held annually: English 
Composition, English Literature, British and Canadian 
History, geography. Arithmetic and Mensuration, Algebra, 
Rook-keepingAgriculture and Botany, Physics and ©rawing* 
Students intending to proceed to a Unive sity, should 
take the languages prescribed for matriculation therein* 

STANDARD VII 

READING- :A general knowledge of the subject matter of the 
books prescribed for reading. These bo ks are for 
independent supplementary reading, rather than study. 
Practice in Oral reading. 

Prescribed books for 1903-4:Tennyson: The Princess, 

Enoch Arden, Ode on thej>eath of the Duke of Wellington. 
Buskin: Sesame and Lilies. Irving: The Sketch Book. 

Scott: The Talisman* 

E NGL ISH C OMPOSITION :- Letter Wtiting. Short compositions 
based chiefly on subjects chosen from the books 
prescribed for general reading. Knowledge of these 
subjects is regarded as lessimportant than the ability 
to write good English* Work notably detective in point 
of Spelling, writing, punctuation, or division into 
paragraphs, will not be accepted at examinations. 
Instruction in the fundamental princuples of Rhetoric 
should be given in connection with this study* 

KHSEIBHEESCTBfilffBHBs- A thorough study of the subject 
matter, structure and language, of each prescribed 
selection.Memorization of fine passages. 

Prescribed selections-1903** Alexander* s School Anthology 
of English Poetry; Books I & II. 1904 - Books III & Iv. 
1903- Shakespeare*s Merchant of Venice. 1904- Julius 
Caesar. Prescribed Prose Literature 190 3 : G-eorge Eliott* 
Silas Marner; 1904, The Mill on the Floss. 









« V- 


r r s r ' 

f * ' 




% 





* 


, 4 

‘ . < i t > ' f . !• ' ■ r : ■ " ■ . . r : ; 

1 ••} ' ’ - ' r t 



- - * 

; 

r~ ■ ( . f ^ • r-*•> t T * - ■ ' f r ? v ' 

.4 rr , 5 r ’ "i r r « , '>*{ T " nf 

t 1 m ‘ r i >?> *■ v *;' • ■ 


- j 

i . ■ > ■ '/ T:' r .<•' 

< : < ; - . ■ 


4Ht PT , C ' f T-*V-T T 










i 







123. 


ENGLISH GRAMMAR AND RHETORI C:*a in the High School 
Grammar, revised edition* Definite instruction in the 
choice of words, in the structure of sentences and 
paragraphs, and in the forms of narration, description, 
exposition, and argument* 

TEXT BOOKS :-Sykes* Elementary English composition* 
Recommended for Teachers* Reference: Genung* s Practical 
Rhetoric* 

HISTORi sOutline of the World*s History* 

TEXT BOOK :-Swlnton*s Outlines of the World*® History* 

GEOGRAPHY : ■"Physical Geography. 

TEX T BOOK :- Elementary Physical Geography by R.S. Tarr. 

ALGEBRA :^Definitions* elementary rules, simple equations, 
of one, two and three unknown quantities, problems, 
factoring, highest common factor, least common multiple, 
fractions, equations with fractions,quadratic equations, 
simultaneous equations of the secons degree, powers 
and roots, indices and surds* 

TEXT BOC KS” G* Smith*s Elementary Algebra,chapters 
I - XXII inclusive. 

GEOMETRY :- Euclid Books I? II and III; deductions, 

TEXT BOOK - Todhunter and Loney* s Euclid* 

ANIMAL LIFE :- As in Jordan and Kellogg’s Animal Life; 
especially chapters:I,II,IV # VI,VII f VIII,IX,XII?XIv,XV 
and XVI* 

CHEMISTRY :-A,s in Waddell’s School Chemistry* 


DR AWING :- Representation, construction,decorat ion,as 
in Prang’s New Graded Course in Drawing for Canadian 
Schools; Books IV and v* 

LATIN :- Translation into English of passages from 
prescribed texts* Translation at sight(with the aid of 
vocabularies) of passages from some easy prose author* 




















t c 

' 

-UU‘ ‘ 

* 



, 

I 



5 


t 


‘"l ■' e ' • - 













124. 


Candidates will be expected to have supplemented the 
reading of the prescribed texts, by additional practice 
in the translation of Latin* 

Grammatical questions on the passages from prescribed 
textsshall be set, and such other questions as arise 
naturally from the content* 

Translation into Latin of sentences and of easy 
narrative passages, based upon the prescribed prose 
texts* 

The following are the prescribed texts: 

1903“ Virgil: Aeneid,Book II lines 1-505. 

Caesar: Bellum Gallicum, Books II and III* 

1904- Virgil; Aeneis, Book II lines 1 - 505* 

Caesar: Bellum Gallicum; Book Iv( omitting ch*X7) 

Book v; chapters 1- XXIII* 

Two papers as follows: 

(a) Virgil and Caesar, 

(b) Latin Grammar, prose composition and sight work* 
TEXT BOOK :-Henderson and Fletcher’s first Latin Book* 

FRENCH :- 

(a{ Grammar 

(b) Composition* (1) Translation into trench of 
short sentences, as a test of the candidate’s knowledge 
of grammatical forms and structure, and the formation 
in French of sentences of similar character* (2) Trans¬ 
lation of easy passages from English into French* 

(c) Authors: Translation of unspecified passages 
from easy French authors.. An examination on the following 
texts: 

1903; Lammenais: Paroles d’un Croyant Chapters VII-XVII* 
Perrault: Le Maitre chat ou Le chat Botte; Dumas,Un Nez 
u-ele and La Pipe de Jean Bart; Alphonse Daudet, La Derniere 
Classe and La Chevre de Monsieur Seguin: Legouve,La Patte 
de Dindon: Pouvillon,Hortibus; Loti, Chagrin d’un 
Vieux Forest; Moliere, L’Avare, Acte III Scene v. 

Victor Hugo; Waterloo, Chapter IX. Kouget de L’Isle; 

La Marseillaise* Arnualjs; La Feullle. Chateaubriand; 
L’Exile; Theophile Gautier; La Chimere. Victor Hugo; 

LBExtase, LaMart-ine; L’Automne* De Musset; Tristesse. 

Sully Prudhomme;Le Vase Brise, LaFontaine; Le Chene 
et Le Roseau* 















t 


1 








i .* -">'1 O (• ) 

0 .*!• J r i 


' . • ■ - r> 1 'a - ' ' ; ' ' , 

* 

. + r- + M i + ' n I ' 

... ,.r r r : m.- «t ■■ f ' <? J 

ft- - forte. • «■■ • W * 

■ 


; ■ 




1 








125. 


Feuillet; Le Village* 

GERMAN :- 
Grammar. 

Composition.(1) translation into German of short English 
sentences as a test of the candidate’s Inowledge of 
grammatical forms and structure, and the formation in 
German, of sentences of similar character. (2) ranslation 
of easy passages from English into German. 

Authors; Translation of unspecified passages from easy 
German authors. An examination of the following texts: 
1903; Grimm.Rotkappchen, Anderson. Wie’s der Alte macht, 
Pas Neue Kleid venedig; Rothchlld, Der Baer.Ertl; 
Himraelsschleussei. Frommel.Das Eiserne Ereuz;Baumbach, 
Nicotiane;Der Goldbaum* Uhland;Schaefer’s Sonntagsleid; 

Das Schloss am Meer; Chamisso; Das SchlossBoncourt; 
Claudius,ule Sterne, uer Riese Goliath; Goethe,Mignon, 
Erlkoenig, Der Saenger; Schiller, Der ^uengling am Bache. 
Leander; Traumereln pp. 46-9©. 

The obligatory subjects are Reading,English 
Grammar and Rhetoric,English Composition, English 
Literature, General History,Physical Geography,Algebra 
Geometry, Animal Life and Drawing. 

The optional subjects are : Chemistry, Latin, 

[French and ~erman. 

Students may elect Latin instead of Algebra, and 
French or German instead of English Grammar and Rhetoric, 
or chemistry. 

For students intending to become teachers, or to 
enter a profession, andexamination on the following 
subjects in Standard VII will be held annually: 

English Grammar and Rhetoric, English Composition, 

English Literature,General History, Physical Geography, 
Algebra, Geometry, Animal Life,and Chemistry; but 
students amy offer Latin instead of Algebra; either 
French or German instead of either English Grammar and 
Rhetoric or Chemistry; or^rench and German instead of 
English Grammar and Rhetoric and Chemistry* 
















> ' • 




-v . > f l • ■ 

: * ■> .^X 

: , 

* 


• • "f 


• ' 




■ - * p * 

-;-r r . f • *■ 


: -•*• ■ 

- 


_ - 




• t • ' .. • • ■ 

' 


.'/< rr« • j ' 




t 




. r + -*r,' ' 

Y ' 








► ■ f .r ■+ r r ' '* 






• T r , • ;• ( 

f : . L 

. 




• • ?• r -■ 

t 





126. 


STANDARD VIII 

READING:-A general knowlede of the subject matter of the 
books prescribed for general Reading# 

PRESCRIBED BQ0K S1903-4: Matthew Arnold’s Sohrab and 
Rustum, and other poems; Browning’s The Lost Leader, 

Rabbi Ben Ezra. The Grammarian’s Funeral, and other 
poems. De Guincey* s Flight of a Tartar Tribe; Macaulay’s 
Life and ?/ritings of Addison; Thackeray’s Pendennis. 

ENGLISH COMPQSITCDON : - Letter writing. Short compositions, 
based chiefly on subjects chosen from the books prescribed 
for general reading. Knowledge of these subjects is 
regarded as less important, than the ability to write 
good English. Work notably defective in point of Spelling, 
Writing, Punctuation, or division into paragraphs, will 
n&t be accepted at examinations. Instruction in the 
principles of Rhetoric, should be given in connection 
with this study. 

ENGLISH LITERATURE :- A thorough study of the subject- 
Tfmtrtrery "'31and language of each prescribed 

selection. Memorization of fine passages. 

Prescribed Poet ic al Literatu re, 190E-4: Tennyson 1 s The 
Palace of Art, Loxley Hall, In Memoriam; Milton’s 
L’Allegro, II Pensoroso, Lycidas, Comus. In 1903 
Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice ana Hamlet; 1904, 

Julius Caesar and The Tempest. 

Prescribed Prose Literature ,1903: Hawthorne’s The 
House of the Seven Gables. In 1904, Hawthorne’© The 
Marble Faun. 

E NGLISH LANGUAGE AND RHETORI C:- 

TEOTT BOOKS : - Burt 1 s Element a ry P hone tics; Gunmere * s 
handbook on Poetics; Genung*s Practical Elements of 
Rhetoric, 

HISTORY^ - Constitutiona1 and Industrial. 

T EXT BOOKS :- Bagehot, The English constitution; 

Bourinot*s How uanada is Governed, revised edition 1902; 
Cunningham’s Outlines of English Industrial History. 


















127 


AL GEBRA : - C Smith’s Elementary Algebra* 

GBOMEtk Y:-E uclid Books I,II,III,Iv; Deductions of Book v; 
Propositions 1,2,3,A,4,33 of Book vi; Deductions* 

TEXT BOO K:- Todhunter and Loney. 

Tx J GONO ME TRY :- As in D.A. Murray’s Plane Trigonometry, 
and Tables. 

PHYSI CS:-The Elements of Physics. 

TEXT BOOK S* Gage’s Introduction to Physical Science, 

LATIN : - Horace- Odes, Book III,( omitting VlI,5C£xv, 

XX,XXVI. Cicero- In Catiliniam I and Pro Achia, 

Grammar- Bennett, with special reference to Parts I-Iv* 
composition- Fletcher and Henderson!s Latin Prose 
Composition, together with continuous prose composition, 
based on authors read* 

FRENCH:-Grammar and Composition- Writing easy French 
from dictation; translation from English into French; 
translation of unspecified passages from easy modern 
French Prose* 

An examination on prescribed texts. 

1903, Racine- Athalie; Halevy- L’Abbe Constantin, 

GERMAN: - Grammar and composition- Writing ea sy German 
from dictation; translation from English into u-erman; 
translation of unspecified passages from easy modern 
German Prose. 

Anexamination of prescribed texts- 1903; Srei Kleine 
Lustspiele; Elster- Zwischenden Schlachten* 

The obligatory subjects are: Reading, English 
Composition, English Literature, English Language and 
Rhetoric, History and Physics. 

The optional subjects are :Algebra,Geometry, 
Trigonometry, Latin, French and German. 

Students may elect Latin instead of Algebra, and 
either rrench or Germaninstead of Geometry or Trigononetry* 












128 


APPENDIX viii 


COURSES OF STUDY AND SUBJECTS OF EXAMINATION 
ALBERTA 1913 

& ^Adf ix 

obligat ory subjects ;- 

ENGLISH LITERATURE:- The course in Literature should 
5e progress si ve~ Tlf "character, and should be covered in 
such a manner as to foster a taste for good reading and 
rievel op . £h§ 4 power of intelligent and correct literary 
interpretation* Special attention should be given to 
oral reading, as well as to voice training, and the 
general laws that underlie vocal expression. Choice 
unspecified abstracts from the prescribed poetry Should 
be committed to memory, In addition to the selections 
prescribed for memorization. 

11913 - 4 

Poetry:- 

Whittier- Snowbound. 

Selections from English Narrative poems; Wordsworth- 
Michael; Byron, The prisoner of Ohillon; Tennyson, 
rhe Revenge; Browning, From Ghent to Aix and The Pied 
Piper. 

P ros e:- 

Hawthorne, Tangiewood Tales; Ruskin, The King of 
the Golden River. 

Colla teral Readin g:- , 

Scott, Ivanhoe;Church, Stories from Homer. 

Mem orization :- 

Campbell, The Battle of the Baltic and The Soldier*s 
Dream; Scott, Hunting Song; Wordswotth, My Heart 
Leaps Up/ 

CO MPOSITIO N:- Short compositions based chiefly on 
subjects chosen from the texts prescribed for eollateral 

reading. Special attention will be given to natrative 
themes, and to the principles stressed in pp.1-88 of 










* 

, : 

' 




: 

_ 

























129 


the prescribed text; due attention will aloo be given 
to the section devoted to letter—writing and the 
treatment- of common errors, the use of capital letters, 
and rules of punctuation as treated in the appendix. 

TEXT BOOK :- Manual of Composition and Rhetoric (Gardiner, 
Kittredge & Arnold). 

GRAMMAR:-A general knowledge of chapters II,III,VI,VII, 

VIII,IX,X,XI? XII and XIV of the prescribed text; 
general and detailed analysis of simple passages; 
determining of grammatical value of words, 

T EXT BOOK:~ The High School Grammar, Seath. 

HI STORY :- The leading events of Canadian History 
with special reference to the period subsequent to the 
tear 1763. British History up to the year 1485» 
Examinations in History will be so framed as to require 
comparison, and the use of judgment on the student’s 
part, rather than the mere exercise of memory. 

TEXT BOOK :- Duncan- History of the Canadian People; 
Buckley and Robertson’s High School History. 

GEOGRAPH Y:~ Political, Commercial and Mathematical 
Geography with Elementary Astronomy. Special attention 
will be given to British Dependencies- Isheir resources, 

productions, c&ief cities and peoples; the world’s 
commercial highways; commercial relations of Canada and 
Great Britain; Canada ana the United States. 

TEXT BOOK :- Dominion School Geography, 

ARITHM E T IC AND MENSURATIO N:- The (following parts of 
the subject to be studied: Measures and Multiples, 
Greatest Common Measure, Least Common Multiple, Vulgar 
Fractions, Decimal Fractions, Contracted Multiplication 
and Division of Decimals, compound quantities, Powers 
of numbers, Roots of Numbers; Mensuration, including 
the Rectangle, Triangle, Trapezium, Similar Triangles, 
Circle, Surface of the Cylinder, Surface of the Cone 
and Surface of the Sphere. 

Percentage as applied tdb Interest, Bank Discount, Trade 
Discount, Profit and Loss, Commission, Insurance, Taxes, 


















T 







t '« 


. 

















130 


and. duties and customs; the Metric System and its 
application. 

TEXT BOOK:- The High School Arithmetic (McMillan). 

ALGEBRA:- Definitions and Notation; facility in the use 
of'Algebraic symbols, and in the interpretation of 
relations expressed by symbols; addition; subtraction; 
multiplication; division; simple equations of one, two 
and three unknown Quantities, and problems solved by the 
use of simple equations; simple factoring. 

TE XT BOOK :- C. Smith’s Elementary Algebra, Chapters 
I - IX inclusive. 

GEOMETRY :-Book I, and easy Deductions. 

T EXT BOO K:- Baker; Theoretical Geometry for Schools. 

EL EMENTARY S CI ENCE:- 

PHYSICS :- Measurements, mass, density, specific gravity, 
properties and states of matter, motion, energy and 
work, simple machines, pressure in liquids and gases, 
molecular theory, 

TE XT BOOK :- Merchant a.nd Chant’s High School Physics. 

BOTANY :- Study the plant as a whole, with special 
attention to flower structure, study forms, and structure 
of leaves, stems and roots; study of a typical fruit, 
e.g. the bean pod, clearly distinguishing between 
seed and fruit; classification of fruits; dissemination 
of seeds; plant contents; plant ecology; germination 
of plants; the study of a grass, e.g. timothy or wheat; 
study of representative plants, and chief characteristics 
of ranunculaceae, violacaae, sosaceae, crueifereae, 
laguminoseae and liliaceae. 

A .TEXT BOOK is not absolutely necessary, but Atkinson’s 
First Studies of Plant Life is a suitable book for this 
Grade. Spotton*s Botany is also useful , ana may be 
used a a key. 



















e 


































131 


ZOO LOG Y: ~ A choice of material should be allowed in this 

subject, so that local forms may be used* Those parts of 
the subject closely related to Agriculture, should 
receive special attention, blank books for notes and 
drawings are essential, and these should be carefully 

supervised by the teacher. 

No Text Book" is required for the pupils. 

Teachers 1 References: Chapman’s Handbook of Birds of 
Eastern North America; Introduction to Zoology, by 
Davenport; Lessons in Elementary Biology, by T. Jeffrey 
Parker; Manual of Zoology by Parker and Haswell. 

DRAWING S - Representation, construction, decoration, 
as in Prang’s New Graded Course in ^rawing for Canadian 
Schools; books I, II, III. 

Teachers’s Reference; The Manual. 

OPTIONAL SUBJEC TS:- 

LATIN: - Grammar* Bennett’s Foundations of Latin( pp.1-85)* 
Reading: Beresford’s First Latin Reader, Part I, and 
first 15 sections of Part II. 

FRENCH: - Grammar:-" High School French Grammar (Fraser and 
Squair) ; Lessons I * XXIV and XXvI * XXIX, also 
regular conjugations, avoir and etre. 

Reading: Laboulaye, Contes BXeus~ Heath. 

GERMA N:- First Year German( Collar) Lessons I * XXVI. 
Re-ding: Extracts in collar® s Grammar! pp#152-177)* 

The examination subjects for a Grade lx Diploma are: 
English Literature, English Grammar, composition, 

History, Geography, Arithmetic and Mensuration, Algebfca, 
Geometry and Elementary Science. Papers will also be 
provided in Latin, French and German, and candidates 
looking forward to University Matriculation, should 
take the examination in such language, as their prospective 
course demands 














* 


v 




“ 

; 

, 

. 

* 

.. 







* 

■ 






132 


GRADE X 


OBLIGATO R Y SUBJ ECTS:- 

EN GL ISH LITERATURE : - The course in Literature should he 
progressive in character, and should he covered in such 
a manner as to foster a taste for good reading, and 
develop the power of intelligent and correct literary 
interpretation. Special attention should he given to Oral 
Heading, as well as to voice training, and the general 
laws that underly vocal expression. Choice unspecified 
extracts from the prescribed poetry, should he committed 
to memory, in addition to the selections prescribed for 
memorization. 

YEAR 1912- 12;- 

P OETRY :- Scott 1 s Marmion; Shakespeare’s As You Like It. 
PROSE :- Eliot’s Silas Marner; Addison’s Sir Kcger de 
Coverley, 

collate ral K^aaing:-Scott’s Talisman; Parkman*s Oregon 
Train*; Macaulay^s Lays of Ancient nome. 

Memorization :- The following selections from Palgrave’s 
Golden Treasurey: 

Wordsworth- Milton l Thou Should’ st Be Living; The Inner 
vision; The Education of Nature. 

Scott” coronach; Kosabells* 

COMPOSITIO N:- Short compositions based chiefly on subject 
chosen from the texts prescribed for collateral reading, 
review the course prescribed for Grade IX, and in 
addition, study the principles of description,and of 
the paragraph: due attention will also be given to the 
section devoted to letter-writing, as well as to 
pp*443"468 of the appendix, 

TEXT BOOK :-Manual of composition and Khetoric by 
Gardiner,Kittredge and Arnold. 

GRAMMAR :- A more thorough study of the chapters 
prescribed for Grade IX; general analysis of a more 















133 


advanced nature; determining of grammatical values od 
words in more difficult constructions; A general 
knowledge of chapters I,v, Xv, and XVII of the prescribed 
text. 

TEXT BOO K:-The High School Grammar, Seath. 

HISTOkY: - The leading events tof British History, with 
special reference to the period subsequent to the year 1485 
also an outline of General History , as contained in 
Fart I of the prescribed text, with special reference 
to the history of Greece and home. Examinations will 
be such as to require comparison, and the use of judgment 
on the student*s part, rather han mere exercise of 
memory. 

TEXT B OOK S:-Buckley and Kobertson*s High School History; 
Myer T s General History, Kevised Edition* 

PHYSIGAL GEOGKAPH Y:* A general knowledge of the Physical 
Geography , as treated in the prescribed text. 

TEX T BOCK :-High School Physical Geography- MacMillan. 

AK ItHMBtIC AND MENSURATION :“ The following parts of 
the subject to be studied , in addition to a review of 
the work of Grade IX: Partnership, Stocks, Partial 
P ayment s, Equation of Payment s, C ompound Interest, 

Present Worth, True Discount, Exchange, Numerous 
problems involving principles of commercial Arithmetic. 

The use of Interest Tables. 

Miscellaneous Theorems, and their applications under 
the following headings: Divisibility, Longitude and 
time,Special Units of Measurement. 

Mensuration, as applied to the inding of volumes 
of ret angular solids, Prism, cylinder, cone, Sphere, 
rrustums of cones and Pyramids. Numerous problems 
for practice in Mensuration. 

TEXT BOCK: - The High School Arithmetic/MacMillan. 


























■ < ■ t . 








. 

' 

* 







- 












- 


! 









134- 


ALGEBuA : - A thorough review of the course or urade IX; 
continuation oi factoring; equati ns evolving the 
principles of factoring, and their solution; Highest 
common raetor; Least common Multiple; Fractions; Simple 
equations of one, two ana three unknowns; Problems 
oased on equations. 

teXx dOOft:- u. Smith's elementary Algebra, chapters 
I- XIII Inclusive* 

G-EOMeini :Keview or course prescribed for U-rade IX, 
and in addition Books II ana III with easy deductions* 
t EXt BOOK :” .baker- xheoretical c-eometry for Schools* 

P:LEMEiirARl SCIENC E: - 

PHYSIC S:- Review of the course prescribed for Grade l£; 
nature and sources of heat, expansion through heat; 
temperature, relation between volume ana temperature, 
measurement of heat, fusion and vaporization,heat and 
mechanical motion,transference of heat; magnetism, 
electric currents, heating and lighting effects of 
currents, induced currents and their applications; 
electrical measurements, other forms of radiant energy 
with applications. 

TEXT B OOK:- Merchant and chant's High School Physics* 


BOTANY:- Study of composite e*g. Aster,Sunflower, 
DanSeXi'dn, Daisy, with drawings to illustrate; and 
intensive study of any one plant society, e*g. one 
in the neighborhood of a slough; a study of the 
characteristics of different plant societies; food 
storage(AO in roots, (B) In stems,(C) in seeds, 

(D) in leaves, structure of leaves, stems, and roots; 
functions of the parts of plants, e*g. roots (anchorage, 
food storage, food absorption), stems (support, sap, 
transportation, food storage), leaves ( respiration, 
transpiration, photosynthesis) , flowers ( pollination, 
different ways its is accomplished), fruits (protection, 
and dissemination of seeds) , seeds ( reproduction and 
food storage); chief types of inflorescence; collection 













. 






' 

- - 




‘ 




- 


~ 

_ 



















* 

. 








. 













135- 


of twenty local plants, and their identification by 
use of a key; recognition of common cryptograms, e.g. 
Liverwort, Moss, Fungi,Pond Scums. 

A TEXT BOOK is not absolutely necessary, but Atkinson*s 
First Studies of Plant Life is a suitable book for this 
grade. Spot+on’s Botany is also useful, and m ay be 
used as a key. 

T eachers* Refe r ences : Coulter* s Plants;Gray and Coulter* 
Text of Western Botany* 

ZQDLOG Y: - A choice of material should be allowed in 
this subject, so that local forms may be used. Those 
parts of the subject closely related to Agriculture 
should receive special attention. Blank books for 
notes and drawings are essential, and these should be 
carefully supervised by the teacher. No text bock 
is required for the pupils* 

Teachers* references:- Chapman’s Handbook of Birds in 
Eastern North America; Introduction to Zoology by 
Davenport; Lessons in Elementary biology, by T.Jeffery 
Parker; Manual of Zoology by Parker and Haswell. 

DRAWING- :- Course prescribed for Grade IX continued. 
T EXT BOO K:Prang*s New Graded Course in Drawing for 
Canadian Schools, Books I; II; and III; 

Teachers’ Reference:- The Manual* 

OPTIONAL SUBJECT S:- 

LAtl N:- Grammar; Bennett’s Foundations of Latin 
pp.l- 168* 

Reading; Beresford’s First Latin Reader, Parts IVII; 

III. 


FRENCH :- Grammar: High School French Grammar, Fraser 
and Squair; Review of the course for ^rade IX, and 
lassons XXX * XXXIV; common irregular verbs; syntax 

of the verb ( Sections 227*299) 

Reading:- Le Maitre- Contes Extraits de Myrrha. 














f 







■ 


- 

* 

* 

- 

« 

- 

■ HHB 

- 

* •* * 












136 


GERMAN; - 

Grammar: £ irst -Lear German ( Collar) ; Keview of course 
for IX, and Lessons XXVII- XL, 

G-jftWK:- Forman* s First Greek Book; Lessons I^XLVI 
inclusive, with grammatical work from Hadley and Allen*s 
Greek Grammar, as required for above lessons® 

The examination subjects for a Grade X Diploma are: 
English Literature, Composition, Grammar, History, 

Physical Geography, Arithmetic and Mensuration,Algebra, 
Geometry, Elementary Science and Drawing. Papers will 
also be provided in Latin, French, German, and Greek, 
and candidates looking forward to University Matriculation 
should take the examinaticnin such language as their 
prospective course demands® 







* 




' - • 


. 

. 

- 

. 



































137 


GRADE XI 

OBLIGA TOR Y SUB J ECTS :- 

ENGLISH LITER A TURE :- The course in Literature should 
he progressive in character, and should he covered 
in such a manner as to foster a taste for good reading, 
and develop the power of intelligent and correct 
literary interpretation. Students in this grade will 
have become acquainted with sufficient material, and 
acquired such an appreciation of the subject, that 
emphasis may he placed on comparative study of the 
subject, and more critical interpretation, Rhe chief aim 
however, must he to teach the student to understand, 
interpret our best literature. 

1912*13 

POETRY:-Shakespeare;Coriolanus* Tennyson; The Coming 
of Arthur. 

The following selections from Palgrave*s Golden Treasury: 
Drydep-ALEXANDER*s FEAST. 

Coleridge- Youth and Age. 

Gray- Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard. 

Shelley- To a Skylark. 

Wordsworth- Nature and the Poet. 

PROSE :- Macaulay- Essay on Milton: Goldsmith- Vicar of 
Wakefield* 

C OLLATERAL REA DING:- Morley- Burke; Dickens- David 
Copperfield; Tennyson- The Princess. 

C OMPOSITION AND RHETORI C:- Essays based chiefly on 
subjects chosen from the texts prescribed for collateral 
reading. Review of work prescribed for former grades, 
and chapters I and IV of Part I of the prescribed text, 
treating of exposition and argument, also Chapter II 
of Part II, treating of sentences. 

TEXT BOOK:- Manual of Composition and Rhetor!e( Gardiner, 
Kitteridge and Arnold)* 

HISTORY : General History to the close of the Mediaeval 

? eriod; Constitutional History of Canada, 

EXT BOOK:- Myer*s General History, revised edition; 
Bourinot*s How uanada ie Governed, 





























138- 


A LG E BRA :A review of the work of Grades IX and X; 
elementary graphs, and their application, to represent 
a point on a line, a point on a plane, an algebraic 
expression, a linear equation involving two unknowns; 
square and cube roots; theory of indices; surds; 
quadratics; equations of the second degree, involving 
one and two unknowns; problems involving quadratics; 
character of the roots of a quadratic equation, and 
problems to illustrate these relations. 

TEXT BOOK:- C* Sffiith 1 s Elementary Algebra* 

GEOMETRY : - Euclid Books I,II,and III with deductions* 

TEXT BOOK :- Toahunter and Loney T s Euclid, 

CHEMISTRY:- The course to be experimental as far as poss¬ 
ible,' ‘ ‘ ~ ' ~ . 

Physical and chemical changes; elements, compounds, 
mixtures, and solutions; fundamental chemical laws 
and principles,©,g., definite proportions, constancy 
of mass and equivalence; Avogadro*s hypothesis, and its 
applications; ionization in solution; properties of 
acids, bases and salts; types of chemical reaction 
e.g.,oxidation, reduction, replacement; neutralization 
of acids and bases; catalytic action; combination 
in solutions; the practical study of the following 
elements, and their more important compounds, for the 
purpose of learning their chemical properties, and 
relationships, illustrating the laws and principles 
of chemistry, and learning something of the commercial 
and industrial uses, and preparations of materials 
derived from them, e.g*,hydrogen, pxygen, sulphur, 
sodium, potassium, nitrogen, phosphorus, chlorine, 
bromine, iodine, carbon, calcium, iron, aluminium* 

TEXT BOO K;- Milll* Chemistry for Schools* 


A NIMAL LIFE :-As in Jordan and Kellog*s Animal Life, 
especially chapters I,II,IV,VI,VII,VIII,IX,XII,XIV, 
XV? and XVI* 













139 


O PTIONAL SUBJEC TS:- 

PHYSICS : A general knowledge of the subject as contained 

in Merchant and Fessenden’s High School Physical 
Science Part II, revised edition* 

LATIN : - Grammar:-* Accidence- Synthetical usages, espec'~ - 
ially the syntax of the cases, Ablative Absolute, 
Accusative*and infinitive; purpose and result; noun 
clauses; time clauses; gerund and gerundive; 
conditional clauses; and indirect narration in detail* 
TEXT BOOK :- Bennett’s Foundations of Latin. 

Composition*Translation into Latin of phrases and 
sentences, illustrative of the syntactical usages, 
outlined under Grammar, and also sentences based on 
the prose authors read, 

TEXT BOOK :Bennett 1 s Preparatory Latin Writers 
reading:- Caesar- Invasions of Britain; Book IV, 

Chapters XX-XXXVIII; Book V, Chapters I* XXIII, 

Virgil- Aeneid, Book II* 

Translation at sight of passages of average difficulty 
from Caesar. 

The examination in Latin will consist of two 
papers, one on authors and sight translation, the other 
on the Grammar and the composition* One- third of 
the marks for the former paper, will be assigned to 
sight translation, 

FRENCH :- 

Grammar;- Review of work of preceding grades; all- 
irregular verbs; syntax of noun, article, adjective, 
pronoun and adverb, 

Reading:- Translation of the prescribedF*rench 
Literature, also translation at sight of passagesof 
average difficulty, from texts not prescribed* 

The examination in French will consist of two 
papers, one on Authors and Sight Translation, the other 
on Grammar, 

TEXT BOOKS:- High School French Grammar; Greville-Dosia* 
















140 


GSkMAN : - 

Grammar5 - A review of the work of the preceding grades, 
and cover remainder of text. 

Heading:- Translation of prescribed German Literature, 
also translation of sight passages of average 
difficulty from texts not prescribed* 

The examination in German will consist of two papers, 
one on the authors and sight translation, the other on 
the Grammar. 

T EXT HOOKS :- First Year German( Collar ); baker r s 
German Stories* 

GKB BK:~ 

GHAMMAK and Prose:- i?Orman 1 s First Greek book, Lessons 
XLVII to the end, with necessary grammatical work 
from Hadley and Allan* s Greek Grammar. The examination 
in this part of the work will be designed to test the 
student* s mastery of u-reek accidence, but short English 

sentences for translation into Greek will also be set, 
involving the more common idioms of Greek Prose* 
HEAPING:- Xenophon- Anabasis ,Book Iv, chapters I-VII. 
Sight translation from the works of Xenophon, 
preferably from the Anabasis* 

T he E xamin ati on Su bjects for a Grade XI Diploma are: 
English Literature, Composition and Khetoric,History, 
Algebra, Geometry, Chemistry and Animal Life. Papers 
will also be provided in Physics, Latin, French, German, 
and Greek, and candidated may take the examinations 
in any or all of these subjects. 













141 


GRABS XII 


OBLI GA TORY SUB JECTS:- 

ENGL ISH LITERATURE :- The course in Literature should 
be progressive in character, and should be cohered in 

such a manner as to foster a taste for good rearing, 
and develop the power of intelligent, and correct 
literary interpretation* Students in this grade will 
have become acquainteawith sufficient material, and 
acquired such an appreciation the subject, that emphasis 
may be placed on comparative study, and more critical 
interpretation* The chief aim however must be to teach 
the student to understand, interpret, and appreciate 
our best Literature« 

Year 1912-13: 

Poetry:- Shakespeare- MacBeth; Milton- Minor Poems* 

The following extracts from Palgrave’s Golden Treasury: 
u-ray- The Rard: Ode on the Pleasure Arising from 
Vicissitude: ©ollins- How Sleep the Brave, The Passions. 
Wordsworth- Upon Westminster Bridge; The Trossachs, 
and to Sleep* 

Prose :- Emerson- Representative Men; Burke- Speech 
on Conciliation* 

C ollateral Rea ding:- Beowulf (translation); Spenser- 
Faerie Queene, Book I; Carlyle- Burns and Scott; 
Shakespeare- Henry v* 

COMPOSITION AND RHETORIC :- Short compositions based 
chiefly on subjects chosen from the books prescribed 
for general reading. Work palpably defective in 
spelling, writing, punctuation, of division into 
paragraphs, will not be accepted at examination. 
Instruction in the principles of Rhetoric should be 
given In connection with this study* 

ENGLISH LANGUAGE AND HISTORY O F LI TERATURE : - Louncbury- 
jinglish Language Part I, revised edition* ; Gunmere- 
HanG book of Peeties; HaXleek- history of English 
Literature, chapters I * VIII inclusive* 





















142 


HISTORY:- Bagehot- The English Constitution, 

Myers- General History- Modern Age* 

A LGEBRA : - C* Smith’s Elementary Alfeebra. 

GEOMETRY:- Euclid Books I,II,III,Iv; definitions of 
Book v; Propositions 1,2,3,A,4,33, of Book vl , 
Deductions* 

TEXT BOCK:-Todhunter and Loney. 

TKI GO in QME TH Y: - Murray’s Plane Trigonometry and Tables. 

CHEMISTRY :-Inorganic chemistry- Remsen*s Briefer course. 

P HYS ICS:- High School Physical Science, Part II, 
revised edition* 

LATIN: - Grammar:- Bennett- With special reference 
to Parts I * Iv; Bradley- Arnold’s Latin Prose 
Composition ( Exercis s i^XXIII) . 

heading:- Horace- Odes, Books I and II; cicero- Manilian 
Law and Pro Achia* 

FkEACH :- Grammar and composition:- Dictation and sight 
translation; High School French Grammar* A study of 
the irregular verbs, and pages 187 - 336 inclusive, 
with associated exercises. 

R ading: - French Texts fog? 1913; Pailleron- Le Monde 
ou L’on S’ Ennuie; Loti- Le Pecheur d* Islande* 

GREEK :- Grammar and Prose:- A general review of Greek 
forms; translation into Greek of longer sentences, 
and short anecdotes* 

TEXT BOOKS :- Forman- First week Book; Hadley and Allen- 
Greek Grammar. 

heading:- Lyaias- Regarding the Olive Stump, and 
On Behalf of the cripple. 

Homer- Odyssey, book XI 

Sight Translation from Attic orators* 


















■ 



\ 









143* 


GEkMAN:- G-rammar and Composition:- Dictation and Sight 
Translation. High School u-erman u-rammar. 

Keadings:- merman Text for 1913; Kbner- Eschenbach- 
Die rreiherren von u-emperlein; Keller- Kahnlein der 
Siehen Aufrechten. 

T he examination subjec ts for a u-rade XIJ Diploma 
are: English Literature ( two papers) , composition 
ana rhetoric, English Language and History Of Literature, 
History, Trigonometry, either Physical Science or 
chemistry, and any two of the following: Algebra, 
G-eometry, Latin, Erench, urerman, or crreek* 













344 


APPENDIX IX 

subjects of Study 1924 


C-roup A 

English I 

u-eneral Science I 

Algeora I 

Art I 

History I 

rrench I 

German i 

Latin I 

u-reek I 

geometry I 

Book-keeping I 

Manual Training 1 

Household Economics I 

Physical Education 1 (a) 

Music I (a) 


G-roup a _ 

English II 
History II 
Algebra II 
French 1 or ll 
German I or II 
Latin I or II 
Greek I or II 
Agriculture l 
geometry I or II 
Book-keeping I or II 
Manual Training II 
Physics 1 

Household Economics II 
Physical Education ( d) 
Music I { b) 















. 


















- 










: ■ 0 .' 






















1 ) 

































145 


Group u 

English III 

History and Economies III 

Chemistry I 

Arithmetic I 

Geography I 

Agriculture II 

Art II 

French II 

German II 

Latin II 

Greek II 

Physical Education I ( c) 
Music L( c) 


Group D __ 

English iv 
History Iv 

Algebra III;Geometry III 

Trigonometry I 

Physics II 

HiolojLogy I 

Chemistry II 

French III 

German III 

Latin III 

Physical Education II 
Music II 


The requirements for the courses are as follows: 

1 * Nor mal Entran ce»(Second Class non-professional. 
( a) Keauired Subjects: 

Group A: English I, General Science I,Algebra 1 
Art I, geometry I, Physical Education L ( a) <* 















. 































■ 























, 


. 


. 























146* 


G-roup B: English II, History II, Agriculture I or 
Physics I, Physical Education I (b) * 

G-roup C: English III,History and Economics III, 

Agriculture II or Chemistry I, Arithmetic I 
Geography I, Physical Education I ( c). 

ELECTIVE SUBJECTS : 

One unit of work to be chosen from Group A 
and the other 4 from Groups b and c, 

NORMAL ENTRAN CE ( first class non-professional) 

fa) Second class non-professional standing 
as detailed above, 

(b) Required subjects; English Iv, Physical 
Education II, 

(c) Elective Aubjects: D ix units to be chosen 
from Group D* 

$. AGRICULTURAL COURSE : 

(a) Required Sub j ects: 

Gr oup A * English I, General Science 1 ,AlgebraI, 
Art I , Physical Education I ( a) « 

GROUP b : English II, History II, Agriculturel 
Physics I, Physical Education I.(b) 

GROUP 0 : English III.History ana Economics III, 
UKemTsTry I, Agriculture II, Arithmetic I, 
Physical Education I (c) , 

{b) Elect ive Subject s: 

One unit of work to be chosen from group A, 
and 4 from groups b and c* 

4. GENERAL COURSE: 

■-rsr required Subjects: 

Physical Education I (a),(b),(c),any two of 
the following: English I, English II,English III. 
At least 6 units of work from G and 
















147 


(b) EL ECTIVE SUB JECTS; 

The remainder of the course may he chosen from 
G-roups A, jb, C, or D. The total number of units 
required for the Diploma is 21, exclusive of 
Physical Education* 

5, Commercial Course : 

Required S u bject s: English II (c) ,Physical Education 
I (c). 

E lec t ive Subject s:Shorthand, typewriting } Office 
Practice,Penmanship, Business English, commercial 
correspondence, Rapid Claculation, Arithmetic* 
or: 

Book-keeping, Office Practice, Penmanship, Business 
English, Commercial Correspondence, Kapid Calculation, 
Arithmetic, Commercial Law, Commercial u-eography. 
Business Forms* 

T WO AN D TH REE YEAK COMMERCIA L COUKSES 


G-roup A G-roup B G-roup C 


English 1(c) 
Arithmetic 
& Kapid Calculation 
Shorthand I ( c) 
Typewriting I (c) 

Book-keeping 1(c) 

Commeria! u-eography X 

History I 

ArtI 

Algebra I 
ueneral Science I 
Manual Training I 
Household Economicsi 
Physical Education I 


English II (c) 

Typewriting II ( c) 
Shorthand 11(c) 
Book-keeping 11(c) 

History II 

History III(-c) 
Arithmetic 11(c) 
Physics I 
G-eometry I 
Latin I 
French I 
G-erman I 
Agriculture I 
Physical Education 
I (b? . 


English IIIU) 

History III 
Arithmetic I 
Book-keeping 
& Accountancy III 
Secretatial 
Training 1(c) 
Chemistry I 
G-eometry II 
Algebra II 
Latin II 
French II 
G-erman II 
Agriculture II 
Physical Ed. 1(c) 
























148. 


Notes : 

1. Subjects marked ( c) are strictly Commercial 
Courses. The content of these subjects differs 
in some degree from those of corresponding 
academic courses* 

2 Shorthand 1(c) and Typewriting I (c) are half 
unit courses. English courses count for two 
units each; all other courses are of one unit 
value. It is proposed that Shorthand, typewriting 
and Book-keeping units shall be given the double 
usual time allotment per unit. 


TEC HNICAL COURSE 



Group A 

Group Jrf 

Group c 

English I 

General Science I 
AlgebraI 

Physical Education la 
Shop Work 

English II English III 

History II History III 

Geometry I Arithmetic I 

Algebra II Geometry II 

Physics I chemistry I 

Latin I Latin II 

French I trench II 

merman I German II 

Physical Education Physical 

I (b) Education 1(e) 

Shop Work Shop Work 

Group 

D 


English IV 

^eSme^ry^Hl 

French III 

Physical Education II 

History Iv 

E&?™? try 1 

German III 

Shop Work* 


For further details of 

these course see 

wand book 


for Secondary Schools * 







































V • v 







' 
















































SPECIAL COLLECTIONS 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA LIBRARY 


REQUEST FOR DUPLICATION 


I wish a photocopy of the thesis "by 

_(author) 

entitled V^-rW C 


The copy is for the sole purpose of private scholarly or scientific study 
and research. I will not reproduce, sell or distribute the copy I request, 
and I will not copy any substantial part of it in my own work without per¬ 
mission of the copyright owner. I understand that the Library performs 
the service of copying at my request, and I assume all copyright responsi¬ 
bility for the item requested. 


Pate Name and address 

S> S' oi - Q «T l-L/l-Z r-, 


Pages copied 


Signature 


ALL- 


£&Zjl 





























