For Reference 

NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


THE BEGINNING aND GROWTH OF THE 
INSTRUCTION IN THE SOCIAL STUDIES 
PROVIDED BY THE SCHOOLS OF ALBERTA 


BY 

DAVID GRANT EMBREE 




Sx hbbi* 
towims 










UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
LIBRARY 


Regulations Re j , nr ding Te e ses a nd * Elss ort ati ons 

Typescript copies ol theses and dissertations foi Easter's 
and doctor's depress deposited in the University of Alberta 
Library, as the Official Copy of the Faculty of Graduate Studies, 
ia^ be con lted in the Reference Reading Room only. 

A second copy is on deposit in the .Department under whose 
supervision the work was done. Some Departments are willing to 
loan their copy to libraries, through the interlibrary loan 
service of the University of Alberta Library. 

These theses and dissertations are to be used only with due 
regard to priority rights of the author. written permission of 
the author and of the Department must be obtained through the 
University of Alberta Library '-hen extended passages are used. 
When permission has been granted, credit must appear in the 
published work. 

This thesis or dissertation has been used in accordance 
with the above regulations by the persons listed below. The 
borrowing library is obligated to secure the signature of each 
user. 


Please sign below; 


Date 


Signature 


Ins titutloh 



























































UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


The undersigned hereby certify that they 
have read and do recommend to the Committee on 
Graduate Studies for acceptance, a thesis entitled 
n The Beginning and Growth of the Instruction in 
the Social Studies Provided by the Schools of Al¬ 
berta”, submitted by David Grant Embree, B. A*, 

B. Ed*, in partial fulfilment of the requirements 
for the degree of Master of Education* 


Professor 


S /is 


Professor 





Professor 







\ 




c ' •' ".. . • ■ l',' < . 

' 

. 


? l 


■ 





• " » . - 




ABSTRACT 


The purpose of this thesis is to trace the development of 
the present social studies curriculum in Alherta from the be¬ 
ginnings of instruction in the various subjects that now make 
up the social studies. Thus, with regard to research procedure, 
the thesis is historical in character. The general approach, 
consequently, is bibliographic. The history of instruction in 
the various social studies subjects is deduced from the limited 
number of secondary sources available in the English language, 
while the development in Alberta of social studies instruction 
is outlined from a study of such primary sources as the annual 
reports and programmes of study issued by the state educational 
authorities both before and after the creation of the province 
in 1905. 

The author attempts to show that the origin of instruction 
in Alberta in the present social studies subjects may be found 
in the development of a curriculum for the present province of 
Ontario by Egerton Ryerson who was strongly influenced by Euro¬ 
pean and American examples in the teaching of such subjects as 
history, geography, and civil government. The Goggin curriculum, 
which was prepared for use in the schools of the North-West 
Territories in 1895, was based upon the Ontario course of 
studies. This curriculum remained in effect in Alberta until 
1912, but its influence in the social studies field continued 
beyond that date. 

Subsequent curriculum developments in Alberta in such sub¬ 
jects as history and geography are discussed in some detail. The 
social studies curriculum from 1912 to 1936 in both the elemen- 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/beginninggrowthoOOdavi 


tary and the secondary schools may he described as traditionalist 
in that instruction in the subjects concerned was conducted in 
separate unrelated compartments. The sweeping curriculum revision 
of 1936, however, inaugurated activity education from Grades I to 
XII and commenced the integration of various materials from the 
social sciences under the title "Social Studies". Changes have 
been and are being made to the 1936 revision, but the principles 
of activity education, so far as the social studies are con¬ 
cerned, remain unchanged at the time of writing. As a result of 
this continued emphasis on activity education, the author con¬ 
cludes with a number of recommendations pertaining to a longer 
period of training for prospective social studies teachers, a 
program of in-service education, a systematic effort to evaluate 
the results of the social studies curriculum in relation to the 
stated objectives, greater teacher-participation in the work of 
curriculum revision, caution that history be not minimized in 
the integration of social studies materials, and some emphasis 
on the history of Canada on the secondary level. 





















. 

























THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


THE BEGINNING AND GROWTH OF THE INSTRUCTION IN THE 
SOCIAL STUDIES PROVIDED BY THE SCHOOLS OF ALBERTA 


A DISSERTATION SUBMITTED 
TO THE COMMITTEE ON GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE DEGREE OF 
MASTER OF EDUCATION 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


BY 

DAVID GRANT EMBREE 
EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


April, 1952 





TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I. THE PURPOSES OF THIS STUDY. 1 

II. THE NATURE OF THE SOCIAL STUDIES. 3 

III. THE BEGINNINGS OF SCHOOL INSTRUCTION IN HISTORY. 9 

IV. THE EMERGENCE OF HISTORY AS A SCHOOL SUBJECT IN 

THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY.... 17 

Y. EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY DISCUSSION OF SCHOOL 

INSTRUCTION IN HISTORY. 21 


YI. SCHOOL INSTRUCTION IN HISTORY FROM THE BEGINNING OF 
THE NINETEENTH CENTURY TO THE ESTABLISHMENT IN THE 
UNITED STATES OF THE COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL STUDIES.... 38 

VII. THE GROWTH OF SCHOOL INSTRUCTION IN SUBJECTS OTHER 
THAN HISTORY WHICH ARE NOW INCLUDED IN . THE SOCIAL 


STUDIES.... 48 

VIII. THE ONTARIO ORIGINS OF THE ALBERTA SOCIAL STUDIES 

CURRICULUM... 59 

IX. THE ALBERTA SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM FROM 


TERRITORIAL DAYS TO THE GENERAL REVISION OF 1912.... 69 


X. CRITICISM OF THE FIRST ALBERTA SOCIAL STUDIES 
CURRICULUM FROM TERRITORIAL DAYS TO THE GENERAL 
REVISION OF 1912. 93 

XI. THE EVOLUTION OF SCHOOL INSTRUCTION IN THE SOCIAL 
STUDIES FROM THE REPORT IN 1916 OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON SOCIAL STUDIES TO THE PRESENT.109 


XII. THE ELEMENTARY SGCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM IN ALBERTA 

FROM THE REVISION OF 1912 TO THE REVISION OF 1922...125 

XIII. THE ELEMENTARY SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM IN ALBERTA 

FROM THE REVISION OF 1922 TO THE REVISION OF 1936...141 

XIV. THE SECONDARY SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM IN ALBERTA 

FROM THE REVISION OF 1912 TO THE REVISION OF 1936...165 


XV. INSPECTORAL CRITICISM OF THE ALBERTA SOCIAL STUDIES 
CURRICULUM FROM THE REVISION OF 1912 TO THE 
REVISION OF 1936........180 

XVI. THE ELEMENTARY SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM IN ALBERTA 

FROM THE REVISION OF 1936 TO THE PRESENT..203 



































iii 


CHAPTER PAGE 

XVII, THE INTERMEDIATE SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM IN 

ALBERTA FROM THE REVISION OF 1956 TO THE PRESENT.... 221 

XVIII. THE SECONDARY SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM IN 

ALBERTA FROM THE REVISION OF 1936 TO THE PRESENT...., 242 

XIX. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS. 259 

BIBLIOGRAPHY... 264 







CHAPTER I 


THE PURPOSES OF THIS STUDY 

Primarily, this study has been prepared in the belief that 
if it is useful for the youth of Alberta to know something about 
past human experience, it would appear just as useful for those 
who are engaged in shaping the social studies instruction for 
our schools to know something about past human experience with 
the social studies as school subjects. It is, therefore, the be¬ 
lief of the author that curriculum makers and teachers alike in 
the social studies field in the province should have available 
an account of the origin and development in Alberta of the sub¬ 
ject for which they are responsible. In an endeavor to provide 
such an account, the author proposes to determine the European 
and American origins of the first Alberta curriculum in subjects 
now regarded as part of the social studies, the means by which 
this European and American experience in these subject areas was 
transmitted to the educational authorities of the North-West 
Territories who laid the foundations for the Alberta school 
system, the subsequent evolution of such subjects as history, 
geography, civics, and economics in the school programs of the 
United States and in the Alberta course of studies, the circum¬ 
stances which led to the establishment of the present social 
studies program in the schools of Alberta, the change in class¬ 
room methods which have accompanied this curricular change, and 
the modifications in the course of studies which have occurred 
since the announcement of an Alberta social studies program. 

In the course of outlining the evolution of social studies 
instruction in alberta the author hopes to find information 








' 


; 


i 

| 


















































2 


relative to the following questions: 

(1) Have the school authorities in Alberta modified the 
social studies curriculum to keep in step with both 
the educational progress of the province and the 
results of modern educational research? 

(2) What objections were made in Alberta to the traditional 
curriculum in such subjects as history, geography, and 
civics prior to the official announcement that social 
studies materials were to be integrated? 

(3) What modifications in the curriculum and in classroom 
methods have been found necessary following the official 
announcement regarding the integration of social studies 
materials? 

Finally, the author has what might be termed a documentary 
purpose in this study. The advance preparation of information 
for the account of social studies instruction prior to the re¬ 
vision of 1936 revealed surprising limitations in the number of 
copies of important educational documents which have been pre¬ 
served for future generations. As a consequence, the author hopes 
to provide extensive quotations from former courses of studies 
and similar sources, which are now difficult of access, in order 
that future research workers in the social studies field may 
have this material more readily available. 











; 




- 





































. 





















i. 

■ 


• 

















■ 

- 






• 



l 

- 





• ; 














- i 













■ ■ 









■ 


o 

. 





* 
























. 



















• 




i - 













CHAPTER II 


THE NATURE OF THE SOCIAL STUDIES 

Before any attempt is made to delineate the evolution of 

social studies instruction in Alberta, it is essential that the 

term "social studies” itself be defined. At the outset, however, 

the relationship between the social sciences and the social 

studies must be indicated, since those terms will be found used 

interchangeably in a considerable portion of the educational 

literature on the subject. While this usage is not likely to 

cause too much confusion on the part of interested teachers, it 

is desirable that a definite stand be indicated in this study on 

the relationship between the two terms. The author feels the 

best solution to the problem is that afforded by Dr. Edgar B. 

Wesley when he refers to the social sciences as "the scholarly 

materials about human beings and their internelations"^and to 

the social studies as "those portions or aspects of the social 

sciences that have been selected and adapted for use in the 

2 

school or in other instructional situations". 

A few definitions taken from recently developed courses of 
study will not only clarify the meaning of the social studies as 
used in curriculum planning, but it will provide a basis for com¬ 
parison between the usage of the term by the Alberta Department 
of Education and the prevalent usage in the school systems of the 
United States. In the Social Studies' Program for the Schools of 
California, for example, the statement is made that, "The social 
studies are those studies that provide understandings of the 
physical environment and its effects upon man’s ways of living, 
of the basic needs of man and the activities in which he engages^to 
















. 

. 





































. 


























. 
















































4 


meet his needs, and of the institutions man has developed to per¬ 
petuate his way of life". 3 In 1949, a year after the publication 
of this definition of the California State Department of Education, 
the Ohio Department of Education defined the social studies as 
being "concerned with man and his environment, and the interaction 
between man and his environment and between groups of men". 4 Mean¬ 
while the San Francisco Public Schools released the following de¬ 
finition for publication: 

The social studies are the knowledge, activities, and 
skills required of an individual to be effective as a 
person and as a member of groups. The social studies per¬ 
tain to the relations of human beings—men, women, children— 
to one another and to the physical environment in which 
they live, work, and play." 5 

Of more importance for the present study is a definition used by 
the State of Virginia, for that definition was quoted by the Al¬ 
berta Department of Education in the Programme of Studies which 
announced the introduction of the social studies course to the cur¬ 
riculum of the intermediate schools of the province. That defini¬ 
tion, which the Department of Education published from 193$ to 1950, 
reads as follows: 

The scope of the social studies embraces the entire 
field of human relations, the significant movements of 
human history, and the problems and issues of contempo¬ 
rary society. Consideration of the customs, culture and 
social practices of the people of the neighbourhood, 

State, nation, and world are the province of the social 
studies. The social studies include those fields of human 
experience that deal with man-to-man relationships con¬ 
sidered in the subjects of history, geography, economics, 
civics, sociology, home economics, and psychology. Social 
movements and social forces can best be understood and 
improved when concepts and materials are drawn from these 
fields and integrated by the learner around large centres 
of human interest. This course of study accepts this uni¬ 
tary view as contrasted with that of history* civics, geo¬ 
graphy, etc., pursued as separate fields of subject patter.6 

Commenting on this very comprehensive definition, the Department of 

Education stated: 

The course in Social Studies for the Intermediate Grades_ 


, 

. 



' li- :.o 




. ■' : • : . ' 

C ... 


0tf r;x 1 -f ' 


■if. IT 


U''XO'V 


jj i:v i ii > ' 

' ■.) i .. i ., :.. no ■ 

) . ' 1 

i j . .■ ' •, ; n > i ) 

. • : < . •/ i; . v;■... 







5 


VII, VIII and IX—of Alberta schools will introduce to 
the pupils the problems of modern civilization in their 
historical and geographical setting. As its name implies, 
it is socially directed, dealing essentially with the 
"here" and "now", and subordinating the "there" and 
"then". It is in no sense an attempt to camouflage 
history, geography and civics. When the content of these 
formal subject categories sheds any light on the problems 
under study, it is then introduced. Frequently the pupil’s 
textbook will be the community in which he lives. 7 

It will be noted that in the above comment and in the definition 
which the Department of Education published with apparent ap¬ 
proval, specific reference is made to those subjects which com¬ 
prise the social studies. Unlike nearly all the other govern¬ 
mental authorities quoted, the Alberta Department of Education 
emphasizes the point that such subjects as history, geography, 
civics, and economics are included in the social studies. While 
the educators responsible for the other definitions certainly had 
these subjects in mind when they outlined the scope of the social 
studies, it must be conceded that the Alberta definition possesses 
a specific quality more readily understandable to teacher and lay¬ 
man alike. Even if the growth of the Alberta system of instruction 
in the social studies were not the major subject of investigation 
in the present study, one would be inclined for the sake of clari¬ 
ty to use the definition approved by the educational authorities 
of the province. It is significant to note, too, that over the 
years the Alberta Department of Education has not changed its po¬ 
sition in this matter. In the following definition published by 
the Department in 1951 the subjects included in the social studies 
field are not only specifically defined, but an interesting al¬ 
lusion is made to the relationship between the social sciences and 
the social studies: 

"The social sciences and the social studies are...con¬ 
cerned with the determination of human conduct. One such 
category, sociology , attempts to describe, classify and ex¬ 
plain the elemental forms of behavior and the principles of 



— .... < 


' 






« 






e 

- 


. 




, . 




















t 










. 

■ 







. 

- 






. lip 


















■ 







6 


group living. Another field is that of economics , 
limited to those relationships which result from 
man’s quest for goods. Civics , or political science, 
specializes in those relationships which result from 
official governmental control. Geography concerns 
the relationships between man and the earth and between 
men in their attempts to meet the problems of the 
natural environment. One inclusive subject, history , 
undertakes to make a record of man’s co-operative suc¬ 
cesses and failures. It is to be noted that the first 
four of the five social sciences are contemporary. 

r ’The distinction between history and the contemporary 
social sciences is of the greatest significance in or¬ 
ganizing and teaching the social studies. The fact that 
history alone is unable to explain the contemporary 
world was the basic cause for the emergence of the 
social studies field with its broadened interest and 
current applicability. The social studies constitute a 
field rather than a collection of subjects. A social 
studies course, therefore, while It absorbs the time and 
much of the subject matter formerly allotted to history, 
geography, civics, sociology and economics, does not 
limit itself in each part, division or unit to the con¬ 
tent of any one of them. The outlook is essentially 
broad and exploratory, and the course is made up of a 
series of correlated units of study rather than con¬ 
ducted as a rigid sequence of lessons. It thus offers 
many opportunities for active learning; for relating the 
lesson to contemporary events; for co-operative study by 
the class as a group.” 8 


As a balance to the foregoing emphasis on the importance of 
the social studies In the curriculum, one must keep in mind this 
observation of John II. Michaelis in summing up a discussion of all 
the divisions of the modern school curriculum; 

"All the foregoing areas of the curriculum contribute 
to social learning and to the achievement of the purposes 
of education. No single area can develop the social compe¬ 
tencies and unique qualities of personality that are 
needed in democratic living. All must be pointed toward 
the achievement of the major purposes of education. The 
social studies, however, because of the nature of the ex¬ 
periences and materials they cover, have a major role to 
play." 9 

Michaelis proceeds from this distinction between the respective 
roles played by the social studies and the other divisions of the 
modern school curriculum to define the social studies. While his 
definition is meant particularly for the elementary school, it 





















: ' * 

’ 

- 

. 

' 

. 























’ . 


■ < 







7 

as well 

will be seen readily that it is in no small measure applicable/to 
the social studies in the higher grades. This definition, which 
it will be noted is in harmony with those approved by the Alberta 
Department of Education, reads as follows: 

’’The social studies are concerned with man and his 
interaction with his social and physical environment; 
they deal with human relationships. In the social 
studies, attention is given to processes of living and 
working together, use of the environment to meet basic 
human needs, customs, institutions, values, and life 
situations—the cultural heritage and its dynamic on¬ 
going characteristics. The social studies in the ele¬ 
mentary school embrace material related to human re¬ 
lationships drawn from history, geography, political 
science, economics, anthropology,- sociology, science, 
and the arts. They include content and activities that 
may be used to develop insight into human relationships 
in such a way that children build competence in basic 
social processes and skills essential in democratic 
living. The social studies make rich contributions to 
the growth and development of children because the cen¬ 
tral function of the social studies is identical with 
the central purpose of education—the development of 
democratic citizenship.” 10 


With the meaning of the term ’’social studies” explained, the 
next step in this investigation Is to trace the growth of in¬ 
struction in those school subjects now comprising the social 
studies, .and to note the transition from these restricted subject 
areas to a broadened school subject embracing the entire field of 
human relations. Following this section of the present study, the 
evolution of the social studies program in the schools of Alberta 
will be examined in detail. 


1 Wesley, Edgar Bruce, Teaching the Social Studies , Boston, D. C. 
Heath and Company, 1942, p. 5. 

2 Ibid., p. 6. 

3 Ilichaelis, John U. , Social Studies for Oxiildren in a Democracy , 
Hew York, Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1950, p. 2. 

4 Ibid., p. 3. 

5 Ibid., p. 2. 

6 Department of Education, Province of Alberta, XProgramme of 
Stunies for the Intermediate School , Edmonton, King’s Printer, 
no date, p. 28. 

7 Ibid. 































■ ? 1 i; ; ' : t". :m Cl 








: 









































* i - U , : ■; 

• * • . *. a t ■ 

* : " 
. - 

- 











8 

8 Department of Education, Province of alberta, Social Studies for 
Grade Ten (An experimental course prepared and issued by the De¬ 
partment of Education for limited distribution in 1951-1952), 
Edmonton, King’s Printer, September, 1951, p. 1. 

9 Michaelis John U., op. cit, , p. 2. 

10 Ibid. 








CHAPTER III 


THE BEGINNINGS OF SCHOOL INSTRUCTION IN HISTORY 

Reference has been made to the predominant position occupied 
by history in the social studies, thus making the growth of 
school instruction in history of special importance in the pre¬ 
sent study. In addition, instruction in history seems to be the 
earliest form of social studies instruction on record. Dr. Henry 
Johnson, the outstanding authority on the history of the teaching 
of the social sciences, writes, "History in some form has probab¬ 
ly been a part of instruction since the earliest dawning of his¬ 
torical consciousness"^ His argument for this view, which seems 
difficult to refute, is that the handing down of tribal tradi¬ 
tions was a duty of the utmost importance amongst the peoples of 
ancient times. The oldest history lesson on record, indeed, seems 
to be that recorded in the fourth chapter of Joshua. After the 
twelve tribes of Israel had crossed the Jordan, Joshua ordered 
twelve stones set up as a memorial of the crossing. "And he spake 
unto the children of Israel, saying, When your children shall ask 
their fathers in time to come, saying, What mean these stones? 
then ye shall let your children know, saying...." 

Another striking example of interest in history among 

ancient peoples is furnished by the stories gathered by Herodotus 

during his wide travels. The latter wrote his narrative before 

the study of history had any special name or was regarded as a 

separate discipline. Herodotus, of course, used the Greek word 

which gave rise to our word "history", but, as Dr. Johnson points 

out, "he used it in its then current meaning of inquiry or 

2 

learning by inquiry"* The work of Herodotus was so well done that 
























f ■ 






















































. 


■ 










. 




10 


’’ historie or historia took on the restricted meaning of a narra¬ 
tive like that produced by Herodotus, a narrative, that is, of 
3 

past events”. 

A younger contemporary of Herodotus, named Thucydides, wrote 

about the Peloponnesian War and thereby introduced a theory of the 

utility of history. According to Dr. Johnson, ’’The theory of 

Thucydides was that r a true picture of events which have happened T 

may be useful because like events ’may be expected to happen 

hereafter in the order of human things T , or as our modern saying 

4 

has it ’hi story repeats itself”’. Partly inspired by Thucydides, a 

long line of historians wrote historical accounts in the belief 

that history repeats itself and that lessons could thus be derived 

directly applicable to their own times. 

”....History thus became ’philosophy teaching by example’. 

It taught by example religion, morals, ideals of life, 
patriotism. It taught by example what human beings ougftt 
to be and to do. And it taught by example what human beings 
ought not to be or to do.” 5 

With the emergence of this didactic history, which marked the 
establishment of history as a distinct branch of learning, there 
began to appear books suitable for the youth of the Roman world. 
Among these works written between the first century B. C. and the 
fifth century A. D. there may be mentioned the epitome of uni¬ 
versal history, compiled by Cornelius Nepos, the histories of Rome 
prepared by Elorus and Eutropius, and the summary of sacred 
history written by Sulpicius Severus. During the Middle Ages these 
books came into use as school textbooks in Latin, ’’but indications 

are lacking that history as a separate study ever figured in 

6 

school programs in antiquity”. 

Although the Middle Ages produced many historical works of 
the didactic type, there seems to be no conclusive evidence as to 




c 













. 

- 

. 














c 




. 






■ 


I - c 







11 


the development during that rather obscure era of systematic in¬ 
struction in history. Hermann Rosenburg reveals that there were 
medieval monks deeply interested in history, but he admits that 
any instruction they attempted seems to have been ineffective. In 
addition, Dr. Henry Johnson reports his inability to find any 

contemporary evidence to show that history was a separate study 

7 

in any medieval school curriculum. 

With the sixteenth century, history more definitely begins 
to emerge as a subject of school instruction. Not only did new 
textbooks in history appear, but specific arguments began to be 
made for school instruction in history. Latin was still the lan¬ 
guage of learning, and the new textbooks, accordingly, were 
written in that language. However, the primary purpose of these 
books was decidedly to promote the study of history'rather than 
to serve as models of Latin. 

The first of these textbooks was published in 1505 and took 
the form of a survey of German history. It was written by Jacob 
Wimpheling whose purpose was to Instil a sense of German 
nationalism into the youth of the-German states. Although Wim¬ 
pheling T s purpose caused him to subordinate history to his edu¬ 
cational aims, it must be pointed out that his purpose led him to 
take a broad view of history. Wimpheling not only wrote about 
princes and wars, but he discussed art, literature, inventions, 
and social customs. Thus German painting, German sculpture, Ger¬ 
man architecture, and German literature were represented as 
having reached the levels attained by the ancient Greeks. Ac¬ 
cording to ffimpheling, in fact, all German achievements in war 
and in peace were striking. To prove his point, he omits all epi¬ 
sodes which would be damaging to German glory. So well did Wim¬ 
pheling subordinate history to his aims for the indoctrination of 


. 

e 

• • | 

u ; 

, 

- . 

. 

. 

* 

* 

: 

« 

o 

c t < 

, ' ilf o' 

j ' c 

t , 

. 











12 

German youth that his hook was translated into German and re¬ 
printed as late as the reign of Frederick the Great. Yet the hook 

8 

seems neither to have been used in sixteenth-century schools nor 
to have had any immediate impression upon school programs. 

The Protestant Reformation, however, proved to be of much 
greater significance in the evolution of school instruction in 
history. The sharp cleavage between Protestants and Roman Catho¬ 
lics caused both factions to appeal to the past for justification 
and to advance arguments for school instruction in history. In 
1524 Martin Luther advocated the teaching of history in secondary 
schools, partly because in history people see themselves as in a 
mirror and thus discover their real selves. In addition, Luther 

quoted from Varro to the effect that, "the best instruction is 

9 

that which combines illustration and example with precept". On 

the basis of this contention Luther argues that history furnishes 

examples, saying, "There we learn what things those who were 

pious and wise pursued, what they shunned and how they lived, and 

how it fared with them, or how they were rewarded, and again how 

they lived who were wicked and obstinate in their ignorance and 

10 

what punishments overtook them". Although Luther regards his- 

11 

torians as "the most useful of men and the best teachers", he 

warns that historical works must be treated critically. Thus we 

must consider "histories as they are and reflect and judge for 

ourselves as we peruse them whether the writer has been warped 

through favor or prejudice, whether he praises or blames either 

too little or too much. We want the truth in history because the 

12 

truth will reveal to us the wonderful works of God in the world." 

In 1531, a few years after Luther had written in favor of 
school instruction in history, a Roman Catholic scholar, Juan 


- 

. 

- 




a 

e • 


, 

t ■ . 

■ t 

- 



a 






















































c 



■a 






* 








. 

. 

- 

. 









13 


Luis Vives, published his De Tradendis Disciplinis . This great 
treatise on education, the title of which means "the transmission 
of knowledge", not only furnished an argument for school in¬ 
struction in history, but it included a program for such in¬ 
struction. Indeed, Vives considered history the most valuable of 
all studies. "Where there is history", he writes, "children have 

transferred to them the advantages of old men; where history is 

'13 

absent, old men are as children." History, furthermore, teaches 
us whence we came and what our rights are. He then cites the fa¬ 
miliar argument that, "History serves as the example of what we 

14 

should follow and what we should avoid". Vives, however, strikes 

out on a new line of thought when he claims that history "is the 

one study which either gives birth to or nourishes, develops, 

15 

cultivates all arts". Examples of this include the following: 

"The medical art is collected from history." 16 
"Moral philosophy is built upon history." 17 
"The whole of law flows out of history." 18 
"A great part of theology is history." 19 

The school program in history which Vives outlined is outstanding 
because it is the first on record which emphasizes geography as 
essential at every stage of historical study. The historical ma¬ 
terial Vives seeks to have covered in schools embraces universal 
history from Adam to his own time. Vives, in addition, includes 
in his account a description and keen appraisal of the out¬ 
standing historical literature suitable for such a program. 

Vives T proposals for school instruction in history are also 
interesting because he sought to minimize the emphasis upon wars 
and battles. He writes? 

"....wars and battles need not be studied closely, for 
they merely equip the mind with examples for the per¬ 
formance of evil and show the Y/ays in which we may in¬ 
flict injuries one on another....Wars should be re¬ 
garded not otherwise than as cases of theft, as indeed. 








t 









. 

- 


• 





• 


. 

, 



5 















. 


■ ' v. J j 


■ 












' ... : 













14 


they usually are, excepting perhaps when undertaken 
against thieves....Let the student then give his at¬ 
tention to peaceful affairs.” 20 

Luther and Vives undoubtedly stirred up considerable dis¬ 
cussion among teachers as to what should be done to improve 
history instruction and may, indeed, have prepared the way for a 
book which became the chief history textbook in Europe for a cen¬ 
tury and a half. This was The Four Monarchies by a German writer, 
Johannes Sleidanus, who had acted as a delegate to the Council of 
Trent and who had been a law professor. Sleidan obtained the 
title for his book from the prophecy of Daniel to the effect that 
four great monarchies would arise in the world and that the 
fourth monarchy would last until the end of the world. According 
to Christian interpretation, these four monarchies were the Baby¬ 
lonian, the Persian, the Macedonian, and the Roman. The latter, 
according to the prophecy, was the last of the four monarchies 
and was destined to endure while the world endured. Presumably, 
the Holy Roman Empire of the sixteenth century was a manifesta¬ 
tion of the continued existence of the Roman Empire. Whatever one 
may think of such an interpretation of history, the division of 
historical time recorded in The Four Monarchies remained the 
standard division until the eighteenth century. Although Slei- 
dan’s book only contained about one hundred pages, it proved so 
interesting that translations from the original Latin appeared 
shortly in schools in Germany, France, and England. Indeed, in 
German school programs which included history, that subject was 
not listed as history, but simply as Sleidanus or Sleidan. 

An important feature of Sleidan T s book was that for every 
topic he indicated his sources. An even more important feature of 
his book is his endeavor to be impartial, an endeavor which 











. 














' 



















. 


e 


























' 

c 

. 

. 






15 


earned him some criticism from his fellow Protestants. By way of 
conclusion, it may be noted also that in his dedication of The ' 
Four Monarchies , Sleiaan places universal history in a list of 
valuable studies. 

Not long after the publication of Sleidan T s history, there 
appeared in England a new textbook entitled Historia Anglorum . 
This book, which was first published in 1580, attracted so much 
interest that a petition was presented to the English Privy Coun¬ 
cil for an order requiring the book to be read in all the schools 
of England. The petitioners, who were successful in their re¬ 
quest, claimed that such action in the schools would make English 
boys more patriotic. While it is not possible to determine how 
fully the schools complied with the Privy Council T s order, this 
incident seems to be the first on record of a national government 
defining in part, at least, the school curriculum in history* 

The first clear evidence of the regular teaching and 
learning of history lessons is that of the cloister school at li¬ 
fe Id -am-Harz in Germany. About 1575 a tv^o years 1 course in 
history and geography for the upper classes was organized by 
Michael Neander who prepared the textbooks. The textbook in 
history, which was called the Compendium Chronikum , was modelled 
after The Pour monarchies and brought universal history down to 
1575* This teaching of history at lifela, which may have been the 
only attempt of its kind before the seventeenth century, is 
interesting and important for several reasons. It may well, for 
example, have been the first attempt to teach history as a 
separate school subject. Of even more importance is the fact that 
the history course at lifeId-am-Harz was shaped by the needs of 
pupils preparing for university work. Since Sleidan T s textbook 






























. = 



' 






C 

. 








i 




~ - 

« 

. 



















16 


was used in several German universities, it may, therefore, have 
determined the history curriculum at Ilfeld. 


1 Johnson, Henry, Teaching of History , New York, The MacMillan 
Company, 1940, p. 25. 

2 Johnson, Henry, An Introduction to the History of the Social 
Sciences in Schools , New York, Charles Scribner T s Sons, 1932, 



P . ii. 


3 

Ibid., 

p.ll. 

4 

Ibid., 

p. 12. 

5 

Ibid., 

p. 12. 

6 

Ibid. , 

p. 14. 

7 

Ibid., 

p. 15. 

8 

Ibid., 

pp. 18- 

9 

Ibid. , 

p. 19. 

10 

Ibid., 

p. 19. 

11 

Ibid., 

p. 19. 

12 

Ibid., 

p. 20. 

13 

Ibid. , 

p. 21. 

14 

Ibid. , 

p. 21. 

15 

Ibid. , 

p. 22. 

16 

Ibid., 

p. 22. 

17 

Ibid. , 

p. 22. 

18 

Ibid. , 

p. 22. 

19 

Ibid., 

p. 22. 

20 

Ibid., 

p. 23. 
























CHAPTER IV 

THE EMERGENCE OF HISTORY 
AS A SCHOOL SUBJECT IN THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY 

In contrast to the slow beginnings of historical instruction 
down to the end of the sixteenth century, the seventeenth wit¬ 
nessed a marked advance in educational thought about history as a 

school subject. Special teachers of history, for example, first 

in 1634 

appear in this century with the addition/of history to the cur¬ 
riculum of the schools of the Oratorians in France. The history 
courses handled by these teachers included the history of France, 
sacred history, and the history of Greece and Rome, and in each 
case the historical material presented was taught in connection 
with geography. The members of the Order prepared the textbooks 
and assembled special libraries for the use of their pupils. The 

instruction, which was in French, laid great stress upon making 

Dr. 

the past real to pupils. According to/Johnson, the Oratorian 
teachers used pictures, charts, and other aids to visualization 

and "described In detail arms, costumes, buildings, and other ma- 

1 

terial conditions of life in the past n . The Oratorians, who re¬ 
garded history as of great value in cultivating judgment and in 
stimulating sound conduct, thought of this subject as "a grand 
mirror in which we see ourselves....The secret of knowing and 
judging ourselves rightly is to see ourselves in others, and 

history can make us the contemporaries of all centuries in all 
2 

countries.” 

The Oratorians, however, were excelled in their enthusiasm 
for historical instruction by Johann Amos Comenius. In his Great 


Didactic , completed in 1632, Comenius proposed a place for history 






' 




- 


. 


. 








, 






, 

. 




t - 

. 

c 

, 


■ 



. 

, 


. - 

~ c ■ 










e . 






* » . • 

- 

v r ; ii t : ;j i. u: .. 




; • u . i. f /: i ' 


. v 








. 






18 


in every grade of instruction from what he called the ’’school of 
the mother’s knee” up through the university and ’’the college of 
lights’*, an institution for research which was to follow the uni¬ 
versity. He proposed a survey of world history for elementary 
schools and a selected list of topics from man’s social history 
for secondary schools, as follows: 

Class I: Epitome of Bible History; 

Class II: Natural History; 

Class III: History of Arts and Inventions; 

Class TV: History of Morals; 

Class V: History of the Customs of Different Peoples; 

Class VI: General History of the Vforld and Especially 
of the Pupils’ Own Country. 3 

Comenius, moreover, desired history to be presented in such a way 
that it would not add to the burdens of pupils; in fact, he wrote 
of a type of presentation which he felt would lighten the burdens 
of pupils, an idea which savors of a later view that ’’tasks” should 
be avoided in schools. It need hardly be added that, if history was 
to be so presented as to seem like play, Comenius’ plan required 
the writing of a special textbook for each of the classes outlined 
above. 

In 1676 a rather remarkable book on the teaching of history 
was published in Saxony by Christian ?feise who had served as a tutor 
to nobility. As a result of this experience, Weise developed ideas 
about the teaching of history which he sought to bring to the atten¬ 
tion of other .teachers. Actually, his book, entitled Per Kluge Hoff- 
Meister , is divided into two parts. The first part deals with the 
methods of teaching history, while the second presents a textbook of 
the historical material Weise considers useful to boys living in 
Saxony in 1676. There is, as well, an introduction to Per Kluge 
Hoff-Meister in which Weise expresses regret that historical studies 
are for the most part excluded from the instruction of youth, and 
that frequently no dates are learned until maturity has been 










... . ■ 

« 

f . 

: e / 1 ■ I : . £ c ,C 

: 

: i 

; : 

: 

: 

: 

. ? . 



: 

' 






' * . ; :; ; :: 


5 : . : Ci" 

q ■ u ... .. n.. B£ ■ v, cl o;i‘ 








. 


),.< : J . '■/ 




' 

; 0:!. { . ;. ■ ;o . h l ■: ■ ; .• , o 

o.o ’i;j: •; : , . ;• t 'i- 

. t . 

- 














19 

reached. In Weise T s opinion, "only one who would use history must 

load his memory with many dates and names, and the time to do this 

4 

most profitably is before the age of twenty". In support of this 
contention he points out that since there are games in which 
children learn very early to count and add, it is quite reasonable 
to direct the student to historical dates. Similarly, the names of 
countries, cities, and persons are as easily acquired as any other 
words in the vocabulary of children. 

In the first part of his treatise, Weise sets forth and ex¬ 
plains principles to be followed in historical instruction. The 
first of these is that before history can be grasped at all there 
must be some knowledge of geography. After recounting his methods 
for teaching geography, Weise discusses his second principle which 
requires the teaching of dates by working backwards from the year 
in which the instruction is being given to the year 1, thus 
calling attention to the birth of Christ as the event from which 
we count the passing of the years. Weise T s third principle has to 
do with the selection of historical material for instructional 
purposes. Briefly, Weise believed that as a teacher in Saxony he 
should teach the history of that state, plus those portions of the 
history of Germany, Spain, loanee, England, Denmark, Sweden, Po¬ 
land, Italy, Turkey, and Switzerland which would help his students 
to understand Saxony at that time. Thus we find Weise is in favor 
of the use of current events, for much of the history he wishes 
taught is essentially contemporary history. In addition, Weise 
would not only have his students familiar with newspapers, such as 
they were in the seventeenth century, but he suggests that the 
ideal way to teach history is to begin with current events and 
work backward. Weise had in mind the division of historical time 


■ 

. 

' 


c 



° 
























' 

c . 

, c c c tX ri ' 

< • C < ■ 

. 

g 

. 

- 


20 


used, by Sleidan when writing his book, but he contends that the 
first three monarchies should be passed over lightly. In fact, 
Weise proposes not to teach any ancient history at all because if 
the teacher begins with ancient history, it is unlikely that he 
will reach contemporary history. 

Other principles advanced by Weise in his book are the use 
of the vernacular in teaching, an emphasis upon oral expression, 
the use of chronological charts with parallel columns for the re¬ 
cording of simultaneous events in the countries under study, 
friendly and informal class discussions, variety in questioning 
by the teacher, an effort on the part of the teacher to avoid 
telling pupils anything that they can work out for themselves, 
and the recounting of historical facts in poetical form. 

As interesting and revolutionary as Weises recommendations 
were, a more influential contribution to the development of his¬ 
torical instruction during the seventeenth century was made by 
Christoph Cellarius (Keller). This professor of history in the 
University of Halle, who had previously served in various places 
as a school director, divided history into three periods and 
wrote a book on each. His three textbooks were: Historia Antigua , 
published in 1685; Historia Medii Aevi , published in 1688; and 
Historia Nova , published in 1696. This division gradually re¬ 
placed Sleidan r s Four Monarchies and is better known to us as 
ancient, medieval, and modern history. 

1 Johnson, Henry, An Introduction to the History of the Social 
Sciences in Schools , New York, Charles Scribner f s Sons, 1932, 
p. 30. 

2 Ibid., p. 30. 

3 Ibid., pp. 31-32. 

4 Ibid., pp. 36-37. 





















ilOxS 










« 


? < 


, i* 







5 














CHAPTER V 


EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY DISCUSSION OF SCHOOL INSTRUCTION IN HISTORY 

The eighteenth, century was one of enthusiasm for history, 
even though the century culminated in the French Revolution which 

Vv 

seemed to be an organized movement to abolish the past. This en¬ 
thusiasm extended to history as a school subject. In 1731 Charles 

j S 

Rollin commented in his Traite des Etudes : 

"History when well taught is a school of morals for all 
men. It describes vice, it unmasks false virtue, it exposes 
errors and prejudices; it dissipates the enchantment of 
riches and of all that vain pomp which dazzles men; it 
shows by a thousand examples more persuasive than all 
arguments that there is nothing great and laudable except 
honor and uprightness." 1 

Rollin, therefore, concludes that history should be a part of the 
earliest instruction of children and in this point of view he had 
the support of other eighteenth century writers and thinkers. 

It is interesting to note that Rollin T s phrase "when well 
taught" would seem to indicate that the teaching of history was 
common in French schools. Certainly, in the schools of the Ora- 
torians history continued to receive special attention, and in 
French secondary schools elsewhere history and geography were 
taught in a sort of fusion with grammar and literature. Various 
German states followed the same practice, but there is record of 
efforts to teach history as a separate school subject. By the 
middle of the eighteenth century, indeed, history was included in 
a sufficient number of school programs that curriculum critics 
counted it among the subjects needing reconstruction. As Dr. John¬ 
son points out, "After that (the middle of the eighteenth century) 
a continuous line of educational reformers accepted history as an 
important subject, cast aspersions upon the history actually being 








■ 

: 








* 
































2 22 

taught, and pointed the way to better things”* 

In England, meanwhile, Joseph Priestley, who lived from 1733 

to 1804, was distressed to observe that English education made no 

provision for "gentlemen who are designed to fill the principal 

stations of active life, distinct from those which are adapted to 

3 

the learned professions”. As a remedy for this defect, he proposed 
courses in history and government which he was able to put into 
practice while a tutor in the Non-Conformist academy in Warring¬ 
ton. During his six years at this academy Priestley produced a 
Chart of Biography which won for him the degree of Doctor of Laws 
from the University of Edinburgh, a Chart of Kistory , and an Essay 
on a Course of Liberal Education for Civil and Active Life . These 
works were published and they were, as a result, very influential 
in the educational thought of the time. 

The history courses proposed by Priestley were designed for 
boys who were sixteen or seventeen years of age. ”It will be said 

by some”, he writes, "that these subjects are too deep and too in- 
4 

tricate” for youths of these years, but what, he asks, is there in 
any of these subjects "which requires more acuteness or compre¬ 
hension than algebra, geometry, logic, and metaphysics, to which 

5 

students are generally made to apply at about the same age?” The 
courses were to be three In number. The first course was a compre¬ 
hensive one which consisted of a full and critical discussion of 
the sources of history and how to use them, a survey of historical 
literature from Herodotus to Voltaire, and an impressive survey of 
the history of civilization, including politics, art, literature, 
education, science, inventions, commerce, and social customs, with 
particular emphasis upon geography, especially commercial geo¬ 
graphy, and upon chemistry. The second course dealt with the 
history of England in a similarly comprehensive manner. Priestley T s 















t • 

"■ • ■ . . v ; : }y£q ■ • n- 

Vv ■■ 

• ' -i,0. ■ . •: . 

- 



' 

. 


* 

; 

- . • t ■ . - - . • . ■ •• -• ' 

- 

c . 

* 

v 

« 

■ C ■ < ■ ■ . ' . ■ 

C . . . - 

, ■■ .. , 




23 


last course was confined to a detailed study of the constitution 

and laws of England which Dr. Johnson feels "is probably the 

earliest precedent for treating government as a separate school 
6 

study". 


It is of particular importance to note the progressive method 
of teaching recommended by Priestley which he describes as follows: 

"Let the lecturer have a pretty full text before him, di¬ 
gested with care, containing not only a method of discoursing 
upon the subjects, but all the principal arguments he ad¬ 
duces, and all the leading facts he makes use of to support 
his hypotheses. Let this text be the subject of a regular, 
but familiar, discourse, not exceeding an hour at a time; 
with a class not exceeding twenty, or thirty. Let the 
lecturer give his pupils all encouragement to enter oc¬ 
casionally into the conversation, by proposing queries, or 
making any objections or remarks which may occur to them. 

Let all the students have an opportunity of perusing this 
text, if not of copying it, in the intervals between the 
lectures, and let near half Of the time for lecturing be 
spent in receiving from the students a minute account of the 
particulars^of the preceding lecture, and in explaining any 
difficulties they might have met with in it; in order that 
no subject be quitted, till the tutor be morally certain his 
pupils thoroughly understand it. 

"Upon every subject of importance, let the tutor make re¬ 
ferences to the principal authors who have treated of it; 
and if the subject be a controverted one, let him refer to 
books written on both sides of the question. Of these re¬ 
ferences, let the tutor occasionally require an account, and 
sometimes.a written abstract. Lastly, let the tutor select a 
proper number of the most important questions which can 
arise from the subject of the lectures, and let them be pro¬ 
posed to the students as exercises.... 

"Some may object to the encouragement I would give the 
students to propose objections at the time of lecturing. 

This custom, they may say, will tend to interrupt the course 
of the lecture, and promote a spirit of impertinence and 
conceit in young persons. I answer that every inconvenience 
of this kind may be obviated by the manner in which a tutor 
delivers himself in lecturing.... 

"But suppose a lecturer should not be able immediately to 
give a satisfactory answer to an objection, which might be 
started by a sensible student. A tutor must be conscious of 
his having made very ridiculous pretensions, and having 
given himself improper airs, if it gives him any pain to 
tell his class,.that he will reconsider a subject; or even 
to acknowledge himself mistaken.... Eor my own part, I would 
not forego the pleasure and advantage which accrue, both to 
my pupils and to myself, from this method, together with the 











. 






- 

; 










. 

c • ■ ' , t •, j i ... i •: 

.. . ; 








. 








: 



e 





« 





















i 




• 






. 



















» 


. 






' 




. 

. 

. 


















. 








. 












. 






















24 

opportunity it gives me of improving my lectures, by means 
of the many useful hints which are often started in this 
familiar way of discoursing upon a subject." 7 


One of the most widely discussed books in the history of edu¬ 
cation was published but one year after Priestley f s appointment to 
the Non-Conformist academy in Warrington. This was Rousseau’s 
Emile which, as could be expected, takes a definite stand on the 
extent and nature of school instruction in history. Rousseau, in¬ 
deed, thinks that history is not one of the subjects that a child 
needs. Children should be carefully kept away from history until 
the age of eighteen because it is only at that age that the words 
of history will begin to have meaning. At the age of eighteen a 
youth is becoming a man and feels the need of knowing men; it is 
only then that he is ready for history. 

It is interesting to note, though, that Rousseau wants 

children to become acquainted with geography prior to history. The 

subject of his treatise, Emile, meets geography with the following: 

"...no book but the world, no teaching but that of fact. 

The child who reads ceases to think. He only reads. He is 
acquiring words, not knov/ledge... .You wish to teach this 
child geography and you provide him with globes, spheres, 
and maps.... What is the use of all these symbols?... Be¬ 
gin with the town he lives in and his father’s country 
house, then the places between them, the rivers near them, 
and then the sun’s aspect, and how to find one’s way by 
its aid.... Let him make his own map, a very simple map, 
at first containing only two places. Others may be added 
from time to time as he is able to estimate their distance 
and position." 8 


As mentioned previously, Emile is ready for history when 

eighteen, and, indeed, he needs it. So far, Emile has been 

thinking only of himself. Now that he is becoming a man, he must 

learn to know other men* Therefore, Rousseau says, "let him see 

that.all men wear almost the same mask, but let him also know 

9 

that some faces are fairer than the mask that conceals them". 




' j .. ;...... ■ i/J [d1 j<j toff* notf. 

■ , 

,, 

< 

« ■ ■ 

* 


; 

< 




, « . 

' « ■ -■ • ■ • •' ' 

' ■ 

i « « "• 

* 

' 

' 

. 



- 

I « 

* ... J:; f C , ft, J : 









25 


His objective is to teach Emile to read the human heart. Since 

living companions might spoil EmiJ.e T s own heart, it is safer to 

"show him men from afar, in other times or in other places, so 

10 

that he may behold the scene but cannot take part in it". Thus 
Emile is introduced to history, even though it, too, has its dan¬ 
gers. 


Rousseau objects to the history books available in his time 
on the grounds that they not only emphasize the evil which men do 
rather than the good, but indulge too much in the opinions of 
the historian. The pupil, Rousseau contends, should be given the 
facts of history and allowed to interpret them for himself. Other¬ 
wise, the student may not gain a true picture of the human hea*rt. 

By his reading of the human heart in history, Emile is to be made 

11 

"wise and good at the expense of those who went before". Unlike 

those who study history in the usual way, he will not see himself 

transformed into the characters he is studying, only to find later 

on that he is himself alone. Indeed, if Emile should wish to be 

that 

any one but himself, that would be evidence/his entire education 
had been a failure. 

To develop further his views on historical instruction, Rous¬ 
seau observes: 

"History in general is lacking because it only takes note 
of striking and clearly marked facts which may be fixed by 
names, places, and dates; but the slow evolution of these 
facts, which cannot be definitely noted in this way, still 
remains unknown.... 

"....history shows us actions rather than men, because 
it only seizes men at certain chosen times in full dress; 
it only portrays the statesman when he is prepared to. be 
seen; it does not follow him to his home, to his study, 
among his family and his friends; it only shows him in 
state; it is his clothes rather than himself that history 
describes. 

"I would prefer to begin the study of the human heart 
with reading the lives of individuals; for then the man 


' -j C.ii : o ■ 1 j‘ t •' /i i'o -vj; i.j u ti I: 

' 

c c / : t ■ 


, , c ■ • ■' ' 

, . 

: 5 - -.( : cst .! r if. i *£o Sxi-J: 

. 

. 

. 


: 





























: 









c - ‘ 









- 













# 9 
























. 



































26 


hides himself in vain, the historian follows him every¬ 
where; he never gives him a moment T s grace nor any cor¬ 
ner where he can escape the piercing eye of the spec¬ 
tator; and when he thinks he is concealing himself, then 
it is that the writer shows him up most plainly. 

"It is true that the genius of men in groups or 
nations is very different from the character of the in¬ 
dividual man, and that we have a vemy imperfect know¬ 
ledge of the human heart if we doJJauLso examine it in 
crowds; hut it is none the less true that to judge of 
men we must study the individual man...." 12 

As Dr. Johnson points out, Rousseau is advancing here the argu¬ 
ment for the biographical approach to history and this is pro¬ 
bably the first instance in educational literature of such a 
point of view. 

Meanwhile, eighteenth century Germany produced a compara¬ 
tively large number of critics, reformers, and promoters of 
history teaching. Frederick the Great, who ascended the throne of 

Prussia In 1740, reigned in what has been called the "golden age 

13 

of German pedagogy". Frederick himself did much to give rise to 
such a description because, among other things, he began early to 
observe the faults of that kind of education which fills the 
minds of children with facts, thus giving them merely something 
to remember. Protesting that this was not education at all, Fre¬ 
derick the Great demanded that teachers should exercise the 
judgment of pupils, cultivate their understanding y and encourage 
them to think for themselves. Having reached this conception of 
the use of reason in education before he mounted the throne, Fre¬ 
derick began early in his reign to turn Prussian education in the 
direction of his line of thought. His educational reforms in 
Prussia may be said to have culminated in his famous school regu¬ 
lation of 1763 which made education compulsory between the ages 
of five and fourteen, although later on he did pay considerable 
attention to secondary and higher education. 




t 

- 










. 


* 

. . 

. 

■ 

. 

* 






27 


The subject of history and history teaching is one of the 
most prominent features of Frederick the Great’s educational 
thinking because he not only wrote history, but he took upon him¬ 
self the task of writing about history in order to influence both 
historians and the teachers of history. Indeed, the thirty 
volumes of his collected works include seven volumes of histori¬ 
cal writings and thoughts about history. Frederick’s general 
argument is summed up in the following excerpts from his Memoirs 
of the House of Brandenburg : 

History is looked upon as the school of princes. It ex¬ 
hibits to their memory the reigns of sovereigns who were 
fathers of their country, and of those tyrants who laid it 
waste. It points out the causes of the increase and decline 
of empires. It displays such a multitude of characters that 
some of them cannot help bearing a resemblance to those of 
the princes of our days, and while it decides the reputa¬ 
tion of the dead, it pronounces a tacit sentence on the 
living. Thus the censure which history passes on those 
wicked men who are no more is a moral lesson to the present 
generation by which they are given to understand what kind 
of judgment posterity will form of their conduct. 

Though the study of history is of all others the most 
proper for princes, yet it is not less useful to private 
persons.... Here the civilian, the politician, and the sol¬ 
dier learn the connection of things present with the past; 
here they find encomiums bestowed on those who faithfully 
served their country and universal odium entailed on the 
names of such as abused the confidence of their fellow 
citizens; here, in fine, they are made wise by the ex¬ 
perience of others. 

To contract the sphere of our ideas to the spot we live 
on, or to confine our knowledge to our private duties is to 
grovel in the most stupid ignorance. But to penetrate into 
the remote recesses of antiquity, to comprehend the whole 
universe within the extent of the mind is really to triumph 
over ignorance and error, is to co-exist with all ages, and 
to become a citizen of all places and countries. 14 


Elsewhere in his writings, Frederick the Great is a champion 
of liberty for historians to tell the truth. If they write 
without liberty to tell the truth, their work, at best, can be 
only mediocre, and is more likely to be positively bad. According 








28 

to Frederick, one ought to respect less the memories of the dead 
than truth, which never dies. The scholar king believed, 
however, that the truth should be made to preach, an idea which, 
it is interesting to note, is in striking contrast to Rousseau's 
appeal for the teaching of facts only. According to Frederick 
the Great, in teaching the Crusades, the teacher must preach 
against superstition; in teaching the night of St. Bartholomew, 
he must preach against fanaticism; and always, in teaching what 
was good, he must preach in praise of goodness. In connection 
with the latter, the pupil must see constantly that without 
goodness there can be neither fame nor true greatness. This con¬ 
ception of history teachers using historical truths to preach 
positive moral lessons met with a more favorable response than 
did the argument of Rousseau because, according to Dr. Johnson: 

••••the eighteenth century had more teachers of history 
who used history for preaching than the kind of teachers 
suggested by Rousseau. The nineteenth century kept up 
this kind of preaching and many history textbooks were 
published which were in effect collections of sermons. 

Authors consistently preached. In the 90's the moral be¬ 
gan to disappear, but in our own time teachers of history 
are again being admonished to preach and preaching text¬ 
books in history are again being produced. 15 


Frederick the Great's History of My Own Time contains yet 
another aspect of his conception of history and of history 
teaching. In it he quarrels with the professors of history of 
his day for devoting so much attention to insignificant things, 
and calls for more effort to distinguish between essentials and 
non-essentials: 

Is it a mortal sin to fall into error as to the exact 
date of the death of Belus or as to the exact day on which 
Darius' horse lifted his master to the Persian throne, or 
as to the hour at which the Golden Bull was published, 
whether six in the morning or seven in the evening? For my 
part I am content to know what the Golden Bull contains 
and that It was promulgated in 1356. 16 





































% 

. •. . 


































29 


This statement is followed by a sharp admonition to historian 
and history teacher alike to put into history only what is es¬ 
sential. 

Frederick the Great's specific directions for the teaching 
of German history are of no small interest. The period before 
the thirteenth century should be passed over quickly with a 
brief mention of only the most important events. From the thir¬ 
teenth century on, there should be a fuller and larger study, 
and on reaching modern times, still more detail which would cul¬ 
minate in a full study of life in the present. As Dr. Johnson has 
pointed out, Frederick is here very much in agreement' with modern 
practice which the former describes as follows: 

Compress the ancient world, bring out only essentials 
that have a bearing on life now, abridge the Middle Ages, 
and expand the strictly modern period, especially con¬ 
temporary history. 17 

Meanwhile, school days at Hamburg had convinced another 
eighteenth century German writer that something was wrong with 
education. Johann Bernhard Basedow, who lived from 1723 to 1790, 
enjoyed his history courses at Hamburg and was moved to write a 
poem of one hundred stanzas proving how indispensable a knowledge 
of history is to right living. He then went to the University of 
Leipzig where, after sampling the professors and disapproving of 
them, he pursued a course of his own making. Emerging from his 
university work with a conviction that the whole system of educa¬ 
tion needed reconstruction, Basedow wrote a dissertation in 1752 
in which he developed ideas very similar to those’ appearing ten 
years later in Rousseau's Emile . 

Basedow's ideas about history teaching, however, were quite 
different from those of Rousseau. In his dissertation he advocated 
teaching history backwards as the first stage in historical in- 






















. 


. 



















































. < ' 






























T 










30 


struction. Beginning with the Holy Roman Empire, Basedow would 

have pupils move backwards to the Byzantine Empire, then to the 

Roman, then to the Greek, then to the Persian, and so forth until 

18 

they had reached what he calls the ”obscure traditions" of the 
Deluge. This world survey would then be followed by Old and New 
Testament history. The entire course would end with an exposition 
of the Lutheran Catechism. In the world survey of history, Base¬ 
dow’s main purpose was to use history as a collection of examples, 
examples to imitate, and examples to shun. An instance of this is 
seen in the ancient history which Basedow abridged from standard 
ancient historians. There the horrible examples overshadow the 
good, and even the salacious gossip of Suetonius is repeated for 
boys in their teens. 

In 1768 Basedow published an appeal for a new education 
which roused all German educational thinkers. He followed this, 
appeal two years later by publishing a book on methods ( Methoden- 
buch ) and an elementary work ( Elementarwerk ). In his Methodenbuch , 
Basedow shows how history may be adapted to highly specialized 
needs when he devotes an entire chapter to history for a prince. 
The needs of the latter are so different from those of his sub¬ 
jects that he should have a history textbook written for his ex¬ 
clusive use which would not be printed, but kept in manuscript 
form in the secrecy of the council chamber. Meanwhile, the 
prince’s subjects would study a different kind of history. Ac¬ 
cording to Dr. Johnson, ’’This was perhaps the first clear recog¬ 
nition of the principle of differentiating history to meet the 

19 

special needs of special kinds of pupils”. The Elementarwerk was 
an all-inclusive textbook which outlined, subject by subject, the 
materials to be taught in elementary schools. Basedow, who 
claimed that the writing of textbooks was an essential part of 







. 

. 

' . ' e 






‘•■Oj 


«, . 
















. 

. ijUKi 






. 

. 






. 

- 





< 


. 








31 


his program of reform, followed up the Elementarwerk with text¬ 
books for secondary schools, including textbooks in history. 

At this point in the eighteenth century it should be noted 
that history was beginning to appear in the list of required 
studies issued by several central European rulers. Frederick the 
Great included history in his famous General Regulations of 1763, 
previously mentioned, and in his instructions in 1765 to the Ber¬ 
lin Academy for the sons of nobles. It was included by the Elector 
of Saxony in his school ordinance of 1773 and in an Austrian 
school law of 1774. It also was included In 1774 in the program 
of a school at Dessau which the Prince of Anhalt-Dessau helped 
Basedow to found. The latter T s reputation based on the writings 

already mentioned, in addition to a public impression that he was 
putting 

/ Rousseau T s ideas into effect, attracted many to the newly-founded 
school at Dessau. 

The instruction in history at Dessau took the form of the 

universal history outlined in Basedow r s dissertation of 1752, and 

no room was made for a separate course in German history. ff Our 

aim", Basedow said, "is to make our pupils Europeans rather than 

Austrians or Saxons, that is, to make them men first and then 
20 

citizens." This attitude partly resulted from the cosmopolitanism 
of the eighteenth century and partly from the number of different 
countries represented among the pupils who came to Dessau. Base¬ 
dow sought to make the instruction in history as pleasant as 
possible with the result that there was little memorizing. The 
pupils were expected to retain a general impression that human 
beings, families, and peoples had lived long ago, as now, under a 
variety of states. Differences were emphasized and in this Base¬ 
dow showed some historical sense. Only by appreciating the 





? . 
























{* 


Y r vtl * . 






. 







. 












J; 

, 

7 ■ . J; "■ l 'v ■ 10 I l&fk 

■ ■ ' ! 

C • J 

















• 










. 

















- 







. 







32 


the 

differences between the past and/present, he felt, would pupils 
be able to place themselves in their own time. Although his se¬ 
lection of facts was determined largely by their utility as 
examples of good and of evil, Basedow held that a textbook must 
not leave the pupil ignorant of names and things found mentioned 
in general literature, even if this knowledge is not in itself 
useful. Mythology, genealogy, and heraldry, therefore, should be 
included. Like the Oratorians, Basedow also stressed visualiza¬ 
tion to make history as real as possible. Since he believed that 
every picture must be as accurate and authentic as the text it¬ 
self, he had engravings made with great labor and care. Finally, 
in this connection, it should be noted that Basedow insisted on 
an even greater accuracy in history textbooks* c pi i c ' - 
.Christian Ernst .Trapp, 'who .lived : from?il745^ to 1 1818, "Was a 
teacher with Basedow at Dbssau and later a professor of pedagogy 
in the University of Halle. While at Dessau Trapp caused an edu¬ 
cational controversy by objecting to the use of Priestley's 
charts, copies of which had been presented to the school by its 
patron prince, the Prince of Anhalt-Dessau. Trapp thought it was 
better for pupils to make their own charts, a point of view which 
would be supported by present-day educational writers. Trapp had 
some other rather original ideas for the improvement of history 
teaching. He believed, for example, that history should be cor¬ 
related writh geography and Latin. He also observed that the older 
historians furnished better models of writing than the textbooks 
then current, and so in his classes he used the old historians. 

He introduced notebooks much like the workbooks used today and he 
encouraged his pupils to see that in writing up their notebooks 
they were really writing history. Trapp laid great stress on 








| . ' /■ .. • i. ' ' 











r-VI. 




: ... .. 

. 

C ' 

- 

' 

. 

:m ■ i. .1^ ....L. 




33 

current events, but it has been shown already that this idea was 
not original with him. The most striking aspect, however, of 
Trapp’s teaching at Dessau was his use of what is now called the 
"true-false” method of testing. With his class in history standing 
in a row, Trapp would read a sentence and then all the pupils who 
thought it a true statement would hold up both hands above their 
heads. Those who thought the statement false would leave their 
hands down, and those who were in doubt would stretch out their 
arms horizontally. 

Joachim Heinrich Campe, who lived from 1746 to 1818, was for 
a few months Basedow’s successor at Dessau. After that he founded 
in succession two institutions of his own, both of which came to 
an early end through difficulties with the Church. Campe then be¬ 
came the editor of an educational journal and engaged in other 
literary work. He wrote many books for children, which included 
an ancient history written in verse and accompanied by pictures. 
Campe’s most significant discovery, according to Dr. Johnson, was 
the use of sagas as an introduction to history. "In this", John¬ 
son writes, "he seemed dimly conscious of the culture epoch 

theory, the theory that the individual in his mental experience 

21 

repeats the experience of the race." Since the saga was one of 
the earliest forms of human history, it, accordingly, seemed 
suitable for young children. 

C. G. Salzmann (1744-1811) was a Lutheran minister who was 
placed in charge of the devotional exercises of the school at 
Dessau. While there he became so interested in education that in 
1784 he founded a school of his own at Schnepfenthal. By this 
time, it should be noted, the teaching of history had become com¬ 
mon in the secondary schools of Germany and had appeared in the 


- 

r 

. 

« 

. 


c . 

. 

. 

. 

' 

- 

: -■ 

; 

- 








' 

- 










34 


programs of a considerable number of elementary schools. Various 

school regulations, dating back as far as 1704, had provided for 

the use of current newspapers in connection with history courses, 

a fact that would seem to indicate a widespread interest in the 

teaching of current events. In addition, Dr. Johnson reports that, 

22 

" Kulturgeschichte had been distinctly recognized”. Yet Salzmann 

felt that he must make this criticism of the history programs then 

current; "History, as it is ordinarily taught, lifts the pupil 

out of the society of the living and places him in the society of 
23 

the dead.” His explanation of why this approach was faulty has 
been well paraphrased by Dr. Johnson as follows: 

"The pupil learns what happened a thousand years ago 
without learning what is happening now. He is taught to 
admire the wonders of Athens, Rome, and Sparta, their 
wars, their buildings, their art, yes, even the tales of 
Venus and Cupid, without knowing what assemblies, mayors, 
and the like really are. He is taught to prattle about 
consuls, tribunes, and dictators. He is taken to visit 
in imagination the Forum and the Areopagus, without ever 
seeing with his eyes the inside of his own city hall.” 24 

Salzmann*s solution to this problem is the now familiar community 
approach to history. He, therefore, prepared a program of history 
courses which began with a study of Schnepfenthal, branched out to 
an examination of neighboring communities in G-ermany, and con¬ 
cluded with an exposition of distant communities. All phases of 
this instruction, it should be added, were correlated with geo¬ 
graphy. It is also interesting to note that in dealing with 
ancient history, Salzmann excluded mythology. Although this was in 
disagreement with Basedow, Salzmann based his decision on the 
grounds that the ancient gods were both immoral and pure unreason, 
and thus quite unsuitable for children. 

Turning to the various other eighteenth century criticisms of 
school instruction in history, one finds a frequent complaint con- 












. 








. ij,'-: os . .. u .. . j • ,• i- iBi'/cJEt s ■ u V 


. 

: ■ . 

. 

< e - 

< ' ' - - , “• 

. 

' 

■ 

a 





- 







e 





a 




. f 


: 



• 




. 
















a 







35 


cerning the neglect of the pupil T s own country. European schools, 
for the most part, offered a general survey of the world, especial¬ 
ly the ancient world, as well as instruction in Bible history. In 
criticism of this state of affairs, the French writer, Charles Rol- 
lin, who was quoted at the beginning of this chapter, commented, "I 

am ashamed to be in a way a stranger in my own country, after having 

25 

surveyed so many others”. Although German school regulations 

generally called for special emphasis upon the history of Germany, 

a student could still ask at the opening of the nineteenth century: 

Tt Shall we go on knowing more about the history of Greece and Rome 

26 

than about the history of our own country?” A short-lived answer to 
this question concerning the teaching of national history was fur¬ 
nished in 1795 by the French Convention. That body issued a decree 
which required French schools to provide three stages in their in¬ 
struction in history. The French Revolution was to be dealt with 
exclusively in the first two stages, while a general survey of 

history that might be useful in perfecting French art and industry 

nationalistic 

was to be provided in the third stage. Fortunately, this/program 
with its undue emphasis upon French current events was dropped in 
1802. 

In closing this survey of history instruction in European 
schools of the eighteenth century, it is highly important to note 
that this was the century in which history was introduced as a 
school subject to North America. Before the American Declaration of 
Independence English history textbooks had been brought to the 
Thirteen Colonies. In 1734 history was taught in a Boston private 
school, and eleven years later the curriculum of a Roman Catholic 
academy in Maryland included history. Different private schools in 
Philadelphia commenced the teaching of history in the years 1751, 


. 











♦ 



























- 













c 






. 


t 





• • 




x 








. - 
















o 










. . 






’ 

. 















1759, and 1770. Private schools in New York City started to teach 
history shortly afterwards in the years 1772, 1774, and 1779. 
Written historical material about the United States first ap¬ 
peared in 1785 when Noah Webster included "short stories of the 

27 

geography and history of the United States" in his Grammatical 
Institutes of the Bnglish Language which was a combined reader, 
speller, and grammar. In 1787 John McCulloch published the first 
textbook to deal entirely with the history of the United States. 
The same author compiled another American history textbook which 
was published in 1795. This book proved sufficiently popular to 
go through four editions and to be translated into Spanish. Thus, 
in but a few years after the birth of the American Republic, pre¬ 
parations were well under way for the teaching of its history. 


1 Johnson, Eenry, Teaching of History , New York, The MacMillan 
Company, 1940, p. 32. 

2 Ibid., p. 32. 

3 Ibid., p, 33. 

4 Johnson, Henry, An Introduction to the History of the Social 
Sciences in Schools , New York, Charles Scribner r s Sons, 1932, 

p. 62. 

5 Ibid., p. 63. 

6 Johnson, Henry, Teaching of History , New York, The MacMillan 
Company, p. 34. 

7 Johnson, Henry, An Introduction to t he History of the Social 
Sciences in Schools , New York, Charles Scribner T s Sons, 1932, 
pp. 68-72. 

8 Rousseau, J. J., Smile or Sducation , translated by Barbara 
Foxley, London, J. M. Dent and Sons, Ltd., no date, pp. 131- 
134. 

9 Ibid., p. 198. 

10 Ibid., p. 199. 

11 Ibid., p. 205. 

12 Ibid., pp. 201-202. 

13 Johnson, Henry, An Introduction to the History of the Social 
Sciences in Schools , New York, Charles Scribner T s Sons, 1932, 
p. 87. 

14 Ibid., pp. 89-91. 

15 Ibid., p. 92. 

16 Ibid., pp. 92-93. 

17 Ibid., p. 93. 

18 Ibid., p. 77. 

19 Johnson, Henry, Teaching of History , New York, The MacMillan 
Company, p. 37. 





































c 


20 Ibid., p. 38. 

21 Johnson, Henry, An Introduction to the History or the Social 
Sciences in Schools , New York, Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1932 
p. 84. 

22 Johnson, Henry, Teaching of History , New York, The MacMillan 
Company, p. 40. 


23 Ibid., p. 40. 

24 Ibid., p. 40. 

25 Ibid., p. 41. 

26 Ibid., p. 42. 

27 Ibid., p. 42. 















CHAPTER VI 


SCHOOL INSTRUCTION IN HISTORY 
FROM THE BEGINNING OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY TO THE ESTAB¬ 
LISHMENT IN THE UNITED STATES OF THE COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL STUDIES 

During the nineteenth century nearly every important writer 
on education approved of school instruction in history* There 
was, of course, considerable criticism of both the kind of 
history being taught and the manner of teaching it, but agree¬ 
ment was general that history should be taught. Shortly after 
1800, indeed, history teaching was promoted quite vigorously as 
a support to nationalism. This trend was accelerated by the Na¬ 
poleonic wars which made practically every European country in¬ 
volved much more conscious of its national sovereignty. Histori¬ 
cal scholars and teachers alike demanded an increased emphasis 
on national history and the history programs built up in re¬ 
sponse to this demand allotted time for the study of national 
achievements and national culture. As could be expected, in¬ 
struction in history was confined mainly to the secondary 
schools, but it was included occasionally in the curriculums of 
some elementary schools. Unfortunately, on the secondary level, 
history in many European states became a sort of creed drawn up 
by the state and geared to support the government in power. An 
early example of this development, which is by no means unknown 
in the twentieth century, may be found in Metternich T s Austria 
where spies were placed in classrooms to report any failures to 
teach the facts ana interpretations approved by the government. 

In contrast to a tendency which was observed in the 
eighteenth century, the teaching of recent history or of current 


























' 




































39 

events was avoided generally until the 1890 r s. Dr. Johnson cites 

an impressive number of* cases to prove this point: 

...German programs dwelt with sentimental and romantic fond¬ 
ness upon the Middle Ages. A five years 1 course at Muhl- 
hausen in 1841, after a general survey extending to the Re¬ 
formation, ended in the fifth year with Charlemagne. A five 
years 1 course at Schleusingen in 1841 carried general 
history to the French Revolution and German history to 1700, 
and ended in the fifth year with a survey of the Middle 
Ages. A six years’ course at Nordhausen in 1848 carried Ger¬ 
man and general history to undefined modern times but ended 
in the sixth year with the Middle Ages to 1273. A Realschule 
at Nordhausen in 1878 carried history only through the 
Middle Ages and in the last year reviewed the Middle Ages. 

In France the program for secondary schools adopted in 1842 
carried French history to 1789 and the program adopted in 
1852 carried French history to 1815. In 1865 history was 
carried for the first time to the pupil’s own day. In 1876 
the limit was fixed at 1848; in 1887, at 1875; in 1890, at 
1889. In England, at the close of the century, the usual 
stopping place for school instruction In English history 
was the accession of Victoria. 1 


It is significant to note that history as a separate branch 
of instruction was rather slow to enter European schools for the 
children of common people. These common schools, as they may be 
called, might provide education up to the age of eighteen, but 
they did not prepare pupils for entrance into a university. Their 
curriculum, therefore, was designed to provide the common people 
with the knowledge required for a good Y/orker and a good citizen 
on the more ordinary level. Although history as a separate branch 
of instruction did appear In some of these schools in the 
eighteenth century, general recognition was not secured until the 
middle of the nineteenth century. By 1870 history was generally 
prescribed for common schools. It seems odd to report, though, 
in this connection, that in English common schools history was an 
option until the beginning of the twentieth century. It was en¬ 
tirely at the discretion of the masters whether or not history 
would be taught in such schools. 































■ 











' 

















. 






































40 


On the continent, however, there was by 1890 a graded, and 
connected history curriculum to be found in each type of secondary 
and common school. These curriculums were compulsory, but they 
were to some extent differentiated to meet the special needs of 
the schools concerned. The length of the course would vary. For 
example, some common schools commenced instruction in history at 
the age of five or six, although most left the teaching of this 
subject to the last four or five years before graduation. If 
history were taught in the beginning classes, the time allotted 
was usually one hour a week, but two hours a week was the general 
allotment in the upper classes. The frequent practice of segrega¬ 
tion in schools, moreover, resulted in the instruction in history 
for boys being quite different to that for girls. However, in all 
Sontintental European schools by 1890 history instruction, once 
started, was continuous until graduation. 

Referring to England once more, it is important to note the 
evolution of history instruction In the English secondary schools 
during the nineteenth century. With the exception of Rugby, these 
schools generally did little about the teaching of history until 
the 1870 T s when Oxford and Cambridge universities began to recog¬ 
nize history in their entrance examinations. Although history then 
appeared in practically every English secondary school, the examina¬ 
tion system emphasized subjects rather than the well-organized and 
continuous history curriculums of the Continental schools. Of this 
situation, ©r. Johnson remarks, "England in the nineteenth century 

may, on the whole, be said to have made more history and to have 

2 

taught less history than any other civilized country". 

Turning to the United States, one finds that during the early 
1800 r s history was becoming an established part of the curriculum 


. 

I J 

0 

. . ' ' . £ > • ’ - : • . £' ■ 

‘ 

















0 




. 




; 











41 


of many secondary schools. The intensification of nationalism 
during and after the War of 1612 gave new life to the interest in 
American history mentioned in Chapter V. Several textbooks were 
published in the early 1800 T s and American history, as well as 
general history, began to appear more frequently in the curricu- 
lums of the academies of New England and of New York. YYhen the 
first high school, then known as the English Classical School, was 
established in Boston in 1821, both American and general history 
courses were included in the program of studies. In 1827 the 
teaching of the history of the United States was established by 
law in Massachusetts in towns, cities, or districts of five hun¬ 
dred families and over, while general history was to be mandatory, 
as well, in every town, city, or district of four thousand inhabi¬ 
tants or more. Before the middle of the nineteenth century, five 
states had laws requiring the teaching of the history of the 
United States in the public schools. 

Up to the close of the Civil War, however, it may be said that 
history instruction in the United States was rather haphazard. 

There were no widely accepted courses of study and the content was 
determined by the textbooks which were not always accurate nor 
very interesting. We may cite the High School Course of Study in 
Cleveland in 1851 as typical of American practice in this period. 
The requirements in history were as follows: 

"First year: First term, history of England. 

Second term, history of France. 

Third term, history of Greece. 

Second year: First term, history of Rome; science of govern¬ 
ment . 

Second term, political economy. 

Third year: First and second terms, general history." 3 

Thus it may be seen that the idea of a connected, related history 
curriculum, each part of which would be a direct preparation for 
the next, was as alien to American schools as it was to those of 


t 


, . 

! .. .. 

. 






* 














. 






■ 
















. 






42 


England. Meanwhile, those American elementary schools which in¬ 
cluded history in their curriculums almost invariably taught only 
the history of the United States. A comment of the New York State 
Superintendent of Schools in 1835 is significant in this con¬ 
nection : 

"The history of foreign countries, however desirable it 
may be, cannot ordinarily enter into a system of common 
school education without opening too wide a field. It is 
safer in general to treat it as a superfluity, and leave 
it to such as have leisure in after life." 4 

The result of this general belief in the United States that the 
attention of elementary school children should not go beyond the 
history of their own country was to leave any account of foreign 
countries to the upper grades and, not infrequently, to the last 
year. There the subjects varied widely and included such desig¬ 
nations as general history, ancient history, American history, 
English history, Grecian antiquities, Roman antiquities, mythology, 
and ecclesiastical history. 

Following the Civil War, national leadership in American edu¬ 
cation became more firmly established, with important consequences 
for history teaching in the United States. Meanwhile, history had 
not only become generally regarded as an essential school study, 
but its position in this regard on the high school level was being 
strengthened by a growing recognition of his tor:/ as a requirement 
for university entrance. A committee of the National Education As¬ 
sociation recommended in 1876 that the history of the United States 

be required in elementary schools while "universal history and the 

5 

Constitution of the United States" should be required in high 
schools. As the century came to a close, such organizations as the 
American Historical Association systematized the study of the social 
sciences on the college and university level and this in turn af- 

















. . 

: 































5 


. 






* 




' 

. 

. 





43 

fected the teaching of the related subjects in American secondary 
schools. All these educational institutions, it should be noted, 
were at the same time undergoing considerable expansion as the 
nation became more industrialized, urbanized, and centralized 
during the latter part of the nineteenth century. 

Beginning in 1892, a number of important committee reports 
issued by the National Education Association and the American His¬ 
torical Association began to shape a national pattern for the 
teaching of history and related subjects in the secondary schools 
of the United States. The first of these national committees was 
the Committee of Ten of the National Education Association, ap¬ 
pointed in 1892 to study the programs of secondary schools and 
college-entrance requirements, and to make appropriate recommenda¬ 
tions for the improvement of secondary education. At its first 
meeting, the Committee decided to hold a series of conferences in 
each of the major subject areas. Thus the Conference on History, 
Civil Government, and Political Economy met in December, 1892, and 
recommended a historical course in the public schools that would 
include two years of biography and mythology in the elementary 
school to be followed by: 


"Grade VII.American history and civil government 

Grade VTXI.Greek and Homan history with their 

Oriental backgrounds 

Grade IX.French history taught so as to demon¬ 

strate the general movement of medieval 
and modern history 

Grade X.English history also taught in a manner 

to elucidate medieval and modern history 

Grade XI.. . .American history 

Grade XII.A special period studied intensively and 

civil government" 6 


Those schools that could not adopt the longer program would use a 
more limited six-year program. The influence of the report of the 
Committee of Ten was quite marked as is seen in the decided in- 

































. 


























. 

; -j-S 

.[GO; ::G 


m. 









































44 


crease in the teaching of American, English, and French history 
courses. Some schools even went so far as to offer the intensive 
study of a selected historical period, as recommended by the Com¬ 
mittee, but it must also be reported that many schools did no more 
than increase the offering of general history, thus ignoring the 
Committee r s report. 

In 1896 the innerican Historical Association appointed the 
Committee of Seven which was even more influential in shaping the 
pattern of history instruction in the United States. After a long 
period of study, which included the sending of questionnaires to 
American schools to reveal current practices, the Committee made 
its report in 1898 which recommended a four-year program of 
history in innerican high schools as follows: 


"Grade IX.....Ancient history, with special emphasis 

on Greece and Rome, 800, 814, or 848 A.D. 

Grade X.Medieval and modern European history 

Grade XI.....English history 

Grade XII.American history and civil government" 7 


This program, coupled with an analysis in the report of the values 
of historical study, methods of study, materials, and college-en¬ 
trance requirements, had far-reaching effects. Not only were text¬ 
books and syllabi published on the basis of the Committee r s recom¬ 
mendations, but high school programs of study were reorganized and 
college-entrance requirements were adapted to it. Writing in 1935, 
Rolla M. Tryon said of this influence: 

"For at least two decades after its appearance, high- 
school courses in history in the United States were almost 
100 per cent dictated by it. In fact even today, more than 
a generation after the publication of the report, its in¬ 
fluence is dominant in probably one-third of the high 
schools of the country." 8 

In 1907 the Committee of Five was appointed by the American 
Historical Association to deal with various objections which had 














. 

, 














































4 






, . 







. 














45 

arisen to the program recommended by the Committee of Seven. While 
the report of the Committee of Five was not so influential as its 
predecessor, a shifting of emphasis from ancient and medieval to 
modern history did result from its deliberations. The Committee 
recommended that ancient history to 800 A.D. be taught in Grade IX; 
English history to 1760, including European history and American 
colonial history, in Grade X; modern history, with particular re¬ 
ference to England since 1760, in Grade XI; and American history 
and government in Grade XII. 

Meanwhile, the new interest in history instruction in the high 
school was being extended to the elementary school. In 1895 the 
Committee of Fifteen of the National Education Association recom¬ 
mended that throughout the eight years of elementary school oral 
lessons in general history and biography should be taught for sixty 
minutes a week. Textbook lessons were also to be taught in the 
seventh and eighth grades on United States history up to the 
adoption of the Constitution and on the Constitution itself. But 
the most influential report on the elementary history program was 
published in 1909 by the Committee of Eight of the American His¬ 
torical Association. This Committee proposed the following program: 

"First grade: Indian life; stories connected with Thanks¬ 
giving day and Washington’s birthday; stories connected 
with local events. 

Second grade: Indian life; Thanksgiving; Washington’s 
birthd ay ; local events; Memo rial day. 

Third grade: Heroes of other times: Joseph, Moses, David, 
Ulysses, and so on to Columbus. 

Fourth grade: Historical scenes and persons in American 
history, colonial period. 

Fifth grade: Historical scenes and persons in American 
history continued; great industries of the present. 

Sixth grade: Selected topics from Greek, Roman, and Euro¬ 
pean history to the end of Raleigh’s colonial enter¬ 
prises in America. 

Seventh grade: American history to the end of the Revo¬ 
lution; European background continued. 

Eighth grade: American history since the Revolution; 
great events in European history." 9 




























. 


















. 






, 

- 

: 

: 












46 


All these new history programs, whether for the elementary 
school or for the high school, were not, however, destined to re¬ 
main static. New forces were at work in the early 1900 T s which 
came together to produce a new school subject known to us as the 
social studies. This merging of forces has been summed up suc¬ 
cinctly by Quillen and Hanna as follows: 

"The 1890’s and early 1900 ’s were marked by many de¬ 
velopments in the theory and practice of education, in 
psychology and the social sciences, and in American cul¬ 
ture generally. Education was becoming professionalized, 
and its leading thinkers were beginning to exert a major 
influence in the shaping of the school program. William 
Jame§,John Dewey, and Edward Thorndike were challenging 
vigorously such psychological ideas as mental discipline 
and the universality of transfer. Dewey and Francis Par¬ 
ker were urging a more functional and democratic educa¬ 
tion and were demonstrating their ideas in experimental 
schools. Around 1910 the junior high school came into 
existence, and the 6-3-3 plan of organization began to 
replace the 8-4- plan in many cities. Manual training, do¬ 
mestic science, and other practical vocational and avo- 
cational courses were added to the school program. Edu¬ 
cators became concerned about social efficiency and the 
adaptation of the individual to city life. Men such as 
James Harvey Robinson were establishing the "New History”, 
and sociology became a recognized area of research and 
study. 

"At the same time the United States was witnessing the 
development of increased industrialism and urbanization, 
the growth of the great corporation, the flood tide of im¬ 
migration, political expansion in the Caribbean and the 
Far East, a strong reform movement to correct the evils 
growing out of rural and urban poverty, widespread politi¬ 
cal corruption, the development of organization in labor 
and agriculture, and the progressive movement in politics. 

It was within the framework of these changes that the 
Committee on Social Studies made its recommendations for 
extensive changes in the high-school social-studies pro¬ 
gram, which up tQ this time had been chiefly history, with 
some attention to civil government." 10 

The Committee on Social Studies, mentioned in the above quotation, 
was a part of the Commission on the Reorganization of Secondary 
Education established in 1913 by the Rational Education Associa¬ 
tion. Thomas Jesse Jones of the United States Bureau of Education 
was chairman, but the moving spirit of the Committee was its secre- 





* 






















• 




• 







. 











47 


tary, Arthur William Dunn, the specialist in civic education in 
the United .States Bureau of Education and the founder of the com¬ 
munity-civics movement. The social studies movement may be said to 
mark its formal beginning with the two reports of the Committee, 

The Teaching of Community Civics , published in 1515, and The Social 
Studies in Secondary Education , published in 1916. The latter pub¬ 
lication, which was compiled by Dunn, was the general report of tfee 
work of the Committee, At this point, however, it is necessary to 
postpone the account of subsequent developments until Chapter XI in 
order that the following aspects of the present study may be in¬ 
vestigated : 

(1) The growth of instruction in the school subjects, other 
than history, which now comprise the social studies; 

(2) The Ontario origins of the Alberta curriculum in those 
subjects later known as the social studies; 

( 3) The development in Alberta of school instruction in the 
subjects now called the social studies,down to the estab¬ 
lishment in the United States of the first Committee on 
Social Studies. 


1 Johnson, Henry, Teaching of History , Hew York, The MacMillan 
Company, 1940, pp. 45-46. 

2 Ibid., p. 49. 

3 Ibid., p. 50. 

4 Ibid. 

5 Ibid., p. 52. 

6 Quillen, I. James, and Hanna, Lavone A., Education for Social Com¬ 
petence , Chicago, Scott, Foresman and Company, 1948, p. 3. 

7 Ibid., p. 4. 

8 Ibid. 

9 Johnson, op. cit. , pp. 61-62. 

10 Quillen and Hanna, op. cit. , pp. 4-5. 



















• « 


















CHAPTER VII 


THE GROWTH OF SCHOOL INSTRUCTION IN SUBJECTS 
OTHER THAN HISTORY WHICH ARE NOW INCLUDED IN THE SOCIAL STUDIES 

Reference has been made already to the fragmentary nature of 
the history of social studies instruction, but one does not 
realize the proportions of the lack of research in this field un¬ 
til an attempt is made to examine the history of such instruction 
in subjects other than history. While Dr. Johnson T s efforts to 
record the history of school instruction in history have provided 
teachers with a fairly complete account of this aspect of social 
studies instruction, the available accounts of the growth of in¬ 
struction in civics and government, geography, economics, 
sociology, and various other social studies subjects leave much 
to be desired. It is fortunate, however, that the lack of de¬ 
tailed information is in these last-named subjects rather than in 
history because of the major role played by historical studies in 
most social studies programs. Nevertheless, an endeavor will be 
made to sketch the evolution of school instruction in the non- 
historical subject'- areas under the headings which folio?/. Unfor¬ 
tunately, most of the curriculum references must be made to the 
United States owing to the fact that practically no other re¬ 
search material is available in this field, but these references 
will give at least some idea of the more recent curriculum trends 
in North America. 

I. Cl Vies AMD GOVERNMENT 

In Chapter V it was pointed out that Joseph Priestley’s 
course dealing with the constitution and the laws of Ehgland was 













< . 








- 







an early, if not the earliest, attempt on record to treat govern¬ 
ment or political science as a separate school study. Yet the 
teaching of the elements of political science is of much earlier 
origin than the efforts made in this direction by Priestley in 
the eighteenth century. Prom the time that the first community 
was organized, the problem of group control through government 
has been an object of discussion. The ancient Egyptians and Baby¬ 
lonians produced works containing references to the science of 
government, but Greek writers discussed government in a more de¬ 
tailed and mature form as is seen in Plato T s Republic and Aris¬ 
totle^ Politics . The Romans subsequently made substantial con¬ 
tributions to the fields of law and administration, while in 
later ages the bitter and prolonged quarrels over the powers of 
the papacy and the rights of monarchs led to the preparation of 
many studies in the field of government. As was only natural, the 
earliest schools undertook to preserve the established order. 
Priests, teachers, and parents regarded the transmission of the 
social heritage as of the utmost importance, and it was thus an 
easy matter for early rulers to induce those in charge of educa¬ 
tion to teach the duty and necessity of preserving the govern¬ 
ment. The Ephebic Oath taken by the youth of Athens is but one 
example of the obligations which were expected of a prospective 
citizen by the state in the ancient world. In more modern times 
countless examples could be cited of the ways in which both demo¬ 
cratic and despotic countries have sought to train their youth in 
the belief that the system of government under which they live 
should be perpetuated. Lessons in patriotism, consequently, may be 
found included in the school curriculums of such countries both 
past and present. The most important materials used in these 




■ 


, 



* 

. 

e 


































- 








- 








. 

. 




50 

lessons have to do, either directly or indirectly, with the 
government, thus facilitating the teaching of some elements of 
political science in the schools. 

The teaching of civics and government, as one would expect, 
received an early start in the schools of the United States. The 
nationalistic feeling of this newly-founded country was reflected, 
in part, by the appearance in American schools of courses in 
government, law, and the Constitution. By 1830 a number of text¬ 
books, which were quite patriotic in tone, were available, but it 
was not until 1875 that any text gave much space to topics other 
than the Constitution and the national government. The courses 
given in this subject field were known by a great many names, but 
after the middle of the nineteenth century the designation civil 
government was the most common of those in use and by the close of 
the century this term was generally accepted throughout the United 
States. 


Despite the early American interest in civil government, the 
percentage of schools or students studying the subject was not 
notably large during a considerable portion of the nineteenth cen¬ 
tury. Referring to courses in government generally, Dr. Wesley re¬ 
cords the following statistics: 

...During the 1860 f s and 1870 f s there were few gains in 
the number of such courses except in a few states, 
notably New York, where the percentage of schools offering 
such courses increased from about 24 in 1860 to about 52 
by 1880. The percentage of pupils in Ohio who studied ma¬ 
terials from political science increased from about 6 in 
188£ to about 35 by 1897, In Michigan the number of 
schools offering such courses rose from 3959 in 1890 to 
5758 by 1900. 

Elements of political science or civil government were 
taught in the elementary schools as well as in high 
schools. In 1888 22 out of 82 cities reporting offered 
courses in civil government. Such work was usually under¬ 
taken in either Grade VII or VIII and sometimes in both. 



















' 


. 
















. 








: 




, 


. 







' 

- 







51 


By 1897 eleven states had statutory requirements for the 
teaching of civil government: in the elementary schools.... 

By the close of the nineteenth century the schools had 
more or less agreed upon the term ft civil government”. In 
1897 the percentage of students who were studying the sub¬ 
ject in high schools varied from 42 in Wyoming to 4 in the 
District of Columbia. The average for the whole country 
was about 21. In 1914 this average had been lowered to 16. 

Civil government was also taught in the elementary 
schools at the turn of the century. In 1910, 24 of the 50 
largest cities offered it in either Grade VII or VIII. 
otate laws tended to strengthen at least the formal at¬ 
tempt to teach civil government in the elementary grades. 

It appears, however, to have enjoyed no great popularity. 1 


After 1900 the term civil government began to be replaced by 
the word civics which by 1914 became the accepted term throughout 
the United States. In 1916 the American Political Science Associa¬ 
tion published a report entitled Teaching of Government which re¬ 
commended that more attention be paid to civics in the elementary 
grades. The statistical results of this recommendation, according 
to Dr. Wesley, were as follows: 

Following the report... civics seems to have received 
more attention in the elementary grades. A survey of 273 
cities made in 1923 shows that it was taught in an in¬ 
creasingly large percentage of the cities as one ascends 
the grade scale. Nineteen per cent of the cities offered 
it in Grade I, 21 per cent in Grade II, 23 per cent in 
Grade III, 27 per cent in Grade IV, 35 per cent in 
Grade V, 45 per cent in Grade VI, 52 per cent in Grade VII, 

70 per cent in Grade VIII-B, and 80 per cent in 
Grade VIII-A. Thus it appears that civics as a separate 
study received considerable but unsystematic attention be¬ 
low the eighth grade. Out of 444 cities reporting, only 233 
made provision for the separate treatment of civics in the 
first six grades. In the remaining cities civics was com¬ 
bined with history, taught incidentally, or simply not 
treated at all. The general conclusion is that civics has 
been recognized widely as a seventh- or eighth-grade study 
and that belo?/ those grades it has received only irregular 
attention. 2 


Radical changes in the content of civics courses were pro¬ 
posed in The Community and the Gitizen by Arthur ¥. Dunn which was 
published in 1907. This book proposed a functional approach to 











- 

a 


. 

c - ' 


0 

; . .. • 0 

. . 

■ 




c 






■ 

I 








, 

. -- 

















52 


civics in which attention would be centered upon the community 

and the pupil T s participation in its affairs. Dunn T s proposals, 

which had far-reaching effects, received a further impetus with 

the publication in 1915 of the report of the Commission on Social 

Studies of the National Education Association entitled The 

Teaching’ of Community Civics . According to Dr. Wesley: 

...The appearance of Dunn’s text...and... The Teaching of 
Community Civics (1915) were influential factors in the 
development of civics. By 1920 the term had become so 
general and so varied that textbook authors and school 
people began to use such terms as "economic civics", "vo¬ 
cational civics", "social civics", "citizenship", and 
"civic ideals" in order to delimit the expanding connota¬ 
tions of the single word "civics". In 1921, 18 per cent 
of the pupils enrolled in high schools were studying some 
kind of civics. Presumably a large percentage of them 
were studying community civics in Grade IX, for in 1927, 
a date for which more specific information is available, 

13 per cent of the pupils in the schools reporting were 
engaged in studying this type of civics. 

The increasing popularity of civics in Grade IX made 
it desirable to find some other title for the course in 
the senior high school. "Advanced civics", "American 
government", and "government" were frequently employed. 

In 1927 about 6 per cent of the pupils in a large group 
of schools for which data are available were studying 
civics other than community civics. While considerable 
numbers were doubtlessly enrolled in vocational, economic, 
and other types of civics, it seems reasonably clear that 
far larger numbers were enrolled In senior- high school 
courses in government. Gut of 575 high schools In Illinois 
80 per cent offered advanced civics during the school year 
1935-1936. 3 


II. GEOGRAPHY 

The account of the growth of school instruction in history, 
given in Chapters III, IY, Y, and YI, contained a considerable 
number of references to the teaching of- geography. This was un¬ 
avoidable because the intimate relation between history and geo¬ 
graphy makes the teaching of the former difficult, if not im¬ 
possible, without reference to the latter. It will be recalled 
that Juan Luis Yives is the first person on record who emphasized 









, 






■v ; '.) j 







■ 






. 






. 













53 

geography as essential at every stage of historical study. In the 
seventeenth century it was noted that the Oratorians were careful 
to teach history in connection with geography, while Christian 
Weise maintained that before history can be grasped at all there 
must be some knowledge of geography. The eighteenth century saw a 
considerable expansion in the teaching of geography as well as in 
its advocacy by educational writers. Joseph Priestley in his 
courses at Warrington placed particular emphasis upon geography, 
especially commercial geography. Rousseau, meanwhile, even went 
so far as to demand that children become acquainted with geo¬ 
graphy some years before their instruction in history. Although 
several other eighteenth century writers could be listed here as 
having supported the teaching of geography, it is sufficient to 
state that by the end of the century their efforts had achieved a 
measure of success with the fairly general recognition of geo¬ 
graphy as a school subject. Having achieved this status, geography, 
however, has not undergone a course of development similar to 
that experienced by the other subjects comprising the social 
studies. Dr. Wesley sums up this situation in the following way: 

Throughout most of its history geography has been re¬ 
garded as a physical science. As such it won its place in 
the curriculum. Only in recent decades has it come to be 
regarded as a social study or as intimately related to 
the social studies. 

Geography differs radically from the other social 
studies in still another significant respect. Whereas the 
other social studies have had their major developments in 
secondary schools, geography has had its chief develop¬ 
ment in the elementary grades. Because of this, fact it 
has been less influenced by the requirements for college 
entrance* It has thus been relatively free to alter its 
contents and shift its emphases. 4 


Nineteenth century school curriculums in the United States 
included several kinds of geography courses. Elementary school 






. 




■ 










( l 














. 

. 

. 




. 


































54 


geography generally required a feat of memory on the part of the 
student as is seen in the great lists of cities, rivers, bays, 
straits, capes, seas, lakes, and mountains which fill the text¬ 
books in use during the first half of the century. Lengthy lists 
of review questions at the end of each chapter involved such geo¬ 
graphical matters as location, direction, population, industries, 
and climate. The textbooks of Arnold Guyot, which began to appear 
in 1866, broke away from this factual tradition in elementary 
geography teaching, and, beginning in 1864, the books of A. E. 
Erye introduced physical geography, rather than political geo¬ 
graphy, to the elementary school. High school courses, meanwhile, 
included geography, physical geography, and commercial geography 
which by the 1870’s and 1880 T s were quite common in the typical 
American high school. In 1893 the Committee of Ten, mentioned in 
Chapter VI, recommended the teaching of physical geography, a re¬ 
commendation so widely acted upon that geography in American 
high schools mainly became a physical science. 

Early in the twentieth century,- however, the appearance of 
general science courses marked the end of physical geography as a 
separate subject. Physical geography, moreover, had come already 
under severe criticism from responsible organizations. In 1909 
committees of the Association of American Geographers and of the 
National Education Association pointed out that far too little 
attention was being paid to environmental influences upon human 
beings and that physical features were being over-emphasised as a 
result.'The absorption of physical geography by the new courses 
in general science partly solved this problem, but in the place 
of the disappearing separate courses in physical geography there 
arose a much greater interest than ever before in commercial geo¬ 
graphy on the high school level. Of this hew movement. Dr. Wesley 





55 


writes: 


...commercial geography was increasing. Even though the 
subject easily partakes of all the faults of the older 
geography in its emphasis upon facts and ephemeral infor¬ 
mation, it presents an appearance of being functional and. 
contemporary. A survey of 371 high schools completed in 
1930 shows that commercial geography was being taught in 
238 and physical geography in 79. During the school year 
1935-1936 a survey of 575 high schools in Illinois shows 
that 357 of them were offering commercial geography. The 
percentage of schools offering this subject was about 62 
in both surveys. Other geography courses under such titles 
as "high school geography", "human geography", "social 
geography", "human ecology", and "world geography", ap¬ 
peared in 23 schools. In 1928 there were 153,351 students 
enrolled in high school geography classes in the United 
States. Some basis of comparison is afforded by the fact 
that in the same year 204,694 students were enrolled in 
chemistry, 198,402 in physics, 153£348 In economics, 80,375 
in sociology, and 619,202 in civics and government. 5 


III. ECONOMICS 

Until comparatively recent times the subject of economics 
has been known by the much more forbidding title of political 
economy . Although economic problems are obviously as old as man 
himself, the first systematic writings on such problems dealt 
with those economic affairs which were of a public nature, thus 
giving rise to the term previously mentioned. Despite the attempt 
of such classical economists as Adam Smith and David Ricardo to 
deal with the economy of a whole people, the subject they fostered 
never won any large place in school curriculums until its name 
was changed to economics. Referring primarily to the United 
States, Dr. Wesley explains this rather odd situation as follows: 

Political economy never won any large place In the 
school curriculum until after it changed its name to eco¬ 
nomics. Political economy was too Inclusive and too ab¬ 
stract for ready adaptation In the schools. While its 
claims to pedagogical efficacy were quite inclusive, they 
were also quite nebulous. Those who advocated the 
teaching of political economy claimed that it had cul¬ 
tural, disciplinary, civic, and ethical values, but it 
gained no great attention until it changed its name, con¬ 
tents, and objectives. 




















. 


. 






56 


Political economy was offered in a few schools in 
New York State as early as 1832, and ten years later it 
was taught in 163 out of 166 secondary schools. It con¬ 
tinued to be offered in a large percentage of schools in 
the state until about 1885, when its popularity began to 
wane. In 1857 Massachusetts passed a law requiring the 
teaching of political economy in large high schools. 

Three years later it was taught in 16 high schools within 
the state. After 1860 the subject won recognition in a 
few high schools in the North Central States. In Minnesota 
the percentage of pupils studying economics rose slightly 
between 1894 and 1900. In 1893, according to the Committee 
of Ten of the National Education Association, about 5 per 
cent of the schools that were studied offered political 
economy. In 1900 less than one per cent of the pupils en¬ 
rolled in the high schools of the 50 largest cities were 
studying economics. It is thus apparent that political 
economy was making little progress. Some increase in en¬ 
rollment, however, began to appear about 1900. This change 
was probably caused by two or three definite factors. 

The old term "political economy" was rather forbidding, 
and various persons had from time to time used the simpler 
term "economics" as a synonym. In 1885 the economists or¬ 
ganized the American Economic Association. This choice of 
name was significant and probably Influential. Five years 
later the great economist Alfred Marshall called his new 
book Principles of Economics . The term "political economy", 
although perpetuated in a magazine founded in 1892 and in 
an occasional book, gradually sanjs into disuse. It was re¬ 
placed by the simpler and less formidable word "economics". 6 

Whatever the reasons for the Increased Interest In economics as a 

school subject In the United States, statistical surveys in the 

twentieth century reveal a considerable proportion of American 

high school students engaged in this study. Of 7,197 high schools 

throughout the United States in 1914, about 29 per cent offered 

economics. In 1916 this percentage had risen to about 36 per cent. 

The statistics for the schools of the North Central Association in 

the last-named year revealed a sharp variation from 100 per cent 

teaching of economics in Iowa schools to about 18 per cent in 

Indiana. The median state in the North Central Association was 

r\ 

South Dakota where economics was taught in about 46 per cent of the 
schools, while the average was a little over 49 per cent. By 1920 
the average in the North Central Association had risen to nearly 
















■ 
































- 




\ - 


7 


57 


59 per cent and in 1922 the figure stood at 66 per cent. 

XY. SOCIOLOGY 

Sociology did not emerge as a separate subject of study until 

the nineteenth century, thus delaying its appearance on school 

curriculums, even in the United States, until the early 1900 T s. 

Although sociology first appeared on the curriculums of two Ameri- 

subsequently 

can high schools in 1911, it has not/received the attention in the 
schools of the United States that has been accorded the other 
social studies. This situation may be explained in part by the 
fact that the content of sociology is dealt with to some extent in 
such school subjects as history, civics, and economics. Statisti¬ 
cal surveys of the teaching of sociology as a school subject have 
differed rather sharply in their findings, but it has been estab¬ 
lished that in 1922 fifteen per cent of the high schools of the 

United States offered sociology, while in 1928 the figure was 

8 

eighteen per cent. 


Y* OTHER SUBJECTS 

Consideration of other school subjects in the social studies 
field involves, for the most part, experimental subjects, some of 
which have become more or less permanent, while others have been 
abandoned. These subjects, which are largely of American origin, 
may be divided into two groups: combination courses and new 
courses. Among the latter, which generally belong to an earlier 
era in the history of education, the following may be cited from 
the American schools of the nineteenth century: universal history, 
chronology, parliamentary rules, historical reading, and current 
events. Combination courses are characteristic of the more recent 
curricular experimentation which has become so common in North 











- 

- 


'■ .*<■ I 










' 





o 









t 









. 








. 


. . 


; 












■ 

- 

, 






58 


America. They include problems of democracy, or problems of 
American democracy, as it is frequently called in the United 
States, a general social science for the upper elementary grades, 
and a fusion or integration of English and social studies. The 
latter combination course, it is interesting to note, will be 
mentioned later in this investigation when the present revisions 
of the Alberta social studies curriculum come under discussion. 

With this chapter the history of school instruction in the 
various social studies subjects has been sketched so far as the 
developments in Europe and in the United States are concerned. 

The next step in this study is to determine by what means Euro¬ 
pean and American experience in the social studies field was 
transmitted to Alberta. Such a problem involves an investigation 
of the Ontario origins of the Alberta social studies curriculum 
which is the subject of the following chapter. 

1 Wesley, Edgar Bruce, Teaching the Social Studies , Boston, D. G. 
Heath and Company, 1942, pp. 186-187. 

2 Ibid*, pp. 188-189. 

3 Ibid., pp. 189-190. 

4 Ibid., p. 191. 

5 Ibid., pp. 192-193. 

6 Ibid., pp. 194-195. 

7 Ibid., p. 195. 

8 Ibid., p. 197. 









CHAPTER VIII 


THE ONTARIO ORIGINS OF TEE ALBERTA SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM 

While it would be of considerable interest to sketch the evo¬ 
lution of social studies instruction in all the colonies which 
comprised British North America prior to the Canadian Confedera¬ 
tion in 1867, the main interest in the present study must be con¬ 
fined to Upper Canada, later known as Ontario. It was the compara¬ 
tively advanced school program of this province which directly in¬ 
fluenced the construction of a curriculum for the North-West 
Territories, to say nothing of the influence of Ontario-trained 
teachers and school administrators who practiced their profession 
in the Territories. This Ontario background to Territorial educa¬ 
tion, it should be noted, was greatly augmented as well by the use 
of many of the authorized Ontario textbooks, a use which extended 
well beyond the Territorial stage of educational development in 
Western Canada. 



It was not until the nineteenth century that history in*- 
struction began to appear in the schools of Upper Canada. Indeed, 
it was not until that century that anything like a school system 
began to emerge in this area which did not receive settlers until 
the 0 arrival of the United Empire Loyalists. Prior to 1807 private 
elementary schools of a kind existed in the scattered communities 
of the colony, but their courses of instruction were confined to 
the traditional reading, writing, and arithmetic, in addition to a 
heavy stress upon morals, manners, and religion. In 1807 the first 
enactment of the legislature regarding education took place, but 
the district schools created under this act were not popular. The 
schools were not only intended primarily for the well-to-do, but 






■ . 





■' ■ 'JiJ... 




. 





■ 

o t 








■ 





. t z ■ J f.< .• ; 








^ t ' 

. :■ , :i‘ j v . : 



* 

. 

. 


,. ■ . .■ v' ■ • ; if ■ 




60 


they were largely controlled by Anglicans. In the matter of cur¬ 
riculum, moreover, each school was a law unto itself..Beginning in 
1816, a series of Common School Acts were passed, but, unfortunate¬ 
ly, the stormy legislative and public debates which took place 
over the control of education in Upper Canada hindered educational 
progress. There were determined efforts made to give the church 
complete control of education, but the many Protestant denomina¬ 
tions made agreement on this step difficult, if not impossible. 

In the end the government of Upper Canada was left in full control 
of both the primary and secondary schools of the expanding colony. 

The quarrels over the control of the schools of Upper Canada, 
however, were but one factor in the slow educational progress made 
by the colony during the first half of the nineteenth century. The 
social conditions out of which the common schools grew militated 
against effective progress for several decades. These conditions, 
which were particularly not conducive to the growth of instruction 
in the social studies, have been described as follows: 

There was a dearth of intellectual interests in Upper 
Canada in the early decades of the century. The one gospel 
of life was work, and work meant a bitter and benumbing 
struggle against great forests, long winters, and remote 
markets. Scattered in small and rude communities or iso¬ 
lated clearings, the settlers were denied the stimulus of 
a rich social life. Politics were still the prerogative of 
a certain class in the colony and had scarcely yet risen 
above the wretched bickerings of factions. Many settlers, 
especially in the rural and remote districts, were denied 
wholly the privilege of public worship. The professions of 
law, medicine, divinity, and teaching were often not 
served, or served by adventurers or incompetents from the 
United States or the British Isles. Poverty throughout the 
colony made a luxury of books, and an imperfect mail ser¬ 
vice limited correspondence and newspapers to the few urban 
centres. Indeed, so forbidding were conditions that the 
editor of the Courier could declare publicly in 1836 that 
'the majority of our legislators can neither read nor write 
nor speak English'. 

The dearth of intellectual interests may be regarded as 
the remote cause, but conditions peculiar to the early 
settlements must be regarded as the immediate cause of the 



. 

- 

. 










i a:' . . , 




- 

* 

> 

■ 














■ 

* 

■ 

, . . J:i: * ' fi , / 


« 

t : • : ■ : 

, 








V 1 




. 

. 












. 














slow evolution of public schools in Upper Canada. The 
rapid influx of an incongruous population threw into re¬ 
lief the incongruities in existing educational ideals 
and practices. In the main the settler from the United 
States brought with him an abiding faith in the methods, 
courses of study, and text-books of the public schools 
of New York and Massachusetts. But the settler from the 
British Isles was wholly unfamiliar with the idea of pub¬ 
lic education, or indeed of any popular education apart 
from the instruction offered by the church or by charity. 
Across these divergent views cut the views of the native- 
born Canadian, whose faith in any form of education 
suffered from his long and strenuous contest with the 
privations of colonial life, and the views of the admini¬ 
strative classes, in whom current political conditions 
had developed an exclusive faith in secondary or higher 
education.... 

In the absence of expert supervision or of a strong 
central authority, local conditions and the accomplishments 
of the teacher determined the courses of study and the 
text-books. The result was a diversity that was almost 
chaotic. Religious instruction was, of course, fundamental. 
The Bible appeared in every common school, and as psalter, 
testament, or Scriptures, particularly as the New Testa¬ 
ment, was daily read, learned by heart, and, at times, ex¬ 
pounded. Occasionally, and in particular where the teacher 
was a clergyman, Bible instruction was supplemented by a 
study of the catechism, Anglican or Presbyterian, and of 
such books as Watts’s Scripture History . Until late in the 
eighteenth century spelling and reading were combined in 
the one subject of reading, but as horn-books and primers 
gave way before spellers and readers, formal spelling 
emerged and, early in the nineteenth century, began to 
monopolize the activities of the elementary school. 

Spellers made spelling popular* It became the chief mea¬ 
sure of efficiency in teacher and pupil. Indeed, in view 
of the relative abundance of spelling-books, of the supre¬ 
macy of spelling in the school programmes, and of the 
spelling matches and spelling bees, spelling can be de¬ 
scribed only as a popular ’craze’ in the first half of the 
nineteenth century. Reading, of course, persisted. The 
primer, the natural successor of the old English horn-book, 
was probably used freely in remoter parts as a first and 
only reader. Grammar, as such, was rarely taught, and then 
only by teachers who had brought classical traditions from 
the old country. Writing ranked high as a school subject 
and as a measure of competency for both teacher and pupil. 
All needed the accomplishment, and all gloried in a hold, 
handsome, and dignified type of handwriting. Arithmetic, 
like writing, was taught often by an expert, whose chief 
qualification as a schoolmaster v/as his skill with ’figgers 
Not so important a school subject as writing or spelling, 
arithmetic grew steadily into favour towards the middle of 
the century. Generally the instruction was limited to the 
fundamental processes, but here and there the teacher ven¬ 
tured into vulgar fractions, mensuration, and even book¬ 
keeping. Geography and history played a very incidental and 

















. 

' « ' 

- 

. 






. - J; j'd 


. 




■ 






. 

. 

: : 

* 

- 

: - * i.. '■ 

. 


: • * 

. . . ...VC 

3‘- .. . . . 

. 

' ; .. ■ t eei a&iu^m 

c ' . ■ .■ o f ' u&i? 

m || 11 




62 


isolated part in the elementary schools before the middle 
of the century. They represented accomplishments for 
which the settler had slight regard or for which the para¬ 
mount claims of other subjects left no room. The teachers, 
moreover, were incompetent in these subjects, and text¬ 
books, unless...faulty or dangerous American books, were 
inaccessible. Beyond these traditional subjects, and where 
the demands of the parents or the equipment of the teacher 
made it possible, such extra subjects appeared as Latin, 

Greek, French, Algebra, Euclid, and....in rare cases 
gardening, knitting, and sewing.... 1 

To this graphic description it is of no small interest to add that 
of a traveller in Upper Canada during the winter of 1852-1833. Re¬ 
ferring to the state of tbe schools in the colony, Dr. Thomas 
Rolph declared that: 

It is really melancholy to traverse the Province and go 
into many of the Common Schools; you find a herd of 
children, instructed by some anti-British adventurer in¬ 
stilling into the young and tender mind sentiments hostile 
to the parent state; false accounts of the later war in 
which Great Britain was engaged with the United States; 
geography setting forth New York, Philadelphia, Boston, 
etc., as the largest and finest cities in the world; his¬ 
torical reading books, describing the American population 
as the most free and enlightened under heaven; insisting 
upon the superiority of their laws and institutions to 
those of all the world, in defiance of the agrarian -out¬ 
rages and mob supremacy daily witnessed and lamented; and 
American spelling-books, dictionaries, and grammar, 
teaching them an anti-British dialect, and idiom; although 
living in a Province and being subjects of the British 
Crown.... 2 

Rolph, however, overlooked several important circumstances in his 
vehement criticism of the use of American textbooks in Upper 
Canada. The colony at this stage of its development was not in 
the financial position to set up publishing houses. English text¬ 
books had been imported to some extent prior to Rolph T s tour 
through the colony, but the American books, which were compara¬ 
tively inexpensive and much better suited to colonial conditions, 
had driven them from the schools. It is to the credit, though, of 
the later educational reformers in Ontario that as soon as condi¬ 
tions warranted it, the province produced its own series of 
school textbooks, many of which came to be used in the North-West 












. . ' 


. 




. 

, 

- 






- 






; 

. 






' J 







63 


Territories, 

An effort to improve the educational services in Upper 
Canada resulted from the Durham Report on conditions in the 
colony. Lieutenant-Governor Arthur set up a general commission of 
inquiry into public affairs and appointed a special committee on 
education, known from the name of its chairman as the McCaul Com¬ 
mittee. Taken as a whole, the report of this committee, issued in 
1840, is an interesting presentation of the outlook in Upper 
Canada on educational problems in the colony at the time of the 
union with Lower Canada. A considerable portion of this report 
deals with the education of the masses as provided by the common 
schools. For the purposes of this study, the most interesting 
section of the McCaul Committee’s critique of common school edu¬ 
cation is the clause recommending that "New subjects like 

3 

history and geography should have places on the time-table." Uni¬ 
formity in the textbooks for these courses, as with the books for 
the other school subjects recommended by the Committee, was to be 
enforced by a provincial board of commissioners. Uniformity in 
the textbooks would help bring about uniformity in the subjects 
of instruction which the Committee felt should be taught according 
to courses of study issued by the provincial board already men¬ 
tioned. 

After further investigation and some legislative experimenta¬ 
tion, the Common School Act of 1843, known as the Hincks Act, was 
passed. This Act, which was the first of a series of open imita¬ 
tions of American school laws, marked the beginning of a new era 
for the common schools of Upper Canada. Among other matters, uni¬ 
formity in textbooks, courses of study, and methods was to be se¬ 
cured, and, unlike previous enactments, a real attempt was made to 



64 

see that the curriculum provisions of the Act were enforced. The 
post of Superintendent of Education for the united provinces was 
created, with an Assistant Superintendent in each province. In 
September, 1844, the Reverend Egerton Ryerson, D. D., was ap¬ 
pointed to the Assistant Superintendency for Upper Canada. 

Dr. Ryerson, who was Principal of Victoria College at the 
time of his appointment, began to prepare for his new duties by 
an extended visit to the schools of Europe and the United States. 
Upon his return in 1846 Ryerson submitted a report on a system of 
public elementary education for Upper Canada, and in the same 
year he drafted the education bill which is still the basis of 
public instruction in Ontario. Ryerson expanded the traditional 
school curriculum in a way that alarmed the teachers of Upper 
Canada, but every subject he added to the course of studies 
proved to be in keeping with subsequent school progress. As it 
has beai pointed out, "He added practical grammar (composition), 
geography, drawing, history, music, natural history (nature 
study), natural philosophy (elementary science), agriculture, 

4 

physiology (hygiene), civil government, and political economy." 

The number of subjects in this list within the scope of the 

social studies is quite remarkable when one takes into account 

the time at which these additions to the Ontario curriculum were 

made. Indeed, according to J. Harold. Putnam, writing in 1912, 

"Ryerson T s remarks on teaching Biography and Civil G-overnment 

5 

seem almost like an echo from some modern school syllabus". These 

remarks, which are of particular significance in a study of the 

evolution of social studies instruction, read as follows: 

Individuals preceded nations. The picture of the former 
is more easily comprehended than that of the latter, and 
is better adapted to awaken the curiosity and interest the 
feeling of the child. Biography should, the^ore, forxp. the 




.i vi. ‘ vow , vi.uoi; v r.aj o ®£Ui 




t * * ■ i 

. > 

' 

' ,.U.oOJ 

- t :V. . -■ .'.A, ■ 

■ 

aw? 


■ • • ' : ?ir 


• 




■ 

, 


r 

. 



% i> 

' . . • 

• 

- 

. 

* 



• 

5 . 




65 


principal topic of elementary history; and the great 
periods into which it is naturally and formally divided, 

—and which must be distinctly marked—should be as¬ 
sociated with the names of some distinguished individual 
or individuals. The life of an individual often forms 
the leading feature of the age in which he lived and 
will form the best nucleus around which to collect, in 
the youthful mind, the events of an age, or the history 
of a period.... 

Every pupil should know something of the Government 
and Institutions and Laws under which he lives, and with 
which his rights and interests are so closely connected. 
Provision should be made to teach in our Common Schools an 
outline of the principles and constitution of our Govern¬ 
ment; the nature of our institutions; the duties which 
they require; the manner of fulfilling them; some notions 
of our Civil, and especially our Criminal Code. 6 

It need hardly be added that Ryerson drew heavily upon Rousseau 

for his exposition of the biographical approach to history and 

upon the school programs of the United States for his advocacy 

of a course in civil government. These are but two examples of 

how Ryerson f s trip to Europe and the United States enabled him 

to bring Upper Canada into line with current educational thought, 

even though he encountered for a time considerable opposition to 

his curriculum reforms* 

Ryerson T s addition of history and geography to the elemen¬ 
tary school curriculum of Upper Canada also had its ramifications 

so 

on the secondary or grammar school level.. Although he was/strong¬ 
ly influenced by the traditional English school curriculum that 
Latin and Greek were made compulsory in the grammar schools of 
Upper Canada, Ryerson included geography and history in his first 
secondary course of studies. Another striking feature of this cur¬ 
riculum announcement ?;as the listing together of geography and 
history, a practice, however, which was not original with Ryerson 
.but which was fairly common in the time schedules of nineteenth 
century European secondary schools. According to Nellie M. Ayles- 
worth, the historian of the alberta high school courses of study, 








- 


r K'.i 









[ , ■ •**' ' 

* 

. 
















; 




-L 






,r - ' *... ■- oJ l 




‘ix’ 





. 

: ■ bm 

, 

. 





66 

the provisions of Ryerson*s first secondary course of studies for 


instruction in geography and history were as follows: 


First or 

Lowest Form.Outlines of Geography and General 

History. 

Second Form.Outlines of Ancient Geography; History 

of Rome; History of Great Britain and 
Ireland. 

Third Form.Ancient Geography; Roman Antiquities; 

History of Greece. 

Fourth Form.Ancient and Medieval Geography; Grecian 

Antiquities; History of France; History 
of Canada. 

Fifth Form..Outlines of Egyptian History to the 

death of Cleopatra; History of Spain 
and Portugal in the reign of Ferdinand 
and Isabella. 7 


This program, which is not unlike the secondary history programs 
to be found in the United States during the greater part of the 
nineteenth century, not only recognized the close relationship be¬ 
tween geographical and historical studies, but it permanently es¬ 
tablished those subjects on the Ontario high school curriculum. 

The recognition thus accorded by Ryerson to geography and history, 
as well as his introduction of courses in civil government and po¬ 
litical economy, were influential factors a few decades later when 
the government of the North-West Territories assumed responsibili¬ 
ty for education and started work on the construction of a cur¬ 
riculum for Territorial classrooms. While it was the Ontario social 
studies curriculum which directly influenced that of the Terri¬ 
tories and later of the Province of Alberta, it must be kept in 
mind that Ryerson drew heavily upon the American and European 
examples he encountered during his tour prior to his curriculum 
announcements of 1846. It may be seen, therefore, that the evolu¬ 
tion of instruction in such social studies subjects as history, 
























T::v 











■ 

. 


« 
















67 


which has been outlined in some detail in the earlier chapters 
of this study, was an indirect but very strong influence upon 
the construction of the Territorial curriculum in the social 
studies field. 

To conclude this survey of the Ontario origins of the Al¬ 
berta social studies curriculum and to prepare the way for the 
following chapter, the Ontario secondary course of studies in 
history and geography, as it stood in 1891, is given below: 

First and 

Second Forms..The leading events of Canadian and 

British history, the nineteenth 
century more particularly; Commercial, 
Physical and Mathematical G-eography; 
Geography of Canada, and the British 
Empire more particularly. 

Third Form....Great Britain and her Colonies from 

the Revolution of 1688 to the peace of 
1815, and the Geography relating there¬ 
to; Outlines of Roman History to the 
death of Augustus, and the Geography 
relating thereto; Outlines of Greek 
History to the Battle of Chaeronaea, 
and the Geography relating thereto. 

Fourth Form.British History from the Discovery of 

America to the Revolution of 1688; 
Geography to illustrate the history 
read. 8 

These courses, which it will be noted are only a modification of 
the relevant sections of Ryerson's first secondary curriculum, 
were in effect in Ontario at the time that a high school course 
of studies was being evolved in the North-West Territories. The 
Territorial curriculum that directly resulted from the Ontario 
social studies program will be the subject of the following 
chapter. 


1 Shortt, Adam, and Doughty, Arthur G. (ed.), Canada and Its 
Provinces , Toronto, Glasgow, Brook and Company, 1914, Vol. 18, 
pp. 288-289 and 295-296. 

2 Ibid., p. 297. 

3 Ibid., p. 287. 

4 Ibid., pp. 303-304. 

5 Putnam, J. Harold, Sgerton Ryerson and Education in Upper 












■ 

' 








' 


. 





’ - 








. * l ill 
















, 


















, 

< . 

. 

. . . 

. : • . 


- 

r.Y .I' 






Canada, Toronto, William Briggs, 1912, p. 115. 

6 Ibid., p. 116. 

7 Aylesworth, Nellie Margaret, A History of the High School 
Courses of Study for Alberta . Unpublished Master r s thesis, 
University of Alberta, 1936, p. 88. 

8 Ibid., pp. 96-101. 



















. 

. 











e .' ? I 

si I : i 

, 

* ° , . 





CHAPTER IX 


THE ALBERTA SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM 
FROM TERRITORIAL DAYS TO THE GENERAL REVISION OF 1912 

To commence the examination of the various social studies 
curriculums officially authorized in the area now known as Al¬ 
berta, it is first necessary to make some reference to the evo¬ 
lution of educational services in the North-West Territories, 

Down to the 1880 T s, approximately, education in this region 
centred around the work of the missionaries among the Indians. 

But great as were the efforts and sacrifices of the religious 
pioneers, the main stream of educational progress in the North- 
West Territories sprang from a new source with the immigration 
of white settlers during the 1880 T s. Up to this time the edu¬ 
cational work of the missionaries was at best primary as judged 
by our present standards. Even John McDougall was forced to send 
his children to a boarding school in Eastern Canada in order 
that they might secure a higher education. In some of the 
schools Cree was taught as well as English and French, and, with 
the limited amount of time at the disposal of the teacher and 
the pupil, very little more than basic reading and writing was 
possible. On the whole, the early missionaries were more intent 
upon teaching the Indian how to live than upon forcing him to 
acquire theoretical book-learning. 

After 1880 the changes in the relation of the state to edu¬ 
cation in the North-West Territories reveal a rapid transition 
from a system of government aid to private schools to a system 
of public and separate schools under government control. In 1880 
government participation in the educational affairs of the North- 



70 


West Territories began with the payment of one-half the 
teacher’s salary in any school having a minimum daily attendance 
of fifteen pupils. The schools which received this assistance 
had been established by private organizations. It was not until 
1884 that the Government of the North-West Territories took 
action to establish tax-supported public and separate schools. 
While it is not necessary for the purposes of the present study 
to explain the reasons for the subsequent administrative 
changes, it is important to note the following titles assumed by 
those in control of Territorial education: 

(1) The Board of Education, 1885 to 1892; 

(2) The Council of Public Instruction, 1893 to 1900; and 

(3) The Department of Education, 1901 to 1905. 

In 1905, of course, the creation of the Provinces of Alberta and 
Saskatchewan entailed the establishment of a separate Department 
of Education for each province. 

Despite the limited information available concerning Terri¬ 
torial education, it is not difficult to form a fairly accurate 
conception of the social studies program which prevailed in the 
schools of the North-West Territories from 1885 to 1905. As one 
would expect, this program went little beyond the traditional 
offerings of history and geography, though reference will be 
made later to one Territorial subject of instruction not pre¬ 
viously mentioned as a school subject in the social studies 

field. The official annual reports dealing with education con- 

* 

tain at least some of the following detailed pieces of informa¬ 
tion which enable one to detect the educational trend of the 
times: the reports of school inspectors on both individual 
teachers and on general conditions in their inspectorates, re¬ 
quirements for teacher certification, reprints of the annual 





71 

teachers’ examinations, reprints of* the final examination papers 
for students, examiners’ criticisms of the papers they have read, 
official courses of studies, and lists of authorized textbooks. 
While the earlier Territorial reports are deficient in a con¬ 
siderable number of these details, the later ones are suf¬ 
ficiently complete to give the research worker a fair idea of the 
curriculum and its interpretation in the classrooms of the North- 
West Territories. 

The first School Ordinance for the Territories, which was 
made law in 1884, required all schools to give instruction in 
reading, writing, arithmetic, orthography, geography, grammar, 
history of Britain and Canada, and English literature, but it 
gave no further details as to the content of these compulsory 
courses. The annual reports of the Board of Education, which was 
established in the following year, do not contain a course of 
studies as do the later annual reports, nor does it seem 
possible to obtain a separately printed curriculum outline for 
those years if such were published. However, some conception of 
the requirements in such subjects as' history and geography may 
be gleaned from other evidence in these reports. The require¬ 
ments for and the nature of the teachers’ examinations set 
during this early period are an indication of the Territorial 
curriculum to a certain extent. According to the report for 1885- 
1886, the candidates for all classes of teachers’ certificates 
were required to write examinations in history and geography. 

With regard to the latter subject, the report specifies that the 
prospective Territorial teacher should ’’have a thorough know¬ 
ledge of the mathematical, physical and political geography of 
1 

the world”, while the history textbooks listed for study indi- 












' 






- 

































. 

























' 

















■ 


















72 


cate an emphasis upon European, British, and. Canadian history. 
These requirements are repeated in the subsequent reports up to 
and including the report for 1889-1890, but the latter, it is 
interesting to note, also specifies the following requirements 
for the instruction in history and geography in the high school 
branch of the Union Schools: 

Geography—Map Geography generally, with Canada and the 

British Empire more particularly; map drawing. 

History—A review of English and Canadian History. 2 
A final and important piece of evidence regarding the outlook of 
the period on the nature of instruction in history and geography 
may be gathered from the questions included in the examinations 
for teachers. The memorization of facts is very much to the 
fore, as is seen in the following "type" questions taken from 
the history examination for a second class teacher’s certificate 
in 1886: 

(1) What Homan Generals visited Britain? 

(2) What Kingdoms constituted the Saxon Heptarchy? 

• • ♦ t 

(5) Name and give dates for the several Acts of the 
British Parliament relating to the Government of 
Canada. 

• ♦ • • 

(7) Give a short account of the C. P. R. Scheme—when 
proposed—for what purpose—the legislation re¬ 
garding it and progress made. 

(8) What events in Canadian History have happened in 
the years 1791, 1763, 1867, 1858, 1755, and 1842? 3 

Although the other questions are open to considerable criticism, 

the seventh question on this examination paper is praiseworthy 

in that it takes note of what was then a current event and, what 

is more, a current event of no small importance to the North- 

West Territories. The inclusion of current events questions is a 

fairly regular feature of the history examinations set for 








- 

. 


■ 





( 


- . 








■ 
























. . 


— 

. 





. : : , x .. • t .pi , 















- 


73 


teachers during this period, but v/hether or not the Territorial 
teachers in turn reflected this interest in their classroom 
teaching, it is, unfortunately, impossible to determine. 

An interesting aspect of the Territorial instruction in 
history and geography under the Board of Education may be noted 
at this point. By the terms of the government order which 
created it, the Board of Education was divided into Protestant 
and Roman Catholic sections. This situation, which lasted until 
1892, resulted, among other matters, in two curriculums, two 
sets of textbooks, and two sets of examination papers for both 
pupils and prospective teachers. From a study of the textbook 
lists and of the examination papers, it would seem, however, 
that the course requirements in history and geography were the 
same in both Protestant and Roman Catholic schools. The examina¬ 
tion papers, though, reveal a difference, as would be expected, 
in the interpretation of such historical events as the church 
settlement of Henry VIII. After 1892 this dual system ceased to 
exist with the result that all the subsequent courses of studies 
discussed in the present investigation apply equally to the 
Protestant and the Roman Catholic schools of Alberta. 

Turning to the annual report of the Board of Education for 
1890-1891, one finds two new features which help considerably in 
determining the nature of the early Territorial instruction in 
the social studies. The requirements for the annual teachers’ 
examinations are stated in greater detail, while the publication 
of the general reports submitted by the school inspectors pre¬ 
sents an over-all view of educational progress in the Territories. 
•For the first time the requirements for the teachers’ examina¬ 
tions are divided into groups, with geography and history com- 



74 

prising Group I. The subjects of examination, which were the 
same for both Protestant and Roman Catholic candidates, were 
outlined as follows: 

The Third Class Teachers T Annual Examination 

Geography —To be acquainted with the general geography of 
the world and of North America and the British 
Empire in particular; and to have a good general knowledge 
of the form and motions of the earth, and their connection 
with climate, the seasons and the divisions of time. 

History —To have a good general knowledge of the history 
of England and Canada. 4 

The Second Class Teachers T Annual Examination 

Geography —To have a thorough knowledge of Map Geography 
generally, with Canada and the British Empire 
more particularly; map drawing. 

History —To be thoroughly acquainted with the History of 
England and Canada. 5 

The First Class Teachers* Annual Examination 

Geography —To have a thorough knowledge of the mathematical, 
physical, and political geography of the world. 

History —To be thoroughly acquainted with the History of 
England and Canada. 6 

The emphasis on British and Canadian history in the above pro¬ 
gram is quite pronounced, thus placing it in line with the On¬ 
tario practice during the latter half of the nineteenth century, 
except, of course, on the secondary level where ancient and Euro¬ 
pean history was also required. In this connection, though, it 
must be remembered that the Territorial teachers, for the most 
part, would not be attempting high school work at this stage of 
the educational development of the North-West Territories. It is 
significant to note that if one substitutes Canadian for American 
history, the general outline of the Territorial program in 
history and geography, as deduced from the teachers 1 examination 
syllabus, is not unlike those then prevalent in the United 
States. The Territorial textbooks were those in use in Ontario. 


























: 

. : : ' - •; ■ ■ 

■ 

. 


■ 








- V 

i 

. 


' 

' “ “ 


. 




. 

: « 

... e . . i 

« i« Ctt'l h ft 

■ 

« ' ' ' 

- - 



75 

In passing, an odd feature of the geography examinations for 
the Territorial teachers in 1891 should be noted. This is the in¬ 
clusion of such questions on government as the following: 

Describe the form of (Government in the United States. 7 

Name the Australian colonies and explain their form of 
Government. 8 

While no parallel for this early example of "fusion" may be found 
in later examinations, it does seem to constitute some recogni¬ 
tion of the close relationship between the various subjects now 
known as the social studies. 

Of the school Inspectors’ general reports quoted in the annual 
report for 1890-1891,the most professionally able account of edu¬ 
cational progress in the Territories comes from the Inspector for 
hestern Assiniboia, William Rothwell, who spoke his mind clearly 
on the conditions he had witnessed. One may infer from his report 
that the quality of instruction in history and geography left much 
to be desired. His report reads as follows: 

With a very few exceptions, the schools I visited are 
in a progressive condition, yet the progress is not as 
much as could reasonably be expected, from the small num¬ 
ber in each school. 

Some teachers are not sufficiently mature in years 
either to assume the guidance of children or to estimate 
properly the position they hold in society. In one case 
the trustees thought it wise to let the teacher go at the 
end of a month being altogether too boyish to control the 
scholars. Yet he obtained a third class certificate in 
1890 and intended writing for a second this summer. I 
have observed many indications of lack of scholarship on 
the part of teachers who hold even a second class certifi¬ 
cate. These indications are especially marked in English 
and mathematics. The inference is evident. The time has 
come for a higher standard of attainment. If young persons 
of the tender age of 13, 14 or 15 years can cope success¬ 
fully with an examination for third class certificates it 
is plain the standard for such examination is not suf¬ 
ficiently high. 

The most urgent necessity, however, is for professional 
training. The lack of such training becomes most apparent 

















. 



























* 




■ 








; i. 




> : 4 




. 

. . 












* 

•*.v 

Ct'j ; 

• : l 







J i' 

' ) , 

. 




. 




. 

X ^' 


$* ■ ' 







■ 

/ 



- 





< 







■iW: 

* 








it - 

; ■ v . 










: 




• 


















t 

















< 



* 





: : ; 


















r 















■ 




■ 




. 










» 

















- 

j 









• 












. 


•• 

, 




* 










. 









■■ 






















- 

. 






















. 




■ 





















76 


in misdirected efforts on the part of the teacher, in 
failure to make the best use of his time, in the total 
absence of a plan of teaching. These untrained teachers 
are generally solicited for young children, just where 
they can do the least good, and the most harm. 9 

Summing up the other inspectors f general reports for 1890-1891, 
as well as the reports on individual teachers, a general picture 
emerges of educational progress being hampered by inadequate 
salaries, serious deficiencies in classroom equipment, and ex¬ 
tremely irregular clasroom attendance. Under these conditions it 
becomes obvious that the business of curriculum planning could 
not receive first consideration in the preliminary efforts of 
Territorial officials to erect an educational system on the 
prairies. 

Turning to the annual report of the Council of Public In¬ 
struction for 1896, the next Territorial report on education pub¬ 
lished, one finds that the report of Dr. D. J. G-oggin provides a 
remarkably lucid account of educational progress in the North- 
West Territories up to that year, and furnishes the reader, as 
well, with a useful review of improvements upon the conditions re¬ 
ferred to in the annual report for 1890-1891. Dr. Goggin, who was 
appointed Territorial Superintendent of Education in 1893 shortly 
after the establishment o,f the Council of Public Instruction, had 
been the Principal of the Manitoba Normal School in Winnipeg. The 
position to which he was now appointed had been proposed in 1892 
because there was no person in the Territories sufficiently 
qualified to take charge of teacher-training. Actually, the post 
of Superintendent of Education was a three-fold one. His duties 
were to consist of the training of teachers, the inspection of 
schools, and the chairmanship of the Board of Examiners. The ap¬ 
pointment of Dr. Goggin is a landmark in the evolution of edu- 



77 

cational services in the North-West Territories, not only because 
of the new position that had been created, but because of the out¬ 
standing ability of the new Superintendent of Education. As Isi¬ 
dore Goresky in his study of the beginning and growth of the Al¬ 
berta school system has pointed out: 

No better appointment could have been made for the po¬ 
sition. This does not mean that the appointment was al¬ 
ways popular with the members of the Legislature. Even as 
late as 1895 some were still criticizing the salary paid 
to the ’official’ of the Council of Public Instruction. 

With the people at large, however, and with the teachers, 
he became increasingly popular, as he infused new life 
into the educational system. Even the documents' gained 
bulk as they became filled with reports of current 
teaching methods and future plans. By birth and training 
Dr. Goggin was connected with the best educational tradi¬ 
tions of Ontario and had a high reputation with the edu¬ 
cational bodies of the Dominion of Canada. Many of the 
present teachers of our province remember him as an 
affable individual well equipped to meet public bodies. 

Not only had he a broad education and a lofty idealism 
himself, but he was able to impart a great deal of his 
zeal to the teaching body. This idealism, combined with 
the practical experience which Jie bad obtained in Mani¬ 
toba, provided an impetus to education which can still be 
felt. One need only attend teachers’ conventions of today 
to hear echoes of statements which fill his reports, and 
which were repeated often in the conventions of those 
days. 10 

At the risk of some repetition, it should be pointed out at this 
point that Dr. Goggin T s Ontario background, referred to in the 
above quotation, reinforced the influences from that province 
which have already been discussed in the present and the previous 
chapters. 

In Dr. Goggin T s report for the year ending December 31, 1896, 
he not only gives a full sketch of tie educational system of the 
North-ffest Territories, but he includes a discussion of each sub¬ 
ject of instruction. Even his introductory remarks are worthy of 
note because they indicate how limited the influence of the Terri¬ 
torial program in the social studies must have been at this stage 
of the educational development of Western Canada: 






;; I. au u. 

. 


. ' , ■ . • Ov 

. 





. 






■ 










o 
















o 















' 
















































. 





















L 






t 









uO 



* 
















/n. 

' 








* 


• ■ 








« . 




' 

. 

. 

■ 


: . q i ,, . I . . 

. 




78 


The North-West Territories (Assiniboia, Saskatchewan 
and Alberta) cover an area of 302,000 square miles, em¬ 
brace large farming, ranching, lumbering and mining re¬ 
gions, and contain amongst a widely distributed popula¬ 
tion a number of 1 colonies’ established by different 
foreign nationalities. To carry on educational work suc¬ 
cessfully under such conditions is difficult, but while 
much remains to be accomplished the progress made during 
the past year gives us reason to be thankful and hopeful. 

The increase in schools, pupils and teachers keeps 
pace with the growth of population. The classification of 
pupils shows that 43 per cent, of them are in Standard I, 

21 per cent, in Standard II, 24 per cent, in Standard III, 

7 per cent, in Standard IV, 3 per cent, in Standard V and 
less than 2 per cent, in the High School Standards; 88 per 
cent, do not proceed beyond Standard III. The conditions 
of life in a new country, and the demands of the farm, the 
. ranch and the shop, account in the main for the early 
withdrawal from school of so many children. The importance 
of the education given in the first three Standards is 
greatly increased through this withdrawal. The scope and 
the thoroughness of the work done In them, and the spirit 
in which it is performed, will be potent factors in shaping 
the characteristics of our future citizens. 11 

Apparently, the instruction given in the first three Standards, 

which Dr. Goggin emphasizes in the above remarks, was not always 

of the best quality, for a little later on in his report he makes 

the following comment: 

Few...provisionally certificated teachers....do more 
than keep school. They do not teach because they do not 
know how, and the children are the victims of their ex¬ 
periments. The attempt to secure provisional certifi¬ 
cates for friends or relations of trustees, though ap¬ 
plications from qualified teachers have been received, 
is not yet unknown. It is still too often true that a 
small salary and a belief in a particular creed are 
more powerful factors in securing an engagement than 
manner, culture and teaching skill. 12 


In his discussion of the various school subjects included in 
the Territorial course of studies, Dr. Goggin is particularly il¬ 
luminating as to both the underlying philosophy and the aims of 
the instruction in each subject. His account of subjects which 
come within the scope of the social studies are described under 
the following headings: 















History 


79 


History, in recording men’s deeds, sets forth their re¬ 
lations to each other and to the State. The relations of 
men to each other give rise to morals. The relations of 
men to the State involve citizenship. Accordingly, one use 
of history is to form moral notions in children and another 
is to teach patriotism and civic duty. Also, if properly 
taught, it affords a first rate discipline in reasoning of 
that practical kindneeded in everyday life, arouses a love 
for reading and gives a sound method of. study. 

In Standards II and III the lives of a small number of 
leading Canadians and Englishmen are described by the 
teacher and the children are led to consider their public 
acts and are guided in forming such judgments on the morali¬ 
ty of these acts as they are capable of. The reasons for and 
against the doing of an act are sought for carefully. The 
relation of motives to actions is considered. Judgment is 
deferred until all available information has been secured. 
The judgment in itself may not be worth much, but the habit 
of eliminating personal feeling and looking at both sides 
of a question before giving a judgment is one of inestimable 
value in every department of life. This condemning of wrong 
deeds and approving of right deeds will tend to establish 
just ideas of right and v/rong in the children’s minds and 
these ideas must have their influence on conduct, must con¬ 
tribute to nobler living. Froude says, ’History is a voice 
forever sounding across the centuries the laws of right and 
wrong’. Nor are these children too young for such training. 
Before they enter school they have begun to learn their re¬ 
lations to those about them and in the history lesson they 
continue this study. 

As the large majority of our pupils do not remain at 
school after the work of Standard III is completed, especial 
efforts are put forth to make them familiar with the es¬ 
sentials of the history of our own country. Those features 
which indicate best the stages in the progress of the Do¬ 
minion and its present condition are fixed in their minds as 
firmly as possible and will serve as centres around which 
their future reading will arrange itself. Our best patriotic 
songs and poems are sung and recited. 

A study of the lives of those men who have made our 
country what it is will tend to teach our pupils to have 
high aims and to be true to those aims. A knowledge of the 
struggles through which the country has passed In attaining 
Its present condition will make forjintelligent patriotism. 

In Standards IT and V a fuller knowledge of the history 
of Canada and England is obtained through a study of text 
books and supplementary reading. Constitutional struggles 
in Canada are compared with corresponding ones in England. 

An outline study of how we are governed completes the work 
in history in these Standards. 


In the High School Standards the history of Canada and 

















England is reviewed and the pupils’ knowledge widened. 

The ’Constitution’ of each is studied, the texts being 
Bourinot’s ’Constitutional History of Canada’, and Bage- 
hot:’s ’English Constitution’. The history of the wcrld 
as presented in Swinton’s ’Outlines’, completes the 
course. 

The errors most generally mentioned by our inspectors 
are teaching too many details through not distinguishing 
between essential facts—those standing for a principle— 
and illustrative ones; appealing too much to the memory 
and too little to the judgment and so minimizing the dis¬ 
ciplinary value of the subject; failing to connect the 
present of the nation with its past, of which it is an 
evolution, and therefore to secure a living illuminating 
interest in the study. There is a slow but steady im¬ 
provement in the character of the teaching. Broader 
scholarship in the teacher and a few volumes of history 
to supplement the pupil’s texts are our chief needs. 

Geography 

The chief purpose of this study is to enable pupils to 
perceive clearly the earth’s essential surface features 
and the relation thereto of man’s modes of living. The re¬ 
lief of the continent determines in the main its drainage 
and through the drainage, the distribution of the soil. 
Where the good soil is will be found the plantjlife, and 
the animal life dependent thereon. Where plant* and animal 
life supply materials for man’s food and shelter, there he 
will make his home. The products of the soil and mine will 
shape his industries, as the sources of power in coal, 
wood, and water will influence his manufactures.... 

Nor must the relation of this subject to history he 
overlooked. The physical characteristics of countries have 
conditioned their history. The French explorers and 
colonizers found an open way to the centre of North America 
through the St. Lawrence, its lakes, and the Mississippi, 
while the English colonists were hemmed in for a long 
period by the Alleghanies. Mountain barriers separate 
France and Spain, Austria and Italy. The narrow sea has 
since the days of William the Conqueror marked the line be¬ 
tween England and the Continent. 

The accessible, essential earth forms are learned by di¬ 
rect observation and the remaining ones by study of 
pictures, mouldings, maps and descriptions. Simple explana¬ 
tions of the meaning and origin of surface features ac¬ 
company this work. When the study of a continent is taken 
up, it is moulded in sand to show the relief, and drawn to 
show the length, breadth, and coast line. Each place taught 
is located on the globe to get its true position, and on 
the relief map or moulded map to view it in relation to 
structural and industrial conditions. A special study is 
made of our own continent and the British Empire but only 
the main political divisions in South America, Asia and 
Africa receive attention. Comparative study aids much in 




' 1 





j . . . 


j:.-; r; 

J... 

Hi f 





■ 


. ■ 


I 

. 


o 


■ • r rt 










c 


. 

. • . . 

; V r ■ ;• O; *; .) ■ 

, 








81 


making geographical principles clear. Increased attention 
is given to industrial and commercial geography hut the 
number of facts to be learned has been lessened greatly. 

There is more appeal to the reason and less to the memory 
than formerly. 

In the High School Standards, in addition to a review 
of the general geography of the world, there is a special 
study of the geography of the British Colonies. The 
physiographic explanations of fundamental forms are dealt 
with somewhat fully. Atmosphere, climate, distribution of 
life, and mathematical geography are the topics which 
complete the course. 

The improvement in the teaching of this subject is quite 
marked. Our teachers are reading and keeping up with the 
advance in the teaching of geography now in progress. 13 

Dr. Goggin T s comments on the teaching of geography are quite en¬ 
lightened for the period in which he wrote. It will be remembered 

in 1909 

how in Chapter VII reference was made to the declaration/of the 
Association of American Geographers and of the national Education 
Association to the effect that far too little attention was being 
paid in physical geography courses to environmental influences 
upon human beings and that physical features were being over-em¬ 
phasized as a result. Dr. Goggin T s remark that "The physical 
characteristics of countries have conditioned their history" is 
an anticipation of this criticism of courses in physical geo¬ 
graphy. At the same time his recognition of the close relation¬ 
ship between geography and history is in accord with previous 
European educational thought on the subject and is a forerunner 
of later social studies programs. Dr. Goggin's comments on in¬ 
struction in history, meanwhile, are equally significant. It will 
be noted that he revives the appeal for moral instruction as a 
part of history courses. This appeal goes as fax* back as Frederick 
the Great, if not earlier, and it was a dominant theme in the 
nineteenth century teaching of history. Of more significance is 
Dr. Goggin’s emphasis on the biographical approach to history, 


■ 




. 

- - oiL j 

\ ^ pi P U - « VLij 







... I 




....... , 

- 

* 

? ... w : l' : 

■ 

. 




I 

. y : - ■ ' - : i , ’ ■ ■ v . 

* 



■ 




- 





C ■ t '■ ■ • 







; 









82 


which may he traced hack to Rousseau. Dr. Goggin, however, was 
undoubtedly influenced directly in his support for this approach 
hy the Ontario emphasis on the biographical background to his¬ 
torical study, following Egerton Ryerson’s report in 1846. 

The curriculum discussed, in part, in the previous quotations 
from Dr. Goggin was one of his most notable contributions to 
Territorial education. The introductory remarks to the annual re¬ 
port for 1896 indicate that high hopes were held for the bene¬ 
ficial influences of the newly-adopted course of studies: 

In the Programme of Studies provision is made for the 
teaching of those subjects a knowledge of which is helpful 
in the transaction of business, the duties of citizenship, 
the care of the body, and the formation of moral character. 
This knowledge is needed by all and may be so presented as 
to be objectionable to none. 14 

Whatever one may think of the content of this curriculum in re¬ 
lation to the above objectives, it is a fact that it not only en¬ 
dured, with certain modifications, throughout the remainder of 
the Territorial period, but it was officially approved by the Pro¬ 
vince of Alberta until the general curriculum revision of 1912. 

As already indicated in Dr. Goggin f s remarks, the social studies 
subjects contained in this curriculum are history and geography, 
although reference will be made later to a subject not previously 
mentioned as within the social studies field. Treatment of these 
subjects was divided according to the plan of organization then 
in use in the North-West Territories, that of Standards. Alto¬ 
gether there were eight Standards, the first five constituting 
the elementary program of the Territories, while Standards VI, 

VII, and VTII made up the secondary school. It should,perhaps,be 
added that during the earlier phases of Territorial educational 
organization, Standard V was a high school Standard and Standards 




■ 

. 

























. 



















• 





, 





























83 


VI, VII, and VIII, which were essentially teacher-training 
courses, did little more than review intensively previous work. 

The elementary curriculum in history and geography, outlined 
in the 1896 annual report, was in effect until the revision of 
1912, with the exception of Standard V which was altered in 1902. 
Since this Territorial social studies curriculum was in force for 
a considerable number of years and was the first Alberta social 
studies curriculum on the elementary level, it is given below in 
its entirety: 

PROGRAMME OF STUDIES FOR THE SCHOOLS OF THE NORTH-WEST TERRI¬ 
TORIES, JULY 1st, 1895. 

This Programme is based on a minimum requirement for each 
Standard. 

History 

Training of the moral judgment, and preparation for in¬ 
telligent citizenship are important aims in teaching 
history. History should be associated with geography and 
literature—historical poems, etc. 

Standard II 

C an adian History— Lives of distinguished men described, 

e.g,—Columbus, The Cabots, Jacques 
Cartier, Champlain, Bishop Laval, Frontenac, LaSalle, 
Montcalm, Wolfe, Sir Guy Carleton, Lyon Mackenzie, Papineau, 
Joseph Howe, Alexander Mackenzie, Sir John Macdonald, etc. 
Discussion of the chief excellences and defects in their 
characters to teach moral discrimination and, ultimately, to 
derive principles of conduct. Reading and reciting of 
patriotic poems. 


Standard III 

Canadian Hi story --Out line stud37- of leading features, e.g.: 

Discovery; exploration; struggle between 
the French and English Colonists; Treaty of Paris; Quebec 
Act; Constitutional Act; War of 1812; Rebellion of 1837; 
Union Act; Clergy Reserves; Land Tenures—Feudal, Freehold, 
Leasehold, Seigniorial; Reciprocity Treaty; British North 
America Act, etc. 

English History —Biography of persons honored as types of 

state or individual life—e.g. : Caractacus, 
Julius Caesar, Arthur, Alfred, Canute, William I, Simon de 
Montfort, Edward I, Wolsey, Elizabeth, Charles X, John 













. 

• 

r 





. 










- 



' 




- 



















. 






, 















i 

; 

. 

- 

. 

, . . . 5 ' 




84 


Hampden, Oliver Cromwell, Marlborough, Pitt, Nelson, 
Wellington, Lord John Russell, Victoria, etc. Discussion 
of their deeds to train moral judgment and incidentally 
to teach patriotism and civic duty. Reading and reciting 
patriotic selections. 

In this Standard the presentation is to be oral, no 
text book being prescribed. After the lesson, supplemen¬ 
tary reading should be encouraged. 

Standard IV 

Canadian History —The text book studied as a review and 

expansion of the topics discussed in 
the previous Standards. 

English History —Outline study of each people or period to 
exhibit its chief characteristics, e.g.,: 
Saxons—a farmer people; brought with them the germs of our 
political institutions—a limited monarchy, parliament, 
courts of justice, personal holdings of land; gave us the 
body of our English tongue; became Christian from choice. 

The presentation of this outline is to be oral. Supplemen¬ 
tary reading in history should be encouraged. 

Standard V 

Canadian History —An intelligent comprehension of the pre¬ 
scribed text; comparison of constitutional 
struggles in Canada with corresponding ones in England; out¬ 
line study of how we are governed—parliamentary, judicial, 
municipal and school systems; our civic duties—voting, 
office-holding, tax-paying, support of law, etc. 

English History —The text book studied as a review and ex¬ 
pansion of the topics discussed in previous 
Standards. Grouping of the essential facts in each period 
under topics indicating phases of progress, e.g., political, 
industrial, intellectual, aesthetic, religious—to show the 
growth of the nation. 15 

Standard V {The Revision of August, 1902) 

Canadian History —The leading events of Canadian history with 

particular attention to events , subsequent 

to 1841. 

Eritish History --The outlines of British history.16 


Geography 

Standard I 

Direction : Position of the sun in the morning, at noon, in 
the evening; cardinal points of the compass; lo¬ 
cation of important places and objects by pointing 
with the hand and naming the direction. 
















c 


. ' . .... 






















' 










' 







85 


Water : Observation of forms of water such as clouds, fog, 
mist, rain, dew, frost, snow and ice as they occur 
to find the more obvious qualities and uses of each. 

Winds : Recognition of calm, breeze, gale. 

Standard II 

Direction : Semi-cardinal points of the compass; observation 
of the directions of winds bringing heat, cold, 
rain, snow, moisture, dryness. 

Land: Hills, mountains—direction and nature of their slopes; 

plain,valley, prairie; cape, peninsula, isthmus, island; 
relation of these bodies to one another; their uses. 

Water : Fuller study of clouds, fog; mist, rain, dew; snow, 

ice, hail; as to uses and effects of each. Effects of 
sun and wind on these. Spring, brook, river—source, 
banks, branches, mouth—lake; bay, sea, strait; re¬ 
lation of these bodies to one another; their uses. 

Winds : Calm, breeze, gale, storm, hurricane; effects on land 
and sea, on plants, animals, people, vessels. 

Maps : Construction of maps of school room., school grounds, 
neighborhood, map representation of geographical ob¬ 
jects studied. 

The World as a Whole : Outline study of its form, rotation, 

axis, poles, equator, hemispheres; 
hot, temperate and cold parts. 

Continents : Their relative positions and sizes; characteris¬ 
tic animals and plants in each; occupations, 
habits, dress and modes of life of the leading 
peoples in each. 

Oceans : Their relative positions and sizes; some characteris¬ 
tics of each. 


Standard III 

Land : Mountain chains, slopes, great plains; description and 
uses of each. 

Water : River systems. 

Continent Structure : Great slopes, continental axis, land 

masses, secondary axis, great river 
basins, great river systems, coast lines. 

The World as a Whole : Relief—World ridge from Cape Horn to 

Cape of Good Hope. 

Lowlands: World basins—their position between the two 

highlands of each continent. Outline description 
of each. 




















« i 











86 


Drainage: World water parting; world river systems. 
Winds: Elementary ideas of causes and influences of 
trade winds, return trades, polar currents, 
monsoons. 

Ocean Currents: Elementary ideas of causes and in¬ 
fluences of Gulf Stream, Japan Current, 
and polar streams. 

Rainfall: Formation of clouds and rain; places of much, 
little or no rain; reasons. 

Climate: Outline study of distribution of climates. 
Productions: Chief agricultural, grazing, lumbering, and 
mining regions. 

People: The different races and their distribution. 

North America 

Position. 


Structure: General description of primary and secondary 
highlands, river basins. 

Drainage : Great water-partings, great river systems, great 
lakes. 

Outline: Shape, leading projections of land and water. 

Climate : Temperature and moisture—their causes and in¬ 
fluences generally. 

Natural Production and Productive Regions : Chief agricultural, 

grazing, lumbering, 

and mining regions; surplus productions 
and exports; deficiency and imports. 

Waterways and Railways : Noted trade routes. 

Cities : Prominent commercial centres of the continent and 
their relation to belts of products. 

Political Divisions : Their relation to the physical structure 

of the continent; capitals, forms of 
government, nationalities, state of 
civilization. 

North-West Territories (later Alberta ): Studied generally as 

a review of a section of the continent; 
the agricultural, grazing, lumbering 
and mining regions; chief trade routes; 
about a dozen towns(later principal 
towns and cities”). 

Standard IV 

Dominion of Canada . Studied as a review, with additions, of a 

section of the continent of North America. 
Same topics as for continent study. 


pouth America. Outline study comparing its structure, drainage, 


























. 

. 

: a; M v:u 0 ■ : o 

. 

. j,v;i * i : « £ X. . , 

, 

* 

. 

. _ 

: 

* 


- 














. 


. 


. 

■ 



87 


coastline, climate, and productive regions 
with those of North America. Political di^* 
visions—mainly Brazil, the Argentine Repub¬ 
lic, and Chili. 

Eurasia . (Europe and Asia.) General structure of Eurasia com¬ 
pared with that of North America and that of South 
America. 

Europe—Under the same topics as North America. Com¬ 
parisons . 

Asia—Only a very general study of climate, natural 
productions and productive regions, trade 
routes, cities. Political divisions—mainly 
India, Japan and China. Comparisons. 

Standard Y 

Africa and Australia . Brief study of general structure; brief 

comparisons of main features with those 
of other continents. 


British Empire . 

Motions of the earth, day and night—reasons; latitude, 
longitude, tropics, polar circles, eclipses. 

Heat, winds, ocean currents, tides, hainfall, dew, ice, 
glaciers, etc. 

Distribution of soil, vegetation, animals, races of men, 
minerals; causes. Great commercial centres of the world, 
great routes of commerce.17 

Standard Y (The Revision of August, 1902) 

The general geography of the world; geography of Canada 
more particularly.18 

Except for Standard Y, these school programs In history and geo¬ 
graphy remained the same, almost word for word, from the moment 
of their inception until the general revision of 1912. In addition 
to the rigid nature of this curriculum, several other features 
may be noted. Generally, the course of studies in geography placed 
its emphasis upon the physical features of the earth which was in 
line with the contemporary American practice. Political and com¬ 
mercial geography, however, are by no means ignored in the Terri¬ 
torial program. The course of studies in history emphasizes 
Canada and Great Britain exclusively which, of course, is in imi- 


















■. ■:' t 

. 

■ 

„ ° ■ . « 






. \ ■ liid.fi * 




, 
























. 




« t • 







. 


























. ' • 



:; < .. / :■ ' { : 

• . ' ■ . * ■■ ' 

















88 


tation of the Ontario practice. Again it is possible to substi¬ 
tute American for Canadian history to produce a program not un¬ 
like those then in use in the United States on the elementary 
level. Indeed, with this substitution the Territorial elementary 
program has some resemblance to the elementary history program 
published by the Committee of Eight in 1909. One major difference, 
though, is the lack in the Territorial program of any European 
history outside that of the British Isles. 

A striking feature of the Territorial social studies cur¬ 
riculum on the elementary level is the inclusion of a subject not 
previously mentioned as within the social studies field, but which 
must be considered as coming within the scope of human relations. 
This subject was called Manners and Morals and was the Territorial 
counterpart of an Ontario course called Ethics which had been 
adopted as a substitute for religious instruction. Until the 
general revision of 1912 when Manners and Morals disappeared from 
the Alberta curriculum, the description of this course in the 
program of studies was as follows: 

Ungraded schools may be divided as in Hygiene when di¬ 
rect instruction is given. 

It is the duty of the teacher to see that the pupil 
practices those external forms of conduct which express a 
true sense of the proprieties of life and that politeness 
which denotes a genuine respect for the wants and wishes 
of others. It is his duty to turn the attention of the 
pupils to the moral quality of their acts and to lead 
them into a clear understanding and constant practice of 
every virtue. His own influence and example; the narration 
of suitable tales to awaken right feeling; the memorizing 
of gems embodying noble sentiments, and maxims and pro¬ 
verbs containing rules of duty; direct instruction, etc., 
are means to be employed. 

Topics: Cleanliness and neatness, politeness, gentle¬ 
ness, kindness to others, kindness to animals, love, 
truthfulness, fidelity in duty, obedience, nobility, re¬ 
spect and reverence, gratitude and thankfulness, forgive¬ 
ness, confession, honesty, honour, courage, humility, 
self-respect, self-control, prudence, good name, good 









89 

manners, temperance, health, evil habits, bad language, 
evil speaking, industry, economy. 19 

Some sections of the above program, it must be admitted have a 
rather shadowy connection with the social studies, but the general 
spirit in which the course seems to have been offered places it 
within that broad field. . A further link may also be seen in the 
stress upon the moral side of life in both this course and the 
history courses drawn up by the Teritorial educational authori¬ 
ties. The position of the Manners and Morals course, in fact, is 
rather similar to that of the Health and Personal Development 
program put into effect in Grade VIX by the Alberta Department of 
Education during the school year, 1951-1952. Later, it will be 
seen that certain sections of this new Alberta course have a 
social studies content, even though one would hesitate to classi¬ 
fy the whole course as within Hie boundaries of the social 
studies. The same situation applies, more or less, to the Terri¬ 
torial subject of Manners and Morals. The latter, however, does 
not seem to have worked out very well in practice, if one is to 
judge by Dr. Goggin’s remarks in the annual report of the Council 
of Public Instruction for 1898; 

In ’Manners and Morals’ our inspectors are informed too 
frequently that ’incidental instruction is given as oc¬ 
casion demands’. Observation of the behaviour of the 
children, and examination of what they kno?/ about the 
topics named in the Programme of Studies reveal the effects 
of this incidental work and emphasize the value, here as 
elsewhere, of systematic and definite instruction. ’Manners’ 
is a fine art based on imitation, and on a genuine respect 
for the rights and duties of others. A knowledge of these 
rights and duties does not come by instinct. It has to be 
taught. The relations of a pupil to his fellows and to so¬ 
ciety ire not known intuitively. This necessary knowledge 
must be taught if moral action is to have a rational basis. 
Inspectors report that there are schools where the external 
forms of conduct are satisfactory, yet the pupils are not 
honest in their wcrk, given to falsehood rather than con¬ 
fession in cases of clear wrong-doing, and do not appreciate 
the necessity for respecting and protecting the reputation 
of others. 











ijjd.. ••• . 



. 


- ■ 




- 






• 












. 

, 


. 







’ 

. 


• 




! 




' 

, } ■ 










. 

. 



. 




- 




. ■. 






90 


More attention is given to this subject each year, yet 
progress is slower than it need be. Our teachers are 
drawn not only from our own schools but from every province 
in the Dominion. As a consequence some give this subject 
due attention, others are content with incidental in¬ 
struction, too many ignore it except when a case of dis¬ 
cipline forces them to deal with some phases of it. If, as 
Matthew Arnold has said, 'Conduct is three-fourths of life', 
and if school is a preparation for life, surely the subject 
has a right to a prominent place in the teacher's thought 
and a definite position in his school work. Those who have 
made little or no preparation for tie systematic presenta¬ 
tion of this subject will find White's 'School Management' a 
very suggestive book. 20 

Unfortunately, there are no other comments available on the 
Manners and Morals course during the years it was prescribed as a 
subject of instruction. The rather detailed criticisms of the 
teaching of subjects on the curriculum, which are contained in 
the annual reports of the Alberta school inspectors from 1906 to 
1912, make no reference to the course. One rather suspects that 
after Dr. Goggin's withdrawal from the educational scene in 1903 
bhbb instruction in Manners and Morals was allowed to become 
quite incidental. 

The Territorial secondary curriculum in geography and history, 
as outlined in the annual report of the Department of Education 
for 1902, is not quite so detailed as the comparable sections in 
the elementary Standards, mainly because of the tendency already 
mentioned to treat high school work in geography and history as 
an intensive review in preparation for teaching. Owing to the 
brevity of the course descriptions in the secondary program, the 
textbooks are also included in the following list of requirements 
which prevailed until the general revision of 1912; 

Standard VI 

History - The leading e-vents of Canadian and British History. 

Examinations in history will be so framed as to re¬ 
quire comparison and the use of judgment on the 
student's part rather than the mere use of memory. 



. 

. 

■ 

■ 

' , • ,i> - v iH) f,d : wj. 

. 




I ' ■ ■ ■ 

■ 





















. 

« 

: X . . 

* 

' 

■ 



91 


Text Books: Clement’s ’History of Canada’; Buckley and 
Robertson’s ’High School History’. 

Geography - The general geography of the world; geo¬ 
graphy of Canada and the British Empire more 
particularly. 

Text Books:’The New Canadian Geography—North-West Edition’ 

(W. J. Gage and Co.); ’Geography of the 
British Colonies’, Dawson and Sutherland (The 
MacMillan Co.). 

Standard VII 

History - Outline of the World’s History. 

Text Book: Swinton’s ’Outlines of the World’s History’ 
(American Book Co.). El 

History (The Revision of 1907) - Myer’s General History--to 
the close of the Medieval Period (p. 485); Bouri- 
not’s How Canada is Governed (Copp, Clark Co.). 22 

Geography - Physical Geography. 

Text Book: ’Elementary Physical Geography’ by R. S. Tarr 
(The MacMillan Co.}. 23 

N. B. - In 1907 this course was dropped from Standard VII 
and the textbook added to those for the geography 
course in Standard VT. 2.4 

Standard VIII 

History - Constitutional and Industrial. 

Text Books: Bagehot—The English Constitution. 

Bourinot—How Canada is Governed. 

Cunningham—Outlines of English Industrial 
History. 25 

History (The Revision of 1907): 

Text Books: Bagehot—The English Constitution. 

Cunningham—Outlines of English Industrial 
History 

Myer’s General History—Modern Age (page 486). 26 
It is rather difficult to compare a secondary curriculum which was 
Intended primarily as a teacher-training program with high school 
courses elsewhere, but it may be pointed out, at least, that the 
above plan for the treatment of history is not In accord with the 
secondary history program approved by the Committee of Seven in 










92 

1898 which gave more emphasis to ancient history and to medieval 
and modern European history. The final test of any curriculum, 
however, is the way in which it is handled in the classroom and 
the next chapter, therefore, will be devoted mainly to the criti¬ 
cal comments of school inspectors on the teaching of the geo¬ 
graphy and history courses outlined in this chapter. 


1 The North-West Territories, Board of Education, Report from 
the 18th December, 1885, to the 1st October, 1886 (Regina, 

N. W. T., 1886), p. 15. 

2 The North-West Territories, Board of Education, Report from 
September 17th, 1889, to September 10th, 1890 (Regina, 

N. W. T., 1890), p. 16. 

3 The North-West Territories, Board of Education, Report from 
the 1st October, 1886,to the 18th October, 1887 (Regina, 

N. W. T., 1887), pp. 15-16. 

4 The North-West Territories, Board of Education, Report from 
September 10th, 1890, to September 2, 1891 (Regina, N. W. T., 
1892), pp. 12-13. 

5 Ibid., p. 15. 

6 Ibid. , p. 17. 

7 Ibid. , p. 160. 

8 Ibid♦, p. 159. 

9 Ibid., pp. 1-2. 

10 Goresky, Isidore, The Beginning and Growth of the alberta 
School System . Unpublished Master's thesis, University of 
Alberta, 1944, p. 71. 

11 The North-West Territories, Council of Public Instruction, 
Report, 1896 (Regina, 1897), p. 13. 

12 Ibid., p. 17. 

13 Ibid., pp. 22-24. 

14 Ibid., p. 11. 

15 Ibid., Appendix "A", pp. 1-5. 

16 The North-West Territories, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, 1902, Appendix n B ,T • 

17 The North-West Territories, Council of Public Instruction, 
Report, 1896 (Regina, 1897), Appendix tf A' ,f , pp. 5-7. 

18 The North-West Territories, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, 1902, Appendix ”B n . 

19 The North-West Territories, Council of Public Instruction, 
Report, 1896 (Regina, 1897), Appendix ?f A n , p. 12. 

20 The North-West Territories, Council of Public Instruction, 
Report, 1898 (Regina, 1899), pp. 21-22. 

21 The North-West Territories, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, 1902(Regina, 1903), Appendix "B n . 

22 Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report, 1907, 
(Edmonton, 1908), p. 99. 

23 The North-West Territories, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, 1902 (Regina, 1903), Appendix "B M . 

24 Alberta, Department of Education, op. cit. , Appendix **D W . 

25 The North-West Territories, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, 1902 (Regina, 1903), Appendix "B ,T . 

26 Alberta, Department of Education, op. cit. , p. 101. 
















5 


; 









c 






CHAPTER X 


CRITICISM OF THE FIRST ALBERTA SOCIAL STUDIES 
CURRICULUM FROM TERRITORIAL DAYS TO THE GENERAL REVISION OF 1912 


Of* the annual reports of the Council of Public Instruction 
still available, criticism of the program in geography and 
history is only to be found in the Council’s last report which 
was for the year 1900. In his report as Superintendent of Educa¬ 
tion, Dr. Goggin refers in marked detail to the comments of the 
Territorial sub-examiners upon the final examination papers they 
had marked, but before quoting the pertinent sections of these 
comments it is of some interest to note first his general remarks 
concerning Territorial progress in the teaching of geography: 

Increasing attention is given to direct observation of 
forms of land and water and it is no longer an offence to 
take children out of doors to study nature at first hand. 

In many schools the pupils keep charts of temperature, 
rainfall and sunshine. Emphasis is placed upon those parts 
of this subject that help the pupil to perceive how geo¬ 
graphical ’facts’ affect man’s industries, trade and com¬ 
merce and he is asked to reason more and memorise less. 
Inspector Hewgill says that the chief defect in the 
teaching lies in the presentation of too many details, es¬ 
pecially in Standards II and III—far more than the course 
of studies calls for. 

When the school library contains a number of geographi¬ 
cal readers there is, as a rule, broader teaching and 
keener interest.In Assiniboia a shrewd agent sold a number 
of school boards expensive and rather useless geography 
charts which the Council of Public Instruction had refused 
to authorise. If half this money had been expended on 
suitable reference books and readers in geography the 
schools would have benefitted to a much greater extent. 1 

With reference to the Territorial examination papers in geography, 

for 1900, Dr. Goggin quotes the comments of the sub-examiners 

under the following headings: 

Public School Leaving. --The low marks awarded indicate 
















■ 


















' 
















- 








. 














; 























94 


that this subject has not received the requisite amount 
of attention. The power of pupils to make deductions 
from given premises is weak, showing that, in the 
teaching, undue prominence has been given to facts. Map 
drawing is not satisfactory. The language and style of 
answers evinced lack of training in composition. The 
spelling and grammar are not quite what ought to be ex¬ 
pected from Standard V pupils. The matter is not well 
arranged and the penmanship in most eases is careless. 
Terminal marks excepted, there seems to be no attempt 
made to punctuate sentences. This paper should cause 
teachers to pay more attention to physical geography and 
to review the work of the lower standards. 

Third and Second Classes. —Some of the second class 

candidates evidently had not 

read the prescribed text on physical geography. Neat and 
accurate maps are the exceptions. The answers are 
couched in general terms and betray a lack of reasoning 
power. The criticism on language, style, spelling, 
grammar, arrangement and penmanship, made on the public 
school leaving work, applies here. The questions are 
carefully graded and not too difficult. They direct at¬ 
tention to the importance of physical and commercial 
geography. 2 

Since the last criticism above is made in reference to the 

examination papers submitted by prospective teachers, one wonders 

what sort of instruction prevailed in the elementary classrooms 

of the North-West Territories. Turning to the subject of the 

examination papers in history, Dr. Goggin quotes the comments of 

the sub-examiners under the following headings: 

British and Canadian, --The questions are well distributed 

over the work prescribed. The 
answers reveal a fairly wide knowledge of historical 
facts but a limited grasp of their underlying principles. 
Pupils appear to have been left too much to their own de¬ 
vices in historical study with the result that their 
knowledge is somewhat unorganized. Penmanship is faulty 
due perhaps to teachers permitting pupils to scribble 
answers in their daily work. The exact phraseology of the 
text appears so frequently as to indicate an inordinate 
use of the book in preparation. Spelling and grammar on 
the whole are not satisfactory. The probable effect of 
the papers will be to cause the teacher to lay stress on 
the idea of progress, to pay more attention to comparative 
history—to national movements with similar causes and re¬ 
sults—and to current events. He will be led to develop 
the critical faculty in his pupils. 

General History. —Candidates have evidently read the pre¬ 
scribed text carefully but there appears 














t 






* 












el 






. 




- 




, 






















. 






- 




. 




■. __ . : v. t 




, 

b . i’4 i: . .-b; . 






' ■ : 
















95 


to have been more reading than teaching. They have not been 
led to see that history is a record of the growth of civi¬ 
lisation. Answers lacked precision. There was little at¬ 
tention given to continuity in paragraph structure and to 
elegant expression of thought. Spelling and grammar were 
satisfactory but penmanship and arrangement of answers on 
paper were below the standard expected of such candidates. 

The effect of these papers on the teaching will be to give 
prominence to great movements rather than to separate 
events. They will encourage correlation of geography and 
history. *3 

The reference in the above comments to current events teaching 
was made as the result of a question on an examination paper 
requiring the student to describe the causes of the then current 
war in the Transvaal. It will be remembered that in the previous 
chapter an example of current events questions from Territorial 
examination papers for teachers was also cited. The unusual fea¬ 
ture of this rather surprising acknowledgment of the importance 
of current events material is the complete absence of any re¬ 
quirement in this direction in the official course of studies. 

In the first annual report of the Department of Education of 
the North-West Territories, issued for the year 1901, Dr. Goggin 
deals at considerable length with the difficulties which had 
arisen in the teaching of geography and history. While it would 
be quite incorrect to say that the teaching of these subjects was 
causing the most trouble for the Territorial educational authori¬ 
ties, it is certainly apparent, when one reads the relevant 
sections of Dr. Goggin r s comments on the subjects of instruction, 
that they were the cause of no small concern to most of the school 
inspectors. Dr. Goggin’s remarks on the Territorial subjects of 
instruction in the social studies field are divided as follows: 

History 

Inspector Bryan is not satisfied with the results especial¬ 
ly in the lower standards. He suggests a redistribution of 
the work and asks for a clear correlation of geography and 
history. Inspector McColl finds in many schools too close an 












, 


* 























■ 

- 















. 


. ...U . ^ ■ . C; 













96 


adherence to the text books. It is not sufficiently 
realised that while it is the business of the book to 
narrate, it is the duty of the teacher to illustrate, 
explain and supplement. Inspector Perrett reports that 
the facts in history are well taught and ’with most 
teachers there is close relation between the history 
and geography lessons’. 

The child is interested in story telling before he 
enters school. By it his constructive imagination has 
been stimulated and developed. The parent selects the 
material for his stories from the literature of the Old 
Testament, from the simpler tales of early Greece, Rome 
and England, and the child enjoys these if they are well 
told. In school we take advantage of this interest and 
begin with biography. Whether it is that we have not se¬ 
lected suitable subjects or that our teachers are not 
skilled in the art of story telling, it is evident that 
the results, in Standard Two especially, are not, in a 
number of schools, as satisfactory as they should be. 

At the beginning of the course in history the ar¬ 
rangement of subject matter is an educational problem 
still in process of solution. Shall we begin with world 
types of men (or boys) in action—types of life and con¬ 
duct, e.g*, the Aryan, Persian, Greek, Roman, Saxon, 

English, Indian, Canadian, after the manner of Jane 
Andrews in The Ten Boys ; to be followed by the bio¬ 
graphies of a few great men in English and Canadian 
history preparatory to reading the prescribed texts? 

Shall we begin, say a standard higher, with Leonidas and 
Ancient Greece, Hannibal and the two great nations of 
his time, Alfred the Great or Early England, Charlemagne 
or Medieval Europe, Peter the Hermit and the Crusaders, 
Wolsey, The Armada or England on the Seas,.. Columbus 
and the discovery of America, Cabot and Cartier and 
early Canadian discovery... Lord Selkirk and the Red 
River settlement, etc., preparatory to the reading of 
the text books? Shall it be an arrangement with little 
regard for logical order of material in the lower stan¬ 
dards but with great regard for the learner’s interest? 

If, at the beginning, we thought less of the logical 
order of our material and more of how it stimulates the 
child’s interest in the past, develops his power to picture 
incidents, and helps to train him to form simple ethical 
judgments, our teaching would be more educative in its 
effects than,in many instances, it now seems to be. 

In the higher standards we have texts dealing specifical¬ 
ly with the political and constitutional history of Eng¬ 
land and Canada, but none with economic history. It will 
readily be admitted that economic forces have been important 
factors in determining the course of human affairs. Economic 
history deals with ’the physical side of the life of com¬ 
munities and of individuals; it dwells on the practical 
use and misuse of national resources, and the successes and 
failures due to financial experiments; and it brings into 





' 










J, S".Li- :£.*if' 






f.»iL 



97 


prominence the fundamental influence in social affairs 
of the need of food and shelter and the requirements 
which man feels in common with lower animals 1 . In their 
ideals and aspirations men differ fundamentally; but 
the touch of practical necessity makes the whole world 
kin; the limitations imposed by physical needs are simi¬ 
lar for all peoples; the opportunities afforded by 
natural resources in one age resemble those offered in 
another, though there is a growth in the power of ap¬ 
preciating and using theip. The organs and the methods 
which human society has developed at different times for 
dealing with industrial problems are closely analogous. 

If, in Standard VII, instead of reading intensively, 
as now, a period of English history, the student read such 
a book as Cunningham 1 s Outlines of English Industrial 
History , or Gibbon’s Industrial History of England , he 
would, through his knowledge of the growth of manors and 
towns, the industrial life, commercial development and 
economic policy of England, have new light thrown on his 
previous reading and gain a knowledge of the relations of 
labour and capital, of the individual and the state that 
there is increasing need for his having* 

Geography 

Inspector Bryan reports that upon the whole the subject 
is well taught though there is a tendency to introduce 
scientific minutiae into junior classes where it is out of 
place and beyond the grasp <Bf pupils. He thinks more at¬ 
tention should be given to map drawing. Inspector McColl 
says: ’That the results in the junior standards are ex¬ 
cellent. In the senior standards the main weakness is in 
the pupils’ knowledge of the Dominion of Canada.’ Inspector 
Perrett says: ’The general work in geography is good and 
based upon sound principles. The particular work in the 
geography of the North-West Territories is not so thorough. 
This is due mainly to the teacher’s want of familiarity 
with the facts. Sufficient use is not made of the appendix 
to the authorised text, which deals with the geography of 
the Territories, and of the documents issued by the Depart¬ 
ment of the Interior.’ Inspectors Hewgill and Fenwick sug¬ 
gest a revision of the course in geography for Standard III. 

The conditions existing in our schools when the present 
course was framed have changed somewhat and it is advisable 
to redistribute portions of the work. In the higher Stan¬ 
dards, especially Standard VII, it seems necessary to lessen 
the extent of the work now prescribed, in order to permit of 
field exercises in physical geography. These, when done in 
the autumn, furnish the basis of the work in physical geo¬ 
graphy for the winter months. Field work in the spring will 
then consist mainly of local illustrations of the classifi¬ 
cations studied during the winter. The objective work, which 
is fairly well done in the junior Standards, is neglected in 
the senior, to the manifest disadvantage of the students. It 
is significant that the College Entrance Examination Board 
of the Middle States and Maryland in its requirements gives 














: : 

c • 

■ 

t ’ 


. 




• • ... • . • . ? : 

- 

f , 

: ? : 

. 

J f . 



, 


5 









98 


a series of suggested laboratory exercises in physical 
geography, forty of which must he performed by the 
candidate, and the result presented in a certified note 
book at the time of the examination. Much of the work 
in our Standard VII is included in this entrance examina¬ 
tion. 4 

Dr. Goggin f s remarks on the teaching of history are particularly 
forward-looking and lead one to wonder what curriculum might have 
been evolved for geography and history if he had not left his 
post as Superintendent of Education in 1903. Although he was 
largely responsible for the construction of the Territorial cur¬ 
riculum in these subjects, Dr. Goggin was prepared to admit 

faults in that curriculum after it had been in effect for a num- 
In fact, 

ber of years.xxci/he seems to have had in mind a major revision 
entire 

of the/course of studies. Such an undertaking, though, would have 
taken many years to carry out. As it was, some of the revisions 
he suggested in the above comments were not acted upon until 1907, 
as may be noted in the course outlines in the previous chapter, 
and no general revision of the entire school program was attempted 
until 1912. In view of the rather severe criticisms expressed in 
the reports quoted so far, one might wonder why the educational 
authorities were so slow in putting suggested curriculum modifica¬ 
tions into effect. It may, however, be safely assumed that the 
resignation of Dr. Goggin, followed shortly by the problems at¬ 
tendant upon the creation of a new province, pushed the question 
of curriculum reform far into the background. Indeed, the last 
criticisms of the course of studies contained in an annual report 
of the Territorial Department of Education are those appeal*ing in 
the report for 1903. Another factor delaying major changes in the 
course of studies would probably be a feeling that, owing to the 
many criticisms of the quality of the instruction in the schools, 
the real problem in Territorial education was an improvement in 


: 

. 

- 

„ 

0 

, . ' • ■ < V ..-lit ' ■ 

, . . • . J 

' 

. 

: 

i ; 

. 

' 

. ' • 








99 


the teacher-training program rather than a curriculum revision* 
Before proceeding with the criticisms of the instruction in 
history and geography made by Alberta school inspectors from 1906 
to 1912, the report of the sub-examiners for the 1902 Public 
School Leaving examination in history is worth noting: 

The work of about one-fifth of the candidates is in 
every respect creditable. The remainder seem to have read 
the book and memorised much with questionable accuracy. 

One sub-examiner remarks, ’Many candidates have learned 
by heart some of the numerous history note books instead 
of studying the text and reasoning about the great facts 
of history.’ Another says, ’The methods employed in 
teaching this subject v/ould appear to be somewhat loose. 

The skeleton of the subject has not been put together as 
it should be and the pupil has not the rallying points, 
mentally speaking, around which to arrange his ideas.’ 

There is a tendency to make sweeping statements without 
giving specific examples to establish such general as¬ 
sertions. Many wander away from the point and introduce 
side issues which have little or nothing to do with the 
question asked. Most of the candidates have no clear 
idea of how our country is governed.... The map work of 
about twenty candidates is excellent. Language, spelling 
and mechanics are generally good.... 

The sub-examiners urge that the so-called ’history 
note books’ be thrown away, that pupils be trained to 
reason more, that more attention be given to obtain 
clear, definite ideas of the great periods of English 
History without so many details, that comparison be used 
to a greater extent in teaching, and especially that 
pupils in this standard be given a dear notion of the 
government under which they live. 5 

As previously mentioned, some criticisms are made in the annual 

report for 1903 concerning the teaching of history and geography 

in the North-West Territories, but they are only a repetition of 

the points which have been already established on the Territorial 

teaching of these subjects. 

Turning to the annual reports of the Alberta Department of 
Education, one finds the remarks of the school inspectors very 
illuminating as to the handling of the social studies curriculum 
prior to; the general revision of 1912. Many of the inspectors in 
their annual reports specifically outlined the progress made 
















> v'.u.-: u 


i: 










u oa 




- 






= • ■ • 1 

;; « , 






, 

. ■ . ■ ■. . wi , .1 

. 

■i'o U C: ’ v- r ; ; . Un--;- : ,r* JiOTG ‘J-i Cil 










100 


in their inspectorates on the teaching of the various subjects 
included in the course of studies. History and geography seem to 
have continued to give cause for considerable concern, although 
they do not bulk as large in the inspectors’ reports as do cer¬ 
tain other subjects on the curriculum which the new province had 
inherited from Territorial days. Arranged according to the year 
in which they appeared, the inspectors’ comments on the teaching 
of history and geography are as follows: 

1906 

In general, difficulty is experienced in teaching all 
the geography that is prescribed for Standard III without 
giving undue prominence to this subject. {.Inspector I. W. 
Brown, Medicine Hat.) 6 

The work in Geography is fairly satisfactory. In the 
lower standards the wide spread error is the attempt to 
get primary concept from books rather than from nature. 

No sufficient stress is placed on home Geography. (In¬ 
spector J. A. Smith, Calgary.) 7 

In Geography the results are fairly satisfactory in 
Standard Y, not so in Standards IY and III. In Standard II 
I found cases whose pupils could glibly recite definitions 
of lakes, rivers, seas, hills, etc., but were quite unable 
to tell what a slough was. Similarly I found scarcely a 
pupil who knew the Geography of Alberta, the vast majority 
not being able to tell even the boundaries. I trust this 
weakness in home geography will be remedied with the intro¬ 
duction into our schools of a map of Alberta. 

In History the results are very poor. Standard III 
pupils in rural districts, especially the short-term 
schools, know nothing beyond a few dates and names in Cana¬ 
dian History; Standard IY know a simple outline of Canadian 
History, but practically nothing of English History. In 
Standard Y the results are only fair. (Inspector P. H. 
Thibaudeau, Lacombe.) 8 

History. —The teaching of biographies in Standard II has 

not been successful. The majority of teachers pre¬ 
sent too many facts about each life, and confusion of ideas 
in the child’s mind is the result. More broad teaching is 
done in'the senior grades and the students have a fair know¬ 
ledge of the important facts of history, but are deficient 
in their knowledge of our own civil government. The pupils 
are led to make comparisons and form judgments as well as to 
learn the chief events in the life of the nation. 


“In many schools the Programme of Studies is close¬ 
ly followed and broadly interpreted and the 













. • : 

• 4 r ,<» r ■' a 










. 







a ;O' 


A. J 








j; to 


oou.:. *. 




. ;1 

> ....... 

. 

* 

. 

- 






101 


pupils have been led to observe the forms in nature, 
while in other schools stereotyped definitions are taught 
and the pupil fits the concept to the definition, and is 
not taught to go to nature to observe and obtain his con¬ 
cepts from his observations. In a number of schools the 
teachers lay broad and deep foundations for the study of 
physical geography, and rapid progress and intelligent 
v/ork is done in continent study later. During my last in¬ 
spection I noticed that careful work was being done in 
the study of the geography of Alberta. (Inspector J. Eoss, 
Strathcona. ) 9 

. . . .Local Geography is receiving much more prominence than 
formerly. (Inspector G. 33. Ellis, Edmonton.) 10 

1907 

History is being very well taught in the fourth and 
fifth grades, but below that there is very little systematic 
work done outside of the town schools. Even here it is 
sometimes made distasteful. In standard three history, I 
find many teachers overlooking what the programme calls for, 
only an outline of Canadian History; not all the provisions 
of each Act. 

Geography is better taught, but even here the lower 
grades are in many cases simply asked to learn definitions. 
Local geography is getting more attention than formerly. 
(Inspector G. E. Ellis, Edmonton.) 11 

The teaching of history shows a growing interest in this 
subject on the part of the teacher, and a more careful com¬ 
parison and relation of events are observed. The teaching 
of the work prescribed is more definite and thorough, but 
many of our instructors neglect to discuss current events 
of interest with the pupils. Therefore many pupils are 
capable of discussing conditions in England at the time of 
Alfred, who know nothing of what is happening in the world 
to-day. 

Good work is being done in geography by those teachers 
who understand the relation and sequence of topics as out¬ 
lined in the programme. Teachers coming from other parts, 
who have not received recent training, usually make this 
study an exercise in memorizing names of places, products, 
etc. The purpose and the mental training to be secured is 
lost sight of by these teachers. (Inspector John Eoss, 
Strathcona.) IS 

The chief defects in the teaching of geography result 
from its being taught almost wholly from the text book. 

The local geographical features, and the every day natural 
phenomena of the district in which the pupil lives should 
be used more largely in the introduction of the subject. 

The use of modelling, of pictures, of blackboard sketches 
should be more general. On the part of many teachers from 
the older provinces there is neglect of the geography of 
Western Canada. 











.t .• iv- • ' i J 0 v.:i 

• ’ 







* 






* 

, 








The teaching of British history is not good. Generally 
it is not given enough time on the time-table, and poor 
judgment is shown in the selection of materials. The text book 
is not made secondary to oral work. Lessons of so many pages 
in the text book are assigned to be got up by the pupil 
without any help in the understanding of it. Later on, the 
teacher tests his knowledge by a few questions. In most 
schools the subject is uninteresting because of imperfect 
preparation on the part of the teacher, and in several 
schools that I visited it was wholly neglected. 

The subject of civics, in my opinion, does not hold a suf¬ 
ficiently prominent place in the work of our schools. I would 
suggest that a more detailed outline of work be prescribed by 
the Department in this subject. (Inspector C. H. Russell, 
Calgary.) 13 

As history and geography are taught mainly to pupils in 
the higher standards they do not receive very much attention 
in the majority of schools in this division. Some really good 
work, however, is being done in local geography, and in 
teaching the main story of Canadian history. (Inspector James 
E. Loucks, Vermilion.) 14 

Geography. —On the whole it is fairly well taught, though 

there are a few instances in which the memoriza¬ 
tion of definitions seems to be the sole aim in teaching the 
subject. There is a general tendency to treat the subject so 
as to call into operation the observation and reasoning powers 
as well as the memory. Home geography has not been receiving 
sufficient attention. I shall look for improvement in this 
particular in the coming year. 

History. —In the yearly rural schools and the town schools, 
especially if there are pupils preparing for de¬ 
partmental examinations, history is, as a rule, fairly well 
taken up, but if there is pressure of work or other un¬ 
favourable conditions this subject is generally the first to 
be slighted. (Inspector J. f. Boyce, Red Deer.) 15 

1908 

The work in the town and village schools is in general good 
in all subjects and the curriculum is being followed care¬ 
fully, but in some of these schools the students in the higher 
grades are not kept acquainted with current events and a 
healthy spirit of inquiry in this respect is lacking. (In¬ 
spector John Ross, Strathcona.) 16 

The change of our text books in history is no doubt a good 
one, but the fact that it has been so difficult to secure 
copies of the new books has made the work very unsatisfactory 
during the last term. When the new texts are in general use, 
the subject will be more easily studied, if not better taught, 
than it has been in the past. 

More Normal-trained teachers have been at work in this dis¬ 
trict this year than last and as a consequence arithmetic and 











. 
























. ■: - • t .. v; 1 

* 


. 






































: ;rot . 


















geography have "been much better taught, and T/hen the 
course has been properly followed the results have been 
excellent. (Inspector James E. Loucks, Vermilion.) 17 

The teaching of geography according to modern ideas 
demands considerable resourcefulness and preparation on 
the part of the teacher and consequently there are 
great differences as to the standing of the subject in 
different schools. Energetic and interested teachers are 
getting good results but those teachers who adhere 
closely to the text-book do not make a satisfactory 
showing.. In too many cases the subject is largely a 
matter of memory and the pupils’ powers of observation, 
judgment, and reason are not made use of. 

as to history it must be said that the teaching of the 
subject as a rule is not satisfactory. The chief diffi¬ 
culties arise from a lack of interest in and knowledge of 
the subject on the part of our teachers. In many schools 
not enough time is given to it and in others for months 
of the year it receives practically no attention. A large 
number of teachers adhere too closely to the text-books, 
the subject is treated in too great detail, and not con¬ 
sidered in its broad aspects. The worst results were 
found in the case of Standard III, particularly the 
British period of Canadian history which is largely po¬ 
litical and constitutional. More attention should be 
given to the study of our present-day institutions of 
government, not only because such knowledge is of great 
value from the point of view of good’ citizenship but also 
because it is a necessary preparation to the successful 
teaching of political history. (Inspector C. H. Russell, 
Calgary.) 18 

....In not a few time-tables I have noticed that no time 
is given to the teaching of composition. The teacher’s 
reason for such invariably was, that her lessons in 
literature, geography and history were frequently made 
lesson in composition. These subjects should, of course, 
be correlated but more time should be set apart for 
direct and systematic instruction in the subject itself. 

A text-book on this subject would be very helpful to the 
teacher. The general work in geography is good and the 
teaching is based upon sound principles. X was pleased to 
note that, in the lower grades, the majority of teachers 
were employing as far as possible the actual observations 
of the pupils themselves. The geography of the Western 
Provinces could be more strongly emphasized* Many of the 
teachers are themselves not sufficiently familiar with 
this part of the subject.(Inspector J. a. Smith, High 
River.) 19 


1909 

The new text books in history are now In general use 
and much better work Is being done in this subject by the 
majority of teachers. There are a few, however, who ask 
the pupils to follow the book too closely and thus cause 







•j 












them to lose a great deal of valuable time in learning 
a mass of unimportant details rather than the main 
facts of history and the relation between them as laid 
down by the Course of Studies. (Inspector James E. 

Loucks, Vermilion*) 20 

History. —Only fairly satisfactory results are obtained 
in the teaching of history. Probably few of 
our teachers are themselves sufficiently interested in 
the subject to awaken the interest of their pupils. 
History is chiefly valuable as explaining present situa¬ 
tions and fbr the light it throws on present practical 
problems, and yet few teachers ever refer to current 
events. A case might be instanced of even a high school 
teacher who discussed at length the old question of 
the Athenian naval policy without even a passing re¬ 
ference to our own naval question. (Inspector D. A. Mc- 
Kerricher, Lethbridge.) 21 

....I regret to report that some schools are paying too 
little attention to Canadian History and Geography. 
(Inspector E. L. Hill, Strathcona.) 22 

....The teaching of history is not satisfactory., as most 
teachers fail to present the facts in a manner that will 
arouse interest in the subject. In ungraded schools few 
pupils below Standard V could make ten pQr cent, on a 
reasonable examination paper. Irregular attendance, dis¬ 
like for the subject, parents telling their children it 
is of no use, and the lack of time for thorough drills 
and reviews appear to me the causes.. In geography the 
results are fairly satisfactory. More map study would be 
an improvement. :(Inspector P. H. Thibaudeau, Lacombe.) 23 

1910 

....The teaching of geography is giving some teachers 
difficulty. Those teachers who adhere closely to the 
text books and make the subject a matter of memory are 
not rewarded with encouraging results. (Inspector J. A. 
Smith, Calgary.) 24 

....History, on the average, is poorly taught but oc¬ 
casionally one meets a teacher who is able to create an 
interest in it and make it a live subject to the 
children. 

Geography in many cases is a mere book subject and 
little attention is paid to the practical side of it. 
(Inspector J. a. Fife, Edmonton.) 25 

The treatment of history by many teachers is faulty 
from the fact that they spend too much time on unimpor¬ 
tant details and fail to impress the minds of their 
pupils with the main action of the drama of the past and 
its intimate connection with the resent. 

The basis of geographical study should be a thorough 



. 












- 






V -.v' 






f t : 
&k. 





j ■ . 



$P - 

1 ? ■» . > : - 

; ; . 

, 




105 


and practical knowledge of the child’s environment. The 
average teacher follows rather the order of the textbook 
which usually starts with a consideration of the earth 
as a whole and the pupil fails to understand the subject 
because the facts presented do not enter into his own 
limited experience, and cannot therefore be assimilated 
by him, (Inspector James E. Loucks, High River.) 26 

• •. .Work in history and geography is only fair. (Inspector 
G. Fred McNally, Wetaskiwin.) 27 

....In geography pupils appear to be deficient in know¬ 
ledge of political sub-divisions, location and importance 
of cities and general map geography. It is a question 
whether or not we are laying too much stress on the 
scientific side of geography. (Inspector D. A. McKerricher, 
Lethbridge.) 28 

....The results In second and third standard history are 
frequently unsatisfactory. Generally, fair average work is 
done in grammar, geography and history above the third 
standard, although there is a marked deficiency in local 
geography in many schools. (Inspector.H. R. Parker, Ter- 
milion.) 29 


1911 

Anticipating the new Course of Studies many of the 
teachers were requested to combine their nature study and 
work in local geography. One result of this was fewer re¬ 
quests for a text-book on nature study; another was a 
greatly increased interest on the part of both teacher 
and pupils in their surroundings,.V,History and grammar 
have been difficult subjects and their present status in 
this district is but little better than last year. With 
the advent of the new curriculum we may expect much 
better results. (Inspector G. Fred McNally, Wetaskiwin.) 30 

....In the elementary work in geography more use is being 
made of the sand table and clay moulding, of simple plan 
drawing, of supplementary reading, and of field excur¬ 
sions. In the higher grades the teachers are making the 
physical the basis of t 1b commercial and political, and 
teaching causes and effects more, with less memorizing. 
History is being taught more through appeals to the pupil’s 
imagination and reasoning and,less attention Is being 
given to details of battles and to memorizing facts. (In¬ 
spector -J. A. ’Smith, Calgary.) 31 

Some few schools are doing good work in geography but 
the majority are doing unsatisfactory work in this subject. 
Generally, the geography of Alberta is neglected. This is, 
in part, due to the lack of knowledge of the subject on the 
part of the teacher. (Inspector H. R. Parker, Termilion.) 32 

...History and geography are fairly well taught but the re¬ 
sults in geography are much better than In history. (In¬ 
spector Walter Scott, Hardisty.) 33 
























106 


•...Geography and history are taught well on the whole, 
especially by those teachers who possess a broad educa¬ 
tion themselves and are thus able to view facts in their 
true relation to one another. (Inspector J. Morgan, Mac- 
leod.) 34 

In the annual report for 1912 the comments of the school 
inspectors on all the subjects of instruction are so limited that 
the remarks on geography and history teaching are not worth 
quoting. The reason for this lack of comment was, of course, the 
general revision of the curriculum which had certain effects on 
the classroom work even before it was finished. These effects are 
well described by Inspector Boyce in his report for 1911: 

During liie spring term the work of inspection was some¬ 
what broken owing to attendance at meetings of the com¬ 
mittee revising the Course of Studies. As a consequence 
not as many schools as usual were visited the first half- 
year. With the thought in mind that material change would 
be made in the Programme of Studies there v/as a natural 
inclination on the part of the teacher not to follow 
closely the old programme and a corresponding disposition 
on the part of the inspector to overlook departures from 
the usual line of work. In all probability this attitude 
will continue to some extent until the new Course of 
Studies assumes permanent form. 35 


Taken as a whole, the Alberta inspectors' reports quoted 
on the instruction in history and geography do not give a very 
favorable impression of this phase of the work of the schools 
during the early years of the province. The lack of trained 
teachers, a reluctance to abandon discredited pedagogical 
methods on the part of those teachers who did possess some pro¬ 
fessional training, and a decidedly narrow and rigid course of 
studies which over-emphasized British and Canadian history, all 
contributed their share to the failure of the Territorial social 
studies curriculum. It is curious to note that it was at this very 

juncture in Alberta's educational affairs the social studies move- 

that 

ment was so gaining ground in the United States/the Committee on 



107 


Social Studies was established. Although it was not until 1936 
that Alberta adopted the solution offered in this committee’s 
report to the problem of school instruction in the social 
studies, it is now necessary to sketch in the following chapter 
the development of the American social studies movement'as a 
background for the study of the forces which led the Alberta De¬ 
partment of Education in the period following the 1912 revision 
eventually to abandon the teaching of such subjects as geography 
and history in separate compartments on the school time-table. 


1 The North-West Territories, Council of Public Instruction, 
Report, 1900 (Regina, N. W. T., 1901), pp. 24-25. 

2 Ibid., p. 28. 

3 Ibid., p. 29. 

4 The North- est Territories, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, 1901 (Regina, N. W. T., 1902), pp. 38-40. 

5 The North-West Territories, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, 1902 (Regina, N. W. T., 1903), pp. 20-21. 

6 alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report, 1906 (Edmon¬ 
ton, 1907), p. 41. 


7 Ibid., pp. 43-44. 

8 Ibid., p. 48. 

9 Ibid., pp. 51-52. 

10 Ibid., p. 55. 

11 alberta, Department 
ton, 1908), p. 40. 

12 Ibid., p. 43. 

13 Ibid., pp. 45-46. 

14 Ibid., p. 50. 

15 Ibid., p. 56. 

16 Alberta, Department 
ton, 1909), p. 42. 

17 Ibid., p. 45. 

18 Ibid. , pp. 50*-51. 

19 Ibid., p. 54. 

20 Alberta, Department 
ton, 1910), p. 48. 

21 Ibid., p. 53. 

22 Ibid., p. 55. 

23 Ibid., p. 57. 

24 Alberta, Department 
ton, 1911), p. 46. 

25 Ibid., p. 52. 

26 Ibid., p. 57. 

27 Ibid., p. 60. 

28 Ibid., p. 65. 

29 Ibid., p. 67. 


of Education, Annual Report, 1907 (Edmon- 


of Education, Annual Report, 1908 (Edmon- 


of Education, Annual Report, 1909 (Edmon- 


of Education, Annual Report, 1910 (Edmon- 


30 Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report, 1911 (Edmon¬ 
ton, 1912), pp. 54-55. 



t 










t 








31 Ibid., pp. 59-60. 

32 Ibid., p. 61. 

33 Ibid., p. 67. 

34 Ibid., p. 75. 

35 Ibid., p. 77. 






















CHAPTER XI 


THE EVOLUTION OF SCHOOL 

INSTRUCTION IN THE SOCIAL STUDIES FROM THE REPORT 
IN 1916 OF THE COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL STUDIES TO THE PRESENT 


Reference was made at the end of Chapter VI to the beginning 
of the social studies movement with the establishment in 1913 of 
the Committee on Social Studies by the National Education As¬ 
sociation. In its general report in 1916 the Committee based its 
program on what it considered to be the best psychological, edu¬ 
cational, and sociological knowledge of that time. To clarify its 
point of view, the Committee quoted John Dewey to the effect that 

We are continually uneasy about the things we adults 
know, and are afraid the child will never learn them un¬ 
less they are drilled into him by instruction before he 
has any intellectual use for them. If we could really 
believe that attending to the needs of present youth 
would keep the child and teacher alike busy, and would 
also provide the best possible guarantee of the learning 
needed in the future, transformation of educational 
ideals might soon be accomplished, and other desirable 
changes would largely take care of themselves. 1 

The Committee qualified this quotation by remarking it did not 

mean that, "educational processes should have no reference to the 

future", but "it means merely that such instruction should be 

given at the psychological and social moment when the (pupil’s) 

interests are such as to make the instruction function ef- 

£ 

fectively in his processes of growth". 

The Committee’s reference to the educational philosophy of 
John Dewey is significant. It was the belief in the "instrumental 
function of school life,as developed in the pragmatic philosophy 
of education,that was so influential in the evolution of school 
programs in the social studies. Indeed, in the very year that the 






























' 

. 











. 








. 






. 












' ■ bO.iJ >J ! ' . ■ 

. 


' 

. it eiiJ €35L • : . 

. 

: 











• . ■ ■: - , 


. 











110 


Committee on Social Studies published its general report, there 
took place the first printing of John Dewey’s Democracy and Edu¬ 
cation , Some quotations from this work will serve to illustrate 
more fully the thought of the times in which the Committee drew 
up its report. Concerning the interest and usefulness of history 
as a subject of study in schools, Dewey wrote as follows: 

The segregation which kills the vitality of history is 
divorce from present modes and concerns of social life. 

The past just as past is no longer our affair. If it were 
wholly gone and done with, there would be only one 
reasonable attitude toward it. Let the dead bury their 
dead. But knowledge of the past is the key to understanding 
the present. History deals with the past, but this past is 
the history of the present....Genetic method was perhaps 
the chief scientific achievement of the latter half of the 
nineteenth century. Its principle is that the way to get 
insight into any complex product is to trace the process 
of its making,—to follow it through the successive stages 
of its growth. To apply this method to history as if it 
meant only the truism that the present social state cannot 
be separated from Its past, is one-sided. It means equally 
that past events cannot be separated from the living pre¬ 
sent and retain meaning. The true starting point of history 
is always some present situation with its problems. 5 

It must be emphasized, however, that Dewey’s importance in this 
upon 

new outlook/sx the teaching of history is due essentially to the 
fact that he typifies the trend of his times. As with school sub¬ 
jects other than history, ’’Dewey’s thinking and writing about 

education since 1900 have been both cause and record of a revolu- 

4 

tion in American educational thinking”. 

The Committee on the Social Studies, meanwhile, In its 
general report defined the most important function of instruction 
in the social studies as the development of social efficiency and 
good citizenship. The latter term, the Committee felt, referred 
not only to the city, state, and nation, but the ’’world community” 
as well. Although the Committee did not make any detailed outline 
of courses because it felt that ”the selection of topics and the 
organization of subject matter should be determined in each case 




* 

- 








V, w .... \ ' ■ ; '• 

























. 

* ' 

* 






5 HI 

by immediate needs", it did state that content should be selected 

that would interest and fit the needs of the adolescent school 
population. Within these limits,the content should make a special 
contribution to the social efficiency of the pupil. History in 
particular was to be taught in such a way that the student would 
gain a better understanding of the present. In brief, the Com¬ 
mittee’s report indicated broad social studies areas for each 
grade level, asserted certain basic principles, each of which 
were illustrated by examples, and attempted "to stimulate initia¬ 
tive on the Dart of teachers and school administrators in testing 

6 

proposed methods or in judicious experiments of their own". 

Before outlining the program recommended by the Committee on 

Social Studies, two important features of its proposals must first 

be noted. The Committee advised that "for effective social 

training in the high school more consideration must be given to 

its organic continuity with the work of the elementary school in 
7 

the same field". Having assumed provision "for the social aspect 

8 

of education in Grades I-VI of the elementary school", the Com¬ 
mittee provided in its plans for both the 6-3-3 and 8-4 types of 
school organization. The Committee stressed two cycles in its pro¬ 
gram—the junior cycle (Grades VII-IX) and the senior cycle 
(Grades X-XII)—and provided for the repetition in both the 
junior and senior high schools of material it hoped had been 
covered in simple fashion in the elementary grades. This cycle 
plan was "based chiefly upon the practical consideration that 
large numbers of children complete their schooling with the sixth 

grade and another large contingent with the eighth and ninth 
9 

grades". The Committee, therefore, recommended the following pro¬ 


gram: 




112 


Grade VII.A half year of geography and a half 

year of European history taught in 
sequence or concurrently, with 
civics taught as a phase of these 
two or segregated in one or two 
periods a week, or both 
Or, a full year of European history 
with geography taught incidentally 
to, and as a factor in, the 
history and civics taught as a 
phase of the other two subjects or 
separately a period or two a week, 
or both 

A. half year of American history and a 
half year of civics taught in se¬ 
quence or concurrently with geo¬ 
graphy taught incidentally to, and 
as a factor in, the other two sub¬ 
jects 

Civics, with emphasis on state, nation, 
and world for a half year and with 
emphasis on its economic and voca¬ 
tional aspects for the second half 
Or, economic and vocational civics and 
economic history for a year in se¬ 
quence or parallel 


Grade X............European history to 1700 

Grades XI 

and XII.European history (including English 

history) since 1700 for one or one- 
half year 


American history since the seventeenth 
century for one or one-half year 
Problems of American democracy (economic, 
social, and political) for one or one- 
half year 10 


Grade VIII 


Grade IX 


With regard to the courses in economics, sociology, and 
government which were common in American high schools in 1916, 
and in justification of the proposed problems course, the Com¬ 
mittee reported: 

The traditional courses in civil government are almost 
as inadequate for the last as for the first year of the 
high school. Efforts to Improve them have usually con¬ 
sisted of only slight modifications of the traditional 
courses or of an attempted simplification of political 
science. The results have not met the needs of high-school 
pupils nor satisfied the demand of economists and 
sociologists.... 









■ 

. 










.... 










- 







t 



; ' ■ L ■ 

t 


- 

- 


' 

' 




' 

•1 . . 

. * 


■ 










. 






. 


















* 








. . . . 






113 


The only feasible way the committee can see by which 
to satisfy in reasonable measure the demands of the 
several social sciences, while maintaining due regard 
for the requirements of secondary education, is to or¬ 
ganize instruction, not on the basis of the formal 
social science, but on the basis of concrete problems 
of vital importance to society and of immediate 
interest to the pupil. 

In other words, the suggestion is not to discard one 
social science in favor of another, nor attempt to 
crowd the several social sciences into this year in 
abridged forms; but to study actual problems, or issues, 
or conditions, as they occur in life, and in their 
several aspects, political, economic, and sociological. 
These problems or issues will naturally vary from year 
to year, and from class to class, but they should be se¬ 
lected on the ground (1) of their immediate interest to 
the class and (2) of their vital importance to society. 
The principle suggested here is the same as that applied 
to the organization of civics and history. 11 


As could be expected, the criticisms, as well as the results, 

of the report of the Committee on Social Studies were many and 

varied. Tryon, for example, says, "It would be difficult to over- 

12 

state the influence of the report of this Committee" to which he 
directly American 

/attributes three common practices in/tt® secondary schools; 

(1) The one-year course in early European history or 
world history found in the tenth grade of many of 
the high schools of the United States; 

(2) The course in problems of American democracy which 
is offered widely in Grade XII; and 

(3) The common use of the term "social studies". 

In his critique of the work of the Committee on Social Studies, Dr. 
Wesley writes: 

The revolutionary recommendations were (1) the new course 
in "Problems of democracy—social, economic, and political", 
and (2) the full year’s course in American history, for the 
schools chose the full rather than the half year. 

The report restored the National Education Association to 
a position of leadership. It gawe currency and respectabili¬ 
ty to the phrase "social studies". It went far toward de¬ 
stroying the notion that school subjects must faithfully and 
fully reflect the scholarly bodies of materials from which 
they are drawn. It did much to popularize the needs of pupils 

and to emphasize the desirability of providing for pupil 


; i. . J 

<•?. . ' - -- 

. 

< 

- 

. . ■' 

. 

V j.;j'.i;!' 0& <3>, r 

# 

. . ' ■ • 

. . . ') . 

• , L; iJi.:.,'. '■ ■'?■! no ;;>o cil 


• ; ' { v. ' ji.jji ■ > . 







■ 

- 

n ^‘iOJ" is i ( .O.X*XO ■. . 


■' ■; -a fi.l 

: 


• ■ ■ 

■ 

.. •' , - . ... :.v. -'j: f-M-l'l' 

„ 

i 

. 


: 










114 


growth rather than of merely storing up information for 
the future. It demonstrated that a national committee 
could safely recommend new and relatively untried courses. 

And it had considerable effect in loosening the rigid 
control which the colleges exercised over the high schools 
by means of entrance requirements. 13 

Quillen and Hanna, on the other hand, express in the following 

words some doubt concerning certain results of the Committee’s 

recommendations: 

The inclusion of a course in community civics in 
the ninth grade and of the course on problems of demo- 
cracy in the twelfth grade was the result of the com¬ 
mittee’s recommendation that problems of vital impor¬ 
tance to society and of immediate interest to the 
pupil be included in the curriculum. These courses, in 
spite of the committee’s recommendation, often became 
highly stereotyped and consisted of textbook memoriza¬ 
tion and recitation. It is true that some courses were 
organized functionally around contemporary problems of 
a personal-social nature amd that a large variety of 
materials was used, but by far the greatest proportion 
of these courses followed a textbook and were organized 
formally. 14 

Some subject specialists were particularly severe in their criti¬ 
cisms of the Committee’s general report. Quoting copiously from 
the recommendations of the Committee, Dr. Henry Johnson, as 
late as 1940, wrote the following: 

History was to be broken up into topics or problems. 

This would make possible a treatment "unhampered by 
chronological and geographical limitations”. Chronology 
was admitted to be ” of the very essence of history”, 
but for a pupil to study "’ancient’ history this year, 
’medieval’ history next year, and ,’modern’ history the 
year following” was declared an antiquated principle of 
organization. Dr. Dewey, requoted on "attending to the 
needs of present growth”, and James Harvey Robinson, 
quoted on the unsolved problem of determining "what con¬ 
ditions and institutions shall be given the preference”, 
led the Committee to suggest in italics that " the se¬ 
lection of a^ topic in history and the amount of attention 
given to it should depend ... chiefly upon the degree to 
which such topic can be related to the present life 
interests of t he pupil , or can be used by him in his pre¬ 
sent processes of growth’.’ The committee called this "a 
new and most important factor in the problem”. At the 
close of the eighteenth century it was an old factor. 


The "present life interests of the pupil” did not mean 
what the pupil would himself think of as interesting. The 


























I : ■ ,i: 1 i' • 

■ 















t> 


. \ ."it OX. 

. ■ J i i;;u: x'ix' : ' '. 

■/I > 

_ i -ygn i 

■ rXf x j;x;x:. 







i: 







' -j . - ■ 















115 


design was to bring the pupil into contact with such 
current conditions, problems, and events as seemed at 
the moment important to curriculum makers and teachers. 
It was assumed throughout that the present problems of 
adult society were the present problems of the pupil. 

The content of history, like the content of other social 
studies, was to be determined by present problems, a bit 
here and a bit there, taken out as ciroumstances might 
call for it. 

With all the emphasis upon the immediate present, it 
may seem strange that the Committee scarcely touched the 
greatest fact of the time—the war in Europe, which was 
already dragging us into its vortex. "Shall we teach the 
war?" was a burning question in schools. Here was an 
opportunity for a full illustration of the Committee’s 
principles, and all that was done with it was to suggest 
a comparison with the War of 1812 so obvious that the 
dullest teacher of the War of 1812 must have thought of 
it. 15 


The year 1916 not only witnessed the publication of the re¬ 
port of the Committee on Social Studies, but it marked the ap¬ 
pearance of the most comprehensive report of the American Politi¬ 
cal Science Association on the teaching of government. This re¬ 
port, which was issued by the Association’s Committee on In¬ 
struction, was influenced by suggestions of the following type 
from local committees: 

1. ’More time for the course in this subject (civics)’ 

2. ’The necessity of civic instruction in the grades’ 

3. ’Concerted action to compel colleges to give ad¬ 

mission credit for courses in civics’ 

4. ’Greater use of the problem method of instruction’ 

5. ’More economics, government, and sociology in the 

high school course and less time to the ancient 
world and Middle Ages’ 

6. ’Compulsory course in civics for eighth or ninth 

grade and a compulsory course in the eleventh or 
twelfth grade in all of the states’ 16 

The final recommendations of the main committee, several of which 

were overshadowed by the report of the Committee on Social 

Studies, were as follows: 

1. That a year of social science, exclusive of history, 
be offered in the senior high school and that at least 
half the year be devoted to government 




^ : 1 

. 

v ■. ... . ; v ....... ■. i ' ,L •J ifc'J i‘: ■ v':-^ ' ;';i 

J" v.> ..... J ; 

. • ■ ; 

‘ ..-Vi).. > A 1 

t 

. : 

»: >•. ... ' eO'V: "oc; L&o 

: i - 


■ 

: •« 5 r. 

■' ■ ■■ ... v J' 

< ... ; • . . .. : . . f 

, • ' ■ v 'o J7U1 aii.O'O 0 u'Z j : u _■ V • 

: ./OXJV;. 








116 


2. That pressure he brought to bear on colleges to accept 
a full year of social science for entrance 

3. Better preparation of teachers 

4. More emphasis on local affairs 

5. Better materials 

6. More practical instruction 

7. Self-government schemes in schools 

8. Cooperation with local government and local civic bodies 17 
To conclude its survey, the Committee on Instruction indicated ap¬ 
proval of the community civics syllabus published in 1915 by the 
Committee on Social Studies and it presented an outline for the 
course in government in the senior high school. 

Despite the influence of the general report of the Committee 

on Social Studies, it must be recorded that "the United States has 

18 

never had a completely uniform program in the social studies". In 

1923 it was revealed that "about a third of the schools tended to 

follow the Historical Association reports; a second third tended 

toward the report of the Committee on Social Studies; and another 

third offered all possible varieties of compromises between the 
19 

two offerings". Committee reports of national educational bodies 
in the United States, however, did not cease to be forthcoming in 
the decades that followed the publication of tie social studies re¬ 
port of 1916. Actually, the latter report was only a tentative one 
which did not propose at that point, if at all, to stabilize cur¬ 
riculum practice in the United States. A more conclusive report 
would have appeared if the Committee had not disbanded with the 
American entry into the First World War. 

Immediately after the conclusion of the First World War, the 
American Historical Association appointed the Special Committee on 
History and Education for Citizenship in the Schools, better known 
as "The Second Committee of Eight", to study the problem created 
by the conflicting points of view on the teaching of the social 

studies. The serious proportions of this conflict are indicated by 


* 

♦ 

- 

* 

* 

■ : . ' , ■ • 

. 

. 0 . •• r:i: 

. 

. . ; ■- 

. 

* 

, 

u 

\ :■ ■ 

P 






117 


the fact that the final report of the Committee was rejected by 
the American Historical Association. The report, however, was 
published in the Historical Outlook in 1921, but it did not re¬ 
ceive wide acceptance. This non-acceptance, though, makes the re¬ 
port very significant in the evolution of the social studies pro¬ 
gram in the United States. It was, in brief, ”too ’historical’ for 

the followers of the Social Studies Committee and too ’social’ for 

20 

the rank and file of the historians”. Consequently, the tendency 
of local and regional groups to draw up their own social studies 
curricula was accelerated. The recommendations of the Special Com¬ 


mittee on History and Education for Citizenship may be summarized 
as follows: 


Grade I 
Grade II 
Grade III 

Grade IV 
Grade V 
Grade VI 

Grade VII 

Grade VIII 


Grade IX 


Grade X 
Grade XI 

Grade XII 


The making of the community 
The making of the United States 
How Europeans found our continent and what 
they did with it 

How Englishmen became Americans, 1607-1783 

The United States, 1783-1877 

The United States since 1877; how we are 

governed 

The world before 1607, including Spanish 
America 

The world since 1607, with emphasis upon the 
economic and social history of the United 
States 

Community and national activities; recent 
economic and social history and commercial 
geography and civics 

Progress toward world democracy since 1650 
Progress toward democracy in the United 
States 

Social, economic, and political problems 21 


Whatever the other reactions to these recommendations may have 


been, it must be admitted that the Committee assigned too much 


time to the teaching of American history and expected too much of 
Grade IX social studies teachers. 


Before proceeding with the work of the national investiga¬ 
tions into the social studies which were to follow the ill-fated 
report of the Second Committee of Eight, it is essential that re- 












118 

ference be made to the effects of the First World War on the 
teaching of the social studies in the United States. Quillen and 
Hanna summarize this educational aftermath of the conflict of 
1914-1918 as follows: 

The social, economic, political, and moral reverbera¬ 
tions of World War I had a catalytic effect upon the social 
studies and education generally. The idealization of demo¬ 
cracy, the intensification of patriotism, the concern for 
the loyalty of recent immigrants, and the social unrest 
following the war, marked by labor-capital conflict and the 
concern over communism, all focused attention on citizen¬ 
ship education. Many people believed that the woeful lack 
in knowledge, skills, and social attitudes which the war 
had revealed could be corrected if students were required 
to take more history, economics, geography, and sociology. 
Many state legislatures passed laws making the teaching of 
United States history and of the Constitution obligatory in 
both public and private schools. The number of states which 
required by law the teaching of the United States Constitu¬ 
tion increased from five in 1917 to forty in 1940, and the 
number of states making the teaching of United States 
history mandatory in the high schools increased from fif¬ 
teen to twenty-six in the same period. 

These legal regulations, plus the belief that the more 
information one had about history, geography, economics, 
and government the more competent he would be, caused the 
social studies to assume increased importance in the cur¬ 
riculum. The percentage of students in public high schools 
enrolled in social-studies courses rose from 59.8 in 1900 
to 70.5 in 1910 and 75.4 in 1928. This percentage dropped 
during the early 1930 T s, yet 70 per cent of tie students 
in public high schools were still enrolled in 1934 in some 
course in the social studies. 

The conditions exposed by the war and its aftermath also 
led certain educators to express skepticism toward tra¬ 
ditional practices. They began to work toward making the 
schools a more vital force in the social, economic, and po¬ 
litical life of the country by stressing the development of 
critical-mindedness and an understanding of contemporary 
society. At the same time, technological advance speeded up 
by the war made employment difficult for young people and 
resulted in an influx of youth into the public high schools. 
These youth were not the academically selected youth of the 
pre-war high-school group but represented all levels of 
personal competence and intellectual and socio-economic 
background. 

These changed conditions brought considerable controversy 
into social-studies instruction. Several committees were ap¬ 
pointed by national associations to study the situation, but 
the scholars could not agree among themselves sufficiently 
to present unified recommendations....Differences of judg- 











■ 


a '• * ; '■ “i ; . ' ' : 

: , J . 

. 

. 

~ 

* 

c i : 

’ 

* . i j Gv i 

- ' . ■ t: . ■ . i>r ...; :..f 

t 


' 






. 


- 

- 

« 










. 

t " • i it : .■ >■ L • o 

‘ 

.. 

* 


. 













119 


ment concerning content and method in civic education were 
not confined to the social scientists and educators. In 
the early 1920’s, violent attacks, some of which reached 
the political arena, were leveled against widely used 
high-school history textbooks. Public-opinion-forming tech¬ 
niques, highly developed during the war, were now used in 
an attempt to control the content of public-school social- 
studies instruction. 22 


Just a few years after the rejection of the report of the 
Committee on History and Education for Citizenship, the American 
Historical Association launched the History Inquiry in order to 
determine the exact status of the social studies in the schools of 
the United States. After presenting a considerable mass of statis¬ 
tics and tables to show the frequency of various social studies 
subjects, the director of the Inquiry, Edgar Dawson, included the 
following impressions in his report which was published in 1924: 

1. Ancient history as a separate course seems to be re¬ 
ceding in popularity. 

2. The tendency to stress recent history seems to be 
weakening such popularity as medieval history Ibrmer- 
ly had. 

3. English history as a separate subject seems to be 
losing ground. 

4. The one-year course in world history, while popular 
in some quarters, does not seem as yet to have made 
much headway. 

5. American history tends to move from the last year of 
the high school to the next earlier year —the eleventh 
grade. 

6. There is a tendency to put into the twelfth grade a 
course in current problems under some such title as 
Modern Problems or Problems of Democracy or Social 
Problems. 

7. There seems to be a tendency to put into the ninth 
grade one or more of the new civics courses. 

S. There is considerable interest among school admini¬ 
strators in a junior high school course made up of a 
combination of ipaterials taken from geography, govern¬ 
ment, history, and industrial and social conditions. 

9. The tendency to give a large amount of time to the 
socialized discussion of current events/to be growing. 

seems 

10. The teaching of government seems to be standing still, 
if not actually receding, under the pressure for a 
rather indefinite discussion of economic and social 
problems. 23 






- 






, 




. . i. : ■ • '■ ■' ■ Oo i; : 






■' ,v ■ , ■; J • » 






- 











. 






< 


• 




. . !. ' 








. 






- 




, 


■ 

4 

. . . 1 


. 




' 

- 










120 

Certain leaders of the American Historical Association, 
however, were still not satisfied as to the curricular develop¬ 
ments in the schools and they regarded the History Inquiry as an 
incomplete report. Since the Inquiry did show that many changes 
were occurring in the social studies curriculum, a group of 
leaders in the Association felt, accordingly, that a new com¬ 
mission was needed to give direction to these changes. According 
to Dr. Wesley, "They visualized a committee consisting, not only 

of historians, but of social scientists, educators, and psycholo- 
24 

gists". A plan for an investigation was published by Professor 
A. C. Krey of the University of Minnesota in 1926, funds were se¬ 
cured from the Carnegie Corporation, and in 1929 the members of 
the commission, who set to work immediately, were appointed. Such 
extensive surveys and research projects were carried out by the 
resulting Commission on the Social Studies that its report com¬ 
prised sixteen volumes which were published from 1932 to 1937. In 
its Conclusions and Recommendations , the Commission did not recom¬ 
mend a program of study as previous committees had done. Instead, 
the Commission recommended that regional groups throughout the 
United States should develop their own social studies programs in 
order to meet local needs more adequately. Despite the violent 
criticisms that the report of the Commission evoked, its decision 
with respect to a social studies program has had a lasting in¬ 
fluence in the United States. In 1940, for example, the Committee 
on the Function of the Social Studies in General Education for 
the Commission of Secondary School Curriculum of the Progressive 
Education Association also refused to recommend a fixed program. 

It insisted instead "that a program of social education to pro¬ 
vide rich and meaningful experiences in the basic aspects of life 










121 


and to promote optimum personal development and effective par¬ 
ticipation in a democratic society should be built on the per¬ 
sonal-social needs of adolescents as revealed by a study of ado¬ 
lescents themselves and of the culture in which the adolescents 

25 

live”. 

The influence of the encouragement given to experimentation 
in the social studies by the Commission on the Social Studies is 
seen in a report in the late 1930 f s from the Department of Super¬ 
intendence Commission on the Social Studies Curriculum to the ef¬ 
fect that, "prior to 1925 fewer than fifteen hundred courses of 
study had been published in the United States”, while since 1925, 
"over thirty-five thousand courses of study have reached one cur¬ 
riculum laboratory", and that "these probably represent less than 

26 

50 per cent of the total number in the country". The struggle in 
the United States to improve the social studies program, however, 
has by no means ended with the general acceptance of local cur- 
riculums. The Commission on the Social Studies, for example, 
warned in its report that a social studies program could not suc¬ 
ceed without competent teachers who should be well trained in 
subject matter and fully aware of their responsibilities in a 
democratic society. Thus the Commission called upon the teachers 
of the United States to strengthen their professional organiza¬ 
tions through which the improvement of their profession might be 
achieved. The Commission specified adequate salaries, security of 
tenure, and social recognition as important in raising the compe¬ 
tence of the teaching profession. 

Undoubtedly connected with this problem of teacher compe¬ 
tence are the criticisms of current American social studies pro¬ 
grams made by Quillen and Hanna in the book, Education for Social 













Competence * Referring to some serious deficiencies revealed by a 
social-information test of 12,000 high school students, they 
write: 


The Pennsylvania Study and the Regents 1 Inquiry, both 
published in 1938, also substantiate this fact. The social- 
studies curriculums which exist in most of our schools, 
they point out, do not provide for effective educational 
development. Too often they are made up of a series of in¬ 
dependent courses in which the students learn the informa¬ 
tion required for ’passing’ a particular course and then 
proceed to forget it since the information is not neces¬ 
sary for success in the next course and since most of it 
has no relation to daily living. The Pennsylvania Study 
found that of the 20,538 high-school seniors to whom the 
American history test was given, those who had just com¬ 
pleted American history made a much better score on the 
average than those who had completed their study the pre¬ 
ceding year. Howard E. Wilson found that the students in 
New York State knew about half the items on tests of con¬ 
ventional civic information and American history; that 
there were peaks of achievement in the ninth and twelfth 
grades, where the material covered by the tests is re¬ 
quired of practically all the students. 

If students are to acquire the understandings necessary 
for effective participation in group living, the Pennsyl¬ 
vania Study concludes, they should have an opportunity to 
meet again and again important social and economic con¬ 
cepts and generalizations so that, through progressive 
study and reflection, these become a part of their mental 
equipment, to be interpreted and applied in their daily 
living. An effective social-education program should per¬ 
mit a student to grow continuously in knowledge, compe¬ 
tence, and value patterns so that by any valid standard of 
evaluation he will show marked improvement over his pre¬ 
vious accomplishments. The series of isolated courses 
which characterizes most social-studies curriculums pre¬ 
vents rather than promotes this growth.... 

...other research studies point out that the schools, 
and the social-studies programs in particular, have had 
little effect on the social attitudes which students are 
developing. The Regents’ Inquiry concluded that the atti¬ 
tudes which students hold have no relation to the quanti¬ 
ty of work taken in the social studies, but are highly 
related to out-of-school factors, to intelligence, and to 
the general morale of the school as an institution. 
Furthermore, after examining the evidence on the attitudes 
held by twenty thousand high-school students, they con¬ 
cluded that most social studies instruction and the 
school’s program in general are ineffective and sterile in 
so far as they contribute to the development of liberal 
attitudes. 

Furthermore, the economic and social crises of the 1930’s 



- . . 




. 








, 

* 





















. 


-- 

- 







. 




- 











• o o 

















- 






























125 


showed that in spite of the increased emphasis on the 
social studies, many Americans were poorly equipped in 
the necessary skills as well as in the knowledge and 
attitudes needed for democratic living. The inability of 
most individuals to think rationally concerning socio¬ 
economic problems, for example, has been demonstrated by 
the willingness of millions of people during depression 
periods to follow unsound political and economic messiahs 
who make wild promises of panaceas and utopias. Public 
discussions in the newspapers and over the radio are also 
indicative of the inadequacies in reflective thinking as 
applied to social problems. These inadequacies are par¬ 
ticularly serious in a democracy because of its reliance 
upon the reasoning ability of the common man. The main¬ 
tenance of democracy in America depends to a large extent 
on the ability of the schools to help youth to understand 
political and economic problems and to think and act in¬ 
telligently in social situations. 27 

While Quillen and Hanna do not mention the problem of higher 

teaching standards in the above quotation, it is fairly obvious 

the situation they describe is not completely the result of poor 

curriculum planning. They observe later that, "One of the major 

trends in the social-studies field in recent years has been an 

increased recognition of the need for in-service education as 

teachers of the social studies have attempted to cope with the 

rapid changes in society and the social sciences and with the 

controversies concerning the proper function, content, and 

methods of social-studies instruction", it was the need for in- 

service education that led to the organization in 1939 of the 

Stanford Social Education Investigation, the purposes of which 

were defined as follows: 

1. To contribute to the in-service development of teachers; 

2. To assist in local programs of curriculum development; 

3. To encourage experimentation in social-studies instruction; 

4. To establish closer cooperation between the work of the 
university and the work of the public school; and 

5. To develop evaluation procedures to determine the extent to 
which the techniques utilized by the Investigation were 
successful. 29 

The results of this investigation, which include the previously- 
mentioned report by Quillen and Hanna, have been influential in the 





124 

United States, and, as will be mentioned later on in this study, 
they have already influenced the present planning of a new social- 
studies curriculum for the junior and senior high schools of Al¬ 
berta. 


1 Quillen, I. James, and Hanna, Lavone A., Education for Social 
Competence , Chicago, Scott, Foresman and Company, 1948, pp. 5-6. 

2 Ibid., p.6. 

3 Dewey, John, Democracy and Education . New York, The MacMillan 
Company, 1937, pp. 250-251. 

4 Wilson, Howard E., The Fusion of Social Studies in Junior High 
Schools , Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1933, p. 72. 

5 Quillen and Hanna, op. cit. , p. 6. 

6 Ibid. 

7 Johnson, Henry, Teaching of History , New York, The MacMillan 
Company, p. 64. 

8 Ibid. 

9 Ibid. 

10 Quillen and Hanna, op. cit. , pp. 6-7. 

11 Ibid., pp. 7-8. 

12 Ibid., p. 7. 

13 Wesley, Edgar Bruce, Teaching the Socia1 Studies , Boston, D. C. 
Heath and Company, 1942, pp. 213-214. 

14 Quillen and Hanna, op. cit. , p. 8. 

15 Johnson, op. cit. , pp. 65-66. 

16 Wesley, op. cit. , p. 215. 

17 Ibid. 

18 Quillen and Hanna, op. cit. , p. 8. 

19 Ibid. 

20 Wesley, op. cit, , p. 216. 

21 Ibid., pp. 216-217. 

22 Quillen and Hanna, op. cit. , pp. 8-9. 

23 Wesley, op. cit. , pp. 217-218. 

24 Ibid., 218. 

25 Quillen and Hanna, op. cit. , p. 12. 

26 Johnson, op. cit. , pp. 82-83. 

27 Quillen and Hanna, op. cit. , pp. 13-14. 

28 Ibid., p. 17. 

29 Ibid. 


























CHAPTER XII 


THE ELEMENTARY SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM 
IN ALBERTA FROM THE REVISION OF 1912 TO THE REVISION OF 1922 

Some years before the appointment of the Committee on Social 
Studies described in the previous chapter, it became evident to 
the educational authorities of Alberta that scattered minor 
changes to the Territorial curriculum were not sufficient to meet 
the needs of the rapidly growing school population of the pro¬ 
vince. While these Alberta educationists were far from following 
the lead of the American social studies movement which was then 
gaining momentum, they recognized the fact that a general re¬ 
vision of the school program in history and geography,as in other 
subjects of instruction,was already long overdue. The course of 
studies inherited from Dr. Goggin’s superintendency had been pre¬ 
pared by one person and was based, not on the immediate needs of 
the people of the Territories, but upon the traditional school 
curriculums in more settled areas. Dr. A. C. Rutherford, the 
first Alberta Minister of Education, therefore, appointed in 1908 
a curriculum revision committee to be headed by the President of 
the University of Alberta, Dr. H. M. Tory. This committee, which 
worked for over two years on the problem of curriculum revision, 
consisted of representatives of the elementary and high school 
teachers, the school inspectors, the normal school, the University 
of Alberta, and the superintendents of city schools. Thus a real 
effort was made to enlist the services of those most qualified in 
the provincial educational field to aid in the work of curriculum 
construction, and to bring together representatives of the pro¬ 
fessional groups directly concerned with the problems of education 












. . . 

t • ■' 

. 





126 


in what was still, in many respects, a pioneer province. 

After more than two years of deliberation, the curriculum 
committee submitted a report providing for a revision and an 
expansion of the course of studies then in use. The new curriculum 
arising from this report, however, did not come into general use 
until late in 1912. As a result of the committee’s recommenda¬ 
tions, the five elementary school "standards” were transformed 
into eight "grades", while the three high school "standards" gave 
place to four "grades". Alberta had, in other words, adopted the 
"8-4" pattern of school organization which was common at that 
time in the United States. The elementary school subjects of the 
1912 revision and their grade placement may be tabulated as 
follows: 

1 

Course of Studies - Public Schools 
Grades I to VIII 


SUBJECTS I II III IV V VI VII VIII 


Arithmetic 
Reading and 

Literature 

Writing 

Spelling 

Grammar 

History and Civics 

Composition 

Nature Study 

Geography 

Drawing 

Geometry 

Manual Training and 
Household Science 
Physical Culture 
Hygiene 
Music 


X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 



X 

X 




X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 


X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 


X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

Agric. 

Agric 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 




X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 


This revised elementary curriculum, which was really an outgrowth 
of Dr. Goggin’s curriculum of 1895, was to remain the basis of 
elementary education in Alberta until the sweeping curriculum re- 


















127 


vision of 1936. The adoption in that year of both the "6-3-3" 
plan of school organization and progressive classroom methods in 
the elementary school finally ended the long domination of the 
1912 revision. 

An unusual feature of the foregoing curriculum outline is 
the omission of formal history and civics or geography courses 
until Grade V. The preliminary remarks in the course of studies 
concerning the teaching of history, however, indicated that the 
Department of Education expected introductory historical material 
to he made available to Alberta pupils in the earlier grades. 
These preliminary remarks are quoted below in their entirety be¬ 
cause they also indicate the officially approved philosophy of 
history instruction in the province: 

HISTORY. 

Definition. —The common conception of history is that it is a 
chronicle of events marking the general progress 
of mankind. This progress is concerned with material and 
industrial things, with literature, art, religion, and with 
social and political institutions. The right teaching of 
history takes account of it ultimately as a study of the 
institutional life of a people or of the progress of the 
whole social organization rather than as a chronicle of the 
doings of individuals; but as movements can best be under¬ 
stood in relation to those who are connected with their 
progress, history resolves itself into a study of the 
institutional life of the race concretely set forth in the 
ideas and actions of its men and women. 

The Biographical Side. —In the elementary school, especial¬ 
ly in beginning the subject, it is 
advisable to treat it as an account of a series of events 
or as a study of the development of institutions. A know¬ 
ledge of institutions is the result of a generalization of 
the knowledge of events, and events are of broader and 
vaguer interest than are the actions of men. This method is 
not only the most interesting, but it is the logical method, 
and the habit of mind or condition of mind of the child. 

While history in the early teaching of it is concerned 
with people and their actions, it is concerned in the main 
with the actions of people outside of the experience or 
observation of the child. It makes constant appeal to the 
imagination rather than to sense perception and in relation 
to formal teaching it is confined to the upper half of the 







128 


course. 

Much preparatory work for history is done in the 
second, third and fourth years in connection with the 
reading work. Stories of home life, of other lands and 
peoples, fables, myths, and tales of Greece and Rome 
and the Northland, adventures, great heroes, Bible 
characters, historical pictures, are good material for 
oral and written reproduction, and at the same time fur¬ 
nish excellent material for the foundation work of 
history. Up to the beginning of the fifth grade the 
story and the romantic, rather than the fact side of 
history should be given prominence. The aim should not 
be so much to impart a definite amount of knowledge and 
to require the memorizing of facts as, by a Judicial 
selection and presentation of material, to leave in the 
minds of the pupils general impressions of the results 
of right and wrong actions, to arouse an intelligent 
interest in people, places and events, and to develop 
a genuine taste for the subject. Inasmuch as in the 
child ! s mind the place relation precedes the time re¬ 
lation, maps should be freely used in the teaching of 
history in the early part of the course and geography 
is an important aid to history teaching throughout the 
course. 

History in the Upper Grades. ■—In the higher grades a 

grasp of the time relation, 

the study of motives, cause and effect and judgment as 
to the reason of things should gradually replace the 
story and picturesque side of the subject. The state 
should ultimately emerge as the highest of human institu¬ 
tions, and loyalty to the state as the first virtue in 
the citizen. 

Special Days. —The dates on which important national 
events have occurred, and national and 
school holidays such as Alberta Day, Dominion Day, 
Paardeburg Day, Trafalgar Day, Empire Day, etc., may be 
marked by special exercises and the flying of the flag. 2 


It will be noted in the above statement that the biographi¬ 
cal approach to historical instruction, originally formulated by 
Rousseau, continued to receive considerable official support in 
Alberta. The cultural background of historical study, cause-and- 
effect relationships, and time and place concepts, however, re¬ 
ceive almost equal emphasis. The formal program, commencing in 
Grade V, which was designed to carry out these objectives, may be 
summarized as follows: 

Grade V: Home history, the organization of the community, 










129 

and an introduction to the history of the 
Canadian West. 

Grade VI: The history of the Canadian West, and the ro¬ 
mantic side of general Canadian history. 

Grade VII: The story of British Canada, the romantic 

period of British history, and the Houses of 
Lancaster and of York. 

Grade VIII: Canadian history in outline with particular 
reference to events subsequent to 1760, and 
British history in outline with particular 
reference to events subsequent to 1485. 3 

The above program, it will be observed, contrasts sharply with 
comparable American programs of the first decade of the present 
century in that no European history, other than British History, 
and no ancient history are included. Otherwise, the American and 
the Alberta history programs are rather similar if one substi¬ 
tutes the history of Canada for the history of the United States. 

Under the 1912 revision formal civics instruction was to be 
given, along with history, in Grades VII and VIII.where it was to 
take the following forms: 

Grade VII: Preliminary study of the family as the social 
unit.and the school as a public organization; 
the Board of School Trustees; Municipal Govern¬ 
ment; and an introduction to the terms, Pro¬ 
vincial, Federal, and Imperial Government. 

Grade VIII: The Provincial Government; the Federal Govern¬ 
ment; and forms of national Government. 4 

In explanation of the above civics program, the course of studies 

stated: 


All school work should convince the child of the advan¬ 
tages of order and government. School training is essential¬ 
ly a training for citizenship. Class organization brings 
the community sense and the administration of the school 
develops regard for authority. Among the subjects of in¬ 
struction also history and literature contribute to broad 
training for citizenship. History shows the development of 
government and tells the story of those who have struggled 
for or advanced national liberty. Literature idealizes the 
qualities that have made men great. 


Civics, on the other hand, deals particularly with the 





130 


duties of citizenship. It gives the special training and 
information that fit the hoy for public and corporate 
duties. It is commenced formally with the study of institu¬ 
tions as they are found, rather than with their growth, as 
well as with a study of the privileges and responsibilities 
of the citizen with respect to these institutions. In ad¬ 
dition to the benefit to the citizen of knowing the 
character of the institutions affecting his life, the study 
of civics should develop public spirit and inspire to use¬ 
ful public service through the example of public men whose 
work is brought within the understanding and appreciation 
of the pupil. 5 

While this program followed the contemporary American practice of 
using the term "civics" rather than the nineteenth century title 
"civil government", the United States differed somewhat from Al¬ 
berta in the grade placement of civics instruction. Alberta con¬ 
fined the civics program to the seventh and eighth grades, whereas 
in the United States considerable but unsystematic attention was 
paid to the subject from Grades I to VI. It must be admitted, 
though, that American schools did emphasize civics more heavily in 
Grades VII and VIII than in the earlier grades. The combination 
of civics with history was also an American practice, but, unlike 
some schools in the United States, the Alberta program did not 
reflect the functional approach in the civics materials to be 
studied. The emphasis in the provincial program, in other words, 
was upon formal structure. As mentioned in Chapter VII, however, 

It was not until the publication of The Teaching, of Community 
Civics in 1915 that the functional approach in civics instruction 
in the United States really gained momentum. 

A very striking aspect of the general curriculum revision of 
1912 in Alberta is the attempt to correlate geography with nature 
study in Grades I to IV. This unusual change in the course of 
studies was explained by the Department of Education in the 
following words: 

GEOGRAPHY, NATURE STUDY ADD AGRICULTURE 







. 














. 




' 

t 










. 


■ . 








' 








. 

























: 





















Scope♦ —Geography teaching is the channel through which 
the pupil gets a knowledge of the world far away 
and near, including the earth itself (taking account of 
land, water and the air), animate and inanimate nature, 
man and his activities and the elementary aspects of his 
political organization. In general geography is the 
natural science subject of the public school. 

Geography and Nature Study. —A difference is sometimes 

made between geography and 
nature study on the basis of one being a formal body of 
organized knowledge of general character on the one hand 
and of the other being concerned with incidental, local 
and perhaps minute nature on the other hand, or of one 
being essentially a study and the other a method. As the 
materials of both subjects for the earlier years of 
school, however, are common and cannot with advantage be 
separated, and as the close observation method is ap¬ 
propriate to both, the subjects are combined during the 
first half of the public school period. 

Formal Geography and Agriculture. —In the fifth year the 

geography becomes 

more formal and takes account of larger physical, com¬ 
mercial, and political relations for the remainder of 
the course. The institution of the school garden is made 
a part of the nature-study work in the fifth and sixth 
grades, and is accessory to the definite elementary soil 
and plant science of the seventh and eighth grades. The 
term agriculture might just as suitably be horticulture. 
The work in agriculture is not intended to be specifical¬ 
ly vocational and may serve the home-maker or gardener 
in town equally with the person living and working in 
the country and give valuable science training to both. 

In the organization of Rural Schools it may be con¬ 
venient to give a manual training aspect to the course 
in the Grades VII and VIII as suggested under the Course 
in Manual Training. 

Method. —The combination of geography with nature study 
is one way of emphasizing the field method of 
instruction. While formal geography involves large 
prospection on the part of the pupil, there is much ma¬ 
terial belonging to the first four years of the course 
in both subjects, and to all of the nature-study and 
agriculture, that is wholly suited to field and labora¬ 
tory methods. Adequate treatment of the course demands 
much out-door teaching. The general aim of the teacher 
in relation to the nature-study side is the awakening of 
interest by the encouragement of observation, and in re¬ 
lation to the agricultural side is to develop a recog¬ 
nition of use on the basis of understanding. As agric- 
culture is an applied science understanding should be se¬ 
cured by experiments with soils and plants in the school¬ 
room, school garden, home garden and farm. 














- 

. 

. 





' 


. 

* 

, 

- 

. 

- 

, 


» 

. 

, 

. 

. 





132 


In the teaching of geography other than local, liberal 
use should he made of literature, pictures, etc., relating 
to travels, natural features, and the habits and activi¬ 
ties of people in other lands. 

Industrial Studies♦ —The course should not be looked upon 

as inflexible or exhaustive. It should 
be modified or expanded to take account of conditions and 
activities in different parts of the province, or in cities 
as distinguished from the country. 6 

The curriculum arising from this correlation of geography and 

nature study into one course may be tabulated briefly as follows: 

Grade I: Direction and time, weather observations, plants, 
and animals. 

Grade II: Direction and time, time, weather, plants, and 
animals. 

Grade III: Map work and conventional direction on maps, weather, 
vapor phenomena, forms of land and water, plants, 
and animals. 

Grade IV: Forms of land and water, map work, the earth as a 
whole, rotation, revolution, plants,and animals. 7 

While it is not necessary for the purposes of the present report 

to trace the subsequent separate courses id nature study, it is 

important to note the geographical studies in Grades V, VI, VTI, 

and VIII which followed the correlation program of the earlier 

grades. In outline, these studies were as follows: 


Grade V: North America, Canada, the United States, Mexico 
and Central America, South America, and local 
physiography. 


Grade VI: Europe, the British Isles, Asia, Africa, 

Australasia, and a study of the causes of climate. 

Grade VII: The British possessions, Alberta, and vapor 
phenomena. 

Grade VIII: T Review of geography of the countries of the world, 
with special reference to exchange as the outcome 
of characteristic resources and activities. 

Simple plan of government in type, states or 
countries. 

’Trade routes of the world. Careful map con¬ 
struction. 

’Latitude, Longitude, and Time.’ 8 
Despite the correlation feature of the foregoing geography cur- 























' 






, 


. 













133 


riculum, it will be observed that the general pattern of the 
program is quite reminiscent of Dr. G-oggin’s course of studies 
in geography which was quoted in its entirety in Chapter IX. 

In 1918 there was another general revision of the course of 
studies by a committee of educationists, but the changes made 
applied to the elementary school program only. Although this re¬ 
vision was not, on the whole, a radical one, the curriculum in 
history and civics was rewritten and changed to a considerable 
extent. The correlation of geography and nature study was con¬ 
tinued, but it now ceased at the end of G-rade III rather than at 
the end of Grade IT. Sven the introductory comments in the course 
of studies were rewritten. The preliminary remarks concerning the 
courses in history and civics, for example, were consolidated as 
follows: 


HISTORY AND CIVICS. 

’It is important for the good citizen to know his social 
and political environment, to have some appreciation of the 
nature of the state and society, some sense of the duties 
and responsibilities of citizenship, some capacity in 
dealing with political and governmental questions, some¬ 
thing of the broad and tolerant spirit which is bred by the 
study of past times and conditions.’ 

HISTORY. 

In the teaching of History in the elementary school 
grades due consideration must be given to the stage of the 
child’s mental development, the relative strength of 
imagination, memory and judgment, and the character of his 
interests and sympathies. 

In the earlier grades emphasis should be placed upon 
the dramatic, picturesque and romantic. The ’child’s ideas 
are of the pictorial rather than the abstract order’. Ad¬ 
vantage should be taken of this to prepare him for the 
real study of history in the later grades,—by acquainting 
him with many historical personages, establishing the 
’historical sense’, and by creating and fostering a love 
for the subject. Biography is best for these grades. A 
wide use of pictures, maps and illustrative material is 
necessary. 

In the intermediate grades the effort should be to pre- 



sent the facts and have them mastered by the pupils; 
but these facts must be carefully related, and the 
lessors must be presented in an interesting way. 

In the senior grades the judgment should be trained 
by means of reflections upon the facts, the study of 
cause and result, and the tracing of the course of 
great movements in history. 

The work in history should, in all grades, be cor¬ 
related with Geography, Literature, Composition, 

Science, and the Manual Arts. 

In general, the aims should be: 

To develop understanding and proper judgment of 
present tendencies through a knowledge of the 
past; 

To inculcate patriotism; 

To quicken and strengthen the moral sense by means 
of a study of the good and evil tendencies in 
individuals, and the results of right and 
wrong courses of action; 

To give a knowledge of the facts of History—which 
is invaluable for reading and culture. 


CIVICS. 

The study of civics in the public school should give 
the pupils training in habits of good citizenship, as 
well as inform them regarding government forms and 
machinery. 

The aims are, in general,-- 

To help the child realize that he is a responsible 
member of the social group; 

To awaken and stimulate motives that will lead to the 
establishment of habits of order, cleanliness, co-opera¬ 
tion, service and obedience to law; 

To emphasize the inter-dependence of the welfare of the 
individual and the welfare of society at large; 

To acquaint the youth with the character of the institu 
tions affecting his life; 

To develop political intelligence and prepare the young 
citizen for its exercise. 9 


While the ideas are essentially the same, it will readily be 




■ 
























. 





























135 


agreed that the above statement of the case for instruction in 
history and civics is much clearer both in wording and in manner 
of presentation than the introductory comments contained in the 
revision of 1912. 

The course outline in history and civics, which emerged 
from the 1918 revision, differed decidedly from the revision of 
1912. Formal statements of the requirements in history for 
Grades I, II, III, and IV were made for the first time, while 
formal civics instruction was to begin in Grade V rather than in 
Grade VII. The history requirements for the first four grades, 
which are reproduced below, are highly significant because they 
reveal the influence of the report of the Committee of Eight 
published in 1909: 


GRADES I AND II. 

Simple stories from the lives of Bible characters: 
Joseph, Moses, Samson, David, Daniel. 

Stories of child life among the following people: 
Indians, Japanese, Chinese, Dutch, Eskimos, French, Eng¬ 
lish, New England Colonists, Swiss, Australians, Russians. 

Special days: Christmas, Thanksgiving, Victoria, Do¬ 
minion, St. Valentine’s. 


GRADE. III. 

Stories connected with the lives of great heroes: 
Achilles, Horatius, King Arthur, Boadicea, Alfred the 
Great, Bruce, Wallace, St. Patrick, Nelson, Joan of Arc, 
Roland, William Tell, Abraham Lincoln, Adam Daulac, Made¬ 
line de Vercheres, Laura Secord, Lord Selkirk, Dr. Gren¬ 
fell. 


GRADE IV. 

I. Interesting stories of the peoples who have contri¬ 
buted largely to the advancement of civilization: 

Egyptians,—stories of pyramids, mummies, and great 
works. 

Greeks,—buildings, statues, games, myths 9 
Phoenicians,—ships, commerce, adventures on the sea. 
Romans,—founding of city, stories of great leaders, 
myths. 




































. 






. ' 


. 




. 




- 

. 







136 


Anglo-Saxons,—sea-rovers, habits, homes, customs, 
laws, administration of justice. 

II.—Stories connected with lives of great artists, 
inventors and explorers: 

Michael Angelo, Galileo, Stephenson, Watt, Hargreaves, 
Morse, Bell, Marconi, Edison, Columbus, Raleigh, Drake, 
Magellan, Livingston, Peary, Scott, Shackleton, Amundsen.10 

A significant feature of the above course outline is the ap¬ 
pearance of a fair amount of ancient history in Grade IV. This 
addition to the history curriculum marks an attempt to break 
away from the over-emphasis on British and Canadian history, so 
characteristic of the previous courses of studies. It was some 
years, however, before this broadening tendency in the history 
curriculum manifested itself in the higher grades. 

The requirements of the 1918 revision in history and civics 
for Grades V, VI, VII, and VIII are tabulated below. The civics 
requirements, however, are stated in full, for the most part, 
because they very obviously reveal the influence of the 
functional approach to civics which had been announced but three 
years before with the publication of The Teaching of Community 
Civics by the National Education Association. 

GRADE V. 

X. Community History. 

II. Early History of the West. 

III. Adventurers and Explorers of the West. 

Civics 

In this grade % beginning is made in the study of civics. 
The treatment of the subject should be suited to the age of 
the child and consist of informal class discussions intro¬ 
duced at suitable times and ibr the purpose of developing a 
sense of obligation to co-operate with others in matters 
which pertain to the common good. 

These discussions should be made to centre about the ap¬ 
pointment, authority and duties of the following public of- 









137 


ficials, and the child's responsibility to co-operate 
with these in the performance of their duties in the 
keeping of law and order and the protection of public 
property: 

Mounted Police, Postmaster, Mail Carrier, Postman, 
Homestead Inspector, Attendance Officer, School Inspector, 
Weed Inspector, Game Guardian, Provincial Health Officer, 
Superintendent of Schools, Juvenile Court Commissioners, 
Policeman, Sanitary Inspector and Staff. 

Note. —These public officials are the ones with whom 
the child may have to do as a junior member of 
the community; in addition, others may be taken if circum¬ 
stances permit. 


GRADS VI. 

The Story of French Canada and the Canadian West. 

The history of this grade should be dramatic and narra¬ 
tive in form. The teacher must present vividly the facts so 
that the children may reconstruct, by means of their own 
imagination, the real life of the past. There should be an 
abundant use of pictures, historical maps and other 
illustrative material. Smphasis should be placed upon 
personal adventure and accomplishment, and the children 
should be led to admire the heroic and self-sacrificing, 
and to despise the treacherous and selfish. 

Civics 


I. —The Family —The Social Unit. 

Parents provide home, food and clothing, administer the 
home and regulate the actions of the family. Children are 
under obligation to parents for care, and yield obedience 
with respect to behavior and home duties. 

II. —The School —A larger community than the family. 

Organization more complex; system of administration 
larger; government suited to larger numbers; central 
authority (Principal) delegated (Teachers); responsibili¬ 
ties more various in kind and degree; greater need for 
community spirit,—sacrifice of selfish motive for common 
good, adjustment of individual interests to community 
interests, co-operation, courtesy, obedience to authority. 

III. —The Order of Business at Public Meetings. 

This should be taught concretely by organizing the class 
into a club or society and conducting an election of 
officers. Meetings should be held and the proper order of 
business followed. No formal teaching in this connection is 
intended. 




















i 


- 


t ■■■ 













































■ 





















• 


















- 












* ' ' c 

. 





■ 


- 















138 


GRADE VII. 

I. —The Story of British. Canada. 

Note.—The teacher should continue to make use of the 
romantic and dramatic phases of history; at the same time 
there should be a conscious effort to present the facts. 

The work should be made concrete and interesting by the 
use of historical maps, pictures, biography, and dramatic 
narratives. 

II. —The Story of the British Nation to 1485. 

Note.—It is suggested that time relationships should 
be established in the minds of the pupils, not only by 
connections with great personages and the more outstanding 
important dates, but also with reference to the centuries 
and periods, the latter being of great value in the pupils T 
later studies of history, literature, art and science. 

Civics 


I.—The Board of School Trustees. 

II.—Municipal Government. 

III.—Introduction of terms Provincial, Federal and Im¬ 
perial Government. 

Current report of the municipality and the School Board. 

GRADS VIII. 

Canadian History 
I.—French Period. 

II.—British Period. 

British History 

I.—Period of English History Prior to 1485. 

II.—Period Subsequent to 1485. 

Civics 

I.—The Provincial Government. 

II.—The Federal Government. 

Forms of National Government. 

Public Meetings: Simple rules of order for con¬ 
ducting of public meetings.il 

It will be noted that the historical material to be covered in 































139 

Grades IV to VIII under the above program is practically identi¬ 
cal with the requirements of the 1912 revision. 

Turning to the section of the 1918 revision which deals 

one finds 

with geography, nature study, and agriculture,/a repetition of 
the preliminary explanations in the 1912 course of studies en¬ 
titled, "Geography and Nature Study" and "Formal Geography and 
Agriculture". The course requirements in geography in the re¬ 
vised curriculum are very similar to those of the 1912 school 
program, but, as previously mentioned, geography and nature 
study were to be separated in Grade IV, rather than In Grade V. 
Although the curriculum requirements for nature study in the 
first three grades was revised considerably in 1918, the geo¬ 
graphy section of the course in these grades remained virtually 
in 

the same as/the 1912 announcement. From Grades IV to VIII the 

revised geography requirements may be outlined as follows: 

Grade IV: Map work, the earth as a whole, North America, 
Canada, Alberta (the local community). 

Grade V: North America, Canada, Alberta, map drawing, the 
British Empire. 

Grade VI: Climate, South America, Europe, the British 
Isles, map drawing. 

Grade VII: Asia, Africa, Australasia, map drawing. 

Grade VIII: A review of the continents, the British Empire, 
maps, climate throughout the world, astronomical 
geography. 12 

Despite the various changes to the elementary curriculum 
which were made in 1918, the educational authorities of Alberta 
do not seem to have been satisfied that the best possible course 
of studies had been produced to meet the needs of the school 
population of the province. The new course of studies scarcely 
had been published when the Department of Education began to lay 































t i 








140 


plans for another curriculum revision which will he discussed 
in the next chapter. Even if one disagrees quite strongly with 
the type of curriculum for the elementary schools which emerged 
from the revisions of 1912, 1918, and 1922, it must he conceded 
that this decade of curriculum revisions stands in marked con¬ 
trast to the long domination of the Territorial curriculum from 
1895 to 1912 and indicates, at least, a little more readiness on 
the part of the educational leaders in Alberta to make the ele¬ 
mentary curriculum less rigid. 


1 Alherta, Department of Education, Annual Report, 1912 (Edmon¬ 
ton, 1913), p. 81. 

2 Ihid., pp. 99-100. 

3 Ihid., pp. 100-103. 

4 Ihid., pp. 103-106. 

5 Ihid., p. 103. 

6 Ihid., pp. 110-111. 

7 Ihid., pp. 111-113. 

8 Ihid., pp. 114-115. 

9 Alherta, Department of Education, Course of Studies for the 
Public Schools, Grades I—YIXI (Edmonton, 1918), pp. 49-51. 

10 Ihid., pp. 51-52. 

11 Ihid., pp. 52-67. 

12 Ihid., pp. 84-86. 













CHAPTER XIII 


THE ELEMENTARY SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM 
IN ALBERTA FROM THE REVISION OF 1922 TO THE REVISION OF 1936 


Shortly after the publication of the curriculum revision of 
1918, the position of Supervisor of Schools was created in the 
Alberta Department of Education. On October 1, 1918, the princi¬ 
pal of the Camrose Normal School, Mr. G. F. McNally, was ap¬ 
pointed to this newly-created position which included direct 
responsibility for the school curriculum. Mr. McNally, according¬ 
ly? began immediately to give attention to the problem of cur¬ 
riculum revision. His procedure, which broke away from past pro¬ 
vincial practice in this field, has been described as follows: 

....At various points throughout the province he set up 
committees consisting of members of school boards, teachers, 
and interested citizens representing all phases of pro¬ 
vincial life. These committees were asked to study the re¬ 
vision of 1918 and to offer constructive suggestions for 
the improvement of the course. The understanding was that 
if the 1918 course of studies was not meeting the needs of 
the children, a complete revision would be made. 

....a questionnaire was prepared as a basis for discussion. 

The questionnaire was sent to representative groups, 
such as organized farmers, farm women, women r s institutes, 
teachers 1 associations, trustee boards, clubs, and boards 
of trade, with a request that some time be given to a 
study of the 1918 Course of Studies for the Elementary 
School, and that the Department of Education be given the 
benefit of these deliberations. Many replies and valuable 
suggestions were received. Committees were organized and 
the actual work of redrafting the courses was set over un¬ 
til early i*n 1921. The Course of Studies in its revised 
form was to be ready for use in the schools by midsummer, 
1922....To concentrate the thinking of every teacher in 
Alberta on the programme, at the beginning of 1920, 
circulars were sent out requesting them to keep a weekly 
record of the work done by them in the classroom. 1 

The re-organization of the school curriculum announced in 1922 

provided that certain fundamental subjects called "constants" 




■* 


, 


, « 

' 

.... 

■ 




! < 1 

■ 

* 

* • *• • • 













142 

were to occupy eighty per cent of the classroom time in the ele¬ 
mentary school, while "directive or optional" courses were to 
receive the remaining twenty per cent. The "constants" were de¬ 
fined as English, arithmetic, geography, citizenship, writing, 
music, and physical education. The "directive or optional" 
courses were agriculture, art, manual arts or household economics, 
French, and commercial subjects. The complete Course of Study for 
1922, accordingly, was published in the following three parts: 

Part I—English and Citizenship, 

Part II—‘Arithmetic, Elementary Science, Industrial Arts, 
Writing. 

Part III—Music, Physical Education, the Directive Courses. 

For the purposes of the present study, the novel feature of this 
organization of the curriculum is the correlation of courses in 
history and civics under the title "Citizenship" and the inclusion 
of geography with elementary science. This re-classification of 
geography from the area of the social studies to that of the 
natural sciences, it will be noted, conformed with the tendency 
in the United States for general science courses to absorb physi¬ 
cal geography. 

Following the revision of 1922, certain changes were made in 
the course of studies in 1924 which removed some unsatisfactory 
features of the new elementary curriculum. The 1924 revision, if 
it may be classified as such, witnessed the consolidation of the 
elementary course of studies into the following two parts for 
publication purposes: 

Part I—English, Citizenship, and Arithmetic. 

Part II—Elementary Science, Industrial Art, Writing, 

Music, and Physical Education. 

The above consolidation was continued in 1929 when the Elementary 
Programme of Studies was reprinted. The 1929 reprint, however, 
was not entirely a verbatim repetition of the 1924 edition 




143 

since some textbook changes and minor revisions in the curriculum 
were included. But summing up the period from 1922 to the 
sweeping revision of 1936, one finds no really major curriculum 
alteration or modification between these two dates in the ele¬ 
mentary course of studies. Departmental enthusiasm for curriculum 
revision, indeed, seems to have waned for a time during this 
long period, but the revision of 1936 finally enabled the ele¬ 
mentary schools of Alberta to keep abreast of educational de¬ 
velopments elsewhere in North America. 

Although the wording of the 1922 course of studies in 
citizenship was changed considerably in the 1924 edition, the 
course requirements remained practically the same. The 1922 out¬ 
line of the citizenship program seems to have been organized in 
such a way that the specific requirements in each grade were not 
made sufficiently clear to the classroom teacher. Whatever may 
have been the reasons for the re-writing of the citizenship pro¬ 
gram, the 1924 outline is at least much clearer in this rather 
important respect. Since the 1922 citizenship outline was in. ef¬ 
fect for' only two years and since its requirements were not 
materially altered in the 1924 revision, the wording of the 
latter, which was effective for twelve years, will be used in 
the following account of the elementary social studies curriculum 
during the period under discussion. 

The correlated citizenship course, which in "title, ; at least*, 
was something new in Alberta social studies education, required 
fairly lengthy introductory statements throughout the curriculum 
outline as to both the aims and methods of such an ambitious 
elementary school program. While it is very doubtful that the in¬ 
tentions of the curriculum makers were carried out in many of the 































- j •)■■■; ■ . il 




« • 




- 


















. . ' 












- 

.. 






v • - 


* 












144 

schools of the province, the statements in the course of studies 
are of no small importance because they indicate not only a 
change in educational thought from previous curriculum announce¬ 
ments in the social studies field, but a movement in the di¬ 
rection of the principles of the 1936 revision. The following 
preliminary remarks, for example, contain significant references 
to the problem of education in a democracy, the social background 
of school life, group activities in the classroom, and a con¬ 
sideration of economic conditions in conjunction with civics: 

’Education in a democracy, both within and without the 
school, should develop in each individual the knowledge, 
interests, ideals, habits and powers whereby he will find 
his place andjuse that place to shape both himself and 
society toward ever nobler ends.’ In other words, one 
conception of education is that it shall prepare the indi¬ 
vidual to do better those things which he is likely to 
have to do anyway. 

In a country such as ours where the conduct of the af¬ 
fairs of the state is in the hands of all the people, 
training in the duties of citizenship could hardly be ne¬ 
glected. This course is built on the general assumption 
that adequately meeting each day’s need as it arises is 
fulfilling all the present requirements of Citizenship 
and is the best preparation for meeting* the needs of 
adult life. At every moment of his active life the child 
faces situations in which society demands that certain 
traditions and conventions in the way of speech, action 
and bearing be respected. Nor is society at all lenient in 
its judgments. It may well happen that a child with suf¬ 
ficient intelligence to make a real contribution to 
social betterment, may have his service rejected because 
of unprepossessing personal habits. Training is emphasized 
in the first three grades and specific practice demanded 
that approved reactions may become habitual. 

Children enter our schools with widely different social 
heredities, experiences and practices. The school environ¬ 
ment is a continual battleground in which it is to be 
feared not always the best survives. Only when the school 
is the conscious ally of the home can the task be ade¬ 
quately done. School life brings to the child the new ex¬ 
perience of membership in a new social group. The course 
aims, through practice in group activities such as class 
movements and games, to assist the child to establish 
right relations with his fellows. 

While the conventions and standards of a civilized com¬ 
munity may be ver# rigid in their requirements, they are 





145 


nevertheless the product of years of experimentation in 
community living. In Grades III and IV, while the idea 
of training is still strong, talks should be given as oc¬ 
casion arises to show the pupil the necessity for rules. 
The group with which he is most familiar and to which he 
is bound by the strongest ties is the family. Unless the 
school can succeed in increasing his devotion to it, 
there is little hope of securing his attachment to the 
broader group, the reasons for which he can discern but 
dimly as yet. For this reason the idea of the family is 
of great importance. It is hoped that the pupil will ap¬ 
preciate more fully his position as a member of modern 
society in comparison with the family and tribal life of 
other days and other peoples. In Grades IV and V the 
lessons from indirect experience relate to early settle¬ 
ment in the land which we call Home. These stories thus 
supplement his work in Geography. 

Society has always protected itself through great 
leaders and has ever made itself more efficient through 
the service of its great men. Biographical studies make 
up a large part of the course in Grades V and VI. These 
deal with leadership. Grade V concerns itself in part 
with the mighty doings of supermen in the days when the 
earth was younger; Grade VI with actual historical 
characters of the day ’when Knighthood was in flower’. 
From these the pupils should get faithful pictures of 
Feudal England and of Mediaeval organization. Stories of 
the bravery of the great navigators and explorers of more 
modern times give further opportunity for the spirit of 
hero-worship. Stories of modern social institutions and 
organizations introduce the formal study of Civics. 

In Grades VII and VIII the major portion of the work 
is formal history. The former concerns itself with the 
social growth of the British people and their expansion 
in trade and territory to the uttermost parts of the 
earth. The work of Grade VIII traces the development of 
our political institutions and the growth of our demo¬ 
cracy. In Civics the pupil is led to consider our present 
economic condition and present-day practice of govern¬ 
ment . 2 


As could be expected from the foregoing introduction, the 
curriculum outline which followed for the Citizenship courses in 
the elementary school is not confined to civics and historical 
materials only, particularly in the earlier grades. This outline, 
accordingly, does not lend itself so well to summary as the 
courses of studies previously examined in this investigation. The 
instructions for the handling of the course in each grade are es- 






















. 


' 







. 












. 





















. 









- 

. 














146 


pecially difficult to condense without altering the meaning of 
those responsible for the curriculum. However, if one leaves these 
instructions in their original form, the Citizenship program may¬ 
be condensed as follows: 

GRADES I AND II. 


A. —Direct Experience. • 

Training: (a) Development of automatic responses in 

group and individual activities in situa¬ 
tions incidental to school and school 
life. 

(b) Cultivation of a desirable school public 
opinion and attitude on all the usual 
primary school problems. 

Some specific habits which should be striven for in these 
grades are the following: 

I. Courtesy. 

II. Personal Habits. 

III. Co-operation. 

IV. Sportsmanship. 

V. Self-Discipline. 

B. —Indirect Experience. 

In addition to the matters in which training in the 
formation of manly habits and some appreciation of the 
value of such habits is the dominant idea, instruction 
through stories and talks ahould be given in the more 
abstract virtues of morality. The aim should be to 
cultivate a taste for the beautiful in externals and 
in character. Here again the intellectual is to be ap¬ 
pealed to and the child f s feelings and desires stirred 
to crystallize the specific habits already formed into 
an expression of his nature. This is character building. 
The Special Committee of the Moral Education League of 
Great Britain names the following for children of 7-8 
years: 


1 . 

2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6 . 
7. 


Cleanliness and tidiness. 
Manners. 

Kindness. 

Gratitude. 

Fairness. 

Truthfulness. 

Courage. 


GRADES III AMD IV. 


A.—Direct Experience. 

In the outline for Grades I and ^ the emphasis has been 














. 













' 


. 


























• 


. 



. 







-■ 

























147 


placed on training and habit formation. The main con¬ 
cern was the crystallizing of right reactions into habit 
on the part of the individual. The course in Grades III 
and IT expects the continuance of training in the for¬ 
mation of these habits but the individual idea is 
subordinated to the group idea, and the intellectual and 
appreciative elements are to be made much more prominent. 

The object is respect for authority and obedience to it, 
regarding it as the expression of the pupil’s own desires. 

Out-of-door Life of Children. Development of Community Pride. 

Appreciation of the progressiveness of a community in 
providing public highways, sidewalks and paved streets, 
public parks, public recreation grounds, public schools, 
churches, public libraries, public order, the peace in our 
streets, public boulevards, public telephone and tele¬ 
graphs, public health, public safety whether of life or 
property. 

The teacher should discuss with the class the necessity 
for school rules, and from this discussion evolve rules 
which all agree upon as necessary and right. These rules 
of necessity must curb and restrict the freedom of the 
pupils, but because the children have participated in 
framing them there will be a strong body of public opinion 
back of them for their enforcement. School rules should be 
few and only carefully considered ones finally approved. 

When the need for a rule ceases to exist, the rule should 
be formally repealed. 

Evolve rules of conduct concerning community possessions 
based on the idea that a person should respect community 
property just as he does family property, and that harmony 
in a community is a vital need just as it is in a family. 

This year’s work should aim at the development of communi¬ 
ty pride. 

The pupils should evolve rules concerning all these 
matters and regard themselves as a club to see that they 
are enforced. Point out that the object of rules of the 
road, etc., and of laws generally, is the same as the 
rules they have framed themselves. 

Discussion of the family, old customs, public opinion, 
and the law. 

B.—Indirect Experience. 

Instruction should be given in: 

(a) Grade III, through stories and discussions on the 
following: 

1. Cleanliness. 

2. Manners. 

3. Honesty. 

4. Justice. 






148 


5. Truthfulness. 

6. Courage. 

7. Self-control. 

8. Work. 

(b) Grade IV, through stories and discussions on the 
following: 

1. Manners. 

2. Humanity. 

3. Obedience. 

4. Patience. 

5. Perseverance. 

6. Justice. 

7. Truthfulness. 

8. Order. 

Correlations should be established with Physical 
Training, Hygiene, Elementary Science, Memorization, 
Composition, and Writing, with the object of carrying 
over into permanent habits the lessons taught.... 

History Talks. 

The History stories for Grade IV should be given in 
the form of reading or talks. The theme is our province 
and its inhabitants before the period of active settle¬ 
ment took place. 


GRADE V. 

With this grade Citizenship training becomes more and more 
that of indirect experience. The main purpose is to develop 
courage and self-reliance. This is the beginning of the 
period of hero-worship. It is important that the stories 
and discussions in this grade should be about admirable 
people. 

Citizenship training can be made effectively not by talks 
about moral qualities and desirable conduct, but by con¬ 
sciously planning situations in which these qualities appear 
in the normal response of the pupils and through observation 
of these qualities active in the lives of the heroes in 
their stories. 

Some of the qualities which should be magnified in the 
mind of the pupil at this stage are self-respect, a sense of 
pseronal honour, a sense of justice, courage, forethought 
in speech and action, and the right use of leisure time. To 
this end the teacher will use (a) stories of the explorers 
of the country that is now the home of the pupils; and (b) 
the famous stories of all countries and all ages. Suitable 
heroes—Jason, Theseus, Hercules, Beowulf, Siegfried, 

Arthur, Holand, Oliver, and Hobin Hood. 

History. 


The work implied in carrying out this part of the pro- 





149 


gramme is in no sense formal teaching of History. It 
should he interwoven with the oral language work, sup¬ 
plementary reading and study of Geography as opportunity 
suggests. Here as in Grade IV the one aim in using his¬ 
torical events and characters is to awaken an interest 
in the past and to quicken a disposition on the part of 
the children to know more about it. Curiosity once 
aroused will demand satisfaction. No attempt should be 
made to form and present a complete chronological ac¬ 
count of the discovery, exploration and settlement of 
the Northwest. The method of presentation in agreement 
with the aim as stated above consists rather in the use 
of graphic word pictures of stirring events and of 
interesting tales of adventure. The material will be 
largely of the nature of stories related to the winning 
of our Canadian West for civilization. These stories 
should be sometimes told, sometimes read, to the class; 
as much as possible, too, the children should be allowed 
to have that enjoyment of them that comes from each 
reading for himself independently. Towards the end of the 
year these should be gathered into a systematic outline. 

GRADS VI. 

The aim of the course is to promote self-reliance, to 
establish in the mind of the pupils the value of co-opera¬ 
ting through organizations, and the necessity for leader¬ 
ship. The exploits recounted and the eagerness of the band 
well organized and well led for action should stimulate 
the pupil and make for zest instead of passivity in his 
conduct. The teacher may with advantage organize one or 
more suitable groups (athletic, musical, literary, etc.) 
in the school, exercising a supervisory and inspirational 
guidance but encouraging pupils’ own initiative. 

Nature of the Course. 


The lbrmal study of history should be begun in this 
grade, but the teacher’s chief aim should still be to 
arouse curiosity about life and conditions in times past. 

The pupils’ Interest in romance and stories of adventure is 
suggestive of the means and method to be used. It is in 
assisting the pupils to develop mental pictures that the 
teacher finds many favorable opportunities for an indirect 
teaching of history. History, so taught, is for the child¬ 
ren a part of real life and thus a means of acquiring 
citizenship. 

Pupils in Grade VI are at an age when organization has a 
strong appeal. Ngte how numerous are the opportunities the 
teacher may have of making reference to organization of 
different forms: the old English manor life; the Feudal tie; 
Robber bands; the clan under the Scottish chief; national 
organization under Parliament; organization for voyages of 
exploration. The important thing to emphasize is the nature 
of the binding ties in each case, and the increased power 
of accomplishment. 




150 


Tlie course is intended to give a picture through 
narratives and biographies of the different organizations 
through which our ancestors passed before modern times. 
These momentous changes which preceded and led up to our 
modern ideas of society are connected with the lives of 
outstanding leaders. The story of these leaders, so far 
as they influenced the trend of events or were repre¬ 
sentative of the life of their times, their historical 
significance and the stirring incidents in which they 
played the leading role, should receive emphasis, and not 
the purely private details of their lives. 

In the mind of the pupil the course should leave an in¬ 
delible impression of the romantic side of Saxon times, 
Feudal times, the Crusades, the Hundred Years’ War, the 
Common People and the Early Exploration. The narrative 
side is to be stressed. The pupils should learn these 
stories by reading them as they read other stories. The 
teacher’s place is hot to synopsize and dictate notes. 

Cive the pupil the pleasure of reading stirring narra¬ 
tives. 

It is expected that the teacher will direct attention 
to the chronological sequence, use maps extensively in 
connection with the explorers and elucidate from her 
superior knowledge points not clear, but where the reading 
course assumes that the pupil has knowledge. 

It is suggested that the pupils keep a personal History 
Note Book; adopt a period chronology based on that listed 
below. Sometimes it would be well to catalogue the inci¬ 
dents of a given period about men’s names, at others, to 
classify both incidents and men under broad movements or 
great social changes. The pupil should also be required to 
narrate in its proper place some interesting incident or 
biographical impression in a way similar to that recommend¬ 
ed in the course in English Composition. 

It is not intended that the books and stories mentioned 
in the following course be considered as the only ones 
suitable for the purpose; many teachers will find others 
equally suitable. The purpose is simply to use interesting 
legends, historical tales and selections from works of 
fiction with historical reference in order to assist the 
pupils in forming a series of mental pictures of life and 
conditions during certain important periods of history. The 
only requirements which this aim imposes are: first, order 
in the course; second, that the main features in the 
picture formed for each period have reference to the chief 
characteristics of life and conditions of that period. 

Extent of the bourse 


Early Mediaeval Times, 800-1500 
Later Mediaeval Times, 1300-1500 
The Tudor Period 











. 













































































































Explorations of Eastern North. America 
Civics 


Consideration should he given the present-day or¬ 
ganization of social life under such topics as: Com¬ 
munity Life, Community Institutions, the part played 
hy Government in the community; Citizenship in re¬ 
lation to such great community institutions as the 
family, the school, the church* Emphasis should he 
placed on the befits which the child received from 
community organizations and the contribution which he 
can make now. 


GRADE VII. 

In this grade the study of history takes on a more 
serious aspect. While the teacher should not hurry to 
huild up a body of historical knowledge to he *com¬ 
mitted to memory 1 , an effort should he made to develop 
in the pupil something of the T tlme sense*. Pictures 
of the past, featuring developments in the social and 
industrial life of the people, are still most important 
Foundation work must he done here that will provide a 
sure basis for the history work in Grade 7II±, with 
which the elementary school course is completed. 

Feudal England, 1066-1485 

Tudor England, 1485-1603 

England In Stuart Times 

The French Period in Canada 

The Early British Period in Canada 

Civics. 

Social Relationships Based on 'Making a Living* 

(a) Personal possessions distinguished from pos¬ 
sessions in common in urban home; in rural 
home. Wants and needs; luxuries, thrift, 
savings; hanking; investments. 

(h) Private property distinguished from public 
property. 

(c) Trading or exchange,—Barter, as in school¬ 
boys* trading of knives, stamps, coins; as 
between Indians and the factors at trading 
posts; exchange fbr money, 7 -money at one 
time not in general use; kinds of money; ad¬ 
vantages in use of money as a medium of ex¬ 
change; exchange of service for money and 
money for service; the trades, the professions 
labor, skilled and unskilled; exchange of 































- 

. 















. 

. 






i « 

















152 


goods for money,—natural products of the water, 
the mine, the forest, hence the extractive 
industries, e.g., fishing, mining, trapping, 
lumbering, dairying; cultivated products of the 
garden, the field, the farm,—hence the cul¬ 
tivation industries—horticulture, argiculture, 
stock-raising, fruit-growing, etc.; manufactured 
products of the mill, the factory,—hence the 
manufacturing industries. The producer, the 
middleman and the consumer,—the rural family, 
the merchants, the urban family, to illustrate. 
Nature and values of the market. 

(d) Needs of transportation,—methods of transporta¬ 
tion, as used by trappers and fur traders; by 
pioneer settlers; by farmers; by shippers; by 
tourists; by nations in times of war; for do¬ 
mestic trade; for foreign trade. 

(e) Value of communication; means of communication 
in early times; in present times,—the postal 
service, the telephone, the cable, the wireless, 
aeroplane service, the press, the pulpit, the 
picture. 


GRADE VTII. 

1. The Basis of British Liberty. 

2. Growth of Democracy in Britain. 

3. The British in Africa, Asia and Australasia. 

4. The Great War, 1914-1918. 

5. Survey of Development of Political Institutions in 

Canada. 

6 . Canada’s Growth. 

Civics: 

(a) Municipal Government In Alberta. 

(b) The study in outline of the organization of the 
government of the Province; the election of re¬ 
presentatives from electoral districts or 
constituencies; chief duties and responsibili¬ 
ties of these representatives; the departments 
of administration. Establish clear notions of 

the ’Government’, the ’Opposition’, the ’Cabinet’, 
the ’Prime Minister’. 

(c) The chief characteristics of a federal form of 
government. Show that the government of the Do¬ 
minion of Canada is of this type. Distinguish be¬ 
tween the following: the Governor-General, Parlia¬ 
ment, Cabinet, House of Commons, the Senate. 













153 


(d) Discuss three or more of the outstanding powers 
or responsibilities of the Federal Government 
and of Provincial Governments. (It is advisable 
to discuss the matter of revenues.) In con¬ 
nection with (b) and (c) discuss the meaning 
and working of Responsible Government. 

(e) The Administration of Justice in Alberta. 

(f) The Rights and Duties of Citizens. 3 

Taking this elementary Citizenship program as a whole, its 

most outstanding feature is the endeavor to correlate a number of 

social studies materials, even though geography was classified 

revision 

as an elementary science course under the 1922/for Grades I to 

VIII. Officially, the Citizenship courses were described as n in- 

4 

eluding History, Civics, and Ethics", the latter inclusion being 
a rather surprising revival in another form of the course re¬ 
quired by Dr. Goggin r s Territorial curriculum of 1895. The ethics 
material, it will be noted, however, is almost entirely confined 
to the first four grades where it tended to take the form of a 
character-building course. Despite the Departmental definition, 
the Citizenship program included some other materials besides 
history, civics, and ethics. Certain sociological and geographi¬ 
cal concepts are also present, though the latter are necessarily 
limited by the separation of geography from the field of the 
social studies. 

An interesting result of the correlation of several social 
studies materials into the Citizenship curriculum is a change of 
emphasis in the instruction In history and civics. Less emphasis, 
for example, was to be given to history in the earlier grades 
than under the 1918 revision. The statement that the formal study 
of history was to begin in Grade VI continues the principle es¬ 
tablished by the 1912 revision—that formal history should not be 














r . . 







































154 

taught before Grade V at the earliest. Civics instruction, though, 
is commenced much earlier under the 1922 revision than seems to 
have been thought possible by the curriculum makers of 1912 and of 
1918. As early as Grade III the teaching is required of such 
civics concepts as public opinion and the reasons for our legal 
system, while in Grade VII the subject of economic civics, a new 
educational development for Alberta, is introduced to the pupil. 
Both these trends, it will be noted, are in accord with the 
American practices in civics instruction discussed in Chapter VII. 

Some change in methodology also may be found in the new 
Citizenship program. Techniques of class discussion and class 
dramatization are mentioned, while in Grades III and IV it is 
suggested by the Department of Education that the class may even 
be encouraged to evolve school rules. Grade VI teachers, more¬ 
over, are instructed not to synopsize and dictate notes in their 
handling of the historical materials for that grade, though it 
must be reported that many did so, no matter what the Department 
had to say about classroom procedure. With regard to the question 
of methodology, it is important to record one significant 
modification of the 1922 Citizenship program in the 1924 edition 
of the course of studies. At one point in the 1922 outline of the 
Citizenship instruction for Grades V and VI the following sug¬ 
gestion is made: 

Socialization of Studies—Geography, History, Arithmetic, 
Composition, Manual Arts,—by introduction of project work; 
by organization of class into pupil-groups for discussions, 
debates, matches, or competitions. 5 

The fact that this passage, or another with similar ideas, fails 
to appear in the course of studies for 1924 would seem to indi¬ 
cate the teachers of the province, as a whole, were not ready to 
accept such radical techniques for classroom instruction. Al- 





155 


though the Department of Education dropped its proposals for 
socialized procedures in the classroom, these abandoned ideas 
were revived on the Alberta educational scene in no uncertain 
way with the introduction of the general curriculum revision of 
1936. 


Turning to the elementary school geography program included 
in the revision of 1922, one finds that it lasted without change 
until 1936. No formal geography was required under this program 
in Grades I and II, though the nature study courses in those 
grades contained some slight references to geographic phenomena 
not unlike those of the earlier school programs. Like the course 
outlines for Citizenship, the Departmental descriptions of the 
formal geography requirements from Grades III to VIII are 
characterized by a greater effort to explain the official in¬ 
tentions for each grade than ever had been given before In Al¬ 
berta. Condensing the actual course outline to the main subject 
headings and leaving the preliminary explanations unaltered be¬ 
cause of their importance in defining official educational 

geography 

policies, the element ary/curriculum may be presented in the 
following form: 


GRADE III. 

The beginning in geography should be made in this grade, 
in the form of talks and discussions among the children on 
the natural forces operating around about them, the 
falling rain and snow, the winds and what they do, frost, 
running water, and so on. By this means bases are estab¬ 
lished from experience, with which to interpret geographi¬ 
cal data in the subsequent grades. The forms of land and 
water may be observed in the vicinity of the home, or by 
making them on the school grounds, or by using the sand¬ 
box, supplementing observation in each case by plans and 
diagrams on the blackboard and on the flat surface of a 
piece of paper or page of a book. Mere memory recitals of 
set definitions is discouraged. Nearly all these forms may 
be associated with the hill and slope and running water. 

The simple beginnings in map-work should be made, re- 







156 


stricting the effort to plans of the class-room and school 
grounds. 

I. Seasonal Changes Affecting the Life of the Pupil. 

II. Surface Features. 

III. Transportation and Travel. 

IY. Sky Study. 


GRADE IY. 

In this grade attention will he largely confined to the 
community. The general topographical features of the 
countryside should be fairly well mastered, paying par¬ 
ticular attention to the nature of the soil, and its ef¬ 
fect upon the life of the community and the occupations of 
the people. The main roads and cross roads in the neigh¬ 
borhood, their conditions at different times in the year 
and where they lead should be studied. In rural districts 
the locations of the homes of the people in the community, 
and in the urban districts the locations of the main 
buildings and manufacturing plants, should be indicated. 
Charts and maps will be made, locating chief community 
features. The nationalities of people may be made the basis 
for taking the pupil afield to the homelands of these 
peoples, about which stories may be read or told. Yarious 
articles of food, cooking utensils and machinery may be 
made the basis for taking imaginary trips to the places 
from which these products are derived. The railway train 
of freight cars, or a passenger train, will form a splen¬ 
did motive for faking the child afield from his home sur¬ 
roundings. The passing of an automobile math a strange 
license plate, a trip made by a member of the class or 
some great world event may form the starting point for 
taking the pupil in imagination into the world beyond his 
immediate surroundings. 

The people in the community, where they came from be¬ 
fore living where they do now. Stories about their home¬ 
land far away. The favorable and unfavorable conditions 
which are found in the community which make it a suitable 
place in which to live. This study will involve climatic 
conditions, general surface conditions of hill or plain, 
sandy or heavy soil, high or low, fertility of soil, sus¬ 
ceptibility to hail or early frost, nearness to railway 
or good roads, ease or difficulty in getting to base of 
supplies for groceries, clothing, machinery, fuel, water 
for home and stock, etc. 

The big world beyond to which grain, stock, coal, lum¬ 
ber and other products are sent, and from which tea, 
coffee, sugar, and cottons are obtained. Means of com¬ 
munication with the world a long way off. Stories of some 
far-away countries associated with some local interest or 
common article of home use. 








■ 

- 

' 

■ 

3 

- 

. 


- 

t . | ' 

- 


. 















157 


In a general way only discuss—tea from China, location 
of China on globe, people who live there, some of their 
customs of living, kinds of homes. How tea is grown, 
gathered, and prepared, how it comes to us. 

In a similar way treat sugar from Cuba; raisins from 
Spain; silk from Japan; nuts from South America; olives 
from Italy; pineapples from Hawaii; grapes from Ontario; 
apples from British Columbia. Lead pupils to the homeland 
of citizens in the neighborhood, locating the land both on 
the globe and on a flat map. Dwell upon some interesting 
general facts in connection with these lands and people. 

Map-making of community, showing roads, chief buildings or 
residences. An understanding of scale, movement of sun, 
moon, North Star and Dipper, Milky Way, evening star. The 
roundness of the sky, of the sun, of the moon. 

(No course outline, other than the foregoing, appears in 
the Grade IV section of the elementary geography cur¬ 
riculum. ) 


GRADE V. 

From local experience and knowledge the pupil must be 
led into the great world beyond his immediate surroundings. 
The inter-relationships of plants and animals, and the re¬ 
lationship of these to man, are of interest to him. The 
earth globe and its general characteristics in land and 
water areas, in hot and cold belts, and the effect these 
have on the earth as the home of man, are matters of 
general knowledge he should Have before he can even ap¬ 
preciate the geography of his home province. How other 
people live, what they do, and how this affects him are of 
great interest and importance to him in the relationships 
he must establish as a citizen of the world. More particu¬ 
larly, however, he will be called upon to obtain a fairly 
comprehensive knowledge of his own province. This study 
should result in pride in his home province, and an 
ability to demonstrate to others the advantages of his pro¬ 
vince, that make it a good place in which to make a home. 
Globe study is very essential. Following the location of 
the large land areas on the globe, will come the study of 
the flat map. Map symbols and methods of representation 
will be mastered in this grade, in which the child will be 
expected to master in quite minute detail the map of the 
province of Alberta. An outline map, on which to record 
progress in study, will be found of much value. 

The great land and water areas making up the earth-ball 
definitely located on the globe, and named; also the great 
barriers to intercommunication; oceans, mountains, deserts, 
ice barriers. The zones, temperature, characteristics, with 
typical plant and animal distribution. The great factors 
which make the earth a suitable home for man: moisture, 
temperature, fertile soil. General map surface translated 
from spherical surface of globe to flat map. Study of maps 
of the continents, with interpretation of marks indicating 


. 

' 


: 



. 

* 

' * 

. 




’ 





























158 


map features; more particular reference made to the map of 
North America, more specific references to places on the 
world area that have some significance to home life, lo¬ 
cating them both on the globe and on the map. 

I. Alberta—Its Location on the Globe, on the Continent 
and in Canada. 

II. A Railroad Ride over Alberta. 

III. A Visit to Alberta Cities. 

IV. The Land Survey in Alberta, Map of a Township. 

V. North America. 

GRADE VI. 

In geography, globe study will be continued, with the end 
in view of establishing definite ideas of the motions of the 
earth and the relations of these motions to the earth as a 
place in which to live. The relation between the earth and 
the sun, the moon and the stars will be established in this 
grade, and the child taken in imagination out into the space 
beyond the earth. Special study will be made of the con¬ 
tinent of North America, with emphasis on Canada as our own 
country. In the study of the continent, care should be taken 
not to make it too formal, and yet there should be a definite 
mass of subject mattey, of such a nature that when it is 
mastered by the pupil he will have a substantial body of 
data that will give him the ability to comprehend and in¬ 
terpret the great geographical controls operating in the 
areas studied. The relation of geographical data to man 
should be maintained all the time. 

I. General-—the Earth as a Ball Floating In Space. 

II. The Surface Features of North America. 

III. The Dominion of Canada. 

The natural subdivisions; the Great Central Plain 
of Canada; the great drainage systems of Canada; 
the political subdivisions of Canada; climate; the 
natural resources of Canada which make her po¬ 
tentially great; the industrial activities of the 
people of Canada; the trade and commerce of Canada.’ 

IV. The United States and Alaska. 

V. Mexico. 

VI. Central America. 

VII. The West Indies. 


VIII 


South America 


















.. 



















■ 




* 

' 












. 








GRADE VII 


159 


In the preceding grades certain general principles will 
have been fairly well fixed. For example, the geography of 
the world is merely an extension of the geography of the 
locality, into which gather and from which radiate myriads 
of lines of communication. Exactly the same forces act in 
distant areas on the earth as operate in the district in 
which the pupil lives. Light, heat, air, moisture, and soil 
may be considered common factors which determine the geo¬ 
graphy of a country. These are variable in different areas, 
and as a consequence a variety of conditions exist which 
determine the suitability of the areas as the home of man. 
Upon these conditions depend man’s problems of food, 
clothing, shelter and protection. These requirements may 
become very complex. They may vary from those of the simple 
Eskimo to those of the wealthy dweller in a modern city, 
surrounded by all the luxuries his imagination may conjure 
up. The ingenuity of man in harnessing the forces of nature 
£o make them do his work, and his consequent ability to 
overcome barriers that otherwise would confine him, makes 
the field of world geography of the greatest personal 
interest to him, because of the myriad points of contact 
established in every turn of his daily life. The newspaper, 
through the medium of the telegraph, is making distant 
portions of the globe and the happenings therein as fa¬ 
miliar to him as were neighboring communities to his fore¬ 
fathers. The oceans that were once effective barriers are 
now the greatest boon to intercommunication. The shelves of 
the grocer or the cases of the dry goods merchant are 
stocked with wares gathered from all corners of the earth. 
An intelligent citizen simply must be familiar with the 
general principles of world geography. He should know the 
general location of the main countries of the world, and 
the outstanding centres of trade and commerce. The impor¬ 
tance of these centres, and the reasons for their impor¬ 
tance, is a matter of legitimate concern. The natural re¬ 
sources of a country, the people and their customs, the 
surplus products and the requirements of the people, the 
natural advantages in the country, in the form of climate, 
fertility of soil, proximity to raw materials and to mar¬ 
kets, how wares reach us and what we send in return, are 
all matters of interest to us about a country and of po¬ 
tential importance. The child in Grade VII is too young, 
and his time in the grade too brief, to make it possible 
to cover even in fair detail the whole field of world geo¬ 
graphy, but in a general way he may be made to delight in 
entering into the experiences of his fellow-beings in 
other lands, sharing in their successes, and bearing with 
them in their struggles. 

In this grade a survey will be made of the whole field 
of world geography. This, of course, will be made through 
a general survey of the continents, paying more particular 
attention to the more important countries and places in 
these. The preliminary study of any new continent or 
country should be made from the globe. In this study the 
following general method is advised: Shape of continent, 
contour (including the important coastal indentations), 










latitude and longitude, ocean currents and their influence 
surface features, plains, plateaus and mountain systems, 
drainage, location and volume of the great drainage sys¬ 
tems, temperature belts, prevailing winds, rainfall, plant 
and animal products, other natural resources, trade routes 
articles of commerce of concern to us, human life, and cus 
toms of the people. The maps of Europe and Asia and Africa 
should be drawn showing the main coastal features, eleva¬ 
tions, drainage systems, temperature belts, rainfall re¬ 
cords, political divisions and centres of commerce, routes 
of commerce. 

I. Eurasia. 

II. Europe. 

III. Asia. 

IV. Africa. 


GRADE VIII. 

In Grade VIII the special field for geographical study 
is the British Empire. In the previous grades, a survey 
has been made of the world and the continents. In this 
study a general survey will have been made of the great 
British Empire. The work in this grade is intended to link 
up the various parts of the great Empire into the com¬ 
ponent whole it has proven to be in time of crisis. This 
study will involve a careful survey of the motherland of 
Britain and Ireland with the view to determining the great 
underlying principles which have made her the mother of 
such a wide-spaced world empire. The strategic position of 
the islands, their natural resources, the climatic con¬ 
ditions of the land, its insular nature, and relatively 
large coastline and the genius and integrity of the people 
are matters of great interest in considering how the Em¬ 
pire grew to such proportions. A sympathetic attitude 
should be established on the part of every pupil for the 
motherland. A sympathetic attitude should be developed in 
the minds of the pupils, and they should be made to feel 
proud that they have intimate relationship with so great a 
people—so rich in literature, in art, in music, in adven¬ 
ture, in science, and in learning. 

The names and locations of the various portions of the 
great Empire, far-flung throughout the world, should be 
known to all. The inter-relationships of these parts is of 
fundamental importance, if the integrity of the Empire is 
to be maintained. The peoples in the Empire should be 
known by their characteristics and national aspirations. 
Their habits of industry, their opportunities for develop¬ 
ment, their contributions to the good of the Empire, their 
ideals and hopes, are matters of family concern to all 
members of the greater unity. By this study an attitude of 
sympathy should grow, and a co-operation should be made 
effective, that should be mutually helpful in any world 































































. 

. 















- 




















161 

crisis that might involve any portion of the Empire. 

In this grade the pupil should he expected to bring 
certain general principles in world geography to bear 
upon the study of the geography of any part of the great 
Empire that may be studied. The reasons for conditions 
as they may be discovered should receive much at¬ 
tention. The correlation of historical data with geo¬ 
graphical phenomena will often be found to be of the 
greatest interest to the pupil. The globe location of 
all portions of the Empire should be determined in terms 
of latitude and longitude. How the different parts came 
to be a part of the Empire should be known. How each 
contributes to the maintenance of the whole, and what 
the motherland contributes to the welfare of each part, 
are matters of great interest. How British relationships 
have benefitted the land, and the possibilities in de¬ 
velopment and world influence of the portions of the Em¬ 
pire, are matters of conoern to every subject of the Em¬ 
pire . 


The range of the Empire is so great that it involves 
nearly every geographical phenomena known in the world. 
This study will open good opportunities for studying and 
applying the great world principles governing climate 
and their effects. This will involve the prevailing air 
movements and their effects, the advantages of oceans, 
the formation of deserts, and the regions of excessive 
rainfall. Tariations in the time in the various portions 
of the Empire should be explained. Tides and their phe¬ 
nomena will come in incidentally, and a general explana¬ 
tion should be in order. On the whole, the treatment 
should be such that when the pupil may at some time 
visit a distant land, he will have a basis of judging 
and understanding many things which otherwise would be 
merely empirical and superficial. 


I. 

II. 

III. 

IT. 

Y. 

YI. 

YII. 

VIII. 


The British Isles. 

England and Wales. 

Scotland and Ireland. 

The Empire. 

Great Trade Routes Connecting the Motherland with 
the Dominions. 

The British Empire in America—North and South. 

The British Empire in Asia. 

The British Empire in Africa. 

The Empire in the South Seas. 

(a) Australia. 

(b) New Zealand. 6 


IX 



162 


Despite the classification of geography as part of elemen¬ 
tary science under the 1922 revision, the course material is not 
strikingly different to that required under the previous courses 
of studies. Certainly, there is not a greater scientific 
emphasis in evidence in the curriculum outline. Indeed, the his¬ 
torical background of geographical study receives considerable 
attention in the program, particularly in the sections which 
discuss the British Empire. The preliminary remarks for the 
Grade VIII portion of the elementary geography curriculum even 
go so far as to include the statement, already quoted, that, w The 
correlation of historical data with geographical phenomena will 
often be found to be of the greatest interest to the pupil”. 
Reading a statement such as this in the course of studies, one 
wonders why the curriculum makers were so determined to divorce 
geography from the Citizenship program which was in theory, at 
least, an attempt to correlate many of the materials now re¬ 
garded as constituting the social studies. As previously men¬ 
tioned, it is true that in the United States physical geography 
had been absorbed by general science courses, but the Alberta 
curriculum makers in following this trend do not seem to have 
endeavored to restrict the elementary geography curriculum suf¬ 
ficiently to the physical aspects to justify its inclusion with 
the elementary science program. 

The method of approach used in the geography curriculum of 
1922, however, stands out in sharp contrast to the previous Al¬ 
berta course outlines in geography. Comparatively elaborate ex¬ 
planations of how the courses should be handled are provided, 
whereas previously little or no effort was made in this di¬ 
rection in the official curriculum announcements. Reading through 


































k ' ; : 

........ 


- 

. 






. 





























. 


163 

these explanations and the course requirements, one notes a very- 
conscious effort to develop the pupils’ steps in geographical 
understanding from his immediate community of interests to that 
of the British Empire and of the world. In Grade III the map- 
work is to he confined to plans of the classroom and school 
grounds, while surface features and seasonal changes discussed 
are to he those that the pupil sees every day. The next step is 
made up in Grade IV of a rather intensive study of the child’s 
community, while in Grade V the pupil’s horizon is broadened to 
the geography of Alberta which is to he examined in some detail. 
The last section of the Grade V geography course is devoted to an 
outline study of North America which is followed up in Grade VI 
with a comprehensive survey of the geography of Canada and of 
South America. In Grade VII the pupil completes his study of 
world geography with an examination of the geographical features 
of Eurasia, Europe, Asia, and Africa, and in Grade VIII a special 
study is made of the great community of peoples of which he him¬ 
self is a member—the British Empire. 

From the point of view of methodology, the geography re¬ 
vision of 1922 is rather disappointing. Although the Department 
of Education warns against ’’mere memory recitals of set defini¬ 
tions” in Grade III, some unfortunate phrases occur in the pre¬ 
liminary remarks for the other grades. In Grade V, for example, 
the pupil is ’’expected to master in quite minute detail the map 
of the province of Alherta”. In Grade VI one reads that "there 
should he a definite mass of subject matter, of such a nature 
that when it is mastered by the pupil he will have a substantial 
body of data that will give him the ability to comprehend and in¬ 
terpret the great geographical controls operating in the areas 





. 













. 












. 




■: ■ 










. 








■ 


. . 






- 








































164 


studied”. Meanwhile, the requirements for Grades VII and VIII 
indicate that considerable memorization of facts would be un¬ 
avoidable under the curriculum then in effect in the province. 
The Department of Education probably did not approve of the 
amount of memorization by rote which took place in many geo¬ 
graphy classrooms, but it must be admitted that the official 
course of studies did not do a great deal to counteract such a 
tendency. The examination of the inspectoral criticism of the 
teaching of the social studies subjects from 1912 to 1936, which 
is to follow the next chapter on the secondary social studies 
curriculum during the same period, will give specific evidence 
as to the type of geographical instruction to be found in the 
schools of the province prior to the great curriculum changes of 
1936. 


1 Sheane, George Kennedy. The History and Development of the 
Curriculum of the Elementary School in Alberta . Unpublished 
Doctor’s thesis, University of Toronto, 1948, pp. 61-62. 

2 Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for the 
Elementary Schools of Alberta, Part I (Edmonton, 1924), pp. 
126-127. 

3 Ibid., pp. 127-143. 

4 Alberta, Department of Education, Course of Studies for the 
Elementary Schools of Alberta, Part I (Edmonton, 1922), p. 4. 

5 Ibid., p. 136. 

6 Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for the 
Elementary Schools of Alberta, Part II (Edmonton, 1929), pp. 
35-51. 













CHAPTER XIV 


THE SECONDARY SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM 
IN ALBERTA FROM THE REVISION OF 1912 TO THE REVISION OF 1936 


Under the general revision of 1912 the subjects of the Al¬ 
berta high school curriculum were divided into two groups—the 
obligatory and the optional. The social studies subjects of the 
revised secondary program were history and geography which were 
both obligatory. The geography courses, however, were only 
taught in Grades IX and X, while history was taught in Grades IX 
to XII. Although the 1912 revision for elementary history and 
geography included a considerable amount of explanatory material, 
the secondary curriculum for both these subjects was notably 
lacking in a lengthy exposition of aims or methods. The require¬ 
ments are so tersely stated that it is possible to include the 
titles of the textbooks in the following outline without adding 
materially to the length of the quotation from the course of 
studies: 


GRADE IX. 

History : The leading events of Canadian History with 
special reference to the period subsequent 
to the year 1763. British History up to the year 
1485. Teachers should aim to stimulate comparison 
and judgment on the student T s part rather, than the 
mere exercise of memory. 

Text Books: Duncan—History of the Canadian People. 

Buckley and Robertson—High School History. 

Geography : Political, commercial and mathematical geo¬ 
graphy with elementary astronomy. Special at¬ 
tention will be given to the British dependencies--the 
resources, productions, chief cities and peoples; the 
world's commercial highways; commercial relations of 
Canada and Great Britain; Canada and the United States. 

Text Book: Dominion School Geography (Educational Book Co.) 






166 


GRADE X. 

History : The leading events of British History with special 
reference to the period subsequent to the year 
1485; a general review of Canadian History; Canadian 
Civics. Examinations will be such as to require comparison 
and the use of judgment on the student T s part rather than a 
mere exercise of memory. 

Text Books: Buckley and Robertson—High School History; 

Duncan’s The Canadian People; Jenkin’s Canadian 
Civics. 

Physical Geography : A general knowledge of the Physical 

Geography as treated in the prescribed 
text. 

Text Book: High School Physical Geography (Macmillan Co. of 
Canada). 


GRADE XI. 

History : General History to the close of the Medieval Period 
(p. 485), constitutional history of Canada. 

Text Book: Myers’ General History, revised edition; Bouri- 
not—How Canada is Governed (Copp, Clark Co.). 

GRADE XII. 

History :— 

Bagehot—The English Constitution (Kegan, Paul, 

Trench and Co.). 

Myers—General History—Modern Age. 1 
A comparison of the above program ?#ith the social studies 
sections of the Territorial high school standards reveals little 
change either in course content or in the authorized textbooks. 
The latter, it will be noted, continue to be so important to the 
curriculum that little more than a sentence or two was used by 
the Department of Education to describe what it expected high 
school teachers to discuss in each of the history and geography 
courses. This failure to improve upon a social studies curriculum 
which dated back to 1895 is disappointing because it not only ig¬ 
nores the findings of the Committee of Seven published in 1899, 
but it shows no effort at all on the part of the Department of 








167 

Education to guide or direct high school teachers toward better 
classroom methods. The small high school enrollment of those 
days, however, may be a partial explanation of this apparent in¬ 
difference to the instruction in the secondary schools of the 
province. 

It was not long, though, until some criticism began to be 
expressed by the high school teachers themselves concerning the 
history curriculum. In a rather influential address delivered ,at 
the twentieth annual convention of the Northern Alberta Teachers’ 
Association, Morden H. Long of the Victoria High School staff in 
Edmonton made the following criticism on November 9, 1916: 

Quite rightly, I think, in the public schools the 
child should begin with his own locality, as in Geo¬ 
graphy, and broaden out from that gradually into national 
Canadian History, and from that to imperial British 
History. Thus we follow the very sound theory of pro¬ 
ceeding from the more immediate and known thing to the 
more distant, difficult and less known, from the more 
particular to the more general. 

But there is an advantage also in the other method of 
going from the general to the particular, and I am in¬ 
clined to think that in History there might be adopted 
with advantage in high school work some such outline as 
follows: 

Grade IX—General History to 800 A.D. 

Grade X—General History to Modern Times. 

Grade XI—British History from 1485, Canadian History 
from 1763, and Civics. 

Grade XII—Bagehot’s English Constitution, Industrial 
History, Elements of Political Economy. 


It seems to me that our present system has the following 
disadvantages: 

Hirst, that British History, being repeated in Grade IX 
immediately after it has been covered in Grade VIII, cannot 
be taught with much more intensiveness because the pupil 
has but little more maturity. The result is that the 
Grade IX course tends to be too much of a barren repetition, 
the subject becomes distasteful and the problem of main- 


























. 


i 

- 










; 

. 

' 

' 

; : 










taining interest becomes acute. 


168 


The same argument bolds true with regard to Canadian 
History in Grade X, where Duncan’s rt Story of the Canadian 
People”, already familiar from Grades VII and VIII, is 
once more used. 

Again, in Grades XI and XII, the only two years in 
which work of much intensiveness is possible, though 
there is a Civics course, yet most attention is given to 
General History, whereas the demands of training for 
citizenship would seem to indicate that these years 
would be better spent in studying more intensively the 
development of our own peculiar Canadian and British 
institutions and problems. 

The taking of Ancient History in Grade IX would solve 
the first of these difficulties. Instead of a repetition 
of work but recently covered we would have subject matter 
entirely new and fresh. It may be objected that Ancient 
History cannot be thoroughly dealt with at this period, 
but the obvious reply is that neither can English History, 
or any other subject, be treated profoundly in Grade IX. A 
boy or girl of 14 or 15 is surely just as capable of 
gaining an elementary idea of the Spartan, Athenian or 
Roman constitution as he is Of the complicated British and 
Canadian ones, and if there is any truth in the race epoch 
theory surely the boy or girl of that age is just at the 
stage where this General History cannot fail to interest. 

The story of the strange and interesting civilizations of 
Egypt and Babylonia, the tale of the far-wandering Phoe¬ 
nicians with their precious wares, of the heroic struggle 
of the freedom-loving Greeks against the giant power of 
despotic Persia, the conflict of Rome with Carthage, the 
Crusades—the tale of these and other such things forms a 
dramatic, moving human story that can scarcely fail to 
appeal. 

And so on in Grade X with the Middle and the Modern Age. 

In Grade XI the student could then come back to British 
and Canadian History and Civics with a two-fold advantage. 

In the first place, two years having elapsed, the subject 
matter will not be stale to him, and he will now have the 
necessary maturity to handle it much more intensively. Se¬ 
condly, in the two years that have passed he will have ac¬ 
quired, in outline at least, a notion of General History 
that will place British and Canadian History in their 
proper background and setting, and give many of their 
scenes a new and fuller significance. 

To take but two instances. The student of British History 
would see that the Hew Monarchy of the Tudors and the Divine 
Right pretensions of the Stuarts were but the recognized 
European political doctrine and tendency of the age, and 
that the English civil war and the revolution of 1688 were 
the beginning of an era of revolutions throughout Europe, 






169 


representing the reaction of the rising power of the new 
middle class and modern democracy against these Divine 
Right things. On the other hand, the student of Canadian 
History would see in the gradual working out of responsible 
government in a colony the evolution of a new sort of 
state, the Dominion, a thing quite unique and unparalleled 
in all previous history. 

Thus the events of British and Canadian History could 
now be studied, not as isolated phenomena, but as inter¬ 
related intimately with World History—the only proper way 
of studying them. 

With this knowledge as a background and the maturity of 
another year, the student in Grade XII would be able to 
handle all the better the prescribed constitutional, in¬ 
dustrial and economic subjects with the difficult practical 
problems in citizenship that they involve. 

In such a system as I have attempted to outline, then, 
in the public schools the child would start with local com¬ 
munal history, this being expanded into Canadian history, 
and this in. turn being broadened into British history. A 
boy or girl leaving school after Grade Till would have in 
outline the story of his own country—that historical know¬ 
ledge most essential for citizenship. 

But in the high school the same process would continue, 
British History being broadened into two years f work in 
General History. Then the process of going from the more 
particular to the more general would be reversed, and 
Grades XI and XII, the two years most capable of intensive 
work, would be devoted to British and Canadian History and 
problems. These again are the things most practical for a 
citizen to know, and the students who intended to teach 
would leave with exactly that subject matter freshest in 
mind and most thoroughly handled which they would be called 
on to teach to their classes. 

This is simply my own idea of a wise arrangement of the 
course. It may be very faulty, but I believe at least that 
the problem of arrangement of fields is a very important 
one that will repay careful consideration. I have ventured 
to take up this much time with what may on its surface ap¬ 
pear to be a high school problem simply, because it seems 
to me that if there is faulty histoo" teaching in the pub¬ 
lic schools the secret of remedying^largely lies in better 
teaching in the high schools and universities where 
teachers themselves are trained.2 

These remarks, coming from a teacher, who only a few years before 

had been a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University and who was on the 

staff of one of the province f s largest high schools, attracted 

much attention and received such commendation that the northern 






c 











170 

Alberta Teachers’ Association arranged to have the complete ad¬ 
dress published for distribution to the history teachers of the 
province, Mr. Long’s address, which was entitled "Aims and 
Methods of History Teaching”, received as well a special note of 

approval in the annual report for 1916 of Mr. 1. A. Fife who was 

3 

then in charge of the Edmonton school inspectorate. In the 
following year Mr. Long was made President of the Northern Al¬ 
berta Teachers’ Association, and, later, after he had been ap¬ 
pointed professor of history at the University of Alberta, he 
was made a member of history revision and examination committees 
of the Department of Education. In the matter of curriculum re¬ 
vision, it will be seen presently that Mr. Long’s recommenda¬ 
tions, which are similar to those of the Committee of Seven, had 
an effective influence. 

Under the new Supervisor of Schools, Mr. G. F. McNally, the 
work of curriculum revision, which was mentioned in Chapter -XIII, 
was extended to include the secondary course of studies. In the 
case of the latter, however, the curriculum changes did not go 
into effect until 1924. The high school program was reorganized 
to provide a greater diversity of studies. Thus six alternative 
courses were provided: Normal Entrance, Matriculation, Agri¬ 
cultural, Commercial, Technical, and General. Meanwhile, the num¬ 
ber of subjects to be taken concurrently by any high school stu¬ 
dent was reduced. Each of these subjects was to be known as a 
unit and promotion was to be made by subject or ’’unit”, not by 
grade. Every unit was to have the same value and to require, ac¬ 
cordingly, the same amount of time per week. Certain subjects, 
however, were regarded as "constants”, no matter which of the six 
alternative courses one took, and such subjects as English and 



171 

history, therefore, were designated as obligatory for every 
course. 

Unlike the high school revision of 1912, the revision of 
1924 included the statement that "cause must be shown for the 

4 

retention of any subject either as obligatory or as optional”. 

In support of this contention the Department of Education placed 
a statement of aims and values before the detailed list of con¬ 
tents of each subject of study, and enunciated in the following 
words a concept of curriculum construction not mentioned before 
in an Alberta course of studies on the secondary level: 

The statement of aims and values has been made in some 
detail, inasmuch as it is believed that the teacher is de¬ 
sirous of knowing the legitimate potential objectives in 
his work, and the reasons for the selection and arrange¬ 
ment of the material in a curriculum. Education must no 
longer be a blind process of faith; it is now becoming the 
sphere of the master craftsman engaged in the building of 
the greatest structure the world knows—a human life. 5 

In accordance with this point of view, the new units, History X, 
2, 3, and 4 are prefaced in the official Handbook for Secondary 
Schools by a general introductory note under the heading, 
"History, Civics, and Economics”. Though somewhat lengthy, this 
statement of the aims and values in history instruction is an im¬ 
portant declaration of Departmental policy governing four-fifths 
of the secondary social studies program which lasted in Alberta 
from 1924 to 1936 and which was the replacement for the 1912 high 
school social studies program outlined earlier in this chapter. 
The remaining one-fifth of the 1924 secondary social studies cur¬ 
riculum consisted of a Grade XI course known as Geography 1 which 
will be discussed later. The general introductory note to 
History 1, 2, 3, and 4 and significant excerpts from the course 
outline which followed are quoted on the following pages: 










172 


In the teaching and study of History, Civics, and Eco¬ 
nomics in High Schools two aims should he held in view. 

These can perhaps best be termed the informational and the 
developmental. These subjects, properly taught and studied, 
should place the student in possession of a body of know¬ 
ledge of both practical and cultural value. They should 
also help, along with other subjects, to develop his in¬ 
tellect, expand his imagination, and engender worthy 
personal and social ideals. 

We live in a complex society. The study of Civics should 
give to the youthful members of it a knowledge and under¬ 
standing of its political and social institutions and their 
operation. The study of Economics, likewise, should give 
them a knowledge and understanding of the laws governing the 
production, distribution, and consumption of wealth, in 
which processes all are interested since they are fundamen¬ 
tal to civilized life. But one cannot go far with the study 
of either Civics or Economics without realizing that they 
deal with institutions and conditions which are the product 
of the past, and which are not intelligible without a know¬ 
ledge of the past. This the stu$y of History should give. 

The story of man, the unremitting labor, the exhaustless 
patience, the marvellous ingenuity, the searching thought, 
the growing spirit of co-operation and self-sacrifice, which 
have achieved the things of civilization and make them pre¬ 
cious—this story is the birthright of every boy and girl. 

It is this record of the racial past which alone can afford 
to each successive generation a full understanding of the po¬ 
litical, social, and economic environment in which it finds 
itself. And it is such a knowledge of the past leading to an 
understanding of the present which is one of the surest 
safeguards for a sane and enduring progress in the future. 

History, Civics, and Economics afford excellent oppor¬ 
tunities for intellectual training. They should be so taught 
as to develop the innate memory capacities of the pupil, and 
to lead him to organize and group his memory facts in such a 
way that recall is ready, accurate, and complete. But these 
subjects are sciences, and the tasks required of the pupil 
in History should be those required in any other science. He 
should search for data, group them, and build generalizations 
thereon. He should be required to discriminate between more 
and less important facts, should be guided to detect and 
trace the operation of cause and effect in social develop¬ 
ments, and should be led to make judgments on historical 
events and personages, and acquire training in the evaluation 
of human actions. Care should be taken,from the first, that 
the pupil should form a scientific method of study. He should 
be practised in the logical arrangement and effective oral 
and written presentation of materials. Above all, he should 
be taught that, as far as it is possible, he should discard 
preconceptions and prejudices, when he approaches any social 
problem, and should go whither the facts, in the light of 
reason, lead him. 

But History, Civics, and Economics have a human interest, 


. 







, " : • t 

. 


. 




; ; ) , 



< ' 

: • , 

: 

. 

i 

. 

t 


i' -..'"Ov.. : 










173 


and possess moral and emotional factors which make them 
possible agencies for much more than merely intellectual 
training. This is particularly true of History. Its pages 
unroll a grand and dramatic human story which should be 
capable of stirring the imagination, appealing to the sym¬ 
pathies, and arousing generous enthusiasm in boys and 
girls. They acquaint the student not only with the greatest 
men of past time, but also with great and vital principles 
of political liberty and social justice and show the 
lengths to which human heroism and constructive genius and 
co-operative effort may go in furtherance of them. In a 
word, these subjects are capable of placing before the 
young worthy ideals, both for the individual and for society, 
and of affording a stimulus towards their attainment. 

In our day, manhood and womanhood suffrage have placed 
ultimate political authority irrevocably in the hands of 
the masses of the people. It follows that the problems, po¬ 
litical, social, and economical which society faces can be 
solved only by citizens who possess a knowledge of present 
day institutions and conditions, and an understanding of 
how they came into being; whose minds are trained to clear 
and honest thinking, and whose thoughts and activities are 
directed by worthy characters to unselfish social ends. To 
the training of boys and girls to become such citizens, the 
subjects of History, Civics, and Economics in the schools 
are capable of being made a powerful contributory factor. 

HISTORY 1 

Ancient and Mediaeval History 

Introduction 


The aim of the course in Ancient and Mediaeval History 
is to present the career of man as a whole in a connected 
story of expanding life and civilization, from the days 
of the rudest stone hatchet to the glorious Renaissance 
period which ushered in the Modern Age. 

In dealing with each civilization, while a sufficient 
frame-work of political organization and historical events 
requires to be presented, emphasis should be placed rather 
on the life of man in all its manifestations—society, in¬ 
dustry, commerce, religion, art, and literature. These 
things should be dealt with so as to make clear how one 
age grows out of another, and how each civilization profits 
by that which has preceded it. Special attention should be 
given to those factors of history which the student can 
articulate with the life of today, or which are essential 
to an understanding of the evolution of important conditions 
now existing.... 


HISTORY 2 

British History from 1485 to the Present Day. 


British History of the Modern Age is placed in the second 


























. 


. 


■t 















































. 

. 




< . c • 

. . . . . 













174 


year to provide the necessary setting for the study of 
Canadian History and Civics in the third year. Our laws 
and institutions are for the most part fundamentally 
British in their origin and genius and therefore the 
proper foundation to their study is a knowledge of the 
history of the Mother Land. 

In teaching this period, main movements should be 
kept steadily before the pupils* attention and particular 
facts be given significance by being related to outstanding 
tendencies of development.... 

In treating these and other topics the details of battles 
and wars should be much less stressed than the principles 
and issues which were at stake in them. Students should be 
taught to take a just pride in their citizenship in the 
British Commonwealth, but such pride should be founded not 
on mere victories over other states or people. It should 
not even be based on the vast size, wealth and power of the 
Commonwealth, though these are legitimate subjects for 
pride. It should be founded rather on the fact that, on the 
whole, the British people have stood throughout their long 
history for freedom and justice in the world and that they 
have made great and enduring contributions to its civiliza¬ 
tion. 


HISTORY 3 

Canadian History, Canadian Civics, and Elementary Economics. 

A. Canadian History. 

This course entails a study of the British Period with 
a review of the salient features of the French Period. 

The course in Canadian History and Civics has been 
placed late in the syllabus, because it was felt desirable 
that any additional discussion of the problems of Canadian 
political and social development should aim to deal frankly 
and honestly and fearlessly with certain very specific 
problems of fundamental significance to our people. 

It is recognized that Canadian History and current 
Canadian politics, fortunately or unfortunately, bristle 
with controversial problems, and it is hoped that the study 
of a stimulating period of world history and of the modern 
period of British history will enable the student to ap¬ 
proach Canadian History with the background of knowledge, 
the breadth of view, the fairness of judgment and the 
qualities of imagination necessary to its effective study. 
The teacher should spare no pains to bring the student to a 
view of both sides of past controversies, so that the bases 
may be laid for that mutual understanding and respect which 
alone can smooth the path of our future national and inter¬ 
national developments.... 

B. Canadian Civics. 






















































' 








175 


For Canada, a member of the British Commonwealth, the 
study of Civios falls naturally into four main divisions, 
namely: Imperial, Federal, Provincial, and Municipal or 
Local. Since the power of self-government originated with 
the first unit and was gradually granted to the others, 
the above sequence is a logical order of treatment. In 
developing the subject, it is necessary to see that the 
student obtains a thorough grasp of the composition and 
powers of each of these great sections of government, 
noting the authority and limitations of each. The student 
must be given a clear conception,also, of the further di¬ 
vision of authority within each unit into legislative, 
executive, and judicial powers. The significance of what¬ 
soever part of actual government comes within the range 
of the student’s personal experience should be clearly 
explained and emphasized. It will naturally lead to a 
broader conception of the whole of government if the 
teaching is supplemented by a habit of reading current 
events from day to day. Thus the trend of economic de¬ 
velopments will be closely correlated with that of politi¬ 
cal tendencies, as the one is of necessity intimately con¬ 
nected with the other. An effort should be made not simply 
to teach the bare facts of government, but also to observe 
and study in a concrete way the working out of the system 
as applied to every-day life in the local community, pro¬ 
vince, Dominion, or Empire. It should be borne in mind that 
the study of Civics is not merely to gain a knowledge of 
facts, but to equip the student with a clear comprehension 
of the application of government, so that he will be en¬ 
couraged and stimulated to take an intelligent part in 
civic affairs. 

C. Elementary Economics. 

The purpose of Economics is to give pupils "an awareness 
of what it means to live together in organized economic so¬ 
ciety, an appreciation of how we do live together, and an 
understanding of the conditions precedent to living to¬ 
gether well" to the end that there may be developed those 
ideals, abilities, and tendencies to act which are essential 
to effective participation in modern economic life. The 
course aims to describe Canadian economic institutions, and 
to explain the working of our economic organization. Special 
attention is called to the questions appended to each chap¬ 
ter. These are designed to evoke discussion about Canadian 
problems, or to elaborate and qualify general principles. It 
is hoped that they will be of material assistance to the 
teacher in dealing with the subject. 

HISTORY 4 

General History of the Modern Age and 
English Constitutional History. 

Introduction 


The course in History for the fourth year is intended to 
be a continuation of the study of mankind as a whole, begun 













176 


in the first year. It takes up the narrative at the close 
of the Middle Ages, and follows the fortunes of the peoples 
of the Western World through political, religious, economic, 
social, intellectual, and cultural changes down to the 
Great War and the present day. 

The catastrophe of 1914, with its tragic sequel, has led 
thinking people to the conclusion that there can never he a 
common peace in the world without common ideals, and prin¬ 
ciples based on common knowledge. It is hoped that, in this 
course, by giving the student an opportunity to examine 
critically the main facts of the history of all nations for 
the past five hundred years, education may play its part in 
raising young Canadian citizens from the ideas of a narrow 
nationalism, or even imperialism, to a higher plane of 
internationalism, where they will be swayed by no prejudice 
of race, creed, or tongue. 

While this is by all means the most interesting, it is 
also the most complicated period in the whole recorded 
history of mankind. An effort should be made to make sure 
that the pupil understands what he reads, and sees its re¬ 
lation to other things. The memorizing of a mass of unre¬ 
lated dates should be avoided, though a sufficient number 
must be mastered to serve as landmarks. The political activi¬ 
ties of the people, since they are the most highly developed 
expressioilman r s social instincts, should receive due at¬ 
tention. At the same time, as it is generally recognized 
that the political activities of mankind are largely deter¬ 
mined by his economic and social needs and ambitions, em¬ 
phasis must be placed on movements such as the Commercial 
and Industrial Revolutions, and the evolution of the power¬ 
ful middle class, or bourgeoisie, which has done so much to 
condition progress in the modern world. Likewise the in¬ 
justices from which the masses of the people have suffered 
in the past should be made clear, the growth in organiza¬ 
tion and power of the proletariat should be traced, and no 
effort should be spared to build up in the student the 
habit of taking a broad viewpoint and making fair judgments 
as between class and class, for the prosperity and peace of 
the world depend as much on mutual understanding and fair 
dealing between class and class as between nation and 
nation. 

In addition to the General History, a course in the study 
of the British Constitution is prescribed. This aims at 
giving the student an appreciation of our political institu¬ 
tions as the result of centuries of development and a fuller 
realization of the bearings of governmental organization and 
practice upon public well-being.6 


A study of the subject matter to be covered in each of the 
new history units in the foregoing outline reveals the influence 
not only of the suggestions of Mr. Long in 1916, but of the 



177 


alternate program proposed by the Committee of Five a few years 
after the report of the Committee of Seven, A comparison, more¬ 
over, of these history units with the elementary Citizenship 
program, outlined in the previous chapter, shows that the new 
secondary social studies curriculum was in accordance with the 
organization of social studies materials that had been put into 
effect in the public schools. History, civics, and economics are 
placed under the subject headings of History 1, 2, 3, or 4, while 
geography continues to be classified as a separate entity, having 
no apparent connection with historical phenomena. Despite this 
serious drawback in the placement of geographical materials, the 
secondary social studies curriculum of 1924 is a very decided im¬ 
provement over the Territorial or 1912 programs, not only in 
course content, but in careful explanation of Departmental in¬ 
tentions with respect to the proper handling of each history 
unit. Although the question could be raised as to how many 
history teachers in Alberta from 1924 to 1936 actually read the 
Handbook for Secondary Schools in preference to the more concise 
regulations of the Department of Education for the annual high 
school examinations, it must be acknowledged that the official 
statement of aims and values in history instruction has several 
commendable features. It should be pointedout, however, that those 
history teachers who did read the handbook and who were convinced 
the only way to teach the subject was by the memorization of 
notes on the textbook, would find solace in some remarks which 
appear in the general introductory note and in the course out¬ 
lines already quoted. Such teachers, for example, would find 
justification for their method of teaching in the statement that 
history, civics, and economies n should be so taught as to de- 















178 

velop the innate memory capacities of the pupil, and to lead him 
to organize and group his memory facts in such a way that recall 
is ready, accurate, and complete?. On the other hand, the 
general introductory note and the course outlines in the history 
section of the official secondary handbook may be commended for 
an emphasis upon the developmental view of history and a recog¬ 
nition of the close relationships between political, economic, 
and social phenomena in historical study. 

It already has been pointed out that secondary geography in¬ 
struction under the revision of 1924 was confined to a Grade XI 
course called Geography 1. This unit was not obligatory and a 
student, therefore, might graduate from high school with no for¬ 
mal instruction in geography other than that obtained in public 
school and the incidental bits of geographical information in¬ 
cluded in the history units. In this connection if is rather 
interesting to point out that critics of the Alberta secondary 
social studies curriculum after 1936 have decried the lack of a 
specific geography course and demanded that the former Geo¬ 
graphy 1 be restored to the high school. Such critics forget that 
Geography 1 was not compulsory, while the new subjects known as 
Social Studies 1, 2, and 3, which are obligatory, specifically 
include geographic materials. 

In the Handbook for Secondary Schools Geography 1 is listed 
with the sciences, a classification which it will be noted con¬ 
forms with the treatment of geography in the elementary course of 
studies. A statement of aims and values, however, is lacking in 
the case of this unit, although such statements appear for most 
of the other courses outlined in the handbook. The introductory 
note, which reads as follows, does little more than indicate what 








179 

subjects are to be discussed in Geography 1: 

In the course in Geography in this grade it is pro¬ 
posed to devote the major portion of the time to In¬ 
dustrial and Commercial Geography, and a minor portion to 
the study of weather and climate. The latter features 
will be studied first in order that the relation of cli¬ 
mate to human activities may be clearly shown. The course 
in Industrial and Commercial Geography will treat of 
man T s activities as influenced by the earth, rather than 
with the parts of the earth as they affect human activi¬ 
ties. 7 

In spite of the various criticisms which have been previously ex¬ 
pressed, the author is able to testify from personal experience 
that those students who elected Geography 1 as one of their 
Grade XI options did choose an extremely useful course which was 
much more advanced than the geography instruction in the public 
school. 

This chapter completes the survey of the social studies cur¬ 
riculum in Alberta from 1912 to 1936, with the exception of in¬ 
spectoral criticism of the quality of instruction in the schools 
during that period. This subject will be dealt with in the 
following chapter and will be followed by an examination of the 
curriculum changes which were commenced in 1936. 


1 Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report, 1913 (Edmon¬ 
ton, 1914), pp. 202-212. 

2 Long, M. H., Aims and Methods of History Teaching (Edmonton, 
1916), pp. 7-10. 

3 Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report, 1916 (Edmon¬ 
ton, 1917), p. 58. 

4 Alberta, Department of Education, Handbook for Secondary 
Schools (Edmonton, 1925), p. 5. 

5 Ibid., p. 7. 

6 Ibid., pp. 92-105. 

7 Ibid., p. 145. 























. 




. 






















CHAPTER XV 


INSPECTORAL CRITICISM OF THE ALBERTA SOCIAL STUDIES 
CURRICULUM FROM THE REVISION OF 1912 TO THE REVISION OF 1936 

During the period from 1912 to 1936 several important 
changes took place in the preparation of the annual report of the 
Alberta Department of Education which are of significance in this 
investigation. The first of these changes was the decision not to 
incorporate the course of studies with the annual departmental 
report. This decision, which became effective in 1914, may not in 
itself seem of much importance to the present study, but it 
should be pointed out that it is difficult to procure copies of 
the courses of studies from 1918 to 1929. The Department of Edu¬ 
cation itself possesses only a very limited number of copies—in 
certain cases but one copy—of the school programs in use during 
this period, which may only be loaned to members of the Depart¬ 
ment’s staff. It is recommended, therefore, that, for the benefit 
of future research workers in the history of Alberta education, 
steps should be taken by the University of Alberta to assemble 
sets of the earlier courses of studies, if these are still 
available from private sources. It may also be noted that a col¬ 
lection of the early textbooks authorized ip these courses of 
studies would be of considerable value to students of the educa¬ 
tional history of the province. 

Beginning in 1919, another important change took place in the 
annual report of the Department of Education. The inspectors’ an¬ 
nual reports were no longer published in their entirety, as had 
been the practice from the earliest days of Territorial control 
over education. They were now replaced by selected excerpts which 




181 


were grouped under significant subject headings. This policy, 
which was followed until 1938 when general summaries began to be 
made, does not give the reader so complete a coverage of inspec¬ 
toral opinion as is possible for the years up to and including 
1918. Also in 1919, the Department of Education placed the work 
of high school inspection under a separate inspectoral staff. Be¬ 
ginning in that year, the annual report of the high school in¬ 
spector or inspectors was published separate from the excerpts 
from the reports of the elementary school inspectors. This 
separation is an advantage for the purposes of the present study 
because few of the inspectors T remarks prior to 1919 on the 
quality of instruction in the social studies indicate clearly 
whether elementary or secondary classrooms or both are under dis¬ 
cussion. 

Turning to the annual reports from 1913 to 1918, one finds 
the inspectors f comments on the teaching of history, civics, and 
geography under the new curriculum of greater brevity, on the 
whole, than those previously cited for the years from 1906 to 
1912. Yet these comments reveal rather clearly the general 
quality of instruction throughout the province, with the possible 
exception of the city schools: 


1913 

...There is an evident tendency to neglect...the teaching 
of history and geography in the rural schools. (Inspector 
G. W. Gorman, High River.) 1 

The work of the schools is improving. This is due 
principally to the better elaboration of the subjects in 
the new Course of Studies....Geography teaching is like¬ 
wise improving. On the other hand, teachers are at a loss 
to secure the material for the first steps in history 
teaching....Teachers show some lack of resource in getting 
the material for the teaching of civics. It seems that 
some body of material will have to be prepared before 
satisfactory work can be secured in this subject. (In¬ 
spector P. H. Thibaudeau, Lacombe.) 2 









182 

...Geography and history vary from poor to fairly good. 
(Inspector H. R. Parker, Vermilion.) 3 

...The defects of a too formal type of teaching are seen 
in almost every subject. Too often the instruction does 
not conform to the child’s environment, and is not 
adapted to his probable future needs. In geography, for 
instance, it is not an unusual thing to find pupils 
studying South America or Asia who do not know the most 
elementary facts about our own province.... 

From a national and patriotic viewpoint, it is especial¬ 
ly unfortunate that Civics and Canadian History are not re¬ 
ceiving more adequate treatment. We are engaged in the 
work of nation building in the truest sense, and it is 
just possible we are so near our work that we fail to get 
its perspective. In this connection, the fact that an in¬ 
creasing number of the teachers have received the greater 
part, if not the whole, of their education in a foreign 
country should not be overlooked. The extremely inadequate 
knowledge of Canadian institutions on the part of many who 
are applying for admission to the Normal Schools, would 
suggest the advisability of making room on the syllabus 
for more thorough and comprehensive courses in Civics, and 
on the Canadian viewpoint in history and in national af¬ 
fairs. (Inspector C. Sansom, Macleod.) 4 

1914 

...Canadian history and geography appear to be ’bug-bears’ 
to many of them {’permit’ teachers) and they make no at¬ 
tempt to teach them. (Inspector J. A. Fife, Edmonton.) 5 

...There seems to be a consensus of opinion that the 
course in History is too heavy for the average Public 
School pupil. There seems a tendency to overload the 
memory of the growing child. More attention might be 
given to civics in order that the Canadian boy and girl 
may grow up with a clearer idea of the nature of the 
government under which they live and a wider conception 
of the possibilities of Canada as an important factor in 
the Empire. (Inspector M. 0. Nelson, ffetaskiwin. ) 6 

The ordinary subjects of the programme are pretty well 
taught, composition and history being, perhaps, the 
weakest subjects. (Inspector J. C. Butchart, Vegreville.) 7 

...Reading, arithmetic, grammar and geography are fairly 
well taught. (Inspector H. R. Parker, Vermilion.) 8 

...Grammar and history are not well taught. Pupils are, 
very largely, left to their texts and to their own re¬ 
sources in these two subjects. Generally speaking, 
grammar and history are not regarded as congenial studies 
by the great majority of pupils in our ungraded schools. 
Geography is a more pleasing subject, though teachers do 
not always show good judgment in the work presented to the 
different classes. (Inspector John W. Russell, High River.) 9 











u\i' v. ti 








183 

..•The teaching of civics receives hut little attention. 
(Inspector 1. J. LeBlanc, Onoway.) 10 

...In the upper grades the teaching of arithmetic, geo¬ 
graphy, literature and spelling is generally satis¬ 
factory. (Inspector F. G. Buchanan, Hanna.) 11 

...I find that...least attention is given to writing, 
grammar, civics and nature study....Civics, with local 
adaptation, is taught as a subject far removed from ex¬ 
perience. The text book is the pupil's as well as the 
teacher’s guide. (Inspector M. E. LaZerte, Bassano.) 12 

...The teaching of geography was, generally speaking, 
neglected, and maps were not being made use of in many 
of the schools....Grammar and composition were very much 
neglected, and the same can be said of history. (In¬ 
spector W. J. McLean, Coronation.) 13 

1915 

...The teaching of Arithmetic, History and Geography is 
gradually becoming more practical. (Inspector J. A. 

Smith, Calgary.) 14 

...History still remains the most abused subject in the 
course of studies. The old method of giving notes and 
loading the pupils' memories with bald facts is still 
with us. In few instances is it made an interesting 
lesson and the matter treated as a real and vital sub¬ 
ject ... .Oral Reading, Literature, Composition, Oral 
Arithmetic, Geography and Physical Culture are steadily 
improving.(Inspector J. F. Boyce, Red Deer.) 15 

...Grammar, History and Civics, Nature Study and Agri¬ 
culture, Art are, generally speaking, not well taught. 

These subjects are dealt with all too frequently in a 
mechanical way. (Inspector John ¥. Russell, High River.) 16 

...Teaching of Geography, inasmuch as it relates to 
'Home Geography' as a basis for the intelligent study of 
'World Geography', is not sufficiently emphasized by 
many teachers, yet the steady elimination of mere text 
memorization is a greatly improved step in the actual 
presentation of this subject. Local History is not given 
sufficient prominence. (Inspector Julian J. LeBlanc, 

Onoway.) 17 

...The methods of teaching Civics, History and Geography 
in many cases could be improved. (Inspector F. G. Buchanan, 
Hanna.) 18 

...The results in Writing, Composition and History, how¬ 
ever, are far from satisfactory in many schools. In these 
subjects there is frequently a lack of definiteness, system 
and continuity in both matter and method, so that the 
pupils' progress is slow and their attainments very meagre. 
(Inspector W. A. Stickle, Tofield.) 19 


? 


* 


■ 


* ■ * 

. “ ...a" -OV f 

■ 

i : 

■ ... ' .' ' • • ■ . . .t ,S c ' V ','i VU ' 

. . , . . . - 

• • * 

* 

- « * * 

t 

... . ... ' ♦ • • . .... " • Ci: ’ ) 




184 

...In Civics, a comparatively new subject on the curriculum, 

I see the great need of teachers starting at home. To this 
end each teacher should certainly get a copy of the Act 
governing the municipality in which she is teaching, 
whether town, village, rural municipality or local improve¬ 
ment district. (Inspector P. H. Thibaudeau, Stettler.) 20 

...Geography, Composition and History seem to be the sub¬ 
jects in which the teaching and results are least satis¬ 
factory. (Inspector J• C. Butchart, Yegreville.) 21 

1916 

Composition and history are the two subjects in which 
the results are least satisfactory... (Inspector J. C. 
Butchart, Yegreville.) 22 

...There is still the tendency on the part of many teachers 
to treat Grammar, History, Civics and Geography simply as 
text-book subjects.(Inspector John ¥. Bussell, High River.) 23 

...Geography is not very well handled in Grades III and IY. 

The home and outdoor experiences of the child should be 
utilized more in the formation of geographic conceptions in 
the lower grades. The teaching of formal definitions of land 
and water forms is a waste of time and effort. (Inspector 
J. A. Smith, Calgary.) 24 


1917 

The work in Composition, History and Arithmetic does not 
seem to improve much from year to year. Many teachers seem 
to lack definiteness of aim and clearness of thought as to 
means in these subjects. (Inspector J. C. Butchart, Yegre¬ 
ville.) 2b 

...Geography, Grammar and History are taught too largely as 
text book studies, on apparently a give-and-take basis. The 
teacher gives the lesson and the pupil the time supposed to 
be sufficient for the preparation of the lesson, but there 
is no real object apparent, no inspiration, no incentive, 
and, as a result, no real Geography, Grammar or History 
lesson. (Inspector John W. Russell, Red Deer. ) 26 

...On the whole, good results are being obtained in the 
teaching of Reading, Writing, Spelling, Geography, Composi¬ 
tion and Arithmetic. Teachers have expressed their apprecia¬ 
tion of the improvements in the revised course of studies.... 
The more detailed definition of the prescribed work in 
History and Nature Study has afforded varied and abundant 
material for the teaching of Oral and Written Composition. 
(Inspector I. G. Buchanan, Hanna.) 27 

...Civics was particularly well taught in many schools. 
(Inspector B. S. Farr, Peace River. ) 28 

Nature Study itself, as well as Geography, History, Civics 


' 

. 



. 






. 













. 

• . - 


- 

■ 

. 

... . . ■ . 


, 

. : onE . * 


- < • 







185 


and other branches considered as partly superfluous, very 
seldom receive due attention, no doubt largely on account 
of the language difficulty. (Inspector Thomas J. Dwyer, 
Sylvan Lake.) 29 

Of the other school subjects, the work of Geography 
and History is perhaps weakest from the point of view of 
application to local conditions and modern times. Pupils 
are found who can glibly name the rivers of Asia flowing 
north or east or south, who cannot tell you whither the 
stream flowing by their own school leads. (Inspector A. E. 
Torrie, High River.) 30 

...The standing of the classes in Grammar and in Geography 
is quite creditable in most schools. The teaching of 
History and Civics is neglected generally. Many teachers 
tend to regard History as a suitable subject to be ’read 
up’ by the pupils themselves, who are consequently assigned 
a fixed number of pages to be covered each day. The princi¬ 
pal aims in teaching History in a public school are, to 
present to the student in an interesting and attractive 
manner the story of the British and Canadian people, to de¬ 
velop the imagination of the student, to inculcate love of 
home and country, and to develop within the boy or girl an 
ability to discern moral truths and to make generaliza¬ 
tions concerning cause and effect. Unless a teacher pre¬ 
pares the work carefully, and actually teaches the subject, 
then the principal value of History will be lost to the 
pupil. The majority of teachers in rural schools are 
lacking in ability to teach History; the Normal Schools 
should aim to remedy this defect. (Inspector C. 0. Hicks, 
Onoway.) 31 


1918 

...Work in Drawing, History, Writing and Grammar varies 
from poor to good. In Geography, selection of material is 
poor. Pew of the higher grades understand the survey system 
of the prairie provinces and it was a rare exception to 
find a class that knew where salt and petroleum were found 
in Canada. (Inspector H. R. Parker, Foremost.) 32 

...History and Geography are not given the attention they 
should receive and the results are poor. (Inspector J. C. 
Butchart, Vegreville.) 33 

...The most formally taught subjects are Grammar, History 
and Geography. There is much room for improvement in the 
viewpoint of our teachers with respect to the use and 
value of this part of our school Course of Studies. (In¬ 
spector John W. Russell, Camrose.) 34 

...Geography and History are not receiving sufficient at¬ 
tention. Much of the work is very formal and bookish. 
(Inspector R. H. Roberts, Termilion. ) 35 

...There Is...a noticeable weakness in dealing with the 
local geography and the history of ffestern Canada in many 


' 




; 

. 

: 

... 

« 

t 

: : ■' . L \ HS 

- 



' 



- 




, 







■ 





: l * 


■ 

* 

. 

... 

' ■ 

... 





186 

cases. (Inspector A. E. Torrie, Macleod.) 36 
It will be observed that many of the foregoing excerpts from 
the inspectors 1 annual reports are almost as discouraging as 
those previously cited for the years from 1906 to.1912. The 
generalized comments of a considerable number of the inspectors 
not quoted above, moreover, would indicate that the handling of 
the social studies subjects was not much better in their in¬ 
spectorates. The new curriculum, however, probably did not re¬ 
ceive a fair trial during the years from 1912 to 1918. Many of 
the inspectors complain quite strongly of the serious shortage of 
teachers arising from the social dislocation caused by the First 
World War. The untrained or "permit" teachers who had to be em¬ 
ployed in considerable numbers are described in the inspectors T 
reports as generally lacking the educational background for suc¬ 
cessful teaching. To add to all these difficulties, the influenza 
epidemic of 1918 made it impossible for the schools even to be 
open a substantial portion of the school year. 

Despite the criticisms of the "permit" teachers, it must be 
noted that those teachers without university degrees who were 
"trained" for their positions in Alberta were the products of on¬ 
ly a four months r training course. The brevity of the normal 
school term had been the object of considerable inspectoral 
criticism, and it was thus with no small hope for the future that 
John T. Ross, the Deputy Minister of Education, remarked in the 
annual departmental report for 1919: 

September 1st was the date on which one of the mile¬ 
stones in educational progress was reached by the ex¬ 
tension of the normal school course for the training of 
teachers from four to eight months. There was a con¬ 
sistent demand to improve the quality of the teaching 
force of the province, even although there was a shortage 
in numbers. Communities realized that they must secure 
teachers with accurate and sound scholarship, scientific 












187 


knowledge of the pupil and subject matter taught, and a 
strong personality, in order that their children would be 
given an opportunity to attain the highest standard of 
efficiency as citizens. This movement to secure competent 
teachers is noticeable in the more progressive districts, 
and is indicated by trustees increasing the salaries of 
capable teachers, and improving conditions through con¬ 
solidation of school districts, or by the organization of 
two-room schools. 37 

As could be expected, subsequent inspectors 1 reports confirm the 
wisdom of this announcement of the extension of the normal school 
term. 


The excerpts from the elementary school inspectors 1 reports, 
contained in the annual reports of the Department of Education 
from 1925 to 1935,provide an interesting commentary on the 1922 
curriculum revision in actual practice in the classroom. No com¬ 
ments on the quality of elementary instruction, it should be 
noted, are published in the annual reports for the years 1919 to 
1922, inclusive, presumably because the curriculum was being re¬ 
vised. After the new curriculum had gone into effect, the 
following inspectoral comments on the quality of social studies 
instruction in the elementary schools seemed to the Department to 
be sufficiently significant, as well as representative of the 
reports received, to merit publication: 

1923 

...Teachers are not handling the subjects of History and 
Citizenship with the same success, but I believe that 
when they obtain and become familiar with the new texts, 
satisfactory work will be accomplished... (Inspector 
J. Scoffield, Foremost*) 38 

...There is a widespread demand for revised texts in 
history and geography, and the opinion that the present 
texts in these subjects do not at all meet the require¬ 
ments of the new course is frequently expressed. (In¬ 
spector R. H. Parker, Yermilion.) 59 

...In History, it is the general impression among 
teachers that the outline is too vague to be of practical 
application in the rural schools, and that further co- 








188 

ordination in the essentials could he obtained if a 
suitable text were available for the teacher. (In¬ 
spector J. J. LeBlanc, Westlock.) 40 

1924 

...In History few of the teachers are sufficiently 
versed in the material required to be taught to se¬ 
cure the best results. (Inspector H. R. Parker, Ver¬ 
milion. ) 41 

...The subjects stressed were Reading, Arithmetic, 
Composition, Geography and History in the order men¬ 
tioned. In Composition, growth in correlating Ele¬ 
mentary Science and Citizenship with the subject was 
noted. (Inspector X. P. Crispo, St. Paul.) 42 

Complaints are still being heard of the difficulties 
in carrying out the course in History and Art. In the 
case of the former, the principal objection of the 
rural school teacher is the difficulty in getting 
suitable material... (Inspector J. A. MacGregor, High 
River.) 43 

Teachers organize the subject-matter in History, 

Geography and Agriculture carefully, and teach them 
satisfactorily. There is very great need, however,for 
good text books which follow along the lines set down 
in the Course of Studies and which provide the bulk of 
the material required in the instruction. (Inspector 
F. G. Buchanan, Calgary.) 44 

1925 

With the exception of an occasional lesson, the 
work in Citizenship, including History, is not being 
well taught. The course is not well understood. More¬ 
over, there is difficulty experienced in securing ma¬ 
terial for lessons so as to cover the points laid down 
in the course. And, strange to say, too many teachers 
still teach by pages in the History, rather than by 
topics. (Inspector F. L. Aylesworth, Cyen.) 45 

1926 

...Citizenship teaching has been strengthened by the 
introduction of the new text book. (Inspector J. J. 

LeBlanc, Westlock.) 46 

In class teaching effective work is being done in 
Arithmetic, Geography and History. (Inspector G. K. 
Haverstock, Hanna.) 47 

...the new texts in Hygiene, Geography, and Civics have 
been well received by both teachers and pupils, and the 
work in these subjects is being carried on with in¬ 
creased pleasure and precision. Teachers have been used 








to texts in History that treat the events chronological¬ 
ly, and as the new Canadian History text deals with the 
subject according to topics, it is not yet greatly in 
favor with some teachers. The text is a modern one, how¬ 
ever, and will become more popular as the teachers be¬ 
come better acquainted with it and its treatment of the 
subject. (Inspector J. Scoffield, Foremost.) 48 

1927 

...the work in History, Agriculture and Writing was con¬ 
sidered less satisfactory than in the other subjects. The 
text-books in History and Agriculture have not proved 
satisfactory... (Inspector L. B. Yule, Peace River.) 49 

Of the grade subjects, Reading, Arithmetic and Geo¬ 
graphy are the best taught...(Inspector J. J . LeBlanc, 
Westlock.) 50 

I do not insist upon the teaching of high school sub¬ 
jects without some text-book assistance, but such public 
school subjects as History and Geography should be 
thoroughly prepared and taught without the use of and 
reliance upon a text-book. 

There is good teaching of Literature and History. Geo¬ 
graphy is rather mechanical and lifeless in presentation; 
and one is surprised at the lack of enthusiasm in agri¬ 
culture in the rural schools. (Inspector W. H. Ed?/ards, 
Wainwright.) 51 

In the public school grades much improvement is noted 
in the teaching of History, Geography and Composition. The 
schools need, as a whole, better library equipment in or¬ 
der that pupils and teachers may have access to a more 
varied supply of materials. (Inspector X. P. Crispo, St. 
Paul.) 52 

There has been a great improvement in the teaching of 
geography and the other branches of elementary science. 

The grasp of subject-matter is much more complete and 
thorough than formerly; and the presentation of the sub¬ 
ject matter involves close observation, investigation and 
reasoning from known facts to a definite conclusion—re¬ 
vealing new facts. 

Literature and history are, in my opinion, not well 
taught....History is rarely taught by the topical method. 
The aim is not clear as the matter is not well organized. 
The results are not definite—particularly in regard to 
training in citizenship. (Inspector F. L. Aylesworth, 

Oyen.) 53 

In class teaching the most effective work is probably 
being done in Arithmetic, History and Geography.... 
Possibly hygiene and citizenship receive the least at¬ 
tention... (Inspector G. M. Dunlop, Foremost.) 54 














: < ■ 







. 






- 


. 





- 



... 









t 4 ' 






















* 


- 













. 









? ♦ • . 

4 

: ? . 

. 

* 

• . * . , T : 




190 


1928 

...Too many teachers introduce intensive note-taking prac¬ 
tice in such subjects as History, Geography, Agriculture, 
Nature Study, Physiology and Hygiene. Pupils who are 
taught to memorize notes on these subjects, in lieu of in¬ 
tensive study of them, may be successful in passing 
examinations, but they are not receiving from their 
teachers the guidance and direction in their contact with 
these subjects which will prepare them to appreciatively 
undertake their study... (Inspector J. W. Russell, Cam- 
rose . ) 55. 

...Many teachers do not appear to have the initiative to 
plan good lessons covering the courses in citizenship 
and elementary science in junior grades, but better work 
is being done in history and geography in advanced grades. 
(Inspector John Scoffield, Wetaskiwin.) 56 

...History up to and including Grade VI was being well 
taught, use being made of the material provided in the 
various teachers T magazines. But this subject was not 
being well presented in the seventh and eighth grades. 

There was too little actual teaching and too much un¬ 
directed study by the pupils from a text of doubtful 
quality. In geography the course was covered in all grades, 
but again with too little actual teaching, too little re¬ 
ference to wall maps, and too much adherence to the one 
text. (Inspector A. R. Gibson, Red Deer.) 57 

The history text has now been in use for a number of 
years, and teachers have had ample opportunity to give it 
a fair and thorough trial. The almost unanimous opinion of 
the teachers of rural schools is that its general language 
difficulty, its omission of many important facts and 
phases of history, and its too brief treatment of many 
topics, make it a very unsatisfactory text. As a result, 
note-giving as a teaching method has become a burdensome 
and deadening means of historical instruction. (Inspector 
F. G. Buchanan, Calgary Rural.) 58 

...The courses are being followed carefully in history and 
geography... (Inspector H. C. Sweet, Foremost.) 59 

1929 

...I have to report a wider use of prepared helps, and 
especially in the teaching of history they are supplanting 
the authorized text-book. (Inspector J. J. LeBlanc, West- 
lock. ) 60 

...Much good work is being done in history and geography, 
though an undesirable feature is the dependence of some 
teachers on the printed notes in educational publications. 
For reference such notes are useful, but authorized texts 
must be made the basis for study by the pupils. (Inspector 
John Scoffield, Wetaskiwin.) 61 











191 


With young teachers (and some older) the most notice¬ 
able weakness was their evident lack of grasp of the ma¬ 
terial of the course of studies. This has always been the 
case, but as teachers become more proficient in the ap¬ 
plication of good methods the fact that the material is 
scanty and poorly assimilated becomes more noticeable. This 
is especially evident in such subjects as history, geo¬ 
graphy and nature study. Lacking a rational grasp of the 
meaning of the lesson, the aim is not clear, and the 
teacher is unable to effect a transfer of the significance 
of the facts or events to the pupil so that it may become 
a part of his mental or moral equipment. (Inspector R. H. 
Liggett, Olds.) 62 

...These subjects do not appear to offer as great diffi¬ 
culty to teachers as do history, grammar, literature and 
geography...(Inspector W. J. McLean, Trochu.) 63 

...Many teachers continue to condemn the history text. 

Those who use it conscientiously, however, develop a fond¬ 
ness for it and get good results... (Inspector D. M. 

Sullivan, High River.) 64 

...There is an apparent weakness in the preparation of and 
grasp of subject-matter in both history and grammar in¬ 
struction. The lessons in these two subjects are too often 
of a text book prescription, with little added to give 
interest or arouse thought. (Inspector R. J. Scott, O-yen.) 6)5 

...silent reading, history, geography, elementary science, 
health education, on the other hand, are more or less either 
neglected or made to assume a very subordinate position. In 
my opinion this tendency to neglect teaching certain sub¬ 
jects which lend themselves to cramming will be strengthened 
by the growing use of so-called teachers’ aids. More and 
more these concentrates are being used in the schools... 
(Inspector F. S. Carr, Medicine Hat.) 66 

...Progress in reading, grammar and history (except history 
in Grade VIII) is up to a good average. In many cases the 
fact that all or part of the Grade VII history course has 
been omitted prevents pupils from use of this background 
for a thorough grasp of the material of the Grade VIII 
history course. Instruction in geography is generally ef¬ 
fective... (Inspector H. C. Sweet, Foremost.) 67 

1930 

Geography, History and Civics: Generally good work is 
done in these subjects, and teachers carefully adhere to the 
requirements of the Course of Study, but there is room for 
much closer correlation, since they are in reality three 
phases of one subject—human life: Geography, the home of 
man; History, the story of the past life of man; Civics, the 
present social, industrial and political relations of man. 
(Inspector W. H. Edwards, Calgary City.) 68 








i 

■ 





■ 
















- 

. 


t 




- 


. 


«; • 


- 



















192 


This is something that should have been rendered un~ 
necessary long ago. All that is required is to provide 
the children with work books. Work books in geography, work 
books in composition, work books in arithmetic, work books 
in literature, work books in history, can all be procured, 
or can readily be prepared. If the children were provided 
with these, the teacher would be relieved of a tremendous 
amount of drudgery, and the school could be handled more 
effectively and much more economically. (Inspector J. H. 
Hutchison, Onoway.) 69 

...Average work is being done in elementary science, 
history and geography, but I am of the opinion that the 
interest taken in these subjects would be increased and 
the work done made more effective if we had a better sys¬ 
tem of placing in school libraries the new, attractive, 
well-written supplementary literature which is being pub¬ 
lished from time to time on these subjects. (Inspector 
John Scoffield, Wetaskiwin.) 70 

...The grades VTI and VIII history is still poorly taught, 
and this is due in large measure to the non-chronological 
treatment of the subject with the aid of an inadequate 
text....There is a strong movement in this district in the 
direction of more practical map work, which will material¬ 
ly improve the geography. (Inspector A. R. Gibson, Red 
Deer.) 71 

In inspecting the work in the class-room it is my ex¬ 
perience that the subjects of arithmetic, spelling, art 
and geography are being well taught, while grammar, history 
and composition are, generally speaking, only fairly well 
taught... A number of teachers do not prepare their 
lessons as they should, and depend too much upon prepared 
lesson helps. (Inspector W. J. McLean, Trochu.) 72 

...History and citizenship are well taught up to Grade VI. 
Practically all teachers are able to make the instruction 
interesting and profitable. With Grades VII and VIII few 
teachers have been able to enliven the material enough to 
make it interesting for the pupils; as a consequence the 
time has not been spent as profitably as it should be... 
(Inspector L. A. Thurber, Hanna.) 73 

...History, grammar and agriculture are often poorly and 
ineffectively taught in the higher grades, due too fre¬ 
quently to lack of thought with a view to preparation of 
subject matter and logical lesson development. Geography, 
nature study, art and hygiene receive creditable treatment. 
.. (Inspector R. J. Scott, Oyen.) 74 

History instruction ranges from fair to good, with very 
little that can be graded as excellent. The chief diffi¬ 
culty is insufficient knowledge of the subject matter on 
the part of the teacher. The cry in Grades IV to VI is 
that there is no text-book. To offset this teachers use 
manuals and other helps, which are frequently placed in 


' 

* 


. 















• 

- 





. 


• 

. 


? 1 

t 








: 

. . . . * 





193 


the hands of* the pupils. Even when the teacher attempts to 
give oral instruction in this subject she does not venture 
far away from her text, literally and figuratively. Thus 
she fails to make the subject matter her own, fails to in¬ 
spire her class with a love for the subject and succeeds 
in giving the impression only that history is a succession 
of isolated facts bearing little or no relation to one 
another. For these and other reasons history, to my mind, 
is one of the least effective subjects on the course of 
studies. (Inspector D. M. Sullivan, High River.) 75 

1931 

I have endeavoured to encourage the problem project type 
of teaching where practical and commendable progress is 
being made, especially in geography and nature study. This 
is a sane application of the activity program now so much 
in vogue without the danger of activity merely for 
activity’s sake—as the end rather than the means to the 
end. (Inspector W. H. Edwards, Calgary City.) 76 

During the year I have examined the work in geography 
with special care, testing particularly the power of pupils 
to appreciate geographic relationships, and their power to 
visualize the activities of the people of other countries 
in the same way as they picture their own locality. In 
Grade VIII a number of pupils are found to have gained some 
actual geographic understandings; for example, they can 
show how the growth of manufacturing in England is related 
to coal deposits, the natural opportunities for shipping 
and the like. Given the latitude of a certain country or 
portion of it, and knowing world climatic facts, they are 
able to speculate as to the activities of the people. How¬ 
ever, I have gained no evidence to show that sufficient 
attention is given to this kind of training, and certainly 
insufficient is given below Grade VIII. In Grades VI and 
VII when the continents are studied in detail, pupils are 
usually able to list many facts, but they often lack the 
reason of things and one can only conclude that there is 
too much of the fact-type of teaching and too little of the 
teaching where large areas or zones are examined first, un¬ 
til the pupils gain some world concepts. When they have 
gained these, they are then in a position to study 
countries, comparing them with one another in terms of 
local factors of climate and resources. An excellent 
foundation for the study of zones and type-countries is the 
story-type geography for which provision is made in the 
Grade IV course. I feel that teachers are under-estimating 
the advantages of these stories of other lands, and fre¬ 
quently omit them in Grade IV to spend the time on defini¬ 
tions of land and water forms or a study of tea, a study 
which is much too formal for junior pupils except when 
taken incidentally in studying the people v/ho happen to 
grow tea. When studying tea from China it is the Chinese 
and not the tea in which we should create main interest; the 
Chinese do other things than grow tea. (Inspector G. L. 
Wilson, Peace River.) 77 















. 

' 













( 















. 

, 








































- 




. 

- 

















: 












, 

. 

- 

. * . * ' 





194 


History: This subject is well taught by only a small 
number of teachers. Too many depend to a large extent on 
’Teachers’ Helps’ for the organization and presentation of 
their subject matter. The effect is deadening to the 
teacher’s initiative and resourcefulness. (Inspector J. A. 
Fife, Edmonton Rural.) 78 


1932 

History and geography lessons are too often a mere re¬ 
citation of facts. Broader reading upon the part of the 
teacher would result in more interesting lesson teaching. 
Recently trained teachers are in many cases combining 
-grades in these two subjects to the ultimate detriment of 
the pupil. If the teachers were permanently retained no 
loss to the pupil might follow. It has happened that upon 
a number of visits I have found pupils who have missed the 
geography of Alberta or of Canada, or the stories of the 
early history of Canada. Investigation has shown that com¬ 
binations of Grades in V, VI and VII have accounted for the 
missing link. (Inspector R. J. Scott, Oyen.) 79 

In the curriculum: I am of the opinion that geography 
and history courses should parallel each other, with much 
material, which could be correlated in a manner which would 
not destroy the identity of each course. 

I am not certain at present, due to lack of an experi¬ 
mental basis, whether it would be best to use combination 
courses in each of these subjects for the rural school, but 
it would seem that a basis whereby such courses could be 
limited to about four years should be worked out, and 
thereby give the rural teacher some opportunity and guidance 
in the teaching of the essential facts of the now rather 
difficult eight-year course. (Inspector X. P. Crispo, High 
River. ) 80 

Good supplementary material now aids the teachers in 
making their treatment of citizenship and history up to and 
including Grade VI interesting and impressive. The objectives 
of the course in history and civics for Grades VII and VIII 
remain more difficult of realization with the sources at 
present available. (Inspector H. G. Sweet, Foremost.) 81 

1933 

History and geography are still too largely handled by 
the pupil as a mass of innumerable facts to be memorized. 
Insufficient co-ordination of these subjects between them¬ 
selves and with other subjects of the curriculum results 
in a lack of interest on the part of many pupils. (In¬ 
spector Lome Good, Wainwright*) 82 

I find too many teachers trying to teach successfully 
without adequate mastery of lesson material; too many 
simply ’take up’ with the class text-book material in such 
subjects as geography, history and agriculture, in the 
same form as the pupil may find it for himself in the text; 
comparatively f e w teachers present lesson material on the 








- 

. 




0 













. 






■ 

- 






< 

- 

' 

. 

. 

, 

- 

- 


■ 

‘ 

r 



195 


authority of their own mastery of it and with a peda- 
gogically artful organization of it to suit the peculiar 
needs of the pupils.(Inspector W. E. Hay, Stettler.) 83 

1934 

Citizenship, History and Geography : There is a great 
deal of fact teaching in these subjects, and too little 
attempt to interpret the facts in terms of the pupils 1 
experience. The use of printed manuals lowers the vi¬ 
tality of the teaching. History is unpopular, because the 
textbook.is not inspiring, and there is very little ma¬ 
terial for supplementary reading. 

Some excellent project work in Geography is done in 
the Ukrainian schools. The grouping of grades in history 
and geography is to be encouraged. (Departmental summary 
of the findings in the inspectors 1 reports.) 84 

The above comment, it should be noted, is the first attempt by 
the Department of Education to summarize the findings of the 
elementary school inspectors on the quality of instruction in 
the various subjects of instruction. It is particularly signifi¬ 
cant because citizenship, history, and geography are listed to¬ 
gether, even though the latter subject was classified in the 
course of studies with elementary science. A more outstanding 
forewarning of the pending curriculum revision, however, was to 
come in the following year with a summary which openly used the 
term fl social studies 11 : 


1935 

SOCIAL STUDIES—(HISTORY, CIVICS, GEOGRAPHY, HYGIENE) 

An improvement has taken place in the methods of 
teaching Social Studies, but the instruction still con¬ 
tinues to be too much a presentation of pre-digested in¬ 
formation which the pupil learns by memorizing. Not enough 
effort is made to secure the appropriate correlation and 
integration of these studies nor to assist the learning 
process by a sufficient use of mechanical and visual aids. 
The teachers 1 methods, on the whole, are too formalized to 
secure the socializing effects which should result from 
the study of these subjects. (Departmental summary of the 
findings in the inspectors 1 reports.) 85 

Reviewing the excerpts cited from the elementary school in¬ 
spectors 1 annual reports after the implementation of the 1922 






196 

curriculum, one sees a general trend toward the conclusions made 
in the above summary for 1935. The social studies subjects were 
being treated as separate compartments of know ledge, while the 
course of studies then in effect did not substantially promote 
the correlation and integration of these subjects. The methods 
of instruction, moreover, were generally of a type designed to 
kill the pupil’s interest in history or geography rather than to 
encourage it. Only a new curriculum,which was based on an inte¬ 
gration of subject matter and which recognized such improved 
teaching techniques as the activity, could help solve the 
serious problem in the social studies which is so strongly em¬ 
phasized in the inspectors’ reports from 1923 to 1935. 

Coming to the subject of inspectoral criticism of secondary 
social studies instruction in Alberta, one finds that the re¬ 
ports of the high school inspectors from 1919 to 1936 reveal 
both the shortcomings of the 1912 revision and the benefits of 
the curriculum changes of 1924. Since the number of high school 
inspectors in the province during the period under discussion 
was quite limited, the comments on secondary social studies in¬ 
struction contained in the annual reports of the Department of 
Education are comparatively brief. These comments may be tabu¬ 
lated as follows: 


1919 

No comment on either history or geography. 

1920 

..•The History course in the junior grades is not proving 
very suitable. Practically the same course has been 
covered through Grades VI, VTI and VIII and it takes the 
most resourceful teacher to vitalize the subject suf¬ 
ficiently to appeal to the student, and to hold his 
interest. In too many of our high schools there is very 
little change in the subject matter presented, and very 
little difference in the method of presentation. (J. A. 



197 

Smith, Inspector of High Schools.) 86 

1921 

^..In History, only fair results have been obtained. The 
weakness seems to be in the failure of the teacher’s 
method to develop in the student a proper sense of his¬ 
torical value and tha ability to satisfactorily organize 
his or her historical information. (Js A. Smith, G. A. 

McKee, Inspectors of High Schools.) 87 

1922 

...In History only fair results have been obtained. In 
many of the small high schools the teacher’s method of 
presenting the content of this subject is somewhat me¬ 
chanical and the students fail to develop a proper sense 
of historical values and the ability to organize his¬ 
torical information. {J. A. Smith, G. A. McKee, In¬ 
spectors of High Schools.) 88 

1923 

...Much enthusiasm is exhibited in the class room during 
the history-teaching period. This is one of the most at¬ 
tractive subjects on the new course. The committee was 
very fortunate in securing a valuable text-book. The view 
point that the students are obtaining of the history of 
the early peoples is a matter of general satisfaction. 

The text-book describes in a simple, interesting, and 
fairly comprehensive way the progress of civilization 
among the peoples of the ancient world and points out the 
contributions which each has made to the progress of man¬ 
kind ... 

In Grades X, XI and XII, where the old programme of 
studies is still in operation, the standard of work in 
the different subjects is much the Same as that of last 
year....In the presentation of the subject of history, 
only fair results are being obtained. Teachers, widely 
read and with a broad grasp of this subject, are doing 
very valuable work. Others, whose knowledge of history is 
confined to the text-book used, follow a mere chronologi¬ 
cal sequence of events. Learning the facts of history 
seemed to be the end of all things. It is the’subject’ 
that seemed to count for most, while its application to 
the students’ understanding of present life situations is 
lost sight of... (J. A. Smith, Inspector of High Schools.)89 

1924 

The British History Text is very much appreciated by 
both teachers and students. Its clear and full explanation 
of the essentials of British History makes it the most 
valuable text that is placed in the hands of our Grade X 
students. Its biographies are very inspirational and its 
handling of European politics appeals strongly to the 


















' 




. 
















- 




, 


- 







* 


















198 


average student. The majority of the teachers are finding 
difficulty in covering the content of the Course this 
year, hut offer no serious criticism, realizing that with 
greater familiarity with the text and more effective or¬ 
ganization of work less difficulty will he experienced 
next year. I failed to find a teacher in favour of making 
any changes in the requirements of this Course. In the 
handling of both Grades IX and X History, the teacher who 
is progressive in the field of History, and enthusiastic 
and alive to the responsibilities and possibilities of 
his or her position in the presentation of this subject, 
is meeting with very marked success. I look for fewer 
failures in Grade IX History next year. (J. A. Smith, In¬ 
spector of High Schools.) 90 

1925 

...During the early part of the year there was considerable 
dissatisfaction experienced with respect to the Geography 
course. No text book had been authorized and the teachers 
in the smaller schools, with the time at their disposal, 
had great difficulty in collecting material for the stu¬ 
dents. Your Department has since published a very helpful 
manual which should be much appreciated, both by students 
and teachers... 

...The History course requires the most careful and helpful 
organization of content. The average immature Grade IX stu¬ 
dent can do very little independent work, on account of 
lack of ability to interpret intelligently the content of 
the text. This accounts for the many failures in the sub¬ 
ject of History in our smaller high schools. (J. A. Smith, 
Inspector of High Schools.) 91 

1926 

...History 1 seems to be quite a popular subject in the 
city schools, where the teachers with specialized skill 
have the time to give to the students the helpful direction 
which the content of the course requires. For a consider¬ 
able time the immature Grade IX student needs more help 
than can be given in the small high school in interpreting 
the language of the text which in many places is very ab¬ 
stract. The lack of proper teaching of History 1 is the 
cause of so many casualties yearly in this subject.... 
...criticism with respect to History 2 could be met by 
giving unimportant details a very subordinate place in the 
course. ( J . A. Smith, Inspector of High Schools.) 92 

1927 

I hope that our high school programme of studies will 
be looked upon as fairly permanent for the next few years. 
The general criticism throughout the province that this 
programme was too burdensome has been met through sub¬ 
stantial reductions in the content of History 1, History 2, 
Algebra 2, Algebra 3, Arithmetic, Latin 2, French 1 and 
Art 1....0ur last examination records show that good nor- 





- 





■ 





199 


mal success was attained in all subjects but two, 

History 1 and Algebra 2. It would not be fair to say that 
the results in these two subjects reflect the unsuccess¬ 
ful efforts of the teachers. There were many contributory 
causes which I hope have since been removed....The de¬ 
letion of the more unimportant parts of History 1 and 2 
has made it possible without undue effort to cover these 
courses with the necessary degree of thoroughness. The 
completion of the manual on Constitutional History is 
looked forward to by the teachers, and I am sure will be 
much appreciated by them....(J. A. Smith, Inspector of 
High Schools.) 93 

1928-1933 

No comment on either history or geography. 

1934 

The least effective of the high school courses seem to 
be the courses in History. By far the greater number of 
teachers sense the need of helping their students to in¬ 
terpret the facts of the text-books in terms of current 
events and contemporary problems. Many of them believe 
that it should be the purpose of these courses to give 
high school students an insight into the mechanism of 
present-day society. But it is difficult for teachers to 
reconcile this larger purpose of History with the more 
immediate requirements of the final examinations. Until 
this reconciliation is effected, the teaching of this 
subject will leave much to be desired. (E. L. Fuller, 

H. C. Newland, Inspectors of High Schools.) 94 

1935 

History is generally limited to the text-book material, 
without the vital relation of its developments to present- 
day problems. (H. E. Balfour, D. M. Sullivan, Inspectors 
of High Schools.) 95 


1936 

On the other side of the picture, the rapid and wide¬ 
spread introduction of grade twelve into many schools has 
found teachers not as well prepared as should be desired. 
This applies not only to teachers with minimum qualifica¬ 
tions, but also to many who are eminently qualified in 
certain subjects but have taken no work beyond grade 
twelve in others. Thus Algebra 3, Chemistry 2, History 4, 
Biology 1 are often treated inadequately owing to the 
teacher's unfamiliarity with the subject-matter;.... 

(H. E. Balfour, D. M. Sullivan, Inspectors of High 
Schools.) 96 

Compared to the elementary school inspectors 1 reports on social 
studies instruction, the comments of the secondary inspectors 


~ 

- 

- - 










* 

C 















200 


are somewhat disappointing in several respects, despite the 
rather full discussion of the 1924 revision in relation to the 
classroom work in history. The Geography 1 course is hardly 
mentioned at all, while nothing is said about the teaching of 
the high school history courses for a period of six years after 
the 1924 curriculum had become stabilized. Although brief, the 
remarks of Mr. Fuller, Dr. Newland, Mr. Balfour, and Mr. Sulli¬ 
van from 1934 to 1936 are similar to the inspectoral criticisms 
on the elementary level previously cited, and point just as un¬ 
mistakably toward the coming curriculum revision which is the 
subject of the remaining chapters of this study. 


1 Alberta, Department 
ton, 1914), p. 67. 

2 Ibid., p. 82. 

3 Ibid., p. 90. 


4 Ibid., pp. 96-97. 

5 Alberta, Department 
ton, 1915), p. 76. 


6 

Ibid., 

p. 81. 

7 

Ibid., 

p. 92. 

8 

Ibid., 

p. 102. 

9 

Ibid., 

p. 106. 

10 

Ibid., 

p. 115. 

11 

Ibid., 

p. 118. 

12 

Ibid., 

p. 122. 

13 

Ibid., 

p. 127. 

14 

Alberta, Department 
ton, 1916), p. 94. 

15 

Ibid., 

p. 99. 

16 

Ibid., 

p. 107. 

17 

Ibid., 

p. 112. 

18 

Ibid., 

p. 115. 

19 

Ibid., 

p. 122. 

20 

Ibid., 

pp. 123-124. 

21 

Ibid., 

p. 135. 


22 Alberta, Department 
ton, 1917), p. 51. 

23 Ibid., p. 84. 

24 Ibid., p. 87. 

25 Alberta, Department 
ton, 1918), p. 59. 

26 Ibid., p. 77. 

27 Ibid., p. 79. 

28 Ibid., p. 86. 

29 Ibid., p. 93. 

30 Ibid., p. 96. 

31 Ibid., p. 99. 


of Education, Annual Report, 1913 (Edmon- 


of Education, Annual Report, 1914 (Edmon- 


of Education, Annual Report, 1915 (Edmon- 


of Education, Annual Report, 1916 (Edmon- 


of Education, Annual Report, 1917 (Edmon- 







■I 







! 0 




. 







« 0 ■ t ...... 







201 


32 Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report, 1918 (Edmon¬ 
ton, 1919), pp. 44-45. 

33 Ibid., p. 46. 

34 Ibid., p. 71. 

35 Ibid., p. 73. 

36 Ibid., p. 79. 

37 Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report, 1919 (Edmon¬ 
ton, 1920), pp. 9-10. 

38 Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report, 1923 (Edmon¬ 
ton, 1924), p. 61. 

39 Ibid.. 

40 Ibid. 


41 Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report, 1924 (Edmon¬ 
ton, 1925), p. 64. 

42 Ibid. 

43 Ibid., p. 65. 

44 Ibid. 


45 Alberta, Department 
ton, 1926), p. 61. 

46 Alberta, Department 
ton, 1927), p. 31. 

47 Ibid., p. 34. 

48 Ibid., p. 36. 

49 Alberta, Department 
ton, 1928), p. 30. 

50 Alberta, Department 
ton, 1928), p. 31. 

51 Ibid., p. 33. 

52 Ibid., p. 35. 

53 Ibid., p. 41. 

54 Ibid., p. 43. 

55 Alberta, Department 
ton, 1929), p. 39. 

56 Ibid., p. 42. 

57 Ibid., p. 43. 

58 Ibid., p. 44. 

59 Ibid., p. 46. 

60 Alberta, Department 
ton, 1930), p. 42. 

61 Ibid., p. 43. 

62 Ibid., p. 45. 

63 Ibid., p. 46. 

64 Ibid., p. 47. 

65 Ibid., p. 49. 

66 Ibid., p. 50. 

67 Ibid., pp. 50-51. 


of Education, Annual Report, 1925 (Edmon- 
of Education, Annual Report, 1926 (Edmon- 

of Education, Annual Report, 1927 (Edmon- 
of Education, Annual Report, 1927 (Edmon- 


of Education, Annual Report, 1928 (Edmon- 


of Education, Annual Report, 1929 (Edmon- 


68 Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report, 1930 (Edmon¬ 
ton, 1931), pp. 33-34. 

69 Ibid., p. 50. 

70 Ibid., p. 51. 

71 Ibid., p. 53. 

72 Ibid. 

73 Ibid., p. 54. 

74 Ibid., pp. 54-55. 

75 Ibid., pp. 55-56. 

76 Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report, 1931 (Edmon¬ 


ton, 1932), p. 35. 
77 Ibid., pp. 45-46. 



202 


78 Ibid., p. 49. 


79 

80 
81 

Alberta, Department of 
ton, 1933), p. 45. 
Ibid., p. 46. 

Ibid., p. 48. 

Education, 

Annual 

Report, 

1932 

(Eamon- 

82 

83 

Alberta, Department of 
ton, 1934), p. 44. 

Ibid., p. 45. 

Education, 

Annual 

Report, 

1933 

(Edmon- 

84 

Alberta, Department of 
ton, 1935), p. 55. 

Education, 

Annual 

Report, 

1934 

(Edmon- 

85 

Alberta, Department of 
ton, 1936), p. 60. 

Education, 

Annual 

Report, 

1935 

(Edmon- 

86 

Alberta, Department of 
ton, 1921), p. 20. 

Education, 

Annual 

Report, 

1920 

(Edmon- 

87 

Alberta, Department of 
ton, 1922), p. 16. 

Education, 

Annual 

Report, 

1921 

(Edmon- 

88 

Alberta, Department of 
ton, 1923), p. 17. 

Education, 

Annual 

Report, 

1922 

(Edmon- 

89 Alberta, Department of 
ton, 1924), pp. 23-24, 

Education, 

Annual 

Report, 

1923 

(Edmon- 

90 

Alberta, Department of 
ton, 1925), pp. 20-21. 

Education, 

Annual 

Report, 

1924 

(Edmon- 

91 Alberta, Department of 
ton, 1926), pp. 20-21, 

Education, 

Annual 

Report, 

1925 

(Edmon- 

92 

Alberta, Department of 
ton, 1927), p. 14. 

Education, 

Annual 

Report, 

1926 

(Edmon- 

93 

Alberta, Department of 
ton, 1928), p. 11. 

Education, 

Annual 

Report, 

1927 

(Ednion- 

94 

Alberta, Department of 
ton, 1935), p. 36. 

Education, 

Annual 

Report, 

1934 

(Edmon- 

95 

Alberta, Department of 
ton, 1936), p. 42. 

Education, 

Annual 

Report, 

1935 

(Edmon- 

96 

Alberta, Department of 
ton, 1937), pp. 38-39. 

Education, 

Annual 

Report, 

1936 

(Ed/mon- 








CHAPTER XVI 


THE ELEMENTARY SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM 
IN ALBERTA FROM THE REVISION OF 1936 TO THE PRESENT 

The curriculum revision of 1936, which revolutionized edu¬ 
cation in Alberta and placed the province in the forefront of 
Canadian educational progress, was preceded by demands for a 
change in classroom methods* This was particularly the case on 
the elementary level where the Alberta curriculum finally had to 
be completely rebuilt in order that it might keep up with the 
improved classroom procedures which were being developed both in 
the province and elsewhere* Some of the inspectoral demands for 
better teaching methods in the social studies subjects have been 
noted already in the previous chapter. However, in a study of the 
origins of the Alberta activity program, Berthold Figur has re¬ 
vealed a general trend in inspectoral opinion from 1908 to 1936 
toward the principles of the elementary curriculum adopted in the 
latter year. Some inspectors, Mr. Figur reports, preferred 
”learning by doing” to mere memorization, while others wrote of 
the need for more play in the elementary schools of the province. 
Still other inspectors went so far as to write that more 
socialized activities were needed in the classroom. By 1929, ac¬ 
cording to Mr. Figur, statements specifically supporting activity 
education may be found in the inspectors 1 annual reports. 

Dr. George K. Sheane, the historian of the Alberta ele¬ 
mentary school curriculum, characterizes the decade from 1920 to 

2 

1930 as a ”challenge to the recitation”. Those "patented tech¬ 
niques”, as he calls them, which influenced the trend of Al¬ 
berta education during this decade were Morrison T s Unit Mastery 




204 


Plan, the Winnetka Technique which sought to individualize in¬ 
struction in the elementary schools, and the Dalton Plan. In 
1924, for example, the latter educational method was put on a 
five-year trial basis in an Edmonton school. The Alberta Depart¬ 
ment of Education investigated the Winnetka Technique, but re¬ 
jected it because of the heavy operational expenses. The Unit 
Mastery Plan, however, was more influential in the province be¬ 
cause it not only changed classroom procedures, but it came to 
alter the writing of textbooks as well as other books of 
reference. 

Yet it was not until 1934 that a general policy for the re¬ 
form of the Alberta curriculum—and of the elementary curriculum 
in particular—began to take shape. Prior to that date the de¬ 
mands for a new educational program in the schools of the pro¬ 
vince tended to emanate from individual educators. In his annual 
report for 1934, George W. Gorman, the Deputy Minister of Edu¬ 
cation, included a statement which was the keynote of the cur¬ 
riculum revisions commenced by the Department in that year: 

The greatness of the Province will ultimately be deter¬ 
mined by the type of education we provide for all the people 
within our borders, more especially children, and the 
creating of an atmosphere within our schools that will serve 
well childhood, youth and manhood. 

Every child is entitled to the groundwork of a thorough 
education. It is highly desirable that irrespective of acci¬ 
dents of birth, or isolation of residence, every child 
should enjoy access to the higher forms of education as 
well. A persistent effort is being made to realize these 
aims. 

Emphasis in education has been placed upon the means of 
livelihood for the worker and the proper enjoyment of lei¬ 
sure time. The changes through which our economic structure 
has been passing indicate the need for a coalescing of this 
dual emphasis. The gulf between making a livelihood and en¬ 
joying leisure hours, between industry and culture, is 
sensibly decreasing. 

Education is not a means of livelihood—it is a means to 


: 




< . ■ ■ c 


■ 

' 


■ 

■ 


* 

* ' * ■ \yi‘ , ■ 

- 

: 

t 

; ' ; 1 . 

- 

. 

. 

- 

■ 

4 




life. Our objectives have possibly been based too much 
upon the need for obtaining a living. The result is that 
many who have failed even to make a living may endure as 
well a mentally starved existence while the richest 
fields of their spiritual life are lying uncultivated. 

Mental attainments, subjects taught, and methods em¬ 
ployed are means rather than ends. G-reater stress must be 
laid on the cultivation of personal and social character. 
The supreme motives in any system of education are 
character building and the enjoyment of a full life. 

Education is not a forced growth in the classroom 
period of childhood, but is rather a self-developing pro¬ 
cess, a living of life in wholesomeness and fullness, and 
the process is continuous and lifelong. This view of edu¬ 
cation does not aim at prematurely burdening the child 
with the tasks of manhood, but rather aims to develop at 
each stage the potentialities of that period. The aim of 
the school is to develop a habit of study and an inclina¬ 
tion to practise it. This implies an interest. This 
interest is the germ implanted by the school. Without 
this germ of potential interest, growth cannot take 
place. Education is thus not merely a matter of school 
years; it is a life process. 

Committees now at work on the revision of courses for 
both elementary and secondary schools are impressed with 
the need for a new approach both in subject-matter and 
method. It is confidently expected that in the near 
future the reports of the revising committees will be 
available for consideration.... 3 

Reporting a year later on the progress made in the revision of 

the elementary school curriculum, Dr. H. C. Rowland, the Super 

visor of Schools, remarked: 

The new programme is built on the principle that edu¬ 
cation is a social experience in the course of which 
pupils plam, initiate, and carry out, co-operative pro¬ 
jects. The motivation of the pupils is strengthened and 
the classroom work is vitalized through a variety of 
activities, which replace the verbalism and repetitive 
book-learning procedures of the old course. The new pro¬ 
gramme, however, makes greater demands on the ability, 
initiative and resource of the teacher. The greater free¬ 
dom, both for teachers and pupils, entails greater 
responsibility; and this fact will of necessity have its 
influence both on the selection of candidates for teacher 
training at the Normal Schools, and on the kind of 
training which the Normal Schools provide.... 4 


After two years of deliberation and experimentation, the 
new curriculum began to be put into effect in Alberta class- 












. 





. 


























































. 










. 

S J • . ' > 

. -. 











206 


rooms during the school year, 1936-1937. Under the scheme of 
organization which became effective in September, 1936, the 
twelve grades in the schools of the province were grouped in 
the following manner: 

The Elementary School—Grades I to VI. 

The Intermediate School—Grades VII to IX. 

The High School—Grades X to XII. 

The Department of Education, in other words, had abandoned the 
”8-4" plan of school organization and replaced it with the more 
modern ”6-3-3” pattern. The six grades of the elementary school, 
meanwhile, were divided into two divisions. Grades I, II, and 
III were to constitute Division I, while Division II was to in¬ 
clude Grades IV to VI. Hand-in-hand with this new scheme of or¬ 
ganization in the elementary school was a new conception of the 
term "grade” which the Department stated was "to denote merely a 

level of attainment in any given subject, activity or element of 

5 

the school programme”. The pupil’s progress in the skill sub¬ 
jects—reading, writing, arithmetic, and language—was "to be 

measured in terms of mastery and attainment, and not by the 

6 

length of time spent in school”. 

The new elementary curriculum, according to the Department 

of Education, was to be "in substance an ’activity programme’" 

based partly on the principle that "learning is not something a 

7 

child gets, but something that he does”. The teacher under this 

programme was not to be "a mere animal-trainer", but "a genuine 

educator” who would "watch carefully and patiently for the 

8 

learning outcomes of social activities and experiences". Of ut¬ 
most significance to the evolution of elementary social studies 
instruction was the Departmental announcement of the following 



207 

principle as basic in the new activity education: 

It is both feasible and desirable to correlate many 
different learning units, and to consolidate them in 
social studies or social activities and experiences. It 
matters little to the learners whether an interesting 
item of knowledge or experience is properly called geo¬ 
graphy, history, dramatization, or literature; the im¬ 
portant thing to them as learners is that it is 
interesting, and is useful for them in the life they are 
living as boys and girls. The significance of right 
nomenclature for the thing is beyond their present power 
of appreciation. 9 


In view of the above statement of principle, the question 
naturally arises as to how the instructional materials of the 
new elementary programme were to be designated. These materials 
were to be grouped as "subjects" and "enterprises". The subjects 
included reading, literature, speech training, verse speaking, 
choral speech, language, spelling, writing, arithmetic, social 
studies, elementary science, health education, physical edu¬ 
cation, art, and music. The enterprises, which were not made 
compulsory at this stage of the revision of the elementary cur¬ 
riculum, were to draw their materials from all the subjects of 
the programme, but mainly from the social studies subjects. They 
were, in other words, to be an integration of history, geography, 

and civics which would include "associated activities in art, 

10 

music, language and dramatics". To define the enterprise, the De¬ 
partment of Education stated: 

The name 'enterprise* has been chosen to designate 
the T doing or activity 1 , rather than the familiar ’pro¬ 
ject^, because it has a somewhat stricter meaning. An 
enterprise is a definite undertaking; teacher and 
pupils agree upon it and tacitly promise to carry it 
through as agreed. An enterprise is an undertaking 
chosen, after consideration, for its interest and 
value; carefully planned in advance, carried out ac¬ 
cording to plan, and brought to a definite conclusion, 
after which some reckoning of gains is made. An enter¬ 
prise is not only a carefully organized undertaking in 
itself, but it is also a part of a whole, a definite 
step in a course designed to cover three years of work. 



208 


Each enterprise involves planning, the organization of 
ideas and of materials, and co-operation. Enterprises 
include both mental and manual work, the collection of 
information and the practice of skills. A well chosen 
enterprise— 

Is centred in the interests of the pupils. 

Is within the range of their ability. 

Suggests several kinds of information to be sought. 

Offers several kinds of work to be done. 

Provides different types of social experience. 

Is capable of being completed within a reasonable 
length of time. 11 


Under the 1936 Elementary curriculum a teacher who chose to 
use the enterprise procedure would find that two different names 
were to be used, according to the division concerned. In Di¬ 
vision I the enterprises were to be known as "Social Activities", 
while in Division II they were called "Social Experiences". There 
was, however, no course outline in the social studies for Di¬ 
vision I, a circumstance which the official programme of studies 
explained as follows: 

...the Social Studies of this programme represent a fusion 
of History, G-eography, and Civics or Citizenship; and as 
such, they present two types of content: (1) informational 
facts and generalizations, to be studied, comprehended and 
* learned f ; and (2) activities of social living, that in¬ 
duce appreciations, attitudes, abilities and behaviours. 

In Division I, only the second type of content is im¬ 
portant; and the teacher will provide it by means of the 
enterprises for this division—the Social Activities. 12 

The teachers of Division I, therefore, were urged to "attempt 

13 ^ 

one or two enterprises, at least". If the teacher sought to 

avoid the enterprise procedure, this was not very easy to do even 

in the social studies content of Division II. There the course 

outline was, to use the words of the Department, "shot through 

14 

with suggestions for activities and enterprises". The main ob¬ 
jectives of the social studies on this level, moreover, were such 
as to make the enterprise procedure very effective if it were 
used. The aims of the social studies in Division II were stated 




































- 
















• 


■ 
















? 






. . 

* 

* 


: r 

• - • , 




■ 






c 


























209 


to be: 

1. To direct children in experiencing a realistic under¬ 
standing and appreciation of human relations; and 

2. To permit children to participate in improving human 
relations. 15 

At the same time, attitudes of inquiry, critical-mindedness, 
open-mindedness, tolerance, responsibility, appreciation, crea¬ 
tive self-expression, self-cultivation, willingness to co¬ 
operate, and sympathy were to be sought in the working out of 
the social studies problems in Division II. The special abili¬ 
ties to be acquired by the pupil were: 

1. To read, speak, write, listen, and study, intelligently. 

2. To follow instructions capably. 

3. To respond to situations requiring neuro-muscular 
skills. 

4. To use references, assemble material, and organize in¬ 
formation. 16 

Thus to achieve all three goals of the elementary social studies 

program—aims, attitudes, and abilities—the teacher in Division 

II was well advised to adopt the new enterprise procedure. 

Turning to the subject of course content, one finds that 

the main theme of the social studies in Division II was to be 

the community idea which the Department of Education described 

17 

as "a plan for fusing History and Geography”. 1$ Grade IV, con¬ 
sequently, the main studies were the Canadian nomad communities:, a 
jungle community, an island community, a village community, a 
hot desert community, a mountain community, a very modern and a 
most progressive community. In Grade V the main social studies 
topic was the development of frontier communities which was sub¬ 
divided into the following studies: the world we live in, the 
continent we live on, the explorers of the great west, pioneers 
of Western Canada, some modern explorers, and our home com¬ 
munity in Alberta. The scope of the social studies in Grade VI 













. 


. 
























■ 
















• ■ ; v .... , • , cm v* oj ..i:. > ‘}fii un 

., ' /. 1 . 

< - ,.U- ' . . ' , 

■ ■ i.. . 










. 






. 






n 










210 


included early English community growth, early Latin-American 
community growth, Eastern Canadian community growth, early co¬ 
lonial communities, modern Canadian communities, Western 
Canadian community growth, and modern Empire community growth. 

For each of the above studies, it should be noted, the official 
programme of studies gave a comprehensive outline of the ma¬ 
terial that could be included by the teacher and the class in 
their social studies activities. 

In 1940 the Department of Education published a revision of 
the 1936 elementary programme which, so far as the social studies 
were concerned, took an even more significant step forward than 
that taken four years before. The number of subjects was reduced 
to reading (including literature), language (including speech 
training, spelling, and writing), arithmetic, physical education, 
art, and music, while an integrated sequence was announced which 
included not only the social studies or history and geography, 
but the materials of elementary science and health. In explana¬ 
tion of this new move, the elementary programme of studies con¬ 
tained the following important statement which also included a 
significant reference to the social studies in the intermediate 
and high-school grades: 

The curricular or instructional materials—the ’con¬ 
tent’ of any school programme may be grouped in two main 
ways: (i) in subjects or in subject-matter categories, 
and (ii) in integrated units of v^ork. In the first re¬ 
vision of this programme both ways of grouping were 
followed: outlines were set forth for all of the tra¬ 
ditional subjects except History and Geography. For these 
two subjects the curricular materials were integrated, 
forming what was called ’’Social Studies”. In the present 
revision the process of integration has been carried a 
step farther: the Social Studies have in turn bean re¬ 
integrated with Elementary Science and Health by use of 
the general theme—Basic Human Needs. The next step will 
be to include within the integration the appreciational 
subjects, such as Music, Art and Literature, and with 
these a good deal of Language and Arithmetic. In a fully 

integrated programme the names of subject-matter cate- 
























gories will disappear entirely. 


211 


It is quite possible to have an integrated programme 
that is not an acti vity programme. Social Studies in 
the intermediate and high-school grades and General 
Science and General Mathematics in the high-school 
grades are examples of integrations that do not 
necessarily require activity procedures in the class¬ 
room. Integrated curricular materials may be ’presented’ 
by means of the subject-matter-set-forth-to-be-learned 
procedures, as Kilpatrick terms them, in formal, or 
even in informal, ’lessons’. But on the other hand, a 
genuine activity programme cannot be carried out without 
a considerable amount of integration. An activity leads 
naturally to integration; because the teacher must find 
scope enough for the activity to make it real and 
meaningful. 

In order to promote this type of integration in the 
classroom, the former Programme of Studies directed 
teachers to plan comprehensive activities, or enter¬ 
prises, with the pupils, and to select from many or all 
of the subject outlines the instructional materials that 
would be required. Moreover, the Programme described 
some illustrative enterprises, and gave outlines for 
many more. The correlations and integrations so brought 
about, however, were found to be ’spotty’ and casual, 
lacking the coherence or sequence of the genuine inte¬ 
gration. Often the comprehensive or multiple-track 
enterprise forced an unnatural or artificial integration, 
’dragging in by the ears* materials from all parts of 
the curriculum. 

The present programme has therefore attacked the 
problem of integration more directly. In place of sug¬ 
gested and illustrative enterprises, completely worked 
out, together with the outlines of others, this re¬ 
vision exhibits ’ready-made’ integrations of curricular 
materials, including all the materials for Social 
Studies, Elementary Science, and Health, and a very con¬ 
siderable portion of those for Literature, Language, 

Music and Art. Since the integrated material is ready 
for immediate use, the teacher will have less responsi¬ 
bility for integration on the content side of an activity 
or enterprise, and more time to shape the enterprise in 
terms of meaningful and purposeful pupil activity. 18 

As a result of this new development, the elementary teacher now 

had no choice but to use the enterprise procedure. To emphasize 

this point, the official programme of studies contained the 

following statement: 

The disappearance of set enterprises from the Pro¬ 
gramme does not mean that the use of the enterprise pro¬ 
cedure is optional for the teacher; nor that the enter- 

























. 








' 


' 













e 


: 




. 







212 


prise procedure is to be used only for the integrated 
part of the Programme. On the contrary, the enterprise 
or activity procedure is prescribed for use in all 
elementary-school classrooms, and is specifically re¬ 
quired not only for classroom work in Social Studies, 
Elementary Science, and Health (the integrated part of 
of the Programme), but also for the greater part of 
the work in the appreciational subjects —Literature, 

Art and Music, and for a substantial part of the work in 
Language, Reading and Arithmetic. 19 


The integrated sequence or programme was based, as already 
indicated, upon the general theme of the basic human needs. 

The scope of this program for both Divisions I and II dealt with 
nine such basic human needs which were described as themes of 
social living. These themes may be listed as follows: 

1. Food. 

2. Clothing. 

3. Shelter. 

4. Work. 

5. Transportation and Communication. 

6. Recreation. 

7. Expression. 

8. Education. 

9. Government, Health, and Protection. 

Both Divisions I and II were to deal with the broad problem of 
adjustments in the ways of living to satisfy these needs, but 
Division I was to carry the specific title, ”How We Adjust Our¬ 
selves to Our Immediate Environment to Satisfy Our Basic Human 
Needs”, while Division II was to be confined to the problem of 

Tt How Man Adjusts Himself in More Remote Environments to Satisfy 

20 

His Basic Human Needs”. The "Immediate Environment” in Di¬ 
vision I was to comprise the home, school and community. The 
"More Remote Environments” in Division II, however, were di¬ 
vided into the following three sections: 

Section A—How Man Adapts His Living to Environmental 
Forces of Nature. 

Section B—How Man Through Early Discovery and Invention 
Satisfied His Basic Human Needs. 

Section C—How Man Today Utilizes the Resources of Nature 
to Satisfy His Basic Human Needs.21 























« . 

« ' ' r; e ■■' ■ ■ . ii - :■ ■ ■ . ■ “ 

: 













; ' 1 ■ vKi 


i L 


. 









In discussion and explanation of the social studies materials 
which went into this elementary integrated program, the Depart 
ment of Education made the following important observations: 

Modern educators agree that the function of education 
is to fit the child to take his place and play his part 
in society. Hence every subject must possess social 
value to justify its inclusion on the curriculum of the 
elementary school. While it is true that all subjects 
have a social purpose, the term Social Studies is re¬ 
served for those T whose subject matter relates directly 
to the organization and development of human society and 
to man as a member of social groups*?. 

The chief objective of teaching Social Studies in the 
elementary school is to help the child to gain an under¬ 
standing of the world in which he lives. As man’s activi¬ 
ties throughout the world are concerned with satisfying 
his basic human needs, it can readily be seen that the 
policy of integrating Social Studies, Science and Health 
in the elementary school is a sound one. A glance at the 
topics listed in the ’Guide to the Integrated Programme’ 
will show that Social Studies constitutes the core of 
the curriculum. The greatest degree of success in the 
treatment of Social Studies in Division II will be 
achieved by those teachers who arouse the interests of 
their pupils by encouraging them to engage in purposeful 
activities. Since an enterprise is a series of purpose¬ 
ful activities revolving about one central theme, the 
relationship between Social Studies and enterprises can 
easily be appreciated. 

A problem arises at the beginning of the school term 
in rooms in which there are pupils in the three years of 
Division II. The pupils who have just entered this di¬ 
vision rarely have any knowledge of maps and their uses. 
When the first enterprise has been initiated, these 
pupils should have available small globes costing only a 
few cents. From the study of these globes the pupils 
should acquire elementary ideas about the size and shape 
of the earth, location of Alberta, names and locations 
of continents, oceans and zones, and finding direction 
on maps. The teacher may even find it necessary to do 
some formal teaching to ensure correct ideas of these 
features. The transition to the use of the flat map can 
then be made quite easily* 

If a teacher has exercised good judgment in her choice 
of enterprises, the pupils leaving Division II should 
have acquired a fair working knowledge of the past and 
present of Alberta, and of a few of the outstanding geo¬ 
graphical features of Canada. It is to be hoped that they 
will have developed the desirable habit of raising the 
question, ’Where is it?’ when a new place is mentioned, 
and of learning the answer to the question by examining 
the map. The most valuable legacy of their work in Di- 
























































B 

, 

i J 


- 

* 























214 


vision II should be the development of an attitude of good 
will towards their fellow pupils, the people in their own 
community, in the rest of Canada, and in the world at 
large. 

If the pupils are to gain a clear appreciation of how 
man satisfies his basic human needs, extensive use must be 
made of suitable illustrative material. One of the best 
sources of illustrations for many of the topics in this 
Programme is the National Geographic Magazine .,.. 22 


The 1940 revision of the elementary school program remained 
in effect until 1947. Needless to say, the changes announced in 
1940 caused rather bitter controversy between the followers of 
the progressive school of educational thought and those who con¬ 
tinued to believe in the traditionalist approach. This argument, 
however, need not be discussed here because to do so would side¬ 
track the present study from the main theme of the evolution of 
social studies instruction in Alberta. But it is important to 
note that, apparently as a result of the criticisms which the 
1940 elementary curriculum had evoked, the Department of Edu¬ 
cation published a supplementary bulletin in 1943 which sought 

"to set out definitely and specifically the minimum requirements 

23 

of the Programme of Studies for the Elementary School". At the 

same time, though, the Department issued the following warning: 

" It cannot be stated too emphatically that this bulletin in no 

24 

way supersedes the Elementary Programme of Studies. " Obviously 

in reply to some of the criticisms of the enterprise procedure, 

the Department stated in an introductory note explaining the 

significance of the integrated programme: 

There is nothing in the Alberta Programme that con¬ 
dones sloppy learning, that prohibits a teacher from in¬ 
sisting that pupils . shall acquire thoroughly and compe¬ 
tently certain basic skills and knowledges. Thorough 
mastery and retention of these will Justify the intelli¬ 
gent use of repetition and drill. Pupils should be more 
widely informed, and better informed, at the conclusion 




















































- 

' 









. 















. > ..... i . v 

.. .. 0 




* 


c 










. 












* • 







. 










. H} , : 








: • 


. < ■ C ’ ■ . 

- 








215 


of an enterprise than they were at its inception. If 
there has been no increment of habit, attitude, skill 
and knowledge, then the enterprise has been, in a 
large measure, a failure. 25 

Of particular significance to the development of social 
studies instruction in the elementary schools was the following 
suggestion in the supplementary bulletin that a Canadian back¬ 
ground be given to the clasroom enterprises: 

It is suggested that teachers should weave a Canadian 
Pattern into as many enterprises as possible. The Cana¬ 
dian people, and their activities, customs, literature, 
music and art, are subjects of first importance to Cana¬ 
dian boys and girls, not only as the proper basis for 
Canadian unity, but as a background for understanding 
other peoples. The social heritage of Canada is a com¬ 
posite of several somewhat different cultures. This heri¬ 
tage can be used in the classroom to lead pupils to an 
appreciation and understanding of the peoples of the 
United Nations, and of the struggle for freedom 
throughout the world. 26 


Another elementary curriculum revision was published in 
1947, but no fundamental changes in method were put into effect 
by the new programme of studies. In a foreward to Bulletin II of 
this programme, Dr. W. E. Swift, the Deputy Minister of Educa¬ 
tion, explained the Departmental purpose in these words: 

Though contained in new publications and styled in 
somewhat new form the programme is not a new one in the 
same degree that the 1936 programme was in relation to 
its predecessor. Rather it is an attempt to present in 
clearer and more useful form the existing programme, 
being based on essentially the same fundamental prin¬ 
ciples. It is hoped that the material of the course, 
especially that relating to the enterprise instruction 
portion, can be more readily interpreted and followed 
by the busy teacher, by the teacher not too confident 
of his capacity to develop his own enterprise programme, 
and by the teacher handicapped by heavy enrollment and 
lack of facilities. In so providing it is hoped that it 
will in no way dampen the enthusiasm or curb the re¬ 
sourcefulness of those teachers who find themselves 
able to develop the initiative not only of themselves 
but of their pupils. 27 

Under this 1947 revision health and science materials, in the 
words of the official programme of studies, "remain merged with 






- * 









V ■■ ' '• ,j.r;. 
























‘ 










* 

t 












. ‘ 

' 

- 








j , ■ 






8 -; 










216 

the Social Studies to prove basic content for the activity pro- 
28 

gramme”. The "Themes of Social Living" of the former course of 
studies were transformed into the following ten major community 
activities which would provide the scope for the classroom 
enterprises: 

(1) Getting and Preparing Pood. 

(2) Providing Shelter. 

(3) Providing Clothing. 

(4) Transporting and Communicating. 

(5) Guarding Health, Safety, and Welfare. 

(6) Governing and Protecting. 

(7) Observing and Conserving Nature. 

(8) Educating for Adult Duties and Jobs. 

(9) Enjoying Recreation, Play and Leisure. 

(10) Expressing Ideals Through Religion and Art. 29 

The Department of Education admitted the "close similarity be¬ 
tween these basic social problems and the *Themes of Social 

30 

Living* of the previous course", but it listed certain dif- 

31 

ferences which, however, were termed "relatively minor”: 

(1) Each item is expressed, not as a theme or topic, 
but as a problem requiring some activity for its 
solution. Thus the theme "Food" has been changed 
to the related problem of "Getting and Preparing 
Food". Each theme has been converted to a corres¬ 
ponding problem. 

{2) The theme "Work" has been omitted completely, on 
the assumption that the activities involved in 
the solution of these problems covers the major 
portion of what was included in the "work" 
section. 

(3) The concepts concerned with Health and Welfare 
have been given stronger emphasis by removal from 
their former listing with "Government and Pro¬ 
tection" in favour of a direct approach to the 
problem of "Guarding Health, Welfare, and Safety". 

(4) An addition to the list of problems has been made 
in "Observing and Conserving Nature". If is hoped 
that concepts related to Nature Study and Science 
can be more adequately treated by focussing more 
direct attention on the problems of the immediate 
natural environment. 32 

To explain the major change which the Department of Education 
felt had been effected by the adoption in 1947 of ten major 
































. 


. 






















« 


c 





■ 












- 

, 






. 







217 


community activities for the enterprise, it is necessary first 
to note the new sequence pattern which accompanied this cur¬ 
riculum revision. The sequence for Divisions I and II was de¬ 
fined in the 1947 programme as "a selection of social groups 

and social themes arranged in order of child interest and 
33 

comprehension" and it was divided into the following three 
groups: 

Grades I and II: Our Home, Our School, and Our 
Neighborhood. 

Grades III and TV: Our Community, People of Other Places 

and Times. 

Grades V and VI : Our Province, Our Country, Man Learns 
to Use the World r s Resources. 

Thus, according to the Department of Education, one finds that: 

...The major change designed for the previous themes of 
Social Living r has to do with their use in the selection 
and planning of Enterprises. Past practice has been to 
make frequent use of one ’theme’ as the topic for an 
Enterprise. Certain ’themes’ lent themselves conveniently 
to this treatment while others were sadly neglected. Thus 
we have repeatedly organized ’Food’, ’Clothing’, ’Trans¬ 
portation’ and ’Shelter’ topics into Enterprises while 
the concepts relating to ’Government’, ’Education’, ’Ex¬ 
press ion’, and ’Recreation’ have had relatively no at¬ 
tention. This lop-sidedness can scarcely be defended. The 
Scope problems accordingly are not intended to be Enter¬ 

prise topics in themselves. The basic purpose in listing 
and discussing them is to offer teacher guidance for 
every Enterprise. Enterprise topics are to be chosen from 
the Sequence pattern, not from the Scope problems. These 
topics will as a rule be so selected as to represent some 
social organization, scene, or situation. As a rule all 
ten Scope problems are to be kept in mind when selecting 
relevant areas for investigation and study since all ten 
will apply in some respect to any social group that may 
be selected for close scrutiny. Certain exceptions to 
this procedure may, of course, be necessary but these 
variations should be for specific educative purposes. 34 


The foregoing 1947 programme for the social studies section 
of the elementary school curriculum is in effect in the class¬ 
rooms of the province at the time of writing. A revision of the 
1947 elementary school programme was published In 1949, but this 
















































. 

- 


- 






. 
































‘ 









218 


revision was only "devoted to the correction of the imper- 

35 

fections of the 1947 publication?. No major changes were made, 
a circumstance which prompted Dr. Swift to remark in his fore¬ 
word to the second edition of Bulletin II: "It should be ap¬ 
parent to all that the enterprise program presented here, al¬ 
though styled in somewhat new form, is organized on essentially 

the same fundamental principles as were introduced in the 1936 
36 

pro gram." 

A comparison of the Alberta elementary social studies pro¬ 
gram since 1936 with the relative sections of the preceding 
courses of studies is difficult, if not Impossible, because of 
the totally different philosophies of education upon which the 
school programs are based. Despite the various revisions which 
took place, the elementary curriculum up to 1936 was tra¬ 
ditionalist in its approach and was based, accordingly, upon the 
premise that education is but a means of preparation for life. 
The program adopted in 1936 is, of course, progressive and is 
founded on the belief that education rs life. Obviously, such 
diametrically opposed philosophies, when applied to social 
studies instruction, do not admit of much comparison. Indeed, 
the conflict is so sharp that it is well nigh impossible for a 
person, who is inclined to compromise in such a situation, to 
adopt a middle-of-the-road position. One is either for or 
against the new program of activity education; modification of 
the principles of this program only results in confusion for 
teacher and pupils alike. 

A few of the more obvious contrasts in the social studies 
field bet?;een the pre-1936 curriculum and the present course of 
studies may be noted in conclusion. The Alberta traditionalist 



219 


curriculum, which had been inherited by the province from the 
Territorial regime, assumed that all children learned social 
studies materials in the same manner regardless of environmental, 
physical, or mental differences. The enterprise program, on the 
other hand, seeks to recognize individual differences. The tra¬ 
ditionalist course of studies, moreover, assumed that social 
studies materials should be taught in separate compartments, 
while the enterprise program put into effect an integration of 
these materials which abolished their appearance as different 
squares on the classroom time-table. It must be admitted that in 
a certain respect the citizenship program of 1922 was on paper, 
at least, an attempt at integration, but it fell down in prac¬ 
tice. In this connection, it is interesting to note that the 
enterprise program solved the problem that the 1922 revision 
created when geography was divorced from history and classed with 
elementary science. The integration of 1940, by combining history, 
civics, geography, elementary science, and health, recognized the 
close inter-relationship between these subjects in a way that 
apparently was quite beyond the curriculum makers of 1922. A 
final contrast between the two types of social studies programs 
may be seen in the tendency of the pre-1936 social studies courses 
to revert to the memorization by rote of materials from a text¬ 
book or a note-book. The new activity procedures of the enter¬ 
prise program, if properly carried out, fortunately make such a 
lifeless conception of teaching impossible. 

1 Figur, Berthold, An Historical Survey of Certain Concepts Basic 
to Progressive Education With Particular Attention to the Al¬ 
berta Scene . Unpublished Master’s thesis, University of Al¬ 
berta, 1950, Chapter V. 

2 Sheane, G-eorge Kennedy, The History and Development of the Cur¬ 
riculum of the Elementary School in Alberta . Unpublished 
doctor’s thesis, University of Toronto, 1948, p. 86. 



























•« 


« , ■ 







■ 








- 












* 

* 








- 

, • . c 


< ' 

. I 





220 

3 Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report, 1934 (Edmon¬ 
ton, 1935), p. 13. 

4 Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report, 1935 (Edmon¬ 
ton, 1936), p. 19. 

5 Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for 
the Elementary School (Edmonton, 1956), p. 3. 

6 Ibid. 

7 Ibid. 

8 Ibid., p. 4. 

9 Ibid. 

10 Sheane, op. cit. , p. 105. 

11 Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for 
the Elementary School (Edmonton, 1936), p. 288. 

12 Ibid., p. 109. 

13 Ibid., p. 5. 

14 Ibid. 

15 Ibid., p. 110. 

16 Ibid., pp. 110-111. 

17 Ibid., p. 111. 

18 Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for 
the Elementary School (Edmonton, 1942), pp. 27-28. 

19 Ibid., p. 29. 

20 Ibid., p. 44. 

21 Ibid. 

22 Ibid., pp. 56-57. 

23 Alberta, Department of Education, Supplementary Bulletin on 
the Programme of Studies for the Elementary School with Di¬ 
rections to Teachers and Statement of Minimum Essentials (Ed¬ 
monton, 1943), p. 3. 

24 Ibid. 

25 Ibid., pp. 4-5. 

26 Ibid., p. 18. 

27 Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for the 
Elementary School, Bulletin II (Edmonton, 1947), p. 3. 

28 Ibid., p. 16. 

29 Ibid., p. 21. 

30 Ibid. 

31 Ibid., p. 22. 

32 Ibid., pp. 21-22. 

33 Ibid., pp. 32-33. 

34 Ibid., p. 22. 

35 Alberta, Department of Education, Program of Studies for the 
Elementary School, Bulletin 2 (Edmonton, 1949), p. 3. 

36 Ibid. 






CHAPTER XVII 


THE INTERMEDIATE SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM 

IN ALBERTA FROM THE REVISION OF 1936 TO THE PRESENT 

The curriculum revision of 1936 entailed the creation of a 
new unit in Alberta school administration in the form of the 
intermediate school. This new separate unit, which has been 
known officially as the junior high school since 1949, grouped 
together Grades VII, VIII, and IX in order to offer a distinctive 
program of studies and activities for pupils from eleven to fif¬ 
teen years of age. The intermediate social studies curriculum, 
accordingly, offers interesting points of contrast and comparison 
with the former elementary and high school courses of studies for 
the grades mentioned. As announced in 1936, the intermediate cur¬ 
riculum contained only one subject in the social studies area, 
but it represented an integration, for the most part, of materials 
from geography, history, and civics. This subject, known as Social 
Studies, was compulsory in each intermediate grade and carried the 
maximum time allotment of five periods per week. Optional sub¬ 
jects, it should be noted, varied in their time allotments from 
two to four periods per week. In 1941 another social studies sub¬ 
ject, to be discussed later in this chapter, was added to the list 
of optional subjects for Grade IX. 

It will be recalled that the definition of the social studies 
used in the new intermediate course of studies was cited in Chap¬ 
ter II. In connection with this introductory definition, quoted 
from a Virginia curriculum announcement, the Alberta intermediate 
programme of studies went on to make the statement that: 


; 

i < ' ■ .' iiv' i i L . u; i: ' ; ;c k% ;.f| 









- 

. • 

' 

- 

V 

. ! . . 

. • 

■ 























; 




222 


Interest is the dynamic motivator of all that man 
does best. These courses should be so treated that they 
will interest the student. The mere acquisition of 
factual information is not education. Mental growth is 
essential. The student should develop a technique of 
investigation—individual and co-operative discovery 
and evaluation of facts, organization and application 
of findings, and formation of tentative judgments and 
attitudes. Thus Social Studies should contribute to the 
production of the desirable qualities of character and 
conduct found in the good citizen. 1 

These observations, however, were but a preliminary indication 
that the principles of "learning by doing" had infiltrated from 
the elementary school into the intermediate grades. Indeed, to 
provide continuity with the new program of activity education in 
the elementary school, the intermediate social studies announce¬ 
ment of 1936 requested that the teacher study the statement of 
objectives and minimum requirements in that section of the ele¬ 
mentary course of studies which pertained to the social studies. 
In addition, a list of fundamental objectives, specially fitted 
to the needs of the intermediate social studies student, was 
provided which further reflected the influence of the principles 
underlying the revision of the elementary school curriculum. 
These fundamental objectives were listed as follows: 

1. To facilitate an understanding of our social and eco¬ 
nomic realities; in other words, to acquaint students 
with enough historical and geographical facts to 
enable them to comprehend at their level our present- 
day economic and political institutions and practices. 

2. To develop the ability to see both sides of a question, 
and to think independently on a basis of facts. 

3. To induce an attitude of fair-mindedness, and a desire 
to co-operate with others for the welfare of the com¬ 
munity. 

4. To train students in the use of efficient methods for 
securing and organizing information that is available 
in reference books, atlases and charts; and to extend 
their use of such tools and pictures, diagrams, maps, 
graphs, and statistical data. 

5. To develop an appreciation of Canadian culture. 



223 


6. To make clear to students the effect of mechanization 
on the production of goods and services, and on de¬ 
velopments in transportation and communication. 

7. To help students understand the contributions of explor¬ 
ers, frontiersmen and statesmen to the growth and de¬ 
velopment of Canada and the British Commonwealth; and 

to understand the contribution made by Canada to the 
trade of the Commonwealth and the world. 

8. To foster an attitude of tolerance and respect for 
world peoples, and a sympathetic understanding of 
their social and economic problems. 2 


The influence of the principles of "learning by doing" was 

very much in evidence in that section of the intermediate social 

studies curriculum announcement of 1936 which stated: 

The basic principle of procedure in this course is 
that learning is an active process. The outline abounds 
in activities that call for pupil experimentation, 
individual research, and creative self-expression. The 
social studies classroom, instead of being a place 
where children 1 learn r history, geography and civics, 
is to be a real laboratory, where co-operation, initia¬ 
tive, originality and responsibility are developed. 3 

In this matter it is quite important to note how strong was the 

influence of the outstanding American progressive educationist, 

Harold 0. Rugg, upon the curriculum makers of 1936, particuarly 

on the intermediate level. In support of the foregoing statement 

that "learning Is an active process", the intermediate social 

studies programme announcement directly quotes the following 

suggestions from Rugg T s Teacher *s Guide to the Social Studies 

Series : 

1. Let the pupils work out their own class organization 
for the development of problems, electing officers, 
appointing committees, etc. 

2. Give the pupil committees responsibility for class 
excursions, for managing the library, for producing 
plays, etc. 

3. Encourage pupils to suggest topics for open-forum 
discussion. Let them introduce current controversial 
problems in which they are interested, and which are 












224 


related to the problem under study. In this way the pupils 
will not only develop open-mindedness, but they will also 
grasp the relation of the problem to the life of today. 

4. Encourage pupils to ask questions of speakers as reports 
are being presented, to develop a vigorous interplay of 
pupil minds and to stimulate thoughtful pupil activity in 
the work of the course. 

5. Permit and encourage individual reactions, fostering the 
development of individual characteristics whenever 
possible. 4 

In this connection it is significant that the influential Edu¬ 
cation Society of Edmonton, which included among its membership 
such officials of the Department of Education as the Supervisor 
of Schools, discussed the Pugg approach to the social studies at 
the time the meetings of the curriculum revision committees were 
taking place. Finally, on March 28, 1936, the Society unanimous¬ 
ly passed a resolution to the effect that the membership en- 

5 

dorsed the n Rugg approach to Social Studies”. 

The official course of studies, however, did not end its 
emphasis upon pupil activity in the intermediate social studies 
classroom with the quotation from Harold Rugg. In fact, the De¬ 
partment of Education added a rather impressive list of its own 
suggestions in order to give variety to the pupil activities 
which the teacher might draw upon to develop student interest: 

(a) Discussions by the pupils rather than presentation 
by the teacher. 

(b) Generous readings from supplementary books, maga¬ 
zines, and newspapers. 

(c) Oral and written reports by individuals and by com¬ 
mittees. 

(d) Open-forum work in which all pupils have a chance 
to contribute. 

(e) A work-book containing diagrams, sketches, charts, 
graphs, summaries, stories, class memos, and map 
work. 

(f) Circle diagrams and time lines to show development 




225 

changes over a period of time. 

(g) A scrap-hook containing cartoons, pictures and 
clippings, suitably labelled, and arranged under 
problem headings. 

(h) Possible excursions to manufacturing plants or 
utilities. 

(i) Use of such statistical references as: The World 
Almanac, The Canada Year Book, School Encyclo¬ 
pedias. 6 

The subject matter to be covered under the intermediate 
social studies program was divided into three sections, ac¬ 
cording to grade, which may be tabulated as follows? 

Section A, for Grade VII; 

Section B, for Grade VIII; and 

Section C, for Grade IX. 7 

To meet the needs of the ungraded schools in the province where 
instruction in Grades VII and VIII would be combined, Sections A 
and B constituted a two-year cycle. Leaving out the sub-topics, 
one finds that the main problems to be dealt with in Sections A, 
B, and C were outlined in the following manner by the Department 
of Education: 

SECTION A: OUR COUNTRY AND ITS PEOPLE (Grades VII and VIII) 

Problem I.—How Canada has attracted many peoples. 

Problem II.—How Canada became French and then English. 

Problem III.—How Canada then received settlers from 
many countries. 

Problem IV.■—The homelands of our European and Asiatic 
settlers. 

Problem V.—How Canadians live together. 

SECTION B: OUR EMPIRE AND OUR NEIGHBORS (Grades VII and VIII) 

Problem I.—Introductory: A pre-view of the Empire. 

Problem II.—How Britain became the centre of world trade. 












* 
















t . 


C 





















? 


: 















. 


: . . 















Problem III.—How the Colonial Empire was founded. 

Problem IV.—How the development of the United States 
has influenced the development of Canada. 

Problem V.—Growth of world industrial competition. 

Problem VI.—Canada and Commonwealth trade. 

Problem VII.—Our own province. 


SECTION C: THE WORLD OF TODAY—GRADE IX 

Problem I.—Introductory: How the environment affects 
living. 

Problem II.—How industrialism is revolutionizing home and 
community life. 

Problem III.—How modern industrialized nations produce 
and distribute goods. 

Problem IV.—How science affects living. 

Problem V.—How Britain and Canada have developed a system 
of democratic government. 

Problem VI.—How certain world powers are dealing with 
their post-war problems. 

Problem VII.—What about the future? 8 
The above problems, it should be noted, were those which appeared 
in the first announcement of the intermediate social studies pro¬ 
gram. It may be observed, therefore, that the "post-war problems" 
referred to in Problem VI of the Grade IX course are those which 
followed the First World War. During the Second World War, how¬ 
ever, Problem VI was renamed "How the security of our democratic 
way of life has been threatened by a second World War". When the 
latter war was over, Problem VI resumed the title used before 
1939. All the problems outlined above are divided, as previously 
indicated, into sub-topics in the official course of studies, 
but the Department of Education emphasized the suggestive nature 
of its elaboration of these sub-topics in the following v^ords: 

The elaboration of the sub-topics for each problem is 

not prescriptive , but purely suggestive . The items of the 









• . . 

. 





— v 

' 

i,'v : 

: 

’ 

* 

. 


sub^topics fall into natural groupings, each of which 
may become the immediate problem of some individual or 
committee. Under no circumstances is each item to be 
T taught’ in detail. The teacher who attempts this pro¬ 
cedure will complain that the course is too long; for 
he will find that he cannot complete it within the 
school year. All the pupils are not expected to study 
all the items of every sub-topic. Different pupils or 
committees will take different items and report to the 
class, which will be responsible as a whole only for 
the gist of these reports, and for outstanding prin¬ 
ciples and generalizations. Teachers are advised to 
govern their distribution of time by the number of 
class and open-forum periods which appears at the end 
of each problem outline. 

The course aims to raise problems; it makes no pre¬ 
tense of solving them. To solve them is the function of 
adult society. If the teacher gets the right perspective 
of the course, he will cease to concern himself with the 
minute details of every problem; and in the meantime his 
pupils will grow into social understanding. 9 


Comparison of the new social studies courses for Grades VII 
VTII, and IX reveals several important points of.difference from 
and similarity to, the social studies instruction offered in 
these grades before 1936. Taking the intermediate social studies 
program as a whole, it will be noted first that the sequence of 
courses follows a definite plan in that the pupil proceeds in 
Grade VII from the more immediate and known subject of Canada 
and its peoples to the more distant and difficult topic in Grade 
IX of the world of today. Thus the Grade IX course offers the 
sharpest contrast of all the intermediate social studies courses 
to the pre-1936 curriculum. Instead of ancient civilizations, 
the student is confronted with a study of current national and 
international problems. The reason for this change of subject 
matter in Grade IX may be found in the theory underlying the es¬ 
tablishment of the intermediate school which the Department of 
Education explained as follows : 

...The intermediate school...must serve as a ’finishing 

school’ for pupils who, for one reason or another, are 









































; . La m mMI . 

. 








- 




- 


. 


■ ID ■ O ci , •: I: ■ Hi, :■.vr 















t ■ 








. 


* 

. 

4 

: 








c 




.. . 






228 

unable to advance beyond Grade IX. 

Many pupils who have no aptitude for academic training 
drop out of Grade VII or VIII with a sense of inadequacy 
and failure, when they could still profit from further 
education if it were of a kind suited to their needs. It 
is the proper function of the intermediate school to 
offer a programme that will appeal to all pupils of the 
adolescent group; a programme that is complete in itself 
and valuable in its own right, without regard to prepara¬ 
tion for the high school; a programme that will, in ef¬ 
fect, enable pupils who leave school to do so with a 
sense of accomplishment. 

The intermediate school must accept responsibility for 
completing the education of many young citizens. It 
should, therefore, inculcate loyalty to the democratic 
ideal, and exemplify in its programme, procedures and 
government, the value and efficacy of that ideal. It 
should continue the programme, begun in the elementary 
school, of teaching the pupil how to examine both sides 
of a question, how and where to find facts, and how to 
use the evidence of authorities in reaching a conclusion. 

It should preserve and foster the spirit of personal 
freedom, evoked in the elementary school by the enter¬ 
prise procedure. 10 

From this line of reasoning it may be seen, therefore, that the 
Grade IX social studies curriculum in Its examination of current 
problems was intended as a culmination of the work covered by 
the pupil in the previous eight grades. As will be seen in the 
next chapter, the Grade IX social studies course was in this 
respect the intermediate counterpart of the new Social Studies 3 
course put into effect in Grade XII after the revision of 1936. 
The social studies courses in Grades VII and VIIJ,meanwhile, do 
not offer so sharp a contrast to the pre-1936 social studies 
curriculum for those grades. An emphasis on British and Canadian 
history may still be noted, except that the material to be 
covered is more modern in outlook and represents an Integration 
of elements formerly treated as separate subjects. 

It was indicated at the beginning of this chapter that 

in 1941 

another social studies subject was added/to the intermediate cur¬ 
riculum in the form of an optional course for Grade IX. This sub- 



229 


ject, which was given the name "Community Economics", repre¬ 
sented, according to the Department of Education, "an interesting 
attempt to apply in the intermediate-school programme the same 

principle of ’integration’ that has been adopted in the programme 

11 

for the elementary school". The new course replaced the former 
Grade IX subject called Elementary Bookkeeping and Junior Busi¬ 
ness, but, as the title would imply, instruction in Community Eco¬ 
nomics would seek "to tie the activities of the classroom to 

those of the community, and so to implement a basic principle of 

12 

democratic education". According to the annual Departmental re¬ 
port for 1941, the new course aimed "directly to facilitate the 
student’s understanding, in practical and quantitative terms, of 
the socio-economic relationships that are exhibited in the fa¬ 
miliar activities of his community, and to a less extent in the 

13 

Province or Dominion as a whole". The specific objectives of the 
Community Economics program were stated to be: 

1. To present an opportunity to survey, study and ex¬ 
perience through participation, some of the familiar 
civic, recreational or cultural activities of the 
community. 

2. To provide experience in keeping and interpreting the 
necessary minutes, records and accounts appropriate 
to these activities. 

3. To encourage the study of the arithmetical and 
quantitative aspects of these activities. 

4. To supplement and make more meaningful the classroom 
work in Social Studies, Mathematics, General Shop and 
Home Economics, by relating it to definite facts, 
familiar situations and practical activities. 14 

With regard to content, the course was "based on about ten pro¬ 
jects, such as the following: Our Club, Our Home, Our Earm, Our 

15 

Automobile, Our Store, Our School, etc.". Only six projects, 
however, were to be completed for the year’s work. 

In 1946 the findings of a revision committee, appointed to 

















• 














- 












. 

















' 

’ 

. 

- 







230 


examine the Community Economics course, were put into effect* A 
complete new course was written and two booklets were prepared 
by the Department of Education to provide suitable material for 
both the teacher and the pupil* The course was organized around 
community and provincial themes which were grouped in two 
cycles. Cycle A may be outlined as follows: 

(1) Major topic: Our Provincial Government. 

(2) Minor topics: Our Club. 

Our Municipality. 

Our Insurance. 

Our Home * 16 

Cycle B, meanwhile, contained the following topics for study: 

(1) Major topic: Our Farm or Our Store. 

(2) Minor topics: Our Club. 

Our School. 

Our Car. 

Our Farm or Our Car. 17 

Consideration of the civics content of this revised Community 
Economics course and of the booklet, "Gur Provincial Government”, 
designed to accompany the major topic of Cycle A, leads one to 
wonder why this subject was placed on the optional list of 
courses for Grade IX. The general precedent for all courses 
containing considerable civics materials has been to make them 
compulsory. 

Hot long after the close of the Second World War, the De¬ 
partment of Education prepared and published a bulletin on 
"Social Studies in the Intermediate Grades” which is unique in 
the history of social studies instruction in Alberta. This 
bulletin was not a curriculum revision announcement, but an ef¬ 
fort, for the most part, by the Department to bring more 
forcibly to the attention of intermediate social studies 
teachers the need for better techniques in the classroom. The de- 
















. 

. . 4 


: 




: 


. 

. 




* 
























, 








231 


cision to issue such an unusual publication seems to have 
arisen out of the decline in the quality of social studies in¬ 
struction in the schools during the war years when the teacher 
shortage became very acute and adversely affected the teaching 
of all school subjects. While the annual reports of the Depart¬ 
ment of Education up to 1940 emphasize the revitalizing effect 
that the new social studies program had upon pupil interest, the 
subsequent reports contain comments similar to the following in 
reference to inspectoral feeling concerning the intermediate cur¬ 
riculum under wartime conditions: 

The reports make note of the fact that the decreasing 
supply of teachers qualified for the senior rooms in 
schools of two or more rooms has already caused a de¬ 
terioration in the quality of intermediate-grade in¬ 
struction, not only in the compulsory but also in the 
optional subjects of the programme. It is impossible to 
expect that immature trainees can instruct Grade IX 
pupils successfully; and temporary teachers are usually 
without special qualifications for the optional subjects. 
Nevertheless, there are indications that achievement in 
the compulsory subjects of Grades Til, Till and IX has 
been real and substantial, especially in Social Studies. 

In many schools, both teachers and pupils are beginning 
to realize that education is a directive force for im¬ 
provement within *the social order. There are even a few 
schools that recognize their obligation to do something 
about local problems of the community, and make use of 
the new course in Community Economics for this purpose. 

The course provides enterprises in Social Studies. 18 

Although the above remarks indicate that the intermediate social 

studies program was achieving some success under difficulties, 

it is quite apparent that the increasing pressure of the teacher 

shortage was the major motive for the publication of the inter¬ 
school 

mediate/bulletin on techniques in the social studies classroom. 

In passing, it may be recorded as well that the annual Depart¬ 
mental reports indicate quite clearly a similar wartime decline 
in the quality of instruction in the elementary school which 
seriously hampered the success of the enterprise technique. 

















232 


The special bulletin on "Social Studies in the Inter¬ 
mediate Grades", however, was not restricted to the subject of 
classroom techniques. In the introductory remarks a statement 
appears concerning the schools of thought in the social studies 
which is not to be found in the other official announcements since 
1936. This statement, which reflects some of the earlier thought 
concerning the role of history as a school subject, reads as 
follows: 

Opinion is divided into two main schools of thought on 
the function of the Social Studies course. The one is 
that Social Studies should merely help to pass on to the 
younger and succeeding generations the cultural heritage 
of knowledge, skills and accumulated wisdom of the past. 

The other is that Social Studies should aim definitely to 
improve society. The Alberta Social Studies courses at¬ 
tempt to synthesize these two points of view by studying 
man’s achievements in the past and by applying the re¬ 
sultant enlargement of mind and broader horizon of thought 
to the solution of the problems of today. We dare not 
fail to pass on a knowledge of the most valuable cultural 
accomplishments of mankind; neither can society permit 
the school to fail to contribute the maximum service for 
the progress of humanity. 19 

The introductory remarks then went on to make these observations 
concerning the dangers of propaganda in the classroom and the 
basis of our social structure: 

However, the schools must beware of indoctrination 
and propaganda. Any procedure in which ready made opinions 
and attitudes are supplied and accepted may be dangerous. 
Propaganda for Nazism is bad but propaganda for fire pro¬ 
tection is good. The propagandist tells people WHAT to 
think.; the educator teaches students HOW to think. The 
propagandist wants unquestioned acceptance and obedient 
action; the educator wants critical thinking and rational 
action. 

Our society is based upon certain ideologies, beliefs 
and attitudes, built up over a long period by our most 
intelligent people. Inherent in Christianity, which is the 
corner-stone of our social structure, are fundamental 
principles which must be more fully understood and applied. 

We believe that certain qualities, standards and principles 
are essential for good citizenship. These we inculcate in 
the home, in the school and by all other acceptable social 
agencies. 




233 


In so far as our intent is identified with the 
interests of society and not in its exploitation, our 
purpose is good. The school can still be charged with 
indoctrination unless the teachers train students to 
think clearly and without prejudice and foster in them 
an appreciation of the worth and dignity of the indi¬ 
vidual and a desire to preserve the rights of minority 
groups and justice for all. 20 

In connection with the emphasis on the "fundamental principles" 
of Christianity, referred to in the above statement, it should 
be observed that such a reference, which never before had ap¬ 
peared in an Alberta social studies curriculum announcement, re¬ 
flected the attitude of a group within the provincial government 
which was led by a former Minister of Education. This emphasis 
on Christian ideals was much more strongly reflected in the 
following statement of "Aims and Objectives of the Intermediate 
School Course" which came immediately after the introductory re¬ 
marks : 


Society wants and needs good citizens. It is the busi¬ 
ness of the Social Studies courses to help produce these 
good citizens, well adjusted socially and well equipped 
mentally, citizens capable of thinking intelligently and 
determined to do their part in bringing about social pro¬ 
gress. 

Teachers who are merely aiming to cover the course of 
studies, to have their pupils master so many pages and 
pass the departmental examinations at the end of grade IX 
are falling far short of being good teachers. The course 
of studies should be viewed, not just as a body of ma¬ 
terial to be covered in a certain order, but as a route 
toward citizen development. 

Of course, pupils should gain significant and meaning¬ 
ful factual information. It is impossible to think and to 
understand relationships and trends without a knowledge 
of facts. But the mind should never be made a heavily 
loaded mental truck. 

The most important knowledge may be of little value to 
the child if he possesses inadequate skill in its use. 
Pupils should be encouraged to develop inquisitive and 
analytical attitudes; this is an age of propaganda fraught 
with pitfalls for the unwary, the ignorant, the unthinking 
and the mentally unawakened. 



234 


Knowledge, thinking ability and other skills are still 
not sufficient equipment for the highest type of Canadian 
citizen. Good citizenship demands a high moral standard 
based on Christian ideals, attitudes and beliefs. It de¬ 
mands good habits and the kind of behaviour which contri¬ 
butes to social betterment. The wise teacher strives to 
have his pupils acquire significant information, adequate 
skills, socialized attitudes, co-operative habits and a 
vital Christian outlook on life. 21 

While the emphasis on good citizenship in the above remarks is 
praiseworthy, it will be noted that the reference to causing the 
pupil to acquire "a vital Christian outlook on life" carried un¬ 
fortunate connotations for certain non-Christian groups in the 
province, even though the introduction to this bulletin had 
spoken of "a desire to preserve the rights of minority groups". 
However, the emphasis on this particular point of view in the De¬ 
partment’s official announcements has been noticeably decreased 
following the resignation in 1948 of the Minister of Education 
alluded to on the previous page. 

Concerning techniques in the classroom, the bulletin on 
"Social Studies in the Intermediate Grades" admitted that "Of all 
subjects in the Intermediate School, social studies seems to pre¬ 
sent the greatest difficulty to teahhers in the matter of tech- 
22 

niques." The Department of Education, therefore, attempted to set 

forth in this publication those techniques which had "been tested 

in classroom situations" and which were "in line with the under- 

23 

lying philosophy of the course". Thus the subjects discussed in 
the bulletin include the principles underlying the organization 
of the intermediate social studies program, the overview for each 
problem taken up by the social studies class, the handling of 
such aspects of committee work as the preparation and delivery of 
reports, the adjustment of group activities to meet individual 
differences, the problem of the one-pupil class, the function of 



255 


the teacher in an activity program, the development of critical 
thinking, the open forum and class discussions, democracy in the 
classroom, the importance of current events study, the need for 
correlation, the use of such visual and audio-visual aids as 
motion pictures, graphs, maps, film strips, cartoons, charts, 
graphs and bulletin boards, and school broadcasts. To conclude 
this survey of intermediate classroom techniques in the social 
studies, which re-emphasized the activity program outlined in the 
course of studies, the Department of Education remarked: 

This bulletin has described methods and procedures 
that experienced teachers have found useful, and has 
suggested goals towards which all should strive. However, 
the competent teacher will not slavishly follow what is 
here set forth, but will realistically choose goals and 
methods consistent with his own training, his own ability 
and his own circumstances. To ensure successful achieve¬ 
ment he should clarify his thinking by writing in his 
plan book at least once a month a list of the specific 
objectives he intends to reach. Such a list should in¬ 
clude (a) mastery of certain specific tool skills in 
spelling, penmanship, reading, vocabulary, note-making, 
sentence structure, paragraphing, etc., (b) mastery of 
certain facts (definitely listed or tabulated), (c) com¬ 
petence in critical thinking with regard to specified 
problems, and (d) practice in developing certain de¬ 
sirable attitudes and traits of character, such as sin¬ 
cerity, tolerance, self-confidence, pride in local, pro¬ 
vincial or Canadian achievement, desire to co-operate, 
desire for self-control, desire to work hard. These 
traits can best be nurtured if the teacher exemplifies 
in his own conduct a sincere effort to act in accordance 
with the Christian ethics, and at every opportunity in¬ 
directly foster respect for religious principles and 
faith in the power of Christian ideals. A code of ethics 
by itself is inadequate; the social studies courses, 
properly taught, should help the student to grow towards 
a faith that will give him power to live up to his code. 

Every teacher should feel it his responsibility to 
help each student acquire in his unique ?/ay the moral and 
mental strength necessary for full participation in demo¬ 
cratic living. 24 


A year after the publication of "Social Studies in the 
Intermediate Grades", the Department of Education issued another 
bulletin which announced a revision of the intermediate programme 





236 


under the title "Social Studies in Grade Nine”. The Department 

explained that this was "in no sense a new course in Grade IX 
25 

Social Studies". Instead, it was "a revision of* the existing 

26 

programme with certain changes of emphases throughout". The 

first four Problems remained much the same, but of the later 

Problems or Units the Department remarked: 

...More attention...is given to the problem of pro¬ 
duction ana distribution of goods; and to develop 
understanding of these basic problems in modern society, 
liberal use has been made of the science of geography in 
its economic and physical phases. Units V and VI are 
largely sociological in nature; and in their objectives, 
content, and emphases are a departure from the previous 
course. Unit VII remains a culminating survey of the 
year’s work with the additions of certain elements of 
global geography. 27 

The actual titles of the Problems in the revised Grade IX course 
were as follows: 

Problem X—Introductory: How environment affects living. 

Problem II—How goods are produced in our industrialized 
world. 

Problem III—How goods are distributed in our industrialized 
culture. 

Problem IV—How we carry on democratic government in Canada. 

Problem V—How industrialism is affecting family and com¬ 
munity living. 

Problem VI—How our homes and communities provide for man’s 
cultural needs. 

Problem VII—How Canada has taken her place among the 
nations of the world. 28 


A. considerable portion of the intermediate social studies 
program described up to this point is still in effect in the 
schools of the province, although an intermediate curriculum re¬ 
vision has been under way since 1949. While this revision has 
not been completed, it is possible to sketch here the main prin¬ 
ciples of the new program which is being evolved, so far as the 















. • 




. 



, 4 , .... 






■ 




. 

: « 














. : ; i JM 


. 


, 






, 


, ; . : i ■ 






* 




237 


courses in social studies are concerned. The actual social 
studies content for each of the new units in Grades VII, VIII, 
and IX has been determined : by. the D^partmpmt and published in 
the form of a scope and sequence chart which is reproduced on 
the following page. Comparison of the subject matter outlined in 
this chart with the'previous social studies curriculum does not 
reveal very startling changes in the matter of content, but the 
planning of the program according to the scope and sequence con¬ 
cepts represents an improvement over the counse organization 
adopted in 1936. Yet the really important departure from pre¬ 
vious Alberta school practice in the social studies field under 
the new program is not shown in the scope and sequence chart. 

This is the proposal to integrate the English language curriculum 
with the social studies courses by means of the program block 
which is officially described as follows: 

The program block is a modification of the core-cur¬ 
riculum idea which has been introduced in various forms 
in many: secondary high, school systems in recent years. 

This idea provides for a curriculum built around a basic 
core of combined or integrated subjects. Social Studies, 
English, Science, and Mathematics, are the subjects 
which have been more commonly used to furnish a core for 
such a program. 

A block is a large section of the daily schedule, 
which covers two or more subjects and is under the 
charge of one teacher. Such an arrangement has two main 
purposes. First, it enables the teacher to become better 
acquainted with the students he teaches, since he has 
fewer under his charge; and second, it provides the op¬ 
portunity for better correlation of the subjects taught. 

The block program for Alberta junior high schools is 
not intended as a step toward a complete core-curriculum 
but is a modification better suited to conditions in Al¬ 
berta. It is a framework within which varying degrees of 
correlation may be attempted according to the inclination 
and capabilities of the teacher. Some teachers will cor¬ 
relate the subjects within the block very closely and 
will use other blocks in addition to those suggested in 
this program; others, who are less inclined to depart 
from their present procedures, will continue to teach the 
subjects separately in the manner with which they are fa- 









i 

. 

. 

. 



































■ 

i 

. 


■ . 

c 

- . 

4 







SEQUENCE 


238 


SCOPE 

GRADS VII 

DEVELOPMENT OF 
CANADIAN CULTURE 

GRIDE VIII 

CANADA, THE COM¬ 
MONWEALTH, and 

HER NEIGHBORS 

--1 

GRADE IX 

THE WORLD OF TO¬ 
DAY 

, , . . .. ... —.-.. 

I. Pro¬ 
duction 
and Dis¬ 
tribu¬ 
tion of 
G-oods. 
Trans¬ 
porta¬ 
tion and 
Communi¬ 
cation. 

1. How living in 
Canada has 
been influenced 
by the physical 
environment. 

1. The geography | 
of the Com¬ 
monwealth. 

1. How environ¬ 
ment affects 
living. 

! 

2. How oppor¬ 
tunities for 
work have at¬ 
tracted many 
settlers. 

2. The problem 
and achieve¬ 
ments of Common¬ 
wealth trade. 

2. How goods are 
produced and 
marketed in our 
iindustrialized 
culture. 

| 


— ■ 


II. 

Insti¬ 

tutions 

and 

Social 

Or¬ 

ganiza¬ 

tions. 

3. How our 
early pio¬ 
neers estab¬ 
lished a Cana¬ 
dian nation 
and culture. 

3. How the Com¬ 
monwealth 
came into being. 

3. How Canada has 
taken her place 
among the nations 
of the world. 

4. How our com¬ 
munity and/or 
region was 
settled. 

L ; 

4. How Canadian 
institutions 
;have been model¬ 
led on British 
institutions. 

4. How industry 
is affecting 
| home and com¬ 
munity living. 

5. How Canadian 
communities 
direct their af¬ 
fairs demo¬ 
cratically. 

|5. How Britain 

developed a 
:democratic 
government. 

5. How we carry 
on democratic 
government in 
Canada. 

III. 

Ideals 
and In¬ 
dividual 
Develop¬ 
ment . 

6. How Canadian 
culture has 
been enriched 
from many 
sources. 

6. How Canadian 
culture has 
been affected by 
that of the 

United States 
and South 

America. 

6. How our homes 
and communities 
provide for man f s 
cultural needs. 


SCOPE AND SEQUENCE CHART 

THE JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES — LANGUAGE PROGRAM 29 















































239 


miliar. In the latter case, the chief benefits of the 
block system will be that, in a departmentalized school, 
teachers will meet fewer pupils and therefore have an 
opportunity to know them better. 

The major blocks designated in this program are Social 
Studies-Language, and Science-Mathematics. These two will 
constitute the essential blocks under normal circum¬ 
stances. The number of blocks beyond the two basic ones, 
and the combinations of subjects within the blocks will 
be affected by such factors as the size of the school, 
the training and interests of the staff, and other circum¬ 
stances. 

The teacher responsible for a given block will endeavor 
to correlate the subject matter from the various subject 
fields whenever and wherever the learning experiences and 
the understanding of students can be enriched by so doing. 
Definite instructions for such procedures are given in the 
Social Studies-Language Bulletin, which has been revised 
to promote integration of these two subjects. Success in 
securing the desired results in such a program will not 
always come easily and will necessitate careful study and 
experimentation by the teacher. 

The above instructions are not mandatory. If the situa¬ 
tion in any school is such that the principal and teachers 
consider the interests of their students are best served 
by not attempting the blocking in these major subjects, 
they may schedule the subjects separately, provided the 
total time devoted to them is...at least ten periods per 
week. 30 

At the time of writing only the revised social studies-language 
block for Grade VII is in effect in many of the junior high 
schools of the province. The curriculum guide for this course 
re-asserts, so far as the handling of the social studies content 
is concerned, the principles of pupil activity which have been 
noted previously in connection with the 1936 revision and the 
1946 supplementary bulletin. In explanation of the integration 
of language and the social studies, the Grade VII curriculum 
guide comments: 

The integration of language and the social studies is 
a recognition of the need of functional rather than for¬ 
mal language. The question, "Is it correct?” is not 
enough. It is not even basic. Since language is primarily 
a means of communicating ideas, the essential question is, 
"Does it say what I mean?" Clarity, precision and fluency 
have evidently not been adequately achieved through the 



240 

teaching of grammar or by restricting the language pro¬ 
gram to the channels of literature and composition. 

In seeking the cause of this inadequacy, more and more 
teachers are coming to the conclusion that the isolated 
teaching of English as a "subject" is much to blame. Re¬ 
search has shown that effective learning in any area de¬ 
pends on a strong will to learn in that area. It depends, 
in short, upon the motivation—upon interest, purpose, 
need. This means that language instruction—to be ef¬ 
fective—must relate to the immediate and expanding re¬ 
quirements of the child. These needs are centred in 
school and community life. The broad field of the social 
studies, therefore, would seem to provide the best area 
for the study and practice of language communication. 

The improvement of communication, however, should not 
be the only benefit obtained from the integration. The 
social studies will gain as much as English. Just as the 
child may be expected to listen, speak, read and write 
better when these operations are carried out for specific 
and compelling rather than "let’s pretend" purposes, so 
the ideas which he gains and exchanges with others may be 
expected to improve in quality, breadth, and precision. 

The integration does not require the suppression of 
such grammatical labels as noun and verb (to give common 
examples), but rather that the student use them as means 
to the improvement of his expression. When formal lessons 
are taught it will be to fulfill an immediate lack in 
his ability to express himself, and the work will be en¬ 
livened by his own use of a language tool in which he 
not only requires but desires to be proficient. The social 
studies-language teacher will thus be responsible for the 
development of language skills and abilities, so that 
pupils will learn to communicate both orally and in 
writing to their own satisfaction and that of others. 

This responsibility will frequently involve specific 
language teaching, and the provision of specific practice 
in particular phases of all the communication skills (in 
writing, for example—sentence structure, punctuation, 
spelling). 31 

It would, of course, be premature to attempt to pass judgment on 
these rather comprehensive proposals before sufficient time has 
elapsed to see if actual classroom practice proves the soundness 
of the new program. It may be remarked, though, that the fore¬ 
going arguments seem sound, and since the time allotment for the 
social studies-language block is from ten to fourteen periods 
per week, there is everything to gain from the Department of 
Education’s proposals. So long as the time allotment is not re- 















; 

, 


* 

- 

' 


. . 






















241 


duoed to fewer than ten periods per week, and, provided that 
the teachers concerned maintain a reasonable balance between the 
social studies and the language materials, it would seem unlike¬ 
ly that the pupil would lose as a result of the social-studies- 
language experiment. 


1 Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for 
the Intermediate School (Edmonton, 1936), p. 28. 

2 Ibid., p. 29. 

3 Ibid. 

4 Ibid., pp. 29-30. 

5 The Education Society of Edmonton, Minutes for March 28, 1936. 

6 Alberta, op. cit. , p. 30. 

7 Ibid., p. 31. 

8 Ibid., pp. 35-62. 

9 Ibid., p. 30. 

10 Ibid., pp. 6-7. 

11 Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report, 1941 (Edmon¬ 
ton, 1942), p. 16. 

12 Ibid. 

13 Ibid. 

14 Ibid. 

15 Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for 
the Intermediate School (Edmonton, 1944), p. 240. 

16 Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report, 1946 (Edmon¬ 
ton, 1947), pp. 60-61. 

17 Ibid., p. 61. 

18 Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report, 1942 (Edmon¬ 
ton, 1943), p. 31. 

19 Alberta, Department of Education, Social Studies in the 
Intermediate Grades (Edmonton, 1946), p. 3. 

20 Ibid. 

21 Ibid., p. 4. 

22 Ibid., p. 5. 

23 Ibid. 

24 Ibid., pp. 21-22. 

25 Alberta, Department of Education, Social Studies in Grade 
Nine (Edmonton, 1947), p. 3. 

26 Ibid. 

27 Ibid. 

28 Ibid., pp. 7-28. 

29 Alberta, Department of Education, Social Studies-Language for 
Grade Seven—Curriculum Guide (Edmonton, September, 1950), 

p. 25. 

30 Alberta, Department of Education, Junior High School Program 
of Studies Handbook (Edmonton, 1951), pp. 11-12 and p. 15. 

31 Alberta, Department of Education, Junior High School Cur¬ 
riculum Guide for Social Studies—Language (Edmonton, 
September, 1951), pp. 27-28. 
















CHAPTER XVIII 


THE SECONDARY SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM 
IN ALBERTA FROM THE REVISION OF 1936 TO THE PRESENT 

From the previous two chapters it will have been gathered 
that under the "6-3-3" plan of organization, adopted in 1936, 
the high school grades were reduced to X, XI, and XII after the 
inclusion of Grade IX within the framework of the newly-created 
intermediate school. It may also be deduced from the chapter on 
the intermediate social studies curriculum that a considerable 
change must have taken place in the high school social studies 
courses as a result of the removal of ancient history from 
Grade IX. The high school social studies curriculum revision was, 
in fact, such a sweeping one that there is only a limited resem¬ 
blance between the new program and the pre-1936 offerings in the 
social studies field. The content of the compulsory high school 
social studies courses may be outlined as follows: 

SOCIAL STUDIES 1 (Grade X) — The story of man from the 

earliest times down to 1500. 

Theme 1.—The Famous States of History. 

Theme 2.—Trade and Industry. 

Theme 3.—The Growth of Human Knowledge. 

Theme 4.—Expression, and Aesthetics. 

Theme 5.—Religions. 

Theme 6.—Society. 

Theme 7.—Peace and War. 

Five of. the preceding themes, together with the study of 

current events, constituted the minimum work for a year. 

Themes 1 and 7, it should be noted, were obligatory. 

Theme 1 was to be studied until Christmas. 



















- 







































. 

* 
































: 

. 

















243 


SOCIAL STUDIES 2 (Grade XI) — Modern history from 1500 to 

the First World War. 

Theme 1.—National States of the Modern World (1500-1914). 
Theme 2.—Expansion of Europe. 

Theme 3.—Trade, Industry and Standards of Living. 

Theme 4.—Growth of Knowledge. 

Theme 5.—Expression and Aesthetics. 

Theme 6.—Religion. 

Theme 7.—Society and Its Problems. 

Five of the preceding themes, together with the study of 
current events, constituted the minimum work for a year. 
Themes 1, 2, and 3, it should be noted, were obligatory 
and were to be given the following time allotments: 

Theme 1, thirteen weeks; Theme 2, six weeks; Theme 3, 
eight weeks. Each of the optional themes was to be given 
approximately four weeks. 

SOCIAL STUDIES 3 (Grade XXI) — Contemporary problems— 

national, imperial, and 
international—from 1914 
to the present. 

Unit I — International Relationships. 

The First World War, the peace settlements, the 
League of Nations, the Pan-American movement. 

Unit II — Outstanding Developments in Different Countries. 

The Communist regime in Russia, the Fascist re¬ 
gime in Italy, the Nazi regime in Germany, 
Japanese imperialism and the internal problems 
of Japan and China, Democracy in Great Britain, 
Democracy in France, Democracy in Denmark and 
Sweden, Democracy in the United States, Demo¬ 
cracy examined, current events. 

Unit III — Commonwealth Problems. 

Constitutional adjustments, Inter-Empire trade, 
Commonwealth defence, immigration and settlement 
within the Empire, the future of the Empire. 

Unit IY — Canadian Problems. 

Diplomacy, Parliamentary control of external af¬ 
fairs, Canada in the League, economic problems, 
problems arising out of Canada T s proximity to 
the United States, constitutional adjustment, 
natural resources, transportation, primary and 


- 


.. 

, 

o ■ 

■ r .. 

. ■ -™ . ■ 

* 

. ■; • «v . 


' 

t - • c ' c • • 


|i 

, ■ ' . ■ 

. 









-so - ■ 

1 

: ■ 

, 




! 


' 



c . ( 



. 


. 


■ 

c 

• t 6 




244 

secondary industries, foreign policy and the 
problem of defence. 

All the above units, it should be noted, were obligatory. 1 

Comparison of this revised secondary social studies cur¬ 
riculum with the former history courses reveals, first of all, 
changes in the grade placement of the subject matter to be 
studied. The development of ancient civilizations is shifted 
from Grade IX to Grade X, now the first year of high school, 
while modern history from 1500 to the twentieth century is moved 
from Grade XII to Grade XI. In Grade XII, meanwhile, a new and 
rather detailed course appears which deals exclusively with 
twentieth-century problems in Canada, the British Commonwealth, 
and other countries prominent in international affairs. Although 
such an emphasis on the twentieth century is unprecedented in 
the Alberta high school curriculum, it will be observed that the 
new Social Studies 3 course is the logical culmination to Social 
Studies 1 and 2 which deal first with the history of man down to 
1500 and, secondly, with world developments from 1500 to 1914. 

It may be conceded, therefore, that the revised program was 
better planned from a chronological point of view than the former 
high school history curriculum, but critics of the revision were 
able to attack, not without some justification, the failure to 
give sufficient attention to British and Canadian history. Yet, 
within each of the social studies courses under discussion, 
chronological study of the subject matter was partially abandoned 
in favor of the treatment by themes which meant simply an examina¬ 
tion in separate units of various aspects of the period of 
history being considered. Thus one finds the following comment in 
the official course of studies as to the proper treatment in the 



, 














- 






. 
























245 

classroom of Theme 1 of Social Studies 2: 

NOTE: The emphasis in this theme \s political and terri¬ 
torial. Wars are to he dealt with briefly with reference 
to general causes and territorial, social and political 
effects. Questions of colonization, and imperialism, and 
social legislation are to he treated in outline and only 
in so far as they relate to the main theme. They are 
handled in detail in other themes. 2 

Such a change of method in the handling of historical materials 
is, of course, a result of the desire to emphasize the inte¬ 
gration of economic, geographical, sociological, and other ma¬ 
terials in the new social studies courses. In addition to the 
decreased emphasis on British and Canadian history in the re¬ 
vised program, it will he noted that the economics section of 
the former History 3 course is dropped in the new curriculum for 
G-rade XI. The reason for this change was the creation of a 
separate optional subject called Economics which will he dis¬ 
cussed later. Such a change inevitably meant, however, that 
fewer students would receive specific training in economic 
thought and principles since the new course w%s not obligatory. 

In keeping with the principles of activity education, which 
had been introduced into the social studies curriculum in the 
elementary and intermediate schools, the Department of Education 
emphasized pupil activity in Social Studies 1, 2, and 3. The 
following procedures,for example, were suggested in connection 
with Social Studies 1: 

1. The printed outline of the course should be made 
available for all students. Encourage them to con¬ 
sult it. 

2. Lecture and explanation will be required from the 
teacher; but the students should have every oppor¬ 
tunity to discover for themselves, and to express 
themselves. Class discussions, properly regulate^, 
should be employed extensively. The emphasis should 
be on practice in interpreting and understanding 
facts, and not merely on collecting and memorizing 
them. However, the facts, and enough of them, must 


. 













. 


. 

















































. 

.. 



























* 


. 




. 









246 

be obtained before they can be interpreted. 

3. The class should be organized with chairman and 
secretary. Have new officers twice a month so 
that all members get practice. The secretary 
keeps a record of committees, their duties, 
books loaned, and progress from day to day. 

4. Major and required themes (e.g., No. 1 and No. 7) 
should be worked on by all members of the class. 

The work should be planned as a whole; and the 
task of getting the necessary information on 
different parts of the theme should be divided 
amongst committees of the class. 

5. Work may be done on two or more optional themes 
at the same time, different sections of the class 
electing different themes according to interest, 
and each section planning and sharing its own 
work. The report on each theme can be made to the 
whole class, and be followed by questions and class 
discussion. 

6. Current magazines and newspapers should be read 
during the year in terms of Social Studies. Stu¬ 
dents should scan all papers and magazines for 
maps, clippings and cartoons. These may be posted 
on the bulletin board, and then filed for use in 
the library. Scrapbooks and cartoon histories will 
also be of value. 

7. Each student should make a time chart on which to 
record all important items. Constant reference to 
the chart helps the student to get a time sense 
without a conscious memorization of dates. 

8. It is advisable to have the students occasionally 
spend about thirty minutes in writing on a topic 
that has been assigned in advance, so that subject- 
matter may be organized for it. (Urge care in 
language, composition and fbrm.) 3 


With respect to revisions of the secondary social studies 
curriculum since it was first put into effect in the high schools 
of the province, it is rather odd to report that the Social 
Studies 3 course has remained more substantially the same than 
either Social Studies 1 or 2, despite the fact that it has in¬ 
curred more revisions than have these two courses. The material of 
Saoial Studies 3 is essentially contemporary, thus leading to fre¬ 
quent changes in emphasis or in the titles of some topics discussed, 


















. 

' 


« . 






, ' 




" 














. 













« 


. 



































247 


but the broad subject areas have remained the same. The present 
revision of the senior high school social studies courses, how¬ 
ever, will alter this trend. The first revision of Social 
Studies 3 was for the school year 1942-1943 "in order to give 
teachers and students more time for the study of current events, 

and of political, economic and social problems emerging from the 
4 

War". The only significant change, though, was in Unit II which 

was renamed "The Axis Powers and the United Nations". The sub- 

topics in this unit were altered to the Axis Powers, Spain, the 

United Nations, the type of democracy and the domestic problems 

in the subjugated countries. Following the conclusion of the 

Second World War, the Social Studies 3 course was revised once 

more "in order to give teachers and students more time for the 

study of current events, and of the political, economic and 

5 


social problems emerging from the war". Although the reason 


given was the same as in 1942, the Social Studies 3 Units and 

sub-topics were altered to read as follows: 

Unit I. International Relationships. 

The peace settlements, 1919-1920; the consti¬ 
tution and purpose of the League of Nations; 
comparison of the peace settlements of 1919- 
1920 with the peace settlements of 1945-1946. 

Unit II. Historical Developments Since 1920. 

The Axis powers; the United Nations; examples 
of international co-operation. 

Unit III. The Second World War and Proposals for Per¬ 
manent Peace. 


Geographical study of the various war theatres 
and general survey of the war; the ideals of 
the United Nations; leadership of the United 
Nations in setting up a permanent international 
organization to maintain peace. 

Unit IY. Canada in the Post-War World. 


Review of Canadian constitutional development; 
foreign policy; economic problems; social se- 




























. 



















. 

























. 

. 
























248 


curity; problems arising out of Canada’s proxi¬ 
mity to the United States; political problems; 
current events related to the foregoing topics. 6 

Subsequent editions of the high school regulations carried minor 

alterations in wording to keep certain sections of the Social 

Studies 3 course in line with changir^ international conditions 

during the post-war period. An unusual feature of this attention 

to current events developments was the publication, beginning in 

1943, of a"Classroom Bulletin on Social Studies" which, among 

other articles, carried an amplification of the announced changes 

in the current events content of Social Studies 3. This effort 

by the Department of Education to provide the busy teacher in 

non-city schools with current events materials was carried on 

during the post-war period. In September, 1950, a precedent was 

created when the twenty-fourth edition of the Classroom Bulletin 

on Social Studies, rather than the high school regulations, 

carried notice of a major change in emphasis in the Social 

Studies 3 requirements for final examination purposes. Under this 

revision the emphasis of the course was directed "toward events 

which are more immediately contemporary than those of the period 

7 

from 1919 to 1935". It is this revision which is in effect in 
the Grade XII classrooms of the province at the time of writing, 
but notice already has been given by the Department of Education 
of a general•secondary social studies curriculum revision which 
will make a significant change in the content of Social Studies 3. 
The general nature of these proposals, however, will be indicated 
at the end of this chapter. 

In 1943 and 1944 a very important revision in the content of 
Social Studies 1 and 2 took place which, it wall be seen later in 
this chapter, seems to have been regarded as unsatisfactory by 



249 


the present secondary social studies revision committee. The 
basic principle underlying the changes in Social Studies 1 and 2 
was an endeavor to reduce the time spent during the school year 
on the purely historical sections of these two courses, and to 
introduce mush more material dealing with contemporary problems 
in various phases of human activity. This revision, which re¬ 
veals a greater effort than ever before to achieve an integration 
of social studies materials on the high school level, may be out¬ 
lined as follows: 


SOCIAL STUDIES 1 

Social Studies 1 comprises eleven units. Of these, 
eight are to be included in the year’s programme of all 
classes and students. 

Section A (Units I, II and III) and Units IV and V 
in Section B are compulsory. Three of the remaining six 
units are to be chosen. 

N. B.—The average time to be spent on each unit is 
one month. This will, of course, be exceeded with 
Unit III, and less than one month will be sufficient 
for such units as Unit IX or Unit XI. 

Section A 

Unit I.—Historical Outline. 

This should develop an appreciation of the 
position of each state in time, and should 
be covered in a systematic way, by use of 
time-charts and other devices involving 
tabulation. 

Unit II.— Geographical Study , with particular reference 
to the Mediterranean Region. 

Unit III.—Early Background of Our Civilization. 

Man before history, the Nile Valley, the 
Fertile Crescent, the splendor of Greece, 
the power of Rome, the early church. 

Section B 

Unit IV.—Canadian Democracy in Action. 

Unit V.—Provincial and Community Problems. 








250 

Unit VT.—Economic Geography of Canada. 

Unit VTI.—Canada Among the Nations. 

Unit VTII.—Employment. 

Unit IX.—Social Security. 

Unit X.—Changes in Agriculture. 

Unit XI.—Housing. 

Although no Section C was used to describe current events 
requirements for Social Studies 1, as was the case with 
Social Studies 2, such study was expected in the Grade X 
social studies course. An introductory paragraph to the 
Social Studies 1 outline stated: 

The study of Current History is an important part of 
the course. Whenever possible, the history of the past 
should be related to present world conditions. However, 
important current events should be discussed even if 
the other topics of this course do not afford an histori¬ 
cal approach. Significant events which affect the lives 
of large groups of peop-le, rather than trivial incidents, 
should form the basis of discussions, but important local 
or provincial matters should not be overlooked. Perhaps 
it is better that there should be no set period for 
cur relit events. The time allowed should be variable; some 
weeks may offer little of interest, while others may have 
much for interesting and valuable discussion. The topics 
may be suggested by the instructor, but it is better if 
the pupils are trained to bring up the topics themselves. 

This is easily brought about by a few suggestions early 
in the year. A study of maps should be part of the work 
in current events, involving the finding of places named 
in the news and the provision of an intelligent basis for 
their consideration. Such place names should be associated 
with meaningful facts of human importance. 

SOCIAL STUDIES 2 

This course comprises thirteen units. Of these nine are 
to be included in the year’s programme of all classes and 
students. 

SECTION A includes Units I to VIII. Six of these units 
are to be chosen, one of which must be Unit IV. 

SECTION B Includes Units IX to XIII. Three of these are 
to be chosen. 

SECTION C is the study of current events. 

N. B.—The average time to be spent on each unit is one 
month. This will, of course, be exceeded with Unit IV and 
considerably less than one month will be required for such 
units as Unit I, Unit II or Unit XII. 






251 


Section A 


Unit I.—Historical Outline. 

At the beginning of the year, the Modern Period 
of History, from 1500 A.D. to the present, 
should be surveyed briefly. This should be done 
in a systematic way, by use or 1 development of 
time-charts and other devices involving tabula¬ 
tion. ... 

Unit II.—Geographical Study. 

The Pacific Area including India, Eastern 
U.S.S.R., Japan, China, the East Indies. Map 
Study. 

Unit III.—Either A. or B. 

A. —Geographical Background for the study of 

Unit IV. 

B. —Geographical Background for the study of 

Unit VII. 

Unit IV.—Historical Study, Europe, 1500 to 1914. 

Unit V.—Production and Distribution. 

Unit VI.—Responsible Government. 

Unit VII.--Either A. or B. 

A. -—The Expansion of Europe. 

B. —The Canadian Nation and the Canadian People. 
Unit VIII.—Problems of Democracy in the United States. 

Section B 


Unit IX.—A Community Problem. 

Unit X.—A National Physical Fitness Programme. 

Unit XI.—Immigration. 

Unit XII.—Consumer Education. 

Unit XIII.—Co-operative Organizations for Buying and 
Selling. 

o 

Section C — Current Events 


The revision of the courses in Social Studies 1 and 2, it 
should be noted, was accompanied by introductory remarks which 






























. 







' 

, 


. 

^ - • 





252 


re-affirmed the usefulness of the principles of activity edu¬ 
cation on the high school level. Indeed, the secondary course of 
studies listed in greater detail than ever before the pupil 
activities which would be found helpful in the high school social 
studies classroom. The lengthy lists of activities suggested by 
the Department of Education were divided under the following 
headings: 

I. Reading Activities. 

II. Using Texts and Libraries. 

III. Using Visual Aids and Concrete Material. 

IV. Problem Solving Activities. 

V. Graphic Presentation. 

VI. Expressional Activities. 

VII. Drill Activities. 

VIII. Leadership Activities. 

IX. Imaginative Activities. 

X. Other Activities. 9 

Coupled with this emphasis on pupil activities was the Depart¬ 
ment’s statement that: 

Social Studies should never degenerate into a memoriza¬ 
tion of material. Pacts are important and study of facts 
is part of our work, but the skilful teacher will show how 
these facts are related to today’s activities. Pacts are 
really valuable when they aid us in logical thinking and 
purposeful inquiry. 10 

Officially, the Department of Education has consistently 
expressed satisfaction with the preceding revised courses in 
Social Studies 1 and 2, but it may be noted that the present 
social studies curriculum revision committee has removed all the 
optional units and replaced them with obligatory ones, much more 
historical in character. This circumstance would seem to indi¬ 
cate that there was some dissatisfaction with the 1943-1944 re¬ 
vision. As an example of the lack of official criticism of the 
revised program in Social Studies 1 and 2, one may cite the con¬ 
solidations of the high school inspectors’ annual reports since 
the implementation of the new course outlines. The following ex- 























: 


* 






. 

* 




. 

i. 

* . 














7 


- 

* 






. 

- 

. ■ 










253 

tract from the 1947 annual report of the Department of Edu¬ 
cation is typical: 

The high school Social Studies courses provide for an 
integrated study of history (reduced in extent in recent 
years), geography, and current problems and events. In 
addition, the most significant educational area for 
studies which have as their objective the strengthening 
of the bonds of Canadian national unity is undoubtedly 
that of Social Studies. The revised Alberta high school 
course-outlines for Social Studies now include an abun¬ 
dance of suggestions, some prescriptive and some optional, 
for the study of Canadian geography, History and citizen¬ 
ship. The teachers of Social Studies have had the advan¬ 
tage of a careful listing and explanation of "activities 
involved in Social Studies" in the High School Bulletin 
in which the courses are outlined, and of the extensive 
material on particular sections of the courses which Is 
made available to them and to their classes in the 
"Classroom Bulletins on Social Studies", four of which 
were furnished by the Department of Education during 1947. 

In general, explanatory lesson work is well supplemented 
by investigative reading, and assignment work guided by 
the teacher and preparatory to students r participation in 
programme-periods or class discussions. One of the real 
problems in Social Studies is that of assisting teachers 
to develop criteria for the continuous evaluation of 
pupils’ achievement and understanding. The participatory 
process is not in itself a thing of excellence; it is a 
means of developing qualities, attitudes, and habits of 
critical thinking. (Consolidated by H* C. Sweet, Inspector 
of High Schools.) 11 

Despite the general official approval of the type of integration 
adopted in the revision of the Social Studies 1 and 2 courses, 
there is some evidence to show that the correlation of social 
studies materials put into effect was not entirely satisfactory 
to the high school teachers of the province. A study of the 
opinion of experienced secondary social studies teachers, as ex¬ 
pressed at conventions, Departmental social studies curriculum 
committees, and Social Studies 3 sub-examiners’ committees, re¬ 
veals several specific criticisms of the revision of 1943-1944. 
One of the most pointed of these criticisms is the lack of or¬ 
ganization or planning in the arrangement of both the historical 
and non-historical units in Social Studies 1 and 2. In other 



254 

words, there is a lack of the scope and sequence concepts which 
have come to be so influential in more recent social studies 
curriculum revisions. Indeed, this lack of planning, coupled 
with an examination of the detailed outlines of the content of 
each unit, tends to give one the impression that the revision 
was prepared in some haste. There is, for example, a very de¬ 
cided inconsistency in the method of outlining the subject 
matter to be covered in the various units. Such inconsistency is 
not characteristic of previous secondary courses of studies pub¬ 
lished by the Department of Education. A second criticism con¬ 
cerns the important units which the Department marked as op¬ 
tional under the revision. Thus it was possible for a student to 
take Social Studies 1 and 2 without studying the units entitled, 
"Economic Geography of Canada", "Canada Among the Nations", 
"Responsible Government", "The Canadian Nation and the Canadian 
People", and "Immigration". Admittedly, the presence of these 
optional units on the curriculum was an improvement over the 
high school course of studies which resulted from the revision 
of 1936, but not to make units on Canada obligatory did not seem 
to bear out the Department’s comment on the revision of 1943-1944 
to the effect that: 

Canadian citizenship should mean something vital. Pride 
in Canadian achievements and a desire to make Canada more 
truly great are worth time and effort. 12 

While no statistics are available, it is possible that secondary 

social studies teachers may have generally selected the optional 

units on Canada for classes in Social Studies 1 and 2. Another 

teacher complaint has to do with the marked difference in time 

required to handle the various optional units in Social Studies 1 

and 2. Thus it has been possible for a teacher, inclined to 




; 













- 
























255 


linger over the compulsory historical units, to select a few 
relatively short units, such as the one dealing with the 
National Physical Fitness Act, to meet the minimum course re¬ 
quirements by the end of the school year. It may also be noted 
in passing that some units, similar to the one just mentioned, 
became rather out-of-date under post-war conditions, but nothing 
has been done to change them until the sittings of the present 
secondary social studies revision committee. A final criticism 
of the revision of 1943-1944 comes from the social studies 
teacher who feels that the major element in any social studies 
course must be history. Such a teacher feels that the optional 
units in Social Studies 1 and 2 represent an unrelated series of 
contemporary economic and social problems which do not fit in 
very well with the historical content of these two courses. The 
present proposals for the revision of the secondary social 
studies curriculum, as announced by the Department of Education, 
would seem to substantiate this view. 

Up to this point the discussion has centred around the com¬ 
pulsory social studies courses for the high school which emerged 
from the curriculum revision of 1936. Before proceeding to the 
present proposals for the revision of Social Studies 1, 2, and 3, 
brief reference should be made to the optional subjects, Eco¬ 
nomics 1, Psychology 1, and Sociology 1, added to the secondary 
curriculum as a result of the decision in 1936 to broaden the 
scope of the academic program. These subjects, all of which are 
within the social studies field, were given a time allotment of 
three instructional periods per week, but the material to be 
covered in each case was a study of elementary principles only. 










256 

Needless to say, the course of studies for each of these subjects 
has remained practically the same up to the present. 

Several references have been made in this chapter to the 
work of secondary social studies curriculum revision which is 
proceeding at the time of writing. A revision committee has been 
meeting since 1949, but so far only one curriculum guide, which 
is experimental in purpose, has been issued by the Department of 
Education. Although this guide deals mainly with the first three 
units of the revised Social Studies 1 course, a scope and se¬ 
quence chart for the proposed changes in Social Studies 1, 2, 
and 3 is included which is reproduced on the following page. A 
study of the chart reveals a much better over-all plan for the 
social studies courses from Grade X to Grade XII than that pre¬ 
viously in effect. The sequence section of the chart reveals a 
basic Canadian theme throughout the three grades, namely, the 
ancient and modern origins of Canadian civilization which is cli¬ 
maxed in Grade XII with a study of the problems of Canadian 
citizenship. The scope portion of the chart, meanwhile, divides 
the materials to be studied in sequence into such appropriate 
divisions as economic and geographic understandings, under¬ 
standings of immediate and wider social environment, and under¬ 
standings concerned with religious, aesthetic, cultural and re¬ 
creational activities. As has previously been pointed out, the 
historical emphasis throughout Social Studies 1, 2 , and 3 would 
be considerably increased under the new program, while the em¬ 
phasis in Grade XII will be on Canadian history and present-day 
problems. All the units indicated on the chart, it should be 
added, are compulsory. Provision will be made as well in the 
course of studies for the classroom discussion of current events 



SEQUENCE 


257 


13 


SCOPE 

GRADE X 

ANCIENT ORIGINS 
OF CANADIAN 
CIVILIZATION 

: 

-1 

GRADE XI 

MODERN BACK¬ 
GROUND OF CANA¬ 
DIAN CIVILIZA¬ 
TION 

-— j- 

GRADE XII 

i PROBLEMS OF CANA¬ 
DIAN CITIZENSHIP 

L 

I. Eco¬ 
nomic 
and Geo¬ 
graphic 
; Under- 
stan- 
dings. 

1. How Geo¬ 
graphy in¬ 
fluenced early 
civilizations. 

1. Expansion of 
habitable 
and productive 
areas since the 
beginning of 
the Modern Age. 

11. Political and 
Economic Geo¬ 
graphy of Canada. 

2. Influence 
of trade on 
early civiliza¬ 
tions. 

2. The effect of 
science on 
our economic and 
social life. 

,2. Problems of 

Canada’s inter¬ 
national trade. 

;- i 

II. 

Under¬ 
stand 
i dings 

1 of Im- 
mediate * 
' and 

I 7/ider 
Social 
Environ¬ 
ment. 

3. Movements of 
peoples in 
the ancient and 
medieval world. 

3. Rise of 

nationalism; 
the expansion 
of European 
Empires. 

3. World history 
since 1900, with 
(emphasis on Canada. 

4. Development 
of demo¬ 
cratic govern¬ 
ment . 

4. Development 
of respon-' 
;sible govern- 
Iment in Britain 
; and the United 

1states. 

4. How Canada is 
governed: legis¬ 
lative, executive, 

! judiciary. 

5. How the 
family in¬ 
fluenced early 
civilization. 

|5. Social en¬ 
lightenment 
and reform. 

j - j 

;5. Canadian social 
legislation and 
iwhat it means to 
Canadians. 

III. 

: Under¬ 
stan¬ 
dings in 
: the 
Spheres 
of Re¬ 
ligious, 
Aesthe¬ 
tic, 

Cultural 
and Re¬ 
crea¬ 
tional 
Activi¬ 
ties. 

6. The 

Christian 
Church and its 
| contributions 
to our civiliza¬ 
tion. 

6. Background 
of dultural 
and religious 
development. 

! 

! 

.—.. ■ ■ -■■■' 

16. Manifestations 
of Canadian 
culture. 

! 
















































of real significance. 


258 


1 Alberta, Department of Education, Regulations for the Year 
Ending June 30th, 1939 (Edmonton, 1938), pp. 32-57. 

2 Ibid., p. 45. 

3 Ibid., pp. 29-30. 

4 Alberta, Department of Education, Regulations Relating to the 
Programme of Studies for the High School—Supplement for the 
Year 1942-43 (Edmonton, 1942), p. 5. 

5 Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for the 
High School—Regulations for the Year Ending June 30th, 1946 
(Edmonton, 1945), p. 45. 

6 Ibid., pp. 45-53. 

7 Alberta, Department of Education, Classroom Bulletin on Social 
Studies, No. 24 (Edmonton, September, 1950), p. 1. 

8 Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for 
the High School—Bulletin II (Edmonton, 1946), pp. 13-29. 

9 Ibid., pp. 8-9. 

10 Ibid., p. 4. 

11 Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report, 1947 (Edmon¬ 
ton, 1948), pp. 43-44. 

12 Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for 
the High School—Bulletin II (Edmonton, 1946), p. 5. 

13 Alberta, Department of Education, Social Studies for Grade 
Ten—Curriculum Guide (Edmonton, September, 1951), p. 10. 






CHAPTER XJX 


CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

The foregoing chapters have attempted to trace the growth 
of instruction in the various subjects now included within the 
scope of the Alberta social studies curriculum* While those 
responsible for the construction of the successive courses of 
studies in use in the province have come strongly under the in¬ 
fluence, first, of the nineteenth century Ontario curriculum and, 
second, of the American social studies movement, it is apparent 
that these curriculum makers have tried to evolve in the social 
studies field, at least, a school program which meets the needs 
of the youth of the province. This attempt, of course, has in¬ 
volved a slow process of trial and error which has been outlined 
in some detail in the main body of the preceding investigation. 

In more recent years social studies curriculum revisions by the 
Department of Education have become comparatively frequent, thus 
revealing an endeavor on the part of the provincial educational 
authorities to keep this aspect of the work of the schools in 
step with both changing political, economic, and social conditions 
and new trends in educational thought and practice. Recent social 
studies curriculum revisions have been directed, particularly, to¬ 
ward making the course of studies more flexible in order to meet 
individual needs and toward creating greater student interest in 
social studies materials by the use of the principles of activity 
education. The Department of Education, moreover, has come to re¬ 
cognize more fully its responsibility in making the social studies 
curriculum more meaningful to the boys and girls of the province. 
In 1946, for example, one year after the conclusion of the most 















260 


destructive war in world history, the Department of Education 
stated in the High School Programme of Studies: 

At the age of nineteen, in Alberta, the youth becomes 
a full partner in the most important business in Canada, 
Canadian government. No other business in our country 
handles the same amount of money; no other business has 
the same impact upon every individual, and no other 
business is so little understood by its partners. While 
it is the law that at twenty-one the youth becomes a 
citizen and a partner in "Canada, Incorporated", only 
education will determine whether or not he becomes an 
intelligent partner. Today, as never before, the com¬ 
plexity of our environment is baffling to many persons. 

More background, more knowledge and more understanding 
of how things grow and develop are required of our citi¬ 
zens. It is not an easy task to be a citizen of the 
Twentieth Century. 1 

Now that a general revision of the senior high school program 
is in progress, the Department of Education has stated recently 
that one of the functional objectives of secondary education in 
Alberta is growth toward competence in citizenship which may be 
outlined as follows: 

Each Alberta youth must be brought gradually to a 
realization of his position and responsibilities in the 
school, community, province, nation, and finally in the 
community of nations. The school should guide him in: 

i. Acquiring insight into the historical back¬ 
ground of contemporary society; 

ii. Developing competence in meeting, and attempting 
to solve, public problems and issues which citi¬ 
zens are required to encounter and on which they 
must take action; 

iii. Developing competence in political action at the 
school, community, national, and ¥/orld levels; 

iv. Developing consumer competence; 

v. Developing democratic attitudes and behavior in 
all social situations; 

vi. Establishing loyalty to the ideals of democracy 
and acquiring an appreciation of his community, 
the province and the nation. 2 


It is the author T s feeling, however, that certain edu¬ 
cational conditions and practices in the province must be im¬ 
proved if such lofty statements of purpose are to be realized, 
and he, therefore, wishes to make the following recommendations 













c . . . 

■ 















. 






















































■ 





261 


as a result of his investigation into the evolution of social 
studies instruction in the province: 

(1) The Department of Education should commence a pro¬ 
gram of evaluation, other than the recording of 
scores in examinations and tests, to determine if 
the stated objectives of the social studies program 
are being realized, particularly with a view to 
finding out if the high school graduates under the 
new course of studies possess more tf competence in 
citizenship" than those who graduated under former 
and more traditional curriculums. 

(2) In view of the introduction of the principles of 
activity education into the schools of the province, 
and in view of the special skill needed for the 
proper handling of such activity techniques as the 
enterprise, the Department of Education should re¬ 
quire a more extensive teacher-training program be¬ 
fore permission to teach is granted. The sine qua 
non of this recommendation, of course, is improved 
salary conditions for teachers. 

(3) For the benefit of those teachers whose training in 
the principles of activity education may have been 
weak or neglected, as well as other members of the 
profession, the Department of Education and the Al¬ 
berta Teachers T Association should support a more de¬ 
finite program of in-service education. 

(4) The Department of Education should not only include 
more teachers in the membership of social studies 
curriculum revision committees, but it should make 



- 





■’?' - ■ ■ ' SI ' ■ . ■ 


. ' 

- 

- 

t 

. 


' 













262 


such teacher membership more representative of 
different sections of the province. If the Depart¬ 
ment is not willing to broaden the representation 
on the social studies curriculum revision com¬ 
mittees, then it should be prepared to permit 
various regions in the province to draw up local 
courses of studies, provided that certain minimum 
standards were met. 

(5) Owing to the considerable number of current events 
materials needed for the successful completion of 
the various social studies courses, the Department 
of Education should make provision for more ex¬ 
tensive classroom service in this direction than 
that afforded by the printing of three or four 
social studies bulletins a year. A monthly publica¬ 
tion would be desirable. The "World Affairs" maga¬ 
zine is, of course, helpful in this respect, but it 
is published in Ontario and is not, therefore, par¬ 
ticularly well geared to the needs of the Alberta 
curriculum. 

(6) The Department of Education should continue to inte¬ 
grate various materials from the social sciences for 
the courses in social studies. 

(7) The Department of Education should continue the use 
of the scope and sequence charts which appear in the 
proposed changes to the junior and senior high school 
social studies curriculums. 

(8) The portions of the social studies courses which refer 
to Canadian affairs, both past and present, should be 








compulsory. 


263 


1 Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for the 
High School—Bulletin II (Edmonton, 1946), p. 3. 

2 Alberta, Department of Education, Senior High School Regula¬ 
tions 1950-1951 (Edmonton, 1950), p. 9. 










264 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


A. BOOKS AND PAMPHLETS 


Aylesworth, Nellie Margaret, A History of the High School 
Courses of Study for Alberta # Unpublished Master T s 
thesis, University of Alberta, 1936. 

Dewey, John, Democracy and Education , New York, The MacMillan 
Company, 1937. 

Figur, Berthold, An Historical Survey of Certain Concepts 

Basic to Progressive Education With Particular Attention 
to the Alberta Scene . Unpublished Master’s thesis, Uni¬ 
versity of Alberta, 1950. 

Goresky, Isidore, The Beginning and Growth of the Alberta 

School System . Unpublished Master’s thesis, University 
of Alberta, 1944. 

Hart, Joseph K., An Introduction to the Social Studies , New 
York, The MacMillan Company, 1937. 

Johnson, Henry, An Introduction to the History of the Social 

Sciences in Schools, New York, Charles Scribner’s Sons, 
1932. 

Johnson, Henry, Teaching of History , New York, The MacMillan 
Company, 1940. 

Long, M. H., Aims and Methods of History Teaching, Edmonton, 

1916. 

Michaelis, John U., Social Studies for Children in a Democracy , 
New York, Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1950. 

Putnam, J. Harold, Egerton Ryerson and Education in Upper 
Canada , Toronto, William Briggs, 1912. 

Quillen, I. James, and Hanna, Lavone A., Education for Social 
Competence , Chicago, Scott, Foresman and Company, 1948. 

Rousseau, J. J., Emile or Education , translated by Barbara 
Foxley, London, J. M. Dent and Sons, Ltd., no date. 

Sheane, George Kennedy, The History and Development of the Cur¬ 
riculum of the Elementary School in Alberta . Unpublished 
Doctor’s thesis, University, of Toronto, 1948. 

Shortt, Adam, and Doughty, Arthur G. (ed.), Canada and Its Pro- 
Provinces , Toronto, Glasgow, Brook and Company, 1914, 
Vol. 18. 

















































































Tryon, Rolla M., The Social Sciences as School Subjects 
New York, Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1935. 


265 


Wesley, Edgar Bruce, Teaching the Social Studies , Boston, 
D. C. Heath and Company, 1942. 

Wilson, Howard E., The Fusion of Social Studies in Junior 
High Schools , Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 
1933. 


B. OFFICIAL BULLETINS AND PROGRAMMES OF STUDIES 

Alberta, Department of Education, Course of Studies for the 
Public Schools, Grades I—VIII, Edmonton, 1918. 


Alberta, Department of Education, Course of Studies for the 

Elementary Schools of Alberta, Part I, Edmonton, 1922. 

Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for 
the Elementary Schools of Alberta, Part I, Edmonton, 
1924. 


Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for 

the Elementary Schools of Alberta, Part U, Edmonton, 
1929. 


Alberta, Department of Education, Handbook for Secondary 
Schools, Edmonton, 1925. 

Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for 
the Elementary School, Edmonton, 1936. 

Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for 
the Elementary School, Edmonton, 1942. 


Alberta, Department of Education, Supplementary Bulletin on 
the Programme of Studies for the Elementary School 
with Directions to Teachers and Statement of Minimum 
Essentials, Edmonton, 1943. 


Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for 
the Elementary School, Bulletin II, Edmonton, 1947. 

Alberta, Department of Education, Program of Studies for the 
Elementary School, Bulletin 2, Edmonton, 1949. 

Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for 
the Intermediate School, Edmonton, 1936. 


Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for 
the Intermediate School, Edmonton, 1944. 

Alberta, Department of. Education, Social Studies in the 
Intermediate Grades, Edmonton, 1946. 

















'. t . . 

, : . , 1 ■ j: ■: 1 J'a ^iO . r ; 

« 

- 


* 

4 .... : 




4 


«■ 










’• 


■ 

4 

. 






* 

' 

4 




. 







: , ; ■ 





• 

: 


L t 





* 

c - : 1 ’ 








“ ' ; ■ ■ -' - 4 











' 





4 

4 

' 




Alberta, Department of Education, Social Studies in Grade 
Nine, Edmonton, 1947. 

Alberta, Department of Education, Social Studies-Language 
for Grade Seven—Curriculum Guide, Edmonton, 
September, 1950. 

Alberta, Department of Education, Junior High School Pro¬ 
gram of Studies Handbook, Edmonton, 1951. 

Alberta, Department of Education, Junior High School Cur¬ 
riculum Guide for Social Studies—Language, Edmon¬ 
ton, September, 1951. 

Alberta, Department of Education, Regulations Relating to 
Courses of Studies and Annual Examinations for 
Grades IX, X, XI, and XII, 1918-1936, Edmonton. 

Alberta, Department of Education, Regulations for the Year 
Ending June 30th, 1939, Edmonton, 1938. 

Alberta, Department of Education, Regulations Relating to 
the Programme of Studies for the High School— 
Supplement for the Year 1942-43, Edmonton, 1942. 

Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for 
the High School—Regulations for the Year Ending 
June 30th, 1946, Edmonton, 1945. 

Alberta, Department of Education, Classroom Bulletin on 

Social Studies, No. 24, Edmonton, September, 1950. 

Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for 
the High School—Bulletin II, Edmonton, 1946. 

Alberta, Department of Education, Social Studies for Grade 
Ten—Curriculum Guide, Edmonton, September, 1951. 

Alberta, Department of Education, Senior High School Regu¬ 
lations 1950-1951, Edmonton, 1950. 


C. OFFICIAL REPORTS 

The North-West Territories, Board of Education, Annual Re¬ 
ports, 1885-1891, Regina. 

The North-West Territories, Council of Public Instruction, 
Annual Reports, 1896, 1898, 1900, Regina. 

The North-West Territories, Department of Education, An¬ 
nual Reports, 1901-1905, Regina. 

Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Reports, 1906-1950, 
Edmonton. 




D. MINUTES OF MEETINGS 


The Education Society of Edmonton, Minutes for March 28, 1936, 






















