Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta 


Berry, W. 

Royce T s theory of the absolute. 


1918. 






































The undersigned hereby certify that they have 
read and recommend to the Committee on Graduate Studies 
for acceptance, a thesis on Royce's Philosophy of the 
Absolute, submitted by William Berry, B. A. in partial 
fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of M. A. 


Special Lecturer in Philosophy. 







Professor of Mathematics. 












Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 



https://archive.org/details/berry1918 


A THESIS 


ROYCS f S PHILOSOPHY OP THE ABSOLUTE. 


*7 

William Berry. 


UBF 


< 
l 

I 


TV 




DIVERSITY 










BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


I. Primary Sources, (prof. Royce»s Works). 

Religious Aspect of Philosophy. 

The Spirit of Modern Philosophy. 

The Conception of God. 

(a) An address by Prof. Royce. 

(b) A Supplementary Essay. 

Studies of Good and Evil. 

The World and the Individual. 2 Volumes. 

The Philosophy of Loyalty. 

William James and other Essays. 

The Problem of Christianity. 2 VoLumes. 

II. Secondary Sources. 

Authors and Works cited in the footnotes to the 
text. 



o <$> 
u O 







ROYCE 1 S PHILOSOPHY OP THE ABSOLUTE. 


Strictly speaking, the problem of the abso¬ 
lute is ultimately one of metaphysics and logic, and 
it may seem somewhat arbitrary on the part of the 
writer to regard an investigation into the worth of a 
contribution to the metaphysical problem as coming 
under the general caption of "The Philosophy of Re¬ 
ligion". It would/however, be a pedantic view of 
the scope of a philosophy of religion to limit it to 
the exclusion of what appear to be, primarily, meta¬ 
physical problems pure and simple, and which have 
only secondarily and incidentally, if at all, re¬ 
ligious and ethical importance. The sharp distinction 
between philosophy in the so-called technical sense 
and religion is not a valid distinction now-a-days, 
nor, indeed, was, for that matter, at any time. That 
"a philosophy of religion is a branch of philosophy 
in general" appears to be a sound and logical princi¬ 
ple upon which to work out some such thesis as this. 

At all events the subject of it had no hesitation in 
declaring that "If it is worth while even to speak of 
God before the forum of the philosophical reason, it 






■ 







is so ‘because one hopes to he able, in a measure, to 
translate into articulate terms the central mystery 
of our existence, and to get some notion about what 
is at the heart of the world." (1) 

t 

Now, the problem of the absolute may 
possess factors which religion, as popularly under¬ 
stood, is not competent to touch; that is to say that 
religion does not possess categories under which these 
factors might be discussed. The absolute has been 
defined from time to time in such a manner as to en¬ 
tirely fail to satisfy legitimate human demands which 
are called "religious". On the other hand it must 
be recognized that religion is somehow or other in¬ 
cluded within ordinary experience and that if an 
attempt to define the absolute be defended on the plea 
that it must be done in order to give validity and 
unity to human experience, then it is surely possible 
to formulate a doctrine of the absolute which will do 
justice to all the demands of experience, religious, 
in the widest sense of the term, as well as epistemo¬ 
logical and ontological. As Dr. Creighton so per¬ 
tinently puts it: "If this conception of an absolute 
mind is t& be anything more than an abstraction, it 


(l) Royce: "Conception of God"--page 6. 













;t „ . FI' 5;" 


. , j c. 


i 


■ -1 . 


6 







i 


Oi- 


r • 


' 


■ 






3 

must oome, not to destroy, but to fulfil the pro¬ 
gram and promises of the categories of ordinary 
experience*” (1) Whether or not it will he possible 
to completely identify the religious ”God” with the 
philosophical ”Absolute” is not now the question. 

What is here insisted upon is that there is no a 
priori reason why the attempt should not be made y and 
that those qualities which we usually associate with 
the highest object of religious emotion and experience 
might possibly be regarded as essential characteristics 
in an adequate representation of the Supreme Reality. 

The author, whose name stands at the head of 
this essay, has during a long period of intellectual 
activity endeavoured to give some attention to this 
problem of the absolute and has formulated a theory 
of the absolute with this idea constantly before him, 
namely, to account for the facts of experience. (2) 

As a great constructive thinker, the quality of his 
work assures for it the respectful attention of serious 
students of philosophy. Although an avowed Idealist, 
he is regarded by all, whether they be Idealists, 

(1) ”Two Types of Idealism” 

Philosophical Review--September, 1917. 

(2) cf. Royce: "Studies of Good and Rvil”-- p.17, etc. 





4 


Pragmatists or Realists, as no mean figure in con¬ 
temporary philosophical movements.(1) As a colleague 
of Professor James at Harvard, the edifying spectacle 
was presented of representatives of antagonistic types 
of philosophy working together in a personal friend¬ 
ship and official relation which has many times re¬ 
ceived literary recognition.f2) As has already keen 

indicated, Royce 1 2 3 s fundamental philosophical faith 
was Idealism. He was through and through an Idealist, 
hut he had an amazing grasp upon human affairs and 
revelled in all the problems of a rich and varied 
experience. He even included an account of a squatter 
disturbance in California in a volume of essays in¬ 
tended to show how an idealistic theory faces and 
settles many acute problems of life, and does so, for 
as he says, "I can conceive of no better way to ex¬ 
press the intimate relation of every fragment with 
the whole in the universe as idealism conceives it 
than in some such way as this.” (3) 

i 

fl) Philosophical Review--May, 1916. Pp. 230, 243, 244pto 

(2) cf. "William James and Other Essays”--page 9. 

(3) Studies of Good and Evil--Intro. P.xv. 
cf. also "Philosophy of Loyalty” and 

"The Problem of Christianity.” 2 vols. 








5 


The method of this thesis will "be: 

(1) To state Royce 1 s philosophical "basis for his 
system and the problem of the absolute from the 
point of view of his Idealism. 

(2) To examine his treatment of the problem under 
two categories: 1. Metaphysics. 

2, Ethics. 

(3) A critical discussion of his concept of the 
absolute from the point of view of a philosophy 
of religion. 

(1) The precise wording of the task we 
propose for ourselves will be, it is hoped, significant 
in view of the distinction which is now frequently made 
between types of philosophy in general and types of 
Idealism in particular. It is becoming almost a 
commonplace to draw fine distinctions between various 
phases of idealistic philosophical systems. Hot all 
these distinctions are useful or necessary, but within 
certain limits it is no doubt possible and helpful to 
classify systems of thought which have otherwise certain 
fundamental characteristics. As has been already 
mentioned, Royce was an Idealist, but as some would 
insist, it is not enough to say so-and-so is an Idealist, 
some qualifying word or phrase is needed to fill out 











0 











1 , 



6 


the idea. Consequently, Perry refers to toyce's 
system under the heading of "Absolute Idealism".(1) 

Miss Calkins places Royce with Descartes, Berkeley, 

Kant, Fichte, Hegel, Lotze and others in a group to 
he known as the upholders of "Personal Idealism”(2); 
meaning thereby "that personal or spiritual idealism 
shares with phenomenalism the doctrine that all 
reality is of the nature of consciousness.... but 
consciousness,the personal idealist insists,is a 
conscious self or person, that is, an unique "real" 
which is conscious....but which is more permanent 
than ideas are". But for Miss Calkins this distinction 
"Personal Idealism", is not sufficient, for in a later 
part of her book, she again draws a distinction between 
"Pluralistic Personal Idealism" and "Monistic Personal 
Idealism"(3) and Royce is finally classified as a 
"Monistic Personal Idealist". Ho doubt it is true 
that "The present day tendency to identify idealism 
either with M ideism" or "subjective idealism” is much 
to be regretted".(4) On the other hand, it is to be 
feared that the process of refinement among Idealistic 


(1) Perry: "Present Philosophical Tendencies". P.175,etc 

(2) Calkins:"Persistent Problem of Philosophy". 4th Ed. 

P.407. 

(3) op. cit. Page 417.__ 

(4) op. cit. Preface XI. 













7 


systems will obscure the fundamental characteristics 
of Idealism as a great historical and valid interpreta 
tion of experience in the widest sense of the term. 

”1 think," says f Professor Creighton 7 , "it is possible 
to show historically that the characteristic mark of 
idealism as it is found in the great systems is its 
direct acceptance of things as having value or sig¬ 
nificance. .... Its primary insight, which reflection 
has formulated as its principle, is that the reality 
known in experience is not something that merely "is" 
or possesses bare existence, but that as existing 
concretely, it forms part of a permanent system of 
relations and values".(1) It is with some such state 
ment as this that Royce would no doubt find himself 
in hearty agreement, although he would no doubt go on 
to show that "it is a permanent Bystem of relations 
and values" .for one consciousness, namely "one 
absolutely final and integrated self, that of the ab¬ 
solute" . (2) 

We must however examine more in detail the 
philosophical basis of his system. neglecting for 


(1) Philosophical P.eview--September, 1917. Pp.515-6. 

(2) "World and the Individual" II. P.289, 
cf. Yol. I. P.425, etc. 

"Religious -Aspect of Philosophy". 


P. 433. 








8 


the moment the metaphysical doctrine of "The World and 
the Individual", his most mature and exhaustive treat¬ 
ment of the problem of the absolute, it may be said 
that as early as the publication of "The Religious 
Aspect of Philosophy" in 1885, and again in 1892 when 
he published "The Spirit of Modern Philosophy tT , Royce 
had formulated his fundamental philosophical faith. 

In the former volume, he shows the "straight and easy 
path" which "forced him to come to idealism".(1) He 
indicates the steps,as it were, which he was compelled 
to take along this "straight and easy path". The 
first difficulty, then, is to find "a simple adequate 
hypothesis about external reality".(2) How a naive 
view of the world has no difficulty at all about such 
a proposition. It includes "external reality" as a 
part of the phenomena of the universe about which we 
have "ideas"; in short, it is that to which our ideas 
correspond, so that some such statement as this is 
possible, namely; "To each necessary relation a:b in 
human consciousness there corresponds A:B in the ex¬ 
ternal world".(3) But a "view" of the world is not 


( 1 ) 

( 2 ) 

(3) 


The Religious Aspect 

TT H TT 


tt 


of Philosophy. 

n tt 


P.357. 

P.338. 

P.338, 


TT 


TT 


TT 


TT 









9 


an "explanation" of it, so that a further question 
appears necessary. What, precisely, is the hypo¬ 
thetical relation called "correspondence" "between 
facts in the consciousness and so-called facts for 
consciousness in external reality? At this present 
stage one hypothesis is as good as another* But on 
further reflection, an hypothesis Y/hich regards the 
entities "A" and "B" as, in themselves, independent 
and real--as indeed they are regarded in. a naive 
realistic view of the world--is seen to present diffi¬ 
culties as soon as questions are asked as to the nature 
of their reality, and the nature of the relation said 
to exist "between them, viz. " T A?: *B 1 ". On the other 
hand, we may adopt as a "working hypothesis" a familiar 
hypothesis of idealism, that the "external" world and 
its contents are not "isolated somethings floating in 
a void", waiting to Become known "by some consciousness, 
"but are rather definite realities present to some 

consciousness, and that their ultimate characteristic 

th fy 

is precisely, that^are -"known" . Whatever criticism 
may "be made of the familiar hypothesis of Berkeley, 
an idealistic theory of reality does hold that "reality 
is of the nature of consciousness".(1) Bor the present, 

(1) Calkins--op. cit. 











i 


O 






1 . 










\ ’ . : 


i.i. i 


i ' .y 


o r 


. :. . ' a;: . ; O , O 

■ O v . ' ■ . 


, 




•0 :.. / , 



10 


therefore, the postulate is put forth that "external 
reality is, in its totality, an essential factor in 
an other-than-self consciousness’ 7 • (1) We shall he 
compelled to discuss later how, according to Royce, 
the external world is known; this much is quite clear 
at this time, that the more one knows the world, the 
more must one suppose a mind for whom the world is 
a mental fact and not a hare "x"- beyond all ideas. 

It is at this juncture that Royce’s distinctive 
idealism begins to appear. In answer to the ob¬ 
jection that surely there is a ’’causal relation” be¬ 
tween external reality and our ’’ideas”, he points out 
here, and in the ’’World and the Individual” develops 
at length, that the causal category does not of neces 
sity come prior to our knowledge of reality, so that 
it may be said, here is reality, now we have ideas 
corresponding to it, and the one is the cause of the 
other, but rather, "All our thinking is based on the 
postulate that the external reality is a counterpart 
and not merely a cause”.(2) Whatever "matter” may be 
--to refer to the time-honored discussion as to the 
nature of matter--whether it be Mill’s "Permanent 


(1) Royce: Ibid. P.349. 

(2) The Religious Aspect of Philosophy--?.359. 











I dr- 

- . ; r 

' ' ’ 0 

■ 

. 


) 


11 


<v 

Possibilities of Sensation” or Kant T s "Mogliohe 
Erfahrung"(1) or the ’’Force” and ’’Energy” of the 
naturalists like Buchner(2), at all events it is clear 
that in an idealistic theory it is not the ’’cause” of 
our ideas. There is a relation between what he calls 
the ’’Internal meaning” and ’’external meaning” of ideas, 
which is not a causal relation, but precisely a re¬ 
lation of meaning , of significance , i.e. ”An idea 
appears in consciousness as having the significance 
of an act of will”.(5) Now this leads to a very im¬ 
portant objection. Perhaps one is altogether wrong 
in talking at all about external reality; at all events 
we may be in complete error in supposing that in some 
way our ideas must or do correspond with it. Here 
then results a pretty problem; we can be in error about 
an external world. How is such error possible? And 
what is meant precisely by ’’error”? Let this problem 
stand until later in our discussion, but it must be 
noted in passing that the objection is by no means as 
crushing as it seems, for it appears plain that if 
’’external reality” is knowable at all, it exists as 


(1) cf.’’World and the Individual” Pages 236-238. 

(2) cf. Perry: ’’Present Philosophical Tendencies”- p.69. 

(3) ’’World and the Individual"-Vol.I. P.23. 

I! 










I 





' 


' f. 



0 •; 


( 


■' : . 


■ L i 





) 












' 






12 


knowable for a mind, and if, per impossible , it is 
unknowable, then by hypothesis it is known as such, 
namely, by its predicate of unknowableness and the 
contention is thrown out. This does not, of course, 
commit us to the statement that our ideas and the 
things for which they stand are of necessity in har¬ 
mony. The latter part of the objection just stated 
is indeed a knotty problem in metaphysics and Eoyce 
achieved a distinction in the subordination of the 
problem of T error T to the greater problem of the 
absolute. Dr. Hale once said of Eoyce who was then 
just beginning his connection with Harvard as lecturer 
in Philosophy, "What do you think I heard him doing 
in a lecture the other afternoon? Why, nothing less 
than showing that our human ignorance is the positive 
proof that there is a God--a supreme Omniscient Being!"(1) 
It is possible then to sum up the philosophical basis 
of P.oyce T s system in some such manner as this. Only 
ideas are knowable, the absolutely unknowable cannot 
exist, "The world is such stuff as ideas are made of. 

But the world is not unreal, it is the world of an 
universal mind for it stretches infinitely beyond 


(1) Philosophical Peview- May, 1916. P. 234. 
cf. "Conception of God"-Pp. 18-29. 









13 


our private consciousness.”(1) "The world as known 
would he found to he a world that had all the while 
been ideal and mental, even before it became known 
to the particular mind that we are to coneeive as 
coming into connection with it.”(2) The problem of 
the absolute then from the point of view of his phil¬ 
osophy is to give a more adequate description of this 
"universal mind", to show that it does indeed satisfy 
a rigid logical analysis, in short, "It is to show 
what we mean by Being in general, and the special 
sorts of Reality that we attribute to God, to the 
world, and to the Human Individual."(3) 

(2) 1. The most mature and complete discussion of 

this phase of his system is to be found in his Gifford 
Lectures for 1899, entitled "The World and the Indi¬ 
vidual" , although it is to be found in all of his work 
beginning with "The Religious Aspect of Philosophy". 

I have used the term "metaphysics” to indicate the 
predominant consideration in the present discussion of 
the absolute, and the term should signify that type of 
thinking which is concerned with the meaning of ideas, 

(1) Royce T s "Spirit of Modern Philosophy"-P.380. 

(2) Tf " TT TT rr P.368. 

(3) "The World and the Individual”-P.11, Yol. I. 












} 



) 









14 


the nature of being and the validity of knowledge, 

"I am one of those”, he says, "who hold that when you 
ask the question, What is an Idea? and, How can Ideas 
stand in any true relation to Beality? you attack the 
world knot in the way that promises most for the untying 
of its meshes."(1) Let us then he clear as to our 
terms. What is an Idea? Neglecting for the moment 
the causes of an Idea, the peculiar specific character 
of an Idea "is a state of consciousness" which is "there 
and then viewed as at least the partial expression or 
embodiment of a single conscious purpose."(2) It must 
be noted here that it is a most important feature of 
his system that an Idea have both "Internal" and "Ex¬ 
ternal meaning". Now by "Internal meaning", it is 
suggested that purpose comes prior to idea, so much so 
that the "idea" is nothing other than "purpose-embodied- 
in-the-idea". That is to say, that "ideas" in the 
mass represent "purposes" which are present to what we 
may here call a finite consciousness. There is, how¬ 
ever, another consideration. An idea may and indeed 
does have reference to that which is beyond the momentary 
experience of the finite consciousness, that it may not 


(1) "The World and the Individual"-Yol. 1. 

(2) Ibid. P.23. 


P.16. 





. X, 

J 



u 


I 



) , 



c 






15 


"be exhausted by the Internal meaning just now defined. 

It may indeed refer to something, an object, a thing, 
considered as external to the finite consciousness. 

So that when I have an idea of my friend, Frank, I 
have an idea of which I am able to say, it has an In¬ 
ternal meaning, namely, it expresses my purpose to 
think of him; it also has an external meaning, namely, 
it refers to an object of my knowledge, an empirically 
known mass of warm animated matier--and something else— 
which has received that particular name or sign. We 
have then apparently a complete antithesis between what 
is, quite obviously, an affair of what common sense 
calls Will, and what common sense, equally persistently, 
calls "an independently real world", i.e. External 
Reality. By what means is it possible for us to over¬ 
come the antithesis, or by what authority do we speak 
of an External Reality which, by hypothesis, is meant 
specifically and precisely^ by our ideas?(1) In other 
words, how do we know that our "ideas" represent or 
correspond with "reality", granted that there is "reality" 
to which they might correspond? This, it may be ob¬ 
served, is that "persistent problem of philosophy", the 
problem of knowledge. Well, one method of attack on 


(1) cf. "The World and the Individual"-Vol.l-P.31 

















q . ' : 


i 


"j'\ .'TV'" - i \7 ■ v '> 




o 



c 












16 


the problem will he to find the validity of Reality 
as external and "independently real". If it appear 
that this validity may indeed he successfully challenged, 
then it will follow that "the external meaning is 
genuinely continuous with the internal meaning, and is 
inwardly involved in the latter, or else the idea has 
no external meaning at all. 7 (1) Reality, then, or 

what it is " to he " will he explained i terms of pur¬ 
pose and will, "To he means simply to express, to em¬ 
body the complete internal meaning of a certain abso¬ 
lute system of ideas*" This is by no means a final 
statement and the question, What is Reality? ox 1 hat 
is Being? must he discussed, since the terms must he 
regarded as interchangeable *(2) 

Eoyce reviews three great conception of Being, 
and develops a fourth as his own peculiar contribution 
to the discussion. These are respectively, Realism, 
mysticism. Critical Rationalism and the fourth, which 
is Royce f s own conception, "which I shall call the 
Synthetic, or the constructively Idealistic conception 
of what it is to be".(3) Space does not permit of 

(1) Ibid. P.33. 

(2) cf. Ibid. P.52, note. 

(3) Ibid. P.61 












r 


r . 



"C • > 










17 


extended quotation and treatment of the first three 
and I shall confine myself to a brief reference to the 
first and a comparison between it and the fourth con¬ 
ception. 

The first is the Realist Conception of Being 
and although it has had a very long and attractive 
history it has never been so persuasively and brilliantly 
stated as by the present day Realists, As Royce de¬ 
fines it: "to be real, therefore, according to this 
conception, means to be independent of an idea or ex¬ 
perience through which the real being is, from without, 
felt, or thought, or known,"(1) This position may 
be supported by statements of the Bew Realists. Pitkin 
in "Bew Realism" says, "The Realist holds that things 
known are not products of the knowing relation, nor 
essentially dependent for their existence or behavior 
upon that relation."(2) Again, Montagne in the same 
volume says, "Realism holds that things known may con¬ 
tinue to exist unaltered when they are not known, or 
that things may pass in and out of the cognitive rela- 


(1) Ibid. P.62. 

(2) "Bew Realism"-P. 477. 

cf. B. Russell: "Scientific Method in Philosophy"- 
chapter on "Our Knowledge of the External - r orld". 













. 



18 


tion without prejudice to their reality, ”(1) (Italics 
are mine). It is quite clear that what is intended 
is that there are many "real" things existing as "hard" 
facts extra-mentjfc. So "hard" are these facts that 
consciousness must take cognizance of them, hv hy¬ 
pothesis, for longer or shorter periods of time, hut 
that the relation existing between them and conscious¬ 
ness when they are so present to it is, precisely, 
one that shall make "no difference" to them , whatever 
happens to consciousness. It would he very interest¬ 
ing (at least for the writer) to follow up this Reo- 
Realistic argument at length, hut this is not the 
place to do it. Suffice it to say that the Idealist 
asserts that he does not know what is meant hy such 
terms as "extra-ment^m" and "things are real indepen¬ 
dent of knowledge of them"; for realities devoid of 
such qualities as ’knowledge 1 2 gives to them are"e pty 
nothings", and utterly negligible .(%) Further , 
whether the "real" are many or one in that abyss where 

(1) Ibid. Pp. 474-5. 

cf. B. Russell: "Problems of Philosophy", 
chapter on "Our Knowledge of Shiver sals" . 

(2) An interesting critique of "The Rev/ Realism" and 
Russell’s "Lowell Lectures" is given by Hiss Sinclair 
in her recent book, "A Defence of Idealism". 

London, 1917. 








i 

iV..j :>. >; 

■ . 1 ' . 

• . 


. 

- • 


. 


i ? , 1 : 


- 

. ■ • r; o 3 ■;. . i, ' 



19 


knowledge doth not corrupt nor consciousness "break 
through nor steal, is not of course "known", hut if 
they are "many" it seems trivial to ask: Are they in 
a world of Independent Beings? since a fundamental 
feature of a Realism is a postulate of complete inde¬ 
pendence. But what does independence mean? Is it 
not a cognitive term, and are we not engaged in that 
delightful task of trying to transcend our conscious¬ 
ness much as a cat would try to jump out of his skin? 
An "idea" may by good fortune enter into some sort of 
relation with the thing it is supposed to represent 
hut only hy good fortune, since it is never clear 
whether the idea meant just that particular thing and 
may indeed not mean anything at all. Thus a "thing" 
may have no "idea" corresponding to it at all, and 
forever remain "unknown" hut not on that account non¬ 
existent, since hy hypothesis the knowledge relation 
does not give existence. The real problem for the 
Realist is to account for any unity whatsoever in the 
hypothesis of "heings" or "reals" mutually and com¬ 
pletely independent. If "a" is to he defined in some 
such way as to make it completely independent of "h", 
so that the presence, absence, or alteration of "b" 


does not in the slightest degree affect "a", or vice 






20 


versa, and if ,T a TT be supposed to represent a "real" 

and "b" a knowing process resulting in an idea of "a" , 

♦ 

then we have two "reals”, "a" and "b" , a "real" and 
an idea of it, for surely idea "b" is a "real" and 
must be included in a realistic world,(1) But how, 
if they are. mutually independent? since to bo "in¬ 
cluded” constitutes a relation which " does make a 
difference" . "The consequence is, then, that both 
the realistic definition and the totally independent 
beings prove to be contradictory and vanish together, 
leaving us,,.the thesis that if the other,which our 
finite"thinking.seeks to attain, is to be defined, 
it cannot be totally independent of the thought which 
defines it."(2) 

he are now ready to pass on to a consideration 
of "the fou] tl conception" or Boyce 1 s theory of the 
Absolute. Quite evidently a realistic theory of Being 
is inadequate, for "Being" or "Reality" is regarded as 
independent of consciousness, as unchanged by the 
cognitive relation. It will be incumbent upon this 
alternative theory, therefore, to she it "Being" 

fl) cf. Boyce: "The 1'orld and the Individual** 

Y o!»I-Chap.III. 

(2) "The horid and the Individual"--Vol.I-P.145. 

cf. "Concept-! re of Cod' 1 -S-gpp. hssay-Pp. 153-181. 















21 


gains its validity from consciousness. Let us then 
take up the question of the Internal and External 
meanings of Ideas. It will he remembered that by 
"Internal meaning" was meant, purpose-being-ex- 
pressed-in-Idea, and "External meaning" referred to 
"that other sort of meaning, that reference beyond 
themselves to objects, that cognitive relation to 
outer facts’ 1 2 3 , (1), which we have mentioned from time 
to time as indicative of External Reality. Now, 
when we speak of "Truth", it is possible to mean one 
of two things, namely, either "that about which we 
judge", or "a correspondence between any idea and 
its object". The first would be the way of logic 
and is precisely the method adopted by Russell (2) 
and others. The other brings us to the question 
of what is meant by "correspondence" or the relation 
of "idea" to "object". This is precisely the problem, 
par excellence, ^or Eoyce (3), and the discussion leads 
quite naturally to a full statement of his own position 


(1) "The Morld and the Individual"-Yol.I-P.26. 

(2) "Scientific Method in Philosophy"- 

Lect.II-P.33-"Logic as the Essence of Philosophy". 

(3) although Royce does pay some attention to the 
"logical" side of the question, cf. Ibid-Pp.270-299. 
cf. lie Taggart: "Mind"-1900-Pp.261-2. 








' 





in*the "synthetic idealistic conception". Let the 
question he stated in some such words as these: "What 
is it that is called an "object" of my "idea", and 
when does this relation exist between them, namely, 
that "object corresponds with idea"? It is clear 
that this "correspondence" does not necessarily exist 
in a "point to point" likeness or resemblance, for 
"A photograph looks like a man, a map may look, in 
outline, like the land mapped. But numbers and the 
symbols of an algebra no longer seem to our senses at 
all like the objects defined by these symbolic devices 
for establishing correspondence; and the accounts in 
the ledger, while very systematically corresponding, 
item for item, to the commercial transactions, are 
very unlike them in immediate interest and sensible 
appearance"•(1) The relation of "correspondence" 
therefore must be involved in a "purpose", that is, in 
the will-to-see that there are present "ideal charac¬ 
teristics" in both object and idea, and further, that 
an idea is said to be true when it has "the sort of 
correspondence to its object that the idea itself 
wants to possess". ( 2 ) So far this is excellent, but 


(1) Ibid. Vol. I- P.304. 

(2) " " " P.306. 


















23 


what about the so-called "object"? For it is an 
apparently well-founded opinion that in order to be 
object of a given idea, the object must be cause of 
the idea ,f1) The validity of such ^ a statement is 
however dubious, for I have an idea of the end of the 
war and certainly there is nothing in so-called exter¬ 
nal reality, an object, per se, to cause such an idea. 
That is to say, it is an event in future time, about 
which I can make valid judgments, although it is not 
given in this momentary experience as these words are 
written, "But, I have a pen in my hand, a watch in 
my pocket, I am writing on a table", says one, "and 
are not these objects, concrete objects which correspond 
with, even if they do not give rise to, my ideas, and 
how can it be said that my idea, say of my watch, 
possesses the sort of correspondence it wants to possess 
Must it not have that correspondence willy-nilly, pre¬ 
cisely because it is there, a watch made up of various 
metals and having certain specific characteristics 
such as weight, size, color, hardness, etc.?" This 
resolves itself,then, into an admission that there is 

fl) Would an observer who stood,as it were, outside 

both "idea" and "object" be mble to judge whether or 
not there was a correspondence between them? I con¬ 
fess the query is to say the least interesting. 









- 

' 

i . ' J : ■ 

. 

. 




. ' • V 







24 


a difference between what are called "objects of 

& 71 cL events 

! sense” and more subtle or intangible objects^ such as 
the end of the war, the value of ^etc. Now, it is, 
of course, well-known that the so-called permanent 
"object of sense" suffers grievously at the hands of 
psychological science, and that color, hardness, weight, 
etc. do not survive a psychological inquisition as 
independent entities. Again when I have an idea of 
my watch, I do not mean my pen or my neck-tie, so that 
"watch" does get some degree of definition by my pur¬ 
pose to mean It and nothing else. This, however, does 
not remove that "stubborn fact" of experience that there 
is somehow^in a thing, an object of an idea, something 
over and above mere correspondence, that somehow eludes 
definition but yet is "there" as a sort of immediate 
certainty. We have then an antinomy of the kind that 
Kant delighted in. Royce (1) then proceeds to state 
the antinomy in the familiar style of "The Critique of 
Pure Reason", the result in each case being equally 
satisfactory or unsatisfactory, according to point of 
view. The outcome, interesting to us in this connec¬ 
tion, is that error is certainly possible in finite 

(1) Ibid. Thesis - Pp.320-323. 

Antithesis - Pp.323-324. 








. 









25 


ideas, that error is a fact of experience, and there¬ 
fore real. But we were after a definition of truth, 
and, behold, we arrive at a conclusion that error is 
possible.' , for "the very possibility of error, the 
absolutely certain truth that some ideas give false 
accounts of their own objects shows that some objects 
contain what is opposed to the intent of the very ideas 
that refer to these objects."(1) 

Now this problem of error would in itself be 
an adequate theme for a complete thesis, and I can only 
barely indicate Royce's method of treating it. He was 
immensely fascinated by it; as is proved by the fact 
that it appears in all his books; in the "Religious 
Aspect", as the expanded presentation of a "thesis pre¬ 
pared for the Doctor*s degree of the John Hopkins Uni¬ 
versity in 1878"(2), and in the "Spirit of Modern 
Philosophy" under the caption of "The World of Descrip¬ 
tion and World of Appreciation"(5), as well as in the 
"Conception of God"(4) and "The World and the Individual" 
(5) as an integral factor in the general argument. 


(1) Ibid. Page 524. 

(2) "Religious Aspect"- Preface- P. 15. 

(5) "Spirit of Modern Philosophy" - Pages 581-454. 

(4) "Conception of God" - Pages 18-29. 

(5) "The World and the Individual"-Yol.I-Pages 525,etc. 











■ 








. 


. 






- 

























26 


What is, precisely, an error? What do we mean by 
error, and to what is error relevant? Dr. Sheldon 
in an article, ’’Error and Unreality” in the Philosophi¬ 
cal Review, states: "The problem of error comprises 
two distinct questions, viz: what is the nature of 
the mental process when we err and what causes lead 
to it? and again, what reality, what status in meta¬ 
physics has the object of error, the illusory thing?”(1) 
I have quoted this to show how the problem of error is 
attacked along psychological lines, and, in the case 
cited above, involves a discussion of the "reality" of 
the ’’illusory thing" or "object of error". Royce's 
problem was not of this kind. For him "error" was 
a complement of "truth" and "reality", and indeed could 
not be discovered or constituted apart from some abso¬ 
lute truth or reality, for, by hypothesis, "the idea 
seeks its own. It can be judged by nothing but what 

it intends".(2) Now, it follows, does it not, that 
wherever there is an "error", there is involved as a 
condition of that "error" an implicit or explicit 
reference to something beyond its limits, a standard 
or norm known to this extent, that a given case does 
not "harmonize" or cohere with it fully(2). This 

(1) Philosophical Review - May, 1916 - Page 335. 

(2) "World and the Individual", Yol.I - Page 325. 

(3) On this, cf. Ibid. Page 335. 







27 


might be put in some such way as this:"what the idea 
always aims to find in its object is nothing what¬ 
ever but the idea’s own conscious purpose or will 
embodied in some more determinate form than the idea 
by itself alone at this instant consciously possesses. 
When I have an idea of the world, my idea is a will, and 
the world of my idea is simply my own will itself 
determinately embodied"(1}. We shall have opportunity 
to speak again on the question of this fundamental 
Voluntarism in his philosophy. It will be noted that 
when I adequately "will" for a certain end, when I 
adequately know a certain object, no other "end" or 
"object” will satisfy the requirements, that is, no 
other object could take its place as object of that 
idea. Let me quote again. "In seeking its object, 
any idea whatever seeks absolutely nothing but its 
own explicit and in the end complete determination 
as this conscious purpose, embodied in this one way. 

The complete content of the idea’s own purpose is the 
only object of which the idea can ever take note,"(2) 

The words in italics are of first rate importance in 
this connection. Although at any finite moment, I 


(1) Ibid. Page 527, 

cf. "Spirit of Modern Philosophy" - Page 451. 

(2) Ibid. Page 529. 











28 


have an idea, notably imperfect and incomplete, and 
by hypothesis, by no means exhausting in the given 
moment all the purpose and significance of reality, 
yet it does indicate unmistakably that reality which 
is the full and complete embodiment of my "purpose" 
and "will”, which can only be realised by an " other ” 
beyond this moment’s consciousness. The antinomy 
then is solved , "for the object is a true " other ”, 
and yet it is object only as the meaning of this 
idea".(1) 

We are now ready to go on to a definition 
of the absolute. It finds expression over and over 
again throughout his works. Let us take one given 
in his Gifford Lectures and there set forth as the 
Fourth Conception of Being, "What is, or what is real 
is as such the complete embodiment, in individual 
form and in final fulfilment, of the internal meaning 
of finite ideas."(2) Amplified, this definition 
may be made to read as follows: "In the world as we 
define it, there can exist no fact except as a known 

fact^as a fact present in some consciousness. 

to the consciousness that fulfils the whole meaning 
of whoever asserts that this fact is real....it follows 


(1) Ibid. Page 331. 
(20> " " 339. 












£9 


then, that the whole world of truth and being must 
exist only as present...to the unity of a single 
consciousness which includes both our own and all 
finite conscious meanings in one final eternally 
present insight ."(1) How for a final statement. 

"There is an absolute experience, for which the con¬ 
ception of an absolute reality, i.e. the conception 
of a system of ideal truth, is fulfilled by the very 

contents that get presented to this experience. This 

> 

absolute experience is related to our experience as 
an organic whole to its own fragments. It is an ex¬ 
perience which finds fulfilled all that the completest 
thought can rationally conceive as genuinely possible."(E) 
Thus it may be said that all Beality is for the Ab¬ 
solute the sum total of his experience, and that both 
"idea” and "object”, "internal meaning" and "external 
meaning" of my finite experience find a place along 
with many other finite facts in an absolute experience 

regarded as the activity of an Absolute Consciousness. 

Se 1 

The Great Reality then turns out to be a Great ?rr* rn , 
a greater self of which each finite seif is an identi¬ 
cal part yet by which it is infinitely transcended. 


(1) Ibid. Page 397. 

(£) "Conception of God" - Pages 43-44. 












30 


(2) 2. There yet remains the discussion of the 

absolute from the point of view of ethics, before 
we can pass on to a formal discussion of the whole 
system in accord with the terms of our program. 

In the preface to his work, "The Philosophy 
of Loyalty", Royce declares, "My own general philo¬ 
sophical opinions have been set forth...most elaborately 
in the volumes entitled "The World and the Individual", 
...but I have not published any formulation of my 
ethical opinions since the brief review of ethical 
problems in the first part of my "Religious Aspect of 
Philosophy".{1) But it is none the less true that 
! he touched the ethical problems many times, notably 
in "Studies of Good and Evil", and in Yol. II of the 
"World and the individual". This being the case, it 
will be necessary to pick out his more important 

JO 

statements upon ethical questions and to connect them 
in some sort of progressive unity. It is in this 
connection that Royce has something to say upon a 
philosophy of religion. He finds that religion differs 
from philosophy, pure and simple, in that it has to do 
with feeling, while philosophy tries to find out what 
it can about a real world. Religious philosophy. 


(1) "The Philosophy of Loyalty" - Page IX 












































. 










* 












































1 











' 












* 






























* 































31 


therefore, seeks to find values in a real world, 
and wants to know ’’what in the world is worthy of 
worship as good”. In other words, the aim of a 
philosophy of religion is to find a genuine moral 
ideal. In the first place, therefore, it must be 
asserted that an idealistic system of philosophy 
cannot, in the nature of the case, find a valid 
moral ideal in any external sanctions, whether they 
be derived from popular and current opinions or from 
a more or less hoary tradition, springing out of the 
past history of the race.(1) Nor can the ultimate 
moral sanction be subjective in character, for it 
must have validity and authority for other selves, 
and the idealist is quite as well aware of the fickle 
character of the ’’subjective” as are his opponents, 
the Realists and the Pragmatists. ’’Why an individual 
should obey his conscience unless he wishes to do so, 
cannot be made clear by conscience alone.”(2) Through¬ 
out his discussions, Royce insists on the validity of 
"intent ” in actions. To quote from his treatment of 
the question, ’’Altruism and Egoism”. ”The altruism 
of consequences as such is morally insignificant, and 


(1) cf. Royce: "Religious Aspect of Philosophy”- P.55. 

(2) "Religious Aspect of Philosophy” - P. 56. 

"World and the Individual”-Vol.II. Pp.347,etc. 














: i ■' 










f 

. 







- 







• ' 






• 




















32 


the altruism of intent is alone morally significant". 
But the question of"intant" cannot he so summarily 
dismissed. In all recent ethical discussions the 
question, what constitutes a ’'moral" act and vice 
versa, an "immoral” act, has been, in the opinion of 
the writer, unnecessarily clouded or obscured by this 
reference to society , viz: that ultimately the good¬ 
ness or badness of an action is determined as it sub¬ 
serves or impairs the grand end of self and race 
preservation. For, in the last analysis, this is an 
appeal for validity to the end of an action and not to 
the "intent" or springs of action. (1) Whether the 
end be defined as the happiness of the individual, or 
"the greatest good for the greatest number of people", 
or even that remote and somewhat uninspiring end, the 
preservation of the human race through nobody knows 
how many ages yet to come, the result is the same. It 
is always possible for some one to rebelliously assert 
"What I want to know is what constitutes the ethical 
validity of an action here and now . I cannot wait 
until results have determined which category - good 

(1) cf. Spencer: "Data of Ethics". 

Also Mill: "Utilitarianism". 

Paulsen’s "teleological energism" is not far 

removed from this position. Paulsen: P.233. 










. 


- 

' 

: : . 










{l) 

, 

. 

. 

. 

, • ■ . ■ 










. 

* 






: 

' 


■ ' 






33 


or bad - should include the aet in question. tT Royce 
treats this whole problem most admirably, asserting 
that, "Surely in fundamental ethios we are discussing 
what we ought t o aim at , not how we can get our aim s, 

so long, at least, as we confine ourselves to the 

■ 

I general principles. TT (1) The thesis which he sets 
forth and defends at length may be expressed in 
some such way as this. Ethical theories are ham¬ 
pered in their usefulness by the fact that an exactly 
opposing one may be found in each case. Now it will 
not do to hurl anathemas at the opposing theories, 
for this, quite obviously, is an endless and fruit¬ 
less process. It is oonsciousness that realises 
the opposition, i.e. the conflict is in us , and when 
: we present to ourselves rival theories which do con¬ 
flict, it follows that we have to that extent re¬ 
alized equally the warring aims. "Moral skepticism 
is itself the result of an act, namely, that act 
by which we seek to realise in ourselves opposing 
aims at the same time."(2) Ethical aims expressed 
in ethical theories are, then, the impression of 
somebody’s will. But"what represents a will but 

_ 

(1) Royce: "Religious Aspect" - P. 73. 

(2) " " P.134 









- 

. 

- 

■ 

. ■ 

- 


r 

. 

. 





34 


a will. Who would know what it is to have an end 
unless he actually had ends himself?"(1) Therefore 
to do justice to any moral system, one simply must 
realise it by reproducing in oneself the will that 
accepts that particular end set forth. But to realise 
the conflicting aims is to make oneself a battle ground; 
for "whoso realises the various conflicting aims in 
the world, his are all these aims at the moment of in¬ 
sight, when, so far as in him lies, he realises them 
and mentally desires their success."(2) Must this 

battle go on forever with no hope of ultimate ethical 
success? No, for in the very act of protesting 
against the conflict one virtually says: "I, too, 
have an end,...and so my will is not aimless. I de¬ 
sire to realise these aims all at once. Therefore, 

I desire their harmony. This Higher Good would be 
attained in a world where the conflict ceased. 11 (3) 

The ideal then amounts to this, the will to direct 
my acts towards the attainment of Universal Harmony. 
Expressed as a maxim or principle after the Kantian 
manner, it would be, " So act as thou wouldst will to 


(1) "Religious Aspect" - P. 137. 

(2) Ibid. P. 139. 

(3) n P. 140. 


























35 


act if all the consequences of thy act for all the 

aims that are anywhere to be affected by this act 

could be realised by thee now and in this one in ¬ 
divisible moment . T ffi Turning then to actual experience, 
what do we find? Simply this, that.unless some great 
effort is made, we regard our fellows as so many active 
agencies which may or may not affect our fortunes, and 
not as so many inner experiences, i.e. so many wills. 
What Boyce means by "insight" ( 9 . ) is that rare moment 
when we recognise that the reality of our neighbors 
is precisely as is our reality. "Selfishness says: 

I shall exist; unselfishness says: T he other life Is 
as my life . "( 3 ) But why should the other life be 
regarded as of the same order and real ity as my own? 
Because the realisation of my own real will as that 
which unites conflicting aims - and therefore wills - 

in one , means that, "an absolute moral insight,which 
we can conceive, but which we never fully attain our¬ 
selves, would realise the true inner nature of all the 
conflicting wills in the world.”(#-) Stated in a 


(1) Ibid. P. 141. Pp. 168-169. 

(3) Ibid. P. 161. 

(£) Ibid. P. 168. 

Royce’s later books, "The Philosophy of Loyalty" 
and the "Problem of Christianity" develop the idea fef 
the community as another type or level of Being. 

See "Problem of Christianity" Vol. I, Lect. IV. 
























' 




hi i 


. ■ - 










. 3 •. ' ■ 






















' ' ■ 
vta.i ■ 

. . 






36 


different form the Universal Will says: "Let each will 
I he acted out as if by one Being who combined in him¬ 
self all the other wills.” In finding myself, by 
means of the "moral insight”, I find my neighbor, and 
I cannot stop there. I reach instead the Universal, 
the Absolute, as the logical end of the process. The 
Universal Will, so reached, must be a higher positive 
unity. As mere groups of individuals with conflicting 
wills, we cannot hope to attain finality or freedom 
from conflict, for it has been made clear that finitude 
means limitation and therefore conflict. But we may 
transcend these limitations by ”the moral insight”, and 

live together united - yet possessing our individuality - 

■ 

in order to develop every form of life which brings 
men into harmony. ”And when we judge of a good action 
we must say, not that this was good because it made 
someone happy, but that it was good because it tended 
directly or remotely to realise the Universal Will.”(l) 

Up to the present in this essay, no character¬ 
isation of the content of the Absolute has been given, 

' 

nor has anything been brought forward which will do 
more than give support for a belief in the existence of 

(1) Ibid. P. £17. 

cf. "Philosophy of Loyalty”, Lecture VIII. Pp.351 to 

397. 













- 




. 

, 


. 








O ; | 

» 






37 


the Absolute. From the point of view of metaphysics, 
it was found that the hypothesis of an Absolute Unitary 
; Being was valid and indeed quite necessary, in order 
to account for a world in which were found such things 
as ideas and objects of ideas, selves, and not-selves, 
and so on. It is true that a hypothesis of a plurality 
of consciousness might have been put forth, for whom 
reality was object and to some extent also as that of 
which they themselves partook.(1) Such an hypothesis 
was put forward by the Oxford School of Personal Ideal¬ 
ists, notably by Hastings Rashdall.fE) But for 
j Royce, such a hypothesis would have been misleading and 
incomplete. It is the very essence of his system that 
Reality should be one . The outcome is the conception 
of the Universe as Absolute.Self, as the organic unity 
of all the myriads of existent partial selves. From 
the point of view of ethics, the concept of the "In¬ 
finite Will” gained a certain definition as that which 
gave final and ultimate unity to a myriad of conflicting, 

although partially unified, wills. Strictly speaking, 

■ 

we have merely justified the ontological predicate, 

The Absolute exists, as the ground for existence of 


■ (1) cf. Miss Galkins* "Persistent Problems"- P. 418. 
(2) "Personal Idealism", Ed. by Henry SI rt , Oxford# 
Paper on "Personality, Human and Divine". 

Hastings Rashdall. 








'• 

. 





. 












' 



• 





. 






' i 




r ' 


' 


' 







38 


certain other more or less interrelated existences. 

The term, Self , which has been used again and agAin, 
has no significance beyond existence and consciousness 
of existence. Now it is surely possible, nay im¬ 
perative, that further predicates of the nature and 
character of the Absolute should be given and sub¬ 
stantiated. It is also imperative that these predi¬ 
cates should be of "worth" and "value". It has been 
pointed out again and again, not only by opponents of 
an "Absolutism”, but also by upholders of such a 
theory, that the term, Self, when it is given to the 
"Absolute" must derive its significance from its hu¬ 
man content. That is to say, it must mean,funda¬ 
mentally, when it is applied to the Absolute Reality, 
what it means when it is applied to finite conscious¬ 
ness. Royce in his famous criticism of Bradley's 
theory of the Absolute, asserts that "the Absolute, 
despite all fa. Bradley's objections to the Self, 
escapes from selfhood and from all that selfhood im¬ 
plies or even transcends selfhood, only by remaining 
to the end a Self."(l) Is it a safe criterion to 
attribute to the Absolute Self all experiences and 
characters of the finite self, having in mind all the 


(1) "World and the Individual" - Supp. Essay- P. 552. 








39. 


time those qualities inconsistent with absoluteness? 

I am well aware that a Realist like Perry would say, 

"It is by no means a safe criterion*) In fact he does 
not hesitate to use the term "equivocation"to the prac¬ 
tices of the absolute Idealist, "The fundamental equivo¬ 
cation in idealism" says Perry, is its use of terms that 
ordinarily refer to characteristic forms of human con¬ 
sciousness -- such as f thotight*, *wil 1 ? , f personality», 
’spirit*. Whatever may be true of consciousness in 
genera1, the moral and religious significance of 
consciousness is bound up with those very elements which 
must be eliminated if the conception is to be employee 
as an unlimited generalisation ".(1) But why eliminated, 
if the conception is to .be valid beyond particular 
consciousness? All that the Realist asks of the Idealist 
is that he should give us those distinctive terms which h 
have most value and worth, even from a pragmatic and 
realistic point of view, and then orders him to go on 
to a definition of reality without his most important 
apparatus of definition. All of which reminds one of 
the fable of the dog and the manger. We do not want 
your terms, says the Realist, but we will not let you 


(1) Perry, 


"Present Philosophical Tendencies" 


-P.180 














■ 





40. 


ase them. Even SradLey views with suspicion the terms 
indicative of what we would call a full-blooded exper¬ 
ience of a self, when those terms are applied to the 
ultimate Reality, (l) He says quite distinctly, "In 
order to reach the idea of the absolute,our finite s 
seIves must suffer so much addition and subtraction that 
it becomes a grave question whether the result can be 
covered by the name of * Self*." May I be allowed to 
quote from a discussion of this question which the 
writer prepared three years ago? Up to the present I 
have not materially altered my Opinion as expressed 
at that time. "We are therefore prohibited from using 
even as analogy, what we find in ourselves as 1 selves* 
in our explanation of the absolute. Yet we must insist 
that Reality, if the term mean anything at all, must 
include us, even though we be "appearances". Appearances 
exist, that is certain, to deny it is nonsense, and 
whatever exists must belong to reality. What we do 
not know, on Bradley*s account, is "the way in which 
appearances can belong to Reality". Strictly speaking, 
he is correct in affirming that fall our ways of thinking 
reality as an unit are, at best, approximations 1 • But 
if his criticism of ’knowledge* is valid in respect to 


Bradley. "Appearance and Reality", Page 114 especially. 

Page 173 and appendix. 











41. 


’appearance’, the conclusion is forced on one T s mind 
that it ought to be valid in relation to Reality, for 
throughout all his discussion of Reality he is forced 
to use the term of relation and analogy, and he does 
not hesitate to use the term of negation, in the defin¬ 
ition of his absolute. It, is ’’impersonal”, and ’ un 
moral ’ and ’non-cognitive’ in our sense of the term* 

I venture the suggestion that these predicates g'ain 
meaning and significance only by analogy and reference 
to our seIves * Yet even Bradley could use a term 
’sentient experience 1 when he is compelled to speak 
positively concerning his ’absolute’. That phrase is, 
to the writer, meaningless, if it must be held in 
thought along with such an entity as the absolute con¬ 
ceived by Bradley”, (l) 

This, however, is a digression. It will 
indicate though, that the writer is quite in sympathy 
with Royce when he ventures to apply the term ’’self” 
to the ultimate Reality. A distinguished pupil of 
Prof. Royce, one whom I have frequently quoted in these 
pages. -- Miss Calkins,-- asserts, that ”it is the 
belief of the monistic personal idealist, that the two 

(1) Essay. ’’The English Absolutism” (Green and Bradley) j 
























42. 


characters, *seIfhood*, and * absoluteness* are 
compatible’] (l) On the other hand a capable meta¬ 
physician like Prof. Taylor, who acknowledges his debt 
to Royce, goes so far as to say, 11 The absolute being 
free from all internal discord, can not have a not - 
self, and therefore cannot be called a seLf." 

While recognizing the profound problem in¬ 
volved in this discussion Royce is quite clear that 
the absolute is a "self". What are the characteristics 
of a self? Among others surely these may be said to be 
essential characteristics of a self, namely, "self- 
consciousness"and related or implied processes, such 
as perception, knowing, feeling, willing, striving, 
and in addition, qualities called f moral ? , i.e. good¬ 
ness, or badness. Now Royce distinctly affirms that 
these are predicates of the absolute. For example, 
he says "Unless the absolute knows what we know when 
we endure and wait, when we love and struggle, when we 
long and suffer, the absolute in so far is less and not 
more than we are". Again he teaches that it is "a 
self-conscious person". (2) By a "person" he means 
one who "is and knows us" (3), for whom my deeds and 
life are necessary. In a fine passage, he says "In 
this sense, one can then say, the absolute unity of 

(“1) "World and the Individual." Vol II. Page 364 . 

(2) "Conception of Cod" P. 302. 

3 « .Religious Aspect of philosophy — P 4?1» 





43. 

consciousness, contains, involves, includes, not merely 


finite types of self consciousness, not merely finite 
contrasts of r self ? and Vother*, but the contrasts and 
the consciousness of its own being as, thinker , exper - 
iencer , seer , and as hove or V/ill , and all of these as 
essentially interrelated aspects of itself as unity. ”(1) 
It would be possible to go on adding quotation to quot¬ 
ation to show how Royce defines his absolute. Whatever 
critisism may ultimately be directed against his con¬ 
clusions and the worth and validity of them, it is not 
possible, I think, to criticise his ’’absolute 11 for being 
”A thin-blooded attenuated thing.” It is a stock 
criticism of an absolute Idealism, that in every case the 
result is something far removed from experience; some¬ 
thing to be spelled in capital letters and regarded as 
’’too utterly utter to utter” l (2) Royce defends himself 
at length against such a common objection, and lays it 
down as an essential factor of his entire system that it 
is only b y experience that the absolute is reached at 
all. It is that precisely which makes our experience 
real and worth while. (3) I shall reserve for the 
present the discussion of one or two questions which 


( 1 ) ’’Conception of God”. Page 301. 

(2; cf. Schiller. ’’Studies in Humanism” 

cf. ’’World and the Individual” Vol. I pages 33-&0. 

(3) See also "Philosophy of loyalty" "Conception 
of God” Page 44. 



















44 


naturally arises in such a discussion of the absolute. 

In drawing this portion of the thesis to a close, let 
it he said that Royce has given a clear-cut, definite 
interpretation of the problem of reality. ™hat has 
been established in this thesis, I trust, is 

(1) That all Reality is in the last analysis of the 
nature^a single individual or person, which differenti¬ 
ates itself into the manifold personalities and objects 
of the world as they are empirically perceived. 

(2) In the second place, the absolute ’though ab- 
| solutely organized experience’, is a person in the 

full and exact sense of the term; that he has an 
experience transcending, though not external to that 
of human selves; that he is not a society of selves, 

' nor an unknown Reality, but rather he who endows our 
finite bits of selfhood with their significance and 
worth. In the strict sense of the phrase, "In Him, 
we live and move and have our Being." 

(3) "By philosophy of religion, says Iloffding, 
"we may understand either a mode of thinking which is 

prompted by religion.or a mode of thinking which 

makes religion its object."(l) The distinction is valid 
enough as long as it is remembered that a philosophy 


(!) Hoffding. "Philosophy of Religion. Page 1. 



















45 


of religion will be a dull and arid affair if it be too 
completely separated from a religious impulse. A 
perennial question in connection with all metaphysical 
systems of Reality is "Oan we regard the ’Unity of Reality’, 
the Supreme Feing, the ’Absolutely organized Experience’ 
as the object of the highest religious emotion and 
devotion? Such a question involves many considerations, 
chief among them being the relation between the individual 
and the ’Absolutely organized Experience’ (to use Royce’s 
phrase). If the main characteristic of religious devotion 
be ’reverence’ then religious experience involves im¬ 
plicitly or explicitly the personality of the devotee 
as well as of the object of devotion or reverence. 
’’Reverence is possible between persons, but not between 
persons and things.” (1) As has already been pointed 
out, it is a specific and fundamental feature of Royce’s 
system of philosophy that the absolute be regarded as 
possessing to the full the qualities and characteristics 
of personality. Every attempt to set forth an ’absolut¬ 
ism’ encounters the Scylla on the one hand of negating the 
worth and validity of human freedom and individuality and 
on the other hand, the Charybdis of 


(1) Geo. Galloway. "Philosophy of Religion” page 491. 










46. 


neglecting the transcendent character and greatness 
of the Ultimate Reality. Again, it has been asserted 
that the absolute includes and explains all finite ex¬ 
perience; it must therefore follow that such a notable 
ahd always-present-to-finite-beings experience as the 
existence of evil must in some way or other find an 
explanation in a final analysis of the nature of the 
absolute. 

The *discussion which follows will, then, 
take the form of an examination of (1) the meaning 
of individuality (2) the question of evil and its 
solution, and (3) the possible identification of the 
metaphysical ? Unity of Reality 7 and the religious 
7 Rod 7 . 

(1) There is a peculiarly strong and ap¬ 
parently deep-seated belief that all moral vaLue is 
inseparably connected with the persistence of the 
indiw: dual thro ugh the change s inc i dental to e xi s t e nc e, 
and, -- what is more important,-- depends upon, (for 
lack of a better term) the 7 ethical freedom 7 of the 
individual. It was a fundamental defect of the 
philosophy of Spinoza, for example, that it destroyed 
human freedom, in so far as the acts of the human being 
follow of necessity frorii the nature of Rod or substance. 













■ 


, 


. 










T 





47. 

of which ho is simply a modification or expression, ( 0 
It is much easier however to say that such an)such a 
system does justice to, or violates the principle of 
individuality, than to state precisely what this 
principle of individuality really is. The task is not 
made any easier by the variety of the methods of 
estimating individuality. The difficulty is to select 
from a mass of presented evidence t hat whi ch will 
' ' 1 urti - 1 | ri • 1 ■ ( , 

Psychologists like Oalton and Thorndike talk of 
individuality in the terms of differences exhibited 
by particular examples of human beings,(2) "For 
Biology the Self is the Individual and the Individual 
is the living organism" (3) That is to say that each 
speck of protoplasm which ultimately becomes a distinct 
"thing" be it man, or plant, or animal,contains that 
which gives it its individuality. Miss Sinclair in 
her essay on’Saiiiuel Butler’ asserts that he (Samuel 
Butler a Biologist), held that what made individual¬ 
ity was acquired after birth, and was very insig¬ 
nificant compared with the inherited "capital" carried 

fl) of. Spinoza. "Ethics" part 7. Bruce "Apologetics." 
(?) Salton "Inquiries into Human Faculty" 

(3/ Thorndike. "Individuality" Page 2, 







43. 

over from the experience of the race(l). from the point 

of view of a philosophy of religion, the term "individual 

must mean not bodily or psychological differences, 

nor the existence of biological characteristics bat 

essentially, ethical worth and reality. It has been 

well expressed by Prof. Howl son.' "By spontaneous 

moral sense we doubtless believe, indeed, that we are 

each entirely real and a seat of inalienable rightsV(2) 

In another place Howison says"the dignity of the 

ethical individual demands the real variety and separate 

existence of the citizens of the ? City of God ? "• "A 

person”, says Hastings Rashdall in an essay already 

quoted, "is a conscious, permanent, self-distinguishing 

individual active being” 

The crux of the whole problem appears t lie 

in the reconoi lation of the self-dis.lfinguishiiig character 

of the individual and the a11-embracing,all-inclusive 

character of the absolute. The problem may be stated 

thus. The conception of a self (even though the 

adjective ^absolute* be attached) which in some way 

or other includes other selves is plainly an absurdity, 

for how can we argue that a self has the power to 

include other f selves* in itself?, since no amount 

of psychological or metaphysical Investigation ever 

"ClT 3 i no lair, lb i'd', Page 3 of Pages 17-18 etc. 

(2) Howison. "The City of God and the t:Vm God as its 
Head" page 1 06. Essay in "concept!. . of Godv 


















49 


shows us the only self we know of, namely, our own, 
doing it. Again, to make human selves manifestations 
of an T including self* is to make human individuality 
impossible. Let me indicate how Royce meets this very 
acute problem. At the outset Royce insists that an 
1 ethical real individual T is also a logical individual., 
that is, if the independent reality of the individual 
in question be asserted, then it must conform to the 
principles of logic prior to a c on sidera t ion o f the 
ethical character it is reputed to possess. In other 
words an ontological predicate precedes a value 
predicate, Now what is meant by the assertion of the 
reality, of the existence of an individual? neglecting 
for the moment all consideration of any peculiar char¬ 
acteristics of an individual and regarding it merely 
as a "this” or in the Aristotelian language, as a 
; f ' * ; v o / 0£ € 

how do we arrive at a determination of the ' that ? 

One a ns we r may be, Experience presents us with f! a 
segmented whole", i.e. the universe is cut up into 
segments, and that these are the "immediate" data of 
experience, ?lie empirical world contains all sorts of 


cf. Conception of Cod. Supplementaty Essay by 
^rof. Royce, Pages 220-221. 
























30 . 


segmented masses, bat it is only when we give a content 
and meaning to the segments that we have attributed 
’individuality 1 to them. How, of course, this at once 
abandons the distinction made between the existence, 
the (t hat ) ( ), and the ’ content ’ ( ~ 7 ~&/ 0 ^ r ,) 

the ( what ). In other words Indi viduality is in the last 
analysis due to "content”, i.e. the "what” of anything. 
On the other hand it may be denied that experience gives 
us, as immediate datej, a series of segments to say 
nothing of a segmented whole . What experience actually 
does give is at any particular moment, a discrete, 
separate phase, and that if the result be a series, or 
an unity having meaning, it is not due to the empirical 
presentation of sense but to the synthetic activity of 
a consciousness. Thus our problem of individuality 
in any case seems to resolve itself into "meaning" and 
"content". It is clear that we cannot hope to settle 
the question by a discussion of the spatial character 
of a thing expressed in the phrase ’the impossibility 
of two objects occupying the same point of space at 
the same instant of time’. (1) We have seen in the 
preceding section of this essay that for Boyce "meaning” 


cf. Conception of God. Page 233* Compare Taylor 
op.cit. Page 38 . 


a) 









t 






? 
























51 


and "content” are precisely the results of an activity 
called "will” and that a ” t ha t ” becomes also a * what * 
when it partially or completely expresses my purpose- 
e mbo died-in-an-idea. That is to say, "that one in¬ 
dividualizes when one feels or wills. There is nothing 
individualizing in the merely perceiving or thinking 
consciousness." (L) This means that when I discriminate 

between the particulars of sense experience, I have 
involved very complex mental x>rocesses known to 
psychology as ’ideational* and ’conceptual* processes; 
further, I have done this because I, am.somehow an 
"individual" different from the things given in sense - 
data. But how do I become an individual? It is clear 
that I have not always been conscious of the fact, for 
the distinction involved between an "individual" and 
the "things individualized" is the result of a very 
subtle and complex analysis of experience, and comes 
only with a certain degree of maturity. The problem 
has therefore changed from one of ’knowledge* (that is, 
the ultimate explanation of relation between * ideas’ 
and objects which the ideas in some way or other 
represent, and the final order or types of order in 


(l) Calkins, op. cit. Page 438. 












-5? 


reality) to the problem of Being, or the question of 
what constitutes An Individual who can individualize. 

It would take me too far afield to follow an analysis 
of the way in which an individual cones to self-con¬ 
sciousness or better still to a consciousness of his 
individuality. (1) Cur immediate question is, what 
constitutes an Individual? Royce’s position is that 
both ’thought’ and, in a wider sense, ’experience’ 
do not provide categories to define the individual.(2) 
He knows a distinction between what he cal Is a ’World 
of Appreciation’ and a World of Description. (3) Thus 
there is an empirical friend whom I have named Frank* 

I can describe him in all the categories of the 
understanding I like to use; like a piece of rock, or 
a lump of clay, he weighs so much, is made up of such 
and such a combination of elements etc. But there 
is a "real” Frank not so describable, in fact, I cannot 
describe him at all in empirical terms, in other words, 
he (the "real" Frank) is appreciated and not describ¬ 
able. (4) His thesis is "Han individuates the objects 


(1) On thisef, Royce "The World A The Individual" Vol.II. 

Chaps. 17. 7. and 71. also Studies of "Good and 
Evil" Chaps. 71 and 7III. 

(2) cf. "Conception of God". Page 269 . 

(3; of. "Spirit of Modern Philosophy". Chap.XII. 

"World and The Individual" 7ol. II. Lecture II. 

(4; cf. ’-Religious Aspect of Philosophy. Page 409-412. 









5 

of his knowledge because he is an ethical being* 

God individuates the objects of his own world and 
knows them as individuals, for no other reason", (1) 

In other words, the principle of Individuation is Will. 

I have already mentioned in this essay that 
there is an essential voluntarism involved in the 
phi15sophy of Royce.(2) Nowhere is it so emphatically 
stated as in connection with the i>rinciple of individ¬ 
uation. We sav; that so far as relation between ’object* 
and ’idea* was concerned it resolved itself in a matter 
of will-or-purpose-'fulfilled in the object of knowledge. 
It seems perfectly fair to draw the conclusion that the 
’will* or’purpose* existed before i.t became "fulfilled" 
in an empirical object‘of sense. It follows then that 
"knowing" is an assertion or an acknowledgment of 
ultimate reality in so far as it is given in the par¬ 
ticulars of sense. We do not form or create sense-data 
as such. We accept empirical sense-data as somehow 
independent of the activity of our consciousness, 
although, not, of course, of consciousness. Things 
are simply to be accepted as instrinsically momentary. 


(1) Conception of God, Page 259» 

(2) Royce Later modified the voluntarism in his 
philosophy, although It is quite clearly expressed 
in his treatment of the individual and also of 
the cognitive processes. 













4 


54. 


yet as involving in themselves a reference to something 
beyond themselves; in the last analysis to an order of 
experience which transcends our own, i.e. the 
M Abso lately organized Experience". But an acknowledg- 
ment is a passive affair; what is active in the process 
is the will-to-acknowledge certain empirical sense-data 
as embodying my meaning expressed in my ideas. If, 
now, we ask for a justification of this activity of 
volition we are told that it is ethical and ultimate 
and no "theoretical justification" for it can be given. 

It is as compelling, as underived, as is Schopenhauer f s 
n Will-to-live 11 . (1) Royce uses the word ’Love* as well 
as ’Will*, and states as his conclusion of the prin¬ 
ciple of individuation to things known, "This practical, 
this passionate, this loving ...... do gma of love, "There 

shall he no other", is, I insist, the basis of what 
later becomes the individuating principle for knowledge". 

We are still left with our problem on our hands, 
namely. How am I an individual? To say that the "Will- 
to-acknowledge" (3) to find my meaning in sense date is 

(1) "Hie Welt als Wille und Yorstellung" (The World as 

Will and Idea) cf. f World and the individual* Vol.I- 
page 434-4^3. 

(2) "Conception of God". Page 262. 

(3; This is not Royce*suterm. I have ventured to use 
it on the analogy of Schopenhauer *s term. 














ethicaL does not help me very much, for I must assert 
that this ’Will’ does not only reside in me, or, better 
still, is the essential character of myself as 
’ individual’, bat is also to be attributed to other 
individuals; my friend Frank hypothetically can 
"acknowledge M reality and find his meanings fulfilled 
in empirical sense-data, even as I can do so.(l) What 
distinguishes me from him? Here we touch the real 
ethical problem# I must be real, so must he be real. 

How is that reality constituted? Even though the ’ real’ 
Frank be not subject to the categories used in ’descrip¬ 
tion 9 he must be sufficiently distinguished (which is 
a category after all, but I can not help it) from me 
to be ethically free. The solution to the problem lies 
in a reference to an absolute self who individualizes/ 
"ihe only possible moral world is a world where various 
individuals are so free from one another, so relatively 
separate from mat 1 predetermination, ~sch has 

his own share of the Divine 11% 11, his own unique fashion 
of dete rmini ng his attitude towards the who le, while all 
are so related to one another and to the absolute that 
they do realise, when viewed altogether the unity of 


(l) cf. Conception of Cod. Page 274*5, 

















56. 

the Absolute Ideal, (l) The crux of the matter Lies in 
the fact that to be an individual being means that 
"the absolute finds in him the fulfilment of an exclusive 
interest, such as, in this individual world, nobody else 
can, or from God’s point of view, nobody else shall 
fulfil ". (2) In conclusion of this part of the 
discussion, let me summarise the^argument. Since the 
absolute is a self, he must possess the ability to 
individualize, i.e. he is able to distinguish through 
’will " and "meaning" the parts of his experience. Each 
individual represents therefore an unique part of the 
absolute. Socrates was an Individual in the sense that 
only that ideal being called the ’real* Socrates 
expressed in the meaning of his life in its fulness 
an unique purpose of the absolute and furthermore, 
could so express it. Instead, therefore, of being 
swallowed up in a "night where all cows are gray" or 
being "lost in a lion’s den to which all tracks lead 
and from which none return" my friend Frank and I and 
all other ethical individuals find the guarantee of 
our individual reality precisely hereiry that we are 

(1) "Conception of God". Page 275* c:f. The To rid and 

the Individual" Yol. II. Page 339• 

(2) Ibid. page 263. 

(Italics mine) 














} 















57 


essential and unique expressions of this absolute self, 
"You are at once an expression of the divine will, and 
by virtue of that very fact the expression here and now 
in your own life, of your own will ....... Nowhere else 

in the universe is there what here expresses itself in 
your conscious being .... nothing is vainly repeated, 

you too as individuals are unique. Therefore are you 
in action free and individual because the unity of the 
divine life .... implies in every finite being just such 

essential originality of meaning as that of which you 
are conscious," (l) 

I must no?; briefly touch on the second of the 
considerations indicated in this discussion, that of 
the problem of evil, and then pass on to the third and 
more important, namely, that of the identification of 
God and the absolute. 

Touching the problem of evil Royce’s solution 
differs very little from a great many which have been 
offered from time to time. Evil is not an "absolute" 
and ’permanent* reality. The absolute, of course, can¬ 
not be regarded as in any way evil, and the problem. 

% 

is to reconcile the postulated goodness of an absolute 


a) 


"The 17orld and the Individual" 


Pages 469 - 470 . 
































(I 















f ' ‘ . • ! .r , • . 
















with the actually-experienced evils of finite experience 
Let as be clear as to oar terms. Goodness and Badness 
are antithetical terms and as the absolute is complete 
and therefore consistent, both these term: ronot be 
applied to it. That is to say, an absolute cannot be 
bo th ’ go odd and ’bad’ . Now it is possible to reject 
. terms and make the absolute beyond ’good’ and 
’evil’, i.e. make it transcend morality all together. 
Such,we have seen,is the method adopted by Bradley. 

But this ties us up, as it were, to the prospect of a 
totality of reality which does not exhibit that most 
valuable of personal characteristics namely, goodness,(l 
i*e • essential - .ad permanent value of the highest 
order. Without following up that line of criticism, 
it might be dogmatically stated that unless the all of 
Beaiity be totally and absolutely ’’good” it is not 
worth bothering about. It is, of course, possible to 
set forth cumulative arguments showing why it must be 
an ethical hypothesis and therefore a philosophical 
hypothesis. In the last analysis, however, it is 
’felt’ rather than ’known’. Tine the problem has been 
brought before us, by the Pragmatists and the Heali-sts, 

(l) Nietzsche and the Super-men to the contrary 
n o t wi th s t an d i ng 1 





























59 


to say nothing of Nietzsche and last and perhaps least 
of all , H. G. Wells, that we have no right to postulate 
an ultimate goodness which is also now a fact. For 
example, a realist like Perry can write TT It is the prac¬ 
tical function of intelligence not to read goodness into 
the facts, hut to lay hare the facts in all their in¬ 
difference and brutality, so that action may he contrived 
to fit them to the end that goodness may prevail”.(1) 

(It is very curious that "fact^' should he TT hrutal " when 
one is desirous of establishing their indiff e ren ce and 
independence, but we will let that pass.) Again, what is 
called the "hazard of faith" is invoked to somehow warrant 
us in continuing to live in the off chance that this 
will not come to pass, namely,"that all the labours 
of the age, all the devotion, all the inspiration, all 
the noonday brightness of human genius, are destined to 
extinction in the vast death of the solar system, and 
that the whole temple of man’s achievement must in¬ 
evitably be buried beneath the debris of an universe 
of ruins".f3) The "bracing" character of the hazard is, 
of course, granted by the Idealist as well as by the 

'1) Perry "Present Philosophical Tendencies". Page 339. 

3) Russell quoted by Perry ibid. Page 346. 
cf. James "Pragmatism" Pages 96-133. 




























6o 


Pragmatist and Healist; and he, as well as they, pro¬ 
foundly-hopes that ’’religious faith has to do not only 
with the truth that there are val ues, but that they 
may prevail”, (l) Unlike them however, he finds the 
warrant for the hazard of faith in the actual con¬ 
stitution of things, especially of himself as a part 
of the universe. The new Idealist recognises that the 
old charge against an absolute Idealism,viz. that it 
provided for an absolute, completely perfect and static, 
in whom there was no progress at all, to say nothing 
of a legitimate progress and that the problem of 
’evil’ in finite experience was ’solved’ by the 
simple method of calling it an ’’illusion” and ’’unreal” 
and so forth, or at the very worst, of simply ignoring 
the problem altogether* had a degree of force end was 
in some way an objection to a theory of the absolute. 

I hope to touch upon this question subsequently in 
this essay. For the' present let it be dogmatically 
asserted that ’ goodness’ is an ultimate determination 
and that the universe, that is, the’absolutely 
organized experience’ is fundamentally good. 


(1) Ibid. Page 340 

















6i 


There was apparently no need to discuss the 
question, for Boyce nowhere doubted that in the last 
analysis * goodness’ was an essential characteristic of 
the absolute, that it formed an essential factor of the 
"what 11 of Beality. That being the case the term ’evil’ 
must disappear as a term of ultimate significance• What 
then is evil? The conventional distinction between 
"physica 1 1 i: evi 1 and ’moral» evil is maintained by Boyce . 
In harmony with his idealistic theory of Being, the 
"evil" character of events find an explanation in their 
fragmentary nature. "A finite ill is a fact of ex¬ 
perience 'whose fragmentariness makes our universal 
see reh for the 0 tb /, for rh.t lies be yond, for the 
context, explanation, and supplement of this fact, 
peculiarly pathetic and eager. In the most general 
sense of the word e vil , all finite facts ..... are 
indeed evil, precisely in so far as,when taken in 
themselves, they have no complete meaning and leave 
us ..... searching still for the other", (l) From 
our point of view,however, the question of "moral" 
evil is of most importance. Here the source is one 
of "Will" and is strictly speaking, a matter of 


(l) "The World and the Individual". Vol II. Page ^62. 
















62 . 


* selfishness 1 2 '^cr when we call the f evil * the work 
of any agent, we mean that it expresses that agentfs 
will, as he embodied -his will at some temporal moment 
of his life.” (l) This is very familiar; what is not 
so familiar is the explanation of*nature of the absolute 
as good while yet maintaining the actuality of "evil” 
i.e. "moral evil". Evil is a subordinate factor or 
element of good, which is evil in a s tate of isolation. 
Now "perfection" is only possible through conflict and 
suffering. The finite being approximates to perfection 
only in so far as in a moment of temptation "he realizes 
evil, he fights it, and at the same time realises his 
fragment of the perfect divine life in the moment itself 
of struggling with it."(2) "Thus in the moment of 
"insight" one condemns the evil that one experiences, 
and in condemning and conquering the evil it, i.e*, the 
moral insight, forms and is, together with the evil, 
the organic total that constitutes the good will'.* low. 
the absolute must recognize "evils" as such and re¬ 
cognise them as had. But the absolute is conscious of 
the had only to hate it; he recognises evil only to 


(1) Ibid. Page 3&5® 

(2) "Beligious Aspect", page 432. 

of. Spirit of Modern philosophy. Page 459® 










6 3 • 

vanquish it. The ’evil’ lies in the fact that it is 

incladed and accepted by a will; as opposed to an 

absolute Will. "The absolute will as such, was just 
what in the evil deed, in sc far a 3 it was your free 
deed, you denied at the moment of your act.” (l) how, 
just as an individual ’adds to his larger goodness’ by 
overcoming, by hating,and condemning completely the 
evil impulse; just as the good world is net innocent 
and does not ignore evil, but possesses it and still 
conquers it, so the absolute finds hin holiness in 
that hatred and condemnation of all finite rebellious 
wills, by thwarting them. "What the evil will is to the 

good aan , wh 0 se g 00 dne s 3 de p ends up on i t s e vi 3 1; e n c e , 

hut also upon the thwarting and condemnation of its 
aim, just such is the evil will to the divine will.(2) 
The moral evil then i 3 not final, "for every evil deed 
must somewhere and at some time he atoned for, by some 
other than the agent, if not hy the agent himself, and 
this atonement,this overcoming of the evil deed,will 
in the end make possible that which in the eternal 
order is directly manifest, namely, the perfection of 
the whole." (3) In conclusion therefore, goodness is 

£l) "The World and the Individual", Yol. IT. Page 3 72. 

( 2 ) Studies of good and evil. Papa 28. 

(33 '’The Wor 1 d and the Individua 1" . Yol, II. :?age 368 . 

cf, "Religious Aspect". Page 436 . and especially 
Problem of Christianity, Yol. I. Lecture Y. 















64. 


an ultimate determination of the absolute;and "moral 
evil 11 is but a factor in experience to produce a larger 
and worthier holiness. 

(3>) The task which yet remains is to indicate 
jan answer to the question of the identification of the 
!metaphysical "Absolute” with the religious "God" or the 
"God" of religion. Each is reached along different 
avenues of approach. The metaphysical "Absolute" 
appears as the crown and fulfilment of the implications 
of knowledge considered as a phase of the total life of 
consciousness, while the "God" of religion appears as the 
answer to the demands of *Emotive processes* in that 
.psychic totality. Is it possible to bridge the gap 
|and in a synthetic act unite the two? An illustration 
will serve to explain my meaning. In a recent book by 
G. H. Wells entitled "God, the Invisible King", there is 
given a popular statement of a problem of deep philosoph¬ 
ical and religious significance. The fact that it is 
rather badly done and is full of contradictions will not 
affect the usefulness of its presentation of the problem 
for my purpose. For Wells there is a God who is limited, 
circumscribed, at times rather impotent in the face of 
great stress and opposition, a God who is a glorified 
human being, plus something, — which after all is not very 













6^ 


much. Again there is an Invisible King. "A Veiled 
Being” (speLled in capitals and mealing some thing beyond 
utterance) who does not reveal himself in or to poor 
finite dust, but who is in some way or other to be 
regarded as a necessary but inscrutable and unknown 
Reality, how the one is the God of Religion, and the 
Dther may well be H the absolute” the final “Unity” etc. 

1 am not now concerned with Well’s theory of religion, 
nor with his application of certain well known and much 
talked of philosophical maxims. As I said before, Wells 
did his work very badly and the book will have at best 
an ephemeral existence and significance. The problem 
existed before and still exists. It is possible to re¬ 
gard the religious Ideal as identical with the meta¬ 
physical Ideal? 

It is, of course, a truism that there is no 
doubt, there is no problem of the existence of the 
absolute on the basis of an idealistic philosophy. If 
it (the idealistic philosophy) does not logically estab¬ 
lish the existence of an “absolute”, or a “plurality of 
selves” then it has miserably failed to do the one thing 
which Justifies its existence as a philosophy. The 
"content’ of the ’Absolute’ or the “plurality of selves”, 
Will be another question upon which it might have some- 




















* 

r 















66. 

thing to say, bat the minimum it mast do, is to show 
that an ontological predicate is rational m d necessary. 
Now Royce*s *Philosophy of the Absolute* does far more 
than thist it does in point of fact give "content" and 
a rich and fall and significant content to the concept ' 
of the Absolute. It will have been noticed that he does 
not hesitate to use the term "God" over and over again, 
especially in his address before the Philosophical 
Union of the University of California. (1) In that book 
he distinctly characterizes his view as "theistic" 
and not "pantheistic".(2) Theism is a philosophy, a 
specific system of thought about the ultimate nature 
of reality. Religion, to quote Royce, is a relation 

"a form of communion with the Master of Life." Now 

■ 

this is the question. Is the object of Religion 
most firmly established upon a Theism, which is a 
philosophy, or upon the "emotive processes" which is our 
best term for a very definite element in consciousness? 
For the present it may be said that those who profess 
to know most about the object of Religious Experience 
(which I shall hereafter call *God*) do most emphatically 



The Conception of God 
Ibid. Page 49* 













67. 


declare that their relation to Gr. d does not possess as 
its chief characteristic an intellectual or purely 
cognitive process, (l) In other words »God is not so 
much “ known " a s " f e 11 V The consideration of this and 

similar facts leads a psychologist like Leuba to 
question the objective existence and validity of the 
God of Religion. "I cannot persuade myself that divine 
personal beings, be they Christian God, or primitive 

i Gods have more than subjective existence.” (2) "Desire 
creates the Gods, but there is nothing to correspond 

I 

to the desire." Again, in the same book, Leuba states, 
"The objective existence of personal divinities or 
equivalent psychic powers is an assumption necessary 
to re li ion; but the mere belief in their existence 
is quite sufficient toaccount for the important place 
it has occupied and still occupies among the factors 
of human development." (3) How, if'this extraordinary 
statement means anything at all it means surely that 
although it cannot be demonstrated that there is an 


object of religious experience, yet a belief in the 


(l) Compare. Leuba. "A Psychological Study of Religion" 
Pages 212-229. James "Varieties of Religions 
Experience" .Leuba. Page 10. 

) Pratt "Psychology of Religions Experience". 

3; Ibid. Page 18. 



















68 


existence of one is wholly good; and I suppose must 
further mean that if it were forever and finaLly demon¬ 
strated that the hypothesis, name iy, God does not exist 
as ultimately Real " was a true statement and not to 

he rejected it would nevertheless he "good” to go on 
believing it to he not true. This is, of course, a 
big question, and to dogmatise on the one Side is just 
as easy and tempting, as it vtfas easy and tempting for 
leuba to dogmatise on the other side. Nevertheless 

I cannot believe that he has est&> lished his point. It 
is an utterly mistaken view that "God is not known, 
nor understood. He is used, -- a good deal; sometimes 
as a meat purveyor, sometimes as a moral support, 
sometimes as friend, as an object of love". I cannot 
indicate just now what are the grounds of my rejection 
of this position stated by Leuba; one thing does 
merit expression however, and that is this, a sounder 
psychology than Leuba’s supports rather than destroys 
a valid belief in the existence of a Being worthy of 
the devotion and relationship involved in the hypothesis 
of ’God * 1 . A fundamental defect in his psychology is the 
implicit exaltation of the cognitive and intellectual 
processes of -man at the expense of the ’ emotive 
processes 1 . He concludes that ’belief in the Gods of 















69. 


religion rests as a matter of fact upon induction drawn 
from the inner Life" f (L) the inner Life being defined 
variously as "being the materiaL for what is called an 
induction of the existence of a divine power" (2) and 
again "inner experience" which it is claimed, leads 
directly or through faith to a knowledge of God, without 
the mediation of science and of metaphysics".(3) As a 
result, theoLogy which deals with "God" is a branch 
of psychology, and because psychology is a science, an 
empirical science, "Then Gods of the rel igions ..... 
have the value of empirical deductions and are there¬ 
fore objects of scientific research as much as, and 

(4) 

for the same reason as, any other scientific hypothesis. 
So far, so good, but the Gods are »subjective» in 
character, their existence is not real or objective, 
they are creations of the subject to meet various needs, 
chiefly emotional, of the subject. "The reason for 
the existence of religion is not the objective truth of 
its conceptions but its biological value". (3) is it 
too great a strain upon strict impartiality of judgment 

. 

- -—.— --- 

(1) Leuba. Ibid, page 212. 

(2) Ibid. Page 233 . 

(3) Ibid. Page 273* 

(4) Harvard Theological Review. 

(3; Leuba. Psychological Study of Religion.page 33. 





























70 


to assert that precisely because the objects of religious 
faith and devotion do meet the emotional needs of man 
more than the intellectual, Leuba chooses to deny 
the ultimate existence of the Gods or God? It is 
difficult to avoid the conclusion that Leuba errs in 
assuming (as he seems to assume) that were God T estal~ 

lished clearly upon a philosophy, or a theism which 

s 

involve, predominantly cognitive and intellectual 
considerations there would be no problem of his 
ultimate objective existence. Failing this, there 
is a problem, a problem which has already been stated 
in that extraordinary quotation given above. Does it 
however follow that the intellectual processes report 
Reality as it is, and the "emotive processes” do not 
concern themselves with it all, and need not, for that 
matter? It is, in the writers opinion, a much sounder 
psychology which finds the religious experience arising 
out of the valid and legitimate element in the total 
psychic life which has received various names, i.e. 
the (l) 11 fringe of consciousness”, ”feeling processes”, 
etc. (1) Such a position enables one to note the 


(l) of. King. "Differentiation of Religious Conscious¬ 
ness. 

Pratt. Psychology of Religious Belief especially 
the chapter, The elements of psychic Life. 
BaLdwin. "Feeling and Will”. 































' 






















71 


significance of the following statement. "God is valued, 
not as an explanation of things and an assistance to 
the understanding, but rather as an immediate help in the 

practical and emotional life;. it is not so much 

his gifts as Himself that is longed for and desired by 
the deeply religious soul." (1) 

Assuming therefore the results of a long and 
intricate discussion of the elements of the psychic 
life it seems to be well established that the per¬ 
sistent belief in the *real existence » of God which 
has marked the history of religion is not founded on 
a fundamental illusion, but is,through various forms 
and in many ways, a genuine and valid apprehension 
of the heart of reality. If the religious environment 
is bound up with the history of man in such a way that 
he must act as if his ideals were val id and had a real 
reference to something greater than man himself; if, 
the religious adjustments which have been made have 
proved necessary and have been co-terninious with 
progressive stages in the advance from lower to higher 
I types of effective life then, surely, even on pragmatic 
grounds, it is pern it ted one to say that the religious 

(1) Pratt. "Psychology of Religious Be lief".Page 278 . 

















72 


i& ea l mast in some degree possess objective reality. 

If it is a fact that the religious ideal is essential 
to the highest unity and development of life, then the 
religious ileal can be no mere shadow projected by the 
imagination or any other subjective process of man, 
but it is real, i.e. it is a necessary and fundamental 
fact. 'This much surely is necessary before a philosophy 
of religion is possible. It would be grotesque in the 
extreme to attempt to have a philosophy of religion 
were that which alone gives meaning and significance 
to religious experience by some alchemy of speculation 
proved to be a pompous and gorgeous illusion. It is 
not denied that many representations of that ultimate 
| spiritual reality have been vague, incomplete f unworthy 
i and sometimes completely false. The history of religion 
is, reviewed from one point of view, a pathetic story, 

; from another point of view it is a tragedy. But we 
cannot change the course of development which has 
| already taken place and which has been achieved at 
| the cost of so much suffering.both mental and physical. 
The highest spiritual or religious experience ever 
attained is very different from those vague and 
inchoate strivings to give expression to what was 
stirring in the deep places of the being. But it may 
well be^and indeed is,regarded as a fact that the 
































73 . 


difference is not one of kind but of degree, and that 
a bond unites the far removed extremes; a bond forged 
in the fires of human experience. 

I am, of course, well aware of the fact that 
many current religious conceptions simply cannot be 
reconciled with a metaphysical doctrine of the absolute, 
nor can the T God f of many religions be identified with 
that Unity of Being to which our thinking has led us. 

If reason has led us to interpret the primal self¬ 
activity, which has been called the absolute, in terms 
of Personal Being with the living unity which that 
Being implies it would be treason to our reason to 
identify that grotesque Being who passes for God in 
many minds with that final and complete self we found 
in our search for ultimate Reality. But the * f God tf 
of the highest religious experience is nothing short 
of that ultimate Reality; for, as we have already seen, 
the absolute was described in the terms of Personality, 
of Self-Consciousness, and further, it was held to 
be a final and complete determination of Reality 
that it was good. Even Leuba makes his definition 
of religion wide enough to n find room even for the 
experiences of those who feel themselves in relation 











74. 


with an Impersonal Absolute / a mere Principle of unity 
in a world of which we are not ohly spectators but 
parts.” But he goes on to distinguish these experiences 
from others ... which have given rise to the historical 

CD 

religions by classifying them under passive religiosity.” 
The "Impersonal" Absolute would not be admitted as a 
statement of the position here adopted, but with this 
exception Leuba’s statement finds a ready response in 
the mind of the writer. If my metaphysics make it 
impossible for me to see in the God of my religion 
the ultimate Reality , He who is the condition of my 
existence and who gives validity and meaning to it , 
together with the whole of other existences, then so much 
the worse for my religion. For religion must be in 
the last analysis a rational Weltanschauung, and this 
can only be achieved by the whole integral life of man 
and not by any one phase or element.On the other hand 
my metaphysics must recognise the value wrought in 
human experience and held dear in consequence. Among 
those values are those of goodness, justice and truth 
and when these are attributed to the heart of Reality, 
whatever the name we care to give to it, it must be 


(l) Leuba. Page 34 













13 


considered that man is not merely whimsical and 
capricious in so doing, bat is,on the contrary, obeying 
the fundamental constitutive impulse of his being. 

This easay must now be brought to a close* 

May I be permitted to say in conclusion that it is, 
in the writer f s opinion, a signal mark of the value of 
Royce * s philosophy, — which has been examined in some 
of its phases, -- that it does make a sincere and 
worthy attempt to give a well-balanced and mature 
answer to some of the problems of our existence. That 
there are many difficulties still outstanding Royce 
himself would be the first to admit. It is always 
good, however, to give credit where credit is due, and 
full credit is due to Prof. Royce for his frank 
acceptance of the problems. His theory of the absolute 
is not that of a static, passionless abstract Being, 
cold and austere and impersonal in an universe where 
values are at stake. Rather must it be said of his 
absolute, as he said it of Hegel T s, -- but with far 
more Justification in the first case than in the latter,-- 
"The dust and blood of ages of humanity*s spiritual 
life are upon him; he comes before us pierced and wounded 
but triumphant, -- the Grod who has conquered contradiction 
and who is simply the total spiritual consciousness that 

















76 


expresses, embraces, unifies and enjoys the whoLe wealth 
of our human loyalty, endurance and passion.” 











