
THE BRIEF-CONTACT METHOD 
OF RORSCHACH ADMINISTRATION: - 
A VALIDATION STUDX 




(3x MBKDS 

tWWMIIS 

JUMMIIMIS 












Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/briefcontactmethOOedwa 











THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


THE BRIEF-CONTACT METHOD 
OF RORSCHACH ADMINISTRATION: 
A VALIDATION STUDY 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
BT PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIRED NTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF ARTS 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 


by 

EDlfARD ARTHUR MCKAY 


EDMONTON* ALBERTA 
APRIL* 1951 





University of Alberta 


Faculty of Arts and Science 
Department of Philosophy and Psychology 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have 
read and recommend to the School of Graduate Studies for 
acceptance^ a thesis entitled r, The Brief-Contact Method 
of Rorschach Administration: A Validation Study ”, sub¬ 
mitted by Edrrard A.rthur Mackay, B.A., in partial fulfil¬ 
ment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts. 



Dated: 










ABSTRACT 


THE BRIEF-CONTACT METHOD OF RORSCHACH ADMINISTRATION: 
A VALIDATION STUDI 


The purposes of this 'thesis are: 

1. To determine experimentally as far as possible, the degree 
of validity of the Brief-Contact Method of Rorschach adminis¬ 
tration, by a statistical comparison with a valid technique* 

2* To study the results of this experiment closely in order to 
evaluate any advantages or disadvantages that this method may 
have as compared to other methods, and 'bo what degree such 
advantages or disadvantages are present* 

A group consisting of twenty-five college students, 
eight'males and seventeen females, was used as the experimental 
group. The procedure consisted of having two examiners present 
at each administration of the Rorschach* one to conduct and 
record the test in the Brie£Contact method, and one to record 
and inquire upon the responses according to the standard (Klop- 
fer) technique. The scores yielded by the two methods were 
compared and analysed for any significant differences. From 
the results the following conclusions are drawn* 

1. The Brief-Contact method of Rorschach administration appears 
to possess a high degree’of validity on the basis of comparison 
with the standard method. This comparability, measured in terms 
of an index of correlation between the main scores on the Brief- 
Contact method and the scores yielded by the standard method 
of administration was computed to be 0.99* 

2* The main differences between the Standard method and the 
Brief-Contact method of Rorschach administration appear to be 
a relative inability on the part of the latter to elicit com¬ 
plete information regarding the use cf color in cone ep Information 
and in evoking material cf secondary importance necessary in the 
scoring of additional determinants. These differences may be 
considered to be slight and do not invalidate the Brief-Contact 
method'as far as interpretation is concerned to any significant 
degree* 

3* The Brief-Contact method appears to save considerab3e time 
in administration of the Rorschach test* This would be to the 
advantage of both examiner and subject. 

h* The Brief-Contact method, appears to be more sensitive to the 
perceptual organization of concepts than is the standard method 
of administration. 













- 









* 


- . 

• 




' * 



: 0 ' 


' 





l,. v ; . 



* 


■ 



. 










* 


* 








A(KNOT/VIEDGMENTS 


I would like to express my thanks to all 
those who have made this thesis possible, I am par¬ 
ticularly greateful to Dr, Donald Spearman of the 
Department of Psychology for his guidance and advice 
concerning both the experimental procedure and pre¬ 
sentation of the thesis* The suggestions of Dr, D, E, 
Smith and Mr, H, Sampson of the Psychology Department 
were both timely and helpful. To Dr, E. S, Keeping 
of the Department of Mathematics I extend my sincerest 
thanks for his kindly and invaluable advice regarding 
the statistical problems of the study, I wish to 
express my appreciation to those students whose cooper¬ 
ation in acting as subjects made this thesis possible, 
and who are to be highly commended for their punctuality 
and courtesy throughout the experiment. Finally, I am 
indebted to my wife who so kindly typed the manuscript* 













■ ' n 











« •» 

: *.? *' 

* ■ - 4 --" 










* 













TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Pag e 

Title Page i 

Approval Sheet ii 

Abstract iii 

Acknowledgements iv 

Table of Contents v 

List of Tables and Figures viii 

Chapter 

I. INTRODUCTION 1 

The Problem .. ..........•••••••• 1 

The Purposes of the Thesis .........3 

The Plan of the Thesis ........••••••••• 3 

II* EARLX WORKERS: RORSCHACH; VERNON; BECK; HERTZ 5 

Rorschach 1 s Method *«•«....«••.. ... 

Veraon ! s Method .. 6 

Beck*s Method ........ 7 

Hertz 1 Method .. 8 

IH.- LATER WORKERS: KLOPFER; MONS; RAPAPORT 10 

Klopfer*s Method .. 10 

Mons 1 Method .. 12 

Rapaport ! s Method ....* 12 

Discussion of the Various Methods ... 1 h 

IV* „ GROUP METHODS: HARR0WER-ER3DKS0N; BUCKLE AND 

COOK: LINDNER AND CHAPMAN 19 

Harrower-Erickson*s Method .. 20 

Buckle and Cook*s Method .. 21 

Lindner and Chapman 1 s Method **.....••••.•••* 22 

Discussion of the Group Methods .. 22 


















7 


(Vi 

Page 

V. OTHER MODIFICATIONS OF RORSCHACH ADMINISTRATION 2h 

Well* s Pointer Method ........ 2h 

Harrower-Erickson*s Multiple Choice Test ...... 2$ 

Klopfer and Sender*s Minimum Prodding Method*.. 25 

Self-Recording Method ..... 2 6 

Graphic Method *.......... 2 6 

Stainbrook*s Modified Method «.••••.•••••••.••. 26 

Weisskopf*s Shorter Method •.•••.•••••••••••••. 27 

Discussion of these Modifications and the Need 

for Inquiry .*.28 

Preliminary Discussion of the Brief-Contact Method 30 
VI* VALIDATION STUDY OF THE BRIEF-CONTACT METHOD 31 

Purposes of the Experiment ..... •••«•••«••* 31 

Experimental Criterion ................ . 31 

Experimental Subjects .... 32 

Experimental procedure .. 3h 

VII. CONTINUATION OF THE VALIDATION STUDY OF THE 

BRIEF-CONTACT METHOD 38 

Experimental Data .. 38 

Discussion of Table I ..... Ij.0 

Discussion of Table II .... U3 

Discussion of Table III .. U5 

General Discussion of the Tables (I, II, III). U6 

Statistical Analysis cf the Experimental Data. b r J 

Results .. U8 

Conclusions .. h9 

Comment .. 5l 

v 




















i 




(vii 

V 

Page 

VIII. RECOMME10ATIONS 53 

Recommendations for Further Studies 53 

Recommendations regarding Clinical Use 

of the Brief-Contact Method*,.......... 5U 

IX. THE BRIEF-CONTACT RORSCHACH: METHOD OF 

ADMINISTRATION 53 

Introduction .. 58 

Preliminaries 60 

Method of Administration* Scoring and 

Recording .. 62 

BIBLIOGRAPHY. 65 

APPENDIX .. 68 

Fosberg 1 s Instructions .. 68 

Carp and Shavzin 1 s Instructions 68 

inquiry Instructions for Harrovrer-Erickson ? s 

Group Rorschach .. 6p 

Sample Experimental Protocol 70 

Klopfer and Davidson 1 s Record Blank 73 

Sample Instruction Sheet of Group Test Used.... 76 


















F 



LIST OF TABLES AND FIGURES 


Table Page 

I, Distribution of Main Determinants .....** 39 

II* Distribution of Additional. Determinants .* 4 2 

III* Distribution of Location .... UU 

IF. Distribution of Differences for Each Subject.... bO 

Figure 

I. Comparison of the Various Individual 


Administration Methods 


18 










I 



CHAPTER I 


INTRODUCTION 

This chapter deals with the purpose and need 
of the study, and outlines the schema to be followed# 

With the publication in 1922 of the results of his exper¬ 
imental study of personality diagnosis by means of ink blots, Hermann 
Rorschach provided modern psychology and psychiatry with an extremely 
valuable diagnostic tool* Since ‘the introduction of the Rorschach 
Diagnostic Method, a considerable amount of research has been devoted 
to extending the uses and inproving the methods# These efforts have 
not been altogether in vain, and the present Rorschach technique, 
with its relatively standardized administration, refined scoring 
system, and convenient recording blank has achieved recognition as 
one of the more basic tests for use in clinical settings for person¬ 
ality diagnosis and assessment# 

However, despite the progress that has been made in the 
direction of perfecting ‘the Rorschach Method, there is still much 
to be desired# One of the main criticisms levelled at the test, 
apart from validity, reliability sad objectivity, is the length of 
time consumed in the fun administration* With subjects of high 
intelligence or compulsive personalities, this can be as much as 
five or more hours* In most cases, a test administration cf this 
length would be fatiguing to both examiner and subject and could 
easily create a negativistic attitude in the patient with regard to 
any further psychological testing* And as die Rorschach is frequent¬ 
ly used in conjunction with other tests, and preferably near the 
beginning of the test battery, it is desirable to avoid resistance- 


' 4 > 







| 





I 



* -3 


. 




0 


DC; S' ■ 





. 


0 ' ■ ■ - V :) i 


% 


f - 0 




< 


b' :.. r : . 


t 






; 


1 


- 






■■■ yyyStW 





(2 


producing situations as far. as possible* 

With this in mind, psychologists and others engaged in 
clinical work are constantly seeking ways to reduce the tune needed 
to administer a battery of tests to one patient* thus any technique 
which will shorten the time of the Rorschach administration without 
impairing the results to any significant degree would be welcomed 
by Rorschach workers* So far, the, work in this direction has been 
mainly concerned with the development of "group" administration, 
which allow several subjects to be tested with a single administra¬ 
tion* A review of these different Group Techniques and their rela¬ 
tive value in personality assessment mil be discussed later in this 
thesis, along with other shorter methods* (See Chapter V) 

While some of these group methods have proven useful in 
certain situations, the need is still felt for a shorter form of the 
individual administration, since the nature of a great deal of psycho¬ 
logical and psychiatric work is such that any method of administration 
other than individual is impractical* The recognition of this need 
led to the development of a shorter method of individual adiirmistra- 
tion in’ the Psychology Department of the University of Alberta* 

This method, called the "Brief Contact Method", differs from normal 
procedure in that the subject is provided with a pointer with which 
to outline his responses^ scoring is done immediately after each 
responses and the usual inquiry is dispensed with* This technique 
has been used for some months in the department and has been found 
to save considerable time and yet yield a seemingly satisfactory 
personality picture* Considering the successful results obtained 
in practice, but realizing that they had only been assessed by 

The method was developed by Dr* Donald Spearman of the 

Psychology Department. 









(3 


practical clinical observation, the department felt that it would 
be of value to conduct a research project designed to test the 
validity of this method* It was also considered that such a 
project should endeavor to determine not only the degree of val¬ 
idity of the Brief Contact Method, but also any advantages or 
weaknesses it might have with regard to attitudes of the subject 
to the test, scoring, and eliciting of diagnostic material* 

The purposes of this thesis are: 

1* To determine experimentally, as far as possible, the degree of 
validity of the Brief Contact Method of Rorschach administration, by 
a statistical comparison with a valid technique** 

2* To study the results of this experiment closely in order to eval¬ 
uate any advantages or disadvantages that this method may have as 
compared to other methods, and to what degree such advantages or 
disadvantages are present* 

The general plan of this thesis is as follows: 

A. A survey of the literature which is relevant to this study* 

This consists mainly of a review of the more recognized forms of 
both individual and group techniques of ad m inistration* 

B* A report on the comparison-validation study of the Brief Contact 
method, including a description of the experimental procedure, the 
subject data, the research data and their analysis* 

C* The conclusions drawn from the project* 

D* Recommendations based upon findings of the study* 

E* A detailed description of the Brief Contact Method of adminis¬ 
tration and the rationale behind it* 

* The technique used is that presented by KLopfer and Kelly in 

The Rorschach Technique - Yonkers: World Book Co* 19k2 



' . .. i. .. 

. :: ■ 





' • ' ■ ■ 










' 

* 

: • • ■ , i. ' ' 










4 
















- 





SURVEY CF THE LITERATURE PSRTDJEHT TO TIES STUDY 



CHAPTER IX 


KARIX TORKERS: RORSCHACH; VEKNONt BECK; HERTZ* 

This chapter presents a brief review of the admin¬ 
istration methods of these early workers. 

Since the introduction of the Rorschach, the adminis¬ 
tration technique has undergone a gradual evolution from the fairly 
simple and brief method used by Rorschach to the more elaborate 
techniques of the present. Tliis development has been a fairly gradual 
experimental growth characterized by various modifications which were 

considered improvements by those introducing them* Some of these mod 

* 

ifications, such as the formal inquiry procedure, gained a fiarly wide 
acceptance and are still recommended by many reputable Rorschach work¬ 
ers, while other innovations received scant attention or a rather gener¬ 
al disapproval. As this thesis is concerned primarily with the intro¬ 
duction of a new administration technique, a brief review of the more 
important early administration methods should prove helpful in providing 
a sound orientation. The different methods are pres sited in chronolog¬ 
ical order, beginning with Rorschach's technique which was the earliest. 

Rorschach's Administration Method 

Rorschach devoted many years to the development of the 
test, and first published his results in 1922. (31) Since he is the 

originator of the method, his technique provides an excellent starting 
point. 


* The administration techniques of'Oberholzer, Schneider, Levy, and 
Loosli-Usteri are also important, but unfortunately literature per¬ 
taining to their methods was not available to the writer. 









- . 

* 

■ ' - ?o ■ • * • ' ' 

. 










• 


















) \ . . 




•F- — . -J ' • • 

■ •’ j : : ■ : j 


■ • 3 







(6 


From his writings* it appears that his method of admin¬ 
istration was as follows: 

• • 

Seating Arrangement: Rorschach does not mention any specific 
arrangement for seating, but it appears that the examiner 
sat near the subject in a position'such that he could see 
the blots as the subject held them* 

Instructions: The subject was merely handed a card and 
asked, ,r FJhat might this be? ,r If the subject appeared 
suspicious of the test, a demonstration of how the blots 
were prepared was given* 

Performance Part: The subject was handed one card after 
another with the question ,f ¥hat might this be? 1 * He was 
allowed to hold the card in any position and at §ny dis¬ 
tance from his eyes within the limits cf the length of 
the extended arm* Hot only the responses but also facial 
expression, bodily movements, and any signs which might 
be significant were recorded* 

Inquiry: It appears that no inquiry into the nature of ihe 
responses was conducted* Responses were apparently located 
by either the subject or the examiner tracing the part of the 
blot utilized immediately after they were given* 


Vernon*s Method 


Vernon was one of the pioneer British workers with the 

Rorschach method* In 1933 5 he published a paper describing his 

technique of administration ( 36 ) which differs enough from the other 

early methods to warrant our attention* 

This technique is briefly as follows: 

Seating Arrangement: The examiner sits behind and to one side 
of the subject so that the blots may be seen clearly* The 
arrangement should be such that the subject feels natural and 
at ease* .Smoking is encouraged if the patient egresses a 
wish to do so* 

Instructions: These are essentially as follows: "Will you 
tell me if this suggests anything to you? tr 

Performance Part: The subject is handed the first card as 
the above instructions are given* Ho limits of any kind, are 
imposed, nor are any suggestions made that speed or quantity 






: ,■. r> r £' 




') i ' ■ 





. 






■ 




. - i 1 i&lj *3;o 


* 

: • o Lj£. • ' ;'.. : . ' 





•f. " ' .. 

> 














■ 





■ 







(7 


of responses are significant* If the subject is unresponsive, 
he may be encouraged by statements to the effect that most 
people see at least one thing* 'If the subject does not turn 
the cards' on his own initiative, ’the examiner tells him he 
may do so, in 'the hope of eliciting further re^ionses to the 
cards* AID. re^onses are recorded as nearly verbatim as 
possible* 

Inquiry: The examiner should mark any dubious responses with 
a cross during the main part of ‘the administration* After 
all ten cards have been responded to, he goes through the 
cards again and questions the subject regarding the doubtful 
responses* 

Location Procedure: The examiner should have mimeographed 
tracings of the b}.ot outlines and mark the response areas on it# 


Beck ! s Method ; 

Beck was one of the first men in .America to woik with the 
Rorschach, and since the early part of the 1930*s has made several 
contributions to the further development cf the test# In 1937* 
he published the first English manual on the Rorschach method* (2) • 
His most recent books were published in ±9hk (3* U) • Beck *s tech¬ 
nique of administration and his scoring system are both widely 
used, and he is considered one of the authorities on the Rorschach 
method* His method of administration is briefly as follows: 

Seating Arrangement: The'subject sits in front of, and with 
his back to, the examiner* 

Instructions: They are essentially as follows: f, You Trill be 
given a series of ten cards, one by one* The cards have on 
them designs made out of ink-blots. Look at each card, and 
tell the examiner what you see on each card, or anything 
that might be represented there* Look at each card as long 
as you like; only be sure to tell the examiner everything 
that you see on the card as you look at it* Whai you have 
finished Ydth a card, give it to the examiner an a sign that 
you are through with it* 11 

Performance Part: The subject is handed one card at a time, 
and his responses are recorded verbatim by the examiner* 

Beck believes in the examiner ! s taking certain measures to 
counteract under or overproductivity. In the case cf the 
former, he usually encourages the subject to hold the card 
at least two minutes before accepting a rejection* Mien 
overpreduction ensues. Beck tactfully limits the subject by 
withdrawing a card af her ten minutes* 







f 










I 




■ 




■ 







.. i,: 







> 










T ■ ' ■ 






(0 


Inquiry: After the subject has responded to all the cards. 
Beck donducts an inquiry* ' This consists of presenting the 
cards to the subject again, commencing with Card X, and 
tactfully questioning him as to just what part of the'blot 
was used, and what qualities of the blot (form, color, shad¬ 
ing,) determined the concept* Spontaneous new responses 
which are offered by the subject during this phase of ihe 
administration are recorded but not scored. Responses are 
located either by having the subject mark off the area'used 
on a special sheet upon which the blots are reproduced, or 
by using numerals to designate the more common details and 
rare details* Beck prefers the latter method because of its 
greater rapidity* 


Hertz 1 Method 


Hertz conducted a fairly extensive research program at 
the Brush Foundation in the early 1930*3, with a view to devel¬ 
oping a reliable method of administration which would be accepted 
as a standard technique for Rorschach administration. She published 
her results in a monograph in 1935 (ill-) , and the method she advo¬ 
cated is essentially as follows: 

Seating Arrangement: ' The subject sits to the side and in 
front of the examiner, so that the latter can see the cards 
also * 

Instructions: These are memorized by the examiner and given 
in a uniform manner to'aXl .-subjects as follows: n I am going 
to show you seme cards, one by one* The cards have designs 
on them made'up of inkblots. I want you to take each card 
in your hand, look at it carefully and tell me what you 
think it could be, what it looks like to you* You may hold 
the card any wsy you wish, but be sure to teH me every tiling 
that'you see in the design* Hhen you have finished with a 
card, you may give it to'me and 1*11 give you the next card* 

If you do not understand, ask me further questions* 11 

Performance Part: The subject is then shown a trial blot 
which is turned on all sides by the examiner to show that 
turning is permissable * This is followed by the remark, 

T, For example, look at this card and tell me what you think 
it could be.' What does it look like to you? ... Anything 
else? ... * does it look like anything else? 1 * Any 
answers are encouraged by such remarks as f, That*s That I 
said, too* 11 or 11 So many people say that*’* Additional instruc- 



n 


i 









(9 


tions are given subjects'who appear hesitant. "You know 
these are only ink blots.' You simply put a drop of' ink on 
a piece of paper* fold it* press the sides together* and 
you get one of these forms or designs. These blots look 
like different tilings to different people* We want to 
lcriow what they look like to you. Now what do you think 
this can be?" 

If necessary* due to further hesitation* the exam¬ 
iner adds: "There are no right or wrong to any answer to 
these blots; they are just ink blots. All I want you to tell 
me'is what they look like to you* what they make you think 
of." If the subject fails to cooperate on the trial'blot 
the test is discontinued* With cooperative subjects* the 
test proper is commenced by removing the trial blot and 
presenting card I with the words* "You have the idea* now. 

Tell me what you think this could be? What does this look 
like to you?" No limits on time or number of responses are 
used. 

Inquiry: After each card has been reacted to by the sibject* 
questions designed to elicit'information regarding the loca*- 
tion and determinant of form* color* and movement are asked. 

Hertz feels that' this immediate inquiry contributes to more 
accurate scoring* as subjects frequently forget their re¬ 
sponses and determinants if questioning is left until the end of the 
main administration. This consists cf questions like w Would this 
look like a butterfly to you if it were all black?" 

Location of the responses is facilitated by the use of 
diagrams* corresponding to the blots* which have various areas 
numbered or lettered* The examiner locates responses by re¬ 
ferring to the diagram and recording ‘the number on a recording 
sheet* Responses which cannot be located by this method are 
outlined on special tracing sheets* 



* 

. 


* 

* 

* 




. 




* 





- , 











* 















- 

‘ ).•• ■ ' i V'' 

4 

* 

























■ 
















(10 


CHAPTER III 

LATER WORK E RS: KLOPFER; HONS 3 RAPAPORT 

The previous chapter presented a discussion 
of early methods of Rorschach administration. The 
review is non* continued with the presentation of 
more recent methods. 

Despite the various modifications and improvements 
effected in the Rorschach method, the administration procedure 
is by no means standardized. Several of the leading workers in 
the field disagree on certain aspects of the technique of admin¬ 
istration, and each uses and recommends a technique which he feels 
possesses advantages over the other well-known methods. The foll¬ 
owing brief review of the administration techniques of these 
later workers is an attempt to bring into relief the characteris¬ 
tics which distinguish them from the others* The technique of 
Beck discussed in the previous chapter should be kept in mind, since 
it is still one of the more widely accepted forms of administration, 

ICLopf er ! s Method 

ICLopfer is one of the foremost figures in present 
Rorschach development* As editor of the Rorschach publications, he 
is in constant touch with most of the experimental work being done 
in this field. He has also been a major contributor to these pub¬ 
lications, and has done considerable research in an effort to im¬ 
prove and develop this test. In 19U2 he collaborated with Kelley 













' 





* ) 






' • 

• ■ ' ' : 

' 














o ■ 








, 



(11 


in publishing a training manual in Rorschach procedure vjhich has 
become one of the basic texts for students of this approach (22) * 
The technique of administration recommended by ICLopf er in this 
manual is briefly as follows: 

Seating Arrangement: This must be such that both examiner 
and subject can see the cards* Klopfer considers it better 
that the examiner sit behind the subject, but variations 
of this arrangement such as the subject sitting across or 
beside the examiner are quire in order if the subject ex¬ 
presses a preference* 

Instructions: Klopfer emphasizes the danger of the subject*s 
misunderstanding instructions, and suggests that the following 
statement is a good standard to follow: “People see all sorts 
of idlings in these ink-blot pictures ; now tell me what you 
see; what it might be to you; what it makes you think of * w 

Performance Part: The subject is handed ihe cards, one after 
the other, and his responses are recorded as nearly verbatim 
as possible* As a general rule, there is no limit to time or 
number' of responses, but in exceptional cases of overproduc¬ 
tivity, Klopfer suggests setting an arbitrary limit'to the 
number of responses per card* In the'opposite case, where 
the subjects resistance is very high, he considers it best 
to merely note when this resistance breaks down, rather than 
to use any pressure* 

Inquiry: After the subject has responded to all ten cards, 
Klopfer conducts a formal inquiry*' The subject is shown the 
cards again, beginning with Card I, and tactfully questioned 
as to just what part of the blot was used and what qualities 
of the blot determined idle concept* Klopfer believes that 
this inquiry is essential for accurate scoring and inteipre- 
tation, and also allows the subject to elaborate and supple¬ 
ment his main responses* Any new responses produced in this* 
phase of the administration are not scored as main responses, 
but as “additional” responses* Such responses are considered 
less'significant than those produced in the main part of ihe 
test* 

The first questions on the inquiry of each card are 
primarily aimed at -the location of the response* The part 
used is then roughly outlined on the location chart of a 
special recording booklet dsigned by Klopfer and Davidson** 
This chart facilitates accurate recording of the location 
of the response* 


* See Appendix, p* 75> for sample chart 






(12 


Mons 1 Method 


Mons is one of the few British Rorschach ■workers Those 
reputation and works have been recognized in America* He has pub¬ 
lished a rather concise manual on the Rorschach which has been 
read fairly widely in this country (26)* The administration pro¬ 
cedure outlined in his manual is as follows: 

Seating Arrangement: The examiner sits behind the patient 
where he can see the cards over 'the latter*s shoulder* 

Instructions: The introductory instructions recommended by 
Mons are as follows: "I am going to show you a series of 
ink-blots* They were made by dropping Indian ink on a piece 
of paper, and folding it to make some kind of pattern* I 
want you to tell me what you can see in them* You may turn 
the card' any way you like; tell me as many'things as you can 
make out, and when you cannot see any more, hand the card 
back to me*" Children should be instructed further as re¬ 
gards there being no right or wrong* "It*s' just what you 
see that I want* Anything you see is there, and anything 
you don*t see isn*t there - so there *s no prize @nd no pen¬ 
alty" * (Encouragement such as "Why not try again?" may be 
given if the patient rejects the first card owing to apparent 
disinterest*) 

Performance Part: The subject is handed the first card and 
the responses are recorded verbatim by the examiner* Encour¬ 
agement such as "Why not try again?" may be' given if the sub¬ 
ject rejects it due to apparent disinterest*' Mons does not 
mention limits of time or number of response, which might be 
set, and it appears that he allows unlimited time and pro¬ 
ductivity* 

Inquiry: This does not appear to be conducted in a formal 
manner,'but consists mainly in asking questions, after the 
sitting, pertaining to responses which the examiner considers 
somewhat vague and wishes to clarify* Mons does’not appear 
to refer to his method of locating the responses* 


Rap a port*s Method 

Considerable valuable work on the development and im¬ 
provement of diagnostic testing has been carried out at the Menninger 
Foundation by Rapaport and his associates* Owing to the accuracy 
of diagnosis demanded by the work of this institution, Rapaport has made 




. 


■ 




2 





T 




? 






' 


i 








' 










(13 


every effort to refine the various testing techniques as much as 
possible to aid in defining the personality picture obtained* 
Rapaport considers the method of Rorschach administration prac¬ 
ticed by the people at the Henninger Foundation to be superior 
to any of the current techniques* In one of his more recent 
publications he discusses the technique and its rationale at some 
length (30)* Hie administration technique is briefly as follows: 

Seating Arrangement: The patient sits across the table 
facing the examiner* This is because all other psycholog¬ 
ical tests given in the hospital are presented in this manner, 
and this precludes the patient*s attaching any special sig¬ 
nificance to the Rorschach. It also provides the examiner 
with the opportunity’to observe facial expression and move^ 
ments of 'the subject* 

Instructions: ho introductory instructions are offered; the 
subject is merely shown the first card and asked; "Tell me, 
please, what could this be? What might it be?” 

Performance Part: If on being shown the first card the sub¬ 
ject limits himself to one response, the examiner asks, n Any¬ 
thing else?” This question is repeated after each response 
in the first'blot, until the subject says that there is 
nothing else. When the subject has finished with the first 
card he is told, 11 You see how it goes; it mil be the same 
with all the rest of Hie cards. You will take your time, y6u 
will tell me everything you think "they might be or could be, 
and when you are finished tell me, and I will take the card 
away” . 

In case of a rejection of a card, the examiner should 
encourage the subject to'keep trying for at least two and 
preferably three minutes* In cases of rejection, it is ad¬ 
visable to encotirage the subject by repeating the instructions 
in varying'ways, such as ,r What could it be?”, ”lhat does it 
resemble?”, etc. 

Inquiry: The inquiry procedure practiced by Rapaport is some¬ 
what different than the usual method. Instead of waiting until 
all ten cards have been interpreted in the main by the subject, 
the inquiry is done immediately after each card is finished. 

It is done with the ink blot out of the subjects sight unless 
it proves necessary to show him the card again. This “blind¬ 
folded” inquiry necessitates the subjects relying upon his 
images of the ink blots and only the determinants which were 
the most'important in actually determining the response will be 
elicited. Only responses where it is absolutely necessary to 






r 






















t 



- '■ 






T 











obtain more information to clarify the scoring are inquired 
upon* 

Rapaport recommends scoring immediately the response 
has been recorded. This procedure provides a more concise 
indication of just what responses "should be inquired upon, 
and in what respect* 

Discussion ; 

As one may observe from the above, (see Figure I, p.18) 
each of the modes of administration which has been reviewed differs 
to some extent from the others* The general trend of development 
since the time of Rorschach appears to be in the direction of fuller 
and more specific instructions and more formal and direct inquiry 
procedures* Various workers such as Hertz (17) , Beck (3) and 
Klopfer (22), have emphasized the importance of proper administra¬ 
tion procedure and the care which should be exercised in all phases 
of this procedure, Benjamin and Ebaugh (5) conclude from a study of 
the diagnostic validity of the Rorschach that, ft An inadequate admin¬ 
istration markedly increases the difficulties of interpretation and 
lowers both the quantitative validity and the qualitative value of 
the test*” 1 Inadequate* in this statement presumably refers to the 
failure of 'the administration to obtain sufficient information re¬ 
garding Incation, determinants, and content of tee responses to 
allow for accurate interpretation* Despite this rather general 
agreement concerning the importance of administration no one method 
of administration has been accepted as a standard technique, and as 
can be seen from the foregoing review, each of the techniques dis¬ 
cussed differs from the others in various aspects, particularly 
in the instruction and tee inquiry procedures* Each technique, how¬ 
ever, apparently has been successfully used by the respective people. 



* 


* 

, 

< 

■ 

■ ■ 

' 

1 ■ r.'. L ;. ‘ - • • • , ' 

- 



* ■ 





* 



• - 


' 


; ' ■ 

' 

r * 






• 

.:. • ft 









all of whom are held in esteem as Rorschach -workers* This -would 
suggest that the actual method of administering the test is not 
quite as important as these Rorschach workers seem to believe, 
so long as adequate information regarding the location, deter¬ 
minants, and content of the responses is obtained* 

Some experimental evidence for this suggestion is pro¬ 
vided by the results of a study conducted by Fosberg (10) • This 
study was designed to determine to what extent various sets of 
instructions actually did influence the reliability of the Ror¬ 
schach diagnostic technique. In his project, Fosberg used four 
different sets of instructions in four separate administrations 
of the Rorschach to the same subjects* The instructions were 
printed on a five by eight inch card and read silently by the 
subject while being read aloud by the examiner* The essence 
of these various instructions was as follows:’" 

1) The standard instructions recommended by Beck; 

2) The subject was encouraged ‘bo make the best possible Impression; 

3) The subject was encouraged to make the worst possible impression 
U) Tlie subject was asked to look for specific things* 

The time interval between these different administra¬ 
tions varied from one-half hour to seven days* The data were anal¬ 
ysed by means of the Chi-square technique* The results showed that 
the psychogram for all four administrations was n recognizably” the 
same* From these results and their analysis, Fosberg concluded that 


* See Appendix, page 68, for the complete instructions* 










■ 

■ 


• 


1 

■ 







. 

■ 4. ■ 

■ 

4 


*' . ’ ' - - r 1 

- ' : ■ 

' r v’ ' ' 















(16 


the Rorschach responses are not significantly influenced by the 
subjective attitude of "die person talcing the test, but reveals 
the more permanent personality picture despite the method of 
administration* He also concluded that the best impress ion on 
the Rorschach was only possible when the subject endeavored to 
n be natural"* This would suggest that the best administration 



and naturally with as few restrictions on his flow of expression 
as possible* 

In a later study (11) , Fosberg used three experimental 
groups; a control group of 26 subjects, a main group of $0 subjects, 
and a special group of 16 subjects* The main group was given the 
Rorschach on three different occasions, using the first three sets 
of instructions described above, on the three consecutive sittings* 

The fourth method of administration, in which the subject is asked 
to look for certain things, was given to the special experimental 
group* From a statistical analysis of the results, Fosberg con¬ 
cluded that the reliability of the test was high, and that it could 
not be "faked”* 

Evidence which tends to contradict Fosberg 1 s findings is 
found in the results of a study conducted by Carp and Shavzin (7)* 

This experiment consisted cf administering the Rorschach twice to 
twenty male psychology students* Instructions 'bo make a "good 
impression" were given half the subjects on the first testing, and 
at the next sitting three weeks later, the same subjects ’were instruc¬ 
ted to make a "bad irpression", * The instructions were reversed in 
order for the other ten subjects* 

-x- For full instructions, see Appendix, page 68 































(17 


A test comparison of each category in the two tests 
indicated no group differences * but shared clear variations in 
the individual records* From the resalts the authors conclude 
that the Rorschach can be manipulated by, some subjects and that 
these subjects can falsify their personality picture to some 
extent when instructed to do so* 

From the conflicting evidence of these three experi¬ 
ments, and from the review of the literature on administration, it 
would appear reasonable to conclude that, while caution should be 
exercised, a considerable amount of flexibility in the administra¬ 
tion is permissable * That this care should be directed towards 
assisting the subject in reacting to the test in as genuine and 
natural a manner as possible is rather clearly indicated by the 
experimental work, as well as by the clinical experience of various 
workers* Among the factors which would be helpful in effecting 
a relaxed natural type of expression in the subject would be the 
establishment of good rapport between examiner and subject, comfort¬ 
able surroundings, and a rapid technique of transcribing the responses* 
The latter 'would help facilitate a smooth, relatively uninterrupted 
flaw of spontaneous expression by the subject. 




f 0 ■ l : - ' 0 ■ . 5 qj t ) 


) 



1 


0 


;‘j < 



i 


+ 






A schematic presentation of the important 
features of: each individual administration. 


E - examiner 


3 - subject 



(18 











Rorschach 

Vernon 

Beck 

Hertz 

Klopfer 

M 

bns 

Rapaport 

B-C Method 

Seating 

Arrangement 

--- 

E beside S 

E sits behind 
and to one side 

S sits in front 
of with back to E 

S sits in front 
of arjd^to side 

E sits behind S 
Variation^er- 

E sits 

behind S 

S sits a cross 
from an| facing 

E behind and to 
one side ofS 

Instructions 

Very brief 

Very brief 

Standard instruc¬ 
tions 

Very detailed 

Standard instruc¬ 
tions 

Fairly 
■ mentio 
card m 

standard, 
ns that 
lay be tur- 
ied 

Very brief 

. 

Fairly standard 
Introduces S to 
use of poin¬ 
ter. 

Performance 

Part 

S handed one card 
after another 
with question, 
”What might this 
be?” No limits 
on time or pro¬ 
ductivity. 

S handed one 
card at a time. 
No limits on 
time or produc¬ 
tivity. E in¬ 
structs S to tur: 
cards if latter 
does not do so 
on his own ini¬ 
tiative. S en¬ 
couraged to see 
at legion. 

S handed one card 
at a time. Re¬ 
sponses recorded 
verbatim. Mea¬ 
sures taken by E 
n to control pro¬ 
ductivity. Time 
limit of ten min¬ 
utes per card. 

S shown trial 
blot, which is 
turned on all 
sides by E. Ten 
regular cards t 
then shown. No 
limits on time 
or productivity. 

No variations or 
limits. 

Unlimited time 
and prpductivi- 
ty. Some en¬ 
couragement givei 
in cases of 
paucity. 

J 

No time limits, 
but in case of 
rejection, S 
i encouraged to 
try for three 
minutes. Verbal 
encouragement 
also in this 
case. Scoring 
done immediate¬ 
ly* 

No limits on 
!time or pro¬ 
ductivity. S 
given pointer 
with which to 
outline his 
responses. 

Inquiry 

Y -—- 

No formal in¬ 
quiry. Responses 
located immediat¬ 
ely after they 
are given. 

After main part 
of test, E in- 
• quires upon any 
dubious re¬ 
sponses. 

Formal inquiry 
after ten cards 
reacted to. Com¬ 
mence with Card 
X. Questions re 
location and de¬ 
terminants. New 
responses are 
not scored. 

Inquiry after 
each card as to 
location and de¬ 
terminants. 

Fur ther inquiry 
after main part 
of test. 

Formal inquiry 
conducted after 
all ten cards 
responded to. 

Inforn 

after 

cards 

respor 

Only v 

sponse 

upon. 

lal inquiry 
all ten 
have been 
ided to. 
ague re¬ 
ts inquired 

Informal, inquir; 
Conducted after 
each card. Blotj 
kept out of S's 
sight in most 
cases during in* 
quiry. Inquire' 
only when ab¬ 
solutely neces¬ 
sary. 

y. No inquiry 
conducted 

3 after all ten 
cards. S mere¬ 
ly challenged 
- by being 
asked to out¬ 
line response 
with pointer. 

Location 

Procedure 

Responses 
traced by either 
S or E. 

i 

E marks off re¬ 
sponses on mim¬ 
eographed tra¬ 
cings. 

Either by mark¬ 
ing on locat ion : 
chart or desig¬ 
nating by numer¬ 
als. 

Numbering sys¬ 
tem. Tracing 
used for diffi¬ 
cult ones. 

Responses marked 
off on special 
record blank. 

Not me 

ntioned. Not mentioned. Location 

scored immed¬ 
iately. Loca¬ 
tion chart 
may be used 
if desired. 










































































Oj'1 < 

* 

• - 






— r 




' 

_ 




- • 

- 


' 

• ■ ': .. 





















(19 


CHAPTER IV 

GROUP METHODS: HAKRG/TER-SRICKSON; BUCKLE AMD COOK 5 
IIHDWER AND CHAPMAN 

Heretofore individual methods'of Rorschach 
administration have been discussed. This chapter 
deals with some of the more important group meth¬ 
ods which are pertinent to this study. 

As interest and knowledge of 'the Rorschach method grew 

\ 

in America, with concomitant appreciation of its value and poten¬ 
tialities, the demand for its services was greatly accelerated. 

However, owing to the training and skill required to administer 
and interpret the test, the number of competent Rorschach wo rkers 
was too small to meet this demand vrith an broad-scale degree of 
adequacy. With the advent of World War II, the need for tools to 
assist in the tasks of screening and classification of military 
personnel increased the consideration of the possibilities of the 
Rorschach. Consequently, the need for some quick and efficient 
method of administration became imperative. As a possibility, 
research led to the development of a method by Y/hich one examiner 
could administer the Rorschach test to a group of subjects at one 
sitting. Tiie first such large-scale technique which proved success¬ 
ful was developed by narrower-Erickson and her associates, who pub¬ 
lished their collected works in book form in ±9h$ (13)* Since then 
other group methods have been developed which have proven to be 
reasonably successful as devices for screening and selection procedures* 
One of the greatest problems facing those workers engaged 
in devising a satisfactory technique for group application was the 
developing of some means of eliciting the information vdiich is 


■ 












(20 


normally gained by means of a personal inquiry# Several tech¬ 
niques were designed by the various workers in answer to this 
problem, and since the question of inquiry procedure is partic¬ 
ularly relevant to this thesis, this chapter is concerned with 
a review of these group techniques and their methods of inquiry# 


Harrower-Erickson* s Group Administration Method 

Harrovrer-Erickson, in collaboration with Steiner, devel¬ 
oped one of the first successful group techniques# This technique 
has become fairly well known and considerable research has been 
carried out frith it# A full discussion of its development is con¬ 
tained in a book published by these two workers in 19k5 (13) • The 
essential features of the technique are as follows: 

Seating Arrangement: The subjects are seated in an auditorium 
in such a manner that each has an uninterrupted and undistorted 
view of the screen# The number of subjects is limited only by 
the size of the auditorium# 

Instructions: No set formula is followed, but a statement some¬ 
what like the following is recommended: "The test which you are 
about to'take is rather an interesting one and I think you will 
enjoy it# All you have to do is look at some slides which will 
be projected on the screen and write dawn what you see* Not 
the point about these alides is that'they are nothing more or 
less than reproductions of ink blots# Probably all of you at 
one time or another have shaken your pen on a piece of paper, 
caused a blot of ink, and on folding the paper, produced a 
weird splotch which 'may or may not have resembled wamething 
that you recognized* Not these slides are nothing more than 
reproductions of ink blots formed this way. Your task is singly 
to write'down what these splotches ronind you of, resemble, or 
might be* You will see each cf these slides or blots for three 
minutes and you may write your answers at your own time* Is 
that understood? It may help you later in the test if you make 
a point of numbering your answers to each slide as you write 
them down# 11 

After these instructions, the booklets are then distributed. 

Performance Part: Slides of the ten Rorschach cards are projected 
on a screen approximately five feet by six feet for three minutes 
in the upright position* The subjects write down their responses 
in a specially prepared booklet wMck provides one page for each 
slide* 



































Inquiry: The subjects are given very full and complete instruc¬ 
tions as to the locating and amplifying of their responses** 

Tito types of booklets have been developed by Harrower-Erickson 
for the purpose of obtaining added information about the re¬ 
sponses. In the first type, a reproduction of the blots is 
on the left hand side of the answer'sheets, and above these 
reproductions are printed the words, "Shape", ”Color”, "Move¬ 
ment”, and "Texture”. The subject is asked to put "The num¬ 
ber of the answer under the headings which are pertinent*” 

In the other type of booklet, the diagram is presorted with¬ 
out words above, and the subjects are merely asked to "amplify 
their answers to any extent they wish”* 


Buckle an d Copies Group Method 

These men are Australian workers -who have done consid¬ 
erable research, individually and together, in an effort to develop 
a better technique of group administration* They began this work 
about the same time as Harrower-Erickson, and first published their 
method in 19l|3 (6) * 


Seating Arrangement: The subjects are seated 15-30 feet from 
the screen with no subject more than 28 degrees from the line 
of projection* 

Instructions: Hie instructions closely follow those given by 
Ivlopfer (see page 11) for the individual administration* 

Performance Part: Ten slides of the Rorschach blots are pro¬ 
jected in an upright position on a silver screen far approxi¬ 
mately two minutes. Hie time allowed can be adjusted according 
to the group* As the cards are projected tie subject is asked 
to write his responses on paper which is provided* He is also 
asked to write which card he likes best and which least, and 
to give reasons for these likes or dislikes* 

Inquiry: After the performance part is completed, charts with 
photographic reproductions of the blots are distributed and 
the subjects are asked to locate their'responses on the cards. 
There is no inquiry as to determinants, as the authors feel 
an accurate location chart supported by brief comments on card 
preferences is sufficient for accurate scoring* 


# See Appendix, page 69, for full instructions 







t 



15 








I 


i 









0 


■ 






















(22 


Lindner and Chapman f s Group Method 

These two -workers developed a group technique which 
was designed as a preliminary screening procedure for admissions 
into Federal Penal and Correctional Institutions (21;) • The nature 
of their problem made the use of already developed group methods 
such as Harrower-Erickson 1 s unsatisfactory and necessitated the 
following modifications of technique in order to cope with the 
problems they faced* 

Seating Arrangement: The seats are in a semi-circle with the 
front row at least 12 feet from the screen, and the back row 
not more than 2h feet away. The room is darkened on the 
screen side and the seats are alternated so as to provide 
uninterrupted vision* Illumination is provided by the ’ screen 
and blinds may be raised if further light is necessary. 

Instructions: 'These are not presented verbatim in the report 
on this method, but the authors emphasize that they were nec¬ 
essarily brief and concise to avoid boredom or'misunderstand¬ 
ing on the part of the subjects, A trial blot, called an 
"orientation blot” by Lindner and Chapman was projected on 
the screen while the instructions were being given. 

Performance Part: The ten slides are projected on a flat, 
smooth white wall so as to provide a four foot by six foot 
image. The slides are rotated, so that each of the four 
views are presented, with the upright view being shown for 
one minute, and the ether three views for one-half minute. 

This bringstthe total time for each blot to two and one-half 
minutes. 

Inquiry: After all slides have been shown, special booklets 
containing black-and-white photographs of the blots are dis¬ 
tributed, The subjects are instructed hew to indicate the 
location of their responses. Originally, Lindner and Chap¬ 
man had the subjects hand their "booklets in to the exper¬ 
imenters who looked over the records and asked pointed 
questions about certain responses. This "tutorial” inquiry 
is defended on the grounds that it was necessary far the 
subjects being tested. The authors suggest that a "minimal 
inquiry technique” such as Hertaman*s offers greater possi¬ 
bilities than narrower 1 s method. 

Discussion 


As a screening device, the group Rorschach appears to 
have proven itself. The different methods mentioned all satisfied 





1 
















(23 


those working with them that they were adequate instruments far 
screening purposes, and the time saved in testing large numbers 
of subjects seems to justify their continued use in this capacity* 
Hertz undertook to test experimentally the validity cf the Harrower- 
Erickson group technique (16) * Seventy-three college girls were 
tested by both the individual and group methods, and the results 
were found to be fairly indicative. Hertz concluded that tins pro¬ 
cedure was satisfactory for screening purposes, but was a compara¬ 
tively crude measure cf personality as compared to the individual 
administration* Hertzman in a similar study of one hundred sub¬ 
jects found "rather small differences between the two tests when 
all the factors are considered" (18)* 

Despite the fact that different administration techn- 
niques are utilized in the several group Rorschachs discussed 
in this chapter, good results are evidently obtained by them all* 
This substantiates the view expressed in Chapter II, concerning the 
variations in administration of the individual Rorschach, that con¬ 
siderable flexibility is permissable in the method of administering 
the test, providing it obtains the information essaitial to an 
adequate interpretation. The review of these group techniques 
indicates that the necessary informatioh can be obtained if the 
subjects are clearly instructed, provided with some means of indi¬ 
cating the location of their responses, and encouraged in some 
manner 'bo express any additional information relating to the blots. 





t 



■ 


'i o jr:..; ./ ,. rt ' k:&1 : 















CHAPTER V 


OTHER MODIFICATIONS OF RORSCHACH ADMINISTRATION 

The last three chapters have dealt with the more impor¬ 
tant Rorschach administration techniques, both individual ' 
and group* This chapter briefly reviews some modifications, 
relevant to this study, of both individual and group'methods 
which have been designed to meet specific situations, or as 
minor improvements on existing administration tec|minues* 

Other modifications of the Rorschach have been institu¬ 
ted by various workers, which are considered to be of advantage in 
certain situations* Some variations, such as Ross ? s use of half¬ 
scores (32), or Monro*s !, Inspection Technique” (27) are concerned 
with the scoring and interpretive aspects of the test* The interest 
here, however, is focused on modifications of administration, and 
this chapter is designed to provide a quick coverage cf the more 
relevant modifications of administration technique, in an effort to 
supplement the variations of the main forms of administration 
which have already been described* It must be remembered that the 
techniques of inquiry are of particular interest in this study* 
Well ! s Pointer Method 

The practice of providing the subject with a pointer 
with which to outline his concepts was first mmtioned by Wells 
in connection with the Rorschach test in 193? (38)* Wells, using 
an alternate series of blots, gave the subject a small pointer 
with which to outline what he saw, and instructions to n show what 
makes it so n * Wells claimed that this technique minimized soiling 
of the blots, and tf simplified the classification of responses, at 
n° apparent sacrifice of smoothness or interpretive value 11 * He 
apparently never developed this technique beyond the ad hoc stage, 
and new considers it to have a limited and casual application (39) • 











• ' "1 






, 





















Harrower-Erickson 1 s Multiple Choice Test 

Tliis method was developed by Harrower-Erickson about 
the same time as her group method (see page 20 of this thesis) • 

It was designed primarily for screening purposes and a complete 
description of the test* accompanied by considerable research 
data, is provided in her manual (13) • The test consists briefly 
of projecting slides, as in normal group procedure, for thirty 
seconds and instructing the subject to place numbers opposite a 
prepared list of suggested replies* These replies are marked by 
preference of the subject. This test may also be given individ¬ 
ually either by having the subject tell the examiner his choices 
or by handing him the ink blots and letting him mark the blank by 
himself. 

Several workers, Challman (8), Malamud (2p), and Bal- 
insky (1) , have carried out studies to test the suitability of this 
method for screening purposes. The results on the whole suggest 
that it is unsuitable as a screening device, but it appears that the 
scoring system is mainly responsible for tliis, and no mention is 
made in the reports as to the validity of the administration tech¬ 
nique itself. Somewhat the same results were obtained by Eysenck 
in a similar study (9) • 

Klopfer and Sender*s lini mum Prodding M ethod 

A technique somewhat like the above, but a little more 
direct, was developed by Klopfer and Sender (33) * This technique 
asks not only for location of the responses and any additional 
information pertaining to them, but also gives selected examples 
for the use of the various determinants (movement, color, shading) , 










1 







t 








: ‘ 










Se lf-Recordi ng Method 


(26 


A technique which has been found time-saving and 
fairly useful diagnostically by St, Glair involves the subjects 
writing his own responses (35) , The cards are placed in front of 
the subject at an angle of 1*5 degrees for two minutes in the upright 
position. The subject writes his arm responses and marks off the 
location on a special chart. After the completion of the main part 
of the test. Card VIII is used to illustrate hair the responses can 
be described in answer to the questions "how?" and "why?", 

A similar technique has been developed by Munro (28), 

Hie main differences in her technique from the above are the absence 
of a time limit, and the allowing of the cards to be turned* 

Graphic Method 

Rochlin, Levine, and Grassi have developed a modifica¬ 
tion of the Rorschach whi.ch they refer -to as the "Graphic Technique" 
(23), Briefly, this consists of having the subject graphically rep¬ 
resent his verbal responses on the Rorschach by cqiying the object 
seen. The subject is instructed to modifijzr the blot by omission or 
addition of detail as he sees fit. The aim of this technique is to 
provide a graphic representation of the subjects concept which can 
be studied and interpreted in terms of the emphasis given to the 
various areas and aspects of the blot* 

Stainbr ook * s Modified Method 

Stainbrook has used a modified technique in a study of 
post-electro-convulsive transitory states (31*) • In cases of gener¬ 
alized convulsion, the cards were divided into three groups: I, II, III; 
XV, V, VI; and VII, VIII, IX, X* Hie first group was presented to the 






f 






.■ 




' 




■ i 

















(27 


patient on the first day, as soon as he could, respond, and then 
presented again every five minutes for the first hour after con¬ 
vulsion. Responses for each five-minute period were recorded. On 
the second day, the second group was presented in a like manner, 
and the third group on the third day* The responses were then 
assembled into a composite Rorschach record for each five-minute 
period. 

In certain cases of sub-convulsive electroshock and 
major convulsions, only cards III, V, and VIII were presented. The 
aim was to determine the variation in emphasis and distribution of 
determinants after both major and minor reactions to diode. The 
movement provoking qualities of Card III, the popular form frequency 
of Card V, and the color and detail of Card VIII determined the 
selection of these cards for this purpose, Stainbrook found that 
the composite Rorschach records obtained corresponded “very closely 11 
to the standard ones* 

Weisskopf*s Shorter Method 

Weisskopf conducted an interesting e:qpe riment in an 
effort to determine the effects of “hurry 11 on Rorschach results (37) * 
Ten subjects were given the Rorschach twice, once under standard 
conditions with no time limit, and once with a limit of only ten 
seconds per card, Hie results showed considerable discrepancy 
between the two records obtained for each subject. This suggested 
to Weisskopf that possibly the shorter method revealed a “deeper 11 
layer of personality, and tended to eliminate the more superficial 
aspects of the individual* Another possibility was that the short 
technique revealed the subject *s reactions while under “pressure 11 . 






.. ; ■ ■ n" ' 


> > . 


* 1 • ’ .. 





. 

. . r ' ..i\ • •- :■ v*/ • : ' ‘ : : • . •' ~; ' >' 

' ■ 1 : , . ' ' • > 

- ■ 'r ' ’ ' : , 

. 


- - . ■ 



* . ' ' •' : ‘ ' 

' 1 



(28 


Due to the small group cff subjects tested, Weisskopf refrained 
from drawing any definite conclusions but felt that this short 
method of the Rorschach should be given further study and con¬ 
sideration* 

Discussion 

The inclusion of the techniques discussed in this 
chapter was intended to further illustrate the flexibility which 
is permissable in administration of the Rorschach* While some of 
them may be limited in applicability, nevertheless they still proved 
to be reasonably adequate in obtaining records which compared 
favorably with those evoked by standard methods of Rorschach ad¬ 
ministration* This adds further strength to the point suggested 
in Ghapter III, namely, that the essential feature necessary for 
a valid administration is the ability to obtain material regarding 
location, content, and determinants of the responses* 

Moreover, specifically, a main propose cf this review 
of literature was to show the Tide variation in inquiry procedures* 
In individual administrations this ranges from a very brief form 
such as that used by Rorschach and Wells, to a rather full, and 
pointed questioning as practised by Hertz; and in group methods, 
the range is from Harrower-Erickson 1 s checking system to Buckle and 
Cook ! s practice of relying solely on location* 

The question thus arises as to what extent an inquiry 
is actually necessary* Hertz states, n Experience with group records 
impresses one at once with the need for some form of systematic 
inquiry in the interest of reliability and validity, at the time of 
examination 11 (1?) • This view is shared by Klopf er and Beck, both 
















' • ■ ' -'C'-.' ' j 














(29 


of whom recommend a, formal inquiry after completion of the 
performance part of the test* On the other hand. Buckle and 
Cook feel such formal inquiries are unnecessary, and obtain 
sufficient information from the main responses* Sender, in a 
study of different inquiry methods with the Group Rorschach, 
scored the records obtained twice* Ihe first scoring was on the 
basis of the performance only, and the second scoring was on the 
basis of the performance plus the additional information of the 
inquiry* She found "a close correspondence” between the two scoring^ 
and felt that it spoke well for the consistency of the Rorschach (33)* 

There is also the point raised by Wells in reference to 
Beck 1 s practice of conducting a full inquiry after the performance 
part (38 ); 11 This procedure, while time-consuming works smoothly 
enough, but one hardly need be reminded cf the suggestion and retro¬ 
spections to which it is exposed*” The danger of influencing the 
subject by leading questions is fully realized by most workers, and 
extreme caution in inquiring upon responses is a It ays emphasized* 

This is particularly true with some examiners* Rapaport stresses 
the importance of keeping the inquiry' to a bare minimum (30) * He 
offers three main reasons for his stand* First, it helps eliminate 
chances of secondary elaboration and contamination cf the main re¬ 
sponses by the subject* Secondly, it does not create the feeling 
that each and every response will be questioned* Thirdly, it saves 
time* 

In the final, analysis, the question of the form and 
extent of inquiry which should be conducted appears to be highly 
controversial, both for group methods and individual administrations* 




;■ ' 






, r 










• - 


* " ' : 




?. .. v 






' 


' 






■ 

■' A 











(30 


This creates the impression 'that the inquiry technique, like that 
of the main administration of the test, is a fiarly flexible pro¬ 
cedure and as yet quite unstandardi 2 ed, However, from the point of 
view of saving time, the minimum type of inquiry such as that recom¬ 
mended by Rapaport appears to be the most reasonable. 

The Brief-Cont a ct Metho d (B-C-R) 

■While it may be more reasonable as far as sequence is 
concerned to include at this point a discussion of the Brief-Contact 
Method in its original form, for practical reasons this has been 
postponed. It was felt that a more complete and clinically useful 
presentation of the B-C-R might be made following the study of it. 
Also, a discussion of rationale might be then included. For these 
reasons the B-C-R in full presentation has been inserted at the end 
of the thesis, (Chapter IX, page 58) , Reference to the method used 
in this study is made in the next chapter (VI) under the section 
entitled n Experimental Procedure 11 , This should suffice for the 
present. 








* 









\ > 












♦ 

: - ' 

A 

* 
















(31 


CHAPTER VI 

VALIDATION STUB! OF THE BRIEF-CONTACT METHOD 

Hie previous chapters have dealt with the liter¬ 
ature relevant to this study* The experiment now pre¬ 
sented is designed to test the validity of the Brief- 
Contact Method by comparing it with the standard method. 

This chapter includes a discussion of the purposes of 
the experiment, the criterion of comparison, the sub¬ 
ject data, and the experimental procedure. 

Purposes of the Experiment 

As stated before (chapter I) , the purposes of this 
experiment are: 

1. To determine, as closely as possible, the degree of validity 
of the Brief-Contact Method of Rorschach administration* 

2* To study the results of this experiment closely, in order to 
detect any differences between the two administration methods, 
and, if such differences exist, to evaluate them as to their 
significance, either positive or negative. 

Experimental Criterion 

Hie criterion selected for this comparison was Klopfer 1 s 
method of administration (22)* While it is fully appreciated that 
the most desirable method would be to correlate the personality 
diagnoses obtained by the Brief-Contact method with psychiatric 
diagnoses, such opportunities were not available* It was therefore 
deemed reasonable to use as a criterion some administration tech¬ 
nique which had been validated by extensive clinical application* 
Owing to the widespread use of the Klopf er technique for a number of 









* 





'* 




















e. 

-.1 :> . s ‘ ;/ r, ' f r-- p 


: 5 aiy r . ':: ' yyi - ■> ' 


Jvy " : . : \ 

1 ' • ■ ■ . '' . 












: ' ; 






(32 


years, it appeared to be a sound criterion. This comparison 
is made on the basis of 'the main scores for determinants and 
location. 

Experiment a l Subjects 

The experimental group consisted of twenty-five college 
students, eight males and seventeen females# The age range was 
from eighteen years to twenty-six years, with a mean age for the 
group of 20#U years# Twenty-three of the students were members 
of a senior psychology course at this university,*while the other 
two were students of other faculties who requested 'bo be included 
in the experimental group# 

The selection of this group as subjects for the experi¬ 
ment, offered four' main advantages: 

1# It was convenient to use subjects who found the time and place 
of the experiment fairly compatible with their routine# 

2* It was felt that college students, because of their reasonably 
high intelligence, would offer a great number of original and 
rich responses, which would provide a fair test of the Brief- 
Contact method* Harrower-Erickson specifically refers to the 
need for an inquiry when testing college students (13) # Since 
one of the aims of this study is to find how much, and what 
kind of material is lost when an inquiry is not conducted, a 
college group seemed to be an excellent sample for the purpose# 

3* As the testing procedure of this experiment required two exam¬ 
iners to be present at the administration,**1t was desirable to 

^Psychology 62:Personality; The University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alta# 
** See following section: Experimental Procedure, page 3U* 

















■ 


xo n 


• i FJ. 











f Q ' - D 









(33 


have subjects who would not be disturbed by this experimental 
situation* The selection of intelligent, cooperative subjects 
who would appreciate the experimental nature cf the situation, 
was therefore deemed advisable* 

lu A newly-developed form of the group Rorschaclf'Aras administered 
to twenty subjects of this group approximately two months before. 
The use of these subjects for the experiment with the Brief-Con¬ 
tact Method provided an opportunity to compare the real Its of 
the group test with those of both the Brief-Contact and stan¬ 
dard methods* This comparison would thus serve as a test of 
validity for the new group method, and eliminate the necessity 
of a separate retesting program for this purpose* 

While reliability studies such as that conducted by Fos- 
berg (10, 11) show fairly conclusively that this prior administra¬ 
tion under ordinary conditions should not influence the test re¬ 
sults of the experiment in any significant degree, five subjects 
who had not had previous contact with the Rorschach test were in¬ 
cluded in the experimental group* Thus, if the group administration 
were to influence the responses in such.a way as to favor the Brief- 
Contact Method, such influence might be detected by comparing the 
records of the five untested subjects with those of the tested 
subjects. To illustrate the non-leading nature of the group Ror¬ 
schach in question, a sample record blank with complete instruc¬ 
tions and inquiry procedure is included in the Appendix, page 76* 

One can observe that the administration and "inquiry* are less 
direct than in the usual administration* In any case, it was felt 
that the group administration technique was cf such a nature that 

This group method was - developed by Dr. Donald Spearman cf the 
Psychology Department, University cf Alberta. 









< 

.. 




■ 




' 







* ■ 









' 

i ■ 


x » - 




t '- . . . 



’ j ,. 

Tj 

. 

■ ./ ' ■ * ‘ . u 


■ 

j 

' : ' ' - J-.vC - • ' 




v _ '■ ' r. , : : v J.' 


f ; ; 

. \) ■■■■■■■■ /J : - 


• 

.; . ;.> 




Oh 


it would act rather as a standardization or orientation than as 
an influence of a more leading kind# 

Experimental Procedure : 


To dispense with the time-consuming and error producing 


procedure of administering the test twice to each subject, it was 
decided to combine the two techniques of administration into one 
experimental method# This necessitated the presence of two exam¬ 
iners during the administration, one to record the responses ac¬ 
cording to the Brief-Contact method and the other to record them 
verbatim# All subjects were tested in the same manner, by the 
same examiners in the same room# 

The technique of this experimental administration is as follows: 

Seating Arrangement: The subject was seated at one end of 
a fairly'long table, to the left and in front of the first 
examiner,‘ 5 Vho sat behind the table in such a position as 
to be able to see the cards diagonally as the subject re¬ 
sponded* 'The second examiner^'dat on the other side of 
the table, about three feet to the right and facing E^* 






Instructions: While subject to some variations, dependant 
upon rapport, attitude of the subject, etc*, the instructions 
were essentially as follows: 

u You recall the first test with the ink blots, do you?' )H ^This 


# Dr# Donald Spearman, Psychology Department, University of Alberta; 
henceforth to be referred to as E^# 

Mr# Edward Mackay, Psychology Department, University of Albeibfca; 
henceforth to be referred to as E^* 

Subjects who had not taken the group form of the test were 
given instructions modified to' idle extent of omitting the 
reference to the previous test# 












. 



















(35 


test is the same in principle excepting that the ink blots 
are on cards instead of being projected on a screen* Your 
task is to look at the blots, one by one, and tell me what 
they look like to you, or what could be represented -there* 

Do not worry about correctness or Incorrectness it is 
not that kind of test* People see all sorts of things in 
these blots# In addition, if you would,-’take this pointer 
and outline your response on the blot * * . and talk 
about it* There are ten cards* I would like'you to try 
to give me at least one response to each card, and not 
more than'three, or four, or five* All set? Here is the 
first one* 11 

After the subject had responded to Card I, he was en¬ 
couraged by the remark, 33 You have the idea * , * * That is 
exactly what I would like you to do on the others* Here 
is the next one* 31 

The above instructions differ from the usual in that a 
pointer is used and a request is made of the subject to n talk 
about it 33 , or describe his response. This latter is not empha¬ 
sized, but is designed to stimulate the spontaneous expression 
by the subject of additional material pertaining to his concepts, 
in a non-leading and natural manner* The limitation of reasponses 
in these instructions was deemed justifiable on the grounds that 
the actual number of responses was not significant to this exper¬ 
iment, and reduced the danger of subjects requiring more than the 
scheduled hour and a quarter for the test* As some difficulty 
was encountered in arranging a satisfactory time-table for the 
testing program, due to other commitments of both experimenters 
and subjects, it was necessary to adhere to the schedule as close¬ 
ly as possible and thus avoid inconveniencing other subjects, A 
limitation by responses rather than by time is in accordance with 
Klopfer T s recommendations concerning such experimental procedures (21)* 
This is consistent with Klopfer*s approach which has been used in 


this thesis 
















:x 


'. i ; j 


£>.cl! 


r 


. j 0 


V 


t. 


l ■ r": 





■ . 


j ) 




Perfoimance Part: The instructions were given the 
subject by Eq, -who then handed the subject the pointer 
and presented Card I* The subjects responses were re¬ 
corded briefly and scored by Eq according to the manner 
of the Brief-Contact method* In this procedure, Eq did 
not inquire upon any responses except to ask fcsr "outlin¬ 
ing” with the pointer when the location was not clear*'”* 

He occasionally made a notation"beside any response which 
would noimally be inquired upon* E 2 did not speak during 
the administration proper, but recorded the responses'ver¬ 
batim* "When the subject had reacted to the last card, Eq 
excused himself with the remark, "Thankyou very much; you 
have managed nicely* You have finished the first part 
of the test. Now, Mr* Mackay (E 2 ) has some questions he 
would like to ask you,” 

Inquiry: When K had left the room, the inquiry was intro¬ 
duced by E 2 with a few general remarks such as, "Now I 
would like to go over your responses with you and have you 
show'me just where you saw them and tell me a little about 
them*" The inquiry was then conducted by tactfully ques¬ 
tioning the subject as to the location and qualities which 
determined each concept, as recommended by Klopfer (22), 
Responses were located‘by marking off the area on the 
special location chart.'*~*Klopfer*s scoring system was used 
throughout by both examiners* 

Justification of the Experimental Procedure: 


The foregoing administration procedure was considered 
to be the most practical and advantageous for this experiment 
for at least the following reasons: 

1. It eliminated the necessity of administering the Rorschach 
twice to each subject, thereby lessening the demands on 
both time and effort of subjects and examiners, 

2. It guaranteed that all conditions such as attitude, emotional 
state, room temperature, etc* for both subjects and examiners 
would be as nearly identical as possible for both administra¬ 
tions * 

3. It dispensed with the necessity of ’the subjects* seeing the 
cards several times, as well as complicating the experimait. 


* This "outlining” request frequently evoked material pertaining 
to the determinants as well as the location, and appeared to 
act as a "challenge" to the subject. 

-x-x- One of these charts Is included in the appendix, page 







r 


• y : 










■■ 




















(37 


which retesting would entail and which might introduce some 
contamination in the third record* 

!•* It enabled the experimenters to compare more directly the 
same performance part of the one administration as revealed 
by the two techniques, which would not be possible if retest¬ 
ing had been undertaken* 



(38 


CHAPTER VII 

A CONTINUATION OF THE VALIDATION STUD! 
OF THE BRIEF-CONTACT METHOD 


The purposes of the experiment, subject data, 
and experimental procedure having been presented 
in the previous chapter, this chapter continues 
with the data, analysis of the data, results and 
conclusions of the experiment* 


Experimental Data 

The data are presnnted in the form of three tables* 

The first table represents the relative distribution of the 
main determinants^of the responses as elicited by the two methods* 
The number of determinants evoked by each card for all subjects 
is listed under the column heading "S u for the Standard method, 
and under the column heading n B ,r for the Brief-Contact method* 

The second table shows the relative distribution of the additional 
determinants as elicited from all subjects by each card* The 
third table shows the relative distribution of the main location 
areas* This distribution shows the total number of each location 
category as elicited from the group as a whole by each of the two 
methods of administration* 

The purpose of this tabu3.ar presentation is to provide 
a means of discerning the specific areas in the total distribution 
in which the difference between the techniques was greatest and 
least* A discussion of these differences and their significance 
follows each table* 

For an explanation of the scoring symbols (M, FM, etc.) refer 
to sample record blank in appendix, p*7U> or to Klopfer and 
Kelley, (22, pp. 62-65) 















$j • p| f . . ■ . M; •.. m ■ 

*> ■ 1 1 

* . ■■■. j •> il: ; - ’ • L r : t ’ " r,Jr;. 

* 

.. ■. • cvf.jfJ';- / r,’ df ?,-•> :> pti q ^ 








to ■ ' j,;;t 

«. r : 










k>i •; j l ' , 

. : ; ••• • { ' r. « 
: ' * - ■ , ■ 





Determinant 


TA BLE I 


Showing the distribution of main determinants as evoked 
by the two methods of Rorschach administration. 

S denotes Standard technique 
B denotes Brief Contact technique 


M 

FM 


k 

K 


F 

Fc 

c 

C* 

FC 

CF 

C 

Totals 


Card I 

II 

III 

17 

V 

VI 

VII 

VIII 

IX 

X 

Totals 

Difference 

%Age 

Difference 

S B 

S B 

S B 

S B 

S B 

S B 

S B 

S B 

S B 

S B 

S 

B 



11 11 

11 11 

22 22 

4 4 

9 9 


13 12 

3 3 

16 16 

5 4 

94 

92 

2 

0.26 

9 7 

16 16 

3 2 

5 5 

6 6 


5 5 

18 16 

6 6 

38 35 

106 

98 

8 

1.05 



3 3 

3 3 


4 4 


3 1 

6 5 


19 

16 

3 

0.39 






3 2 

2 2 

1 1 



6 

5 

1 

0.14 







1 1 

1 1 

2 2 


4 

4 

- 



1 1 




1 2 

2 2 

1 1 

1 1 

1 1 

7 

8 

-1 

0.14 

36 38 

28 28 

44 47 

37 38 

38 38 

46 48 

27 28 

41 48 

44 47 

90 107 

431 

467 

-36 

4.73 

2 2 



2 1 

1 1 

8 6 



1 


14 

10 

4 

0.52 







1 1 

1 



2 

1 

1 

0.14 

1 1 



1 1 







2 

2 

- 



1 1 

4 2 





6 5 

3 2 

24 13 

38 

23 

15 

1.85 


3 3 






8 7 

12 12 

11 9 

34 

31 

3 

0.39 


1 1 


1 1 






1 1 

3 

3 

- 


59 59 

61 61 

77 77 

52 52 

54 54 

62 62 

51 51 

83 83 

91 91 

170 170 

760 

760 







(bo 


Discussion of Table I 

As can be seen from the column under "difference”, the 
differences between tlie totals for each determinant are positive 
in every case but two, in favor of the standard method* The two 
negative differences are registered by the determinants FK and F 
respectively* The difference for FK is very slight and only 
amounts to a percentage difference of 0#llj.j which suggests that 
each technique elicits the FK (Perspective) determinant to about 
the same degree* The difference in the F row is by far the largest 
of both positive and negative deviations* This'would seem to in¬ 
dicate that relatively more responses are recorded as being de¬ 
termined by form alone in the Brief-Contact administration than 
in the standard technique* This is to be expected, in view of the 
fact that a formal inquiry is not conducted in the Brief-Contact 
method and thus some specifying material, which is usually elicited 
by the inquiry and contributes to the scoring of determinants, is 
not obtained by this shorter method* 

The largest positive difference is registered in the 
FC row, and indicates that the Brief-Contact method may not be as 
successful as the standard method in revealing the use of color 
as a determinant in the concepts* This weakness should impress 
upon persons using the short technique the need for alertness to 
the possibility of color being used in concept formation* Further¬ 
more, it can be noted that the difference in FC determinants ob¬ 
tained on Card X amounts to well over half the total difference 
for the ten cards* This indicates that the aforementioned 
alertness to color should be mainly focused on Card X. The only 
other difference which might be considered significant is that 





found in the FM row* This difference appears to be fairly well 
distributed over the "whole ten cards, and the impression gained 
is that a general alertness to the possibility of animal movement 
in Cards I, VIII, and X in particular is a necessity when using 
this briefer technique* 

A question might always be raised as to whether the FC*s 
are genuine if the inquiry is required to bring them out* By this 
time, the subject is thoroughly warmed to the task, having gone 
through the test twice. This may allow for production beyond 
initial perception and as such may be a fault with the standard 
approach, unless the inquiry is handled extremely carefully* 

With the Brief-Contact method FG is possibly scored on a more 
genuine basis. It is also possible that the Brief-Contact method, 
in showing more F responses, and fewer FC responses, may be demon¬ 
strating a greater sensitivity to the rather more tense and cautious 
adjustment in such subjects as they respond to a new situation* In 
any case, this appears to be an area for more careful inquiry in 


both methods 














? 



















Determinant 


Showing the distribution of additional 
determinants as evoked by the two methods 
of Rorschach administration. 

S denotes Standard technique 
B denotes Brief Contact technique 


Card I 


M 

FM 

m 

k 

K 

FK 


3 1 

1 


Fc 

c 

C« 

FC 

CF 

C 

Totals 


2 

2 1 


II 

III 

17 


V 

VI 

VII 

VIII 

IX 

X 

Totals 

Difference 

s 

B 

S B 

S 

B 

S 

B 

S 

B ! 

3 B 

S 

B 

s 

B 

S B 

S 

B 




3 2 

1 


2 

2 

1 

1 

i 4 



1 


3 2 

18 

12 

6 

2 

2 

2 2 



2 

2 



L 

2 

2 

1 

1 

11 8 

21 

17 

4 

2 

2 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 




2 


4 

2 

3 3 

15 

9 

6 



1 

1 

1 





L 1 






3 

2 

1 






1 

1 



3 2 



4 

3 

2 

10 

6 

4 

1 

1 






2 

1 

I 1 

2 

1 

1 



7 

4 

3 

1 















1 

- 

1 

1 

1 

2 

5 

4 

4 

1 

7 

1 

2 1 

2 


4 

2 

2 

31 

10 

21 

1 

1 




1 

1 




2 

1 



1 

5 

3 

2 

2 

1 

4 4 

2 

1 

3 

1 

3 

1 

2 1 

1 

1 



4 1 

23 

12 

11 

6 

2 









2 


4 

1 

8 2 

20 

5 

15 

8 

6 

1 1 








3 

2 

12 

7 

5 1 

29 

17 

12 

24 16 

14 9 

10 

7 

14 

9 

13 

4 1 

4 10 

16 

7 

31 16 

39 17 

183 

97 

86 







(U3 


Discussion of Table II 

The significance of additional determinants'*!s not 
fully understood, but it is fairly generally agreed that the 
contribution of these determinants to the personality config¬ 
uration is much less than that of the main determinants. With 
regard to this question, Klopfer (21) states n The additional 
responses seem to have the significance of capacities only half¬ 
heartedly used, whereas the main responses alone represent what 
we may call the actually working part of the personality 11 . It 
thus appears reasonable to assume that the relative inability of 
an administration technique to obtain additional determinants is 
not a significant weakness. Bearing this in mind, an examination 
of the data presented in Table II might prove helpful in evaluat¬ 
ing the Brief-Contact method with regard to the eliciting of 
additional material* 

It will be noted that the over-all difference between 
the two methods is in the ratio of approximately two to one* The 
areas in which the Brief-Contact method appears to show differences 
from the standard in obtaining additional information are those of 
bright and achromatic color (C, CF, C ! ) and shading-texture responses 
(Fc) . These discrepancies indicate that the examiner might do well 
to be alert to the possibility cf such additional determinants, 
particularly on Card 71 for the use of shading, and on Cards IX 
and X for the use of color. The differences between the two methods 
with regard to the other determinants are fairly evenly distributed 

wAdd^ are defined by Klopfer (22, p.70) as 

”concepts formed later as afterthoughts, or concepts withdrawn 
later by means of 're jection, or elements also important for the 
concept formation, but not independent concepts in themselves”. 




















' 








. . . •" • ' . ’ : • ' •' r 

... 




* 

. ■ • 

' ' . • . I . ' " )' 

' 


: 

















„ . 



.1 ■ - ' ' 

' 


r, 















and do not indicate the need for any special precautions* 


TABLE III 

Showing tlie distribution of locations 
of responses as evoked by the two 
methods of Rorschach administration* 

S denotes Standard method 
B denotes Brief-Contact method 


Location 

Number of 

Responses 

Difference 

Percentage 


S 

B 


Difference 

¥ 

125 

no 

15 

1.85 

¥ 

7h 

86 

-12 

1.57 

D-4 W 

5 

12 

-7 

0.92 

Dr-> ¥ 

l 

0 

1 

0 . 1 U 

D 

I 4.20 

I 4 .I 8 

2 

0.26 

Dr 

35 

32 

3 

0.39 

d 

30 

27 

3 

0.39 

dr 

30 

29 

1 

0.1U 

de 

11 

14 

-3 

0.39 

di 

0 

1 

-1 

O.Ht 

dd 

12 

lU 

-2 

0.26 

S 

17 

17 

0 

0.00 

)tals 

760 

760 










Discussion of Table III 


As can be observed, the bulk of the differences in 
location fall under the general category of W (W, % D~^ W, 

Dr-^ ¥) responses. This nay suggest that the Brief ^Contact 
method detects the perceptual processes, as far as the area 
chosen on the blot is concerned, to a finer degree than the 
standard method* For it mil be noted that the briefer method 
evoked more ¥ and D—> ¥ responses than did the standard method* 

This suggests that the subject had time to elaborate his responses 
by the time they were inquired upon, and what had first been 
responses utilizing normal detail or somewhat less than the whole 
blot were later "filled in", or "polished", in the form of secon- 
dary elaboration*" The Brief-Contact method would therefore seem 
to register the more immediate or spontaneous conceptions of the 
subject, as well as recording the organizational, processes involved 
in the formation of some of the whole responses* This idea is fur¬ 
ther strengthened by noting that the briefer method registered 
more "de" (edge detail) responses than did the standard method, 
which shows more "d" (small normal detail). Again this may indi¬ 
cate that on these occasions the subjects had elaborated upon their 
first impression by the time the inquiry was given, due to warm¬ 
ing-up and the allowances cf greater feelings of security* 

The impression received by Eg during the administration 
of the inquiry by the standard method to the subjects of this group 
was that in many cases this elaboration was consciously top super¬ 
ficially conceived by the subject. For, in many instance^, the 

$T Cf * Freud ! s "discussion of the role played by secondary elaboration 
in dreams. (12 - Basic writings of Sigmund Freud, 

New York: Modern Library, Inc., 1938) 









I : . . 




' 




£ 


■ 















. 


ft 





■ V 


0 ' ' 








(1(6 


foim qualities of the concept appeared to be better in the main 
response than they did after the inquiry. This elaboration 
seemed to be motivated by a wish to dispense with the need for 
a fairly careful delineation as requested by the examiner for 
such purposes. This, of course, may have been a result of the 
manner in which the inquiry was conducted, despite the fact that 
E 2 strove to inquire as tactfully and carefully as possible. On 
the other hand, it is not unlikely that this kind of superficial 
elaboration is characteristic of inquiry procedures and as such 
represents an inherent weakness in the standard method. Thick is 
not present in the Brief-Contact method. 

General Discussion of the Tables (I, II, III) 

The over-all picture presented by all three tables indicates 
that the difference between the two techniques is very slight. The 
highest percentage difference recorded is U.73, and this is in the 
F area which is of lesser importance interpretatively compared 
with the other determinants. With regard to the other areas, 
the differences are fairly evenly distributed, although somewhat 
higher in the color areas. Tims a careful examination of these 
data impresses one with the close similarity between the results 
rather than with the differences which are slight* The impression 
is gained, however, that possibly the Brief-Contact method is not 
quite as efficient in revealing the degree to which color is util¬ 
ized by subjects in their concepts, and that greater alertness on 
the part of the examiner when using the brief technique is necess¬ 
ary. An almost equally strong impression is gained with regard 







r> 





t 



. 















(U7 


to the comparative superiority of the Brief-Contact method in 
registering the organizational-perceptual processes involved 
in outlining the areas in which the concept is seen* Thus any 
weakness which the shorter method manifests with regard to 
evoking color, appears to be compensated for, perhaps, by its 
greater sensitivity to the location aspects of the responses* 

And there is always the possibility that the inquiry-evoked 
color responses are too directed by the examiner. 

With respect to the records of the five subjects who had 
not been given the prior group-administration of the Rorschach 
(page 36) , an inspection of these protocols did not reveal any 
greater deviations between the two administration methods than 
did the records of the other twenty subjects. This maybe suff¬ 
icient evidence for purposes here to confirm 'the view expressed 
in Chapter VI, (page 33) concerning the non-influencing nature 
of this prior group-administration on subsequent testing. 

St atistical Analysis of the E xp erimental Data 

Attempts to subject the Rorschach test results to an objec¬ 
tive analysis are fraught with difficulties arising from the very 
nature of the test* The interpretation of Rorschach records is 
based upon the total pattern of all the various scoring categories, 
the content of the responses, the reaction times and time taken 
for the test as a whole, as well as other minor signs which may 
be revealed such as facial expressions, etc* of the subject* 

Thus the personality configuration is revealed, not by quantity 
of each single determinant, but rather by the proportionate relar- 
tionship between all the various aspects of the test. However, 








. 






; 













* 






- 























' J 1 A ■ \ 




■ 



























. 














' 












in any case, one starts with the scores of the responses in 
making an interpretation* It was therefore deemed advisable 
in this experiment to analyse the data obtained in as objective 

-/f- 

a manner as possible* After a general consultation, it was 
concluded that the best measure of validity of the Brief-Contact 
method would be a statistical correlation of the scores yielded 
by each method* The standard method was taken as the criterion* 
Results : 

The two columns of figures in Table I representing the total 
number of main determinants elicited from all subjects for all 
cards were correlated by means of the Pearson Product-Moment 
correlation formula. The index of correlation obtained was 
0.9987. 

r « 0*9987 

An index of correlation was also computed far the two col¬ 
umns of figures in Table III which represent the total number of 
location categories used by all subjects for all cards. The 
index of correlation as computed by the Pearson-Product-Moment 
Formula is 0*998?* 

r = 0.9985 

Due to the limited significance of additional responses tab¬ 
ulated in Table II, no analysis of these figures was undertaken* 

The mean correlation for Table I and Table III is 0 *9986 * 

As can be readily appreciated, the correlation figures obtained 

in all cases are high, and suggest a very close relationship 

between the two methods of Rorschach administration, as far as 

total scores are concerned. With regard to individual scores, 

x Dr* B. S* Keeping, Department of Mathematics, University of Alberta 
was consulted on this problem* He felt that as the reason for 
the differences was known, any tedhnique such as u Chi-square 51 
was unsuitable, and that a computing of correlation was 'the 
best method of analysis* 






(k9 


inspection of the protocols revealed only slight discrepancies 
between the -two methods* It was therefore considered unnecessary 
and impractical to subject these individual scores to a statis¬ 
tical analysis. However, a comparison table is included herewith. 

(Table IV, p.50) 

Conclusion s 

From an analysis of the results of this experiment, 
the following conclusions may be drawn: 

1* The Brief-Contact method of Rorschach administration appears 
to possess a high degree of validity on the basis of compar¬ 
ison with the standard method. This c omparabtility, measured 
in terms of an index of correlation between the main scores 
on the Brief-Contact method and the scores yielded by the 
standard method of administration was computed to be 0*99* 

2. The main differences between the Standard method and the 

Brief-Contact method of Rorschach administration appear to be 
a relative inability on the part of the latter to elicit 
complete information regarding the use of color in concept- 
formation and in evoking material of secondary importance 
necessary in the scoring of additional determinants. These 
differences may be considered to be slight and do not inval¬ 
idate the Brief-Contact method as far as interpretation is 
concerned to any significant degree. 

3* The Brief-Contact method appears to save considerable time 
in administration of the Rorschach test. This would be to 
the advantage of both the examiner and the subject. 

U. The Brief-Contact method appears to be more sensitive to the 
perceptual organization of concepts than is the standard 
method of administration. 







































a 


. 






. 


' 


. 

■; > 




























- 








(5o 


TABLE IV 

Shewing the differences in number of main and 
additional determinants between the two methods 
for each subject. These differences are in favor 
of the Standard Method.* 


Subject 

Total 

Main Determinants 

Additional Determinants 

Mimber 

Responses 

Diff¬ 

erence 

Percentage 

Difference 

Difference 

1 

16 

1 

6.2 

1 

2 

22 

1 

!u5 

b 

3 

3b 

1 

2.9 

8 

h 

35 

3 

8.6 

5 ' 

5 

23 

0 

0.0 

5 

6 

19 

0 

0.0 

2 

7 

20 

0 

0.0 

2 

8 

29 

1 

3 mb 

1 

9 

23 

2 

8.7 

1 

10 

22 

5 

22.7 

3 

11 

23 

0 

0.0 

1 

12 

28 

1 

3.5 

1 

13 

30 

1 

3.3 

2 

Ik 

b6 

1 

2.2 

5 

15 

35 

2 

5.7 

5 

16 

30 

3 

10.0 

3 

17 

27 

0 

0.0 

3 

18 

51 

2 

3.9 

5 

19 

29 

1 

3 mb 

3 

20 

32 

2 

6.3 

2 

21 

31 

2 

6.U 

5 

22 

35 

2 

5.7 

7 

23 

50 

0 

0.0 

5 

2b 

31 

b 

12.9 

5 

25 

39 

1 

2mb 

2 

Totals 

760 

36 


86 


It can be observed from this table that the differences 
are fairly evenly distributed* The greatest percentage difference 
in the main determinants was 22*7% In this case (Subject Ho. 10) 
four of the differences are as a result of color (FC, CF) being 
elicited in the inquiry.- This is consistent with the findings of 
Tables I and II, which show a relative inability on the part of 
the Brief-Contact method to evoke color detemLnants* 

Subjects 21-25 inclusive are those who did not take 
the group administration. 


£ one difference was recorded in favor of the Brief-Contact method, 
but it is not shown on this taffile. 















(. 
















y ; o.: 

>1 f i O CJ J'y I ; 










(51 


Comment 

In the administration of the Brief-Contact-method in 
this experiment^ the examiner was occasionally required to 
challenge the subject with the remark, ,r ¥ould you outline that 
response for me, please? tt This was required to specify as to 
the location of the response. It has been found in this exper-. 
imental situation that 'this challenge frequently elicited not 
only information regarding location but also material pertaining 
to determinants of the response. During the experimental admin¬ 
istration, Sn_ issued this challenge only when the actual location 
of the response was in doubt. When he felt that there was a poss¬ 
ibility of further determinants being utilized by the subject, 
but the location was clear, he refrained from challenging the 
subject, and merely recorded the scoring symbol in the margin 
which he believed might be forthcoming if prompted by the above 
statement. On inspection of the records after the experiment 
was completed, it was found that on several occasions the determin¬ 
ants that E-, had marked in such a manner had actually been elicited 
by the formal inquiry conducted by Eg* While there is no definite 
evidence that the challenge mentioned above would have evoked the 
material in question, it is reasonable to assume that at least in 
some cases it would have been sufficient, particularly when the mat¬ 
erial was produced fairly spontaneously by the subject during the 
inquiry. Thus, it suggests that the Brief-Contact method is even 
more valid than claimed in the conclusions, and some of the weak¬ 
nesses stated there would not be as great in the normal situation 





) 


X 


\ 


p r 


x 





as they were in this experiment, because of the experimental 
restrictions. In consideration of this method of inquiry, it 
would seem that the "location-challenge" approach is a more 
standardized,- non-directive, and reasonably effective method. 


' . 






:• j • rrls J. r.i' . r- 


' ■ . i : ■: . • • 


r •: - ! 









CHAPTER VIII 


REC OMMENDATIONS 

From the foregoing results and conclusions certain 
recommendations regarding the Brief-Contact Method of 
Rorschach administration can be made* This chapter 
presents some suggestions for futher studies, applic¬ 
ability and precautions concerning the Brief-Contact 
Method. 

From the results and conclusions of this experiment, 
as well as from its use in clinical work, some suggestions as to 
further study, clinical applicability and precautions with regard 
to its use are appropriate at this point* These suggestions are 
divided into "two sections: 

A. Recommendations for further studies* 

B. Recommendations regarding the use of the Brief-Contact 
method in clinical settings', including some precautions to be 

taken by examiners when using this method of Rorschach administration. 

A* Recommendations for Further Studies 

As the experiment discussed in this thesis is somewhat 
limited in its scope, but with respect to the number and to the 
type of subjects used, it would be desirable to have experiments 
of a broader scope undertaken to further test the validity of the 
Brief-Contact method* Such experiments should reasonably include 
the following, although this list is by no means couplete: 

1. A study similar to that presented in this thesis, but using 
a much larger group of subjects (at least one hundred) , would 
yield a large amount of valuable data, and allow further exam¬ 
ination of the validity of this Brief-Contact method* 















; j . 










- 






: ? i ' : iy! h‘ v . 






' 

* ; • - .. 




■ 


' 














2. An e^cperimental study involving the use of psychoneurotic 
and/or psychotic subjects -would be useful in providing a 
measure of the Brief-Contact method ! s efficiency in evoking 
responses from this type of subject* 

3* A validation study based on a comparison of personality 

diagnoses by means of the Brief-Contact method, and diagnoses 
gained by psychiatric and other evaluation would be a valuable 
adjunct to the present study. This would supply information 
on the basis of item 1 above (normals) and item 2 above (mal¬ 
adjusted) • 

Lu One of the difficulties inherent in studies such as this one, 
is that occasionally slight differences in the scores obtained 
on an individual record may influence the interpretation to a 
slight degree. It is therefore desirable to have the Brief- 
Contact method compared with a valid method on the basis of 
interpretation. Such a comparison could be made by having the 
two records of one individual, as obtained by the Brief-Contact 
method and the standard method respectively, interpreted sep¬ 
arately by two experienced Rorschach workers. The resulting 
interpretations could be compared and an effort made to assess 
the degree of validity possessed by the brief method, 

B* Recommendations for Use of the Brief-Contact Method in Clinical 
Settings, and Precautions Regarding"SucH Use 

The high comparability with the standard method, and 
relative briefness of administration demonstrated by the Brief- 
Contact method of Rorschach administration shown in this study war¬ 
rant the following recommendations regarding its acceptance as a 
standard method of clinical diagnosis with the Rorschach test. 
















*■ 







■ 

~ 


















, 




■* 

* 






. 






(55 


1. In the light of the high validity and time-saving features 
mentioned above, it is recommended that this method be studied 
further and considered for a standardized technique of individual 
Rors chach adminis tration. 

2. The value of the Brief-Contact method of Rorschach testing as 
an adjunct to an interview can be readily appreciated* The exam¬ 
iner can administer the Rorschach during the early part of the in¬ 
terview. This administration, as indicated by our experiment, 
should not take longer than twenty minutes, in the average. The 
examiner then has some concrete material revealed by the test, upon 
which to direct the interview. Moreover, a need for such a measure 
is stressed by Wittson (lj.1) in his discussion of the value of the 
brief psychiatric interview as a screening device for military 
purposes. Wittson and his associates found the brief interview 

a very valuable tool in screening naval recruits but stress the 
need for some M supplementary measures to correct its errors". The 
suitability of the Rorschach as such a supplement is implied by 
Munro (29) in a group discussion of the test, as follows: "It is 
a technique much closer to that used in the evaluation of the psy¬ 
chiatric interview or in the case-history, than to that used in 
the evaluation of such tests as the Binet." The advantages of the 
Brief-Contact Method of Rorschach administration over the standard 
method as an interview technique are not only the saving in time 
realized, but the convenience of having the scoring ail completed 
at the end of the administration, providing the examiner with the 
opportunity to draw the psychogram quickly. The examiner would then 


. 

, 

* 




A 






* 






* 








* 








.-■% • 

* 




(56 


have both the psychogram and the content of the test as a sound 
basis for the interview and could utilize any unusual responses 
or irregularities in the psychogram as starting-points for the 
interview. A further advantage of incorporating this method of 
Rorschach administration into an interview is that the general 
atmosphere is that of an interview rather than of a test, and as 
such is more relaxed and informal which would help the subject to 
’be natural*. This would obviously aid in the establishment of 
good rapport in the subject for both the test and the interview. 

If the Brief-Contact method is accepted as an interviewing tech¬ 
nique as recommended in this discussion, it is suggested that 
the naine be changed from the "Brief-Contact Method" to the 
"Interview Method" of Rorschach administration, or "Rorschach- 
interview" . 

With regard to precautions in the use of the Brief- 
Contact method the results of this experiment have brought to 
light certain features of the method which should be carefully 
considered by persons planning to use it. The following suggest 
ions may prove helpful in effecting a more efficient administration, 
and consequently a more complete and sensitive interpretation. 

3« Alertness to the possibility of color being used by the subject 
in his concepts should be maintained by the examiner when using 
the Brief-Contact method of Rorschach administration. This is 
particularly true for Card X. The same alertness should be dir¬ 
ected towards the use of shading as an additional determinant, 
especially in Card YI* These possibilities may be explored by 
challenging the subject with the request, ’Would you outline that 


















, 





*' ■ 








- 






- 










, 


















4 . 







- 








A 







* 






* 




. 


* 
















for me, please?" Further questioning is not recommended at that 
time as it was found both in the experiment discussed in this 
thesis, and in clinical settings, that this challenge proved to 
be sufficient in most cases to elicit the desired information, if 
it was forthcoming with any degree of naturalness or spontaneity* 

It is felt that questioning of a more direct nature will tend to 
lessen the naturalness and spontaneity of the subjects reaction, 
the maintenance of which this technique is directed towards* 

Such responses may be marked for later questioning* 

U* The Brief-Contact method, as outlined in Chapter VI, has shown 
itself to be an economical form of administration of the Rorschach, 
and its use is therefore recommended as described, and not subjected 
to modification unless such modification is experimentally validated 
and shown to be justifiable. 

5>. If the Brief-Contact method is to be used in research work of 
a type that needs the full content of the responses, such modifid¬ 
eations as will provide for verbatim recording of the responses, 
such a s a recording machine, will be necessary* This point should 
be kept in mind if any research projects using the brief method 
of administration are contemplated* 














, 























(58 


CHAPTER IX 

THE BRIER-CONTACT RORSCHACH:* METHOD OF ADIiffNlSTRATIOTf** 


Foregoing chapters have reviewed the approaches in 
Rorschach administration, have presented the methods em¬ 
ployed in this study as well as the results and conclusions, 
and finally, recommendations were offered in consideration 
of the values and shortcomings of the B-C-R. A discussion 
of the actual B-C-R administration has been postponed until 
now for reasons of economy and afterthought contribution* 
This present chapter will attempt to outline this method ' 
as it might be employed in the various settings* Further, 
some thoughts will be expressed in terms of rationale* 


Introduction : As will have been observed in reading the previous 
chapters, the experimental procedure (pp.3li.-36) of the B-C-R 
has incorporated many techniques from past and current Rorschach 
workers* This is both desirable and justifiable as long as the 
demands of economy are served* Economy has been a primary con¬ 
sideration in this study and in the development of the B-C-R* 

In meeting this aim it is believed that a fairly simple method 
of Rorschach administration has resulted^ — simple, and seeming¬ 
ly accurate* 

In the development of the B-C-R method, emphasis 
has been placed also upon the attempt to study the ego-functions 
of the subject. By this is meant ego-expressive as well as ego- 
defensive activities. It is perhaps reasonable to claim -that in 
the usual test situation the subject is rather more on the defen¬ 
sive than is necessary or desirable for complete projection of 
personality. This attitude, it is believed, has been considerably 


Hereafter to be referred to as the B-C-R* 

## For practical reasons, since the author has not had wide enough 
experience with the B^C-R, this chapter has been written in 
collaboration with Dr. D* Spearman, Department of Psychology. 








* 

- 

- 

. 

- 

















- , ' 












; 






' 

■ 




- $ 

-V 

* 






* 

~ 

- 

■ 

, + - 



lessened in the B-C-R approach* Rather, it is presumed that 
the subject is more interested, better motivated, and in gen¬ 
eral enjoys the briefer method# And, usually, it is more stim¬ 
ulating for the examiner as well# Rapport, then, is likely to 
be better on the whole# This would tend to create a more expressive 
(permissive) atmonsphere. It is expected (and reasonably verified 
from work with this method) that the subject-centered approach 
encourages a more natural flow of verbalization, greater spon¬ 
taneity and, in general brings the ego-picture into clearer em¬ 
phasis for study and interpretation# There are, of course, rea¬ 
sons for all of this# It is believed that the ego-expression is 
less interrupted by the non-verbatim recording of the examiner# 

The perceptual-associative functions (see Rapaport (30) pp #89-910 
are neither interfered with nor assisted to the same extent as in 
the usual test situation, especially as in the case where the 
inquiry is elaborate# The subject is probably more on his own, 
after the simple instructional guidance, and this is the way it 
should be, since more individual and primary structures are 
revealed# 

A problem in many Rorschach administrations, as has 
been pointed out in the earlier pages of this thesis, has been 
the role of the examiner* Often, the examiner is too directive# 

It is likely that this "suggestion-error" is most pronounced in 
the inquiry. This is particularly true in the case cf the un¬ 
trained examiner, although experts are also guilty to some degree# 

In the B-C-R method this problem has been considerably reduced# 

The brevity and simplicity of the method tends to keep the test 













, 



- 


* 

>• 


* 










- 

- 

. * 

4 ■ ■ ' ' . 

* 



„ 




* 


% 




- 


* 

* 

■ 


* 

T 

- • 

. 




(6c 


a test, rather than encourage development along artistic-intuitive 
lines. And yet, it is unfair to compare this test with the usual 
test. The atmosphere is considerably more relaxed and in this 
sense the test situation may be thought of as an interview in 
the hands of the expert. Moreover, it is likely that this B-C-R 
method will be received favorably by most, if not all, vocational 
and clinical personality types. It is too early to say yet 
whether or not it mil be a good test with all types of subjects. 
But since it is simple, designed for subject and examiner interest 
and economy, it is reasonable to predict that it Till be useful 
in most vocational and clinical situations where a fairly complete 
personality assessment or screening is required, and where brevity 
is desirable. It is particularly adapted to being included in a 
tent-battery. 

Again, because of the simplicity of the method, it 
is likely that the B-C-R would be more communicable. Psychologists 
and psychiatrists can be trained to enploy the method in a more 
stgndardized fashion. 


The B-C-R Method 

Preliminaries: Following 'the above considerations, it is impor¬ 
tant that the creation of rapport and naturalness be attended to 
at the outset. In meeting 'the subject and in introducing him to 
the test situation an effort should be made to lower resistances 
and allow security-feelings as quickly as possible. The seating 
arrangements require that the examiner be able to see There the 
subject is pointing or outlining on the blot. Adjustments cf 





- 

* 








, 








1 

4 

'. - . 

, 

* 

* 


. , 

. 

, 



(61 


position can usually be made rather easily here to the satisfaction 


and comfort of both examiner and subject. The main euphasis at 
this point is upon mutual adjustment, while still satisfying the 
requirements of the test. The seating arrangement is usually 
accomplished by having the examiner and the subject sit along¬ 
side each other with the latter slightly forward. As in the pre¬ 
liminary adjustment, there are many variations in instructions 
also, but the following have proved useful: 

"I am going 'bo show you a series of ink-blot pictures. 

There are ten of them. I shall show them to you one at a 
time. Tour task is to look at them and tell me what you 
see there ... what they look like to you. People see all 
sorts of things in these blots, so feel free to mention 
anything that occurs to you. There is no question of 
right or wrong answers; for it is not that kind of test. 

You simply look at the blots and tell me what you see there 
. Also, here is a pointer which I should like you to 
use to point out the things you see ... and ... if you wish, you 
may talk about the thing that you see as you point it out." 
(Pointer is given to subject.) “Finally, I should like you 
to give at least one response to each blot and net more than 
five. Now we shall go ahead. Here is the first card*’ 1 (Sub¬ 
ject is given Card I). 

After the subject has responded to Card I, further 
instructions are offered for guidance and reassurance. 

11 That is fine ... you have done well. You have the 
idea* You looked at the blot, told me That you saw there, 
pointed out the response and described it. That is exactly 
what I l d like you to do with the rest of them. Here is the 
next one. 11 

Following the secondary instructions, the subject is on his own 
for the rest of the test. It can be seen, perhaps, that these 
instructions do not place serious demands upon the subject. They 
are simple, yet they set the limits. The subject is encouraged, 
though not required, to “tall: about" or "describe" the response 
material he offers. Strict limits are avoided in the matter of 

























T 



, 


- 






(62 


production, and yet the subject is guided to some degree by the 
request n at least one response to each blot and not more than 
five'*' 

M ethod of Administration, Scorin g and Record ing: It has been 
found useful to employ a clamp note-holder for retaining in a 
firm position the response-recording sheets* Finely-lined note- 
paper has been found effective for recording (size 8J M by 11”) * 

In using such sheets it is often possible to record a Thole pro¬ 
tocol on one face of the sheet, thereby allowing an appreciation 
of the personality-constellation at a glance and maiding for a 
more rapid sequence-analysis* Hie sheet may also have vertical 
columns for aligning information pertaining to scoring, content, 
and analysis or dynamic interpretation* Reaction-time, card-time, 
and pauses are noted in the usual manner advised by Klopfer (22)* 
(Incidentally, much time appears to be saved by the B-C-R method 
on all counts.) Responses are not written down verbatim* It is 
questionable whether this is necessary and there is always the chanc 
chance of delaying or disturbing the subject when this is done* 

In recording the response, the scoring is done first, then a, 
reporting of the main features < as scored; of the response is 
included* As it sometimes happens, a further determinant may be 
an expectancy* The examiner immediately asks for a location as: 
,T Will you outline your response again, please?” This is often 
sufficient to bring out the determinant. If it is not brought 
out, and the examiner is convinced of its influence in producing 
the response, that response is marked (x) for subsequent inquiry. 








- 
























* 

■ 













■ft 1 ■ 'H 











~ 









, 
























4 


* 






» 


- 

' 




This inquiry, conducted after the test is couple ted, begins with: 
,f I did not quite understand this response you gave before. Will 
you outline it again for me please, and describe it to me? 11 If 
this is unsuccessful in bringing the determinant to the surface 
the exploration is either discontinued or conducted in the stan¬ 
dard fashion. The former is recommended. It is observable that 
this approach is simple, non-leading, and possibly more standard¬ 
ized than the elaborate methods of inquiry. It is not unlikely 
that it is more effective in producing more nearly spontaneous, 
subject-determined material. Alertness should be maintained by 
the examiner with regard to more difficult-to-bring-out determ¬ 
inants (see pp . 56-57) * 

Scoring is done as the responses are offered. This, 
also, appears to be a more sensible approach in so far as very 
few responses are left unsatisfactorily scored, implying that 
the examiner does not leave a response until he understands it* 
Although this would require a rather thorough familiarity with 
the scoring method, this is not an unreasonable demand to make 
of an examiner. Presumably, it would make him a better adminis- 
trator and interpreter. Since the scoring is done first, and 
since the examiner is usually regarding the subjects effort 
with some care, this approach probably convinces the subject of 
the genuineness of interest on the part of the examiner* It may 
even be interpreted as a challenge or an encouragement by some 
subjects. In either case, such attitudes perceived by the subject 
would, quite possibly stimulate production. Moreover, the exam¬ 
iner can often observe directly the creation of a response and 
the effort involved, since he is observing the subject directly 






■ \ a •' 

- ~ 







* 




- 






4 . - 


. $0' ^4 












* 

, 

- 

' 


■ 

' 

$ ' 

* 

* 

. 



and.not occupied -with copying verbatim* Further, this is an 
ideal time for scoring since the perceptions and associations 
are fresh, warm and active* It is believed that since the pro¬ 
ductivity is likely to be better understood by the examiner, the 
scoring Trill be more accurate. The role of the pointer in the 
whole process is not well understood, but it is possible that 
it contributes somewhat to the confidence of the subject by 
allowing tension-reducing motor activity and a more direct con¬ 
tact with the stimulus material# 

The responses marked (x) for later investigations 
may be explored by means of the simple method outlined above 
which is recommended, or by an extension of the inquiry which is 
probably not too advisable* Further, testing-of-the-Hmits, free 
associating to response material, or graphic techniques may be 
employed* It is likely, however, that these extensions would 
only be useful in special cases* Following the scoring and re¬ 
cording of the responses, the protocol is ready far interpretation 
along the usual lines* 

In the above, then, the B-C-R method has been outlined. 
While much of the above presentation may seem speculative, and 
therefore unjustified, a good part of it has been based on prac¬ 
tical experience with the method* In any case, it is hoped that 
the thoughts offered will be provocative of further study with 


this method, 



- 

4 

, 

' 










* 





















. % * j 





* 













~ 



n 


*? ' 







~ 


-7> 

I V : " ; 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



(65 


SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY* 


1# Balinsky, B. The multiple choice group Rorschach Test as a 
means'of screening applicants for jobs* J. Psychol*, 19: 

203-8, 1 9h$. 

2* Beck, S.J. Introduction to the Rorschach method* A manual 
of personality study* Res* Monogr* Amer* Orthopsychiat. 

Ass*, no* 1, 1937. 

3* Beck, S*J. Rorschach*s test* Vol* 1* Basic processes* 

New Yorkj Grune & Stratton, 19UU* 

k. Beck, S.J* Rorschach*s test* Vol* 11. A variety cf person¬ 
ality pictures. New York: Grune & Stratton, 19k5. 

5* Benjamin, J.D* and Ebaugh, F*G. The diagnostic validity of 
the Rorschach test. Amer. J* Psychiat., 9b: 1163-78, 1938. 

6. Buckle, D.F. and Cook, P.H. Group Rorschach method: technique* 
Rorschach Res. Exch., 7: 111-22, 19U3* 

7* Carp, A.L* and Shavzin, A.R. The susceptibility to falsi¬ 
fication of the Rorschach psychodiagnostic technique* 

J. Consult. Psychol*, OUs 230-37, 195b. 

8* Challman, R*C. The validity cf the ‘Harrawer-Erickson Multiple 

Choice Test as a screening device. J. Psychol*, 20: I4.I-I4.8, 19U5 

9* Eysenck, H*J. A comparative study of four screening tests for 
neurotics* Psychol. Bull., 1±2: 659-62, 19U5* 

10. Fosberg, I.A. Rorschach reactions under varied instructions. 

Rorschach Res. Exch*, 3: 12-38, 1938. 

11. Fosberg, I.A* An experimental study of the reliability of the 

Rorschach psychodiagnostic technique* Rorschach Res. Exch*, 

5$ 72-8I4, 19U1. 

12. Freud, S.' Basic 'writings of Sigmund Freud* New York: Modem 

library, Inc., 1938* 

13* Harrover-Srickson, M.R., and Steiner, M.E* Large scale Rorschach 
techniques:'a manual for the Group Rorschach and Multiple 
Choice Test* Springfield, Ill*: Thomas, 19U5. 

lLj.* Hertz, M*R* The method of administration of the Rorschach 
ink-blot test* Child Develop., 7: 237-5U, 1936. 


* The most complete and recent bibliography may be found in Bell, 'J.E. 
Projective Techniques. New York: Longmans, Green and Co., 19l|8* 

The above bibliography contains those references which are rele¬ 
vant to this study. 









(66 


15* Hertz, *M,R, Rorschach: Twenty years after, Rorschach Res, 

Exch. 90-129, 19Ul. 

16, Hertz, M,R, The'validity of the Rorschach'group method, 

Psychol, Bull,, 39: 5l h (abstract), 19^2, 

17* Hertz, M,R, Comments on the standardization of the Rorschach 
group method, Rorschach Res, Exch., 6: 153-59, 19l*2, 

18, I-Iertzman, M, A comparison of the individual and group Rorschach 
tests, Rorschach Res, Exch,, 6: 89-108, 191+2 

19# Hertzman, M, Recent research on the group Rorschach test, 
Rorschach Res, Exch#, 7: 1-6, 191*3* 

20, ICLopfer, B, The technique of the Rorschach performance, 

Rorschach Res, Exch., 2: 1-lU, 1937, 

21, ICLopfer, B.$ Burchard, E#M.L,$ Kelley, D,M,j and Male, F.R. 

Theory and/ technique of Rorschach interpretation, Rorschach 
Res, Exch,, 3: X52-9U, 1939. 

22, Klopfer, B,, and Kelley, D*M* The Rorschach technique, 

Yonkers: World Book Go#, 19l*2, 

23, Levine, K,H,, and Grassi, J,R, The relation between blot and 

concept in graphic Rorschach responses# Rorschach Res* Exch, 

6 : 71-73, 191*2 * 

2 I 4 ., Lindner, R,M,, and Chapman, K,W# 'An eclectic group method, 
Rorschach Res,,Exch,, 6: 139-1*6, 19l*2. 

25, Malamud, R.F#, and Malaimid, D,I, The validity of the amplified 

multiple'choice Rorschach'as a screening device# J, Consult, 
Psychol#, 9: 22l*-27, 191*5* 

26, Mans, $T* Principles and practice of the Rorschach personality 

test, London: Faber and Faber, Ltd,, 19l*7* 

27, Monroe, R.L* The inspection technique: a method for rapid 

evaluation of the Rorschach protocol, Rorschach Res# Exch# 

9: 39-1*0, 191*5* 

28, Monroe, R*L, An experiment with a self-administering form of 

the Rorschach and group administration by examiners without 
Rorschach training, Rorschach Res, Exch,, 10: 1*9-59, 191*6# 

29, Minroe, R*L« Report of a group discussion of the Rorschach method, 

Rorschach Res, Exch,, 5: 15U-65, 19Ul 

30, Rapaport, D,$ Gill, and Schafer, R# Diagnostic psychological 

testing^ the theory, statistical evaluation, and diagnostic 
application of a'battery of tests# Vol, II, Chicago: Year 
Book Pubs,, 191*6, 



(67 


31* Rorschach, H. Psychodiagnostics, a diagnostic test based on 
perception.' Trans, by P. Lemkau and B. Kronen&urg. 

Bern: Huber, 19S2# New York: Grune & Stratton, 19U2. 

32. Ross, W.D. A contribution to the objectification of group Ror¬ 
schach scoring. Rorschach Res. Exch., 7: 70, 19U3. 

33* Sender, S. The influence of variations in Rorschach group 

method administration upon the' scorability of the records. 
Rorschach Res. Exch., 7: 5U-69, 19U3. 

3km Stainbrook, E.J. A modified Rorschach technique for the des¬ 
cription of transitory postconvulsive personality states. 
Rorschach Res. Exch., 5; 192-203, I 9 I 4 . 6 . 

35* St. Clair, W. F. The self-recording technique in Rorschach 
administration. Rorschach Res* Exch., 7: 109-18, 19U3. 

36. Vernon, P.E. The Rorschach ink-blot test. Brit. J. med. 

Psychol., 13: 89-118, 1933* 

37* Weisskopf, E.‘The influence of the time factor on Rorschach 
performance. Rorschach Res. Exch., 6 : 128-36, 19k2. 

38* Weils, F.L; Rorschach'and the free associa/tion test. J* gen. 
Psychol., 13: 203-33, 1935. 

39* Wells, F.L. Personal communication. 

SO. Wittman, P. The use of the Multiple Choice Rorschach as a ' 

differential diagnostic tool. J. clin. Psychol., 1:281-87, 19U5* 

la* Wittson, C.L.; Harris, H.I.$ and Hunt, W.A* Ah' evaluation of 

the brief psycliiatric interview, J. Psychol., 16: 107-111;, 191*3 


1 












APPENDIX 









(68 


Fosberg T s Instructions 


The complete instructions as given in Fosbergis 
experiment (10) are as follows: 

!• "Tou Trill be given a series of ten cards, one by one* The cards 
have on them designs made up out of ink-blots. ' Look at each card, 
and tell the examiner what‘you see on each card, or anything that ' 
might be represented there* Look at each card as long as you like, 
only be sure to tell the examiner everything that you see on the 
card as you look at it* When you have finished with a'card, give it 
to the examiner as a sign that you are through with it. If these 
directions are not clear ask any further questions that you wish* 

Are you ready?" 

2* "You will be given the Rorschach cards again, one by one. As you 
know that it is a test of your personality, try this time to make the 
very best impression on, let us say, a group of psychologists who 
might later examine your responses* Look at each card, and tell the 
examiner what you see on each card, or anything that' might be repre¬ 
sented there. Look at each card as long as you like, only be sure to 
tell the examiner everything that you see on the card as you look at 
it* Mien you have finished with a card, give it to the examiner as 
a sign that you are through with it* Are you ready?" 

3. "When you take the Rorschach examination this time, try to make the 
worst possible impression on'the group of psychologists who might 
later examine your responses* Look at each card as long as you Kike, 
only be sure to tell the examiner everything that you see on the card 
as you. look at it. P/hen you have finished a card, give it to the 
examiner as a sign that you are through ?dth it* Are you ready?" 

H. {r When we go through the cards this time, I shall ask you to look for 
certain things. Do not force yourself to see them, but only tell me 
if they are in the card you have before you* Are you ready? Tt 


Carp and Shavzin T s Instructions 

The complete instructions given in the experiment con¬ 
ducted by Carp and Shavzin (7) are as follows: 

Situation I: (for bad impression) " . . . you are being drafted for 
the array and want very much to stay out. The results of this "person¬ 
ality test will determine whether or "not you will be accepted* An 
unfavorable report will keep you out*" 

Situation II: (for good impression) "... you are in a hospital for 
the mentally ill and naturally want to get out* You are being given 
this personality test to see whether or not you can be released. A 
favorable report mil get you that release. 

Row let 1 s go through the test with these circumstances 
in mind* What do you see in the first card?" 




- 


, ' • 







* 

‘ 


. 

« ■ 


. 

, 




■* 




* : 


* 









„ i , 

, ,, , 

„ 

T 

*s 





(69 


Inquiry Instructions for Harrower-Erickson’s Group Rorschach 

The instructions recommended by Harrower-Erickson (13) for 
the inquiry following the administration of the group Rorschach are 
as follows: 

Locating of Responses: ”Well, this is the first part of the ex¬ 
periment. Now we shall go on th the second. I’m sure you will have 
seen a lot of amusing and different tilings in the various ink blots, 
but one of the important aspects of this test is the fact that I 
must know as accurately as possible just what it is you have seen 
and where it is you have seen it. In order that you can do this, 
you will find on each page a little diagram representing the slide.” 
Slide I with various areas marked off on it is thrown on the screen 
and tlie examiner continues: ”Now perhaps some of you saw on this 
particular ali.de a butterfly, and then'perhaps you also saw the 
legs of some person in the center here, and perhaps a boxing glove' 
in this little'protruberance here or a dog’s head here on the side. 
Your next task, therefore, is to number your own answers, if you 
forgot to do so before, and then with your pencil to draw a line 
around the area where you saw that particular object and attach to ' 
that area the number of the answer you are describing. For example, 
let us suppose you have seen just those four things which I mentioned. 
You would put a number 1 by "a butterfly”, draw a line all the way’ 
around the miniature ink blot, and put a number I beside this line. ' 

If ”somebody 1 s legs” was your second answer, you would number that 2, 
draw a careful pencil line around the area on the diagram and attach 
a number 2 to it. In other words you will do for all your own an¬ 
swers what has been done for these hypothetical answers on the screen.” 

Obtaining Added Information: ”Before you begin to mark off your an¬ 
swers, there is something else you have to do for me. You have to 
help me reconstruct as accurately as possible the kind of experiences 
you have been having or some of the characteristics cf the things 
you saw. You might, for instance, have seen two bears or two animals 
here on the side. You might have seen two flags here in the center, 
or you might have called these same parts two cushions. This part 
here (pink and orange) might have reminded you of some kind of flower* 

Some of you may have said, for example, that the bears 
looked as if they were climbing up, but it is also very possible that 
you did not put in that last bit of information. Now is your chance 
to do so if you want to. If you want to explain to me that the animals 
you saw looked as if they were stepping from one rock to another, you 
may add that information now. But perhaps you did not see them as if 
they were stepping. Fine! That is just as important. Perhaps they 
looked to you as if they were some kind of animal on a heraldic design 
and you may have alread said so. In that case you will not need to 
give any more information. 

Let us suppose that you not only saw cushions here but saw 
blue sati n cushions. In this case you would again amplify your answer 
because it is important for me to know whether you got the impression 
of the satiny or silky feel of the eushion, and whether you were im¬ 
pressed by its blueness. Again this area may have reminded you of a 
flower because it was the color of the sweet peas in your back yard. 

If it was tlie color' that attracted your attention and made you think 
of those sweet peas, then add this information by writing in the 
word, ’color 1 . 



1 







- 












4 ) 

„ : 






* 












. 






•' T 

* 













. 4 .. 

. 

♦ 














4 

■ 

' 


ts 

. 3 •■■;■. ' • 3 






SAMPLE EXPERIMTAL PROTOCOL 


The following record was chosen from the group to 
illustrate the difference in the amount of material recorded by the 
two techniques of administration. The underlined words represent 
the total content of the responses as recorded by E^ in accordance 
with the administration practice of the Brief-Contact Method. The 
total responses including the underlined -words are as recorded by 
Eg according to the standard administration practice. Abbreviations 
were used by both examiners in the recording of the original protocol. 


Case No. 7 

Subject Data: Sex: female Age: 20 yeans 

Education: 2nd yean B.A. Occupation: student 
Previous testing: Group Rorschach, December, 195>0 

Date: Jan. 31* 195>1 

Performance In quiry 

Card I 
12 n 

1. The whole card looks like a moth The whole blot. Body in 
with the tail-end here, head is here and wings here, 

up front; wings out here; antenna 
here* 


Card II 


12 * 

1 . 


2 . 


Looks like two animals - somewhat .All but the red pant, 
like an elephant . Trunk here, ears Trunk suggested it. 
back; in sitting position facing 
each other. 

The red part at the top - that Paws out here - sitting 

appears to be some kind of an back on its haunches. 

animal with its pars forward in 
a sitting position. 


Card III 

38 * 

1. The closest tiling it could be is 
two people sitting there. ' Arms 
back , and perhaps talking . More 
or less relaxe d. 

Red part would be decorations 
on the wall* 


Head and neck and body. 


Its position and hanging 
from somewhere. 























1 










■ 

. 




















A 




gjjl • 




. 





(71 


Performance 


Card IV 


1. Reminds me of a zoology lab .- 
vertebral column *o’f' ’an animal *— 
on a table when you 1 re dksscct- 
ing it. 

Card V 


1. Again it looks like the first 
one - a b utterfly . Antenna and 
head, feet, wings here. Appears 
to be f3.ying « 

Card VI 


32” 

1. This top part locks like a 
fountain with water coming 
out of the side. 

Card VII 


5 "' 

1* This looks like two women 

talking . Their liar is up and 
it looks like they'might be 
waving behind’them. The rest 
*oF^EHeir bodies are in a sitting 
position. 

Card VIII 

6 “' 

1. These look like perhaps a group 
of different kinds of animals. 
Parts on the side here look like 
an animal climbing . Feet'here, 
and tail and head up’here. More 
like a squirrel head. 

. Top part looks like a sea animal 
cf some kind. Bones coming out 
here and wide fins. 


Inquiry 


V/hole thing. Column in center. 
Line in center suggested it. 
Arms and feet and tail 
spread out. 


"Whole thing. 


Water coming out the side. 


The hair back and the shape 
of face* 


The whole blot at a glance. 
Side ones give the impres¬ 
sion. ' 

Shape. Eye 'there* 


These lines look like bony 
lines in a fish. 


2 


























































(72 


Performance 


inquiry 


Card IX 

5 " 

!• This part in the'middle looks Long stem and shape of it* 

to be two things. Upside down Petals. 
it*s a large pink f lower. 

2. Candle in pink holder , blue part Same as in 1. Pink holder, 

is the glow from the flame . green flame up here. 

3. The orange part looks like two Looks like the claws of an 

sea animals. The lines remind animal. 

me of i't. “Crayfish or something. 

They seem to be ’ ffghting. 


Card X 

1. Animals, sea animals. This is 
a type of crab. 


2. Here is another type of animal 
with long claws . 

3* Down here appears to be some¬ 
thing like a seahorse. 

lu These look like large green 
wo ms. 


5. This yellow part*is shaped 
like p oodle dogs. 

6 . Tills part appears like a face 
on an animal 1 2 * * 5 6 s body . 

. Those look like some kind of 
animals ' waving horns, and 
leaping. 


lines of these things. Matybe 
blue part seen first. Blue 
part - round body and claws 
at the side. 

Shape, mouth and eyes. May 
be a bug. 

Long nose on it. 


Lower green* Shape - the way 
they curl back and seem to 
be climbing. 

Inner yellow. Shape — 
nose, etc. 

Shape - noe and profile, 
almost like a caterpillar. 

Green part. Like sheep 
jumping in the air. Feet up 
in the air - shape* 


7 























9 















T 












(73 

THE RORSCHACH METHOD OF PERSONALITY DIAGNOSIS 

INDIVIDUAL RECORD BLANK 


Developed for the Rorschach Institute, Inc. 

By Bruno Klopfer and Helen H. Davidson 

Name... Sex. Date. Examiner. 

Birthdate. Age. School. Grade 

Address. Occupation. 


To the Examiner 

N.B. For further information about the use of this Record Blank , and scoring and interpretation of results , the examiner is re¬ 
ferred to “The Rorschach Technique ” by Bruno Klopfer and Douglas Kelley, published by World Book Company. 

To facilitate recording of responses, divide your record sheet into two columns: one for the performance proper and one 
for the inquiry. 

Number the responses to each card separately. Number each response in the inquiry to correspond with the main re¬ 
sponse if it is an elaboration of or an addition to it. If a new response is given in the inquiry, list it as an additional 
Response by adding a letter to the number of the preceding response. 

Leave adequate space after each response in case the inquiry should require more space than the original response. 

For position of card, use symbols A V > <, the apex indicating the top of the card as presented to the subject. 

For time, note the time when each card is presented and the time when the first response is given. Note the total time for 
5ach card and the total time for the performance proper. Time any delays of more than 10 seconds between responses. 

Indicate on the picture sheet (page 5) the area chosen by outlining the part and numbering it with the same number as 
the response. If the whole blot is chosen, write “W” next to the number of the response. This can be done during or 
after the inquiry. In case of doubt, ask the subject to outline his concept on the picture sheet. 

List the scoring of all responses in the form on page 2. Columns are provided for recording the number of the card and 
the response numbers, the time, the position of the card, and main and additional responses. Additional determinants to 
i main response are also to be listed in the “Add ” column, listing these one below the other if there are several. 

Ijse the Tabulation Sheet (page 3) for the tallying of all responses. Tabulate all additional scores in the “Add” columns. 
Use a pencil of a different color for this purpose. 

3nly main responses are used in determining the relationships among factors on page 4. Compute percentages only in 
the instances where they are specifically called for as indicated by the “ % ” symbol. In all other cases, simply record the 
absolute frequencies of the various categories. 


SUMMARY OF PERSONALITY DESCRIPTION 


Published by World Book Company, Yonkers-on-Hudson, New York, and Chicago, Illinois 
Copyright 1942 by the Rorschach Institute, Inc. All rights reserved, bmfd- 16 

FEINTED IN U.S.A. 


























SCORING LIST 


Card No. 
and 

Number 

of 

Response 

Time 

and 

Position 

Location 

Determinant 

Content 

P—O 

Card No. 
and 

Number 

ot 

Response 

Time 

and 

Position 

Location 

Determinant 

Content 

Main 

Add 

Main 

Add 

Main 

Add 

Main 

Add 

Main 

Add 

Main 

Add 

Main 

Add 


















( 































EXPLANATION OF SCORING SYMBOLS 


CATION 

Whole Blot 

W intended use of whole blot but part or parts omitted 
or cut off 

W, S whole blot and white space used 

(tabulate as main W and additional S) 

DW a detail interpreted, with its meaning assigned to 
the whole blot without justification (confabula¬ 
tion) 

Large Usual Detail 

P W detail interpreted and remainder of blot used as 
background or W tendency otherwise expressed 
(tabulate as main D and additional W) 

D,S white space used in addition to D 

(tabulate as main D and additional S) 

Small Usual Detail 

Unusual Detail 
dd tiny detail 

de edge detail 

di inside detail 

dr large or small detail combined with rare adjacent 

areas, or parts of usual areas, or unusual combi¬ 
nations of usual areas 

White Space 

SD a detail used in addition to S 

(tabulate as main S and additional D) 

NTENT 

Human Figures 

Parts of Human Figures, not Anatomical 
Animal Figures 
Parts of Living Animals 
i Fur Skins, Skulls, and the like 

Human Anatomy (dissected parts, x-rays, anatomical charts) 
All Kinds of Man-Made Objects 

Nature (landscapes, mountains, sunsets, rivers, and other 
scenery) 

Topographical and Outline Maps and Geographical Concepts 
like Islands, Gulfs, Channels, not seen in vista 

^Caricatures and mythological figures indicated by parentheses as 
(H) or (A) 

Note. Other symbols like Arch ( architecture ) or PI (plant) are self- 
explanatory. 

XJLARITY — ORIGINALITY 

Popular Responses 

Original Responses Found Not More Than Once in 100 Records 


DETERMINANTS 

M Figures in Human-Like Action 

(human, mythological, or animal ) 

FM Animals in Animal-Like Action 

m Abstract or Inanimate Movement 

m form excluded from consideration 

mF form indefinite 

Fm definite form in inanimate motion 

k Shading as Three Dimensional Expanse 

Projected on a Two Dimensional Plane 
(x-ray, topographical map ) 

k form excluded from consideration 

kF form indefinite 

Fk definite form with k 

K Shading as Diffusion (smoke, clouds ) 

K form excluded from consideration 

KF form indefinite 

FK Shading as Three Dimensional Expanse 
in Vista or Perspective 

F Form Only , Not Enlivened 

F + form more accurate than popular 
F form on level of popular response 

F — form less accurate than popular 

Fc Shading as Surface Appearance or Tex¬ 
ture, Differentiated 

C Shading as Texture (undifferentiated) 

c form excluded from consideration 

cF form indefinite 

C' Achromatic Surface Color 

FC' definite form with C' 

C'F form indefinite 

C' form excluded from consideration 

FC Definite Form with Bright Color 

F/C combination of F and C where the form is definite 
and the color used merely to distinguish areas 

CF Bright Color with Indefinite Form 

C/F combination of C and F where the color is used 
merely to distinguish areas and the form indefi¬ 
nite (indefinite anatomical chart, political map) 

C Color Only 

C concrete association to bright color; form and con¬ 
text disregarded (blue: sky or water, red: fire or 
blood) 

C n color naming 

Cdes color description 

Csy m color symbolism — abstract association to bright 
color (Spring, Fall, Gayety) 














CONTENT DETERMINANTS LOCATION 


TABULATION SHEET 


Scoring 

Symbols 

Number of Card 

Total 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

VII 

VIII 

IX 

X 

Main 

Add 

Main 

Add 

Main 

Add 

Main 

Add 

Main 

Add 

Main 

Add 

Main 

Add 

Main 

Add 

Main 

Add 

Main 

Add 

Main 

Ad 

w 

fw 























* 





















DW 





















D 























d 























Dd 

dd 























de 





















di 





















dr 





















S 























k Main Total 

+ H- + + + H- + 4- + 


M 























FM 























m(m,mF,Fm) 























k(k,kF,Fk) 























K(K,KF) 























FK 























F ■ 

F + 























F 





















F- 





















Fc 























c (cF,c) 























C(FC',C'F,C') 























FC 

FC 























F/C 





















GF^ 

CF 























C/F 





















G 

C 























Cn 





















Cdes 





















Csym 





















Main Total 

+ '+ + + + + + + + 


f H 























Hd 























A 























Ad 























Aobj 























At 























Sex 























Ohj 























PI 























N 























Geo 























Art and Des 























Arch 























Emblem 























Clouds 























Blood 























Fire 























Mask 























Abstract 




























































































Main Total 

■f 4* 4- 4- . + + + 4- 4- — 


1 p 

| 






















1 O 

| 























[3] 









































































































































































LOCATION CHART 









M 

FM 

m 

k 

K 

i 

(Dijferei 

t 

FK 

i 

xtiated S 

1 

hading ) 

t 

Fc 

c 

C' 

FC 

CF 

C 

F 

Movement 

Diffusion—Vista 

Form 

Texture and Achro¬ 
matic Color 

Bright Color 


RELATIONSHIPS AMONG FACTORS 


Total Responses (R) = 

Total Time (T) = 

Average time per response = 

Average reaction time for Cards I, IV, V, VI, VII = 
Average reaction time for Cards II, III, VIII, IX, X 


Total F 


R 


F% 


FK + F + Fc _ 
R 


% 


A +Ad 
R 


A% 


Number of P = 

Number of 0 = 

(H + A): (Hd + Ad) = 

sum C 


FC + 2 CF + .3 C 

9 


M: sum C = : 

(FM + m): (Fc + c + CO = : 

No. of responses to Cards VIII, IX, X _ 


R 


% 


W: M = 
Succession 


Rigid Orderly Loose Confused 
(Place a check mark at the appropriate point on the scale above ) 


Estimate of Intellectual Level 


Intellectual Capacity 
. .Very Superior 
.. Superior 
.. High Average 
.. Low Average 
. . Dull Normal 
. .Feebleminded 


Intellectual Efficient 
. .Very Superior 
.. Superior 
.. High Average 
.. Low Average 
. . Dull Normal 
. .Feebleminded 


Note that this estimate is based mainly on the following: 
number and quality of W 
number and quality of M 
level of form accuracy 
number and quality of O 
variety of content 
succession 


W(_ 


%) D(. 


Manner of Approach 
_ %) d(_ 


%) IM a " r d SC 


Enter the location percentages in the spaces above. Compare t 
centages with the norms shown in the box below, by placing a ch 
opposite the appropriate range of percentages. 


w 

D 

d 

Dd m 

0 

<10% ((W)) 
10-20 (W) 

< 30% ((D)) 
30-45 (D) 

< 5% (d) 


20-30 W 

45-55 D 

5-15 d 

< 10% 

30-45 W 

- 55-65 D 

15-25 d 

10-15 

45-60 W 

65-80 D 

25-35 d 

15-20 

>60 W 

>80 D 

35-45 d 

20-25 



>45 d 

> 25 

























































(76 

Sanple instruction sheet used in the Group Rorschach administered 

to the subjects orior to tliis experiment. 

S-A-R Method (DSJ. 


Su bjec t Data 

Name : 

Education: 
Marital Status; 


Age:_Sex:_Date: 

__ Occupation:_ 

Religion:___ 


INSTRUCTIONS (Examiner & Subjects please read) 

Ple a se READ THIS PAGE CAREFULLY b efore y ou open the booklet or look at the cards . 

You are about to see a series of ink-blot designs. You will look at them one 
at a time. You are requested to write down on the sheets of this booklet what these 
designs look like to you, what they resemble or anything that might be represented 
there. People see all sorts of things in these ink-blot pictures, so feel free to 
write down any response that is suggested to you. There is no question of right or 
wrong in what you see and write down. There are no rul.es or regulations other than 
that you look at the ink-blots in the proper order and write down what they might be 
or could represent. Do not look ahead in the series. Do not go back to change or add 
to the responses you have given to a previous card. Be guided by the questions on the 
Response Pages as you describe more fully the factors that influenced what you saw in 
the ink-blots. You will have one Response Page for each ink-blot design. 

Instructions for INDIVIDUAL Administration 

(cards are used) 

You will have______minutes to write and describe your im¬ 

pressions of each ink-blot. Write in the spaces provided on the Response Pages of 
this booklet. When the time is up, lift the card off the rack, place it face down¬ 
ward on the table and start on the next one. Do the same until you have completed the 
series. Use a fresh Response Page for each new ink-blot as you come to it. You will 
notice that there are spaces for five impressions on each Response Page. The spaces 
are numbered accordingly. Not everyone is expected to be able to fill all five 
response spaces on the Response Sheets. It is important, however, that you work as 
quickly as possible. Please do not attempt to write down more than five responses. 


Instructions for GROUP Administration 

(slides and screen are used) 

You will have____ minutes to write and describe your impressions 

of each of the ink-blots. Write in the spaces provided on the Response Pages of this 
booklet. Following this, the next ink-blot in the series will be shown on the screen. 

WAIT FOR IT - Please do not turn over the Response Page until you are told to do so. 

Use a fresh Response Page for each new ink-blot as it is shown to you. You will 
notice that there are spaces for five impressions on each Response Page. The spaces 
are numbered accordingly. Not everyone is expected to be. able to fill all five 
response spaces on the Response Sheets. It is important, however, that you work as 
quickly as possible. Please do not attempt to write down more than five responses. 
Please do not compare responses with others in the group. 






















(77 


RESP ON SE PAGE for Ink- Bl ot I 




\ > 

\ v 


N 


~n 


j 


l f 


(l) WHAT do you see? 

WHERE did you see it ? (Circle and number your ENTIRE response on outline above) 
WHAT WAS IT about the ink-blot that suggested your impressions to you? (Be 

as specific as you can) 


(2) WHAT do you see? 

WHERE did you see it ? (Circle and number your ENTIRE response on outline above) 
WHAT WAS IT about the ink-blot that suggested your impressions to you? (Be as 

specific as you can) 


(3) WHAT do you see? 

WHERE did you see it ? (Circle and number your ENTIRE response on outline above) 
WHAT WAS IT about the ink-bT#t that suggested your impressions to you? (Be as 

specific as you can) 


(4) WHAT do you see? 

WHERE DID you see it ?(Circle and number your ENTIRE response on outline above) 
WHAT WAS IT about the ink-blot that suggested your impressions to you? (Be as 

specific as you can) 









Sr " :j ''- ‘ r L \] [}. ■■ '■ r fi,- • 

il'i/ : 




..A ' 


'• .00 


^il 


■ 10dV:ij;.;n ■. 


' ! ’ 



-i ,;{■ 


mx 

; ? T'i 



: 1 o-iv ■ [ i ;_o 

1 . . '= : iond'.- i ■; 


f! 










