For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


PETROLOGY 

Or' THL 

FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 

BY 


A.F.BUCKHAM, B.Sc. 







(3.X IDBaiS 
araviBSiiwis 
















Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/buckham 1936 


UNIVERSITY OE ALBERTA 


GRADUATE SCHOOL 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have 
read, and recommend to the Committee on Graduate 
Studies for acceptance, a dissertation on M A Petro- 
graphical Study of Gabbro-like Precambrian Rock Types 
in the Erancois River District, Great Slave Lake, 
N.W.T.", submitted by Alex Eraser Buckham, B.Sc., 
(Mining Engineering), in partial fulfilment of the 
requirements for the degree of Master of Science, 

























.... < • * * 

f 















































A PETROGRAPHICAL STUDY OF GABBRO-LIKE 
PRE CAMBRIAN ROCK TYPES IN THE FRANCOIS RIVER 
DISTRICT, GREAT SLAVE LAKE, N.W.T. 


Alex Fraser Buckham, B.Sc. (Mining Engineering) 
Department of Geology 
University of Alberta* 


A THESIS 

Submitted to the University of Alberta in 
partial fulfilment of the requirements for 
the degree of Master of Science. This major 
thesis represents approximately three-quarters 
of the work of an academic year and an 
additional three months in the field. 


Edmonton, Alberta. 


April 22nd, 1936 













. 


. 

r - 











TABUS OF CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION . 1 

General statement and acknowledgments . 1 

Location and means of access... 2 

Previous work ........ 5 

Physical features and climate of the region. 6 

GENERAL GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY . 9 

Relationships of the rocks in the area. 9 

Distribution of the gabbro-lik© rocks.... 13 

Petrology of the rocks of the Francois River gabbro . 15 

Petrology of the main rock types .. 15 

Gabbroic rocks... 15 

Anorthcsitic rocks . 23 

Acid rocks ........ 27 

Petrography of the main rock types . 32 

Gabbroic rocks . 33 

Anorthcsitic rocks . 49 

Acid rocks .. 60 

Other rocks........ 71 

Metamorphism of the Francois Fiver gabbro . 77 

Structure of the Francois River gabbro.. 80 

Age of the Francois River gabbro .. 89 

Comparison with other bodies ..... 91 

Bushveld Igneous Complex... 92 

Duluth gabbro . 93 

Conclusions from comparison of the Francois 

River gabbro with similar bodies .. 95 

ECONOMIC GEOLOGY. 98 

Metallic minerals occurring within the body ......... 98 

Possibility of platinum, chromite, and nickel 

segregations in the body. 101 

Nickel occurrences . 102 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS DERIVED FROM THIS STUDY ... 103 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


107 

































































































































LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


Plate 1. Index map showing routes of travel in the north ... 3 

2. Aerial photograph of eastern portion of gabbro .... 7 

3A, Brule windfalls in the gabbro .. 17 

3B. Hand specimen showing megalophitic texture . 17 

4A. Photomicrograph of orientated inclusions in augite. 50 
4B. Photomicrograph of gabbro showing sideronitic 

texture. 50 

5A. Photomicrograph of altered gabbro showing uralite . 51 

5B. Photomicrograph of gabbro with coarsely ophitic 

texture .. 51 

6A. Photomicrograph of gabbro showing reaction rims ... 52 

6B. Photomicrograph of gabbro showing titanite ........ 52 

7A, Photomicrograph of hornblende in gabbro, showing 

zoning ... 53 

7B. Photomicrograph of anorthosite.... 53 

8A. Photomicrograph of aplitic dike showing granophyre, 75 

8B. Photomicrograph of aplitic dike .... 75 

9A. Photomicrograph of contaminated granite .. 76 

9B. Photomicrograph of muecovadite .. 76 

IOA. Banding in gabbro ..... 82 

IOB. Banding in gabbro .. 82 

IIA. Banding in gabbro ..... 83 

IIB. Banding in gabbro ..... 83 ' 

12. Banding in gabbro .... 84 

13A. Banding in anorthosite .. 84A 

13B. Banding in anorthosite .. 84A 

14. Photomicrograph of polished specimen of 

titaniferous magnetite .. 100 

Figure 1. Sketch showing the location of plates 10 and 11 ... 81 

Map 1. Geology of the Francois River district .. Bound at back 































. 























A PETROGRAPHICAL STUDY OF GABBRO-LIKE 
PRECAMBRIAN ROCK TYPES IN THE FRANCOIS RIVER 
DISTRICT, GREAT SLAVE LAKE, N.W.T. 


INTRODUCTION 

General Statement and Acknowledgem ents, 

In the summer of 1935 the Geological Survey of 
Canada, as part of an extended program of field work, 
sent many parties into areas not previously examined. 
The writer was attached to a party under the direction 
of Dr. F. Jolliffe, which mapped the Yellowknife River 
area, that covered about 10,000 square miles of terr¬ 
itory lying north of the north and east arms of Great 
Slave lake. An important result of this work was the 
discovery of some 3000 square miles of metamorphosed 
early Precambrian sediments which are considered to be 
favorable ground for prospecting. One of the most 
interesting fields of study was the body of gabbro- 
like rocks in the Francois River district. The vari¬ 
ation of rock types in and around this body of gabbro, 
from metamorphosed greywackes, or from granites to 
anorthosite, or to banded segregations of magnetite, 
and banded gabbros showing stratiform differentiation 
made it an intensely interesting area. 

During the time spent in study of the gabbro the 


1 


























< 

. . X- 






















. 

. 




















, 











PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


2 


writer collected specimens for microscopic examination. 
He is greatly indebted to Dr, Jolliffe, who made it 
possible for him to undertake this study, and who gave 
generously of his time and advice both in the field 
and at later times. In the laboratory, the advice of 
Dr. J. A. Allan and of Dr. R. L. Rutherford and the 
guidance of the latter in the microscopical work are 
gratefully acknowledged. Dr. A. E. Cameron gave 
generous assistance and advice in the study of a pol¬ 
ished section of magnetite. The laboratory work in 
connection with the study of this problem was made 
possible through a University of Alberta Research 
Scholarship for the award of which the writer wishes 
to thank the Board of Governors of the University. 

Location and Means of Access . 

The Francois river is one of a number of minor 
streams flowing into the northeast portion of Great 
Slave lake from the north. By air it is about 115 
miles southeast of Fort Rae and 20 miles east of 
Gros Cap, which is a prominent landmark in this section 
of the lake. These geographical relationships are 
shown in plate 1, which also indicates the main routes 
of travel in the north. The gabbro body is situated 




EXPLANATION OF PLATE 1 


Index map showing routes of travel in the north, and the 
location of the Francois River district. 



PLATE I 




































PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


4 


some 1 1/2 miles north of Great Slave lake and 2 miles 
east of Francois river. 

Access to the area is by boat in the summer 
months, and by air all year. Details of the routes of 
travel to Great Slave lake are given by Kidd and 
Stockwell (l). The following notes bring this inform¬ 
ation up to date and deal specifically with that 
relevant to the district about the gabbro. 

The nearest regular port of call for the boats 
plying on Great Slave lake is the camp of the Burwash 
Yellowknife Mines, 50 miles northwest. The routes of 
travel, however, all lead past Gros Cap (pi. l). The 
Canadian Airways in January 1935 transferred its 
radio station and refuelling base from Fort Rae to 
the Burwash camp which is now on the air route to 
Great Bear lake. 

Francois bay, two miles west of the gabbro area, 
provides a good harbor. The gabbro body may be reached 
overland from Great Slave lake or by following an 
Indian canoe route which reaches Bird lake (map l) by 
way of Caribou lake. Numerous lakes within the gabbro 

(l) Kidd, D.F., Geol. Surv., Canada, Sum. Rept. 1931, 
part C, pp. 47c - 49c. 

Stockwell, C.H., Geol. Surv., Canada, Sum. Rept. 
1932, part C, pp. 38c - 39c. 
















. 

. . 

t 

. 

..• • . 







PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


5 


provide fair landing for aircraft, landings having been 
made during the season of 1935 on Bird, White Man, 
Caribou, and Mad lakes. 

Previous Work . 

The Great Slave Lake area was examined by Robert 
Bell in 1899 (l). His work was exploratory and no 
mention of the gabbro was made, probably because of the 
fringe of granite along the shore. It is interesting 
to note that he recognized the existence of the large 
area of sediments whose boundaries were delineated in 
1935 by the Yellowknife party, although it is not evi¬ 
dent how he ascertained its presence. 

C. H. Stockwell carried out field work in this 
area in the summers of 1929 to 1932. His work was 
confined to shoreline and canoe route reconnaissance, 
but as a consequence of the discovery of nickel in the 
gabbro by Paul Beaulieu in 1932, he made a brief exam¬ 
ination of the gabbro, the results of which are to be 
found on pp. 55c and 60c-61c of his report (2). 

The gabbro body was visited by J. Barrington, 
Ventures geologist, some time subsequent to the nickel 
discovery, and a copy of his sketch map, supplied to 


ll) Bell, Robert, Geol, 
vol. xii, part A, pp 
(2) Stockwell, C.H., Op. 


Surv., Canada, Ann. Rept. 
. 103-110, 1899. 
cit. 


i 










, 




l 




























, 








. 













PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


6 


the party hy Mr. A, Cameron of Ventures, gave much 
valuable information concerning the topography and 
surface geology of the body. 

The general geology of the area, as worked out 
in the field in 1935 is briefly dealt with in the 
“Preliminary Report on the Yellowknife River Area, 
Northwest Territories”, 1936, paper 36-5 of the Geol¬ 
ogical Survey of Canada. 

Physical Features and Climate of the Region . 

The district forms a part of the Precambrian 
shield, and the physiographical descriptions so famil¬ 
iar to students of Precambrian geology would in general 
apply well here. The country is rugged and rocky, with 
narrow valleys and round flat-topped hills with steep 
slopes. The depressions are occupied by lakes and 
muskegs which are underlain with glacial drift. 

It was found that, contrary to the usual gen- 

gramte 

eralization, the surrounding A was characterized by low 
comparatively flat, muskeg-covered stretches, while a 
more rugged topography marks the gabbro body, although 
a grey granite stock which was the most prominent land¬ 
mark in the vicinity was an exception (pi. 2). 

The country has been ravaged by forest fires at 
















* 




* 

* 

t 












jg ::r;,r < c :• 

X O i \t 1C ■ . i C:'■•1*3 p B 1.0 ; > ’ B 7. 'v C fc ti 7 f i t ’' : ■ / 

t fi 

s . t o*td 

t 

r •: ' ' 7 ^ r ; ■ i . j 

. 

' 





EXPLANATION QV PLATE 2 


Aerial photograph of eastern portion 
of the gabbro body, looking southeast. The 
contact of the granite and gabbro, as shown 
by a more rugged topography in the latter, is 

evident. White Man lake is in the foreground. 

% 

The arrows show the contact. 

(Royal Canadian Air Force photograoh) 



7 


PLATE 2 








PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 8 

least twice in the past quarter century. As a consequ¬ 
ence windfalls of Burnt timber make travel over the 
gabbro body difficult (pi. 3A). Another consequence 
due probably to these fires, is the weathered nature of 
the rocks,(l). The gabbros and related rocks, and to a 
lesser degree the more resistant granites in the vicin¬ 
ity, often have a covering of disintegrated, incoherent 
rock, made up of more or less weathered individual 
crystals (pl.l3A), 

Atmospheric erosion seems to have been more int¬ 
ense in the gabbro than elsewhere in the district, for 
polished surfaces, striae, and other evidences of 
glaciation were not noted on its surface, although common 
enough in other rocks. Thus fresh specimens were at 
all times extremely difficult and in some cases imposs¬ 
ible to obtain. Much of the gabbro suffered alteration 
when the granite was intruded, and therefore the diff¬ 
iculty of obtaining specimens which were at least free 
from the effects of weathering is particularly unfor¬ 
tunate. 

(l) Blackwelder, E., Eire as an agent in rock weathering. 
Jour. Geology, vol. 35, pp. 134-140, 1927. 





















. 

I 
























PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


9 


GENERAL GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY 

RELATIONSHIPS OF THE ROCKS IN THE AREA . 

The formations occurring in the immediate vicinity of 
the gahhro body may be grouped as follows: 

TABLE OF FORMATIONS 


QUATERNARY 

Glacial drift, sand beaches. 

Great 

unconformity. 


Diabase dikes. 


Intrusive contact. 


Granite, granodiorite. 

PRECAMBRIAN 

Intrusive contact. 


Gabbro, anorthosite, pyroxenite, 
etc. 


Intrusive contact. 


Metamorphosed sediments, greywacke, 
slate, etc. 



































































PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


10 


The oldest rocks of the district consist of 
highly metamorphosed sediments, which as a broad belt 
occupy the basins of the Francois and Beaulieu rivers, 
(l). These rocks are for the most part fine-grained, 
arkosic greywackes, interbedded with slates and 
argillites. The weathered surface of these rocks 
varies in color from grey-green to rusty brown, and 
shows well-marked banding, individual bands ranging 
from one thirty-second of an inch to three or four 
feet. On the fresh surface, the rocks are chiefly 
fine-grained, grey-green to silvery grey chlorite and 
mica schists, which show no trace of the bedding app¬ 
arent on the weathered surface. 

Much of the sedimentary rock in the district 
shows nodules up to two inches long, which sometimes 
stand out on the weathered surface, or sometimes are 
eroded inward, giving the rock a knotted appearance 
suggesting conglomerate. These nodules are raetacrysts 
or centres of growth of chiastolite and similar meta- 
morphic minerals. Some seem to be aggregates of crystals 
but in a few places crystal units showed well the 
characteristic orientated inclusions of chiastolite. 

ll) See map accompanying G.S.C. paper 36-5, Preliminary 
Report on the Yellowknife River Area, N.W.T.'• 1936. 






* 

. 

, 

« ’ 


t 

' . • 







PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


11 


A particularly good outcrop of the nodular weathering 
rock near the gabbro "body occurs on the islands in 
Francois hay, in the vicinity of the Indian cabins. 

These rocks form a part of the assemblage of sediments 
and volcanics termed the Point Lake-Wilson Island series 
by Stockwell ( , !) who places them in the Early? Precambrian. 

The gabbro-anorthosite complex which is the 
subject of this thesis is summarized at the conclusion. 

The granites of this area have never been studied 
in detail and may consist of several petrographical 
types, Stockwell (2J states f, these intrusive granites 
north of Great Slave Lake are of two main types. One is 
red and is granodiorite in mineral composition. Its 
feldspars are oligociase and microcline in about equal 
proportions and the rock carries biotite or muscovite 
and, at many places, feldspar phenocrvsts... Within the 
main areas of these red granodiorites are small areas 
of gneissic, red, massive, light grey, white, and pink, 
and slightly gneissic, dark grey granites... The other 
main type of granite north of Great Slave Lake is a 
light grey to white rock varying in mineral composition 
at different localities . n These range from microcline- 
biotite and muscovite granite to biotite-oligoclase- 


(1) Stockwell, C.H., Op. cit., p. 46c, 

(2) --, Op. cit., p. 53c. 








• . 


. 

. 

. 

, .. - 

! » 

.. 










PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


12 


quartz diorite. Specific descriptions of granite thin 
sections follow later in this section. 

In the Francois River district contacts are for 
the most part sharp. Elsewhere in the area, however, 

zone 

a contact*several miles wide, grading from pegmatitic 
granite, or hybrid granite, through injection gneiss 
and lit-par-lit sills to sediments cut by pegmatite 
dikes often occurs. A few examples of hybrid rocks 
were noted within the gabbro. 

All the rocks are cut by the ubiquitous diabase 
dikes and sills. These are definitely late Precambrian, 
since they cut the Et-Then series, Athabasca sandstone 
in age, on Et-Then island to the east of the gabbro 
body. 







. 





. 








. 

, 









. 










. 




■ 










PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


13 


DISTRIBUTION OP THE GABBRO-LIKE ROCKS , 

Map 1 shows the gahbro body to he in plan somewhat 
oblong. The gabbro mass is bounded by granite on all 
sides with the exception of the north where it is in 
contact with sedimentary rocks. The position of the 
contacts as mapped is approximate, since no accurate 
map was available and the presence of bodies of magn¬ 
etite hindered the pace and compass surveying methods 
employed. Moreover the actual contacts were practically 
all drift covered. 

In the southern and southeastern ends of the 
gabbro body it appears that the contact of the bottom 
of the gabbro with the granite is at a relatively high 
elevation, with the result that there the higher hills 
are capped with gabbroic rocks while the lower ground 
is granite. The effect of this on the position of the 
contacts is obvious but cannot be mapped without some 
form of instrumental survey. After determining by 
traverse the physiographical relationship noted on 
page 5, the contact from this point to Mad lake was 
determined accurately from aerial photographs, (see 
pi. 2). (The topographical base for the map was pre¬ 
pared by the writer from aerial photographs kindly 
loaned by Dr. Jolliffe). 









. 

. 

, 

. 

* 

■ . 








PETROLOGY OE THE ERANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


14 


In the short time and with the mapping methods 
at the disposal of the field party it was not possible 
to map the individual rock types in the field. 

The exposed area of the gabbro is about 13 
square miles. 























































PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


15 


PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 

PETROLOGY OP THE MAIN ROCK TYPES 
The rocks of the gahbro are divided into two broad 
types, namely, anorthosites and gabbros. There are in 
addition two subordinate masses of ultrabasic rock, 
and some hybrid types due to the assimilation of sed¬ 
imentary rocks by the gabbro, and of both sediments 
and gabbro by the granite,, 

Gabbroic Rocks . 

The gabbroic rocks include several varieties. 
Peridotites, dunites, and other ultrabasic rocks were 
not found in the gabbro, although in some places the 
feldspar made up only 30 percent of the rock, (see 
slide A144)» There is a possibility that in places, 
particularly in the lower portions of the outcrop at 
sta, A138, such rocks might be present. There a 
coarse sand occurs made up of rusty decomposed rock 
up to six or eight inches thick, grading into decom¬ 
posed rock in place. The resistance of the ultra- 
basic portions of gabbroic bodies to weathering is 
elsewhere found to be poor. 

Rocks that appear to be amphibolites occur at 
two localities apart from the gabbro. On an island 
in the southwest portion of Francois bay (sta. F8), 











* 

. 

. 

. 

* 


















PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


16 


a dark green, fairly homogeneous amphibolite showing 
generally coarse grains of amphibole having cleavage 

occurs 

faces over one inch across/y The whole island is made 
up of this rock. On the Francois river (at sta. F190) 
a similar rock was found which showed a few streaks of 
chalky altered feldspar. The rock formed a topograph¬ 
ical eminence, standing about seventy-five feet above 
the bed of the stream, and although its contacts were 
drift masked, seemed to have the form of a small stock. 

The normal gabbroic types include rocks whose 
ferromagnesian minerals are olivine, augite, and horn¬ 
blende. Of nine gabbro slides examined, four contain 
olivine, and eight contain augite or strong evidence of 
the former presence of a pyroxene. Five contain augite 
with secondary hornblende, suggesting that in the two 
which carry hornblende alone it is secondary to augite. 

The feldspars crystallized early and the gabbros 
for the most part show a diabasic or ophitic texture. 
They are on the whole coarse grained, and Dr. Jolliffe 
coined the term M megalophitic” for the occurrence of 
this texture on a megascopic scale (see plate 3B). 

On the basis of grain size t-wo varieties of the 
gabbros may be distinguished, the normal gabbro with a 
grain up to a quarter of an inch, and the pegmatitic 










t 

. 

t 

« 

, 

l 

















rpj‘1 


rdt i9v,c Jhv?:-J v« Jityav ■ o a. T i-pl-bnr '.V 

- ■ 

, . ' 

•>,) r-f- -:fr hr:■■;:• r hf ? an..b;: m r. nc 

,.• re - • ;■:: j ■"• »■ " r ■• : 




EXPLANATION OF PLATE 3 


A. Windfalls of burnt timber make travel over the 

l 

gabbro difficult in many places. 

B. iiegaloohitic, or coarse diabasic, texture shown 
on the weathered surface of a hand specimen of 
gabbro. Natural size. 



17 


PLATE 3 



A 
































PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


18 


type, often showing megalophitic texture, with coarse 
grain up to 1 1/2 inches, and consisting of the same 
minerals as the normal gabbro with the possible sub¬ 
stitution of hornblende for pyroxene. The pegmatitic 
type is believed to represent concentrations of miner¬ 
alizers, water, sulphur, etc., along certain bands and 
in certain spots in the gabbro (l). 

The feldspar of the gabbro is in general basic 
labradorite and acid bytownite, although as acid a 
plagioclase as Ab^An^ and as basic as Ab 15 Ang 5 occur. 
This range may be explainable by the intrusion of the 
granite. The feldspars on the whole are highly altered. 
The commonest alteration products are clinozoisite and 
calcite, but in one or two places sericite-like products 
were observed. 

The augite of the gabbro is in thin section 
colorless to a vary faint purplish red, only faintly 
pleochroic, although in one place (slide A144) it is 
titaniferous augite, and has yellowish to purple brown 
pleochroism. The augite is full of microscopic orient¬ 
ated needles and rods of a dark mineral (see pi. 4A), 
forming schiller structure. This mineral is probably 
ilmenite or titaniferous magnetite, this conclusion 


(l) Grout, E.F., The pegmatites of the Duluth gabhro, 
Econ. Geology, vol. 13, 1918, pp. 185 -197 









* 
































PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


19 


Being Borne out By the facts that where iron stain is 
found in the augite it is comparatively free from 
inclusions, and that no inclusions occur in the titan- 
iferous augite. The augite of the gaBBro is often 
altered to secondary hornBlende and to chlorite, Biotite, 
and iron oxide. 

Olivine is present in four slides. It is an 
iron-rich variety, Being optically negative in all 
cases, therefore contains over 13 percent FeO. The 
maximum Birefringence oBserved in a slide of normal 
thickness indicates an iron content of at least 26 
percent FeO. It commonly alters to the non-fiBrous 
variety of serpentine, antigorite, and iron oxides, 
the latter occasionally paralleling the cleavage. In 
one slide a zone of serpentine (antigorite) was surround¬ 
ed By a zone of magnetite and this By a zone of Xeucox- 
ene and calcite. The olivine shows no reaction rims 
of augite, garnet, hornBlende, and the like, as descr- 
iBed By Sederholm andAGillson 11J, 

(l) Sederholm, J.J., On synantectic minerals, Bull. 

Comm. Geol. de Finlande, Njo 48, 1916 
Gillson, J.L., Callahan, W.H., and Millar, W.B., 
Adirondack Studies: The age of certain of the Adir¬ 
ondack gaBBros, and the origin of the reaction rims 
and peculiar Border phases found in them* 

Journ.Geology, vol. 36, 1928, pp. 149-163. 




. 


fc 

. 

. 

, 

< , 

. 

: . . 

t « 

, 













PETROLOGY 0E THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


20 


Titaniferous magnetite is one of the most 
abundant accessory minerals in the gabbros, which 
contain from five to ten percent of this mineral. It 
commonly occurs as irregular grains interstitial to 
the plagioclase laths, in some cases giving the rock 
a texture which has been called sideronitic (l) (see 
pi. 4B). The titaniferous magnetite alters to a yell¬ 
owish opaque mineral, probably leucoxene. Concentrations 
of magnetite occur in pegmatitic patches, and in one 
place as a band in the gabbro. 

Irregular grains of yellow sulphides, determined 
in the hand specimen as both pyrite and chalcopyrite, 
commonly occur in association with the magnetite. 

Biotite, while in some cases primary, is for the 
most part a reaction product of the ferromagnesians and 
ores with the plagioclase. In the reaction rims it 
generally occurs as flakes with ragged outlines surr¬ 
ounded by a vermicular intergrowth of hornblende, 
largely chloritized, and plagioclase feldspar. The 
biotite may form part of the vermicular intergrowth. 

Such a texture has been termed by Sederholm (2), a 
hornblende-biotite symplectite. 

(1) Osborne, E.E., Magmatic titaniferous iron ores, 

Econ. Geology, vol. 23, 1928, p # 757. 

(2) Sederholm, J.J., Op. cit., p. 46. 










. 

. t 

t 

. 






, . .. , 

• , » 

• • 1. * , . . l 













PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


22 


Titanite occurs in three of the slides. In some 
places it seems primary but in others its close assoc¬ 
iation ■with the pyrite and magnetite and the absence of 
typical wedge-shaped grains suggest that it is second¬ 
ary. 

The first mineral to crystallize in the gabbro, 
apart from the apatite, was the plagioclase. Following 
this olivine, augite, and magnetite began to crystallize. 
The olivine preceded the other ferromagnesians. The 
magnetite asserts its crystal outlines against the 
augite and is moulded on it, suggesting that cessation 
of crystallization of these two minerals was in part 
contemporaneous. 

Reaction rims are common in the gabbro* Although 
these are not all found about the one mineral the seq¬ 
uence is apparently: 

pyroxene (augiteJ-* amphibole (hornblendeJ-^biotite, 

Much of the pyroxene has gone over to a green hornblende, 
uralite, (see pi, 5A). Another common series is: 
magnetite or chalcopyrite-*biotite-*hornblende , 
the last-named mineral being found intergrown with the 
plagioclase as a symplectite. There are two main causes 
for such structures, primary magmatic reaction, and 
secondary, paulopost magmatic reaction or the action of 





























, 

. 

I 

A, 

. 










PETROLOGY OP THE PRAHCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


23 


metamorphism. Both have probably been active in the 
gabbro but to distinguish between the two has not been 
possible, so the term'reaction rirrf is used. 

Anorthositic Rocks . 

Anorthosites form the second main group of rocks 
in the gabbro. They are prominent in the field, being 
readily recognized by their light color on weathered 
surfaces. Peldspars ranging in color from light grey- 
green and light pink to buff and brownish are the chief 
constituent. The brownish feldspars are most common in 
the more acid varieties. The anorthosites shoitf medium 
to coarse grain and granitic texture. The feldspars, 
basic labradorite and acid bytownite, show much the 
same range in composition as those in the gabbros, but 
a gradation into acid pl'agioclase is also present. The 
feldspars are much altered, mainly to the clinozoisite 
varieties of the epidote series and to calcite. In 
some slides the alteration has directional features, 
being oarallel to the cleavage planes of the feldspar. 

The ferromagnesian components of the anorthosite 
are highly altered. In several slides the stumpy shape 
of the grains, and the birefringence of the less altered 
parts, suggest augite* which has in most cases altered 
to uralite (green hornblende), which has in its turn 




. 

. 

. { 





t 

. 

, 

. 

. ■ 

. 

. 

. 

. 

r , , 










PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


24 


altered to chlorite and epidote. The chief accessory 
minerals are magnetite, in rounded to shapeless grains 
altering to leucoxene, apatite in rod-like crystals, 
and in one slide biotite, which seemed to be a reaction 
product between magnetite and plagioclase. Secondary 
quartz and a brownish carbonate, probably ankerite, 
also occur* The gradation from gabbi*o to anorthosite 
is well shown by slides numbers F15:1 (30 percent ferro- 
magnesian), E253X (25 percent), and 3? 15 (15 percent). 

At eta. A144 an outcrop which throws some light 
on the relative ages of anorthosite and gabbro was 
observed. The contact between anorthosite and gabbro 
seemed to be quite sharp with no chilling effects. 
However, for a few inches from the contact the anorthos¬ 
ite appeared to be abnormally low in ferromagnesians 
while the gabbro appeared to be rudely banded parallel 
to the contact. This suggests that the gabbro consol¬ 
idated later than the anorthosite and that flow in 
the crystallizing gabbro or crystal mush along the 
sides of a block of anorthosite produced the banding. 

No veinlets of one rock in the other were found. 

Another type of gradation is found in the eastern 

portion of the gabbro body, where a more acidic type 
of anorthosite has considerable areal extent. In nearly 
all places, however, little work was done on this type 





. 

, 

« 

* 

. 




. 












PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


25 


since these rocks were so friable that it was seldom 
possible to trim a coherent hand specimen of them. 

The exposed surfaces of these rocks were pink to 
light brown and crumbly weathering, frequently overlain 
with a mantle of loose feldspar crystals (see pl.l3A). 

The rock varied from 75 to 85 percent feldspar cryst¬ 
als about 1 cm. in diameter, and from 15 to 25 percent 
ferromagnesians which were in one place 15 percent 
hornblende and 10 percent biotite. The normal anorthos¬ 
ite seems to grade into this type without any abrupt 
change, as is indicated in the following sequence obs¬ 
erved in the southeastern part of the body. 


Location Rock 


Sta. A145 to 
Sta, A147 
200 feet 
1650 feet 
2600 feet 
4300 feet 

Sta. A148 
3800 feet NW 


Anorthosite and 
anorthositic gabbro 
Banded anorthosite 
Banded anorthosite 
Gabbroic anorthosite 
Gabbroic anorthosite 

banding 318 

Coarse grained anorthosite 
Banded anorthosite Trend 345°. 


Banded in one 
place. 

Trend 340°. 
Trend 315°. 

Trend of 


The material from sta. A148, believed to be 
representative of the more acid anorthosite, is made up 
of greenish feldspar crystals up to 1 1/2 cm. in diam¬ 
eter which on the weathered surface appear to be surr¬ 
ounded zonally and interstitially by pinkish feldspar, 
probably the result of weathering inwards from crystal 






* 

, 

' 









. 








. 


. 















PETROLOGY OP THE PRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


26 


boundaries. It was determined by immersion methods 
to have the composition of basic oligoclase, Ab77An£3. 

It also contains 10 percent of chloritized hornblende 
and a little magnetite. 

These rocks are classed as anorthosites on a 
basis of field relationships and on their composition. 
Authorities do not specifically delimit anorthosite 
to plagioclase rock more basic than Ab 50 An 5 Q. Shand (l) 
states w the feldspar is usually bytownite or labrador- 
ite, but it may be andesine or even oligoclase. 

Mawdsley, in discussing the St. Urbain anorthosites (2), 
notes anorthosite composed of andesine, ^70 An 30 # 

These acidic anorthosites are in general found 
in close proximity to the gabbro and granite contact, 
and are possibly a hybrid rock having been acidified 
by the granite. They are in many places cut by numer¬ 
ous aplitic dikes. 

Another monomineralic differentiate noted was 


a band of massive titaniferous magnetite (at sta. F253). 
There an outcrop of dark, coarsely crystalline banded 
gabbro grades by increase in magnetite percentage and 
decrease of the other constituents into a rock contain- 



Shand, S.J., The Study of Rocks, 
Mawdsley, J.B., St. Urbain Area, 
Ueol. Surv., Canada, 1927, Mem. 


T.Murby, 1932, p.98 

Charlevoix, Quebec, 
152. 







- ■ 

, 

. 




. . . 
, • • 














PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


27 


ing 85 to 100 percent magnetite with a little chalky 
white feldspar. The magnetite crystallized as octa- 
hedra when isolated. It contains an intergrowth of 
ilmenite, determined from calculations of a chemical 
analysis to he 20.9 percent. Immediately above the 
magnetite the rock is white weathering and quartz¬ 
hearing and is of the nature of a hybrid granite, 
believed to be intrusive. In any case, the relation¬ 
ship of gabbro grading into magnetite is definite. 

Acid Rocks . 

The acid rocks are less amenable to classific¬ 
ation than the other groups since doubt exists as to 
their origin. Many of these may be aplitic dikes from 
the granite, others may be the rt red rock” so common 
in differentiated basic intrusions. In this body it 
may be, at least in part, dikes cutting the more basic 
phases. 

Mention has already been made of the types of 
granite found in the area. The main country rock is 
a coarse grained pink granite which in hand specimen 
showed about 40 percent of glassy quartz in irregular 
grains up to 1 cm. in diameter, 40 percent of fresh pink 

feldspar in large crystals up to 1 cm. in diameter, 
and about 20 percent highly altered ferromagnesian, 












PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


28 


probably chloritic hornblende. In a thin section of one 
specimen the quartz was clouded with numerous gas and 
liquid inclusions* The feldspar seemed to be of two 
generations, an older altered oligoclase, and fresher 
feldspars, oligoclase and microcline. Hornblende and 
biotite, both bleached, were present and the accessories 
were apatite and magnetite. 

Another type noted was the grey granite which 

composed the hill northeast of White Man lake. This 

rock showed coarse medium grain with about 40 percent 

of quartz in aggregates up to 1 cm. in diameter, 50 

percent plagioclase, most of which was oligoclase, 

Abg 3 An 17 , with some microcline, altering to flakes and 

shreds of sericite, and about 10 percent of biotite. 

Apatite and zircon were accessory minerals. The rock 

may be classed as a tonalite. 

The basic rocks of the gabbro body are cut by 
v 

many medium grained, pinkweathering dikes of aplitic 
aspect. These seem quite similar in the hand specimen, 

all being made up of pink feldspar, in places somewhat 
porphyritic, and a fine grained mass of pink feldspar, 
glassy quartz, and chloritic aggregates suggesting 
hornblende and biotite. In thin section a difference 

is noted. These rocks, which appear so fresh, are highly 
altered. They all have granitic texture. All show 


















< 










c 


















PETROLOGY OP THE PRANG01S RIVER GABBRO 


29 


fairly large, much altered crystals of a feldspar which 
falls within the range of acid andesine, and contains 
a heavy cloud of iron oxides. The ferromagnesians, 
while much bleached and altered to chlorite and epidote 
appear to have been hornblende and biotite. Zircon, 
magnetite, and apatite are the accessory minerals. 
Stringers of quartz and fresher feldspars, both micro- 
cline and oligoclase occur. The quartz in many places, 
especially in the absence of the fresher feldspar, 
appears contemporaneous with the altered feldspar* The 
numerous grains of quartz scattered through the altered 
feldspar frequently show simultaneous extinction sugg¬ 
esting granophyric texture. In a slide showing a 
dike-anorthosite contact a xenolith of anorthosite is 
surrounded by granophyre, (see pi. 8A )* The slides 
studied suggest that there has been an intrusion of 
the dike rock, somewhat contaminated by xenoliths of 
country rock, followed by a slightly intrusion of the 
same dike rock along the same channels. 

A somewhat different type was noted in tw^o places. 
One (slide Al36:l) is from a dike, the other (slide 
A138:5) from a small triangular intrusion into banded 
gabbro. In these the feldspar is made up of fresh and 
stained spindles which suggest micropefthlte. The 
























. 




. 






. 

. 





* 









PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


30 


other constituents are quartz and hornblende, with 
magnetite, apatite, and zircon as accessory minerals. 
The quartz contains inclusions with gas bubbles showing 
Brownian movement. 

The fact that the dikes are more numerous near 
the contacts, and that they contain zircon, an access¬ 
ory mineral which has not been observed in the gabbro, 
suggests that these are aplitic dikes from the granite. 
Furthermore in several places pegmatite dikes, definit¬ 
ely connected with the granite cut the mass, and at one 
place the granite gabbro contact was observed, the 
granite sending off small aplitic dikes into the gabbro 
The granophyric texture previously described which in 
some slides seems identical -with photomicrographs of 
the Bushveld granophyre, some of which cuts the norite. 
At present, however, the mass of evidence appears to 
favor the conclusion that they are simply aplitic dikes 

Two slides of hybrid granites have been examined 
They show fine grained, granitic, equigranular texture 
with occasional somewhat porphyritic crystals of grey 
feldspar in a groundmass of quartz, grey feldspar, 
(oligoclase, ^t^Ango)* and brown biotite bleached and 
altered to chlorite. Apatite, zircon, rutile?, and 
pyrite? were noted as accessories, the last named 








* 





, 


. 
















. 
















PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


mineral fulfilling the criteria of deuteric minerals 
given by Gillson (l). 


(l) Gillson, J.L., Granodiorites of the Pend Oreille 

District of Northern Idaho, Jour. Geology, vol. 35, 
1927, pp. 1-31. 






. 










... . 












PETROLOGY OE THE ERANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


32 


PETROGRAPHY OE THE MAIN ROCK TYPES 


In this chapter the thin sections studied are described 
in detail* They have been grouped for purposes of 
discussion into the main rock types, thus: 


Gabbro slides. 

A136 Olivine gabbro 
Al36:l Contact of granitic 
dike and gabbro. 
A137 Olivine gabbro 
A138A Megalophitic gabbro 
A138E Gabbro 
A138:3 Hornblende gabbro 
A140 Olivine gabbro 

A144 Olivine gabbro 

El5:l Hornblende gabbro 
E253X Anorthositic gabbro 


Acid rock slides. 

A136:l Contact of granitic 
dike and gabbro 
A138 Granite 
A138:5 Tonalite 
A144X Granitic dike? 

A144:2 Granophyric aplite 
A144:7 Contact of aplitic 

dike and anorthosite 
A3.46 Aplite 

*15:2 Granite 
F249X Tonalite 
I'253:1 Contaminated granite 
J?253A Contaminated granite 


Anorthosite slides. 

A144:5 Anorthosite 

A144:7 Contact of aplitic 

dike and anorthosite 
A145X Anorthosite 
A146X Anorthosite 
A147 Anorthosite 
E15 Anorthosite 


Others. 

A138:4 Spessartite 
A144:3 Muscovadite 


The locations from which these specimens were obtained 
are shown on map 1. 




* 


: 

. 














PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


Gabbroic Rocks , 

Specimen number A136 

Name Olivine gabbro 

Occurrence Massive gabbro on west shore 

of Caribou Lake* 

Macroscopic . 

The hand specimen is a dark greenish grey rock 
with fine medium grain, made up of crystals of augite 
up to 2mm., lath-shaped individuals of dirty green 
feldspar averaging 2 by l/2 ram., biotite and magnetite. 

A few specks of a yellowish sulphide whose lustre sugg¬ 
ests pyrite are visible. 

Microscopic . 

The minerals observed in this rock are plagioclase 
feldspar, augite, olivine, biotite, magnetite, pyrite?, 
apatite, chlorite, calcite, serpentine^antigorite), 
leucoxene, and iron stain. The texture is poorly ophitic 
The feldspar crystals, which make up at least 
50 percent of the rock, occur both in thin laths up to 
3 by 1/2 mm. and as stubby crystals averaging 2 by 1 mm, 

X* on 010 in 001 cleavage fragments is 25°, making the 
j)lagiocla§§ bytownite (Ab^An^). It is euhedral to all 
the other minerals in the rock, but contains small 
crystals of apatite. The feldspar is quite dusty contain 





















( < < 

. < 

. 

. 


PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


34 


ing submicroscopic needles of dark mineral. It alters 
to calcite, and some secondary chlorite occurs within 
the feldspar. 

The augite crystals are thickly shot with orient¬ 
ated inclusions of a dark mineral (see pi. 4A). These 
have two directions, one of which is parallel to the 
front pinacoid. Where the augite is twinned the incl¬ 
usions give a herringbone structure. Apart from the 
darkening due to the inclusions, the augite is colorless 
and non-pleochroic. It alters in a few places to biotite 
and chlorite. 

The olivine present is interstitial to the feld¬ 
spar, and in one place the augite seems moulded on it. 

It is optically negative, hence contains more than 13 
percent BeO. It contains iron oxides as alteration 
products and also alters to the non-fibrous variety of 
serpentine, antigorite. 

The opaque minerals present, magnetite and 
pyrite?, occur in rather shapeless grains. The magn¬ 
etite seems to be moulded on the augite. There are 
numerous reaction rims of biotite between the plagioclase 
and mafic minerals. Some of the magnetite has altered 
to a rather bright, opaque yellow mineral probably 
leucoxene. 







PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 35 


Specimen number 


A13 6:1 


Name 


Contact of granitic dike 
and gabbro. 


Occurrence. 


Bike cutting gabbro on 
the west shore of Caribou 
Lake, 


Megascopic . 

Light colored dikes up to 4 inches across cut the 
gabbro. One of these shows a coarse grained border 
against the country rock with feldspar crystals up to 1 
inch long. The middle of the dike is composed of buff to 
dirty green feldspar 60 percent, quartz 30 percent, 
chloritized hornblende and chlorite 10 percent. 
Microscopic . 

This slide shows parts of the gabbro country rock 
described as slide A136 (q.v.) and part of the granitic 
dike. The minerals of the gabbro are essentially the 
same as previously described but more highly altered. 

The feldspar is altered to a dense aggregate of flakes 
and shreds of clinozoisite?» The augite where unaltered 
still contains needles. An alteration sequence is part- 


Wtjl 

icularly A iliustrated, the augite altering to a green-blue 
pleochroic hornblende (uralite)(see pi. 5A), which in 
turn is followed by a green mica, then straw colored, 
highly pleochroic biotite. The latter alters to a feebly 

pleochroic green chlorite, penninite. The rock contains 
titamte m one or two places whose close association 




















„ 


. 

' 

,■ 

. ' 








PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 36 

with the ferromagnesian minerals and oxides suggests 
a secondary origin. 

The dike is made up of quartz, feldspar, and 
hornblende. Its texture is pegmatitic and it has a chill 
phase 3/4 to 1 mm. wide with banding of hornblende 
parallel to the contact. The quartz contains several 
inclusions of liquid with bubbles which when 0.002 mm. or 
less in diameter show Brownian movement. Two types of 
feldspar are evident, one suggesting perthitic texture 
by differential clouding with iron oxide. It is in any 
case one of the acidic feldspars, having negative sign 
and low index. The second kind of feldspar occurs in 
small grains on the contact, and as stringers extending 
into the gabbro. It is optically positive and as deter¬ 
mined by the statistical method is Ab9QAn-j_Q. 


Specimen number A137 

Name Olivine gabbro 

Occurrence Massive gabbro on the west 

shore of Caribou Lake. 

Megascopic.. 

The fresh surface of the rock is medium grained 
and dark greenish grey, with olive green feldspar in 
lath-shaped crystals, black augite with good cleavage 
faces, some magnetite and a little biotite. One aggregate 













, 









PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


37 


2 mm. long of yellowish metallic mineral was evident. 
Microscopic . 

The constituents of the rock are basic bytownite 
(Ab 15 An Q5 ) 69.8%, augite 19.6%, magnetite and pyrite 
5.3%, olivine 4.2%, biotite 1.1%, apatite, hornblende, 
chlorite, calcite, clinozoisite, serpentine (antigorite), 
and iron stain. The percentages were determined by 
Rosiwal analyses of two slides. The biotite content as 
reported is low, since it occurs as very narrow reaction 
rims around the ferroraagnesians and opaque minerals. 

The texture is megalophitic (see pi. 5B). 

The most abundant constituent is a basic bytownite 
in lath-shaped crystals averaging 3 by 1/2 ram. and 
stouter oblong crystals averaging 3 by 2 mm. It shows 
albite, Carlsbad, and pericline twinning. By its extinct- 
ion angle of 29° for X on 010 in basal cleavage plates 
it is Ab-^g Ang^. 

The augite is, where not filled with orientated 
needles of ilmenite?, faintly pleochroic from colorless 
to pale yellow brown. Although fairly fresh in this 
slide it shows the reaction series, augite--*uralite 
(green hornblende), the latter altering to chlorite. 

The olivine is an iron rich variety, being opt¬ 
ically negative. It shows one fairly distinct cleavage. 

It alters to serpentine (antigorite). 





































. 




♦ 

I 





PETROLOGY OR THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


38 


The opaque minerals show reaction rims of brown¬ 
ish mica with the plagioclase. A yellow sulphide, 
probably chalcopyrite, is present in fair amounts. Its 
shape is that of Gillson f s deuteric. 

The sequence of crystallization as shown in this 
slide is feldspar, olivine, then probably augite and 
magnetite together, the latter crystallizing when the 
former had ceased. Some of the feldspar crystals show 
evidence of crushing during crystallization. 


Specimen number 
Name 

Occurrence 

Megascopic . 

The fresh surface of this rock shows a rather 
confused aggregate of murky grey feldspar, principally 
in laths, suggesting ophitic texture, but with some 
chunky feldspars, and about even proportions of chunky 
and lath-shaped crystals from 3 to 7 mm, in diameter. 
Microscopic . 

The rock contains plagioclase feldspar, pyroxene, 

probably augite, secondary hornblende, biotite, chalco¬ 
pyrite, magnetite, apatite, clinozoisite, chlorite. 


A138A 

Megalophitic gabbro. 

One of the lighter weathering 
bands in an exposure showing 
stratiform differentiation on 
the west shore of Caribou Lake. 














. 

' , 






« ■ < 




. 


































. 








, 


















PETROLOGY OP THE PRAHCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


39 


The texture is megalophitic. 

The feldspar occurs in lath-shaped crystals. 

It appears to he of two kinds, one,having Z on 001 in 
cleavage fragments parallel to 010 about 28°, is Ab32Ang8» 
The other -is about AbpoAnss* with Z on 010 in basal 
cleavage fragments 26 1/2°. 

The pyroxene, where unaltered, contains the 
oriented inclusions giving schiller structure. It is 
highly altered to a pleochroic blue green hornblende, 
which is twinned in places. They both alter to chlorite 
as does the biotite present. 

In addition to the magnetite there is a yellowish 
metallic mineral determined in the hand specimen as 
chalcopyrite. 

The sequence of crystallization is here feldspar, 
thenmagnetite and pyroxene, the latter apparently having 
ceased crystallizing first. 


Specimen number A138P 

Name Gabbro 

Occurrence One of the darker weathering 

bands in an outcrop showing 
stratiform differentiation, 
oh the west shore of Caribou 
lake. 

Megascopic. 

The constituents of the rock are plagioclase 








- 
















. 






. 




, 










































PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


40 


feldspar, in laths which penetrate and are enclosed 
by plates of a stumpy dark mineral determined micro¬ 
scopically as augite, magnetite, biotite, and a 
yellow metallic mineral, probably pyrite. The rock 
is coarse medium grained. 

Microscopic . 

Under the microscope the rock is seen to consist 

of plagioclase feldspar (Ab An ), augite, hornblende, 

37 63 

magnetite, apatite, chlorite, clinozoisite?, iron stain. 
The texture is megalophitic, in part sideronitic (see 
pi. 4B). 

The plagioclase is in euhedral crystals, most 
of which are lath-shaped averaging 3 by 1/2 mm., but 
some are stubby, 2 by 1 ram. They show Carlsbad, alb- 
ite, and pericline twinning. The feldspar contains 
orientated needles of what in the augite was considered 
ilmenite. They are approximately 



orientated as shown. The feldspar 


contains a little clinozoisite 


but is fresh in appearance, 

Augite occurs in rather large grains up to 4 mm. 


in maximum diameter. Some of the larger grains pres¬ 
ent a poikilitic appearance. It contains many orient¬ 
ated inclusions of ilmenite?, but where clear is 


































t 








. 
























, 

. 











PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GAEBRO 


41 


non-pleochroic, and light yellow brown. It alters to 
uralite (green hornblende) and chlorite, but most of 
all to biotite, the crystals when in contact with the 
plagioclase showing small flakes of biotite projecting 
into the plagioclase. These seem to parallel the alb- 
ite twinning. 

"Magnetite" grains consisting of two minerals, 
probably magnetite and ilmenite, were noted. They are 
penetrated by the feldspar but seem to assert their 
crystal outlines against the augite. The grains are 
surrounded by rims of biotite, in part like the spine¬ 
like flakes noted above. This is in turn succeeded by 
a zone showing vermicular intergrowths of plagioclase 
feldspar, a greenish mineral, probably chloritized 
hornblende , and sometimes biotite. The base of some 
of these intergrowths is against the biotite with the 
curved ends against the feldspar, in others the reverse 
relationship occurs. This structure has been termed 
"symplectite" (l), by Sederholm, who attributed it to 
metamorphism from a granitic intrusion. Hills (2), 
however, attributes it to paulopost reaction. 

(1) Sederholm, J.J., Op. cit,, p. 46. 

(2) Hills, E.S., An unusual occurrence of myrmekite, 
and its significance, Geol. Mag., vol* 70, 1933, 
p. 294-301. 















< 

, 

. 

■ 

•' 

• • t 

. 

t 

.«• • . 

• • 






PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


42 


The slide shows this type of reaction rim particularly 
well (see pi. 6A). One or two intergrowths of magnet¬ 
ite suggest the former presence of olivine. Apatite 
occurs in rod-like crystals in the feldspar and in one 
case cuts the hiotite. 


specimen number A138:3 

Name Hornblende gabbro 

Occurrence As a band of stratiform diff¬ 

erentiate, on the west side of 
Caribou Lake. 

Megascopic . 

The rock shows medium to coarse grain with fibr¬ 
ous green mineral, determined microscopically as horn¬ 
blende, surrounded by dull white to light buff, pink, 
etc., material, probably altered feldspar. In places 
in the rock carbonate occurs. Tiny brownish aggregates 
of biotite are present in small amounts. Specks of 
metallic minerals are also present. 

Microscopic . 

The constituents of the rock are hornblende, 
plagioclase, titanite, magnetite, pyrite, clinozoisite, 
chlorite, and calcite. The texture is granitic. 


The most abundant mineral of the rock is common 
hornblende. It is highly pleochroic with X - light yellow, 












- 






. 






. f . 

- 

• ‘ 











PETROLOGY OP THE PRANllOIS RIVER GABBRO 


43 


Y = dark brown, Z s brownish green. The maximum value 
of Z on c noted was 22°. Twinned crystals were noted. 

The feldspar is almost completely altered. Its 
index shows it to be more basic than AbggAn-^, some 

places it is entirely replaced with columnar to rad¬ 
iating aggregates of clinozoisite. This mineral is 
optically positive, and its birefringence places it at 
about 8 to 9 molecular percentage of the HCagBe^Si 3°13 
molecule, (l). It is therefore almost common epidote. 
Clinozoisite also occurs as shreds within badly altered 
feldspar. This slide is illuminating since in the others 
the material is seen only in small shreds. Stringers of 
this mineral also cut the hornblende crystals. 

Magnetite and pyrite? are accessories, in assoc¬ 
iation with which are several subhedral crystals of 
pleochroic titanite up to 0.3 ram. in diameter. 


Specimen number 
Name 

Occurrence 


A140 

Olivine gabbro. 

Massive outcrop of gabbro at 
the west end of White Man 
lake. 


Megascopic . 

The rock is a medium grained gabbro, rather low 


(l) Winchell, A.W., Elements of Optical Mineralogy, 
Part II, 3rd Ed., 1933, p. 313. 





















* 










« ' ' 























PETROLOGY OE THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


44 


in feldspar. It contains a little biotite. 

Microscopic . 

The minerals observed are plagioclase feldspar, 
augite, olivine, biotite, magnetite, pyrite, apatite, 
iron stain, calcite, serpentine (antigorite), penninite?, 
leucoxene. It has subophitic texture. 

The plagioclase is a comparatively fresh labr- 
adorite (Ab4 3 An 57 ), in lath-shaped and stubby crystals, 
which show albite and a considerable amount of Carlsbad 
twinning. 

The augite is almost as abundant as the plagio¬ 
clase. It contains orientated inclusions of ilmenite? 
giving schiller structure. Numerous "blebs* 1 of magnetite 
also occur in it. 

Olivine, in rounded grains, is the most altered 
mineral in the slide. The fresher grains are surrounded 
by a narrow border of augite. Some have altered to a 
mass of antigorite and iron oxides. Others seem surr¬ 
ounded by a zone of magnetite followed by a zone of 
leucoxene and calcite. 

Around the grains of olivine and opaque mineral 
*? 

is a zone of penninite-plagioclase symplectite, which 

is separated from the opaque minerals by a zone of 

biotite. A fellow sulphide constitutes a considerable 
amount of the accessory opaque minerals. 

































, 














. ! 























PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GAB3R0 


45 


Specimen number 
Name 

Occurrence 


A144 

Olivine gabbro 

Massive outcrop on ridge 

southeast of Caribou lake 


Megascopic . 

The hand specimen shows a fine medium grained 
rock consisting of dull, pale green feldspar, approx¬ 
imately 25 percent, and black shiny material, deter¬ 
mined microscopically as titaniferous augite, slightly 
brownish in places when mixed with biotite. The cleav¬ 
age faces of the feldspars appear to show a lath-like 
arrangement. At places on the joint cracks of the rock 
a dull greenish bloom is present. 

Microscopic . 

The rock is made up of titaniferous augite, plag- 
ioclase feldspar, olivine, biotite, magnetite, serpent¬ 
ine (antigorite), clinozoisite and iron stain. Its 
texture is granitic, 

Titaniferous augite is the most abundant const¬ 
ituent of the rock, at least 50 percent of this mineral 
being present. It is optically positive, and exhibits 
weak reddish violet pleochroism, as X = light yellow, 

Y = reddish purple, Z = light grey. It alters to a 
brown hornblende, whose pleochroism is X * clear yellow, 

Y = golden brown, Z = reddish brown, to brown biotite, 
and is stained yellow with iron oxide. 





















- 




t 

. 








. 












PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 46 

The olivine is in rounded grains, altering to 
serpentine (antigorite), and iron oxides. At least 
20 percent of this mineral is present. 

The plagioclase, making up about 25 percent of 
the rock, is at least as basic as labradorite, Ab 45 An 55 , 
by three measurements on the statistical method. It 
is much altered, to one of the epidote minerals, prob¬ 
ably within the clinozoisite range. 

The biotite present is nearly all secondary. 


Specimen number F15 j1 

Name Hornblende gabbro 

Occurrence An outcrop of massive gabbro 

northeast of the east end of 

Trout lake. 

Megascopic . 

The rock shows considerable local variation in 
appearance, the bulk of it showing on the fresh surface 
black hornblende, 40 percent, pale green feldspar 50 
percent, and biotite 10 percent. Some magnetite is 
evident. It is medium grained and in places shows 
megalophitic texture. 

Microscopic . 

Microscopic examination revealed as constituents 
of the rock, plagioclase feldspar, hornblende, biotite, 
magnetite, titanite, calcite, dipyre, chlorite, clino- 






t 

, 

c 



. 


< 


t 






. 













PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


47 


zoisite, leucoxene. The rock shows granitic texture. 

Plagioclase feldspar, basic labradorite (Ab^Q 
Anr, 0 ), is the most abundant constituent. It is highly 
altered to clinozoisite?, and in some places to dipyre 
and calcite. The dipyre shows distinctly the charac¬ 
teristic prismatic and pinacoidal cleavages. 

The predominant ferromagnesian is a highly 
pleochroic hornblende, which in one place showed zoning, 
yellowish brown-*greenish brown—>blue green, (see pi, 7A)L 
Alteration of the hornblende has proceeded far. It has 
gone over to biotite, to chlorite, and to calcite. 
Although much of the biotite is secondary, some is 
primary. This latter contains tablets of plagioclase 
along the cleavage planes. 

Some of the magnetite has gone to leucoxene. 

In one place, an aggregate of magnetite, which seems 
to be arranged in a rectangular net-like pattern, is 
associated with titanite, calcite, biotite, and a 
grain of plagioclase (see pi, 6B). 

A grain of apatite cuts across several feldspar 
grains and a hornblende grain. 





C ' 




* 

' w . ft T 

r 

« < 

. 

* 

< 

» 













PETROLOGY OE THE ERANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


48 


Specimen number 
Name 

Occurrence 


E253X 

Anorthositic gabbro 
Body of massive, white 
weathering rock at the 
northwest end of Mad lake 


Megascopic . 

On the weathered surface the rock is dull white 
and appears to be mostly feldspar. The hand specimen 
shows a coarsely crystalline anorthositic gabbro with 
olive green to pink feldspar in crystals up to 1 1/2 
cm., forming about 75 percent of the rock, and a dark 
mineral with good cleavage, determined microscopically 
as augite in part altered to hornblende, occurring as 
clumps of crystals to make 25 percent of the rock. 
Microscopic . 

The rock is made up of plagioclase feldspar, 
augite, hornblende, biotite, apatite, chlorite, clino- 
zoisite, and calcite. It has been so highly altered 
that the texture is obscured, but it appears to be 
megalophitic. 

The plagioclase feldspar, which is found in 
large crystals averaging 3 by 2 mra., is almost too 
altered to determine. One crystal perpendicular to Y 
gave its composition as Ab 35 Ar^ 5 . It is now a mass 
of clinozoisite and calcite. Chlorite with very good 
ultra blue birefringence also occurs in the feldspar. 
















. 

, . 




















. 

. 

' 


















PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


49 


The ferromagnesian is augite, non-pleochroic and 
conaining orientated inclusions (schiller structure). 

It shows rims of biotite and in places hornblende. 

A little of the hornblende may be primary, but most of 
the hornblende and biotite is secondary. 

A large individual of apatite in a plate of 
hornblende was noted. 

Anorthositic Rocks . 

Specimen number A144:5 
Name Anorthosite 

Occurrence, Massive outcrop, southeast 

of Caribou lake. 

Megascopic . 

The anorthosite is grey weathering, speckled with 
green and dark spots of ferromagnesian. The fresh surf¬ 
ace shows coarse medium grained rock consisting largely 
of light olive green to buff feldspar, a small amount 
of biotite, and aggregates of altered ferromagnesian. 

A small amount of secondary quartz was evident. 
Microscopic . 

The rock is made up of plagioclase feldspar, 
amphibole, iron oxide, apatite, chlorite, calcite, 
clinozoislte., The texture is granitic but the arr¬ 
angement of the hornblende suggests directional feat¬ 


ures. 




















" 











. 




. 






















. 














PLATE 4 





, ( V£I> . oeqa ) , oicTcTfs j q on.p. irnoX.oifl ,1 

er[T . rneinlr errpj'pt'Xani JreXto jHDfworfe 

ertf Jo ss&v&elo ord^rmiii &ti$ ?;t£ *?-^nfJ ^B9rf 

igjjj? 

, J tii r,/, V'T i- f ■ i,: 7 0 * 0 6 S: X 

gfiiworie t (^8£J> .oeqe) t oicfcfjBg lo nq.eTgo*io rn\oXor[ 9 i ,8 
^eXjRTXeneq eii-d-er^m Jo JjpfiWvi bnr egT^I \e 
.97uXxeX orXinoTehrp r- zldoi, &tij gnrvtg <8f(X.sJ i^qa 

.XrCgtJ *5S X 



EXPLANATION - OP PLATE 4. 


A. Photomicrograph of augite in gabbro, (spec. A137), 
showing orientated inclusions of ilmenite?, The 
heavy lines are the prismatic cleavage of the 
augite. 

X 250. Ordinary light. 

B. Photoraicrograph of gabbro, (spec. Ai:58F), showing 

a large individual of magnetite penetrated by feld¬ 
spar laths, giving the roSlc. a sideronitic texture. 

X 25. Ordinary light. 


50 


PLATE 4 




B 










5 


ATE 



e mis i ,r c 1.7/ v>$ jsxf 

■ 

,©eqa) . oicfcteg h970j.fi? ^0'' lrtqjpTgo*ip fmo£qj|S */ 
d’uocfB (itr) ©JJIptjj Jo a mi 7 gn r vvori; r.c .14 

(l) ©iinwod’Ycf he79i\ljp ^J-dgiH 

jp§ is n '&e 9 1 q • ■■ o e '£& s i 
, 3 r{v ;- r* x/m ; h*xO v , r **y 


, 07ddj?g oiJ-irtqo x;Iee7jR0C Jo n^WJIfffmrTOi'orfS A a 

-eneq alB^a^Td ea^Iooi'g^IS , {&&U *oeqa) 
»e*T.jjdooTd'e TsIIrxioa awode rioirfw ^e^igti.e ed^'id 

.frigid xqjBfcihTO .££ X 



B 



^XPL\H\TIO>I OV PL m 5 

<. Photomicrograph of altered gabbro. (spec. 
Al36:l) showing rime of uralite (ur) about 
augite (aug). Highly altered bytownite (f) 
is also present* 

X 36, Ordinary light. 

B. Photomicrograph of coarsely ophitic gabb.ro, 
(spec, <137). Plagioclase crystals pene¬ 
trate augite, which shows schiller structure. 
X 33. Ordinary light. 





51 


PLATE 5 



B 
































3 I 


gnrworfe , (‘tTBSI/ , 0 9cr^^^Bi&f r iBg rCq.f 7^07 0imo^or!*! *A 

b \;o’ beJbnjJOTTue er emfi nor^OBei 

To mri b nr f>980®*e er ^f:.^ ^e 1 .- toio r To mil 
iBqa 619*3: eaBlooigBl^^onB ' 9^9 JtfnTOfJ. ^es.IJiioJrio 
er aTirtouotfe errfT ,■&.&$ wroigi'e tft-i tBluoJtorrev nr 
.mlort/iebe? ^cf ei iPbann'stJ' 

, &,i% l± X-> pn ' r • • 7 ® *8d X 

gnrworia ,(l:8I^ n 9 mro 9 qe) oicrcf.Bg To riaBigoiotmoi oxi 1 ! ,8 
rttrw heiBiooaaB nie^Bq iBlngoBioe*f‘B nr eiiiengBm 
..eirolBO rfj£w 6 hb t aniBig .bsqBria egbaw nr airnBiri 
*eaBloorgBlq haiailB nf Jbeeolona ar eIorf»v axiT 



B 


EXPLANATION 0? PLATE 6. 

A. Photomicrograph of gat'oro, (spec. 4I38F), showing 
reaction rime. The magnetite is surrounded by a 
rim of biotite, 'which is enclosed in a rim of 
chloritized hornblende and plagioclase feldspar 
in vermicular intergrowths. This structure is 
termed a symplectite by Sederholm, 

X 68. Ordinary light. 

B. Photomicrograph of gabbro (specimen ^lbsl), shoving 
magnetite in a rectangular pattern associated with 
titanite in veige shaped grains, and with calcite. 
The whole is enclosed in altered plagioclase. 

X 36. Ordinary light. 



52 


PLATE 6 



B 


EXPLANATION 0? PLATE 7. 

A, Photomicrograph of hornblende in gahbro (spec, 

F15:l). The hornblende shows zoning, the interior 
zone being yellowish brown, the middle brownish 
green, and the margin blue green, 

X 25, Ordinary light. 

B* Photoraicrograph of anorthosite (spec, 4145X), 
showing labradorite and much altered inter¬ 
stitial ferromagnesian, 

X 25, Crossed nicols. 


53 



PLATE 7 


B 










PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


54 


The feldspar, a basic labradorite of composition 
Ab3Q An 70> occurs in subhedral, equidimensional grains 
averaging about 2 by 2 mm. It is much altered to calcite 
and an epidote mineral, probably clinozoisite. The 
alteration is directional, seemingly paralleling the 
Cleavage of the feldspars. 

The ferromagnesian mineral is now a mass of calc¬ 
ite, and chlorite. The presence of the former, and the 
fibrous appearance of the grains, suggest a calcium 
amphibole, possibly actinolite. 

A few grains of iron oxide, for the most part in 
the ferromagnesian, have a dull yellow lustre. 


Specimen number A144:7 

Contact of anorthosite and 
aplitic dike. 

Occurrence Aplitic dike cutting anorthos- 

ite, south of Caribou lake. 

Megascopic . 

The hand specimen shows the contact of pink, 
rather fine medium grained aplite with the medium 
grained green anorthosite, the aplite sending off 
stringers into the anorthosite. 

Microscopic . 

This slide shows the contact of the anorthosite 
described as slide A144:5 and an aplitic dike described 







< 




< 


• , 






< 



. 








€ 






< 




L c 



: 
















PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


55 


as A144:2. The anorthosite is a more highly altered 
variety of the type described as A144:5. It contains 
the same minerals, and in addition one or two grains 
of zircon have been introduced close to the di£e 
contact. 

The dike rock is the same in mineral content, 
mainly altered plagioclase, quartz, hornblende and 
mica. It has developed marked granophyric texture, 
(see pi. 8A), about the contact. This in one place 
surrounds a xenolith of feldspar from the anorthosite. 


Specimen number 
Name 

Occurrence 


A145x 

Anorthosite 

Massive outcrop of coarse 
grained anorthosite, south¬ 
east of Caribou lake. 


Megascopic . 

The rock is coarse medium grained. It is 
almost entirely light green and pink to buff feldspar, 
in places showing both Carlsbad and albite twinning, 
and in one place slightly zoned. A little biotite, 
magnetite, and chlorite are also present. 

Microscopic- 

Under the microscope the rock is seen to consist 
of plagioclase feldspar, a badly altered ferromagnesian,' 
apatite, calcite, epidote, chlorite 3 iron stain, and 










. : 





, 








. 










. 

t 









- 
























PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


56 


some introduced quartz, orthoclase and calcite. The 
texture is granitic. 

The plagioclase occurs in equidimensional octa- 
hedra about 2 by 2 mm., (see pL 7B). Its composition, 
although difficult to determine exactly, is within the 
labradorite range. It alters to calcite and to an 
epidote mineral, probably clinozoisite. 

The ferromagnesian mineral, which is interstit¬ 
ial to the feldspar, is too altered to determine, a 
mass of chlorite, calcite, and epidote. The slide 
contains considerable accessory apatite. 

In addition to the above, there is some sec¬ 
ondary quartz and calcite, two veinlets of the latter 
appearing to be ankerite, and some introduced alkali 
feldspar, which was determined as orthoclase. 


Specimen number 
Name 

Occurrence 


A146 X 
Anorthosite 


Massive outcrop southeast 
of Caribou lake. 



the fresh surface of the rock shows tabular 
feldspars over 2 cm, long, showing albite twinning. 
Their color ranges from greenish grey through pale 
huff to pale pink. The rock contains considerable 


amounts of a pinkish grey mineral, having the same 













( 






. 

* < 

, 

- t t 

< 




. 

. 







PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


57 


same color and lustre when wet as native silver. 
Microscopic . 

Microscopic examination shows the rock to consist 
of plagioclase feldspar, pyroxene?, apatite, magnetite, 
epidote?, calcite, chlorite, leucoxene, and quartz. 

The texture is granitic. 

The chief constituent of the rock is an acid 
bytownite, AbggAnvs* ^ occurs in equidimensional, 
subhedral,grains, averaging 2 by 2 mm. It alters to 
calcite and to an epidote mineral, probably clinozoisite. 

The ferromagnesian, whose shape suggests a 
pyroxene, is now too altered to determine. It is a 
mass of epidote, calcite and chlorite, the last named 
mineral occurring in radiating aggregates. 

A large individual of apatite, some leucoxene, 
and some introduced quartz are the other minerals in 
the rock. 


Specimen number A147 

Anorthosite 

Occurrence. Outcrops of grey to pinkish 

brown, rather altered 
anorthosite, south of Caribou 
lake. 

Megascopic , 


The fresh surface shows coarse grained olive- 















, 

i l 

< 

* 

c 

, ' 


, 

< 












PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


58 


green feldspar and very little else, A small amount of 
secondary quartz and calcite are present. 

Microscopic . 

The rock contains plagioclase feldspar, pyroxene, 
apatite, magnetite, hornblende, chlorite, calcite, 
clinozoisite, leucoxene, quartz. The texture is gran¬ 
itic. 

The plagioclase feldspar is acid bytownite, 
At^An^, It forms rather large, equidimensionai cryst¬ 
als up to 4 mm. across. Calcite and clinozoisite are 
the main alteration products. 

The ferromagnesian is now a mixture of horn¬ 
blende and chlorite. It may have been augite, although 
the structure is suggestive of olivine. Some magnetite 
is present as irregular grains, now largely leucoxene. 

A considerable amount of apatite in euhedral crystals 
up to 1 by 1/2 ram, is the other accessory mineral. 

Some large grains of secondary calcite and quartz occur* 


Specimen number 
Name 

Occurrence 


PI 5 

Anorthosite 

Massive outcrop, 1/2 mile 
south of nickel showing. 


Megascopic . 


The rock is a pale green coarse grained anorthosite* 









. 

* 

« 

t 

■ 

. 

. 

. 

. 








PETROLOGY OP THE PRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


60 


Microscopic . 

The rock consists of plagioclase feldspar, 
augite?, biotite, magnetite, apatite, chlorite, zoisite, 
-calcite, leucoxene f The texture is granitic. 

The plagioclase is highly altered. Two measure¬ 
ments by the statistical method show it is at least as 
basic as Ab^QAn^Q It is now a mass of zoisite, calcite, 
and chlorite. 

The ferromagnesian, also badly altered, suggests 
augite by its shape, color and birefringence. It alters 
to chlorite and epidote. A little biotite, apatite, 
and magnetite are present. The last named mineral alters 
to leucoxene and also has in places a rim of biotite. 

In one place a network of magnetite laths surrounded 
by leucoxene occurs in a large biotite individual. The 
network suggests a rhombohedral arrangement. 


Granitic Rocks . 

Specimen number A138:5 
Name Tonalite 

Occurrence Massive granite near gabbro 

contact, on northwest shore 
of Caribou lake. 

Megascopic.. 

The rock is coarse medium grained, pink weathering, 
and is made up of pink to white feldspar, an equal pro¬ 
portion of rusty looking quartz and about 20 percent 









, 

, 


. ' 

< 

. 








PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


61 


ferromagnesian. The white feldspar is cut by stringers 
of the red, and some crystals show albite twinning. 
Microscopic : 

The minerals of the rock are quartz, microcline, 
plagioclase feldspar, hornblende?, biotite, apatite, 
magnetite, sericite, chlorite, iron oxide. The texture 
is granitic. 

The quartz is dusty looking, with lines and clus¬ 
ters of cavities which contain bubbles, and with needle¬ 
like crystals of apatite. 

The rock appears to contain two generations of 
feldspar. One is in large rather altered crystals and 
by immersion methods was determined to be oligoclase, 
although the albite twinning is neither prominent nor 
abundant. It is largely altered to sericite. There 
are also a number of smaller crystals of microcline 
and oligoclase in about equal proportions. These are 
less altered and seem to have brought about a regrowth 
in the old feldspars. The second generation is prob¬ 
ably due to a later stage of magmatic action. 

The ferromagnesians are almost completely altered 
to a dirty green chlorite. The remnants suggest both 

bleached and chloritized hornblende and biotite. Some 
yellow oxide of iron is present, an alteration product 
of the magnetite. 










* 

. 

: 

, 

« < 

, 




. 







THE PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 62 


Specimen number A138:6 and A138 

Name Tonalite? 

Occurrence Patch of "granite 11 4 ft. by 4ft. 

by 5 ft. intruding gabbro, 
on the northwest shore of 
Caribou lake. 

Megascopic . 

The ’granite is uniformly pink weathering, and 
■varies from a medium fine grained aplitic phase to a 
coarse grained pagmatitic phase, the latter having 
crystals up to 1 inch across. The most common phase 
is a medium coarse grained rock consisting of salmon 
pink feldspar (45 percent), milky quartz (40 percent), 
and magnetite (15 percent). 

Microscopic. 

Slide A138 is typical of the medium grained 
phase while A138:6 is a magnetite rich segregation. 

The constituent minerals of the rock are quartz, 
perthite, magnetite, apatite, zircon, hematite. The 
texture is coarse grained granitic. 

The quartz present is in rather large crystals 
which seem dusty because of inclusions of liquid cont¬ 
aining bubbles. It is also present as smaller crystals 
in the feldspar which give the effect of granophyre by 
simultaneous extinction. 

The differential iron staining of the feldspar 
spindles strongly suggests perthite. Its index is 







: 







- 



■ 


. 




< . 


- 

* 




: 





* 
























PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


63 


less than danada balsam. 

Much euhedral magnetite with rectangular outlines, 
in places altering to red oxide of iron, is present. 

Some crystals of zircon occur, one of which is seen under 
the high power to he associated with small amounts of 
an undetermined purple mineral, 

-b'rom its marked similarity to the dike rock of 
slide A136:l, and from the presence of zircon, not found 
in the gabbro, it is inferred that this rock is genet¬ 
ically connected with the granite (tonalite). 


Specimen number A144X 

Name Granitic dike? 

Occurrence Isolated outcrop in muskeg 

south of Caribou lake. 

Megascopic . 

The rock is pink weathering, and in as fresh a 
specimen as could be obtained, is made up of pink 
feldspar (80 percent), chlorite (10 percent) and quartz 
(10 percent). The texture is rather coarsely granitic, 
cut by quartz and plagioclase stringers. 

Microscopic . 

In thin section the rock is seen to consist of 
microcline, plagioclase feldspar of two generations, 
hornblende, quartz, zircon, apatite, titaniferous 











, 

. 

, : 

t * 

« 


. 

• , 








PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


64 


magnetite?, epidote, calcite, hematite, leucoxene. 

The rock contains two types of feldspar, show¬ 
ing Carlsbad and albite twinning, and in two or three 
places apparently microcline. The oldest, most altered 
feldspar is andesine, Ab^An^g, It contains clouded 
iron oxides, and is cut by stringers of quartz and 
albite of the composition AbggAn^Q, and in places 
contains grains of albite and quartz in granophyric 
groups* The quartz contains inclusions with bubbles. 
Zircon and apatite are common accessories, and from the 
leucoxene the former presence of titaniferous magnetite 
is inferred. The slide contains much iron oxide. 

The nature of the rock apparently indicates a 
granitic dike which either contains xenoliths of 
anorthosite or of an early phase of the granite. 


Specimen number A144:2 

Name Granophyric aplite. 

Occurrence Aplitic dike cutting gabbro 

southeast of Caribou lake. 

Megascopi c. 

The dikes are fine grained, and on the fresh 
surface appear to be made up of quartz and pink feld¬ 
spar with a very little chlorite. 

Microscopic . 

The constituent minerals of this rock are 














t 





.. 

t 

t 

, 

. : 

: 


, 

. 

. 



« 


* 










PETROLOGY 0jr THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


65 


quartz, plagioclase feldspar, hornblende, mica, apatite, 
-magnetite, chlorite, red oxide of iron, leucoxene. 

The texture is poorly granophyric. 

The quartz occurring as blebs and stringers in 
the altered feldspar, suggest granophyre by its simul¬ 
taneous extinction. It contains gas and liquid incl¬ 
usions. The plagioclase feldspar, which is at least 
as basic as acid andesine, is highly altered. It is 
full of infinitesimal specks of some dark mineral and 
also of red oxide of iron. The iron oxide seems to 
have come in along the joints of the rock. 


Specimen number A146 
Name Aplite 

Occurrence Thirty foot aplitic dike 

cutting anorthosite. 

Megascopic . 

In the centre of the dike the rock is medium 
grained, slightly porphyritic, with pink feldspars 
up to 1 cm. in a medium to fine grained ground-mass 
of glassy quartz, pink feldspar and chloritic agg¬ 
regates. 

Microscopic . 

The minerals of the rock are plagioclase feld¬ 
spar of two generations, quartz, hornblende?, magn¬ 
etite, apatite, zircon, epidote?, chlorite. The 








I l < t 

, 

. 

* 







< 

. 

. 

• 









. 



* 









, 

. 

, 

. 









PETROLOGY OP THE ERAFCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


66 


rock shows granitic texture. 

Two ages of feldspar occur in the rock. The 
first is as least as "basic as acid andesine according to 
two measurements by the statistical method. It is 
very heavily dusted with iron oxide. Some crystals 
seem to have been replaced by fresher feldspar, which 
also occurs as stringers with the quartz and as indiv¬ 
idual crystals. It is an acid oligoclase about AbggAn^Q 
by a determination on a combined albite-Carlsbad twin, 

A little orthoclase may also be present. In one place 
the newer feldspar shows a myrmekitic texture, (see 
pi. 8B). 

The ferromagnesian, whose shape and color sug¬ 
gest hornblende, is now altered to a mass of epidote 
and some calcite. A stringer of hornblende cuts across 
the slide, A little magnetite and zircon are also 
present. 

The slide suggests that the rock was fractured 
subsequent to the intrusion of the rock which contains 
the old feldspar, and that quartz, fresh plagioclase, 
and hornblende were then introduced. 





* 


’ 


* 1 

, 





















PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


67 


Specimen number ^15:2 

Name Granite 

Occurrence. Massive, aplitic rock which 

may cut the gabbro, l/2 mile 
south of the nickel outcrop. 

Megascopic . 

On the fresh surface the rock is medium grained 
and pink, and is made up largely of quartz and pink 
feldspar with very little ferromagnesian. 

Microscopic . 

The rock consists of alkali feldspar, quartz, 
plagioclase, apatite, zircon, hematite, chlorite, 
calcite, epidote. The texture is granitic. 

The feldspar is heavily dusted with red oxide 
of iron making determinations uncertain. Alkali 
feldspar is suggested in many grains by the negative 
sign and low refringence, while some which shows 
albite twinning is about albite in composition. The 
fresher feldspar is in small grains, of about the 
same refringence and birefringence as the other. 

Quartz is abundant in rounded anhedra aboutil/2 
mm. in diameter. It contains many inclusions with 
bubbles. The former ferromagnesian is now almost 
wholly altered to epidote and chlorite. The slide also 

contains zircon and apatite, with secondary calcite. 

The appearance of the slide, together with the 
proximity of the nickel veins suggest that this was 







: 

, 

« I 

< • c < . 




* 

l 

. . 

. , 

. 

. . 





















PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


68 


an aplitic dike from the granite which suffered consid¬ 
erable hydrothermal alteration by iron-rich solutions. 


Specimen number F249X 

Name Tonalite 

Occurrence Grey granite stock?, north¬ 

east of White Man Lake. 

Megascopic : 

On the fresh surface the rock is coarse medium 
grained, with 40 percent of quartz crystals up to 6 
mm., 45 percent of white and pink feldspar crystals, 
and 15 percent of biotite. 

Microscopic : 

The rock consists of quartz, oligoclase, micro- 
cline, biotite, apatite, zircon, chlorite, calcite, 
sericite. The texture is granitic. 

Quartz occurs in individuals up to 3 mm. It is 
comparatively fresh, traversed by a few dusty lines, 
the particles of which are cavities containing bubbles. 

The plagioclase feldspar is mostly oligoclase, 
Abg 3 An i7» X on 010 in basal cleavage plates being 10°, 
and X on 001 in 010 cleavage plates being 2°. Some 
microcline is also present. The feldspar alters to 
patches of flakes and shreds of sericite, these parallel¬ 
ing the cleavages, The microcline is much more altered 


































* 

: 

« < * 

; 

, < 

< < C , < ■ ■ 

p 

- 










PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


69 


than the oligoclase. It contains a little calcite. 

A little biotite, altering to chlorite, is present 
but much less in the slide than in the hand specimen. 
Other accessory minerals are apatite and. zircon. 


Specimen number F253:l 

Name Contaminated granite. 

Occurrence As massive outcrop of intrusive 

granite above magnetite band 
at sta. F253, north of Mad lake. 

Megascopic . 

The rock is fine grained and white weathering, 
and contains small inclusions of bedded sediments. The 
fresh surface shows somewhat porphyritic texture with 
grey feldspar phenocrysts up to 6 ram. in a groundmass 
of quartz, grey feldspar, and biotite. 

Microscopic . 

The constituents of the rock are quartz, piag- 
ioclase feldspar, mica, apatite, zircon, rutile?, 
sericite, chlorite, calcite. The texture is granitic, 

(see pi. 9A). 

The most abundant mineral is quartz, in rounded 
to subangular grains, which contain bubble bearing incl¬ 
usions. The feldspar is an oligoclase, Ab on An^ n . It 

oil ktu 

show r s in one or two places albite and perhaps pericline 










■ „ 



« 








* 



« 










- 





. 



c 

« 

. 




( 



t 

. 


















PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GAB.BRO 


70 


twinning, but is for the most part untwinned. It is 
highly altered to sericite. 

Much mica, both bleached and altered to chlorite 
is present. Accessory minerals are apatite, in the 
quartz and plagioclase, zircon, in quartz, plagioclase, 
and biotite, where it forms pleochroic haloes, and 
euhedral crystals of a dark brown mineral, probably 
rutile?. 


Specimen number 
Name 

Occurrence 


F253A 


Contaminated granite. 
Outcrop of contaminated 
granite showing many incl¬ 
usions, north of Mad lake. 


Megascopic , 

The rock is rusty white on the weathered surface, 
containing many small rusty weathering inclusions of 
bedded sediments. The fresh surface reveals a fine 
grained rock made up of grey feldspar, quartz, and 
biotite, with a little pyrite. 

Microscopic . 

Microscopic study shows the rock consists of 
quartz, plagioclase, biotite, zircon, calcite, pyrite, 
apatite, rutile, chlorite, sericite. The texture is 
granitic, equigranular. 








”7 ''. . 

' 

t 

. 


. 















. 








, 









PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


71 


This rock is very similar to that described as 
E253A. The quartz also contains the inclusions with 
bubbles. The feldspar appears to have about the same 
composition, an oligoclase. Considerable biotite is 
present, altering to radiating masses of chlorite. 

Apatite, zircon and rutile are the accessory 
minerals. Some calcite, probably of hydrothermal 
origin. The rock contains pyrite in shapless blebs, 
which according to Gillson is evidence of deuteric 
origin, (l). 


Specimen number A138:4 

Name Spessartite. 

Occurrence Lark fine-grained dike 

cutting gabbro on the 

northwest shore of 
Caribou lake. 

Megascopic . 

The dike shows chilled margins against the 
gabbro. Its fresh surface is fine grained, and jet 
black, with a suggestion of ophitic "texture* 
Microscopic . 

The rock contains hornblende, plagioclase feld¬ 
spar, biotite, pyrite, magnetite, and iron stain. The 

(l) Gillson, J.L., Granodiorites of the Pend Oreille 
Listrict of Northern Idaho, Joolt, Geol., vol. 35, 
1927, p*23. 
































, 

* 

, 

e ' 


: 

. 

* 








, 





, 

- • 


« < 

< 



... , 








PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


72 


texture is ophitic with glomeroporphyritic aggregates 
of hornblende. 

The hornblende, in pleochroic anhedra, forms a 
little over half the rock. The maximum value of Z on c 
noted was 25°, the mineral was optically negative, and 
the composition was checked by the position of Z. The 
average size of grain is l/2 mm. 

The plagioclase has the composition of a basic 
andesine, Ab 57 An 43 , by three measurements using the 
statistical method. It occurs in lath-shaped crystals 
averaging 2 by 1/2 mm. 

A little biotite and magnetite are present, and 
a considerable amount of pyrite in shapless octopus¬ 
like patches. 

The rock is a lamprophyre (spessartite). 
According to Grout (l), the rock is probably from a 
diaschistic dike, coming from the granite, although 
it may be diabase. 


Specimen number A144:3 

Name Muscovadite or granulitic 

gabbro. 

Occurrence. Outcrop believed to be a 

sedimentary inclusion in 
gabbro, southeast of 
Caribou lake. 


(l), Grout, F.F., Petrology and Petrography, McGraw- 
Hill, 1932, p. 122. 











, 

* 

< 






- 

. 

► 

. 


. 














PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 73 


Megascopic . 

The rock weathers rusty red, much like the gabbro 
but on the fresh surface it is dark grey, fine grained, 
hard, and has the aspect of a quartzite. 

Microscopic . 

This rock in thin section shows a fine equi- 1 
granular aggregate of rather rounded anhedral crystals. 
The texture is hornfelsic, (see pi. 9B). The constit¬ 
uent minerals are plagioclase, olivine, augite, biotite, 
apatite, magnetite, antigorite, chlorite 3 iron stain. 

The feldspars have the composition of basic 
andesine, Ab-^An^g. It shows a tendency to assert its 
outlines against the ferromagnesians. It is slightly 
altered, to clinozoisite. 

The olivine is fairly high in iron being optic¬ 
ally negative. It alters to antigorite and much iron 
oxide. There is almost as much olivine as augite 
present. The augite occurs in fresh, rounded, non- 
pleochroic, faintly purple grains. 

Biotite and magnetite together form about 10 
percent of the rock, the biotite being most often assoc¬ 
iated with olivine or magnetite. A vein of chlorite 
cuts the rock. 


This rock, although containing no cordierite. 

















. 


. 


















c 










c 









PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 74 

is the same as that named muscovadite by A.N.Winchell, 
(l), This is believed at Duluth to be a re-crystallized 
sedimentary inclusion and is very probably the same 
here. 


(l) Broderick, T.M,, Titaniferous Iron Ores of Minnesota, 
Econ. Geology, vol. 12, 1917, pp. 672-673, 














. . 




. 





















.8 .0 I^prTAFJj^^ 

( V: ,0 9qe ) 9^15 o r.tiXqs.:o»so 1 mci$ <&? ../ 

rfl r Ion ex j? grr Jbnironiue efvr-n ons iTpiJf > get fworis 
4 91 x e o rf.l't o ftM ei[i' Mo % % M J Jo 

,0*1 ooIn X*e.& •?otr. ,c*.S X 

.oeqe) ejf.rJb oxlxJqp Jp9iq\;l lo xiqpTgoTOXirroloxH ,E 
y,cT Ijjo anxpTg enleeJonj? fte'iell.e ^oxwotfs (VjMI/ 
kItsjjp oiTYriqonsTg rfes'i'l Jo ev egnxile hop errxpig 
le^ol erf I nl T9lI bI eri.T ^Tpqeblel Ub>(Xb JbHB 
oilr>t9rrfT-y;in s eworte eljslq ertt/lo ncxlToq Il9l 

. i ! &A, ,xil vo7^T9In r 

, 31c d rr. jh 9 p. e o *t0 ,5S X 



"SXHATUTICW 0^ PL4TTC 8. 

4.. Photomicrograph of aplitic dike (epee. A144:7) 

showing a quartz granophyre surrounding a xenolith 
of feldspar from the anorthosite. 

X 25. Crossed nieols. 

B. Photomicrograph of typical aplitic dike (spec. 
4144:7) showing altered andesine grains cut hy 
grains and stringers of fresh granophyric quartz 
and alkali feldspar* The latter in the lower 
left portion of the plate shows a myrraekitic 
intergrowth„ 

X 25. Crossed nieols. 


PLATE 8 


7 5 . 



B 



76 . 


PLATE 9 



9 foit 

, 9 d-rrtBTg h^BnimBd-noS’ I#orq\.t‘ To. o'.or7goioimo7 orfT .A 

ee&I.o ogflo Jboiurolo <sd- 7 Bop ; -; tb^Jo gnhvofte, (/c r .a$*F ,9900 ) 

♦ oJJTorcf Jb e s r d r 7 o r r*. o fr hb 5 •? rt 0 £ 9 1 a ti 0;. ■ : 1; jbn b 

.,d.':-j.i vTB-nriviO |?SX 

. (£:£M/ . osqa) ed- rfrBV'ftoo l m To .ciq&ygQvp 1 mod-orfT .a 
,enrvfJo , 9 d-tgujB ^enreeJbnB oraBcT Jc edrh-no'O feoT snT 
er dl ,oi-pIeJoTorf er 97 udX 9 d orfP YodrdengBOT hnB 
.>[001 ^iBdnonri’JbOe fcosi I Lsda^iooT b ed. od Jbe'isJbrgnoo 

.drCgfJ y,TBnrMO .as X 






EXPLANATION 0^ PLATE 9 

A. Photomicrograph of typical contaminated granite, 

(spec. E2534) showing clear quartz, clouded oligoclase, 
and much bleached and chloritized biotite. 

X25. Ordinary light. 

B, Photomicrograph of muscovadite (spec, A144:3). 

The rock consists of basic andesine, augite, olivine, 
and magnetite. The texture is hornfelsic. It is 
considered to be a recrystallized sedimentary rock, 

X 25. Ordinary light. 




76 . 


PLATE 9 



B 



PETROLOGY OE THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


77 


METAMORPHISM 0^ THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 

There is little remaining evidence of metaraorph- 
isra v/rought by the gabbro, At one place an outcrop 
of a dark-grey, fine-grained rock, of quartzitic aspect, 
appeared to he a recrystallized sediment. In thin 
section it showed rounded equidimensional grains of 
plagioclase, olivine, a.ugite, biotite, apatite, and 
magnetite. The feldspars are basic andesihe, Abg^An^g* 
The texture is hornfelsic, with an average grain of 
1/2 mm., (see pi. 9B). The rock is similar in nearly 
all respects to that named muscovadite by A.N.Winchell, 
(l), although it lacks cordierite. In the Duluth mass 
such a rock is considered to be an entirely recrystall¬ 
ized sedimentary inclusion. 

An interesting fact noted in descriptions of the 
Bushveld is that the first or lowest grade of meta¬ 
morphism in argillaceous rocks, in which the bedding 
is still recognizable, is characterized by a develop¬ 
ment of crystals of chiastolite and like raetamorphic 
minerals. Photographs of the chiastolite show the 
characteristic regular arrangements of inclusions that 
might be identically matched in many places in the 


ll) Broderick, T.M., Titaniferous Iron Ores of Minn¬ 
esota, Scon. Geology, vol. 12, 1917, p. 672-673, 










, 

. 


, 

, , ■ , 


. 




- . ( ‘ 

. « 



. 

, 


< 


. I 


. 















PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


78 


metamorphosed sediments in the Francois River district. 

The Francois River gabbro is comparatively little 
altered, considering the batholithic intrusion it has 
undergone. Gneissic structures due to metamorphism 
were not noted. The main type of alteration was hydro- 
thermal, attacking most strongly the feldspars of the 
gabbro and anorthosite. From a macroscopic viewpoint 
the most evident effects have been a weakening of the 
rock, producing incoherence,and an alteration of the 
original grains, shown by dullness of cleavage faces. 
Microscopically the albite twinning is often obscured 
by the shreds and fibres of the alteration minerals. 
Determination of these is difficult owning to the small 
size of individual grains, but where larger individuals 
were found, (as in slide A138F), they are largely clino- 
zoisite, and in the more calcic feldspars, calcite. 

The mafic minerals of the gabbroic rocks are also altered, 
but minerals lower in the reaction series were formed 
prior to the development of the commoner alteration 
products, in the gabbro mostly chlorite. Goncurrently 
the olivine was altered to antigorite. 

The more acid rocks wdthin the complex, whether 
red rock or aplitic dikes, have also suffered hydro- 
thermal alteration. There is apparently an introduction 









. 

. 

. 

, 

. 














t 

. 




PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


79 


of new auartz and microcline, the old feldspar is seri- 
citized, and in addition clouded with much iron oxide. 

The nickel veins contain niccolite and cloanthite- 
smaltite and other complex cobalt nickel minerals. The 
gangue mineral is ankerite. The presence of these min¬ 
erals and of sericite, chlorite, calcite, epidote, 
serpentine, leucoxene, all combine to suggest that the 
hydrothermal action may be classed as mesothermal, 
according to an application of the criteria tabulated 
in Grout’s Petrology and Petrography, (l). 


llj Grout, F.F., Op. cit,, p* 427 









. 

c 

c 







PETROLOGY OP TKS FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


80 


STRUCTURE OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 

The only definitely primary structure noted in 
the "body was strongly marked handing, which occurs in 
many places in the gabbro, A description of one of 
the best exposures of banding, which shows w^ell the 
degree of differentiation reached, is informative. On 
the northwest shore of Caribou lake (sta. A138), the 
succession shown in fig, 1 occurs. The first 125 feet, 
described as underlain by altered basic rock, is made 
up of an altered gabbroic rock containing a high per¬ 
centage of ferromagnesian, which altered to a rusty, 
yellowish green mineral. One hundred and twenty five 
feet from the shore of the lake bands of light colored 
rock up to 8 inches w r ide appear and become more common 
until at 175 feet an outcrop of highly differentiated, 
banded gabbro appears. The banded gabbro continues for 
a further 75 feet to the cliff edge, Plate 10A shows 
a particularly striking exposure of banded rock. At 

this point bands of light and dark colored rock, varying 
in width from 1/4 to 7 inches, alternate. The bands 
are made up of plagioclase feldspar, augite and biotite, 
the dark colored bands, with the higher percentage of 
ferromagnesian, being rusty weathering where coarse 
grained, Pegmatitic lenses, the largest of which is 












< . 

« 




l 

. 

, 

' ' ; • 


< 

* 




■ 

















PETROLOGY QV TH T $ ARANGOI ; RIVBR S4BBR0 


8.1 


So att a re d outoro »j s o f iran i to 
267° 


oOO 


1 V Mi. 0 ' U * / / I '* i/ V' W/ ^" ,l/> kv*' 


i ■ :! 


± O.U 


1 O'- ■* 


•'••: and d r i r t 


Banded rcakd 
1 . 1 0-4 


a 


4 and 11B 


Hi ff } n 1 j alt. c t a : j 
roo/ Q 


Mtyj, iV'/i, K \\V Cliff 

<"» * <n 


XBQTJ L 

4^ 

band! 

177°y ( 

,p shov. 

iaf location of 

oatcro 

,fof gt,A13 ;> 











ox r '«o '70; 





; r f -■ i / , r' 7 6 t- ; £ t - • .. : f> r X*ff s IT *, X 

r*yriooI t*S: \,d 8 

X n eri'ie 7 c >r e r Jii p fix I * X e n; b X p ?• i X.o o i e d'T , q o7 0 X Jj.c '5 


0 r X S X 94; ,2 O ft tt 9 X 

9riX Xo eXMuaX enX. ru 


• . 

. 


















EXPLANATION OV •HLATE 10 

A. Banding in gabbro. 4 large lens of pegmatitic 

gabbro 8 by 24 inches occurs in the middle of the 
outcrop. The rock is stained with gull excrement. 


B. Pegmatitic band in banded gabbro. 


The hammer is 20 inches long 


82 


PLATE 10 




















U FTAiH TO T/r&f 'rWAJftXF 








* 0'I0Cfj?£ rr f f. 'L f; J 

,A lo Jbne firt£r J cfrfgj-7 t^aqI nitt r io vst.v bsfi&z&V. : . Sf 

, c? '• rl on ; C: ? r i st f ;-:~ 





"EXPLANATION 0^ PLATE 11 


A. Banding in gabbro, 

B, Detailed view of the lower right hand end of A, 


The hammer is 20 inches long 


83 


PLATE 11 


















♦ SI £TAJ<I TO TOITAEAJSXE 






-JjbiJs j-ee'J. J-ircnJA , o'joc 

evil jr ocfri ertt :j 1 rW ?vou> Y.IlBni'teF'i^r 

;>r»JRCf eJ !' ■ C>f : lOO'I 

.gn-r-; aeiiont 0^ elt gIIof rC lermFri erf! 










■:s* . A 


































k -0 













\ 1 ■ %■ 


EXPLANATION 07 PLATE 12 


The plate shews banding in gabbro. Vbout 50 feet strat¬ 
igraphic ally above this the gabbro grades into a five 
foot magnetite band. 

The hammer handle is 20 inches long. 


84 


PLATE 12 
















•' to KOiTAEA.t'Ix': 



to ervisr bs7.e? . ■ ; . ■.■?>■:■: 

T£qeM9 r t a.aooP' 7 c a.Fjr'i'ni' erfj ’(o nwoiig pf , e3(007 srfJ 

•. ijwotf a ? r t <? J.£,t n vt n 


>1.001 s»rtcf no e^cuc? Jboti.QT enT . . ecHeoWTonjp nr .£.n M:on^ .2 

* ? non or I ?i<? 

. -;0. • pooon- 0 -\ r of^nrf too frierf ori'T 





3XPLAUATI01T 0? PLATS 13. 

Banding in anorthosite. The highly altered nature of 
the rocks, as shown by the mantle of loose feldspar 
crystals, is well shown. 

B. Banding in anorthosite. The round spots on the rock 
are lichens. 


The hamner handle is 20 inches long. 


84A 


PLATE 13 



A 



B 

















PETROLOGY OP THE ERANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


85 


8 by 24 inches, occur in these bands. They contain large 
augite crystals up to 1 inch in length in a buff to 
greenish grey matrix of plagioclase feldspar. 

About 20 feet south of this outcrop and slightly 
above it stratigraphically the exposure shown in plate 
11A occurs. At the bottom of the section the bands are 
for the most part light colored, and from 1 to 3 inches 
thick, separated by somewhat indefinite darker bands. 
About 1 foot above the bottom a narrow band is very 
coarse grained. At the top of the outcrop the bands are 
mainly of the darker colored rock. They are from 5 to 
10 inches thick and are separated by lighter colored 
narrow streaks and lenses, some of which are pegmatitic. 
The pegmatitic patches in the darker bands consist of 
crystals of jet black, slightly fibrous hornblende up 
to 1 inch long, crystals of pink, buff and grey feld¬ 
spar the same size, and smaller amounts of much altered 
biotite. No magnetite was apparent and the hornblende 
seems to be concentrated towards the centres of the 
patches. 

Plate 11B shows thelower right hand portion of 
this outcrop in greater detail. The bands are of two 

types, the dark and the light colored bands, both 
made up of plagioclase feldspar, augite and hornblende 









, C 











' 

























* 















► 

t 

C 

. 


t 






PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


86 


with a little biotite. The dark weathering hands 
contain about 20 percent more ferromagnesian than the 
light, and the feldspar tends to weather murky grey in¬ 
stead of chalk white. The grain size averages 1/8 to 
1/4 inch, but three pegmatitic bands with crystals up 
to 3/4 inch in diameter.occur. The largest of these 
has a layer of 3/4 inch feldspar crystals overlying a 
band of coarsely crystalline ferromagnesians, which in 
places weather a rusty rose color. 

A thick pegmatitic band is shown in plate 10B # 
taken 25 feet southwest of the preceding plate. This 
pegmatitic band is 8 inches wide and is made up of 
extremely coarse (up to 1 1/2 inches) crystals of 
augite, feldspar and biotite. The band exhibits in places 
a megalophitic texture, plate 3B showing a hand specimen 
from this band. 

Banded gabbro also occurs north of Mad lake, 

(sta. F253), Plate 12 shows this outcrop, which about 
50 feet stratigraphically above grades into bands of 
solid magnetite. 

The difference between the bands is wholly one of 
mineral percentages. The lighter weathering bands are 
higher in feldspar, the darker in ferromagnesian content 





. 

t • 

4 

. 

, 

. 

< 


. 





PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 87 


but the qualitative mineral composition of each is 
the same and there is no sharp boundary line between 
them, the crystals interlocking across the bands. 

Orientated specimens of the bands were not 
collected but in one slide subparallelism of the feld¬ 
spar laths was noted which suggested that they had 
settled into position. Banding in the anorthosite is 
similar to that in the gabbro, i.e., due to variations 
in percentage mineral composition. Plates 13A & B 
show banding in anorthosites. 

Although there is no agreement as to the actual 
mechanics of band formation, it is fairly well establish¬ 
ed that some form of gravitative differentiation is their 
cause. If this is the case the bands should have orig¬ 
inally been horizontal. Collins and Kindle (l) have ded¬ 
uced the structure and subsequent deformation of the 
Sudbury Nickel Irruptive from this premise in a most 
convincing manner. In the Francois River body the present 
dips of the banded rocks therefore show a considerable 
degree of tilting since consolidation. 

In the Bushveld, Duluth, Sudbury, and other 

(l) Collins, W.H., and Kindle, E.D., Life history of the 
Sudbury Nickel Irruptive: II, Intrusion and Deform¬ 
ation, Trans. R.S.Can,, 3rd ser., vol. 29, sect. IV, 
1935, pp. 27-47. 






























. 
















, 








l 









. 



. 























PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GAHBRO 


88 


strongly differentiated basic igneous complexes con¬ 
cordant structure has been amply demonstrated. The 
Bushveld, Duluth, and Insizwa (l) bodies are all lopo- 
liths. The same structure has been suggested for 
Sudbury but Collins and Kindle believe it to have been 
a sill basined by later deformation. The Trout River 
body ( 2 ) is considered by Ingersontto have been a lacco¬ 
lith. It will probably never be easy to deduce the 
original structure of the Francois River gabbro from 
such a remnant as it now presents. One can only suggest 
that it was a concordant intrusion of considerable size. 


(1) Insizwa lopolith - Tyrrell, G.W., The Principles of 

Petrology, 2nd Ed,, Methuen, 1930, p.20„ 

( 2 ) Trout River laccolith - Ingerson, E f , Layered 

Peridotitic Laccoliths of the Trout River area, 
Am. Jl. Sci., 5th Ser., vol. 29, 1935, op. 422- 
440. 













PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


89 


AGE OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 

Four formational groups have been recognized in 
the Francois River district, metamorphosed sediments, 
gabbro, granite, and diabase dikes. The sediments and 
gabbro are pre-granite in age. This has been established 
from the following field relationships. At sta. F256 
the contact of granite and acid anorthosite was observed. 
The granite was fine grained near the contact and sent 
off aplitic dikes into the anorthosite, which showed no 
change at the contact, being uniformly altered. At 
sta. F249 pegmatite dikes, evidently derived from the 
granite, an outcrop of which is 250 feet north, cut the 
gabbro. Similar relationships were noted at a point 
1000 feet east of sta. F258. Between sta, F257 and 
sta. F258 an outcrop of hybrid granite containing blocks 
of sediments and of gabbro occurs. 

The gabbro is believed to be younger than the 
sediments winch are the oldest rocks in the district. 

As the gabbro is intrusive, the sediments were probably 
the intruded rock. At sta. F249 the occurrence of 
large blocks of bedded sediments included in anorthosite 
is more conclusive proof of this relationship. The 
gabbro is then post-sedimentary and pre-granite in age. 














r ( 

. 

t 

t • t 

* 

. 






. 








PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


90 


Reference should perhaps be made to the fact 
that practically all the detailed field studies in that 
part of the Precambrian shield which extends north and 
west of Rainy lake through Ontario, Manitoba, Sask¬ 
atchewan, and the Northwest Territories to Great Bear 
lake have revealed gabbroic intrusives of greater or 
lesser magnitude, which, insofar as correlations may 
be drawn between these districts, are of approximately 
the same age. 




l < 

X 

, 












PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


91 


COMPARISON OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO WITH OTHER 

SIMILAR BODIES . 

The main petrological and structural features of 
the Francois River gabbro have been outlined above. In 
such a preliminary study as this, after establishing 
what appears to be the type into which the body falls, 
it is illuminating to compare it with similar bodies 
whose geology is more fully known, and from such compar¬ 
isons to endeavor to make deductions concerning the 
body in question. Bodies showing differentiation of the 
scale of the Francois River gabbro are considered by 
authorities to be large and such bodies are perhaps more 
common than is generally realized. Bodies of this type 
include the Bushveld Igneous Complex, the Insizwa lopo- 
lith, the Sudbury Nickel Irruptive, the Stillwater comp¬ 
lex of Montana, and the Trout River laccolith of New¬ 
foundland. The Insizwa and Sudbury bodies do not show 
banding on the scale of the Francois River gabbro, 
detailed descriptions of the Stillwater complex have 

(u 

not been available to the writer if such exist, and the 

study of the Trout River laccolith, said to be of this 
type, is still in the preliminary stages. 

(l) Howland, A.L. , Peoples, J.W.and Sampson, Edward, 

The Stillwater Igneous Complex, Misc. Contrib. No. 7, 
Montana Bureau of Mines and Geology, 1936. 




















„ 










. 






















, 

, 

► 

















PETROLOGY OP THE PRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


92 


The Bushveld Igneous Complex . 

"The Bushveld Igneous Complex of Transvaal, 

South Africa,... a huge, composite body of plut- 
onic and volcanic rocks that outcrops as an irreg¬ 
ular oval with a maximum major axis trending east- 
northeast 288 miles long, and a maximum minor axis 169 
miles in length. The total area embraced within the 
limits of the complex is over 23,000 square miles, but 
nearly 11,000 miles of this is hidden by a cover of 
younger strata. The outer, lower part consists of norite, 
anorthosite, and related basic rocks, and the central 
upper part of red granite, granophyre, basalt and pyro¬ 
clastic volcanic rocks. 

"The lower part, known as the norite belt, is a 

huge lopolithic sill that varies in thickness from 1 

to 3 1/2 miles and in width of outcrop from 4 to 19 

miles. The norite belt has a central sag and dips 

everywhere about the heart of the complex, at angles 

between 5 and 50 degrees. In eastern Transvaal it has 

been subdivided by Hall, into five zones. The Upper 
Zone, of bronzite norite grading upwards into gabbro 

and syenite, is approximately 800 feet thick. This 
merges downward into the Main Zone, which consists 
largely of bronzite norite, with, near the top, prominent 

















¥ 









t . . . , 















. 




• 




. 

« 






. 

, 




c 






















• 

% 





. 



t 

l 



PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GARBRO 


93 


"bands of magnetite and anorthosite, and has a maximum 
thickness of about 10,000 feet. Below this is the Crit¬ 
ical or Differentiated Zone, It reaches a thickness of 
5000 feet in some places, and is so remarkably different¬ 
iated into layers of rock of different composition and 
color that it appears stratified. The rock types incl¬ 
ude bronzite norite, diallage norite, bronzitite, dunite, 
chroraitite, anorthosite, etc., and some serpentine. 
Beneath this is the Transition zone -- of bronzite- 
norite with some layers of pyroxenite -- which is up 
to 2000 feet in thickness and lies on top of the rel¬ 
atively thin (up to 400 feet) Basal or Chilled Zone of 
norite. 

"The Merensky Horizon is in the upper part of 
the Differentiated Zone and contains the most important 
and extensive platinum deposits in South Africa..." (l) 

The Duluth Gabbro . 

"The Duluth gabbro is a multiple, composite, 
divided, lopolith. Conservative estimates of its size 
indicate an area of over 15,000 square miles and a 
maximum thickness of over 50,000 feet." (2) "It is 

(1) O’Neill, J.J. and Gunning, H.C., Platinum and Allied 
Metal Deposits of Canada, G.S., Can., Ec. Geol. Ser., 
No. 13, 1934, p. 32. 

(2) Grout, E.P. , The lopolith, Am. Jl. Sci. , 4th Ser., 
vo 1. 46, 1918, pp. 516-522. 






















. 

. 

< 

. 




t „ < ■ , 






































PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


94 


"estimated that over two thirds of the gabbro mass at 
Duluth consists of olivine gahbro, varying*only slightly 
from the average. Such average rocks are scattered 
from top to hottom. On the other hand, specialized 
types have a more limited range. The peridotite occurs 
only near the "base; the magnetite gahbro, equally heavy, 
is near the centre; the anorthosite ranges from the 
centre towards the top and is largely in the thin earlier 
intrusion. Very locally at the base of the early gabbro 
there is an apatitic hypersthene gabbro. The occurrence 
of red rock (is chiefly as) irregular patches at the 
top of the main gabbro and apophyses into its roof; 
it occurs also near the top of their earlier feldspathic 
gabbro, in a large sill close above the gabbro, and in 
some small dikes near the bottom of the gabbro." (l) 

"'Banded structure is especially noticeable in the 
eastern part of the area in which the magnetite bodies 
occur. In these areas of banded gabbros there are bands 
of plagioclase-magnetite rock, which, though but a few 
feet in thickness, extend for about a mile along the 
strike."(2) 

(1) Grout, F.F., A Type of Igneous Differentiation, 

Journ, Geology, vol. 26, 1918, pp,632, 637. 

(2) Broderick, T.M., Op. cit., pp. 666-667. 













• 







. 





< 

. 






. 





t 

; 






; 

















* 























c 
















' 




















PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


95 


Conclusions drawn from c o moarison of tHe Francois 
River gabbro with similar bodies . 

The Francois River gabbro falls into the same 
general type as the Bushveld Igneous Complex and the 
Duluth gabbro. It shows a main rock type very similar 
to the norite or olivine gahhro of the two bodies. It 
shows differentiation in the salic-femic direction, 
anorthosites, rocks so high in mafic minerals as to he 
almost peridotites, and magnetite-rich rock being found, 
(l). It shows the same pronounced pseudo-stratification. 

Igneous bodies showing a comparable degree of 
differentiation are all large. Grout, (2), states that 
bodies which have only differentiated into basic and 
acid fractions are seldom thinner than 500 feet. 
Differentiation in the Francois River gabbro, as has 
been shown, has proceeded much further, being more of 
the Bushveld or Duluth type. Both these are bodies of 
great extent and thickness. 

In his first paper 0 n the life history of the 

(1) Grout, F.F., A Type of Igneous Differentiation, 

Jour. Geology, vol, 26, 1918, p. 643. 

(2) ---, Petrology and Petrography, McGraw-Hill, 

1932, p.253. 










- 

t 

. . 

, < 

. 

. 






t 










PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


96 


Sudbury Nickel Irrupt.ive, W*H.Collins, (l) notes the 
general likeness of that body to the Bushveld Complex 
but in remarking on the absence of the igneous banding 
at Sudbury points out that the Bushveld is much larger. 
The area of the Sudbury Irruptive is approximately 
1000 square miles, and it is approximately 2 miles 
thick. The area of the Bushveld was 25,000 square miles 
with a maximum thickness of 15,000 feet, a little less 
than 3 miles. Therefore it is concluded that the 
Francois River gabbro must have been considerably larger 
than at present. 

A second important deduction derived from the 
comparison is that the sequence seems to be, from the 
bottom up, mafic rocks, highly differentiated gabbro, 
acid rocks or syenite at the top. This is in general 
the sequence that would be met with in a traverse across 
the gabbro from west to east. It is therefore suggested 
that the body is now inclined, with its top towards the 
east, but with the whole considerably disturbed by 
granitic intrusion, A feature corroborating this is 
the general concordance of the observed strike directions 
of the banding. When those at sta. A142 and at sta.F253 

(l) Collins, W.H., The life history of the Sudbury 

Nickel Irruptive: I, Petrogenesis, Trans. R.S.Can., 
3rd ser., vol. 28, sect. IV, 1934, pp. 123-177. 












I 

* 












, 







PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


97 


are neglected, as having been affected by local granitic 
intrusion, the others all trend approximately north-south, 
the general structural trend of the country,north of 
Great Slave lake. 

It would require more detailed work to say which 
of these bodies the Francois River gabbro most resembles. 
The general scale of its differentiation is more like 
Duluth than the colossal Bushveld, although in studying 
the descriptions of both, many phenomena that can be 
duplicated in the Francois River gabbro were noted. 





■ 


, ' 

« 















. 



















PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


98 


E CONOMIC GEOLOG Y. 

Me tallic Mine r als Occurring within the Bod y. 

These may he grouped in two classes, namely, 
segregations of metallics within the gahbro, and later 
veins. Reference has been made to the occurrence of 
metallics as accessory minerals within the gabbro. 

The occurrence of these as segregations within the gabbro 
body, constituting a mineral deposit, would be expected 
from a study of similar bodies, and one segregation of 
titaniferous magnetite was found. 

The magnetite as it occurs in the rock is titan¬ 
iferous, since it alters to leucoxene and since wet 
tests indicate the presence of titanium. The pegmatitic 
patches in the gabbro are often rich in titaniferous 
magnetite. The band of magnetite at sta. F253 shows a 
complete transition from an ordinary banded gabbro, 

(see pi, 12), to a band of magnetite five feet thick. 

The magnetite crystals are octahedra, up to 1/2 inch 
in diameter, and seem to possess an octahedral parting* 

A polished section of the magnetite, (see pis. 14 A & B), 
showed magnetite intergrown with thin plates or tablets 
of ilmenite. The ilmenite also occurs in individual 
grains. The magnetite shows octahedral parting, and 
the plates of Ilmenite parallel the octahedral faces 





















'■ „ •*£ ' 

.m . *to : .• ' n:r.- 

suoie^inB^i:^ erfX J.o nemioeqa natfe rloq;* &. abode ef&Jq 9 pT 
9ftnsmS. r eriT. . JO'H Mr* fee. 
e.B bn.p anrRig nr aiuc 
9^-JPO i'iiti V ,?) ; 

exij- anoIjR emrooo 

* C e | 7. .£ .t r-•' ■ ? O r H I ‘Tv 

-anoo nr 97.B ( b-t^ r .. e'?v ?■?, "-aT^rs^ 

,y,-fTb:P ( 

.xoas sm 



f EXPLANATION 07 PLATE 14 


The plate shows a polished specimen of the titaniferous 
magnetite from sat. F253, etched with HCl. .The ilraenite 
is the unetched mineral, which occurs in grains and as 
an intergrowth with the etched magnetite. Silicate 
mineral, probably plagioclase feldspar occurs along the 
grain boundaries. 

Such structures as are shown here, are in metallurgy cons¬ 
idered to be the result of unmixing. 


PI. 14A is magnified 100X, plate 14B 250X 


100 . 


PLATE 14 



A 



B 










PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


101 


The presence of gold in titaniferous magnetite has 
apparently not Been previously noted. The explanation 
may he that the intrusive hybrid granite in contact 
with the hand, which carries pyrite, may have introduced 
the gold. 

Possibility of Platinum. Chromite and Nickel Segregations 

in the body . 

This possibility must occur to everyone with even 
a cursory acquaintance with the Bushveld Complex, which 
contains these metals, none occurring stratigraphically 
near the magnetite. On the other hand, the Duluth gabbro 
contains only deposits of titaniferous magnetite. The 
difference is apparently due to the fact that in the one 
case the magma contained appreciable quantities of 
platinum, chromium, and nickel, and in the other it did 
not. Whether the Francois River gabbro contains such 
deposits depends on whether or not its magma contained 
these elements. This may only be determined by careful 
prospecting, which would be fully justified by the poss¬ 
ibility of finding such deposits. 































t 

. 












■ 

<• 

. 
















PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 102 


Nickel Occurrences. 

The discovery of two veins of nickel and cobalt 
minerals within it first led geologists to the gabbro 
body* These veins occur midway between Caribou and 
Great Slave Lakes. They have been described by C.H. 
Stockwell, (l), who classed the gabbro as augite diorite. 
The veins strike about N80°E, and parallel a rather well 
marked jointing in the granite. They cut granite dikes, 

cut, and therefore are younger than, the gabbro. 

The veins contain botryoidal masses of niccolite 
surrounded by cobalt-nickel-arsenic minerals including 
Icloanthite-smaltite and gersdorffite? (2). Cloanthite- 
smaltite also occurs alone. The gangue mineral is anker- 
ite. At the widest point the veins are not more than 
15 inches across and the one carrying the highest mineral 
content has only been traced for 230 feet. A chip sample 
taken by Stockwell showed only a trace of gold and 1.97 
oz. of silver. Evidently, unless further prospecting 
develops larger bodies of nickel, or higher precious metal 
content, they are of no value at present. 


(1) Stockwell, C.H. , Op. cit., pp. 55c and 50-61c. 

(2) Cameron, A.E*, Oral communication. 













» 





< 






. 



r < 



t 














PETROLOGY OR 1 THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 103 


SUMMARY 

OF CONCLUSIONS DERIVED PROM THIS STUDY . 

This thesis presents the results of a field and 
laboratory study of a body of gabbro-like rooks which 
occur near the Francois river, on the north shore of 
Great Slave lake. This body, whose exposed surface is 
13 square miles in area, was nevertheless found to 
present an example of extreme differentiation compar¬ 
able to the Bushveld Igneous Complex or the Duluth 
gabbro. 

The rocks occurring in the district are of three 
main types, metamorphosed sediments, gabbroic rocks and 
granitic rocks, in order of age, i.e., the gabbro body 
intruded the sediments, and was intruded by the granite. 

The gabbim-Iike rocks may be divided into two 
broad groups, gabbros and anorthosites. Other mono- 
raineralic differentiates noted were a banded segregation 
of magnetite, and two subordinate masses of ultrabasic 
rock. The masses of ultrabasic appear to be amphibolites 
Neither is within the gabbro and as one is an island and 
the other is a hill whose sides are covered with drift 
their relationships were not determined. 

The gabbros include rocks whose ferromagnesians 



















PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


104 


are olivine, augite, and hornblende. The feldspars 
are plagioclase, ranging in composition from basic 
labradorite to acid bytownite. The sequence of cryst¬ 
allization was feldspar, olivine, magnetite and/or 
augite. As a consequence many of the rocks show ophitic 
texture, and for those which show ophitic texture in the 
hand specimen, the textural term "raegalophitic” texture 
was coined. The grain size of the gabbro varies from 
medium to coarsely pegmatitic, the latter phase repres¬ 
enting concentrations of mineralizers along bands and 
in irregular areas in the rock. 

The anorthosites have approximately the same 
qualitative mineral composition as the gabbros, but are 
more altered, and thus the interstitial grains of ferro- 
magnesian mineral are too altered to determine. An 
interesting feature is a gradation from normal to acidic 
anorthosite, the feldspar of the latter being basic oli- 
goclase. 

These rocks have been hydrothermally altered and 
the feldspars are filled with shreds and patches of 
calcite. The ferromagnesians have altered to epidote 
and chlorite. The rocks contain well developed reaction 
rims, which show the reaction series of Bowen, and the 
related synantectic phenomena. It was not possible to 
determine whether the reaction rims were 






. 


, 











PETROLOGY QV THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


105 


due to primary magmatic reaction or secondary reactions. 

The gabbros are cut by many aplitic dikes. These 
show two generations of feldspar, altered andesine and 
fresh raicrocline and oligoclase, the two last named 
minerals occuring along with quartz as stringers and 
granophyric aggregates in the altered feldspar. The 
mass of evidence suggests that they are aplitic dikes, 
genetically connected with the granite, along which . 
later magmatic action has taken place. Another manifest 
ation of hydrothermal action is the nickel-cobalt veins 
which are genetically connected with the granite as well 

The gabbro body shows strongly marked primary 
banding. Light and dark weathering, and medium grained 
and pegmatitic bands alternate in many places in both 
gabbro and anorthosite. At one place the gabbro passes 
into a five foot band of titaniferous magnetite, which 
microscopic examination shows is an intergrowth of 
ilmenite along the octahedral faces of the magnetite. 

Comparison with similar highly differentiated 
basic bodies leads one to the Conclusions that the 
gabbro body was originally a much larger body than at 
present, that it was a concordant Intrusion which has 
now been tilted so that it strikes approximately north- 

south with an eastward dip, and that there are possib- 











. 

. 




, 

. 




. 




. 












. . 




















PETROLOGY OP THG PRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


106 


ilities of platinum, chromium, and nickel deposits 
occurring in the Prancois River gabbro. 














PETROLOGY OP THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


107 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 

This hiholography includes only the more relevant 

•works referred to in the preparation of this thesis. 

Many of the papers cited contain full bibliographies 

on their particular field. 

Bowen, N.L. , The Evolution of the Igneous Rocks, 
Princeton University Press, 1928, 

Broderick, T.M., The Relation of the Titaniferous 
Magnetites of Northeastern Minnesota to the 
Duluth Gahhro, Econ, Geology, vol, 12, 1917, 
pp, 663 - 696. 

Collins, W.H., The Life History of the Sudbury Nickel 
Irruptive, I, Petrogenesis, Trans. Roy, Soc. 

Canada, vol. 28, sect. IV, 1934, pp, 123-127. 

Collins, W.H. and Kindle, E.D., The Life History of 
the Sudbury Nickel Irruptive, II, Intrusion and 
Deformation, Trans. Roy. Soc. Canada, vol. 29, 
sect. IV, 1935, pp, 27 - 47. 

Daly, R,A., Igneous Rocks and the Depths of the Earth, 
McGraw-Hill, 1933. 

(Contains a list of bodies showing gravitative) 
(differentiation in concordant intrusions. ) 

Gillson, J.L,, Granodiorites of the Pend Oreille 

District of Northern Idaho, Jour, Geology, vol. 35, 
1927, pp. 1 - 31. 

Gillson, J.L., Callahan, W.H., and Millar, W.B., 
Adirondack Studies: The Age of Certain of the 
Adirondack Gabbros and the Origin of the Reaction 
Rims and Peculiar Border Phases Found in them. 

Jour. Geology, vol. 36, 1928, pp, 149-163. 














, 








PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


108 


Grout, F.F. , The lopolith, Am. Jl. Sci., 4th Ser. , 
vol. 46, 1918, pp. 516 - 522. 

- t Internal Structures of Igneous Rocks, 

Jour. Geol., vol. 26, 1918, pp. 439-458. 

- 9 A Type of Igneous Differentiation, 

Jour. Geol., vol. 26, 1918, pp. 628-658. 

- t The Pegmatites of the Duluth Gahbro, 

Econ. Geology, vol. 13, 1918, pp. 185-197. 

- 9 Petrology and Petrography, McGraw-Hill, 1932. 

Hall, A.L., The Bushveld Igneous Complex of the Central 
Transvaal, Geol. Surv. of South Africa, Mem. 28, 

1932. 

Hills, E.S., An Unusual Occurrence of Myrmekite and its 
Significance, Geol. Mag., vol, 70, 1933, pp. 294-301. 

Ingerson, E., Layered Peridotitic Laccoliths of the 
Trout River District, Newfouldland, Am. Jl. Sci., 

5 th ser,, vol. 29, 1935, pp. 422-440. 

Jolliffe, F., Preliminary Report, Yellowknife River 
Area, N.W.T., Geol. Surv., Can., paper 36-5, 1936. 

Mawdsley, J.B., St. Urhain area, Charlevoix district, 
Quebec, Mem. 152, Geol. Surv., Can,, 1927. 

O’Neill, J.J., and Gunning, H.C., Platinum and Allied 
Metal Deposits of Canada, Geol. Surv., Can., 

Econ, Geol, Ser. No. 13, 1934. 

Osborne, F.F., Certain Magmatic Titaniferous Ores and 
Their Origin, Econ. Geol., vol. 23, 1928, pp. 724- 
761, 895-922. 

Schwartz, G.M., The Relations of Magnetite and Ilmenite 
in the Magnetite Deposits of the Duluth Gabbro, 

Am. Min., vol. 15, 1930, pp. 243-252. 

(Contains bibliography of titaniferous magnetites) 


















PETROLOGY OF THE FRANCOIS RIVER GABBRO 


109 


Sederholm, J.J. , On Synantectic Minerals, Bull, Comm, 
Geol. de Finlande, N:o 48, 1916, 

Stockwell, C,H., Great Slave Lake-Coppermine River area, 
Geol, Surv., Can,, Sum. Rept., 1932, part C, 
pp. 37c-63c. 

Tyrrell, G.W., The Principles of Petrology, 2nd Ed., 
Methuen, 1932. 































































































