
CANADIAN LABOUR AND THE LAW 
by 


Donald Victor Smiley, M. Ed 








©X amis 
llTOtBSWaiS 

mmrmm 






UNIVERSITY OF ALL'RTA 
LIBRARY 


Regulations Ko[;>rJing 1 ;itjai-c. lias ortati oris 

Type script copies oi theses and dissertations for Master's 
and doctor's degrees deposited in the University of Alberta 
Library, as the Official Copy of the .Faculty of Graduate dttidies, 
may be con; ulted in the inference . 3 a ing Room only. 

A second copy is on ieposit in trie Department under whose 
sup< i v Lon th work was done. Some : arts 3nts are willing to 
loan their copy to libraries, through the interlibrary loan 
service of the University of nlberta Library. 

These theses and dissertations are to be used onlv with due 
regard to priority rights of the author. mitten permission of 
the author and of the Department must be obtained through the 
University of Alberta Library when extended passages are used, 
■/hen permission has been granted, credit must appear in the 
published work. 

This thesis or dissertation has been used in accordance 
with the above regulations by the persons listed below. The 
borrowing library is obligated to secure the signature of each 

user . 


Please sign below; 


Signature 


Date 


Ins titution 












































































THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


C'NA'IA LABOUR AND THE LAW 


A DISSERTATION SUBMITTED TO 


THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 


IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF 


THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE 


DEGREE OF MASTER OF ARTS 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 


DEPARTMENT OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 


BY 


DONALD VICTOR SMILEY, M.ED., 


CALGARY, ALBERTA 





Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 



https://archive.org/details/canadianlabourlaOOdona 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


\9>^l 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 


DEPARTMENT OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 


The Linder signed hereby certify that they have read and 
recommend to the School of Graduate Studies for accep¬ 
tance a thesis entitled “Canadian Labour and the Law 11 
submitted by Donald V, Smiley, M. Ed., in partial ful¬ 
filment of the requirements for the degree of 
Master of Arts. 


Professor 





Professor 


Professor 


September, 1951 













n:.vo ... v.%;. di 


■ t 8V 1 .:; .:■ t,:.', 4 v’i > Ji* ~ 

11 

. 




O' ■ ■> 


v "JO r:•; 


Sr ^ 




•-'■V O -J\ ^ v / y- 


1QBP C'J 01 









INDEX 


Introduction Page 

A. 1* The Background of Canadian Labour Legislation 5 

B. 2. Basic Preconceptions 10 

Chapter I 

Canadian Labour Legislation and The British North America Act- 14 
Chap t er II 

The Status, Liabilities and Privileges of Trade Unions as 56 

Defined by the Courts of Law 

Chapter III 

Collective Bargaining Legislation in Canada 91 








1 


Synopsis 

This thesis is an attempt to outline and evaluate certain aspects of 
constitutional, common and statute law as they relate to Canadian labour. 
My survey is by no means exhaustive and I have felt in dealing with al¬ 
most every section that I have been somewhat more successful in stating 
important problems than in providing answers to them, I believe, how¬ 
ever, that this work has some value as a “jumping off 11 point for my 
own further research in labour problems and that perhaps the facts 
and conclusions outlined here will be helpful background to the writer 
of a satisfactory text on Canadian labour relations. 

The first chapter of this thesis deals with the constitutional 
problem as it relates to labour legislation in Canada, Although a 
satisfactory solution to these difficulties can come only when Canad¬ 
ians have finally devised an adequate procedure for amendment of the 
British North America Act or when the nation becomes involved in a 
major war, the situation is by no means as hopeless as some would 
have us believe. There are grounds for reasonable hopes that provin¬ 
cial unanimity may be possible for amendments dealing with very spec¬ 
ific and limited transfers of legislative power to the Federal Parlia¬ 
ment. In the second place, provincial jurisdiction over a broad field 
of labour legislation appears desirable and necessary. 

The most unsatisfactory features of Canadian labour have evolved 
through the application of common law principles by the courts to var¬ 
ious aspects of labour relations. I approach this second chapter with 
the humility of a layman but the fact that the law relating to the 
status of trade unions, collective agreements and picketing is incompre¬ 
hensible to all but the expert is, by itself, an overwhelming argu¬ 
ment for statutory clarification. 



9 

' • £ '•./ .•> &H C. • m & l Y : -— ^ £ ■ 

■ 

_ 

i 




, 

- 

' 


. . • 

- 

- ■ ■ . 

. 

■ . 

* • 

. 

. 


. 








2 


The final chapter of this thesis is a comparative survey of Fed¬ 
eral and provincial collective bargaining legislation as it now exists. 
Outside of Prince Edward Island the situation is a relatively healthy 
one. Canadian legislators have, by and large, been agreed that the way 
to industrial peace lies in the encouragement of collective bargaining 
within the boundaries of such provisions as a pear necessary in the 
public interest rather than in compulsory arbitration. There seems no 
reason to believe that the various Governments will not continue to 
revise and refine their legislation with this end in view as they 
have in the past. 

I wish to extend my thanks to the staff of the Calgary Law Lib¬ 
rary who have so generously allowed me the use of their facilities in 
my research, Mr. J. Cohen, B.A., LI. B. of Calgary was kind enough to 
answer several of my questions regarding picketing and the legal status 
of trade unions and I wish to thank him very much for putting the 
results of his experience as the legal representative for several 
unions at my disposal. Finally, I wish to express my appreciation to 
Prof. H.B. Mayo and Mr. T.F. Wise of the Department of Political Ec¬ 
onomy for introducing me to the problems surrounding labour relations 


in Canada 


. 

* 

, • : ■■■ • o ■.ft i& ■ t J ■ •■■■ l ot idug 

. - 

• V . , 

r '-v \ • ifi.- 

■. . r-y;: 

* * . 

, . „ . » ... 

* 





5 


Introductio n 

A. The Background of Canadian Labour Legislation 

It is impossible to describe and evaluate intelligently the legal 
position of labour in Canada without at least a cursory survey of the geo¬ 
graphic, economic, political and demographic structure within which labour 
legislation has been framed*. 

Geographic Aspects . 

The outstanding geographic fact about Canada is its proximity 
to the United States and the effects of this proximity on the organized 
labour movement in Canada can scarcely be over-estimated. As early as 
i860 four Canadian locals of the Iron Moulders’ Union affiliated with a 
union of their American counterparts. In 1865 the International Typo¬ 
graphical Union was formed with locals on both sides of the border. In the 
late 1860's and l870’s international railway unions were formed with the 
significant policy of remaining outside federations and congresses of 
workers in other trades, a policy which remains an important fact of 
the Canadian labour movement. In 1948 some 675,044 Canadian workers, 

69.0 per cent of all union members, belonged to international unions 

1 

which had their headquarters in the United States. The activities of 
the internationals, along with the intimate cultural, social and economic 
ties between Canada and the United States, has had a vital, if somewhat 
undefinable, impact upon Canadian labour. 

Almost inevitably, the Canadian labour movement has been aff¬ 
ected by the tensions and schisms in the rankis of organized labour 


1o Department of Labour Report on Labour Organization in Canada 
King's Printer Ottawa - lp49-p.28 








V 

' 

« 

, . 

. -V •' ' :• 0 " : " V . '<<J 







- 

* 



. 

. 


.. 





Y ; i ; 







. ' - 0 

■ *' 



• 

t' • ■ < -, 






' • < - • ^ -e- '• : -wi- ■ ;.h.v ns e*;.j 

* 

. 

, ~ 









4 . 


in the United States* The Trades and Labour Congress formed in 1885 re¬ 
mained aloof in the bitter rivalry between the American Federation of 
Labour and the Knights of Labour for many years. However, in 1902, the 
T.L.C. amended its constitution to exclude Knights of Labour unions. 
Similarly, the Congress could not escape the effects of the split between 
the American Federation of Labour and Committee on Industrial Organiza¬ 
tion unions which led to the expulsion of the latter in 1956* I n Jan., 
1959 the Congress expelled seven C.I.0.-affiliated unions, who in 1940 

united with elements of the All-Canadian Congress of Labour to form the 

1 

Canadian Congress of Labour. 

The preponderance of American influence in the internationals has 
given rise to a reaction in the Canadian labour movement from time to 
time. The rise of the Canadian and Catholic Congress of Labour in 
Quebec has been a part of the broad strategy of the Roman Catholic 
Church to isolate its French-Oanadian members from the secularist and 
'‘materialistic'’ aspects of North American civilization. The Canadian 
Federation of Labour, which was formed in 1902 from elements which had 
been expelled from the T.L.C., pursued for two decades a somewhat un¬ 
successful policy of organizing Canadian workers on a purely national 
basis. In 1925 the leaders of the Canadian Brotherhood of Railway 
Employees which had been expelled from the T.L.C. in 1921 on charges 
of dual unionism attempted to unite remnants of the almost defunct 
Canadian Federation of Labour and other unions into a national congress 
on an aggre3sive platform of opposition to the internationals. Apart 
from the Canadian and Catholic Congress of Labour, which in 1948 included 

1. Most of the historical materials for this section are taken from 
Prof. H.A. Logan's Trade Unions in Canada - Macmillan 1948 and 
T he Labour Movement in Canada - R.H. Coats - Canada a nd the 
Provinces Vo. IX - Edinburgh University Press - 19l4^pp. 277 -555 












. ■ 

* • * 




_ 

... 


> 






. 






, 


















. 

- 








. ' 

- . \ . * ♦ * » 

, , * 

: 

. 










. 


. 















5 


40.7% of the organized workers in the Province of Quebec] - the movement 
to organize purely national congresses have had little success because 
of lack of funds to compete in organizational activities with the inter¬ 
nationals, poor leadership and the failure of a platform of shrill 
nationalism and aggressive opposition to American domination to appeal 
to the mass of Canadian workers* 

Most large Canadian manufacturing firms are subsidiaries of Am¬ 
erican enterprises and thus follow the policies of their parent firms 
in their labour relations. The struggle of organized labour for in¬ 
dustry-wide bargaining in the steel and automobile industries in Canada 
and the violent antagonisms of employers to these attempts are but 
facets of similar clashes in the United States. The integration of the 
Canadian and American economies is the most significant fact to be con¬ 
sidered in any study of Canadian labour relations* 

The second vital geographic fact affecting Canadian labour is the 
vastness of our nation. Obviously the great distances between urban 
centres imposes special difficulties on union organizational and co¬ 
operative activity among unions and the obstacles of distance are less 
easily surmounted than in the case of business. The size of our nation 
also reduces labour mobility and aggravate s unemployment both in times 
of prosperity and depression. These effects have been somewhat miti¬ 
gated by the fact that about half of our population and an even higher 
proportion of our secondary industry are concentrated in the St. Law¬ 
rence Valley - Niagara Peninsula area* 

Economic A spects * 

Canada’s natural resources are of a highly specialized 
nature. Therefore foreign trade is perhaps more important to us than 
to any other nation with the exception of Britain, and Canadian labour 

1. Department of Labour Report on Labour Organization in 

Canada - 19^9 25 







I 


' : ' • Q ! J 






' ol 



3 01 , 




, 


■ul 




6 


can ill-afford to be insular in its outlook or to believe that its 
interests can be secured through purely national action. The Canadian 
labour movement has taken a keen and active interest in the activities 
of the International Labour Organization since 1919 and in the inter¬ 
national trade union movement,^ 

It has become a truism that the modern trade union movement is a 
product of the industrial revolution. The grouping together of large 
numbers of workers in a single factory, the minute specialization of 
mass-production industry and modern methods of transportation and comm¬ 
unication have inter-acted to mould the pattern of twentieth century 
collective bargaining between large labour organizations representing 
workers in particular crafts, regions or industries and mammoth corp¬ 
orations or employers’ associations. Under the impact of two world wars 
the economic nationalism, which has been a permanent factor in Canada 
almost since Confederation, and technological advance our nation has 
evolved an important industrial economy. Until the late 19^0's labour 
organization in the new mass-production industries had been almost un¬ 
iformly unsuccessful, largely because of the hostile attitude of T.L.C # 
leaders to organization on an industrial basis. The new C,C,L. unions 
have met the challenge and have been outstandingly successful in indus¬ 
tries like rubber, automobile, steel and meat-packing. Industrializa¬ 
tion has made the old-type craft union, with its accent on mutual benefit 
activities and standards of workmanship, relatively unimportant and has 
given place to craft unions almost exclusively interested in bettering 
working conditions and wages, ’’cognate” unions of members of related 
crafts and industrial unions. 

1, The Congresses are active members of the International Confederation 
of Free Trade Unions which in 19^-9 broke away from the Communist-domin¬ 
ated World Federation of Trade Unions. Significantly the United Steel¬ 
workers’ Union of Canada(a C.C.L. affiliate) is now engaged in a cam¬ 
paign to raise $25,000 for the setting up of labour colleges in India. 
Labour’s Own Colombo Plan - Saturday Night - MaylJ951. 





-i::. 10 

“i 

. . . b 

■. bo ; -i:-w IOT,lO r: :;<0 . 

: v />:. 4 . ' •"o-i.r:b vv. 

, 7 . . . & <; ob . v •. - ; 

~*t 3 «/u o::!J ■ -:•* ©or Is 

* 

. j c ; o : b 


' 

. 1 

■' 

,, ■ ' IX • 

. •... o b.i.t‘ rio.Lb b 'iO ! € ■; iv 'io o;: 

. J ... ' . , ' ■/ ' ~ ' ' 

■ - 0 

: o 0 ;\i.o .',..b •*•./:• ob: J. sv aoivi"£ci;xo 

. ■ ■ ' . 

- . ' t a 

- :*io :j {.>:!’ suL 

' • 

how 1 1 

* b o : , ' I ■ ’ - " ' ■ 

IGi 

‘ t . ■■-. i: ... o. : •. \... - .00" 

"• £i i rt■ b. :m tj ■ ; o .v b s I b o 1. 

, 

' .. : >x ...... 

* 

—. 1 .. 

bb o- ' - ' . i . :b £-10 

• -• * 

- ' v bb' V- ' ; : b 

. » . , 

t 

t 


, ; : - 

<. b . t ■; . - ■’ L 

■ 

t ■ ■■ b' ' ' ■. . • 70 - b .- ' ■ ! : : . ' O' b 

• >• . ••• 'Ow Vj O', ... .i- 

V 

• v - 

_ 


u 



» . 

ii . . b 7. . .; v 7 . •• 0 

, b 0 J . " b - 

. . • 

* '■ 

y : f \ 

' ■ soil;, -• ; .' ' ■ ' 




7 


In s■ ite of industrialisation, primary, extractive industry sti 11 
plays a major part in the Canadian economy and presents special problems 
to labour relations. In eneral, primary industry is usually carried on 
by small business units often widely separated and the problem of labour 
organization and the enforcement of collective bargaining and industrial 
standards legislation is difficult. Secondly, employment in extractive 
industries such as lumbering, agriculture and mining is often of a sea¬ 
sonal nature and a serious unemployment problem is thus created at diff¬ 
erent times of the year. 

Political Aspects . 

The political and constitutional structure of the Canadian 
nation has had a persistent influence on Canadian labour relations. 

The British North Am e rica A ct as judicially interpreted confers compe¬ 
tence over most matters directly involving labour relations upon the 

1 

Legislatures of the Provinces. Therefore labour must exert pressures 
for favourable legislation on all eleven governments. Provincial labour 
federations of international unions have assumed considerable importance 
in Canada. The fact that industrial standards, and, more particularly, 
collective bargaining legislation favourable to labour, were effected 
later in Canada than in most other democratic nations is in part a re¬ 
flection of the predominant legislative competence of the Provinces in 
these fields. Provincial governments have felt, reasonably or other¬ 
wise, that to go further or faster than their neighbors would put them 
at a competitive disadvantage so far as their own economic development 
was concerned. 

Canada is a parliamentary as well as a federal state. The failure 
of the trade union movement to exert its potential influence on govern¬ 
ments has impeded legislation favourable to organized labour. 

1. See Infra - Chapter 1 






8 


Following in the A.F.L. tradition the Trades and Labour Congress has prac¬ 
tised an atomistic policy of supporting individual candidates sympathetic 
to labour's cause. This policy has been much less successful than in the 
United States because of the rigid party discipline characteristic of the 
parliamentary system which makes an individual member's views of rel¬ 
atively little account unless he can make them prevail within his own 
party. The bankruptcy of T.L.C. political action is illustrated by the 
fact that apart from the C.C,F., primarily an agrarian Socialist move¬ 
ment, there have never been more than three or four Members of Parlia¬ 
ment who consistently represented the special interests of labour. The 
situation has not been basically different in the Provincial Legislatures* 
The Canadian Congress of Labour, following the lead of the C.1,0., has 
undertaken direct political action. At the 19^5 Annual Convention of 
the Congress the C.C,F. was named as the "Political am of labour" 
and the Political Action Committees threw their support behind that 
party in the General Elections of 19^5 and 19^9* The leaders and the 
rank-and-file of the Congress have not been united in their support of 
the C.C.F. and it has proven impossible to "deliver" the labour vote. 

Revolutionary unionism has from time to time exerted a disruptive 
force in the organized labour movement. The International Workers of 
the World had some temporary successes in organizing the employees of the 
B.C. lumber industry and the Grand Trunk Railway in the early years of 
this century. The syndicalist One Big Union, with a radical program of 
revolutionary industrial unionism, was formed in 1919 and had a signif¬ 
icant part in bringing about the Winnipeg General Strike of the same year. 

1. For a full and scholarly account of this strike see The Winnipe g 
Strike of 1919 - D.C. Masters - Univ. of Toronto Press, 1950 




. . . 

ih 'm ' ■ ' ' ' ' : m- ' . 

. 

; '-ni;! .iosix: v;t\ ■ ", o . d ,!V:sJ,i 


I 


i j.av 


r. • f' 


. * , 

,, . . : 

. 'TO Of, u, of Ov&d If. K C'Y >1 :;ffd7 


' 






< . . > I.. •-" . •; 

... 




r 


Hrad ictfj o' Of fs 

>' ■ 


; vJ-5 


1 ■ . . oi J ' • ■ ; ■ f . b ■ • 

. 

' * 

■•V-' ■ I..;oj ^To-ioi.Juiovei 

u x o i: 

. 

. ’ ■. o' . . - . yoo 



9 


Although the O.B.U. had a membership of some 50,000 in 1920 it soon de¬ 
clined to the status of a weak protest movement. Since the formation of 
a Canadian branch of the Communist International in 1922 communists have 
attempted to capture the organized labour movement. From time to time 
such important unions as the International Union of Mine, Mill and Smelter 
Workers, the Canadian Seamen’s Union and the United Electrical Workers 
have come under communist domination. 

In general the failure of the Canadian labour movement to mobilize 
its latent political strength has had two effects on provincial and fed¬ 
eral legislation. Trade unions have never aroused the intense hostility 
of the public and of special interest groups which led to the passing 
of the Taft-Hartley Act of 1947 in the United States. On the other hand, 
Canadian labour can look back to no charter of liberties like the 
British Trade Union Acts of 1874 and 1906 or the American Wagner Act 
of 1955* The policies and activities of the organized labour movement 
have shown a general preoccupation with improving the lot of the worker 
within the framework of capitalism by collective bargaining, atomistic 
political action and lobbying. 

Demographic Aspects . 

The Canadian labour movement has been in part conditioned by 
the existence of several unassimilated ethnic and national groups in the 
Dominion. The Confederation of Catholic Worker© represents a self-con¬ 
scious French-Canadian nationalism, eager to preserve its way of life, 
against the impact of Anglo-Saxon influences. The influence of British 
emigrants on the Canadian labour movement is perhaps less important 
than in the past but the British labour tradition of direct political 
action has done something to temper the influence of “Gomperism 11 in 
Canada. ^ 

1. D.C. Masters in his The Winnipeg Strik e of 1919 (U. of T. Press, 

1950) asserts that the leaders in the O.B.U. and the General Strike 
were almost exclusively products of British radical unionism. 









V , * 

, 

■: 1 -."o': ■. . ;i 'iq w oi ft&axAo 

*; ■ fi r:no SX . : ;1 iTi- i. 

' 

■ 

- 

. 

J ,B103il 



.* : .uHrt ■ .1 l--' - ill- 

. ' ' ■ . ’ 


‘ . 

;-o 

o 1J X : . ic. " 1.1 

1 ; ;' , ..■■■ - . c v'0 • i r X tiai! r r: 


* 

J ! V'- , 1 . X \‘I 1 ' ■ 1 - ‘ . C 

■' ' - 

1 


. 

, 

» u 

> j ■ -1. 


i • -1 s:-. aJ ; i ^.: Uv.r-r; ^ 

r , • . 

" 

. 

» 

'f ■■■:•;■:. ; ■ ? n ■ ' ; - Xn1 : •; 1 sc 

• ■1 ■ 1.1 . ■ . ■ f>;:. 

. 


: . ' 

■ 

iXu j -U7i; •: 

■ 


j • 

. 

- 

. . , 

L .. ■ '1 ■: v.’ 


' 




10 . 


The unassimilated Eastern European emigrant has complicated the task of 
labour organization. Without a tradition of collective activity these 
workers have often proven docile and difficult to organize and at other 
times have provided the rank and file and the leadership for revolution- 
i ary unionism. 

In general, differences in national background and language have 
hampered labour-class unity in Canada. 

B. Basic Preconceptions 

It is impossible for a student of the social sciences to approach 
any problem without bringing to it certain fundamental ideas his ex¬ 
perience and observation have caused him to accept. I believe that 
much confusion can be avoided if these basic beliefs are explicitly 
stated so that any body ox" conclusions reached may be tested in the 

i 

light of the writers fundamental preconceptions. This study will pro¬ 
ceed from these assumptions: 

1. There is a definable public interest in the relations between 
management and labour . One writer lists its elements as follows.^" 

13 1. The continuing (and continuous) operation of any company that 
proves able honestly to survive, 

2. Competitive costs which assure prices that attract a high 
volume of business* 

5* A smooth internal functioning of the organization, reflect¬ 
ing friendly and amicable relations of supervisors and those supervised, 

4. Conditions which give every possible opportunity for personal 
fulfilment and group satisfaction as work, 

5. Provision of terms of employment on as high a level as the 
competitive conditions of the industry permit^ 

1. Ordway Tead - P ublic Mindedness Through Cooperation - Annal s of 
the American Academy of Political and Social Science - Nov. 19%&- P.162. 













' i; ip joi 10 .li 


. ' ' ■ • ■ 

j.io. ir.. 1 ■■ suiooo never, n . , vv-r' 

>1 0 six’ ' 1 ■ 


t • 


. ' “ : 

f .i i .V _ • n . 

■•r • :.j . i:.....: j. 'u- x f-.XOO$ ■■ . aV i.)s 0 TO’, ri .!X*0'1 *X Bo 1 

j; .1 ‘i -ii i -\p 1 -' •-1- • •'• . '■ • 

. j <:! ,-j o ...• - V " ' t rc. ■ r \ • ' ■ iv 

: ■ . - ■ - ' 1 ' , o-j fi t tt 

-ix : ob ■ b ^ hre vri n .... J;' './J orr; ^bocl 'is i rlu o8_ o' -io j o 

. 


Vi ',ciV boro 



'. ■: to'mid it i 


§iu: 


•- ;0 





» 

■ ■ , i ' i : 


■ ' 

, 

. ■ 

V 










11 


6. A sufficient profit to retain and attract such volume of capital 
as is required in the exercise of prudent managerial judgment". 

There is no "natural right" of workers to join unions or to bargain 
collectively or to strike any more than there is an inalienable prerog¬ 
ative of an employer to hire and fire under conditions that he alone be¬ 
lieves expedient. The public interest must prevail so far as it may be 
discovered in any particular situation. 

II. The interest of management and labour are neither unalterably 
opposed nor fundamentally identical . Advocates of both the class war¬ 
fare and the "invisible hand" theories are guilty of gross oversimpli- 
cation. High wages and high profits are not necessarily antithetical, 
high productivity can be made to benefit both employers and employees, 
worker solidarity often improves the lot of labour and management and so 
on. On the other hand, experience fails to suggest that good will and 
approximate equality of bargaining power will resolve every issue. 

Even under the best of conditions the basic interests of labour and 
management can and do diverge, especially over such problems as union 
security, seniority and the "speed-up". Glib economic dogmas provide no 
solution to the complexities of labour relations. 

III. The Provinces should retain the largest feasible sphere of 
jurisdiction in labour legislation. Dr. Eugene Forsey has deplored the 
"extraordinary and bewildering diversity" of provincial collective bar¬ 
gaining legislation. 1 There is little doubt that the B.N.A.Act as 
judicially interpreted does not give the Dominion adequate competence 
over labour matters and it is obvious that the diversity in provincial 
legislation seriously inconveniences officers of both unions and busi¬ 
ness firms, as well as students of labour matters. 


1. Provincial Collective Bargaining Legislation-Pub l ic Affairs 
Dec. 1947-pp.35-40 








1 . ■ 1 -;jb 

v : 

£ ' i 



' 

■ J' ..... •;./*?. G : 

■;c 

. 




\ .. r-i -t v:~ t.,v i : |! : 

’ 

. 

- ' ' \ . .. 

* : 1 ■' ■ • 

' 

- 

-£.! iev j r_: 3 o r i _ \ ; vy I i?.'- r- : \.S : : H in.!; r{ ■ Hi vaJ:* o.U b«4 

t j J ... l. ' - ' . . ' ' : 

. ' O-L s oi ;j\- >.;*y if'r : ; ' 

. 

' 

' 

■ . ' . ' . ... 

, ‘ . • ;., . ■ ■ ■. oe 

*$■”• i 

• • • : .' ... 

. 

- - - .aoj,:v. 

' 

' 

, . 

.V..-. . .^ ov.i. J c^XX cr Uxo>- .Lv-yj . 









12 


On the other hand, the fact that different provinces with different 
problems and different prevailing social philosophies have chosen to deal 
with collective bargaining in different ways does not indicate that "what 
we have is nine peoples and nine governments, not a nation but a loose 
league of semi-independent states' * 1 2 . 1 The raison d'etre of federalism 
is a reconciliation of unity with diversity necessitating a large 
degree of autono my to particular areas. A comparative study of collect¬ 
ive bargaining legislation in Canada, the United States, Britain and 
Australia reveals that their nations have had varying degrees of success 
with widely divergent methods of reducing the effects of industrial 
strife. The need for uniformity is, I believe, counterbalanced by the 

i 

advantages of experimentation as each province meets its particular 
problems -in its own way. Rather obviously no provincial administration 
should be unaware of what its neighbors are doing or of the experience 
of other provinces with various expedients but this need can and is 
being met by such consultations as are provided by the annual conferen¬ 
ces of administrators of labour legislation. 

IV. Wherever possible, the legal aspects of labour relations should 
be clarified by statutory enactments rather than be left to interpreta¬ 
tion by the courts in the light of the common law. Judicial interpreta¬ 
tion in the light of common law principles almost inevitably leaves an 
area of uncertainty, particularly in situations involving picketing and 
the civil liability of trade unions. When we come to cases involving 
the British North America Act the problems become even more acute. The 

Industrial Disputes Investigation Act of 1907 was in operation for 18 

~~ " ~ _ ~~ ~~ 2 

years before being declared ultra vires. 

1. See op. cit. P. 40 

2. Infra pp. 27-29 








15 


The validity of legislation delegating power by the Dominion to a Province 
or vice versa was a moot constitutional point until a 1950 decision of 
the Supreme Court of Canada.^ It is of the most urgent necessity that the 
Dominion and the Provinces agree on a method of amending the British North 
America Act so that the intolerable uncertainties surrounding the present 
Constitution as judicially interpreted may be resolved. 


1. See infra p. 40-4^ 





14 . 

Chapter I 

Canadian Labour Legislation and the British North America Act . 

No adequate understanding of Canadian labour legislation is possible 
without some study of the peculiar constitutional framework within which 
all such legislation must be enacted. Quite understandably, the B.N.A, 
Act of 1867, the product of a pre-industrial age, makes reference to 
the relative jurisdiction of the Federal Parliament and the Provincial 
Legislatures over labour matters only by implication and thus the delim¬ 
itation of the powers of each has come almost exclusively through the 
judicial interpretation of certain clauses of the Act, 

A. The Text of the B.N.A. Act 0 ^ 

The relevant clauses of the B.N,A, Act are as follows: 

1* The preamble to S, 91 confers upon the Federal Parliament 
the power to legislate for the M Peace, Order, and Good 
Government of Canada in relation to All Matters not coming 
within the Classes of Subjects —assigned exclusively to 
the Legislatures of the Provinces. 11 
2. S. 91 confers upon the Federal Parliament exclusive legis¬ 
lative authority over, 

(a) Unemployment insurance (B.N.A. Act 19^0) 

(b) The regulation of trade and commerce S.91(2) 

(c) Navigation and shipping inter-provincial 
and international ferries (S#91) 10 and 15 

(d) The criminal law S.91 (27) 


1. 50 and 51 Vic. C.5 















. 





- * • 

* 

. 




15 


5* S.152 confers upon the Federal Parliament the authority to en¬ 

act legislation to bring into effect any treaty made between 
the British Bnpire and foreign countries, 

4. S. 92 (10) by implication confers upon the Federal Parliament 
the power to legislate upon matters concerning 

(a) Railways, canals, steamship lines and “other Works 
and Undertakings connecting the Province with any 
other or others of the Provinces, or extending be¬ 
yond the Limits of the Province. 111 

(b) Steam ship lines between a Province and any British 
of Foreign Country. 

(c) Such works as are declared by the Parliament of Can¬ 
ada “to be for the General Advantage of Canada or for 
the Advantage of Two or more of the Provinces." 

5. S. 92 confers upon the Legislatures of the Provinces exclusive 
jurisdiction to legislate on matters concerning,, 

(a) “Property and Civil Rights in the Province S .92 (15) 

(b) “Generally all matters of a merely local or private 
Nature in the Province.'* 

6. S .94 confers upon the Governor General the authority to appoint 
“the Judges of the Superior District and County Courts in 

each Province except those of the Courts of Probate in Nova 
Scotia and New Brunswick. 1 * 

B. Federal Labour Legislation Now in Existenc e. 

The bulk of Federal Labour legislation now in effect is based 
upon the Dominion's power in matters relating to the Criminal Law 
(S91, 27), unemployment insurance (91,2A), navigation and shipping, 
inter-provincial and international transportation and communication 
(92,10) and the power over Federal contracts. 



J VO .. ■: i / \ 1 . r.O Ji ' ‘ . 0 O' l ,$ l *1 

... : ,0. J b£:J.-GJ. Joti 

, 

. , 

t rtqqy, : ei. -:>d' oowoq e/U 

i 

—• ^ ■ ! i\Cn'-: &fiJ 0 0 .--r. ‘v„, *t. ciOo 

■ • 

- f ‘... i'*.. , b\'‘ , ■ . 0 k;> iOiJr (D / 

TC « *1 i 9 ' >• , 0 >. ... i 

. 

. 

. 

. 

- J'£U 0 '• .. : . v : j o X'.v J o tO $0: ':.o ko ;J.viP., ooJ"'. * 

‘ 

* 

T9: 



■ • iij' L ■ : .. 

■ 

. 0.' 

; ;; 



' J ....' "X SOOv 

£ ■' 


. 



• • • • ^ ■ 

■ 1 $Ci 

t 

' 


. - 

•, • V j . v f . <S .; 







16 . 

1* Criminal Law 

Early trad© unions in Canada, Britain and the United States found 

their existence menaced by decisions of common law courts which declared 

workers combinations to be criminal conspiracies in restraint of trade. 

A strike of Toronto Printers in 1871 was followed by a conviction of 

twenty-four of their leaders on charges of seditious conspiracy. It was 

suddenly realized that Canadian organized labour did not share in the 

protection afforded to British workers by the Trade Union Act of I 87 I 

and that in Canada combinations of workingmen were in fact illegal.'*' 

The 1872 Trade Unio n Act stated that the purposes of a trade union 

should not be considered unlawful merely because they were in restraint 

of trade so as to make any member of a union liable to prosecution on 

charges of criminal conspiracy. s. 498 of the Criminal Code y defines 

several indictable offenses in restraint of trade but specifically states 

that the provisions shall not apply to 11 combinations of workmen or emplojr- 

”4 

ees for their own reasonable protection as such workers or employees. 

5 

The Combines Investigation Act confers similar freedom upon unions. 

The Criminal Code makes it an indictable offense to break wilfully 
any contract knowing that such action is likely to endanger human life, 
cause bodily injury or expose valuable property to destruction. It is 
further declared to be a criminal offense to break any contract which will 
deprive the inhabitant s of any place of power, light, gas or water or to 
break wilfilly any contract with a government railway on which mail, 
freight, or passengers are carried if the person so doing has reasonable 
reason to believe that his action will delay or prevent railway services 
from being carried on. The Criminal Code thus attempts to protect the 
community from the interruption of vital services occurring because of 

1. Lo gan pp. 45 

2. Revised Statutes of Canada, 1927,0.125^3,52. 

5. R.S.C. 1927, C.146. 

4. R.S.C.,0,146, S .498 (2). 

5. R.S.C.,C.146, S.499 . 








' 

: . . • ' . i ■ ‘ 

. 

c C u >'* '^ l - ? -n t ■ i- Ojtn^oT ^ro 

, , ' 

arCv isi . LV *•;>;. ?k •: ior.^i-o ffjgsj.^.siX&D o ; 

L f , ': . ' ~ o 

. 

liolxti ■:■'■ iS .i'j • U.: W‘J' vf.l.w ’ ?3 „+0'/ £„t O ©bjR'^f IvV-I 

ii - - :>./ ; :. : v omcosd or • e 1 \.;oeoLScicn ;d od Jc:: hlmodB 

, 

Co j : C vl-i oci • . o;:;o o; •, i C , 0- '. v o •; ., • oeaoc .o' <= .' fli~i oiorro 1 O'l^VSB 

' 

f- ' 

* 

* 

oC.:ii : , ■ ...' •■ . .. . , ^ •. . . . .. •.; : 1 


e ’ • 














.-sv J ' 




* 





• 







$ 

■ 
















0-, GO O T..-000; -i 


• - 






t 


. V V Q : } 
























i 

















■ 






ii.ifi v 





















0 O 0.' 





. 











t .: 

















- 









* 














* 

» . * 


. 












, 


. 

• * 


« 


* 


xv ■ 




T7 


deliberate breaches of contracts by employers and employees, 

S .501 of the Criminal Code deals with certain acts of violence which 
from time to time occur in labour disputes. It is declared to be an indic¬ 
table offence to use violence or intimidation to compel any person to do 
something he has a lawful right to do or to refrain from doing anything 
from which h© has a lawful right to abstain. Watching and besetting, foll¬ 
owing another person persistently about from place to place or hindering 
another in the use of his property are also defined as indictable offense3^ 

A 193^ amendment declared that coming near or attending at another’s house 

2 

or place of business shall not be deemed watching and besetting, SpQ2 
and 505 of the Criminal Code further defines certain acts of violence 
in pursuance of unlawful combinations and conspiracies,^ 

The Federal Parliament has also used its power over the Criminal 
Law to make it an indictable offence for anyone to send a ship registered 
in Canada to sea if such ship should be unseaworthy because of over-load¬ 
ing or under-loading. For some reason this section applies only to voy¬ 
ages on the inland waters of Canada and to or from the inland waters of 
h 

the United States. 

S 5 502 A of the Criminal Code /the “Woodsworth Amendment’ 1 f of 1959 
ranks with the sections of the Code exempting unions from prosecutions 
for criminal conspiracy as the most valuable legal defence of union in¬ 
terests enacted by the Federal Parliament, The section makes, it an indic¬ 
table offense for an employer or his agent to • 

(a) refuse to employ or dismiss from employment any person for the 

1 

sole reason that such person is a member of a lawful workers ass¬ 
ociation whose purpose it is to raise wages or regulate conditions 
of work in a lawful manner, 

1. R,S.C., C 146, S* 501 

S. Statutes of Canada, 1954. C*47, S» 12. 

5. R.S.C., C.146, SS.502, 505, 

4. R.S.C. C.l46 ? SS. 288 , 289 . 



„ 

■■I J‘*>- 0 tiv'j I .i-G.G .1. i’G'J iS-^XISijO " it aQ i'3X,C 

/ ■ ' ' o • ; ■ : ' * • I : • ■■! ! 'C : .JOG ..■ . J - : : 

V ).; . Xg ■ OS [\si 1 i Jm.v tU G : Oa©'I'.)£V 'C;?.:,; gJ GGr.GX‘iO Gi w -u!' 

■ • . 

, / ■ . , 4 n i ii • 

' ■ 

a; j i‘:ol so Lj jX c> e ‘io ^4 r i&qoT:q exit X ..0 @e*j ©fU* fix 

••• 5 J' . •■<■;:g.g J - ". i. :on .‘ 4 - v .Uotf-.oszrn ' 

, 

' 

* ' ■’ ''''''J 

r... r. ■ /. V .. . L • u os ■ 'g::,. .'n \i. \.r. . .‘.:oXe''i 

. .■ ■. ' ' ■ 

■ uk 


' 


?:.. ,• a 1 


\ . < ... 




"so b niu;xi: > no sgog 

* ; : ' i 

. ■; % ; i: ■ : «s , • ' .... . i K ; X , C ■ . X .> ' ' 

- 

... . • j I 1 { ( ■ ■ 

. . .' ■ * : 

I j . /i - lei io )o 3 "j. osna'iX:o <v>i t’acf 

■ ■ . : . •.: .• ■.. ■ g ■ X: si '■ 1 , j'z.i s G" mfio'i \ } 

■ 

• • ■ ■ i.. -i ej si Ji ....-■. '.tug or.OiW noxJs'loo 

, 'G ' i.GG.G. I ■ 


^ .. 5 . . . 

J . i t z:li . W 1 •: :•.. . >' 

*. ■ • , '■ • ■ - . * 


(b) seek by intimidation, loss of position or employment or threat of 
such loss or by any pecuniary penalty to compel workers to abstain from be¬ 
longing to a lawful trade union to which they have a lawful right to belong* 
(c) To agree, conspire or combine with others to do any of the things 
mentioned in (a) and (b). 

Under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Dominion over the Criminal 
Law the Federal Parliament in 1909* as a result of pressure from the 
rather un-natural combination of the Trades and Labour Congress and, the 
Lord's Day Alliance, enacted the Lord's Day Ac t, 1 2 which with many excep¬ 
tions prohibited Sunday employment and required that in cases in which a 
person was lawfully employed on Sunday that he be given a period of 
twenty-four consecutive hours without labour some other day of the week. 

The Criminal Code has thus attempted to mitigate the results of the 
harsh and anachronistic decisions of the common law courts in defining 
the rights and duties of employers and employees. 

2. Unemployment Insurance . 

Soon after the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council declared the 
Employment and Social Insurance Act of 1955 to be ultra vires the Federal 
Parliament Dominion officials began to urge the Provinces to agree to a 
constitutional amendment to give the national government power to enact 
a scheme of unemployment insurance. In 19^0 the last remaining Province, 
Quebec, agreed to the proposed amendment and in 19^0 the Imperial Parlia¬ 
ment, on the receipt of a Joint Address from both Canadian Houses, amended 
the B.N.A. Act by adding "Unemployment Insurance" to the enumerated list 

2 

of subjects within the exclusive legislative competence of the Dominion. 

1. Statutes of Canada ,1959, C.50 r SU 

2. Con s titutional Amendment in Canada -Paul Cerin - Lajoie 
University of Toronto Press 1950 pp.278-279 






(. 

„ ' . : 

. - ft: ' . ... \ / ... u; '<J ’i. 

j t ■ ■ ‘ i . • ■■ • o. 


■ - 








, 
















. x- 






. 

. 


. j vs . , ■ . ■. r s:.r\o L i.x._ :. 

- , ■ • ■ . /• - .' J J. : : .. 

. 

■ 

. ' . .. ... : i: ... r ■.. ' 

, , , 

* '■ - ' x 1 © 1 n vj-. 0:10 aldJlh v . ' jjs 


. \ ‘ : • ■ 

• “ .... ■ ' ' - : ■ 





19. 


Almost immediately Parliament enacted a comprehensive system of contribu¬ 
tory unemployment insurance for workers in covered occupations and earning 
below certain salaries and a system of national employment offices to ad¬ 
minister the Act.* 

5• The Dominion Power over inter-P r ovincial T ransportation and Commu n icatio n 
and over Navigation and Shipping . 

T he Railway Labour Disputes Act of 1905, the Industrial Disp u tes Acts 
of 1908, 1927, and 1959, and the Industrial Disputes and Investigation Act 

of 19^8, will be discussed in detail later in this thesisIt is suffic- 

the 

ient to note here that Dominion has jurisdiction to enact such collective 
bargaining legislation as is now in effect by virtue of its implied powers 
over various international and interprovincial systems of transportation 
and communication under S. 92 (10) of the B.N.A. Act. 

Two significant judicial decisions in 1952 conferred the authority to 
legislate in matters concerning aeronautics and radio broadcasting upon the 
Federal Parliament. Under this authority the Dominion has enacted a sch one 
for workmens' compensation for flying personnel of civilian air lines aid 

4 

a system of licensing for operators of radio transmitters. 

Under its jurisdiction over "Navigation and Shipping" the Federal Par¬ 
liament has enacted labour legislation governing both inland and interne— 

5 

tional shipping. The Canada Shipping Act enacts concerning minimum ages 
of seagoing personnel, contracts of merchant seamen, discharge of seamen 
pilot's licenses, safety conditions on steamships, standards for stevedores 
loading and unloading ships and other matters. In general. Dominion leg¬ 
islation governing shipping has endeavored to bring conditions on Canad¬ 
ian ships in conformity with I.L.O. Conventions.^ 

1. Statutes of Canada 1940, C .44 with amendments. 

2. Infra Chapter 5 

5. Statutes of Canada 1944-45 9 C ,28^3.5. 

4. Statutes of Canada 1958,C.50,S.4» 

5. Statutes of Canada 1954,0.44 with amendments. 

6. Labour Legislation in Canada as existing December $1, 1948 
Dept, of Labour 1950 - P. 52 




















. 








"fC 0© %. 








0' '.: -.if 1U V' :• 

' 


i>uo 




■ :, ■ :/ -i. V V Ji'. 




vo.- VOl: 


■ 

* 

. 

4 . 

. 


i- ( v l V, 








rmX 














20 


In 1946 the Federal Parliament enacted a comprehensive Workmen's Compensa¬ 
tion Law for merchant seamen.^ 

4. Federal Jurisd i ction over Dominion Go ve rnment Works* 

Although legislation regarding working conditions of most employees 
except those engaged in inter-provincial transportation and in shipping is 
under provincial control the Provinces have no power to: 

(a) regulate the working conditions of the servant of the Dominion, 

(b) regulate the working conditions of persons engaged in works de¬ 
clared by the Federal Parliament to be for the general advantage 

p 

of Canada, 

(c) regulate the working conditions of those engaged in Federal 
Government contracts* 

In 1900 a resolution of the House of Commons declared it to be the 
policy of the Government to pay the generally accepted level of wages in 
Federal undertakings or in undertakings aided by Federal funds. P.C* 

1206 in 1922 outlined the industrial standards to be inserted in Federal 
contracts for construction works for the use of the Government. In 1930 
the Fair Wages and Eight Hour Day Ac t fixed a limit of eight hours per 
day (lowered to 44 hours per week in 1945) for persons employed on Feder¬ 
al works of construction and repair. In 1949 all Fair Wages legislation 
and regulations were consolidated in P.C. 5547*' 

As well as regulating wages and working conditions of Dominion civil 
servants and workers engaged on Federal works, the Federal Parliament 
has also legislative jurisdiction over industrial standards in Dominion 
Crown corporations like Trans-Canada Airlines, the Polymer Corporation 
and the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. 

1. Statutes of Canada 1946 - C 58 and amendments* 

2. The most important legislation under this section of the B.N.A. Act, 
S.92 (10c),is that dealing with the grain trade. 

3. The material for this paragraph is taken from Fair Wages Policy 
H.S. Johnstone - Labour Gazette-Sept. 1950 pp* 1545-1548. 










. 

. .. .. 

■:: '* ... . v. . bi.;'x.«Xo 

* 

* , . . . 

. 

♦ 

* . , 

- Ot- 

» 

. 

. 

... Yi - ■ . - . % . . - . .. cm J ,. 



21 


5* Other Federal Legislation Directly Affecting Labour 

Under other sections of the B.N.A. Act apart from those mentioned above 
the Dominion has enacted legislation of a more or less direct concern to 
labour. Some of this legislation may be noted briefly. 

1. Under its concurrent power over immigration the Federal Parliament 

has enacted a comprehensive immigration policy. 

and 

2. Under its power over "Naturalization Aliens" (S. 91,25) the Federal 
Parliament has enacted legislation forbidding the importation of 
alien labour under contract.^ 

5. Under its jurisdiction over "copyrights" (S.91,25) the Federal Parliar 

ment has enacted legislation for the registration of union labels and 

2 

their exclusive use by the union which does so. 

4. Under its authority over "Bankruptcy and Insolvency" (S.91,2l) the 

Federal Parliament has enacted legislation which gives debts owing 
by a bankrupt to any Workmans * Compensation Fund or to employees 
for three months' wages a "secured creditor" status.^ 

5. Under its authority over "Militia, Military and Naval Service and 
Defence", (S.91,7), the Federal Parliament has enacted comprehensive 
program of veterans' rehabilitation involving such labour matters 

as apprenticeship conditions in the "Training on the Job" program 
and the reinstatement of veterans in their civilian occupations. 

6. Under its implied jurisdiction to incorporate interprovincial compan¬ 
ies the Federal Parliament has enacted legislation making the direc¬ 
tors of such companies personally liable for the wages of the company's 
employees for six months if the corporation has gone into liquidation under 

1. Revised Statutes of Canada 1927 C 97 

2. Revised Statutes of Canada 1927, C 71 and Statutes of Canada, 19^4 
C 58 S.2 

5. Revised Statutes of Canada 1927, CHS 121 and amendments. 



. . 

...» 

« 

. . ' -v |: • .. V r\! i ‘V: J 

. 

, , - ; 

* 

, 

, 

- - - .7 

* 

. 

; i ' / O./fs-" ■■ 1 ,f 

, / 

' 

* V r. 




22 


the Bankruptcy Act and also that it shall be an ancillary object of any 
such company to establish or aid in the support of employee pension 
plans 

7. Nearly forty per cent of the total area of Canada is within the North 
west Territories and the Yukon and in these regions the Federal author¬ 
ities have exclusive legislative competence. In both cases workmens' 
compensation, mechanics' liens and other labour legislation of a some- 

p 

what rudimentary nature exists. As only 483 workers belonged to un¬ 
ions in these areas in 1948 there is no collective bargaining code.''* 

6. Canadian L a bour Legislation and the Treaty-making P ower 

It is an elementary principle of international law that the power to 
make treaties is, in countries owing allegiance to the British Crown, a 
Royal Prerogative. By convention, however, this aspect of the Prerogative 
is exercised only on the advice of the Crown's responsible ministers, and 
so far as Canada is concerned these ministers are the Federal Cabinet. 

Since the Statute of Westminster was enacted there has thus been no legal 
barrier to the Federal Executive entering into any treaties or conventions 
it may so desire. 

The competence of the Federal Parliament to enact legislation implement¬ 
ing the international obligations into which Canada has entered is a more 
complicated matter. Two decisions of the Judicial Committee of the Privy 
Council in the 1920's had strengthened the idea that Parliament had compe¬ 
tence to enact such legislation. A convention had been drawn up and signed 
at the Paris Conference of 1919 making elaborate provisions for the regulation 
of aerial navigation. The convention was signed by His Majesty on behalf 
of the British Empire fry name and the Parliament of Canada had enacted the 

1. Statutes of Canada, 1934, C. 35 S. 96 and S, l4 

2• Ordinances of the Yukon and Ordinances of the Northwest Territories - 

text of ordinances is given in labour legislation in Canada as exist¬ 
ing Dec. 31» 1948. Dept, of Labour 1950 
5* Labour Organization in Canada 1948 Dept, of Labour P. 12 









. 

^ : - 1 * 1 L ' X “ f ’ ■' X p') >4^ t*jiX 

v ... ...... ... ■ . j . ., n 0 

o :•.» j. . wo ..• o,; on-- o iimjv 


■ ' - '■ ax i.‘,; .... : - ...j. ■ 

, 

1 -<• X. • in':.. Co DOO,bt n, r b 

i'l 

* 

' ' .... - -x 


■: 

- 

‘ 


b".X' . .;.,X: ni s:.o.X 

■ ; . 

+ 

n t r , ,.n. 1 :.*rJUKin«oni • 

1 .. . £ 

<• ' .'•i o;i, oj 1 .i.- 1 


. 

4 • - Vi . i.;T:V' 

X-- : t^n -.b.. olcls 0 qi . : ; , w or 

• v.fb. boaXn'zoxe oi; 

*bv ili i : ■ 1 VO b i.j V '• r : J : . £< ■ j _ j 

; ^* r yoro;,::; oX X, nv\:- ;• ■ ! „e , i c 

X : ■ ;• j ■■ , d ■ ■, ..; v ! b: i;> ; 

7 V.-V'lj 30 • -• J 

evo:.':.. , •; , XJ,-:a-'U- v CJ-I a,;- 

' - 


♦ 


.0C ! . *i,.; .. 


• 

■ 1 3-iJ ■ 

•. . i • . v 



'• ■ . t - 


* mod bM{ itoxbiievir o: 

• • 


■ -X ,X to &ofii; , i$tisbO : slwaft 6,'i.vf 


• 


■’ -o' •.;■ ; ■ ,. j;,. bn 



, 

• 

“ 


, 

* 






25 


Regulations in question. In a reference to the Judicial Committee, the Comm¬ 
ittee held that parliament had exclusive jurisdiction to enact such legisla- 

1 

tion under S.152 of the British North America Act. A less clear-cut refer¬ 
ence was made by the Committee involving Parliament's exclusive power to reg- 

2 

ulate radio broadcasting. The International Radiotelegraph Convention of 
1927 had been negotiated for Canada by representatives appointed by the 
Governor-General in Council, ratified and confirmed by an instrument of the 
Canadian Secretary of State for External Affairs and implemented by the 
Ra diotelegraph Act of 1927 and regulations made under this Act. The Jud¬ 
icial Committee declared that the legislation in question did not come 
under the provisions of S 152 of the B.N.A. Act but asserted that the pre¬ 
amble to S.91# which conferred upon the Federal Parliament the general res¬ 
iduary power, gave Parliament exclusive jurisdiction to enact such legisla¬ 
tion. 

Encouraged by the liberal interpretation of the treaty-making power by 
the judiciary and alarmed by the failures of the Provinces to enact adequate 
industrial standards legislation, Parliament in 1955 passed the Weekly Rest 
in Industrial Undertakings Act, the Minimum Wages Act, and the Limitation 
of Hours of Work Act. The statutes were passed by the Dominion Parliament 
in implementation of conventions adopted by the International Labour Organ¬ 
ization and ratified by Canada in the previous year# 

In a reference to the Judicial Committee,counsel for the Dominion sought 
to justify the legislation on two grounds. Firstly, it was contended that 
the Government of Canada had an obligation to implement the conventions be¬ 
cause of Article 405 of the Treaty of Ver sa ille s which set up the Internation¬ 
al Labour Organization. This treaty had been made in the name of the British 
Enpire (although signed specifically by a Canadian Minister) and the obliga- 

1. In the Regulation and Control of Aeronautics in Canada (1952) A.C. 54. 

2. In re R egulations and Control of Radi o Broadcasting in Canada (1952) 

A.C. 504 

5. R.S.C. 1927, C.195. 















' . .1 

- ■, ... : . Ij cJ: -i;j l 1 bni j 1 / d. LX,. ; oodd 

. - .♦■••• 

: ' , : • v 

* 

• . v- ' - i J .'i- ; •: vd i ■./. X J hzii \d-i 

r" : : '• : J:,: 4 *s ^iioaucd t j: loyyuo • • on v y 00 

' - <,: fy ■-'£ mi Vi dJdd to'j. "-y y , ■■yy' 0 

- 

• • - • ' ■■ iJ •- . .1 . ‘ J. j J ..■!■■■: b cyd.,1 ,r I i: 

- . ... ■ 

~ .'■■■■ . 

. .r.J \ • j-; '■ yvxzuloxo d / .ill *£/■.': <--V : ■ . • • •: ; O’' j. 

■ - ~ ■ ■ ' 

••■■■■- .. ■ j 

• ■' . ' . 

■ 

, 

‘ •• • ~ - id he4 q Gfc& Bn^ijn&vaoQ do y,cl d£jyvy:ioxyy.i n£ 

* 

1 ~ ' r -- - ■ ■■ ■ dl o C i :• i. o J. / . -■ j yj *■ t b a I 

. 

' oj u ,0 '• r -0 ' o ••• •;; v o J 

■ ' 7 - 

' 

» • ' 

' ’ _ ' * 

* 

. . 

... V, 








tions resulting from it came within the purview of S. 152. In the second 
place, the validity of the legislation wa3 defended under the general re¬ 
siduary powers of S.91# 

The Judicial Committee rejected the Dominion's contentions on the 
following grounds: 

1. The obligations under the ratified conventions were not obligations 
of Canada as part of the British &npire but of Canada by virtue 
of her new status as an "international juristic person," 

2# The obligations to perform the conventions did not arise under ‘the 
Treaty of Versailles until the Canadian Executive, acting solely 
under its own volition^acceded to the conventions# 

5* The general residuary power did not give the Federal Parliament 

exclusive authority to legislate for performing the obligations of 
Canada not within the terms of S,152 or the enumerated heads of S91# 
4# The general residuary power did not come into effect because the 
legislation was not concerned with matters of such general import¬ 
ance as had "ceased to be merely local and provincial" and had 
"Become matters of national concern." 

The accession of Canada to an independent status thus was held not 
to have given the Dominion the authority to encroach upon the exclusive 
provincial powers enumerated in S 92 under the guise of the treaty-making 
power# The power of the Federal Parliament to implement any treaty is 
thus governed by the division of legislative powers laid down in S 91 and 
S. 92, unless such treaty should be made on behalf of the British Empire. 

The position taken by the Judicial Committee seriously inconveniences 
Canada in her dealings with other nations* It has become more and more ob¬ 
vious that no nation,least of all ore as dependent on economic conditions 
elsewhere as Canada, can deal adequately with its internal problems by 
purely unilateral action, although the theory that a county which enacts 




. 

. 

* - 

1 . ■. . .■ .1 - i - U ' K . mm. - i 1 

. .. 

, . 

. 




•: It :t J " 
























«i- . J. ;:;c:■ i.'iufi. .'(.ri-o? i 

. 

• - ' ... '■ ' : -.... ; ■ . U 

, 

. 

, 

! i. ■ ... 

I : <, V . ■ '.. ■ ' ... ' 

,. : .. . i \.j 



25 


superior industrial standards is at a competitive disadvantage in world 

trade is, under most conditions, questionable.^ Neither do other federal 

states labour under such disabilities in their international dealings. 

Art. VI of the American Constitution decrees that all treaties shall be 

"the supreme Law of the Land" if they are validly made by the President 

and c ncurred in by two-thirds of the Senators present, and the High Court 

of Australia has given the power of the Commonwealth Government over 

2 

"external affairs" a liberal interpretation. There is also little doubt 
that the Canadian Government has ratified international conventions of one 
nature and another without making any serious attempt to implement them 
or to encourage the Provinces to do so. As Mr. James Eayers remarks# 
"After four years of listening to the Canadian delegations uphold the san¬ 
ctity of provincial rights over and against the international authority, 
pay scrupulous attention to these rights, and invoke the inviolable con¬ 
stitution, the delegates of other nations must be beginning to wonder 
whether the inviolable constitution is nothing but a convenient device 
which the Canadian government can and does use to avoid sacrificing its 
sovereignty to the international body and its affiliated agencies".''’ 

The present constitutional position has been the object of criticism 

4 

m many quarters. The Rowell-Sirois Report suggested that the Dominion 
and Provinces come together to devise methods to implement I.L.O. conven¬ 
tions (but not other international agreements) which Canada had ratified 

and that the Provinces give to the Dominion such power. Delegations, as 

5 

we know now, will necessitate a constitutional amendment* 

1. Lester, H.A. Economics of Labor - Macmillan 194-9 pp 528-555. 

2, An Australian View of the Hours of Labour Case John D. Holmes 15 
C.3.R, 428. 

5# Canadian Federalism and the T nite d Nations - C.J.E.P.S, May 1950 p 182 

4. The Canadian Bar Review in 1957 devoted an entire issue to a symposium 
of the decisions in the Bennett "New Deal" case with articles by 
John D. Holmes, Prank Scott, A,B. Keith,W.P.M. Kennedy, Vincent C, 
MacDonald and others. XV C.B.R. See also Matas - T reaty -making i n 
Canada XXV C.B.R. pp458-477 

5. Report of Royal Commission on Dom-Prov. Relations Book II pp.48-49 











}1 

, s ' • r ;:r;/ , - - S.C . 







. i ‘ 

: • 


•• iooriv uJ 10 

• :■ ; "t: 


Si:,.* v" ' .H X.siOijiV010 ' 1 7 VC 


■ -70, 7; 7': 


*. /:•: i 7 7 7 <' 7 .: J" fr i 7 7 


; 


: 

* 

ini . - - 

:. ■ ■ . ' ■ 


:* ■ r 

' 

1 . . :• t ’ 

. , 

... 

... 









Most critics of the present constitutional position in regard to 
treaties neglect the real issue which is the reconciliation between fed¬ 
eralism and international action. It should be obvious that if the Fed¬ 
eral Parliament undertook to implement in a thoroughgoing way the rec¬ 
ommendations of the multifarious economic and social agencies of the 
United Nations provincial autonomy would be meaningless. Although modern 
technology may have made it possible for Canada to become a unitary state, 
there can be little doubt that the social, cultural and economic divers¬ 
ities which made federalism necessary in 1867 still persist. In partic¬ 
ular, any proposal which would give the Federal Parliament almost unlim¬ 
ited control over labour relations would run directly into the barrier 
ox* the Civil Code of Quebec and few who know the temper of French Canada 
cou'.d doubt that the result would be a separate Laurentian state. Nor is 
there evidence, as there perhaps was in 1957* that the Provinces are in¬ 
capable of enacting advanced collective bargaining and industrial stand¬ 
ards legislation. 

Prof. H.F. Angus outlines a plausible compromise to a difficult prob¬ 
lem by suggesting that the B.N.A. A.ct be amended so that the Federal Par¬ 
liament would have the competence to implement international conventions 

1 

which had been ratified by a considerable number of states. Under Prof, 

Angus 1 proposal the demand for the necessary relinquishing of provincial 
\ 

powers would come not from the Dominion but from a group of highly diver - 
sified nations. This solution appears to me to be the only one through 
which the seemingly antithetical demands of Canadian federalism and inter¬ 
national collaboration can be resolved. 

1o The Canadian Con sti tution and the United Nations Charter 
C.J.E.P.S. May, 1946 pp 127-155. For the point of view of 
Canada’s foremost ’’centraliser" see ’’ Constitutional Adaptation to 
Changing Functions of Government F.R. Scott - C.J.E.P.S. Aug. 1945. 
pp. 520-541 







- 

- 

- 

. 

* 

- 3 •. 

- 

. - ‘ V '■■■' r . t ■ - ■ 

. 

- ■ 4 . 

■" -> . „ 

“ 

« - 






27 


In the meantime a great deal can and is being done by officers of the 
Dominion Department of Labour to encourage provincial governments to enact 
legislation to bring their standards up to those of I.L.O. conventions. 

Each Province is informed of these conventions by Federal officials and 
the provincial attitude in recent years appears to have been sympathetic 
and constructive in most cases. Ultima ely however, some form of constitu¬ 
tional amendment to allow the Federal. Parliament to fulfil its international 
obligations more adequately is clearly necessary. 

D. Federal Ju ri sdiction over Collective Bargaining . 

In 1907 the Parliament of Canada enacted the Indus tr ial Disputes In¬ 
vestigation Act 1 which was designed to protect the public interest against 
precipitate work stoppages, in mining, railway, telegraph, telephone and 
other public utility industries. To this end^ the Act required that any 
labour dispute which involved an employer of more than ten employees in 
the covered industries should be submitted, if the case were deemed worthy 
by the Minister of Labour, to a conciliation board. A stipulated period 
was provided during which the Board was carrying on its investigation when 
a strike or lock-out was illegal. The recommendations of boards were to be 
made public throughthe Labour Gazette. 

Legal proceedings involving the constitutionality of the Act of 1907 
were instituted in the Province of Quebec in 1911* The case in point in¬ 
volved the appointment of a board of conciliation to deal with a dispute 
which had arisen between the city of Montreal and the Montreal Street Rail¬ 
way Employees' Union. In upholding the constitutionality of the Act, 

Mr. Justice Lafontaine of the Supreme Court of Quebec pursued the following 
line of argument,^ 

1. Statutes of Canada 1907- 020. 

2. J udicial Proceedings Respecting the Constitutionality of the Indu s¬ 
trial Disputes Investi gation Act, 1907- Kings Printer, Ottawa, 

pp 255-258. ~ - — 











,• V 6 ■: •< J 'G ; ' .: .: • U ‘0 i ,r; .0 • G £0 XJ.: G G : : fi f’v fi$ . 

. - • . '.v.. v v: - ■, . o -Ute- ■d o.g c 0 jc gJ. 

, * * 


- . ' . ■ ' •. I ".G. j.GO ■ ; ”! v,. . ;..i. 

■ . 

• . : : ■ : 

• nx el i : . i > i 

t 

". o uv.: 0 . . ,i 0 i:v .go.: cny 0 " 


. *1 ' 1 

, 

: 0 ‘ • . •• ,! !'■ ' ■ j do 

, 

- 

- 

i.io ' Y' I 

■ 

v ... . - d . . o-i •. b$i ■ ■ 

‘ : l ii- J . ,W 1 , vtO.c. Gi'G Gj. 

.. . ■ : , ■ i : 

. 

. 

■ v ' 

’ ;. t GOO (J.:d : :0 f.C. v‘ :ie 0 

■ . ■ : ..: '. \ ~ xlr 1G0 -.ixl 

• 

' 

■ 

. i.i-.ic.: ■■ ■' .I:', . 

*. 

• 

, 

. r v J,; -a~ ol 'i :* 0 i'X- " 

- 

■ . 

. :: : . , v.v; , : 

GO '.'/G 1 GGGO 

~ 

' ’ 


j. e. &d :iwJ:J'. 1 .Lon go "go do od .3 d’iieipJnl&qrB td.J ov 

. u i ■ 

* - :. ; ■. . » 


•' "o'.; oodou; do do: kG o ,.-o u' 

. 

- t /. ■ 

.r; 

* 

.... ■ . ;G : j g it ,1 GC-dd Gg 

* . .' - ; ■ . . ,• . n -0 ' 

t & 

' 

* 



28 


(1) The Aim of the Act was to deal with "a social and economic, con¬ 
dition existing throughout the Dominion and thus was of a general nature 
and not of a purely ’’local and private” character””* (§92, 16) 

(2) The conditions under which the Act was enforced in the case in 
question could not be regarded as within the subject matter of “property and 
civil rights” (S92, 15) nor of the administration of justice in a Province 
(S92,l4) and so could not be held to infringe upon the exclusive authority 
of a Provincial Legislature under these sections of the B.N.A. Act* 

(5) The Act was ”in a general way” essentially connected with the 
peace order, and good government of Canada and thus was within the competence 
of the Federal Parliament according to the preamble to S.91» 

The judgment of the Superior Court was in 1915 affirmed by the Superior 
Court in Review and the plaintiff did not carry the case to a higher jud¬ 
icial authority. 

In 1925 the constitutional validity of the Industrial Disputes I nves¬ 
tigation Act was challenged successfully by the Board of Electric Commiss¬ 
ioners of the City of Toronto.^ The decision by the Judicial Committee in 
declaring the Act ultra vires the Dominion is one of the most significant 
in Canadian constitutional history. The Dominion’s case was based upon its 
authority to legislate in respect to “trade and commerce”, the general 
’’peace, order and good government” residuary power of S.9^and in respect 
to exclusive Dominion competence over the criminal law. In regard to the 
first point. Lord Haldane in delivering the Committee's decision declared 
that jurisdiction over "trade and commerce” related to "matters of national 
and general concern” rather than to contracts of "a particular trade or 
business" which come within the purview of “property and civil rights with¬ 
in the Province.” The justification given for this interpretation was that 

!• Toronto Electric Commissioners V. Snider (1925) A.C. 596. 






'/■ ... ■ .J : i 

. j . ■* 


* 

1 T;i ■ ; •: . ju 1 :.. J .:. V 

i/x. x. 1: xx-I.*' 

’ i X; 

, J 0 


;. . . 

Ll& e£V. *C- X..J li;]: 

. . 

x : .. ,x;;x t;Q' 



. ■ 


X X 

• 

y 


- x i 1 1 •■'. - x 


.x,; 


■ 


,\7 ... J ,x V ' XX;. . . .• 

: X : . jXX.., I OJ 


X- 08 J’.ti.X 


\ 

... 

. 


.... , ..'x:.''• 

ox . 


•. . .■ - t _o .... Vs L .. J ...' J : ■ 


■ 


(oj 








.. . .. x . :V0 :''. .. ■ ' x 



■ 




XXX-lx . V w 





- 


TO i . ■ 


Of", 


- 

' 


' 


vtx 




— - .._ • .... . V -- - x - • J. 

. ... •. ' ■;. .- ■ .. .' •. • ; - ... x.t -- 

* 

. 

• •. . • • ■- * 

: ■■■■ x .. ' ■ i 

i 

liv; . x ■ L\.i;jq 

* 




— 

the Fathers of Confederation in drawing up the Quebec Resolutions had in¬ 
cluded banking, bills of exchange and promissory notes under the subjects 
over which the Federal Parliament had exclusive authority, which provisions 
would have been superfluous if they had wished that the Dominion should 
regulate "contracts of a particular trade or business." In respect to the 
sec nd contention ol Dominion counsel, the Committee insisted upon a very 
narrow interpretation of the preamble to S*91* The "peace, order and good 
government" residual authority was held to justify Federal encroachment of 
fields normally within provincial competence only in situations of "extra¬ 
ordinary peril to the national life of Canada"* In the third place. Lord 
Haldane reiterated the principle that had been stated in several previous 
decisions that the Dominion did not have the constitutional authority to 
interfere in fields of normal provincial competence by reason of its juris¬ 
diction over the criminal law. The Act was thus ultra vires the Dominion* 

At the 1926 Session of Parliament a revised Industrial Disputes Inves ¬ 
t igation Act was passed restricted in application to works within Federal 
jurisdiction and to disputes within provincial jurisdiction in which the 
Provincial Legislatures passed enabling legislation. The 1926 Act (extended 
in its coverage under the Dominion war powers in 1959) was in operation 
until it was replaced by the War Labour Regulations contained in P.C. 1005 
in 1944. 






.. ..$&• ' :jt; do -* vl qu -urIwe'-rb nl :clXt*izdjXrm£) 1.o 

- 

. ; : . . -. ;■ -i.il o /.. j, hi s - . ' d* , ■> 

. ,v o hi. it -■; v ..uh hi/ .i ■■ : Jr.i hh;<Al 

: , ■ fd . ", ’ - • U^'T O 'J ' ■ : -h ■ 'I 

• - ; l , ,■■ /, . . . : : , < ' ■ - '.V . . ■ i H I i • HO.!. J C = - H '> ; • 

. 

.. . • ...... i \ h ■ ■ - •• i ' • • •' : 

oh ... J - .--.ih Vi:: -,h -‘/'h r;roi-:io»D 

■ ■ ' 

. 

.:• J. v j .t .< ‘ o^~ - l 

. 

. 

• ( l 

» , ' " 

‘ 



50 


E. Federal Jurisdiction over Unemployment Insurance 

Another judicial attack on the competence of the Dominion to enact legis¬ 
lation dealing with social problems which could be resolved only by action cm 
the part of the Federal Government was made in 1957 when the Employment and 
Social Insurance Act of 1955 was declared ultra vires . The Act, whose con¬ 
stitutional validity had been denied on a reference to the Supreme Court 
of Canada, provided for a system of compulsory national employment insurance 
to be financed from the contributions of workers in certain covered industries, 
from payments by their employers and by Federal funds. An appointed commiss¬ 
ion to administer the Act and a system of national employment exchanges were 
also provided for.^ 

Counsel for the Dominion justified the validity of the Act on three 
2 

grounds. 

1. In Article 25 of the Treaty of Peace of 1919 Canada had pledged 
herself to endeavour to maintain “fair and humane* 1 2 conditions of 
labour. To do so, it was contended that a system of national em¬ 
ployment insurance and national labour exchanges was necessary. 

2. Under the desperate economic conditions which prevailed in Canada 
before and during 1955 the Act was within the competence of the 
Dominion under the 11 peace, order and good government 1 * preamble to 
S. 91. 

5* It was further contended that the validity of the Act could be justi¬ 
fied under the enumerated heading of S .91 which gave the Dominion ex¬ 
clusive authority over “The Public Debt and Property 1 * and conferred 
upon the Federal Parliament the power over the “Raising of money 

1. Statutes of Canada 195$ 0. 5& 

2. A.C. for Canada V. A.G. for Ontario and others (1957) 

A.C. 555 








' 












■ ■ ■ : 5 . I 


:hs$ U 




■ 


* 






v-. J>A 


J ;-o 


■ 

' ’ i, • 


* 










, 








■ \ . 




. 

. 

, 

; • ■ vv • 1 i ■ J 





>1?: 't ¥0 




* • • ' ! 








51 


by any yode or System of Taxation”. The argument was that the obliga¬ 
tions imposed upon employers and workers constituted a tax, that the 
money so raised became public property and that the Dominion thus had 
complete legislative authority to direct that such funds together with 
other revenues raised by general taxation be applied to an insurance 
fund in accordance with the provisions of the Act. 

The Judicial Committee brushed aside all three contentions and declared 
the Act to be ultra v ires as an encroachment upon exclusive Provincial juris¬ 
diction over "property and civil rights." The Committee followed their re¬ 
cent decisions in the cases involving the three industrial standards acts 
of the Bennett Government in denying that the stringent economic conditions 
of the mid 1950's gave the Dominion any competence to encroach upon fields of 
jurisdiction normally within exclusive Provincial competence by reason of the 
preamble to S«91* The Act did not deal with any "special emergency" but en¬ 
acted a scheme that was intended to be a permanent feature of Canadian life. 
The treaty-making power of the Dominion under 3*152 was similarly emascu¬ 
lated. In regard to Dominion's counsel third contention, the Committee 
affirmed the competence of the Federal Parliament to levy any tax it so 
wished but questioned the validity of its disposal under the Act. The cri¬ 
teria of an Dominion expenditure was whether "in reality, in pith and sub¬ 
stance", it invaded the exclusive provincial field of "property and civil 
rights within the Province" and according to this standard the Act in ques¬ 
tion was ultra v ires.^ 

1. Interestingly, this argument was advanced in a somewhat similar form by 
the Supreme Court of the United States in the 195^ decision of United 
States V. Butler in which the Agricultural A djustment Act was held in 
valid. See " The lowers of the National Government 11 - Walter F. Dodd 
The Annals of the American Academy of "oliti c al and Social Science 
Vol. 185 p. 70 














* ' > . I 

■ . . 

' , J ' ' c •; ■ r. i -.. o. ■■ • ' ' '■ 

. . ; ' . 0 .;,. O' j ,0' : •: Y':-;-: vJ:x, Lsi v.L o»i'; I 

• ' i . : r : .< . b ■ \ .U 7 &7 "ic Mx 

. 

» 

• - 

. ' 

■ . . . . ' 1 t 

' 7 : ■ . . . 0 '■ - U J w’f; ; 

J' : . f 0 V .... JO'iJ -0 0!; ' 

.• .; 0 ' •- : . 1 . *..• 7 : ' : . ft 5 1 .0 ' 5 

. o . . u ii- ■ 

« . * 

. 

-. • : 0 - ,.n •; \ , x . ix^v: - O’ '.J &$£ 

, 

0 . ■ I :-0 - ; .i. 'i -'T. ' .0- • ■ .0 iO ;■ . •. Vx..a 

- ’ ■ ' ■ . ■: . o x . j 1? . v rfj : j.j J ■ j . l,i v .0: xw. 

“ • - J ir; . 0 . 'WiiS® 1 M ro ' :: 7 fixualiiou io 

■ ' 0 J : ■■ : . ' ■ '' ri.v: v J ni: iJ'iv xO '^.XX 

* 

' i •■.'■;! 0 j..; t ! ,i ;j J'tXiOv)- ; €>ma'iq;.rP B/IJ 

. 

. 

• .> I >. ;) • /. ' j. :■■■ 

• ■ ' 


. 







52 


F. The Constitutional Validity of Provincial Labour Legislation 

A8 has been outlined, the constitutional validity of several signif¬ 
icant Federal labour enactments has been challenged by the judiciary. How¬ 
ever, only one piece of Provincial labour legislation has been declared 
ultra vires although several cases have involved the constitutionality of 
such legislation. 

In two cases plaintiffs have attempted to challenge Provincial legisla¬ 
tion on the argument that such laws conflicted with Ss. 496-498 of the Crim¬ 
inal Code which declare illegal certain combinations in restraint of trade. 

Tlie validity of the Quebec Labour Agreements Extension Act of 195^ ^ and the 

2 

Saskatchewan Industrial Standards Act of 1957 were both upheld as the prim¬ 
ary purpose of both Acts was declared to be the securing of better wages and 
working conditions for employees and that the Provinces had thus not enacted 

to create illegal combinations in restraint of trade. 

3 

Two other cases have resulted in the validity of Provincial labour 
legislation being u held against the challenge that such legislation was 
ultra /ires because it enacted penalties for infringment of its provisions 
and thus encroached upon the exclusive authority of the Dominion over the 
Criminal Law. In both cases the penalties provided were declared ancillary 
to the enforcement of the industrial standards legislation in question and 
thus did not constitute an encroachment on Federal authority. 

The Alberta Coal Miners 1 Wages Security Act of 1928 provided that all 
coal mine owners should furnish a bond or other security each year so that 
the payment of employees during the current year would be guaranteed. 

1. Diva Shoe Co. V. Cagnon (1957) 70 Que. K.B. 4ll 

2. FUv. d ulak (l959) 2W .vV *R. 219 

5. Ontario Boys' Wear Ltd., and Tolton Mfg. Co. V. Advie o ry Committee and 
A.C-. for Ontario (1945) ^ D.L.R, 474 and Aird and Son Ltd. V.*~Docal 
500 International Union o f Shoe and Leather Workers7 ~T^94b) D.L.R. 

114 (Que.) 
























The judiciary held the Act intr a vires against the plaintiff's charge that 

it infringed upon Dominion authority over Federally-chartered companies and 

over "trade and commerce".'* 

2 

In several cases plaintiffs have endeavoured to challenge the validity 
of Provincial labour legislation setting up quasi-judicial administrative 
boards as being an encroachment on the exclusive power conferred upon the 
Governor General to appoint "the Judges of the Superior, District and County 
Courts in each Province" by S. 96 of the B.N.A. Act, Although a line of 
cases have been decided on the basis of this Section the 1948 decision of 
the Judicial Committee involving the validity of Section 5 (e) of the Sask¬ 
atchewan Trade Union Act is the most instructive. This part of the Act'’ 
vested in an administrative board power to order reinstatement of an employee 
who had been discharged contrary to the provisions of the legislation and 
to order the employer to compensate the worker for monetary loss suffered 
by reason of such discharge. The enactments of other Provinces with such 
legislation provide for reinstatement and compensation by the courts of Isw, 
The Privy Council denied that the board was, in a strict sense, a court at 
all. The qualifications of its members differed from the qualifications of 
judges in that it had been found necessary to choose appointees with extra¬ 
judicial knowledge of labour problems. The jurisdiction of the Board was 
not invoked by the employee for the enforcement of contractual rights he could 
assert elsewhere. Furthermore the Board had been set up to deal with far- 
reaching industrial conflicts and to perform functions that were in no sense 
analagous to those of Superior, . District and County Courts in 1667 » In brief, 

although the Judicial' Committee refused to answer the question as to whether 
the Board exercised judicial functions, and although there was no 

1, (1952) 2 D.L.R. 475 (C.A.) 

2. Ricard V. Crete . (1952) 5 D.L.R. 660 (Que.), Hughes V.R., (1947) 2 WWR 
684 (B.C.) etc. 

5. Statutes of Saskatchewan, 1944 C 69 . 







, 

- 

« . ♦ . * 

. 

*■ 




















. 




■ 















I 









appeal from its decisions to a court of law, these facts did not make it a 
Superior^District or County Court within the meaning of S.96.^ 

The only case in which the constitutional validity of Provincial lab¬ 
our legislation has been challenged successfully involved the authority of 
the Saskatchewan Government to apply the Provisions of its labour relations 

and industrial standards legislation to employees of the Canadian Pacific 

2 

Railway and Express Companies. The Appellate Section of the Supreme Court 
of Saskatchewan decided that the employees involved were engaged on "Works 
and Undertakings connecting the Province with...other or others of the 
Provinces" and so were under the exclusive Federal jurisdiction by the 
provisions of S*92 (10,a,) of the B.N.A. Act. Further the Court declared 
that if the matter of fixing tolls on railways were a matter under exclus¬ 
ive Dominion authority, as had been decided in a recent ease,^ the compet¬ 
ence of the Province to enact legislation dealing with wages, hours of work, 
holidays, etc., would put the Federal authorities in an anomalous position. 

The Court also decided that employees in C.P.R. Hotels in Saskatchewan were 
engaged in occupations adjunct to "Works and Undertakings" dealt with by 
S.92 (10) and were under exclusive authority of the Dominion. However, in 
a later case it was decided by the Judiciary that conditions of work in the 
C.P.R.*s Empress Hotel in Victoria were governed by the labour legislation 

of the Province of British Columbia as the hotel was merely an"ancillary 

4 

convenience" of the Railway and not a part of it 0 

1. John East Iron V/orks Ltd. V. Local ^495 United Steelworkers of America 

1946'2 W.W.R. 1055 for a discussion of this case see Labour Relations 

and Precedents in Canada - A.C. Crysler - Carswell Pub. Co. 19^9 pp*67-68. 

2* C.P. Railway Co. and C.P. Express Co. V. A.G. Sask., (1947) 

2 W.W.R. 909 (Sask. C.A.) This decision was ucheld by the Judicial Committee 

1950 A.C. 122 

5. Quebec Railway, Light and Power Co. V. Beauport (Town (1945)S *C.R. 16 

4. Reference re Application of Hou r s of W o rk Act to Employers of C.P.R . 
in Express Hotel (Victoria) 1948 5 D.L.R. 417 












■ 0 «*'■; d - fitl '■( J'i'fi'OO 13 Od ' & fi 0 J, 5 X 0 ' J I 

* f - • \ o o:-:J ■ : c> x i* ,'^nuoO 'io 


. ); :: .; ■ - : ' ■ ■•■ ■ 



\". .*XOW SO ? r i.fJO :' ^ /. . .C . • J. vv'i>: • 

« . ■ ■ . : - 

' 

: 5 .': v. ... . .. '■ J. < . .... / . ■. rr- ■. r ■' '..a.' .. •; - : j' ' r 'l) 

W 




. 

, . , 

. . 




V 


. 








G. Labour and the Constitution in World War II 


It is not too extreme to say that the British North America Act as 
judicially interpreted provides Canada with two constitutions, that of peace- 
time exalting Provincial jurisdiction at the expense of Dominion and that of 
war-time transform ng our nation into a virtual unitary state*^ emergency 

powers conferred upon the Federal Government in time of war arise from the 
preamble of S. 91 which gives the Dominion authority to make laws for the 
"peace, Order and Good Government of Canada” in relation to all subjects not 
assigned exclusively to the Provinces, and, to a lesser extent, from the 
power of the Federal Parliament over ”Militia, Military and Naval Service 
and Defence”* 

p 

In Sept*, 1959 the War Measures Act , which had been passed by the Fed¬ 
eral Parliament in 1914 and had never been repealed, was declared in force* 

The Act conferred upon the Governor in Council (not the Federal Parliament) 
the authority to 

”make such orders and regulations as he may, by reason of the exist¬ 
ence of real or apprehended war, invasion or insurrection, deem nec¬ 
essary or advisable for the security, defence, peace, order and wel¬ 
fare of Canada.” 

These sweeping powers as in effect during the War and after by the 
various National Emergency Transitional Powers Acts constituted the legis¬ 
lative authority for the enactment of Canada's first national labour code 
by Orders-in Council. In no case has the judiciary seen fit to challenge the 
authority of the Governor-General-in-Council under these emergency powers', 

1* F. Scott - The Constitution in the Post War World in Canada After Lhe 
War , ed. by A. Brady and F. Scott. 

2* 5 Geo. V. Chap. 2 

3* For significant cases in which private individuals attempted unsuccess¬ 
fully to challenge these emergency powers see Reference re Regulations 
of Chemicals (19?5) S.C.R. and Factum of A.G* Canada in Matter of Ref¬ 
erence as to the Validity of the Orders-in-Council of 15 Dec. 194-5 
r elating to the Persons of Japanese Race . 















I•.o :. v i: ._ 

. 

' 2.1 „ ■ 

o ... x ■ •. c i J’XS 

r; xr j .• ...,;j lo--. ov*? i.vti:w BfomO sojbivo 


• . .\r .' :qC 'J.o o;':- noiJr Iboir 

I x o a v or' x • 1 J; J : r:r ar i :$ 

, ■ 

* 

• 


i 

■ 

. v ' ■ • x . '. c : ■ 

, ... . '. , ... : ‘1 r . 1 rro x -* r .. o 

■ i: , v • 

. 

. '-V' :,'.l a .n 


.. ::: r - - 

t 

. t 


lit J • l . 



' 


£ • • • 


- ■ ■.. ■ t • • • •. ‘ t . ' 

x r .■■■■■" lo or.:no . 

■ . ■« .. «, . , • ' 


■ 


- .1. .. o . , : : o. . ; 1 .. r l- 2 r ., 

X •• V 


• '• rVX: ; 1 

. 

, 


.•. * 

■ 


x .'.. '-j ••3' • Bivo ok( yov^/xe.' O ®.a« 

. . . . * 

J '• J 1 ■ •*' 

, - - 


. 













56 


On Nov. 7, 1959, P.C. 5^95 extended the provisions of the Industri a l Dis¬ 
putes and Investigation Act to all industries engaged in war production. P.0 
5495 was supplemented on June 6, 1941 by P.C. 4020 which provided for an Indus 
trial Disputes Inquiry Commission whose duties included the making of a prompt 
report to the Minister Of Labour in the case of any war industry in which a 
strike or lock-out appeared imminent. 

It is significant to note that until the enactment of P.C. 1005 in Feb¬ 
ruary, 1944 there was no Federal legislation which made it compulsory for 
employers to bargain with their workers. P.C. 2685 of June 19* 1940 merely 
cited the Cabinet’s approval of the principles that workers should be free to 
organize to bargain collectively in unions free of employer control and 
that every agreement which resulted from such bargaining should provide a 
method of settling disputes arising from such agreement without work stopp¬ 
ages. However, the Order remained simply a statement of Federal policy. No 
penalty was provided for any employer who refused to bargain with a union 
of his workers’ choosing nor was any board set up to administer the Order. 

Although the Government had at various times expressed itself in favour 
of the principle that wages in war industries should be fixed through the 
process of collective bargaining, P.C. ?44o of Dec. 16, 1940 provided for 
wage ceilings in industries under the I.B.I. Act and was for the guidance of 
conciliation boards appointed under the Act, P.C. 8255 of Oct. 24, 1941 re¬ 
pealed P.C. 7440 but extended its provisions to all employers. V/age rates 
were to be stabilized at the level of Nov. 15, 1941, although provisions were 
made for the raising of unduly low wages and cost-of-living bonuses were to 
be given when the price level rose. The Order made provisions for its admin- 










• * t , a • 

. 

' 

« . 

"j 

‘ 

■ 

. 

* « 

-■ . 

- 

* 

* 

. . 

» * . 

* 4 ' « 

, . 

t 

. 




57 . 


istration by a National War Labour Board and nine Regional Labour Boards, each 
agency to consist of an independent chairman and an equal number of employer 
and employee representatives. By P.C. 95^4 of Dec, 1945 the bonus system 
was dropped and wage increases were to be granted only where gross irregularit¬ 
ies or injustices existed and where it could be shown that the increase would 
not require a rise in the price of the product. 

Almost inevitably, the right of employees in war industries to strike 
was curtailed under the War-Time Orders, Under the I. D.I. Act a strike 
could not lawfully take place until after the Board of Conciliation had com¬ 
pleted its report. The provisions of P.C, 7507 of Sept 16, 1941 outlined the 
conditions under which a strike could lawfully be called after the Board's 
report had been made. The procedure was as follows: 

(1) Employees desiring to strike were required to notify the Minister, 

(2) The Minister could then, if he were of the opinion that the strike 
would interfere with the efficient prosecution of the war, direct a 
strike vote under conditions which he determined, 

(5) All employees who, in the opinion of the Minister, were affected 

by the dispute or whose employment would be terminated by the strike 
had the privilege of voting. Unless a majority of all employees so 
designated voted in favour of strike action, any strike called was 
unlawful. 

P.C. 5580 of Ju]-y 29, 1941 provided that under certain conditions the 
militia could be called out to suppress an unlawful strike likely to impede 
production in war industries or defence projects. 

Until the passage of P.C. 1005 the position of labour under the War¬ 
time Orders was distinctly unsatisfactory. V/ages had been "frozen", the 
right to strike curtailed, collective bargaining was not compulsory upon 




employers and organized labour felt that it had not been given adequate rep¬ 
resentation on government agencies with a direct interest in labour activities . 

P.C. 1005 of Feb. 17, 1944 was Canada's first national labour code. It 
was declared that every employer and employee had a right to be a member of 
an employers' association or a trade union and to bargain collectively. Em¬ 
ployers were required to bargain in good faith and to refrain from discrimin¬ 
ation against union members. Union organizers were forbidden to coerce workers 
to join unions or to canvass on the employer's premises during working hours. 

A War-time Labour Relations Board, with regional boards, was set up to cert¬ 
ify the bargaining unit and to see that bargaining was carried on in good 
faith. The order provided that if at the close of 50 days from the time a 
labour dispute had been referred to the Board no agreement had been reached 
the Board, at the request of either party, could ask the Minister to appoint 
a conciliation officer to assist further negotiation. If within 14 days (or 
such additional period as the Minister might allow) no agreement was reached 
the Minister was required to appoint a conciliation board. The Order also 
provided heavy penalties on a per diem basis for any employer, union official 
or worker who engaged in a strike or lockout contrary to the provisions of the 
Order. Finally, it was provided that the Minister could, with the approval of 
the Governor in Council^enter into an agreement with any Province for the ad¬ 
ministration of the Order within the area of that Province. By the end of 
the war such agreements had been concluded with all the Provinces but Alberta 
and Prince Edward Island. These agreements lapsed in May, 19^7*^ 


1. Crysler - Labour Relations and Precedents in Canada , p 55 





- 

. 

■ 

' • v.;;?; 7 v o - ■ r;. x j o - > 

* 

< 


. • V. : • 9 ■/.. . ; , 

« 

' 

■ J %' 4 ..J . 

• 

. . 907 i (wbi. i •" ■ * *■ ' ; ; 

• 

■ t ’ 7-. ;o ; 

, ■ : 

• ; ' < ' •-— 

■ , : 0 . r. : •. ‘■ X9 7 . ■ vf r- i. nt - - 1 -> A 


’ 

• « 9 • /... ..-.-•v *: •: - . . 

, 

■ ■ .. . < ■ 1 . . 


. •- i.-.i . J": 

s 

. 

' 

.0.9. v ... , . ■ JwoXl j-' i:i ■ 


* 

• 1 : 

. 


• - - r .'i • • ' ;i ‘ o , 

t 

■ 

. . - ' f 0 


' ■ X lot ' ■ 

* • 

■ ' ' • ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ • ■ 


■ • • • 


'. ■ r : M'' ' ■ •* : ■ ' - .■ /•;, 







59 . 


K. The Delegation of L eg islative Powers b y the Provinces to the Dominion 
and by the Domi ni on to the Provinces . 

For some time students of Canadian constitutional law have suggested 
the delegation of powers by the Dominion to the Provinces and by the Provin¬ 
ces to the Dominion as a method of introducing a measure of flexibility into 
our constitutional structure,^ although it was a point of dispute as to 
whether the use of this device would necessitate an amendment to the B.N.A. 

Act. The Rowell-Sirois Commission recommended that the Act be amended so 
that delegation of legislative powers would be possible. In any situation 
the delegating legislation would be operative only if the Government to vh ich 
the delegation was made was agreeable. An agreement of the sort recommended 

by the Commission might be made for a limited period or for perpetuity, but 

2 

any agreement could be revoked or altered only by mutual consent. 

As has been outlined^ P.C. 1005 provided that the Minister of Labour could 
enter into agreements with the Provinces for the administration of any part 
of the Order. With the expiration of the War-Time Orders several of the 
Provincial Legislatures enacted new collective bargaining legislation which 
provided for delegation. An 1948 amendment to the Albert a Labour Act em¬ 
powered the Lieutenant- Governor in Council to enter into agreements with the 
Government of Canada for the application by Federal authorities of the Indus ¬ 
trial Dispu tes Investigation Act of 1927 in disputes in the coal mining and 

meat-packing industries in which collective bargaining usually involved 

4 

workers and employers on an industry-wide basis. The Ontario Labour Relations 
Act of the same year provided that the Minister of Labour, with the approval 

1. Delegated Legislation E. F. Shannon 6 C.B.R. 245-261 (Can. Bar Review) 
Delegation, a~W 8 y over the Constitutional Hurdle - Raphael Tuck 
1945 25 C.B.R. pp 79-104 

Difficulties of Divided ■Jurisdiction J.A. Corry - Report for Commission 
on Dominion-Provincial Relations - King’s Printer, Ottawa 1940. 

2. Report of Royal Commission on Dominion-Provincial Relati ons Book II pp 72-75 
5. infra p. ^TT 

4. Statutes of Alberta 1948 CHS (2) 


























. 








' ■- '0 1 ; '■ " 





* - 

;uc. , .. I ■>'u.' 

* 

* ■ 

t ■■ 

. 


















. 






V . 






. •• 


- — 

. . . 

. , 

■ 














4o 


of the Lieutenant-Governor in Council could enter into such agreements with 
the Federal Minister of Labour as were deemed necessary for the enforcement of 
the Act and that the Lieutenant-Governor in Council could authorize Provincial 
officers to carry out powers over labour matters delegated to Ontario by the 
P a rliament of Canada*^ In 1948 also the Manitoba Labour Relations Act provided 
that if the Parliament of Canada enacted legislation which was "in the opinion 
of the ieutenant-Governor in Council... .substantially uniform 1 * with the Act 
the Minister of Labour could enter into an agreement with the Federal Govern- 

2 

ment for the administration of the Act in designated undertakings or industries* 

Provisions of the Industrial Relations and Disputes Investigation Act^ 
enacted by the Federal Parliament in 1948 indicated that the Dominion author¬ 
ities were willing to cooperate with the Provinces in administering labour 
legislation in businesses and industries under Provincial jurisdiction* S .62 
declared that in cases where the legislation enacted by the Provincial Leg¬ 
islature was "substantially uniform" with the provisions of the Act the Fed¬ 
eral Minister of Labour, with the consent of the Governor in Council, could 
enter into an agreement with the Provincial Government for the administration 
of the Provincial legislation b y Dominion authorities. The Act provided that 
such agreement could provide for the administration of Provincial labour leg¬ 
islation "with respect to any particular trade or business" and for the pay¬ 
ment by the Provinces to the Dominion for expenses that the latter had so 
incurred. 

It was finally settled by a Supreme Court of Canada decision in 1950 
that the type of delegating legislation described above was unconstitutional 
in a reference involving Bill 1^6 which had been enacted by the Nova Scotia 

I* Statutes of Ontario 1948 C 51 SS. 7 (1) (b) and 8* 

2. Statutes of Manitoba 1948, 0.27, S.60. 

3* Statutes of Canada 1948, 0,54. 






Legislature in 19^7* The legislation in question had provided that the Lieut¬ 
enant-Governor in Council could tfy proclamation delegate to or withdraw from 
the Parliament of Canada authority to legislate in regard to any matter with¬ 
in exclusive Provincial jurisdiction under the enumerated heads of S» 92 of the 
B.N.A. Act and that the enactments made by the Dominion under such delegated 
authority would have the same effect as if they were made by the Province. 

The Act also conferred upon the Provincial authorities the power to enact 
and administer legislation in relation to employment in any industry under 
Federal jurisdiction if the Parliament of Canada should enact the requisite 
delegating legislation. 

The Supreme Court of Nova Scotia, with one justice dissenting, ruled 
the Bill ultra vires . the Provincial Legislature and the Supreme Court of 
Canada concurred unanimously in an appeal by the Provincial authorities.^ 

The argument advanced by the N.S. Court was accepted by the Supreme Court 
of Canada and ran as follows: 

1* There is no express power of delegation conferred upon either Prov¬ 
ince or Dominion by the B.N.A. Act. Neither is there any implied 
power, for, if the British Government had intended to confer authority 
so far-reaching in its possible effects, it would have explicitly con¬ 
ferred such jurisdiction. 

2. The conferring of "exclusive 0 power over the sixteen enumerated heads 
of S. 92 upon the Provincial Legislatures means that only they can ex¬ 
ercise such authority. 

% The delegation of powers by Provincial or Federal authorities to sub¬ 
ordinate units, so-called ,s delegation in depth 11 , was an entirely 
different matter from that of delegating power to independent and co¬ 
ordinate legislative bodies. 


1. A.G.N.S. V.A.G. Canada et al (19 50) D.L.R. 5^9 






. O 

' .. * 

. 

•i 

' 

. 

. 




j; J \ (?i 

i .1 ■ , i■ ; : ■ Li-' '• J i-C 

: IJ'Qi '' I ‘ I : 

: ■ - • • 

•. ■ • ; 

•• J j : -i I - o.bi 
' ; . ; j . I ’ ;.. •: !jj: r: j.Jy-i :i " ■ i / ..V br.M 

' i• : ..: . :o J v.r• ■..1L-1 n • enJ i: r /. >v; ®b&i 

, 

‘ 

$■ , 

• £.i ' 

* , 

jj. • :■ us.i by. ■ J-Bii-toO *fo 

* 

. . . 

1 ' ■ -■ '■ - ■ 0 

- : ' ■' : : : ■ *” ' '• 

* 

. 

. ' ; . . : j; L b ~ , -V 1/ ■' - ' - 

j xO j :;■< ysvtl V ... ^ 'iObb...i 

« 

. . . . 


J : n b' . ■ 





42 


Rand J. of the Supreme Court of Canada enunciated the interesting doctrine 
that "delegation implies subordination"o 1 2 Following the principle declared in 
Hodge V. the ueen, he asserted that both Provinces and Dominion have sover¬ 
eign authority within their respective fields of jurisdiction and that delega¬ 
tion is an unlawful relinquishing of jurisdiction by the delegating Legislature. 

The effect of these decisions was to block another possible device by 
which the distribution of powers between Provinces and Dominion could be made 
to correspond with current economic realities. The Supreme Court of Canada, 
now the final court of appeal in all Canadian cases, will apparently follow 
the literalistic interpretations of the B.N.A. Act enunciated by the Judicial 
Committee. It seems furthermore that the argument that "delegation involves 
subordination" is shaky. Delegation does not mean that the delegating auth¬ 
ority abdicates any of its powers but simply elects to exercise them through 
an agency and has the right to revoke or alter these powers at any time it 
see3 fit. The decisions are indefensible on both legal and economic grounds.2 


1. (1950) 4 D.L.R. at p. ^85 

2. For a critical comment on these decisions see note by 
John B. Ballim in 28c B»R . pp 79-84 (Can. Bar. Review) 





F. Sec. 94 of the British North America Act * 

Prof* F.R. Scott has made the interesting suggestion that S* 94 of the 



rica Art affords a way through which the powers of the 


Federal Parliament and the Provincial Legislatures may be redistributed with 


out constitutional amendment,^ 


This much-neglected section read s as follows 


“Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Parliament of Canada may 
make provision for the Uniformity of all or any of the Laws relative 
to Property or Civil Rights in Ontario, Nova Scotia and New Bruns¬ 
wick, and of the Procedure of all or any of the Courts in those 
Three Provinces and from and after the Passing of any Act in that 
behalf, the Power of the Parliament of Canada to make Laws in re¬ 
lation to any matter comprised in any such Act, shall, notwith¬ 
standing anything in this Act, be unrestricted, but any Act of the 
Parliament making Provision for such Uniformity, shall not have 
effect in any Province unless and until it is enacted and adopted 
as Law by the Legislature thereof*“ 

Since 1902 there has been no attempt to bring this clause of the 
Constitution into use* The Rowell-Sirois Commission felt that “There is 

considerable doubt whether the section applies to Provinces other than 

2 

Ontario, Nova Scotia and New Brunswick.” Prof* Scott concludes by a 
study of the Quebec Conference and by subsequent utterances of Confed¬ 
eration leaders that $.94 was meant to apply to all the common law Provinces 
i.e. all the Provinces except Quebec* 

Prof. Scott comes to the c nclusion that the Industrial Disputes In- 
vestigation Act of 1925 enacted just after the decision in Toronto Electri c 
Commiss io ners V* Snider was announced, complied with the conditions of S 9^* 

1* Section 94 of the British North America Act C*B.R* Vol* XX (194-2) 
pp 525-544 ~ “ ~ ~~ 

2* Report of Royal Commission on Dominion-Provincial Relations -Vol* II p*75 
5* Statutes of Canada 1925 - cap. l4~. 




















'jg 


' 




■ 

.J 


X ■ ; J- i.. 




„ . V.- t 


I 














* 








44 


S.l of the Act declared that the provisions of the Act applied to “any dis¬ 
pute which is within the exclusive legislative jurisdiction of any Province 
and which by the legislation of the Province is made subject to the provis¬ 
ions of this Act." Within the next few years all of the Provinces enacted 
legislation applying the terms of the Act to disputes within their exclusive 
jurisdiction. Prof. Scott concludes that this legislation was intra vires 
except in the case of Quebec and that, because the power granted to the 
Dominion under S*£4 is not revocable by the Provinces, the British Columbia 
enactment which later revoked the application of the Act within that Prov¬ 
ince was ultra vires .^ 

Prof. Scott admits that it is very doubtful that any court would accept 
2 

his interpretation although I can find no case in which the validity of 
Dominion legislation has been argued on the basis of S. However, it 

is desirable that this neglected section receive more discussion by stud¬ 
ents of constitutional law as a possible way in which the distribution 
of powers can be altered without amendment of the B.N.A. Act. 

G. Evaluation and Suggestions . 

It is trite to say that the present constitutional impasse has serious 
implications for industrial relations in Canada. Although I do not believe 
that the situation in regard to labour matters is as unsatisfactory as some 
critics presume it would be folly not to concede that fundamental changes 
are necessary. It may well prove to be that federalism and the demands of 
the ‘'garrison state" are incompatible and that the best that can be hoped 
for is an over-riding Federal jurisdiction over most labour matters with 
as much decentralization in administration as is feasible. 

1. Op. cit. p. 540. 

2. Op. cit p. 542. 







' 

. 

; 

* 

t , " i 

' 


,t : 0 :. o -i: .< . J 

,•' 

HOi ' ' 

i 

. . , 


.'.I'.. " 









, 

•: . • as 







■ 

- 



















* 

« 

1 

. •: 1 . ; ■■ 3.1 

' 

ti 

« 

' 

■ ' v .’ . . : ■ i: ’ , ! ' 

: • .v . J 

■ 

' • ■■ n- ■ ' ' ' 

: \ /. ■■ r : - ■ - ■- D : 'i 

. . * ' ■' . 

* 





45 . 


The division of legislative powers between the national and regional 
governments in a federal state can be altered by three methods. 

(a) The amendment of the constitution, 

(b) An evolving pattern of judicial decions in cases involving the 
division of powers, 

(c) The devising of schemes of federal-regional cooperation within 
the constitutional framework. 

The possibilities inherent in each of these methods will be considered 
in turn as they relate to present Canadian conditions. 

1. Constitutional Amendment 

The present position in regard to constitutional amendment is 
briefly that the Federal Parliament can, by the ordinary legislative pro¬ 
cedure, amend the B.N.A. Act in regard to matters which concern the Domin¬ 
ion authority exclusively, while in matters concerning the division of 
powers between the Federal and Provincial governments, and, seemingly, cer¬ 
tain minority rights, amendments must still be made by the Imperial 
Parliament on a Joint Address by both Houses of the Canadian Parliament.^ 
Although it appears certain that Westminster would in no circumstances re¬ 
fuse to enact an amendment requested by the Canadian Parliament, one can 
be equally certain that the Federal authorities would not venture to so re¬ 
quest by purely unilateral action. Although Federal and Provincial author¬ 
ities have been conferring from time to time, during recent years as to a 
mere satisfactory general amendment procedure I can find no reason to 
hope that sectional and regional interests will permit success in these 
ventures. It must also, I believe, be taken for granted that if such a 
general procedure were adopted there would be a proviso that Quebec should 

1. For an exhaustive and scholarly discussion of this whole problem see 
Constitutional Amendment in Canada by Paul G-erin-Lajoie - U. of T. 

Press 1950 




, r 

v j 

■ i. \o) 

* 

' >i\ ; -.‘i ' ' : f. I i' iC. ]. ; y ( . ;. <. I 

* 

j,io. : - .j ;: >’J i* ^iz:-r~.v' q b : JJ 

,/i -.i.J-ric r •• r.l \-& ; - / .1 

- ■ , , , 

t . ■ . ■ . : ■' ' >:■./ 
o t ^ t c :> JrJr' iv oi : ■ .. i br r '- p:!,- ■:p-fv.;.'po f'T?’-’0:{ 

•• '' ■ J VG - ,-w. r ( 0 v Jrt - Jr:. \ i . : .j 

* 

' ' ■ ' ' ' . . i . *1 .. lj ' P ’V ' - '/ O 

' ' v -rrrr' B'- Iji icrJ:Ji;: Im-be' -r ; J ' ■ r" ■’/.rJ-r vl i 2 u jj'd. $ti 

■ ' . 

f, . >' i ~v ( 1 ■ •. -rpr. ; 

’ - 1 ' "C£ ' 1 1j r ' o >r;v • .r, v-. J. ■:»ei;JjjJ t f {-arcC 






46 


hp,ve power of veto over any specific constitutional amendment* 

There is, however, some small basis for hope that constitutional amendments 
to give the Federal authorities more adequate powers over certain aspects of 
labour matters will be possible. 

(a) The Prime Minister, Mr. St. Laurent, has openly rejected the spec¬ 
ious "compact theory" to which his predecessors at least paid lip 

2 

service. We hope tat the concept of the B.N.A. Act as an invio¬ 
lable contract will soon be so thoroughly discredited that no pol¬ 
itical leader will dare to advance it upon any pretence. At least 
we may expect that soon most of those concerned will be able to 
deal with constitutional problems in a spirit of pragmatism in¬ 
stead of being encumbered with a theory that has no justification 
in history or in law, 

(b) Quebec (and the other Provinces) have unanimously consented to two 
amendments to the B.N,A, Act which give the Federal Parliament more 
adequate jurisdiction over pressing economic problems - the amendment 
adding unemployment insurance to the enumerated heads of S. 91 in 
1940 and that giving the Federal Parliament jurisdiction to enact 

a scheme of contributory old-age pensions in 1951. Thus the con¬ 
stitutional impasse has been breached in two specific cases. It is 
important to consider the nature of these amendments. Each dealt 
with a very specific problem, the Provinces in giving their con¬ 
sent had some fairly accurate knowledge of the exact implications 

1. It is somewhat disheartening that the proposals of even such an able 
and moderate French-Canadian as Mr. Gerin-Lajoie are so framed to 
provide for this veto power. 

2. Ti e Government of Panada - R. Mac G. Dawson - U. of T. Press - 1948 
p, l47. See Appendix I to Mr. Gerin Lajoie’s book for example of the 
homage paid to the compact theory by Canadian political leaders since 
Confederation, 






. ©• '■ ■' ■ -■ ’■ . i : .J' ’ ■ [ :/T- ' ■: i, ; 

. 

. :w: / ■, 1 . ?<■ . La 

* » 

* 

. p,:jru:j '-C'j.'J- ;.io Jeoir f?Cv£; ,t« ' 


- 


■ i: 























« 

















,:'Xb; 3 VI., d: 



* * * 





- 









* 













j. • i 







>0 g : ' 




- 

' 





. 










♦ 













oi' os : % 






V " ' " ' .. 0 j ■ ;■ : ] 

- ; , ; , '■■■•::• If .. ;■ • 

. 

* - - • C'L . ! , r 0- • . ~ 



of the amendments. Secondly, each amendment transferred jurisdiction to 
the Federal Parliament over a problem with which the Provinces were quite 
incapable of dealing in any satisfactory 'nanner. It appears that future 
amendments concern.: ng labour matters will have these characteristics. The 
most hopeful approach is, I believe, to work for ad hoc changes, such as 
an amendment giving the Federal Parliament authority to regulate labour 
relations in the meat-packing industry, 1 rather than to attempt to secure 
fundamental changes like the devising of a method of mutual delegation 
of powers, 

2 

The Rowell-Si roi s Report recommended much more sweeping constitutional 
changes than those I suggest. It would seem that each of these proposals 
is an utter impossibility at the present time. In particular, delegation, 
a natural and desirable way over the constitutional hurdle, will require an 
amendment to the B.N.A, Act and there is no reason to hope that all the 
Provinces will consent to a change whose precise implications they cannot 
foresee. Two other recommendations of the Commission are equally impossible 
for the same reasons and I should like to question even their desirability 
in the present situation. 

(a) The Commission recommended that: 

"The Dominion,,. be empowered to implement any labour conven¬ 
tions of the International Labour Organization." It must be real¬ 
ized that the Report.was written against the background of a sev¬ 
ere depression. Industrial standards legislation, with which the 


1. In this particular case the Federal Parliament could no doubt assume 
jurisdiction by declaring such works to be for the "general advantage 
of Canada" under S.92 (10) of the B.N.A. Act. A private Member of Parlia¬ 
ment, Mr. Alistair Stewart, has unsuccessfully attempted to have this 
proposal enacted several times in recent years.- see Hansard 1949 (2nd. 
Session) pp 575-^82. However, I believe that such unilateral action 
would strain unduly the constitutional framework and that ad hoc amend¬ 
ments are preferable. 


2• Recommendation of the Royal Commission on Dominion Provincial Relations 

Book II p. 49. 









, 


. 

■ 

. 






















■ 

* . . » » ! 

• ■ . "... I; . - 

, 

. 







48 . 


I.L.O. Conventions are mainly concerned^was of a very low order, 
each Province afraid that a progressive policy would inhibit its 
economic recovery and expansion. The natural remedy to suggest 
itself was Federal control of industrial standards. The situation 
is basically different today. Experience has now shown that the 
Provinces are not inherently incapable of enacting satisfactory 
industrial standards legislation. It has become evident that the 
kind of industrial standards legislation a Province has enacted 

will play a relatively small part in encouraging or discouraging 

1 

industrial developments within its boundaries. There is also 

evidence to suggest that at least two of the Provinces feel that 

2 

the I.L.C. Conventions to some extent bind them. On the other 
hand, the record of the Federal Parliament is by no means 11 lily 
white" in implementing Conventions which they have ratified and 
which are within their sphere of jurisdiction. 


1. For an analysis of the "labour in location " theory see Lester — 
Economics of Labor pp. 516-618 

2. Of tremendous potential significance were several enactments of the B.C. 
Legislature in 1921 giving effect to conventions adopted by the I.L.O. 
in 1919. These statutes dealt with maternity protection, employment of 
children, night employment of young persons and women and hours of work. 
In 1945, the P.E.I. Legislature enacted legislation concerning the 
minimum age of admission of children to industrial employment to bring 
the law in that Province into harmony with an I.L.C. Convention of 1957“ 
see Labour Legislation in Canada - 1949 Publication of Federal Dept, of 
Labour p. 152 and p. 917* 

. The time lag between the passage of a Convention by the I.L.O. and its 
implementation is particularly illustrated by reference to matters in¬ 
volving merchant seamen.op. cit. p. 52 


5 








* * * 

.. . .... . , . i .. v - iC-n ' . '■:> 

■ 

. 

. 

, . ; : •• :: ■. ■ ’!•: - , . o"f o L, 

, 

» . * • - 

, 

f 

« 

• ' 

. ; 

v 

» - » ..... . V ..i. i O' • • •-' . oj 

. 

, . • . : !■ . . ' v i t o-;v:' i xr.O 

., aoi.<?:••••.xlo e : Mndiiitit 

. , . 

* 

, . . 

» * * 

"£ 

. 


i 








49 . 


It is easy for one to come to the conclusion that a problem in which he 
is vitally interested can be resolved by national or international action. 
The fact of the matter is, however, that because a matter is of vital con¬ 
cern to more than one nation or more than one Province does not ipso facto 
imply that it cannot be dealt with in a satisfactory way on a national or 
a provincial level. If it could be proven that the Provinces were inher¬ 
ently incapable of enacting satisfactory labour legislation there would 
be an overwhelming argument for transferring jurisdiction over labour 
matters to the Federal Parliament. As this is not so, I believe that 
the advantages of decentralization outweigh the advantages of this 
transfer of authority. 

(b) The Commission also recommended that the Dominion Parliament have auth¬ 
ority to enact basic minimum standards concerning hours of labour, wages 
and age of employment, leaving the Provinces free to enact better stand¬ 
ards if they so desired. It is important to note that one of the reas¬ 
ons for this suggestion was to facilitate relief payments by the Domin¬ 
ion. Happily, the relief problem is no longer a major one. 

The economic effects of national minima in these fields are complex, 
unpredictable and outside the scope of this thesis, but there is little 
doubt that they would constitute a major burden upon marginal producers, 
particularly in the Maritime Provinces, further aggravating the acute prob¬ 
lems of certain firms in certain areas. Again there crops up the old 
problem in government of statutory minima becoming the normally-accepted 
standards, perhaps impeding further progress. Although industrial stand¬ 
ards, particularly in the Maritimes, are by no means entirely satisfac¬ 
tory, ^ it is perhaps better to hope that Provincial administrations who 
lag behind in this respect will adjust their legislation as fast as ec¬ 
onomic conditions within their boundaries permit than to embark upon the 
road of complexities and difficulties in which Federal control would 

1. See the survey of Comparative Industrial Standards in Canada issued by 
the Dept, of Labour in 1949. 







50 . 


inevitably involve us. 

2. An Evolving Pattern of Constituti o nal Interpreta tion 

In the session of Parliament immediately after the General Election of 

1949 provisions were enacted to mace the Supreme Court of Canada the 

final court of appeal in all cases arising in Canadian courts, except 

2 

those cases which were already under way when the Act was passed. 

The question immediately arises as to whether we can expect a new 
pattern of constitutional interpretation to emerge under the final 
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court giving the Federal authorities en¬ 
hanced power to deal with matters with regard to which national ac¬ 
tion is necessary. 

The extent to which the present Supreme Court of Canada is bound 
by its own previous decisions and in particular those of the Judicial 
Committee received extended discussion in Parliament when the Supreme 
Court Act was under debate in 1949^• The Canadian Bar Association 
had submitted a brief which recommended (among other things) that 
“The rule of stare decisi s ought to continue to be applied with 
respect to past decisions of the courts as well as respect to 

4 

past decisions of the Judicial Committee. 11 
This recommendation would lead one to believe that there was some 
apprehension on the part of the Bar Association that the Supreme 
Court of Canada as final court of appeal might launch out on a new 
and uncharted sea of constitutional interpretation. The Government, 
however, held the view that the oath which judges took when assuming 
office bound than to acceptance of the doctrine of star e de c isis , 
that the recommendation would put the Supreme Court of Canada in a 

1. The problem of adjusting Federal minimum wages to the divergencies in 
the cost of living among various regions of Canada would prove partic¬ 
ularly acute. 

2. Statutes of Canada, 1950, C 57 

5* Hansard's Parliamentary Debates 2nd Session 1949 references - various 

4. ibid. p. 286 










. 

. 

. 

. . 

* 


.. . . • 

- 

- 

. ■ • 

' 

■ .. : , ; ; .. , •. .. 

. 

* 

’.I. ■' . ■ ‘ O Uj ...-0 | 

* 

. 

■ -J' J I. j.:; o-; ncJ -j. adf 

' 'j ' . ■ J. ■■ ■ ;; jj ' : • . . .01 ; ■; 


• 

. 

. 

. . 











51 


legal straitjacket and that its acceptance would imply an unjustified lack 
of confidence in the Canadian judiciary. One would, I believe, be over¬ 
sanguine to expect a sudden volte-face of the Supreme Court to give the 
Federal Parliament more extensive control over labour matters and certainly 
the decision involving delegation, 1 one of the first constitutional decisions 
given by that court as a court of final jurisdiction, would lead one to be 
very cautious in his hopes. There is little doubt that in spite of the 
technical question as to whether Canadian courts are still bound by the 
past decisions of the Judicial Committee most judges would consider it the 
duties of the a propriate legislatures rather than of the judiciary to make 
significant changes in the constitutional framework. It is possible of 

course to argue that certain decisions have exalted what might be called 

2 

the quasi-federal clauses of the B.N.A. Act, especially the '‘trade and 
commerce"" and "peace, order, and good government" sections of Section 
and that it is possible that a new pattern of constitutional interpretation 
might emerge if these decisions were widely used as precedents. These 
judgments which exalt the Federal power are, I believe, aberrations from 
the normal pattern of constitutional development rather than a definable 
tradition and it would be unrealistic to expect our courts to find in them 
the basis for the extension of Dominion jurisdiction which recent social 
and economic developments make necessary. 

1. infra pp 59-41 

2. Russell V. the : ueen (1882) 7 A.C. 829 Re Regulation and Contro l of Radio 
Broadcasting in Panada (1952) A.C. 504, Reference re Alberta Statutes 

(1958) S.C.R. 100 and other cases. 

5* It is interesting to note that the sweeping powers of the U.S. Congress 
over labour matters arise from the liberal interpretation given to the 
"inter-state commerce" clause of the Constitution by the Supreme Court 
in the last quarter century - Federalism and Labour Relations - A. Cox 
and M. Seidman - Harvard Law Review - Dec. 1950 pp. 211-2457” 












' 

. . 

* ... 

♦ 

* ' 

« 









♦ . - 


■ 


* 


- 


- 


















52 


5• Federal-Provincial Cooperation within the Pre s ent Con s titutional Framework 
Cooperative Dominion-Provincial action to solve national problems might 
conceivably take three forms: 

(a) Delegation - as we have seen this is now impossible. ^ 

(b) The devising of cooperative schemes for the solution of national 

problems with each authority legislating for the parts of the 

program within its sphere of exclusive jurisdiction - Lord Haldane 

2 

declared in re Weekly Rest in Industrial Undertakings Act. 

"It must not be thought that the result of this decision is 
that Canada is incompetent to legislate in performance of 
treaty obligations. In totality of legislative powers . 

Dominion an d Provinces together, she is fully equipped ." ^ 

However, in 1955 all nine Provinces and the Dominion had co¬ 
operated in enacting a marketing scheme for natural products. 

On reference to the Judicial Committee the Federal legislation 

was declared ultra vires as an invasion of the exclusive Prov- 

4 

incial sphere of "property and civil rights." Prof. F.R. Scott 
reasonably commented: 

"Thus the courts take the view that even where there is complete 
co-operation between all Canadian legislatures, each contributing 
its share of legislative capacity, still the scheme thus established 
will be destroyed if, perchance, one legislature has made a slip 

in the wording of its contributory statute and has in fact included 

5 

some subject matter beyond its jurisdiction," 

1. infra pp 59-41 

2. (1957 1 D.L.R. 695 
5* emphasis mine 

4. For a full discussion of this case and others of the Bennett "New Deal" 
see the symposium to which the whole of the Canadian Bar Revi ew issue 
of June, 1957 was devoted. 

5. ibid p.465 

















. 

. - 

: 

« - , ' n • - - 

' 

„ 

. 

‘ 

, 

' . ?i *'• > • 

. 

, 

- 

A 

... 

: - 


' 

<. . •; ; I ‘ no.r .M'.; : ,J 

■ 

j .. . . . ' , 

■ i uJ- /<.nco ' o ov/ 4 

> 

. 1 » ' C i : 1 'HI : 

■ - 

. 

. 

' 

. 










55 


Although the evolution of similar cooperative schemes of legislation in 
labour matters is logically possible, it is, in practical terms, impossible 
to frame comprehensive enactments whose validity could satisfy the courts, 

A less formal type of Dominion-Provincial and inter-provincial cooperation has 
emerged in regard to labour matters in recent years. Since 1945 Federal-Pro¬ 
vincial Conferences on Farm Labour have taken place with the primary purpose 
of increasing the mobility between Provinces of seasonal agricultural workers 
and of framing satisfactory immigration policies on the basis of the need for 
£arm labour. In 1942 the first Conference of Administrators of Labour legis¬ 
lation met and annual conferences have been held ever since. The meetings of 
the 1950 conference were featured by lectures on subjects as "Labour Relations 
in Britain Today", "The Organization of a Provincial Labour Department" and 
"Recent Trends in Collective Bargaining Procedure" along with round table 
discussion of techniques of conciliation, personnel management, industrial 
standards etc. Representatives from the Federal Department and the respective 
? rovincial Departments presented the developments in labour legislation that 
lad been made by their respective governments in the preceding year. Although 
ill ten Provinces and the Dominion were represented at the Conference it is 
loteable that Quebec and Ontario had in attendance almost all of their senior 
Labour officers with 22 and 8 delegates respectively, while Alberta and New¬ 
foundland chose to send one official each. It is impossible to guage accurate- 
-y the effects and potentialities of this form of cooperation* These confer¬ 
ences will at least assure that Federal and Provincial Administrators are not 
forking i n vacuo and that the experience of one will be put at the disposal of 
til. 

1. 9th Annual Report of Administrators of Labour Legislation - Montreal, 1950 







, t ■■ 


. .. 




- 

-01. - ' " *ei. • ' ni n J ■. r . efsi at tti hv&t&a 


. 

.■ ■■■■■• i. : ■ • :: : : - ' • ' • • o : : at:', ajor; 

„ 

. 

. • ■ ' ■ l " 

■ 


• ■ i ■ . ■ i 

* 

- 

; 

* • a. ' ■ t c' : ... . 3 ' ' -iV 0 wycfij 

. 

, 

« 

' •. • ili : 







54 


It Can be said in conclusion that, barring a national emergency in whihh 
the Federal Government would receive over-riding jurisdiction over labour 
matters, that the most fruitful approach to labour legislation lies in the 
unspectacular attempts to secure ad hoc constitutional amendments and in 


working in informal conferences like those which have been described 




55 , 


Chapter II 

The Status, Liabilities and Privileges of Trade Unions as Defined by the 

Courts of Law . 

A. The Status of Trade Unions 

It might be thought that a trade union under ordinary circumstances 
would be an easily definable entity by its purposes, organization and activities. 
However in Canada, alone among the major democratic nations, the legal status 
of most trade unions is obscured by the most intricate of legal subtleties. 

This section will attempt to define this status as it now exists. 

1• Trade Unions Whose Status Is Defined.by Statute Law 

Federal legislation bearing directly upon the legal status of trade unions, 
was enacted in the Trade Union Act of 1872. The Act provides for the voluntary 
registration of a trade union under the Registrar General of Canada upon the 
application of seven or more of its members. Unions registered under the Act 
have a quasi-corporate status conferred upon them by Section 18* 

"The trustees of any trade union registered under this Act, or any officer 
who is authorized so to do by the order thereof, may bring or defend, or cause 
to be brought or defended, any action, suit, prosecution, or complaint, in ®ny 
court of competent jurisdiction, touching or concerning the property, right 
or claim to property of the trade union and may, in all cases concerning the 
property, real or personal, of such trade union, sue and be sued, plead and 
be impleaded, in any such court, in their proper names, without any other 
description than the title of their office." 

Section 5 of the Act declares in part; 

"and this Act shall not apply to any trade union not registered under 
this Act; 

The Trade Union Act has had relatively little success in defining the 
legal status of trade unionsas they have extended their power and influence 


in Canada: 

















■ ! . 

. 

• v . ' • , • or iooiW ! b ige* , ( v : ' M vivv/oH, , 


\.0 .XJ l ‘; J'i\ .< J'■ O ■.; ? fi } f, R-bx’To daOSTf $$ ' 

, ■ ■ J ' . .1 ■ I. .1 : :> ; J ox e aifiT . J 

. , 

V. . •: 

. , . 

■ ' : J :,l c ■: 

. 

■ - 

J ■ J' 

t " . • - o - ■ ' - si: 

< * ' : e t . 0. .. -J / • 

* t 

. 

. 


* . . j-.i -i.i t 3 u ■: . ■ . v '■ .1 ;r:i: ©d 

, ' 

, v. .. . ' i.civOSc 

: ' J 

1 

: 



















56 


(a) Relatively few unions have chosen to register under the Act. Since 

1872 there have been 117 unions registered. Of these, however, 82 have ceased 

1 

operations leaving only 25 active to date. 

(b) The constitutional validity of the Act has been doubted or denied 

in several cases before the courts as an encroachment upon the exclusive 

2 

jurisdiction of the Provinces over property and civil rights. However, the 
Manitoba Court of Appeal in Chase et al V. Starr came to the interesting and 
dubious conclusion that S. 18 applied to all trade unions registered and un¬ 
registered." 

Quebec has gone much further than other Provinces in giving statutory 
definition to the status of trade unions: 

(a) The Professional Syndicates Act ^ - enacted in 1925 provides for 
the voluntary incorporation of "twenty or more persons engaged 
in the same profession, the same employment or in similar trades." 
Section 6 of the Act declares: 

"Professional syndicates may appear before the courts and acquire 

....property suited to their particular objects." 

5 

(b) The Collective Agreements Extension Act enacted in 1954 provides 
that a! 1 2 * 4 5 6 parity committee" shall be set up to administer any collec¬ 
tive agreements rendered obligatory shall "constitute a corporation 
and shall have the general powers, rights and privileges appertaining 
to ordinary civil corporations." The Catholic trade union movement 

has not shared the hostility to the incorporation of trade unions 

6 

that has characterized other labour organizations in Canada and the 

1. Private letter from the Department to the Secretary of State for Canada 
dated July 7? 1951 

2. C lay Products Workers’ Union V. Dominion Fire Brick and Clay Products Ltd . 
(1946) 5 W.W.R. 798: Polakoff V. Winters Garment Co ., (1928) 2 D.L.R. 277, 

and Starr V. Chase, (1924) S.C.R. 495 

5* Chase et al V, Starr (1925) 1 W.W.R. 1595* This decision was reversed by 
the Supreme Court of Canada under s ub, nom. Starr 7. Chase - see above 

4. Revised Statutes of Quebec , 1941 C. 162. 

5. ibid. C I 65 See also infra p. 97-98. 

6. Logan - pp. 425-424 















5 



: ' ‘ ■: / j 

* 

■ 


i * 


* 





* 

% 





.... 








* 






> » , 

" 

... 

- 

* ’ * 

■ . 

* 

~ . 





'7 


Confederation of Catholic Workers chose to be incorporated in 19^7* 

The statute law of British Columbia has been held by the courts to have 
given trade unions in that Province some of the duties and privileges of 
legal entities: 

(a) It has been laid down by the British Columbia Court of Appeal 
that trade unions in that Province have been made liable for 
suits in tort under Section 2 of the Trade Union Act which 
declares: 

"No Trade union nor any association of workmen or employ¬ 
ees in the Province, nor the trustees of any such trade 
union or association in their representative capacity, shall 
be liable in damages for any wrongful act of ommission or 
commission in connection with any strike, lockout or trade 
or labour dispute, unless the members of such trade union ., 

«. or its council , committee or other gove rning body, 
acting within the authority or jurisdiction given such 
council committee or other governing body.have authorized 

i» 2 

or have been a concurring body in such wrongful act. 

(b) Two very recent decisions of the British Columbia Court of Appeal 
are significant in their enunciation of the principle that trade 
unions certified as bargaining agents under the Industrial Concil ¬ 
i ation and Arbitration Act of that Province have been thus endowed 

by the legislature with the status and responsibilities of legal en¬ 
tities and become at law bodies apart from their individual members. 

1. Labour Legislation as Existing in Canada on Dec. $ 1 , 19^8 - P. 525 n. 

2. Em hasis mine. 












• Oil . ■: 


- 

■ 




■ 





















• ••• : ' u". ' . •• i: i 

- ’ . ••. ^ : i 

4 . < 

'... 

* 

f ; hr 


• * 















58 . 


In re Patterson and Nanaimo Dry Cleaning; and Laundry Workers Local Union Mo. 1 
the Court argued from sections 54-^8 of the Act, which impose certain responsib¬ 
ilities and privileges upon trade unions certified under the Act, that any nnion 

so certified was a persona juridic a. This principle was followed in Vancouver 

2 

Machinery V. United Steel Workers of America . Mr. Crysler concludes: 

"As trade unions, whether registered or unregistered, are in fact act¬ 
ing as legal entities in the course of collective bargaining, it is 
inevitable that they take on the attributes of a quasi-corporation . It 
is unavoidable to subscribe to them a legal status correctly related 

II 2 

to the facts of their operation. y 

An amendment to the Alberta Labour Ac t was enacted in 194-8 to make 
unions liable for illegal strikes. The amendment reads* 

"In any case where a judge has certified to the Minister that a strike 
is illegal any trade union or employees’ association, any of the mem¬ 
bers of which have participated in the illegal strike , is guilty of an 
offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding 
one dollar for each person participating in the strike for each day 
or part of a day that a strike exists after the third day.follow- 

4 

ing the adjudication by the judge that the strike is an illegal strike." 

A further section goes on to add that this penalty shall apply only to a local 
union or branch whose members are on strike illegally and shall not apply 
£o any other local of the same union whose employees have not participated 
in such unlawful activity. These amendments are among the most unfortunate 
clauses in extant Canadian labour legislation. They make any local vulner¬ 
able to the unauthorized actions of its members and provide a method whereby 
a determined minority within a local can destroy such union. It is to be 

1. (1047) 4 D.L.R. 159 (B.C.C.A.) 

2. (1948) 2 W.W.R. 480 (B.C.C.A.) 

5• Labour Relations and Precedents in Canada pp• 57 mm 58 
4. 1948 Status of Albert a 0 ~j6 S 82 C. (1). Qmphasis mine. 















■ 

‘ 

u . ' . •. '..i'v-.j ij'teo e> hert .t aOJM i 


• 

E 


• 

~ : >. : • '* • ■ 1 '' ‘v ■ 'i 

•. • . - . / . ; 


■ evj. ■: 


* 



: V .. ,• l 

* 



• ■ k ■' 

. 


i 


~ ■ ■■ ■ ^ . 

. ■ 




' w ■ '• ' : ■;.■ . .; . „E' 



vt-£:-. ■ "l-,, 


' 


v .. i . i ^ i cx.*iJ jbr ;.:J' rjo c 

' ■ ' V. 0 ' ' /> 


• - 


■ -< , " • r; oi 

i 

‘E 

. 


■ 

i.'.i . j I '' 

• 

v; “ l ‘J'6'h f;. 1 . ;;; , -i 1 1 ni 0 r b 8 

- ft 0 .. 

... 


- 












59 


hoped that the Alberta Legislature will see fit to amend this unfortunate 
legislation as soon as possible. 

Enactments of the Saskatchewan and Ontario Legislatures in 1944 defined 

the legal statue of trade unions at least in a negative way. The relevant 

1 

sections of the Saskatchewan Trade Union Act of that year read: 

"21 A. trade union shall not be made a party to any action in any 
court unless such trade union may be made a party irrespective 
of any of the provisions of this Act. 

22. A collective bargaining agreement shall not be the subject of 

any action in any court unless such collective bargaining agree¬ 
ment might be the subject of such action irrespective of any of 

the provisions of this Act. 1 ® 

2 

The Ontario legislation is framed in almost identical language. 

In conclusion, it must be emphasized that the Crown may bring prosecu¬ 
tions against any trade union for infringments of the Criminal Law as if 
the union were a legal entity.^ 

2. Trade Unions Whose Status is not Defined by Statute Law 

Apart from the statutes that have been discussed,the problem of 
the legal status of trade unions is a quagmire. On several occasions Can¬ 
adian judges have expressed their confusion in this regard. Idington J. of the 

Supreme Court of Manitoba in Williams et al V. Local Union 1562 United Mine 
4 

Workers said this: 

"The party (i.e. the respondent trade union) that says it is not a legal 
entity had the courage to proceed as if it were while saying it was not". 
In a more recent case Martin C.J.S. of the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal con¬ 
fessed a similar puzzlement: 

1. 1944 (2nd session) Statutes of Saskatchewan C. 69 

2. 1944 Statutes of Ontario C 54 S 5 (2) and 0) 

5* Chase V. Starr (1924) S.C.H. 495. 

4. (1919) 5 W.W.R. 828 at p. 851 

5. Clay Products Workers* Union V. Dominion fire Brick and Clay Products Ltd. 

(1946) 5 W.W.R. 798 at pp 806-807. 












■ ' d 

* 

" O O . ■ 0 ■ ' ' ' it ' ■ O uoto - . O. 

:» 

: ' • i.'f'V * Vo. ch* A i) GJk.a r .! ©b*-* ct/:wr(od.&3i&.t»Z &>iJ to &n0JtJ'09@ 

l 

vjJ ■: yJ'i q r ■■ . - "lean viv-uvs obv'tt .o. uq is& Jmi 

. 

. 

"f : ‘x i t l :-o ' . j. ;.u 10: ■ / n ..V. : yn 3 

i: 

* 

* 

■ I . .1 • m , ■ . L r ;r o n .f 

' . ni.*£ ■ V ; i . ■ o ; .vj 

£ 

■ J" ■ 0 9. V. o'. * 4 { -V; ry jy.TM.ts orio roor uTfMA 

4 

* 

. 

:•. :A x ■■■ 

: ■ ■ • 

* . „ 

• A 

. . ♦ 

, 
















60 


"The position taken by the counsel for the union is incongruous, he asks 
the Court to extend the time to enable the union to appeal and at the same 
time argues that the union is a nonentity; he seeks for the union all the 
benefits extended to persons and bodies corporate or politic in courts of 
law and at the same time is not prepared to assume any of the responsibilities 
for he argues that costs cannot be ordered against the union.” 

hat then is a trade union at common law ? The classic definition given in 
the Taff Vale Case has been widely accepted in Canadian courts: 

"while under the prevailing policy our legislature gives to unincorpor¬ 
ated labour organizations a large measure of protection, they have 
no legal existence; they are not endowed with any distinct personality; 
they constitute merely collectivities of persons. The acts of such 
an organization are merely the acts of its members.""^ 

Can a Canadian union apart from statute law sue or be sued in its own name ? 

Judicial precedents in this regard are, to put it mildly, confusing, although 
in most circumstances it would seem that the answer is in the negative. Some 
of the leading cases will be discussed briefly: 

(a) In Krug Furniture Co. V. Berlin Union of Amalgamated Woodworkers^ 
before the Ontario High Court of Justice an action was brought 
against the defendants for "wrongfully and maliciously" inducing 
the plaintiff’s employees to break their contracts with him. In 
answer to union counsel’s contention that the action should be dis¬ 
missed because the defendant union was not an incorporated body the 
Court held that "this is but a technical objection" and that "no 
encouragement should be given to any organized body to evade the 

1. (1901) A.C. 426 at p. 428 

2. (1905) 5 D.L.R. 46^ 







. 

. 

' 

(■■■ f«riw=v o; hr>:;:co:m m^d ft an t^ ,iO < t *lf , J|v 

- 

.' ••' t ■ .'■■■' ■ - ;r -i ■ r ; ■ A. o - j 

. 

0 ■ : - ■ J:-' • • • n . . : I. o 

*- '■ ' ■ ' i. v 'iJ J..t c;o _.! ^ > c k.>: - • • o ,» u . 

> 

< t . ' 1 


i 


* 




















6 , 1 . 


consequences of its act by abstaining from obtaining corporate capacity or 

n 

other legal existence. 

In Kay V. Local Union No. 25 Ontario Bricklayers* and Masons' Interna¬ 
tional T Jnion ^ the First Divisional Court of Ontario and the Supreme Court 
of Canada respectively held that civil actions against unregistered unions 
could not be maintained. 

(b) Two interesting and divergent Canadian decisions have been made again¬ 
st the background of the House of Lords judgment in Russe l l V. Amalgamated 

2 

Society o Carpenters and Joiners which held that the 'defendant trade union 
w.s an illegal association chiefly because of the restrictions upon conduct 
to which manbers were required to assent. These regulations were typical of 
those enforced by most unions. In Chase V. Starr ^ before the Manitoba Kings' 
Bench action was brought by two officials of the Canadian division of the 
International Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers, an unregistered trade 
union, against the former secretary-treasurer of that organization to surr¬ 
ender certain of the union's funds in his possession. Defense counsel ar¬ 
gued th t the union could not be a party to a suit because it was an illegal 
organization in restraint of trade and the Court dismissed the action rely¬ 
ing on the Russell case as precedent. In an ajpeal to the Manitoba Court 

4 

of Appeal this decision was reversed. As noted above," it was decided 
th t the Trade Union Act of 1872 applied to all unions. Furthermore, 
through an examination of Dominion and Provincial statutes relating 
to collective bargaining and by an analysis of the by-laws of the union, 

1. 65 O.L.R. 4l8, (1929) 2 D.L.R. 556 

2. (1912) A.C. 421 

5. (1925) 2 D.L.R. 1112 

4. Chase et al V. Starr (1925) 4 D.L.R, 105 

5. infra p. 56 








































w 









' 



. 

































• 




- 







































• 























. 












' 

* 




















. 







; 

“ 




~ 


, 









. 



















- 
















. 

pt< 0 V : 



— . /. ■ 







, 








* 


. 













S. V ' 


■' oil 








- 

























. „ » 




. - *■ 


_ 










*. 

. - 

* 




















62 


the Court decided that governmental policy had for many years been one 
of encouraging collective bargaining and that this policy would be frus¬ 
trated if every union was at the mercy of its officials so far as the 

security of its funds was concerned. The Supreme Court of Canada affirmed 

1 

this decision and dismissed the defendant's appeal with costs. 

A much different use of the precedent established in the Russell 
case was made by the Supreme Court of Canada in Polakoff V. winters 
Garment Co. In this case action was brought by the International 
Ladies' Garment orkers' Union against an incorporated employers' assoc¬ 
iation to enforce a written collective agreement, Raney J., speaking 
for the majority of the Court, reviewed in detail the history of the doc¬ 
trine that militant trade unions were illegal as being in unreasonable 
restraint of trade and so contrary to "public policy" as declared in 
the Russell case. He declared that this doctrine was not founded upon 
any "well-recognized principles of common law" but upon "principles of 
political economy which were at the time the doctrines were first prom- 
ulgated, as they are still in keen controversy". He asserted that the 
doctrine of the illegality of militant trade unions as being contrary 
to public policy had come into the common law as late as 1855 in Hilton 
V. Eckersley. Although he felt that this doctrine was an unjustified 
invasion of the legislative sphere by the courts, he declared the Court 
to be bound by the precedent established by the Lords in the Russel l 
case. Thus the union was declared an illegal organization incapable 
because of its illegality to maintain a civil action. 

(c) A recent case before the Ontario High Court of Justice again resulted 

in that Court relying on the classic definition of a trade union in the 

5 

Taff Vs 1e Case. In Canadian Seamens' Union V. Canada Labour Relations 


1. Chase V. Sta rr (1924) S.C.R. 495 

2. op. cit, p. 280 
5*infra p. 60 












- • 

« 






. 






* 


< • 




. 





■ 












' 



' 



- 





* 













» 







■ 

. . . 



. 

. 








65 


Board and Branch Lines Limited an unregistered union applied to the 

Court for an order to quash the order of the Canada Labour Relations 

2 

Board revoking the union's certification. The Board had acted on the 
evidence of a British White Paper that the labour organization was no 
longer a "trade union" within the provisions of the I ndustrial Relati ons 
and Disputes Investigation Act. The Court dismissed the application on 
the grounds that a union was merely "a collection of persons" and as 
such had no right to bring such an application. 

Are collective agreements between unions and employers enf o rceable as contracts 
in courts of law ? This question is of course logically inseparable from the 
previous ones and the status of collective agreements is dependent upon the 
status of those who enter into them. Again, the judicial precedents are con¬ 
tradictory: 

5 

(a) In Caven V. Canadian P acific Railway plaintiff brought suit against 
the C.P.R. for damages for improper dismissal allegedly in contra¬ 
vention of a collective agreement between the railway company and 
its workers. Justice Walsh for the Alberta Supreme Court took the 
position that such an agreement was not legally tenable, although under 
common law principles it was held that the plaintiff had been illeg¬ 
ally dismissed and he was awarded $10,000 damages. However in success¬ 
ive appeals to the Appellate Division of the Alberta Supreme Court and 
to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council both these bodies based 
their decisions on the assumption that the agreement was legally en¬ 
forceable and directed their attention chiefly to the plaintiff’s 

1. Labour Ga zette - May 1951 pp 697-698 

2. Although I can find no fuller report of this case than that in the Labour 

Gazette , I presume that the Board decertified the union because it had 
become a revolutionary organization and was thus not a "trade union" with¬ 
in the terms of the Industrial Relations and Disputes Investigation Act . 

The C.S.w. has had left-wing leadership for some time (Logan pp. 287 - 289 ) 

and in 1949-50 its disputes with Great Lakes shipping operators led to 

sympathetic strikes of seamen and dockers as far afield as Liverpool, 

England and Sydney, Australia. 

5* (1924) 5 D.L.R. 785 - for discussion of this case and others involving 
the legal status of trade unions in Canada see Trade Unions In Canada 
Part 1 - C.A. Pearce Vol. X (1952) C.B.R. pp. ^49-560 



















. . . 

it .)..» to tt; J le.SSJl} to or VjO wXUcO 

• '' 

■ 

.<-■ / . .0 iif.’J i\! : .in J 5 . f ■ u i. .1 

; ‘o. f • •; . iii.i. o, J. loo t h t:£-v ao-x^ii -» 


« 

■ 

t'. . . !. i::. j. ' t . , . " t ■ .. ■ :.:J 

- 

. . . 

t;t-- : _; :t ...or t .. : t io lI to t j (. i>.h 

. 

-in-lu-j t , ,i. : . , ; ; I ■ o. • v • - - ..... ... iJjUot 

■* : * 

' 

' 

—VC I . J :J.:00‘i : -t v \ «'V t'tv j ;T..: | o , fjjf-. .?> ■ ,0 :• r; Qr & l:) 0 ■ tOWto 

■ i. , . 'V 

■ 

h . 

' 

■ ' t ■ ... • ■ : . t ; ’ - , i . v • 

. .... . ' '. ‘v ': 

... 

* 

.... . . 
, • • • " 












64 


compliance with the agreement. 

(b) Decisions before the Manitoba King's Bench, the Manitoba Court of 
Appeal and the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in Young V . 
Canadian Northern Railway ^ seem clearly to reverse those in the 
Caven case. The former dispute involved the allegedly wrongful dis¬ 
missal of a railway employee under the terms of a collective agreement 
negotiated by a union of which the plaintiff was not a member. The 
judgments of all three courts indicated that a collective agreement 
was not a contract binding at law. In the Manitoba Kings' Bench 
Dysort J. quoted with approval decisions of several American courts 
in similar cases one of which read in part: 

"The rule seems to be that individual members of a trade union 
are not bound by contracts between the union and employers un¬ 
less such agreements are ratified by members of the union as 
individuals and that in the absence of such ratification by a 
member, no rights accrue to him which he can enforce against 

an employer."2 

The Manitoba Court of Appeals concurred in this judgment. 

Justice Fullerton concluding that the collective agreement was not 
a contract because of its "lack of mutuality" said: 

"I am satisfied that so-called wage agreements between workmens' 
unions and employers are never intended by the parties to be legally 
enforceable contracts...... If employers do not live up to the 

terms of their agreements the workmen may apply for a Board of Inves¬ 
tigation and Conciliation under the Indu strial Disputes Investigation 
Act..... and failing a satisfactory adjustment may go on strike.""' 


1. (1929) 4 D.L.R. 452, (1950) 5 D.L.R. 552, and (1951) A.C. 85 

2. (1929) 4 D.L.R, 452 at p. 465 

5* (1950) 5 D.L.R. 552 at pp. 556-^57 












■■ Li ' 




... o : . .. do .! , 

4 




-lasjq^A 

■ . . . . 

• * 

■,:i ' l- ibi . • ■ . ■ - i ' & ■ ■■ ■' 1 .W 

, 

•. i i ■ . - LA ■: : v r 

♦ 

* - vt-tc-'p''C 

fj'T ' 5 }. CV riV,- 1 ■ 0 L L ‘' 7.-J! is .ill 

; r & o •. 1 Iv >' 










nOiiOtt Uv 

: V =; : v. ' i... i *: • m:: ;:: -;i: ui ■ 

.tcJfli . - . li ' 

. 

, 

, : . ■.■ vj , . ; • ■ '. o : v- -r o J. X .... .. i - 

. ' 

: ■: .. «• . -;i J:..-. i- . 

• f i J L.fi j 

. 

.. V C , •. J . 7 V ‘L3>‘if 

. ■ J;; : .. : -u .... .. j ^rr; si; i. ; r\‘ ' 


. 


. , ... 




... 

... 

. . . 




The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council concurred in this significant 
declaration that the ultimate remedy of workers for breach of a collective 
agreement was a strike rather than civil action for damages*^ 

5• Trade Uni o ns and Representative Actions 

It has been authoritatively decided that trade union can lawfully partic¬ 
ipate in a representative action through its officials. In the Taff Vale 
case Lord Macnaghten declared: 

" I have no doubt whatever that a trade union, whether registered or 
unregistered may be sued in a representative action if the persons selec¬ 
ted as defendants be persons who, from their position, may be taken 

2 

fairly to represent the body*" 

This position has been followed in several Canadian cases in suits by 
or against trade unions.^ 

4• The Legal Status of Trade Unions in Other Democ r atic Natio ns_* 

United States courts have been more ready than those in Canada to con¬ 
sider collective agreements between unions and employers as binding contrac¬ 
ts. Some years ago an American observer commented thus upon the ©hanging 
attitude of the judiciary in his country: 

"Certainly the fears of older labor leaders that judicial control over 
them would be used by the courts as a weapon for the oppression of 
labor have proved unfounded. Such a record....as is available reveals 
that labor rather than the employer has been the chief beneficiary of 
judicial intervention. Such limitations as the courts have placed upon 
the effective function of collective agreements seem not the result of 
economic prepossessions but rather of blunders committed by judges within 

1. (1951) A.C. 85 

2. (1901) A.C. 426 at p. 428 

5* Meta l lic Roofing Co. V. Local No. 50 Amalgamated Sheet Metal Workers 1 Inter¬ 
national Ass^. (1905), 9 O.L.H. 171, Local Union fo. 1562 United ine 
Work ers of America V. Williams and Rees , 59 S.C.R. 24o, Clay Products 
Workers Union V. Dorn. Fire Brick and Clay Products, Ltd ., (1947) 1 D .L.R• 

578 (Sask. C.A.) and other cases. 


















i. T;r; : JOiK.C I f.'OOJJOZ ' v'': <•'.! ! X '10 0 uj'-'O Li :.J r , ©•(£! 

♦ 

. •. ' 

* 

. 

- .1, • ; ■ :o Loifiv e *4 3X no ne> ;i soil . .. 

■ 

o • . 

- ■. ;• ■ ‘'.. . i r-oki r, br::Ti 

' • : : ■' >■; ■■-■■■ • 

' 

■ 

, 

, 

:::v. , "i... b .o O /.'oJ' h. iiiML 

. 


: ' 

•: V 0 I . X : ; ... ■ : , V. 1 0 •• X ‘i ' L ' . . Y.U'i.iX 

'. foil ■: . •; ' . • ■ row 

;$*>** * y.’ii ‘a •; I 

; t ■ ■ 

. ' 

. 

- 

. 




. 


, 


. * 

* 














1 


the grip of concepts derived from the law of private contract". 

The La bor Management Relations ( Ta ft-Rartley) Act enacted by Congress in 
1947 declared that suits for breaches of collective bargaining agreements 

negotiated by employers and unions in business "affecting commerce" can be 

2 

maintained in Federal courts. In such a suit a union is to be treated as 

a legal entity apart from its members and it is provided that any judgment 

against it is to be settled from union assets only. It is also provided 

that a union is legally bound by the acts of its agents. 

In the 1950*3 France, Belgium and the Netherlands enacted legislation 

similar to the Labour Agreements Extension Act of Quebec^ by which the terms 

of collective agreements entered into by representative or majority groups 

in an industry might be made legally bind ng upon all persons in the indus- 

4 

try or in a particular region. 

The legal enforceability of the awards of arbitration courts has been 

a normal feature of industrial relations in Sweden, Australia and New Zeal- 
5 

and for many years, in Britain emergency war-time legislation which makes 
awards of the National Arbitration Tribunal binding on both parties is still 
in effect.^ 

5. Summary and Conclusions 

Apart from Quebec, and perhaps British Columbia, the legal status of 
trade unions, especially as it relates to the enforceability of collective 
agreements, is more confused in Canada than in any other democratic nation. 

The solution suggested by many involves the compulsory incorporation 
of trade unions. It is argued that business incorporates and is financially 

1. The Present Status o f Collecti v e Agreements (note) Harva rd Law Review 
Vol. 51 (1958) p. 520 

2. For a full discussion of this legislation see " The Labor Management 
Relations Act ’ 1 - Archibald Cox - Harvard Law Revi ew Vol. 61 (194-8) pp.274-5 

5. infra p. 97 

4. Economics of Labor R.A. Lester pp.724-725 

5. ibid. p. 725 

6. Britain 1 95 0-51 - Central Office of Information p. 170 
























. . .. ... .. .V. . ..■ ... .. .1 . _ 

. 

* — ■ ' ' •" • ' • ■ 

... 

- 

' • • ■ • ■ '• ... _ '■ _ •—— 

V . ■ .. . ... ■ ■ V : ■■■ i - ; - "L 1 

.< 






• ‘ ' 

J ■ . j. i fi - ' J . - : 8 • ... • 

; J . ' * • ■ 


* 

♦ 

. ...... :. . ... . . - x- L Li. • L- Q'i: - ■■ 

, 

. . 






67 


responsible for any damages it commits and that unions should be compelled to 
undertake similar obligations. 

Canadian labor organizations, apart from the Catholic trade union move¬ 
ment, ha^ always opposed compulsory.incorporation. It is argued that the pur¬ 
pose of the incorporation of business is to limit liability, that of the in¬ 
corporation of labor unions to extend it. Labor spokesmen feel that a hostile 
political regime might impede the rights of workers to organize by refusing 
or delaying their charters of organization into unions. Also it is argued 
that a government might restrict normal union activities by refusing to 
include such activities within the provisions of the union’s charter and 
that judges might break a strike at any time by deciding that the striking 
union had contravened some provision of its charter and by thus cancelling 
or suspending its activities.^" 

‘The real case against the compulsory incorporation or labor organiza- 

2 

tions rests on the doubtrul practicability of its workings. 

(a) Should only the national union be incorporated or should each 
local be incorporated ? If various locals incorporate under Provincial 
laws and the national incorporates under Federal legislation, legal compli¬ 
cations appear certain to arise. It appears constitutionally impossible for 
all unions to be incorporated under Federal enactments.^ This dilemma seems 
logically insoluble. 

(b) Should mere membership in a union whose agents enter into a 
collective agreement entail a legal obligation to abide by the terms of this 
agreement ? 

1* For a thoughtful discussion of the incorporation of unions see Survey 
of Labor Economics - Florence Peterson - Harpers and Bros. - 19^7- 
pp.642-44 

2. The premise uponwhich I consider these difficulties is that collective 
bargaining rather than any form of compulsory arbitration should be 
the way in which conflicts of interests between employers and workers 
are reconciled. 

5. infra p. 56 





' 

1 


I ■ . ■ 

' 

t : oe .Bt . ... i : - 









.,jr; . x ■ 


1C 








* 





X : 

■ 





. 

... 

. -j ^ 0 -r 0 cf 







. 

■if.cio- /" 

: jOill 

■nc-.iu.y,,..: 



j. 

‘-V .. 

. 

t . 

. 



<<j: ' ■.< .0 1: ' b 







■ 



. 

Ov 





i ); 


0 






. 








oJ it 



« ->* 



. 

■ b y, • J 




. 

ffO 

' 



' 






.l-v-- w .../r.ivc;•><.; n. aei,.ivi:J: ,v. aw- Qbuioai . j 

xJ' . : jC H i C»u 0 VO f J' ' t:. £ A Q&'<■'* J . : i'jsxiif I 

■ ■-■■■ 1 " : ! .. .. - 

, . 

■- 'i ■■.••'i ') Oi a. i ; rif * r'± 

* 

- !.o b -.v 1.00 : 7G.i;n;j ■ : •• ■; j ■ ■ . .: j -^Irro bi. jci;':' (x. \ 

■ ■ ■■ ' - • : •. • X‘ -V ■■ 

. 

. 

. 

0 •• ' -s••. -.i'.: r.. J .13 n J: .Ibsjecfmxn b ; ,;C 

V ... . : 0fi :0 V “£ k : | 

* 

. 

, 

' GO ‘1 3 !■' : Wi.-ii ' • . ' . ' ■'/ ;'f .. :J' 





68. 


(c) Is it possible to safeguard local and national unions from suits 
arising out of unauthorized acts of its members or officials ? ^ 

(d) Should workers who are employed under conditions established by 
collective agreements but who are not members of the contracting union have 
rights and obligations under the agreement ? 

(e) If a majority of members of an incorporated union desired to 
change its affiliation, would it not be possible for a minority to continue 
under the old charter and retain the unions funds and property ? 

In general, it appears to be a sound principle to discourage litiga- 
tion involving the respective rights and obligations of parties to a collec¬ 
tive labour agreement: 

(a) Almost any comprehensive collective agreement involves clauses 
which can be interpreted intelligently only by those who have a first-hand 
knowledge of the particular occupations or industry. 

(b) The application of individualistic common law concepts to indus¬ 
trial relations results in absurd decisions in the light of modern economic 
realities. 

(c) Workers in general believe, with some justification, that the jud¬ 
iciary has a pro-management bias. This distrust with which employees and 
labour leaders regard the courts makes judges unsuitable for the role of 
arbitrers in industrial disputes. 

(d) Litigation is a slow and costly process. In both these respects 
labour unions are at a positive disadvantage vis-a-vis employers. 

(e) In many industries and businesses where a moderate degree of con¬ 
fidence between workers and management prevails industrial peace is aided 

by informal but mutually-understood conditions of employment. The incorpor- 

1. Much of the hostility of union leaders to incorporation revolves around 
this point. The most valid objection to the Taff-Yale judgment was that the 
national union was held responsible financially for unauthorized acts of some 
of its members. 





■ 

■ ■ 

o o*iocfr.!e-f3 v '& 'll . (*»} 

Lhiil ' ■ ■ ■ 

. ■ . . ■ i;. 1:. 

.... v .. ■ '.'.j i•: I ' • 

- 

: 

- 

. 

, 

- ' v . ]' 1 1 . •> : : ■ t. ■£.. ( ) 

* 

•• >' to e- . ; .:<?\ eJ iuoo IxavoT TcJodj^X J 

. 

. 

~ 

- >■.■£ ■' avSTXVi'c-< aaswJ©cf acnsBxl J 

» • - . : 

.. 

. 

' : i> . . : I: ’ £ 1 £' O' 

. ■ 




69o 


ation of labour unions in these circumstances might ho doubt lead to a legal¬ 
istic attitude in union-management relations which would impair mutual confid¬ 
ence. 

The compulsory incorporation of labour unions is not a practical alter¬ 
native to the confusion that now surrounds the legal status of unincorporated 
tr^de unions in Canada. This problem appears to have no solution. I should 
suggest that legislation be enacted by the Provincial Legislatures and the 
Federal Parliament providing that in industries within their respective sph¬ 
eres of jurisdiction the courts be given the power to enforce collective 
pgreements in situations where such agreements contain clauses specifically 
stating that any disputes arising out of breaches shall be decided by the 
judiciary. It can of course be argued in objection to this proposal that 
unions who desire that agreements into which they enter be legally enforceable 
can attain this end by incorporation under the Federal Trade Union Act, How¬ 
ever, few unions have desired to buy "a pig in a poke 11 , to incorporate them¬ 
selves without knowing just what kind of suits may be brought against them 
at some future date* It may well prove to be true that in a few instances 
where there has been a lack of understanding between unions and management 
that the reduction of mutual rights and obligations to an agreement enfor¬ 
ceable at law will better industrial relations. This mild proposal leaves 
some of the difficulties I have brought up earlier unsolved but beyond it I 


see no solution to the unfortunate situation that now exists 






B• Trade Unions and the Law of Criminal Conspiracy 

The most bitter battle in the struggle of British trade unions for exist¬ 
ence was that against decisions of common law courts which declared that com¬ 
binations of workmen were as such criminal conspiracies in restraint of traded 
It is not necessary here to examine the social philosophy underlying these de¬ 
cision except to remark that it was a natural reaction of those who had an 
unbounded faith in the efficacy of unregulated competition to growth of econ¬ 
omic organizations which were frankly and inherently monopolistic in nature. 

The doctrine of criminal conspiracy was first brought forcibly to the 
attention of Canadian labour as a result of prosecutions in the Toronto Frin- 

A 

ters 1 Strike of 1872* Workers were alarmed to discover that trade unions were 
in fact illegal organizations under the Combination Acts of 1792-1800 which 
had been repealed in Britain in 1824 but which still applied to Canada and 
that Gladstone's famous Trade Uni o n Ac t of 1871 which had legalized trade 
unions in the Motherland had no application to the young Dominion. The out¬ 
come was the passage of a bill introduced by Sir John A. Macdonald in 1872 
which almost exactly duplicated the British Act of the previous year. S.52 
of the Canadian Act reads: 

"The purposes of any trade union shall not by reason merely that they 
are in restraint of trade, be deemed to be unlawful, so as to render 
any member of such trade union liable to criminal prosecution for con¬ 
spiracy or otherwise, or so as to render void or voidable any agree¬ 
ment or trust." ^ 

However, this exemption applied only to unions registered under the Act. 

In 1892 the Criminal Code was amended to read: 

"496. A conspiracy in restraint of trade is an agreement between two 
or more persons to do or procure to be done any unlawful act 
in restraint of trade. 

1. History of t he British Working Class Movement 1789-1947 -G»D«H. Cole 
London, 1948 

2. Logan - pp.58-45. 

5. Revised Statutes of Canada 1927-0 125 











■ 

■ • . •- 




, ' • 

' 

; ■ 1 ‘ . 

[ 

. 

j .J' ■: ‘i oj - ■ xo ii o iaio 

- ■ ; ' '■ • o ' ■ i. f ' o'i■ V ' 

' 

. • , -■ - - ■. - ......• 


' : d i . . dll 

■ 

/ 

- \ 

' 


. , 


■ . - . 

70 ..C. •;? Hi; cl'e.e'J .xti: 


. 

.... 

- 

_ 

7 i . . ' '. 

' 

■: . .. 

: • . 




' ■ 

~ ■ ' - ■ : ' •:••• ' ' \ . i > . .: j. . - : 

■ 

' ' 

' ■: , 

; . ,. . 





■ 

■ 


i r ..• 

*■ 

‘io 






71 . 


497* The purposes of a trade union are not, by reason merely that 
they are in restraint of trade, unlawful within the meaning 
of the last preceding section 11 ^ 

Section 498 of the Criminal Code reads in part: 

''Every one is guilty of an indictable offence....who conspires, 
combines, agrees or arranges with any other person*.. 

(a) to unduly limit the facilities for transporting produc ing, 

i 

manufacturing, supplying, storing or dealing in any article or 
commodity which may be a subject of trade or commerce; or 

(b) To restrain or injure trade or commerce in relation to any 
such article or commodity, or 

(c) To unduly prevent, limit, or lessen the manufacture or produc¬ 
tion of any article or commodity or to unreasonably enhance the 
price thereof", 

(d) .... 

(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to combina¬ 
tions of workmen or employees for their own reasonable protection 

2 

as workmen or employees". 

A section of the Combines Investigation A ct exempts trade unions 
from criminal prosecution as combines operating to the detriment of the 
public interest in terms similar to S. 498 (2) of the Criminal Code.^ 

S. 499 of the Criminal Code makes it an indictable offense for 
anyone to break wilfully a contract which he has reasonable cause to 
believe will "endanger human life or cause serious bodily harm" by 

1. Revised Statutes of Canada, 1927, C*146 

2. R. S.C. 1927, C. 146 

5. R.S.C. 1927 C. 26 , S 4 





interrupting the operation of such public utilities as railroads, elec¬ 
tric light, water, gas or power services. It is further declared imm¬ 
aterial whether any such offense is committed out of malice or not.^ 
Criminal cases involving conspiracy in restraint of trade have 
come for the most part under S, 498 (2) of the Criminal Code, Courts 
of law have been called upon to decide whether or not combinations of 
workmen or employees have gone beyond "their own reasonable protection" 
and thus become conspiracies in restraint of trade. The essential fac¬ 
tor in determihg legality or illegality in each case is the purpose of 
. the combine or combination. 

The decision of the Manitoba Court of Appeal in the case of R. V, 

2 

Russe ll is significant for the principles it laid down regarding the 
limits of the exemption of trade unions from criminal prosecutions for 
conspiracy. The case in point arose out of the actions of one of the 
leaders of the Winnipeg General Strike of 1919*^ Defense counsel ar¬ 
gued that the accused was not guilty of participating in a criminal 
conspiracy because of the protection against such prosecutions by Sec¬ 
tions 2 (38) and 590 of the Criminal Code, S.2 ( 38 ) reads as follows 
"Trade combination means any combination between masters or work¬ 
men or other persons for regulating or altering the relations be - 
tween any persons being masters or workmen, or the conduct of any 
masters or workmen in or in respect of his business or employment 
or contract of employment". 

S, 590 states: 

"No prosecution shall be maintainable against any person for con¬ 
spiracy in refusing to work with or for any employer or workman, 
or for doing any act or causing any act to be done for the pur¬ 
pose of a trade combination unless such act is an offense punish¬ 
able by statute" 

1, Revised Statutes of Canada, 1927 C. l46, 

2. 51 D.L.R. 1 

5* see Master 1 s book 







. ' ■ 

* V •. 

. 

. \ ■ ■ 

. 

„ 





. 

- 

. 


■ 






-• 

, 

- •• , •. . - •', ■ : v . . ■ . . ■: ’ ■ ' 

< ~ - • ■ ■ ' !‘T j. • 0 a c 

, 

' 

. 

' 





75 . 


The accused was convicted by the court of seditious conspiracy and 
the principles stated by Cameron, J.A. and Perdue, C.J. can be summarized 
briefly: 

1* Sympathetic strikes are unlawful. If a strike involves no trade 
dispute between the strikers and their employers and is not the 
outgrowth of relations between the employer and his employees 
the strike is not justified and is thus unlawful. 

2. The protection afforded to workers under S. 5^(2) a:d S.590 
of the Criminal Code does not cover strikes whose purpose is 
revolution and the overthrow by force of the existing form 
of government in Canada. 

5* It is lawful to strike for higher wages. Cameron J.A. stated 
•‘as long as a strike is for a legitimate purpose, such as, 
for instance, advancing the rate of wages, the fact that injury 
results to the employer does not thereby alter the character 

of the act.The employer may suffer loss or be financially 

ruined but under the law as it is, our Courts of Justice are 

impotent to give him a remedy.A combination to quit work 

is lawful where its purpose is to obtain for the parties a 
benefit they can lawfully claim.”"*” 

4. The protection given to workers by S. $ 8 ( 2 ) and S. 590 does 
not extend to situations in which the object of a combination 
is not to secure something to which its members have no lawful 
right. M If the primary object (of a combination) is to injure 
others in their business of calling, or to deprive them of 
their liberty of action without just cause, and not to advance 
the interest of the combination, except perhaps in some remote 

p 

and indirect way, it is unlawful. M 

1. op. cit . p. 17 

2 . op. cit. 


























> . • t • • 

: • * 

, 

•iv ; • v ■ J > V- r: . : v v ©rfT 

. i -( , 

, - . . ' 

, '-L *r\ : ■ i ■ % aerugo a io‘x 

. . .. 

< 

. 

, 

* 

. 

' 

. 

. 

. 









• * 


. 








There have been several other Canadian cases which staked out the 


limits of exemption from prosecutions against criminal conspiracy that 
trade unions enjoy. In each case the determining factor of legality or 
illegality is the purpose of the combination, 

1, A combination not to work is lawful but a combination to prev¬ 
ent others from working by such means as a sit-down strike is 

1 

unlawful* In Johnson V. McKay officers of a mineworkers’ union 

had combined by a strike, picketing and a threat to withdraw 

maintenance men from a mine in breach of contract to compel 

the mine-owners to discharge workers of another union with 

which the management had a contract of employment. The accused 

were found to have been guilty of actionable intimidation. 

It is of course unlawful under most conditions to conspire 

to commit a breach of contract or to advise others to do so. 

2* The fact that a trade union organization requires that one 

member does not take the place of another when a legal strike 

is on and arranges a scheme of strike pay does not make it an 
2 

illegal combination. 

5# An individual may cease to work for an employer and any number 
of men may as a group act in the same manner provided the pur¬ 
pose is mutual benefit and no unlawful means are used to cariy 
5 

out their objects. 

4. It is not criminal conspiracy for union members to refuse to 
admit other workers to their union so long as the purpose can 
be shown to be the attainment of a lawful object even though 
the persons who have been refused membership lose their jobs 

1. (1957) 1 D.L.R. 445 

2. Phase V. Starr (1925) 5 W.W.R. 500 

5* International Ladies( Garment Workers Union V. Rother (1925) 

5 D.L.R. 768 ——— 







o. ; : ' ■ •• 8 . ' o . 

. .. >:• . '©<' \ : /.:•{ : xo ... ... ..' o r i. 

■. •• ; o 

. 

♦ . 

I 

4 i 

.J • ‘. ' ■' ■ ■■ ; - ; o;. .,r: w . - o 

'. ■ ... 

* 

. 

' ' .1 -. :• o , i 41 

• • 'j ■ ’ 0 . '10 i . J‘ r 

, 

•- • ’ ‘X •• 'O •! .. j "■■Or. 0 

' -r ... ■■ • .' 0 ■ .’ . ■ .ooi •■’ ■■ -'.■: Of'.". ■ ' i...:' ; V- f • ■ - 

* 

■ ■-.. . O'; : ..of- -, o' X mj4u<v ‘ ti co-co,. 

* 

i - ■ 

■• :,o rf, o4 ■■ XfOLiO/ xo.u ■ o J,i..ou>/- 









1 


75 . 

thereby. 

In general, C a nadian courts have given a fairly broad interpreta¬ 
tion of the clauses in tie Criminal Code exempting unions from prosecu¬ 
tions for criminal conspiracy so far as such actions arise out of rela¬ 
tions betw en a particular employer and his workers. On the other hand 
the judiciary has consistently refused to recognize any such concept as 
the legitimacy of working-class solidarity or that one group has any 
lawful right to interfere in relations between other workers and 
their employers. 

It is, I believe, unfortunate that boycotts and sympathetic 
strikes are illegal at common law and I should suggest that this con¬ 
dition be rectified by legislation of the Provinces and the Bominion: 

(a) In situations where workers in an industry are divided into 
several craft unions no one union may be able to exert de¬ 
cisive economic pressure against an employer or employers 
if other workers are not allowed to come to the aid of 
those on strike. 

(b) It is possible for employer groups to use the weapon of 
the boycott against workers and against the products of 
other firms of whose policy they do not approve, and to 
make illegal the boycott and the secondary strike by 
workers puts management at an unjustifiable advantage 
vis-a-vis workers. No law could be enforced which proh¬ 
ibited employer pressure similar in effect to the sympa¬ 
thetic strike or boycott. It is no secret that certain em¬ 
ployees can be and have been blacklisted by employers' groups 
in spite of S. 502 A of the Criminal Code. Rather obviously, 
similar economic devices used by labour unions become imm- 


1. R.V . Day 17 C.C.C. 403 (C.A.) 




. 

'< ■ •- • !••• 

♦ 

* 

' • ; ■ ■ ■ 

' ■■ 

, 

' 

. 


■ 

: 


■ 

. 

* - - 

» 


. 

. 

















ediately apparent and are within the purview of the courts, 

(c) The situation as it now exists puts the responsibility for mak - 
ing the decision as to whether a strike is in the pursuance of 
the legitimate self-interest of workers or no in the hands of 
the courts, who, it is respectfully submitted, are less capable 
of determining this matter than are the unions themselves, A 
union which engages in a boycott or a sympathetic strike will 
do so only if it feels that the interests of its own members 
are involved in the outcome of some labour dispute between 
another group of workers and their employers. Surely these 
workers are better able to decide this matter in almost any 
conceivable situation than are judges whose social background 
is usually closer to that of management than that of labour 
and who are nourished on the individualistic concepts of the 
common law. To follow to its logical conclusion the princi¬ 
ple that workers can lawfully exert pressure against employers 
within the prohibitions of statute law if their object can be 
shown to be something that they have a lawful right to attain, 
it must be admitted that sympathetic strikes and boycotts 
should not be declared illegal. It should be decided by the 
legislatures rather than the judiciary whether solidarity of 
workmen within an industry or a region or throughout the na¬ 
tion is a legitimate interest of individual unions and I believe 
that a reasonable answer to this question will be in the affirm¬ 
ative. 

It may be said in conclusion that we in Canada can afford to rely 
at present upon the good sense of the trade union movement in keeping 
sympathetic strikes and secondary boycotts at a minimum. Responsible 
labour leaders are no doubt aware the widespread use of such devices 



* ':J "i 

- *S J . futaixa UOli J X r r «OJC X BiJu X S ©ff? (fi| 

; I-: ••.... .. : ' ' ; 

_ \:r : - :.?J 

. J J • Vi':.'." r X/.r,■ ! ■' t ■: .' X 6 - 

■ 

‘ ■ ■ ■ •: '■ . • ' •/ ii . 


’ Vi?;. -.1 ' • ■ V. J 

■ f-..: ■ - 


1 '. • . : i v ~a j-.. ■ 




' 







* 






. : ' ' •' ;i . i:.' • V : 0"( ■ 

-. •• •• \ : 0 - ;• : J" 

. 

' ' ' 

■ ' y : ■ 'J •*[>.■ a r o .• 'r n oaa*■ * .X :, :J 

* 

■ 

v:, X- oa f 'I.'J C: > i : i 



77 


would quickly bring down the public ire and subsequent repressive legis¬ 
lation upon their heads. In the meantime we are unjustified in denying 
to them the privil ge of resort to secondary pressures when they feel 
that the situation warrants it. 

















C. Trade Unions and the Law of Civil Cons pir acy in Restra i nt of Trade 


Although it is impossible to separate completely the principles of 
law relating to civil and criminal conspiracy in restraint of trade it 
is convenient to separate them for purposes of analysis. Under the 
B.N.A. Act the Dominion has exclusive legislative powers over the Crim¬ 
inal Law while "Property and Civil Rights" are matters of exclusive 
Provincial jurisdiction. The Legislatures of Saskatchewan, Alberta 
and Ontario have each enacted similar provisions declaring: 

"A trade union and the acts thereof shall not be deemed unlawful 
by reason only that one or more of its objects are in restraint 
of trade".'*’ 

The Ontario and Saskatchewan enactments go on to assert that any 

act done by two or more members of a trade union in "contemplation or 

furtherance of a trade dispute" shall not be actionable unless the 

2 

act done were actionable in the absence of a combination. 

Canadian Courts in dealing with criminal and civil cases of 
conspiracy in restraint of trade have leaned heavily on the "United 
Kingdom Trilogy" from which several principles relating to combin- 

5 4 

ations have emerged. Mr. Crysler has listed these basic elements: 

"1. Interference with contractual relations without justification 
constitutes the violation of a legal right. 

2. The use of unlawful means such as compulsion intimidation or 
threats to obstruct or interfere with a person in the exercise 
of his trade, profession or calling or to prevent others from 
entering into or continuing contracts within him constitutes 
a violation of a legal right. 

1. Statutes of Ontario,1944-46 C. 54 S.2. similar provisions St atutes 
of Alberta 1947 C.58 and Statutes of Saskatchewan 1944-45 C.19 

2. ibid . C.54 3. 3 (1) and C. 69 S. 20 

5* Allen V. Flood , Quinn V. Leathern and Sorrell V. Smith - 

for a full and critical discussion see Labor and the Law - Gregory 
4. Crysler - p. 14 ——-- 















. 

. ; ; • \ deJt 1 1 ■'■•v<oo -i<sifoa o.t ai Jt I 

■ 



■ 

■ . 

* . * 



, 

. 

r ‘ 





• ■ . •.■.;! . :6 .. i ■' ■ ■: ;c 

, 



UbIh:: .v oo 11 . ; v. 

. 


■ f> h ■ r.- : ■ o : S.i'T W 

* 

. 





vr-l : 

. 

. 


' 

% 

* 

■ 


- 



( 

■ ■ 


' ■ 


' 

4 . 

• o' -■ . -■ il‘.' :' S;' 

• ' 

♦ 

. . ,:' . . 

. 


*> 

ti 


. - • 





79 . 


5- A person has not a cause of action because of having suffered 

damages where the party causing the damage, without using unlaw¬ 
ful means, induces others not to enter into or continue a cont- 
tract with such person* 

4. A lawful act does not become unlawful because done with an intent 
to injure but an act otherwise lawful becomes unlawful if done 
by two or more persons with intent to injure another and not with 
the intent of furthering their own trade interests. 

5.it is not necessary for the plaintiff to prove malice 

in the sense of spite or ill-will in cases of violation of legal 
rights referred to in (1) and (2) n . 

The principles of the 11 Trilogy 11 have been clarified in several cases 
before Canadian courts. 

1* An agreement between a trade union and an employer which discrim¬ 
inates against certain members is a lawful act carried out by 
lawful means if it can be shown that the union’s predominant pur¬ 
pose is the furtherance of the interest of its members®*^ 

2. Workers may lawfully combine to refuse ta admit a person, to mion 

membership if there is an absence of malicious intention. In 

2 

C-raham V. Bricklayers' an d Masons' Union a union had refused to 
admit the plaintiff to membership and had threatened to strike 
if his employer continued to employ him® It was held that the 
union was pursuing a lawful object by lawful means and that its 
conduct was therefore not actionable. 

5* A combination to have a workman discharged or prevent his re-empl¬ 
oyment is actionable if done without justification*'^ 

4* In general if a combination contravenes provisions of the Crim¬ 
inal Code in advancing its own interests its conduct is action- 


1. Corbett V. C fl n. Nat’l, Printing Trades Union , (1945) 4 D.L.R. 44l 

2. ~9 W.L.R* 475 

5. Thompson V. Ryall and Cunningham (1924) 4 D.L.R. 778 (Man.) 








... . ■' t . K v * 4 , OilJ ■ v'*' 

. i , . ■■ ■ • - ■ ■ - -• ■■ ■ ■ * ■ [ 

■ 

*•*•'•* * 

- 

i: ■ • •: ;| 

* 

'V. (A , 

' 

Ami 

■■ 

■ 

« 




- 




1 




* 


- 





* 

1 


- 


- 


— 


■ 



, 

, , , 





80/ 

able, 

5, A combination to induce a breach of contract is unlawful and the ob- 

1 

ject of the persons, so combining is immaterial as a defence. 

In summary, the activities of a combination are actionable if 

1. lawful means are used to further an unlawful end, 

2. unlawful means are used to further a lawful end, 

5* unlawful means are used to further an unlawful end. 

It may be concluded that the same suggestions as have been made in 

2 

respect to criminal conspiracy would be applicable here. The definit¬ 
ion of what constitutes a "lawful end" should be made by the Legislatures 
rather than the courts and that the scope of what constitutes lawful act¬ 
ivities of trade unions through secondary pressures should be expanded 
by statute. 


1. Cotter V. Osborne (1908), 8 W.L.R. 451 and Fokuhl V. Raymond (1948 ) 
5 D.L.R. R. 11 

2. infra pp. 75-77 




. : •' 0 •' * '■ ' 

. 

' 

. 

. 

. -, i; s , , . ■ - ; *xc d eac-Jtcuj *lo 00i vi: 



. ... 






81 


D. Picketing 

It must be admitted at the outset that it is impossible for the 

layman to make an adequate analysis of the law relating to picketing as 
1 

it exists in Canada, This fact alone indicates the need for further 
statutory definition of the limits within which this form of economic 
activity may lawfully be carried on. This section will be concerned 
merely with pointing out some of the more obvious difficulties w.ich 
arise when the common law concepts of a l aisser-faire society are 
applied to modern industrial conflict and to suggest a possible re¬ 
form of the situation as it now exists. 

Picketing has been defined as "watching or spying or establishing 
a system of watching and surveillance, of propaganda, or practices and 
manoeuvres with a view to rendering effective the boycotting of an in- 

p 

dustrial establishment by preventing the continuance of work," Picket¬ 
ing has three objects; to inform those otherwise unaware that there is 
a strike in a particular firm, to persuade workers to join the strike 
and to by persuasion, or in some cases more forcible means to prevent 
non-striking perso s from going to work in the establishment in which 
the strike is being held.' 

As both Canadian judicial decisions and Canadian legislation have 
been affected directly by British statute and common law it is necessary 
to outline briefly the legal position as it has evolved in England. 

After a series of decisions restrictive of trade union activity the 


1. The basic references for this section are; The haw of Picketing in 
Canada , I and II, Jacob Einkleman, U, of T. Law Journal, Vol. 2 
pp. 67-102 and 3kk-360; Labour Law ; 1925-19^7 > Bora Laskin XXVI 
C.B.R. pp, 289-299# Picketing , 57 Canadian Criminal Cases pp. l-8lj 
and A.C. Crysler, Labour Pelstions and Precedents pp. 27-52. 

2. Crysler p. 29 

5. Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences - 195^ Vo. XIV p. 22 quoted 
in Finkleman o p. cit, p. 66, 












U'ii'.J \ ‘ 







4 


' 

■ • ■ 5? ! 0 -■ /?' : f ■■ , . 

' 






. 












. ■ 










. 

. 












v :V:/j; j C i v. : - 


vU . iet O'; 






0 ^ 


. • • 

iC;. ' : - .. .» c ;■ , ;■■■ ( y> t • 

■ . 






- 






82 


Conspiracy and Protection of Property Act was enacted in 1875 one section 
of which read; 

’’Attending at or ne r the house or place where a person resides, or 
works, or carries on business or happens to be, or the approach to such 
house or place in order merely to obtain or to communicate information, 
shall not be deemed a watching or besetting within the meaning of this 
sections.” 

This section freed trade unions from the last vestige of the crimin¬ 
al law which applied special liabilities upon labour. Employers then 
began to bring civil actions against unions but attention was not focused 

on this situation till the famous judgment of the House of Lords in the 
2 

Taff-Vale Case. I n 1906 the Liberal Government was forced to yield to 

the pressure of the trade unions and their much-augmented representation 

in Parliament by enacting legislation of a positive nature assuring 

workers the right to picket peacefully. S.2 of the Tra des Di s putes Act ^ 

reads as follows; 
n 

(1) It shall be lawful for one or more persons acting in their 

own behalf or on behalf of a trade unions or of an individual 

' -• 

employer or firm in contemplation or furtherance of -3. trade 
dispute, to attend at or near a house or place where a person 
resides or works or carries on business dr' happens to be, if 
they so attend merely for the purpose of peacefully obtaining 
or communicating information or of peacefully persuading any 
person to work or abstain from working.” 

In 1927 as a result of the General strike of the previous year the 

4 

Trade Disputes and Trade Unions Act was enacted which substantially cur¬ 
tailed the privileges of labour, including the right to picket peacefully. 

This Act was repealed in 194-5. 

1. 58 and 59 Victoria C. 86 

2. Taff-Vale Railway Company V. Amalgamated Society of Railway Servants 

(1901) A.C. 426 
5. 6 Ed. VII C. 47 
4. 17 and 18 Geoo V., C 22 













,. . ' • t 

t ' ■■ • 

■ 

; 

» 



... 


■ 


" • v i/J' n ■ 




1 


. 

: 

' 

l 

■ ■ t : -i.0 - 1U si/'COvv 1C SfttiawT 

' 

, 

„ 

. 

. . " • . w O'- • ' 

. 

. 

, * 

. . 













85. 


The two leading, and seeimgly contradictory, cases which have con¬ 
tributed most to the Canadian law of picketing were both decided before 
the enactment of the Trades Disputes Ac t of 1906 when the Canadian Stat¬ 
ute Law was substantially the same as that of Britain. The implication 
of Ly ons V. Wilkins ^ - was that peaceful picketing was i pso fact o a 
nuisance at common law. A contradictory decision was rendered by a court 

of coordinate jurisdiction in Ward, Lock and Company (Limited) V. 

’ 2 

Operative Printers 1 As sistant s Society when it was laid down that 

picketing per se was a criminal offense only in cases in which a 

civil remedy for tort existed. As Prof. Finkelman pointed out, most 

Canadian cases prior to 193^ were decided on the basis of the earlier 

3 

and more restrictive decision. 

In I 876 the Parliament of Canada enacted legislation based sub¬ 
stantially on the Conspiracy and Protection o f Property Ac t. When the 
criminal law was consolidated into the Criminal Code the “peaceful 
picketing 11 clause was ommitted and in spite of the persistent protests 
of labour was not restored until 193^ when S.501 (9) was enacted. 

The ommission of this clause was emphasized by judges, who, in 
many cases held that all picketing was illegal. The relevant provis¬ 
ions of the Criminal Code concerning picketing are now contained in 
S. 501 as follows: 

“Everyone is guilty of an offence....who wrongfully and without law 
ful authority, with a view to compel any other person to abstain 
from doing anything which he has a lawful right to do, or to do 
anything from which he has a lawful right to abstain, 

1. (1896) 1 Ch. 811 

2. (1906) 22 T.L.R, 327 

3 * Finkleman - op. cit. p. 91 n* 
















w. 

(a) uses violence to such other person, or his wife or chil dren, 
or injures his property, or 

(b) intimidates such other person, or his wife or children, by 
threats of using violence to him, her or any of them, or of 
injuring his property, or 

(c) persistently follows any other person about from place to 
place, or 

(d) hides any tools, clothes or other property used by such other 
persons, or deprives him of, or hinders him in, the use there¬ 
of, or 

(e) with one or more other persons, follows such other person, in 
a disorderly manner, in or through any street or road, or 

(f) besets or watches the house or other place where such other 
person works, or carries on business or happens to be, 

(g) attending at or near or approaching to such house or other 
place as aforesaid, in order merely to obtain or communicate 

infomatinn, shall not be deemed a watching or besetting with¬ 
in the meaning of this section® 111 

Of all the Provinces, only British Columbia has enacted legislation 
specifically related to picketing. Anticipating the British Act of 1906 
the B.C. Legislature relieved trade unions from civil suits and injunct¬ 
ions stemming from peaceful picketing.’*’ 

2 

According to Prof® Laskin there were no criminal prosecutions for 
picketing before superior courts in Canada between the enactment of 
S 50l(9) in 195^ and 194-7 and I can find none since the latter date. 

A few of the principles which have emerged in criminal cases, 
before Canadian courts may be listed briefly: 

1. R.S.B.C. 1936, C 4 289 , S.g , 

2 . op. cit. p. 289 

3* Crysler pp. 27-52 




.. ' b' ■ , S'; ; ,b lob. (©) 




c ■ 

' 

■ b • V. • : 

' ■ 1 i. • .' /(.££■■ 0 0 :?>y; 'O'b 


. 

• 

. 


• ■ 

. 

0 : . !-r . 



. . , 

. '. . .. • . • b . 01 oii: 10 on' so■ 

■ . b "■ ;■ 

... ‘ ■ . 

..o*; .. . • : ' 

' 

t 





. 

- 

v.; .' Or. ' 

* 




■ 


. . 


■ { * 

* ■: , " / ■ ^ 

t ■■ b ov 1 (hicba ? 4qi:o0iTq obb ‘:io ; 

i 





85, 


1. A striker has no more justification for picketing than he ob¬ 
tains by the common-law right of every individual to go about his busin- 

1 

ess in a peaceable way. 

2. Picketing which constitutes "practical compulsion" by moral 
force is a violation of S 501 (f) of the Criminal Code even though phy¬ 
sical force is not used or threatened. In the only case involving pick- 

2 

eting which has come before the Supreme Court it was decided that con¬ 
tinual picketing by day and by night in order to persuade non-striking 
workers not to work was an illegal "watching and besetting" and that 
picketing which constituted an unlawful assembly, a nuisance or a tres¬ 
pass is an offence against S. 501 (f). 

5* Any hindrance or molestation of non-striking workers is un¬ 
lawful.^ 

4. Picketing otherwise a criminal offense is not justified by 

4 

the existence of a contract. In R.V . Blackawl it was decided that 
watch ng or besetting a theatre in order to compel the mana ement to 
.ire union musicians was not justified by the fact that there was a 
contract between the management and the musicians' union. 

5. The excuses which 3. 501 (g) might afford to picketing at a 

place of business are not available in the case of picketing at a 

. . 5 

residence. 

6. Picketing is restrainable by injunction and where property 
rights are affected an injunction will lie notwithstanding that the 
acts are also criminal. 6 

1. Rex V. Russell (1920) W.W.R. 624 

2. R»V. Reners (l926) W.W.R, 810 

5* R>V. Doherty and Stewart (1946) 4 D.L.R. 686 

4. “(1925) ^ W.W.R. 5W 

5. R.V, Slford (1947), $7 C.C.C. 572 (Qnt.) 

6. Hurtip V. Reiss (1957) 5 W.W.R. at 558 




















■ 



























* 

* 

- 

. 

. 


* * 

, 



. 

* * 

. . 











86. 


It is almost impossible to lay down any general principle governing 
the limits to which picketers may lawfully go in persuading the public 
not to patronize a particular business. 

The civil law relating to picketing is even more complex than that 
affecting criminal prosecutions. Prof. Laskin puts it thus.^ 

11 The civil cases on picketing which have come before the courts in 
Canada in the past quarter century are a veritable wonderland of 
confusion so far as any consistent theory of liability is concerned. 
Thus liability has been based upon (1) civil conspiracy to injure 
(2) The commission of individual acts of wrong doing (5) placards 
carrying defamatory statements or statements of opinion rather than 
of fact (4) coercion, threats or intimidation (5) compulsion of 
patrons of the employer (6) violation of section 501 of the Crimin¬ 
al Code. Some cases have stated that ’’peaceful picketing” is law¬ 
ful without defining the term; at least one judge has taken the view 
that ’’peaceful picketing” is a contradiction in terms. For some 
courts patrolling is an acceptable element of picketing, for others 
patrolling of an organized and consistent character is unlawful as 
constituting intimidation or coercion. No Canadian case contains 
any clear-cut announcement that persuasion of members of the public 
is permissible on the picket line; but there are cases which say 
categorically it is not.” 

A yet more significant point of confusion is whether picketing is 

lawful in the absence of a strike, although there must be a labour dis- 

2 

pute in existence. In a 1959 case it was held that because no labour di s- 
pute existed between an employer and a trade union that had no previous 
relationship with him picketing by workers was unlawful and was enjoined 

1 . op. cit. p. 29^ 

2. Besler V, Matthews (1959) I D.L.R. 499 



. '• 


' ■ ■ i ■ J por ;■ * o' I 

. i ' 

* 


rj; 






' 


Mr O' 








■ 


•3£-.,r .rffiTvy 
}j 

• f 

; r?oo\ o : rfi‘ (£) 

■ • 










■ 






























87 


1 

by injunction. However in Canadian Dairies Ltd., J. Seggie it was de¬ 
cided that picketing was lawful in the absence of a strike. Rather ob¬ 
viously the implication of the former case is that unions are deprived 
of a valuable economic weapon in not being able to picket lawfully an es¬ 
tablishment to compel unionism. 

The Seggie case is also significant for the valiant attempt of 
MacKay J. to confine civil liability for picketing to three situations, 

(a) if it is featured by defamatory statements, 

(b) if it is carried on in such manner as to disclose a purpose 
other than peacefully obtaining or giving information, 

(c) if it is a part of conspiracy to injure. 

Although these limitations are helpful, it is true, as Prof. Laskin 
2 

points out, that it is far from a complete and satisfactory definition 
of the lawful limits of picketing. There are other torts besides de¬ 
famation which may make picketing unlawful. The limits of peaceful 
persuasion, especially persuasion of the general public, are still un¬ 
satisfactorily defined. 

The general situation is unsatisfactory for several reasons: 

(a) It makes arbitrariness on the part of judiciary inevitable. 

If an employer believes that his v/orkers are engaged in ill¬ 
egal picketing in the course of a strike his normal course 
of action is to apply to a judge for an injunction. Whether 
an injunction is granted or withheld will inevitably depend 
on the personal predilections of the judge as to what consti- 
tutes peaceful picketing.' This brings us dangerously close 

1. (l°4o) 4 D.L.R. 725 

2 . op. cit p. 295 

5. From a conversation with Mr. J. Cohen, B.A. L.l.B. of Calgary 
on this matter I should judge that many injunctions are framed 
in very sweeping terms which makes the continuance of effective 
picketing im:ossible. 






. 

. 

' 

♦ 

■ 

« 

- 

- 

* 

« ; 

t t 

. l : 

* 

- 

. 

.... 

. 

. 





88. 


to the totalitarian concept of a government of men rather than 
of laws. 

(b) The present restrictive interpret&ions of the limits of peaceful 
picketing made by the judiciary deprive unions of a legitimate and 
necessary method of publicizing facts and opinions in labour dis¬ 
putes. The decisions since 1957 of the United States Supreme 
Court which have declared that peaceful picketing is a form of 
free speech as guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment to the Con¬ 
stitution are inspiring attempts to apply the traditional con- 

1 

cepts of civil rights to contemporary economic problems. jt 
should be obvious that in Canadian society the means whereby 
labour organizations can present facte and opinions during a 
labour dispute are extremely limited and that the means of mass 
communication are to an overwhelming degree in the hands of 
those who are hostile to the trade union movement. In the interests 
of justice and of the freest possible dissemination of information 
on public questions our society should "lean over backwards” in 
permitting labour the widest possible latitude consistent with 
public order in bringing its case before the citizenry , The 
courts have, on the other hand-held picKeting in some cases un¬ 
lawful because the pickets carried signs declaring that an em- 

2 

ployer was "unfair to organized labour". It is hard to believe 
that the same words in any other context would provide a basis 
of successful actions for libel or defamation. 

(c) The situation is intolerably confused in regard to the legality 
or otherwise of picketing in illegal strikes or in aid of sympath- 

1 . 


2 


The American Constitution - A.H. Kelly and W.A. Harbison - 
New York, 19^8 pp. 795-796 

Finkleman - pp. 101-101 







■ 

' 

_ 

* 

> 

' 

- 

. 

- ' - 

. 

, 

. Vi:: 

—•: : ' . t ■ V .' ' ■.•'•! .. . 

, 

. 

. . . * ■ • 

. . , 

. 








89 


etic strikes or boycotts. In Toronto very recently a judge refused 

to grant an injunction against picketing in an allegedly illegal 

strike because the Provincial Labour Relations Board was the proper 

1 

authority to declare the lawful nature or otherwise of a strike. 

This situation could no doubt occur in other Provinces than Ontario. 
There is a desperate need for statutory clarification of the limits 
of lawful picketing. Satisfactory legislation would include the follow¬ 
ing*. 

(a) A recognition that picketing apart from the use of violence,intimida¬ 
tion and defamation is a necessary weapon of organized labour in 
legal strikes. 

(b) Further statutory clarification of just what actions of picketers 
constitute unlawful watching and besetting, intimidation, coercion 
and nuisance ,especially so far as these affect the picketers in 
their relation to the general public, 

(c) The application of the laws of libel, slander and defamation to 
the publicity methods used by picketers on the same basis that 
these laws are applied to the expression of facts and opinions in 
other contexts, 

(d) The statutory recognition of the lawfulness of peaceful picketing 
as defined by legislation in aid of sympathetic strikes and boy¬ 
cotts, 

(e) Provisions giving authority to the judiciary to issue injunctions 
against picketing in strikes in which the judge by careful appli¬ 
cation of the relevant statutes to the particular situation finds 
that such strike is illegal, 

(f) A clarification of the law of agency relating to picketing so 
that no national or local union could be made liable for the un¬ 
authorized acts of its members on the picket line. 

1. S aturday Night June 5, 1951 p. 6 





* ■ 

'• ; - ■'? .'••• & y o': \ 

■ . , . „ ' ■ t C . > ' -*■ '■ 

, 

■ 

* 

. : ^ ■ ‘ •. r /. / . ■', 

' 

♦ 

•: - tj snci ( ^ ’ i ' • . < 

i . : . • t •. ' . 

. 

I 'V .... ■■ iuU Is . 'll I 

hn : t J 

i. . 

■ 

“ . y- 

■ 

, ‘ ' ■' 

' 

LiI h • - - ■ : 

- . ' U ■■ MS - 







90 


Chapter III 

Collective Bargaining Legislation in Canada 

A. Canadian Labour Law Relating to the Conciliation and Arbitration of 

Industrial Disputes before 19*7o 

The enactment in 1957 of the Trade Union Act 1 and the Industrial Con- 
2 

ciliation and Arbitration Act by the Nova Scotia and British Columbia Leg¬ 
islatures respectively making it compulsory for employers to bargain collect¬ 
ively with unions representing a majority of their employees and providing 
penalties for 'failing to do so, marked the end of one era and the beginning 
of another in Canadian labour le islation. Up until that time both Dominion 
and Provincial enactments pertaining to trade disputes had been based upon 
voluntary conciliation or in some cases compulsory conciliation and investiga¬ 
tion with a specified period during which strikes and lockouts were illegal. 
Pre-1957 legislation rested on three implicit assumptions: 

1. A commendable faith in the efficacy of government conciliators to 
obviate the differences between employers and workers, 

2. A belief that the provision of a "cooling off" period during which 
strikes and lockouts were illegal might forestall precipitate action 
on the part of either party. 

5. A hope that the publication of the reports of conciliation and arbi¬ 
tration boards would bring public opinion behind reasonable settle¬ 
ments of industrial disputes and discourage irresponsible action by 
parties to them. 

The basis of Canadian labour legislation since 1957 rests on the theory 
that the way to industrial peace lies in compulsory collective bargaining with 
governments attempting by legislation to equalize the bargaining power of 
labour and management in particular businesses and industries. The earlier 
principles of compulsory investigation and arbitration have been combined 
with mandatory bargaining between employees and government-certified agents 

1. Statutes of Nova Scotia, 1957-0 6 

2. Statutes of B.C. 1957 - C 51 












~ • ■■ ■- •' ■ •••' 

‘ 

• - .u:i. j 


. 




' 

4 ■ ' .. . . 

* 

* 

- 

* • 










of employees* In brief we have in Canada swung from the British to the Amer¬ 
ican tradition in industrial relations legislation*' 1 ’ 

The earliest statutory provisions for the settlement of industrial disputes 
were made by Ontario in 1875* The Act in question provided for local boards 
of conciliation to be set up between employers and employees. Significantly, 
the Act restricted the scope of the boards to disputes not involving any ques¬ 
tion of wages. Except for an 1888 enactment of Nova Scotia providing for 
compulsory arbitration^the earlier acts had few compulsory features and most 
had become dead-letters long before they were repealed*^ 

The Trades Disputes Act enacted by the Legislative Assembly of Quebec in 
1901 was typical of the early voluntary conciliation and arbitration acts* 

The Act dealt with disputes involving not less than ten workers in the same 
business. It was provided that the appointed Registrar of Conciliation and 
Arbitration could on his own initiative ( or at the request of an employer 
or at least five employees to a dispute or at the request of the mayor of the 
municipality in which the dispute took place) attempt to mediate differences 
relating to wages, hours of work, conditions of sanitation and ventilation 
at the place of work or the dismissal of employees for their connection 
with labour organizations. If mediation failed the dispute might be submitted 
to conciliation, and if this procedure failed to bring about an agreement, 
either or both parties might request that an arbitration board be appointed* 


1* British collective bargaining legislation since 1871 has been essentially 
“voluntaristic M in nature as such bargaining between labour and management has 
long been accepted as a normal feature of British life. The National Labou r 
Rel ations Ac t of 1955 (the Wa gner Act ) in the U.S. made collective bargaining 
mandatory and redressed the balance in favour of labour. The avowed object 
of the Taft-Hartley Act of 19^7 was to again equalize bargaining power by 
curbing certain labour practises* 

2* C onciliation Law and Practice in Canada - Ronald Hooper - Labour G azet te 
September 1950 p. 1^95 


5. Statutes of Quebec 1901 - C 










u.Ul uo ;iex, rsft i v :iu\r 


' ■ 


■ . 


. 

1 oil. -o'"; &h& 

■ ' 

'.0 

J v 

; 


• ■ -:y, ■ ’ . ■ ■' j^ .*:• i.oo;; o -O o:o o- o ot tjJ:*;J JoA ou: 

. 

, .■ l . . 1} V. ■ A V J'O1.• £ .. 1 ’O ^ H*. J .Olv ; 1• ' ’£ .1 .• 1 '£■ .ji-'OO 

, ■: • • 

: ; e . . v ■. ■ ‘ 

» 

o... , j ■. 000 :r:.J J r .; :: v.- . J. •: l OJJ0Jo iooh J 0 ' O'. 1 

" ' - ’ . J *- ' - * ■ r -- 

id n 

• ■ ■ ... ■ *£ 10 ' i ■ 

■ ■ ' i ■ J &■ rioiri 

O 4 *t ■ ■ 


ffO 

IJ C-O ■.0 "i d: o\;o! ; ve 

? X .i 


10 :hvw 

. 

0.0 do 

' 


' 

* 

i 

• 

; •■: !. A&sm 


• 

_ . 

>0'* 

, 

■ 

io ro© 

. 



• 

- ' 

; rU' -:i 



* 

. .J 0;. : . _ J; . /•:.<■! SJ.; S1SJJ ri aj. ’’ y I * rv' i fiul ov 

. . 

* . 

vfi' i©wo; . ii£xvi b<S .s 1 1.sup# 0 .;; y• 

eJJ'v;v;V: "f/./j'i.; ■ - 10.. 0]! .bl .ajoH - £sbi ; :<t 


■ d-:: ■ 

.. ' ■ • 

J 0 J'D •: .- ..oii.i ■ 

, ■ 

* 

, 


. ,' ... i : ' . 

'J. ■ J.h: -..o e- 





92 


The board of arbitration was to consist of three British subjects appointed by 
the Minister concerned, one on the recommendation of each party to the dispute 
and the third on the recommendation of the other two. The boards thus set up 
were to hold public sittings and were to submit their report within one year 
of their appointment. It was further provided that upon the request of either 
party to a dispute and upon the approval of the board itself the report of 
an arbitration board could be made public through the .Quebec Official Gazet te. 

The Dominion entered the field of conciliation when in 1900 the Concil ¬ 
i ation Act was passed. This Act provided for the establishment of the Depart¬ 
ment of Labour and had as its objects the conciliation of labour disputes 
through the voluntary action of the parties themselves, 

A protracted dispute on the Canadian Pacific Railway in 1902 led to the 
introduction in Parliament of a bill known as the Railway Arbitration Bil l 
a compulsory arbitration measure applied to disputes between railway companies 
and their employees. Because of widespread opposition to the principle of 
compulsory arbitration the bill was never enacted and in 1905 the Minister of 

Labour introduced a ore moderate bill which came into the statute books as 

2 

the Railway Labour Disputes Act , The Act provided that where any dispute 
between any railway company and its employees made a strike or lockout likely 
the Minister of Labour could on his own initiative or at the request of any 
party to the dispute or any municipal corporation directly affected appoint 
a conciliation committee of three members, one to be appointed on the recomm¬ 
endation of each party and the third on the recommendation of the other two. 

If the conciliation committee failed to bring about a settlement, the Minister 
might at his own discretion refer the dispute to an arbitration board which 
might, upon the agreement of both parties, have the same members as had the 


1 . op. cit. pp.1497-1^98 
2* Statutes of Canada, 1905, C.55. 











95 


conciliation committee. 

The Conciliation Act of 1900 and the Ra ilway Labour Disputes Act of 1905 
wer in 1906 consolidated in the Conciliation and Labour Act* - which is still 
in effect. The Act provides that where a labour dispute exists in any but 
the railway industry the Minister of Labour may on the application of the 
workers or employers appoint a conciliator and on the application of both 
parties appoint an arbitrator or arbitrators. In the case of a railway dis¬ 
pute which threatens to disrupt services the Minister on his own initiative 
or at the request of any municipal corporation affected by the difference may 
appoint a committee of conciliation, mediation and arbitration. Such committee 
is to'be composed of one employer representative, one workers' representative 
and a third person appointed by the other two or by the Minister in case they 
cannot agree. If the committee fails to bring about an amicable settlement 
the Minister may on his own initiative refer the difference to arbitration. 

For the information of the public and of Parliament it is provided that the 
report of the arbitration committee must be published in the Labour Gazett e 
without delay. In the case of Government Railways the Minister may confer 
his authority to appoint conciliators or arbitrators upon the Lieutenant- 

Governors-in Council of the Provinces of Quebec, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick 

2 

or Prince Edward Island. 

A prolonged strike of Alberta coal miners in 1906 brought to the atten¬ 
tion of Canadians the fact that the public interest required some more pos¬ 
itive approach by government to disputes in industries vital to the general 
welfare. Under the guidance of Mr. W.L. Mackenzie King, then Deputy Minister 
of Labour in the Federal Government, the Industrial Disputes Investigation 
Act was in 1907 enacted by the Parliament of Canada. The Act as amended 

1. Revised Statutes of Canada 1927 C.110 

2. I have not been able to discover why only these Provinces are named 
in the act. 








































- 














. 


. 1 

■ 

- 

♦ 

- 






•I. n':T •• 

< ,r, : I . ; 

. * 









94 


from time to time was in effect until the proclamation of P.C. 100^ in 1944 
and its basic features have been retained in the Industri a l Relations and D is¬ 
putes Investigation Act of 1948, The principles of compulsory investigation 
and of the reliance on public opinion as a final court of appeal which had 
formed the basis of the Railway Labour Disputes Act were reinforced by the 
further coercive provision prohibiting strikes and lockouts till after in¬ 
vestigation, Furthermore the 190? Act recognized a distinction between in¬ 
dustries in w ich a work stoppage would immediately involve the public in¬ 
terest and those not of such vital concern by bringing under the compulsory 
provisions only public utility and mining industries. The public interest 
was further protected by a 1918 amendment which empowered the Minister of 
Labour to appoint a conciliation board at the request of any municipality 
interested in a dispute in the covered industries or upon his own initia¬ 
tive, a further recognition of Mr. King's frequently quoted statement that 
"in any civilized community private rights should cease when they become 
public wrongs." 

The I.D.I. Act of 1907 provided for boards of conciliation appointed 
by the Minister of Labour, one member on the recommendation of each party to 
the dispute and the third by agreement between the other two or failing 
agreement, by the Minister. It was provided that if the disputants failed 
to settle the differences underlying the dispute the board was empowered to 
make recommendations for the settling of such dispute and majority and min¬ 
ority reports were to be made public. Not until the report has been de¬ 
livered to the parties affected were they free to alter the conditions of 
employment with respect to wages or hours regarding which there was a dis¬ 
pute and thirty days notice was to be given by the party desiring the change. 
The Act provided also that if the parties agreed in writing to be bound by 
the award it might be made a rule of court of record and enforceable at law. 









95 , 


It was declared illegal for an employer in the covered industries to lock¬ 
out his employees or for workmen to strike prior to or during a reference 
to a board of conciliation and investigation. The Act provided heavy pen¬ 
alties for contravention, an employer was liable for a fine of from five 
hundred to one thousand dollars for each day that an illegal lockout existed 
and an employee illegally on strike was liable to a fine from ten to fifty 
dollars for each day or part of a day he was on strike. 

Provision was also made in the Act for its voluntary application to dis¬ 
putes otherwise without its scope. In the latter years of the Act’s oper¬ 
ation many disputes of this nature were submitted to conciliation with 
the consent of both parties.’*’ 

The constitutional validity of the I.D.I. Act was denied by the Judicial 

2 

Committee of the Privy Council in 1925, and in the same year Parliament re¬ 
enacted the legislation to bring it into harmony with the decision in 
the Snider case.''’ The new Act was held to apply not only to disputes in in¬ 
dustries witfin the exclusive legislative jurisdiction of the Dominion but 
also those within Provincial competence which by the legislation of Provin¬ 
cial Legislature were made subject to the provisions of the Act. Between 1925 
amd 1952 all the Provinces except Prince Edward Island enacted laws to bring 

4 

the I.D.I. Act into force within their respective jurisdictions. 

The Industrial Disputes Investigation Act was perhaps one of the most 
effective enactments making for industrial peace which has ever existed in 
any country. Its basic provisions survived for thirty-seven years, includ¬ 
ing their extension in two World Wars, and are now extant in the 1948 Indus ¬ 
trial Relations and Disputes Investigation Act and in Provincial collective 

1. Government Inter v ention in L abour Di s putes in Canada p. 298 

in Judicial Proceedings respecting the Constitutional Validity of 
I.D.I. let in Canada - Dept, of Labour 1925 

2. infra pp. 27-29 

% Statutes of Canada, 1925 - c l4 

4. Fifty Years of Labour Legislation in Canada - Edith Lorentsen 
and Evelyn Woolner - Labour Gazette Sept. 1950, p. 1429 





















’ 
















- 

t 






■ ■■ 












, 






1 

■ 

' 








'.! : ■ i; 1 j 

















- - 

* 








96 


bargaining statutes. The suspicious attitude to the Act adopted by labour 
in the years immediately after 1907 gave way after 1917 to a persistent de¬ 
mand by the Trades and Labour Congress that the provisions be extended to 

1 

other classes of employees. j n the first thirty years of the Act's oper¬ 
ation there were some 866 applications for boards of conciliation (in I 65 
cases such disputes were not clearly within the direct scope of the Act 
i.e. voluntary conciliation on the agreement of both parties occurred) 
and in all but 59, or 4.5% of the cases strikes were averted* The compul¬ 
sory investigation and conciliation of industrial disputes coupled with a 
prohibition against work stoppages during the period when conciliation pro¬ 
ceedings were going on has been Canada's distinctive contribution to in¬ 
dustrial disputes legislation and in particular the "cooling-off" period 
has found its way into the labour enactments of many American States®^ 

In 1919 the Legislature of Manitoba enacted the Industrial Conciliation 
Act. Until that time no legislative action had been taken in the Prov¬ 
ince to deal with labour disputes although the Bureau of Labour apparently 
had been called upon many times to provide conciliation and mediation 

4 

services. The Act provided for a Joint Council of Industry composed of 
five persons to hold office during the pleasure of the Lieutenant-Gover¬ 
nor in Council. Employers' and employees organizations were given the 
right to nominate two members each and the fifth member was to be an "im¬ 
partial" person. In addition to its power to investigate matters of wages, 
cost of living, unemployment, housing and other matters of industrial 
concern, the council was given the power to act as a board of arbitration 
at the request of parties concerned to a dispute. There was no compulsory 
reference of disputes to the council and no enforcement of awards by law* 

1* Government In~ervention in Labour Disputes in Canada - Dept, of Labour 
1925 - p* 299 

2* Department of Labour - Annual Report 1957, p.45 
5* State Experiments in Lab o r Relations Legislation - Dale Yoder 
Annals of the Amer i can Academy of Political and Social Science 
Nov. 1946 - pp. 155-154 

4. Government Intervention in Labour Disputes in Canada - p. 294 


















•• . 






« 

* 




, 






* 

. 

. ' <'■ : • •. •' .• i: vi :c 

' 






' 


. 




. 










. 

■ c-vi. 


» 






4 

* 

. 

-• 












97 


The Act was in force for only two years and at the 1922 session of the Legis¬ 
lature was so reduced as to make the provisions inoperative. 

In the Province of Quebec the interest of the public in industrial peace 
was recognized earlier and more clearly than in the other Provinces. In 
part perhaps this is a reflection of the social teachings of the Catholic 
Church which have stressed social solidarity and have always rejected the 
laisser-faire concepts of free contract as being a field in which state in¬ 
terference was unjustifiable. In 1921 the Quebec Legislative Assembly en¬ 
acted the Municipal Strike and Lockout Act ^ dealing with disputes between 
any municipal authority and policemen, firemen, waterworks employees or 
garbage workers if at least tw&ntyfive persons were employed in any one 
of these classes. The statute provided for compulsory references to arbi¬ 
tration in disputes involving wages, hours of labour or discrimination ag¬ 
ainst union members and prohibited under penalties strikes or lockouts befb re 

the dispute was thus submitted. There were no provisions for enforcment of 

2 

the arbitration award. Jn 1924 the Professional Syndicates Act was en¬ 
acted and is dtill in effect. The Act provided for the voluntary forma¬ 
tion of twenty or more employees in the same trade, profession or busin¬ 
ess into a syndicate which in effect could become certified bargaining 
agencies for their members by registration with the Provincial Secretary. 

Any collective labour agreement entered into by a syndicate was to be en¬ 
forceable at law and the syndicate might hold property and sue or be sued as 

. 4 

a judicial person. The Quebec Labour Agreements Extension Act of 1954 


1. Statutes of Quebec 1921, C.46, amended 1922, C.40 

2, As will be seen these provisions followed closely that of the I.D.I. 
Act. In general it appears that municipal corporations were unwilling 
to cooperate in submitting disputes with their employees to the Fed¬ 
eral conciliation service. Government Intervention in Labour Disputes 

in Canada pp. 296-299 

5. Revised Statutes of Quebec 1941, 0.162 
4. Revised Statutes of Quebec 1.41, C.I 65 

















’ 

' 






V :v V , . ■ 

- 














\tn& -is, 

, 

« 

. 




. 


“ * , . 0 t . . i o:. 


. 




, 


i ''■■■■ ' Or 

t r! •. :: c 






- 









98 


provides for the application of the wages, hours and apprenticeship terms of 
a collective agreement to non-parties in the same industry, trade or occupa¬ 
tion in any region or in the Province as a whole by order of the Lieutenant- 
Governor in 'Council., The collective agreements thus made obligatory are en¬ 
forced by joint "parity committees" of employers and employees which may make 
a compulsory levy for administrative expenses on both parties and which may 
sue for unpaid wages. A number of agreements made in particular businesses 
have been extended to the whole Province in the construction, boot and shoe, 
fur, clothing, printing, garage and service station industries.‘ L In 1948 

2 

some 204, 428 workers were employed under agreements extended by the Act. 

This represented 16.8 per cent of all workers covered by collective agree- 
ments in Canada in 1948 and 12.2 per cent of the Quebec working force/ 

4 

Aside from sections of the Alb erta Labour Act enacted in 1947 no other 
Canadian government has in peace time enacted legislation of this type al¬ 
though it is a normal practice in some industries in the United Kingdom and 

5 

in New Zealand, South Africa and Australia. 


1. Number of Workers Affected by Collective Agreements in Canada by Indus ¬ 

try, 1948. Dept, of Labour Publication~ 1950 p.4 

2. op. cit. p.5 

y. 1948 Canada Year Book p, 

4. Sections 46 to 56 of ""this Act (Statutes of Alberta, 1947, C 8) provide 
that upon petition of employers or workers in a particular industry 

in a zone defined by the Minister the Minister may call a conference 
of all workers and employers in the industry within the zone to form¬ 
ulate certain industrial standards and, if this is agreed upon by 
a majority of employers and employees in the industry in the zone, it 
may be made binding on all by Ministerial Order. 

5. Crysler p. 45 







4 










. 





. 








- 

5. ' 




« 



t t t 

• 






, 

. 

, 










„ 

' * • . 


, 

* 




In Alberta the Alberta Labour Disputes Act was enacted in 1926 to provide 


for machinery for settling industrial disputes* The Alberta legislation was 

modelled upon the Industrial Disputes Investig ation Act, whose validity had 

1 

been denied by the Snider decision, except that it did not prohibit strikes 
and lockouts and was made applicable to all industries. In 1928, when the 
Alberta Legislature made the I.D.I. Act applicable to such disputes as were 
iwithin the scope of the Act, the Labour Disputes Act was amended to make it 
,not applicable to disputes not within the Dominion legislation, that is, to 
disputes in industries other than mines and public utilities as defined in 
the I.D.I. Act. The 1926 statute was repealed and replaced by the Concil - 
i iati o n and Arbitration Act of 1958* 

Apart from the enactments of Manitoba, Quebec and Alberta which have 
‘been discussed there was almost no legislation referring to industrial dis- 
[putes brought into existence in Canada between 1907 end 1957* Apart from 
[Quebec, the voluntary conciliation acts of the Provinces fell into desue¬ 
tude and in some cases were repealed. After the validity of the I.D.I. 

'Act of 1907 was challenged in 1925 and a new Act enacted all the Provinces 
[but P.E.I. brought into existence legislation which extended the provisions 
[of the Federal law to disputes within exclusive Provincial jurisdiction. 


jl. infra p.27-29 














* 

. 

... 

. 

. • :.( r' c*i .. - - in « t 




. . . 

: 

' 




- 



*• • * * 

, . 


i "£ 

. 










. 






* • • 











100 . 


Industrial Disputes Legislation in Canada 1957-1945 

In spite of the remarkable success of the I.D.I. Act machinery in the 
promotion of industrial peace, Canada’s industrial disputes legislation as 
it existed in 1957 was by no means adequate to the demands of a modern in¬ 
dustrial economy. Only 584,619 workers were organized in trade unions } 
most of them craft unions of skilled workers. Few of the unskilled and 
semi-skilled employees in manufacturing and primary industries were as yet 
organized. The open shop principle was supported by many employers and the 
demotion or dismissal of workers for union activity was not unusual* Exist¬ 
ing legislation and judicial decisions had made it evident that trade union 

activity which would be effective might subject participants to both civil 

2 

and criminal penalties* 

During World War I the Federal Government issued an Order-in-Council 
forbidding an employer to dismiss an employee because of union activity 
but this progressive measure elapsed automatically at the end of the em¬ 
ergency period and it took labour nearly two decades to win back the position 
it had held in 1918*^ In the mid- 1950 's the drive for compulsory bargaining 
and against discriminat ry treatment from the courts and from employers be¬ 
gan in earnest. The Trades and Labour Congress, no doubt stimulated by the 
growth of unions in number and strength under the National Labour Relations 
Act of 1955 in the United States, agitated for the amendment of the Criminal 

Code to make discrimination against union members unlawful and circulated 

4 

a model draft bill among members of Provincial Legislatures. The central 
points of the draft bill were to render it lawful for workers to organize 

1. 1957 Canada Year Book 

2. Recent Labour Legislation in Canada - Bora Laskin C.B.R. Vol* XXII (1957 
PP 779-780 

5« Logan - Trade Unions in Canada pp 4l4-4l8 
4. Logan - p.~4l6 









. * . ■. 

a;vvjc dwrc .■©'x ad.J '.1:0 f:i 

• r :• >; d : v - ■ .c-j.v .. /ivaoHoi ! 

• 

- 

• 


"I i •... ' ^ - ' • ■' . '> J . ‘i 


. 

C. : . eci tj" V ' 1 . ■ ,• do J Cl'' 

,r - • v-v .. ■ e! seed \:ycc.Ly : bah 

d . ' . 1 x - 

®d$ one >X .va |aa;i t Y.o fret'toqttsjs ©. 

CO 

- ■ J, * .i... ' . X . 

. . ■ 

. * . i Ct: 


XJtvi dJ'Cd 0,t vd V; i.0 Jo ■: joofdijE ,t;i 

. ' • ' 

• 

1 1 onnol-c * ~c , • .-v:. .0- :■ ■ 

: 1 v. da .. {d dC 'a d.' Hid ; ^cri/iC 

Yd 1 vie ... : i ol iVJ "i . ,'J.J .. G ■ -V: /. . I « . to 

■ <r..' . vdd. -I;-., "d-'d da.idv'j Lendl 

f a,>d : e..d : </..[ d rvijvcvdao 

• Vi 

uoiSie oq acd ■ *d do od cad a : o d . i •: 

x-,:.V W ii.i, V ^ /orte,;ii 

Y"’J Cl Y.C \0 0 pO'C.VVVCvO 'SC... GV.d.i. ''V -.' B 1 d 

■ 


: .' * J d 

. ■ - . • 

. 

£d.L£^lidjd .‘V J C:cd .■'• id H add dddriv ;!J 

dioads b:ie yc due.a nt ecicdnn do rfdwo'i.d 

J “i )' 

. 

■d dVv.> <j ; ; Si.OIfV- 

■ ■: . d 1 . © 

* 

dc :w’oa;. 0 vi cvs Hid dd "d loboe a 


• c; Hid ddcii Otid do Guvi:o';., 


* , , , 

. 

vdc-: i ' tfc 

. - 









101 . 


themselves into trade unions for collective bargaining and to make it lawful 

for employees to bargain through officials or representatives of unions. 

Union security was the chief theme of the T.L.C.'s Annual Convention in 

1958 * and the delegates could show in pressing their arguments home that 

strikes in 1958 , after low depression levels, had resulted in the loss of 

more working days than in any year since 1925 and that many of these strikes 

0 

had involved disputes over union security. 

What Prof. Laskin calls "the death of this old policy of negation of 
worker's freedom to combinecame with the passing of the Nova Scotia 
Trade Union Act in 1957* The Act declared it to be lawful for workers to 
join together in trade unions and for the first time in Canadian history 
employers were compelled by law to bargain with trade unions representing a 
majority of their employees under pain of a maximum fine of |100 or 5 © days 
in jail. The writing of clauses restricting union activity in collective 
agreements and the use of threats or intimidation to prevent workers from 
making use of the rights guaranteed to them under the Act were forbidden. 

In the same year the Legislature of British Columbia enacted the I ndus- 
trial Conciliation and Arbitration Act which recognized the legal rights 
of employees to bargain collectively through a negotiating committee. The 
Act made it mandatory upon employers to bargain collectively with such 
committees and provided penalties of up to |500 for each offense if they 
so refused. There was no certification procedure provided byt any group 
of workers was to furnish the Minister with certain information when they 
appointed a bargaining committee. It was also made an unlawful act for an 

1 . op.,cit. p. 4l 6 

2. Canadi a n Strike Trends - J.I. Griffin - Public Affairs July 1948 - P185 
5* 9 p.cit. p. 780 

4. Statutes of Nova Scotia 1957? C. 8 . 

5. Statutes of B.C. 1957,0.51. 










■ 


• • :X : ■ r -■ v " '• 

; i'iCj.S • C" V’ 

-nioi-U* ■. .blwoa. aoi 

XjiiO 8 0.C J !u 

, ■■ . J . 0 : • ' ool ‘i . " ■ , oi; : ... riJs 

?r.\. bob A O ' 

.. o , : .. . . V': ■ ' . "J .■■■■ : ii.t m : ■ ■ X . ", ' or 

* 

' 

Y&- - f ■ .i '•••' • . . • • - 

jj x o' oor* .. v ‘.y 

: ' 

' : ■ 


.... • i ., .,o 

. % . : 

■ *ti - * ■ 

4 ido: n©-iq o r 

o . ob Ov'.' -.v : : ,h ■ -rod cj >; ycJ i '.1.0 too yiov %m& t 


. : r >( 

; ‘r v 1 j :.)->! X 00 ni 

. . , 1 ■ ‘ v ' . J .' ' i-J. 

*1 . 

' ,'vi ,.kOi X £lci J71 i: 't 0 © J OS'J ©fid bit® O'-Ob.) 0\£''1 ,\s;3: 

. 

. oo , "i ., fit./ o'U' bo: Jo.:--;. i.;/ odd X. oo/,; 'gai&aiiii 

. ":J o r f. 30 X .v o ..; 

loO il ■:bo ooo.o' / X t..i : , J obo ooay Odd f*X 

■ 

. : ..O' . ' ■ - 

0 ■ .oo . :. . 

,:: Xw OXjOii d ..l- 'y'loOr.'H 00 i;si@g*TOCi Qw .OS0\’; i. 00 0 V 0 


l ' 5 i • . 

\o £■{,.: 

- ■ ■ : l 

quoi.’v, void Xy ’ 


VV:u- / J 

: v •; . X i. •:, ; <: ;, .;oi,ooo .J , r:.tow ' ‘io 


. 


- 

. " t' 

, , .. . . . 


' 





102 


employer to use intimidation, demotion, pecuniary loss or the threat thereof 

to restrain union activity. The Act provided for the appointment of a Con¬ 
or 

ciliation commissioner upon the request of either party to a dispute the 
Minister could do so on his own initiative. The Conciliation co mmissioner 
was required to report to the Minister with its recommendations and if no 
agreement has been reached the Minister was required to appoint a board of 
arbitration, consisting of one representative from workers, one from the employ¬ 
ers and a chairman who was acceptable to both. The arbitrators were required 
to make their award within fourteen days of their appointment. The award was 
to be accepted or rejected by employers (where more than one was involved), or 
employees by voting by secret ballot which might be supervised by the Minister. 
It was further provided that between the time when a conciliation beard was 
appointed and fourteen days after the vote on the arbitration award was made 
no strike or lockout could be held. Where any dispute arose a strike or 
lockout could not lawfully take place before a request for the appointment 
of a conciliation commissioner had been made. 

In the same year, 1957* the Manitoba Legislature enacted the Strikes 
and Lockouts Prevention Act'* which provided for the appointment of a tri¬ 
partite conciliation board if either partytoan industrial dispute so request¬ 
ed. The Act provided that there should be no strike or lockout or no changes 
in wages or hours of work prior to the request for the appointment of a con¬ 
ciliation board nor during the period in which the dispute was under review. 

The year 195$ saw the Alberta, New Brunswick and Saskatchewan enact 

legislation providing for compulsory collective bargaining. The Alberta 

* 2 

Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Act was almost identical with the 


1. Statutes of Manitoba 1957 C.40 

2. Revised Statutes of Alberta 19^2, 0.280 









105 . 


British Columbia law of the previous year. The New Brunswick Labour and 
Industrial Relations Act asserted the right of employers and employees to 
bargain collectively. Penalties of up to $100 for each offence were provided 
for employers who attempted to prevent their employees from engaging in law¬ 
ful union activity. The Act was somewhat restricted in its application as 
its provisions extended only to businesses in which more than thirty workers 
were engaged. The Saskatchewan Freedom of Trade Union Association Act 
similarly made collective bargaining mandatory upon employers and prohib¬ 
ited restrictive clauses in agreements and the use of force, intimidation 
or demotion to prevent lawful union activity. 

The Federal Parliament’s contribution to the problem of union security 
was the enactment in 1959 of an addition to the Criminal Code which made 
it an offense for an employer or his agent to 

(a) refuse to employ or to dismiss from employment any person for the 
sole reason that he was "a member of a lawful trade union or of a 
lawful association of workmen or employees formed for the purpose 
of advancing in a lawful manner their interests and organized for 
their protection in the regulation of wages and conditions of 
work”. 

(b) seek by ”intimidation, threat of loss of position or employment, 
or be causing actual loss of position or employment” to compel 
workers to join any union they had a right to abstain from joining 
or to abstain from joining any union to which they had a lawful 
right to belong, 









(c) “conspire or combine“with any other employer and his agent to do any 
of the things mentioned in (a) or (b). 

The amendment provided penalties for it?- infringment of a maximum of one 
hundred dollars fine or three month' imprisonment in the case of an individual 
or of one thousand dollars in the case of a coporation. Rather obviously, 

S. 502A provides a source of confusion in not defining under what conditions a 
labour combination has been formed for advancing in “a lawful manner" the 
interests of its members. The latitude of the courts in defining what unions 
come under the provisions of 502A and under what conditions has been greatly 
restricted by the enactment of more recent Federal and Provincial legislation 
making certain labour practices unlawful and providing for the certification 
of bargaining agents by an administrative authority. However, there are 
still areas regarding picketing, sympathetic strikes and revolutionary ac¬ 
tivity by unions which make necessary further statutory action by governments 
before the application of the provisions of this amendment are as clear-cut 
as could be desired*^ 

Canada entered World War II with only a minority of her labour force 
covered by compulsory collective bargaining provisions. In Nova Scotia, 
British Columbia, Alberta and Saskatchewan the enactments of 1957-58 had all 
suffered from the defect that no administrative machinery for enforcing the 

2 

rights guaranteed to workers by statute had been provided. As we have seen 
the general structure of war-time federal labour legislation was the exten¬ 
sion of the provisions of the I.D.I, Act of 1925 combined with a system of 
wage-fixing machinery. 


1 . infra pp. 70-77 
2 * infra p. 56 


* ■ . 

«• ' 

. 

* ■ 

« . 

» - * ■ •' . <: . J 

J " 





105 , 


The Collective Bargaining Act enacted by the Legislature of Ontario in 
1945 was the first labour legislation in Canada combining mandatory collective 
bargaining with a system of certification of bargaining representatives 0 The 
Act imposed u on the Labour Court, a section of the High Court of Ontario, 
the duty of certifying trade unions as bargaining agents of workers and em¬ 
ployers were required by law to bargain with such agents. The Court was also 
empowered to order any person to restrain from violation of•the Act, to direct 
compliance with its provisions and to direct reinstatement of any employee with 
monetary compensation who had been discharged contrary to provisions of the 
Act. There was to be no appeal from the actions or decisions of the Court. 

The statute contained the usual prohibitions against clauses restricting 
union activity in collective agreement and the use of intimidation, threats, 
monetary penalties and demotion for lawful union actions which had been prov¬ 
isions of the legislation in Alberta, Saskatchewan, New Brunswick, British 
Columbia and Nova Scotia. The Act was declared not applicable to farm 
workers, employees of a police force, domestic servants and employees of 
the Ontario Hydro-Electric Commission and of local governments. 

The War time labour legislation enacted by the Federal Government has 
been discussed in an earlier section. 1 It is remarkable to note that collec¬ 
tive bargaining did not become compulsory until 1944 although wages and 
other working conditions were regulated by several Orders-in-Council. 


1. infra pp. 55-58. 














B. Collective Bargaining Legislation N o w in Existence in Canada. 

I have outlined how Canadian labour legislation has moved further 
and further sway from "voluntarism" since 1957• Prof. Selig Perlman 
has traced the policy of the state to labour unions through five succ¬ 
essive stages; suppression, grudging toleration, benevolent toleration, 

1 

promotion, absorption. There would seem to be little doubt that Canadian 
governmental policies are somewhere between the third and fourth stages. 
Perlman's analysis appears weak in that the absorption of labour unions 
by the state would seem to depend upon one of two conditions - the ab¬ 
sorption of labour unions as but one arm of a totalitarian state as in 
Italy or Russia or the dependence of a democratic government on trade 
union support as in Britain. The sequel to the Wagner Act in the 
United States was the Taft-Hartley legislation which endeavoured to 
curb the power of labour organization in the general welfare. Be that 
as it may, the experience of other nations seems to suggest that Can¬ 
adian governments may be expected to intervene to an ever-increasing 
extent in relations between workers and their employers. The final 
section of this thesis will analyze and compare collective bargaining 

legislation now in existence with the Federal Industrial Disputes and 

2 

I nvestigation Act of 194-8 being used as a standard of comparison* 

1. The principle of Collective Ba rgaining - Annals of the American 
Academy of Political and Social Science : Vol. 184 pp. 156-157 

2. The Department of Labour in 1949 reprinted the labour legislation of 
the Federal Government and of the Provinces as it existed at the 
end of 1948. Within the past three years amendments to this legis¬ 
lation have been made at each Session of Parliament and of the Legis¬ 
lative Assemblies but only Ontario has made a substantial revision. 

In order to save space this part of the thesis will not note each 
enactment. The text of Newfoundland legislation was not available 

to me. 
















.. ■, ; o : : ■'-■h-.-l m-mIm miMmI' sod. .1 os'b'.jo mv-m I - 

. 

r; ; I ;> j.sfdJ n H'j .Im.l I C>j oSwJk MtU' ■: r M 'YO : £'S&q B'M'ti 

: . . : l.., ' V M ■ ' O ' . ■ : ? ' . . v ' ; ' 11 1? 

M . M 4\' ' V. MM . " :: 

M-j : ; • M M : \4 ■ -:]J OS- MV-'I MM ' 1.‘ M; MMMM >M ;? ' .i J. O 1 --; Im; 4 i -iT V ’.) 

m'm..m 'I i '.to rtolsssosu’s. :mmm .ImmI4 as asss mtmm i - o x?i:av;I mob :c 

: .'.U' r ..,'0 M :■ O' MM'■■■:.'■ M'j •' MOM' ' ■ "07 M MM ; 

> I OMt iloJ X; M . J . !; f : ■ . MM >M>'i '1 ■ M 

' 

, 

' MM ■ M" M." ■ ; i' M M : ,,,i >. \M ■. M ^ 4"M c :~-J'.M mm-I :■ . :•■ tv" " M ...... .iMMU d 

, 

> ‘ * J i 

m *1.0 , o*i ’ j aa >4 ■'M - vt-'wii tut be>; &cf 

. 

MMXM.MM-m SI !. vloo ? ’V,MMMM.'0 'M//m MOV;].:’ 1 ' : It. '.S sisSdd MI I .1 MM HCi.Ij'OMM ; 

' 

* 

* 

“ . 

. 

' . - : 1:4 . >■ f ■ ! 4 V > I 0 M tl" 

. 

' . ■ . • ' v •' 

- : -I cl: . I ■ . 

, 4m.;>4 bi-'-J- m’/mm> m4 m:M ; ;mmm ill 

* 






107 


The Scope of Existing Collective Bargaining Legislation 

Although the right of workers to bargain collectively with their 

employer is asserted by the Federal Act and by the Acts of all the Provinces, 

certain groups for one reason and another are exempted from the collective 

1 

bargaining legislation enacted by Parliament and all the Provincial Leg¬ 
islatures . 

(a) Civil Servant s, 

The Federal Act specifically exempts Dominion civil servants from 

its previsions. However, employees of Crown companies come within the 

provisions of the Act except those who are specifically excluded by 

Order in Council. In 1950 employees of the Canadian Arsenals Ltd. and 

the National Research Council had been so excluded. 

In 1944 the Quebec Legislature enacted the Public Services Bnolov - 
2 

e es Disputes Act , which provides for compulsory arbitration in disputes 
involving employees of the Provincial and of local governments. Strikes 
and lockouts are prohibited in all circumstances. It is also provided 
that policemen in particular and other civil servants generally shall 
not belong to an employees 1 association not consisting solely of employ¬ 
ees in their own category or having affiliation with any other associat¬ 
ion. 


The provisions of the Ontario Trade Union Act of 1950 do not apply 
to policemen, firemen or teachers. In the case of the first two groups 
legislation similar in effect to that in Quebec exists.'' 

1. In 1950 the Federal Department of Labour estimated that 509,500 
workers were covered by the Industrial Disputes and Investigation 
Act. Of these approx. 77 per cent were engaged in transporation 
industry under Federal control and approx. 14 per cent in telephone, 
telegraph and cable and radio broadcasting industries. The rest 
were employees of Federal Crown Corporations, workers in Yukon and 
the N.W. Territories, employees on works declared for the “general 
advantage of Canada 11 by Parliament and workers in other inter-prov¬ 
incial industries - The Industrial Relations and Disputes Invest i¬ 
gation Act - Dept, of Labour Publication p.2 

2. Statutes of Quebec, 1944 C.51. 

5* Statutes of Ontario 1947 C.57 and C.72. 
















- . 

■ 

; ■>- '\'X V 

- 




... 








• Jq v 

■ 




. 










. 

; 


* 

. 'i- . ii-jM : i 

, 

A - J; : . >, 3 

: 5 ;\l jv...:.- , >J ; c: j. -m v! 


♦ 


. 

,:r ! „ ;. . p : - " « ; ■ % ; V \. :■ ■ ■ -; ,\j 

s 

1 

* 

* 

8 

. . . 

, i • iTtJtOW fcfH v',ej l] 

. .:j.-., , . ... - «•" ' . .1 L :■ 

q ■ - :i u ■ , j. 3 


;■ . .;-r 





















108 


The Legislature of Saskatchewan in 19^7 enacted an amendment to the 
City Act which provided that employees of city police forces could enter 
into collective agreements with the Board of Police Commissioners in 
cities of more than 15,000 population or the City Council in cities of 
less than 15,000 population, as employers and that the provisions of tbs 
Trade Union Act would apply to these relations. In each case the chief 
of police would be considered the agent of the employer,^ 

Except perhaps in the case of police and supervisory government em¬ 
ployees, there are overwhelming arguments that collective bargaining 
between civil servants and governments should proceed under the ordinary 
collective bargaining legislation of the Federal Parliament and the Prov¬ 
inces. I shall examine the question of compulsory arbitration in a later 
2 

section, but it appears necessary to realize that there is no compelling 
reason to prohibit strikes of civil servants unless similar prohibitions 
are enforced against workers in vital private industries. In a sense, 
any work stoppage is “against’ 1 the community and the effects of strikes 
of firemen, or government clerks or collectors of income tax can scarcely 
be thought to be more potentially damaging in effect than similar work 
stoppages involving meat-packers, locomotive engineers or milkmen. The 
prohibitions against the affiliation of civil servants with unions in¬ 
cluding other workers is, I believe, unwarranted discrimination. It is 
particularly unfortunate that the Federal Act is not extended to Dominion 
employees. 

(b) Supervisory Employees 

It is a sound principle that employees whose work is of a supervis¬ 
ory nature or who are commonly taken into the confidence of management 
should not organize themselves into trade unions composing other personn¬ 
el and any departure from this principle will undoubtedly make The position 
of management intolerable. The Federal Act declares as follows: 

1. Statutes of Sask. 19^7, C.4^ SS.92 (2) and S.100 

2. infra pp. 142 - 151 








. * ■ Ht 


LiOi-xB iiO ho&Q.'jiy: 





. ... ^ - 


■ 1. : ft 


o x .;. < 




■ft j 

■ 

- ' . ■' 


ft 





f 




. i. Xi : ii J . . 





t 

C- ».? • ift ft •; 



i oi 



' ■... L 'ft 1 

t 


, 



. 





' ft 

: ,. ; .... 



. 





■ 0 ft: 1 : J.: " ".ft ft' i L 0 - ‘iO 



. 






. 









t ■ 

m 





■ ft ; V' .. ft ■ 


i 

~~ 








' 








. 









, ; 


1 loin 

' -1 ft : 1 o ft i ft; 




. 


' 

, 0 ft i 






-i r-... ft.-ft-' 

‘ 








l; 

-i , 

. 

X' 1 ’ 

■ 

' 




ft ■ X ft >i. . 

ft: 

• 

■ m 


.> H'ft.■ .ft:;, '.ft 




..'.ft- ft..,. . ■ 

/.TO ft: ; J 

J- i'i,.:J.ft iU -:Hi; 

. 


i • i 


. t 

- 


: .- v: j- •■j-i 



:W ; . a; , ■ V: , . 


0 






- 


; 1 .1 

. 


1 ,ft'lOV 

1: . ■‘001.0 ■ 



' J Oi • '■'•I ; 




ift.ftvfti j , j * 

'.ft;i-.r 








i 


. > ; -i ft 















■ft 4ft 

1 

- a: 4i 








' 

. 



' C 0 ft:' ft: ft ft.- - 


ft 


;'io' J'.ft-ft;'- ftiooria 



j -jJ-y i i;,l . 



i-.fti.-o-. ■ 



■ 


; 

. 



. 


4 , ... ..o. ‘i . 








. 

, 


. 




109. 


"S. 2 (1) (i) 'Employee' means a person employed to do skilled 
or unskilled manual, clerical or technical work but does not in¬ 
clude 

(1) a manager or superintendent, or any other person who, in the 
opinion of the Board, exercises management functions or is employ¬ 
ed in a confidential capacity in matters relating to labour rela¬ 
tions," 

The collective bargaining Acts of all the Provinces except Prince Edward 
Island contain similar provisions, 

I believe that provisions should be made whereby those who work in 
a supervisory or confidential capacity can bargain collectively. It is 
completely unrealistic to assume that an identity of interests with 
management exists so for as the managerial group is concerned. In many 
cases these employees have a clearly defined interest with others who 
work in a similar capacity and this interest could well be promoted 
through the nonnal collective bargaining legislation of the Federal 
Parliament and the Provinces, The only safeguards necessary could be 
provided in requiring that supervisory and confidential employers do 
not join or affiliate themselves in any way with unions composing other 
workers. 

(c) Other Employees Who a re Not Covered by the Normal Collectiv e 
B argaining Legislation . 

The collective bargaining laws of the Federal Parliament and 
the Provinces exempt certain other groups of workers from their provis¬ 
ions. These exemptions may be tabulated briefly: 

(1) The Federal legislation and that of Manitoba exempt mem¬ 
bers of the medical, legal, dental, architectural, and en¬ 


gineering professions 





, 

, 


i 

. 


- , /. ; -.\u; ... ci vJ'io:.:v: ' ' .ei J ...i.\ neo ,.e n.x b:> 



■ 


.. . , 


» 




• 

' 




■ 


■ 



. 


• . *:• v C", ■ '. ; ■ 





• 




• 


' ' 

. 

. 

- 



' < ! t ' , - . o ; bw 





110 


(2) The Alberta and British Columbia Acts exempt employees engaged 
in Agriculture and domestic service. The British Columbia law 
carries further exemptions of apprentices and those employed 
in fishing and hunting. 

(5) An amendment to the Prince Edward Island Trade Union Act in 
1948 provides in effect that no union may operate in that 
Province if it has membership in or affiliation with any un¬ 
ions outside the Province.^ 

(4) The Ontario Act provides that guards are not allowed to join 
trade unions that include other employees. 


Dr. Eugene Forsev believes the Act to be ultra vires as an infring- 
ment of the Federal power over criminal law and immigration and as an 
attempt to regulate property and civil rights outside the Province. 

He makes a somewhat better case that the Act should have been dis¬ 
allowed by the Federal authorities as being contrary to public 
policy - The Prince Edward Island Trade Union Act. - C .B.R ., Oct. 
1 948, pp. 1159-1181. 










. 

- 


- viCLili-S. or: . 






, 




■ 

' . V 1 J.O.ijV/ ' M ':M& 









- 

. 

■ - , 

. . 







111. 


2. Unfair La b our Practices 

The parties whose interests are directly involved in industrial re¬ 
lations are labour, management and the public. Insofar as the legitimate 
interest of any one of these groups is menaced by the activities of 
trade unions or business firms it becomes necessary to prohibit by law 
certain labour practices. In general, Canadian labour legislation does 
not recognize that workers as individuals have rights v is-a-vis labour 
organizations, which rights need protection by special enactments not 
applying to the relations between other individuals and groups, nor is 

the relations ip between one union and another an object of special 

1 

legislation. It is implicit in Canadian labour law that the irt erests 
of unions and of individual workers are in harmony and that organized 
labour itself can be trusted to eliminate without state interference the 
practices which are deleterious to the welfare of union members. 

1. Dis c rimination 

The Federal Industrial Disputes and Investigation Act makes 
it an unfair labour practice to refuse to employ or to dis¬ 
criminate against a worker solely because he is a member of 
a trade union or to by threats or by actual loss of position 
or money to discourage a worker from joining a union or part¬ 
icipating in its activities. All the Provinces have identical 

or similar enactments. Obviously this legislation has grown 

p 

out of S. 502 A of the Criminal Code. 

1. The Taft-Hartley Act recognizes a divergence of interest between 
workers and unions and purports to guarantee the freedom of workers 
covered by its provisions to choose their bargaining agents, to 
participate in truly representative elections and to enter any occu¬ 
pation or industry (cf. prohibition of closed shop.) For a sympathetic 
account of the act see reprinted article of Summer H. Slichter from 
the American Economic Review of Feb, 19^9 

2. infra pp. 17 , 18. 









- 


. 

. 


' 

' 




- 


* 




' 


: • • .era noi.; ■ ■ ■ v, . . -. j ' -■ ' .-,,.1 ish'y\ 














« 

* 

* 

. 

* 

. 

I * - 






112 


Saskatchewan is the only Province in which a Bill of Rights in 

the American sense of the word exists. Sections 8,9 and 12 of the 

Bill of Rights Act of 19^7 declares that every person has a right 

to employment and to trade union membership without discrimination 

as to race, creed or national origin.^ The Ontario Labour Relation s 
2 

Act of 1950 declares that any arrangement between workers and em¬ 
ployers which provides for discrimination against any person be¬ 
cause of his race or creed shall not be considered a valid agree¬ 
ment. The Regulations issued by the Unemployment Insurance Comm¬ 
ission to each National Employment Service ofice specifically for¬ 
bid officers to discriminate against any applicant seeking work 
because of his ’’racial origins, religious belief or political aff- 
illation.”' Although the problems, constitutional and otherwise, 
which would arise from the enactment of Bills of Rights and Fair 
Employment Practices Codes in Canada would take us too far afield, 
it may be pointed out that it is surely an incongruous situation, 
when, under Federal legislation and that of most of the Provinces, 
discrimination against a worker is an offense only if its sole 
grounds are trade union membership or activity. 

2. Company Unions 

In the past many employers in Canada and elsewhere have 
sought to forestall the growth of labour organizations representing 

1. Statutes of Sask., Ip47 C. 55. This legislation differs significantly 
from National and State Bills of Rights in the United States in that 
it was enacted through the ordinary law-making processes and can be 
similarly amended, altered or repealed. 

2. Statutes of Ontario 1950, C,^>b 

5* P olicy of Un empl oyment Insurance Commission against Einployment Dis- 
crimination - Labour Gazett e - 0 c t. 1950 p. 1537• ~ 














t . • • 

■ 

, 

. 

. 

* 

■■ : r 

, ‘1 1 J : 

i 

. 

. i vo. 

oh..- uv- v vv ...';o "'o :i, me;, orio ’' .,,av avi,./, yv j : .>ji.ov ■ 

, 

. 

■ 

. s ■ : - ... • : v j.vi’<o 








the genuine interests of their workers by encouraging unions to 
a greater or lesser extent dominated by management. The Industrial 


Relations and Disputes Investigation Act and the collective bargain¬ 
ing legislation of all the Provinces contain prohibitions against 
employer support of or participation in trade unions, although in 
each case except that of Quebec it is provided that the employer 
may lawfully confer with a representative of a union upon union 
business during working hours without deducting pay for time so 
spent from the representative's wages. The Federal enactment 
and those of Ontario, Saskatchewan, Nova Scotia and British Col¬ 
umbia forbid the respective administrative boards to certify a 
company - dominated union as a bargaining agency. Interestingly , 
New Brunswick and ntario legislation forbids unions to support 
or participate in employer associations. 

The enactments of prohibitions against employer support of trade 
unions have been made and enforced for such obvious reasons that 
no comment is necessary. It is suggested that other Provinces 
"put teeth” into their legislation by following the device used 
by the Federal Parliament and the Legislatures of Ontario, Sask¬ 
atchewan, Nova Scotia and British Columbia in prohibiting labour 
boards from certifying company unions. 

5* Trade Union Activities on the 5npfoyers' Premi s es 

There are clauses in the I ndustrial Relations and Disputes In¬ 
vestigation Ac t and in the enactments of Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, 
Quebec, Manitoba, Alberta and British Columbia which prohibit, ex¬ 
cept with the consent of the employer concerned, the solicitation 
of workers on behalf of trade unions upon the employer's premises. 

In Nova Scotia this prohibition applies at all times but in other 
Provinces and in businesses and industries operating under the 
Federal legislation the restriction applies only during working 

















hours. A Quebec enactment forbids also the convening of meetings 
of employees with the object of soliciting trade union membership 
on the employer’s premises without his consent at all times,, 

4. The Closed and Un i on Shop 

The problems arising from the closed and union shop have led 
to more bitter disputes than have any other problems in labour re¬ 
lations. Only in Prince Edward Island is there a specific prohib¬ 
ition against closed shop contracts. The Federal Act and enact¬ 
ments of Alberta, Saskatchewan, Ontario, Manitoba and British 
Columbia specifically state that the making of closed or union shop 
agreements giving members of specified unions preference in employ¬ 
ment is not prohibited by the respective collective bargaining leg¬ 
islation. The "closed shop" agreement i.e. the type of agreement 
by which a worker must belong to a specified trade union before 
be can obtain employment in the firms so covered by "closed shop" 
provisions, is a device which lends itself to abuse. The creation 
of artificial scarcities in various crafts (and perhaps, it can be 
whispered, some of the most respectable professions) by arbitrary 
and discriminatory entrance reauirements is rather clearly an anti¬ 
social practice for which there is little justification. The real 
argument against enactments prohibiting closed shop arrangements 
lies in the difficulty of enforcement and it appears that the sec¬ 
tion of the Taft-Hartley Act which contains such a prohibition has 
been rather widely evaded.^ 

The union shop agreement puts no restrictions on the employer's 
power to hire whom he will but specifies that & worker must join 
the union within a certain time after he has been hired or die will 

Labour and Industrial Relations - R.A. Lester - New York, 1950 
p. 154 








, 

- 









* 








':tl aM ' V . ;; •' . i ? . 















. 

- 













' 


. 






































\:C ' ’1, 


» 










- 












4 











115 


be discharged. It would seem unwise and unjust to put any legal ob¬ 
stacles in the way of union shop collective agreements. Labour peace 
is just not possible in many industries if unio is do not bargain for 
all the workers or if there are 11 free riders'* working with union 
members. Labour discipline, so important to industrial peace, is 
not probable in industries where the union does not include all em¬ 
ployees. 

The Saskatchewan Act attempts to encourage the formation of un¬ 
ion shop contracts by providing that at any time a union represent¬ 
ing the majority of employees in any bargaining unit can insist on 
a clause providing for union shop and maintenance of membership 
provisions being written into the governing collective agreement. 

The employer is required by law to abide by such terms so long as 
the union is the appropriate bargaining agency and failure to do so 
constitutes an unfair labour practice. 

The Saskatchewan legislation shows an intelligent realization 
of the social desirability of union shop contracts. Similar clauses 
in the collective bargaining enactments of other Provinces and of 
the Federal Parliament would contribute to the cause of industrial 
peace in Canada. If such enactments were coupled with provisions 
making failure to bargain collectively an unfair labour practise 
there can be little doubt that unions would feel a sense of secur¬ 
ity that would eliminate much of the bitterness surrounding present 
labour relations.^ 

1. The so-called "Rand formula" developed by Mr. Justice Rand in the 

Ford Motor Company Arbitration Award of 19^6 provides an alternative 
solution to the problem of union security. This award provided that 
employees should be required to pay regular union dues but not to 
join the trade union. Also "maintenance of membership" provisions 
may be somewhat more acceptable in many quarters than the direct 
approach of the Saskatchewan provisions. 


i 

, *01 

. 

‘ 

- 

. 

. 

, 

* 

■ 

* 

, 

• ' • 



116 


5. Labour Practices Which Restrict Production 

In Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Quebec, and British Columbia 
there exists legislation prohibiting labour practices which un¬ 
duly restrict production. However, the enactments of New Bruns¬ 
wick and British 0olumbia qualify these prohibitions by stating 
somewhat ambiguously that no provision in a collective agree¬ 
ment for the "safety or health" of the workers shall be so deemed 
an unfair labour practice. Obviously the restrictions of all the 
Provinces are directed at the more blatantly restrictive practices 
of unions. The solution seems to lie in the elimination of rest¬ 
rictive attitudes of workers and union leaders in the atmosphere 
of an expanding economy and by the assumption by government of 
responsibility for the rehabilitation of workers who are the 
victims cf technological unemployment rather than in specific pro¬ 
hibitions. Adequate union shop agreements also do a great deal 
to protect management and society against unofficial slow-downs 
and restrictive practices. The prohibitions discussed above are 
feeble and superficial approaches to the problem. 

6. The Prohibition of Strikes and Lockouts During the Conciliation 
and Arbitration Period 

One of the few distinctive contributions that Canada has made 
in the development of collective bargaining legislation lies in 
the provision of a "cooling off" period when a labour dispute is 
under conciliation and arbitration during which period a strike 
or lockout is illegal* 

It is significant to note the relative lengths of the "cool¬ 
ing off" periods in Canadian labour legislation as measured be¬ 
tween the time either party requests conciliation procedure and 







:: ; . ' '.*> ::.v . V t vJoo: ; : v k > ' • s X 






i 


■ 


- 

. J 77 .. *:£ vJUj.b 


J ; ■ .i '.i. 

• •, - . . -r ; ■ .■ >. ■. . .. 

i •,' ' . : ! ' l /: j 

,f io ;'0.£ . 

' 

* 

; 7T:-r .■... > l-u-- -7 7 ow aei :-j xj'ji’ 

' 

- 11 ? '.w siviicw *!i.o nox.taJ. 1 d«;it>7 e<{,7 -i vjii 

' ii 1 . . : ■ : . ■ ' .' 

, 

• ' — v : J '. If 7 : • r j /;■ ; .'7 .' '"■ '.7 . 

. 

» 

' 

' 

. 

' • %n ! i\ 7: . \[ I r .; ;; j 7 \ .1 J77/J.1 00 ...., J 77/74 olo V® *: 7/1^ H t. 

> *17 S \ 1 . ! 

' 

i 

- 

■ •'07 ; . :w ■ • -.7 : \ 7 •;7 1 ■ :■■ / . J 707 ■ ■ 






117 

the time a legal strike or lockout may be held, allowing conci 1 
iation and arbitration boards the maximum time permitted by statute 
to hand down their decisions: 

Federal Act: 47 days. 


P.E.I. - 

- no provision except that a strike or lockout is illegal 

during undefined period of arbitration. 

N.B. 

57 days. 

N.S. 

no specific time given for conciliation officer to make 

his report but the conciliation board has 14 days to 

bring in a report and no strike or lockout can lawfully 

take place till 7 days after this report has been sub¬ 
mitted to the Minister. 

Quebec 

no specific period - arbitration boards have 5 months 

in which to begin their activities . 

Ontario 

no specified period , 

Man 

47 days . 

Sask. 

No strike or lockout during the time a dispute is under 

conciliation can take place lawfully although there is no 

specified length of "cooling off" period. 


Alberta 49 days (period for taking vote of employees on arbitra- 


B.C. 

tion award disregarded) 

20 days (period for taking strike vote after Conciliation 

Board report disregarded.) 


The "cooling off” period makes possible the examination of 
every alternative way to a settlement of a labour dispute without 
a work stoppage. J.R. Hicks widely-accepted theory of industrial 
disputes states that most strikes are the result of faulty estim¬ 
ates by the union as to what concessions the employer will make in 
order to "buy off” a strike before it occurs and of faulty estim- 
1. The Theory of Wages - Macmillan 1955 - p. l40ff. 



-,v: ■' . : • ■. : 

, 









» * 



■. ..' ' '".n: 

* * 



^ J j. v : L-; .. 


- 




“V.■" !' 






• 


. 





* 





» 




c 




■j »: -it , 


* 


!\ f ; ; tz'xv .vqa 





■ 


■ 

* * 

i 

- . . 

- 

«'• . 







ates by the employer as to the minimum concessions the union will 
accept. Hicks says: 

H Any means which enables either side to appreciate better the 
position of the other will make settlement possible. The 
danger lies in ignorance by one side of the others dispositions, 
and in hasty breaking-off of negotiations....* " 

The "cooling off 11 period gives each party every opportunity under 
the guidance of conciliation officers and boards to appreciate the 
temper and the position of the other. 

Labour leaders have often attacked the length of periods dur¬ 
ing which strikes are illegal. The potential strength of the strike 
weapon depends to a large degree on the ability of unions to "time" 
strike action. To different degrees in various industries and 
businesses a strike or the threat of a strike may be particularly 
effective when the firm is producing at its peak, or when an import¬ 
ant contr ct has been undertaken or when there is an unusual short¬ 
age of labour. The provisions of the Canadian enactments make it 
quite impossible for the union leaders to predict just when a legal 
strike can be called i.e. conciliation officers and boards may take 
a longer or shorter time to perform their functions within the limits 
set by statutes or in Provinces where there is such a provision, 
the dispute may or may not "go to arbitration." However, I believe 
that the blunting of this particular weapon of labour is justified 
by the interest of the organized community in industrial peace. 

The Federal legislation and that of every Province provide 
that no strike or lockout can lawfully take place until the dispute 
has been submitted to the conciliation^and^in cases where so prov¬ 
ided, arbitration machinery as enacted. In the Federal law and in 
the law of all the Provinces except P.E.I., Alberta and Saskatchewan 
strikes and lockouts during the duration of a collective agreement 




i ■ ■ . - l 


k j : o:!< ' it ' ■' 

. 

i. s .. ■; v. oxo: ,oo;i ni X; i , 'OX; :u; 1 

■oooox I ijv'i v.. . 1 ; ' 1 sovl : • .> gailojcr : onix 











’X . 

I [.ion 

. .0 

















. 


' : 








•© ' 



. 











. 







( 


'jJ- 









1 
















i-b 
















'X 0 



p r x ;x | 




. 








r. 





•• 














; 












* 




00 i 











srx:.;. x;i: 










* 

, 




0 S 










" 

tfv 1 


.so ■ 




. 0 .!:;: i. ; . 









- 







<• 






i 

















1 







► 





















' 











. noo 










1 




■ 








♦ • - 


.... 

! oooo:iJ ■:jsjo..:ool bat} 



are unlawful 


(7) The R e fusal to Bargain Collectively 

In Saskatchewan, Alberta, Prince Edward Island and British 
Columbia the failure of an employer to bargain collectively with a 
union representing the majority of his employees in an appropriate 
bargaining unit is an offence and penalties are provided. In 
British Columbia it is also an offense for a union to fail or re¬ 
fuse to bargain collectively and the law provides that for unions 
(as for employers) this failure constitutes a separate offense 
each day it is carried on. There can be little doubt that compuls¬ 
ory collective bargaining with real "teeth" in it is necessary for 
the cause of industrial peace in Canada. 

(8) Penalties Provided for Unfair Labour Practices 

(i) Federal - individuals found guilty of unfair labour pract¬ 
ices are liable to fines not exceeding one hundred dollars 
For a corporation, a trade union or an employer's associa¬ 
tion the maximum fine is one thousand dollars. A corpor¬ 
ation is liable upon summary conviction to a fine of two 
hundred and fifty dollars per day for an illegal lockout 
and unions for fines of one hundred and fifty dollars a 
day for illegal strikes. Officials representing manage¬ 
ment or unions are liable to maximum fines of three hund¬ 
red dollars for authorizing illegal lockouts or strikes. 
Furthermore, magistrates are empowered to order the rein¬ 
statement of a worker dismissed because of union activities 
and to order payment of back wages for the period of invest¬ 
igation. 

(ii) ^rince Edward Island - a maximum fine of one hundred dollars 
or, alternatively, thirty days imprisonment is provided for 
each offense in which an employer refuses to bargain collect 










. 

. 

- 

- 

6 

. 


- 


* 








•« 








* 

. 

. ■ 

- 


■ 













120 


ively with a trade union representing a majority of his employees# 

(iii) Nova S cotia -.maximum fines of two hundred dollars for 
an individual and five hundred dollars for a corporation, a trade 
union or an employers 1 organization found guilty of committing 
unfair labour practices. Those responsible for illegal strikes or 
lockouts may be fined a maximum of one hundred and fifty and one 
hundred dollars respectively for each day that the strike or lock¬ 
out exists. Provisions similar to those of the Federal Act govern 
the reinstatement of workers illegally discharged# 

(iv) New B runswick - penalties of a maximum of one hundred dollars 
for individuals and five hundred dollars for employers’ organizations, 
trade unions or corporations are provided for effences against the 
Act# Maximum fines of five hundred and two hundred dollars per day 
respectively are provided for employers and unions who declare ill¬ 
egal strikes. It is fur .her provided that any employee who strikes 
illegally is liable to a fine of twenty dollars for each day he is 
on strike. 

(v) Quebec - Minimum and maximum fines of from one hundred to 
five hundred dollars are provided for employers who fail to negotiate 
collective labour agreements with unions representing their employees 
For subsequent offences penalties of from two hundred to one thousand 
dollars are provided. An individual representing an emplojrer, em¬ 
ployers’ association or professional syndicate who is responsible 
for an illegal strike or lockout is liable to a fine of between one 
undred and one thousand dollars per day* In cases where an•individual 
acts without such authority he is similarly liable to a fine of between 
ten and fifty dollars per day. 

(vi) Ontario - Maximum fines of one hundred dollars per day in case of in¬ 
dividuals and of one thousand dollars per day in the case of corpor¬ 
ations, employers’ organizations and trade unions for contravention* 






of the provisions of the Act. 

(vii) Manitoba same as Federal Act. 

(viii) Saskatchewan - there is provision for minimum or maximum 
fines of twenty-five and two hundred dollars for individuals who 
are responsible for unfair labour practices. In the case of corpor¬ 
ations (but not unions) minimum and maximum penalties are two hund¬ 
red and five thousand dollars. Subsequent offences makes those re¬ 
sponsible liable to the same fines and a maximum of one years’ im¬ 
prisonment. In addition the Act provides that the Lieutenant-Gover¬ 
nor in Council can take over any business in which an employer has 
disregarded or disobej^ed any order of the Labour Relations Board 
and operate such business until the Lieutenant-Governor in Council 
is satisfied that future orders of the Board will be obeyed. 

(ix) Alberta - anyone convicted of intimidation in threatening 
any person with loss of position employment or of actually causing 
any person loss of position or employment as a penalty for lawful 
trade union activity.is liable to a fine of not more than five hund¬ 
red dollars and costs. Any representative of an employer, employers' 
association or trade union who calls an illegal strike or lockout i s 
liable to a fine of not more than fifty dollars for each day the st¬ 
rike or lockout exists. Upon the certification by a judge that a 
strike is illegal, the union whose members are on strike is liable 
to a fine not exceeding one dollar for each worker participating 
in the strike for each day it exists. If a union defaults in such 
fine the employer is authorized by a magistrate to deduct such moneys 
from his employees’ wages in accordance with any check-off provisions. 

(x) British Columbia - maximum fines of twenty-rive and one hund¬ 
red and twenty-five dollars are provided in the cases of individuals 
and employers, employers' associations and trade unions respectively 
who fail to bargain collectively in accord with the provisions of 








•'-i 

- 

0 

~ 

. 

' 1 

.. ' : “ ■ •: O .0 O Oo , . ■ l. C h; • " 

“ 

■ 

: • *; 'c:,\ . -.:00 : -j .10.- o o 

■ -■ ' ‘no f • 1.: 1 , -r 

. 

. 

* 

. 

■ 

. 



. 






122 


the Act. A separate offence is created for each day that such ref¬ 
usal or failure continues. Every employer who authorizes an illegal 
lockout is liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred and twenty-five 
dollars each day the lockout continues and every representative of 
an employer who similarly causes an illegal lockout is liable to a 
maximum fine of fifty dollars per day. Maximum fines for illegal 
strikes are provided at the rates of one hundred and twenty-five 
dollars per day and fifty dollars per day for trade unions or their 
representatives respectively. Maximum penalties of fifty and one 
hundred and twenty-five dollars are provided in the case of individ¬ 
uals and trade unions respectively who solicit trade union member¬ 
ship on the employer's premises during working hours or who support 
or engage in any activity to limit production. 

(9) Conclusions . 

Adequate legislation would prohibit the following labour prac¬ 
tices only: 

(i) The solicitation of union membership or the carrying on of 
trade union activities on the employer's premises during 
working hours without his consent. 

(ii) The use of violence or intimidation in labour relations, 

(iii) The fa_lure of unions or employers to bargain collectively 
under the terms of the Acts, 

(iv) Discrimination by unions or employers against workers on 
the basis of race, creed, national origin or trade union 
affiliation or activity. 

(v) Lockouts and strikes during the period e. dispute is in 
process of conciliation and in cases where so provided, 
arbitration. 

(vi) Employer participation in or support of trade unions. 










Although there may be compelling arguments against the closed shop 
and practices restricting production as anti-social actions, I be¬ 
lieve that legislation prohibiting these practices would be diffi¬ 
cult or impossible to enforce and that more fruitful approaches 
to these evils lie in other directions. 

Certain principles governing the enforcement of unfair labour 
practices provisions can be states briefly: 

(i) No prosecution should be made without the eonsent of the appro¬ 
priate labour relations board. 

(ii) Penalties for refusing or failing to bargain collectively should 
be made much more severe than at present. 

(iii) Corporations, employers 1 associations and trade unions rather 
than individuals should be made liable for unfair labour 
practices unless it could be shown quite clearly that indiv¬ 
iduals were engaging in unfair practices without authority 
so to do given by their principals, 

(iv) A recognition of the relatively weaker financial position 

of trade unions than employers should be made by the enforc¬ 
ing of higher penalties against employers who commit unfair 
labour practices. 

(v) Heavy penalties should be provided for employers who partic¬ 
ipate in or support trade unions. 

In general, I believe that the cause of industrial peace is furthered 
if unions representing a majority of workers in appropriate units are 
granted by law a high degree of security. In the past the most bitter in¬ 
dustrial disputes have revolved about the issues of union security and 
if these conditions are allowed to prevail the less moderate elements in 
both management and labour will no doubt exercise a decisive influence. 

Union security on the other hand will in most cases lead to mutual con¬ 
fidence as the workers are aware that the employer cannot destroy their 



■ 

. 

* 

i 

♦. 

■ 

i ■ . 

■v.. : -j* J. . 

* 

. 

* 

. 

.• 

. 

. .. 

■ V-.'. V>. j y ;■ v.k;I b^iQl: 

* 

■ 







bargaining power by infiltration^discrimination against union members, re¬ 
fusing to bargain collectively or by more violent means. When such secur¬ 
ity is achieved but not before straightforward bargaining on the matters 
of wages, hours, working conditions etc. can take place. 



4 



* 










125 , 


5• The Certif ic ation and re-certifi ca tion of Bargaining Agents. 

The federal Industrial Disputes and Investi ation Act and the leg¬ 
islation of every Province except Prince Edward Island provide for the cert¬ 
ification of trade unions as the bargaining agents of workers. In effect 
this is a form of compulsory arbitration by appointed administrative 
boards of an often-disputed issue in relations between employers and 
workers i.e. the [uestion of w ich organization s ould represent workers 
in their bargaining with employers. The decision as to whether a part¬ 
icular labour organization should be certified will depend on two cir¬ 
cumstances: 

4i) Is the unit of employees whose representation request cert¬ 
ification appropriate as a bargaining unit ? or, put in 
another way, do the employees in the unit have sufficiently 
strong common interests to make it feasible for them to 
bargain collectively ? 

(ii) Do a majority of the employees in the unit wish the bargain 
ing agent to represent than in dealings with the employer 
or employers ? 

The Federal Act gives the Labour Relations Board wide power in the 
certification of trade unions. If the Board is satisfied that a major¬ 
ity of employees in the unit are members of the union or that the majority 
has indicated by a vote that they wish the union to act as bargaining 
agent in their behalf, the Board may certify the union. If a bargaining 
agent representing employees of two or more employers applies for cert¬ 
ification such certification can be made if each employer affected con¬ 
sents and if the Board is satisfied that the normal conditions govern¬ 
ing certification apply to the workers of each employer. The Manitoba 
Legislation is identical with that of the Federal Government and that 
of Nova Scotia has the same provisions in somewhat different words. 

The New Brunswick law provides for certification of a bargaining 





- 






■ 




. 








r 

, 



' 'S .' \ .. ‘ 










. 








■■ 





■ 




« . 



- 















. 





























- 















































, 


. 







* 























• 




o 


CC’M'Tj' V:; v}.|v' 

1 c,.:. t&> 




















* 


1 










,'.S | 









- 














■ 













• 




















agent on the same terms as the Federal enactment except that where a union 
or unions apply for certification the consent of each employer affected 
is not required but merely t-hat the majority of workers affected of each 
employer have signified that they wish such bargaining agents to act on 
their behalf. 

The Quebec legislation provides that the Provincial Labour Relations 
Board can, in deciding whether an application for certification shall be 
granted, require a secret ballot of any specified employees if theBoard 
is of the opinion that "constraint' 1 has been used to force a number of 
them to join or to refrain from joining a trade association or that the 
employees are members of more than one association in sufficient numbers 
to affect their decision. 

The Ontario Labour Relations Act of 1950 provides that, if the Labour 
Relations Board, in examining the records of a unit deemed suitable for 
collective bargaining, finds that 45 to 55 per cent of the members of the 
unit are members of the union applying for certification a vote of emplo¬ 
yees in the unit is compulsory. Where such a vote is taken the Board 
must certify the Union if it obtains the votes of more than 50 per cent 
of those eligible to vote, providing that those who are absent during work- 
ing hours and thus do not cast their ballots will not be counted as elig¬ 
ible voters. Where the Board finds that more than 55 per cent of the mem¬ 
bers of a unit are union members certification may be granted without a 
vote. Furthermore, if the Board should decide that over 50 per cent of 
the members of the unit belong to the trade union, and that the true wish¬ 
es of the workers are not likely to be disclosed by a vote, certification 
without balloting may take place. 

The Saskatchewan legislation confers upon the Provincial Labour Re¬ 
lations Board the power to certify a union as a bargaining agent without 
a vote, although a vote of all eligible employees may be taken by the Board 




' V . . . • tO - I >. ’ •' !. : ■ ' . JiW " f ' , . s ' &f j 

I " !■! ■ • ... £$ : L.:<J b i 'x J .. ' 1 

: ■ ' ; / . . • 

■ 

. 

. : . : - ■ ! ' v ; ' S: > ’ ' .• .; 'r .. ' . <,!:!. : :<i t n:?. '7 : 0 - : 

' ‘ ■ • ' - : v .■ ' . . ., Jc.L : &•: J -i e . . \ ; 

■ V: " ' :' 1 ' ! 4 ■ : : i. I •. : ; ... r .■ 

.V j'.? 4 r l i . . ( i i. • i: G' Clb. i 'if&7‘i 8 T ■ GJ 70 Cii 0>t 

. 

" J" ;■ }. ",.i...". boo :r ? go ■,»<;* rojo \:.o gov oaoool 

* 

' 

'■>: C bo : i r;o ' ydv-’O 104 C : .t J CO J\£f‘j sbcl'..": ' gX«'1 "J ovi-j O0IS0.O 

' ' ■. tvi urn 

, ill: - 

' 

‘ o'o ■ "■ •• '■ : '.V- : n.:; tor v.ri v , 7 V ■, x .4 ib i ./ 

.... .* ■ .toil.-: 0 ' 0 j /c. ■■ .i ;-b : '. . - o-o;ori '"ob 

. 

■ 

.-. jo '0 : ■ ’ 0 . J ' t . -;o 0 ■' 

■ ■•••• •■■■■■ ... .1 : .i . b . : ' :v ' •. 

■ 

. 

■ J r -' ■ M'. 'oij "J'i ?® flOi j Jl S O X joI luiyJododOO?--' C-./T'T -X 

■' ’. . j .. X '■ J. : v y. O’, 0 




127 . 


It is further provided that a secret vote shall be taken upon the applica¬ 
tion of any trade union which 25 per cent or more of the employees hare 
indicated, within six months preceding the application, as their choice of 
bargaining agent by membership or written authorization. The Board may re¬ 
fuse such a ballot if it is convinced that another union represents a clear 
majority of the employees in the unit. If a vote is held, a majority of the 
workers eligible to vote constitutes a quorum, and if a majority of thos e 
voting cast their ballots for the union it shall be taken to representthe 
majority of employees for purposes of collective bargaining. 

The Alberta Labour Relations Board has the power to certify a union as 
a bargaining agent only if such application has been preceded by a vote of 
the employees in the unit. Those eligible to cast ballots are: 

(i) Any employee who has been a member in good standing of the trade 
union for three months prior to the vote; 

(ii) Any employee who has been ’’engaged in his class of employment 
in the industry at least three months prior to the vote. 

The bargaining agent must have received the ballots of a majority of 
those entitled to vote before it will be certified. 

The provisions of the British Columbia legislation are in effect the 
same as those of the Federal Act except that in the former it is enacted 
that where an application for certification is made by a labour organic - 
tion representing the employees of two or more employers the application 
shall not be granted unless the majority of employers have consented to 
bargain with the bargaining agent. 

A satisfactory certification procedure would include the following 
elements: 

li) A provision that a bargaining agent representing the employees 
of two or more employers could be certified if the appropriate 
Board was satisfied that the majority of the employees of each 




.‘0-:i ! j. c.: vJo/v ■ <■ i ; j ,o'‘ ; . V •, r/.. - j; cfl 

■ 

t ■ ' ' 0 ; o' " j.'.] ' o. i; ■ . : ,,J:..: , o;. bnx 

- 

> ' r • ■ . ■ i i 


.... 

t i 



ij 5 oOp • \ j J - ! J'o.voc o jo; si j„(s e't^’sow 


■ 

' ' 


- ''' ' 5 ■- i" ' o' o - r ■ of o ,,.,j : J-r ; -o J 

: • 

_ ■ i o - 

■ J. . : - ■ o . - 0 . » , ’ 


’ . 

: 


: '' ’"or ;, o ■. ,l lco. o o: /ow r oj. ; ) 


V 

> i:2 O-’O J , ... J. : 0;-: ; A.;J :■} 

■ 

0) ■ ; i > . J . • . tT 

* 


' 


JO ■ J '• O'-'- JO..' .i. • i* 

' ' 



' - 1 ’ o o: :i . o.-"J J ; ■ n ) > ■ f. ; o;o.. o\ rsoivt 

JJ; Jv'iJJ.aoO 'V/: 

( 

. 


* 


. ■ 



• . : fi k tn 


■- •" --- ■ . . 0 ■ f.o. -O-O,: - J •■'■■■■. : , i;o ■;v- i . ,, ' : 


■•'•91 30 • . :/O0 0'i poi 0,; ' j (..... ' 10 OVj - 






128 


employer so desired, regardless of the wishes of any employer. 

(ii) The provision that if a vote is taken, a majority of those voting 
should be considered a quorum and that if a majority of those who 
vote cast their ballots for the trade union it should be certified 
as bargaining agent. 

Under any conceivable certificat on provisions, the certifying board 
will have a wide degree of discretion in determing in particular cases 
what is the proper unit for collective bargaining. It would seem almost 
inevitable that strong proponents of industrial or craft unionism will 
criticize the decisions of Boards in particular instances. The best that 
can be expected, however, is that the administrative authority will app¬ 
roach the disputable cases in a pragmatic way, considering in each inst¬ 
ance the history of bargaining in the unit, the structure of the industry 
and other relevant factors to determine what bargaining unit will best 
further the interest of workers, employers and the public. 

The collective bargaining legislation enacted by the Federal Parlia¬ 
ment and the Legislatures of Nova Scotia, Manitoba, Ontario, New Brunswick, 
Saskatchewan and British Columbia provides for the decertification of 
previously certified bargaining agents. The Federal Act and those of 
Nova Scotia and New Brunswick provide that the respective Labour Relations 
Boards may de-certify any union which has ceased to represent the majority 
of employees in a particular unit, providing that such bargaining agent 
has the privilege of applying for re-certification under the regular pro¬ 
cedures. The New Brunswick enactment provides that after ten months of 
the term of collective agreement under the Act the employees affected may 
apply for the' certification of new bargaining agents and that this new app¬ 
lication shall be dealt with as if it were an initial application for cert¬ 
ification. The Saskatchewan Act states simply that the Labour Relations 
Board may amend or rescind any order it has previously made. The British 
Columbia law makes it possible for the Board to de-certify a bargaining 


■ 

0 v, :. 

: ' . . ' : v, : : e. ^v. v U jv<; 


. 


1X l l -c J: r, o 1 .aa J: s> 6 i < 




. 

. . : .1: - i . t .t;:- ' >10 

■ ■■ r;.r ■ . i ?.$£'..yi-d&f U ,;&i Mtif.'"li.D.yat 

, 

t >-■■. >f; • . . ' 


* 




- 










* 






- 


















129. 


agent at anytime if it is found after investigation that the union has cea¬ 
sed to be a labour organization or that the employer has ceased to employ 
the workers in the unit. In other cases the Board can revoke certification 
only after at least a ten month period has elapsed since it was given if 
the Board beccmes satisfied that the agent does not represent the majority 
of employees in the unit. The Ontario Labour Relations Act of 1950 has 
the most elaborate provisions for the revocation of certification of barg¬ 
aining agents which may take place under the following conditions: 

(i) If a union does not enter into an agreement with the employer 
within a year after it is certified, any of the employeea in 
the unit may apply to the Board for decertification; 

(ii) After an agreement has been in effect for 10 months any of the 

employees in the unit may apply to the Board for decertification 
In both this case and in ( l) in order to obtain a declaration 
terminating certification the employees must signify in writing 
that they no longer wish to be represented by the trade union, 
after which the Board must take a representative vote. If more 
than 50per cent of the workers eligible to vote cast their ballots 
against the union, the Board must de-certify it; 

(iii) Under certain conditions a union may be de-certified if it fails 
to give the employer notice of wishing to bargain collectively 
or if the union refuses to bargain collectively. 

In general, reasonably complete legislative provisions relating to 
the de-certification of bargaining agents seem preferable to leaving the 
Board wide powers of discretion. This is one situation in which the eff¬ 
ective actions of Boards is not hampered by a curtailment of their dis¬ 


cretionary powers. 





' 








• Si 

, ■ : - , , 1 ■ ■: r ’S ■ ' ' . ..... . ; . 4 . , • ’ ) 




; 

. ■ ' 0 . -.U.:'.. ,'o 








t OO.:.,.OJ ' ■ ":-i do '/o' ' I i;, u7 f 

■ ■ : 


rioii '*r 






■ ~ 

- 

. 

- 



150. 


4• Con c iliation Procedure 

Conciliation (or mediation) has been defined as n a form of industrial 
diplomacy without resort to public pressure”}' In the Federal legislatin 
and in the enactments of all the Provinces except Prince Edward Island 
there are provisions for the use of conciliation in industrial disputes. 
Conciliation in Canada has two meanings: 

(i) The conciliation in a dispute by an official appointed by the 
Department of Labour; 

(ii) Conciliation by boards, usually composed of one representative 
of each party to the dispute and a chairman who is agreed upon 
by both parties or, in default^ appointed by the Minister* 

The I ndustrial Relation s and Disputes Investigation Act provides 
that where a notice to begin collective bargaining has been given as 
under the terms of the Act and bargaining has not commenced or \h ere 
bargaining is in process and either party so requests, the Minister may 
instruct one or more Conciliation Officers to confer with the parties. 

If the Conciliation Officer fails to bring about an agreement within 
14 daySjOr such longer period as the Minister allows^he must make a 
report on the state of negotiations to the Minister who may appoint a 
Conciliation Board. The Minister, if he so decides, may require that 
each party within seven days of receiving the Minister’s notice appoint 
a member to the Conciliation Board. If either or both parties do not 
do so the Minister appoints members. The two members thus chosen are 
required to meet within five days after the second is appointed to nom¬ 
inate a person to be the third party and chairman of the Board. If this 
proves impossible, the chairman is appointed directly by the Minister. 

No person who has any pecuniary interest in matters referred to the 
Board or who has acted within the past six months as "solicitor, legal 
advisor, counsel, or paid agent of either party" can be a member of the 

1* Labor and Industrial Relations - R.A. Lester - New York, 1951 pi 552 




















151 


Conciliation Board. Within 14 days after the appointment of the chairman, 
or such longer time as the Minister allows, the Board must report its find¬ 
ings and recommendations to the Minister, who sends a copy of such report 
to be published. No strike or lockout can lawfully take place till seven 
days after the report has been received by the Minister, 

The legislation of Manitoba and Nova Scotia and Ontario is identical 
with the Federal enactment. That of New Brunswick is the same except that 
the authority of the Minister to appoint Conciliation Officers and Concil¬ 
iation Boards is mandatory rather than permissive. 

The Quebec Trades Disputes Act provides that the 'Lieutenant-Governor 
in Council may appoint a Registrar of Councils of Conciliation and Arbi¬ 
tration, one of whose duties it is to enquire into any industrial dispute 
which has come to his notice within the Province and to take such steps 
as he deems expedient to bring about a settlement. If one party to a 
dispute so requests^a Conciliation Council is constituted of two represent¬ 
atives appointed by each party. If one party fails to nominate its mem¬ 
bers within six days after receiving notification from the Registrar that 
the other party has chosen its representatives, the Registrar chooses the 
representati es of the delinquent party. No limit is put on the time 
within which the Council must conclude its activities but when it does 
so it must report to the Registrar who sends a copy of the report to each 
party. 

The Saskatchewan Trade Union Ac t confers unlimited discretion upon 
the Minister to appoint Conciliation Boards at such times and of such 
membership as he sees fit. 

Alberta legislation provides for the appointment by the Minister of 
a Conciliation Commissioner upon the application of either party to an 
industrial dispute if the Minister feels the dispute to be a proper one 
for reference to a conciliator. At the same time or subsequently the 
Minister can refer to the Commissioner other disputes of a similar nature 







. 

- ■ . ■' ■■■■'•■ • 0, . <'.v. jr ..... JS ^ 

■ 

, 

- 

. . • 




■ . x 


^ . . . t : . 

* 

9 

. • 

. 




- 

* 


♦ 

• . i . 







15 ? 


between other employers and their employees. The Commissioner must report 
to the Minister within 14 days of his appointment except in cases where the 
parties to the dispute unanimously consent that the time for the transmiss - 
ion of the report be extended beyond 14 days. 

The British Columbia I ndustr i al Conciliation and Arbitration Act pro¬ 
vides that where bargaining has been in progress ten days either pa* ty can 
request the Labour Relations Board to instruct a Conciliation Officer to 
confer with the parties. The Board may accede to or refuse the request 
or it may appoint a Conciliation Officer in any dispute at its own dis¬ 
cretion. The Officer so appointed is given 10 days to complete his 
duties, although this time may be extended upon agreement by both parties 
or by direction of the Board. If the Conciliation Officer fails to bring 
about an agreement a Conciliation Board is appointed under almost identi¬ 
cal terms as that in the Federal enactment.'*' The Act provides an alterna¬ 
tive procedure by which the parties to a dispute can, at any time before 
a Conciliation Board is appointed, agree to refer the dispute to a Media¬ 
tion Committee of their own choosing and that such a Committee shall ex¬ 
cept for the payment of its Chairman by the Government, be considered as 
a Conciliation Board. No strike can lawfully take place until after a 
vote has been taken after conciliation proceedings are completed and a 
majority of workers affected have declared themselves in favour of the 
strike. 

The potential role of the trained government conciliation officer 
in effecting settlements of industrial disputes cannot be over-estimatsd. 

If he can keep the parties at the bargaining table, he may be able to 
keep discussion down to the actual problems of the dispute and eliminate 
rancorous arguments about side-issues or general principles. He may 
find it possible to find new areas of agreement and to narrow down and 
define the areas of disagreement. If he can secure the confidence of 
1* infra, pp. 130-131. 






■ 

- ..... vlekionlrixiuj ftdsjqoik I'xU r xi 

. 

- ex •,• .i-,c.:.-. 4 ...ub-L^ ±iUJ,£!LJluLgl ^.eub n X oiuxjyXuO aeixliS edT .•;. 

' -i 1V-Y %*.->■.; (X ;0*X : !.V jjfi ftf)O t i “A ; v £.( h-h t .WJ : i ohXT &&&£'¥ 

■ v i ru ' - . 

, 

,. .. hie:.- • . .... '■ ■:.■■. oi ■..:'■■■ J XO 00 vs' eXoX oXoX" d u"' •' wJ'e , O^iX jjXi 

. •- 

oeei ■:: .■ ow #?.i insoC ^xhhei. 1 ioecO & a% Jujorf® 

, 

, 

- ■ ' ' . . . . ■ X \ w ' •'. t • : . ■ J 0 : X . X 

■ 

t v 

, 

■ .; ■ v .X 0 X. .; X"" : X. b Ov'^i hs)J 2 ’: X;: vxx.bx. vb-X: 0 X.' . ej$ 

« 

0 .' ' O . * X ■' XeO.O, vXT-- X ?' 0 . 0 > X. O '0 J" O.X, 0 X i 01 X . .XJx. O:, 0 .XXX' 

• ■ - * ' . X 

. . : : , . 1 0 

: x'lx., boo oo ih w.,x.;. g ,eoooIbQtq Ieoh as &iii oj f?v ; oo naspvUovih 

• • . ~ ? hi 

' . ■ , J o 

. 


. 



* 

both parties he may be able by consultation with each separately to find 
in what ways each will compromise. The development of a skilled concil- 

9 

iation service should have the first priority in every Labour Department. 

Representative Conciliation Boards have also an im ortant part to 
play in furthering industrial peace. Ideally the appointed representa¬ 
tives will be able persons who have the confidence of those who have 
appointed them but who have no direct pecuniary interest in the dispute 
and who may be able to lead discussions between the parties into calmer 
waters. Conciliation Officers and Conciliation Boards have, under ade¬ 
quate legislation, im ortant parts to play in the settlement of labour 
disputes. 






134 . 

5. Arbitration in Lab our Disputes in J^jebec er .- 1 Alb (.r If 

Arbitration procedures are used in two ways in the settlement of lab¬ 
our disputes in Canada. In the first, which will be discussed in this sec¬ 
tion, arbitration boards are appointed, usually after conciliation has fail¬ 
ed to bring about an agreement in a particular dispute, but the awards of 
such boards are not legally binding on workers or employers unless either 
or both so desire. "Compulsory arbitration" which will be dealt with in 
some detail in a later section ^ involves the arbitration board's award 
being made binding all parties to a dispute whether they wish it or not. 

The Quebec ' Trades Disputes Act provides that either party to a dis¬ 
pute which a Conciliation Board has iM.led to settle may apply to the Reg¬ 
istrar of Councils of Conciliation or Arbitration for the appointment of 
an Arbitration Board or both parties to a dispute which has not been re¬ 
ferred to a Conciliation Board may similarly apply for arbitration. The 
Arbitration Board is constituted of one representative of each party and 
a neutral chairman agreed upon by these representatives. In default, the 
Minister appoints representatives of either party or a chairman, the latter 
to be "an experienced impartial person not personally connected with or 
interested in any trade or industry, or likely by reason of his occupation 
business vocation, or other influence, to be biased in favour of or against 
employers or employees." The Board has almost unlimited discretion in 
making its award according to "equity and good conscience" except that in 
any case involving a local government the Board must take into account the 
financial position of the municipal or school corporation, it's capacity to 
meet the additional financial obligations resulting from the award and the 
present tax burden on the ratepayers. In the case of a local government 
any interested party can appeal an award to the Quebec Municipal Commission 


1. infra pp. 142-151 








' 

- " 

. ■ . : 

... i ... . J : I-- - i t .. >!■■■ 

. 

• i L . 

-c. - . ■ . ... & x • ' ./. { ..:i| ■ ■ 4| 

- 

; . ' 





iMit: ;:gh l. ; ■ ;>;1 ;r: ii ; K 

* - : ' 



■ 




:: vi: 


;o:j; tt 

X ■ ' ;t ;•* 



V'j*',;. :,J 



ii'j i. W, 


K 

■' 

v>i:x ,0XG a 11 c<l 

.. ' ) r 1 :i . ‘0 ■ ; vO 








■ 'SO « 

' 



r : ■ B . 

, 



• ■■ ' ■- , . ' > 

... :■ i ' ' i O I 

' 

. 









on the grounds that the Board has not sufficiently considered the stipula¬ 
tions outlined above and the Commission has power to annul or amend the 
award and there is no appeal from its decision. No time limit is imposed 
upon the Board in making its award. The meetings of the Board are public 
except when one of its own members or a representative of either party 
requests otherwise. If both parties agree in writing to be bound by the 
award either before or after it is made the conditions of the award be¬ 
come legally binding upon them. 

The Alberta Labour Act requires the Minister to appoint a Board of 
Arbitration if a Conciliation Commissioner has failed to bring about a 
settlement in a particular dispute. The members of the Board are appoint¬ 
ed in the same manner as in Quebec except that the Lieutenant-Governor in 
Council rather than the Minister appoints the chairman if the other mem¬ 
bers fail to agree on a choice for this position. A time limit of 14 days 
after the Board is constituted is imposed for making the award. The ques¬ 
tion of acceptance or rejection of the award must be submitted to a sep¬ 
arate vote of employees directly affected by it and of employers (where 
more than one is involved). The vote is to be held when the Minister so 
directs and may be supervised by the Board of Industrial Relations. A 
deciding majority of employees is a majority of those eligible to vote 
and the test of such eligibility is the same as that eligible to vote fb r 
a bargaining agent* Strikes and lockouts are prohibited until 14 days 
after such voting has been completed. 

The legislation outlined above is, I believe, unforunate: 

(i) It imposes unnecessary delays in the settlement of labour dis¬ 
putes, particularly in the Quebec enactment which sets no time 
limit for the handing down of an arbitration award. Delays 
may mean that new areas of agreement will be found by the part¬ 
ies and a "cooling off" period may provide time for moderation 


1* infra p. 127 



.. i-... : vl-on ' . ' ' 3 ---e'-rojo*! orlJ* uo 

' "b. . • • ' 

* • 

• ■ ... . i>lv , I* b, , ■ ;.iO ns- • J a . 

■ • 

- 

. 

. 

. .. ' 

i • J "i „ f :'f ry v ub — J". . , f . v.:' u-'^OXO OpClCfj. ni c.: 'iwttmm ©ittSC Ofiw id Lv 

- 

. 

. ■ ' 1 

■ 

. 

V . • . 

' 

* 

' , beJ j:b CO • '-V'; " ; : . J' ' .10 ' C ' 4 

: . ■ . . t v >. •. • , ' : .. ' : D. i.-J - I. 1 erlT 

o ;i •, J- t 

. 

' ■: ^ . ■ . c . ’! v/;- ; i i. c-: 

. ■ v ! o 1 









to develop but a long period may mean that grievances will be exac¬ 
erbated. Disputes which remain unsettled generally weigh more heavily 
on workers than on their employers and being forced to work for un¬ 
necessarily long periods of time under conditions which appear unsat¬ 
isfactory may well lead to increasing intransigence. Labour's ultim¬ 
ate weapon has been blunted by unions not being able to "time" a 
strike and there is no justification for introducing a further elem¬ 
ent of unpredictability into the calculation as to when a legal strik e 
can be called; 

(ii) The party which refuses to accept an arbitration award is made 
to appear intransigent in the eyes of the public, perhaps unjustifia¬ 
bly. Any arbitration tribunal is faced with the problem of framing 

and applying fair and equitable standards to the dispute under consid- 
1 

eration. By their very nature these standards are subjective and 
there is little reason for a situation to be created in which either 
or both parties feel a certain pressure from the community to accept 
a particular award; 

(iii) Arbitration often frustrates honest, direct collective bar^L in - 
ing. I have personally observed disputes involving Alberta teachers 
and school boards in which one party was determined to"let the matter 
go to arbitration" and treated the regular bargaining and conciliation 
procedures as formalities. In some of these disputes teachers have 
used the delays created by arbitration as a pressure on their employ¬ 
ers, knowing that school boards find it difficult to hire personnel 
or frame a fiscal policy if they did not know what salary schedule 
would be in effect in the forthcoming year. There can be little jus¬ 
tification for creating situations in which such uncertainties can 
be used to the advantage of one party or the other. 


infra pp. 148-149. 


fi': : , r oli j$ 

- 

rs *{:c: r . j I:1 ' 5 ■ )* t h - • ■' baliL i ' >1 gliijfe bb©os a 

’ X i : 

■ ' 

•*C '■■• ■ •- •: • /.. • J J 

V ' - 

-. : ol o, v "i ••• ,. r r (j .) 

' . '• / ■ , ' i' ■ : ,*V"i L' ; • .; J iU: , i 0 !;; '! 0 a 1 ’U^'? O C 

. ‘ 



•' ! . : i 


■ ... : j. ‘... b. ; j p 




• 

■ 


i - l 

* 

o'.: ■ 



‘ n.;f.■ vL; tnnf 

. 


• ' 

“ , 

, 

: 

i 

i 

.■'■ X ■ '■ ’ . !.■ ':: •: -1 ^ / ; ■ in v • 




157 


6. The Collective Agreement 

The Federal Industrial Relations and Disputes Investigation Act and 
the collective bargaining enactments of all the Provinces except Prince 
Edward Island contain clauses regulating the terms of collective agree¬ 
ments between employer and employees, 

(i) The terms of the agreement - The Federal Act and the enactments 
of Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Manitoba, Alberta and British Columbia 
provide that no collective agreement shall be deemed as having been 
made for less than one year. Contrariwise, the Saskatchewan and 
Quebec legislation provides that no agreement shall be made for more 
than one year, although each provides for renewal without negotia¬ 
tion if both parties so consent, 

(ii) Provisions for the settlement of questions arising from the 
i nterpretation of an agreement - The Federal Act and those of all 
the Provinces except Prince Edward Island and Saskatchewan and 
Quebec provide that every collective agreement must contain provis¬ 
ions for final settlement without work stoppage of any dispute con¬ 
cerning interpretation or violation of the agreement. In each case 
if the agreement does not contain such clauses the Labour Relations 
Board must, on the application of either party, prescribe procedures 
for the settlement of disputes without work stoppages, 

(iii) The Ontario Labour Relations A ct o f 1950 declares that any 
agreement discriminating against any person because of his race or 


creed is invalid. 













- 

- 

■ ' ' • ' ' —•' •• ■ ;• 

- 

. 

t " 

* 

' 

- 

- 











7• The Administration of Collective B arg aining Legisla tio n 


There exists in the Federal Government a Department of Labour and 
each of the Provinces except Alberta and Prince Edward Island has its 
separate labour portfolio. In Alberta labour legislation is administered 
by the Department of Trade and Industry which has widespread jurisdiction 
over other matters relating to economic regulations and developnent. Fur¬ 
thermore ,the Federal Government and all the Provinces except Prince Ed¬ 
ward Island have appointed administrative boards to administer collect¬ 
ive bargaining and, in some cases, other labour legislation, 

A Labour Relations Board of a maximum of eight members who hold off¬ 
ices at the pleasure of the Governor in Council administers the Federal 
Industrial R e lations and Disputes Investigation Act . The Board has pow - 
ers to issue orders which have effect upon publication in the Canada 
Gazette , The Board also determines certain questions of procedure such 
as whether an agreement is in force, whether a person is a member of a 
trade union, whether a group of employees is a unit appropriate for coll¬ 
ective bargaining etc. and in these matters its decision is not le viewable 
by any court or other agency. The Act further provides that no prosecu¬ 
tion for violation of any of its terms shall be made ec cept with the con¬ 
sent of the Minister. 

The New Brunswick Labour Relations Board consists of a chairman and 
at least two other members and wields powers similar to those of the Fed¬ 
eral administrative agency. The New Brunswick legislation differs from 
that of the Federal Government in that it declares that prosecutions for 
offences under the Act shall be made only with the cons ent of the Board 
rather than the Minister. The Nova Scotia Board of a chairman and two 
or more members has analogous functions. 

Manitoba legislation confers upon the Labour Relations Board the auth¬ 
ority to administer any labour legislation that the Legislature shall direct. 








_ 

* 

, 

S ■ ■. Wv-.-.i i h'i 

, 1 ■ ' ■ ' 

... , ; ■„ . . . . ' ' ’ P \ ' 


isi : 

* 

• . 

t 


. 

. - ■ . ". 

. ' 

. 

■ I i 1 ! . ■ d : I d 

.. . . . I ' 

■: id . . 

.. . ' .... 'i .. ■ i. :o 

•1 









159 


The Board consists of three or more members appointed by the Governor in 
Council and has powers in relation to collective bargaining analogous to 
that of the Federal Board. No prosecution under the Labour Relations Act 
can be made without the consent in writing of the Board. 

The Ontario Labour Relations Board consists of a chairman and two o r 
four other members to administer the Labour Relations Act . No prosecutions 
under the Act can be made without consent of the Board. 

The Quebec Labour Relations Board consists of a chairman, a vice-chair¬ 
man and three other members appointed by the Governor in Council. The 
Board has the ordinary duties of certification and has the power to diss¬ 
olve any association of employers which has tried to dominate or hinder 
the formation of a trade union and any employees’ organization which has 
tried to dominate or hinder the formation of an employers' association. 

There is no provision in the Act forbidding review of decisions or regu¬ 
lations of the Board by the courts. Prosecutions for offences under the 
Act can take place only with the consent of the Board o r the Attorney- 
General. 

The Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board differs from its counterparts 

in other parts of Canada in that it includes equal representation of or- 

1 

ganized employers and employees. The Lieutenant-Governor in Council may 
appoint equal representation from the general public. As well as holding 
the same powers as Boards in other Provinces, the Saskatchewan Board has 
the further authority to require an employer to bargain collectively, to 
reinstate with compensation an employee discharged contrary to the Act 
and to disestablish a company-dominated union. It is further provided 
that the Lieutenant-Governor in Council may, if any employer has wilfully 
neglected or disobeyed an order of the Board, appoint a controller to 
operate such business in the name of the Crown until the Lieutenant-Gov¬ 
ernor in Council is satisfied that upon return of the plant or premises 

the order of the Board will be obeyed. There is no appeal from an order 
1. as does the Ontario Act of 1950 



( • 


o ■ '• . .--ild ' l s ;.s -t*K enciJoi -non.:; t sri'J 

* 

• ' 

. t 'lo'lO ojh 00 Oh O' 1 Sfrl d 'UOOCiO I ' OiiCV.kjf &ii'\ 

’■ ; * ; ' : -‘ t roi: to : o ' do do ' = ,v..d" r ■ idJ dm.: 

H oh'Oi v o.j" j. nmj: ;w sismol. we ho omfJBIOOmoB vri.o evl 0 

: " ■ ■ ■ o 1 11: ■ ■ -I: m • . o.oo ;:o o ; ., . j;• i. • oh -. d; 

- . ... 

„ . o a 

"■ : 1 ■' '• .■ . & '■ O: O ...;d ' ; O jy,, 

' . • 

' ' .v>.' • 'f.-'O-o o : o i- :fjr . ... j : ;; c .. ,■ - 0 . .• 

■ •' 'hr • • • j-j ' . : 

, ■ t 

t i o.o; d ..." *!?■ v; O' O'"'.; (' :o oh J.m: '-.'Oldon O.ld' 

; ' "r- o d.domed otvnioo: no noi.roemo mm .-dddo •oooo onio'-x 

■ ’ • " : • - 0 ■ ; "... 0 o 

: mm a ' r t ■ . . .■ - 

*h.? " . • * 

*■' : “ ' : ' 0 dm OO.O. ;;J o .. ,'m.m oo.,-. . io JO 

. 

* ■ 

, 





or decision of the 3oard and it has full power to decide any question of 

fact ’’necessary to its jurisdiction”* It is specifically provided that no 

certiori ari, mandamus , prohibition or injunction of any court of law can 
, . . 1 

make the Board’s actions reviewable* It is almost superfluous to condemn 

this vicious clause which airily brushes aside the traditional rights of 

2 

the citizen under the ’’rule of law”. 

The Albert:. Board of Industrial Relations has wide powers in the admin¬ 
istration of the industrial standards legislation as well as the collective 
bargaining enactments of the Province. It consists of a maximum of five 
members appointed by the Lieutenant-Governor in Council, Disputes are re¬ 
ferred to the Board for settlement only if the Minister so deems wise. 
Prosecutions under thp Act can take place only with the consent of the 
Minister, 

The British Columbia'Labour Relations Board consists of a Chairman, 
a vice-chairman and such other members as the Lieutenant-Governor in 
Council deems necessary. Besides the same powers that are wielded by 
the Federal Board,the British Columbia agency may issue orders to any 
employer or labour organization to desist from certain unfair labour 
practices. No prosecution under the Act may be made without the permiss¬ 
ion of the Board. 

Certain basic principles emerge regarding the administration of 
collective bargain ng legislation: 

(i) The Board should be confined in its activities to the adminis¬ 
tration of collective bargaining legislation and should have 
no duties involving other enactments. There is little justif¬ 
ication for having civil servants dealing with industrial re¬ 
lations on a part-time basis. 

1. Often courts will review or prohibit certain actions of administrative 
agencies if such actions are clearly outside the jurisdiction of such 
agencies or are contrary to "natural justice.” 

2. Since this thesis was completed the”Gale Decision” has been reported, 
which decision would lead one to doubt the efficacy of even the most 
explicit non-certiorari clauses in labour legislation Ontario„Buprgm e 
Court Quases Certification - labour Gazette - July, 1951 -pp.952-959 







* 

, < .£••. O. 

’ 

T :d.‘ l.:: h ir: c l xl,t( L> rfei'CtW ■'0; B±.iu\' 

■ (U .' 

1-'/ i'/:.; ; \y ■ i\'[ ■o'.: J'7 O U ;. erT I 

■ 

. 

1 ' “ , ■ - . 

• . ' i 

■ ' r • f- r ■ ■ v. , V;;« ' ; ,h.U . 0:;. ■'"-! / 

♦ 

±S 1. 'v-i' 

4 

t :‘ ■ f I' tS. 

■ . 

. 

' 

; .. ; i . . 

v 

« 

‘ 

, • 




(ii) The Board rather than the Minister should have the power to give 
permission for prosecutions under the Labour Relations Acts. So far 
as is possible,this kind of decision should be made by a person or 
agency which is not under direct political pressure. 

(iii) Members of the Board should be chosen so far as is feasible 
from among these who have no direct interest in or biases for or 
against labour or management groups. The Saskatchewan legislation 
presumes a certain tug-of-war situation within the Board itself. 

There seems no reason to believe that this kind of Board will make 
the maximum contribution to industrial peace. 






■ 








C, Compulsory Arbitration of Labour Disputes 


The alternative to the determination of wages, hours of labour and 
other working conditions by the processes of collective bargaining is com¬ 
pulsory arbitration by which the parties to an indsutrial dispute are re¬ 
quired to submit it to an outside person or board for a final and binding 
decision. Compulsory arbitration is not entirely new to Canadians. Such 
provisions were widely discussed in relation to railway labour disputes 
and finally rejected by the passage of the R ailway Labour Disputes Act of 
1905*^ The Public Serv i ces Bnployees Disputes Act 1 ^ enacted by the Quebec 
Legislature in 1944 provides for compulsory arbitration of disputes invo 1- 
ving local government employees, and employees engaged in transportation 
communication gas, water and electricity industries. The Federal Govern¬ 
ment also resorted to compulsory arbitration on an ad hoc basis' in the 
dispute involving the railways in 1950*' Compulsory arbitration proced¬ 
ures have been enacted in several other democratic nations. New Zealand 


pioneered in this field in the I ndu s trial Conciliat i on and Ar b itration 
ct o f 1894. Australia followed ten years later by the enactment of the 
Conciliation and Arbitration Act by the Commonwealth Government and the 
States have followed with similar legislation. Kansas in 1920 brought 
into existence a Court of Industrial Relations which had the power to en¬ 
force its awards in industries deemed fundamental to the general welfare ' 
.New Jersey in 19^7 enacted compulsory arbitration legislation pertainirg 
to labour disputes in utilities operating under government franchise if 
a work stoppage will, in the Governor’s opinion, threaten the public in¬ 
terest, health and welfare* France enacted compulsory arbitration legis- 


1* infra pp. 92-95 

2, Statutes of Quebec, 1944 C. 51 

5. infra pp. 144-148 

4* Labor Problems - G.S. Watkins and P.A. Dodd, Jrd edition New York, 

1946 pp. LI58P551. A Supreme Court decision in 1925 declared uncon¬ 
stitutional the application of wage-fixing to industries which were 
net public utilities as being in contravention of the ”due process” 
clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. After 1925 the compulsory arbi¬ 
tration features of the legislation lapsed. 

5. La bor afad Industrial Relations R*A. Lester - New York - 1951 pp.^41-^42 




















* 


; p ,v ;; j f?V ,j\;t .f'lr/ f> J' I ,J: 

- 

■•vO'J';--V:,;' .f ? ■. oJ: •] ■; ;: J; v 

- 

' 


' ■ • I ■ • 


. 


i 

1 ' 

. 



* 


' 




- 

* 


’ ri j ai o 


- 

* 




. 

; 

"V 10 O'- . .! 

.. 


' 

' 

* 



* 



■ ■ 

( 

A 

■* 

1 V ri ‘ ' i ' ’ " : >-y- VC-;"’ c J . i. , i ,iw -y ■ y ; ; 

■ 

, 

t 

v ■ . ’VL * ■ 

* . - 

. 

* » . « - ' 

“ 

. 

... 

* 

. 


- . . « 







lation in 19^6 and war-time legislation still in effect in Britain provides 
for the settlement of certain disputes by the National Arbitration Tribunal 
whose awards are legally binding on both parties*"*’ 

It is instructive to consider in some detail the experience of New Zea¬ 
land under the compulsory arbitration procedures of the Industrial Cond l ia- 
tion and Arbitration Act. Under the Act a registered union can demand that 
its claims be heard before a Conciliation Council. All employers in the 
industry and administrative district to which the dispute relates are dee - 
med to be respondents in the action. Issues which are not settled by the 
Conciliation Council are forwarded for consideration to the Court of Arbi¬ 
tration which consists of a Judge, who has the same status and tenure as 
a Judge of the Supreme Court, and two other members who are nominated for 
three-year terms. Proceedings of the Court are much the same as in the 
other courts although no barrister or solicitor may appear for either 
party. An award of the Court is non-reviewable and binds not only the or¬ 
iginal parties to the dispute but also every union of employers or work¬ 
ers and every employer who is engaged in the industry in the district to 
which it relates and every worker employed by them. The Court has power, 
however, to extend or limit the scope of the agreement almost at liberty 
within the industry and to extend it to cover other industrial disputes 
in which employers manufacture goods entering into competition with thee e 
made where the award is in force. The awards are enforced by Inspectors 
of Factories and of Mines and the Arbitration Court has power to deal with 
offences under the Act by fine. 

A full and sympathetic account of the workings of compulsory arbitra- 
2 

tion in New Zealand reveals the follwwing effects of the system: 

(i) Insofar as the settlement of a dispute is imposed on the parti es 

by law it does not encourage goodwill between them; Dr* Hare states 

1* Britain 1950-51 Central Office of Information, London, p. 170 
2. Indust rial Relations in New Zealand - A.E.C. Hare-Wellington, 

19 ^ 6 - pp.212-240 ~ ~ ~ 




















- 









, 

; ' iA' < sy-j ' i. 





’,£:Jr>::vOw' ' z-p.'- L*m’:0 uJ' - l,'-o.:r; tacit. ■JJ 

* i • ' ^ ' 

- • - i . 

J . 

' •• . ‘ 

• ' ■■■■••’ '■ •' ’>■' •■■5 -V.- ■ : C V:o O’-buT, c> 

'>■' '■ ' '■ ' - ■■ - - - .. .. ■' v - :■ . " ■ Y 

. 

. 

■ ■ 

. . 

' • • ; • 

* 

* J' ’U I'X 'i { 1 'i&f' ' U O Io' "10 

♦ 

* ' 

- 

• . . “ 



144 


n A legally imposed settlement is in reality no settlement, but simply 
an armed truce imposed by superior force, in which at every opportun¬ 
ity the struggle will break out afresh," 

(ii) It appears that the compulsory arbitration process has inhibited 
the growth of strong trade union movement; 

(iii) The settlement of disputes through what Canadians regard as 
the normal collective bargaining procedures without reference to 
Conciliation and Arbitration Councils is infrequent; 

(iv) The legislation has introduced legalism and bitterness into 
labour relations. In most cases it seams that employers 1 and workers’ 
representatives will not deal with each other except through the form¬ 
al channels of Arbitration and Council Councils. Also because awards 
are imposed by force of law "they are not regarded as voluntary treat¬ 
ies to be honourably kept"' and all parties are inclined to find every 
loop-hole they can in the hope that the Court will find in their fav¬ 
our and thus establish a precedent, 

(iv) Compulsory arbitration in Australia and New Zealand has not brou¬ 
ght industrial peace. Between 1927 and 1950 strikes caused a loss of 
work days per l,ooo persons considerably greater than that in the 
United States. Rather obviously it is impossible to imprison sever¬ 
al hundreds of workers engaged in an illegal strike and in general 
governments have refrained from enforcing the penalties against such 
strikes.'*" 

Compulsory arbitration became a live issue in Canada in connec- 

2 

tion with the nation-wide railway strike beginning August 22, 1950, On that 
da.te the last of a series of attempts to mediate the differences between 
two groups of labour organizations representing some 125,000 non-operating 

1. Industrial Re l ations - Lester pp. 555-536. 

2, For a full account of the strike and the Maintenance of Railway 
Operation Act see the Labour Gazette of October, 1950.pp. 1638-1654 








.•'■OC; 














railway employees and the management of the principal Canadian railroads 
failed to resolve their dispute over the demands of the employees for a 
five-day, 40-hour week and other concessions and over proposals of the em¬ 
ployers for a revision in working rules in order to facilitate a "fair and 
economical" introduction of a shorter work .week. Bargaining between the 
unions and the railways had gone on intermittently since June, 1949. 

On August 16,19^0, when a strike appeared imminent, the Prime Minister 
on behalf of the Government of Canada appealed to both parties to postpone 
the strike for JO days. Upon the refusal of the unions to postpone the 
strike deadline, Dr. W.A. Mackintosh, Vice-Phnciple. of Queen’s University 
and one of the nation’s foremost economists, was appointed by the Minister 
of Labour as special Commissioner to mediate the dispute. The Commission¬ 
er's activities between August 19 and August 22 succeeded only in formal¬ 
izing "points which had been tentatively and conditionally accepted at 
earlier stages" and on the latter date the strike commenced. 

On the same day the work stoppage began the Prime Minister announced 
that Parliament was being summoned as quickly as possible to deal with 
the serious emergency created by the strike. On August 29 the Prime Min¬ 
ister introduced into the House a Bill entitled " An Act to provide for 
the Resumption of Operations of Railways and for the Settlement of th e 

Existing Dispute.between Railway Companie s and the i r Employees." 

By suspension of the standing orders of the House and by night sittings 
the Bill was rushed through the Commons and the Senate and received Royal 
Assent late on the evening of August JO, Immediately the leaders of the 
unions used every means of modern communication available to order the 
railway employees back to work and within 24 hours normal services had 
resumed. 

In the Commons debates on the Government bill, conducted by all part- 

1* Text of Dr. Mackintosh’s report to the Minister of Labour 
Quoted op, cit. p. 164^ 









' ■ r ■ '■ ' ■ ■ vi 1 

. * • ’ . 

■ ■ t 6 t 

:;no vi' 1 

. 

«. . ' .V . . ' .rlV 

. 

■ 

- 

- 

I. .»■ ■■ .? ; ' . ■ ■ ■ . .. a! ; .d « : - : '.■■■• ciedi 

- . 

. .. I .; : _ __ _ ' ■ • I: & i: I ii f r-jjF cu uJ: i ••...• 3 .1 

! i, -\,V 

. 

* 

.. 

' -V ; ' J 

, 

. 

- 

« 












146. 

ies on a reasonable and constructive level somewhat remarkable in the light 
of the acute situation which had developed, there was basic agreement on 
two points: 

(i) That the Federal Parliament had a definite responsibility to the 
Canadian people to see that railway service was resumed without 
delay; 

(ii) That the measures of compulsory arbitration framed to achieve 
the above purpose should not be considered to have set a pre¬ 
cedent in future labour disputes. The Prime Minister by a some¬ 
what ingenious juggling of phraseology denied that the Bill in¬ 
volved compulsory arbitration at all but added ’’that it is the 
only way we can find....to restore the normal functioning of 
Canada’s transport system”. 1 David Croll, a Liberal Member who 
was formerly Minister of Labour in the Ontario Government, opp¬ 
osed the Bill in the fear that the compulsory arbitration prin¬ 
ciple might be applied in the future to strikes involving other 
industries deemed essential to the public. In general, C.C.F. 
Members who spoke in the debate shared Mr. Croll's apprehensions. 

'The Maintenance of Railway Operation Act as enacted contained the ibllow' 
ing major provisions: 

(i) Within 48 hours all railway services suspended by the strike 
were to be resumed. 

(ii) The collective agreements then in force were to be revised by 
a four cent per hour increase in all wagesi 

(iii) If within 50 days after the Act came into effect the parties 
had not settled the dispute, an arbitrator was to be appointed 
to decide all points at issue which he felt were necessary for 
the conclusion of a collective agreement, including fixing of 
1 . House of Commons Debates - 1950 (Second Session) p. 14 



■ 

' , > ■ • 

. 

■ 

. 


- 



. i 




• 


• 



-- 




. 

s.:' 






. 1 - J V 


... 

t ' ■ • *: .. •: i .. • 'I o' 

• *X 

...1 V : ;'i. J J c Cs,'v . ■ : . •; .., •; J ■:> a :.±‘J 

. , . . 

* • 1 ' • J ' 

: :. 'J. ,j. . ■-•l .'I J: 

■ 

. 

: : 0 J' 1 ' i"/ /: n ■; rJ nJ .v 

• ..' . i. - ' 

. 

-■ t jr..ri :■ a lo rtolfuj'lo^oo ;.?Tiv!' 



1 * 7 . 

a term during which the collective agreement should operate, 

(iv) The arbitrator was required to decide any matter in dispute 
within the limits of disagreement between the parties when 
negotiations between them were terminated* 

(v) The arbitrator's award was to be binding upon all parties, 
although no legal barrier was erected to prevent the altera¬ 
tion or amendment of such award by all parties* 

Two observations can be made about this legislation: 

(i) There was no special machinery set up to ensure the en¬ 
forcement of the provisions of the Act. Mr. Drew and his 
Progressive-Conservative colleagues had suggested an amend¬ 
ment to the Bill which have provided for the appointment 
of a national administrator to ensure immediate resumption 
of railway services pending final solution of the dispute 
by free collective bargaining. This amendment was negat¬ 
ived by a vote of 186-56* 

(ii) The arbitrator was given the authority to make his award 

only within the limits of disagreements between the parties 
when negotiations broke down. The Bill as first introduced 
by the Government would have made it possible for the arbi¬ 
trator to deal with any matters involving the relations of 
the companies and the railway workers. Mr. Coldwell, the 
0.0.?. leader, was particularly afraid that the working 
rules which had been hammered out through many years of 
negotiations would become matters of dispute if the arbi¬ 
trator's discretion were unlimited. As it was, the area 
of disagreement when negotiations were broken off was a 
relatively narrow one* 








. j| 

' 

< 

’ 

- 

, 


iff 










, 



P 




. 

. ■■‘:d .. l:oi-~.sz V' i d.'V.i j /-w ,1 tffi- 














.... 




, . . 

' : - , ' . , ' ’ " : : r'V' - ■. il ... i. '/ C*:! 












» 








, ' ' 







148 


Mr* Justice Kellock of the Supreme Court of Canada was appointed arbi 
trator under the Act on Oct. 17, 1950 and made his award on Dec. 18, 1950. 
It is not necessary to go into the details of the award here. 

Compulsory arbitration of industrial disputes is an unsatisfactory 
policy for the following reasons: 


(i) 

It deprives unions of their ultimate weapon, the strike, and 

strips management of its essential functions* 

(ii) 

It inhibits the growth of free trade unions. At best, trade 

unions are somewhat more than merely pressure groups but rather 

organizations through which free men can reel that they can 

control their economic destiny. 

(iii) 

.It produces attitude of legalism in industrial relations and 

inhibits the development of confidence between labour and 

management. 

(iv) 

It leads to the accumulation of unadjusted differences which 

may be solved more easily as they arise through direct negotia¬ 
tions. Arbitration, like other forms of litigation, is inevit¬ 
ably a protracted process and grievances remain for months and 

even years before they are settled. 

(v) 

It brings into industrial relations those who have no first¬ 
hand familiarity with the particular ndustry involved. Modern 

industry has become too complex to expect the layman to make 

intelligent and practical awards in labour disputes* 

(vi) 

It has proven almost impossible to enforce the awards against 

unions. 

(vii) 

It imposes upon the arbitrator the task of making awards which 

are almost of necessity based upon his own predilections about 

society. The Quebec legislation requires the arbitrator to 

make his award “according to equity and good conscience 11 ~ - per- 


haps a reflection of Catholic doctrine of the just wage which 
1. Revised Statutes of Quebec, 1925, C.97, S.24 








149 . 


is, unfortunately^difficult to translate into quantitative terms* 
Management has in many cases resisted compulsory arbitration because 
it has feared that it might lead to a definition of "reasonable” 
profits for industry and thereby lay the foundation for government 
wage and price control* 1 Workers fear that arbitrators, who will 
usually be members of the judiciary, have backgrounds and experiences 
which make them unable to appreciate the legitimate demands of labour 
Only bitterness can result from awards which must inevitably reflect 
personal opinions of individual arbitrators or boards as to the rel¬ 
ative weight that should be given to the interests of labour, manage¬ 
ment, shareholders and the organized community in particular disputes 
(viii) It introduces undesirable elements of rigidity into the econorcy 
As compulsory arbitration has never received serious consideration 
in peace-time Canada except in connection with industries whose 
continuous operation is vital to the national welfare this aspect 
will not be considered. It might be said in passing, however^that 
in an expanding economy any device which decreases the mobility of 
the factors of production by introducing rigidities into the wage 
structure is in most cases unwise* 

If we rule out compulsory arbitration as a method of settling labour 

disputes in those industries whose continuous operation is vital to the 

national welfare we are forced to choose some other alternative. The 

Taft-Hartley Act of 194/ provides that where, in the President's opinion, 

a threatened or actual strike or lockout will imperil the national health 

or safety, he may appoint a board of inquiry to report the facts of the 

1. Requirements of a National Labour P o licy - Ludwig Teiler 

A nnals of the .American Acad e my of Political and Social S c ience p. 380 
Kov. 1946 p. -180 








* 

o i;d ir, f ^10$ tki-imo6 f 

• : . i ' 

t r • •• ■ ’ ’ v " » ‘ 

■ 

;j o>i *i ;•.... i ' . 

, ■ .. • ' J \ " .. .. j ' . 

' - . ' ' 

... ■ i ■■ t jI . 

■ 

[ » ■■ ;.’ j. i i •. : ie soo 

';-d noidc r io i:.i ,, : 

- 

„ 

: 1 .. f ' f i ■ £ C 

osit :qJ' noI,v ■' mjptt&lvnao -0aodw ■' 

» 

t ' ,-l . . ■ 

• , ,.v ... j- 

.*■ 

t 








dispute to him without recommendations. Upon receipt of the board's re¬ 
port the President may direct the Attorney-General to seek a court injunc¬ 
tion to enjoin such strike or lockout. If the injunction is issued, the 
Board is reconvened and if the dispute continues, must report again to 
the President at the end of 60 days indicating a statement of the employ¬ 
er's last offer. Within the succeeding 20 days a secret ballot is taken 
of the employees on the employer's last offer. Thereupon the injunction 
must be dissolved and the strike is legal. 

The Taft-Kartley Act provisions relating to disputes in vital indus¬ 
tries do not provide an adequate solution. Provision for a ballot on 
the employer's last offer does not promote adjustment of the dispute but 
rather places additional obstacles in the way of settlement. Workers are 
unlikely to repudiate their negotiators by accepting the employer's last 
offer. Anticipating that the unions are likely to consider a refusal to 
accept the offer as a mandate from the rank and file to ask for more 
favourable terms, employers may be expected to keep in reserve the con¬ 
cessions that may result in a settlement. I believe that the solution lies 
in giving the Federal or Provincial cabinets, as the esse may be, suffic¬ 
ient power to deal with work stoppages threatening the public wd fare by 
whatever methods may seem appropriate in particular situations. No doubt 
compulsory arbitration may prove the only possible method of settlement 
in some cases, However, any legislation which ties the government down 
to particular procedures may well inhibit collective bargaining and the 
settlement of the dispute. It is suggested that the I ndustrial Relations 
and Disputes Investigation Act and the relevant Provincial enactments be 
amended to give the Governor in Council the power to seek an injunction 
forbidding a work stoppage in an industry deemed vital to the public 
safety for a limited period of time after the normal conciliation proced¬ 
ures are completed. During this period the Government could take whatever 
measures it considered necessary to avert the strike or lockout, including 

















compulsory arbitration at the end of such period as a last resort. This 




somewhat unspectacular compromise is I believe the best that can be sugg- 
eated. 










































D. Notes on a Model Labour Code 

This final section will attempt to sketch in outline the provisions 
of a model Labour Code which might be enacted by either the Federal Par¬ 
liament or any one of the Provincial Legislatures. Apart from the sec¬ 
tion on Fair Employment Practices, which is inspired by the post-war 
enactments of several American States, almost every suggested provision 
can be found somewhere in Canadian labour legislation now in effect. 

1. Coverage 

All employees should be guaranteed the right to join trade unions 
' and to bargain collectively. However, supervisory employees, guards, 
policemen and firemen should be restricted to unions comprised solely 
of members of their own occupation. 

2. Unfair Labour Practices. 

The following labour practices should be forbidden by law and Labour 
Relations Boards should have power to issue orders prohibiting the con¬ 
tinuation of such practices in specific cases: 

(i) The solicitation of union membership or the carrying on of 
trade union activities on the employer's premises during 
working hours without his consent; 

(ii) The failure or refusal to bargain collectively under the 
terms of the Act; 

(iii) The use of violence or intimidation in labour relations; 

(iv) Discrimination by unions or employers against workers be¬ 
cause of their race, creed, national origin or previous 
trade union affiliation or activity; 

(v) Lockouts and strikes before a dispute has been submitted to 
conciliation or during the conciliation period; 

(vi) Qnployer participation in or support of trade unions. 

The penalty under (i) should be not more than ten dollars for each 


offence in the case of an individual and fifty dollars in the case of a 
trade union. The penalty under (ii), (iii), (v) and (vi) should be a 






; ..- r tiJ Qffej tshc&l n 'VO. 

■ ' . ■ .. 

. Hi 

i • . ' • 

. 

. > ’ 

t • u-:. \ J " ■ )" < ] i ■ J v . '■ ■ d - : ; 

4 , 

' 

t ' ’ . 

- ' ' ' ■ ' ' d. ■ ’ ■ /' • r: r- . 

- ! . .... 

’ 

- 7 •: J ‘ ' ' j < ’ . ' 7 ■ ’ ' '£.!> 

■ . ' aolcu 

. 

. 

t ' ‘ . , \x i) erf: 





155 . 


maximum of one thousand dollars in the case of a labour organization and 
five thousand dollars in the case of an employer or employers’ association. 
In the case of (iv) the maximum penalty should be one hundred dollars in 
the case of either a union or employer. The refusal or neglect to obey 
a specific order of the Board prohibiting unfair labour practices should 
result in maximum fines of one hundred dollars, one thousand dollars and 
five thousand dollars for an individual worker, a labour organization or 
an employer respectively. 

5• Certification and De-Certification of Bargaining Agents. 

A union should be certified as the sole bargaining agent for a group 
of employees only after an application accompanied by the returns of a 
vote on this question' has been received by the Labour Relations Board. 

In such a vote the relevant majority should be the majority of those 
who actual^ cast ballots. After ascertaining that the vote was a valid 
one and that all eligible employees had had the opportunity of voting, 
the Board would decide whether the employees involved comprised an app¬ 
ropriate unit for collective bargaining and if so the bargaining agent 
would be certified. A bargaining agent for the employees of two or more 
employers should be certified if in each employer-unit the above pro¬ 
cedure is followed. Any time after ten months following certification 
have elapsed the employees concerned should have the opportunity to 
apply to the Board for the revocation of the bargaining agent's cert¬ 
ified status by a majority vote of the employees affected. This should 
be the only condition under which a union is de-certified. 

4. Conc il iation Procedure 

Adequate labour legislation would provide that no strike or lock-out 
could lawfully take place before the dispute had been submitted to the 
Minister who would be obligated to refer it to conciliation for settlement. 
Similarly, no change in the terms or conditions of employment could be 
made by either workers or employers, except in cases of agreement with 









154 , 


the other party or parties, before the matter had been referred to the 
Minister. The dispute would first be submitted to a Conciliation Officer 
and, if no settlement were reached, to a Conciliation Board made up of a 
representative of each party and a chairman upon whose appointment both 
were agreed. It is suggested that the Minister have a maximum of three 
days to submit the dispute to a Conciliation Officer or a Conciliation 
Board, as the case may be, and that each of these have a maximum period 
of fourteen days between the time of their appointment and the submiss¬ 
ion of their report to the Minister. Seven days after the Minister had 
transmitted the Conciliation Board's report to each party, a strike or 
lockout should lawfully be allowed to take place. As an alternative 
to submission of a dispute to a Conciliation Board there should be a 
provision allowing both parties to submit such dispute to a Mediation 
Committee upon whose membership both parties agree. 

5. The Collective Ag r eement . 

Adequate labour legislation would require the following terms in 
any agreement concluded under the Act.: 

(i) The agreement must be concluded for a period of neither more 
or less than one year unless the special permission of the 
Board is given otherwise. Either party to an agreement would 
be able to open collective bargaining negotiations only if the 
agreement had been in effect for a period of at least ten 
months; 

(ii) An agreement would be invalidated if any clause in it provided 
for the discrimination in employment of any person because of 
race, creed, or national origin; 

(iii) All agreements must have a procedure for the final settlement 
of disputes arising out of interpretation or violation of the 
agreement without work stoppages. If the agreement does not 






155 


include such terms the Board should be required to insert such a pro¬ 
cedure in the agreement; 

(iv) At any time during the negotiation period or after an agreement 
is concluded a majority of the employees in the bargaining unit, 
whose wishes are ascertained by a secret ballot, should have the 
power to have inserted in the collective agreement union shop 
or maintenance of membership provisions. 

6. Labour Disputes in Industries and Business Whose Continuous Operatio n 
is Vital to the General Welfare 

The Governor-General in Council or the Lieutenant-Governor in 
Council, as the case may be, should be given the authority to order that 
any actual or impeding strike or lockout be postponed for a period of 
at least thirty days if such work stoppage be deemed to menace the health 
and safety of the community. During this period the Government would be 
charged with finding any method possible for settling the dispute includ¬ 
ing compulsory arbitration. 

7 Fair Employment Practices o 

The Lieutenant-Governor in Council or the Governor-General in Coun¬ 
cil should be charged with naming an official as Fair Employment Pract¬ 
ices Commissioner. Any report of alleged discrimination by an employer 
or a trade union on the grounds of race, creed or national origin would 
be investigated by the Commissioner. If such discrimination were found 
to exist the individual or organization which had so contravened the 
law would have fourteen days to comply with the Commissioner's order 
to cease so doing or be liable to a fine. More severe penalties should 
be provided for second and subsequent offences. 

8. Administration 

Collective bargaining legislation should be administered by a 
Board of the size and composition determined by the Governor-ueneral in 

Since this thesis was completed the Ontario Fair Employment practices Act 
ha- been reported which enacts provisions similar to those I have suggested- 
Labour Gazette - r une 1951-pp.£46-847 











, ;.j , i . ' , ■: ■■■■} : ■ , o ■ \ 10 ■ -- vVi'ilO/ o :■ 10 o jI'Crto? o.j.\ 

ri,J- ■ .... ol . v " : ' ■ +** r '"' ryl 1 

. 

. 

, 

- i ■ ; ' ' ■ ■-■■■ • ' “ ■' 

I .d 

, .. 00 110;:;.' O,.' 11 oh t , O'O-’O'd 0 • ''l ‘ ■ 0;Jf; ■ ■■ l'x' ; .)0 \'l 1.'' v " a;! 1 

- 

_ 

* ■ ' . 

«. . ~ . . . • ■ in; r;C :i: ' .1 . -■ i.o.oo-:- i - ■■ -■ 

- 

» 

' j. ' ..."'.'V '::o ; Li.-Jon: ,,J" a-) noill ooi-J 

: . ■ 'C. , .. ' ' " ; . '■ - • 0- OO ' ■ : ' 

0!! v^iofiGO o :■ li Oil i. o; 10 10 i o ; J" i;',.. io Oli ;Sdl OJ ; 

. : v • 

t 

•j . i . .. o j i p ■ ■ 

. 






156 


Council 
duties. 
courts, 


or the Lieutenant-Governor in Council and should have no other 
Orders and regulations of the Board should be reviewable by the 
No prosecution under the Act should take place without the writt¬ 


en permission of the Board 












