
University of Alberta Library 


0 1620 3416689 0 


For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


CATALASE ACTIVITY AS A IIEASURE OP 


I D VIABILITY 


By Cyril Wilmer Leggatt 


University of Alberta, 
(department of Pield Crops) 

Edmonton, Alberta. 














































Clx 

{iMWKaais 

aiBBlMlEIiSM 






CATALASE ACTIVITY AS A MEASURE OR 


SEED VIABILITY. 


By Cyril Wilmer leggatt. 


A THESIS 

submitted to the University of Alberta 
(Department of Pi eld Crops; 
in partial fulfilment of the requirements 
for the degree of 


MiiSTER OP SCIEIIGE. 


Apr i l, 1928 








Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/cata1aseactivity00legg 


CONTENTS 


Page. 

Introduction . . 1 

Review of literature on catalase and 

other biochemical tests . 2. 

Summary. 24. 

Experimental part. 

Development of a method for seed catalase 

determinations.. . 27. 

Materials. 27. 

Apparatus. 27. 

Experimental. .. 28. 

The catalase reaction applied to the study of 

seed viability.37. 

Materials and m.ethods.38. 

Experimental ....•••••• . 38. 

Discussion.44. 

Summary.44. 


Literature cited 


46a.. 




























CA?AIASE AC?IYI?Y AS A lOASURE OF SEED VIABILITY 


C. T/, Leggatt 
IITTROEUCTIOE. 


It is a truisD to say that agricultiira], crop 
production per unit of land stands on the whole at a 
much higher level today than was the case in the past* 

Among the many factors v/hich have contributed to this 
result not the least important is the use of good seed* 

Hot only should such seed he free txom the seeds of 
undesired species, whether cultivated or not, hut it should 
also have a high degree of vigour and viability, thus 
giving the seedlings the best possible chance of estab¬ 
lishing themselves amid the competition of weeds and 
other plants* IThile this ha>s been recognized for a long 
time it Y/as only at about the beginning of the present 
century that the systematic testing of seeds began to 
a,ssume any very considerable importance* Fromi that tim.e 
forward the establishment of seed testing laboratories 
became general in all civilized countries* 

As a result of this general testing of seed 
it was found that the stock commonly used was in a de¬ 
plorable condition and. m:Ost countries adopted some sort 
of government supervision and control of the sale of 
seeds. 


In making a test of the vitality of seed, a 
given number, usually two or more replicates of 100 seeds 
each, are counted out and placed on suitable media such 
as soil, sand, or moist blotting paper and left for 
varying lengths of time to gernainate. The percentage of 
germination after all the seeds remaining undecayed have 
sprouted is considered a mieasure of the viability of the 
seed, while the percentage of germination after a shorter, 
arbitrary time determined by experience, is considered a 
measure of the vitality. The usual period of time re- 
4 .uired for a germination test is several days while som^e 
seeds require as long as a month or more to shot/ their 
germiinating capaoit37. Moreover, in somie species the seeds 
exhibit a dormant condition which results in delayed ger¬ 
mination or even roakes the seed. extrem.ely diffieu.lt to 
germiinate in laboratory practise* 

It soon became apparent that the long p)eriod of 
time reL^uired was apt at times to be a serious hindrance 







to trade. Accordingly investigators turned their attention 
to the prohleci of securing a satisfactory index of seed 
viability without the necessity of having recourse to the 
germination test. 

REVIEW/ OR URE UE 0^llAhti;3E 

All) QRHER BI OQH ELIIQAL TESTS. 

In 1901, Waller (£7) published the results of 
his experiments in which he used an electrical method. 

He observed that the momentary excitation of living tissue 
ty an electric current produced an after current which 
he termed a ^^hlaze current”. u!he Haze current Vv'as gen¬ 
erally in the sarte direction as the exciting, ttit in the 
case of a tissue which gave a blaze current of the contrary 
sign, tlie blaze current remained in the samie direction 
when the sign of the exciting current was changed. The 
blaze current was hence distinguishable from a polarization 
current. With non-living tissue however, the after current 
was invariably in the opposite direction to its exciting 
current and hence 'was only a polarization effect. 

He found that-with the soaked radicles of bean 
seeds ( Phaseplus vulgaris ) there was a marked negative 
correlation beH'een the blaze current and the age of the 
seeds, radicles from dead seeds giving no blaze effects. 

He found also a correlation between the blaze currents 
given by whole seeds and their subsequent behaviour in the 
germination chamber. 

He concluded that the blaze reaction was of a 
physiological character. There was shewn bo be a general, 
but not faultless correspondence as regards magnitude be¬ 
tween the blaze reaction and the germination, which was of 
the order of 0,0500 volts for fresh and vigorous seeds, 

0.0100 volts for older and less vigorous seeds, while still 
older seeds, incapable of germination manifested blaze 
currents of only 0.0010 volts down to the small counter 
effect due to polarization of 0.0005 volts more or less. 

The method appeared suitable 7/here there was a question of 
great differences of vitality, but less so vvhere the dif¬ 
ferences were smaller. 

Puvel (7) studied enzym^es in their relation 
to the vitality of seeds. He pointed out that the artificial 





V 








♦1 

' 

I « 

lo 



V <1 ' ’'■ ' L J. i',-'^. -'' 

* 1 ■ ". I • Vi u' ■• ~ O ^. '-t Ci Qi'ifcitji 

. CT. ‘ ■i.cdvMv'" ^sr.i:!.’i:o 


i;^' , '-M- Til ■ 

•Tjo ;' ■^7*’' “ "i.t'’^ ' t'/t‘.fer v.';.r- 

0 





J-- .( 


.:v.c- 
■ r 


■ 

• L i ’; 


.- ■' . ‘it ' 

Ji; r ''. :.C>' 


' Dr —^' V 


' 'T •■ 


‘ ... 

. . , .. ..•: • . 

J .)f .W ' : . 

- JJ4 -44:^) " ^r 

, . ;■ '^Xvri^'i'^ijVui'', 

.-A fu.;'’::■ ■:»..,;,^^;4’ 

:;xvrcl -f: 

V __ '■. ) ,0.:*,.-: • ' 

. .. ; 

' ' '• " - '- " ''■' c 

' ■' '.■ '.^ '■ ■ v , 1 . i' '■ r-K 

': ^ f Cojsr _ _ : .•"Viif 

« ! y, .. .C' ill C'.:' i .'I'l i ■ t ' 3 ■ ■ 


<»tr- 


* 


^ I 


.. . !. 


.r-v ’:.;■ 






•’ r 


. 6 r O' 




•-C0 


.£ r:,; :''••■*■ 

.r. . . '■’' 

;;fov 

'-■ '< '■ '■ ’■•. ' 


'. ' 'w'.. i ( 


■ - 'i!: ■ ■ 


OJ 





t. i«’ii 




( 5 ) 


use, of enzyii-i 3 S had greatly increased the germination of some 
old seeds, hut shewed this to he the case only 7/hen vitality 
was at a lov/ ehh and not when extinct. He concluded that the 
loss of vitality in seeds is not due to the disorganization 
of the enzymes hut that there is a close connection between 
the tv/o. In some of his experiments he reduced the vitality 
of seeds hy prolonged storage ( up to 85 days ) in closed 
bottles with varying quantities of water, which hOT/ever was 
not in contact v/ith the seeds hut added on small strips of 
blotting paper. The enzyme he studied was diastase (amylase). 

Darsie, Elliott and Pierce (5) based a method 
for determining the vitality of seeds on the temiperatures 
developed hy a given weight of seeds placed in silvered De- 
war flasks under conditions suitable for germination, 
found a "normal temiperature" for each of a number of different 
kinds of seeds. This normal temperature was the average 
increase in temperature produced hy ten granis of vigorous, 
high germinating seed under the above conditions, per dajr. 

This varied from 1.82*^0 for hemip to 0.49°G for corn. A tem¬ 
perature in excess of normal was taken to indicate a condi¬ 
tion of infection and was generally due to the heat gener¬ 
ated by the growth of moulds &c; while a subnormal temp¬ 
erature indicated decreased vigour. Apparently there was 
no attemipt to correlate different temperatures with different 
percentages of germination. 

Lesage (14) in a recent paper, cites his earlier 
work published in 1911 and 1917 on the determination of 
viability by miethods other than direct germination. He used 
20 solutions of KOH varying in concentration from H to 
X 2“^, in which he soaked the seeds being tested. He 
found that seeds having lost their viability coloured' all 
solutions an egg-yolk yellow, while those still viable 
coloured only the stronger solutions. He worked chiefly 
with Lepidium sativum , but found his method applicable to 
eighteen other species. 

Appleman (2), Crocker and Harrington (4) and 
others whose work is touched on later in this review, 
shewed that catalase activity paralleled respiratory ac¬ 
tivity. This fact suggested to some that catalase activity 
might be used as a measure of viability in seeds. 

Hemec and Duchon (21) published soxie work based 
on this principle, but gave rather scanty particulars as 
to their method. They determined the volume of O 2 split 
off from 15cc of 3% HgOg by 2 gms. of ground farinaceous 
and f gm of oleaginaceous seeds in a given tim^e. By run¬ 
ning a control in duplicate, using flour of the seed in 








(4) 


Liuestion wliich had been heated to 100° 0 for 20 Einutes 
on the water-bath, and subtracting the vo3,unie of Og liber¬ 
ated by the control from that liberated by the experimental 
samiple, they obtained a figure expressing the catalase 
activity of the seed which they found to be directly cor¬ 
related with the germination* Thej/ then prepa,red a graph 
from which the viability might be read, the catalase ac¬ 
tivity as obtained by this method having been determined* 

In a later paper (22) these authors traced 
again the correlation of loss of vitality with loss of 
catalase activity, which, they concluded, represents a 
vital indicator enabling one to see in only a few manutes 
whether the seed examiined has a high germination or not* 

Uhey worked entirely with seeds of low vitality through 
age, using barley, wheat, oats, peas &c* Extensive 
figures of numerous experimients are given, and graphs 
where the percentage of germination is plotted against Og 
liberated in 5 minutes, are shewn. Several of the tables 
of figures include data shewing the progress of the reaction 
at regular intervals and from these data, using the follow¬ 
ing modification of the niono-miolecular formiula ( K - 1 log 

/T 

a 

a - X ) in wliich ^Tt' is substituted for they calculated 
a series of values for K v/hich were very to*lerably constant 
except for the first few readings of any one determination, 
and which they used as an expression of the catalase activity 
of the seed instead of the volume of Og liberated. In the 
above formula, K should be Constant with varying values of 
t and X, where _t is the tim*e in seconds at which the reading 
was taken, x is the volume of Og liberated in that time and 
a is the initial concentration of the Og in the H20g capable 
of being liberated, ^his constant K they found to be 
correlated with the percentage of germination, and prepared 
graphs from which the latter might be read, the formier having 
been determined experimentally. 

It will be shewn later that somie other invest¬ 
igators have failed to find this direct correlation claim^ed 
by ITemec and Euchon; but here, a review of the literature 
on the functions of catalase and the determination of its 
activity will serve as an introduction to papers dealing 
with catalase activity and seed viability. 

Applem.an (1) working with potato catalase found 
that rapid deterioration of its activity set in after making 





' M 





0 




Ul 

fc .,1 »*.'?•( 










(5) 


the preparation, unless certain precautions were taken. 

Ihese were to grind the iraterial with OaCO^, promptly to dilute 
the extract in the proportion of 1:10, and to keep it at 
EO^G, or less. He pointed out the necessity of grinding for 
a uniform time in order tMt the different preparations mdght 
he comparable, and used, as the basis of his comparison, the 
volume of oxygen liberated after a given period. He confirmed 
the existence of the insoluble (oC -catalase) and soluble 
( (!3-catalase) forms mentioned loew (15, cpaoted from 
Appleman), based on the passage of approximately 50% of the 
catalase through a filter paper, though none passes through 
a Pasteur-Chamiberland filter. He found that potato catalase 
is very sensitive to temrperature, being conroletely destroyed 
at 50^C as comipared with 66-80^0 for other forms, the des¬ 
truction comimencing at temperatures over 20^0. As, the result 
of his experiments he concluded that catalase can onli^ decom¬ 
pose a limited cxuantity of peroxpde, and that catalase activ¬ 
ity appears to bear soxie relation to respiration. 

In a later i^per previously quoted (2) this 
author concluded that while oxidase activity does not, catalase 
activity does shew a very striking correlation with the 
respiratory activity of the tubers. 

Crocker and Harrington (4) describe two types 
of dormancjT in seeds. In the one there are certain funda- 
miental changes necessar^r before growth can start, Y/hich are 
favoured ty Ioyj temperature (5^0) and a.bundance of oxygen 
and moisture. Hhe other is of the hard seed-coat t^npe. 

2hey also describe s secondary d orr:anc 3 r imposed ^:y the struc¬ 
tures enclosing the erabr^^o, as for example, in Johnson gra.ss 
( S0rghum Ha1apense (1.) rers) which fails to germinate when 
kept moist at constant t emrperature, but which retpaires dry 
storage for after-ripening. 

In making their catalase d e terminations they 
used a given y/ eight of the finely ground seeds sifted through 
bolting cloth. 2he strength of the PdgOo v/as determined by 
using an excess of catalase material which they found acted 
as a buffer to counteract the adverse effect of the acidity 
of the peroxide, and released the Og quantitatively/. Hhey 
used 1.5 grn of material in the case of crimiSon clover seed 
in 5cc of H 2 O, and 2cc HgOg diluted to 5ec. Phey point out 
the necessity for neutralising the acidity of the peroxide, 
discussing the effect of var37ing degrees of acidity/ on the 
catalase activity/ of Johnson grass, and conclude that an 
excess.of GaGO^ js as effective as exact neutralization to 
phenol-phthalein with HaOH. Phis point is further elaborated 







( 6 ) 


With other seeds. In considering the effect of the degree 
of pulverization they found that excessive agitation caused 
a partial destruction of the catalase and that the degenera¬ 
tion of the enzyme was relatively ^-lUick after grinding if 
stored in a dessicator over GaO. 

In comparing the catalase activity of different 
parts of the caryopses of grasses, they found that the 
emhryo shewed much higher activity than the endosperm. 

Among the numerous conclusions and points of 
interest mientioned, the following hear directly on the scope 
of this thesis. 


Catalase activity paralleled respiratory aetivit37 
in seeds rniuch miore closelTr than viability or vigour. For 
eq.r.al weight irrimature grains shev/ed much higher activity/ 
than miature, this preponderance being maintained even sifter 
drying and storage, but the sam.e numiber of immature and mature 
seeds of Johnson grass (separated by means of the blower) 
shewed approximately equal catalase activity. 

The driving' of seeds was shewn to lov/er catalase 
activity, which was also observed to becomie less as seeds 
aged. This how-ever was concluded t o be not true of all 
seeds, as it was not observed in the case of Ama ran thus 
retroflexus, Th 037 failed to find, that catalase activity 
V7as directly correlated with vitality. Tw^o gra]phs were 
prepared, one shewing two curves illustrating the relation 
between germhnation and s^ge, and cata.lase activity and age 
respectively; the other shewing two curves illustrating the 
relation between germination and the number of hours heated 
at 81^0, and catalase activity and number of hours heated 
at 81°C respectively. Comparison of these two graphs in 
the opinion of the authors, "strengthens the coagulation 
conception of age degeneration". 

Seeds tlmt after-ripen with dry storage but 
without self-imposed dormant embr^/os, either appeared to 
shew no change in catalase activity (e.g. Amaranthus spp. ) 
or a lowering thereof (as in the case of grasses) 7/ith 
after-ripening; while those thiat after-ripen in the germin- 
ator at low teXiperature, having self-imrposed. dormant emiryos, 
seem^ed to sheT? increased catalase activity with after¬ 
ripening. 


Seeds r/hich had been treated with heat to lower 
their vitality shewed a greater fall of catala.se activity 
than of germination in the shorter periods of treatment, but 





(7) 


the reverse in the longer periods in the case of Johnson 
grass. In air-dried seeds of Amarantlms spp., the catalase 
appeared to he coinparatively heat- and time-stahle, the 
substances connected with viability, coir.paratively heat-and 
tiiLe-labile, \ihlle with Johnson grass the reverse was the 
case, fhis latter shewed a loss in catalase activity under 
stora-ge in a gerisin^itor at 20^0, but the loss was less 
parked at 7^0. Jhe longevity of dormant seeds appeared to 
be limited by the exhaustion of stored foods by respiration, 
the intensity of ?/hich is much reduced during domTancy along 
with catalase activity. With the germination of the seed, 
the catalase activity increased. The proportion of the 
soluble (3-catalase varied with different species, being 
responsible for about 50;'b of the total activity in Ama ran thus 
retroflexus, and about 14-30% (depending on the filter used) 
in Johnson grass. 

In a paper designed to shew the inadecuacy of 
the then existing methods of m.easuremient of catalase activity, 
and to propose a new method, Becking and Hampton (3) 
criticised a numiber of miethods in use at that time or proposed. 

fhey point out that the measurement of the height 
of the foam produced during the reaction (method of pallad in) 
is rendered useless on account of the fact that this height 
va-ries with the purity of the enzyuae. Jhe titration method 
with Il.in 04 fa.ils to shew clearl37 either the end point or the 
beginning of the reaction in many cases, the beginning being 
considered as being at the conclusion of the latency period. 

Discussing the manometric methods, their note the 
danger of over saturation of the substrate with ga.s. This 
and the fact that the solution contained a great part of the 
ox^/gen was overcomie by shaking and by the use of a, shallow 
layer of fluid with a large surface, since shaking does not 
injure the catalase in the short time of the catalase reaction, 
even though when prolonged it does. The fact that the 
pressure becomies higher during the reaction, another objection 
which had been made to mianometric m-ethods, was disregarded as 
they found the effect to be negligible. 

Another important criticism of nearljr eT.1 .niethod s 
of catalase determnnation was advanced. Heca.lling the defin¬ 
ition of an enzirm.e as a substance that changes the velocitir 
of a reaction, the onlir miethod theoretically justifiable 
would, be to determine the time in which the rea.ction is com.- 







( 8 ) 


plated under the influence of the enzyme* 

'IThe authors developed an autographic method 
which provided a complete record of the reaction and gave 
a satisfactory means of m;easuring the reactio'n-timie • 'Zhe 
reaction vessel (providing a large surface to the thin layer 
of the substrate ) was connected to a rcereury msnom.eter hy 
a ground glass joint. In the free arm of the manoneter was 
a wooden float hearing a convenient support for a glass pen. 

Zliis r ec 0 rded on a c 371 ind er in the usua 1 ?/, the speed of 
the c^/linder being Imra. in 1 3/8 seconds at the p 0 ri'pher 37 , 

his cuss ion follovjs as to the chemical nature of 
the decomposition of HEOg; they consider that there is evidence 
of t?/o successive reactions and tlat the d - and ^ -cats.lase 
of loew are two successive stages of peptisation of the .tam.e 
substance• 


In considering the comparison of the action of 
two different quantities of enzym.e, since they found that 
there was destru-ction of catalase during the reaction, the^r 
point out that the reaction velocity was not constant; hence 
they conclude reaction-velocity/ is a rt.isleading test for the 
strength of an enzyme. On the other hand, the amiOunt of 
peroxide deconroosed gives different ratios after different 
lapses of time. These consideratious confirm their previous 
conclusion that the tim.es rev-iuired to complete the reaction 
shouId be direc 1137 cormpar ed • 

Using their autographic Wiethod they found that the 
reaction tirae was inversely proportional to the an'ount of 
enzymie and, ?i/ith a constant quantity of catalase, directly 
proportional to the quantity of peroxide. 

They/ worked out the reaction velocities of a nun:- 
ber of different experiments and found that .the expression:- 

Heactlon velocity x number of cc. peroxide 

number of cc. enzyme 

was fairly constant, but point out that it would reuuire 39 , 
de.terminations of this sort to prove what one d eterWiinati on 
of the reaction time gave, viz. that the reaction follows the 
law of Mass Action. 

They tried farther to eom/pare the ciuves obtained 
with Xiatherniatically/ constructed logarithmuc curves, using the 



V 


■'.0 1 , .♦ 

, ■ - ■ it: V 

. ; . . ■ f.c 

, ■ ' t 

I. , 

j V ’■) 


r ^ 






(9) 


ec[-aation: - 



a 




t = C log 

a - X 

and found:- 


Calculated from 

Amount 




curve. 

extract, 

G X 

E. 


0.15 

4 cc. 

0.6 



0.£0 

5 " 

0.6 



0,50 

2 ” 

0.6 



0,60 

1 ” 

0.6 



1,20 

1 !! 

2 

0.6 



and concluded that thi 

s miethod would probably 

be the 

most prac- 

tical and accurate. 





Ifhey found 

that the latency 

time X 

amiount 

of enzyme 

seemed to be more or less constant but 

felt it 

was premiature 

to dr a?/ any c one liis ions from this. 






ii’ig. 1 shews the type of curve obtained on an 
autogram. It occurred to the present writer that it must he 
a matter of considerable difficulty to determine when'the end 
point in time had been reached, though there is less chance of 
error in reading the ^’action” end point (cf, a S: b with a b * ) 
^he authors ca,lculated the volume of oxygen actually liber¬ 
ated by subtracting the known volume of the container less 
that of the extract and H 2 O 2 , from the observed final volume 
(allowing for the pressure^set up by the column of mercury) 
and comparing it with the^Ji^'volume of oxygen the peroxide 
v/as capable of liberating* Having determined the point on the 
autogram representing miaximum oxygen liberation, the corres¬ 
ponding time was taken as the reading. 

In a study of the depressive effect of successive 



















I 









a'r C/S 

.'. ’ ' (,'• J 






f\ 


ft 





' ■■' ‘ . • ^ ,V ■' J 

a'-fya^c. -av^ 

'■ '• ' -a M /rf '. ■ Vi: 

i^-'A fjrr f.. . 1 ’' a. 'j ■■' 


.:- ■/f ill ':' 


. I 




a 


a'’ 






( 10 ) 


doses of peroxide on a given viuanti ty of extract they found 
that the action of the catalase did not vary with its dilution 
nor with the quantity of the peroxide, lut only with the al- 
solute quantity of the enzvxrie itself; and that in the particul¬ 
ar experinant u.nder consideration the peroxide destroyed 
rh IO 70 of the catalase during each soiccessive reaction. 

In a very thorough study of the catalase reaction 
liorgulis (16) used a crude liver cavtalase preparation, "but 
found that the data, obtained applied to catala.se frou many 
sources. The peroxide was standardized by ti traction with 
Kl.inO^ and its pH adjusted to 6.9. fhe author points out 
the error introduced by the use of peroxide with an acid reac¬ 
tion. He found the optinnim pH for the catala.se reaction to be 
7.0 but at this pH the E20£ decomposes soxiewhat, spontaneous¬ 
ly, while at 6.9 the catalase shews almost the same activity 
as at 7,.:0.: In experiments to determine this point the quant¬ 
ities of cata-lase and peroxide were so adjusted that the curve 
of oxygen evolution followed the isotherm of a bi-rnolecular 
reaction, 

H = 1 . X 

1 : a(a - x) . 

In this first series of experiments the reaction 
was found to run triie to. the course of a bi-molecular curve 
at pH values of from 6.4 to 8 .S, but not at acidities exceed¬ 
ing 6.4. 

Increasing the concentration of the HgOg, the 
volume being constant, v/ith a given quantity of extract' liad 
the effect of increasing the volum^e of oxygen liberated fromi 
grami-molecular concentrations of 0.16 to 0.S2, though the 
percentage of peroxide decomposed was less whth increase of 
concentration. Gram.-molecula.r concent rat ions in excess of 
0.32 had the effect of diminishing not onj-y the proportion of 
peroxide decomoposed but also the actual aXiOunt of oxygen 
liberated. In addition to these effects, the reaction proceeds 
more slowly with increase of concentration of HgOo. Hrom the 
curve illustrating these da,ta it may be assumied that decompos¬ 
ition would be complete with a concentration of 0.14 PI. H 2 O 2 . 

Discussing the depressive effect of an excess of 
peroxide oh the catalase reaction he concludes that catalase 
is not destroyed through oxidation bj/ the peroxide since even 
a very large excess of the latter does not prevent the reaction, 
ilor does he find this depressive effect to be due to some 
incidental impuritjr which becomies present in sufficient quant¬ 
ity to retard the reaction when excess of peroxide is employed• 
The actual reduction in the voluxie of the oxygen liberated 
when the concentration of EoOg exceeds a certain aXiOunt leads 
to the conclusion tlat the catalase reaction is a reversible one. 




( 11 ) 


•phe ma^xiinuni oxygen evolntion was found to occur 
when the relative amounts of catalase and peroxide were so 
adjusted that 65-70^ of the latter, was decomposed. 

Using a moderate excess of peroxide he found, that 
the reaction came to a stop after partial decomposition. With 
the addition of a ft-rther dose of catalase the reaction went 
to completion. Then, using a constant tpuantity of catalase 
and adding the peroxide in two doses, the first dose was com¬ 
pletely decomposed, the second partially and the proportions 
having teen adjusted to conform with the previous experiment, 
it was found that the total volume of oxygen was the sanie as 
“before. Another variation of the sam.e experiment was tried 
in which the sam.e quantity of peroxide was used as in the first, 
tut the first dose of catalase was added in two portions. These 
two stages made no difference to the total volume of oxj^gen 
produced. 

He concluded that the catalase is used up in the 
reaction and that it reacts with a definite qua,ntity of the 
peroxide. 

In a further series of exr)eriments he found that 
there was a direct proportionality "between the am^ount of cat¬ 
alase and the amount of oxygen it produced from a given 
quantity of peroxide. This was true only for acsolute amiounts, 
changes of concentration alone having no effect. 

In a curve illustrating the effect of an increase 
in the quantity of peroxide with a constant quantit37 of cat¬ 
alase, he found that the curve of ox^rgen evolution had a 
smaller slope for every new increase in the aiiiount of H 2 O 2 
emiploj-ed, which is significant since if the diminution were 
due to an oxidation of the catalase, a proportionately greater 
destruction of it would "be expected w'ith the greater amaunt of 
peroxide. 


The reaction velocity was found to dimiinish in the 
early stages with increase of concentration of HgO^, using’ the 
reciprocal of the time as a measure of the rate. In the- later 
stages the rate "became equalised except with a concentration 
of over 0.36 gm Hoi. when the retardation was very marked 
throughout. 






( 12 ) 


V/hen the absolute amount of peroxide and the 
absolute volume of reacting liquids were unchanged but the 
relative concentration of the catalase y/as increased, the 
rate remained practically constant; but when the amount of 
the catalase was increased, the relative concentration remain¬ 
ing unchanged and the absolute amount of the peroxide being 
the same, the rate varied directly v/ith the amount of the cat¬ 
alase. Ee concluded that the reaction rate depends directly 
on the quantity of catalase used, v^hile the effect of the 
peroxide is to limit the rate. 

In discussing the chemical nature of the catalase 
reaction he states that the course of the reaction seems to 
depend solely on the quantitative relation between the avail¬ 
able catalase and the peroxide. He finds three stages. When 
the conditions are such that the decomposition falls between 
9^ - lOOfo of the peroxide, the reaction follows a mono-molecular 
course and the formula X = i lop ^ 

t ^ a - X applies; when 
the decomposition falls between 68 - 82% the reaction is 

bi-molecular, the formula x - 1 . _x_ 

t a(a-x) applying; while 

a more or less intermediate zone exists between 88 - 9J% de¬ 
composition, when the reacticm is o ne an d one half molecular, 
and the formula x = 1 • - xAa-x applies, 

t 7a X 

It v/as necessary to change the quantities very 
little to produce appreciable differences in the value of X. 
Three graphs are shewn in which the experimental curves are 
plotted with the theoretical curves calculated from the 
average value of E for each respective experiment and shew 
a striking similarity between the two. 

The use of very large quantities of peroxide is 
criticised on account of the depressive effect unless very 
large quantities of catalase are employed. On the other hand, 
when comparison is made of the catalase activity of prepar¬ 
ations of presumably different strengths, the depressive 
effect is much greater in the case of the weaker sample and 
differences will be exaggerated. 

Ee concludes that the entire method of comparing 
several samples of catalase on the basis of the amounts of 
os^gen liberated is of questionable accuracy, and recommends 
that the comparison should instead be made between the re¬ 
spective quantities of catalase preparation required to set free 






(IS) 


the same amount of Og from a given q.uantity of E^Og, anci that 
further, the reaction he adjusted to follow some definite 
course ax^proximinting Vojo peroxide decoFiposition* 

Repeating the experiments of Eem.ec & Puchon, 
with different varieties of pea, Pe YilmiOrin and Cazau-hon (26) 
found a distinct correlation 'between the diiTiinution of their 
catalase activity and of their germination on account of age. 

In the case of the seeds of certain trees however, notably 
pine and larch, in which they felt this reaction would he of 
particular value 'because of the slov germiination of these 
seeds, they found that there was still considerable catalase 
activity even in dead seeds, while it was m.uch reduced when 
the seeds were 'heated at 100for one half hour. Hence they 
concluded that the m.ethoc1 was inapplicable to these species. 

Heinicke (10) working with apple-leaf tissue 
pointed out the imiportance of variations in concentration 
of the substrate, particularly in the case of catalase 
material. Pie found that since, by increasing the quantity 
of H 20 g used, the volume of Op liberated was increased some¬ 
what, but not markedly, it was important to have an excess 
of peroxide. 

Agitation of the preparation, a li^iuid suspension, 
did not degenerate the catalase of apple-leaf tissiie. In 
making the determination, . the ra-te of agitation varying fromi 
30-90 shakes per miinute, did not affect the speed of oxygen 
liberation. 

On letting the preparation stand, the catalase 
activity increased up to one hour, after ?/hich the increase 
becam.e so slight that it mdght be disregarded, and retained 
its full activity up to four days. Without preliminary 
neutralization witii GaGO^, however, the degradation was very 
rapid. 

Shull and Davis (25) working with seeds of 
Xanthiumi found that catalase activity was not strictly 
proportional to the amount of material used. With this species, 
they found no variation in activity as a result of dry storage, 
but that germinator storage at a temiperature too low for 
germination increased respiratory and catalase activitjr. Seeds 
collected from the field at weekly intervals shewed a progres¬ 
sive decline in catalase activity till about the mdddle of 
April, when it began to increase as the natural germinating 
season approached. 

Heinicke (11) in a paper later than the one 
previously cj.uoted, in discussing the preparation of material 




( 14 ) 


pointed out the advisability of trituration with water, the 
time of grinding making no difference provided it was done 
wet; the probable cause of the lowering of catalase activ¬ 
ity with excessive grinding in Crocker and Harrington*s 
experiment with Johnson grass being that it was done dry* 

He tested his peroxide with Mn02 using as the 
index of activity the time rei^uired to liberate 5cc of oxygen* 
He found a retardation of the reaction if the 6cc of oxygen 
liberated represented more than 1/6 or 1/6 of the available 
Og in the peroxide* On the other hand the larger the amiount 
or the greater the strength of the peroxide, the slower the 
initial rate of catalase activity, but the more rapid the 
subsequent liberation of given quantities of oxygen. In such 
cases he found that the volume of gas in the burette might 
either be reduced by as much as 0*6cc when the liquids were 
first mdxed, or remain the same for the first 5-16 seconds in 
spite of continual shaking* IThis "latency time" while fre¬ 
quently observed, does not always occur* 

After the first dose of peroxide was completely 
decomposed, he found that a second was split miOre slowly, 
whether by catalase or MnOg. The effect of the dilution of 
the liquids in the reaction chamber was to retard the 
liberation of the Og from the HgOg, both by his apple bark 
preparation and by MnOg, such dilution of a weak preparation 
resulting in a more than proportional loss in catalase ac¬ 
tivity, while doubling the quantity of the preparation reduced 
by miore than one half the time required to liberate a given 
quantity of oxygen* Ihe stronger the original preparation, 
whether of catalase or Mn 02 , the miOre nearly proportional 
was the activity of diluted or increased quantities. 

Ota (2*5) concluded that respiratory and catalase 
activities run parallel throughout the dormancy period, in 
seeds of Xanthiumi* 

Knott (IS) working with leaf tissue, principally 
that of spinach and tomato, used the following technique* 

One grami of discs of one centim.eter diameter cut from the 
leaves, was ground with an equal weight of QsCOg in a miortar 
with 2cc of water and a pinch of pure quartz sand for two 
manutes. ^he paste was washed into a bottle with 18cc H 2 O 
(or presumably made up to 20cc total). After thorough mixing, 
2cc were immiediately withdrawn and placed in one arm of the 
dry reaction tube, in the other armi being placed 2cc H 2 O 2 
(equivalent to 26co available O 2 ) previously neutralized with 
a slight excess of GaGO^. During the course of the reaction 
the levelling bulb was moved to keep the reaction under con¬ 
stant atmiOspheric pressure* His rate of shaking was 240 







(15) 


complete excursions per minute, tut lie found no variation 
in the total rate of literation of oxygen when the speed 
v/as varied from 2E0-S00, though the initial rate was faster 
with the higher sliaking speed* 

A constant temperature hath operated at 20*^0 
was used, the reaction vessel being immersed therein for 
three minutes prior to shaking. Check tests were made to 
within an accu.racy of ifo. 

He allowed the reaction to proceed hejT-ond the 
See used 157 Heinicke, since he found that catalase ac¬ 
tivity in two tests might run parallel up to this point 
hut diverge markedl37 thereafter* 

In discussing the amount of HgOg to use, he 
stated that it might in certain eases he a limiting factor 
when the oxygen liberated was more thJin one fifth of the tot¬ 
al available^ hut he had not found it so till 60 fo of the O 2 
was released. By increasing the q.uantity of HgOg, the strong¬ 
er catalase preparations shewed a slight increase in liber¬ 
ation of oxygen, less strong preparations being unaffected, 
while weak preparations shewed a retardation. 

2he problem often arose as to how a catalase 
preparation miight be kept with its activity unimpaired. Held 
at room tem/perature, it decreased in activity u.p to a point 
when it started to increase, after about 50 hours. Uhis 
secondary activity was shev^n to be due to bacteria,. He tried 
the use of 1% toluene, which checked bacterial growth but 
also affected the rate of the catalase reaction. 2he problem 
was finally solved by emiploying lo?/ teniperature'. storage, and 
he found that placing the bottles on ice immediately after 
trituration and dilution appea.red to be the best method of 
keeping over prex^arations of celery and spinach, but that 
tomiato catalase lost its activity slightly during 24 hours, 
even when on ice. One other factor was found to have an 
influence on this point. Ihe exposure of the preparation to 
air after cold storage remioved somie inhibiting factor and 
thereafter the catalase reaction was found to have been ac¬ 
celerated. Ihe weaker the catalase reaction the greater was 
this effect, which reached its miaximum after 6-8 minutes 
exposure to air. Bhis effect was thought to be due to the 
greater solubility of GOg at the low temperature. 

More recent studies in the determination of seed 
viability or age by methods other than the germination of the 
seed, or the catalase reaction, include those of f’ick and 
Hibbard (8) and Ihinerati (20). Hhe former based their 
method on the measuremient of the conductivity of water 



(16) 


in which seeds had teen soaked. G!he greater diffusion of 
the salts from seeds of low viatility than from those of high, 
brought about the greater eonduictivity of the soak water. 

Using varying maxtures of old seed of Zfo germination (since 
artificially killed seed were found to be unsuitable) with 
fresh seed having germination, some very fairly consis¬ 
tent results were obtained. Uimuthy and clover vi/as the mat¬ 
erial used. Munerati found that the optimum tem.perature for 
germination v/as correlated with the age of the seed. 

Davis (6) failed to find a close correlation 
between catalase activity and germination as reported by 
Uemiec and Duchon. Since, hov/ever, the loss of catalase ac¬ 
tivity seemed to lag behind the loss of via,bility, it occurred 
to himi that its disorganization might be brought about in some 
manner that would not affect the catalase of viable seeds. 

He found that soaking in warm, water effected this. Using the 
ratio:- cc. Og liberated by soaked: unsoaked, he found that 
this ratio was niore or less equal to unity when the germina¬ 
tion was high, but less when the viability was low. 

Instead of a given v/eight of material, this author 
used a given number of seeds. He found that in choosing 
between a short soak at relatively high temAperature and a 
longer soak at a lower temperature, the former was preferable 
since disorganization of the catalase was more comiplete and 
there was less chance of its increase with increase of respir¬ 
atory activity. Hhe catalase content of viable lettuce seed 
was not reduced by soaking for one hour at 54°C, (high temip- 
erature, short soak). Somie seeds responded much more com^pletely 
to the high temiperature soak than to the lovr. He used as his 
basis of measurem-ent the volume of 0^ liberated after ten 
minutes. 


With seeds shewing high catalase activity he 
recommiended grinding a large number with repeated additions 
of 20ec. or more of water, and working the mass through a 
60 mesh sieve till 250ce. had been obtained. After thorough 
agitation a 5cc. aliquot to which 5ec. of water were added, 
was taken for each run. 

He found that the seed axis and especially the 
hypocotyl portion of the embryo appeared to be the first to 
succumib to" devitalizing factors. In cases where this was 
true and the cotyledons or endosperm form.ed the bulk of the 
seed, the difference in catalase content of the dry and 
soaked seeds might not be sufficient to indicate the true 
condition of the viability of the seed. In such cases it 
was recomAmiended that the catalase be determined on the epi- 
cotyl and hypocotyl without storage parts. 



(17) 


IVhere the seed W8>s "badly infested w'ith fungi the 
test was found to be of no value, as the living fungi bear 
part of the catalase and protect it against decomposition in 
the high temperature soak. 

The advantages claimed for the method are, that it 
is unnecessary to know the catalase content of the same kind 
of seed of high viability; the quick estimation of the viabil¬ 
ity of dormant seeds is possible; viability of quickly germ.- 
inating seeds can be still miore quickly estimated where special 
dispatch is necessary; and for checking up erratic results 
obtained by germiination methods. 

In a study of the catalase relations of rice 
under different germiination cond it ions, Morinaga (19) found 
that there was only about one tenth as much catalase in dry 
seeds of rice as in those of wheat, oats, barley and rye. 

Rice germiinating anaerobically shewed no increase in cata^lase, 
but a gradual increase was observed in the course of germiina¬ 
tion in a miedium with a reduced supply of oxygen, while under 
aerobic conditions of germiination the catalase activity was 
high, being about seven-tenths as miUch as that in the germ- 
ina,ting grains of wheat, barley and oats. Hence it was con¬ 
cluded that the ratio of increase of catalase activity is a 
function of the free oxygen in the miediumi. 

The free oxygen was found to affect the develop- 
mient of the radicle and plumule and also of the chlorophyll 
the latter. The catalase once having been increased 
under aerobic germina,tion conditions, decreased when the 
plant was returned to anaerobic conditions, though the growth 
continued. He found furfher that where the catalase had been 
increased by germination under aerobic conditions, much more 
oxiT-gen 77as used by the seedlings than in the reverse case, 
but the carbon dioxide relations were unchanged. 

In a general discussion as t o the value of catalase 
as an indicator of seed viability, Gra.canin (9) points out that 
contradiotor37 results have been obtained by different authors. 
He found with certain seeds a diminution of catalase activity 
with loss of vitality T/hen such loss of vitality is occasioned 
by age. In plant tissue which has lost its vitality however, 
he distinguishes, after Grafe, between "dead” and "disorgan¬ 
ized" tissue. In the former case while vitality is gone, 
the enzymes still retain their properties to a certa^in extent, 
while in the latter the enzynies are lost also. In order to 
being about these conditions in seeds, he soaked them in 

various solutions. Thus 0.05 M haOl and 0.001 M ZnSOx killed 
the cells (leaf tissue of Mnium undulatum j without disorgan¬ 
izing the catalase; 0.001 M OuSO^ killed the cell and reduced 






(18) 


catalase activity; while 0.001 M FeCl^ and 0.001 M I des¬ 
troyed loth life and catalase activity. Similar results 
were obtained with seeds of four species* 

He concludes that while loss of catalase 
activity indicates loss of vitality in seeds, the converse 
does not hold necessarily, and points out how erroneous 
conclusions could he reached hy judging the vitality of 
seed hy the catalase test, if such seed had been shipped 
hy ocean and become injured hy the salt water. 

ITaced with the problem of determining the rela¬ 
tion between the vigour of seeds and the condition of the 
distilled water in which they had been soaked, Hottes and 
Huelson (12) carried out a large number of experiments 
using the Abbe refractometer and the leits nephelometer. Hhe 
method used was to soak 5 or 10 grams of the seed in 50 cc. 
of water in well stoppered bottles for 48 - 72 hours at 30^0. 
fwo or three drops were used for the reading. There was 
found to be an inverse correlation between the refractive in¬ 
dex and germination as also betv^een the colloidal index and 
germination, but the latter correlation was better. As a 
standard for the colloidal index readings 0.55b c.p. soluble 
starch was used dissolved in 0.55b sodium toluene para-sulpho- 
chloramide. 

They found ths^t the coefficients of correlation 
tended to increase inversely as the percentage germination — 
an advantage, since it is usually the low germdnating samples 
which are indoubt. The authors think the method miay prove 
useful in determining the viability of grains and seeds 
having a fairly large endosperm. 

The tvi/o following papers have been left for 
discussion at this point on account of certain matheiratica,! 
features they present, which it was felt made it ad visible 
to discuss them together, though the discussion of the miOre 
general features will be considered at the same time. 

Morgulis and Beber (17) working with a beef 
kidney preparation, shewed in a previous paper (16) that 
the optimum temiperature for catalase activity lay bet7;een 
O^C and 10^C. It is to be noted that in the crk of these 
authors, the criterion as t o catalase activity is not the 
rate of liberation of oxygen as with miost of those previously 
.j.uoted, but the total amount of oxygen that a given quantity 
of the preparation is capable of liberating. Hence, although 
the reaction proceeds much more.slowly at the low tem.peratures 
rbentioned, it does so m^uch miOre completely, the difference 
being due to the partial destruction of the catalase at the 


r f' 


■*»; ( 



«6’m< 


(19) 


hi ghe r t envpe ra tur 0 s • 

She iraterial used for the experiments dealt v/ith 
in this paper was a semi-pure heef kidney preparation v/hi^ii, 
having "been maintained at pH 7,0 by the use of the Holthoff 
phosphate-horax buffer, had retained its full strength for 
three years, She exioerimental temperatures ranged from O^G 
to Z0°0. 2he method of temperature control was an improve- 
mient over that previously used and was very accurate. As the 
experimental temperature was increased it was found necessary 
to increase the catalase concentration to make up for the 
destruction of the catalase during the experimient. 

Fig. 2., rougiil37 copied from the paper under 
discussion shews the relation betw’een catalase activity and 
temrperature with varying amounts of the catalase pre-paration. 



•Ilhe optimum texiperature is found to lie between 
l^G and 3^G. Hhe variation between these temperatures is so 
slight that the authors considered that the mean, 2^G, might 
be set as the optimum temperature. 

In Fig. 3., also copied from their paper, the 
results of the same series of experin:ents are arranged in such 
a way that the percentages of H£02 decomposed are plotted against 
the relative catalase concentrations. Ihe straight line graphs 
so produced are therefore catalase is.otherm^s. 







* 




' ('iaii 








In the paper previously quoted (16) Morgulis 
found that the course of the catalase reaction at the point 
where 70% of the was decomposed, followed exactly that 

of a li-rnolecular isothe^rm, and had previously teen proposed 
as a means of standardizing catalase preparations. By draYs/- 
in^the horizontal line corresponding to this degree of 
peroxide decomposition, the alscissa shews the relative cat¬ 
alase concentration which will nianifest this activity at 
varying experimental temperatures. 

Assumdng that all of the catalase is active at 
the optimum temperature (2°G.) it is possible to calculate 
hot; much is destroyed at a higher temrperature; for, regard¬ 
ing the amoumt of catalase which at 2®C effects 70% decomp¬ 
osition as one enzyme unit, the relative amount which is 
still active at any other temrperature may de odtained. If 
the values of the relative catalase activity thus calculated 
are plotted against their corresponding temperatures, the 
curve. Fig, 4 (also copied) is odtained, which corresponds 
to the equation:- y = 0.e58+0.425 sin 90/19 (10 - t), when 
equals the relative catalase activity and t_ the experimental 
temperature. 




















f - . 


L 






( 21 ) 



glis. 4. 


O^his esprassion holds good up to a temperature 
of E4°C, hut hayond this point there is a divargenca. 'iThile 
this divergence is of no loraetical value, since higher 
temperatures than this are never empl 037 ed in cata-lase deter¬ 
minations, there is a theoretical interest in this deviation* 

In a previous paper (18 quoted from 17) it was shewn that 
catalase destruction is a mono-molecular reaction ¥/ith a 
temperature coefficient v^hich increases miOderately for higher 
temiperature ranges; the temperature coefficient for the 
catalase reaction however Imving no fixed value, hut increasing 
greatly as the experimental temperature rises. It follows 
fromi the new ohservations that 24^0 is a critical temperature 
for the catalase reaction, the ra.te of the catalytic reaction 
being so much greater than that of the enzyme destruction 
reaction that the volume of oxygen set free 'becomes progress¬ 
ively greater than the theoretical amount for tenrperatures 
above 24^G. 


aJhis curve names it possible now to find the actual 
number of enzymie units no matter at v/hat temperature the 
experimient is ' perf ormed . Experiment ing at temperatures as 
low as 2^0 is not practicable and even if it were it would not 
be desirable, for the reaction at this temperature is very 











slow, whereas at 16 20°C the reaction is complete after from 

SO to 90 minutes. 'Ihe results obtained at an^z of these temip- 
eratures may easily be corrected for the catalase destroyed at 
the tenrperature used. It is necessary to determine the percent 
ilgOg destroyed by at least two different catalase concentra¬ 
tions (which should produce betvveen 50 and SOfo decomposition 
but in any case not m.ore than 90fo) , whereby the catalase iso¬ 
therm m^ay be established and the catalase concentration pro¬ 
ducing 70fo decomposition determined. 'The relative activity 
at the experimental temperature m^ay be read fromi curve Fig. 4. 
I:h8 quantity of catalase producing 70% decomposition ( Q ) 
divided bjz the factor for relative activity *( A ) at the 
temperature of the experiment gives the actual amount of the 
catalase used in the test; or if b/xl at where A - 1, is 

considered as the enzyme unit, the figure obtained is the numbe 
of enzyme units. 

^hey concluded that any catalase preparation 
could thus be standardized on a strictly quantitative basis, 
which is easily and exactly reproducible, and in experiments 
designed to prove this.point, found their conclusions justified 

In a paper dealing with the relationship between 
catalase activity and respiration of germinating seeds 
Rhine (24) after diseussirig the properties and. probable 
functions of catalase and various theories conerning the 
same, poinued out that*]j*fact that in many cases a parallel¬ 
ism had been found betv/een catalase activity and respiration, 
has lead the forriBr to be determined as a measure of the 
oxidation rate; but that tbere were discrepancies Wfhich it 
was the intention of her paper to solve. 

Rhe reaction vessel was operated in a water-bath 
maintained at 21 - 22*^0, and all results were calculated to 
standard temperature and pressure. In all experiments 5 ce. 
of Oakland dioxygen neutralized with h/10 BaOH was the ^luant- 
ity used. The tissue was ground v-zith GaOO,;. and sand and used 
quantitatively with 16 cc. HoO. When the "temperature of the 
bath was reached the peroxide was added, and shaking eommeneed 
15 seconds therea-fter. One 10 minure ’ reading ?vas taken, exces 
pressure being avoided by adjusting the level in the burette. 

Rhe degree of pulverization, w hich w as d one d ry, was d e termined 
according to the operator’s ’’best judgii:ent", being as nearly 
as possible equivalent to grinding dry wheat for four nzinutes. 

Where follows a discussion of the objection of 
Morgulis et al ” that a tiXae reading, arbitrarily chosen for 
the'^measurement of the catalase-hydrogen peroxide reaction, 
cannot afford an accurate measurement of catalase activity. 
Under the law of mass action, an arbitrary time limit would 


Of>DO. 


:.iD' 


C-.. 

■ J *. ' • 


lx' 

’>5*? .... 

’? -y ' 


c~iM ^ t ' 


::.i:.; . JJ ..m 

. r'? j n'x • .,wf-,.' 

'V 

*i: '- '-v ‘ ■'■ , 

o.i ..:i X.i 

' w;; r' • • • .^ ..• '• 


••. ■ ! -V*' ..■f'W\d£:.0 ■ „ 

1 " ■ : .xr 1 




V?l 




% 


: \ ;* .0; 


-Ic 


wi*» 

{' 






r>t<.yt:.-fli%t:,J 

:: 1 

; ■* ;V|? < ' 

' ■ . ■ * :K.T.'' 

5vXi, , ,1' ' 1 




J 






.: • .M.aOjri 


* I* 


f, 


tii i % 0!l 


U t\ 


■ >. >i.'- -f if/'U., 






(2S) 


not express the results of coiirparable stages in the reaction 
when the aXiOunt of one or more substances was varied, 'flms 
when the proportion of catalase to is high, a , 10-minute 

reading would express the results of a fxiuch greater part of the 
entire reaction than it v;ould when the amount of catalase is 
relatively sm.all". The authoress shews a table in which 
this is illustrated. She goes on to point cut that Forgulis 
stated that a great excess of either of the reacting substances 
exerts a depressive influence on the reaction, as a result of 
wrhich he argued tha.t ea.talase determinations could only be 
coiTipared by comparing the amounts of catalase preparation 
re.iUired to liberate eqtial volumes of oxygen. The iXipract- 
icability of this is pointed out and a remedy suggested, xi 
series of catalase determinations T^ere m£ide involving a wide 
variation in the amiount of the catalase preparation used (in 
this case wheatshewing sufficient excess of catalase at 
one end and of H 2 O 2 at the other for this depression to be 
produced. Having calculated the volum.e of oxygen liberated 
per grami of naterial, the highest value was taken as unity 
and the necessary correction factors calculated as shewn in 
the follo'^vLng table (.^uoted fromi Rhine ):- 


'TABLE 


?/e ight 
grams. 

in Gc. O 2 liberated 

in 10 miinutes. 

Cc. Og per 
grami. 

Factor. 

0.02 

0,49 

24.55 

1.34 

0.04 

1,01 

25.55 

1.30 

0.06 

1.56 

26.00 

1.26 

0.08 

2.06 

25.76 

1.28 

0.1 

S.Ol 

30.10 

1.07 

0.2 

6 * 38 

31,94 

1.03 

0.4 

12.92 

32.30 

1,02 

0.6 

19.77 

32.96 

1.00 

0.8 

24.56 

30.69 

1.06 

1.0 

30.80 

30,80 

1.07 

1.2 

35,82 

29.84 

1.13 

1.4 

39.49 

28.20 

1.14 

1.6 

42.02 

26,26 

1.26 ■ 

1.8 

44.49 

24.71 

1.33 

2.0 

47.82 

23.91 

1.37 


illl her further results 

were corrected 

with 

t he s e 

factors. Another table is 

given shewing 

simiilar 


but using different volum^es of a water excract 01 rye ovul.es. 
These two tables gave curves varying in type, but since in 
subse(iuent experiments the ground seed type of maS^terial was 















(24) 


used, the former set of factors was empl 037 ed. tests were 

run in triplicate. 

She found that while there was a large and immed¬ 
iate rise in respiratory? activity/ when seeds were put under 
germinating conditiouvS, the catalase activity decreased in 
the early stages of gemhnation in the case of six kinds of 
seeds tested; tut the initial decrease hov/ever was followed 
ty the rise generally reported, fhus the early curve of 
respiration was found to'.diverge widely from that of 
catalase activity. 

Catalase w/as found to decrease slowly, almost to 
exhaustion hy prolonged soaking of seeds in oxygen-free 
w^a ter. 

Ihe, decrease in germinati ng w hea t was e vid ent 
'both in the em.hryo and endosperm, the suhseeluent rise, 
however, while not confined to the emhry^o, w-as much more 
mar ke d t he r e i n. 

In ripening seeds the catalase was found to de¬ 
crease loth per/anit of w?et and of dry? w'eight. It increased 
per ovule as the seed, grew, hut after ripening hegan decreased 
rapidly with lowering of wa t e r content. 

Ihe production of catalase was found to he in¬ 
directly? connected with oxidation, and loew^s suggestion was 
advanced, that the fimction of catalase is to ren:ove either 
hydrogen T)eroxide or some other substance as y/et unknown 
whieli the catalase has the pow/er to decompose, and w/hich is 
formied in the tissues as the result of iLetaholic processes. 

In her opinion catalase activity could only? he 
used as an indicator of mietaholism in those cases where there 
v/as no rapid change in respiration. 


Summary « 

A number of hiochemdcal miethods of estimating the 
viability of seeds have been considered, ' Ihe miethod involv¬ 
ing the determination of catalase activity has been chosen 
for further study as giving promise of the solution of the 
problem and. a Is o'” as holding the possibility? of throwing light 
on som^e of the problemis of dormancy? and delayed germination. 







literatiirs on the catalase reaction has leen 
reviewed. Among authors who have attempted to use the catal¬ 
ase reaction as a mieasure of seed viability consid erafle 
difference of opinion exists as to its usefulness, fwo 
methods Vvhich are claimed hy their authors as giving a meas¬ 
ure of seed via'bility have "been descrilad. In the one, the 
difference "between the catalase activity/ shewn "by the untreated 
crushed seed and that shewn Iv the crushed seed after treat- 
mient on the water-hath of lOO^G for 20 minutes is taken as the 
m.easure; in the other the ratio;- catalase aetivit37 of seed 
soaked at fairly high temperature: that of seed not soaked, 
is the measure. 


'Ihe optimium pH for the cata,lase reaction has keen 
shevrn to he 7.0. Hhe method of neutralisation of the acidity 
of the peroxide v>?ith excess, of GaCO^ and grinding the material 
with excess of this siihstance has keen used ky a numker of 
investigators to produce conditions approaching this optimum 
and appears to ke a satisfactory mieans to accomplish this end. 

A depressive effect due to excess of either the 
peroxide or the catalase material has keen found, kjr 
several authors. 

A numker of methods have keen proposed as a has is 
for expression of catalase activity. The most practical for 
the purpose of this work appears to ke the volume of oxygen 
likerated after a given time corrected ky a factor to allow 
for this depressive effect. Ahis is mors full37 discussed in 
the next section. 

rhe importance of con'iparing the activities of 
catalase pre^a rat ions under uniform, temperature conditions 
has keen stressed. Ahe most suitakle temperature from a 
practical point of view is 20^G though this is not the 
optimum temperature for the cata-lase reaction. 

Catalase has keen reported to exist in a solukle 
and an insolukle formi; while one author considers these two 
formis to ke different degrees of peptization of the same 
sukstance • 

Respecting the quantity of catalase n&terial to 
use, som.e workers have used a given v/eight, others a given 
numker, of seeds. 2he latter is satisfactory where the seed 
is uniform, kut the former is perliaps the m.ore generally 
useful. It is to ke noted however in comparing seeds of 
different degrees of maturity directly, that Crocker and 
Harrington (4) found that a given numker of im.mature seeds 
exhikited the same activity as the sarnie numker of imiture 
seeds of the same species, though they weighed ^ess. 





- f. 


f'i /f<:c0‘ oifw 

e.*'- •:^i:7-' Cv.2i/Dr/f> a:'* ,^'Et^.v*^ ■ ^,-,.>^.,.«i 

''*:' ’r-::n d 'tP"»-;c kI rt/': i ; Tt 
foTii ^nna S2 ^fp ..u ■S?'* "vrf 1 ., rtsy^r^i, >0 fy.'tr 
-*>" -70'j r.*zjR >90 - f. T 0 c ^;. 0 J !r*o: '> r ^ 9 r c4 


Z f^j{l:<U' 


zdf 'ic '^:<o 40 ho^r 






* ^ *:; *: pToisrt^^^# 

■■»■ •* ‘ ' %t'^ l'> -oii^ xt\ ir’^'CX 


t:- 


I 


m 




l-Jv>l 


ifc i 


■t - 


■ . 


kf. 


tfTj 


<*4'4 



rflW'. * 


KfW. - 

Ik. « i 


>.>l i 


f Ai -r 

AJ... 


//,. 




Apparatus used for 


Gatalase Determinations 



5*ig. 5 

































( 27 ) 


aXPiaiMEHTiil PART. 


Development of a Method for Seed Catalase 
DQ t ermi n^i ons ♦ 

V/hila some of the methods for the determina¬ 
tion of seed viability outlined, which did not make 
use of the catalase reaction appear to be promising, 
it was felt that the catalase method not only gave promise 
of the solution of the problem, but that it might, 
moreover, throw more light on seed germination problems. 


Materials. 


It ?/as thought best to confine the following 
study to one kind of seed in order to avoid undue com¬ 
plications and that the study might be more complete; 
accordingly spring wheat has been used throughout. 

Merck H 2 O 2 , w^hich in repeated tests was 
shewn to be very fairly uniform in strength and which 
could be secured locally, was used. 

Merck precipitated GaOO^ 


Apparatus. 

The apparatus used was similar to that she?m 
in Pig. the reaction vessel being operated by an 
electric shaking mechanism, the speed of which could be 
varied within v/ide limits. 

In the early part of the ?/ork an attempt was 
made to keep the temperature of the laboratory about 
12’ by 14’) constant at C. by a thermo-regulated 
auxiliary heater. This hot proving very satisfactory the 
reaction vessel was immersed in a constant temperature 
water-bath, which was operated by a relay mechanism. This 
in turn not proving as satisfactory as could be desired, 
the author constructed a constant temperature cabinet, 
a cut of ?;hich is shewn in Pig. 6, in ?/hich the entire 
apparatus was placed, the sam.e relay mechanism, also home¬ 
made, being employed. This effects a tamperature control 
within -lo c. and was set to operate a fraction under 20O 
C. A suitable worm gear clutch mechanism enables the 
operator to set the shaker in operation from the outside 
of the cabinet. 

Ylhlle at first a reaction vessel shaped like 
that in Pig. ^ was used, this was later replaced by a 
Y-shaped vessel which was much more convenient. 








GOITSuJAiNG: TMPERA^URE UABIUK: 



A. Ehernostat. 

B. Belay. 

C. Condenser. 

G. Burette 


!)• Battery operating relay 
E. Rocker. 

E* Fan and Gear Boz. 
assembly. 


Pig 


6 















Relative Catalase Aotlvity of 
”germ'' and ^^brush^- ends of ?/heat 



?ig. 7 




(28) 


During the course of the reaction the level¬ 
ing bulh was left on its stand , lut a graph was prepared 
from w?hieh could le read the actijal volume of Oc dis¬ 
placed corresponding to the volume read on the burette* 
This correction of course was always made; also, in the 
latter part of the v/ork all volumes were corrected for 
ha r 0 me t ric pr e s sur e * 


Experimental, 

In regard to the basis for expression of 
ca-talase activity, five methods have been reviewed. These 
are: - 

(1) The volume of oxygen liberated after a given timie* 

(2) The time rec^uired to liberate a given volumie of 
02 ^ gen. 

Co) A reaction constant derived by the use of a mod¬ 
ification of the Hiono-miolecular formula, 

(4) The total amount of 0 x 37 gen a given quantity of 
catalase is capable of liberating or, alternativeI 37 
the amount of catalase preparation capable of liber 
ating a given volume of ax 37 gen. 

(5) A FiOdifi cation of (1) above. 

While the first of these affords a very conven¬ 
ient m^easure it has the objection that comiparisons are 
not made bet?/sen comroarable stages of the reaction. ThLis 
strict proportionality between the amoLint of catalase 
present and its misasurerneiit on this basis ca.nnot be expec¬ 
ted. This is illustrated by the carves shev/n in Fig. 7, 
in which the author has compared the activity of equal 
weights and equal numbers of the germ- and brush-end 
halves of wheat kernels. After 600 seconds the activity 
of the brush-ends to that of the germ-ends is as 6.6:14, 
i. e. the formier shev/s 47^ of the activity of the la.tter; 
while after 300 seconds the pro/portion is 5.1:9.7 or 
52.6fA Moreover, no regard has been paid to the depres¬ 
sive effect of excess of one or other of the reacting 
sub s ta nc e s. 


This latter point is also one affecting the 
second method. On the other hand since the volumie of the 
oxygen liberated is the samie in two comiparative readings, 
the concentration of the substrate is the sarnie and the 
reactions are hence at comiparable stages, 37 st it is a 
matter of somie miomient as to w/hich volume to decide to 
use as will be made clear fromi the following consider¬ 
ations. If in Fig. 7. we com.pare the activities of the 






(£9) 


two curves on this tasis at 3 cc. and 6 cc. of oxygen 
liberation, we find that the times rey.uired are 132:63 
seconds to liberate 3 cc. for the brush- and germ-ends 
respectively^, and 462:152 for the same to liberate 6 cc. 
Since the activity is the reciprocal of the time we 
find that at 3 cc. the brush-ends shew 47.770 of the 
germ-end activity, and at 6 cc. 33.6^. It would be 
necessary therefore, working with catalase preparations 
of known strength, to determine the best volume of 
oxygen liberated to use for comiparison. A further ob¬ 
jection is that the possible error is muich greater in the 
tinie reading than in the volume reading as will be seen 
on examiination of the brush-end curve Fig. 7. Ihis is 
the more marked when the tim.e approaches that re^iuired 
for the comrpletion of the reaction. 

r The third method mientioned above was the use 
of the formula 

K = X log a 
Jt a - X 

Morgulis (16) shev7ed that the miono-molecular formula 

K - 1 log a 

t a - X 

is only applicable to the catalase reaction when the rea^ct- 
ing substances are present in such proportion that 
95-100?^ decomposition of the peroxide occurs. As the 
proportions are so adjusted that smaller percentages of 
the peroxide are decomposed the formula must be changed 
accordingly. With about 70% decomposition the formula 
for a bi-molecular reaction was shewn to apply. The mono- 
miOlecular formula did not fit the results obtained by 
lemi 0 C and huchon, ’who therefore devised the modification 
above, in which they substituted ft for Even this 
n'iOdification hov/ever, did not fit the curves obtained by 
the present writer. In an investigation into this point 
it Y/as found that if K were kept constant the experim¬ 
ental ^ was greater than the theoretical by a numiber 
which increased by the pov'/er of x , such that, if this 
numiber were called 1 the formula cecarne 

K - 1 log a 

“-” 1 ^ -- 


a - X 









( 30 ) 


This value 1 is dependent on the curve itself and may be 
deduced by means of a quadratic equation obtained from 
two values of x, the one double the other, ( Since Z 
is constant 

_^_ log __^ _ 1_ log a ). 

t-1^ a-x t- 1^^ a - 2x 

This formula fitted some of the curves very satisfact¬ 
orily, but not others. This appeared to be due to the 
fact that variations in the speed of shaking affected 
the shape of the curve such that with two experiments 
identical except for the rate of shaking, two entirely 
different values of K were obtained, the sharper curve 
giving the higher value. Since, however, the reactions 
were never allowed to go to completion ( as, keeping the 
practical end in vie?/, this would require too long a time) 
it was impossible to tell to which category the reaction 
was related, i. e., whether to apply the bi-molecular or 
other formula. 

The fourth and fifth methods have already been 
fully discussed in the review of literature. The fifth, 
the calculation of a set of factors to correct readings 
in which the depressive effect of one or other of the 
reacting substances is in evidence, as suggested by Ehine, 
appears to afford a satisfactorj^ solution to all these 
difficulties, is convenient to apply and enables one to 
use the simplest and least toublesome reading,, namely 
the volume of oxygen liberated after a given time. 

The adverse effect of acidity on the catalase 
reaction has been stressed. The use of an excess of 
CaCO^ both in the ground material and in the peroxide 
is a convenient means to assure practically the optimum 
pH; but since the peroxide decomposes spontaneously 
rather rapidly it is inadvisable to neutralize the acid¬ 
ity of the peroxide till just before the experiment. 

Since it has bean concluded that an arbitrary 
time limit reading corrected by a suitable set of factors 
affords the most practical measure of catalase activity, 
it is necessary to work with a carefully standardized 
peroxide solution. 

Among a series of preliminary experiments carried 
out by the author, are some w"hich throw some light 
on these points. In these the stated quantity of 
















r!>, ^0 


j 





r 


:: tf 













(31) 


seeds was ground with a pinch of CaCO^ and sand and 
with sufficient water to form a paste. Grinding was 
continued till a smooth paste had been secured, when 
sufficient water was added, in successive portions to 
miake up a total of 100 cc. water added.- ilhis was 
allowed to extract the catalase for a given length of 
time. ^B’our portions, each sufficient to. provide an 
ali^^uot of 10 cc. were then withdrawn and centrifuged for 
varying lengths of time, the first to/be tested for 15 
minutes and each subseq.uent one an additional 15 miin- 
utes. It was found that 15 minutes centrifuging at 1000 
revolutions per minute was often sufficient to bring the 
aliC|,uot to a stable condition of activity but rbat 30 
minutes centrifuging’ 7;ould always bring this about. 

/^his is illustrated in Table II. 


TABLE II Cc Op liberated after unit tinie by samples 
_ centrifuged for different periods. 

Centrifuged. Minute d• 


Series. 

Exp t. 

lb 


45 

60 

22 

la 

5.2 

5*5 

5.3 

5.4 

22 

lb 

8.2 

6.2 

6.3 

6.3 

22 

2 a 

2.7 

2.8 

3.0 

2.7 

22 

2 b 

4.4 

4.2 

4.2 

- 

22 

3 a 

4.4 

4.3 

4.1 

4.2 

22 

3b 

6.4 

5.9 

5.8 

5.8 

24 

1 

7.8 

7.1 

7.0 

6.8 

24 

4 

7.3 

6.8 

6,7 

6.8 


Using 10 cc. of a peroxide solution having 
134.4 cc. available Og, the results shewn in Table III 
were obtained. In this series a given number of seeds 
of different 100-kernel weights were used, the proceed- 
ure outlined above being followed. 

TABLE III (Series 24) 50 kernels of wheat of different 
weights comipa-red. 


Saxiple Weight Oc 
Bo. 


4 1.90 

1 2.04 

3 2.19 

5 2.19 

2 . 3 / 

6 2.41 


Og after 475 Gc 
seconds 

7.18 

7.38 

8.66 

9.24 

10.76 

11.68 


Og per unit weight 


3.78 

3.62 

3.95 

4.22 

4.54 

4.85 




















( 32 ) 

At the time this series was carried out 
certain points which have come to light in the prepar¬ 
ation of the foregoing review were not fully appreciated, 
hence samples ilo^s, 2 and 3 which were done at a differ¬ 
ent timie to ho’s. 4, 5, and 6, cannot be directly com¬ 
pared with them, hevertheless, the general depressive 
effect of excess of peroxide is clearly shewn. All the 
samples were fromi the sam^e hulk sa^niple and were selected 
according to size. Each result is the average of the 
closest tw’o or tliree of at least three runs. 

In another series (Series 23) different num¬ 
bers of seeds of the sarnie kernel-vi/eight were usee, ihe 
pero.xide strength was approximately 100 cc. available 
0. aSd- 10 cc. of solution, fable IV shews the results of 
unis series. 


xA-bLk IV (Series 23) Varied numbers of kernels of the 
same kernel weight compared. I. 


Sample 

ho. of 

Weight. 

Gc Og after ■•''27 5 

Cc 

O 2 per unit 

ho. 

seeds. 


seconds. '• 

ho 

. or weight. 

1 

50 

2.19 

7.55 


1.51 

2 

60 

2.63 

10.71 


1.79 

3 

70 

3.07 

11,88 


1.70 

4 

80 

3.50 

16.13 


1,89 

6 

90 

3.94 

16.56 


1.84 


Series 26 was similar to the above, except tha,t 
different numibers of kernels were used and a reaction 
chamber of different shape was em.ployed; also the peroxide 
was standardized to exactly 100 cc. available 0 ^ ih 10 cc. 

fable Y gives the results of this series:- 

fABLS V (Series 25) Varied numbers of kernels of the 

_ same kernel weight comipared. II. _ 


Samtple ho. of 
ho. seeds. 


height. Gc Og after 276 
seconds. 


Go Og per unit 
ho. or weight. 


1 

30 

1.28 

2 

40 

1.71 

3 

50 

2.14 

4 

60 

2.57 

5 

70 

3.00 


« 5<i 

1,17 

5.70 

1.43 

9.13 

1.83 

10.95 

1.82 

13,16 

1.88 


























(53) 


'fhese two series also shew the depressive 
effect of a preponderance of peroxide. In Series 25 
there is seen to he a sudden Jump in activity "between 
samples 2 and 3. Gomrparison of samples 3, 4 and 5 of 
this series with sai^ples 1, 2 and 3 of series 23 also 
shews a relatively increased a^^ctivity for the three sam¬ 
ples of Series 25 under consideration. These samples 
were given much more vigorous shaking, namely four ex-’ 
Gursions per second as against one-half per second for 
the remainder of the sam^ples of these two series. We 
must conclude therefore that speed of shaking does in¬ 
fluence the speed of the cata.lase reaction when such 
widely divergent speeds are comipared. That this effect 
is greater during the earlier stages of the reaction is 
shewn in Table YI in which the activities of two samrples 
are comrpared after 150 seconds and 600 seconds for dif- 
erent shaking speeds. 


TASLE YI Shaking speeds compared. 


Sample 

Shaking 

Oxygen 

liberated • 

Relative 

activity. 

lo. 

spe ed. 

150 secs. 600 secs. 

150 secs 

. 600 secj 

25/1 

1 

2 

E.l 

5.5 

64 

95 

25/la 

4 

3.3 

5.8 

100 

100 

25/2 

1 

Q 

3.9 

7.8 

85 

95 

25/2a 

4 

4.6 

8.2 

100 

100 


In order to get rid of undue depressive effect 
on account of excess of peroxide therefore, and a.Iso to 
"bring a greater proportion of the later stages of the 
reaction writhin the time limit set to miinimize the effect 
of variations in shaking speed, the preponderance of 
peroxide used sliould be considerably lessened. In the 
rest of the experimients here reported therefore, 5 cc. of 
HgOg standardized to exactly 10-volumie strength have been 
used. In testing the peroxide, 5 cc. were diluted to 
50 cc., 5cc. of which were then tested with an excess 
of catalase miSiterial. 

Heinicke (10) found that on letting an apple- 
leaf caralase preparation stand, its activity increased 
up to one hour by which tim^e it had reached a stable 
condition. In the author^ s preliminary experiments, 
the time that elapsed from the first moment^of contact 
between the finely crushed seeds and the water uill cenu- 
rifuging was commienced 'wsls IS"^ minutes. in order to de¬ 
termine whether in this miatter a seed catalase prepara- 










ffect of Time of Maoeratioa on Catalase Activity 



0 30 60 90 120 150 130 210 240 270 300 


Time of Maceration — Minutes. 


•S'ig. 8 




(M) 


tion would behave in the same way as the apple-leaf 
preparation used by Heinicke, three series, Hi, Nla 
and IT2 were carried out. 

In each series 2 grams of seed were ground 
to a paste for 5 minutes, washed into a flask calib¬ 
rated to 113 cc. and shaken at intervals. In HI and 
I'lla sufficient preparation was poured off (after thor¬ 
ough shaking) into centrifuge tubes after 13, 3U, 43, 

6o, 73 and 30 minutes, to provide aliquots of 10 cc. 
from each tube, which were tested immediately after 
centrifuging; in H2 the aliquots were poured off after 
73, 30, 103, 120, 133 and 130 minutes. Results are 
shewn graphically in Rig. 8. 

while the three series shew very different 
activities for their respective preparations, HI and Hla 
she?; a sharp initial rise in activity follov;ed by a 
rapid falling off, v;hile H2 shew'S that this fall con¬ 
tinues up to 130 minutes. In H2, the 133-minute result 
is out of line with the rest and the 30 -minute test was 
spoilt, but the general trend is sufficiently evident. 

This was further confirmed in a later series, 

H 11, in which aliquots were v/ithdrawn by pipette and 
tested entire without centrifuging. The results of this 
series are shewn in graph H 11 of Rig. 8. 

In this connection it is interesting to note 
as in Table II, that the catalase activity of centri¬ 
fuged samples did not diminish after standing up to 6o 
minutes, but diminished activity was only observed ?;hen 
maceration was continued and this, whether the samples 
were centrifuged before testing or tested entire. This 
seems rather obscure, but m.ay indicate that the soluble 
( (B ) catalase m.ay, after solution, gradually become 
absorbed by the solid particles. 

It is apparent that a wheat-seed catalase 
preparation does not behave in this connection like the 
apple-leaf preparation mentioned above, but deteriorates 
rapidly, further, closely comparative results seem, hard 
to secure, since all the above samples were prepared in 
exactly the same manner and with the same material, except 
that in HI GaCO^ was omitted in the preparation of the 
paste, which, ho\?ever, should tend, if anything, to decrease 
catalase activity instead of the reverse as was the case. 
Again, frothing of the preparation m.akes it very difficult 
to pipette aliquots accurately. 


I 



I 





(S5) 


IPor these reasons it was deciaed to prepare 
sarriples hy a dry method. '2o this end a nuniher of tests 
were made on samples prepared in different ways. '2hat 
which was finally adopted and used throughout the last 
section of this paper was the follo?/ing:- 

From 200 to 300 seeds (roughly) taken from 
different parts of the pile of seeds to he tested were 
placed in a flat dish to facilitate inspection. From 
them ?i/as removed all extraneous matter, also such seeds 
as were too hadly injured, from the point of view of the 
seed analyst, .to he considered suitable for setting in 
a geimiination test. Tnls sample was then coarsely ground 
in a coffee grinder to particles of about the size of 
timothy seed. After careful mixing 1 grami 7/as weighed 
and placed in a miortar with ^ gram GaGOr. and ^ grami 
washed sand . fhis mixture was then ground by hand for 
exactly 2-J minutes. 

In a series of tests (I 11 a) to determine 
the optimum! tim.e of grinding using exactly the above 
m.ethod, except for the point to be determined, the re¬ 
sults shewn in fable YII were obtained. 


fABLE YII Effect of grinding catalase preparation for 
different lengths of time. 


fime of grinding. 

2 mins. 

2i - 

3 ” 

4 " 

6 " 

8 

10 " 


Gc Op liberated 

7.65 

7.49 

7.65 

7.05 

5.15 

5,09 

3.72 


fhis shews a rapid falling off of activity? 
due to excessive grinding, but little difference be¬ 
tween two and. three minutes. A fraction m.ore than tm 
manutes grinding was therefore adopted as .just stated. 

fhis finely ground sample was then mixed 
?/ith a spatula, and from it were weighed the portions 
to be used for test, fhe test samiple was transferred 
to one arm of the Y-shaped reaction vessel and 10 cc. 
HgO added, about ^ cc, being added first and the vessel 
shaken till a fine suspension was secured, after which 








Catalase Units corresponding to Go 0^ libereted^ 



0 2 4 6 8 10 


Catalase Units. 


9 




the Dalanee of the vvater was added, 'fhis yrooe/d.ViTQ 
was foimd to "be important, as other\^‘ise the pov;der 
caked, preventing the peroxide from penetrating. In the 
other arm were placed 5 cc. of standardized HoO and 
the vessel ?/as connected to the apparatus, li was not¬ 
iced however that a rapid alsorption of air took place 
after attachment and lefore the liquids Y^exe mixed, 
amounting_to about cc. This was found to be comiple te 
in about b minutes, conse^.iuently this time was allov^ed to 
elapse before adjusting the level in the burette to zero, 
although the columin of water in the graduated part ms 
adjusted to reach nearly to the top during this process 
to avoid extra absorption due to pressure. 

In order that the catalase reactions of samples 
shewing Xiarked differences in activity mdght be com.pared 
on an equitable basis, it was necessary, as has already 
been discussed, to prepare a set of correction factors or 
other m.eans to correct for the depressive effect of one 
or other of the reagents. In series IT 8 sam.ples of cat¬ 
alase preioaration varying in weight from 0,0750 gr. to 
0.3760 gr, were tested in triplicate with results indic¬ 
ated in fable YIII. 


fABIE YIII Oatalase 

units corresponding 

to Cc Oq liberated 

Wei ght 0 f saxiple • 

Catalase units. 

Cc Op liberated. 

0.0760 

2 

1.49 

0.11E6 

3 

2.60 

0.1500 

4 

3.89 

0.1875 

5 

4.85 

0,2£50 

6 

6.11 

0.26E6 

7 

7,23 

0.3000 

8 

8.20 

0.3375 

9 

9.17 

0.3760 

10 

10,43 


fhis was plotted on the graph Fig. 9. and in 
all subse^iuent work, except where specifically mentioned 
the somewhat arbitrary catalase unit has been read from 
it and used as a measure of the catalase activity of the 
samfple. 


Samples prepared in this way Vi^ere found in 
repeated tests to suffer no depreciation in activity for 
several days. 











(57) 


u!he Catalase Reaction Applied to the Study of 

Seed Vial:iliiy. 

In tlie papers of Crocker and. Harrington (4) 
and. Davis (6) who failed to find the correlation "between 
catalase activity and. germination claimed, hy Hem.ec and 
Dnchon, no mention is made as to v/hether the experiments 
of the latter were exactly duplicated. Apparently, acc¬ 
ording to the Yvritings of these and other authors on cat¬ 
alase activity in relation to seed germination, (except 
Hemec and Duchon, and Pe YilmiOrin et Gazauhon) the catalase 
activity m.easured is the total activity, Y/hereas that 
which lTem.ec and Puchon found, to "be correlated with germ¬ 
ination was the total activity less the residYial activity 
exhihited when the same ma.terial ha.d keen treated for 20 
minutes at 100^ 0 on the Y/ater-hath. Davis however did 
not hase his m^ethod on the direct comparison of the total 
catalase activity of seeds hut rather on the relation 
exhihited between the total activity of the seed, before 
and. 8.fter treatment of the Y/hole seed 'by a soak of from 
one to several hours at a temiioerature of from 54° C to 
50^ G* 


It Y/ould appear at first sight that there is 
a connection between this treatment and. that of Usmeo and 
Duchon but the results obtained are exactly the opposite 
in the two cases. With Ms treatment Davis finds that 
the ratio treated: untreated approximates unity in the case 
of seed of high viability and. is less than unity in the 
reverse case, while the results of Hemec and puchon, 
though the authors did not express them in that form, 
would shew approximation of the ratio to unity Y;ith seed 
of low viability but miuch less than unity in the reverse 
case. Dhe explanation appears to be in the more drastic 
nature of the treatmient in the latter case which, one 
would deduce from their paper, would reduce the treated 
seed to a condition of shewing ' catalase activity not 
related to viability ' the subtraction of which from the 
total catalase activity would, give the ’ catalase activ¬ 
ity nresYimably related to viability ' • In the case of 
Davis’ treatment however, since the seed was still whole 
and thus protected to a certain extent against catalase 
disintegration and since further, the treatment was not 
drastic enough to destroy the catal.ase except in the case 
of seeds of low viability, these would be the . only kind 
to sustciin loss in catala-se, anc uiiat rougnly ^o tne 
extent of v/hat in hemec and Puchon’s experiments jMght be 
considered. ’ catalase presumiably related, to viacility ’ • 




•c:5 






( 38 ) 


Soih methods are claimed, hy their authors to 
give figures indicative of the viability of the seed 
though the results reported hy havis do not shew verv 
much more than that a sample has low or high viahilitv 
i.e, there appears to have been no artemnt mi-ade to con^ 
nect a given catalase result with a definite rercentage 
of germ.iimtion* 

liaterials and Methods. 


In this section the methods outlined in the 
ppvious section were used, in c onjunction with the con- 
s tan t t empe ra t ur e ca1ine t pre viou sly d e s crih e d • 

__Sar::ples of wheat of the 1920 and 1921 crops 
wnich had been used in frost studies and represented many 
different stages of miaturity and frost injury, and of 
which the full history was known, were kind Ir’supplied 
by the^kepartment of Field Crops, University" of Alberta. 
In addition to these there w-ere sores samples which 
had passed through the laboratory, presenting different 
degrees of weathering and other injury. Only samples 
which,were thoroughly after-ripened by prolonged stor¬ 
age were used in order that difficulties of inter¬ 
pretation wloich rrdght result from the use of dormant 
seed miight be avoided. 

Exp e r i me n t a 1, 

Owing to the fact that the dry method appeared 
to give the best results and that it had been developed 
to the stage at which it rright be relied upon, it was 
felt best first to check the method outlined hy IJemec and 
Duehon. 


Series h 9 a. fhe samples used in this series 
with their eorres'ponding germ^inations and othsr data are 
given in fable lA. 


fABLE lA 

Samples 

used in Series A 9 a. 


Sam^ple. 

Germ, 12 

d a y s. Re ma r k s. 

Degrees of frost to 




whic h sub j e c t e d• 

plot D/20 

14 

Mealj; d ough 

1, 2, 4, 7, 13. 

65-1997 

22 

Badly frosted & 

H'mact degree unlniown 



weathered 


D-11-21 

34 

Clear green 

14. 

B-11-21 

36 

Yellow kernel 

6,5, 14, 

C-11-21 

65 

Green to ^^ellow 

6.5, 14, 












V 


,v^^■ '-■:, ■' 


..vVl' 




': -At-i,-. ■ ; .., 



•tp’ 



f: 





(59) 


xABIE IX c t d . 


San:ple« G-erni. 1£ Qays« 


G-12-21 

71 

6 0-6 501 

80 

C-10-21 

88 

#1 

95 


Remarks. 


Pale Ti^ellow 

Vv e a the r e d , p lamp. 

Green to yello?/ 
(1926 reg. crop, 

(ve ry hi gh qua,li t y 
(Put miaintained at 
( R.E. 71% several 


Degrees of frost to 
which subjected. 

6.5, 14. 

Frosted, hut exact 
degree iinknow/n. 

6 . 5 . 


0 . 


0 . 


(months. 

G-l~21 99 Whitish (very 

immature) 

(motes on all samples except 65-6501, 65-1997, and #1 
taken from notes made 5^7 the Universit37 of Alherta at 
tin:e of harvesting.) i 


Catalase tests were m.ade on these saciples, hoth 
on the treated and,untreated grortnd miaterial, the treat¬ 
ment consisting of placing the weighed experimiental mat¬ 
erial for 20 minutes in an oven containing a dish of water 
and. regulated to 98°G, this being the nearest approach 
to lemec and Duchon^s treatm.ent on the w/ater-hath tfet it 
V7as possible to make under the circumstances. ( Whe boil¬ 
ing-point of water at the elevation of Calgary is approx- 
imately 98°G.) 

Phree replicates were made on each of the 
treated and untreated sa-mples. ‘Where one replicate was 
divergent from the other two, the tW'O close ones were 
used; where there was a XiOderate spread betw^een the three, 
the average of all three; biit v/here there was no close 
agreement, a fresh sam.ple was prepared and. tested, Phese 
remarks apply also to Series E IS, reported later. 

Results of these determinations are given in Gable X. 














( 40 ) 


TABL3 X 

Series il 9 a. 

Catalase determinations. 


Sample. 

derm. 

: c\j 

0 

. 

0 

0 

liberated. Nemee and Du- 

Cc. O 2 
ratio. 



Untreated 

. Treated. chon figure 

Plot D /20 

14 

6.43 

3.16 5.75 

.491 

65-1997 

22 

3.77 

2.73 3.04 

.473 

D-11-21 

34 

8.74 

5.68 5.36 

.650 

B-11-21 

36 

6.32 

3.94 2.38 

.623 

C-11-21 

65 

6.60 

4.14 ■ 4.31 

.627 

C-12-21 

71 

6.24 

3.44 4.90 

.551 

65-6^01 

80 

6.36 

4.29 2.07 

.675 

C-lO-21 

88 

7.40 

4.62 4.87 

.624 

#1 

95 

7.38 

4.68 2.70 

.634 

C-1-21 

99 

10.13 

7.18 5.19 

.708 


In the fifth 

column is the figure Hemec 

and 

Buchon use for 

their expression of seed viability. 

This 

figure has been obtained 

by subtracting the number 

of cc. 

of oxygen 

liberated by the treated sample from that 

liber- 

ated by the untreated; 

but note that on account of 

the 

great activity 

in all samples except 63-1997* B-ll- 

21. 

65-6501 and #1, 

, in which 

0.2623 grams were used, the size 

of the sample had to be , 

reduced to 0.1300 grams, hence 


the figure obtained by subtraction had to be multiplied 
by 7 / 4 . There appears to be no correlation betv^^een this 
figure and the germination of the seed. 

Since these samples shew very uneven catalase 
activity, it was thought that perhaps if the ratio of 
the activity of the treated to that of the urTtreated 
v/ere compared, a correlation might be revealed. In the 
sixth column these ratios are tabulated but again no 
correlation is apparent. 

If these samples are arranged in order of their 
maturity as indicated in Table IX there is seen to be a 
striking inverse correlation between catalase activity and 
maturity. This is shewn in Table XI, the factor 7/4 being 
introduced as before to bring all samples to an even 
weight basis. 














(41) 


TABLE XI 

Maturity of seed 

as affecting catalase activitv. 

Samrple • 

Cata 

lase activity. 



Untreated• 

Treated. 


C-1-21 

17.76 

12.57 


I)-ll -21 

15.30 

9,94 


C-10-21 

12.95 

8.09 


G-11-21 

11.55 

7,25 


C- 12-21 

10,92 

5.02 


plot P/20 

11.28 

5,53 


B- 11-21 

6.32 

3.94 ) 

Hot miuch difference 

65-1997 

5.77 

2.73 ) 

b e tv/ e e n ma t uri 137 0 f 

65-6501 

6 • 36 

4.29 ) 

these samiples, but 

#1 

7.38 

4,68 ) 

to best judgment as 
arranged. 


j^eniec and Duehon B'orked with samples of pre¬ 
sumably the same degree of ma,turity, but which had lost 
their vitality through age. "Ihe effect of seed ezhib- 
iting increased catalase activity with imimaturity maj/ be 
to mask the effect of the treatment suggested by these 
authors. 


It occurred to the present writer that possibly 
the treatZient at 98^Gfor 20 minutes did not in fact re¬ 
duce the test sample to a condition of exhibiting only 
therma-stable catal 8 .se activity 8 *nd to c^uestion whether 
there was such a thermo-stable residue. In Series II 12 
this point was investigated. 

In the series just discussed, the figures used 
have been on the basis of cc. Og liberated and not cor¬ 
rected to catalase units, since’^this is the basis used by 
IIem.ee and Duchon. Ihe conclusions are unaltered hor/ever 
v/hen eatal 8 .se units are used as the basis. In Series 
11 12 and II 13 catalase units have been used throughout. 

Series II 12. In this series the test sam.ples, 
all prepared from one bulk sanrple , were heated for 10 , 

20, SO, 45, 60, 75, and 90 minutes respectively. All 
tests were risde in quadruplicate, two replicates being 
fromi one grind and. t\io from^ another for each treated 
sample, and from each grind a check untreated test was 
also made. Results were then calculated to the basis of 
the highest set of checks, since absolute uniformdty 










feot of Heat on Catalase Activity 



SCVTUn aS’BXBQ.BO 


Treatment -- Minutes 






(4£) 


"between the different grinds was not detained* 'rhe 
graph, Fig. 10. shews the results obtained in this ser¬ 
ies. 


It is clear from this graph that 20 minutes 
heating'"bj; no means destroys all the thermo-labile cat¬ 
alase but that the curve becomes Yeiy nearly; horizontal 
after treatmient for 90 minutes, at vAilch point there is 
a very considerable residue of catalase which m.ust be 
considered as thermo-stable. 

It seem.ed possible that the proportion of 
truly thermo-stable catalase in the seed mdght bear a 
relation to the viability of the seed. Series h 13 
was therefore carried out, on the same plan as E 9 a, 
but in which aj,l treated test samples were heated for 
90 minutes at 98^ G. 

Series II 15. The samples used in this ser¬ 
ies are shewn in Table XII. Som^e of these are the same 
as those used in h 9 a, but are repeated here for con¬ 
venience . 

TABLE XII. _ Samrples used in series II 15. 


Sample. 


I)-16-20 

65-1997 

L-ll-Sl 

B-11-21 

C-31-21 

0 - 12-21 

65-6756B 

65-6756A 

65-6501 

65-6885 

#1 


D-7-20 

A-16-20 


Germ. 12 days. Remarks. Legrees of frost to 

which subjected. 

8 Mealy dough-wet. 15 


22 

Bad 13 ^ frosted &o 

weathered. Exact 

degree unkn OY/n 

34 

Clear green. 

14 

56 

Yello'w kernel. 

6.5, 14. 

65 

Green to yellow. 

6.5, 14. 

71 

pale yellow. 

6.5, 14. 

73). 

V/eathered. -{Frosted, tut exact 

77') 

(degre 

e unknown. 

80 

Weathered, plu.mp. 

tt It It 

87 

Uneven maturity. Somie 
(1926 Reg. Crop, 

fros t« 

95 

-{ver 37 high q_ual- 

0 . 


(ity, but maint- 
(ained at R.H. 71^ 
(several months. 


97 Medium dough. 4. 

100 Hard. 0. 


(Botes on those samples v/here exact degree of frost given 
(except #1) made by” the University of Alberta at time 
of ha.rvesting. ) 











Series H 13 



Jig. 11 





(4S) 


Results in this series have leen calculated to 
catalase units and on account of the great differences in 
individual catalase activities, have lean expressed as 
the ratio of theriro-stahle to total catalase^'in the. form 
of a percentage. Ihese are shewn graphically in Rig. 11. 

While there is not the close correspondence it 
had been hoped to secure ‘between this catalase ratio and 
the gerrhnation of the seed, yet on the whole, the samples 
of low viacility shew'markedly lower ratios than those of 
high Viahi1ity * 

However, the points on this graph are seen to 
lie more or less in two zones, a lowrer and an upper, as indic¬ 
ated hy the dotted curves, it we take the samples re¬ 
presented hy the points near each curve and takulate them 
separa^tely as in Halle XIII an interesting and vossilly 
significant i)Oint ‘becomes evident. 

TABLE XIII Samples shewing relatively high and. low 
_ catalase ratios, ta'bulated separately. 

Samples shew/ing high catalase ratios. 


Samnle. 

Germ. 

Ka tie. 

Total 0; 

I)-16-£C 

8 

3E.4 

8.01 

65-1997 

£E 

39.6 

6.6E 

B-ll-El 

36 

43.1 

5.75 

65-6756B 

73 

49.3 

6.80 

65-6756A 

77 

51.7 

7.56 

65-6501 

80 

53.9 

6.El 

65-688S 

87 

54.3 

8.E0 


95 

5E.1 

7.78 

A-16-S0 

100 

53.0 

5.83 

Saxiw 1 e s s he w i n g 

low catalase 

ratios. 

I)-16-E0 

8 

3E.4 

8.01 

L-ll-Sl 

34 

37.E 

14.98 

0-11-El 

65 

40.8 

10.94 

C-IE-El 

71 

43.5 

10.55 

L-7-E0 

97 

44.9 

14.51 


In the last column the total catalase activity 
of each sample is shew/n. One sample (I)-16LE0) finds a 
place in loth curves, how^ all the samples in the group 
shewing low catalase ratios, except I)-i6-20, were such as 

























( 44 ) 


exhibited such high total activity that the amount of 
material tested had to be reduced to 0.1300 gms. in order 
that the burette might accommodate the oxygen liberated. 

It has previously been shewn that high total catalase 
activity is associated with immaturity of the seed at the 
time of harvesting, hence this is an important point to 
be considered in the interpretation of results. 

Discussion . 

This method appears to be capable of being 
developed into a useful accessory to the germination test, 
but a considerable amount of further study is required. 

Dot all samples may lose their therm* 0 “labile 
catalase in the ^O-minute heating period, in which case 
those Y/hich gave an unduly high ratio might be brought 
more into line v/ith the others. (The sample used to test 
the loss of thermo-labile catalase was a ?/ell matured 
frost-free sample of good quality, of which there was 
sufficient to make all the tests required.) 

Relative degrees of immaturity of the seed 
introduce a complication which may require the introduction 
of a correction factor in order that all samples may be 
compared on an equal basis. 

Vdiile the dry method developed is not entirely 
reliable for the direct comparison of catalase activity 
betv/een samples, this is not of much moment when the 
comparison is to be made between treated and untreated test 
samples taken from the same grind, for replicates of any 
one grind shew quite close correspondence, t^here direct 
comparison between samples is required this may be done 
by preparing tvi^o or more grinds from each sample. 


Summary . 

That the germination method of testing seed 
viability, requires a considerable time before the results can 
be known, is apt at times to be a serious hindrance to 
trade. 


This has led investigators to turn their atten¬ 
tion to finding an index of seed viability other than that 
of germination, ^mong the methods proposed,that making use 
of the catalase reaction has been chosen for study. Litera¬ 
ture on these methods, and on the catalase reaction in 
general has been revievYed and summarized. 

This study has been confined to one kind of seed, 
viz; spring wheat. 

Two methods of preparing the experimental sample 






■, ■’,:. ■ -• ^ '--^ -) 










Cm 




. ■„'.;, 
.i' ^.: j- 


rv f-M: : :■ 




;'r v':C‘A -mv 



( 45 ) 


have been tried out, a v/et and a dry. 

In the wet method, the time of maceration 
adversely affected catalase activity, but centrifuged aliquots 
maintained their activity unimpaired up to one hour. Centri¬ 
fuging for thirty minutes at 1000 revolutions was necessary 
to bring all samples to a stable condition of activity. 

A dry method was finally adopted as more suitable. 
The catalase activity, however, was shewn to be inversely 
proportional to the time of grinding, which necessitated the 
adoption of a standard time for grinding. 

The depressive effect of excess of peroxide 
reported by other Ywrkers was observed. 

The speed of shaking during the reaction was 
found to affect the activity, but this was more marked in 
the earlier stages of the reaction, and with a great diff¬ 
erence,!in shaking speeds. 

A graph in ?/hich oxygen liberated is plotted 
against catalase units was prepared and used in correcting 
for the depressive effect of excess of one or other of the 
reacting substances. 

An attempt was made to duplicate ITemec & 

Duchon’s work, but without securing the same results. 

It was observed, however, that not all the thermo-labile 
catalase was destroyed by heating for 20 minutes at the 
termperature of boiling water, and a series of experiments 
shewed that this destruction did not occur until after 
about 90 minutes of such treatment. 

A fresh series of experiments in which sam-ples 
of different viability were tested before and after this 
90 minute treatment shewed a certain measure of correla¬ 
tion between the ratio thermo-stable: total catalase and 
viability. A graph on which the catalase ratio was plotted 
against the germination shev/ed the points plotted to be 
arranged more or less in two zones, in one of which the 
catalase ratios were proportionately much lower for their 
corresponding germinations than in the otherJjut in each 
of v/hich there was a fairly good relationship between the 
catalase ratio and germination. The lower set of ratios 
were shewn to be associated with samples having a consider¬ 
able degree of immaturity and exhibiting high total catalase 
activity in consequence. The question of immaturity as 
affecting the catalase ratio is one requiring further 
study. 




I have great pleasure in expressing my thanks 
to Dr* R. Dewton, Professor of Pield Crops & Plant Biochemis¬ 
try, under whose ^idance this work has been undertaken, 
and to Dr, J. W. Campbell, Professor of Mathematics, for 
help in the mathematical parts. 





nUERilgUHE CITED 


(1) Apnleman C.O. 
1910. 

Some observations on catalase. Bot. 

Caz. 50: 182-192. 

(2) -- 

1915 

Relation of catalase and oxidase to 
respiration in plants. Maryland Agric. 
Exp. 3ta. Bull. 191. 

(5) Becking I.G.M 
1920 

.B. and Hampton H.G. 

Measurement of the catalytic power of 
catalase. Amer. J. Bot. 7:26i-274. 


(4) Crocker W. and Harrington G.T. 


1918 

Catalase and oxidase content of seeds 
in relation to their dormanc37, age, 
vitality and respiration. J. Agric. 
Research. 15: 137-174. 


(5) Darsie IvUL., Elliott G- and Pierce G.J. 


1914 

A study of the germinating power of 
seeds. Bot. Gas. 58: 101-136. 

(6) Davis W.E. 
1926 

The use of catalase as a means of det¬ 
ermining the viability of seeds. Proc. 
Assoc. Off. Seed Anal. H.A. 1926: 33-39. 

(7) Duvel J.W.T. 
1904 

The Vitality and germiination of seeds. 
U.S.D.A. B.P.I. Bull. 58. 

(8) Pick C.L. and 
1925 

Hibbard R.P. 

A method for determining seed viabilit^r 
by electrical conductivity m^easurements. 
papers Mich. Acad. Sci. 5: 95-103. 

(9) Graeanin M. 
1926 

Sur la question de la catalase comiiTie un 
indicateur de la faculte vitale des 
semences. Ann. Sci. Agron. 43: 430-438. 

(10) He ini eke A.J< 
1923 

Ecictors influencing catalase activit37 in 
apple-leaf tissue. Corn. Univ. Agric. 
Exp. Sta. Mem. 62. 







I 





(47) 


(11) -—■ 

1923 

Catalase activity in dormant apple t7/igs; 
its relation to the condition of the 
tissue and other factors. Corn. Unlv. 
Agric, Exp. Sta. Mem. 74. 

(IE) Hottes 

1927 

and HueIson H.A. 

A new use for the nephelometer and refract 
ometer. Science. 65: 576-7. 

(13) Knott J.E. 
19£5 

Some conditions influencing the deter- 
mina.tion of catalase activity in plant 
tissue, proc. Amer. Soc. Hort. Sci. 

22: 398-407. 

(14) lesage P# 
1922 

Sur la determination de la faculte germ- 
inative autrement ciue par la germination 
des graines. Com-ot. Rend. Acad, Sci. 
(Paris) 174: 766-7 

(15) 1007/ 0. 

1901 

Catalase, a ns7/ ensymiO of general occurr¬ 
ence. U.S.R.A. Ann, Kept. 68. 

(16) Horgulls S* 
1921 

A stud.y of the ca^talase reaction. J. Biol. 
Chem. 47: 341-375. 

(17) —- 

' 1926 

and Be her M. 

Studies on the effect of temperat-ure on 
the catalase reaction. J. Biol. Chem. 

72: 91-98. 

(18) - 

1926 

Studies on the effect of temperature on 
the catalase reaction, II. loss of 
catalase activitj/. J, Biol. Chem. 68: 
535-545. 

(19) Morinaga T. 
1925 

Catalase activity and the aerobic and 
anaerobic germination of rice. Bot, Gas. 
79: 73-84. 


(19) 










(48) 


(20) Mimerati 0. ^ ^ 

1926 POv^sitilite de determiner I'age des 

graines de "ble par la temperature de 
leur germination. Gom.pt. Rena. Acad. Sei. 
(Paris) 182: 535-537. 


(21) Remiee A. et Puchon P. 

1922 Sur une methode indicatriee perrnettant 

d’evaluer la vitalite des semiences par 
YOie liocliimiipue. Cornpt. Rend. Acad. Sei. 
(Paris) 174: 632-634. 


( 22 ) — — — 
1923 


(23) Ota J. 

1925 


Sur une nouvelle methode hiochimiQue pour 
la determination de la faeulte vitale des 
semienees. Ann. Sei. Agron. 40: 121-150. 


Oontinuous respiration studies of dormant 
seeds in Xanthiumi, Bot. Gaz. 80: 288-299. 


(24) Rhine Louisa R. 

1924 ■’divergence of catalase and respiration in 

germination. Bot. Gaz. 78*. 46-67. 


(25) 


Shull C. A. 
1923 


and Pa vis 'w.3. 

Relayed germination and catalase activity 
in Xanthium.. Bot. Gaz. 75: 268-281. 


(26) 


Vilmorin J. 
1922 


de ,et Gazau'bon. 

Sur la ea talmas a des graines. Comipt. Rend. 
Acad. Sci. (Paris) 175: 50-1. 


(27) Waller A.P. 

1901 An attempt to estimiate the vitality of 

seeds hv an electrical miethod. Proe. Rny. 
Soc. 68": 79-92. 














