























©X MBBflS 

awonsiiaais 

aiBBlMOHlS 















Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/causecureofspeecOOkerr 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


THE CAUSE AMD CURE OF SPEECH DEFECTS 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN'PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR 
THE DEGREE OF MASTER OF ARTS 


COLLEGE OF EDUCATION 



BY 

EVELYN CHRISTINE KERR 

EDMONTON, ALBERTA 
MAY, 1941 















TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Chapter 

I. 


II. 


III. 


IV. 


Page 

INTRODUCTION iv 

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF THE SPEECH ORGANS 1 

Resonating cavities of the speech 
mechanism 

The physiological basis of speech 

The breathing apparatus - the 
speech mechanism 

The production of vowels and con- 
sonants 

CLASSIFICATION AND DIAGNOSIS OF SPEECH 
DEFECTS 15 


Definition of speech defect 
Classification of speech disorders 
Diagnosing speech difficulties 
Test chart - Word test - Sentence 
test 

STUTTERING: MAJOR SPEECH DEFECT 24 

Definition of stuttering 
Sex factors 

Age of onset of stuttering 
The etiology of stuttering 
A composite point of view 
Treatment of stuttering 
Practical work 

LISPING: MAJOR SPEECH DEFECT 77 

Nature and causes of lisping 
Types of lisping 
Correction of lisping 
Practical work 
Conclusion 

MINOR SPEECH DEFECTS 107 

i. Baby Talk 

Definition and causes of baby 
talk 

Nature of baby talk 
Correction 
Practical work 








iii 

Chapter 

Page 

V. MINOR 

SPEECH DEFECTS 

ii. 

Foreign Accent. 148 

Causes and prevalence of 
foreign accent 

Three correction problems 
Correction of foreign accent 
Practical work 

MINOR 

SPEECH DEFECTS 

ill. 

Muffled or Indistinct Speech 182 

Causes 

Exercises for relieving 
tension 

Drill for careless speakers 
Exercises for careless 
speakers 


VI. INDIVIDUAL VOICE PROBLEMS 186 


i. 

Aphonia 

ii. 

Nasality- 

iii. 

High Pitch 


VII. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 197 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 200 








INTRODUCTION 












IV. 


INTRODUCTION 

Parents who have children afflicted with speech 
disorders 5h.0u.ld not entertain the belief that the child¬ 
ren will outgrow their speech defects by themselves as 
they mature. The case of the stutterer should be studied 
from all angles in order that remedial measures spec¬ 
ifically adopted to his needs may be instituted. 

Remedies for each case vary in relation to the ind¬ 
ividual demands. Those whose speech defects are 
caused by organic disorders should be given a thorough 
medical examination. 

The practical work outlined in this thesis was 
carried on, for the most part, in Edmonton schools. 

Pupils afflicted with defective speech were visited 
for one hour periods three times a week during the 
school term. The writer attempted to make a careful 
study cf each individual, the physical condition, the 
mental ability, the emotional attitudes, and the en¬ 
vironmental conditions, in order to understand the 
causal factors of the case. The next endeavor was to 
ascertain the cause of the difficulty, whether physical 
or psychological, and then to suggest or attempt a 
remedy. The various drills and exercises used in the 







V. 


corrective procedure are described with each specific 
case. 

The writer wishes to thank the principals of the 
schools in which the work was undertaken, and also the 
class teachers who cooperated to make the work pleasant* 

It is hoped that this paper may be found useful 
to parents of children suffering from speech disorders 
and to others interested in the welfare of those under 
their charge. 






CHAPTER I 


THE PHYSIOLOGY OF THE SPEECH ORGANS 





CHAPTER I 


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE SPEECH ORGANS 

Before attempting a discussion of speech correc¬ 
tion let us examine the structure of the human speech 
mechanism and discover how it functions* Sound is gen¬ 
erally thought of as the sensation perceived through 
the ear* In terms of physics it is a form of wave 
motion, set up by a vibrating body and transmitted 
through a medium, usually air* The production of air 
waves requires some motive force to start the vibrator. 
Very often some resounding body (a resonator) is re¬ 
quired to reinforce the waves formed by the vibrator 
and make them effectively audible as sound. 

Practically all musical instruments have these 
three elements - the motor, the vibrator and the reson¬ 
ator* The human musical instrument has still another - 
the articulator (the tongue, teeth and lips) by which 
the voice is shaped into the xoatterns of articulate 
speech, that is, converted into vowel and consonant 
sounds, which combined into words are used to convey our 
thoughts audibly to others* 








2 


Since one of the purposes of this thesis is to 
try to understand the nature of the cause of speech dis¬ 
orders, it may be well for us to begin with a consider¬ 
ation of its physical and physiological bases. 

Resonating Cavities of the Speech Mechanism. - The 
cavities that seem to be the chief agents of resonance 
in the speech mechanism are those of the chest or 
thorax, the larnyx, and the head. The nature and extent 
of the reinforcement furnished by the thoracic and 
laryngeal cavities appears to be so little understood 
that most literature on the topic is limited to a dis¬ 
cussion of the supralaryngeal system. 

This system consists mainly of the passages of 
the throat, the mouth and the nose. Each of these 
resonators may undergo many alterations both in capacity 
and in the size of its openings, so that the whole sys¬ 
tem is capable of very great possibilities for rein¬ 
forcing tone. All three passages may act together as 
one complex resonator, or either the mouth or the nose 
may separately unite with the throat, the other being 
shut off by the action of the soft palate. Like the 
rest of the speech mechanism, these cavities are only 
secondarily concerned with the production of voice, their 
primary functions having to do with the maintenance of 
life - breathing and the mastication and swallowing of 
food. ____ 








, v; * 











5 


The Physiological Basis of Speech. 

Breathing .- Since breathing is a primary func¬ 
tion of the speech mechanism and since the outgoing 
breath is the basis of speech, an examination of the 
speech process is often begun with a description of 
breathing. Respiratory air currents initiate tones and 
noises in the human speech mechanism on the same gen¬ 
eral principles that air blasts set up by an organ 
pump initiate organ tones. 

Respiration consists of two distinct physiolog¬ 
ical processes: (l) inspiration - the entrance of an 
air current into the body, and (2) expiration - the 
exit of an air current from the body. During 
inspiration the chest expands and a current of air 
enters the body through either the nasal cavity or 
the cavity of the mouth, proceeding thence backwards 
and downwards through the throat, larnyx and trachea to 
the bronchi. The inspired air current is divided 
by the bronchi into two separate streams and is then 
further divided by the ramifying branches of the 
bronchial tubes until it is finally diffused into the 
innumerable air cells of the lungs. During expiration 
the chest contracts and a current of air proceeds from 
the air cells of "the lungs back along the respiratory . 
tract to the outer atmosphere. 











4 


The sole purpose of the respiratory mechanism - 
as far as speech production is concerned - is to pro¬ 
duce an expiratory blast of air from the lungs. In¬ 
spiration must be regarded as a function of importance 
to speech production only in that it serves to store 
the lung reservoirs with air that may be subsequently 
expired. The expired air current is utilized for the 
production of speech because it is especially adapted 
in a number of ways for the formation of a rapid suc¬ 
cession of sounds. The expired air current is the fund¬ 
amental and dynamic basis of speech - the energic 
origin of not only the sounds of our own language, but 
the sounds of all languages. 

The Breathing Apparatus .- A very brief descrip¬ 
tion of the organs of respiration gives a more clear 
understanding of the relation of breathing to speech 
production. 

(l) The Lungs .- The lungs, the focus of the 
most important part of the respiratory act, are two spongy 
cone-shaped structures which nearly fill the cavity of 
the chest, the base of each resting on the diaphragm 
and the rounded apex reaching about an inch above the 
first rib. The lungs are separated from each other by 
a median chamber, with thin-walled partitions, which 
contains the aesophagus, the trachea or windpipe, the 







- 5 - 

heart, and certain large blood vessels. 

Within the lungs the bronchial tubes branching 
from the trachea divide and subdivide into smaller 
tubes and these in turn ramify into numerous fine 
branches which lead ultimately into little pouches 
called air sacs. These air sacs have very thin walls 
in which are embedded a network of tiny blood vessels 
or capillaries, and it is here that the work of the 
lungs, the interchange of gases, occurs. The air that 
is taken into the expanded air sacs during inspiration 
loses oxygen and. acquires carbon dioxide, and it is 
then expelled from the sacs during expiration. The 
bronchial tubes and air sacs with their accompanying 
nerves and blood vessels, held together by elastic 
connective tissue, constitute the substance of the 
lungs. The lungs, being passive through elastic organs, 
have often been compared to rubber bags which can ex¬ 
pand and contract on3_y when acted upon by forces from 
without. 

(2) The Thorax .- The chest or thorax is the 
upper part of the trunk of the body. The framework 
consists of bones, cartilages, muscles and tendons 
and encloses the upper of the two great ventral cavities. 
In this cavity are located the trachea, the lungs, the 
aesophagus, the heart and the large arteries and veins. 












6 


The framework consists of the twelve rihs on either 
side and the sternum or breast bone, to which the ribs 
are attached in front. The diaphragm serves as the 
dome-shaped floor of the thorax. As a result of their 
peculiar shape, attachments and musculature, the ribs 
are capable of being moved upward and outward, thus 
increasing the diameter of the chest from front to 
back and from side to side. 

The Speech Mechanism, - Speech is a function to 
which we are so accustomed that we give little thought 
as to how it comes to us, how it develops with the 
growing child, and what physical and mental actions 
are concerned in it. Only when we come to some dis¬ 
turbance of speech and try to realise that it is 
wrong, and still more when we try to put it right, do 
we find out what an extremely complex thing speech 
development is. 

1. The Larnyx. - The larnyx or voice box, which 
acts as the vibrator in producing voice, is situated 
just below the base of the tongue. It is the enlarged 
upper end of the trachea, the tube leading from the 
mouth to the lungs. In shape the larnyx is broad and 
triangular at the top where it opens into the trachea 
proper, and flattened at the back. 









- 7 - 

2. The Vocal Cords. - There are, extending into 
the cavity of the larnyx on each side, near the upper 
opening, two pairs of horizontal ridges consisting of 
elastic connective tissue covered with mucous membrane. 
The upper pair of these ridges are the false vocal 
cords, and the lower the true ones. The false vocal 
cords act in conjunction with the epiglottis in 
preventing food from entering the lungs. In the act 

of swallowing, their muscles contract powerfully, thus 
helping to close the larnyx. The true vocal cords are 
the principal agents in the production of voice. They 
are attached in front to the inner angle of the thyroid 
cartilage and behind to the arytenoids. When tone 
is desired, the vocal cords are approximated, and 
air is sent through the narrowed slit of the glottis 
with sufficient force to set the delicate edges of the 
elastic vocal cords into vibration, thus producing 
voice. 

3. The Pharnyx. - The pharnyx is a vertical 
passage lying behind the mouth and extending from the 
base of the skull above to the larnyx and aesophagus 
below. It is cone-shaped, wide above and narrow be¬ 
low. The back and side walls consist of muscular and 
fibrous tissue; in front the pharnyx opens into three 
spaces which lie one above the other, the larnyx, the 









8 


mouth, and the nasal cavity. In the production of 
voice, the pharnyx serves the double purpose of provid¬ 
ing a free passage for the current of air and acting 
as a resonator to reinforce the tone generated in the 
larnyx. 

4. The Mouth. - Like the pharnyx, the mouth is 
a resonator which is capable of many changes, both in 
capacity and in size of openings. It is nearly oval 
and consists of two cavities, the back cavity (the 
mouth proper) and a front davity having for its outer 
wall the lips and cheeks, and for the inner, the teeth 
and gums. The lips, which are of considerable use in 
eating, are of very particular importance in the pro¬ 
duction of voice. When at rest the lips press gently 
against each other, closing the front orifice of the 
mouth. When in a state of muscular activity they per¬ 
form an endless number of voluntary movements - sep¬ 
arating, pressing more closely together, widening, 
pursing, thrusting forward, drawing back tightly 
against the teeth, tensing and relaxing. 

5. The Tongue .- The tongue is an organ of the 
utmost importance in swallowing, in breathing, in con¬ 
trolling the shape of the resonator and in the artic¬ 
ulation of sounds. Nearly all of the floor of the 
mouth is occupied by the tongue - an elongated, mass of 
muscular tissue capable of endless variations in pos- 





















....... .. .... - 






















' ... 









. 





















. . 










ition and shape. The muscles of the tongue render it 

surprisingly mobile and hence able to participate in 
a great number of articulatory contacts* 

6. The Palates *- The roof of the mouth con¬ 
sists of two parts, the hard palate in front and the 
soft palate at the back. The hard palate is a bony 
structure covered with mucous membrane; it extends in 
front and at the sides to the upper gum or teeth ridge* 
Continuous with the hard palate is the soft palate or 
velum, a movable fold of muscle fibres with a pendulous 
tip called the uvula* 

7* The Nose *- The nasal cavity is a long 
narrow passage between the bones of the face, extend¬ 
ing from the upper part of the pharnyx, to the edges 
of the nostrils* The roof of the mouth serves as the 
floor of the nose* The nose is furnished with small, 
weak muscles, those above serving to dilate the nos¬ 
trils, those below, to depress and contract them* In 
forced breathing the former assist in enlarging the 
air passage® The nostrils are the only parts of the 
nasal cavity that can change their size* 

I hope that the above survey of the anatomical 
structure and primary functions of the speech mechanism 
has prepared us for a better understanding of the 
causes and possible cure of speech defects. In order 








10 


to appreciate the many difficulties confronting a 
teacher of remedial speech it seems necessary to gain 
an understanding of the normal producers of sound. 

The Production of Vowels and Consonants, 

Voice sound is produced by a column of air 
passing from the lungs and- coming in contact with the 
various parts of the vocal organs. Articulation•is 
the proper adjustment of the vocal organs to the 
production of speech. 

In the formation of consonants the sounds 
which pass through the mouth are more or less obstructed 
through the activity of the lips, tongue and palate. 

If the column of air generates a vibration in the vocal 
cords of the larynx, the sounds produced are known as 
voice sounds (y,b,v,w,d,j,l,r,g,z). If the column of 
air does not cause a vibration of the vocal cords of the 
larynx, the sounds produced are known as breath or non- 
vocal sounds (h,p,f,wh,t,k,s,sh,ch). Sometimes the 
nasal passage is open when the sounds are made. The 
sounds so produced are called nasals. There are three 
nasal sounds: m,n, and ng. 

While forming consonants the child should give 
attention to the position of the tongue, that is, whether 
it touches the roof, the palate, the upper or lower 


















* 


















. 










. 

. • ( , . • ■ , , , , v" . • 





































m 



















11 


teeth or the gums. He should also note the air current, 
whether it causes vibration of the vocal cords, making a 
voiced sound; whether it does not cause vibration, making 
a breath sound; or whether the nasal passage is open 
when the sounds are made, resulting in a nasal sound. 

The lips may be either closed, open, rounded, slightly 
drawn back, protruded or pouted. 

In the formation of vowels, the voice is modified 
by different shapes of the mouth. A vov\rel (a,e,i,o,u) 
is a simple vocal sound. The lips, tongue, teeth, 
palate, and throat enter into the shaping of the different 
vowel sounds. A vowel is always a voice sound. When 
producing vowels one should give attention to the 
position of the tongue, that is, whether the tongue is 
high, mid or low in the mouth; whether the tongue is held 
tense or relaxed; and the part of the tongue which is 
raised, whether it is the front, the middle, the point 
or the back. Attention should also be directed to the 
position of the lips, whether they are wide, slightly 
open, or whether they are rounded, protruded or pouted. 

Sounds are often classified according to the 
organs of speech which are used in their production: 

The terms used in the classification are: 

1. Labials are the sounds made chiefly by the 
use of the lips (p,b,m,w), 


























> 










' 





























































12 


2. Labiodentals are those made chiefly by the 
use of the lips and teeth (f,v) 

3. Linguadentals are those made chiefly by the 
use of the tongue and teeth (th (soft), th (hard) ). 

4. Anterior linguadentals are those made 
chiefly by the use of the front part of the tongue 
(tip), and the palate (n,t,d,l,g (soft), s, sh,r). 

5. Posterior linguadentals are those made 
chiefly by the use of the rear part of the tongue and 
the palate (g,k,c (hard), ng) . 

The tongue, lips, jaw, teeth, and palace are 
the parts of the vocal tract used in articulation. 
Defective enunciation is, caused by the lack of control 
of the articulation organs. These organs are just as 
capable of development and control as are the other 
muscles of our body. The purpose of various longue, 
palate, and lip exercises found elsewhere in this thesi 
is to give full power and control of these parts so 
that the vowel and consonant sounds are pronounced 
correctly. 


















CHAPTER II 

CLASSIFICATION AND DIAGNOSIS OF SPEECH DEFECTS• 


1 













13 


CHAPTER II 

CLASSIFICATION AND DIAGNOSIS OF SPEECH DEFECTS 
Definition of Speech Defects. 

A speech defect is any acoustic variation from an 
accepted speech standard so extreme as to be conspicuous 9 
confusing or unpleasant. Such a variation may involve 
defective tone quality, defective breath grouping, de¬ 
fective stress placement, omission of sound units from 
portions in which they properly occur, insertion of 
sound units into positions in which they do not properly 
occur. 

I. Classification of Speech Disorders. 

A. Nervous Speech Disorders .- 

1. Stuttering .- Rapid repetition of the first 
sound in words. Example, t-t-t-to. 

Inability to speak at times, 
often no outward sign of inner struggle. 

Audible or visible spasmodic 
action of the speech organs. 

2. Hesitation .- Excessive self-consciousness 
and lack of poise, with speech confusion, resulting in 
refusal to recite. 

3* Cluttering .- Rapid, choppy, very indistinct 
speech, almost unintelligible. 
















14 - 


B. Organic Speech Disorders *- 

1. Defects in Speech Organs . 

a. Nose - adenoids, or other nasal obstructions 
resulting in the loss of resonance. Example "bood" for 
"moon". 

b. Teeth - overshot uppers or undershot 
lowers, causing misplaced consonants. 

c. Palate - sluggish, resulting in nasal 
"twang". Cleft, extremely nasal tone with defective 
consonants. 

d. Throat - extremely enlarged tonsils causing 
"thick" voice. Defective vocal cords resulting in 
chronic hoarseness. 

C. Habit Speech Disorders .- 

1. Voice Defects .- (not organic) 

a. Monotonous. 

b» Nasal. 

c. Lacking resonance. 

d. Throaty, 

e. High-pitched. 

f. Harsh. 

g» Aphonia (loss of voice). 

2.. Enunciation ,- oral inactivities. 

a. Sluggish mouth action. 




























■ 










, 






























15 


b. Tense jaw. 

3. Foreign Accent. - Foreign pronunciation, for¬ 
eign inflection and word stress. 

4. Articulation Defects .- 

a. Lisping on the consonants s, z, sh, zh, ch, 

j, observed as protrusion of the tongue, causing sub¬ 
stitution of the "th" sound. Example, "thing” for "sing” 

b. Other substitutions of consonants or in¬ 
fantile speech. 

Nervous speech disorders - stuttering, hesitation 
and cluttering - are not caused by an organic disability 
but by psychological factors. The speech specialist 
should seek causes in the environment of the home and 
the school. The stutterer has nothing wrong with any 
of the organs or functions which he uses in the pro¬ 
duction of speech. He is able to vocalize and artic¬ 
ulate. The trouble is that he cannot balance, that is, 
he cannot harmonize and coordinate these functions. 

His problem is one of emotional maladjustment involving 
the total personality. 

Organic speech disorders are caused by physical 
defects in the speech organs (enlarged adenoids, over¬ 
shot upper or undershot lower teeth, defective palate) 











16 - 


No progress can be made in the treating of an organic 
speech disorder until the patient has been examined by 
the school physician and treated. Speech correction 
is relatively easy, after the defect has been remedied, 
because the child suffering from an organic disability 
does not usually manifest nervousness common to the 
stutterer. The most common organic cause of speech 
defects is enlarged adenoids. Fewer children would 
contract adenoids if they were taught while small to 
clear their noses well and breathe through them reg¬ 
ularly. It has been said that regular humming will 
cure adenoids if they are just beginning to be trouble¬ 
some. The vibration involved helps to keep the mem¬ 
branes in a state of health which resists germs and 
growths. When adenoids have taken film hold an oper¬ 
ation is necessary; this gives the child a chance to 
mend his ways. If he is not taught afterwards how to 
breathe, recurrence is fairly certain. 

Habit speech disorders - voice defects, foreign 
accent, articulation defects - have their roots in 
early conditioning in home and school. These disorders 
are not usually accompanied by nervousness. They nec¬ 
essitate a complete retraining. The seven kinds of 










'O. 























. 











































17 - 


voice defects (not organic) listed in Section 0 above 
may be modified greatly by the exercises in breath 
control and articulation given in a later chapter. 

The existence of foreign accent in our Canadian speech 
of today is a pressing problem. The establishment of 
a correct knowledge of the phonetics of our language 
and the proper lip formation of the various sounds is 
beneficial for its elimination. Many children, 
either foreign born or of foreign parentage, develop 
a speech conflict because they are trying to balance 
normal English speech i-iracticed at school with the 
foreign language spoken in the home. 

II. Diagnosing Speech Difficulties. 

V/hen the speech teacher examines a child with a 
speech defect, all the facts that have any bearing 
upon the physical or mental development available from 
medical or other sources should be considered® For 
example, speech development is often retarded by severe 
illness in childhood. A history of such illness may 
throw some light into the child’s present condition. 

A correct diagnosis of the sympton is important in 
order that a suitable corrective procedure may be 
followed. 

An early step in the diagnosis of a speech defect 



















' 




- ■ ' 




















- 


■ 

. 













" i 












* 





- 18 - 

is the obtaining of a full history of the case. A 
careful study of the individual is made in order to 
understand the causal factors of the defect. The 
following general outline^ records significant facts. 

(1) Name. 

(2) Nationality. 

(3) Mental and moral status in school and at 
home shown by: 

fa} Intelligence tests. 

(b) School work. 

(c) Character and personality. 

(4) General physical condition: strong, anemic, 
active, lazy and so on. 

(5) Physical defects throughout speech organs: 
nose, throat, mouth, lips, teeth, palate, tongue and 
lungs. 

(6) Nature of particular speech organ defect; 
its peculiarities. 

(7) Other physical defects. 

(8) Illnesses, past or chronic. 

(S) Home environment. 

(a) Condition of home; standard of living. 

(b) Care of the child; food, clothing, sleep- 

# A modification of the outline given by Greene, J.S. 
"The Cause and Cure of Speech Defects”, p. 41. 
















1 








-ly¬ 


ing conditions, etc, 

(c) Associations; Speech defects of other 
members cf the family. 

(d) Sympathy and cooperation of the family. 
(Does the child meet with patience and consideration at 
home? Has medical aid been procured when necessary?) 

After the complete history has been obtained, the 
child, if suffering from an organic disability, should 
be referred to the school physician by the speech 
teacher before any corrective work is undertaken. The 
following Test Chart, a modification of the one outlined 
by Mrs. Gifford, and the Word and Sentence Tests given 
below, are useful for preliminary work with these child¬ 
ren afflicted with all speech defects exclusive of the 
Nervous Speech Disorders (stuttering, hesitation and 
cluttering). If the child mispronounces a vowel or 
consonant when repeating the words or sentences after 
the teacher has classified the disorder from which the 
child is suffering, she should then concentrate on the 
sounds pronounced incorrectly on these tests. Specific 
exercises for specific defects are detailed later. 

Test Chart :- (see pages 11 & 12 for a definition of 
these terms). 

Labials May I buy a piece of melon? 

p, b, m, w. Mary poured the water in the basin. 

# Gifford,Mabel,F. - "Tentative Handbook for Teachers 

of Corrective Speech p.20. 











- 20 - 


Labiodentals Four and one are five. 

f, v. That is very fine. 

Linguadentals 

th (soft) Smell this rose. 

th (hard) I saw three bears in the zoo. 

Anterior linguadentals 
n, t, d, 1, g (soft), 

j, s, x, sh, r. Tom did not see little Georgie jump. 

Posterior linguadentals.Kate gave me a ring. 

g, k, c (hard), ng, x. The wax candle burned quickly. 

# 

Word Test ."- The teacher, while giving the word test 
below should hold a piece of paper in front of her 
mouth so that the child cannot imitate the performance. 
The words should be said clearly and distinctly in order 
that they be plainly heard. 

Consonants.** 


hat 

find 

day 

good 

jaw 

you 

vest 

no 

see 

quart 

pie 

when 

lady 

zone 

X-ray 

bat 

we 

ride 

shop 

thank 

milk 

take 

key 

chair 

this 


# Greene - Cause and Cure of Speech Defects, p. 36-7- 












* t v t C 












- 21 - 


Vowels,- 


arm 

ask 

it 

use 

out 

age 

eel 

ice 

up 

owe 

at 

egg 

old 

ooze 

oil 

all 

ermine 

odd 

belong 

oyster 

Sentence 

Test.- 

In giving 

the Sentence 

Test, follow 


out the same procedure. Have the patient repeat the 
sentences after you. Write down any defects noticed. 

ft 

Consonants. 7 - 


h — He has a high hat. 

y — Yes, you yelled yesterday. 

p -- Polly, pick up that paint pot. 

b — See the big black bear. 

m — Mary’s mamma made it. 

f — Frank caught five fish. 

v -- The view of the valley is fine. 

wh — The wheel whirled and wheezed. 

w — Wee Willie won a wagon. 

t — Tom tells no tales, 
d — The day is dark and dreary. 

n — Ned is never neat. 

1 — Look at little Lucy. 

r — He ran around the rock. 

k — Kate kept the kitchen clean. _____ _____ _ 

# Greene, J.S. Cause and Cure of Speech Defects, p. 57. 

















g — Gus gave Peggy a gift. 

ng — It is a long strong string. 

s — See the sun set. 

z — The bees buzzed around the rose. 

sh — She used the sharp shears. 

zh — The azure sky was a pleasure to behold. 

ch — The Chinese champion. 

j — Jack and Jim joined the army. 

qu -- The queen was quaint and queer. 

x — The sexton had boxes cf wax candles. 

th — Get the thimble and thick thread. 

th — Feathers flew hither and thither. 

Vowels 

a ~ The lark flew to the arch in the park. 

It is too late to make a sale. 

The cat is an animal. 

The ball will fall on the shawl. 

It is the last class, 
e — We peel a peach before we eat it. 

Spend twenty cents for eggs. 

She earned her ermine wrap, 
i — The five-dollar bill is in the till. 


Ivan’s idea was fine 













. 











25 


o — The old post was in the open snowy road* 

She did not stop to shop* 

u — The union did its duty as usual. 

Ugly black mud was under us* 

The purse and curtains were burned. 

oo — The moon will soon brighten the room. 

The cook took his foot from the brook. 

ou) —■ Our cow is out in the field now. 
ow) 

oi) «— The oil in the ointment soiled the doily, 

oy) 








CHAPTER III 


STUTTERING: 


MAJOR SPEECH DEFECT 











24 


CHAPTER III 

STUTTERING: MAJOR SPEECH DEFECT 

Definition of Stuttering 
In English the terms stuttering and stammering 
have frequently been used synonymously. Some have 
attempted to use the term stammering to describe a 
peculiar form of stuttering called spastic aphonia, 
in which the individual exerts considerable effort 
to £alk but emits no sound at all. This is also 
sometimes called 11 speech hesitation’ 1 . Those who adopt 
this usage call stuttering that form of defect which 
is characterized by the repetition of initial syllables. 
Fletcher, in "The Problem of Stuttering",says that this 
is an erroneous clinical distinction, that the funda¬ 
mental difficulty in each case is precisely the same, 
namely, an inability to succeed in articulate utterance 
of speech under certain conditions, and that the varia¬ 
tions in the manifestations of this blocking are 
purely incidental and superficial, having nothing to do 
with the basic character of. the disorder. At the 
present time, the tendency is to use both terms synono- 
mously, although the term stuttering is perhaps the 
more widely used of the two. 




- 25 - 

Prevalence of Stuttering Among School Children. 

Prom the statistical data published we find that 
there are ten million speech defectives in the United 
States, and one million stutterers. If we take the 
average of various findings, slightly more than one 
per cent of the children in public schools are found 
to be afflicted with stuttering.^ To this number one 
would have to add the considerable number who drop out 
of school through inability to meet the requirements of 
the class room* Surveys indicate that there is a larger 
number of stutterers among school children than there 
are of blind and deaf children combined. Wallin 
found that the proportion of school children who stutter 
increases from the first to the eighth grade. 

Sex Factors in the Causation of Stuttering. 

Stuttering is more prevalent among boys than 
among girls. Estimates of these differences range from 

4iU 

two to one, to ten to one /' w The rate changes with age, 
so that the greater the age the greater the preponder¬ 
ance of male over female stutterers. Males, therefore, 
are more likely to acquire the defect and are much more 
likely to continue it, once it has been acquired. 

# Travis, Lee Edward - Speech Pathology, p. 97. 

## Fletcher, J.M. - The Problem of Stuttering, pp. 56-58. 
























- 


■ 









i 









' 








* 

. 




















- , - 















- 26 


Age of Onset of Stuttering. 

The greatest frequency of stuttering is reported 

between the ages of two and four years. The most 

# 

reliable surveys reveal that about eighty-five per 
cent begin to stutter before the age of eight years. 
There are certain clearly marked stages in the normal 
development of every child which, being periods of 
mental or physical stress, may be in themselves 
sufficient to account for the onset of stuttering. 

These periods may also temporarily intensify a stammer 
that may have been already established. 

The first stage is that of learning to talk, when 
undue attention to childish defects may set up that 
dread or anxiety which fixes the trouble. The second 
stage is during the latest period of speech develop¬ 
ment, that is, during the fourth or fifth year, which 
in elementary school is coincident with the beginning 
of school life. A highly-strung, intelligent child 
often becomes over-excited in his eagerness to express 
himself - his expression shows the strain of his 
efforts to articulate and he is handicapped by a limited 
vocabulary and of selection of words. The third stage, 
the period of second dentition, is the one in which 

# Travis, Lee Edward - Speech Pathology, p. 101, and 
McAllister, A.H. - Clinical Studies in Speech 

Therapy, pps, 8-11, 

























. 














- 








. 

' 

































- 27 


lisping occurs. The loss of the front teeth forms an 
opening, and the longue, not under sufficient control, 
often slips through this opening. The fourth period - 
puberty - can hardly be said to cause stuttering. By 
the time the child has attained the age of twelve years 
the trouble usually has been well established. Very 
few, however, having a speech defect, escape an in¬ 
tensification of the defect at this age. In a boy the 
change of voice is partly responsible for a considerable 
loss of confidence and an increase of self-consciousness 
during the period of adjustment. 

Etiology of Stuttering. 

The phenomenon of stuttering has engaged attention 
and interest from the earliest times. In Biblical 
times Moses, when commanded to go before Pharaoh, said, 
f 0 Lord, I am not eloquent, neither heretofore nor 
since Thou hast spoken to Thy servant, but I am slow 
of speech and of a slow tongue. ! (Exod.IV,10). In 
God T s reply, as Moses records it, we see that defects 
of speech were regarded by the Jews as afflictions equal 
to deafness and blindness: T, Who has made man 1 s mouth? 
or who maketh the dumb, or deaf, or the seeing, or the 
blind? have not I the Lord? ! (Exod. IV,II) 

Both Greek and Latin languages contain numerous 
words relating to impediments of speech. There is no 








28 


evidence, however, that either the Greeks or the 
Homans achieved the formulation of any satisfactory 
classification of speech disorders. In Roman writings, 
stuttering and lisping were not differentiated from 
other speech peculiarities. The stutterer had his 
special name as had the squinter and the long-nosed 
person. 

During medieval times no progress in the differ¬ 
entiation of speech difficulties was made. Wot until 
the sixteenth century did the problem receive serious 
consideration. 

Mercurialis (1584) stated that the cause of 
stuttering was to he found in the humidity of the brain, 
which disturbed the normal action of this ’central 
organ 1 . This conception, which makes the ’central organ 1 
the seat of the affliction, marks a notable progress 
and may be considered the forerunner of most of the 
theories up to quite recent years. 

The researches made by medical men in the eighteenth 
century - Hahn, Delius, Santorini, Morgagni - show a 
regression to earlier concepts. These men regarded 
stuttering as the result of malformations of the speech 
organs. In 1825 the !S American Cure” for stutterers was 
discovered by Mrs. Leigh of New York. She attributed 
the cause of stuttering to a weakness of the tongue which 










29 


caused it to be kept at the bottom of the mouth 
instead of in the roof of the mouth. 

Chegoin (1830) thought he had discovered the 
fundamental cause, in abnormal formations of the 
tongue. According to his theory defects of speech 
were due to tongue anomalies, either in the form of 
shortness or restriction of movement. The obvious 
cure was by surgical operation. 

In the 1840 , s enthusiasm for the cure of defective 
speech by surgery spread rapidly over the entire con¬ 
tinent of Europe. Nearly two hundred cases in France 
alone submitted to an operation in the course of a year. 
A sort of rivalry, even, sprang up among the surgeons 
for the honor of inventing new kinds of operative 
procedure. Almost every muscle of the tongue appears, * 
in its turn, to have been cut, in the hope that the 
focus of the trouble might be located. The advocates 
of surgical treatment either pretended to have seen 
successful instances or expected to do so in the near 
future. 

Merkel (1866) placed the primary cause of 
stuttering in the psychic sphere - the sphere of the 
will. He held that a debility in this sphere was 
responsible for a disturbance of the equilibrium be- 





























































50 


tween articulation and vocalization. Thome (1867) 
believed the cause of stuttering to be an abnormal 
working of the central nervous apparatus, induced by 
the influence of certain emotions, which lead to 
respiratory disturbances. Shrank (1877) believed 
with Merkel that the cause of stuttering lay in the 
will. He said that during the act of speaking, the 
will is hampered and flurried by disturbing influences, 
generally consisting of feelings of dread. 

Many variations upon the above theories might 
be detailed, but to no practical purpose. The 
curious reader may be referred to Appelt - u Stammering 
and Its Permanent Cure’ 1 , Chapter I. 

Present day explanations of stuttering are 
numerous, diverse, and conflicting. One theory suggests 
that the cause lies in childhood mental trauma or in 
motive conflict, another stresses inferiority feelings, 
and a third points to faulty habit foundations. Some 
authorities hypothecate a nervous instability as the 
fundamental factor, others speak of emotional instabil¬ 
ity as basic in the disorder, and still others find an 
explanation in the anomolies of cerebral dominance. 

A few of the more widely accepted theories will be 
briefly summarized and their limitations indicated. 




• . 












' 


■ 








31 


The Freudian school of psychology, or more 
generally the psychoanalytical school, finds the 
genesis of speech disorder in childhood experiences 
involving severe shock or severe conflict. Of the 
latter the Oedipus complex and the Electra complex 
are typical. An exaggerated attachment, sometimes of 
an incestuous or neurotic origin, of the child for the 
parent of the opposite sex and a consequent hostility 
toward the other parent, constitutes the bases of a 
conflict that is likely to be repressed. Some 
psychoanalysists emphasize rather the shock or trauma 
consequent upon a precocious experience (usually of 
a sexual nature) which is apt similarly to be repressed 
In either case the repression may suffer conversion 
into any of a number of physical or psychical mani¬ 
festations, one form of which is the speech defect, 
stuttering. According to the psychoanalytical theory 
relief is to be sought in psychoanalytical treatment, 
the purpose of which is to expose the conflict and to 
resolve its elements by appropriate techniques. 

As a theory this is very attractive, and to those 
disposed to accept psychoanalytical theories in general 
very plausible. Unfortunately the therapeutic measures 
indicated meet with a peculiar difficulty. The free 
association technique depends for its success upon 















































































. 









32 


a free vocalization. This in the very nature of the 

case the stutterer lacks. Many words and phrases he 

avoids religiously, feeling unahle to say them. At 

other times he seeks refuge in obstinate silence 

rather than expose himself to the humiliation of 

# 

stuttering. Thus the theory itself is difficult of 
confirmation. 

Very closely akin to the above explanation is 

that advanced by Coriat, himself a psychoanalyst. He 

suggests that the stutter is normally the result of 

some infantile sexual fixation. When for example, 

a stuttering boy was being diagnosed by him, he found 

out what particular letters or sounds gave the patient 

most difficulty. If the patient had trouble with 

pronouncing K sounds, he assumed that this boy had 

previously had some kind of an emotional sex experience 

with a girl whose name was Kate or some name beginning 

with K, or else a similar experience with a girl of 

another name in a kitchen, or a camp. He contends that 

the patient had received a K trauma of some sort. 

# 

Commenting upon this explanation Fletcher writes: 
n One may succeed with this explanation in one or t?fo 
instances in any single case, but how one could complete 
the life story of a boy who stutters on practically 
every letter is difficult to imagine.” 

(#) Fletcher,J.M. - The Problem of Stuttering,ups.134-5 

:iaq-150. 



























■ 




























53 


Fletcher^ states that stuttering is a psychological 
problem. He is the most vigorous exponent of the view 
that stuttering is an indication of maladjustment to 
the social environment. He says 11 ...it (stuttering) 
should be diagnosed as a morbidity of social conscious¬ 
ness, a hypersensitivity of social attitude, a pathologic¬ 
al social response. The morbid elements in this social 
response include, typically, fear, anxiety, the feel¬ 
ing of inferiority, and kindred attitudes arising out 
of a state of mind engendered by the realization of 
the necessity to meet, through speech, certain social 
requirements. The memory of previous failures to meet 
similar requirements serves to ! set off* these reactions..” 

According to this theory the child who is con¬ 
tinually thwarted in his activities and who has no 
chance to achieve success will, in all probability, 
develop a sense of inferiority, and a hypersensitive 
social consciousness which may predispose him to 
stuttering. In his social environment the child has 
to learn his earliest social adjustments. If his 
egoistic tendencies are strong, this brings him into 
conflict. The outcome of the conflict will depend upon 
the kinds of restraints imposed upon his own mental 
and nervous make-up. 


#Fletcher, J.M. - The Problem of Stuttering, p. 226. 











34 


Fletcher 1 s theory is obviously worthy of 
serious consideration. Stuttering appears in fact 
to be closely associated with unhealthy mental states 
resulting from social maladjustment. Under certain 
conditions the stutterer can speak without any 
difficulty. He is affected by a variety of social 
relationships. He has his greatest difficulty when 
he speaks to those whom he regards as his social 
superiors or who are in authority over him. The vast 
majority of stutterers, because they suffer from an 
inferiority complex, have the habit when they come 
into contact with another person, of thinking, first 
of how that person is going to regard them, rather 
than thinking of how they are going to regard the 
other person. 

In connection with practical work, the writer has 
found that the stutterer is able to read' in unison 
without stuttering. This is possibly because he does 
not have the sole responsibility, resting upon him, and 
that if he ! gets stuck* some other person will keep 
going. Singing is possible to the stutterer because 
while singing he is simply vocalizing, and he does not 
feel any sense of responsibility for conveying a 
message to others through speech. Since the physiological 






















. 










, . 










35 


processes of singing are identical with those of talk¬ 
ing, Fletcher says we are compelled to seek other than 
physiological explanations for the stutterer*s ability 
to do one but not the other. The social relations 
in the two acts are different. 

A stutterer may speak quite freely when he is 
speaking to someone who gives' him no feeling of in¬ 
feriority. He can vocalize easily when he is in the 
company of people to whom he feels no hostility. 

In singing, his whole body is relaxed, he is not self- 
conscious and his speech mechanism performs its task 
satisfactorily. The stutterer is usually able to talk 
when introducing himself to. an inferior, or to some¬ 
one upon whom he is proposing to confer a favor. His 
speech often * blocks* completely when introducing 
himself to superiors. The subtle character of these 
social attitudes has a marked effect upon the stutterer'* s 
mind and upon his speech. 

The mental and emotional factors described above 
are undoubtedly important in so far as they are attitudes 
which the stutterer has adopted in association with 
his defect. It is by no means certain that they can be 
regarded as the fundamental factors in the production 
of stuttering. 


























■ 














' 
















36 


•The neurological explanations of stuttering 
have been based chiefly on the theory of cortical 
dominance. The exponents of this theory believe that 
the principal speech centers of the brain lie on the 
dominant side, which they say is the left for right- 
handed persons, and the right in the case of the 
left-handed. Lee Travis of the State University of 
Iowa explains the causation of stuttering from a 
neurological point of view. He says that the primary 
causes of stuttering are:^ 

1. "Lack of an inherent bias for the development 
of a sufficiently dominant gradient of excitation in 
the central nervous system to integrate the movements 
of the organism in the production of normal speech. 

2. "Environmental interference with the develop¬ 
ment of a sufficiently dominant gradient of excitation 
in the central nervous system to integrate the movements 
of the organism in the production of normal speech. 

3. "Brain injuries at and subsequent to birth. 

4. "Physical and mental diseases." 

Travis believes that his theory of the dominant 
gradient is a solution of the problem of stuttering. 

He maintains that approximately one-half of the stutterers 
under his observation are ambidextrous in unimanual 


#Travis, L.E. - Speech Pathology, p. 255. 











- 57 


activities*'' He believes that a great deal of this 

ambidexterity is the result of parents and teachers 

attempting to convert naturally left-handed children 

to right-handedness. Some of it, however, he believes 

to be the continuation of a condition of ambidexterity 

which existed from the beginning. According to this 

theory the stutterer is one who lacks a dominant 

grad.ient - n during stuttering the right and left 

## 

cerebral hemispheres are equipoise^* The problem 
then is to develop a strict one-sid_edness in all motor 
activities, so that one dominant side is preferred. 

The side to be selected and made the leading one is 
determined by a thorough study of the case. This 
theory indicates that stuttering comes from the con¬ 
flict of neural impulses resulting from an incomplete 
dominance of one side or the other. 

Wnndell Johnson, a pupil whom L. Travis treated 
'for a severe,form of stuttering at the Iowa Speech 

£ 

Clinic laboratories, has v/ritten an interesting book 
in connection vd.th his remedial training and laboratory 
work. Mr. Johnson ?/as T right-handed 1 when he arrived 
at the clinic. On the basis of laboratory findings, 

# Travis, Lee - Speech Pathology, p. 185. 

## Travis, Lee - Speech Pathology, p.viii. 

£ Johnson W. - Because I Stutter. 




























- 
























*il « 









58 


Mr. Travis found that Johnson 1 s native neural dominance 
lay in the right hemisphere of the brain. According to 
this ! neural dominance 1 theory, then, the patient was 
naturally left-handed. In spite of this he had 
always been T right-handed 1 . He explains: "No one 
recalls that I was ever shifted from the use of the 
left hand to the use of the right; it is apparent 
that I learned to use the right because the large 
family with which I was surrounded was made up of 
right-handed individuals. 

The connection between stuttering and left-handed- 
ness has been emphasized so often that it has almost 
come to be regarded as a fact requiring no proof. 

While general opinion seems to make a connection between 
stuttering and the correction of left-handedness, 
experimental evidence by no means points unequivocally 
in that direction. On the basis of the results of 

, JUL 

experiments McAllister^ deduces the following general 
conclusions, which are contradictory to statements 
made by Travis: 

1. ”Speech disability and left-handedness are not 
linked together in any causative relationship. 

2. "Change of handedness does not lead to speech 
disability in the majority of cases of left-handed 

# Johnson W. Because I Stutter, p. 93. 

## McAllister, A.H. - Clinical Studies in Speech J^grapy, 








39 


children changing to right-handedness. When speech 
disorder does follow the change, it may be due to one 
or other of the following causes: 

(a) Over-concentration upon the unilateral 
process of writing, inhibiting other language functions 
which are bilateral. 

(b) Wrong methods of inducing the change. 

(c) Insufficient and inefficient practice in the 
new facility. 

(d) High strung, nervous temperament, upset by 
the demand for adjustment to new conditions. 11 

McAllister thus maintains that there is no re¬ 
lationship existing between cerebral dominance and 
stuttering. This view is upheld also by Henry Head^ 
who says in this connection: "There are no 1 centres 1 
for speaking, reading, writing, or other forms of 
behavior comprised in the normal use of language. 11 The 
whole question of the relation between stuttering 
and handedness is, as may be concluded from the con¬ 
flicting evidence given above, an unsettled one. Basing 
an entire correction program upon the single principle 
of cerebral dominance, then, would be an unsound pro¬ 
cedure. 


# Head, Henry - Aphasia and Kindred Disorders of 
Speech, Vol. I, p. 478. 

















































































; .. . ;■ 






■ 










40 


J.S. Greene, who operates the National Hospital 
for Speech Disorders in New York City, suggests that 
stuttering begins with a nervous shock of some kind. 
According to this theory the speech defect starts in 
the mind of the child when, after some shock that has 
temporarily disorganized the nervous system, the memory 
of the experience remains clearly with him. The 
child then begins to wonder why he could not speak at 
that particular time, and carries over the idea of 
failure, and wonders if he will be able to speak the 
next time. From this condition there is likely to 
develop nervous disorders resulting in stuttering. 

The original faulty speech was a temporary con- 
dition due to shock or fright or surprise. Everyone 
receives shocks. The reason everyone does not become 
a stutterer is that in the normal nervous system these 
shocks result in only temporary maladjustment, and the 
stumbling speech that follows leaves no marked impression 
on the mind. It is only in the nervously constituted 
that the maladjustment and the stuttering speech is 
severe enough to give rise to emotionalism. 

The stuttering child then, according to this vie?/, 

unstable 

starts with an inherited/nervous constitution, then 
suffers a fright or fall that lowers his resistance and 
throws the nervous system out of adjustment. The normal 
























■ 




































41 


child is a little shaken up but recovers from the 
shock presently. Greene^ says in this regard: 

"Stuttering children are the victims of sensitive, 
impressionable, high-strung excitable, or emotional 
temperaments. Either this or they have a nervous 
instability which is the aftermath of some children 1 s 
disease. A fright, a blow, a falj., a shock of some 
kind may disorganize the machinery of speech." This 
theory holds that emotionalism in the form of fear and 
worry tends to cause the speech apparatus to become 
uncontrollable, once the defect begins. The resultant 
speech failure throws the child out of adjustment 
with the people about him. His emotionalism increases 
in the form of self-pity, fear of ridicule, or dis¬ 
couragement. The emotionalism reacts again upon his 
speech, and the vicious circle is complete. 

Since emotionalism, in the form of fear of being 
unable to speak, is the thing that causes the stutterer 1 s 
trouble, Greene concludes that the stutterer should be 
trained to keep his emotionalism under control. Although 
Greene looks upon stuttering as an emotional phenomenon, 
thus placing it in the domain of psychology, he con¬ 
siders the treatment a medical problem. 


# Greene, J.S. 


- The Cause and Cure of Speech Defects, p.74 












42 


A Composite Point of View. 

When the various aspects of stuttering stressed 
by different investigators are taken into account, one 
realizes that stuttering involves many of the complex 
processes of the personality. Obviously, in the 
present state of our knowledge, one v/ould be unwise to 
center attention upon any single factor to the exclus¬ 
ion of all others. 

By way of summarizing the many suggestions 
bearing upon the causes of stuttering, one may conclude 
that according to different investigators this disorder 
may be due to one or several of the following factors; 

1. Fright. 

2. Shock. 

3. Psychoneurosis produced by shock or injury. 

4. Nervous debility. 

5. Careless habits of speech in childhood, the 
result of diffused thinking or of a child ? s having 
been allowed to form the habit of repeating v/ords. 

6. Endeavoring to produce sounds with the speech 
organs in incorrect positions, for instance, opening 
the mouth in an attempt to produce I! m ,! . 

7. Imitation of stuttering speech, either direct 
or indirect. 

8. Use of words whose pronunciation and meaning 















- 43 


are beyond the mental development of the child. 

9. Forcing a left-handed child to write with 
his right hand. 

10. Speech conflict - thinking in one language and 
trying to talk in another. 

Treatment of Stuttering. 

Stuttering is a form of social maladjustment. It 
is probably true that all stutterers are extremely sensit¬ 
ive, and that they suffer from an inferiority complex. The 
major causes of stuttering are found in the mass of 
accumulated emotional associations that result from the 
daily experiences of trying to talk. Only by establishing 
counteracting emotional associations can the old associat¬ 
ions be removed. Every time the stuttering child suffers 
embarrassment through inability to talk, he lessens his 
chances of recovery. Reestablishment of confidence in 
ability to speak is all important in the corrective 
procedure. Any program of exercise is merely a means by 
which confidence may be restored. All measures must be 
undertaken with this principle in mind. Method of any 
kind is probably not the important thing. Any means which 
will accomplish feelings of confidence are to be commended, 
and any means which destroy confidence are to be condemned. 

The treatment outlined below is based on the 
recognition of the many-sidedness of the causes of 













' 


" 






• ■ 












. 











. 











. 

. 












44 


stuttering. It seems doubtful that the treatment of a 

stutterer can follow any stereotyped plan. The material 

# 

presented has been gathered from various sources" and 
modified in many instances to suit particular needs. A 
large number of the breathing exercises, and the lip, 
tongue, and palate exercises as well as those dealing 
with the correct placement of. the tongue, lips, teeth 
in the production of vowels and consonants are taken 

jj-ff 

from Greene . Many of the word drills and simple 
sentences were compiled by the writer in connection 
with the practical work done in the Edmonton schools. A 
number of short poems v^rere taken from Barrows and 
Case, "Speech Drills for Children in the Form of Play." 

Relaxation Exercises for Speech 
Correction. 

While the directions for the relaxation exercises 
are detailed the actual execution of them takes no more 
than ten minutes. The exercises should be taken at 
least three times a day. To insure a maximum benefit, 
they should be taken in the morning upon awakening, 
sometime during the midday, and at night before going to 
sleep. Most important is regularity and faithfulness 
in performing the exercises. 

# Gifford, M.F. - Correcting Nervous Speech Disorders. 
Bennett, Rodney - Practical Speech Training for Schools. 
Peppard - The Correction of Speech Defects. 

Bender and Kleinfeld - Speech Correction Manual. 

##gg®, a ??S? u § s fhi §8ai§ h & C e&fi c Smeech Defects. 








■ 






- 




. 



























• ■ 


■'. . 1 ' 










45 


Drill I . (a) Lie down at full length. 

(b) Stretch the body and limbs to an 
extreme degree in all directions. Then relax. Repeat 
often with slow and intense action. 

This drill is a preparation for all the drills 
which follows. Make certain that the limbs have plenty 
of room. Do the exercise on the floor. A couch with 
ends open limits movement y especially if the student 
is tall. A flat pillow may be used under the head, 
although it is advisable to perform the drill without 
one. 

Drill II. (a) Place the right hand over the region of 
the diaphragm. 

(b) Breathe deeply so that the hand is moved 
up and down regularly by the undulating movements of 
the diaphragm. 

(c) Inhale on the count of one. (The 
abdominal wall should .rise on each inhalation) 

(d) Hold the breath on the count of two. 

(e) Exhale the breath on the count of 
three. (The abdominal wall should collapse) 












46 


Repeat the drill until the breathing becomes even 
and rhythmic breathing. This is nature’s way of combat¬ 
ing fatigue and recuperating the forces of the body. 
Modern treatment seems to begin with a series of breath¬ 
ing exercises. These are intended to instil control of 
the breath and to develop concentration. 

Drill III . (a) Inhale on a count of five. 

(b) Hold the breath for a count of five. 

(c) Exhale on a count of five. 

Repeat this drill five times, make certain that the 
chest remains stationary. 


Drill 

IV. 

(a) 

Inhale on a count of five. 





(b) 

Hold the breath for a count 

of 

one. 



(c) 

Exhale the breath for a count ' 

of one 



(a) 

Repeat many times. 



Drill 

V. 

(a) 

Inhale on a count of one. 





(b) 

Hold the breath for a count 

of 

one. 



(c) 

Exhale on a count of five. 





(a) 

Repeat often. 































. 




' 



























47 


Drill VI . Relaxation of the Back. Repeat five times. 

(a) From an extended prone position very 
slowly and tensely elevate the back and bend forward 
until the head touches the knees. 

(b) Allow the body to fall back to the 
original position. 

Drill VII. (a) Lie on the right side of the bod;/, with 
arms extended. 

(b) Bend forward at the waist until the 
hands reach the toes, without bending the knees. 

(c) Return to the original position. 

(d) Now reach the arms backward, bending 
the head and spine slowly backward and trying to touch 
the heels with the hands. 

(e) Return to the rest position. 

(f) Alternate these two movements. First 
on the right side then on the left. Repeat five times. 
Drill VIII . Relaxation of the neck. 

(a) Lie on the back. Turn the head so 
that the right cheek touches the pillow. 

(b) Very slowly and tensely turn the head 
until the right cheek touches the pillow• 

(c) Very slowly and tensely turn the head 
until the right cheek touches the pillow again. Repeat 
this series of exercises ten times. 














48 


Drill IX. (a) Assume a sitting posture. 

(b) Allow the head to fall inertly in its 
shoulder socket, making one complete rotation to twelve 
slow counts. 

(cjD Reverse the direction. 

(d) Repeat five times, keeping the eyes shut. 
Drill X. Relaxation of the lips and cheeks. 

(a) Pucker the lips as much as possible. 

(b) With the teeth together, smile as 
broadly as possible. 

Repeat (a) and (b) alternately ten times. 

Lip Exercises. 

(1) Protrude the lips in a puckered position. 

(2) Extend the upper lip outward and upward to 
touch the nose. 

(5) Pull down the lower lip, exposing the 
lower teeth. 

(4) With the teeth closed say ah— 00 —ee—*oo, 
ah— 00 —ee— 00 , slowly and with vigorous lip action. 

Round the lips for 00 and stretch them for ee. With the 
teeth separated and with the mouth wide open repeat 
the exercises. 

(5) Say we-woe-we-woo, we-woe-we-woo with 
exaggerated lip action. Be sure that the lips are 
spread as in smiling for we and are rounded for woo . 














1 
















f 








r 


■ 













: ; 






. 


49 


Drill XI . Relaxation of the forehead. Use a mirror. 

(a) Frown as deeply as possible. The eyes 
should become mere slits, the eyebrows contracted, the 
surrounding skin creased, the lips tightly pursed. 

(b) Raise the eyebrows and elevate the skin 
on the forehead, waiting until deep horizontal lines 
appear. 

(c) Alternate (a) and (b) ten times. 

Drill XII. Relaxation of the eyes. 

(a) Close the eyes. 

(b) Open them as widely as possible. 

(c) Roll them (the eyeballs, that is) in a 
circle very slowly, first right, then left. Repeat 
ten times. Focus the sight upon every object that is 
observed on the periphery of the visual circle. 

(d) Shut the eyes and rest. 

Drill XIII . Relaxation of the throat. 

(a) Ya?/n with the mouth opened as widely 
as possible. 

(b) Expel the breath on the whispered 
sound of a as in father. Repeat five times. 

(c) Alternate whispered and voiced product¬ 
ion of a as in father. Repeat many times. 












■.:: J 






i 








: 




























- 








50 


Speech Games. 

Drills for group participation for stutterers 
can be given in a group as small as two, or as large 
as fifteen. Six or eight constitute an excellent 
number for group work. A group of this size is small 
enough to allow each member a number of opportunities 
to participate in speaking situations within a class 
period, and at the same time it is large enough to 
compose an audience which the stutterer may feel at 
ease in. When the stutterer proves to himself that 
he can speak before an audience of eight or ten 
persons, he has gone a long way toward establishing 
self-confidence in group situations. It is not ab¬ 
solutely necessary that the group be homogeneous in regard 
to defects of speech. Lispers, lallers, stutterers, 
and other speech defectives may be included in one 
group. When possible, however, it is expedient for 
a group to be homogeneous. 

Drill I. Group and Alternate Reading. 

(a) Read in unison a paragraph of at least 
seven sentences in length, alloYving one count for 
every syllable. 

(b) Now let one member of the group read a 
sentence in the same rate as that in which the para¬ 
graph was read. 

(c) The next sentence should be reaxl by the 







51 


group. 

(d) Next, let another member of the group 
read a sentence. 

(e) The next sentence should be read by the 
group. This method of alternate reading is a profit¬ 
able warming-up exercise. 

Drill II. The Chain Story. 

Let some member of the group begin a story with 
one sentence, such as, ”0nce upon a time there was 
a young man who went to China”. Another member of the 
group will add some such sentence as: !, This man was 
interested in becoming a newspaper correspondent for an 
American newspaper.” Still another member will add 
another sentence. After each member of the group has 
added a number of sentences (the number of sentences 
for each member will vary with the size of the group 
and the time allowed), someone will say, ”And so he 
lived happily ever after.” 

Because of the many quick turns that a chain 
story usually entails, much fun and laughter are forth¬ 
coming. The results are likely to foster good feeling, 
spontaneity, co-operation, interest and relaxation. 
Drill III. Completing Sentences. Let one member 
of the group read the following incomplete sentences 
and another member of the group complete the sentence by 
adding one word. 







. 



















. 


















. 




. ... - 




























r t ' 





















52 


1. The opposite of black is -. 

2. Two and two make-. 

3. Students make use of books and-. 

4. The boys and girls ran down the-. 

5. Three thousand soldiers marched -. 

6. In the month of May the flowers are-— * 

7. The teacher assigned the homework for-. 

8. The train arrived in Edmonton at *—•. 

9. It very seldom snows in- 

10. I went to the grocery store to buy apples, 

potatoes, and —-. 

11. John gave Mary fifty cents to buy-. 

12. Boys and girls should get at least nine hours 
of 

13. A good student always studies ——. 

Drill IV . Let one member of the group give one of the 
following words, and another member add words to make 
a complete sentence. 

1. Happiness —-- 

2 . Baseball--- 

3. English —-—--. 

4. Rowing-- 

5. Birds-——. 

6. Chairs-—--. 

7. Oranges-——. 






























53 


8. 

Automobiles - 


9. 

Letters - 

• 

• 

o 

H 

Books - 

• 

. 

<—1 

i—1 

Dogs- 

* • 

12. 

College - 

- - . 

13. 

Vocations — 

• 

14. 

Summer--— 

• 

15. 

Swimming- 

' ~ <9 


Drill V. A somewhat more difficult but still inter¬ 
esting sentence game, especially for older students, 
is the following: 

(a) Let one member of the group give a sentence 
such as, "Newspapers are excellent sources for current 
events 

(b) Another member of the group will then give a 
sentence beginning with the last word of the previous 
sentence, such as "Events in the life of a great man 
are recorded by biographers and historians." 

(c) A third member of the group will then begin 

a sentence with "historians” and so on. The objectives 
are fluency and lack of long periods of hesitation 
between sentences. Tell each student to use a loud 
resonant voice in speaking and reading, thus constantly 
developing habits of smooth and controlled articulation 
and phonation. 






















54 


Drill VI . Including Opposites. Select one of the 
words in the following list and use its opposite in 
a sentence. 


black 

bitter 

hard 

light 

slow 

run 

high 

short 

cold 

opaque 

giant 

kind 

beautiful 

smile 

dull 

safe 

wealthy 

laugh 

expensive 

talkative 

bald 

son 

mother 

reliable 

floor 

studious 

uncle 

honest 

hut 

easy 


Drill VII . Rapid Replies. 

An exercise which calls for attention, concentrat¬ 
ion, and speech coordination is the yes-no game. A 
member of the group will use u yes Tt and ,? no TT in various 
combinations. Another member (designated by the first 
member) will reply with the opposite* Strive for 
smooth and controlled articulation throughout. 

First member: Yes. 

Second member: No. 

First member: Yes - no - yes. 

Second member: No - yes - no. 

First member: Yes - yes - no - ho - yes - yes. 

No-no - yes - yes - no - no. 


Second member: 











55 


The variety of combinations is numberless. The 
students may be interested in making a game out of the 
exercises by eliminating those who make mistakes. 

Drill VIII. Plays and Dramatic Readings. 

The reading of plays in group work is especially 
profitable to the stutterer. The cast should be 
rotated so that each member of the group has a turn 
at reading a character. In many instances, the 
stutterer will take on the character of the role he 
is reading. Hence his speech will be changed for the 
better. One-act plays are more adaptable to the 
average class period or speech hour than long plays. 
Drill IX. Telephone Conversations. 

Actual telephone calls are recommended for 
stutterers. Calls may be made to the teacher, and they 
may be made to the various members of the group. If 
the stutterer can as sure himself that he can use the 
telephone, he will gain confidence. 

Make-believe telephone conversations may be 
carried on in the practice period. Let two members of 
the group take chairs in opposite sides of the room, 
facing opposite directions. Now let one call a number, 
while the other responds. The folloY/ing list provides 
real telephone situations: 









56 


1. Telephone the grocer for a large week-end order. 

2. Telephone a friend to arrange for an outing. 

3. Telephone a prospective buyer of an automobile. 

4. Telephone the police to report a ransacked house. 

5. Telephone the gas company to report a mistake in 
the monthly bill. 

6. Telephone a friend to get the homework assign¬ 
ments for the past two days. 

7. Telephone the radio station, requesting your 
favorite singer to sing a certain song. 

8. Telephone the neighborhood moving-picture theatre 
to inquire about the current program. 

9. Telephone the president of your club and make 
some suggestions concerning the next program. 

10. Telephone the landlord to report a leak in the 
roof of your house. 

11. Telephone your mother, telling her that you will 
be late in returning home. Give a reason. 

12. Telephone a furniture dealer and ask to rent a 
piece of furniture that is needed for a play production 
at school. 

Drill X. Speeches. 

Stutterers should have many opportunities of 
expressing their thoughts on subjects in an impromptu 
fashion. If the stutterer collects his thoughts and 












57 


organizes his reactions to an assigned topic before 
speaking, he talks with a greater degree of self- 
assurance and conviction than if he begins to speak 
without knowing how to continue or how to conclude. 
Generally, the impromptu speaker should arrange his 
thoughts and ideas around one main point. After the 
main thought has been delineated by comparison, contrast, 
and exemplification, the speaker should take his seat. 

Too often an impromptu speech is ruined by wordiness and 
lack of thought. Five or six sentences which illustrate 
one point will make a much better impromptu speech 
than ten or twelve sentences poorly unified. The 
following list of subjects is suggested; many more 
subjects should be added by the speech group. 

1. The Pleasure of a Hobby. 

2. A Current Event. 

3. An Ideal Vacation. 

4. A Favorite Radio Program. 

5. The Science of Getting High Marks in School. 

6. What I Would Do If I Had Just One More Year to Live. 

7. Selecting a Vocation, 

8. The Most Interesting Book I have Ever Read. 

9. Experiences in an Air Raid Shelter. 

A Recent Discovery in the Field of Science. 


10 . 












58 - 


Drill XI . Games. 

Games that involve speaking are recommended 
highly for group work. Such a game is Personalities, 
which is played as follows: 

Let one member of the group go outside the 
room, while the other members decide on the name of a 
prominent man or woman. After the decision has been 
made, the member who is n it M is called back into the 
room. He asks questions of the group in order to 
try to identify the person of prominence. The question 
must always be phrased so as to elicit a T, yes lf or n no” 
response, as: 

Q. "Is he a man?” 

A. ”Yes, he is a man.” 

Q. "Is he a Belgian?” 

A. ”No, he is not a Belgian.” 

Q. ”Is he an American?” 

A. ”Yes, he is an American.” 

After the member who is ”it” is fairly certain of the 
identification of the person of prominence, he is per- 
mitted to ask three questions, including the names of 
three persons. If the person is identified in one of 
three questions, the member wins. 










- 59 - 

4 

The following exercises used by Mrs. Gifford? of 
Sacramento, California, may be used in addition to those 
mentioned above. The author begins with Body Stillness 
Exercises. 

1. Stand, taking the erect position, not leaning against 
desk or chair, then attempt to stand absolutely still 
without moving body or facial muscles, for thirty seconds. 
Increase each week until you can stand still for two 
minutes. 

2. Associate the feeling of the word with the idea of the 
word (the abstract with the concrete). Stand perfectly 
still for one minute while thinking of the word ,T STILL ,r . 

As frequently as possible we associate the constructive 
ideas with the exercises. Especially is this necessary 
for stutterers. 

Mental Stillness Exercise. - To further build up the ab¬ 
stract idea of calm from the concrete, picture a still 
place in nature, in the following manner. 

Close the eyes and relax the body. Picture the 
stillness on a desert and imagine oneself there listening 
to the stillness. Feel the resulting body stillness and 
calmness. Hold until restless, which at first will be in 
about half a minute, and after several weeks in from one 
to two minutes. 

# Gifford, Mabel F. - Correcting Nervous Speech 

Disorders, p. 85-6. 












■ 










































































6.0 - 


Instead of a desert, recall the stillest place 
that you have ever visited. 

This exercise should be taken every day. 

First Steps in Control of Speech Mechanism .- 

(a) Relax body thoroughly. 

(b) Breathe out a deep sigh, feeling the breath 
pour outward. Extreme relaxation of the throat and 
mouth. 

(c) Pour out phrases on breath steam. (To offset 
fear associations on certain consonants and vowels) 

(d) Feel the teacher 1 s outflowing breath on your 
hand as she repeats a short poem, line by line. Now 
repeat the lines in the same smooth, flowing voice, 
while the teacher feels your breath on her hand. This 
is an excellent exercise for building up the feeling of 
speech control. 

(e) Visualize each situation of the story involving 
action, which the teacher reads. Reproduce it, seeing 
vividly each event as they relate it, and using out¬ 
pouring breath. 

Rhythm .- Various exercises for rhythm are of value before 
introducing poem work. 

In some children the sense of rhythm is below 
normal or is disturbed by the emotional conflicts accom¬ 
panying stuttering. 









t 















61 


Many systems for establishing rhythm have been 
used. They employ music and dancing steps, marching, 
skipping, clapping and tapping. If poems or rhymes 
are added while marching or clapping, the results are 
more effective for speech. 

Vowel Drill .- Note: In some stutterers, the 
memory associations of struggle with certain initial 
consonants is so great that they are unable to pronounce 
these words. Use Vowel Reading of phrases with flow¬ 
ing, outpouring breath. 

Vowel Reading. 

Link vo?\rels of phrases together as one continuous 
vowel stream omitting all consonants. 

Illustration: Dark brown is the river. 

Keep pupils on this work until they can gradually 
add the consonants with an extremely light mouth action. 

If the spasmodic action returns review the vowel 
reading until all spasms disappear. 

Strive to keep pupils 1 minds on the ideas in the 
phrases, poems or stories, instead of on the motor 
speech action. 

Recall:- Children sit in a relaxed position with eyes 
closed. 

Teacher in slow relaxed tone gives a line of 

poetry. 








62 


Pupils recall or "think 11 the line three times. 

Teacher asks for a volunteer to say the line 
just as he recalls it. 

Imagine the outflowing breath. 

Think of the smooth flowing words. 

Recall the loose, easy mouth action. 

Visual Imagery. - Purpose: Removing attention 
from the mechanics of speech to the ideas to be conveyed. 

Technique: Write a short descriptive sentence 
on the board. Describe it vividly to stimulate the 
imagination so that the child "siees through the words" 
to the thing itself. 

Continue with descriptive poetry, prose and short 
stories as Aesop f s Fables, visualizing each phrase in 

detail. 

# 

Dramatization of Life Situations .- such as: 
Telephoning Talking to the Principal 

Introducing people Buying a ticket 

Going to the store Applying for a position 

Procedure: (a) short dialogues prepared by the 
teacher, (b) short dialogues written by the pupils. 

(c) impromptu dialogues. 

Practical Work. 

Recently I studied the case of a chronic stutterer. 
She was eleven years old, and had talked poorly from 

#Gifford, Mabel F. - Correcting Nervous Speech Disorders, 

p. 106. 























































■' 
















63 


birth. First, I tried to find the history of her case, 
and used the outline suggested on Pages 18 & 19. 

1. Name - Ethel C-. 

2. Nationality - She is of Scotch descent, but 
Canadian born. 

3. Her mental and moral status in school and 
at home. 

(a) Intelligence Quotient - 102. 

(b) She is in Grade IV and does very ordinary 
work. The teacher says her speech defect required her 
to repeat Grade I. This now makes her one year behind 
normal pupils, even though her I.Q. is normal. She is 
unable to speak a word when ask.ed a question in class, 
but her written work is satisfactory. 

(c) Ethel is shy and self-conscious and strongly 
introverted. The teacher says that she is slow to join 
in group games. She prefers to stand alone and watch 
rather than to participate. She had two girl friends in 
Grade II, none in her own class. She probably feels more 
at ease with younger children, or those socially inferior 
to her. Her nervousness and bod.ily tension are easily 
recognizable. When she is trying to speak, her face often 
becomes strained, and she looks embarrassed. Her mouth 
and lips are usually tense. Sometimes her attempts to 

speak are accompanied by sucking, chewing, or gasping. 

♦ 

Blinking of the eyelids and facial tics also occur. 








. 





. 















- 





' 





































64 


4. Her general physical condition presents a 
typical undernourished, high-strung child. Being the 
oldest in a large family, she has been given more 
responsibility than her physical stamina warrants. Her 
mother says that the child is susceptible to colds. 

5. To my knowledge the girl has no physical 
defects of the speech organs. Her teeth require dental 
treatment, but the family is on relief and they have 
not seen fit to have the teeth attended to. 

6. The father has stuttered badly since birth. 

The mother is of a nervous temperament and she talks 

in a rapid, jerky manner. Clearly Ethel 1 s is a case of 
stuttering brough on through imitation. When she 
started to stutter, she was probably scolded. Her 
friends may have noticed her defect and ridiculed her. 
This scolding and ridicule undoubtedly produced an 
upset mental conditionwhich has aggravated the 
difficulty until to-day she is very.nervous and is a 
confirmed stutterer. 

7. There are no physical defects of any kind 
noticeable. 

8. Her personal history rev®Ls that she has had 
the usual childhood diseases, mumps and measles, with 
a strong predisposition towards colds. In the winter 
the child is underclad and undernourished, and has to 














































' 










: . 















65 


walk two miles to school* 

9. Home environment: 

(a) Ethel*s father is shiftless. He lives on 
a small farm near a village in Southern Alberta, but 
prefers to idle in town, while his family and farm are 
neglected. The standard of living is low, as the 
family have been in dire circumstances for a number of 
years. During the winter months, the children rarely 
have meat; they live chiefly on cabbage, turnips and 
potatoes. 

(b) The mother has reached a point of complete 
resignation to her fate, and she seems to have lost 
interest in everything . She nags her husband for 
playing cards and remaining away from home so much, 
and he continues to stay away because of the bickering. 
Thus, a vicious circle of the worst kind is built up 
dn the home. This is an unhealthy environment for 

any child, and particularly so for one of a very 
nervous temperament. 

(c) There are six children in the family 
ranging from two to eleven years of age. Every one of 








66 


stutters, but Ethel is worst of all, 

(d) The mother says that Ethel lies habitually. 
If the child is asked what she has in her pockets, she 
will mention any article that she happens to think of, 
regardless as to whether it is in her pocket or not. 

The child has often been punished for telling untruths, 
but the condition persists. I tried to explain that 
her original intention may have been to tell the truth, 
but in trying to answer the question, she has probably 
found it difficult to utter the correct words, and has 
yielded to the temptation to substitute words which she 
can pronounce more easily. The child tells untruths 
not because she wishes to be dishonest, but because 
sometimes it is too difficult to speak the words 
necessary for a true answer. After some time, the 
mother was convinced that Ethel might tell an untruth 
without any intention or desire tote dishonest, and 
said she would adopt a more tolerant attitude toward 
the child. 

Ethel is inclined to be bossy with her younger 
siblings and is able to speak to them without stutter¬ 
ing. The reasonis obvious. She feels that they are 





67 - 


inferior to her, at least in age, and so she has no 
mental agitation to interfere with her speech. She 
says she can talk aloud to herself when no one is 
near, or to her pet dog without the usual "blocking” 
or repeating. Only when some psychological disturb¬ 
ance arises does her speech become atypical. 

Treatment. 

The first day the girl came to me, I asked her t 
tell me her name. She stood twisting her handkerchief 
with eyes downcast. She sputtered and puckered her 
lips, but could say only E-E-E. Without pretending 
to notice her hesitancy, I told her that someone had 
told me that her name was Ethel, and that 1 thought it 
was a very pretty name. She nodded her head nervously 
and continued to look down. I then remarked on the 
weather, saying, !, Isn ! t it a nice day? TI She tried to 
answer f, Yes I! , but was able only to say !, Y-Y-Y...." 
Breathing faultily, she was attempting to speak during 
inhalation of the breath. The child was mentally 
upset because of her inability to speak. I continued 























































68 


talking of the clear summer day, of the grain in the 
wheat fields and of the farm animals. She became 
interested and unconsciously said without any hesitat¬ 
ion, ,! We have a new puppy at our place called Snippy.” 

When I asked her what color he was, she became conscious 
of speaking to a comparitive stranger, and could not 
answer. I told her a story of a dog I used to have when 
I was her age, and she seemed at ease again. 

The next day she was not able to answer my 
"Hello, Ethel". I began to tal \ about the nine new 
little pigs my father had just bought. She was very 
much interested, and immediately told me about their 
mother pig and her small pigs. Her speech became 
"blocked" after a few seconds, and she was unable to 
continue. I asked her if she would like to sing 
"There T ll Always be an England". Her eyes lit up, as 
she nodded in the affirmative. I played the piece on 
the piano and sang the song through with her. On the 
second playing of the song, I sang only part of the 
verse with her, and she continued alone. Then she 
sang through the verse and chorus with the music and later 
did so without any accompaniment. When I asked her to 
read the words of the song to me, she said she could not 
read very well. She told me she had always been able to 
sing but was afraid she could not pronounce certain words 








69 


when she had to read them. The very thought of 
failure to utter words caused her breathing to become 
uneven and her face to color. That day we sang several 
songs together, and she became more and more at ease in 
my presence. As she was leaving I told her that I 
would like to see her puppy. 

The thirdday she arrived smiling with her pet dog. 
She gave commands to him in an easy, controlled manner 
as he performed several tricks. Then we sang n Good 
Morning To You”, and TI Here We Go Hound the Mulberry Bush 11 . 
She told me that she sings n Good Morning To You” at 
school. This was our first mention of school. I asked 
her if she liked to go to school, but she pursed her 
lips and shook her head in the negative. She said 
that the others laugh at her when she tries to answer 
questions. I told her I wanted to help her with her 
reading and that we would start with relaxation exercises 
(see pages 45-49 ) . I explained that these exercises 

would help to drive away the fear feelings which she 
said she had when she tried to speak. The fear of 
speech failure caused a holding of the diaphragm and 
contraction of the waist and abdominal muscles. This 
bodily tension made it impossible for the child to 
speak freely. She asked me if she would ever be able to 
read ”like the other kids.” I answered that she would 

















70 


if she practised the exercises at home in the morning, 
at noon and before she went to bed. She was eager 
to do this. 

We spent ten minutes at the beginning of each 
lesson period doing the relaxation exercises. Then 
she did the n stillness exercises” on page 59 and the 
breathing exercises outlined on page 126-128JThese 
exercises proved to the child that she has the power 
to be calm at will. I took great care never to call 
Ethel T s attention to the mechanism of speech. Even 
after she had hesitated for a considerable period of 
time or had great difficulty emitting sounds, I con¬ 
tinued the lesson as if she had been speaking normally 
all the time. She seemed relaxed in body and mind 
after she did the various exercises. 

After the first week we began to read simple 
poems from ”A Poetry Speaking Anthology”, chosen and 
edited by Hilda Adams and Anne Croasdell. The first 
poem we attempted was: 

White sheep, white sheep 
On a blue hill. 

When the Yrind stops 

You all stand still. 

You all run away 

?/hen the winds blow; 

White sheep, white sheep. 

Where do you go? 


W.H. Davies 






71 


I read the poem first in a low, slow speaking 
voice, while she sat still and listened with her eyes 
closed. Then I read it line by line and asked her to 
visualize the thought in each line. The words I used 
in that first poetry reading period were something 
like this: 

White sheep, white sheep. 

Now think of hundreds of beautiful white sheep, grazing 
on the hill with the blue sky behind them on a summer 
day. 

On a blue hill. 

Picture these snowy white sheep on a big hill covered 
with green grass and many pretty blue blue flowers - 
crocusses or blue bells. 

When the wind stops 

The day is very clear. There is no wind blowing. The 
leaves of the trees on the hillside are motionless. 
Everything is calm and quiet. 

You all stand still. 

The sheep are very quiet, scarcely moving. They feed 

silently on the peaceful land. 

You all run away 
When the winds blow; 

Suppose a high wind starts blowing. The leaves of the 
trees begin to murmur, the grass bends on its side, 
and the hundreds of sheep scurry over the hill. 










- 72 - 

White sheep, white sheep. 

Think again of the hundreds of white sheep. Imagine 
you see some of the baby lambs left behind as their 
mothers run over the hill and di&ppear out of sight. 
Where do you go? 

Visualize a shepherd running up the hill only to find 
that his sheep have disappeared. He looks around for 
them and wonders where they have gone. 

Then I read the whole poem through again, as 
Ethel sat relaxed and thought about the poem. Later 
she read it in a slow soft voice. During her first 
attempt, she stopped at the beginning of the second 
verse, saying y-y-y~you. I asked her to close her 
eyes for a moment and to think about the hundreds of 
snowy white sheep grazing peacefully on the hillside. 
This she did, and was able to continue in a slow 
voice. 

Other poems we read in the above manner are: 

The Horseman 

I heard a horseman 
Ride over the hill: 

The moon shone clear. 

The night was still; 

His helm was silver. 

And pale was he; 

And the horse he rode 
Vtfas of ivory. 


- Walter de la Mare 










J-■... ■ li: i 


■ ' ' ' • ; ' 

. r. „ 




v - -' ! ' 







.* ' 


r -i 















75 


Bread and Cherries . 

"Cherries, ripe cherries," 

The old woman cried. 

In her snowy white apron. 

And basket beside; 

And the little boys came. 

Eyes shining, cheeks red, 

To buy bags of cherries 
To eat with their bread. 

- Walter de la Mare. 


Hush-a-Byey Baby ,. 

Hush-a-bye, baby, on the tree top; 

When the wind blows, the cradle will rock; 
When the bough breaks, the cradle will fall 
Down will come baby and cradle and all. 


The Old Woman. 


There was an old. woman. 

As I have heard tell 
She went to sell pie. 

But her pie would not sell. 

She hurried back home, 

But her door-step was high. 
And she stumbled and fell 
And a dog ate her pie. 


- 3L.T. Headland. 


Ride a Cock-Horse . 

Ride a Cock-Horse to Banbury Cross, 

To see a fine lady ride on a white horse. 
Rings on her fingers and bells on her toes 
She shall have music wherever she goes. 













74 - 


Where are You Going; To, My Pretty Maid? 

Where are you going to, my pretty maid? 
I*m going a-milking, sir, she said. 

May I come with you, my pretty maid? 

You*re kindly welcome, sir, she said. 

What is your father, my pretty maid? 

My father ! s a farmer, sir, she said. 

What is your fortune, my pretty maid? 

My face is my fortune, sir, she said. 

Then I cannot marry you, my pretty maid. 
Nobody asked you, sir, she said. 


A Song . 


The feathers of the willow 
Are half of them grown yellow 
Above the swelling stream; 

And ragged are the bushes. 

And rusty no?/ the rushes. 

And wild the clouded gleam. 


The 

His 

His 

The 

The 

The 


thistle now is older, 
stalk begins to moulder, 
head is white as snow; 
branches all are barer, 
linnet f s song is rarer, 
robin pipeth now. 


- R.W. Dixon. 


Poems suitable for stutterers,older in years, 
may be found among the many poems in Book III, Senior 
Work of n A Poetry Speaking Anthology, by Adams and 
Croasdell. 














' 


















t. 






- 


: 






.. t. . . . 










, 1 >r; • . v i j j j C. ■ 


■ 


























75 


We began each lesson with relaxation exercises 
and varied the remainder of the time by selecting two 
or three of Drills I to XII, on pages 45-49 
Ethel preferred drills III, IV, VI and IX. Drills 
V, parts of VI, X, and XI are too difficult for a 
child of eleven years. After a week of quiet 
practice on Drill IX, she had gained sufficient 
confidence to call me on the telephone before coming 
for her class in the morning and in the afternoon. 

By the end of two months, she was able to carry on 
a conversation with me for from five to ten minutes, 
hesitating occasionally. 

She became quite gay when we did the 11 Chain 
Story” exercise on page 51 . I began the story with 
the sentence M Once upon a time there was a young lady 
named Ethel who went to the city.” (By the way, she 
has never been to the city.) The sentences added 
took interesting and amusing turns, and the story 
ended with the young lady meeting her grandmother 
who was coming from the States on a surprise visit to 
her parents. 

At the end of the two summer months, I noticed 
a considerable improvement in Ethel 1 s speech condition, 
although she was far from being completely cured. 





' 





















■ . 

;; ■ - ■ ■ ■ 

■ 

. ' 






76 


In moments of relaxation she was able to speak with few 
pauses and repetitions. I noticed that she responded 
very favorably to encouraging remarks. They probably 
lessened the fear of failure which weighed upon 
her mind, and prevented her from giving her whole 
attention to what she was going to say. Once she 
convinces herself that she really can say every sound 
in the language as well as anybody else, most of her 
speech difficulties will be ended. Encouragement and 
praise from her associates will help her to conquer 
her fear and to establish speech habits which are 
proof against anxiety and nervousness. As she grows 
older and has a change of environment away from 
nervous high strung people, there is reason to hope 
that her affliction may become less severe. 













CHAPTER IV 


LISPING: 


MAJOR SPEECH DEFECT 












77 


CHAPTER IV. 

LISPING: A MAJOR SPEECH DEFECT. 

I. Nature and Causes of Lisping. 

Of all the speech defects, lisping or sigmatism 
is the most common. It is especially frequent in the 
speech of children during and after the period of 
second dentition. In many cases, when the second 
teeth emerge, the tongue is forced into positions 
which produce lisping. Lisp is commonly used to 
designate a certain form of mispronunciation, rather 
than all forms, namely, the use of the th sounds for the 
js sounds, as in the pronunciation of the word n some n , 
which a lisper would pronounce as T, thum w . Unless the 
child is trained to make the proper adjustments of the 
tongue, sigmatism is most likely to ensue and to re¬ 
main as a habit throughout life. Early speech habits 
of children are usually closely identified With those 
of the mother. This is true because the average child 
spends more time with its mother than with anyone else. 

If the mother lisps, the child in all likelihood will 
also lisp as a matter of mimicry. It is not infrequent, 

however, to find lisping children who have acquired 
habits 

their speech/from their father, a sibling, or a playmate. 















■ 















78 - 


Many girls of high-school age feel that a lisp adds 
to their attractiveness. 

A number of authorities in the field of speech path 
ology employ the word 11 lisp" to identify a great 
variety of articulation disorders, such as faulty 
production of th, 1, r, delayed speech and so on. 

Others maintain that the faults of sibilation should 
be listed under "lisping", i.e. those faults in the 
production of the family of hissing or breath-pressure 
sounds and including the sibilant hissing sounds, s. 
z, sh, zh, and their combinations tsh, and dzh . 

In this discussion, I have included the faulty 
production of th, 1, r, s_, z, sh and zh under the 
general heading of lisping. 

II. Types of Sigmatism. 

1. Lateral Emission - A very severe type of lisp¬ 
ing is known as lateral emission. In most cases of this 
kind the tongue muscle is weak along its outer or side 
margin and allows the breath to escape laterally rather 
than forward over the front of the tongue. The result 
is a make-shift, blurred substitution rather than a clear 





































































. 























79 


forward hissing sound. The lateral emission sigmatism 
is more difficult to correct than any other type of 
lisping defect. The corrective program involves a pre¬ 
liminary rebuilding of the tongue muscles before their 
proper control can be established. 

2. Infantile Lisping .- This type of lisping 
occurs when the tongue protrudes between the teeth 
in the production of various sounds. For example 
,T I thay tho TT would be said for 11 1 say so" . This defect 
is due largely to lack of control of the lingual and 
tongue muscles. The action of the tongue is sluggish 
in almost all cases of infantile lisping. Such lisping 
usually develops during the period of second dentition. 

The loss of the front teeth forms an opening and the 
tongue, not under sufficient control, slips out through 
this opening and we get the th in place of the s.. 

In the majority of cases the speech regulates itself 
when the second teeth grow in. In many irs tances, 
however, the tongue continues to protrude when pro¬ 
ducing _s, jt, 1, d, or n and the lisping habit is confirmed. 
To correct this form of lisping it is necessary to 
strengthen the muscles of the tongue and get them under 
automatic control. Tongue exercises, given below, and 
the correct position for the production of _s, _z, zh. 






















. 






























i t ■ 


■ 
























. 







80 


should be taught, in addition to those sounds listed 
earlier in this paragraph. Lisping of this kind is 
caused by misuse of a perfect speech mechanism. 

Correction of Lisping. 

There is no panacea or magic formula for 
correcting speech defects of this kind. Only by know¬ 
ing and obeying the laws of habit formation can the 
muscles of speech be disciplined to produce correct 
speech sounds. These laws apply alike to all mastery 
of good speech, type-writing or dancing. In each 
case, muscular training and coordination are the 
basis of a skilful performance, and in developing 
such skill, correct habits must be permanently estab¬ 
lished. Some of the important factors which enter into 
habit development are: 

1. Yfillingness. - This is an important factor in 
speech training. The student who is tempted to neglect 
his practice because of the time required, or who is 
easily discouraged, should try to remember that the 
complete cure of a speech defect is a life-long 
acquisition and not a temporary expedient for passing 

a speech course. 

2. Time. - Ample time must be allotted for each 
practice period or results will be meager and of no 











81 


lasting value. The minimum practice time allowance 
for removing obstinate speech defects (such as lisp, 
lall, stutter or foreign accent) is an hour a day, 
seven days a week, for about fifteen weeks. 

The daily practice period may be divided into 
two or three units of twenty or thirty minutes each, 
occurring at different times during the day when the 
mind is most alert. Less than twenty minutes of 
practice in a period will contribute very little to 
the habituation process. Conversely, an overdose of 
practice in any one period may cause fatigue, and 
fatigue retards habit development. In the beginning 
of the corrective program caution should be taken 
against over exercising and straining poorly developed 
muscles. 

3. Patience .- It is advisable to practice only 
when the mind is fresh and alert and the spirit will¬ 
ing . The student should have some knowledge of the 
progress he is making and should be fully aware of 
definite objectives in all his practice. Otherwise 
his work will be aimless and he will become impatient 
to stop. 











i ' 










■ 

* 




















. 







- 82 


Setting Up Exercises to be Done at the 
Beginning of Each Correction Period. 

A. Exercise for relieving tension .- Drop your 
head forward on your chest. Let it hang until it 
seems to pull the body down with its own weight. 

Dangle the arms loosely. Without bending your knees, 
allow your head to descend toward the floor. When 
your relaxed fingers touch the floor without the 
slightest stretching., resume an upright position. 

Repeat this relaxation several times. Be sure that 
you are slumping, not stretching to the floor. This 
is sometimes called the !, rag doll ff exercise. 

B. Drills for Strengthening the Lazy Tongue .- 
The tongue is the chief organ of speech. It is com¬ 
posed of numerous muscles, each of which must be 
properly controlled in the correct production*of 
speech. Enunciation is practically impossible without 
the manipulation of the tongue. The training of the 
tongue is fundamental to the production of correct 
speech. 

1. Slowly move the tip of the tongue about the oral 
cavity and in every direction. Touch every part (upper 
and lower teeth, right and left cheeks, hard palate, 
the inside of the lips) that can be reached without 
undue muscular strain. Repeat often before proceeding. 





■ 

. 

. 

, 












83 


2. Open the jaws wide. Extend the tongue outside the 
oral cavity between the upper lip and teeth. Slowly 
brush the tip of the tongue over the surface of the 
upper teeth. Repeat often. 

3. Without separating the lips, open the jaws. 

Extend the tongue outside the oral cavity between the 
upper teeth and lips. Move the tongue slowly in 

a semicircle, exerting pressure against the lips. 

Repeat often. 

4. Open the mouth wide. Elevate the tongue so that 
the tip touches the hard palate. Without moving the. 
lower jaw, gradually increase the pressure of the 
tongue against the hard palate. 

5. Open the mouth. Press the under side of the tip 
of the tongue against the hard palate. Gradually in¬ 
crease the pressure of the tongue without moving the 
lower jaw and without permitting the tongue tip to 
move from the position on the hard palate, 

6. Open the mouth wide. Curl the tongue, until the 
tip touches the front portion of the soft palate. 
Gradually increase the pressure of the tongue. Return 
the tongue to the rest position. 

Practice these six drills as a warming up exercise. 
They take only a few minutes to complete. 











. 













■ 






. 

- 




I 1 








. 

■ ■ ■ ■ '■ - . - - • _ 

: 

. . . 

•• : . u . ; . 


















>'■ ■' 








84 


C. Exercises for establishing freedom and 

# 

Control of the Tongue .- Do these exercises with a small 
hand mirror. The mirror should be held in such a way 
that the light shines on your mouth. 

1. Stretch the tongue out and down until it touches 
the point of the chin. Rest. Repeat this exercise 
smartly to a count of eight. Relax. 

2. Stretch the tongue-tip up towards the tip of the 
nose. Rest. Repeat this as before. Relax. 

3. Alternate (l) and(2). For the first four counts 
alternate without rest; then rest and relax. Repeat 
for a count of sixteen in all. 

4. Curl the tip of the tongue backward toward the 
soft palate. Rest. Repeat four times. Relax. 

5. Place the tip of the tongue behind the lower front 
teeth and bulge it out. Rest. Repeat four times. Relax. 

6. Place the tip of the tongue behind the upper 
front teeth. Bulge it out. Rest Repeat four times. 
Relax. 

7. Combine (5) and (6) without a rest for four counts,. 
Then relax. Repeat the group four times. Relax. 

8. Place the tip of the tongue behind the upper front 

teeth. Allow it to fall flat on the floor of the 

mouth. If you open your mouth wide for this exercise, 

# See Greene - Op.Cit. p. 223-7. 











the tongue gets a maximum of exercise. Repeat 
eight times. Relax. 

9. Groove the tongue, draw it hack into the mouth, 
blowing out a while. The directions are: Groove, 
blow, rest. Repeat eight times. Relax. 

10. Rotate the tongue around the lips. Begin at the 
right side of the mouth. Directions are: Up, around, 
down, in. Repeat four times. Relax. 

11. Repeat (10) beginning at the left. Repeat four 
times. Relax. 

In order to correct any type of lisp, it is 
first necessary to establish the correct articulation 
of all the sibilant sounds. 

D. Exercises for Developing; Flexible Lips .- 
Practise the following exercises rapidly and very 
lightly with the least possible tension: 

(a) 



Four times 


aw - ah 


(b) Bo-Peep 


Four times 


Bubble-babble-pebble. Four times 


If the last line is said rapidly, but distinctly, the 
sound of a running brook will be heard. 










86 


SoiiEtimes b gives a staccato effect of beating 
or thumping: 

Bob caused the hub-bub. Three times. 

And sometimes it almost says boo: 

A big black bear. Three times. 

General Rules for the Correction of all Lisps. 

1. Practise faithfully the general tongue and lip 
gymnastics for lisping, for flexibility and control. 
See pages 82-85 

2. Make sure that you are able to distinguish between 
the correct and the incorrect production of difficult 
sounds. 

3. Practise daily the special drill under the type 
of lisp which most nearly describes your production. 

4. As soon as you can pronounce the sounds with which 
you have had difficulty, you should begin to use them 
in sentences. Then you should begin reading aloud, 
reciting poetry and conversing with your teacher or 
fellow-students. If you wish to correct a lisp, you 
must never allow yourself to mispronounce the sound 
when you have once produced it correctly. 

Correction of Faulty Sounds. 

Before we turn to the individual case of lisping 
with whom I have ha.d some practical experience, let 










87 


us study the tongue and lip positions for the correct 
production of TH, L, R, S. Z, SH and ZH along with 
remedial drills and exercises. 

Exercises for Daily Practice for the Correction 
of the S Sound .- The correct position of the tongue 
and lips for the production of the sound S is obtained 
by making your front teeth almost meet, that is, loosely 
close them. Hold the tip of your tongue up just 
behind the upper front teeth without touching the 
palate. Then send out a steady stream of air out 
over the tip of the tongue, making a soft hissing noise. 
The sound S is then produced. 

1. When the correct sound can be produced in isolat¬ 
ion, practise the following combinations: 

say sa sah see so 
ays as aws ees os 

This drill may be varied by substituting ts. for s_. 

2. Read the following list of words aloud, slowly, 
taking great pains to keep the tongue tip behind the 
teeth: 

see, Susan, supper, soap, sell, soap, salt, 

Sunday, serve, soil, saw, psalm, savage, 
sit, cent, scent, search, silver, circle, 
severe, sentinel, secret, sell, settle, sent, 
sacrifice, sack, sad, safe, soil, salad, sale, 
satire, Sam, sane, sample, satin, Satan, sword, 
sand, city, save, sandal, sea, secure, seam, 
scene, sword, sand, city, secure, second, sigh, 
seeds, select, servant, sew, sow, sick, sink. 



























38 


3. Compose a sentence using each of the above words. 
Write these sentences in your notebook and practise 

them aloud, taking care to pronounce each word correctly. 

4. Prepare to deliver three sentences aloud on each 

of the following topics: 

sailboats, the seasons, the sea, 
sidewalks, the circus. 

Sentences for Practice in the Correction of 


S Sounds. - 


1. The soldier fired on the enemy. 

2. The general lifted the sword from the ground. 

3. The sailor lowered the gangplank. 

4. We enjoy our vacation in the summer. 

5. This is the time of roses. 

6. Several girls threw roses at the flyers. 

7. Now Sally has time to study. 

8. Secretly the children stole to the deserted house. 

9. "Cherries are ripe", he shouted. 

10. One of the best detectives in fiction is 
"Charlie Chan." 

11. Sometimes he shudders at the sounds of the bells. 

12. The song of the sword fell sharply on their ears. 

13. The children spent their pennies for sugar 
cookies and chocolate sodas. 

14. In order to take pleasure in the unusual, one 
should learn to observe the usual. 

15. n There is so much good in the worst of us", said 
Robert Louis Stevenson. 

16. There 1 s much to be done before peace has been 
accomplished. 

17. The church mouse smiled when his country cousin 
said he thought he smelled cheese. 

18. Chickens scratch on the shore, mliile ducks swim 
placidly on the bosom of the waters. 

19. This is one of the oldest churches which the 
city boasts. 

20. Necessity is the mother of invention. 








89 


Test List to Check Mastery of the Initial , 


Medial and Final Sibilants, S and Z. 


scissors 

sling 

strong 

streets 

swings 

nestle 

tests 

lisps 


kisses 

resign 

reset 

insist 

confuses 

confesses 

resistance 

plaster 


stocks 

rocks 

knocks 

strikes 

sinister 

raspberries 


Exercises for Correcting; Z Substitution for S 


and Vice Versa .- In reading the following lists of 
words, make certain that there is a marked distinction 
between the articulation of z and the articulation of 
s,. Both are made with the same lingual position. See 
page 94 . The difference is one of phonation and 
vocalization and breath pressure. If the fingers 
are placed on the !T Adam T s Apple 11 , vibration will be 
felt when the z is produced correctly. When the s. 


sound is produced, no vibration will be felt. 


Words with s 

Words with z 

Words with z and s 

hiss 

his 

presents 

buss 

buzz 

business 

ace 

haze 

haziness 

sounds 

eyes 

sometimes 

ice 

lose 

misunderstandings 

loose 

raise 

essentials 

race 

zoo 

appliances 

Sue 

rise 

noiseless 

rice 

zeal 

histories 

seal 

fuzzy 

hesitancy 

fus sy 

plays 

swans 

place 

seize 

sands 

cease 

dozing 

tresses 

racer 

razor' 

hazelnuts 

dosing 

zounds 













90 


Sentences for the Correction of the Above 
Substitution.- The sentences below are suitable for 


senior students and adults. Simple sentences for 
primary children may be easily constructed from three 
letter words containing S. 

1. Integrity is the evidence of all civilization. 

- Diderot. 

2. Light is, perhaps, the most wonderful of all 

visible things. -Leigh Hunt. 

3. Sweet Spring, full of sweet days and roses. 

-George Herbert. 

4. All the world*s a stage 

And all the men and women merely players. 

They have their exits and their entrances; 

And one man in his time plays many parts. 

-Shakespeare. 

5* The best things are placed between extremes. 

-Aristotle. 

6. Soft as some story divine, the story flows. 

-Homer. 

7. Purposes, like eggs, unless they be hatched into 
action, will run into rottenness. 

-Samuel Smiles. 

Exercises for Correcting X Substitution for S♦ - 
The S sound is represented in English by si , as in 
excursion; ti , as in exposition; cj_, as in precious; 
s,' as in surely; xl as in anxious; ss , as in session. 
Practise slowly, alternating S and SH sounds following 
lists of words, first vertically, then horizontally. Use 
the mirror constantly to check the articulation of 
J and S. 















SI 


Words with s Words with 


1 


Words with 


1 


and s 


same 

shame 

shameless 

sin 

shin 

sunshine 

seen 

sheen 

sheets 

sun 

shun 

shunts 

so 

show 

sash 

sell 

shell 

seashell 

said 

shed 

conscious 

sank 

shank 

assertion 

sip 

ship 

swishing 

sad 

shad 

Shakespeare 

sale 

shale 

anxious 

sag 

shag 

shallowness 

seep 

sheep 

precious 

saw 

pshaw 

expression 

sake 

shake 

description 


Drill . Read aloud the following sentences. Underline 
every s. once, and every J* twice. Use the mirror and 
emphasize the correct production of / and _s. 

1. That which astonishes, astonishes hut once. 

-J oubert. 

S. Affection, mistress of passion, sways it to the 
mood of what it likes or loathes. 

-Shakespeare. 

3. Many a good intention dies from inattention. If, 

through carelessness or indolence, or selfishness 
a good intention is not put into effect, we have 
lost an opportunity and stolen from the pole of 
possible good. -Babcock. 

4. Inspiration developed the noblest fantasies of 

the ancients. -Jules Janin. 

5. Fashion is an off jumble of contradictions, of 

sympathies and antipathies. ©Hazlitt. 

6. Emotion turning back on itself, and not leading 

on to thought or action, is the element of 
madness. -John Sterling 

Exercises for Correcting Q Surd (Th as in Think ) 

Substitution for S .- 9 surd is a continuant whispered 


consonant. It is made correctly by lightly resting the 
broadened tip of the tongue against the edge of the 
















92 


incisor teeth and lightly expelling the breath. 


Excessive breath 

or tongue pressure 

in this positi' 

will prevent 

the 

production of a good th (9) 

After 

the 

correct position for 

the tongue ha 

been practised and tongue control drills given on 

pages 82-85 , 

practise the following: 


Initially 


Medially 

Finally 

thou 


without 

with 

they 


breathing 

breathe 

than 


smoothed 

writhe 

thus 


bathed 

scythe 

that 


lather 

teethe 

there 


smothered 

clothe 

thine 


bother 

soothe 

though 


rather 

blithe 

then 


smoother 

wreathe 

those 


further 

bathe 

these 


southern 

swathe 

thyself 


northern 

seethe 

this 


neither 

bequeath 

the 


oaths 

sheathe 

the 


paths 

lithe 


1. What art thou, thou idle ceremony? 

What kind of God art thou, that suffer*st more 
Of mortal griefs than do thy worshippers? 

- Shakespeare. 

2. 0 ceremony, show- me by thy worth. 

What is thy soul of adoration? 

Art thou aught else but place, degree and form. 
Creating awe and fear in other men? 

Shakespeare. 

5. Be fearful only of thyself, and stand in awe of 
none more than thine own conscience. 

- Burton. 

4. Though thy slumber may be deep. 

Yet thy spirit will not sleep; 

There are shades that will not vanish. 

There are thoughts thou cans ! t not banish. 

- Byron. 






































93 


5. Thou slave, thou wretch, thou coward 1 

Thou little valiant, great in villainyl 
Thou ever strong upon the stronger side! 

Thou fortune*s champion, thou dost never fight 
But when her humorous ladyship is by 

To teach thee safety. 

- Shakespeare. 

6. 0 blithe newcomer I I have heard, 

I hear thee and rejoice; 

0 cuckoo I Shall I call thee bird. 

Or but a wandering voice? 

- Wordsworth. 

7. There is no mistake; there has been no mistake; 
and there shall be no mistake. 

- Duke of Wellington. 

8. We hold these truths to be self-evident; That all 
men are created equal; That they are endowed by 
their creator with inalienable rights; That among 
these are life, liberty and the pursuit of 
happiness. 

- Jefferson. 

9. Theology is but a science of mind. As schools 
change, theology must necessarily change. Truth 
is everlasting, but our ideas of truth are not. 
Theology is but our ideas of birth classified and 
arranged. 

- Beecher. 

10. Many thoughts are so dependent upon the language 
in which they are clothed that they would lose 
half their beauty if otherwise expressed. 

- Buskin. 

These sentences are too difficult for young chil¬ 
dren. Simple ones may be found on page 103 . 

Exercises for the Sibilant Sounds Z - S .- The same 
position of the tongue and mouth is used in the format¬ 
ion of _s and _z. The difference lies in the fact that S 
is a breath sound and z is a voiced sound. 








94 


S, as in the words: son - lesson - miss. Make 

your front teeth almost meet, that is, loosely close 

them - hold the tip of your tongue up just behind the 

upper front teeth without touching the palate - then 

send out a steady stream of air out over the tip of 

the tongue, making a soft hissing noise. Do it and 

you will produce the sound of _s. Practise this sound 

by carefully repeating the following words: 

see lesson kiss 

soup assist pass 

Z as in the words: zone - dazzle - maze. Make 
your front teeth almost meet, that is, loosely close them 
hold the tip of your tongue up just behind the upper 
front teeth without touching the palate - then use 
your voice, make a buzzing noise. Do it, and you will 
produce the sound of z. Practise this sound by care¬ 
fully repeating the following words: 

zone dazzle prize drizzle 

zinc lizard gaze nozzle 

Exercises for the Sibilant Sounds SH and ZH .- 
Sh - ZH. In the formation of sh and zh the position 
is the same for each. The difference lies in the fact 
that .sh is a breath sound and zh is a voiced sound. 

Sh , as in the words: shut - bashful - cash. Make 
your teeth almost meet, that is, loosely close them 
and draw back your tongue so that there is free space 












95 


between the front of your tongue and your teeth, then 
send out a steady stream of air. Do it and you will 
produce the sound of sh . 

Practise the sound by carefully repeating the 
following words: 

shop bushel flush ship 

shave bishop brush wish 

shore cashier wash fresh 

Zh as in the words: azure - treasure - ambrosia, 
(the s or z in these words is sounded as zh) Make your 
front teeth almost meet, that is, loosely close them 
and draw back your tongue so that there is free space 
between the front of your tongue and your teeth - 
then use your voice. Do it and you will produce the 
sound of zh . 

Practise this sound by repeating the following 

words: 

leisure azure vision decision 

explosion seizure treasure pleasure 

Exercises for the Production of L . - L.- In the 

formation of L and R, the position is almost the same 
for each. The difference lies in the fact that for 1 
the tip of the tongue touches the palate, while for 
r, the tongue is free. 

L, as in the words: lame - yellow - bell. Place 
the tip of your tongue against the gum behind the upper 






96 


front teeth, a little further hack than for t and 
hold it there while using your voice. Do it and 
you will produce the sound of 1. 

Practise this sound by carefully repeating the 
following words: 


lady 

coblar 

peal 

yellow 

let 

fellow 

boil 

lolling 

look 

hollow 

fool 

billow 

lip 

swallow 

3 ail 

jolly 

lion 

pillow 

seal 

bully 

lap 

lily 

ball 

silly 

lake 

bellows 

bell 

tallow 

light 

Billy 

pearl 

gallon 

loose 

dollar 

kill 

sallow 

land 

gallows 

bill 

Ellen 

live 

duller 

doll 

miller 

large 

hollow 

mill 


love 

jelly 

nail 



Exercises for the Production of R .- R as in the 
words: run - arrow - race. 

Direct the tap of your tongue towards the gum 
behind the upper front teeth as you did for 1, but 
do not touch your palate - hold it in that position 
while using your voice. Do it and you will produce 
the sound of r. Practise this sound by repeating the 
following words: 


race 

sorrow 

very 

error 

rod 

mirror 

rare 

road 

rise 

marry 

roller 

read 

red 

hurry 

original 

river 

rid 

sparrow 

erect 

rail 

rude 

sorry 

arrange 

dairy 

rag 

morrow 

royal 

erase 

roll 

berry, 

arrest 

real 

ran 

carry 

Orient 

room 

rat 

Harry 

errand 

root 

rut 

merry 

ruffle 

romance 




























97 


Exercises for the Consonant R . (for Senior 


Children and Adults.) 

1. Roll on, thou deep and dark blue Ocean, roll. 

- Byron. 

2. The river rolls in its rocky bed. 

-E. Pauline Johnson 

3. The horse and rider reel: 

They reel, they roll in clanging lists. 

And when the tide of combat stands. 

Perfume and flowers fall in showers, 

That lightly rain from ladies 1 hands. 

- Tennyson. 

4. Oh, ye whose hearts are resonant, and ring to 

War ! s romance. 

Hear ye the story of a boy, a peasant boy of Frence. 

-Robert W.Service. 

5. Great rats, small rats, lean rats, brawny rats, 

Brown rats, black rats, gray rats, tawny rats. 

Grave old plodders, gay young friskers. 

- Browning. 

6. The road was a ribbon of moonlight over the purple 

moor. 

And the highwayman came riding - riding - riding - 
The highwayman came riding, up to the old inn door. 

- Alfred Noyes. 

Exercises for the Production of TH .~ In the 
formation of TH the position is the same for the breath 
sound as for the voiced sound. 

Th as in the words: think - author - teeth. Place 
the tip of your tongue slightly against the edge of 
your upper teeth, then send out your breath. Do it, and 
you will produce the sound of th. Practise this sound 
by repeating the following words: 













93 


thank 

breath 

tooth 

teeth 

think 

ether 

sixth 

therapy 

thread 

athlete 

faith 

thirteen 

thimble 

method 

width 

Thursday 

third 

author 

earth 

thousand 


Th as in the words: there - weather - breathe. 
Place the tip of your tongue slightly against the edge 
of your upper teeth, then use your voice. Do it, and 
you will produce the sound of th. Practise this sound 
by repeating the following words: 


than 

either 

bathe 

feather 

that 

mother 

clothe 

leather 

they 

father 

smooth 

rather 

those 

another 

breathe 

bother 

these 

niether 

soothe 

gather 


Practical Experience. 

During the past school term, Henry L— -came 

to my attention for remedial treatment for lisping. 

He is eight years old, and is in Grade II in school, 
with an I.Q. of 82. His teacher reports that he is 
poor in his studies, is lazy in the class room, and 
delights in annoying those who ?/ish to study. He 
does not show any nervous tendencies and was not too 
willing to cooperate in the speech exercises. He 
lisped only on two letters - he substituted n S” for 
”TH n , instead of the usual ,f TH !T for n S ,T , and TI 0W !t for 
n R”. His speech organs are not defective. He speaks 







99 


very well except for the two sounds already mentioned. 
His mother and an older brother lisp, so Henry 
probably acquired his lisp through imitation of them. 

At the beginning of each speech period we 
dfilled on the tongue exercises on pages 82-86 
We started corrective procedure on the R first. I 
asked him to direct the tip of his tongue towards the 
gum behind the upper front teeth, but not to touch 
the palate. Holding that position he used his voice, 
to produce the R sound. I found difficulty in getting 
him to understand the exact position of the tongue 
for this sound. For years, Henry had been saying R 
•with the lip movement necessary for the production of 
”0W ,f and could not get accustomed to stationary lips 
and a moving tongue for the production of R. He is a 
slow thinker and a slow speaker, and does not 
understand instructions as a normal child does. I 
next tried a different procedure for the production 
of R. I asked him to place his knuckle between his 
teeth and to curl his tongue back. Then with his 
tongue and mouth in this position, I asked him to 
pronounce Z. He did this without difficulty. At first 
there was too much "buzz”, but he gradually reduced the 
breath force and the amount of friction until he 
obtained a good R. 









100 


In correcting the pronunciation of a sound, do 
nfct present the corrected form of the new sound with 
words formerly mispronounced. Combine the correct 
sound with various vowel sounds in new combinations, 
for the child has no incorrect auditory imagery in 
these cases and will have practically no difficulty 
in learning them. Isolated consonant sounds are 
more difficult for the child than sounds combined with 
vowels. For instance, the child can say ray, raw, ree, 
ru, ri, roh, roo and rye much more easily than he can 
pronounce the sound R alone. I asked Henry to open 
his mouth as widely as possible Yirhen he gave the vowel 
sound, and to use a hand mirror so that he could get 
a correct visual as well as a correct auditory image 
of the desired sound. Considerable time is necessary 
to make the above combinations because it is difficult 
for the child to stop the lip movement which was 
formerly a part of the- sound. He used a toothpick to 
hold his bottom lip away from his teeth until he had 
realized the correct tongue position for R. 

Then I asked him to repeat the following syllable 
being careful to note the change from lip to tongue 
position on each syllable; 





101 


wa 

- 

ra 

wo 

ro 

woy 

roy 

we 

- 

re 

woo - 

roo 

wair - 

rair 

wi 

- 

ri 

waw - 

raw 

wow 

row 


Then he repeated the following words, after I 
asked him to make sure to direct the tip of his 
tongue towards the upper gum when he produced the 
consonant R* 


race 

red 

rug 

rude 

rag 

row 

raft 

rice 

rudder 

reed 

ride 

rough 


The next step was to use the new sound between 
vowels as in the words very, carry, marry and hurry. 

Here again, considerable practice was necessary. 

A list of words which I found of great value are 
given on page 96 . Another list may be found on page 
117 . Henry then practised simple sentences after 
underlining all of the Rs. Some of these sentences we 
used are: 

1. I ran a race with my brothejr. 

2. Our dog, Rover, killed a lajrge rabbit. 

3. Mother cooked rice fox dessext at dinnex. 

4. The teachex rang the bell fox x ecess » 

5. The roax of the fire was gxe&t. 

6. I found a r_ed rag yestexday neax the store. 

7. I pxactise my exexcises with a mirror. 

8. I have two bxothexs. Theix names axe Jerry and H arry . 


















102 


9, Father found, a dead sparrow in our yard. 

LO. After four tomorrow, our class will arrange a 
Christmas concert. 

When Henry was able to use R in sentences and 
in ordinary conversation with ease, we began remedial 
work on TH. We followed a procedure similar to 
that outlined on page 86* First, he learned the 
correct tongue and lip position for the production 
of TH. He did this by placing the tip of his tongue 
slightly against the edge of his upper teeth and 
sending out his breath. This gives the sound TH as 
in think - author - teeth. Then he combined this 
new sound with vowels: tha, thee, the, tho, thoo. I 
next asked him to repeat the following syllables, being 
careful to note the change in lip and tongue position 
on each syllabize: 


sa 

tha 

so 

tho 

soy - thoy 

se 

the 

soo - 

thoo 

sair- thair 

si 

thi 

saw - 

thaw 

sow - thow 

He practised 

the 

following 

lists of 

words: 


thank 

breath 

tooth 

teeth 

think 

enter 

faith 

Thursday 

thread 

athlete 

sixth 

thousand 

thimble 

method 

width 

thirteen 

third 

author 

earth 

forth 








103 


TH may be a breath sound, as in the above 
words, or a voiced sound, found in the lists below. 
The tongue position is the same in the production of 
both sounds, the only difference being that in the 
case of the first only the breath is sent out, while 
in the other the voice is used after the correct 
position has been attained. 



than 

either 

bathe 

feather 


that 

mother 

clothe 

leather 


they 

father 

smooth 

rather 


those 

another 

breathe 

bother 


these 

neither 

soothe 

gather 


Then we 

practised the 

word lists 

on page 92 and 

the 

sentences 

on pages 92 & 

113 . Other sentences 

suitable are: 




1. 

Tell them 

to do this. 

Tell them 

to do that. 


2. Did he do this? Did he do that? 

^hen they walked with him to Thirty-third Street. 

4. We planted three trees. 

5. ' Follow through. 

Henry was now in a position to read simple poems. 
Some I used are given below. In selecting rhymes for 
any corrective work, remember that the aim is not to 
teach literary gems, but simply to train the child to 
enunciate correctly. The material selected for young 














.... 






- ■ ■ - - 


























. 

. 




1 








104 - 


children should be simple in construction and easy to 

remember. Use the mirror constantly in all exercises 

designed to correct lisping. 

Simple Simon met a pie-man 
Going to the fair; 

Said Simple Simon to the pie-man 
1! Let me taste your ware.” 

Said the pie-man to Simple Simon, 

”Show me first your penny”. 

Said Simple Simon to the pie-man, 

’’Indeed, I have not any.” 

- Mother Goose. 

Swift and sure the swallow. 

Slow and sure the snail; 

Slow and sure may miss his way; 

Swift and sure may fail. 

- Anon. 


I saw a ship a-sailing, 

A-sailing on the sea; 

Her masts were of the shining gold, 

Her decks of ivory. 

- Gabriel Setoun. 

There’s no dew left on the daisies and clover, 
There’s no rain left in heaven; 

I’ve said my ’’seven times” over and over - 
Seven times one are seven. 

- Jean Ingelow. 

As thus we sat in darkness, 

Each one busy with his prayers. 

”We are lost,” the captain shouted. 

As he staggered dovm the stairs. 

But his little daughter whispered. 

As she took his icy hand, 

’’Isn’t God upon the ocean 

Just the same as on the land?” 


- James T. Fields. 








105 


After six months of remedial treatment, Henry 
was able to say the formerly mispronounced sounds in 
a normal manner. Only when he was in a hurry or 
when he was not conscious of his speech did he revert 
to his former habits. 

Conclusion. 

Lisping causes a great deal of unnecessary 
embarrassment and shame to the individual. It can 
be readily eliminated through the proper corrective 
measures. The lisper lacks control of the tongue 
muscles. A sluggish tongue action results. Do 
corrective work by strengthening the tongue muscles 
so that the child will have automatic control of them. 
Then show the correct tongue and lip positions for the 
faultily pronounced sounds. Next present to the child 
the correct visual and auditory imagery of the desired 
sounds. A small hand mirror is of incalculable help 
in this exercise. Sometimes It is necessary to hold 
the tip of the tongue down with a tooth pick so that 
the child can form correct motor habits. Then give 
exercises in combining the sibilant sounds with vowel 
sounds. The child should be required to open his mouth 
wide when giving the vowel sound which follows the 




106 


consonant. When the patient has learned to produce 
the various sounds correctly he should use them first 
in words, then in simple sentences, and later in 
poems and pieces of prose, and finally in conversation. 











CHAPTER V 


MINOR SPEECH DEFECTS 








107 


CHAPTER V 

MINOR SPEECH DEFECTS 
(i) BABY TALK. 

Definition and Causes of Baby Talk. 

Baby talk is the result of erroneous interpret¬ 
ation and production of sounds. Incorrect auditory 
and motor images are often early established as a result 
of foolish prattle by parents. Children are not 
born with speech images - they acquire them through 
the auditory sense. There are very few instances in 
which mental and physical defects accompany baby talk. 

A child cannot form correct auditory images when he 
is taught incorrect ones from his parents. Care 
should be taken to supply the child with good speech 
copy long before he even begins to speak, because 
internal speech impressions are formed months before 
motor or external speech begins. 

The general attitude of parents is that it is 
useless to spend time in correcting baby talk. 

The vast majority of our "baby-talkers” do outgrow 
this defect. It is fortunate that an immature 
brain can replace the erroneous mental and physical 
speech habits with correct ones. 


without 


















. 




































. ; : .. ; ) . . | 
' , 







108 


definite training. When we consider that for months 
and often for years, a child has been performing 
definite physical movements, for example, using the 
tip of the tongue and producing a _t sound for the k 
sound, resulting in tan for can , it is remarkable 
that he can make this readjustment at all. 

Nature of Baby Talk. 

The following are some of the errors common to 


most baby talkers. 

(a) Substitution of - 


1. 

t for k (or hard c) 

as 

2. 

d for g (hard) 

as 

3. 

f for th 

as 

4. 

w or y for 1 

as 

5. 

th for f 

as 

6 . 

w for v 

as 

7. 

s for sh 

as 

8. 

w for r 

as 


Elimination of - 


1. 

r after consonant 



sounds 

as 

2. 

Initial 1 

as 

3. 

1 after consonants 

as 

4. 

Initial y 

as 


. St (in some cases the 
the t). 


tar for car. 
do for go. 
fought for thought, 
wook or yook for look, 
thour for four, 
wery for very, 
soe for shoe, 
wan for ran. 

buvver for brother 
ook for look, 
pease for please, 
oo for you, es for yes. 
s is eliminated, in others 


5 











109 


Correction of Baby Talk. 

Because the whispered sound is more easily grasped 
by the child than the vocalized consonant, teach the 
whispered form first. For instance, teach the K sound 
before teaching the G sound. Do not have the child 
sound the vocalized consonants separately, as vocaliz¬ 
ation is a difficult problem for him. The child is 
able to imitate much easier if the teacher says gay, 
gah, go, goo and gi, than if she pronounces the hard 
G alone. 

Teach consonants in combination with the vowels. 
When correcting the production of a sound, do not 
apply the corrected form to the words formerly mis¬ 
pronounced. Combine the newly taught sound with the 
various vowel sounds, thereby forming unfamiliar com¬ 
binations. The reason for this procedure is that the 
child can apply the newly acquired sound to an unfamiliar 
combination with practically no difficulty; whereas, if 
he attempts to apply the newly acquired sound to a 
familiar combination, before the motor coordinations 
involved in the new have become fixed, he will fall 
back into his old errors. For example, if a child has 
difficulty with the words cat, candy, can, car, carry, 
use such combinations as kah, ka, kee, kaw, koh. Moo, 







■ 












110 


which have no old associations but which develop the 
correct production of k. Such words as cat, candy and 
can are not suitable drill material because they 

recall coordinations which constitute this particular 
speech defect. When the child has developed definite 
control of the new coordinations, then he can be 
taught to apply them effectively to the old words 
that caused his trouble. 

Drill Exercises for Baby-Talkers. 

1. Substitution of t for k. - The difficulty here 
lies in the fact that the child produces the sound by 
raising the tip of the tongue to the palate rather than 
by raising the back of the tongue to the palate. In 
the formation of k the child is told to press the back 
of his tongue up against the palate - then release or 
drop it suddenly by means of a puff of air causing an 
Explosive sound. This sound is the required k. Some¬ 
times it is necessary for the teacher to hold down the 
tip of the tongue with a tongue depressor or a tooth 
pic. 

When the sound can be correctly formed, combine 

it with the vowel sounds: 

kah kee koh ki 

ka ka w koo ku 







Ill 


The next step is to apply the difficult sound to 
simple words, as: 

cow caught talk kill 

key kind look kept 

cough kite ask milk 

Then apply it to sentences, using the sound k: 

1. The cat ate the candy. 

2. I can see a cow. 

3. Daddy caught the car. 

4. The key can open the door. 

5. My cold made me cough. 

Now we use sentences with the final k: 

1. I like candy. 

2. Let me look at the book. 

3. I will take the cake to the sick boy. 

4. John took a sail on the lake. 

2. Substitution of d for g (hard) .- Give the 
correct tongue position for £. Ask the patient to press 
the back of the tongue up against the palate - then 
release or drop it suddenly, using his voice at the 
same time. This will produce the sound of g. Con¬ 
stant use of the hand mirror is advocated for the 
production of all of these sounds, so that the proper 
visual as well as auditory images will be formed in 
the mind of the child. Next, give the various vowel 
sounds in combination with the consonant g: 

gah gee gi go 

ga gaw gu goo 









. 

. 

. 

. 

' 

, . 

- 





















. 

. 











112 


Practise with simple familiar words until the 
child masters the initial, medial and final £, as: 


good 

bigger 

big 

gas 

digger 

dog 

get 

swagger 

rag 

gold 

giggle 

fig 


Then give further practice with simple sentences: 

1. My grandfather is digging for gold in the North. 

2. A girl at school giggled when she got a rag doll. 

3. I gave the teacher a big bag of figs. 

4. I will be a good girl as I grow bigger. 

3. Substitution of f for th .~ With the aid of the 

mirror, give the correct tongue position for the sound 

th. Place the tip of the tongue slightly against the 

edge of the upper teeth, then send out the breath. 

This will produce the sound of jbh. Now combine th with 

various vowel sounds: 

tha the thi thaw 

thah thee tho thoo 


Practise simple words with the sound th used in 

the initial, medial and final positions: 

thank ether teeth 

think athlete width 

thread method faith 

thimble author earth 

third other 










115 


Apply the th sound to simple sentences: 

1. I thank you. 

2. The hoy was there. 

3. That thimble is mother*s. 

4. I think that father and mother took brother with 
them. 

5. Father pulled my tooth. 

6. Take Martha with you. 

An excellent drill poem for the correction of 
this sound is "The House that Jack Built.” 

4. Substitution of w or y for 1 :- This sub¬ 
stitution is caused by the use of the lips in place of 
the tongue. The correct position for the tongue in 
the production of 1 is to place the tip of the tongue 
against the gum behind the upper front teeth, a little 
farther back than for t and hold it there while using 
your voice. This will produce the sound of 1. 

In the following drill, be sure that the child 
keeps the mouth well open, enabling the tongue to 
perform the maximum of action. 


Drill I. 

Drill 

lah 

ahl 

la 

al 

lee 

eel 

law 

ell 

loh 

awl 

loo 

ohl 

li 

ool 

lu 

owl 


































. 














114 


Next apply the sound 1 to simple words: 


lady 

collar 

peal 

let 

fellow 

boil 

look 

lollow 

fool 

lip 

lily 

jail 

lion 

Billy 

ball 

land 

dollar 

bell 

live 

duller 

nail 

love 

jelly 

kill 

large 

duller 

doll 


Simple sentences using the above words, or other 
simple words containing the letter 1 are then practised, 

5. & 6. Substitution of th for v or f .- Here 
the trouble is caused by pressing or biting the tongue, 
rather than the lips as must be done in producing f 
or v, and as a result we get thour for four, A sub¬ 
stitution of w for v is also found in the speech of 
baby-talkers; as wery for very. The position of the 
tongue and lips for f and v is to put your lower lip 
against the edge of your upper front teeth, then while 
holding that position send out your breath softly over 
your* lip. You will produce the sound of f. With 
similar lip and tongue positions use your voice and you 
will produce the sound of v. 

The following drills for the combination of vowel 
sounds with f and v are given before words using the 
sounds: 












































■ 










- 




115 


Drill I 

Drill II 

Drill 

III 

Drill IV 


fah 

ahf 

vah 


ahv 


fa 

af 

va 


av 


fee 

eef 

vee 


eev 


faw 

awf 

vaw 


awv 


foh 

ohf 

voh 


ohv 


foo 

oof 

voo 


oov 


Words: 





find 

coffee 

leaf 

vine 

seven 

love 

full 

offer 

cuff 

vest 

river 

brave 

fear 

effort 

roof 

voice 

over 

stove 

fun 

differ 

wolf 

visit 

saving 

leave 

first 

scoffer 

deaf 

very 

Rover 

move 


Simple sentences prove helpful. 

1. Four and one are five. 

2. Forty and four are forty-four. 

5. Fred is a very fine fellow. 

4. I have a velvet coat. 

7. Substitution of s for sh .- There is a 
decided difference in the position of the tongue and 
lips for the production of these two sounds. The 
lips are drawn back approximating a smile producing js, 
while the lips are pushed forward when producing sh . 

In the formation of js, make your front teeth almost 
meet, that is, loosely close them - hold the tip of 
your tongue up just behind the upper front teeth with¬ 
out touching the palate - then send out a steady stream 
of air out over the tip of the tongue, making a soft 
hissing noise. This will produce the sound of s,. 

In the formation of .sh the front teeth almost meet, 
that is, they are loosely closed, and then the tongue 



















. 










...... 


' . 



. 

. 

■ 

. 






. 




























■ V 




. 









116 


is drawn back so that there is free space between the 
front of the tongue and the teeth. When a steady 
stream of air is sent out, the _sh sound is produced. 
Drill I (Initial sh) Drill II (Final sh) 


shah 

ahsh 

sha 

ash 

shee 

eesh 

shaw 

awsh 

shoh 

ohsh 

shoo 

ohsh 


Drill words, using the sh sound in initial, 
medial and final positions: 


shop 

bushel 

wish 

shave 

bishop 

fresh 

shore 

cashier 

flush 

ship 

ash-can 

wash 

shoe 

ashamed 

fish 


Simple sentences are: 

1. Show me your shoe. 

2. A fish is in the dish. 

5. I wish I could go. 

4. John is ashamed. 

5. She can shine her shoes. 

8. Substitution of w for r :- In this case the 
child is trying to produce r ?d.th the lips instead of 
with the tongue. To produce the sound r, direct the 
tip of the tongue towards the gum behind the upper 
front teeth, but do not touch the palate - hold it 
in that position while using the voice and the sound r 













■ ■ ; ■_ ; ;. . ■ , : r. ■* J, «, 10 iKn.t; 












• 4 ' . .. " - L 

. 




















. 































117 - 


will be produced. See the practical example on pages 99 & 
10 0 . 


Run the sounds together in the following drill: 


rah-rah-rah 
ra-ra-ra 
ree-ree-ree 
raw-raw-raw 


roh-roh-roh 

roo-roo-roo 

ray-ray-ray 

rye-rye-rye 


Drill words are: 


race 

carry 

river 

rod 

berry 

rooster 

rise 

sorry 

rear 

rug 

sparrow 

roller 

rail 

marry 

array 

rut 

rarity 

roaster 

rat 

merry 

cheers 

red 

hurry 

tear 


Sentences: 


1. Let us run a race. 

2. I have a red rose. 

3. Rover ran far away. 

4. Her mother rode on the car. 

5. I ripped my red coat. 

In addition to the above exercises for the r 


sound, additional sentences and poems may be found 
under the heading of Lisping on page s 97 and 101. 

9. Substitution of shfor ch. also y for j :- 
In the formation of ch . the tip of the tongue is placed 
against the upper gum behind the front teeth, as for t. 


then quickly run into ch by making the front teeth 
almost meet, that is, loosely close them, draw back 


the tongue while sending out the breath. Ch sound will 
be produced. 















. 


- 



*t r 










HW tO ^ 


118 - 


Drills: 


chah 

ahch 

cha 

ach 

chee 

eech 

chaw 

awch 

choh 

ohch 

choo 

ooch 


After the child is able to combine the difficult 
sound with the various vowel sounds, use the sound in 
simple words: 

Drill for initial ch. Drill for medial ch.Drill for finalch 


chair 

merchant 

match 

church 

pitcher 

which 

chin 

orchard 

touch 

check 

teacher 

crutch 

cheek 

catcher 

stitch 

chap 

richer 

latch 

chain 

preacher 


Sentences: 




• Charlie is my cheery chum. 

. I chased him around the chair. 

. My chum has a gold chain. 

. Show me the cherries. 

J is the vocalized ch. It is therefore taught 

through hearing the teacher make the sound after the 


ah j 

aj 

eej 

awj 

ohj 

003 


ch is under control 
Drills: 













119 


Words: 


joy 

major 

Japan 

June 

enj oy 

job 

jaw 

injury 

juvenile 

jump 

January 

jewel 

Jill 

unjust 

jot 

judge 

justice 

junket 

jazz 

rejoice 

just 

junk 

enjoin 

justify 

Jack 

Jewish 

jingle 


Sentences: 

1. I like cheese. 

2. George picked the cherries. 

3. Jack jumped over the chair. 

4. Jenny ate the jelly. 

Drill Rhymes for Correcting Baby Talk. 

The following rhymes are helpful in applying the 

correct form of the sounds mispronounced by baby-talkers. 

K. Polly put the kettle on, 

Polly put the kettle on 
Polly put the kettle on 
We ! ll all have tea. 


Hickory, dickory, dock, 

The mouse ran up the clock. 
The clock struck one. 

The mouse ran down. 

Hickory, dickory, dock 


J. There ?/ere two blackbirds 

Sitting on a hill. 

The one named Jack, 

And the other named Jill; 
Fly away Jack! 

Fly away, Jill! 

Come back, Jack! 

Come back, Jill! 








Jack, be nimble. 
Jack be quick. 
Jack, jump over, 
The candle stick. 


If I ! d as much money as I could spend, 

I never would cry, ”01d chairs to mend 
Old chairs to mend. Old chairs to mend.” 
I never would cry, ”Old chairs to mend 


Goosey, Goosey, Gander, 
Where shall I wander? 
Upstairs and downstairs. 
And in my lady ! s chamber. 


This is the way we wash our hands. 
Wash our hands. 

Wash our hands; 

This is the way we wash our hands 
On a cold and frosty morning. 


This little pig went to market; 

This little pig stayed home; 

This little pig had roast meat; 

This little pig had none; 

This little pig said, ”Wee, wee, wee, 
I can 1 1 find my way home. ” 


This is the way we go to school. 
Go to school. 

Go to school. 

This is the way we go to school 
On a cold and frosty morning. 


Little Robin Redbreast, 

Sat upon a rail, 
Niddle-naddle went his head. 
Wiggle-waggle went his tail. 
































■ . . 











• . - ' v." i -■_ _ 




















121 


St . "Stop, stop, pretty water," 

Said Mary one day 
To a frolicsome brook 
That was running away. 

"You run on so fast, 

I wish you would stay 
My boat and my flowers 
You will carry away." 


F. Every fiddler he had a fine fiddle 
And a very fine fiddle had he; 

"Twee, tweedle-dee, tweedle-dee," went the fiddlers 

three. 

Oh, there 1 s none so rare as can compare 
With King Cole and his fiddlers three. 


V. Valentine, 0 Valentine, 

Curl your locks as I do mine; 
Two before and two behind 
Good-morrow to you, Valentine. 










122 


Practical Work. 

During the past school term, an interesting 
case of a lad who had a serious speech defect was 
observed. I tried to get a complete history of his 
case by consulting his mother, the principal, his room 
teacher and the school nurse. I followed the outline 
suggested on pages 18 & 19 . 

1. Name - Bruce S-*— 

2. Nationality - The boy was born in Edmonton on 
August 29, 1932, of parents of Irish extraction. 

3. Mental and moral status in school and at home as 
shown by: 

(a) Intelligence tests. The Binet test shows that 
he has an Intelligence Quotient of 105. 

(b) School Work. The teacher reports that Bruce 
does very satisfactory written work. His mind is 
active. He is able to see number relationships quickly 
and can grasp the thought of the printed page even 
though his articulation is poor. He does not hesitate 
to attempt to answer questions. One day the principal 
and I entered the class room and the teacher asked 
Bruce to read. He immediately stepped to the front of 
the room and read a story from his primer without the 
slightest embarrassment. The fact that we understood 









123 


little of what he read made no difference to him. When 
he finished reading he smiled and walked to his seat, 
perfectly at ease. He ranks among the top ten in a 
class of thirty-five. 

(c) Character and Personality. Bruce is a pleasant, 
well mannered youngster. His outward appearance is 
that of a normal healthy lad of eight years. He is a 
general favorite among his classmates. He is always 
ready to cooperate with others and excels in sports. 

He is neither moody nor selfish. Being a member of a 
large family, he has learned to consider others. The 
teacher says he has an amiable disposition, with no 
emotional disturbance of any kind. 

4. General Physical Condition. He is normal physically 
He weighs 54 pounds and is 49 inches high. Mentally 
and physically he is very active. 

5. Physical Defects throughout the Speech Organs. The 
sbhool physician reports that Bruce has no physical 
defects of the jaws, tongue, palates or lips. 

6. Nature of the Speech Organ Defect: its peculiarities 
Bruce 1 s speech defect is puzzling. It seems to be the 
result of a combination of baby talk and lisping. The 
defect is aggravated by the loss of the 





















. 







■ 7 












. 












. 


. 

. 


* 






- 124 - 


four front teeth. He has very little control of the 
lingual and tongue muscles. At first I found diffic¬ 
ulty in understanding anything he said. A professor 
from the University of Alberta, who so kindly arranged 
my first meeting with Bruce, pointed to several common 
articles and asked the child to name them. The boy 
substituted the following words during that first 
meeting: 

wah for watch 

ah for eye 

teh for chair 

wih for lips 

a (as in man) for yes 
thi for finger 

His teacher. Miss Campbell, he called Mih Cah. I 
asked him what he did at recess and he said, ” Ah peh 
bah”, for 11 1 play ball.” 

7. He has no physical defects. 

8. Illnesses, past or chronic. He has had measles 
and an operation for tonsils and adenoids. 

9. Home Environment. 

(a) Condition of the Home: standard of living - 
I visited the home on several occasions during the 
past year and found there a congenial atmosphere. There 
are seven children in the family ranging from two to 
fifteen years of age. The babies are twin girls. I 
have not met the father, but the mother is a pleasant. 

























































. 



















- 




. ' 












* 




7 -i- ■ • ■ : r-/ o (■) 






. 


. 







12b 


intelligent, understanding woman. Mr. S-—- has a 

well-paid government position and provides a comfortable 
home for his family. 

(b) Care of the Child. The children are all well 

cared for. The S-s live in a large, well kept 

home with ample room for the family. 

(c) Associations: speech defects of other members 
of the family. A sister, aged fifteen years and a 
brother, aged twelve years, have speech defects of the 
articulation nature. Neither ease is as serious as 
Bruce 1 s is. 

(d) Sympathy and Cooperation of the Family. The 
mother was very pleased when I spoke to her about giving 
Bruce remedial treatment. She said she hadn’t much 
time to spend on him because, even though she employs 

a maid, the household duties are heavy. She curls in the 
winter and lawn bowls in the summer. 

In all probability Bruce’s speech defect began 
through imitation of his older brother and sister. The 
mother was too busy with household duties to give the 
lad the individual attention required to correct his 
speech at an early, age. As a consequence, the muscles 
of his tongue have never been properly exercised. He 
was the baby of the family for six years (until the twins 
arrived) and did not feel the need to articulate clearly. 










126 


He seems to think it is unnecessary to sound all of 
the letters of a word to convey the meaning. Invariably 
he says only the first two letters of a word, for 
example, he says: 


thoo for shoe 
uh teh for upstairs 
nee for near 
buh for buns 
thih for finger 
bowdee for birthday 


wag for large 
eh for air 
it for hate 
wahss for lace 
feh for fair 
oht for hurt 


Treatment .- I gave Bruce many exercises for 
breath control, articulation and strengthening tongue 
muscles before proceeding to treat individual sounds. 
During the first two weeks of remedial treatment he 
practised exercises for ten minutes and relaxed for 
five minutes and then continued the exercises. In 
the five minute intervals we talked about school work, 
about games and other things in which he was interested. 
He chattered freely with no uneasiness. As he 
talked I wrote down various words he mispronounced for 
later use. The exercises I used for the correction 
of his case are: 

Breathing Exercises (general) : 


1. The child sits, or stands, in correct position. The 
teacher beats a regular one, two, three, the child 
inhaling through the nose — in, two, three; out, two 
three. Try to get the breath flowing in and out smoothly. 

















- 127 - 


2. Repeat the above exercise, exhaling through the 
nose. 

3. Beat three as before. This time include a "stay" 
which is better than "hold” as it is less likely to make 
the pupil tense. In, two, three; stay, two, three; 
out, two, three. 

4. Breathe in, two, three. On "out” of next bar, 
clap the hands smartly. Children drop the jaw and 
clear the lungs quickly on "ha"; in, two, three; out 
f, ha l! . Repeat three times. 

5. "Big Man”. - Raise the chest, extending it as much 
as possible by muscular action. Breathe in, two, 
three; out, two, three. 

6. I! Mr. Frog”.- By muscular action swell out the 
lower ribs and draw them in; out, in. Repeat three 
times. 

7. fl Tired Dog”. - With lower ribs swelled out, pant 
five times. 

# 

Breathing Exercises for Control : 

1. “Chickadee”. - Take a deep breath and exhale, 
saying ”chickadee, dee, dee,” as long as possible. 

2. "Steam Engine”.- Take a deep breath and exhale 
saying "s-s-s" as long as possible. 


# Taken from Alberta Course of Studies, 1940-41 









128 


3. "Feather-in-the-air”. - Take a deep breath and, 
pretending to toss a feather into the air, keep it 
up by blowing as long as possible. 

4. ” Swim-under-the-water 11 . - Take a deep breath and, 
moving the arms from front to back as in swimming, 
hold the breath for 2,3,5,7,10 counts. 

5. "Let-go”. - Inhale, exhale, letting a little go in 
each count; 1,2,3,4; Practise this till the child can 
let go on counts up to ten. 

Relaxation Exercises : 

1. Take a deep breath slowly; exhale slowly. 

2. Raise limp arms slov/ly; lower slowly. 

3. Bend the body forward at the waist, drooping limply. 
Raise slowly. 

4. Lower the head slowly to the chest; raise slowly. 

5. Drop the jaw, opening the mouth. Do not push down; 
let it drop. Raise slowly. 

6. Take sitting, or standing, position. Tense the 
body, stiffen the fingers, stretching towards the floor 
or tighten the hands into fists. Tense slowly, relax 
slowly. 

7. Tense the throat; say ”dog” harshly; relax the 
throat; say the same word softly. Repeat with any word 








129 


Exercises for Resonance : 

1. "Bumble Bee". - Hum "M" on three slow beats. The 
pupil should feel the sound high behind the nose and 
at the roots of the upper teeth. 

2. Repeat the exercise with "N" and "NG". 

3. Take the exercise with "M", changing to "N", 
changing to "NG". The tone should flow smoothly 
without a break, one strip of sound moulded in 
different ways. 

4. Take some exercises with other vowels and final 
consonants. 

5. "Rolling "R"". - Say "ah brrrr"; repeat. This is 
an invaluable exercise for breath control, stimulating 
the soft palate, and agility of the tongue, as well 

as for resonance. 

Articulation Exercises : 

(a) Jaw. 

1. Open the mouth as wide as possible. Close slowly; 
open, close; open, close - five times. This limbers 
the muscles of the hinge of the jaw. It is also a 
useful relaxation exercise. 

2. Relax the lower jaw and move it slowly from side to 
side three times; then move it slowly down, around, and 
up, as in chewing. 






: 


- 











■ 

















. 










130 


3. Open the jaw about two finger-widths and with an 
open throat say "ma-ba-pa." Repeat five times, keep¬ 
ing the throat relaxed all the time. The sounds made 
by a relaxed throat are very soft. 

(b) The Lips. 

1. Rub the tongue over the lips, wetting them. Then 
rub the teeth over them, biting them gently. 

2. Make the lips as narrow as possible, drawing the 
corners as far back as you can; "narrow - relax ", etc. 

3. Raise the right side of the upper lip; raise the left 
side, "Right-left". Repeat five times. 

4. Repeat "eedee - eedoh," many times rapidly. 

5. Make the lips flare outward like the mouth of a 
trumpet, saying the word "new" correctly. Exaggerated 
lip action will enable you to do this. Use a mirror. 

(c) The Tongue. 

Since the tongue is the most important organ 
of pronunciation, considerable time should be spent on 
tongue gymnastics. 

1. Point the tongue upwards. 

2. Point the tongue out and downward towards the chin. 

3. Wag the tip up and down for eight counts. Begin 
at the right and go around; then from the left around. 

4. Protrude the tongue with a groove in the middle, 
raising both sides. 





131 


5. Rotate the tongue around the outside of the mouth. 

6. Cut the tip back to a point behind the upper 
teeth; "up-down", "up-down", for eight counts. 

7. Press the tongue against the back of the lower 
teeth; "press-go, press-go", for eight counts. 

3. Say "lee-lee-lee" very rapidly for a few seconds. 
9. Trill "R". 

Later he practised the tongue exercises on 
pages 82-85 . 

Treatment Given to Individual Sounds .- Bruce 
had no difficulty with the lip sounds, jd and b, when 
tested on the various letters of the alphabet. He 
was also able to pronounce the lip-teeth sounds f and 
v. Some of the tongue sounds gave him trouble. He 
could not say ch , 1, r, hard &, j, z. He had no 
difficulty with t, d, s., and th as in this. He could 
say the nasal sounds m, n, ng., but not hQ A number 
of the vowel sopnds were troublesome. He could not 
say a as in ate, a as in air, i. as in mile, 1 as in 
bird, u as in use (but he could say u as in hut) . He 
could say ee, and £ as in no, and a as in cat. 

The first sounds I dealt with were the tongue 

sounds. 









152 


1. Ch. - the boy was not able to make even an approxim¬ 
ation of this sound. When ch occurred in a word, he 
either omitted it altogether or he substituted t . 

He said: teh for chair 

tih for chin 
cah for catch 
tiahn for chicken, 

I showed him the correct tongue and lip position 
for the production of this sound. I asked him to place 
his tongue flat across the hard palate just above the 
upper gums, and then lower his tongue suddenly and use 
his breath. A similar sound accompanies sneezing. 

As soon as he was able to say this sound, he 

combined it with vowels: 

chah chee chi choh 

chay cheh chy choo 

Then, using a mirror, he practised the follow¬ 
ing word list: 


chair 

church 

chest 

preach 

chime 

couch 

chin 

chalk 

cheek 

cheer 

chap 

teacher 

which 

match 


He was unable to say those words containing r, 

wh, i, or a as in aim. He said 

choich for church 
cheh for chair 
wich for which 
cheeoo for cheer 
teachoo for teacher 



' 
























135 


I did not draw his attention to these mis¬ 
pronunciations because we had not practised the sounds 
r, wh> &Z or JL* The words chest, chin, couch, match, 
which contained ch and sounds which he could say, he 
pronounced well* 

Then I gave him simple sentences to repeat: 

1. Our clock chimes * 

2. That chap has red cheeks * 

3. I like the match which he gave me. 

4. I have a cheerful teacher. 

5. I like cheese very much* 

6. I sat on the chair. 

7. We have a china pitcher. 

8. I go to church on Sunday. 

9. My chin is sore. 

3.0. My sister sat on the couch. 

Bruce did not have much success saying these 
sentences at first because he was unable to say a number 
of sounds other than the new sound ch. His sentences 
sounded something like this: 

1. Ow cwock chahms. 

2. That chap ’as wed cheeks. 

3. Ah wahck ah watch wich ’e gave me. 

4. Ah f ave a cheeohfoo teachoo, 

5. Ah lack cheese vewy much. 

6. Ah sat on ah cheh. 

7. We ? ave a chahnah pitchoo. 

8. Ah go to chohch on Sunday. 

9. Mah chin is soh. 

10. Mah sistoo sat on ah -couch. 

When he had finished saying the ten sentences, I 
Itold Bruce that he had pronounced them very well. I 
find that encouragement and praise are powerful allies 








- 



• « ■) ' a ■ i - f - * P 









. ozm \ ' y . r v 

- : . - $ k 

^ iLiV no .ooxk- k 

' •• ' 

. . 


. 

; 



; 

. 

. 

■ r 

. 




154 


in remedial speech classes. I was satisfied in each 
of the above sentences if the boy pronounced ch properly. 
After we had finished practising other sounds 1, r, ± y a, 
he was able to read the sentences quite well. 

Other drill words and sentences using the 
sound ch may be found on page 117-118. 

2. L. - A detailed account of the proper lip and 
tongue placement for the formation of 1 is found on 
page 113 

The conversation belov/ reveals the procedure 
which I employed in the teaching of each new sound to 
Bruce. I used a similar method when I treated Mike 
for Foreign Accent, and Henry for Lisping. Bruce is 
learning the correct placement of the letter 1 for 
which he substitutes W. For like he says wike. First, 

I write the letter on the blackboard and say it over 
a number of times. I represent myself as X in the 
following conversation. 

X. "You now know what this sound 11 sounds like". You 

also know what it "looks like" - that is, you have 
watched me adjust my tongue and lips for its production, 
and in the hand mirror you have watched yourself place 
the tip of your tongue behind your upper front teeth 
and hold it there while using your voice. Now let me 
see if you can produce the sound." 







155 


Bruce - (Produces a sound which is a slight modificat¬ 
ion of w.) "Was that right?" 

X. - "That was close but still it wasn ! t quite right. 
Now watch my mouth closely and listen to me once more - 
note how the tip of my tongue is touching my gum behind 
my upper front teeth." (i again produce the sound 1) 
"Now this time before you say anything be sure that the 
tip of your tongue appears against your upper front 
teeth in the hand mirror." 

Bruce.- (Produces a sound which is very close to the 
standard sound.) "Was that right?" 

X. - "Much better. Repeat that ten times, still 
looking in the mirror." 

Bruce - "L-l-1-1-1-1-- ten times." 

X. - "Now say the letter another ten times without 
the mirror, this time concentrate on the feel of your 
tongue in its new position. Remember to keep your 
lips stationary." 

It is as necessary to the success of the treat¬ 
ment that the child "feel" the new sound, as it is 
that he "see" and "hear" it. 

Bruce.-"L-1-1-1-1-ten times." 

The above conversation typifies the procedure 
I followed in the teaching of each of the sounds mis¬ 
pronounced by Bruce. 













- 156 - 


I wrote the following simple words on the black¬ 


board, and asked the pupil to say them after me: 


lane 

lean 

lime 

lisp 

load 

animal 

simple 

lall 


rumble 

let 

little 

call 

bill 

low 

lie 

last 


He pronounced them something like this: 


lehn 

lean 

lahm 

lisp 

load 

animal 

simple 

lall 


wumble 

let 

little 

call 

bill 

low 

leh 

last 


If he pronounced the 1 correctly in the word, 

I proceeded to the next word. Then we practised the 
simple rhymes for lispers on pages 119-121, 

3. R.- R proved to be the most difficult sound for 
Bruce to say. Every speech lesson day during the 
past school term we spent a few minutes practising 
words containing r. Even after he had learned the 
correct tongue movement for the sound, he still 
persisted in using the lip movement used in the product¬ 
ion of ow as in ho?/, and held his tongue stationary. 

He used a number of substitutions for r. They were oh. 





























. ■ 




137 - 


oo, w and ow as in cow. 

For rain he said wehn 
For ride he said wahd 
For manner he said mannow 
For fire he said fehoo 
For red he said wed 
For rug he said wug 

In all of these r substitutions, the lips move 
but the tip of the tongue is not used at all. To make 
the correct sound the back of the tongue must be 
lowered and the front raised. A good exercise for ob¬ 
taining the sound r is to place the bent knuckle of the 
forefinger between the teeth and try to say z as in 
pleasure, taking care that the finger is underneath 
the tongue. 

The production of r , without using the knuckle, 
has already been explained on pages 96 . Suitable 

drill words and sentences which I used may be found 
on page 96 , and on page 117 . 

The r sound after a (as in arm) continued to 

be incorrectly pronounced, even when the boy could say 

r in combination with other sounds. He said: 

ahm for arm 
fahm for farm 
cad for card 
mock for mark 
cowt for cart 
cow for car 
lack for lark 
tuot for tart 
pack for park. 






138 


This defect will rectify itself after the 
longue muscles develop through constant practise of 


tongue gymnastics. 

4. G (hard) .- This sound is produced by raising the 
back of the tongue against the soft palate and forcing 
the air out suddenly and using the voice when the 
tongue is lowered. 

He was able to pronounce this sound readily 

when shown the correct placement of the tongue. Then 

he practised £ in combination with vowel sounds: 

gah gee gi goo 

gay geh gi go 


Next he repeated these simple words, followed 


by sentences: 

gas 

good 

get 

gold 

big 

dog 


rag 

fig 

bigger 

swagger 

digger 

giggle 


1. Please give me some gum. 

2. I brought gas from the garage. 

3. My uncle is digging for gold at Goldfields. 

4. My dog stole my figs. 

5. The girl giggled in school. 

6. Sister Sue has a rag doll. 

7. I am in Grade II. 


5. J.- The correct tongue and lip position for is to 
place the tip of the tongue against the upper gum behind 
the front teeth as for d, then quickly run into zh by 
making the front teeth almost meet, draw back the tongue 











• , ■ 

■ s ! ::: - • 




. ■ 


■; :u : . 













. 






























139 


while using the voice. This will produce the sound of j.. 
Bruce was unable to produce the sound in this way, so 
I asked him to place his tongue flat across the hard 
palate just above the upper gums, then drop the 
tongue suddenly and use his voice. This he did and 
produced the sound easily. 

He practised j[ in combination with various 
vowel sounds: 


jay jee joo 

jaw j eh j oh 

Word lists we used are: 


June 

joke 

just 

strange 

jaw 

jump 


Jo 

college 

jam 

jug 

Jack 

Jill 


Then he repeated simple sentences: 


1. Jack and Jill went up the hill. 

2. It was no joke when his jaw broke. 

3. I have a jug of water and some bread and jam. 

4. When I grow up I f m going to college. 

5. A stranger just came to our door. 

6. We begin holidays the end of June. 

7. I have a brother called Jo. 

8. Jerry is my best pal. 

6. Z.- This sound is made by making your front teeth 


almost meet and then holding the tip of your tongue up 
just behind the upper front teeth without touching 
the palate. 










140 - 


Bruce practised the new sound in combination 
with the various vowel sounds and by repeating the 
following words: 

zone prize doze 

zinc gaze gaze 

lizard drizzle prize 

Then he studied and repeated these sentences: 

1. I saw a zebra at the zoo. 

2. There are many houses on our street. 

3. My brother won a prize for racing. 

4. One boy got zero on his arithmetic test. 

5. Sometimes I gaze at the stars. 

6. Mother found a lizard in the back yard. 

7. There was a drizzle of rain this afternoon. 

8. Father dozes when he reads the paper. 

7. H.- The next sound I dealt with was the nasal 

sound h. In the formation of this consonant only the 
breath is used. Open your mouth, not too wide, allow¬ 
ing your tongue to lie on the floor or bottom of 
your mouth; then, while holding that position, blow 
out your breath. Do it and you will produce the sound 
of h. 


After Bruce was able to produce the sound he 

combined it with vowel sounds: 

hah hoh hee he 

hay hoo high 

Later he repeated simple sentences, which I 


constructed. These are: 














141 


1. I live in a high house. 

2. He held his hat in his hand. 

3. She hummed a hymn for him. 

4. Mother cooked ham for dinner. 

5. The minister gave a sermon on Heaven and Hell. 

6. No harm will come to him. 

7. The heat of the day was great. 

8. We live up in the hall at recess. 

9. My head is hot. 

10. We played hunt the thimble at the party. 

Then we spent considerable time on the proper 
production of the vowel sounds with which Bruce found 
difficulty. We began with a as in ate. 

8. A.- This sound is produced by raising your tongue 
midway in your mouth so that the front of it is 
directed frontwards. Hold the tongue there while 
using your voice. The lips are well apart and the 
teeth are well separated in this production. The 
sides of the tongue touch lightly the back upper 
teeth. 

He practised the sound by carefully repeating 
the following words: 


face 

safe 

late 

game 

race 

make 

play 

pay 

baby 

gate 

mate 

lake 

rage 

ate 

made 

cake 

stay 

take 

name 

waste 







- 



' 

. 




■- ix 'll-. r - ■ • * r ‘ '■ ‘ ■" ■ 




142 


Simple sentences I used are 


1* Sam was late for the race. 

2. Her name is Maimie. 

3. The baby played with a basket of grapes. 

4. His face was red with rage. 

5. The tree makes shade for us to sit in. 

6. I play with a tame cat named Tabby. 

7. We had to pay at the gate. 

8. Father was late for supper. 

9. Mother framed the photo of James. 

10. I bought tape and lace at the store. 

9. I, (as in mile) . - To produce this sound, hold 
the lips and teeth apart. Place the tip of the tongue 
against the lower gums and raise the body of the 
tongue near the roof of the mouth. The productioh of 
i gave Bruce almost as much difficulty as r. He was 
unable to say it. 1 tried another method of product¬ 
ion. This sound is a diphthong, being composed of the 
two sounds, a (ask) and i (it). He was able to say 
both of these letters and after some time he was able 
to fuse them together quickly. 


Then he repeated these words 


kind 

kite 

like 

while 

find 

mile 

ice 

nine 


high 

night 

write 

line 

rice 

dine 

dime 

dice 


smile 

pride 

bite 

idea 

wipe 

slice 

price 

spice 


brine 

trial 

might 

time 

ripe 


sight 

spite 

fight 





' 





145 


Sentences he practised are: 

1. Father gave me a dime to fix my kite. 

2. I might get to school on time if I run. 

3. The hell chimes at nine o’clock. 

4. I write on white paper. 

5. I ate a slice of bread and spice cake. 

6. The boy fights in spite of himself. 

7. The sight of his smile filled me with pride. 

8. I skated a mile on the ice. 

9. The dice was loaded. 

10. A high wind blew last night. 

10. U.(as in use) .- This sound is a diphthong, being 
composed of two sounds - e (me) and (oo)(food). ^ruce 
was able to make these two sounds separately and 
after practice with the mirror he fused them together 
quickly and obtained a good u sound. 

Words he practised are: 


duty 

duke 

fume 

use 

mule 

cute 

mute 

useful 

amuse 

blue 

fuse 

duel 


Sentences I used next are: 


1. Sometimes I have to amuse the bahy. 

2. Mother says it is my duty. 

3. I have a new blue sweater. 

4. We have a spare fuse at home. 

5. Some farmers use mules instead of horses. 

6. The duke uses two palaces. 

A further peculiarity of this case was the 
difficulty the child had in saying two consonants 
after each other. After we had completed the above 
series of exercises, he could say pay and lay, but 
not play, kick and wick, but not quick, bo?/ and low. 







144 


but not blow, sing and ting, but not sting, bing 
and ring, but not bring. 

A good deal of practice was necessary to 
overcome this difficulty. When he practised play 
I had him hold 1 for some time and while he was say 
ing it, bring his lips together for the without 
taking the tip of his tongue from the teeth ridge. 

In quick I asked him to say the k sound and 
while holding this, round the lips for the w. In 
this way he managed to get the two sounds almost 
simultaneously. 

The last month Bruce recited a number of 
nursery rhymes with which he was already familiar. 
Some of these were: Little Boy Blue, Little Miss 
Muffet, Hot Cross Buns, Little Jack Horner. 

Then we spent some time on the Drill Rhymes 
on pagell9for correcting baby talk. Other simple 
rhymes he practised are: 

Christmas Bells . 

Ding dong dong dingl 

In every steeple, bells swing. 

Ding dong ding dongl 

Bells swing all the morning long. 

Ding dong boomt 
Ding dong boomt 








145 


The Shop Bell . 

The bell-spring swings 
And the small bell rings 
With a tingaling, tingaling, 
Tingalingoling. 

Here*s someone who is willing 
To spend a silver shilling 
So come along. Dingadongi 
Tingalingalingl 


Windy Nights . 

Rumbling in the chimneys. 

Rattling at the doors. 

Round the roofs and round the roads * 
The rude wind roars. 

Raging through the darkness 
Raving through the trees. 

Racing off again across 
The great grey seas. 


Thick and Thin . 

I can think of six thin things, 

Six thin things 1 Can you? 

Yes. I can think of six thin things. 
And of six thick things, too. 


Blue Bov . 

"How do you do. Boy Blue, 

How do you do? 

Have you a new blue suit?" 

"Yes I have two. 

I spilled some fruit on my old blue suit 
And that is why I have two new suits. 








146 


Slow Clock and Quick Clock . 

Slowly ticks the big clock; 

Tick tock, tick tockl 
But cuckoo clock ticks double quick 
Ticka-tocka-ticka-tocka 
Ticka-tocka 
Tick. 

I say Aw . 

I say Aw 
When I yawn. 

Awl - Awl 
How I yawnl 
Mouth is open 
Lips are round: 

That makes aw 
A yawning sound. 

Lucy Locket. 


Lucy Locket 
Lost her pocket, 

Kitty Fisher 
Found it; 

Nothing in it. 

Nothing in it. 

Just the binding 
Round it. 

At the end of the school term the teacher and 
I noticed considerable improvement in Bruce 1 s speech 
condition. I attribute this improvement to a number 
of causes. Apart from the individual attention he 
has had in speech classes, I think maturation may have 
been partly responsible. Each day his mother and his 
teacher drilled him on words and sentences outlined 
in the preceding several pages. This extra drill 
helped to draw Bruce’s attention to his speech processes 


















147 - 


and make him conscious of pronunciation. The sounds 
which persisted in giving Bruce trouble are r, 1. and JL. 
There is reason to suppose that as he grows older and 
his tongue muscles develop, these sounds will come 
easier. Weakness seems to be more in the motor center 
than in the auditing center. From my pradtical 
experience with speech defectives (which has been 
quite limited), I have found that malformation accounts 
for a very small proportion of speech defects. Most 
cases seem to be due to bad habits set up in child¬ 
hood and not corrected. 









148 


MINOR SPEECH DEFECTS 

(ii) FOREIGN ACCENT 
Causes and Prevalence 

Foreign accent is the use of consonants, vowels 
and tone patterns of foreign languages in speech. 
People who speak with an accent usually have acquired 
whatever English they know by imitation. This is 
especially true of those who learn English after 
the elementary school age. 

Foreigners usually learn to speak in word 
combinations, not in syllables. This often results 
in make-shift combinations because of the rapidity 
of average speech. Long familiarity with a language 
is necessary before the ear can distinguish vowels 
and consonants. Foreign accent is very common 
among children in public schools. Children brought 
up in a foreign atmosphere usually speak or hear 
nothing but a foreign language outside of school. 

Three Correction Problems 

There are three basic problems in correcting 
foreign accent difficulties. There are: 

(1) The consonantal difficulty caused by a lack 
of tongue control. 

(2) The vowel difficulty caused by a lack of ear 
training, and 










0 



m 


■ 





r.' 


' 









149 


(5) Intonation caused by an inability to hear and 
use characteristic tone patterns. 

1. Consonant Problems .- To the average for¬ 
eigner, £,b, w, v, and f present few difficulties. 
Foreigners whose native language does not include the 
w will tend to substitute another sound, usually v; 
those whose native tongue does not include the v 
will tend to substitute the w. Some make surds of 
sonants. When this is the case, have becomes haf; by 
golly becomes py kolly, etc. By checking the articul¬ 
ation through the use of a mirror and through tests 
for sonant sounds, one can eliminate these difficulties 

Of special importance are the alveolar conson¬ 
ants, t, d, is, jz,_ z y n, 1 and 3?. These nine sounds 
and their many combinations have been treated in 
this thesis. They all owe their production to a 
special activity of the front of the tongue. Generally 
the main source of difficulty with the articulation 
of the alviolar sounds is a low tongue position. 

The articulation of foreigners usually reveals 
a sluggish tongue movement. This tongue weakness is 
due mainly to a lack of certain muscular controls in 
speaking the native language and may be overcome by 
practising tongue gymnastics. For example, in some 







150 


dialects (e.g. Yiddish) little or no front lingual 
activity is required. Thus the tip of the tongue 
is usually fixed in the bottom of the lower Jaw and 
scarcely moves from this position during speech. In 
English all cases of foreign accent reveal a low 
tongue tendency and a general lack of independent 
lingual activity. The foreigner will find it ad¬ 
visable to develop tongue flexibility as a preparation 
for further drill on the consonants. See pages 82-85 
and 130 

In addition to the above drills for correcting 
sluggish tongue movement, these have been found 
helpful: 

Drill I. Tongue Compression for Pronouncing ssh,zh: 

Round the lips as if about to pronounce the 
vowel oo as in noon. With the lips firmly puckered, 
thrust the tongue through the aperture thus formed 
so as to create a u-shaped longitudinal groove along 
the entire length of the tongue muscle. (If necessary 
use the blunt end of a match stick to help shape the 
u‘groove in the tongue.) 

While maintaining the groove thus formed, slowly 
withdraw the tongue and move it upwards in the mouth 














\;, X 





V L S. J 







■; ■ 



- ' - • ; •"■ ■■ -- 

i )*Z0. - - - ~ 

i: ■o r r.l: j/y ^ ' y 

; ; ; j y 






151 


until the sides of the tongue groove are firmly 
pressed against the palate just inside the molars. 

In its final position, the tip of the tongB should 
always rest firmly against the alseoli or gum ridge. 

Repeat this exercise frequently or until the 
tongue groove can be made easily and "felt" and 
considerable upward pressure exerted without cramp 
or fatigue. 

Drill II . Suction Drill: 

(a) Hold the tongue against the roof of the 
mouth in the position described in Drill I. 

(b) Now create a suction with the brea.th so as 
to cause the entire upper surface of the tongue to 
cleave to the hard palate without moving the tongue 
and without making any sound. 

(c) Release suddenly. (A clicking sound will 
result) 

A slow and intense pressure of the tongue during 
the exercise will greatly strengthen the muscles 
supporting this position. 

Drill III . Breath Compression: 

(a) Repeat (a) in Drill II. 

(b) Now try to sense an air groove between the 
upper surface of the tongue and the roof of the mouth 
and fill this groove with breath without allowing any 

































* 

1 

/ . '• - 

. 

' 

. 

■ ; - 0 • :to .t 'o r :-o $ c . . :■ '' >, 













152 


of it to escape. 

(c) Gradually increase the amount of breath in 
this hollow or groove until the pressure is just at the 
point of bursting out past the resistance of the 
edges of the tongue. But stop as soon as the strain¬ 
ing point is reached and do not allow any breath to 
escape. Keep the jaws open and relaxed during the 
exercise. 

Drill IV . T release: While employing the technique 
described in the breath compression of Drill III, 
gradually increase the upward pressure of the tongue 
and at the moment of greatest tension suddenly release 
a short puff of breath on a whispered T sound. Care¬ 
fully observe the tip-gums contact until the moment 
of release, and do not allow the sides of the tongue 
to move from their position against the palate during 
breath emission. Wow practise sneezing with the T 
release. 

Drill V . ,f S” enunciation: Practise reading lists of 
words and sentences containing s. sounds. (See pages 87 
and 88* Produce the t release according to the tech¬ 
nique described in Drill IV whenever an s. occurs. 

Thus a synthetic short sibilant quality will be sub¬ 
stituted for a sustained finished s. effect. This 
synthetic stage will last until the muscles involved 














{. ■ ' 





; 


I 


" 









- 155 - 


in the act of sibilation become strengthened, and 
the ear grows accustomed to a sharpened, hissing 
quality. Following this drill, reading may be con¬ 
tinued with the t_ release substitution described 
above, except that the t attack now may be placed 
mentally before each _s without audibly sounding the 
t. The sustained hiss or £ part of this exercise will 
be sounded clearly. 

Drill VI . 

(a) Hold the palm of the hand two inches in 
front of the lips. 

(b) Store the breath in the cheeks with a 
tightly closed mouth and with gradually increasing 
pressure. 

(c) Release the breath suddenly on a whispered 
sound of jd. Do not part the lips when emitting the jd 
sound but force the breath between tightly compressed 
lips. 

(d) Repeat this action, this time holding the 
mouth open and using the tongue as a check valve for 
the breath stteam in place of the lips. Now release 
the compressed breath on the whispered sound of t, 
while the sides of the tongue remain firmly pressed 
against the roof of the mouth. Do not flap the tongue. 











154 


Try to feel the breath pressure against the palm of 
the hand when the t sound is released. 

Repeat this drill often or until the control 
of forward breath release has become a thoroughly 
familiar process. The alternation of £and t sounds 
should be practised for several minutes as a warming 
up exercise before attempting any of the prescribed 
_s enunciations. 

The Low S : The 11 ^.ow js ,T is one of the most common 
forms of sigmatism and is a peculiarity of the speech 
of foreigners who are learning to speak English. 

The defect occurs when the tip of the tongue is 
lowered to the incisor teeth or to the lower teeth. 
When the low s, is made, the result is a blurred sound 
instead of the customary distinct hissing sound. The 
problem of correcting a low s, is mainly one of 
correcting a low tongue position. 

Exercise for Correcting the Low S : Read the follow¬ 
ing lists of words. Make certain that the tongue 
is adjusted. Use a mirror. 


Words 

with Final ts 

Words with Medial ts. 

hats 

lights 

itself 

hotsy-totsy 

boats 

sets 

draughtsman 

Pittsburgh 

cats 

lots 

boatsman 

jetsam 

teats 

eats 

Trotsky 

flotsam 

beets 

dates 

footsore 

Matsy 

hets 

pats 

Vifatson 

whatsoever 

bites 


Kitson 













1 . 














V' 










155 


Word Combinations with t and s. 


wet streets 
hot stove 
might slip 
not so 
heat some 
fight sanely 
hot soup 


let ! s see 
fat sparrow 
light sandal 
hat store 
net shipped 
what city 


Drill VII ; Read aloud the following sentences. Use 


a mirror and emphasize the correct production of _s. 


1. Abundance consists not alone in material possess¬ 
ion but in uncovetous spirit. - Seldon 


2. A mother 1 s love, in a degree, sanctifies the 

most worthless offspring. - Ballou. 

3• I have not so great 3 , struggle with my vices, 
great and numerous as they are, as I have with 
my impatience. - Calvin. 

4. Abstinence is the surety of temperance. 

- Plato. 


5. 0 brave poetsl Keep back nothing, nor mix 

falsehood with the whole; speak the truth in 
worthy song from earnest soul; hold truest truth 
in fairest beauty. - Elizabeth Barrett. 

6 . The sun never sets on the immense Empire of 

Charles V. - Scott. 

7. The silent countenance often speaks. - Ovid. 

8 . Consider in silence whatever anyone says: speech 
both conceals and reveals the inner soul of man. 

- Cato. 


9. Patience is a necessary ingredient of genius. 

- Emerson. 


10 . 


Or sweetest Shakespeare, Fancy 1 s child. 

- Milton. 

































: 


































. 


* 






' 










. , 

j ::i • ■ s or: ..... ; .. 


















156 - 


II• Vowel Problems .- All vowel distortions are 
traceable to a lack of ear training. For the correct¬ 
ion of foreign accent it is advisable for the student 
to identify first and memorize, with the aid of the 
instructor, the hearing or sounding effect of certain 
key words, each containing a typical English vowel, and 
then to study the pronunciation of familiar words with 
reference to the key-sound vowels thus memorized. 

This is largely a vocabulary practice and serves the 
triple purpose of training the ear, of improving 
articulation, and of extending one’s familiarity with 
new words and phrases. 

III. Intonation .- Tone patterns are elements 
in speech which add meaning and mood to words. Tone 
patterns help to stimulate in the listener an emotional 
and intellectual response. A tone pattern cannot be 
learned until a keen and critical sense of hearing is 
developed. 

The student with a foreign accent is reminded 
that listening to good conversational English and 
participating in it are most essential. Phonograph 
records of model speech, radio lectures and announce¬ 
ments, and intensive study of the Phonetic alphabet, 
with frequent practice in transcribing spoken English 
are recommended as excellent devices to supplement the 






157 


drills. 

Consonant production is principally based upon 
tongue habits, while vowel production is based upon 
ear or hearing habits. Tone patterns are a result of 
habits of meaning comprehension. The mastery of these 
three sets of habits provides a correction for foreign 
accent. 

Correction of Foreign Accent 

When dealing with foreign accent, a diagnosis 
to discover errors in production of sounds should be 
made as with other speech defects. When the teacher 
has discovered the difficulties, he should proceed 
to eliminate them one at a time. 

The first step in the correction of foreign 
accent is to establish correct auditory verbal images 
of the vowel sounds. The teacher should repeat, 
several times, and very distinctly, the vowel sound to 
be taught. When the student thinks that he has heard 
it correctly, let him produce it once. Then the 
teacher should pronounce it again and the student 
repeat. Continue this until the student can produce 
the vowel without assistance. 

When the vowel has been taught, combine it with 
the consonants with which the foreigner has little 
difficulty, as for example, m, b, £. Then build up 
















- 158 - 


simple words around these consonants. The eliminat¬ 
ion of foreign accent is principally a correction of 
the articulation of the individual sounds rather than 


the pronunciation of the entire word. 

Testing for Foreign Articulation of the English Sounds . 

Have the students pronounce the words that 
exemplify the vowel sounds in the following list. 


The vowels that cause a foreigner most difficulty are 


a, o, jL, a, e_ y u, oo, ow 
arm. 

a (ah) as in arm 
a as in late 
e as in me 
a(aw) as in all 
o as in no 
oo as in noon 
i(ahee)as in night 
u(eeoo)as in mute 
a as in cat 
e as in pet 
u(00) as in rude 
u as in pull 


(as in cow), a (ah) as in 


i 

as 

in mit 

0 

as 

in not 

u 

as 

in up 

a 

as 

in what 

e 

as 

in there 

e (withr) 

as 

in her 

oo 

as 

in good 

ou(ah oo) 

as 

in South 

ow(ah oo) 

as 

in cow 

oi(ow ee) 

as 

in oil 

y 

as 

in fly 

y 

as 

in nymph 


The following are some of the consonants with 


which the foreigner has difficulty. 

1. Substitution of v or f for w and the reverse. The 
difficulty here lies in the literal translation. When 
teaching the production of v or Jf, the student should 
bite the outer surface of his lower lip, and when 
producing w his lips should be pushed forward into a 


pucker. 














159 


2. Substitution of sh for as shpelling for spelling. 
Here again the fault is due to a wrong position of the 
speech organs. The lips should be pushed forward in an 
exaggerated manner for the sh and drawn back for the s. 

5. Substitution of d or t for th, as dis for this: 
in this case the kinaesthetic impression is weak. 
Protruding the tip of the tongue between the teeth 
and biting it lightly while producing th will make a 
deeper and more kinaesthetic impression. 

4. Substitution of m for w, as mit for withr The 
lips should protrude and the sound should come through 
the mouth and not through the nose. Holding the nose 
when producing this sound will aid materially. 

5. Substitution of z, for th (Latin races), as zee for 
the. Protruding the tongue between the teeth when 
producing th will correct this error. 

6. Such words as sing and ring are often pronounced 
singk and ringt. This is caused by a relaxing of the 
rear muscles of the tongue before the ng sound is com¬ 
pleted. The use of the mirror aids in the correct 
production of ng . 

7. Omission of h is another common error. The easiest 
way to correct this bad habit is to tell the student to 
blow uut his vov/el sounds; for instance, first produce 









•••• " ■■' " 

. 
























- - 














. ■ ' ; 

























160 


a, then blow it out and you get ha. Then take 
combination as ave, blow it out and you get have. 

Many other errors are found in consonant product¬ 
ion, but if definite positions for all sounds (as 
given in the lessons throughout this thesis) are 
taught and a systematic effort to improve is made, 
the difficulties can be overcome. 

The Z Substitution ; 

A less frequent defect of _s articulation that 
occurs in the speech of some foreigners is the sub¬ 
stitution of z for js. In this case the vocal bands 
are vibrated during the production of js and a z 
results. The correction of this difficulty is 
relatively easy. The correct placement of the lips 
and tongue for the production of z is to make the 
front teeth almost meet. Hold the tip of the tongue 
up just behind the upper front teeth without touching 
the palate. Use the voice and make a buzzing noise. 

Do this and you will produce the sound z. Then 
explain thecorrect production of js. Instead of using 
the voice with the above mouth formation, use a soft 
hissing sound and the sound s. will be produced. Then 
practise phonetic exercises given below in articulating 
and differentiating z and s. sounds. 

























161 


Drill I: 


Initial z 


Medial z 


Final z 


czar 

zoo 

zone 

zero 

zest 

zebra 

zip 


razor 

prizes 

muzzle 

dazzle 

ozone 

museum 

result 

lazy 


maze 

blaze 

phase 

daze 

prize 

gaze 

cries 

phrase 

trees 

graze 


zigzag 

Zanzibar 

zeal 


greasy 

Ezra 


Since the correct hearing of the sound is the 
fundamental basis of all speech training, exercises 
for ear-training form an important part of each 
lesson. It is natural that if the foreigner 1 s own 
language contains a sound which is similar to an 
English sound, that he will substitute that old sound 
in speaking the new language. Here is a list of the 
commonest mispronunciations of sounds due to the 
influence of a non-English mother tongue. 

Italians and Spaniards frequently change: 

pul for pool 

bort for bought 

hat for hot 

tait for tight 

tri for three 

norz for nose 

rorz for rose 

paip for pipe 

Germanic peoples are apt to change: 

tin for thin 

dat for that 

wo uz for rose 
















: J. 


: .. 



162 


pid for bead 

vaz for was 

wanderful for wonderful 

French people are apt to change: 

min for mean 
pul for pool 
mert for met 
had for hard 
boed for bird 
kerik for cake 

Practice Word List for Foreign Students: Practise 


these lists first vertically and then horizonatlly 


in pairs. 




a. 

b. 

c* 

d. 

merry 

marry 

tough 

thought 

three 

tree 

deaf 

leaf 

finger 

singer 

tent 

dent 

wit 

with 

red 

rose 

cats 

dogs 

single 

longer 

sheep 

ship 

singe 

crinkle 

bit 

but 

tomato 

potato 

bird 

bud 

banquet 

bouquet 

come 

calm 

low 

bow 

thick 

this 

route 

rout 

world 

worth 

question 

vacation 

foot 

put 

house 

mice 

boot 

hoof 

didn T t 

crush 

though 

through. 

because 

granite 

bough 

cough 

order 

mountain 


Stress, Inflection and Pause Mannerisms: 

Drill I : Read the following lists of words, stressing 
the indicated syllables by increasing the vocal force 
to about twice normal. Start each word on a high 
pitch level and sharply drop the pitch downward after 
each syllable in this list. Avoid double (upward 

























165 


and downward, or vice versa) inflections on any 
one syllable. 

In each case stress falls on the vowel part of 
the syllable. Consult the dictionary when necessary. 
Words with First Syllable Stressed 


final 

.jovial 

ecz ema 

champ ion 

form idable 

advert 

lit erary 

pos itively 

fav orite 

excellent 


antiquated 

tri umph 

con ference 

attribute 

comp liment 

jocund 

bron chial 

opposite 

requisite 

rea sonable 


indicate 

gon dola 

comb atant 

ancestors 

armistice 

relative 

work ing 

jocular 

rep utable 

explicable 


drown ing 

applicable 

chattle 

pain fully 

admiral 

cemetary 

industry 

grie vous 

helpf ul 

the atre 


Drill II : Read the second syllable of each word in a 


higher pitch level than the other syllables. 


Words with the Second Syllable Stressed 


umbrella 

affianced 

prerequisite 

alarmed 

defeat 

superb 

museum 

resources 

robust 

nocturnal 

address 

municipal 

transact 

curator 

horizon 

hotel 

idea 

eject 

annihilate 

cement 

pretense 

research 

biology 

professor 

reverse 

executive 

finance 

autumnal 

condolence 

paternal 

maternal 

polygamy 

estate 

acoustic 

technique 

provincial 

romance 

amenity 

profound 

scenario 

Drill III: 

Use a prominent 

and contrasting pitch ley 


for each third syllable, i.e. stress the vowel sound 
in each third syllable in the following list: 































































164 


Words with the Third Syllable Stressed. 


engi neer 

singularity 

parsi mon ious 


sacr ileg ious 

esoteric 


scientific 


philo soph ical 

repro duc tion 


problematical 

simi lar ity 


reputation 

acri mon ious 

disobedient 


congregation 

manufacture 

masquerader 

demarcation 


eco hom ical 

anti quar ian 


insta ntan eous 

inurbanity 


multitudinous 


efficacious 
super flu ity 


Drill IV : Stress plays an important part in making 
the meaning of a sentence or expression clear. The 
meaning of the following questions is not wholly 
clear unless a major stress is placed on each of the 
indicated syllables. The stress is applied by 
suddenly changing the pitch (either higher or lower) 
or force (i.e. greater or less) of voice, or both 
pitch and force, on each underlined syllable. Note 
that stress especially affects the vowel in each 
syllable. 

Read aloud the following variants of the 
question, applying exaggerated stress to the under¬ 
lined syllable: 

1. Are you going to ride to the country to-day? No 

2. Are you going to ride to the country today? (No 
my sister is.) 

3. Are you going to ride to the country to-day? (no 
(I ! m going to walk J 

4. Are you going to ride to the country to-day? (No 
to the city.) 

5. Are you going to ride to the country to-day ? (No 
to-morrow) 

Construct similar questions and sentences and 































165 


read them aloud. Study the effect of stress upon 
meaning. 

Practical Work. 

Mike R-, of Hungarian parentage, is twelve 

years of age and in grade III. Intelligence tests 
reveal that he is mentally backward. He has an I.Q. of 
74. His teacher says that he will not answer questions 
and is equally quiet on the playground. I learned that 
he had been teased for his poor English by the boys 
in his class. They call him a ’’bo-hunk". He is very 
sensitive about his speech condition, and has developed 
into a shy, nervous lad. He is slow to join in group 
games and has no chums. His condition is aggravated 
by the attitude of his classmates and by the fact 
that he hears English only at school. His physical 
appearance is pathetic. He has a very decided cast 
in one eye and squints with the other. His teeth are 
malformed. He is not- particular about personal 
cleanliness. He is ill-clad and undernourished. 

Having been born in the Old Country, he came to Canada 
with his parents and four siblings seven years ago. 

During the first few lessons, I talked to Mike 
about school and outside activities. He was reluctant 
to speak, answering in monosyllables. I could not 




























166 


get him interested in any topic. His reticence was 
probably due to lack of self-confidence when speaking. 

Then I gave him the test suggested on page 158 
and found that there were a number of letters which 
he could not pronounce. Some of these are: 


wh as in what 
w as in watt 
th as in thin 
r as in roar 
ng as in sung 
i as in will 
a as in bare 


The lad found difficulty in mastering these 
sounds and consequently had a tendency to replace 
them with acoustically similar sounds contained in 
his own language. Mike substituted: 


for th as in thin 
for th as in then 
for i as in will 
for a as in amid 
for ing as in sing 


t as in town 
d as in down 
e as in weal 
a as in lace 
ink as in sink 


He also substituted a uvular trill for the 
English consonant r as in roar. 

For "There is nothing wrong about it”, Mike says, 
"Der-r iss nossingk r-r-rong aybout eet." For "We 
neverhave fair weather here”, he says, "Ve nevair-r-r 
haf fer-r vedder-r her-r." For, "We will fight for 
freedom and win," he says, "Ve vill fight for-r-r 
fr-reedom aynd veen." The boy experienced great 
difficulty with the short vowels of the English 



■/, ■:. j 


- 












•i 
























b b":-. J 





167 


language. For example, he said hees for his and 
nevair-r-r for never. 

Treatment .- When Mike replaced an unfamiliar 
sound unit of English with a familiar sound unit of 
his native tongue, the problem of speech correction 
thus presented was by no means a simple one. In all 
variations of sound, I tried to make the lad conscious 
of the acoustic difference between the standard sound 
that he should produce and the defective sound that he 
did produce. The average speech defective never 
becomes conscious of his defects until he is made to 
hear them. When Mike mispronounced a sound, I asked 
him to listen critically while I produced first the 
standard then the substituted sound. I continued 
this exercise until he was able to detect a clean- 
cut acoustic distinction between the two. Trial-and- 
error drill should enable the student to achieve in 
a relatively short time the muscular control necessary 
for the production of the correct sound. If this 
drill fails to achieve results within a reasonable 
period, the following supplementary measures should 
be employed: 

1. Have the patient perform lip, tongue and palate 
exercises calculated to give these organs increased 



















: • . ' . . 








■ 


... \ ...: , 










- 











































; 

. 













168 


flexibility and greater capacity to adjust them¬ 
selves in new positions, 

2. Employ appropriate mechanical interventions. If 
the child persists in substituting t; as in town for 
th as in thin, hold the blade of his tongue forcibly 
down in its proper position by means of a wire form 
or a tooth pick. 

Before beginning remedial work on individual 
sounds, Mike practised exercises for the muscles of 
the tongue outlined on pages 82-85 . Throughout the 
eight months 1 period during which I worked with 
him, he spent the first ten minutes of each speech class 
on tongue gymnastics for the improvement of the slugg¬ 
ish tongue. 

We began a correction of the vowel sounds first. 

1. He substituted jee for i, and said: 

eet for it 
beek for big 
seet for sit 
seek for sick 

(a) I explained that the difference between the 
two sounds is that when producing e, (me), you direct 
and press your tongue up close to the hard palate in 
a tensed condition while for i, (it), the front of 
your tongue is directed toward the front of the 
mouth in a relaxed condition. 





169 


(b) To make i, (it),raise your tongue high, dir¬ 
ecting the front of it towards the front of your 
mouth, hold your tongue in that position while using 
your voice. I said the two sounds many times for 
him so that the correct auditory imagery for the 
sound i could be learned. Then he pronounced the two 
sounds, using a mirror. 

(c) He repeated the following syllables, noting 
the change of the position of the tongue on each 
syllable. 


eed 

- id 

een 

in 

eef 

- if 

eep 

- ip 

eeg 

- ig 

ees 

- is 

eek 

- ik 

eet 

it 

eel 

- il 

eev 

iv 

eem 

- im 

eez 

iz 


(d) Next he repeated the following words after me; 
then he read them aloud: 


lid 

lift 

big 

sick 

bit 

bill 

will 

limb 

ill 

win 

tip 

whip 

live 

fit 

sit 

lit 

sin 

river 

lip 

stick 

Then I 

made up simple 

sentences 

using th< 


in the lists and asked him to repeat them. Three 
speech lessons were required before Mike was able to 
pronounce j. and. say simple words containing the letter. 
Less time is necessary for a normal pupil. 

















- 170 


2. He substituted a as in cat for e, as in men, and 

said lat for let 

tan for ten 
pan for pen 

(a) The difference between these sounds is that 
when you produce a (fat), the tip of the tongue rests 
against the lower gums, while for e, (met), the tip of 
the tongue is higher, more in the middle position. 
Open the mouth wide and use a mirror to distinguish 
between the two positions. 

(b) To make _e(met), raise your tongue slightly 
in your mouth so that the front of it is directed 
frontwards, then hold your tongue partly relaxed in 
that position while you use your voice. 

(c) Repeat the following syllables: 


ad - 

ed 

ak - 

ek 

an - en 

at - et 

af - 

ef 

al - 

el 

ap - ep 

av - ev 

ag - 

eg 

am - 

em 

as - es 

az - ez 


(d) Repeat the following words, making sure that 
the tip of the tongue is in mid-position when pro¬ 
ducing the e: 


led 

left 

let 

neck 

tell 

empty 

dent 

fence 

slept 

best 

dress 

less 

nest 

wet 

well 

step 

egg 

beg 

went 

red 












■ 






r-) 


. . . - • . 

. 







171 


3. He substituted a as in fate for e. as in let. 

He said nevair-r-r for never 

inair-r-r y for merry 
hair-r-r-r for her 

(a) The difference between £ (met), and a (fate) 
is that when producing js, your tongue is relaxed and 
raised slightly in your mouth, while for a your tongue 
is held rigid and raised midway in your mouth. 

(b) To make _e (met) , raise your tongue slightly 
in your mouth, so that the front of it is directed 
frontwards, then hold your tongue partly relaxed in 
that position while using your voice. 

(c) Repeat the following syllables, being careful 
to note the change in the position of the tongue 

on each syllable. 


ed 

- ade 

ek 

- ake 

en 

- ane 

et 

- ate 

ef 

— af e 

el 

- ale 

ep 

- ape 

ev 

- ave 

eg 

- age 

am 

- ame 

es 

- ase 

ez 

- aze 


(d) Repeat the list of words for je (men) at the 
bottom of page 170 . 

4, He substituted e as in me for y or i as in it. 

He said faree for very 

anee for any 
peetee for pity 

(a) The difference between these two sounds lies 
in the fact that when producing e. (me), your tongue is 
held rigidly and pressed close to the palate and the 
lips wide, while for i (it) the tongue is held relaxed 










- 172 - 


and is directed toward the front of your mouth* 

(b) To make _i (it), raise your tongue high, 
directing the front of it towards the front of your 
mouth, hold your tongue relaxed in that position 
while using your voice. 

(c) Repeat the following syllables, being careful 
to change the position of the tongue and lips on 
each syllable: 


ed - 

id 

ek - 

ik 

en - in 

et - 

it 

ef - 

if 

el - 

il 

ep - ip 

ev - 

iv 

eg - 

ig 

em - 

im 

es - is 

ez - 

iz 


(d) Repeat the following words, being careful not 

to stress the final letter y: 

hurry fairy lily hilly 

worry mercy very every 

lively truly merry celery 

blowy glassy gaily fully 

empty breezy pretty pity 

5* He substituted o as in cot for u as in us. He 

said: op for up 

cot for cut 

shot for shut 

(a) The difference between these two sounds is 
that when you produce o, (not) your tongue is raised 
midway in the mouth, the back of it being raised to¬ 
ward the roof of the mouth with the lips slightly 
rounded, while for u (cup) the tongue is also raised 
midway in the mouth, but the back of it is raised only 
partially backwards and the lips are slightly wide. 










173 


(b) To make u (cup) raise your tongue midway in 
your mouth so that the back of it is just partly 
raised towards the roof, not extending fully back 
but allowing the point to touch the lower gum, then 
hold it relaxed and the lips slightly wide while 
using your voice. This will produce u. 

(c) Repeat the following syllables. Note the 
position of the tongue and lips when saying each 
syllable: 


od ~ ud 

ok - uk 

on - 

unm 

ot - ut 

of - uf 

ol - ul 

op - 

up 

ov - uv 

Og - ug 

om - urn 

os - 

us 

oz - uz 

(d) Repeat 

. the following words. Make sure 

that the back 

of the tongue is raised 

halfback, allow- 

ing the point 

to touch the 

lower 

gums 

and the lips 

slightly wide 

when producing the 

u: 


mud 

cuff 

mug 


duck 

dull 

sun 

sum 


cup 

must 

but 

buzz 


brush 

bluff 

blunt 

crust 


fund 

cut 

shut 

pump 


cunning 


We then began remedial work on the Consonants, 
which Mike mispronounced. 

6. He substituted v for w. He said: 


vail for well 
vide for wide 
veesh for wish 




' 




174 


(a) The difference between these tv/o sounds is 
that when you produce v, the lower lip is under the 
upper teeth, while for w the lips are rounded as if 
about to whistle. 

(b) To make w, purse or round your lips as if about 
to whistle, then send out your voice while forcibly 
separating your lips. Mike still was unable to make 
the proper sound, so I asked him to blow out his 
breath as if he were trying to cool something, and 
then to use his voice at the same time. The sound 

he obtained was w. 

(c) Repeat the following syllables, being careful 
to note the change of the position of your lips on 
each syllable: 

va - wa vo - wo voy - woy 

ve - we voo -woo vair - wair 

vi - wi vaw -waw vow - wow 

(d) Repeat the following words, making sure to 

round the lips when producing the consonant w: 


was 

wear 

wide 

winter 

wall 

wise 

wish 

wadding 

wade 

went 

will 

wife 

water 

west 

work 

woman 

worse 

well 

wind 

want 












175 


7. He substituted t for d. He said: 

dit for did 
colt for cold 
dattee for daddy 

(a) The difference between these two sounds is 
that when you produce d you use your voice, w^iile for 
t only the breath is used. 

(b) To make d place the tip of your tongue against 
the upper gum behind the front teeth, then suddenly 
drop it and use your voice. Mike was not able to 
make the correct sound, so I asked him to put the tip 
of his tongue on his upper lip, and with a tooth pick 
I pushed the tongue up into the mouth, so that the 
tip rested on the gum tight behind the upper front 
teeth, and then asked him to drop his tongue suddenly 
and to use his voice at the same time. The sound d 
was then made. 


(c) 

Repeat 

the 

following 

syllables: 

da - 

ta 

do 

- to 

doy - toy 

de - 

te 

doo 

- too 

dair- tair 

di - 

ti 

daw 

- taw 

dow - tow 


(d) Repeat the following words: 

fed cold Fred 

red did said 

led shed bed 

dread sled speed 




. ." '■ : 


: - ■ 


. 






. 








- 






















. 


















. 









■ :• ■ 

,r-. 










- 176 


8. He added a trill to the r. He said: 

r-r-r-rabbit 

ver-r-r-ry 

r-r-oar-r-r-r 

(a) To make jr, direct the tip of your tongue 
upwards to the upper gum behind the front teeth but 
do not touch the palate. Hold the position while 
using your breath. You will then say r. 

(b) Repeat the following words, being careful 
not to roll or trill the r: 


ribbon 

arrow 

read 

Irish 

robber 

sorrow 

rare 

curry 

rabbit 

mirror 

romp 

story 

rare 

marry 

rude 

Harry 

rice 

merry 

root 

furry 

ride 

Jerry 

rude 

err 

room 

carry 

rubber 

arrest 

round 

worry 

radish 

furry 


(c) Other suitable practice lists may be found on 

page 96 and page 117, and simple sentences containing 

the r sound are given on pages 97 and 117 

9. He added k or g to ng. He said: 

nossingk for nothing 
swingk for swing 
songg for song 

(a) To make ng, press the back of the tongue up 
against the palate and hold it there while sending your 
voice through your nose. 

(b) Repeat the following words, making sure that 
you hold your tongue in position (not dropping it), 






. 











178 - 


until all sound has ceased for ng : 


bring 

thing 

swinging 

flinging 

sung 

sing 

morning 

running 

bang 

ring 

ringing 

singing 

string 

hang 

bringing 

writing 

song 

swing 

banging 

winging 


10, He substituted f for v, saying: 

fife for five 

fer-r-ry for very 
haf for have 

(a) The difference in these two sounds is that 
f is a breath sound, while v is a voiced sound. 

(b) To make v place your lower lip against the edge 
of your upper front teeth, then send out your voice 
softly over your lip. Mike still could not make the 
proper v sound so I asked him to bite the middle of 
his lower lip, easy not too hard, and then to send his 
voice out over his lip. He felt the vibrations of 

his voice on his lower lip and made the sound v. 

(c) He repeated the following syllables, and noted 
the change from the breath to the,voice on each 
syllable: 

fa - va fo - vo foy - voy 

fe - ve foo- voo fair- vair 

fi - vi faw- vaw fow - vow 

(d) Repeat the following words, making sure to 
use the voice when producing the consonant v: 





179 


very 

vest 

vine 

vote 

vale 

vile 

volt 

velvet 

vamp 

vim 

vapor 

vinegar 

van 

vent 

vast 

valley 

vice 

valve 

visit 

vigor 


11. He substituted d for th. He said: 

dis for this 
wid for with 
dot for that 

(a) The difference between these two sounds lies 
in the fact that when producing d the tip of the 
tongue is against the upper gum behind the upper front 
teeth, while for th the tip of the tongue is slightly 
against the edge of the upper teeth. 

(b) To make th place the tip of your tongue 
slightly against the edge of your upper teeth, and 
while holding that position send out your voice. 

Mike found the production of th easier when I held a 
toothpick in front of his lips. He touched it with 
his tongue while he sent out his voice. 

(c) Repeat the following syllables: 

da - tha do - tho doy - thoy 

de - the doo - thoo dair - thair 

di - thi daw - thaw dow - thow 

(d) Repeat the following words, making sure to place 

the tip of the tongue slightly against the edge of the 

upper teeth Y/hen producing the consonant th : 












180 


this 

the 

thus 

with 

that 

them 

thine 

bathe 

these 

there 

though 

feather 

those 

then 

thy 

leather 

they 

than 

breathe 

clothe 


(e) Practise the lists of words suggested on page 
92 and at the bottom of page 112 

In the preceding eleven major substitution 
exercises upon which we drilled, Mike used a mirror 
to get the correct positions of mouth, lips and tongue 
in the production of the new sounds. I repeated many 
times the old and the new sound in each substitution 
exercise, so that he could form a correct auditory 
image of the new sound. Vowels, especially, should be 
taught through the auditory sense. I found a tooth 
pick of invaluable aid in the formation of difficult 
sounds. After Mike had practised the syllables and 
words I wrote a number of simple sentences on the black¬ 
board, using the words in the (d) part of each exercise. 
He underlined the sound which he had formerly mis¬ 
pronounced* Then he studied the sentences, and read 
them aloud before we proceeded to the next large 
division of the remedial work. 

I felt during the year that Mike progressed slowly. 
Often I could scarcely notice improvement from day to 
day, even though I reviewed the last day ! s lesson at 
the beginning of each speech period. Speech correction 





181 


is a slow laborious process under the most ideal 
circumstances. The teacher must be patient and 
sympathetic. Progress was especially slow in Mike f s 
case because his mental ability was much below 
average. He disliked school and had no interest 
in improving his spoken language. 




182 - 


MINOR SPEECH DEFECTS 

(iii) MUFFLED OR INDISTINCT SPEECH 
Causes 

Indistinct speech may be caused by an organic 
abnormality such as cleft palate or tongue tie. If 
this be the case, consult a physician. A simple 
operation will remedy the cause of the difficulty. 

If there is nothing wrong with the formation of the 
tongue, lips or teeth, this indistinctness is 
probably caused by sluggish action of the articulat¬ 
ory organs. Perhaps the upper lip remains immobile 
throughout the entire speech. Maybe tha patient is 
not relaxing his tongue tip enough to produce the 
proper articulations of the organs. Some people try 
to speak through clenched teeth or a rigid jaw. If 
the person is not suffering from an organic disability 
then he can proceed to remedy his speech defect 
by means of simple exercises. 

Exercises for Relieving Tension. 

1. Drop your head forward on your chest. Let it 
hang until it seems to pull the body down with its 
own weight. Dangle the arms loosely. Without bending 
your knees, allow your head to descend toward the 
floor. When your relaxed fingers touch the floor with 
out the slightest stretching, resume an upright 





185 


position. Repeat this relaxation exercise several 
times. Be sure that you are slumping, not stretching 
to the floor. This is sometimes called the "rag doll" 
exercise. 

2. Lie flat on the floor - not on a couch or bed. 
Place your arms at right angles to your body. Turn 
your toes upward and point them as much as possible 
toward your face. At the command "Stretch 11 given 
silently or aloud by yourself, stretch hard to the 
heels and to the tips of your middle fingers. When 
the maximum sensation of stretching is reached, give 
yourself the command "Relax". Lie quietly on the 
floor for a moment. Imagine that you are sinking 
through the floor, through the basement, through the 
earth. The ability to free the body from tension 

is a valuable asset to any speaker. 

3. Let your head fall forward on your chest, allowing 
it to pull itself down by its own weight, rather 
than by effort. Rotate it, as if it were "a cannon 
ball on a thread", dropping it over the right shoulder, 
back, left, shoulder and front. After several silent 
rollings, say sleepily as you rotate it, "easy-ah, 
lazy-ah", dropping the jaw on each ah sound. 





- 


. l •- : ' ' iS i * 

■ 

. 

. 

' 

; . " . * ' 

- ; ’ ' > 

fS . : ' 

’ 





184 


4. Do the tongue and lip exercises listed on pages 82 
and 85. When you have finished the above four 
exercises read aloud, taking pains to pronounce each 
separate word carefully and to phrase in such a way 
that the divisions of the thought are spaced properly. 

This combined attack upon the sluggish or rigid 
mechanism, and the added practice in phrasing should 
clear up the patient*s speech and give it the necess¬ 
ary crispness. The combinations of sounds which are 
most difficult for the individual should receive 
special attention. The list of words given below 
require careful articulation. Ask the student to try 
them alone and in sentences to test the ability to use 
the speech mechanism skillfully. 

Drill for Cari.ess Speakers. 

1. acts recognizes 

respects fifths 

complexities twentieths 

irrevocable thousandths 

incomprehensible sequestered 

2. The wind blow r eth where it listeth. 

5. Juliet: How art thou out of breath when thou hast 

breath 

To say to me that thou art out of breath? 

The excuse that thou dost make in this delay 
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse. 

Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that: 

Say either and I T 11 stay the circumstance. 


ignominious 

indefatigable 

incomprehensible 

idiosyncrasies 









■ 


, 



i'.Tj- 
































185 


Exercises for Careless Speakers. 

1. These be times that try men’s souls. 

2. Self-activity is an essential in the cultivation 
of personality. 

3. The fifth, sixth, and eighth rows may pass to the 
blackboard. 

4. A unit may be divided into tenths, hundredths, and 
thousandths. 

5. Springing up, the young man hung up his hat in 
the hall. 

6. Running and jumping are healthful exercises. 

7. The younger pupils were asked to assist the 
teachers. 

8. He said he wouldn’t give five cents a hundred for 
such trash. 

9. The six bicyclists went out on the speedway to 
try for a new athletic record. 

10. The champion golf player of modern times is 
Bobby Jones. 

11. The boy acts in some respects as though he had 
lost his wits. 

12. Our primitive ancestors celebrated their victories 
with elaborate feasts. 








. 


. 








i 







CHAPTER VI 


INDIVIDUAL VOICE PROBLEMS 






186 


CHAPTER VI#. 

INDIVIDUAL VOICE PROBLEMS 
I. Aphonia 

Aphonia is a vocal disorder which makes impossibl 
the production of a clear voiced sound. It may vary 
in seriousness from a slight huskiness to a total loss 
of voice. 

The most frequent causes for this condition are 
chronic laryngitis, chronic catarrh, hysteria, chronic 
nervous or physical exhaustion or strained vocal bands. 
If an organic ailment causes the hoarseness consult a 
medical doctor. The chief cause of aphonia which is 
merely functional is faulty resonance. In order to 
have a good round carrying tone, one must have balanced 
resonance and all the resonators must function. Many 
people, through fatigue, inertia, or because their 
speech is influenced by another tongue, whose chief 
resonance is in the back of the throat, do not make 
sufficient use of the nasal and front resonance. 

In order to remedy this condition practise the 
following exercises. Pay particular attention to vigor 
and precision of action of the abdominal muscles. The 
effort must be to remove all strain from the delicate 







. - ', . ,. ■» 


















■ 

- 



r 

. 







? 0 -: .x- 1 : ■■ ■ _ 

.. ,.. ■ : x ...... ■■ . - • ■ ■■ 

. 

- 

. 

. 

. 













187 


throat muscles and to place all the work of projecting 
the voice stream upon the sturdy muscles of the dia¬ 
phragm and the abdomen. 

1. In order to discover the point of controj. 
of the breath, place your hands on the front walls of 
your body, just below the belt. Cough slightly. You 
will feel an inward pull of the muscles. 

2. Now, using this inward pull, give the 
letters in the name of your school, rather slowly, as 
if you were cheering at a game. Suppose the name of 
your school is ’’Garneau”. 

G (with an inward pull) - relax and expand in order 
to allow the bellows to fill with air. 

A (with an inward pull) - relax and expand in order 
to allow the bellows to fill with air. 

R (with an inward pull) - relax and expand in order to 
allow the bellows to fill with air. 

N (with an inward pull) - relax and expand as before. 

S (with an inward pull) - relax and expand. 

A (with an inward pull) - relax and expand. 

U (with an inward pull) - relax. 

Be sure: (l) that your throat is relaxed; (2) that your 
chest and shoulders do not move. 









188 


3. Count from one to ten In the same way, but 
smoothly, without the jerk which produced the explosive 
utterance of the school yell. 

one (with an inward pull) - expand; two (with a pull) - 
expand; etc. 

4. Count from one to five as follows: 
one (with a pull)- expand 

one, two (with a pull) - expand 

one, two, three (with a pull) - expand. 

one, two, three, four (with a pull) - expand 

one, two, three, four, five (with a single pull) - 

expand. 

5. Using the method indicated above, practise 
the vowel sounds in the following words, one at a 
time, first as directed in (a) and then as directed 
in (b) . 

(a) Whisper each sound, holding it for a count of 
four, still holding your hand a little below the belt. 
Note this time the more gradual inward pull of the 
muscles. 

(b) Repeat exercise (a) using voice instead of a 


whisper. 










189 


ale 

ice 

view 

at 

it 

fur 

arm 

old 

up 

all 

hot 

now 

meet 

too 

oil 

met 

took 



6, Practise the following exercise, beginning 
each time with a hum through slightly parted lips: 

(a) MMMMMM-ah, MMMMMM-ei, MMMMMM-eeeee, MMMMMM-aw, 
MMMMMM-oo. 

(b) Nah Nei Mee Maw Moo 

(c) MMMah ei ee aw oo 

(d) ahMMM eiMMMM eeMMM awMMM ooMMMM 

(e) See-saw see-saw see-saw 


Sing 

ring 

sing 

ring 

ah 

Sing 

ring 

sing 

ring 

ei 

Sing 

ring 

sing 

ring 

ee 


7. Practise the exercises for relaxation 
given on pages 45-49, and 182-183 . Do the following 
exercises for resonance. 

(a) Relax the throat. See page 49 . 

(b) Hum: mmmm rnmirnn mmmm 

(c) Practise the following exercise very rapidly, 
dropping the jaw each time on the final ah: 

many-any many-any many-any many-any-ahhhhh. 

(d) Hum: nnnn nnnn nnnn 















' ' . 




■ 





00 






J 




j 















■ 









- 


* 


































190 


(e) Hold the n for a count of three in each of 

the following words: 

twenty seventy ninety 

twenty seventy ninety 

twenty seventy ninety 

(f) Hum: ng ng ng ng ng ng ng ng ng ng ng ng 
(There is no g. in this sound). 

(g) Dwell on the ng : 

ding-dong sing-song Hong-Kong 

ding-dong sing-song Hong-Kong 

(h) Again dwell on the ng : 

hung-ee 
hung-ay 
hung-oo 
hung-oh 
hung-ah 












191 


2. Nasality 

Nasality, a nasal intonation, is an abnormal 
voice condition which many people have. This tonal 
defect is due to disturbances in the vocal vibrations 
which pass from the oral to the nasal cavity, chang¬ 
ing non-nasal sounds into nasal sounds, the nose 
being open when it should be closed, or vice versa, 
being closed when it should be open. 

During normal breathing the soft palate hangs 
loosely so that there is a communication between the 
nasal cavity and the mouth cavity. When the mouth 
is closed the soft palate, which is held somewhat 
tense, is swayed by the respiratory currents in a 
passive manner. For all sounds except m, n, ng, the 
soft palate moves upward, almost closing off the mouth 
cavity from the nasal cavity. If for any reason there 
is an interference with this normal function, the 
result is a nasal intonation. 

Nasality may be due to cleft palate or to injuries 
following the removal of tonsils and adenoids or to 
tuberculosis, tonsilitis, syphilis or tumors. Nasality 
causes the voice to become flat and dull. Sometimes it 
causes a change in speech which makes enunciation 
indistinct. 

















- 


' 




- 


, 

. 

■ 

. 






192 


No progress in the elimination of nasality can 
be made until the patient*s musical sense has been 
developed to such a degree that he realizes the 
difference between nasal and non-nasal intonation. 

If there is no organic reason for the overabundance 
of nasal resonance the teacher should give a series 
of exercises to prevent blocking the passage to the 
oral cavity. 

If the soft palate is lowered during vocalization, 
the following exercises may be found helpful: 

1. Take a small mirror in your right hand and 
stand with your back to the light so that the light 
is reflected in the mirror. Shine this light into 
your open mouth. You will see a little red tag of 
flesh at the end of the roof of your mouth, hanging in 
front of your throat opening. This tag is called 
the uvula and it is used as an indicator to tell how 
the soft palate is acting. Take a short quick breath 
through your mouth trying to have the stream of air hit 
the roof of your mouth in front of the uvula. Do 
you notice that, as you breathe in, the uvula vanishes 
upward and the whole soft palate is raised? Do this 
several times until you have become familiar with the 
motions of the uvula. 







- 193 


2 . Now begin to pant rhythmically, taking 
care that the air stream hits the middle of the roof 
of the mouth. Watch the action of the uvula throughout 
the exercise. Begin with a count of four and go up 
gradually to eight. Be very careful not to tire the 
muscles of the throat and palate while doing this 
exercise. 

3. Now, without taking the quick breath through 
the mouth, try to make the uvula disappear and the 
soft palate rise. You will probably find this quite 
difficult at first, but you can conquer if you are 
patient. When you are able to raise and lower the 
soft palate at will, then practise doing it rhythmic¬ 
ally to a count of four. Be very careful not to 
prolong the exercise to the point of fatigue. 

4. While you are gaining control of your soft 
palate, you should also be training your hearing so 
that you can distinguish clearly between a good balanced 
tone and an -unpleasant nasal one. While practising 

the vowel sounds try to hear the difference between 
the correct quality and your usual one. At the same 
time watch the action of the soft palate in the mirror 
and try to keep it high. It sometimes makes it easier 
to distinguish the right sound from the wrong one if 




. 




- 






. 

• 






. 

. 









, 






194 


you can consciously do first the right one, then the 
wrong one, then the right one again and note not 
only the difference in sound but also the difference 
in the action of the soft palate. 

5. The ear-training should be continued faith¬ 
fully. You should try lists of separate words first, 
then put the ?/ords in sentences and practise saying 
the sentences aloud. 

6. If you find great difficulty in relaxing 
the lower jaw sufficiently to open a wide passage 
into the mouth, the best relaxation exercise is to 
yawn. Practise this in your mirror, noting the action 
of the soft palate and the throat muscles. When you 
are able to yawn at will, then practise relaxing the 
throat without yawning. 










- 1S6' - 


3. High Pitch 

There is nothing more distressing or embarrass¬ 
ing than a shrill, high-pitched woman 1 s voice, or a 
falsetto voice in an adult male. An abnormally high 
pitch is a real vocal defect. If the pitch of one's 
voice is so high that it calls attention ot itself; 
if people are constantly thinking you younger than 
you are, then you should learn to lower the pitch 
a tone or two. 

A falsetto voice suggests a lack of muscular 
control, besides a disturbed balance in the respirat¬ 
ory tract. Of all the vocal anomalies the persistent 
falsetto is the one most frequently observed. 

When treating these cases a number of factors 
should be given consideration. The general physical 
condition of the patient should be improved. A tonic 
for the nervous system is indicated. The treatment 
for a high voice usually does not require an extensive 
period of time. The patient*s musical sense must be 
stimulated and developed, and as soon as that is 
accomplished the rest is comparatively easy. If the 
pitch of one*s voice is higher than E above middle C, 
one should plan to take it down a little. Use a 
piano if possible. Begin by training yourself so that 
you are conscious of exactly what tone you are 









196 


beginning on. Experiment on the piano to find the 
note. Then every day, practise intoning or chanting 
nursery rhymes, poems, and conversation on the tones 
and half-tones between middle C and E. When you 
have a certain tone well 11 in your ear 11 , try beginning 
a sentence with that tone and then check yourself 
on the piano to see whether or not you were able to 
strike the right pitch. By patient practice every 
day, and a conscious effort to keep the pitch low, 
and the tone free, most cases of high pitch can be 
corrected. 





CHAPTER VII 


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 









197 


CHAPTER VII 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 

Speech disorders are caused in various ways. 

Some may he traced to organic causes. Others have a 
psychological origin inherent in the environment of 
the home and the school, while others are due to 
incorrect habits of speech set up early in life. 

Speech defects are classified into various groups 
because treatment in each case is different. 

When those afflicted with nervous speech defects 
feel happier in their social relationships, their mental 
anxiety and concern rapidly decrease, and they become 
more interested in what they have to express and less 
conscious of their handicap. Situations which destroy 
the confidence and self-reliance of the nervous child 

bring about feelings of inadequacy. This loss of 

? 

power may cause emotional conflicts. Anything which 
disturbs the emotions is bound to disturb the voice 
and speech control. One of the first factors in the 
treatment of the nervous patient is that of relaxing. 

The speech teacher can suggest the idea of relaxation 
by her own manner; by creating little games, choral 
reading, and other quiet activities in addition to the 
relaxation exercises. 
























' 




/ 




1 c 




























198 


Children suffering from habit speech defects 
have nothing organically wrong with them requiring the 
treatment of the dentist or the physician. The basis 
of the disorder lies in faulty conditioning during the 
early formative years. The children may have imitated 
faulty speech patterns set down by their parents or they 
may have been allowed to talk "baby-talk" for years 
after it should have been discarded. Other children 
play with companions who have difficulty in enunciating 
clearly and tend to imitate them. Most children can 
overcome these habit speech defects with the assistance 
of a sympathetic speech teacher. Correction is based 
on the proper position of the lips and tongue in the 
articulation of mispronounced sounds and on a course 
of tongue gymnastics and breathing exercises. A 
great deal of repetition and drill is required if the 
incorrect habits have become well established*. Many 
speech teachers suggest that the children use a hand 
mirror in the formation of the new sounds. 

Children suffering from organic speech defects 
should be referred to the proper medical authority 
before the correction of speech is undertaken. Re¬ 
training after surgery (palate, tongue, larynx, or nose), 
should consist of substitution of new habit patterns 
for old, accompanied by appropriate breathing exercises. 







199 


It is sometimes difficult to understand how 
far-reaching and complex a speech disorder is, and to 
realize that many forms of treatment are required in 
order to effect a cure. In an attempt to correct any 
habit, it is easy for the child to slip back into the 
old behavior pattern. Faithful practice is of paramount 
importance. This re-education differs from the process 
of learning new material in that there is constant 
interference from old sets of habits. 















200 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Fletcher, John M. 

Greene, J.S. and 
Wells, E.J. 

Appelt, Alfred 

Johnson, Wendel 

Haefner, Ralph 

Peppard 
Ward, Ida C. 

Bender and Kleinfeld 

Bennett, Rodney 

Gifford, Mahel F. 

Borden & Busse 
Swift, W.B. 


The Problem of Stuttering, 

New York, Longmans, 1928. 

The Cause and Cure of Speech 
Disorders. New York, 

Macmillan Co. 1927. 

Stuttering and its Permanent 
Cure. New York, Dutton, 1930. 

Because I Stutter. New York, 

D. Appleton & Co. 1930. 

The Educational Significance of 
Left-Handedness. New York 
Teachers 1 College, Columbia 
University, 1929. 

The Correction of Speech Defects. 
New York, Macmillan Co. 1925. 

Defects of Speech - Their Nature 
and Their Cure. 

New York, Dutton, 1923. 

Speech Correction .Manual. 

Farrar & Rinehart - 232 Madison 
Ave., New York City, 1936. 

Practical Speech Training for 
Schools. University of London 
Press, Ltd. 10 & ll, Warwick 
Lane, London, 1936. 

Correcting Nervous Speech Dis¬ 
orders. New York, Prentice- 
Hall Inc. 1940. 

Speech Correction. New York 
City, Crofts, 1925. 

Speech Defects in School Children 
The Riverside Press, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, 1918. 













- 201 


Avery, Dorsey Sc Sickels 

Barrows Sc Case 

Travis, Lee Edward 
Orton, Samuel Torrey 

Head, Henry 

McAllister, Anne H. 


First Principles of Speech 
Training. New York, 

D. Appleton Sc Co., 1928. 

Speech Drills for Children 
in the Form of Play. 

Boston. The Expression Co. 

Speech Pathology. D. Appleton- 
Century Company, New York,1931. 

Reading, Writing and Speech 
Problems in Children. 

W.W. Norton and Co. Inc., 

New York, 1937. 

Aphasia and Kindred Disorders 
of Speech, Volume I. 

Cambridge University Press, 1925 

Clinical Studies in Speech 
Therapy, University of London 
Press, Ltd., 1937. 


m 


















