


















For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


©X UBBI6 

MWRwarajjs 

aiBEKaamsis 







Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/christologiesancOOIors 



CHRI3TQL0GIEE ? AN GIElMT AND MODERN 


A Thesis 


Written and submitted by 


HENRY EARLE LORSBriCH 

Towards the degree of BACHELOR OF DIVINITY* 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


April, 1943. 










TABLE OF CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION Page 1. 

CHAPTER 

1. The Self-Consciousness of Jesus. 7. 

2. Paul and the Primitive Tradition. 27. 

3. The Logos Interpretation and the Patristics.38. 

4. The Modern Period. 54. 

5. The Incarnation, or The Logos Interpreted in 

Terms of Personality.... 61. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY. 71. 


















INTRO DUCTION 

Of the conscientious student of Christology 

the question might well be asked: "Why attempt a theory 

of the person of Jesus?", "Why not take Jesus as we find 

him?2 Why not accept him as a fact of experience, try 

to emulate his example and draw ever nearer to him in 

blessed communion? It is the fact of Christ in the 

soul of man that matters, not a theory of his person. 

To such a question we should be forced to reply 

that it is impossible to have an experience of Christ 

without some kind of reasoned Christology, some theory 

about his person* "Personal experience", as Prof. J. 

3. Stewart puts it, "is indeed the primary thing, the 

sine qua non of the Christian life; but experience 

1 

begets reflection*" Experience of any kind must be 
given form or meaning; thence it issues forth as idea. 
Because we are rational beings we have to interpret 
our experience and there is no such thing as experience 
without interpretation. Religious experience unform¬ 
ulated and unrationalized cannot survive. 


L. A Man in Christ, p. 21 



























. 



















- 2 - 


Two factors enter into the doctrine of the 
person of desus. In the first place something real 
did happen to his disciples away back there, something 
new came into their lives which gave them a courage 
which they had not known before, a spirit of self- 
renunciation and willingness to serve and suffer, 
a new sense of values and a new spirit of love and 
fellowship with God and with each other. ‘Phis new 
relationship in which they found themselves came to them 
through companionship with desus. It was this exper¬ 
ience of desus which led his followers to declare that 

1 

if any man be in Christ there is a new creation. 

In some mysterious way they had caught his spirit, 
so that the mind that was in him was also in them. 

Their problem now was to explain this thing that had 
happened to them. This is the second factor in our 
Christology. 

,s It was the impression made upon His disciples 
by the spirit and words of the historic desus which 
first suggested to them that higher view of His 

2 

significance to which the church has ever since clung . H 

where, then, we may ask, did they derive the categories 

which would enable them to put their experience of 

H. 2 Cor. 5:17 Moffatt. 2. Haillie, ‘The Place 

of desus Christ in Modern Christianity 1 *, p. 100. 














- 3 - 


Jesus into an intellectual framework? They used the 
thought forms of their own world as every successive 
generation has had to do. Experience is in some sense 
permanent and unchanging but the expression of it will 
change from age to age. .Naturally the categories used 
by the disciples are not entirely adequate for today. 
Yet we must examine theirs to acertain if possible 
the nature of that experience to which they are 
attempting to give literal expression. Our problem 
then is to estimate the quality of that life in which 
God is declared to have been genuinely revealed and 
to see how it affects mankind, to express the Christ¬ 
ian experience of Jesus in terms of our own world view. 

In the person of Jesus Christ it is claimed 
that we have the supreme revelation of God. Although 
^od is manifested to some extent in the whole of His 
creation the different levels of existence differ 
vastly in the adequacy of their manifestation. In the 
person of Jesus God has been able to manifest Himself 
(to reveal Bis true nature) more completely than at 
any other level. 

The story of religion, Canon Haven tells us, 
is the record of man's endeavor to find a satisfying 















. 

- 

















-4- 


1 

symbol to embody his apprehension of uod* In our 

own day the ultimate Reality of the universe is 

variously referred to as Creative Principle', 'force' 

'vitalizing power', 'Principle of concretion' or even 

as an interaction which makes for harmonious relations 

But all such conceptions, as Dr. Tuttle has pointed 
2 

out are entirely inadequate. "An impersonal God", 
he says, "is too far removed, too indefinite, too 
elusive. Man cannot grasp it in the form of a univer¬ 
sal but only in the guise of a particular finite 
object.* 1 2 Hence the need for the incarnation of the 
Deity. Man must objectify the object of his faith. 
"The infinite spirit whom man worships", he goes on 
to say, "cannot be less than man in self-conscious¬ 
ness and will." "There may be a time", says Raven, 

"when sacraments shall cease, but that time is man- 
3 

ifestly not yet." 

Certainly the evidence is all in favor of this 
position. The universal demand for some incarnation 
of the ultimate reality was never more evident than 
it is today. Lenin, Sun-yat-sen, Gandhi, Hitler, 

1. Jesus and the Gospel of Love, p. 428. 3. do. 

2. Modern Substitutes in Religion, an article in 
'Religion & Life', Spring 1942, pp. 277-8. 










-5- 


Mussolini, Hirotito, all testify to the naturalness 

of the desire for an incarnate deity. In the article 

quoted above Principal Tuttle refers especially to 

the challenge of Communism and JMazism as competing 

incarnations of the Deity. ‘Lenin", he says, "is 

the embodiment of universal invisible force, vital 

principle. He is completely identified with it. 

He became the channel of its expression in the history 

of mankind• " Similarly, "the God of Nazism is the 

state or the racial spirit of the German people. 

That spirit is the deepest reality above the universe. 

...Hitler poses as the incarnation of the German 

Spirit.' 1 2 The inevitable tendency of mankind to find 

its religion symbolized and embodied in a man confirms 

the position reached by argument, it would seem that 

human nature is such as to demand an incarnation of 

1 

the ultimate reality. 

Hence the urgency of making an evaluation of 

the life of Jesus. Today other names than that of 

Christ are competing for the loyalty of mankind. 

**The man on the street feels instinctively that he is 

2 

called to choose between Christ and Antichrist. 

1. cf. Baillie, pp.67 and 75. 

2. cf. Horton, "Our Sternal Contemporary", p. xviii. 
















- 










• 

' 







• 


* 
























. 



. 





• 

. 



. 






















- 6 - 


It is imperative that we present to the world the 

highest embodiment of the divine nature. Otherwise 

man in his desire for an incarnate god will deify 

human nature. The question, therefore, which confronts 

us today is the same as that with which uesus himself 

confronted the disciples long ago: n ^hom say ye that 
1 

I am? M The task of answering this challenge for our 
generation is more urgent now than ever before. 


1. Mark 8:29. 














- 7 - 


Chapter 1. 


TixE oBIJ-COiNloClOu aw B33 Oi*' ^Bo U3 

as )i i* 

Interesting and important„to seek to know how 

men judged of the historic Jesus and how they judge 

of him today, it is of far greater importance to learn 

if possible how Jesus himself judged of his person. 

The attempt to analyze the consciousness of Jesus may 

well prove, as some have claimed before now, to be a 

hopelessly speculative task. To answer the questions 

'How did oesus regard himself?’, 'who did he think he 

was?', is all but impossible, his self-consciousness 

is a closed book for all of us, but fortunately we do 

have a few glimpses into it. ‘‘The Gospels 11 , as Cave 

has well put it, ‘have preserved for us a few intense 

utterances which give us passing glimpses into the 

mystery of His inner life. But neither knowledge nor 

1 

imagination can pierce the secret of His soul. 51 

In turning to the Gospels another difficulty 
confronts us - the question of interpretation. Guig- 
nebert, the T'rencfe historian suggests the danger 
inherent in this problem. “It has become very difficult 
he says, “if not impossible for us to determine what 
Jesus said of himself and of his relation to the 
Kingdom he proclaimed, because the evidence produced 


1. 3.Cave, “The Doctrine of the Person of Christ, p.ll 



















. 










* 










- 8 - 


by the Evangelists is distorted by an already develop¬ 
ed Christology wholly foreign to his own mind." 

Accordingly, we must try to form our ideas of 
how Jesus judged his place and person, not from his 
words alone, as does Guignebert, but by the total 
impression made by his life and teaching. However, 
in attempting to answer the question of Jesus 1 2 Christ- 
ology we must turn first to the 1 lives’ of Jesus with 
which we are familiar, in particular to the Synoptic 
Gospels. Here we find three titles used by Jesus 
•which may possibly shed some light on his estimate of 
his own person and place: Son of God, son of Man, and 
Messiah. Let us consider each of these in turn. 

The first of these appellations need not detain 
us long; Two passages are often quoted as proof that 
Jesus regarded himself as ’Son of God’ interpreted as 
some sort of heavenly being, viz. Mark 13:32 and 
Mat. 11:27. I quote: 

“But of that day knoweth no man, not the angels in 
heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father.” 

and this, 

1. C. Guignebert, ’Jesus’, translated from the French 
by S.H.Hooke, p. 280. 

2. cf also the parallels in Mat. 24:36 and Lk. 10:22. 
























1 ■ . 












' , 











- 9 - 


”A11 things are delivered unto me of my Father, 
and no man knoweth the Jon but the Father, neither 
kno.eth any man the Father, save the Son, and he 
to whomsoever the Jon will reveal him.' 1 

Not only are these two passages fundamentally incon¬ 
sistent, but the title ’the Son* as found in both and 
with the significance which is apparently given to it 
(i.e. synonymous with Messiah), would be quite unintell 
igible to the Jews. As far as the text is concerned 
Guignebert's position seems to be well taken. That is 
to/say that in the first passage the word 'Son* must 
have been substituted for some other word in the 
original. The second, he maintains, is the work of 

1 

a Christian prophet living in a Hellenic community. 

Certainly ’Son of God’ was not used by t esus 

as an equivalent for the title ’Messiah’, as understood 

at least, by his Jewish contemporaries. Case tells 

us that not until the end of the first century A.D., 

and then only in one of the apocalyptic books (IV Ezra) 

does the expression ’Son’ appear as a synonym for 
2 

’Messiah*. "The epithet ’Jon’”, he adds, "implied 
exceptional equipment for duty of special commission 
for service. But it could hardly have occurred to 
anyone, much less could it have been a generally rec¬ 
ognized interpretation, that the designation was an 
official messianic label.” Guignebert supports this 

. cT7~GuIgneber 17 _ p~*”2637 27 cf7~ J 7j7Case7 _ ~'Jesus7~A~ 

New Biography', p. 361. 

























- 10 - 


evidence: "It now seems definitely established that 

there is not a single passage in Jewish literature 

giving the Messiah the title of the Son of Sod, which 

1 

can with certainty be regarded as pre-Christian." 

Taken in the orthodox sense the expression 
’Son of God* would have seemed to any Jew of Jesus’ 
own time, the most preposterous absurdity and the 
grossest blasphemy, tie must therefore conclude that 
Jesus did not use the term Son of God as an equivalent 
for the title Messiah; nor was that term so used during 
his lifetime. But, "subsequently the disciples, view¬ 
ing the earlier events in the light of their later &x 
experiences, believed that he had attained to a sense 
of divine sonship that meant identification of himself 

with the one whom God had promised to raise up in Israel 

2 

to accomplish the deliverance of his people.” Thus 
it is that the term ’Son of God' came to mean the 
Messiah of Jewish expectation. 

The appellation ’Son of Man* brings us face to 
face with the most involved and complicated of all the 
problems offered by the hew Testament. In Hebrew lit- 

1. Guignebert, Jesus, p. 261. 

2. Case, p. 360. 






































• : 


■ 






. 







. 

. 


' 

■ 

. 



























- 11 - 


erature it is synonymous with 'man' and rarely employed 

1 

except poetically. In Ezekiel where the term occurs 
ninety times, it has a somewhat deeper significance 
and may be interpreted as ‘humanity' or mankind in 
general, i.e. Man. Daniel 8:17 gives us a similar 
impression. Even in the famous passage, Dan. 7:13, 

"Son of Man" means simply rt a man" , and represents not 
the Messiah as is commonly accepted, but the redeemed 
community. Thus we read “And I saw one in the like¬ 
ness of a man", i.e. in human form. 

In the Similitudes of Enoch, however, the phrase 
has come to denote a specific and mysterious Man, the 
Elect of God, a heavenly individual who would come 
on the clouds at the last day to preside over the 
Great Judgment and the New Age. But even if Jesus had 
been sufficiently familiar with Enoch to speak of the 
Son of Man in connection with the institution of the 
Kingdom, we are not at liberty to infer that he would 
apply the phrase to himself. Indeed it would still be 
very difficult if not impossible to imagine that he 
could have so designated himself. 


1. cf. Num. 23:19; Isa. 51:12; 56:2; Jer. 49:18 and 33; 
50:40; Ps. 8:5; 80:18, etc. 








- 12 - 


"It was far easier 1 ', once more to quote Prof. Case, 

"for Christians in the latter half of the first century 

to designate Jesus r Son of Man* than it would have been 

1 

for him in his own lifetime to so style himself." 

Branscomb too lends his support: "That the title seems 

to have been unrelated in the earliest tradition of the 

Passion argues against Jesus having applied the title 
2 

to himself.** "It was the early Church after the res¬ 
urrection which identified Jesus with the heavenly bon 
2 

of Man." Certainly it was not a regular appellation 

of the Messiah amongst the Jews at the beginning of the 
3 

Christian era. 

however that may be, the fact is that all four 

gospels permit aesus to call himself by this title. 

It should be noted too that the term is always restricted 

to his owp vocabulary. It would seem that the writers 

were not controlled simply by T sources r , but that they 

used the term ’Son of Man’ because : fond of it on their 
4 

own account". Nor do the words as used in the gospels 

always mean the same thing. Sometimes they stand for 

5 

nothing more than the word *1*. Sometimes, as for 
exampleMark 8:38 they refer to the apocalyptic Messiah. 


1. S.J.Case, ’Jesus, A New Biography’, pp.367-9. 

2. B.H.Branscomb, The Gospel of Mark", p. 147. 

3. cf. Guignebert p. 273-4. 4. Case, p. 365ff. 

5. cf. Lk. 12:8 and Mat. 10:32; also Mark 8:27 and 

parallels Mat. 16:13 and Luke 9:18. 
































- 13 - 


In other places it seems plain that 'son of man* 

means simply 'man', as for example Mk. 2:28 and Mat. 

12:31ff. Guignebert estimates that there are about 

forty passages in the bynoptics and twelve in <John 

1 

in which ^>on of Man definitely means Messiah. It 

is found only once outside the Gospels (Acts 7:56) 

2 

where it is obviously an editorial insertion. It 
is significant that neither Paul nor the General 
Epistles use the term. 

Guignebert concludes his study with these 
words: “Even though Jesus may have employed the 
expression 'Son of Man 1 , there is not one passage 
to indicate that he used it as a special and char¬ 
acteristic designation of himself, nor in which it 
has any definite connection with a consciousness of 
his Messiahship. In short there is no use of it 

which cannot be interpreted in a way entirely diff- 

3 

erent from the pseudo-Janielic 'Son of Man'.*' 

T 

"The Evangelist's use of this expression", he cont¬ 
inues, "is almost certainly nothing more than a 
pious error of the Gentile Christians, and does 

not belong to the apostolic times. If Jesus used 

the term 'bar-nasha' it was only and could only be 
in the current sense of 'man', 'son of man'." 

1. For~a careful analysis of the oynoptic passages see 
_Guignebert. pp. 275-8. 2. Guignebert, p. 279. 3 m }bt<L.i7& 
















- 14 - 


;/e agree with Guignebert that aesus did not 
use the term 'Son of Man' to represent the tradit¬ 
ional Messiah. But is it not possible that he thought 

to change the traditional concept of Messiahship, 

£ 

and so used the old terminology as a screnfc on which 
to throw the new picture? Perhaps ^esus did use the 
term 'Son of Man' as synonymous with Messiah but 
sought to give to it a spiritual and ethical interp¬ 
retation. This possibility Guignebert seems not 
even to consider. He is so busy flailing the Mess¬ 
ianic self-consciousness of Jesus that he misses 
altogether the God-consciousness of Jesus. 

This brings us to the very heart of our 
problem. Did desus think himself to be the Messiah? 

A brief discussion of the 'Messianic Hope' will help 
in making that decision. It has already been point¬ 
ed out that we can rightly evaluate the person of 
«^esus only from the total impression made on us by 
his life and teaching. Central in the life and 
teaching of ^esus is the idea of the Kingdom of God. 
His gospel is built around that idea. 







- 15 - 


As a matter of fact the conception of the 
Kingdom of God had for centuries before °esus been 
central in the Hebrew religion, but for the pre- 
Christian tiew the Kingdom had a very definite meaning. 
Hemember that the Jew had lived through centuries of 
bitter experience. His country, Palestine, was the 
cockpit of the Orient. It was surrounded by great 
nations whose clashing armies time and time again 
decided the fate of Palestine on the great plain of 

^sdraelon. Jewish history in the Old Testament 

a 

is a tragic tale of nations1 suffering at the hands 
of successive tyrants who sought to destroy the racial 
culture of their victims. The Assyrians, the Chal¬ 
deans, theP x ersians, the greeks, the Ptolemies, the 
oeleucids, the Homans - each of these names stand 
for successive persecutors of the °ew in the eight 
centmries before the birth of °esus. It was a 
natural development of faith, then, that such people, 
driven to despair, humanly helpless, should conceive 
the hope of a great ■‘-'ay of the Lord when crod in 
person ol? through his ^essiah, His viceroy, would 
step in and make His will effective. And by the 

1. At first there seems to have been no idea of a 
personal Messiah or agent; Yahweh alone is the 
deliverer. Hot until the first century B.C. does 
the idea of a personal Messiah come to the fore. 










- 16 - 


“will of bod" the Jew meant simply a glorified Heb¬ 
rew kingdom with political and spiritual headquarters 
in Jerusalem, from which the restored people of bod 
would hold sway over their enemies. This popular 
conception of the kingdom is quite understandable. 
Bvery oppressed and conquered race has cherished in 
its heart the secret hope of a day, 'der Tag 1 , when 
the tables would be turned. In the popular mind the 
messianic age was thus identified with the vengeful 
ambitions of the nation. 

It was into this atmosphere supercharged with 
nationalist ambitions on the part of the Hebrew race, 
that <^esus was born. How could he fail to be reared 
in the hope of Israel? Is it any wonder that when 
both John the Baptist and ^esus preached that the 
Kingdom of bod was at hand their words electrified 
the whole countyside? The nation flocked to see if 
at last the great Bay of the Lord was about to dawn. 

But something happened to the meaning of the 
Kingdom of God after the idea had passed through the 
mind of tesus and had been fertilized by his spirit. 
It was no longer the kind of kingdom that his fore¬ 
fathers had looked for. The record of the temptation 





. 








■ 




. 







. 


I 




















. 






. 





' 

























. 














-17- 

of uesus is simply the story of how Jesus sought to 

find a new meaning for the idea of the Kingdom of 

God. He knew with an unassailable certainty that 

God had set His hand upon him to fulfil the hopes of 

His people. The three temptations represent three 

oossible ways in which public opinion expected the 

1 

Kingdom to be fulfilled. Jesus refused to identify 
his program of action with any of them. They were 
on a lower level than God's way as he had come to 
see it; so he rejected them, rhen he spent the rest 
of his all-too-brief public career working out his 
program of the Kingdom in terms of the righteousness 
and the holiness of God. Perhaps it was Hosea's 
tender gospel of the power of redeeming love and 
Isaiah’s picture of the suffering servant of the 
nation that influenced him more than anything else. 

He decidexd for a Kingdom of love that transcended 
all national boundaries and ambitions. 

1. No definite portrait can be contructed of this 
’Attainted One' of later Jewish thinking, but from the 
inter-iestament literature where reference is made to 
him, three general classifications have been made. These 
are the Davidic, Apocalyptic and Priestly Messiahs. 
















. 












. 
























' 




* 





























- 18 - 


The teachings of Jesus lead one to believe 
that he had abandoned the idea of a sudden apocal¬ 
yptic coming of the Kingdom. In his parables, for 
example, he deliberately teaches that the Kingdom of 
God is a gradual development of righteousness in the 
human heart. It is within us like a small seed in 
the ground, like the yeast hidden in the dough, 
working secretly until its growth is finally estab¬ 
lished, or like the yeast, gradually leavening the 
whole lump. His attitude to children further streng¬ 
thens this point. Children have a very small place 
in the hew Testament doubtless because it seemed 
improbable that they would have time to grow to man¬ 
hood before the end of the world should come, The 
^ew Testament is impregnated with apocalypticism, 
and only with the fading of the apocalyptic hope did 
the early church give much attention to children, 

In his time 4esus was the only one with a kindly 
word for children. “Apart from the Gospels'*, Burkitt 
says, I cannot find that early Christian literature 
exhibits the slightest sympathy towards the young.... 
In the words and actions of w esus alone, as recorded 

in the synoptic gospels, and especially by Mark, do 

1 

we find love and sympathy for children. 

l7 Burkitt, 'The Gospel Kistory and its Transmission' 

n. PPfi. 












- 19 - 


sus was by no means a prophet of gloom, he came to 
proclaim the 'good news' of God. "The Spirit of the 
Lord is upon me, because He hath anointed me to preach 
the gospel to the poor; He hath sent me to heal the 
broken-hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, 
and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty 
them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of 
the Lord." (Luke 4:18 and 19). It was by such works 
that he bade the messengers of John the Baptist judge 
:>f his vocation. It is strange too that if °esus 
believed in the speedy coming of the Kingdom that his 
commands took the form they did. "Lay not up for 

yourselves treasures on earth. etc." Why? Not 

because the end is near but because where men's 
treasure is, their heart is also. (Mat. 6:19 and 21). 
Similarly he says ,; Be not anxious about the body., etc:, 
again not because the end is near but because worry is 
distrust in God. Neither does he say “Be ye perfect 
becuase the Day of Judgment is at hand' 1 , but Be ye 
perfect because the Bather is perfect." Thus we are 
led to say with Rufus Jones, "The closer we press to 
the actual life and the very words themselves which He 
spoke, the less we find of material which related Him 
to or links Him up with the popular hopes and expectat- 





. 



. 

. 










• 20 - 


ions of the time, and the more He stands forth as a 

unique revelation of uod's love and tenderness and as 

the teacher of a moral and spiritual way of life, 

1 

here and now." 

And yet in the New Testament we find words 
placed in the mouth of *>esus which imply that he 
looked for a coming Kingdom in terms of the Old Test¬ 
ament Apocalyptic hope. In the Lynoptics he is rep¬ 
orted to have said that this expected kingdom would 

come during the lifetime of those who were listening 
2 

to his words. However it is now generally recognized 
by New x estament scholars that Apocalyptic passages 
in the Synoptics referring to Jesus in his sojourn 
on earth are a projection of a later period, subsequ¬ 
ent to the crucifixion into an earlier. 1 Thess.4:15 
is sometimes taken to support the apocalyptic view: 
"This we say unto you by the word of the Lord... the 
Lord Himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, 
with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump 
of God." But in all probability 'Lord 1 2 here means 
Yahweh as elsewhere in Paul. In any case Jesus 
certainly does not think of himself as doing the job. 

1. H.M.Jones, The Church's Debt to Heretics, p. 19. 

2. cf. Mark 13:30, Mat. 24:34 and Luke 21:32. 








































■ 














■ 






























' 


■ 










■ 
























- 21 - 


Jesus, we believe, was much too sane in his daily- 
life and thought to be swept off his feet by current 
expectations of some divine catastrophe. 

We have attempted to show that in his lifetime 
oesus walked with firm step upon this earth. .;e do 
not claim that the argument is conclusive that he did 
not hold the messianic hope of his contemporaries, 
but we do claim to have shown that he was not greatly 
concerned with it. Jesus may have believed in a com¬ 
ing messianic kingdom, but it is altogether improb¬ 
able that he could think of himself as being its in- 
augurator. How could he think of himself as pre¬ 
existent or supernatural? He had lived a human life 
in his home in Galilee. 

As a., matter of fact the only role open for 

°esus during his lifetime was that of the Davidic 
1 

Messiah. Hut the term ’Son of David' is a vestigium 
of an earlier period. The Synoptics do speak of Desus 
as the ’Son of David’, and as having come from David’s 
city Bethlehem, but in so doing they reflect the 
earlier situation prior to the crucifixion. Hot a 
single passage of our Gospels puts this title in the 
mouth of ^esus. Furthermore it was neither bestowed 

1. They could not claim Priestly Messiahship for Jesus 
in spite of Heb.5:6,10, and 6:20. 





















































- 22 - 


up on him by his disciples nor contested by his advers¬ 
aries. As against this position the story of the 
'triumphal entry' is often quoted, but it is important 
to note that, in the Marcan account of the entry of 
tesus into t erusalem (Mk.ll:10), it is '‘the coming 
kingdom of our father David" and not "the bon of David 
which is spoken of. 

We may go further still and assert that aesus, 
far from assuming the status and title of bon of David 
definitely depudiated them. We read in Mark 12:35-7: 
"And beginning to speak, Jesus said, teaching in the 
Temple: 'Why do the scribes say that Christ will be 
the Con of David? David himself said to the Holy 
Ghost: the Lord said to my Lord (that is to say, God 
said to the Messiah), 'Sit thou on my right hand till 
I make thine enemies thy footstool'. David therefore 
himself called him Lord, and whence is he then his 
son?" We close, therefore, with the words of Guig- 
nebert: "It is impossible to base any conclusion x 

regarding the M essiahship of Jesus on this supposed 
title of bon of David." (Guignebert, p. 270). 

Stated negatively, our conclusion in regard 
to the Messianic self-conscicusness of °esus is this: 
that Jesus never claimed to be the traditional newish 
Messiah in any of his characterizations, bven so 






























■ 




































































- 23 - 

conservative a scholar as ^ranscomb admits that 

there is no dependable record that Jesus claimed to 

1 . 

be the Messiah.' 1 2 3 The idea of himself as Messiah 
probably never entered °esus’mind. 

Jesus was not concerned with messianic self¬ 
interpretation. His energies were consecrated to the 
task of preparing his fellow Jews for membership in 
the Kingdom. As S.J.Case has pointed out "No true 
prophet was ever an adorable hero to himself, however 
ardently he might be admired by his disciples. He 
was God’s man and had no time or taste for vaunting 

self-esteem. Self-abasement was the only garment that 

2 

he wore with becomjg grace." And yet, on the other 

hand, ^ames Stewart in his valuable book 'A Man in 

Christ", makes the statement that 'Jesus was never 

3 

anything else but central in his own religion.' 1 * 


1. B.H.Branscomb, "The Gospel of Mark', p. 151. 

Note also Guignebert p. 290: ’’The primitive trad¬ 
ition did not attribute the proclamation of his 
Messiahship either to Jesus or to his disciples 
during his lifetime.' 1 

2. S.J.Case, ’Jesus, A New Biography’, p. 378. 

3. James S. Stewart, A Man in Christ’, p. 297. 




































4 j 








* 






■ 













* 












' 



























- 24 - 


Gn the contrary °esus was never central*, God always 
jas. “Jesus was not concerned to make ’claims' for 

Himself. M says Gave, f, It was God and God's Kingdom 

1 

that he preached." "His concern was with God", says 

2 

Haven, "not with Kis own claim to .divinity." Far 
from making himself central his earthly career was 
marked by traits of lowliness and of great humility. 

But while <3esu.s was not altogether ’absorbed’ 
in himself, none the less, like the greatest and the 
humblest of us, he had to face the problem of his own 
vocation, to work out his own salvation and that of 
his people in harmony with the will of God as he had 
come to know it. Perhaps it was mainly along the lines 
of a vivid consciousness of God's Fatherhood, which 
he found to be dim or non-existent in his fellow-mwn, 
tb t he approached the problem of his life xkl$ work, 
i’he words which he uttered in Gethsemane summarize 
his attitude towards his chosen vocation: "Father, 
all things are possible unto thee: remove this cup 
from me: howbeit not what I will, but what thou wilt." 
Jesus enjoyed a unique relationship with God. 


1. S. Gave, The Doctrine of the Person of Christ, p.ll. 

2. Haven, p. 426. 


















- 25 - 


He walked with the firm step of a son in his father's 

house. 'He felt himself entirely permeated by the 

1 

spirit of God and guided by His will." His communion 
with God was unbroken and he seems not to have known 
the chagrin of living at less than his best. Thus far 
we seem to be in entire agreement with Cave when he 
says It was a Messiahship to be interpreted primarily 
.... through His filial consciousness of God, and His 

2 

conception of the work which God had given Him to do. kt , 
except that where Cave uses the term Messiahship we 
prefer to use the term vocation, mission or life-gimcja 
purpose. It may be, as we have already suggested in 
connection with the term ’Son of Man* that tfesus meant 
to change the concept of Messiahship so as to give it 
a new meaning, but on the other hand it is just as 
reasonable to believe that the idea of himself as 
Messiah never occurred to him. Whichever view one 
takes it cannot be denied that Jesus was supremely 
conscious of a great purpose in life: his objective was 
a Kingdom of Love, his task a mission of service and 
sacrifice, not of ease and glory. "With Him, as with 
no other man, vocation and personality were inextric¬ 
ably united. His personality was determined by His 


1. Guignebert, p. 266. 


2. Cave, p. 24. 






























. 




, 






























. 






. . 

• • 5 






















- 26 - 


filial relationship to God, and that personality found 

1 

expression in his vocation." "He knew himself to 
have been chosen of ^od for this work of redeeming 
Israel's lost sheep, and he knew also that his suffer¬ 
ing and death were a divinely appointed part of 

2 

this work of redemption." 


1. Cave, p. 20. 

2. John Baillie, The Place of <Jesus Christ in Modern 
Christianity, p. 98. 











- 27 - 


CHAPTER 2. 

PAUL A ND TH E PRIM ITIVE T 2UD ITI0N . 

Paul's Christology and that of the primitive 

Christian group may be linked together for two reasons. 

In the first place our earliest reference to this 

1 

group is found in J^aul. And in the second place 
Paul's Christology does not differ largely from that 
of the early church. 

From the primitive Christians Faul had received 

(among other things ) the story of the life of °esus, 

and in all probability he got a better understanding 

of t^esus than those 'who passed it on. (Paul was 

intellectually prepared to understand Jesus more fully 

than they were.) At any rate, so far as we know, there 

never was any disagreement between the primitive Christ- 

2 

ian community and Paul on the ground of Christology. 

'Men who dissented violently with his interpretation 

of the Law found no difficulty in his conception of 
3 

the baviour." At the Council of Jerusalem Paul was 

given the right hand of fellowship by tames, John and 
4 

Peter. do the legitimacy of his preaching was endorsed. 


1. C. Jackson in "Environmental Factors in Christian 
History”, p. 41. 

2. James otewart, A Man in Jhrist, p. 294. 

3. H.R.Mackintosh, "The Doctrine of the Person of oesus 
Christ", p. 74. 

4. cf. Acts 15 and Gal. 5. 












- 28 - 


In his ministry Paul was associated with members of the 
Jerusalem Church - -Barnabas and Silas; in his letters 
he is recognized by the older apostles; he wrote to 
churches which he did not found - Home and Colossai. 

So that consciously at least hex did not diverge from 
the church before him. True, he did seek to break new 
ground, but between his doctrine of Qhrist and that of 
the primitive church he seems to have made no distinc¬ 
tion. "No doubt Paul, in the course of long and deep 
reflection on the mystery of Christ, has gone beyond 
those comparatively rudimentary positions of the 
primitive community; he has done this, v for example, 
in his doctrine of pre-existence and of Christ’s 
place as agent in the work of creation. But the 
circumstance that his Christology stood unchallenged 

means that nothing in it was felt to be alien to the 

1 

fundamental tenets of the church. Et We may conclude tkx 
then, that subject only to modification by his own mind 
and personality, Paul's Christology was that of the 
primitive church. Along with them he came to believe 
that Jesus was the Messiah. 


1. Stewart, ; A Man in Christ', pp. 295-6. 





















■ 












- 
























. 











- 29 - 


Of all the characterizations at hand among that 

Jewish community which might have been used to evaluate 

the person of °esus, the term ^essiah seems to have 

been most popular. The earliest disciples, as the 

late Prof. Jackson has pointed out, were Jews. “The 

estimate”, he writes, “which these primitive Christians 

formed of their fellow- 0 ew who had become central in 

their religious life, was expressed by the ^ewish term 

Messiah 1 , i.e. 'anointed'.” ’’For centuries", he 

continues, "this word had been gathering up into itself 

1 

the hopes and ideals of this prou§ people." Paul 
accepted the primitive -hristians' characterization of 
°esus as Messiah - but as with them the title called up 
no unified or standard portrait. 

In Horn. 1:4 it would seem that r aul accepted 
the belief in Davidic AW essiahship. No doubt he does 
accept it ’formally' (as some of us could be said to 
believe in the doctrine of original sinj, but it is 
highly improbable that he could think of Jesus as the 
great military leader that David had been. The death 
of Jesus had killed the Davidie-Messiah, and after the 
crucifixion the apocalyptic concept took the field. 


1. Environmental Factors, p. 35 




























. 














* 











" 



. 











. 





. 









■ 




























- 30 - 


The title as used by Paul in xtom. 1:4 is given an 
ideal rather than a literal meaning. It has "drawn 
to itself all the desirable qualities of the many 

1 

idealizations of the inter-testament Jewish writers." 
Actually, then, this reference to the 'seed of David' 
carries no association with the Davidic Messiah. 

It was from the primitive church as well that 
Paul received his apocalypticism, i !he influence of 
this on his conception of Jesus is undeniable, borne 
scholars Ce.g. bchweitzer) have maintained that apoc¬ 
alyptic detail is basic in Paul. In 1911 Prof. b.F. 
Scott supported this view, but more recently, (1931) 
he has changed his position. Jesus, he says was not 
a fanatical dreamer. Much of the apocalyptic pass¬ 
ages of the gospels he believes was read back into 
the life and teachings of Jesus by the later Christian 
Church. Certainly there are many passages in his 

letters which show that Paul had accepted the apoc- 

2 

alyptic interpretation of Jesus as Messiah. 

Jewish apocalypticism however, is not the 
central or controling factor in his Christology. 

Other aspects contributed to the picture. "New traits 

1. environmental Factors, p. 39. 2. cf. C. Jackson, 

Kellenization of Christian ^essianism, 1923, an unpub¬ 
lished thesis in the university of Chicago Libraries. 





























































. 

. 

■ 

















- 31 - 


appear in the picture which Paul drew of t e m essiah; 

these new aspects take precedence over Paul's inherited 

1 

conception of the ^essiah.’* The features in Paul's 
new Messiah portrait which are basic are those which 
come from the life of Jesus Environment alone will 
not account for Christianity, since in haul's own words 
If any man be in Christ there is a new creation" 

(Moffatt). That which was new in this case was the life 
and teaching of Jesus. 

From his experience of the life and person and 
teaching of Jesus Paul enlarged the current ideas of 
the Messiah. 7e can do no better than to quote Prof. 
Jackson again on this point: "Jesus had lived humbly 
the life of a Galilean itinerant preacher; after his 
crucifixion his disciples came to think of him as 
risen, at God's right hand: when Paul applied the 
epithet 'Messiah' to this Jesus, something had happ¬ 
ened to his conception of Messiah. Jesus had come to 
De for Paul a charismatic personality, in Otto's 
phrase, i.e. a religious and moral genius; in him 
Paul saw the realization of his peoples' dreams of 
messianic succor: the realization was quite unlike the 

dream, and the title inadequate; but no other near- 

1 

adequate category seemed at hand." That Paul knew 
1. Environmental Factors, p. 46. 












- 32 - 


the story of cesus' life and teaching is amply 
demonstrated in the same essay, and the inference is 
inescapable that he actually taught the life of qesus 
to his disciples. 

.^hat are some of these characteristic qualit¬ 
ies of ^esus found in Paul's new picture of the 

1 

Messiah? Sinlessness had already been postulated 
in the Apocalyptic Messiah, but now it had been 

2 

realized in One M in the likeness of the flesh of sin - ' . 

3 

The quality of gentleness and meekness was hitherto 

4 

a trait proper to slaves; humility , forgetfulness 
5 6 

of self , and capacity for love are not hinted at 

7 

in apocalyptic literature. Obedience to Yahweh is 

a new ideal not hinted at in the concept of the 

heavenly Messiah. Faul's Christ was universal, 

concerned not with a new Israel but with a new humanity. 

"All the local, national and material ideas which 

Jewish M essianism has developed so strongly were 

8 

completely transcended Ho racial limits, no 
traditional categories could hold Paul's Redeemer. 


1. 2 Cor. 5:21. 2. Horn. 8:3. 3. 2 Cor. 10:1 and 

Phil. 2:7,8. 4. Phil. 2:6. 

5. 2 Cor. 8:9; Horn.15:1-3. 

6. Horn. 8:37; 1 Cor.16:22; 2 Cor.5:14. 

7. Phil.2:7,8; Rom.5:19 and 15:3; 2 Cor.8:9. 

8. Stewart, A Man in Christ, p. 299. 










- 33 - 


His meaning, his messgge, iis mission, were universal. 

The net upshot of c esus’ life upon Paul was that 

here was a .ay of living worthy and capable of imit- 

1 

ation. “Be ye imitators of me as 1 am of Jurist." 

Here was a conception of God which had brought Faul 

an emancipation he had never known under the haw. 

Jesus, for Paul, is r, not the Messiah of Jewish dogmatic 

but the suffering, triumphant, ever-living Messiah of 
2 

God." But he is more than this; he is also the Jesus 
of history. The problem still remained for Faul 

to rationalize this fact of experience, to find a 

place for this Gesus of history alongside the Messiah 

of his inherited Jewish hopes. For Paul, monotheist as k 

3 

he is, the Li ess j_ a h ± s a person to be loved. He prays 
4 6 

to him and places him alongside Yahweh. Prof. Jack- 

■fcc. 

son points out that he of-s^tn uses the same expression 

6 

for what God has done and what "hrist has done." 

"Sometimes”, he says, “it is impossible to say 

7 

whether Faul ! s Kyrios is Yahweh or ^esus ; sometimes 
thfct most intimate relationship is oddly expressed) 


1. 2 Cor.11:1. 2. Stewart, d. 301. 

3. 1 Cor.2:9; 16:22. 4. 2 Cor.12:8; 5. 1 Thess.l:l. 

6. 1 Cor.15:10 & 2 Cor.12:9; also Kom.l5:15ff. & 5:11. 

7. Horn.14:6-9,14. 












- 34 - 


1 

f if bod'o spirit dwells in you’ , 'if anyone has not 

2 

the spirit of Christ' . A prayer to God is also add- 

3 

. ed to < esus Christ. He called ^esus by the title 
for ^ah'v eh in his Greek Bible - Kyrios, as others 

4 

gave oerapis or the bmperor Nero the same title." 
Nowhere does he call Jesus God, but nevertheless for 
him Jesus has the value and functions of God. Theo¬ 
logically, however, Paul does subordinate.Jesus to 

5 

God in the form of sonship. 

Paul's most-loved name for Jesus, however, 

was not Messiah, but Lord. The background for Paul’s 

use of this term is to be sought, not as Bousset 
6 

suggested in the pagan mystery cults, but in the 

7 

Septuagint version of the Cld Testament. The name 
Lord was being given to Jesus by the primitive com¬ 
munity before the gentile mission had been inaugurated. 
The Aramaic 'Marana tha ’ (1 Cor.16:22) is proof of this 


1. Rom.8:9. 2. Rom.8:39. 3. 1 Thess.3:ll. 

4. Environmental Factors, pp.48-9. 

5. Rom.15:5; 1 Cor.l5:24ff. cf. also Stewart, p.304-6. 

6. cf. Bousset, Kyrios Christos. 

7. cf. Stewart, " Man in Jurist, pp. 47,73 and 301. 

8. nets 2:36; also cf. Cave p. 33. 









- 35 - 


The ^reat Psalm beginning "The Lord said unto my Lord, 

Sit thou at my right hand" was already being interp- 

1 ^ 

reted in a messi* nic and Christian sense. Yahweh in 

the Hebrew Scriptures had become Kyrios in the Greek 

translation: the phrase ' ■ ‘ios’ as the 

2 

Septuagint rendering of 'The Lord's Anointed'. 

This phrase occurs also in the Psalms of Solomon, a 

Pharisaic work of the first century B.C.:"They are 

3 

all holy, and their king is 'ChristoS Kyrios'" 

A.D.Nock also supports the Hebrew origin of the term 
Kyrios. "The nuance of Kyrios", he says, "depends on 

the person or God to whom it is applied; it can be a 

4 

mere courtesy title like 'Master* in English." 

"The use has probably in origin nothing whatsoever 

to do with the description of heathen deities or the 

5 

Emperor as Kyrios." 


1. Acts 2:34 2. Lam.4:20. 3. 17:36. 

4. Early Gentile Christianity, in 'Essays on the 
Trinity and the Incarnation’, ed. Rawlinson, p.87. 

5. ibid. p. 85. 










- 36 - 


Paul's use of the title Lord went deeper than that of 

the primitive church. In fact it ceased altogether to be a 

title and as Stewart says, "had become the most sacred express- 

1 

ion of a personal devotion stronger them death." This Jesus 

whom the Jews had crucified, God had made "both Lord and 
2 

Christ". In practice, then, Faul does not distinguish between 

the 1 Lord* Jesus and God. Functionally Jesus is god, for 

3 

"in Him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily.” 

Often the two names are linked together as in Horn. 1;7, "Grace 
to you, and peace, from God our rather, and the Lord Jesus 
Christ." The church of the Thessalonians is "in God the Father 
and in the Lord Jesus Christ." In the Trinitarian benediction 

"the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ” is correlated to "the love 

4 

of God and the communion of the Holy Ghost." Paul refers to 

Jesus along with God as creator of the universe: "There is one 

God, the Father, from whom all comes, and from whom we exist; 

one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom all exists, and by whom we exist. 

"The Son might be subordinate to the Father; yet in the deepest 

sense of all. Father and Son are one - and one not only in 

6 

mind and will, but in nature and eternal being." 


1. Stewart, p. 302. 

3. Col.2:9; 1:19. 

5. 1 Cor.8:6; cf. also Col.1:16 


2. Acts 2:14-36. 
4. 2 Cor.13:14. 

6. Stewart, p.307 











. 

* 

: 

. 

i 


■ 







. 

. 













- 37 - 


The dilemma introduced by Paul's acknowledgment of 
Jesus as Messiah was only resolved by his recourse to pre¬ 
existence, a characterization borrowed from Jewish messian- 
1 2 
ism. For Paul Jesus was the Messiah from eternity. He 

3 

was 'declared' the Messiah by the resurrection. Prior to 
his earthly sojourn he was ‘in the form (or likeness; of 
God', i.e., having a spiritual nature; nevertheless he 

4 

"emptied himself" and became in the likeness of a man. 

At the resurrection he again becomes 'Ho Christos'. Here 
we have what is really the ‘Logos' Christology without the 
•Word*. 

To deny the Logos to Paul, as nr. Jackson has pointed 

out, is only to postpone the solution which the church did 

adopt. ^It seems more likely , he says, "that Paul himself 

attempted the solution than that the canon-making church 

5 

has interpolated into Philippians from Marcion." 


1. cf. 1 Enoch, 48:2 and 4 Ezra 13:26. 

2. Phil.2:6-10; n.om.8:3; 2Cor.8:9; Gal.4:4. 3. Rom.l:4. 

4. Phil.2:6-8. ror a discussion of pre-existence in Paul 
see the article by C.Jackson in "Environmental Factors in 
Christian nistory", Univ. of Chicago Press, 1939, pp.50-2. 
col.1:15-17 and Phil.2:6-11 are set forth as definitely 
Pauline, a position contrary to that held by F.C.Porter 
and E. Barnikol. 

5. environmental Factors, p. 52. 








' 


’ 










< 

- ( ■' 


( 

















- 38 - 


unAPl'ER 3 

THE LOGOS INTKRPKETAT I ON AND THE PATRISTICS . 

With the formulation of the Logos Christology we enter 
the first great speculative stage of Christian thought. The 
Logos had already had a long history both among ^reek and 
Hebrew thinkers before it was taken over by John and the 
early apologists. In the early use of the word x/>gos meant 
uod - God thought of as intelligence, rationality and pur¬ 
pose. .ueracleitus first used it about 500 13. C. and the stoics 
took it over from him. .according to Ueracleitus the Logos is 
the intelligent "steering power" in the world akin to the 
reasoning faculty in man. The Stoics too thought of the Logos 

as divine Season, purely immanent and impersonal, "a rational 

1 

Soul vitalizing and guiding all that is." But as the tendency 
towards ± dualism increased, and God came to be thought of as 
Absolute, withdrawn from all earthly contact, an intermediary 
became necessary between God and the world. The Logos came 
to have this meaning. 

Among Hebrew writers tne Word or Wisdom had a prominent 
place. In the Wisdom literature it is personified and creative, 
an independent spiritual entity whose function was to establish 
communication between God and the world. Philo attempted to 
combine the Greek and Hebrew conceptions. He speaks of the 
Logos as a sort of second God, the mediator between God and 
man, the first-born creature and the organ of creation and 
providence. 

1. R.M.Jones, The Church’s Debt to Heretics, p. 64. 












r- ’ j ; J 1 ‘:'j 







- 












■ 








• . 

. 








■ 




' 









-39- 

"For Him", says Rufus Jones, "the Logos becomes the sacred 

name for all of God that can be revealed and manifested. 

The Logos is God *3 expression. His utterance of himself, his 

Y/ord. Logos is wisdom, intelligence, mind, thought, will- 

purpose. Logos stands for God in all his outgoing, creative, 

revealing activities, he is the divine Agent, the image of 

God, the first-born Son of God, sometimes called by Philo 

1 

and by later writers deuteros theos - 'the second Goa'." 

The three functions performed by rhilo's Logos were those of 
creation, revelation and redemption, however, at no point 
is the Logos identified with the Messiah. 

The fourth Gospel in its opening words identifies the 
historic °esus with the creative Logos. The writer, we believe, 
makes use of current philosophy to make intelligible and 
attractive to his readers, his own conception of °esus. But 
John starts with tine historical figure of Jesus. The Logos, 
he says, is Christ. The Logos 'became flesh'. Philo's Logos 
we note could never have become flesh. It may be that John's 
Logos is distinct altogether from Philo's, as Mackintosh 
believes, but at any rate we must note several differences 
between the two. In the first place John's Logos is fully 
personal and historical whereas some scholars deny altogether 

2 

that Philo thought of the Logos as being in any sense a person. 

1. R.M.Jones, The Church's Debt to Heretics, p. 64ff. 

2. cf. Drummond, Philo Judaeus, 2, pp.156-273. 











- 40 - 


John's Logos is *soteriological and ethical; it places consid¬ 
erably more stress on the redemptive than on the creative 
function. And finally, the Logos as Keason is subordinated 
to the Logos as Wisdom or Word. It is the expression of God's 
will and power, the outgoing of His life. His light and His 
love. The colour and significance of John's Logos are drawn 
from the writers own experience of the life and teaching of 
Jesus. He believes that it is tne Divine desire to impart 
life to a perishing and darkened world. 

The Apologists and their successors boldly followed the 
lead of the fourth Gospel in its use of the Logos concept. 

Like other educated men of their time they thought of God as 
self-existent, infinite,and immutable, eternal and incompre¬ 
hensible. He could be known to men only through revelations 
or manifestations of himself. The Logos, they believed, was 
the supreme revelation of God. This was identified as in the 
fourth Gospel with Christ, and as with Haul, the Logos before 
his incarnation was pre-existent. 

The earliest Christian apologies extant are the writings 
of Justin Martyr ^114-165A.D.). Justin's Logos is a second 
Godj created yet eternal and divine, appointed Creator by the 
will of God having been eternally immanent as a principle in 
God, "being of old the Logos" , existing wholly in Christ, 
though only partially in man. The inner nature of the Son is 


1. 1 Apol. 63 (p. 184). 














•;vt ' ■ 

4 

- 














, 

■. . ' 












. 

, 

« . » 

. 






, . 












- 41 - 


identical with that of the Father, and in the production of 

the Son God was not Himself ohanged - "begotten from the 

Father by His power and will, but not by abscission, as if 

1 

the essence of the Father were divided," Numerically dis- 

2 

tinct from the Father he is yet one with Him in will. The 

"first power after God the Father and Lord of all is the 

3 

Word, who is also the Son" ; and the Word "took flesh and 

became man". The power of God * overshadowed' Mary, so that 

3 

she conceived and bare Jesus, the Logos, "Finite in His 

own being, since there was a time when He began to be. He 

4 

forms the natural organ of revelation to the finite," He 

is the mediator between a finite world and an abstract and 

transcendent God. As such he has appeared in Christ not just 

in part as in the Old Testament prophets, but completely, 

5 

becoming, as Justin sy says, the 'whole logos' • "He is 

6 

innate in all, and in Him all participate" , yet He alone 

7 

is properly to be called son. 

It will readily be seen that Justin has little interest 
in the historic Cqsus. He finds in Christ not so much a 
Redeemer as the teacher of a perfect philosophy, uhrist is 
not one with God, He is another God, inferior to the high¬ 
est God. The interpretation of °esus as Logos did not solve 


1. Dialogue with Trypho, 128 (p.264). 2. ibid, 56. (p.224). 

3. 1 Apol. 32-3, 4. Mackintosh, Doct. of Person of J.C., p.141. 

5. 2 Apol.10. 6. 2 Apol. 13. 7. 2 Apol. 6. 











. 

- 

* 

l ■ . • ■ ! 


4 


, . 

. 

. 


, 

. ■ • 

* 1 

















• ' 


\ 

* 







- 42 - 


the problem of his relation to God, yet it has value, as 

Mackintosh says, "as testifying to the profound impression 

made by Christ on a mind determined to be philosophic 

1 

than as a reasoned Cnristological scheme," 

Irenaeus, Bishop of Lyons, gives us our first comp¬ 
lete outline of Christian theology. As Logos, he believed 
that God had always been manifested in the world, first 
through the prophets and finally in <jesus Christ. "Through 
the Y/ord Himself, who had been made visible and palpable, 
was the Father shown forth; all saw the Father in the Son: 

for the Father is the invisible of the Son, but the Son the 

2 

visible of the Father," Irenaeus thus identifies God with 

Jesus Christ the Son of God who became incarnate for our 

salvation. "Christ is the Logos in human guise, with an 

eternal personal pre-existence lying behind his earthly 
3 

career," But since no one understands how the Son was 
brought forth by the father it is fruitless to build up 
theories of his origin. To Irenaeus the pre-historic Christ 
is unbegotten. The Logos is not a portion of the Godhead, 
much less a second inferior God, but God Himself breaking 
forth in revelation and revealing nis true nature of love. 

In His incarnation is men*s redemption. To effect redemp¬ 
tion liod has inoculated sinful and doomed humanity with the 
immortal antitoxin of deity. Jesus Christ, the Saviour, is 


1. Mackintosh, p. 142. 

2. Against Heresies, 4:6:6; cf. also 4:4:2 and 4:20:5 
!• Mackintosh, p. 145. 







„ ' ■ 1 s I ■ 

■ 

. 

I 'i •£*.. ‘i Mr 3 &ih*i CK? U OjilV; bov & :i aid&fyb 

■ 

« 

- 'i 

. 

. ■ '••••.: . , , ■ 

. 






- 43 - 


thus identified completely with the flesh of mankind, lie 

"was made a man among men, that he might join the end to 

1 

the beginning, that is, man to God." "Through his trans¬ 
cendent love" he became "what we are, that he might bring us 

2 

to be even what He is Himself." 

As with Justin the Logos is regarded as the Creator of 

the universe, irenaeus insists "that it is one and the same 

person - Jesus Christ- the Jjogos - the Son of cod - who 

created the world, was born as man, and suffered and kjdk 

3 

ascended to heaven, still man as well as v*od." In his own 

words it is "the Word of God... who is our j_,ord Jesus Christ, 

4 

by whom all things were made." 

In Irenaeus also we have the Kule of *aith, a form- 

5 

ulation of the basis for the so-called Apostles' Greed. 

On the whole, then, we must admit that the church owes an 
immeasurable debt to ■‘•renaeus. Harnack, who is not sym¬ 
pathetic to Greek theology & Irenaeus represents), 

remarks of him that he was "the first to whom °esus Christ, 

6 

uod and man, is the centre of history and faith.” 


1. Against Heresies, 4:20:4. 

2. ibid, preface to fifth book. 

3. nethune-Baker, quoted by Mackintosh, p. 147. 

4. against Heresies, 3:8:2 (p. 421). 

5. ibid. 1:10:1. 

6. History of nogma 2, p. 243. 









. 

■ 

, 

■ 



. 






, 














,/x, .. 



. 












- 44 - 


Tertullian goes considerably farther than the oarly 

Apologists did. ihe Logos being first existent in Uod issued 

forth from uod as Son by generation before the creation of 

the universe - of the same substance as vjod but invested with 

independent being, "he proceeds forth from God, and in that 

procession fie is generated; so that he is the Son of God, and 

1 

is called uod from the unity of substance with wod." But 

'l’ertullian insists that though tne oon was pre-exostent, yet 

2 

"there was a time when He was not." 

The pre-existent xjogos or Son assumed flesh for our 
salvation, born "to a certain virgin", "made flesh in her 
womb", prompted by <jod's redeeming love, tiod amd man are 
united, the divine and the human, spirit and flesh, brought 
together in one person. Although conjoined in Christ's one 
person these two substances of flesn and spirit act independ- 

3 

ently and by themselves, each according to its own character. 
Tertullian makes a sharp distinction between God and the Logos 
through his insistence that Father and Son are two separate 
persons. He attempts to avoid the dualism which threatens 
to dissolve the union of God and man in Christ by stressing 
the eternal nature of that union. 

creation, regarded as an essential part of the revel¬ 
ation of God, is the work of ohrist the .Logos. This however 
is no obstacle to the monarchy of God. Although of tne same 

substance, the Son is considered as subordinate to the Father 

4 

in whom alone resides the fulness of deity. 

2. Against Fraxeas 2. 

4. ibid. 9^ cf. Mackintosh 154-5. 


1*Apology, Voi.3, Ch. 21, p. 34. 
3. ibid.27. 














V 






- 45 - 


Tertullian used categories which later had a great 

influence in the ecclesiastical statement of the doctrine of 

the I'rinity. There was one substance but three persons. Father, 

Son and holy Ghost - differing in degree, form and aspect - a 
1 

1 rinity in unity. In spite of the hampering inadequacies of 
the Logos conception Tortullian provided the church with a 
vocabulary in which to express the relation of the Son to the 
Trinity, and of the divine to the human in the incarnate life. 

Rufus Jones gives us a very comprehensive picture of 
the Logos of the Apologists, "he was pre-existent before nis 

incarnation.Jie is the d vine Agent, the active Reason, 

the operative Power of God. he is sprung from . or begotten 
by God, and yet is an absolute unity with God. He is person¬ 
alised as Christ and yet in all his activities Jie is identical 
with God. he creates; he reveals; he mediates betv/een the 

infinite and the finite, he is first-born and only Son; he 

2 

is 'second God', i.e., God as He is revealed." Such a 
review more than half inclines one to acquiesce in Loof's 
verdict. Somehow we cannot help but feel that this falls 
short of the genuinely Christian estimate of Christ. As Jones 
has so well expressed it, "a vague and shadowy neing, far 

removed from human contacts was taking the place of the tender 
and friendly Person who had come to show men the Father." 


1. Against Praxeas, 3 said 13. 

2. The Church's Debt to heretics, p. 66. 3. ibid. p. 68. 









- 46 - 


Clement of Alexandria sought to incorporate into the 

new faith all that was best in Hellenic culture, ue rescued 

intellectualism from degradation by Gnostic heretics and 

made it a legitimate possession of tne cnurch. Christ, the 

Logos, he insists is the best and highest revelation of God. 

It is through the eternal V/ord that all revelation comes 

1 

since God is unknowable and transcendent. There is an 
essential unity between Father and Son, as stated for exam¬ 
ple in these words : "the unbegotten and indestructible and 

trie only true God, the V/ord of God... this Jesus who is 
2 

eternal...' 1 Yet it is generally recognized that the Son 

is also a distinct hypostasis. 

But Clement asserts the true numanity of Christ as 

well as his divinity: "He became man tnat man might become 
3 4 

God." and he speaks of Christ as "a God in human form". 

The Logos is the Revealer, first in tne Creation in which 

He Himself takes part. He imparts 'seeds' of reason to all 

mankind and finally becomes incarnate in Christ to become 

the Educator of His fellows to lead them into nis own 

perfect stste. The motive of this whole divine activity, as 

Raven points out, is love, although it would seem to be a 

love which is coldly intellectual since Christ Himself, 

(i.e. God) is thought of as 'impassible and apathetic' - 

1. Miscellanies, 5:11. 2. Exhortation to tne neathen, Ch.12. 

3. Protr. 1. (Vol. 2, p. 205.) 

4. Paed. 1:99. cf. also Protr. 10:110 - "Assuming the 
character of man, and having been fashioned in flesh, ue 
enacted the drama of numan salvation." 









■ 


. 

, 

. , 

* 

, 























- 47 - 


unconcerned, unfeeling, inaccessible to any movement of 

1 

feeling, either pleasure or pain. The God he reveals is a 
philosopher's God, not the loving Father of the Hew Testament. 
Not only that, but the incarnation of the Word is incomplete; 
his humanity is half unreal, his body is superior to 
physical needs; he knew no pain or grief or emotion and had 

I. 

no need to learn. 

The greatest of the Alexandrian School, however, and 
the first thoroughgoing systematic theologian of Christendom 
was Origen. For him, as for Clement, God is an absolute 
Being - eternal, unchangeable, indivisible, incorporeal, 
incomprehensible, self-conscious Mind. He it is who had 
revealed Himself partially in Nature and in the Old Test¬ 
ament prophets, but who had become fully manifested in Christ 
the Logos or Son through whom the world was made. In that 
incarnation the Logos of God had expressed all of the 
divine nature that can be expressed in the limitations of 
space and time. As against x ertullian he insists that the 
Logos never at ary time began to be* He is co-eternal with 
the Father and is eternally begotten by Him. Thus it is 
that the creative Logos, the consciousness and activity of 
God becomes manifest and explicit in the incarnation; but 
he existed prior to it. 

Origen fx differs from the Apologists in that the 
Logos does not 'become' man, but ratner 1 unites with* man 

1. Miscellanies, 6:9. 























. 
















; 




















*■ ■: 








* i 




,, - 


' 






- 48 - 


to become a 'God-man'. "In the incarnation", to quote 

Rufus Jones, "the eternal Logos was united with, an absolutely 

pure and sinless soul, and witn a body equally pure and 

perfect, a® so that God’s real Mature radiated and shone 

1 

through him unhindered, he was 'the God-man'" 

As Son, the Logos proceeds from the Fatner not by way 
of partition but by eternal generation. In the process God 
is not divided but remains a perfect unity. Although the 
Son is numerically distinct from the Father, they are in 
substance absolutely one - one substance (ousios) but two 
'hypostaseis'• 

In regard to his doctrine of the holy Spirit, Origen 

is an unwavering Trinitarian, ^e always thinks of the noly 

Spirit as co-equal and co-eternal with the r ather and the 

Son. In spite of this, however, Origen has a tendency to 

make Christ subordinate to the r ather, a tendency which 

provides the real basis of the Arian controversy. Origen 

holds that Christis 'theos', i.e. divinity, but God is 

'ho theos' which is essential deity. *±e speaks of Christ 

as a 'ktisrna' (creature), and "the most ancient of all 

2 3 

the works of creation." The Son is a 'second* God , 

but not immutably or intrinsically good as the Father is; 

He is an Image receiving honour second only to God - "the 

4 

stainless mirror of God's working." In addition to this 


1. The Church's Debt to heretics, p.88. 2. Contra Celsus 5:37. 

3. ibid. 5:39. 4. De Principiis 1:11:5 (Vol.4, p. 246.) 










, ' • 


* 

« 

, 

. 


■ 











» 

■ 


■ 

■ 








■ 

• • - : 






.■ • . ‘’.1 0 < •. ■' ... •; 










- 49 - 


the Father*s will is wiser than the Son's, and at Creation 

1 

the Son was the Father's servant executing nis commands. 

Origen's philosophy is strongly redemptive and wholly 
Christ-centred. Jesus is the instrument of salvation but 
it is his life not his death that saves. Ftfr him as for 
Clement Christ is the Teacher. 

It must be admitted that brigen rendered a great 
service to the church of his time, ne made Christianity 
intelligent and attractive to educated men and helped destroy 
the pagan thought forms of Gnosticism. Christian thought 
after Origen never again reached do high a level. But never¬ 
theless his Christology was not all gain, dis emphasis on 
co-eternity and subordination sowed the seeds for further 
trouble. Then too, the humanity of this God-man is hardly 
satisfactory. "It is of ethereal purity and celestially 

fair, with a glorious brightness that shone forth even upon 

2 

earth and was manifested completely after death." The 
very humanity of Jesus is itself deified. 


1. For further evidence of Christ's subordination see 
Mackintosh p. 166. 

2, Mackintosh, p. 167. 


















1 

: 

* 












* 













* 












* 












- 50 - 


Origen's teaching on the co-eternity of the Son was 
taken over by Athenasius and emphasized as against the great 
Alexandrian*s teaching on the Son's inferiority. Athenasius 
insists on the unity of substance of Christ and God. The 
Son is identical in nature and essence with the father. He 
is therefore eternal, not created but 'begotten', which is to 
say that the Son participates in the whole essence of the 
Father. Athenasius saw clearly that if ^hrist is only a 
creature, then he is not truly God; neither can he reveal 
God to us, nor have any part in God's plan of redemption for 
us. And herein lies Athenasius' chief contribution. Only 
God Himself could save the sinner; a demi-god could not serve. 
Jesus was the Saviour. Therefore he must be fully divine. 

In the person of Jesus Christ God Himself has entered into 
human history in order that He might conquer sin and death. 

In His infinite love "the immortal V/ord took human flesh and 

1 

gave His mortal body for us all." "He was made man that we 

might be made God; and He manifested Himself by a body that 

2 

we might receive the idea of the unseen Father." Christ is 

literally a God-man and the humanity of J esus tends to be 

obscured. Haven is well within the truth when he says "Jesus 

has faded and become a luminous ghost, radiant still out no 

3 

longer of this world." 

1. Gwatkin, Arian Controversy 10, quoted by Mackintosh p.184. 

2. Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Incarnation of the Word, 
Vol.4 (Sec. 54:3). 

3. Raven, Jesus and the Gospel of Love, p. 346. 





- 

■ 








* 














- 51 - 


Over against this right-wing school of ^rigen was 
Arius who emphasized the subordination of the Son to tho 
one eternal essential and indivisible divine Being - a 
transcendent God who cannot be revealed or made known to 
man. Christ, on the other hand was a created being, the 
first to be created - ’before the worlds'. Since the Fatner 
is indivisible Christ is not begotten from the Father but 
created by God out of nothing. God was one and changeless; 
the Son became flesh and was therefore capable of change; 
therefore the Son is essentially inferior to the Father. 

Nevertheless this Christ or Logos of God was the 
instrument of creation, separate from God and substantially 
different from Him. He is morally changeable, and like our¬ 
selves, is equipped, in part at least, with freedom of will. 
Yet, being created by the Fatner, Christ must be subordinate 
to Him. 

One of the chief objections to this Christology is 
that the Son did not have a human soul; the Logos took the 
place in him of a soul. Christ, accordingly is neither God 
nor man and cannot reveal for us the nature of either„ 
Through the excellence of his life, it is true, Christ did 

achieve Sonship, thus becoming worthy of worship and divine 
honours, but the nature of God nimsejf still remains unknown. 
In attempting to safeguard the unity of God, Arius has 
sacrificed both the humanity and the deity of Christ. 





. 

■ 

■ 

• ■■ i 

, . ........... .... ■ 






- 52 - 


Schultz has oronounced the ^rian controversy to be "inwardly 

the least stable and dogmatically the most worthless of all 

1 

the Christologies to be met with in history." "Few", says 

mackintosh, "wiil question the justice of this verdict." 

It was at the Council of Nicaea that a solution to the 

Arian controversy was attempted. The Council asserted the an 

unity of the Godhead and the essential divinity of the Son. 

At the same time it rejectee pure transcendentalism. God 

was creator of the universe and tne Son was made man; yet the 

•humanity of Jesus was completely overshadowed by his divinity. 

Still, we may say with Mackintosh, that * Nicaea is a position 

2 

gained once for all.’ , and as Canon Haven says it did preserve 
the fundamentals of the faith at a time when tney might easily 
have been abandoned. 

Following Nicaea Christian thinkers were more concerned 
to anathematize heresy than to interpret truth. Theology 
strove to vindicate existing conclusions, neresy-hunting 
became a favorite occupation and Christian scholars lived in 
fear that their conclusions might render them liable to ex¬ 
communication, banishment or persecution, nowever there is 
one other school of thought which should at least be indicated 
before leaving this period of church nistory. That is the 
senool of Antioch. 


1. quoted by Mackintosh, p.178 


2. idackintosh, p. 2S2 



















































: 

« 

* 

a 

. 






, 

.. 

. 










- 53 - 


This group of tninkers laid stress on the reality of 
Christ's humanity. At the same time, however, tney retained 
the orthodox position of the Nicene Creed by asserting tne 
existence of Christ in two natures, one divine, the other 
human. They saw in Christ not so much the God-man as simply 
a man whom God had inspired. This position seemed to minimize 
the true divinity of Jesus. No longer was his a unique rev¬ 
elation, The Chalcedonian Council, which sought to end the 
controversy about the nature of Jesus Christ proved to be 
no solution at all but merely a preservation of the problem. 
Jesus Christ was a God-man who in his one person combined the 
two natures of God and man. The resulting dualism has led 
invariably either to a denial of Christ's humanity or to 
belief in a solit-personality whicn is unintelligible. It 
is this insistence upon the doctrine of the two natures which, 

as Prof. ^ckintosh argues, is "the chief defect in strictly 

1 

traditional Christology." 


1. Mackintosh, p. 293 













-544. 


CHAPTER 4 

T HE MODERN PERIOD . 

Prof. Forrest tells us that "in spite of Chalcedon the 

1 

Church remained for centuries practically monophysite". For 

those who found the duality difficult to accept Lionothelitism 

seemed to be a way out. According to this, though Christ had 

two natures he had only one 'will*. But in 680 the Council of 

Constantinople condemned the doctrine of a single will and 

affirmed that within the single person of Christ there were 

not only two natures but also two wills. There the matter 

rested throughout the Middle Ages and through the period of 

Protestant orthodoxy, right down to the modern period. "From 

the eighth century to the sixteenth", says Mackintosh, "not a 

2 

single contribution of real importance was made." 

The dogmas of the Church, as Cave has rightly pointed 

out, did conserve "the common Christian faith in Christ as 

both truly God and truly man, and saved the church from oart- 

3 

ial and premature solutions," But as this writer goes on to 
say, "the categories employed were inadequate, and the philos¬ 
ophy of Substance 1 , which lies behind these classic definit¬ 
ions, though congruous with th conception of Christianity as 
deification', is incongruous witn tne conception of Christ¬ 
ianity as communion, fellowship between God and man." 


1. cf. D.W.Forrest, The Cnrist of nistory and Experience, 
pp. 194ff. 2. Mackintosh, p.223. 3. Cave, p.233. 













. 

' 

. 












« 

■ 

•: •: ’ ■ ’ f 

• ■ ’ • ' ' ’ ’ 






- 55 - 


"Chalcedon", says Hr. Temple, "marks the definite failure of 

all attempts to explain the Incarnation in terms of Essence, 

1 

Substance, ^ature and the like." The classic formulae 

"are too inconsistent and too obscure, too imbedded in ways 

of thought which have lost for us their meaning to save us 

from the trouble of thinking for ourselves on the highest of 
2 

all themes." 

Since religion is essentially an achievement of the 

whole personality it cannot justly be represented in categories 

lower than the personal. The incarnation, as we have already 

pointed out,in our introduction, must be interpreted in terms 

of personality. Personality, although it may not be the last 

term in the series, at any rate is the highest level of creation 

known to us. Thus, in the words of Archbishop Temple, "it 

affords the best analogy we nave for the Most nigh." "Yfe 

shall think of Him more accurately", ne says, "when we think 

3 

of Him in terms of personality than in any otner way." The 

Greek world, however, did not possess any adequate language 

for describing personality or its relationships, nence, "it 

was driven to abstract terms like substance and hypostasis 

which leant themselves to a chemical ratner than a personal 
4 

treatment." 


1. Christ the Truth, p.159. 2. Cave, p.234. 

3. Temple, p.138. 4. cf Raven, p.340. 












. 







. 







. . 


. 






. 




. 

; . 







. 




'.V 




. 








- 56 - 


One of the most creative theologians of the early 

nineteenth century, and in fact "one of the most amazing and 

1 

attractive characters of modern times" , was Schleiermacher. 

Schleiermacher interprets Christ in terms of our experience 

of redemption through him. Bacause Christ redeems tnere 

must be redemptive xxxhxxxnaiBrai forces resident in his 

nature. These constitute his divinity. The divine in Jesus 

is further evidenced in tne God-consciousness displayed in 

his life. Like us in nature Christ is yet "distinguished 

from us all by the constant strength of His God-consciousness 

2 

which was the veritable existence of God in Him" • "through 

His essential sinlessness and His absolute perfection" Christ 

3 

was "absolutely distinguished from all other men". This 
absolute and primary perfection of u esus is simply the 
complete and perpetual triumph in Him of the God-consciousness 
over the sense-consciousn ess. 

It is the holiness and sinlessness of tne historical 
Jesus that make him the true mediator between God and man. 
Christ is the source of a new spiritual life of communion with 
God, first realized in ^esus himself and from him communicated 
to those who are drawn out of themselves into fellowship with 
him as members of the Christian community. Christian exper¬ 
ience shows that Christ was not an example or a pattern only; 


1. McCown, The Search For the Real Jesus, p.43. 

2. Christian Faith, Gotha Edition, sec.94. 3. ibid. Sec.98. 
























« 






, 

' 

. 





, 








■ 

, 



















- 57 - 

he was an archetype, the perfect Redeemer, 'the* perfect 

Mediator between God and man. Salvation was only possible 

through him and in the sphere of religion ne is normative 

and final for all races and generations of mankind. 

Several objections have been brought against Schleier- 

macher's estimate of Jesus, In the first place the appearance 

of Jesus in history was supernatural, due to the special 

creative act of God, It would seem too that this v/as not the 

Jesus of history, since in Christ the body is wholly passive 

and receptive and is entirely without moral conflict, Christ, 

we believe was not absolute and unconditioned but shared in 

tne limitations of the historical, A further criticism is 

that Schleiermacher has not faced the problem of the relation 

of Christ to the eternal life of God, 

Although he produced no system, Schleiermacher is 

rightly regarded as the outstanding theologian of his day. 

This he has done: "first he proclaimed the advent of Christ 

and 

as a supernatural interposition, redeeming xtck Bivine; 

secondly, he once more placed the figure of Jesus at the 

1 

centre of His own religion." A pioneer in the field, he 
left to others the work of exploration in the new country 
which he had discovered. 


1, Mackintosh, p. 256, 












- 58 - 


The work begun by Schleiermaoher was taken up fifty 
years later by Albrecht Ritschl. Ritschl abandoned speculative 
theology and turned to the Jesus of history, liven more persist¬ 
ently than Schleiermacher he strove to vindicate for tne 
historic Christ the central place in his religion. Accordingly 
he rejects all attempts to explain Christ*s person by specula¬ 
tions on the nature of God, or of tne pre-existent Logos. 

Ritschl begins v/ith the revelation of Christ. Jesus is a man 
in whom God has revealed Himself completely, nis divinity can 
only be proved by Christian experience. It cannot be proved 
"except to those who have felt His saving influence" upon 
themselves. Christ is divinejust because his gifts - pardon, 
liberty, life, - are divine. But it is useless to try to 
explain the significance of Jesus. Y/e know him only through 
what he has done for us. If he has tne value, for us, of God, 
then he is divine, and so becomes for us the object of relig¬ 
ious veneration. 

Ritschl refused to speculate on tne origin of Christ, 
his pre-existence or his exaltation. God, as the ultimate 
Reality was unknowable except througn abstractions, revelations 
or manifestations. Jesus is a manifestation of God, but God 
has been made concrete apart altogether from this particular 
manifestation. Christ’s uniqueness lies in the fact that he 
is the author of tne Kingdom of God. An subsequent manifest¬ 
ation would be dependent on him. 






■ • 












, 


















. 








. 

. 

. 

, 

» 

. 






* 












. 

• . 

. 

. 








- 59 - 


Jesus is to be imitated because "He made God*s 
supreme purpose of the union of men in tne kingdom of God 
the aim of his own personal life." At the same time, 
having helped to clarify our feeling apprehension of God, 
he becomes the object of our faith and devotion. 

Reoresenting right-wing Ritschlianism is Julius 

Kaftan. For him Christianity means the life *hid with God in 

Christ*. Hence it is not only an ethical religion; it is a 

religion of redemption. Kaftan begins with Cnrist the 

exalted Lord, the perfect revelation of God. In fact Christ 

himself is God revealed in the flesh in human history. It is 

the exalted Christ who is the object of our faith, and this, 

says Kaftan, is what we mean when we confess his Godhead. 

But the exalted Christ is the Jesus of nistory. "The life 

of Jesus Christ in the world", he says, "was a divine life in 

human form. It was a divine life, in that it had for its 

content the working out of the divine will of love towards 

men; it was human in that the fulfilment of this divine 

calling was manifested in fidelity to a human vocation. As 

divine it was the perfect revelation of God in the flesh; as 

human the perfect sinless pattern of obedience to God, loyalty 

1 

to vocation, and inner freedom from the world" . There was 
in his life a perfect unity with God. 


1. cf. Dogmatic, op.443-459 










■ 

. 
















* 






4 










* 












. 






, 








• 



.. . ' 





„ • 


















' 




. 












-60- 


Christ is eternal since our faith in him "lacks 

adequate expression unless we affirm the eternal God in the 

historic Saviour, so that he who stands before us there, is 

1 

he who from eternity is in God" . So "although trie pre¬ 
existence of Christ transcends the reality which we can 

2 

grasp it is the necessary consequence of faith," 


1. Dogmatic, pp,460-9. 2. Cave, p. 199, 












-61- 


CHAPTER 5 

THE INCARNATION, OR THE LOGOS IN TE RPRETED IN TERMS OF 

PERSONALITY. 

The doctrine of the Logos with which Jesus is ident¬ 
ified in the fourth Gospel today is in the course of being 
rehabilitated by modern scientific philosophy. This doctrine 
carries with it all the modern implication of a creative 
Reason pervading the universal scheme of things. But the 
scriptural doctrine goes deeper than the modern intellectual 
conception in that it attaches a redemptive significance to 
the appearance of God within tne time series. For the Christ¬ 
ian at any rate Jesus* is not simply the strongest link 
in the evolutionary chain. The incarnation of Jesus we 
believe must be interpreted in terms of biological evolution. 
The eternal background which sustains all life and nature 

obviously includes factors making for moral redemption as 

1 

well as factord supporting natural development. 

Dr. Robert Paton in his very valuable work "Evolution 

2 

and the Christian Doctrine of Human Worth" demonstrates the 
importance of the incarnation in the realm of the spirit. 

"In the natural order", he points out, "wnen confronted with 
a developmental crisis, the growing organism has been stim¬ 
ulated to discover richer channels of form and function 
through which it might evelve in order to overcome the crisis." 

1. cf. facts of spiritual regeneration, e.g. James’ Varieties 
of Religious Experience. 

2. An unnuolished thesis in the University of Edinburgh library 
1931/ 































, 




■ 


' 

. 



























* 






itVr't'l • . ' ' ■ 

. 












' 

' 


■ 

' 










. 






-62- 


Hut “crises develop also within the moral and redemptive 

order of human experience.... These nave called forth from 

time to time new types of spiritual personality fitted to 

cope with the challenge of the situation." "The great 

prophets of the world", he says, "are all of this order, 

born to cooe with the crises of their generations and to 

1 

lift life to new levels." 

"The moral crises, however," Paton adds, "may be of 
such a nature that tne human organism in itself.... does 
not possess trie requisite equipment to cope successfully 
with the situation." "In proportion as life increased in 
self-consciousness it increased also in its reliance upon 
the spirituality of the cosmos. The need became greater in 
proportion as humanity exercised its freedom to move away 
from rather than towards God." The coming of Jesus, he 
argues, was coincident with the necessity of a new spirit¬ 
ual beginning for mankind. "Humanity stood at the cross¬ 
roads. The moral crisis was such that it required tne aid 
of a more than human agency to lead it into richer channels 
of religious development. To safeguard the fulfillment of 
humanity’s high destiny God himself in tne person of Jesus 
Christ stepped into the arena, compelled by the exigency of 

His own nature as Love to confront men with the challenge 

2 

of a fuller and more abundant way of life" , and, we might 
add, to save them from the consequences of their own folly. 


1. Paton, p. 296 


2. Paton, p.297-8 




















-63- 


"Hence, in the fulness of time camo Jesus of Nazareth, 

the Y/ord of God made flesh* To ensure the ultimate spiritual 

development of the race God in Christ reconciled the world 
1 

unto Himself." God was in Christ reconciling t*.e world 
unto himself. Apart from this conclusion the significance 
which the early church applied to the person and work of 
Jesus is meaningless, "humanity in him was made tne vehicle 

of a full manifestation of the spirituality tnat pervades the 

1 

cosmos." henceforth it was cnarged with a fresh dynamic so 

that if any man be *in Christ* tnere is literally a new 

creation. That is to say, "as the individual appreciates 

and responds more fully to this communion with the universal, 

and learns to *live eternally*, he becomes increasingly at 

2 

one with God; God dwells in him; he incarnates deity." 

The aopearance of °esus Christ in the flesh 
heralded the emergence of a new spiritual fact in history. 

At different times and in different ways God had already 
revealed himself in past history. But in the spiritual crisis 
of the first century there was revealeu in its richest poss¬ 
ible concreteness the quality of that hinterland of life in 
which all existence is sustained. "Througn the numan life of 
Jesus there worked a power which was felt as coming from 

beyond, from God Himself, who here has found His uniquely 

3 

oerfect self-expression." "The Christian gospel' 1 , to quote 
Baillie once more, "is that the eternal Mind and V/ill nave 

4 

at last been fully revealed to us in a Man - the Man Christ Jesus." 

1. Paton, p.299. 2. Raven, p.443. 3. Temple, p.144. 

4. Baillie, p.114. 








* 


* 

, 


, 

, 

. 

... , * 



. 











. 







-64- 


Speoalative Christologies of modern times seem to fall 
into two main classes. Some writers see in Christ a man 
filled witn the divine, the example 'par excellence', since 
in him the religious consciousness finds exemplary perfection,-* 
and truly tne religious experience expressed in the life and 
teaching of °esus does represent the supreme achievement of 
humanity. Others see in him the incarnation of tne Logos, the 
supreme revelation of God and the Redeemer of mankind. The 
truth seems to lie between these two positions. Jesus, we 
believe, is both the 'ideal' of mankind and the incarnation of 
Godhead. Prof. Baillie has most clearly set forth this view 
of the 'double significance ' of Jesus, xie sees in the 
advent of the Man of Nazareth "a direct enterprise of &dd 
for the enlightenment ans salvation of the world. " "In the 
soirit of his life", he says, the church has found "not merely 

1 

an ideal for humanity, but also the self-disclosure of Deity." 
"Gn the one hand. He represents tne highest point to which 
our human race nas yet attained, he stands, by nimself alone, 
at the vanguard of our human search for the Divine, ne i s 
altogether one of ourselves, a man among men, a human brother 
to the lowliest among us, with the same handicaps and the same 
opportunities. He had his human chance just as you and I 
have ours; He had His life to make or mar, and nis human free¬ 
will to make or mar it with. He differs fromx us only in 
that He made more of His human opportunity than any of the 
rest of us has ever made of ours, and used His free-will to 


1. Baillie, p.102. 







. 





„ 

' 

. 

, 

, 

. 

■ 


, , 








-65- 


better ends. He is the great Discoverer, the great Trail- 

finder, the great Leader of men and himself tne Ideal wan 

to whose faith and patience and bravery we must ever keep gni 

going back for guidance and inspiration until, as St.Paul says, 

we all come unto the stature of his own fulness. But on the 

other hand we cannot read the story of Christ's life without 

its being very strongly borne in upon us that it marks the 

culmination, not only of our human search for God, but also 

1 

of God's search for the human heart." Dr. Temple expresses 

the same idea in these words: "In Jesus Christ", he says, 

"we shall find the one adequate presentation of God - not 

adequate, of course, to the infinite glory of God in all 

his attributes, but ad quate to every human need, for it 

own 

shows us God in terms of our^experience. But in ^esus Christ 
we shall find also the one adequate presentation of Man - 
not man as he is apart from the indwelling of God, but man 
as he is in his truest nature, which is only made actual 

2 

when man becomes the means to the self-expression of God." 

In Jesus God Himself became fully human, going forth from 

Himself, yet at the same time retaining His transcendent 

3 

nature. "He is the incomparable revealer of God to us, the 

incomoarable example to us, just because he is surely one 

4 

of us." 


1. Baillie, pp.107-8. 2. Temple, p.148. 

3. W.M.Horton, Our Eternal Contemporary, cf. pp.132-3. 

4. Horton, p.139. 







* 

' 

, 

. 


* 







1 


-66- 

In his exemplary capacity, as Hr. Brunner points out, 

Jesus redeems others by arousing in them the same God- 

consciousness which ne nixxlxf himself felt - a feeling of 

union with the infinite. As the incarnation of deity we nave 

already given full weight to the redemptive significance of 

^esus. In either capacity salvation is effected only through 

the outgoing nature of God in the process of redemption. 

Perhaps Cave is right when ne says "Whether we see in Christ 

the God-filled man or the incarnate Son of God, it matters 

not so much if we have found in Him the perfect Revealer of 

2 

God and the sufficient Saviour of men." At any rate the 

felt experience of the Cnristian church has been that God 

gave His only begotten Son that whosoever believetn on nim 

should not perish but have everlasting life. 

The problem of the 'uniqueness * of Jesus still remains 

to be answered. "Between the divinity of sages and prophets 

and the divinity of esus", says Raven, "there was only a 

difference in degree. If He were an intruder from another 

sphere, if there were no spark of deity in us, and no fully 

personal Manhood in Him, we might admire and worship; but 

3 

between God and man the antithesis would still remain.." 


1. Emil Brunner, The Philosophy of H e iigi 0 n, 1937, p.46. 

2. Cave, p.239. 3. Raven, p.432. 











« 


. 

\ 

* 

. 

' 

- ... 

. 

■ 

- 

- . 

. 

, « ■ •. i 





■. r. 




-67- 

This threat to the uniqueness of Jesus is answered by Prof. 

John Baillie of Edinburgh. "There is a tendency in our time", 
he says, "to speak of God's presence in Cnrist as being differ¬ 
ent only in degree, and not at all in kind, from nis presence 
in other men. But tne distinction is after all an unreal one 
and is not without its perils. For surely the very glory and 
headmark of all living history and living personality is just 
its uniqueness, its irreducible singularity and unrepeataDility, 
its refusal to conform to any kind of quantitative computation 
of measure or degree. So the question is not as to the compar¬ 
ative measure of Christ’s divinity, but as to the particular 

sind unique nature of the work which, through and in him, God 

1 

has accomplished in our souls and in the world." Between 
Jesus Christ and the rest of us the difference xxxsasxgrBxt 
would seem to be so great as to constitute a difference of 
kind. 

It is clear therefore that life in God as °esus lived 

and taught it does not necessarily depend upon an orthodox 

confession of his divinity. Jesus Christ is not another 

name for God "but the name of a Man in whom God was, and 

2 

through whom God came to meet us." With Farmer we believe 

that "it is idle to imagine that we are ever going to comp- 

3 

rehend the ultimate nature of God." 

1. Baillie, p.121. 2. ibid. p.20l. 

3. Experience of God, p.216. cf also ^atthews. Future of 
Christianity, p.115. 









. 





* 






* 





■ 












* 
















. 

, 




-68- 


It is only in Christ that we know God in any C u ristian sense. 

It is Christ we know and we have to try to interpret God 

through him. "Romeiiber", says Dr, Tample, "that tne 

importance of all we say about him (Christ} oomes from the 

consequent thought of God.God is Christlike. The 

majesty which rules all things is the majesty of such love as 
1 

we see in Christ." 

But even if Jesus Christ is not another name for God, 

for many people ne has the value of God, and the experience 

of Jesus is identical with the experience of God. Baillie 

gives us a list of quotations to show that union with Christ 

and union with God are not two experiences but one. Prof. 

Forrest points out that "by no analysis is he (tne Christian) 

able to distinguish his communion with the Father from his 

2 

communion with Christ." Stanley Jones testifies that "it is 

an actual fact of experience that when you deepen the Christ- 

consciousness you deepen the God-consciousness." "Jesus", 

he says, "does not push out or rival God; the more I know 

3 

of Him the more I know of the Father. " Prof. Morgan is 
still more emphatic: "It is simply not possible to distingu¬ 
ish between the operations of the living Cnrist and God; and 

4 

no Christian man tries." And here is James Stewart: 


1. An article on ’How Can Y/e Find God* in the Christian Century 
(Chicago) for 28th Feb. 1929. 

2. The Christ of History and Experience, 1897, p.166. 

3. The Christ of the Indian Road, p.59. 

4. The Nature and Right of Religion, 1926, p.277. 









-69- 


"The more any man comes to be 'in Christ*, the more is he 

1 

'in God'. There are not two experiences but one." 

Unfortunately we cannot agree with Archbishop Temple 

or Canon Raven, that because Jesus nas the value of God, 

2 

tnerefore he is God. To affirm tnat Christ is God is to 

confuse being with becoming; it is to confound transcendence 

with immanence. In Christianity God the father is the only 

object of worship - a Being who transcends the universe in 

the sense of being its origin and creator, but who is 

immanent in all his works. Y/e can admit with C as e that 

"Jesus has the value of God for us in that he makes possible 

for the believer the sense of the divine fatherhood and the 

practice of human brotherhood. In him the love and moral 

perfection of God became incarnate. And if one so chooses 

he may evaluate this fact by speaking of the divinity, or 

3 

indeed the deity, of Christ." In our introduction we have 
already pointed oat that there has always been a desire for 
a physical expression of the invisible God. Thus for the 
great majority of Christians the religious experience 
will be definitely Christocentric. Nevertheless, "it will 
no doubt be true that some will find tneir devotion more 


1. A Man in Christ, p.170. 

2. cf. Temple, Christ tne -‘•ruth, p.135 and footnote; also 
Raven, Jesus and the Gospel of Love, p.444. 

3. Case, Jesus, A New Biography, p.333. 

* 







> 




















> i , " : \ | 




' 








-70- 


emphatioally God-centred, 'passing beyond the God-man to the 
1 

Godhead*", since "the real centre and burden of the Christian 

2 

confession is a conviction concerning the nature of God*" 

Thus our interpretation of both Jesus and man depends for 

its final truth upon the nature of God himself* "Because 

God is what he is, man is what he is, and he is endov/ed with 

freedom to become the new creation tnat he may be in Jesus 
3 

Christ." 


1. VtfP. Paterson, The Mature of fteligion, p.290, quoted by 
Raven, p.121* 

2. Baillie, p*142f. 


3. Paton, p.30l 









£ .•■ v.- v 

, 

' 










-71- 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Ante-Nioene Fathers, American Edition, Vol.1-4, Buffalo, 1885. 
Baillie,J.,The Place of Jesus Christ in Modern 


Christianity, 

New York, 1930. 

Branscomb, B.H. - The Gospel of Mark, 

London, 1937. 


Brunner, Emil, The Philosophy of Religion - trans. by 

A.J.D.Farrer & B.L.Y/oolf London, 1937. 

Burkitt,F. C. , Gospel history & Its Transmission, r,din. 1906. 


Case, S.J., Jesus, A New Biography, 

Chicago 1927. 

Case, S.J., Jesus Through the Centuries, 

Chicago, 1932. 


Cave, S., The Doctrine of the Ferson 0 f Christ, Cambridge 1925. 


Environmental Factors in Christian History - 


ed. McNeill,Spinka & Y/illoughby, 

Chicago, 1939. 


Essays on the Trinity & the Incarnation - ed. 


by A.E.J.Rawlinson. 

New York 1928. 

Fairbairn,A.M. ,Place of Christ in Modern Thel* 

New York 1911. 

Farmer, H.H., Experience of God, 

New York, 1929. 


Farrar,F.YL, Lives of the Church Fathers, Vol.l Edihburgh 1889. 
Fisher, G.P. History of Christian Doctrine New York 1911. 
Forrest, D.V/. The Christ of nistory & Experience, Edin. 1908. 
Forsyth, P.T., The Person & Place of Jesus Christ, London 1909. 


Guignebert,C., 1 Jesus *, Trans, by S.H.Hooke, 

^ndon, 1935. 

Horton, Y/.M. - Our Eternal Contemporary, 

New York, 1942. 

Jones, R.M. , The Church's Debt to n©retics 

London, 1924. 

Kaftan,J., The Truth of the Christian Religion, 

Edinburgh 1891. 

Knox, John, The Man Christ Jesus, 

1941. 











- 72 - 


Mackintosh, h.R. - The Doctrine of the Person of 



Jesus Christ. 

New York, 

1931, 

MeGown, C.C. 

, The ^earon for the Real Jesus 

New York, 

1940, 

Nicene and Post-Nicene r athers, 2nd, Series, 7.4, 

New York 

1892, 

Nock, A, D. - 

St.Paul, 

Harvard, 

1938, 

Paton, Rob't 

. Evolution & the Christian Doctrine 
of numan Y/orth, Univ. of Edinburgh Lib. 

1931 

Porter, F.C. 

, The Mind of Christ in Paul, 

New York 

1930, 

Raven, Jesus 

& The Gospel of Love, 

New York, 

1931 

Rawlinson, A 

.E.J., The New Testament Doctrine 
of Christ, 

London, 

1926 

Religion is 

and Life, Spring, 1942. 

New York 

1942, 

Ritschl, A. 

Justification & Reconciliation 



Stewart, £.J 

.S., A Man in Christ, 

London, 

1935 

Temple, V/., 

Christ the x ruth, 

New York, 

1924 













