
University of Alberta Library 


0 1620 3416719 5 


For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


THE classification of coal 


A Thesis Submitted by- 


Sutherland, B. Sc 


Scientific and Industrial Researcii Department 


University of Alberta 





























































T H E 


CLASSIFICATION 


COAL 


0 F 


- by - 


JOHN WALTER SUTHERLAND 

Scientific and Incitistrial Research 
Council oi Alberta, 

University of Alberta 


A THESIS 

Submitted to the University of Alberta in Partial 
Fulfilment of the Requirements for the Degree of 
Master of Science. 


Edmonton, Alberta 


April, 1928 





Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/classificationofOOsuth 


PREFACE 


Tiie investigation described in tiiis thesis was carried out in 
conjunction witn the duties ox Fuel Analyst oX the ScientiXic and 
Industrial Research Council oi Aloerta. 

The writer wisnes to specially acknowledge his indebtedness to 
Mr. Edgar StansXield, Research Engineer in Fuels, tor discussion and 
advice during tne preparation oX tne thesis. 

He also wishes to thank ProX. H. C. Pitcher for criticism and 
suggestions. 

In addition to these he wishes to thank Dr. Clark, Dr. Allan, 
Dr. Cameron and the junior members ol the staff of the Research Council 
for discussion and criticism. 

He is indebted to Mr. Baird for the preparation of the figures 
used, and to Miss Wortman for the typing of the thesis. 


















' 


. 

■ 


. 

* 








* 










. 

* 













TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


Page 

General Introduction 1 

Cnapter I. Criteria and Data tor Classification oi Coal 

Requirements oi a classilication system 4 

Diiiiculties to be overcome in making a classifi¬ 
cation of coal 5 

Data used 7 

Methods oi carrying out Analyses and Tests 8 

Adjustment of Analyses 10 

Ignition Temperature 13 

Ulmin Content 13 

Cnapter II . Classification oi Coal 

Introduction 18 

Classifications considered* 

Regnault's 19 

Fleck's 20 

Hilt's 20 

Scnondorfi's 21 

Muck's 21 

Fuel Ratio 21 

Wedding's 23 

Gruner‘s 23 

Seyler's 2o 

Carbon-hydrogen ratio 30 

Ralston*s Graphic Representation 3^ 

Parr's First 32 

Grout * s 33 

Parr's second 3^ 

Thom's 3^ 

Stansfieid's 36 

Ashley's 38 

Dowling's 39 

U.S. Geological Survey 39 

•Twelfth International Congress 41 

Fisner's Diagrams 43 

Fig. I - Fisher's Coal series, Proximate consti¬ 
tuents 43 a 

Fig. II - Fisher's coal series. Ultimate consti¬ 
tuents 43 ”b 

Summary 44 

Table IV - Summary of methods 01 coal classifi¬ 
cation 45 

Table V - Moisture content of mine samples of 

coal from two townships in Alberta 48 

Chapter III. The Classiiication of Alberta Coals . 

Introduction 49 

Provincial Mines Branch Classification 49 





























' 






- 




: 











‘ 





’ 

• 1 










1 

- 

1 













* 




Page. 


List of T a kles and Figures. 

Tabl® VI - Ratios and data of Kootenay horizon coals 
Fig, III - Seyler's classification for Kootenay horizon 
coals 

Table VII - Data of Belly River & Edmonton horizon coals 
Table VIII - " " 18 " 

Table IX - Order of arrangement of Belly River & Edmonton 
horizon coals by various data 
Fig. IV - Seyler's Classification 

Table X - Areas by classes by Seyler's Classification 
Fig. V - Parr's Second Classification 

Table XI - Areas by classes by Parr's Second Classifica¬ 
tion 

Fig. VI - Thom's Classification 

Table XII - Areas by classes by Thom's Classification 
Fig. VII - E. Stansfield's Classification 
Table XIII - Areas by classes by E. Stansfield's 
Classification 

Fig. - VIII - Graphic Representation of Alberta coals 
Fig. IX - ■ " " 

Fig. X - ■ " " 

Table XIV - Areas by classes by Dowling's Split Volatile 
Ratio 

Table XV - Areas by classes by the Carbon-hydrogen ratio 
Table XVI - Areas by classes by Grout's Classification 
Table XVII - Areas by classes by Parr's First Classifica¬ 
tion 

Discussion of Tables and Figuress 
Seyler's Classification 

Classifications based on Volatile Matter and Calorific 
Value 

Fisher's Scheme 
Split Volatile Ratio 
Carbon-hydrogen Ratio 
Grout's Classification 
Parr's First Classification 
Miscellaneous Classifications and Data 
Conclusion 


50 

52 

53 

54 

55 

5b 

57 

58 

59 

bO 

bl 

b2 

b3 

b4 

o5 

bb 

b8 

b9 

70 

71 

72 

73 

74 

75 
7b 
77 
77 
77 
si 




















' 










r- - 

* 

- 

1 

- 




i 









THE CLASSIFICATION OF COAL. 

GENERAL INTRODUCTION » 

The earliest reference to coal that has come down to us was by 
Theophrastus in M Tne Book of Stones”, written about 200 B. C. He describes 
an earthy substance which would kindle, and which was used by smiths. 

We have references to the use of coal in England during the Roman 
occupation, and coal cinders ha/ve been found among ruins dating from the same 
period. The Saxon Chronicle of the Abbey of Peterborough in Sb3 mentions 
coal, but no mention of it was made in the Domesday Book in 1085* Records 
preserved in Holyrood Palace show that coal was being mined on the snores of 
tne Firth of Forth aoout 1200. 

Coal mining as a recognized industry began after the signing of the 
Magna Carta in 12lq, So rapidly did the industry exoand thab in 12b^ coal 
was being shipned from Tynemouth. At the end of the century coal was being- 
used in London, by the poorer people tor heating, and by such artisans as: 
smiths, limeburners, and brewers, in their trade. However, with the exhaus¬ 
tion of sources of supplies of wood, came the introduction of new heating 
equipment, which made possible tne use of coal as a fuel tor heating castles 
and the houses of the well to do. 

Even with such a limited field of requirement for coal, a use classi¬ 
fication, 'orobably based on the conditions of burning, would gradually be 
evolved. This rougn use classification had to give way to a more definite 
system wnen new uses for coal were discovered, and as it became clear that all 
coal deposits did not yield coal equally suitaoie for all the reouirements of 


tne trade 




































- 




, 








* 














4 






. 



' 








* 






file introduction of tne bee-hive type of oven lor the manuiacture of. 
coke in Germany about louO, ana of tne by-product oven about a century later, 
opened new uses for coal. These inventions, followed in 1740 by tne first 
successful use oi coke in the manufacture of iron, made necessary a better 
system of classification of coals, since specific varieties of coal were re¬ 
quired. The discovery in 175*2 that coal gas could he used for lighting pur¬ 
poses made it necessary that criteria be established to distinguish coals 
suitable for the manufacture of gas. Tne invention of the steam engine, which 
in turn made possible the introduction of steamboats, and later of railway 
locomotives, caused new demands to be made for coal. Tnese inventions and dis¬ 
coveries, all depending on coal either as a raw material or lor the generation 
of power, lead to, and made possible the Industrial Revolution in Great Britain. 

Low temperature carbonization,(44) as a source primarily of a home 
supply of liquid fuel, but also yielding a smokeless solid fuel and important 
by-products, has received a great deal of attention, and has been the subject 
of a great deal of research in Great Britain and on the continent of Europe. 

The process of hydrogenation of coal (21 C) under pressure, invented by Pro¬ 
fessor Bergius in Germany, also aiming at a home source of liquid fuel, has 
also had mucn exoermentation done on it. 

The result of these inventions, making possible the production of a. 
liquid fuel from low rank coals has given those coals, formerly considered of 
little value, a new importance in the industrial world. Even the large oil 
companies are looking to tnese coals as the future source of supply of liquid 
fuel. It seems, in spite of what has been said and written to tne contrary, 
that the era of coal is far from being supplanted by the era oi petroleum, but 
that coal aided by modern science is quite capable of competing with natural 
liquid fuels. 

A standard system of classification, applicable to coals of all conn- 














tries, is required, in order to make the best use of the coal reserves of the 
world, and to estimate the amounts of those reserves available for the different 
uses. 

The aim of this thesis will be to review the various systems of 
classification wnich have been proposed, and to investigate the adaptability 
of these systems to the coals found in Alberta. Consideration will be given 
chiefly to those systems of classification which are based on chemical criteria. 










- 4 - 


CHAPTER I, 

CRITERIA AM) DATA FOR CLASSIFICATION OF COAL , 

Requirements of a Classification System. 

Prof. F. F. Grout* gives a good outline of the requirements of a 
classification. In discussing the classification of geological materials, 
ne makes the statements contained in the following quotation; 

•’All “bases (of classification) should be capable of quantitative 
determination, or exactly related to some property capable of such a test; 
so that, if no natural groups are found, an arbitrary line may be drawn to 
limit the classes. The best basis for classification should involve inherent 
and fundamental qualities of the materials considered. Allied to this is the 
requirement that advantage should be taken of any natural grouping. As a 
further help in selection, the basis or test should be easily applied, widely 
known, and have a wide range of values in tne material classified. If no such 
classification exists, the choice of action depends entirely on the material 
concerned. 

•'In discussion of concrete examples of the criteria available, we 
iind age generally discredited, and uses and geologic position producing many 
overlapping groups. There are left tne physical and cnemical properties and 
method of genesis. Some physical properties capable of quantitative measure¬ 
ment may be used it they also conform to the above requirements 1 ’. 

Referring particularly to coal classiiication, he states; ”We are 
not dealing here with any grouping for special study of some minor problem, 
but with a general, comurenensive and scientific classification of coal. Qhe 
grouns must be selected to avoid overlapping as far as possible. Coals clearly 

*F. F. Grout. The Classification of Geological Materials, and Tne Classifica¬ 
tion of Coal, Economic Geology, Vol. 4, 1909, pp. b4b & bq2. 





























■ 








!§. ? :'i 




* 




- 
















. 


. 

. 













- 5 - 


distinct must not be left together. We still know too little to make good 
use of genesis as a basis of classes. Aside from this, the physical and 
chemical properties of a coal are its most fundamental characters. The selec¬ 
tion of the particular properties to use must be made on definite principles. 
The property must primarily be capable of quantitative expression. It should 
take advantage of any natural grouping that exists. It should, if possible, 
be easy and accurate of determination. In devising tests for quantitative 
determination oi groups, tnose tests should be selected which disagree least 
with the commercial classification, and that method should be selected (other 
things being equal) which has the minimum number of exceptions 11 . 

As was to be expected, coal classification has been the subject of a 
great deal of attention during the last few years. It is generally recognized 
by those in any way connected with the coal trade that it is necessary (21 a) 
n to establish standard ranks* of coal which will be acceptable to operators of 
coal mines, dealers, consumers, chemists, engineers and geologists; and to 
accurately define the limits and characteristics of these ranks, so that they 
may be readily recognized and differentiated, and to prevent the attempt to 
settle the question by committees and commissions not familiar with the 
subject H . 

Difficulties to be Overcome in Making a Classification of Co°l . 

The making of a system of classification which shall be applicable 
to coals of all types and ages presents a great many difficulties. Coals 
have been produced irom different vegetable substances so that there is a 
divergence in eonstitution at the very start of tneir formation. Then there 
is great difference in .age between some coals. Different original vegetation, 
coupled witn differences in conditions of pressure and heat, makes it impossi¬ 
ble to base any reliance on the age of the coal, as a basis of classification. 

*Tne word "rank" is used to designate changes in coal due to metamorphosis. 


















D - 


The coals in Great Britain are of Carboniferous age. Most -of those 
being mined in Eastern America are of the same age* Coals of Tertiary age 
are being mined on the continent of Europe. In Alberta tnere are three coal 
horizons (4p). all of Cretaceous age, but representing a very great lapse of 
time between the laying down of the lower and upper horizons. 

The tnree coal horizons referred to above occur in the Kootenay forma¬ 
tion, in tne Belly River formation, and in the Edmonton formation. 

Pressure exerted in tne upheaval of tne Rocky Mountain Cordillera has 
played a very important part in the metamorphosis of Alberta coals. So great 
has tnis effect been, that, while bore holes show small variations in rank 
between successive coal seams encountered, in spite of time elapsed between 
depositions, a very appreciable increase in maturity is encountered in the same 
coal seam, a few miles nearer the Rocky Mountains, and therefore nearer the 
source of pressure. The result of this abnormal pressure has been that some 
Alberta coals have undergone metamorphosis to a greater degree than have some 
coals of Carboniterous age. 

Different vegetable substances and dilferences in age ana conditions 
of pressure and heat have produced coals which though very nearly isomeric, 
yet, as is to be expected, exhibit dilferences in physical and chemical charac¬ 
teristics. Most British and American classifications have been proposed for 
small areas, end to suit coals whose method of formation and maturity have 
been similar. It is, therefore, not surprising that many of those classifi¬ 
cations do not suit the coals of Alberta., where a large range of ranks of 
coal is encountered in a small area. 

A casual consideration of the above factors is sufficient to impress 
one with the difficulties to be surmounted in obtaining a standard coal 
classification applicable to the coals of all countries. 

Committees to undertake the drawing up or a standard coal classifi- 

















- 7 - 


cation were appointed at tne International Conlerence on Bituminous Coal 
neld at Pittsburg in November ly2b. Since tnat time a committee has been 
appointed under the National Research Council oi Canada to make a study of 
the subject, with tne aim of drawing up a standard classification. It is 
hoped that it will be possible to adopt the same standard system in both 
countries. 

In Europe the system proposed by C. A. Seyier has been quite generally 
adopted, and the fuel literature refers to classes of coal as distinguished 
by that system. 

Prom the earliest days of the coal trade three distinctive varieties 
of coal have been recognized. Though variously designated, these three 
varieties correspond to those now broadly known as Anthracite, Bituminous, 
and Lignite. The distinguishing characteristics of these groups are rougnly 
as follows? 

Anthracite} a hard coal, deep black in color, low moisture content, 
does not soil, ignites with difficulty, and burns with¬ 
out flame or smoke. 

Bituminous; generally burns with a smoky flame, and gives off much 
gas on heating. 

Lignite; retains a woody or earthy structure, is brown in color, 
slacks on weathering, and contains as much as 30 to ^0^ 
moisture when mined. 

Data used. 

for the purpose of testing tne applicability of the different classi¬ 
fications to Alberta coals, use was made of the results of the following 
analyses and tests; 

^84. Proximate analyses and calorific value determinations made in the 
laboratories of the Scientific and Industrial Research Council of Alberta, 
on samples supplied by tne Provincial Mines Branch. These samples represent 
fifteen mines in the Kootenay formation and one hundred and eleven townships 















- 8 - 

in the Belly River and. Edmonton lormations. 

40. Ultimate analyses made in tne laboratories or the Scientific and 
Industrial Research Council. Tne samples in tnis group were as follows; 
nineteen from the Kootenay formation, six from the Belly River formation, and 
fifteen from the Edmonton formation. 

bl. Ultimate analyses made in the Fuel Testing Laboratories of the De¬ 
partment of Mines at Ottawa*. 

10. Ultimate analyses made in the Fuel Testing Laboratories of the 
Department of Mines at Ottawa®. 

33- Ignition Temperature Determinations made in the laboratories of 
the Scientific and Industrial Research Council. 

34. Determinations of the oxidizable constituents (Ulmins) of coal made 
in the laboratories of the Scientific & Industrial Research Council. 

Metnods of Carrying out .Analyses and Tests. 

The Scientific and Industrial Research Council in their laboratories 
adopted methods of analysis of coal which are substantially those laid down 
by the A.S.T.M.(4o). This means that results obtained there may be used in 
comparison with analyses made elsewnere under the A.S.T.M. metnods. Some 
changes have been made where they would lead to more accurate determination. 
Briefly outlined the methods of Proximate and Ultimate analysis by tne 
Scientific and Industrial R e search Council are given below. 

Proximate analysis consists of the determination of moisture, asn, 
volatile matter, and fixed carbon. These are not definite constituents of 
tne coal, and the determinations depend on arbitrarily standardized tests. 

The determination oi caloriiic value is usually considered as part of tne 
nroximate analysis. 

* Analyses of Canadian Fuels, Part 4, Alberta & Northwest Territories, 
'Bulletin 2^, Mines Branch of the Department of Mines, Ottawa, 1^22. 

® Investigations of Fuels and Fuel Testing, ly2h. Mines Branch No. b/1. 











'i'ne analyses are made on the air-dry coal. Air drying* is done by 
exposing crushed coal in shallow pans at room temperature for 48 hours, in 
a current of air of b0$> humidity, This is not a method of the A*S.T.M. but 
has oeen adopted by the Fuel Testing Laboratories of the Mines Branch at 
Ottawa. The results obtained by tnis method are independent of the humidity 
conditions of the atmosphere at the time, and hence results so obtained are 
strictly comparable. 

The total moisture in the original coal is calculated from the loss 
during air drying and the moisture retained by the coal after air drying. 
Moisture is the loss in weight sustained wnen the coal is dried one hour 
at 10o-7° C in a current of dry natural gas. 

Ash is the residue left when the coal is burned in a muffle furnace 
neated to a temperature of 700° C to J^O® C. 

Gross Volatile Matter is the loss in weight of coal heated at 930® C 
for seven minutes, in a platinum crucible with a close fitting lid. Net 
volatile is gross volatile less moisture. Coals retaining more than Z°]o 
moisture on air-drying require pre-heating for five minutes in the muffle 
furnace at 800® C, after wnicn they are given the full heat for six minutes. 

The percentage of fixed carbon is calculated by subtracting from 
100 the sum of moisture, ash, and volatile matter. 

Calorific value is determined by burning the coal in compressed 
oxygen, in a bomb calorimeter. 

Ultimate analysis consists of the determination of carbon, hydrogen, 
afih, sulnhur, and nitrogen, ano. the calculation of the percentage of oxygen 
by subtracting the sum of the percentages of the above constituents from 100. 

Carbon and hydrogen are determined by burning the coal in a combustion 

* Kenort No. 10. Fourth Annual Benort of the S. & I. R. C., 1923* 












10 - 


lurmce in a current of dry oxygen and absorbing and weighing the water and 
carbon dioxide so produced. The *sn from the proximate analysis is used. 

Sulphur is determined by tne Eshka method, and nitrogen by a modiiied Kjedahl 
metnod. 

Adjustment oi .Analyses . 

Before any use for classification oumoses can be made of the results 
obtained by analysis, they must he calculated to a basis such that they are 
comparable. It has generally been customary to calculate the proximate 
analysis to the ash free, or ash and moisture free, basis. The ultimate 
analysis .was generally calculated so that the sum of the percentages of carbon, 
hydrogen and oxygen, or carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen, together made 
up K)Q. This might be on the dry, air dry, or moist as mined coal. 

In these calculations there is an inherent error due to the fact that 
the ash percentage as determined aoes not truly represent the mineral matter 
present in the coal. 

The mineral matter of the coal may contain carbonates, hydrated shales, 
and pyrites. On burning, carbonates give up carbon dioxide, shales give up 
water, and nyrites oxidize to sulphur dioxide and ferric oxide. On account of 
these chemical changes, the ash as weighed is less than the original mineral 
matter of the coal, and a factor is necessary to correct the determined ash to 
original mineral matter* 

W. S. Parr (30) at the University of Illinois, E. Stansfield (37) at 
the University of Alberta, and R. ¥• Wheeler (41) at the University of Sheffield, 
have studied the subject of correcting the ash, as determined, to mineral matter. 

Parr worked out a formula for correcting to what he called tne "Unit* 1 
coal basis, this basis being what others have described as "pure coal". Parr's 
formula corrects tne a.sn to mineral matter by using tne factor 1.08 which he 

















ll 


found best suited to Illinois coals, ana also corrects ior sulphur, all of 
whicn he regards as being present as pyrites. Parr’s formula isj 
Ion-coal = 1,08 x ash as weighed + P.l/40 sulphur. 

Mr. Stansfield suggested a. method of determining the relation of 
mineral matter to ash. This method was worked out in the laboratories of the 
Scientific and Industrial Research Council* (Ref. Lewis* Thesis) and has been 
fully described by Mr. Stansiield, as well as in the thesis referred to above. 

In this method a coal is separated into fractions of difterent ash 

: _ 1 \''V : ■ ■ ; ; 1 ft,? | 

content, by means of solutions of suitable specific gravity. The calorific 
value of these fractions is plotted against their ash consent (both on tne 
dry basis), A straight line relation is obtained. By extrapolation the 
theoretic percentage of ash when tne calorific value becomes zero is obtained. 

i 

This percentage is always less than 100. Dividing the percentage of ash at 
zero calorific value into 100, obviously gives the ratio of mineral matter 
to ash. Though the ratios found vary considerably, 1.1 appears to be near 
the average of values obtained. 

Wheeler, after a study of the subject, chiefly as it affected the 
carbon as determined in the ultimate analysis, decided that the factor 1.1 
best represented the average ratio of mineral matter to ash ior English coals. 

In the adjustment of analyses used in this thesis the mineral matter 
is calculated by multiplying the percentage of ash by the factor determined 
for that coal, or, if that has not yet been determined, Dy the factor 1,1. The 
sulphur content of Alberta, coals is low, so the correction due to it is negli¬ 
gible. 

In correcting the calorific v»!ue to the pure coal basis the formula is 

H = H 1 x 100.. 

. 100 - (K x A + M ) 

* Lewis, J.W, 11 A Further Study of Alberta Coals”. Thesis for Decree of M. Sc. 

University of Alberta. 













- 12 - 


wnere H represents the calorific v^lue of oure coal; H , the calorific value 
of the coal as analysed; K, the factor for converting ash. to mineral matter; 

A, the ash as determined; and M, the moisture as determined. 

In correcting volatile matter, it is assumed that the mineral matter 
lost in the ash determination is also volatilized in the determination of 
volatile matter, so the difference between mineral matter and ash (i.e. volatile 
mineral matter) must be subtracted from the percentage of volatile matter as 
determined to give the percentage volatile matter actually produced by the dis¬ 
tillation of the coal. The volatile matter in the pure coal is determined by 
substituting volatile matter for calorific value in the formula given above. 

The percentage of fixed carbon in the pure coal is given by the formula; Fixed 
carbon in oure coal = 100-volatile matter in pure coal. 

Mr. Stansfield (37), in his work, adjusted analyses for Alberta coals 
to an average ash of 10%, or mineral matter of 11% on the dry coal, instead of 
to the pure coal basis. He did this because a considerable error was involved 
in a high ash coal if the factor employed (1.1) did not quits suit the coal. 

The errors introduced in small adjustments irom either side of the 10% ash are 
less likely to be serious. 

These methods of adjustment give the correct calorific value, and only a 
small error, due to the absence of the oxidation eftect, persists in the volatile 
matter. 

In the adjustment of the ultimate analysis to the oure coad, basis, a. 
different situation from that encountered in adjusting the proximate analyses is 
met. The percentage of carbon, as determined, includes carbon from carbonates of 
mineral matter as well as that from the coal substance* The hydrogen determined 
includes hydrogen from water of hydration of mineral matter as well as the hydrogen 
of the coal. Sulphur, as determined, includes the sulphur present as sulphates in 











trie asn, and accounted lor there already. (This is a very small error with the 
low sulphur coals of Alberta). The oxygen, as calculated, is made uu of all 
the errors of the analysis, oxygen from carbonates and water of hydration of 
the mineral matter, as well as the oxygen of the coal substance. 

Carbonates can be determined, and tne carbon percentage corrected for, 
but no satisfactory method of correcting for water of hydration has been devised. 

In adjusting to the pure coal using the mineral matter percentage, as 
calculated, tne difference between mineral matter and ash is subtracted from 
tne oxygen, as calculated, this makes the oxygen percentage so corrected too 
low by the percentage of oxygen from the hydrated shales, (Tne error due to 
oxidation of pyrites would be very small for Alberta coals). 

The method outlined above has been followed in adjusting analyses 
used in tnis thesis. In view of the errors entering the adjustment it has 
been decided that in future, ultimate .analyses in tne Scientif ic and Industrial 
Research Council’s laboratories will be made on coal cleaned.by separating the 
original sample in a solution of suitable specific gravity. By this means a 
sample, low enough in ash content to eliminate most of the error due to 
mineral matter, will be obtained for analysis. 

Ignition Temperatures . 

The determination of the ignition temperature of coals was first 
undertaken by Wheeler and Burgess (47) in their work on tne subject of tne 
spontaneous combustion of coal. Ignition temperature of coal was defined by 
Wheeler as “tne temperature at which under standard conditions, different coals 
begin to react with oxygen so rapidly that the ultimate appearance of flame is 
assured". 

Parr carried out determinations of ignition temperature (48) on a number 


of United States coals 












- 14 - 


For results obtained to be at all comparable, tne metnod and pro¬ 
cedure followed must be standardized. A procedure was standardized for 
use in tne laboratories of the Scientitic ana Indus-crial Research Council, 
ana determinations were made of the ignition temperature of a number of 
Alberta coals. 

ihe metnod employed consists in passing dry oxygen through a column 
of finely ground coal, the temperature of which is raised at a definite 
rate by an external source of heat. The coal used is ground with repeated 
screening, until it just passes a 200 mesh Tyler standard screen. The 
retort used is a pyrex glass tube through which oxygen can be passed. A 
column of coal one inch in length is placed in the retort so that the coal 
is in the centre of the furnace when the retort tube is placed vertically 
in the furnace. One thermometer is placed with its bulb in the coal, another 
is placed in tne furnace so that its bulb is just outside the retort tube, 
and on tne same level as tne bulb of the retort thermometer. 

The current supplied to the furnace is controlled so that a rise 

of 10®G. per minute is shown by the furnace themometer. At the same time 

Oxygen is forced through tne column of coal in the retort at a definite rate. 

Readings of the two ■cnermometers are taken every minute. 

At first the coal temperature shows a lag behind the furnace tempera¬ 
ture. Wnen oxidation of the coal becomes rapid the coal temperature rises 
more rapidly than the furnace temperature, and eventually passes it. Tne 
temperature, at the moment when both thermometers snow the same temperature, 
is tahen as the ignition temperature. 

Ignition temperatures were determined in the same way on the coals 


after they had been oxidised for six hours in a current of dry air at 
10b-107® C. 











. 








- 




























Ignition temperatures obtained, on Alberta coals are shown in Table VI 
and the order oi values obtained compared with the order the s^me co^ls are 
placed in by different classifications. 

TJLMTN CONTM. 

The determination of the oxidizable constituents of coal* is based 
upon the fact that low rank coals impart a dee^ brown color to a solution of 
potassium hydroxide, while as the rank increases the shade of brown gets 
lighter until, with anthracite, no brown color is given to the solution. 

The development and standardization of the test from one requiring 
a colorimetric determination to one capable of quantitative measurement has 
been the subject of one part of the thesis recently presented by S. Seavin, 
and requires no more than an outline of the method finally adopted* 

In the method, now standardized, a. weighed amount of coal, of known 
moisture and ash content, is digested for a set length of time in a potassium 
hydroxide solution of standard concentration. The solution produced is 
filtered off, and to an aliquot part of it is added standard potassium per¬ 
manganate solution and phosphoric acid. This is boiled gently for one hour 
and the amount of oxygen absorbed by the coal determined by means of standard 
solutions of ferrous ammonium sulphate and potassium permanganate, This 
amount is expressed in grams of oxygen per hologram of mineral matter-free and 
moisture-free coal. The purpose of the test is to distinguish between the 
lower rank of coals and to make uossible a sharp division of those coals 
into classes. 

.Another attempt to make use of the uimin content as a basis of classi¬ 
fication ot low rank coals was by Stadnikoff and Proskumina*? Their aim was 

♦The part oi the coal dissolved by digestion in potassium hydroxide solution 
is known as the u'lrain compounds. 

** Stadnikoff and Proskumina, Brens toff - Chem. July 1, 192b, pp. 197-199 • 
Abstr. Fuel in Science and Practice, Aug. 192b, p. 3b9« 











- Id 


to devise a quantitative test "by means oi wnicn brown coals could be distin- 
guisned irom coals oi higher ranks* Their test was based on the amount of 
ferric hydroxide that a sample of tne co^l absorbs from a solution of ferric 
chloride. They assumed that this absorption depends on tne amount of nlmins 
present in tne coal, and claimed that their results on a number of coals 
justify this assumption. 

Some work on this test was done in the laboratories of the Scientific 
and Industrial Research Council. The conclusion arrived at was that the 
phenomenon was one of adsorption, and as such was a function of the size of 
tne particles of coal used. 

Another test, one devised by W. Fuchs* also depends on tne humic acid 
and ulmin content oi the coal. The method employed was to measure tne amount 
of acetic acid liberated by the humic acids of the coal when the coal is 
shaken up with solutions of sodium, and potassium acetate. It was found that 
brown coals contain about 60^ of humic acid, while bituminous coals had only 
about Some experimental work will be done in the laboratory oi the 

Scientific and Industrial Research Council to find if this test can be adapted 
for distinguishing between tne low rank coals. 

W. Francis® has described work done on the oxidation of coal. He has 
extracted parts of certain coals with pyridine and chloroform in an inert at¬ 
mosphere. He has oxidized tne residues at 1^0° C. As a result of his ex¬ 
periments he advoca.tes the use of oxidizability as a basis for classification. 

Some oxidation work of a different kind has been carried out in the 
laboratories ox the Scientific and Industrial Research Council. In the drawing 
of tne calorific value ash curves referred to on page 11 , if the curve be 

* Brennstofi-Chem. 1927 , No, 8, an. 337-340. Abstr. Fuel in Science and 
Practice, Vol. 7. No. 2 p. 95* 

° A paper presented at the meeting oi the Coa.1 and Coal Products Committee of 
the A.I.M.E. held in New York, on Feb. 23, 1928. 


— 



























» 








. 

























. 





. 














. 










. 

















. - 












- 1 ? - 


extended to meet tne line of zero ash, tne point at which the lines meet may 
be considered to represent the calorific value of tne pure co»l. A similar 
curve for the same coal after it has been exoosea to oxidation by a current 
of dry air at 10o-7® C invariably falls below that obtained ior the fresh 
co^l. The amount by which the calorific value of the pure oxidized coal fall 
below tnst of the pure fresh coal might be taken as an index of the suscepti¬ 
bility of the coal to oxidation* The loss in heating value produced by the 
oxidation has been observed to range from pO B.T.U* for a semi-bituminous 
coal to P10 B.T.U. for a coal of much lower rank. The loss in calorific 
value so obtained does not seem to be capable of correlation with any other 


chemical property 









CLASSIFICATIONS 


OF 


COAL 


A division into classes sued as that on page 7 is very indefinite, 
too indefinite to be of any practical use. One of tne cniei purposes of a 
classification is to provide some means by wnicii it is possible to draw 
fairly sharp and distinct lines between the various groups, and by such 
means to make it possible to more or less definitely foretell the properties 
of the coal considered, and also the uses to which it can most satisfactorily 
be put. 


A large number of classifications have been proposed at different 
time, all having in view the division of coals into definite classes and the 
assignment of limits to these classes. The earlier classifications were based 
on some physical property or properties of the different ranks of coal. Aiming 
at greater definiteness, workers on tne subject began to give consideration 
to tne chemical properties and constituent of the coal, so that nearly every 
factor oi the proximate and ultimate constitution, as well as different com- 
binations of these, have at some time or other oeen proposed as the basis of 
a classification. 

The system of classification used in Great Britain and tne United States 
about 184p (.Ure's Dictionary of Arts, Manufactures, and Mines (184t>), page 
9b9), divided coals into four classes chiefly on the basis of physical charac¬ 
teristics. These classes were as follows; 

1. Cubical Coal; black, shining, compact, moderately hard, and easily 
frangible. Comes out in rectangular masses of which tne smallest 
Portions are cubical. Tne lamellae parallel to tne bed plane on 
which the coal rests. Two varieties are (1) open burning, and is known 
as rough or clod coal, or cheery coal irom its cheery blaze, and (2) 
caking, which is true smith's coal. 

2. Slate or Splint Coal; dull black, very compact, much harder and less 
frangible than the last, resists cross fracture, burns without coking, 
with much smoke and flame, leaves white ashes. 













- 19 - 


3* Cannel Coal; between velvet and grayish black in color, lustre 

resinous, fracture, even to small fragments, trapezoidal, hard, as 
splint coal, xinales readily, burns with a bright flame, 

4, Glance Coal; iron black, occasionally iridescent, lustre shining, 

does not soil, easily frangible, has flat conchoidal fracture, burns 
without flame or smell except when sulphurous, produces no soot, seems 
to be coal deprived of volatile matter and bitumen and converted into 
cone from subterranean calcination. 

Another classification (Watt's Dictionary of Chemistry, Vol. 1, p. 103?) 
of about the same time recognizes and names the classes as lignite, bituminous, 
and antnr^cite. 


An early French arrangement (25) divided coals into five classes based 

on coking power and conditions of burning* The classes were *^s follows* 

!• Poor coal, with long flame, non-coking. 

2. Gas coal, long flame, poor coke. 

3* Rich coal, shorter flame, fair coxe. 

4. Caking coal, snort flame, best coke. 

5» Anthracite ~nd steam coal, little or no flame, non-coking. 

No very definite separation of coals into the various classes was 
possible under a classification such as any of those outlined above, since the 
different classes as there outlined would overlap to a very great extent. 

Regnault's Classification . 

Regnault, in 1837> introduced the idea of using the ultimate analysis 
of coal substances as a basis of classification. As a result of" very pains¬ 
taking experiments and analyses he came to the conclusion that "the elementary 
composition of coals of the Carboniferous formation, ior coals of one and the 
same quality, varies between narrow limits"• He based his classification on 
the percentage of oxygen plus that of nitrogen in the ash 'ana moisture free 
coe.1, and divided the coals considered into five groups, each of which had as 
an average the amount of oxygen plus nitrogen shown in the following table; 













- 20 


Mean Oxygen - 1 - Nitrogen 


1. An thrac i t e 2. o 2$ 

2. Lean, or snort flame bituminous 4.47 

3 * Bituminous or smith’s coal !>74 

4. Long flame bituminous 8.89 

5. Dry long flame lb.39 


ihe names given to some of these classes might well nave been re¬ 
tained, instead of being displaced by other designations less suggestive of 
tne nature of the coal. 

Fleck’s Olassiiication. 

Fleck? in 18b3, attempted a. classification based on what he called 
disposable, available, or “free 11 hydrogen. By this term he meant the per¬ 
centage of hydrogen in excess of that required to combine with the oxygen 
of the coal (i.e. hydrogen - oxygen / 8), thus making use of the rather 
debatable assumption that all the oxygen in the coal is in combination with 
hydrogen. He also introduced the idea of caking power. He used a graphic 
method of plotting disposable hydrogen against combined hydrogen, both as 
percentages of total carbon. His classification recognises the following 
classes* (oxygen percentage being given instead of combined hydrogen) 

Oxygen under Xb% of carbon; 

Disposable hydrogen under 4 fo of c*rbon ~ (Dry) sinter coals 
and anthracite. 

Disposable hydrogen over 4% of carbon - caking coals. 

Oxygen over Ibfo of carbon; 

Disposable hydrogen over of carbon - difficultly caking gas 
coals. 

Disposable hydrogen under 4% of carbon - non-caking gas and 
sand coals. 

Inis classification appreciates the fact that non-caking coals are 
found both when the oxygen is low and also when it is verv high, ihe pro- 
nerty of coking is attributed to an available hydrogen higher than of the 
carbon. 

Hilt 8 s flpsgif ic p tion. 

In 167'$ Hilt (23) introduced a classification based on the amount of 
* Fuel in Science and Practice, Vol 3 (1924) P • 20. 
















- 21 - 


volatile matter °s a percentage of the amount of coke. He outlined the 
following classes* 

1* Lean anthracite 

2. Sinter coals poor in gas 

3. Caking coals 

4. Caking gas coals 

5. Gaseous sinter co»ls 

b. Gaseous sand coals 

Schondorff f s -Classification. 

Schondorff (23) "based a classification on the appearance of the coke 
produced in a platinum crucible in the ordinary volatile matter determination. 
He considered that no correction existed between volatile matter and coking 
power, especially when comparing-different coal fields. His classes for 
bituminous coals were as follows; 

Coke rough, (Ijoose 

fine, sandy (Molten hard, loose in centre 

and black. (Molten hard all over 

Coke gray and solid opening like a bud 
Coke smooth and metallic, and strong 

Muck*s Classification . 

Dr. 1. Muck (23) also in Germany used a similar system, as follows; 

Annearanee of coke . 

Powder, .just like the coal powder used 
Somewhat molten, partly powder 
Molten but not puffed 
Molten, somewhat puffed 

Thoroughly molten and puffed up in a form similar 
to a potato 

Fuel Patio. 

In the United States as well as.in Europe attention was being given 
to coal classification. In 1844, Professor Walter R. Johnson, in - report 
to the United States Government on American coals, said that coals could be 
compared by the ratio of volatile matter to fixed combustible matter, volatile 


1. 

Sand coal. 

2. 

Molten 

sand coal. 

3. 

Sinter 

coal. 

4. 

Caking 

sinter coal. 

5* 

Caking 

coal. 


1. Sand coal. 

2. Molten sand coal. 

3. Sinter co^l. 

4. B^ked sinter coal. 

5 . Baking co°l. 


5 to 10 volatile per 100 coke 


10 to 13.3 " «' 
15.5 td 33.3 " » 
33*3 to 40.0 ■' 15 
40.0 to 44.4 '• » 
44.4 to 48.0 » « 












- 2 ? - 


matter to include moisture. 

Professor H* t>. Rogers (17) a short time later, sub-divided American 
coal in accordance with natural characteristics, into four principal groups, 
and gave the ordinary range of constituents. He claimed to have originated 
the term semi-bituminous for one of the classes. His classification recog¬ 
nizes three orders* anthracite, common bituminous, ^nd hydrogenous. The 
divisions and limits proposed by Rogers are as follows: 

Ran k of coal . Percentage of Volatile matter . 


Anthracite 
Semi-anthracite 
Semi-bituminous 
Bituminous 


Below b 
Below 10 
12 to IS 
Over IS 


He gives the limits of ultimate analysis, but does not clear of ash, 
thus showing apparent variation in the combustible part of tne coal. 

Persifor Frazer, Jr, (17) in 1877 followed up the idea of the ratio 
of fixed carbon to volatile matter® His purpose was to suggest limitations 
to the four vague classes into which Rogers had divided the coals of Penn¬ 
sylvania. The designations of classes suggested by Rogers had been quite, 
largely adopted by the trade. 

Frazer took analyses as provided in Rogers* report and determined the 
ratio of fixed carbon to volatile matter - commonly known as the fuel ratio. 
He considered other constituents of the coal to be accidental. The fuel 
ratios so determined showed overlapping in the classes, into which Rogers 
had divided the coals. To make separation into definite classes, Frazer 
proposed that limits of fuel ratios for the different classes be assigned as 
follows• 


Class 

Hard dry anthracite 
Semi-anthracite 
Semi-bi tuminous 
Bituminous 


Fixed Carbon 
Vol ati le Hydroca rbons 
100 - 12 
12-8 
8 - 5 
5-0 


Fuel Ratio on 
Roger s 1 Pivision 

67.02 - g.of ~ 

12.75 - 5.41 

11,41 - 8 . 9 b 
3.93 - O.bg 

















. 

1 








. 


- ' 












1 ■ 

. 

- 



















— 








- 23 - 


This classification seems to have been generally adopted in the United 
States. It was proposed only for Pennsylvania coals which re of high rank. 

It has "been found unsuitable for lower rank coals in other parts oi the coun¬ 
try, since no division is made for coals whose fuel ratio is below 5 . 

Wedding*a Classification. 

Wedding, a German investigator, proposed dividing coals into six grouos, 
as Sxiown below, according to the percentage of volatile matter in the dry, 
ash-free coal. 

Clpss. Percentage yield of Vo] 

1 . Le^n anthracite 5.0 to 10.~0 

2. Sintering coals (old) roor in gas 10.0 to 15.5 

3. Coking coals (old) poor in gas 15.5 to 33.3 

4. Coking coals (recent) rich in gas 33*3 to 40.0 

5- Sintering coals (recent) rich in gas 40.0 to 44.0 

0 . Sand coals (recent) rich in gas 44.4 to 50.0 

Wedding's opinion was that in general the percentage of volatiles 

yielded by a coal diminishes with its geological age. a view not now generally 

held. 

A classification such as this fails entirely when applied to the higher 
volatile coals. 

Pruner 1 s ^lassiflca11on . 

In IJurope the ultimate composition seems to have been favored as means 
of deiining groupings of coals. In 1873 Gruner,(2b & 4) following the lead 
given by Pegn^ult, attempted to bring the properties of the various coals into 
relation and to define tne limits of each class of coal contained in the French 
grouping a.lre^&v referred to. He distinguished five groups ranging between 
anthracite and lignite. His classes and limits are shown in T^ble I. Table 
II shows the same classification as revised by Bone (4). His classification 
was based on a small number of analyses, and his generalizations do not always 
agree with exoerience. It has been claimed by some other investigators that 






























. . ' 

_ - 

* 







S 








* 





















: 

. 










TABLE I. 


Class or tyoe of coal 
and. commercial name 
in France 

Assumed 

Translation 

Proportion 

of coke in 
100 parts 
of Tviire 
coal. $ 

Proportion 
of volatil 
matter in 
100 parts 
of pure 
co°l• % 

Nature and 
i appearance 
of coke 

Heal Calori 
fie power 

Calories 

Carbon 

!> 

Hydrogen 

% 

I Oxygen 

and 

Nitro¬ 

gen 

% 

L 

I Ratio 

0 + N 

H 

IDesigna- 

1 tion in | 
Germany 

I(Ruhr 

I Basin) 

Designation 
in Engl ind 

1 

1. Houilles secnes 
(dry) a longue ilamme 
Houilles flamosntes 

Dry, long 

1 lame bitu¬ 
minous coal 

foO 

4^-40 

Powdery 

slightly 

fused 

8 OOO- 83 OO 

70-80 

■ 5 .5-4.5 

r~ 

19 . 5 - 

15.5 

Between 

4 & 3 

I 

1Flamm- 
Kohle 

1 

I Splint coal 

> 2 '.: Houilles grasses 

(fat) a long ilamme 
Cnarbons a gaz 

Fat, long 
flame bitu¬ 
minous coal 
Gas coal 

b0-b8 

42-32 

Completely 
agglomerated 
and very 
often fused 

8500-8800 

80-85 

5 . 8 - 5 .O 

14.2- 

10.0 

Between 

3 & 2 

Gas-Hohle 

Gas coal 

p. Houilles grasses 
(fat) proorement dites 
Cnarbons de forge et 
Houilles marecnales 
(smiths) 

Fat coal 

3 prooerly 
so called 
Smiths coal 

b8-74 

32 - 2 b 

Fused and 
more or less 
swollen 

8800-9300 

84-89 

5 . 0 -b.5 

H 

11 . 0 - 

5.5 

1 

Between 

241 

1- 

IFett- 
Kohle 

1 Caking coal 

U. Houilles grasses 
a courte flamme. 
Cnarbons a coke 

Fat coal 
with short 
flame 

Coke coal 

74-82 

2b-18 

Fused, com¬ 
pact 

1 

9300-9b00 

88-91 

5.5-4 .5 

1 

b.5 - 
4.5 

1-i 

Nearly 

1 1 

1 

!-i 

!Fett-Kohl< 

!- 

Steam coal 

5. Houilles maigres 
(iean)ou anthraciteu- 
ses charbons demigras 
Charbons quartgras 

Lean bitu¬ 
minous coal 
or half fat 
anthracitic 
coal 

82-90 

18-10 

Slightly 
fused, very 1 
often 
powdery 

9200-9500 

90-93 

I 

1- 

4.5-4.0 

| 

5.5 - 
3.0 

! 

Less thar 
1 1 

1 Mager- 1 
Kohle 

1 

c. Antnracites Char- 
bon maigre (lean) 
anthracite 

Antnracites 
'Lean anth¬ 
racitic cos] 

| 

90-92 

Ls 

I 

10- 8 j 

! 

Powdery 
often de- I 

crenitated 1 

] 1 
9000-9200 93-95 1 

' -1 

14.0-2.0 1 

1 

1 

-1 

3.01 

J 

-j 

1 -0.5 I 

1 

| 

Anthra- I 
cite | 

| 

Anthracite 




































































TABLE II. The Eegnault-Gruner Classification of Coals (As Revised by W. A. Bone) 



Class 

Chief Uses 

.... _ 

Percentage Comnosition 

% Volatiles 

% Fixed 

Carbon_ 

Character of Carbonaceous 

Residue 

' C. 

H. 

0 + N + S 

at .900° C 

A. Lignites 

Non-caking 

- 

bO to 75 

about 

5.0 

20 to 35 

above 45 

below 55 

Non-coherent 


(1) Non-caking 

Long flame 

Reverberatory 

Furnaces 

75 to 80 

4.5 to 
5.5 

15 to 20 

40 to 45 

55 to bO 

Non-coherent 

B. Bituminous 

(2) Caking 

Long flame 

Gas-making 

80 to' 85 

about 

5.b 

10 to 15 

; | 

32.to 40 bO to b 8 

| | 

jVery porous coke 


(3) Hard 

Coking 

Coke Manufac¬ 
ture 

I 

84 to 89 

5.0 to 
5.b 

5.5 to 

11.0 

I 1 

2 b to 52 : j b 8 to 74 

Dense coke 


(4) Hard Coking 
Short flame 

Coke manufacture 
and steam 

1 raising 

88 to 90 

4.5 to 

5,5 .] 

5.5 to 

O.h 

18 to 2 b 1 74 to 82 

Verv dense coke 

1 ■ 

B. C. Semi- 
bituminous 

Non-caking 

Short flame 

1- 

1 Steam raising 

90 to 92 

4.0 to 
4.5 1 

4.0 to 

5.5 

15 to 20 80 to 85 

Weakly caking or Non-coherent 

C. 

Anthracitic 

and 

Anthracites 

1(l)Anthracitic 
'Non-caking 

Steam raising 


3.0 to 1 
1 4.0 1 

1 

1 


1 8 to 15 1 85 to 92 

i T 1 

1 Pulverulent 

1 

| 

I . 

1 

J(2)Anthrecites 

1 Non-caking 

Domestic and 
Central heating 
Malting kilns 

|92 to 94 

1 

5.0 to 
4.5. 

1 1 

I Below 8 (above 92 

1 

1 1 


All tne numerical data in the above table refer to the dry ashless coal 





































































tile re is no correlation between volatile matter ~nd coking power, -oarticularly 
wnen compering different fields. 

Sevier^ Classification. 

C. A. Seyler (3o) made an intensive study of the coals of South Wales, 
and from the results of his study drew up his classificetion. He had a con¬ 
siderable number of ultimate analyses available. With each analysis he had a 
statement of the physical character of the coal, and the use for which it was 
best suited. 

Seyler calculated these analyses to a pure coal basis, so that the sum 
of the percentages of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen and nitrogen made uo 100. 
The coals used were of low ash content, hence the error introduced owing to 
mineral matter not being exactly represented by ash would be small. By a 
graphical study of the analyses he was able to establish Regnault*s tnesis, 
that coals of a similar character fall between narrow limits of ultimate com¬ 
position. Another important result was the discovery of a relation between 
the percentage of hydrogen dnd the volatile matter. He found that, for coals 
not too high in oxygen content, with increasing oxygen there is a regularly 
decreasing carbon content. So close was the correspondence between oxygen 
and carbon that he concluded that the percentage of carbon could well be sub¬ 
stituted for the percentage of oxygen in Hegnault*s classification. Carbon 
has advantages over oxygen as a basis of classification, in that there is a 
larger range of values, and it is capable of more accurate determination. 
However, he also found that volatile matter and coking power could not be 
correlated with the carbon percentage. For example, between the limits of 90 
and 93 % carbon, were found coals with hydrogen varying from about 3*4 to 5» 2 %, 
and volatile matter from b to 24%, and every variety of coal from anthracite 
to coals with considerable coking power. Typical varieties of coal occurred 







— 




















. 


- 










. 
















. 

, 

* 




* 




' 




* 




■ 


' 








1 





- ?7 - 


within a narrow range of carbon content, or in a narrow c°rbon plane. Just 
as important ~s tnis was the observation that whenever a certain percentage 
of hydrogen was reached the same kind of coal recurred. Acting on these two 
observations he divided coals into species according to tneir carbon content, 
each species having many properties in common. Using the nercentaae of 
hydrogen, he divided the species into wider groups which he called genera. An 
example should make this clear. A tyoical anthracite has carbon over 93*3% 

4 

and hydrogen under 4$. Whenever the percentage of hydrogen drops below 4 
(provided the oxygen is not too high) the coal resembles anthracite in many 
ways and Seyler calls such coals pseudo-anthracites. He cites cases of pseudo- 
anthracites having as low as 84 fo carbon. Seyler excludes coals having carbon 
below. 2>tyfb from this scheme, as he aid not consider that the laws of correlation 
of properties with composition held for coals so high in oxygen. He distin¬ 
guished between those lower rank coals mainly on their carbon content. Coals 
having below 73^ of carbon he classed as lignites. 

Tne complete classification snowing the limits of carbon assigned to 
the species, and of hydrogen to the genera is siiown in Table III. 

'The names given to tne species ares 

1. Anthracitic. 

2. Carbonaceous. 

3. Bituminous. 

4. Litnitous. 

Those coals having carbon below S4 % being grouped in a separate genus - tne 
lignitous. Tne bituminous genus is sub-divided into tnree genera, meta-, 
ortho-, and para-bituminous, in order of decreasing, caroon content. The 
ortho-bituminous is the typical bituminous coal® A rise o± nydrogen aoove the 
limits for tyoical bituminous coals is indicated by the prefix ^per’ 5 , while a 
fall below the typical hydrogen is indicated by the prefix "sub 11 . This gives 






• 














. 


• 










- 






* 







- 



• 



- 









. 





. 








■ • 












. 











- 28 - 


'ABLE III. Seyler's Classification of Coal. 


1 Anthracitic 

Carbonaceous 

Bituminous 

r Lignit( 

)US 

Carbon 

Carbon over 

95.5 uer cent 


Meta - I Ortho - 

Para - 

Meta- 

Ortho- 

93.3 - 91-2. 

Hi.2 - 89.0 

59.0 - 87.0 

87.0 - 84.0 

84-80 

80-75 

PER-BITUMINOUS GENUS 
Hydrogen over 5*8 
percent 

- 

- 

Per-bituminous 
(Per-meta-bituminous ] 
Long flame steam 
coals 

Per-bituminous 
)(Per-ortho-bitumin- 
1ous)Bastard,cennels 
Gas coals 

Per-Bituminous 
(Per-para-bi tu¬ 
minous) Cannels 
Long flame steam 
coals 

Per-Litnitous 

1 

1 

1 

__j_ 

BITUMINOUS GENUS 
Hydrogen 5*0 -5*8 
per cent 


(P s eudo -oituminous 
species) 

Meta-bituminous 1 Ortho-bituminous 

Durham coking coals 

Welsh coking coal j Smithy ft gas coals 

1 

Para-bituminous 
Long flame steam 
coals. Coking 
coals. Best gas 
coal 

Lignitous 
(Meta-)J(Ortho-) 

_ 

SEMI-BITUMINOUS GENUS 
Hydrogen 4.5 - 5*0 
per cent 

- 

Semi-bituminous 
species. (Ortho-s 
semi-bituminous) 
Steam coals (cok¬ 
ing) Higher Index 
blended for coke 

Sub-bituminous 1 Sub-bituminous 

(Sub-meta-bituminous)(Sub-ortho-bitumin- 
House coals. Con- lous) 
tinental coking when Coking and steam 
Index high 

Sub-bituminous 

(Sub-para- 

bituminous) 

Sub-Liam: 

(Meta) 

It ous 
(Ortho) 

1 

CARBONACEOUS GENUS 
Hydrogen 4.0 - 4.5 
per cent 

Semi-antnracitic 
species. Dry 
(non-caking) 
steam 

Carbonaceous spe¬ 
cies. (Ortho-car¬ 
bonaceous) Welsh 
smokeless steam 
(slight caking) 

1 Pseudo-carbonaceous |Pseudo-carbonaceous 
(Sub-meta-oituminous)(Sub-ortho-bitumin- 
1 Steam coals ous) 

Pseudo-carbona- 
(Sub-para- 
bituminous) 

1 1 

I 1 

I 1 

ANTHRACITIC GENUS 
Hydrogen under 4 per 
cent 

1 Ortho-anthracite 
True anthracite 

Pseudo-anthracite 
(Sub-carbonaceous) 

1 . - - 

|Pseudo-Anthracite ^?seudo-*nt hracite 

(Sub- meta- 1tSub- ortho- 

1 bituminous) 1 bituminous) 

1 

1 Pseudo-?nthracit( 
(Sub-para- 
bituminous) 

' 

; 

I 



N. B. Tne various genera are arranged in column I vertically according to the hydrogen. The species in each genus are arranged 
horizontally according to the carbon. 



















































— 











- 












- 


■ 

- 






- - , . 












. 

. 








. 










r*— " ... 




, - n 
































rise to three genera ner-bituminous, bituminous end sub-bituminous. The ore- 
tix is used with the separate species, e.g. sub-meta-bituminous, so that tnere 
is no confusion with the term sub-bituminous as used in America as the name 
oi a class oi coal. The term "carbonaceous" is introduced for tne species 
ordinarily known as anthracite lean, or semi-anthracite. The anthracitic 
species includes the true anthracites. 

Seyler named the genera after the typical species in each c^se. They 
are five in number, thus: 

Anthracitic. 

Carbonaceous 

Semi-bituminous 

Bituminous 

Per-bituminous. 

Cannel coals all occur in the per-bituminous genus. 

Owing to the close correlation of hydrogen and volatile matter, 

Seyler considers that for coals having less than 24of volatile matter, the 
genera can be distinguished almost as well by the percentage of volatile 
matter as by the hydrogen. The relation is about as follows; 

Anthracitic genus H under 4, - volatile matter under 10. 

Carbonaceous genus H 4.0 to 4*5, - volatile matter 10 to lb. 

Semi-bituminous genus H 4.5 to 5*0, - volatile matter under lo to 24. 

In the remaining genera, the bituminous and per-bituminous, the vola¬ 
tile matter varies too much in the different species to be capable of generali¬ 
zation. 

Seyler also suggested terns to replace those suggested by Sehondorff 
in his classification, (referred to above). In determining the color, the 
surface of the coked residue from the volatile matter determination in a 
platinum crucible is observed. The terms proposed and those which they are to 
replace, together with the characteristics of the coked residue are shown in 
the following table; 
























. 




• ■ . 






















■ 












. 
















. 












' 






. 

- , , 

- . - . ' - 




















- 














- 










: 




- 30 - 


Surface 

Colour 

Coherence l^chbhdorff *'s 

term 

’'Proposed’ 

term 

Sough like fine 
sand 

Black 

Entirely pulveru¬ 
lent 

Sand coal 

Discretive coal 

<1 

it 

Just conerent 

Sintered sand 
coal 

Semi-accretive 

I! 

11 

Just conerent all 
over, flat, radial 
cracks in coke 

Sinter coal 

Accretive 

1! 

Bull grey 

Solid with bud-like 
projections from 
surface 

Caking sinter 
coal 

Semi-concretive 

Smooth 

Metallic 

Solid, more or less 

Caking coal 

Concretive 


grey 

swollen 




Or'bon - Hydrogen Ratio. 

In 1904 Marins V, Campbell (b) of the U- S. Geological Survey, con¬ 
sidered a number of available factors from proximate and ultimate analysis, and 
decided that the ratio of carbon to hydrogen on tne air-dried coal was the best 
method of differentiating between the different ranks of coal. This classifi¬ 
cation was based on fifty-seven analyses of coal from different states. 

The limits proposed by Cam-obeli for the groups are as followsj 


A. 

Graphite 


to 

r 

B. 

Anthracite 

? 

to 

30 ? 

C. 

Anthracite 

30? 

to 

2 b ? 

D. 

Semi-anthracit e 

2 b 

to 

23 

E* 

Semi- bituminous 

23 

to 

20 

F. 

Bituminous 

20 

to 

17 

G. 

Bituminous 

17 

to 

14.4 

H. 

Bituminous 

14.4 

to 

12.3 

I. 

Bituminous 

12.3 

to 

11.2 

J. 

Lignite 

11.2 

to 

9.3 

K. 

Peat 

9.3 

to 

? 


Wood 

7,2 




This ratio is capable of accurate determination and in the higher ranks 
of coal, owing to tne fact that tne dividend is large and divisor small, a 
good range of values is obtained. In the range of lower rank coals, there is 
no sham distinction between lignites and bituminous coals, that, however, is 


not given by °ny chemical criterion so far suggested. Tne inclusion of hydro- 

















- 31 


gen of water is introducing a non-fuel constituent, though on tne otner nand, 
it snows something oi tne water retaining property of tne coal. 

Pollard and Strahan (The coals of South Wales. Mem. G-eol. Surv. England 
and Wales) have used the ratio of carbon to hydrogen in the dry coal as a guide 
in tneir study of progressive anthracitization in tne Welsh coal field, 

Ralston^ Graphic Representation . 

Ralston (33) in the United States calculated a large number of ultimate 
analyses to the pure coal basis, by eliminating moisture, ash, sulphur and 
nitrogen so that carbon, hydrogen and oxygen make up 100, 

He plotted the value of these elements using triangular co-ordinates, 

A right angle triangle was used so that the carbon percentage was on 
tne base of the triangle, the hydrogen on the perpendicular and oxygen on the 
hypothenuse. 

On plotting carbon against hydrogen tne points representing the coals 
fall along a narrow band. He found that the different classes of coal fell 
into separate fields with very little overlapping, thus substantiating the 
original thesis of Regnarult, He found that coking coals occupied a position 
near the sharp bend in the band of analyses. This is where resin content is 
supposed to be highest, and also wnere available hydrogen is hignest, Ralston 
considered that coals were to be found with high available hydrogen and also 
with high hydrogen-oxygen ratio, yet they did not coxe, hut on tne diagram 
coking coals fall into a group, 

H. J. Rose (33) made a graphic study along the same lines as Ralston 
followed, of many hundreds of American and loreign coals, ior which ne had 
records of by-product yields, and coke oven tests# Prom this work he con¬ 
cluded that "all coking coals appear to fall within fairly definite chemical 
limits, so tar the ultimate analyses are concerned". 








__ 


„■ 










. 






: 










. 




















. 

I 









■ 

r 

. 

. 

* 

* 

. 














. 










* 


























- 32 - 


•Dorics "First ogsi i-i cation . 

In ISOb Parr (28) published a scheme of classification which is b^sed 

on the ratio of volatile carbon to total carbon, expressed as a percentage* 

Por the lower ranks the percentage oi inert volatile matter is made use of. 

This classification recognizes the fact that the volatile matter contains 

hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen which' are not available as fuel* Total carbon 

and fixed carbon as determined by analysis are used in this classification. 

The percentage of volatile carbon is obtained by subtracting the percentage 

of fixed carbon from that of total carbon* The ratio used is v»C. x lOO/o. 

The percentage of inert volatile matter is obtained by subtracting from. 100 

the percentages of the following constituents of the coal; carbon, sulphur, 

ash, water, and hydrogen which is not united with oxygen (i.e. available 

hydrogen). To reduce this remainder to the pure coal basis it is multiplied by 

_____. 100 _ * 

100 - (ash + moisture) 


The limits found suitable for the different ranks of coal are as 


follows* 

Rank Vol atile carbon x 10 0 Percentage of 

___ Total carbon Inert Vol atile 

Anthracite below 4 


Semi-anthracite 4 to 8 
Semi-bituminous 10 to 15 

Bituminous A 20 to 32 5 to 10 
Bituminous B 20 to 27 10 to 15 
Bituminous C 32 to 44 5 to 10 
Bituminous D 2*7 to 44 10 to 15 
Black lignite 27 up lb to 20 
Brown lignite 27 up 20 to 30 


He also introduces the term “Gross coal index*, which is the weight 

of coal which gives 100 pounds of pure fuel* It is expressed by tne iormula; 

_ 1 00 _ x 100 

Carbon M Sulphur + Combustible hydrogen 







■■. i i ~ 


~ I 





* 

, 


















. 

- 





































• ■ 

. 




















. 













Groups Classification 


Grout (IS) in 1907 calculated a number of ultimate analyses to tne 
mre coal 'basis, so that carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen made up 100. He plotted 
tnese constituents using tri-axial co-ordinates, but did not use this as tne 
basis of his classification. He decided that there were no natural groupings 
of coal, but that *ny group designations must he arbitrarily drawn. 


Grout considered that the proximate analysis gave the best distinction 
for high carbon coals, and taken with the precentage of total carbon, made a 
very satisfactory classification* He was in favor of using more than one 


ratio in distinguishing between groups* His classification recognizes tne 


following classes and fixes the limits of each as shown. 


Graphite 
Anthracite 
Semi-anthracite 
Semi-bituminous 
Bituminous 

High grade 

Low grade 

Cannel 

Black lignite 
Brown lignite 
Peat 


Fixed carbon over 99% 
Fixed carbon over 93% 
"fixed carbon S3 to 93 % 
fixed carbon 73 t° %b°h 

fixed carbon 48 to 73?® 
Carbon 62 to 88$> 

fixed carbon 48 to 73 % 
Carbon 7 b. 2 to S2^» 
fixed carbon 33 to 48% 
Carbon 7b.2 to 88^> 
fixed caroon 35 to b0% 
Carbon 73®b to 7b. 2% 
fixed carbon 3^ to 55^ 
Carbon c>5 to T5 e f°_ 

fixed carbon below 55 1° 
Carbon below b5?^ 


The percentages are expressed on the pure coal. Grout states that 
tne fuel ratio can be substituted for the percentage of fixed carbon, 

David White (42) in a consideration of tne ei'lect of oxygen in coal 
found that it is equal to ash in its anti-calorific v^lue. To compare the 
efficiencies of different coals he arranged them in the order oi their Carbon/ 
oxygen 4* ash ratios, using these values on the air dry coal. 

If the arrangement were on the ^sh—free or mineral matter—free oasis, 










' 


. 




••• ' •• ■ ■ 

•' ■! *’ ■ 










, 



• . 



' 

.L- 7 .*■; 

■ 

' 









* 




* 
















" ■ 




















G : ■. £ 




•,' .. -r... .r . • •: ■ 1 ; ; , 






- 







becomirg caroon/oxygen, the r^tio mi.-ht be of some value ^s a basis of 
classification, though no limits h : ve been proposed for classes. 

Parr t s Second Classification . 

Parr (28) in 1322 advanced another scheme of classification. This 
svstem was based on the percentage of volatile matter, and on the calorific 
value of what he called "unit coal". The term unit coal has been explained 
above. By this classification coals containing up to 33% of volatile matter 
on the unit coal basis were subdivided on the basis of volatile matter. For 
those with over 33% volatile matter the calorific value was the criterion 
employed. 

For low rank coals P^rr considered that the calorific value was a. 
safer criterion than physical properties. The limits set by this classifica¬ 
tion are ’S follows! 


Anthracite 
Semi-anthracit e 
Semi-bituminous 
Bituminous (Eastern type) 
Bituminous (Western type) 
Sud- bituminous 
Brown lignite 
Cannel Over 


Calorific value of 
un it coal, B,T,U. ~oer 

13,000 to 15,300 

15.500 to lo,000 
15,300 to lb,000 
15,000 to 1§,0G0 
14,000 to 15,000 
13,000 to 14,000 

11.500 to 13,000 

13,730 


Percentage of 
lb. V ola ti le matter 

0 to 10 
10 to 14 
14 to 24 
24 to (33-47) 


47.5 up 


Thom t s Classification. 


W. T. Thom Jr, (40) considering that the physical characteristics and 
use nronerties of low rank coals are directly related to the moisture content, 
modified tne last mentioned classification. Thom considered that moisture 
eliminated between 20® and 100° C is as much a part ox the coal as that elimin¬ 


ated in the determination of the volatile matter, so he fixed on the air dry 
coal as being cauable of best representing the true condition of the coal, 
Thom says that tne low rank coals show an overlapping by both Seyler ! s and 






















• ’ . ' . n* I 























, 

. 

. 

, 















. . 












. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 




- 


■ - 





■ 
















Parr's classifications, while he considers that the personal equation enters 
too much into such a scheme as that of the United States Geological Survey. 

Thom plotted the calorific value of the air dry, ash-tree co^l 
against the sum of the volatile matter and moisture on the same basis. He 
thought that the air dry moisture best distinguished between accidental 
moisture and that forming an integral part of the coal. TJnstand^rdised 
methods of air drying make this classification open to the same objections 
as others based on air dried coal. 

Stansxield 1 s Classification . 

E. Stsnsfield (37) also considered that Parr's scheme of using calori¬ 
fic value and volatile matter of "Unit" coal did not sufficiently differen¬ 
tiate between the lower rank coals, since coals with large difference in 
moisture content were quite similar when compared on the pure coal basis. In 
his scheme of classification proposed for discussion in 1 ^ 25 , he used the 
percentage of volatile matter and the calorific value of the coal, adjusted 
to a mineral matter content of 11$ on the dry coal, (for reasons already ex¬ 
plained) and readjusted to the percentage of moisture in the coal as mined. 

An ash content of 10$ was taken as equivalent to a mineral matter content 
of m. 


The classes and limits proposed by Mr. Stansiield are as follows; 


Class 


Short flame bituminous 
Long flame bituminous 
Sub-bi tuminous 
Black lignite 
Brown lignite 


Calorific value of coal 
moisture as mined with adjusted 
ash 


above 12, 700 
above 12,700 
10,700 to 12,700 
8,200 to 10,700 
below 8,200 


Volatile 
matter 
(same b asis ) 

below 20$ 
above 20$ 


In later work, as vet unpublished, Mr. Stansfield has employed the 
Bum of the moisture and volatile matter in the coal as mined, adjusted lor 









' r ■:! 

' 

. 

. ••• . • • - :.c 

. 

. 

. 






. 






. 

. 







- 



















- 

. 













ash as explained, above, in graphical representation of the different coals 
of the province. 

Ashley 8 s Classifications . 

Ashley has advanced two different Use Classifications of coal. Tn 
the earlier classification the higher rank coals are distinguished by their 
fuel ratio, and the lower ranks by the ratio of the moisture H ss received 11 
to fixed carbon. The woody character of low rank coals is also considered. 

The ratios are chosen because in the higher ranks of coal the mois¬ 
ture changes little and the volatile matter much in relation to fixed carbon, 
while in the lower ranks there is a larger proportionate change in the mois¬ 
ture than in the volatile matter, with respect to the fixed carbon. 

For the purposes of this classification all coals are first divided 
into those of compact texture and those of woody, fibrous, or earthy texture. 
The subdivisions of these two classes are shown in the following tabular 
statement of the classification. 

Oo^ls of com-oact texture . 

1. Anthracite, fuel ratio 7 plus, non-lurainous flame. 

(a) True hard anthracite, fuel ratio 10 plus, conc'hoidal fracture. 

(b) Soft anthracite, fuel ratio 7 to 10, semi-cubic fracture. 

2. Bitumite, fuel ratio less than 7* luminous flame. 

1. Calorific value over 14,300 B.T.TJ. per pound, on moisture, ash, 

and sulphur free basis. 

1. Fuel ratio 2.3 to 7, smokeless coal, short to medium flame. 

(«.) Fuel ratio 3 to 7, non-caking household and caking steam coal 

(b) Fuel r*tio 3.5 to 5, caking coal. 

(c) Fuel ratio 2.5 to 3*5 caking coal. 

2. Fuel ratio below 2.5, long flame. 

(a) Fuel ratio 1.4 to 2.5, caking long flame. 

1. Fuel ratio 1.85 to 2.5* 

2. Fuel ratio 1.4 to 1.85 

(b) Fuel ratio under 1.4 

1. Fixed carbon-moisture ratio 0 plus. 

a. Fixed carbon-moisture ratio 10 plus. 

b. Fixed carbon-moisture r^tio 0 to 10. 

2. Fixed carbon-moisture ratio below b, (contains high 
moisture coals) 















_ 












‘ ■ 

















' • ■ 




















. 




. 

* 

. 

r' 

. 


' • * 

. 

. 






, 


, 












- 37 - 


B. Calorific value less than 14,700 B.T.U. per pound. 

This class consists of bituminous and sub-bituminous coals which 
are sepT^ted on tne basis of weather resisting properties. Most 
sub-bituminous have fixed carbon-moisture ratio 1.0 to 2.0. 

Co^ls of woody, fibrous or earthy texture . 

This class includes lignites having fixed carbon-moisture 

ratio, 0*3 to 1.0 

Each of these classes and sub-classes is given the name of a state 

or county of which it is the typical coal, e.g, those with fuel ratio 1.4 to 

2.5 he designates as Pennsites, from their abundance in Pennsylvania. The 
two sub-divisions of this group are known as Connelsite and Pittsite, irom 
the Oonnelsville and Pittsburg districts. 

Ashley's second classification, which was proposed for the considera¬ 
tion of the committee of American Engineering Standards on Goal Classification 

is based on the percentage of fixed carbon in the ash free coal as rained. 

He Justifies this theoretically on the assumption that the process of 
coal maturing may be considered as a progressive elimination of volatile 
matter, including moisture, the proportion of remaining fixed carbon forming 
a regularly ascending series from one end of the process to the other. 

He considered that each of the common commercial classes of coal as 
high volatile, medium volatile ~nd low volatile, etc., as mined, cover a 
range of about seven per cent of fixed carbon. Hence coals can be designated 
as* Goal 28, Coal 35, Coal 42, etc., up to Coal 70 or 77 or 84. Coal 70 
being a coal with from 70 to 77<& fixed carbon on the ash-free, as mined, basis 
Letters are appended to show grading in the class, e.g. A. B. C, and D. expres 
four grades of ash content, F, 0, H. and I. express four grades of tempera¬ 
ture of fusion of ash, S. T. IT. and V. four grades of sulphur content. X. 
represents cannel, X. non-caking, Z. sub-bituminous. Fames are introduced 
for each of the classes, e.g. lovol, midvol, hivol and moistvol. 



I 























/ 








n 






■ 

























Camobell 1 s Physical Classification for Tow Rank Co-Is, 


In 190S Campbell (8) proposed a scheme, based on Physical ■nro^erties 
and characteristics, for differentiating between low rank coals. Two grouws 
•'re recognised below the r^nk of bituminous, they that are known as black 
lignite, until 1908 when the TJ. S. Geological Survey adopted the term sub- 
bituminous for that class, and the other known as brown lignite. Campbell^ 
scheme is based on the theory that the change from wood to lignite and other 
ranks of coal was due to chemical change caused by heat and controlled by the 
rate of escape of the gases produced. If the gases escaped unimpeded the coal 
would be highly developed, if impeded the coal would not become so metamor¬ 
phosed. To separate bituminous from sub-bituminous, he took lack of cleavage 
pl»nes to denote a low rank coal. In exception to this rule occurs where 
strong forces had acted to produce well developed cleavage wnen the coal was 
still too young to have been metamorphosed to bituminous. 

The manner of fracture on drying was also suggested. In bituminous 
coals on weathering, the prismatic shape persists until small pieces are 
reached. Sub-bituminous checks irregularly on exposure, giving fragments with 
rough irregular faces. It does separate into plates parallel to the bedding 
plane of the seam. The black color alone is used to distinguish between 
sub-bituminous and brown lignite, 

Dowling^ Solit Volatile Ratio . 

Dowling (12) in his geological survey report, advanced a classifica¬ 
tion by means of which he hoped to get a division similar to that given by 
Camubell 1 s caroon-hydrogen ratio® His so-called, M Split Volatile Ratio !l was 
decided upon. He had only a few ultimate analyses to work on, while several 
proximate analyses were available. 

Tne Sulit Volatile Ratio is expressed by the formula? 












■ 

- 


. 

. 




. 


. 






* 

* 






. 

* 






* 

■ 

■ 


* 

* 













~ 39 - 


Perce ntage off fixed carbon + 4 pe rcent age of volatile m atter 
Percentage moisture + J percentage of volatile matter 

.All precentages were to be expressed on the air dried basis. Most of the 
samples made use of for analysis, he considered to be approximately air 
dried by exposure to the air before being analysed. This classification, 
and others based on the air dry coal, introduce too much error owing to un¬ 
standardised methods of air-drying, 

U. S, Geological Survey Classification . 

In a paper (21) given at the International Conference on Bituminous 
Coal held at Pittsburgh in November 192b, M. R. Campbell outlined the classi¬ 
fication adopted by tne U. S. G-eologic^l Survey, He 'Iso showed a chart 
giving the proximate analysis and calorific value of oo^ls typical of each 
class. The chart is reproduced in Plate I* The classes recognized with the 
characteristics of each are as follows* 

Peat; approximate constituents 8^ moisture, 10,4% volatile matter, 

4,bJ& fixed carbon,, and calorific value 1,290 B.T.U, 

Li gnite ; brown in color, woody or composed of finely divided plant 

tissues, or amorohoiis and representing the first stage in the development of 
cannel* Contains 25% to 45% moisture, and on drying shrinks and breaks up 
in an irregular manner. Calorific value ranges from b,000 to 7»500 B.T.U* 
gab-bituminous ; moisture 12 to 25%, black in color, slacks on 

exposure to the weather, Calorific value "J-,000 to 11,000 B.T.U. 

Bitu minous; little slacking on exposure to weather. Calorific 
value 11,000 to 15,000 B.T.U. Fuel ratio below 2.5 - the class includes 
cannels, some of the best steam coals, and the best gas and by-product coal. 

Semi- bituminous ; fuel ratio 2,5 to 5« Calorific value 12,000 to 
15,400; nearly smokeless, usually friable and breaks down easy. 
Semi-anthracite; 


fuel ratio 5 to 10, harder than bituminous but not 




























- 






















































UOiKITe___ 7ioo 



- 40 - 


>6,000 


0 

0 



(2,000 

• t • • • 




•• 

0 ~ 

0 

0 

0 

0 



&,©oc> 





a 

Oi 

a 

n 


S 

<0 

1 

u* 

N. 

4,000 

O 

O 

3 

? 

t 

• 













Z 3 -4 5 6 r 8 9 r 



PLATE X. 

Diagrams Snowing the Efiects oi the Progressive Metamorphism of Vegetal 
Matter from Peat to Super-Anthracite. Tne Lower Diagram Represents tne Chemical 
Composition (except Ash) and the Upper Diagram, the Heating Values in B.T.U. 






















































41 - 


so hard as anthracite, burns with a. short vellow flame **t first, then with 
blue flame after volatile matter is given off. 

Anthrac ite: fuel ratio over 10, hard, heavy, hums with a blue 

flame, is difficult to ignite, burns without smoke, does not soil. 

The Executive Committee of the Twelfth Session of the International 
Geological'Congress, made coal the chief subject for discussion at that session. 
A special committee drew up a classification system which was used in deter¬ 
mining the nature and extent of the coal resources of the various countries. 
Coals were divided into four classes, designated by the letters A, B, C, and 
D, Three of these classes had subclasses, so that in all eight divisions or 
ranks of coal were recognized. 

The classes and subclasses with the characteristics of each, are 
given in the following table® 

Class A. 

1. TBurns with short, blue flame; gives off | to 5% 0± volatile 
combustible matter, 

Fuel ratio Fixed carbo n s ip an & over 

"Volatile matter 

CaAorific value 14,500 to 15,000 B.T.U. per pound. 

Mean composition; 

Carbon 93 to 35 % 

Hydrogen 2 to 4 

Oxygen and nitrogen 3 to 5 

2, Bums with slightly luminous, short flame and little smoke; does 
not coke and yields from 7 to 12.% of volatile matter* 

Fuel ratio, 7 to 12. 

Calorific value generally 15,000 to 15>900 B.T.tT. 

Mean composition* 

Carbon 90 to 93% 

Hydrogen 4 to 4.5 

Oxygen and nitrogen 3 to 5*9 

Class B . 

1. Burns with short, luminous flame and yields 12 to 15% volatile artier; 

does not readily coke. 


















- 42 


15,200 to lb, 000 B.T.TJ. 

60 to 90 fo 

4.5 to 5 

5.5 to 12 

and yields from 12 to 2b% volatile matter; 

lb,000 B.iE.U. 

75 to 30% 

4.5 to 5.5 

b to 15 

3. Burns freely with long flame; withstands weathering, "but fractures 

reahily, and occasionally has moisture content up to b%; volatile 
matter up to 35 6 !°\ makes porous, tender coke. 

Fixed carbon + \ volati le a 2.5 to 3*3 

Hygroscopic moisture + volatile 
Calorific value 12,000 to 14,000 B.T.TJ. 

Mean composition' 

Carbon 70 to 80$ 

Hydrogen 4.5 to b 

Oxygen and nitrogen 18 to 20 

Class C« Cannel . 

Burns with long, smoky flame; yields from 30 to 40% volatile matter 
on distillation, leaving very porous coke. Fracture generally resinou 
Calorific value 12,000 to lb,000 B.T.U* 

Class D. Sab-bituminous . 

Contains generally over bfo of moisture, disintegrates on drying; 
streak drown or yellow; cleavage indistinct. 

1» Moisture in fresh-mined, commercial output up to 20%. Fracture 

generally conchoidal. Drying-cracks irregular, curved lines. 

Colour generally lustrous black, occasionally drown. 

Fixed carbon + 2 volatile s .^g 2 k 

Hygroscopic moisture + 1“ volatile 
Calorific value 10,000 to 13,000 B.T.U. 

Average composition; 

Carbon oO to 75^ 

Hydrogen b to b*5 

Oxygen and nitrogen 20 to 30 


Fuel ratio 4 to 7* 
Calorific value generally 
Mean composition; 

Carbon 

Hydrogen 

Oxygen and nitrogen 

2. Burns with luminous flame 

generally cokes. 

Fuel ratio 1.2 to 7* 
Calorific value 14,000 to 
Mean composition; 

Carbon 

Hydrogen 

Oxygen ^nd nitrogen 









. 

. 















: 












- 

. 

- - - 

- 


- 
















- 43 


?. Moisture in commercial output over 20 %« Fracture generallv earthy 

and dull. Drying-cracks generally separate ^long bedding planes 
and oiten show fibrous (woody) structure. 

Calorific value 7,000 to 11,000 B.T.U. 

Average compositions 

Carbon 43 to 

Hydrogen b to b.S 

Oxygen and nitrogen 30 to 45 


Fisher 1 s Diagrams . 

D. J„ Fisher of the University of Chicago, has recently suggested 
two new ideas in the way of coal classification. He has drawn two triaxial 
diagrams, the one based on the oroximate constituents, and the other on the 
ultimate analysis. His purpose is to show the loss by coal of certain sub¬ 
stances during the coalification process. Fisher used the “as-received H 
“basis, and calculated his analyses to the ash-free basis for his graphical 
representations. 

In the first scheme Fisher plots the percentages of moisture, volatile 
matter, and fixed carbon in the coal ( 3, as received 31 ash-free), using equi¬ 
lateral triaxial co-ordinates. The diagram shows that in the earlier stages 
tne process of coaliiication is mainly one of dehydration, while in the later 
stages it is mainly one of devolatilization. The dehydration process is tne 
most important process up to about the early bituminous stage, after which it 
is practically sunplanted by the devolatilization process. 

The second scneme shows the ultimate analyses constituents; - carbon, 
hydrogen, and oxygen - on the as received ash-free coal. From the diagram 
deoxidation is the most important process of coalification, though dehydro¬ 
genation is important in the earlier and later stages. 




















- 


' 




* 




























I 
























' 








. 














X 




















■ . 




■ 














- 43 a 


i'isner* 


iooy, 

Mtxvro**. 



I I & IJ E E I, 

Coal Series - Proximate Analysis, as received. Calculated 
asn-iree. 

























£ I <£ 2 £ I IX. 

Fistier's Coal Series - Ultimate Analysis, as received, calculated 
ash-1ree. 










- 44 - 


Sunacfl ry . 

From the foregoing description of the diiierent classifications 
wnich have been proposed, it will have been seen that classifications h^ve 
been based on tne data obtained by both proximate and ultimate analysis ^nd 
on combination oi both, and also on other criteria. They have been founded 
on data on the moist, air dry,, and dry coal bases of both nroximate and ulti¬ 
mate analysis. Table 4 gives a summary of the classifications mentioned, 
with the criteria employed in each, 

A general consideration oi the relative accuracy and reliability, 
as well as ease of application, of the different bases and criteria should 
be given at tnis point. 

A classification based on data obtained by the proximate analysis 
has the obvious advantage that the data is easily and quickly obtained. On 
the other hand the proximate analysis is not the determination of either 
definite compounds or chemical elements, but is the determination of arbi¬ 
trary values. Carefully standardized procedure is required in order that the 
results obtained in all laboratories may be comparable; e.g. if the tempera¬ 
ture used in the determination of the volatile matter be raised 100 p C above 
the standard temperature, a higher yield, of volatile will be obtained. 

A classification based on the ultimate analysis requires tedious and 
expensive determinations, but being determinations oi chemical elements, they 
are not based on arbitrarily standardized procedure, and hence results obtained 
vary only within experimental error. However, for reasons already explained, 
care must be exercised in the interpretation of the results or the ultimate 
analysis. 


Neither proximate nor ultimate analysis determines the a.ctual com— 







- 






























. 














■ 

* 

- 


. 

. 
















* 

. 


















* 











. 

























- 4 ^ - 


! AB L ! IV, Summary of Me mods of Coal Classification. 


Classification 

Basis of Classification 

Hilt 

Volatile matter ~s a percentage ox fixed carbon 

Fraser 

Ratio Fixed Carbon 

Volatile matter 

Dowling 

Ratio Fixed Carbon + i Volatile Matter n n Hr drv final 

Moisture + v - Volatile Matter 

Pprr (?) 

Calorific Value and Volatile Matter of pure coal 

Thom 

Calorific Value and Gross Volatile Matter of air dry, 
ash-free coal 

Stansfield 

Calorific Value and Volatile Matter of moist coal with 
adjusted ash 

Ashley (1) 

Ratios Fixed Carbon and Fixed Carbon 

Volatile Matter Moisture 

Ashley (2) 

Percentage of fixed carbon in moist ash-free coal 

• 

Fisher 

Triaxial diagram showing moisture, volatile matter, and 


fixed carbon in moist ash-free coal* 

Regnault 

1 Oxygen + Nitrogen in pure coal 

Fleck 

j Disposable and combined hydrogen 

Sevier 

J Ultimate analysis of pure coal 

Campbell (1) 

| Ratio Carbon 0 n air dry coal 


"Hydrogen 

Schondorff & Muck 

j Apnearance of coke from volatile matter determination 

Gruner 

| Ultimate analysis and percentage of volatile matter 

Parr (1) 

j Ratio Volatile Carbon x a i so inert volatile matter 

Total Carbon 

Grout 

• Fixed Carbon and total carbon of pure coal 

Campbell (2) 

Physical characteristics of low rank co^ls 

U.S.Geological 

Proximate analysis, calorific v^lue and physical 

Survey 

•properties. 

12th International 

Proximate and ultimate analysis 

Congress 

...—.— " • ——————— - .-™ 


T A BLE IV. 































- 

. - 








. 



















































































- 







- 4b - 


nounds present, nor tne proportions oi diiierent Kinas oi comoounas in tne 
coal. To obtain a realiy satisfactory classification, it would seem that some 
metnod of determining, or oi finding out something about the different com¬ 
pounds making up the coal is required* Extraction with solutions such as 
chloroform, pyridine, etc* may give some indication of the nature of the coal; 
also, oxidation work on the ulmin content of the coal may provide some better 
method of classification* 

Classifications using both ultimate and proximate analysis have 
been based on tne coal, moist*, air dry, and dry. 

The air-drying of co'- 5 ! is an arbitrary procedure for wnich a 
standard method of procedure has not been adopted in all laboratories. Hence 
the sir dried basis is not a satisfactory one upon which to base a classifi¬ 
cation. 

In calculating an analysis to the dry basis, the loss in weight 
sustained by the coal when heated at 105 - 7 ® C is considered as the moisture 
present in the coal. This is an arbitrary procedure. There is no way of de¬ 
termining whether this water is present as water - bound or otherwise - in 
the original coal, or whether it is produced by the breaking down of un¬ 
stable compounds in tne coal. This shows a possible defect in any classifi¬ 
cation which makes use of the moisture of the coal, or whicn is ba.sed on the 
so-called "dry" coal. 

Relatively few classifications h«ve been based on the moist coal. 
Several facts seem to noint to this basis as the logical one upon which to 
found a classification. The water of the vegetation from which coal is pro¬ 
duced is considered to be an integral part of those plants, hence should be 
regarded as being an integral part of the coal. It is generally considered 

* "Moist” when used in this thesis, in this connection, reiers to the coal 
moist as mined, calculated to - mineral matter free basis* 






































' 







. 






* 







' 

- 








* 




■' p * 


















, 

- 


- 

* 













. 






- 












, . 
















■ 









- 47 - 


that, in the metamorphosis of co»l from peat towards anthracite, dehydration 
is one of the most important changes the co«l undergoes. Hence, it is diffi¬ 
cult to think of the moisture content "being other than part of the co»l* The 
physical properties - such as weathering - of coals ~re directly related to 
the moisture content, Prom, a consideration of these factors, it would seem 
that the logical "basis upon whicn to found a classification of co°l is the 
moist coal. 

The moisture content of mine samples of Albert^ co^ls, has "been 
found to vary very little "between successive samples from the same mine, 
or even from the same township. This would indicate that the water makes 
un an integral p°rt of the coal rather than that it varies with the mois.ture 
conditions of the mine or part of the mine* Table V, showing the percentages 
of moisture in mine samples of coal from two townships, shows the small 
variation between samples* The samples from the Drumheller township were 
taken from eight different mines in three different seams* 



I 


- 48 - 


T A IB L E V, 











































- 49 - 


0 _H A P T E R I I, I. 


THE C LAS SI IP I CM 1 1 OH OP ALBERTA COALS. 


A considerable amount of work has ‘been done on the classification 
of Albert® coals. The Alberta Provincial Mines Branch employs a class if i. - 
cation which divides the coals now being' produced in the province into 


three classes; bituminous, sub-bituminous, and domestic, The Atlas of the 
Coal Resources of the World, contains a, map showing the coal field® of the 
Province of Albert? according to the class of coal. E. Stansfield has 
proposed the classification outlined above, and has plotted charts showing; 
how calorific v~lue and moisture content of Albert® coals vary with the 
locality in which they occur. 

The following table shows the arrangement adopted by the Alberta 
Mines Branch? 


Title of .jO.ls.ss_ 
Areas bv classes 
Kootenay horizon 


Anthracite 

Cascade 

(B®nkhe®d) 


Belly River 
horizon 


Edmonton horizon 


5 Bituminous 


| Domestic 

jBrule 

! 

t 

! 

(Mountain P®rk 

1 

1 

JlTordegg 

i 

1 

1 

Cascade 

! 

1 

1 

! Orowsnest’ 

! Oldman 

1 

! 

! 

! 

^ Halcourt 

|Sexsmith 

1 

! Coal spur 

j Ma.gr? th 

( 

! Saunders 

Lethbridge 

I 

jPekisko 

I Ta.ber 

1 

'Fincher 

'Milk River 

I 

1 

i 

J ?®kowkx 

! 

! 

!Rede1iff 

i 

I 

j 

( 

jBro^ks 

1 

i 

Pembina. 

|Edmonton 

1 

1 


! 

'Tofield 

I 

1 

i 

1 Camrose 

i 

i 

5 Castor 

! 

1 

( Sheerness 

1 

1 

(Ardl e v 

i 

i 

jBig Valley 

i 

1 

j d-rbon 

Brumheller 

Crleichen 



Charrraion 
















A good example of the need of - standard classification of Albert® 
en-ls is furnished by the feet that the Atlas of the Coal Resources of the 
World show the Lethbridge district as being in an Anthracite and Bituminous 
coal area, while the Provincial Mines "Branch classify the s^me coal as 
Domestic. 

The tables and figures following show data and graphic representa¬ 
tions of classifications with points to represent Alberta coals. 

They are shown in the following table’ 


Tabbe VI 

Ratios and percentages by mines of the Kootenay horizon 

Figure III 

Points on Seyler’s Classification to represent coals of the 
Kootenay horizon. 

Table VII 

Ratios and data of the Belly River and Edmonton horizons 
arranged by areas. 

Table VIII 

Ratios and data, of coals of the Belly River and Egmonton 
horizons arranged in order of decreasing calorific value of 
the moist coal calculated mineral matter free. 

Table IX 

Order into which coals of the Belly River and Edmonton horizons 
fall by different criteria - arrangement being as in Table VIII 

Figure IV 

Sevier’s Classification applied to Alberta coals. 

Table X 

Distribution by areas of the classes of coal as arranged by 
Sevier’s Classification. 

Figure V 

Parr’s second Classification applied to Alberta coals. 

Table XI 

Distribution by areas of the classes of coal as arr«n<aed by 
Parr’s second Classification. 

Figure VI 

Thom’s Classification applied to Alberta coals. 

Table XXI 

Distribution by sre^s of the classes ox coal as arranged by 
Thom’s Classification. 

Figure VTT 

E, Stansfield’s Classification applied to Alberta coals. 

T°ble Xttt 

Distribution by -reas of the classes of coal as arranged by 

E, Stansfield’s Classification. 






Figure VIII 

Figure IX 

Figure X 

Table XIV 

Table XV 

Table XVT 

Table XVII 


Graphical Representation of Albert? coals snowing calorific 
value and gross volatile matter of moist co®l calculated to 
mineral matter free basis. 

Graphical Representation of the proximate analysis of 
Albert® coals (moist, calculated to tne mineral matter free 
basis) 


Scneme proposed by Fisner with, points to represent Alberta 
coals and Fisher’s division into classes. 


Distribution by areas of the classes of coal as arranged 
by Dowling’s Split Volatile R:~tio. 

Distribution by areas of the classes of coal as arranged 
by the Carbon-Hydrogen ratio. 

Distribution by areas of the classes of coal as arranged 
by Grout’s classification. 


Distribution by areas of tne classes of coal as arranged, 
by Parr’s first classification. 






52 - 


BLE VI. 






Ratios and Percentages 137 Mines ox' the Kootenay Horizon. 


Area 

i- 

jMine 

Fuel 

Ratio 

Split 

Volatile 

Ratio 

Volatile 
Matter 
moistco 0 

VolatilejV.C.xlOO 

Matter 1 Carton 
. drycoal! 

| C/H 

Air dry 
| coal 

B/i’.U. 
moist 
Coal_ 

| Oxygen 
pure 
Fboal 

Ignition 

Temperature 

Cascade 

I 

Canmore (C) 

5.37 

10.2 

15.b 

15.s | 

1 

7.8 

n 

| 20.4 

I5,3b0 

| 1.80 

235.0 


" (S) 

5.1b 

10.1 

lb.l 

lb.2 

8.3 

19,9 ' 

15, M 

2.10 

232.5 

Nordegg 

Brazeau 

4.57 

9.2 

17.5 

17.9 

10.7 

18.8 

15,590 

l.b5 

223.0 

Brule 

iBlue Diamond4.4b 

9.0 

18.2 

18.5 

15.4 

18.2 

15,730 ] 

l.b4 

222.5 

Mt. Park 

Lusc^r 

3-lb 

7.7 1 

20-5 

21.b 

15.0 

18.2 

1H,38O 

2.5b 

225.5 

Crowsnest 

Greenhill 

3.0? 

b.b 

24.3 

1 24.8 

18.0 

lb.b 

15,470 

3.20 

220.4 

Oldman 

1 Skeen (14-4 

[ 5.00 

b.4 1 

23.9 

1 24.9 1 

lb.O 

17.7 

14,9b0 

4.05 

212.5 

Crowsnest 

j Tp. 7-b 

2.95 

b.2 

24.3 

1 25.3 

1 

1 

14,930 


- 

Crowsnest 

1 Car 1 dale 

2,81 

1 0.2 1 

1 25.8 I 

! 2b.2 1 

1 18.5 

lb.4 1 

15.370 

4.45 

213-5 

It 

! Dennison 

2.bS j 

| 5-9 j 

I 2b.7 

! 27.2 

18.5 

17.b J 

15.330 

2.80 

218.4 

n 

iBurmis 

2.bl 

5-b 

2b. 1 

! 27.7 



14,o40 


- 

Mt. Park 

1Cadomin 

2.57 

5-7 

2o.4 

28.0 

19.7 

lb.9 | 

15,400 

3.45 

214.3 

Crowsnest. 

iBellevue 

2.47 

5.5 

28.4 

28.8 

18.4 

lb.7 

13,3b0 

4.30 

- 

n 

[Hillcrest 

2.29 

5.2 

29.7 

30.2 

I8.5 

17.0 

15,4b0 

5.59 

208.5 

Mt. Park 

Mt. I s ?rk 

2.10 

4.9 

31.5 

32.2 

23.3 

15.b 1 

15,270 

5.90 

207.2 

Crowsnest 

Tu. ( b-2W5 ) 

1.94 

4.4 

32.5 

34.0 



14,900 



11 

|Tp.(5-iW5) 

1.87 

3.9 

32.3 

34.8 



13,700 

[ 

1 










































Percentage Hydrogen 


- 53 - 


/ 


Figure showing the position of the coals in Table VI 
when plotted by Seyler>s Classification. 


5.8 

". *. ‘ ' I 

1 o7- i 


! pS o9 ' 

! A: 

oi<b 

00 

5 J____ _ . I 


! 

r~ ... ~sr~ 

ol2 1 


o5 

i 

! 

i 

! 

i 

1 

'■ 03 

! 

1 

I 

\ 

! 

4.B! 

o2 

i 

1 

_____ ( 

1 

ol 

T 


017 


I 


4 ! I 

93,. 3 





Percentage 

Carbon. 


i. 

Canmore 

Carey" 

8 . 

Cadomin. ‘ 

2. 

Cankore 

Steward 

9* 

Bellevue 

3, 

> — 

Braaeau 

10. 

Carbondale. 

4. 

< - 

Blue Diamond 

11. 

Hillcrest 

3- 


Luscar 

12. 

Oldman (Tp. 14-4) 

b. 

Dennison 

13. 

Mountain Park, 


7. G-reenhill 


FIGURE III 














tn« Rally Rlv«r ••nil Edmonton Horizons *rr*njB-e<1 by Ari* 

























































































































































srTv i irr nZTl ot Fiot? 1 i f'C'Z *t " ?.?. • t i "tri-gf 























































































































































































































T"Me nhowlnr the Order Tnt’o~Whtrh Coni* of the Belly River -'nA Mmonton Horizons 
fill wnen omnged by the Criteria mentioned "t, the heed of e->rh column. 







w?,° 






&pi£'3‘&£LS53S??L$SSSL 






2?£$i£©P££8£:&S£&i 


£j°£j»£§3Si£«ig£3: 





























































































$&& 


£ 

R? £ 

£ 



1 

« 

^ 1 

! u 1 

rA 

rH I s - 

r<"\ t^\ 

to 

ro 



£3#:&£££&£ S 8 £8 £8 & 

r—? r—' r 1 H H r—' 


£ 8 SS 8 £§£'&g 3 g ££&[^£8 8 ^S£ 8 g 8 ££g £888 8 & 
_?.,_. J_i_is_ H . H . H i 

Plf5L?L'5?^JSLg|3--®gL©e5gfSLgeg©©®*e©©|fe&:|||§gg|| 

■aSS8PPfSLgggS‘ , ^©«^&gi&^SSISS5‘§;R©^5;^||S l ||§gg 

t^S^©Pia^S^ , &S^^S8^ Sl g^^S'R^^|8 8||'g&||g 


$8&£g&&g£gSS&fc£§88-go8g£™g £8?2-gg££££§ 













































Sevier's Clsesilication sp-nlied to Alberts 
co°1b. 









Pc* CENT#»OE OW *W©«*0 CM 


Pe.r- 

ftrruMiNous 

fiHTrtRftOTE 

CftPvbOK- 

ftCEOOS 

ftn 

t'lt.lfi- 

0T^\ N 
ORTA0- 

OOS 

PARA' 

i 

L\QK 
M E.T R*s.ooa« rJL 

Pir-ber ' ' Ce>«lt 

^ Wm m 

, '/Y ,ik 

\T0 OS 

°Jm± -, ORTHO- 

ey-L— 

X/wr ,,, 

- 1 Ch#*l^/0f 

. r^r " 

Lignite, 

6tfOt*\\KoOS 


■* 

$ 

t 

1 

{ 

-5 

OLd «J, 

O 

o 

O ( 

0 
|o 

o 



o o % 

0 

. 

0 o 

0 

' Carbail dawftst 

O 0 I3.i|*r 

<* 0 

0 * 

onhn 

Castor 

Sk'trrpst 

Seiai- 

&ITON\UHOOS 

Nofde<^ [ 

r 


v 0 

0 

o 





0* # *• • 

• 

• •• 

• 

• 

> • • 

CR*EONfcCEOU$ 

Citcade ^ 

0 








AnTH^RCr^ 

SeYL€<?*S CLASSIFICATION 

RfPMEO To flU&EKTA CftRU*, 

O' MlH®. Avecfl(aHS « KooTtMflX WoRiioN 

$• ToU^$ H h> n : BeU.X « 

, _ ti k : eor^&NToH •• 

- 1 - 1 - 1 - 




/ 



-1-1-4------J_ 

13 .3 ?/2 S? 3? 8-f 80 7S 

P€*CtHTe<»€. O? CfiftOoN |M Pont CoftU 




























3 L E X, SELLER 1 ^ CT1 SSTi'TCft i ION , 


Classes by Areas and Mines oi the Kootenay Horizon and by Areas of the 
Belly River °nd Edmonton Horizons, 


Ti t1 e oi C1a ss 
Kootenay Horizon 
Ortho-carbonaceous 
Ortho-semi-bituminous 


Bituminous 
Meta. - 


Sub-met a. - 
Ortho - 

^ellv River Horizon , 
Per-nara ■» 
Lignitous 

Meta 


• Area and Mine or Townshin 

Cascade (Canmore mine, Carey seam) 
Cascade (Canmore mine, Stewart seam) 
Brule 
Nordegg 

Mountain Park (Luscar) 

Mountain ?*rk (Cadomin) 

Crowsnest 

Oldman 

Mountain Park (Mountain Park) 

Pekisko ° (22-4) 

'Hal court 

Coalspur (47-19) 

Saunders 
Pekisko (IS-2) 

Pincher (3-2) 

Magrath 

Lethbridge (70-9-21) 


Paf-meta- 


Ortho- 


Sub- ortho - 
nton Ho ri^n> 

Ortho - 


Pincher (7-2) 

Coalspur (43-22) 
Lethbridge* (3) 
Milk River 
Taber ( 3 ) 

Coalspur (43-21) 

Camrose (4o-20) 
Carbon (31-24) 
Ardley (38-23) 


Sub-ortho - 


Lignite 


Pembina 
Edmonton ( 3 ) 

Carbon (31-23) 

Big Valley (7o-22) 
Lrumheller ( 3 ) 
Champion (1to-23) 

Edmonton (55-25) 
Castor 

Sheerness (29-14) 


*> Numbers of this sort in brackets refer to township numbers, 
* Single numbers in brackets refer to the number of townships 















C«uorific VpikOE of V\*ri=. Coal B.T.V/ /La. 































- 60 - 

X I, Parr's Second Co*l Classification - Applied to Albert* Ooels. 


Title of Cl*ss 

1 Semi- bituminous 

Eastern Type 

Western Type I Sub-bituminous 

| Brown 


L 

Bituminous 

Bituminous 

(Black T,ignite) 

Lignite 

Deiinition of cl* 

ss 



j 13,000-lj|}000 

4—iii£eite- 

Calorific V«lue 

llB,500-lo,000 

15,OOO-lb,000 

1 14,000-15,000 

11,500 - 

Volatile "rtter 

j14 to 24 4 

24 to ( Vi -47) 1 

[Above (33-47) * 

Above 

1 Above i3% 

\re*s oy Classesr 



r 

r ' 


Kootensv horizon 

1 Brule 

Mountain P*rk*(2' 



1 


1 Mount*in Park (1 

1 Lusear 

1 Wordegg 

1 Cascade 
lOldman 

Crowsnest 

! 

i 

| 


1 

i 

1 

1 


Belly River 



Hslcourt 

1 

Pakowki 

horizon 

1 


Co?lspur°(43-lb) 

Co*1spur (4) 

Redcliff 


1 


Pekisko 

Saunders 

1 Sexsmith 


1 


Pincher 

Lethbridge (5) 

jTaber (2) (12-10 &7-< 


1 


?*rgre th 

Milk River 


1 

1 

i 

! 

j Lethbridge(7-21) 

Taber (fc>) 

Brooks I 

I 

1 

j 

Edmonton horizon 

1 



Ipembin* (53-7) 

j Pembina (53-4) 


1 


1 

1 Edmonton (51-25) Edmonton (4) 


1 



C*rbon 04) 

Carbon 0?) (32-21 & 


1 



Drumhe]ler 

27-23) 


I 



se*nj] (3) 

Tofield 


) 



*2 se-m» 

Camrose 


1 



#5 ee*n^B 

j Castor 


1 



47 se '’'m 

Ardley 


1 



GleicnaB 

(Big Valley 


i 



1 Ardley ft 

Sheerness 


! 


1 

1 

iDrumheller 


i 

1 

1 


I 

1 

! 

1 #1 seam (27-18) 

1 #5 seam (28-19) 


Single numbers in brackets refer to tne number of townships 
tfumcers of this sort in brackets refer to township numbers) 




































VoLftTiLi. Plarrc.* + tyoivrvme. 
























































'ABLE i X X s Distribution bv areas of the classes of Coal 
ns arranged bv Thom’s Classification. 


T i 

Semi - b i tuminous 

t 1. e o i 0 1 ? 

! Bituminous 

is s 

|, ^hb-_bi tuminous 

Lignite_ 

Kootenay Horizon 

! i 

1 

1 

Cascade 

Brule 

Crowsnest (3) 
Mountain P^rk (2) 
Oldman 

1 

1 Mountain P^.rk (1) 

'Crowsnest (2) 

1 ( b -2 & 3-1) 

1 

1 

I 

1 

1 

1 

i 

1 

! 

1 

I 

! 

i 

j 

Belly River horizon! 

1 

i 

[Milk River (1) (3-11) 
i Pakowki 
i Sexsmith 

1 

i 

1 

i 

1 Pembina 
!Edmonton 
t To field. 

! 0 am.ro se 

Edmonton Horizon 

Halcourt 

Pekisko 

Pincher 

Magrath 

1 Lethbridge (1) 

! (7-21) 

I 

1 Coalspur 

1 Lethbridge (5) 

I Milk River (3) 

I Taber 
'Brooks 

1 

! 


i 

I 

1 

'Carbon (3) 

' Drumheller 

1 #1 seam (3) 

!Champion 


I 


Castor 


I 

i 

i 

! 

i 


! Ardley 
'lie Valley 
* Carbon (4) 

t 

' Brumheller 
I #1 se^m (?7-15) 
I 42 seam 
1 yo se-m 
! #7 seam 
'Sheerness 


I 



















a 

7 

C 

* 

o 

c 

x 

H 


4 

t 

o 

o 

\r 

* 

O 

* 


uf 

o 

J 

5 


a 

0 






6 <*W 

C»stait 

IT 0 

O 

HoOotal* 

Po<R 




0 

o\4n»>i 

O 

CvoviMcst 

o g ° 0 C 

0 




Short Flo^h 

5ito 

Mi Now 

0 

0 

Lotte 

biTori 

Few 

UNO os 

0 

IE. 








k 







M 

I • 

r 

3 

t 

«o * 

5" 

0 0 
V 

0 0 


} 

I 

2 r 5 

1 <£ 
fi J 

C 








<0 

3 

</) 

A 

0 

A O 0 * 0 

* 0 ° 0 

£ 

■ 

-«f 

i 

} 

() 

T 

• 1-1 
? t 







« 

e 

f 


O 

0 

*0 

0 

> 0 . 

- 

. b 
* 

0 * 5 
*. -i 


3 J 


? 

| 





1 

3 

I 

o 

” * 

0 

If 

J- 

Jr 

t 

Jc 

/ 

0 >** , 

«r 

to 


>= 

* 

£ 







i 

cfi 

< 

IT I 
3 - 

i 

r 

»• » 

0^0 

V;/° 




f 

>2 

£ 

E.Stomspieuo^ 
Classification of Coal 

Analyses CaWvAaVsA to Mailer Free 'iasis 

o-Mme 8v*K«c»e.s - Kootchay Homxotf 

^ * Townsmi* ») OtiJ-X Rwtft 9 

• - ” 1 EonyoNToW «> 

-—1---1_ 

J 

1/ 

[ 

3 

IJ; 

.* ' 

i.r 

31 

jl ; 





% 

0 

tr 

z: 

jr 

-J 





0 



■ 



P« csur VoUiTite M<rrren- Moist Coni- 











































- b4 - 


H L 


XIII. 


Alberts co^ls 


~s Arranged by E. Stsnsfield's Classification. 


iitle of classes 


Definition of cl* 

C^loriiic value 
Volat il e **rtter 
Are~s by Classes 

Kootenay horizon 


Belly River horizon 


Short blame 
Bituminous 


1 Long Flame ~J Sub-bituminous 

! Bituminous I 


Above 14,250 
■Below 


Above 14,250 114, 25 O - 11,750 

Above 22.5'fc 


Cascade 
Brule 
Nordegg 
Mountain Park 
(Luscar) 


Mountain Park(2 

Crowsnest 

Oldman 


lack Lignite ~j Brown"*!,ignite 


11,750 - 9,000 jBelow 9,000 


Edmonton horizon 


Coalspur 

Halcourt 

Saunders 

Pekisko 

Pincher 

Hagrath 

Lethoridge 


Mi lk| River 
bar 

Brooke 
Redcliff 
IP- owki (2) 


Pern bina 
Edmonton 
Cpmrose (3) 
Castor (10) 
Ardley 
Bv; Velley 
0'rbon 
Dm iheller 
Gle^hen 
Sbeorness (2) 


Pakowki (b) 
Sexsmith 


Tofield 

Camrose (l)(48-19) 
Castor (3) 
Sheemess ( 5 ) 



































<0 

> 

Hf 

CD 

a 

2 

s 

D 

O 

I 

)- 

J 

0 

$ 

5 

Z 

u. 

O 

tu 

J 

> 


/6 


M- 


/3 


U 


C«vci<*« 6H 

r 

o ’"o 


fountain 


Sauniws 

BeKrtKo 


-ff— 

6^ 


t-tUWi< ae 


❖ O 

* 

QO 
0 O < 


I t 


/2 


0 o 

* 


IN 


1L 


i 


/o 


it a 


VJ 

H 

c2 

3 

a 

vj 


6.5 


Graphic KepRtitHTHTiON of 

Alberta Coav_*>. 

fU SUGGESTED BV VE1.0. 

Ahai^srs Awusreo to Mineral rttrr Pree 

0 MlRE. Averages - KooTEHhX ^OR.\r.oK 

* To«H^P » &CLLX R.WR.R » 

• 0 ') tPKlOUTOK » 


6.5 


fo 


Hf 


ZO 


Z5 3o 35 Jo 45 50 55 

PeRCEHTA6E OF VOLATILE MATTER + MotSTURfc, 


60 


6S 


To 


75 















































\ 


I 









PenttHtnae. Fi«&.9 Crrooh in li»»vr Com. 
























/ 











































- bf! - 


'TABLE XIV. Dowling's Split Volatile Ratio - Applied to Alberta on-i ,1 


Title of Class 


Anthracitic 

; i 


Definition of Class 
Fixed. C g rt>on + jr V .M. 
Mois ture + r'v.V. 
Areas by Classes ; 

Kootenay horizon 


10 - IX 

^ Cascade 


Belly River horizon 


Edmonton horizon 


'High C»rbon 

I Bituminous_ 

Bituminous jLow Caiuon 

1- iBitumin no 

[Lignitic 

coal 

j Li ( ni te 

b - 10 

" ■ 

I 1 

3.5 - b I 2 -j.r, I 

2 . 5-3 

! 

Brule 

p- m 

Mountain Park ( 2 ) 1 


| 1.0 - 2.5 

Nordegg 

Crowsnest 



Mountain Park 

(Dennison) 



(Luscar) 

(Bellevue) I 



Crowsnest 

(Hillcrest) 1 



(Greenhill) 

(Burmis) 1 1 



(Carbondele) 

(Tp. b- 2 ) f 

' 


(Tp. 7 -b) 

(To. 5-1) 1 


| 

Oldman 

1 1 
1 


! 

1 

[Pekisko ( 4 ) 

Halcourt 

Lethbridge 


Pincher ( 2 ) 

Coalspur 

Milk River 


Mafrath J 

Saunders 

* Pakowki 


(?- ? b) 

Peki sko^l*?- 9 ! 

(Taber 

I 

I 


?incher(8-2)1 

Redcliff 

1 


1 

Brooks 

1 

| 

I 

| 

Sexsmith 

| 

1 

1 

Pembina 

1 

1 

1 

Edmonton 

i 

1 

j 

Tofield 

| 

1 


Cararose 

1 

1 


Castor 

1 

1 

1 

Ardley 

1 

i 

1 

I 

Big Valley 




Carbon 

1 

1 

1Drumheller 


1 


Gleicben 



1 

Sheerness 


1 

1 

Champion 


1 
































- b9 - 


TABLE XV. Carbon-Hydrogen Ratio - Applied to Albert? coals. 


p , - . ' i ■ i '' ^ ! ■ i ( 

Definition of I 

class I I j 

Carbon/Hydrogen 23-20 (20-17 j 17 - 14.4 

(Air dry cool)| _ 

Kootenev hoi'izon^Canmore 


(C?rev seem) 


Bellv River 
horizon 


Edmonton 

horizon 


.i' nouB(4)| Li nite J } - 


14.4 - 12.3 


Canmore Mount-in Pk.(?) 


(Stewart seam 

Nordegg 

Brule 

Mountain Pk. 

[ (l)(Luscar) 
Oldman 
(Skeen) 
Crowsnest 
(Dennison) 
(Hillcrest) 


Crowsnest 
(Bellevue) ! 
(Greenhill) [ 
(Carbondele)I 


I Megrsth 
Ipekisko 
Saunders 
Co Q lsnur 
Pincher 



iH^lcourt 
[Lethbridge 
Milk River 

U 5 2\ 


' PemoimJ 
| ( - 7 ) 
Ch'mmion 
( (ib-?^) 
Drumheller 
#1 £ '°am 
( 28 - 1 . 9 ) 
Aa seam 
(? 4 - 20 ) 
Carbon 


I 

|H.2 - 9.3 | 9,3 - 


f 


(T-ber (3) j 


IPembina 
| (53-4) 4 

IEdmonton(3) 
IC-mrose 
j (Ub-20) 

'Ardley (1) 
[Drumheller 
I #1 se-’m 
( (29-20) 

* (27-28) 


Edmonton 
(55-24) 
Sheerness 
(29-14) 
Castor (3) 






























70 - 


Distribution by Areas of the Classes of Co~i is Arranged, by 
Grout»s Classification. 


Title of Class 

Semi-Anthracite 

Semi-Bituminous 

1 High nr: tie 

Bituminous 
Fixed Cgrbon 

| Low Cra.de [ 

[Bi tuminous_ 

lFixed Carbon 

Definition of class 

Fixed Carbon 

Fixed Carbon 


S3 - 93 % 

73-83$ 

4s - 73 $ 

4s - 73$ 




C. S2-gg% 

lo.7b.2-S2% 

Footenav horizon 

Cascade 

r 

llTordegg 

(Mountain Pk (?'| 1 


1 

[Brule 

Mountain Park (?) 1 
Crowsnest (1) 
Oldman 

Crowsnest (Ij 

1 

! » 

1 

1 1 

Belly River horizon * 

1 


Pincher 

'Lethbridge i 

1 

1 

I 

i&grath 1 

1 Co-'l spur 



! 1 


Milk River 1 

1 T-ber 

Edmonton horizon 


t | 

1 

Coroon 

1 

1 1 

t 

1 

1 

L-amheller 1 
Po'ibina 

Edmonton 


1 

_ 


C^rrorose 
! | 


Black Lignite 


i n'lxea ua: 
75 - b0% 

| C. 77 


b - 7b,2% 






















- 71 - 


TABLE XVII, Parr's First Classification - Applied to Albert- Co«ls 


Title of Class I Semi-Anthracite Serai-Bituminous "pituminous A 

Definition m. el-’ss; I 


V.C. X 100 I 4 - S 

Carbon 1 

Inert Volatile 

10-15 4 

1 

20 - 32 

5-10 

Areas by Cl°sses: 



Kootenav horizon Cascade 

Wordegg 

Mountain Pk. 

1 

♦Brule 

(Mountain Pk 

1 

Crowsnest 

Crowsnest 

1 

! 

1 

i 1 

1 (G-reenhill) 
(Carbondale) 
(Dennison) 

1 (Bellevue) 

1 Oldman 

(Hillcrest) 


Bi tuminou'JB 

Bituminous C 

jBituminous D 

Black jBrown 

Tj ite Li i t) g 

20-27 

1 10 - 15 ' 

32-44 

5 - 10 

27 - 44 

1 10-15 

27 up 27 up 

lb-20 I 20-70 

' 'K 


--— 


Belly River norizon 


Edmonton horizon 


Mountain P->rk (2 


I 

I 

I 


I 

! 


I 

I 

I 

I 

I 




I 


Pincher 
Pekisko 
Saunders 
Magrs th 
Lethbridge ( 


Lethbridge (3) 

Coalspurj 
Milk River 
Taber I 

b • 

i 

Pemoina Pembina 
(53-7) (53-4) 

C-’mrose I Edmonton 
(4o-20)I Castor 
Carbon Ardley 
D'nellerlB'neller 
#1 seamI#1 seam 
(28-19)1(29-20 &27-K) 
#5 seam j Sheeraess 
(29-20) I Champion 


















































- 72 - 


DISCUSSION OF ffPJ-UBES AND TABLES. 

Seyler's classification, shown graphically in Figure 4, -no. summarized 
in Table X, was prepared from a study of the anthracitic *nd bituminous coals. 
According to this classification co«ls of the Kootne^v horizon ^re ^lpced in 
four classes or groups. The properties ot these coals *»re well described 
bv the descriptions for each group as contained in Table 1 . Thus, C^nmore 
coal from the Carey seam (ortho-carbonaceous, Welsh, smokeless steam slight 
caking) does not show any indication of agglomerating in the -nlatinum crucible 
during the volatile matter determination. Slight agglomeration is snown by 
the coal from the Stewart seam and the caking power of the coal xncre°ses 
through the ortho-semi-bituminous (steam coals, higher hydrogen blended for 
coke) group with increase in hydrogen. The met?-bituminous group is de¬ 
scribed by Sevier as containing the Welsh coking coals. Crowsnest and 
Osdomin coals occur in this group, the coals of which contain 20 to 
volatile matter or slightly more, as mined when adjusted to about 10^ ash. 

The ortho-bituminous group is said to contain the Durham coking and gas co^ls. 
Mountain Park Colliery supplies the only coal among the Albert- coals an*lvsed 
that falls in this group, and it answers the description well. 

Only one coal, of which an analysis is available, falls in the par* 5 - ,j! 
bituminous class. This one comes at the extreme lower limit of the per-parr 
bituminous group. In work done on the Hydrogenation oi coal at tne Univer¬ 
sity of Birmingham, it was found that coals of the p-r--bituminous class -ere 
most amenable to hydrogenation. 

Seyler•s classification has been quite generally adopted by scienti¬ 
fic workers for the coals of bituminous and higher ranks. 

Co^ls below 84% carbon are subdivided mainly on the c-roon content. 




- 73 - 


These are higher moisture coals and no account is taken of tneir moisture 
content. However, a fair range of values is obtained for the lignitous groups 
and lignite. 

Sevier defends a classification b^sed on the ultimate analysis on 
the grounds that f, it gives the amount of the products of combustion. ~nd 
the amount of oxygen required for complete combustion, - factors of great 
importance in the control of the efficiency of firing.If tne coal is to be 
gasified in any form of producer it gives the amount and nature of the 
materials available for this purpose, or if it is to be c^rboniaed, (especiallv 
in conjunction with the yield of coke) the elements available for the pro¬ 
duction of coke, gas, and- by-products’ 1 . 

Classifications based on Volatile Matter n nd Calorific Value . 

Parr’s second scheme of classification, shown graphically in Pig. V 
and summarised in Table XX, being based on tne pure coal, does not take into 
account the moisture of the water-holding properties of the co^ 1 . In the 
higher ranks a, «mite satisfactory division of tne coals is obtained, but tne 
same cannot be said of the division obtained for the lower ranks. In the 
alternative division into lignite and sub-bituminous classes, coals from 
Saunders and Brooks are thrown close together, as n lso are coals from Pembina 
and TolieXd* The range of values in sub—bituminous ‘~nd lianite is much too 
small. 

Thom * s classification (Fig. VI *nd Table XTI) being based on the air 
dry coal, will not give the same division into classes in all laboratories, 
owing to there being no generally adopted standard method o± air drying coal . 

The arrangement of the low moisture, higher r°nk coals is much the 
same as that given by Parr’s second classification. The lines of division, 
however, do not separate tne Cascade coals from that of Cadorain ana moat of 




- 74 - 


those of the' Orowsnest are?• 


The line of division "between sub-bituminous and lignite, is not a. 
satisfactory one, though ?. better arrangement is given than bv pnrr's classi¬ 
fication on the pure coal basis. 

IS. Stan&sfieldd s classification (Fig. VTI f>nd Table XT II) makes a 
satisfactory division‘between the higher rank coals, •'nd in tne lower rank® 
places the coals in very nearly the order of their relative values as domestic 
fuel. This classification being based on the moist coal, more nearly repre¬ 
sents the coal as it is used, than do the two previously considered classifi¬ 
cations. 


An objection to classifications based on the calorific value and 
volatile matter has been based on the assumption that the calorific v^lue of 
^ coal is the algebraic sum of the heat of combustion of the c=rbon ^nd hydro¬ 
gen and the heat of decomposition of the coal. The latter is ° negative 
ouantity which increases with increase in oxygen content* Contrary to the 
above argument, it would seem that, if this be so, a classification based on 
calorific value, by including this factor, better represents the true value 
of tne coal than can a classification based on the ultimate analysis. 


Figure VIII shows the gross volatile as well as the calorific value 
of the pure moist coal, and spreads the points for co*ls over a larger area. 

No use for classification purposes 'has been made of this figure, since no 
change would be made excent in the higher ranks in the v«lue of volatile matter 
separating short and. long flame bituminous. It 'was considered that sufficient 
use h-d been m-de of moisture content when the colorific value of the moist 
coal was used. 

Fisher } s Scheme . 

The trioxial representation of the proximate analysis according to 





- 75 - 


Fisher 1 s scheme (Fi , shows the'relative import nee o 

devolatilization at different stages of the formation of coal. Albert' co-’ls 
do not follow puite the same line, nor do they fall in as narrow a ribbon as 
that shown bv Fisher. 

Figure X shows graphically the constituents considered to m°ke up 
the pure coal. (The lines representing oxygen are not drawn, hut the per¬ 
centage of oxygen may he obtained from the relation, oxygen equals 100 - 
(carbon + hydrogen). In the higher ranks where the moisture content is verv 
low, a small difference in moisture makes a large difference in carbon, so 
that Lascar is shown a bituminous coal, while G-reenhill, due to a verv low 
moisture content, is shown as a semi-bituminous coal. For the lower p^rt of 
the bituminous rank and in the sub-bituminous and 1 isnite ranks, the lines of 
division do not properly mark out the r°nks. Thus Sounders is considered *■» 
bituminous coal, and Sheemess and Castor °re placed in the sub-bituminous 
grour>. Tables VII, VIII and IX show some values of carbon in the moist 
mineral matter-free coal, ana these serve os well as Fisher’s graphical 
scheme. From those tables it is seen that theper cent age of carbon in the 
moist coal decreases with decreasing calorific value. Limits might be ? rv *- 
*o 0ge d to base a classification for the lower rank coal on this value alone. 
Thus the coal? which are classified by P, Stansfield's classification, as cub- 
bituminous, would be separated from those classilied as dIpck; lignite at a 
carbon percentage of J 0 3 while 54% carbon gives much the same division be¬ 
tween black lignite and brown lignite as does the above mentioned classifica¬ 
tion. 

guilt Volatile Ratio . 

Table XIV shows the division into classes by areas according to 
Dowling*s split volatile ratio. This ratio being based on the ~ir dry coal 



-Th¬ 


is subject to the same objection as : re other classifications on that oasis. 
Table VT snows that much tne seme division of the higher rank coals is given 
ov tnis r^tio as by other ratios. For the rank's below bituminous, the r-n,- ; e 
of values is small. A source of error in this ratio occurs owing to the 
fact that some coals have their volatile matter determined by the quick coking 
method, while others have' this value determined by the slow coking method. 

Tne present lack of a generallyf accepted standardized method of air drying 
rules out this classification, since all laboratories would not snow the s-me 
division into classes. 

Carbon - Hydrogen Ratio . 

The division into classes by Campbell 1 ? carbon hydrogen r^tio is 
shown in Table XV. This ratio gives a fairly satisfactory range of values 
in the higher rank coals, but the value IS would be better tnen 20, as given 
by Campbell, for the division between semi-bituminous and bituminous ^ 
already mentioned, Strehan and Pollard used this ratio in showing progressive 
anthracitization in the Welsh coal fields. It is quite generally agreed that 
the usefulness of this ratio does not extend below the bituminous rank. In 
bituminous and lower rank coals the hydrogen percentage does not vary greatly, 
but a small variation is quite a large percentage variation, -nd, with the 
much larger percentage of carbon, causes a 1 arger variation in the ratio 
than is justifiable® Campbell uses the ratio on the air dry coal, but Taoles 
VI, VTT, and VITT show the ratio on the moist coal with no better result. The 
fact that co-ls from the Edmonton, Sheerness, *nb Castor areas fall into the 
class of peat definitely rules out this classification as being suitable for 
Alberta, coals. excepting for the higher rank co-ls wnicn. f-ll into practically 
tne same order by all criteria except calorific value, which is unsuitable lor 
those coals, due to the small variation as shown in Figures V and VII. 






- 77 - 


Sftout 1 s Classification . 

Insufficient data was available to plot m-ny points by gout's 
scheme, the arrangement given by which is shown in Table XVI. The division 
bv fixed carbon in the higher ranks is the same as that by fuel ratio, while 
in the lower ranks the arrangement on the total carbon of the -ure co^i i B 
that shown by Seyler’s classification in Figure TV « n d already consid 
The limits as placed by Grout do not suit Alberta coals, since the cl-ss 
known as low grade bituminous places coals from'Lethbridge and Coal spur in 
the same class as Camrose coals. Also the semi-bituminous class includes 
Lrule and Fordegg a$ well as 0 -domin and some Crowsnest coals, while Cenroore 
is classed *s semi-anthracite. 

Parr’s First Classification . 

Table XVII shows the arrangement provided by Parr’s V.C. x 100 

carbon 

ratio and by percentage of inert volatile. Insufficient data was available 
to properly test this classification. The ratio itself does not seem to be 
founded on any logical basis, since there is little connection between i^xed 
carbon ~nd either volatile or total carbon. The percent o -?e of inert volatile 
requires the percentage of available hydrogen, which is a rather hypothetic''! 
quantity. In spite of objections to the theory of the classification it would 
seem to be capable of giving a satisfactory division into c 1 asses. 

Miscellaneous Classifications and Pata . 

Taole VI shows that the fuel ratio gives a satisfactory separation 
in the higher ranks of coals. A value of about 3*1 might serve as the point 
at which to serrate the higher rank coals of Alberta into two a 1 ^«ses. Taole 

VII shows the narrow range of values of fuel r^tio in the ranks below bitu- 

■'f , 

minous. The fact of M&grath coal being ''"laced below some Pakowki coals is 
sufficient to condemn this ratio ior these coals. 








78 - 


The percentage of oxygen is not capable of sufficiently accurate 
calculation to he made the basis of any classification. This fact al¬ 
ready been discussed at considerable length. 

Table VT shows that there is insufficient range in the calorific 
value of the higher rank coals to use that the basis of a classification 
for those ranks. 

The classification of the twelfth International Congress gives 


several criteria for each class of coal, A few examples of the application 
of these criteri*' 1 to Albert? coals should be sufficient to test i.ts suita¬ 
bility. 

Canmore coal yields fa?om 14.5 to l~ff> volatile matter which places 
it in class B 1 or B 2, The fuel ratio is *oout 5.2 which places it in 
class B 1, the percentage of carbon is about 91 or 92 ^nd this places it in 
class A 2. 

Coal from Mountain Park min® yields from 30 to 74% volatile matter 
wnich nlaces it in class C or B 3• It has a fuel ratio of 7.1 whicn places 
it in class B 2, the percentage of carbon is about 8b, and on this account 
it belongs in class B 1 or B 2. 

Coal from the Galt mine in Lethbridge has a fuel r*tio of about 1.3; 
this places it in class B 2. The split volatile ratio is 7.4 which places it 
in class D 1. The calorific value is about 12,300 which would place it an 
class B 3, C, of 1)1. The percentage of carbon is about 72, which places it 


in class B 1. 

■Ihe fact that different criteria place the same coal in different 
classes is sufficient to show the unsuitability of this classification for 
Alberta coals. 

flshlev's first classification proposes the ratio fixed carbon as 

moisture 














- 

























. 


























. 




. 






































, 






♦ 


- 









- 79 - 


criterion tor distinguishing between low rank co^ls. The r^tio is s own 
by Tables VIII and IX to be capable of giving the same division into 
classes as that given by calorific value of the moist coal. The limits are 
unsuitable, as only the last three coals in T^Die VIII would be classed as 
lignites. 

Ashley*s second classification, based on the -percentage of fixed 
carbon in the moist coal has an error owing to the use of results from the 
slow ~n& quick coking methods of determining volatile matter. The clessifi 
cation is similar to that by fuel ratio of the higher rank coals. For the 
ranks below bituminous it is not so suitable. Tables VIII and IX snow the 
values and the order of arrangement by this syfetern, Tt will be noted that 
coals from the Halcourt Coalspur, Lethbridge, Magrath, Milk River, Carbon 
and Champion areas have a fixed carbon percentage of about SO. Ho one with 
any knowledge of these coals would group them into the same class. A varia¬ 
tion in calorific value from 13,390 l.T.U. to 11,250 B.T.U. is shown by 
these coals, while moisture content varies from 7»3? p to 17 . 1 ^. 

Mr, Stansfield has done considerable work on the plotting of ratios 
and data, on a map of Alberta showing the townships. He found that lines 
joining townships having the same moisture took a. position roughly parallel 
to the Rocky Mountains, the moisture increasing with distance from the 
mountains. A similar map for calorific value of the moist coal snows similar 
lines with the calorific value decreasing with distance from the mountains. 

The first column of tables VII and VIII show distances and relative 
distances of the towhships, in which coal is produced, from the divide of the 
Rocky Mountains. These figures show some exceptions which are also shown: in 
the figures (37) referred to above. Thus Pembina coal is mined at about the 






so - 


same distance ±rom the mountains as is Pakowki. The letter is a rtnich lower 
rank coal, Champion and Lethbridge -re about the same distance irom the 
divide, but Lethbridge coal has been metamorphosed to a greater extent than 
has Champion. The coal of the Edmonton area is mined much farther irom the 
divide than -re some oi about equal r^nk from Taber and Sheerness areas. 
Presumably pressure has not been exactly proportional to dist-nce from the 
mountains* The development of faults in the geological structure at some 
place between the mountains and the coal area, may have operated to lessen 
tne piessure on tne coal, -nd hence the maturing urocess may have been 
retarded. 

Other values n-ve been plotted in the same manner as was done by u r. 
Stansfield. The calorific value of the pure coal did. not show any regularity 
4ven in the same are-. The percentage of carbon in the moist coal snowed much 
tne same regularity as was shown bv moisture and calorific value of the moist 
coal* 

Ignition temperatures for coals of the Kootenay horizon are snown 
in Table VI, It would seem that an ignition temperature of about 22©°C might 
be used to divide those coals into two groups. 

The following table shows ignition temperatures, percentages of 
oxygen in the pure coal, and the grains oxygen absorbed per kilogram of coal 


in the ulmin content determination* 


Area and Township 

Percentage of Oxygen 
in -pure coal 

Ignition * Crams Oxygen ab- 

Tenroerature * sorbed r 'er kg.oure coa. 

Pincher (f-2) 

8.6 

184.0°C 

12*9 

Lethbridge Q 9 — 21 ) 

12,1 

178 . 0 ©C 

25.0 

" ( 10 - 21 ) 

14.2 

! 170 . 8 ©C 

25.7 

Milk River (2-15) 

13.2 

1 175* 8 ©C 

28.9 

Taber (9-lb) 

14. g 

! 172 . 3°0 

58.5 

Drumheller #1 seam( 29 - 2 ^ i 

) lb. 7 j 

lb 5 * 2 ®C 

32.7 

Oroon (31-24) 

! Id.? 

lb 3 .s®c 

5b.b 

Pembina (5.5-7) 

! 15.4 

lbb*S°C 

42*5 

Drumheller #1 se-m(26-19* 

1 17.1 

lbl.9°C 

88.7 

" i! ( 27 - 18)1 

17-7 

IbO.5®0 

4b .8 

Cam rose (4b-r2Q) 

17.7 

157.b°C 

54.b 

Drumheller #5 seam(29-20j 

1 lb. 7 

157 . 5 °o 

42.b 

















































. 

' 

* 














- 




























































- 



























- 






. 





. 

. 

- 

. 

. 

. 


















■ 

. 

. 


: 













81 


An ignition temperature of 170°C would divide these coals into two 
groups. Insufficient determinations have been mpde to give enough d~ta to 
d.r rj w any conclusions. S. Zeavin discusses the ulmin content in his thesis 
and it will not be discussed here. 

A more satisfactory classification would be one in which physical 
and chemical properties are both made use of. The evaluation of physical 
characteristics of the coal, "both as it is taken from the mine and a')so after 
storage would be of value in classifying the lower rank coals. Some work 
on the storage of coal has been carried out bv the Scientific and Industrial 
Research Council, but insufficient data is yet available to be any use in 


a. classification. 


Conclusion. 


The writer has attempted to discuss the merits of the different 
classifications which have been proposed* Prom the study of Albert : zo; ■» ? 
from the chemical standpoint, he is satisfied that the best classification 
of coals of bituminous and higher ranks, that is for coals of the Kootenay 
horizon, is provided bv the percentage of volatile matter ~nd by Sevier’s 
scheme. Per the coals of rank below those, that is for those of the Belly 
River and Pdmonton horizons, the calorific value of the moist coal best dis 
tinguish.ee between these coals. Possibly the percentage of carbon in the 
moist coal classifies these coals equally well, but insufficient ultimate 
analyses are available to properly test out this factor. 

Some of the ratios considered may give the same division into 
classes, but most of them are founded wholly or in part on data from arbi¬ 
trarily standardized determinations. On tne other hand, the criteria gust 
mentioned, with the exception of the volatile matter determination for higher 
rank coa.ls where the possibility of error is small, have an advantage in th-t 
they are definite quantities or values cana.ole of very accurate determination. 





BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


45. Allan, J. A. Tne Mineral Resources of Alberta, Report No. 1. 

1. Analyses of British Coals and Cokes, compiled By the "Colliery Guardian". 

2. Ashley, G. H. A. Use Classification of Coal. Trans. Am. Inst. Min. 

Eng. (1920) Vol. b3. p. 732. 

3* Ashley, G. H. A Practical Classification of Coal. 

4. Bone, W. A. Coal and its Scientific Uses. Longmann, Green & Company. 

5* Brame, J.S.S. Fuel. Edward Arnold, London. 

0. Campbell, M. R. The Classification of Coal. Report on the operation 

of the Coal Testing Plant of the U.3.A. Geol. Survey at St. Louis, Mo. 
1^04, pp. l^o to 1J3* 

7. Campbell, M. R. The Classification of Coal. Trans. Am. Inst. Min. 

Eng. Vol. 3& (190b) pp. 324 to 339* 

8. Campbell,, M. R. A Practical Classification for Low Grade Coal. Econ. 
Geol. Vol. 3 (1908) pp. 134. 

9* Campbell, M. R. Hypothesis to Account for the Transformation of Vege¬ 
table Matter into the Different Grades of Coal. Econ. Geol. Vol. 1, 
U905) PP- 2o to 33. 

10. Campbell, M. R. Physical and Chemical Criteria for Classification of 

Low Grade Coals. General Introduction U.S.A. Geol. Survey, Prof. 

Paper 100a (1922) 

11. Collier, Coal Resources of the Yukon. Alaska Bull. U«S.Geol. 

Harvey No. 218 (1903). 

12. Dowling, D* B. Journal of the Canadian Mining Institute. Vol. 2, 

( 190 S) pp. 220 to 230 . 

13. Fieldner, A« C. and Davis, J. B. Modem Views of tne Chemistry of 
Coal of Different Ranks as Conglomerates. Trans. Am. Inst. Min. Eng. 

U925). 

14. Fishenden, Margaret. "House Heating", H. F. and G. Witherby, London. 

15* Eisher, D. J. University of Chicago, Notes Regarding the Classitica- 

tion Process. The Journal of Geology, Vol. 33 7 (1927)* 

lb. Frazer, Persifor, Jr. The Classification of Coal. Trans. Am. Inst. 

Min. Eng. Vol. b, May 1877, PP* 430 to 451. 

17. Frazer, Persifor, Jr. Tne Classification of Coal. Trans. Am. Inst. 

Min. Eng. Vol. 3b, 190b, pp. 825 to 833* 

























* 

■ 


- 














18 


Grout, F.F. Tiie Composition of Coals, Econ. Geol. Vol. 2, (ly07) 

P• 225. 


19. Grout, F.F. TUe Classification of Geological Material. Econ. GpoI. 
Vol. 4, (1909) p. b4o. 

20. Grout, F.F. The Classification of Coal. Econ. Geol. Vol. 4 (I909) 

p. 652. 

21. International Conference on Bituminous Coal, held at Pittsburgh, Nov. 
192b, Carnegie Inst, of Technology. 

(a) Campbell, M. R. Our Coal Supply; its Quantity, Quality and Distri¬ 
bution, p. 5* 

(b) Lander, C. H. British Research on Fuel Utilization, p. 65. 

(c) Bergius, F. The Transformation of Coal into Oil by means of hydro¬ 
genation, p. 102. 

(d) Fisher, Franz., The Synthesis of Petroleum, p. 234. 

(©) Mueller, Fr. Low Temperature Carbonization of Coal, p. 

22. Intestigations of Fuel and Fuel Testing, Mines Branch No. 671. 
Department of Mines, Canada. 

23. von Juptner, Hanns. Heat, Energy and Fuels, Chap. 8 to 13• 

24. Keystone Coal Catalogue, combined with Coal Field Directory (I925) 

25* Lewes, V.B. The Carbonisation of Coal, Chap. 2. 

2b. Moore, E. S. Coal. John Wiley & Sons. 

27* Moss, K. Neville. Historical Review of Coal Mining, Chap. 1. 

28. Parr, S. W. The Classification of Coal. Jour. Am. Chem. Soc. 

Vol. 28 (192b) p. 1425. 

29. Parr, S. W. The Available Hydrogen of Coal. Jour. Am. Chem. Soc. 

Vol. 29 (1907) p. 582. 

30. Parr, S. W. and Wheeler, W. F. Unit Coal and the Composition of Coal 
Ash, University of Illinois Bull. No. 37* 

31. Parr, S. W. The Classification of Coal. Jour. Ind. and Eng. Chem. 

Vol. 14, October 1922, p. 919. 

48. Parr, S. W. and Coons, C.C. Garbondioxide as an Index of the Critical 

Oxidation Temperature for Coal in Storage. Jour. Ind. & Eng. Cnem. 
Vol. 17 (1925) p. 118. 

32. Porter, H. C. and Ralston, 0-C. Some properties of Water in Coal. 

Tec. Paper No. 113, Bureau of Mines, (1913)* 

Porter, H. C. Coal Carbonization. The Chemical Catalogue Co. Inc. 


44. 







33* Ralston, 0. C. Graphic Studies oi Ultimate Analyses of Coals. 

Teen. Paper 93. U. S. Bureau of Mines. 

4b. Report of Committee D. 5* Proc. A.S.T.M. Yol. 2o, Part 1, pp. 1132 

to 1130. 

34. Rogers, H. D. Tne Geology of Pennsylvania, A Government Report. 

Vol. 2, Part 2, Ig^S p. 923- 

35* Rose, H. J. Selection of Coals for the Manuxacture of Coke. Trans. 
Am. Inst. Min. Eng. Vol. 74 (1^20) p. bOO. 

3b. Seyler, C. A. The Chemical Classification of Coal. Fuel in Science 

and Practice. Vol. 3 (1924) pp. 15. 41 and 79. 

37* Stansfield, E. A Chemical Survey of Alberta Coals. Trans. C.I.M. 

& M. Vol. 2S (1925). 

38. Strahan, A and Pollard, W. Tne Coals of South Wales. Mem. Geol. 
Survey, England and Wales, London (I9O8) pp. 1 to 72. 

39• The Coal Resources of the World. Twelfth International Geological 
Congress (1913) Vol. 1, p. XI. 

39a. Atlas for above. 

40. Thom. W. T. Jr. Moisture as a Component of the Volatile Matter of 
Coal. Trans. Am. Inst. Min. Eng. (19 2 5) 

41. Wheeler, R, V. and Tideswell, 

47. Wheeler, R. V. Tne Ignition of Coal, Fuel in Science and Practice, 
Vol. 3 (1924) p. 3&o. 

42. Wnite, David, Tne Effect of Oxygen in Coal. Bull. 29, U.S. Bureau 
of Mines (1911). 

43. White, David and Thiessen, R. The Origin of Coal. Bui. Ho. 32. 

U.S. Bureau of Mines, (1913). 






















T 
















B29739 


