


f ...-.MM 






M &*£ Idh* '8P# 



For Reference 




. •• 


ar^SMi'.; 








*• 



1 

mnn 1 


»Ji;j 


•>.. '•!% " f 

;P®$% v- 


" 


- 


« • :JS% WMlT^k 
m,Jm* Tv, rj ,f y 


« 


toT W «S' 


H18 


wiSR^Swi 




NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


■' V Jr- 

‘POIR* ' ir 


\nJm- • ■ ,jg mt- d 

w • . 4 m 


^■- : 




if 



THE COKING PROPERTIES of COAL, 






A Thesis Submitted by, 

K. C. Gilbert, B.Sc. 

Scientific ft Industrial Research Department 


Ft, 


k. 

P** 4 vvt 

m^w t-#r 

m m 

^sa 

i .' 
if 4 


PwJgm-M 




wL 






i t 




*Lf 






A: '> 







































Gfx iUBBIS 
(suawsissis 









T_H_E COKING PROPERTIES Of COIL 

- by - 


KEEZIE CLARKE GILBART, B. Sc, 

Scientific and Industrial Research Council of Alberta 
University of A_lberta 


A THESIS 

Submitted to the University of Alberta in Partial Fulfilment 
of the Requirements for the Degree of Master of Science. 


Edmonton, Alberta. 


April, 192S 






02t 

Jt '7 


PRSFAGE, 

The investigation described in this thesis was carried out in 
the Laboratory of the Industrial Research Council of Albert*. 

The work was done under the direction mci supervision of Mr. 

Edgar Stsngfield, Research Engineer on Fuels, to whom tne writer wishes 
to acknowledge his indebtedness for helpful suggestions during tne in¬ 
vestigation, and thoughtful criticism in tne preparation of this thesis. 

The writer also wisnes to thank Mr. Pitcner, Professor of Mining 
Engineering, and Dr- Clark, Research Engineer on Road Materials, ior their 
nelrful criticism from time to time; Dr. Cameron, Associate Professor of 
Mining Engineering, for his help in the photographing of the coke section; 
and Mr. Lang, Mr. Sutherland *nd Mr. Teavin for the coal analyses, *nd 
assistance during the e*rly stages of this investigation. 

To Mr. Baird and Mr. Wood ne is mucn indebted for assistance in 
the preparation of the graphs *nd drawings illustrating the work. 




TABLE 0? 0 0 NT El I S. 


Pas^e, 


Preface 

TABLE OP CONTENTS, 
INTRODUCTION 


DEFINITION AND VALUE OF CARBONISATION. 1 

HISTORY OF CARBONISATION 3 

A? related to* 

Coke Industry 3 

Gas Industry 5 

Low Temperature Carbonisation . p 

Coke Industry and Gas Industry in Canada b 

CHEMICAL CLASSIFICATION OF COKING COALS, b*sed on 8 

Proximate Analysis 8 

Ultimate Analysis 8 

CONSTITUTION OF COAL IN RELATION TO CARBONISATION 13 

Physical Structure " 13 

Solubility 14 

Oxidation lb 

Distillation 17 

PLASTIC STATE OF COAL 21 

Fusion in the oo'ke-oven 

Early Investigations by Foxswell 24 

University of Illinois Investigations 2b 

Foxswell*s Investigations 29 

Physical and Chemical Changes ^1 

Previous History of the Coal 32 

Theories of Coking 32 

University of Alberta Investigations 37 

Development 

Apparatus 37 

Procedure 42 

TESTS FOR COKING COALS 47 

Skill-scale Oven Tests 47 

Box Tosts 47 

Crucible Test 47 

Caking Index 49 

Lessing Test 5^ 

Modified Lessing Tost 52 

Gray-King Laboratory Carbonisation Assay 
Tube Coking Test 55 

Original Test .55 

University of Alberta Modified Test 55 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/cokingpropertiesOOgilb 



Page 

LABORATORY STUDIES OF ALBERTA COALS 

bO 

Introduction 

bO 

Samoles 

bO 

Proximate and Ultimate Analysis 

bo 

Crucible Test 

b7 

Ash Content 

hi 

Tube Test 

71 

Coke and Gas Yields 

72 

Examination of Cokes 

74 

Plasticity and Decomposition Tests 

87 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 

9b 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

98 


LIST OF TABLES. 


I By-Product Coke Plants in Operation in Canada 1 

II Seyler’s Classification 11 

III Bex Tests in 1909 bl 

XV Location of Samples for Coking Tests 0 ? 

V Proximate and intimate Analyses of Samples b5 

VI Samples Coked in the Tube Test 71 

VII Gas and Coke Yields in the Tube Test 73 

VIII Appearance of Cokes Obtained in the Tube Test 73 

IX Specific Gravity ^nd Porosity of Tube Tost Cokes 77 

X Plastic Curve Data for Different Sizes of Coal 88 

XI Softening and Decomposition Temperatures 90 


I 


II 

III 

IF 

V 

VI 

VII 

VIII 

IX 

X 

XI 

XII 


LIST OF FI.&URSS. 


A Isotherms Bounding the Fusion Zone 23 

B Temperature Gradient Across the Coke Oven 
C Diagrammatic Pressure Curve 23 

D Progress of the Fusion Zone 23 

Plasticity Apparatus, Layng and Hatnorne 27 

Plasticity Apparatus, Foxswell 30 

M ,s , University of Alberta, g^s pump 

" M 11 Pressure Curves 40 

n 11 1 * Tubes 47 

" M 11 Comparative Temperatures 4p 

Tube Coking Test Apparatus 5b 

Sketch Map of Alberta Showing Location of Samples b3 

Classification of Coking Coals, by H. J. Bose bb 

Plastic Curves for Alberta Coals 91 

Portion of Plastic Curves and Decomposition Curves 9*+ 



















































■ 












, 

. 

' 


















I, Coke Buttons 

II. Csdomin Coke Buttons, A 

II. » " 

III. Coke Specimens, 2-9 

IV. " 11 10-17 

V. » » H - N 

VI. Coke Sections 

VII. 

VIII. 

IX. 


Pn^e 

b9 

Top JO 

Side View 70 

79 

50 

51 

53 

54 
S3 
Sb 


11 


11 









INTEODUrTlOF. 


This investigation of the bituminous cools of the province was under¬ 
taken bv the writer, under the auspices of the Scientific and Industrial 
Research Council of Alberta, in order to determine the value of these coals 
for the production of coke. 

The investigation included the study of the methods used for deterrainin 
tne coking properties of coal. Particular attention has been paid to the de¬ 
velopment of the tube coking test, wnich provides a quick and satisfactory 
method for testing tne coking quality of a coal under conditions somewhat 
similar to those pertaining in commercial coking practice. 

It also included .a study of the softening properties of coal, A 
method has been devised for the determination of the plastic curve, and an. 
attempt has been made to correlate the temperature of initial plasticity with 
the temperature of initial decomposition. 

















































' 












* 


. 


























* 














THE COKin PROPERTIES 


OF COAL 


DEFINITION AND VALUE OF CARBONI SA'i'IOlM» 


1. Carbonisation is tne process in which a carbonaceous material is 

neated in a retort from wnicn air is excluded. In this process the raw 
material gives up its volatile matter in the gaseous form and leaves behind 
a solid residue. The coking process is the destructive distillation of 
coal in which tne solid residue is a coherent, highly refractory substance 
known a,s coke* 

The gaseous matter driven off consists of: 

(A) Non-condensible gases. 

(B) Condensible portion, including: 

(1) Steam. 

(2) Water soluble products, known as the "ammoniacal liquor 1 '. 

(3) Organic products, which colie ctively make up the "coal-tar". 

The three main products of carbonisation are therefore coke, gas 
and tar; and tne commercial process used for carbonisation will depend upon 
the relative importance oi these products. 

The industries founded upon coal carbonisation are; 

(1) The coke industry in which coke is the main product. 

(2) The gas industry in which gas is the main product. 

(3) Low temperature carbonisation in which (a) a high yield of fuel oil, 
or (b) a smokeless domestic fuel, is the important product. 

Carbonisation is growing in importance as the products of carboni¬ 
sation are found increasingly useful. It is essentially a process for modify¬ 
ing the raw coal into tuels which can be burned more efficiently, and lor 
recovering valuable by-products which are lost when the raw coal is burned. 
Depending upon the use to which the coal is to be put, carbonisation may be; 




















- 2 - 


(1) Essential - as in tne production of a fuel for the iron and steel 
industries. 

(2) Highly profitable - as in the recovery of valuable by-products for 
the dye industry and the explosives industry. 

(3) Profitable to the community at large rather than to the individual 
consumer - as in the abatement of the smoke nuisance and the con¬ 
servation of coal resources. 

(4) Unprofitable and not advantageous - as, for instance, the carbonisation 
of coals such as anthracite. 

Carbonisation is therefore an economically sound process, and the 

tendency now is towards greater carbonisation. 





- 3 - 


THE HISTORY 0? CARBONISATION . 

It is probable that coke was made in Germany as early as 1534, 
but tne process was not developed until the rapid growth ox the iron and 
steel industries in the seventeenth century created a demand lor a cheap and 
efficient metallurgical fuel* In lol9, a secret process was invented in 
England by Pud Budley for making iron with the use of coixe, but the idea 
languished for a number of years, although the records of the latter part of 
the seventeenth century describe various processes for ’’burning out the sul- 
phure of sea-coals and rendering the cinders sweet and pleasant for domestic 
fires”* However, by 1735 ah industry was established for the production of 
coke for the iron and steel industries. Tne industry made rapid progress 
due to the rapidly increasing scarcity of charcoal* 

The first efforts at coke production, aaturally, followed closely 
the practice of the charcoal burners and the coal was carbonised in earth 
covered heaps called meilers. The bee-hive oven, which derives its name from 
the close resemblance of its iorm to that of the dome-shaped bee-hive, was an 
early development of this primitive method. This system presents a simple 
method for the production of high grade metallurgical coke, but as in the 
earlier eartn-covered heaps, the heat necessary for carbonisation requires 
the combustion of most of the volatile matter and part of the fixed carbon 
of tne coal. The bee-hive oven has been adapted to modern methods of 
mechanical operation involving the use of automatic sprinkler and coke¬ 
drawing machine, and great advances have been made in recent years in the 
utilisation of waste heat from this type of oven. This oven, however, is very 
wasteful due to the vast amounts of valuable by-products lost, and objection¬ 
able due to the pollution of the atmosphere with smoke and vapors injurious to 
health and the growth of vegetation. Due to the comparatively small demand 



- 























- 


. 


. 








- 

* 












. 









■ 










. 
























- 4 - 


in America for the by-products of coking, the bee-hive oven has received a 
great deal of attention and has attained a degree of perfection, both in 
construction and operation, which has only recently passed its zenith, 

The by-products, wnich in the bee-hive oven were lost and which to 
the gas manufacturer were a nuisance, gradually created a demand which brought 
about the introduction of the by-product coking plant* The first by-product 
ovens were constructed by Knab in France about 185b. In the earlier recovery 
plants the value of the by-products was overemphasised and the coke did not 
have the structure most suitable for metallurgical purposes, hence there arose 
in consequence a prejudice among iron-masters against by-product coke. The 
by-product oven is externally heated by the combustion of part of the gaseous 
products of distillation in flues surrounding tne oven instead of by the com¬ 
bustion of the volatile matter (and some of the fixed carbon) in the coal. In 
the first ovens practically all of the gases produced in the plant were required 
for heating the ovens, but in modern plants the waste heat is used in recupera¬ 
tors or regenerators for preheating the gas, with the resulting economy that 
tnere is a considerable surplus of gas. 

Early ovens were designed by Coppee in ISbl, Carve in I8bb, and Simon 
in 1881, Improved types of ovens were built by Hoffmann in 1882, and Otto in 
188^. Other types of ovens include the Otto-Hilgenstock, Collin, Still, Hoppers, 
Semet-Solvay, and-Willputte. The development of the by-product oven industry 
in United States was begun by the Solvay Process Company, who, in 18^1, started 
construction of 12 Semet-Solvay ovens at Syracuse, New York. An initial plant 
of Otto-Hofimann ovens began making coke in l8^b. An initial installment of 
280Hoppers ovens at Joliet, Illinois, was successful in supplying high grade 
coke to olast furnace men, and otner plants soon followed. 








1 - 
















• - 








. • 


’ 






. 

- 


•J ■ 












- 














. 








. 














, 

. 









: 








- 5 - 


■file necessity for a large supply of fuel and illuminating gas in 
tne large cities has drought about the development of a great gas industry* 

The pioneer work in the development of the gas industry was begun by William 
Murdoch in Cornwall in 1792. In 1810 the first Act of Parliament was passed 
for the formation ot a company to manufacture and supply coal gas to the 
1 public. In the gas industry the production of coke is necessarily subservient 
to the production of gas, and until recently the gas manufacturer has paid 
very little attention to the yield and quality of tne coke he sold as a by¬ 
product. For years the gas industry and the coke industry underwent parallel 
but distinctly separate development; but these two great industries are 
gradually merging as far as equipment requirements are concerned, and the 
tendency now is toward the same type of plant for both industries, this being 
the modem by-product plant. 

The rapid expansion of the motor industry has created a great demand 
for fuel.oil, and this together with the demand for a smokeless fuel has led 
to the development of low temperature carbonisation. The question of low tem¬ 
perature carbonisation is not a new one, since the disadvantages of burning 
‘bituminous coal as a fuel have been recognised from early times, and at one 
time the burning of coal was prohibited on account of the smoke nuisance. 

In I0S5 a patent was taken out by Becher and Searle in England for 
the production of pitch, tar, and smokeless fuel from coal. In 1890 Colonel 
Scott Moncrieff suggested tne withdrawal of the cnarge from the gas retorts 
wnen only halt the usual quantity of gas had been evolved, and tne use of the 
residue as a domestic fuel* In 190b, Parker in England took out his famous 
patent for the production of ‘’coalite 1 ’, by heating coal in the presence of 
steam to a temperature not exceeding 800° P. The ’’coalite” failure served to 
create a popular interest in coal carbonisation. The British Naval Commission 
in considering the question of a home supply of luel oil, in 1913, suggested 





. 

■ 








* 







. 













- 


■ 



















. 















- b - 


the carbonisation of all coal burned in domestic appliances. 

The problem of low temperature carbonisation is very complex, since 
many of the coals which would be used to produce this fuel oil produce only 
a char in the form of powder when they are carbonised, only a limited number 
of coals producing a firm, compact coke on being carbonised. Several hundred 
processes have been patented for low temperature carbonisation, but none of 
these are yet operating on a commercial scale. 

The Coke Industry in Canada . 

There is a substantial production of coke in Canada, out not enough 
to meet the requirements of the iron and steel industries. For the years 
1923 - 1927, the coke produced in Canada has been about bO - b^ percent of 
that consumed. Only a small amount is exported. A great part of the coke 
produced in by-product ovens is used in the iron and steel industry. In 
I 923 (1) there were 9 by-product coke oven plants in operation in Canada. 

A list of these plants is given in Table I. 

TABLE I. 


Location 

Type of oven 

Ovens in plant 

Sydney, N. S. 

Koppers 

ISO 

Sydney, N. S. 

Otto 

120 

Sydney Mines, N. S. 

Bauer 

30 

Sydney Mines, N.S. 

Bernard 

IbO 

Sault Ste. Marie, Ont. 

Wilputte 

25 

Hamilton, Ont. 

Semet-Solvay 

25 

Hamilton, Ont. 

Wilputte 

80 

Winnipeg, Man. 

Koppers 

17 

Anyox, B. C. 

Foundation 

30 


There are also gas plants in most of the principal cities which 
furnish coke to be used as a domestic fuel. 

Although there is no production of coke in Alberta at present, a 


(>1) J. L. Landt, Coke as a household fuel, Mines Branch Report No. b^O, 1925 



















- 7 - 


number of coding plants have operated in the province in tne past. At Lille 
tnere were SO Bernard ovens coking washed coal. These ovens were not operated 
as a recovery plant, and were shut down in 1^X3• At Coleman there were 450 
Bee-hive ovens but tnese were shut down in I5I8. In lyOb there was a substan¬ 
tial production of coke in Alberta, 20 percent of the bituminous coal output 
being coked. The rate of production gradually dropped until at tne close of 
the war the market was completely lost. Since 15)18 there has been no production 
of coke in Alberta. 


v 








~ 

. 


* 










■ 

. 




. 





* 



- 8 - 

the chemical classification of cohi m goals. 

For practical purposes a coal may be classed as a coking coal if it 
will yield a coke when carbonised by an economically feasible method. Whether 
the coking properties of a coal can be predicted from its chemical analysis, 
is ^ question which has received much consideration. Some of the earlier 
classifications were based on the coking power and burning characteristics of 
the coal, for example5 

il) Poor coal, with long flame, non-coking, 

(2) G-as coal, long flame, poor coke, 

(3) . Rich coal, shorter flame, fair coke, 

(4) Coking coal, shorter flame, best coke. 

(3) Anthracite and steam coal, little or no flame, non-coking. 

Proximate Analysis . 

The proximate analysis may differentiate into a class those coals 
which may coke on being carbonised, but it does not definitely prove that a 
coal will yield a commercial coke. It may, however, snow that the percentage 
of volatile matter is so low or so high that the coal will certainly not coke. 
The Fuel Ratio based on the ratio of fixed carbon to volatile matter, and 
Parr’s Classification based on the percentage volatile matter ana the heating 
value of unit coal, are not of particular value for differentiating coking 
coals. 

Ultimate Analysis. 

Classifications wnicn are based upon the ultimate composition of 
coal are founded upon an analysis of the coal substance and are more likely 
to be of value wnen the coking coals are concerned. The earliest attempt at 
this form 01 classification was by Regnault, who was the first to make accurate 
ultimate analyses of coal. G-runer extended Regnault 1 s results and set limits 
for the chief classes of coal. These earlier attempts did not sufficiently 
recognize tne importance of the hydrogen content of the coal, especially in 









' 

_ _ 










. 




. 




. 

T ' . 






. 

* 


' 

- 








. 



















; ■ 






' 






. 










; 




- * 

♦ 
















regard to the coking properties. All recent analyses and classiiications, 
however, substantiate Regnault 9 s thesis, tnat coals of a similar kind all 
occur within narrow limits oi chemical composition- 

A comprehensive study of tne chemical classification of coal was 
carried out by C. A. Seyler (4), who drew the following conclusions from 'his 
work; 

(1) l ine caking power oi a coal is not directly correlated either with 
tne volatile matter content, or with the carbon percentage. 

(2) Tne most important correlation between the cnemical analysis and 
the coking property is. tnat large variations oi volatile matter 
and caking power are concomitant with variations in tne hydrogen 
content. 

(3) Unis correlation between tne hydrogen and the volatile matter is 
closest for coals ricn in carbon, but is observable throughout 
the range of bituminous coals. 

(4) Tne caking power, or the tendency for the coked material to form 

a coherent mass, is related to the hydrogen content for coals rich 
in carbon, but is not so closely related to tne hydrogen content in 
coals rich in oxygen. 

Seyler therefore assumes that a purely cnemical classification, 
based upon the percentage of carbon and the percentage of hydrogen, is valu¬ 
able and groups the various coals into natural classes. In this metnod the 
coals are classed within certain limits of carbon content, wnich he calls 
carbon planes, each of wnicn includes tne majority of coals of some more or 
less well-defined type. Tne limits of tnese planes are drawn up after a 
consideration of the behaviour of the coals during combustion, distillation, 
and carbonisation; and in order of decreasing carbon we have four cnief 
carbon planes as follows* 

^1) Anthracitic coals. 

(,2) Carbonaceous coals. 

(3) Bituminous coals. 

C4) Lignitious coals. 


(,4) C. A. Seyler, "The Classification of Coal 11 , Fuel in Science & Practice, 
1324 . 












_ • „ 







, 







- 

. 









V . ... 

. 

- 

. 


. 


. 










- 





































* 













10 - 


In tne case of t'he bituminous coals it is usual to make a further 
sub-division, and using a purely chemical nomenclature, to divide this class 
into three carbon ulanes, the term ortho-bituminous being used for the true 
bituminous coals; met-bituminous for the short-flame bituminous coals; and 
para.-bituminous for the long-flame bituminous gas coals® 

The coals may also be classed by their hydrogen content into hydrogen 
planes called genera® A number of coals of different species as determined 
by the carbon planes may thus be grouped into a genus determined by a charac¬ 
teristic hydrogen range* Each of the carbon ulanes may be further subdivided 
into higher and lower hydrogen planes, which are shown to be correlated with 
higner and lower volatile matter content* A coal in any given carbon plane 
which has the normal hydrogen of tne species will be orth-hydrous, while 
tnose having unusually high or low hydrogen will be called per-, and siib- 
hydrous respectively. The complete suggested classification is given in 
Table II. 

Since tne coking power is tied up with the hydrogen content it will 
be the genera oi most suitaDie hydrogen which will contain the coking coals. 
The coals belonging to any one genus of characteristic coking behaviour, may, 
however, fall into several different carbon plants; that is tne hydrogen 
determines the genus and the carbon determines the species* 

There appear to be no coking coals of hydrogen content below that 
characteristic for the bituminous genus except a few wnicn fall in the 
carbonaceous plane of the semi-bituminous genus® Tne only coking coals of 
tnis class, however, are found towards the upper limits of the hydrogen, in 
which position the coals begin to resemble tne bituminous coals. A charac¬ 
teristic of many of these semi-bituminous coking coals is that the coke is 


. 






■ 




- 

■ 

■ ■ 










■ 

. 

. 

* 

. 














- 









, 
































1 


SI 


Pm 


O 

M 

£?| 

PQl 

«3I 
EH I 



I 

« 

PQ 




IT 


'rue various genera are arranged in column l f vertically according to tne hydrogen, Tne species 
in each genus are arranged horizontally according to the carbon. 
























































- 12 - 


light, porous, and swollen, although the coal usually possesses a low 
caking power* The bituminous genus contains coking coals in the meta-, 
ortho-, and para-bituminous carbon planes* 

The meta-bituminous plane corresponds to the class of coking coals 
proper. They are moderately rich in the coking constituents which are of 
relatively high thermal stability, and they yield a dense, hard, metallurgical 
coke* These coals do not cake very much in burning if heavily fired, and they 
conserve their coking properties well on storage* 

In the coals of the ortho-bituminous plane the coking constituents 
reach a maximum and are of a lower thermal stability. They yield a dense coke. 

In the coals of the para-bituminous plane the coking constituents 
begin to decrease and are oi low thermal stability. They yield a poor coke and 
the coking properties of the coal tend to deteriorate on storage. This type 
includes the best gas coals and above a hydrogen of 5*5 percent they pass into 
the long-flame steam coals. 

Coals of tne lignitious plane are intermediate between the bituminous 
coals and the true lignites. They are long-flame coals with liffle or no 
caking power. 























. 










* 








- 


. 

. 






















. 








, 






. 
















. 
















ThE CQ^S'iTi'UtIQI'J Off COAL IJM KELA.ilOCT TO CAjfBQHI SAflOfil » 


A vast amount of research work has been hone on the constitution 
oi coal and a great deal of this work has been to determine, if possible, 
the cause oi certain coals exhibiting the property of forming a hard, com¬ 
pact mass when carbonised. So far the researches have led to tne classifi¬ 
cation oi the materials present in the coal into groups having certain 
characteristics. Coal is therefore a conglomerate of many different sub¬ 
stances and it is with the chemical behaviour of these substances that the 
mechanism has to deal, 

Tne Physical Structure of Coal , 

Drs. M, Stopes and jft. V. Wheeler in a monograph on “The Constitution 
of Coal” describe the four visible ingredients found in bituminous coal, 
called lusain, durain, clarain, and vitrain. These differ both in structure 
and probable origin, Fusain exhibits a recognizable woody structure with 
black, opaque cell walls, Durain has a granular structure which is black 
and opaque and in which occur numerous golden colored spores. Clarain 
contains small fragments of plant stems and spores and is of a more or less 
translucent character. The vitrain possesses an almost structureless texture. 

A review of tne worit done on the physical structure of coal by 
English, German, French and Belgian investigators is given by H. Winter (10). 
Clairain and vitrain which make up the “bright coal“ do not differ greatly 
from one another but these two difier sharply from the other two consti¬ 
tuents, fusain and durain, which make up the “dull coal”. The bright coal 
was found to contain more hydrogen than the dull coal. When these fou* con¬ 
stituents were separately subjected to coking tests, vitrain was found to 

(10). H. Winter, “Physical Structure of Coal", Fuel in Science & Practice, 
February, 1^28. 





















. 




. 


. 

■ - 


- - . - 




' 

- 

' 

■ 

' 







































. 

- 








- 14 - 


produce a porous and very much swollen coke, clarain a compact coke, while 
durain and fusain possessed no caking power and left only a powdery residue* 

The presence of fusain in a coking coal was found to increase the yield of 
coke "but to reduce the Quality 01 the coke produced. Although durain possesses 
practically no caking power it was sometimes found to produce a dry and fissured 
coke. 

Working on the coals from the Campine Basin, Be Boosere (10) round 
that vitrain yielded the greatest quantity of extractable material. It 
also yielded more tar and volatile matter than the others, and has a higher 
agglutinating value and swelling index, probably related to its higher content 
of extractable material. He states that a normal coke can be made by mixing 
vitrain with a non-coking coal. It therefore appears that bituminous coals 
owe tneir caking and swelling properties mainly to the vitrain. 

Solvent Reagents. 

In making a study of the constitution of coal it is important to 
consider the action of solvents upon coal, for the task oi analysing the coal 
conglomerate will be greatly simplified ii it can be resolved into a number 
of more simple substances. The ordinary laboratory solvents, such as-water 
and mineral acids, cannot be used, and in using complex organic reagents it 
is important to determine that they have a solvent action only and that they 
do not decompose or polymerize any part of the coal. 

The first systematic study of the effect of solvents upon coal 
appears to nave been made by Be Marsilly (18b2), wno treated different coals 
with alconoi, etner, carbon disulfide, benzene, and chloroform, and noted that 
all except alconoi had a distinct solvent action upon the "fat 59 (bituminous) 
coals, chloroform apparently dissolving tne most. He also noticed that "lean” 
(anthracite) coals were not affected by these solvents and therefore presum¬ 
ably did not contain the same ingredients as bituminous coals. He also iound 









































. 















* 

■ 








. 



































■ 


. 









- 




























. 






. 

' 












tnat after extraction with tne solvents a coking coal did not yield as good 
a coke as before tne treatment. 

Since tnat time many others have tried tne effect of solvents upon 
coking coals. Most oi this work has resulted in the separation of ,9 resinous ,B 
substances from tne coal, and all tneories of coking nave postulated such a 
resinous substance as playing an important part in tne mecnanism of coking. 
These resinous substances separated irom the coal are presumed to be derived 
from tne natural resins occurring in tne coal-forming plants. 

In their revie?/ of the work done on tne action of solvents upon coal, 
M. C» Stopes and R. V* Wheeler (9) draw the following conclusions: 

(1) Evidence has been obtained oi tne presence, in bituminous coals, 
ot small quantities of (presumably but little altered) resins 
extractable with ether. 

(2) Free hydrocarbons exist in small quantities in many coals. 

(3) Whatever be the exact nature oi its action, pyridine affords a 
means of resolving many coals in sucn a manner as to render sub¬ 
sequent examination less difficult. 

Much of the work in this line has been done by S. R. Illingworth, 

who bases many of his conclusions upon results obtained by resolving coal 

into constituent parts using pyridine ana chloroiorm as solvents. By means 

of these reagents bituminous coals have been resolved into three substances. 

BITUMINOUS CO-AX 
treated witn pyridine 
yields 


Insoluble residue Extract, wnicn treated 

"ALPHA 11 COMPOUNDS witn chloroform yields 

i 

1 --7 

Insoluble residue Extract 

"BETA" COMPOUNDS "GAMMA" COMPOUNDS 

The alpha and beta compounds were found to be of the same type and 

are termed "cellulosic", both being quite distinct from the gamma compounds. 




















.. -v 


■ ' . -V. . : 

* 

■ 








* 

. ■ 













■ 

. 






- 

- 























. 













Id - 


which are termed, n resinic“* 

Alter investigating the various coals whien give rise to coke, S. R* 
Illingworth has formulated the following conclusions (11): 

(1) The coking property of a coal is due to the resinic constituents, 

.that is the portion of the coal soluble ootn in pyridine and chioro- 
form* This must be present in an amount equal to at least 5 or 

of the coal for tne production oi a coke. 

(2) The different types of coke-producing coals are distinguisned by 
the relative stability oi the gamma constituents as compared to that 
oi the beta substances. True coking coals contain a type of beta 
substance which is very unstable relative to the gamma compound, 
whilst in the gas coals the stability of these two compounds approxi¬ 
mates the same value* The coals wnieh produce dense cokes have a 
smaller proportion of the gamma compounds than tne other coking coals. 

(3) The resinic and beta substances may be regarded as of three main 
types: 

(A) Constituents decomposed at or below 350 degrees Centigrade. 

(B) Constituents decomposed between 350 and 4Q0 degrees Centigrade. 

(C) Constituents decomposed between 400 and 45 O degrees Centigrade. 

• 

True coking coals contain no substances 01 type (A), but mainly sub¬ 
stances of type (B) with small amounts 01 type (C). The coals which produce 
dense cokes contain gamma and beta compounds of type (C). The gas coals con¬ 
tain almost equal quantities of types (A) and (B). 

Oxidation Products. 


An early method 01 distinguishing in doubtful cases between lignites 
and bituminous coals was to treat botn witn a, solution 01 potassium hydroxide. 
If a brown liquor resulted the coal was a lignite while if tne solution was 
colorless or yellow the coal was bituminous. The substances thus extracted 
with caustic potash are called tne ulmins. 

The various ulmins form a large proportion of the “humus 11 01 wood, 
and tney occur in only small amounts in bituminous coals. Tideswell and 
Wheeler (12) on experimental and other grounds concluded that # a close relation 
exists between the typical peat ulmins and the structureless portion of banded 





























. 




* 

- 

v 

.. 




■ 

N 

























■ 1 , ■ 




* 










































- 17 - 


bituminous coal known as vitrain. The change in tne ulmins during coali- 
lication has resulted in decreased solubility of the coal in alkaline solu¬ 
tions. 

Destructive Distillation . 

If we examine the behaviour of anthracite, "bituminous coals, and 
lignites on heating, we observe certain characteristic differences* On 
being rapidly heated to a high temperature, anthracite evolves only a small 
amount or gas and is not appreciably altered in shape. A lignite rapidly 
evolves large quantities of volatile matter and the particles of the residue 
shrink and alter in shape hut show no tendency to cohere. On tne other hand 
a bituminous coal rapidly fuses, the fused macs intumescing with a copious 
evolution of volatile matter and then hardening into a strong, coherent, 
porous mass, which shows none of the physical properties of the original 
coal, and which is the material we call coke. Different bituminous coals 
vary widely in the extent to which they snow this coking property. The method 
of destructive distillation has been widely used in an endeavour to find the 
material which causes the coal to coke. 

The temperature of initial decomposition has been studied in connec¬ 
tion with the process of carbonisation. Some of the early investigators were 
misled by the evolution oi occluded gases into thinking that decomposition 
occurs as low as 100® 0. Burgess and Wheeler studied in particular the initial 
decomposition of bituminous coals when heated under vacuum in an inverted re¬ 
tort. They found that ^13); Occluded gases continue to be removed up to 
about 2QQ°C, these gases being mainly hydrocarbons. At about 200® tnere is a 
conious evolution of water and water continues to "be removed up to a tempera¬ 
ture of 4^0°. Liquids other than water begin to distill at about 310° at 
whicn temperature a thin brownish oil appears. A decomposition point occurs 







- 18 - 


at about 350® when a rapid evolution or gas and mucn viscid oil is formed. 
Decomuosition then continues with increasing rapidity as the temperature is 
raised, The first products of decomposition are water ana tne oxides of carbon 
and as these are also tne first products oi decomposition of cellulose, it is 
tnerefore considered that the cellulosic constituents of coal are responsiole 
for the first, decomposition products, and tnat the increased difficulty of 
decomposition with increased carbon content, indicates the progressive de¬ 
gradation of these substances. 

Some evidence as to the nature of the constituents of coal is obtained 
by observation of the effects of moderate heating upon the coking qualities 
of tne coal. De Marsilly (1S37) found that all caking coals lost their caking 
properties after being heated for a short time to a temperature oi 300®C, and 
assumed that it was due to the volatilisation of some ‘'coking principle”, but 
Anderson showed that tnis loss of coking property was due to oxidation. Ander¬ 
son snowed, however, that there was also a loss of coking power due to heat 
alone, presumably to the decomposition of some constituent. He heated coals 
to about 300 ®C, in a current of dry carbon dioxide and found tnat the casing 
power 01 non-coking coals was destroyed wnile the caking power of tne true 
coking coals was impaired. Anderson explained this by assuming that certain 
compounds of a resinoid character were easily destroyed by heat. He said, 
however, that tne compounds which were responsible for tne coking power were 
capable of extraction by a solution ot potassium hydroxide. Such compounds, 
however, have been snown to be of an ulmic nature and not resinoid in character, 
and they have been found to have a detrimental effect upon coking. 

A study of the decomposition at different temperatures has brought 
out the general facts tnat, in the early stages, there is a rapid increase in 
tne volumes of gases evolved as the temperature of distillation is increased. 


























' 








. 






* 

' 

- 

. ■ ■- - >: 

■ 

• •' j 

„ 




















* 

















. 










. : . 






- 13 - 


and that witn increasing temperature a change takes place in the comoosition 
oi the gas, the proportion of hydrogen increasing and that of the paraffins 
decreasing* 

Erom their worm on the decomposition of coal at different tempera¬ 
tures, Burgess and Wheeler (14) round that* 

(1) Witn all coals there is a well defined decomposition point, at a 
temperature lying between fQO and 80Q®0, which corresponds to a 
marked increase in the quantity of hydrogen evolved, 

(2) Evolution of hydrocarbons or the paraffin series ceases at 
temperatures approximating ~{0Q o C* 

(3) By prolonged exhaustion at low temperatures it was lound possible 
to remove or destroy the parafrin-yielding constituents and to 
leave behind a residue which decomposes at higher temperatures 
yielding only hydrogen. 

Coal therefore was assumed to contain two types of compounds 
differing,in their tendency to decompose. It seems probable that the dirfer- 
ence between one coal and another is determined by the proportion oi these 
two types of compounds present. 

This subject has been carried considerably further by the researches 
of Illingworth (1520). The general conclusions that Illingworth drew from 
his work are ( 15 ): 

(1) The decomposition of coals at temperatures above 450® results 
in the destruction of the pyridine soluble constituents. 

(2) The destruction of the beta-fraction is more rapid than that of 
tne gamma-fraction. 

(3) Two types of beta, and two types of gamma-constituents occur in 
coals, the one stable and the other easily decomposed at 450® C. 

(4) Typical coking coals contain a nearly homogeneous beta-fraction 
which is readily decomposed at 450®C. 

Illingworth's theory of coking is based upon the idea tnat the 
compounds in coal which are soluble both in pyridine and in chloroform are 
the- source of the cementing material necessary to bind the coked material 
together, whilst the amount of volatile matter evolved while the hot mass 














. 




- ' 


. 

■ 












. 

« 

. 












t ... 






' 












. 














. 












- 20 - 


is in its viscid state is the critical iactor in determining the prosity 
of the resulting coke. The factors wnicn determine the character of the 
coke are therefore the amount and rate of decomposition of the gamma-fraction 
of the coal and the rate of evolution of volatile matter from the beta-, and 
gamma-fractions at this critical temperature. 

The character of the curves obtained representing the relation 
between the evolution of volatile matter and the temperature led Illingworth 
to tne conclusion that it is the behaviour of the coal below jpOO®C which de¬ 
termines its cnaracteristic properties and uses. He concludes that there 
are four types of beta-, and gamma-compounds, differentiated by their thermal 
stability. Tnose of the bituminous coals are or lower stability, decomposing 
below 400®. There exists a progressive increase in the actual stability of 
these compounds from the para- through the ortho- to the meta-hituminous 
coals. In general therefore the coking (meta-, and ortho-bituminous) coals 
are distinguished from the gas (para-bituminous) coals by a smaller content 
of a beta-fraction which is relatively unstable compared with the gamma- 
fraction associated with it. 

from tnis work it is clear that rhe character of tne coke must depaid 
very largely upon the rate of heating of the coal, since the amounts of beta- 
and gamma-compounds remaining when the coal reaches its softening temperature 
are determined by tnis treatment. Slow heating allows premature decompositioi 
of the coking constituents of tne coal beiore tne coal fuses. 














. 








- 






. 









. 






. ■ 


- 












- 

■ 














































- 21 - 


THE PLASTIC STATE Off COAL, 

The Fasion Process * 

The explanation of the process of coking coal in a large mass was 
first proposed by Hilgenstock, and this explanation of the physical pheno¬ 
mena associated with the process of carbonisation has been confirmed by the 
work of all subsequent investigators* It has been shown above that slow 
heating has a tendency to destroy the coking property, and yet it is possible 
to coke a large mass of coal in a coke oven where it takes about fourteen 
hours for the heat to penetrate to tne centre of a fourteen-inch coke oven. 

In brief, the theory supposes the formation and gradual advance through the 
mass of coal, of a fusion zone which is impervious to gases, a very poor 
conductor of heat, and which acts as a virtual screen protecting the coal 
from premature decomposition. 

When green coal is charged into the oven there is a violent evolu- 

i 

tion of steam and occluded gases from the coal adjacent to the walls. During 
the first hour the temperature does not rise much above 100®G. Once the 
moisture is evaporated from the coal lying next to the oven walls, the tem- 

j 

perature rises very rapidly, small amounts of actual distillation gases are 
evolved, and the so-called plastic state of the coal begins. The plastic 
state of the coal corresponds to a temperature between 3<30 and 52 Q® 0 . The 
initial stage of this plastic condition is characterised by the fusion of 
certain bituminous constituents of the coal, resulting in the formation of a 
pasty mass which cements together the unaltered particles of coal. As the 
result of a further small rise of temperature this mass of coal and binding 
material becomes quite homogeneous* Destructive distillation of the coal 
now ta.kes place causing an evolution of gas irom the pasty mass, and imparts 
to it the cellular structure. At the completion of the plastic state the 








- - - 










. 

































* 


i, 'fc&i. 






. 
























■ 


















. 




' 














' 

































* 










. 















- 22 - 


mass hardens into a. rigid, cellular structure, and the process of carboniza¬ 
tion is completed by the driving off of most of the remaining volatile matter. 
Prom the time the coal adjacent to the walls reaches the temoeratuie 
of plasticity all the above mentioned conditions are found existing in tne 
oven at any one time, the plastic layer gradually travelling towards the in¬ 
terior of the oven. The part of the charge lying interior to the plastic 
layer is little affected by the progress of carbonisation, and so efficient 
a screen is the plastic layer that the temperature of tne coal interior to 
it scarcely rises above 1QQ®G, 

Since fusion always precedes the formation of coke, a study of the 
manner in which the plastic layer moves across the oven should enable one 
to explain the effect of various factors upon carbonisation. The following 
characteristics are usually ascribed to the fusion zones 

(1) The fusion range is from 380 to 320 

(2) The temperature drop across it is very great, 

(3) Tne resistance to tne passage of gas through it is very great. 

These characteristics afford three metnods of investigating the 
path of travel of the zone across the oven ( 17)2 

(1) The isotherm method in which thermo-junctions are placed in the 
charge at intervals across the furnace, and the rate of rise of 
temperature across the furnace determined. Lines of equal tempera¬ 
ture or isotherms may then be drawn for any time during coking. 

Curves (A) Pig, (I) show the isotherms for the temperatures 
bounding the fusion range. 

(2) The temperature drop method. If tne temperature drop across tne 
fusion range is very great, a curve snowing tne rate of temperature 
drop across the oven snoula pass txhrougn a maximum at the fusion 
zone, as snown by curve (B), 

(3) The pressure method, in which manometers are attached to small 
pipes extending into the charge and regularly placed at intervals 
from the oven walls. By plotting the time-pressure data from 
these manometers tne progress of the fusion zone across the oven 
can be traced. Curve (C) is a diagrammatic pressure curve showing 
the pressure developed coincident with the condition of the charge 
around the openings of the pipes. Curve I) shows the rate of travel 
of the fusion zone across the oven. 




‘ 




















.r H 


. 

' 

' 





































■ 









♦ 

' 

' 

' 







■ 









A-Isqthbrms 



Time of Max. 7J?E3S - Mrs. after start. 'Temp Dpop ~ 'F pep half-/neh 

























































~ 24 » 


This movement of the fusion zone across the coke oven assumes 
tne transient fusion of eacn coal particle. It would, therefore, seem 
probable that coal is in a critical state so far as the process of coke 
making is concerned, from the time it becomes plastic until it is again a 
solid mass. The difficulty of investigating carbonisation phenomena of 
this kind is that direct observation is impossible. However, laboratory 
metxiods have been devised for the experimental determination of the charac¬ 
teristics of this fusion zone. 

Many diverse opinions exist in regard to the path taisen by the 
gases in the coke oven. This will probably depend upon the plastic layer. 
Three hypotheses ares 

(1) The gases pass mainly up through the cool interior of the 

charge. 

(2) They pass up through the highly heated zone of coke. 

(3) Some pass in each of the above directions. 

The Early Work of Foxwell. 

0. E. Foxwell of the Hoppers Coke Oven Company, Sheffield, England, 
was the first to study the path taken by the gases in the coke oven, by 
laboratory means. Tne method adopted (18) was to determine experimentally 
the laws governing the ilow of gases through coke, crushed coal, and coal in 
various stages of carbonisation; and from these laws to deduce by mathe¬ 
matical means the probable path of the gases. 

The material to be investigated was contained in a hard glass tube 
connected to a litre flask containing the gas. The gas was forced through 
the material by displacing the gas in the flask with water, and the pressure 
required to force the gas through the material was observed on a gauge 
connected to the flask. After making a determination on the raw coal, the coal 
was heated to a definite temperature (310°), the charge was allowed to cool, 































. 









- 25 - 


and. the pressure determined necessary to rorce the gas through the material 
produced by this heat treatment. The charge was then heated to a higher 
temperature and the pressure measured in the same manner for the material 
produced at this temperature. Thus the coal was carbonised in stages, and 
the pressure necessary to pass the gas through the material produced at 
- different temperatures was determined. A summary of his work includes the 
following conclusions? 

(,1) The laws governing the flow of gases through coal end coke are 

found to "be similar to those governing the flow of gases through 
capillary tubes, and follows the law? 

V”kxpxS/lxn 

where V is the volume of gas of viscosity n passed through 1 cms. 
of coke, etc., of cross-sectional area S, per minute, and where k 
is a constant depending upon the nature of the porous material, and 
p is the pressure difference between the ends of tne tube of the 
material through which the gas is passing. 

(2) Tne resistance of crashed coal to the flow of gases increases wnen 

compression is used but the increase in pressure is slow after the 
first few strokes of the compressing macnine. 

13) Wetting tne coal increases tne resistance. When over 3% of water 

is present the rate of increase "becomes very rapid. 

^4) The resistance of the carbonised material to the passage oi gas 

depends upon the temperature of carbonisation. 

(S) This method of investigation shows that in the case of the good 

coking coals the material is in a viscous state at a temperature 
of probably 380 to 430®C. Wnile in this state tne coal has a much 
higner resistance to the flow of gases than at any other temperature. 

(b) During carbonisation tne oven is divided into a hot zone and a 

cool zone by a layer of semi-fused material of high resistance which 
is at a temperature of approximately 400® 0. 

(J) Whetner the gases pass up through the hot or the cool zone is con¬ 

ditioned by the time which has elapsed since charging, and the size 
and moisture of tne coal. 

Foxswell says (18)? "Tne Temperature at which the resistance to gas 
flow becomes greatest (i.e. the temperature of maximum plasticity) is lound to 
be dependent upon the nature of tne coal. Non-coking coals do not show any 


























; 





• 





5 


. 

. 

. 

. 

. 



" 




.... 


( : 






5 . • • 

* - 



.. .. 


* • 

. 









\ 







- 2b - 


appreciable increase oi resistance during carbonisation; tney do not fuse. 
Poor coking coals shov/ only a low maximum pressure, while good coking coals 
snow a high pressure at the temperature of maximum plasticity. It is pro- 
bable, therefore, that the maximum pressure recorded will he a measure of the 
coxing power of the coal, and this method may prove more reliable and more 
satisfactory than the Camoedon test'** 

Investigations at the University of Illinois . 

In 1921 notice was given oi some work done in the University of 
Illinois on the plasticity of coal. The investigation was carried out "by 
E. T. Layng and W. S. Hathorne, using a metnod somewnat similar to that 
employed by Eoxswell. The report (19) of their work gives a description of 
the apparatus and method whereby the temperatures oi initial plasticity, 
maximum pressure, and solidification into coke wereobtained ior a number of 
.American coals. Tney believed that the results give promise of being of 
value ins 

(1) Aiding in tne classification of those coals which soften on 
neating. 

(2) Tracing any particular seam of coal. 

(3) Determining the particular state of a coal which has been weathered 
for some time. 

(4) Determining the resultant coal formed by the mixing of two coals 
as in modern coke-oven practice. 

The apparatus consists essentially of an electric furnace in which 
the heating of the coal may be accurately controlled, a device that supplies 
a constant volume of nitrogen to the tube containing the coal, a manometer 
ior measuring the pressure developed, and a potentiometer for measuring the 
temperature. Eigu.re II shows a diagram of the assembled apparatus. The coal 
is placed in a pyrex tube of 14 inms. internal diameter. A copper spiral 
10 cms. long is placed in tnis tube to serve the dual purpose of keeping the 
coal in place and removing any traces of oxygen which might be in the nitrogen 






- 






- 





.... 






. 









. 












ft 






... 


! •> 


. 

. 




* 

. 




. 








• • 








* . 


■ 

. . 














. ' ■ 







.. ; «... ir | 






■ 






. 




. 


... 













27 


—fl> v>s*4. \<\ \i t\\Nie<c,\\^ ^\W\>f\o\v* - 


Vo^«A>on\«.Vtf 



Ho \/ 

















































- 28 - 


Freshly mined, coal is best for tne sample as weathering has a great effect 
upon the melting properties of the coal. Coal which passes the 20-mesn and 
stays on the bO-mesh screen is used. 

file copper gauze is placed in such a position th?,t the lower end 
of the ten cms. of coal comes to about 5 cms. above the centre oi the furnace. 
Coal is poured in upon this screen until a column 10 cms. in length is obtained.. 
The tube is then connected to the nitrogen, and a flow of 40 ccs. of nitrogen 
per minute is sent through the coal by turning on the water in the constant 
head apparatus and opening the shut-off cock„. The temperature of the furnace 
is allowed to rise at the rate of 10 degrees per minute, and readings of tim$, 
temperature, and pressure are taken every 3 to 5 minutes until the coal has 
passed through the critical stage and again snows a constant resistance to 
the flow of nitrogen. The pressure plotted against temperature gives the 
plastic curve. 

The results obtained show the wide variation in the temperature of 
initial plasticity as snown by various coals. 

Foxwell criticises tne work of Layng and Hsthorne as follows (20)® 

‘•The autnors do not state at what rate the temperature oi the coal was allowed 
to rise; the rate oi rise has little influence upon the temperature at which 
plasticity commences, but it profoundly affects tne extent of tne plastic 
range, and tne pressure developed. It must here be observed that there is 
no temperature at wnich tne plastic stage is completed, tne pressure con¬ 
tinuing to drop sligntly over a temperature range as grea,t as 200 degrees. 

»In Layng and Hatnorne’s work no precautions were taken to prevent 
the coal from expanding. The coal was allowed to rest upon the coiled copper 
wire and was not confined in any way at the upper surface. Under these cir¬ 
cumstances coking coals may expand to a. surprising extent, and may at tne end 






















, 


. 

' 





. 


. 

* 

. 











' 


. 



. 

■ 

. 

* 


- 

. 
















■ 











































■ 

* ' 









oi the experiment, occupy twice the space they did at the beginning, thus 
showing a lower resistance to gas flow tnan should have been tne case. This 
expansive force of coal in its plastic state may be very great and has fre¬ 
quently been found sufficient to break tnick combustion glass or fused silica 
tubes. 

B It would have been preferable if the authors had measured the tem¬ 
perature insice the tube, and not outside as shown in tne diagram, as there is 
frequently a considerably lag. The use of a large bottle holding 12 litres 
of gas must be regarded as reducing the sensitiveness of the apparatus. When 
tne resistance of tne coal is increasing, a portion of the water is displacing 
the gas which flows through the coal, and another portion, sometimes the major 
portion, is required to increase the pressure in the apparatus. The larger 
the volume of the gas holder the less readily will the fluctuations in resis¬ 
tance of the plastic coal be detected”. 

Foxswel^s Investigations. 

A complete method lor the investigation of coal in its plastic state 
is given by Foxswell (21). In his preliminary work Foxswell found that his 
glass or quarts tube was invariably broken ?/nen he tried to prevent expansion 
during carbonisation. He finally used a wrought iron pipe of l.b cms. inside 
diameter, having a metal wedge moving in two slits in the tube in such a. 
manner as to take up the expansive iorce. In order to prevent the coal from 
flowing in the tube, the whole of the tube was packed with carefully graded 
fire-brick, as shown in the diagram. (Figure III). 

The tube was placed horizontally in an electric furnace, the tempera¬ 
ture ot which could be raised at any desired rate. A complicated apparatus 
was used to force the gas through the coal, wnereoy only a small gas-nolder 
was used, tne gas in the holder being replenished at intervals during the 












30 


O 

- 

4o 

*0 

£ 

. 

£ -4 

4S £ 

V > 
C^x <~0 

<> ^ 
^ U. 

• Si 

+~* ^ 
vO 

«T 

a! 

L 
o 


o; 

-O 

h? 


00 

~t7 

vO 

rJ 

t/> 

< 


</> 

-o 

<£> 



O- 

3 

a; 

-n4 

O 

I 

</> 

0* 

<o 


k O 


f 


FIGURE III 


Meta L Vi/edgQ 



































- 31 - 


experiment. An elaborate mathematical calculation enables one to obtain data 
to plot the plastic curve, irom wnich may be determined the temperatures of 
initial plasticity and maximum pressure, and the maximum pressure required to 
force the gas tnrongh tne coal in its plastic condition, Foxswell himself 
believes tnat this method is useful for research work, but that it is too 
complicated and cumbersome for routine analysis. 

Physical and cnemical cnanges associated with the -plastic state . 

Foxswell has shown that with few exceptions all coking coals pass 
through a plastic stage between y(0 and ^00® C. In no instance has the plas¬ 
tic curve shown that plasticity has begun below 370 degrees, and in very few 
cases does this state persist above 500 degrees, unless the rate of heating 
has been very rapid. Tne nature of tne plastic curve and the fact that tne 
plastic limits are dependent upon the rate of heating give evidence respec¬ 
tively that the changes which cause plasticity begin fairly sharply but require 
time for development and completion. 

On maintaining a good coking coal at a constant temperature within 
the plastic range, tne plastic resistance rises to a definite amount and re¬ 
mains tnere indefinitely. Plasticity is therefore a physical and not a 
chemical phenomenon, and since the value of the resistance varies with tne 
temoerature with which tne coal is heated, it is evident that the coal passes 
through an orderly sequence of stages during coking. The behaviour ox a coal 
during coking may be deduced from the plastic curve which always snows certain 
peculiarities* These peculiarities are due to the manner in which the coal 
passes through its successive stages. 

The principal evolution of tar from a coking coal occurs either be¬ 
fore or after, but never during the plastic stage, and regarded from tne stand¬ 
point ox gas, tar, water, and ammonia evolved, experiments justify tne con- 













, 
















. 






. 

. - 














- 




- 











* 

















* 

. 




- 














• 























elusions that the plastic stage is not a period during which tne coal is par¬ 
ticularly active chemically* 

The greatest activity during this period is shown by the beta- and 
gamma- compounds* Between tne temperatures of 400 and 500 degrees the almost 
complete destruction 01 these compounds occurs. The rate of decomposition of 
the gamma-compounds is very rapid in tne earlier stages and the amount tends 
to reach a definite limiting value for each temperature, the rate falling off 
as this temperature is reached. 

The influence of the previous history of the coal unon the elastic curve . 

Pre-heating reduces tne ‘’coking energy” of a coal a.s measured by tne 
area of the pla,stic curve, Illingworth suggests that heating below tne de¬ 
composition temperature causes a ’’depolymerisation” of tne coal substance, 
and hence the structure of the coal is modified by preheating although no 
visible change occurs. This no doubt affects tne mode and extent of extru¬ 
sion ol the gamma-compounds, Rapid heating to degrees gives a greatly 
increased area of tne plastic curve, and it may be possiole to enhance the 
coking power of semi-coking coals by suitable heat treatment. 

The general effect of weathering is to reduce the height of tne 
plastic curve. Coals differ widely in this respect, taming longer or snorter 
periods of time before showing the effects of weathering as determined by the 
plastic curve. This indicates that the plastic curve determination represents 
a very delicate method of ascertaining if any change has taken place in tne 
coal. 

Theories of Coking . 

V. b. Lewes (22) makes the following statement as to the process of 
coking, ”As tne temperature rises to 3^0-350° G, the coal oecomes semi-iluid, 
decomposition 01 all the coal bodies commences and rapidly increases in vigor 
witn each accession 01 heat, and the iluid tar irom tne humus, the slightly 






- 33 - 


viscid tar from the resinoid bodies, and the rich heavy tar from tne hydro¬ 
carbon gases, go forward as vapor with tne gases, away from the heat and 
seeking a cool zone. When in turn this zone reaches 300-3^0 degrees, "it is 
only tne more volatile portions which distill oil, and a deposit of pitch is 
left which hinds the half-coked coal, whilst as the temperature rises aoove 
700 degrees the residues in tne semi-coke and tne pitch further decompose 
until the hard coke is left whicn consists of little else than carbon, ash, 
and traces of occluded gases. Each individual lump of coal in the plastic 
zone is affected in the same way by the passage of heat. The heat passes 
slowly into the centre of each lump, the exterior of tne lump being at a high 
temperature before the centre has finished distilling tar-vapor, and this on 
passing through tne hot exterior is decomposed with tne deposition of pitch". 
This hypotnesis in regard to tne path of travel of the gases does not seem 
reasonable in view of the later work which has been done on this subject. 

When a good coking coal is split up into alpha-, beta- and gamma- 
compounds and these are mixed in the proportion in which they occurred in 
tne original coal, tne mixture tnen being coked in a crucible over a strong 
glame, a coke is produced wnich is equal in all respects to the coke produced 
from the original coal, but when this mixture is heated at a slower rate as 
in the determination of the plastic curve, the coke is powdery and no plasti¬ 
city is developed. 

This important observation led Foxswell to put forward a new theory 
of coking. Tne various stages in the coking process, according to his theory 


arej 








v* 

A 


* * 
$1 




i 


Extrusion'of fused gamma- 
compounds. Particles assume 
globular shape owing to 
surface tension 


Expansion. Small 
particles unite to 
form larger ones 

5 

I 


! 


Expansive force overcomes 
surface tension - Deformation 
appears on the surface, ^nd 
adjacent portions of the 
charge unite- 


Surface tension, holding globule* 
intact is operating in opposition 
to internal pressure. 



8 

I 


Vesicular structure formed inside alobul.es 

o 


A non-coking coal if carbonised in large pieces shows complete cell- 
formation within each piece, but the individual pieces do not cohere, because, 
owing either to the properties or the quantities of the gamma-compounds preset, 
there is not sufficient extruded matter to bind the particles together. With 
coking coals the process is exactly similar, but extrusion takes place and the 
individual pieces of coke are bound together. In the case of the slpha-beta- 
gamma-mixture considered above the three constituents exist as separate parti¬ 
cles, and during slow coking no extrusion takes place and the particles of 
coke are not bound into a coherent mass* 

A coal poor in coking qualities, therefore, passes through the earlier 
. A coal oi fair coking qualities may pass through all 


stages of coking only 









' 

, 






' 


. 

. 


' 

















1 





















- 





, 

■ 




■ 






- 










, 


♦ 

• ^* 






* 

« 









- 35 - 


the stages, but while the phenomena occur properly in the earlier stages, 
there is not sufficient energy in the latter stages to Produce a hard coke, 

A good coking coal will show all the stages well-marked. Occasionally a 
coal passes through the earlier stages very rapidly. Bubbling and frothing 
may occur, and it would evidently be advantageous to mix this type of a 
coal with a non-coking coal before carbonising. 

The distinctive characteristics of the plastic curve are due to 
these variations in the method of coke formation. The maximum pressure is 
a measure of the energy with which the coal passes through the various 
stages ot coking. If the maximum pressure is low the coal cokes sluggishly 
and each successive step requires a considerable time interval for its com¬ 
pletion. A high value for the maximum pressure shows that the coal passes 
through certain stages very rapidly and that overlapping or the phases occurs 
causing greater resistance. 

Audibert (23) has correlated the temperature of plasticity and the 
temperature of initial decomposition. The fusion was studied by the dilato- 
raeter method and tne decomposition by determining the loss of weight as car¬ 
bonisation proceeded. 

The dilatometer apparatus consists essentially of a cylindrical metal 
tube, in which was placed the sample of coal to be studied, previously made 
into a cylinder bO mms. long and b or 7 nans, in diameter. The tube being 
supported vertically, a glass rod was pl.aced on the coal to measure the ex¬ 
pansion. The rod was almost completely counterpoised and carried a long 
pointer moving in front of a scale, the movements of the pointer under these 

circumstances giving evidence of changes in form 01 the heated coal sample. 

«r 

All the coals examined showed the following characteristics* 

(A) For all temperatures below a certain value Tr the pointer remained 
motionless. 









. 

■ 








. 






- 

' 


■ 

■ 






' 


. 










. 












♦ 






■ 





















. 






' 















(b) For all temperatures between Tr and a higher temperature Tg, the 
pointer moves downward. Tr is theretore the softening temperature. 

(c) When the temperature is above Tg the pointer at first descends, but 
afterwards ascends the amplitude of the upward movement increasing 
with the temperature. Tg is the intumescence point. 

For the coals studied the softening point lies between 3^5 and 4p0 

degrees, and the intumescence point lies between 375 and ^00 degrees. 

The fusion oi coal is similar to the fusion of potassium chlorate 

or tne fusion of sulphur, and therefore the fusion phenomena depend upon the 

relative position of the decomposition point and the melting point. Audibert 

has divided coals into two classes according to the relative position of these 

temperature points. 

(1) Coals of the first class. For coals of this class the temperature 
at which loss of weight by progressive heating begins, is never 
lower than the softening temperature at the same rate of heating. 

(2) Coals of the second class. In coals of this class thermal decomposi¬ 
tion undoubtedly begins at a lower temperature than that at which 
the coal softens. 

Sufficiently long heating to a suitable temperature below the softening 
point will cause coals of the second class to completely lose the power of 
fusibility. Therefore, by slow and progressive heating coals of the second 
class fuse only incompletely. 

This fact is important when it is realized that the rate of heating 
in the coke oven is very slow, Audibert has come to the conclusion that only 

those coals can be used for making metallurgical coke which melt when they 

' t 

are heated at a rate not greater than one degree per minute. Coals of the 
second class do not fulfil this requirement but under suitable heat treatment 
tney may be made to yield a hard coke. 

This tneory of coking explains the coking of a mixture of a nonlocking 
coal with a coking coal. When particles of a non-xusible substance are neated 

























• . 

. 

■ 









■ 

, * 








- 

. 






* 

■ 


' 

» 


- 



































- 











- 












- 37 - 


witn suixicient quantity ox a substance which undergoes transient fusion, a 
beat treatment may have the effect of cementing together inxo a hard mass 
the particles of the non-fusible substance. But Audibert claims that a mix¬ 
ture of a coal of the first class with a coal of the second class does not 
oenave in this way, for after solidification they show only a single phase. 

Tne addition of a coal of the first class to a coal of the second class has, 
therefore, the effect, not of cementing together the particles of the latter 
more firmly, but rather of causing them to melt at a temperature wnen coke 
formation can take place. Thus the softening temperature ox the mixture may 
be lowered to a temperature at which the rate of decomposition may be negli¬ 
gibly small. 

University of Alberta Investigations. 

The early work in this laboratory on the plastic state of coal was 
done with apparatus designed after that described by Layng and Hatnrone ( 13 )* 
However, it was found impossible to obtain check plasic curves with this 
apparatus and so piece by piece the apparatus was remodelled in an endeawor 
to obtain better control of the reaction and to approximate more closely the 
soitening Phenomena which occur during the coking process. 

The method of passing a constant flow of an inert gas through the 
coal received considerable attention. It was found that when using a constant 
head of water to displace the gas xrora a large container that the volume of the 
gas displaced irom the container varied with the amount of gas in the container. 
Tne amount of gas flowing from the container through the tube also varied with 
the pressure in the apparatus, that is, part of tne water, flowing into the con¬ 
tainer was used to raise the pressure in the container to the pressure existing 
in the tube at that instant. The apparatus shown in Figure IV was designed to 
do away with this constantly changing volume factor. 






■ J —— - 








■ 








' 

_ 















. 


(ft 












- 




. 










V 






• 


■ 























. 















































. 











38 


























































This gas pump consists oi two glass pipettes oi identical design and 
having a volume of about pO ccs. The gas is taken into the pipette through the 
centre tube (a) which extends nearly to the "bottom of the pipette. When the 
mercury levelling bulb is raised the mercury rising in the tube seals off the 
inlet tube and forces the gas through the outer tube (b) and thus through the 
coal. A mercury seal is placed in the line near the tramp to prevent a return 
of the gas into the pipette when the levelling bulb is lowered, and a new supply 
of gas is sucked into the pipette from the gas supply line* The two pipettes 
are connected together in such a manner that when one is discharging its load 
oi gas through the coal the other is taking in a new supply from the gas line* 

The levelling bulbs are operated by hand, the position of the bulbs being re¬ 
versed every minute. The pipette empties in about 10 seconds and the bulb must 
be held down in place only for this length of time. The tubes connecting the 
mercury seal to the pipettes are oi capillary bore in order to reduce the dead 
space in the pumping system and also to reduce the rate of flow of the gas from 
the pipette to such a degree that the pipette takes approximately a minute to 
discharge its volume of gas into tne system. The rise of the mercury in the 
murcury seal is not sufficient to alter appreciably tne volume oi tne system. 

As tne pressure rises in tne manometer the mercury will not rise to the same 
heignt in the pipette at all times during the experiment, the height or the 
mercury in the pipette being proportional to the pressure in the manometer. 

Tne graphs in Figure V snow the pressure-time curve and the volume-time curve 
for a blank run in which the tube was completely closed off to represent com¬ 
plete plasticity. If these two curves are considered together it will be seen 
that the volume of the gas passed into the coal tube is proportional to tne re¬ 
sistance of tne coal to the flow oi gas at that temperature. The pump is thus 
automatically controlled and will not pump any gas into the system a,fter the 
pressure limit of the manometer (2000 mms. W.G.) is reached. Ii this system were 

























r 














' 


. 

* 













* 







. 















Curves Showing 


X 



f>M k/v/v N/ 


ZO . 30 /O ZO ■?< 

in Minutes ~T/nie in Minutes. 






























































- 41 - 


not used a coal whicn remained in a state completely impervious to the flow 
of gas ior any considerable time would cause the pressure to be built up to 
such a height that the manometer would overflow. In tne case oi some coals 
the pressure does continue to be built up even after the pump has stopped 
discharging gas into the system due to the back pressure of the gases being 
given off from the coal during decomposition. Evidence of this back pressure 
is shown by the departure oi the plastic curve from the curve obtained in 
the blank run representing complete plasticity. With this pump there is a 
slight interruption of gas flow just at the end of the minute when the pump 
is being reversed, and this imparts an oscillatory effect to the pressure, 
tne pressure tending to drop at the end of the minute. Readings are taken 
at the same point of the curve every minute, however, and when these points 
are plotted against the temperature a plastic curve is obtained which gives 
a good idea of the behaviour of the coal during the plastic state. 

In doing the preliminary work and while developing the method of 
procedure, Natural G-a.s was used as the inert gas. This gas contains approx®™ 
mately methane and about 3^ nitrogen, and it was felt that this should 
behave in much tne same manner as the nitrogen. This gas could be obtained 
from tne gas main at a very uniiorm pressure and temperature, and as it 
worked satisfactorily in tne preliminary woric it was used in tne analysis of 
all the coals. 

In the apparatus first used the coal v/as contained in a quartz tube. 
This tuoe was of very uneven bore and it was very difficult to remove the 
coke. A hard glass tube, as employed by Layng and Hatnorne, was substituted 
for the quartz tube, but the tube was warped out of shape during the first 
run. Porcelain and a.lundum tubes were tried but these would not stand the 
pressure. A steel tuoe was made inside an alundum tnimoie to prevent oxida- 










_ 

, 








. 




. 

- 






- 







* 

■ 

■ 















■ 






- 










. 

' 

■ 

. 







- 42 - 


tion or the steel, and consequent rapid deterioration of tne tube. 

It was found that certain coals expanded so mucii wiien heated that the 
Semi-coked mass was iorced partially out of the tube, and tnus a lower pressure 
was recorded than should have been the case. This agrees with tne criticism of 
Foxsweil. Several metnods of containing the coal in the tube to prevent expan¬ 
sion were tried, the tuoe (A) shown in Figure VI finally being decided upon as 
oeing the most suitable. The thin-walled steel tube (a) has a heavy piece of 
steel (b) 5 inches long at one end, in which is bored a chamber 4 inches long 
and one-half inch in diameter. The solid end oi this block has a small hole 
bored through it to allow the gases to enter the chamber, this opening being 
covered with a piece oi copper gauze while the tube is being filled. A small 
amount of freshly ignited Ottawa Sand is put in the bottom of the chamber, 
and a column of coal 3*7 cms. long (3 ccs.) is put in on top of this sand, and 
more sand is added to the chamber until tne plunger (c) will just fit into the 
tube, tne head oi the plunger coming Hush with the end of the tube. The 
plunger tits loosely into the tube and allows the waste gases to find a ready 
exit from tne tube. The tube stands in a vertical position, the chamber being 
at the lower end, so that the coal in expanding had to lift the entire weight 
of the tube. Tne maximum expansion recorded with any coal, using this tube, 
was about 3 mms. Tne steel tube firs loosely into an alundum thimble 12 
inches long and having a flange which rests on the lid of tne furnace. The 
gases escaping irom tne tube have to pass up insi e the alundum thimble. The 
interposing of this alundum thimble between the steel tube and the heat of the 
furnace causes a considerable lag of the temperature of the coal behind the 
temperature of the furnace, but the heavy construction of the tubes tends to 
make the temperature rise more uniform throughout the whole length of the coal 








- 







- 

' 

* 


. 

. 








. 







. 






. 



■ 


■ 




r • 


. 




























flPPnRHTUS FOR DETERmitHTIon 


or TEriP£RFITUR£5 OF 
Plhsticity & PrconpooiTion 

OF COHL 


I nerh 

<3*3 fs’orr? /burr/p 




/*7<r/7 o meJ-e t 


0=T? 

PoZ-errS-zom e/r 



/7, open Lube 
B.C/osed » 


ii 































































































































- 44 - 


column. The lag in temperature is constant for all temperatures as is shown 
by the graph in Figure VIX f which shows the temperature difference between the 
tube and the furnace, in the case oi a blank run which is typical for all runs. 

In oraer to get a true idea of the temperature during plasticity an iron- 
constantan thermocouple was placed in the sand immediately below the coal column 
in a position where it would be exoosed to the same heat effects as the coal it¬ 
self, The thermocouple wires passed through the plug and up between the two 
tubes from which they were insulated. The temperature was indicated on a Leeds 
and Northrup Potentiometer. 

To determine the decomposition temperature of. the coal under the same 
conditions under which tne plastic range is determined, another tube (B) of 
identical design except that it was closed at the lower end witn a screw cap, 
was placed alongside the first tube in the furnace. This tube had a thermo¬ 
couple imbedded in the cap. It was found necessary to take the temperature in 
this tube also, as this tube did not have a current of gas circulating through 
it as did the first tube. The decomposition tube was connected to a eudiometer 
tube in which the gases produced during decomposition were collected and measured. 
A blank run was ma.de to determine the volume indicated in the eudiometer due to 
the expansion of the gas in the tube. 

The interior of the furnace was kept at the same temperature throughout 
most of its height by means of a stirrer® The stirrer in the original anparatus 
consisted of a propellor working in a. brass tube, but tne brass tube gradually 
corroded at the tenroeratures reached in the furnace and this stirrer had to be 
discarded. The stirrer finally adopted consists ol a heavy ring of fibre-board 
whicn is drawn up and down the height of the furnace by means of a motor^driven 
gear arrangement. As the character of the plastic curve depends to a great 
extent upon the rate of rise of temperature, it is very important to keep the 





























. 


$ J 


















* 






























. 

i ' . v >v» t- 
















Comparative Temperatures 

A-VeCOMPotltiON B-VlQST/CITY C'FuRsH\C£- 















































- 4b - 


iurnace temperature rising at a uniiorm rate* To determine the temperature 
in tne furnace a tnermocouple was placed in the furnace space oetween the two 
tubes and at the same height as tne thermocouple in the tubes. This thermo¬ 
couple was connected to a Leeds and Horthrup Recording Potentiometer. A line 
was drawn on the paper representing a temperature rise of 5 degrees C per minute, 
and the rheostat, controlling the current passing through the heating coils, was 
adjusted irom time to time in order that the marking pen followed this line 
throughout the run. By this method the temperature of the furnace could be kept 
rising at a remarkable uniiorm rate, and the temperature of the tubes was found 
to rise at the same uniform rate. 

With this apparatus it was found possible to obtain duplicate plastic 
curves for tne seme coal which checked to two degrees tne temperature of initial 
plasticity and the temperature of maximum pressure. The maximum pressure usually 
checked within a few millimeters, but the maximum pressure is very dependent upon 
operating conditions, and tne value of this factor means only the approximate 
energy with which the coal passes through the various stages of coking. It was 
felt that the temperature of initial plasticity was the important factor of the 
■elasticity phenomena, and an attempt has been made in this investigation to 
correlate the temperature of initial plasticity and the temperature oi initial 
decomposition. 

The results obtained will be given in the section entitled ^Laboratory 


Studies of Alberta CoaJ.s ,, . 





- 47 - 



TESTS if OR COAIIM G COALS, 

When considering the development of any coal area it is important 
to know the coking properties of the coals of that area, and to determine if 
any of the coals can be used for the commercial production of coke. The pro¬ 
blem of dete'rmining the coking qualities of a coal by test methods has re¬ 
ceived an amount of attention warranted by the great industrial importance of 
coke. In the following pages a number of these tests will be mentioned, giving 
in detail those tests which were used in the analysis of Alberta coals. 

The Tull-scale Oven Test. 

The final word in obtaining a complete knowledge of the coking proper¬ 
ties of a coal is the full-scale oven test. In order to produce the best 
possible quality of coke it is often necessary to make a number of full tests 
under different operating conditions. As 10 to 15 tons of coal are required 
ior a single charge in a modern coke oven, the expense involved puts this 
test out of the question, at any rate as far as a preliminary investigation 
is concerned. 

The Box Test . 

The box test is probably the best preliminary test, especially in the 
case of coals which are of doubtful coking quality, or if it is suspected 
that the coke formed will not shrink sufficiently to permit ready pushing 
from the oven. If the results are definitely unfavorable, the expense of a 
full-scale test is saved. "Box tests are also recommended in cases where only 
a small amount of coal is available for testing. In a preliminary test of 
this nature a box oi the coal is imoedded in the normal charge oi the oven. 

The box is so designed that the lid cannot become removed from the box during 
tne subsequent operations, but that it can be pushed dow r n into the box, and 







— 














■ 










. 


« ■ 


*. 





. 









- . 

. 

. 






















. 




* 










. 

... - 















tne coal in tne box will tnus be under the same pressure as tne rest of the 
coal in the oven. A baton of test boxes are prepared and placed on tne floor 
of tne empty oven with their length across tne oven in oraer to get a full 
section from wail to wall. The oven is then charged with .coal by the regular 
staff and the coking proceeds exactly as usual. At the exoiration of tne 
coking time the charge is pushed in the usual manner and the boxes a.re raked 
out from the mass of coke and are quenched as rapidly as possible. Tne box 
is then weighed, opened, and the contents examined and sampled. When properly 
made, a box test gives to tne experienced observer a definite idea of the 
character of the coke and the coking possibilities of the coal. This test 
does not allow of a quantitative test being made of the by-products. 

A preliminary investigation of the coking properties of the coals of 
a given area must necessarily be begun with laboratory tests. The small-scale 
laboratory test will give results comparable among the series of coals tested 
and will indicate the desirability of making large-scale tests. 

Tne Crucible Test. 

Tne simplest of all coking tests is, no doubt, tne standard volatile 
matter determination, in which a, gram of powdered coal is placed in a flame 
at 950° C in a small platinum crucible, and the loss in weight determined. The 
anpearanee of the resulting coke button will indicate whether tne coal is non¬ 
coking, feebly-coking, or strongly-coking, but almost every condition in this 
test is at variance witn large scale coking practice. Due to the rapidity 
of heating in tnis test many coals will coke in the crucible which will not 
coke in commercial practice. 

The appearance of tne coke obtained in the crucible test might, 
however, lead to the following conclusions i 







While good coking coals usually give a much swollen button of coke, 
the surface of which may be thrown up to form curiously formed ex~ 
cressances, the degree of swelling cannot be accepted as a measure 
of the coking power. Some coals which do not produce a serviceable 
coke in commercial practice, give a crucible button which is more 
swollen than that obtained from high class coking coals. 

The crucible coke from a good coking coal is usually silver-gray in 
color, and has a well fused, smoothly convoluted surface, and a 
strong, metallic lustre; but any, or all of these characteristics 
may be shown by coke buttons produced from coals Ydiich are of rela¬ 
tively little value for the production of coke. 

Coals which give a dark colored residue with little or no lustre, 
and having a granular surface, and show little or no swelling in the 
crucible, are of no value in the manufacture of coke. 

The Caking Index. 

The determination of the agglutinating or caking power of a coal has 
been the subject of many communications. Hichter in 1S70, Campredon in 189^ 
and Meurice in 1908 were the earliest ones to propose methods of evaluating 
the agglutinating power of coals. 

Campredon describes his method as follows (24); “Mix the coal with 
an inert substance and submit the mixture to carbonisation in a closed vessel. 
The coke will remain in lumps which will be less cohesive the greater the 
amount of inert material added. The coking quality of the coal is determined 
by the amount of inert material which can be added to the coal and still 
produce a coherent coke 18 . The procedure is open to the following objections; 

(1) The mass of the mixture varies with the amount of the inert 
material added, since the amount 01 coal used was usually fixed 
at one gram. 

(2) Dirierent operators fail to agree on the sufficiency of cohesion. 

(3) The nature of the inert material has an important influence upon 
the coherence of the coke. 

Meurice defined his “index of the limit ot agglutination 1 " as the 
maximum number of grams of sand which can be added to one gram of fresnly 


u) 


( 2 ) 


( 3 ) 







- 50 - 


mined coal to obtain a block oi coke whicn will stand a pressure oi 3 kgms. 
per sq.cm., without allowing more than one gram oi' powdery residue to separate 
irom the coke block. Tne test must be carried out under well-defined condi¬ 
tions 01 operation. 

Some workers (2p) using the above test have assumed the following con¬ 
clusions to be justified* 

(1) Coals with an index of 11 or under are of no value for the 
manufacture of coke in existing coke ovens. 

(2) Coals with indices 12 to 15 inclusive will be useful for mixing 
with good coking coals, hut are not serviceable lor use without 
such admixture* 

(3) Serviceable metallurgical coke can he expected from coals having 
a caking index of lb and upwards. 

Although, this method has been commended as of practical value for 
the assay of coking coals, it is not obvious why the caking power is used as 
a criterion rather than the coking power, which is measured by the strength 
of the coke produced from the coal alone. Any more complete interpretation 
of the caking index must take into consideration the question of how far the 
method of heating in a small crucible can be regarded as corresponding to 
the process of coking in the coke oven. 

Tne Lessing Test. 

The following test, devised by Dr. E. Lessing, has become a standard 
laboratory method lor determining the coking value 01 a coal. In the crucible 
test the only point of uniformity attempted is a quantitative determination 
of the volatile matter, little consideration being paid to the quality of the 
coke obtained. Dr. Lessing, therefore, endeavored to design an apparatus 
which would show more markedly the differences in the cokes produced irom 
difierent coals, and which would at the same time allow one to follow to some 






--- 





























































* 








- 




. 




■ , 










' 























- 51 


extent the urocess of carbonisation. A description of the apparatus as 
placed on the market ( 30 ) is given below; 

The apparatus consists oi a,n electric furnace capable of accommodating 
two cylindrical quartz-glass retort tubes, having walls of uniform thickness, 
and having definite dimensions which must be strictly adhered to. The coal 
sample is compressed during heating by a quartz piston fitting loosely in tne 
retort tube so that only gas and tar vapor, but no coal dust, can pass between 
it and the retort walls. The gas passes from the retort by a side tube through 
a small glass scrubber-condenser, in which the tar is retained, into an 
audiometer of 300 ccs. capacity. The supporting tubes are raised to such a 
height that the coal column is in the hottest part of the furnace. The tempera¬ 
ture of the furnace is adjusted by means of an outside resistance, and the tem¬ 
perature is determined by inserting a thermocouple in another retort tube placed 
on tne other supporting tube. In operation the furnace is brought to the required 
temperature and the retort is quickly placed in the furnace, the time noted, and 
the progress oi gasification is followed with a stop watch, volumes of the gas 
being read off at intervals of 30 seconds. Tests at $00° 0 are completed after 
7 minutes, those at bOO® alter 15 minutes. After the required period of heating 
the retort is removed from the furnace and is allowed to cool before the final 
volume is read off. The tar is then extracted from the retort walls and from 
the scrubber-condenser and the resultant tar and coke weighed. 

This test is not intended for, and will never be capable oi, periectiy 
reproducing coke oven operation on a small scale, but it has proved useful in 
following the urocess oi carbonisation. This test was used in some previous 
work in this laboratory, but was not used in the present investigation, the 

(30) Lessing Apparatus as placed on the market by A. G-ailenkamp & Co. 









— 






— 










- I 

* 

' 

r io •; . :: kk; 1 












. 




; 






. 








* 

. 






. 










■ 




- 








■ 







































- 52 - 


tube test, described later, being substituted for it. 

I 

Moditied Lessing T^st. 

A modification of the Lessing test is described by S. Qvarfort (2b). 
Coking is carried out in a furnace similar to tne Lessing furnace using a 
slightly conical crucible of transparent quartz. Contrary to Lessing’s pro¬ 
cedure the test is carried out with an initially cold furnace. To permit of 
tests being made on the resultant coke, a larger quantity of coal is used, 
namely b gr^ms. Tne use of a piston in the crucible proved unsatisfactory, 
because it easily became stuck, whereby an unequal pressure was caused, so it 
was not used in this test. At the outset it was found that the coal must be 
gasified very slowly if the resulting coke cylinder were to be smooth and free 
from cavities. This could only be effected by imparting a continuous motion 
to the whole crucible during the experiment, this being accomplished by means 
of a motor driven gear system. At the beginning of the test the coal rests 
slightly below tne zone to be heated. The furnace is raised from the cold to 
1000° C in 20 minutes, the crucible being drawn slowly up and down through the 
heated zone during tnis period. Heating is continued during about minutes, 
after which the crucible is lowered into the cool part of the furnace wnere it 
is allowed to remain for one hour. After cooling the coke cylinder is removed 
and sectioned in a standard manner and crushing and porosity tests are made uoon 
these sections. Photo-micrographs of thin sections were also prepared. The 
author of this test suggests the following advanta-ges: It provides, 

(1) . A means of rapidly classifying a coal in respect to its coking power. 

(2) . A means of rapidly identifying a coal.. 

(3) . A means oi studying tne effect of different rates and temperatures 

of carbonisation. 

(4) A means of studying the effect oi deterioration upon the coking 
of a coal. 

This test was used on a large number oi American and Englisn coking coals, 




. 






- 


. 


- . 

4 


* 








/ . 

' . 


. 

* 

" ' ■ ... ' . " • 





' 


- 

, : ; ■ 








* . 






■ ■ 











••. 



: 



« 















- 


. 

















and an elaborate series of ‘’standards’ 1 was drawn up lor tnese coals. Mr. Qvar- 
lort states that a detailed classification oi coking coals may be obtained in 
tbis way, and suggests that the properties which determine the coking quality of 
a coal are the coke yield, the crushing strength, tne appearance of tne ’’pressure 
cone” after the crushing test, and the appearance of the sectioned surfaces. 

Each of tnese factors form a group which may be divided into classes according 


to experience 


The Gray-King Carbonisation Assay . 

Tne method and apparatus described below have been recommended by the 
Fuel Eese&rch Board (28!) for the laboratory examination of coals by their car¬ 
bonisation at about bQO© C. 

The furnace is a nichrome-wound electric furnace giving a uniformly 
heated space at least 15 cms. long at the centre of the furnace. The tempera¬ 
ture is regulated with the help of a thermocouple, the junction of which is 
in contact with the outside of the retort tube at the middle of the furnace. 

The hard glass or transparent silica retort tube is 30 cms. long and ha.s a dia¬ 
meter of 2 cms. The retort has a short side tube sealed in at a distance of 
about two cms. from the open end, which is closed by a ruboer stopper. A ”U” 
tube condenser of 5 ccs* capacity is used for the reception of the liquid products 
of distillation, and a small wash bottle charged with glass beads, drenched in 
sulphuric acid, is used lor the absorption of ammonia. The gas is collected in 
a gas holder, filled with a mixture oi equal volumes of glycerine and water, with 
an almost saturated aqueous solution of magnesium chloride, or with water saturated 
with coal gas from a previous experiment. A device is used wnich automatically 
maintains a constant pressure in the gas holder. 

The coal sample is ground to pass a bO mesh sieve, and is dried in a 

current of inert gas at 105-110© 0. The retort tube, togetner witn a small amount 

28. Fuel Research Technical Paper #1 (1921), ”An Assay of Coal for 
Carbonisation Purposes”, by T. Gray and J. G. King. 







































* 
















- 

■ 










t - 




. 

. 

. 

. 

■ 




* 

















. 


. 

• * 







1 


- ^4 - 


of previously ignited asbestos, is weighed, and is then charged with 20 
grains of dried coal, spread out in an even layer and occupying about 1 $ cms. 
of the length and two-thirds of the diameter of the tube. Tne coal is held 
in place by means of a loose plug of asbestos. The retort is then connected 
to the gas train and is clamped in position with a slight forward slope. The 

furnace previously heated to 3^0® C is then pushed forward until the coal 

. 

column is contained in the heated zone of the furnace. 

As soon as the evolution of expanded air and occluded gases has 

ceased, the temperature of the furnace is gradually raised, by cutting out 

resistance in the external circuit, so that the ultimate temperature of bOO® 

is reached at the end of an hour. During this time readings are taken of 

tne temperatures at which oil appears and at which the evolution of gas 

commences. Heating at the final temperature is continued for an hour, after 

which the furnace is withdrawn and the tube is allowed to cool. 

The yield of coke is arrived at by weighing the retort after 

the tar has been removed from the front end. The tar thus removed is added 

to the weight oi tar collected in the condenser to give the total tar yield. 

The contents of the wash bottle is distilled to give the yield to ammonia. 

The volume of the gas in the holder is measured and its specific gravity 

determined. The weight of gas produced is then calculated. 

The results obtained afford data for predicting the behaviour 

of tne coal on carbonisation on a large scale a.t the same temperature, thus? 

(1) The yields of coke, gas. tar, liquor and ammonia are readily 

and accurately measured, and large scale yields may be predicted 
from them as follows? 

Coke - tne yield and. tne volatile matter remaining are approxi¬ 
mately the same. 

Gas - the yield from tne assay is usually slightly greater 

than that obtained on a large scale owing to the necessity 
oi limiting the time of carbonisation in industrial working. 
Tar - the large scale yield is in most cases about b 0% of the 
assay yield. 

.Ammonia - the yields are usually comparable. 









' 




. 

' 




. 

. 


V 












* 


. 




























* 



. 


■ 


, 






- 

■ 















(.2) The appearance of the coke cylinder formed is similar to that 

obtained by carbonisation on a large scale. 

(3) The temperature at which rapid decomposition of the coal begins 
may be recorded by observing ‘the appearance oi oil vapor and by 
noting the start oi gas evolution. 

(4) The yield of tar is sufficient to allow of its specific gravity 
being determined. 

(3) The composition of the gas is not materially different from that 

obtained on the large scale, the cnief diilerence being a lower 
percentage of the unsalurated hydrocarbons in the laboratory made 
gas. 

The Tube Coding Test. 

The aim of a laboratory coking test is to reproduce as far as 
possible the operating conditions obtaining in the coke oven. The most im¬ 
port ant factor in coke oven operation is that the heating of the charge is 
not accomplished immediately the charge is put into the oven, but that it is 
gradual, and progresses uniformly during the coking period. 

Mr. F. W. Sperr, Jr. 41 has patented a test ^27) whereby a material 
is progressively heated at the desired rate and temperature, to produce a 
more refractory material than that started with. This test has been applied 
to the coking of coal to reproduce as far as possible conditions existing in 
the coke oven. 

In tne lirst stages of this investigation this best was used as 
described by Mr. Sperr, but in the course of the investigation the apparatus 
has beeh changed and the method of procedure modified to suit existing con¬ 
ditions. 


The Moaiiied Tuoe Coking Test . 


.Apparatus . 

Figure VIII is a diagrammatic sketcn of the apparatus used. 

The galvanised iron box is a tube furnace having two alundum cores, 


*F. W. Snerr, Jr. Chiei Chemist, The Koppers Company, Pittsburgh, Pa. 


























- 

' 


- 





3 ■ ■ ■ 









. 


. 


■ 

■ 

, 

. 

- 










. 






• 




















QMJM£ z 

Q£BRKBXMA 


56 



FIGURE VIII. 


Gao ne/^r 



























































































































- 5? - 


10 incnes long and 2 incnes inside diameter, on wnicn are wound the heating 
coils. The heating unit on each core consists ox 43 feet of B. & S. 17 gauge 
nichrome wire (.237 ohms resistance). The front end of each core is wound 
with three extra turns oi wire in a second layer to make the temperature at 
this ena of the furnace approximate the temperature at the middle of the fur¬ 
nace* The two porcelain tubes (only one oi which is shown in the diagram) 
are JO inches long and 1 inch inside diameter, in which the coal sample is 
contained. Each tube is provided with a train for purifying and collecting 
the products of carbonisation. The catch flask serves to collect the water 
and tar, and the wash bottle contains a dilute solution oi sulphuric acid to 
absorb the ammonia. After passing through the purifying train the gas is 
measured by a flow gas meter. A gasometer oi two cubic feet capacity was ob¬ 
tained for this work, but did not arrive in time to be used in the present in¬ 
vestigation. 

A rheostat is included in the heating circuit of each tube for con¬ 
trolling the heat of the furnace. Tne temperature is taken in each tube by a 
platinum - platinum plus 10% rhodium thermocouple placed in tne furnace between 
the tube and the core, and lying a/b a point 3 inches from the front end of t&e 
heating element. The temuerature is indicated on a Leeds ajid Northrup Potentio¬ 
meter. 

Metnod of filling tne tube . 

Many of the modern coke ovens are 14 inches in width, ana as neating 
oi the charge proceeds simultaneously from both walls, the conditions repro¬ 
duced in the test must be those conditions aftecting a seven-inch length oi 
the charge. Therefore a weighed quantity oi coal is charged into tne tube so 
that it will occupy exactly 7 inches. Tne coal column comes to within b inches 
of one end of the tube. Thin discs of paper are used to keep the coal in place 


while tne tube is being charged, and alundum plugs which fit tne tube loosely 







— 




















' “ 



















- 


. 







. 








- 




- 

. 





















































■ 
















- 

























£eep the charge in position after carbonisation has begun. The plug used at 
tne front end 01 the charge has a hole bored through it to provide a ready 
escape for the products of distillation. The outside of the tube is provided 
with a scale to indicate the position of the coal column in relation to the 
heated zone of the furnace. 

Procedure. 

The furnace having been heated to 1000° C, the charged tube is in¬ 
serted in the furnace in such a manner that only the empty part of the tube is 
in the heated part of the furnace. When temperature conditions have become 
uniform again, the gas meter is read, and the tube is moved in relation to the 
furnace so that the front end of the coal column is brought to the edge of tne 
heated zone. The front end of coal column will then be heated and carbonisa¬ 
tion will begin. After 1$> minutes the tube is moved forward one-quarter inch 
and allowed to remain in this position for Ip minutes. At the end of every 15 
minutes the tube is moved forward one-cuarter inch, until the whole of the 
cnarge has been carbonised. Readings of temperature, tube pressure, and gas 
volume are taken every 15 minutes to follow tne course 01 carbonisation. The 
coking period in a modern coke oven is about 14 hours, but this was cut down to 
7 hours in order to make this test more useful in a laboratory assay. Although 
tne coking time will not be exactly that of the coke oven, this method will pro¬ 
vide 1 or a slow and progressive heating of the coal. 

After the charge hs,s been carbonised the tube is removed from the 
furnace and allowed to cool, after which it is weighed and tne coke removed. 

The coke is immediately separated from the tarry material in the tube, and is 
examined, measured, and weighed, the weight of the lump coke and the weight oi 
the fines being recorded. The scrubbing bottles in tne gas train are weighed 
oeiore and after carbonisation and the amount of water and tar determined. The 




























c, 



_ 
















. 


' 








- 




■ 


- 






.. 




. 






VC j i 






. 




:v . 1 













gas volume is corrected lor the water vapor pressure end is reduced to the 
volume in cubic geet, at bO degrees Fahrennei'c end at a ^ressnre of 30 inches 
of mercury* Tne coke yield is calculated as the percentage of the charge. 

The use of two tubes enables one to check the coke yields in 
one operation. Duplicate runs check the coke yield to 0.2 percent, and the 
gas yield to Q.Q^ cubic feet uer pound of coal charged. 













- oO - 


A LABORATORY INVESTIGATION OF ALBaRTA COKING- COALS . 

Introduction , 

As already mentioned certain Alberta coals have been tested by con¬ 
tinued use in the commercial production of coke* Coke with a structure 
suitable for metallurgical purposes has been produced on a commercial scale 
in this province from washed coal at Lille, ^nd from a mixture of co^l from 
#2 and #4 seams at Coleman, 

During an investigation of the coals of Canada, conducted for the 
Dominion Government by J, B. Porter and others, Mr, Stansfield in 1909, made 
a number of box tests on Alberta coals (3l)» Some of these tests were made 
in coking plants in the Maritimes, including the Qtto-Hoffmann ovens at 
Sydney, the beehive ovens at Bridgeport, and the Bernard ovens at Sydney 
Mines, The remainder of the tests were carried out in Alberta, either in 
the Bernard ovens at Lille, or in the beehive ovens at Coleman, Table TTI 
gives the results of these coking tests. In many of these tests the coal 
samples were considerably weathered, and most of the samples had an ash 
content of 18 to 22%, which is much higher than the ash content of commer¬ 
cial shipments which are' beins made today, 

A number of box tests on Alberta coals have recently been made at 
Winnipeg, Manitoba, but the results of these tests have not vet been published. 

Senrnles . 

The nresent investigation was begun early in 1927, in the laboratories 
of the Scientific and Industrial Research Council of Alcerta, The program 
consisted of an analysis of samples of bituminous and sub-bituminous coals, 

?»nd included a number of snecial tests to determine the coking properties of 
these coals. The mine operators co-operated by sending in samples, the list 

(31). Stansfield, E. and Porter, J. B. "The Manufacture and Testing of Coke" 
in An Investigation of the Coals of Canada, Vol. 1, Part GGV, Mines 
Branch Renort, 1912, #83. 


























. 


- 


- 

. 






















. 



























. 


* 












. 
















- ol - 








































































































































62 - 


of sarnies being follows i 

T A B L D I V. 


Samole 

No, 

Operator 


| Address 

J Coal Name 


Crows Nest Are?, 




402 (/ 

Hillcrest Collieries, Ltd. 


Hillcrest 

Hillcrest 

403 

West Canadian Collieries, Ltd, 


Bellevue 

Bellevue 

404 1/ 

West Canadian Collieries, Ltd. 


B.lairmore 

Greenhill 

40b 

McGillivray Creek Coal & Coke Co. 

Ltd 

Coleman 

McGillivray Ck. 

409 

International Co* 3 ! & Coke Co* 


Coleman (#2 seam) 

International 

410 

International Co^l & Coke Co* 


Coleman (#4 seam) 

I’A''A r " 

International 


Fincher Axea. 



413 

Marlow 


Lundbreck 

Lundbreck {/ 


Nordegg Area. 




405 

Brazeau Collieries, Ltd. 


Brazeau 

Brazeau 


Mountain Perk Area 




411 

Mountain Park Collieries, Ltd, 


Mt. Park 

Mt. P^rk 

412 

Luscar Collieries, Ltd. 


Luscar 

Luscar 

413 

Cadomin Co^l Co, Ltd, 


Cadomin 

Cadomin 


Coal sour Area. 




40?? 

Saunders Ridge Co- 5 ! Co. Ltd, 


Mercoal 

Saunders Ridge 


Samples of U.S.A. Coals. 




400 

Pocahontas, West Virginia, Used 

in 

Hamilton Go-^e Plant. 


401 

Mather, Pennsylvania, Used 

in 

Hamilton Coke Plant. 


407) 

413) 

U.S.A. coal Used 

in 

Winnipeg Coke Plant. 



























63- 




Sketch Map 

OF 1 *?• 

ALBERTA 

showing 

Location op SmpLes 

por 

Coking Tests. 





SASKATCHEWAN 






















- 64 - 


Figure IX is - sketch map of Albert? showing the location of the samples, 
(the 400 is left off the s^mole numbers, e.g. 400 is shown ~t location ?). The 
samples were shipped to the laboratory in wooden "boxes containing a-voroximately 
20 pounds of Coal. Upon arrival in the laboratory the samples were crushed to 
a uniform size and placed in cans with tight fitting lids. The proximate end 
ultimate analyses were made by J, W. Sutherland ~nd S. Zeavin. Table V gives 
the proximate and ultimate analyses of the coal samples. 

H. J. Rose (.32) found that it was not possible to classify coals by means 
of single index numbers, but that a two-dimensional system is necessary. Using 
a triaxial diagram Rose plotted the ultimate analyses (calculated to the b^sis 
of Carbon + Hydrogen + Oxygen “ 100) of 150 typical American coking coals from 
10 States. His diagram is reproduced in Figure X, and on this diagram are also 
plotted the analyses of the Alberta coking coals. 

This diagram shows the close proximity of Mountain P~rk coal (1) to the 
coal used in Winnipeg (triangle) in chemical composition. Cadomin, Grreenhill, 
Bellevue, and International are found on the border line between medium and high 
volatile coking coals® Hillcrest and McG-illivray Creek appear to be below the 
average hydrogen content for high volatile coking coals. Lascar and Brule are 
found among tne low volatile coking coals, while Brazeau and Canmore are out¬ 
side the range of coking coals. Lundbreck is found towards tne outer limits of 
the gas coals. 

The coking tests were carried out as soon as the special apparatus re¬ 
quired for these tests h°d been constructed. Tne many changes in method and 
apparatus which were necessarv in the tube test, and plasticity test, took some 
time to complete ^nd so reneat runs were made on the earlier coals tested in order 

f32) Rose, H. J. ’’The Selection of Coals for the Manufacture of Coke”. Imer. 

Tost, of Mining ^nd Metallurgical Engineers, Transactions Vol.-T^, 192b, 

pi' bll. 







^n^lysi^ of Oo?ls for Coking Tasts, 




>1 


Kl 

Pi 

ml 

<\ 

el 


1 ^ 
£ 


cr 4 

.=1" rH 
XV 

If'K, -O X) 

* . . r— 

4 X, co * 
tOtOH 


CO CM O' 

^ .» r- 

UT-..4- ^ 

K: X) rH 









p 

>4- 

_ 


x,4 

CT.rH 

a* 

XV O', 4 X. 

« , 9 C\J 

co r— cvi » 

CVJ O OJ 


r', I s -- O 
« 1* 

O or * 

K. JO CVJ 


I s - • ec 4 Ki cv 

C* 4* CC* C rH 

CO 

-O 

4 

CC 

4 

rH 


4- 4 O 

CO X, 4* 

'0 s 


c c c 

OJ CVJ 4 

O O! 4 5 

4 4 Xn , 

r- 1 ' rH r-i 

j i 


o o 

O O 4 LO 


IT \ LTv O 









K 



9 » * CV 


* . 









rH 


cvi IT's I—* r—- o ® 


K o * 









4" 


4 

H(04n 


.rt LTV rH 











CO co 

C O CM IT , • 


X> .4 K~ 









o, 


* * 

• 9 . 4 


9 9 D 









rH 


c o 

o o cr- • 


rH CO * 









4 


a: 

H a 4 X^ 


a. r—r-> 











rH 4 

rH 1**— CO Xt 


r— 1 cr* o 


rH CO CV X s rH 

X\ 



4 4 C 


od c j 

r-t 


■a * 

• • 8 ac 


9 9 O 


• • « • • 

d 

cr. 


d 9 » 


X. CC x. i 

r-f 


rH «H 

r-t cr. r- * 


K'v X) » 


X4HOrt 

X) 



CO X . 4 


x 4 a> 

4 



rH CVJ LIT, rH 


K X> CM 


r- rH 


x\ 

^—* 

CO 


X,X, X ll 










r~3 




H H H i 



CJ'. I s -- 

h-a; 4 m 


4" x> cr 









c 


* » 

• * • 4 


r • r- 









rH 


4 C 

0 4 4 » 


D pr * 









;Zt 


OJ 

rH a' 4 CVJ 


cm r— cvj 











c c 4 c 4 x 


r— toe 









1 <T 


» ^ 

® * ® 4 


9 9 £> 









C 


4 rH 

CVI tO>fH 9 


r- cv > 









* 


OJ 

rH aj 4 CV! 


CM r— CM 











XV4" 

jo cr h io 


rH CTV r* - 









cc 


* ft 

9 ® * CM 


* - CVJ 









c 


x r— 

r—“ r— r— » 


.4 JTs • 









* 


4- 

X 4 rH 


4" XM rH 











r- cu 

4 IT v I s - X, 


so cv tr 


JO C r- JD K . 

CO 

rH 


:CTv X 4 


oo c 3 

I s - 


* • 

• 9 . K 


9 9 i— 


» » « 41 » 



\ 

* • • 


X 4 r-’ 

o 


4 rH 

X) XV CO » 


IX s . 4* * 


O X O O |H 

X\ 

■O 


50 X . X , 


rH X^ X i 

4 

, 

K\ 

XV LT rH 


rr X h 


CO 


rH 


CO 


4 4 X 














rH rH «H 1 

; 


4 r— 

o r~ o o 


cr. r-t co 


cc 4- r- josas 

4 

.4" 


a> co x, 


o oc ! 

O 


4 ft 

* . 9 r-l 


* « fH 


» e e * 9 

© 

» 


« » » 


rH O X 

o 


toe 

4 oj o • 


jD » 


O 4 X) O rH 

4 

co 


X 4 4 


rH OJ X i 

4- 


OJ 

cvj r-xv 


cu r Xx 


CO 


rH 


CO 


4 4 X. i 

1 













r-i r^i t—l 

1 


4- o 

r-~ 4 cr. ir. 


CC CM CM 


rH rH CO X, O 

XC 

iNT\ 


I s - cr. 4 


o c- o ! 

x 

ft « 

* ® • CV! 


9 9 XJ 


« * * « « 

9 

* d 

» .« « 


X CO X\ 4 

c 


r— rH 

OJ X) CT\ * 


r— gj * 


CT-4 -eV; o rH 

cv 

CJv 


X , 4 |H 


X 4 .O', 1 

4-j 


rH 

H H O 4 


rH CC 4“ 


f— rH 


r—* 


a> 


X \ IX x 

u - - 













H H H 


h— - 

x. cr 4 sO cr r 


I s — K-, X. 


" o 

Xv 

I s - 

V 

'0 s . r- 1 o 


oco 

4i 



9 9 9 X) 


9 . r^. 


CG X. C— X. * 

a 

« 

J 

© © « 


O X j rH 

ol 


X O 

cr 4 ^4 9 


,.0 XV » 


9 9 9 9 rH 4- 

I s — 


O XV 4 


0 s . o I s - i 

4 1 


OJ 

CM X> CVJ 


CVJ I s -oj 


cr.4’ 'Oco 


rH 


CTv 


X 4 X J 

j 

i 

i 






I s -- 



_ . fl'l 



r~" rH r—’ j 

X j 

i 

x> cr 

1 9 

K I s - rH C 


I s — X'. CO 

9 9 d- 





© 

u 




a 


r—o 

K 0 4 » 


CO rH ® 





Vi 




4 

I 

a> 

CVi X> OJ 


CV I s -- 0.1 










i _ 









Xfl 




i-H 

1 

x at 

p«H rH ^4 C 

" * 

© 



X- 4 XV rH 

a« 

'JO 

e£ 

fH C cr 


o o c ] 

. cm! 



9 9. 0 

U 

9 « O 


X'. » 9 9 

« 

9, 

\ 

9 8 f . 


4 :X. CVJ ; 

a 

. 

O rH 

rH cr. CO • 

H 

cvj r— • 


-b - rH CH 

D 

!*— 

3 * 

0 s . X. X 


X, 4 4 j 

4 


XV 

rn; CVI LO CVJ 


m X) cm 


I-“ 4 rH 


rH 

ai 

CO 


X iO X s . | 

! 1 .. . 



O 

A 1 


— 




3 



rH rH rH 8 


’ 

d 4> 

IO. J4 its O' , 


X, X s . 4- 







4 


' rH 


ft 4 

••*.£> 


» 9 r-- 





• 9 


rH 


o 


XV rH 

60 i'O O 9 

■d 

•O ^ * 





O 




4: 


XV 

^ LCV rH 

& 

JD rH 





a 


4 






R 








© 

■ P 





KV 

e 

q> 

T- 




S 




O 


OJ 4 

D JD OJ 


at co 4- 





* 


P 


c 

<*j 


... 9 


» 9 » 

P 






* 


4 

j “ 

CO o 

ur. r- D 4" 


CC |H 4' 





2 


■ EH 


1 


rH 

rH I s — 


rH CC 







- pej 

__ .- . J 


-- IQ 

; © 



© 


m 




TO 




! 

1 CQ 



© 


© 




© 




1 

t>. 



>? 


m 




TO 


© 


1 

rH 




© 





> 


4 

a> 


05 



o : 

l-> 

rH 




r*H 


rH 

© I 

1 * 

£ 


r? 


-h a 

© 






CC 

4 j 

o 

*a} 


o 


c o 

q 




q 


> 

’ Vi j 

fe 


© 

4 O 


e o 

*5} 




<5i 





© 

© 

*H 

© 

JH -h 




O 



G 

® i 

a; 

•P 

O © 

+> Cd H> 


© Cj -p 

© 

4 , C 


•H 

© 

q 

•H 

a \ 


© 

u u 

© O R. 

0. 

rH O RJ 

jp 



■P 

•V 

© 

Vl 

• 



hi) pj 

C cr’ 

& 

•h m 

c6 

C W; pJ £u) 

4 

R. 

Cj 

4 €v0 4 

•H 

a 

i 

•H 

(j 

& 

•H 

-p -4 

fcj 

o o 4 0 

© 

m 

c 

o o © 

f-l 

® j 

c' 

! X 

• © 

9 © rH 

X 

0 © rH 

•H 

4 JH X-i ^ 

6i; 


•H 

4 u fuO 

O 

m •» | 

u< 

* O 

^ -H 

r cJ s H5 © 

O 

rH X © 

+> 

Ih -d 4 rH 45! 

>, 


-P 

4 d > 

rH 

>:■ >> j 



* o 

CQ » .H H 

u 

C *H 4 

rH 

C © 4 «H 



rH 

tr X 

CV 

• 4 4 j 


S & 

> 5s 

o? &■ ft 


> £ 

t=> 

c m <jj tr- & o 

o 

P 

o 4 e 

o 

<1 PR 


c;q 





















































perce nr oxygen 























































15D TYPICRL CDK/riE CDRL5 OF U.S.R. 

CDRL5 OF RLBERTR 
A U.3R CDRL POKED in CRMRDR 

F\LL RHRLYSES OH BF\SIS CRRBDH^HYDROOEH + OXYOEH = 100 


BRSED On DIRGBRn BY H.J.BOSE 


8 7 


T6 


85 


8 4 


JJ 











































The apparatus and methods used in 


to have comparable results on all samples, 
obtaining the following results is as described in the last section of this 
thesis. 

Crucible Test Results , 

A study was made of the coke buttons produced in the volatile matter 
determinations, Plate X is a photograph of the coke buttons, arranged in the 
order of increasing coke yield. The coals represented by some of the.buttons 
°re special blends prepared to give a complete range from high volatile to low 
volatile coads. The coals corresponding to the first four and l^st four 
buttons are usually considered to be outside the r^nge of coking co^ls. The 
coke buttons from tne American coals are underlined, A number of these buttons 
show the well-fused, swollen appearance, and tne smoothly convoluted surface, 
which are characteristic of good coking coals. 

The Ash Content of Coking Co*Is . 

The statement h^s been made that a certain amount of ash is necessary 
to give a. lira body to the coke. On the other hand coke manufacturersare 
very strict in their specifications ^s to the ash content of the coals they 
use'. For use in metallurgical purposes the coke must have a low ash content 
for not only is a high ash content detrimental from the point of view of 
calorific value and possible influence upon the metal smelted, but it involves 
the expenditure of additional flux to remove it as slag, as well as the extr-- 
consumption of c°rbon to provide the necessary he°t for the fusion of this slag* 

Since the coke yield is about 7*1 percent of the coal charge and all the 
ash remains in tne coal, this means that the ash content of the coke will be 
about one-third higher than that of the coal from which it was made. Although 
many of the Alberts coals produce good cokes, the asn content, in most cases, 
is from ‘8 to 11$. It would be difficult to induce the coke manufacturer to use 






















_ 


- 

' 

- 

. 






. 














* 


* 


■ 

. 








- 
















* 

- . 

. 













. 

. 

















these coals unless the ash content w ere first reduced by washing 


That the asn content of the coal affects its coking oualities is 
shown "by a comparison of the coke "buttons shown in Plate XI« A Oadomin co^l 
of about 14% ash was separated into fractions by the float and sink method*. 
Fractions 1, B, C and I) were thus obtained, having an ^sh content of 4, b„ 

IS and 2bfo respectively* A top view of the coke buttons obtained from these 
fractions is shown in Plate XI/a» r nd a side view is shown in Plate Xl/B« 


Kev to Piute 


4b - 27 

1 413 - 27 

?a - 7? 

21 - 25 


M )X -77 

1 407-27 

1 

! 2 

s 

3 

4 


5 

b 

Longview 

* Lundbreck 

Bragg Creek 

Maycroft 


Mather 

(Winnipeg 

5S,1% 

\ 5 s. 1 % 

b4.3$ 

! 

05*0% 

1 b5 /JJ 

120-25 

417B - 27 

40SB - 27 (413A - 27 


401A. - 

27 1 411- ®7 

7 

' 3 

9 

10 


11 

* 12 

Fincher ^reek!Hillcrest 7b ' 

(Hillcrest S5 j 

!Hillcrest 

S5 

Mather 

SO | Moun t a in Pk. 


!Lundbreck 25 

! Saunders 15 

Ijundbreck 15 

Pocahontas 20? 

tto.3% 

>b7.3« 

!07.9% 

b8.3$ 


0S.9-. 

09.4* 

40SA - 27 

- ]402-’ 27 

1 402A - 27 1 

| 403 - 27 



25 ! 402B - 27 

13 

* 14 

79 j 

lb 


17 

1 18 

Hillcrest 93 Hi11crest 

Hillcrest S5 ! 

Bellevue 


Oadomin 

Hillcrest 73 

Saunders 

3 

Brazeau 15 ; 

1 



< Brazeau 25 

b9 • b% 

Mj! 


72.4% 


72*4J> 

5 

407A - 27 

404 - 27 

119 - 29 1 

i 403B - 27 

404A - 

iruh 07 

19 

20 

21 | 

22 


23 

! 24 

Bellevue 

S3 *Oreenhill 

Crowsnest 

jBellevue 

73 

Greenhill S5 Oreenhill S5 

Brazeau 

151 

I ! 

!Braze»u 

75 

Brazeau 

15 Brazeau 25 

74.2% 

i74,6% 

*75.0% j 

(75.4% 




412 - 27 

1 400 - 27 ! Ill - 25 s 405 - 27 




23 

2b 

27 

2S 




Luscar 

1 Pocahontas 

Brazeau #2 

|Brazeau 




79.2* 

|gl.8t 

SI *9% 1 

[S2.b% 

, 




* In the float and sink method adopted in the Scientific and Industrial Be- 
search Laboratory, a coal samule is placed in a special container and 
covered with a liouid of sufficiently high specific gravity, so that when 
the mixture is centrifuged it is separated into a. fraction of low ash con¬ 
tent which floats and a fraction of high ash content which sinks* In the 
above tests a liouid having a specific gravity ol °bout 1*17 was used. 












































. 









L 





- b9 





















- 70 - 



■R, Horizontal view. 

PLATE X T_. Coke Buttons. Q-domin Co*l . 
























71 


From the general appearance of the four coke buttons it is nuite 
evident that the swelling power of the coal is determined to some extent by 
the ash content, as the buttons obtained from the coals of low ash content 
^re much more swollen than the 'buttons obtained from the coals of high ash 
content. The sample of coal having ash content of gave a flat non-swollen 

dark colored coke, which was somewhat fissured. The sample of 18$ ash yielded 
a flat button, still very little swollen, and still fissured, but which was 
somewhat lighter in color. The coke from the sample having b$ ash was silver- 
grey in color *nd more swollen, and indicated a good coking coal. The button 
obtained from the sample having only 4% ash was very much swollen and indicated 
a strongly coking coal* 

This indicates the advisability of washing high ash coals which are 
to be used for the production of coke. 

Tube Coking Test Results , 

The following coals and coal blends were coked in the tube test, 

TABLE V X, 


Coke Uo. 

Coal Sample No* 

, Name of Coal 

1 

408 

Saunders Ridge 

2 

413 

Lundbreck 

3 

402 X 

Kilicrest (Moisture 22$) 

4 

402 B 

Blend - Hill crest 80$, Lundbreck 20$ 

Blend - Kilicrest 90$, Lundbreck 10$ 

5 

40? A 

b 

407 

Winnipeg 

7 

411 

Mountain Park 

8 

417 

Cadomin 

9 

403 

Bellevue 

10 

402 

Kilicrest 

11 

410 A 

Blend - International #4, 90$, Lundbreck 10$ 

12 

404 

Greenhill 

13 

409 

International, # 2 seam. 

14 

410 

Internationa} # 4 seam. 

15 

412 

Luscar 

lb 

40b 

McG-illivray Creek 

17 

405 

Brazeau \ 

















- 7 ? ~ 


Tne coke and gas yields ^re given in T^Dle VII* 

Tiie coke yield varied from b3«S to S5«0 percent of the coal charged. 
Only in the case of McGillivray Creek co°l was the residue found to be non¬ 
coherent, Among tne other lb cokes formed there were a number of very good 
cokes *nd a number of rather poor ones, the poor ones being at the top and 
bottom of the range when the cokes were arranged in order of their coke yield. 

The gas yield as a rule varied from 5,5 to 7*5 cubic feet per pound 
of coal, but in the case of McG-illivray Creek coal the gas yield was exception¬ 
ally high, being 10,S cubic feet of gas per pound of co^l charged. 

The vield of condensible by-products is only approximate, and includes 
not only the weight of tar produced, but also the moisture and dust deposited 
in the tube and in the wash bottles during coking. 

As it was hoped tnat a coal from Alberta could be used to successfully 
compete against the American coal.being imported into Winnipeg for use in the 
Koppers ovens of the Winnipeg Electric Railway, it was necessary to find a 
coal which would give a coke of r s good a quality, with as high a yield 
as obtained from the sample of Winnipeg coal (407). Eor this purpose several 
blends were made using sm^ll amounts of Lundbreck coal to increase the gas 
yield of a good coking coal such as Hillcrest. The cokes produced from these 
blends were somewhat denser than that obtained irom the Winnipeg coal, but 
they were firm and well fused. The result wr* a high gas yield. 

An attempt was made to coke moist Hillcrest coal in an endeavor to 
increase the ffas yield through the production of producer gas by steaming, 
extreme c»se moisture) was taken and a nigh gas vield w^s obtained. 


An 










> 

/ 




- 








. 

. 








» 






‘ 






















. 


















































































. 







* 

■ 
































- 73 - 


TABLE VII, 

Gas and Coke Yields of Alberta Coals 
in Tube Coking Tests* 


Samnle 
_ lb 

Coke Yieldj 

of ciiarge 

Lump 

* 

1 Gas Yield 

cu*ft» -'er 

By-p c 3 - T-*r ; 

lb*! and dust 

402 

,,, 

qy 

r 

5*4 


1 5.3 

403 

To.5 | 

100 

5*9 


1 

5*5 

404 

7B.5 | 

95 

5*3 


! 5 .? 

405 

S5.0 j 

100 

5*1 


f P1 

1 * ■ 

40b 

! 

| 

bO 

5-9 


3*5 

407 

75.0 | 

91 1 

! 

[ 0.5 


1 

5.0 

4og 

1 

58.b 

s 

o ! 

1 

! 10.8 

1 


3-3 

409 ! 

78.8 J 

loo i 
j 

b.O 

f 


f 

| 3#b 

410 1 

79-5 | 

99 I 

i 

5-9 

1 


• 4*8 

411 J 

75.1 J 

97 

5.3 


5*7 

41? » 

1 

82.8 1 
! 

100 

5*5 


2*1 

417 1 

1 

b3.8 ! 

1 

100 

8*5 


- 

414 * 

7b. 1 

99 { 

5*5 

i 

5.5 

40? A ! 
1 

74.0 1 

1 

I 

100 | 

5*7 

1 

0.0 

4o? p 1 
i 

73-7 

99 1 

| 

5*8 

i 

| 

7.0 

I 

410 A j 

77.9 j 

99 [ 

b*3 


5*0 

402 7 1 

‘ i 

73-b j 

1 

99 j 

7-5 


10*3 


moisture 


c 





























^x^mi.n^tion of the Cokes. 


Each run in the tube coking test gave two identical coke cylinders, b 
to bi inches long: ^nd about 3/^ inch in diameter. These were examined and 
tested for the quality of the coke. One rod was used for the physical and 
chemical tests and the other was used for the preparation of the specimens and 
the cross-sections. 

App earance of t he Coke, 

The better cokes were silver-grey in color and uniform in appearance 
excent at the butt, which was not as thoroughly coked as the rest. In the 
case 01 the poorer coking coals the coke cylinders showed striations of 
different qualities of coke through the length of coke corresponding to each 
fifteen minutes of the coking period. In these cokes there is a tendency for 
the cylinder to break easily at a point corresponding to the coke formed during 
the last few minutes of e~oh fifteen minute interval. The surface was smooth 
in some cases, and deeply pitted with cells in other c^ses* Wo special tests 
were applied to determine the strength or the coke, but some idea of the 
toughness was obtained when the cokes were cut in the preparation of the sec¬ 
tions. The sample for analysis was obtained by cutting a three-inch piece 
from the middle of the coke cylinder and discarding the two ends. Table VIII 
gives some ide° of the quality of the cokes judged by the appearance. 

, Spec ific gra vity . 

The sarable was dried for one hour in an atmosphere of inert gas at 105 
degrees, and tne apparent specific gravity determined by weighing the sample in 
air, and then weighing it suspended in water. The weight in air divided by the 
gp-n^rent loss in weight when suspended in water gives the apparent speciiic 

gravity. 

i Tne sample was then surf°oe dried, ground to pass the bb mesh screen, 
and then dried at 10b degrees. The real specific gravity was then determined 







- 

4 


















* 




- 


■ 























■ 






* 
















. 




■ 

- 




* 


- 

- 
























- 








. 

- 




L 







75 - 


f AB L| V I T I• 

Appearance of Cokes Obtained in Tube Coking Tosts 


Sample 

No. 

Toughness 

Coherence 1 Denistv 

405 

Strong.& hard 

-1 

Well fused 

Fairly porous 

403 

Strong & hard, j 

Well fused 

Fairly porous 

404 

j 

Hard 

Well fused 

Porous 

405 

Soft 

Poorly fused 

No real pores 

40b 

No lump coke * 

' 1 

Very little 
coherence 

- 

40? ! 

Strong & hard 

Very well 

Verv large 

[ 


fused 

pores 

40S 

1 No coke 

j a 

No fusion 


j 

| 409 j 

(Fairly hard 

1 

Quite well 
! fused 

Dense 

; 4X0 

iH^rd 

1 ' i 

Fairly well 
( fused 

Dense 

411 

j Strong & hard 

jVerv well 
fused 

Verv porous 

412 

1 ■ 1 

1 Strong 

! 

1 Fairly well 
fused 

!Dense 

j 413 

|Very soft 

[Not well 
| fused 

•^ense agglo¬ 
meration 

414 

1 Strong & hard 

I 

1Well fused 
| 

(Quite porous 

402 A 

Hard 

Fairly well 
( fused 

Dense 

402 B 

Fairly hard 

(Fairly well 

1 fused 

Dense 

i 410 A 

Hard 

’Fairly well 
| fused 

Dense 

402 X 

Not very 
strong 

'Not very 
(well fused 

L — 

Verv porous 


Oj i tside surf ace 
Rough, some lumps. 

Tends to stick in tube 
Pine pores on surface 
T»nds to break easily 
Small agglomerations ^ 

! 

I Uneven norous surface 

I 

(powdered char 

! 

!Smooth surface 
Smooth surface 
!Cellular surface 

i 

!Smooth surface 

! 

iBreaks easily 
jSlips out of tube easily 
iSurface shows particles 
Smooth surface 
Smooth surface 


ee 


Good agglomeration of 
narticles 


































■ 

' 

. 
























- 7b - 


on this sample following the method adopted in the Scientific and Industrial 
Research Laboratory for the determination of the real specific gravity of 
coal. In brief, the method consists of weighing out 5 to 10 grams of the 
ground coke into a 25 cc. pyknometer, and placing the pyknometer in a dessi- 
cator, which is evacuated for two hours, the pressure dropping to -bout two 
rams, of mercury* While still under vacuum, Xylene,, of known specific gravity, 
is run into the pyknometer until the co°l is covered. The pyrometer is re¬ 
moved from the dessicator and filled up with Xylene* The stopper is then 
inserted *nd the pyknometer is placed in a thermostat at 25 ® for half an hour 
before weighing. Luring evacuation, a coal of high moisture content will lose 
moisture and a co c l oi low moisture content will take up moisture, so that a 
control experiment must be run at the same time ^nd the loss or gain in weight 
corrected for in calculating the specific gravity. The coke samples, however, 
showed no tendency to gain or lose in weight while being evacuated. 

By this method duplicate determinations of the real 'specific s-r^vitv 
of coke can be checked to three units in the third decimal place. The porosity 
of the coke is calculated from, the apparent and real specific gravities by 
the following equation* 

Porosity ~ 100 - 100 x anna rent s p* gr, 

re-1 sp. gr. 

Table IX gives the apparent specific gravity, the real specific gravity, and 
the porosity of the coke produced in the tube test* 

The volatile matter content of the coke was determined for some of the 
cokes, but as it was only slightly over one percent, ^nd practically the sane 
for -11 the samples, these determinations were not completed. 








- 77 - 


TABLE IX 


Physical Characteristics of Cokes Produced in 
Tube Coking Tests. 


Sample 

Size or Coke 

in inches f~ Specific 


Porosity 

c /a 

Ho. 

L. 

D. !H of charge Apnt. 

J 

Real 

40? 

b .125 

*745 

80 

0.924 

n 

j1.837 

49.7 

403 

b,?5 

*7b5 

84 

I .015 

11.830 
i 

44.5 

404 

b .125 

*7b5 

82 

0.9 b? 

1.8b5 1 

1 i 

48.4 

403 

o-75 

.770 

91 

0.973 

i1.87b 

1 

48.1 

40b 


' 


- 

! 

1 

1 

1 

: 

407 

b .50 j 

i .780 

89 

10.829 

! 1.8b9 

1 

55 .b 

408 

_ i 

] 

t - 
| 

1 

! 

1 

| 


i 

I ■ 

409 

b.50 

1 ,73b 

1 i 

8b 1 

I " ! 

!i .001 


1.8b4 

4o.3 

410 

b.128 1 

' | 

1.748 i 

1 ' 1 

so ! 

| ! 

[ 

|0.9b9 

1.841 

47.4 

411 

5.50 

;.75° j 

! 89 

I 0.873 

1.857 

| 1 

53.0 

412 

b.50 

•73b 

85 

O .991 

j1.852 

4b. 5 

413 

jh.875 

.715 

8b 

- 

I 

| 

1 . 

- 

414 

10.375 

j.7?5 

81 

0.8/0 


1.843 

52.8 

402 A 

'o.0o2 

| 

*732 

78 

0.935 


1.829 

48.9 

402 P 

! 0.125 

.735 

79 

|0.931 

J 1.872 

| 50.3 

410 A 

b.OO 

• 732 

77 

0.9bb 


1.84/ 

47.7 

402 X 

tL. - . 

b.00 

|— r — 

j .724 

7b 

—- 

jo. 839 


1.814 

‘ -■■■ - - - -i---' 

53.8 


Coal Column is 7 inches in length and . SX?5 inches in diameter. 













































I 





























! 







- 7b - 


Speci mens. 

A three-inch piece of coke, similar to the sample, was cut from the 
other coke cylinder for mounting °s the coke specimen. Two section? each 
one-half inch in length, were then cut from the face of the coke immedi-'telv 
adjacent to, and at the front end of, the specimen piece. The cross- 
sectional surface of one of these sections was then polished by grinding on 
a glass plate with carborundum paste. The cross-sectional surface of the 
other section was ^olisned in tne same way and the pores of the coke were 
filled with a white composition consisting of 9Sfo plaster of Paris , and 2$ 
magnesium oxide, made into a paste and applied to the surface. Alter drying, 
the surface of the filled section was again polished. This sfiectively showed 
up the dark cell walls and unfused particles against the white background of 
the cell cavities. The specimen and the two sections were then mounted on a 
plaster of Paris base, in the order of increasing coke yield. Plate III and 
Plate IV are photographs of these plaques. 

The longitudinal specimens snow very clearly the character of the coke. 

Specimen #1 was non-coherent °nd could not be mounted. Specimen #2 was very 

soft ana there was a tendency for the coke to break into short lengths. This 
coke was too soft to prepare a filled cross-section. Specimen #3 "the coke 
made from moistened Hillcrest coal. In this experiment too much water (22^) 
was added to the coal with the result that ^ny advantages derived from coking 
the moist coal was offset by the poor quality of the coke which was not well 

fused. This specimen should be compared with specimen #10 which is the usual 

coke obtained from Hillcrest coal. 

Specimens #4 and #*5 *re dense, hard cokes made from blends of Hillcrest 
and Lundbreck co*ls, the latter being added to increase the gas yield. The 
coke produced from these blends was much denser than that produced from the 














I 














X <N 





PLATE III. 


Lundoreck 
Hillcrest (moist) 
{ 80 % Hillcrest 
( 20 % Lundbreck 
(90% Hillcrest 
(10% Luncibreck 


o 6 . 6 % coke 
73- b « 

73*7 ,J 

74. b • 19 


Coke Specimens. 


b Winnipeg 

7 Mountain P^.rk 

8 Cadomin 

9 Bellevue 


75'*0% coke 

75.1 19 

7b. 1 " 
7b. 5 « 









































KEY. 

10 

11 

1 ? 

13 


P L A T 

1 1 

V. 

Coke Specimens. 



Hillcrest 

77-3% 

coke 

14 

International #4 

79*5% 

£ 

o 

c 

( 90 % 



15 

Luscar 

82.8 

It 

(, 10% Ltindbreck 

77.9 

19 

lb 

McGill ivr=y Creek 

83*5 

13 

Oreenhill 

78.3 

H 

17 


83.0 

19 

International #2 

78.8 

13 










































P L A T E 

V, 

Coke Snecimens. 

KEY. 

Coal 


%Coke 

H. 

Bellevue 


7b~.S 

I. 

Greenhill 


78.0 

J. 

International #2 


78.8 

K. 

Int e rnational #4 


79.2 

L. 

Luscar 


81,7 

M. 

McG-ill^vray Creek 


83.7 

1ST. 

Br^ae^n 


84i9 


I 
























Hillcrest coal alone, but the gas yield was appreciably increased. 

Specimens #b and #7 hard, ^nd tough, but very porous cokes* #t> is 
tne coke obtained from the coal being coked in the Winnipeg Coke ?l.*nt» 

Specimens #S, #9, #10, #11, #12, #13 and #14 ^re all. well fused hard 
cokes, Thev ^re fairly dense, but have the characteristics of good coke. 

Specimen #13 is not very well fused, while specimens #lb and #17 are 
very soft cokes. 

As the coals had been in the laboratory for about a year before these 
tests were made, it is to be expected that some of the samples would show 
the effects of weathering. Plate V is included to show the type of coke 
obtained from some of these coals, in tests which were made soon after the 
samples arrived in the laboratory. Specimens L, M and IT of the earlier 
cokes correspond to specimens 13 , lb and 17 of the later cokes respect"?vely* 
It is apparent that weathering has affected the coking qualities of these 
poorer coking coals. 

C r oss-Sect ions* 

The unprepared cross-sections in the centre row in Plates IT and V 
do not show uo very well. The cross-sections which were filled with the 
white composition, however, show up tne cell structure of the coke i°irly 
well* #1 2 , # 13 , #14 and #Ip cross-sections show that the cokes are very 
dense, and thev also show that a large number of unfused particles remain 
in the coke. On the other h^nd, cross-section #b (Winnipeg) shows that 
this coke is very r> orous, the cross-sections most nearly resembling them 
being #7 and #10, 

These filled cross-sections, before being mounted, were photographed 
under the microscope at a magnification of 7»5* These photographs snow much 
tne same thing as the plates above, but on a larger sc^le. 



























) ... 


ori ' 




■■ 



























■ ,i. 










Hi 11c resit» 

( 22 % moisture) 


4* Blend, 

Hi11crest - 80% 
Lundbreck - 20 % 



5. Blend b. Winnipeg 

Hi 11crest - 90 f* 

Lundbreck - 10fc 

PLATE V l* 


j 

i 









































1 




9. "Bellevue 


10. Will-rest 


S. Cadomin. 


7• Mountain P?rk 




































I ! 


!| 



| 

■ 

\ 





11. Blend 

International ^4 - 90% 
Ltmdt> reck - 10% 



1^. International 



12. G-reenhiil 



14. International #4 


? L A T E 


VIII. 




















* 





























, 



























. 



lb* 

P L ATE X X, 








i iLt. 
































- 67 


Plate VI shows these photo-micro graphs. 

Some oi these photographs show the very cellular structure of the coke, 
as in the case of the Winnipeg (b) and Mountain Park (7) coals, while others, 
particularly International (14) and Greenhill (12) show the l~rge number of 
uniused particles in the coke* Braaeau ( 17 ) appears to be a cellular coke, 
but it is poorly fused ~nd tends to break easily. The small light colored 
points in some of the secionts (13 & 14) are due to the reflection of light 
from the highly polished .surface of ash particles. If the ash particles were 
removed from some of these cokes the sections would have the characteristics 
of e good coke. 

Plasticity md T)ecom y >osition Tests . 

A certain amount of work was done in this laboratory using the ^nn^ratus 
described by Layng and Hat home of the University of Illinois. This work, 
wnich included a study of the effect of siting, methods of packing, and rate 
of rise in temperature, not reacted with the new apparatus, as it was 
thought that the two methods were sufficiently similar to enable one to work 
out a satisfactory method of procedure with the new apparatus from the data 
obtained with the old apparatus* 

Co al Size* 

A samnle of Bellevue coal was ground to pass tne 14-mesh sieve, and this 
was then screened into tne following sizes, through 14 ana on 28 (414 + 28), 
through 26 and on 48, through 43 and on 100, through 100 and on 200, and 
through POO. The characteristics of the plastic curves obtained with' these 
fractions are given in Table X. 

Prom this table it will be seen that the larger sizes of coal give the 
more sharoly defined plastic curves, and hence it would be desirable to use 





















88 


tne larger sizes, if the process of grinding dia not result in the loss of 
any constituent of the co^l whicn has a definite effect upon the softening 
properties of the co«l, Por example, fusain which h^s no coking ^ro^ertiee 
and which is quite friable might not he included ^n tne s=<rrrole if tne liner 
fractions were discarded. An ultimate analysis was made on each of the ^rove 
fractions to determine the carbon and hydrogen content of tne various sizes, 
line analyses were found to be so nearly constant for all. the fractions t:mt 
it was not probable that the widely different plastic curves for tne different 
fractions was in this c^se due to any difference in ultimate composition. 


T A B L E X. 


Size 

Tlnitial PJLasticity. 
®C 5 

Ma: 

°c 

- 

: 

Solic 

°c 1 

iiiication] Tyoe oi Curve 
, n rpss‘ 

A “14+28 

f ~‘ 

j 425 j 55 


1000 

745 

195 

*Sh*rn noint of initial 


j 1 





•rise in pressure. 

B -28+48 

1 41b I bO 

1 | 

lf 57b 1 

t j 

S70 

740 1 

1 

[ lt>0 

Similar to curve A 

C -48+100 

i i 

( 410 | 57 

254 

1X00 

740 j 

1 140 

I Initial rise in press. 

' 

i j 




1 

'not quite so snern 

D -100+200 

! indefinite 

f 1 

i b30 1 

! | 

,32 

! indefinite 

1 

'Irregular curve 

S -200 

! Room f 7b0 

i 420 ] 

1 1510 

f SIO 

190 

Gradual rise in ^resa. 


i 1 ' i 

i 1 

1 . 

1 


•from room temp, sharp 


1 j 

! 




1dro^ . 

F -14+200 

j ^ j I 

5&5 | 

J 9t>0 

1 , 1 

1 740 1 

1 1 

1 190 

!_ 

1 Smooth average curve 

1 


It was decided to use in the sample coal some of all the sizes passing 


the 14—mesh sieve and being retained on the 200—mesh sieve. Diiierent coals oi 
course differ in tne ease with which they resist crushing daring the grinding 


process, and so in order to have a uniformly sized sample in all te-t* th* coal 
which passed the 14-mesh sieve was screened into fractions as in the previous 
Experiment, and the fractions between the 14-mesh and the 200-mesh sieves were 
recombined in the proportion of 9 parts through 14 and on 28, b parts througn 28 


and on 48, 3 parts through 48 and on 100, and 2 parts tnrough 100 and on 200 sieves 













































. 




- 








- 





















































~ gq - 


?s it was found that this was the average proportion of e‘-'C.n si?e produced 
when a number of coals were crushed -nd screened. 

This sample gave a very smooth curve, but the initial pressure ^as 
rather high, so it was decided to discard the part of the sample passing the 
100-mesh. The fractions between the 14-mesh and the 100~mesh screens were then 
combined in the proportion 5 parts through 14 and on 28, 3 parts through 28 :nd 
on 48, and 2 parts through 48 and on 100 sieves. A sample thus prepared w-s 
used for the determination of the plastic curves and the decomposition curves 
in all subsequent work. When this mixture was used in tne new apparatus, it 
was found that the initial pressure was always about 2 mms. and that the initial 
rise of pressure waf. always.sharp for coals which soften on heating. 

M ethod of Packing the Tube. 

In the old apparatus the method of packing the tube was found to 
affect the maximum pressure obtained to a very considerable degree, but in tea 
new apparatus the method of packing was so uniform in all cases that there was 
very little v^ri^tion in the maximum pressure obtained in duplicate runs. The 
curve for the blank run (Fig. XII) using freshly ignited coke in the tube in 
place of the coal, shows that the gradually increasing temperature causes only 
a verv small increa.se in the resistance of the apparatus to the gas flow. 

Bate of Rise in Te mperatu re. 

In the early work done in this laboratory the temperature of the 
furnace was caused to rise at the rate of 10©C per minute. This comp-ratively 
rapid rate of heating caused many of the co & ls to bubble and froth, and resulted 
in a very high maximum pressure being recorded. In the later experiments the 
temper-ture of the furnace was caused to rise at the rate of per minute. 

In the case of some coals which give a very high maximum pressure it was not 
possible to obtain a complete plastic curve. Tne type of curve is, of course, 
















' 

- 




■ 






- 








j 


















, 















































■ 

' 


























dependent upon the r*te of heating and slower rates of nesting would probably 
give curves with a lower maximum Pressure. 

Results. 


Table XI gives the temperatures of initial plasticity, maximum pressure 
and solidification into coke; the maximum pressure; and the temperature of ini. 
tie! decomposition, for the laboratory samples as obtained with the new apparatus 

~s finally standardised* These points were taken from the curves shown Figure 
XT* 





1 A B L B 

X I. 



| Run 

| Coal 
j Sample 

hm~ 

Temperature in ° 0 

1 Me ximum 

* Temperature 
pf initial de~ 
corrraosi tion i n ori 

No. 

!Initial 
Plasticity 

Maximum [Solidification"" 

! Pressure * 

Pressure in 

mms. 

81 



1 

1 1 

1 

| 

- 

415 

79 

j 414 

xgj 

1 

i 


- 

410 

7b 

411 

371 

j 5^5 


1990 

400 

73 

407 

377 

j 504 | 

- 

1895 

■ 

385 

SO 

402 | 

j 

| 382 

4b 8 

* 

37S 1 

1 

* 810 

1 400 

¥7 

410 | 

! 392 

' 

R 30 

1 278 1 

| I 

i 400 

1 

87 < 
| 

1 407 1 

1 1 

389 

4b0 j 

505 

235 j 

1 

i- 380 

74] 

403 

4X8 

481 

555 

115 1 

420 

74] 

412 

405 ! 

i 

4b4 

505 

1 

b5 

415 

P 

40b 

i 

393 | 

454 j 

545 

b2 

7 40 hrw 

85 | 

408 1 

j 

No evidence 
f 

1 of softening 

! 

[ 

| 

i 

330 


Figure XI shows the plastic curves for these coals obtained by plotting 


the pressure in mms* against the temperature, in °C. The curves are plotted on 
short consecutive temperature ordinates, one inch on this ordinate representing 
50°C. The point marked 400 C refers to the ordinate used for the curve beginning 































1900 


/^oo 


1700 


/GOO 


l$00 


mo 


1300 . 


UJ 

Oc 

£ 

<*//00. 




VI 

UJ /OO0 


Uj 

?• 


900 




Plastic Curves 












































































Plastic Curves of Alberta 



— 



Legend. 


BLANK 

TUBE CLOSED TO REPRESEN 
COMPLETE PLASTICITY. 

T?UN * 81 

COAL 

SAMPLE * 404 

- - 79 

- 

- 414 

- - 76 

•* 

- 411 

•• •• 73 


- 407 

80 

- 

402 

77 

« 

- 410 

- ■ 83 


•• 403 

, 74 

- 

} - 405 

• •• 78 

- 

■412 


«-7 e- il A/ 





























































































































































































immediately before or after this ^oint. These curves represent coals renting 
from those which become completely plastic and remain so for some time, to 
those which show little or no tendency to soften on heating. 

The first curve was a. bl^nk run made with the tube sealed uo to 
represent the condition of complete plasticity, when no ots can pass through the 
co°l. Portions of the curves 81, 79 , 7 b, 73 and 80 "'re of a. similar type to 
corresponding portions of the blank curve, thus showing that these coals are 
comoletely plastic through the range of temperature in which these curves co¬ 
incide. In curves 81 and 79 there is no maximum pressure indicated, the pressure 
continuing to rise even after the pump had ceased to punp gas into the tube. The 
temperature at wnich the curves dep-rt from the blank curve toward a higher 
pressure, reoresents the temoerature at which the gases coming off from the coal 
begin to exert an appreciable 'back pressure. These two coals yielded a dense, 
hard coke. 

Curves lb and 73 are very similar to one another, having a high 
maximum oressure but still within the range of the apparatus. These runs had to 
be stoooed at the temoerature indicated on the curve, but some preliminary runs 
indicated that the pressure continued to drop fairly rapidly. These two o^le 
yielded hard but very porous cokes. Curve 73 represents the softening curve 
for the Winnipeg cbal sanrole. 

Curve 80 represents a coal which is completely plastic, but only for 
a snort time. The maximum pressure is only moderately high, and the pressure 
drops rapidly when the coal begins to solidity. This coal yielded a har^, 
fairly porous coke. 

Curves 77 and S3 are very similar and represent co*ls which do not 
become plestic to such an extent that they completely block the flow of gas. 

They soften slowly and the maximum pressure is small. Tnese co=le yield a 
fairly dense, firm coke. Curve 77 represents the softening curve for the 






International co^l (#2 seam), which was coked in the beehive ovens at Coleman. 

The next three curves 74, 78 and 75 represent coals which soften 
only slightly and the time during which they are softening is comparatively 
long. The cokes obtained from these co^ls *re soft and not well fused. Curve 
lb represents the McG-illivray Creek coal which formed a coxe whicn was only 
slightly coherent. 'The samples used in obtaining these curves were - year old 
when the tests were made. Preliminary tests made when the samples were fresh 
indicated that the maximum pressure for fresh McG-illivray Creek co°l would be 
much higher. Curve 85 represents Saunders Ridge coal which snows no tendency 
to soften on heating. 

Ini tial Decomposi tion. 

An attempt was made to correlate the temperature of initial decom¬ 
position with the temperature of initial plasticity. Figure XII shows the 
lower portions of the decomoosition curves and the lower portions of the plastic 
curves, closely associated for the sake of comparison. They are plotted on the 
same temperature ordinate and show at a. glance the relative amount of decom¬ 
position taking pl^ce while the coal is softening. The decomposition curve 
is based on the amount of gases evolved, this volume being corrected for the 
expansion of the gas in the tube due to the temperature. The blank curves were 
obtained in a. run using freshly ignited coke in the tube instead of the usual 
coal sample. 

Curves 81, 79, 7b, 73 and SO show that for coals which become com¬ 
pletely plastic, there is a negligibly sma.ll amount of decomposition taking 
place while the coals are softening. 

Rurves 77 and 8? show that decomposition is beginning to become 
noticeaoie during the time these coals are softening. 






















. 








. 

. 

’ 

♦ 













* 



























































A-Voiuwe of gas /n c.cs B-VresSURE IN finis. 


TEMPERATURES OF IMiTIAL DECOMPOSITION V INITIAL PLASTICITY 



Temperature /n Degrees Centigrade . 


L 




































































Curves* 7^- ~nd 7$ show that decomposition becomes auite rapid during 
the time tnese coals are slowlv softening. Curve 7b shows th*t for McGrillivrsy 
Creek coal the decomposition becomes very rapid before tne coal begins to 
soften. Curve shows, of course, that this coal decomposes without softening. 

The main object of tne determination of the plastic ^urve is to provide 
a quick and easy method for determining the effect of blending coals. 'Unis 
work on blending has not vet been completed. 




- So - 


SUMMARY AND COkCLU SICbfS, 

(1) A brief summary is given of the history of carbonisation. 

(2) The ehemicsl classification as related to tne coking coals has been 
studied and the Proximate and ultimate analyses ffiven for a number of Albtrt? 
coking coals. 

(3) A study has been made of tne constitution of coal in relation to car¬ 
bonisation as determined by physical structure, solubility, oxidation and 
distillation. 

(4) i r he various methods for testing coking coals have been enumerated 
and tne particular tests used in this investigation have been described in 
detail. 

(b) The tube coking test has been devised, for use in the routine -nalvsis 
of coking coals. 

(o) Seventeen samples of co tt l were coked in the tube test for this in¬ 
vestigation and the coke and gas yields calculated. 

(7) Physical tests were made on the cokes produced by the tube test to 
determine the specific gravity and the porosity. 

(8) The coke specimens were mounted and photographed. Cross-sections of 
the cokes were prepared and filled witn a white composition, ~nd -photo¬ 
micrographs of tnese were taken. 

(9) A study was made of the plastic state of coal. Tne metnods used in 
England and in the United States lor the determination of the plastic purve 
were studied *>n& apparatus was devised in txiis laboratory tor the determina¬ 
tion of the plastic curve. 

(1C) The temperature of initial plasticity, for the Alberta co-ls tested 
was found to be between 37^ sad ^0 0. 

(11) Apparatus was designed for the determination of tne temperature of 


















- 97 - 


initial decomposition and this temperature was correlated with tne temoera- 
ture of initial plasticity. 

(12) A number of Albert a co*ls were found to yield cokes of good quality 
for domestic purposes and some were found to yield cokes of good quality for 
metallurgical purposes. 

(13) The coals which yielded good cokes were found to become completely 
elastic, in a very short time after becoming plastic, and during this time 
there is no appreciable decomposition. 

(14) The coals ?/hich yielded soft, poorly fused cokes were found to soften 
slowlv and they did not become completely plastic at any time. Thiring the 
softening period these coals were found to decompose to a greater or less 
extent. 

(13) The non-coking coals did not give any indication of softening,. 







HISTORY . 

1* Landt, J.L. "Coke as a Household Fuel in Central Canada" Mines 

Branch Report #b30, 1925. 

Haslam, R. T. ^nd Russell, R. P. "Fuels and Tneir Combustion", n. o71 
3* Sperr, F. W. "American Fuels"., by Bacon and Hamor, Vol. 1, p. 1?8. 

4, Porter, H, C. "Coal Carbonisation", Chapter VTI. 

CHEMI CAL CLA SSIFlCAilOM. 

5* Sevier, C. A. "Classification of Coal", Fuel in Science *nd Practice 

1524, p. 

0 , Lewes, V. B. "Carbonisation of Coal", Carter VTI. 

7* Rose, H. J. "Selection of Coals for Making Coke", Airier. I-nst. Mining 

Sr. Metallurgical Engineers, Trans. Vol. LXXTV, p. bOO. 

8. Drakely, T. J. "Classification of Coals", Fuel, Julv I923, p. 19b. 

CONSTITUTION OF COAL AND CMBOIISATIoit 


9* 

Stopes, M. C, and Wheeler, 
1924, p. 294. 

R. V. 

"Constitution of Coal", 

Fuel, July 

10. 

Winter, H. "Physical Structure 01 

: Coal", Feb. 1928. 


11, 

Stones, M. C. and Wheeler, 
p. 104 

R. V. 

"Constitution of Coal" 

Fuel, Mch. 1934, 

12, 

Stones, M. C. and ?/heeler, 

R. V, 

"Constitution of Coal", 

Fuel, Men. 1924 

13* 

Burgess, M. J. and Wheeler, 
Fuel, Feb. 192b, p. b5* 

R. V. 

"Initial Decomposition 

of Coal", 

14, 

Burgess, M. J. and Wheeler, 
tures", Fuel, Feb. 192b, p. 

R. V, 
bo. 

"Decomposition at Different Temper?- 

15. 

Illingworth, S. R. "The Analysis 

of Coal and Its By-Products", p. 112. 


PLAST IC STATU OF COAL , 

lb. Foxswell, Gr. E. "The Plastic State of Coal", Fuel, April 1924, p. 122. 

17. Ryan, W. P. "Rate of Travel of the Fusion Zone", Fuel, April*, 192b, 

P* 150 

18. Foxswell, G-. E. "Path of Travel of Cases in tne Coke Oven" Jour. Soc. 

Chem. and Industry, Sept, lb, 1921, p. T-193* 






















) 


- 99 - 


19. 

layng, E.T. and Hathorne, W.S. "Plasticitv in Coal 11 T n d. & Eng o nem 
Feb. 1925, p. Ib 5 . * ' ynem - 

20 , 

Foxswell, G. E. ’’Plastic State 01 Coal", Xnd. A Eng. Chem. Nov. 1929 
p. llbl. 

21 . 

Foxswell, C, E. "Plastic State of Coal", Fuel, April 1924, -q* 121 . 

22 . 

Lewes, V. B. "Carbonisation of Coal", w. Ib3. 

23. 

Audibert, E. "Transient Fusion of Coal", Fuel, June 192b, n. 229. 


COKING TESTS* 


24, 

Badarau, A. and Tideswell, F. V. "Coking Power Curves", Fuel, /-aril 

1923, p. bl. 

25. 

Gray, T. "Caking Power of Coal", Fuel, March 1923 , p. 42. 

2 b* 

Quavort, S. "Classification of Coals with Special Reference to their 
Coking Properties", Fuel, 1923* 

27, 

Sperr, F. W. Jr„ "U. S.A.Patent #1,444,5b7 - Method and Apparatus ior 
Testing Materials. 

28. 

Gray, T. and King, J. G. "Carbonisation Assay", Fuel Research Bo°rd, 
Technical P^per #1, (1921) 

29, 

Fischer, F., Brocne H, and Straugh, J. "Coking Properties of Coal" 

Fuel, Oct. 192b. 

30* 

Lessing, R. "Apparatus for Coking T#ast", Fuel, June 192b, p. Ip5» 

31. 

Stansfield, E. and Porter, T. B. "Manufacture and Testing of Coke" 
in An Investigation of the Coals of Canada, Vol. 1, Part IV. 

32* 

Rose, H. J. "Selection of Coals for the Manufacture of Coke",- Amer. Inst 
Mining & Metall. Engineers, Vol. LXXIV, 192b, p. T-bll. 


■ 


33 * 

Nichol, E.W.L. "Coke and its Uses" 

34. 

Coste, J. H. and Andrews E. R. "Fuels, Gaseous, Liquid and Solid". 

35 . 

Moore E* S. "Coal" 

3b. 

Bone, W. A. "Coal and Its Scientific Uses". 

37. 

Parr, S* W. and Olin, H. L. "Coking of Coal at Low Temperatures" 
University of Illinois Bulletin #b0. 


















, 
































100 - 


Ovits, F. K» “Coking of Illinois Coals", Bureau, oi Mines Bulletin fl. 38 . 

Cofimann, A. W. ^nd T/-yng, S* T. "A Differential T^dex of the Coking 
Po?^er of Coal", Ind. A Eng. Chem., Feb. 19?8, ltoh. 

Proceedings of the ttsburgn Coal Conference, 19?o. 





'"Jr** 







