







©X MBRHS 

jmwEESJiaais 

auBtRwimB 







Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/collins1936 


JONATHAN SWIFT AND POLITICS 


BY 


RALPH EDGAR COLLINS, B*A#, 
DEPARTMENT OP ENGLISH 
UNIVERSITY OP ALBERTA 


A THESIS SUBMITTED TO THE 
UNIVERSITY OP ALBERTA 
IN COMPLETE FULFILMENT OP THE REQUIREMENTS 
FOR THE DEGREE OP MASTER OP ARTS 


UNDER THE DIRECTION OP PROFESSOR JOSEPH FISHER 


EDMONTON ALBERTA 


APRIL, 1936 














. . , 



















UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 


The undersigned hereby certify that they 


have read, and recommend to the Committee on Graduate 
Studies for acceptance, a thesis on Jonathan Swift and 
Politick, submitted by Ralph Edgar Collins, B.A. , in 
complete fulfilment of the requirements for the degree 
of Master of Arts. 


Professor 


^ » i<C r l 


Professor 



Professor 


Professor 




























, 

, 

, . . 













. 


















































ACCTOWEE DGSMBITTS 


I wish to take this opportunity to thank 
Professor Joseph Fisher, under whose direction the 
work was carried out, for the valuable criticisms 
and suggestions which he has given throughout my 
study of this subject. 


I am also greatly indebted to the Carnegie 
Trust Fund, by which this study was made possible 


for me 
































TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Section I : introduction 

1 • The Partisan Atmosphere of England under -Anne.1 

2. Literature and Politics. ..... .9 

3. The Elevation of the Author ....27 

Section II : The Political Career 

Chapter I : The Governing Factors . ..39 

Chapter II: England - Trial and Error .50 

1. Moor Park 1689-99. ....50 

2. Uncertainty.....64 

3. First Fruits and the Test - ................ 79 

The Whigs vs. The Church 1704-10. 

Chapter III: Minister of Propaganda 1710-14 ..........95 

Chapter IV : Ireland - Mending the World....143 

1. Retrospect ......143 

2. Nostra Miseria Magnus Es .....156 

3. The Drapier.....170 

4. The Irish Bishops....180 

Section III : Gullivers Travels 

1. The Puppet-Show of Memory......................184 

2. Remedies .. ...195 

3. Despair »...........198 















































TABLE OP CONTENTS 


Section IV : Concluding Remarks 

1. Some Aspects of Swift’s Thiridng. ••..209 

2. The Technique of Propaganda...213 

Bibliography . ......222 



















: 

- . 

. 





















1 


SECTION I 
INTRODUCTION * 

1* The Partisan Atmosphere of England under Anne * 

"I wish you had been here for ten days", writes Swift 
to the Kev. William f isdall from London in 1703, "during 
the highest and warmest reign of party and faction, that I 
ever knew or read of, upon the Bill against Occasional Con¬ 
formity.It was so universal, that I observed the dogs 

in the streets much more contumelious and quarrelsome than 
usual; and the very night before the bill went up, a comm¬ 
ittee of Whig and lory cats, had a warm and loud debate 

upon the roof of our house.The very ladies are split 

asunder into nigh Church and Low, and out of zeal for rel¬ 
igion, have hardly time to say their prayers," 

Such was England under Anne, riddled from top to 
bottom by the strife of party against party, faction against 
faction, scarcely an aspect of thought or action was left 


(1) Correspondence I. 38 (Dec. 16, 1703) 



















2 . 


untouched by this spirit of partisanship which had been 
growing in force and influence since the inception of 
"Whig" and "Tory" in the struggles of 1680, after the brief 
respite of the restoration. In all its pursuits, from 
philosophy and religion to the boudoir and the bottle, 
mankind fell into the categories of Whig and Tory, High 
Church and Low. One thing that made for this permeation 
of party influence was the very fact that it was chiefly - 
for the ordinary man at least - sectarian and religious at 
the outset, with the result that party struggles became 
the interest of everyone who had a religion he felt worthy 
of defence. 

One realm of thought alone remained above the smoke 
of battle - science. Since the foundation of the Hoyal 
Academy in 1662 it had pursued its course serenely indiff¬ 
erent to the feuds beneath, and contributed men like Boyle 
and Newton to Bngland*s roll of honour. But if the scient¬ 
ist remained neutral in the spirit, he could not continue 
so in affairs of daily life. Lewton contributed to the 
religious controversy of the time; he was active in the 
cause of Cambridge liberties against the incursion of 
James II; he even stood for election as a Whig in 1705, re¬ 
ceiving from his university the lowest vote in the poll. 






3 , 


The same is true of the scientific profession of medicine. 
-Although we may asnme that the illustrious Physicians in 
Ordinary to the Queen applied their remedies according to 
the rules of science and not of party, they too were div¬ 
ided among themselves even as the nation. Blackmore and 
Garth, the Whig wit who M deserted Aesculapius for Apollo", 
aided, their party with their pens 1 - 1 \ while Arbuthnot, 
friend of swift and his Tory circle, defended the Oxford 
ministry's peace of Ctrecht in the captivating allegory of 
John Bull . 

If science remained aloof, the same cannot be said of 
philosophy, history, or economics. Hobbes had served as 
the bible of royalism in the court of Charles. How Locke 
in his "Assays of Civil Government”* 2 ) provided the polit¬ 
icians with a theoretical analysis which was in effect ”a 
glorified version of the ^evolution settlement, as seen 

through Whig glasses."* 3) Clarendon had viewed the 
rebellion from within the precincts of the restoration 
court; now Burnet wrote the History of his Own Time as a 
Whig bishop, and the abortive efforts of swift as an hist- 

41) Garth contributed to Maynwsring 1 s Medley , which 
attacked the Hierh Churchmen. 

(2) Published 1690 

4 3) Bsmd Wingfield-Stratford, History of British civiliza ¬ 
tion II, 630. 

























































4 


orianwere mainly apologias for the Oxford ministry.*^ The 
Tory Dean annotated the works of the Whig Bishop with the 
term "Dog", and Whig historians have tended ever since to 
perform the same service in a milder way for Swift. In 
economic thought, scientific objectivity was yet to he 
horn with Hume and Adam smith. Meanwhile the mercantilist 
balance of trade theories had received an added impetus as 
a reason for protection against Eranee, the bogey of the 
Whigs, while "it is clear that the Tory'writers on irade, 
however sensible we may suppose them, could hardly fail to 
have a partisan bias in favour of liberty of commerce, and 
that, however clearsighted they may have been, they were 
likely to have their insight sharpened by party prejudice 7 1 
And when such matters acted as an inspiration for party 
poets, the result was disastrous. We ow*e the line 
”0 property, 0 Goddess English born" 
to the celebration by Ambrose Philips of the rise in stocks 
after the fall of the lories and the Accession of George I. 

The Church, bound up as it was with the political 
wheel, revolved inevitably with it, and the prelates became 
politicians. After William had come to England, as a result 

tl) Bee "History of the Hour last xears of the neign of 
Queen Anne" I Works X 18-191) Swift tried in 1714 to 
obtain the post of Historiographer Hoyal on the death 
of Ihomas itymer. It is well to remember the scholarly 

labours of itymer embodied in his massive Eoedera as 
another example of work untouched by party - "Influences. 
(2) Ashley: Surveys historic and economic - 271 {±ory Eree 
.trade) ~ 




























. 













. 



5 


of the popular reaction against the affair of the Seven 
Bishops, five of these and one other, with about four hun¬ 
dred of the clergy, stood by their principles of non-resist¬ 
ance and refused to take the oaths, ihe new king replaced 
them with Whig prelates like Burnet (bishop of Salisbury) 
who were essentially out of sympathy with the lower clergy; 
Tillotson was made -Archbishop of Canterbury, to be replaced 
by -lenison in 1694. Ihe rapid changes caused by these 
and other appointments resulted in a sharp division between 
the low-church bishops and high-church clergy, so that 
when Convocation was revived in 1700 there began a period 
of dissension within the ranks of the Church which greatly 
aggravated the political divisions in parliament and 
nation. A similar situation in Ireland resulted from 

the government appointments under Hanover, and goaded Swift 
into such tirades as 

And who is this bishop? and where does he dv/eil? 

Why, truly *t is Satan, archbishop of fiell.*^ 

So despite the zeal of Anne and her honest adviser Sharpe, 

Archbishop of xork Ilenison was under the influence of 

Somers and the Junto ) ? the road to preferment and Lambeth 

__ 

11) vx. H, Clark Later Stuarts 151; J. m, Roberts on 
Bolingbroke and Walpole 48 (note £). 
t£) See Swift Examiner s, passim. (Works, 1JL) 

(3) British Poets (1822) vol. 38 p. 167. 






























6 


■became the road of party politics. Secheverell, Atterbury, 
and Drake ^ ^ attacked the Whigs with sermon and tract 
during the early years of the reign. Despite the resistance 
of the Queen* Lord Chancellor Harcourt succeeded in promot¬ 
ing Atterhury to a bishopric in the interests of party ^ 
and was made head of Christ Church, Oxford. (Cambridge was 
in the shade at this period* being dominated by Whigs like 
Bentley). A political crisis was caused in 1707* during 
the Whig ascendency, by Anne T s appointment of Tories to 
the sees of Exeter and Chester and was only averted by two 
Whig appointments in compensation. j n August 1711* 

Robinson* bishop of Bristol* was made Lord Privy Seal* and 
Swift notes with glee that "The Whigs will fret to death to 
see a civil appointment given to a clergyman*. But the 

day of compensation was to come under the Georges* as it 
had come once before with William. Trelawney, Wake* and 
Blackburne were bishop, dean, and subdean of Exeter, a Tory i 
see. In the elections of 1705 they bolted to the enemy; 
their rewards came then and later* Trelawney holding the 
rich bishopric of Winchester by 1707, the others becoming 

(l) Published the .Memorial of the Church of England 
anonymously, 17D4. 

(E) Firth Swift and Ecclesiastica l Preferment , (Review of 
English - S~tud'ie's* Jan. 19E6) 

(3) G. M. Trevelyan England under Queen Anne » II 3E0 

(4) Works II, S33. 






























. 

T 











, 


























7 


archbishops of Canterbury and York respectively under the 
Whig aegis of Hanover. ^ Speaking generally, politics 
had invaded the pulpit, and as early as 1703 the Archbishop 
of York protested vigorously against their "practising in 
state matters". It is to this tendency that we owe one of 
the best puns on record. Daniel Burgess, later bishop of 
Ely, asserted in a Sunday discourse that the Hebrews were 
called Israelites because "God ever hated Jacobites". 

If high politics occupied pulpit and study, party div¬ 
isions were no less characteristic of the man on the street. 
There were "sides" in the playhouse and the opera, coffee 
houses were hot with discussion, and "our streets", says 
Steele, "swarm with politicians; there is scarce a shop 
which is not held by a statesman". Even the footmen 

imitated their betters as they waited outside Westminster, 
with parliamentary debates and an elected Speaker. 

The spirit of these controversies was moreover of a 
rather low order, a spirit of violence and faction not 
centering around high issues but more the result of a crass 
pursuit of wealth and power by the mighty of the land. On 
this point opinion then and now is in perfect accord. 

(1) Trevelyan (op. cit. ) II, 30. 

(2) Sichel Bolingbroke and His Times 12£, 124. 

(3) Tatler So. 160 (cited, Sichel) 













8 


"The two parties"* wrote Bolingbroke, "were in truth be¬ 
come factions, in the strict sense of the word. I was of 
one and I own the guilt; which no man of the other would 
have a good grace to deny". ^ In modern times* similarly* 
Wingfield-Stratford writes: "The politics of Queen .Anne’s 
reign form a sordid prelude to a sordid epoch. To talk 
seriously of either Tory or Whig principles gets more and 
more difficult as time goes on....... [they] are not parties 

but factions in the worst sense". ^ 1 2 ) 

So it is hardly to be wondered at that the literature 
of this era should have fallen under the universal spell* 
or that young Jonathan Swift, a moralist with a genius for 
placing proper words in proper places, a cleric with a 
social viewpoint and worldly ambitions, who had been formed 
socially and intellectually during a ten years’ association 
with one of the most honourable statesmen of the preceding 
age* should have gravitated to the political arena like a 
steel blade to a magnet. By the end of Walpole’s reign, 
when the Opposition had to write their own pamphlets to get 
a hearing and the Ministry seemed to attract to its cause 
none but mercenary hacks. Swift would probably have vented 


(1) "Of the State of Parties". ( Works XI, £38, London 1749) 

(2) History of British Civilization . 11,646. 



































9 


his moral indignation not as the prop or lash of party hut 
through the medium of The Kambler , and The Bee . And we 
may conjecture that its title would have been The Wasp * 
Yet, however dirty may have been the sand on the floor of 
the arena wherein contested the fiery penmen under Anne, 
it would have been partly owing to the very factiousness 
of the era which ended with her that his Wasp would have 
had a public and a form. 


2. Literature and Politics . 

Literature, under Anne, was more than affected by the 
feuds in St. Stephen*s Chapel. It had, especially the 
pamphlet and press, become tf the very life blood of polities?*. 
'l^And in order to understand the reason for this as well 
as for the status of the man of letters at this time, it is 
necessary to trace the development since 1680 of the var- 

( p) 

ious kinds of propaganda mobilized in the party war. 

The theatre, the coffee-house and news-letter, pamphlets 
and tracts in verse and prose, the country pulpit, and the 

(1) Trevelyan, III, 100. 

(2) The greater part of the following is taken from Beljame, 
Le Public et les Hommes de lettres en Angleterre au 

ftix-HuitiSme Sikcle 1660-1*744 ( Paris» nachette 1885) 

Sources for other material will be noted. 

















. 











f 














10 . 


press all had their days of supremacy in this development, 
and all in some form and to a greater or less degree were 
utilized by Swift in his life-work of "setting three king¬ 
doms aflame". 

The press was the oldest,in time, but the latest in 

becoming an effective weapon, so we shall leave it to the 

end. The drama was the first in chronological importance. 

Perhaps the earliest attempt so to use the stage in England 

was in the Elizabethan days when Essex planned to work on 

the sympathies of the London mob with a presentation of 

Richard II . At any rate, when the Court of Charles II 

found itself in 1679-80 facing an angry city roused by 

Titus Oates and the Popish Plot, and an Exclusion Bill in 

Parliament pushed with vigour by the oratorical feats of 

Shaftesbury, the dramatists, dependent upon the Court, came 

immediately to its aid with the most popular literary form 

of the day. Titles suddenly changed; allusions to amorous 

intrigue or the butts of fashion gave way to the newer mode, 

in such plays as Sir Barnaby OThigg and The Royalist by 
and 

D’Urfey./ The Loyal Brother or the Persian Prince by Otway. 
Shakespeare was harnessed, and Crowne revamped henry VI , 

Part XI under the title The Misery of Civil ^ar ' x The 


!l) See Bel fame's list, pp. 151,2. 

















, 

. 










. 





11 


city party tried tentatively to strike "back through Shad- 
well and Settle and Crowne, bothered hy his puritan 
conscience, followed up with henry VI Part I . having this 
time added 

What to please you gives better hope 

t 3) 

A little vinegar against the hope. 

It was soon suppressed, The Whig writers were limited thus 
to general allusions to Papacy, and despite the fact that 
the turns and twists of party fortune were dealt with to 
some extent In most of the prologues and epilogues of the 
clay and that the stage continued to be used for propa¬ 
ganda, as in l>ryden T s opera Albion and Albanius 11685), it 
never proved adequate to the task of effectively swaying 
public opinion, ihe theatre was a court monopoly, speak¬ 
ing in the main to an already convinced court audience. 
Moreover the new interests w'ere lessening Its at tract ion^ 
and its references were by nature too general. 

Meanwhile the parties were finding the coffee-houses 
in the City and the new?s-letter for the country more effect - 

(1) The Lancashire Fitches and league O r Divelly the Irish 
Priest t played 1681) ~~ — 

( E) TKe~j-emale Prelate 
< 3) Prologue 

(4) Monmouth's Rebellion was commemorated by l) f Urfey having 
the prologue to his Commonwealth of 'omen (1686) spoken 

by an actor "with a Western Scyth in his hand”. 


























4 

. 

- 

.r- , i n 

. T 






. 


. 





































12 


ive political agents, Ihey served to bind together and 
provide a meeting place for the hitherto scattered and ind¬ 
ividual knots of public opinion that had not as yet been 
united by the press* Each class and section of thepopula- 
of London had its coffee-house, which as an ideal place for 
uncensored discussion soon began to take on the aspect of 
a political club, ihe news-letter to the country had the 
same advantage of escaping censorship, and the other func¬ 
tion of the coffee-house was in part performed by the 
country clergy and the illegal conventicle. Ihe country 
pulpit soon became the chief influence in the counties, and 
served to keep England outside London largely lory in its 
loyalties, ihe dissenting clergy, on the other hand, worked 
mainly through the continuous publication of sermons and 
tracts, wherein their energy and zeal were enormous, These 
were to become most important in the short reign of James 
II, and constituted an underground agitation that was pre¬ 
paring the way among the readers who had bought eight 
editions of the Pilgrims Progress in four years while it was 
unknov/n within the circles of the Court. 

But most important of all w/as the happy discovery by 


(l) The most important dissenting divines - Owen,' Eowe and 
Calamy, published 35, 25, and over 80 volumes respect¬ 
ively. 







































































r 13 

Dryden and Charles II of the political pamphlet in verse. 

On November 17, 1681, Dryden published his Absalom and 
Achitophel . which by nature of its biblical allegory forced 
itself upon the puritans, turning their own weapons against 
them, and by its satirical and polished quality was an 
immediate success at court, Johnson*s father * ^ said 
that he had never seen a greater sale save perhaps that of 
the Judgement against Saeheverell in 1710, Its form was 
exactly suited to coffee-house and news-letter distribution 
and served as the text for many a country sermon. The 
reaction - from the pens of Settle, Buckingham, and Care - 
demonstrated the power of this new form of propaganda, and 
established the political value of poetry, ihev king called 
for more, and Dryden produced xhe Medal (against Shaftes¬ 
bury), Mac j-lecknoe . part of Absalom and Achitophel, Fart 
Di (against Shadwell and Settle) and finally the ^eliglo 
Laici . opening the doors of the Church to all who would 
enter. 

Dryden thus established the political value of poetry 
in a form of his own creation, and the controversial poem 
and pamphlet became the chief mediums of propaganda owing 
to the decline of the theatre to a rank of secondary import¬ 
ance and the embryonic nature of the press, 

(1 ) Life of Dryden 


With the aid 













































14 


of the Anglican clergy he won the day for royalism, and 
when his land Lee’s) Luke of Pulse called forth a flood 
of answering poems and reflections in 1683, the result 
indicated the extent of the victory. Lryden replied in 
a lengthy vindication and ihomas hunt fled to Holland, 
while Shadwell was forced to cease writing plays hy his 
unpopularity during the following "worst of times". 

The rye House Plot of the seme year completed the stamped¬ 
ing of opinion against the Whigs, and Charles concluded 
his reign in triumph. 

With the accession of James II, however, came the 

i 4) 

eclipse of Lryden and the heyday of the prose tract. 

The reason was two-fold: the shifting of the battle from 
propaganda to the enemy*s ground of serious theological 
argument, and the altered calibre of the opposition, re¬ 
sulting from the flight of the Church from the royalist 
camp. The great Anglican divines like Til lot son, Prideaux, 
Burnet, and Atterbury turned the weapons forged by Lryden 
against him with telling effect. The most important men 

(1) Author of A Defense of the Charter and Municipal rights 
of the City of London. 

( 2) Borne reflections upon The Pretended Parallel in the 

±Tay called the Luke of unise. 

*3) Between 1681 \ Cbanc ash ire Witches ) and 1688 \ Squire of 
Alsatia ). xory ascendancy was always for the Puritans 
’The worst of times" iSee Swift 
as in 1610-14. 

14) Macaulay and Beldame attes 
Qf controversial'material 
m the libraries . 


to 

rom 


the existence of £0,000pp 
thisperiod preserve’s 















. 




























, 



, 
























. 













. 


















of the opposition were stillingfleet and Halifax, "the 
great tractarian"•^^ Lryden was ordered to answer Still- 
ingfleet's attacks against Catholicism and did so with 
A Defence of the Papers Written hy the Late King of Blessed 

Memory 11686). Hut the theologian easily had the last word 
against the poet. xhe seme year Dryden essayed to repeat 
his easy victories of yore with xhe Hind and the Panther } 
but despite the becking of the royal press and diligent 
distribution^its effect was destroyed by the simple device 
of Montagne and Prior's xhe Country-Mouse and xhe City - 
Mouse which merely ridiculed the ineptitude of Lryden's 
allegory - and incidentally founded the political fortunes 
of its authors. Halifax, placed with Swift and Burke among 
the greatest and most effective of political tractarians, 
and partly responsible for the "bloodless revolution 1 , * 
wrote during this period his Character of a Trimmer . xhe 
An a tomy of an Houivalent . and the Better to a idssenter r *^' 
The last of these was hawked in the streets of London on 
the eve of the Petition of the seven Bishops against James 1 

11) Herbert Paul men of Letters pp. 209-240 
(2) bee Herbert Paul,op cit. 

13) The last tv;o were designed to warn the dissenters from 
joining with ^ames against the Constitution, at the 
persuation of William Penn. 






























io 


Declaration of Indulgence, and had an enormous sale. The 
opposition had won, and the twenty odd replies went for 
nought, i/ryden celebrated the birth of "James III" with 
Brittania Rediviva , but five months later William had 
landed and the father fled to the tune of "Lillibulero". 

Meanwhile was being forged the weapon destined to be 


the most important of all, the popular press. Pamphleteer - 
ing goes as far back as the theological controversies of 

u) 


Elizabethan days which produced Martin Mar-Prelate . 
{ 2 ) 


ihe press owed its first lease of life to the similar 
controversies of the .Rebellion, ihere had been Oorantos , 
meagre translations of foreign news, since 1622. But the 
civil turmoils stimulated the publication of news, so that 
there were more than a hundred of these irregular brief 
sheets between 1640 and. 1649, and eighty odd more from then 
till 1660. xhe chief product was the brood of voilen% 
partisan Mercuries starting with the Mercurius Givicus <1643 


and ending with the Mercurius Anti-Mercurius which offered 


to do battle with all its brethren. But the Restoration 
cut short this deluge of papers by means of censorship and 


il) "That scurrilous libel" i swift; see w orks IV, 32, n.l) 
(2) 3?or the histor?/ of the newspaper Bel lame has been supp¬ 
lemented from w. P. Trent's Defoe - the Newspaper and 
the novel (Cambridge History of English literature, 

VIII, Chap. I.) 




































, 




♦ 






. 


, _ 




















. 















. 







. 


. 


. . 

















the royal monopoly of "authorized" news, beginning with the 
Kingdoms Intelligencer in 1661, and established in The Ox ¬ 
ford Gazette (later The London Gazette ) which appeared in 
November 1665. The only otheiscountenaced were harmless bits 
of news or fantasy. Nevertheless the puritan pen could 
not be completely tied, and the excitement over the Popish- 
Plot gave rise to a number of Intelligencers and Mercuries 
in the old manner, and to Henry Care's Weekly Pacquet of 
Advice from Home (1679-83). The Gazette was useless at 
this juncture, and Roger L'Estrange, who had suffered for 
the crown during its days of defeat, had served it since as 
censor and pamphleteer, and was in Holland as a result of 
the animosity aroused by his attacks against Cates, returned 
in 1681 to take up the Royalist cudgel against Care in the 
form of an Observator: In Question and Answer *^ The 
first answer was: "Come, come; *Tis the Press that has made 
T um Mad, and the Press must set 'urn Right again". 

But the press had as yet no great audience, and it 
remained for Pryden and poetry to really turn the trick. 

Two reasons for this were the inspid nature of the 
official Gazette and the tendency of censorship to restrict 
s contraband press to the violence of fanatics or the 

fl) 1681-1687. Three to four issues per week. 

























I 












I 


I 









level of hacks - the "underworld” of Grubstreet. With 
William all this began to change. In 1695 occurred the 
most important event in the life of the newsprint and pol¬ 
itical periodical, the lapsing of the licensing Act, and 
by May 14 the public was in possession of Harris \ Intell ¬ 
igence Domestick and Foreign . Among those which soon 
followed were The Flying Post by Ridpath, a Whig Pit. 

Post Man ? and Abel Roper ‘s Tory Post Boy . But they were 
still single sheets of poorly printed news items, and the 
little discussion of political issues was still wary, for 
they did not wish to test the humour of the magistrates in 
order to find by experience how much could now be said. 

This deficiency was as of old partially supplied by the News- 

( p) 

Letters, especially those of Dyer 1 2 and Lawks - the latter 
printed in italics with space left for writing. Finally 
in the month of William’s death, March 1702, appeared The 
Laily Pourant , the first English journal in the strict sense 
of the word* 

The result of this new freedom was that the way was 
prepared for the establishment under Anne of journalism 
(and its important auxiliary the pamphlet) as the chief 

(1) Began as a Hews-Letter and soon became a regular period¬ 
ical. 

(2) Famous for his "partisan mendocity" (W.p, Trent op.cit.) 




























. 




















and legitimate medium of political discussion, gradually 
releasing other branches of literature from that service. 

It also opened the press to the first rank of writers, and 
in the heat of party under Anne was patronised by the most 
illustrious - Addison ^ , Steele Atterbury, Prior, 

and Bolingbroke Most important of all was the "terrible 

pen" of Swift, whose Examiner kept opinion behind Harley's 
Tory Government, and like Dryden's Absalom was read from 
the pulpit throughout the kingdom. The chief reason for 
the growth and improvement of the press under Anne was its 
immense political importance. "The Glorious Revolution" 
had been founded on popular Tory opinion led by the great 
Whig oligarchs. When the crisis had past that opinion be¬ 
gan to waver, and many an English churchman had pangs of 
conscience in his efforts to reconcile divine right with 
William. So the new dispensation, founded on public opin¬ 
ion, had to he maintained on the same basis, and propaganda 
became vastly important both for this and as a mouthpiece 
of the enemies of the Settlement. The press became the 
life-blood of politics because it was the only means of 
access to the public in a time when Parliamentary reporting 

(l) Whig Examiner, Medley, Guardian, Free Bolder, Old Whig 
(£) Medley, Guardian, Englishman, Old Whig, 

(3) Examiner. Bolingbroke with Pulteney wrote the Crafts ¬ 
man vs. Walpole under Hanover. 



























I 











. 




. 




00 

was strictly prohibited - and with the press may be included 
all the other literary mediums at the beck and call of party. 
Another reason for this importance was the power of 
a particular section of public opinion - the London mob. 

It was powerful, violent, and fickle, and had demonstrated 
its potentialities with no uncertainty at the call of 
Titus Oates. Luring our period it was swayed alternately 
by the cries of "ITo Popery" and "Church in Langer". When 
Lefoe was imprisoned for his Shortest way with The Lis sent - 
ers , he went to Hewgate amid the furious peering of his 
fellow non-conformists. Yet such was the effect of his 
Hymn to the Pillory that his three days 1 stand in the 
streets of London turned, to the chagrin of government and 
High Church, into a triumphal march. It was the mob that 
backed Sacheverell in the Tory turnover of 1710, and it was 
the mob which was to "call halt to Walpole at the height 
of his power", to defeat the Act against gin, and indulge 
in a wave of anti-semitism in 1753. Its power was not 
broken until 1768, when the government at last determined 
to use the red-coats against it in the riots supporting 
the ousted Wilkes il). Consequently whoever had influence 
over this Hydra, ballad-maker or pamphleteer, was important 


(l) Wingfield-Stratford f History of British Civilization ; 
II, 700-4. 

























, 


















































-;21 


to any government ^ K And this is hut an aspect of what 
one might almost call the local or "town-council Tf nature of 
Parliament at this time, as contrasted with the awesome and 
elevated body which governs the Empire from Westminster to¬ 
day. It is with a sense of unfamiliarity, for example, that 
we picture Daniel Defoe, tile manufacturer and popular writer 
riding up to Commons in May 1701 with his Legions Memorial 

II 

in which he roundly thrashes the Members for everything from 
finance to morality in the name of London, and forcing that 
assembly to recognise the Eentish Petition and reverse its 


decision against granting William the necessary military 
power to carry out his European schemes 1 

The increasing importance of the press to politics 
and ministers of state from 1702-14, and the concomitant 
change in the calibre of its writers,may be best illustrated I 
from the examples of three men: William Pitt is " ; , Defoe, 

and Swift. Tutchin*s Observator . the chief Whig political 

organ of the period, began on April 1, 1702, following 

Cl) As Walpole found when Swift commenced" his masterly in- 

citements to resistance as tT the Drapier". 

(2) Legions Memorial and History of the Kentish Petition 
in later Stuart Tracts f Aitken;’pp. 155.204! 

( 3) T.F.M. Hewton; “ William Pittis and Queen Anne Journal¬ 
ism ( Modern Philology . fovT 1935) ~ ~ — 

T4) The” chief political journals of Anne's reign fall into 
two groups. Those founded before the Tory period (1710-14) 
are: The Observator (Whig 1702-12); The Rehearsal (Tory, 
by the Jacobite Leslie, 1704-9); The Peview (Moderate, by 
Defoe, 1704-13) and a group of lesser Tory papers called 
forth in 1704-5 like Pittis* Whipping Post and Led Ward's 



































n ■"> 


the title and form though reversing the politics of L'Estram 
Its chief opponent was to he Leslie's The Rehearsal hut 
there had been a paper contemporary with L T Est range's called 
Heraclitus Riders , a dialogue between Jest and Earnest, and 
this was revived in 1703-4 by one of the underworld of 
letters, William Pitt is, a Jacobite. Libel action was 
threatened with the result that he ceased publication. But 
when the government in 1704-5 began to move from High Tory 
to Whiggish Moderatism, a number of angry Tory papers 
appeared, and among them The Whipping Post at a new session 
of Oyer and Terminer for the Scriblers (June-HOvember 1705) 
in which Pitt is brought all his weekly brethren to mock 
trial, being particularly severe with the Whigs. He also 
indulged in several separate reflections in prose and verse 


(4) -continued- 

pandering Spy . The Tory Examiner was begun Aug. 3, 1730, 
lasting under Swift and then Oldisvorth till the end of the 
reign. Answering papers were The Whig Examiner (Addison 
Sept.-Oct. 1710, 5 issues) and' The Medley IMaynwairing; 
founded for the sole purpose of answering the Examiner and 
publishing or ceasing with it). Besides these there were 
Boyer's Political State of Orest Britain (monthly 1711, 2 
or 3 issues), such papers as Steele's Guardian and English¬ 
man (1713-14), and the two short lived periodicals brought 
forth to argue the merits of Boligbroke's Commerce Treaty 
with France in 1713. (Defoe's Mercator, or Commerce Re¬ 
trieved and the answering Whig British Merchant subsidized 
by the moneyed interests and successful in quashing the 
Treaty.) 



























against the Government with the upshot that he wrote him¬ 
self to Bewgate and the "hieroglyphic state machine" where 
he stood abashed on high by April 1706. 

Meanwhile the career of Defoe had been moving apace, 
and he suffered the like honour for similar reasons three 
years previously. By now however he had been rescued 
by Harley, Secretary of State, had begun Ihe heview in the 
interest of his benefactor*s increasingly Moderate policy 
of riding on and between both party horses, and had been 
employed by him on various missions throughout the country. 
Bow Harley had started as a Whig but had soon gone over to 
the Tories and was considered one of them at the beginning 
of the reign. At that time he probably employed Pitti© 
much as he was now employing Defoe. At any rate he had 
promised to get the "Whipster" out of his difficulties in 
1706. But the situation had changed; he was now possessed 
of a literary henchman far above the calibre of this early 
u-rubstreeter, one who had a knack of a'ppealing to the ord¬ 
inary bourgeois public by a conscious blunt artlessness of 
prose ^^ and whose Moderate Whig viewpoint was much less 
embarrassing to a politician wishing to run along with an 

(1) "He was the first literary artist to make a virtue of 

his lack of art.even a suggestion of polish would 

have destroyed the effect". D. E. Cole, Politics 

and Literature , p. 80) 

























■ 

. 

. 


. 

, i 

. 

t 









o I 
fs&rji; 

increasingly ?Thig house than Pittis* pugnacious high-flying. 
It would not do in 1706 to he associated with such an one, 
and he who had picked Defoe out of Newgate with the aid of 
the Lord Treasurer and the Queen's purse, dropped Pitt is in¬ 
to the same unpleasant building and left him there. The 
top-gallant Tories were for the time out of control, and 
Harley wished to enjoy the sunshine of his trimming policy 
undisturbed, listening to The review exhorting all and 
sundry to study PAkTY-PEACE, and piping the tune "that 
Patriots are our Courtiers, the Prince's favourites are 
the People’s favourites’’.^^ 

The sunshine of Party-Peace however did not last in the 
foggy London atmosphere and in 1708 the juggernaut of the 
Junto pushed Harley into temporary darkness, though Defoe 
continued his Heview? and his services. The politician had 
learned his lesson of the importance of the press, and of 
the value of quality. Consequently when he came into the 
bright light again in 1710 as leader of a determinedly Tory 
England, he bound to his interests not an "artless" trades¬ 
man whom he netted by unlocking the doors of prison, but 
an exceedingly artful clergyman whose pen was already the 

Cl) Preface to the Second Volume of The Heview . 1706 ( Later 
Stuart Tracts. 228.229) 













# 

. 

. 















, 

, 

f 

. 

. 





. 




, 





. 












terror ana the boon of politicians who could sway the 

powers and the intelligentsia as well as the shopkeepers 
and the mob, end who could only be enmeshed by the offer 
of services to his Church and a companionship as of equals 
at club and table. Swift*s Examiner and pamphlets were the 
result, and it was the best thing that Harley did for his 
party. "The writings of Swift alone rendered greater ser¬ 
vice to the Tories than all the political refinements of 
Harley and the eloquent orations of Bolingbroke." ' 

Other forms of literature however were not by any 
means entirely superseded as party weapons by the stream 
of pamphlets and periodicals - really at this time pamphlets 

( rz ) 

in series - which swelled to a flood in the years 1710-14 
The drama was a rather dead issue by now, and faction had 
transferred its activities to the politically harmless 
rivalries between British Tofts and The Tawny Tuscan at the 


(1) Bolingbroke told Swift that they were determined to 
have him; he was the only man they feared. 

12) Beljame, 350. Bee also Trevelyan, op. cit II, 393: "If 
they Cthe Whigs! had either held their promise or eng¬ 
aged him as a pamphleteer on suitable terms, the hist¬ 
ory of English literature might have been different." 

13) "the pamphlets and half sheets grow so upon our hands, 
it might very well employ a man every day from morning 
till night to read them". 1 Swift, Sept. 26, 1710; Gorres 
I p. 199). Bolingbroke r s Stamp Tax in 1712 killed many, 
but the waters by no means receded. 













26 


opera house. Yet in 1703 Pittis had utilized the Restora¬ 
tion device of the prologue and epilogue to flay the Observ- 
ator, assisted by the Jacobite actor Powell. And every¬ 

one knows the story of how Addison's Cato became the play of 
the hour in 1713, contested for by both Whigs and Tories. 

In the next reign Cay's Beggar's Opera contained many a 
political allusion, which caused its successor Polly to 
be prohibited. But the stage was become more the scene 
of sentimentalism and revivals than of active partisanship. 
The coffee-houses on the other hand had multiplied and 
fathered such clubs as the Kit-Kat and the Brothers Club, 
centres of discussion whence emanated much of the political 
satire in prose and verse. The latter organization had been 
partially inspired by Bolingbroke's desire to have a meeting 
place where he might prime Swift for his pamphlets. Verse 
had lost the preeminence of Pr.yden's brilliant flourish, 
and remained in politics mainly as a multitude of eulogies 
to great men and on great events, a ’'hackney muse” however 
that was invaluable as a key to lucrative political prefer¬ 
ment. The most important of these poems was Addison's Cam¬ 
paign after Blenheim. The old tradition of effective satire 
remained mainly in Defoe’s True-Born Englishman (1710) and 


(l) T. F. M. Newton, op. cit. (Modern Philology. November 
1935). 
















. 


, 


, 

, 

. 








. 




. 




. 






. 

. 

















27 


Hymn to the Pillory (1703), and in the biting verses with 
which Swift harpooned his personal and political enemies, 
from ^odolphin to the Irish Bishops, finally, the pulpit 
Remained as powerful as ever, whether as the place from 
which Atterbury and Sacheverell thundered their denuncia¬ 
tions of the Whigs and Pean Willis of Lincoln reflected 
upon the perils of Jacobitism, or in the more quiet work of 
bringing the Examiner to the country parish. Pryden had 
provided material for such sermons. Swift, to whom the 
political questions of the day were as the breath of his 
nostrils, and who engaged in the battle on every available 
front, provided both the material and the sermons. Tt I nevef 
he onoe Jokingly exclaimed, "preeched but twice in my life; 
and then they were not sermons, but pamphlets".^' 


3. The Elevation of the Author . 

What effect did this adoption of literature by politics' 
have upon the author and his work? 

In Restoration England previous to the adoption the 

man of letters was in the position of a hanger-on in the 

closed circle of the court which exercized an aristocratic 

Jrilkington r s Memoirs I 56. (cited xemple-Scott Works 
IV, 181) - — 












, 


. 


. 














, 




. 


. 






. 








, 

, 














. 








, 
















28 


monopoly in matters of taste, dependent upon the favours 
of the great and a precarious income from the only lucrative 
source, the stage. After 1680, when the adoption took place 
with the realization that poets were valuable to the polit¬ 
ician, their social status was improved, and there appeared 
the beginnings of an English public rather than a court 
which stood in isolation like an island in the midst of the 
sea. xhe political issues were common to both Court and 
Country; the union of the two as a reading public still 
barely cultivated served to add puritan solidity to the 
graceful polish of the Porsets and Medleys, with a general 
benefit all round. Further, following the signs of a new 
public, the bookseller began to appear as the enterprising 
publisher with xonson, who began tentatively with his 
Miscellanies . published an edition of Paradise host , and 
then in 1697, published I>ryden l s Vergi l on the same basis, 
subscription, the success of which held promise of the 
future possibility of financial independence for the author 
when the necessary public should be created. But at the 
end of this period ^1688) the man of letters was still as 
before economically dependent upon court patronage because 
the opposition could offer no means of support, and as a 
consequence could not indulge in independence of opinion. 









* 


. 

, 

























29 


being forced to reflect faithfully the politics of the 
purse-master. 

"Charles", says Beljame, "loved letters without paying; 
James payed without loving; and William did neither". *1) 
sut the result was all to the good, for William's ministers 
did both. As the inability of the next imported king to 
speak the language left Parliament free to consolidate its 
control of government, so the inability of William to 
appreciate it, and. the formation of two great parties on a 
basis of equality, released the writer from the vicious 
circle of court dependence and left him free to choose his 
patrons. Thus was ushered in the great age of patronage, 

in which Halifax, Somers, Porset and Montague among the 

.and 

Whigs,/Oxford and Bolingbroke among the Tories, realizing 
the importance of public opinion in the swaying balance of 
party, vied to secure the allegiance or at least neutrality 
of the practitioners of letters. At last the mountain was 
coming to Mahomet, and with gold to he mined by the willing. 
If most of the patronage was interested and political, it 
at least offered political preferment in return, and raised 
the author from the position of a mercenary to that of an 
ally; self-respect, public esteem and worldly opportunity 
were the results. 

fl) p. 226. 





































- 










30 


Never before or since Anne's reign were men of letters 
to achieve quite the same pinnacle in society. lord Treas¬ 
urer Godolphin, advised by Montague, Chancellor of the Ex¬ 
chequer sent personally to seek out the young Addison in 
his lodgings to solicit a poem in honour of Blenheim, an 
asset which the ministry wisely desired to popularize. 
Addison was rewarded for the Campaign with the place of 
commissioner of appeals, succeeding Locke. He later follow¬ 
ed Wharton (Lord Lieutenant) to Ireland as secretary, and 
was made Keeper of the Records, a position the salary of 
which was raised to £400 for his benefit. Finally, he 
married a countess, fulfilled the functions of Secretary of 
State under Hanover, and retired on a pension of £1500 
When Swift told Harley, now Earl of Oxford, that Parnell 

was in the antechamber, he came forth to greet the former 

( 2 ) 

Whig poet white staff in hand . When the Whigs were 

triumphant after Anne's death, the Whig tragedian Rowe was 

. and 

made Laureate, surveyor of the customs,/clerk of the Prince 
of Wales's council; and was presented with the place of 
secretary of the presentations without solicit at ion by Lord 

(1) Johnson, Life of Addison (Oxford World's Classics Sditior 
of the Lives I 4, 19, 420, 434, 435). 

(2) Johnson. Parnell (I, 396). 
















31 


Chancellor Parker as soon as the latter receive*? his seals 

of office ^ ^. Sven such minor penmen as ’’little Harrison”, 

. 

Diaper, and Trapp were the objects of personal interest to 
Earley durine: the Tory ministry ^^# -And every writer of 
any importance at this time held some position at the dis¬ 
posal of party, ranging from the Ministership of State given 

to Addison and the Versatile Ambassadorship held by Prior 

(**) 

to places in the public works and livings in the Church '• 
There was of course the obverse of the medal in the spirit 
of revenge which possessed both factions of the day# At 
the top of the scale appear Tory impeachments of Somers 
and Walpole, Whig reprisals against Oxford, Ormonde, and 
Bolingbroke# Writers of note did not escape entirely for 
Steele was expelled from Commons as a result of The Crisis 
and two numbers of his Englishman . and a £300 reward was 
offered for the author of Swift’s anonymous Public Spirit 
of the Whigs, the publisher of which was eventually pros¬ 
ecuted instead# But most of the reprisals fell on the more 
lowly writers like Tutchin and Pitt is, men of whose type 

(4) 

Bolinsrbroie is reported to have imprisoned a dozen at a lot. 

~ _ 

f1)Johnson, Howe (I, 409) 

(2) Journal to Stella , passim. 

(3) See list, Beljame 230-32. 

(4) Journal to Stella Oct. 24, 1711. 

























32 






We mentioned the prosecution of Swift's publisher fa 
thing that was to happen more than once). If the author 
was dependent upon the parties which elevated him, so to a 
great extent was his publisher, when pamphlets and period¬ 
icals were the chief products of his work, and when anon¬ 
ymity made him the only responsible factor that could be 
reached. Tonson, an ardent Whig, had tried to force the 
old royalist Dryden to dedicate his Vergil to William by 
having the engravings of Aeneas adorned with the hooked 
nose of Nassau. How John Barker (with Tooke and Motte ) 
was the Tory printer patronized by Swift and his party. 

He printed the Gazette with Tooke during the Tory Ministry 
while Ford, Swift's intimate friend,was editor (1712-14). 
Queen Anne died in August; by the end of September the 
Tories were routed. Stanhope had succeeded Bromley as Sec¬ 
retary of State, and Buckley had replaced Ford as Gazetteer. 
The issue of September 21-25 was "Printed by J. Tonson in 
the Strand" - and party faith had had its reward ^• 




The elevation of the author under Anne was the result 
(l) Kichol Smith, Letters of Swift to Ford (Introduction XV) 
















































1 

, 

, 
























33 


of his political value and was rewarded in kind. It was 
dependent upon the value not of art as art, hut of good 
art as propaganda; and when that value declined in the long 
years of the Pax Walpoleana which followed, the whole 
structure collapsed* What was the net effect upon literature 

In the long run, the social effect was all to the good. 
Party strife had created a political press and a public to 
read it. This in turn gave rise to men like Defoe and 
Swift who established the tradition of realistic prose; it 
created journalism, and in the days of adversity following 
the days of glory these men were able to turn their forced 
leisure to account, and, building upon that experience to 
create, one the sweeping political and social satire of 
brulliver . the other a series of realistic novels beginning 
with Kobinson Crusoe in 1719. 

At the same time the political press had opened a 
way for the non-political periodical. John Dunton had 
shown that a public was ready for w^ork of this nature by 
the success of his Athenian Gazette , begun in 1690. In 
1698 the puritan revolt had come to a head with Jejsmy Coll¬ 
ier *s Short View . The public demand for both the non-pol¬ 
itical journal and an attempted moral reform was partially 
met by the Scandalous Club which Defoe annexed to his pol¬ 


itical Keview , a department inspired in part by Henry Care 1 * 






































. 

. 




















I , 














34 


Weekly Pacquet of Advice from Home . What he could never 
achieve remained for Addison (and Steele), who softened 
the puritan rigour of the reformist tendency and cultivated 
the parlour where Defoe had appealed to the shop. By the 
time Addison had finished, the English public which began 
to form under the pressure of political issues was unified 
and developed to an extent that made possible the future 
independence of the man of letters. 

As Swift was in the thick of the political fight, so 
too did he battle with the reformers ^ / * though unlike 
Addison he has more of the puritan in his stern Pauline 
denunciations than of the complacency that was typical of 
Anglicanism - much as he would have repudiated the charge. 
j?or while Defoe reported turpitudes and lapses in his 
Mercure Scandale . and Addison applied the soothing influence 
of sweetness and light. Swift was dinning his condemnations 
into the public ear and giving the world one lash more. 
Addison^ mild admonitions served as an actual and benefic¬ 
ial moderating influence, steering the public into a middle 
course between Congreve and Collier, Charles II and Crom¬ 
well; but Swjift's violent and bitter attempts to achieve 
’’government by virtue” and a realization by man of his own 

(1) Specifically in the Project for the Advancement of 
"bttt really throughout his work. 














































































, 


, 





























irrationality and vileness glanced off as too true to be 
useful, and he succeeded only ir setting three kingdoms 
aflame whenever he felt the urge to get something done . 

He could "mend the world", hut he could not persuade it to 
alter the quality or colour of its vestments. 

If in the long run the effect of the adoption was 
good, the immediate effect was not, and neither literature 
nor the administration of government positions hy the 
authors to whom they were awarded benefited hy the union. 
Most of the political literature of Anne's reign has passed 
into the limbo of historical data. It is A Tale of a Tub 
and vrulliver . The father and Spectator . Robinson Crusoe 
and the works of Pope that are remembered as the literature 
of this brilliant period; not The Examiner , The Rre eh older 
or -rhe Englishman or The Review , Pope stayed carefully 
away from politics, employing Whig publishers and dedicat¬ 
ing his Iliad, to the fallen Tory leader Bolingbroke, The 
rest were written when political adversity had thrown the 
party of the author out of power and left him to his own 
devices. Too much time had to be given, on the whole, to 
the details of administering petty offices or the advocacy 
of ephemeral causes. On the other hand we must remember 
that it w?as party politics which had freed the author from 
the invidious time-serving which had been the blight of the 





































, 







’ 

, 









36 


Restoration. Pryden*s art as technique is certainly not 

impaired by his easy changes of livery over the length of 
his career. But art demands more than technique, and while 
there is no basis for a moral condemnation of Pryden in 
this, there is a legitimate reason to regret the loss of 
intellectual sincerity. Under Anne there was no cause for 
insincerity, and if the writer felt keenly he had only to 

choose his side, The evils were rather the necessity of 
choosing any side at all, and the violence with which the 
pleading was conducted - becoming often merely special 
pleading. 

Political issues in the broad sense are certainly not 
the w f orst of inspirations in literature. One has only to 
think of Milton, Voltaire, Mill, Carlyle, and Shaw. But 
two things will destroy their value: tawdry issues and a 
position of vested interest in the actual administration. 
The literary politican works best always in independent 
opposition, for the simple reason that what he is vitally 
concerned with is never really politics but philosophy, or 
morals, or relgion. Anne r s Sngland provided neither of the 
requisites - the issues w^ere mainly dead ones preserved by 
the taxidermist for the benefit of faction, and the author 
was by the nature of things bound to the vested party int- 








37 


erests and to the machinery of political administration. 
Swift r s own comments on this latter aspect are bitterly 
drawn from first hand experience - 

So men of wit are hut a kind 

Of panders to a vicious mind. 

Speaking of Cryden, G. D. H. Cole asks whether he did 
not "fall short a little in satire, despite his transcend¬ 
ental craftsmanship, for lack of an idea?" Swift dom¬ 

inates the early eighteenth century as Dryden the Restora¬ 
tion. With him there is no lack of an idea, no lack of 
intellectual sincerity. If anything, the fiery Dean was 
too sincere. But with, all the power of intellect, all the 
wealth of genius which he possessed as few men have poss¬ 
essed them, there is something tragic in the ultimate value 
of his work. It is a tragI-comedy of unfortunate circum¬ 
stance, of a great mind forced to work largely upon issued 
which in the long run are not very important. He himself 
would not have minded this; his political works were for¬ 
gotten hy Swift himself when Jrord wished to publish them 
in 1733. '^ Like Toltaire writing "dcrssez l ! inf^me" and 

(1) Politics and Literature . 76 
12) Letters of Swift to jrord .163 












38 


fighting to the finish l r affaire Calas , Swift was mending 
the immediate world and not writing for posterity. '" r e may 
he permitted to regret that his was not a bigger world. 

T, Le manage d T un gouvernement const itutionnel*' , writes 
villemain* x , "s r il est permis de parler ainsi, occupe trop 

l r esprit pour §tre fort utile au gdnie. II ne lui donne 
ni les passions et la grandeur de la liberte rdpublieain, 

ni les loisirs d r une monarchie splendide et paisable". 

Bor, he might have added, the reactions of one that is . 

{ 2) 

splendid and tyrannous. 


11) Tableau de la literature au XVIIIieme si&cle 6^ leg on 
(cited Beljame 358-9) 

(2) "The DrS-pier" is perhaps Swift r s most admirable r61e. 
But l r ood, the Duchess of Kendal , and w alpole could 
hardly reach the level of the Bastille, and an inquis¬ 
ition-minded cliurch. 






















1 














1 

















































. 

. 











section II 


THE POLITICAL CAKE Sit 


CHAPTER 


The Cove riling j- actors 

The history of Swift T s actual participation in the 
politics of his time, especially during the period ending: 
with his retirement from the English scene in 1714, is large 
ly a story of the logic of circumstance working steadily to 
its conclusion* 

Dominant among the factors which governed that career 
was his position as an Anglo-Irishman, a member of the 
"garrison" whose symbol throughout the troubled history of 
Ireland was Dublin Castle* This Garrison represented the 
conquering minority of English occupation; its members be¬ 
longed to the Anglican Establishment, and were alone elig¬ 
ible for political office; theirs was the legacy of conflict, 
of religious strife, and of clashing interests in the struggle 
for possession o^ the land - problems which had been rend¬ 
ered insoluble as a result of the Catholic rebellion of 
1641 and the Cromwellian invasion of T 49. As a consequence 


















■ 

. 

. 

, 

. 










40 




their hands were, in a sense, against every man, against 
the Presbyterian ulsterman of the north and against the 
hamstrung Catholic majority of "Old Irish", who were de¬ 
prived of commercial as well as political rights by the 
garrison monopoly. 

Swift was thus a child of conflict, the bitterness of 
which when transplanted to the scene of English, politics 
did much to destroy his ability to maintain a central pos¬ 
ition with regard to English issues, a position which should 
also have been the result of his Irish background, ne had 
been forced to flee from Trinity College, Dublin, when the 
Catholic uprising in 1689 threatened all protestants in the 
country, Bis whole background placed him in opposition to lie 
Catholics. Therefore he was firmly behind, the revolution 
Settlement, an enemy of the Jacobite wing of the Tory party, 
and by English standards a Whig. But on the other side of 
the ledger was his memory of those days of civil strife 
"when the Church of England was malignant" and when his 
loyalist grandfather Thomas Swift, vicar of Coodrich in 
nerefordshire, had been plundered by the Roundheads six 
and thirty - some said fifty - times, and had been forced 
to steal to prayers in a back room, with his chaplain dis- 


























4:1 


guised like a butler. ' He always thought of Presbyter¬ 
ians in this light (lumping together with them dissenters, 
free-thinkers and deists of all types), as the party of 
potential rebellion ready to overthrow Church and. Constit¬ 
ution had they but the power. This attitude, combined with 
the more personal hatred of fanatics or enthusiasts of 
whatever breed, found ample reinforcement in what early 
became one of Swift T s favourite books - the puritan-drubbing 
nudibras of Samuel sutler. And if more encouragement were 
lacking, it was supplied by his first experience in orders 
as prebendary of kilroot in 1694, in a parish of Presbyter¬ 
ians by the shore of Belfast Lough with hardly enough Church 
folk to warrant a service. "Of which growing weary in a few 
months", says Swift, "he returned to England." 

In Ireland it was the Ulstermen who constituted the 
real menace. The Catholics had been beaten to a state of 
submission that was later to infuriate Swift on quite other 
gram:ds; while to the Presbyterians, the spawn of Cromwell 
and Scotland, he attributed the dangerous vigour of the 
wicked that he later associated with Whig faction in general] 

The carry-over of this in his emotional attitude was obvious 

__ 

! (1) A Letter Concerning the Sacramental Test ( "forks IV, 18) 

and fragment of Autobiography i "forks XI 371) 

(2) Ibid . ( Works XI 379) 

• ( 
























42 


He hated, not the Presyterians because they were Scotch, hut 
the Scotch because they were Presbyterians, And the menace 
of the dissenters in Ireland became the menace of their less 
dangerous brethren across the Channel, whose influence lay 
in their alliance with the Whigs. Consequently, once Swift 
had decided upon orders in the Church of Ireland, and as his 
| interests became increasingly those of the Church, the future;, 

course of his active political career was practically inevit 

, 

I able, Ae could not remain with his early Whig friends and 
patrons, for he saw in them danger to his church. As a 
churchman, not to fight against her enemies was, for Swift, 
unthinkable, Ihe danger in the iories to the revolution 
Settlement he never saw, 

A corollary of his Church position was his stand with 
regard to the division between the two social classes who 
were ranged against each other by the end of Anne 1 s reign: 
the landed squires and the City merchants and financiers, 
or "moneyed-men". In the discussion of the period, whether 
in pamphlets or in treatises like Petty’s Political Arlthmeti 


and Locke’s Hssay on Toleration , commercial and financial 
expansion had been equated with the genius of the dissenting 
element, Holland, Huguenots, and Flemish weavers were cited 
as examples, with a foundation of truth. But Swift was int- 
































t 








T 

, 


















erested in the Church and not in what was to appear to him 
a false superstructure of credit-economy, and so the econ¬ 


omic argument for dissenters "became in his mind an argument 
against all they were alleged to represent - the rising 
commercial classes, the great merchant enterprises, and the 
Bank; - and hence against the Whigs, their political embodi¬ 
ment, It was another case of Scotland and the Presbyterians, 
Actual economic reasons for this stand Swift soon discovered, 
and used them with telling effect In the person of the Exa¬ 


miner, But it was certainly not economics that lay at the 


root of the matter, for while the "moneyed" classes were per¬ 
haps not making two blades of grass grow where one had grown 
before, they were bringing to England two bales at least 
where only one had come before. But Swift looked at the 
bales and saw merely vicious stimulants and useless luxuries. 

"Swift denounced, as part of the same odious creed, 
the maxim that ’religion ought to make no distinction between 


Protestants 1 and the policy ’of preferring, on all occasions. 


the monied interests before the landed 1 ," writes K, H, 

11 ) 


awney.'*'. And it is significant that Swift fathered the 
idea of the National Debt, child of the Bank, credit finance, 
and Whiggery, upon the detested Low Church bishop, Burnet .' ' 


^^Religion and the Pise of Capitalism. 2D7 

f£) [1 that expedient (which he had learned in Holland) of 

raising money upon the security of taxes, that were only 








































, 

' 

. 






44 


On the other hand the landed squirearchy was the bul¬ 


wark of the Church. "No Bishop No Xing" had since the 


Restoration become ?T no parson, no squire". ^ It was also 


the bulwark of the Tory party, and chiefly country squires 
congregated in 1710 to -form the embarrassingly High-Tory 
October Club, drinking October ale, in celebration of an 
October victory at the polls. Thus we find that Swift is, 
from 1710 on, an advocate of government by a landed aristo¬ 
cracy' as opposed to either the rule of the moneyed Oligarchy 
or an open franchise. "These men", he writes as the Examinei 
"these men come with the spirit of shopkeepers to frame rule 
for the administration of kingdoms; or, as if they thought, 
the whole art of government consisted in the importation of 
nutmegs, and the curing of herrings". In 1711, Bolingbroke 
passed a bill to limit the membership in Commons to land- 
jowners of .2600 income (£300 in the boroughs), in reality a 
political move against the Whigs. The Examiner rejoices in 
"that noble Bill of Qualification", by which care has been 
taken "that future Parliaments should be composed of landed 
men, and our properties lie no more at the mercy of those 


-continued- 

sufficient to pay a large interest". ( History of the Four 
Last .tears cf the Queen . Works X, 88. ) Note the association 
of Holland, credit-finance, and a Scotch Low Church (i.e. 
ro-dissent) bishop. 

(l) See Wingfield-Stratford. History of British Civilization 

I I, o 87 * ~ ^ - : — — — — 


p 


































, 

. 







45 •• 

who have none themselves, or at least only what is transient 
or imaginary* Tf ^ J 

These were the factors which governed Swift's active 
participation in politics and led almost inevitably to his 
alliance of 1710-14 with the Tories. But there is another 
that must be considered briefly before going on to trace the 
actual story. As we have seen above, this was the great age 
of political patrons, and it is through them that writers 
under Anne came into their own. What influence did Swift's 
contacts with such men as Temple, Somers, Oodolphin, and 
Harley have upon his career? 

Speaking generally, they had little "influence 1 * upon 
the man himself. (The case of Sir William Temple will be 

f 

considered in the next section). His most outstanding char¬ 
acteristic among the party men of his day was an almost 
truculent independence of spirit in his relationships to 
"the great". If he entered the arena as a combatant, it was 
he that adopted the party rather than the party that adopted 
him, and his choice depended upon the factors outlined above. 

fl) Works IX. 225. This is not mere propaganda, written withj 

his tongue in his cheek . In the much later Of Public Ah 
surdities in England (Works, XI, 181,2) which was never 
published t Swift laments that the old 40s. safeguard of 
the Constitution should have been made a £20 qualification 1 
because of the decrease in money value, and that the Bill 
can be so easily evaded* (as it was). 














, 

. 


- 













46 

Nevertheless these men were important in two ways. The 
first was negative: they served as something to react against 
Swift's pride, his independence, and scepticism, his devotion} 
to the cause of his Church, made him a dangerous man to 
trifle with. When all was over there was scarcely a single 
great political figure of the day whom he respected as a 
politician save perhaps Oxford and Carteret. He tried them 
each in turn, found them wanting, traduced them in pamphlet, 
memoir, or lampoon, and continued in his search A an eighteenth 
century Diogenes. Their second function was to open the 
way. Only through alliance with them could he achieve his 
ambitions, either of obtaining a position which he felt 
worthy of his abilities or of using those abilities to in¬ 
fluence the course of events. It is a tribute to his powers 
that the way was opened in practically every direction, 
though in the end circumstances denied him the reward he 
felt his due. 

But however Important may have been these various 
factors in determining the direction taken by his political 1 
career, they certainly did not "produce” the Swift we know/. 
Back of them all there is of course the man himself, shaping 
almost inevitable viewpoints to the bent of his own genius. 

It is the harsh and ever practical moralist, driven to in- 




















1 ' . 


. 

* 
























47 


cessant action "by the intensity of his very nature, it is 
the saeva indignatio and the acidity of his criticism, it is 
the genius of the prose in which all these found expression, 
that we remember; not the circumstantials, Whig, Tory, or 
Churcii, of the sides he took in that puppet show of memory 
wherein we picture the politics of England under Anne, 

In conclusion let us draw the threads together. Swift*s 
position between both Jacobite and nissenter, his association 
with men like xemple and Harley, should have placed him in 
the Moderate camp between the parties, the camp to which many 
of his time, notably Defoe among the writers, professed to 
belong. And so in a sense Swift thought of his own posi¬ 
tion. ^' nis oft-repeated assertion that he was a Whig in 
polities and a xory in religion is an exact statement of the 
case, if hy Whig we mean as did he an exponent of what were 
at the time considered to be the establishment of English 
liberties by the Williamite Settlement of 1689 and 1701. 

Hut there were forces operating in a quite opposite direction 
The idealized doctrines of Whiggery left out ox account what 

11) See his statement in A Letter Concerning the Sacramental 
Test { Works IV, 15) that in Ireland the parties are on 
one side, moderate Whigs (with which he would identify 
himself) and on the other, "Presbyterians and their 
abettors". 























































48 


was the really important result of the Settlement, the rule 
of an Oligarchy and the increasing power of a new commercial 
moneyed class. On the other hand, it is important to remem¬ 
ber that Swift T s middle position was the result of anti¬ 
pathies, not of natural moderation. 

In reality he felt himself above parties, not between 
them. Ihe moralist has always a more clear-cut idea of 
right and wrong than the politician, and when he enters 
politics is apt to identify his own position not with one 
side of a contested issue to be made the best of, but with 
the right form of government, blinding himself to its defic¬ 
iencies, seeing the opposition as a mere subversive faction, 
and still considering himself above the party strife. Such 
was the case with swift. He never thought of himself as a 
"party" or faction man, even when in 1714 he was advocating 
the most extreme lory position and the virtual extermination 
of the Whigs. In part this was because he could never under¬ 
stand or see the crypto-Jacobite elements of which both 
Oxford and Bolingbroke were representatives, especially the 
latter. In part it was the result of his moral viewpoint, 
his native intensity, and his reaction against the actual 
as opposed to the idealized consequences of the Whig devolu¬ 
tion. But most of all it was the result of a faculty which 









































49 


Swift possessed to a surprising degree for one whose whole 
credo was rationality and a realistic clarity of view for 
was it perhaps because of the necessities of that credo?) - 
the faculty of rationalization. As a consequence, while 
on the one hand circumstances plus his association with ac¬ 
tual institutions, the Church and an acting ministry in 
government, drove him farther and farther from a detached or 
moderate position, on the other he never thought of himself 
as anything hut above them, merely assisting in the cause of 
government by right and virtue. And though we may see more 
of the factors involved than was possible for him, we may 
take him at his word. 



















. 

, 










. 

. 





. 




. 




. 


















60 


CHAPTER II 
England* ^ 


Trial and Error 


1. Moor Park: 1689-99 


Swift T s intermittent ten year residence at Moor Park | 
with Sir William Temple as "a gentleman to wait upon him or 
as a clerk to write for him" ^ , as confidential secretary, 
and finally as guest, companion, and editor of his patron’s 
Works . was his first important contact with the great world 
of affairs. Here he ate plentiously of the fruit to which 
Temple had devoted his years of retirement Hater to he 

blamed for the vertigo which troubled Swift increasingly 

fl )An outline of the significant dates in Swift*s life of 
this period is as follows: Born in Dublin in 1667, edu¬ 
cated at the Kilkenny Grammar School, he was at Trinity 
College Dublin from 1682-89, when he was forced to go to 
England by the uprising in favour of James. From 1689-99 
he was with Sir William Temple at Moor Park, except for 
two trips to Ireland (August 1690-lste 1691, for his 
health; 1694-6 as prebendary of Kilroot) From 1699-1710 
he was in Ireland, making trips to Ionian in 1701, 1702, 
1703-4 (November-June) and a long stay there, November 
1707-June 1709, attempting to obtain the remission of 
First Fruits for the Irish clergy from the government. I if 

1710 he returned for the same purpose after the Tories had! 
come into power, and remained as their chief literary 
support till their fall after the death of Anne in August 
1714, except for a short trip to Ireland in the summer of 

1713 to be invested as Dean of St. Patrick’s* 

(2) Letter of recommendation from Temple to Sir Kobert South- 
well, 1690 ( 0orrespondence I, 2) 



















. 

. 






















51 


through life) # read voraciously in the well-stocked library 
of history, travels, and the classics, acted as Temple’s 
envoy on an advisory mission to William III, and wrote un¬ 
readable pindarics and that overflowing of his genius^A 
Tale of a Tub * 

But "the supreme importance of the stay at Moor Park", 
writes W. D. Taylor, in his Jonathan Swift , "was that it 
brought him daily over a long period into the company of 
Sir William Temple"* Temple had been unique among Restora¬ 
tion statesmen in that his career was a record of action 
motivated always by principles of honour and moderation, a 
j fact which forced his eventual retirement from active pol¬ 
itics. Starting as a diplomat, his friendship with Pe Witt 
had enabled him to achieve the brilliant Triple Alliance 
between England, Holland and Sweden in 1667. But Charles 
was secretly francophile, and recalled his Hague ambassador 
in 1670. Temple thereupon retired to cultivate oranges 
j and write. He soon however returned to negotiate matters 
with the Dutch, and arranged the important marriage between 
Mary and William of Orange. "hen he returned from Bimuegen 
he was among the group of rising young men to whom the 
nation looked in 1679 for leadership, among them Halifax, 
Sunderland, and Grodolphin. ' It was he who instituted the 




















♦ 
































reformed Privy Council of that .year, which he hoped to make 
a non-partisan basis of government. But it was soon domin¬ 
ated hy an inner cabal to whom Temple r s rather lofty princ- 

, as 

iples were distasteful, and/he would not compromise on such 
i issues as prorogation or the anti-Dutch policies of the 
government, he found retirement the only solution and in 
1681 he turned his back again on London to read and write 

his memoirs among his Dutch gardens at Sheen, taking T, leave 

■ 

of all those airy visions which have so long busied my head 
about mending the world". 

But if he had. retired to cultivate his warden, he was 
fated in 1689 when he moved with wife and sister to Moor 
Park in Surrey to assist also in the cultivation of one 

whose life work was to be mending the very world upon which I 

' 

Sir William had turned his stately back. Bo two characters 
1 could have been more unlike in many ways than those of 
this sedate libre-penseur and the raw young secretary with} 
a daemon in his breast who had just come out of Dublin. 

Swift r s reflections upon Temple in his Journal to St ell 

give his later memories of the relationship. " I would not 
be treated like a schoolboy", he writes in 1711, "I had 

felt too much of that in my life already (meaning Sir Will- 

'D Memoirs H'Vorks i, 472, Cited by Clara Marburg, Sir will- 

iam Temple , doctorate thesis of the University 

Chicago, 1929) 



















■ 







T 










■ 

. 

' 




. 























' 















53 • 


iam lemple};", and then, "Don T t you remember how I used to 
he in pain when Sir William Temple would look cold and out 
of humour for three or four days, and i used to suspect a 
hundred reasons. I have plucked up my spirits since then, 
faith; he spoiled a fine gentleman", but he had not al¬ 
ways looked upon his benefactor in this light - a view which 
may be partly accounted for by the fact that Sir William 
had died before he could obtain for Swift a promised pref¬ 
erment. ne had already written to Stella in November, 1710: 
"I am thinking what a veneration we used to have for Sir 
William Temple, because he might have been Secretary of 
State at fifty", and to his cousin fhomas in 1692, referring 
to his love for his friends "and particularly to Sir William 
Temple", he had confided: "I never read his writings but I 
prefer him to all others at present in England, which I 
suppose is all but a piece of self-love, and the like ness 


of humours makes one fond of them as if they were one J s 

* ( 1 ) 




own 


As secretary, and editor of these writings, he had 
ample opportunity to read them and benefit by whatever 
likeness of humours he may have found, ihe phrase is sig- 


(1; May 3, 1692. ( correspondence I, 365) 'The italics are my 

own. 




























. . * 




























54 


nificant, for on specific issues it was not for such a man 
as Swift to be unduly influenced by anyone, least of all 
I Sir William* Temple had written in appreciation of the 
JDutch in his Observations on the Netherlands (l£7£) and in 
favour of an out-and-out despotism in the English rule of 
Ireland, ignoring the natives as "wild horses", in his 
Present State of the Settlement in Ireland <1667—8). Swift 
was to turn the power of his pen against both Holland and 
the English despots when the occasion arose. Hut with 
"humours" it was a different matter. There was an element 
of critical scepticism common to both men, however differ- 
ent in the form it took. Temple's 'D views on the nature 
| of politics and the imperfectibility of mankind were the 
result of weary disappointment, and he turned from the ab¬ 
stractions of philosophy and science to the contemplation 
of human nature through self-knowledge in solitude. Swift 3 s 

stinging satire was anythins: but weary; - his disgust with 

. 

abstractions, evident in his refusal to load his mind with 
scholastic lumber at Trinity College, was because of their 
; social and moral uselessness, not because of the impasse to 
which science had brought the metaphysics of the seventeenth! 

11) See Clara Marburg, Sir William Temple , passim. 


























. 








, 


. 

. 

, 

. 







. 
























. 













century; and he turned from them not to solitary self-con¬ 
templation hut to the thankless task of lashing the world 
for its everyday sins. 

xhe common residue of scepticism, however, was there. 
And many of the peculiar trends which it took in Swift and 
which were to he the basis of much of his future satirical 
approach may he attributed to this likeness of humours 
which he found. The onslaught against schisms and sham of 
the Peter, Martin, and Jack portion of A Tale of a Tub 
owes its inspiration partly to views expressed in Temple *s 
Of Ancient and Modern Learning .^ x * The Battle of the Books 
was a cause taken up on Templets behalf; and that strange 
Pindaric aberration in which Swift loads the most fulsome 
of praise upon the "great unknown" men of Punton f s "Athen¬ 
ian Society" was written because "Sir William Temple speak¬ 
ing to me so much in their praise, made me zealous for 
their cause." * ' His blindness to the value of science, 

his satire on the pro lectors and the vain pretences of man¬ 
kind, which were to culminate in Aulliver . may well have 
received stimulation from the man who asked, "what has been 
produced for the use, benefit, or pleasure of mankind, by 

\ 1 ) Taylor, Jonathan 8-1ft . 15. 
t2) Correspondence , I, 363. 

























































r 




! 

































5i> 


all the airy speculations and ’wondrous pretentions and 
visions of men 7 ” ?' 1! 

But it is the political attitude and not the satires 
: on science and pedantry with which we are really concerned, 
i Temple*s non-partisan code in politics and his scepticism 
| concerning: party politicians and the great events of history 
were both important influences, ne was in the tradition of j 
those who belittled the significance of the great men of 
history, attributing to trivial happenings the origin of 
most historical events* Wars had, to his knowledge, turned 
upon such things as the indisposition of admirals and gov- 

( O I 

ernors , and he knew by experience the motives which 
underlay Hestoration politics. It is this twist that we 
find in Swift T s treatment of conquerors and philosophers who! 
owe their success to a conjunction of vapours. In A Tale of 
j a Tub . Section IX; it is this attitude which he uses to 
belittle Marlborough r s achievements as the Examiner; and it 
is this attitude which is transformed into the bitter ver¬ 
dicts on history and politics in it ulliver . 

But before the Tale was written, he had stated this 
view in his Odes of 1692. The Ode to the Athenian Society 

(l)Some Thoughts upon reviewing the Essay of Ancient and 

Modern Leafnin g.'" (Temple T s TTT orka "TTl 456 ciTA “ 'Clara 

m arburg , p". TOT 

( 2Iraylor, Jonathan Swift, 16, 17. 


































r 



































concludes with one characteristic touch; they have shown 
How strange a paradox is true, 

•rhat men, who liver 1 and died without a name, 

Are the chief heroes in the sacred list of fame. 

One of those who died without a name is the leoman called 
forth from the land of the shades hy Sulliver. In the Ode 
to Temple there is no doubt as to the young poet^ opinion 
on these matters* After dismissing ’’Philosophy l the 
lumber of the schools’ 1 in favour of his patron 4 s easy cul¬ 
ture, and those who 

Bor Learning^ mighty treasurers look 
In that deep grave, a hook, 
he turns to affairs of ,state: 

The wily shifts of state, those lugglers tricks 
'thich we call deep designs and politics, 

{As in a theatre the ignorant fry. 

Because the cards escape their eye, 

WP onder to see the motions fly) 

Me thinks, when you expose the scene, 

Down the ill-organ r s engines fall; 

Off fly the vizors and discover all. 

How plain I see through the deceit. 5 ' 
now shallow. 1 and how gross the cheat. 1 
Look where the pulley r s tied above I 











58 


*Great God" (said I) what have I seen.' 

On what poor engines move 
The thoughts of monarchs and designs of states, 

That petty motives role their fatesJ 
Row the mouse makes the mighty mountain shake. 1 
As a matter of fact, he had as yet had no opportunity per¬ 
sonally to see through the deceit. But this was the atti- 

- 

tude with which he entered the world of politics, and saving^' 
a very few lapses in the first flush of enthusiasm, all he 
saw confirmed him in the opinion; his correspondence and 
his verse are a lengthy elaboration of the theme. Moreover, 

I 

when in the next strophe he enquires of his Muse 

'That serpents that which still resorts. 

Still lurks in xialaces and courts?#..... 

To drive all virtue out, or look it dead? 
he is asking a question often to he repeated, especially 
| after the fall of his friend Lord Oxford in 1714. 

There are also in his writings of this period evidences} 
of the other* more important opinions on Church and State 
over which his .patron had no control. The Ode to King 
/illiam, ritten in Ireland, in 1690-1 after the battle of 
the Boyne, shows us the Swift who is the Irish Protestant, 
solidly behind the Revolution^ as ^ Tale o p a Tub shows us 































. 

■ 





59 


the -Anglican's hatred .of dissent. Another of the 169E odes 
"brings this out even more clearlv. It is that addressed to 
the late Archbishop Sancroft, an advocate of passive resist¬ 
ance and an ardent Churchman. In it Swift* who had not yet i 
entered the Church, describes the state as the weathercock 
blown by the winds of chance atop the solid pinnacle which 
is the Church. King William he chides as a rose without 
thorns, too lax in allowing the weeds of Dissent to grow 
unchecked about him, and he describes the dissenting sects 
as physicians whose administrations are fatal to the pat¬ 
ient - church and state. These were the opinions about 
which his career was built. 

The other service that Temple performed was to intro¬ 
duce Swift to men from whom he might hope for advancement. 

As early as 1690 he had recommended him to Sir Robert South- 
well, who was then going over to Ireland with William III 
as Secretary of State. Rut nothing came of it, though 
Swift's trip to Dublin of that year may have been partly in 
hope of receiving some position from Southwell or the Xinsr. ( 
In 1693, however, there was trouble in the government over 
a proposed Triennial Bill. Temple sent Swift to advise 
T ’illiam in its favour. The proud young envoy employed his 
knowledge of English history, in which he was "well versed". 



























GO 


in a long discourse to the Sari of Portland and a short one 
to the King; hut all in vain. "This was the first time 
that Mr. Swift had ever any converse with courts t and he 
told his friends it was the first incident that helped to 
cure him of vanity." Hot completely however; and from 

this initial advocacy of triennial Parliaments, he was to 
go to a lifelong conviction of the necessity of the "Gothic 
institution" of annual ones, a Tory dogma, i Stanhope's 
Septennial Act was an added irritani.f ^ From William Swift 
; expected a promised prehendaryship in Westminster after 
Temple r s death. When he applied, nothing was done, and it 
ended in the manner he came to expect of court promises. 

The next patron to whom he looked was an old associate 
of Temple 1 % the Sari of Sunderland. It is significant that 
I both Temple and Sunderland were of the group of Middle-Men 
of whom Halifax (the "Trimmer") had been the most illustr¬ 
ious example, and of whom Shrewsbury, who held the reins 
at Anne's death, and Oxford, Swift's eventual political 
leader, were the last, respite the violence of faction, 
party lines during the embryonic stages of cabinet govern¬ 
ment (which was not established as a recognized principle 
till after Anne's death) were not clearly defined. In 

I (1) fragment Autobiography (Works, XI, 378) 

(£) 1716. 







































♦ 


















1 

1 

* 

. 


I 

























61 




Parliament throughout Anne's reign there was a group of 

varying size who were the Queen's men, hacking government 
and not party. '^ The tradition had started soon after 
the Restoration, and the ministers who created it were of 
two types? with men like Halifax, Temple and Shrewsbury it 
was a matter of principle; with men like Sunderland it was 
a matter of interest, and his career was a bewildering maze j 
of religious conversions to suit the royal taste or simul¬ 
taneous intrigue with the houses of Stuart, Orange, and 
Bourbon. Yet he had a principle of a sort. "What does it 

matter", he was wont to say in the court-tune he affected, 

? 2 ) 

"who saarves his Majesty, so long as his Majesty is saarved?" 
So Swift did not have far to travel from men like Temple 


fl) As we have seen above (Section IT, Chapter!) it was to 
this moderate group that Swift logically belonged, in 
politics . 

(S) Keith Failing, History of the Tory Party , 282 ff. The 
chief Middle-Men who manipulated faction for their own 
and the Sovereign's service at this time were Sunderland! 
Shrewsbury, (Jodolphin, and Marlborough. in 1693 all 
four joined to establish Whig supremacy. In 1694 tfod- 
olphin went on to advise the establishment of an indep¬ 
endent Court party, (the thing Harley - or Oxford - triad! 
to do later). In 1700 Sunderland, Codolphin, and Marl¬ 
borough brought in the Tories, with Harley appropriately 
as Speaker. From 1702-6 Codolphin and Marlborough ruled3 
through the ‘Tories, while from 1706-8 they achieved j 

the same feat through the Whigs. Shrewsbury helped 
usher in the Tory government in 1710 and to usher it 
out in 1714, taking the staf- p from the hands of the un¬ 
fortunate Oxford » via the dying queen. 




















I 





















62 

and Sunderland to the similarly ’’moderate” Harley. And 
his contempt of faction and party-men was in tune with 
these early contacts. 

H 

But this hope again proved hollow. From Moor Park 
Swift writes on April 1, 1698, to the reverend John Winder: 
’’For my own fortune, as late in my life as it is, I must 
e’en let it drive on its old course. I think I told in my 
last that ten days before my resignation my Lord 

Sunderland fell and I with him. Since that there have been 
other courses, which if they succeed, I shall he proud to 
I on the methods, or if otherwise, very much ashamed”. 

I ; 

What were these other courses, of which he ■would he 

■ 

ashamed in the event of failure? Swift’s correspondence 
reveals nothing further, so they must have failed. Some 
light, however, is perhaps thrown upon the problem, and 
upon the uncertainty of Swift’s affiliations at this date, 

tb 

by a poem on the huiring of Whitehall which was written soon jj 
after Sunderland’s resignation (December 26, 1697) and 
which Dr. Blrington Ball considers as certainly Swift’s. 
It celebrates the conflagration which destroyed ’’This 
pile---raised by Wolsey’s impious hands”, the home of bloodyij 

tl) of his living at Kilroot, in January. Winder replaced 
him. 

(2) Swift’s verse, 40.1, 

* ■ ■ - - — ■ 













63 


Henry, weak fidward, and Mary the "bigot. ’’lathis really 
interesting however is the fact that the blessed martyrdom 
of Charles 1 is spoken of as the death of a tyrant, and that 
the poem was designed to hear the date of the execution, 
January 29. If this is his, he must heve felt the loss of 
opportunity through Sunderland very keenly, to offer such a 


bait to the extreme Whij 


Apparently he was ashamed of the 


method of this particular course, for the poem was never 
published. ^ 

Sir William lemple died in January 1699, leaving Swift 
his unedited Works but no position. Kilroot had already 
been given up in expectation of something better. Swift 
applied to the King for the promised Westminster prebend; 
nothing happened. So when he had the opportunity of going 
to Ireland in the train of the Sari of Berkeley, Lord 
Justice, he accepted. By Janusry he had received the living 
of Laracor, to which were added a few other small incomes, 
and his life as a Churchman in politics began to take shape. 


illThough Swift in 1709spoke in high praise of Sunderland 

in the preface • of his edition of iemple T s Memoirs , 
volume III, and had been instrumental in 

eliminating a passage referring to Sunderland T s coldness 
to xemple at the time of the Privy Council, he later 
changed his tone. The Karl, "when he turned Papist, in 
the time of King James 11" is included among the mean, i 
"Of Mean and ^reat figures" (Works XI, 176) 





















































. 

2. uncertainty : 1700-04. 

: 

During these years of residence at L&racor and Dublin, 

■ 

punctuated hy flying trips across the Channel, of punning 
with Lords-Lieutenant and contacts with Whig magnates in 
London, Swift was testing his chances in the larger world 
outside Ireland and finding himself uncomfortable in the 
j party with which he flirted. 

This uncertainty of his own position was indicated by 
j the Whitehall poem already discussed. It had been indicated 
in other fields than those of politics. He had toyed with 
the idea of going as a chaplain to Spain, as a few years 
later he was to consider escaping with the embassy to 
Vienna, or to a bishopric across the seas in Virginia. 

Sven the taking of orders had been in the first instance 
an assertion of independence as much as a settled convic¬ 
tion that it was his vocation, a vocation he was never to 
idealize, however strongly he may have felt about the 
Church itself. ’ T All that i can say is I wish to Hod you 
were well provided for, though [even though"] it were with 
a good living in the Church. Tf * 1 * 

*1/ to Thomas Swift, 1692 ( Correspondence , I, 365) 




















































The Earl of Berkeley was to a certain extent but 
another disappointment. Swift was edged out o^ the hoped- 
for position as his secretary, Bribed out of the expected 
Deanery of Derry, and forced to content himself with Lara- 
cor. Though he always remained on good terms with the 
family. Swift was never one to suffer indignities in sil¬ 
ence, and his reactions were characteristic. First he 
ridiculed the Earl in a satire called The Discovery , in 
which that functionary is depicted as neglecting the wel¬ 
fare of Ireland in his niggardly preoccupation with the 

version 

price of oats and hay, a lighter/of the charge he hurled 
against all the governing classes when he Became the 
champion of Ireland; then for his private satisfaction he 
vented his spleen In a scurrilous lampoon. The Problem. 

There are here the seeds of a. later philippic against 
another governor of Ireland, the profligate Earl of Wharton. 

However, these were unpublished, and did not epparent- 

■ 

ly affect the relationships between the two men. Meanwhile 


party fortunes in London were again to intrude upon Swift *s 
life with the fall of the Whig Junto which had been main¬ 
taining itself in power since 1698 despite an increasingly 
Tory lower House. The trouble started over William*s Irish 
Land Grants to favourites like Portland, and Lady Orkney - 















66 

in contradiction of his assurances in r 88. A Commission 
was formed whose Tory majority reported in favour of re¬ 
version, with the result that a crisis occurred in April, 
1700* in which City excitement rose to its highest pitch and 
Lords remained deadlocked against the lory Commons led hy 
Harley. The King and Lords finally gave way, the forfeit¬ 
ure was passed, and Somers was dismissed under the cloud of 
a threatened impeachment hy the iory firebrands. An impend¬ 
ing change in the ministry was now obvious, and we find 
swift writing in the midst of his famous "marriage letter" 
to Jane Waring: "for coming down to Belfast, it is what I 
cannot yet think of* my attendance is so close, and so much 
required of me; but our government sits very loose, and I 
believe will change in a few months; whether our part 
[Berkeley’s and his"] will partake in the change, I know not, 
though am very apt to believe it; and then I shall be at 
leisure for a short journey." o r a long one; for Berk¬ 

eley followed the fate of his party and Swift followed 
Berkeley in 1701 to London, with his first political pamph¬ 
let ready for publication* 

The elections had confirmed Swift*s suspicions; a det¬ 
erminedly Tory Commons met (January-July, 1701) to consider 


(1) Correspondence » I, ZZ (May 4, 1700) 






. r 

, 

, 

■ 









G7 

the issues of William r s Partition Treaty and the impending 
war with prance. William had taken the initiative in arr¬ 
anging the rirst Partition of 1698, against the advice of 
somers (Lord Chancellor and Lord deeper). He had also de¬ 
manded from Somers an unconstitutional blank warrant for 
the appointment of commissioners that he would choose. 
Parliament was furious at this diplomatic entanglement into 
which the king had drawn England by going over its head, 
and this was the chief reason for the dismissal and threat¬ 
ened impeachment of Somers in 1700. Hager to finish what 
its milder predecessor had begun, the new House impeached 
somers, Halifax, Portland, and Orford i the Whig Junto) in 
a wrangling series of debates which lasted till William 
cut the matter short by another prorogation. 

At the same time a popular Whig reaction had set in 
backing the King r s European policy and his demands for a 
standing army, led by the Kentish Petition and Defoe’s 
Legions memorial . The result was that the electorate re¬ 
turned a balanced iiouse for the next session late in Dec¬ 
ember, with a small Tory majority, Harley still Speaker, 
and, owing to the altered conditions established by Louis 
XIY T s declaration for the Pretender in full accord with the 
inevitable irrench war# The Tories were ostensibly still 









; 


. 


































. 








. 











68 


in power, but in reality it was the Middle-Men who had won 
the game. Since 1698 they had been floating between the 
unpopular Junto and the pack of right-wing Tories. Sunder¬ 
land, though out of active administration, was still the 
powerful "cabinet-maker” behind the scenes as long as Will¬ 
iam lived, and Harley used him as the first stepping stone 
for his mounting fortunes, while Marlborough and Go dolphin 
were kept in place by the necessities of war* Though God- 
olphin had resigned at the beginning of the 1701-2 session 
he was soon to return and direct affairs till 1710 as the 
home and financial agent of the indispensable general. 

It was into this scene that Swift thrust his Contests 
and Dissentions in Athens and Home in the summer of 1701, 
during the electioneering period between the two parliaments 
His attention had been gradually turning to the actual pol¬ 
itical questions of the day. At Moor Park he had written 
in a general way of the paltry tricks of politics, and of 
the relationships between church and state® In 1700, dur¬ 
ing the trouble over the Irish Land Grants, he had composed 
A Fable yet a True Story taking a detached view of William 
III in which he likens the monarch x s position to that of 
Aesop 1 s henpecked husband: 

The parties henpecked William are thy wives. 





■ 

- 

. 

. 

r 

, 

. 

1 









69 


The hairs they pluck are thy prerogatives; 

Tories thy person hate, and Whigs thy power. 

Though much thou yieldest still they tug higher. 

Till thou and this old man alike are shewn. 

He without hairs, thou without a crown. 

The next year he wrote a poem occasioned hy the Story of 
Phaeton and the impeachment of the Whig lords, in which his 
interest has become more specific though still detached, 
siding with the lords I the great, the good, the just, the 
wise respectively) against the people*s rage and chiding 
William as the over impetuous Phaeton for his action in 
going over the head of Parliament in the Partition Treaties: 
In wild uproar they hurry on; 

The great, the good, the just, the wise, 

{ g) 

Law and religion overthrown. 

Are first marked out for sacrifice; 

When, to a height their fury grown, 

Finding too late he can't retire. 

He proves the real Phaeton, 

{ nt \ 

And truly sets the world on fire. 

This is the attitude which Swift takes in the Contests 

(l) Elrington Ball, Swift's Verse . 48. 

(S) Law hy William, religion hy dissenters and the moh. 

(3) Ball, op. cit. 49. 
























' 


* r 

I 








i 








f 





70 


and Dissent ions . It was intended to be a moderating in¬ 
fluence upon the coming elections, to turn the pack from 
their party prey to a consideration of the national issues 
which were now at stake J 

"This encourages me to hope, that, during the present 
lucid interval, the members retired to their homes may sus¬ 
pend a while their acquired complexions, and, taught by the 
calmness of the scene and the season, reasume the native 
sedateness of their temper". 

The event Justified Swift*s stand. But it is doubtful 
whether the pamphlet itself had much effect as compared with 
such things as Befoe 1 ^ dramatic march on Westminster. It 
is written in the same vein as that which he had no doubt 
employed in his earlier admonitions to William on the 
Triennial Bill - an elaborate and detached historical anal¬ 
ysis, rather academic for election purposes, an appeal to 
the members themselves on an entirely non-partisan basis 
rather than an appeal to the mass. He had not yet learned 
the art of propaganda which was to be his greatest political 
asset, and was striving to combat the unreasoning passions 
of faction. "Is it possible", wrote Bolingbroke to him many 
years later, "that one of your age and profession should be 
ignorant, that this monstrous beast has passions to be moved 















, 

. 

. 






71 



but no reason to be appealed to, and that plain truth will 
influence half a score men at most in a nation, or an age, 
while mystery will lead millions by the nose?" 

The history of Athen, Home, and Fnsrland, with the 
four impeached lords as Aristides (Somers), Themistodes, 
Pericles, and Phocion is drawn upon to prove the central 
thesis, that 

"in all free states, the evil to be avoided is tyranny, 
that is to say, the summa imperii , or unlimited power solely 
in the hands of the One, the Few, or the Many. Now, we have 
shown, that although most revolutions of government in 
Greece and Home began with the tyranny of the People, yet 
they generally concluded with that of a single person; so 
that a usurping populace is its own dupe, a mere underworked 
and a purchaser in trust for some single tyrant, whose 
state and power they advance to their own ruin, with as 
blind an instinct as those worms that die with weaving mag¬ 
nificent habits for beings of a superior nature to their 
own." 

Here he is defending the Hobles against the tyranny 
of the People, for Swift was no leveller. In A Tale of a 
Tub he had with heavy irony proposed writing "A Modest 

Defense of the Proceedings of the Kabble in all Asres". This 
t~l) Correspondence, III, 89. (July 21, 1721) — 



















. 

# 

t 

» 

* 





# 

. 

















, 








is it. "The raging of the sea, and the madness of the 
people, are put together in Holy Writ; and it is God alone 
who can say to either. Hitherto shalt though pass, and no 
farther". But the real issue is theoretically the Balance 


of power in the state, and when Marlborough later threatened 
to become the "single tyrant" prophesied above, he received 
the same, if more brutally effective, treatment. 

The pamphlet was attributed to the pens of Burnet or 
Somers himself. When it became known that Swift was the 
author the Whig lords naturally welcomed this new acquisi¬ 
tion, as it seemed to them, to their cause, already known 
in the literary world as the editor of Temple's memoirs. 

The friendship with Somers in particular led to the mock 
dedication of A Tale of a Tub to him in 1704. Swift had 
been very canny as well as detached in this first political 
venture, for though he had condemned the sheep-like men 
of party and the equally fortuitous power of their leaders, 
and carefully avoided any such mistake as that he had 
flirted with in the Whitehall poem, the Whig lords whom he 
had defended,(as lords . one factor in the balance, but not 
as men or as Whigs), were powerful men capable of assisting 
a politically minded young cleric with no intentions of 
wasting his power as an Irish Philemon in Laracor. At the 


















, 

. 






































. 












3 


same time however he was looking about him for what might 
he offered, undecided as yet where the tangle of unresolved 
political forces would find him when the day for action 
might come. It is fairly certain that at this time he was 
also assisting Dr. Charles Davenant, Tory economist and 
pamphleteer, in a tract against the Legions Memorial in 
which the Tory war policy was attacked and defended at the 
same time, and it is possible that he accompanied Davenant 
to a mysterious dinner with Harley, Harcourt, and Ormonde - 
his future lory associates. 1 *^ In his first letter to Arch¬ 
bishop Hing from London in 1710 Swift speaks of Earley as 
one "who formerly made some advances towards me". 

ihe next important visit to London was from November 
1703 to June 1704, during which he published A xale of a xub 
and though he consolidated his tentative Whig contacts. Swift's 
uncertainty found an added difficulty in the shape of the 
furore over the Occasional Conformity Bill. 

Anne was now on the throne with a xory government, 
ihe two main issues during her reign were religion and the 
War of the Spanish Succession, F or the time being, since 
the nation was behind the war though the parties might 
differ as to the best method of conducting it, party bicker- 
ll) Blrington Ball, swift's Jerse . 48-51. 





































. 












. 


. 


, 

. 

, 

; <"^T00 































ing turned for its subject matter to matters of domestic 
religious policy, neligion in a denominational and Erastian 
sense had become one of the chief lines for party division. 
If the whole matter of this formalistic and political 
quarrel of Church with I/issent and Eree-ihought (except 
where the free-thinker like Lolingbroke was politically 
High-Church) seems trivial and unreal today, especially 
when contrasted with the real religious struggles at the 
time of Laud and Cromwell, it sufficed to arouse a great 
deal of passionate dispute. With Anne the High-Churchmen 
lik^Atterbury and sacheverell had come into their own again, 
the former leading the lower house in convocation against 
the low-church bishops, the latter raising the flag of 
"bloody defiance" against Lissenters and especially against 
the practise of Occasional Conformity, fhis particular 
problem had many facets, fhe lest Act of 1673 was designed 
chiefly to eliminate the Catholics; but it ruled out non¬ 
conformists as well, and a practise had grown up among the 
politically ambitious of taking the Anglican communion sole¬ 
ly to evade the j.est. Ihis was a rather cheap procedure and 
even some Lissenters, like Lefoe, felt strongly that al¬ 
though the lest was an evil, to play fast and loose with 
one T s religious convictions to evade it was worse. On the 

















other hand there were many Anglicans as well as dissenters 
who occasionally attended services of other sects by pref¬ 
erence. But even more important was the political aspect: 

A Bill against Occasional Conformity would give the j.ories 
a distinct advantage in the control both of Commons and of 
the borough elections... 

Ihe result was that, whether from High-Church zeal or 
political interest, a Bill was proposed in 1702-3 by ot* 
John and Bromley, sent by an overwhelming majority to the 
House of Lords, and then defeated by the passive attitude 
of Codolphin who disapproved of such domestic wrangling in 
time of war* and/t?e machinations of Wharton and Burnet. 

•ihe lories themselves were divided on the question, which 
helped further the split in their ranks that was to admit 
an increasingly Whig wedge that was driven home by 1708. 
"And to cool your insolence a little" writes Swift to a 
lory friend early in 17 04, "know that the Queen and Court, 
and the house of Lords and half the Commons almost, are 
Whigs; and the number daily increases". 

Queen and Court were not Whigs. But they were cooling 


towards the high-flying element of Rochester and Nottingham 
as well as toward the whole group that was by now trying to 













■ 

. 

_ 

, 

« 

. » 

. 

. 

. 










<r 


6 


force a second Occasional Conformity Bill with the sugges¬ 
tion that it he "tacked" to the grants of finance to the 
government. It was in 1704 that Nottingham was dismissed 
and Harley and St. John received posts in the government 
which was tending toward a mixed coalition. Nevertheless 
the High-Churchmen were making a desperate stand, faction 
was funning high in Parliament, and Swift described the 
state of things by his Tfi . f hig and lory cats in his first 
letter from London.* 1 * 

^7hat stand was he to take in this matter? He had not 
yet found his level either as a Churchman or in party 
polities; he could not decide, like Defoe, on "principle", 
for principles at no time cut very much ice with Swift; 
results were the basis of his thought, and he was as yet 
uncertain what results he really wanted. Moreover this 
was an English question which did not directly affect what 
vested interests swift had at stake in Ireland. "I would 
be glad to know men's thoughts of it in Ireland; for my¬ 
self, I am much at a loss, though I was mightily urged by 
some great people to publish my opinion. I cannot but 
think, if men's highest assurances are to be believed, that 
several, who were against this bill, do love the Church, 


(li supra , p. 1. (December 16, 1703) 


















• : 


t 

4 












77 


and do hate or despise Presbytery.so that I know not 

what to think, and therefore shall think no more.” 

Hj.s reference is to Somers, Burnet, and Peterborough, the 
friends gained by his Contests and Bissentions > who wished 
to enlist his pen on their behalf. Kis native inclination 
against Dissenters added to his difficulties, even if he 
rather wished to oblige these powerful friends. The whole 
fuss over Occasional Conformity had really started when, in 
1697, the Lord Mayor of London, one Sir Humphrey Edwin, had 
so far forgotten himself as to ride in his civic robes to 
attend a Presbyterian service. Swift’s reaction to that 
event had been recorded in two works he was now seeing off 
the press. In A xale of a Lub he had described "how Jack’s 
tatters came into fashion in court and city: how he got 
upon a great horse and ate custard;" (custard was the time- 
honoured dish at the Lord Mayor’s feast). While speaking 
of the share of inward light as an ingredient of the Art 
of Canting in his Mechanical Operation of the Spirit , he 
had given a flick of his whip to the notorious Mayor, as 
a bearer of this light: "resembling lanthorns compact of 
leaves from Old Oeneva Bibles; which invention. Sir Humphrey 

Edwin, during his mayoralty, of happy memory, highly appro vd 
(1) Correspondence. I, 39. 



















, 










. 












and ^advanced". -And prejudices are as exacting as principles 

‘The matter continued to trouble him, however; politics 
gave preferment f and his only influential political contacts 
as yet were with men who opposed the hill, finally, with an 
obvious ill grace, ("Pox on the dissenters and Independents.’ 

I would as soon trouble my head to write against a louse or 
a flea") he made a gesture, and wrote against the bill - 
but just too late to be of use, so that it was never pub¬ 
lished. ' * The whole business of catering to politicians, 

however great, was in a characteristic manner beginning to 
get on this proud and truculent outsider’s nerves. Swift 
was always conscious of his own genius and it angered him 
that others would not immediately recognize the fact and 
reward him accordingly. Moreover, his position was uncom¬ 
fortably like sitting on the fence. By April he is writing 
to xisdall again: 

"I...envy very much your....love of peace and settle¬ 
ment; the reverse of which has been the great uneasiness of 
my life and is like to continue so. And what is the result*?' 
~5n. quis consevimus agros . f i find nothing but the good wish¬ 
es of a decayed Ministry, whose lives and mine will probably 
wear out before they can serve either my little hopes, or 
their own ambition. Therefore I am resolved suddenly to re¬ 
tire, like a discontented courtier, and vent myself in study 
or speculation, till my own humour or the scene here, shall 
change". { ~ } 

(1) Correspondence . I, 44 (.February 3, 1704 to Tisdall) 

(2) Correspondence . I, 47. 












. 

. 


. 














So, flinging his xale of a iub before an astonished 
world, retire he did, as yet neither Churchman, Whig nor Tory. 

3. rirst bruits and the rest: xhe Whigs vs. the Church 

1704 - 1710. 

In the three years which followed Swift remained in 
Ireland, giving little thought to politics or the great 
war upon the continent in which Marlborough was leading 
the allied armies to victory after victory over the while 
and blue armies of rranee. He was finding himself, however, 
becoming as the years passed more and more solidly behind 
the Church which, for good or ill, he had chosen to serve. 

As to parties, his opinions of them had not been altered 
by his London experiences, and In one of the rare political 
references of this period he writes to JacJt Temple, son of 
his former benefactor, that ’’Whig and lory has spoiled all 
that was tolerable here....I am sorry we begin to resemble 
England only in its defects”. frogs and f action, he adds 
sarcastically, seem to thrive equally on importation. 

Queen Anne had in 1704 granted a Bounty to her beloved 
English Church; the first fruits and Tenths \ the income of 
a benefice for the first year and a tenth part thereafter) 
which had been paid to the Crown since the reformation were 


(1) June 15, 1706 i Correspondence , I, 57,8.) 





























. 

f 





















t 





80 


remitted to the Church as a fund to he used for the allev- 

11 ) 

iation of the poorer clergy* The economic position of 
the parish clergy is recorded hy many writers of the day, 
hy Addison, and Oldham, and later in Goldsmith‘s vicar of 
forty pounds a year* Their state was certainly had enough. 
Their social position was as yet in transition from the 
peasant status of the Middle Ages to the equality with the 
squirearchy which they attained under the later Georges. 

The ,f draggle-tail parson" of Swift's Argument against Abol¬ 
ishing Christianity was the butt of satire, often forced to 

(l) It is rather ironical that the Whig bishop Burnet, 

Swift*s political bete noire , was chiefly responsible 
for this act of grace which Swift himself spent six 
years in obtaining for Ireland. His historical re¬ 
searches had brought to Burnet's notice the fact that 
this privy royal income was being used for purposes 
hardly in keeping with its origin. A thousand a year 
went to a nobleman who had purchased the interest in 
the fund paid to the Duchess of Portsmouth, mistress of 
Charles II. Another thousand went to the son of Hell 
Gwyn. Burnet began his agit/ation for the Bounty under 
William, and with the aid of Archbishop Sharp obtained 
it from Anne. (Trevelyan, England under Queen Anne . I, 
47,8) That Burnet, who was ever assisting the fortunes 
of the lower clergy who reviled him as a Whig, and 
especially those of his own diocese, and Swift, whose 
diplomacy obtained the Bounty for Ireland, whose Pro ,1ect 
for the Advancement of religion resulted in Anne's 
decision to erect fifty new churches in London, and who 

privately devoted a tenth of his own income to charity 
in Dublin, should have come to hate one another with 
all the zeal of partisan fury, is a comment upon the 
effects of politics at the time which speaks for itself. 









































, 




1 






























81 


degrade himself in the effort to rise through the influence 
of a patron as whose chaplain he might expect to he dis¬ 
missed from table before dessert* Swift describes this 
side of the picture without any relieving sympathy in the 
vivid character of Corusodes, a dull and subservient cleric 
who goes up to London and through his sister, a waiting 
woman in a noble family, obtains the post of chaplain. 
Truckling to his lordship*s humours, assisting him in his 
amour with his sister, he succeeds in adding sinecure to 
sinecure, ingratiates himself with the political faction of 
the day, and is left "mounting fast toward the top of the 
Ladder iScclesiastical, which he hath a fair probability to 
reach; without the merit of one single virtue, moderately 
stocked with the least valuable parts of erudition....and, 
in his grandeur, naturally choosing to haul up others after 
him, whose accomplishments most resemble his ora." The 
other side, that of the parish clergyman who is content 
with doing his humble task on the modest income that is 
his lot, is recorded with sympathetic realism in Swift f s 
Country Parson : 

Parson, these things in thy blessing 

(l) "An isssay on the Spates of Clergymen" ( Works . III. Writtm 
for the Lublin Intelligencer circa 17281 


























, 

T 

. 
































82 


Are "better than a bishop*s blessing. 

A wife that makes conserves; a steed 
That carries double when there 1 s need; 

October store and best Virginia* 

Tythe-pig and mortuary guinea; 

Gazettes sent gratis down and franked, 

For which the patron*s weekly thanked; 

A large concordance bound long since; 

Sermons to Charles the ^irst, when Prince; 

A chronicle of ancient standing; 

A Chrysostom to smmoth thy band in. ^ ^ 

It was in the interests of such as these that he was + 
to work during the next half-dozen years. Here was a cause 
to his taste. Its homely practicality involved neither the 
intricacies of conscience and principle nor the fires of 
prejudice; moreover, or so he thought, there would be no 
political strings attached to this simple question of the 
extension of the Queen*s Grace to Ireland, although polit¬ 
ical wires might have to be pulled. And there was no doubt 
here as to "men^ thoughts of it in Ireland Tt . The sugges¬ 
tion came from himself. On his return in 1704 he wrote to 


(1) cited, Trevelyan, II, 49 





















' 







, 


1 





















William King, Archbishop of Dublin, who was then in the 
English capital, urging him to intercede for the benefit 
of "many poor livings". King was however in rather bad 
odour with the government, and put Swift off with a pious 
hope: "I doubt not but the Duke of Ormond ["lord lieutenant] 
thinks of it." 

There the matter rested. Finally in November 1707 
Swift Journeyed to London again in the train of the Bari 
of Pembroke, this time to stay almost two years, and in the 
capacity not of a mere Irish vicar, but of the accredited 
agent of the Irish Bishops in the matter of First Fruits 
and Iwentieth Parts. He was thought to have some credit 
with the increasingly Whig ministry, and it was also deemed 
expedient, not without reason, to have some one on the spot 
to prod the Lord Lieutenants memory. This trip was to be 
a turning point in Swift 1 s political career. He came as an 
Irish Churchman, and this fact was to make his hitherto 
tentative Whig alliance impossible. Iwo issues were at 
stake, the r irst ^ruits and the repeal of the Irish lest 
Act which he soon found to be an important new item in 
Whig policy. Both vitally concerned his native Church, 
which Occasional Conformity had not; disappointed by the 
Whig lords in the first, refusing to compromise with them 

































r 

1 

1 

, 
















84 


on the second, his Whig alliance was inevitably doomed, 
despite the fact that his contacts, opportunities, and 
purely political tenancies lay in that direction, Ihe 
question of the war, which was to be so important a few 
years later, was hardly an issue at all to bwift as yet. 


so he came to London after a visit to his mother at 
Leicester and began using his influence with Somers and yoirg 
Sunderland, basking in the literary sunshine as the great¬ 
est genius of the age, for the authorship of his -iale was 
known to the literati , and cultivating the friendship of 
the lords in Addison r s Little Senate, Philips and Steele. 


meanwhile he kept a keen eye upon the political manoeuvres 
which were causing revolutions on the back-stairs, ihe gov¬ 
ernment, which had been moving through moderatism towards 
Whiggery since 1704 as a result of the lory opposition to 
marlborough f s operation of the war, would have been already 
in the hands of the Junto, though still under Godolphin. 


were it not for Anne T s distrust of party government and 
especially of the Whigs. "Keep me out of the power of the 


merciless men of both parties", she had cried; and now she 
relied upon the indeterminate tergiversations of the mod¬ 
erate Larley, whose influence on the back-stairs had been 
























85 


increased with the entrance of his cousin Abigail Bill 
as a power in the Queen T s bedchamber t so long dominated 
by the imperious Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough* 

In lebruary, 1708, Harley and the Queen attempted to 
stop the Whig tide with a sudden coup * Jodolphin was 
dismissed from his post as Lord treasurer. But the Privy 
Council refused to act under Harley T s guidance, Marlborough 
threatened to resign, and the attempt proved a complete 
failure. Harley r s position was also weakened by the Jregg 
affair, in which it was discovered that a clerk in his 
office (of Secretary of State) had been conveying inform¬ 
ation to Prance* Earley was innocent, birt the Whigs made 
the most of the incident, and Harley was to be dismissed, 
followed by St. John and Harcourt. Moderation was fast 
becoming a lost cause; the government which in 1702 had 
been lory and Eoyal, in 1704 developed into a xvoyal (or 
Queen's) administration between both parties. But events 
were now forcing Anne and the Moderate lories like Earley 
towards a definite j.ory stand in opposition to the monop¬ 
olizing Whig Junto. 

owift noted these manoeuvres with a disinterested glee 
which indicated the instability of his Whig alliance. "Mr. 

(1) Or Mrs. Masham, as she had become in the summer of 1707. 
















, 



































86 


Harley had "been some time, with the greatest art imaginable, 

carrying on an intrigue to alter the ministry....! never 

in my life saw or heard such divisions and complications 

of parties as there have been for some time: you sometimes 

see the extremes of Whig and j.ory driving on the same thing 

...my Lord Peterborough's affair is yet upon the anvil, 

( 1 ) 

and what they will beat it out to, no man can tell 
It is said that Harley had laid a scheme for an entire new 
ministry, and the men are named to whom the several employ¬ 
ments were to be given. And though his project miscarried, 

it is reckoned the greatest piece of Court skill that has 

(2 i 

been acted these many years.’ 1 'fhe obvious approval boded 
well for Harley's future. 

Iwo other items indicate Swift r s stand as essentially 
a non-partisan Churchman by this time, who thought of him¬ 
self as a Whig if anything (he could still sneer at the 
violently high-lory Atterbury), but whose allegiance was 

mainly on the unstable basis of looking out for the main 

*1) The lories had set Peterborough and the" Spanish theatre 

of war up as their hero and policy, mainly to detract 
from marlborough and his victories against the French, 
xhe Whigs supported the Harl of Calway as the general for 
Spain; the fact that swift merely refers to this busi¬ 
ness without comment indicates his essentially non-part¬ 
isan attitude at this time. In 1707-10 he is the Church 
man, using party merely as a means to the County or to 
preferment. 

*2) -xo Archbishop king, February 12, 1708, ( Correspondence 
I, 75, 76) 








. 


' - • 


. 

' : 

' 






■ 

■ • • . . 















87 


chance in the only direction then open, ihe now dominant 
lords of the Jurto like aomers and Sunderland were the best 
bets as aids in the x?irst fruits business. But he did 
not neglect to cultivate the lories as well, and appicached 
both Edward Southwell, son of the man toward whom he had 
looked hopefully in 1690 i and who becomes ‘'Bed'* in the 
Journal to Stella ), and Ormond. Then, the Biekerstaff 
hoaxes were the products of these years, They were some¬ 
thing more than the witty and rather supercilious practical 
joking of genius. swift makes the poor astrologer Petridge 
die in Bis sent. More than two years before the same pop¬ 
ular writer of almanacs had been attacked by the Tory 
journalist William Pitt is, saying that people bought his 
stuff “for the sake of his running down what he did not 
understand, the Church of England, and his Invectives 
against the true sons of it”, which “were of more weight 
with his Ignorant readers than all the Terms of Art and 
hard Words that usher’d in his pretended Nativities.” 

Meanwhile he was engaged in a ticklish diplomatic 

tangle. Pembroke must be prompted but not antagonized, so 

Swift was forced to keep his own efforts from appearing as 

*1) x. P. M. Newton “William Pitt is and Queen Anne Journal¬ 
ism”, I i Modern Philology , November 1935, p. 117) 









































■ 

. 

























though he were going behind the Lord Lieutenant’s hack* 
Pembroke said the matter was in his hands, progressing 
well, and there would he no need of seeing the treasurer, 
bwift thought otherwise, hut kept the interview with 
Godolphin for which he was arranging a careful secret, 
finally the interview was granted - and Swift’s early feel¬ 
ings about the juggler's tricks of state received corrobora¬ 
tion anew. The great man was cold* It was not his prov¬ 
ince, but the Queen’s and Pembroke's. In any case he could 
see no great advantage in even the English Bounty, for the 
sum was relatively small, corruption drained most of this, 
and what was more, the clergy had proven ungrateful. With 
this preparation he began to state his conditions. He 
would demand assurance that the remission be properly ad¬ 
ministered, and - that the Irish clergy would return a 

proper acknowledgement. What he meant by this he refused 

. ti) 

to say. 

What he meant was obvious to Swift. It meant the re¬ 
pealing of the Test in Ireland preparatory to the same move 
at home, a party project as dear to the Whigs, and as imp¬ 
ortant from the viewpoint of elections as the Bill against 
Occasional Conformity was to their enemies. To Swift, an 
Irish Churchman and member of the Garrison, such conditions 
^Correspondence i t 92-95. (June 10, 1708) 

















. 

. 

r 




, 






89 


were impossible. He had heard rumours of this move when 
the Pretender ? s invasion of 1708 was first threatened and 
the Irish Dissenters had used their legal proscription 
from the army as a lever to repeal the Test, hut he had 
not believed that his Whig friends would really make this 
a condition to be traded for the Bounty* There was no 
comparison between them in their importance to the Irish 
Establishment. How however his Church had at last come 
squarely face to face with Whig policy, and there was no 
doubt which would eventually win* 

It was his first real experience with the horse-trad¬ 
ing tactics of politicians. He was left hanging between 
two evasions, those of Godolphin and of the Lord Lieutenant 
whose constant assurances that matters were progressing he 
knew to be false* nis annoyance with Pembroke was increas¬ 
ing, especially, he writes to King with a note of remon- 
stanee, in view of the fact "that if it had been solicited 
four years ago by no abler hand than my own, while the 
Duke of Ormond was in Ireland, it might have been done in a 
month". He began to fume; and by August he was ready to 
seek consolation in a general observation about politicians 
"In the small conversation I have had among great 


men, there is one maxim I have found them constantly to ob- 

































, 





• 




* 



. 































90 


serve, which is, that in any business before them, if you 

enquire how it proceeds, they only confide what is proper 

to answer, without one single thought whether it be agree- 

f 1) 

able to fact or no.” 

Swifts career was to be a drama in miniature of the 
political history of two islands. Here we can see, in the 
office of the Lord Treasurer, the meeting of two forces 
which in 1710 were to affect the political history of Eng¬ 
land: £odolphin, whose dislike of the clergy caused the 
fall of his party in the Tory election two years later, 
and Swift, whose loyalty to his Church and hatred of Dissent 


caused him to be driven by just this element among the 

ii 

Whigs, to give the Tory party the brilliant supporting prop¬ 
aganda necessary to keep them in power. 


(1) Correspondence . I 104, l to King, August 28, 1708| 

(2) The Tory election of 1710 was the result of Sacheverell's 
trial, nis inf1amatory High-Church sermon of November 
1709 would have come to nothing, if brOdolphin*s anti- 
clericism had not led him to bring the preacher up be¬ 
fore Parliament. (Sacheverell had struck at uodolphin 
under the name "Volpone") A cry of "Church in danger" 
was the immediate result, and popular feeling ran so 
high that the nominal sentence handed down against the 
high-flying clergyman was a virtual Tory victory. The 
mob and £odolphin J s stupid rancour gave Anne her chance, 
and Harley soon became the leader of the Ministry. 










, • r 

, 

• « 









' 

. 

, 

















In November events began to move rapidly* There had 
been an election that spring which gave the Whigs a sub¬ 
stantial majority, but Anne moved no faster than was ab¬ 
solutely necessary. In November however the Whigs took 
advantage of Anne r s grief over the death of her consort and 
succeeded in forcing the junto into place: Somers (Lord 
President of the Council), Pembroke, Halifax, Sunderland, 
and Wharton (Lord Lieutenant of Ireland). The affair of 
the First Fruits was beginning to look up, and by the end 
of the month. Swift heard that they had been granted. 
Despite the fact that he was even then preparing a groupof 
religious tracts and satires against Whig policies, his 
old uncertainty returned with the possibility of being em¬ 
ployed by his now all-powerful friends; though he assures 
King ”that no prospect of making my fortune, shall ever 
prevail on me to go against what becometh a man of con¬ 
science and truth, and an entire friend of the Established 
Church”. With uncertainty came the old discomfort. He 
would prefer to go to Vienna as secretary to the Earl of 
Berkeley, ,f by which I shall be out of the way of parties, 
until it shall please urod I have some place to retire to, a 

little above contempt." ' At the same time the op portnn- 

tl) Correspondence I. 117. (ITorember 9. 1708) 

(2) 1-bid. 








. 


t 

' 

r '- ’ , . . . 1 : 

. 


















9 


o 


ity arose of going with the Sari of Wharton as chaplain to 
Ireland. But Swift knew his avowed policy of gaining a 
repeal of the Test, and refused to apply. The other poss¬ 
ible candidate proved his qualification by changing from 
his former Church stand to preach lustily in favour of a 
united Protestant frent with toleration of Dissent. He got 
the place. 

By March he realized where he stood; he was a Churchman 
outside both the factions of the day. The reported success 
with regard to the First bruits had been false. Nothing 
remained but to return again to the bogs and fens, still 
Vicar of Laracor. "I believe by this time you are satis¬ 
fied that I am not grown great rf , he writes to he friend 
Charles Ford, "nor like to do so very soon: for I am thought 
to want the Art of being thourow paced in my Party, as ail 
discreet Persons ought to be, and some time this Summer 
you may not improbably see me alighting at your House in my 
way to Besidence". * ^ 

This is a fair statement of the case. He had come to 
London hoping, quite naturally, to obtain some station "a 
little above contempt" as well as to obtain the Queen’s 


(1) Letters of Swift to Ford. 5, {March 8, 1709) 















. 







. 


f 








’ 

, 





















Bounty, through the good graces of his Whig friends. As 
C. H. Firth has shown notoriety as author of A Tale of 

A Tub and the objections of the ’’royal prude” had as yet 
no influence in the matter. The Whigs wished to secure 
his support, hut he was not thorough paced enough, and the 
Test stood as a harrier in the way. Somers had promised 
to support his claim to the Irish see of Waterford, and it 
was given to Dr. Thomas Milles, upon the recommendation of 
Pembroke. Halifax had promised to assist Swift to a preb¬ 
endary in Westminster - and gave him a book. Cork was 
thought of, and lost. He even asked for some living in the 
bestowal of Stearne, Dean of St. Patrick's; it went to a 
relative of Archbishop King. 

There remain the pamphlets which were written at the 

close of 1708 and early in 1709, all bearing on the relig- 

( 2 ) 

ious issues which were then uppermost in swift's mind. 

The mock solemnity of An Argument against AbolishingOhrist- 
ianity and the mixed irony and practical suggestion of A 
Project for the Advancement of religion both contain re¬ 
flections on the Dissenters and the enemies of the Church. 

11) "Dean swift and Ecclesiastical Preferment” i The Heview 
of English studies . January 1926) 

12) These will be dealt with in the consideration of swift's 
religious position, infra , section III. 


















. 




. 


. 









■ ' 



















. 

. 




























94 


A Letter Concerning the sacramental xest is the most imp¬ 
ortant, for it came as a statement on this vital issue 

' 

which owift had to write; and despite his rather weak 
efforts to evade the responsibility of authorship, which 
went so far as to make him refer to himself in the work as 
one likely to write for the repeal, it was proof positive 
for the Whigs that they had been nourishing a snake in 
the bosom of their party. In it is the attitude of Jonathan, 
Swift, Churchman - its views are a large portion of the 
constant factor in his political thought. The problem is a 
practical one: if the xest be repealed, what then? Swift 
was among the many whose opinion* of the dissenting bourg¬ 
eoisie were memories of f 41. They would revert to type 
and, capturing the Establishment, effect the antithesis of 
toleration, he will have no humbug about reasons of con¬ 
science or false bogeys resurrected from the prostrate 
body of Irish Catholicism, when it is obviously a purely 
policial issue, using the Irish Church as its experimental 
victim and designed to reward party men among the Whigs. 

It is no wonder that they failed to gain him a Westminster 
stall or an Irish see. 











CHAPTER III 


Minister of Propaganda. 1710-14. 


"It was then [l70l] that I first began to trouble 
myself with the difference between the principles 
of Whig and Tory; having formerly employed myself 
in other, and I think much better speculation.... 
a lover of liberty, I found myself much inclined 
to be what they called a Whig in politics; and 
that, besides, I thought it impossible, upon any 
other principle, to defend, or submit to, the Rev¬ 
olution: but, as to religion, I confessed myself 
to be a high Churchman, and that I did not con¬ 
ceive how anyone, who wore the habit of a clergy¬ 
man, could be otherwise. That I had observed very 
well with what insolence and haughtiness some 
lords of the high church party treated not only 
their own chaplains, but all other clergymen what¬ 
soever, and thought this was sufficiently recomp¬ 
ensed by their professions of zeal to the church: 
that I had'Tlkewise observed how“the Whig lords 

took a direct contrary measure, treated the per¬ 
sons in particular clergymen with great courtesy, 
but shewed much ill will and contempt for the 
order in general.....that the connivance, or en¬ 
couragement, given by the Whigs to those writers 
of pamphlets, who reflected upon the whole body of 
the clergy without any exception, would unite with 
the church, as one man, to oppose them; and that, 

I doubted, his lordship's friends did not consider 
the consequence of this....I have indeed been told 
by an honourable gentleman of the same party, that 
both their lordships, about the time of Lord Gk>d- 
olphin's removal, did, upon occasion, call to mind 
what I had said to them above five years before*.. 

"About the end of August 1710, I went to England, 
at the desire, and by the appointment, of the Arch- 
































, 










, 




















1 ' f 





















96 


"bishops of that kingdom [Ireland] ; under whose 
hands I had a commission to solicit in conjunc¬ 
tion with two bishops who were then in London, 
the restoring the first-fruits and twentieths 
to the clergy, which had been many years solic¬ 
ited in vain, upon my arrival in town, I found 
the two bishops were gone to the country; where¬ 
upon I got myself introduced to Mr. Harley, who 
was then ohancellor of the exchequer, and acted 
as first minister. He received me with great 
kindness; told me that he and his friends had 
long expected my arrival; and upon shewing my 
commission, immediately undertook to perform it; 
which he accordingly did in less than three weeks, 
having settled it at five meetings with the Queen, 
according to a scheme I offered him and got me 
the Queen r s promise, for a further and more imp¬ 
ortant favour the crown grants to the clergy of 
Ireland; which the bishops there, deceived by mis¬ 
information, not worth mentioning in this paper, 
prevented me from bringing to a good issue. 

"When the affair of the first-fruits was fully 
dispatched, I returned my humble thanks to Mr. 
Harley in the name of the clergy of Ireland, and 
of my own; and offered to take my leave, as int¬ 
ending Immediately to return to that kingdom. Mr. 
Harley told me, he and his friends knew very well 
what useful things I had written against the princ¬ 
iples of the late discarded faction; and that my 
personal esteem for several among them would not 
make me a favourer of their cause* that there was 
now an entirely new scene, that the Queen was re¬ 
solved to employ none but those who were friends 
of church and state: that their great difficulty 
lay in the want of some good pen, to keep their 
spirit raised in the people, to assert the princ¬ 
iples, and Justify the proceedings, of the new min¬ 
isters. upon that subject he fell into some per¬ 
sonal civilities, which will not become me to re¬ 
peat.... and concluded, that it should be his 
particular care to establish me here in England, 
and represent me to the Queen as a person they 
could not be without. 

"I promised to do my endeavours in that way for 





















, 

. . 














. 










■ 















































97 


’’some few months, to which he replied, he expected 
no more; and that he had other and greater occasions 
for me." ID 

swift came to London determined to gain the Yirst 
j?ruits this time, and hopeful that the new scene with Harley 
as its chief figure would he propitious; hut though he found 
himself "equally caressed hy both parties, hy one as a 
sort of hough for drowning men to lay hold of; and hy the 

f p) 

other as one discontented with the late men in power” , 
he had no particular hopes from the new ministry, and in¬ 
tended to return when his mission was accomplished. -Anyway, 


11) "Memoirs relating to that Change which happened in the 
Queen's Ministry in the Year 1710” October, 1714, 

( Works V 380-83; the italics are mine). Hote Swift's 
attitude toward what he satirized in his .Argument against 
Abolishing Christianity as "nominal” Christianity (the 
italicized passage). With his almost wholly social 
viewpoint, the results were what counted almost to the 
exclusion of everything else, xhis explains why he 
could ardently support the brilliant hut loose-living 
and free-thinking joolingbroke, who based his political 
career upon a "profession of zeal to the church” and 
kept his deistic writings safely locked in his drawer, 
where their social effects would he nil - at least till 
after his death. un the other hand Burnet, however 
charitable or likeable in private, wrote and spoke on 
the wrong side and led the Low-Churchmen, a dangerous 
man. Wharton, whom swift attacked with unparalleled 
savagery in his short Character , offended on every count: 
his personal profligacy and irreligion were flaunted 
before the world, an aggravation which merely doubled 
Swift's resentment of his political opinions. 

(2) Correspondence . I, 193,4. 



















. 
















T 


















. 












he knew too much about ministers to hope for much, even 
after he had enlisted with the Tories as their unofficial 
minister of Propaganda, and at this time was essentially 
still the non-partisan Churchman. * 1 ^ But he had a linger¬ 
ing grudge against the Whigs, who had promised without ful¬ 
filling, who had placed him in so many uncomfortable sit¬ 
uations because of their Church policy; and ^odolphin, 
when Swift met him, "gave me a reception very unexpected, 

and altogether different from what I ever received from any 

( 2 ) 

great man in my life; altogether short, dry, and morose." 

So much for the old - and Swift began to meditate vengeance 
in the form of a lampoon. Later on, when the Whigs tarnishec 
his rising glory with calls of turn-coat, the grudge and 
desire for vengeance grew. "Hot 'em, for ungrateful dogs; 

I will make them repent their usage before I leave this 
place", he is exclaiming in annoyance to Stella by November. 
The reaction of the Whigs he left behind was perfectly nat¬ 
ural; he had done little for them save mark time and finally 
publish a group of pamphlets against their schemes for tol- 

C1) "Journal to Stella" (Works 11,17.) "They call me nothing 
but Jonathan; and I said, I believed they would "have me 
Jonathan, as they found me; and I never knew a ministry 
to do anything for those whom they make companions of 
their pleasure;... .but I care not." f ibid . 122; Feb. ITU) 
(2) Correspondence . I, 194. 























. 

. 




t 








. 














99 


eration. But then, so was Swift's. They had failed to 
signify that they adequately realized what he knew very 
well; that his was the most powerful and dangerous pen in 
England. 

Hobert Harley, leader of the new, proved wiser in 
these matters. He had already hound two journalists to his 
cause, and knew their worth. He realized what the Whig 
lords had not, that Swift represented a delicate problem 
in diplomacy, an art of which Harley (known as Kobin the 
Trickster to his enemies) was master. When the all-import- 
ant interview finally took place on October 7, Swift came 
away a prospective party man, already half enmeshed. The 
porter had told him that the great man was at dinner, and 
that he might return an hour later - the sort of treatment 
Swift cynically expected. But when he returned, Harley 
himself came out, took him into the dining-hall, and pre¬ 
sented him. 

w We sat two hours, drinking as good wine as you 
do; and two hours more he and I alone; where he 
heard me tell my business: entered into it with 
all kindness;...and, in short, said everything I 
could wish; told me he must bring Mr. St, John 
(Secretary of State) and we acquainted; and spoke 
so many things of personal kindness and esteem for 
me, that I am inclined half to believe what some 
friends have told me, that he would do everything 
to bring me over...he has desired me to dine with 
him on Tuesday; and after four hours being with 
him, set me down at St. James's coffeehouse. All 









100 

’’this is odd and comical if yon consider him. and 
■ me. He knew my Christian name very well.” 

Swift might well meditate -upon the contrast "between 
this and the interview about the same business which he had 
had with another head of the treasury a year and a half 
before. At any rate, within a few days he fired his open¬ 
ing gun unasked, and satisfied his grudge by some verses on 
Sjd Hamet’s Hod : the Treasurer’s White Staff of which Sidney 
Godolphin had lately been rudely deprived. 

Sid’s rod was slender, white, and tall. 

Which oft he used to fish withal; 

A plaice was fasten’d to the hook. 

And many score of gudgeons took; 

Yet still so happy was his fate. 

He caught his fish, and saved his bait... 

He had not caught Swift, however; and although the 
ignominious manner of dismissal which Anne had meted out to 
the man who had led her government since 1702 was well 

known - Swift reported to King that a groom of the Queen’s 

. 

stables had been sent to order that Godolphin break his 
staff - the lampoon improves upon the occasion with: 

Hear Sid. 1 then, why wert thou so mad 
T‘o break thy rod like naughty lad? 

You should have kiss’d it in your distress 

(l) Journal to Stella . & 23 ,24. 













































, 

* 

















































101 


And then returned it to your mistress. 

Or made it a Newmarket switch 
And not a rod for thy own breech. 

The story of the heights to which Swift rose as comp¬ 
anion, adviser, and public voice of the ministry is the 
oft told tale in the pages of his Journal to Stella * Harley 
kept the relationship upon the footing of that first meet¬ 
ing; "Jonathan" soon met the meteoric young Secretary, St. 
John - hardly passed thirty - and Lord Keeper Harcourt. 

He dined with them regularly at Harley f s on Satnrday, 
thinking them a triumverate unique in political annals, 
for they seemed tertily to love one another. Sundays were 
usually granted to the Secretary, who instituted a Brother^ 
Club for Tory wits and men of state: Harley, St. John, 
Prior, and Arbuthnot. Swift had begun to swell like a 
turkey-cock in all this glory. He would not be reconciled 
with Harley for days because the Treasurer had made/single 
diplomatic faux -pas , sending Swift fifty pounds as though 
he were a paid hack. He could bully ministers, sending one 
in to a session to tell another that he would not dine 
late that evening, and rule the Brother*s Club like an aut¬ 
ocrat, black-balling a Puke whom he did not choose to have. 
As Harley *s Saturday dinners began to be crowded with 






















. 

■ 


















, 







.l&2 


lesser statesmen and drinking to replace the old conversa¬ 
tions, Swift began to deny them his company* When the court 
moved to Windsor he drove down with one or other of the 
Tory leaders and stayed with Arbuthnot, breeding pamphlets 
or "biting" splenetic lords and unsuspecting Ladies of the 
Queen's Bedchamber. Meanwhile he used his power to help 
his literary brethren, great and small. Whig and Tory, from 
Addison, Steele, Parnell, and Congreve, to Trapp and "little 
Harrison", whom he supplied with jobs and ideas and whose 
death evoked one of the few simply human outbursts of 
feeling that Swift kept as a rule rigidly to himself. De¬ 
spite his certainty that he would leave as he came, mere 
Jonathan, and the growing coolness of his admired friend 
Addison, which made him rail at the curse of party madness, 
it was "the best of times" for Swift. 


The Tory party which came into power in 1710 was in 
a peculiar and a difficult situation. 

The two parties represented, besides principles which 
were fast becoming almost indistinguishable in so far as 
they continued to exist, - certain divisions of party and 
class with the interests or prejudices native therein. The 
Whigs were essentially a minority party which enlisted 
















. 








■ 

. 

. 

. 
























wealth, vitality, and power from divers quarters, including 
the old "country" families among the aristocracy who had 
been on the side of the itoundheads and held almost feudal 
sway over the elections of their counties, a minority of 
the gentry, and a conglomeration of Dissenters, seamen, and 
the professional classes outside the clergy, 'i'he middle 
classes in the towns, from puritan shopkeeper to wealthy 
merchant or hanker whose credit depending upon keeping out 
the Pretender, were the most solid of the Whig foundations. 
"I knew", said Swift, "[that] it was necessary for their 
party to make their bottom as wide as they could, by taking 
all denominations of Protestants to be members of their 
body".^"^ The strength of this minority party lay in the 
fact that all its parts were in mutual agreement upon the 
important issues of the day. It stood for protestant tol¬ 
eration, was anti-x-rench (a result of commercial interest 

combined plus its traditional opposition to the francophile 

■ 

Charles xi ) and wanted to carry on the French war both on 
land and sea, but particularly on land, was behind the 
Scottish union of 1707, and was uncompromisingly behind the 
protestant Hanoverian succession, ihere was also a strong 
tendency towards the principle of la carri&re ouverte aux 
talents within its ranks, a principle which gave it men 
'1) "Memoirs.Queen's ministry in 1710" (Works, y, 380) 
















* 

, 

, 


. 


. 

. 













104 


like Halifax and Somers. 

Un the other hand the j.ories were a majority party 
drawing support from the landed and rural classes; the 
Cavalier section of the feudal aristocracy, the lower clergy 
and the squires, xheir allegiances lay with the Church 
against toleration, they were anti-Dutch for much the same 
reasons that their opponents were anti-French, and although 
their policy in international matters corresponded to the 
later "Little England” desire for insular peace and quiet, 
when war became inevitable they bacteda sea policy with sub¬ 
sidies to the allies for whatever continental activity 
might be found necessary. But they were never unified and 
disciplined like their opponents under the Junto, Their 
inconsistency and instability came from the fact that their 
quota of the Middle-Men differed more radically from their 
true-blues than was the case among the Whigs. The result 
was that such Middle-Men as Marlborough and Codolphin, who 
started in inne f s reign on the same "bottom" as men like 
nochester and Nottingham, ended by governing through a 
straight Whig Junto; and the years of ^ory power, the last 
four years of the neign, represented an Indian bummer of 

xoryism because a Middle-Man (Harley) and a true-blue (St* 
each 

John)/tried to steer the party in his own direction and 















1 


















105 


interests* ±he w alpolean winter was the result. 

xhe reason for this fundamental weakness was the in¬ 
ability of the lory majority to decide upon the question 
of the Succession, ihis always split them among themselves 
because they could never quite reconcile their High-Church 
principles and the theories of Id vine night and .Passive 
Obedience with which they were historically associated, and 
the part which they had played in 1688. It was an inherent 
weakness which even strong leadership would have found diff¬ 
iculty in surmounting. lime had been too short for the body 
of the party to adjust itself to the conditions of the inv¬ 
olution, to find new excuses for fundamental conservative 
assumption and the Jacobites and non-jurors were always 
there to remind them of the problem, finally, their lead¬ 
ers offered little help. Bolingbroke (St. John) vacillated, 
hoping until the last that the Pretender would see his way 
to an Anglican confession on the principle that no mass 
is worth a throne, and Oxford (Harley) like most of his 
contemporaries took out "insurance" with the court of St. 
Germain to be safe if the unexpected happened. 

xhis was to help create an impossible situation by 
1714. xn 1710 however the issues were immediate and fairly 
clear-cut. Pirst among these was the question of peace. 










■ 


. 






. 












, 

. 


. 


















The War of the Spanish Succession had been engaged in orig¬ 
inally on the basis of William r s Partition -Treaties whose 
purpose was to stop the growing power of France: to gain 
an effective barrier of blemish forts for the Dutch and to 
keep the crownsof Spain and Prance from being united. The 
Tory element had been opposed to the King's European policy 
until Louis XIV forced all England to unite as a result of 

his declaring for the Pretender, occupying the Netherlands, 

. 

and threatening English trade interests. Marlborough had 
then taken things in hand, with v*o dolphin's financial genius 
at home supplying the funds. All had gone well so long as 
victories like rtamillies followed strokes like Blenheim, so 
long as the Tory squire received blood for taxes, and so 
long as the general economic conditions at home were good. 
Put in 1708-9 conditions began to change. The winter of 
1708 and the vireat Prost resulted in poor harvests and 
general depression. The "bloody butchery" of Matplaquet in 
1709, a victory bought only at the expense of 17,000 Allied 
troops against 11,000 Prench seemed to indicate that Marl- 
bourough*s magic touch was beginning to fail, malplaquet 

itself was the result of the failure of the Whigs to neg¬ 
otiate a by now obviously desirable peace. 


The original aims of the war had been gained, trance 






















































. 






















107 


was prostrate. *ihe negotiations at Gertruydenberg in 1709 
were eminently satisfactory from this standpoint. But 
the Whigs had meanwhile added the sloeran "No Peace without 
Spain’’ tthat is, Spain for Charles of Austria) to the or¬ 
iginal aims. Consequently they demanded that Louis should 
personally guarantee that his grandson, Philip, he ousted 
from the Spanish throne, (Article 37). Bor the Grand 
monarch to submit to such an indignity was impossible, 
and France rallied to wipe out this insult to her national 
honour. In 1709-10 the Whigs tried again. Ihe Barrier 
treaty with the Butch was signed i October-Decembery) making 
them in reality the cat r s paw of English party politics. 

Bor the Whigs were in power on a "No Peace without Spain” 
basis, and to ensure support from the Dutch as well as 
assurance that they would not negotiate a separate peace, 
they offered the war-weary Hollanders a complete Barrier 
with economic rights in the Netherlands, equal trading 
rights in Spanish America, and Minorca - ostensibly in 
return for a Dutch guarantee of the Protestant Succession. 

Ihe whole thing was a bad job of party manipulation, for 
the Spanish War had long been obviously futile; Louis again 
refused in 1710 to sign ’’Article 37*,' and the costly war 
went on. 

Ihe lory reaction had set in with the change of con- 







. 


. 



- 























. 

. 




















108 


d it ions. As early as November 17 08 St. Gohn had written, 
"For God’s sake let us he once out of Spain", ‘ihey were 
opposed to the system of conscripting the unemployed, 
which seemed to them an evidence of "French militarism”, 
and the po^er of Marlborough in the councils of the min¬ 
istry seemed out of all proportion to safety and free civil 
government, nis rash demand late in 1709 to he made Cap¬ 
tain-General for life brought this feeling to a head, with 
cries of "Cromwell" and "Caesar". Finally, the financial 
strain of war was becoming enormous despite the novel in¬ 
stitution of a Rational Debt, ihe previous urench war had 
cost Si millions per year for nine years, and left a debt 
of 14-2 millions. Anne’s war, owing to ever increasing 
subsidies to the Allies, cost 4 million per year for twelve 
years, and left a debt increase of El millions, ihe taxes 
had thus to bear the difference, or about 30 millions, twice 
the peace time expenditure, and at that paying only the 
interest on the growing Debt. Economic depression brought 
these matters sharply to the fore. 

Consequently Harley’s main lob was that of successfully 
negotiating peace. Cut the surface reaction to which he 
owed his power was the religious one following the bachev- 
erell affair, and while Earley himself still hoped to 












■ 


. 




















# 

. 






, 

' 

. 












109 


govern a moderate or coalition Queen’s ministry retaining 
Whigs like Shrewsbury and keeping the necessary prestige 
of Marlborough as a lever in the negotiations, he found 
himself at the head of a Commons violently i ory and High- 
Church, with a large group of iory squires forming the 
uctobrist Club to force his hand and drink damnation to the 
Whigs, xhe j.ory majority also demanded the spoils of vic¬ 
tory in the form of ministerial and other positions. His 
colleague St. John placed himself more and more at the 
head of this discontented High-Church element, forcing 
through such bills as the Qualification Bill for the benefit 
of the squires, and in 1714 the Schism Act against non-con¬ 
formist schools for the benefit of High-Church. This, 
added to personal rivalry and the inherent Succession diff¬ 
iculty, created the peculiar and impossible situation into 
which Swift stepped, unsuspecting, as a result of the con¬ 
versation on October 7. 

In 1708 Swift had set down his unbiassed and most con¬ 
sidered opinions on the subject of politics in The Senti¬ 
ments of a Church of England Man . Experience and a clear 
eye had shown him that the sectarian basis of partisanship 
in his day was the result of the dislike of other men*s 









T ■ 

« 

‘ 

. 

. 

. 

' 

1 











tio 


religion more than a faith in one l s own. ’’Though the ex¬ 
tremes of Whig and Tory seem with little justice to have 
drawn religion into their controversies, wherein they have 
small concern; yet both have borrowed one leading principle 
from the abuse of it; which is, to have built their several 
systems of political faith, not upon enquiries after truth, 
but upon opposition to each other, upon injurious appella¬ 
tions, charing their adversaries with horrid opinions, and 
then repraching them for the want of charity; et neuter 
falso .” ^ He makes a plea for independence of mind and a 
non-partisan approach, even though this may be well nigh 
impossible considering the factious nature of human beings; 
for anyone who has examined the conduct of both parties 
’’cannot well conceive it possible to go far towards the ex¬ 
tremes of either, without offering some violence to his 
integrity or understanding”. Both parties in their saner 
moments are in agreement upon fundamentals of government. 
Moderation is therefore what the Church of England Man 
should strive for. 

In the light of what happened during the coming Tory 
alliance this may appear a pious travesty. But it is not 
so. Eor there is likewise no excuse for sitting on the 


(1) Works III, 54 

















„ 

. 

. 

. 








til 


fence when a crisis occurs. "When the two parties that 
divide the whole commonwealth, come once to a rupture, 
without any hopes left of forming a third with better princ¬ 
iples, to balance the others; it seems every man's duty to 
choose a side, though he cannot entirely approve of either; 
and all pretences to neutrality are Justly exploded 

I 

by both, being too stale and obvious, only intending the 

safety and ease of a few individuals while the public is 

■ 

embroiled. . .But before things proceed to open violence, the 
truest service...is, by unbiassing his mind as much as 
possible, and then endeavouring to moderate between the 

rival powers." Swift had tried to follow this course. 

» 

But the safety of the Church, which had nothing to do with 
the "extremes" of the religious controversy <i.e. Pissent 
and Jacobitism) had been endangered by the Test policy 
of the Whigs, while the Tories were all in her interest; and 
he refused to partake or believe in the Jacobite extreme 
of the new government. Then, the crisis had occurred over 
the question of peace, a question in which the Tories were 
obviously in the right, however shifty might be the methods 
they were to employ, and Swift would not withhold his 
support because of the safety and ease of a few individuals. 


(1) Ibid . 52. 































. . . 

. 

. 




. 












ir*> 


his former Whig friends. So while Harley attended to his 
first duties of setting the finances in order, and arrang¬ 
ing for the peace. Swift in November took over his as writer 
of the Tory Examiner , 

These duties were two-fold; to discredit the Junto 
in the eyes of the nation and put Marlborough in particular 
in his place as a General subordinate to the civil arm in 
Parliament, and to establish a broad Harleyan basis of supp- 1 
ort for the Ministry. This he proceeded to do with a per¬ 
suasiveness that even now does not fail in its effect. 

To discredit the Junto as politicians was a political 
necessity in this period when politics revolved about per¬ 
sonalities as much as about principles. When writing his 
History of the Hour Last Years of Anne 1 s reign. Swift stated 
the basis for his characterizations of politicians; they 
were to be considered, not as private men, but only as 
public figures. He does not attempt to treat them in full, 
but only in so far as their characters or allegiances 
affect society. It is a dangerous method, for it too easily 
yields to the exaggerations of the partisan; but it proved 



of which he was a master, will be discussed in Section 


17. Such writings as the scathing Short Character of the 
Earl of Wharton, and the Windsor Prophesy verses, were 
supplementary efforts obtaining special treatment be¬ 
cause of personal spite. 




































































. 













. 


















































effective as a technique of propaganda. So the Examiner 
presented England with a picture of the previous ministry 
as a group of men kept in power by the moneyed interests 
who had staked their fortunes upon a continued war, corr¬ 
upting the free expression of electoral opinion by "powerful 
motives from the City" (i.e. gold), The result had been as 
always in money-politics, that "falsehood flies, and Truth 
comes limping after", so that England had been governed by 

men who "by birth, education, and merit, could pretend no 

( 1 ) 

higher than to wear our liveries". This rather snobbish 
statement was the form which Swift J s faith in the landed 


aristocracy and distrust of the rising plutocracy assumed 

under the stress of propaganda. "A pearl holds its value 

though found in a dunghill; but however, that is not the 

{ 2) 

most probable place to find it". Somers in particular 

is reflected upon as a man of mean birth; his father had bee: 
a provincial lawyer. Mrs. Manley, a shoddy Queen Anne 
version of Aphra Sehn, had scurrilously attacked the Whig 


leaders in her flew Atlantis of which Sw?ift had written to 
Addison in 1710 from imblin that its characters "happened 
to be right once in five hundred times", he now borrowed 

il) flumber 15 (Works, IX) 

(2) flumber 41. 


- 































. 
























, 












from her arsenal and insinuated that Godolphin's interest 
in the war had been increased hy his interest in the 
Duchess of Marlborough The present Lord President 

of the Council was never "able to arrive at that perfection 
of gallanlry, to ruin and imprison the husband, in order to 
keep the wife without disturbance", as was, the Examiner 

( g) 

implies, the former president, Somers. Again, in 

Lumber 18, he asks innocently whether a landlord who knew 
that his tenants were paying their rent and yet found him¬ 
self deeply in debt would not naturally suspect his receiver 
Mr. Oldfox, turn him out, and take another? (Mr. Oldfox - 
volpone i Godolphin). He then turns to the Earl of Wharton, 
former Lord Lieutenant or Ireland, printing a speech by 

Cicero against a certain »erres, noman governor of Sicily 

(1) In the journal to Stella mts. Manley appears as an. 
under-spur-leather whose character is extenuated by be¬ 
ing on the right side in party matters. He advocated a 
pension for this "poor woman" who "has very generous 
principles for one of her sort and a great deal of 
sense and invention". Swift supplied her with materials 
for a pamphlet which he did not wish to write for fear 
of antagonizing either Harley or at. John (re the Guis- 
card affair, in which the former was stabbed and the 
latter jealous of the popularity as a martyr) and handed, 
the Examiner over to her when he ceased writing it in 
June 1711. 

(2) Humber 27. Mrs. Manley, in her Memoirs of Europe , had 
treated Somers as "Cieero-.-.-.by birth a plebean.. .whirled 
about by his lusts, at the pleasure of a fantastic worn- 
out mistress". (See Temple seott’s note. Works IX, 171) 





























for three years, "who is a rohher of the public treasure, 
an overturner of law and Justice, and the disgrace, as 
well as the destruction of the Sicilian province ....±o 
recount his abominable debaucheries, would offend my 
modest ear, since so many could not preserve their daughters 
and wives from his lust....A public robber, an adulterer, a 
Jj&jplL-i&k OF Ala Arcs, an enemy of religion, and of all that is 
sacred." But the Examiner is an impartial seeker after 
truth, ready to acknowledge any mistakes. So in Lumber 25 
it is humbly admitted that he had been hasty in the attack 
on Wharton. Ihe desecration "was neither in the cathedral, 
nor city, nor county of Gloucester, but some other church 
of that diocese. If I had. ever met any other objection of 
equal weight, though from the meanest hands, I should cer¬ 
tainly have answered it". 

Marlborough was a more delicate problem. The prelim¬ 
inary articles of peace were not made public till October 
1711, and in the meantime the ministry wished to keep their 
famous general from resigning. Eis name alone was their 
best asset when bargaining with France. In this they were 
successful, and Marlborough was not dismissed till December 
of that year, un the other hand his popularity was a 
threat to the new government; it had been he who had forced 



























. 








. 

. 

. 








Anne to keep vzodolphin and finally let in the Whigs. He 
had been the real prime minister throughout the war, and had 
seemed to desire even more complete control as Captain-Gen- 
eral for life. Consequently his power must be broken and 
the right to control governmental policy restored from the 
army to the ministry. ±his was swift’s task. His attitude 
was actually quite sane and moderate: he recognized Marl- 
bourough’s value as a general and deplored the factious 
spirit which would completely blacken his name. On the 
other hand, he detested the great man’s cool avarice, and 
warning the military arm of its subordinate station was a 
congenial duty for one whose opinions of war and militarism 
were those to be expressed in Gulliver . In December, 1710, 
he had written to Stella: 

Tt I swear it pitied me (Marlborough’s laments that 
he was ’worn out with age, fatigues and misfort¬ 
unes’] ; and I really think they will not do 
well in too much mortifying that man, although 
indeed it is his own fault. He is as covetous 
as Hell, and ambitious as the prince of it: he 
would fain have been General for life, and has 
broken all endeavours for peace, to keep his great¬ 
ness and get money." 

Over a year later he writes of the dismissal: 

tr Ihe Queen and the Lord treasurer mortally hate the 
Luke of Marlborough, and to that he owes his fall, 
more than to his other faults.... the world abroad 
will blame us. I confess my belief, that he has 
not one good quality in the world besides that of 
a general, and even that I have heard denied by 















I 





1 










' 





« 






• 






























1 








. 




, 









. 














117 


M several great soldiers, .but we have had con¬ 
stant success in arms while he commanded. Opin¬ 
ion is a mighty matter in war, and ± doubt the 
jrrench think it impossible to conquer an army 
that he leads, and our soldiers think the same; 
and how far even this step may encourage the 
.orench to play tricks with us, no man knows. 1 
do not love to see personal resentment mix with 
public affairs. Tt 

The Examiner gravely discusses the conduct of wars and 
the relationship which should obtain between the army and 
ministers of state. Ee deals with the question of avarice, 1 
citing the examples of Cataline, ’’greedy of what was not 
his own, lavish of what was”, and of Orassus, whose avarice 
was merely an endless desire of hoarding. Appearing to give 
the fairest treatment possible, he implies that Marlborough's 
case is the latter, and the former more dangerous to the 
state, because it mingles well with ambitions. "However, 
in those cases where the frailties of particular men do 
nearly affect the public welfare, suchfa prime minister of 
state, or a great general of an army; methinks there should, 
be some expedient contrived, to let them know impartially 
what is the world's opinion in the point”. The Examiner 
would have sent Orassus a letter of advice, and presents a 


sample which concludes: ” 
will be a truly great man 


The moment you quit this vice, you 


; and still there will imperfections 

(1 ) 


enough remain to convince us, you are not a god. Farewell.” 
tl) Humber 28. 





























118 


Passing flicks at the General abound. He had not meant to 
reflect upon the whole army, hut only to.consider the 
abuse of its power by its leaders. And he reminds his 
readers of the occasion when it was suggested that Athens 
should erect a statue to Miltiades. The citizens were 
willing to vote such a recognition Tf whenever he conquered 
alone but not before." 

The most famous of the Examiners . and one of the best 
examples of Swift's technique of driving the same point 
home time after time under a multitude of disguises, is 
im umber 17, the paper on "Homan and British Gratitude", 
nas the Tory ministry been ungrateful to their brilliant 
general? Swift firstly gently reminds him that the choice 
of ministers lies with the Queen according to the Constit¬ 
ution, and not with him. So the dismissal of his friends 
Godolphin and Sunderland is no reflection upon him. Then 
the Examiner turns to monetary rewards, and gravely calcul¬ 
ating the items of a Homan triumph (frankincense and pots 
to burn it in, a sacrificial bull, an embroidered garment, 
a laurel wreath, medals, an arch, etc.) sums them up at 
994 pounds, 11 shillings, and ten pence. Against this 
is balanced the 540,000 pounds which Marlborough received 
in the "Bill of British Ingratitude". And in a noman 














119 


triumph, he adds, there were hut two items which seemed of 
real profit to the general: the laurel crown, made and sent 
him at the charge of the public, and the embroidered garment. 
r>ut he could not find whether this last were peid for by 
the senate or the general. On the whole, considering the 
treatment meted out to the rest, and particuarly to Wharton, 
and the nature of the political situation, Marlborough is 
anything but roughly handled, -±-he Examiner plays with him 
in the traditional mood of raillery, directing against 
him the best of his "Art of Political Lying." 

However, "when I first undertook this papef, says the 
Examiner in the beginning of lumber 18, "I was resolved to 
concern myself only with things, not with persons." The reel 
job was to establish a favourable picture in the public 
mind of the new ministry and its policies, number 26 opens 
with the description of a knot of men cursing the Tories 
for their uncharitableness in affirming that had the last 
ministry continued in power they should have had neither 
Church nor Monarchy left. xhis sort of assertion is typ¬ 
ical of the extreme statements of faction, warns the Exa¬ 
miner - a thing to be carefully avoided. Actually Church 
and State might have lasted somewhat longer, though the 
late enemies to both had done their worst. Besides, the 
















120 


Queen would have interposed "before they came to extremities. 
But a more use-fftL question is: What may reasonably "be expec¬ 
ted if ever they come into power again? And there follows 
a list of the stock anti-Whig arguments restated in the 
startling form of likely Bills, - such as: '‘Ordered, that 
a Bill be brought in for repealing the sacramental lest; 
Another, to forbid the Clergy preaching certain duties in 
religion, especially obedience to .Princes; nesolved, that 
by the original compact the government of this nealm is 
by a junto, and a King or Queen; but the Administration 
solely in the junto." 

xhis is fairly straightforward stuff. j.he real stroke 
! of genius in the Examiners lay in the creation of what for 
want of a better name may be termed the "Examiner equation", 
- an equation all the more effective as propaganda because 
it was Swift r s own self-justification. The old distinction 
of Whig and Tory, he says, no longer applies - especially 
as the question of peace has nothing to do with the ancient 
party principles. Having carefully considered the history 
of England and compared it with that of other nations, he 
has concluded that were it merely a question of party, a 
prince, (and a Church of England Man?) would descend from 
his dignity to put herself at the head of either. "But 
























121 


when the visible interest of his crown and kingdom lies on 
one side, and when the other is but a faction , raised and 
strengthened by incidents and intrigues, and by deceiving 
the people with false representations of things he ought, 
in prudence, to take the first opportunity of opening his 
subjects* eyes, and declaring himself in favour of those, 
who are for preserving the civil and religious rights of 
the nation, wherewith his own are so interwoven". Ac¬ 

tually the moderate men of both parties in their historical 
meaning now stand for the same essentials, "are very con¬ 
sistent"; but take up party labels according as they appre¬ 
hend most the danger from the Pretender*s party on one hand, 
or from the violence and cunning of other enemies to the 
constitution on the other. Present divisions are not on a 
real party basis, for since Anne’s reign "the bulk of the 
Whigs appear rather to be linked to a certain set of person^ 
than any certain set of principles. In his papers it is 
these that he has meant by "Whigs", not those who,like 
himself(a "Whig in politics") ^stand for the devolution Settle 
ment. By Tories he has meant all who were unwilling to 

support any set of ministers except they were friends of the 
( 2 ) 

constitution. ' 

tl) Number 36. (the italics are mine) 

(2) Fumber 44. 



















. 







. 

T 

1 


















122 


By this means Swift raises the matter above party, 

approach 

equating Harley*s ministry with the nearest possible / to 

a "right" system of government, a "Queers ministry” freely 

chosen by the monarch and nine-tenths of the people, and 

therefore, incidentally, not to be criticised in safety by 

opposition writers. The "last minstry" he equates with a 

mere faction - that "obscene, ominous bird, daughter and 

discreditor of liberty" x±l -powerful only because of earr- , 

uption and vested interests, and because of the unified 

strength characteristic of "those who are engaged in some 

evil design" or "who labour under one common misfortune," 

It is the moralists self-justification for entering the 

( 2 ) 

dirty game of politics. 


Harley issued from the first session with renewed pop¬ 
ularity as Sari of Oxford, martyr in the national cause. 

(He had been in bed for weeks, greatly to Swift’s anxiety, 
as a result of the Guiscard stabbing; St. John had found 


(1) Humber 32. 

(2) Swift, like Plato and other moral philosophers dealing 
with politics, believed emotionally, if one may use 

the phrase, in a "right" type of government administered 
by an appropriate class, whether "landed men" or "guard¬ 
ians". Democracy was to him a superimposed allegiance, 
countenaced only so long as Demos chose correctly. "It 
is usually reckoned a Whig principle to appeal to the 
people; but this is only when they have been so wise as 
to poison their understandings beforehand.."(Number 32). 


























' 





■ 

r 

. 




























123 


Whig-Hanover alliance meant no mercy after Anne’s death, 
were forced into the vicious circle of Jacohitism; this 
was all the more likely since the first steps in the peace 
negotiations had been taken through the channels of Lord 
Jersey, an avowed Jacobite, and his French priest Gaultier, 
an agent of St* Germain, 'i'he Whigs were loud in their 
denunciations of the treaty, and caused a crisis when the 

session opened in December which almost defeated the min- j 

. 

istry. They had effected an alliance with the rigid Kigh- 
i'ory Nottingham - Swift r s "Dismal" - who promised to pro¬ 
pose a vote of "No Peace without Spain" in return for Whig 
support of his long cherished Occasional Conformity Bill. 

The manoeuvre was successful, and Swift in December wrote 
in great agitation that as far as he could judge the game 
was lost. He suspected the Treasurer’s negligence, back¬ 
stairs betrayal, and even worse, that the Queen was fise, or 
at least very much wavering; hardly trusting himself to 
the anger of his enemies while their anger was fresh, he 
again contemplated going abroad as Queen’s Secretary, some- 
where or other, and then being sick for five or six months 
till the storm had spent itself. But the Treasurer managed 
the Queen, and his favourite methods of under-the-surface 
manipulation saved the day. On New Year’s Day, 1712, Anne 

















. 






, 

. • 

, 

* 

1 

r 

' • . 
















124 

that he could not as yet do without him.) Finances had 
been solved through national lotteries, retrenchment, and 
the transference of part of the Debt to the South Sea 
Company, which was to have in return a monopoly of the 
Spanish American slave trade, or Asiento, to be obtained in 
the treaty of peace, Thus the promise given by the Whigs 
to Holland in 1709 was tacitly pledged away by the Tories 
before any negotiations were even made public. These 
negotiations were progressing now under the vigorous hand 
of Bolingbroke (as St. John soon became) and were published 
in the Preliminary Articles of October. 

The forces at work behind the scenes however were be¬ 
ginning to operate in such a manner as to spell the eventual 
doom of the Tory party. Harley and Anne were unwilling to 
apply the spoils system and satisfy the large Tory majority 
who wanted rewards in the shape of positions. The Octobrist 
group began therefore to become restive again, an even more 
violent March Club was soon to be formed, and the danger 
of an internal split between the moderate Oxford and the 
discontents increased. On the other hand the October Pre¬ 
liminaries had produced distinctly unfavourable reactions 
in Hanover; the Whigs took their cue, and the ministry, 
seeing that their America was here or nowhere since the 



















, 








. 

. 

* 









. • 









1.25 


created a dozen new Tory peers who carried the House of 
Lords against the enemy. 

Meanwhile Swift had been saving the day outside the 
halls of Parliament. He had laid down the Examiner^ pen 
in June, obviously the greatest political controversialist 
in either camp. The opposition was moreover crippled by 
the fact that Defoe had followed his paymaster Harley and 

I 

was losing credit with his middle-class public, and that 
Steele was still hampered because his official position 
in the Stamp Bureau had been left him through the good - 
and canny - offices of Harley and Swift. So Bolingbroke 
took great care that their minister of propaganda should be 
retained on his own terms, and in September end October in¬ 
troduced Swift to the inner council of the negotiations 
with the x-rench emissaries at Windsor; into everything, 

that is, but the innermost chamber of Jacobite intrigue. 

■ 

xhe result was xhe Conduct of the Allies , published in 
November, it sold beyond all hopes, counteracted popular 
reaction against the Preliminaries, and provided Tory min¬ 
isters and members with all the necessary arguments in the 
crisis of the parliamentary session. 

The pith of the argument is contained, strangely enough 
in a statement made by Marlborough himself to Oxford in 













. 

' 

. 

. 

t 

. 

, 

. 

. 


. 

. 

. 

, 








126 


October: "I am perfectly convinced'' # he wrote, "that be¬ 

sides the draining of our nation both of men and money al¬ 
most to the last extremity, our Allies do by degrees so 
shift the burthen of the war upon us that, at the rate 

( 1 ) 

they go on, the whole charge must at last fall on England." 
Swift had remarked to Stella in his philippic asrainst 
Wharton that the facts were indifferent by the character 
good, for the former had been supplied by some gentlemen 
from Ireland, while the latter was his own. Ihe same was 
true of the Conduct . though subsequent opinion would seem 
to reverse the order of merit. Ihe facts and the main arg¬ 
ument were Bolingbroke r s, the character, both of the piece 
itself and in the sense of the "character" given to the 
opponents, was Swift's. Bolingbroke had already advanced 
the thesis in an issue of ihe Examiner previous to Swift’s 
editorship that the original objects of the war had been 
won since 1706, that flT ^e engaged as confederates but we 
have been made to proceed as Principles", and that the 
emphasis on Handers as the main theatre of war "where 

(g) 

France is best able to keep us at bay", had been a mistake. 
And in his famous eighth letter on the Study and use of 
History (1735) he reviewed the matter in detail, comparing 

- V-. - - - - - - - - -—- . . T , - .. r-, „ 

1 x 'Quoted by Keith Veiling, History of the iQry Party . 439. 
(2)Taylor, Jonathan swift . 107. 






















' 

. 

. 

, 1 

I 

- 














, 
















1.27 


Gertruydenberg demands to those imposed hy nome on Carthage, 
deliberately made unacceptable to France, either in the in¬ 
terests of the Butch and vxermans for whom England had "acted 
so long....like one of the hereditary kingdoms usurped by 
that family ^Austria]'’, and a faction in Parliament, or 
merely because the heads of that faction "had been bred up 
in a hatred of Prance". ' 1 ' 

Swift ? s arguments in favour of a necessary peace, his , 
exposure of the Gertruydenberg and "No Peace without Spain" 
fallacies (giving the Whigs the benefit of the doubt and 
attributing their actions to malice aforethought rather 
than to stupidity), and of the futility of the operations ir 
Spain, which had been elevated to the first importance as 
the diplomatic object but relegated to a secondary place 
in the military efforts, are clear, forceful, and valid. 

But the major portion of the pamphlet is taken up with 
cleverly worded onslaughts against the Allies, against 
Marlborough, against the Whigs, and most of all against the 
monied interest whom he sees as the dei ex machina. Here 


he carries the analysis of Bolingbroke T s Better to its ex¬ 
treme limit in the interests of propaganda, working no 


doubt on the principle that the happiness of a nation con- 


(1) Bolingbroke 's Works . VI, 328, 339, and passim (1710 
edition)• 

























r 














128 


sists in being well deceived - in its own interests. Yet if 
we endeavour to sort out the specious from the valid, we 
shall find that there is usually a hard kernel of truth in 
much of what he says, which swift has enveloped with a 
burr to make it stick and sting. 

xhe method is that familiar to us in the marxian pol¬ 
emicists of today who reduce all action to the common level 
of self-interested economic motivation, fhe seventeenth 
century had seen the beginnings of a science of economics, 
and economic considerations ranked high in the pamphlet lit¬ 
erature of this time. Swift's particular use of this mode 
of attack had been the devastating method in his favourite 
work, nulibras . where Butler corrosively applied a material¬ 
istic analysis to every human activity. When Swift con¬ 
tinues his work as the Examiner against Marlborough by sugg¬ 
esting that in the long run it is not the brilliancy of 
generalship nor the winning of victories that count, and 
that he "can see nothing else in the modern way of making 

war, but that the side, which can hold out longest, will 

il) 


end it with most advantage", he is echoing the nudibrast 
ic note. "Alldangers are reduc'd to famine", Butler had 
said. And whatever we may think of Swift’s ungrateful 
rendering of Marlborough r s services, in his propagandist cap- 


The conduct of the Allies" (W orks , V, 119) 









































129 


acity, the fact remains that in this he was right in a way 

he did not himself realize, England heat trance in the 

last analysis, says Trevelyan, because her financial and 

( 1 ) 1 

taxation systems could bear a longer siege. 

The Conduct of the Allies disregards the early ]tase of 
the war into which Tory England had entered whole-heartedly 
because of Louis XIv T s insolence added to his threatened 
domination of the European system, and after an "exhaustive 11 
analysis of the conditions concludes that, considering the 
state of her finances and her merely secondary interest in 
putting out the fire in her neighbour's house, she should 
never have entered at all. Once in, had it not been for 
Mad-borough T s vested interest in the I landers theatre, and 
&odolphin's desire to keep the White Staff of the Treasurer, 
the war would have been quickly disposed of; in any case 
England should have concentrated upon naval operations in 
the Indies which would cripple trance and pay in prizes for 
subsidies to the Allies who should fight their own battles. 


This scheme had as a matter of fact been considered by 

{ 2 ) 

William, at Defoe's suggestion, just before his death. 

It was a Tory dogma adopted for the occasion by Swift and 


based essentially on the current fallacy known as the 

(1) England under Queen Anne . II, 162 

(2) Dottin, Daniel Defoe, 84,5. 






































, 

. 

1 





































# 








130 


"bullion fetish”, which equated wealth with gold instead of 

goods* and helped to choice the Spanish Empire. Had France 

actually "been importing gold from the Indies in large 

quantities it would not have helped much in carrying on the 

( 1 ) 

war, and prices would simply have risen in proportion. 

It is interesting to note Swift T s position among the maze 
of economic fallacies of the day, each with its political 
importance, under William and Anne, England was in transi¬ 
tion from a money to a credit economy, and consequently in 
theory the "credit talisman", faith in the magic of which 
ended in the South Sea Hubble* was being superimposed upon 
the bullion fetish, swift, ever stubbornly opposed to 
innovation* exposed the new talisman with increasing scorn, 

and accepted the former notion when convenient for purposes 

. 

of argument, as here and in Ms Brapier days, such matters 
were for him essentially but weapons*in the fight. But 
fundamentally he was opposed to both these attitudes, ne 

was a physiocrat before their theories came into being, for 

■ 

he based his economic (and political) thought upon a faith 
in the land as the ultimate source of all wealth, such 

men as Sir William Betty, who in his Political Arithmetic 
had taken nolland as his model, and by statistics had 
shown that since money was wealth, and traders or sailors 

(l) Robertson, Bolingbroke and Walpole , 99. 























• 




■ 


, . 

. 

. 

. 














131 


made two and three times the money made by farmers, a 


nation should endeavour to engage wholly in these pursuits, 
could only be anathema to him. 

.For it is with the monied-men and the new credit 
system that Swift really engages in the Conduct of the Aliks 
Wars before William had paid for themselves. Dutch finance, 
the Debt, and the "money-changers in the temple" had come 


with the House of Orange and Whig ascendancy. The Dutch 
Wars had given rise to a stock-jobbing race of men to whom 
the nationwas pawned, and who backed the Whig faction 
under Anne that their war profits might increase. 

"Ho doubt, we shall teach posterity wisdom, but they 
will be apt to think the purchase too dear; and I wish they 
may stand to the bargain we have made in their names", is 
Swift f s reaction to the revolutionary innovation of the 
National Debt. ^^ Posterity, running for two centuries 
on the impetus of the commercial and industrial expansion 


which he did not foresee, did not learn as rapidly as he 
rhetorically hoped. Again, 


"It will, no doubt, be a mighty comfort to our 
grand-children, when they see a few rags hung up 
in Westminster Hall, which cost a hundred millions, 
whereof they are paying the arrears, and boasting, 
as beggars do, that their grandfathers were rich 
and great. I have often reflected on that mis¬ 
taken notion of credit, so boasted of by the ad- 
cates of the last ministry: Was not all that 




(1) Works, W, 113 













































. 








' ’ 

. 

■ , 

. 











132 


’’credit built upon funds, raised by the landed 

men, whom they so muchhate and despise?. 

neither hath anything gone further to ruin the 
nation, than their boasted credit, For my 
part, when I saw this false credit sink, upon 
the change of the ministry, I was singular 
enough to conceive it a good omen.” 

Although the monied-men had not been responsible for 
the war, as he insinuates, they certainly had a vested int¬ 
erest in its continuation and in a Whig government. The 
Debt had bound them to the Whigs, for any Jacobite restora¬ 
tion would have meant the loss of their investment. Stocks 

dropped when the Tories came into power, and Addison in 

(x) 

his Vision of Credit saw the money bags piled about that, 
goddess suddenly droop like pricked balloons. That one 

ill 

part of the nation was ’’pawned” to the other was, in a 

1 

sense, the fact. The chief source of taxation, from which 
the interest and principle of the Debt must be paid, was 
the four shilling land tax. The excise mainly hit the poor. 
In 1702 an income tax had proved a failure. Consequently 
the city banker or monied-man, who lent the money to the 
government, was paid out of the pockets of the landed. So 
Swift asked: ’’But the common question is. If we must now 

surrender Spain, what have we been fighting for all this 

While? The answer is ready: We have been fighting for the 

f 2) 

ruin of public interest, and the advancement of a private.” 

(1) Spectator , Humber 3, (March 3, mi) 

(2) Works , v, 116. 


























. 


, 

. 


. 




















133 


The Allies, and the Dutch in particular, are treated 
in " the language of an Enemy’ 1 , as Dr. Hare retorted in 

j 

his The Allies Defended . The Dutch had been exasperating 
partners. The concessions offered them hy the Whigs in 
the interests of faction in the Barrier Treaty had been 
rather steep. But they had in this been a cat ? s paw; ac- 

I 

tually their war effort had been great, and instead of a 
rival they came out of the struggle a broken power, soon 
the commercial customer of rising England. Swift l s duty, 
however, was to cut short any sympathy that might arise 
from the fact that the ministry was negotiating a separate 
peace which in reality left the Dutch to fend for themselves 
after England had picked what plums she could. So they 
become not only self-seeking burghers who have shifted 
most of the burden onto England, but a major menace to 
British safety. On© would think our kingdom a mere Dutch 
dependency , says Swift, from the relationship between the 
two powers during the war . And in a single paragraph he 
creates a masterpiece in the art of special pleading, again 
all the more effective because he had probably convinced 
himself: by the Barrier Treaty 

"the Dutch will, in effect, be entire masters of 
all the Low Countries.and in that fertile country 
may set up all sorts of manufactures, particularly 
the woollen, by inviting the disobliged manufacturers 























■ 

■ 





, 















’’in Ireland, and the trench refugees, who are 
scattered all over Germany. And as this man¬ 
ufacture increases abroad, the clothing people 
of England will he necessitated, for want of 
employment, to follow; and in few years, by help 
of the low interest of money in Holland, Flanders 
may recover that beneficial trade which we got 
from them; The landed men of Snarl and will then 
be forced to re-establish the staples of wool 
abroad; and the Dutch, instead of being only the 
carriers, will become the original possessors 
of those commodities, with which the greatest part 
of the trade of the world is now carried on. And 
as they increase their trade, it is obvious they 
will enlarge their strength,at sea, and that ours 
must lessen in proportion”.' 1 ' 

The Menace becomes a reality as we read; mere weisrht 

of facts. Dr. Johnson to the contrary, has received a good 

deal of assistance from the hand that produced them. 


His main work for the ministry as a writer was now 
done. Incidentals however kept cropping up, each of which 
Swift tended to with a pamphlet just suited to the occasion. 

In July, while the negotiations were yet secret. Prior had 

been sent to Paris. On his return he was arrested by an over 

111 

officious customs agent , and rumours of French spies began 

' 

to spread. The ministry was anxious, for separate peace 
negotiations were contrary to the terms of the Alliance, and 
The Conduct of the Allies had not yet prepared the national 
humour for such a move. Swift came to the rescue with a 
delightful red herring in the form of a "formal grave lie. 























. 












. 


. 










. 

. 
































135 

from 'beginning to end*...by way of furnishing fools with 
something to talk of” * It was A hew Journey to Paris , pur¬ 
porting to he a circumstantial account written by Prior’s 
French servant, who is much surprised at the high tone his | 
master took with the Grand Monarch. More serious business 
soon came to hand. Besides the discontented country squires 
there was another group of ’’Whimsical” lories, who supported i 
the party of Harley’s mOderat ism and were ardent Hanoverians.. 
Bolingborke ? s high-flying tactics and the Jacobite rumours 
were antagonizing them. So Swift dealt with each group 
in 1712, publishing first his Advice to the OctoberOlub . 
Pealing adroitly with these extremists, he points out the 
danger yet left in the moribund Whig faction, and the nec¬ 
essity of a united front, xheir claims are just, and he 
promises that Oxford will satisfy them as soon as he is able, 

hinting in a tone of intimacy and veiled allusion that they 

.and 

are all of the inner circle,/that Anne is difficult to manage 
In the Letter to a Whig Lord , on the other hand, the tone 
changes to one of impartial sincerity, for he is addressing 
Whimsicals and possible Whig converts. Ihe question is a 
common-sense, practical one of peace and the Church, ihe 
Examiner equation is employed to dispose of Whig and xory 

(1) Jou r nal to Stella. September 11, 1711; Correspondence I, 
290. 















.„ 

. 

. 

■ 

1 

. 

r 







- 

































136 


differences on principles, and Jacobitism is ccontemptuously 
dismissed. It is a crisis when the government needs the 


support of every Englishman who is not tied to faction. In 
a word, it is the "coalition' 1 appeal of today. 

xhe Peace of utrecht was signed in April, 1713. By 


June, Swift had repaired to Dublin once asrain, to he installed 

hut 

as Dean of fit. Patrick s. He was not mere Jonathan now;/ he 


had wanted a preferment in England, or at least a fat hishop 
ric to mitigate an Irish exile. But the Queen and the Arch- 

1 

hishop of xork were stubborn about giving high place to the 
author of A Pale of a iub . neeailing the verses on Sid 
Hamet, Swift wrote T, In short, the gudgeon took the bait" of 
intimacy with the ministers: 

Experience I have dearly bought; 

You know I am not worth a groat; 

But tis folly to contest 
When you resolve to have your 5 e ^t; 

Yhen, since you now have done your worst. 

Pray leave me where you found me first. 

Even plain Jonathan were better than exile and a 
thousand pound investiture debt. However, the ministry soon 
repented Swift’s departure and after urgent entreaties he 
came back in August, xhe last pamphlets were occasioned 



























. 

. 

. 

. .. 

- 











137 


by a quarrel with Steele illustrative of the havoc partisan¬ 
ship could cause. Swift prided himself on his assistance of 
opposition writers like Steele, but was not content to en- 

i 

joy this virtue as its own reward, and let the fact be widely 
known as evidence of his power and superiority to party, ex¬ 
pecting the recipients of his favour to cease criticizing 
the government. Steele r s impetuous nature bridled at this, 
and his chivalrous sentimentality led him into a rash accus- ' 
ation of Swift for a scurrilous attack on Ivottingham in the 
.Examiner, which Swift had long ceased to write, in inter¬ 
change of letters through Addison before the new dean's de¬ 
parture ended with a technical victory for Swift, friendship 
was now lost in the abyss which separated party from party. 

On his return he found Steele Whig member from Stockbridge, 
writing against the government's slowness in carrying out 
Article Dine of the ±reaty, which provided for the dismant¬ 
ling of the jrrench harbour of Dunkirk. England "expected" 
action, he declared i n The Importance of Dunkirk Consider'd. 
This delivered him into the dissecting hands of Swift. a. he 
Importance of the guardian Consider *c ~ridiculed the proud 
new' member's style, birth, education, and character. "What 
bailiff would venture to arrest SEr. Steele, now he has the 
honour to be your representative?" the constituents of Stock- 


























. 

. 


. 

. 





















. 














1 



. 















. 

' * 
















138 


bridge were asked; "and what bailiff ever scrupled it before*" 
Steele understood the new basis of cabinet responsibility 
upon which government rested more and more since the devolu¬ 
tion. Swift asked, from the heights of his station and of j 
his"Examiner equation", what right such a one had to "expect" 
anything, or to criticise the Queen in the person of her 
ministers? j 

The Succession was now the question which raised party 
fever to an extent dangerous for the ministry. Steele pub¬ 
lished xhe Crisis , crying that the Succession was in danger. 


and as a result was expelled from Commons. Swift's answer 


-fc 


Tk Jf 

was one of his most amazing of all his pamphlets, cutting 
Steele into shreds, shadow-boxing in a maze of twists and 
turns with the Jacobite charge, damning the Scotch peers, 
and the union, and trying to turn popular opinion against 
the unfortunate Catalans, left to a bloody fate in the near 
future at the hands of Philip of Spain. xhe Whigs were fur¬ 
ious, and charged the author with gross libel on the Scotch, 
Nothing was left of the old friend Steele, the "schoolboy". 
Swift places him with party scribblers like nidpath and 
uunton, and leaves him empty. 


"the third and principal of this triumvirate is the 
author of the "Crisis"; who although he must yield 
to the ’Plying Post’ in knowledge of the world, and 
skill in politics, and to Mr. hunton in keenness of 

















. 

. 

, 

. 

- 

. 

- 

. 

» r » 












139 


"satire, and variety of reading, hath yet other 
qualities enough to denominate him a writer of a 
superior class to either, provided he would a 
little regard the propriety and disposition of 
his words, consult the grammatical part, and get 
some information in the subject he intends to 
handle." l1 ' ' 

Meanwhile the fortunes of another more lofty "trium- 

verate", of whom Swift had written in such glowing terms in 

1710, were bringing disillusionment to him and the downfall 1 

of the ministry for whom he had worked. His correspondence 1 

and Journal record Swift’s growing anxiety over the relation- 

" 

ship between the two leaders who were both his friends, and 
whose mutual distrust he vainly strove to allay. Although 
Oxford seemed to him by far the greatest minister he ever 
knew', he had since the fall of 1711 been working more with 
j^olingbroke, because the latter's vigorous policy seemed to 
offer some hope; whereas Oxford, failing in health, hampered 
in the vital problem of the Succession by the fact that Anne 
refused to allow any open declarations for Hanover that 
would suggest apprehensions of her coming death, seemed to 
be marking time. Swift’s analysis was acute; he saw that 
in Anne lay the difficulty, but he never did see the Jacobite 
danger as an actual issue and hence could never understand 
what really lay at the bottom of Oxford's and Bolingbroke’s 


(1) The Publib Spirit of the Whigs (Works V, 317) 









































T 

. 






























I 


14.0 


moves, and as he became increasingly tied to party interests, 
blamed the difficulties on Anne’s unwillingness to make a 
clean sweep of the Whigs* In his disillusionment he turned 
for solace first to the literary activities of the Scriblerusl 
Club with Arbuthnot, Cay, and Pope, and finally, seeing the 
impending crash which his efforts at reconciliation had 
failed to avert, he fled in June 1714 to the retirement of | 
Letcombe in Berkshire* Phere he made one last effort to i 

help the party, by writing Some Free thoughts upon the Pres- 
ent State of Affairs, which Bolingbroke kept from being pub¬ 
lished. It was Swift T s attempt to make the party follow the 
principles upon which he had joined it, to make the ministry 
declare openly and firmly for Eanover and the Church. Could 
this have been done, it would have reestablished confidence, 
but Bolingbroke, now trying to lead the Tories, had neither 
the inclination nor the power, Mistaking the nature of the 



political forces. Swift advocated a clean sweep of all Whigs 
in office, for he saw in them only the enemies to his Church. 
In this he was following Bolingbroke 1 s lead, for early in the 
year, the latter had written: ”1 begin to reckon upon a clear 


( 1 ) 


Tory scheme, more concert, and better method". 


He how 


knew better. ±5ut neither he nor Oxford could decide between 


(l) Quoted by Keith Feiling, History of the Tory Part . 463. 













. 

. 


. 

, 

. 

. 

. 

, 

1 
























141 


Stuart and Hanover in time to save the party. Swift followed 
the fortunes of the Dragon (Oxford) and the Colonel (Boling- 
broke ) in his Letcombe correspondence, till on July 25th 
Ford wrote that the Dragon would fall. Bolingbroke remained 
in power only three days, and on the 30th Anne gave the 
Treasurer's Staff to Shrewsbury; the next day she was dead. 
George and the Whigs came into power without a struggle, and 
stocks rose three points in relief. "Confo>und all politicks, 
Have I had enough of them or no? Tf wrote Swift to Ford ^1®. 

He left for Dublin on the 16th, swearing that he would never 
meddle in Irish politics, fearing Whig retaliation because 


of their treatment of the escaped Bolingbroke and the broken 


Oxford, "expecting the worst they can compass and that they 


( 2 ) 




will be able to compass it", v Once again he was disillu¬ 
sioned by the game that politicans play. Illness followed 
despair, and the Dean of St. Patrick’s faced his new life 
of exile an apparently hopeless man. 

T Tis true — they why should I repine 
To see my life so fast decline? 

But why obscurely here alone. 

Where I am neither loved nor known?.... 

[With] no obliging tender friend 


u7 


(1) August IE, 1714. 

(2) letters of Swift to Ford, 32. 
























142 


To help me at my approaching end. 

My life is now a burden grown, 

( 1 ) 

To others, ere it be my own. 


(l) In Sickness 





r 


































Chapter 1Y, 


Ireland: Mending the World 


1. Ketrospect . 

l'heyears from 1714 to 1720 were for the Dean of St* 
Patrick's a period of silence, in which he lived mainly with 
his memories of the past, kept alive in his correspondence 
with his fallen friends of London days, Repercussions of 
happenings in England broke in upon his life in Lublin, 


stirring him uneasily. But nothing could be done, his party 

( 1 ) 


and his connections were gone, 1 *' and the silence remained 
unbroken. "You know how well I loved both Lord Oxford and 
Bolingbroke", he wrote to Pope on Jtane 28, 1715, "and how 
dear the Luke of Ormond is to me. Lo you imagine I can be 
easy, while their enemies are endeavouring to take off their 
heads. ... . ,Lo you think I can be easy, when I think of the 
probable consequences of these proceedings, perhaps upon the 
very peace of the nation, but certainly of the minds of so 
many hundred thousand good subjects? Upon the whole, you 


may truly attribute ray silence to the eclipse, but it was 


( 2 ) 

that eclipse which happened on the first of August." He 


(1) "I have no Interest even with the Footmen of anybody now 
in power." (Letters of Swift to Ford, 53; August 12, 1714!, 


(2) Correspondence , II, 286. (Queen Anne died August 1, 1714, 
There was an eclipse shortly after.' 























. 


. 

. 

; 







1 


















, 


. 









144 


tried, or so at least he professed, to turn his hack 'upon 
the sink of iniquity which he suspected the new Whig govern¬ 
ment to he. "The greatest felicity 1 now have is, that I am 
utterly ignorant of the most public events that happen in 
the world: mult a gemens ignominiam plagasque , etc." 

Great events were shaping in the diplomatic world; alliances 

, its 

with France in which the new world was taking/cue from the 

old one which it so despised and an impending war with Spain. 

"But I am more concerned about Sheridan the Schoolmaster 

plaguing me with had Verses during his Christmas leisure; 

and about contriving how to hinder an old Knave of an Aider- 

man from cheating me in a Lease, and where to find a proper 

Successor for Farvisol, who dyed last Month without any not- 

( 2 ) 

ice taken of it either in Court or in Parliament." Writ¬ 
ing in review of his political career to Pope in 1722, he 
reiterates the same statement. Since the Queen's death he 
had lived in privacy and utter ignorance of the political 
world. "I neither know the names nor number of the royal 
family which now reigns, further than the Prayer Book informs 
me. l cannot tell who is Chancellor, who are secretaries, 
nor with what nations we are at peace or war. And this 
manner of life was not taken up out of any sort of affeeta¬ 
il) To Archbishop King, February 26, 1716 ( Correspondence 
ill, 307,8.) 

f2) Letters of Swift to Ford, 69. (December 20, 1718) 















f 




. 








- 







? 































I • 



















145 

tion f but merely to avoid giving offence, and for fear of 
provoking party zeal." Such a condition would indeed 

he strange for Swift, were it true. Actually his keen eye 
could not turn itself away, and in the same letter is a ref¬ 
erence to George I's suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act 
after the Jacobite rebellion of 1715, in the course of an 
explanation of his permanent political creed: T, I could 
never discover the necessity of suspending any law upon which 
the liberty of the most innocent persons depended." In 
Gulliver's Travels , which shows how closely Swift was ac- 

r 

tually following the events across the channel during these 

( 2 ) 

years, this same thing comes in for a scathing bit of irony. 
In 1716 Townshen^ lost the King's confidence and was removed, 
to be succeeded by Stanhope and Sunderland. Walpole followed 1 2 
his brother-in-law into the opposition the next year. It 
was merely an internal crisis within the Whig ranks, leaving 
the Tories as far beyond the pale as ever. Swift, though 
he may not have known who was Chancellor, understood the in¬ 
tricacies of the situation well enough to give an exact in¬ 
terpretation of the affairs in a passing comment to Arch¬ 
deacon Walls in January 1717: "The silly Tories here are just 

(1) Correspondence . Ill, 114. 

(2) The references in Book I to the Lilliputian king’s clem¬ 
ency, and how his subjects trembled whenever he published, 
a paper proclaiming it. 


































. 












146 


as you describe those in Dublin, very sanguine and feeding 
themselves with foolish imaginations.” A year later 

in a letter to Ford, he expressed the same feeling with re¬ 
gard to Tory hopes, in a tone which shows that his mind 
still moved however among his memories of past glories and 
lost opportunities. ”But everybody now is as desponding as 
I have been always. The Toryes have lived all this while 

/ 9 \ 

on whipt cream, and now they have lost even that.” 

Looking back on the brilliant pamphleteering of his 
days in the London of Anne, it was the contrast between that 
time and the stagnation of this, with its hacks paid by Wal¬ 
pole and the only opposition coming from such men as Mist, 
that annoyed him perhaps most of all. What could he, author 
of The Conduct of the Allies , not have done if let loose upor., 
such an effervescence of jingoism as the Spanish War. T Swifts 
professional pride felt chagrined. In 1719 he saw a copy 
of the Apology for Alberoni . which used the Spanish cardinal- 
minister's notoriety to attack the English clergy, and was 
filled with disgust at the new taste in political satire, 
lamenting ”the Taste of the Age, as well as the Malice, for 
except the latter, I can impartially find nothing in it but 

great Impudence, Wickedness, and wrong Representation.” 

(1) Corre sp on dene e , II, 359. 

(2) Letters of S^ift to .cord . 66. 

(3) Ibid, 72. 

















147 

In his verse as .Dean of St# Patrick's, whenever he refers to 
Walpole it is usually with a reference to this aspect of 
his influence. And when in 1727 he toyed with the idea of 
reengaging in the battle beside Bolingbroke, who had returned 
from exile to organize the opposition fron outside the walls 
of parliament and write his Craftsman , it was against the 
Billingsgate hacks of the government that he turned his pen 
in A Letter to the "riter of the Occasional Paper ^ \ ‘rhe 
Whigs had always professed to uphold the liberty of the 
press, yet for several years no one could write who did not 
"sqra-e to a point with the maxims and practices that then 
prevailed: I say, it is a little hard that the vilest mer¬ 

cenaries should be countenanced, preferred, rewarded, for 
discharging their brutal ities.against men of honour, only 
upon a bare conjecture. "This condition, he infers, is but 
a reflection of the character of the minister in power; rap¬ 
acious, insolent, partial, palliating Ions* and deep diseases 
of the public with empirical remedies.... As the thief-catcher 
upon viewing a house broken open, could immediately disting¬ 
uish, from the manner of the workmanship, by what hand it 
was done". 

The tw?o visits to England in 1726, when he published 


(1) Works, in 1, 37 7*381 












f • 1 

. 

. 

T 

, 

, 

, 



, 













148 


Gulliver , and 1727, were a brief interlude in his life as 
Dean of St, Patrick’s, by this time the champion of Ireland 
against English opporession. Things looked brighter with 
Bolingbroke back once more, leading a conglomerate Opposi¬ 
tion of ”Boy Patriots 1 ’ with Pulteney. But he could not turr 
the clock back, and though he encouraged them as the saviours 
to whom all England looked, he took Pope’s advice and re¬ 
sisted Pulteney’s invitations to actively throw his lot in 
with them. On his arrival in 1726 an interview had been 
arranged by Walpole himself; but as before he had been a 
Churchman, so now was he an Irishman, and his uncompromising 
stand on Irish matters made any rapprochement impossible. 
There were some hopes raised by the Zing’s death in the 
summer of 1727, but the Prince of Wales found Walpole as 
indispensible as had his father. So Swift restricted him¬ 
self to writing letters to the royal mistress, Mrs. Howard, 
scolding the new queen, and promoting the interests of the 
weavers by sending the royal household samples of Irish 
plaid. For the last time he left London for the island he 
championed and detested —to sit in a dingy innat Holyhead 
awaiting 

A passage to the land I hate. 

Stella was dying, and he must return: 


Else, rather on this bleaky shore 








. 




























, 






, 




, 

. 























Where loudest winds incessant roar 
I'd go in freedom to my grave 

ihan nule yon Isle, and he a Slave 


149 


The new Dean faced a difficult enough situation. His 
appointment had been opposed by Archbishop King on political 
grounds. When he came over to be installed in 1713 he found 
a Dublin seething with anger at the Tory government of Chan¬ 
cellor Phipps, and verses nailed on his cathedral door vil¬ 
ifying himself as a godless, turn-coat Tory. Prom swaying 
the opinion of England he was reduced to bickering with his 
underlings in the petty politics of his cathedral chapter, 
the Whig members of which resisted his prerogatives and made ! 
decisions behind his back. .Archbishop King professed friend¬ 
ship, but placed a Whig, one Iheophilus Bolton, in his chapisr 
as a watch-dog. King was one of the Lords- Just ices, and had 
Swift r s letters opened in the post-office in search of in¬ 
criminating evidence which would justify the same proceedings 
against him as were being instituted against his former min¬ 
isterial friends. Consequently there was little for him to 
do except review his past and gradually store up the indig¬ 
nation at the conditions he saw about him which was to burst 
forth years later in the Drapier r s Letters . 

He came away from his lory alliance still feeling him¬ 
self to have been a man above party, "ihe friendship I had 





r - 

. 

■ 

. 

, - ■ • # : 

, 


* 

. 


. 

. 

. 




' 








150 


with the late Ministry, and the trust they were pleased to 
repose in me, were chiefly applied to do all the service to 
the Church that I was able.•..And upon the whole, this I can , 
faithfully assure your Brace, that I was looked upon as a 
tr immer....." In this mood he wrote in 1715 his Enquiry 

into the Behaviour of the Queen's hast Ministry (Chapter I), 
an impartial account of what he had seen and the reasons he 
adduced for the failure. The conclusion he arrived at with 
regard to politics and politicians is an interesting result 
of his constant scepticism concerning the intricacies and 
arcana of politics, urenius, he says, is the worst possess¬ 
ion for a would-be politician. "Having often considered the 
qualities and dispositions of these two ministers ,£oxford 
and Bolinghrokej , I am at a loss to think how it should 
come to pass that men of exalted abilities, when they are 
called to public affairs, are generally drawn into incon- 

veniencies and misfortunes, which others, of ordinary talents 
( 2 ) 

avoid;" and he cites the examples of italeigh, and Clar¬ 
endon. (Speaking of the same thing to Boling-broke in 1719 

( 3) 

he adds the names of r>acon and Baud ) The reason for 

this he thinks is their neglect of common forms, and their 

tendency to think of government as a profound science; where- 

i 1 )To king, June 17, 1716. (Correspondence. II. 37 0). 

(2) Works . _T, 438. 

(3) Correspondence . Ill, 41. 


















, 

, 

.... 

' 






# 

. 

. 

, 
































151 


as in reality it would only require a moderate share of plain 
common sense. 

"Which hath made me sometimes say, to a great 
person of this latter character £ superior 
genius], that a small infusion of the Alderman 
was necessary to those who are employed in 
public affairs, upon this occasion, I cannot 
forget a very trifling instance: That one day 
observing the same person to divide a sheet 
of paper with a penknife, the sharpness of the 
instrument occasioned its moving so irregularly 
and crooked, that he spoiled the whole sheet; 
whereupon I advised him to take example by his 
clerks, who performed that operation much better 
with a blunt pfece of ivory, which, directed by 
a little strength and a steady hand, never failed 
to go right.” 'U. 

xio historian has offered a better description of the govern¬ 
ment which was guided by the secretive, procrastinating Ox¬ 
ford and the brilliant, erratic i^olingbroke. But was this 
in Swift’s mind a criticism of them or of politics? That 
government was not a science but an empirical, hand-to-mouth 
affair was his deepest conviction; and the greatness of 
T * r alpole as a politician is a perfect justification of his 
general analysis. But other considerations enter in to 
cloud the issue. As a moralist Swift condemned Walpole un¬ 
sparingly - to say nothing of his anger against him as the 
man Who had impeached his friends and who was to try and 
force Wood's half-pence, even though they were so many fire- 


fl) Works, V, 439 


























152 


"balls, down Irish throats. On the other hand, though 
Swift treated opposition politicians as though nothing 
mattered hut the political half of their character, he tend¬ 
ed to do the opposite with Oxford and Bolingbroke. They 
were dear to him Because of their learning, their wit, and 
those personal qualities which he prized so much in his 
friends - and friendship ranked with honesty and justice 
in his general scale of values. Consequently the edge of 
his sceptical criticism was deflected; Swift never quite 
made up his mind on the point, hut tended to harbour a 
grudge against the world for the simple reason that a genius 
and man of letters was unfitted for its politics. He may 
have had Temple in mind when he wrote; later he might have 
thought of Carteret, whose career was crushed hy the un¬ 
scrupulously able Walpole because his culture and his hon¬ 
our provided him with no weapons against such an antagonist. 

The final expression of Swift's political creed occurs 
in the famous letter to Pope, written just after the end 
of this period of silence and. before he became immersed in 
Irish questions to the exclusion of almost everything else. 
He is defending himself against the pamphleteers who have 
been continuing to blacken his name in England, and surveys 
his record in an apologia, containing, he says, some of the 















153 


sentiments he had relating to public affairs while he was 
still in the world# m e have met most of the points before. 
There is the antipathy to standing armies as a danger to 
free government (for they were the Kind’s armies), a Tory 
attitude since the outcries against William's Dutch guards; 
a word is spoken in favour of the gothic institution of 
annual parliaments; the setting up of the monied interest ir 
opposition to the landed is abominated, with the South Sea 
Bubble cited as an object lesson; the suspension of laws 
like Habeas Corpus is deplored; and his stand on the Succ¬ 
ession is briefly stated* This last is the most important. 

The Succession is based on law and opinion. Now "nec¬ 
essity may abolish any law, but cannot alter the sentiments 
of the vulgar, right of inheritance being perhaps the most 
popular of all topics; and therefore in great changes, 
when that is broke, there will remain much heart-burning 

and discontent among the people.As to what is called a 

revolution principle, my opinion was this; that whenever 
those evils which usually attend and follow a violent change 
of government, were not in probability so pernicious as the 
grievances we suffer under a present power, then the public 
good will justify such a revolution." Again this is an 

{1) Correspondence . Ill, 120, (January 10, 1722). 

















. 

f 











154 


exact and realistic exposition of the existing facts and 
the forces that must he considered. This realism was 
Swift's greatest contribution to the political thought of 
the party he chose to adopt. The Kevolution had, as he 
had frequently proclaimed, changed the basis of the Whig 
and Tory parties. The Whigs had found their justification 
of it in the mythology of Locke's "Contract" between the 
people and its ruler, that the latter should hold his posi¬ 
tion as long as he ruled for the benefit of the governed. 

On the other hand, among the mass of * the Tories there was 
just that uncertainty, that heart-burning and discontent 
with their equivocal position, that Swift describes. Their 
theoretical basis had been founded on the principles of 
divine right and the passive obedience to Caesar enjoined 
by the scriptures and the Homilies of Elizabeth. To alter 
this in a generation had proved too great a task for the 
majority and as a result the party had disintegrated from 
within to pass into a moribund state after 1714. The real¬ 
istic exposition of Swift, repeated time and again from 
his Sentiments of a Church of England Man on, was what the 
party needed for survival and rebirth. He steered the sane 
course between a now shattered divine right, obviously un¬ 
tenable since 1688, and the equally unreal contract myth. 
















• 




' 


. 



, 






i 




, 






. 





, 
































155 


placing the ultimate sanctions in the actual forces of law 
and public opinion. The passive obedience enjoined by 
his Church and ingrained in conservative Toryism, he sal¬ 
vaged by making this obedience due to the government of 
king and parliament, not to the sovereign alone. This un- 
compromsing obedience to law he maintained even in his 
most rebellious moods. George I made certain statements 
which Swift took to mean that he would like the clergy 
muzzled in political matters. The Dean was immediately up 
in arms, and since this was not yet law, would fight it to 
the last. When the affair of the half-pence arose, it 
was not law, but an illegal imposition of English will on 
an Ireland who only could legislate for itself , against 
which the Drapier wrote. The dividing line, as in all 
such matters when fundamentals are once touched, was very 
thin; but it was clear in Swift*s mind. 

Note : A little essay of uncertain date but from the 
tone and some of the references apparently written during 
the Gulliver period. Of Public Absurdities in England . 
( Works XI, 179 ff.) affords a commentary upon that book 
and a supplement to the Pope letter; much of it covers the 
same ground. Swift satirizes the coffee-house wits for 
their ridiculous "pragmatical disposition to politics". 

(ef. his description of the Flying-1 si and- 

ers.) But who, he asks, can reflect upon the absurdities 
of English politics without being tempted "either to laugh, 
lament, or be angry, or if he were sanguine enough, perhaps 
to dream of a remedy. It is the mistake of wise and good 
men, that they expect more reason and virtue from human 
































. 

p 
























156 


"nature, than, taking it in the hulk, it is in any sort 
capable of". In Gulliver Swift laughs, is angry, and des¬ 
pairs of a remedy. 

Among the "absurdities" which follow it is interesting 
to note that he inveighs against rotten boroughs and the 
lack of representation allowed to growing centers of pop^^la« 
tion. Sir William Petty had voiced the same criticism in 
1677, There was social criticism of this sort at this time 
among a few, but it took over a century to bear fruit. 


2. "Nostra Miseria ivi agnus as." 

"My notion i£ f , wrote Swift to his friend Chetwode in 
January 1715, "that if a man cannot mend the public he 
should mend old shoes if he can do no better; and therefore 
I endeavour in the little sphere I am placed to do all the 
good I am capable of". 

There was little enough he could do as the detested 
Tory Dean. But until greater things opened he contented 
himself with such humble and congenially practical tasks 
as improving the glebe at Laracor contrary to accepted 
custom, which was to get as much out of leases on a living 
as possible and leave one's successor to worry about the 
future, and in 1721 organizing a lending scheme for the 
assistance of Ltiblin tradesmen of whatever creed within 
the district of at. Patrick's. 


(1) "A Short view of the State of Ireland" <Works, VII, 89) 



























. 

. 

, 

. 











157 

In 1720 the opportunity and the impetus came which 
caused him to enter the arena again as a pamphleteer, this 
time not as a Churchman in party politics, hut as Jonathan 
Swift , hard, unsentimental, hut scorching inwardly with a 
sense of the injustice and irrationality of the conditions 
which had for six years been burning themselves into his 
heart and brain* ne hated Ireland as a habitat for a civil¬ 
ized being, feeling that he was there as a "stranger in a 
strange land TT . ^ He had no sentimental illusions; nor 
was he inspired by the "noble” motives of patriotism* xt 

4 

was with him as tit had been said) with his modern counter¬ 
part, Bernard Shaw, who is a vegetarian not because he 
loves animals but because he cannot stand the thought of a 
dead one. A dying Ireland unwilling to strike a blow in 
its own defence against tyranny enraged him. He himself 
was made of less pliant stuff. "I will kill that flea or 

louse which bites me, though I get no honour by it”, he 

i 2) 

once said to Sheridan; and if the xrish would not bite 

the English louse, swift'both bit for them and roused them 
to do the same. Moreover he felt keenly his position as an 

Anglo-xrishman. To him the garrison of ”true English people 

of Ireland” ' were either Englishmen unfortunately born 

(1) Correspondence . IV, 90. 

12) Correspondence , III, 275. 

^3) i'he Drapier Letters, 85 (Davis 1 Edition) 








■ 

■ 

, 

, 

. 

. 

, 

; 









. 

. 


















158 

there like himself, or descendants of its conquerors, and as 

such he * humbly conceived they ought to he on as good a foot 

(1) .of 

as any subjects of Britain", instead/being treated as 
an English dependency to be farmed at will and totally sub¬ 
jected to English interests, There was ample fuel here for ! ( 
his saeva indignatio . and in his fight against Irish slavery 
he inevitably took in the whole population, the politically 
despised Catholic majority as well as the minority of which 
he was a part. 

We can trace his growing interest in Irish affairs dur¬ 
ing the years when he looked mainly back upon the past. His 
normal attitude had been one of contempt. In 1711 he had 
written to Ford: "You are right as to my Indifference about 
Irish Affairs, which is not occasioned by my Absence, but 
contempt of them; and when I return my Indifference will be 

[ g) 

full as much." But underneath this indifferenee toward 

Ireland as Ireland lay a smoldering resentment against the 

English attitude toward her. In the Letter uoncerning the 

3acramental rest , he had referred with heavy irony to the 

Whig proposal to experiment with lest Hepeal in Ireland."We 

value your interest much more than our own: If your little 

finger be sore, and you think a poultice made of our vitals 

will give it ease, speak the word and it shall be done; the 

* 1 Correspondence , III, 309 fto Peterborough, April 8, 1726) 
\2)Letters of swift to Ford , 7. 










, 

. 

l 

. 

. 

. 

















159 


interest of oar whole Kingdom is at any time ready to strike 
to that of your poorest fishing towns•" ^ ^ By 1716 his 
indifference was again Beginning to give way to resentment, 

i 

and he wrote to Atterhury: TT I congratulate with "England for 

li 

joining with us here in the fellowship of slavery. It is 

not so terrible a thing as you imagine: we have long lived 

( 2 ) 

under it." And by 1719 he has given in to the inevitable, 

"As the World is now turned, no Cloyster is retired enough 
to keep Politicos out, and I will own they raise my passions 
whenever they come in my way." 

The condition of Ireland was certainly bad enough to 
rouse a lesser man than Swift. The heritage of internal 
religious antipathies had been aggravated by the land 
settlements which followed the rebellions, dispossessing 
Catholic owners in favour of the Protestant victors and 
their attendant capitalists, which had left a Catholic 
peasantry under the thumb of alien owners. To this was 
added a system of absentee landlordship and rack-renting 
which at the same time drained the country of money and de¬ 
pressed what peasantry were left upon the land by an in¬ 
creasing conversion of arable land into meadows for sheep 

(1) Works, IV, 10. 

(2) Correspondence , II, 312. 

i (3) Letters of S-1ft to H, ord , 82. (December 8, 1719) 









. 


« 

t 

♦ 

. 


P . 

. 




. 

, 



















160 


grazing. Irish industry since the Restoration had been 
systematically sacrificed to the demands of English inter¬ 
ests. Staple products and cattle had been virtually ex¬ 
cluded from the English market, and when the Irish turned to 
wool the same treatment was again applied. That the woollen 

industry could not in all probability have survived in any 

situation 

case does not alter the J between the two nations, under 
William linen was encouraged as a substitute but it took 
many years to develop into an industry. Shipping had been 
killed by the Navigation Acts. In spite of all this, how¬ 
ever, whether from the smuggling trade or from an uncontroll 
able agrarian prosperity, conditions on the whole had prob¬ 
ably improved in the latter 17th century. But by the 1720’s 
the country presented a dismal picture of squalor and degrad 
ation. The peasants were forced in many cases to live on 
a mixtures of cattle blood and meal called bonny-clabber, 
and Sheridan described these ’’natives'’ as ’’sunk to the 

i 

lowest degree of misery and poverty, whose houses are dung¬ 
hills, whose victuals are the blood of their cattle, or 

the herbs of the field; and whose clothing, to the dishon- 

, (i) 

our of <jOd and man, is nakedness. beggars were every¬ 

where, and constituted a problem which Swift tried to solve 
in some measure by a scheme for giving badges to the gen¬ 
ii) The Intelligencer, number 6. (Quoted by Temple Scott, 
Swift’s Works . VII, 26, note.) 





























. 

- 








. 

r 

. . 

. 

. 



1 










161 


uine beggars of a given district that the almsgiver might 
know his own, and each locality support its poor. The 
plight of the weavers in the cities was as bad; and in 
1721 Swift reported that 1600 were starving, ’’which is 
pretty fair for this Town, and one Trade, after such numbers 
have gone to other Countryes to seek a Livelyhood.” 

Added to all this was the political factor, an inevitable 
aggravation to the Tory Dean. Under Hanover, the English 
government had deliberately set out to run the Dublin 
parliament from the offices of the Lord-Lieutenant and the 
Primate of the Church. Archbishop King was first selected 
to represent the ’’English Interest” as Lord Justice. But 
he was found to be also an Irishman, and later things were 
run by the Primate, Boulter, whose allegiance was unquest¬ 
ioned, and who controlled Irelandthrough a puppet Lord- 
Lieutenant. As a consequence all appointments, in the 
Church and out, were given as far as possible to the hangers 

on of the English governors, and native clergymen were left 

\ 

nothing but the prospect of a lifetime in some poor living. ' 
But Swift needed southing more than general conditions 
and past laws to stir him to action. He wrote to get some¬ 
thing done, not to analyse or describe. And in the years 


(1) Letters of Swift to Eord , 89. 






















.. 

. 

. 

. 


















162 


immediately before and after 1720 the necessary stimuli 
appeared. In 1719-20 the English government passed a hill 
taking away the Irish House of Lords' right to he the court 1 2 
of ultimate appeal for Ireland, and laying down the principle 
that legislation passed in London was binding upon the 
people of Ireland, further reducing their self-government to 
a cipher. Swift's reactions were immediate and violent. 
Writing to Ford April 4, 1720, he says: 

"I believe myself not juity of too much veneration 
for the Irish H. of L° s , but I differ from you in 
Politicks, the question is whether People ought 
to be slaves or no...You fetter a Man seven Years, 
then let him loose to shew his skill in dancing, 
and because he does it awkwardly, you say he 
ought to be fettered for Life....I do assure you I 
never saw so universal a Discontent as there is 
among the highest most virulent and anti-church 
Whigs against that Bill and every Author or Abettor 
of it wi thout exception. TT 111 

Prom the memories of the party struggles of 1710-14 he turned 
to the non-partisan battle for Ireland, in which he was soon 
to fight shoulder to shoulder with men like king and Chancel¬ 
lor Mi diet on, the "Speaker Brodrick" whom he had formerly 
cursed as an Irish Whig agitating for a repeal of the lest. 

In the session of 1720-1 the English parliament demon¬ 
strated its intentions of applying this "Act for the better 

securing the dependency of the kingdom of Ireland" by shut- 

- ( 2 ) 

ting out Irish calicoes from the English market. Added to 

(1) Letters of Swift to Ford , 8-5, 6. 

(2) I. S. Leadam, The Political nistory of England , IX, 313. 











_ 














































163 


all this, 1720 saw the bursting of the South Sea Bubble 
and a resultant havoc in Ireland. Both Swift and Bing took 
this matter very seriously, attributing to it a large portion 
of the blame for the particularly bad conditions in Ireland 
from then on. While in England the crash had in one sense 
merely dislocated the balance of incomes, transferring large 
sums from the pockets of unlucky investors into those of 
wiser men like Walpole, the main effect as Swift saw it 
had been to transfer large sums from Ireland to England, 
draining the country of its already impoverished supply of 
gold and silver. This touched Swift in one of his most vital 
spots, his hatred of the' financiers, and of "pro.lectors” in 
general, and seemed to justify all he had said about them in 
the past. Consequently when a group of men in Dublin pro¬ 
posed in 1720 to set up a Bank to assist commerce and allev¬ 
iate the shortage of money by floating credit on the secur¬ 
ity of the land values of its investors, in reality an ex¬ 
tension of Swift's own lending scheme on a larger scale, he 
saw in it only another dangerous bubble scheme. So he 
raised the cry that it was only another device whereby Irish 
gold would be transported to England, and ridiculed it by 
proposing to set up in its place a "Swearer's Bank" founded 
on the vast sums raised by a tax on all oaths uttered in the 








* 

. 

, 

. 

. 


. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 
















kingdom. 

More creditable however was his first Irish pamphlet, 

A Proposal for the use of Irish Manufacture , resulting from 
the Acts of the British Legislature of 1719 and 1720, Its 
admonitions to the people of Ireland was to "Buy Home Prod¬ 
ucts" if they wished to save the textile trade, and to burn 
everything English save the people and the coals. Be applied 
to the relationship of the two kingdoms the fable of Pallas 
and Ar^chne, condemned through jealousy to spin and weave 
forever out of her own bowels as a spider. Ireland is even 
more unjustly treated, "for the greatest part of our bowels 

and vitals are extracted, without allowing us the liberty of 

i 2 ) 

spinning and weaving them." xhe spirit in which it was 
written, and the spirit which inspired all the Irish pam¬ 
phlets is shown by a scriptural quotation. "The Scripture 
tells us, that 'oppression makes a wise man mad'. Therefore, 
consequently speaking, the reason why some men are not mad, 

is because they are not wise: However, it were to be wished 

(3) 

that oppression would in time teach a little wisdom to fool^T 
For the next decade swift continued to lash wisdom 

into fools with a series of pamphlets on every angle of the 

(1) "An Bssay on English Bubbles" and "The Swearer's Bank", 
J^orks, VII. 

(2) " r orks . VII , 21. 

(3) Works, VII, 21,2. 
















• 


■ 

# 


. 

, 























165 


Irish problem, ranerins: from a continuous assertion of the 
principle that no legislation for Ireland could he considered 
binding without the consent of the people as represented in 
the Dublin parliament/ 1 2 ^ to practical suggestions about 
the planting of trees and the draining of bogs. Absentee- 
landlords, rack-renting, the payment of huge sums annually to 
England through salaries, rents, and importation, the mon¬ 
opoly by the "English Interest” of all available positions, 
the driving of the people off the land by the sheep raisers, 
emigration, the bankers and their wiles, all are attacked. 
Swift had learned the value of constant repetition made 
striking and novel by different disguises as a weapon of 
propaganda. In his Maxims Controlled in Ireland (1724) he 
states his case in the form of a series of economic paradoxes 
Is it not an undisputed maxim that the people are the wealth 
of a nation? ne will grant it to be true even in Ireland, 
that "if we had the African custom, or privilege, of selling 
our useless bodies for slaves to foreigners, it would be the 
most useful branch of our trade, by ridding us of a most 

( 2 ) 

unsupportable burthen, and bringing us money in the stead. 
(Here is the first hint of the modest Pioposal ). In A Short 
view of the state of Ireland (1728) he sets down fourteen 

(1) i'his is mentioned in the Proposal for the use of Irish 
Manufacture . but is really driven home in the fourth 
Drapier's Letter . 

(2) ^orks, VII, 70. 

























. 

. 

' 








' 
































, 














1(36 

true causes of any country r s prosperity and shows, point hy 
point, that Ireland has been mulcted of them all. Her ports 
are hut so many beautiful prospects of a man shut up in 
prison, swift turns savagely on the hankers in conclusion, 
saying* that he had often wished that a law were enacted to 
"hang up a half a dozen hankers every year, and thereby inter¬ 
pose at least some short delay, to the further ruin of 

Ireland." * ^ In The story of the Injured Lady and his 

the 

Answer he depicts/three British kingdoms in an allegory of 
a gentleman and his two mistresses, fhe "character" of 
mistress Scotland, who replaces her rival in the affections 
of England, is vitriolic, and the general theme is outlined 
in the sub-title: "Being a true Picture of Scotch Perfidy, 
Irish Poverty, and English Partiality". Swift satirizes 
the attempt to substitute linen for wool as the chief Irish 
industry: "and to reward my love, constancy, and generosity, 
he hath bestowed on me the office of being sempstress to 
his grooms and footmen, which I am forced to accept or 
starve." * 2 ^ 

These repetitions do not flag because of the images 
with which swift burns his meaning into the mind of the 
reader, as indignation had burned it into his. "Aiax was 
mad", he says with reference to the grazier, "when he mistook 

'1 ) nr orks , Til, 90. 
t 2 ) -orks , yl1 , 102. 











' 

. 

■ 







. 






f 





. 
























167 


a flock of sheep for his enemies; hut we shall never "be 

sober, until we have the same way of thinking." If the 

native Irish are perverse and lazy, it may not he entirely 

their fault. "however, supposing the size of a native's 

understanding just equal to that of a dog or horse, I have 

often seen those two animals to he civilized by rewards, at 

( 2 ) 

least as much as my punishment." 

However, the solution upon which perhaps the most 
stress was laid (three pamphlets were devoted to it), was 
the first. "The directions for Ireland are very short and 
plain Tt ; is Swift*s blunt answer to one man’s suggestions: 
"to encourage agriculture and home consumption, and utterly 
discard all importations which are not absolutely necessary 
for health or life". Exception has been taken to this 
tendency of Swift’s to peremptorily dismiss all suggestions 
but his own, disregarding the more academic work of men 
like Molesworth and Arthur Hobbs. Mr. Hobbes proposal that 

the Hutch system of a pump-room in the vault of every work- 

■ 

house, in which the shiftless and Incurably lazy native 

Irish should be made to pump to save themselves from drown- 

( 3 ) 

ing , is hardly preferable. The factors involved in the 

(1) "An Answer to a Paper called ’A Memorial 1 ". ( T " T orks VII. 

111 .) -- 

(2) "An Answer to Several Letters.... Unknown Hands" (Works. 
VII, 133.) 

(3) Taylor, Jonathan Swift , 161. 



















. 


. 

. 

1 





' 



. 










, 






















economic conditions of Ireland at this time were so tangled 
that the modern historian is still at a loss when endeavour¬ 
ing to make a definite statement. In any case a careful 
study of the facts, even if it had proved correct in its 
diagnosis, could have achieved nothing in the face of an 
English government blind to anything but English interests 
in the most insular sense. It would have been mainly of 
interest and use to posterity, an audience about which Swift, 
when mending the world, had little or no concern. His econ¬ 
omics, like most of his "facts", were really a secondary 
matter. *^ What he wanted was to get something done; in 
the matter of Wood's half-pence he succeeded. But even more 
he realized that the Irish must be whipped into self-conscious 
ness, bound together in their own interest, as he grudgingly 
admitted were the Scotch, by a. spirit of independence. His 
"short and plain" answer was an admirable one for this pur¬ 
pose, for though it might do little actual good, to substi- 


fl) That prejudice entered into the Irish pamphlets is un¬ 
doubted. We have already seen it in operation with re¬ 
gard to the Irish Bank. Another interesting? condition 
perhaps explains Swift's constant interest in the w ooHen 
Weavers, first advertising? them to the purchasing world, 
then advocating a guild system to ensure honesty and 
quality, and calling them to account for their inability 
to do anything for themselves, as well as his antipathy 
toward the linen projects. The woolleii industry employed 
mainly English weavers; the linen industry was largely 
monopolized by the Scotch. 












r 

. 











► 





■ 















169 


lute Irish plaids and clerical frocks for foreign stuffs, it 
symbolized a determined tightening of the nation f s belt 
against whatever hardship might befall. England would do 
nothing, - absentee-landlords would go on living in London - 
the Lean himself would have preferred to do so; but the 
people could at least do this much for themselves. Beyond 
this it was Swift’s aim to bring home to the Irish a sense 
of unity, transcending the ruinous preoccupation with the 
local faction. Whig and Tory, as a result of which Ireland’s 
real problems went unregarded. Swift’s pen, as always, 
served his will, and Ireland became conscious of her slavery 
as Ireland. It is The Lean that Dubliners now remember of 
the figures who worked for Ireland, not Archbishop Hing or 
Mr. Lobbs, saner though they may perhaps have been in the 
matter of facts. 

His appeal to Ireland, as distinguished from his crit¬ 
ical or constructive advice, reached the climax of its inten 
sity and bitterness in the cold inhumanity of the Modest 
Proposal (1729). The inhumanity is not Swift’s but a final 
condemnation of the circumstances which had made it possible 

Swift had no illusions either about himself, or the 
extent of his influence. The name of patriot, he wrote to 
Pope, ”is what I do not deserve; because what I do is owing 









, 

, 







* 








T r 







♦ 




* 

, 


• # 

•1 

• 





( 







* : 



* 









« 










, 










1 



. 




. 

, 















170 


to perfect rage and resentment, and the mortifying sight of 
slavery, folly, and baseness about me, among which I am 
forced to live." To the blind men of faction, he spoke 

in the accents of the Old Testament: " 'Wisdom crieth in the 
streets: Because I have called on ye; 1 have stretched out 
my hand, and no man regarded; but ye have set at nought all 
my counsels, and would none of my reproof; I also will 

( 2 ) 

laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear cometh 1 2 ". 

3. The Prapier . 

The most famous of the Irish tracts is of course the 
group of Prapier^ Letters of 1724, in which Swift succeeded 
in winning what was practically a one man revolt against the 
English government. The cause of this revolt, an attempt 
by the government to introduce an issue of half-pence coined 
by a certain Mr. Wood, was trivial enough; but its trivial¬ 
ity was of the order of a certain "tee party" in Boston 
later in the century, and Swift made of it a symbol around 
which to raise all the deeper issues involved in his struggle 
against Irish "slavery". The knaves in office must be 
warned, the ^aves aroused by something that would seize 
their passions and imaginations. To the first he quoted 

(1) Correspondence, IV, 34. 

(2) ' r orks . VII, 114*115. 




















. 




. 

„ 

, 

. 












±71 


Ecclesiastes, ”Bind not one Sin upon another, for in One 
thou shalt not he Unpunished”, and advanced against them 
the principle which William Molyneux had enunciated on Ire¬ 
land's behalf in 1698, ”That Ireland should be bound by Acts 

of Parliament made in England, is against Reason, and the 

( 2 ) 

Common Rights of All Mankind.” To keep up the Spirits 

and Resentments of the second, he painted vivid pictures of 
the devastation these drossy brass coins would cause, a 
wicked cheat imposed upon the people of Ireland by one 
single, diminutive, insignificant Mechanick; like a parish 
bell-man he repeated the cry in pamphlet after pamphlet, 
BEWARE OP WOOD'S HARF-PEHCE. As he tola his printer, 

Faulkner, years later, he wrote to the vulgar more than to 
the learned, under the disguise of an ordinary Dublin Draper 
who thought it necessary to translate the words ”nota bene” 
for his readers and carefully informed them that the stat¬ 
utes he was quoting had been supplied and translated by a 

lawyer feed for that purpose, for they ”were, as I am told, 

( 4 ) 

writ in latin” . As letter followed letter the disguise 
became thinner, and Swift manipulated his appeals so that 

(1) Title page of Letter V . 

(2) The Case of Ireland*s "Being Bound by Acts of Parliament 

in" England. Stated. (Quoted by Herbert Davis, The Prap- 

ier r s Letters , Introduction, ix) 

(3) See Letter VI . 142 (Davis Edition) 

(4) letter I . 11, (Davis Em ion) 













. 









. ' • 


. 










' 

r 

. 

. 











, 











172 


they gradually “built up the case, moving from the picturesque 
hut transitory propaganda of the first letter, concentrated 
mainly on the half-pence, to the real issue of the depend¬ 
ence of Ireland upon the English Parliament, in his fourth 
letter to "the ^hole people". 

The currency question was one well calculated to 
arouse popular excitement. Irish currency was in a rather 
bad state, and what coins there were represented a heterog¬ 
enous collection ranging from Portugese moidores to local 
issues and counterfeits. In Elizabeth f s time it had been 
debased to ruin the Catholic rebels under Tyrone, While 
more recently James II had done the same to support his 
last stand against William. Irish petitions for a national 
mint had been completely disregarded and since the Restora¬ 
tion several patents had been granted by the English govern¬ 
ment to private men to supply the deficiency. At the end 
of the century one of these, Moore, had added to the troubles 
caused by James T s worthless issue by so overstocking the 
country with half-pence that the currency became undervalued. 
The whole question was therefore a sore one to the Irish. 
Consequently when the news leaked through that another pri¬ 
vate patent had been granted in July 1722 to a certain Mr. 
Wood, (in return for a substantial bribe to the King's mist- 




























. 

’ 

. 

. 












A 

X { o 

ress, the Duchess of Kendal), for the coinage of 2100,800 
of half-pence and farthings, without even the knowledge of 
the Irish Parliament, there was a natural reaction. Memor¬ 
ials were sent that year and the next to the Treasury in 
London and to the King by the Commissioners of the Revenue 
in Dublin and by both Houses of Parliament, stating that 
there was no need of such an issue, that it would be highly 
prejudicial to the trade, welfare, and governmental revenue 
of the kingdom, that it was a notorious fraud calculated to 
represent a loss to the nation of 150$, and that private 
coinage in any case was an evil. No notice was taken until 
finally in November, 1723, they received His Majesty's 
gracious answer that He would enquire into those abuses of 
the patent complained of, obviously side-stepping the main 
issue at stake, of the patent itself and of private coinage. 
The investigation was duly held, a favourable assay of Wood f s 
coins returned by Newton from the Mint, and a report drawn 
up by Walpole skilfully and convincingly upholding the case 
for Wood and the patent, but adding that the sum might be re¬ 
duced to 240,000. 

Meanwhile, before news of this reached Dublin, Swift 
had become interested in the matter, and early in March, 

1724, published the Drapier's first Letter to the "Shop-keep- 












. 












. 





* 










































• 





















♦ 


. 












. 


































* 

♦ 





















„ 














• 








. 










> 




















• 



















• 

• 
































. 















174 

ers, Tradesmen, Farmers, and Common-People of Ireland". In 
this matter he was associated with King and Midleton, who 
led the resistance to it in governmental circles, and on 
April 2, wrote to Ford that he had just come from an inter¬ 
view with them* "I spoke very severely to the Knaves about 
the Farthings. I told them the baseness and pusilanimity 
when they and others were sent for by the L^ upon that sub¬ 
ject they all talked as much against the Thing as I. But 
People are more in fear than ever." 

This first Letter was strong stuff, using the facts 
wildly to get his desired effects. Later he described it 
allegorically in a manner which shows what he intended. "Con 
sidering with my self that the lower and poorer sort of 
People wanted a plain strong course stuff to defend them 
against cold Easterly ^inds which then blew very fierce and 

blasting for a long time together . I contrived one on pur¬ 
pose, which sold very well all over the kingdom , and pre¬ 
served many thousands from Agues ." The half-pence are 
worth either a ninth or a twelfth of their face value. Pic¬ 
tures are drawn of farmers carrying three cartloads of the 
trash to pay their rent. As for himself, he will keep his 
little supply of gold and silver by him like his heart’s 
blood till better times, and trade on a barter basis with 

(1) letter V, 103 (Davis Edition) 











. 

. 

* 

. 







. 




« 


* 









. 





















, 


. * 

, 

. 










. ( O 


the butcher and the brewer* But Swift also takes this opp¬ 
ortunity to get at the more general questions in Which he 
wishes to arouse interest, and depicts the results of allow¬ 
ing these coins into the country; the tenantry will be 
ejected because unable to pay; the graziers will then turn 
all the land into pasture, and the shop-keepers will have to 
emigrate, because it is the landed-men who support the mer¬ 
chant • 

In these Letters Swift added few new arguments* He 
merely popularized what had been said by thinkers like 
Molyneux or by the Irish government in its various memorials 
putting them in startling and often grossly exaggerated form 
There was some foundation even for the cartloads of half¬ 
pence. When the Commissioners presented their first protest 
to the Lord Lieutenant in August 1722, they claimed that 
owing to the inflation caused by Moore’s issue in William 
111*8 reign, T, the collectors of the Revenue got so much - 
especially when the Army refused to accept it - that it had 
to be kept in Casks.” ^ ^ Moreover, there was a cause for 
alarm in the magnitude of Wood’s intended issue. That 
there was a need for copper coins Swift admitted, but only 
for £10,000; and this was likewise substantially the opinion 
of even the pro-Snglish Archbishop Boulter. But to flood 


(l) Quoted by Herbert Davis (introduction, xiii) 





, 


' 

. 

. 1 

, 

, 









176 


the country with over a £100,OOO*s worth of irredeemable 
half-pence and farthings when the total currency was estimat¬ 
ed to be only about £500,000 was hardly sensible* 

In the next two Letters the Drapier dealt with Wal¬ 
pole’s report and told Ireland that, since no one could 
force them to take these worthless coins, the only thing to 
do was to proclaim a total boycott* Such was his influence 
that the various trades and corporations hastened to print 
broadsides declaring their refusal to accept the coins, and 
even the news-boys, or "Plying-Stationers” declared: ’’That 
we will not Keceive or Offer in change any of William Wood's 
Drossy Half Pence or Fathings, because we can neither get 
Hews, Ale, Brandy, Tobacco, nor Snuff for such cursed Stuff.” 
Swift riddled the arguments of Walpole’s report, coming away 
easily the vOctor, and placed the whole case before the peo¬ 
ple, as one in which all Ireland, in the person of its parl¬ 
iament, had been forced to bo\^ before the interests of a 
single Englishman: ”St. Paul says; All things are Lawful . 
but all Things are not Expedient . W© are Answered that 
this Patent is Lawful . but is it Expedient ? We Read that 
the High Priest said It was expedient that one Man should 
Die for the People ; and this was a most wicked Proposition. 
But that a Whole Hation should Die for one Man , was never 















< 





* 










. 

, 

. 


















. 

, . r 



. 







, 




. 


« 








• 
















































JL 4 4 


heard of before." ^ Finally, in a passage which lifted the 
debate far beyond the question of half-pence, he asked 
whether the people of Ireland were not born as free as those 
of England. "Does not the same Sun shine on them? And have 
they not the same God for their Protector? Am I a Free-Man 
in England , and do I become a Slave in six Hours by cross- 
ing the Channel?" 1 (2) 

It was to this question that his next Letter . "To 
The Whole People of Ireland", was devoted. Carteret arrived 
in Dublin as Lord Lieutenant on October 22, sent by Walpole 
to clear up this mess which was fast becoming a dangerous 
national crisis. Swift had written two private letters of 
advice and warning to his old friends, and on the very day 
of Carteret’s arrival the fourth Letter was published* In 
it Swift mockingly warned his compatriots to beware of the 
wiles of a Lord-Lieutenant bent upon getting his way, of 
the pressure and the inducements at his command as the 
bestower of office, and of the blandishments of flattery and 
vice-regal dinners. The real sting however lay in Swift’s 
denial that there was any legal foundation, to say nothing of 
justice, for the dependency of Ireland upon England’s will, 
and that others might differ on this opinion, but he. The 
Drapier, depended only upon the King and the laws of his own 

(1) Letter III, 54 (Davis Edition) 

(2) Ibid, 40. 










' . 

. 

, 

. 

, 


. 

, 

. 

. 

’ 













178 

country: "For in Reason . all Government without the Consent 
of the Governed is the very Definition of Slavery : But in 
Fact . Fleven men well Armed will certainly subdue one 
Single Man in his Short ," ^ 

As a result, Carteret succeeded in persuading the 
Privy Council to offer a 2300 reward for information against 
the Drapier, and Swift’s printer, Harding, was prosecuted. 

But the day before his trial Swift sent a letter of Season¬ 
able Advice to the Jury members, and Chief-Justice Whitshed, 
who had formerly failed to gain a conviction against the 
printer of Swift's pamphlet on Irish Manufacture , found that 
no Dublin Jury dared present a verdict against the author 
of this illegal circular by which the Drapier had tried to 
influence them. In fact, one of the minority who voted as 
Whitshed desired, a banker, suffered a run on his bank as 
a result, and the government had to come to his aid. Whit¬ 
shed in anger dissolved the Jury and called another - an 
illegal move. The morning the second Jury was to sit Swift 
published a short Extract from a similar case during James 
II T s reign, when the English Parliament had declared against > 
such a dissolution. When the Chief-Justice faced his second 
Jury, he found that not only would they not present against 
the hero of the hour, but that instead they had drawn up a 

(1) Letter IV, 79 (Davis Edition) 




























179 1 

Judgment condemning the half-pence* in which the Drapier*s 
hand was more than suspected# The governments rout was 
complete. 

Letter IT was the climax of the Drapier’s work. The 
next one, to Lord Molesworth, is in many waysthe most enjoy¬ 
able, for here the Dean throws off his mask and plays with 
it, tossing the Drapier, and the charges of treason brought 
against him, about, as only Swift could do. But it was 
really only a reiterated warning for the good of the cause, 
ending with "BEWARE." Of the other two Letters . neith¬ 

er of which was published, the last was written in 1725 as a 
general letter of advice on all the problems of Ireland "to 
Both Houses of Parliament" when their long delayed session 
should begin. The English government, however* had finally 
admitted defeat, and after being so advised by both Carteret 
and Boulter, revoked Wood’s patent, compensating him out 
of the Irish establishment. The news reached Ireland in 
August, and so on the 31st Swift wrote to his friend Worrall 
to stop the publication. "The work is done, and there is 
no more need of the Drapier." 

In spite of Swift, however, the Drapier could not 
die. Taverns were named after him and celebrations held in 
his honour. Elections in the despised petty politics of 









’ 

' 

4 


* 






♦ 

' 


♦ 

























180 


Dublin were fought among pamphlets signed with his name. 
Whoever could claim The Dean’s support was almost sure of 
his votes, and on one occasion, when both candidates had 
claimed it, the future winner turned the trick by publishing . 
a letter from The Dean to himself - of his own composition. 

4. The Irish Bishops . 

Ye paltry underlings of state.’ 

Ye senators.’ who love to prate; 

Ye rascals of inferior note. 

Who for a dinner sell a vote.’ 

Ye pack of pensionary peers. 

Whose fingers itch for poets’ ears.' 

Ye bishops.’ far removed from saints. 

Why all this rage? why these complaints? 

Hot all of Swift’s activity in Ireland was confined to 
the supporting of her cause against foreign oppression. 

There were a plenty of internal abuses, in high place to 
evoke comment from his caustic pen, and many a private grudge 
to be paid off in a lampoon or two, as in the case of Whit- 
shed, whom even death could not save. He might uphold the 
Dublin Parliament against Walpole and Wood, but he had no 

(1) On the Irish Club. 1729. 















' 










181 


higher an esteem for their ability as disinterested governors 
than he had of politicians in general, and completed the 
work begun in the poem quoted above with his terrible Legion 
Club, in 1735. In the f 30 f s also he turned again to the 
task of squelching another attempted Test repeal, and by a 
series of brilliant pamphlets won his case, as usual. But 
it was the behaviour of his fellows, the Irish Bishops, that 
raised perhaps his most bitter feelings. They were, most 
of them,English appointees, uninterested in the lower clergy 
for whom Swift had laboured to gain the small bounty of the 
First-Fruits. Like most of the men of superior station in 
Ireland, they had the interests of the nation as a whole 
little at heart. And there was also for Swift an added 
incentive in the memory of their treatment of him when he 
had finally won the First-Fruits from Harley: they had ig¬ 
nored his work for their Church, and had treated him as a 
turn-coat upon his return as Lean. 

In 1723 they tried to pass a bill which would give 
them the right to lease Church livings on long terms, there¬ 
by lining their pockets at the expense of future holders. 
Swift published against them, and won. In 1731 they tried 
another scheme, proposing two bills, one forcing incumbents 
of livings to reside and build thereon, and giving the 
bishops an economic power over them which Swift felt would re* 
suit in no good to the lower clergy, and another giving the 





. 

. 

, 

, 


. 






. L 







. 





' 



















' 















, 






















182 


“bishops the right to divide livings and create more places 
for their henchmen. Swift had never forgotten his days as 
a mere vicar of Laracor, and immediately sided with his 
brethren of the gown against those of the mitre - and again, 
though the bills passed the Council and lords, his pamphlets 
prevailed. He celebrated the victory in one of his best 
satires, comparing the bishops to the emissaries of the Old 
Dragon, in a tone vtfhich reminds one of Burns* "Address to 
The De'il", comparing them unfavourably with Pilate, and 
concluding: 

So God bless the church, and three of our mitres, 

( 1 ) 

And God bless the Commons, for biting the biters. 

But the Dean was fighting a losing battle against the 
disease which had tormented him throughout his life. Vanessa 
and Stella were dead, his mind was sinking into darkness, and 
there soon became little more for him to do in the political 
world which he had invaded, mended, and despised. His 
thoughts turned to more important matters, such as polite 
conversation or the foibles of servants, in which he perhaps 
amused himself by recalling Harley inthe person of the butler, 
He had served Ireland well - 

The Dean did by his pen defeat 
An infamous destructive cheat: 

f 1 ) The Irish Bishops. 











, 









1 

. 

, 

- 

: 









, 


. 















183 


Taught fools their interest now to know, 

-And gave them arms to ward the blow. 

And at last he died, leaving her in a characteristic way a 
fund for the building of a mental hospital. 

He gave the little wealth he had 
To build a house for fools and mad; 

To show, by one satiric touch, 

Ho nation wanted it so much. 

That kingdom he hath left his debtor, 

I wish it soon may have a better: 

And since you dread no further lashes, 

Methinks you may forgive his ashes. 



, 

, 

, 

. 

, 

. 

. 













184 


sacTioff hi 

GULLIVER'S TRAVELS 

1. The Puppet-Show of Memory. ^ 

"....either to laugh, lament, or he angry; or if he 
were sanguine enough, perhaps to dream of a remedy.” 

In 1726 Swift published Gulliver's Travels , which, 
as his greatest work and one of the few written for his 
own satisfaction and for posterity rather than for a 
particular cause ”on the anvil” at the moment, may he said 
to embody his final opinions on life and the public affairs 
to which he had devoted his life. As it stands, its mood 
changes from the ironic laughter of Book I, to the blight¬ 
ing anger of Book IV, from which we may draw the conclusion 
that, to Swift, a remedy was nothing more than a dream. In 
the order in which it was written, however, the first and 
last books were those dealing with the Lilliputians and the 
Flying Islanders of Book III, and into them was woven the 
satirical allegory of his political career and of the 
history which he had helped to make. Book I, written prob- 

(l) The best explanations of the political allegory in Gull- 
iver T s Travels are in C. H. Firth’s essay. The Political 
Significance of Gulliver's Travels , and in Shane Leslies 
The Skull of Swift. Upon these I have based most of this 
section. 















' 











185 


ably in 1719-20 with later additons, belongs to the period 
of retrospect, and its intricate maze of allusions are 
odd bits of his memories and opinions of the England he 
had left; Book III, written in 1724-5 by the Drapier, is a 
fable of the Ireland he had espoused. There are also sim¬ 
ilar references in the rest of the book, but on the whole , 
the satire is there more general. 

Lilliput is England viewed from the distant perspect¬ 
ive in space and time of St. Patrick's, and its politics 
are the puppet-show which they now seemed to the Dean, the 
"Juggler's tricks" of his earliest convictions. Gulliver 
himself is Swift, pelted by ineffective though annoying pam¬ 
phlets in the form of Lilliputian arrows, locked and chained 
by the fourscore and eleven Pamphlets he had written in the 
cause of six and thirty factions, as he had Jestingly 
claimed in A Tale of a Tub , but which had actually condemned 
him to exile away from London, as the chains kept him safely 
outside the capital of Lilliput, or condemned by the Court 
for saving the palace from fire in a manner considered in¬ 
decent, and therefore incurring the enemity of the queen, 
as A Tale had ruined his chances of preferment under the 
prudish Anne; or he is Bolingbroke, whose making of a peace 






















- 

. 



. 




* 






* 



. 








. 

1 

• 




















, - 


. 




• 


, 








, 



















186 


with Prance, and refusal to continue the war against a 
prostrate enemy, had led him to flee from what Swift con¬ 
sidered an unjust charge of treason. The war Gulliver 
carried on for the little king against Blefuscu, the articloE 
drawn up against him afterwards, and his flight from the 
King’s notorious "mercy" to the court of the enemy, are all 
a parody of this. Flimnap, the King’s Treasurer, who 
worked against Gulliver and suggested that he disposed: of 
by a poisoned shirt (libels?), is Walpole, and like him a 
master of factious politics. Any artificial or currupt 
means of securing party allegiance was detestable to Swift, 
as in the case of the vested Whig money-interest in the war. 
Walpole’s revival of the orders of the Bath and the Garter, 
which he used to secure support on a basis of vanity, was 
of the same ilk, and is satirized in the blue and red 

ribbons which the little politicians received for profic- 
over 

iency in jumping/or crawling under a stick held either by 

the Emporer and his first minister (Flimnap), or by one 

■ 

of them alone. Swift had often sarcastically complained 
that such a yard-stick or set of the latest tenets of the 
prevailing faction should be periodically published for the 
benefit of party men who wished to crawl or jump as the 
ministry desired. 







, • 


, 


. 









. 



, 

, 





. 












187 


More important however was the method employed to 
choose the ministers of state. Whoever could lump the 
highest in a dance upon a tight-rope received the office. 
Walpole, whose twenty years of power represented the best 
in political artifice, is allowed, in the person of Flim- 
nap, to cut a caper at least an inch higher than any other 
lord in the empire. There were, of course, frequent acci¬ 
dents. Flimnap himself would once have broken his neck 

. 

save for one of the King’s cushions which happened to break 
his fall. Walpole had been restored to favour after his 
fall in 1717, through the good and purchasable offices of 
George’s mistress, the Duchess of Kendal. Her part in the 
Wood affair no doubt helped to inspire Swift to refer to 
her in such an uncomplimentary image. 

Gulliver’s other mortal enemy at court was Skyresh 
Bolgolam, ’’Galbet” or Admiral of the Realm, who was of a 
morose and sour complexion. In his poem The Author on 
Himself, in 1714, Swift had mentioned Nottingham as his 
mortal enemy along with Walpole. Nottingham, or ’’Dismal” 
as he was nicknamed because of his manner, and his ’’adust 
complexion”, had prided himself upon his knowledge of naval 
affairs. Moreover, he had turned against the Tories partly 
because they would not accomodate him with an office, and 









, 

r 

. 

r 

r 

. 

, 

. 

♦ 














188 


was one of the bitterest opponents of the peace with France. 
When a friendly lord came to inform Gulliver of the art¬ 
icles of impeachment which had been drawn up against him 
because he refused to complete his victory by completely re¬ 
ducing Blefuscu, it appeared that Bolgolam was the moving 
spirit behind it all. ”His original reasons I know not”, , 
says the lord, ”but his hatred is much increased since your 
success against Blefuscu, by which his glory as Admiral is 
obscured”. ^^ Previously however he had objected to Gull¬ 
iver’s being set at liberty soon after his arrival on the 
island, and had drawn up a list of conditions which the 
giant was forced to sign. Is it not possible that Swift 
was here recalling those days in 1714 when he thought his 
liberty was in danger from men like Nottingham and Wal¬ 
pole, now in power; and also of all the restrictions he suf- 

/ o) 

fered under in those years? fhe Conditions were 1 2 that 
the Man-Mountain should not depart from Lilliput without 
a license under the royal seal; that he should not enter 
the metropolis without express order; that he should ”take 
the utmost care not to trample the bodies of any of our 
loving subjects, their horses, or carriages, nor take any 

of our said subjects into his hands, without their own 

(1) Gulliver’s Travels . 76 (Oxford) 

(2) Ibid. 46,7. 











. 




* 


. 


. 

. 







, 








, 


























189 


consent”. As an Irish clergyman Swift had been forced to 
obtain special permission to journey to London, and occas¬ 
ionally had some difficulty with his superiors over this 
matter. In 1714 he contemplated escaping 1! 7hig reprisals 
by going to the court of Sweden, and wrote for a general 
license of absence, that he might depart from the "dominions" 
of the English King. And during the early years as Lean of 
St. Patrick's, while he was forced to remain silent by the 
complete collapse of his party, he was in a sense on his 
good behaviour, spared only so long as he refrained from 
"trampling upon the bodies” of the victors. 

Reldresal, Principal Secretary of Private Affairs, 
and Gulliver's friend at court, is taken to be Carteret, 
whom the Lrapier respected even as an enemy. It was he Who 
instituted the £300 reward offered for information as to 
the identity of the Lrapier. Reldresal, when Flimnap 
suggested that Gulliver be killed, tried to mitigate the 
sentence by proposing that his eyes be put out instead - no 
great hardship, for it would be sufficient for him to see 
through the eyes of the ministers, and "the greatest princes 
do no more.” May this not be an ironic reference to Cart¬ 
eret's attempt to force the Lrapier into silence again, to 
make him close his eyes to the wrongs of Ireland, and see 







- 




. 

, 

♦ 












190 

things through the eyes of the ministers who ruled from Eng¬ 
land? The Drapier had frequently stated that his Letters 
were no reflection upon George I, who was no doubt working 
for the good of his Irish subjects, but who had been led 
astray by the evil counsels of his ministry. 

The particular factions which divided England are 
also mockingly depicted in the parties of Lilliput. There 
are the Tramecksan and Slamecksan, or the high-heel and low- 
heel parties, obviously the High-Church Tories, and the Low- 
Church Whigs. "It is alleged indeed, that the high heels 
are most agreeable to our ancient constitution: but however 
this be, his Majesty hath determined to make use of only 
low heels in the administration of the government," ^ 
(George I and the Whigs). But the Tories were in the 1720 f s 
hoping that they could capitalize upon the animosity between 
the King and the Prince of Wales, and persaude the latter to 
adopt them in opposition to his father’s party. So, the 
Heir to the Crown is described as havins: a slight tendency 
toward the High-Heels; at least one is higher than the 
other, which gives him a slight hobble in his gait. 

On the other hand, the history of religious strife 
in England since the Reformation is parodied in the quarrels 
between the sects of Big- and Little-Endians (Catholics and 


(l) Gulliver’s Travels , 52 (Oxford) 




















' 




, 

. 

, 




. 

. 1 ' * • 

* 









191 


Dissenter^, who differ as to the end at Which an egg> should 
he broken, that is, about the ceremony of faster Communion. 
It is computed that eleven thousand persons had suffered 
death rather than submit to break their eggs at the smaller 
end. 

Lllliput is rather an amusing puppet-show, and its 
satire deals chiefly with actual historical incidents and 
persons. In the Voyage to Laputa, while Ireland instead of 
England is the specific historical milieu , the satire cuts 
deeper. Swift’s viewpoint had been indicated in the triv¬ 
iality of the objects over which the factions in Lilliput 
had disputed as violently as the parties in England. In 
Book III this is carried further to become a general critic¬ 
ism of government and society. 

The Plying Island of laputa which hovers over the 
subject state of Balnibarbi is England and the English ruler 
in Dublin Castle, hovering over a subject Ireland. To main¬ 
tain their power the Plying Islanders had only to cut off 
sun and rain from a rebellious district, and in extreme 
cases could crush the inhabitants below by lowering the 
adamantine bottom of their island upon them. The former 
method was that of the trade and Navigation Acts: the latter 









, 

. 















192 


the method treatened in the case of Wood’s half-pence. But 
one of the cities which had a large pointed rock in the 
center (St. Patrick’s Cathedral) refused to submit, and 
erected four large towers supplied with lodestones and com¬ 
bustible materials( The Lrapier’s Letters and Swift’s Irish 
pamphlets), which would have cracked the adamantine bottom 
had the Laputans tried to descend and crush it, "This 
incident broke entirely the King’s measures, and...he was 
forced to give the town their own conditions." 

Laputa is an island of hopelessly impractical music¬ 
ians and mathematicians. In Lagado, capital of Balnibarbi, 
Gulliver visits the equally hopeless Academy of Projectors, 
who are attempting to extract sunbeams from cucumbers, or to 
discover all possible knowledge by forming sentences from 
permutations and combinations of the alphabet. This is 
usually considered a straightforward and rather inept satire 
on science and music. In a sense that is true, but it is 
only as a secondary consideration. With science, as we think 

i 

of it; Swift had nothing to do. The practical fruits of the 
research of the seventeenth century had not yet appeared, 
and in pure science Swift had little interest. The Laputans 
are prophetically credited with havinsr extended their astron¬ 
omical discoveries much further than their European colleag- 







' 

r ' 

, 

# ' 

. * 

. 

t 

. 







ues. Yet, Swift implies, they can still he in a state of 
moral and social barbarism, as their treatment of the king¬ 
dom beneath them had demonstrated. Chart ins: the heavens 
is of little aid in the problem which alone was vital to 
Swift, the problem of men trying to live together without 
slavery, injustice, and poverty. As a matter of fact, the 
realization of man f s insignificance in the universe has only 
tended to make more difficult the problem of living at all. 
What Swift satirizes is not science, but "projects" in the 
18th Century sense of the word, useless or pernicious schemes 
of any kind, and preoccupation with unimportant issues at 
the expense of important ones. No doubt he had in mind the 
"bubble" schemes which appeared in the investment craze of 
1720, and swept England during the South Sea boom: projects 
for fattening hogs, for a wheel of perpetual motion, for the 
importation of jackasses from Spain, and even one for an 
object not to be divulged. It is a continuation of the 
satire on the High-Heel and Low-Heel disputes of Lilliput, 
on the exalting of the trivial above the vital. In other 
words, in a social and political sense, it is a satire on 
all he thought of under the word "faction". 

Why else should he append an apparently irrelevant 
note in the midst of his description of the star-gazing 





■ 

. 

. 


* 




. 


• 


# 


, 

, 

. 




' 

, 


► 














194 


Laputans, saying that Gulliver chiefly admired ’’the strong 
disposition he observed in them towards news and politics, 
perpetually enquiring into public affairs, giving their 
judgments in matters of state, and passionately disputing 
every inch of a party opinion”? ^ The explanation is 
clear when we come to Gulliver T s experiences in Balnibarbi. 
Munodi, an old-fashioned nobleman of that realm who still 
believes in the ordinary methods of farming and building 
houses, explains to Gulliver the reason for the ramshackle 
structures and cropless farms he sees everywhere about him. 
About forty years before certain persons had gone up to 
Laputa, and after five months, they came away with a very 
little smattering of mathematics, but full of volatile 
spirits acquired in that airy region. Hence they began to 
dislike the management of everything below, and, putting 
all upon a new foot, erected Projecting Academies throughout 
the Kingdom. How Balnibarbi is Ireland, and the miserable 
state of Ireland was to Swift the result of just this sort 
of thing. In 1719 (approximately five years before) he had 
written in A Letter to a Ypurg Clergyman that ’’this universal 
depravity of manners is owing to the perpetual bandying of 
factions among us for thirty years past ; when without weigh- 

(l) Gulliver’s Travels , 192 (Oxford). 








. 

. 

. 

T 

' 

* 

. 

, 

. 







195 


ing the motives of justice, law, conscience, or honour, everj 
man adjusts his principles to those of the party he hath 
chosen, and among whom he may best find his own account." 

The preoccupation of governors with faction, of landlords 
with their London pleasures, while Ireland was falling into 
economic and social degradation; projects and bubbles; 
squabbles over the relative merits of Fandel or the Italian i 
opera; star-gazing - they were all of a piece in Swift’s 
mind: fiddling while Pome burned. "Wisdom crieth out in 
the streets." 

E. Remedies . 

Apart from the interwoven maze of personal and polit¬ 
ical allusions of which Gulliver is composed, and of which 
we have touched only the most important, there are moments 
when Swift becomes sanguine enough to suggest possible remed¬ 
ies or offer criticism which indicates what he would propose. 
Education, for example, was one of the few panaceas in which 
he had any faith, and he had written of the distressing state 
of feminine education, to say nothing of the training which i 
his degenerate age was giving to its future governors, making 
of young nobles nothing more than swordsmen, dancers, and 
shallow coffee-house fops. The education which Swift desired 


(1) Works, III, 215. (the Italics are mine) 














« 

■ 


, 








- 


'■ 















t 



























, 

, 

• 

































196 


was not a training in the social sciences or even in philos¬ 
ophy, for one of his first principles was that, there being 
no arcana or science of politics, only common sense and hon¬ 
esty were required. It was a moral and practical education 
he proposed. The question is dealt with in Books I, II, and 
IV, hut perhaps the clearest statement is in the rather 
inartistic digression (I, vi) where he turns the Lilliputians 
for a moment into ideals instead of puppets satirizing Eng¬ 
land. The males of noble or eminent birth "are bred up in 
the principles of honour, justice, courage, modesty, clem¬ 
ency, religion, and love of their country." Likewise, 
as in Brobdingnag, the Lilliputians in choosim persons 
for all employments have more regard to good morals than to 
great abilities. 

Law reform is another matter which recurs throughout 
the book. His own experiences with the profession had been 
unfortunate, and lawyers are satirized unmercifully. To 
Swift the moralist, although he upheld law as one of the 
essential bulwarks of society, the English system of common 
law based on precedent was incomprehensible. There seemed to 
be no sound basis in justice or reason, but only a haphazard 

accumulation of details - to say nothing of the corruption 
(l) Gulliver^ Travels . 68 (Oxford) 







# 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 






19 ? 


introduced by political influence. The King of Brobdingnag 
asks, for Swift, "Whether advocates and orators had liberty 
to plead in causes manifestly known to be unjust, vexatious, 
or cppresive. Whether Party in religion or politics were 
observed to be of any weight in the scale of Justice. Wheth¬ 
er those pleading orators were persons educated in the gen¬ 
eral knowledge of equity, or only in provincial, national, 
and other local customs". And in Book I he suggests that 

such a general knowledge of equity would, for example, make 
fraud a far greater crime than theft. 

Through the mouth of the Brobdingnagian monarch. 

Swift voices once again his Tory criticism of English govern- 

, of 

ment and institution^/standing armies, of the selection of 
governors, of the National Debt. But the real significance 
of this book lies in the figure of the King himself. His 
government is the ideal which Swift places in contrast with 
the factions he satirizes elsewhere. He is the benevolent 
monarch of the Moderate-Man’s dreams, the "Patriot-King" 
described by Bolingbroke, who rules without party or faction 
for the good of his people, a practical governor who voices 
Swift’s last word on the real duty of any government. "And 
he gave it for his opinion, that whoever could make two ears 
of corn or two blades of grass to grow upon a spot of ground 

(2) Gulliver’s Travels, 157 (Oxford). 









. 

# 


. 

. 












. 





































I 









198 


where only one grew before, would deserve better of mankind, 
and do more essential service to his country than the whole 
race of politicians put together." 

3. Despair . 

Of all these scattered suggestions the only ones which 
may be called fundamental criticisms are those which reflect 
Swift’s emphasis upon the moral basis as the necessary one 
for social existence. But as Gulliver continues in his 
strange journeys the good man gradually loses most of his 
illusions about the grandeur of his European civilization, 
and finally loses faith in humanity itself. In lilliput 
he had been amused at the foibles of the little politicians 
with whom he had to do, and made no odious comparisons. But 
his education begins at the hands of the benevolent Brobding- 
nag monarch, whose verdict upon the society described with 
so much pride by Gulliver is: "I cannot but conclude the 
bulk of your natives to be the most pernicious race of little 
odious vermin that nature ever suffered to crawl upon the 
surface of the earth." Consequently by the time hereaches 
the Academy of Lagado he no longer sees any hope for man 
in the possibility of government by virtue, whatever might 
have been achieved by midgets or giants. 









* 


























199 


"In the school of political projectors I was hut 
ill entertained, the professors appearing in my 
Judgement wholly out of their senses, which is a 
scene that never fails to make me melancholy* 

These unhappy people were proposing schemes for 
persuading monarchs to choose favourites upon the 
score of their wisdom, capacity, and virtue; of 
teaching ministers to consult the public good; of 
rewarding merit, great abilities, eminent services; 
of instructing princes to know their true interest 
by placing it on the same foundation with that of 
their people; of choosing for employment, persons 
qualified to exercise them; with many other wild 
impossible chimaeras, that never entered before 
into the heart of man to conceive, and confirmed 
in me the old observation, that there is nothing 
so extravagant and irrational which some philosophers 
have not maintained for truth*" '1) 

As Gulliver travels on to Glubbdubdrib and calls up the 


shades of past heroes, he finds that they confirm the Judg¬ 
ment of the Brobdingnag King, that European history "was 
only an heap of conspiracies, rebellions, murders, massacres, 
revolutions, banishments, the very worst effects that avar¬ 
ice, faction, hypocricy, perfidiousness, cruelty, rage, mad- 

( 2 ) 

ness, hatred, envy, lust, malice, or ambition could produce," 
Consequently he is ready to be convinced by the Houyhnhnms 


on his last voyage that human beings are a sort of animals 
to whose share, by what accident he could not conjecture. 


some small pittance of reason had fallen, whereof they made 
no other use than by its assistance to aggravate their nat¬ 


ural corruptions, and to acquire new ones which nature had 


(1) Gulliver r s Travels , 222. (Oxford). 

(2) Ibid 153* 

















200 


not given them. As Swift wrote to Pope # man is not animal 
rationale hut only animal rationls capax . And in Book IV 
it is Gulliver himself who supplies the evidence of his 
fellowmen's luxury, vice, sensuality, mass cruelty and stup¬ 
idity, from which his equine master draws his conclusions. 

In Houyhnhnmland there are three factors to he consid¬ 
ered. There are the horses, who represent Swift’s ideal 
rational beings. There is Gulliver, the ordinary product 
of human civilization, saved from most of its corruptions 
because unassocisted with any of its worse collective organ¬ 
izations, or as his master among the horses thought, by hav¬ 
ing been away from Europe, on long voyages. And there are 
the Yahoos. 

In the Yahoos, drawn from the worst examples of human 
degradation that Swift had seen in Ireland, he flung his 
bitterest curse at the humanity which had not come up to 
his expectations. Snarling, lecherous, vile, they represent 
mankind as Swift saw it beneath the veneer of civilization 
of which it was so proud. There is an almost pathological 
quality in Swift's insistence upon their nastiness - but it 

is because his nature drove him always to probe beneath the 
surface of things, and when he had succeeded, his whole 
being was almost always lacerated by the "reality" he found. 









♦ 







r 

. ■ 

. 

. 

, 

. 

. 









201 


The science of the 17th Century had probed beneath the sur¬ 
face of nature and found a meaningless* mechanistic world 
of atoms. Swift stripped society of its ornate facade* and 
found it sordid* hasty, motivated by naked self-interest. 

The explanation of the Yahoos lies in the verses of The 
Lady T s Pressing-Room , seen by Strephon the lover* He had 
seen the underclothing and the disarray of artificial beauty- 
aids, that represented* to Swift* the reality behind the 
f aq ade. 

But Vengeance, goddess never sleeping* 

Soon punish’d Strephon for his peeping: 

His foul imagination links 

Each dame he sees with all her stinks; 

And if unsavoury odours fly* 

Conceives a lady standing by. 

All women his description fits* 

And both ideas jump like wits* 

By vicious fancy coupled fast. 

And still appearing in contrast. 

So too Gulliver cannot stand the sight or smell even of his 
wife on his return to England* his imagination linking her 
with the Yahoos he had seen, and he stops his nostrils with 
rue and lavender. 











. 


















202 <i 


That such a creature, irrational and in reality foul, 
should vaunt itself in pride was what angered the disappoint¬ 
ed Swift most of all* In his correspondence he had frequent¬ 
ly claimed that he expected nothing of man as he knew him. 

He expected nothing - hut he demanded humility. And since 
his fellow men had not expected as much of themselves as had 
Swift before his disillusionment became a mental discipline 
that he could not always maintain, humility was what he 
seldom found. 

"I am not in the least provoked at the sight of a 
lawyer, a pickpocket, a colonel, a fool, a lord, 
a gamester, a politician, a whoremaster, a physic¬ 
ian, an evidence, a suborner, an attorney, a traitor, 
or the like*, says Gulliver; ,f This is all according 
to the due course of things: but when I hold a 
lump of deformity, and diseases bothin body and 
mind, smitten with pride it immediately breaks all 
the measures of my patience; neither shall I be ever 
able to comprehend how such an.animal and such a 
vice could tally together.* 

To teach the world a lesson in humility Swift places both 
Gulliver and the Yahoos below the level of horses. 


Book IV is in a sense the dramatization of Swift’s 
answer to the political philosophers of the 17th Century. 
The standard formulas employed by Hobbes and Locke were the 
"State of Hature", the "State of War", and the "Social Con- 
(l) Gulliver’s Travels , 354 (Oxford) 




















. 

. 

. 

t . 

. 




















. 









203 


tract " "by which men had supposedly handed together to effect 
the transition from the State of Nature to Society - a 
society either under an Absolute Monarchy as in the Leviathan 
of Hobbes, or of Civil Parliamentary Government as in the 
analysis of Locke. Hobbes had said that the State of 

Nature was a State of War, - Locke that it was a time of 
rational individualism, liberty, and amicability. The State 
of War against which the Contract was signed was only the 
result of some individuals having betrayed their natural 
reason. Swift agreed in general with the Eobbistic view - 
and the Yahoos are his reply to the idealistic concept of a 
State of Nature. Not only is reason not natural in man; 
it is only a shadow of rationality that even most civilized 


(l) In his actual political philosophy Swift stood between 
the schools of Hobbes (and Filmer and Bo din) and Locke. 

We have already seen that he rejected the contract myth 
common to both. On the one hand however he subscribed 
to the materialistic psychology of Hobbes, based on self- 
interest, even propounding it in his sermons (See "On 
The Wisdom of This World", Works IV, 174); while on the 
other he supported Locke’s version of the best form of 
working governmental institutions, as a constitutional, 
parliamentary state, with the power balanced between 
King, Lords, and Commons. (See The Contests and Pjssen- 
tions in Athens and Rome . passimH Swift’s practicality 
tended to steer him safely between the two. He ridiculed 
Locke’s abstractions, his "idea" of government, in his 
"Remarks" on Tindal’s "Rights of the Christian Church" 
( Works . Ill, 100). He agreed with Hobbes that abstract 
"rights" had little to do with the question of a rebell¬ 
ion against the sovereign, and that it was a matter for 
balancing loss against gain. But where Hobbes based his 
absolute monarchy on the thesis that since the chances 
























. 

. 










• 















. 











. 







. 


• 


, 











, 




' 

















. 



























204 * !l 


men could achieve. If you wish to find an ideal and rational 
state of nature, says Swift, where truth is self-evident and 
factious perversions are so unnatural that they have to he 
described by a circumlocution as "the thing which is not", 
you must look outside humanity altogether. And so he present 
his rational horses. The eighteenth century delighted in 
turning to Noble Savages or philosophic Chinamen as the 
mouthpieces of its criticism of European society. Swift had 
no such illusions. 

Consequently he holds out no hope that man shall achieve 

the rational state of which he is perhaps capable but which 

the Houyhnhnmspossess by nature. On the other hand, he 
entirely 

does not/condemn civilization. Gulliver, its product, is 
obviously far superior to the Yahoos. That bestial race is 
not to be considered a picture of social man - but as a 
symbol of what man's passions and instincts would degenerate 
into were the veneer of civilization thrown off. Swift, one 
might say, was a St* Paul without his vision of Christ and 
redemption. He distrusted all passion and emotion as forces 
-continued- 

of a successful rebellion were heavily weighted asrainst 
the rebels, and so excused obedience even under a tyr¬ 
anny, Swift, thinking of the Bevolution of 1688, said 
that if such a rebellion could be achieved, without too 
much loss it was justified. 










■ 








' 

, 

. 

. 

' 




. 



























205 


which were irrational and therefore dangerous. This is the 
meaning of that highly modern attitude of the Lilliputians 
toward the parental relationship. They will have it 

"that men and women are joined together like 
other animals, by the motives of concupiscence; 
and that their tenderness towards their young 
proceeds from the like natural principle; for 
which reason they will never allow, that a 
child is under any obligation to his father 
for begetting him, or his mother for bringing 
him into the world." (1) 

And to depict a rational state of society Swift created a 
race of passionless horses, living, like Plato's Guardians, 
a life of eugenic disinterestedness and bearing calmly the 
thought of death. That is why, with their painless virtue 
and their poetry composed of just similies and minute descrip¬ 
tions, devoted to exalted notions of friendship and benev¬ 
olence, they are really such uninteresting creatures beside 
Gulliver. The rationalistic verse of the 18th Century would 
be rather dull reading were it not for the satires; and 
Swift himself, who lived for witty conversation and the 
victories of his ironic pen as much as for anything, would 
have been rather uncomfortable among the sedately correct 
whinnyings of the Houyhnhnms. 


Gulliver stands for civilized man in his most innocent 


(l) Gulliver's Travels, 67 (Oxford) 






. 

' 

f 

. 

. 


















206 


form. He is merely an individual, and Swift, when writing 
to Pope in explanation of the great foundation of misanthropy 
upon which his Travels w as erected, had said: ”1 have ever 
hated all nations, professions, and communities, and all my 
love is toward individuals.....But principally I hate and 
detest that animal called man, although I heartily love 
John, Peter, Thomas, and so forth." 

The Lady T s Dressing Room had ended : 

He soon will learn to think like me. 

And bless his ravished eyes to see 
Such order from confusion sprung; 

Such gaudy tulips raised from dung. 

And it is in this sense only that civilized humanity in its 
collective forms is preferable to the Yahoos. For as man’s 
pretended reason had increased his wealth and power, so 
had it increased his ability to indulge the Yahoo beneath 
the periwig in organized destruction, diseased luxury, and 
unnatural vice. Instead of reason he seemed only possessed 
of some quality fitted to increase his natural vices, and 
in this respect the Yahoo with all his filth and degradation 
might seem preferable. 

In Book IV there is no hope, no redemption. But that 
is not the last word of Gulliver’s Travels as a Whole. 


(l) Correspondence III, 277 (September 29, 1725) 

















, 

4 

. 


. 





















, 



















. 














• 



♦ 





















• 







, 









T 

























207 


The purpose of Lilliput with its pompous midgets and of 
Brobdingnag with its giants whose most refined beauties 
seemed coarse and malodorous to the little Gulliver had been 
to sort out the abiding from the ephemeral in human values. 
Nothing is great or small, says Swift, but by comparison; 
nothing, that is.but the moral virtues which remain admir¬ 
able whether possessed by little Keldresal or burly, clumsy 
Glumdale1itch: truth, honour, justice, temperance, courage, 
modesty, clemency, and relgidn. These were the permanent 
values for Swift, and they are in large measure the products 
also of civilization. Certainly the Yahoos possessed none 
of them. Without these moral disciplines as the guiding 
forces civilized society is worse than barbarism or Yahoodom, 
because its capacity for perverting man’s powers and serving 
man’s passions is greater. With them it is far better, and 
at least bearable. Swift was no constructive analytical 
thinker; the remedies he proposed were in the main scattered 
Tory comments on the politics of his time. He never went 
behind his own moral values to test or define them in any 
fundamental philosophic sense, perhaps because he felt that 
man’s reason was incapable of such a task. But as a moral 
critic, as a prophet crying in the wilderness of Augustan 
complacency, he was a great as he was unheeded. 














. 

, 

♦ 

. 

. 

. 

. 

1 

. 

■ 

. 

, 

. 










208 


" Gulliver 1 s Travels is an indictment* not only of 
his countrymen, but of the human race itself. He 
was appalled at the stupidity with which the powers 
and energies of mankind were turned into perverse 
or suicidal channels. The moral of the hook is 
that of Goethe’s Mephistopheles, 

'Life somewhat better might content him 
But for the heavenly light that thou hast lent 

him. 

He calls it reason, thence his power’s increased. 
To be far beastlier than any beast. 1 

It would have been well if, with the enormous increase 
of human power that was to come in the eighteenth 
century, men had been able to ask whether with 
their habits of mind and notions of civilization, 
they were fit to receive it. Lean Swift would heve 
answered, emphatically, that they were only provid¬ 
ing themselves with the means of drifting to the 
devil at an accelerated pace; there must be a 
mental and spiritual as well as an Industrial Rev¬ 
olution if mankind was to survive. But by the 
time that the need became urgent. Lean Swift was 
dead, and Gulliver had passed, with Robinson Crusoe, 
into the category of amusing and instructive lit¬ 
erature for the yoxing. Mankind favoured the view 
of Shaftesbury, that civilization was on the whole 
an excellent thing, and God a genial power or po¬ 
tentate who could be trusted to make things come 
out right without undiie fuss on the part of his 
creatures." (1) 


(l) Esmd Wingfield-Stratford, History of British Civilization 
II, 674. 














. 









' 

« 

, 




. 

. 








. 













209 


SECTION IV 


CONCLUDING REMARKS 


1. Some Aspects of Swift's Thinking , 

"In religion, a man may perhaps have little or 
none of it at heart; yet if he conceals his 
opinion, if he endeavours to make no proselytes, 
advances no impious tenets in writing or dis¬ 
course: if, according to the common atheistical 
notion, he believes religion to be only a contri¬ 
vance of politicians for keeping the vulgar in 
awe, and that the present model is better adjusted 
than Any other to so useful an end: though the 
conditions of such a man as to his future state 
be very deplorable; yet Providence, which often 
works good out of evil, can make even such a man 
an instrument for contributing toward the pres¬ 
ervation of the Church." '1/ 

Thus Swift advocated nominal Christianity, as he had 
before suggested that it be made fashionable at court so 
that by imitating their betters the common people might 
fall into Christian habits. This particular element in 
his thought is sometimes rather baffling to the reader. But 
it is a perfect illustration of the complete subservience 

of his thinking to the principle of social utility. What 
a man thought or did in private was his own concern and 


(l) Examiner 30. (Works, IX, 189, 90) 











' 

, 

: 

, 

. 

, 

. 













God's; what he did in public was Swift's, ^en arguing 
the question of Test Repeal, of tolerance, or of party 
allegiance, he never appealed to principles based on rights 
or on truth, but to expediency, always advocating that the 
best be made of existing institutions. The result and not 
the means, the effect and not the motive, was what counted. 
Hence came the tendency on Swift's part sometimes to adopt 
the attitude in his propagandist writings that is usually 
attributed to the Jesuits, to sway public opinion in a good 
cause at the expense of strict exactitude. But such was 
the quality of his mind that he himself seemed to believe 
in the validity of whatever arguments he could produce in 
a worthy cause, almost as soon as he had produced them. 

Bound up with this was his concentration upon essentials 
disregarding whatever trappings and side issues might be 
involved. In religion, the creed of the magistrate was 
obviously the best fitted to perform religion's social task. 
To undermine that work by differing over the incidentals and 
to weaken the social utility of a state Church for the 
sake of one's private conscience was absurd to Swift. The 
Lilliputian Alcoran had stated that true believers should 
break their eggs at the convenient end* - and A Tale of A 


Tub is really a satire on the triviality of the quarrels 














+ 



, 




* 



- 







, 




• 























* 





























































211 


and corruptions Which had attended the religious history 
of Europe. What mattered was the moral effect. 

This view is clearly stated in A Letter to a Young 
Clergyman (1719), where Swift discusses the advisability 
of studying the moral philosophers of classic times. There 
are, he says, no better moral guides anywhere. But their 
teachings fall short of Christianity principally because 
they had no divine sanction, no revelation, to make them a 
universal social force* Only the high-minded will be 
impelled to follow. The divine authority of Christianity 
however gives it this missing element; and in this consists 
its superiority. 

Swift is here really in the same stream of thought as 
the rationalists and deists whom he so much despised* Lord 
Herbert of Cherbury had started the deistic approach by 
endeavouring to reach a residuum of religious truth by 
sifting out the local peculiarities from the more important 
religions. This in the hands of the pure rationalist soon 
resulted in a line of thinkers who were taking all her auth¬ 
ority gradually away from the Christian Church, and sub¬ 
stituting a set of formal concepts based on reason rather 
than revelation. Swift had taken the first step: he thought 





♦ 


, 

* 

' 

. . * T* I “ 

> 


































212 


of religion essentially as the residuum of all moral phil¬ 
osophies.^^ But to attack the Christian version merely 
because it was one of many was folly* for it had the social 
power none of the others possessed. So Swift never thought 
of criticizing it. 

This method of attempting to arrive at truth not through 
philosophy hut by taking the least common denominator of 
the many human variants of an idea was one of which the 
18th Century was very fond. It was the basis for the neo¬ 
classical poetic version of "nature" and of style; it was 
the basis for the distrust of enthusiastic aberrations, of 
the abstract or the mysterious or the difficult in relig¬ 
ion and philosophy. It was the test which Swift utilized 
as one of his ultimate standards. His moral virtues had 
the approval of the ages. When the King of Brobdingnag 
asked concerning English law, he wondered if it were based 
merely on local custom. Swift, in the pamphlet entitled 
The Contests and Dissentions in Athens and Home had argued 
for democratic government on the principle that in an 


(l) It is significant that faith, hope, and charity are not 
included among the list of moral virtues in Gulliver . 
whereas the "pagan" virtues are all there. The Houyhn- 
hnmsseem, since they are rational and therefore moral 
by nature, not to need any religious sanctions or 
promptings. 












, 

. 












, 

, 

f 9 


' 












31.3 

assembly the virtues, which are few and common to all, tend 
to be reinforced, while vices, which are many and various, 
cancel each other out. 


2. The technique of Propaganda . 

"You have overturned and supported Ministers; you 
have set Kingdoms in a flame by your pen. Pray, 
what is there in that, but having the knack of 
hitting the passions of mankind ? with' that alone, 
and a little knowledge of ancient and modern 
history, and seeing a little farther into the in¬ 
side of things than the generality of men, you 
have made this bustle....as often as I have read 
any of your tracts, I have been so tired with them, 
that I have never been easy till I got to the end 
of them. I have found tfiy brain heated, my imagina¬ 
tion fired, just as if I was drunk. A pretty thing, 
indeed, for one of your gown to value himself upon, 
that with sitting still an hour in his study, he 
has often made three kingdoms drunk at onee.’ T 

A knack of hitting the passions of mankind, of swaying 
public fancy and mass opinion as he willed, was exactly 
what Swift possessed. Throughout his long pamphleteering 
career he never failed to achieve the particular object he 
desired, to swing the people behind him, whether in the 
cause of European peace or in the literary murder and bur¬ 
ial of poor Patridge the almanack-maker. One of the best 
examples of this power was his one-man victory over the 
Dublin crime wave of the 1720's. A notorious criminal, 

fl) Lord Bathurst to Swift, September 9, 1730 ( Correspondence 
IV, 163,4) The italics are mine. 











, 


* 




. 

. 

. 






. 

. 


, ' 


. . . . 

, 

. 








, 






























2iA 


Ebenezer Elliston, was to be handed in 1722. Swift merely 
published a little pamphlet called The Last Speech and Dying 
Words of Ebenezer Elliston . couched in appropriately down¬ 
right terms, so effectively dramatizing the life and speech 
of the underworld that it was accepted as genuine, Slliston 
has seen that his way of life simply does not pay - the 
"overhead" of crime far exceeds its profits - and to force 
his companions to the same conclusion he has deposited a 
list of their criminal activities with an honest mean, to 
be produced whenever one of them is caught again. The effect 
was all that could be desired. 

It was not through reason and argument that Swift 
worked, although these were in the background. His knack 
lay in his genius for causing explosions in the mind of the 
reader by sudden vivid images, dramatization, unexpected 
flicks of the whip of his irony, and a mad logic which des¬ 
troyed by inverting an opponent’s argument or by carrying 
it to its extreme. Swift’s prose conteined no rhetoric, 
no sentimental appeal. In its purely expository passages 
it was clear, blunt and unadorned. Even when uttering the 
most terrible indictments in the Modest Proposal , or in 
the last book of Gulliver , he keeps the surface deceptively 


calm. But beneath the surface were the fires which burned 









. 

♦ 

* 

. 

. 

, 








f 








in Swift’s brain, and as the simple, straightforward prose 
passes into the mind of the reader, somehow the fire is 
kindled there as well. And what Swift said was not to he 
forgotten. A merely rational argument might he read, con¬ 
curred with, and then effaced. Emotional flights might 
awaken sympathy and a quickening of the bloodstream; another 
emotion would soon take their place. But the cartloads of 
worthless half-pence, the wastrel mortgaging his lands and 
leaving the burden of repayment to his heirs, the govern' 
ment of herring-curers, the fattening of Irish children to 
replace suckling pigs on English tables, were images one 
never forgot. And lest the fickle mob might forget. Swift, 
as we have seen, drove his points home time after time in 
every disguise which genius could invent. As Ebenezer 
Elliston, as the simple Dublin Drapier, as Prior’s naive 
French servant, he gained an immediate hearing. He stole 
into the enemy’s camp under the guise of a commentator who 
only wished to restate the deistic arguments of Collins in 
simple form for public consumption. He used the weapons of 
the opposition to defeat them. Did Freethinkers and Deists 
wish to disregard the spiritual element in Christianity and 
attack it from practical and rational grounds? He would 


(l) The Debt, Conduct of the Allies 









, , ' 


, 


. 




. 


* 


. 




. 

. 

. 


1 

, 

, 

, 


r 




• 

• 


. 
















216 


answer them on their own plane - and in the Argument Against 
Abolishing Christianity he did so, proving that for all prac 
tical purposes there were, for instance, no healthier breed¬ 
ers of children in the kingdom than the clergy. If he were 
repeating his arguments he might either appeal to his whole 
public again with fables or imaginary bills or novel per¬ 
spectives, as in the Examiner . or he might address his pamph 
lets to different classes or groups, accomodating them deft¬ 
ly to the characters of the intended readers, as in the 
letters to the October Club, and to the Whimsicals in the 
person of a Whig lord, or as in the Drapier’s letters grad¬ 
ually broadening his intended public as well as his critic¬ 
ism in each successive letter . 

Allegory was particularly effective in Swift’s hands. 
Sometimes, as in the case of the Injured lady , the theme was 
completely allegorized; more usually however it took the 
form of an occasional pointed fable, such as that of Pallas 
and Arachne. Pryden had won his first political victory 
with this instrument, and it became Swift’s favourite, in 
literary as well as merely political works. Its value as 
propaganda lay in the favourable climate of reaction which 
it tended to produce, and, to borrow from Aristotle, its 
many removes from the truth. Nothing is stated definitely 











. 






f 


, 

, 

■ 

. 

r 




































about anything. The resemblances may he in reality only 
superficial and therefore, if the same attack were delivered 
directly, it might miss the mark completely. But in allegory 
the damage is done as soon as it is read. For the reader 
tends to accept the underlying argument, because he feels a 
sense of superiority and accomplishment in merely having 
seen through the mystery. It is much the same reaction as 
that which one gets from being the first to see through a 
joke - one likes the teller (and oneself) much better than 
before, and is more ready to accept what he has to say. 
Similarly a reader tends to receive the opinion beneath the 
allegory less critically than in the case of a bald state¬ 
ment . 

We have already discussed the "Examiner equation". 

There was also an "Examiner technique" of which Swift made 
effective use in most of his pamphlets, the best single in¬ 
stance being in the Conduct of the Allies . It consisted 
in opening a discussion with an apparently disinterested 
analysis of, say, the question of war, its causes, and the 
occasions when it is justified, or of the factors which 
produce economic prosperity in any state. Before long, how¬ 
ever, the reader comes to realize that the stage was merely 
being set for an attack on the pro-war Junto or on the econ- 
















. 

, 

. 

. 

, 

. 

. 

, 

. 

' , . 

. 

. 

. 






218 s I 


omic perfidies of the English administration of Ireland. 

But the disinterested analysis has already left its mark. 

Akin to this was the peculiar form of the Swiftian 
irony which gives the bite to so much of his writings. A 
paragraph will begin innocently enough - but it seldom ends 
without a sudden thrust of the knife. One has only to read 
the opening paragraph of the Argument Against Abolishing 
Christianity to find a perfect example. The Modest Proposal 
is the same thing on a large scale. And the Examiner abounds 
in it: 

"Since it is observed of armies, that in the present 
age they are brought to some degree of humanity, 
and a more regular demeanour to each other and to 
the world, than in former times; it is certainly a 
good maxim to endeavour preserving this temper among 
them without which they would soon degenerate into 
savages. To this end, it would be prudent among 
other things, to forbid that detestable custom of 
drinking to the.damnation or confusion of any person 
whatsoever." 

His opponents found Swift a dangerous man. Steele, we 
have seen, found it so. There was nothing he more enjoyed 
or did better than standing an opponent's arguments on their 

heads, making them look ridiculous; and to indulge in any 

. 

figures of speech in a work of which Swift disapproved was 
most dangerous of all. The Whigs talked much of the danger 

(l) Examiner 21 ( Works . IX, 127) Some of the officers had 
been cashiered for drinking damnation to the Tory mini¬ 
stry. 











































. 


















219 


of a Bill against Occasional Conformity. So he turned the 
tables on them,saying that in their Church, which was Party, 
they allowed no such toleration: 

11 Another great objection with me against the late 
party, was the cruel tyranny they put upon con¬ 
science, by a barbarous inquisition, refusing to 
admit the least toleration or indulgence. They 
imposed a hundred Tests, but could never be pre¬ 
vailed with to dispense with, or take off the 
smallest, nor even admit of occasional conform¬ 
ity; but went on daily (as their apostle Tindal 
expresseth it) narrowing their terms of cojimnun- 
ion; pronouncing nine parts in ten of the kingdom 
heretics, and shtting them out of the pale of 

their Church.these very sons of moderation 

were pleased to excommunicate every man who dis¬ 
agreed with them in the smallest article of their 
political creed , or who refused to receive any 
new article, how difficult soever to» digest, which 
the leaders imposed at pleasure to serve their own 
int erest." (l) 

Bishop Burnet was as distasteful to Swift in his prose style 
as in his politics. He had published an ’’Introduction” to 
the forthcoming third volume of his History of the Reforma¬ 
tion . both to increase its sale and as a political pamphlet 
against the Jacobites. In his Preface to the Bishop of 
Sarum’s Introduction . Swift treated Burnet much as he had 
formerly treated Steele, sparing nothing in a riot of ridi¬ 
cule. The comments upon the bishop’s concluding paragraph 
are, in their way, a masterpeice: 

"However, he ’thanks Cod there are many among us 


(1) Examiner SO, (Works IX, ISO) 




















. 

' 











r 






220 ! 


" f who stand in the breech T : I believe they may; 
f tis a breach of their own making, and they 
design to come forward, and storm and plunder, if 
they be not driven back. f They make themselves 
a wall for their church and country 1 . A south 
wall, I suppose for all the best fuit of the 
church and country to be nailed on. Let us ex¬ 
amine the metapher: The wall of our church and 
country is built of those who love the constit¬ 
ution in both: Our domestic enemies undermine some 
parts of the wall, and place themselves in the 
breach; and they they cry, T We are the Wall. 11 
We do not like such patchwork, they build with 
untempered mortar; nor can they ever cement with 
us, till they get better materials and better 
workmen: God keep us from having our breaches 
made up with such rubbish/ T They stand upon 
the Watch-Tower 1 ;....but who assigned them that 
post, to give us false intelligence, to alarm us 
with false dangers, and send us to defend one gate, 
while their accomplices are breaking in at another? 

.He has been poring so long upon Pox’s Book 

of Martyrs that he imagines himself living in the 
reign of Queen Mary, and is resolved to set up for a 
knight-errant against Popery....In short, how eas¬ 
ily might a windmill be taken for the Whore of 
Babylon, and a puppet-show for a popish process- 
ion?" 'I) 


Voltaire used a rapier; Carlyle was to wield a bludgeon; 
Swift, in his political writings, manipulated the scalpel of 
his irony to operate upon what he considered the ulcers of 
the body politic, and like a surgeon, he was in them operat¬ 
ing upon the immediate body, not upon the ultimate soul. 

¥? hen he came to consider the ultimate value of saving the 
patient he rather doubted that it had been worth while. But 

(1) Works . Ill, 159, 158. 










'.21 


he had, at any rate, a remarkable record of successful cases. 

For the political pamphlets were written, not for 
posterity, but to get something done, or, more often, to 
stop things from being done. In the verses on his death. 
Swift wrote their epitaph: 

As for his works in verse or prose, 

I own myself no Judge of those; 

Nor can I tell what critics thought them. 

But, this I know, all people bought them. 






























, 

















BIBLIOGRAPHY 



I. Editions and Studies of Swift 


The Prose Works of Jonathan Swift. D.D . Twelve volumes. 
Edited "by Temple Scott. London, George Bell and 
Sons, 1897-1908. (Bohn's Libraries) 

The Poems of Jonathan Swift . Three volumes (Yols. 37-39 
of The British Toets ) Chiswick, 1828. 


The Correspondence of Jonathan Swift, D.D . Six volumes. 

Edited by F. Elrington Ball. London, George 
Bell and Sons, 1910-14. 

The Letters of Jonathan Swift to Charles Ford . Edited by 
D. Nichol Smith, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1935. 

The Drapier's Letters . Edited by Herbert Davis. Oxford, 
Clarendon tress, 1935. 

A Tale of A Tub . Edited by A. C. Guthkelch and D. Uichol ! 
Smith. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1920. 

Gulliver's Travels. Oxford Edition. Humphrey Milford, 
1919. Till the page references in the thesis 
are to this edition). 


Stephen, Leslie. Swift (English Men of Letters Series) 
Macmillan & Co. 1882. 

Pons, Emile. Swift : Les Annees de Jeunesse et le Conte 
de Tonneau . Oxford, Humphrey Milford, 1925. 

Leslie, Shane. The Skull of Swift . Indianapolis, Bobbs- 
Merril Company, 1928. Also The Script of Jon¬ 
athan Swift and Other Essays . Oxford University 
Press. (Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvan¬ 

ia Press), 1935. 

Taylor, W.D. Jonathan Swift. London, Peter Davies, 1933, 


























22:i 


Eddy, Wm. A. Gulliver's Travels: A Critical Study , 

Oxford University Press. (Princeton, Princeton 
University Press) 1923. 

Firth, C. H. The Political Significance of Gulliver f s 
Travels (Proceedings of the British Academy, 
Vol. 9) Oxford, 1919. 

Bean Swift and Ecclesiastical Preferment. 

The Review of English Studies, January, 19^6. 

Goulding, Sybil, Swift en France . Paris, 1924 

Ball* F. Elrington. Swift's Verse. London. John Murray 
1929. 

Williams, Harold. Bean Swift's Library . Cambridge, 1932. 


Aitken, George A. (Editor) Later Stuart Tracts New York, 
E. P. Button and CoT (An English Garner) No 
date. (Petty's "Political Arithmetic", a 
selection of Befoe's political writings, and 
Arbuthnot's "John Bull" pamphlets). 

Ashley, W. J. Surveys. Historic and Economic . London, 

Longmans, Green and Co. 1900 ("The Tory Origin 
of Free Trade Policy", pp 268-303) 

Beldame, Alexandre. Le Public et les Hommes de Lettres 

en Angleterre au Bix-Huiti&me Siecle . 1660-1744 . 
Paris. 1883. 

Benn, A. W. The History of English Rationalism in the 

Nineteenth Century . London. Longmans. Greenand 
Co. 1306. {Volume I, Chapter III: The English 
Beists). 

Bolingbroke, (Henry St. John). Works. London, 1770. 

Vols. VI (On History: Letter VIII) and XI (idea 












































I 










of a Patriot King; On the State of the Parties 
at the Accession of King George the First). 

Clark, G.H. The Later Stuarts . 1660-1714. Oxford, 

Clarendon Press, 1934. 

Cole G. P. H. Politics and Literature . London, Hogarth 
Press, 1929. 

Park, Sidney. Five Leans London, Jonathan Ca pe . 1931. 

Pott in, Paul. The Life and Adventures of Paniel Pefoe . 
London, Stanley Paul and Co. 1928. 

Foiling, Keith. A History of The Tory Party: 1640-1714 . 
Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1924. 

Franz, R. W. Swift T s Yahoos and The Voyagers . Modern 
Philology, Vol. 29 Ho. 1. August 1931. 

Hearnshaw, F. J. C. (Editor) The Social and Political 

Ideas of Some English Thinkers of the Augustan 

Age. George Harrap and Co. 1928. 

Hobbes, Thomas. The Leviathan . (Cambridge English Classic^ 
1904. 

Johnson, Samuel. The Lives of the English Poets . Two 

Volumes”! Oxford, (The World 's Classics ) 1926. 
(Lives of Howe, Parnell, Gay, Addison, Prior, 
and Swift ). 

Leadam, I. A. The Political History of England Volume 

IX. (1702-1760) tondon, Longmans Green and Co. 
1912. (Chapters XVIII and XXVIII) 

Locke, John. Works London, 1823. Volume V (The Essays 
"Of Civil Government"). 

Love joy, Arthur 0. The Parallel of Deism and Classicism . 

Modern Philology, VoT. 29, number 3. February 
1932. 

Marburg, Clara Sir William Temple, A Seventeenth Century 
"Libertin ". Poctorate Pissertation at the Uni-" 
versity of Chicago, 1929. 































I 
















225 


Newton, T. F. M # William Pitt is and Queen Anne Journalism 
I, Modern Philology. Vol 33, number 2. Novi 
eraser, 1935. 

Oliver, F. Scott. The Endless Adventure . Three volumes. 
London, Macmillan and Co. 1931-1935. 

Paul, Herbert. Men and Letters London, John Lane, 1901. 

(Essays on Swift, iy The Prince of Journalists”, 
and Halifax, "The Great Tractarian”). 

Robertson, C. Grant. England Under The Hanoverians . 
London, Methuen and Co. 1911. 

Robertson, J. M. Bolingbroke and ^al-pole London, T. 
Fisher Unwin, 1919. 

Rogers, J. S. Thorold. The Industrial and Commercial 
History of England . T. Fisher Unwin, 1891. 

Savile, George. (Marquess of Halifax) Works . Edited by 
W. Raleigh. Oxford, Clarendon tress, 1912. 

Sherburn, George. The Early Career of Alexander Pope . 

Oxford, 1934. (Chapter III) 

Sichel, Walter. Bolingbroke and His Times . London, James 
Nisbet ana Co. 1901. 

Tawney, R. H. Religion and The Rise of Capitalism . 

London, John Murray, 1926. 

Temple, William. Early Essays and Romances Edited by 
G. C. Moore Smith. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 
1930. 

Trevelyan, G. M. England Under Queen Anne . Three volumes. 
London, Longmans, Green and Co. 1931-1934. 

Webster, C. M. Notes on the Yahoos . Modern Language Notes 
Vol. 37, number 7. November 1932. 

Whibley, Charles. Literary Studies London, Macmillan and 
Co. 1925” ( ,y An Underworld of Letters” and 

"Jonathan Swift”) 

Willey, Basil. The Seventeenth Century Background London 
Chatto and WIndus, 1934. 





























Wingfield-Stratford, Esm£. The History of British Civil. 

ization. (in two volumes, Volume Two: Book 
ITT). George Routledge and Sons, 1928. 


The Cambridge History of English Literature . Volume VII 

Chapter XII (Hohhes and Contemporary Philosophy); 
Volume IX, Chapter I (Defoe - The Newspaper 
& The Novel). 

The Dictionary of National Biography , Articles on: Sir 
William Temple, The Earl of Sunderland (Robert 
Spense, second Earl); The Duke (and Duchess) 
of Somerset; Mrs. Mary de la Rivi&re Manley; 
Matthew Tindall 














. 

♦ 

. 

. 

„ 










































