
University of Alberta Librai 


0 1620 3069181 8 


For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 






































©x ansflis 
arawMjais 

aiBKaaiiasis 















A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF THREE HOVELS; DICKENS' 
POMBEY AND SON . MEREDITH'S THE EGOIST , AND 
GALSWORTHY'S MAN OF PROPERTY 


BY 


RUTH 


OLSON 













TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PAGE 

Chapter I - The Leading Idea of Each Novel. 1. 

I. Dombey and Son. 

II. The Egoist 

III. The Man of Property. 


Chapter II - Development of Leading Idea. 8. 

I. The Possessive Instinct. 

(a) Particularized by Dickens. 

(b) Generalized by Galsworthy. 

(c) Universalized by Meredith. 

II. Possessiveness Versus Sex. 

(a) Treatment of Marriageby Galsworthy. 

(b) Dickens Convention. 

(c) Relation of Sexes as seen by Meredith. 


Chapter III.- Characterization. 52. 

I. Dickens as a Creator of Character. 

(a) His Types. 

(b) Portrait of a Gentleman. 

(c) Dickens 1 V/omen. 

II. Meredith 1 s Characters. 

(a) The Egoist. 

(b) Meredith’s Women. 

(c) Comparisons. 

III. Galsworthy’s Delineation of Character. 

(a) Attitude of Galsworthy to Forsytes. 

(b) His Portraits of the Middle Class. 

(e) The Man of Property. 

(d) His Objective Characters, 

Irene and Bosinney. 

(e) Galsworthy’s Method. 







Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 




https ://arch i ve. org/detai Is/com parati vestudyOOolso 




PAG 


Chapter IV. - Realism and Romanticism. 115 

I. Romanticism in Pickens. 

(a) Complexity of Plot. 

(b) Tendency to Moralize. 

(c) Melodrama. 

(d) Fairy Tale Ending. 

II. Meredith as Romantic and Realist. 

(a) Failure as Constructive Artist. 

(b) Meredith 1 s Obscurity. 

(c) Romantic Treatment of Character. 

(d) Romanticism and Realistism 

in his Work. 

III. Realism of Galsworthy. 

(a) Simplicity of.Plot. 

(b) Transcription of Life. 

(c) Lack of the Unexpected. 

(d) Negative Ending. 


Chapter V. - Style and Spirit. 1S7 

I. Some points of Style. 

(a) General Characteristics of Style. 

(b) Treatment of Pialogue. 

(c) Nature in the Novels. 


II 


Spirit of the Novelist. 




- , 










' 

. 

1 









Chapter 1. 


THF LADING IDFA OF FACH YOVFIj 

There is no English writer who has approached 
the theme of a woman ? s unhappiness in unfortunate 
marriage, with the consummate skill of Flaubert 
in Madame Bovary . It is a theme, however, that 

has intrigued many writers. In the modern and 
highly artificial "pattern” novel, it is as pop¬ 
ular as variations on the patient Griselda theme. 

A great novel must, of course, accomplish 
something more than the mating of the right man 
and woman, after releasing them from an unhappy 
alliance. It may be a criticism of character, 
or a criticism of a way of life, or both. It may 
also be a criticism of a society whose selfcomplac¬ 
ency needs the tonic of the author 1 s ironic analysi 

Dickens 1 novel, Dombey and Son , Meredith 1 s 
The Fgoist , and Galsworthy 1 s Son of Property deal 
with essentially the same situation. In each case 
a woman endeavors to free herself from an unsatis¬ 
factory alliance. Yet each author attempts a great 
deal more than this. In developing the central 











. 






























. 









































theme, Dickens may he said to attempt a criticism 
of a way of life, Meredith a criticism of character, 
and Galsworthy a criticism of a social class. 

"I think Dombey very strong - with great capac¬ 
ity in its leading idea." (1) In these words Dickens 
expressed his own feeling towards the theme of his 
book, still in the early stages of composition. It 
was during that period in English history when the 
Industrial Revolution had reaped its full harvest 
of misery and wealth. (Dickens was engaged in the 
composition of Dombey in 1846). The amassing of 
immense individual fortunes by members of the middle 
class, the social evils resultant on the exploitation 
of labor under the factory system, and the consequent 
over-crowding of the cities and towns with poorly 
paid labor, had brought about a condition that Carlyle, 
in Past and Present , calls the triumph of mammonism. 

In the service of this god, other deities were forgotten. 

Like Carlyle, Dickens was always an ardent champion 
of social reform. The over-crowding that resulted in 

(1) "Dombey and Son" Dickens, Collins, London, 1916 

Introd. XV. 










. 
































. 











































3 


in the filth and squalor of the slums, the illiter¬ 
acy of the poor, the inequality of justice that 
punished the offender hut did nothing to correct 
the sordid conditions under whice vice and crime 
flourished - these were matters of vital concern 
to him. In Domhey and Son the propaganda for social 
reform is very much in evidence in his treatment of 
secondary plots and characters. We have the stories 
of G-oody Brown, Alice, the Charitable Grinder. But 
Dickens* leading idea, which may be summed up as: 
the disastrous consequences ensuing upon a total 
devotion of one’s life force to the accumulation 
of wealth - this implies a propaganda, not for 
social, but for spiritual reform. As Chesterton 
puts it, ’’you can trace the revolutionary hope 
till it reaches the repentance of Dombey." (1) 

In a sense, too, Meredith’s book, The Egoist , 
is interested in spiritual reformation. But he 
probes more deeply than Dickens into the springs 
of human action. He is not so much interested 

(1) "Charles Dickens". G.K. Chesterton, Methuen, 
London, 1940. 15. 





















































































4 


in the way a man lives as what makes him live that way. 

Meredith takes his theme from the "book of egoism. 

With the aid of the comic spirit, whose imps malignly 
"love to uncover ridiculousness in imposing figures” (1) 
he will strip the egoist of his skin, and uncover a 
complete set of nerves, not heretofore examined, and 
yet running all over the human body - a suit of 
nerves. (2) Meredith means to expose egoism in all 
its manifestations, and by chastising these manifest¬ 
ations in Sir Willoughby, he chastises them in humanity. 
"Sir Willoughby is a document on humanity of the highest 
value; and to him that would know of egoism and the 
egoist, the study of Sir Willoughby is indispensable. 
There is something in him of us all. He is a compendium 
of the Personal in man.” (3) 

G-alsworthy has also a good deal to say about 
egoism, but it is that peculiar form of egoism which 
finds its main expression in the accumulation of 
property. His hero, however, is not an individual. 

(1) "The Egoist". George Meredith, Scribner*s, 

New York, 1916, Prelude, V. 

(2) E.L.Stevenson 1 2 3 s letter to Henley, April, 1882. 

Quoted in "George Meredith", J.A.Hammerton. 

Grant, Edinburgh. 1911, p.221. 

(3) Athenaeum. Nov. 1,1879, Review of Egoist (W.E.Henley) 
























■ 




; 










. . 

. 









5 


but a tribe, the Forsyte Family. The gift of 
psychological insight is "a talent without monetary 
value and properly ignored by the Forsytes." (1) 

But it is a gift that Galsworthy, their creator, 
possessed to an unusual degree. His study of this 
upper middle class family in full plumage (2) is 
something new in psychological analysis. 

Since Galsworthy regards the family as "a 
reproduction of society in miniature" (3) he is 
confronted with the task of making his characters 
sufficiently generalized as to be representative 
of the whole middle class society of Fngland. He 
has therefore selected one trait of character to 
dwell upon - that of a grasping acquisitiveness. 

Young Jolyon gives an accurate diagnosis of 
the malady of Forsyteism in his conversation with 
Bosinney. "We are, of course, all the slaves of 
property, and I admit that it 1 2 3 s a question of degree, 
but what I call a T Forsyte 1 is a man who is decidedly 

(1) "The Forsyte Saga". John Galsworthy, Heinemann, 
London, 1933 (Part One, The Man of Property) p.3. 

(2) Ibid. 3. 

(3) Ibid. 3. 








' 















. 


















6 


more or less a slave of property. He knows a good 
thing, he knows a safe thing, and his grip on property - 
it doesn’t matter whether it "be wives, houses, money, 
or reputation - is his hall mark.” (1) 

Dickens regards Mr. Dombey not so much in his 
relations to society as in his personal relationships. 
That there should he Mr. Domheys in the world is tragic 
enough, hut the inference is that the tragedy is a 
personal one, and that these people lose a great deal 
hy putting money before everything else, including 
wives, and that they have no one to hlame hut themselves 
for being so shortsighted. When they see the falsity 
of this way of life and abandon it, they may acquire 
tranquility. But G-alsworthy sees this myopia extending 
to a whole class, and exercising a degenerative 
influence on the whole social structure, on art, 
literature, science, even religion. (2) 

G-alsworthy takes no such simple view of the sense 
of property as Dickens, nor can he treat it with the 
light comedy of Meredith. To him it is an invidious 

(1) ’’Forsyte Saga”, 238. 

(2) Ibid. 238. 




























. 

■ 

. 







■ . . 

•• 



■ 


















7 


class doctrine, almost a creed, potent as a social 
force, because it makes creative activity possible 
for "the few cranks who believe in such things." (1) 
and yet exploits creative energy to subserve its own 
ends. Therefore G-alsworthy seizes a new word to 
represent this egoism that rests complacently on no 
spiritual power, but the material power of property 
and possessions. He calls it "Forsyte!sm." 

The question that the three novels present is 
substantially the same. In each novel there is the 
figure of the egoist, the man of wealth, the man of 
property, whose creed is possession. Is there any 
power sufficient in itself to defeat this possess¬ 
iveness, to defeat Forsyteism, Dombeyism, Patterneism? 
Dickens, Meredith, and G-alsworthy find such a force 
in the disturbing power that a beautiful woman can 
have on the lives of men. Galsworthy is quite explicit 
in his statement of the theme; "The figure of Irene," 
he says in the preface to Saga,"... is a concretion 
of disturbing Beauty impingeing on a possessive world." 
In each case it is a woman who cannot be possessed as 
the man of property desires to possess her, that brings 
discomfe^*%iture to the Forsyte spirit. 


(1) "Forsyte Saga", 238. 





















. 















' 






















. 






' 























8 


Chapter 2 


DRTHLQPMRNT OF LEADING ID^A 

It may be said that in dealing with the 
possessive instinct in the novels, Dickens 
particularizes, Galsworthy generalizes, and 
Meredith universalizes. 

In Dickens we have Dombey, whose possess¬ 
iveness has been gratified by the accumulation 
of great wealth, which has had the effect of 
engendering in him an enormous pride, and an extremely 
foreshortened view of the universe; "The earth was 
made for Dombey and Son to trade in, and the sun 
and moon were made to give them light. Rivers and 
seas were formed to float their ships; rainbows 
gave them promise of fair weather; winds blew for 
or against their enterprises; stars and planets 
circled in their orbits, to preserve inviolate 
a system of which they were the aentre. (1) 

Characteristically, Dickens by deliberate 
exaggeration, makes of Dombey a unique being. 


(1) "Dombey and Son M . p.10. 





9 


Meredith, on the other hand, makes Sir 
Willoughby universally typical of the man whose 
egoism is rooted in his sense of family and 
property; "You may as well know him out of hand 
as a gentleman of our time and country, of wealth 
and station, a not flexile figure, do what we may 
with him; the humour of whom scarcely dimples the sur¬ 
face, and is distinguishable but by very penetrative, 
very wicked imps, whose fits of roaring below at 
some generally imperceptible strokes of his quality, 
have first made the mild literary angels aware of 
something comic in him, when they were one and all 
about to describe the gentleman on the heading 
of the records baldly (where brevity is most com¬ 
plimentary) as a gentleman of family and property, 
an idol of a decorous island that admires the concrete."(1) 
Though the egoism of Willoughby has its roots 
in the sense of property, it is a many faceted thing. 

It is not singular, like the pride of Dombey, nor 
typical of a certain class, like the possessiveness 
of the Forsytes.. It has so many aspects that we are 
bound to recognize ourselves in at least one of them. 


(1) "The Egoist". Prelude, 4. 











. 






: 




























. 














” 


































10 


"It is yourself that is hunted down; these are 
your faults that are dragged into the day and 
numbered, with lingering relish, with cruel cunning 
and precision. A young friend of Mr. Meredith 1 s 
(as I have the story) came to him in an agony. 

T This is too had of you, 1 he cried. ’Willoughby is 
me. 1 ’ ’No, my dear fellow,’ said the author; ’he 
is all of us.’ I have read ’The Fgoist’ five or 
six times myself, and I mean to read it again; for 
I am like the young friend of the anecdote - I 
think Willoughby an unmanly but very serviceable 
exposure of myself.” (1) 

The Forsytes are recognizable by the same 
externals as the egoist; ’’All Forsytes, as is 
generally admitted, have shells like that extremely 
useful little animal which is made into Turkish 
delight; in other words, they are never seen, or 
if seen, would not be recognized, without habitats, 
composed of circumstance, property, acquaintances, 
and wives, which seem to move along with them in 
their passage through the world composed of thousands 

(1) British Weekly, May 13, 1887. Books which have 
Influenced Me. (R.L.Stevenson). 




- 






' * 




























































11 


of other Forsytes with their habitats. Without a 
habitat a Forsyte is inconceivable, "he would be 
like a novel without a plot, which is well known 
to be an anamoly." (1) 

Galsworthy is no more satisfied to show the 
general characteristics of Forsyteism, and let it 
go at that, than Meredith is satisfied with the 
general characterization of the egoist. Just as 
Meredith pursues egoism through all its ramifica¬ 
tions and superstructures and hiding places in the 
personality of Willoughby, so Galsworthy pursues 
the sense of property through all its ramifications 
and superstructures and hiding places in the person¬ 
alities of the Forsytes. And the Forsytes are many, 
because they do not die young. "Death being contrary 
to their principles, they took precautions against 
it; the instinctive precautions of highly vitalized 
persons who resent encroachments on their property." (2) 
There is, for instance, the manifestation of 
the sense of property in an almost loveable form in 


(1) "Forsyte Saga". 102. 

(2) Ibid. 4. 



























































12 


Aunt Ann. One cannot really dislike her sense of 
proprietorship in the family she loves. T, It was 
her world, this family, all their little secrets, 
illnesses, engagements, and marriages, how they 
were getting on, and whether they were making 
money - all this was her property, her delight, 
her life; beyond this only a vague shadowy mist 
of facts and persons of no real significance." (1) 
James Forsyte 1 2 s sense of property reveals 
itself in a love of family; he takes pleasure in 
the thought of transmitting the money he has saved 
to his children. At his age he is still the slave 
of property. There is no other pleasure but that 
of saving, and the kernal of life is in this saving 
for his children. James would have liked to boast 
of the grandeur of the family tree from which he 
had sprung, but unfortunately the Forsytes were but 
three generations removed from the stonemason 1 s 
trade. (2) His sense of property found little 
relish in surveying the country side of his ancestors, 

(1) "Forsyte Saga". 16. 

(2) Ibid. 19. 























































13 


that country side of rutty roads and tiny farms 
and mills; he had come back to town in a poor way 
and had gone about to make the best of a bad 
business. (1) 

Old Jolyon cannot escape the mark of the beast. 
He looks upon his heavily carved mahogany and finds 
it pleasant to think that in after life he can get 
more for things than he has given. (£) 

Swithin* s love of property reveals itself in 
worshipping all the wrong things; ormulu and gilded 
chairs, and badly sculptured marble. (3) 

If this instinct for property runs through the 
entire family, it finds its fullest manifestation 
in the personality of Soames Forsyte. There are two 
absorbing interests in his life; the accumulation 
of property, and the gathering of possessions around 
him that will furnish the gratification his senses 
desire; pictures, and furnishings, and silver, and 
a lovely wife. Galsworthy shows us a picture of 
Soames in his home, taking a sensuous delight in 
all this; 11 Could a man own anything prettier than 
this dining table with its deep ruby tints, the 

(1) "Forsyte Saga". 20 

(2) Ibid. 25. 

(3) Ibid. 41. 














. 













. 







. 




14 


the starry soft petalled roses, the ruby coloured 
glass and quaint silver furnishing, could a man 
own anything prettier than the woman who sat at 
it?” (1) 

There is no more satirical passage in the 
novel than Galsworthy’s composite portrait of the 
Forsytes. It is not only an indictment, it is an 
epitaph; "They had all done so well for themselves, 
these Forsytes, that they were all what is called 
’of a certain position’. They had shares in all 
sorts of things, not as yet - with the exception 
of Timothy - in consols, for they had no dread in 
life like that of 3 per cent for their money. 

They collected pictures, too, and were supporters 
of such charitable institutions as might be benefic¬ 
ial to their sick domestics. From their father, 
the builder, they inherited a talent for bricks 
and mortar. Originally, perhaps, members of some 
primitive sect, they were now in the natural course 
of things members of the Church of England, and 
caused their wives and children to attend with some 

(1) "Forsyte Saga". 76. 

(2) Ibid. 20. 




























- 




















































. 



15 


regularity the more fashionable churches of the 
Metropolis. To have doubted their Christianity 
would have caused them both pain and surprise. 

Some of them paid for pews, thus expressing in the 
most practical form their sympathy with the teach¬ 
ings of Christ." (1) 

That the satire is directed at the common 
failings of the middle class is questioned by 
Desmond McCarthy, in an article that appeared 
shortly after Galsworthy 1 2 s death. He says, "When 
the foreigner reads Galsworthy he supposes that he 
is understanding the English at last, that when he 
follows the Forsytes, he is watching the very pulse 
of the machine". (1) The critic does not agree. 

He goes on to say that the "strong family cohesion, 
the joint stock company spirit” is more characteris¬ 
tic of France than of England, that, in fact, there 
is an indifference to family unity among the English 
middle class. He finds Galsworthy an unsparing critic 
of the "conventional possessive Englishman." But he 
maintains that the typical Englishman does not seriously 
object to being described as "an obstinate oak of a 
man, gnarled and set in prejudice." putting forth in 

(1) Ibid. 20. 

( 2 ) Living Age. April 1933, John Galsworthy 

(Desmond McCarthy) 
































































































16 


old age some tender and sunlit leaves" or being 
described as "a Philistine, pig-headed, dominated 
by a sense of material values;" these are not his 
radical faults nor those which make him wince when 
probed. The faults of the English, as Desmond 
McCarthy sees them, that Galsworthy should have 
stressed but did not, are "impenetrable self com¬ 
placency, smugness, for short", and "incurable 
determination in the face of truth, honor, art, 
to have things both ways - Hypocrisy." (1) 

He champions passion, says Desmond McCarthy, 
and calls it love of beauty. He wanted to envisage 
the struggle as one between beauty and possessiveness. 
It made it nobler. But he would have done beauty’ 
and incidently drawn his artist rebels far better 
if he had recognized the real nature of the struggle, 
’possessiveness versus sex’." (2) 

If Desmond McCarthy’s analysis of the English 
character be correct, then Sir Willoughby fulfils 
the requirements where the Forsyte family fall short 
of doing so. Not only do we find in him that sense 


(1) Living Age. April. 1933. John Galsworthy. 

(Desmond McCarthy) 

(2) Ibid. 

























. 
































. 


















■ 














17 


of property and family that we have in Soames, hut 
we algo have the smugness, the self-complacency, 
and the determination to face both ways, satirized 
most effectively in Sir Willoughby’s attitude to 
Clara and Lastitia, and in the final imbroglio. 
Although Meredith is more frank in the treatment 
of sex than Galsworthy, he does not obscure the 
problem of ’’possessiveness versus sex” by stressing, 
as Galsworthy does, the symbolism of Beauty. 

The attitude of the male egoist towards the 
woman he regards as his property is much more fully 
depicted by Meredith and Galsworthy than it is by 
Dickens, but it is essentially the same. 

Soames is unlike Dombey and Sir Willoughby in 
this; from the first he suffers from some anxiety 
that he may lose his grip on the exquisite piece of 
property that is his wife. In the opening chapters 
of the book there are many indications that he has 
already lost his grip on her. Trifles, light as air, 
in themselves, but they show the way the wind is 
blowing, dames Forsyte believes it is ^ust as well 
that Irene has no money of her own. She would not 
be so foolish as to do anything wrong when she is 



















































18 


dependent on Soames. He had been in such a hurry 
to marry her, he "got quite thin dancing attendance 
on her". (1) Now she was asking for a separate 
room. It is the first time the Forsytes have been 
in danger of losing a possession, and it vaguely 
disturbs the whole class. 

Soames is not gratified by the possession of 
his wife in the fullest sense, because she fails 
to yield him the pleasure he believes is his priv¬ 
ilege to enjoy in her. He experiences "a sense of 
exasperation amounting to pain that he did not own 
her as it was his right to own her; that he could 
not, as by stretching out his hand to that rose, 
pluck her and sniff the very secrets of her heart." (2) 
He wants Irene as he has wanted everything that 
appeals to his eonnoiseur 1 s eye. That he cannot 
possess her as he wishes to do, because she is in 
essence so foreign to him; because they have no 
sympathy or thought in common; because the springs 
of their being are different - this he does not 
understand at all. 

Acute understanding of how two discordant natures 
worry and agonize each other is shown by Galsworthy. 

One can feel sympathy for Soames, in spite of the 

(1) "Forsyte Saga". 11. 

(2) "Forsyte Saga". 76. 


























































. 





































19 


fact that he feels so much sympathy for himself, 

as he sits opposite his averse and silent wife, 

and contemplates the gulf between them. "It was 

hard, when a man worked as he did, making money 

for her, yes, and with an ache in his heart - 

that she should sit there, looking - looking as 

if she saw the walls of the room closing in. It 

was enough to make a man get up and leave the table." (1) 

The incompatibility is shown as a matter of 
temperament, rather than, as in Clara’s and Sir 
Willoughby’s case, of intellect. 

"There lived a mistress who would have dwelt 
daintily on a desert island; a master whose daint¬ 
iness was, as it were, an investment, cultivated 
by the owner for his advancement, in accordance 
with the laws of competition. He would not have 
gone without a bath for worlds - it was the fashion 
to take baths; and how bitter was his scorn of 
people who omitted them’. 

"But Irene could be imagined, like some nymph, 
bathing in wayside streams, for the joy of the 
freshness and of seeing her own fair body." (2) 

(1) "The Forsyte Saga". 75. 

(2) Ibid. 73. 






















- 

















































































20 


Yet Soames cannot see that in the fundamental 
difference between them - a difference of temper¬ 
ament too great for either adjustment or compromise, 
there should exist the charter of her freedom. He 
feels it, but he refuses to admit the existence of 
the incompatibility he knows to be there. (1) 

The Forsytes never relax their grip on anything 
that they can call property. TT Ke had married this 
woman, conquered her, made her his own, and it 
seemed to him contrary to the most fundamental of 
all laws, the law of possession, that he could do 
no more than ov/n her body - if indeed he could do 
that, which he was beginning to doubt. If anyone 
had asked him if he wanted to own her soul, the 
question would have seemed to him both ridiculous 
and sentimental. But he did so want, and the 
writing said he never would.” (2) 

It is in the nature of egoism to refuse to se e 
any possibility of deficiency in itself. It had 
never occurred to Soames that the fault la,y in 
himself. The incapacity of the egoist to understand 

(1) "Forsyte Saga”. 76. 

(2) Ibid. 76. 




















. 

























21 


why he is not loved as he thinks he ought to be 
loved, may arouse in the compassionate reader 
some sympathy. To be unloveable, and to be aware 
of the fact, to be sensitive to it, is uncontroll¬ 
able tragedy. But the egoist cannot believe him¬ 
self to be unloveable. 

"He could not see what she found wrong with 
him. It was not as if he drank 1 2 . Did he run into 
debt, or gamble or swear’, was he violent, were 
his friends rackety, did he stay out at night? 

On the contrary. 

"The profound, subdued aversion which he felt 
ih his wife was a mystery to him, and a source of 
the most terrible irritation. That she had made 
a mistake and did not love him, had tried to love 
him and could not love him, was obviously no reason. 

"Soames was forced, therefore, to set the 
blame down entirely to his wife." (1) 

That she was one of those women, not too common 
in the Anglo Saxon race - born to be loved and to 
love, had certainly never occurred to him. (2) 

It is in such scenes as these that Galsworthy 

(1) "Forsyte Saga". 61. 

(2) Ibid. 62. 























• 
















■ 




■ 1 




* 




































22 


draws very clearly the struggle between possess¬ 
iveness and sex. It is a point that he dwells on 
repeatedly though as McCarthy points out in the 
article already referred to that Galsworthy prefers 
to call it a struggle between possessiveness and 
Beauty. (1) 

Like the Forsytes, Lombey is an eminently 
practical man, but unlike Soames, there is no faint 
trace of sentimentalism about him. He would have 
laughed at the idea of owning a woman’s soul. His 
firm had often dealt in hides but never in hearts. (2) 
His attitude towards marriage is revealed in the 
first chapter, and it remains with himself as 
distinctly honorable and gratifying to any woman 
of sense. (3) The social contract of matrimony 
is almost necessarily a part of a genteel station 
in life. The death of the first Mrs. Lombey does 
not affect him deeply, because he is a man not 
easily upset emotionally, but he feels a sense of 
regret. There is ’’something gone from among his 
plate and furniture, and other household possessions, 

(1) Living Age. April 1933. John Galsworthy. 

(Desmond McCarthy). 

(2) ’’Lombey and Son.” 10 

(3) Ibid. 10. 




























‘ 



















. 



























23 


which was well worth the having, and could not 
be lost without sincere regret.” (1) 

The attitude of Mr. Dombey towards his second 
wife is as clearly an attitude of ownership as 
that shown by Soames. But where Soames has a 
baffled sense of not owning Irene as he wishes 
to own her, both body and soul, Dombey is conscious, 
not of a physical aversion in his wife, but of the 
opposition of her pride to his. "Their pride, 
however different in kind and object, was equal in de¬ 
gree, and in their flinty opposition, struck out fire 
between them which might smoulder or might blaze, as 
circumstances were, but burnt up everything within 
their mutual reach, and made their marriage way a 
road of ashes.” (2) 

Dombey, however, is the middle class husband 
of two generations before the advent of Soames. 

He is more demanding, more imperious, more insistent 
on the exaction of dutiful obedience from his depend¬ 
ence. The source of irritation is the same with 
Dombey as with Soames; the refusal of a wife to con¬ 
form to the husband’s requirements, but the require¬ 
ments are different. Where Soames asks to be treated 


(1) ’’Dombey and Son”. 13. 

(2) Ibid. 624. 
































•• ~ 











































' 

























24 


as a husband, Dombey asks to be treated with the 
deference required by his pride. TT She had the 
grand demerit of unaccountably putting herself 
in opposition to the recognition of his vast im¬ 
portance, and to the acknowledgment of her complete 
submission to it, and so far it was necessary to 
correct her; but otherwise he still considered 
her, in his cold way, a lady capable of doing 
honour, if she would, to his choice and name, and 
of reflecting credit on his proprietorship. TT (1) 
Dombey is concerned chiefly with a show of 
deference on Edith's part before the world. (2) 
Soames is concerned with his wife's attitude to 
him personally. Soames wishes to bring his wife 
to show the love for him that his position as her 
husband warrants him to expect. Dombey wishes to 
bring Edith to show the respect and obedience for 
him that his position as her lord and master war¬ 
rants him to expect. The word "obey" is still in 
the marriage ceremony, in Dickens' day. Soames 
would be incapable of issuing an ultimatum to 
Irene as Mr. Dombey does to Edith. (3) 

(1) "Dombey and Son". 624. 

(2) Ibid. 548. 

(3) Ibid. 548. 











































. 

- 




.aid ' 















































25 


Nor would he elect a business associate to act as 
an intermediary between his wife and himself. (1) 

There is a strained artificiality about the sit¬ 
uation that is not found in Galsworthy 1 2 s treatment 
of the same thing. His behavior towards Edith is 
not the only one of exaggerated self importance, 
but it is too strained and frigid for a husband 
galled into remonstance by his wife’s insubordination. 

This is seen most clearly in contrasting the 
scenes between husband and wife as shown in Dickens 
and in Galsworthy. Galsworthy does not hesitate to 
deal with the sexual side of marriage with candor, 
where Dickens does not mention it at all. Even the 
implication of unsatisfactory relations between 
husband and wife is extremely vague. Soames is 
frankly dissatisfied with the state of his marital 
relations, and when Irene’s aversion to him becomes 
so intense that she looks him out, he behaves him¬ 
self in a thoroughly primitive manner. (2) Though 
there is very little dialogue in the scenes between 
husband and wife in Galsworthy, in comparison with 

(1) ’’Dombey and Son” 549. 

(2) ’’Forsyte Saga”. 272. 































































26 


the "brilliant speeches of Dombey and Edith, we feel 
each word weighted with an intensity of feeling. 

There is the scene where Soames enters Irene’s room 
and demands to know how long the state of affairs 
between them is to last, demands to know if she will 
treat him as her husband. Irene’s replies are mon¬ 
osyllable, yet nowhere else are we made so aware of 
the strange fierceness, the strength of this appar¬ 
ently soft and passive woman, aroused to hatred by 
her sexual antipathy. (1) Again Soames behaves, not 
like a Forsyte only, but the ineensed male deprived 
of the legal satisfaction of his appetites, and 
asserts his rights in the supreme act of property.(2) 
The most powerful scenes between Edith and Dom- 
bey are full of suberb dialogue, as that in which 
Edith pleads for compromise, for forbearance, in the 
hope that in the course of time ’’some friendship, or 
some fitness for each other may arise,” invokes the 
memory of Dombey’s dead son in the hope of softening 
his obdurate nature; but her plea is rejected. (3) 

But Dombey’s speeches have an unreality about them; 

(1) ’’Forsyte Saga”. 283. 

(2) Ibid. 314. 

(3) ’’Dombey and Son”. 552. 






















• 




















. 




: ; . 






. 




■ 












' 



























27 


when he is lecturing Edith on her stubborn dispos¬ 
ition, her extravagance, or the necessity of curbing 
the rebellious principle within her. (1) There is 
none of the directness, the simplicity, the candor 
of Galsworthy in dealing with the relations between 
husband and wife, and because this is lacking there 
is an artificiality to the scenes that even Dickens’ 
inimitable way of writing human speech cannot dis¬ 
simulate . 

There is an obvious reason for the vagueness of 
Dickens’ treatment of marital relations. The reading 
public of his day would not accept the frank revelation 
of intimacies that the more sophisticated readers of 
Galsworthy 1 s day would regard as a necessary part of 
the realistic treatment of the story. The timidity 
of the Victorian mind towards the frank portrayal of 
such a subject as sex aversion would be sufficient to 
cause Dickens to avoid any such method as Galsworthy 
uses. ’’Dickens was unable to work quite clear of the 
atmosphere in which Mr. Podsnap lived, where the ques¬ 
tion that settled everything was: ’Would it bring a 
blush to the cheek of a young person?’ 

(1) ’’Dombey and Son”. 634. 




































. 





























. 






28 


Besides he was writing for a circle of domestic 
readers in Household Words and rightly he had to 
be careful.’ 1 (1) 

Dickens restricts himself to the clash of 
personalities, though we feel on Edith's part the 
same deep seated aversion as in Irene, towards the 
husband who has purchased her as he might a refrac¬ 
tory slave.(2) It is not Edith's refusal to be a 
wife to him that causes the breach between her and 
her husband, as it does between Soames and Irene. 

It is her refusal to be exhibited as his possession.(3) 
It is her refusal to permit Dombey to humiliate her 
before Florence and Carker.(4) 

The actual struggle as Dickens depicts it is 
summarized in one paragraph: 

"Mr. Dombey was resolved to show her that 
he was supreme. There must be no will but his. 

Proud he desired her to be, but she must be proud 
for, not against him. As he sat alone, hardening, 
he would often hear her go out and come home, 
treading the round of London life with no more heed 

(1) Living Age. Jan.6,1923. Dickens and Meredith 

(James Moffat) 

(2) "Dombey and Son". 635. 

(3) Ibid.635 

(4) Ibid.635. 



- 






















. 






















. 






. 


■ 



























29 


of his liking or disliking, pleasure or displeasure, 
than if he had been her groom. Her cold supreme 
indifference - his own unquestioned attribute - 
stung him more than any other kind of treatment 
could have done; and he determined to bend her to 
his magnificent and stately will.”(1) 

This is the conflict going on in the Dombey 
household. In contrast with Dickens’ delineation 
of unhappy domesticity, there is Galsworthy’s vivid 
picture of Soames and Irene at the foot of the stairs, 
when one returns from seeing Bosinney, and Soames 
intuitively discerns that the two are lovers. He 
sees it in Irene’s radiance, in her heightened color. 
She seems on fire.(2) Yet her indifference to him 
only accentuates the impression of her glowing and 
animated vitality awakened by her new passionate 
awareness of living. Soames really pathetic attempt 
to show his possession of her by touching her blouse, 
by criticising its shapelessness, is essentially 
lifelike, where Dombey’s magnificent gestures of 
lordship are not. 

(1) ’’Dombey and Son”. 546. 

(2) ’’Forsyte Saga”. 275. 






























































30 


If the conflict between Dombey and Edith is 
kept on a plane that will not offend the Victorian 
mind, the action itself is kept on a path that will 
not offend Victorian morality. Dickens was chiefly 
concerned with his story, and its affect on the 
reader.(1) The attitude of the early nineteenth 
century mind towards morals was a different attitude 
from that of Galsworthy 1 2 s generation. "Some fifty 
years in the nineteenth century the English speak¬ 
ing race, as it now appears, was under the sway of 
Mrs. Grundy. It v/as living in a state of the most 
reprehensible respectability, and Art was tied to 
the apron strings of morality." (2) 

y 

Dickens was fullt conscious of the necessity 
of paying his respects to Mrs. Grundy. Nor was he 
the only author in a similar predicament. We know 
how the fear of offending Mrs. Grundy, or rather of 
vexing the prudish soul of James Ballantyne, made 
Scott handicap St. Eonan T s Well by hesitating to 
reveal the real connection between Clara Med-bray 
and her lover. Ee blurred that and spoiled the story. 

(1) Charles Dickens. Andre Maurois. 112. 

(2) Century Magazine. Feb. 1912. The obviousness 

of Dickens. (S.M.Crothers). 












































' 





. 






. 




. 

















31 


Dickens was guilty of appeasing social morality in 
the same way. By evaporating the intrigue between 
Edith and Carker, he caused the plot to suffer. 
Meredith from the very first had the courage to take 
the plunge even though many in Victorian England 
disapproved his frankness. In Richard Feverel he 
drew the young man and the strange woman as they 
really were. 

Both novelists treat tenderly the fallen woman 
who remains essentially pure, who is the victim 
rather than the temptress. Emily in David Copperfield 
belongs to the same class as Dahlia, in Rhoda Fleming . 
In each case the novelist punishes the aristocratic 
seducer, the one by killing him, the other by letting 
him live and miss what he sought. Emigration appears 
as the way out of the difficulty for the girl. Edith 
does not surrender to the blandishments of Carker. 

The punishment for both remains as severe as though 
she had. Carker dies even as Steerforth does by that 
accident or stroke of fate that is the conventional 
idea of retribution. Edith retires into an obscurity 
lightened only by a consciousness of good works. That 
Edith does not surrender to Carker, as Irene does to 
Bosinney marks her for the approval of Mrs. Grundy. 





. 















. 

' . 







■ 












. 




< 







. 

■ 




■ 












. 




. 

■ 
















■ 





32 


Dickens could not show Edith as the mistress of 
Carker and remain sympathetic towards her. The 
fact that Galsworthy could make the reader accept 
the fact of Irene and Bosinney as lovers, and still 
retain sympathy for them instead of the Forsytes, 
reveals the striking change that has taken place ' 
in the general attitude towards orthodox morality 
in two generations. 

Santayana says of Dickens; "He denounced 

scandals without exposing shams and conformed 

willingly and scrupulously to the proprieties."(1) 

"Lady Dedlock*s secret, for instance, he treats as 

if it were the sin of Adam, remote, mysterious, 

inexplicable. Mrs. Dombey is not allowed to deceive 

her husband except by pretending to deceive him."(2) 

t 

To paraphrase Sanayana, it might be said that 
Galsworthy exposes shame without denouncing scandal. 
Irene and young Jolyon do not submit to their love¬ 
less marriages for the sake of a sham propriety and 
to avoid scandal. Bosinney 1 2 s artistic integrity 

(1) Dial, November, 1921. Dickens. (Santayana). 

(2) Ibid. 




















. 


i 














.. 


. 








■ 















makes him refuse refuse Soames’ request to cheapen 
the construction of the house and thus sham the 
perfection it aspires to. The irregularity of the 
young architect’s dress, the irregularity of his 
behavior cannot spoil for G-alsworthy the beauty of 
his Grecian devotion to regularity of design. There 
is the genuine thing. 

There is another contrast in the character of 
Galsworthy and Dickens. Dickens was no free artist. 

He wrote under pressure for money and applause, and 
cheapened execution in consequence. Galsworthy was 
free to write as he pleased, belonging as he did to 
the Forsyte strata of society, the moneyed middle 
class. Dickens’ lively imagination and warm fancy 
was not always aided by a thorough understanding of 
his complex characters. Galsworthy’s gift of psych¬ 
ological analysis is not aided by a powerful imagin¬ 
ation. Dickens had more genius than taste. Galsworthy 
had more taste than genius. Galsworthy’s mind severely 
ruled his heart. Dickens’ heart ruled his mind. 

Where Galsworthy achieves his purpose, the defeat of 
Forsyteism, by sacrificing the lovers, Dickens will 
abandon an artistic purpose to secure a happy ending. 

A case in point is his expressed intention to show 


































. 








34 


the gradual disentegration of character In the case 
of Walter Gay. Instead, he remains the colorless and 
nohle youth who grows up to marry Florence Dombey.(l) 

"It is not only public prejudice alone that plays 
the censor in Dickens’ art, his own kindness and even 
weakness of heart sometimes act as marplots.”(2) 

It is as much Dickens 1 sympathy for Edith that 
makes him refrain from placing her completely beyond 
the moral pale, as it is a concession to public opinion. 

The Egoist , though it does not contain a marriage 
at all,has, paradoxically enough, more to say on the 
subject of marriage than either Dombey and Son or 
The Man of Property . Meredith makes of this book 
a complete study of the relationship of the sexes. 

In Dickens’ novel we see the flinty opposition of 
two kinds of pride; in Galsworthy’s novel we see the 
instinctively possessive Forsyte spirit in contact 
with an alien principle, vaguely known as Beauty, 
v/hich it cannot conquer. In Meredith we see the 
egoism and sentimentalism of man opposed by the 
sanity and reason and purified emotion of woman 

(1) Charles Dickens. Maurois, 113. 

(2) Dial. November, 1921. Dickens. (Santayana). 




























■ 

























' 










35 


rising out of subjection into a world of freedom. 
Meredith ikniversalizes the subject of sex relation¬ 
ships. Clara is not so much an individual woman 
struggling with her own specific problem as the 
"evolving Superwoman".(1) 

In his novel The Egoist Meredith also estab¬ 
lishes his fundamental attitude towards women. 

Ee insists that the well-being of society depends 
upon the position which women occupy in it and 
insist further that men hold the key of the situation 
since women have hitherto been what men made them. 

"Women have us back to the primitive conditions 
of man or they shoot us higher than the topmost star. 
But it is as we please. Let them tell us what we 
are to them: for us, they are our back and front of 
life: the poetic Lesbia, the poet 1 s Beatrice: ours 
is the choice. And were it proved that some of the 
bright things are in the pay of darkness, with the 
stamp of his coin on their palms, and that some are 
the very angels we hear sung of, not the less might 
we say that they find us out, they have us by our 
leanings. They are to us what we hold of best or 

(1) Forum. July, 1905. Maddening the Meredithians. 

(William Chislett). 



































. 



































































36 


or worst within. Bybtheir state is our civilization 
judged; and if it is hugely animal still, that is 
because primitive men abound and will have their 
pasture. Since the lead is ours, the leaders must 
bow their heads to the sentence."(1) 

As Meredith chooses to deal with his subject 
in the spirit of comedy, he avoids treating, except 
through the anticipatory reflections of Clara, the 
subject of unhappiness in marriage. Clara succeeds 
in her struggles to break her bonds before they 
fetter her irrevocably to the man for whom she feels 
a growing aversion. He is not faced with the dis¬ 
approval of Mrs. Grundy, and he has therefore full 
scope to deal with his subject within the limits 
of comedy that he has set for himself. 

The possessiveness and the egoism of Sit Will¬ 
oughby 1 s attitude© to Clara are shown very vividly 
in the opening chapter^ It is interesting to note 
that the egoist 1 s choice of a wife is more consistent 
with the drawing of his character than that of Dombey 
or Soames. Soames’ choice of a, girl without money 
is a violation of his sense of monetary values, but 


(1) The Egoist. 232. 



















. 




























M 






37 


Soames is not always consistent, and therefore he 
is very human. He is capable at times of a nos¬ 
talgic craving for beauty.(1) 

Sir Willoughby is fascinated by the portionless 
poetess, Laetitia Dale, but he will not marry her 
because she lacks "that triune of perfect starriness 
which makes all men astronomers".(2) Money and health 
and beauty are the qualities he stipulates. His whirl¬ 
wind wooing of Clara Middleton does not commence until 
his appraisal of her notes these qualities which will 
most gratify the possessive instinct. Her choice of 
him, however, is gratifying for another reason. 

"A deeper student of Science than his rivals, 
he appreciated Nature’s compliment in the fair one’s 
choice of you. We nov; scientifically know that in 
this department of the universal struggle, success 
is awarded the bettermost. You spread a handsomer 
tail than your fellows, you dress a finer top-knot, 
you pipe a new'er note, have a longer stride; she 
reviews you in competition and selects you."(3) 

In the study of Soames’ attitude towards Irene, 
it was noted that Irene’s personality, foreign in 

(1) Forsyte Saga. 1104. 

U) The Fgoist. 36. 

(3) Ibid. 42 


























■ 





















. 



. 








1 







38 


every aspect to Forsyteisra, made the union of two 
such dissimilar "beings impossible. With Clara 
Middleton and Willoughby, the case is different. 

It is Willoughby’s insistence on possessing in her 
a feminine counterpart of himself, that awakens the 
spirit of rebellion in the girl.(l) 

Meredith’s analysis of love is too detached to 
make one feel any real human passion breathing through 
his pages. He dilutes love by intellectualizing it 
too much. Willoughby believes he loves fervently, 
but merely becomes more of an egoist than ever, in 
that he demands the utter surrender on the part of 
his betrothed. She is to have no thought or dream 
that does not belong to him, and so completely does 
he wish to possess her that he extends his ownership 
beyond the lease of life itself.(2) 

It is, however, when Clara attempts to get out 
of her bargain that Willoughby’s real sentiment asserts 
itself. She is his property, and he intends to retain 
his grip on her, though she belongs to him only by 
virtue of her own promise.(3) He is shocked out of 
his usual self satisfaction and smugness by Clara’s talk 


(1) The Egoist. 44. 

(2) Ibid. 48, 

(3) Ibid. 150. 










































. 













. 






















. 






39 


of running away, and forcing him to surrender poss¬ 
ession; "His ideal, the common male Egoist ideal of 
a waxwork sex, would have been shocked to fragments 
had she spoken further to fill in the outline of 
these awful inter,) ections. "(1) Nothing is more 
alarming than the thought of this assertion of in¬ 
dependence on the part of a possession. 

Willoughby, like Soames, is unable to conceive 
of a fault in himself to account for Clara 1 2 3 s failure 
to love him. "Distaste for his person was inconceiv¬ 
able to the favorite of society."(2) 

There is also the same hint of an essential 
brutality in the character of Willoughby as there is 
in that of Soames. Willoughby, in contemplating the 
rebellious behavior of Clara reflects; "The capricious 
creature probably wanted a whipping to bring her to 
an understanding of the principle called mastery, 
which is in man."(3) Although it is distasteful to 
him, Soames believes in the necessity of the assertion 
of strength in a husband, because he has within his 

(1) The Egoist. 150. 

(2) Ibid. 225. 

(3) Ibid. 225. 












• ; . ' ; :lr ' 




































. 














' ' V 





-40- 


own nature TT a^ecret fund of brutality".(1) 

Like Soames also, Willoughby 1 2 3 s conception of 
women has been coloured by the reading of popular 
romances. In his imaginary scene with Clara, he 
pictures her as humbly repentent, and himself in 
the attitude of lordly forgiveness.(2) 

There is more than a reminiscence of the novels 
of the period that Meredith was familiar with as 
publisher’s reader, the type of novels represented 
by East Lynn . Thirty years later the pendulum had 
swung, and public approbation was given to the novel 
with a happy ending. Soames, an inveterate novel 
reader, was convinced by his perusal of the fiction 
of his day, which coloured his view of life, that 
his wife would eventually come to love him.(3) 

Neither Meredith nor Galsworthy was writing 
for the wider reading public that they satirize in 
these passages. Aware that their appeal was limited 
to a different class of reader, they could afford 
the fun. 

(1) Forsyte Saga. 77. 

(2) The Egoist. 227. 

(3) Forsyte Saga. 77. 













































. 
































. 











41 


There is a striking similarity in the way all three 
authors treat the egoist’s reaction to the woman’s re¬ 
quest for freedom. At first he regards such a request 
with incredulity, amazement that something belonging 
to him could dare to claim any existence apart from him. 
His secondary reaction is anger that he should he exposed 
to the ridicule of the world. Dombey dismisses his wife’s 
appeal for a separation as absurd.(1) Willoughby dis¬ 
misses Clara’s appeal for freedom with the words, ’’There 
is no possibility of releasing a wife” - with a somewhat 
premature assumption of the married state.(2) 

Soames Forsyte, secretly alarmed by Irene’s request to 
let her go, takes refuge on bluster and calls it all non¬ 
sense. (3) Reputation is a kind of property that must be 
safe-guarded, Dombey’s first thought, when his wife makes 
her extraordinary demand, is the effect of such a separ¬ 
ation on the good opinion the world holds of him.(4) 

What will people say? Willoughby is even more sensitive 
to the ridicule of the world. Convinced that he is 
about to lose Clara, he plans how best to salvage the 
idol, ’reputation’. Soames finds it unbearable to 

(1) Dombey and Son. 636. 

(2) The Egoist. 149. 

(3) Forsyte Saga. 245. 

(4) Dombey and Son. 636. 





















7 








. 

: : ’ ' . 





















.. : ..: / r i 5 , f 

. 

. 


- 42 


contemplate the necessity of making the rift between 
himself and Irene public property.(1) 

Where Meredith detests the male Egoist’s claim for 
purity and innocence, that is, for ignorance, rather 
than strength and companionship in woman, Galsworthy 
detests the Forsyte attitude of Possessiveness. But 
Galsworthy’s analysis of the male attitude is much 
less penetrating than Meredith’s. He attacks in man, 
not only the instinct of possessiveness, but a 
’’voracious aesthetic gluttony”(2) Meredith sees a 
grossness in the masculine demand for innocence and 
purity in woman. 'Women, he says, have worn a mask 
of ignorance so that they may be named innocent, have 
turned themselves into ’’market produce” to minister 
to his delight, and ’’have really abandoned the commodity 
in ministering to the lust for it.”(3) He condemns 
women for this. They have ’’suffered themselves to 
be dragged ages back in playing upon the fleshly 
innocence of happy accident to gratify his jealous 
greed of possession, when it should have been their 
task to set the soul above the fairest fortune, and the 
gift of strength in women above ornamental whiteness.”(4) 

(1) Forsyte Saga. 273. 

(2) The Egoist. 110. 

(3) Ibid. Ill 

(4) Ibid. Ill 


































' 



















‘ 






























43 


Meredith's attitude is in striking contrast with that 
of Dickens, who knows nothing of the evolving Super- 
woman who demands that marriage shall be based on 
equality. Dickens shares the egoist's conception of 
the type of woman who is eminently marriageable. She 
has a great deal of Meredith's "veiled virginal doll" 
about her, and his chivalry is always protective to¬ 
wards her frailty. There is nothing of the intellect¬ 
ual recognition of the equality of sexes in Dickens, 
nor in Galsworthy. 

But Galsworthy, like Meredith, is tolerant towards 
women who find their relationship in marriage unsatis¬ 
factory, and do not wish one error to ruin their lives. 
They do not contemplate marriage with the irrevocability 
of doom that we find in Dickens. Meredith's feeling 
towards a world that condemns youth to irreparable 
misery for a fault of judgment, is expressed in Clara’s 
words, "It must be an ill-constructed tumbling world 
where the hour of ignorance is made the creator of our 
destiny by being forced to decisive elections upon 
which life's main issues hang."(l) Galsworthy does 
not express this tragic truth by a precept but by an 
example. Young Jolyon's "hour of ignorance" cost him 


(1) The Egoist. 93. 















. 













































44 


his father 1 s love and companionship for fifteen years, 
for "the grim remorselessness of that business had no 
pity for hearts."(1) 

Galsworthy has the same pity for the ignorance of 
youth as Meredith, and he shows up the whole complicated 
business; the tragic consequences of a mistaken youthful 
impulse, and its effect on several lives. Galsworthy 
neither condemns young Jolyon for breaking the conven¬ 
tions of society nor Old Jolyon for condemning his son. 
But Old Jolyon, who represents all that is most rigid 
and most conventional in society, law, moderation and 
order, finally breaks down and wonders if his attitude 
is the right one. Galsworthy is depicting the gradual 
awaking of a spirit of tolerance towards those who kick 
over the traces of moral convention. There is implied 
in the attitude of old Jolyon, the hope that some day 
society will mellow as the grand old Forsyte does, with 
the wisdom of age, and refuse to pass dogmatic judgment. 
Again and again Galsworthy satirizes that popular opinion 
of the Forsyte strata of society that those who break 
the moral code are lost. "His son ought, under the 


(1) Forsyte Saga. 32. 

































* r 

. 














■ - '■ . ' r - 















45 


circumstances, to have gone to the dogs; that law was 
laid down in all the novels, sermons, and plays he had 
read, heard, or witnessed.”(1) 

In Meredith and Galsworthy confusion overtakes not 
the publicans but the Pharisees. It is Vernon Whitford, 
and young Jolyon, both unfortunate in their first marriage, 
who attain happiness and not the self-righteous Sir 
Willoughby and Soames Forsyte. Dickens never feels 
himself equally free to extend forgiveness to those who 
sin against the moral code. It is at best, with Dickens, 

£o<r "TWos*. 

a modified forgiveness, a limited tolerance / who come 
back, repentant, to the fold of orthodoxy. 

Both Galsworthy and Meredith advocate courage on 
the part of the woman faced with an unendurable situation, 
courage to front popular opinion, and if necessary to 
disregard it. Clara reflects; "She must have courage 
to break with honor, she must dare to be faithless, and 
not merely say, ’I will be brave enough to be dishonor¬ 
able’ "(2) It is June Forsyte, the nearest approach to 
a Meredithian woman that we find in Galsworthy, who 
counsels courage and action. She had preached the 
necessity of facing the evil, by separation if need be. 

"Who cares? Let him do what he likes - you’ve only to 
stick to itl”(3) 

(1) Forsyte Saga. 36. 

(2) The Fgoist. 93. 

(3) Forsyte Saga. 57. 


















'..3 












' 














































46 


In his endorsation of courage to front .the evil 
of marital unhappiness, Galsworthy does not recommend 
a disregard for every personal obligation. There are 
times when marriage might rest on compromise, when 
after all, too much is involved. As young Jolyon says 
to Bosinney, TT I do not recommend everyone to go my way; 
it depends. M (l) There are circumstances, according to 
Galsworthy, that make the course of flight the better 
one; TT A man fled when he was in danger of destroying 
hearth and home, where there were children, when he 
felt himself trampling down ideals, breaking something. TT (2) 
There are circumstances that make the breaking up of a 
home less unpardonable than others; as in Bosinney’s 
case where it was "all broken to his hand."(3) 

The thing that is needed to clarify all such 
situations, to make the right course of action apparent, 
is imagination; "It was a question of imagination, of 
projecting himself into the future beyond unpleasant 
gossip, sneers and tattle that followed on such separ¬ 
ations, beyond the passing pangs that the lack of the 
sight of her would cause, beyond the grave disapproval 

(lForsyte Saga. 240. 

(2) Ibid. 240. 

(3) Ibid 240. 
































47 


of the worthy. But few men, and especially few men 
of Soames' class, had imagination enough for that. 

A deal of mortals in the world, and not- enough imag¬ 
ination to go round’. "(1) 

The struggle between the sense of duty, the desire 
for conformity, and the shuddering revulsion from the 
obligation it entails is shown from the feminine view¬ 
point in Clara’s meditations; she feels that for a 
woman yoked in marriage to one for whom she has anti¬ 
pathy, submission from a sense of duty is really 
shameful, and therefore not obligatory.(2) There is 
a striking similarity in the treatment of this theme 
by Galsworthy and Meredith. There are, as young Jolyon 
sees it, times when there ceases to be an obligation 
on the individual to be miserable. Irene’s desertion 
of Soames, after he had asserted his rights as a husband, 
’’had done his best to sustain the sanctity of marriage, 
to prevent her from abandoning her duty’’(3) is felt to 
be, not morally reprehensible, but inevitable and right, 
since further submission would be an outrage of all that 
is finest and most sensitive in her character. 

(1) Forsyte Saga. 241. 

(2) The Egoist. 201. 

(3) Forsyte Saga. 315. 






' 



























, 







































48 


In the chapter on Soames’ outrage, Galsworthy has 
shown with powerful insight, the tortures of loveless 
marriage from the physical aspect. But he does not, 
as Meredith does, show the still more ingenious torture 
inflicted on the woman mated to one utterly uncongenial 
in mind and temperament. The horror that Clara feels 
at the prospect of communing daily with an Hgoist, is 
graphically described; "To he fixed at the mouth of a 
mine, and to have to descend it daily, and not to dis¬ 
cover great opulence below; on the contrary, to be 
chilled in subterranean sunlessness, without any sub¬ 
stantial quality that she could grasp, only the mystery 
of inefficient tallow light in those caverns of the 
complacent talking man; this appeared to her too extreme 
probation for two or three weeks. How of a lifetime 
of i t T . " (1) 

The plea of the Meredithian woman is for comradeship, 
"a living and frank exchange of the best in both, with 
the deeper feelings untroubled."( 2 ) 

Perhaps Galsworthy is right, in his conception of 
Irene, to make her shrinking from Soames appear some¬ 
thing mysterious, if not biological, and therefore 

(1) The Hgoist. 55. 

(2) Ibid. 
















































































. 





































49 


psychologically sound in attempting no explanation of 
something we know exists. Meredith is not satisfied 
to do this; he traces Clara’s averseness to Willoughby, 
as it gradually develops. Her repugnance to his caresses 
grows out of her revulsion to his egoism. Meredith 
attempts to uncover the whole of Clara’s mental processes 
and show the thin edge where one can turn from esteem to 
aversion, in much the same as a person standing on the 
crest of a precipice may descend on one side or the other. 
He shows Clara precariously balanced on the precipice 
and at last falling. 

Irene’s mental processes are never analysed. There 
is an adequate defence, however, for Galsworthy’s indirect 
method of drawing Irene’s attitude, as well as her charac¬ 
ter. In Galsworthy the thing is worked out in the terms 
of actual human experience. In Meredith’s novel we are 
given the author’s attitude towards marriage, and egoism, 
and numerous other matters by the devious route of mental 
genuflections on the part of the characters, notably 
Clara, for with Meredith, she is on the side of the angels. 
Clara merely imagines, however vividly, what marriage 
under certain circumstances would be like; Irene does 
not imagine it; she experiences it. The reflections of 


















































. 































50 


Clara are supplemented by the author 1 2 s running com¬ 
mentary . The result is a highly intellectualized 
and attenuated atmosphere. In Galsworthy the problem 
is not soved by mental analysis. In fact it is not 
solved at all. It is presented as a transcription 
of life. 

Galsworthy really achieved a new thing in this 
book. He has said that to make success of illicit 
love is to invite mockery.(1) He is therefore in 
accord with Dickens in not offending the suscept¬ 
ibilities of Mrs. Grundy. But he wishes to justify 
this "illicit love" and Dickens did not. Meredith 
avoided the theme in his book altogether, because 
there is no broken marriage involved. Yet Galsworthy 
succeeds better than either Dickens or Meredith in 
this; he does not sacrifice convictions to convention, 
nor does he sacrifice popularity for a purpose. He 
succeeds in silencing criticism because he does not 
make the lovers happy, yet he makes them victorious 
because he arouses pity for them, and condemnation 
for the forces that have crushed them. He sums it 
all up very well in his letter to Garnett; 

(1) The Life and Letters of John Galsworthy 

K.V.Marrot, Heinemann. London, 1935. 169 

(2) Life and Letters of John Galsworthy, Marrot. 171. 




. 











. 





























. 





-51 


"Yo'y and your wife sympathize too much with the 
lovers, or rather you don’t sympathize enough with 
them, for I repeat once more that your ending would 
leave the Fosytes victorious with the reader (general 
reader); my way leaves the lovers victorious even 
with them, for it is only the beaten who are victor¬ 
ious. ”(1) The powerful and hitter satire of the 
sanctity of the hearth preserved, would almost serve 
as an illustration for Meredith’s strongest words on 
the subject; 

’’The weak may be vsredded, they cannot be married 
to Injustice. And if we have the world for the butt¬ 
ress of Injustice, then is Nature the flaring rebel; 
there is no fixed order possible. Laws are the nec¬ 
essary instruments of the majority; but when they 
grind the sane human being to dust for their mainten¬ 
ance, their enthronement is the rule of the savage’s 
old deity, sniffing blood sacrifice. There cannot be 
based society upon such conditions. An immolation 
of thenaturally constituted individual arrests the 
expansion to which we step; decivilizes more, and is 
more impious to the god in man than temporary revelries 
of a license that Nature soon checks."(2) 

(1) Life and Letters of John G-alsworthy, Marrot. 171. 

(2) Lord Ormont and Eis Aminta. George Meredith. 









































. 


















- 






52 


Chapter 3 
CHARACTERIZATION 

By quoting contemporary criticism it would he a 
fairly simple matter to justify the rather facile 
statement that Dickens’ characters are types, Meredith’s 
characters are symbols, and Galsworthy’s characters 
are persons. Conversely it would he possible to prove, 
in the same manner, that Dickens’ people are great, 
Meredith’s people achieve greatness, and Galsworthy’s 
people have greatness thrust upon them. But any attempt 
to draw parallels in such a manner will result in erron¬ 
eous or prejudiced appraisal. Every author exhibits 
certain strengths and certain weaknesses in his delin¬ 
eation of character. Dickens is not uniformly great. 

He succeeds best in presenting his great caricatures. 
Meredith succeeds best in presenting his gentlemen and 
his women, Galsworthy in depicting the middle class. 

y' 

Mauois defines a Dickens’ character as ’’all of one 

a 

piece, entirely good or entirely bad; it does not con¬ 
tain within itself those disturbing mixtures, which, 
in real people, make evil intentions sometimes pervade 
the spirit of the novelist, or fine feelings flash 
through the soul of an actual criminal. In Dickens one 





















. 





































































53 


is a saint or a monster. Circumstances, education, 
development of events play no part. ,T (l) 

2 

11 It is hy outward signs,” says Stefan Sweig, 

"that Dickens makes the individuality of a character 
recognizable. He gives the schoolmaster Creakle a 
a very deep spluttering voice, and that suffices to 
give an idea of the horror which the children will 
have of the man. His Uriah Heap has hands that are 
perpetually cold and clammy."(2$ 

"It can he said of Dickens’ figures that they 
are made of wood$ and mounted on wheels, and ^ust 
as the wooden horse is within range of a child’s 
emotions and imaginative reach, so the Dickensian 
dummies, according to feewes, are within the range 
of the average reader."(3) 

The summary of hostile criticism is well expressed 
in the three quotations, Dickens, it is maintained, 
could only draw good or had people, and he distin¬ 
guished them hy exaggerating external characteristics, 
and therefore nohody could mistake them for anyone 
hut themselves, and the most ordinary people could 

(1) Dickens. Andre Maurois. John Lane, 1934. 121. 

(2) Ihid. Quote. 

(3) Ihid. 121. 




























. 











. 

. 

















. 





. 

























54 


understand them. 

Chesterton has taken up the defence of the great 
Dickensian characters with such vigor and "brilliance 
that little remains to "be said on their side, and the 
hostile critics are left to meditate on the derisive 
sentence; "A man looking at a hippopotamus may sometimes 
"be tempted to regard a hippopotamus as an enormous 
mistake; but he is also bound to confess that a fort¬ 
unate inferiority prevents him personally from making- 
such mistakes. " (1) 

Agreeing that we are not in a position to create 
either a hippopotamus or a Major Bagstock, we are 
still capable of appreciating Mr. Toote, and being 
bored with Mr. Dombey. 

The truth of the matter is, that one cannot gener¬ 
alize about Dickens; the multiplicity of his characters 
will always afford evidence to contradict any dogmatic 
assertion about them. Maurois 1 2 statement, that a 
Dickens’ character is either entirely good or entirely 
bad is only superficially true. 

’’Carker is a spirited charcoal sketch. ”(2) He is 
the dyed-in-the-wool villain of melodrama, standardized, 

(1) Charles Dickens, G.K.Chesterton, Methuen, 1940. 173. 

(2) Ibiti 132. 























■ 














‘ 




























55 


simplified, and incredible. But could one classify 
Edith Dombey as entirely good or entirely bad? She 
is what Maurois denies a Dickens 1 character can be; 
she is a disturbing mixture of good and evil emotions, 
and if we are aware of anything in Edith 1 s character, 
it is the conflict going on within her of these 
opposing forces. Granted that pride is the fault of 
angels, it is nevertheless as evil an emotion in the 
bosom of Edith as in the heart of Dombey. Yet Edith 1 s 
devotion to Florence is a beautiful and selfless one. 

Again we refer to the generalization already quoted, 
that "circumstances, education, development of events 
play no part" in the making of character. What of 
Alice and the Charitable Grinder? Did circumstances 
play no part in developing them? Granted that Dombey* s 
conversion is unconvincing, was it nevertheless not 
the result of a certain strange development of events 
climaxed by the loss of his fortune? 

The truth of the matter is that Dickens lacked the 
ability to show psychologically the development of 
character, but he did not overlook it. He is simply 
unsuccessful when he endeavors to show such development. 
Yet he takes the effect of environment on character 
for granted. It is one of the burning reasons for his 











■ 
























. 











.. c ' . ' ■ - ' *' i, ' 








- 











. . . . 
















, . 


56 


advocacy of social reform; correcting the evils of the 
slums, the educational system, the workhouses. Of the 
great majority of Dickens' characters, and particularly 
the more memorable ones, it is true that they remain 
the same from first to last. Is it not one reason for 
their being memorable? It is a part of their charm 
that we are never in a quandary as to whether we will 
recognize them when we meet them again. 

Dickens tells of an experience at Harrogate. 

"There was a remarkably good fellow of thirty or so 
who found something so very ludicrous in Toots that 
he could not compose himself at all, but laughed 
until he sat wiping his eyes with his handkerchief, 
and whenever he felt Toots coming again, he began to 
laugh and wipe his eyes afresh." In relating this 
incident, Crothers adds; 'whenever he felt Toots coming 
on again’ - there you have the philosophy of the whole 
matter. The young fellow found Toots amusing when he 
first laid eyes on him. He wanted to see him again, 
and it must be always the same Toots."(1) 

(1) Century, Feb. 1912. The Obviousness of Dickens. 

(S.M.Crothers) 







. 

. 






. f.. ■ - ■ ■ 








•" ■ ■ ' 

- . ' 




. 



■ 





















57 


When Dickens portrays T, the same Toots” he i s always 
on safe ground, hut whenever he begins to tamper with 
his characters, to "develop” or metamorphose them, as 
he does with Mr. Dombey, he usually fails. It is one 
weakness in Dickens that Chesterton will freely admit; 
"When it was objected that the pride of old Paul Dombey 
breaks as abruptly as a stick, he tried to make out 
that there had been an absorbing psychological struggle 
going on in that gentleman all the time, which the reader 
was too stupid to perceive. Which is, I am afraid, 
rubbish.”(1) 

Another reason for the failure of Mr. Dombey to be 
convincing as a person, is Dickens 7 lack of familiarity 
with financiers as a class. vV He approached the world 
of practical finance as an uninformed outsider. What 
he would have made of his bankers, his promoters, his 
merchants, if his humor could have played as naturally 
about them as it did around his young men in search of 
a career, his first floor boarders, his country gentle¬ 
men, his lawyers, his strolling actors, his impecunious 
debtors, his police sergeants, and his still more numer¬ 
ous gentlemen of no visible occupation, can only be 
eonj ectured. 


(1) Chesterton. Charles Dickens. 66. 








































































58 


"In Dombey and Son, he tried to draw a great city 
merchant. But Mr. Dombey.... is depicted exactly as 
Dickens in his Old Balley reporter days would undoubt¬ 
edly have depicted him. The extremely wooden figure 
which he presents as the head of Dombey and Son was 
thus portrayed, no doubt, partly because old City 
merchants seemed like that to the Bohemian eye of 
Dickens (he was quite as unconvincing with his lay 
figures of noblemen) but partly because it was diff¬ 
icult for him to imagine men in any such occupation, 
endowed with the ordinary feelings and emotions. 

Those were reserved for the retail trade - the drapers, 
the ship's chandlers, the instrument-makers, and the 
undertakers, whose humorous side was visible at a 
glance. 

"The feeling of relief with which the novelist 
leaves Mr. Dombey in his office to go home with Dombey 1 s 
far more amusing clerk, is unmistakeable. Dickens 
cannot resist a laugh at his own picture when he makes 
Mr. Toot f s pugilistic friend, the Game Chicken, observe 
of Mr. Dombey that "he T s as stiff a cove as ever he see, 
but that it is within the resources of Science to 
double him up with one blow in the waistcoat."(1) 

(1) The Nation. Feb.8,1912. The Business World as 

Dickens Drew It. (Unsigned). 























. 



































































59 


Dickens has "been compared unfavorably with Meredith 
in this matter of drawing gentlemen. Meredith has a 
surer touch and a greater skill in his portraits of 
the upper classes. Dombey is proud, but he is proud 
of being a London merchant. Meredith met wealthy men 
who were proud of other things than wealth, proud of 
rising in the social scale, fatuously proud of a little 
learning, as Sir Willoughby, proud of their ability to 
bestow patronage, proud of their condescension. He so 
thoroughly understood what real gentlemen were, that 
he could draw the genuine article as well as the imit¬ 
ation. It was the common people that Dickens knew 
intimately and that he could draw with inimitable skill. 
His joy, as Santayana aptly phrases it, was "in the 
universal human anonymity," and he found his sense of 
happy freedom in littleness.(1) 

"There appears to be an unbridgeable gulf between 
one who could not describe a gentleman and one who was 
a perfect delineator of gentlefolk...But this differ¬ 
ence shows in a way their similarity for Meredith is 
supplementary to Dickens, filling in the lacunae in 
his work. Meredith is greatest where Dickens fails or 
partly fails, and Dickens is at his best where Meredith 
is weakest."(2) 

(1) Dial. Hov.1921. Dickens. Santayana. 

(2) Living Age. May 25,1918. Dickens and Meredith. 

(MdHulty). 


i : GU ■ , B'- 

■ 

- ■ ’ll ' .. . 













. 






. ' - ‘ 




. 


. 

. 







60 


Mid-Victorian England gave both novelists material 
for their upper middle class characters in the rise of 
the manufacturing classes to wealth; the social changes 
produced by the prosperity of a new set of people gave 
them the literary grist for their mill. They both 
level their criticism against the same kind of people, 
but the criticism is different. Meredith charged that 
they are brainless. Dickens charged that they are 
heartless..Meredith made them lose themselves. Dickens 
made them lose their money. 

The criticism that Dickens made individuality of 
character recognizable by outward signs is a criticism 
that can with equal justice be levelled against any 
author who lays claim to artistic methods. Galsworthy 
says of his method of character portrayal that he delib¬ 
erately chose to make his secondary characters objective,(1) 
This is a legitimate convention, if the novel is to con¬ 
vey the impression of life. We do not know even our 
intimate friends in the subjective way that we know the 
principal figures of a novel. The majority of people 
we see as two dimensional figures, known to us by a gesture , 
a mannerism, a way of walking. Dickens makes us acquaint¬ 
ed with his people by exaggerating some trait we are fam¬ 
iliar with in ourselves or others. ’’There are persons 


(1) Life and Letters of John Galsworthy. H.V.Marrot. 182. 









~ 

' 






. 






















. 


























61 


who are like umbrellas, very useful but liable to be 
forgotten. The memory is an infirm faculty and must 
be humored. It often clings to trifles."(1) 

That Dickens made his people the familiar friends 
of the mass of readers, is, in the final analysis, the 
only justification they need. Of their obviousness, 
or rather their lack of subtlety, Crothers has this 
to say, ,T He deals with characters and situations that 
are obvious, at least they are obvious after he deals 
with them. The perception of the obvious is a common¬ 
place achievement; the creation of the obvious and 
the making it interesting, is the work of genius. TT (2) 
Carker is obvious, he is simplified villainy. 

His catlike sleekness and his gleaming teeth are as 
obvious as any villain 1 s of melodrama. The charact¬ 
eristic that fixes him in our minds indelibly is that 
toothsome smile that is constantly curling the corners 
of his mouth. It is a memorable smile; "A cat or a 
monkey, or a hyena, or a death’s head, could not have 
shown the Captain more teeth at one time than Mr. Carker 
showed him at this period of their interview. ,T (3) 

(1) Century Magazine. Feb,1912. The Obviousness of 

Dickens. (S.M.Crothers). 

(2) Ibid. 

(3) Dombey and Son. 235. 















































































62 


One could hardly forget a man that smiles like that. 
Rob cannot help staring wildly at the gentleman with 
so many white teeth when that gentleman is choking 
him.’’(l) It is a smile that confuses Old Sol and 
makes him vaguely uncomfortable.(2) One is willing 
to believe that all this is possible of a smile, but 
when we are informed that "more affable and pleasant 
yet, and humming his song until his many teeth 
vibrated to it, Mr. Carker picked his way along.”(3) 
we are brought up with a jerk of astonishment at this 
ultimate accomplishment of teeth’. From henceforth 
it is utterly impossible for us to forget that smile. 
We are as familiar with it as Old Sol and Captain 
Cuttle and the Charitable Grinder. It is thus that 
Dickens plays upon the obvious, even to the point 
of ludicrous exaggeration, and impresses it indelibly 
upon the mind. 

Some critics seem to have misunderstood Dickens’ 
purpose and method altogether, when they consider 
the figure of Carker. Hood says of him; ’’Carker is 
thinking more of his spite against Dombey than of his 

(1) Dombey and Son. 300. 

(2) Ibid. 304. 

(3) Ibid. 309. 















■ 






































; 


63 


passion for Edith, and Carker 1 s gleaming teeth are 
brought into greater prominence than his love." (1) 

It is not Dickens’ purpose to show Carker as a 
man capable of great passion, or for that matter, 
capable of love at all. Such a figure in the plot 

o o J 

would be an an^mply. He fulfils the purpose for 
which he is created admirably well. For the purposes 
of the plot Dombey must be taught a very severe lesson 
It is immaterial why Carker hates Dombey so much; he 
has something of the motiveless malignity of an Iago; 
but it is material to the plot that Dombey suffer 
humiliation, and what greater humiliation could a 
man of his character be subjected to than the elope¬ 
ment of his business manager with his wife? Had 
Carker been a man of Bosinney’s type, a man capable 
of arousing the warmth of passion in Edith, a man 
capable of intensity of feeling, capable of suffering, 
yet with courage enough to take her out of her unhappy 
situation - what would have happened to the carefully 
shaped plot devised to give no offence to Mrs. G-rundy? 
It is clear that Dickens had no such intention in mind 
Edith’s denunciation of Carker, when he is hoist by 

(1) Living Age. Jan.1,1916. Charles Dickens and Love. 

(A.Hood). 






















/; ■ 









































. 






















































64 


his own petard, so to speak, preserves, and is intended 
to preserve for her the admiration of the reader. 

It is not, therefore, that Dickens attempted to draw 
"illicit love TT and failed. He sees only in unlawful 
passion the vice and cunning of the seducer and the 
misery and remorse of the victim. 

Carker meets a horrible death in the chapter entitled 
"Retribution". There is something of the Forsyte in 
Dickens. Carker has endangered both the "pocket and 
the hearth" of Mr. Dombey, and it is fitting that 
Providence should take note of the enormity of the 
crime. Young Jolyon’s reflection on the typical 
Forsyte attitude towards Bosinney’s death is purely 
satirical; "Concerning the cause of this death - his 
family would doubtless reject with vigor the suspicion 
of suicide, which was so compromising’. They would 
take it as an accident, a stroke of fate. In their 
hearts they would even feel it an intervention of 
Providence, a retribution, had not Bosinney endangered 
their two most priceless possessions, the pocket and 
the hearth?"(1) 

Dickens uses Carker’s death to show the crushing effect 


(1) Forsyte Saga. 369. 



































. 













































65 


of sin on the lives of men. Galsworthy uses Bosinney's 
death to show the crushing effect of property on the 
lives of men. Carker is a sinner; Bosinney is more 
sinned against than sinning. Bosinney loses his life, 
but it is the Forsytes who lose their souls. 

"Dickens 1 2 3 men characters are far superior to his 
women. With Meredith the reverse is true."(l) 

Maurois suggests a reason for the weakness of the 
Dickens 1 woman. "One feels that in his young days 
Dickens knew only girls of a rather common order, 
and that later on he never took the trouble to adjust 
the picture he■had thus formed."(2) Just as the 
failure of Dombey was largely owing to his lack of 
familiarity with financiers, so his failure with his 
women characters can be attributed to the fact that 
his acquaintance with women was not fortunate. Yet 
to say that Dickens could not draw a woman, or to 
sum up his feminine characters as "all simpering dolls 
or gnarled grotesques" is hardly true. Of the latter 
type we certainly have a good many examples. There 
is Mrs. Pipchin the ogress child-queller, Mrs. Skewton, 

(1) Living Age. May 25, 1918. Dickens and Meredith. 

(J.H.McNulty). 

(2) Charles Dickens. Maurois. 123. 

(3) Lippineott. Feb.1912. Dickens and Women. 

(H.Snowden Ward Quote). 


. 























. 





















* 





. 











66 


that "faded Cleopatra", and the wholly pathetic Miss 
Tox. Yet though we might concede something of the 
"simpering doll" to be recognizable in Florence, or 
at any rate the "doll", we still would have Edith 
Dombey and Susan Nipper escaping any such arbitrary 
classification. 

Edith Dombey is a character that-'both Dickens’ 
merits and deficiencies as a delineator of women. 

First we may contrast Edith with the emancipated 
women of Meredith. Edith, unfortunately, lived 
before the days of women 1 s emancipation, intellectual, 
economic, and moral. "Y/e have also to consider," 
says Ada Shurmer in her article on ’The Women of 
Dickens’, in the times in which Dickens wrote, mat¬ 
rimony was the only career open to women. In those 
days, girls were often sold to the highest bidder by 
matchmaking mamas and if they did not manage to secure 
a man or even an apology for one, they were labelled 

useless 

as more or loss' 1 lumber and relegated to the top shelf. "(1) 
Dickens has portrayed in Edith a type of woman 
very common in his day. She is the girl whose educa¬ 
tion and accomplishments and appearance have all been 

(1) Living Age. March £7, 1920. The Women of Dickens. 

(Ada Shurmer). 


















. 

« *>i . - ' - : 0: J 38^ : ' 


. • : 






.... <r : ~~ rf 









. 

. ' 




■ 





• 






■ 















, 






















66 


studied with the one end in view of securing for her 
a successful marriage. Mrs. Skewton is the same type 
of matchmaking mama as Jane Austen 1 s Mrs, Bennett, 
although in Dickens' hands she becomes a caricature. 
TCdith has no illusions as to the nature of the bar¬ 
gain she is striking with Mr. Dombey. "He sees me 
at the auction and thinks he vail buy me,” says Edith 
to her mother, speaking of Dombey. "When he came to 
view me - perhaps to bid - he required to see the roll 
of my accomplishments. When he would have me show 
one of them, to justify his purchase to his man, I 
require of him which one he demands, and I exhibit it. 

I will do no more. He makes the purchase of his own 
free will, and with his own sense of its worth, and 
the power of his money; and I hope it may never dis¬ 
appoint him."(l) 

One feels Dickens is fully aware of the plight of 
such women as Edith, and that the bitterness she feels 
in her humiliating position is one with which he sym¬ 
pathizes. That the drawing of Edith is propaganda 
for the improvement of the position of women in society 
can hardly be asserted. But it is a. denunciation of 


(1) Dombey and Son. 388. 











, 




. 

































67 


the type of mother represented by Mrs. Skewton.(l) 
However, it is impossible to question the realism 
with which Dickens presents the problem of the un¬ 
endowed and marriageable young women. "I was a 
woman - artful, designing, mercenary, laying snares 
for men - before I knew myself, or you, or even 
understood the base and wretched aim of every new 
display I learnt.”(2) 

Meredith oh The Egoist presents no such problem, 
unless one infers a similarity between Edith and the 
faded and disillusioned Laetitia, who is equally 
candid in declaring that her bargain with Sii* Will¬ 
oughby is a mercenary one.(3) Galsworthy places 
Irene in a similar position to that of Edith, in 
that Soames, like Dombey, recognizes in her a highly 
desirable piece of property, and determines to buy her 
"His keen scent for the commercial side of family life 
soon told him that Irene cost her step-mother more 
than the fifty pounds she brought her; it also told 
him that Mrs. Heron, a woman yet in the prime of life, 
desired to be married again. The strange ripening 

(1) Dombey and Son. 387. 

(2) Ibid. 388. 

(3) The.Egoist. 516. 















































• 



























68 


beauty of her step-daughter stood in the way of this 
desirable consummation. And Soames, in his stealthy 
tenacity, laid his plans.")!) 

Having shown clearly that Edith has been brought 
up for no other purpose than to make a successful 
marriage, to rather illogically condemns her for 
accepting the fate that she could hardly avoid.(2) 

Yet it is not so much a condemnation as a pitying 
presentment of what the future holds for such as 
Edith. She is the unfortunate victim of circumstances 
beyond her control, or if within her control, her 
training has inadequately equipped her to rise sup¬ 
erior to them. Edith does take the line of least 
resistance in her acceptance of Dombey, and therein 
lies her weakness, her condemnation. Edith has some¬ 
thing of the same passivity in the face of circum¬ 
stances as Irene, and here she is in striking contrast 
with Clara Middleton. 

Passivity is a quality not characteristic of the 
Meredithian woman. As William Lyon Phelps put it, 
"Meredith believed that men and women are not passive 

(1) Forsyte Saga. 130. 

(2) Dombey and Son. 382. 




- 


. 



. 

, 







. 




. 






■ . 

■ 

































69 


instruments of Fate; he thought that men and women 
can conquer heredity, environment, yes, fate itself; 
his stout-hearted heroes and heroines are at all 
times masters of their own destiny. ’The fault, dear 
Brutus, is not in our stars, hut in ourselves, that 
we are underlings.'”(1) 

Edith Dombey does eventually rebel, and take 
matters into her own hands. Yet she remains the 
victim of her environment. Her separation from Dombey 
does not bring her freedom and happiness. She lives 
ever afterward in a kind of twilight of the author’s 
commiseration. In breaking with convention, and fol¬ 
lowing the dictates of her emotions, she places her¬ 
self even outside the pale of Florence’s friendship.( 2 ) 
Dickens’ attitude towards a woman who offends the 
proprieties even to the limited extent that Edith has 
offended them, is clearly shown. He makes Edith her¬ 
self conscious of an overwhelming sense of her own 
unworthiness to be accepted on equal terms with Florence, 
the true Dickensian heroine. She kneels before Florence 


(1) Bookman. April, 1916. Advance of the English Hovel. 

(William Lyon Phelps). 

(2) Dombey and Son. 854. 




















































70 


and cries; "Guilty of much, Guilty of that which sets 
a waste between us evermore. Guilty of what must sep¬ 
arate me, through the whole remainder of my life, from 
purity and innocense - from you, of all the earth."(1) 
Dickens’ attitude towards one who breaks the con- 
ventions, who offends the "reprehensible respectibility rf 
of the mid-Victorian followers of Mrs. Grundy^ i s very 
apparent. Even the generous Florence behaves towards 
Edith in an execrable fashion, considering the love 
and devotion her stepmother has given her. That Dickens 
should show Florence devoted to her father, who had 
never shown her any natural affection, and yet draw 
away from the woman, who befriended and loved her, who 
in fact actually sacrificed reputation for her sake, 
seems almost inexcusable in an author whose kindliness 
to'eards his characters is so evident in most cases. It 
is sufficient comment on the Christian charity of his 
readers that he felt compelled to leave an unbridgeable 
gulf between Edith and Florence. In contrast the attitude 
of the Forsyte woman is almost benignant. It is June 
who holds out her hand to Irene, and Irene who refuses it.( 2 ) 

(1) Dombey and Son. 836. 

(2) Forsyte Saga. 351. 


















. 














' 










. r 













71 


It could hardly be said of Dickens what has been 
said of Meredith; "Not only did Meredith glorify the 
instincts of the heart at the expense of law and order, 
he glorified the liberty of the individual above all 
discipline."(1) 

Dickens does, however, intentially preserve a cer- 

A 

tain amount of sympathy for Edith throughout. Eer self¬ 
less devotion to Florence, her willingness to sacrifice 
for the sake of the girl's peace, her own interest (2) 
are expressions of an inherent fineness in her nature 
that Dickens does not permit her scorn and stormy 
moods to conceal. 

It is in her rejection of Carker, however, that 
Dickens attempts to prove her essential integrity and 
nobility of spirit.(3) Even here Dickens puts words 
of self condemnation in her mouth. It is not because 
she wishes tp preserve her honor that she behaves as 
she does, but because she wishes revenge on both her 
persecutors.(4) Dickens intends us to feel that in 
this she is very wrong, that her harsh and unforgiving 

(1) Bookman, April, 1916. Advance of the English Novel. 

(William Lyon Phelps). 

(2) Dombey and Son. 635. 

(3) Ibid. 733. 

(4) Ibid. 734. 










_ 








. : . 






’ 


















. 








moods have brought much of her trouble upon her. He 
suggests that had she been softer, more easily moved, 
in other words, more "womanly”, she would have been 
happier in her fate.(l) He makes Edith 1 2 3 s hardness a 
part of her character. He does not penetrate to the 
psychological truth, though he depicts it objectively, 

yv\ 

that any woman, even the "soft" wo K aia of Irene’s type, 

will be hard to the man she hates.(2) 

In leaving her in obscurity he makes her do penance 

<x 

for her sins. But her care of Cousin Feelix and her 
devotion to him redeems her to a certain extent. 
Dickens’ attitude towards Edith is characteristic of 
his attitude to his women characters in general. It 
is an attitude of chivalry, never the detached apprais- 
ment we find in Meredith. It is the attitude that is 
most acceptable to the general reader; "Dickens was 
regarding woman from a man’s point of view, and argue 
as much as we like we can never get away from the fact 
that in all honorable men there is a chivalry towards 
the weaker sex."(3) 

Dickens’ chief reason for drawing Edith as he did, 

(1) Dombey and Son. 836. 

(2) Life and Letters of John Galsworthy. Marrot. 170. 

(3) Living Age. June 20, 1908. Dickens Women Characters 

("Old Fleet") 









, 














































73 


and making her intrigue with Carker a very pallid 
one, has already been stated. He was writing to 
please his public. It has been argued that one 
reason for Dickens 1 failure to depict romantic love 
was a certain deficiency within himself. Nowhere 
in Dickens do we find the story of a great passion. 
Dickens could not draw a great woman, capable of 
greatly loving. According to some critics, such 
a figure would be completely out of place among his 
feminine figures. A.Hood says on this subject; 

"A completely adorable woman would be as astonishing 
among Dickens’ women as Venus de Milo in her statute’s 
bulk at a modern tea party, towering above all the 
timid, tender, roguish little girls Dickens loved.(1) 
It is difficult to agree with this statement. 

If Dickens had placed his art above his wish for 
approbation, it is possible that in the character of 
Edith he might have created such a woman. 


(1) Living Age. Jan.l, 1906. Charles Dickens and Love. 

(A.Hood) . 





























































74 


It has been aptly said that Meredith is the Dickens 
of the drawing room and Dickens is the. Meredith of 
the Man-in-the-Street. Meredith could have drawn 
Mr. Domhey with considerably more success than Dickens, 
and on the other hand Dickens would have delighted in 
making a memorable character of Flitch. 

Where Dickens 1 2 characters have been criticised for 
being too simplified, Meredith’s might be criticised 
for being too complex. 

Sir Willoughby has so many aspects that he resembles 
the elephant that perplexed the six wise men of Hindus¬ 
tan. Stevenson saw in Sir Willoughby a serviceable 
exposure of himself.(1) A later critic sees in him 
an exaggerated figure in a morality play, ’’Meredith 
did what Dickens never did. He wrote a morality; 
pure and stern satiric allegory for the lashing of one 
special vice. The Hgoist is not a man, he is a sin. 
There is no character in Dickens which is symbolic 
and moral in that extreme degree. Micawber is not 
Improvidence; Sikes is not Brutality, in the utterly 
naked and abstract sense in which Sir Willoughby is 
Selfishness.”(2) 

(1) George Meredith. Hammerton. 221. 

(2) Living Age. Sep. 29, 1906. Moral Philosophy of 

Meredith, (unsigned). 












. 





















































. 
























75 


It is this symbolism which is implicit in the 
drawing of Sir Willoughby that makes him difficult 
to visualize as a person, in the sense that Soames 
is a person. But he is too skillfully and completely 
drawn to be a stereotyped figure like Dombey. To 
study Meredith’s Sir Willoughby in all his glory 
would require a second book on egoism. It is possible, 
however, to note certain important aspects of Meredith’s 
conception of him, and his method of presenting him to 
the reader. 

Meredith makes his characters reveal themselves 
to us through incident and dialogue. We are always 
conscious, however, of Meredith close at hand, observing 
his people and talking about them. Galsworthy chooses 
incident in much the same way as Meredith, with this 
difference, that the incidents do not appear advent¬ 
itious but actual. Galsworthy makes no effort to 
analyse his people with the thoroughness of Meredith, 
but his people are more easily recognized by us because 
of their mediocrity. Meredith’s people are all very 
complex and brilliant. Where Meredith overemphasizes 
the scintillating wit and rapier like thrusts of repartee 
Galsworthy rather overworks the ’’colloquial inexpressive¬ 
ness” of his characters.(1) Dickens makes his people 


(1) Living Age. April, 1933. John Galsworthy.(D.McCarthy) 





































c. 








. 


■ ! .. ' -;.i vfi 










* 
















76 


express themselves with a fluency that would make 
Galsworthy* s characters appear stiff and taciturn 
to a degree, yet he never touches on the border line 
of the fantastic as Meredith does. On the whole it 
would be true to say that Galsworthy’s people talk 
naturally, Dickens* people talk naturally and wittily, 
and Meredith’s people talk wittily and unnaturally. 

It is, in part, the dialogue in The Egoist that makes 
the characters appear so difficult to picture clearly. 

One can never recognize a character infallibly by a 
trick of speech or turn of phrase, as we can in Dickens. 
And the amazing articulateness of all the characters is 
extremely confusing. 

In addition to his characters talking too much, 
Meredith himself talks too much. We are always con¬ 
scious of the author’s cleverness and at times he talks 
so much about his people that he talks them out of 
favor with us. For instance, he wishes to impress 
the reader with the fact that Sir Willoughby is extremely 
personable. Mrs. Mountstuart’ s ’’quiet little touch of 
nature;’You see he has a leg’”, is to Meredith the 
significant trifle in which is embedded the meaning 
of the whole matter. But with all his amplification 





















































. ■ ;> ■. 
■ 


















77 


of tfie significance and aptness and audacity, and 
seductive implications, we are not persuaded that 
Sir Willoughby is more attractive than we know him 
to "be from his conversation. Meredith can tell us, 

"but not convince us, that here is a Rochester, 

Buckingham, Dorset, or Suckling. All the ribands 
and love-knots of the Merrie Court of Charles the 
Second could not give Willoughby the grace incarnate 
of an English cavalier (1) after we have heard him 
talk, and Meredith talk about him, through the first 
hundred pages of the novel. We are wearied with 
accolades of literary admiration, and do not find 
him attractive at all. That is the weakness of 
Meredith’s delineation of character. His strength, 
and it over-shadows even the greatness of this defect, 
is that he has seen into the springs of human action 
and discovered them to us. If his analysis is not 
always completely clear, it is clearly complete. 

It has been stated that, unlike Dickens, Meredith 
was so familiar with the true type of gentleman that 
he could draw both the genuine article and the imitation. 


(1) The Bgoist. 12. 




. 


• " 

















■' : M : T ; 
















' 











78 


Though Sir Willoughby is indubitably at home in the 
drawing room, and Vernon Whitford is ill at ease there, 
Meredith leaves no doubt as to the genuineness of the 
latter. Though he can draw glittering sophistication 
very ,r well it is not the carpet knight he cares for, 

"His knights-errant are plain people like Tom Redworth 
and Vernon Whitford."(1) 

In the Egoist, however, it is not the true gentle¬ 
man who is most completely drawn, but the synthetic 
product, Sir Willoughby, and Whitford is present as a 
sort of measuring stick to show where the former is 
short of stature. It is this lack of genuineness that 
is most apparent in Sir Wi1loughby^s character. He 
affects a platonic friendship for Laetitia, when it 
is merely that her devotion gratifies his egoism.(2) 

He affects an interest in science and scholarship, 
but it is his cousin and secretary, Vernon Whitford, 
who writes for him the "trenchant English supported 
by an opposite classical quotation"(3) when his half 
column appears in the Press. His love for Clara is 


(1) Living Age. June 12, 

(2) The Egoist. 33. 

(3) Ibid. 86. 


1909. Meredith, Great Writer 
of Fiction. (Unsigned). 













. 

- 




. 











' 








■ 


































79 


a sickly sentimentality reflecting his own egoism. 

His interest in young Cross-jay is that the hoy 
amuses him, hut he is not sincerely enough inter¬ 
ested in his welfare to send him away for a nautical 
education that will make a man of him. He prefers 
Cross-jay to grow up to he a parasitical appendage 
to his own magnificence.(1) 

Meredith’s way of stating that Sir Willoughby 
had affected, not natural, good manners, is so 
characteristic that it is quoted in full: 

"Willoughby*s comportment, while the showers of 
adulation drenched him, might he likened to the 
composure of Indian gods undergoing worship, hut 
unlike them he reposed upon no seat of amplitude to 
preserve him from betrayal of intoxication; he had 
to continue tripping, dancing, exactly balancing 
himself, head to right, head to left, addressing his 
idolators in phrases of perfect choiceness. This is 
only to say that it is easier to he a wooden idol 
than one in the flesh; yet Willoughby was equal to tk-e 
task. The little prince’s education teaches him that 


(1) The Egoist. 82. 





- 












































■ 











































80 


he is other than you, and by virtue of the instruction 
he receives, and also something, we know not what, 
within, he is enabled to maintain his posture where 
you would be tottering. Urchins upon whose curly 
pates gray seniors lay their heads with conventional 
encomium and speculation, look older than they are 
immediately, and Willoughby looked older than his 
years, not for want of freshness, but because he felt 
that he had to stand eminently and correctly poised.”(1) 

Neither Galsworthy nor Dickens have seen so com¬ 
pletely into the sham of a false set of social values, 
and its effect upon the character of those it would 
elevate. It is not wealth or the possession of wealth 
that Meredith satirizes, but the articiality of the 
little princes who abound in a land of heaped riches. 

The Forsytes lose their souls for worldly possess¬ 
ions; the Willoughbys lose their souls for the shadow 
of that substance; worldly prestige. 

Meredith has seen behind the pleasing surface of 
things, and uncovered the ugliness beneath. Behind 
the most innocent appearing and even praiseworthy 
actions lies the motive of selfishness. We see Sir 
?/illoughby always thinking first and foremost of 


(1) The Fgoist. 13. 









' 



















■ 































81 


himself in every relationship. Meredith has studied 
him in almost every conceivable connection. We see 
him dealing with his servants, his dependents, his 
cottagers, his circle of admirers, and above all 
we see him in relation to Clara Middleton. Always 
he attributes to himself motives of generosity and 
nobility, and always Meredith uncovers the egoism 
beneath. And as we proceed with this analysis of 
character we soon perceive that it is not only the 
selfishness of Sir Willoughby that we are beginning 
to understand, but the selfishness of humanity. 

It is not only selfishness that Meredith chastises 
in the figure of Sir ’Willoughby. It is almost imposs¬ 
ible to find a sin of human character, or a defect, 
that does not sooner or later appear, made manifest 
by the egoist’s words or actions, to be pounced upon 
with delight by the imps of the comic spirit. 

It would be possible to multiply instances, but 
one will suffice to show his method; Lieutenant 
Patterne of the Marines had tramped a good many miles 
to see Sir Willoughby, only to be handed that gentle¬ 
man’ s card on a salver, ’’Hot at home.” Willoughby 
had noted his approach and disapproved of his appearance. (1) 


(1) The Egoist. 8. 













































' 




































32 


He cannot understand why that perspicacious gentleman 
curtly declined a second invitation.(1) But his own 
memory for a trivial and perhaps unintentional 
incivility is exceedingly long. To Clara he divulges 
this interesting side of his character; "You may, Clara, 
have observed a man who passed me on the road as we 
were cantering home, without a hint of a touch to his 
hat. That man is a tenant of mine, farming six hundred 
acres, Hoppner by name; a man bound to remember that I 
have, independently of my position, obliged him frequent¬ 
ly. His lease of my ground has five years to run. I 
must say I detest the churlishness of our country pop¬ 
ulation, and where it comes across me, I chastise it."(2) 
Such illustrations in Meredith of the moat and the 
beam are almost everywhere. They are so deftly and so 
frequently done, that they may easily escape one’s 
notice until a second reading. There is hardly a line 
in Meredith, however innocent on first acquaintance, 
that does not contain some such sly thrust at human 
nature. 


(1) The Hgoist. 82. 

(2) Ibid. 85. 














' 





















. 





























































83 


It is not, however, in the portrait of the Hgoist 
himself that Meredith has done his finest piece of 
work in the volume, but in the portrait of one of his 
ideal women, Clara Middleton. 

"Your knowledge of women is almost indecent," a 
celebrated lady novelist once remarked to George 
Meredith. (1) Hammerton says of Meredith’s female 
creations;"Meredith has sought to breathe into woman 
a larger life; to claim for her qualities that are 
not typical; to prove, above all, that she is not 
dominated by sex, but is as individual as man, Hence 
his womenfolk are unique in literature, and perhaps 
in life."(2) 

Miss Flora Shaw says of Meredith’s women; "The 
most striking feature of his presentation of women 
is the frankness with which he takes them on their 
merits. He surrounds them with no halo, he wraps them 
in no mystery, but, approaching them as simply as he 
approaches man, he lays the strength and the weakness 
open before us."(3) 

Meredith understands women and sees through them 

(1) Hammerton. 231. 

(2) Hew Princeton Review. March, 1887. Meredith’s Women 

(Mora Shaw), Quoted in Hammerton. 331 

(3) Hammerton. 235. 








- m ~ 





















. 

. 










. . • ■ ■' 








84 


with almost feminine intuition, hut he sees them as 
individuals, and respects them as possessing intelligence 
and volition quite foreign to the "waxwork" sex of the 
male Egoist. He places them on no pedestal where 
their faults are unobserved. 

Miss Piggott summed up the "kinship in individuality" 
of Meredithian heroines, by saying that they have "a 
truth to self and to nature which is as the genuineness 
of metal ringing true, a splendid directness of purpose, 
strong energy of living, an absence of sentimentality, 
a craving for liberty, a quick heart capable of unbounded 
generosity and constancy, an intellect, rather keen and 
alive in present actualities, than deeply imaginative 
and creative. And these noble qualities are poured 
into a mould fit to receive them, a body planned in the 
same noble proportions. Diverse as these women are - 
and few have been more subtle than Meredith in the 
delineation of varied types of womanhood - they all 
breathe of health, grace, and suppleness in strength; 
they are all creations of Nature in a generous mood, 
requiring spaciousness; their physique is inextricably 
associated in our minds with their qualities; we cannot 
dissociate the two; and the whole is again placed 
continually in direct harmony with external Nature in 


















































' 







' 






85 


its fairest and freest manifestations.’’(1) 

Miss Piggott also makes an interesting point 
in her essay in noting that Meredith’s heroines are 
seen "best against the background of "harmonious 
natural landscape." 

"It is interesting to reflect how often the name 
of one of Meredith’s heroines will call up in our 
minds a picture which, while it is true revelation 
of her very self, owes much of essential truth to 
its setting in harmonious natural landscape." 

"Clara Middleton lures us^heads a run with young 
Cross-jay, running ’ as though a hundred little feet 
were hearing her onward, smooth as water over the lawn’, 
’so sweet is her flowing pace’." 

"Such conceptions as these," Miss Piggott cont¬ 
inues, "are indications of that love of plastic beauty, 
that delight in graceful idyllic glimpses, that imper¬ 
ative demand for perfect accord between beauty of 
spirit and beauty of form, that firm belief in the 
absolute unity of nature in man and in the world without 
him which we should expect from the author of "Love in 
the Valley." (1) 

(1) Westminster Review. Dec. 1909. George Meredith’s 

Women. (Romola Piggott). 




















































- 

























86 


It would be easy to multiply examples of the 
"plastic "beauty" in Meredith. Miss Cary, in an 
article on Meredith’s "Women", has given numerous 
examples of the author’s success in portraying his 
women hy radiant glimpses of them, moving in beauty, 
enchanting in action. That fluidity of grace of the 
actual living being is caught .with photographic 
clarity. 

"The detailed description of Clara Middleton with 
"the mouth that smiles in repose," the eyelids lifted 
slightly at the outer corners, the equable shut mouth, 
and so on, is too categorical to charm, but there is 
the style of Botticelli in the other sketch of her 
walking ’insufferably fair’ on the highway to Sir 
Willoughby’s displeasure, in a dress ’cunning to em¬ 
brace the shape and flutter loose about it like the 
spirit of a summer’s day,’ trailing her garlands, and 
moving as if she were ’driving the clouds before her’, 
a ’sight to set the woodlands dancing’"(l) 

It is perhaps this peculiar method of Meredith’s 
in rendering his women in movement, that gives the 
sense of energy we feel is inherent in them. He 
catches this energy in a single line; "Still Constantia’s 

(1) Hew York Critic. Oct. 1905. Meredith’s Heroines, 

Miss Elizabeth Luther Cary. 































































-87- 


beauty was of a kind to send away beholders aching, 

She had the glory of the racing cutter full sail on 
a winning breeze;" 

Miss Piggott draws a comparison between Shake¬ 
speare 1 s women, widely though they must differ from 
Meredith’s, owing to necessities of subject, time, 
and treatment, would yet not feel utterly astray if 
thrust into the company of the latter day sisterhood, 
but would meet with thoughts and utterances that 
would strike chords of understanding and kinship. 

"How well Portia’s frank, whole hearted surrender 
of herself to Bassanio in its generous unreserve 
which yet implies no abasement of self, no lack of 
conscious dignity, might have befitted the lips of 
Clara Middleton, nor would this ’dainty rogue in 
porcelain’ have lacked the sense of humor which 
could have turned from the serious business of the 
law court to enter with zest into the fun of teasing 
her unconscious husband.” 

"Cordelia, who cannot heave her heart into her 
mouth, whose proud candor will not even stoop to humor 
her old father’s heart, might have spoken the words; 































































































88 


’I must be myself to be of any value to you, Willough¬ 
by/ "(1) 

It is undoubtedly true that Shakespeare and Meredith 
cannot paint women who do not at times speak in the 
tones, and voice the thoughts of their great progen¬ 
itors. Shakespeare 1 s women have the nobility of mind 
and the pregnancy of utterance that are Shakespeare’s. 

We get the same feeling of the largeness of intellect 
in the women of Meredith. 

”He puts before his readers, young natures yet 
untouched by love and we watch them gradually growing, 
falling repeatedly into trouble either because wittingly 
or in ignorance they accept a makeshift in place of the 
real thing, or because they let themselves be cramped 
and bent, and do not greatly dare.” 

** Clara Middleton had only dreamed of love as one of 
the distant blessings of the mighty world, lying some¬ 
where in the world’s forests across wild seas, veiled 
encompassed with beautiful perils, a throbbing secrecy 
but too remote to quicken her bosom’s throbs.” Nature’s 
voice had not yet quickened her to a full understanding 
of the meaning of love, and in her ignorance and inexper- 

(1) Westminster Review. Dec. 1939. Meredith’s Women. 

(Romola Piggott). 


. 
































. 



















■ 






89 


ience she ’bent like a sapling 1 before the whirlwind 
wooing of Sir Willoughby. She was filled with simple 
faith and wonderment at being loved. The*gradually, 
in that respite which her true instincts have exacted 
from her too urgent lover the realization of his all- 
embracing egotism is forced upon her and she knows 
the truth of him. It is then that the struggle begins 
within her, and we follow her' step by step through the 
masses of her doubts; whether she must not passively 
submit; whether her honor does not now bind her to her 
word. Yet her exceeding truthfulness will not bind her 
to the fact that the real dishonor must be a false 
loyalty and her urgent nature insistently demands its 
liberty. And all the while she is unconsciously being 
drawn towards the man who is her fitting mate, soul is 
crying out to kindred soul, though for her their voices 
are almost drowned in the hideous clamor of the fight 
she is waging.”(1) 

Meredith makes very clear that it is only in the 
process of achieving self understanding that a woman 
achieves maturity both of heart and intellect. It is 
Clara 1 s self searching honesty and her courage 
to pursue the course that her honesty instructs her 

(1) Westminster Review, Dec. 1909. Meredith 1 s Women. 

(Romola Piggott). 


















. 


































90 


to follow, that she develops the essential fineness 
of spirit we most admire in her. 

Unlike Meredith, Dickens surrounds his good women 
with a halo; Galsworthy wraps them in mystery. In 
In contrast to Clara, Edith lacks "truth to self" because 
her own mind is in league with social convention and 
condemns her; Irene lacks "truth to nature" because she 
is rather the incarnation of Beauty than a real woman. 

In Edith and Irene, we miss that sense of "directness 
of purpose and strong energy of living." Both Edith 
and Clara have a heart capable of unbounded generosity 
and constancy, but we are not aware of any of Clara 1 s 
"deeply imaginative intellect" in Edith. If Galsworthy 
ever achieves any similarity to Shakespeare in his 
drawing o$ a woman, it is in his ability to produce 
effect through economy in drawing. Irene, like Cordelia, 
has hardly a speaking part, yet she influences the lives 
of all around her. But Galsworthy gives to Irene none 
of that largeness of intellect that is characteristic 
of the Meredithian and Shakespearean woman. 

Again the objective rendering of the women in each 
case is different. Clara is usually rendered in movement, 
Edith in mood, Irene in repose. 







. 




. 












































91 


The authors’ attitude to their heroines may be 
summed up by saying that the three writers admire 

w ‘.th 

courage in their women to break the convention, 
but Galsworthy and Meredith advocate it; Dickens 
does not. 

The three writers agree that ’’Society has her laws 
and great is the danger for woman when she breaks 
those bounds, lest in such a doubtful position she 
lose her healthy outlook on the world around her, 
and a right and honest estimate of her own feelings. ”(1) 
But Dickens stops here and goes no further than to 
sound the warning. Meredith and Galsworthy go further; 
’’love is a madness having heaven’s wisdom init - a 
spark. But even when it is driving us on the breakers, 
call it love and be not unworthy of it; hold to it^. ”(2) 
’’The sin that will inevitably avenge itself on 
the perpetrators is the sin against the wise call of 
Nature; her voice will of a surety make itself heard 
whenever the ear is open to her call, neither perverted 
by the voice of artifice and convention nor wilfully 
deaf to her dictates.”^ 

(1) Westminster Review. Dec. 1909. Meredith’s Women. 

(Romola Piggott). 


(2) Ibid. 




































































92 


It might be said that Dickens and Meredith had 
this in common; the vividness with which they saw 
life, and the gusto with which they depicted it, 

What William Lyon Phelps says of Meredith’s people 
is equally true of Dickens’. "Meredith’s men and 
women delight in violent exercise, eat capacious 
meals, and rejoice in old wine; they find the world 
jovial, and add to its joviality.”(1) 

Yet vivid as was Meredith’s sense of life, his 
rendering of it was always in indirect terms. It 
is not that the men and women in Meredith are arti¬ 
ficial in the sense that Dombey is artificial; he saw 
not a single aspect of life and transcribed it for 
us; he saw every aspect, and in the multiplicity of 
the facets he revealed to us, the general outlines 
of the figures sometimes become blurred. With Meredith 
it is not seeing too little, as in the case of Dickens 
and Dombey, it is seeing too much. Another reason 
for that feeling of living in a fictitious world, a 
world at least removed from common-place reality is the 
setting which he chooses for his action; 

”If real life enacts itself in Meredith’s novels 

(1) Bookman, April, 1916. Advance of the English Novel. 

(William Lyon Phelps). 





















. 


















93 


upon a plane of unreality, it must "be remembered that 
a peculiarly heightened and concentrated effect was 
thereby obtainable. Meredith singled out certain 
qualities - courage, spirit, pride, sentimentalism, 
and threw them into the strongest relief. He did much 
more than record them, he raised their power, so to 
say, by intensifying their setting. The level of 
ordinary life was much too low for the strongly sym¬ 
bolic parts his heroes and heroines had to play. TT My 
people are actual, yet uncommon”, he himself pointed 
out. 

"High comedy cannot be rendered in terms of our 
daily intercourse; it requires isolation, a swept 
stage, an artificial disposition of lights. The frame¬ 
work which for Meredith gave the required relief was 
florid and artificial; in it his characters could not 
be merely themselves; they v/ould be striking and 
exceptionally themselves. n (1) 

Whether or not we agree that this artificial 
setting enables the characters to be more themselves, 
we will agree that it has a tendency to heighten the 

(1) Living Age. Feb.26, 1910. George Meredith 

(Percy Lubbock). 








■ 






' 




















. 

































94 


effect of Meredith’s obscurity. That he chose a 
consistency of tone and the right artistic notation 
for the theme selected is undoubtedly true, but it 
is also true that he shows an indifference to the 
background against which his people move. In the 
"Egoist, with its entirely simple scheme of time and 
place, the scene never changes after the opening 
chapters and yet Patterne Hall remains to the end 
more or less of an abstraction. ’’Meredith felt the 
relation of his figures to the social picture more 
acutely than to the background of the moment.”(1) 

It is essential to understand this element ih Meredith’s 
character drawing, because the unreality one sometimes 
feels in his people may be partly attributable to the 
rather rarefied atmosphere in which they live. 

It has been shown that Meredith’s satire was directed 
not only at man’s inherent qualities but those acquired 
as the result of environment. The environment productive 
of a false set of social values is productive of those 
defects in character which in turn bring about the de¬ 
cadence of society. Desmond McCarthy describes Galsworthy* s 

(1) Living Age, Feb. 26, 1910. "George Meredith” 

(Percy LubbOck). 






























































. 












' 



































95 


attitude towards his characters as that of a "severe 
and scrupulous judge,"(1) But Galsworthy sees, with 
Meredith, that his people are the products of society 
and are not entirely to hlame for being what they are; 
egoists one and all. But unlike Meredith he adopts 
a tone of pessimism. These people are not masters of 
their destiny, in a sense that, Meredith’s are, nor can 
they rise above their egoism and sentimentality if 
they choose, to a plane of purified emotions and sanity 
and reason. They are all lost souls. However much 
Galsworthy may "sugar the pill of pessimism," it is 
a bitter pellet.(2) 

Again, as McCarthy has pointed out, Galsworthy’s 
satire inwardly relents towards sympathy.(3) He could not 
mock whole-heartedly, he saw in each of these people 
however much he detested their philosophy of life, "a 
puppet in the power of great forces that cared nothing 
for family or class or creed, but moved, machine-like 
with dread processes to inscrutable ends."(4) 

Within these limitations, Galsworthy has done a very 
fine piece of work in depicting characters that are 

(1) Eiving Age.. April, 1933. John Galsworthy, by Desmond 

(2) ibid. McCarthy. 

(3) Ibid. 

(4) Forsyte Saga. 41. 


















































. 

































96 


representative of the class he understands best; the 
upper middle class. Among this gallery of portraits, 
one, of course, stands out, Soames Forsyte. But there 
are others worthy of notice. 

The grandest Forsyte figure of them all is old 
Jolyon. "Highty years of age, with his fine white hair, 
his dome-like forehead, his little dark gray eyes, 
and an immense moustache which drooped and spread 
below the level of his strong jaw, he had a patriarchal 
look. He gave an impression of superioity to the doubts 
and dislikes of smaller men. TT (l) 

The picture of Swithin is excellent. There is some¬ 
thing genial about this great fat man. In Swithin 1 2 3 4 s 
luxurious chambers, "everything betokened that love of 
beauty so deeply implanted in each family which had its 
own way to make into Society out of the more vulgar 
heart of nature."(2) "The perfect luxury of his latter 
days had embedded him like a fly in sugar."(3) We see 
Swithin inquiring into his family origin and being a 
little dubious about the value of a coat of arms with 
"three dexter buckles on a sable ground gules."(4) 

(1) Forsyte Saga. 41. 

(2) Ibid. 43. 

(3) Ibid. 43. 

(4) Ibid. 198. 















































. 










. 















. 


' 




















. 











97 


We can smile at Swithin chivalrously protecting Irene 
from gossip by intimating that in fact she is more 
gracious to him, Swithin, than to the Buccaneer - and 
rater fatuously believing his own pleasant lie.(l) 

He is the grossest but most ingenious and most harmless 
of the Forsytes. 

June Forsyte is a direct young person and has 
evidently a wealth of character in spite of her dimin¬ 
utive stature. June had remarked to Irene that feathers 
were "vulgar" and Irene, though fond of feathers, had 
left off wearing them.(2) This is one of Galsworthy 1 s 
subtle bits of characterization and such a trifle that 
it might pass unnoticed. But it reveals the soft, 
yielding, essentially feminine quality of Irene, and 
the positive and aggressive character of the Forsyte 
woman, with a stroke of the brush, June knows what she 
wants and goes after it. Once having possessed the thing 
she desires, she will not loosen her grip on her property. 

In her effort to keep the lover she feels is slipping 
away from her, she exercises her strength, her ingenuity, 
and her will. She is almost the feminine counterpart 


(1) Forsyte Saga. 199. 





















. 






































98 


of Soames in this respect. Galsworthy uses her not 
only as a contrast to Irene, and a parallel figure 
to that of Soames, hut to accentuate the main problem. 

She is Irene’s friend and Bosinney’s betrothed, and 
her presence adds to the poignancy of the hopeless 
situation in which the lovers seem to find themdelves. 

It is Soames Forsyte, however, who represents the 
tribe most completely. We have seen him as the embod¬ 
iment of the possessive instinct. But Soames is more 
than this. He is really a rounded and human character. 

We have seen him in his relation to Irene. It is 
interesting to note his attitude to that other TT alien Tf 
character, Bosinney. 

The notion of being the one member of his family 
with a country home counted for little with Soames; 
being a true Forsyte, sentiment, even the sentiment of 
social position was a luxury to be indulged only after 
more practical considerations, and more material pleasure, 
had been satisfied.(1) In giving the contract for the 
house to Bosinney, Soames has the pleasant feeling that 
he will be helping the young man, keeping the thing in 
the family - always an important instinct with the Forsytes, 


(1) Man of Property. 64. 



























,<i ': . 














































99 


and at the same time he able to get "favored nation" 
terms for himself.(65) It is gratifying to a Forsyte 
to be able to do a favor if it costs nothing.(65) 

Soames finds Bosinney the ideal man for the job. 

In the first place he looked clever, but he had also 
an air, one of his greatest attractions, of not knowing 
on which side his bread was buttered; he should be easy 
to deal with in money matters. With Soames there was 
no desire to defraud; he was merely showing shrewd 
business sense. It was the natural attitude of mind of 
any good business man. "Thus he fulfilled the inscrut¬ 
able laws of his kind - of human nature itself, when he 

reflected, with a sense of comfort, that Bosinney would 

3 

be easy to deal with in money matters. T, ( 66) 

The typical attitude of the Forsyte breed is a business 

like one; get the most for your money, if possible deal 

with those who are less shrewd than you are - these 

artistic chaps are easy meat - but when dealing with 

another business man, don 1 t believe a word he says; they 

are all out to do you; if you are building a house, get 

the most in appearance for your money, even if there 

is a little cheapening of construction here and there, 

a little compromising with the ideal. 

(i) Fov-Sv/f 2 - 
(Z) Ibvst us*. 

0) lb»d 6C*. 










- 





















’ 

















. 
















. 































100 


The essential difference between a man of property 
and the idealistic dreamer is that the latter has a 
capacity for pleasure in a thing that he neither owns 
nor can own. Bosinney can be enthusiastic over a house 
he is building for another man to occupy. Soames can 
only know real enthusiasm for something of his own. 

As the two men survey the building site, the beauty of 
the prospect overwhelms them both. But the attitudes 
of the two men are sharply contrasted. Galsworthy 
employs this method of character drawing frequently 
throughout his book. The way in which they look at 
the earth and sky is a sufficient revelation of the 
springs of being within. 

"Almost from their feet stretched ripe corn, dipping 
to a small copse beyond. A plain of fields and hedges 
spread to the distant blue downs. In a silver streak 
to the right could be seen the line of the river. The 
sky was so blue, and the sun so bright, that an eternal 
summer seemed to reign over this prospect. Thistledown 
floated around them, enraptured by the serenity of the 
ether. The heat danced over the corn, and pervading 
all was a soft insensible hum, like the murmur of bright 
minutes holding revel between earth and heaven. 















' 
























■ 

















,, ;:• - . 





























101 


"Soames looked. In spite of himself, something 
swelled in his breast. To live there in sight of all 
this, to be able to point it out to his friends, to 
talk of it, to possess it!....He stole a glance at 
Bosinney, whose eyes, the eyes of the coachman 1 s 1 half- 
tame leopard 1 seemed running wild over the landscape. TT (1) 

So it is, that there i s no aspect of living untouched 
by the possessive instinct. What the Forsytes cannot see, 
what they will never see, is that only those truly possess 
anything that have the power within themselves to let 
it go . 

The inherent ugliness in the Forsyte nature is brought 
out by any opposition or impediment placed in the way of 
their gaining or retaining property. Just as Irene’s 
opposition to Soames’ demands brings out in him the 
worst side of his nature, so the knowledge that Bosinney 
is in love with his wife brings out the same brutish 
element. Soames feels the impulse to destroy. One 
might feel a sympathy for jealous rage of the physical 
type, but rage that plots and schemes to use the sanction 
of legality to obtain revenge is too cold-blooded to 
arouse anything but detestation. Soames is never less 


(1) Forsyte Saga. 71. 






















■ 
















































102 


attractive than when he plans with methodical coolness 
to ruin Bosinney through the power of property. He has 
Been annoyed, then angry at Bosinney f s over-expenditure 
on the house, hut secretly gratified by the excellence 
of the structure. He determines to ruin the architect; 
and through him to hurt Irene. Bosinney was in love 
with her; He hated the fellow, and would not spare him 
now. He could, and would, refuse to pay a penny over 
twelve thousand and fifty pounds - the extreme limit 
fixed in the correspondence; or rather he would pay, 
he would pay and sue him for damages. He would go to 
Jobling and Boulter and put the matter in their hands. 

He would ruin the impecunious beggar’. (1) 

Fven in the bitterness of full awareness of Irene’s 
and Bosinney’s love for each other, he is gratified to 
realize that neither of them have any money.(2) So in, 
and through, the character of Soames we see the diabolic 
power of property working to crush the lives of others. 
For Soames is, in reality, not a ba<d man. He is, as his 
own solicitor describes him, ”a gentleman, a man of prop- 

(1) Forsyte Saga. 273. 

(2) Ibid. 274. 

















. 






















































103 


erty, who would he the last to dispute any legitimate 
claim that might he made against him.”(1) 

The thing that Soames lacks, as all the Forsytes do, 
with the exception of young Jolyon, and to a limited 
degree his father, is imagination, He is incapable of 
seeing any other point of view hut the Forsyte’s. Once 
and once only does he hetray the Forsyte in him and 
become lifted into the pure ether of the selfless and 
impractical. It is when Irene’s renunciation of every 
Forsyte possession has brought home to him for a fleeting 
moment the truth of her aversion, and he pities her.(2) 
Only such A moment passes quickly. Soames is .incapable 
of any spiritual transfiguration. He is caught in a 
web of his own weaving; he is enmeshed in his possess¬ 
ions. He is not and never will be a winged spirit. 

He is earthbound. And becaiise he has gained the world 
and lost his soul, he is destined to be forever lonely. 
”He might wish and wish and never get - the beauty and 
the loving in the world. 17 (3) 

G-alsworthy cannot retain his spirit of harsh and 
bitter satire to the end. He mixes it with sentiment 

(1) Forsyte Saga. 329. 

(2) Ibid. 348. 

(3) Ibid. 1104. 


























. 





























104 


Me is a pessimist, but because of this admixture, he 
is not a great pessimist. 

There is a marked contrast in Dickens’ treatment 
of Mr. Dombey, and G-alsworthy’s treatment of Soames. 

The cold and distant nature of Mr. Dombey resembles 
the aloof and supercilious nature of Soames. But 
Soames is a lover of the beautiful in his home and 
surroundings. Kis sense of property is not satisfied 
with the accumulation of wealth. He gets a warm and 
intimate feeling out of his possessions, and his house 
is distinguished by a certain elegance and individuality 
because he is a collector of fine things. The surround¬ 
ings of Mr. Dombey show no such sensuous love of property 
The cold bleakness of the house repudiates any familiar¬ 
ity with the beautiful. (1) 

Mr. Dombey himself, impassive and gentlemanly always, 
is as cold as his own shekels. At the christening of 
his son, Dickens attributes to him the feat of making 
the atmosphere so cold that the young curate smokes at 
the mouth.(2) It is this over-emphasis on one character¬ 
istic trait that is partly responsible for Dombey being 

(1) Dombey and Son. 30. 

(2) Ibid. 64. 





















' 























' 































. 








105 


less real than Soames. There is no variation in the 
chill hauteur of Mr. Dombey*s manner. His sense of 
his own importance and that of his name and station, 
and the preservation of a personal dignity in keeping 
with that station seems the one idea that animates him 
after the death of his son. His philosophy of life is 
apparently concerned with the incarnation of Dombey 
and Son. He is about as impersonal as a corporation. 

It is also true that Dickens is not given to the 
searching psychoanalysis , that we find in Galsworthy 1 s 
novels. He does not delve deeply into the subtleties 
of human relationships. He sees his people as we see 
those about us, objectively. Their appearance, their 
actions, their words, are revealed to us, but not their 
mental processes to any degree of intricacy. The 
essential difference, I believe, is this; Galsworthy 
and Dickens have both taken a character from life, but 
where Galsworthy has stressed an attitude of mind 
without exaggerating the whole character and throwing 
it out of balance, so to speak, Dickens has overemphas¬ 
ized the whole personality of Mr. Dombey by exaggerating 
one aspect. Mr. Dombey is not a rounded individual 
but a humour almost in the Jonsonian sense of the word. 







• -V : 






' 






106 


Sir Willoughby Patterne has been subjected to more 
complete analysis them Soames Forsyte. There is hardly 
any facet of egoism that Meredith does not cause to 
sparkle by the illumination of the Comic Spirit. We 
see his character in prismatic colors. But Meredith 
fails in the synthesis of his personality; Willoughby 
is too compendious altogether to be just a person. He 
is univers^ized, but he is a symbol. It is not character 
for its own sake that Meredith is interested in, rT but in 
the bulk, as interpretative of life. TT (l) Studied with 
intellectual detachment, Sir Willoughby is a source of 
unfailing delight as a character in the abstract, but 
the ordinary reader will not accept him, as they will 
accept Mr. Dombey in spite of being a caricature of 
wealth and pride. The serious, analytical reader would 
undoubtedly vote Soames as the most real, on the ground 
of his more natural reaction to every stimulus of his 
environment; Willoughby as the most interesting and 
complete analysis of a universe-1 quality, and Dombey 
as the least real of the three because the least compli¬ 
cated as a human mechanism. 


(1) Hammerton, 157. 































’ 




















■« 















107 


Meredith and Galsworthy have employed the same 
method in dealing with their central and secondary 
characters, except that Meredith has undertaken in 
The Egoist to draw Very fully, two people, and Gals¬ 
worthy, in Man of Property, did not task his capacity 
beyond the figure of Soames. He felt his inadequacy 
to the task of doing subjectively, more than his central 
figure. Unlike Dickens, whose secondary characters 
become unruly, and take the centre of the stage to 
themselves, Meredith and Galsworthy keep their subsid¬ 
iary people in their places. One cannot refrain from 
thinking of Chesterton 1 s remark however, in regard to 
Dickens 1 characters; "They shake the house like heavy 
and shouting school-boys; they smack the story to pieces 
like so much furniture. When we moderns write stories 
our characters are better controlled. But, alas; our 
characters are rather easier to control."(1) 

It has already been noted that Galsworthy chose 
young Jolyon for a mouthpiece to voice his own opinions 
of Forsyteism. The criticism that Lubbock gives of 
Vernon Whitford is equally true of young Jolyon, that 


(1) Charles Dickens. Chesterton, 10. 


- 











. 
















































' 

























108 


there is a certain "colorless tenuity" about him, due 
to too close kinship with the writer’s mind.(l) These 
characters have not been conveyed as images before being 
described as characters, with the result they do not 
crystallize sharply enough to form recognizable figures. 
For true understanding of Meredith himself, it is necess¬ 
ary to examine Vernon Whitford closely. He never loses 
sight of the sene relation of man and woman to each other; 
it is he who alone of all the characters, understands 
Clara’s position fully. He gives her credit for an 
independence of mind that is a compliment of a high order, 
and neither condemns nor condones, but watches her work 
out her own salvation. Galsworthy’s interpretation of 
Jolyon is very similar. Like Vernon, he alone sees with 
the impersonal eye, and he alone is capable of seeing 
Irene’s position among the Forsyte clan with the clarity 
of an outsider, in other words, with the author’s own 
lack of prejudice. He is, however, as consistently 
outside the real action as Whitford; he is not an actor 
in his own drama, but a mouthpiece, and therefore there 
is an unsatisfying sense of incompleteness about his 
figure as there is about Whitford’s. 

(1) Charles Dickens. Chesterton, 10. ^ 

(I) L.V.OO) Acje. fe-b. l<LO- ^re c[\tb ’S Art Lubbock 
















. 

■ 








































- 



































109 


The striking difference in the portrayal of Irene 
Forsyte and Clara Middleton is the passivity of the 
one, and the active rebellion of the other. The word 
"soft" could never be applied to Clara, however young 
and charming, but Galsworthy himself stresses this as 
Irene 1 s main quality. In a letter to Garnet, he says; 

"Irene does nothing. She is. passive. To a man she 

hates she can be hard, so can anyone. There is no 
softness to Soames anywhere, for softness can hardly 
be inferred from the outrage. But she is soft all 
through because she is passive."(1) 

That the character of Irene is never fully drawn; 
that we see her through the eye of the Forsytes, and 
then chiefly we see her beauty, charm, and desirability, 
but we see very little of that truly distinguishing 
thing, personality, is a weakness admittedly on the 
part of the author, but Galsworthy justifies himself 
on the ground that he would have been less successful 
with the book if he had attempted too much. In a letter 
to his sister, he accounts for his failure to do more 
than sketch in the figures of Irene and Bosinney; 

(1) Life and Letters of John Galsworthy, H.V.Marrot. 

Heinnemann, 1935. 170. 
















. 


' 












































110 


"Bosinney I freely admit to be shirked. I orig¬ 
inally subjectivized him, and found him repulsive to 
me, not even seen,(even according to my average insight), 
so I changed him into an objective being, and swung the 
focus of the book entirely into the Forsyte eye, which 
gives a certain artistic completeness to the book, on 
its lines... He is now really a figure, not a character; 
the same with Irene; she is entirely objective also. 

They are neither of them vitalized as the Forsytes are 
vitalized; but they serve. Characters are successful 
(in my experience) in so far(l) as you have enough of 
them in your own composition,(2) as you have opportunity 
of observing them. Only a certain number of figures 
can hope to act on your retina, and the creative nerves 
of your finger and thumb; and unless you are an absolute 
genius, you must look near home, for the material you 
work with. That is why most people fail so pitifully, 
they try far too much. TT (l) 

In spite of his frank admission that Irene*s figure 
was sketched only, and not fully drawn in the sense of 
a completed character y G-alsworthy must have been grat- 


(1) Life and Letters, Marrot, 183 















































































. 

. 
















Ill 


ified "by such notices of appreciation as the following; 

"The poor woman caught in their toils hardly has a 
speaking part; hut a whole tragedy lies in her silence 
and in her influence over the carefully moral, well-fed 
human animals around her.”(1) 

"Irene is a remarkable study in impressive silence. 

She rarely speaks, yet both Soames and the reader have 
an impression conveyed to them that she has always the 
last word.”(2) 

If Galsworthy sometimes failed in treating his 
secondary characters subjectively, he was unusually 
successful in drawing them objectively. Like Dickens, 
it is often some apparently trifling thing that engages 
his attention. 

"The many little traits in our characters which to 
us seem devoid of any special significance are treated 
by him as if of the utmost importance, and are brought 
into the greatest prominence. His vision is as piercing 
as the most powerful searchlight, and he uses it with 
the most remorseless effect."(3) 

(1) Quoted in Life and Letters, Marrot, 186. 

(From Evening Standard). 

(2) " ” " " " (From The Scotsman). 

(2) Westminster Review, June, 1909. The Hovels of John 

Galsworthy.(Maxwell ) H.H.McCartney. 












_ 



















. 































' 

. 



















r 1 





112 


Take, for instance, the matter of Bosinney 1 s hat. 

At first reading it appears to he somewhat the same 
irritating nonsense as Meredith wrote about Sir Will¬ 
oughby 1 s leg. But it is more than that. It is the 
"significant trifle, the detail in which was embedded 
the meaning of the whole matter. TT (1) All Forsytes are 
fastidious about clothes. The shapeless gray hat 
Bosinney wears for his "duty call" on the aunts is all 
that is needed to place him in a category alien to the 
Forsytes. ITone of them would have paid a formal call 
in such a hat. This neglect of the superficial niceties 
of life is unintelligible to the Forsyte mind. They are 
concerned with externals, with appearances, with prop¬ 
riety. The hat symbolizes all that Bosinney stands for, 
a contemptuous disregard for all the little carefully 
guarded conventions of middle class society. It wins 
for him the soubriquet "the wild Buccaneer." The name 

4 Coo'iC. 

clings, and it comes to have a quite different signifi¬ 
cance, when piratically enough, he steals Soames 1 wife. 

In contrast with this minute analysis of detail is 
Galsworthy 1 s power of restraint when the purposes of 
narrative require it. A remark is attributed to Mr. 


(1) Forsyte Saga. 7. 











































113 


Galsworthy that throws light on his attitude towards 
the use of economy to secure his best effects; "Turgenev 
above all men teaches you what is more important than 
anything else - he teaches you what to leave out."(l) 
Galsworthy, in his letter to Garnett, reveals how 
the art of curtailment is used to overcome what he feels 
are limitations of his work in characterization; "The 
fact is I wrote a chapter between Irene and Bosinney 
travelling in the Underground with that for motif. I 
subsequently took it out because I wanted to give Bos¬ 
inney indirectly, feeling as I still feel, that this 
is the only way for me to do him - in other words, I 
haven 1 2 t power enough over him or insight enough into 
him."(2) 

In developing the love theme, Galsworthy nowhere 
shows Irene and Bosinney together, except through the 
eyes of one or other of the Forsytes. We hear snatches 
of their conversation through the ears of others. We 
catch glimpses that are more revealing than slow surveys 
For instance, there is the exquisitely beautiful scene 
between Irene and Bosinney where, as they stand in the 

(1) Westminster Review. June, 1909. The Novels of John 

Ga1swo rthy. (Maxwe11 H.H.Mac ar tney). 

(2) Forsyte Saga. 132. 







































114 


little garden with their faces "buried in the golden 
pink azalea "blossoms. June comes upon them. With 
flaming cheeks and angry eyes, the watching girl, 
listening to snatches of their conversation, recogni¬ 
zing for what it is, the very thing she has feared. 

The scene is very "brief, and told with the utmost 
economy of wording. The sweet hot scent of the flowering 
azaleas is not heavier on the air than the feeling of 
smothered emotion, of forces working in and through 
the lovers over which they have no control. 










































. 








115 


Chapter 4 

ROliAHTICISH AND RHALISH 

It has been the fashion to divide fiction into two 
schools, that of realism and romance. It has been said 
of Dickens that he took romantic plots and treated them 
realistically. Once, it is said, that you accept the 
romantic conception of one of his characters, you are 
then prepared to en^oy the resounding realism with 
which he treats them in action and in speech. Chesterton 
prefers to turn this theory upside down in his comment 
on Dickens’ treatment of Dombey and Son; 

’’The incurable poetic character, the hopelessly 
nonrealistic character of Dickens’ essential genius 
could not have a better example than the story of the 

Dombeys. For the story itself is probable; it is the 

treatment that makes it unreal. In attempting to paint 

the dark pagan devotion of the father (as distant from 

the ecstatic and Christian devotion of the mother) 

Dickens was painting something that was really there. 

.... A man of Dombey’s type would love his son as he 
loves Paul. He would neglect his daughter as he neg¬ 
lects Florence. And yet we feel the utter unreality 











































. 






























116 


of it all, while we feel the utter reality of monsters 
like Stiggins or Matalini. Dickens could only work in 

A 

his own way, and that was the wild way. We may almost 
say this; that he could only make his characters prob¬ 
able if he was allowed to make them impossible. Give 
him license to say and do anything, and he could create 
beings as vivid as our own aunts and uncles. Keep him 
to likelihood and he could not tell the plainest tale 
so as to make it likely... The story of Florence Dombey 
is incredible although it is true.”(l) 

According to Chesterton’s theory, Dickens was such 
a confirmed Romanticist that he was incapable of treating 
a realistic theme realistically, although he could make 
a romantic tale seem true. If his assumption is correct, 
then the chief reason for Dombey 1 2 s unreality is that he 
is real’. 

That Dickens preferred the Romantic tradition in 
the matter of plots and type figures cannot be disputed. 

Dickens took his plots seriously, but he loved mystery 
and a villain, and above all, coincidences. ”His coin¬ 
cidences are not merely long but Briarean in variety.”(2) 

(1) Charles Dickens. Chesterton. 134. 

(2) Living Age, June 22, 1912. ’’The Plots of Dickens.” 

(H.C.Biron). 





























' 






» 



















.... 
















117 


Maurois mentions a letter from Dickens to Forster 
regarding the composition of Dombey and Son, in which 
one can see the exacting care given by Dickens to his 
construction of plot and his linking up of incidents. 
Where one plot would be needed, Dickens manufactured 
ten.(l) He wanted everything to be put down, even the 
most obvious things. The contrast with Meredith, who 
has scarcely any movement or action, and Galsworthy, 
who uses the minimum of incident together with rigid 
restraint in narration is striking enough. But Maurois 
puts in a word of defence for Dickens; "The modern 
reader is perhaps accustomed to read more, and conse¬ 
quently collaborates more readily with the novelist, 
but he dislikes insistence. 1T (2) 

In the Romantic tradition, also, is the tendency so 
strong in Dickens, to point everything up with a moral, 
Retribution overtakes Carker because "the wages of sin 
is death". Dickens does not shrink from bringing in an 
act of God to point the story. 

Not only does Dickens bring in adventitious incident 
to point a moral, but he indulges himself in the happy 

(1) Dickens, by Andre Maurois. 130. 

(2) Ibid. 130. 












































' 

































118 


endings of the fairy stories to please his readers. 

The reform of Dombey is obviously this type of ending. 

So good-humored is Dickens towards his characters that 
not only does he give Carker a split second at the end, 
to repent of his deeds, hut he gives his dumb animals 
a share in the general good will. Writing to Forster 
about the final chapter of Dombey and Son, Dickens has 
this urgent message to give; "I suddenly remember that 
I have forgotten Diogenes. Will you put him in the 
last chapter, 11 (1) 

Meredith is weak in the construction of plot. Some 
critics maintain that Meredith was contemptuous of this 
method of catering to the average fiction reader. 

Hammerton wrote; "The iron fact of his lack of popularity 
is simply that he had been denied by the fairies, who 
had given him so many other gifts, the power of writing 
a tale which holdeth children from their play and old 
men from the chimney corner. T "(2) 

As Meredith himself said r , T My people conquer nothing, 

win none. it is the clockwork of the brain that they 

are directed to set in motion."(3) Since physical activity 

(1) Dickens, Maurois, 118. 

(2) George Meredith, Hammerton, 154. 

(3) Ibid. 155. 













































































































119 


is much less difficult to follow than mental activity, 

It is little wonder that Meredith 1 s characters were 
"poor troops of actors to vacant benches." 

Another reason for Meredith’s unpopularity is his 
lack of simplicity, of Dickens’ "obviousness." 

Mr. Meredith’s world, however, is not a real world. 

It is a fantastic one, treated realistically. It is 
not simple enough to be real; he is not real enough. 

It is so little representative that it lacks illusion. 

Any one who should base upon it his notion of the world 
of English society - society in the large sense, I meam - 
would get not only an incomplete, but a distorted idea, 
though Mr. Meredith’s world is as multifarious as it is 
populous. It is, like his genius, thoroughly sui generis , 
and it is peopled for the most part with figures of which 
the large or piquant conception is far more definite than 
the realization. Dickens’ world, too, is sui generis , 
but it is everywhere intensely real and definite. You 
recall his characters vividly, often without remembering 
in which books they occur. In the case of Mr. Meredith, 
you recall the books and the characters.’’(1) 

Meredith’s relation to the realist school is well-defined 


(1) Victorian Prose Masters. Brownell. Quoted in 

Hammerton, 158. 









































































120 


by the late George Parsons Lathrop, in the Atlantic 
Monthly, February, 1888; 

"The crudities and disproportion in Meredith seem, 

At first glance, to ally him with the extreme so-called 
Realists, who believe that nature stunted and dwarfed 
is truer nature than nature carried to the largest 
development. He says, somewhere , "Romances are the 
destruction of human interest." But in fact, Meredith, 
while realistic in certain ways, is highly romantic. 

He never hesitates to give free rein to the impulses 
of human nature, however sentimental or extravagant 
they may be. He is also very romantic in his manner 
of heightening effects, and idealizing emotions or actions. 
Possibly it is just this mixture of the two tendencies 
in him which has led to his missing popular approbation 
in his day."(1) 

Galsworthy was a professed realist, but he did not 
make Meredith 1 s mistake of confusing realism with roman¬ 
ticism. Galsworthy 1 s own statement of his artistic creed 
will give the definition of his method of employing 
realism; "But manners change, and morals change; men 

(1) Atlantic Monthly. Feb. 1888. Meredith, G.P.Lathrop. 




' 















' 





































































■ 













121 - 


remain; to seif men, and the facts about them, down faith¬ 
fully so that they draw for us the moral of their natural 

k 

actions, may also possibly of benefit 1 the 

Galsworthy differs from Dickens in that he chose to 
deal realistically with the actions of men in the actual 
world, where Dickens chose to deal realistically with the 
actions of men in a romantic world of his own construction. 
Galsworthy chose people to inhabit his world who exist, 
not because they are amusing or odd or interesting, but 
because they are typical of the many and they are mediocre; 

Dickens often chose characters, "too large for the gate 
of birth." 

With Galsworthy interest in the story is never para¬ 
mount. Ke has a well-unified plot ir The Man of Property , 
because each incident is chosen for its bearing on the 
main situation, and any tendency to deviate from the main 
course of the narrative is ruthlessly checked by the 
author. Galsworthy is a master of the art of pruning. 
There are no secondary stories woven into the main fabric, 
in the Dickensian manner. The story deals with the 
whole clan of Forsytes, but Galsworty rigorously confines 

(1) John Galsworthy’s "Irritating Philosophy", 

Current Literature, Dec. 1912, Quoted. 














■ 






















































































122 


himself to those situations in the lives of the other 
members of the family which will reflect some light 
or shadow on the lives of the main characters, Soames, 
Irene, and Bosinney. 

The story is told in a manner that makes it appear 
a transcription of life. We see only those incidents 
that can be reported through the eyes of some member 
of the Forsyte family. We are only made familiar with 
the thoughts of the collective Forsyte mind. Much of 
the drama of the situation must be, of necessity, left 
to the corroborative imagination of the reader. One must 
read it intuitively as one reads life, filling in the 
gaps of experience by inference. Galsworthy practises 
only the limited omniscience of looking into the group 
mind o£ the Forsyte family. He and the reader are in 
league to get as much material as they can from this 
source, and piece it together according to their own 
lights, the premise being that the reader is somewhat 
superior to the Forsytes in the art of interpreting' 
incident and character. It is a clever way of telling 
a story, because it requires the active co-operation 
of the reader. The drawback is that not all readers 





































. 




. 






123 


enjoy novels that require the exercise of their mental 
faculties. 

In a sense Galsworthy’s simplicity of narration is 
a reimbursement to the reader for his attention to the 
theme. Galsworthy writes in the natural easy manner 
of everyday thought and speech. The almost photogra¬ 
phic accuracy of his descriptions of scenes is equalled 
by the almost stenographic report of conversations. 

The dinner-party at Swithin’s is a perfect example of 
this method of Galsworthy’s.(1) We have the scene, 
the people, the insignificant small talk, so naturally 
reported that we are not conscious of the author’s art 
intervening between these people and ourselves. We 
are, in feet, as much present at the dinner as Gals¬ 
worthy himself. 

There is only one weakness in Galsworthy’s use 
of this technique. Life in itself is forever sur¬ 
prising, and the unexpected is a more ordinary occurr¬ 
ence than we usually realize. Yet we miss this in 

TXGv'e f 

Galsworthy’s narration. We know, as we v know in actuality, 
what is going to happen next. The lack of the unexpected 
is lack of truth to life. 


(1) Forsyte Saga, Part 1, Chap. 3. 












124 


The stereotyped happy ending is missing here, and 
the twist of events at the end, which would be sheer 

it 

melodrama in a lesser writer, made by som° clever 

planning ahead, to be inevitable also. Galsworthy’s 
naturalness in narration, his skill in toning down 
the startling or the harsh reality by the simple 
device of not playing it up, makes it possible for 
the reader to accept even the act of Providence, or 
stroke of fate, seen in the death of Bosinney. 

It has been observed that the ending of the book 
is exceptionally well done, because Galsworthy achieved 
hisartistic purpose without offending anyone’s sensi¬ 
bilities. The death of Bosinney was the only solution 
for the problem Galsworthy had in mind. Galsworthy 
said of his problem, and of his method of solving it; 
”To my mind (and I desire to defeat Forsyteism) the 
only way to do so is to leave the Forsytes masters of 
the field. The only way to enlist the sympathies of 
the readers on the other side, the only way to cap the 
purpose of the book, which was to leave property as an 
empty shell - is to leave the victory to Soames... To 
make success of ’illicit love’ is to invite mockery. 



125 


,T Conra& said on finishing 'the end is terrific,' 

I only quote this to shov; that a certain impression 
is made by that picture of Soames and Irene on each 
side of the hearth, and the door slammed on any 
interference. 

"We both wish to produce the same effect. We 
both hate the Forsytes and wish their destruction. 

Your instinct tells you to do it negatively; I 
would leave them victorious; but what a victory. 

"This is tragic. 

TT I thought the best scene in the book the last; 
and the best passage the comparison of Irene to a 
shot bird. I still think this will make more im¬ 
pression on the public than any happy ending, end 
palpable defeat of the Forsytes. TT (1) 

It is the author's artistic instinct that decides 
the denouement. Galsworthy has chosen to leave the 
field to Forsyte!sm, and thus array the sympathies 
of readers on the side of the lovers. Dickens, who 
is more interested in his story than in his satirical 
study of the egoist, Mr. Dombey, makes no effort to 
achieve Galsworthy's artistic unity. Mr. Dombey's set 


(1) Life and Letters of John Galsworthy. K.V.Marrot. 169. 



































. 
























126 


of values are entirely recast; he is completely reformed, 
and though he has been flayed by the passionate revul¬ 
sion of Fdith, and though Dickens makes him suffer suff¬ 
iciently for his sins, he eventually finds happiness 
in the love of Florence and her children. Meredith 
makes no such truce with egoism. Nor does he believe 
in leaving it the master of the field, as Galsworthy 
does. Ke artistically massacres the egoist by the 
rapier thrusts of the Comic Spirit. Or it might be 
more correct to say that the egoist is responsible 
for his own undoing, while the Comic Muse sits with 
lips compressed, watching him. "Through very love 
of self, himself he slew," is the epitaph Meredith 
allows him«M There is an artistic unity, a consistency 
of representation, an unfaltering satirical purpose 
in Meredith*s novel that places it on a very high 
level of art. 

(1) Tbe Egoist Preclude, y 










. 












. 
























127 


Chapter 5. 

STYL^ AND SPIRIT 

We have noted the restraint of Galsworthy in 
characterization and delineation of scene. "This 
gift of restraint is at once so admirable and so 
rare that one must adduce as a last manifestation 
thereof of this additional virtue of his writings, 
negative indeed, but none the less appreciable, 
that Mr. Galsworthy eschews paradox and spurious 
brilliance."(1) 

Galsworthy 1 s style is simple, realistic, and 
clear. Meredith is never simple, often romantic, 
sometimes vigorously realistic, but seldom, if ever, 
clear. It might be summing up the case fairly well 
to say that where Galsworthy has both emotional and 
intellectual restraint, Meredith lacks intellectual 
restraint, and Dickens lacks emotional restraint. 
Dickens, like Galsworthy, can be simple and direct 
and reportorial. The style of Galsworthy never gets 
between the reader and the character like a hedge. 
The emotions of Dickens get between the reader and 

(1) Living Age, June, 1909. Novels of Galsworthy. 

Maxwell H.H.McCarthy. 
















' 

' 


■ 










123 


and the people of his tale. There is again, the 
problem of Dickensian obviousness and Meridithian 
obscurity in the matter of style. Galsworthy de¬ 
mands a certain intellectual activity from the 
reader by leaving too much out. Meredith demands 
intellectual activity from the reader by putting 
too much in. He bristles with allusion, and epigrajn, 
and parallel, and paradox, and every form of learned 
and witty commentary. Dickens demands no intellect¬ 
ual activity from the reader, but he makes him the 
victim of an emotionalism that is even more exhausting. 
The death of little Paul Dombey, like the death of 
little Hell, is almost a deliberate snare for the 
unsuspecting and tender-hearted. Dickens wallows 
in sentiment. Galsworthy sometimes falls into sent¬ 
iment unwittingly, but pulls himself up immediately 
with dignity. Meredith carefully skirts the pool 
and does not even touch it with his garments. Meredith 
is austere towards all forms of human weakness. He 
desires to scourge self-pity and sentimentality out 
of man and woman, and bring him into the light of 


pure reason. 
























. 

‘ 





























129 


The three authors are never more individual then 

in their handling of dialogue. Galsworthy ha.s been 

criticized for the under-statement of emotion in his 

dialogue, and the colloquial inexpressiveness of his 

characters. It may be possible to justify him against 

Vjv 

these criticisms. It is frequently a the under-statement 
of emotion , as in the scenes between Irene and Bosinney, 
and Irene and Soames, that Galsworthy secures his most 
powerful effects. 

Eis people talk like human beings. They never say 
witty and clever things just for the sake of saying 
them. They talk very little under stress of strong 
emotion. Galsworthy has caught the English aversion 
to a revelation of the true state of one’s feelings, 
the middle class antipathy for a scene of any kind. 

An example of this restraint and under-statement can 
be seen in the scene where Irene requests her freedom.(1) 
This scene is in striking contrast with the same thing 
in Dickens. (2) Edith says much; Irene says little, 
her words are so simple, so few, one almost overlooks 
the fact that they say all there is to say, yet they 
are natural and perfectly in keeping with our picture 


(1) Forsyte Saga. 245. 

(2) T)ooo <XYO<\Soa. 












■ 










. 
























: 

























130 


of Irene, and do not break the effect of her impressive 
silence. Edith talks with the passionate intensity of 
a turbulent spirit charged with emotion,, and (i t isjin 
this scene(that)it has an authentic ring in spite of 
its garrulousness. Dombey ! s speech has not. No hus¬ 
band could talk with such length and pompousness under 
such strained circumstances. It is foreign to the type 
of Englishman that Dombey represents, to become so 
loguacious at such a moment. It is this fluency under 
all circumstances that one notices in so many of Dickens 
characters. Unlike his more successful figures, whose 
characteristic and sparkling witticisms and tricks of 
speech identify and endear them to the reader. Edith 
and Dombey never seem quite natural. 

In trying to make the talk of his upper class people 
more dignified, one might almost say , more refined, 
Dickens fails because he does not really know how these 
people do express themselves. 

Meredith, in a scene similar to the two mentioned, 
where Clara asks for her release,(1) reveals his best 
method of handling dialogue. Clara talks exactly as 


(1) The Egoist. 141. 




' 




' 

■ 

. 


































131 - 


a girl caught in such a predicament, and faced with an 
unpleasant task, would talk. There' is desperation and 
honestj' in her words, hesitation and urgency. One feels 
the agitation in her broken sentences, her inability 
to make herself clear. Her wit had apparently deserted 
her in the dilemma. She talks almost stupidly. Sir 
Willoughby 1 s sentimental strain is nowhere quite natural, 
and it is hardly so here, but his confusion is most real. 
He is for the moment shocked out of his self-complacency, 
and he says idiotic things. It is observable in human 
life that when one is under the shock of a great emotional 
revelation, one’s tongue seems to assume an independent 
existence of its own, and draws its inspiration from 
some hidden recesses of the subconscious mind, bringing 
forth to light a fantastic mixture of the inconsequential 
and momentous. Willoughby’s talk of tea-cups and egg¬ 
shells, caviare and iron cables, butter and bacon, and 
plighted faith, reminds one of Chesterton’s dream that 
begins with the end of the world, and ends with a tea 
party, where the end of the world seems as trivial as 
the tea party, and the tea party as terrible as the 
day of doom.(l) In the same way Willoughby shows the 


(1) Chesterton. 123. 






























. 




































. 




132 


eruption of the subconscious as he struggles to wake 
out of the nightmare of his dissolving universe. It 
is excellently done. 

But Meredith is often guilty of fantastic conver¬ 
sations that have no such possibility of psychological 
justification. His conversation lends itself to parody. 

It is another case of Meredith failing prodigiously, 

"not trailing clouds of glory, but running into avalanches 
of sawdust."(1) 

Galsworthy is at his best depicting the gentler moods 
of nature, spring, evening, the warmth and perfume of a 
summer night. Meredith does not make use of nature to 
aid in securing the right atmosphere for the moods of 
his characters. He describes clouds, wind, gathering 
storms, pelting rain, the greenery of woods, for the 
sheer delight he has in the beauty of the natural world. 

We feel his characters breathing deeply the exhilarating 
air, and walking faster because a, storm is approaching. 

But the storm is not symbolical of any providential 
intervention of Fate in the lives of his people. 

Dickens is not at home in the country as he is in 

(1) Scots Observer. Sept. 28, 1&89. Meredith. 

(James McLaren Cobban). 



133 


the crowded streets of London. The latter he has des¬ 
cribed with inimitable skill. But-his descriptions of 
natural scenes tend to be either categorical enumeration 
of particulars, as in the passage where the sketching 
party rides to the castle.(1) or the artificial effort 
of a man who makes a clumsy attempt to bring in nature 
as if the attempt were obligatory, and then hurries 
off with relief to something else. There is no scene 
in Dickens like the scene where Clara bends over Vernon 

3iOc\ i looking op 

asleep beneath the wild cherry tree," and has a moment 
of ecstatic insight, mingled with a pure joy in the 
ineffable beauty of the snowy blossoms - nature 1 s 
transfiguration of her earthiness beyond all ornamental 
whiteness of human conception, -fife- does what Dickens 
and Galsworthy cannot do, he rises to the highest 
poetic perception of nature and its effect on the 
sensitive spirit; 

". she turned her face to where the load of 

virginal blossom, whiter than summer 1 s cloud on the 
sky, showered and drooped and clustered so thick as to 
claim colour and seem like higher Alpine snows in 
noonlight, a flush of white. From deep to deeper 


(1) Dombey and Son. 380. 




. 








































134 


heavens of white, her eyes perched and soared. Wonder 
lived in her. Happiness in the beauty of the tree 
pressed to supplant it, and was more mortal and narrower. 
Reflection came, contracting her vision and weighing 
her to earth. Her reflection was; "He must be good 
who loves to lie and sleep beneath the branches of this 
tree! 1 2 She would rather have clung to her first im¬ 
pression; wonder so divine, so unbounded, was like 
soaring into homes of angel-crowded space, sweeping 
through folded and on to folded white fountain-bow 
of wings, in innumerable columns; but the thought of 
it was no recovery; she might as well have striven to 
be a child."(1) 

The fleeting moment of pure exaltation in some 
ineffably beautiful manifestation of nature may come 
only once or twice in mortal experience, and is like 
spiritual purification, "the catharsis of beauty"-, ? has 
been captured rarely*in poetry.(2) This is Meredith 
at his best. 

In contrast, even the exquisite scene of Irene and 
Bosinney among the flowering azaleas, though it is one 

(1) The Egoist. 114. 

(2) Cf. "Sbf? Sweet Chance that Led My Steps Abroad" 

(W.H. Davies). 



* 












































135 


of the loveliest in Galsworthy, is only second, rate. 

One is often aware of a cloying heaviness in Galsworthy's 
descriptions of the beauties of spring, instead of the 
freshness of Meredith's airy and sunlit world. 

It is more difficult to say what is the essential 
character of a man's spirit than of his style, though 
both are taher elusive and intangible, being pervasive 
rather than particularized. 

At first glance Dickens and Meredith appear to be 
remote in bathstyle and spirit; Dickens with his humor 
predominant; Meredith with wit end all the self-con¬ 
sciousness and cleverness of wit. Dickens splashing 
in sentiment; Meredith the scorner of sentiment. 

Dickens direct and generally journalistic in style; 
Meredith apt to be allusive, jerky and compact. Their 
methods of story-telling, as we have seen, belong to 
different worlds. But both Dickens and Meredith 
believed human beings were greater than their circum¬ 
stances. Galsworthy believed they were in the clutch 
of circumstance. Galsworthy gave a limited view of 
human nature. His refined pessimism is in contrast 
to the vulgar optimism of Dickens who places no bounds 
on the greatness of human nature, nor does he limit 















. 

■ 








' 

•: . ■ ' • • . 

. 

- 









136 


its ultimate destiny. Meredith is like Dickens that 
he holds with him that life is not only worth living, 
but it is worth living well. 

"fralsworthyfaith, n says one writer, n has not 
the relative virtue of crudeness and extravagance but 
the vice of humanitarian vagueness."(1) 

It is one thing to be a pagan and not believe in 
God. It is another thing to be a pessimist and not 
believe in the devil. There was something positive 
in the paganism of Meredith, as there was something 
even more positive in the Christianity of Dickens. 
Meredith might look on the dark side of things, but 
he also looked on the bright side of human nature. 

He believed virtue was its only reward, but he believed 
in virtue. Dickens is equally sure of the gloriousness 
of the future rewards as he is of the gloriousness of 
virtue. It is this belief in positive • evil and positive 
good that is the touchstone of an author 1 s greatness. 
Without it he can, like Galsworthy, achieve only the 
lesser peaks of human experience, but he never stands 
on the Alpine summits and looks across the eternal snows. 

(1) Literary Digest. Feb.11, 1933. "Where Galsworthy 1 s 

Fame Lay." (Unsigned). 

0 

0 ~~ 

















BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Editions of Novel s:- 

Charles Dickens - "Dombey and Son”, Collins, London, 1916. 

George Meredith - T, The Egoist”, Scribner 1 s, Few York, 1916. 

John Galsworthy - "Forsyte Saga”, Heinemann, London, 1933. 

B ooks of Reference :- 

Maurois, Andre - "Dickens, Lane, London, 1934. 

Cheastertcn, G.K. -"Charles Dickens”, Methuen. London, 1940. 

Hammerton, J.A. - "George Meredith", Grant, Edinbergh, 1940. 

Photiadis, Constantin - "Meredith's Life, Genius and Teaching", 

Scribner's, Few York, 1913. 

Ellis, S.M. - "George Meredith", Grant Richards, London, 

1930. 

Marrot, H.V. - "Life and Letters of John. Galsworthy” 

Heinemann, London, 1935. 

Periodicals :- 
Charles Dickens 

Living Age,. June 9, 1906. "Other Times, Other Manners", 

(P.H.Fitzgerald). 

Living Age, Sept. 29, 1906, "Dickens and the Popular Hovel”, 

(Anon.). 

Living Age, June 20, 1908, "Dicken 1 s Women Characters", 

(Old Fleet). 

Review of Reviews. January, 1911, "Dickens as a Social Reformer" 

Living Age, Dec. 30, 1911. "Charles Dickens and the Law", 

(E.Clarke). 















Periodicals . (Continued) 
Charles Pickens 
Nation, Feb.8, 1912. 

Lippincott, Feb. 1912. 
Century, Feb, 1912. 

Living Age, June 22, 1912. 
Living Age, Jan. 25, 1913. 

Atlantic, July, 1915. 
Living Age, Jan.l, 1916. 
Living Age, Feb. 12, 1916. 

Living Age, May 5, 1913. 
Living Age, May 25, 1918. 
Independent, June 12, 1919 


"The Business World as Dickens 
Drew It". (Anon.). 

"Dickens and Woen". (H.S.Ward). 

"The Obviousness of Dickens", 
(S.M.Crothers). 

"The Plots of Dickens",(H.C.Biron). 

"New Light on Charles Dickens", 
(H.Lucy). 

"Dickens Then and Now". 

"Charles Dickens and Love",(A.Hood). 

"Dickens and Some Modem Authors", 
(W.Matchett). 

"Dickens and Carlyle", (Anon.). 

"Dickens and Meredith",(J.H.McNulty). 

"Sequel to Dombey and Son", 
(E.E.Slossom). 


Living Age, March 27, 1920."Women of Dickens", (A.Shurmer). 
Dial, Nov., 1921 "Dickens", (Santayana). 


George Me red ith. 

Critic, 47 : 338-42, 1905. "George Meredith 1 s Heroines" 

(E.L.Cary). 

Critic, July, 1905. "Landscape Background in Meredith", 

(E.L.Cary).Current Literature 

Current Literature, Nov.1907. "Treatment of Marriage in 

His Novels" (Anon.). 






























. 














. 




















. 



































Periodicals. (Continued) 


George Meredith. 

M 

Nation, Fed. 27, 1908. Literary Impersonality" (Anon.). 

Current Literature, April, 1908. "Meredith 1 s Message to 

Kis Age", (Anon.). 

Current Literature, July, 1909 "Great Psychologist of 

English Fiction". 

Bookman, Aug. 1909. "Meredith’s Obscurity", (Anon.). 

Living Age, Aug. 14, 1909 "Moral Philosophy of Meredith" (Anonfl). 

Contemporary Review, 1909 "Meredith’s Moral Philosophy", 

(G.K.Chesterton). 

Atlantic, June, 1909. "Novelists' Allegory", (Anon.). 

Westminster Review, Dec. 1909."George Meredith’s Women", 

(Romola Piggott). 

Living Age, Fed. 26, 1910 "Meredith’s Art", (P.Luddock). 

Forum, April, 1915. "Maddening the Meredithians", 

(W.Chislett). 

Bookman, April, 1916. "Advance of the English Novel", 

(A.L.Phelps). 

Living Age, May 25, 1918. "Dickens and Meredith" , (J .H. McNulty). 

Current Opinion, Mar.1919 "Was George Meredith Really a 

Novelist?" (Anon.). 

Living Age, Jan.6,1923. "Dickens and Meredith", (J.Moffatt). 

Bookman, April, 1926. "My Favorite Fiction Character", 

(The Egoist),(J.A.Wylie). 

Fortnighly Review, May,1929 "Some Victorians Afield" 

Essay on Comedy and It’s Author 
(H.Granville Barker) 









































■ 























































Periodicals (Continued) 


John Galsw orthy 

Current Literature, Oct.1908. "Vital Literary Art of 

Galsworthy". (Anon.). 

Current Literature, Dec.1912."Galsworthy 1 s Irritating 

Philosophy". 

Review of Reviews, 43 : 634. "Galsworthy an Interpreter 

of Modernity",(E.Bjorkman). 

Independent, Oct. 30, 1913. "Galsworthy at His Best". 

Nation, March 19, 1914. "Galsworthy 1 s Protest". 

Dial, Sept. 16, 1915. "Life as Seen by John Galsworthy" 

(F.F.Hall) . 

World of Tomorrow, Nov.23, 1932."Galsworthy, One of God 1 s 

Tools". 

Saturday Review of Literature, March 18, 1933. 

"Galsworthy, An Estimate". 

Living Age, April, 1933. "John Galsworthy",(Desmond 

McCartney). 

Literary Digest, Feb.11, 1933"Where Galsworthy’s Fame Lay". 

Christian Science Monitor, Feb. 5, 1936. 

"John Galsworthy; a Forsyte", 
(V.S.Pritchett). 

















. 
























































