University of Alberta Libra 


0 1620 3071301 8 


For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta 


Porter, Winston D. 

Consumer's demand: a.review of 
certain contributions in the field ol 
demand theory. 1938. 



































0.X 1IBBIS 
wnisiiftJK 

mmmmn 
















ft 




































\ 


< •> . . ,.i .'V-' 


s 



^ / 


I 




UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 
(Department of Political Econoany) 


We, the undersigned, hereby certify that we have 
read the within thesis entitled "Consumers* Demand? 

A Review of Certain Contributions in the Field of 
Demand. Theory", submitted by Winston D. Porter, in 
partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree 
of Master of Arts. 


Edmonton, Alberta 


























































UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA. 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 
(Department of Political Economy) 


A THESIS 


CONSUMERS* DEMAND 

A REVIEW OF CERTAIN CONTRIBUTIONS IN THE FIELD OF 
DEMAND THEORY 


Submitted in partial fulfilment 
of the 

requirements for the degree of 
Master of Arts. 


by 


Winston D. Porter. 


Edmonton, Alberta 


April, 1938 














(S(3S 
ft IS 


i 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ACKNOMDOmiOT Page 

INTRODUCTION . .. 1 

past i, theory. 11 

Lav/ of Diminishing Utility. 13 

Translation of the Law into Price Terns 14 

The Balancing of Marginal Utilities and 

the Maximising of Total Utility • . 17 

Demand Schedules . ....... . • 20 

The Elasticity Concept. 27 

A Critique of Marginal Utility Analysis 
and the Law of Diminishing Utility 
(based on the psychological pre¬ 
suppositions of the law). ..... 36 

Other Criticisms of Marginal Utility 

Analysis . ........ 41 

Positive Contributions of Utility 

Theory to Price-Economics • • • . • 45 

The Transition to Welfare Economics 47 

Consumer*s Surplus .......... 48 

Utility Theory in Welfare Economics • . 55 

The Measurement of Welfare ...... 59 













Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/consumersdemandrOOport 






ii 


Page 

The Contributions of the Utility Theory 

to Welfare Economics as seen by Viner 74 

The Transition to the Statistical Study 

of Denand ...... 77 

PART II, METHODS OF QUANTITATIVE MEASURaiBOT 79 

A. Price Quantity Relationships and the 
D ifficulties Involved in their 
I nterpretat ion • . . .. 79 

The Static Law of Demand ....... 79 

Difficulties in the Path of the 

Statistical Economist * . .... 86 

Statistical Techniques .. 90 

The Schultz Method of Deriving "Demand 

Curves" and the "Elasticity of 

Demand": ............. 92 

i. The Use of the Matheoat leal Law of 

Demand .. a • 92 

ii. The Inclusion of Dynamic Factors . . 94 

iii. The Dynamic Law of Demand .. 95 

iv* Time, Elimination .......... 95 


(a) The Method of Helat ive Changes ...... 100 

The Determination of the Coefficient 

of Elasticity. ........... 105 





























' 










iii 


Page 

(b) The Method of Trend Ratios . . . . 106 

The Selection of a Good Trend • . . 108 

The Selection of a Good Demand Curve 110 

The Coefficient of Elasticity as 

Derived by the Trend Ratio Method 113 

Various Critic isms of the Schultz 
Method.* . . . . 116 

Mrs. Gilboy*s "Studies in Beeand" 122 

B. Income-Expenditure & Income Quantity 

R elationships. ........... 128 

The Definition of Budgetary 

Elasticity * « *.. 131 

Pigou^ Approach ....... ... 135 

C• A Comparison of the Statistical Price- 
Quantity Concept and the Budgetary 

Income-Quantity or In c ome-Expenditure 
Relationshi p ............ 139 

The Mirror-Image Controversy • • • • • 143 


CONCLUSION . . * , ... 146 

»♦«**•» 

BIBLIOGEAJHY ............... 150 




























ACKN OWL3SDOTv5ESjJT 


The author wishes to express hie appreciation 
to those members of the Department of Political 
Economy whose valuable suggestions and criticise 
have been of material assistance during the writ¬ 


ing of this thesis 












C't'SL MRS* m AND 


A REVIEW OF CERTAIN CCTORIEUTIONS IN THE 
FIELD OF DEMAND THEOH3T 


INTRQBl >CTI0N 


"The mere attempt to state clearly how the 
demand for a thing is to be measured opens up new aspects 
of the main problems of economics."^ 

When first its foundations were laid down by its 
pioneers, economics dealt xvith problems related to the pro¬ 
duction and distribution of the world’s goods* The 
industrial revolution lent new impetus to the study of these 
economic phenomena. Agricultural and trading states grew 
into great manufacturing nations* Inventions,, production 
and the discovery of new methods of production were the 
keynotes of the new age. 

In terms of historical time the machine age is 
comparatively recent. Little wonder then that a new 
economy so unlike any preceding it should not function as 
smoothly as the proponents of ’laisser faire laiseer aller* 
anticipated. Furthermore the new methods of capitalistic 

I karshall: "Principles of Economics". MacMillan & Co., 
eighth edition 1930, Page 85. 










- 2 - 


production or ’roundabout production* as it ie sometimes 
called gevo rise to more problems than the early fathers 
of Political .conomy had foreseen. As new problems arose, 
practically in proportion as the economic ’distance* be¬ 
tween produced and consumer increased, new schools of 
economists grew up to explain the new economic phenomena 
brought to light through the application of capitalistic 
principles to procuction. 

Thus, primarily because capitalistic production 
on a large ecale vies an innovation and made possible the 
mass production of almost innumerable commodities, many of 
which were previously unknown, it became the central problem 
of the time* 

The supply side of the picture received the major 
part of the economists* attention, largely because the 
supplying: of commodities was* then the most emphasized activity 
of man in the economic sphere* Demand was taken for granted 
by early economists partly because choice was, in any 
case, comparatively limited, and moreover because it was 
considered sensible to hold the view that subtle economic 
























































. 











analyses v/ere not necessary to guide men in the use of their 
resources. The existence of demand was of course implicit 
in the ?jritings of the time; it was recognized as the 
necessary concorariitent of production but toe not considered 
to require any explanation as such. Production was the 
problem which invited discussion and solution end it was 
the supply side of economics which for a long time occupied 
the centre of the economic stage. There is probably more 
than a little truth in the statement which spoke of the 
consumer as the ’forgotten man*. 

It was not long however before a new trend set 
in. The Austrian economists in particular realized that a 
factor very important in the value equation was being; 
neglected. Jevons, however, probably emphasized this here*- 
tofore neglected factor to a greater extent than has been 
the case before or since his time. It was he who postulated 
demand in the form of ’final’ (marginal) utility as the sole 
determinant of value* It was left for Marshall to bring the 
two extreme views into a synthesis. At the same time the 
application of mathematical reasoning to economics was 
leading to a clarification and closer reasoning of all the 
fundamental economic concepts including that of demand. 









- 4 - 


And now the late (?) depression has swung the 
pendulum again in the direction of demand and consumption 
studies. Most problems of production could find a ready 
solution and factories end men were idle not because of lack 
of productive power or raw materials but because there was 
no market for the goods they could produce. This is not to 
assert that the depression me caused by ignorance of the demand 
of the market, but there is no doubt that misdirection of 
production as aresult of lack of knowledge concerning 
demand conditions was a contributory factor to that depression. 
The problem is now one of balancing production so that the 
supply of commodities coming on the market will just 
satisfy the demand for these commodities without causing any 
economic disturbance. The necessity of a balanced pro¬ 
duction and hence a thorough knowledge of the probable 
demand for a commodity as well as of its supply, has led 
governments and other institutions to provide funds for wide 
research in this field. 

Perhaps the oft-re iterated phrase "poverty in tie 
midst of plenty" helped to turn the economic spotlight from 
the producer to the buyer. We are apt to face more often 
the problean of disposing of overproduction in the most 




- 5 - 


efficient manner, rather than the question of how to in¬ 
crease production. Today a producer must have the consumer 
constantly in nine, if not individually, at least collectively. 
Producers who continually ignore the consumers* preferences 
will soon be looking for a market while the man viio con¬ 
centrates his efforts on giving the consumers what they desire 
will have no difficulty in finding buyers. The wise 
entrepreneur will study tfer potentialities of any 
particular area for the absorption of his product and he 
will make it his business to learn whether or not the price 
for which he can sell at a profit is one which these con¬ 
sumers will be willing and able to pay. These and many 
other considerations have led the modern economist into the 
field of consumers* demand. 

The particular task of this thesis is that of 
reviewinr briefly and critically certain of the achieve¬ 
ments which have been made to date in the developnent of 
demand theory and. to point out useful possibilities which 
may be found to exist in certain approaches. An attempt 
has been made to place the main emphasis upon the field of 
price economics but it is impossible to dissociate 







- 6 - 


completely certain aspects of welfare economics. The 
question inevitably arises whether we could not spend 
our increasing wealth in such a way as to further public 
welfare in some positive fashion. We ask ourselves just how 
far the exchance value of any element of wealth represents 
accurately the addition which it makes to happiness and 
public welfare. "And though the theory of demand is yet 
in its infancy, we can already se© that it may be possible 
to collect and arrange statistics of consumption in such a 
way as to throw light on difficult questions of great im¬ 
portance to public wellbeing."^ 

The reader will be disappointed if he expects to 
find much of an original nature in t is inquiry. It ie not 
the aim here to present something novel but rather to 
present critically and in somewhat summary fora certain of 
the accomplishments which have to date been made in the 
field of demand theory* 

The main body of the thesis will consist of two 
main parts, brief outlines of which are given below: 

Part I: Fundamental Theory - In this field, as in many others, 
it seemed only natural to turn to Alfred Marshall for a first 

1 Marshall: op.cit. Page 85. 

























. 










, 

















. 









































- 7 - 


glance into the subject. In Book III of his "Principles 
of Economics", entitled "On Wants and their Satisfaction" 
will be found nearly all the fundamental demand concepts 
which will be met with in one connection or another through - 
out the thesis. To present e rather more modern view of the 
fundamentals I have drawn freely on Jacob Viner*s critique 
of marginal utility analysis . 1 studying Marshall and 
Viner in conjunction it is possible to obtain a more com¬ 
prehensive understanding of the theory of demand as at present 
outlined than would be the case if either of these authorities 
were considered alone. 

Part II sMethods of Quantitative Measurements 

(A) Price-:, uant it y Relationships — In this section 
it is projiased to deal with certain applications of the 
fundamental concepts elucidated in Part I. The origins of 
the statistical methods used in this connection will be 
briefly considered, along with their difficulties, uses, 
end future possibilities. The works of such authors as 
Mrs* Elizabeth Gilboy and Henry Schultz will be 
reviewed. Some of the articles considered are concerned 

^Jacob Viner: The "Utility Concept in Value Theory" and 

the "Utility Concept in Welfare Economics". 

Both found in the Journal of Political 
Economy, Volume XXXIII. 










- a - 


largely with the attempt to supply an inductive verification 
of theories previously arrived at through deductive methods 
by the so-called ’orthodox* economists. However this 
thesis does not concern itself with these relationships to 
♦orthodox* concepts so much as lith the possibilities of 
pointing out different and possibly more practicable 
methods of measuring demand* It is now recognized that the 
classical and neo-classical schools have at least for most 
practical purposes been led by the methods they aaployed to 
impound rather too many factors in the pool of ♦ other things 
being equal* to permit of true-to-life statistical analyses 
and it has become the work of later investigators to throw 
light upon the effects of bringing back into the economic 
arena these heretofore partially neglected factors. The 
discussion begins with a restatement of the static aseumptiois 
and considers the effect of liberating the various factors 
concerning demands which have under static theory been held 
constant by the assumption of ’other things being equal*. 

With emphasis on the work of Schultz we shall see how far 
certain of the statistical economists have been able to in¬ 
troduce dynamic factors into their methods and by some fom 
of compensation return to at least an approximation of 















■ 




' 

. , . * > :,V ■■ ; X. 














■ 
































- 9 - 

static conditions. The question of whether or not the 
1 demand curves* so arrived at are the demand curves 
postulated in Part I of this thesis will be considered but 
the answer to this is probably not so important as will 
be the answer to whether the curves so arrived at are 
recognized for what they actually are and used accordingly* 

(B) Income-j&pend iture Relat ionsli ips :— The 
Budgetary Method - This section concerns Itself with the 
collection and use of budgetary data in the interpretation 
and measurement of consumers* demand# Work in the purely 
theoretical angles of this method is very fragmentary* 

There are available a few notes by A# C. Pigou, a note by 
A. E* Waugh# no brief article by Mrs# E. Gilboy, another 
by Jacob Marsohak# and a recent book by A. L. Bowley and 
R. G. Allen entitled # Family Expenditure*. 

Much that is of a descriptive and explanatory 
nature ha- arisen however out of numerous studies which hsne 
been undertaken with a view toward alleviating conditions 
of malnutrition, poor housing and the like. Consequently 
a few suggestions as to the roossible uses of budgetary 
data in studies of economic welfare have been included 


in t' is sect ion. 










- 10 - 


Although many consumers• studies have been made and 
innumerable budgets compiled, only recently has the 
possibility been investigated that budgetary data might 
be made to serve as an analytical tool in price 
economics as well as in the broader field of the economics 
of v/elfare. It is ray principal desire in this section 
to indicate what contributions in this direction may 
lie dormant in the use of budgetary data and the "income- 
expenditure” curve as opposed to the more familiar price- 
quantity curve dealt with in Part II (A). 

(C) A brief comparison and attempt at 
coordination of the two concepts considered in (A) and 
(B) above. 

Conclusion:—Tne conclusion will consist in a brief summary 
of the main features presented in the body of the thesis 
with emphasis on future useful lines of endeav ur. 






- 11 - 


PART I . 

Firm iJMTAL aiiEomr 


As man’s ’wealth* both in knowledge and material 
things increases so does the variety of hie wants. And ae 
the variety of wants increases so does the complexity of 
demand relations. Capitalistic production has brought into 
being an age where luxury more than ever before flourishes 
in the midst of poverty. For some the desire for con¬ 
spicuous consumption, or oompet It it ive ostentation as it is 
sometimes called, may be indulged at will. For others life 
is a perpetual striving fox* the barest of necessities ~ 
these unfortunates may or may not be able to satisfy even 
the most basic of wants, food and drink* As we pass up 
the scale of wants from the very poor to the very rich we 
are at the same time encompassing an expanding capacity £>r 
conaumption. Whether it is as Marshall said that in the later 
stages of nan’s development it is new effort^ and new 
activities which -give rise to new grants rather than the 
contrary, it is still true that a higher income makes 
possible the satisfaction of more wants than does a lower 









income. Thus throughout our inquiry it will be found 
necessary to consider the fact that the demand of one 
income group for a commodity is apt to be very unlike that 
of another income group for the same commodity, and it 
will also be observed that the gap between these demands 
widens as wc pass from the realm of necessity commodities 
to that of luxury commodities. 

But the study of wants in themselves would lead 
far beyond the stage of economics into a field which could 
only be covered by a theory of life itself. As Marshall 
states, "The higher study of consumption....though it nay 
have its beginning within the proper domain of economics, 
it cannot find its conclusion there, but must extend far 

beyond. "3- 

The practice of the English economists will be 

followed and no attempt will be made toward the classification 

P 

of the various wants of nan* 

^Marshall; op.cit. Page 91. 

® For an interesting classification of wants see J. W* Angell: 
"Consumers' Demand" in Q,* *T. E. Volume XXXIX. 

Various continental economists have also seen fit to 
include elaborate classifications of wants in their 
treatises. 












J 








. 









. 




. 










. 


. 



■ 






































. 


' 





- 13 


Suffice it to note that wants do exist, are generally 
capable of satisfaction (if the necessary means to that 
end are available) and are Unities in number. 

The remainder of this Part consists in an inquiry 
into the economic concepts which have been evolved in the 
attempt to clarify, analyse, measure and forecast the 
motive force which leads man to undertake the satisfaction 
of these unnumerable wants of his. In brief, we are to 
study the concepts used in one way or another in the analysis 
of consumers* demand. It seems obvious that the ultimate 
regulator of all demand; (i.e., of wholesalers* demand, 
retailers* demand etc.) is the demand of the consumer 
and the present Inquiry is limited to this last category. 
diminishing Utility — The statement that wants are 
innumerable has already been made but we also know that each 
distinct want has a limit at any one time. This familiar 
phenomenon was stated by Marshall as the "Law of Satiable 
Wants" or as it is more commonly known, the Law of Diminishing 
Utility, thus:"The total utility of thing to anyone (i.e, the 
total pleasure or other benefit it yields him) increases with 






. 


. 

' 











. 
























- 14 - 


every increase in his stock of it, but not as fast as his 
stock increases”.... in other words, ’•the additional benefit 
which a person derives from a given increase of hie etock 
of a thing, diminishes with every increase in .the stock 
that ha already hoc*?* We i^ay term the last unit of 
e good he is just induced to take, his marginal purchase 
and the utility of this last purchase to him may be spoken 
of as its marginal utility. In Marshall’s own words 
"The marginal utility of a thing to anyone diminishes 
with every increase in the amount of it that he already 
has" 2 

Implicit in this law of course, is the assumption 
of a point of time* With time in the picture tastes and 
sensibilities may change. Let us take the ease of a small 
boy who ate seven green apples on Monday. For that day, 
for him, the seventh apple was the marginal apple. 

However, it 3s quite possible that on Tuesday even a first 
apple would be distinctly subnarginal* 

Translation of the Law into Price Terms - This translation 
affords us our first price-quantity concepts. An example 
may illustrate how the translation is made. Let us consider 


^Marshall: op*cit. Page 93 
S Ibid Page 93 











15 


a consumer who purchases, say ten pounds of tea in a yet r 

when tho price of that connocity is fifty cents a pound. 

Then fifty cents is his marginal demand price, for it 

measures the marginal utility of one pound of tea to him. 

He does not think an eleventh pound would be worth fifty 

cents so he stops at the tenth. We may now reword the 

lav; in these terns. "The larger the amount of a thing that 

a person, has, the lesr, * other things being equal; 

(i.e., the purchasing power of money, and the. amount of 

money at his command being equal), will be the price he will 

pay for a little more of it: or in other words his marginal 

demand price for it diminishes.”^ 

The introduction of money into the neo-classical 

method of demand measurement makes necessary certain 

qualifications. Only * efficient 1 demand may be treated 

objectively by statistical methods, i.e., if the price 

which a person is willing to offer for a commodity does 

not reach the current selling price then me cannot 

statistically record his demand. Only when the bid price 

comes up to the sale price we can definitely chalk up a sale, 

^Marshall op.cit. Page 95 








- 16 


only then is the demand ’efficient** This of course 
does not prevent the construction of hypothetical denand 
curves for the purposes of theoretical demonstration but 
the limitations of such imaginary schedules for practical 
purposes should bo realized and the imperfections of 
money itself as a measure of demand must be reckoned in... 
However, the difficulties connected with the applications of 
’orthodox’ theory to statistical practice will be more 
fully dealt with in Part iiof tie thesis. While the 
elucidation of the technique of deriving the fundamentals 
of demand theory is simple enough superficially there are 
pitfalls which must be avoided v£ien applying these concepts, 
e.g., it must be emphasized that price cannot measure 
marginal utility .for a group - it can only measure marginal 
utility of s good to an individual..*for the wants end 
circumstances of the individuals composing aliao£ ‘ t an y 
community are bound to be widely different. 

An increase in the price of a coismodity may cause 
each of the individuals in a group to cease purchasing let 
us say one unit of the good valued at a dollar per unit. 

But this one dollar may represent a totally different 

fu 









- 


■ 

















. 








' 










. 
























- 17 - 


marginal utility to each individual in the group, 
depending on that person’s taste or means* Jevons tell 
into the error of comparing the marginal utilitios of 
commodities to gro ps and has since been roundly 
criticized therefor. 

By making certain assumptions covering the 
rationality of consumers* motives 1 certain generalizations 
have sometimes been made to which objection may be taken 
on the grounds that the basic assumption is not true to 
the facts - take, for instance, the principle of the 
maximization of total utility. 

The Balancing of marginal utilities and the Ifeximizine of 

Total Utility — If wo assume that individuals act from 
purely rational motives we may date that each individual 
will purchase up to the point Where his money has the same 
marginal utility as every other dollar---otherwise there 
would be a loss in satisfaction. If Ik is point is reached then 
we can say that the total utility of each individual’s income has 

^’or a discussion of the irrationality of consumers’ demand 
see: W. B. Baddway, ” Irrationality in Consumers’ 

Demand”, in the Economic Journal, Volume XLVI, Page 419 et seq. 








- 19 


been maximized* So also with present and future wants 
says Marshall "A prudent person will endeavour to distribute 
his means between all their several uses, present and 
future, in such a way that they will hav® in each the same 
marginal utility." 1 

It is objected against this doctrine that nan is 
not the cold, calculating animal that this argument would 
imply* Man is probably prone to fall in with the rather 
flattering suggestion that rational purchasing is apt to 
be the rule rather "Qian the exception. Conceivably when 
the marginal utility of money to an individual is vary 
low (as is the case with a rich man) this attempt to 
balance and offset marginal utilities will be at a 
minimum, but among the ra&jority of consumers them is 
probably no doubt that this selective principle is constantly, 
though imperfectly, at work, its action being distorted 
however by those occasional purchases made on sheer 
impulse—and especially by those disparities which are 
bound to occur between the desire for a thing and the 
ultimate satisfaction which is derived after the purchase 


Marshall: op,eit* Page 119 







- 19 - 


is consummated. 

A further and possibly even more potent 
hindrance to the smooth working of this principle is 
the disutility involved through the time and labour spent 
in making the innumerable calculations which would be 
necessary to assure that the satisfaction received from 
the expenditure of any dollar is not less than that 
received from any other dollar* However, the fact 
remains that most consumers have some vague idea as to 
how their future resources are to be budgeted and this 
foresight must have a general tendency at any rate towards 
the maximizing of total utility. 

Again, the condition of an instant of time 
implied in the statement of the l&w precludes changes in the 
marginal utility of money to an individual* Hence the marginal 
utility of money is to him so fixed that the prices he is 
just willing to pay for two coxnraociites are to one another 
in the same ratio as their marginal utility to him. This 
statement of course involves another as umption, that price 
is a fair measure of desire, satisfaction or xshatever we 
consider ’utility* to consist of. This assumption mil 
be more fully dealt with later. 






• 20 


Moreover the marginal utility of money is 
greater for the poor than for the rich—in other words 
the satisfaction offered by any one dollar is greater 
to a poor man than to e rich man simply beca se the former 
has fewer dollars. This last principle is coining to be 
recognized in most modern taxation 601*1611105—and thus 
rovides us with an example of the application of economice 
to social justice. 

Arguments against the use of the marginal utility 
concept in economics have become so profuse in the 
literature of the past few years that w? cannot overlook 
them entirely here. But before touching on this point 
it will be well to consider briefly certain related 
concepts, such as the demand schedule and the elasticity 
of demand. 

Demand Schedules — Since no one has yet invented a 
satisfactory subjective measure of desire, the marginal 
utility economist again translates, the diminishing 
utility lav/ or schedule into price terms and so forms a 
demand schedule. To do this the possible prices of the 
commodity are li-ted and the corresponding quantities 










- 21 - 


Estimated or obtained experimentally) which the individual 
will take at these hypothetical prices are filled in. The 
result is a simple individual demand schedule which my be 
expressed graphically to 1‘orm the demand curve as we 
know it. The assumptions involved in the static statement 
of the demand schedule concept vrill be more fully put 
forward in Pert I. 

In subsequent sections the terra. *a change in 
demand’ will sometimes be employed. In this connection 
an increase or a decrease in demand is to be understood 
unless qualified as an increase or a decrease in the neo¬ 
classical schedule sense, i.e., an increase or decrease 
throughout the isSiole list of prices at which the consumer 
is willing to purchase different amounts of the commodity 
and not merely that he is willing to buy more or less of it 
at different prices* Thus an increase in demand, would be 
represented graphically {where amount is abscissa nc. price 
is the ordinate) by raising- the demand curve or moving 
it to the right with perhaps some modification of its 
shape—the last qualificetioix being made necees ry by the 
fact that the demand change will seldom be proportionate 

L 

over the entire range of rices. 













22 


But the demand of an individual, while inter¬ 
esting in itself is seldom representative of the 
group. Where, however the commodity is one which 
is bought often and in small Lea , t *., milk f 

the individual’s demand is quite continuous and more or 
less representative of the general demand found in the 
arket. The demand, however, for watches, hats, and the 
like is discontinuous and an individual demand schedule 
for such commodities is of little importance since 
for want of sufficient data a curve cannot be constructed. 

By taking the group demand the irregularities arising from 
sporadic individual purchases are ironed out and a usable 
continuous demand curve illustrating the law of diminishing 
utility is obtained. The conclusion is reached then that 
for the aggregate of demand in a market, "every fall, however 
slight in the price of a commodity in general use, will, other 
things being equal, increase the total sales of it".^* 

Hence, "if we had the requisite knowledge we coi*ld make a 

list of the prices at which each amount of it could find 

2 

jjurchasers in a given place during say, a year.” This 
idea of Marshall’s of deriving a demand curve over a period 

^Marshall: op. cit. Page 98 
2 Ibid. Page 99 . 







- 23 - 


of tine rather than at a point of time appear© again in 
the letar sect lone of this theata*^ 

To continue tho total darisaad curve la a coop- 
oeite one ©oneleting of ell the individual damn&a in the 
ijirke t «c ertepoeed on o m another* farshsll ferns lly 
define© the donoM curve in theeo terne# "The dorsad 
curv© for any emaodity in a market during my given unit 

g 

of tine is* the locus of demand point© for It." 

The foregoing analysis. load© to .the ftel 

conclusion stated as the general law of damnd* "The 

greater the accent to he ©old, the pmllar Met fee the 

price- at which it is offered In order that it my find 

purchasers; or, in other words # the a&^wi demoded in- 

ereeeea with a fall in price and diminishes with a rise 

s 

in pried* The simplest rm6 naet fuade^ntal state.- -eat 
of the law of demad postulate© that the derated curve will 
be inclined negatively throughout the whole of its length* 

T ffV OiYboy on Studies in Xmmu&i 0*3 *.■•■-# .A»®pe* 193P sad 
i* fehultz^Stct istieel loara of md Supply * 

e Iferehalls Ibid* f*ge S9n* 

Psgo 9S. 







- 24 - 


Many apparent contradictions of Ihis law ray be quoted. 

There is of course the common case of the coin 
collector who as his set nears completion is apt to offer 
increasing suns of money for those coins still missing 
frcm his collection. Thus for the coins in the set we 
night have a positively inclined demand curve. However, 
it is the set rather than the individual coin that the 
collector has in mind and if m set up his demand schedule 
for sets of coins we will find our lav/ operates as before. 

The same argument applies to a jewel fancier who is 
attempting to match up a string of pearls. The string 
should be considered the unit rather than the individual 
gem. 

Again there is the miser and his attitude toward 
gold. We can find no evidence of diminishing utility or 
desire here. But a miser is abnormal in this respect; he 
is psychopathic. We might consider him as a collector 
whose initial set is never complete. For him the unit 
is all the gold in existence. 

Again, supposing we find a positively inclined 
market demand curve, night we not assume that many if not all 
purchasers of such goods have positively inclined desire 





















- 

















. 
















' 













- 25 - 


curves for then? Thus we might find over time a positive 
market demand curve for such commodities as telephones, 
hymn-book editions and so forth, which become popular in 
proportion as they attain wider use. So also for certain 
styles of fashion goods although these latter may lose 
their value if their use should become too widespread and 
therefore ’ common*• But let us note that these suppositions 
all arise only when we depart from our original static 
definition of the demand curve and in any case there is 
mo implication of positive desire schedules. For while 
a person’s desire for successive units of a good will some¬ 
times vary directly with the generality of its use (e,g., 
the number of telephones on a circuit and hence the greater 
number of calls to be answered) it will still vary 
inversely with the number of units that he already possesses. 
The operation of the law is obscured but the law itself 
is not disproves for at any given n<men% given the extent 
of its use a consumer will take a lesser number of the 
units at a high than at a lovr price. 







Viner states an interesting case where it 
ectually is possible to have a true positive demand curve 
at least for part of its range. This phenomenon may 
occur for commodities which have a prestige value derived 
mainly from their expensiveness and also for commodities 
whose quality is generally judged by their price. "In 
both these instances (i.e. f prestige attached to price 
and quality judged by price) the positive inclination of 
the demand schedule will be due to the fact that at any 
given price, x, purchasers will desire any nth unit more 
than they would ave desired an nth unit at a lower price, y. 
It does not follow that the desire curves will also be 
positive in their inclination, i.e., that at any given price 
or irrespective of price, purchasers will desire second or 
third units more than first units* The failure in these 
instances of the demand schedule to follow the desire 
schedules In its inclination is due to the fact that for 
such commodities the desire schedules are functions of actual 
price as well as being variables of it." 1 Evidently in 
this connection we are to take desire schedules to mean in- 
dividual desire schedules and demand schedule to mean 


1 Viners The Utility Concept in Value Theory and Its Critics: 
J.P.I. Volume XXXIII, Page $ 79 . 









- 27 


market demand schedule. W* on price becomes cause qe well 
as effect we nay ret a positive market demand schedule. 

Other freak demand curves might be cited^ but the 
point at issue, that the general law of demand a: sta ted is 
valid in spite of such objections as the above, has been 
sufficiently well emphasized. 

Having noted how the general slojeof the demand 
curve is established the next ?tep is to consider xshat in¬ 
ferences may be drawn from the fact that the demand curves 
for different commodities at different times may have different 
slopes* 

The Elasticity Concept — This concept ie arrived at when we 
consider that the law of diminishing utility or desire may 
operate slowly or rapidly,i.e*, the demand durvo may be in¬ 
clined toward, the horizontal or steeply toward the vertical., 
and as this is the case with the individual so it is with 
the market. 

"The elasticity (or responsiveness) of demand in a 
market is great or small according as the amount demanded in¬ 
creases much or little for a given fall in price, end diminishes 

o 

much or little for a given rise in price." The coefficient of 

elasticity will be unity if a small fall in price causes an 

eqpial proportionate increase in the amount taken. 

3-See note to Page 5 of H.Schultz* 6 "Statistical Laws of Demand 
and Supply" for further references to the pos. ibility of 
obtaining ♦positive* demand curves. 

2 Marshall: op.eit. Page 102. 












- 28 


It must be emphasized that as ordinarily 
defined the coefficient of elasticity relates to a point 
on the curve and may vary in magnitude from point to point 
unless the demand curve is one depicting constant elasticity* 

If Ihe demand curve is in the form of a constant outlay curve 
(i*e*, xy* constant) it will take the shape of a rectangular 
hyperbola if plotted on ordinary graph paper* One must be 
careful to avoid confusing the above definfcion of elasticity 
(point elasticity) with the idea of elasticity across a 
finite arc (or arc elasticity as it is called). The 
distinction between these two concepts may be explained 
by the use of an example accorcing to the manner of H* Schultz* 1 

Assume a constant outlay curve such that no matter 
what the price of the commodity, a fixed amount, say $1200 
will be received from the amount sold* The equation to 
the curve will then be xy“ 1200 where x » quantity sold 
and y is price per unit. 

Then so long as the changes are infinitesimal 
the elasticity at every point on such a curve is equal x,o one. 
Moreover, since this is a constant outlay curve (elasticity = 


1 H. Schultz: Statistical Laws of Demand and Supply” Page 7 et seq 



















. 













- 29 


unity) according to Marshall, any small fall in price will 
cause a proportionate increase in the amount bought. 

But novj let us consider the elasticities 


corresponding to finite changes or rather elasticities 

measured along an arc of the curve rather than taken at e 

point on the curve. Let us assume that the present 

price of the commodity is $4.00 per unit. At this price 

300 units will be gold (300 x #4.00 * $1200). Now if he 

price should rise by 50$ (i.e*, from $4.00 tc f 0Q per unit) 

the quantity taken would drop from 500 to 200 (200 x $6.00 

= $1200), k fall of 53 1/3$ • According to the definition 

as applied to Infinitesimal changes the elasticity of demand 

is (for this arc) S3 1/5$ _ .*2/3. If, on the other 

50$ 

hand, the price should drop by 50$ (i.e., from $4.00 to 
$2.00, the amount taken would rise&om 300 to 600 
units (600 x $2.00 Z $1200) and elasticity for this arc 
becomes “100$ 


oO? 


Now suppose price returns to 


its former level, i.e., from $2.00 back to $4.00 which 
is an increase of 100$. The quantity taken will fall 
from 600 to 300, (300 x $4.00 - #1200), i. e., a drop 


of 50$ and the elasticity measured in this direction is 












- 30 - 


- 50 $ 

- Z ■"Ssj* Then it is obvious that, although the point 

100 $ 

elasticity of this curve is always -1, the arc elasticity 
(measured arithmetically according to percentage changes) 
is never equal to -1, i.e., " a given finite percentage 

change in price does not cause an equal percentage change 
in amount demanded. Furthermore, the magnitude of the 
(arc) elasticity depends upon the particular end of the arc 
which is taken as a base, or - which is the same thing - 
upon the direction in which the price is assumed to change***' 1 ' 

It is always numerically greater than 1 for a fall in price 
and an increase in amount taken, and it is always numerically 
less than 1 for a rise in price and a decrease in amount taken. 

Here it becomes apparent that percentages are 
not good measures of pro ortionate changes under such 
circumstances as we have outlined. 

An alternative method of measurement is avail¬ 
able and is to be recoiraended for by its use there is no 
difference to be found between the point elasticity and the 
arc elasticity of the constant outlay curve - which is as 
it sh uld be. By this new method the coefficient of 

Schultz: op. cit. Pages 10 - 11. Cf. also Hugh Bglton, 
n Some Aspects of the Inequality of Incomes in Modern 
Conmunities w (1920) Pages 192 - 197. 















:> : 
























- 51 - 


elasticity if taken as the ratio of the difference between 
the logarithms of the quantities to the difference between the 
logarithms of the prices. 

By using logarithms instead of the simple numbers 
our constant outlay curve which up till now has been in the 
form of a rectangular hyperbola becomes a straight line in¬ 
clined at an angle of 45° (when plotted on double 
logarithm paper)• The slope of this line then measures 
the elasticity which under constant outlay conditions 
is obviously -1 at any point or over any arc of the curve. 
Thus whenever we have to deal with finite differences of 
any consequence (and hence arc elasticity) it is practically 
mandatory to use the logarithmic method if a significant 
coefficient is to be obtained. If the differ nces are 
infinitesimal or at any rate relatively small then the 
arithmetic method may give good enough results for all 
practical purposes (i.e., the arc elasticity will more or 
less approximate point elasticity). 

In the demand schedule it is obvious that the 
prices and quantities proceed by finite differences - the 
size of these differences depending on the frequency and 
range of the data. From this schedule arc elasticity (which 





- 32 - 


may or may not be significant) may be derived- but 
no point elasticity. To derive the latter concept 
( hich is the one commonly referred to in economic 
treatises) it is necessary to have the deraand curve 
and its equation. When the demand curve has been filled 
it becomes possible to obtain both forms of elasticity 
and to judge the significance of the elasticities 
of various arcs of the curve. 1 

Since a knowledge of the probable elasticity 
of demand for a commodity is tltal to the success of any 
inquiry instituted with a view toward assisting producers 
in the marketing of their product and since the elasticity 
factor is inseparable from any study of demand we are 
justified in making a few generalizations about this 
concept• 

The task will be much simpler if we consider one 
income class at a time, for when we speak of high prices 
relative to a poor man’s income the same prices might 
conceivably be low from a rich man’s viewpoint. In other 
words the fact of the difference in the marginal utility 
of money to a rich man and a poor man again becomes evident 
her • For any one income class hox*7ever, wo may say "The 

Gf. A.C.Pigou op.eit. Page 258 n. in which the tens. arc 
elasticity ifi discussed. 






- SO - 


elasticity o- de-ii~nd is gie-t ior high prices, and great, 
or £t -teast considerable .or medium prices; but it declines 
as the price falls and gradually ..'sides away ii the iell 
goes so far the t satiety -Level is re&cheoi It is re¬ 
marked too that tills rule seems to hold lor most commodities 
ana lor all clashes, “save only that the level at which 
high prices end and mow prices begin is different for 

different classes, and so again is the Level at which low 

2 

prices end and very low prices begin.” 

The shape of the demand curve varies too with 
the commodity, ior common necessities the satiety revel 
is soon reached, end once a low price is reached elasticity 
practically disappears. But with another group o 
commodities, luxuries, and particularly those luxuries 
wanted ior the gratific tion of the desire or distinction 
or ior “conspicious consumption* * the case is different* 
ihe appetite for emulation® i& practically Inatiable 
and for this type o- commodity the elasticity of demand 
remains considerable even at very low prices. 

1 Ibid. Page 105. 

* Ibid. Page 103. 
x 

° Of* Thorsteinjfeblen "Theoiy oi the Leisure Class*, 







. ; 














■ • - 

' 








- 


■. ■; 




■ 

. ■. ■ 

. 

. 














. 














■■■« 








' 










. 



















lx we apply the demand curve ior luxuries to 
ell classes it will be noted that the desire :or luxuries 
acts us a dormant iorce cutting through ell strata of 
society, lor as price fails, new volumes o- latent demand 
are made * efficient* and the total demand for luxuries 
becomes extremely elastic, i* 6+, the efiec.t of lowering 
price is often to make effective a large latent demand 
which has been awaiting only this opportunity to make 
itself felt* If a method of forecasting this latent 
demand could be devised mahy changes in the present .rice 
structure might follow. On the other hand a knowledge 
that no further demand could be tapped by the lowering of 
prices might serve to prevent many a costly experiment 
in price cutting* 

till further inferences may b: drawn as to the 
probably shape a.: the demand curve, for instance, demand 
will be almost perfectly inelastic for articles such as 
suit* The price is already so low that any further lower! 
would hardly increase their use.^ On the other hand we 
may note that part of the demand x'or the more expensive 
roods is really a demand for the means of obtaining 
social distinction and is almost insatiable..hence elastic 


i Cf• Page 132 below. 









-se¬ 


ll a good is applicable to many uses its demand 
will tend to be elastic* A demand curve for eo.eh use 
may be drawn and when all are superimposed the aggregate 
demand curve will snow the effect of the use of the commodity 
xor all its purposes from the highest to the lowest. If 
the satiety level should be reached tile demand will again 
become inelastic. Again if the purchase of the commodity 
whose demand. curve is under consideration requires the 
expenditure of orLy & v ry small portion o the consumers 
income, the demand for this commodity is apt to be quite 
inei&stic.ihe concept or elasticity will of course be 
elaborated more specifically when we come to deal with 
the quantitative measurement ox demand in Fart II. 

Vie have now briefly stated the basic economic 
concepts with which we shall be concerned in the latter 
part ox this thesis* However, the backbone of the neo¬ 
classical system of demand theory as we have stated it, 
i*e., the ..aw of diminishing utility, n&s of late been 
subjected uo so much criticism that we should not proceed 
to use these eoncepts without being thoroughly aw re of 
tne nature ox the objections brought against them. 


i 


The question of the shape of the demand curve for such 
commodities will be considered -gain in Part XI (b)* 










• 56 


ii. u ritl ue oi‘ lab, filial Utility mui.,, sis .n o. the Lav.- of 
Diminifehing Utility: — j^uch fruitless discussion has 
arisen concerning the validity oi the psychology behind the 
concept oi marginal utility as currently used in modern 
economic treatises# However, the v^ry volume 01 these 
criticisms directed against the utility theory makes it 
imperative to take some notice of them* We might quote 
the following sentence as a sample oi the * violence* 
with which the concept has been attacked* "The hocus- 
pocus o- marginal utility does not explain price?*** 

This along with dozens oi other similar sentiments attests 
to the severity of the critics. In essence the flaw 
in the utility theory is seen to consist in its faulty 
psychological foundation and in the f taint 1 or hedonism 
which seems to surround the use of the word * utility 1 * 

The underlying psychology oi' the utility theory 
has been attacked from two angles, that of price economies 
and that of welfare economics* At this point the in airy 
will be limited to the viewpoint of the price economist, 
but a section will be devoted below to a discussion of how 
the criticism affects the welfare economist# 

1 R# G* fugwell; "Human Mature in Economic Theory 1 *. J*P#&# 
June 191k 










- 57 


The Utility Theory in Price Economics — To use the utility 
theory us an explanation of the mode 01 dete mim tion 
of particular exchange values or prices it is obviously 
necessary to establish a causal sequence between it and 
price* "The utility theorist commonly does this in 
elliptical .ushion and by resort to the assumption or 
argument, generally implicit, that the intensity of desire 
for objects is governed by and is uaniitativ&Ly a more or 
less accurate reilection of the utility or satisfaction- 
yielding power of the objects*It is this passage from 
desire to satisfaction that involves the psychological 
reasoning which the critics allege to be rationalistic 
and hedonistic—and modern psychology is pretty much on 
the side of the critics. Viner objects in these term® 
to the use of the hedonistic calculus which is implied 
when desire is taken as the equivalent of satisfaction 
and the attempt is allegedly made to treat man as an 
economic animal who spends his days in a rational end 

measurable search for * satisfaction* or •pleasure 1 • 

"Human behaviour in general", says ^iner, * and presumably 
therefore, also in the market place is not under the constan 

"Winers "The Utility Concept in Value Theory** Volume 

HXIIX, Page 575. 

















- 58 - 


told detailed guidance oj careful accurate hedonic 
calculations, but it is the product of an unstable and 

unrational complex of reflex actions, impulses, instincts, 

1 

habits, customs, fashions and moo hysteria*" On this 
uestion Marshall too, had something to say but his view 
was rather more lenient than Viner* s* "Some of those 
desires with which economics is chiefly concerned, and 
especially thoss connected with emulation, ar. impulsive; 
many result from the force of habit; some are .morbid 

and xead on^y to hurt; and many are based on expectations 

Z 

cnat are never fulfilled#* However, after admitting tnese 

/uaiiiieations Marshall still saw fit to continue under 
the assumption that the resulting satisfaction corresponds 
in general i'airry well to that which was anticipated when 
the purchase was made* Thus while adult ting that the two 
uantitles •desire* and •satisfaction* will not necessarily 
in practice be equivalent he notes that since a direct 
measure of either is impossible, at least in the present 
state of knowledge, we must “fail back on the measurement 

which economics supplies, of the motive or moving force 
to actions and we make it serve with all its faults? but. 
for the desires which prompt activities and the satisfactions 

- 


% 

Marshall! op f eit*?uge 9k n, 









Wjji; : 






- 59 - 


that result from them#"^ 

fly a somewhat different route Viner reaches 
essentially the same conclusion* He admits willingly the 
faulty’ psychology underlying utility theory but 
characteristically asks 'what of it'? How vital is its 
dependence on this erroneous psychology? His solution 
is simple* for purposes of price economies, says Viner# 
we might substitube a simple law of diminishing desire 
for that of diminishing utility - thus eliminating the 
•hedonistic taint* and all reference to the objectionable 
term®! pleasure* pain, and the fike-—but still leaving 
sufficient of a psychological background to explain the 
negatively inclined pecuniary demand curve and therefore# 
sufficient background to explain the mode of determination 
of market price# la a word diminishing desire is a 
sufficient reason to explain diminishing price offers as 
the quantity available increases (the negative slope of 
the uerasnd Curve)# 

Moreover, states Viner, it is not necessary to 
compare the desires of different people for the same or 
different coiaaoditea nor need we ascribe to them any 

I 


Marshall* ap.eit* Page 95 a 













' 
















, , 
















- 4U - 


particular genius for rationalistic calculations or 
reasonings* All the price economist need as ume with 
respect to an individual*© desires is that they Vary in 
intensity and that the desire for a further unit of a 
good diminishes with the increase in the number of units 
already acquired* 

In point of fact many of the utility theorists 
in the main confined their value theory within the limits 
of price-economics,ie., they mt.de it their chief, if 
not t'-ieir sole concern to explain the mechanism of price- 
determination,without appraising that meea&uism from an 
economic welfare or other ethical or quasi-* till cal stand¬ 
point* any searching of the subjective strata underlying the 
objective phenomena of market demand was undertaken ©imply 
with the view o: shedding light on the origin demand 
and not bec £ : u *e 01 any interest in the consumer*s 
psychology ior its own state* Among writers in this category 
may be clas sed Go seen, J evens, W&lras, bohm-B.awerk and 
Wicks teed* These writers may be &eed too 01 the allegation 
oi boriuwing their major premises from the then current 
psychology* nave it on nerds authority the.t the law of 
diminishing utility, whether sound or not, has been 






- 41 - 


developed by the economyais &© a product o: their own 
oucterv-tdon uno not been borrowed iz'om psychology* 
both uide and Vsick steed preceded Viner in the 
attempt to get away 1'ro/a the iaplic tioua o: a bid 
psychology. Xh© former mux a r&ther use the tern 
f cioauiability* than utility -wail© the matter economist 
rex erred to ©peek ox 1 d&airedaess* • 

(finer 1 & case ox course depends upon the assumption 
that there is c. lav ox diminishing deaxre* or in other 
words that the -.aw of the demand curve is that it shall 
be ae^a txveiy inclined* be .» ve greedy discussed under 
the section dealing with defend schedule© a nu..X ©r of 
fcp^val exception© to this law and hey-: there ©horn that 
these mey all be explained in terms canal abe it uitfo the xew* 
xs&y objection© huve been advanced ageicet the phono ^uuoa 

or diminishing desare but none have so far been overwhelming* 

1 

the negative ©lope ox the ae^na carve i© u direct 
inference from experience and the *av o diminishing desxre 
is the best working hypothesis so far available oiiieh serves 
to expiela the general recurrence ox that phenomenon* 
other U&jujty a:-.?u.yais; Some 


^Ci* &©tid&v*y # op«cit* Fage 419 




















' 


. 

. 







































- 4i - 


ori tic & o* the a&rgitteJL utility school ik v. .*o>:<ever, di rec ted 
taeir otu-da not on the peyehoiogicel pi eeupjXnd fcioui* 
behind the theory but on c^rU4n isua* eneea dr^im there* 

:'ro&«. rdut tins thooiy i*.r4e to the position tha-t i'or each 
pv.-cnn»«r oi & series o* ooam^itiss the pureimo© r rices 
u the r entire utility o.> thee* ca&ur.oditjMi 

rjr» Vines- Touid eubetitutc tan fern Sii «&.rgin&X desire* 

. or .-ugin**! utility ****& thin aeftoipt "Sill eerva equ&iiy 
we*- Use only uegi tlnn t,e iunetloa o; the aonoept in 
price ocaiioiaie## tfil*, &e « iegjU&i device -or e... •.. easing 
*ibh greater praeleioa the subjective irelatlonshi^e b - 
t» een a- iufei i&ere&en t* a * di f t m *m t goods * * A 

fiiMi tueoriate ruuv exceeded bhi *- ue-..- ai the 
concept cued have eaniueea utility curve* end de&.-.ad 
soaedu-.**, tJTid especially beceuee o'- di$ *rather 
a..ng«xou* practice* o* expressing utility curve# in 
pecua~..ry terse, fctve %oksn oi --rice a© ?&*garlng the 
nergindi utill tie* at the eeue goods to difiereat person* 

&nd a- <u~ . rent *oode ta society rs e whole* hut Vi?.- -r ak&a 
i clair tint this oritieie* should be directed only at 
these craters hnd not ngeinst U entire utility school. 


^Viaeri op» ci%« Volume hhli, Page Sgi. 

























































- 45 


Marshall was very carexul to avoid this particular error# 
But since we have admitted that price is not £ 
satisfactory measure of utility as between individuals 
have we not robbed the theory of any market significance? 

The answer is in the negative for it is still possible to 

m, 

show a relationship between individual utility (or desire) 
seneduies, and market price, Thus: "the price of a 
particular commodity is determined in part by the market 
demand for it and the market demand is a compound of the 
individual demands. The individual demands are in turn 
resultants ox the contact, for each individual, of his 
desire to acquire that commodity with Ills desire to retain, 
or to make other use of, what must be surrendered to 
obtain it* In this way individual desire schedules are 

an ultimate determinant of market price and have a market 

„1 

significance. B 

k number of •points 1 may be made against certain 
utility theorists such as boha-Bawerk and Jevons which do 
not apply to Marshall, Edgeworth, licksteed, Davenport, 
xisher, Walras, Pareto and other members or the school —* 
but we cannot go much further along that line here* 

hbid. page 585. 































































■ 













■ 













- 44 


i'he school has been accused o- circular reason* 
log because they are said to explain exchange value by 
exchange v^-i.u© since they teach that V; lue is partially 
determined by desire expressed In purchasing po;*er which 
i& ench: Aigc v~lue* Viner dieaisacs this criticise vary 
lightly* Xhis * circular reasoning* he says, is really 
e perception or the mutuality of relationship between 
exchange values* Inch value any be thoughtoi as mi item 
in & nystea oi in fcerdepeadea t values* Xhc m. thorns ti eel 
scitooi* tiS will be robed below* hnv; gone far beyond 
the aeo-el&ssieisti in placing ©aphasia on. this mutuality 
oi' relabionshipa* iliorstein Vebleri^ hue noted & cotmon 
criticism Ov the utility theory and that is that it 
is on inuie^uate because incomplete theory ©f value— 
but this is really & d&ieisei oi the r&ngfe oi activity . 
or the theorists «bo huTw accepted the utility theory 
rather than oi' the theory itself• Such critics ..re un~ 
satisfied with * static theory oi value ;Ba would go back 
further into thv origins of wants and desires* Viner 
s t .a«mis to the point here (as does Marshall* Page 6 
ubove/ *—**bh«sa they suggest that & etc tic theory is of a© 
service* because the consumer becomes a different person* 

V©blent *lhe ^x*ai tuba ana of Marginal Utility* - in the 
'*?i&cw of bcieace in modern bivilisubion* * 
















V 




S/' ,• ■■ . 








.. 






- 




L 




























1 


V 






















4b - 


with a new set oj. values, every time he buys a cigar or 
a meal, obey exaggerate trie instability of' human 
behaviour, and they contradict their own assertions 
about the importance of habit and custom. When they ask 
for the development out of value theory of a theory 
of consumption they often lay down specifications which 
call for a theory oi life,”**' however, Vfner continues, 
when the critics suggest, that new, fertile d .t& be g ther d 
from painstaking study of human behaviour there is weight 
in their remarks* The utility school has been too 
limited in its investigations and the theory has probably 
been over-refined for all purposes. But likewise critics 
have spent too much time elucidating the alleged in¬ 
adequacies 01 the utility doctrine. 

Positive contributions of utility theory to price-economics * 

Tills section may be well summer!zed in Viner* s 
own words. *It (that is, the marginal utility analysis) 
has, for the first time, afforded a satisfactory explanation 
of the disparity between value in use and value in exchange 
which so puzzled the exassical economists. It provides a 
hypothesis, in harmony with what is known of human nature, 

Miners op.eit, page 586* 






. 

' 





- 4b 


which c.de^uately expiring the downward slope oi the demand 
schedule end which is yet alone in the field* It throws 
some light on the causes and types ox interrelationship 
which exist, between the prices of different goods* It 
bridges the gap between the price or exchange value theory 
of economics and the psychological “general taeory o^ value" 
ox the philosopher* Whether or not these contributions are 
important is a matter of individual definition o terms, 
or of individual judgement, or interest*"^ 

We might now pass on directly to consider the 
Quantitative Measurement 01 demand and this would probably 
be tiie more logical procedure. However, we have already 
noted that it is impossible to dissociate completely 
certain aspects of wei&re economics from a study involving 
price economics nor would it be desirable or useful to 
do so. It seems natural to ask at this stage about what 
concepts have been evolved to assist the price economist 
in making his contributions useful in the field oi welfare* 
Gonse ently we s iall digress somewhat at this point and 
consider the contributions made by marginal utility 
economists to welfare economics. No stady of consumers* 
demand would be complete without making some effort to 
evaluate the attempts made to measure the effects of the 
individual and collective demands of consumers on public 
l\g Q 

mer: "Utility Concept in Vaj.ue i‘heory u . Page 587 















































































- 47 - 


welfare# 

The Transition to Welfare Economics: "Ihe discussion of 
the influence on general wellbeing which is exerted by the 
mode in which each individual spends his income is one of 
the more important of those applic:. tions of economic soiree 
to the art of living* n *^ 

When we come to consider consumers* surplus 
or consumers* rent as some economists have preferred to 
call the concept we are entering the field of weJffre 
economics* We are still using the terms of i:>rice economics 
but we must also make some commitments as to the substance 
we are measuring, that is, are we considering welfare to 
consist ox a certain sole of satisfaction^ as ophelimity: ^ as 
utility ~r as some oth§£ subjective quantity? neo- 

classicist has attempted the construction oi a satis¬ 
faction calculus o welfare based on marginal utility theory# 

^"Marshall: op*cit* Page 157* 

£ 

Gf* h i choi son * s treatment o. this concept in his " 
Principles oi economies 11 Volume 1, and in the economic 
Journal, Volume IV* 

®Gf* A* G. Pigou* s approach to the study of welfare problems 
in iiis “economics ox Welfare* 1 * 












- 48 


Whether this procedure is defensible or not cannot be 
answered definitely in these pages* There is too much 
t r und to cover. owsver, e shal at least attempt 
to point out the main fact re inv ved. 1 

Consu mers * Sur plus — Tils concept postulates a relationship 

between utulity and prices. It may be defined thus: the 
the 

excess of . rice which the consumer would be willing to ay 

rather than go without the thing’, ov r that which he actually 

does pay, is the economic measure of his surplus satisfaction, 
as 

or we better know it, his f consumer’s surplus*. This 
consumers* surplus will obviously be high for such 
commodities as salt, matches and the like. From this 
concept we may roughly estimate, at least in terms of 
** lore or less” the benefits we derive from our environment 
or let us say * ur cultural heritage’. Thus, "if we were 


^Keddaway: op.cit. P-gc 419 ff. This writer points ut that 
the welfare economist requires gr ater no vl edge regarding 
the motives behind consumers* purchases than does the price 
economist who is concerned merely with discovering how much 
of a coitEioc ity can be sold in a ■ iven m rket under given 
conditions. The student of econo- .ic welfare cannot escape 
the psychological implications of marginal utility theory 
by simply coriving a demand curve as a c ir: inference. 
Consumers * motives do not directly affect rice and output. 

. is actions do that. Bet his motives are important* hen vie 
cone to seel-: a guide to maximum welfare. 






























■ 








. 




















- 49 - 


to neglect for a mom', nt the feet thet the same sums of 
money represents diflerent amounts of pleas re to 
c iff ere nt people re night measure the surplus satis¬ 
faction which the rale of tea affords, say, in the London 
market, by the aggregate of suite by ’hich the prices shown 
in a complete list of demand prices for tea exceed the 
selling price.This aggregate may be represented 
graphically,.see Marshall*© Principles, : age 123 n. 

If vs:- do not make the assumption that the marginal 
utility of money is the same to all individuals the 
above quantum only represents an aggregate 0 f satis¬ 
factions, the several amounts of v&ich are not exactly 
measured. Only by making that assumption can the 
* consumers * surplus* ex ressed as a sum of money measure 

he volume of t tal net satisfactions derived from any 

2 

commodity by its users. 

It may be noted here that the demand prices 
necessary to a summation of consumers* surplus for any 
commodity rill be necessarily conjectural except 
possibly in the ir/. lediate vicinity of the customary price 

Marshall: op.eit. Page 128* 

2 ibid. Cf. Page 128 n. 







- 50 


hence it will be difficult to pet a correct estimate 
of total utility, Marshall points ut however, that for 
all racticsl purposes this is unimportant since e will 
in practice be concerned with such changes in consumers* 
surplus as are occasioned by price changes in the i ediate 

tttti . eM ... y these 

demand data would not be impossible to secure, particularly 
if the commodity w< re a necessity and we could use 
a set period of time for collection of the data rather 
than the static Instant of time which would again force us 
into the hypothetical reels* 

The value of this concept is seen by Marshall 
to consist in that it reduces t ■ compact technical form, 
the explanation of why in real life the real worth of 
things to a man is not gauged by the price he pays f\r them. 
In a word we cannot trust the marginal utility of a. 
commodity to indicate its total utility* For instance, 
the marginal utility of a free good Is zero but its total 
utility may be enormous, e*g., air* Again salt is of more 
real worth then tea but our ’conjuncture* so rules that it 
shall be cheaper and its consumers* surplus greater* 








































. 


. 














- 51 - 


So long as the concept is not applied to the 
group it seems c ear that no great objection con be token 
to it. Ilq over, if wr effort oo e; ply the analysis to a 
market situation in an at empt to measure the concept it 
must be remembered that it then hangs on the very tenuous 
assumption that the same sum. of money measures equal 
satisfactions to different people, i.e., that t? stes nd 
sensibilities of all jeople in the market ore the same. 

oveover, differences in wealth must be taken into ace unt. 

In measuring: the consumers’ surplus in a market patronized 
by all classes in such a way as to obtain ’net’ satis - 
feet ions we would have to assume that the marginal utility 
of money is the same for the rich as it is for the poor. 

Ko ever, as long the the commodities under 
discussion are in general use among the same clas. ee of people 
and the group includes ever:/ variety of temperament,we may- 
possibly in such cases be justified in speaking of a 
dollar’s worth of satisfaction to one member of the group 
as equal to a dollar’s worth of satisfaction to another 
individual in the group* 


In connection with a group concept of consumers’ 













- 52 


surplus karshall maker this statement:"On the whole, however, 
it happens that by far the greater number of events with which 
economics deals, affect in about equal proportions all 
the different degree of society, so that if the money 
measures of the happiness caused by the two events are 
equal then is not in fen ral any very great difference between 
the amounts of happiness in the two cases. nd it is 
on account of this fact that exact measurement of the 
consumers* surplus in a market has already so much 
theoretical interest and may become of high practical 
importance." Phi. summation has not met with the 
approval of many later economists* Viner criticizes it 
severely, see below Page 66. 

Certainly there would be danger in applying 
the concept indiscriminately to a market inhere all types 
of commod ites may be fo~ nd and. which is patronized 
by all clas es of people. Eowev r, it seems reasonable 
that much may be learned from a welfare point of view 
by applying the concept judiciously to one homogeneous 
group at a time and to commodities in general use by 
that group. 

^Marshall: op.cit. Page 131. 








that { roup 


Nicholson-*- objects to even the individual 

application of the idea. But Marshall had a neat 

answer ready for him in the connection* 

2 

Thus Nicholson asks "of what avail is to to 
say that the utility of an income of (say) £100 a year 
is worth (say) >£1000 a year?" - and obviously there is 
no point in sayinf that - by itself - nor does Marshall 
do this* He disposes of Nicholson in this fashion: 

Consumer’s surplus is made possible by one’s ’conjuncture* 

- or environment. We are not apt to take account of this 
factor because we are accustomed to our surroundings and 
tend to overlook the additional satisfactions (and savings) 
they make possible. Thus, "if a man pays Id toll on a bridge, 
which saves him an additional drive that would cost a 
shilling, we do not say that the penny is worth a shilling, 
but that the penny tog ether with the advantage offered 
him by the bridge (the part it plays in his conjuncture) 
is worth a shilling for that day. Were the bridge swept 
away on a clay when he needed it, he would be in at least as 

lyicliolson: "Principles of Political Economy" Volume I, Page 
57 ff. 

2 Prof. Nicholson, Ibid, and Economic Journal, Volume IV. 














bad a position as if he had been deprived of eleven 
pence"^ 

Furious controversies have been waged over 
consumer’s surplus and related concepts. Bohm-Bow6rk end :ieser 

g 

disagreed over the concept of total utility. The 
former held the view that total utility was the sum 
of all the utilities talcen separately, i.e., in 
computing the total utility of half a dozen pails 
of water one should add together the utility of 
quenching thirst; the utility of cooking,the utility 
of washing dishes, end so on. 

It is from this concept of total utility that 
the Marshallian idea of consumers’ surplus has been 
derived and for the purposes of weSfere economics it 
is this concept of total utility which must b. considered. 

On the other hand, flieser, followed by Cannan 
and others took the view that total utility is equal 
to the marginal utility multiplied by the number of units 
(in our example, the utility of the marginal pail 

Marshall: op.cit. Page 127 n* 

%or more complete refemces to this controversy see 
Surganyi-Unger, "Economics in the Twentieth Century" pages 
88 - 92; 354 - 355. 

•7 

u See for example, Caiman’s Consumers’ Surplus"• 









- 55 


multiplied by six). 

This concept of totel utility leaves no allowance 
for consumers’ surplus and is relevant only for price 
ana value theory. 

The nature of our inquiry does not permit of 
e further elucidation of the consumers’ surplus 
concept. Its existence can be granted and also its 
use in economics thary (if extreme care in definition and 
analysis is used), but any extended search into the 
possibilities of measuring the concept would lead us too 
far astray from our central topic.^ 

Utility Theory in Welfare Economics :- - "By the selection 

of the data which he investigates the economist nay 

suggest by implication what in his judgement is the proper 

basis for ethical judgement, but provided he does not 

defend his selection on ethical grounds it is at least not 

2 

obvious that he has offendeu~ the scientific proprieties" 

To enter into a discussion concerning the 
legitimacy of any kind of welfare economics would require 
a separate thesis covering- the whole ground between 

lCf. L.; .. Fraser, "Economic Thought and Language", Page 
84 et seq» 

*Tiner: "The Utility Concept in Welfare, Economics" J.P.E. Vol. 
XXXIII, Page 633. 












- 56 


ethics end economics. Without much argument I think 
we can admit that if the economist but considers the 
bearing of economic institutions on "maximum satisfaction" 
or "maximum utility" (assuming that the two are more or 
less equivalent for the time being) and does not endeavour 
to take sides regarding' the ethical qualities of any 
particular satisfaction then it seems his analysis 
can be considered free of ’ethical taint.* Utility 
and xvelfare may be used as ethical concepts in 
economics but they can conceivably be used as such 
without making any ethical judgement concerning them. 
Moreover, economic welfare is only a part of the total 
welfare of mankind and hence we can see the impossibility 
of making final ethical judgements from a science which 
admittedly covers only that part of the range allotted 
to economics by the general division of labour among 
the sciences."They (the welfare economists) ordinarily 
go no further towards ethical judgement than to claim 
the existence of a strong presumption that an increase 
in economic satisfactions or in economic welfare will 
contribute to total welfare".^ 

1 


TTiner: Ibid. Page 640 









- 57 


This approximates Pigou's position which is that there 
is no disharmony betv/een total welfare and economic welfare. 1 

The general tendency among the utility school 
of welfare economists has been to take satisfaction or 
pleasure as the unit of welfare. But this tendency 
leads to a hedonistic ethics-assuming the function of 
our welfare economist is to contribute data which my serve 
the social philosopher or statesman in the making of 
the ultimate welfare judgements. If price is not used as 
a measure of satisfaction, however, the welfare'economist 
nay keep free of the taint of a hedonistic psychology 
since under such circumstances he is not committed to 
expressing the existence of close harmony between desire 
and satisfaction. 

But continues Viner, it is difficult to find support 

for an ethics ?critten in terns of a pleasure element or any 

other single element. Many emphasize the importance of 

rather 

desire fulfilment itself/than the gratification or other 
states of consciousness which result from such fulfilment. 
There is no essential efreenent in this field. Most 
economists have disregarded what they e\*idently consider 

*Pigou: "Economies of Welfare*. 











- 58 - 


as finespun theory and have preceded on the old 
utility rian aesu ption with no fear that their 
conclusions will be toppled by new revelations in 
philosophy or psychology. Viner admits that they may 
be wrong but that in the absence of better information 
the; can but hope there Is a sufficient element of truth 
in their premises "to justify in a utiliterian sen»e 
the effort expended in reaching their conclusions." 1 

One notable exception to the above-mentioned 
approach is probably deserving of mention. It is that 
of F. H* Knight, who while first insisting on the limitation 
of economic inquiry to purely objective data, has by a 
gradual process of evolutionary thinking come around to the 
view that economics should invade even the realm of 
metaphysics in order to discover the basis for the 
objective regularities discernable in the external world. 

For him even the satisfaction-calculus is only a 
tentative or intermediate step towards an inquiry 
"into the origin of judgements upon which man builds a 
hierarchy of good-and-bad, higher-and"lower values 

Hiner* Ibid. Page 642. 





















59 


by v/hich ho Gubjecto desiree; to an valuation ore fun<ta©nt)i 
than the merely quantitative stnndtrd of zooro«or»lao0 
•atlsfftotion or pie or©." 1 (£<*© Captor III of Knight** 

**' Risl$, Uncertainty, and Profit" end Various articles by 
the gone out or). 

ViSMt is favourable to this type of reasoning 
but c Isidore It to bo at yet too far advanced* " o 
©till ve eo frr to go before wo trill have attained 
adequate control of the technique of the satisfaction 
calculus tfc.*t it wmm unwise to attempt on even more 

2 

difficult end no re elusive typo of subjective measure t ion* 

11,0 .‘TRsur- ent of ■elfrr-c; — : el far© is yen orally conceived 
to be a subjective pfccivosioaoi/Sp 0 1o the present no direct 
r*e -a© of : eesurimy ruefc sfeeaaaeaa as pleasure, pa la, 
satisfaction etc., have e yet been devised. f i>© natural 
eonee;r,e • ee of this lack of a •welfareMmlt* has been the 
attonpf to use the met familiar o omtm deMaltetor w© 
h ve, that is, money, as an objective index of welfare* 

Vinor is mthm doubtful of this approach, thur: "perhaps 
the chief contribution of the utility school to welfare 

1 vin; rt Ibid. ; a 642 
®Vineri Ibid f* ; e 642 M 


■ • 













- 60 


economicr has been the negative one of denonetratine 
the inadequacy at their beet of such measures of 
welfare (as price or exchange-value) because in many 
respects they conceal or are inapplicable to the very 
problems for whose solution they ere intended to serve 
as instruments."'*' Doubtless price is not a completely 
adequate measure of welfare but neiHer is it a perfect 
instrument for the statistical interpretation of 
demand schedules as v© shall see in Part II But until 
something better is found for the purpose we shall 
evidently have to go on using it in the hope that vie 
are clearing the ground for further advances. However, 
so long as we persist in using price as the main index 
in economic analyses of welfare, we should be thoroughly 
©ware of its defects and always be on the alert to . tate 
what assumptions are made necessary by its use. The 
chief objections or qualifications to be made when we 
use price as a measure of welfare or to trace changes 
in welf re over time are given below: 

The value of money Itself changes over time 


Miners Ibid. Par e 643 





























. 

















' 

■ 



























- 61 - 


••as a yardstick for the measurement of objective 
exchange value it varies arbitrarily in its own length 
from time to tine* If we could make allowances for 
these changes by using a perfect index number we should 
have left real or Objective* income*.the flow of goods 
and services as a measure of welfare. But even this 
would be inadequate for the following reasons: 

1. To find total well\ re all gooes and services must be 
added up and this summation must be in terms of 
relative prices which are in a constant state of flux. 
Granted a satisfactory provision could be made for thi 
variation we roust yet consider that prices measure re¬ 
lative marginal utilities or desires for goods while w 
know that welfare is a matter of total utilities. We 
need only to refer to the well known *paradox of 
value* that exchange value diminishes as total utility 
approaches its maximum to crystallize the difficulty. 
Marshall would say that as price falls consumer's 
surplus becomes greater..and hence e simple summation 
of prices would give no indication of total welfare. 
Some further elaboration of the consumers* surplus icea 
might get us over this hurdle,but Marshall is d 






- 62 - 


the opinion that while a emanation of total utilities 
may he theoretically feaeible "the result would be 
encumbered by so many hypotheses as to be practically 
useless" 

2,Suppose all incomes double while prices remain fixed. 

The objective mea-ure would indie te a doubling of wel- 
fare but the diminishing desire principle would establish 
a presumption that a doubling of objective income would 
less than double welfare.^ or suppose changes occur in 
the total attitude of individuals to material income 
e.g., a trend toward the simple life, or a greater 
appreciation of leisure etc. Any measure of welfare 
in terms of objective income will not reflect such 
changes. 

3. The aggregate income of a community may remain unchanged 
over a period but any change in the relative distribution 
of inc me as between the different classes will obviously 
bring about changes in the amount of welfare. This is 

an obvious corollary of the law of diminishing utility. 

4. No price calculus can take into consideration the 
importance of free goods.* 1 2 * * 5 

1 *Cf. Marshall: op.cit. Pages 131 - 132 n. 

2 

Contrast Ricardo who had no clear idea of the diminishing 
utility principle. See Chapter XX, Page 265 in Conner’s 

edition of Ric rdo’s "Principles". 

3cf. Marshall: op.cit Page 134. 


















... 




. 




■ 



' 
















■ 



































- 63 


5. kenl income is ill-adepted to d&sl with public goods 
as an element in welfare. Services rendered by the 
g vernment are apt to be ignored or else included 
indirectly through the inclusion of the communities* 

taxation bill..thus evaluating these services in 
terns of their money-cost which we often find to our 
sorroi7 is a far cry frn any approximation to their 
market value. 

6. A real-income calculus of welfare reflects only the 
flow of utilities on the consumption side, totally 
ignoring any pleasures or satisfactions derived from 
the process of production itself. For instance, it 

is quite possible that a decrease of an hour in the 
working day of all producers would materially reduce 
the amount of goods ana services available for con¬ 
sumption. Bat it is also conceivable that the 
additional freedom and leisure granted the producers 
would giv them such a flow cf non-material satisfaction 
as to more than balance the loss in welfare brought about 
by the reduction in the amount of real goods and services 
on the market for consumption. 

7.This objection is a revere I bo the argument regarding 









cQBire and satisfaction. Price if it measures aiysub¬ 
jective quality, measures desire—and could only measure 
satisfaction if desire and satisfaction were quantitatively 
closely related—in which regard says Viner, there is 
abundant grounds for scepticism. "If tien welfare is a 
quantity of satisfaction, price, therefore, would not be 
an acceptable measure even if it did measure desire 
accurately*.'*' 

Granting that these objections to the use of 

price as a measure of welfare are powerful indeed, it is 

still conceivable that this approach may serve as a focal 

point for inquiries into public welfare. Using economic 

welfare measuiaa objectively in money as a starting point, 

rhat is to prevent us from bringing in all these other 

factors which wd have just been discussing, together with 

all the data which may be available concerning them and. with 

this information to state logically the necessary assumptions 

to 

and by careful p.nr.l; L/ arrive at an answer which at least 
may be f iso re or less* correct. Taking this attitude we shall 
continue to examine Viner*s work in this field. 


^Viner: op.cit. Page 647. Cf. L.M. Fraser op.cit. Page 78. 
















. 













- 65 - 


He credits the utility theorists with having 
done good work in the exposition of the qualifications 
which must be made with respect to a price-calculus of 
welfare based on utility economics. The contributions 
of Edgeworth, Sidgwick and Wicksteed are noted to be 
particularly valuable in this regard. 

Some econ. mists hovrever, have tended to minimize 
these difficulties concerning the objectiommeasurenent 
of welfare by the expedient of singling out one single 
factor such as the unequal distribution of wealth as the 
culprit and neglecting the other objectives we have 
pointed out. Some have tired of questioning the validity 
of objective measurement in connection with the,conflict 
between the analysis in utility (subjective) terns and 
the objective analysis worked out in price terms and have 
selected for consideration only those problems in which 
the conflict is least sharp, or peihaps least apparent, 
and in this manner have succeeded in reverting to the 
measurement of welfare in terms of price, at the same 
time maintaining the ”language and superficial appearance 
of subjective measurement”. 1 

^Yiner: op.cit. Page 646. 








- 66 - 

Vinor if* of the opinion that Marshall is 
eligitfc for this last criticism. Marshall thus attempts 
to dispose of inequality in income as an objection to 
the measurement of welfare in price terns: w 0n the whole, 
however, it happens that by far the greater number of events 
with viiich economics deals affect in about equal proportions 
all the different clesses of society, so that if the money 
measures of the happiness caused by two events ar< equal, 
thero is not in general any groat difference between the 
amounts of happiness in the two cases”. 1 G. E. Persons, 
writing in the Quarterly Journal of Economics for August 1915, 
characterizes the above quotation as a "cavalier dismissal 
of the effect of difference in wealth and differences 
in sensibility". Yiner too, is not content with this 
f dis issal f and hie criticism is well worth quoting: 

"Granted that there are some problams in connection with 
which the existence of inequality in incomes may be 
safely disregarded, it is nevertheless difficult to over¬ 
estimate the extent to which the problem of inequality 


X Cf. Page 52 above 










- 67 - 


pervades end underlies the important - problems to which 
economics has traditionally applied itself. It is only 
necessary to mention taxation, govern: .ent expenditures, 
poor relief, immigration, land policy, and above all the 
problem of inequality itself to make clear that a 
caloulus of welfare which abstracts from inequalities 
in the distribution of wealth and income is a Hamlet 
with Hamlet omitted from the cast."^ Viner is 
evidently reluc ant to concede much of value in tie 
approach to welfare economics via the route of any 
objective measurement. It may be well to pursue our 
observations yet a little further and see what he has to 
suggest as an alternative. 

We have already noted that some of the utility 
economists have seen fit to minimize the difference 
between desire and satisfaction. Any welfare economist 
accepting satisfaction as the content of welfare cannot, 
according to Viner, accept price as a measure of welfare 
unles he accepts desire as an accurate or at least an app 
roximate measure of satisfaction. If they could fell back 
on hedonistic psychology and the concept of complete 

1 

Viner: Ibid, pe e 847. 










. 













- 










- 68 


rationality of human behaviour then they could take 
desire as a fairly accurate ensure of satisfaction and 
so proceed. But they are debarred from this course since 
the modern utility theorist has disavowed faith in that 
sychology. Hence he mst needs search for other ethods 
of speaking of desire quantities and satisfaction 
quantities in the same breath as it wer , if he is not to 
involve himself in a ’complete reorganization’ of his 
economic system. 

Pigou does not take such a serious view of the 
problem. He concedes that the disparity between desire 
and satisfaction is obviously of great ’theoretical 
importance’ but denies to it any practical importance 
because "it is fair to suppose that ost commodities, 
especially those of wide consumption that are required, 
as articles of food and clothing are, for direct personal 
use, will be wanted as a means to satisfaction and will 
consequently, be desired with intensities proportional 
to the satisfactions they are expected to yield".'*' If 
only for the sake of consistency Viner finds it necessary 
to question this statement. He says that the above need be 
acdepted only "if expectations are never grossly mistaken 


^Pigou: "economics of .elfare" Page 24# 
























- 69 - 


end if the dee ires for "food and clothing" are simply 
desires for instruments for the satisfaction of 
prim ry physical needs whose serviceability for the 
purpose in view can be accurately judged by the ordinary 
purchaserFor corroboration Viner points to on 
article "Ethics and the Economic Interprets.ion" by 
F* H. Knight, which appeared in fie Quarterly Journal of 
economics in May, 1922. In this article Knight, who, 
it will be remembered mild go even behind the eatis- 
faction-calc lus in search of a useful subjective measure 
of welfare, interprets desires for food, clothing and 
shelter, as desires for a whole set of cultural values 
rather than desires for mere nourishment and protection 
from the elements. 

There is still another possibility of a dis¬ 
parity between desire and satisfaction. It is possible 
that desires, even if they do originate in a careful 
calculation of the satisfaction potentialities of canmoditic-s 
may persist after a change in circuiistances has deprived 
them of their rational basis. This possibility was pointed 

^Viiiffr: Ibid. Page 648. 








- 70 - 


out long ago by J. S* Mil, a pronounced hedonietl.* 

"Ap we proceed in the formation of habits and became 
accustomed to will a particular act or a particular course 
of conduct because it is pleasureble, we at last continue 
to will it v ithout any reference to its being plea sure bio. 
Although from some change in us co. i_a our circumstances, 
we have ceased to find any pleasure in the action, or 
perhaps to anticipate any pleasure as the conseque ce 
of it, we still continue to desire the action, end 
consesjuently do it* In this manner it is that habits 

of hurtful excess continue to be practised although they 

1 

hove ceased to be pleasurable"• 

But Marshall, Pigou, Dickinson, and others 

have assumed V7ith some variations that since the causes of 

disparity cannot be reduced to any general principles, 

price must serve ’with all its faults’ as a measure 

of both desire and satisfaction and hence fall under 

Viner*s accusation of ’arbitrarily and unwisely’ limiting 

the scope of welfare economics. Both Viner and Hazel 
2 

Kyrk hsve pointed out that the ifcole problem of unfair 
i, J.S. Mil: "System of Logic" Eighth edition. VI .ii .4* 

2 

Kyrk: "Theory of Consumption"* 











' 

' 


















' 






71 


netl-ode In t c# Ifkatofer ©c tbo te3rc.tr in ooaaeraod would 
not os let if the neeu pt, loots of Picon «ae rorahell wwre' 
in ecoordanwa t itfc the facto,for If th© buyer w*?r« nitror 

dicappclntoe in hi© purchase; if the m% infant lone ho 
derived £r » t-teai were *» v^yo c^uol to the do©Iron 
ho pacrionoly '. r-‘,r thisa there mold be m crottade 

for tli«£U|ff the preoosMMI of ©ay/£§eti§w on the part 
of cwllere or cap i^ier^ste on the part of the teporo# 
Yteer vr-ni■.• rrefwr to efcvdjr deductively th© oeucc* of 
diapsrit.ioii fa the hope of finding ©efficient ua~ 
ifowitioe o& ti;ioh to teat select if to gnr'er&iu&tieae* 

&© a hint ee t what ©or* of ce&clueiece stay ho roateod, 
ho iadio too the yrop€w©itioa that it i© t$ui*e poerifci© 
%&©&*© 1© © negron ncdortrtlnttt# of the contribution ehieh 
covers &t*l efeoele* .mho to iadividucl wolf-- •©, resulting 
froa the IVronrfeblo - idvertielwg *&*#* private on erpriee 
yrotidee far Itc? own f*edu«te s»n£ to the nsfwmrftblo 
advertielag v&ilch it often «pr*ftde vith ret poet to the 
products a:, gcrertg&mt activity# fetalis*!? h© asserts the 
poftsit&liy that the o&devfii hi# pressure g^ctea of 

caleeneiiehlp i© tend Inf to tDora&fc* the disparity between 
desire end getlef^ctioe* >m: that iateaeively putshed 








- 72 - 


coramoditbs are overcesired in comparison to the satis¬ 
factions they will yield, and hence play a disproportionate 
part in the ordinary consigners’ budget as compared to the 
few commodities which are still -emitted to make their 
own appeal. In one connection, however, Viner credits 
the utility theorists with having allowed fully for the 
disparity between desire and satisfaction. This case 
is the theory of time-preference. Here the risk of 
changes in desires, the actuarial allowance for the 
uncertainties of existence, the chances of future augmented 
income are all figured into the interest theory. This 
suggests that a similar procedure applied to other phases 
of the disparity might afford a basis for equally 
serviceable generalizations. Other objective measures 
of welfare have been suggested, at least for the more 
common economic goods but when it becomes necessry to 
compare individuals and groups any objective criterion 
must be resolved in terms of price and the same objections 
apply* 

Still another objection to an analysis of welfare 
in strict utility terms is this: Ordinarily, utility analysis 
has been based on short tern interpretations, that is, little 


















. 






























. 







' 












, 



















- 73 - 


thought has been given to the future conse^ue ce of any 
action so Ion as it can bo shown to heve given satis¬ 
faction in the immediate present. But no such narrow 
interpretation can serve adequately for a complete 
welfare analysis. In this connection it seems obvious 
that the ultimate effect of the satisfaction of 8ny 
desire must be reckned in as well/uid poss ibly weighted more he vi 
than the proximate effect. 

"If Ihe immediate satisfaction to an individual 
from the consumption of a given quantity of whiskey and a 
given quantity of ennobling literature be th* same, but 
if the consumption of whiskey would result in future 
pains and frustrations for its consumers, whereas the 
acquisition end study of the good literature would 
contribute to a happy old age, the economist, must for 

welfare calculus purposes, attribute greater utility or 

1 

greater importance to the books than to the whiskey** 

Most utility theorists may also be charged with 
not taking sufficient care in distinguishing when they are 
applying their analyses to the individual and when to the 
group and also with not sufficiently emphasising the latter 

viner: Ibid. Page 653. In connection with the various 
definitions which have been applied to the term "utility" 
see Frasers op.cit. Chapter V. 

























. 


' 







- 
















- 74 - 


case. Thus analysis in individual terras might refer only 
to the ( irect utilities given and received in any action, 
say a price transaction. A ^roup concept of welfare would 
have to consider not :erely those utilities which influence 
the determination of that price, but also those utilities 
or disutilities, which arise therefrom to persons who 
played no d irect part in the transition. The prevalence 
of laisser-faire policy of course has/a''cozr^ri&^ing ^factor 
in concealing the need for this distinction. 

The c mtributions of Utility Theory to ..el it re Economics ns 

seen by Viner; — The utility theory is put forward by 
Viner as a mode of analysis rather than as a set of 
conclusions and what conclusions will be reached by it 
cepend on the character ana completeness of the data to which 
it is applied and the skill and honesty with which it is 
used. He considers the case for an objective measure 
of welfare is badly damaged and directs attention toward 
some type of subjective measure perhaps along tae lines 
suggested by Knight or possibly through a more complete 
elucidation of the already existing but incomplete satis¬ 
faction-calculus. The fact remains that vie do in real life 

































. 


• i. ■ 




. 





. 




' 


' 


. 

























■ 















- 75 - 


siake subjective measurements continuously in regard to our 
friends; relations with the government and so on—and we 
go on making them although we have no objective measuring 
stick. Conseque tly it should be possible to make certain 
generalizations concerning these relationships. 

For problems of price-economics the limited 
concept of diminishing utility as he has set it forth in 
terms of desire is considered by Yiner to supply a 
sufficient working hypothesis. But for many purposes 
the pecuniary analysis is a "grossly imperfect instrument 
whose results require nod if icat ion by calculation of sub¬ 
ject i e quantities before they can serve at an acceptable 
guide to ection or understanding. f,i it has so far been 
impossible to derive absolute quantities from subjective 
calculations but there is not doubt that we can and do dis¬ 
cover relationships of the ’more or less* type and while 
these are obviously imperfect tools there is a wide range 
of human activity in which only such imperfect instruments 
are available to ’guide conduct toward perfection*. 

Viner’s whole position with regard to welfare economics 
may be epitomized in this last quotation from his article. 


^Viner: Ibid. Page 659 


















. 









. 




























- 76 - 


"Those who insist that welfare economics 
confine iteolf to measurement in terms of prices, because 
prices are data for statistical investigation, whereas 
the subjective conditions reflected by prices are not, 
have succumbed to all-too-prevalent methodological 
fanaticism which prefers the accurate but superficial to 
the approximate but fundamental, and which makes 
adaptability to its special technique of investigation, 
rather than importance, the standard for the selection of 
problems and the dateraiilat ion of the scope of the inquiry* 
Statistics is a tool, not an.end. The imperfect measure¬ 
ment of variations in welfare may serve as a better guide 
to action than the perfect measurement o* something which 
has something to do with welfare." ^ 

This ends our digression into the field of 
welfare economics. Primarily its intention ms to point 
out the broader uses to which the marginal utility concept 
has been put and what qualifications are made necessary 
when the concept is applied to conditions other than those 
laid down by the price economist. It is to be hoped howev> r, 
that another and possibly more important object has been 

Viner: IMS* Page 659* 










' 


































. 












. 

































. 




4 























- 77 - 


achieved, viz., the provision of a brief glimpse into the 
wide field which awaits those students of demand who incline 
rather to the human side of economics than to the more 
purely quantitative approaches involved in the field of 
price economics* 

The Transition to the Statistical Study of 3,& and ;— For 
pureiy a afr?£?^caf U d£SaS curve bared on the as sumptions which 
have been discussed in a general way throughout Par\, I, per¬ 
forms the valueble function of portraying in coneise, 
technical form just what will be the ddmand for a particular 
commodity when purely static conditions are observed. But 
in real life we cannot maintain our hypothetical static 
conditions and at the same tine provide information 
concerning probable prices, consumption, demand 
elasticities an ^ the like in the actual market. 

The business nan, the government official, the 
marketing expert or whoever is in a position which requires 
some knowledge of the probable demand for coomocities must 
gain that information from nvorld of affairs vjhich refuses 
to conform to static conditions. 


With the entrance of time into the economic arena 




. 









. 







■ . 















- 


















- 78 


the picture Immediately develops a dynamic note. Testes 
refuse to stay fixed; the purchasing power of money varies; 
population charges; and even the weather lias a notable 
effect on many econouiic data. In short, to make practical 
contributions; e.g., in the field of price-forecasting, 
we i:mst add something to the tools already at hand. 

Methods must be developed to account for the forces 
held passive theoretically by such phrases as ’ceteris paribus’, 
under given conditions, etc* This task has been token up 
by the statistical econcsni; ts and of late by students 
of budgetary data. 

In Bart II of this thesis eorae of the more typical 
methods they have developed in the effort to arrive at a 
realistic quantitative measurement of demand, will be re¬ 


viewed 











- 79 - 


PART II 

METHODS OF QUANTITATIVE. 

A. Price-quantity Relationships and the Difficulties 

Involved in their Interpretation : 

"In any inductive invest igation,.••. the statical law 
of demand may only be approached, but never realized" * 1 . 

As a general rule the statistical economists have 
endeavored to make their statistical analyses ’true to life* 
by modifying- in some degree the neo-classical static law of 
demand as laid dovm by Marshall. While we have already dis¬ 
cussed incidentally in Part I the essential data of, and 
the assumptions underlying the Marshallian law, it may be 
as well to restate them briefly at this point with a view 
toward some clarification of this most common point of 
departure for statistical analyses of demand. 

The Static 1 Law of Demand: 

In the first place, the curve must be continuous, that 
is, the data must not bo so scattered or so few in number 
as to prevent the fitting of a curve, vAiether by inspection 
or by some more involved statistical technique. To fulfill 
this condition the price-quantity points must be sufficiently 
numerous to allow the fitting of smooth curves concerning 

1 Henry Schultz: "Statistical Lav/s of Supply & Demand" 

Page 94. The quotation is from a letter of H. L. Moore’s 
written to Schultz. 















- 80 - 


which serviceable and more or lees accurate genereliza- 
tions nay be made. ^ 

Moreover any particular demand curve must be related 
to some particular market, which term may be defined for 
this purpose as any territory in which corariunications are 
sufficiently well established to enable prices to reach 
the same level without any hindrance. 

Statistically neither of these two essential features 

is impossible of attainment. Ordinarily if sufficient tine 

is allowed to elapse it will be possible to secure sufficient 

price-quantity points to form a regular (continuous) demand 

curve, and the market area of any particular commodity is 

2 

generally capable of at least approximate definition. But 
the neo-classical law of demand is definitely related to a 
point in time. Thus if the strict letter of the law were 
adhered to it would prove impossible to secure anything 
besides purely hypothetical demand schedules, for the essence 
of an ’economic market* is that the price of the commodity 
in question shall be uniform over the whole area tributary 
to the market — and this situation could give us only one 

Henry Schultz: Ibid. Page 24. 

SCf. Professor Fetter’s definition of a ’Market’ in "The 
Economic Lav/ of Market Areas”. Quarterly Journal of 
Economics for May *24, Page 525. 













. 








^ . - ■ • 


. 

■ ■ . "(• 

























■ 












■ 

■ 

. 







81 


point on the demand curve, viz., the point of equilibrium 

where the instantaneous demand and supply curves meet. Thus 

only by hypothesis could ue obtain the quantities of the 

commodity which could be sold at other than the prevailing 

market price. This reasoning alone is sufficient to explain 

why the statistical economist has found it necessary to 

with 

reckon in dynamic forces which/the passage of time exert 
their influence ... for time must be brought in to allow 
for the collection of the primary data—and the introduction 
of time inevitably brings with it changes in those economic 
data which under theoretical conditions of static equilibrium 
have been maintained in a state of * suspension’• 

Thus it seems clear that when time is allowed to enter 
the picture both the demand and the supply curves may move 
to the right or left (shift) and their inclinations 
(elasticities) may vary from time to time. Many writers* 2 - 
have unduly simplified their analyses by the use of straight 
lines or rectangular hyperbolae to represent the demand 
curve, i.e., they assume constant elasticity over the wiiole 


1 Cf. Leontief’s method of deriving demand curves - as de¬ 
scribed by Mrs. E. Gilboy in an article "The Schultz & 
Leontief methods of deriving ’Demand’ curves". See. Q.J.E. 
Feb. 1931 pages 218-61. The absence of any translation of 
Leontief’s own work as well as lack of space has prevented 
any treatment of this wtiter’s v/ork in this inquiiy. 






> '• ' ' 



* 








82 


price range#, an assumption by no means necessarily in 
accord with the facts, and in addition they have sometimes 
assumed that any shifting of the curves will be in a parallel 
direction (i.e., no change in elasticity with a shift in 
demand)« 

Another limiting factor was stated by Marshall. This 
is the well known ceteris paribus assumption which postulates 
that the prices and quantities represented by the supply and 
demand schedules apply to only one commodity, and the prices 
of all other commodities are assumed to remain constant# 

This assumption obviously fails when the commodity under 
discussion is one for which substitutes are available or 
concerning the demand for Which, other interdependent price 
relationships may exist. Thus, a change in the price of beef 
may affect in a certain way the consumption of that comodity- 
—but in addition the prices of mutton, pork and other beef 
substitutes will not remain constant since the demand for 
them will have shifted as a result of the changed consumption 
of their rival commodity beef, and the consequent increase 
or decrease in the demand for beef substitutes. Marshall 
suggests that in such cases it may be necessary to group 









. v 












- 83 - 


commodities and study them as a whole but this would be of 
little assistance to us if v/e were desired to provide a 
donand curve and some measure of the elasticity of demand 
for the producer of only one of these commodities. 

However the need for this assumption of ceteris paribus 
has been done away with by means of a device employed by such 
economists of the mathematical school as Walras and Pareto 
who allow for the coincident changes in the prices of other 
commodities through a series of simultaneous equations which 
really represent the mutual relationship between supply and 
demand and the prices of all commodities. It should be 
emphasized, however, that their analysis still applies to 
an instant of time and to a given ♦perfect* market 1 2 3 . 

These and other difficulties led Professor Edgeworth 
to say.."it may be doubted whether Jevorus* hope of construct¬ 
ing demand curves by statistics is capable of realization^. 

However, not in the least overawed by this pessimistic outlook 
Schultz has followed the lead of Professor Henry L. Moore 

k 

lThe limitations of the static ’law of demand* have been freely 

die cus-sed by Marshall. Op.Cit. Pages 109-16, and by Prof. Edge- 
worth in an article on "Demand Curves" in & Lgi^e’s "Diction¬ 
ary of Political Economy". Vol.l, Page 554. 

2 Edgeworth, op. cit.. Page 544. 

3 See list of Moore’s woik in this field, page 24n, of Schultz’s 
"Statistical Laws of Supply and Demand". 













- , - i i 

. f ? ■ ' ‘ 




J ' 1 ■ . • : - . - . ‘• <*?■ •- : ■ * ‘ , 


' 






' ' 




v*--* , J y;,X if ' : : ’ : < ■ ■■ "Vv^v- 


• ’ ■ * - ■■•■■■.••. r -■ ‘ • 




•; ■ ;• ' 

► 

. - VV-.. r . ’ ' ' ' H * " . * ;• 'V; - : -'V : T . - 

: ■' • 

' 













s; .; 


. 


j ; V ; \j 


■■ ■: • , . :• • ' < ■ j 

« • ■' 1 ■ ■ ‘ ’ ■ 






- 84 


in adapting the more general law of demand of the mathematical 
school to research in the field of statistical demand curves, 
thus departing from a strict definition of the neo-classical 
law of demand* 

To overcome the disturbing effects of the dynamic forces 
which must creep into the analysis as soon as one allows for 
the passage of time Schultz again follows the lead of Moore 
and utilizes.."the more modern tools of statistical analysis"^. 

By these two departures in particular from the strict neo¬ 
classical approach Schultz believes that the limitations to 
the construction of statistical demand curves may be overcome, 
and that "concrete statistical demand functions may be de- 
rived which are exceedingly useful for a good many purposes" 4 

Before proceding further along this line a criticism of 
Mrs. Elizabeth Gilboy*s in regard to certain uses of the 
elasticity concept should probably be given recognition. Mrs. 
Gilboy notes that the assumptions behind the concept of 
elasticity have been somewhat confused, even by Marshall. 
"Elasticity", says Mrs. Gilboy, "is the rate at which the 
amount of a commodity v&ich would be bought sold changes 

1 Schultz, Ibid., Page 24. 

2 Schultz, Ibid., P 8 ge 24. 









■ . 

>. ' v V ■ t 













NtQ 


- 85 


with given changes in price when these changes are very 

small"\ In most elucidations of the elasticity concept 

the idea is present. Implicitly at least, that it applies to 

a given instant of time and to a given market. Any concept 

of elasticity over time is a very different thing and must 

depart from the assumptions of static theory. Obviously if 

the Orthodox* explanation of elasticity confines the concept 

to a moment of time then vie cannot determine coefficients of 

elasticity empirically, according to these assumptions, for 

by the same token there is no statistical method by which the 

2 

instantaneous demand schedule may be derived ..and without 
the demand curve how may elasticity be measured? s 

The concepts and assumptions generally associated with 
the neo-classical static low of demand have now been sunsnarifced. 
Before proceeding with the consideration of various methods 
of demand measurement it may be well to set down briefly the 
chief difficulties which confront the statistical economist 
in the securing and analysing of reliable price-quantity data. 


1 Grill 
Cf. 


y, "Demand Curves in Theory and Ifcctice" OJE, Vol.44,pd606 
Page qi above. 


CS. Schultz, Ibid., Page 95, and Appendix I to the same work 
for a criticism of Professor Lehfeldt's attempt at deriving 
the coefficient of elasticity without first obtaining a 


demand curve. 










r 





. ■ 








- , • ' : . • - 




-• 


. 


■ ■ v' -v ' -v!' 



V >: 





: T;4 













; 




- 86 


Difficulties in the path of the Statistical Economist: 

The generel difficulty of course is that ’other things* 
usually refuse to remain ’equal* over a period of tine long 
enough to allcvr for the collection of sufficient price data 
to show a spread on either side of the custcmaiy price wide 
enough to construct even a fair portion of the demand schedule. 
Moreover various causes enter end mingle with the particular 
cause we are trying to isolate^* In addition the full effects 
of a cause are often postponed until after the cause itself 
has ceased to exist* The more important of these fother 
things* or dynamic factors, as they nay be temned, viiich 
r^eight the burden of the statistical economist, are discussed 
below* 

To begin with changes in the general prosperity of the 
people and the total amount of purchasing power available in 
the market bring about wide variations in our economic data. 
Marshall minimizes the allowance to be made for general 
changes in prosperity (including the trade cycle) because the 

•^It is to this difficulty that the Mathematical Economists 
have applied themselves with so much success* By the use of 
multiple and partial correlation techniques it has been found 
possible to isolate the variable under consideration, at the 
same time accounting for the other variables by a system or 

simultaneous equations* 













07 


losses, h© maintains, of those depending on the prof its of 
business for their living are nearly cancelled by the gains 
of those living on fixed incomes. However the trade cycle 
is growing increasingly severe with each recurrence and doubt¬ 
less the necessary correction to our basic data on this account 
must bo greater and possibly more difficult to make accurately 
than it was in Marshall f s day. Probably, however, it is not 
impossible by means of price indices to ascertain at least 
the broader changes in the purchasing power of money. 

Other corrections are necessary to account for the 
gradual growth of population and wealth. Marshall indicates 

that an easy numerical correction may be made for these 

1 

factors when the data are known . 

Probably the most difficult allowances to make are those 
required due to the action of nan-economic factors such as 
fashion, taste, habit, an overabundance of high-pressure 
advertising, and the like. The question of whether or not 
demand can be created arises. The discovery of new uses for 
a commodity or the discovery of a substitute for the commod¬ 
ity have decided effects on the eaononic data of prices and 
eonsumpt ion. 

^Marshall, Ibid., Page 110n. 





' '■'< . v’r t i ■' ■ J.. 

. 



' I") 


, ' 







| 

a ** 

. 

. 

■ 

. 















- 88 - 


Moreover, as wo noted above, further difficulties arise in 
allowing for the time elapsing between economic cause and 
effect, e.g., time is required for consumers to learn the 
use of substitutes and to became familiar with new products; 
old prejudices may have to be broken down before new coumod- 
ities and lower prices can tap new strata of demand, and have 
their full effect on consumption* An error in point, which 
must be carefully avoided ;$ien making inductive investigations 
is that of imputing all the increase in consumption to a fall 
in price when in reality the facts may be that much of the 
credit for the increase is due to increasing familiarity with 
the product, or to some other extraneous factor. 

Again as previously noted, some commodity purchases are 
capable of postponement and the rise in price of such a 
commodity my cause a steep drop in its immediate consump¬ 
tion (rather, purchases of the good may fall off for con¬ 
sumption may continue, e.g., clothes may be worn a little 
longer than would otherwise be the case) due to the fact 
that purchases are delayed in the hope of future lower 
prices. However when the goods wear out, as eventually 
they must, purchases of the good (especially if it be a 
necessity, such as clothing) will be resumed despite the 
fact that prices may then be even higher than they were 
after the initial rise. 











- 39 - 


There is another difficulty besides that of tine in 
applying the static equilibrium analysis to statistically 
derived curves* "In the static equilibrium the qnantity 
under consideration is a supply already on the market, or 
at least available for the market; a stock already produced* 
The idea of cost of production, in the sense of physical 
cost of producing changing amounts of a commodity, under 
different productive conditions does not enter* The quant¬ 
ities vhich a statistician must use however, are quantities 
produced under varying conditions of production at changing 
costs, at different instants of time* Statistically speak¬ 
ing, quantity varies as well a a price, over time, whereas in 
the static analysis the quantity is fixed"** 

The above-mentioned factors, and in particular, sensi¬ 
bility, tastes, distastes and the like, all play a great 
part in determining the type of demand curves which will be 
obtained and consequently the value of the elasticity of 
doiiand. It is in no snail measure to these economically 
ir^iensurable factors (taste etc*) that the statistical 

economist owes the difficulty of his task* 

Aside from the above fundamental difficulties we have 

*** Gilboy, Demand Curves in Theory and Practice, QJE, V* 44, 
Page 607. 






‘ ' ' ' ■ 


: -- i 


■vs 


■ • V ; • 


. 

' 

. 

* 


. . 




i.- : r -r* : - ■ • 


’ - - n s ■ Si M § ' 








■ ; ■ ■ 
















• ;• 




■ 






.. 








• ! 




: v. 


- 






• - ■ ; " * i 

x . ■ 














90 


tho seemingly inevitable imperfections in our statistics 
themselves. Those imperfections arise out of incomplete 
consumers f knowledge of the market; out of the fact that 
we have often no means of ascertaining the exact prices 
paid in many transactions; and because as a general rule 
a consumers * market area is not strictly limited geograph¬ 
ically. Moreover ambiguity is all too common in the 

1 

statistics which are available • Too, quality differences 
often play havoc with statistics. As an example of this 
Marshall points out that the substitution of the stronger 
Indian tea for the weaker Chinese tea has made the real 
increase of consumption of tea greater than that which is 
shown by statistics. 

With these difficulties clearly in mind we are now 
ready to proceed with the discussion of certain of the 
statistical techniques T&ich have been evolved in the 
attempt to overcome these difficulties and to arrive at 
sane serviceable and practical measure of demand. 

Statistical Techniques ; 

The statistical techniques involved in demand measure- 
1 e.g., see Marshall, Ibid., Page 112. 





















91 - 


mant hare been built up in a large degree from the works 
of the mathematical economists and statisticians# However, 
the more mathematical aspects of the statistical apx>roaCh 
have been largely eliminated from this thesis — the assump¬ 
tion being that the isriter is Justified in using certain 
mathematical forms without going through the processes of 
their derivation and background so long as it is clear from 
the context just what purpose these forms are intended to 
serve* 

Following the example of Part I above it imm found 

desirable to concentrate attention on a few typical author*- 

ities rather than to build up a more rambling discourse 

reviewing the works of a great number of economists mch of 

whose work has been along parallel or near-parallel lines* 

Thus it is proposed to discuss briefly at the outset the 

contributions of Henry Schultz in this field in the light 

1 

of the criticisms of his work by Mrs. Gilboy and Philip 

£ 

G. Wright * Following this discus rim. certain other 
approaches to the statistical measurement of demand will 
be noted. 

1 Gilboy, "The Leoirtief and Schultz Methods of Deriving Demand 
Curves QJE., v* 45, Pages 218-261. 

2Wright. A review of Schultz f s "Statistical Laws of Supply 
and Demand* J.S.A. v.24 f . Pages 207 et seq. 









■■V" , 





* 








92 


The Schmitz Method of betuving bem*nu Curves and the 

Elasticity or Demand l 

While in his book from which we heve already : uoted Schultz 
derives the *laws* of demand and supply for one commodity alone, 
it is quite obvious that he has the more general problem o- the 
derivation of statistical demand end suo^ly curves in his mind* 
Thus,**• w the object of this study has been to make an explore** 
tion into the difficult and interesting field oi statistical 

economics, not to develop methods of forecasting the price or 

hi 

the production of sugai 

The Jsc of the 

In the first place as we have already noted, Schultz fol¬ 
lows the lead of ^oore and makes use of the law oi demand of the 
mathematical senooi which differs iroa that of the neo-classical 
school in that the need of the 1 ceteris paribus 1 assumption is 
removed, i*e*, the aatiiematical economist prefers to write the 
price of any commodity as a function not only of the quantity 
demanded (which would give the neo-ciassical concept) but also 
as a function of all other prices* In symbolic form the law is 
then written as* 

cw * 0 3 ^. 

where x Q and are, respectively, the price and quantity 
of the co^rodity in question, and Xg, x,* ••*••*• .x^ are the 




i hi. i V>4 n - P>i js» IQU*. 


















prices of all other commodities. Such a formulation gives 
us an insight into tile tremendous complexity of our economy. 

To get back on the iamiliur ground ox neo-classical 
theory it is a simple matter to derive the law according to 
that theory from the formula just staked by assuming that all 

other prices are kept constant (i.e., x*,.Xj*, 

are given constant values^ ana thus to derive the neo-class¬ 
ical law as a special case of the more general law of the 
mathematical school. But the demand curve obtained by this 
method will depend in part upon the magnitude of the con¬ 
stants assigned to the other variables. Thus, as Schultz 
points out...."the demand curve for wheat wnen the price of 
rye is kept constant at $0.75 per bushel may be considerably 
different from what iu is when the price of xye is kept 
constcnt at $1*50 per bushel". Conse .uentfy this method of 
•aittheaatical ignoration* practiced by the mathematical 
school is seen to be superior, at least theoretically, to the 
ceteris paribus assumption of the neo-classicists, for the 
latter school entirely ignored the (other 1 variables whereas 
the mathematicians faced up to the problem of the level at 
which (other things 1 must be kept constant. 











94 - 


But, ire may a sit, whet practical advantage has this 
device which makes it possible to t; ke into account f other 
things 1 ?• fhe answer is this# While in theory it is seen 
necessary to treat the demand function in all its complexity 
in order to show that the price problem is soluble, "in prac¬ 
tice only a small advantage is gained by considering more 
than the first few highly associated variables"^. 0f course 
the problem of discovering the most highly associated var¬ 
iables Vecries with the commodity under glass at the moment. 
Only by experimenting with each case cm we tell just what 
portion of the phenomenon under discussion, i.e., the 
dependent variable is accounted for by each of the variables 
selected. 

ths Xnclu8ioa. .ei 

But the mathematical law is also a static law relating 
to £ point in time and the very essence of the statistical 
approach is, as ;e h^vs seen, the absolute necessity of 
allowing xor the passage 01 enough time Co make possible 
the collection of sufficient price-quantity data to iom & 
continuous curve. It has also been made clear in preceding 
sections that with the passage ox time, important dynamic 

1 Schultz, Ibid., ?&ge £5. 








f 


-V 






- 95 


changes occur in the market—thus, the inevitable conclusion 
the t "the statistical approach must therefore deid with 
variables which ure the function of time"^. 

The Dynamic; Law ox Pesnand i 

By including time explicitly in our equation we get a 
dynamic law oi demand, thus* 

(2) x a - F ( x^, Xg, x e .x n , t ) 

where the x* a have the same meaning as in equation (1) and 

where t stands for time* If we were to give to t a constant 

value say t Q — repress: ting a particular period of time we 

should revert to the Walrasian (mathematical) static law of 

demand as a special case, andggain if we were to assign 

constant values to x,..x we should have the neo- 

1 n 

classics! law as another special Cage* 

It must be emphasized however that in inductive investiga¬ 
tion (for reasons we h*T® already discussed »* see above pp —86-90 
et seq.) it is impossible to reach any tiling better than en 
approximation to the statical law. 

Time-elimin-v tiem 

Most statistical economists have preferred not to 

T 


Sehuits. Ibid, Page 28 




















2G 


include time as an explicit Variable in their demand equation® 
and have as a result had to search out different me^ns of adjust¬ 
ment in the other variables for such changes as are occasioned 
by the allowing of a time interval* Among the most common 
methods of sidestepping the inclusion of time as an explicit 
variable are the reduction of consumption statistics to a per 
capita basis} the deflating of prices to a constant purchasing 
power (real price) basis} trie use of such devices as link 
relatives, percentage changes, trend ratios, etc# etc# 

Since our inquiry deals primarily with the relationships 
existing between prices and consumption the problem resolves 
itself into one of how best to eliminate tae effects of the other 
variables will eh distort the underlying rel, tion ships between 
these two economic data* Schuits points out in connection with 
his investigation into the demand for sugar two chief methods 
of dealing with this problem# The first is the use ox multiple 
correlation technique' 1 which considers the price of the com¬ 
modity in question as a iunction of all the variables and not 
of quantity alone* ^he second method consists in adjusting 
(By some or all of the devices for * sidestopping* suggested 
abovs) "the statistics of prices and consumption for the 

■Lffeg- a .o oaj p psa ensive treatment oi various methods of statistical 
approach to this problem of • tine-elimination( see H#l,goore*s 








• 57 - 


resultant or changes in the other variables assuming that 
such an adjustment is possible, and then deriving the desired 
relationship by considering the price of sugar as a simple func¬ 
tion of oniy one variable, the quantity demanded 11 ^. 

Schultz considers the first method ag theoretically the 
more desirable because it yields what Moore has taimed a 
"dynamic law of demand in its complex form" in a f om 
permitting us to derive an approximation to the static law at 
the same time's Moreover if the simple linear function should 
involve too great an error it is always possible with this 
method to secure second and even further approximations by 
the use of some more general equation# H owerer in the inductive 
investigation undei consideration Schultz did not make use of 
the multiple correlation technique because he considered that 
"the really important disturbing factor* which obscure the 
relation between the prices and the amount of the commodity 
(sugar) are not the changes in the price of glucose, com 
syrup and honey, but the growing popularity of sugar as an 
article of consumption, the increasing population, and the 

A Sehultz. Ibid*, Page £9, 

£ Schultz, Xbid*, Page £9* Cf* also Mrs# Gilboy* s criticism of 
Moore 1 s use of multiple correlation# She is of the opinion 
that insofar as time is eliminated, or rather 4he dynamic 
changes due to time are eliminated, the curve derived is a 
complex static curve and not dynamic as stated by both Moore 
and Schultz* 













y rA-y .-4/,.. j 


• - v •- J - A-.-; ■•■v- . ■ J. • '• ^ j 



J ‘ . ' • • • -•... ■ \ ; >.* 




96 


changes la the general price level, and the effects of these 
long time changes may be eximinoted by one of two simple 
statistical devices ^lilte as welx as by the method of multiple 
correlation"^. 

Thus for the solution of the peculiar demand, problem as¬ 
sociated with sugar Schultz turns to the second of the two 

methods mentioned, that is, to the elimination of time by 
using •link relatives 1 or 1 trend ratios* instead of absolute 
quantities, along with appropriate corrections where necess¬ 
ary for increases in population and changes in the general 
price level* 

The steps involved in the derivation of statistical 
demand curves by the use of these methods o~ eliminating 
time will be considered briefly# &ince the author has had no 
opportunity to carry out any inductive investigation in this 
line on his own behalf it wra.3 found necessary to draw further 
en the source closest to hand, via*, Schultz, for on example 

to illustrate how the statistical e-onoaiste derive demand 
curves from actual data in contredistinction to the hypoth¬ 
etical demand schedules and curves postulated by those 
economists with a bent for pure theory* 

^ Schultz# Ibid#, Page 52# 













■> 





-i f\ ! . - .V.'/ 


■ ■ . C ■ •" ... 

* . -■ « ■ ■ ' 












99 


It should be noted at this point that Schulti uses 
wholesale* not retail prices in his investigation. Xhus 
hi s # demand curve* sill be in the form of a wholesaler s f 
demand curve rather than a consumers’ demana curve end we 
may seem to bo departing from the original condition of 
the study* However it must be remembered that the primary 
reason for considering the Sdhults method is to illustrate 
some of the most common techniques used in the derivation 
of*deraand curves” - and since these same techniques may 
be applied to retail prices equally as well as wholesale 
prices (if the d ata are available) it is really a matter 
of no moment which sort of data we use for purposes of 
illustration* In any case there is a possibility of de¬ 
riving some notion of the probable shape of the consumers’ 
demand curve from the curve arrived at by the use of whole¬ 
sale prices* providing the different conditions under which 
the two markets operate are taken into consideration. 


^ In Mrs. Gilboy* s article "Studies in Milk and 

Butter,” W.JE* Vol#46, which we shall discuss later is 
to be found the following* ”DecJ.er* s demand is closely 
related to the demand of final consumers. If a dealer is 
to be successful his demand must reflect that of ilnal 
consumers| although the speculative element entering into 
dealers* demand may obscure consumers demand for snort 
periods* It must be remembered, too, that the dealer is 
buying not only for present consumer© but, within the limit 







.1 


-< ■ . ■ v ■ f - 


r X-£ ’’ ,/• 

T ■ ••• ■ •> ' 1 ' ' 


■V • n - •. 


■H ••• v 


; : ■ 


vV ; ; ■ * -w,.-'.. - ’ 


. 


■ 




: 


j: 


. 


* ' • •• 


. 


■ i. 

, 


f Vi .c ■- 







- 100 


But a considei*ation of the relationships involved between 
consumers 1 aemuad uad dealers 1 demand would lead a* away 
from the main problem of this part which is to review the 
methodology and assumptions underlying the quantitative 
measurement of demand# 

She two alternative methods used by Schultz to derive 
curves 

statistical demaac^will be considered! (a) The method of 
relative changes and (b) the methoa of trend ratios# 

(a) The Method of h^iative Changes* 

*By taking the relative charge in the amount of the 
commodity that is demanded instead of the absolute quantities, 
the effects of increasing population are approximately elimin¬ 
ated j and by taking the relative change in the corresponding 
prices instead of the corresponding absolute prices, the 
errors due to a fluctuating price level are p rtially re¬ 
moved* If the observations should cover the period of a 


of storage capacity, for future consumers as well* 

It may be remarked, too, that in general dealers 1 
demand for a commodity is apt to be more elastic than 
will be consumers 1 demand. Ihe dealers 1 knowledge of 
the price situation is enormously greater than is that 
of the consumers 1 and a small change in price will have 
a greater proportional effect on thoir purchases than the 
same change is likely to have on the purchases of indiv¬ 
idual consumers* 











101- 


major cycle or prices, and the commodity under investig*- 
cion should be a staple commodity,****** the above method 
of deriving the demand curve wixl give an extremely accurate 
formula summer!ling the relation between valuations in price 
and variations in the amount of the conunodity that is 
demanded*^* 

As & measure ol relative change Schultz uses the link 
relative, i*e*, the ratio of the given year’s price or 
quantity data to that of the previous year* The link rela¬ 
tives are always positive in form which is a great advantage 
when it is desired to use the logarithms of the figures* 

The basic data, of Schultz’s inquiry consist of two 
unadjusted series, the first representing the total yearly 
consumption of sugar in the United States from 1890-1914 inclusive, 
and the second representing the average annual wholesale prices 
at flew York of refined auger in cents per pound* for the same perioc 

To obtain the link relatives of consumption and prices 
each item in these series was divided by the preceding item. 

The link relatives were then plotted on scatter diagrams, the 
consumption relatives as abscissae and the price relatives as 
ordinates* 


^ H. L* Moore, Economics Cycles, Pages 69- 7 D* 












V-" 


• V s i i • ; . .• ,.l:5 




. 





; 




i ' 




t 


■; ;k. 




■' 

. .J 











' 




*p-;S. 











? 


? 




1 1 






; 







In the case of the sugar data under consideration the 
correlation between the crude data lor prices and consumption 
was but the correlation between the link rela#- 

tives of the two series was 68*^*07# This last co¬ 

efficient is definitely significant and provides some indicar* 

tion of the extent to which the effect of # other things* have 
been removed from the picture# 

Once plotted on the scatter diagram the link relatives 
revealed quite clearly the nature of the correlation between 
the two variables# 

The problem of deriving a statistical law of demand for 
sugar then resolved itself into the statistical problem of 
discovering the best-fitting str?ight> line—since by inspec¬ 
tion curvilinear relationship could not be assumed. 

As the nature of the data made it reasonable to suppose 
that errors were apt to be as frequent in one series as the 
other Schult* could see no justification for using either of 
the regression lines as the best-fitting straight line and 
therefore to assume that one or the other of the variables was 
free from error# t»onse uently a statistical compromise was 
adopted^, the two variables were assumed to be equally 

1 The hypothesis that both v ri-foj.es (independent and dependent) 
are equally subject to error nas been considered by Merriman, 
fearson, heed, etc#, etc# bee bibxiogrupny, page 66 et eeq# 
in . &chuita, op# cit. 











. : . .. . ■ . ■ . ■ .■ 




" .... ■ ■■ , 




,v ‘ m s 




t ^ ■ /V' 


; r r . • 

-v." ,. s jn?n: , ' 

..H L-k ■ ■. 


V 


■i.v.St- 




. >' : 'V. .. 


- 

•’! ■ ' i"‘ - ■' >'i •• : <• • 


W 




rt ■ 


. v ... r -iV. ■■■ •' > '■■ ■■ " • 1 •. ; •= • ' ■ ' - • 

, ; ... . ■ . 

. ■ , ■' ■■ ■ : ' ■■ ■■ .. . • 


*'«Wv 




. ' 


... i . . 

• r \ 




. 5 • - ■ a 




: T ■ t : ' * ' 1 ‘ - .' : ' ■ ; : - 

■, ■ * ' 1 •• ->r- ■■■•“ ^ r- ■ ■ 

: - ■ - • . • - 

, 








*’’•• ■- ,• ’ A-v 1 ■ ■ - ‘ ' v - r V l- 

" ; ■ '■ ■’ 

. : - ...; i' :, ■ • ! 'V it 

, • ' ■" • K ■■■ : 


; l 








103 


accurate (or inaccurate) and a curve was fitted to the 
gcstter for which the sum of the a uare# of the "normal** 

(i*e., the perpendicular distances of the points from the 
curve) was a minimum* 

It is pointed out carefully by £chults that the Standard 
error (root mean square deviation) is of no service to us in 
detersuning whether one of the regression lines, or the line 
derived thiough the use oi normal criteria should be used 
as the line of "beet fit u * A h; reaccning behind this is 
clear, for the standard errors of these lines are obviously 
not comparable* b&eh is measured in different units* for 
the regression of I on £ the standard error represents a 
distance measured in vertical unit"; for the regression of 
v on ? the standard er or represents r. distance measured in 
horizontal units; and for the line derived from normal 
criteria the standard error represents a distance measured 
in a direction perpendicular to itself* In a word the 
s&mdord errors are measured in different units since 
vertical distance represents price; horizontal distance, 
eon sumption; and perpendicular distance represents a combination 
ef both price and piantity data. Hence tne standard error* are 
not eaapsr&bla. 






104 


Bor would it be any use to measure the standard error 
oi' all three lines in the suae direction for the smallest 
standard error is already lore-ordained according to which*- 
ever of the three directions we choose* If we were to take 
the vertical direction wc know aljead* that the regression of 
X on X will have the smallest standard error for this line 
was fitted by making the gum of the Squares of the vertical 
deviations a minimum, and so with the other two lines and 
their respective ♦directions** 

Hence the f line of best fit*, M mus^ therefore be based 
on the fundamental conditions which were adduced, and not on 
the size of its standard errer 1 ^* 

The equation of this ’line of best fit* is capable of 
yielding in terse ox link relatives, a means of estimating 
the probable change in price corresponding to & given change 
in consumption and vice versa* Moreover, by transforming the 
equation into terms of absolute quantities (through the sub¬ 
stitution of the mathematical definitions of the link rela¬ 
tives for the link relatives themselves and rewriting the 
equation in terms of either * ory , the crude data) we are 


Schults, op* cit*. Page 44, 








103 


provided with a very convenient form for the rapid estima¬ 
tion of price from consumption data, or consumption from 
price data, for any one year. 


lbess equations could be easily derived for each year 


for whicn data have been provided, •»’•Such equations afford a 
measure of the shifting of the demand curve from year to 
year as a result of dynamic cnanges HJ *, 

The determination. oi the W>efliciaqs of jLLasticityt 

By definition (see Page Z7, Part I, above) the co¬ 
efficient of the elasticity of demand is 


1 Z-^SL r £*♦£ 

' 4 7 dy a 


The equation cf the demand curve derived according to 
normal criteria -may as we have pointed cut be adjusted to show 
the law of demand for any one year in absolute quantities# 
Hence to find the (average) coefficient of elasticity for any 
one year it is only necessary to find dr from this adjusted 


equation and to multiply the result by J ^ lere H Is trie price 
and x the consumption of the commodity in that year# 

■^rom the nature of the result it is clear that the co¬ 
efficient of elasticity varies from point to point along the 
curve (as must be the case unless we accidentally should have 
curve)# 















10 0 


a constant outlay curve). For iow quantities (or high 
prices) the coefficient will be higher than will be the 
case for lower prices and greater quantities. Schulta 
derives the coet icient for three points on his demand 
curve and proves this to be the case. (Cf. PV. .below) • 

Obviously if some other line has been taken as the 
f line of best fit 1 , say, one of the regression ^ines, we 
should have obtained materially different coefficients of 
elasticity. Evidently then, great care must be exercised 
in fitting the demand curve if the coefficients of elas¬ 
ticity are to be at all reliable. 

(b) Xh* Method of iredd natiog * 

The assumptions underlying this method are*...that 
"points on a secular trend fitted to price-time data 
represent Manual" prices throughout the period covered by 
the observations, and that the corresponding points on a 
secular trend fitted to consumption-time data represent the 
"normal" quantities taken at the corresponding "normal 
prices" 1 . 

The ratios of the actual annual prices end quantities to 


1 P.G. Wright, Review of Schulta* s "Statistical Laws of 
Demand & Supply" in J.A.S.A. v.24. Page 2U8. 









.•,'i if?*. 




j 



V 






■'' 


■flM. i’:,- 





, 






.. j js ■ ■: 


; 


t $ 

















107 


their respective trends are then computed and plotted on a 
scatter diagram in place of the crude data (price ratio as 
ordinate and consumption-ratio as abscissa). 

Schultz explains the rationale of this method axong 
the following lines* If theoretical static conditions had 
obtained over the period of observation there would be no 
secular trend in either series, ^he existence of such a 
trend in one or both of the series is evidence that dis¬ 
turbing elements were present* other tilings" did not 

remain equal, ^hese disturbing elements often give rise to 
a measurable trend and by taking the ratio of observed 
prices to trend prices*."we eliminate to a first approxima¬ 
tion, the effect of the long-time disturbing elements on the 
price of the commodity under consideration. Likewise by 
taking the ratio of the corresponding quantities to their 
trend, we eliminate a . roximately all the long-time dis¬ 
turbing factors influencing the supply"'*'. Schultz indicates 
that in his belief this device practically overcomes the 
chief difficulties which "according to Edgeworth and others, 
lie in the way of deriving statistical laws of demand"^.,, 
for, continues Schuits, "our data, though extending over a 
period of years, may, when thus adjusted, be conceived of as 





f <*" 

A ■ 





‘ v';. : . V .. . .}■ 








| 

•■■■v .i 4 a " 











108 


representing approximately, observations taken at a given 
point in time*..at least lor practical purposes 11 ^* (This 
last statement lias been pointed out by Schultz’s critics as 
evidence of inconsistency in his argument* At this point, 
they say, he virtually states that his curve is an approx¬ 
imation to the static neo-classical curve, but throughout 
the remainder of his work he persists in considering his curve as 
representing a dynamic law of demand* (We will hear more of 
this point later) • 

The Selection of a Opocl Trendl 
The problem of selecting the best trend for any given 
set of data calls for good judgment on the part of the 
operator* *»• ^* Rhodes notes that the statistician is faced 
by two mutually inconsistent principles at this juncture* 

(1). fl We must obtain a curve without the sinuosities which 
are not inherent in the data and (&) we must get a curve 
which f fits* by least squares* •*. somehow by careful bouncing 
of these two mutually destructive principles we ctn obtain for 
any data a curve which is reasonably smooth and which at the 
s=me time gives a series of errors which have a reasonably 
small mean square error* ^he smoothness we obtain is not 


1 Ibid, 








, -r- 


-- .a-;: *.■ . ^ 











.1 










109 


the best, nor is the sun of the squares of the errors a 

minimum 0 ^* 

With the type of data. available Schuxtz indicates that 
a check may be conducted on the wisdom of one's compromise 
between smoothness j*nd goodness of fit* Thus, the object of 
fitting trends is in the first place to remove disturbing 
factors and to unmask the true relationship between price 
and consumption* li this removal were complete the (inverse) 
correlation between the variables would be perfect* Hence 
that pair of trends, other tilings being equal, the correlation 
of whose deviations from the actual data (trend ratios) yields 
the highest numerical coefiieient of correlation will be the 
most suitable trends for the purpose* Since this inquiry i« 
not designed primarily as a treatise on statistics we shall 
touch but briefly on Schultz's attempts to find the 'best- 
fitting' trend* Suilice it to say that four curves were 
fitted to the consumption data arid six to the price data* In 
both series the relatively simple cubic seemed to present 
the most happy compromise between smoothness and goodness of 
fit. Moreover tne conelusions reached by inspection were 
checked by computing the correlation coefficients for the 

1 E# C* Knodest tracts for Qomputers No* ^•"Smoothing 1 11 

Pages 45-44* Cambridge university Press, 1321* 









• 110 - 


various pairs of trends and the highest coefficient, r» -0*78 
was obtained when the cubic was used for both trends, *8 a 
general conclusion it was noted that*•"the degree of correla* 
tion diminishes as the complexity or sensitiveness of the 
price trend is increased until, as in the case when the Rhodes 
curve^ie used, the very existence of a correlation becomes 
somewhat doubtful” . 

X'hs Selection of a Ejananc. C^_e; 

As prift^ry data the consumption ratios W and the price- 
ratios (Y) were computed end tabulated for tile years 1890-1914 
inclusive just as in. the case of the link relatives analysis* 
Xhe trends used as a base from which to plot the ratios were 
of course those derived as stated in the preceding section* 

The data were then plotted on a scatter diagram* ^galn, 
parallel to the link-relative analysis the next problem was 
that of passing a good continuous curve through these obfterva- 
tioas in order to derive from them "for any one year the most 
probable relations between the variations in the amount of 

sugar that is consumed and the corresponding variations in 

price” 5 . 

^ E# C* Rhodes, op* cit* 

| Schultz, op* cit* Page 54. 

® Schultz* Ibid., Page 55* 












- Ill 


Inspection was then necessary to determine what function should be 
fitted. In this case as in the link-relative study there w<is no 
evidence of curvilinear relationship so the problem resolved 
itself into one of choosing the best-fitoing straight xine. We 
have already discussed (Page 102 et seq.) the reason why a 
straight line fitted by normal criteria is preferable to either 
of the regression lines. In his analysis# Schults, for purposes 
of comparison derives, in addition to the •normal 1 curve# two 
curves using Professor Moore*s "typical equation to the law of 
demand"'*’ as well as the ordinary regression lines. While the 
normal line is etil^. obviously the *line of best fit* the other 
curves show th^t should we have followed the ordinary practice 
of using one of the regression lines on the assumption that one 
of the variables was free from error# better results would have 
been obtained by choosing price as the independent variable 
(the regression of * on I) than by using consumption as the 
independent variable (and the regression of 1 on X). Evidently 
the errors in the data on sugar prices <jad consumption are some¬ 
what more numerous in the consumption series thm in the price 
series. 

I H. L. Moore# "Elasticity of Demand and Flexibility of Prices." 

J.$•£•£« March# 1922. 


















i 





- 112 


Schultz is not unaware of the d-ngers of extrapolating 
from any demand curve and he says explicitly, . "to extend 
any empirical demand curve much beyond the range of observa¬ 
tion is not a safe procedure..and that in most practical 
problems the extreme ends of the demand curve are of no 
importance anyway"^, 

from the equation of this "normal line" or demand curve, 
may be estimated the probable change in consumption correspond¬ 
ing to a given change in price and vice versa* Al so the 
equation may be stated directly in terms of the crude data as rag 
done in the link relative analysis. It is obvious that this 
equation serves the same purpose as did the equation derived 
from using the method of link relatives—but the estimates 
obtained from the trend ratio method will be the more reliable 
since a higher degree of correlation exists between the two 
series of trend ratios than between the corresponding series 
of link relatives, i*e., the approximation to static conditions 
is better in the former case than in the latter* In addition 
it will be noted that for the same reason the trend ratio equa¬ 
tion for the demand curve provides a better measure of shifting 
(of the demand curve) from year to year than is provided by the 



Schultz, op* cit* fage 60* 











corresponding equation derived by the method oi link- 
relatives* 

Thp. Cocf fi cient of Elasti city as Derived by the Trend Ratio Methodi 
It seems consistent to maintain that the best coefiicient of 
elasticity as well as the best estimate oi probable price (or 
consuaptionj and the best measure oi shifting will be obtained 
from the curve that 1 fits the data with the highest degree of 
probability*^.. .in this case the •normal line 1 derived by the 
tread ratio method* 

Echultx has in this connection included an interesting 
elasticity curve or graph which is probably worthy of reproduction* 
See fig* 1* Page.... 

The curve ^ - is deduced from our • normal line N or the 
demand curve derived from trend ratio criteria as Schult* would 
call it* This graph clearly indicates the higher elasticity of 
demand for low consumption or high prices and the lower 
elasticity of demand for greater consumption and lower prices* 

“For example, when PI, that is to sty, when the consumption 
of sugar in any year is •normal 1 or is equal to that indicated 
by the trend for the same year, tj. * 0.51 or a reduction in the 

* Moore, Economic Cycles, Page 84* 

























I 


j 






Jo -l rv„7 /D 


- 114 


price oi sugar by one per cent wiU. -increase consumption 
by 0*61 of one per cent*’" and so on* 

Xt %3 % : ie £ were computed for 

comparable points on the iwo demand curves derived by Schulte, 
the results obtained by one method did not difier materially 


from those obtained by the other* 

y v In order to suggest just what 
sort of concrete results we may 


-.Z 


5 
* 


-.8 


-*c. 


~70T 

t 1 ■! 



expect to deriva from tois sort 

V 

of statisticci investigation 


Schulti’s own conclusion regarding 
the elasticity of demand for sugar 
is .footed.."When the consumption 
for any one yekr is •normal 1 , 
that is to say, when it is equal to 
laab indicated by the trend of consumption for the same year, or 
when it exceeds the consumption of the year immediately preced¬ 


ing it by four per cent (the average increase according to Link 
relatives), then the coefficient o'- elasticity equals -0*5, or 
a decrease in price of one per cent will increase consumption 
by 0*5 of one per cent, ^he elasticity of demand under other 


1 


Penults, op* cit*, i'age 65, 
















i,: 










■ 












115 


conditions of consumption may be read oil the graph of in 

Fig. 15“ 1 (our rig. IJ. 

SchuitSB ai.ec repeated the whole study using data adjusted 
for changes in price level and copulation* The fact that the 
results were not m&tarislly different from those obtained by 
using unadjusted data strongly indicate® th.t the two methods 
derived aoove, aria in particular the one dealing with trend 
ratios, are able to go a long way towerd eliminating the effects 
®f dynamic changes and thus to bring out at least to a first 
approximation, the relationship between the prices and con¬ 
sumption of the commodity, sugar* 

It cannot be emphaaiaud too strongly that with other data 
for other commodities and under other conditions, we might find 
it necessary to use adjusted data; or the link relatives might 
show higher correlation than idle trend-ratios. The statistical 
technique must oe adapted to silt who need of each individual 
problem. 

*inaiiy, the law of demand devised by such methods should 
be applied only to the pe . iod for which the observations are 
taken. The forces behind the demand end supply of commodities 
may change greatly overtime and cny extrapolation from one 

I 


Schulte, Ibid Page 66, 








... ... ■ • 




llo 


period into the next - without considering the force* 
operative in the second period - is of no scientific value 
and would probably yield impossible results. 


Various Criticisms of the bchults Method* 

Certain of Lie reviewers have been inclined to be 


rather dubious about the moole approach. Mrs. Gilboy takes 
iiisus with Schults in regard to hie terminology. Thus, 
Sehultg stages, r: i‘he maw ox demand derived in this study is 
a 1 fyn.-juc* iavj it describes in summary fonn the * routine 
of chciige 1 of an Important economic pneaoaenon. It is the 
dynamic -aw of demand in a simile form (link relatives or 
fcr^nd ratiocj. It is vuite different from the static law 
of damond on classical writers. The statical law may be 


only approached, but never realized in inductive investiga¬ 


te orb 


Kc?/ in this statement ^chunts has made it abundantly 
clear that th« curves he cbtains aintiSoically are not the 
neo-classical defend ana supply curves - and by inference of 
course the elasticities he derives will not be the elasticities 


of defend and supply according to neo-classical theory. 


1 


SchuLts, ?age 94. op. cat, 














■Si 




S 


1 

i - 












117 


But *rs. Gilboy objects to the void •c^namic* • Kather, 
by t_u» 0 -elimin *tion, she states Schuits lias derived an 
approximation to the st. tic law and his demand cuivg would be 
an average curve "applying to the period of time as a whole 
and not to specific instants within the period"***. 

Care must be taken not to impute to Schulte a clflm for 
having made discoveries which he does not in fact claim to 

have made. Bow, M IS# Gilboy writes, "Schulte appears to regard 

o 

the price quantity points as points on a demand curve" , but 
she evidently had the classical deiinition of the demand curve 
in mind when the above was written, for sne continues "this 
is logically true, from the point of view of equilibriu m 
analysis , only if oxie oi two hypotheses Can be madei Ordin¬ 
arily the points on tire scatter diagram are points of intersec¬ 
tion of instantaneous demand and supply schedules end lie on 
both curves, f’hey can be said to lie on the demand curve 
alone,‘^if supply can be disregarded as a determining factor 
or (2) if it is known that the demand curve has remained stable 
during the period under consideration and that tne supply 
curve alone has moved. In the latter case the moving supply 

*** Gilboyi "Schuits & Leontief Methods of Deriving Demand 

Gurves* Q* J. £• v ol# 45, Page £26* 

2. Ibid. 







- 118 - 


curve obviously traces the course of the static demand curve"^. 
In itself this statement is quite acceptable but if applied as 
intending to shov; that Schultz was unaware of this principle it 
is not, for Schultz could not have stated more explicitly that 
his demand curve is not derived as a new classical dotum. He 
recognized that the denand and supply curves (of neo-clessical 
theory) move with tine. What he endeavours to describe with 
his ’demand curve’ is this ’routine of change* of the ’instan¬ 
taneous* demand and supply schedules. Considered as such his 

demand curve would seen to bear same relation to the ’path of 

o 

equilibrium* idea as expressed by Mrs. Gilboy , Leontief and 

5 

other writers • When time is eliminated the path of equilibrium 

4 

may be expressed as an average demand on supply curves • This 

relationship - 


3-Gilboy, Ibid. Pages 226-7. Cf. E.J. Working: "What do Stat¬ 
istical Demand Curves show". Q.J.E. Vol. 41. Pages 212 ff. 

<fcf. Mrs. Gilboy's "Demand Curves in Theory & Practice" Q.J.E. 
Vol. 44, Page 608 ff. In this concept of the ’path of equilib¬ 
rium’ or ’historical trajectory’ as Amoroso calls it v/e have a 
summarized picture of the variations in equilibrium price over 
time. Buphasis is placed on changes in the equilibrium points 
rather than on changes in the demand end supply schedules them¬ 
selves. The inclination of such a curve will be determined by 
the balance of forces making for changes in equilibrium. If the 
changes over time are largely on the supply then the curve will 
have a negative inclination and vice versa. But if the changes 
are entirely on the supply side the changes in the supply curve 
will trace out the true demand curve. 

3Cf. E. J. Working op. cit. Amoroso, Moretti, etc. 

^Cf. Gilboy: The Leontief & Schultz Methods, op. cit. Page 233. 































. 























■ 

. 


. 


































' 


- 

- 




* 














, . . 

- 







- lie 


might bear further study* It is impossible to derive any¬ 
thing approximating the neo-clasaical coe:.icient of elasticity 
from the # path of equilibrium* curve (see note below) since 
it can give no informer tion as to the neo-classical demand or 
supply schedules* But neither does Schulte's elasticity of 
demand or supply correspond to the neo-classical concept of 
elasticity, nor was it intended to do so* Possibly the Schulte 
curve could be compared with tne neo-classical deaana curve if 
supply were dependent on demand or if the supply curve alone 
moves* 

P* Wright agrees with Mrs* Gilboy the aeo-elassical 
curves and concepts as such are obteauabic iroa statistical data 
only in these special c^ses* 

Mrs* Gilboy also takes bchults to task on account of his 
system?deriving laws of demand for individual years witiiin 
the whole period of observation* iechnicaliy, of course, it 
is easy to derive these ♦absolute* curves for each year - out 
says Mrs* Gilboy, it is much more difficult to explain their 
meaning in a particular cage, vis*, what is the relation of 
this 1 absolute* curve to the general curve for the period?" 










H What determines the diiierence in shape of these * absolute* 
curves?Since trm© is removed from the whole period of 
observation by some of the method® of •sidestepping* we have 
outlined the Sehulti curve may be taken as a sort of 

average *demanu* curve over the period and the coeixicient of 
elasticity derived may be considered as an average • coe- icient 
of elasticity 1 * Viewed in this light it is rather diixicult 
to see how one can be justilled in deriving coefiicients of 
elasticity and l~ws of demcnd ior particular periods of time 
within the whole period* 

The above criticisms all serve to point out the extreme 
care with which such problems must be attacked* No e: ort 
should be spared to dexine clearly all the underlying assump¬ 
tions! tiie purposes of the particular study should be clearly 
set out and the results should be interpreted precisely in the 
light 01 the methods used to achieve them* Nothing should be 
left bo chance. 

Probably the real test that should be applied to Schult** s 
method is, how we^- does it face up to and overcome the 
difficulties facing the statistical economist as we h^ve out¬ 
lined them at the beginning or this part* In this regard we may 

r 


Gilboy* Ibid., Page £65 













121 


recml tint by the statistical devices employed ail constant 
and s sterna tie •errors 1 (brought in through allowing for the 
entrance oi time) were eliminated through the use ox fink- 
relatives, trend ratios, index numbers, etc* Obviously there 
are other errors inherent in the data which 0011101111 to no law 
of regularity and regarding these the assumption was made 
that they are eliminated by the graduation process involved in 
fitting the demand curve (by the •normal 1 criterion)* 

This well reasoned effort has been »&d© to account for 
all the dynamic factors involved and because Ills results cannot 
be defined in neo-classical terms is no evidence that they are 
unimportant* 

In summary form, &chulta*s contributions amount to this* 
Whenever a high degree of correlation exists between price 
data and quantity data (after statistical corrections have 
been made for dynamic influences) there is evidence that tlx© 
dynamic forces affecting supply and demand conditions have oper¬ 
ated under the influence of some law during the period under 
observation* With this in mind it is quite legitimate to use 
the •curves*and •elasticities* derived from the data, as does 
Schultw, to discover the unknown price corresponding with a 














122 - 


given consumption (or output) and vice versa* The better 
the correlation between the data the closer will be the 
approximation to the truth when we endeavor to estimate 
price from consumption or consumption from price using 
observations made during the period covered by the data* 

As we have pointed out carefully in preceding sections, 
any extrapolation from these * demand 1 curves is a ra tiler 
dangerous procedure, but "to the extent that it may be assumed that 
the dynamic forces will continue to operate thereafter in the 
same manner as they have been operating during that period, the 
methods may be used with some confidence for forecasting"^, 

before concluding this section of Part XI it may be well 
to discuss briefly a rather special case (which we have men¬ 
tioned immediately above) where it as deemed possible to 
construct a demand curve - over time - and still maintain the 

neo-classical assumptions concerning the curve# 

I.lrs. Gilboy' s Studies in Demand ; 

ie have pointed out that Mrs* ^ilboy holds the belief'^ 

that if demand regained constant during any period of time 
then the priee-qusntity data may be looked upon as points on 


^ P* k* Wright op* cit* Page kl4. 

£ Gilboyi "Studies in Demand, Milk and Butter 1 ** 

5 Shared by' W.** Merger - "The Static & Dynamic in Statistical 
Demand ^irves ^oi. 47. 










123 


the demand curve;- this curve being then disclosed or 
exhibited by the shitting supply curve* This follows be¬ 
cause "the moving supply curve must, by the assumptions 
of equilibrium theory, move along the constant demand schedule, 
and the price-quantity points are at its point of intersec¬ 
tion with the stable demand eurve"^* 

Mrs* ^ilboy points out etiU. another case in which the 
orthodox demand schedule may be determined from empirical data* 
Tne demand schedule may also be determined if the supply of 
the commodity under discussion is a fixed quantity wit iin the 
period of time considered* Supply is then not an independent 
factor, acting with demaiid upon price, but & dependent factor, 
the movements of which result from the action of demand, 

Under these circumstances supply becomes a function of demand, 
and is no longer an independent variable, working conjointly 
with the other independent variable, demand* In this case 
as in the case just mentioned, the price-quantity points on a 
scatter diagram will cluster closely around a negatively- 
inclined line which may be assumed to be tne constant demand 

o 

schedule* 

^Mrs. Gilboy* studies in Demand, ililk Si B utter, <,*J.E* Vol. 46, 
Page 671* 

2 Ibid* 


















Shs then proceeds on the assumption that for 
agricultural commodities as a whols the supply schedule 
is usually do parti ant, in the sense defined a bo/ s, within 
an Interval o f tlas . With most agricultural commodities 
adju tmonts* of supply to pries changes ie difficult 
(particularly where the corn odltles are perishable). 

Turning specifically to the study of milk and butter 
Mrs. Oil boy emphasizes first, "the shifts in the supply 
schedule of these two coomoditiee determined by the compet¬ 
ing deman for each of the derived products (cheese, ice 
cream, etc., etc.) and by the seasonal s av i ng^ in tbs 
production of milk* • Secondly she points out that once 
the butter is made it musk be eold "either for Immediate 
consumption or for storage, -ind it mu t be sold in accord¬ 
ance with the existing deman d schedule. It is at thig stage 
that supp ly becomes a factor dependent on demand , and moves 
solely as a result of demand. The same may be said of 
whole milk , except that storage is relatively unimportant"^, 

1 See article by F.F. Liniger, "Seasonal Adjustments in 
Fluid Milk Areas", J.F.E. Jen, , Z^. In this article he 
atetea tint the adjustment of milk production lags two to 
three years behind milk price*. 

2 Gilboy. Ibid, Page 675- 
5 Ibid. 















' 

c i.; ■ . ?. | . i : i ■ k ‘ 


i- ; . ' ' - • 






yy - .v j _ 

■ : - f ^ m a fl 

} . ', . : • ' ■ ■ krl .... . 


• .. 


■ 




A * £ 


’ 

> 

r . | . • ; \ 

' 

. 

■ ■ • ■ 


* ' - 

- • 

- , ■ - 

. • 

. 






- 125 - 


uses 

Duo to the axis tone# of alternate / for milk the 
supply of that coanx>dity la more quickly adjustable to 
changes in de cand than ia usual for agricultural commod¬ 
ities. "The depe ndent nature of the supply la nob 
apparent untt 1 t he supply sch edule haa beco me _•• tab 1 iah ed,* 
(e.g. until milk Is bottled). Thirdly, the fact is pointed 
out that seasonal variation of demand is of relatively 
little importance as far a# milk Is concerned. The con¬ 
clusion drawn fro a all this follows: "It ia apparent, in 
fact, th«t the seasonal v a riati o n in demand is less than 
the seasonal variation In suppl y both for butter and whole 
milk. The outstanding factor in the annual production and 
consumption of both commodities ia the seasonal shifting 
of the supply schedule, necessitated by fluctuations in 

the basic u pply of milk and by the competing demands fer 

„ 2 

milk, resulting from the existence of alternative uses . 

Hence assuming the validity of this analysie we shoull 
expect to find weekly or monthly price-quantity data dis¬ 
tributed around a negatively inclined curve, itoich ould 
represent, approximately, at least, the demand s chedule for 

ribldU Page 6? 4 . 

2 Ibid. 























• i*r. - 


the period in question (say,a ys&r). Still further claims 
aro put forward for this—me Ihnd . Thus B if similar data 
were exsndnad for a series rf ys are we couli then indicate 
the changes in the schedule over time, both changes in 
elasticity and shifting. A simple and effective way of 
determining the changes in the demand schedule fbr a 
period of time would be th^ result . Ho complicated stat¬ 
istical method would be necessary, wind no questionable 
assumptions concerning the effect of time w>uld enter".* 

Zt must be emphasized of cotroe that sueh a nsthod could 
be applied only to commoditise concerning whose demand aid 
supply curves the assumptions stated at the outset of our 
note on this article may be legitimately made. 

The results obtained by Mrs Gilboy in a great m asure 
corfirm her optimistic views of tie above m thod of approach. 
The actual techniques employed by her in derivi rg Is r demand 
curves are comparable in some degree to tho? e of Schulte 
which we have previously discussed. Thus she makes use of 
uncorrected price data as well as price data corrected far 
changes in the general price level by the use of an index 
nusfesr of prices. In addition when deriving her dem« d 


1 


Ibid 









- 127 - 


curvQB from the scatter diagram ehe usee the line fitted 
by * normal criteria 1 (ee does Ochultx when fitting hia 
trends) rather than elthsr of the regression liras* Of 
course there are material differences in the two analyses 
dnd in the interpretations of the results to be derived 
from them for the basic assumptions of the two mtthode 
are in no degrse comparable• 

Huabrouo other attea pts have been made at deriving 
statistical demand curves for a good many commodities* 
References to scan cf the more well-known attacks on the 
problem will be fouxti in the bibliography. 

It has been deemed desirable from the point of view 
of this thesis to eei out certain of the more typical 
approaches end to let thsm serve as a guide to the inter¬ 
pretation and weight to be given the findiqgs of those 
investigations into the problem diich have not been 
explicitly mentioned herein. 

In Part II, B # we shall consider a relatively new 
approach to the study of conBurners* demand, vl*5- through 
the analysis ct data derived from family budgets. 







Y;-v.L - : 






• i - ; 

*■ .. ' 

..i 

■ ' ' J 


| 


Y vfc-r* 


. ' • v " f y ■ 1 - 

i* T -n'’ 

.U • : # 

i : - •: -- ?-!■■* * l >- * '■ 

■ if . i i } ■ % . 'i 




' 


: - Y"Y.; : - % ' • h- ' ■> ■ V 1 '.:- ■■ 

h J,\:_ : .. ■ ; ~ : ' 


- 




; . • 


: ; 





- 128 - 


PART II 
(Continued) 

B. Incp t^ e-Sy^ a ud itors and I ncoae-Qusritlty Relationships . 

' Ihi border g rounfl between the provinces of doaestie 
economy titd public oconooy ia ona in whie h e xeellent work 
may be dor* by lu&ny *ho are disinclined for no re general 
and abetract speculatL one’ 1 . 

Family budgets have been collected for many years, 
usually for tie purpose* of studying conditions of aalnu- 
trition; coete of living] standards of liviig ; and the like. 
But only recently taae a tent ion been called to tie fact that 
a closer study of the relationship existing between income and 
expenditure my provide us fresh concepts with ihidi to 
attack the problems of* price-forecasting and the derivation 
of elasticities of demand* 

The scarcity of material available in this relatively 

new field haa been already commented upon in the introduction 

of this scarcity 

to this thesis. Dus to the fact/and for other reasons tie 

1 Marshall, op. elt. Pag. 115. 









1 







'l 







1 








• 129 - 


writer has had to curtail to a great extent hie inquiry 
into the relatione exieting between the two quantltl ea* In¬ 
come and expenditure. 

Very few attempts hay# been nade toward constricting 
eurree fx> m incone andquantity rel tlonshipa. Probably 
the meet well-known efforts in this line hare been found 
in articles concerning what we might call 1 food economies'*. 
Little attempt* however* has been » de at economic analysis 
in these studies# so they will be passed over far the tiv 
being* 

The search for a a asure of deoaid through the uee of 
budgetary data has arlstn fro a a desire to get away from 
the criticisms dirsctsd against certain of the statistical 
method s used in deriving demand taasuresi in particular the 
difficulties involved in allowing for the action of dynamic 
fr otors #1 en time is allowed to eii er. 

Since budgetary data may be taken at a 'point in time 1 
they ehould not be subject to historical diangee in the 
demand function 8 • But if we are to use sow* concept of* say* 

* e.g. Sir John Orr's wall known report on “Food, Health & 
Income" and tho League «f Nations Report on the “Relation 
of nutrition to Health* Agriculture and Economic Policy*. 

2 A. 3. Viaugh :! 31^at5.d.ty of Dc^aap from Budget Studies* 

£.J.E. Vol. 47* Page 1^4, at. seq. 











130 - 


budgetary elasticity and compare it with the Ifershallian 
elasticity of defend we find oureelreo In difficultlee 
similar to thoee of the statistician witn his price-quant¬ 
ity concepts including time* "Juet e© the statist!clan, 
in studying market data must assume stability of the demand 
function through time (if he is to use directly, without 
qualification, the Marshallian concepts of tl» defend curve 
and its elasticity*) so must the student of budgets posit 

stability of ths demand function throughout the income 

2 

range" • Waugh recognizes ttet this stability of desires 
end tastes over tie whole income range is an exceedingly 
unlikely phenomenon, thus "The assumption that shifts from 
one income group to another are analogous to shifts up and 
down a single neo-cl&eeical demand curve would seem unten¬ 
able in the light of what is known of 9 conspicuous consump- 

* 

tion* and conspicuous leisure^* 

This fact alone makes it sufficiently clear that our 
ineofe -expenditure concepts provide no simplifying ah<r t 
cuts toward the derivation of'instantaneous 1 deaand schedules 

* Of. Mrs. Gilboy. "Studies in Milk and Butter", op. cit. 

2 daugh. op. cit. Page IJ6, 

5 Ibid. 























J . i 


' 

jtf' : ■? ' ' 1 

l-r 

r . * ; • - ' » ■ - ■■ 5 ■ , ■ ' : 

- „ ; v : ' ; ■ j. , . • •; v • -V \ ••• ■ ■- 1 : ' : 

. . - f 

- - 5 •- - : : * 7 *; • l — *'-'*’■> "• 

, . - . - ' ■ ■ ■ ... 


I' !i !’ 








• 7-. - 





■ 









, 




: ; - v * - : : : . ' - ' • " 

. ' • 

. 

■ 

'. . . 








- 131 - 


in tbs Marshallian eons*. 

Tta> definition of 'budgetary slastiolty': Waugh 
defines the elasticity derived from family budgets In 
terms parallel to the neo«*clasfi©al concept when stated 

1 U 

in terms of outlay . Thus "Suppose th t « have budget* 
from many families, and that these are classified acccr fl¬ 
ing to inoonn. If, as we pass from one incors group to 
another having a (slightly) greater inoomo, tho p resntags 
outlay for the commodity In question remains constant, 
th*re is unit elasticity. If higher incomes are accompanied 
by smaller percentual outlays fer tho particular commodity, 
the demand is inelastic. If higher l&cotn is accompanied 
by larger percentage expenditure* for the particular com* 
modity, tho denand ie elastic 1 * 2 . While Hie elasticity 
concept derived from income-expenditure data may be expressed 
in tors*# parallel to the definition of the elasticity concept 
derived from price-quantity data (in this case price- 
expenditure data) the two concepts differ radically. In the 
fir e t pi ce as we h^ve noted, the use of the budgetary concept 
postulates that tastes eh^ll be constant over the entire 

1 Of. Th9 criterion of unit sligticity etc. as adduced in 
pages 26 et seq. Part I of thie tin sis. 

2 

flaugh. op. cii. . ages 155-6. 
















132 


lncoffli range if results comparable to thoe e derived from 
Marshallian data are to be obtairs d. 

In the second place to get results comparable to neo¬ 
classical theory it would have to be assumed that a change 
in income has t he same effect - or rather the reciprocal cf 
the same effect, as has a change in price. However, the 
neo-classical concept concerns itself only with changes in 
the prices of single © mmodities, the prices of dttor 
commodities being assumed to remain constant. But "chaig es 
in income are not analogous to changes in the price of any 
single budget itea • If they are to be compared with any 
price changes, they must be compared with gerr ral sn d uniform 
changes of the prices of all items in the budget. Thus, fhr 
from being similar to the change in the price of one commodity, 
the effect of ifaich is studied by the neo-classicist, the 
concept is similar to one which might trace the effect on 
quantities taken of dianges in the purchasing po er of money**. 
One poe sible exception may be taken to both cf these 'diff¬ 
iculties* • Let us consider a commodity which occupies a 
very snail but important place in the budget, e.g., salt. 

* laugh, op. cit. Page 















. 














. v . ■■■■'■ -■ ■ ; r r - ' i r i : ,4 ■ , ; 

* 

■' I •' : - r i " 

: .. ; : , ■■ 1 • : 7 >: ■ 

. ■ - - > : ! 

.... * . . ■ 

■ r»; , ’ „ ' - ' " - - - - • 7" ! «.■< '■ - J - ' 7 ~ ^ ? ' v " ^ I 

. 

" 


, 









- 133 - 


The demand in the neo-elaeelcal sense for these 
commodities is nearly if not completely inelastic. With 
regard to the first difficulty N lt seams logical to suppose 
that the taste of men in all income groups for this commod¬ 
ity will be approximately uniform. Salt is a mceseity and 
as such will be desired equally by everyone (discounting of 
course personal abnormalities which my cause certain indiv¬ 
iduals to require more or less salt than the average require¬ 
ment). Thus, f> r this commodity (and for commodities fulfill¬ 
ing similar condiU ons, i.e., absolute necessities) this 
objection to a comparison of neo-classical concepts with the 
budgetary concept is overcome. 

Now in regard to the second dL fficulty of comparison, 
vim., that changes in income cannot be considered as 

anal© ;ous to changes in tte priee of any siig le budget item. 
Let us consider the same commodity. Ordinarily tte expem iture 
on salt consumes a very small fraction of an individual's in¬ 
come and the desire for a certain quantity of salt will be 
satisfied, almo31 at any price. Moreover a general increase 
in incomes is nob going to increase the consumption cf salt 
(at least for human consumption), although it dill definitely 














■ 

... - , 


' 













; 



- 


affect the consumption of other commodities and most of 
all those commodities belonging in the class of luxurfe s. 

Nor is a decrease or an increase in price going to affect 
materially the consumption of salt. Since tie expenditure 
on salt is in any case trivial, an increase in the price at 
it will cause only a trivial (hangs in the marginal utility 
of the individual's remaining purchasing power and there 
will be no repercussions on the amount of salt purchased. 

Thus for commodities fulfilling these two conditions, 
via; (a) that of beixg a necessity and (b) that of account¬ 
ing for only a small fraction of the individual's total 
expenditure, we may conceive of a situation where an income- 
quantity curve may be considered as the reverse picture or 
'mirror image' 1 of the neo-classical 'price-quantity' curve. 
Admittedly commodities ihich completely fulfil these condi¬ 
tions are few in nunber and in any case their demand functions 
are probably fairly veil known beforehand but the case is at 
last worthy of note as it could conceivably be used as a 
point of departure from in i<h to make further sallies into 
this, as yet little known field. Waugh's conclusion con¬ 
cerning budgeting studies is rather optimistic but gives no 


1 


See below: Gilboy. "Demand Curves by Personal Estimate". 





























, 




















c 

■ ' ! " 

' 








■ ■ ( '.'v, 
















1155 


hint as to profitable lines of procedure. Such studies.... 

"are 10 rthy of the careful and sympathetic attention of all 
students of the economics of consumption"*. 

Figou 1 s Approach ; 

Figou in appendix II to his "Sconomlce of Welfare" 
describes a method dnereby comparative elasticities of 
denand for different © mmodities in ax ccessive income groups 
may be derived from the useof data on the an ounts of commod¬ 
ities consumed by persona different income at a given price. 
The notarial fbr analyses cf this nature would be obtained 
from family budgets. However, Pigou hb de no attempt to derive 
a •demand curve’ and his conclusion is that it is not possible 
to derive •absolute* elasticities of demand in trie Marshallian 

p 

sense from family budgets • 

The practical value of obtaining comparative elasticities 
is explained in this fashion: "It is important to know 
whether the deatnd of workers with 35s a week £> r dlothes ie 
about twice, or about ten times, as elastic as their demsnd 
for food. But the inform ta on is also df val us indirectly. 

For, if we can in some other way - through the examination 

*Waugh. op. cit. Page 137« 

2 Cf. N 0 ta by Pigou. Pag. 542. (fcj J. B. Vol. 47. 








v ' ■ ■: ■ ■' • “ > . r ■ 

■ * 

■ 




• . ' 

•<! •• :• :i-, V’". • : •' t; ' "'• ' 






. -'A j? •"■•V ■ ^ 7 -py'-.v 

. 








- 


' 


■■ 






■ ' : - 




. . 




■ V 




. 









- 136 


of shopkeeper*s books or otherwise - determine tha elastic¬ 
ity of d esarei of any income group, or collaotion of incoma 
groups, fbr one thing, we have a bridge along ihich we may 
proceed to determine the alaatid ty of their demand for all 
other things"*. 

Pigou concludes hie brief inquiry in these words. "This 

small experiment, therefore is not discouraging, and it is 

much o be desirad that soma economist di ouid undertake a more 

2 

extended study along similar lint a" • 

A-eido from tha more pirely quantitative aspects of demdnd 
® aai remen ta, tha collection ana analysis of budgets based on 
the family unit may serve to provide indices which id 11 be 
invaluable in the study of economic welfare. A knos ledge of 
the behavio’ir of the consumers of any particular market area 
may enable us to assist in directing coneumptl on into 
channels from di idi tha utmost in •welfare* may be obtained. 


Pigou: "SconomiC9 of Welfare”. Page 789. Aith this state¬ 

ment compare Marshall, Ibid. Pages 11J-114. Here a similar 
hint is given concerning the use of shopkeeper*e records as 
primary data. Indeed the hint m f .y be traced back to Jevona 
(Theory, P&gee 11,12). Marshall also suggests determining 
the elasticity and law of densnd for particular income groups 
and tr en piecing togeth* r the fragmentary laws obtained until 
the general demand curve is arrived at. 

2 Ibid. Page 788. 











. f . . r' l ' 

' 


r; 






. 






■ ’ 


• • ; _ i •. 

i 

- 

V f'' :% ; 









. 

■ 

v 

r 





For example* a study of the incoms-elaetioity of demand for 
various items in the food budget will demonstrate to anyone 
with a fair knowledge of dietetics wfr>t elements of a good 
diet are lacking from the fond purchases of certain income- 
groups*. A knowledge of these deficiencies will enable the 
nutritional experts to plan a program of education aimed at 
those classes of people #10 are buying unwisely through 
ignorance. The economist will at the same time be in a 
better position to assist the producer in planning his 
production to conform with the probable shifts in deoand 
ihlch t he educational program may © nceivably bring about. 

If space permitted, a great deal could be set down 
concerning the methcd s of collection and interpretation of 
budgetary data. But since our inquiry is limited in its 
scope we ehall content ourselves with noting that two main 
approaches are possible. 

The first consists in an intensive study of a few 

supposedly 1 typical* families. This type of study requires 

exceptional tact andjjudgment in tbejforming of any general 

conclusions; but in good hands it would probably yield 

excellent results. This is the m thod followed by Le Play 

^See ’’Nutrition*s Tbs final Report of the Mixed Committee 
of the League of Nations on the Relation of Nutritt on to 

Health* Agriculture & Sconomic Policy* and Sir John Orrs 






... / . 








m? ? y ' 

' 'iWZ&r* ' 








- - - 

■ . . : ■ 1 

: \ : f ; ; ! • 




■ .... 

v ' - , ' - ■ 




' 






• ; *■ x r <- .k ft, 




!; 


■1 ?. ■ 1 . 


L 'V 




■■ - : - 


.. ; . * i . t ' • : 


5 i 


. .. ■ y; - ‘ ■ 


- ■ 


' 


• : • 


. 




■ • ;■ '• .* 

■ 


■ 

.... . ' V; : •' .■- V '--V- 


- 

I ' • ; 

' O 

• ’ 

" 


















■ 














- 150 


in his "Lee Ouvriere Europeene n . 

Ths seconl, and taore widely uetd method consists in ths 
rapid collection of numsroue observations from a largo number 
of families. These data are t T ien subjected to statistical 
analysis and sufficiently bro^d averages obtained to enable 
one to make the assumption that the inevitable inaccuracies 
involved will counteract each otter to a large degree. This 
last method remcv ea the need of overauch pers> nal judgmeri 
and has the added advantage of costing a good deal lees than 
the first aethod. 

H 0 waver, a tberough study of the various indices and 
relate onehipa whldi may be derived from budgetary data would 
require an entire thesis in itself. In this inquiry we can 
hope to have accomplished but little more than to point out 
tk3 inherent possibilities of the budgetary method for demnd 
analyses. In accord with the findiig a of Figou and #oUgh we 
may express th opinion that 1® re indeed lies a fertile field 
for the student of consumers* demand. 


"Food, Health & Income". Cf. Also the report on the study 
of family food purchases carrte d out ln Edmonton and Lacombe 
in 1956 by Professor Andrew Stewart of t he Department of 
Political Sconoay of the University of AH erta. 















P * 


■ ■; 




139 - 


PART II . 

(Continued) 

0,_A C omp rison of the Statistical irlce-Quantity Concept 

and tbit Budgetary Income-Quantity or Income-Expenditure 
Relationship: 

There is thue far no work tollable which attempts a 
direct comparison of these two concepts for their own sake. 
Hoover in one article by lire. Gilboy, "Demand Curves by 
Personal Estimate"^* a comparison of the two 1y peabf curve 
applied to tbs same data has been made, but only as a means 
toward checking two of the assumptions sometimes postulated 
by statistical economists. Moreover the data for this little 
investigation were derived subjectively rather than objectively, 
i.e., the quantities are thoe e *hlch would be consumed if a 
certain change in prices or a certain change in incones were 
to occur. In a word, the curve for price and quantity would 
approximate the hypothetical neo-classical demand schedule. 

Such data, of course, is open to all the objections which nay 
be directed against the doctrine of rationality in consumers* 
purchases and the idea of a previously conceived demand schedule. 
In 9 pits of this Mrs, Gilboy is of the opinion that the results 
obtained justify the use of "ftiia type of data. There is no 

1 . 

Gilboy: "Demand Curves by Fersonal Estimate." Q.J.E. Vol.XLVI 
















■f r ; 











■>u.'_-- ; ..' ■■■ 

. 

, 











xtu 


point hero, however in arguing either for or against ths 
rationality of consumers* demand. References to this contro¬ 
versy have bscn aide in Bart I. la might nota h t* aver that 
ths data wars obtained from faoulty immbere (or thsir wives) of 
tha Department of Political Economy at Harvard, To tha extant 

than that tha individuals investigated may be as suited to have 

to 

had more than ordinary knowledge concerning tha use/which tie 
data ware to be put, and also because it is logioal to assume 
that parsons who have no idea how tls ir money is spent would 
not bother to answer a questionnaire of this nature, it seems 
that, used vdth care, such data, undert hese conditions, may be 
taken fairly safely as providing approximations to statlo 
conditions* 

The assumptions, whose validity Mrs, Gilboy is desirous 
of determining are theses (l) That demand curves are straight 
lines on a double-logarithmic scale, i,e., the elasticity of 
demand may be considered constant all along the curve, and (2) 
demand schedules are continuous within a considerable price 
range 1 • 

1 e.g. Both of these assumptions were made by Leontlef in his 
"Method of Deriving Statistical Demand Ourves". The second 
is used by practically all of the statistical economists. 










\ 


■■■ 


J 




















- 141 - 


The original data consisted in* 

(1) The total family incone «nd age of tte department 
member? whether accounts were kept. 

(2) The annual expenditure on travel, clothes, to¬ 
bacco, beverages, entertainment, automobile, books, 
musical instrument s, domestic service, rent or 
home saintenance, charity, and savings. 

(5) Estimates of the amount that would be spent on each 
of the above items, asaumirg tastes to remain the 
same, under two kinds of conditions: 

(a) If income increased 10, 25, 50, and 100%; and 
decreased 5, 10, 25, and 50%. 

(b) If income retained the same, and tV® price of 
each commodity or group of commodities increased 

10, 25, 50 and 100%, and decreased 5, 10, 25, and 50%. 
From these estimates, it was intended to derive both price- 
quantity curves, corresponding to the orthodox demand curve, 

and income-quantity curves, similarfeo the type computed by 

1 2 
ISarschak from budgetary data” • 

It is interesting to note that £0% of these questionnaires 

were answered. This percentage is almost phenomenally 

1 Jacob Marschak, "Slastixitat der Hachfrage" (ncfc available 
in English). 

2 

Gilboy. op. cit. Fage 577. 
























- 142 


high for this method of collecting budcotary data. Returns 
of six or seven per cent or less r^e not uncommon. This 
fact in itself tends to show that the particular croup of 
consumers selected did not constitute an average sample. 

In each instance of the twenty usable samples, the 
family concerned stated how niuch it would spend, on the 
basis of its present income and standard of living. "The 
estimated expenditure for each item, corresponding to the 
assumed incomes, was plotted on a double logarithmic scale, 
and curves were fitted by inspection to these data"' 1 '. The 
price-quantity data were also plotted on a double logarith¬ 
mic scale according to a formula which allows for the fact 
that a per cent increase is not the same as a per cent 
decrease (e.g., a 100$ increase in price is only a 50$ 
decrease in quantity - when unit elasticity prevails). Cf. 
I&rt I above, Page 30. 

Mrs. Gilboy concludes from tue sample scatter diagrams 
she prepared that in general economists are not fer wrong- 
in assuming the existence of a continuous demand schedule - 
thi- conclusion being arrived at because the scatter of points 
in a3.1 cases tenned to fall mien; a curve. 

1 Gilboy: op. cit. Page 379. 




! 




. ' 




343 - 


With record, however, to the other common assumption 
we have under coneideration, viz., that elasticity is 
constant along the curve, a different situation is indicated. 
The curves derived were prone to the occurence of *flex points 1 
indicating greater elasticity in some parts of the curve 
than in other portions of the same curve. Thus for snail 
price and income changes considerable inelasticity was found 
but when the changes became considerable the curve tended to 
become elastic at both ends. The income curves had a more 
general tendency toward curvilinearity than did the more 
familiar price-quantity curves which on the whole were 
predominately straight lines. Of course the sample is too 
small to indicate conclusively xghether or not the assumption 
of constant elasticity over the entire curve is justified. 

The results do indicate that extreme caution should be 
exercised in the use of this hypothesis. 

The Mirror-Image" Controversy : It is advanced by Marsch e k 
that the curves derived from data upon income and expenditure 
(if income is plotted as ordinate ;and quantity, in terms of 
expenditure, as abscissa) nay be considered as mirror-images 





. 

. 

. 






■ 


' 

■ 


■ - 










■ *v 


: ' ' ; , ^ 


. 

• 






- 







144 - 


of the uounl prleo-^u-nt ity curvet 9 the oorrsodity 

la question f me o erw 1 port of the Mfeet\ 

&rs# Oil boy oonci Core It thooroi loiblly pot»tlU to 
conceive of m inoosoe cfosage no the ©>;t Ivnlont of ea 
inverse price ohrar- t but believes tir-t the eyebologieol 
reaction of constsaeve to theeo two type© of Chagas iwxild 
bo quite different, i#e#, "people be oap ctefl to 

beb vo ta quite opposite myts in response to e ten per 

increase in income as against a ten per cent 

cent dacru ©e In prices* * A eon; rieoa of the it.o curve© 

d» derived in hear study revealed little ©S&ilarity between 
the two sorts of curve** 

It i© of interest hewever in the licjht of ttotvebak’c 
obove-noteC q\iGlifl0atioa f (l#o#, tb t the o ra udity oh-.Tulfi 
represent only o aarsil portion of the badfrettoy oiepeaditure) 
that ia the tm o i&m& la which the curves Tiers; oaB@ejNMe« 
e Irty per cent wet* for oomoaitio© actauntia^ to fire per 
cent or lose of the tot el laws** 

3 Thin idee ie developed by B ftlMbfe k, op# oit* Hi* Is 
m% tmnelated into hselish &a£ in the ebseaco of cuoh c 
ir^mXoxtm it is difficult to esoeHsin the exact nig* 
nif lessee of tbic lf*rt qualification# Of* howev r, pe&e 
above# 

s Gllboy. XbiC, PECO 303. 





In general, too, the income-quantity curves 
displayed greater elasticity than did the price- 
quantity curves. It is difficult to find an explanation 
of this phenomenon. Without relating it to the underly¬ 
ing psychological principles involved. In concluding, 

Mrs. Gilboy sums up in what by now should be quite fam¬ 
iliar terns: Thus, she writos "The author is convinced, 
on the basis of the present sample, that further investig¬ 
ations of this sort would be productive of important 
results in indicating the nature of demand" \ 

It is to be hoped that the whole question of the 
relationships involved in the use of budgetary data for 
the purpose of demand analyses will be elaborated in 
the near future. 

Gilboy: Ibid. Page 584* 







- 146 


COJCLUSICN. 

This brief summary must not be accepted in the sense 
of a synopsis. Its purpose is rather to point out in 
retrospect the broader relations of the problems which 
have been reviewed. 

In Part I the fundamental bases of the whole economic 
concept of demand were discussed and commented upon. The 
derivation of the various concepts which may be used to 
describe or measure demand under static conditions was 
outlined. An attempt was made to point out clearly the 
limitations as well as the legitimate uses of marginal 
utility analysis in the related fields of welfare economics 

JL 

and price economics. It was noted that the marginal utility 
concept when used as a means of analysis may yield widely 
divergent results depending upon the skill and honesty with 
which it is applied in the particular problem under con¬ 
sideration. Possible measures of welfare were discussed and 
the qualifications which must be introduced if price is to 
serve as a measure of welfare were set dovm. Briefly, the 
neo-classical demand concept supplies us with a set of 
tools whereby under static conditions the fundamental nature 





- 147 


of demand may be studied ae it were, under glass* 

In Part II-A the effect of removing the static 
assumptions end allowing for the effect of dynamic factors 
has been given consideration. The possibility of deriving 
several kinds of statistical demand curves has been indicated 
ae well a6 the dangers of using the results of certain in¬ 
vestigations for purposes for which they were never in¬ 
tended, for exemple as would be the case if one were to 
extrapolate from the demand curve derived by Schultz. 

Probably too much time and effort has been spent by 
the statistical economists in trying to bring their methods 
into haraony with that of the neo-classical school which is 
based on rigid statical assumptions. The bolder approach faces 
up to the knowledge that dynamic factors must be included and 
that their effects on the demand function must be accounted 
for. If this approach is adopted however, the new assumptions 
should be explicitly stated and the terminology should not be 
confused with that of the neo-classical theory. Probably more 

controversy is caused among economists through simple misunder¬ 
stand 1 ^ 8 terminology than by all the other causes put 

together. If a coefficient of elasticity is derived for any 
other curve thaii the static Marshallian demand curve then it 








. 

.v / - vv.. v,v . ... 

' 

V v' v ■, . , vi.- . ; ,.v-v-, v 

. * 










- . ' i . - , ' v . ‘ 

' 

y-'y ' ‘ i ■■■ ' ' • . : '■ - ■' : ' : 

• ' 

- 




■ ■ , • ' ■ V *; • • v^-v' ' - ' '‘ 













140 - 


1b not a coefficient of elasticity as defined and understood 
in Part 1 of this thesis —— it may be something even more 
•useful* or important but it should not be called elasticity. 

In addition to noting the dangers of careless reasoning 
and careless applications of quantities derived by different 
methods, an approach which seems to embody rather more than 
ordinary possibilities has been touched upon. Thus, used with 
care, the method evolved by Mrs. Gilboy permits the considers- 
tion of the dynamic factors introduced through the inclusion of 
time, but at the same time allows for the derivation of the 
neo-classical demand schedule and the coefficient of elastic¬ 
ity. This method may conceivably provide a relatively simple 
and at the same time accurate means of determining the demands 
of those camodities which fi If ill the essential condition. 

In Part II, B. & C. it was pointed out that by the use of 
budgetary data as a means of measuring demand we would 
eliminate in a large degree the difficulties brought into the 
picture with time (for family budgets can be collected at an 
approximate ’instant of time*). However this method is yet 
in its infancy and any generalizations concerning its future 
growth are bound to be more or less premature at this time. 

The problems involved in comparing the tastes and wants of 



’ 

_ 

' 

, 








- 



















149 


different income croups must be faced in some way before a 
definite intimation can be given as to the probable place 
in economic theory that budgetary analyses will occupy in 
the future. While the Vrlue of such analyses is already 
recognised by students of welfare the method has still to 
prove itself in the eyes of the price economist. That the 
price economists are willing, nay, even anxious, to be 
shown proof of the worth of budgetary data in the field 
of demand measurement is amply demonstrated by the opinions 
expressed above in this regard by Pigou, Waugh, and Gilboy. 
Here, in a new field relatively untouched by previous 
research, undoubtedly lies an excellent opportunity for 
those economists who wish to justify their existence by 
adding something of value to the body of knowledge already 
existent in their science. 














' 














■ 






















BIBLIOGmPHY, 


Bibliographical Note : 

Quotations gits fully documented in the footnotes. 

The references given in the bibliography are of a more 
or less typical nature and the assumption must not be 
made that all possible sources of reference have been 
listed hereunder. 

Allen , R.G. and Bovrley , A.L. "Family Expenditure"• 

Angell , J. W. "Consumers* Demand". Q.J.E. Vol, 59. 

Canaan (Prof.) "Consumers* Surplus". 

Edgeworth (Prof.) "Demand Curves": Palgrave*s Dictionary 
of Political Economy. 

Egekial , M. "A Statistical Fascination of Factors Relat¬ 
ing to Lamb Prices". J.P.E. Vol.35. 

Ferger, W.F. "The Static & Dynamic in Statistical 
Demand Curves". Q.J.E. Vol. 47. 

Fetter, (Prof.) "The Economic Law of Market Areas". Q.J.E. 
May, 1934. 

Fraser , L.M. "Economic Thought and Language". 

Gilboy , E. ¥. 1. "The Leontief & Schultz Methods of 

Deriving Demand Curves". Q,.J.E. Vol. 45, 

2. "Demand Curves by Personal Estimate". 
Q.iT.E. Vol. 46. 

3. "Studies in Demand: Milk & Butter". 
Q.J.E. Feb. 1931. 

4. "Demand Curves in Theory & Practice". 
Q.tT.E* Vol. 44. 

Knifefrt , F. H. "Risk Uncertainty & Profit", and various 
articles. 




















- 151 


Kairk, Hazel. "The Theory of Consumption". 

Liniger , F. F. "Seasonal Adjustments In Fluid Milk Areas". 
J.F.E. Jan, 1929. 

Marschnk, Jacob. "Consumption": Encyclopedia of Social 
Sciences. 

Marshall , Alfred. "Principles of Economics". 8th ed. 1930. 

Moore , H.L. 1. "Forecasting the Yield and3&*ice of Cotton". 

2. "Economic Cycles". 

3. "Elasticity of Demand and Flexibility of 

Prices". JJUS.A. Mar. 1922. 

Nichols , A.J. 1. "Measures of Average Elasticity of Demand". 

J.P.E. Vol. 39. 

2. "A Farther Note on Measures of Average 
Elasticity of Demand". J.P.E. Vol. 59# 

Nicholson , (Prof.) "Principles of Political Economy". 

Pigou, A.0.1."Economics of Welfare" Appendix II. 

2* (Note) "Elasticity of Demand from Budget 
Studies". Q.J.E. Vol* 47. 

Rhodes , E.C. "Tracts for Computers". No. VI "Smoothing", 

Schultz , H.L. 1. "Statistical Laws of Supply & Demand". 

(Note) The above work contains a partial 
bibliography on the Determination 
of Lines and Planes of Closest Fit. 

2. "The Shifting Demand for Selected 
Agricultural Commodities". J.F.E., April, 1932. 

Thompson , J.G. "The Nature of Demand for Agricultural 
"products". J.P.E. Vol. 24. 

Veblen, Thorstein, 1. "Theory of the Leisure Class". 

2. "The Limitations of Marginal 
Utility "2 "The Face of Science in Modern Civilization". 

Viner, Jacob. 1. "The Utility Concept in Value Theory and 
its Critics". J.P.E. Vol. 33. 

2. "The Utility Concept in Welfare Economies". 

J.P.2* Vol. 33. 





















- 15 * - 


We ite, W.O. 1# "Economics of Consumption as a Field for 
Research." 

2. "Some Developments in the Techniques of 
Studying Consumers* Demand". J.A.S.A. Mar*, 1930, 
(Supplement) • 

Working , E.J. 1* "Demand": Encyclopedia of Social Sciences. 

2. "Indications of Changes in Derasad for 
Agricultural Products." J.F.E. April, 1932. 

3* "What do Statistical Demand Curves Show?" 
Q.J.E. Vol. 41. 

Working, H. "Statistical Determination of Demand Curves". 
Q,.J.E. Vol. 39. 

(Note) The above article contains a 

bibliography of certain achievements 
in the statistical study of demand 
up to August, 1925. 

Waugh , A.E. (Note) "Elasticity of Demand from Budget 
Studies". Q.J.E. Vol. 47. 

Zimmerman, C.C. "Ernst Engel*s # L?,w of Expenditure for 
Food*". Q.J.E., Vol. 47. 


Miscellaneous? "Elasticity of Demand as a Useful Marketing 
Concept". A.E.R. Proceedings. 1932 (Supplement). 

A Note on the Shane of Demand Curves, 

J.F.E., July, 1934. 

"Nutrition": The Final Report of the Mixed 
Committee of the League of Nations on the Relation 
of Nutrition to Health, Agriculture end Economic 
Policy. 


































B29745 




