


6bc ami* 

araoiBSwais 

aBmimsis 



University of Alberta 











Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/correlatesofacadOOchab 


















THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


CORRELATES OF ACADEMIC UNDERACHIEVEMENT 
IN MALE ADOLESCENTS 

A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT 
OF THE 

REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF 

DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY 

DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY 


BY 

DAVID JOHNSTONE CHABASSOL 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


APRIL 14, 1959 



UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
FACULTY OF GRADUATE STUDIES 


The undersigned hereby certify that they 
have read and recommend to the Faculty of Graduate 
Studies for acceptance a thesis entitled "Correlates 
of Academic Underachievement in Male Adolescents" 
submitted by David Johnstone Chabassol in partial 
fulfilment of the requirements for the degree 
of Doctor of Philosophy. 

PROFESSOR, 

PROFESSOR 

PROFESSOR 

PROFESSOR 

PROFESSOR 


PROFESSOR 












.. J. o' *J-'. 0 




V 




;: :io 130 


■ < f 


o ; o 


' ( >n 


o :• . ■: ?.u’ : ' 


if ; 


if 0:50 


o ■ x c 


O', 










ABSTRACT 


The purpose of the present research was to identify 
correlates of academic underachievement in male adoles¬ 
cent students. The case study method was used. Thirty- 
five students, enrolled in the Edmonton Public School 
system, were identified as marked underachievers on the 
basis of marks made on the grade nine departmental 
examinations of June, 195$* These students were tested 
and interviewed during the school term 195&-59 ? at which 
time they were in grade ten. Case histories were prepared 
for each student, and an effort was made to discover 
correlates of academic underachievement which would have 
applicability in a number of cases. 

When all data had been made available, it was found 
that certain syndromes of correlates of underachievement 
could be noted. Three such groupings of correlates could 
be identified. A large number of hypotheses concerning 
possible correlates of underachievement were postulated 
and checked against the accumulated data with a view to 
substantiating or negating each. 

A notable finding was the fact that a majority of 
these underachieving students had experienced parental 
rejection. There was also evidence of self-rejection and 

















'■ v -' .1 , ', 






. 

. ■ 

' 

I . ' ■ < 











• j . 




■: * 

. 

■ i. 


















IV 


of rejection of one T s peers. A majority of these under¬ 
achievers believe themselves to be socially inept and are 
inclined to accept the leadership and domination of others. 
There is a strong suggestion, however, that such dependence 
on others is resented, and there is evidence of hostility 
and belligerence which is not openly expressed. A majority 
of underachievers, while recognizing the value of a formal 
education, revealed that they are not completely happy 
with the school situation, and a number would prefer to 
stop school immediately if permitted to do so. Levels of 
academic aspiration of these underachievers were found to 
be irrational, a fact which suggests that high goals were 
selected in an effort to bolster self-esteem. 

Although complete data relating to the academic 
progress of these students in earlier grades were frequently 
lacking, there is a suggestion that a number of the present 
study might have been identified as underachievers as early 
as grade six. Since the incidence of underachievement 
seems to be closely tied to the student T s relations with 
his parents and as such underachievement can be identified 
in the lower grades, it would seem that an early concerted 
attack by parents and teachers will be necessary if this 
problem is to be successfully met. 






(• 


»£> 0 ' I >. 


. <.. c 




0 


J.'. 


. 


c 


O Kl o'Xi'lK.oO ■ ■ ysx J 0 




) 


i 






XcKjdo',% a 


0 .. 


()/' 


;t O• -iC? 




o j i 


0 






■ J. 


t 


• O' 





TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PAGE 

LIST OF TABLES....... xi 

CHAPTER 

I. THE PROBLEM... 1 

The Importance of the Problem.. 2 

The Child and His Family.... 2 

The School and the Teacher........ 3 

The Influence of Underachievement 

on Society... 4 

Incidence of Underachievement..,. 5 

II. THE PROPOSED STUDY................. 3 

Delimitation of the Sample... 10 

Selection of the Thesis Population........... 11 

Definition of Terras..... . 14 

The Problem of Adequate Measures.. 13 

The Measurement of Underachievement,.......... 1? 

Selection of a Research Method..... 23 

Treatment of Results... 25 

Basic Assumptions. 26 

III. RELATED RESEARCH.... 2$ 

Areas of Research... 2$ 

Study Habits. 2$ 


























L 












vii 

CHAPTER PAGE 

Intelligence . 32 

Health . 34 

General Pattern of Interests . 36 

Social Service Interests . 3$ 

Adjustment of the Total Personality . 39 

Personality Factors . 42 

Sociability and Extraversion... 44 

Subjectivity-Objectivity • ........... .. 46 

Dominance or Social Ascendance ... 4$ 

Energy .. 49 

Restraint ........ 31 

Masculinity-Femininity Scores .. 52 

Emotional Stability ... 53 

Self-Concept . 55 

Level of Aspiration .. 57 

Relations With Peers of Both Sexes ... 60 

How Time is Spent .. 6l 

Hobbies .. ...» .. 62 

Vocational Goal . 64 

Socio-Economic Status .. 66 

Educational Level of the Parents .. 70 

Birthplace of Parents .. 71 

Languages Spoken in the Home ... 72 

Broken Homes .. 73 


























viii 

CHAPTER PAGE 

Size of Family; Position in it .. 73 

Parental Interest . 74 

Relations With Parents . 75 

School Attendance . 7$ 

Reading Ability... 7$ 

Extracurricular Activities .. 82 

Attitude Towards School . .. $4 

Acceleration .. 86 

IV. THEORY AND HYPOTHESES . £3 

Hypotheses . 99 

School .. 99 

Home ..... ... ...... 100 

Interests and Goals .. 101 

Personal .. 101 

Relations With Others ...................... 102 

V. PROCEDURES AND INSTRUMENTS USED .. 103 

Meeting the Underachievers Selected .......... 103 

Procedure Followed in Interviewing and Testing 105 

Instruments Used .. 106 

VI. PILOT STUDY... 125 

Purpose .. 125 

Population. 125 

Selection of Students .. 125 

Instruments Used. 126 































ix 

CHAPTER PAGE 

Procedure ... 12? 

Appraisal of Instruments and Procedure . 12$ 

Persistence of Underachievement .. 130 

VII. PATTERNS OF REJECTION . 133 

VIII. FACTORS RELATED TO THE SCHOOL. 146 

Attitude Towards School .. 146 

Peer Standards. 149 

Poor School Background .. 130 

Achievement in Mathematics.. 152 

Achievement in Literature « 0 .. ... 153 

Achievement in Language . 154 

Study Habits . 154 

Summary .. 156 

IX. PERSONALITY FACTORS .. 157 

Self-Acceptance and Underachievement . 157 

Other Personal Characteristics ..161 

Non-Interpersonal Characteristics .. 162 

Interpersonal Characteristics. 165 

Summary .. 167 

X. TESTING HYPOTHESES .. 172 

XIo CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER 

RESEARCH . 194 

Suggestions for Further Research .. 19# 

























X 


PAGE 

BIBLIOGRAPHY .. . 202 

APPENDICES . 21$ 

Case Histories . 219 

Data Sheets . 2$9 

Instruments . 324 



































LIST OF TABLES 


TABLE PAGE 

I. Number of Underachievers in Each 

High School . 104 

II. Indices of Underachievement as of September 
1957 and May 195$ for a Group of 9$ 

Underachievers . 132 

III. Distribution of Stanine Scores in 

Mathematics for Underachievers . 153 

IV. Distribution of Stanine Scores in 

Literature for Underachievers .. 154 

V. Distribution of Stanine Scores in 

Language for Underachievers . 154 

VI. Distribution of Percentiles Earned on the 

SSHA by Underachievers . 155 

VII. Taschuk-Hepburn Discrepancy Scores for 

Seventy Non-Underachievers at Grade Ten 

Level . 159 

VIII. Distribution by Percentile Rank of Taschuk- 
Hepburn Discrepancy Scores for 

Underachievers . l6l 

IX. Number of Minutes per Night Devoted to 
Studying by Underachievers in 

Grades Nine and Ten .. 173 

X. Comparison of September 195$ and December 195$ 
Indices of Underachievement in Those Cases 
Where Underachievement was Increasingly 
Marked ......; 1$0 

XI. Comparison of September 195$ and December 195$ 
Indices of Underachievement in Those Cases 
Where Underachievement was Less Marked ...... 1$1 

XII. Percentage of Fathers of Underachievers in 
the Various Occupational Categories as 
Compared with the Percentages of Employed 
Edmonton Males in 1951 ... 1$4 

XIII. Kuder Scale Scores Which Fell at or Above the 
75th Percentile for Thirty-Five 

Underachievers . 1$7 















m 














CHAPTER ONE 


THE PROBLEM 

Our society is presently one of educational opportunity. 
Education is free, and attempts are made to provide education 
for all children. Modern schools are clean, bright, well 
staffed and well equipped. At no time in the world T s history 
has so much been spent so willingly on education, and at no 
time has there been such a need for educated citizens. 
Medicine, science, engineering, law, letters, and education 
all require increasingly large numbers of professionally 
trained personnel. At the level of skilled labor there is a 
need for informed workers because of the increased complexity 
of machines and techniques. Indeed, the development and 
maintenance of a highly industrialized society has required 
that even the unskilled worker possess knowledge and abilities 
which would have been superfluous just a generation ago. 

Notwithstanding the many opportunities for education 
which exist today, and in spite of the great need for 
educated citizens at all levels of work, it is probably 
correct to say that at no time have so many people, possessed 
of the potential and the opportunity, failed to achieve 
academic excellence. Academic underachievement is one of 
the most serious problems which school administrators, 






c 







2 


teachers, counselors, and parents must cope with today. 

At every level, both in school and university, there 
are to be found students who are doing mediocre work, or 
even failing, when, according to the results of standardized 
intelligence tests, they are capable of better performance. 
The importance of such underachievement is realized only 
when one pauses to consider its effects upon the child and 
his family, the school and the teacher, and upon society in 
general. 


The Importance of the Problem 

The Child and His Family . Underachievement is of 
importance to the child and his family for several reasons. 
First, it is widely held that somewhere in the hierarchy 
of drives which have been attributed to man there is a 
drive to succeed and to make the best of whatever talents 
he possesses. Whether we refer to this drive as one of 
t! self-actualization, ft as Goldstein (1939) has suggested, or 
whether we label it with another term, it cannot be denied 
that a belief in the existence of such a need is widely 
held. While it is not necessary at this time to consider 
the effects of failure upon the individual, it will be 
appreciated that if such a drive for self-actualization 
does exist it is thwarted in the underachiever. 

Another very important consideration is a financial 
one. It is impossible to estimate with any degree of 




. 



i 


.tr.: * •' 

•: : ■ c ' 

i ■ 07 (. 

t 



. ■ r '7 •' "'"7 

' 

. 

c 






, • - ; ;} y p-;L 79 I. ; 1 “' ;7i0 7c .9 70 r 7. 

>;i;r p,J Cvi;x n®bi w'.:'v-V>. 

■ 








. 




• . . . * . .. . . 

■ ■ 

. - ; ■ s /y.. . 7 , .V ,’77 ' \y 7 i '.S "■ l 7 

• • J.'; . i - iy":l9 777 77) ‘’O. 

J 

> .... : : , } • ■' 7 7 ■- o, 7 o - : , ' 7 ' 

■' ' ■ ! • c - ■ : •!- ■- : ■ 

: r -o ■-■■■.> 7 .7.7 7.i 7. j.1 7 9 9.7'..*.1 

* 

. 

•. • . J ' • - ■ ' V- -J ,'7 

, 

j , . j . 7 i ■ ■' 7 ■ ‘ 


3 


exactitude the total cost which must be borne by a family 
in order to provide a child with a high school education. 
There can be no doubt, however, that the amount involved is 
a large one. It follows, then, that a child who has the 
opportunity to attend school and does not make the best 
possible use of his ability is putting his parents to a 
great deal of unnecessary expense. 

A third consideration, which also revolves about the 
financial loss involved in underachievement, must be enter¬ 
tained. In most middle class homes it is assumed that the 
way to financial security is through the professions. 
Children from such homes are exhorted by their parents to 
do well in school so that they may be able to embark upon 
professional careers. However, attendance at university is 
a prerequisite for entrance into the professions. Since 
acceptance at university is contingent upon obtaining good 
grades in high school, it becomes apparent that many under¬ 
achieving high school students of ability will be fated to 
labor at non-professional, relatively unremunerative careers 
because of their inability to satisfy college entrance 
requirements. 

The School and the Teacher . Underachievement, on the 
part of an appreciable number of students, means that the 
school system is rendered less efficient because of the 
inclusion, at all grade levels, of students who are opera¬ 
ting at less than capacity. Such students influence the 




• : . Vv ■ ■ tii ; 

o : 3 . 0 . n-: 0 l'O 'do 






■ \ - , o.io. d, r' 

. 




: ~X . i ■ j 

: ' Y 

0./- v : ;ov. 


r'j; c.'i oo omom 

• •'/ < ' V > . ‘ O' " ' 

.0. r.i-Cij o'- ' riidmoo o.. : : ;■■■'<: o., vj,;:.u do oo-nr.jqoD.'j-B 

jt» yj) ' •• - |c •. ■. moo ■ • ri i i < do ■ o' - • n t a > dr , 

o ‘ o . ■ . ;• ■ . ; o ■ ' V<. id ; r..iv;ddo- 

V0. ' 0. . Ov \.S ■ r i f, ■ '• ‘ ; ' : ' ; ■■■■■■•■' -*i UH O • Oi;.>L 

:V \v 0 i i ; ■ I.'..:. ;0 ‘ / 0 j 0:0 , < ■> 0 ■' ' 1 . ' ■ • h.i ‘3 O'I.; . 'OO JO ' 0> 

' ‘ ' ' 

< ' • - -o J- • o ; o ' '••• • ''' ' 

■ ’ i. •- ■ • 'O'i ' Y i i • S. ’ ■. ><■ JV. I J .* OClifY 






4 


operation of the school in several ways. 

First, they are potential disciplinary problems. While 
it cannot be held that in every case underachieveraent makes 
for poor school behaviour, it can be seen that the disinterested, 
poorly motivated child who is not doing his best academically 
might well become a behaviour problem to his teachers. 

Second, such children could influence their agemates 
adversely. If a number of children in a class are obviously 
disinterested there is always the possibility that such an 
attitude will become contagious. Others may feel no compulsion 
to strive when it is apparent that certain of their peers are 
content with less than maximum effort. 

Third, one must consider the problems which the presence 
of underachievers in a class create for the teacher and the 
school administration. It is impossible to calculate the 
effect that underachieving students have upon the teacher 
who is trying to do a conscientious job. However, it can 
be appreciated that lack of consideration for a teacher T s 
efforts might well constitute one of the major drawbacks to 
teaching as a career. 

The Influence of Underachievement on Society . It is 
obvious that a loss accrues to society when a student under¬ 
achieves. Gowan (1955) makes mention of the fact that 
certain economic and social factors prevent over one-half 
of successful high school seniors from going directly to 
university. If to this figure is added those who do not 





r . m 




' ; ■■ " ' ■ 

. ; : , • .j M. :.i >o ■:*«- i:v: , J i 

, . ), . , ,U > ::v 1 ; ' CO-ic‘i 








'r; . 


, , .. -vi ^ 










. V 


... 




■ : ..j : '■ • ■ 3 

' 


: ' ‘ ■ ■ <■ ■ 










IV): rii ’ :^.ioo-v. T $. ; -0 

f ; : : : . . V ■ in.h ' " : oMo.n 


o ■ j 

;• • L) O.i '■ ■ ' •' i 


V r ; . 


« ; a ■ i ' -: i ; i u d • : ’ - - 

, ■ - ' 

\( :■ J. 0 •' be Js i Di-ICN 9 <i 

{ . ■ ■ i«ti ' : ■ ' 

, ■ • 


: : - ■: • ■: : : 'V. - 




. 

t 








5 

attend because underachievement has made university admission 
impossible, it can be seen that a majority of the able high 
school students in the United States are prevented from 
furthering their education immediately, Gowan also notes 
that of those who do go on to college 30 per cent of the top 
decile underachieve for one reason or another. Under¬ 
achievement, then, not only reduces the ranks of the potential 
college population but also renders less efficient the efforts 
of some of the most intelligent students who are admitted to 
university. Unfortunately, comparable figures do not exist 
for the Canadian student population, but there seems to be 
little reason to doubt that the findings would be quite 
similar. 

We live in a society in which technological advances 
have made a good education virtually a necessity. We also 
live in a world in which, in order to maintain our own way 
of life, we must be prepared to match the progress of those 
nations whose ideologies are antagonistic to our own. 

Under such conditions it is certainly essential that all 
our young people of ability make the best of their potenti¬ 
alities. The problem of academic underachievement thus 
assumes great social importance. 

Incidence of Underachievement . One might well inquire 
as to how frequently academic underachievement occurs. The 
answer will, of course, depend upon a number of factors. 






. 











x-r,j. 

















. 













. : i; 





• ' 


| ■ ' ■ 


■ . : v ■- j 










< ' ■' 


a 


. ' , : n fr.'.r* 


J. s ■ ?;,ii 






i " ' 







o ■ • ■ ' 




6 


Because one does not always find comparable figures for 
schools and colleges, and for elementary and high school 
levels, it is virtually impossible to give an answer which 
will apply in every case. Stone (1922), however, noted that 
almost 50 per cent of the students in a freshman college 
class were underachieving, whereas Strang (1947) suggested 
that the figure might be placed somewhere between 33 per 
cent and 50 per cent. Such figures can be somewhat reduced 
if one is primarily interested in cases of very marked 
underachievement, as is the case in this study. Although 
one does not find complete agreement as to the degree to 
which academic underachievement occurs, no one who has 
studied this question has ever suggested that it is anything 
other than a most serious problem. 

One might well imagine that a matter of such importance 
would have received a good deal of attention in Canada, but 
such is not the case; and a review of the literature for the 
past twenty years reveals inadequacies in the research in 
this general area. It would be incorrect to assume that few 
studies have been done on academic underachievement. However, 
it is noted that most of the research has been confined to 
college populations and has been carried out on non-Canadian 
samples. While it may be of value to draw from such studies 
inferences for Canadian high school groups, one runs the risk 
of accepting inferences that are not completely valid. 
Knowledge of this fact, as well as consideration of those 



: or : > 3riC U 

i itvS :.T hS.t> -io‘ 

• . 4 • .) : u . i ■ 


r . : : e- i; ; 


/ v ■■ : - - 

•' v • r i 


;r V.'. , . .'XOq J ; i-Xi 


o . : i ry. ''' 

5 ’ ’ - 

■ j ji ■ .i ' ■ 

J.a; . ■ ; . ‘ ii'sv 




' 

P.< ■ 

. ■ L i> " ; i 

■ 

. . . ; '' • : '■=■ ■>' r* o 

i ; • • ' 

OV i • ' i : 

bi.jce; 

: x $:an • cbrj:i 

, 

• ' ; K. ’ MX.;., .jaOiU X- •' flu 'In'njO 

r io .J'- m tfsi’U 

J'n u 


. .. ( ■ - ]o\v •) iOJ-'S. 


■ : 



■ 


. f ' : ' ' ; 

BVl.'d ••• ••• s. >"<• 


. . . . i ’ 


: ' 

,i. . ,i v 

' o' ' 

c 

I ■ ■■ ■ - 


]00 000 ,\.ni "~r \ OC) 3 xC 



issues mentioned above, strengthens the belief that the 
question of underachievement, as it influences a Canadian 
high school population, is in need of further study. 






CHAPTER TWO 


THE PROPOSED STUDY 

The problem in this study was to identify and invest¬ 
igate factors which are correlated with underachievement 
in male students in the secondary schools of the Edmonton 
Public School system. The identification and investigation 
of these factors was done by an intensive study of a 
limited number of underachievers. Thirty-five students, 
in whom academic underachievement was seen to be most 
marked, formed the population for this study. Because of 
the need for an intensive investigation into and a clear 
understanding of the problems, behavior, and needs of the 
students involved in this research, the case study method 
was used. A number of available sources of data were 
utilized, and information about the students was gathered 
by means of standardized tests, inventories, blanks, check¬ 
lists, questionnaires, interviews and by reference to 
cumulative record cards. 

It was decided that this study should be confined to 
male students in grade ten in the Edmonton Public Schools. 
Various reasons for this selection might be offered. First, 
these students had written examinations set by the Depart¬ 
ment of Education of the Province of Alberta at the termin- 




')■ . 


> v 


X I 




0 


• ( 




. i ■ >'!; 








n ■■ 


t 


'):; o 




r 




< 


■ v.i X 


X J0» 


. O > U B 0 9 ; 



XU. 


c 



0 : 



i'. ■ i 


i 


:o 


(), • fi j:b n s cj - xuu diiii 


i c 



c vnx 


V ' ’■ "to ‘1-- CiuilT 


. J 


I 





t 


< 


j ' :• v r f 


c 


: : 


* 


J , 



ft : . ' :jj< b . '■ 


i. 




9 


ation of their grade nine year, June 195$* These examin¬ 
ations were partially "objective” in nature and were 
marked by a panel of teachers in such a manner that teacher 
bias was kept at a minimum. It was assumed, therefore, 
that the results of these examinations might be accepted 
as reliable measures of actual academic achievement. 

Second, the appropriate form (Level Three) of the School 
and College Ability Test (SCAT) (1949) was administered 
to the grade nine population, also in June 195$* The 
results of this test, expressed as percentiles based on 
an Alberta population, were taken to be an accurate meas¬ 
ure of the students 1 academic ability. Third, male 
students were selected in preference to a mixed sex group 
or an all female group because it was found, through exam¬ 
ination of the current results of the grade nine depart¬ 
mental examinations, that male students made up the greater 
percentage of underachievers. Tibbets (1954, p« 41), when 
conducting a similar study, noted that,”. . . it was the 
unanimous opinion of ten high school counselors queried 
that boys offer at least twice as many problems of low 
achievement as do girls. . Comparable results were 
reported by Chapman (195$) and Strang (1956). Militating 
against the use of a mixed sex group was the fact that a 
possible sex factor might be introduced which would render 
a comparison of the findings invalid. Fourth, a secondary 
school population was preferred because it was felt that 










,( O ' 

lo o 


:o-Lj ;.o noi. 

r oo:; . r. l o j: 


v ./ * L 




, • ; j v r.c o o .. \r 




ioc o • ■ ,< o v 




j’o 


'CD.- , 


. 

,i c ' o. c oo: :> 




i ( r... 




DC. CD 


< ; 


o- 


•: • . : 


xo u Cj ' 






* 




o ' : ' 

:'f o: . ac o 


JOO .'..OU.00 


o 


0 o 








\.o ■ •: 


o 


J 0-0 



10 


such students would be better able to assess and relate 
their feelings, preferences, attitudes, and problems than 
would students of a lower grade* Fifth, the investigator, 
having taught and worked with students at the secondary- 
school level for several years, had a preference for this 
particular age group and felt that he would be able to do 
his best work with students who had reached this point in 
their education* Sixth, it was felt that thirty-five 
case studies would suffice to illustrate certain of the 
major correlates of academic underachievement* It was 
believed that such a number might well be found in the 
Edmonton Public Schools, which list approximately 1,225 
male students at the grade ten level* The size of this 
group made it unnecessary to complicate the study by in¬ 
cluding a portion of the population of the two large high 
schools of the Edmonton Separate School system* 

Delimitation of the Sample 

It is almost certain that one could find evidence of 
academic underachievement at every grade level; yet if a 
systematic and thorough study of this phenomenon is to be 
made, one must of necessity limit the area in which he is 
to work* Such a limitation applies not only to the age 
or grade level at which the investigation is to be carried 
on but also to the school subjects upon which the study 
will concentrate* 


( 



0 ( 











t;' ‘ 


•j 


\ 


C 


s. 


i 0 


h.iitovr 


! 




) 


< 


.■vr.c; 





I 


% 


:0 


f rr 






• ;:• o J - 1.: j. Hovoo c 



o 


d l: < 


i o 


0 rr,riO} : 


o 





‘10 


;! 


O 


: 


Vi 


/ 


•;. T : r. r.i.o( 


:oi- oovo ajici ro 


I • 




11 


A student was considered to be an underachiever if 
he had made lower marks on the grade nine departmental 
examinations in language, literature, social studies, 
science, and mathematics than he should have made in view 
of his percentile grade obtained on the SCAT* These 
particular high school subjects were selected for two 
reasons. First, they are important ones in the grade nine 
curriculum. They are, it is contended, "basic” subjects 
in which the student would be urged to do well and in 
which he might be interested in doing his best. Second, 
these subjects were used for the purpose of identifying 
underachievers because they are compulsory subjects and 
results are available for all grade nine students. 

Selection of the Thesis Population 
The following procedure was used in the identification 

j{s 

of underachievers. First, the stanine scores for a given 
student on the five subjects were obtained from the 
Department of Education records® The stanines for language 
and literature were added and averaged, the score obtained 
being taken to represent achievement in English. This 
stanine, plus the three for the remaining subjects, 


* A U.S.Air Forces type of standard score, with a mean of 
five and a standard deviation of two. Scores range from one 
through nine. (Hilgard, 1957) 





i:); i.ci 


i : JD ' 


. [ i r i h ori • f) d 


: 0 X'O 


r : 


'.) 0 O' 0 


'00 i C.X 




. 


t ! H 


LX 


G 


; 


j ! J 


’ I 


[tQ-E 


;f.0.■ • .i. ' Ci'iiG I .l :)‘ij n. 
f'i r.' V ■ G.C; j , i£ \ J ‘1C ■ 0 . 

■ ) - {yl X G‘.i\ > 0 . 


J \ 
vl li 


1 ‘ 


t'.C Oi ill 




12 


mathematics, social studies, and science, were added and 
the mean was obtained* This mean was further divided by 
the SCAT percentile score made by the particular student 
and the result was multiplied by one thousand in order to 
remove decimals* The final figure obtained was referred 
to as the preliminary index of underachievement* ,f (See 
Appendix A)* 

The indices obtained were then studied, and the 
lowest ones were retained for further investigation. 
Although an index of one hundred represents Tt average rt 
achievement for a given student, scores from seventy up¬ 
wards on this preliminary index list were rejected. While 
it was felt that even these higher scores were indicative 
of underachievement, nevertheless, it was deemed advisable 
to select for further study only those students with the 
lowest scores in order to ensure that the thesis popul¬ 
ation would be composed on the most marked underachievers® 
Consequently, only those students whose preliminary in¬ 
dices were lower than seventy were considered for further 
investigation® 

The use of the preliminary index of underachievement 
as a screening device made it possible to reduce to fifty- 
two the original 234 cases selected from the Department 
of Education records. 

A further inspection of the Department records 
disclosed the scaled or raw scores made in the five school 


„,. v j.\> ,,, 




>jfcl 


(Vi 


U"', 

C J 'H.O \.i- .U.rm •-•V. . .7Clf:'’'! y*.:’' :.)rr: 

j-‘ _ » J:\)Oh 

■ . u) 

' - - o ■ 


: o r x 


•j, .■•iqo'c ‘i j: i, ;jv-. 

r : v-i V' '■ 




W r ' 

;0> i'. ■' r::• > .>■ 

O:') • 3 ' v . ■ . ; 


. !.i:< ; ; .■ 






; > v. . 


v 




- 


.(3/^7 no.r;;£i 


; ; 

< 



13 


subjects by these fifty-two students. The scaled scores 
were utilized because they provided a more exact measure 
of underachievement than did the stanines used in the 
first instance. The language and literature scores were 
added and averaged once again. To this average were added 
the scores for the remaining three subjects. The result 
was divided by four, and this figure was then divided by 
the SCAT percentile for the given student. The resulting 
quotient was multiplied by one hundred in order to remove 
decimals. The final figure obtained was referred to as 
the "final index of underachievement." (See Appendix B.) 

It was on the basis of the scores made on this final index 
that the members of the thesis population were selected* 
Because the scaled scores used in the computation of the 
final index of underachievement represented a finer meas¬ 
ure than did the stanines used originally, the final 
indices tended to run somewhat higher than did the prelimi¬ 
nary ones. They ranged from fifty-one to seventy-seven, 
with the majority of cases being within the range sixty 
to seventy inclusive. The original intention was to 
select from each school that number of students who would 
bear to the total number used in the study the same rela¬ 
tionship as the number of students in that school bore to 
the total grade ten population for the Edmonton Public 
School system. Such a plan was not followed, however, 
for subsequent investigation revealed that the number of 








- 




i ;• , ' ' ' '■ 1 ' ' • 

. ■ . ' .1 A 

- 


























■■ -J 1:) ; i 


L . 








i 


• ■ / & i- vf 5 : H0 


i • 


f) • • , f A ‘ 1,1 ‘.'.V 


. •/, ■) : ■ i’;r >31 -,o f< 

i.. ' . •* iv ;i 

;; . i: \ i" a jdj 








- 

i : 

,« V ; ' M , 'l ; : T "/■'■*>>; 1 0 Z > 

’ ' U>0|k>E 




underachievers varied considerably from school to school, 
even though the grade ten populations in the schools 
did not vary so greatly. To select the most marked under' 
achievers, therefore, it was deemed advisable to work 
with any student found in any school provided his final 
index of underachievement was less than seventy-five. 

It had been planned originally to limit the study to 
thirty students, but utilization of the above method 
resulted in data being made available for thirty-five 
students. As the study progressed, it was noted that a 
number of students who would normally have been included 
in this study were not to be located. Fifteen students, 
of the original fifty-two, were not attending grade ten 
in the Edmonton Public Schools. 

Definition of Terms 

"Achievement” as used in this study refers to 
achievement in Alberta grade nine departmental examin¬ 
ations of June 195&I in the school subjects mathematics, 
social studies, science, language, and literature. 
"Average achievement" for any student is the average of 
the scores received on the above-mentioned examinations 
in these subjects. "Underachievement" is the discrep¬ 
ancy between average achievement and ability level as 
measured by the SCAT. 


.U>, .'03 O'. '0.'X 


iu\ 


:0.1\ O'.i.'L 


( V . . ■ 


C •. V C 


) V ( 
7.- /VC 1 .’ 


f .LooX, 


. i' 


,■:> ‘i->>: n , o ..-7)0 


f ' c 




0; j 7 ' 


J. 7 ■ .1.0 


7' 


. CO/.. lOf ; 


s . 


c ■ 

' ' .tJ Cf 

.. - - vx o 

i 

■ o.'i ' ch'Oii 


o’. ].u vi"; ri'no >07 0 0 

JiUJo j:0 c71C3oo 

.1 C3i 

c. ' ' ■ ' ' ■ . 

i . v,..i.ro) ' 703,7 o' 

vioo.oo ne-ioov. oti:', 


■ ' • ■ ■ ' ■ ! • . 1 


' 1 



15 


The Problem of Adequate Measures 

Obviously, before one can state with certainty that 
a given student is underachieving, one must have a meas¬ 
ure of his ability to achieve and a measure of his level 
of achievement. That is, one must know what the student 
is capable of doing and what, in fact, he is doing. When 
these two measures are made available, it is possible to 
determine to what extent a discrepancy exists and to what 
degree the student is an underachiever. As mentioned 
above, it was decided to use the results of the School 
and College Ability Tests as a measure of academic ability. 
There are various reasons for the selection of this 
instrument. Of importance was the fact that all grade 
nine students had been given this test three months 
before the beginning of this study. Had such results not 
been made available it would have been necessary to 
administer an academic ability test to the entire male 
population of the Edmonton Public School system at the 
grade nine level. Inasmuch as this number would 
approximate 1 , 500 , such a task would have been a formidable 
one. However, the decision to use the SCAT was 
influenced by factors other than the availability of its 
results. The fact that this test provides percentiles 
which are based on an Alberta population seemed to suggest 
that the use of this test would be particularly suitable 











■ ' 

. 








16 


in this case* Finally, the SCAT was selected because, 
while it is a new test on the Canadian scene, it shows 
considerable promise. It is highly regarded in the 
United States and bids fair to become one of the better 
known and more widely used tests of its kind* 

As was explained above, the grades received on 
certain subjects in the grade nine departmental exam¬ 
inations were used as an index of academic achievement* 

The decision to use these results was, in part, influenced 
by their availability. Had such results not been available, 
the task of administering a standardized achievement test 
would have presented a very great problem because of the 
size of the potential population for this study* Also, 
it was felt that these examination results were relatively 
free from bias which so often influences the marks of 
teachers. Again, these results were obtained from tests 
of an objective or semi-objective nature so that the 
marking from paper to paper might be taken to be quite 
consistent* 

Second, the decision not to administer a standardized 
achievement test was influenced by the findings of certain 
other researchers in this field. While it must be 
admitted that many studies in underachievement have made 
use of such tests, it should be noted that there is not 
complete agreement as to their value when used in this 


manner 


Oi 







r ; 3 i'S. n U 




> ;j 


i 


‘.i . 




i:o ; | - 




(- 




■ r 






C 


j 




( 




* 


o;j 


i ’ i 




: 


t 


f 


Q 




; < , : 1 cij 

i-Iv) c:r ;r: * :.k; -irr; od 



17 

For example, when working with two groups of students 


who had previously been identified as underachievers and 
overachievers on the basis of reliable criteria, Shaw 
and Brown (1957,p. 19$) noted," . . . although these two 
groups differ significantly from the point of view of 
grade point average at the end of the freshman year, they 
do not differ at all when compared on the basis of 
standardized achievement tests. . ." The authors state 
that it seems that the underachievers have absorbed from 
their schooling, or elsewhere, as mcuh general knowledge 
and information as have their achieving intellectual 
peers. 

Third, inasmuch as the members of this sample 
were identified as underachievers with reference to 
school subjects, it seemed quite logical that objective 
examinations, which were set up for the specific purpose 
of testing knowledge in these school subjects would be 
of particular value in this study. Standardized 
achievement tests suffer from the fact that they are 
meant to be used widely and therefore must confine their 
questions to that broad area of knowledge in which, in 
any subject, an "average" student is presumed to be 
informed. 


The Measurement of Underachievement 
As was noted, one cannot state with certainty that a 


:) . • v . ^ 


■ 


• 'C.O-JL.V ' ?i -Cl; 

■ ■ ' ; jv< "r: •;>' ■ ?>, ; 08v; 

r 

. . . , * c . - ) 

V./ • v.' : avfj‘Q"i~.. 

• :o f-1.8 8: ‘ d':: :•: :V8 :it' ; l 0 q old'll, 




f.O 




''J\, • 'j.O 


c „: 


■! j ..■ o -r. (■■ '■ i"... V-, IdlXli'; JCiX 

, . . 

. ! ), /: ;l8 • ■ c ^ericN. 

1 . ■. , 

u:'\ 'V r . ::ri v 'xnr>r- Isox'xi :ynobs. s-'ivvi 

o- c j '■ . . '0. : . cJ. .u-jj.;. j08 ;‘J: <c;c-oor 0JJ8 :u:-o.uOG 

J ..! ;• -/. v\ r: :n; ’ >. . <X J ■ xj i ., 

. . ) 0 ( t i l . \ . if ’ .. Xo 

* 

J 8" o a'xi-i tr'i'v 'Iwi'jikiff-- '-uHiJ-'r O'n' ed ;/ 

■ : . ■(.. S c. • . '• 8 • '■i* : V * > 1 . ( XJlf. OZJV 

: : ■ "'.i- - n :< ? «./:; - 1 . < i:ii 

* 




c‘1 )| nl: xo 6 .:*>ra 


given student is underachieving unless one has a measure 
of academic capacity and of academic achievement* However, 
the actual means by which the degree of underachievement 
may be assessed after such measures have been obtained 
may differ considerably. A number of means by which 
underachievement has been measured are therefore reviewed 
below. 

In his study, Gowan (1957) classed as underachievers 
all those gifted children whose scores were two or more 
standard deviations above the mean of a given intelligence 
test, but whose average academic performance was one full 
standard deviation below their ability standing in the 
same group. An early study by Stone (1922) utilized a 
different and very direct approach* He converted the 
scholarship averages of his population and their Otis 
scores into percentiles. A comparison of the two 
percentiles for a given student revealed whether or not 
he was an underachiever. That is, those students with 
the greatest gap or discrepancy between achievement and 
ability were included in his study* A somewhat similar 
but more involved approach to the measurement of under™ 
achievement was used by Tibbets (1954). He first ranked 
his students on the basis of scholastic efficiency 
ratings. This rating was computed for each student by 
comparing his T-score for scholastic aptitude, as derived 
from the California Test of Mental Maturity (1951), with 






\ •;, ' ;» 0 ; •(• . , it SJ ' : -'-V ' ; X 

Hi j x O'i : 3 

r-.:-; . :h -j' : -tO 1>- 

■ •') ' XO 


0 hi ' i : y' ; 


, ' ci’U« lOO ■' ■ ' ■■ ■' 

; ■. XX 1 XX "XXXX. ' >X XX 

. ; • , : : ■ 

‘X-.Xx. o XiXX ... : ' : 

M • •- - v -■ : ' - 1 

XX : ; }XX-v v..* j. i \:) 'ix i./fii. 

„ . ... 

jiiiM-.‘ jl.-; Jixfj f,o xx;.x:"xv, ( 

;JO i . ; X . . • . ' .£ - 

j;r f • -\fc lit ' ■' v XO'jXOV Or.Oi'iVi r. 

• • . x ; .) X S > '. 

xl n . I *X< • • 

1 ' ..X'.x 0 . .0 > • 

. ,/iiC rxx; jy.fi': .*/x x xv ‘--i.: . o '0 

■ ; ’ • / ' y , V V .' ■ 1 ■ ' IX ' 3 

r ■ - ; ;3i:. i: • ■ ■ 

. .. ■ fix .IX ’ X > X.Xi ,. J 

: , ; .fclicto (xxy. i.} or o u vd % ■ >: 

: . xv.-. . i » ; xx ■ 

) ; : . : ■ - . * iiotiO'X 

n X X'.' ■ x v :■ cl i >*x 

x 3 f :cI : ioJ:d sn < : 

. / ; ' x i V j’o b 

• X .... ' i '' ' '' ■ 

. . . 'X o ‘ :[X ( ( X j; , x.x ' - 


ca *io x. it 1 ./ xxxlxvv xx o' ' : i vx-xv.xx: • ; ••• .3 m 

, • x ■■ ' x x X < /. x . - • : ; : ■' ' -■ ■ 


„ j; . . . , ■ ■ 

y; :.x; v • V 

X x; • * ' X ’ ■ 

. X; X ; .; ?: '.v X - 

■v . J . X. -.0 i: ■ c 

■y xx: x - ' . V. x -x'i : j; x vox. olid 

. ( X. ; 

vx' Ooxv. xx..: J'j. x:v/:j:x,o.o 

' X ‘: ■ ' x ^ > d *: 

Xvxi o.xX iV.) x:j "iO : : JXXX". XXXa 

■ . X . X. ; ‘.V Xx i XV :\X^) X 

. . ■' 



19 

his T-score for scholarship as determined from the grade 
average of the previous year f s academic subjects. A 
comparison of the two sets of T-scores readily identified 
the underachievers in the population. 

McQuary T s use of the American Council of Education 
Psychological Examination (ACE) (1945), a popular 
measure of academic ability, is quite typical of the use 
to which it has been put in the identification of 
underachievers. In his study (1954) he classed as an 
underachiever any student who had earned a grade point 
average which was one-half a standard deviation below 
the grade point average corresponding to his ACE score. 
Shaw and Brown (1957) suggested that any freshman who 
had made an average grade, on college examinations, 
which fell below their class mean might be classed as 
an underachiever. 

Schonell (1942), Cohler (1941), Calhoun (1956) 
and others have made use of standardized achievement 
tests in their identification of underachievers. 

Schonell, for example, classed as "backward 11 any child 
whose ability in a subject was at least one and one-half 
years below his other educational attainments and 
general intellectual level as measured by standardized 
tests. 

One of the few studies done on underachievement in 
Canada made use of a very simple measure. In his 








r «■. - 





? v 


<5 




to sri \ i\: ■-/ 




( j;;J j , 


j 


B 







v £>l ■ : 



c 7 


C, .< V 


/ 






> 


< 


O.uOL 




i : o .. 





20 


Toronto study, Barrett (1957) identified as an underachiever 
any child who had earned an I.Q. of more than 130 on the 
Henmon-Nelson test (1950) and who came nearest to the 
bottom of his class in academic achievement. Such a 
measure yielded one underachiever from each class studied. 

Stasek (1955) used a somewhat different approach. He 
went on the assumption that certain selected students 
were working to their capacity. Their average progress 
was referred to as the "projected average" for all students 
having that I.Q. Any student who had a difference of one 
or more academic points between his actual and his 
projected average was classed as an underachiever. 

It will have been noticed, perhaps, that the usual 
method employed in the above studies is to subtract the 
measure for academic achievement from some measure of 
academic ability, the gap or discrepancy then being 
accepted as being indicative of underachievement. The 
most obvious advantage to such an approach is that the 
author of the study can declare in advance what size of 
gap a student must have between these measures in order 
to be classed as an underachiever. That is, the measure 
of underachievement is not relative, but rather is fixed 
and absolute. While such an approach to the measurement 
of underachievement is quite satisfactory and is backed 
by the prestige that comes from frequent usage, it is by 
no means the only possible measure. After due consideration 






; u ■ - o 





i 




i: O' 




o 


. o ■ .l.,.: Vi j r \ 


. ; c 


11 


0a. 


! 







V 


C J 




j: o 









21 


of all the methods by which the degree of underachievement 
has been assessed, it was decided to utilize a quotient 
in this study. Certainly the quotient has been made 
respectable as a measuring device in education and 
psychology and one has but to consider the eagerness with 
which the I.Q., E.Q., and A.Q. have been accepted by 
psychometricians in order to realize its popularity. 

However, it would be incorrect to assume that the 
quotient has never been used in research of this nature. 
Griffiths (1945) and others have utilized the point-hour 
ratio as a rough measure of academic achievement. This 
ratio is derived by dividing the total number of 
semester hours of courses taken by the student by the 
number of points earned in a given set of examinations. 

In computing such a ratio a letter grade of ft A tf equals 
three points, a Tr B ?f equals two points, a ,f C M equals one 
point, and a t, D !t has a value of zero. Griffiths worked 
with a university population and presumably was concerned 
only with what the student did or actually produced in 
the way of grades rather than with what he was capable of 
producing, for this ratio makes no reference to ability. 
Possibly the fact that the student had been admitted to 
university was taken as a rough measure of his general 
ability. As will be noted, this is not a particularly 
fine measure. More recently, a quotient was used by 
Chapman (195$) in a study of underachieving language 


< 

«■ . 

t * - 0 

0 

o ' . : ■ < 

-i ni . -. - \ ■ ' ' 

- . 1 -., ^ ■■■ 

, 













■ 






t 




a 


t ■■ ; 


. 



22 


students in Alberta. 

It is believed that the method proposed in this 
study is superior to the point-hour ratio and is quite 
comparable, in value, to any other measure explained 
above. The results from the use of the method suggested 
here would tend to be more discriminating than those 
derived from the use of the point-hour ratio. While 
such a coarse measure as the above ratio might have some 
value at university level, where one could assume that 
the mere fact of admittance is indicative of a certain 
level of intelligence, it would have very little 
value at high school. At this level many factors other 
than intelligence, such as parents 1 wishes, student’s 
age, and school law, influence the fact of a student’s 
inclusion in a high school population. It was felt, 
therefore, that any measure which might be used with 
profit in this study would have to take the pupil’s 
academic ability into account. 

In this study, certain time-honored approaches to 
the measurement of underachievement such as that one used 
by Schonell and others, were ruled out. This step was 
taken because of the fact that the measure of achievement 
available, that is, marks made on the grade nine 
departmental examinations, did not provide a score which 
could be interpreted to mean that the student was operating; 
at a particular age or grade level. Such a score is 




23 

essential if one is to use the method advocated by Schonello 
Had a standardized achievement test been used, an age or 
grade level score would have been providedo The arguments 
against the use of such a test have been explained else¬ 
where. On the other hand, in order to have utilized a 
measure such as that one used by Gowan (1957) end others 
one would have needed the standard deviations of both 
the measuring instruments® It would have been necessary 
also to determine the level of achievement in each school 
subject for every male student in the grade nine 
population® While Gowan 1 s approach has certain advantages, 
it would have resulted in a great deal of work, and it 
is held that this method is less suitable for a clinical 
study than for a statistical one. 

There are, therefore, various reasons for the 
selection of the method by which underachievement was 
measured in this study. First, it made use of presumably 
valid and reliable measures. Second, it readily provided 
a relative measure for the identification of the most 
marked underachievers required for this study. Third, 
it was quite economical of time and effort in that it 
made use of measures already available. 

Selection of a Research Method 


A statistical treatment or the case study technique 




L fo io 

•. O V 


t 


: v r 





0 







. 


C v 


c 


.OO V/ 



/ J 


w ' ) 




. 


c 




. fjj i 


...-.0 


1U 



lo • nc Iloe i K', 


//,'.. ;•':r $ 


m i 


5 


0 


'V 



Iloilo bn.G a, 


)ii:X co 5 ei:: 


,0-a.oo 0 0;0 la o©jbBfH 




f) ii f' f f , •; n * 


■.::o 




24 


would seem to offer the most logical design for the 

investigation of this particular problem. The former 

research method has been widely used and, while it is 

undoubtedly true that a statistical treatment of the results 

represents a desirable method of dealing with some topics 

and problems, it can hardly be defended in every case. 

Certain authorities are of the opinion that this method 

may not have as wide an application as is frequently 

attributed to it. Good and Scates (1954, p.773) note: 

While statistical studies are essential and defensible, 
in a social field they must be looked upon as the lesser 
rather than the major influence. [Statistical and 
experimental] studies do not play the role in education 
and in the various social areas that they play in the 
physical sciences. 

However, the decision to use the case study 
approach for the identification of correlates of 
underachievement was not reached solely because of the 
negative appeal of the statistical method. As mentioned, 
the purpose of the study was to discover correlates of 
underachievement and, because of the relative scarcity 
of investigations done at the high school level, it was 
necessary to utilize many instruments in an attempt to 
gather pertinent information. Certain of the instruments 
were standardized and gave results that were readily 
interpretable. Others, such as checklists and inventories, 
offered findings which required a more subjective 
interpretation. While such subjectivity has a legitimate 




. 


. 


■ - J' '■ 








a 

■ y . , ■: ■ : ^ V j.C < }: - ^ ' 

; 

^ • : ... , , ; j. •: a d:or- \yti 

■ ; ; « . ; , . 


cl 




V. 




. 1 i.c os.%X‘- - : ; 

' 

V < ' ' ' ■ ■ ^ ^ ' ‘ ^ 

:i * *,:>•: J , u '• cl 

, V ..... . .1 U. ■ ; ■ • ’ • ; ' V ' • 

ii . • ;:.c, ay, * '■ jk/ l . ’:>'u oJ 

i: ■ ‘ ' ' • 

. 

' 







place in case study and clinical approaches, it is not 
acceptable in a statistical design. 

Not only does the selection of the case study 

method permit the inclusion of instruments which another 

design might rule out, but it also permits the researcher 

to give weight to those more or less intangible factors 

which he has encountered in his relationships with the 

individual members of the research population. Barr, 

Davis, and Johnson (1953>PP*l$$-$9) claim: 

The case study is potentially the most valuable method 
known for obtaining a true and comprehensive picture of 
individuality. It makes possible a synthesis of many 
different types of data and may include the effects of 
many personal factors in drawing educational inferences. 

We are reminded by these writers that Terman ! s 
monumental Genetic Studies of Genius (1923) utilized the 
case study approach. 

Finally, the greatest justification of the case 
study method lies in the fact that it brings depth and 
penetration to the study of individual problems and 
provides insights which are not possible with the large- 
study statistical approach. 

Treatment of Results 

After all data had been made available and the 
case studies of the various members of the thesis group 
had been compared, it was possible to arrange certain 
correlates into comprehensive categories or syndromes. 




J 01 



r ' j: VI 




*■) ’■ 





, 


j - " V 


0* 




.U:C 


L Ox 


- V 


' -0 i 


(. J 


z 


c 




z 


miol 


z 





6 ■..‘o', rmom! 







rvn 


.. } i 



'10 


l ! : , 


>V .v vo . Vv:ooo : j jjvo/i,_ l: ivv: 


us. 


/ 






o i vJ:V' oi 




■I 


:0 Q; ,70 V 


.. 0 i > OV . VI > ■ < 

v aeblvcxa 






o.i.vc;'/ ..) ‘i.o 


:) 




v •no 



26 


Those case histories best illustrating a particular 
syndrome were described in considerable detail while 
others, less illustrative, were dealt with more briefly. 
Also, a large number of hypotheses, dealing with possible 
correlates of underachievement, were proposed and tested 
against the accumulated data. A careful study of the 
results revealed that certain correlates had application 
for fairly large numbers of the thesis population. 

Because of the nature of the study and of the instruments 
used, the evaluation of the data was, of necessity, 
somewhat subjective. Whenever possible, however, steps 
were taken to reduce the element of subjectivity. In 
the case of standardized tests, use was made of norms 
and of other interpretative data. It was hoped that 
the general findings of this research would reduce the 
doubt and uncertainty which surround the whole problem 
of academic underachievement and might also suggest 
areas in which fruitful and effective study could be 
carried on. 

Basic Assumptions 

Before a study of this nature could be undertaken, 
certain basic assumptions had to be accepted. F^rst, as 
Calhoun noted (1956, p. 312), w . . . the postulate of var¬ 
iation among individuals in capacity for school achievement 
was accepted. . . ?T The fact of individual differences in 


; ix .:7 773' .O-i-.L"' ‘'o ; 3o • • ..''.’'‘ic.c ] a &7;3o f 

U .. 7’ '7 : 77 7.7 oo<' 7 L>-or c / s . 7.3777 

■ . r • 17 t y. : ' 7 • .7 lo'o 

' L ' t 07 ; 1V'7 ■ ! 3 377 o 'X t 073L \ 

r j, 7 7 / 77 1" 7 " 1 3 3 v v.--‘ 77 . 3- 

„ . . 0 ■••■■■:' 7- ■' 

:■ , ■ . .. . ■ -• .! 77 7 7 7 ;'■ • . V V Ji.7..37'.': 

. ; • " / 7 ' ■ 

•- : , 7 ' ' . '• ■: 1 : 7 ■7 17 V.t ■ ' 7 ‘ ' ‘7 • . 7 ; - 37;, ! -3 > < 

t .7 7 '• <• • ' J '' ) - 7' < ’ - J ■ 

t 

* 

‘ j 7 ,) ■ ■ ; v ; 7 c : ,‘;t : ,7 7 • r ‘' 7,7 7 377; ' .7 o ::. . , 

"I .. 7 f7 * 5 ‘I 1 Jj r; , 77)7 '..77; 7 7 3 .'.7 i 7 7.3 77 7 . .7 . i 77 V. 7. >. 777 ! 3 ) 7>i7:.7' 

.7 :< ; .77-1 ? ti r .:l •.7 7 •.777 , V.ij.J. \7 7.. '.[ . 7 7J ■ 73 37730 7 

V' 7) : : • u; .. ' 7 I: X7:, ,1733 J'.OV'l ./ .7,7} 7!; , 7 r 77 '7': ; 77'0 7 lo 

• .70 i 7.7777 ■' 7.7;]' ''77..; 1 . ’ 77 '.:7' j 7 7i77 .‘-lo'.fj'lj f j. .3 773 7) 77 3 

. 1 

7 i 7- / |7 . J ' 7 7 . 0 .j '7 £> 3 

" 7 - “>o -Vo; 7 ; 3 707/.Loo 

t - ' C • ' . 7' j 77. 777 7 .7 - • 7 7 7) 

. . . , . c 

V J 7 : .3 7 ,7/ . j; . . :i ■■ ' ' : ■ ; ; 7 . 7 .; 7. ,7. 



27 

academic achievement had to be entertained and accepted 
if one were to believe, for example, that a score or 
grade which was indicative of underachievement in one 
student could represent overachievement in another. 

Second, one had to assume that the various instruments 
being used were sufficiently valid so as to enable one 
to place some degree of confidence in their results. 

A third assumption, the acceptance of which was 
necessary before this research could be undertaken, is 
possibly the most important of all. We must assume that 
the factor of underachievement has a cluster of correlates 
relating to behavior, adjustment, and emotion which can 
be measured or observed. This is not to suggest that 
underachievement necessarily causes these measurable 
reactions, or is caused by them, but only that if one 
does not accompany the other then it is fruitless to 
look for ,f correlates of underachievement• Tf 

A fourth necessary assumption centers about the 
belief that we have at our disposal a procedure which 
will enable us to identify such correlates if they do 
exist. That is, we must assume that we have a method 
available which is sufficiently refined to detect the 
presence of such correlates. In this instance, the case 
study method has been selected as being the most valuable. 
The reasons for the selection of this method have been 


considered above 






























8 v 




r : 

. 

. .. 

t . ■ ' ' ' ' « 


.. 

. . . ' • ■■ • 

c . „ . 

■ . 


■ i 




CHAPTER THREE 


RELATED RESEARCH 

A consideration of the research done in those fields 
which border upon academic underachievement is desirable at 
this time. A review of the literature reveals that little 
research has been carried out in Canada on the problem of 
academic underachievement. However, interesting and signifi¬ 
cant studies have been made on related topics with fairly 
comparable populations. These have provided some direction 
for the present study and supply a background against which 
present findings may be properly assessed and evaluated. 

A review of the research done in areas related to the present 
problem is presented below. In every instance, conclusions 
have been drawn which are supported by a majority of the 
findings. An effort has been made to give appropriate weight 
to the results of those studies which were most carefully 
carried out and which are recognized as authoritative. 

Areas of Research 

Study Habits . A review of the research reveals that 
study habits and the amount of time spent in studying are, in 
many cases, found to be related to school achievement. 






29 


0 ! Leary (1955), for example, noted a correlation of .7$ between 
work and study habits and school grades, while Anspaugh (1953) 
found that there was a definite relationship between the 
amount of time spent on study and school achievement. He noted 
that the top 5 per cent of his group reported studying from 
ten to twenty hours a week at home, whereas the lowest 3 per 
cent of the group reported an average of only two hours of 
home study per week. He concluded that superior students seem 
to spend five times as much time on home study as poorer 
students do. Gowan (1955), Stasek (1955), Bell (1931), 

Chapman (195$), and Gough (1953) also report that effective use 
of time and good study habits appear to be characteristics of 
excellent students. 

Eckert (1935) noted that superior students apparently 
spend more time in study than inferior ones spend, but she also 
noted that on a study habits questionnaire poorer students 
occasionally make scores higher than those made by better 
students. She concludes that if such scores are valid indica¬ 
tions of how students actually study, one cannot claim that 
the possession of supposedly superior study techniques can be 
related to better school achievement. However, a comprehensive 
study by Ross and Klise (1927) suggests an answer to the 
problem posed by Eckert. These writers believe that skill in 
using study habits or procedures is of great importance in 
attaining academic success. They hold that it is possible 
for some students to use approved study methods and yet do 


J T 


h l, i : o' 


• ; 






•. * I ■ 


r . via 


1 ! > V 


•, L , ( • ' ’ . »i / ’ 






r.. '.: 


fjji-i *,tc^ ‘.m 


.1 • ‘ • • 


ooi ; c; 



30 

relatively poor work, while other students, using methods of 
doubtful value, may meet with considerable academic success. 

In such cases, they attribute the results to a less skilful 
use of study methods by the former students and a more skilful 
use by the latter. They conclude that knowing what consti¬ 
tutes good study procedures is not enough; they believe that 
the student must be trained to use the better methods with 
skill. Ross and Klise also noted that a positive correlation 
exists between academic achievement and good study procedures 
that are properly used. 

In a second study done by Eckert, in conjunction with 
Mills (1936), it was noted that achieving students used 
study procedures which were better than those of the non¬ 
achieving student group. The differences between the superior 
and inferior groups were largely in method, curiosity, effort, 
and degree of purposefulness. These researchers reported that 
scores on a study habits questionnaire were tT . . . the nearest 
approach to genuinely variant traits . . ." between the 
achieving and the non-achieving groups, but they noted that 
measures of intelligence and of study procedures were not 
particularly closely related. The evidence of Eckert and 
Mills suggests that perseverance,or the ability to exert con¬ 
tinued effort, might well be the factor which best differenti¬ 
ates between the superior and inferior student. 

Serene (1952), Woellner (1953), and Bond (1952) report 
that there is a tendency for poor students to blame their 




31 


underachievement on poor study habits<> Other workers in 
this field (Eckert and Mills, 1936) have noted that over¬ 
achievers tend to regard their study habits as being 
efficient and to report that reading and studying are their 
hobbies. Myers (1950) has suggested that perhaps some 
children are so preoccupied with being accepted socially 
that they hesitate to study for fear that they will get an 
undesirable reputation among their peers. 

After a very comprehensive survey of much of the 
recent research done on the relationship between study 
habits and underachievement, Harris (1940) states that he 
is inclined to agree with Uhrbrock (1931) who claims that, 
n . • • the total pattern or rhythm of activities may be 
far more important than any single factor which may be 
isolated for study. . . . n (p* 142.) 

Despite the lack of agreement on certain points, the 
following conclusions relating to study habits and under¬ 
achievement may be made: 

(1) Study habits and school and college marks tend 
to be related. 

(2) The mere possession of good study habits does 
not make for academic success. The evidence indicates 
that, in addition, the student must exhibit (a) skill in 
the use of study habits and (b) the ability to put forth 
a sustained effort. 


1 ■ 


•_C.. 


".rco 


j o 




c 




c d hi. d‘n 


>i o 


t 


on 


.lOl d ooo 


0 0 


c-J;c: due 


lo 


i d p ■' 


l ' 'd' .-1*./ 


1 


.Co or:.:' [h.'h;S$ "'ooo: 


J: cro 


.0 j; 


dooio o ":l( 


t 


0 


.u LO.ooo ;■:::i„C 


:) 


J.O '>'0 0 - ,n 


U) 


judo do{ 


•;0 v'.r:r (;K) 


O ': ? :,0 ' 0 


( ) 


/ 


ro.So do 








32 


(3) Underachieving students and low achievers in 
school and college tend to see ineffective study habits as 
a causal factor in their poor academic showing* 

(4) Superior students credit themselves with 
efficient study procedures* 

(5) The amount of time spent on study correlates 
positively with grades received* 

(6) The nature of the relationship between intelligence 
and study habits has not been clearly defined* 

Intelligence * While it may be assumed that students 
of every level of intelligence underachieve, there is a 
fairly widespread belief that children with superior 
intelligence are the worst offenders in this respect* The 
usual classroom situation is built about an academic offering 
which has been tailored to the abilities of the "average 11 
child, thus presenting little or no stimulation to the 
child who has above average intelligence* Such lack of 
stimulation may well make for boredom, disinterest in 
school, and subsequent underachievement* What do the find¬ 
ings of studies in this area reveal about level of 
intelligence and the incidence of underachievement? 

Alter (1953) carried out a study in a junior-senior 
high school in the United States in which it was noted that 
about one-half of the gifted students enrolled were under¬ 
achieving. In this study, a student was classed as "gifted" 





. 


v . I 


: : ■ 


; n 


JLOQ: iO 





\ 

> 


) O C: 


> j; 0 



CO/' 


J;0 


ij .1 •:> 


o 





.0 


i 


1 ‘' 101/0 1*6 




oo x o tmh 


« 00 


o oc.o 


) o 



?‘.V;.o o.c 


co 


jicJo.; o/".- . oooaoolo 


) 




; c 


OXJ 


<< i b '..:c ■ / 


c 


' c 1 doc 


.0 ; j 


'.:c ;• ' -ox./. 'x 


O V ' 0: v -V -•-) 


c i 




c 


33 


if he had an I,Q, in excess of 130, Chapman (195#) 
carried on a study in a large high school in which eighty 
pupils were selected from the total grade ten population as 
being "potentially outstanding students," Every student in 
this group had an I,Q, greater than 120, On selecting 112 
students who were underachieving in a language course, he 
noted that seventeen of the original eighty "potentially 
outstanding students", or 21 per cent, were included in 
the underachieving group. When 112 students were selected 
as achievers in the same language course, it was found 
that twenty-two, or 2$ per cent, of the original eighty 
gifted students were included in this group. The remaining 
forty-one, or 51 per cent, of the "potentially outstanding 
students" were not classed either as underachievers or 
achievers. Inasmuch as only seventeen of the original 112 
underachievers had I.Q. ! s in excess of 120, we must assume 
that the remaining ninety-five students had I.Q^s which 
fell below this point. This indicates that the majority 
of Chapman*s underachievers were not mentally superior or 
"potentially outstanding students," 

Remmlein (1939) found that 50 per cent of those 
students whose I*Q, T s were in the highest decile tended to 
do poorer work than they were capable of doing, according 
to their intelligence test scores. He believed that under¬ 
achievement on the part of the gifted was due to feelings 
of over-confidence engendered by the fact that they had 


- ^ 

c c. 


O' 


( 


"hr, i 


; .0 


C I 


£0 


0 



o. 



* 


co 




K. ° 


0 


o 




i 


% 


,0 XX ' O 


c 


.0 


t, 




0 



oo o 




j-0 


xo, :xo j - .V o 


LO •h/j i 


% 


r 


\ : J 


1 ,t: j j" 


■ 


c : , 


,toq 


xc xc r;j■ . ... xox; Jx. 


( S 


OX! 


c 




- / 




? 


xo o: ' «, £(•] '.x X. ' " 0 


■OCX' •ooxoxx;; o' 


' .0 


10, 





34 

little difficulty in mastering the relatively easy academic 
fare which was offered them. 

Because of the fact that relatively little research has 
been done on underachievement among children of average or 
less than average I.Q., it is impossible to offer comparable 
figures for students from those levels*. 

On the basis of the above findings we may conclude: 

(1) Underachievement among gifted students is quite a 
common occurrence. The percentage of such students who may 
be classed as underachievers will depend upon the degree of 
severity of underachievement identified, 

(2) Underachievement most certainly occurs among children 
of average or below average intelligence, but comprehensive 
studies seem to be lacking in this area. 

(3) Underachievement among the gifted may be attributed 
to lack of motivation and feelings of over-confidence brought 
about through contact with a curriculum which fails to stimu¬ 
late them. 

(4) Because students of average and below average 
intelligence may not lack motivation, it is suggested that 
underachievement is less common among these classes of 
students than among the gifted* 

Health . It might be imagined that a student suffering 
from poor health or possessing numerous and severe physical 
defects would do relatively poorer work in school or college 






•; •/ rv v?.'.; .aio lu '.: on , nnatao.. bn.; no anon nooc!' 


■ : ■ ( , ; .. jb i: ;c ;i ‘ aj . b : t * .b .; n \ a 0 si 

v a .. . ■ . a . - • • 

' 

" > 9 , i ■ an *j>• a; i b\.. ; ' b a\n a. • a a ,. bo/.-l t ab aO 

n ab aba-baba b, a ' ■ ; a ban a a b a) abi nb v !:) 

. i ; ' ■ r •' a,: b. j, - a a * '• . •• a. a -'.a.. nc i , un 

f b a >; . a., naan I an ■; Jba . a*, v ban.a'a;, a ”ba b .a.’ a nj 

. 

* . ,bb ; . a J. . ; : a a.: 

ana a.Jain ; .oa ;> annaa- \'.a . •'a'-" a. a >. a a anna. a. aa*. 

i vi. an i, i'i . 1 1 baj ^ ;'i.: b.U b ’ a / vnJL 0 a:a ..a ‘ at y .t<3 

„ • • ., a i . .an bn t b i a: • ba 

.baba b j ,a j \. ■ ■« v a aabbaa ban .: .at* •; bbaan/avaiboa'i : ' i baab \ b 
a ;■ *; i ; ■; bbil.an-a ■ bn ..a; aba? b a *i ibno. ;■•«• b '10 .. o-ab b 

-* .)■ i.a ab. ' . ...a i j a i. >.• ‘v j ...> ?> a.,.a ona .(a a a i ■ an a om a «, 

......... a J' ab. 

>'• v ■■ '-.a .ion )■. • - • -a n\ b , b . Dai bona x , 
a .. b ' t ■: .' b , . a ■; ' a . a • a .a a . J .a b' / 

, . • n .a .) a a t -..’:a: a ia a. ,.ab b/iaf.-av.^bibiba:;. onu 










■i j I 3 ; . Oabi.;a 

: !■:•:. ; j'ab. .a» ■; a- aba n.b •... on inO'XX 

a ' • .b O ■( : 1 ' t a P.rra.b'roh. 


35 

than a student who was not so afflicted. Does the research 
bear out this hypothesis? 

Stedman (1934) concluded that health defects were the 
most consistent causes of underachievement in a high school 
group studied. She noted that the average grades of those 
students with health defects were found to be only ?6 per 
cent of the grades of the healthy group. She also noted that 
low achievement on the part of the handicapped group could 
be found at each level of intelligence. Griffiths (1945), 
being somewhat less positive, suggested that men college 
students who had very unsatisfactory health records tended 
to make academic grades which were somewhat lower than those 
made by more healthy students. The difference noted was not, 
however, a significant one. Zintz (1951) noted that the 
unhealthy child or the one with physical defects tended to 
lag behind the normal child in academic achievement and also 
reported that the results of such retardation tended to be 
cumulative. Serene (1952), however, reported that a rela¬ 
tively small number of underachievers blamed poor health and 
physical defects for their lower grades. Further conflicting 
evidence is introduced by Musselman (1942), who reported that 
he could find very little relationship between achievement 
scores and measures of pupil health or the number of physical 
defects reported. Eckert and Mills (1936) noted that data 
on pupil health were of no value in explaining variations in 
academic achievement among gifted high school seniors. 






>oC 


< ■ 







or • 


J'!..-' ' 


■■ • ■ J . 


o 


H 




■ 










' 


' . A. : 

' 


j 0 










) O 


[:) *. /(' .1 


5 



V 




, 


5 




:>) 


joi • 


j *'i 


■ ’ j u 


c 




: ) ;j 





c 




■ 


i !.. O 07 V J,; J. j i ■ ’ j )•' j- '0.1 i 


jju 0 0' V 


:t.i » . :■ j x 


) j 


• i 




' 0:001 


■ 


O;0 ; 0 '.0.007 ’ O' * , ‘ ;fO ' '.O' OOOM;! o.l o; vJ.OVjj 


■ a * • j. o: ■' < 0 ' ’ 1 o' 1 > j ‘ ’ : o" 70 q 

. '.'.A.. t , ' , . , I . i J 00 ■“ o' > O :[ < :. : '. ■ .0 070, 1 V . ■ 

• ; i O'. i.j • r 1 - . 0.0 , i. AC . 0 :?;.' i .7 0'O. \\i ■/ in io 7 . 3<i 

' . ; •. ' ' • .-. O «. i.O. O .: ; 0 r‘i v .. vO i • .• • ■) ■ 

\ . i i. 0 1 * .'■■■■ 

. o . 1.. : > ol ■ / i: 0 - 7 . ; , l,;jl . jj : ,• f c. 




36 

While the above results are not in complete agreement, 
it would seem that the majority of the findings support the 
following conclusions: 

(1) Poor health scores and high academic scores are 
negatively correlated. 

(2) Very unsatisfactory health records or severe 
physical defects may be related to marked academic retarda¬ 
tion or underachievement. 

(3) The effects of such retardation will be cumulative 
if poor health continues. 

(4) A minority of poor students may blame poor health 
and the presence of physical defects for their academic 
failures. 

General Pattern of Interests 0 The question as to whether 
it is possible to identify different interest patterns for 
successful and non-successful students has been the object 
of some study over the years. Young and Estabrooks (1934) 
noted that n studious tf pupils and, presumably, successful 
ones are inclined to be relatively favorable toward scientific, 
artistic, and educational interests and toward clerical 
occupations. They also noticed that such students show little 
interest in business and athletics. White (1947) compared 
the interests of underachieving and overachieving groups 
and noted that the former scored high on outdoor, persuasive, 
literary, and musical interests, whereas the latter were 
found to have patterns of interests very similar to those 













' 


. 






. 

V... 

' '"I ( 

' 






* 







» 






' 






, 




Do 





37 


noted by Young and Estabrooks, above. 

Utilizing the Strong Vocational Interest Blank (1951), 
Morgan (1952) found that underachievers tend to be interested 
in business detail work and sales occupations, while 
Shuttleworth (1927) reported that students who suffered 
academic failure tended not to be interested in things 
intellectual but, rather, were more concerned with 
mechanical matters. 

Phillips and Osborne (1949) found a slight positive 
relationship between scores on the literary scale of the 
Kuder Preference Record ( Vocational ) (1956) and academic 
aptitude, while social service, mechanical, and computational 
scales seemed to show low but negative relationships to 
scholastic aptitude. These researchers noted, however, that 
Kuder scores for students on academic probation did not differ 
significantly from scores made by students not on probation. 

While the results of the studies given above are not in 
complete agreement, it seems safe, on the basis of the major¬ 
ity of the findings, to conclude: 

(1) Successful students tend to show a greater interest 
in those pursuits which might be broadly classified as 
intellectual than do underachieving students. 

(2) Underachievers are more apt to be interested in 
practical pursuits, such as selling, mechanics, and outdoor 
activities than are successful students. 








































t 


< 


; 






- V ■ , 






i > 


c 


c 


c 




Social Service Interests . It has been suggested in 


certain studies already considered that underachievers may be 
seen as being hostile or unfriendly towards parents and other 
authority figures and, in some cases, towards society in 
general. If such a lack of concern for the interests and 
welfare of others does exist, can evidence of this fact be 
found on scores made on social service scales of certain inte¬ 
rest and personality inventories? 

Working with a group of college sophomores, Morgan (1952) 
found that significantly more achievers had interests typical 
of persons in social service; i.e., they scored higher on a 
TT social responsibility” scale, while more non-achievers had 
interests typical of persons in business and sales occupations. 
It was reported by Gowan (1955) that underachieving gifted 
students tended to have little awareness or concern for others, 
while Anderson (1956) reported that of 12,000 superior high 
school students, selected as being the best 5 per cent of their 
classes across the entire United States, 30 per cent declared 
that teaching, obviously a social service occupation, was to 
be their vocational goal. Fourth vocational choice for this 
group was medicine, another social service pursuit. As men¬ 
tioned, Phillips and Osborne (1949), concluded that the Kuder 
Preference Record scores for students on scholastic probation 
did not differ significantly from scores made by students not 
on probation, but they noted that social service, mechanical 















_ 

: ' ,<J ‘"X ' ) ' ' V 

c \ "' V ' 1 ‘ ' ; 

• ■ 

' ' VJ ■ • ' c - - ’ • 


. ■ 






; v. t ■ ■ : - 1 

O .... . -J. ." ' . ■ 'I • ' : •••' • ' ' : "' - n '- 0 

. j # m • ' : • ; I 

-- . .! . ■'!. . . .'. . 

i J- • j • O' j:/; £. 8 J i •' .1 i> J, X ' ‘iO ‘ 8 C '*) c'JH.J 

. t- ’ c>&rt$ (c< ■ . • -V ■' ft- C'ioqs* , ‘i VSW c<i 

K < ■ • •••• ' { J. ) ; 

,■ ; : ,.:.v m. ij : i. .. . - r ;;n .. •; ja lot . I.o-j 

c .. / . ■ - . ■ '■;*'> ■ -• ! •" 

' t ' . ' ' ■ ... ■ " V. ■ ' •• ' ;i 

• 

. : •. . ; •> ■., \. ■■ , . : o' >;■ ; ■ <: 

. \.■ <; ....: • ••-• : ’ j -' ac 





39 

and computational interests scores seem to show a low but 
negative relationship to scholastic aptitude. 

Because of the disagreement which is noted in the results 
reported above, it must be concluded that: 

(1) It is impossible to say at this time whether social 
service interests bear any relationship to level of academic 
achievement. 

Adjustment of the Total Personality . It is frequently 
suggested or assumed that lack of adjustment in the student, 
especially in the personal, social, and emotional spheres, 
causes academic underachievement. A review of the research 
indicates that a considerable body of material has been amassed 
by those who have investigated this subject. 

On reviewing a number of studies which had been done on 
the relationship of non-intellectual factors to underachieve¬ 
ment, Gough (1949) reported that lack of maladjustment was 
found to be related to higher achievement. Stagner (1933) 
offered findings of a similar nature. He determined that 
students who were classed as unstable and maladjusted tended 
to be lower in academic achievement than those students who 
were not so-classed. The findings of Assum and Levy (1947) are 
substantially the same as those of Gough and Stagner. 

Both Altus (194$) and Monroe (1945) found that certain 
personality and adjustment tests or inventories have some value 
in the prediction of academic success. The former found that 






i • • 






1 


: • K 


c 


V - 


■1 ' j. . / - •. • yj •; j • : J 


C> ■ - iB'Vyvf:.. • ■ 







I 




i 


. . : . . .' ■ 




jUM :) 


i,(. 




'-It 






■ 


. J . ‘ i. i ■ .■ :i i.r v .... .' ' i “1 ,:>"J C i, -HI < 

. - . • . 

. . • ', . - • . fJ' 

: ( . ,. .• , .)■ •. :n . :j j Jl. ,!>■'* I - 

.... •/ ' : : ■ i j " ; ; ; . ... ! ■ . . i ' 





40 

sixty items on the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory 
(1951) correlated .39 with grades made in a psychology course, 
whereas the latter student, utilizing the Inspection Rorschach 
(1953), noted that scores on this instrument had better 
predictive value for academic success than scores on the ACE. 
Monroe administered the Rorschach to the freshman class at a 
New England university and was able to identify as relatively 
maladjusted almost 95 per cent of those students who eventually 
failed. 

Liebman (1954) worked with a population in the elementary 
school and utilized four different instruments, one of which 
was the Rorschach. He found that children who made high scores 
on measures of personal and social adjustment achieved to a 
greater extent than those who did not make such scores. The 
findings were significant at the .05 level. 

Studies by Darley (1937) and Nason (1954) have also added 
to knowledge in this area. The former found that a considerably 
closer relationship existed between ability and achievement 
scores for a group of students found to be well adjusted than 
for a group of students who were classed as being maladjusted. 
The implication here is that maladjustment influences a stu¬ 
dent adversely, so that he is unable to realize the full poten¬ 
tial of his measured intelligence. Nason worked with students 
of both high ability and high achievement and found that they 
were relatively better adjusted than were students of comparable 
ability who were earning poorer school grades. The differences 












, 


■ 


«. k 




:.c i < ;f r ' .JJ : o 
t /-: 3 .: ■ : 'x ■. •••= -' ■ 

v r I.. - -\ i .0 o' 7 >.• :" J c'.: 

j {; > j'.1 -y [jj-, JUi - l 7C 




. 


7 7a. r' 


( ; . ft 


. 


, 77 ; Y 0.1 J ■' ' : 

■' d i ; . ■ ■. . ' : ' - - ■ ' • - . 

: > 7 , Y. ■ 

o . . J-i r k'-V'l ' ■' ^ ^ 

;• 7 " :. t 1 r - '*• ■ ■ ri 

. . ' 1 

' : ' 

' • . .. J ' ■ • : 1 '. " ' ' >' 



41 


noted here were not significant, however* 

It would be incorrect to assume that all research 
workers in this area have been able to convince themselves 
that maladjustment, as measured, is positively related to poor 
academic achievement. Griffiths (1945) could find no signifi¬ 
cant differences in the personal adjustment scores of. poor 
and superior students at university level, and he noted that 
those students who did poorly academically made higher adjust¬ 
ment scores than did superior academic students. 

A study by Owens and Johnson (1949) revealed that when 
groups of college underachievers, overachievers, and normal 
achievers were compared, the underachievers compared very 
favorably in adjustment with those students in the latter two 
groups, with the exception of scores made in the Neurotic- 
psychotic tendency" and "family relationship" areas. Because 
it was felt that the former area was inadequately measured by 
the instruments used, the authors hesitated to draw any 
conclusions regarding the presence of such tendencies in 
underachievers. 

Interestingly enough, Montalto ( 1946 ), with the use of 
the Group Rorschach ( 1953 )? found that achievers, as well as 
being better adjusted than the non-achievers in his group, 
revealed more neurotic tendencies than did the poorer students. 
He believed that this neurotic trend might well be a factor 
making for success in the academic situation. 

A glance at the above findings suffices to illustrate 








,! . ! 


¥ ■ 











V. A 






a ?; naA/t'- ao» 

. 


n 7 


■ • o 




: ■ 7 =. .. 

' 


■J 








T! : 








c 




: ' [ 




c 




•V 'J i 0 




• . 


V '■ ' 






v 


c 


. o A f ? i 1: rv 


. 

: ■ < ^ ■' * ‘> * t J. ’ 1 . > 

1 ■ 1 ’ < . 'X . .! . ' ; . 

. 


) 


All 


• : 1 ' ■■ ' J ■ 7 ‘ c \ ■ L ; 


■ — 77 ■ i 

J ■ A i : ; ' A , ' 7 

7 A 'V 4 •. 777 .. . 7 7 ' 7 ■ / . i 

, ; 7 A ' • ■ 



42 


the fact that the results in this area are contradictory and 
inconclusive. Possibly such results are due to the fact that 
the instruments being used to measure personality and academic 
achievement are not sufficiently refined to reveal the nature 
of the true relationship between these factors. Or, perhaps 
such findings are caused by the fact that we are entertaining 
a false notion when we assume that academic achievement and 
adjustment, as we define it, should somehow be related. There 
is also the possibility that not all varieties of emotional 
disturbance will have the same effect upon a given individual. 
While one affective upset may well make for underachievement, 
another might have the effect of spurring the student on to 
overachieve. It is quite possible, too, that certain kinds 
of emotional disturbance may have no appreciable effect upon 
the academic achievement of the individual. 

A review of the above findings leads to the conclusion 

that: 

(1) While most of the work done in this area seems to 
support the contention that adjusted students do better, 
academically, than maladjusted ones, enough evidence of a 
contradictory nature exists to discourage the making of any 
clear statement regarding the nature of the relationship 
between adjustment scores and academic success. 

Personality Factors . Much has been done in the way of 
research into the nature of the relationship between measures 







43 

of personality and of academic achievement. Some twenty-seven 

years ago Stagner (1932) offered an explanation as to the 

devious manner in which personality influences academic 

achievement and in so doing revealed why clear relationships 

between the two are not always easily noted. He wrote: 

It becomes increasingly clear that personality influences 
achievement in an indirect way, by affecting the degree to 
which use is made of the individuals potentialities. . • • 

At some points along the distribution, personality is an 
advantage to academic work while different amounts of the 
same personality traits may be disadvantageous, or may 
be operating in one direction in one case and the opposite 
in a similar situation. . . .Extreme personality trends seem 
to counterbalance advantages in aptitude, making for equal 
achievement in opposed groups, (p. 652.) 

Writing at about the same time as Stagner, Rothney (1936, 
p. 29$) was less sanguine as to the possible relationship 
between personality and academic achievement and declared, 
n . . . failure has invariably attended attempts to predict 
students 1 marks by means of scores obtained from instruments 
designed to measure non-intellectual factors of personality. . . w 

A similar opinion has been voiced by Shaw and Brown 
(1957*) It would appear, however, that there are those who 
believe that such a relationship does exist even though, as 
yet, it has not been clearly assessed. Griffiths (1945, p<> 360) 
has said: 

Occasionally studies appear to show some definite relation¬ 
ship between personality and scholarship. Others seem to be 
contradictory. The result is that there has been as yet no 
clear definition of the connection between scholarship and 
personality. 

It will be noted that the above writer does not claim that there 
is necessarily no relationship between measures of personality 


, , : C.'-.L ' ' • ii '■ "I : 'X \ 4 * O. S*’X;;jO 

olixsbso a »anojxX.xri.;t ^d;l\Lc.u oa'iac osioXi. i m. . Q,tf 

. uij .. a: -a ■'■■■■ '■ oa s ,:ar mirve x.ilo 

: :■ t. „ , ■ • -a. " : i * * ;i - 

f ; . f ■' .. : a a • o: < : j 

.... a v • ■ :.i ;;;j ,a:i X: a • t i 

.... r 

• . , ..... \ J ■ > X ; iO.L : «. :o •; J 

... :• " ‘ s. a''i'' O C’J’ 9 1 sctnsv.jb 

c • ■ vx;j • '• 

• . ;; 'j; ' . :. ■!. ' . ■ , * • • j :v a. . ' :' 

‘.col : .uj: .aoy-i onnvhB BoxinJJnniO'Of^iJO'O 0 

’ . . . • -••:■■■ < •' • 1 

Vlj mtti : i a■; .‘a; a 

:a. ■ a • a;. 1 :a:-v, a ' ■ ' • ; 1 » 

t j'xalpei > : o oi o ;tj uoc'.c 

. 


jjv.>{ s. v ax-rXt :‘n io a.?: _vo", a:rxar.i. i, &:jW)bu3 

. . .• .. a ^ ■ /-:■/ v j ho< ; la© 

'■ - sj. v {i ■ ■. •,'.X J:a -. 

, , c 

■ r .'•o j x . ■ ;>'oJ:: v ■ aXa -a.v'j *■; ,ioaa JauaX 

« ■ t; . , ... « . ■ . - :> 

; : 


■ ij: .ioo 

t 

/' ;a - . . ' . ■ > Oi 0 /q 

ro....:.r io j.:.o. i :jJ"rJ:'.ioh *'££9l 

« 



44 


and of academic achievement but, rather, that as yet the 
nature of the relationship has not been made clear. Presumably, 
many students in this area have accepted such a statement, for 
a review of the literature reveals no scarcity of research on 
this problem. 

In an effort to make the results of the research in this 
area easier to be assessed, studies bearing a relationship to 
particular personality factors will be discussed separately. 

Sociability and Extraversion . "Are underachievers too 
socially oriented? Are underachievers too outgoing in their 
relationships with others?" These questions have been 
considered by a large number of research workers, a sample of 
whose findings are given below. 

Wrenn and Humber (1941) reported that "Too much time 
spent on social activities" is one of several items found to 
differentiate between the study habits of high and low scholar¬ 
ship students, while Owens and Johnson (1949) determined, 
similarly, that social extraversion was the most important 
trait isolated in the make-up of underachievers. Serene (1952) 
reported that about 5 per cent of a group of underachievers 
studied listed excessive social activities as a causal factor 
in their underachievement. Basically the same result was 
noted by Shuttleworth (1927). The implication of the latter 
study seems to be that underachievers do not wish to be alone 
and frequently seek the companionship of others. A somewhat 







45 

similar finding was reported by Altus (194$), who determined 
that underachievers seem to desire to be T, on the go" a great 
deal; they are over-active, restless, and tend to become 
involved in many activities. Underachieving engineering 
students were found to have no difficulty in establishing 
rapport in social situations, according to Burgess (1956), but 
she found that such students are quite dependent in their 
attitudes toward others. Myers (1950) also noted that under¬ 
achievers are more preoccupied with the social aspects of life 
and are more active in social groups than are normal achievers. 

It was noted by Malloy (1954) that underachievers feel 
socially inadequate, but apparently there are few who support 
such a finding. A number of studies have, however, revealed 
that superior students or overachievers tend to be introverted 
rather than socially active. MacCurdy (1956) found that 
superior students tend to be ft socially limited," while Young 
and Estabrooks (1934) concluded that the "studious personality" 
very closely resembles the accepted picture of the "introverted 
personality." Eckert*s findings (1935) support substantially 
those given above, whereas a study by Hendrickson and Huskey 
(1932) suggests that the grade level of the student must be 
considered before any pronouncements regarding the relation¬ 
ship between extraversion and school success may be made. 

These writers note that in elementary school grades extra¬ 
version and achievement seem to be related, whereas in high 
school and college the opposite is the case, with the 




46 

introverted students making better academic grades, Bishton 
(1955) found that close peer relations, or an affinity for 
social activities, was a characteristic of children doing 
superior work in grade eight. Gowan reported a finding which 
is basically the same; namely, that achievement is related to 
socialization whereas underachievement is related to withdrawal 
and self-sufficiency. At least one researcher in this area has 
found no measurable relationship between the two factors under 
consideration. Russell (1934) noted that social qualities and 
leadership bear little relationship to school progress. 

The majority of findings of the studies referred to 
above support these conclusions: 

(1) Underachievers at high school and college level tend 
to be socially active, restless, and desirous of the company 

of others. 

(2) Underachievers are socially extraverted. 

(3) Overachievers at high school and college level tend 
to be introverted. 

(4) Overachievers at elementary school level tend to 
be extraverted. 

Subjectivity - Objectivity . References to a relationship 
between scores of academic achievement and those obtained on 
an objectivity-subjectivity scale are frequently noted in the 
literature. Objectivity is usually taken to mean the ability 
to remain relatively unmoved by the opinions or beliefs of 




■ J v 

. ; ; •: c ■ <v J -J ' '■ ' ■ : • • ' 1 -' —- 

:\ . v , • w , - Ui v.i' : Igj o 

; v '.• •;f v. « : ! a . i •> 

; > ' \: - ■ • J • ..... < J* •: ■ \ •’ >C 

* ( , v; J jj J:.). ■: '• ■ fivj n<. nln::n/J.nj:oc 


x r / J...; .' : • . ' • ’i 1 i 


• 

‘XI ■ 

. ‘ L 

J ( ■ . 


. 






; • L J 

f;n 

- 

■ 

•: ‘ . 1 






! . ’. 

> J 

.. 1 


;j y .. . •• J.j„o 0 1 nr. .!.< !■' :>$ s. '.Ll w n/.r/'V' 'JLi'H; ^ J. / | 

■ r. •.) : • ' . , ' - ; ' ' t V ' ■ ' ' 0 

' .V . •. ■ - \C . , , 




1 J 




: J-'-;, *; v 


•v'> V 


jyjo 


• Xl.yJl ' “ ■ . 

• ■ i \U i 'j ' -j : v U'oorcio 

■ . : . ' 




47 


others, or a tendency not to feel oneself completely bound 
by the usually accepted social conventions. The Guilford - 
Zimmerman Temperament Survey (1949), for example, measures 
objectivity-subjectivity along a thickskinnedness-hyper- 
sensitivity continuum. 

Hinkleman (1952) reported that positive correlations 
exist between school achievement and scores on the trait 
"opposite objectivity" (presumably "subjectivity"). Signifi¬ 
cant correlations were found between this trait and scores in 
mathematics, science, and total achievement. Bishton (1955) 
found that superior grade eight students revealed an ability 
to "stand alone" and evinced a belief in themselves, thus 
suggesting a degree of "objectivity" as defined above. Eckert 
(1935), however, determined that students who do well academ¬ 
ically reported greater disturbance after unkind remarks than 
did those students who were not academically excellent, 
suggesting a greater degree of "thinskinnedness" or subject¬ 
ivity in the good student. Gough (1953) also found that 
achieving students tend to accept conventions, whereas Altus 
(194$) and Morgan (1952) noted that underachievers were found 
to be "fearless," self-assertive, and relatively insensitive 
to the wishes of others. The findings of Shuttleworth (1927), 
however, run counter to those reported above, for he noted 
that failing students tend to be thinskinned and subjective. 

What conclusions may be deduced from the above findings? 








'I' 1 . 




i 


. 


j 




* 



tfu ;'?o 


. 


' ; : ■ , • '■ i: ■ 



‘ ; o :.\)'j:ovc ; q;'qo 

l { J r • . • • . 0 Cl 




■ 


< 


- 





1 l i 


t 


, 






C ' 








0 




• 1 . ’ - u" 

: ■.. ■: ! :; . ■. i / :'■ a • 




)k' 




) ri£JL.O 


- 










C v 















4& 


The consensus of opinion seems to be that achievement and 
subjectivity are related, with Bishton’s being the only 
dissenting voice. There is a possibility that, inasmuch as 
his study was carried out on an elementary school population, 
different factors are at work at this level than at the high 
school and college levels. Recalling that it was noted that 
the extraverted student in elementary school achieved, whereas 
the opposite was the case in the secondary school and college 
levels, perhaps it can be postulated that the achieving extra- 
verted, outgoing student in the elementary school tends to 
hold his own opinions quite highly and is not easily swayed 
from them by the beliefs of others; whereas, at a higher 
academic level the more introverted, achieving student is apt 
to be acquiescent to social opinion and tends to do what he 
is told. If one assumes the above to be a logical possibility, 
then it may be concluded that: 

(1) Objectivity and high academic achievement tend to 
be related in the elementary grade, 

(2) Subjectivity and high academic achievement are 
related in secondary school and college. 

Dominance or Social Ascendance . Various research workers 
have tried to show that dominance, or ascendance in social 
situations, is in some way related to academic achievement. 

Morgan (1952) noted that college achievers tend to make higher 
scores on dominance and social responsibility than underachievers, 





, t Of < < ; ! 

j ;■ : : ,i [. ; . , ! ' . .3 V ' J ' V ‘ ■./03 [ C! . 


I . > ■ ■ 

t 


)J . ; 




V 








. f iv .. 






<£.0 ■' \ ‘"i t.Oi C 




I 


U VO 



•; • . • '(■ > ••• ■ ;■. j 

1 r j j v : . ‘.0-1 ’/ !•' Oi ..J A V J > 

- ■ r. [ J ■ j v 5 ,o ! \* o. A.: • ■ S 'j. 003. d'fio i> < o o o 3 u OZ 


% ; - - . ■ . 8 

: ' ■ ■ ■ 

O j • ! \-j J if. l V ! •. : O. - . ' ’ O.. ' . \ •->'-L V 3A > - i ■ ' ) .. -/ 

■ • .0 1 O f oi ■ 0 ; . :) ! >; ... I ,'i" V,. : ■/: Of) '3.-. O i , , 

* . 1.1 

’ * ' ■ •' ‘ ’ ■ V' . ; : . 

‘ 1 -O i . r> : j : ' .< ; 0 0,1 j;. OVf'O 

• •.) : )■,: - , ■ ■:} t L’ ' ; / : 

■ 1 •' ", /..i :') j.’ i . ( .! J. } U 'v -£0: 




49 


while Gough (1953) reports substantially the same thing for a 
high school group. Stagner (1932) noted that high dominance 
and self-sufficiency scores are related to a level of achieve¬ 
ment closely proportional to one f s intelligence. That is, 
students making high scores on such scales are not under¬ 
achieving. Goche (1954) developed a discriminant function 
for the purpose of distinguishing between survival and attrition 
groups in engineering and noted that ascendance-submission 
scores, as measured by the Guilford - Martin (1943) scale, were 
the third most important factor contributing to the make-up 
of this function. In an early study, however, Bender (1923) 
noted that significant differences in ascendance-submission 
scores are in the direction of submissiveness on the part 
of those students who are doing well academically. 

Because of the contradictory nature of the findings one 
is forced to conclude that: 

(1) The direction of the relationship between scores 
of dominance or social ascendance and academic achievement has 
not been completely clarified, although the consensus of 
opinion seems to be that high academic achievement and high 
dominance scores are positively related. 

Energy « Relatively little work has been done on the 
relationship between academic achievement and "energy” level f 
as determined by the use of certain standardized tests * 

Stevens has recently thrown some light on this area, however. 





• . ; U." X . >X(Xi X,' ■ X' C- XXX T X ( xO X^XXo' Xi.XiL’X 

, - , :. . / < x x - :i 

OK ' x . - x 

q * : . \x 

>;• ; . o .. •.x ■ i,o x xioxa fl; ;' : ■ : xru x . x; x x:x: 

■ , , ■ i ' , . ■ - ... - ' / . • 

■ . ■. ■ ■ . . ! ■ . ■ ■ • 

... .. • ■ •;x x xx L x > i: : ' -ix 

' ? ; . v , .. . - . / • 'x,. ■ . . • . c . \ 

. • . ' • • : ' $• X 

‘ 

.. t ‘, ' .. < . . ' . ; . J ; ; ‘ ■ ’' : 

fiv ~x. vj '' ■:. ll . 3oi 

c ■. • ■. . ■ ic ■ . c . ■ ■ . 

. 

<-■ .... .. ' - ... ■ \j x , yx , xy • ;,y.on ax V..•• .xx xoxx 

: . . . H/In 33 \ ' 

•x -ioo y X ..xxjy-viu,} Xo nu i: Jxxx-xx.. xy.:. : .(,;j 

, V .. ■/ i '.o:. :xix ’ .Xyxxrx. X G •^ ■.xX.VcX 1c 

j" ,x x-x , ’■ .rxx t . x’x y.. •... Ux •; <o ' 

id i . ' X . ■■ .' 

. . - x X •. ■ -X : X. o r 


* , 

‘■'XX- • ; ■' ... , . ;■ ■ •> ' : . x ,:0 (Xr,X’V :X. : X;-V. 

j Xi ; : ix }) M j: 1 . X 

e '■ ; x( ci‘-:,cxti. . X(X.X X ' X : X* XX •; :.X.l SE0 


He noted that non-achievers tended to give higher salience 
scores to "General Activity" as measured on the "G" scale of 
the Guilford-Zimmerman Temperament Survey than did achievers. 

The latter group gave first position to this trait, in 
salience, whereas the non-achievers tended to stress those 
traits which emphasize social interaction, giving a very low 
salience to the "G" scale. Inasmuch as the Manual of the 
Guilford-Zimmerman states that this scale measures "production", 
"efficiency," and "vitality" it might be assumed that interest 
in doing well on such a scale would be desirable, if not 
necessary, for academic achievement. It was noted by Stevens, 
after the Guilford-Zimmerman had been administered, that the 
achieving group made higher scores on the "G" scale than did 
the non-achievers, showing that scale scores in this area 
tended to be lower for those students who gave "G" a lower 
salience and higher for those who saw it as being more import¬ 
ant. It should be mentioned that the students in Stevens 1 
study had the scales of the Guilford-Zimmerman explained 
to them before they actually took the Survey and rated each 
scale for salience at this time. 

Stagner (1932) has noted that the capacity for sustained 


. .Salient traits may be viewed in self-concept studies 
as those characteristics of an individual which receive special 
emphasis in his conception of himself and are most clearly 
differentiated. . ." (Stevens, 1956, p.49)« 













• o: =.■■■.' ~ 

* on itUti I) ; i 

.croc, o m 


■ ;.j j ' . 1 


as'xooe 



• j • ~ .. 



• K > 

V.: . . ' < ' ''' ■ " ■ 

■ c ' . : ; '• : ■ ' ‘ tial.dv > l 




on 




ii i i. 








l ■ \ 




hLu co i: ..:.a.as-no J..I y r ?.nxab as 

.: c 


; x 

o .. "v . ' ■ - ■- a ■ - 

: J J:. iOOi'J' ‘ic/i ’x^V/cl :r.; Cj f. 0:i,ri 

' 0 \ r I - L'i It 6 ... M 

. ■■ . . . 


■ . : 


; ■ / ' , ; : . "-0 v 


: 

■ 





51 


and diligent application is a characteristic of successful 
students, but it is difficult to say whether the traits 
indicated by him are comparable to those measured by the ”G” 
scale of the Guilford-Zimmerman. 

On the basis of these findings it may be concluded that: 

(1) Successful students give a higher salience score to 
a scale measuring n general energy” level than do poorer 
students* 

(2) Successful students make higher scores on a scale 
measuring TT general energy” level than do non-successful 
students* 

Restraint * The relationship of restraint to school and 
college success has attracted the attention of at least a 
small number of research workers. In the study referred to 
elsewhere, Goche (1954) found that rhatymia or impulsiveness 
(lack of restraint) placed as being the fifth most important 
factor, out of six, in contributing to the make-up of a 
discriminant function which differentiated between success 
and attrition groups in university. Gough (1953) also noted 
that self-control was a characteristic of successful college 
students, and Hinkleman (1952) reported that the correlation 
between self-mastery, as opposed to impulsiveness, and school 
grades was .41. Stevens (1956) noted that achievers made 
higher scores on the restraint scale of the Guilford-Zimmerman 
than did underachievers. He suggests that the latter students 




. 








f 

l 





a CO VL 


i 


' : i 


( \ ‘ 



t 




i 




>■ i ; r; 


■ ;• 




) - 


c 


; 






.! 


t 

i ■' i. 


t 


f 


c 


o:; r a 


> i 




52 

do poorly on this scale because of a strong preoccupation with 
a need for immediate satisfaction. 

While there is a possibility that the instruments used 
by the various researchers above do not all measure precisely 
the same thing, the findings, as reported, enable one to 
conclude: 

(1) Underachievers tend to make low scores on a scale 
measuring restraint. 

(2) High restraint scores are characteristic of those 
students who do well academically. 

Masculinity-Femininity Scores . Some research has been 
done in an effort to determine whether there is any relation¬ 
ship between masculinity-femininity scores and academic 
success. Morgan (1952) found no differences on the 
masculinity-femininity scale of the Strong Vocational Interest 
Blank when he compared scores made by groups of achieving and 
non-achieving college male sophomores, whereas Altus (194$), 
utilizing the MMPI, noted that scores of male underachievers 
reveal uncertainty, extraversion, and femininity. Kimball' 
(1952) did a study on a limited number of male underachievers 
in a clinical situation and found that certain feminine 
characteristics were typical of this group. A study by Clarke 
and McGregor (1955) revealed a correlation of .21 between raw 
M-F scores of the MMPI and achievement in certain university 
courses, for a group of Alberta teachers. Armstrong (1955) 












>;K* ; i 


i .[- ‘XJ' 




: u vi'xooc; . oi 













J i'l 







. •). 


■ 








:;r i • 




? 














■ 


:■ ' 


: ! '■ ... ' . ' • r. i : i ; ! > :• V. 

L , MO. V. ••• (. I ! M M ' O ,U> ' I / . - - - : 


■ .L . 










V • 


ti 








•.) :, n 


- . • o ■ 1 M;. ' ■ CIO : C-: Jo Oi ■[{ 

. : MO : < ■ o j. •" , . I; M ; ; 0 hi 

' ■. > 



53 


found that underachieving boys, at least at certain high 
school levels, seem to have preferences for activities quite 
closely related to those preferred by girls and suggested 
that more research be done on the masculinity-femininity 
scores of underachievers. The above findings are somewhat 
at variance with those reported by Bolander (1947)* He deter¬ 
mined that male underachievers tend to make high masculinity 
scores on the MMPI, while Stevens (1956), using the Guilford- 
Zimmerman, came to the same conclusion. Stevens suggested 
that high same-sex scores for underachievers may well 
represent an attempt at compensation. 

It is obvious from a consideration of the above studies 

that: 

(1) The nature of the relationship between scores on 
masculinity-femininity scales on personality inventories and 
academic grades has not been clarified. 

Emotional Stability . In an early study, Stagner (1932, 
p. 653) noted, !t . . . High emotionality and high self-suffiency 
lead to lower achievement than would be predicted from intel¬ 
ligence scores. . . . T? An early study by Keep and Whiteside 
(1930) seems to add considerable support to Stagner 1 s statement. 
They noted that in those children in grades six and eight who 
are identified as being conspicuously nervous and emotional, 
there is a "strong and reliable tendency rf to average more than 
one year retarded in age grade standing, nearly two years 






. - - . . .1 : : ' V* j: ,t'i a ■ .U - ri:i LL^‘ 








. , ■: r ‘ < •' - j ■ ; 


. aia aO Or a, a oo naa. aa;;;r'l . J&£V 




* 

■ 








: . c v a . : ■ < • ; : r - •’ - 

. 


. 

: 

« 


< • . , . ; .• t ... , , . 

- . = ' • « . • ’• v 

- . . . 

i 




54 


lower in mental and educational age, and some eighteen months 
lower in I.Q. as compared with their more stable classmates, 

Hadley and Kennedy (1949), Edelston (1950), and Boyce (1956) 
report substantially the same results as do Stagner and Keep 
and Whiteside. Chapman (195$) reported that although approxi¬ 
mately the same percentages of achievers and underachievers in 
a grade ten language group classify themselves in two extreme 
categories on a rating scale measuring emotionality, teachers 1 
ratings of the same two classes differ greatly. Instructors 
place only 10 per cent of the achieving group in the "highly 
emotional" categories, whereas 27 per cent of the under¬ 
achieving group were so classified. It would appear, then, 
that something more than one out of every four underachievers 
is seen by his teachers as being quite "emotional." Hinkelman 
(1954) also reports that "composure" is quite highly related 
to achievement in the academic situation. 

Not all the research in this area suggests that under¬ 
achievers tend to be less emotionally stable than their 
achieving peers. Griffiths (1945, p* 366) concluded, 

". . . Men with very unsatisfactory adjustment scores tend 
toward higher grades than men of excellent adjustment scores f , .” 
He noted also that the difference was not a significant one. 

In an early piece of research, Young (1927) concluded that at 
least one-half of the failures in a particular college gradu¬ 
ating class were in no way emotionally unstable. 

From the above analysis of the research done in this 











■). ' ■. 


, 

< ' ; t-V' ■ 


, ' ••• -.1 , : 


- . C‘.( )•»’ t - ■■ ■ . A •• • X “• . i ' V 

. 


« 






! 

- 

t ' ■. : : ■ ■ 

. . is " i 


. 


: ; j ) 






5 ■ ? :r< 







h ;o ■ l. m ' ;j':i ■ LI . j'i:: ■ 


. ' 


» . • 





. , • >v 

, ■ , ...... .• •; ;ido 

. . . 

■ : ■:■■■:■; •; : . < ■. a 

< • 

- 

* ’ : ) M V : ' - ■, l : .[ 0 ' fliJ 



55 


area it may be concluded that: 

(1) The direction of the relationship between 
emotional stability and scholarship is not clear,, 

(2) Teachers characterize more underachievers than 
achievers as being somewhat emotionally unstable. 

Self-Concept . Bills, Vance, and McLean (1951) have 
defined self-concept as "the traits and values which the 
individual has accepted as definitions of himself.May we 
assume that the way in which the underachiever sees himself 
differs, in any marked degree, from the way in which normal 
achievers or overachievers see themselves? Do underachievers 
have a more acceptable self-concept than overachievers, or is 
the opposite the case? Is it possible to detect any difference 
between the self-concepts of these two classes of students? 

Walsh (1955) recently carried out a comprehensive study 
in itfhich she worked with twenty boys, arranged in two groups. 
They were classed as low achievers and adequate achievers 
and were selected from grades two through five. She used 
the Driscoll Playkit (1952) and noted the roles projected to 
the boy doll provided. The following conclusions were 
reached regarding those children who were not operating at 
their maximum capacity in the school situation: 

(1) They consistently differed from the adequate 
achievers in portraying the boy doll as being restricted in 
action. 








O': tO 


. .0 


<X;.no 9 




; j 


f ' ' 

\ ' I 


oLl 3;k), i - o. 




J ! iOO r* 


) 


; 9 


) 



f j: on 


D 


' ■. 


. 






‘ i ■ ■' v O' 


i • -J 


0. -1 c 


. c ■ ;• o oil j 






om o- 




CO ■ J.r.iO 


Xoo. 0 



(. '.r (. 


II 




I 


09 . O 


i 




|:C,L U O". 


xri 


c ■ '■ 


c 


) jo.d b.r 


0 


f , 9 <:■’ X ('J 


( ■ i ’ ;■ 'X-XXXo j j 


'/ i'.i’-i Xo 


IXi. 


.3 ■■xli’ 




i: oioo 


/ 




o 


iC c 




56 

(2) They were unable to express their feelings appropri¬ 
ately and adequately. 

(3) They tended to show the boy figure as being 
criticized, rejected, and isolated. 

(4) The boy figure was seen to be acting defensively, 
through compliance, evasion, or negativism. 

Reeder (1955) noted that children with a poor self-concept 
tend to be more frequently classed as having problem behaviour 
and are poorer achievers than are those students whose self- 
concept is seen to be more satisfactory. Calhoun (1956) found 
that underachievers have very vague concepts of their own 
potential and of the appropriateness of their achievement. 

Such students, he believed, lacked ,f realistic self-appraisal. tT 

Chapman (195&) found that both achieving and under¬ 
achieving high school students rated themselves as having 
very stable personalities. The ratings of the former, however, 
were more apt to agree with the ratings supplied by their 
teachers than were the ratings of the latter. The under¬ 
achievers were noted by their teachers as "rather quiet, 11 
TT rather sensitive," "slow to adapt to change," and "inclined 
to give up too easily." 

Bishton (1955), working with children characterized by 
superior academic achievement, reported that they tended to 
believe in themselves and see themselves as "capable of 
standing alone." This would seem to suggest that these 
students see themselves as having a satisfactory self-concept. 




57 


From these results of research it may be concluded: 

(1) Underachievers lack the ability to appraise 
themselves realistically. 

(2) The self-concept ratings of underachievers are 
less apt to agree with ratings supplied by teachers than 
are ratings of achieving students. 

(3) Low achievers tend to see themselves as being 
criticized, isolated, and rejected. 

(4) Low achievers see a need for themselves to act 
defensively in their relations with others. 

(3) Low achievers tend to see themselves as being 
restricted in their movement. 

(6) Low achievers may not be able to express themselves 
adequately and appropriately. 

Level of Aspiration . Level of aspiration has been 
defined as t? . . . the level of future performance in a famil 
iar task which one explicitly undertakes to reach. . . . n 
Frank, 1955, p. 120). Inasmuch as level of aspiration is 
commonly presumed to be influenced by past successes and • 
failures, it might be imagined that characteristically diffe 
rent levels of aspiration could be noted for those students 
who have done well in school as compared with those students 
who have not. Has research shed any light on this problem? 

Frank (1955) is quite pessimistic about the possibility 
of noting significant differences in levels of aspiration 

















)l.K 


' 











( 
















; 


■ ■«: ). i.,i i = r; : ) j ) .. .. 


:. 1 7 •: 


^ ^ i, 7 I 7 ‘ j. ■■ VT> 1:j 


/ 






- - * j • V 




7 


' (V y' . ' 




: if. ’j 

' 












ir 


- 


58 

among students who are characterized as having varying degrees 
of academic success. He notes that many investigators had 
hoped to find evidence of such personality traits as self- 
confidence and ambition accompanying a high level of aspira¬ 
tion and such characteristics as realism, cautiousness, and 
fear of failure accompanying a low level of aspiration. He 
determined, however, that attempts to support such impressions 
by conventional statistical methods have been only partly 
successful. 

Jucknat (193&) reports that characteristic differences 
could be noted between the levels of aspiration of successful 
and unsuccessful students. She found that students who had 
failure experiences were inclined not to raise their level 
of aspiration on a subsequent trial, whereas those students 
whose efforts had met with success very frequently stated 
that they would do even better on their next attempt. Sears 
(1940) found that discrepancy scores (between levels of 
success expected and success attained) for successful students 
were closely grouped in a small positive range, whereas the 
failure group revealed generally larger discrepancy scores and 
greater variability in the discrepancy. Sears concluded that 
there is a tendency for the discrepancy to be large in 
individuals who have experienced continual failure in con¬ 
nection with the experimental task. Basically the same 
findings have been reported by Anderson and Brandt (1939)* 









. 


■ 




c 




1 > ' 


o M- 






! , 





c 


r 




: >01 0 




!.-) \i .:0 «> 


I 








V 


) " ■;' • J J J 'J IiCD 






■ : 1 : 


j 




> 








> 




/ 




c 


i : 








*Wx 




' 

<■ I ■ > ■■ ! W 


/ . noj 


j •> 




l 


K> : 


- 






'J . ! I 


* 


■ ■ : i. 1 : ■ i.V ! 1 ,! 


:) l 


•j • 







/ • c ,i. ■: 


.1 





( f x ... ' ;j-ic ■ . < 




59 

Stevens (1956) reported that 72 per cent of a group of 
underachieving students tended not to estimate their ACE 
scores correctly, with 42 per cent overestimating their intel¬ 
ligence and the remaining 25 per cent underestimating their 
scores on this test. He observed, ”. . . that the experiences 
of academic failure may have acted as a threat to the non¬ 
achieving students and thus aroused defensive behaviour which 
then disturbed their own accounts of their intellectual 
abilities. . . .” (p. 91.) 

Stevens attributes overestimation of intelligence on 
the part of underachievers as being due to a compensatory 
defensive behavior set up to maintain and enhance self-esteem 
of intelligence that has been impaired by academic failure. 
Underestimation of intellectual ability may be seen as a 
lowering of one’s concept of intellectual ability in order 
to set up protective defenses against future threat of failure. 

On the basis of the limited number of studies given here 
which bear on the relationship between level of aspiration and 
academic achievement, it may be concluded that: 

(1) One’s level of aspiration in a given task is 
influenced by previous experiences of success or failure. 

(2) Poor students tend (a) to set levels of aspiration 
which are considerably at variance with their present levels 
of performance; (b) to do poorly at estimating their intel¬ 
lectual ability, with the majority overestimating their 
competence in this area. 


. : . j : ;r;i, ■! . ;; s,~: :■ ■, X c ; rI n sirtt)0 

, j ,j -V ,'ii : I . • i: Qi'.i-.i'' "i i 

. . . , ■ ■ 






' J. > ■ jj'C; ’j\?XX\ 




0 ■ C 

I - - . . ■ • ■ . - 

1 

7.0 V.o -Vi.-t 

. -- • •• . ■. . i.- - . : \ . ■ ■ , - ; v ■ ’ ' - : 5 ; 

■ 


‘ j v 1 ■ ■ ■ j. •, a •■- : -• • -‘f 










j o..-, 'jo on j U: i -Oil;? ‘.re .. ■ 0 i'I-'j 


i X) 

. . . ■ , ; ; 0 „ • O : .. O) ] S , !M. ■' ' L ^ 1 - •' ! • 1 

-.1. •' o:i i , -oi '-■■■- v • * 

. 

, . 

■ . ... . . *.( , ' \J : o . M. : c ■. ' :-B X 0 


60 


Relations with Peers of Both Sexes . Are the relations 
which underachievers enjoy with their peers significantly 
different from those enjoyed by normal achievers or over¬ 
achievers? A fair amount of research has been done in an 
effort to clarify this problem. It was found by Granzow 
(1954), when working with a group composed of overachievers, 
normal achievers, and underachievers in reading, that under¬ 
achievers were not as well accepted by their peers as were the 
former two groups. The same results were noted when a popu¬ 
lation of Canadian underachievers was studied (Barrett, 1957). 
Chapman (195$), working with a second Canadian group, reported 
that underachievers are less inclined to rate themselves as 
being very friendly. When given a check list measuring 
"friendliness", fewer underachievers than achievers selected 
either of the top two choices on the scale. Only 55 per cent 
of underachievers checked one of these choices as applying to 
themselves; 6$ per cent of achievers did so. Malloy (1954) 
also reports that underachievers in university dated less fre¬ 
quently than did their peers and rated themselves as having 
less ability in meeting new people and in participating in 
social activities. On the other hand, Robinowitz (1956) found 
that overachievers had a greater number of ambivalent responses 
in the important areas of family acceptance and peer acceptance 
than did most students. It was Robinowitz*s belief that, 
because of doubtful acceptance in these areas, these students 
had put forth an extra effort in the academic situation to 








i l 



















,o. Jv. > -xk/s/ : a.r \xJ/o' J r> 

Cik : = " / - :K : f ) 












' ... ■ V . , 


t 


. . . 

. 

r :» ■ ' -v: , , ( 

f . j . . . ' ■ i) I 

. f *, y,.L 






i 


( 




3 fH 








i ■ ... vo si::.o ^xaimu ih’iK! nOBJ 

. : ... : . i ' . O 111 ; .‘f ) . ; ‘"J i. ", 0 ■' ; > i ' : V> ^ ' 

• ■ .. . Jo i i : •' . > • " 



■ > . . : ; J, * j. j 


61 


insure acceptance there. Finally, Musselman (1942) found a 
negative correlation between achievement and certain person¬ 
ality measures, the most marked negative relationship existing 
between achievement grades and adjustment to the opposite sex. 

A survey of the above findings reveals a considerable 
amount of disagreement as to the nature of the relationship 
which exists between relations with one’s peers and academic 
achievement. The only conclusion tenable therefore is that: 

(1) It is impossible to make any authoritative statement 
regarding the relationship which exists between the degree to 
which one enjoys suitable relations with one’s peers and the 
degree to which he is academically successful. 

How Time is Spent . A considerable amount of time and 
research has been devoted to the question, ”Is there a rela¬ 
tionship between the amount of time a student works for pay 
each week and the grades which he obtains in school or college?” 

One study in this area reported that scholastically 
poorer high school students were working four or five times as 
many hours a week for pay as were academically superior 
students (Anspaugh, 1953)* It was concluded, however, that 
while little outside employment was reported by superior 
students there was no clear indication that doing a moderate 
amount of work for pay had any effect upon school grades. 

Umstattd (1932) is inclined to agree with the above 
findings, but adds that while a reasonable amount of work may 









( . • . ■' . VI i.-i •■■■■> • V' • Li • 

. 

. , I ■; ■ v .i : /.'W c> ■■ • Mll£5B9£S 

j . ' : ‘ : : 

.. ; ' r J:' .v >. : ■ 

j .. ■ ' 

1 

; ' : Cj U ' - ; 

v . . C) 1 * ■ : . ' ' ,. • ' - 

9/iw' • i'• .> •>( ■ o r : ’"/ j.• <. .1: 


s : . ■: ■■ 


■■ ' ' ■' ■ . 

■ ! . • ; J. ■ c i ,■ j.J ' .. • . " v 1 1 V Y* i "> '' 1 f ■ 




. 


' ■. • ... . .: 

. ■ : , p-: i . ■ ■■■* ‘ ■< 


■ 

C ■ ■ c • . . ... 1 t 

■ 


.. . ■ . .. 




62 


not have an adverse effect on students 1 grades, "excessive 
employment,” especially during the first two years of college, 
tends to result in lower grades. Dunkelberger (1935) and 
Uhrbrock (1931) report findings which suggest that outside 
employment adversely affects achievement scores, but Carter 
and McGinnis (1953) report that working for pay seems to have 
little if any effect upon a student’s grades. Chapman (195$) 
also noted that the amount of time spent upon after-school 
paying jobs is not significantly different for members of 
achieving and underachieving groups. 

While, once again, the results of the research which has 
been done in this area is not completely in agreement, it may 
be concluded that: 

(1) Working for pay has no adverse effects upon school 
grades unless the number of hours worked may be classed as 
”excessive.” 

Hobbies . Can the way in which the student spends his 
leisure time be shown to bear a relationship to the level of 
academic achievement attained? MacCurdy (1956) reported that 
superior students tend to have solitary interests and report 
that their hobbies are studying and reading. Not all researchers 
have supported the view that superior students have hobbies 
that are solitary and not competitive. Armstrong (1955) carried 
out an intensive investigation of the interests and social 
adjustment of underachievers as compared to those of normal 












. -i V 

: ' • ■ J. t • '• . ! 












- 



. 


' 




, . V. ' v J ' ' • ‘ ' 






. 

i i : . ■- - t \ ' « 


■ ... • h ■ • 6 




: ... m: . 


• i • / ; n 


. . . ■ >: 


' .5 ■ ; • ' - - . 

- ■ k: •: 

■ ■/ - . ■ I ■ ■' 1 

, 

. v , ;j: ■ 

/ ' ^ - : ^ 




achievers at two grade levels in high school. She noted that 
more normal achievers than underachievers had hobbies which 
might be called "creative," such as painting and woodworking, 
whereas underachievers tended to enjoy "watching" and 
"listening" activities, as well as "outdoor" ones. The 
"outdoor" activities were divided into two categories, those 
that could be carried on by oneself, and those that required 
teamwork and cooperation from others. A difference, signifi- 
cant at the .01 level, was noted to the effect that under¬ 
achievers were more interested in the former type of outdoor 
activity. Also significant was the difference between the 
number of underachievers and normal achievers who reported 
"collecting" interests, with the former evincing more interest 
in this type of hobby. Some non-significant differences 
suggest that more underachievers enjoy non-competitive sports 
and are almost completely alone in their interest in car 
racing. 

Chapman (1953) revealed that there is a significant 
difference between the amount of time spent by underachievers 
and achievers on their hobbies. This difference, significant 
at the .01 level, shows that the former students spend a 
greater amount of time on such pursuits than do the latter 
students. Eckert (1935) and other researchers have reported 
that while underachievers tend to have interests which do not 
make great demands upon their ability to concentrate and 
attend for longer periods of time, achievers 1 hobbies are quite 




. ■ : , : v- ’ ' : vyr. yv;:i - v 1 

; ■ : ’• >■- - / ’ ■ 7 1 ’• j ' 
fz ; s ' • 

i ■- m: f.v.’'yuxrtoJul, 

■; b - v' j ' ' ■ -J-'j.c ■ 

i i’ V; . ■■■ v. r ■ ■ L :} J :-S 


• ; .. s •’ 






; 




■ 


■V ■ 


_ o o’.‘v ;i 3 f ); i b S?ij 

' 

• •i ni : * • ■ ■ c 

* ■ ■ 

- i . i ‘ 1 

■ ■ . : ■ 

. 1 . 

.uoo 7 0( : DiK-. ISl’l : X 

i no no >v n ••• * bn 


b V. •.!_ 5. i. I , y >... V i. o' 


• : • ■ : : . J 

t; • , , ; ‘ , fi j [ () «)’ 


' 


. : . 


•/ ’ . u ; ■ 


■ 1 .■■ i ■ •. ■ ■ ■ - j * 1 ^ • 


j 


T . o 




■ . ' ( . . j ■ LLj J 

x .. n/.t u .• on v. ii on I ■ tx ... J i■< >“ 5ii 
. y. ' L.i a..-.' on' n:.'y . L. ■ n (■ o y .:.r l tr->:Jr. 


64 


apt to be of such an ’’intellectual” nature. 

From a review of the above findings it may be concluded 

that: 

(1) Underachievers tend to spend more time on their 
hobbies than do achievers. 

(2) The consensus of opinion is that underachievers 
tend to enjoy hobbies which are not creative and which can 
be enjoyed alone. 

Vocational Goal . Some research has been done in an 
effort to determine whether the degree of clarity with which 
a student perceives his future occupational goal is related 
to success in school or college. 

It was noted by Carter and McGinnis (1952) that having 
a ’’definite vocational choice” was one of the factors which 
predicted college success at the .01 level of confidence, 
while McQuary (1954) reported that college underachievers 
were apt to be n very uncertain” about vocational choice. 

College overachievers, on the other hand, were relatively more 
certain as to their vocational interests. Clearness and 
definiteness of vocational goals were also reported by Gowan 
(1957) as being positively related to the factor of academic 
achievement. Gowan also reports, in an earlier study (1955), 
that gifted high school underachievers not infrequently express 
an interest in a vocational goal which will cause them to be 
free from their parents. 






« . J 














. ] 





< 














'.£ v • > • ‘ 




65 


From the above evidence it may be concluded that: 

(1) Clearness or definiteness of vocational goal is 
positively related to academic achievement. 

(2) Underachievers may be influenced in their choice of 
a vocational goal by a desire to be free from their parents. 

Is there a possibility that the measured interests of 
the underachiever will not be in agreement with expressed 
interests? This was the question to which Armstrong (1955) 
addressed herself, and she concluded that, when utilizing the 
Kuder Preference Record ( Vocational ), occupations selected by 
underachievers at the secondary school level were not likely 
to agree with the dominant interest pattern as shown by this 
instrument. She stated that tT . . . the degree to which voca¬ 
tional goals are in agreement with dominant interests as 
measured by the Kuder Preference Record ( Vocational ) is a 
factor in school achievement. . . . Tf (p. 10$.) 

This finding was statistically significant. Armstrong 
noted that more underachievers suggested that they had chosen 
their vocational goals at the suggestion of others, usually 
their parents. 

From the above findings the following conclusions may be 

drawn: 

(1) The measured interests of underachievers will not be 
in agreement with their expressed interests. 

(2) More underachievers are influenced by others in their 
choice of a vocational goal than are students whose achievement 
is in keeping with their measured intelligence. 















; i v 






. 










. 

. f ’ ■ - 

■ . c C v\i ' 

■ \iit ’ 1 

, , , ; . , j . ... ■ • V J 

, ;/ } ■ • ' ' 




; ■ .;f ' > 


1 Mu i 


M . ■ uv :--,o t 

■, <u; ■ ■ * ■. • h,: - , !■; '..Vi' VJV: ; 

• " ;£ ■ * *' * 




. ‘X 


1 i':' J‘3 : ■ 1 

I 

j -. \ci 1 owBrg 

; , ,• , ; : ■ 'I'- . : 

' 


:V vv .i i ,: > 






i vi 

i . / V - : ' % - 

„ , . ■ ■ ' 




vt>c : 


: i 








: . 





' 


■ 


■ ■ 1 ■. • ■ l . i •!; ' o ■ ■ ! :; ' - ‘ ' : 

. „c i i 



66 


Socio-Economic Status<> Chapin (192$, Po 99) has defined 
socio-economic status as,” . . .the position that an individual 
or family occupies with reference to the prevailing average 
standards or cultural possessions, effective income, material 
possessions, and participation in group activity of the 
community. . . ,f 

Few other possible correlates of school achievement have 
been investigated so thoroughly as socio-economic status; and 
while some contradiction is noted in the findings, it will be 
of interest and value to give consideration to some of the 
better known studies that have been done in this area. 

In a recent article Havighurst (1957) suggested that 
poor socio-economic status is prejudicial to the development of 
talent, a statement which seems to find considerable agreement 
among others who have investigated this problem. Friedhoff 
(1955) found, when working with a grade eight sample, that the 
correlation between measures of socio-economic status of 
parents and the grades obtained by their children ranged from 
•37 to o47, while Gough (1949) also reports a slight positive 
relationship between these two variables. A significant relation¬ 
ship between socio-economic status and achievement in four 
areas of learning was reported by Coleman (1940 o ) He concluded, 
however, that one could not state positively whether superior 
achievement was the result of high I a Q« or of high socio¬ 
economic status, for in this study it was found that the 





■. vS 


\ * • C '■■■■! 

0 *; :i' : : - oo ..c. .oo oc 

i -J j; / . j: ... - o- :■ -L - 

( •; , * 'Lj 1 r c v ‘ OAu\t 

:■ : - V' - ; '■ • 

\ .' ■ 1 

5 

' o . ;j v.c- y^-Cv xooo cut' 

• ■ ..T.':.; - o.o.'.o .. 

■ . - - • 

«&£ j r,:, ■; ; j’ ( ( • J';;i' 

0 J.' :u'> ( '0. . ■ OO v 




t ■ 

; in. joi l one a 

. ■■ : 1 ; C l 7 10. 0 OrC O’OOO 

Uih ru ' 1 :il : • - 1 ' '• - 

. (VCCI) 

j ■ : ■■ ■ 

' V i '■ ■' V'-'-l: 

• r ■, . '■ : : ■ c , oik o j. ot|l *.?. 

• " L ‘.lO j X. 01 v 0 *'• :.'i. 

... o ..... J.:i- 0"; , JnO 

. 

0 i pel' c sJ$l V OCO :.;7 0 ti O i '( ‘ | 

o < . 

•. ■> • ■ • < - ( •• - 

jj; c v-o .- 

(■;. l 0 CO OC"XrOOO;il .0 HvVCu'JO _ HOJ-Ci oX.0: •' 

i :c, ,o o' .. .oo 

?•■ •/;i j'. . o ■ .M ; -tu ; o 

•• v.;' b aobr/i;- oo;.< bno 

. o . - -, ■ O' 

• 

•. oi - , ;J: Cr 1.0’ji " 0 0 1 . ‘ ; 

s - 1 ' * '' 

.. , ;j ; c j .. < . ; ■ •’ ■ ■ : } ■' 

* 

, 


'0 




67 

average I.Q. for the groups was positively related to measures 
of socio-economic status. Edmiston and McBain (1945) cast 
some doubt on the findings of certain other workers in this 
area by reporting different results for measures of social 
background than for measures of economic background. They 
determined that a positive correlation might be found between 
measures of school achievement and social background but that 
economic background scores might well correlate negatively 
with measures of academic success. It would appear that one 
might be guilty of faulty thinking when it is assumed that 
scores of social and economic status are necessarily highly 
related. 

In a recent study Chapman (195$) noted that an over¬ 
whelming number of achieving grade ten language students had 
fathers whose occupations are in the "professional" class. 

On the other hand, the greatest percentage of underachieving 
language students was concentrated in semiprofessional class 
homes, with the extremes of professional and laboring classes 
contributing roughly the same percentage of underachievers. 

He also noted that more male and female underachievers reported 
having mothers who worked outside the home than did members of 
the achieving group. 

Engle (1934) utilized a tri-partite division of students 
based upon the types of homes from which they came. At one 
extreme were students from "better homes"; at the other 



0 X. 


■: ■ 


, . ' j:-. - < 

. •, ,-*•< j 
















■ r, • .1 V;'- :• '■) j.: ,'i I . 

j.! tv o :.0j < w ;- 0 ' Lriui o 

' O . ' ■ ' " : • 










■;: • j. ■ ' • 1 •. ■ 'V: •» 




' 


. i j ; 'L 

" fl 




;.} o;v ' ■ > ■ 


V : '■') 




j 



' ■ ''' - ; c '• • 

i'J' ■ • :Y ) J V p V "I ; • f' 




(. 0 ; 




' 


: 


















6S 


extreme were found those students who were classed as being 
Underprivileged, Tr their families actually being in receipt 
of financial aid from the local authorities. A third group 
of students was unselected as to home background and was 
composed of an equal number of boys and girls. In comparing 
these three groups for grades made on four different types of 
curricula, it was noted that the children from fT better class" 
homes did work that was superior to that done by the members 
of either of the other two groups of students, while the 
unselected group placed second. A similar trend in intelligence 
quotients was also noted and might very well explain the above 
results. 

McQuary (1954) reported findings which are considerably 
at variance with those given above. Working with a university 
sample, he found that the overachiever is more apt to have had 
a less fortunate home background than the underachiever. He 
noted that a smaller percentage of the fathers of overachievers 
were currently employed in professional and semiprofessional 
occupations and also that the mothers of overachievers were, 
before marriage, employed to a lesser extent than were the 
mothers of underachievers, Eckert (1935), also working with 
a college group, obtained results which substantiated those of 
McQuary. White and Nemzek conducted a study on the relation¬ 
ship between indigency and achievement and noted that indigent 
students tended to make slightly higher scores on most school 
subjects than did non-indigent students. It was suggested 






i ';r:v.J 






. 


c 




. 









) 


i ■ 




l 




H ! 


. . " 


. • 








. 

; . \ ! ■ • ; /: 


Tv I ,)xi 0 mi 


■ " : ■ ) 


l 


’ 












‘ 


, ■!..) f •.• i > ■: : '• 3.v- <■. ■- 


■t 


’ 


t 






!« 




S 


' - ' 










V 


I 


i r i ■ • ') 






v< 






:■■■ ;j. 




a. 


69 


that indigency might, in some cases, be a factor making for 
increased effort (1939). 

The findings of a third group of researchers suggest 
that the academic achievement of a child and the socio-economic 
status of his home are in no way related. Ford (1957) and 
Nemzek (1940) both reported no significant relationship between 
the grades made by a student and the occupational status of his 
father. 

Before leaving this particular topic it might be well to 
note the ifork done by Armstrong (1955). In a recent study she 
noted that many underachievers had parents whose occupations 
fell into the "sales and service" category, and she suggested 
that a study of such occupations be made in order to determine 
whether the occupation of the parent tends to influence the 
attitude of the child toward school and school work. Such a 
possibility is an interesting one and might well be investigated. 

Is there a possibility that the socio-economic level of 
the child influences the grades given him by his teacher? A 
study by Heilman (192£) suggests that this is the case, and 
further evidence seems to be added by Hollingshead* In his 
Elmtown 1 s Youth (1949) he noted that there are between seven 
and eight times as many "failing students" from the poorer 
socio-economic class as there are from the two higher classes. 
While he believes that socio-economic level and intelligence 
are positively correlated, he also suggests that poor home 
conditions may foster a defeatist attitude in academic 
activities. 








' 


( 








1 fi< 


! 1 








. 


! 




; ) 




) ’■ Hi O J 


; 


i 


j, c) d 




' y 


) .. •;; V 


J • - : 








\r, :e 








\ ■ . ' " J 


j 


). 


J 




■ [v'«’/ Ql id > j o 


....i l j. •; oo 


■ 







. : . •' n o ,u r 'l 


■ d • j 


•) 


L 


‘J'J 0 .0 O ' 


< 


L < i ' - ' 


'. .! 0- ) 


. 


1 


J . I ■ . ;* 




' 






i, ' 


■ . •. ... ; ■ oi ' '.o_ ; jj; . .<. : 

: ' j •; i ; , U L \ -k 'M ■■■ ■ o ■*. 'O dor. S.Q/;kCi 

• 1 M : 

. i' /\u ■ : 



70 


What conclusions may be drawn regarding the relationship 
between socio-economic status of the family and the academic 
achievement of the child? While the findings are not in 
particularly close agreement, the consensus of opinion would 
seem to support these statements: 

(1) Children from "better” homes fare better academically® 
It is impossible to say, however, whether this is due to the 
superior status of the home, to a higher I®Q., or to more 
lenient marking on the part of the teachers, 

(2) Homes in which the father is engaged in "sales and 
service" occupations seem to contribute a disproportionately 
large number of underachievers. 


Educational Level of the Parents , It has frequently 
been suggested that the educational level of the parent some¬ 
how influences the academic achievement of the child. Does 
the evidence of research support such a statement? Chapman 
(195$, p« 70), who investigated this problem with a secondary 
school population, noted: 

There were more mothers and fathers of achievers with a high 
standard of education than there were mothers and fathers of 
underachievers with a superior education® On the other end 
of the scale, only two parents of achievers had not attended 
school while fifteen parents of underachievers had never 
attended school. This lack of contact [with the educational 
situation] may have colored the opinion of the latter group 
concerning the value of an education and this opinion could 
conceivably have been passed on to their offspring® 

A review of the research, however, reveals a considerable 
amount of disagreement concerning the relationship between the 








■ . iiiiO'ii01 00 i. !i 

"MG, 0±i tX 0 0.: ^0^ OO- VO.iOO 

...if) • .• ■. ■ : 

. o: oboI: X ■ • oh 






CM 


go;.. • o, obogOg. ■ g - / 




. . 


; "O' 


o ■ Of 




- 


30:.iOM \ 0 } 


OMB K.OCOuuKOO 


0 0 :t .0.0 : :0U OJO VO ■ , 


. 

... . - 

v . : -; „o inch'3 gmoo. : GKj o Oi'oi' b.O'.'.vo o'--' '"OJi; o o >o 

\ • ■; •/ VO ;;v, ■•JOiOloODO & LJ OOO.O. " v'OiOO >/0J 

• ; •. r Omo-mOBg ’ B.v., OOO DO 0.0 OOOOOO'/G yrf 

: .. V ■ :* ■ 

: Oo 0 c. .; ooo m u<"ooo J.c;c- io 

r ;o;.,0. . i ■' . M.. . 0 Of . OMiOiB O'j. 1 .;; 

• ( ■ o ", Or ' 0.0 O' O' 0 0 O Or : 

f . 'mb; O. .gbbo ooo..;: '0 -o: .00 

/ o j c ; O'. ■ ' :i . c , - oo 

; Gf . ; 0 c :■ :i; -' o:-~'0 .o oo J.C ’ oj 

,o o;; o ..j i c : ’ 0 .' o - i* • ’ • ’ <• J 0 : 0 [' ; 1e ^ 

r . 0 .l. :j» O'J o fjiC ■ 1 

• • ; y; OJOL.OV ! :i.- o hrpouc 

■ V f.; L/C O'.MOM 0.00 tf 0 '/ « ■ '{,.U 

, :0'l .00-0 





71 

two variables under discussion, Shaw and Brown (1957) noted 
that the parents of college underachievers have less formal 
education than do the parents of college students in general. 
Such a finding, basically the same as that of Chapman, is at 
variance with that of Eckert (1935)* She determined that 
superior students at university are apt to have parents with 
relatively less formal education than have the parents of all 
college students. Nemzek (1940), however, was forced to 
conclude that measures of the education of parents are of no 
value in predicting the academic success of their children, 
while Carter and McGinnis (1952) and Ford (1957) concur. 

The only conclusion that might be arrived at in view of 
the above findings would be that: 

(1) It has not been definitely established what type 
of relationship exists between the level of parents T education 
and the academic achievements of their children. 

Birthplace of Parents . A limited number of studies have 
investigated the influence of foreign-born parents on grades 
received by a child in school or college. McQuary (1954) noted 
that, in college, a greater percentage of overachievers had 
one or more foreign-born parents than did underachievers. 
Substantially the same findings are reported by Boyce (1956) 
and Eckert (1935)* 

On the basis of this small number of studies it might 


be concluded that: 




){)U : l ‘ i\ 


S < ;■ 


, - i ;.K ■ 

r.v iJ:\oiJD 


: iJ >j : K. •• •• w 




a ■ 


. : 


a ' / -,u 






:.Ji U \ i > . 

. 


; • - >■ 

' ' x , xJu’aO a 


/ , v 1 , 


Ux n<; j oil'u ■ 

■ 


: ..it> .... 


.. 


,, cQ 


V.'.'l Ol-.i' J'i-. r p ■ 'A.iU j.3'1 -< 

• : '.. , , ■; , • ' . ■ i;: ' : .; • j 


‘ ; I j- ;■ • 

- 




• ' . r ; ' 


• ■ , 

•■■■'. ' - 
•. ' ■ . ■ - i ... ' 

■ ■ ' . ‘ ! ■ ' •' ? ■ : 

'. . U ..... -. ■ 1 . . - : ' 

. ' ... ) 





72 


(1) Having one or more foreign-born parents is a factor 
more frequently reported by academic overachievers than under¬ 
achievers. 

Languages Spoken in the Home . Research workers have 
also attempted to determine whether the use of a foreign 
language in the home has any effect upon the academic achieve¬ 
ment of the child. Studies done by Skuba (1955), Robinson 
(1934), and Reid (1954), all of whom worked with Alberta 
populations, suggest that those children who came from homes 
in which languages other than English are used are definitely 
handicapped in mastering certain school subjects. English is 
one such school subject which is frequently affected adversely. 
Ghapman (195$), on the other hand, noted that the percentage 
of achievers coming from homes in which foreign languages are 
spoken is not significantly smaller than is the percentage of 
underachievers coming from such homes. Carter and McGinnis 
(1952) also noted that the number of languages spoken in the 
home had absolutely no predictive value for academic achieve¬ 
ment of college freshmen. Eckert (1935), however, found that 
superior students frequently came from homes in which little 
English was used. 

It is obvious that the findings of the above studies are 
not in agreement, and it must therefore be concluded that: 

(1) Having one or more parents who speak a foreign 
language is not a factor which discriminates effectively 
between overachievers and underachievers. 









- 

1 ! ’ •. i 




- 

j->) 

^ i 



• iv ■ c: ,1 


. 










• 

, 



; . ■ 



c • 








: 

. 



' 

' 

• J •; 





' 





z ' • 


1 . 


c - 







ih-IJ: 






c 


;oi.; c 













’ 






- 





; 




■ 









' 





: 


. 

il‘)i }£■ Of; 


c 







? j < * .j . 


J 

.->i r. 

k-' 



c 




. 

* 1 





Oj.'C i 




■ 


' 




■ 



■ ■ 





. - 


; 

n 



0 





• 


. a •') 



L'fdLi«.'0 •. 


■ 

. >-J 


■. 








DO \£ 


; 

. 






) 

■ o; 







i 

j 

: 


■ - 'i c 

i j 

< 



t ' ’• 

a 


; . . 


• 

. 



: 1 

. 





j ( 

. L 

• 

■. 

f'fiO' 0 




t : 



L'.r; 





























. 

. 1/ 


X 









. 



• 

. 











• 


. ■ 


e- 

H ' 


. fj.: •: 














i 

. 












J-* V: 


C 1. 





73 

Broken Homes, Does the fact that a child comes from a 


broken home cause him to do poorly in his academic work? While 
it is difficult to postulate a cause and effect relationship 
between these two factors, some research has been done in an 
effort to throw light on the correspondence between these two 
variables. Tibbets (1954) and Curtis (1930) noted that a 
broken home tended to have an adverse effect upon the school 
grades of children, while both Serene (1952) and Ford (1957) 
report that about 5 par* cent of the underachievers in their 
respective populations list broken homes as the cause of their 
poor academic showing. Another student in this area (McQuary 
1953), reporting conflicting results, noted that overachievers 
tended to have less fortunate home backgrounds than did over¬ 
achievers; whereas Anspaugh (1953), supporting none of the 
findings given above, concluded that there is no definite 
evidence that broken homes and school grades are related. 

The findings here are contradictory, but the results of 
the majority of studies lead to the conclusion that: 

(1) Students who come from broken homes are more likely 
to underachieve than are those who do not. 

Size of Family ; Position in It. A considerable amount of 
research has been done in an effort to determine whether the 
size of a child T s family or his position in it bears any 
relationship to his school achievement. In their study of a 
high school group, Eckert and Mills (1936) found that the 







' -.■. 

I J ; , . . •. ' J.,! • .O’ ' • 

: , ■ . ■. . ■. ' c - o - ■ : - v/:) ' 5 

■ 

. \ { j ' •. ■ i.'vl 1 t - iv, % i tx i > a afo* H 

j :■ , (' Cl j i; 0 'i .1 i >, ■ 

; n: ■ ;i ,:k xo ; t. v\U oxq,;:: 

■ - : ' ! 

; • . j .. c - , ■ . ' 1 • - • ’ 1 

. . . ■■;■■....■• I ■■ ! ■ ^ ' 

c . . : - . i- ' c - • ■' ; 

■ ;•/; .. ■ » ■ ' ■ ‘ ‘ . c : • ' : / ' '' 

; .j...* . r ' •= ■ .. - ■<: V'.'...., : : •' f - >•' - •• 

< i % v;.i \ . ^ ■ i ; i. ' •• : xo • - 

ik oaob ’ erlcf c:> *io 

• • . ; • r. < ; . • , ■ ;. . , fj (. '• C ; .■ -1 - - '' • : ; ' 

, j i . ' ■ ;i ■ ■ - i i'i ■ ' ■ : > '' - l; - 1 ■ 


- . ' . ! . ‘ . .. 

• . ..V,- ' y. ■ . 

■ .i • ; ■ . o i ■ • 1 v! ' I0 ' : - K 

. . v ■ » • • ■ ' v J • £l <' j'. j 



74 


number of children in a family and the birth order of the 
individual student reveal nothing concerning the probability 
of a pupil T s falling into either the achieving or the non¬ 
achieving group, Tibbets (1954) also reported that size of 
family, siblings T ages, or position in the family apparently 
have no real influence upon a child T s work in school. Similar 
findings are noted by Ford (1957), Carter and McGinnis (1952), 
and Anspaugh (1953)* Bayliss (1934), however, found that almost 
50 per cent of underachieving college girls were "only" 
children while another 15 per cent were middle children in their 
families. Bayliss believes that a child*s position in a 
family is of considerable importance in determining school 
achievement. 

Once again, it is difficult to note any great degree of 
agreement among the results of the various students in this 
field. However, a perusal of the above studies suggest that: 

(1) The majority of researchers in this field are of 
the opinion that size of family and position in it are of 
little or no importance in determining the success which the 
student will experience in the academic situation. 

Parental Interest « The possibility that the degree of 
parental interest in the child T s progress in school might be 
reflected in his grades has been given some consideration. 
Barrett (1957) noted that the parents of underachievers tend 
to be neutral toward, or disinterested in, education, while 
Serene (1952) found that about 5 per cent of a group of 









i . 




m 


> 




' 




c 


c 





; 






t ^ 


< j 


:) 


non o 


V M 0 




) 


.>;:■■; l 


\ 


( 




j.; f 








:■ 


(.0 n 


J ' ') 


. 






75 


underachievers blamed their poor scholastic status on 
’’parental apathy.” Parental membership in a Home and School 
organization or similar body was found by Ford (1957) to be 
one of six factors which distinguished between overachievers 
and underachievers, and he assumed that such membership 
indicated parental interest in the child’s progress in, and 
adjustment to, school. He noted that 75 per cent of both 
parents of overachievers belonged to such an organization, 
while neither parent belonged in 25 per cent of the cases in 
which underachievement was noted. Underachievers did report, 
however, that one parent belonged in 50 per cent of the cases 
dealt with in this study. 

On the basis of the small number of studies at hand, it 
would appear that one might conclude that: 

(1) The degree of parental interest in the academic 
pursuits of their children is positively related to success 
in school. 

Relations With Parents . An unsatisfactory home atmos¬ 
phere was noted by Edelston (1950) as being of considerable' 
importance in making for educational failure. He declared 
that there are two extreme kinds of poor home environment to 
be noted: first, the home in which the parents are indifferent 
to the child’s progress; and second, the home in which the 
parents, being overanxious, exert too great pressure for 
achievement upon the child. Very similar findings were 











uy . ■ • 












r ) 








' - v >\> 


c 




) 


'X 


: n r '.'' xfryvew 




s 




' , :) 




. 


' 










. ; ■ . 


r 


: 


t ' 


76 

reported by Barrett (1957), while Stice et al. (1956) noted 
that underachievers tended to see their parents as being 
indifferent or rejecting to them. Kirk (1952) expressed the 
opinion that underachievement may satisfy an unconscious 
hostility against a parent who is demanding success. The work 
of Kimball (1952) seems to suggest that the male underachiever 
rebels against the father, for she noted that a number of male 
underachieving students reported an essentially negative 
relationship with that parent. Tibbets (1954), on the other 
hand, suggested that underachieving male pupils seem to have 
greater difficulty in establishing satisfactory relationships 
with the mother. Shaw and Brown (1957) extended Kirk’s 
hypothesis so that it encompassed hostility of underachievers 
toward all authority figures in general. Such an attitude, 
they hold, may be unconscious and masochistic and probably is 
related to the family and social milieu in which the 
individual matured. 

Gough (1949) determined that the parents of underachievers 
tend to be dominant, autocratic, or laissez-faire in their 
relations with their children. Drews and Teahan (1957) found 
that the mothers of both gifted and high achieving students 
had a high "I t! (ignoring) scale on a parental attitudes 
scale. They concluded that the high achiever is a child 
who has a rigidly defined place within the home which he 
is expected to keep with docile acceptance. Gough (1953) 
noted that successful high school students tended to be 





t ' ■■■ -■) V ' 

. 


, 


. 

. 

■ c ■ | 

. 

. 







. 


..Cla ■ 






ss.LsJu It-. to 





. 

j 


• c 


t : ’ -V . . i ' 

. 

' J‘C :). | 

:■ . . ■ 


. ■ : o." 





77 

conventional, orderly, and conforming, a fact which suggests 
that they may have been the product of the type of home 
referred to above* 

Research by Kurtz and Swenson (1951) revealed that pride, 
confidence, affection, and interest of the parents in their 
children, as shown by the parents reading to them, playing 
with them, or attending school functions with them, was in 

i 

greater evidence for the overachiever than for the under- 
achiever. The former students showed a greater tendency to 
respect their parents, to take them into their confidence, to 
be concerned with pleasing them, and to return the love which 
the parents evinced. The underachievers were found to have a 
limited place in the home. They gave few evidences of mutual 
respect, exchange of affection, or desire to measure up to 
parental expectations. Their parents, it was found, gave them 
little encouragement for an extended education. 

The above findings lead to the following conclusions: 

(1) The parents of underachievers are apt to be over- 
solicitous, or rejecting, or may adopt a laissez-faire 
attitude towards their children. 

(2) Gifted and high achieving students enjoy more 
clearly defined relations with their parents. 

(3) Gifted and high achieving students may find them¬ 
selves in a position where (a) the parents restrict their 
actions considerably, tending to cause them to be conforming 




' . . i ■ • V 5' 

• s ;i:i-' m>ocb s v.-.vfl ^rra-.'^srid’- 











,:l i: K; 


: ’ '■ : 

. .1 b. ’ V. ■ ' : :1 


ft 


■ 









.; ■ • t S 


. 

0 






<r.: 




> 




" 






: ; ' ' ; 

. ■ -f *•. rJ-rs 


Jr.’.J".' : b ;; ' : 

-i ; ' j :.v;obiio.i: 


V I ; > : 1 - *■* t 

if'.: j. ■ J ■; • • ■ 1 



73 

and conventional; or (b) the parents are less firm and more 
openly affectionate. In either of the above cases, however, 
the children know where they stand with their parents. 

School Attendance . Does a relationship exist between 
school attendance and the grades which a student obtains? 

Some research has been done on this question, and the 

results seem to be in quite close agreement. Butler (1936, 

p» 2&3), in a study utilizing high school students, noted: 

The evidence indicates inescapably that there is a distinct 
and consistent tendency for low marks to be accompanied by 
poor attendance, and vice versa, and the consistenc 3 ^ of this 
tendency gives reason to believe that this relation may be 
a causal one. (Butler 1 s italics). 

Anspaugh (1933) also worked with a secondary school 
population and determined that superior students have just 
one-quarter as many absences as do poor students but noted 
that ill health might well cause both the absences and the 
low marks. Van Alstyne (1923) reported that hypochondriac 
tendencies, resulting in poor school attendance, were among 
the most important factors which adversely Influenced the 
school progress of children. 

From these general findings it may be concluded that: 

(1) Poor school attendance and poor school progress are 
positively related. 

(2) It has not been proven that the relationship is a 
causal one. 


Reading Ability . Inasmuch as the ability to read well 










ful;.!w‘x ■' 

l cf) 


0 

. 

'aO t .li 

_ 












, ■ 

■ 





l 








• V 

■ . ' i oil - C 

t 




■i 




• 


" - £ 5 t 



- 








t ’ 





i 

, . > 

; _ 





** 

- 






c 




. ■ 


v ; ■ 


' 


; ■> >0 : ; ■ 









■;m > ' . • 

•f'O.COl H■ :‘Ibi-XiiO- OjflC 


■ ■' >( ' cvr^-blv 


■. 


")« < 


i s .-;,d 




j£?w 111. u . 

; , .. - ■■■ V'■ ; • e : ’• 


c •; s,' ;; ; ... . ' ..u. • ■ : > . •' i. • •• . l ' ■ ’ : - Ji 1 


txn.i -- <"i i 


1 oil' Vi-i: l-OHi 9'.t 

. 

; ' ( £ i ■ - 1 : ' ( - • ' 


. /Ictj 


■ .? .1; \r i-:=■- 3 '• ;i ' 


j-:o J. 


79 

is essential for success in high school subjects, it might be 
thought that poor reading ability and low grades would tend 
to be positively related. Has this been found to be the case? 
The usual procedure in such cases is to administer a standard¬ 
ized reading test and then seek relationships between the 
scores of this instrument and scores or grades made in school 
subjects. Ankerman (1947) reminds us that the explanation of 
the relationship may not be so simple, however, since intel¬ 
ligence is positively related to both reading and achievement 
and might well account for any relationship noted. It is 
obvious, therefore, that when seeking such relationships 
intelligence must be held constant. 

Three tests were used by Anderson and Dearborn (1941) 
in an effort to measure different aspects of reading skill in 
university students. They noted that scores on reading tests 
were positively related to academic achievement scores, even 
when intelligence was held constant. Working with a population 
of over two hundred college students, Humber (1944) found that 
the reading test scores obtained by the members of this group 
are frequently found to be related to achievement in the 
subjects of the humanistic group but infrequently related to 
achievement in those subjects or curricula which emphasize 
science material. 

A third study offers cautious support to the theory that 
excellence in reading is positively related to academic 



c 





>; >! 'v -i. -ti 


) i 


vxx<'-: v v ^' < 




oa 




H 


> 


\ 


c 


i 


?. ■ 


J 


X i 


: i 


odor* j.xo ! vtri 



C' 




4» i 




j; <' 


o 







c : • 
: - ;< ■ iijx 


D : )V 






T j ~ , 


' An 1 


achievement. Having found a number of low but positive 
correlations between reading and achievement scores, Preston 
and Botel (1952) concluded that the importance of reading to 
academic success is overshadowed by the importance of certain 
personality factors, but they believe that reading skill plays 
a more influential role in the determination of achievement 
scores than the results of their study would seem to suggest. 
In an effort to determine the predictive value of a number of 
tests for college achievement, Jackson (1955) administered 
four tests to a sample of college freshmen. He subsequently 
noted that a reading test was the best predictor of college 
success of all tests given. Studies by Eckert (1935) and 
Dickinson (1925) also lend support to the belief that there is 
a positive correlation between good reading scores and high 
scholastic grades. 

A study by Shaw (194&) in which he made use of the 
Primary Mental Abilities Tests (Thurstone 1945) indicated that 
verbal-meaning is highly related to a number of measures of 
school success, but he found that word-fluency bore little 
relationship to grades obtained. Results which run counter to 
those of the majority of studies mentioned above were noted by 
Pond (1940). At the completion of a study on the influence of 
reading abilities on school success in grade eleven he con¬ 
cluded, ”... The quality and quantity of reading experiences 
do not contribute materially to success in school courses as 
at present organized. , . . ?T (p. 443*) 






'.mm 


10 \T 


. 


0 vi 


tji 


I;, rrr ,;0$YK j'fc ci’ 


. ■ > 


I • ■ j 


) 1.0 - 




V.i ■ : 31 : 




i 


. ( 


7 Oil 





61 

Studies by Jensen (195$), Pierson (1951), and Wallace 
(1951) suggest that we are guilty of faulty thinking if we 
assume that there is a "general reading ability." These 
research workers have found that in the use of standardized 
reading tests which offer more than one score it is quite 
possible for a part score to correlate quite highly with 
academic grades while the total score shows no such correlation. 
Having done a comprehensive study on the relationship between 
reading skills and achievement in certain courses in the sixth 
grade, Fay (1949) concluded that: (1) achievement should be 
considered in terms of specific areas rather than as a compo¬ 
site of all school work; (2) reading should be thought of as a 
composite of many specific skills rather than as a generalized 
ability; (3) some reading skills are related to achievement in 
a given subject matter area and others are not; (4) the reading 
skills related to subject matter achievement differ from one 
achievement area to another. 

From the above findings it may be concluded that: 

(1) Studies of this nature usually fail to reveal the 
very close relationship which many believe exists between 
reading scores and school grades. 

(2) There is no "general reading ability" but rather a 
number of specific reading skills. 

(3) Certain of these skills seem to be related to achieve¬ 
ment in certain school subjects, but not in others. 





$2 

(4) Findings in those studies in which reading and 
academic achievement scores are correlated are frequently 
distorted by the failure to hold intelligence constant. 

Mathematical Ability . Some work has been done in an 
effort to investigate the nature and the extent of the relation¬ 
ship between mathematical ability and school achievement in 
general. In a recent study, Gough (1955) noted that ability 
in arithmetic was related to school success, and Granzow (1954) 
reported substantially the same finding. Winegardner (193$) 
found a significant correlation between mathematical ability 
and grades in physics and chemistry, while Carter and McGinnis 
(1952) found that the number of units of high school mathe¬ 
matics completed successfully by a college student would predict 
success at the .01 level of confidence. On the other hand, 

Shaw (194$) could find no relationship between number ability, 
as measured by Thurstone T s P.M.A. Tests, and high school 
achievement scores. 

While there is not complete agreement in the above 
findings, the consensus of opinion seems to be that: 

(1) Mathematical ability and general level of academic 
achievement are related. 

(2) There is no proof that this relationship is a causal 
one. It is very probable that ability in both of these areas 
is dependent upon intelligence level. 


Extracurricular Activities . Possibly extracurricular 






. ' 


- 

,■ JJ . 




' )’■ •< .L 




" - ' ■ . ; 


\X l ’ ■ ' ' "i J ■ " : 3* ' 




r:i ‘il :H‘I< 

J 7; 1 : ' 

ii.; j/r ■ f y o j ■.: \ :• i < ■ 1 :: - ’ 1 


I, . ’ ; . , r s. ‘ ' 


i. 




•> 


( v .1. ;' ; i, ;'f! •: r ' < ‘ 1 7. 

, 




. , • 




, j.; ; 0 ; /:■ '■ ' l" • ■' - • ■ 1 c 

■ - 

•).i; no-t ■ h i i ’>( t 7 ; • 7 7 > • ; - - -V 

• , <• ' 

.. i; s ■. •; 7 . j i > ) 7 ■ ; 


' 




i ... ' 


jj i ■ 


•. k:!. 0 7 " -•' 

\ i - '.I;;-;-:.:'>Oi.iO i>':? 7 - "■! -V '> ; 7;.>77' 

i , ■. . .1 7. * ■ 7 '• ’ ‘‘5 

V \ . 

. T =il. 7 ■ *J 7 "7 r:;-, j; 

■ - > 

C;; v <>,j .1.' r> 7 7 7:7 ■■:.>■ 7: / : 77 3" £7 

; j -> 7■ •. , • j :■ ) \ .! ; : i.* <■ '7- . ■ ’ .;.i- • 7 7 ■. 'Vj 

• . o ; . . . .. - ; . 1 ■ i ■ 


. ■ ■ 1 . i j 


.v: , ■;. :ov- 


• >&£>■ • 


: 

. 


■ ! - t ■ 

, '■ • 1 : ■■ 

. v . 7 . ' ■■ ■ ' ; " - 





&3 


activities have been suggested as potential causes of under¬ 
achievement more frequently than any other factors. A good 
deal of research has been carried on to determine to what 
extent these two variables are related. Serene (1952) has 
noted that slightly less than 3 per cent of underachieving 
students suggested that overparticipation in extracurricular 
activities was a cause of their doing poorly in school work, 
while Woellner (1953) reports that in his study about 21 per 
cent of underachievers made a similar statement. Young and 
Estabrooks (1934) and McCurdy (1956) report that superior 
students are relatively unsocial and appear to be especially 
disinterested in athletics. Wrenn and Humber (1941) note 
that Tt . . . too much time spent on extracurricular activi¬ 
ties. . . . Tt is the one item upon which two groups of 
college men, the one successful academically and the other 
unsuccessful, differ significantly. 

Various other studies, which throw considerable doubt 
upon these findings may be cited, however. Anspaugh (1953)j 
Chapman (195$)* and Remmlein (1939) all report that increased 
service to the school is rendered by superior students rather 
than by poorer ones, while Malloy (1954) has noted that 
underachieving females in college hold fewer elective offices 
than do non-achievers. Eckert and Mills (1936) submit find¬ 
ings which are essentially the same as those given above. 

No significant differences between the school achievement 
records of those students who were classed as athletes and 










£4 


those classed as non-athletes were noted by Snoddy and 
Shannon (1939). Armstrong (1935) also reported that she could 
find no evidence that either normal achievers or under¬ 
achievers in high school differed in the average amount of 
extracurricular participation. Presumably, she did not count 
the holding of offices as fl extracurricular participation," 
for she reports that three times as many normal achievers as 
underachievers had assumed positions of leadership and 
responsibility in school activities. 

Because of the disagreement noted above, it must be 
concluded that: 

(1) The relationship between participation in extra¬ 
curricular activities and school achievement is not clear. 

(2) Underachievers tend to blame too great participa¬ 
tion in extracurricular activities as a causal factor in their 
underachievement. 

(3) Normal achievers and overachievers tend to take a 
greater part in school activities, exclusive of athletics, 
than do underachievers. 

Attitude Towards School . There seems to be some agreement 
that having the "proper attitude" towards school work, liking 
the school situation, and being adequately motivated all bear 
some relationship to academic success. 

Burgess (1956) found that underachievers in a college 
engineering course had weak motivation for academic achievement, 






He 



. i j 




t 




> 


\T:0\':'X U-t 


)i 


I ■. 


;,o 


• n t ; 


k 


' ! . 










hi ii 




*) 


■ 1 > 


’ 1 " ) 




j "■ 1 


y :: \ > 


■ 






: : . - . 1 ■ c 

C, ■' ! 


:) ‘ < 







S5 


tended not to enjoy the school situation, and were not completely 
convinced of the value of a higher education. A second study 
on low-scholarship college students was carried out by Brown 
(1954). He reported that such students are characterized by 
Tf activity delay," a lack of decisiveness of action, a tendency 
to procrastinate, and an unwillingness to conform to. academic 
requirements, routines, and regulations. Van Alstyne (1923), 
Malloy (1954), and Barrett (1957) all report that underachievers 
report disinterest in, or indifference toward, academic 
achievement. Serene (1952) found that not being "scholastically 
conscious" ranked fourth, of fifteen, in order of importance of 
those factors which made for underachievement in school. An 
investigation of thirty different factors was undertaken by 
Ford (1957) to determine whether they bore any relation to 
extremes of academic achievement. Six of the factors were 
found to be of importance, one of which was "attitude toward 
school." The probability of the chance occurrence of this 
factor was placed at the .001 level. 

Drasgow (1957) and Gough (1949) both noted that 
"curricular satisfaction" was positively related to achievement 
in school, and the former writer is of the opinion that dis¬ 
content with curriculum and courses is of primary importance 
in determining the grades which the student will make. Pressey 
(1920) and Ames (1943) report findings which suggest that 
"right" attitudes toward school and good school grades are 
positively correlated. Finally, it might be noted that Morgan 




i • i 


r v 7u Jjj 


; }; • j, • , U J v .i ■ i 


•' : j. 




ii . ) :J \ ■ ■ ■' i 

' > . ;0 .-0 ■ 1 

" ..! •/ $i>'£ IM V j !. S- ' i'' ‘ • • '• :; 1 V' c ■ 5 : 

' i.t' ' 1 1 ' ■ '■ • e ' 




:' 


i • ■ J ' ' 1 


S 


... 


•: : 


! 1 > 


i:),'M’V'Ji' J' u . .. .v 

1 :) J: i ji' : r)/;, 5 '. 

, ' i }.')!>•<'’ - ■ ' ■ - 

; •• ■■.j' 1 .!.,;-' I '. U -ia ' i U 


• 1 J ■ , , ’ ■ ! 

: :: £ ■ l ‘l . i 




. .. 'j •' 




i. J>:. ' 'v 'j- 




7 






oj - s Y c. : 

■ -.. ■ a * :,''; ) ■d 


I 1 :') 


). .1. • 




B . 




at* 




(va'ii 


. ■ 








. 


■ : : ■ 






V 


: • b j 


■ 


: 



$6 


(1952), when working with superior college students, found that 
the need for achievement or the motivation to achieve seems to 
be quite a striking characteristic in the make-up of these 
students. 

A consideration of the above studies enables one to 
conclude that: 

(1) Being convinced of the desirability of an education, 
i.e., having the proper attitude towards school, is positively 
related to academic achievement. 

(2) Satisfaction with one’s curriculum and courses is a 
factor in achievement. 

(3) A desire or a need to achieve may be noted in 
superior students. 

Acceleration . Final consideration in this general area 
of the ’’School” is given to the question of acceleration and 
its importance in scholastic achievement. Gowan (1957) carried 
out a study of the dynamics of underachievement in gifted 
children and noted that acceleration was desirable for such 
students for it offered them more challenging material and so 
increased motivation. Terman and Oden (1947) reported that 
gifted children who were accelerated in school did better than 
gifted children who were not accelerated. Similar results 
were reported by Engle (1934) and by studies sponsored by the 
Ford Foundation (1953)* Findings of a conflicting nature were 
reported by Bayliss (1934), who noted that about 3$ per cent 
of a group of underachievers stated that at one time or another 



v - ' ' ; 

,i V .■ . 11. v. j i -j- 1 vj . 14 '.*' - v . 


' 


.. 0 j : .i,i, ■ v c k 9r.iio i;t x■ ■'i' 


.) . ; • 


: •< u) 

\ 0 lo ‘XO -JL ix- H‘ ■' o : ; > i 0 •• (-0 " ■ 


. 


:. : ■ U ' - uj, i ■■ • i i X. > i' 






; TUX' 


■ ■ j 




0;/ 1 u'X 


. ■; xo It \w> X'xv: * r J.oofio 

V - ' V ■ . X' ' ‘ ^ - 1 ■> - ' ^ ‘ ' 

f? >v > x > v.;'. > n: '^ 






, > . 


' i " i v , . .V J, ; )': Os - •-1: . 

, ;a ;! „ i; 0.1 ' ....v xV, >.. r..’ ■ : : J ‘x i ' ; 0 -) '■ 


V ' o H 






„ i. , '.s. .i f >:.) \> ' : r. O' • n-J :: •' 

■ nooxo . •: 


.• I: • j ' X- ; - X 


! i i.i ’ l • J. 


< 




$7 


in their academic careers they had been accelerated. These 
figures would seem to suggest that acceleration may make for 
weakness in the mastery of school work which will later affect 
the scholastic achievement of the student adversely. 

Because of the contradictory nature of certain of the 
findings given above, it is obvious that acceleration of 
academically precocious students may not always be the best 
course of action. The implication would seem to be that 
factors other than intelligence must be considered. 

After a consideration of the above material it may be 
concluded that: 

(1) Acceleration may have salutary or adverse effects 
upon the subsequent academic career of the particular student. 
Possibly differences in personality make-up may determine how 
a given student will react to being accelerated. 


« 










A,;.; ! ' 

• j ■. 1' t ’ : 




1 \K " 

‘.'j- 


H.* w 

hi ■ s 


' . 9 < j ( ■ 


' 

J 

■ ) 

) 




■ 1 :: . ; 

x it .■ ' ' i 




: r ■ 


UJ )h‘i\i • ' ' 

■- 




i .1 • . i ' 1 > 


. »:) ’ . 

' . 

' 

• • 


. 





































CHAPTER FOUR 


THEORY AND HYPOTHESES 


In the present chapter a consideration of certain 
theoretical aspects of underachievement is offered. Even 
as a review of the results of related literature will help 
in the assessment of present findings, so will an overview 
of theories of underachievement help one better to under¬ 
stand the theoretical implications of the study at hand, 

A number of hypotheses bearing on academic under¬ 
achievement are offered in the last part of this chapter. 
These hypotheses, for the most part, arise naturally from 
the conclusions of related studies and permit the results 
of the present research project to be compared with the 
findings of earlier works. In a small number of cases, 
where the results of previous studies were inconclusive, 
the author has put foward an hypothesis which is supported 
by the majority of findings. 

It is the purpose of this chapter, therefore, to provide, 
in the form of theories and hypotheses, a frame of reference 
within which the findings of the present study may be 
evaluated. 


;t\(. o '.u.» tt?. 


. 


; J. 








) jj ■ ' i.-Olu i. 






iiiQ'tt ‘ .U- 


t ■ ■ '• ' ' •' 1 

bfj :■ 1) « ' '* - - ' ' 1 ■■ : ' ; 


, j 


O '...-i .• IT 




• >< 


:• - •••■••• - ' b • ; ' v .' - 


.. 


•>. 



#9 


A review of the literature on underachievement reveals 
that there is a disinclination on the part of many students 
to consider the theoretical aspects of academic under¬ 
achievement. References to theory are frequently brief and 
are usually given only when findings seem to suggest, or 
perhaps demand, some theoretical explanation. This reluctance 
to offer some theoretical framework for research done in this 
area is difficult to understand. Consequently, an effort is 
made at this point to offer a review of some of the more 
plausible theoretical implications of academic underachieve¬ 
ment. The question to be considered is, "Why do students of 
proven ability, as indicated by standardized-test scores, 
operate at an academic level much inferior to that at which 
they are capable of operating?" 

Symonds (1936) has suggested that the drive for success 
is very strong and may be counted upon as existing in every 
child. Obviously, however, in the case of the academic 
underachiever, we must be prepared to admit one of three 
possibilities: (a) that this drive does not exist; (b) that 

if it does exist, it is a very weak drive; or (c) that the 
drive for success has been diverted from the goal of academic 
underachievement to success in some other area. 

Inasmuch as the population under consideration in this 
study is composed of adolescents, certain factors relating 
to adolescent development must be considered. It is a 
truism that the vast majority of adolescents desire to be 


'1 V .. • I . 






.. ■ >■ 


J i. 




ii ■ > 




}. J 


‘ r;j 

I j d ij \ 



90 


approved by their peers. Any standard text on adolescent 

development would almost certainly support the following 

statement by Crow and Crow (1956, p. 176): 

Whatever may be the wants, interests, and ambitions 
experienced by the adolescent that constitute the basis of 
developing personality, one characteristic appears to be 
outstanding. He wants to be like by his peers. The goal 
towards which he strives especially is acceptance of himself 
by the members of the groups that he strongly admires and in 
which he believes that he can best achieve self-realization. 

Bios (1941), for his part, contends that the need for 
group belongingness becomes progressively more important 
until it eventually replaces, to some extent at least, the 
desire to be completely accepted by one’s parents. If it is 
possible to accept the views of these writers, then it is 
obvious that most adolescents will go to considerable lengths 
in order to avoid group disapproval. If one of the greatest 
sins which the adolescent can commit is to deviate from the 
peer standard of behaviour, then such deviation must be 
guarded against at all costs® The school Is obviously an 
area in which individual differences make themselves apparent, 
and the possibility is a very real one that an adolescent 
student might be ostracized because his level of academic 
prowess deviates from that accepted by the group. Such 
deviation is almost certain to occur if the student is of 
superior ability. Havighurst (1957,p» 24) explains it in 
these terms: 

The fact that the American high schools are non-selective 
means, in effect, that the average high school student body 
consists mainly of boys and girls with ability just average 


j 


o-ri", '■ iip ;b:cG b" tGGG'u 


* , 


•a.’: obb ' v v- ; )yjvo'KrqB 


. J : o : ’ J t •: ' ■■■ '■ ' " - 


1 t ■ 

' 

o • 

. : : ' C; ■■■ . - : ' ■ ■■ ■ 


\!C e l 
;i O 




i <- 


. 


... i r o ' - : ■ 

' 

■ , ; J «‘i ' • 7 i ’ ■ ■ - ■ ■ : ' • 


£ 

i ■ 'g>\g 

j 

■ Jrjr 




. 

. ; ■ ■ ■ - ^ * ' ;i - <‘“ 

UM,i G'lOG 

G: V) <b . ■ ^ : ■ : ; " 

::;i; bi n;-,^ 

si-j? : ntoS.' oJjyyxohxKVioo c b o:. xll\ 

I ) ; • , . • r ■ j '■ v g - < - 

:.;»g ;■ , . gg .1: JGb . >; • ■• --0 

, • ‘ i , • : 


f 


. 

) i 


; :ggiG 




V ) 




V'-> GG 

GO G "V;V G O: :g O 

;• r- ; 7 G &Ci G G:; GG ! .G/JLg : X vGOlH GGGGJ XiU 1 

g> : ' v • .■ - *•«. '■ t 

j;.o;i 1 ■ ;i G;OGoIob;G o b; i'bj.Mvf 


0 . ■ 


LG 1 


; 


. 


■ . ‘ » ‘ ’ 

, zwicwrab tSL'tiUterJ: GG. ^ G.b: ggg 
•.;?;c- 1 • .G.t v iVV '■ g: v;Gj i.G. •: r. : ' 
r.} g • - . . gg.>."GG ^ G-b ;rb: hi buz. 

.gg\> . cb. G.GGG.-vGb,: bgovgcg: 

j,GOi iir> b noibsift 
■ . 


. .u< 

, • ■ ji : ■’.: ;,i.... vlb; b.C ‘J.'G ' g C j : : > ^-G • 

» c ■■■•'. ’■ 


:g ,. g 






' G | ' d JO ■ 

Z , 




91 


or slightly above or below average .... Thus the gifted 
youth are likely to be outnumbered in the high school and 
college classes as well as in the elementary school . . . 
and such students tend, when outnumbered, to adopt the 
learning pace and the attitudes toward learning of their 
average age mates. This is particularly likely to happen 
in America where the pressure of the peer group to conform 
to peer standards is greater than it is in any other country 
that has been studied in this connection. 

The implication here is that the gifted student, having 
attained that degree of academic success which deviates most 
from that which is accepted by his peers, is the student upon 
whom most pressure is brought to bear. In effect, he has a 
choice to make: Will he continue to make the best of his 
academic ability and run the risk of ostracization, or will 
he operate at a lower level of efficiency than that at which 
he is capable of operating and so win the approbation of his 
peers? 


Weber (194$, p.42), in his masterful work, The Protestant 
Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism , discusses the dilemma in 
these terms: 

Scholarship requires a disciplined alternation of contact 
with colleagues and isolation. In so far as our culture 
teaches that depersonalization of relationships is bad, then 
the depersonalization involved in achievement may cause 
anxiety. Some men will ease up to relieve the anxiety; 
others will find that their own interests and the expectations 
of others make the reversal of the depersonalizing trend 
difficult or impossible. The fact that status, power, and 
related rewards exist as positive inducements to achievement 
makes possible a resolution of the dilemma: the chronic 
achiever expiates depersonalization with more achievement. 
Perhaps non-achievers reduce anxiety over low achievement by 
the cultivation of more gratifying interpersonal relations. 

The average man may split the difference between the two 
emphases, and the neurotic will vacillate from one to the 
other. 







u 



j ■ 


II ‘ 


-U A 


' 




IX 




% ' 






10 •! 


not 


(10 i 


: 

k 

' . i "1 ' - ' ' 

' 

' L ' ’ " 1 ’ 

: ' 





■ 


■; ; 


' ' 

i o .lot coo 





fiojoio 


j, 


o 




*< ■ 







92 


From the above it is obvious that academic under- 
achievement may well be caused by a desire on the part of 
the student to be accepted by his peers* Referring back to 
Symonds, perhaps we can assume that the alternative listed 
under (c) is of most value in explaining underachievement in 
these circumstances; that is, that there is a drive for 
success but the desire to succeed in interpersonal relations 
with one T s peers is greater than the desire to succeed 
academically® 

Other researchers who have worked in the area of 

academic underachievement have suggested that the desire to 

do poorly is not necessarily a conscious one but, rather, 

may operate at an unconscious level* Anderson (1954,p.209) 

attacks those who believe that underachievement ” just happens” 

or is the result of a lack of motivation* He explains: 

It may be assumed that students who have not applied them¬ 
selves do not lack motivation but probably have unconscious 
negative attitudes which predispose them to failure . * .An 
emphatic analysis of specific student problems will often 
reveal that unseen negative motives are sabotaging the 
efforts and ambitions of the individual. 

Further support for the belief that academic under¬ 
achievement represents an unconscious attempt at ”self-sabotage” 
has been offered by Friend and Haggard (194$) and others f 

If one accepts the ”self-sabotage” view of underachieve- 
raent, one is faced with the question,”What factor or factors 
could cause a student to behave in this manner?” The 
answer usually offered suggests that the child is unconsciously 
motivated to underachieve so that he may punish his parents, 





.: 4 ■ ‘ 


" 


. 


< . a.. 


■ 

: v ; :; '" i.lw 




lo.Lioc 


: , 


.1 Js if \ '.'.‘i ■ 


. : > I . 


)'* \o: ; ' 




93 

who, in most cases, place a premium on academic achievements 


As Wattenberg (1955) has explained, the child, in order to 
counterbalance certain weaknesses which he may have in his 
relations with his parents, may decide to blackmail them by 
becoming a problem in school. If doing well in school is a 
confession that he has failed to gain self-mastery at home, 
then there is a decided temptation not to "knuckle under” to 
the demands of parents and teachers. English and Pearson 
(1945) suggest that underachievers may actually be trying 
their best not to achieve and that such achievement as is 
noted is the result of the innate ability of the child which 
cannot be completely stifled. These writers suggest that 
academic underachievement is probably an unconscious espress- 
ion of spite at a nagging mother who is demanding success. 
Kimball (1952) carried out research with underachieving 
college males and noted unsatisfactory relations with the 
father in the majority of cases. 

Haggard (1957, p*393), who has stressed the cultural 
implications of the problem of underachievement, suggests that 
academic underachievement may serve purposes other than just 
spiting one f s parents. He states: 

If we think of academic achievement as a byproduct of the 
socialization process, the question arises why learning diff¬ 
iculties occur in a cultural setting in which intellectual 
accomplishment is so highly prized. An explanation which 
follows from our general assumption - that the level and the 
pattern of academic achievement are related to how an individual 
perceives his world and relates to it - is that difficulties 
in the acquisition of the valued skills should result when the 
socialization process does not occur smoothly. Thus learning 





. 


, . 




■ 


•? ;, !o.. a ■ :<it 


. . : •. . < 

t ".. ,.:J K r ' ^ - ■ 1 

j . yr ■ ■ ' ’ ' ' 

; . ■ .. > . 

. ! 

- . 

V . ' • ■■ - 1 ’ 

. 

, • » (, cl'i . .f . . ' ' ' ' ■ ^ 

) 1 ■ ■:-» " . ■ ■ ■■ ■ ■■ ■ : 

I . > a ■ i jj - : ■ 'XcincoKf <?. ■ : " ’■ io 

; ■; ' i l.Lbn ">i *>■') 

-j. >< .x ur. ' ,r.:0 ])Oj:Ti "o \ • 


f: >..u .v.: 1 liiioo 

. : t< 

j 

.. '■ ■ >i 

- : ' . 


. < 1: JO' 


■ •• ! x. -H, j ' : 

;• j.i/::, 'lv f,( 
. d . 

, i aoisvdf- ■ ■ ' ... ■ ; <r; >.U - . ' 

» . •: 

* 

, , - t ; , J . ; ,, • ■. - • 'J .'(.C O'.l'j XO '■ ’ * '■ • i " J : ! 

; & ;} j . . , • • ■ , U - i 10 •• l i t - ' 


v i j. • ■ ■■■ ; 

>D( 0 

r ;;; • J n :.;u 


i \v ' .c ■ ■ i •... vi: • • ' . ■ v' ■ .o'.J ' 0 £ 

; . \ .■ ; /'■ 

! ' '£ ;i xJ- ''v..-' 

. 

■ ' ' . : ' ' ■ 

,' o .; , " . t, ‘ < ■■■ ■ "• v 


oV-;.; 

■ ' . 




' ' ■ .U1 - 


\i I .'-'vv / 


94 


difficulties should occur when the conditions which normally 
facilitate the child’s acceptance of the essential aspects 
and norms of his culture somehow goes awry. And, since the 
parents are the primary socializing agents, one would expect 
that disjointed parent-child relationships play a role in such 
learning difficulties® A child who develops marked learning 
problems also provides himself with an ingenious means of 
self-defense and of frustrating and embarrassing his parents 
and teachers - particularly if they place primary emphasis on 
intellectual achievement. Furthermore, the development of 
such symptoms leaves the child immune from the usual punish¬ 
ments. . .that would probably result if he were to express 
openly his hostility toward the socializing agents. On the 
contrary, his development of such symptoms serves to satisfy 
certain emotional needs by giving the child added personal 
attention and sympathy, as well as relaxation of pressures 
to achieve. 

A further possible explanation of academic underachieve¬ 
ment centers about the socio-economic level of the home. As 
Symonds (1936, p. 239) has noted,”. . . All families in our 
culture tend to see the school system as a means of improving 
their position in the status structure, and the emphases of 
the schools are consistent with this ambition. . It is 
usually assumed that this statement is most applicable to 
the middle class. That is, members of this stratum, usually 
seen as being most interested in upward social mobility, 
tend to stress school achievement to a greater extent than 
do members of certain of the other classes. 

An interesting study done by Rosen (1956) quite 
recently throws a good deal of light upon the degree of 
motivation possessed by members of the different social 
strata insofar as education is concerned. The investigation 
was carried on in New Jersey and utilized a grade ten popu¬ 
lation in certain high schools in the state. Rosen explains 
its purpose as follows: 



C : 0.0 . -O : v; • , 


* 


o X; '«OOO' O j Ofi-yro 


■jo • . - : 0 , 'll I 



00 -\i. ' 'C).0 


:-o 


j.ra 


. 






A 0 


non c 



j Jj o V, 0 o : : o q i ■- i »ci‘ o v J: o c 







95 


The study examines empirically the notion • . . that social 
classes in American society are characterized by a dissimilar 
concern with achievement, particularly as it is expressed in 
the striving for status through social mobility. It is 
hypothesized that social classes possess to a disparate extent 
two components of this achievement orientation. The first is 
a psychological factor involving a personality characteristic 
called achievement motivation . . . which provides an internal 
impetus to excel. The second is a cultural factor consisting 
of certain value orientations which define and implement 
achievement motivated behaviour. Both of these factors are 
related to achievement; their incidence, we suggest, is 
greater among persons of the middle class than those in the 
lower class, (p. 204). 

The results indicate that social strata differ from one 
another in the degree to which the achievement motive is 
characteristic of their members. The findings also indicate 
that students from the lower classes have lower need- 
achievement scores than do students from the middle class. 

The same relationship holds with respect to values: the lower 
class groups are shown to have a smaller proportion who indi¬ 
cate future-oriented, individualistic, value orientations. 

That is, students from lower class homes have a motive for 
high achievement much less frequently than do children from 
homes characterized as belonging to a better class. Also, 
even when certain lower class students do have high motivation, 
they do not have a high level of aspiration for themselves. 
Those who were highly motivated did not intend to go on to 
college, for example. This finding suggests that the value 
placed on education by the family group varies from class to 
class, the lower class not stressing education to any great 


extent. 






c '. 


..... 

: 

' 

, 

■ . • . , 


I. • ; ■ 

H I • ■ 




HOnOO: 






) 

. ■ ■ . ' X f ' . 

v 1 i i l.ja Jinnc: o 'I-'. jojJ.o: 

j ;ckm '.v,.. -; i:. .'u ' ■ ~j o 

. : 






o ow; 

. 

. 

- ■ : 

; 

' 

. ■ 


a-to i a:.. •; ■> - xxo a. - - -> 

:,i v ; ; jO. V J.H o • .' j ,H) ' V • 


. . 


; -i 


H ) 




.t J 


hi • . ; 'li v 




•. h 


jo 1 


: 

JeOnoi/ay oij.L 


■ 0 » On ; :HhHH./ jn >; :0V n< ttC 

; li L '0 

; t o u . hi :■ 'lx a3a. 


< 

k J. : ■ X a.: < 






o •. 


X 


J .'.f V J J ( X v .. i; 




Lis Xp 'X 


oo , nx; 

; , v \> , ;< Hi ' J' . • o X ') - 



, 

I,!n-:Jrrl J 

cb ■ . • 

t OH' 0 toi 




• 

0 


■ • ' 

j “X :<v 

j , • ox vc noxjooHuo 

i t 0 ( 0ODS; 



ii'OJ an. 

< Cl e 0 •. 

' * 


- 


96 

The results of Rosen 1 s study suggest that one might expect 


to find members of lower class homes constituting a fairly 
large proportion of the number of academic underachievers in 
a given group. Berdie (1954) concluded that the whole pattern 
of family interests is a most important factor in determining 
the college plans of high school students, and he believes that 
any program of action must be directed toward the parents of 
high school students, who, in many cases, are not interested 
in having their children go on for further education. Studies 
done in Britain by Hamza (1951) and Campbell (1951) suggest 
that poor home conditions or poor home and peer attitudes 
toward education tend to make for academic underachievement 
on the part of the child. Campbell concluded, !t . . . These 
findings strongly confirm the widely held belief that certain 
aspects of home background greatly affect secondary school 
achievement. . . . tf (p. 100.) 

Hollingshead (1949) has suggested that, quite apart from 
poor home conditions and adverse parental attitudes toward 
academic progress, the child from the lower class home is 
influenced by yet another set of factors which may well make 
for academic underachievement. In his Elmtown study, he 
noted that the lower class child has less chance of being 
helped by teachers than a child from a better social class. 

He also declares that the child from the lower class home 
lacks prestige and is made to feel unwanted in all phases of 
school life. There is a distinct possibility that such treat- 
ment might well have an adverse effect upon the child 1 s 





■ 




' 1 ■ 


' 



'V c -L.l 


:} 


i 












t, 





■ < 


■ : 


. 


L vV < 


, ) 


€ 


:r:oo 




i'y.Qikya " 


8fui 


' ■■ 


t 



• ■ 


neo ■, i-;» 





) 


o 




; 


"0 - 


'v 


.,(.■■ 1’: ao 


% irm: 


>aqJ 




•aiJ > 



;) 





97 


academic achievement. 

A further explanation of academic underachievement 
hinges on the existence of a wide gap or discrepancy between 
the self-concept and the self-ideal concept, within the 
individual student. Basically, the suggestion is that if 
there is a wide discrepancy between self-as-seen and self-as- 
desired, then this may make for maladjustment. Such maladjust¬ 
ment, on the part of the adolescent student, may in turn make 
for poor academic progress. Much has been written on the 
concept of self and its influence upon the psychology of 
adjustment by Rogers (1947), Leckie (1945), Snygg and Combs 
(1949), and many others. Jersild (1957,Po377) , writing on 
the discrepancy between self-concept and self-ideal concept 
as related to academic underachievement, states: 

It is likely that a disparity between the real and the ideal 
often prevails among the so-called underachievers and over¬ 
achievers in school. We may suspect that when a student is 
a constant underachiever. . .it is partly because he does 
not have the freedom to set goals for himself that are within 
reach. This inability to set achievable goals may be due to 
discouragement about ever reaching the standard others have 
set for him. Coupled with this discouragement there may be 
an element of defiance to those who, as he sees it, have 
rejected him or abused him. The underachiever may be one who, 
paradoxically, pretends not to care because he overcared too 
much and was disappointed or who even now would place pain¬ 
fully high standards upon himself if he once broke away from 
setting no standards at all. Whatever the underlying 
condition, the one who consistently and deliberately fails 
to live up to his possibilities is one who is at odds with 
himself. 

Calvin and Holtzman (1953) offer some support to this 
view, noting that the tendency to enhance the self is inversely 
related to maladjustment. That is, the maladjusted individual 




c 1 


oi: o ‘ '.t( ' >q ’ ■ • 


3 0 ; 0 3 01.0 

no :-.,r .1; no 


j ,t 


o oqoonoo 


u loo : 




V 




0 o 




. (). 


< . 7f\t 




93 

is relatively more self-depreciative than the well-adjusted 
one, Hanlon et al. (1954, p* 217) report, ft . • . Maladjustment 
is a person need not require that his self-concept be 
negatively related to his ideal self. Where the correlation 
is minimal (an r of .27 or less) signs of maladjustment may 
already be manifest. . . 

Finally, Sheerer (1949) has noted that there is a definite 
and substantial relationship between acceptance of and respect 
for self and attitudes of acceptance and respect for others* 
Inasmuch as ability to get along with others is a necessity 
in the school situation, it might be postulated that inability 
to do so could be an indirect cause of underachievement. 

An attempt has been made to offer some theoretical frame¬ 
work within which research may be done in the area of under¬ 
achievement. Four possible explanations have been offered: 

(1) That students purposefully underachieve in school so 
as not to make superior grades which would set them apart 
from their peers. 

(2) That academic underachievement may be an unconscious 
manifestation of a desire to spite or n get even f? with parents 
who are demanding success. 

(3) That students from lower class socio-economic back¬ 
grounds may underachieve because of a poor home and cultural 
milieu, in which parents and peers hold education in poor 
regard. Hollingshead has also suggested that children from 
poorer homes tend to get less attention in school than do 


V 



j; o' 


O.'Of: 






! 


jUv J 


CPOOCfS iVi j i ■ ‘ .<■ 1 





< ’■■■ I.: ,M 0 




1 9 b 


o on 


o 


toi i $ :■;/ c j vcM:.L-;dr> 


c i 



* j,.' .Jlv; v ■ ':) ‘x > *L 0 ' ' .0 o :. r ) 0 03 


Ml L 0 CO, uh OJ 


0 j.jOls.uO 




0 


; 


v 'it, anc 


c 






- 


j 


\ 0 ) 


O 




on oo 




ai: on. oof: 


0 I D.c on 3 - 0 . ' 0. C G'l • - 0 : ' 

I O.; : ‘,0 9 '■■ r xQ 3 CO. 03 6 O •/ 3 X. i 1 3 L'S'S. 01 H O ' , 0 i 

. 


! (' 


r: 







O 


;>• 


99 


children from better homes, 

(4) That the discrepancy between self-concept and self¬ 
ideal concept, indicating a lack of self-acceptance and 
possible maladjustment, may make for poor academic progress. 

This list does not pretend to be exhaustive, and one 
might wonder about the place of such factors as level of 
aspiration, interest or disinterest in school, and motivation 
in academic underachievement. While it is admitted that 
these are important considerations, it is believed that 
these may be explained within the framework of certain of the 
four theories offered above. 

Hypotheses 

The hypotheses given below have been based, for the 
most part, upon conclusions drawn from the studies referred 
to previously. In a very few cases the writer formulated a 
new hypothesis when previous research had failed to shed 
sufficient light on a given area. An attempt was made to 
substantiate or negate each of these hypotheses when all . 
data from the case studies had been assessed. 

School 

(1) Underachievers spend an inadequate amount of time 
on home study. 

(2) Poor study habits and attitudes toward school are 
correlates of underachievement. 

(3) Underachievers doubt the value of a formal education. 



r; ■ u ■. ' c 


3 9' 




'C 




. 


01 c 




•; 1 t 

■ V • • - J 


v 


■ , | 


. 


rr 


> < ■ 




. 


100 


(4) Underachievers show a lack of interest in education 
and may express a desire to stop school. 

(5) Poor school attendance is a correlate of 
underachievement. 

(6) Poor progress in mathematics is a correlate of 
underachievement. 

(7) There is no characteristic relationship between 
scores on a standardized reading test and average class 
scores for underachievers. 

(3) Lack of confidence in ability to do well 
academically is a correlate of underachievement. 

(9) Frequent school retardation is a correlate of 
underachievement. 

(10) Infrequent acceleration in school is a correlate 
of underachievement. 

(11) Underachievers frequently attribute their poor 
academic progress to excessive interest in extra-curricular 
activities. 

(12) Students who have been identified as underachievers 
on entering a given grade in school will remain underachievers 
within that grade. 

Home 

(13) Underachievers frequently come from homes in which 
a foreign language is spoken. 

(14) The majority of underachievers have parents who are 








i 


■J ' 


X. j 




1 


■ 







: ; ... ■ ■ ■■ • i 


) J ) 


ii 




?i c;j 


. r .) '' £ 


■ o 


i ' '■■i'r.iic-rj f x< : 


n, ■ v 




• ' 


' • ‘"S :i 







... 


.•. ■ ' • ■ '. • : 


‘ I. ;U’ 


J 


i.-:- j -v.' i. 


a .*■ • v J. 




. 


•3: j 







{ [ •; v > ■: ni ■ 1 ' 



101 


not foreign born. 

(15) Underachievers frequently are products of broken 
homes. 

(16) No relationship exists between birth order position 
and incidence of underachievemento 

(17) Low socio-economic status is a correlate of under¬ 
achievement. 

Interests and Goals 

(1&) Lack of clarity of vocational goal Is a correlate 
of underachievement. 

(19) Underachievers select vocational goals for which 
they do not have the necessary intellectual ability. 

(20) Underachievers select vocational goals that are 
non-professional in nature. 

(21) Underachievers select vocational goals which are 
not supported by their interests as measured. 

(22) Underachievers tend to have measured interests 
which may be called "non-intellectual” or "practical." 

(23) Underachievers select hobbies that are non- 
creative. 

(24) Underachievers spend an excessive amount of time 
on part-time employment. 

Personal 

(25) Poor physical health is a correlate of under¬ 


achievement 













.: ’r. ; 7 ' ' c o ‘ . -rOPOyoi.ao u \ .1 ) 


. . <; 

■..P i'iOO O pJP'X -O > O.J. 0 ' V . 

* 

... , - } 


- .v -• 


. 








: , ■ 


i. -nolox poy :.<■ ^ooroUooUo ilo/nA ibl } 

* o' . 


T ' J • ;. . :< <. .: :.u •. b: > : • v ) \. UrJ i U-; 

' - ■ 

y.. yyyi '. O' t ; ; . y, y y OK. V bo -v ./..bp . O • '•/' b 0 v :, b/ 

rt ‘' i . : ■ ~ ! 

Ol ■ ■ I ' •'! us; 

•. ; •. c ■ ' 

:y;o o i b h'ru y b Ob ioo:.*b rbov b bov,: jb: , . .; 

... . : • 

- ' \ \ .. : O- 0 • . ; 0 . / : b y;y o . . ' , 

* 0 ... 

oybb bo A. .bOrOPP;-) CO .jooyO .'PI 070 Job)OOP. V-iO.v boy . 

„ :... / . py..-. o ' b v P 


■. PnOCOPP 



102 


(26) Lack of self-acceptance is a correlate of 
underachievement• 

(27) Male underachievers will make high masculinity- 
scores, as such scores are provided on a standardized 
personality survey. 

(2$) Those students who are the most marked under¬ 
achievers will have the most irrational levels of aspiration. 

Relations With Others 

(29) Underachievers are socially extraverted and enjoy 
the company of others. 

(30) Underachievers enjoy satisfactory social relations 
with members of the opposite sex. 

(31) Underachievers show little interest in social 
service pursuits or occupations. 





'■ ... ... ■ ■ ■ .. :■ . ) 

i 

_■ . • • Ofivj 

. . : i\-_ V 

, v v ooa -yi ' lv.*/ , 

« ■ • i. : 

[zxoos ex ■ X* ■ ... 

w - 

; i it i ■ ■ x 

o 



CHAPTER FIVE 


PROCEDURES AND INSTRUMENTS USED 


Meeting the Underachievers Selected 

The underachievers utilized in this study had been 
identified on the basis of marks made in June 195$ 5 while 
they were in grade nine. It was uncertain in what high 
schools they would be enrolled for grade ten in September 
of that same year. While each high school normally draws 
its grade ten population from the junior high schools in a 
given area, various factors might result in a grade nine 
student’s attending a high school other than the one which 
might have been expected. Consequently, in order to find 
the fifty-two underachievers from whose ranks the thesis 
population was to be drawn, it was necessary for the princi¬ 
pal of each high school to check the names of the fifty-two 
against his grade ten enrollment. In this way the under¬ 
achievers in each school were located. 

It was found that thirteen of the original fifty-two 
students were not in attendance at any of the five high 
schools in the city. Inasmuch as these students had done 
poorly in their grade nine examination results, it was not 
surprising that a number of them had apparently stopped 





O' 


i it. 




> 


i 


t - 


Ji ; 


■ i 


o i Li 


j 










i 


0;.«, -i 




ic 


| 


v ■ 


(i 


> 


bi u 


!:1 


, , > 




i . i 


,1.1, c, 


( 


.r > 


( j 


) i 


loo' ,jJ. 


: L 


00110 


104 


school® While it was believed that each high school would 
contribute about equally to the number of underachievers, 
this was found not to be the case® 

TABLE I 

NUMBER OF UNDERACHIEVERS IN EACH HIGH SCHOOL 



School 

Underachievers 

A 

5 

B 

11 

C 

9 

D 

6 

E 

2 


Because grade ten students in the Edmonton Public 
Schools have few study periods, it was necessary to meet 
them during the regular class hours® Principals and vice¬ 
principals were most cooperative in arranging to have 
students made available. Every effort was made not to have a 
student miss a class in which he was especially weak® Pre¬ 
cautions were also taken against a student ? s missing a number 
of classes in the same subject. 

The number of school periods required to finish testing 
and interviewing a given student varied according to several 
factors. The length of the school period was not uniform from 
school to school, ranging from thirty-five to sixty minutes® 







-' 0 -L 



or loo ..o.f, u;',J:.a ; ; :o j hovivileo -v, . :;. r : olio:''' 

ir*’ijif V.o ' : r:i oc h f-f*^ no. -o 

* : 






or .0 





ox: In A [■,:? i j:<■: AA/'o-nA' nx crfiftou 


doc: 




):) 


' 








.I.C Oil 


0.0 i 






00 1: BD.tH) APOf JOt .00 VO 

• >{ ' ■ V * : . 




' 

■ • :j. A o: < •;; !>, ; r 




■ 


. 


O 'loo 





105 


Another factor which influenced the amount of school time 
required was the speed with which the student worked. It 
was found that, on the average, about six hours were 
required for each student. This meant seeing the student 
for from six to ten class periods. In each case, the school 
administration arranged that an office be made available. 

In most instances, either the medical services room or a 
counseling room was provided. 

Procedure Followed in Interviewing and Testing 

In every case the student was acquainted during the 
opening session with the purpose of the study. This explana¬ 
tion was followed by the administration of the Brown-Holtzman 
Survey of Study Habits and Attitudes , or SSHA (1956). If time 
permitted, the Kuder Preference Record ( Vocational ) was also 
begun. 

Frequently, it was possible to work with two students 
simultaneously during the early stages of the relationship. 

A structured interview on ff Free Time” was carried out during 
the second meeting. (See Appendix C.) The Tasehuk - Hepburn 
Self - Concept Inventory (Taschuk, 1957) and the Bills f index 
of Adjustment and Values (Bills et al., 1951) were also 
administered during the early stages of the relationship. 

The second structured interview, on "School,” was carried out 
next. (See Appendix D.) This was followed by the administra¬ 
tion of the Wechsler - Bellevue Intelligence Scale (Wechsler, 


1944). Next came the Rotter Incomplete Sentences Blank 



























, 


. i» 0 


■ - - 




; •; \i XX 


- K. : • : 






't- l : 






106 


(Rotter, 1950) and the SRA Youth Inventory (Remmers and 
Shimberg, 1953), together with a third structured interview, 
on the "Family. tT (See Appendix E.) The Guilford - Zimmerman 
Temperament Survey was administered toward the end of the 
program, and a fourth structured interview, "Plans,” was 
completed. (See Appendix F.) The Taschuk - Hepburn Self-Ideal 
Concept Inventory was also administered, quite frequently in 
the last session. A number of checklists, blanks, and 
scales, described below, were also used to gather informa¬ 
tion about the student. Most of these instruments were 
simple and required only a few minutes to complete. A tape 
recorder was tried during the pilot study, but it presented 
several difficulties. Since the interviews were structured, 
it was possible to keep note-taking to a minimum. At no 
time did it appear that the taking of notes was disturbing 
to the student. Good rapport with the students was experi¬ 
enced throughout the study. 

Instruments Used 

The Brown-Holtzman Survey of Study Habits and Attitudes 
(SSHA) was developed with three purposes in mind: (a) to 
identify students whose study habits and attitudes are 
different from those of students who earn high grades; (b) to 
aid in understanding students with academic difficulties; and 
(c) to provide a basis for helping such students to improve 


















i/oaqa aaa; ' ;j 












,’vav 




o 


J ; fl i''' ■ S J 




, - > 


naiat 




I . 1 





107 


their study habits and attitudes and thus more freely to 
realize their potentialities. 

The instrument consists of seventy-five statements 
relative to one T s study habits or attitudes toward school or 
college. The subject is required to indicate to what extent 
each statement applies to himself. Five possible answers 
are provided: Rarely (0% to 5% of the time); Sometimes (16% 
to 35% of the time); Frequently (36% to 6 3% of the time); 
Generally (66% to $5% of the time); and Almost Always (86% 
to 100% of the time). Scoring may be done by machine or by 
hand stencils. The authors provide a Counseling key” which 
identifies ”wrong” answers on thirty-eight statements. Tt Wrong” 
answers are those that differ from the answers provided by 
students who are academically successful. 

The Manual for the SSHA provides percentile norms for 
approximately 2,800 students in grades ten, eleven, and 
twelve in six American states. Reliability coefficients, 
computed by correlating odd with even items by the Spearman- 
Brown formula, were obtained for approximately 550 students. 

For boys the coefficient was found to be .87, and for girls 
it was .79* 

Validity coefficients had been worked out for the SSHA 
and fourteen school subjects. These ranged from .54 down to 
.22, with nine coefficients over .40. The validity coefficient 
between the averages of grade twelve marks and SSHA scores 
made by students in that grade was .50 for boys and .44 for 






}). 





girls. Correlations between the SSHA and the ACE are low. 

The authors claim that the addition of the SSHA to the ACE 
results in multiple correlation coefficients with the criteria 
ranging from .03 to .23 higher than the coefficients yielded 
by the ACE alone. 

The Kuder Preference Record ( Vocational ) consists of 
504 suggested activities arranged in groups of threes. The 
subject is to select a T, most liked” and a "least liked” 
activity in each case. Scores are available for ten areas 
of interest: Outdoor; Mechanical; Computational; Scientific; 
Persuasive; Artistic; Literary; Musical; Social Service; and 
Clerical. A verification score is also provided for each 
student. 

The Kuder Preference Record ( Vocational ) has two specific 
uses: to point out vocations with which the student may not 
be familiar but which involve activities of the type for 
which he has expressed preference, and to check on whether a 
person 1 s choice of occupation is consistent with the type of 
activity he ordinarily prefers. The record is easily admin¬ 
istered and scored. 

The most recent revision of the Manual gives separate 
reliability estimates for each of the ten interest scales. 

This information is provided for four groups, labelled as: 
1,000 men; 100 women; 100 boys; and 100 girls. On the 
average, the reported reliabilities are approximately .90. 

On the whole, the evidence suggests that the Kuder scales 












' : " . ) i?'- J' : ' i > ■■ ' J 

x ' - ' 41 b - -4 


c 


; ■ ■ . j ■. i* ■ ; f :; ■ - : 

. 

I oi'j.i: jcoiod : - ■ 

Ivnx ; ooi.>'-:ro.i. : *vi.pc - 


0'V 




•0 Y. 




.0:1.1;v 

: : . '. 


:.v 00 c . 
n "\>0 4“no 
■iu': oq T ( 
•. djDife r. 


Did;: 4i„; 


j/i: j c.ivin- 


L 


■;J0 , .; ■ : i 0 0i 


1 , DXi ' i.>* I 


■j • 0 : ,;c oc 


I'c'r .to 


.1 : ‘i 


v rr ;.c j.. .1; 


• , . : 


»3 .M J.. 



109 


yield scores which are at least as reliable as the average 
personality measure. 

The occupational profile presented in Tables II and III 
of the Manual offer some evidence to support the hypothesis 
that the scores are valid. For example, accountants score 
high on computational and clerical, but low on mechanical 
and persuasive interests. Fowler (1953) thinks that this 
type of evidence fails to be completely convincing, and he 
believes that the validity of the Kuder is still open to 
question. He concludes, however, that the Kuder is one of 
the best available measures of interests, especially for high 
school students, and states: 

Counselors appear to think that the administration of the 
Kuder blank is a good beginning point in an interview. They 
look upon it as a useful source of suggestive information 
that may be used in conjunction with data concerning 
ability and other personality factors in explaining the 
possibilities of vocational choice, (p. 742) 

The Bills T Index of Adjustment and Values consists of a 
list of forty-nine adjectives which might apply to any indi¬ 
vidual. The subject is asked to react to each of the 
suggested traits on three scales. The first scale offers'a 
measure of one f s self-concept. ”Self-concept” has been 
defined by Bills et al. as ”. . . the traits and values 
which the individual has accepted as definitions of himself.” 
(Bills et al., 1951, P« 257)* The student is required to 
take each trait and fit it into the sentence, ”T am a (an) 
.person.” He then nbtes on the answer sheet the degree 











; ■ . . ■ :. . ; 0 'io 0 

: 






0 j 




ii.l 






' ■ 




e a 


4 


C - 0 


'0; 


j 



, • . . i . 

f j ■ i-j 

L : J v ;■ sb ■' '■ vo ■ 

* 

■ 

• , • ,, > . >0 ; j \_ : ;• J'"0o SH'i 

; h . ,-:r -J bo XoOffo 


r/iJ'.'ib r vdn u 

: >. ' bid <:■ 

' 

. 0 Lie. :} L' O ‘ ' lo . 

; 

. . V 



r •:.: r iol9^nuo 
" .' l ii • '' ?loc 

j.. r '.H: V v ’ ' " 

rule .bn:v vj ilic 


• ■} \ : ; ■: 0 /.! . r '• " . ' 

• , ■ ■; ..rr . , o : r '-> - ■ r ■■= '■ ;i ; 


j.wj.iii'icJj "•,: b? or; >000 ssb Xrodbvbbrib obd uoh 

• : : ;• - : c r. j. j; jib'?, bo" ' ■ n.n bo '0 ob 








no 


or extent to which this statement is now true of him. Five 
possible answers are suggested, ranging from (1) "Seldom is 
this like me" to (5) "Most of the time this is like me." 

Each of the forty-nine terms is marked in this manner. 

The subject is then required to consider each of the 
suggested traits a second time. On this occasion he is to 
consider the scores already given on Scale I and indicate on 
Scale II how he feels about himself. Once again, there are 
five possible answers, ranging from (1) "I very much dislike 
being as I am in this respect" to (5) T, I like very much 
being as I am in this respect." This scale measures the 
degree to which the subject accepts himself. 

When considering these items for the third time, the 
subject is required to insert each one in the sentence, 

"I would like to be a (an) ..person." The five answers 

range from (1) "Seldom would I like this to be me" to (5) "Most 
of the time I would like this to be me." This scale presuma¬ 
bly measures the concept of ideal self. 

Thus, on the Bills ! Index are offered scores which 
provide a measure of the subject 1 s self-concept, acceptance 
of self, and concept of ideal self. By comparing the scores 
offered on Scales I and III it is possible to note the 
degree of discrepancy between the subject’s self-concept and 
his self-ideal concept. Some value may also be derived from 
this index even if the scales have not been scored, for a 
brief examination reveals in what areas or on what traits 












0 





■ {': ' 




) 





Ill 

the subject sees himself to be most unworthy or unacceptable. 
(See Appendix Q.) 

The Wechsler - Bellevue Intelligence Scale has been widely 
used since its introduction in 1939. The test, which offers 
norms for subjects aged ten to seventy, was welcomed as pro¬ 
viding an adult intelligence test score which offered more 
"top" than did the Stanford - Binet . It also replaced the 
method of computing I.Q. T s that had been advocated by Terrnan 
and which was felt to be weak for subjects with a chrono¬ 
logical age of more than thirteen years. The Wechsler scale 
provides three scores, verbal, performance, and total score. 
It may utilize some eleven subtests in the determination of 
the subject T s I.Q. Wechsler offers estimates of the reli¬ 
ability of the scale on the basis of two studies. The first 
consists of inter-subtest correlations in which eight sub¬ 
tests were selected and divided into two groups of four. 

The reliability coefficient so obtained is given as .90. A 
second study employing a test-retest approach with fifty-two 
subjects yielded a reliability coefficient of .94 for the 
whole scale. 

It is admitted by the author that it is difficult to 
establish the validity of an intelligence scale directly, 
and he acknowledges that the usual indirect methods, such as 
correlating I.Q. T s obtained with teachers T grades or scores 
made on other standardized intelligence tests, are unsatis¬ 
factory. He does use such criteria, however, in his valida¬ 
tion studies but suggests that the final validation of an 










;; f £)' 




112 


intelligence scale may well be whether or not it works well 
in practice. Certainly the Vfechsler - Bellevue Intelligence 
Scale has earned wide acceptance, and the vast majority of 
articles in the literature dealing with the Wechsler as an 
instrument for the measurement of intelligence are highly 
complimentary. 

The Rotter Incomplete Sentences Blank consists of forty 
words and phrases. The subject is to add words and phrases 
so as to form complete sentences, which presumably express 
his Tt real feelings." The principle underlying the Rotter is 
the same as that one underlying all projective techniques, 
namely, that if an unstructured stimulus is presented to a 
subject he will project into his response to it certain of 
his most intimate attitudes and feelings normally kept locked 
within himself. 

The Rotter is a relatively new instrument and has not as 

yet been widely used. The validation studies done on this 

blank have been criticized, but Cofer (1953> p. 243) states: 

Although one may doubt the ultimate value of the criteria 
employed and deplore the small number of cases used in 
validity studies, there is, nevertheless, some clearly 
presented evidence that the test has some validity as an 
indicator of maladjustment. 

Interscorer reliabilities of .91 and *96 are reported for 
trained scorers using fifty male and fifty female records 
respectively. Spearman-Brown test-retest coefficients of .34 
and .33 are reported for a total of 195 male and female 
college students. 













. 






: 1 / . ; 9 ■■ 


i/fLC 

j •ji 


.< Of 9>„j 0 > X.l 1 o 'I flO . j 




; ; (. t *. - 


VJ 9 C 

). uood ov r. Ji'.JvX 



a 


v . o ; o ^ 

■ X ;ii •) 'I, J.. • >' 0*.x 

; ; ■ , V „ , .V ■ r.,): 

J , ri. 


S. tj A' 1 

bru? boxol.qri 
ujo \J 1'.‘.ris 

"v 1 O’’ 

' . r i : o.ibl 


r J ' • ■ 




•:>x.. xo■ 1 ■ < 0’ -’ 


•n 

: X ■ 


. i : ) v 



113 


In the present study no effort was made to score the 
Rotter; it was utilized only as an instrument which would 
quickly identify possible problem areas. Cofer has suggested 
that the blank was intended as a gross screening instrument, 
and Woltmann (1953) recommends it to clinical psychologists, 
psychiatrists, and analysts who want to gain information 
about their patients in a minimum of time. 

The SRA Youth Inventory consists of a checklist of 29$ 
statements, which are arranged in eight scales. The inventory 
is meant to help school personnel, parents, and the students 
themselves in the identification of students 1 problems at 
the junior and senior high school levels. The statements 
included in this inventory were originally gathered by 
having more than five hundred students in approximately forty 
schools write essays on the problems that were of greatest 
concern to them. The content of these essays was analyzed, 
and items or statements were based on the results of this 
analysis. The preliminary inventory was given to about 
13,000 senior high school students and to 4,000 students in 
grades seven and eight. The manual provides scoring instruc¬ 
tions and adds the caution that these scores are to be used 
in conjunction with other material about the student. 

Reliability coefficients for this inventory were calcu¬ 
lated separately for each of the eight areas, using the Kuder- 
Richardson formula. The coefficients ranged from .75 (Health) 
to .94 (My Home and Family), with a median of .$$. The 






...• t -. .... ; a 


• . . ’. 


. .. 'i . s ‘i. .! 


• - s. . J i ;■ ■: . 

. \. r ■■ : . . •;( o£ > . 


< ‘ 


s Li ..:i vu,l.uij 


, ' : ' . 


. ’'.I.. >■<! { ’ - J ' •• 

£ J 




■ 




c 






• v 'fi£> ; •,>.rill.: Ji t. 

j_ :i . • ,■- s . I ' . j : ■ * j ■ 1 ' - • 








"Ji'L 0 BTi 


J ‘ " •' Jo ii 




. 


< 

! 1 Lii ciu i; ; j.ii 'it' j : 

. .. ■ : > ■ < \ J', 


J '■ . .. LLL ■ j.o . ( ‘X : >U ■ Ot 0 ,1 

■)', k.. ; no4; x,i 1 i■ -■ oll ciriox 

. 

... ■ j . ,JV ' ; V i J V jXVi.i.i V. 'X : : 

, i j ; i ■„/. L., .4 j LiLi 'j. C J £L>LL LO'i . ■; ; SOoB, 

. ■.) . .. • : '■ - 



114 


inventory obviously possesses certain face validity in the 
measurement of students 1 problems inasmuch as the statements 
composing it were obtained from material which the students 
themselves submitted. The authors report that a bi-serial 
coefficient of correlation, calculated for each item with 
the total score of its own area, was shown to range from .50 
to .70 for the various scales, the median r being .55. Other 
validating procedures have been used, such as comparison of 
counselor 1 s ratings with inventory scores, but as yet these 
results are tentative. 

Writing on the SEA Youth Inventory , Freeman (1953, p. 155) 
concludes: 

On the whole, this inventory appears to be one of the sounder 
instruments in the field. ... In the hands of professional 
psychologists and counselors this instrument should be useful 
and more valid than some others of the same type in facili¬ 
tating the discovery of areas of difficulty and maladjustment. 

The Guilford - Zimmerman Temperament Survey has evolved 
out of three inventories of the Guilford series. Ten traits 
are measured on the Guilford-Zimmerman, with a total of 300 
items being offered. The scales are as follows: "G tr , General 
Activity; Tt R tT , Restraint; Tf A", Ascendance; r? S", Sociability 
(opposite to "shyness”); "E", Emotional Stability; "0", 
Objectivity; "F tT , Friendliness; tT T ft , Thoughtfulness; ,? P", 
Personal Relations; and T, M", Masculinity. Each scale 
measures both positive and negative aspects of the traits 
indicated by the scale title. 

Estimates of the total score reliabilities have been 








7 




e o $ •!. a i J • I'i o' > ' p .•;« <: p i ■ 8 o<| ^. : ij ■• 
Jo: If: Wij o... - o . ! 

j ;■ ilJ li:) i L OX’O J 0 • 1 i 

. - 0 : - < -i ' 

(, J.': • , o.. . • J ■ ’ :•> c 'O.i 

Jj ,0 Li % 0 0 fvO.uO, ■ ■ t • 

- • _ *i :' ■ J ■ , o o 1 n ■ / ; 

■ i. : > 0, 0>! < •-> V ■ ! ■ >. ' ^ 

f 0 . Y‘.0 ^ ' J- 


0 J ■ fi'lO'O 

o v.J.oooJJ 
x.y 

:i J '• to J or z 


Joe no f J 



o 


s 




c 


o(-,[ 


V 


iiOi O 


hiJ.X OHO: 


. 1 J r :c ■ '■ ' 

X ‘.n.'of:...o xc v ; : ■ 

j J . \J ' o JO J 

., o 0 0 i . • , i . . ■ j ' ' 



l . ) / S.i V 5 0 ■ : 


o. . 




i 


V j, ■. 


J. 


. 


. I 


< 


0< - 


• . 


; on 


: oooi j:.: i'oo I 00000 


i/i ! . . . ■ 




'): • 









115 

made in various ways, based upon samples of 523 male college 
students and 3$9 female students. Reliability coefficients 
for the ten scales range from .75 to .&5 with standard 
errors of obtained scores ranging from 2.2 to 2.6. The 
intercorrelations between the ten trait scores are "gratify- 
ingly low.” This is indicative of the general uniqueness of 
the scores. 

The Manual (1949, p*llf> ) states that: 

Factorial validity of the scores is fairly well assured by 
the foundation of factor-analysis studies directed toward 
internal consistency and uniqueness. It is believed that 
what each score measures is fairly well defined and that 
the score represents a confirmed dimension of personality 
and a dependable descriptive category. 

There are also evidences of practical validity in which 
correlations have been computed between the test scale scores 
and practical criteria of adjustment. The authors claim 
that all the evidence which arose in connection with the 
previous Guilford scales can be applied with confidence to 
the scores of the present survey. 

The School and College Ability Tests aid in estimating 
the capacity of a student to undertake the academic work • 
of the next highest level of schooling--so states the 
Manual for Interpreting Scores (l9b.9)• These tests measure 
two kinds of school-related abilities which are most impor¬ 
tant in the greatest number of school and college endeavours: 
verbal and quantitative. Each SCAT test booklet contains 
four subtests; two, Sentence Understanding and Word Meanings, 









L..V - Jlejj . 0,10.. ;i. o •: old 0 0. bOO'.O J!u)bl'j8 

■ J . ’ 

t ; ■ .' . ' . > , -;•.; -. . 

.) . 1 \ .. Cl. O - ■ J nc.v 3, . a i. 0 V 0CO,‘X-1 v -.0' c: J o. r 

■ ' . / ' :} : - i;S ,‘J * .0 J. ' ,.l.' i LC 

. . ...CO 

' , . / o_. _ . ... 

o.'. OjXo ‘,.v yblbljX'v o:.:io:oJ' os* 5 ! 

■ 

’ ■ . . ' j' ' ■ [ : ! ■ ■ < ' ’ 

: 

.... ■ .•: 'll J ■ .; ' I lO 9 

;lo-:d\i hi v L o. ‘:to blxo ' ; ' ,j -' '• 

J j. •:, . ;o;j- ,c- f O jj 0 0 9 rfOOO "V.0 j. OOCC. J:" J-COE COD 

: • . O!’■ 1 ■ : 1 J - 

-.I . ‘ ,, o oi o’o., o:o • I J: * l’: / cooic; > i: / c..:j .U." 3 : oci 

O3 .9 :)fi • ,33 i f i j,., ; . i,, 

■; ; ' o- ■' • 

■ 

. - ' . : :, . ■ ■' ' ! ; 1 

— ... 

^it,;..': J : i . .3 :j.3l' 9 , v. : ..L.i.' £)0 d'-r ixri^.U.K, ii J -a- 1C ''.lifilX OWC 

♦ ;■ ...... .u ./. • >1309 3n '• 100.003 1C ‘10ClOJ/l, 3 ; '0 OOJ ILL ■ $TI ; $v 

. 




Y 0 ' .. ■ OV; 

.. . 

O h > 

J • .1, u:: b . .i' 




116 


are measures of developed verbal ability, and the two others, 
Numerical Computation and Numerical Problem Solving, measure 
ability in basic quantitative areas. Each test yields three 
scores: a Verbal score, a Quantitative score, and a Total 

score. The SCAT tests are offered at five grade levels, i.e., 
at grades five, seven, nine, eleven, and thirteen, with 
equivalent tests being made available at each level. 

Norms are provided for grades four through fourteen 
(second year college) based on populations ranging in size 
from 1,130 to 6,471- School mean norms are also provided for 
the grades four through fourteen, the number of schools 
ranging from forty-one to fifty-three. The Manual strongly 
suggests that local norms be utilized and gives detailed 
information as to how these norms may be computed. 

Development of the SCAT was undertaken as an alternative 
to revision of the ACE. Strictly speaking, the SCAT is not 
truly a replacement for ACE, for it does not have the same 
content and does not measure exactly the same things. 

However, tables are provided which enable one to convert 
SCAT scores into ACE scores and vice versa. 

The publishers of the tests claim that the SCAT is 
intended primarily as a measure of a student T s ability to 
succeed in future work and therefore its predictive validity 
is of primary importance. Obviously, it is impossible at 
this early date to give much information relating to this 
use of the SCAT, although the Manual insists that Supplements 







CfJttr'O < 


onn , 


r;.| ; :/i j- , c ;. j. . p- J.»-U'il&tf ijOqG J..0 V '* i.) :-.0 Cv'O'iwciufenu '' ■ - 1 ' 

n.'jvXoo ai^-uoTi .• b uuiobc:^. * •>> XnO/.ioiujj* 


. i j l.‘i - ! 


C VJ -- 


t 


■ 0 cl 






c 


t 



■ 






•/ ■ . 7 . 




71 


■ i;.:) 







■ r. 


i 


, ,i \. ' i -v 


O -V 1 


n .': , j.Yc'j. v.' 


\.:.j ••,: 


v I 




'( . 



o 



'. ' Li 5 '■ 01 : 


,i>:- i. ■ v <' •' 





117 


to the Technical Report will be published whenever such 
information is made available. The Technical Report does, 
however, provide estimated correlations between SCAT and 
ACE scores. For example, when the SCAT, form 2A (grade 
eleven) and the 1953 ACE (high school level) scores were 
correlated, the coefficients were as follows: Verbal- 
Linguistic, .39; Quantitative, .75; and Total, .33. The 
Manual suggests that inasmuch as the ACE has long been 
accepted as a valid test, it can be assumed that the SCAT 
exhibits a similar degree of validity. A recent study by 
Black (1953) is of interest in that he correlated SCAT total 
scores and grades received on six grade nine subject areas 
for an Alberta population. The coefficients ranged from .76 
to .33. 

The reliabilities reported in the Technical Report for 
the SCAT are the results of internal analyses based on single 
administrations of the tests. They are, therefore, estimates 
of internal consistency. These reliabilities were computed 
by use of the Kuder-Richardson Formula, No. 20. At all five 
grade levels, using the T, A f? form of the test only, the reli¬ 
ability of the total score was found to be at least .95* The 
reliabilities of the Verbal scores are at least .92 in all 
grades, and the reliabilities of the Quantitative scores are 
.90 or greater in three of the five grades, the lowest being 
.33 for grade five. 

The Alberta Department of Education has used its own 










:io:.i-Lj \i;?'V :.'L- 


■ JJ f 


c 


J O, 





j xi j o ;j 


-i: 


■ 


j 


c ov 


o 




9'r.j 


X .lo-cao 






x f 








jc 






. : 






















5 


. 


u l! '■ 










: 







118 


norms for the grade nine level SCAT since these tests were 
used in this province a few years ago. New norms are worked 
out for each grade nine class. Verbal scale scores for the 
Alberta group are found to be a TT bit low" when compared with 
the norms offered by the SCAT publishers, while Alberta 1 s 
quantitative scores are a "bit high" when so compared, 
according to a Department of Education official (Budnick, 1959). 
No estimate was made regarding the comparability of the two 
Total scores. As yet, means and standard deviations for the 
various scales have not been computed for Alberta populations. 

The original Taschuk Self - Concept Inventory was a list 
of self-referent statements to which the student was to 
respond. In each, five possible responses were provided: 

T..true of me; a good description of me, 

MT..mostly true of me, but not completely true, 

N..neither true or false, not applicable to me, 

MF..mostly false of me, like me only to a small extent, 

F..false of me, not like me at all. 

The statements (originally 246 in number) were derived 
from student essays on the topics, "What I Like About Myself" 
and "What I Dislike About Myself." The ratings of a number 
of judges eventually reduced the number of statements to 
seventy-seven. Different answers were assigned weighted 
values, and scoring techniques were worked out. 

There is no material on hand regarding the validity of 
the scores of this inventory, but Taschuk (1957) reports a 
coefficient of reliability of .91 in a test-retest situation 
when fifty-seven students took the inventory on two occasions, 
eight days apart. 








119 


Subsequent work on the Inventory by Hepburn (1959) 
suggested that certain of the statements were not completely 
satisfactory. As a consequence, the form which was used in 
this study (the Taschuk-Hepburn) consists of only seventy 
statements. In all other respects, however, the original 
Taschuk instrument is unchanged. (See Appendix G.) 

The Taschuk - Hepburn Self - Ideal Concept Inventory was 
devised by the author of this study in an attempt to provide 
an instrument which would extend the use of the Taschuk and 
offer a measure of discrepancy between self-concept and 
self-ideal concept. Statements in the original inventory 
were reworded so as to suggest what the subject would like 
to be the case. For example, the statement Tt I have many 
friends” from the original inventory became ”1 would like 
to have many friends” on the self-ideal concept form. The 
two instruments were administered approximately five days 
apart and the scores on the individual items were compared. 
If, to use the example given above, the student marked as 
False the statement, ”1 have many friends” from the self- 
concept inventory but marked as True the statement, ”1 would 
like to have many friends” from the self-ideal concept 
inventory, this obviously represented a discrepancy of four 
points, that is, a move from one end of the answer scale 
(T, MT, N, MF, F) to the other. The discrepancy scores for 
the subjects in this thesis population were totalled and 
compared with those scores made by approximately seventy 















* ' 


■ ' ■ < u ' 5 ' ■ 


; ■ : 1 : ■ •£ 


rr--. ! 






OilOO !<■. 


c: 


■ , } 


VCiI '■ -. 'V 


C 


) 


/i. '! 






n 


ili ( \ 




yvod 




;' ) 


! 


) 


riit. 'y yw;. >-j 


v •) 






'Vf ,'Ti , 


r>XX .1 ,'r 



120 


unselected males from the various grade ten classes of one 
of the high schools of the Edmonton Public School system. 

(See Appendix H.) 

Also utilized in this study were four structured inter¬ 
views which were obtained from research done by Super and 
his associates-(1957)* These workers were primarily inte¬ 
rested in providing a framework for research in vocational 
development and in the formulation of a theory of occupa¬ 
tional choice and development. Inasmuch as the students 
that Super worked with were of approximately the same chrono¬ 
logical age as the students in this present study and 
because Super and his associates sought to elicit much the 
same information as was deemed necessary in this study of 
underachievers, it was seen possible to use, almost without 
change, the interviews as given by Super et al. The inter¬ 
views sought to uncover data and provide information on 
four topics or areas which were seen as being important to 
the student, namely: "Free Time," "School," "Family,” and 
"Plans." 

The Underachievement Scale produced by McQuary and 
Truax (1954) is composed of items taken from the MMPI. They 
selected twenty-one items which distinguished between over¬ 
achiever and under-achiever groups with critical ratios of 
2.33 or greater. Three items were borrowed from Altus (194$), 
who had constructed a similar scale, also of MMPI items. 

The twenty-four true or false items now on hand constituted 






121 


the underachievement scale. Various attempts have been 
made to determine the efficiency of the scale on new under¬ 
achieving and over-achieving groups. In one instance, 
students making extreme scores on the scale were examined 
as to discrepancy between expected and earned grade averages. 
It was found that 54.5 per cent of students with scores of 
fifteen or greater achieved less than what was expected of 
them, while 52.3 per cent of students with scores of six: or 
less achieved higher marks than were expected of them. 

For the purposes of this study the number of items in 
the scale was reduced to twenty because it was found that 
four items were unsuitable for a Canadian high school popu¬ 
lation. (See Appendix I.) 

The Gough Predictive ( Achievement ) Scale (Gough, 1953) 
was developed primarily for the purpose of predicting college 
undergraduate course grades. Gough hoped that the findings 
of his study xvould contribute to a broader understanding of 
some of the non-intellective factors relating to academic 
underachievement. The writing and selection of items were 
based upon three general sources: previous findings; 
theories about academic motivation and achievement; and 
intuitive hunches. Altogether, thirty-six true or false 
statements were selected and administered to 600 college 
students. The median r, when scale scores were correlated 
with grade scores, was .47- The scale was also administered 
to some 1,100 high school students, with a median r of .3$ 






I , ; y -", j n n. .1 .7 V, j 

17 t;i 7 ' >7717 U.0. O .[ ' •>' - > :i.o '-7 


, 5 7 7 • 

i 


:7’7 > i;M> ' 0,7. 




r mqj 

7 . 


. 0 :■ 


) V! 


,1 .'] ;v : 

■ 7 7i 7 7 .L l '.7 Ui .. 
7. 7i J J ;j J i .1 - : •> • * • ! 

U 7 oq .1.7 7. ; 'o7 ».a I n 


. • * 


> 




. UcJ- < 7> - ■'- - '.'-7"; . 7 

I [< )D ; j; j ;r )j 17)7 7 )7< 7L< 

: lijjfti 'J >1.1-1 ;; 7 q 7 qoi I : • 
'.co • i;7.f> 7 cj- 77:77 7 o7' 77 " 


> ■ 1 ’ - - 


v.;.»7 7 I (J - 


r.! M 


77 uf : .1 


J ■ 


■ 


j 3.1*1 




7 i,7>; . . ; 7 ■ ■ i ■ ■' 


J:; i'o 1 7'i. o y'i : >v; 

J i 3 7.7 -J'0 711.7 jt)'B ’ 0 7,',;.; 


0 7 J -7uVf t ; : 7 -7.7 i 


. . ' 


;)ii77 


122 


between scale scores and grade scores being noted. 

Gough found that in approximately 1,400 cases the 
correlation between the scale and measures of intellectual 
ability was considerably smaller than the correlation 
between the scale and achievement scores. He concluded 
that the scale would thus appear to be a partial predictor 
of academic outcomes in its own right without drawing to 
any great extent upon intellectual factors. 

The scale, as used in this study, contained only thirty- 
five items. One statement was found to be unsuitable for 
a Canadian high school group and was removed. (See Appendix 
J.) 

There is much interest in the possible relationship 
between level of aspiration and academic achievement. It 
is generally assumed today that an individual does not have 
one level of aspiration but rather that he has many—as 
many as there are different types of tasks which he will 
attempt to carry out. If such is the case, one can measure 
a subject T s level of academic aspiration only by using an 
instrument which makes specific reference to that field. 
Accordingly, a form was prepared which sought to reveal 
something of the student 1 s level of aspiration with reference 
to the five school subjects under consideration in this 
study. 

For each subject, the student was asked to indicate the 
highest, lowest, and the actual mark he would like to make 









„ 

i 

; 5 . . i ' j: • ' ’ •' ■ '■ ^ : ''' .' • } 

i. ' i : ' ' > • =>.'U oa:;,:,; ’ >•< ^ rlQ0 


1 [ l 




- 1 

• , ; , - , •■; ■ j ' r; ' y'u . • & ■ «■■■ ■'< ‘ ' • 0 






*.y • ■:] y• y.x.'C ‘ 






yyry iy 'Jfi 






: ,r\y t -■ 

- • :jn 'ml m * u: 

• y I c,r\ ! V ‘v'>'U>V. ; 1 ' ' J 


. J ' 1 'r'V- ‘ ' . > y : ^ ' 1 - •• 


' 

' , s ' ■ ' ' ' c v J i ■ ct 

■ 

... 

• • . yy, : y " 

, r< • ■, 






y.y ■ - 

y / -• - r... • - ' •" 

. ' : 1 r 0 * 'V . ' ■ • • ' 1 - 

>y cy ■ : ' ■ ' ' <' ■ ■ 

■ 

• ... l) t : 1 ; • ' ; 1 ' • ' 7 : 


•' ; ■ i! ' " i 


j;.: 






U t .i:y.iy ' ; 1 



123 

in his next examination. He was then asked to suggest the 


highest, lowest, and actual mark he was going to make in 
his next examination in each subject. Also available, of 
course, were the marks which the student had received in 
the grade nine departmentals. It was hoped that a com¬ 
parison of the marks estimated and those eventually made 
would reveal something of the boy T s level of aspiration in 
these key high school subjects. (See Appendix K.) 

In order to determine what factors the subject felt 
were most important in making for success, a list was 
devised. Eleven characteristics were included, with refer¬ 
ence being made to such inherited ones as "good looks," 
acquired characteristics, as "clothes," and to those which 
directly refer to one f s relationship with others, such as 
Tt always doing what you are told. ?? The student was to 
indicate the order of importance each factor had for him. 
Space was left for the subject to add any factors which he 
felt were important but which had been omitted. (See 
Appendix L.) 

In a further effort to learn something of the 
student T s self-concept, a word list consisting of twenty- 
three words and phrases was prepared. The subject was 
to underline all those words and phrases which he felt 
applied to himself. Certain of the traits were 
complimentary in nature, whereas others were not. (See 
Appendix M.) 



. 1 i s .,; _ i 


\.0 




c • 

vj: .. . 'i 

• iOO : I 

( r ;j; v ctri s 


c tor, i - xa 






io j: i iv/ o ao.u o 


: i(OX . ' : *K u'O ' '' 

o oL ) .;x 




o;/ O ■: 


j. 8 0.7 Oi) 


ioxav; J 


x.iio\/o xo ;;'n. 

o. o o r f xx 


‘10 0 ...G r i'ji' 
. ,7 £ 


; j../-, curiovr 


■).. ] j 


C tdi/I . 1 Hi 1 0 


)J XJ 



124 

A form was prepared which, it was hoped, would reveal 
the subject’s reading preferences. On two separate check¬ 
lists the student was asked to rank order the type of 
material which he enjoyed reading most. The first list 
dealt with various types of newspaper articles, and the 
second referred to articles and stories such as might be 
found in magazines. (See Appendix N.) 

A good deal of interest has been shown in school achieve¬ 
ment as it is related to the students s position in his 
family, and to the number and age of his siblings. Accord¬ 
ingly, a blank was prepared which obtained the name, sex, 
age, education, position, and marital status of every member 
of the subject’s family. The subject was asked to list his 
siblings in order of birth. (See Appendix 0.) 

In an effort to gain further information regarding the 
subject’s vocational interests, a job-preference list was 
prepared and administered. This list made reference to 
eight broad vocational groupings. These, it was felt, 
covered the majority of vocational fields. The subject was 
asked to rank order the eight categories in order of prefer¬ 
ence. It has been reported by one research worker 
(Armstrong, 1955)*that students who are not working to 
capacity tend to express vocational interests which do not 
coincide with vocational interests as measured. It was 
hoped, by administering this checklist, to substantiate or 
negate this contention for this particular group of under¬ 
achievers (See Appendix P.) 






T 







i. • > > 


e 



i/O 




. :• 0 . ■. ) .-.it:’ -1 





> ■. ; . 




CHAPTER SIX 


PILOT STUDY 

Purpose 

To determine something of the efficiency and value of 
the proposed research method and the utility of the instru¬ 
ments suggested, it was decided that a pilot study should 
be carried out on a small group of grade ten students in 
advance of the main study. 


Population 

This study was carried out in May, 195$, and was 
confined to members of the grade ten class in each of two 
high schools of the Edmonton Public School system. The 
Strathcona High School and the Strathcona Composite High 
School were selected because of their proximity to each 
other, thus permitting the maximum use of spare periods and 
so reducing the over-all time required to complete the 
study. 

Selection of Students 


An examination was made of the files of all the grade 



' X ■ ■ l) ')} >' ■ > 


i x XL 











'll.; uc-L; 


i J f ic 


fj 


5 


126 


ten male students in the two schools. Their stanine scores 
were recorded, as earned on the grade nine departmental 
examinations of June, 1957 in mathematics, social studies, 
literature, language, and science. A preliminary index of 
underachievement was calculated for each boy. (See 
Appendix A.) The ten students in each of the two high 
schools who had an index indicating the greatest degree of 
underachievement were then given further consideration. A 
second examination of the Department of Education records 
gave the scaled scores obtained by these students in the 
five school subjects mentioned, and, on the basis of these 
scores, a second index of underachievement was calculated. 

(See Appendix B.) Three pupils were then selected from each 
of the two groups of ten students previously derived from 
the larger population. Those chosen were the pupils having 
the highest final index of underachievement. These six 
students were considered, therefore, to be the most marked 
male underachievers in all the grade ten classes in the two 
high schools. 

Instruments Used 

The instruments used in this pilot study were as follows: 
the Brown-Holtzman Survey of Study Habits and Attitudes ; the 
Kuder Preference Record ( Vocational ); the Bills T Index of 
Adjustment and Values ; the Rotter Incomplete Sentences Blank ; 
the Wechsler-Bellevue Intelligence Scale ; the SRA Youth 


























^ : . » n. vj ... ' . 

; . i. o: vr ne;? 

\7i ; , . •■ ■ ;>: - : £' ( 

c ;. 1. f-r; i':-, j. ;M ' c OJ - . C' 1 c 1 : 

. 

' .-, c,;. . " : i ■' " ' :r ‘ ‘ « " ' 


■ ‘TO 

: . 

i-]-: 1'-, 0>:;i ; ; ‘' • ' r ^ 0 

‘ 


% o ■ ' : 0 . ■ X" '■ ' ' ’ ■ 1 : : 

t... •'"ilcoi Idb 

., . ,• ■,.' . 


\ •, , o.' : ' v Joe;:; o : r< u .k; 

■ 00 

xa r.x ^ , ■ i. .. i; x ' ■ 

. r, •. .v,; -- 

■ «... . .. ' / /■ ‘ w v . ; uv t : ; i 

. 

, \ 

< 

•) : r i‘j <■. v ./ . x■ ■. 1 ,i ; v j . .; \ 

, 

/ ' 

> -J ■> 


e ■ 

. : . 

, ; ' .>• y .?:•; oiw 

'• .)... '.i - ■ : ' ' c ^ ’• ! " t 

;■. i:-i...,-; r ;.v L'l: j; 

- { . ; i ) Cl ■ riJ I 



: , j ' • 7 y; ’ ; . '’ .1 : ;f ■ 



■ ". : . ' f 



127 


* 

Inventory ; and the Guilford - Zimmerman Temperament Survey . 

Two inventories, the Taschuk - Hepburn Inventory of Self - 
Concept and the Taschuk - Hepburn Inventory of Self-Ideal 
Concept , were also administered in an attempt to measure 
the discrepancy existing between self-as-seen and self-as- 
desired. Four structured interviews, dealing with spare 
time, school, home and family, and future plans were also 
conducted. Other less formal instruments included blanks 
and checklists which gathered information on the subject T s 
reading habits, job preferences, siblings, opinions regard¬ 
ing the importance of certain factors of success, and level 
of aspiration. 

Procedure 

With the permission of the principals it was possible 
to meet each student individually and explain to him the 
purpose of, and his place in, the study. Care was taken to 
assure each subject that no stigma was attached to the fact 
that he had been selected for inclusion in this research. 

In every case the student indicated his willingness to take 
part in the investigation. In Strathcona Composite High 
School, where the thirty-five-minute period is employed, it 
was possible to meet with the subjects during their "free," 
or study, periods. In Strathcona High School, where the 
one-hour class period is used, it was found that the students 



















' 


e 





- < 




c 


a : > ' 


;OJC 





c 


;).! 


. 1 ) 15 




■<c 




.< * 






* > u 






■ I; 


11 y Jllll,;© 




$ 


s: 


5 ••.« 110 




f ii 


13 ) 


y 


:’.i y ' • 



* 


; • . 


> '. . • . I . 


i 


. > i .t : 


■ t 




■ 




i:5 J'S 


■j.y *.oi 




12$ 


had only two study periods weekly. With the close 
cooperation of the principal and staff, however, it was 
possible to meet with the students during certain of their 
regular class periods. Insofar as it was possible to do so, 
the testing instruments were administered in the order 
listed above. It was found that from five and one-half to 
seven hours were necessary to complete the work with each 
student. The differences in time required depended upon 
such factors as the speed with which the subject worked and 
the length of the period for which he was available. The 
study took three weeks to complete. 

Appraisal of Instruments and Procedures 

The pilot study proved to be of considerable value for 
several reasons. First, it enabled the tester to become 
very well acquainted with the instruments so that he was 
able to administer them later in the most efficient and 
time-saving manner. Second, the study revealed the potenti¬ 
alities of each instrument, and the tester was able to know 
precisely what results he could expect from each. Third, 
it was found that the suggested procedure and sequence and 
administration of tests had some value other than just pro¬ 
viding uniformity. For example, it was found that the Rotter 
should be completed before the third interview had been 
carried out. Very often, leads frequently touching on the 
subject r s home and family were provided by the Rotter, 




i O. <.3 i w • 




■ ... ) 


o v 










a ; t. ; ■ ' 

..; ?o. v 1: • x on-o.. o ;::i ' o ; - ■■ " (:) 

; ... i J - ' - • - - oc j 

* 

• ; : . O'C.; y100 i 3 • 0.. i -• . s - •' 

. ' ; ' * : 

;:i. ■ . Oi 0 •. ■ ■ ' O' ' • • ; o ' i "'- 1 ‘ ‘ 1 1 '' ’ V:J - 










:.} C 


’ i , ' » ’ • • 


. 

\ ; if ) J 


: : '• 





0 




0 




>j 0 


. 


O 



j 


r i ■ 



_r„ , 0 . ' . ... : ■ 


129 


which, when followed up by the third interview, were most 
productive of insights and information. Fourth, the pilot 
study proved that there was no particular value in the use 
of a tape recorder during the interviewing sessions. As the 
interviews were structured, the interviewer always had before 
him a list of the questions which had been asked. This fact 
enabled him to keep note-taking to a minimum. 

Fifth, the pilot study revealed the wisdom of retaining 
all the instruments which had been used in appraising the 
students. Certain devices were found to be contributing 
information not provided by any other instrument. Others 
were of value because they tended to substantiate or refute 
the results offered by other tests, inventories, and check¬ 
lists. 

Sixth, the pilot study offered proof that the methods 
and instruments used were of value in selecting correlates 
of underachievement. In every case it was possible to note 
factors of a personal, a social, a physical, or an emotional 
nature which seemed to be intimately related to the subject ! s 
underachievement. While it is impossible to generalize on 
the basis of a few cases, the pilot study offered hope that 
when a larger number of underachievers were tested, it would 
be possible to give meaningful consideration to the 
hypotheses suggested. 

Possibly the most important result of the pilot study 
was the fact that it convinced the tester that he was, 




- .<•,.w,.': .i‘.v vc} . j i ?v>/o .Lf.o'.t nonx? ■, no Ai\w 


. . 


:.jy 


V !: O'i - :i ' V - r( ’ 1 ^ ?,iJ ' i00 

i: .. e , ■ , ; ■ . i . o;; ■ u ; :j ‘ :t : • ; b u/.W - -V ■' v ' ! 

• r ... . . . . •. ■ ... .v ■■ : ;)•■■'>' AvH.VVi i) Vul: 

-■ • t 

. . y , . . , •, ;•j j ; > •' V'f ■ ' ■* V ! . ' £ijlfi 

• . . ( j- ; : .? o.v pb;i bold 

/.■J.'. ;)r lb- ■ WiV - ■ 




. 




' ■ d ■. it ' ' • ' ■ 1 








;;.« _vi jf.j 

- 


i :>, : . v f> i.. : : - y^ : - 


;‘.mo D I, 


V s j 


' 

1 M ' * ■ ; • 

, 


*x o rid 


t ■ • •• 


> , i V :'i ■ •*. ■ '' • ' - • • 

V,; Aoo/icni ;■ n m ; . yi'.i 

. . ... -. ■■' ■ 1 

,■ n, vi ■:<: •. V> ?; ‘i.o b o & 


ij u.>■!.!. : . j< s' ■; 

j i- - ■ - • - ' ■ ' ; ■ 

V J : ;. V ',’i VJ ■)■■>■■. /->.t ’ .riljjr.i 

.., cJ.r o.L.d! ax^.xSiuf-XObfli 

t ■ X 7' ■ 


*/! s.C'i. O K« 

no /;:V ; ’ r -- r r 

j.IC*': j r 4 ■ o. ... 3,j 

o y OC'i.•a 9 b ; tn fOD ii'j 


. ' . * ■ ' i ' ’ ' ■ 

. .. v i. c vl o.i'.bJ: ■,'.o 

Uo 


• . • 


, 


. j u, 






! 



130 


indeed, dealing with a group of underachievers. When the 
testing was completed and the results assessed, he was con¬ 
vinced that the six most marked underachievers in all the 
grade ten classes in the two schools had been included in 
this pilot study. All six students admitted to being under¬ 
achievers, and in several cases some were so identified by 
their teachers. Again, in the majority of cases, remarks 
on cumulative record cards made by former teachers suggested 
that the work of these students in earlier grades had not 
been acceptable. Finally, in five out of six cases the boys 
continued to make exceptionally poor marks, and the index 
calculated on their June, 195$ marks was lower than that 
calculated on the June, 1957 marks. 

Persistence of Underachievement 

From the findings above it might be assumed that boys 
who are underachievers when they enter grade ten, in the 
majority of cases, tend to remain underachievers until the 
end of this grade. In an attempt to throw some light on 
this question, information was obtained from approximately 
one hundred male students who were in grade ten in the 
Edmonton Public Schools during the school term 1957-5&* By 
the computation of indices of underachievement these subjects 
were all shown to be underachieving to some degree as they 
entered this grade. In order to assess their subsequent 
progress in that grade, information on their marks was 



i/O'L'l 


o jj.. cop. clc In. 







c 


■■ni 





„nt'j 




. 


X PO-OOP. P>L: 


PC £H:iX cClOOilO 


CP. 9 COO : r.o 






■V . : ')- 




c 




i .0 


;! i 


■ 




• ' 


< 


L o 


n;, ns9 




.t. J !. ■ i 


t 


■ 


iCf v.i j. 




<' it 


nc 


c,V 


c 




;) ; O 


c 


sj 1 ■ 


I/O ' 


O' 


■; v ( c 


J • 


X i < ■ Op•’ ) V C > Ci J?- ‘ ’ ’ :> li 1 1 I 'S i' I 




t 


0 


: .0 PC: Pf JJ 




V 


c 


. Pi v ; ; > L 





v . i yJ < 




nx. oc:, r;«t 




CPU ■ Id 




)b C1 «?, per ; OPf. 


i j {i 


> i p 


cc c 






131 


obtained in May, 195$, at which time they had completed 
four-fifths of the grade ten course. In about two-thirds 
of the cases the Easter examination results were used as a 
basis for calculating an index of underachievement, and in 
the remaining cases the average of all examination marks, up 
to and including the Easter examinations, was used. It was 
felt that both the Easter examination marks and the Easter 
average marks were quite representative of what the student 
was doing in grade ten. The results indicated that of the 
ninety-eight students identified as underachievers when they 
entered this grade in 1957 every one continued to under¬ 
achieve up to May, 195$. (See Table II.) 

The breakdown of the results is as follows: 

(1) In four cases the June, 1957 and May, 195$ indices 
were the same. 

(2) In seventeen cases, the May index was higher than 
the index of the previous June, but not sufficiently high 
to raise the student out of the underachiever category. 

(3) In seventy-seven cases, the May index was lower 
than that of June, a fact which suggests greater under¬ 
achievement. 

On the basis of these findings one may state: Those 
male students who are identified as underachievers as they 
enter grade ten tend to remain underachievers after they have 
completed most of the work of that grade, and their under¬ 
achievement, in most cases, tends to become more marked. 







- 





i 





• ... h-i ! 


' .!, . j V... J. i. . J .j. 









... 








c 


C 1 













)•; ; 




. 




' ; 


' 




A 






■ 

< ’ 




i'i 












. : 1 •: u. 


‘x , : . 


... . - . , 


i 


■ ■ i. ' 


. 


- 


I l 


«> ... \U 


.; '..:, v v 


> 




L U 


. 


: . ■ ' : 


132 


TABLE II 

INDICES OF UNDERACHIEVEMENT, AS OF SEPTEMBER 1957, AND MAY 
1958, FOR A GROUP OF 98 UNDERACHIEVERS 



Range 
of Indices 

n a cp c 

September) 1957 

Cases, 
May, 1958 


95-99 

0 

2 

90-94 

3 

2 

85-89 

5 

3 

80-84 

25 

7 

75-79 

15 

11 

70-74 

29 

17 

65-69 

13 

25 

60-64 

6 

13 

55-59 

1 

6 

50-54 

0 

9 

45-49 

1 

0 

40—44 

0 

3 











* 



WOS.-J 


<-v — 







CHAPTER SEVEN 


PATTERNS OF REJECTION 

As Haggard (1957) has suggested, when the child does 
not accept the academic situation completely or does not 
appear to be deriving the maximum value from his educational 
opportunities, there is a tendency to look to the home for 
an explanation. Such a step is seen to be a logical one, 
for the parents are those agents of society who are most 
responsible for the transmission of culturally accepted edu¬ 
cational values to the child. It is further held that if 
relations between the child and his parents are not com¬ 
pletely satisfactory, especially as seen from the viewpoint 
of the latter, then such distortions of parent-child 
relationships may well be reflected in the child 1 s educa¬ 
tional achievement. 

While it is possible that a number of adverse patterns 

of parent-child relationship might exist, it is the purpose 

of this chapter to discuss only one such pattern, namely that 

of parental rejection. White (194£, p. 134) has noted, 

In the small urban family of today, which has lost most of 
its economic and educational functions, the meaning of the 
home to the child becomes virtually equivalent to his 
emotional relations with his parents. Acceptance or rejec¬ 
tion, in particular, becomes the overwhelmingly important 
feature of home life. 




:> > .. JOn 


i .; : 


i • 


' 


f o 


t 


.f ( .{*:• 


r: 


i I 


, . i 


>w' 


l- T X d €< UiOC{8 911 
: I j. ' V .1 ] K {.. J 1 ■ 


Xn 


*1 c « 

- 


••• ‘.l J 




- f ' J j’.' 


!i ' ( '( 


{ 




t 


t 




J 




; j 


,Lj c 



J 


.f 1;' 




- 


' 



134 


Parental rejection of a child may be manifested in 
various types of behaviour. In some cases it may take the 
form of active dislike and hostility on the part of the 
parent. In the majority of cases, states Stagner (194$), it 
is usually shown in attitudes of disinterest and indiffer¬ 
ence by the parent. Symonds (1939, p. 23), in discussing the 
various means by which parental acceptance or rejection of a 
child may be manifested, notes, 

It may be nothing more than a shrug of the shoulder, the 
lifting of an eyebrow, or a gleam in the eyes; it may be a 
chance remark expressing fondness or hatred; it may be the 
mere fact that parent and child do things together, or that 
the child is not included in the parents 1 plans and activi¬ 
ties. These subtle and elusive tokens of rejection or 
acceptance are just as significant from the point of view 
of parent-child relationship as other more overt forms of 
expression. 

The manifestations of rejection may also be very well dis¬ 
guised and appear as oversolicitous behaviour and as over¬ 
protection. Such behaviour, usually felt to be compensatory 
in nature, stems from a sense of guilt which the parent has 
because he entertains rejective attitudes toward the child. 

Rejection of the child by a parent may take place for a 
number of reasons. Frequently, children are rejected if 
their birth was not welcomed. A mother may reject her child 
because the added responsibility ties her to the home, limits 
her freedom, or interferes with her ability to work. Both 
parents may be rejective if the added expense attending the 
child*s birth and care cannot be easily met. Male children 
may well be rejected if the parents wanted a girl, and vice 


r ' J • ■ 


i 1 X i •- 1 . . ‘J 

. 

.. -\i ■■■; ( •. - ' ; X. > 7. 'i ■ :J>: : ; ' • ’>'■ '' 

, 

nc i; -y. [eu - vO ojo • ‘X■■ j .ntr:r-q hoxdv; x<! xocxm aroiasv 

t -. : f.i t i' .7 • ' ! = ■ • ■ .= , ; ■ xno 

• ■ i X " ..7 ’..Op. V ' r ■■ .X ' '.‘.j XM. 

■ f:; . ; 0‘ .. -■ m i. ,* X ’ IS 1 

; t.. ' m x O':, wo... ox 

■; ; j j . ■ 

hi 

‘ill si c ■. - J. ;• hr. •• si J c.« . ..>x. :.«T - 391.3 

;« [ V jt. oj Xi• .. £r: x : .,_ -mm ^mmiMmmo;^ 

r i. jo ,r. m inane.!or->J. r :c X-.'.X ; .■^317., ic 

, . 

, }M XXV X \ vof: rr< '7 os i>" *10 IOM • > n\ 3ri f j 

vo :::1) m:ocX /xaoX ..k.j :;.c.(o:.:vxvi av 5 i • '•> ! Is- x.rin 

'v-i..:) ou c o Jiol v X. ■ ■ v t o:.'ci'v>::.iie'q w , .. no.U o-o 

) ; . • X- . , ■<: Mi iX 

' 

. ■ ' . USX 




: 

' < 1 ; ‘ 7;r - 

i, 

-X 7 Xc .i M 

, f _ .. \i ' V 


, . ... ' o . « c ■. - 


'.‘■o 

c \ : ;.i jm Xm:ov 


. ;i,.ij M , ■ 

V b. " • ' ■ ' X ; x : ! . • ■ • . • 

: , . ■ ■ . .;f ' v; : o.:- C ' ■> ' ■ ' ■' ' r ; ! '' 




135 


versa. Children of either sex may be met by rejective 
behaviour on the part of the parents if they are sickly or 
physically handicapped. There is also the possibility that 
the child may experience feelings of rejection even when 
none is intended. The arrival of a new sibling, for example, 
may cause an older brother or sister to feel unloved because 
he no longer receives the attention he once did; or the con- 
tinued or frequent absence of a preferred parent may well 
cause a child to feel rejected. 

Children react to parental rejection in a variety of 
ways. Whereas one child may become submissive and tend to 
cringe before the hostile outbursts of a parent, another may 
become inured to such hostility and either fight back or else 
adopt an attitude of seeming indifference. Still another 
child may resort to delinquent acts in order to punish the 
parent whom he sees as rejective. Less obvious rejective 
behaviour on the part of the parent may evoke responses in 
the child which are subtle and more difficult to detect. 
Possibly in some cases, as for example where the rejection 
takes the form of overprotection, the child may not recog¬ 
nize the behaviour for what it truly is and may believe that 
he is deeply loved by his parents. It is not the intention 
in this study to concentrate on these more subtle manifesta¬ 
tions of rejection, but rather to look more closely at those 
patterns of indifference and disinterest which Stagner and 
Symonds have suggested are most frequently encountered in 
such cases. 


v , : i vi’-'I-' ■ 


• ' >V 


' . v . ■■ 


. )!M. . ' ' . ' - 

. 

. 


- 


. 


v -j }il'U ■ A ' 












'.U I.i 

■i ; ( 

■ 

J'jk ■ - «i J : '- A 



• ■ 


od.;} • ; . j .• • i- "1C ■ Jli-hki ( •• --v 

; / . . 

■ V\ v ' ■ ■■ ■ 

. . ■ . :• , > ■ ■ •' ‘‘ - ! ' ■ ■■ ■ '- 

u : •>;) I j.;'> , id OM ,-d : ' - , 1 t • 

t ‘i; r; /x ■ A !' •' - ■ - c • • •• - 

■ ; reiJ { ■ ' X 


■ X. KtiL 1 • ■ ' 






- ' 


•, X ■ 'V' .. • ' : ; <' < •' ■ 1 ' ' ■ c ■' ; ■ • 

•. ■ f'' \i.. ; i ‘) j, : 1: / X", X ;!: ■ J alx A.b DO V tJOiXn ‘Si'L 



136 

In the remaining portion of this chapter consideration 
is given to a number of case studies of underachievers in 
which parental rejection may be noted. Whereas in the 
majority of cases complex patterns of correlates of under- 
achievement will be found, in which rejection is but one 
factor, in a smaller number of cases it will be possible to 
identify parental rejection as being the most important 
correlate present. While these latter cases are relatively 
few in number, they will be dealt with first because they 
best illustrate the syndrome of rejective factors involved 
in underachievement. 


Case No . 6. The subject is the youngest child in a 
family of three boys. He is a small boy, poorly dressed, 
and gives the impression of being still in the early stages 
of puberty. He is fifteen years of age and has siblings 
aged seventeen and twenty. The father is a mail clerk, 
and has been for twenty years. The mother has been dead 
for five years, and there is no woman in the house. The 
subject T s grandmother, who lives nearby, helps the family 
in whatever way she can. 

The boy sees very little of his father, who sleeps a 
good deal of the time when he is at home. When asked if 
he would like to spend more time with his father, the boy 
stated that he would not and added, TT He doesn f t bother me; 

I don ! t bother him. We get along fine." On the Rotter he 
noted, "A mother is nice to have." 

The subject does not feel free to discuss his problems 
with anyone at home. His father is disinterested, and his 
brothers would tell him to "Get out of here" if he went to 
them with a problem, the boy admits. He is completely "on 
his own" at home and declares that he likes it that way. 

The boy reveals that he "hates school" and goes only 
because he must. When asked what he got out of attending 
school, he replied, "An education-nothing more." When 
asked how he would treat his children when he became a 
father, the boy replied that he wasn f t sure but he knew that 
he T d be willing to listen to his children 1 s problems. He 
then added that a boy his age needed someone with whom he 
could discuss his problems and to whom he could go for advice. 



:,r T.i-ujo onjo>di> o.t-U< n. noxxn.on xnnoro on:! nl 

■ ■. ■ . 1 ■ ■ : ■ ’100 ■ ■ ■ 

■ i' ./!- x >ioi ; v> : \ • • .L; btRXX - Ub.ixi J 

: • • JZi . > ■■ , • Zi 0 ■ 1 ■ ' 1 10 3 

•, / . ' : /. l-uy C‘.i OC LC 7 XXXXX.OY 916.0 

,r i j; ;u ji, I b •’ xb . ‘JxXO.; !■ ! ’ . -.X X ' ■'*.!. _ e ’ ! 

.;!■ : no. . : K. ■ .c ' J;‘;<X^ xnjo<,- : " j .: £1 i: 


£>liCT X.X X‘J j j x 
■j j, >x Xj X X - xx X • 



. V 



./ 


. ■ ■ ;j . ... L 2 ■ 

xveiooxrrib •• r - xx r : 


1 < l 

........ t v 


■ :• i. 


L l 1 


! ' ! 


:■ J. fi 



xx 

■ 

x X. x. X. c ' •::■ , ' ' • ! , Xx-. ;, . .X -; 


jri 


' 31 ) b O O £ 
: ■ x • >: 

: 


, • • ) 












j..::;. X J-.,n o bxx ^ j 

' 

7 .{ ; .X X •: 

- ' v ■ b' ■■■■■ ; • X ; 

, b ... : ■; •> 'X ■'. i 0 1$ i . ' ' •> ; i' ; x i X 


■ .-.xx. J OXvX 
J'• i 
'•;i vo x,ix: 


;(■;•; - r; {}.: I: .U O X..?X 3 OX P.ii' Oil XX: X X ft! 

. ■ X ' V • : - : • X ‘ .' • X x :■ XX„ 1 

. ; .! v !,X. . O ■ ,/ j. ! .. > c 

r ' 











137 

The above case is an excellent example of rejection in 


the home. The boy is rejected by his father and also by 
his older brothers. No one in the home has the slightest 
interest in his academic progress or, indeed, in any aspect 
of his life. He has reacted to this rejection by assuming 
an attitude of indifference, and he tries very hard to give 
the impression that he is quite pleased with the disinterest 
which he encounters at home. Only toward the end of the 
relationship with the counselor did he admit that he wished 
that he had someone in whom he could confide and to whom he 
could go for advice. 


Case No . 35 * This student is the only child in a 
family in which both parents are working. The father is a 
commercial traveller and is absent from the home from Monday 
through Friday. The mother is an experienced machine opera¬ 
tor and leaves home every morning at eight o T clock, return¬ 
ing in the evening at six. The boy reveals that he is fond 
of both parents and wishes that he could spend more time 
with each of them. He is especially attached to his father. 

The student has been receiving increasingly serious 
reports regarding his school behaviour. He has an almost 
compulsive desire to "act up" in class, and his teachers 
have referred him to the school authorities on several 
occasions. When the boy was asked about his conduct in 
school he admitted that as soon as he had misbehaved he 
regretted having done so but was unable to curb his "smart 
alec" tendencies in advance. A large number of responses 
on the Rotter refer to his inability to "smarten up" in 
school. He insists that he likes school and wants an educa¬ 
tion, and states that his greatest fear is of academic 
failure. 

Because his parents are away from the home a good deal 
of the time, group activities are kept to a minimum. The 
boy states that the only time the family is together as a 
group is when they watch television on the week ends. He 
does not feel free to approach his parents with his problems 
and tends to figure them out for himself. He has no close 



• £) j . ■ ' O . i ' ' ' ' ' 

... oB : f r( ' 0 ' I J AOJOA ^ ji 'll VpC ,-^10x1 BlU 

r ■ rd-< A ■ ! ono c . . •. '.i ; ua/IO "iCiijiO 0£fi 

V.J .. 1 , C ,tt/ V V '- 

-or A: * i ■) I,.. tAj) An_r.fi ill j:.’;) 70 jlij' 

t. • - - * 

•; ,.o .. .. a roor .Ad • •- . 'di. .u do 

■ ,, ■ din. ; "O V :■• A-t . . o '■> or0 o ; AA >. ; J ... 

: -y : . _■ a o;‘ 'o.; do ijv .oj?o od o :i dodd i.a. dAAAo ori,; 

. ; • ■ , . odiAdlACo "> . A, dnj'„ d; 

... a j:; f aa ;.!.:,• :. o 3. : •„) a a a it:i i.d ■ -:d '■ -• t' o.i: d; i & a: 


od hr 


, . 

') A A';'' "A O' ' dJ.lA • 



A {.: O'd . I ■ ■ i 

B'lHiQ AoAAO f 

• • ; C " - :i 

Ql ’ :' ' 1. i 

It,:,A) ■ : od ; A.. • > 



oo 



o. ■ i . 

i -.aa ;- . v . • . > v 

, . \Vi:i 

. : 

' •. , ■ ... .. ■ ...• 


■ i ' 


oo id< fi 

. ■ o. ■;>].; » 


of v• too.. v. d • :o>' '.a 

j ■ i 1:: a; i. • A.i ’■ i 

0 0: - 0 ! ' A O , ' !'■ ’ ■■ ■■ 

. 

no o . o d ... ao • ■ ; i ; ' 

: :•• •, .., .■j J 

A, •: - to. O | 

O. j 


Vi-DOJ’j. 


' f ;} :o .' o i .. 

. 

' 

A : [A'idAO. v 

' 


t 


• • • 1! 


) 




. 


. . ’ 0.. • A J . ’ i - • •> AO'... 

. .. ,o...-' . OA Ad .AI.oo Ato. AA. , . i.: 

d. , w ' .A : ,f A<A fi o : t v ' 0...... A . ^ A, ;..o 

./ A .1. d viol.od . nod A A.." ./ 

.■ . ; .0 - aa- on ( :) oa-j:' . !.ond d< 


friends in whom he can confide and lives a secluded life. 
His father has attended Home and School meetings on two 
occasions, but the mother has never done so. 


To a boy who thinks highly of both parents, their 
prolonged or frequent absence from the home might well sug¬ 
gest desertion or rejection. It is apparent that the boy 
receives a minimum of attention from his parents, and he may 
well have convinced himself that they are so engrossed in 
their own problems that they have little time for his. He 
does not feel close to his parents, as is revealed by his 
admission that he could not approach them for advice. In 
certain studies of rejective behaviour, infrequent attendance 
at Home and School or similar associations is taken as an 
indication of parental disinterest in the school progress of 
the child. 

There is an excellent possibility that the boy’s unruly 
behaviour and his lack of interest in his school progress 
may well result from a desire to gain, in school, the atten¬ 
tion which he is denied at home. 


Case No . 23. The subject in this case is slightly 
built and is of average height. He is tense and gives one 
the impression of being uncertain and afraid. Subsequent 
testing revealed that the boy worries a great deal and finds 
it very difficult to make a decision independently. He is 
the oldest in a family of three, there being a younger 
brother and sister. The father is a truck driver, and the 
mother is a manageress of a coffee shop. The student sees 
little of his parents and admits that he would like to see 
more of his mother. His relations with his father are 
obviously poor. He sees little of this parent and is not 
interested in spending more time in his company. He states 
that his father sleeps a good deal of the time and has no 


; . : jj)| : ' : '• 

. j :C(;i ... < hi i : fri'l.C i ; iO' /. Ou J 

. 

5 . ! ; i V; •' V ■■ : • ' - f -? ;i; f 

( i: . l r -i'C'i; vtJ ; ■ 

J J : •• ' * ’ 1 ' ■ ' r 

■ j, y.yr, n ; „ O'l, r.-;.o i:\ 0 JJ i- ‘jO BV-* — 1 

. 

;:.i , ' „ Dv ' 'I c B ; 1 1 ‘‘i- 

>; . J ■: ... < . J. : ,• : : v 

£{&. i i. . ij X Z< f 10 .** v» fi X o c u c: s 


' j Bs: : .U : V v 
: ' .:£■( !') 

■ . ; i;l 

?■ :.... J. - M >:i C 



i • ■ ' / ■■ ■ 

;:, V f ( ■ ( _ V j . i |; j j.', ) *'( }. .J J J;’ j". j.C J ' '• J. U l f* Dll 




i ■ ' .7 : 


>. i oh 


c.i b o r b..u 

- 

j 

. j . * 

' 

. . • < ’ ■ 

. 

. : t’O':- 

' 

J . j : ; J .i . ' : j. 


- $ • 

, 

o ■ o: ■ j < 

.. '• ' . 

- 

. 

... 


>00 


a ■ ■■' , 

• V.*. /■ 

; ! • : : :\ O ' ^ 

f. 

; < 
i 

.1 Jo i._ j.'■ . :: 

f.vn-- BroJ J c 
i 

. 

.9'IOifi' 

' 1 u;c-.CV OiiQC 

' 


j 

J [.'.!>■' •' 

•. ri;Kri> 

’ 

\ 

' 

; J 1 •• : 



139 


interest in the boy’s school progress. On the Rotter the 
boy noted, Tt My father is not a very nice guy.’ 1 

While the boy is much attached to his mother he believes 
that she is making unrealistic demands upon him in his school 
work. He complains that regardless of the marks he brings 
home she demands that he try to do better. He spends a good 
deal of his time away from the home, and when with his family 
he tends to read a good deal. He has attended the provincial 
guidance clinic recently, and while he was not willing to 
discuss his problem in great detail the counselor received 
the impression that the boy was referred there for a 
’’nervous condition,” which quite probably resulted from his 
unsatisfactory relations with his parents. 

On the SRA Youth Inventory the boy checked such items 
as: I get no encouragement at home; I wish I could get my 

parents to treat me as a grown-up; my parents neglect me; 
my parents criticize me too much. 


This case is of interest because of the fact that the 
subject openly reveals his dislike and hostility for one of 
his parents. It is also an interesting case in that the 
boy’s reaction to his unfavorable home climate is especially 
severe. He has developed marked feelings of inferiority, is 
very uncertain, and tends to worry excessively. It is noted 
that seven of the eight scales of the SRA Youth Inventory 
earn scores which fall at or above the 75th percentile. It 
is not difficult to predict that a boy in such a disturbed 
state might well underachieve academically. 


Case No® This subject is the middle child in a 
family of three boys. An older brother is a school teacher 
and a younger one, aged six, is in elementary school. The 
father is an insurance adjustor, and the mother is a house¬ 
wife. The family is apparently quite well-off and the boy 
notes on the Rotter: ”1 am glad that I was born into a 
family that is not poor.” 

This student thinks a great deal of his father and 







■ v.. .. . oO.. [:'■) i!;; 7 n'xi XX *1.1 XX ■:)' ‘XV Sill 

\ v.jv don ,...L '■ t^ojun yctf 


v -, v .,:;Lh; xxx i ■.■dx >JX' > X'j 'i • Xx "V-‘^ .oS.hX 


. 

; 'J: ...^ 'i 

: > * ' . 



■ Ofi '5; 

0 

; . ■ . ' 

, : > 

* 

hi o; c ' 


. J • ;i>. 

• ) 

*3da -jii'Cii 

... \ ; J 

« 

t • . ' 


'X<J j. ub 






j,. '.’ 6 j V ’ X 1 . 1 : i ■ 

i' ■ /. ; j. ■) ii J : i..; 



Oi‘ i'J. 


: i h e v. ' j : i 



b9Vit; :!' : li 


v 'di) •?0' 4 x^ ax- 


a ax oa iib 

. 

'X*10 


■ 


1 ,i. «: j ; '.i' . v 



;uiO 0 

j c: ;j •> • 

00.) O Vi Of.;. 

J '' . f ■ i 

. 

k>3>h:)Oi: n 

■■ ■. . : : , , . < J JJ'C; V ' 

y.i.ui 


•>; ;) O' 

JO .1 


., • 



* .1 . . '< ' ’> 

.>! i;! v iC .-utu Xu ‘c»I jX*‘ >V* •’ lO X i '• ‘ ^ ; *d-*• 

M . . • • . ; j- :; •• .; v ■ x d- •v r, .. .. x < J:>cj < ■ • ; x 

... i;. . ■ : X :•) ■ : X . ' : ' ■ < i -x • ' 

■ ) , j: l . ' ) - : ' 1 ■ ' ' ■’ ' ■ ; - u l ot 


, . > ' i 

-u- . ..a j lo . aJj xx jxxvxx j ’fid 

. j . , xt ... / xd • a • ;j x i L x .i i0 .> i v ■ >x • o . .x. ■ 

i r j! xrc, d .'} J-/. i aJ‘ .j XAX- U'.fX OJ 0 .Li .ifh .jv.'j, EJ. 

„ . .. J ■ ! S. . .‘ * f 


; ' :. : .. . .. • . .... 

'.. ... .5,:; v' X. ’ ‘.'i : . ' ' 

.... . . i t l ■; •, ;i . i .. .1: : '■■■ ' c - ■ i '. : ,;i - v 

-. ■ i„ x •. :iJc<; 0}^.ywiMu: .. :• - 'iortX&l 

c - » 

r .. ; • (. . ■ . :. - ■' j w , ! ■ • ' ' - : • ' Xi . ' -'J-.- • • C: 

, 'l i 




140 


deplores the fact that this parent T s work keeps him away 
from home a good deal of the time. He misses his father 
greatly when he is absent, especially during the school 
term. In summer he frequently accompanies his father on 
plane trips to various parts of the province. He sees his 
father as being an "ideal man" and declares that he loves 
him very much. 

The subjects relations with his mother appear to be 
somewhat strained. On the Rotter he noted, "A mother should 
be a comforter to her children." He explains that at home 
he is often criticized and is treated like a child. There 
is a good deal of faultfinding of teen-agers and of boys in 
general in his home, he explains. Inasmuch as the father is 
held in very high esteem and is absent much of the time, it 
may be concluded that the mother is the source of most of 
this unappreciated criticism. On several occasions the boy 
stated that he was happiest when he was out with the "gang," 
where he feels that he "belongs." The SEA score for the 
scale "My Horae and Family" earned a very high score. 

The boy has a very high intelligence quotient, as 
measured by two tests given in school. Both the Detroit and 
the Laycock tests credit him with an I.Q. in excess of 140. 
In spite of this fact, however, the boy*s work continues to 
be very unsatisfactory in school, and his disinterest had 
reached the point of "complete apathy" by the midpoint of 
the 195&-59 term, according to a school counselor. 


This case differs somewhat from the first three dis¬ 
cussed in that the mother is identified as the rejecting 
parent. The boy T s relations with her are obviously strained, 
and a fairly exhaustive investigation by this counselor 
revealed no factor which might possibly be related to the 
boy T s underachievement other than the rejective attitude of 
the mother. 

A survey of the thirty-five cases comprising this study 
revealed rejective behaviour on the part of the parents in 
twenty-three of them, or approximately 66 per cent. In six 
cases it was impossible to identify either parent as being 






■ .i. j j 

let 


' 



IU 


. • 


V. ■ 7< 


ct:) V.. one) - oenolqob 

' 

• ■ 

. y 


. 



/1 ;• j 


... ■ . ■ 

■ , .■ ' . : . . . 3£fi y 

■ ■ ... ' . , . . . ' ■ - V / j ■ 

.. ,i ■ j, , :) • • ,o . .. ? -/• 0 e : - '-C 

;r, ; c j-Of * . ;;J: V oJ ) '■ oc 


- 


i v 


r X0i .'J, 

;■>v J ' i ‘JO 'J i ' 

; 


J 




• J' ji • I-Jt.sc J -4 ') ... . • •' 0 i-.Dl'.!.- 

. 


HO ' i- 




i.w,: VI 


r.i o ■ 


d ■■. 


V©-' 

■ 

» 

:) ■ ' - 

’ 

. ' • o - 1 ~ ' 




141 


more rejective than the other; in eight cases the mother 
appeared to be rejecting; in nine instances the father 
emerged quite clearly as the rejecting parent. A brief 
review of some of the remaining cases will indicate some 
of the manifestations of rejective behaviour and the subjects 
reactions them. 

In one instance (Case No. 21), there is evidence of 
rejective behaviour in the very miserly attitude which the 
father has adopted toward his son. For three years the boy 
has had no allowance other than enough to pay for his bus 
fare and for milk at school. Yet, the father has two jobs, 
and the mother works part time. The boy notes, tf My father 
is sometimes mean" and adds, "At home I spend little time." 

A divorce is found in just one case (Case No. 26), and 
it appears that the boy has felt the loss of his mother 
keenly. Although the parents have been divorced for only 
two years, they had been separated for some time, and the 
boy has not seen his mother in eight years. He notes on the 
Rotter, "I regret not having a mother." He believes that his 
father has no real interest in his school work other than to 
tell him to remain in the matriculation program and to try 
to make high marks. The boy does not feel free to talk over 
his problems with his father and reveals that he finds his 
grandmother more understanding. He is not at ease in the 
presence of his family and tends to be happiest when he is 
outside the home. 


■ . : : 





> iv 





■ . ’!( 




•J \:.: : T r j 5 

. 


j: 




. 

,i- > ■ • i: i 

■ <: i 


0 I:-.L ad s 

■ 

' 

/■ ./ ; ■ i - 

;: : ■ ' ,r. . - -i"/ 


• - 



142 


There is evidence of rejection in one of the few 
bilingual homes studied. In Case No. 1$, the student 
reveals that his father, a landlord, is very mean with 
money and is extremely strict with all members of the 
family. Everyone is "scared” of the father but himself, the 
boy insists. The student still entertains some love for his 
father, apparently, and states that he would like to spend 
more time with him. The subject seems to feel sorry for a 
man like his father, who spends all his time in making 
money and who never takes time off to enjoy himself. He 
would like to take his father hunting, he states, "just to 
show him what he is missing." The student has a criminal 
record and has been placed on a two-year probation for 
numerous car thefts. 

Case No. 31 illustrates rejection of his son by a very 
clever surgeon. Apparently the father views the boy as 
being lazy and inefficient, and the student, in return, sees 
the father as being very intelligent and feels inferior to 
him. The subject says that his father is very strict and 
declares that when he is a father he will be very under¬ 
standing, adding, "That will fix everything." 

In at least four instances (Case Nos. 1, 7, 9, and 25), 
there is a suggestion that the subjects see themselves as 
being rejected while the parents pay more attention to 
younger siblings. In Case No. 7, the boy declares that his 


. 

^ ' : ■ 'V.-: . ...!. L: '-v'i 

. ' : n ... 

■ . . ■ 1 . ; 1 ’■ J -' v - 

. . . . , . f : ; ■ •: . ;• ' t0 j t j j. ; O . .. . . i.: : :U) .Uy7:. Oj.i j. J v*l'v‘ 








_ ’ • 1 C 

"i ' \ 





. 







• 1 ■. J fi- *■ 

:, i > v\roa 

o i •; 




t 



t 






0 j 

•j: 

: b bf/v ' 




o' 


. 

• 

* 





, :ib 

' 

■; .1J :■ -"j. < 

’ I 




... 

nnoc.: 


i f 

r;' b‘10 09*1 











; •. 

:■ o 

•'90 TOirLUfl 


•k 



(■ rjr 






* 


•JV . - 










• 

no:/ 

■ i 


f ij. - 


. < 




c 

;• r .... i:o s 1 


i; 



:;vl TTiXOC 




iv. :• 



• V 





d •/. 







■ 




M 0; t 1 - 


. 







'i ' ; • s- 


r. IT. 


! \i Xi i 


O f: 







■ ■ ; ■ i.j; 


. t 




c • : ' 1: ' ■' ' 



i i. 

* 



i 

:V- v 



: Z 0 J, 

.J 

b £;I 



i 


>r: 




oi 




G.i; Q'XOflc 





>' x o r if 


cJ o -. v * I 


. 

bf'J 1 

■ J 

i;o'i ;iou:9< 







< 


« 



> r 

•: -L ■ f a: O' 




143 


parents "play favorites" and that he is discriminated against 
in favor of a younger sister. It is interesting to note that 
seventeen of the thirty-five students included in this study 
are oldest children. There is a possibility that having 
younger siblings causes them to feel "left out" and, 
consequently, rejected. 

The cases discussed in this chapter have served to 
illustrate the presence of rejective tendencies on the part 
of the parents of about one-half the students comprising 
this study. It has been noted that both parents have been 
guilty of rejection and about an equal number of fathers 
and mothers have been identified as being rejective by 
their sons. In most cases, the rejection has been manifested 
in disinterest or indifference toward the child, although in 
some instances there is evidence of excessive criticism and 
a refusal on the part of the parent to be satisfied with the 
child T s school progress. In at least two cases, it would 
appear that the father might have been guilty of using force 
on the boy or upon some other member of the family, possibly 
the mother, causing the child to dislike him very much. 

As was postulated above, the subjects have reacted to 
their rejection in a number of ways. Some have adopted 
many outside interests and try to stay away from the home 
as much as possible. Others have recognized rejection but 
apparently have refused to accept it and continue to want to 
spend more time with the rejecting parent. In a small 






_ 










- 


c 

t 

■ 

t ; ■ ■ . .o - ioo>vj ' I Ax 






V j - ■ -i , . Sj i: : u - 1 : : - x 




t 








- 


144 

number of cases there is a record of criminal activities, in 
most cases petty, which might represent a reaction against 
rejection or a desire to spite an unloving parent. 

It is believed that such unsatisfactory home relation¬ 
ships as were discussed here have had an adverse effect 
upon the child 1 s school progress. Such poor parent-child 
relations might well have influenced academic achievement in 
a number of ways. The child might purposely do poorly in 
school in order to spite a parent who is continually demand¬ 
ing success or who is, from the point of view of the child, 
making impossible demands for achievement. Again, the child, 
experiencing rejection at home, might well feel that no one 
is particularly interested in his school progress and so 
lacks the motivation to do well. Finally, as was noted in 
Case No. 35 above, the child may try to gain attention from 
his parents, and others, by becoming a problem in school by 
adopting patterns of behaviour which are unacceptable or by 
making poor grades. In this way attention will be gained. 

It should not be assumed that the underachiever T s reaction 
to parental rejection is necessarily a conscious one. The 
child may be quite unaware that his poor school progress is 
quite directly related to his unsatisfactory relationships 
with his parents. Many students in the present study, for 
example, quite readily admitted that they were underachievers, 
but almost invariably blamed their poor school progress on 
lack of study, poor study habits, or poor attitudes towards 




r,?>.-\trv r$oe>' Xfutimirxo 10 ircoDOi n 


?.o j-o r ' )< • r/iijr. 


■ . . • ■ ■ 

- . ' 

-ftoxoriu.3';' Of. on vio dDnluidscml rions df-io bovyj-j-od. =-■£ j J- 

1 ' ^ 

■ _ ai . ■ ■ wiu irb arid noqi 

; ; -.yin,; :iv ‘>> ixionx-iB hz'-jut iX'.cru: ovoii J-.-sa; ob .U:. t ouo o.!.y 

; - 'ICO b ''O.OI.I •.‘Ilfti ■ 1 -I; ■ ' : 1 ■ ( ' lt ' 

. noi ■ ■ ■ - 

r 

* . . v.. . .. 

■ t . ■ ■. . n ■ 

B ; ■ 

c j-coxioe n.c wadasiu^nx Yxnti-UJ yxd'Hn <iJ 

i .. dm 

. , ■ • i 0 ' • - O (; • - - ■> * 

:j - , ' ■■ 

d hi r 

- -K, 9 im;d(jooo ;mi ; i£ rb.alv: •i.no.n.riiHi io einioddoo jtn.cdqob.i 

K 0< : ■ 

■ $. e<f ILiiod 

. 

: .LOO: I.: 't. 'IOCO OXl'l jBXlb OMCi: O.'l'XL'o -<• . .CO 1 „j.U 

lOdQE'II . ' - : 

olid ni 

■ . r.>' ooiobnu 'i'I'o yojid k. ; jadd.crbis yx.ljjxo'' oj.-wp ,s>j.mj.u»x 
rx RCJ- C-V. -U.orioe -tot- / -x.brld bmnsXa doouue du 



145 

school. It would appear that attitudes of parental rejec¬ 
tion will almost certainly influence the student T s academic 
achievement adversely, but it is impossible to say whether 
his reaction to such rejection will operate on a conscious 
or an unconscious level. 

Should one be inclined to believe that the importance 
of the child-parent relationship is being overstressed, one 
must recall the significant statement made by Karen Horney 
(1937, P* &0.) This well-known psychoanalyst has noted that 
in the childhood histories of disturbed and neurotic patients 
whom she had treated, tT . . . the basic evil is invariably a 
lack of genuine warmth and affection. . 


XH 

■ 

ox. i-:-b vO 
* 1 #' d J o 1 

i: .C 0' ; 

ooiv. 

nw ; fa* 

'biQZV'lO . 

-o:;Aj ? ) ■ '' ■' 


! ( C/ > J-) .* ■ . v/ r 'jf ’ t - 

■ j j ' . . s. ' . ' ' ■ 

... u ' i' ; ■ ; - i!: ftVia;:. 8 ! 

ci’O .■ 10 vl ■" • • i ■' - ■. • ’ 1 ' : ' ' ; 

, 


■;0 i )ri j oulj OJ t/n,S.‘XQLU : DQ OlVO hl^Od'., 

* * O' j J C ‘ f 'j \f{ > V i . 1 < <. . i \<~ 11.0 J.. J ..L'.’M '• • i A •- 

I 'mj t'h n. .0- i.) ' $1%F\ 0.Cv.jTfl^ Oild • . 

'(, : . ' . . .. O C-- ■- ' “ - - ' '* *' * 

oMo'W'iji ! ( IV. ■ ■ -Haf'axv ')<>■ :vix'io3-a.;:,i oooiifr xl!^> o 
: .; - . a...-; . , \.'\h bvl a.u 

■ ■ . . - ■ ' ' ' ' 


: iO d:I 


CHAPTER EIGHT 


FACTORS RELATED TO THE SCHOOL 


In the present chapter an effort will be made to 
present a syndrome of correlates of underachievement which 
are closely related to the school or to the academic 
process in general. 

Attitude Towards School . Only a few of the underachievers 
in this study revealed an openly hostile attitude towards 
school, but there is a strong suggestion that a large 
number of students are relatively disinterested in, or 
indifferent towards, the school situation. In at least 
75 per cent of the cases there is evidence that the 
subjects are not particularly interested in attending 
school. A few representative cases are offered here to 
illustrate this attitude of disinterest. 


Case No . 10 . This student revealed that he is tT not 
crazy” about school and admitted that he would leave at 
once if he were to get a ”d@cent” job offer. When asked 
what he got out of attending school, the boy answered that 
it kept him busy, permitted him to meet his friends, and 
gave him an opportunity to take part in organized sports. 
There was no mention of the educative function of the 
school. 


Case No . 12 . This boy declared that he is ”not fussy” 
about school. He admitted that it is all right in the winter 
time when there is nothing else to do, but stated that he 







- U .. t 


o J' oj >;: t J •xx- hi. ' 1 ‘ - :i •' Ji i0; ' : ' :o 

i OXiia CtaOi X 'V • J. V ... X. X, •; -»*.l*X* .u ■ 

■ oh oh Lot u;i Mv’ . x.^eiix ■ Oho < j 

„ X-. XX 

* jx_c ^ __ l 

±y ; ' .r : ■ > '< j • f! ' ; . 0 .Stfi , S. 

x ' O'. : ro 

c) ' i: ' 1.1 d X ' ■ : 

; j_ v * - c 


/ uL i vt 11 O > * 

■ o h'io.Kot .): ; j i 


:r “i 


o ’ ’ . ' XOX 

/ aoooOXi: x 

.. rn: 

( ' ■ .i. Kii j. r; 


Jl.LL 


:)i 




;xxa no jx 

Cj OTO.X hO' 


I 

:i. . jx J; v ox ix ' Xuo. '• o f . > xXx JK: 

i'.. nhih, x x 


jt 11 ” ;x j:" i)0. o " h 0 : ) " - v 'X . x; • f x 0 '< • -'X i. 

-j ■ . < . y i Xj OU' : ,X .'X;.x : ■ X0 ^ -'XXu i X i i \ 

-' ; j: . x; -' j. xx.' 

u ‘ ■ w ( i 0 : ux’x . : j : 


■ X Xu) X 
• ;:x. ( xnxr> 
. .; 1 


. t .; 

'o > ■ 

x ' 

• no X-/ oi,\ xx 


xc’i,. i ;.i i ;) * J r j: i i 

j:xlc. xx; ! u x x. • ; x xx 


■i 


. 


oh,;') '.to f, OJxX •, j :‘x. •) ; , : .x 


! ; J' I 

• j j:i.XXX.X iCX x o. ./••£;> i ,i.X: i X X 
j.u .i.X Xu ; fXX :: 07 OXi; >(lT 

. 1 


• X. » 



147 


finds it very boring when the weather is fine and he could 
be doing other things. He would like very much to be work¬ 
ing for a living. 


Case No. 13. When asked about his school plans, this 
pupil answered that he "guessed" that he would remain in 
school until he had finished his grade twelve. He admitted, 
however, that there was a chance that he might stop this 
year. As he explained, "It all depends on how I feel." 

He stated that he got nothing out of going to school as yet, 
but hoped that eventually he would get an education. (A 
later visit to the school revealed that this student had 
been expelled.) 


Case No. 2$. This boy admitted that he "didn f t mind" 
going to school. When asked what he got out of the school 
situation, he answered, "I get an education; besides, it’s 
easier than working for a living." 


In Case Numbers 6 and 30, the subjects revealed a 
strong dislike for school and admitted that they were in 
attendance only because they were compelled to attend. In 
all, nine students, 26 percent, admitted that they would like 
to leave school immediately. 

One might ask, "Why do so many of these students show a 
dislike for, or a disinterest in, school?" A close exam¬ 
ination of the Brown-Holtzman Survey of Study Habits and 
Attitudes (SSHA) and the SRA Youth Inventory suggests a 
number of reasons. 

Fourteen students, 40 per cent, indicated that their 
dislike for at least one teacher was such that it caused than 
to neglect their school work. They suggested that this 
condition existed for at least one-half of the time they 










o oo i bx oilco aI: v 

-OK o: v ( t 



: ' • . . ( } 


•0/3 V 

Ido 


j .. 


■ w « ■ 

nx ajr.M:\o r y. b./oco' -b /••■■•■ 
/jog dbo b :■ :.o.,. ./ L. d 

aifib' C V, b; , j. 0 .O' . • ' 0 

ij * bf> 


O’ 


i 

D Urt 


AGO • < 0 ; j G 

* 




l * 


X < .0 1 






c 


C : O' 

() J: J o. 



O' . •.' o. o 


? 


d : ! 3 ) n 


GrtO 


iojo/oo c d bob ...vi • o *o ••;' /o;,/ ;>o.o C /.boa ooo : 


J o 


"■ > 


< ' 


0 3 , 


ri', .iO : j" jo oooob 'o' /o o ■ o o c 
; ' o :,o ’o • ' J! o :o ; b : , 


0/00 • 1 C "/' /‘.O' 0. ;/:.bio- ,-0 o OO. oo'd iO if 

o, o: ;i., ' ; .o , ////_ b-o . - ° ■ ■■ ^ , : / 

«. e , ' .■ 

0 b ) 0 "i j ' f > J; / 0 ' j b t O' i 11 ■/..,' c 0 f O ;l ' O ', : 0 Ob'/.J 0 

o . ’ b f j i:>j oo o o ; J 6 i .. d - - - ' 

::”, .... . : , « ' . . - •. • 'j ; ' , ■’ J;*0 











143 


were in school. A somewhat smaller number, 17 per cent, 
noted that their teachers tended to make fun of them, while 
15 per cent saw their teachers as having favorites. A large 
percentage of the group, 91 per cent, indicated that they 
would not approach a teacher to ask for help if they were 
having difficulty with their school course. It would 
appear from a consideration of the above factors that a 
number of these underachievers do not enjoy particularly 
close or pleasant relations with their teachers* 

The content of the courses offered was also attacked 
by a number of this present population of underachievers* 
Fourteen students, 40 per cent, indicated that they found it 
difficult to concentrate upon certain of their courses 
because they were so dull and interesting. Seventeen 
underachievers, 49 per cent, believed that they were taking 
courses which were of no practical value. 

These underachievers also revealed that they possess 
certain weaknesses in applying themselves efficiently in 
school. Twenty-two students, 63 per cent, stated that, 
when taking notes in class, they tried to take down every 
word spoken by the teacher. It is not surprising, perhaps, 
that thirteen students admitted that they tended to find 
in their notes a good deal of information which was of no 
value. Fifteen students admitted that they had difficulty 
in determining what is of importance in a lecture and what 
is not, and a like number stated that they had little idea 


« 


Q *1 0 




o a * 



0.0 0 0 as .■ 9 ‘iov? 


o. 


u-o x;j 






:j 






lo ); 'j'i.i oooo 


! . •) 


0 0 


CJ .!.' O' 


0 V.V. 




crx'i ‘J.UO - ;T 


vJoirJjo.o.ccJ'a 


t 


■■hr 




•yo o.ro.U 


00 33 


c< 


0,0 


c 


■( 


O’. 


0 


o;j oJ: * j her 


% 


i>{. 


:,)j 


0 i. 


u r i ■ i' 


”j. ’ o:: < 


"V 



s 



j ft d I 


o;J on 



149 


as to how one should prepare for a test or examination* 
About one-half of the group admitted that they had con¬ 
siderable difficulty in expressing themselves in writing* 

A number of personality characteristics which might 
work to the detriment of the student were also revealed 
on these two instruments* Fifteen students stated that 
they were nervous when called upon to recite in class* 
and nineteen of this group admitted that they had great 
difficulty in concentrating upon what the teacher was 
saying. Two-thirds of this population revealed that they 
made no special effort to be neat in the work which they 
had to pass in to the teacher. Sixty-two per cent of the 
students admitted that they did not study their hardest 
unless they liked a course, and an equal number declared 
that they did not strive to develop a sincere interest 
in every course they took* If a subject was not liked, 
there was a tendency to do just enough work to guarantee 
a pass. About one-half of the group declared that study¬ 
ing was a "hit-or-miss" proposition, depending upon the 
mood they were in. A most revealing finding is that 
slightly more than one-half of the students stated that 
having a good time is just as important in a boy T s life as 
is studying. 

Peer Standards . There is a strong suggestion in at 
least five cases, 14 per cent, that the student T s 
scholastic standing might have been influenced by the 






' V ■ ' ■I jj'KOb . ..... !; 0 " ‘ 0 ' Ou ■ 0 


d - J.. 


. yj.il 


bo.1 £*) •/ o'.i c' •, j. o• iow ., f;v .< .t; 
bb | ■ : . 

iOlo x mtxo 


a >.. a 


ox >:.» 

V (1 : ' ' O X ■ ( .. . 1 'H A 

■. Q • f# x 

ob * x f jj •; J:'t.. .b ox j 

o n ,"[ , r;j G\non . ? vx.r,b 

;.. i X- l -i i’.; ’■ 

' j v. i.Li) 




d ) ■ ) i ’ 0 


'. L , 


* U d ‘ ' ' 




*: 




. 


. . U ..:.■. X O' •' X X i r 

b : ) . .C.: • '-Ob O/ -b < .7 t/yixid,.;, Jon hbb "b->i'ib C; : • j 
: : ' *: : ' 


£u 

;j■■ : 0 b .. ~X)X.d o ,.-0.b 


<: ' 




■ 


; xj no- x; , no 

J ;„ij a.’: xi 

r , lio:i ci . o ) 


x . bfx . ■ 1 - 

t - . 


. 




: . :'\'bb o'rot : Vj-db? b.LO 
b 0j i J hoc ; ' fl b .■ ' l 

. 






150 


standard set by his age mates. In Case No. 34, this 
influence was quite obvious. 

Case No. 34 * This student explained that he had fallen 
in with a number of boys, the majority of whom had now 
stopped school. These boys had little interest in getting 
an education. He believed that he had been influenced by 
them to such an extent that it was now too late to change 
his ways and salvage something from his school career. 

In Case Numbers 7, 30, and 31, there was a suggestion 
that tT regular guys" do not do well In school. One of the 
students referred to above insisted that only "squares" 
make high marks in school. A second student did not wish 
to be identified with his cousin who "spent all his time 
studying." This boy hastened to add that he was "just 
aiming for a T B T average." A third student noted that 
the boys in his room were "fun loving" and implied that 
in order to be accepted as one of the "boys" one must be 
prepared to be fun loving also. There is a possibility 
that the influence of peer standards on one ? s educational 
achievement was more important than the limited number of 
cases offered here would suggest. No direct question was 
asked the student about the possible influence of his 
age mates 1 views on education on his own academic achieve¬ 
ment, and such information as was made available here was 
revealed indirectly. 

Poor School Background . It is not surprising to find 
in a city such as this children with varied educational 
backgrounds. Prosperity attracts new citizens, and as 









t 


j i 


U'O 



' ■ : h - 0 C 


|T \ 




C \i 












■fi .<:» 


‘ !. 




ft 




0;; 


. 




j "j ’ 


• < J '. .. . ' 






y, 


j: »0 


CH 




i 


T I 




OJ. j; ■ v: j',‘ v V7 i 


j..l; •a'X-o -> at 


j a if 


Ok 


1 



r ;. ; i 


- 


j 


■ 




.o 


n 



J; : 






( ' 






(;■- a os;j. 




- 


( ; j l- y.:.o 




T 




j'/.l j.'xauj , 


151 

migrants come from different parts of Canada and from 
other countries also, it is apparent that the schools 
will be called upon to accept children with varied 
educational experiences. 

In at least seven cases, 20 per cent, there is a 
suggestion that the student may have received a poor 
educational grounding because he was moved about a good 
deal while attending the lower grades in school. Such a 
poor grounding might well pass relatively unnoticed 
until the student reached the higher grades where the 
work became more difficult. It will be remembered also 
that at grade nine a student Is called upon to pass his 
first examination which is set and marked by external 
authorities. A brief review of certain of these cases 
is offered here. 


Case No. 1. This subject is the stepson of an engineer 
who did seismographic work for an oil exploration company. 
The father T s work required that the family move about a 
great deal and the boy claims that in one year he was 
enrolled in eight different schools. As the father worked 
for this company several years, it is likely that the 
boy ! s education was received in a large number of schools 
of varying degrees of efficiency. 


Case No . 27 * In this instance, the subject spent most 
of his earlier school days in rural schools. The family 
has lived in the city for four years, and the boy is 
now attending his sixth school. 


Case No . 31 . This boy has lived in Canada for six 
years, having come here from Britain. He has attended 
four schools in this country and insists that he attended 
at least ten while in England. 





him ol-v’.!,uX Xo 

DODO GG.-'f — 'GO' 0 
■3 . • - ' •*' 


; 'y v ; ;■; 0 :;: •0 0 l;• 0 t' XIO J- > V 

, , : X .. • r: XogX> cn> ‘a • - 0 

d . >o'- :■ OiJ iw tt ooIXL ■> il.c.f 


c-m: -X; ! .- ■' 

.GO 

f)GO; '■ OGl— ' IG'V 0 :', 

„ . . . i'J - ■ X ; 

.— GO JC • ii JO 


u \: -. I • . l‘-‘ i' ■ i; •' ■■ ■ 

GO . • Or. TOG i O': 0 ■' - X ' - ! - - 

. ;■ j 0GO' fiGGi bol-TOG G.>: •• J ’- 

X vi,rxo j:x: Y»; s ->t 1 ■■ :: - ■ ■ 

o GO.;; to;'/ bo otto ?o oG'Xoyo. XtXx 


... ) rff , V GG/ ckiGOi TT .til 

G ; - ' 

) ; o- •< ;J f j 

,\;v. rj' 0 9 0 r / 'X:1XGl>'0i: . 1 olCoXoBOlib^ 
r< l ij ; ! -i tf ■ ' : ■ ' ! 

, >.0 / J.T X Xi'X J »£'TO %„, OOOq 
)•;■: OlTbbGObG obo XgJ'HJJ 
Tog ...'.coo; 0 tkkX :gigw 

An i: fi G •" G'V'' : . u'G j'Giij 

xo boniX 


•: . n c .0 ,n 


*' '■ '• 


G, r go G OTXTTO'G 

, j: . > • v O i ' . -X 

n w/ .0.0 10 GY 0)00 : 

0, ■ Y.G / • T ■ - : : 


‘ ■i X 



go" o) i O ' X o J; . 



00 

oo^X e B\f ’noXABOJjho 


0000/ 


. . 

'j 'to'}. 

■\ t-vO'C 

:/0¥, X.c 


0 :O 


' oiiX’ 

r > j; O d 


: . 

. 0 

: Xj X/i'B 


c 



. (■ 






oolj :f 


Jot 


\ 1 





152 

In at least three other cases there is evidence of 
frequent moving about, quite often from rural to urban 
areas. In each case the student attended at least five 
different schools. One further instance might be noted. 

In Case No. 19, the subject is an American boy who moved 
to Canada less than two years ago. He is presently 
attending his fourth school. There is a possibility that 
the boy suffered academically because of the fact that 
all his earlier education had been received in the United 
States. While it does not necessarily follow that this 
education is inferior to what he might have received in 
Canada, it might have been sufficiently different to cause 
him to do relatively poor work in his grade nine examin¬ 
ations. It may be postulated. In the aboce cases, that 
frequent changing of one T s school might well have been a 
factor making for low achievement. Such low achievement 
on the part of students who are intellectually capable 
of better performance represents underachievement. 

Achievement in Mathematics . Close attention was paid 
to the grade nine departmental examination mathematics marks 
made by the pupils included in this study. It is widely 
believed that the ability to do well in mathematics is 
different from the ability required in most, if not all, 
other subjects. It is often assumed that a w verbal 
ability” underlies high grades in such subjects as language, 






:.o • .. 

- 




' • / C^"‘ -C- 3u.fc.Cj: 


r ■ . . c 



;! : r :< - L:r1 ; ■" >L : ' 5 -L : ' 





■ 

IL| 



- 









c.L; 


- 










; 

LLL: 





(iL f o • 



: 

0';l o 









- j 

- 







. 

; 

L t -■ 






. 






. T 

• 0 



O';? 




* L* 


< . 


XS 1 ' LX'Lusi 





r L ;l1 Li: - 

C, ■ L. 

; ■ - j: 

( 

L;t 


. 


ol 

V 

L 





) j; r;q . y■> (U)y. J'i ,, L ' L LL, 

,. ii L ' v. ' . ' . 


1 j 


oL 


xil^ bf ilLlk-.I: v:...': 


r i [• tLI. ' ■ " L ' c' i • 












, 




. T.j; 


• ; L 


> ■ 



153 

literature, and social studies, whereas a ?t problem-solving 


ability" is required for success in mathematics* A 
review of the stanine scores made by the underachievers 
of this study revealed that twenty-six students, or approx¬ 
imately 76 per cent, earned scores which fell below 
the midpoint of the distribution, while just 24 per cent 
have scores which exceeded this point. It is obvious 
that underachievers tend to do more poorly in mathematics 
than do the generality of grade nine students upon whom 
the stanine scores were based. 

TABLE III 

DISTRIBUTION OF STANINE SGORES IN MATHEMATICS 
FOR UNDERACHIEVERS 


Stanines 9,$,7,6 

Stanine 5 

Stanines 4,3,2,1 

2 

14 

19 



Achievement in Literature . A survey of similar scores 
made in literature reveals a trend not unlike that noted 
for mathematics. Once again, the stanine scores show that 
two-thirds of these underachievers earned scores which 
fell below the midpoint of the distribution, whereas 
only twelve students made scores which exceeded this 
point. 










,0 


•>{ ! 0 








C 






:o: 




>, 




c- ■ ;.' .r ■■ "4^ 




oil; ' . , ; j; '(.J.a 1 . (■' C 


;.i 


: 




- ? 




-,:oo 




c*,::;, r 


c 


6 , 




ios.ih r co’toot 






c Jx 


; .I '.O 


154 


TABLE IV 

DISTRIBUTION OF STANINE SCORES IN LITERATURE 
FOR UNDERACHIEVERS 


Stanines 9,3,7,6 

Stanine 5 

Stanines 4,3,2,1 

& 

g 

19 


Achievement in Language o When the same scores were 
examined for language, a distribution very similar to 
that found for the literature scores was noted* Once 
again, 66 per cent of these underachievers made scores 
which were less than the midpoint of the distribution 
of grade nine scores* No such uneven distribution of 
scores was noted for social studies and science* 

TABLE V 

DISTRIBUTION OF STANINE SCORES IN LANGUAGE 
FOR UNDERACHIEVERS 



Stanines 9*3*7,6 

Stanine 5 

Stanines 4,3,2,1 

7 

10 

is 



Study Habits * A survey of the scores made on the SSHA 
indicates that a majority of these underachievers earned 
very low scores on this instrument* It may be noted 
from Table VI that only five scores fell above the 75th 


















* 


0 







t. 




- c ' ^ • < 


, X'i ' XX • - 




• . 





155 


percentile, whereas thirty scores, £6 per cent, fell below 
this point. Of this latter figure, twenty-five scores, 
or 72 per cent of the total group, fell below the 50th 
percentile. One might generalize and claim that poor 
study habits and school attitudes, as measured by the 
SSHA, are correlates of underachievement. It would be 
incorrect, however, to assume that there is necessarily 
a causal relationship between these low scores and 
underachievement. It is held that any one of a number 
of correlates of underachievement might have an adverse 
effect upon study habits and school attitudes. For 
example, disinterest In school, dislike for a teacher, 
rejection at home—all might conceivably be reflected 
in poor study habits and attitudes towards school 0 
Whatever the explanation may be, however, It cannot be 
denied that a low score on the SSHA is a correlate of 
underachievement as studied here. 

TABLE VI 

DISTRIBUTION OF PERGENTILES EARNED ON THE SSHA 
BY UNDERACHIEVERS 


Percentiles 1-25 26-50 51-75 76-99 


IS 


Cases 


7 


5 


5 











\,t d 


c ;i n rvj; 


* 


j; O :. 


0 


« 


1 ' c. 


'.l>/ .■ ‘JO 


'i( o d ■.! xj . j. aLo : ! " o ‘jj’it'fi* ; J 


G; u . dj.i - ;.;:dr- rd 


! 


< I 


0 c 




j ; J'A'ic.O 


0 


D 


0; J -i i 


o •: v j£:. n ‘ / > * d .1 ; d .. v rt 


01 o 


i : 0 


J 0 0 J- 


v-.L v..'D ! c; ) ;! 


O 1 3 ) 

t 

■, xoxdo d; 


■Ja o dr; g' r :dr ;> : 


c; 


vovcdi 




. i. 


'do od rmro;; 


l C 1 0 . ( J ; 


M) 


hap 




•j 


j do ''X^ : dx>rj 







156 


Summary . A majority of the underachievers in this 
study reveal an indifferent or disinterested attitude toward 
school, and one out of every four of these students would 
prefer to stop school at once. Forty per cent of the group 
have strong feelings of dislike for at least one teacher, and 
thirty-two of the thirty-five admit that they would not ask a 
teacher for help if they were making poor progress in school. 
A fairly large number of these students believe that certain 
of their courses are dull and of no practical value to them. 

A number of weaknesses in school procedures, such as taking 
notes, preparing for tests, and expressing themselves in 
writing, were noted for at least 40 per cent of all these 
underachievers. The evidence in favor of peer standards as 
being a factor making for underachievement in this study is 
not too impressive. One out of every five of the present 
group of underachievers has had a sufficiently varied back¬ 
ground in school that this must be considered as a possible 
correlate of underachievement. There is evidence that these 
underachievers are poorer than the generality in grade nine 
in mathematics, language, and literature. Low scores on the 
SSHA are noted for the majority of underachievers used in 
this study. 



t ' J . ;) \) ■ ,'j' i ,j vT ’ O ‘3 . . , ' 1 ' ) 3 ; . X. > • - 1 .x ' X S V C it) Xl 0 1. J. I jj i X 

r. jxo x x ' i .' 3 fio '>x : * ' Vxx./vs ‘.to o t 


( 03 3 ic jii "0 ! t:o:\ 

L > i x t T 1 


) 0 J 



-) v ■ j; X 8 .. .1 l ,x ■ r If c.r V £>-.<3 


V f • -X. ; ' I 


i 


..j ,> ■ X • .Jc/.-.j. • 0 


• ■ • *3 i..eoi 








■ i\ ... ■ i 


c 


■‘Ibbi 




8 





' '•/ ' ‘i \."Xv"; ' 


- : , ., . •;;; ■ V X ; .X Of. \ : ' " 1 ■' 1 ' ‘. X) i X o. CJ. 

. L 'X X'S b-'i. C,ac o OC J- IX.. 1 xi-V Xi '.■»■; .X-.X-. sx, I ;x, ■ 

:i . • / '; ■ i ! ) . ' . V\ ■ . , ■' ' ■ ■ X. ' ■ ' ■ 

j-,; ib '*;; -li: xxi >, /)■; s:v.. ; . x -- xsxxri'X- o ' ' ‘V \ro.r. ioci xxxx 

i.lO X;Xr ... ' , . ./• r :, "• j ' >0 ! '• ■ ; c X:’ .- : n . ..! c . X. x U : XK> Of , 

i .XV/ .L VVV:i. . • !.j, Xu .X;.V.S V • ■ •' • • • • • x »• ' ' i 

» !. ■ * j X, : 


CHAPTER NINE 


PERSONALITY FACTORS 

In the two preceding chapters, attention was paid to 
correlates of underachievement which centered about the home 
and the school. In the present chapter an attempt will be 
made to illustrate a syndrome of correlates of underachieve¬ 
ment which relate directly to personality traits or 
characteristics. 

Self-Acceptance and Underachievement 

A good deal of time and energy has been devoted to 
research on the self, and one finds frequent reference in 
current literature to the terms ”self-concept,” ”self-ideal 
concept, tT and ^self-acceptance.” It is not necessary at 
this time to probe the depths of self psychology, however. 
For the purposes of this discussion it will be assumed that 
”self-concept” is synonymous with ”self-as-seen”, while 
”self-ideal concept” will refer to ”self-as-desired.” It 
is postulated here that a discrepancy between these two 
views of self is indicative of a lack of self-acceptance. 
Such lack of self-acceptance might well be indicative of a 
degree of maladjustment, of which academic underachievement 


c, j oj:oq qoi; re ■ ■ 

Qjv >,.• * i .'O: '- ' 0 .;*j: 

oo ■!..Lev/ jOi: ori-io- i 


TOOO 0,0 li>$ 0 0 IO c 




■' V' C. : . J 


. 


;• oo o • ' o - ■ 

i o , on ■ ■ o;r ,o vb yi :i o .1 — 


>■ ■ b,. 


i ■ vii 




J i.u'i i,: 1/'• :-:...-bCi 




15$ 

could be a manifestation. Mowrer (1953, P* 319) has noted, 

". . . There would probably be universal agreement among 
psychotherapists. . . that prior to treatment, a disturbed, 
puzzled. . . person would show a discrepancy between himself 
as he T is T and as he *would like to be*. . . ." Studies by 
Chodorkoff (1954) and others have verified this assumption. 
Hanlon et al. (1954) were able to show that a significant 
relationship existed between "school relations" and the 
degree to which there is congruence between these two 
concepts of self. 

The two Taschuk-Hepburn inventories were administered 
to each underachiever with a view to measuring the discrep¬ 
ancy between self-concept and self-ideal concept. A com¬ 
parison of the results of these two inventories provided a 
"discrepancy score" for each student. A high score indicates 
a greater discrepancy between self-ideal and self-concept 
than does a low one. As mentioned above, these two inven¬ 
tories were also administered to a male population of seventy 
grade ten students who had not been identified as under¬ 
achievers. (See Table VII.) It was possible, therefore, to 
calculate the percentile rank for each of the discrepancy 
scores made by the underachievers in this study. 

The raw discrepancy scores for the underachieving group 
ranged from thirty-four to one hundred and thirty-one. When 
converted into percentile ranks, it was found that fourteen 
students, or 40 per cent earned scores which fell below the 


o !; ;vi.b> J.u. 1 



» . * 


■ 




: : ’ 

■ ■ ■ 

<, 

i b 

.j * * ■' ■ 


■ .Of 






C.‘> 



■ 




















: . ‘ • j : 0 













„ ; b. • k-i'-.i ■ 

■ 


: 1 b' 



■ ■ 

oab 

; j ; j •, :■ r 


V:.! j •/ v. 

... 4 * v/ ; ■ f : ! o; 

- 

■ • 


b $ b 


■ I: . Lu; j £ • i 

j.' :■ j : . v 1 ■ 


t > ■ ‘.■■I 







•■ Of >:; jo.nb: -‘j : : ; ■ > 

•; ; 



: ■ \ bv.U b> ; : 


b •' ■ ■ 

_ 

■ 



/ i i ( V ; c ■ • . ; 

no \ : ■ 


^■.. . ooo r \ b'b , ■. ■ ,* .bb -• : 

j ‘ ' : ' ! ' 



. ■ - 


■ 

: .;b \« 










bob ■!. 

b. if: :'bjj 




f, . V ■ ■ ■ : ' ' 

■■ v : . s >. • ■ c ■ " 




159 

median for the unselected grade ten population, whereas the 
remaining twenty-one students, or 60 per cent, earned scores 
which fell above the 50th percentile. Of the latter number, 
twelve students, or 34 per cent of the total group, earned 
scores which exceeded the 75th percentile for the standard¬ 
ization group. (See Table VIII.) That is, three out of 
every five underachievers earned discrepancy scores which 
exceeded the median score for the grade ten population, and 
one out of every three students earned scores which fell in 
the upper quartile. On the basis of these results it may be 
stated that the majority of marked underachievers are rela¬ 
tively dissatisfied with "self-as-seen, T! while one in every 
three is decidedly aware of a large discrepancy between 
self-concept and self-ideal concept. 

TABLE VII 

TASCHUK-HEPBURN DISCREPANCY SCORES FOR SEVENTY NON¬ 
UNDERACHIEVERS AT GRADE TEN LEVEL 


Score Limits Frequency Cumulative Frequency 


130-139 

1 

70 

120-129 

2 

69 

110-119 

3 

67 

100-109 

6 

64 

90-99 

9 

53 

30-39 

6 

49 

70-79 

13 

41 

60-69 

10 

23 

50-59 

13 

18 

40-49 

4 

5 

30-39 

1 

1 









I ‘ ■ 




< • . nit ; 




' . . c ... O ■■ '• ' ' ' :l , < • j: -' : 

/■ , : ! 0 J - ‘ ' U " * l 1 ' 

■; i <, .v r ’ / .. n o; *i£ ’ <o - o'oo IM;: {; ' JJ 

SS ' 

i ' ■ ■ : . . ' ' : : 

t T-"H, : » • : i ’ ' 

)■ is. I ■ o ' • * 

; ■ ’ *; O ■ . " ■' ' '■ } 


v ! ; 


[tW uv'll :.)• 


Id; I 


;. i'lG Of. D9i 


■ ' ■' '' - 




• : id j i 

- :J , , t v ■/: > 

li&QW lOG Vt’JH y'-V'} 


id i.o axfcf 

or. 1 . O GO •'{. "■ 


0” r:l 


>. > '... 1 ■ o o, : 

.1 ' .J ’ O , . ' • 1 

lb J i:o i o ' 




j G 


: 









. :). ro. , .11" 
. 


Oiij >i ■ o /l ;n.'l g. o."" 


if I ' ’ 






0 

y I 


- 





160 


Two possible criticisms of the above findings might be 
anticipated at this point. A recent article by Anderson 
(1959) has cast some doubt upon the whole concept of con¬ 
sistency of self or at least upon the Taschuk - Hepburn 
Self - Concept Inventory as a device for measuring it. Also, 
those who are so inclined might wish to discuss the above 
findings in terms of statistical significance. To consider 
the second part first, a Chi square test revealed that the 
degree of discrepancy noted here could have occurred by 
chance in a normal group with a probability between .10 
and .15. While such a finding may leave something to be 
desired, it is held here that it cannot be ignored completely, 
and when considered in conjunction with findings relating to 
parental rejection and rejection of peers, it forms a part 
of a very meaningful pattern. 

By way of confirming the findings of the Taschuk-Hepburn 
inventories, however, it should be noted that when discrepancy 
scores between self-concept and self-ideal concept were 
obtained from the Bills T Index and correlated with those 
obtained from the Taschuk-Hepburn inventories, the correla¬ 
tion between these two sets of scores was significant beyond 
the .01 level. It would appear that this correlation offers 
reasonably strong evidence that the Taschuk-Hepburn inven¬ 
tory is a valid test of self-consistency. 















X. >j V l.» 


vo r Uv 


XV;V; O “X 


. i 


. ;■ ■ : • igt i • ' : 


• • 'V i.'- • ’ 




; v '. ;l .;;.0 , ' ' ; 

: : J '' >i . "■ ■ '■' V • ; : : : ‘ ... X . V 


.. ... v V V J ■ ! ■ 






* 

>vv.; 


. • : \ . ■ W V • i 

) v ...■ ' •• 








>! ' l 


< vqvvvxf: od, 

) :.wivV) :xl . )V >ii kl 

L .. - -i; ■ : - . ;:,.x. .U. 

.j . v ■ 1 ' j’ tbo'xi s 

' v.f ’ ;i.. XV : V V . a v; V 0 JVVUx I- H 

... | . " > ‘ :V ' ‘ " 

J 


i. JeJvr • ■.) v v : ; 

, ■ , I;; 1 vj ..vxivi vlv d 




(' ) i i -- ‘ 1U - '-X - 


. 3 x ; v ■ j IVV.L Jj V 0 i*. J ’’ ; ~x° 


} ' : 

• V.. 


, w , , i - ■ - ■ ■ < • ; * 1 ■■ 

V XV j ! V . ; .;v) ; : •- VO , -J 'I - 'OOIJVVV- .V .X 

•: , . ' ■' ') i.'V :x. ijxx vUviv j,v, '.o • vviVvic: 

j* 1 •- X 

'.J,' AtanjXi.u i.a V acfs-e OjO u a 

. 

j X .1; £ •• ' . ' '■ . hi ■ " ' 






161 


TABLE VIII 

DISTRIBUTION BY PERCENTILE RANK OF TASCHUK-HEPBURN 
DISCREPANCY SCORES FOR UNDERACHIEVERS 


Percentile 





Ranks 

1-24 

25-49 

50-74 

75-9 ( 

Cases 

9 

5 

9 

12 


Other Personal Characteristics 


With the above findings in mind, one might ask, "If 
most marked underachievers see themselves as being not 
completely acceptable, in what areas or dimensions of person¬ 
ality do they believe themselves to be lacking?" A survey 
of the scores of the Guilford-Zimmerman Temperament Survey 
(hereafter called the G/Z) serves to throw some light upon 
this question. 

Before a detailed examination of each of the G/Z traits 
is undertaken, it is well to consider the over-all results 
obtained from the administration of this instrument. When . 
the scores of the ten scales were ranked, it was found that 
underachievers tended to see themselves as possessing the 
various traits in the following order: masculinity; personal 
relations; emotional stability; objectivity; social interest; 
thoughtfulness; ascendance; friendliness; general activity; 
and restraint. These scales of the G/Z may be divided into 

















.. . ... ' ■ • " 1 
. • , * ■ ■ . .oc-,, ; v . ; .: .. v 







JO ”i Y 






0 ■ i 


■ ■ 


■ ■ ; k[ ■ ;; • U f ’VIV V- f ■ .id:') -■'.£bi .J i IviV V. ) j : VOj 

. ' • ' . ; • V ‘ -' ' ' < ‘ '■ : ■’ ' ' ’ 

' X V ' ,.1m \ J\ •" ' x L • (Y C > v7 ' /• -Y 1 V 5 .1 X. ■■ ivJ Y u l.Xi 

. • 

■■ ' . i'H:: r . . y . . 

iso L i.i Vi. VfCVi. Ml- ;v V-.. v, , y> -J bv: J.iip/jV.K; vrivm 


■' • 


; ' • ", > ' ' ' : ■' 

o.i.ifc./. , V V V. V •' . V, l 0 ‘ Y XJ 'VV; c i v ' JW -.v-., .V : t 

, - ■ ■ ■ ' 

J ;,. U J Vf f vV. v; \W V.' c hi, ii m ".‘1 0 VfV 3 Y & .V ':K; Sit 3 Y, Y ‘l 0 30*10 08 SXi 

) ; . . ' . ; . ,; .(.At ; ■ /.£ J V ; ■: J O L O.l ■ Y YYV : j . 'UYY. 

: : , . ■ : • y'i ' ■ 1 ■ 

j . j 

* , L v l Jo X'i'j ■ ; : ;£ / . t; ' ' o 

Y Y . ' •. , ’ •• ••■' ' 0 i 



162 


two categories, those that measure characteristics which are 
of importance in interpersonal relations, and those which 
are not primarily of importance in this respect. The latter, 
or non-interpersonal scales, will be considered first. 

Non-Interpersonal Characteristics 

As noted above, underachievers see themselves as possess¬ 
ing "general activity” in a relatively small degree. The 
Manual for the G/Z suggests that low scores on this scale 
indicate a tT slow and deliberate pace; fatigability; pausing 
for rest; low production; inefficiency.” Stevens (1956), 
who also used the G/Z with an underachieving group, viewed 
"general activity” as a manifestation of the achievement 
drive. He noted that McClelland (1947, 1953) had found 
marked differences in achievement drive between academically 
successful and unsuccessful students. A review of the scores 
made by these present underachievers revealed that twenty- 
seven students, or 77 per cent, earned scores which fell at 
or below the 50 th percentile, while only eight students made 
scores which exceeded this point. That is, approximately 
three out of every four students in this group earned scores 
which fell below the median for the standardization group. 

One item which claims to measure "general activity"* suggests 

* The authors of the G/Z forbid the direct quotation of 
test items. 









. 


1,0 


0 




' V j - . .. •/ 'I L i 



.! 





C 





o.ri 


j ■ 



. ' I 




.< j 


b:;j* t, 


' 


\.l. yl)/-u oj 




!i 


ii 


—' ' J n/0 j ’ .j .. - V 


r j.:. :• ') ‘X 


c 








,7C..LL'ii "iX 


c 


: 0 ■'!< 0 




J 


'X. • 


H 




i 




I) • I 




163 

that some individuals can produce a good deal of work in a 
short period of time. It is found that twenty-two under¬ 
achievers, or approximately two out of every three, admit that 
this is not characteristic of them. It might be imagined 
that the possession of the trait "general activity” would be 
necessary if one is to do a reasonable amount of work with 
efficiency. Most of these underachievers, by their own 
admission, are low in this ability. 

"Restraint” is that trait which the members of the 
present group of underachievers saw themselves as possessing 
in the smallest degree. The authors of the G/Z claim that 
low scores here suggest not being "serious minded”, being 
carefree and impulsive and tending to love excitement. A 
survey of the scores made by these marked underachievers 
revealed that twenty-nine students, or $3 per cent earned 
scores which fell below the median, while only six under¬ 
achievers made scores which exceeded the 50 th percentile. 

That is, about five out of every six underachievers earned 
a score which might be classed as low. Considering answers 
given on two statements which measure along the "restraint” 
scale, it is found that two of every three underachievers 
admit that they do not tend to take life very seriously, 
while five of every six reveal that they often crave 
excitement. 

These underachievers tend to see themselves as possess¬ 
ing the trait "emotional stability” in some fairly marked 


; : S‘s_0",! 'ie iiwh a 

.. ;., : , . .. .: ■ .: ,):. ' - o'- ••.. - - ! ' /' ; ' 


j .. 


1 


< . ■ 


■ * : >j ) •.. Cj: ■ ■■ 

j :u; o j.. o \ic n<. . -vJ-xU ' of-MU 


J ... V ... ‘.v. ' 

; 'h . I • ■: -■ J ■- ■; : Oi< ^ .' Oh C ^ l 


: ' 


j . ■ i,j ...' i f • ■■ - . 

;r - • w. ! 


ux \ 


' 


v 

» 

. . , ; , i .■•' , . • : ■ , ; ; ' j < , . ' -• > 

. ■ ; ■ "I - 

, • : "/ .. • i l ■' U 


oyt i : . • . ;o eb ■ ■ - “ ' 

• . . ■ • - d 5 ■' ' ‘ - •' 

.. v.\ih % VJ : ■■ 9' u - : ' o.luo . • ■' • ; o- , -> ^ * <ui ^ J 


f" J i . 

■ • /.; ) , ' : . 

> ; J.. ■ I 

■ ’ Iv . ■ • ■ 


:) 


. 


) 


• : • ■ t 

' lo 


• - : ■ ■ 
y ■■ • 

y i 1« 


V J vJ Ohhb bj.Xv./. ;■ 

;j ....11;) ,t bOh C ■ ■ _ •■ ; 




; ; ■! ,■ . ■: : .0 .■ V J Jilv.i 


: : 





164 

degree. This characteristic is ranked third. A survey of 
the scores made by the present group, however, revealed that 
approximately three out of every five underachievers earned 
scores which fell below the median of scores for the stand¬ 
ardization group. Low scores on this scale indicate 
"fluctuation of moods, interests, and energy; pessimism; 
perseveration of ideas and moods; daydreaming; feelings of 
guilt and loneliness." On one statement which measures 
"emotional stability," twenty-eight students, or $0 per cent 
of the total, admitted to extremes of mood which ranged from 
being "very sluggish" to "bubbling over with energy." 

The trait "thoughtfulness" is ranked in sixth place by 
these underachievers. A perusal of the individual scores 
reveals that twenty-three students, or about two out of 
every three, earned scores which fell below the median for 
this scale. Low scores on the "thoughtfulness" scale 
suggest a lack of "reflectiveness"; a tendency not to be 
"observing of behaviour in others"; an "interest in overt 
activity" as opposed to being "interested in thinking"; and 
not being "philosophically inclined." As an example, 
twenty-four students, or about seven in every ten, admit 
that they would rather help put plans into action than work 
them out originally. 

A final score which might be considered here is that 
one obtained on the "masculinity" scale. As mentioned else¬ 
where, the present underachievers tend to see themselves as 










■ 



i, o a 


• >WO il, 


l>£ 


;• j: i t r '■ ■; : ; ‘ /. oa * aa.; 

• ) 1 "• 


• i 






0 


I , ? i ■■ Ol ' i ' 






c 




OX ;j'OlVX::v 




0 ; J 




' 


■ i 0 




. 








7 


) ! i 


. ili-L. 


O’ 


ja 


■0 0 


v 


C -1 / 


•’Xijo'i'vsiiac 


; 


7 • i 


t « ' 7 I 0 




. 


l.'■■■ -K V.LU 

: ■ 

. iV ■ 1 ■ ,i ■. 7. ' : : 0 ' ; 


. 




L'< )£ 


■ • : ■ ! ) , ■ ‘ i i. : r 


; • . r, 




r I: n j 


f-O O >i . ao oo 


t 



165 

possessing this trait to a relatively high degree. The G/Z 
authors claim that high scores here suggest an "interest in 
masculine activities and vocations; not easily disgusted; 
hardboiled [as opposed to being sympathetic] ; and resistant 
to fear." Sixty per cent of the students earned scores 
which fell above the median, whereas 40 per cent made scores 
which were below this point. 

Interpersonal Characteristics 

Those five scales dealing with traits or characteristics 
which bear directly on one ! s relations with others will now 
be considered. 

The members of this group of underachievers see them¬ 
selves as possessing the trait "friendliness" in a relatively 
small degree. This trait is ranked seventh out of ten. 
Twenty-six students, or 75 per cent earned scores which fell 
below the median score provided for this scale. Low scores 
here are said to suggest "belligerence; readiness to fight; 
hostility; a desire to dominate and a resistance to domina¬ 
tion by others." On one statement which measures along the 
"friendliness" scale, two out of every three underachievers 
admitted that it bothers them considerably to have others 
tell them what to do. 

"Ascendance" is another G/Z trait on which these under¬ 
achievers score themselves quite low. It is accorded sixth 
place out of a possible ten. Twenty-two students, or 63 per 




. 

1 

-a.': 77 .Mvx/n.n:,.v 

‘ i ' ) ; .' X i J i ...’ ' ' . ' J . ■ o 7 \ 

.' :. ' .'7 Li ‘ ■ 

' . . 1 - - " ■ 

-..'1 •• ’ 


;;'7J7C0 cu 0 U1 ‘o' 

•, ? ■ . : • : ■- • ... .if::. .7. >':L ; :>.C 1, 

. , / .. ' 7 ■ ' ' :■ '• 



7, 77.) 77,- . 

Z ;i ... : 7.'i K." > 7 ' :> 7 • ' - 

;• "j.v i: * rii'J. )1 violsoa aHricx ascniT 

# \7 i., 7 ; : .‘.s: ■ >7 7 

; : .j to J. 7 77 . n*' > V 7 ; 7)7777 ‘ .ficxVHi 

. ■ ■ ' 1 ' : 

• - , : ij ■ . 7\77 

-7 . ' ■ 0777; ' Vl 7- }uj )i 

■ 

. ' 77 77 : . : .7 7777 . i ; ; ; via; 

« 

v . • , iiv‘ . v ~i‘ 

iy.Li ■ . 

■, o 7 : ■ 7•; *. ■ ,..-'7 ■■■■ '- : m--- 1 


7 \ ».- r : 7 ; ova):: ;.r/t 7 fJ ■j o 

: 7tv; . \ € V 7 ; • .i . ol 7. 

: : .1 j 7 OJ ‘ ' - j "i - 77 . 

- ■ i. • 77 j 7 : )f, ' 

iv.t {'■):' 7 i i .I 'v ■■ i. o.t ■ ■■„ i.•;..<■ : : .7 : x J.vo 

■ 'if., . 77,. 7 . 7X].77'7s . 

>. .. •. ■ ... • 7 1 

': ,: > v 7) "l 0. .1 v. 

J ' V :■ . J> c • . ■ • 0 ■ 7 :. j. 

7C9iJ ' >v :• a 

. - ..... - cm j :i 

„ < 7 ■, 

■ ; i 

- m a.Jcnr. v;.' r -n-j *bi:o 

o' ’ . n ■ 7 o'< 

/ 1 : . .i ' :> ■ • ' 






166 

cent, earned scores which fell below the median. Low scores 
here are said to indicate fT submissiveness; habits of following; 
hesitation to speak (to others, or in public)”; and a desire 
to "avoid conspicuousness.” Nineteen students, or about 55 
per cent have admitted that they have never initiated a 
project or taken the lead while in a group. 

Scores on the "sociability” scale are quite low for 
members of this group also. Although the trait is ranked 
in fifth place, 60 per cent of the group earned scores which 
were less than the median score. A low score on this scale 
suggests having ”few friends and acquaintances; refraining 
from conversations; disliking social activities; and avoid¬ 
ing social contacts.” Considering answers on two items 
which measure along this scale, it is noted that four out of 
five of these underachievers seldom see themselves as taking 
an active part in the entertainment at social events, while 
three out of five do not believe that they are so friendly 
that others soon relax and feel at ease in their company. 

The members of this population rate themselves as 
scoring quite high on "personal relations.” This trait is 
placed second in a list of ten, although approximately 60 
per cent of the group earned scores which fell below the 
median. A low score on the "personal relations” scale is 
said to suggest a tendency to have "faultfinding habits” 
and to be "hypercritical of people and critical of 


' . ■’ - ’ ' " < ' ' 




i • • 

• 101 



fir. 





*'V 'if: 

• ■ . i 



■ 





c 1 






: ) - ' 


1 -.0>. :■ 




> j 




i ■ 


osH;sohos 

| 



J Hi: 



; Hi 









re vt. 





. 

■ T. 








'i: > o i 





' 


r 





' 


:jr'j HO ;■ 

, - ■ 



1 nrrln or: err 

:ir 




ri :i 




< is 



Ht0l- 



; 0 1 





• 













JO 8 *Ji 


• 


0 ': 



' 


hhhs 



' 

' 

; :>: 











-- 





i '■ ;to£ 






; s ;i " ' 


' 


: 




■'.hh' /■ 






„ 

! J s„ / r.r st 


' is 

















:i no 







ft 

. s 



a ■ 






■ 









Hr r : • 




V,' 


is or; 

J. 



' 




r-7 : JO 











L 






r 

• i •: 







r. 

i)li- 

■jr. no os 

.• 




HO -V .:■* v i- ■ 

i.l'S') 




. 



iJ 

■ in c < 








- 







H .is 


' ' 0 



. 




• . 

is 

4 ;: J 

■j;c :i' 




S) 'Hi 




< 



• 

■ so 


' • 



Ho :'r HO' 



• 



■ 






* . • ■ '■ : 

* 

: 


• 






o;l 


b 



' 


, 

' 



167 

institutions.” This scale also measures ”suspiciousness of 
others” and ”self-pity.” One item which measures along this 
scale suggests that an individual meets few ”two-faced” 
persons in his dealings with others, but $0 per cent of all 
the underachievers reject this statement as being false. 

The last G/Z scale to be considered here, the Objec¬ 
tivity” scale, is ranked in fourth place by this group of 
underachievers. Twenty-two subjects, or 63 per cent, have 
earned scores which fell below the median. Low scores on 
this scale suggest ”hypersensitiveness; egoism; self- 
centeredness; suspiciousness; fancying of hostility; and 
having ideas of reference.” When answers on two items 
which measure along this scale are considered, it is found 
that about three of every four underachievers admit that 
they seldom discuss their problems with others, while 
approximately two out of every three subjects believe at 
times that ”everyone else is against them.” 

Summary 

Although a number of these underachievers see them¬ 
selves as possessing certain of the above traits to a 
greater or lesser extent than others do, it is possible to 
make certain generalizations on the basis of findings which 
apply to the majority of these students. 

Most of these academic underachievers are not completely 
accepting of themselves; and a somewhat smaller number, 


■ . ' : • fi 


.■ ; s 


, '• , . i .. i ■ 

-i’> C! . 


:>} 

oe *:t8Q 




j x 0 ' ’i ' -5 . '>■ ' • ^ - ; - ? 


•. 0 \ - 






■ 


MiJ 




0 1 1..0J U 


o: vi . 

.. '■ 1 /V.'. J 

t j 'to . J oi;t - jm: - 

. ' 


IX. •• 


; V J 

i:) .i: f i v 


■ 


LI u: 


■... ’ 0 ■ 1 Ct a.UDBi 


"l • /:■ - r M.i j.:li ec> r x: d Me* j . • uv/.; V!. >J o: 

■ ' Jl: 1.0 O.i , ' VO. •'/ . ' : : 


•\ J\J ■ J i 






K- O'l' JOlOl^lO. O. .0 0 8o0Oj. lO T. CO / 


PuXiJ 








i > . i j' • - ’ J 


O iailti f>.£l$V D.C 8.iF 0*X: 

, Od ■ ‘t vi . U .OnJ V‘ 

• , \ ij j; .!.. oh o 'o 


'lO On; 

iv f:r. j'lho 
• ■ . o. ' r 
,'.\V 'Vo ,;kk»V: 


approximately one in every three, are very acutely aware of 
their shortcomings and see themselves in a correspondingly 
less favorable light. 

The majority of the members of this group are interested 
in action rather than reflection. They may be labile in 
their emotions and interests, quickly going from interest in, 
and excitement over, a project or course of action to the 
opposite. They lack the energy or drive needed to keep up a 
sustained or persistent effort. Further, most of these 
marked underachievers do not enjoy satisfactory relations 
with others. They tend to be relatively shy and submissive, 
shrinking from social contact and from positions of respon¬ 
sibility. Although the majority of these underachievers 
accept domination, they resent it; they are suspicious and 
harbor feelings of hostility and belligerence. They are 
sensitive to the opinions of others and are frequently 
secretly hurt by the actions of adults and peers because 
they tend to keep their real feelings to themselves. Their 
tendency to rate themselves as being relatively ^masculine”- 
may be seen as an attempt to compensate for other recognized 
weaknesses. High scores on the G/Z "masculinity" scale may 
also reveal a lack of sympathy for others. These under¬ 
achievers have unsatisfactory relations with members of the 
opposite sex. 

Stevens (1956) substantiates certain of the above 




sal 




■•n 


r.JOiStj 


v) 


j 


, 


f. 




t 




•( j 






f 


C 


t 


(, .j. 




i:, J: ■ i 


c 


VO 


‘ ‘ ti 


. 


! / 


c y V 




j 


. .ex 


v-> >'11 or r ioj'oiiv 
: ; ).! : 


J i J 


c 


i 


jx v fo fui ( } '■ f - oio;. 


■ ; ■ ) 




''to p i 




0 V 1. i:) 


)■ V! .VOD? \L V'V'UV' 


■ 


{;f?- 


' 


■ V 




- 


V 


or oeX: 


w .s', vi’ 


! U 


IC; l' 


nx 


v 


■ . : ! 1 


f ' ' ' : 


<‘ij 


169 

conclusions. He found that underachievers tend to be more 
self-rejective than overachievers. He believes that these 
essentially negative, perhaps hostile, self-attitudes may 
have lowered the self-esteem of the students to a point 
where academic efficiency is impaired. Whereas previous 
studies (Gough, 1949; Kimball, 1952) have suggested external 
rejection of authority as the cause of underachievement, 

Stevens believes that his findings imply that such attitudes 
of rejection have been internalized. 

The study by Sheerer (1949, p. 174) is also of interest 
at this juncture. She noted that rt . . . there is a definite 
and substantial correlation between attitudes of acceptance 
of, and respect for, self and attitudes of acceptance of* and 
respect for, others. . . .” If such is the case, and 
Sheerer T s findings have been supported by other research 
workers, then it is not surprising to find that the tendency 
which underachievers have to reject themselves is closely 
allied with a tendency to reject others also. 

The views of Harry Stack Sullivan (1947, p. 10) offer 

further support for the interpretation given above. He noted, 

The self may be said to be made up of reflected appraisals. . . 
if the self dynamism is made up of experience which is chiefly 
derogatory, then the self dynamism will itself be chiefly 
derogatory. It will facilitate hostile, disparaging and 
hostile appraisals of self. . . . The peculiarity exists 
that one can find in others only that which is in the self. 

And so the unhappy child who grows up without love will have 
a self-dynamism which shows great capacity for finding fault 
with others and, by the same token, with himself. 

Such a view of interpersonal relations gains considerable 


' 

. 


• . s ;! ■ ' -• : ;! ^ t 

. 

* 


V • J . 


■ u ; ,■ • 3 i s) . : 


. 

i ; ... i.,i "-r . r; -,' .- . . or*. oj.lojioo 

■' . •; ' ; ... V '■ :. - ■ ■ ■ 

• ’■< ' ■ c ' '• : 

,| . ! , • ;.i . V-. ■ '.>. 1 . •/ 

' 

■-[' < 0 ' • ; . - ' • - :j; ’ 

■ 0 .. ■■ 1 : ' i 

•• _ J : . ■}.) • * '•/ .7' > .) ‘ '.i.O 




* t 

• . • * 

. ' '::o B A . ' ' :i • 3 - 

c c . ' V 0 : J )'B 

t - :;.:7> fiB 1. -I >1 

1 ; . ■. ) Ci< JL' 1 if J 

- ' 

' ... 7 >7 . r . : j ' J 


■ . . .. . ■ j ' i. OB ..).•) .: 

■ 

. ' . ■■■:;.■. i:; 

t • •- < 

. . . . •••.. 77> J'OL'qBO'i 

; ;ron •"i oou: 

•, J ■ ' ' .1 ■: • 

... 


c 


« . V 


.I;..:!i; .0 i‘" 
■■ 

. ■ 


V 

V.O*i; \'J. , H ]. V 0<i 0 ■'< 0.1. ' 0 70 J .LB B 

' J ;; 7 0 0 X ' ’l.’.' iT0 X.0. O' ‘.VO 'XJOO 7,70' X J 

\ i . •;: . .. ' : J 0 i.T ■ b 'o -B 

. ; . . .. ; ;/0«, • .■ j ..: • . ±0 X 1 : • 

■ : X • 

' ■ ■■ •.. ' . ' tier oe bi 

... : : oe . iLior:; o B,i' c : ' "' :x- 





170 


support from the findings of the present study. It was 
shown that the majority of these underachievers experience 
parental rejection, that most of them have basically self- 
re jective attitudes, and that the majority of them tend to 
reject others. Sullivan would insist that this pattern of 
findings was not due to coincidence. He would suggest that 
since one’s self is rt made up of reflected appraisals/ 1 one 
tends to regard himself as unworthy if others do so. Because 
one is rejected by others, he tends to become self-rejective, 
and, because tT one can find in others only that which is in 
the self, 11 feelings of rejection toward others are inevitable. 

Finally, a study by Hanlon et al.(1954) may be noted. 
These workers utilized a group of students remarkably similar 
to that used in the present study and noted that 1! self-ideal 
congruence, 11 i.e., the relationship between self-concept and 
self-ideal concept, tends to correlate very highly with a 
number of factors which have been touched upon in the present 
study. It was found, for example, that measures of self- 
adjustment, self-reliance, sense of personal worth, feeling 
of belonging, freedom from withdrawal tendencies, social 
adjustment, social skills and community relations all corre¬ 
lated very highly with measures of self-ideal congruence. 

The latter measure and estimates of ,f family relations 11 were 
significantly correlated also. 

The marked similarity between the conclusions of Hanlon 
and his co-workers and those drawn in this study are at once 












. 






i - 


u 




. ■ . Is: 


v.'.:' - J uO; 




c 







i <. i3 ‘.j i i /. c 






( C ’M 





' 


I 


9 c. J 


•\ 


C 






i 


.'i 


; IO C 


u 


. . 


j \rt j 


i 




Ji-o't 




' 


c 


... ■ ( 


}: e. ; 




c ’■ 


. 


r . .-j:; 


:.v. '•.!>; 





171 


apparent. They conclude: 

Subjects in the low self-ideal congruence group were charac¬ 
terized by a lack of persistence in work habits and by 
feelings of oppression and inadequacy. They were more likely 
to feel rejected by both family and peers and tended to 
react to this rejection by withdrawing within themselves 
. . . and . . . subjects in the low self-ideal congruence 
group showed more uneasiness in social situations; They 
tended to stay in the background and to avoid contacts 
calling for poise and diplomacy, for they were easily hurt 
and were aware of their proneness to quarrel. They tended 
to dislike school, and their negativistic attitudes made 
for difficulties in their relationships with teachers, 
fellow students, and members of the opposite sex. (p. 217.) 



... 


j;~';L • ■ ■' ■' 

' 

i.V; ■. ucr. .x "o 

• : ;h i ■ ; o: ’ ' ■ . ..'-‘O -■ OJ 

, ■ • ’•J Cv •-> 


-a . . :> ■: • • 

- 

5 


.« * « * ’• 

. ■ /oo> Loh iv)J’ 

; . . ■ \ -U 

t . j 1--$^ 










CHAPTER TEN 


TESTING HYPOTHESES 


With the results of the case studies now at hand, it is 
possible to consider the hypotheses put forward in Chapter 
Four with a view to substantiating or negating each. 

Hypothesis 1: Underachievers spend an inadequate 
amount of time on home study . It is not a simple matter to 
determine precisely what represents an adequate amount of 
time for study purposes at the junior and senior high school 
levels. The Edmonton Public School system makes no official 
pronouncement regarding the optimum number of hours that 
should be devoted to study at each grade. In order to 
arrive at a representative figure, a number of counselors 
were contacted for both grades nine and ten. The former 
suggested that between four and six hours per week in grade 
nine might be seen as necessary, while the latter indicated 
that from five to ten hours would be needed in order to 
make optimal progress in grade ten. All counselors added 
that the ability of the individual student and the amount of 
class time devoted to study would have to be considered. It 
would appear, however, that there is agreement that about 
one hour per night should be devoted to study at grade nine, 
whereas in grade ten one and one-half hours are seen as 
being optimal. 











173 


A review of the information provided by the present 
group of underachievers reveals that during the present term, 
thirty-two grade ten students, or 94 per cent of the cases, 
were not devoting an adequate amount of time to study at 
home. A slightly smaller number, thirty students, or $4 per 
cent of the cases, were in a similar position last year. It 
is of interest at this point to note that thirty-two students 
admitted that they were underachievers in grade nine, with 
thirty-one students, or 91 per cent of the cases, giving 
11 insufficient amount of time on study” or "lack of interest” 
as the causes for their underachievement. 

TABLE IX 

NUMBER OF MINUTES PER NIGHT DEVOTED TO STUDYING 
BY UNDERACHIEVERS IN GRADES NINE AND TEN 


Minutes Grade Nine Grade Ten 


60 plus 

i 

3 

60 

4 

10 

50 

4 

2 

45 

3 

4 

30 

5 

7 

20 

6 

3 

15 

7 

5 ' 

10 

5 

1 


Hypothesis 2 : Poor study habits and attitudes toward 
school are correlates of underachievement , The data required 
to support this hypothesis have been offered in Chapter Eight 

















o ~~ ' i • ' 


■ 


J; / (>v£-«> • m <: rnjlXIO XI i 

X . ■ -X',: ■ i„r, ;x x. v.) ; xx-vx'x 

Jx'xXxjJx noX ol x; 

; n )b : , : .xx 


• r 




■> ) 


t 




, ; 





j 


■ !. 



K. 


J 


Xi.r 


V 





:•:.) Pi 



. 

< 


F 


VO 

uc 




l .. . 






0 IX 


■: :i ‘Y 


174 


It was pointed out that 72 per cent of all underachievers 
have study habits and school attitudes scores which fall 
below the 50th percentile on the SSHA. On the basis of these 
findings, one may conclude that this hypothesis has been 
substantiated. 

Hypothesis 3} Underachievers doubt the value of a. 
formal education . The evidence on hand suggests that such 
is not the case. When asked to rank order a number of 
factors which might be of importance in making for success 
in life, twenty-nine underachievers, or S3 per cent of the 
total, selected "education" as being that factor which was 
most important in this respect. An additional three students 
placed "education" in second place out of a possible twelve 
factors. In only three instances was "education" ranked 
below third place. It would appear, therefore, that under¬ 
achievers are not unaware of the value of a formal education, 
and this present hypothesis must be rejected. 

Hypothesis 4: Underachievers show a lack of interest 
in education and may express a desire to stop school . The 
data relevant to this hypothesis have been considered in an 
earlier chapter. Notwithstanding the value which under¬ 
achievers attach to an education, a majority of these students, 
75 per cent, express some dissatisfaction with the school 
situation and indicate that they are not particularly inter¬ 
ested in attending school. One of every four underachievers 

































> in i' 




.:. i..' 


. 1 ■. 


: H ..../O'. 


j *.\ ■■jJ.Xu i 
: >3 .. : 1 


, 


C;U ... 


. 




•) . 




a,: 
Jo : 


*.) 


:) xn o 


: ... ; .. ■ 


:) j ■ 


i: L . 0 : C 


i .;0 


fUi •/ . . iO 


. ■.. >;•. •:fi ■ " x‘f j 
d e j&-d $ s oooo: iiio 
, ; ' > 

■' . . i no j - .. 


175 


indicates that he would like to stop school immediately. 

On the basis of the above findings, it may be declared that 
this hypothesis is supported. 

Hypothesis j>: Poor school attendance is a correlate 
of underachievement . The attendance record of every under¬ 
achiever was obtained from the Department of Education 
records, and the average yearly attendance was computed for 
the members of this group. The attendance records for an 
unselected group of fifty students were also drawn from the 
same source, and the average yearly attendance was computed 
for this sample. It was found that underachievers had an 
average yearly attendance of 17# days, while the unselected 
group had a yearly attendance of l£l days. It should be 
noted that the attendance figures for the two groups would 
have been even more similar had not one of the underachievers 
missed one hundred days, thus lowering the mean attendance 
figure for this group. While it is impossible to evaluate 
these findings objectively, it is held that there is no 
meaningful difference in the yearly school attendance of 
underachievers and of an unselected group of students. The 
present hypothesis may therefore be rejected. 

Hypothesis 6: Poor progress in mathematics is a corre ¬ 
late of underachievement . As was noted in Chapter Eight, 
twtnty-six underachievers, or 76 per cent of the total group, 
earned on the grade nine departmental examinations in 
















la 


• v ■ C.j 0;; 1 - 


;>, ( !> ;, 






0 ' . ■ 




L-m ?ioc 

i ' 


. 


' t- ' ■ o 




■ V v'i ' ' 

iJiBVS c -> 


* ii'.J 


1 JiJJl 




o j: 


■ 





176 


mathematics scores which fell below the median score for 
the entire grade. Furthermore, 66 per cent of the under¬ 
achievers admitted, during the interview on "Plans" that 
inability to do well in mathematics would represent one of 
the greatest hurdles to be overcome if they were to reach 
their vocational goal. It would appear that underachievers 
make poorer grades than the generality in mathematics and 
also that they are very aware of their weakness in this 
subject. From the above findings it may be concluded that 
this hypothesis is confirmed. 

Hypothesis There is no characteristic relationship 
between scores on a standardized reading test and average 
class scores for underachievers , k review of the stanine 
scores made on the standardized reading test given in June, 
195$ provides evidence on this point. It was found that 
twenty-two students, or 63 per cent of the group, earned 
stanine scores which fell above the midpoint of the distribu¬ 
tion. That is, the majority of underachievers have earned 
reading scores which exceed those earned by the greater part 
of the grade nine population as a whole. It may be assumed 
that the hypothesis is negated and that underachievers tend 
to do slightly better on standardized reading scores than do 
members on an unselected grade nine population. 

Hypothesis $: Lack of confidence in ability to do well 
academically is _a correlate of underachievement . Certain 
































■ lli’Vj 



. iiojoio oo 

‘IOO 

■) Cj 

ox^ciuo^l^Bfr* 

-- 

■l ) > 



: 

- . . 


■ •: 

i.o odvt 








G'i voi 


.. i 


- : - i ■' 


. . 

• 

V C Cl 



. 

o. ;Oi 

V.O/VV : 


O '' ' • 


• 1 

.vjo,vv;- oOvi' 



. 



. 













) 





: 0 . . 




. 

■ . ' ■ 


•.) l . " • .. ...... ■. , ; , 

. 





. . ' ■ 


X, vOJ 



rj 

• 

- 


- i . : . i 'J.. 



■ 







ob . 


:;; 


lie/.,. .'x 

o 





v 0 


. 

'.ri\ •c.x- 1 ' 

hoy.1 



o ; ;o .oo o. 



< 

.: on :.?/ 

J u 

o if 









ox 



0 






. 




ti "‘ ■ < 


, ■ ; . 

.r 

■ 



■ j .0'..;. . • 









■ , ; - ■ . ' . </.•.' r ' ■' • : ’• ->X 

a r'. .. 0 0/..0 HS 

....... ;■/. :. ;i : VJ, 



177 


information has already been offered which suggests that 
this hypothesis cannot be supported. It was noted above 
that 94 per cent of all underachievers indicated that their 
grade nine marks were not indicative of their true ability. 

A similar finding was noted in response to a statement on 
the SSHA. Since it would appear, therefore, that most 
underachievers believe that they are capable of better work, 
the hypothesis is rejected. 

Hypothesis Frequent school retardation is a corre ¬ 
late of underachievement . Eight of the underachievers 
studied here have experienced failure at one time or another 
in school. Inasmuch as three of the students have failed on 
two occasions, there are eleven instances of failure. It is 
difficult to determine whether or not such a failure rate 
can be said to represent "frequent tf failure. Clarke (1955) 
noted that, on the average, between 5 per cent and 6 per 
cent of all students in grades one through eight were likely 
to experience failure. McManus T s study (1950) is probably 
of more help here, for he worked with a grade nine population 
and considered all instances of failure in the pupils T pre¬ 
vious school careers. He noted that 3$ per cent of 370 
students had experienced failure in the first nine grades in 
school. Of the failed group, 66.7 per cent had experienced 
failure once, while 27.4 per cent had failed on two occasions. 
In the present study, eight students, or 23 per cent of the 









/ • < ; 






)'X 




j m 




- 


' 




.0 


i 


. o'-.' 1 ' i; : • ;i n z ■ > : : ■ ioi u! : ■ .' >'f 

. ;*r.: I: rX/n ;. : >l n: 1.1/3 'ZO Jl ’30 "I'-CI ■/•'. ■vJ'oda 


; ■ 


'v 1/ 










c 




. 

■ 

,, ■ . ■■■ ... "J ’ /ii.U 






.! 




1 


y/,0 ; 






v :i r>i • ■ ' . / 




dl.UO 'X ■' 




VC '. ")n.;t n< 


It ' 




. : ' 


) j,;’j 

: I 


: ■ 




) - ■ ■ ( 


:;> j • ; " 

C\j/j;/ .vlOi'., "ZQ 






- »' ■ 


;l; ",:r: o' i-)/>./ I i £> 



o i:n ■ ■ ■. 


:J > si' "■ ■,') 


■'ll ■ . ' / . iOi 




>h; #£ 


:!'.rx: •» 




17S 

total, had failed at one time or another in their first nine 
grades of school. Of this number, 62,5 per cent had failed 
on one occasion only, whereas 37*5 per cent had failed on 
two occasions. A comparison of the present findings with 
those of McManus reveal that a smaller number of under¬ 
achievers failed in the first nine years of school than was 
the case for an unselected group of grade nine students. 
Underachievers also fail on one occasion less frequently, 
but more underachievers fail twice than do members of the 
grade nine group as a whole. The differences noted are not 
especially great, however, and it is felt that the evidence 
is too inconclusive to permit one to make a clear pronounce¬ 
ment regarding this hypothesis. However, the findings suggest 
that underachievers do not have a more frequent failure rate 
than do a group of unselected grade nine students. 

Hypothesis 10 : Infrequent acceleration in school is 
a. correlate of underachievement . Only one underachiever in 
this study has been accelerated. Once again, it is difficult 
to determine whether this represents "infrequent" accelera¬ 
tion or not. McManus (1930) noted in his unselected grade 
nine group of students that seventeen times as many pupils 
had experienced failure as had known acceleration. In this 
study the ratio is eight to one. Because of a scarcity of 
information on acceleration practices in Edmonton schools, 
it is difficult to be conclusive on this point. However, 









no ;» 




OO’ 1.S. O .l Dj'ii'i 

. 




■ nr; ;;; ; 0 0 


nOiV 


noxan o o 


n a - no 




■>. :J’ ‘ ;<-■ nc 


■ o 


. 




o 




< - . 


0.1 


.)■'!/ *r ‘n ■ non: .bod■>' 


n:c 






' ' ■ . tO 






. 



■h: 


:) > 1 no 


OC\j P.j. 








. 


I 


.V 


fj ; j’-.O . O. n ■ "T 




nJ: nov vinio on ; ■ -m. 


■ 


i • y 




)0B 




) Ion no 1 r-n. n -i 


U( o ocrni) • < 


0 






C a X 0 0 0 0 : ' 


; >or- 0 irx jan:. : > brn 




c 





no.fv.' :mo ! :jn • ■ no 





179 


in view of the findings of McManus, it would appear that 
underachievers compare quite favorably with the generality 
insofar as acceleration is concerned. There is no clear 
evidence that this hypothesis can be substantiated. 

Hypothesis 11 : Underachievers frequently attribute 
their underachievemen.t to excessive interest in extra ¬ 
curricular activities o It was noted above that the majority 
of these underachievers blame the fact that they do not spend 
an adequate amount of time on study for their poor progress 
in school. In no case was excessive interest in extra¬ 
curricular activities offered by the student as a factor 
making for underachievement. This hypothesis must, therefore, 
be rejected. 

Hypothesis 12 : Students who have been identified as 
underachievers on entering a given school grade will remain 
underachievers within that grade . It will be recalled that 
in Chapter Six it was noted that approximately one hundred 
students who had been identified as underachievers on enter¬ 
ing grade ten in September, 1957 were found to be still 
underachieving when four-fifths of that grade’s work had 
"been completed. In an effort to determine whether the 
members of the present population were continuing to under¬ 
achieve, the marks received at Christmas, 195&, were obtained 
and a "final index of underachievement" was calculated for 
each student. These indices revealed that in twenty-six 



























c 


I 


0 


o 


>‘"Ii :0'0 


( 


( ); 




o 


: 


c : c J 





•' iOi 




i.j 0 



C 



C . D 


l 


7 'X 


11 1 o( 


' O 





i 


? 


.al 0: ;' )fi 







C 




( . ■ 


c 


5 




■ :c 


i urns 


01 




ISO 

cases, or 74 per cent of the total group, the student T s 
underachievement was more marked in December, 195$ than it 
had been on his entrance into the grade ten course. (See 
Table X.) In five cases, the December index was somewhat 
smaller than the September one, indicating a lesser degree 
of underachievement. (See Table XI.) In addition, four 
students had been expelled or had left school before the 
Christmas examination had been written, and it was impossible 
to make a comparison between September and December indices. 

TABLE X 

COMPARISON OF SEPTEMBER 195$ AND DECEMBER 195$ 

INDICES OF UNDERACHIEVEMENT IN THOSE CASES 
WHERE UNDERACHIEVEMENT WAS INCREASINGLY MARKED 


Differences between 

September and December indices 

Number of Cases 

1-7 

9 

3-14 

14 

15-21 

2 

22-23 

0 

29-35 

1 


If it could be assumed that underachievement was a factor in 
their leaving school, it is obvious that the number of cases 
in which underachievement became increasingly marked would 







- 


* 




. 


, ' 


chi: 


')! : IT 


ciTi.C ' JiivC; 




':.) 


oXclr-.T 


c 



?»n. 


j 






r ‘.I; i .) 






■ 


s f:; ( ; 



i, 




i 






*l$Q:-xL>0 







jit 






) 


jr 


. 


: v . ccj : ac 




181 

be even larger. It should be noted that while underachieve¬ 


ment was less marked in December in a very few cases, the 
December indices were such that all thirty-one students may 
still be classified as underachievers. The hypothesis is, 
therefore, substantiated. 


TABLE XI 

COMPARISON OF SEPTEMBER 195$ AND DECEMBER 195# 
INDICES OF UNDERACHIEVEMENT IN THOSE CASES 
WHERE UNDERACHIEVEMENT WAS LESS MARKED 


Differences between 

September and December indices Number of cases 


1-7 4 

8-14 1 


Hypothesis 13 : Underachievers frequently come from 
homes in which a foreign language is spoken . In only three 
cases in the present study was a second language reported in 
the home. In every case this language was Ukrainian. None, 
of the students was able to speak or understand Ukrainian, 
however, and he was never addressed in this language. 
Invariably, the use of the second language was restricted to 
conversation between the child’s parents and grandparents. 
Inasmuch as only 9 per cent of the student population is 
influenced by a foreign language in the home, it must be 
assumed that this hypothesis is rejected. 














>n • 




3 :r 5 ’ 


! 


, 




■ :J j, i' ii ; 

• f.j- ioof»ff}oS)G nX bs»; 

;i i:J‘ itoui: 0‘1V ' 

. ■ , ■ , ; , • .) i : . ' ■ •' < ‘ ; 

, r . Oj 


;v. 

i di:;939 












; 


, w : ,:kj a.-': 

. . i... . luj 


i 








i ' ■ 


. . . . 




. 


" ' < r ' 


M' ,b'' Xv. •)' 

r 




■■ ; C J' 9 x U.(' 

:: . ' 11 •I •; '• 'I9Y H'l GCVf 
u :> ■; J Aa 

.} ) 

Ui ':b: ,, 5) ‘.u:’-: :i 


. 


* 


, ; V ' •• • ' W 
' ...» - /11 


:;: . . i. 


132 


Hypothesis 14 : The majority of underachievers have 
parents who are not foreign born # It was found that in 
twenty-two cases, or 63 per cent, both the parents were born 
in Canada, In the majority of the remaining cases at least 
one of the parents was born in the United States or Great 
Britain. In only one case was a parent born in a non-English 
speaking country, the Ukraine. The evidence supports the 
hypothesis and suggests.that these underachievers have 
parents who are native born. Such a finding complements that 
of Eckert (1935), who noted that a greater percentage of 
overachievers have foreign-born parents. The results of 
these two studies seem to suggest that to have parents who 
are native born is apt to prove to be a detriment when one 
considers the academic achievement of the student. 

Hypothesis 15.; Underachievers frequently are products 
of broken homes . The term "broken homes" is used to refer 
to those homes in which one parent is absent because of 
death, separation, or divorce. Only two such cases are 
noted in the present study. Since only 6 per cent of this - 
group of underachievers are products of broken homes, It may 
be assumed that this hypothesis can safely be rejected. 
Unfortunately, data are not available for the generality of 
grade ten students, and a direct comparison between the 
homes of such students and of underachievers is not possible. 
Figures for an American high school population, however, 
suggest that between one-quarter and one-eighth such students 


















■jx'ao ?■; of; 






D o f ' D 


Vl & 


o XO < Od'li: 


0000 0110 


O 0 a o V1 




ii .0 


ooroo os 


■ j ’ 0 . i i; o; 

■'0 0 ;’i O) :0 CO ■ .1. 




t • 


o,;..'-) ■ I 


■; 0 .. v f‘ • ; . . • i i !' I 

\L - VO.:: 'Or o 




y , j ' ) 




.04 , 


,; •... . S. 



183 

come from homes in which one parent is absent through death, 
divorce, or legal separation, (Wattenberg, 1955, p. 186.) 
While such figures might well be unrealistically high for a 
Canadian high school group, it is felt that the number of 
broken homes noted in the present study does not differ 
greatly from that which one might expect to find for the 
grade ten population as a whole. 

Hypothesis 16 : No relationship exists between birth 
order position and incidence of underachievement . The order 
of birth for the underachievers studied here is as follows: 
in 49 per cent of the cases, the subject was the oldest 
child; in 17 per cent of the cases, .the subject was the 
youngest child; in 20 per cent of the cases, the subject was 
the only child; in the remaining 14 per cent of the cases 
the subject occupied an intermediate position within the 
family. Inasmuch as a disproportionate number of under¬ 
achievers are eldest children, this hypothesis must be 
rejected. 

Hypothesis 17 * Low socio - economic status is a corre ¬ 
late of underachievement . Table XII shows the percentage of 
the fathers of underachievers who fell into the various 
occupational categories as compared with the percentages for 
all employed males in Edmonton according to the 1951 census. 
It is interesting to note that underachievers have fathers 
in the "managerial" category twice as often as they are 


















b o M-ob ebbb 

) j ;i : • 

ore..! . .0 0. O' r j .( 

i b . ooox rl roQ-i'o bb ; o 

■ 

* c • - • 



. : 


' 


■ , ) . 

njji • ' i 

. 

c 

:>i ■ .• , e .bo. n bb ' ■ ) 


' ' ■ : 

■ ; 

<; ;0 y r . JI.K;-U .O' ' 


. ' 

y.i . o.c 



. 


. 


. , 

;]■ bo- .j ;i ; ' v ;• :> j_.br.' • :■ b c o . b; - b . >o o: < i ■ 

.bo . , . : : ;/ ■ 0^ : .* ; ‘> 0 ■, • . ■ • ' : . . LI - -- : ' J 

) ■ ;•. j.;,;, : 'o . ; . •:> ... b . ,< o o •') ; b •: : : . .;o b ' " . J ', 

• 

b' b > • ■ .; . . ' ' O’i 00 00 j i 

••>• i b •• ;j. ■ : :b < ■ o lo b . b. . • ;■ ■ o.ov 1 o 0 ; 

- . h ..b oobr... 


■ . ■ .■ -■ 1 0 • ■ : . : 

; .'vo.bi. ,) c ,.\b .bbb u/.; ' \b bObb bt'.b'OO be : o. ,bbb Jib 

: , ... : •; 0 :ij.i . o b‘ X::m xJbcoooc 

/ : ' ' . : 1 ■ ■ : ■. . ; ' ' ‘y ' ’ • - ' 

\bb b bo'b yb.ryjj ;bbj 0 J< C, 0 0'; bbbO'IO jl'b C.l'bJ 


134 


found in the general population. "Clerical" occupations 
also contribute heavily to the underachieving group. In 
three cases, "professional," "manufacturing," and "trans¬ 
portation," there is a close degree of resemblance between 
the two sets of percentages. "Service" and "construction" 
categories are very lightly represented for underachievers. 
There is no clear evidence to suggest that underachievers 
come from homes of low socio-economic status; indeed, the 
evidence ma}?- support the opposite contention. The hypothesis 
is therefore rejected. 

TABLE XII 

PERCENTAGE OF FATHERS OF UNDERACHIEVERS 
IN THE VARIOUS OCCUPATIONAL CATEGORIES AS COMPARED 
WITH THE PERCENTAGES OF EMPLOYED EDMONTON MALES IN 1951 


Occupational 

Category 

Percentage of 
Sample 

Percentage of 
Edmonton Males 

Managerial 

26 

13 

Professional 

9 

3 

Clerical 

31 

9 

Service 

3 

10 

Manufacturing 

16 

13 

Transportation 

11 

11 

Construction 

3 

12 







A,; X 

, . ■ ( 1 . > ; 1 •' 

. j. i.'.!.' i / ' ' ’ Aj. 1 • " ' 

■ /j hr. : c '; * ‘V r.;. u\ 

t J 

'■ oorv y *••>< 0 

; . -; . ' ' .a ■ ' ■ ■' 

j r>r,' uO u;.) , ‘irnSo fi t rJ: 

;; ;yr ; OI i<: .VC- 1< i‘i -■ "A':'. OiAO 0 

yj 1A ;., ,\ L J ;1 9,:^. ! 90 '■ 9 D.'iO hi’'-/-} 

' ' ' . £0:i , <i ' 



‘.i • c ' ' 

. V , OVAH Ofi.j 






1 


r.. v 3 Or:*■.» ' r, 0 :• 

j r ■ 


>0 .T'k : . ■ 



>: h -v ■; •> ; ■ 


: . X s. ; •• ! ' r ! 




; v' 


. . .! : U 9 D 


" y t;r 



IroJrx 10 

3 oi:.V‘X 9 ; sS 


T i 


i 




vrr 









Hypothesis l£ : Lack of clarity of vocational goal is 
a correlate of underachievement . A review of the data 
reveals that twenty-four students, or 69 per cent of the 
cases, admit that they are not certain as to their vocational 
goals. Only four students are quite sure as to what they 
will do when they leave school, while in seven instances the 
subjects might be classed as being "reasonably certain" as 
to their future occupational goals. The above classifica¬ 
tions were based upon such considerations as the length of 
time during which the student has considered a particular 
goal; his knowledge concerning the nature of the work 
involved; his knowledge regarding the type and length of 
training required. Further evidence may be had by reference 
to one statement on the SSHA. In response to the cue, "I 
feel confused and undecided as to what my goal in life will 
be," twenty-eight students, or $0 per cent of the total 
group, admitted that this was so in their case. The find¬ 
ings here permit one to conclude that this hypothesis is 
supported* 

Hypothesis 19 : Underachievers select vocational goals 
for which they do not have the necessary intellectual ability . 
A review of the vocational choices and of the SCAT scores of 
the underachievers in this study suggests that there is 
nothing to support the present hypothesis. If SCAT ability 
alone is considered and no attention paid to such factors 
























•j. : . . v' •• 


.. I. ;: O7 ) r X 




■tdoo ji r 


: . ■ ■ . Cj- C! 


.a. 

,; -j •) : adq.ciis 


*;). 1 .a "• J;..) 




'DO -\d '■ d, 

, . ■ Bi'K 1 


0 


' : ; ■ ' 

I . i no J. bid :• ■; 

)oi )• v.a.i • /o . i 




V 0 9tij 0;» Od-d-O- 


J' ' d C 


Xdjccr >:ui ',x aoq 0 - , .* 

- 


o ■ ■ [; : J . : J ’o 

' . ; . 

A A . .. ;/ Ad dd; : Li ; Odd OCi' 

j dti . . i ) :rX.o;j ' 

. d>. ' i - ;J: ■ • - ' v di 


d j <. > 


j < 


i - ' 


, ' d • • 


;; 


, ^ . j 


■ • 

i 



as interest and motivation, it would appear that in every 
case the student has the necessary ability to reach the 
goal which he has set for himself. While it is extremely 
doubtful, however, that many of these underachievers will 
reach the goal which they have presently set, it does not 
appear that lack of academic ability will be the deciding 
factor in their failure. This hypothesis must therefore be 
rejected. 

Hypothesis 20 : Underachievers select vocational goals 
which are non - professional in nature . Eighteen students, or 
about 52 per cent of the total group, selected goals which 
are non-professional in nature, while the remaining seventeen 
subjects showed an interest in professional positions and 
callings. The most frequently selected non-professional 
goal was "mechanic", while some form of tf engineering" was 
the most frequently chosen profession. Because of the fact 
that professional choices and non-professional choices are 
quite evenly matched for this group, this hypothesis cannot 
be substantiated. 

Hypothesis 21 : Underachievers select vocational goals 
which are not supported by their interests . The Ruder 
Preference Record ( Vocational ) was used to obtain a measure 
of the student’s interests. The method suggested by Ruder 
(1956) was employed in the interpretation of the scores. 

Scale scores which fell at or above the 75th percentile were 

























J 




.t 










... & -J‘. 




■ :) 


^ i 









fiCii LOJ'O U 




floor 


o 


c„ 


Di'^ 


f ' > ■ 


fr: iioct 


O L 


;Vy 



■ ;!• ( V> C 


1 C 



r; c .l . i ' J :)•' 'io i}' 


[;>■ i-x 


x ■ 



187 


classed as "high" and the high scales were combined with all 
possible combinations being investigated in the Kuder 
Manual . It was noted that twenty-three students, or 66 per 
cent of the cases, had selected vocational goals which were 
not supported by their interests as measured by the Kuder. 
Since two of every three underachievers had selected voca¬ 
tional goals which were not supported by their interests as 
measured by the Kuder, it is felt that this hypothesis is 
substantiated. 


TABLE XIII 

KUDER SCALE SCORES WHICH FELL AT OR ABOVE 
THE 75TH PERCENTILE FOR THIRTY-FIVE UNDERACHIEVERS 


Scale on Kuder 

Number of High Scores 

Outdoor 

5 

Mechanical 

13 

Computational 

14 

Scientific 

14 

Persuasive 

8 

Artistic 

6 

Literary 

13 

Musical 

0 

Social Service 

10 


Clerical 


11 










' r-; , O' •' j. : r.i ■■ • A • ■ ! 

■ - I, ! ■ : : ■ : ■ j:..; /• .1 ; ^ ; ' 

' ' • . A . - • ■ . - ' . • ■> ■ ' 1 ' ■ ■■■■'■ •.. 

„• ; 0 ' , . .* >- , ... - - 
_ • ■ ■ ■ j *x ■ - 

■ ■ j; ' • ' ■ . A ' ' A '• A' ' '■■■■ ‘ • ' ' .. 1 

AO ' ,■ ■ A v >'■ ; 

. 




A''.! 


■Vi /:■ 'A x - 

. : . * 












u :) ; ..1; -. j ■ > AiA<. ; : '' A 


, 




■'lol':]; A lie 

*.i :rvo?- A 

. 

jJAiiA. :hv : ) 'x.-) A 

9 : . i ) i 

no AAj. 

.. o} ! 

:).< '■ V Li '■. ■ • - ■' 

1 . • A 




Hypothesis 22 : Underachievers tend to have measured 
interests which may be called " non-intellectual " or 
" practical ." In order to evaluate this hypothesis a record 
was made of all Kuder scores which fell above the 75th 
percentile. It was found that such scores could be found on 
ninety-four scales. The ten Kuder scales are classed as 
falling into two areas, "non-intellectual" and tT intellectual. 
In the former are Outdoor, Mechanical, Persuasive, Social 
Service, and Clerical; in the latter, Artistic, Literary, 
Musical, Scientific, and Computational. It may be seen 
that the "non-intellectual 1 * scales have been scored as 
"high", i.e., at or above the 75th percentile, on forty- 
seven occasions. (See Table XIII.) A survey of the "high" 
"intellectual" interest scales reveals an identical total. 
There is, accordingly, no clear weight of evidence here to 
suggest that the measured interests of underachievers tend 
to be particularly "practical" or "non-intellectual," and, 
consequently, this hypothesis must be rejected. 

Hypothesis 23 : Underachievers select hobbies that are 
non - creative . Twenty-one underachievers, or 60 per cent, 
revealed that they have no hobby at all at the present time, 
although twelve of this number admitted that they have had 
hobbies in the past. The majority of these former hobbies 
were non-creative pastimes such as collecting stamps, caring 
for fish, and running electric trains. The fourteen students 


















I/O' 


‘TO 


:: ~ 


:oo 


01 < 


:.);: i j i 


: o c ■ 


< - >-■>> ' a- [(: 


a j : ; 




no Dr. - 


u jo j 


:in.n.o , 


\j O C':l> 10 

a' oXdnT on •) 


oj j. 


i;*.'::.; oodp . no v; 

L : .mO O' 9 j;'l 0 Oil 


v, i on; to 


. Ci 


yijO: 'O ii/ioi 


U : .U/ O 


(10 


niliio.u mi 




: o y c 


;j'0 0 1 0 'O'I” 


: i rtoriu.:. 
j; ■■ .it : 0 




139 

or 40 per cent, who reported that they had hobbies revealed 
that they were almost completely non-creative. Collecting 
stamps, coins, match folders, and assembling model aircraft 
and ships were the most popular hobbies reported. In view 
of the nature of the findings, it must be assumed that this 
hypothesis is supported. 

Hypothesis 24 : Underachievers spend an excessive 
amount of time on part - time employment . While in grade nine, 
twenty-one students, or 60 per cent of the group, held no 
part-time jobs at all. The remaining fourteen students were 
employed for periods ranging from four to twenty-five hours 
a week, with a mean of thirteen hours being noted. Six of 
these fourteen students worked ten or less hours a week. 

Since two of every three underachievers had no part-time 
employment and approximately one-half of those who were 
employed worked what may be classed as a moderate amount, 
it appears that there is little evidence to support this 
hypothesis. 

Hypothesis 25 : Poor physical health is a. correlate 
of underachievement . It was found that twenty-two students, 
63 per cent of the group, reported that apart from the usual 
childhood diseases of measles, chickenpox, mumps, they had 
never been ill. The remaining thirteen subjects have, at 
one time or another, had illnesses which might be classed as 
serious. In the majority of cases, however, these illnesses 
















(' 


1 






! 


C 




| ' * " i 


■■ v rj I 


? ° i ! ! ■ “ . 




6 





J 


% 




V. j x 


ji 


0 K.'l 


). i 


c 


x.;:) 


; 


c, 


t 


i 


j 


D 





a 


t 


c 




' j] O«: J- ,' (.' 


. 





;, yjft i.i 


c 





190 

occurred some years ago and there is no evidence of continu¬ 
ing ill effects. In only four cases is there a possibility 
that the student’s activities are presently curtailed by 
poor health. It is held that there is insufficient evidence 
to support the above hypothesis, and it may therefore be 
rejected. 

Hypothesis 26 : Lack of self - acceptance is a correlate 
of underachievement . It was reported in Chapter Nine that 
60 per cent of underachievers earned discrepancy scores on 
the Taschuk-Hepburn inventories which fell above the median 
for an unselected grade ten group. More than one-half of 
this number earned scores which exceeded the 75th percentile, 
suggesting marked marked lack of self-acceptance. The above 
findings suggest that this hypothesis may be supported. 

Hypothesis 2? : Male underachievers will make high 
masculinity scores , as such scores are provided on a standard ¬ 
ized personality survey . As was noted above, underachievers 
see themselves as possessing ’’masculinity” to a greater 
extent than any other trait measured on the Guilford - Zimmerman 
Temperament Survey . This is the only personality trait scale 
in which the majority of underachievers earned scores which 
fell above the median, and in this instance a relatively 
large number of students, 40 per cent, made scores which fell 
below this point. However, it would appear that these find¬ 
ings offer support to the present hypothesis. 




























& oloxKi 


o ■) 


s ■- ' .1 • > / 


0(1 


! 


oo:: 


?) •') i 











o. ill - txi 

' , , ).:!> o V; .i 

» 100 
, COT 


'0 : i|;0‘0,0 0 0 



s:o 


: r 


.Lb b:Of 






J, 






"1000. I i'i 


Yi ; " . : 0 10 


! 


j 







V 






* 


■ ; v.i ■ ■ 



c 




... ;• 




V.LOOi'C.oi;/ 00 



: ( j" J ’ 


' ' ' ! i • 



:'K 


Voytov 


loi 


' b >'V 


SO 


:. i 


‘ 


■C 1 . 


t 


:obj 


oo oc 


') b n . or.oo ’;■ 
; ,;j ■ bb looqqo bJta -v 


i. . 1 ;■ 



191 

Hypothesis 28 : Those students who are the most marked 
underachievers will be found to have the most irrational 
levels of aspiration # As mentioned above, all students in 
the present research project were asked to state what marks 
they would make on their first set of examinations in grade 
ten, in the subjects literature, language, mathematics, 
science, and social studies# The grades reported in these 
five subjects were averaged# The marks which actually were 
made in these five subjects in the grade ten Christmas exam¬ 
inations were also averaged. A tT difference score," the 
discrepancy between the two averages, was computed for each 
pupil. A coefficient of correlation (Pearsons r) was com¬ 
puted for these difference scores and for the students 1 
final indices of underachievement. A coefficient of -.47 
was noted# The correlation is significantly above zero 
at the .01 level of confidence. This result suggests that 
those students who had the highest difference scores had 
the lowest, i.e., most marked, indices of underachievement. 
That is, those students who were most unrealistic or 
irrational in their level of aspiration were found to be 
the most marked underachievers in this study. On the 
basis of these findings, therefore, we may assume that this 
hypothesis is confirmed. 

Hypothesis 29 : Underachievers are socially extra - 
verted and enjoy the company of others . The "S" or "socia¬ 
bility" scale of the Guilford-Zimmerman offers the best 





























Ci: ■ C ••; 


Oi 



0; j * COx..'. O'X'V', ; 1 ‘.0 

; o . i . \ . . V. . 


vi 


o' 0 0 1 i‘‘i 


j. i : - ‘4 Oi C 


j/jiict no 





‘".i 


j 



' 


t j : 


. J ‘J. 


:.)( 


■ • . > j;;)! , 




' e ; 0..‘ 


.ooo o.oo' Ouo ox oo: 


0 0.0 : : 9Y 


l £■) 


• O o 


3 i c . : 


id 


,00 


■oqofo> a qo/qnoo' 

T lOa’-i 00 } OOXCi :j. 


t ;■ J 


0 :0 > 1 ) . 0 O ' 


Oil 3 0 


?-j .■ j\ ; ; ;■] ■ \.Q0 ■ ; 0 ;.i dO 0! XX 00 Oi ODJIK] 

o £; J o. . o . o. o ' lc a - 5 x 

c.. qxo i ooi:0.x.>x . ox ox jo - o - ■ o ■. «oov o 

hi . . • 


j.) j.i ; - ‘S.G'i 'O 0 Oi • . r X - ■ XXo 
; >no voJoio xioi. r 4.0 ;.o. o. 

oco o. : cia jo : 1 


Z J'fii 


0 90 )"./ O ; i / 0 Ct. 00 i. iJo I 


ci ;o oaoj.,:o 

0.070.9 0.0 0 

o' ;0 c ' 


{ .t - : ooiolio JOOi Oik; 

r : - : T\ OO"'- C ’ O' -oOOO' ! 

. 


-o . .O'V-O-.O: / 


Ci'O 



192 


measure of social extraversion. High scores on this scale 
suggest having many friends, liking social activities, and 
desiring social contacts. It was mentioned above that 60 
per cent of all underachievers earned scores of the "S" 
scale which fell below the 50 th percentile for the standard¬ 
ization group. Such a finding suggests that the majority 
of underachievers tend toward social introversion rather 
than the opposite. An inability to get along with others 
is also suggested in low scores on the "Friendliness" 
scale. From these findings it is concluded that the 
present hypothesis cannot be substantiated. 

Hypothesis 30 : Underachievers enjoy satisfactory 
relations with members of the opposite sex . Twenty-four 
students, or about 70 per cent of these underachievers, 
revealed that their relations with girls are not satisfac¬ 
tory. For the most part, these students admitted that 
they are poor dancers, are not attractive to girls, and are 
ill at ease and embarrassed while in their company. Typi¬ 
cal statements were: "I don’t care much for girls"; "Most' 
girls are not my type"; and "Dating is not in my line." 

Seven students, or 20 per cent, stated that they get along 
well with girls. They admitted that they enjoy dancing 
and date frequently. In four cases, it was difficult to 
assess the student r s relationship with members of the 
opposite sex. Obviously, some students see satisfactory 












v.;. ■■) ; ;r : : : .. - ‘inn no 

\:'on-oo;o ; rtjrs-l.t.v. \obrio ini': 

* 


■' O ' ■' 

‘:T.o o'inti bo m 


on niirii; 1 


' ; ■ 0 0 . ! 1 


C 


') ■: j ;3 


' 


( -v : c 


BXl J 0 i. 

Ifr, r. 


I JO O' ‘I! 


o.'or.i: JJ'o ":o dot 00 . oocf 
i: ■; n . : ■ ■■ 

: ;, V . • ■ "O' - ' 

. V ! ' • 

■' ' ■ 

'■■■ft VOO Oo Li' 1 O <: 


■ i d" l 


: 


OO 8X 




. 


; j- \r . . „ " 9<j Cfon ' O - bon; ■ ■ 


o o 






o.;:.';yoIJ;_o([Xn 


c 






: !f 


r ’ 


'I 


t 


:) 


: ' - ' 0 ■ O 


. .0 j 




. ■ fi 


r :ko': in * \n: j 


bi J 




c 


: 


■;0' f ;3 ,i' jr: o0000 





193 

heterosexual relations as being desirable and expected of 
teen-agers, and they hesitate to admit to inadequacies in 
this area. From the evidence presented here, it may be 
assumed that this hypothesis is negated. 

Hypothesis 31 : Underachievers show little interest in 
social service pursuits or occupations . It was noted above 
that the thirty-five underachievers in this group made 
scores which equalled or exceeded the 75th percentile on 
ninety-four Kuder scales. In ten instances, the TT social 
service" interest scale fell into this "high score" cate¬ 
gory. When all scales had been rank ordered as to prefer¬ 
ence, it was found that "social service" interests fell in 
fourth place. The above findings offer no support to the 
hypothesis that underachievers are relatively disinterested 
in social service pursuits or occupations. Consequently, 
the present hypothesis must be rejected. 



















: "4‘ <4 ' f 

■ • : *x ' . > h i )• \ ;;: * hi Jh\ i 1 ' : ' ' : 

; c I. ■ '• c o■ > l • i ' ' <. '• ■ 

- 

r r. : i .1 ■ ho . -hh : <* - • • 




v : 0 




no , oLrhrio000:0 ohnY rooneoono 

J. ; * e h i ! h - ho yu. 

o t > a; J ' ' ■ < >* ■ 

. ■ 

j;Ji-nh ' JeonjoYnJ:: h-nhonno. n : o 


hhh o,! hien::: c.u ToYhr o; on 


, • i 

ho o.: l ..i 

one i..' ■ sD'/.oos 


X; :r;o*:oo oo: hoo x.yion 
: ; ,ni . ■" 


O - !' » 




;o:i !ono n vo hi: c no, 


V r •< 


>;) ■ ■■ o vii ; axb . , 

n ' i 


\! ' . : ' i J i''' '■ i ' • ■ " O ' i. 


j .... ; , : ■ , vh"xnoin(' onivoYn-;:; .inorooG no 

. vf oX jin .00 0he01 [:.n.r- r ,Vii ufiOOO■'-: i OMOJ 






CHAPTER ELEVEN 


CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS FOR 
FURTHER RESEARCH 


There is evidence that a majority of the under¬ 
achievers studied here believe themselves to be rejected 
by one or more of their parents. It is held that such 
rejection has unconsciously caused the student to see him¬ 
self in a poor light. He tends to become self-rejecting 
and unaccepting of self. This tendency to be critical is 
also found in the underachiever T s interpersonal relations, 
possibly because he can accept others only to the same 
degree that he accepts himself. A general inability to get 
along with peers of both sexes is noted for many of these 
underachievers. Such students, seeing themselves as not 
being socially adept, tend to accept the domination and 
leadership of others, although they resent being cast in 
the role of followers. Part of this resentment is directed 
outward against their peers, while a portion may be turned 
inward, possibly because such students tend to see themselves 
as being weak. Such a course of action would make for 
greater feelings of self-rejection. It is interesting to 
note that these underachievers frequently report that they 







* 

3 \ J’t i, ' , 

; , i. v.Uj;.; ; nio < V* :J ' j 7 ’ " ' ' 

, v . j;, ,xs : ; , " ;! ,if ; ! ' ' . ? ' ■ '• • : ■ ’ ‘ : " 


U. : :i ' . ■/ J - ' 


■ 


i.) . ,1 1 >:j: 


.-Oil;..i:i..■■ ": i.-. ; ‘ .> J. i.J C -J ’’I • 

* « 

): . ■ . . ' ' 

- 


iiOHS Jj " 0 ■ 


9 




195 


have a "bad temper." Such outbursts of temper may not be 
unusual in people who unwillingly accept domination by 
others. It is possible that the individual, finding it 
degrading to accept completely the role of follower, feels 
that he must assert himself on occasion. Such assertions, 
being the result of long pent-up feelings of inadequacy and 
domination, are seen as outbursts of "bad temper" and rep¬ 
resent to the onlooker and to the individual himself over¬ 
reactions to the situation at hand. 

The underachiever may reveal an inability to put forth 
a persistent and sustained effort for any length of time. 

He may be unrestrained and may act quickly without giving 
proper consideration to the consequences of his acts. It 
has been suggested that such lack of restraint is evidence 
of a desire for immediate gratification and a disinclination 
or an inability to seek out long-range goals. Many male 
underachievers rate themselves as being quite "masculine." 
This may represent an attempt at compensation by the student 
for his many felt inadequacies. 

A relatively large number of the present population of 
underachievers dislike the school situation, possibly because 
it represents another area in which they may reveal their 
weaknesses. Also, it was noted that these underachievers 
do not have completely harmonious relations with teachers. 

It is not surprising to find that most underachievers 
frankly admit that they are not operating at their fullest 


- 


• : 

.GXG'>.i iJl: "i: j ,,0 ’) "(j. c \XJ..'JX *\.U 'OOq fti- -- 

« 

<uimcl..U .. V- .. . o ' j i .06 poo :■ 0 5 ^tiibr^Qb 

. - : O t 1 : ' ■ ' 




r 


. 

- . .. . V 




. 






' J < . 


>Xno d ■■ 1 : 5 0- 

■ •:J:d :• •• -ri 

i ; ■ ; 1 ' ‘ '.X 5 "!'■/' I'! ■ 

' 

, n J. • x' '■ ; - 1 ' i -‘> ■■ 

■ l ' ' 









■v- : V. . ' 


. 


• ; j;,: .. j..a; J b>:. - bj xvx :n rv ••.uX' 



‘ 


• xbixxQxb ;.vx 


: . 0 'G • 

. ') . '■ . , 





1 j • c- JjO j’ 1 .U 'a 


. : 7 .■ ’• 0 i'i 



i : .7 ;{ - b ; ‘ 


L" ■■ ■ 




196 


capacity. The tendency to preserve his self-esteem may 
cause the underachiever to say, in effect, Tt I could do much 
better in school, but I’m not interested and I don T t put 
enough time on my studies." While these underachievers 
readily admit that they fall into this category, there is a 
suggestion that some of them never quite accept this status 
completely. It is understandable, therefore, that a number 
of such students will have relatively unrealistic levels of 
aspiration. They refuse to accept the fact of their under¬ 
achievement and continue to aim for higher grades than they 
will probably attain. Other underachievers may, however, be 
so crushed by continual defeat that they will set levels of 
aspiration which are unrealistically low. This may also 
serve as a device for the preservation of self-esteem, for 
if one is striving for an easily attainable goal he is 
almost certain to meet with success. Mathematics, which 
requires close attention to detail and persistent effort, 
is the subject which underachievers find most difficult. 

The stereotype which is frequently held of the under¬ 
achieving student--that of the extraverted, outgoing, 
socially competent student who spends a good deal of time 
in extra-curricular activities—is not borne out by the 
findings of this study. Most of the members of the present 
population are relatively disinterested in any type of 
extra-curricular activity, quite possibly because they 






:>v :.) 




*Xr*' fJl 


V 9Jli 


■O ' 


O i 






197 


believe that they possess inadequacies in the area of 
interpersonal relations which would work to their disadvan¬ 
tage . 

The indecision and lack of foresight which has been 
noted for these underachievers in other areas is also to be 
seen with reference to their vocational plans. Many such 
students apparently select occupations because they sound 
exciting, once again revealing a tendency not to think in 
terms of long-range outcomes. In most cases, however, it 
is obvious that little is actually known about the occu¬ 
pations chosen, for the measured interests of the majority 
of these underachievers do not support the vocational goals 
selected. It was noted here, however, that in every case 
these underachieving students picked vocational goals for 
which they had the necessary intellectual ability. It will 
be recalled, nevertheless, that one-half of all these 
underachievers selected vocational goals which were non¬ 
professional in nature. This fact again suggests that some 
underachievers seek to preserve their self-esteem by 
selecting easily attainable goals so that the possibility 
of failure is largely obviated. 

There is some proof that students who are identified 
as underachievers tend to remain so. Barrett (1957) reported 
such a finding, and the results of the pilot study and of 
the present research support such a view. This finding 
suggests that habits of underachievement, once learned, are 


■ - ■ 













• 1 







■ 

. J;i 


■_ 

fo j 


.. 












.9; 







;Xo. ; :: 


i.-. 







■ 





, 

- 




- 





o vdn, ' 




■D'j DO 













' < 


' 

. • ’ > / - 




• 





- 










: 












D< ' 








: 

.0 VX/dV'iX 


t*'- 





. 





















dUl / J o 




■■ 






d. Cui 


/ 





) • 7 ju 'j 0 3 

i' . ; 




* 

c . 

* ■ • 

;• . . c < r't ■ 

. 

: ,, . v r .. 0 ■ 3 ti J i 3 V £i HoilB 

- C'tXX J3333 r ^ 9 .id 


193 


difficult to break. It is quite possible, however, that 
those factors which make for underachievement in the child 
at grade five may still operate when the child is in grade 
nine or ten. If such reinforcement continues to be present, 
it is quite likely that patterns of underachieving behav¬ 
iour will be difficult to unlearn. It is not certain that 
the underachiever can easily divest himself of the habits 
of underachievement, but it would seem that early identifi¬ 
cation of underachievement, followed by a concentrated 
attack by both teachers and parents upon the conditions 
responsible, would offer the best approach to the ameliora¬ 
tion of this condition. 

Suggestions for Further Research 

The present study has made no use of a control group. 
While a case study approach ordinarily makes no provision 
for such a group, it cannot be denied that certain advan¬ 
tages might accrue from its use. It is suggested, therefore, 
that a study might be carried out with a group of normal 
achievers, that is, students whose academic achievement is- 
quite in keeping with their intellectual potential. A 
comparison of the findings of such a study with the results 
of the present research would prove to be of interest. 

Another study which would complement the present find¬ 
ings could be built about a group of overachievers. Use 
might be made of the devices perfected in this study for 


f ' : ; : 'I ■ ■ ' 


* ' v_ - » 

[ ; S0: ! 10 j;.: • • ' i' 10 -it ' > l '■ *1 O O i 1 






- 


( ,j. ■ 1 ; 


. 

■o (i :) •£ ■/ 


* X 


00 GX' ‘3 ■ t O i' 0 


. : 0V 


r;no :Ov o i. o ■ oocoq o :■ o f .r,)D:) >■ o,.- ( 

• ' 






■ 


dcoLxncK 'Ovoo 




.i r j 


•r ■ 1 i - ■ 











1 




c 


c 




\ ) •. ; .1 








; . 






c 


' . ' i ■ 




199 


the identification of the necessary population, A case 
study method, similar to that utilized here, would almost 
certainly offer findings of interest. 

A follow-up study on the population used in the present 
research might prove to be interesting and informative. 
Possibly such an undertaking might be carried out when the 
students had finished grade twelve and the results for the 
departmental examinations for that grade were available. 

One drawback to such a follow-up study would be that the 
original population might be greatly depleted. 

As mentioned above, Barrett f s study revealed that 
those students who were found to be underachieving in high 
school could be identified as underachievers as early as 
grade five. A research project that would endeavour to 
locate underachievers at such an early grade would be 
interesting in that it would permit the population to be 
re-examined at regular intervals. Consecutive studies of 
underachievement of this nature might well prove to be 
invaluable. 

A study similar to the present one might be carried 
out with emphasis being placed upon the determination of 
a significant pattern of personality characteristics for 
underachievers. In such a study, one might omit certain of 
the instruments used in the present research, adding several 
others of the nature of the Guilford-Zimmerman. Such a 


n o 


.. . OAJOOV 

. 

'70 ■: X 1 

. . 

r ii\ .; ■/ 

O J OOOV 

7 Cl O O : ’ '7 . 

. . • ) : ?K 

' 

' ;0 ttl G ' . 0 si l 

a .»g * ' ■ ’ f 

7 : n/ 


o \ 1 00 3 7 OOY; Cnfj '%0 CIO i jBD.clXd'nB b.£ OUv> 
5 Oj J./J'J ' ' . -V ■ - • ■ ' c UoO * " . • J - J 

*:J . .1 . 

; .. f ' ■ .1 •- ' 



:l 7 9.j < ’ 

• 00 077 77 7!: 

■ 

: 077 




;! . ■ * • 


... 7. ■'. ■ o.o 

.. 

J ■ I ' ■: • : f. ■■■ 1 :■ ■ ' ■ ; ^ v : - o-O.-'-'' ■ 

■. 

O ■. I 7 . II ■ J >! : : ■ ■' ■' 

i- 3 . v • ji: :) v. :,r ; .built., Jn 'b l : &ii h. >joo ioorioo 

1 

.• : ■ ■ O. ' « 7 . 7 7 7 ' : 77 7 7 ' -' 7 ' ' ~ 

j." ;h 7 ./' <:r,y,J a j.7.u;' xO' 7077 7,77 

• « ■ 7 ‘ 7 . 777 COO.:'. ' 7 .J 177 0 07 ; j.-. '7 7 ) .7 .;J -7 7 - .Xc, : 

■ 

K 7 .>77 7X 0 .1 . 1 '. i 77 fetyf'I? ■ 7 ■ r i / 7 7; 7777 ,. 

• 7 ‘ ; ' _ , ' ( 7 i.j 7 7' i; 7 C : •• :.. O' ■ ■■■ • J .'7 "7 {0 i 0 O 



200 


study would permit one to evaluate the present findings of 
the G/Z and might serve to shed new light on the personality 
traits of underachievers. 

The findings of the present research suggest that 
parental rejection is a major correlate of academic under¬ 
achievement. It must be admitted, however, that the 
evidence for such a finding comes entirely from the student. 
In a further investigation of this area, it would be of 
value to visit the homes of those children who had been 
identified as underachievers, so that parental attitudes 
might be assessed at first hand. Parental attitude scales 
or similar instruments might be utilized to supplement the 
results of observations. 

An interesting and valuable study could be carried 
out on a group of female underachieving students. A com¬ 
parison of the findings of such a study with those of the 
present research would suggest possible sex differences 
in correlates of underachievement. 

The need for a sociometric study is also indicated 
by the findings of the present research. A sociogram or 
similar device might be used in various classrooms in an 
effort to determine to what extent students who have been 
identified as underachievers are rejected by their peers. 

Such a finding would indicate whether there is mutual 
rejection between underachieving students and their agemates. 

Research in this area is considerably hampered by the 






X "• 




c 








'■) ' Li Vv i 


• . • ■ ' / ■ • : ; 

'to. . Go.ffxanofox 


; :p p-t <• 

■ 

. 

[j;jn K,i :! v. : : ■.p pPti'PPP ni xslxr.is 




. , ; v , p ' c ■ J : J P'P: 

„ 





■jit"'.' J-p ;!• • Ip/pcp; .oppp",' 1 '- o:> :'rioXi® 

.. .j ppp.yp Mo£*pppr..p' p ".. : '.v;j7;0bx 

P . I’a; p po. i: hi,ij/ /• ; ,.;.x j- i r -< :;v 


• ’ P ■ : /■ ' ‘ *u- ' P fP P' P' : '- ’ 


201 


lack of an instrument which would measure the degree of 
underachievement present in a particular case* Instruments 
have been devised, as in the present study, which are of 
value at a given age or grade level, but as yet no objec¬ 
tive measure has been perfected which can be used with 
equal success at any point in the school program. Because 
of the seriousness of the problem of underachievement, it 
would seem that an attempt to perfect such a tool should 
receive immediate consideration. With the aid of such an 
instrument it would be possible to investigate under¬ 
achievement among students of both sexes, at all grade 
levels, and of various socio-economic backgrounds. If 
the results of a number of such diverse studies were 
gathered and compared, there would be made available valu¬ 
able information which might indicate the best approach to 
the understanding and explanation of the important problem 
of academic underachievement. 


t ■ e . * 

Ld . 

c 

aO*: . 

_ 

. ti x.. . ■ ed it ' ; tu .. * 

. ' c ■' 


'' • x , . v ;: ■■ ■ 0 • ;• 

. " :v ; . ’V-, OiOf'i 

' 


. 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 





BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Alter, H. M* tT A study of high school students with scores 
of 130 and above on the California Test of Mental 
Maturity." Unpublished paper, 1953* 

Altus, W. D. ,T A college achiever and non-achiever scale 
for the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory." 
Journal of Applied Psychology , Vol* 32, 1948, pp* 

385-97. 

American Council of Education Psychological Examination . 
Educational Testing Service, Princeton, 1945• 

Ames, V. "Factors related to high school achievement. TT 
Journal of Educational Psychology , Vol. 34, 1943, 
pp. 229-36. 

Anderson, C. C. "The many voices: A preliminary invest¬ 
igation into the consistency of self-concept." Alberta. 

Journal of Educational Research , Vol. 5, 1959, pp* 5-15* 

Anderson, H. A. "Career choices of gifted children." 

School Review , Vol. 64 , 1956, pp. 388-89* 

Anderson, I. H. and Dearborn, W. F. "Reading ability as 

related to college achievemento" Journal of Psychology. 
Vol. 11, 1941, pp. 387“96. 

Anderson, J. R. "Do college students lack motivation?" 
Personnel and Guidance Journal , Vol. 33, 1954, pp. 

209 - 10 . 

Anderson, R. H 0 and Brandt, H. F. "A study of motivation, 
involving self-announced goals of fifth grade children 
and the concept of level of aspiration." Journal of 
Social Psychology , Vol. 10, 1939, pp. 209-32* 

Ankerman, R. C. "Differences in the reading status of good 

and poor eleventh grade students." Journal of Educational 
Research , Vol. 41, 1947-48, pp* 498-515. 

Anspaugh, G. E„ "Qualities related to high scholarship in 
secondary school." School Review, Vol. 61, 1953, pp. 
337-40. - 

































• A 0' i 



, c ;j*. iiye:'l . o 





& 




0 


n - • I 





0 





. ' c 


i v - 


o'.::: c 


c 


I ■. j c 




j 



U.K.- io 


( j: 




,c 





c 


r; 


o -o..:' ) 




c 









O 




' ; (> 


Z 


Z 


z 


o i- ;/ 




,( 


z 


( 


z 


0 


< 


c 


c 


0 


0 





204 


Armstrong, M. A comparison of the interests and social 
adjustment of underachievers and normal achievers 
at the secondary school level . Unpublished Ph. D. 
thesis, University of Connecticut, 1955* 

Assum, A. L. and Levy, S. J. Comparative study of the 
academic ability and achievement of two groups of 
college students." Journal of Educational Psych¬ 
ology, Vol. 33, 1947, pp. 307-10o 

Barr, A. 3., Davis, R. A. and Johnson, P. 0. Educational 
Research and Appraisal . New York: J. B. Lippincott 
Co., 1933. 

Barrett, H. 0. tT An intensive study of 32 gifted children. 71 
Personnel and Guidance Journal, Vol. 36, 1957, PP. 192- 
94. 

Bayliss, Z. B. "A study of factors contributing to the 
scholastic attainment of first year women students." 
Journal of Educational Research, Vol. 27, 1934, PP. 

687-97. 

Bell, H. M. tf Study habits of teachers 1 college students. 17 
Journal of Educational Research, Vol. 22, 1931, PP» 

3-4, 

Bender, J. E. "Ascendance-submission in .relation to certain 
other factors in personality." Journal of Abnormal and 
Social Psychology , Vol. 23, 1923, pp. 137-43* 

Berdie, P. F. After High School , What ? Minneapolis: The 
University of Minnesota Press, 1954. 

Bills, R. E., Vance, E. L. and McLean, 0. S. "An index of 

adjustment and values." Journal of Consulting Psychology , 
Vol. 15, 1951, pp. 257-61, 

Bishton, R. C. A study of some factors related to achieve ¬ 
ment in intellectually superior eighth grade children . 
Unpublished Ph. Do thesis, Ohio State University, 1955* 

Bios, P. The Adolescent Personality . New York: D. Appleton- 
Century Co., 1941. 

Bolander, W. G. A study of the Minnesota Multiphasis Person ¬ 
ality Inventory as an indicator in the prediction of 
college success . Unpublished M. A, thesis, University of 
Oregon, 1947. 

































































205 


Bond, J. D. rf An analysis of factors adversely affecting 

scholarship of high school students." Journal of Educ¬ 
ational Research , Vol. 46 , 1952, pp. 321-31* 

f 

Boyce, E. M. A comparative study of overachieving and under ¬ 
achieving college students on factors other than schol ¬ 
astic aptitude . Unpublished Ph. D. thesis, University 
of Wisconsin, 1956. 

Brown, W. F. et al. "Motivational differences between high 
and low scholarship students." Journal of Educational 
Psychology , Vol. 45, 1954, pp* 215-23. 

Brown, W. F. and Holtzman, H. W. Survey of Study Habits 

and Attitudes . New York: The Psychological Corp. 1956. 

Budnick, A. Private conversation with the author. March, 

1959. 

Burgess, E. "Personality factors of over- and under-achievers." 
Journal of Educational Psychology , Vol. 47, 1956, pp. 
¥997 

Butler, C. H. "The relation of achievement and attendance 
in one high school." School Review , Vol, 44, 1936, 
pp. 2SS-90. 

Calhoun, S. R. "The effect of counseling on a group of 
underachievers." School Review , Vol. 64 , 1956, pp. 

312 - 16 . 

Calvin, A. D. and Holtzman, H. W. "Adjustment and the dis¬ 
crepancy between self concept and the inferred self," 

Journal of C onsulting Psychology , Vol. 17, 1953, PP* 

39-44* 

Campbell, W. J. "The influence of home environment on the . 
educational progress of selective secondary school 
children." British Journal of Educational Psychology, 

Vol. 21-22, 1951-52, pp. 39-100. 

Carter, H. L. J. and McGinnis, D. "Some factors which differ¬ 
entiate college freshmen having lowest and highest point- 
hour ratios." Journal of Educational Research, Vol. 46, 
1953, PP* 2l6-2'ST — 

Chapin, F. S. "A quantitative scale for rating the home and 
social environment of middle class families in an urban 
community." Journal of Educational Psychology, Vol. 19, 
192S, pp. 99-111. 


























































206 


Chapman, R. S. A study of achievement and underachievement 
in English language ten in an Alberta composite high 
school p Unpublished M. Ed. thesis, University of Alberta, 
1953. 

Chodorkoff, B. "Self-perception, perceptual defense, and 
adjustment." Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 
Vol. 49, 1954, pp. 503-12. 

Clarke, S. C. T. and McGregor, J. R. "Teachers 1 adjustment 
and teachers T achievement in university courses." 

Canadian Journal of Psychology , Vol. 9, 1955, pp. 55-5$. 

Clarke, S.C.T. "Promotion practices and policies in Alberta 
schools." Alberta Journal of Educational Research, Vol. 

4, 1955, pp. 24-34. 

Cofer, C. N. Fourth Mental. Measurements Yearbook 0 O.K.Buros, 
ed. Highland Park: The Gryphon Press, 1953. 

Cohler, M. J. "Scholastic status of achievers and non¬ 
achievers of superior intelligence." Journal of Education¬ 
al Psychology , Vol. 32, 1941, pp. 603-10. 

Coleman, H. A. "The relationship of socio-economic status 
to the performance of junior high school students." 

Journal of Experimental Education, Vol. 9, 1949. PP. 

61 - 63 . 

Crow, L. D. and Crow, A. Adolescent Development and Adjust ¬ 
ment . Toronto: The McGraw-Hill Book Co., 19567 

Curtis, E. A. et al. "The relation of certain unsettled 
home conditions to the academic success of high school 
pupils." Journal of Social Psychology , Vol. 9, 1930, 
pp. 419-35. 

Darly, J. G. "Scholastic achievement and measured maladjust¬ 
ment." Journal of Applied Psychology , Vol. 21, 1937, pp# 
435-93. 

Dickinson, C. F. "A study of the relation of reading ability 
to scholastic achievement." School Review , Vol. 33, 

1925, pp. 616-26. 

Drasgow, J. "Underachievers." Journal of Counseling Psych ¬ 
ology , Vol. 4, 1957, pp. 210-117 

Drews, E. M. and Teahan, J. E. "Parental attitudes and 

academic achievement." Journal of Clinical Psychology , 

Vol. 6, 1957, pp. 323-32o 






















































20? 


Driscoll, G. P. The Driscoll Playkit . New York: The 
Psychological Corp. 1952. 

Dunkelberger, G. F. "Do extra-curricular activities make 
for poor scholarship?" Journal of Educational Socio- 
logy . Vol. 10, 1935, p Po "2TpT^o 

Eckert, R. "Analyzing the superior college studento" 

School and Society , Vol. 41, 1935, pp® 69-72. 

Eckert, R. and Mills, H. C. "Variations among high school 
seniors in promise and performance measures." School 
Review , Vol. 44, 1936, pp. 274-32. 

Edelston, H. "Educational failure with high I.Q." Journal 
of Genetic Psychology , Vol. 77, 1950, pp® 35-116. 

Edmiston, R. W. and McBain, L. "Social and economic back¬ 
ground effects on school achievement." School and 
Society , Vol. 6l, 1945, pp. 190-95® 

Engle, T. L. "Home environment and school records." School 
Review , Vol. 42, 1934, pp® 590-93. 

English, 0. S 0 and Pearson, G. H. J. Emotional Problems of 
Living . New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 1945® 

Fay, L. E. "The relationship between specific reading skills 
and selected areas of sixth grade achievement." J ournal 
of Educational Research , Vol. 43, 1949, pp® 541-47® 

Ford Foundation, Fund for the Advancement of Education: 

Bridging the Gap Between School and College, New York: 
1953® 

Ford, T. R. "Social factors affecting academic performance; 
futher evidence." School Review, Vol. 65, 1957, PP® 
415 - 22 . 

Fowler, H. M. Fourth Mental Measurements Yearbook . O.K. 
Buros, ed. Highland Park: The Gryphon Press, 1953® 

Frank, J. D. "Individual differences in certain aspects of 
the level of aspiration." American Journal of Psych¬ 
ology, Vol. 47, 1955, pp® 119-23. 

Freeman, F. S. Fourth Mental Measurements Yearbook . O.K. 
B u ros, ed. Highland Park: The Gryphon Press, 1953® 


















































20$ 


Friedhoff, W. H. Relationships among various measures 

of socio - economic status , social class identification , 
intelligence , and school achievement . Unpublished 
Ph. D. thesis, State University of Iowa, 1955* 

Friend, J. G. and Haggard, E. A. "Work adjustment in 

relation to family background." Applied Psychology 
Monographs, No. 16, 194$. 

Goche, L. N. Relationship of interest and temperament 
traits to survival in engineering curricula . 

Unpublished M. S. thesis, Iowa State College, 1954. 

Goldstein, K. The Organism. New York: American Book 
Co., 1939. 

Good, C. V. and Scates, D. E. Methods of Research , Educa ¬ 
tional , Psychological , Sociological . New York: 
Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1954. 

Gough, H. G. "The relationship of socio-economic status 

to personality inventory and achievement test scores." 
Journal of Educational Psychology , Vol. 37, 1946, 
pp. 527-40. 

Gough, H. G. "Factors relating to the academic achievement 
of high school students." Journal of Educational 
Psychology , Vol. 40, 1949, pp. 65-7^T “ 

Gough, H.G. "What determines the academic achievement of 
high school students?" Journal of Educational 
Research, Vol. 46, 1953, pp. 321-31. 

Gough, H. G. "The construction of a personality scale to 
predict scholastic achievement." Journal of Applied 
Psychology , Volo 37, 1954, pp. 361-67. 

Gowan, J. C. "The underachieving gifted child: A problem - 
for everyone." Exceptional Children , Vol. 21, 1955, 
pp, 247-49. 

Gowan, J. C. "Dynamics of underachievement of gifted chil¬ 
dren." Exceptional Children , Vol. 24, 1957, pp. 9$-101. 

Granzow, K. R. A comparative study of underachievers , normal 
achievers , and overachievers in reading . Unpublished 
Ph, D. thesis, State University of Iowa, 1954. 

Griffiths, G. R. "The relationship between scholastic 

achievement and personality adjustment of men college 
students." Journal of .Applied Psychology, Vol. 29, 

1945, PP. 360-67. ~ 





























































t. 















209 


Guilford, J. P. and Martin, H. G. The Guilford-Martin 
Inventory of Factors GAMIN . Beverly Hills: The 
Sheridan Supply Co., 194$• 

Guilford, J. P. and Zimmerman, W. S. The Guilford - Zimmer - 
man Temperament Survey . Beverly Hills: The Sheridan 
Supply Co., 1949. 

Hadley, J. M. and Kennedy, V. tr A comparison between per¬ 
formance on a sentence completion test and academic 
success. TT Educational and Psychological Measurement , 

Vol. 9, 1949, pp. 649-70. 

Haggard, E. "Socialization, personality, and academic 
achievement in gifted children." School Review, Vol. 

65, 1957, pp. 338-414. 

Hamza, M. "Retardation in mathematics among grammar school 
pupils." British Journal of Educational Psychology, Vol. 
21-22, 1951-52, pp. 98-107. 

Hanlon, T. E. and Hofstaetter, P. R. and O’Connor, J. P. 
"Congruence of self and ideal self in relation to 
personality adjustment." Journal of Consulting 
Psychology , Vol. 13, 1954, pp. 215-17. 

Karris, D. "Factors affecting college grades: A review 
of the literature, 1930-37." Psychological Bulletin, 

Vol. 37, 1940, pp. 125-66o 

Hathaway, S, R 0 and McKinley, J. C. Manual : The Minnesota 
Multiphasi c Personality Inventory . New York: The 
Psychological Corp., l$5l. 

Havighurst, R. J. "Conditions favorable and detrimental 
to the development of talent." School Review, Vol. 65. 
1957, pp. 20-26. 

Heilman, J. D. "The relative influence upon educational 
achievement of some hereditary and environmental 
factors." The Twenty-Seventh Yearbook of the N.S.S.E., 
Part II. Nature and Nurture : Their Influence Upon 
Achievement , 1928, pp. 35-66. 

Hendrickson, G. and Huskey, J. F. "Extraversion as a factor 
conditioning achievement in the fifth and sixth grades 
in an elementary school." Journal of Educational 
Research , Vol. 25, 1932, pp. 6-13. 

Henman, V. A. A. and Nelson, M. J. The Henmon-Nelson 

Tests of Mental Ability. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin Co., 
1950 o 





















































210 


Hepburn, D« An interview validation of a self - inventory 
scale . M. Ed. thesis, University of Alberta (in 
preparation). 

Hilgard, E. R. Introduction to Psychology . New York: 
Harcourt-Brace & Co., 1957* 

Hinkleraan, E. A. "Relation of certain personality variables 
to high school achievement." School Review. Vol. 60, 
1952, pp. 532-34. 

Hollingshead, A. B. Elmtown* s Youth . New York: John Wiley 
& Sons, 1949. 

Horney, K. The Neurotic Personality of Our Time . New York: 
W. W. Norton & Co., 1937. 

Humber, W. J. "The relationship between reading efficiency 
and academic success in selected university curricula." 
Journal of Educational Psychology, Vol. 35. 1944. PP. 
17 - 26 . 

Jackson, R. A. "Prediction of the academic success of 

college freshmen." Journal of Educational Psychology, 
Vol. 46, 1955, pp. 290-3OI. 

Jersild, A. T. Psychology of Adolescence , New York: The 
Macmillan Co., 1957® 

Jucknat, M. "Leistung, anspruchsniveau, und selbstbewusst- 
sein." Psychologische Forschung . Vol. 22, 193$, PP* 
$9-179 (in translation.) 

Keep, N. and Whiteside, G. H. "The relation of nervous- 
emotional stability to educational achievement." 

Journal of Educational Psychology , Vol. 21, 1930, 
pp. 429-41. 

Kimball, B« "The sentence-completion test in a study 

of scholastic underachievement." Journal of Consulting 
Psychology . Vol. 16, 1952, 353-5$® 

Kirk, Bo "Test versus academic performance in malfunction¬ 
ing students." Journal of Consulting Psychology , Vol. 
16, 1952, pp. 213“l6o 


Kuder, G. F. Kuder Preference Record { Vocational ). Chicago: 
Science Research Associates, 1956. 






































... ; . u. o V 


c 


. t> . J. m 


V JL. • ■ >. J 


V .J. 


. V, - •/ .. - 


- { * 


» ■; * 






• 1 v -L .1 J J "J «J 'j ' 


C 


vOO.Vtf : .i'I'BL'f -’B J- 


. ~ 

.0. - • ■ • ■ c c • • ’ ' 


* \ . - • ffi * •' ' ' 


t f 


• A.% « -LO V * ' ■! i. 


i.Ofa'iO i :nv>'<<l'<AOJ..ojr- 


:i.:aa 


, vJ i 1' ■> ... j • • - 

< * ‘' 


0 » (T ' ’ 

iiio.r.d"iOj ;-o oo' ' j.c.i.co.-iot. u r oOxvfOi i 

0' i'C 1 ‘ ; 0 0. 


. 


i.O. 


j ■,j,■.. .io..■ .! i>' c i ->:! i■:a ■■ .> i. 


* j' -■ 




.c j 


»f ’■ f ■ - - o 




). *y 5 

„v .. . -fa q 

x > 




J. -i 


.to 


O - ' .J 


OiO 


j: iIX.0. 


:0 f XX 


f )UA 





211 


Kurtz, J. J. and Swenson, £. J. "Factors related to over¬ 
achievement and under-achievement." School Review , Vol. 
59, 1951, PPo 472-80. 

Leckie, L. Self Consistency . New York: Island Press, 1945* 

Liebman, 0. B. "The relationship of personal and social 

adjustment to academic achievement in elementary school®" 
Dissertation Abstracts , No. 14. p. 6659, 1954 

Malloy, J. "An investigation of scholastic over- and under¬ 
achievement among female college freshmen." Journal of 
Counseling Psychology , Vol. 1, 1954, pp. 260-63» 

McClelland, D. C. "The effect of the need for achievement 
on thematic apperception." Journal of Applied Psych ¬ 
ology . Vol® 39, 1949, pp. 242-55. 

McClelland, D. C. The Achievement Motive . New York: 
Appleton-Century-Crofts 9 1953. 

MacCurdy, R. D. "Characteristics and backgrounds of super¬ 
ior science students." School Review , Vol. 64, 1956, 
pp. 67-71. 

McManus, T. M. A survey of pupil progress in Edmonton city 
schools . Unpublished M. Ed. thesis, University of 
Alberta, 1950. 

McQuary, J. P. "Some relationships between non-intellectual 
characteristics and academic achievement." Journal of 
Educational Psychology , Vol. 44, 1953, PP* 215-28 

McQuary, J. P. "Some differences between under- and over¬ 
achievers in college." J ournal of A dm i n i s t r- a t i o n and 
Supervision , Vol. 40, 1954, pp. 117-20. 

McQuary, J. P. and Truax, W. E. "An underachievement 
scale." Journal of Educational Research, Vol. 48 , 

1955, pp. 393-99o 

Monroe, R. "Prediction of the adjustment and academic 
performance of college students by a modification of 
the Rorschach method." Applied Psychology Monographs, 
Vol« 7, 1945. 

Montalto, F. "An application of group Rorschach techniques 
to the problem of achievement in college." Journal of 
Clinical Psychology , Vol. 2, 1945, pp. 254-60. 













































212 


Morgan, H. H* "A psychometric comparison of achieving and 
non-achieving college students of high ability.” 

Journal of Consulting Psychology , Vol. 16, 1952, pp. 

' 292 - 9 #. 

Mowrer, 0. H. Psychotherapy : Theory and Research . New York: 
Ronald Press, 1953. 

Musselman, J. W. "Factors associated with the achievement 
of high school pupils of superior intelligence." 

Journal of Experimental Education , Vol. 18, 1950, 
pp. 229-73’. 

Myers, R. C. "Academic overachiever: Stereotyped aspects." 
Journal of Experimental Education , Vol. 11, 1942, 
pp. 53-65. 

Nason, J. L. Patterns of circumstances related to educational 
achievement of high school pupils of superior ability . 
Unpublished paper, University of Southern California, 1954. 

Nemzek, C. L. "The value of certain non-intellectual 
factors for direct and differential prediction of 
academic achievement." Journal of Social Psychology. 

Vol. 12, 1945, pp. 21-30. 

0 T Leary, M. J.. The measurement and evaluation of the work 
habits of over - achievers and under - achievers to deter ¬ 
mine the relationship of these habits to achievement . 
Unpublished Ed. D. thesis. Boston University, School 
of Education, 1955* 

Owens, W. and Johnson, T #. "Some measured personality traits 
of collegiate underachievers." Journal of Educational 
Psychology , Vol. 40, 1949, pp. 41-46. 

Phillips, V/. W. and Osborne, R. T. "A note of the relation¬ 
ship of the Kuder Preference Record scales to College 
marks, scholastic aptitude, and other variables." 
Educational and Psychological Measurement, Vol. 9? 

1949, pp. 331-37. 

Pierson, G. A. and Jex, F. B. "Using the Cooperative 

General Achievement Tests to predict scores in engin¬ 
eering." Educational and Psychological Measurement, 

Vol. 11, 1951, pp. 397-402. 

Pond, F* L. "Influence of reading abilities on school 

success in grade nine." School Review , Vol. 43, 1940, 
pp. 437-44. 























































) 



t 


V .. * ^ 



c 



i 


t 













c 


c 




c 







213 


Pressey, S. L. "An attempt to measure the comparative 
importance of general intelligence and certain char¬ 
acter traits contributing to success in school," 
Elementary School Journal , Vol. 21, 1920, pp. 220-29® 

Preston, R, C. and Botel, M. "Relation of reading skill 
and other factors to the academic achievement of 204$ 
college students," Journal of Experimental Education , 
Vol. 20, 1952, pp. 363-71. 

Reid, T. S. A survey of the language achievement of 

Alberta school children in relation to bilingualism , 
sex , and intelligence . Unpublished M* A, thesis, 
University of Alberta, 1954* 

Reeder, T, A study of some relationships between level of 
self - concept , academic achievement , and classroom 
adjustment . Unpublished Ed. D. thesis, North Texas 
State College, 1955* 

Remmers, H. H. and Shimberg, B. The SRA Youth Inventory , 
Science Research Associates: Chicago, 1953• 

Remmlein, Madaline. "Scholastic accomplishment as affected 
by intelligence, and participation in extra-curricular 
activities." Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 23, 
1939, pp. 602-07. 

Robinowitz, R. "Attributes of pupils achieving beyond 
their level of expectancy." Journal of Personality, 

Vol. 24, 1956, pp, 308-17. 

Robinson, C. H. The study of written language errors of 
1238 pupils of Ukrainian origin . Unpublished Mo Ed, 
thesis, University of Alberta, 1934. 

Rogers, C. R. "The organization of personality," The 
American Psychologist , Vol, 2, 1947, PP<> 35^-68, 

Rorschach, H. Psychodiagnostics ; Fourth Edition . New York: 
Grune and Stratton, 1953® 

Rosen, B. "The achievement syndrome," American Sociological 
Review , Vol. 21, 1956, pp. 203-11. 

Ross, C. C, and Klise, N. M. "Study methods of college 

students in relation to intelligence and achievement," 
Educational Administration and Supervision, Vol. 13. 

1927, PP® 551-52^ 

























































f 


I'futniioti -S'-* io n ' 

C V . _ ; 


. 1 Ac s n.-.'.o* xo r.:o j : rBisa 1 - 




c j 


• .r j.t ot r iiaao:^ :o Ax ? o ' : "~ 


* 


i J c 


J.. £ ^ 




;' . .0 . ; 

... oc ‘ - ' ; - - - -' 


* : 


J. ( .w. 


c 


'. fcj J 


fy.9 A ' 


x-a... . 

- - 


. - - 

y x j j 


a, „• .s ;/ ._ aa o 

. 


■ 7 . ..f -:r ,cA r ’P£.Ar r r/cooA. ozSf ic 


i'OXV.u,*;}- 

'tv - - ■ C 


t 


- t ■ A 


*ac . 


vc 


t v v ■' 

. 

C 

■ • ; c : * A 

------ ----- 

. * -. t - t - 


o x x J - . - - 

. . a. A xU - - 


t .Gt: ( 


•; O v n' (H.c-rrv*; 


c 


.AC' 


( ..... 0 ... 


be a .. ;■ : oirt. 


a: ■ e X£OJ£ 


* ■' r ; a 


« 


I j; i. ’} jb ; . . A. .9 A A. A a 


oxer -. 


c ■ - ' ’ A, ;-fl fi.OX .'A A A r.iC j-a : --a'a 




214 

Rothney, J. W. "Evaluative attitudes and academic success." 
Journal of Educational Psychology, Vol. 27, 1936, 
pp. 292-95. 

Rotter, J. B. and Rafferty, J. E. Manual ; the Rotter 

Incomplete Sentences Blank . New York: The Psychological 
Corp., 1950* 

Russell, J. B. "The relation of intellectual, temperamental, 
and other qualities to success in school: A follow-up 
study." British Journal of Psychology , Vol. 24, 1934, 
pp. 295-312. 

School and College Ability Tests : Manual for Interpreting 
Scores. Educational Testing Service, Princeton, 1949* 

School and College Ability Tests : Technical Report . 
Educational Testing Service, Princeton, 1949* 

Schonell, F. B. Backwardness in the Basic Subjects . 

London: Oliver and Boyd, 1943® 

Sears, P. "Levels of aspiration in academically successful 
and unsuccessful children." Journal of Abnormal and 
Social Psychology , Vol. 35, 1940, pp. 490-536. 

Serene, M. F. "An experiment in motivational counseling." 
Personnel and Guidance Journal , Vol. 31, 1952-53, 
pp. 319-24* 

Shaw, D. C. "A study of relationships between Thurstone 
Primary Mental Abilities and high school achievement." 
Journal of Educational Psychology, Vol. 40, 194$, 

PP® 239-49* 

Shaw, M. C. and Brown, D. J. "Scholastic underachievement 
of bright college students," Personnel and Guidance 
Journal , Vol, 36, 1957, PP* 195-99* 

Sheerer, E, T. "The relationship between acceptance of 

self and acceptance of others." Journal of Consulting 
Psychology , Vol, 13, 1949, PP* 169-75* 

Shuttleworth, F. K. "The measurement of character and 
emotional factors involved in scholastic success." 
University of Iowa Studies in Character , Vol. 1, 1927* 
















































% 











<■ 


t 








c 




) 


c 


c • * ' ■ t 








215 


Skuba, M. "An analysis of English errors and difficulties 
among grade ten students in the Smoky Lake school 
division." Alberta Journal of Educational Research, 

Vol. 1, 1955, pp. 15-23o 

Snoddy, M. L. and Shannon, J. R. "Standardized achievement 
measurement of athletes and non-athletes." School 
Review, Vol. 47, 1939, pp.610-12. 

Snygg, D. E. and Combs, A. W. Individual Behavior : A New 
Frame of Reference for Psychology . New York: Harper & 
Bros., 1949# 

Stagner, R. "Relation of personality to academic aptitude 
and achievement." Journal of Educational Research , 

Vol. 26, 1933, pp. 648-60. 

Stasek, S. D. The effects of specialized educational 

counseling with selected groups of underachievers at 
the secondary school level . Unpublished Ph. D. thesis, 
Northwestern University, 1955* 

Stevens, P. H. An investigation of the relationship between 
certain aspects of self - concept behaviour and students 1 
academic achievement . Unpublished Ph. D. thesis, New 
York University, 1956. 

Stedman, M. "The influence of health upon Intelligence 
and school grades of high school pupils." Journal of 
Applied Psychology , Vol. IS, 1934, pp* 799—509. 

Stice, G. et al. Background Factors and College Going Plans 
Among High Aptitude Students in Public High Schools . 
Educational Testing Service, Princeton, 1956. 

Stone, C. L. "Disparity between intelligence and scholarship." 
Journal of Educational Psychology, Vol. 31, 1922, pp. 
241-44. 

Strang, R. Educational Guidance : Its Principles and 
Practices . New York: Macmillan & Co., 1947* 

Strang, R. "The counselor 1 s contribution to the guidance of 
the gifted, the underachiever, and the retarded." 

Personnel and Guidance Journal, Vol. 34, 1956, pp. 

494-97* 

Strong, E. K. Manual : Vocational Interest Blank . Stanford: 
Stanford University Press, 1951* 

































































( C >0 


: ;,C 

■'.vO 


* < 


9 -i-u- *\:.r~ T r.' i " .’ 


G±j 


uiSi-CId’S lo r . TO-T 


. .... -..iOj: ’ • ■ - 

. c c .■ • - c 


*70. 


4 ' 


t :„o O 


; i O _ ' ; ' ' ■. 






’iO .. C . .. - * t' 

%oob . 

" • 


>:orsj io a* 


7^7107^ ’ bs" :r oVITpr. 


>c 3 B- 


t 


Vo laOOiiU' TrS'f.jv'wdi '0"' 


t .. h ? 


■ v4 4. .lOio.'iv t:i-a v< ' 


.0 


■ ■ ' ' ' „ . . ' ■ • ■ ■ ■ . 

. .. - t ' 




„ c ... . 4 . i •- ■■ • 


c 

. —?pr. ■ ; ' ■ (i/r y ”■ .„ .Of 


.00 J 


01 


i 'IO 


' * " 

i ' ~ .. 

t • 


. : ' 00 rj J j . k> , H \Cf i*l 

. 5 - - C ' 


no j 


* 


; .i. ; . * o' 

: 


,. r t 

«. or;- .o-- ' Oi . COC. 

. 


■- ' <k . ■ > 


0 - 


\ .. v :. * - < 

o - 







216 


Sullivan, E. T., Clark, W. W. and Tiegs, E. W. The 

California Test of Mental Maturity and Adaptations , 

Los Angeles: California Test Bureau, 1951* 

Sullivan, H. S. Conceptions of Modern Psychiatry . 

Washington: W. Alanson White Psychiatric Foundation, 
1947. 

Super, D. E. et al. Vocational Development : a. Framework 
for Research . New York: Bureau of Publications, 
Teachers 1 College, Columbia University, 1957. 

Symonds, P. M. "Fundamental drives to action." Fifteenth 
Yearbook, National Elementary Principals: Personality 
Adjustment of the Elementary School Child. New York, 
1936. 

Symonds, P. M. The Psychology of Parent - Child Relation ¬ 
ships . New York: D. Appleton-Century Co., 1939. 

Taschuk, W. An analysis of the self - concept of grade nine 
students . Unpublished M. Ed. thesis, University of 
Alberta, 1957. 

Terman, L. M. Genetic Studies of Genius . Stanford: 
Stanford University Press, 1925-27. 

Terman, L. M. and Oden, M, The Gifted Child Grows Up . 
Stanford: The Stanford University Press, 1947. 

Tibbets, J. R. The role of parent - child relationships in 
the achievement of school pupils : A study of the 
family relationships associated" with underachievement 
and high achievement . Unpublished Ph. D. thesis. 

New York University, 1954. 

Uhrbrock, R. S. "The freshman 1 s use of time." Journal 
of Higher Education , Vol. 2, 1931, pp. 137-43 

Umstattd, J. G. Student Self - Support at the University 
of Minnesota . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press, 1932. 

Van Alstyne, D« "A study of ten gifted children whose 
school progress was unsatisfactory." Journal of 
Educational Research , Vol. $, 1923, pp. 122-35 

Wallace, W. L. "The prediction of grades in specific 
college courses." Journal of Educational Research, 
Vol. 14, 1951, pp- 437-97. 





































































c 


t * 





c 






! 



5 






< J 






? 











c 


O 




t 









21 ? 


Walsh, A. The Self-Concept of Bright Boys With Learning 
Difficulties o New York: Bureau of Publications, 
Teachers 1 College, Columbia University, 1956. 

Wattenberg, W. W. The Adolescent Years * New York: 

Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1955* 

Weber, M. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism . 
New York: Scribners, 194*57" 

Wechsler, D. The Measurement of Adult Intelligence . Balt¬ 
imore: Williams and Wilkins Co., 1944. 

White, J.W. and Nemzek, C, L. ”Rwlation of indigency to 

scholastic success.” School Review , Vol. 47, 1939, 
pp. 199-204. 

White, R. W. The Abnormal Personality . New York: Ronald 
Press Co., 1948. 

White, V. ,f Measuring achievement in high school English.” 
School Review , Vol. 55, 1947 f pp* 474-53. 

Winegardner, J. H. ”The relation between secondary mathe¬ 
matics and physics and chemistry.” Mathematics 
Teacher , Vol. 31-32, 1938-39, pp. 220-222. 

Woellner, R. C. ”Why don’t students do their best?” 

School Review , Vol. 6l, 1953, PP* 325-26. 

Woltmann, A. G. Fourth Mental Measurements Yearbook . 0. K. 
Buros, ed. Highland Park: The Gryphon Press, 1953. 

Wrenn, C. G. and Humber, W. J. * } St\idy habits associated 

with high and low scholarship.” Journal of Education ¬ 
al Psychology , Vol. 32, 1941, pp. 611-16. 

Young, C. W. and Estabrooks, G. W. ”Non-intellective factors 
related to scholastic achievement.” Psychological 
Bulletin, Vol. 31, 1934, pp. 735-36. 

Young, J. B. ”How emotional traits predispose to college 
failure e ” Journal of Educational Psychology, Vol. 

18, 1927, pp. 631-35. 

Zintz, M. V. ft Academic achievement and social and emotional 
adjustment of handicapped children.” Elementary 
School Journal , Vol. 51, 1951, pp. 502-0?. 

Black, D. B. ”A study of relationships of the grade IX 
principals rating to performance on the Alberta 
grade IX departmental examinations.” Alberta Journal 
of Educational Research , Vol. 4, 1958, pp. 227-367 

















































A 



u.:i 0 


5. 


O'.'.O ~ n fi. 




» - 





* 










j 





% 





c -■ 


j 








c. 








<: •' - * - < 




> 




t 




O 


A 



C. ■ < 




no 


< 


? • 9 -- « 




APPENDICES 








219 


CASE NO. 1 

The subject is a tall, slender youth who impresses 
one as being immature. He is the eldest of a family of four. 
His father was killed in the RCAF before he was born, and 
his mother subsequently remarried. His step-father is 
an engineer with an oil company and, while presently 
stationed in Edmonton, he formerly moved about the province 
a good deal, doing seismographic work for his firm. The 
mother has no employment outside the home. The subject 
has two half-brothers and one half-sister. As his 
siblings are very young, aged five, four, and three 
years, it is apparent that he receives little companionship 
from them. The boy seems to accept his step-father 
completely, but there is a suggestion that he feels some 
resentment for his mother. Possibly the fact that, when 
a widow, she left him with friends as she worked by the 
day, appeared to the boy as rejection. He may also 
resent the fact that she has little time for him now that 
she has three young children to care for. 

The student does not appear to be particularly 
keen about attending school and is quite undecided as to 
his future plans. He has few friends and his pursuits 
are solitary ones. He is shy in the presence of others 
and admits that he sometimes likes to lf take off” and get 
away by himself. His hobbies are outdoor ones, such as 



TO 




c 


o: d 


. : 


•: iv>: 


. j; o . 




00 


- 1 . 0 . 1 .:: 


o< : 


•j 


l ■ j 






c 




j 


t 


.0 le.noxa 


10 j 


■JoooiOi 


Ci -1 


1 •' 


GO 


vod 


i• j:'. 


Or.; '.;J. >;i $ 






■ > 


: o 


''[X.-.jioo o 


0 i 







VTOJl) 


■ .. /' < 







i) oxo 


M» r 


j i! 




220 


hiking, fishing, and hunting. 

There are a number of factors which might possibly 
have influenced the boy 1 s academic achievement. There is 
a possibility that he feels rejected at home. He may 
believe that his parents, and especially his mother, are 
disinterested in his school progress. The boy has poor 
relations with his peers and has cut his contacts with his 
age-mates to a minimum. He lacks clarity regarding his 
life f s goal, and such lack of certainty may make for 
poor academic motivation. The boy T s attendance at 
numerous schools, occasioned by his step-father f s frequent 
moves about the province, may have caused his earlier 
education to suffer. Finally, the student has poor 
study habits and attitudes toward school, as measured by 
the SSHA. 




* •' : 


•j *.lO CM’X '* 1 


c 


f 




221 


CASE NO. 2 

The subject is a serious-looking boy of average 
height and build. He is the eldest of four boys, two of 
whom are his brothers; the other is a half-brother. The 
boy ! s father deserted his family a number of years ago 
and the mother eventually remarried. The step-father is 
a clerk in a hardware store, and the mother is a housewife. 
The boy appears to be on excellent terms v\rith his step¬ 
father but he suggests that his mother is quite restrictive. 
The student does not feel free to invite his friends to 
his home, for example, because he feels that his mother 
disapproves. When confronted with a problem he tT thinks 
it through" for himself, or else goes to his maternal 
grandmother for advice. 

The boy has few close friends and spends most of 
his free time in reading novels. He attributes his lack 
of friends to his obesity, a condition which is not 
apparent at the present time. The subject has adopted 
a critical, faultfinding attitude toward his peers. 

He is taking the matriculation course at school 
and wishes to become a civil or an aeronautical engineer. 

He knows little about either of these fields and admits 
that they were suggested to him by his grandfather. 

There are several factors which might be seen as 


3i 01/8 9 U 




ft i ‘" 


r.. .f'vo 


I L : 




i i r J f 


222 


being relevant to the boy T s underachievement• He is 
obviously insecure and uncertain as to his own ability. 

He feels that he is rejected at home and is rejected by 
his peers. His age mates might have refused to accept him 
at one time because of his obesity, and the boy continues 
to use this as a convenient explanation of his unpopularity 
at the present time. He has no clear vocational goal 
and so may suffer from weak academic motivation. His 
attitudes toward school and his study habits are poor. 


« 



/; „ O' \ ' : f £ 

; ' ' ■ 

ij bs job r ox s:i Iub sbo-S - do. bobooi'.e'd 

X ; . ■ : 

8 . l;ji oo. cl . ' <■> : ■ 91 

- 

» 

,. . nolo;- . > $o< 

, 




. * ; 
d 0€ ,i 

. 

• . i 


223 


CASE NO. 3 

The student is a tall, well-built, attractive boy. 

He is the only child in his family. The father is the 
owner of a jewellry business and the mother is a house¬ 
wife. It appears that the family is quite prosperous,. 

The boy seems to be quite close to both his parents, 
and especially so with the father. He explains that 
the family is closely-knit 0 

The boy believes that he is a n slow learner” and 
explains that he does not ”catch on” to new material 
quickly. He also finds it very difficult to concentrate 
on his work. He dislikes reading very much, and it was 
noted that his reading score, as determined by a standard¬ 
ized test administered in June, 195$* was the lowest 
made by any boy in this group of underachievers® 

The subject is much interested in sports and 
games and he believes that he is especially proficient 
in football. A considerable amount of his free time 
is also given over to the radio and television. 

The boy has numerous worries regarding his vocational 
goal. At the present time he is interested in a career 
in electronics. He feels that he could complete a 
university course successfully* but admits that there is 
a possibility that his father will want him to take over 




J 


<v 


oil ‘ ./j: 


.0 


c 


it , 


o;: ■ o' ■ ■ :o 




f). ; 


. c) u r.>nc o- 


l) i 


<' 


HQ 




O 


Dll'. 


it t. ■) 


c..’.D ::d V 8X 


r 


0 






00 / 1 . 


D: "-A OiLdJ c.J 


a 



22 ^ 


the family business. If such were the case, the boy’s 
formal education would probably terminate at grade twelve. 

Several factors were noted which might have some 
influence on the boy’s relatively poor academic achievement. 
He seems to have difficulty in his relations with others. 

He tends to feel inferior to his peers and believes that 
others ,f push him around.” There is some uncertainty as to 
his vocational goal, and such indecision might well make 
for weak academic motivation. Although the boy is 
interested in electronics, he admits that he hasn’t 
mentioned this interest to his parents as yet. Finally, 
the boy’s disinterest in, and ability to read well 
undoubtedly works to his disadvantage academically. 


* VO ' J, 


3 , •, 





* 


no 


a 


>y 









o.:, n 




*.J :> ; 


) 


i ,'K 




z ■ 


[(-S. j ■ : I ; V cV.r. i 




■ ■ i . 1 . « .. !/' 


.o.tr.Do 


;•) 


C 






cj b ■■ u .i:ri .i > 




■> 


i 


c) 


? 


’■OCi 3lij 


■) 


u f j 





225 


CASE NO. 4 

This subject is slightly built* and of average height 
for his age. At first he gave the impression of being 
somewhat reserved but he became more relaxed as he 
understood the purpose of the study. He is an only 
child. His father is the manager of a prosperous 
business in the city, and his mother is a housewife. 

The father is very busy and the boy sees little of him. 
There is relatively little group activity within the 
family. In answer to a statement presented by one of 
the inventories, the boy revealed that he does not 
see his father as being an "ideal man." 

The subject seems to be quite accepting of him¬ 
self at present, but believes that he was a "brat" when 
younger. He is very interested in sports and feels that 
he is very good at a number of them. He has few interests 
other than sports, the radio, and television. He seems 
to get along quite well with his peers of both sexes, 
and dates frequently. 

He is somewhat undecided about his future. He 
believes that he would like to be a teacher of physical 
education but is not certain that he should attempt 
university. The boy also shows some interest in 
apprencticeship programs but is quite sure that his 
parents expect him to go to university. 




T, I'Vi Ol 


i C'xfX 


- ( 


): ( 


n ■ ■ i 


-O'. u> 


r! 


'0 D 


j: . 




J ' UJ v.- 1 .,.' ,1.. I 


i.u.ro.iici 


■ ; • 


226 


There are several factors which might well have some 
bearing on the subjects underachievement * He has poor 
work habits, and tends to rush through his work without 
giving it the proper consideration. There is a possibility 
that the boy was over-indulged as a child and, as a 
consequence, he tends to be somewhat immature and 
undependable at present. The subject is quite largely 
ignored by his father and the disinterest of this parent 
may well have had an adverse effect upon the boy*s 
academic motivation. The student has no clear vocational 
goal, and this may be seen as another factor making for 
weak academic motivation. 


- 

- 

5 1 .. ' ‘I< ■' 0 1 

*W $ 5C 

. 



;J D : f. 3 ; 3 ii £<' : j ■: ' 


' 


y : , , r : S '• o /. ' J.' " 

- ti: i‘ 4 

\ 

. u ' -i S: : ■. 

- • j LSlj 3.1 i is V 

■ t .'.i ■ 

D 

> s s h&£ .£ishi:J 

' • VOi 


- i: 

. ■ 0’ S - 0 

' . ' y ay ^ o-Oi'SJ >ys'.y o 


■ L : 3 - J ' ■ ' 

j-; ;.:iy e ±0 J hi ■' vj .iui:;:;,' r : 


T ’ 


j ri-..c n :y/> ‘..y or/irvlvs : -b { ':l zvj V- r; 


''i.-G.r.y :.:,r / ‘133: UO Gi 


;;v , ’Vf :;i V. S O. .. ... i. ' > '■ 


l< ’£0cli 


, ns ;. il s 


j-jC ibs; i. :>c; ol ; o.y . * 



227 


CASE NO* 5 

The subject is a short, dark, boy with weak facial 
features* He is quite obviously underweight. He is 
the second oldest child in a family of four. The father 
owns and manages a small furnace-making plant and the 
mother frequently sells toiletries and utensils from 
door to door. There are four cars in the family and the 
boy explains that group activities are kept to a minimum 
as everyone goes his own way. The subject does not 
appear to be particularly close to either of his parents® 

The boy had a congenital heart defect until 
recently when it was corrected by surgery. He was prevented 
from taking part in most sports because of this weakness 
and there is a suggestion that he was over-indulged by 
his parents because of his physical disability. 

The student*s progress in school was apparently 
quite satisfactory until he entered grade seven. He 
failed that grade and later was expelled from grade nine. . 
On returning a second year, he was promoted to grade ten. 

He had violated certain school regulations within two 
weeks of arriving in that grade. The boy has been in 
trouble with the police on a number of occasions for 
theft. 

There are several factors which might have some 


U ' I : 


o rr.;ii 


C 0 


it' Q 


... 


.. o. r . ■ .X .. ... 

jo, \ j; o. *,o o. ;oV. o o: ■. 1 oo 

. O v is. - o jo i o 0 ■ . « . ■ • ; 

^ {J O j.J .0 0 . • >' ; 5 i J. a . ; . o 

j.J:j j- o v o:O' jv. . i .L jjoo.o j.oo o 


C . 


X’OJ r. o' IOC 


;' v ■> . v 


0 


3 : . 1/3 


• v l 


: ri ' ; 'V/ 0 . ono • 3 3 3 3 03:. CO 


; c J') j 




. ;ci .. X . ■ o ! o' JCX /one 

( vO : J '0 ; OtGf O' O : j ^ O'. 0 _ : : coo '.; 


)o n 


C ; - o. .. 


XO'.L o. 0)00 /O' O.o : 3ii 


O' 


o oo 




228 


bearing on the subject 1 s underachievement. His work habits 
are poor, as are his study habits and attitudes toward 
school. Apparently the boy was "spoiled" as a child and 
was permitted to set his own pace in school. The mother 
appears to indulge him still, but the father tries to 
exert some influence over the subject T s actions. The boy 
has no clear vocational goal, a fact which might make for 
poor academic motivation. He seems to have a basically 
hostile attitude towards society in general, and those 
in authority in particular. 

A later visit to the school revealed that the boy 
had been expelled shortly after Christmas. 


t 



. i 0 . '’ 






' J 





* -. 0 


;'C. , - *Aou ■;>. 



* 1 A • 





■j; o 


1 j 






229 


CASE NO. 6 

The subject is a short, slight boy. He is very 
youthful in appearance and is plainly dressed. He is 
the youngest of three boys, his two brothers being 
seventeen and twenty years old. The father is a mail 
clerk and the father has been dead for five years. 

The student reveals that his father has little, 
if any, interest in his school work, and the two older 
brothers appear to be equally disinterested. The 
subject claims that he TT hates TT school and would stop 
at once if he were permitted to do so. He has very 
few close friends and he impresses one as being shy 
and ill at ease in the company of others. He has 
no hobby other than working on the two old cars 
which his brothers own and which, apparently, are in 
constant need of attention. He is very much interested 
in mechanics and indicates that he would like to work 
in a garage when he leaves school. He has not, as yet, 
discussed his future plans with his father. 

There are a number of factors which might well 
have some bearing on the subject ? s underachievement. 

He has poor study habits and very poor attitudes toward 
school. He is not at all motivated to do well in 
school and it is quite apparent that no one 



’ • 







o.l o,i 






.o J 


' 1 




Ov- 


c' J 


,aaa raiOY or a: 




K> 




aao c ?. ::,n AArA’A'L oi d 




< 




no a 




( , 


c - j < - 


;i 


AT 




'/ ; 'v ■ ; ; 4 c a d v d ... ‘ > 


.. 




■[ •’ ■ A 




■ aaa.oo •.to t 


. 0 ' 


I'X 




cl I ... i 

A- iiB;.:,!-.A.A'd-'A ’■cvIo.il on 

C A d' 0 *X - ■ ■ . 


* 


i ; ■ 


••AO : Vo A.I..AOA Oil 0 Aid AAAAA.i: 'AA' AO..U 

r . ■ 

-• V; i; . :! A ow, Ao;o AO.AD AoOODD a da a amaa l' 

A A) " .r, : ' ■;>•:■) i AJ • AO ' : A ^ ■ V ' i 

: -;c; .a:- jo a; • 'A < - a; ' aav • a .< od .o' <ja! - aoda oa! 


IJ.O'A <0 




. loo .0 ■ 


f 


230 


is particularly interested in his academic progress. 
The boy is not self-accepting and is not accepting of 
others. Perhaps the most important factor is that he 
is very obviously rejected at home, by both his father 
and his brothers. The student pretends that he enjoys 
being "on his own" but he eventually revealed that he 
would appreciate having someone to listen to his 
problems and take an interest in him. 




‘"‘.h/bibr'D 

" 

i 

' : O '" JC--. a 


■ .J 0 



,v>/ j /c J :;o : o>i 

c'.i-.; .’iJ'CHi Vu] 


. ; , : , ■ . ’ '.. 

: J-Xij 


.v 

- 


rtnovn • cti.s d 


' o a 

: j c■■■■; o;j : a/7 : : 




liu, uoi r,.r. voo- ouj: 






Jr-; ;o I-O" j; 

1 •; / •, i : L.U'O v 

■: 


231 


CASE NO. 7 

The student is a tall, slight boy with certain 
nervous mannerisms. He wears ”engineer T s boots” and 
wears his blond hair in a very exaggerated style. 

He is the middle child in a family of three. He 
has a sister one year his senior and another five 
years his junior. English is used as the first 
language in the home but some Ukrainian is also spoken. 
The father is a cement contractor and the mother works 
part-time in an aircraft plant. The subject appears 
to be on quite close terms with his father, whom he 
sees as being an ”ideal man.” His relationship with 
his mother is not quite so easily assessed. He spends 
most of his spare time work!ng on his motorcycle and 
admits that he does not take an active part in any 
sports. He appears to get along quite well with his 
peers of both sexes. 

The student admits that he has many worries 
regarding school and, while he believes that an 
education is very necessary, he admits that he would 
stop school if he got a ”decent” job offer. He thinks 
he would like to be "some sort of engineer” but is 
not certain as to what would be involved in such work. 

Several factors might be seen as having some 






* 



;,'V'< - 


. 





y, i, 








[C 








•J J T:T J 






c «.y .' J.':r ; ::o ocj oJ 


• - ■ 


.Cl i 


* 

r .'> V'D’'ir;} 


j: i iiC : 


: : 


vl n 


. 




» ' . . 

ci . j-'Z o ' : ■. • • • '• • 0: -. - Jj; >;; d'n:y y,U J'-., ouT 

. ■: _ ; .. . ^ . l: ■ j .r ■ 

; "■ .' ■ ;.L '• t ■; •v : - , ■c. 

' . ■ ■ . ' ■:) | ( Ci 

"i J. - t vioji t9;;:or. n 9v o:i' >. 1 . hh-oyr vd 

* 1 : . . <•.} . . o : I 


: ?,r.\ 



232 


bearing upon the boy’s underachievement. He has poor 
study habits and school attitudes, as measured by the 
SSHA. It is also obvious that he has relatively weak 
motivation to do well academically. Such disinterest 
in school work might stem, in part, from the fact that 
he has no clear vocational goal. Parental disinterest 
in the boy’s school progress might also be a factor 
making for weak academic motivation. Also, the subject 
claims that only ”squares” do well in school, so the 
possibility exists that he may be underachieving in 
order to hold peer acceptance. There is a suggestion 
that the boy’s relations with his mother are not 
completely satisfactory, and he accuses her of being 
partial to his younger sister. 


f 




© Oci.L'. 


Li 


c j 


j ;.. 


a ; : j. 










233 


CASE NO. 8 

The subject is a tall, thin boy with prominent 
facial features and is somewhat unkempt in appearance. 

He is the oldest of two boys, having a brother five 
years his junior. The father is an employee of a 
railroad and the mother is a housewife. The student 
seems to enjoy close relations with both of his parents® 

The boy is quite serious and seems to have little 
desire to take part in the usual teen-age pursuits. He 
has an after school job which demands eighteen hours of 
his time each week. He also has a second job to which 
he devotes three hours on Sundays. Apparently his 
main source of relaxation is an old car which he is 
converting into a tr hot rod®” He seldom mingles with 
his peers and spends a good deal of his free time at 
home, watching television. 

The student is uncertain as to what he will do 
when he leaves school, but believes that he would like 
a job of a mechanical nature which would keep him out¬ 
doors. He suggested that he would like to be a maintenance 
worker on a radar outpost. 

Several factors were noted which might have some 
relationship to the boy T s underachievement® There is a 
distinct possibility that the boy is not happy at school 






B a.:. 








; 


■ 






• ; 


j 


r 


a: a: 


BXa J.0 -::-v.u- 

ctoai ovad cb 'i'Hw~ 

. O i xai. a s. 

0.;, i.' OJ' CO‘. 'o 1 
aasl vJU'.>a. ;<; 
a.c o,i doiba a;.a 
; a! J 




. a abb; * a': vob ed'x 

■ ;• ,., 5J :; . j ; i; :\ a V :•: C [ f. t ; 0 0 t '1 ±tt ■:> J •• 

_•.a bb . ck-\, ..Coo oo.. 'x :• a a a an 

a 

; .La ; -a: b JaaaaJa: a' ".Bj - : a.auB iioas 

.■ j- '1 ‘ r a a.-'.' 3, 

a acc/a v. aaa.:; : a • Baooc; a.bi 

„ c 

cl a a i 1X B J' 1 ' a.);. i ■ a.... v : a 1 . .... o ■. 


■ v; i j. ').'o oi :£J a.::a 
> ,‘.c a; aaaavaj) ed 


.;a..B0; 3. 


L i. 1 


• ;• o'. . ' r t; a 1 

r. z)d.od u:ab. Ujjovi. &:i bifid b 


' . ,a»'> :>f av a.u. a. i a'. >•? i a 

* i;aba:! v J.0 a o I, 

* 


. c 


ua a ;■••• a ... 


hi: la: -.a >n *■>'£ a c/ioda o‘:i i. 'xov v >b 
a : T C 


23k 

and he admits that, at times, he finds it very hard to 
keep up his school work. His parents, and especially 


the father, are not particularly interested in the 
subject’s academic progress, so that the question of 
motivation must be considered. Further, it might be 
argued that the boy devotes too much time to his 
part-time employment and not enough time to his school 
work. Finally, the student seems unable to admit 
that he has problems in any area. He strives very hard 
to give the impression that his study habits are 
perfect; his relations with his parents exemplary; 
and that his relationships with his age-mates leave 
nothing to be desired. Such refusal to admit the 
existence of problems when almost certainly they do 
exist, suggests that the boy is unable to come to 
grips with reality and face up to his own weaknesses 
and deficiencies. 


' . : \; ' / ■: . v r : ■ ■ >« . c c , ; a ' r : ■ 

<. ■ ‘ a : ■. ■ ■ .1: . ." oe v l d :n < • " »■ ’ 

L ' . . . 0.1 t 


1 ,a. ■ 1 ; .... t ; a; ;.o: { a ' , . a \o . o T : o;;: 

v- i a : a: * a .■) ' . ■ < :• - ;;i j: oc ' .. j; j; 5 .. 







i. “ 0 i i 









u* • : ■ 

,. :o 




m . 




U'/0i: V0J/TP0 











- « , 

. ; 

- 



. 




•; 





. 





















: 

• 




. 


. 





« 

. 











, 

















■ bfiB 














. . n 

, 

V; 





« 




■ .O'; OVi f 


; 

ac:0 

\ 


c 



'.yi ..O 

: 

. 





* 



• : ? f 1 d •, ■ 




- 


BOC/X 






XT 





235 


CASE NO. 9 

This subject is quite tall but is not heavily built. 
He tends to be somewhat quiet and seldom takes the 
initiative in conversation. He is the oldest child in a 
family of four; there is a brother two years his junior 
and also two half-sisters, aged ten and eight years. 

The boy’s mother died when he was three years of age 
and his father, the owner of a successful retail store, 
re-married three years later. The subject sees his 
father as being an ’’ideal man” but there is a suggestion 
that his relations with his step-mother are somewhat 
less close. 

The boy is quite interested in sports and also 
enjoys working on a ’’hot rod" which he and a friend have 
bought. He does not belong to any organized clubs or 
groups and declares that he does not get along too well 
with members of the opposite sex. He is uncertain as to 
what he would like to do when he leaves school but 
believes that his father expects him to work at the 
family retail business. The student is not especially 
interested in this prospect and apparently resents his 
father’s suggestion. 

There are a number of factors which might have some 
bearing upon the subject’s poor academic achievement. He 




'• - 




. 






! ■ ' 


■JO O':!. 

r c . i < 


O.lOO; ,70.! 




OOj U) 


.r G 


.1 < 


f 


;) G\0 ; o', .. jS 





236 


appears to be quite insecure and uncertain of himself, 
and seems to worry overly much about the opinions and desires 
of others. It is quite apparent that he has weak academic 
motivation. There is a possibility that his relations 
with his mother are somewhat strained, probably because 
she devotes a good deal of her time to her two younger 
children and pays relatively little attention to the 
older boy. Finally, the subject has no clear vocational 
goal and rejects the one selected for him by his father* 






• ' ■ ;• ■ : .V,i, :h ,>i! ' -'or V .■/< • r 




• ■ ' ‘ - * 

; : . 




■:r.v. r u.T rtod 'ic .).. ,' : ( cy / " ’’ OjCVO^) -mu'; 


. 




: ■ ' : •( V ' ' . C - . ' •• - > t -• • - • - ' ' ' ■' 


^ : -r . ■ ci •> I. ■- ' i: '■ ' ;v 


237 


CASE NO. 10 

The student is of average size and build. He is very 
interested in the study and asks numerous questions. He 
works conscientiously, but is very slow. The boy is the 
oldest of three children, there being a brother and sister 
three and five years his junior, respectively. The father 
is an accountant and acts as office manager for a company 
in which he is a partner. The mother is a housewife. 

The subject has two main interests - sports, and 
and an early-model car. He appears to enjoy very good 
relations with members of the opposite sex. He does not 
belong to any organized groups at present but has belonged 
to several clubs in the past. He does not have any part-time 
employment as his parents feel there is no need of him 
working. 

The boy has done some farm work for a relative and 
enjoyed it very much. He is quite certain that he wants 
to be a beef rancher and apparently his parents have 
given at least tentative assent to this choice of vocation. 

There are several factors which might have some 
influence on the boy ! s poor academic achievement. He has 
poor study habits and school attitudes, as these are measured 
by the SSHA. He has weak academic motivation and frequently 
expresses the desire to stop school. He is very critical 




.c o. :/ ' = '• r .n: o.i 


;Ci . 11 :v;. /• > 0 L t ‘ J. • •••! 




i jJGi V «"J 


J £ . j. U ; 




.00 *3.0 L 

<y] . : ;; .j 


■ OOV Ci. - < , - > ; 1 ‘-•'2 ’■< 00 ’I •' 

, J < o . 

- • .1,; C J: ■. ■: O ^ ^ 

,.!!(O0 • u :• •'j: 




0 r I . 


y Li 


. # o' . ' ■ 

. 

i5cio(' noo ; o t o' o. ; r ' 

mini io l o : on k;J: &i > kJ 


a OT . hO'o.i}• mi \0 l ' 




' 


■ nojo onrovoc 


0 V i v.i 


0 1 0 


. 


: ; •a ( :/ 


JO 


, ■ - ' O'O o •.»' 





238 


of himself, and he believes that he possesses certain 
undesirable and unworthy characteristics. There is also 
a suggestion that the boy enjoys relatively poor relations 
with his peers of the same sex, and he appears to have few 
close friends. He has developed quite intensive dislikes 
for certain people and, while he tends to accept the 
domination and leadership of others, he resents being 
cast in the role of follower very much. 


;* i'- o .to.:-,' >.i if.-. : j: :1 'io 

- ‘ • . . 




"... 



. 

: "CO ( ■ l ,1 . 

: 

.. . . 

i 


* .';i: an, Ja> 



'j oo; -j.- edr era:; J orf loLciitr 

c f \ .- ftj "la; a j; 



• ", . . ? ,\r: o 


i ■ .?o. 



239 


CASE NO. 11 

This subject is slightly built and is of average 
height. He is very friendly and cooperative. He is the 
oldest member of a family of five; there are two brothers, 
one sister, and a half-sister. The boy ! s father died about 
three years ago and the mother soon re-married. The step¬ 
father is a tractor operator and has just seasonal 
employment. The mother is not employed outside of the 
home. The subject indicates that he is much attached to 
his mother but has little love or respect for his step¬ 
father, whom he classes as a tyrant. 

The boy is inclined to be shy and somewhat reserved in 
his dealings with others. He appears to have few close friends, 
and his hobbies and pastimes are solitary in nature. He is 
unhappy at home and spends as much time as possible away 
from his family. 

The student is not certain what he will do when he 
leaves school. He would like to attend college but 
realizes that it is financially impossible to do so. He 
is also interested in draughting, welding, and mechanical 
work. His mother believes that he should enter one of 
the armed services and learn a trade. 

There are a number of factors which might well be 
related to the subjects underachievement. Possibly the 






c 


. X 


-) d: 




jCi 


. .. ‘,\0. 




o 


c 


a.l ■ '.'.ox j'Ojcp^’X *iq 



3 i : 


f: ; - ih ’ Ob 


..... . . 




/ ' 0 [:•> ' I'-' u * 


t - 


:i of,/. 1 


■ ■ , 


:1 o s x v; j: X 6 c< 1 .i. x 1 ■.. c i c.; 




> -m: .: ■! '• 


most important of these is his rejection at home. The 
boy does not accept himself and feels that he has a 
number of undesirable traits. He does not enjoy satis¬ 
factory relations with his peers, and tends to be 
suspicious of others. He lacks a vocational goal, and 
this might make for poor academic motivation. Finally, 
his study habits and attitudes, as measured on the SSHA, 
are found to be poor. 




CASE NO. 12 


The subject is a tall boy, quite strongly built® He 
tends to be serious and does the work at hand conscien¬ 
tiously. He is the oldest of two children, having one sister 
five years his junior. The father owns and drives a truck, 
and the mother is a housewife. The boy sees his father 
as being an ”ideal man” but suggests,” A mother is a person 
who really annoys you.” 

The boy spends a fair amount of his time working at a 
part-time job. He is fond of a number of sports but has 
never played on an organized team. His social activities, 
he declares, are limited by ”too much work and not enough 
moneyo” He spends a good deal of his spare time at home, 
listening to the radio and watching television. 

He is not completely certain as to what he will do 
when he leaves school, but he believes that he would like 
to be a mechanic. He reveals that his parents have 
accepted this decision for the alternative is his being a 
truck driver, and they would prefer the former vocation to 
the latter. 

A number of factors might be seen as being of some 
importance in influencing the subject T s academic achieve¬ 
ment. The boy has poor academic motivation, freely 
admitting that he is ”not fussy” about attending school. 


j'j o ;! 


2i|_2 


His study habits and attitudes toward school are poor. The 
boy sees himself as being not especially clever and regrets 
that he has to work so hard to achieve what M others tf get 
with so little effort. His parents do not appear to be 
especially interested in his academic progress, and such 
disinterest may make for weak academic motivation on the 
part of the subject. Finally, it would appear that he 
does not enjoy particularly close relations with his 
mother, a fact which consciously or unconsciously might 
cause him to underachieve as a means of spiting her® 


„ ■ ' ' ■■ ... J ' ' ■ - 

: V. » V-J' • ;• • 

» ■ . ' : 

o : u.C t .. - : . :h) -'\,Cu ' ■ 

. . ; . . . •„ ' • . . j ' ■ ^or/i j J*:-, t j 

... . • ■ . ■( •'.) : ;• ■■ - •' ' 
c .. ... • ; •• ■ ■ ■■■ • ■ -• ' 


























CASE NO. 13 


The subject is of average size and build. He has a 
"baby face" and reveals an attitude which suggests he would 
pout if he did not get his own way. He tends to be a n smart 
alec" and is the least cooperative and least likeable boy in 
this entire study. He is the oldest child in a family of 
three, there being a brother, aged ten, and a sister, aged 
four. The father is a mechanic, and the mother is not 
employed outside the home. Statements offered on the Rotter 
suggest that the student is not on particularly close terms 
with either parent, this being especially so in the case of 
the father. 

The student seems to be quite accepting of himself, and, 
while he reveals certain hostility toward others, there is no 
suggestion that his relations with them are exceptionally 
strained. He was once accelerated in school, into grade six, 
and claims that his marks have suffered ever since. He feels 
that he would like to be a mechanic, a goal which has his 
father T s approval but not his mother*s. The boy believes 
that his own laziness will be the biggest hurdle to overcome 
before he can reach his goal. 

A number of factors which might have some bearing on the 
subjects underachievement may be noted.. He is very obviously 
disinterested in school and is making little or no effort to 
succeed. Such disinterest may, in part, be traced to the 
apparent indifference shown by his parents with regard to 










' H i 

























no' 




.,!■ / 'm : ■ 


o 




7 , i 




; $J ‘J 








: 


XMU-J I ■ 

■ 


■ :>. ;. 














■ i 






y 




; ;jt j 7 ‘ 7 0 Oi . < 07" : ' jVi llO 1!.; rl 77l'. 7 •) ■ .0 ‘.7'. "I ; - -i 7 * 

..7:-.; ... - ‘ : 

o:J ■« ’V.,o on o.UVJJ &tu tooths foil bojac/t 

• • ■ . . • . 1 ■ ' 7 - ■ ■ ‘ : ' 





2^4 


his school work. There is also the possibility that the 
subject, feeling himself rejected, is underachieving 
(consciously or otherwise) in order to spite his parents. 

He seems to entertain feelings of hostility for all authority 
figures and has been in trouble with the police on more than 
one occasion. 

(When the counselor visited the school five months after 
he had first interviewed this student he was told that the 
student had been expelled.) 


- 

• .: : ■ % b J y* t ’■ - ; : •■■■• : • ■<" : 




. 




. . 



















CASE NO, 14 


2l*S 


The subject is a fairly short, plump boy who wears 
glasses. He impresses one as being somewhat effeminate and 
is quite nervous. He is, however, cooperative and anxious 
to please. He is the oldest member in a family of two, there 
being a sister six years his junior. The father is a candy 
maker and is also engaged as a linoleum contractor in his 
spare time. The mother is not employed outside the home. 

The boy apparently gets along quite well with both parents, 
although he admits that he sees relatively little of his 
father, whom he regards as being "an ideal man." 

This student seems to have few close friends, and he 
admits that he does not tend to "hang out" with a group in 
the usual teen-age haunts. He enjoys playing records from 
his collection and finds movies and television to be inte¬ 
resting pastimes. He believes that he would like to be a 
social studies teacher and has received encouragement both 
at home and in school. He must improve his mathematics 
grades, however, in order to enter the matriculation program 
at school. 

This case is of especial interest because the subject 
apparently believes that he is perfect in every respect. He 
is more self-accepting than is any other subject in this 
study. It seems that if a trait is desirable, the subject 
sees himself as possessing it in the highest possible degree; 
if it is undesirable, then he does not possess it at all. 






p i ; : > V , (if 


! 




V J‘L> ‘‘J 






:ilt ’10 I'Oii 




■ v 




:;bno.L- :> 


c.:: ; • • , ... : 






niGl'S • : 

- . .... r o; • r;-.' 

cuj Oil o.:/l J. bl.uo\ 

do' d Jii - i. • ' '.J. :i 

: J • » v J: o. 

i : : j J j;j 0.t‘ - * ' ' $ 




. 


, . 

00't :' 'imtOsf; j ' 

, . 


, 


■ • . ■ : - : ' ' ' ' 


r ;>. jo ii.r JD9 X.'isa 


. 




:• ■ t - • - ' 
‘ ■ ? ' , . ' ■ • 


. . •!. " .. I./' : x - 1 'L ■ 

- • 

* 



2 l )_6 


Such statements as, "I suffer from almost nothing, tr T? I am 
very intelligent,” and T, I secretly know I could be a T brain T 
in school” reveal this attitude. It is impossible to deter¬ 
mine whether the boy actually does believe that he is quite 
perfect or whether he refuses to admit to anyone, including 
himself, that he has any weaknesses. It is apparent that 
his relations with his peers are not completely satisfactory. 




V ' 




■ 






t ■' ! - ' T; : ' 






■: ; ... , ■ . ' 










. 


; ) ‘ ... ) ; x.s • - i i ' 


jJrj’ 3i' ii^.t I 




CASE NO. 15 


The student is a sturdily built boy, with a shock of 
blond hair. He tends to be quiet but is cooperative and 
interested. This subject is the oldest member of a family 
of four boys. The father is a shipper in a meat-packing 
plant, a position which he. has held for twenty years. The 
mother is a part-time worker in a department store. There is 
some suggestion that the boy believes his parents to be 
restrictive in their dealings with him. 

The student is very much interested in sports and was 
selected for the high school football team. He admits, 
however, that he does not get along well with girls, and 
certain scores on the Guilford-Zimmerman suggest that his 
relations with his peers are not completely satisfactory. 

The boy seems to do a good deal of worrying, as is evidenced 
by very high scores on all scales of the 5RA Youth Inventory . 

The subject admist that "The future is a question mark," 
but he declares that he would like very much to go to uni¬ 
versity and take "some sort of engineering course." 

Apparently his parents have offered no advice or suggestion 
as to a possible vocational goal for the boy. 

Lack of motivation might well have exerted an adverse 
influenceupon the boy’s academic achievement. It is possible 
that holding an indefinite vocational goal would make for 
slight motivation to do well. Again, the boy is a "worrier," 






, , .. 

;<■ ■ ■ < ■: J : '• • • >• ■ • • ■ •• -*• 

I * 

. , ■ . ' ■ J . . " - •; i-'-'-t c 

•, ■ i. ‘ i. ( : : - ■ ' 

_ 

. : . r )K , r J. ,' r ; '< !. :*■ i d J i > *.iC • b 


; '• * ft .,. 1 rj: •* \ ' J . t ! '-‘ ' : '' •’ ■ •'> 

. i ' ' . . ‘ ’ . ' ■ ■ ■ ■' ; 1 • 1 ' • ■ ■* 

. 

. 

t ■ , ■ 

; ", ■ . , J : .L 1 ■" - ! ' S ‘ 1 ■ •■■■ 

. ; \ i • J iii ' ,i ■ ■ / .vcq 

■ 


2lj_8 


and such fears as he expresses in all areas of personal and 
interpersonal relations (as measured by the SRA Youth 
Inventory ), might well interfere with his ability to do well 
in school. Finally, the boy T s relations with others are not «• 
completely satisfactory* Inasmuch as academic success is at 
least partly dependent upon one’s ability to get along well 
with others, there is a possibility that a weakness in the 
area of interpersonal relations might be reflected in 
relatively low school grades* 





249 


CASE NO. 16 

The subject is a tall, slender boy. He is neatly 
dressed and is obviously concerned about his appearance. 

He is a quiet, quick, and cooperative student. He is an 
only child. Apparently the family is quite prosperous, 
and the father is credit manager for a large wholesale 
meat packing plant. The mother is not employed outside 
the home. The boy seems to be quite close to both his 
parents and feels that his father is an "ideal man." He 
believes, however, that his parents are somewhat restrictive. 

He is very much interested in sports and he has played 
on several organized hockey teams in the past few years. 

He also devotes a good deal of his time to working on an 
old car. He seems to get along well with girls and reports 
that he has a "steady" girl friend. It appears that he 
also gets along well with age mates of his own sex. 

The student is not sure what he would like to do when 
he leaves school and admits that his plans change frequently* 
He worries about his future and especially about the fact 
that he will not be accepted at university unless his high 
school mathematics grades improve. 

Several factors might be seen to be contributing to 
the boy T s underachievement« His ability in reading is 
poor, according to the results of a standardized reading test 


. 











J. 


0 


2.:i c/Ijoc ho.p.%3C)ttQ$ 


a 


0 


c 






l-j;ro L>yvt 


j' ;;r 




' 


D C* 


.! 




c 






O Cf t 


re. r o 




. 


JiXk 


.co 


. 






r.oo'H: o 






f c'r 1 ; -oo 



250 


administered at the end of the grade nine year. The family 
has moved about a good deal, and the boy has attended five 
different schools. There is a possibility that his 
education has suffered because of this fact. He appears to 
lack a genuine interest in education, and there is little 
indication that his parents are particularly dissatisfied 
with his present school progress. The fact that he has 
no clear vocational goal may make for weak academic 
motivation. 


• . ... :: •/ . \ • :j ' ' ’■ - . 

> ic ;.l ■,/ Ci. c I; i'r:. . : oc ■ tijorf:: ': cvo;: a 1 -; 

( ■ • 2 CL ! 

. 

c >*.■ . . ■ t f c ./ • 

• ....•. j.r:c‘ •• " 'a ■ x ' J c 

C ' . ■ c J: 

.0 ' f CO ; .. sj ;j: V- U> l-IU-JJC ‘ > ( V jlo o 

. 





251 


CASE NO, 17 

The student is a tall, slender, attractive boy. He is 
a slow worker and has a tendency to ask numerous questions. 

He is polite and cooperative. He is the middle child in a 
family of three boys. One brother is a year older and is 
attending school in another city because he was expelled 
from the Edmonton Public Schools. The other brother is 
two years younger than the subject. The father operates 
an appliances rental agency and the mother is a successful 
caterer. The boy is quite attached to both his parents, 
although he believes that they do not understand teen-agers 
completely. 

The boy admits that he is not 1T sports minded t? and 
enjoys less strenuous pastimes. He reveals that he has very 
few friends and blames his unfortunate tendency to talk first 
and think later. He realizes that his ff loudmouth”, as he 
explains it, has gotten him into a number of unpleasant 
situations, but he seems to be unable to curb himself. He . 
has poor relations with girls and attributes his lack of 
success in this area to his verbosity also. 

The subject wishes to become a psychiatrist because he 
is interested in the problems of others. His greatest 
worry is that he will not be accepted at university because 
of his mediocre high school grades. 



t 


t • 


iB&U 


if, 


UD 






:o. 


o 


- 


,, 


. . ; ; ' . f •••••(. 


v,l'9 r .L ■.v r s’i ■ ' 


Do 




< do : Ol 


oi 9i i'j mo r 


. • - 


j'i 


eooov 0 ' 




, : ., 9 /! 




■ . j : 




T 9 it. 


j' "i i 


JO 


9 7 


Oil !].;a;onj. 




; ■ c . -X 

■ 


:. i-'i- 


' ‘. , ‘ 9.1 J Oii.U 

U.oJ ext i o? i$»:l‘urjjr 


. 


* 


ol 


o.i 





olojoo c 


, ' ., ■ J'.loi . ... 


Jvvyvoo o oi'.oooo' o;J ooao.'i ; v;oyi,Mu. 

i 


252 


There are a number of factors which might well have 
some bearing on the subjects underachievement. He has very 
poor study habits and school attitudes, as gauged by the SSHA. 
He also admits to studying just fifteen minutes a night and 
reveals that he tends to be inattentive in class. He is not 
self-accepting, and it is obvious that in many respects he 
sees himself as being an unworthy individual. He is poorly 
socialized and has few friends of either sex. There is also 
the possibility that his relations with his parents are not 
completely satisfactory. Although he suggests that he is very 
fond of his parents, he admits that he does not feel free to 
discuss his problems with them. Possibly the frequent 
absence of the mother from the home tends to evoke feelings 
of rejection in the student. The fact that his older 
brother was also a problem student lends support to the 
contention that home conditions are not completely 
satisfactory. 


. 


: ■ l- 

• 


. 







■ 


■ i i : : 


j 




q ■ ' i,‘j: 


.. . .. 

jor: l-’j: • " 





Z',Sr .I ft; s 

ov :> .u 


, i; y,o' 

j i:. 1 


- "v 

1 < i _ ; . 





j- , 







- 






: ■■ ■ c .! • • [yj 


:■ j.l ; . o. ■: . ■ ' ;•v •; • ' : ■ 


253 


CASE NO* 16 

The subject is a boy of average height and build. 
When first met, in the company of several other boys, he 
"wisecracked” and was generally something of a nuisance. 
After a private discussion with the interviewer, he became 
more tractable, however. On subsequent occasions he was 
seen alone and was most cooperative and polite. 

The boy is the oldest member of a family of three. 
There is a brother and a sister, two and three years his 
junior, respectively. The father owns several properties 
and apparently has no other occupation than "landlord." 

The mother is a housewife. The father spends very little 
time with his family, coming home only for meals. The 
student claims that he is the only member of his family 
who is not afraid of his father. He appears to have 
identified with a maternal uncle, whom he sees as being 
almost perfect. 

The boy is interested in sports and has played on 
a number of organized teams but is, by his own admission, 
not excellent at any particular sport. He has few friends 
and believes that he is hard to get along with. His 
relations with girls are equally unsatisfactory. 

The subject is quite uncertain about his future but 
feels that he might be interested in being a garage 



x : . 


: ,-vo - •, , .. X V ,, Vi- v; : ■ ■ Ou ; X ; , 

j .• 1 .><; : : :. : J ■ o ox ■ ■ o .- v • *.c J'.i 

C ■■'■0 X ' ^ 

, 




... . Kt< 


i'v yo 


; i 


f 1 V 


■ y 


ll 1 ! 


j ; : 




j" J J'X 


' ■, rx> > , o/i • i; i r c O.'.Q. 


I UK . Vv | .1 -m ; 0 i X ; * • t >* ' 

, 'J J '. 


• u.. (i . ccl s ‘‘a 


O 


clour ox 


v : f 



mechanic. He states that his father would like him to go 
to university, but he believes that he does not possess 
the necessary ability. 

There are several factors which might have adversely 
influenced the boy f s academic achievement. His study 
habits and school attitudes are decidedly poor. The boy 
is a "worrier,” and it is noted that on the SRA Youth 
Inventory all eight scales earn scores which exceed the 
$5th percentile. His relations with his father and with 
his peers of both sexes are unsatisfactory. He has no 
clear vocational goal, a fact which might well make for weak 
academic motivation. The subject tends to be very self- 
critical and sees himself in a very poor light. The student, 
when interviewed, was on indefinite probation for several 
car thefts, and seemed to feel that others did not accept 
him freely because of his criminal record. 

(When the counselor re-visited the school five months later 
he found that this student had been expelled.) 





v. ; 


.. 1 . 


■ . - i 1 ; 


■ 

i - 

, i iC ' v .77. : ■ •' 1 c J 7 - A ; 7 





v.L v./: : v ' : 7 ioiio . > ' .1 . / - . 'a - 0*1 

: 

-■ <„ . ■. -A. a; : .. ■ J Jc; L- v i • o it • i 

fi,;: ’; 1 ' . ii ’ : ! i' . ' a. \ • o L 

: • : ?. ■ • . ' 

■ . ’ . > 0 . 

«■ a. • .; . ■ ■■ jo , ■ : j • t Bo - f ' \x , 

-a ij.xv: > : • ’ ■’ . ; '"O' L n" i io); v •i.roio 

i ' . '■ *;r \ X ...... 3* . ' .! • [, t Jj - . i jl . • / ’ Jx f i DXin&i>7‘ O Bj 

. ..... . .' a i : - 0 ’ j I'x'.i 

- • ' c ■/. ." '.a .* i.' - \ . a ■ .: v • • • ■.'. ■. •: i • o 

,v i ■ j ■■■} , .a , i.i . ;■ A... 1.0 i 07 03 ; aa ; 7>a . . '• .7' .77'a j ‘7 '<0 

, l 1 ; • i ' ' > , = i. ; .!’ 

, j lot < , i l \ *i .■'.■■■ 1 ■ >i l ■ ■ 

{ , > . . . : 












255 


CASE NO. 19 

The subject is a very sturdily built boy who is a 
member of the school football team. He is a quiet, consci¬ 
entious boy whose drawl betrays the fact that he has recently 
come to Canada from the southwestern part of the United 
States. He is the middle child in a family of three boys. 

An older brother, aged eighteen, is in university, while a 
younger one, aged fourteen, is in high school. The father 
is a drilling superintendent for an American oil company 
which has holdings in Canada, and one is led to believe that 
the family is quite well off. The mother is a housewife. 

The boy indicates that he does not enjoy particularly close 
relations with his father but believes that ”a mother is one 
of the best friends you can have.” He remarks that, Tt At home 
I don T t say much to anybody.” 

The student is very interested in a variety of sports 
and believes that he excels in several. He has few friends 
of either sex in his present school and suggests that he 
would like to have closer acquaintance with a number of his 
peers. He spends a good deal of his spare time at home, 
usually watching television or listening to the radio. He 
has belonged to few boys r clubs or organizations and declares 
that the frequent moving of his family has interfered with 
this aspect of his social development. 

The subject is uncertain as to what he will do in future 
but believes that he would like to be a psychologist. He 


. 

. . . 

< . . - ■ > ■ . ' ■ .. , ’ -V '[ ' . )M 

.'. . •• .. ' V■ " 1 

„ « .. i .. 




. .. .. . .0, < 

. -• • •- .:.0 .Oft 







• « 

■ 



i 1 ■ ■ - ; . L . ■ • • ■ 

: ,! L 0 :, '< j,ia . Li J.i *xb : 


’ ' .. .. . -U xl 


. 

. v.!.':. ! . ' .. ■ '.L. )\l .' v ' IT 

■ 

. ' • ' i •. - ■ •' ' - ' 

. * _ 1 1 ( > ' ' .. • ,• ' ■ * 

•: ‘ fj-jj■■■:> '-Si *L. . 

' ... ; . : V . . o- •, : - ■ u. L9 Of : 

... 0< fi . ■ 

(■; i.. ' . i,j i: r w,- oaoelo ov-v. o.f oLJJL LiiJOW 

. ■ . >0 . .• ..:. • • •• ' • "■ • ■- 

■ ■ „ -■ o : ■ a ■ . ■■ u. ' j ■ • 1 'O . \J - ' o 

. v •; , .. . 3 u • > .'. ' . . ) i: 

■: -0 -3: •, noLfr or.j, of ;Lf ;;,o o "OO'"' 



2^6 


explains that he met many people as he moved about 
and has become interested in them and in their problemso 
There are several factors which might have exerted 
some influence upon the boy T s academic achievement*, A low 
score on the SSHA suggests poor study habits and attitudes 
toward school• His relations with his peers are not 
completely satisfactory, and he complains that others try 
to dominate him. The boy is a "worrier”, and earns very 
high scores on six of the eight scales of the SRA Youth 
Inventory . Furthermore, it is obvious that he is not 
completely accepting of himself 0 His relations with his 
father are not particularly close and the boy may experience 
rejection in his dealings with this parent. There is also 
the possibility that his rather erratic school background 
has worked to his detriment. 




Cl's;: O' 


'Ok 




.1 !, 1 V 




d . 


O.L 

> i 1 vi 


. ; ; ‘ • 

*• c 

Ojnuni ooioto •.:oC'.- oo n . 


o eiooffi 


joaoo ytmo 


a on 




r,< :) 


kO K.i. 0 OV . O 3 


V. 






louro, :o:: "on: 







257 


CASE NO. 20 

The student is large for his age and is much more 
mature in appearance than his sixteen years would suggest. 
He is more reserved than many students but is conscientious 
and interested. He is an only child. Both parents work as 
caretakers or Janitors of buildings, and there is a sugges¬ 
tion that the boy is somewhat ashamed of his parents’ 
occupations. The student spends little time at home and 
notes that his mother worries about him excessively. He 
reveals that he was tf on the verge of being spoiled” by his 
parents. 

The subject has played in a number of sports and 
believes that he is quite competent here. He enjoys being 
out with his friends and spends a good deal of time in 
coffee shops, bowling alleys, and cafeterias. He helps his 
father clean the apartment building in which they live, 
devoting about two hours an evening to this work. Most of 
Saturday is given over to this pursuit also. 

The student is quite uncertain as to what career he . 
will follow. He is at present giving some thought to both 
electrical engineering and pharmacy. He implies that he is 
looking forward to attending university. 

Although his SSHA score does not betray the fact, the 
subject admits to having certain weaknesses in his study 
habits. He also reveals that he is not as highly motivated 
toward school as he might be, and he is uncertain as to 


















. 






: .i ’ i' • ' "V 1 .. r J 






. ■ 








• 1 ,■ •, 


* 








i [ . }■v;C:.v c: J.-.v* c<6-ivi ;t ;.■ ; J \ o Jon 


. 


. 

'>■ 


, . ' J I c . •' ’• . < • ; ; : 1 0 




• ■ ' . ;i r.. ; , .vs n ' . i . • v - ! • ! ■' : J ' 


, 

* 

■ . . : . . ) ■! X 

, 

. j ' i,. ; ■ ■ L - '.■ 


2£8 


whether he really likes school or not. He has attended a 
number of schools, and there is a possibility that his edu¬ 
cational background is not particularly strong. The boy is 
uncertain of himself. While his discrepancy score on the 
Taschuk inventories is not especially large, there are 
numerous suggestions that the subject lacks self-confidence. 
A high score on the SRA scale T? My Home and Family” implies 
that the boy’s relations with.his parents are not completely 
cordial. 




. t : 

• . . ' . : . ■ v • c ■ '■ 

.. 








, . • 1 ’ : ■, ' Vi : i. . ... 


. 

- 





. 



■ 





« 
















259 


CASE NOo 21 

The subject is very short and slight, presenting a very 
juvenile appearance. He is very cooperative and eager to 
please. He is the oldest in a family of three. He has two 
sisters, aged three and eleven. The father is a payroll 
clerk and also has a job at a local airport several nights 
a week. The mother teaches school in the mornings but is 
not employed in the afternoons. The subject does not appear to 
be especially close to either of his parents. He sees his 
father as being mean and demanding and believes that his 
mother does not fully understand him. 

The boy spends a good deal of his time away from home 
and enjoys a number of non-competitive sports. He is very 
interested in making new friends and admits that he has to 
"put up with a lot" from his peers because he is the smallest 
member in his group. There is a strong suggestion that he 
resents being discriminated against in this manner. He has 
adopted a very protective attitude toward girls and reveals 
that his closest friend is a member of the opposite sex. 

The student is uncertain as to his vocational goal. 

His parents want him to finish high school but apparently 
have no plans for him beyond this point. He has expressed 
some interest in mechanics but realizes that there are 
certain drawbacks to this field. He declares that, above all 
else, he does not want to work in a "tense atmosphere." 





c ' 1 


■ 


c 


o 


;r. 


. 


LL "I . ' ■ - T. 




O .1 


. 




.). . Oj. 


' 




o'on 


j i jc :>f 


•/ 


i-'ylrv-') bn;' 


.»b,> 


on 






I/O-A 


Xu :;)[ 


■■ ’ bxi 


j, >.l: 


u.u b j ; o ov 


i 0 


j bfir. ■■ ■ : ■■ ; 




on 9 v 0 i 4 




c,0 j .U i‘i'j 







260 


There are several factors which might have some bearing 
upon the boy’s poor academic achievement* He has poor study 
habits and attitudes toward school. He tends to worry 
excessively, and it is noted that all his scores on the SRA 
Youth Inventory exceed the &5th percentile. His relations 
with his peers are not altogether satisfactory, possibly 
because his stature causes him to receive discriminatory 
treatment. The boy’s relations with his parents are 
strained, and there is a strong possibly that the subject 
believes himself to be rejected. 






i 


j.d J:. • l J"- V Ib'Xfc/vbK; b'.£G tribA'iV 

e 


- 


_ 






■ i/yj < 


‘lS-.k * ^ b ‘IG> f - o J-.l>. jo-n c \ • b J.; J 








co" • .!" ‘ • b; Obi . 1 ;:^ 


0 ■ : : .S ' - ■,< b.i; . - ,1: o c ;rl- • ■.. 


1 1/ , 1 1 cl j 1 ;- \.U 


. 

Ajb.fbbA b 


0 i 0 ; r 


J 1 . 






26 l 


CASE NO. 32 

The subject is a short, chubby, verbose boy who appears 
to be very much at ease. He is cooperative, works quickly, 
and seems to enjoy the relationship with the interviewer* 

He is the youngest child in a family of eight, there being 
three sisters and four brothers. The father is a shipper 
for a local company, and the mother is a housewife. The 
student is very close to his next oldest brother and also 
seems to think a good deal of his mother. He feels that his 
father is "getting grumpy in his old age" and does not see 
him as an "ideal man.” 

The boy seems to enjoy very good relations with his peers 
of both sexes. He believes that he is quite good at hockey 
and also that he is quite adept at a number of other sports. 
The student is quite interested in art and spends a good 
deal of his time in sketching and drawing. He feels that 
he is popular with girls and claims that "Dating is one of 
my favorite pastimes." The boy has a police record for a 
theft which occurred about three years ago. He now 
appears to realize his error and worries about this crime T s 
prejudicing his chances for future success. 

Several factors were noted which might have influenced 
the boy*s academic achievement adversely. His study habits 
and school attitudes, as measured by the SSH4, are very poor. 


c • ; ' 




- 

. 


I. , 

- 



t 

* 

, 

J 1 . ... . v ..)• . • ■ . . - 1 

u . ' • ' ■ - - ■ ’ ■ ■ - ; 


■ 






. 












■ . 




. 



262 


He does not appear to be strongly motivated to do well in 
school. Possibly such lack of interest can be traced to 
parental indifference and to lack of a clear vocational goal. 
He is not accepting of himself and believes that he possesses 
a number of undesirable personality traits. He is inclined 
to worry a great deal. Six of the eight SRA Youth Inventory 
scales earn scores which fall above the 75th percentile. 

The disruptive influences of excessive worry and doubt might 
well make for underachievement. 




| ,, j : <; . j > N.-J 

OCi.'; bi>:.' r »', r i j a : .'O O - 



- ■ 

i *i 

J: A. Of i: 

. 


. 




i-d£Y 

.'■ 7C 


. d ■ ■ ; ' ' - 

■ - » 1 

, -_r (/; .fojj : 7vtno'x& c 
; : '.cv: : r;.i:j dcr; cu: 'f 

- • ' R : £. SJ V.- • 'l V- t ■ XX 

. 

- - 0 


J .. xn d if of) 





■ 


a 


■ . r v j ;J i “i 

v i: ;d : r iol f;ii 'i ; 1 V. ; )>';x. - 1 - >.dvi 











263 


CASE NO. 23 

This student is a slight boy, of average height. He 
is thin-faced, pale, and gives one the impression of being 
timid and defensive. He is cooperative, however, and is a 
quick worker. The boy is the oldest child in a family of 
three, and has a brother and a sister five and six years his 
junior, respectively. The father is a truck driver, and the 
mother is the manageress of a coffee shop. There is little 
group activity in the family. The subject is apparently 
quite close to his mother but makes no effort to hide the 
fact that he harbors an intense dislike for his father. 

He has few close friends and spends a good deal of 
his time reading, listening to the radio, and watching 
television. He declares that he is not good at sports and 
it would appear that his main contact with his peers is 
made through two boy ! s groups which are sponsored by the 
Army. He is paid for attending these organizations and gets 
his pocket money in this manner. The subject seems to have 
good relations with the opposite sex, and states that he has 
a TT steady” girl friend. He believes that he would like to 
be a lawyer and hopes that the expenses involved in obtaining 
legal training will be paid by the Army. 

A number of factors must be considered as having 
possible relevance to the boy T s underachievement 0 His study 
habits and school attitudes are not completely satisfactory. 





* ..! 


•i ,J>' 










• 5 ') V ' ;V . c 0 / £ , 




* 1 







. 





! I ’ ' 






i 


o £o oxtxiip 


f. ’ '. ;' 1 1 .• 1. ■ ;> 






I. i‘.J. 




0 


{ 1 j 


c * 


J-,.o r , ; ; • i' (.< . j .i-/ < \ Loo, r ■■ * , tip/. : u 


I : - C : :: (.( > f I , /li 0 , : p ‘ Ml 0X7 oi 


J' • c' i to i"i P>.«. > t P . OG'I 


0 '.i . 




't/i 


U.!„ ■ 


5 . • ■ ' <■ • ' 


005 




v' l i .7 




i iO 



. p ■. I ; 




v ■ • j v ■ . i • ■ 


h\:: C j i/O.S.. 


f 






264. 


He is self-critical and feels that he is a very unworthy 
individual in many respects. He has unsatisfactory relations 
with his peers, and it is apparent that his relations with 
his parents, and especially with his father, are not at all 
cordial. He believes that his mother is too demanding, and 
states that she never seems to be satisfied with his academic 
prowess. It is the belief of the interviewer that the 
subjects maladjustment - personal, social, emotional, 
and academic, can be traced to poor relations with his 
parents. 


. 

i 

. 

.j iJ. a 

. 

o~q.. 



■ 

:• 



. . 

. 


' q.:1:1. il 

‘ f ■ * 

• >Q : 



' / : • -r ■ 5 ■ ‘a : .: :::: 1 ;£<q :. v i“'q ... a I 

c 

o ;• ;' -o - ' 1 .' : ;• ; • i. j r. % *- / 1 i o I •' "• . 

< ! i« , ' 0 < ■ c . . T! - •• : ',1 '•* : ' ' ' '< 

i :,oil "i 'Si O C < : : >0 '1.1 : V> 0 c :> 1. Of. 0 ' i HB 



265 


CASE NO. 24 

This student is of average height, but is quite heavily- 
built. He is friendly, cooperative, and a quick worker. 

He impresses one as being quite intelligent. He is the only 
child in his family. His father died many years ago and the 
boy has no recollection of him. The mother re-married, and 
the boy seems to accept his step-father completely. This 
parent is a welder, and the mother operates her own grocery 
store. There are few group activities. The parents have 
a large collection of classical records and spend a good 
deal of their time in listening to them. There is no 
car or television in the home. 

The student is not interested in participating in 
sports, and most of his partimes are those in which he can 
participate as a sepctator. He states that he enjoys 
being out with his friends but also likes to spend some 
evenings home with his parents. He thinks that certain of 
his peers take advantage of him and he sees himself as being 
Tt too soft." There is a strong possibility that his relations 
with girls are not satisfactory. 

The boy is uncertain as to what occupation he will 
follow when he leaves school. He feels that he would like 
to be either a welder, a mechanic, or a lab technician. 

He declares that his parents are little interested in his 
future plans for they feel that he will change his mind 


- ; ./ .••. : :c *.a v ‘ :< ■ ; r.s. : .i 

: 

[Jj ' ■ . J:.. 

. 

- • ... c 

. 









c '• 







gv 



. 


1 






: :r 1 

* 



r t 


’JC 

,.:a 



. 


J ! 






on ...• 


a 















* 









. 



CO id-3 ■ 












i ■ ) 

u ;.l r r o ± chy 

i / 









< ■ 

















r ;/ 


■ u i ■' 



- 



. 

; d 

o <' 

r.r-M 


* ' • C 

r 

I:-- -' 

* • ■ ' :. • 

, ,U: . oxo ' •] -u ;l yiv o;l ■ ?, ■ , j yi: \ocT ariV 

. 

.' •' 1 .. ■ ■ .■ ■' c v- : 

' ;t l ■ ' ' Z ... 




266 


as he has many times in the past*. He feels that his parents 
would like him to go to university, although he admits that 
his father has threatened to take him out of school if his 
grades do not improve. 

There are a number of factors which might possibly be 
exerting an adverse influence upon the boy*s academic 
achievement. The boy tends to be self-rejective and critical, 
believing that he has a number of undesirable traits. He 
has no clear vocational goal, a fact which may make for 
weak academic motivation. Seeming parental disinterest may 
also be a factor in the boy T s underachievement. Finally, 
his study habits and school attitudes, as revealed by the 
SSHA, are poor. 


» 

, . ' ■ c . ■ ' ' 

r’j.:.;' y. ( '0/1;)i; lo JWO A.hi o'—h o.'j borxe^fr.e f lu:j' 


■ 

. 

: 



: -x jo, ; r - 


•> 

* 

V o. 

v ■ ho j. 


' i..i; i .. Jv 'I;:-' h- i. i \ - ■: oo 

T 

’ 

. 

; v- ' • f o.O, ' •- 1 ■ : . a ' 

./■/ \'i r j..A ! ; :» 

V ■ ■ 5 



267 


CASE NO. 25 

The student is a tall, well-built boy, who is quite 
good-looking. He is very deliberate, reticent, and smiles 
very rarely. He is not sullen, however, but rather gives 
the impression that he takes a very serious view of the 
testing and interviewing procedure. The boy is the oldest 
child in a family of four. His siblings range from four to 
twelve years in age. The father is a shipper for a furniture 
company, and the mother sometimes sells cosmetics about 
the neighbourhood. The student does not see his father as 
being an Tt ideal man” but admits that he wuld like to spend 
more time in his company. He notes,” A mother is supposed 
to be able to love her children”. He does not believe that 
his parents fully understand young people but he does not 
suggest that he disagrees with them seriously. 

The subject is interested in sports and believes that 
he is quite proficient in hockey and football. He seems to 
have a number of friends but feels that others do not accept 
him completely. He tends to be suspicious of the actions 
of others and feels that his age mates and parents are too 
critical of his actions. His relations with girls appear 
to be quite friendly. 

Several factors might be considered as having some 
influence upon the boy*s academic achievement. His study 







. 




o <, 


i* 


jilVVIKic; Oil 




Ol;. 


t 




'Of 


! 


:p i: v, 




c 


0 ' .!' : ;0 1 >i; .nOfi-.XO ' ’O 




OD 


' 





c 


l.u r : :i() A r; voO 


7 0 L > J .') .0 ■ •. : OJ 


Jy . ob J" ■ . j. C . J’O 




:) 


0 


C ( 


d; ' 


-y ;f) 


JfX< 


;■> 




r ?;;).i! j>x b v::c :i 1! 






c 





268 


habits and school attitudes are exceptionally poor. He may 
lack motivation to do well in school because he feels that 
he will not be permitted to follow that vocation which 
interests him most. The boy is interested in electronics 
but believes that his father will want him to go to univ¬ 
ersity. The subject f s relations with his peers are not 
ideal. While he evinces a strong desire to be accepted, he 
also reveals a basic hostility and suspiciousness. His 
relations with his parents also leave something to be desired. 
He does not accept his father completely and there is a 
strong suggestion that he is even more estranged from his 
mother. There is a possibility that he receives little 
attention from his mother, who is undoubtedly very busy 
with her younger children and her part-time employment, and 
he may view this disinterest on her part as rejection. 


t 


-LOOilOcV i £T£ 


( j iov C O’.i l:OX ’• v X JO. 


; ; c ,'x': jx j. xoxioj x.x i: ex.: ■ • ><■ jox •- • 

j ' X C 1 ■ ■ • - 

■ 

* 

xx... IX;x OX. xx J o bnb vJ ixx jx x'.X OXx xx :■ X- • 


: • 'XX • J.. ; r ■ XX ) X' XL LX; , x.; ' . . 


x‘ix.u;.; !u'x y.U' j '.ixxxoo 


' > )•; x v; j : ■ xxo ' 'xx 


: 1 


X 0 9 OX O.X 


ixx x x xx 


X 


3 


Y3IKf Y r x 


JLfOlxti X ) i c X 


O.],: 






j; ;.-o\ oxx. 


. ' ( :,0* 


u , C" 






269 


CASE NO. 26 

The subject is a tall, good-looking boy who is quite 
sturdily built. He is very easy to work with and is inter¬ 
ested and cooperative. He is the younger child in a 
family of two, having a sister three years his senior. The 
father is a civil servant, and as the parents are divorced, 
little was said about the mother. The boy, his father, and 
his sister have lived with his paternal grandmother for 
fourteen years. “While the subject does not reveal any 
animosity toward his father it is obvious that he is not 
especially close to this parent. He believes that his 
father is not especially interested in his school progress 
and he tends to discuss his problems with his grandmother. 
He admits that he regrets not having a mother. 

The boy is not adept at sports but enjoys watching 
various games being played. He likes being with a crowd 
of teen-agers but does not believe that he is especially 
popular. He spends quite a bit of his time in working oh 
an old car which he owns. He also devotes a good deal of 
his free time to television. It is diffifult to assess 
the success of his heterosexual relationships, although 
it appears that he is quite at ease in the company of 
girls. 

He is very uncertain as to what he will do when he 





( 


s 






t 


:( :/! hjt 0 h \;:.0 




C " 


t 





' 


■ 


■ ■ f 




; ?•' (■; ) ; 


O 


_! 




; O 


Lch do 


O^rU-iO ;tO f l < 4 l 


* 




•j"; 


J, i ' ' : •/ :i . ~ J'i 


1 .) 


! 


)'. • ) C |[i 


0 0 






.. J 


V 


j { IT. 


■ ) . C) ‘io 


.. 



. 


ci •. 




d/ J'iO 


c 




, ( 


f T 






> ■ l o i 'j 








270 


leaves school* He admits that he has been interested in 
"everything" at one time or another. At present he feels 
that corporation law might prove to be interesting. 

There are several factors which might have exerted 
some influence upon the boy T s academic achievement. He 
has no clear vocational goal, and it is held that such 
indecision regarding his life T s work might well make for 
poor academic motivation. There is reason to believe that 
he is not especially happy at home. He regrets not having 
a mother and may view her absence as evidence of rejection® 

His relations with his father are cordial but not particularly 
close, and he makes several references to the fact that he 
cannot get along with his sister. The boy may well have 
convinced himself that no one is especially interested in 
his progress and he may have decided to decided to give 
up trying to do well in school. 





i. Oi t:< * x 






it 


:i .'b >4J 


f V0< 


0-0 


; 1 


C 







o,:ob 


i 


oJ tlo: 




0 0 


. '« 



;:hc.: 


:: 






O.L: 


' 10.1 



oa'iy ni: 



271 


CASE NO. 27 

The subject is a fairly tail, thin boy who is plainly 
dressed. He is slow and quiet but is always interested and 
cooperative. The student is the oldest child in a family 
of two, there being a girl two years his junior. The 
father is a worker in a government warehouse, and the 
mother is head of a department in a large store in the city. 
The boy seems to enjoy close relations with both parents 
and regrets that he sees so little of them. The family has 
moved about quite frequently, and the boy is presently 
attending his sixth school. 

The student is interested in many sports, although he 
does not believe that he excels at any. He likes to read 
and estimates that he reads two novels a week. He enjoys 
radio and television and attends meetings of a boys* group 
which is sponsored by a local service organization. His 
relations with members of the opposite sex are summed up in 
the statement, n I don r t care much for girls. n 

The boy is very uncertain as to his occupational goal. 
He has entertained thoughts of being an electrical or a 
mechanical engineer but admits that he has little idea as to 
what is involved in either occupation. He has not as yet 
discussed his future with his parents. 

A number of factors present themselves as having some 
bearing on the subject r s underachievement. Although the 


i 1 j 


: ?.X. X''X 


31 J-XOUyiiX :&flx 


D 0 J 0 


. 


.r ' 


; « ■ • ; 1 ; 


. 

• . , , , • , i 0 ' ■ ' " ■ ^ ; 

C'd onoxd'oio'i 'eouio \o(,.n©s od yoe.( orti 

o )ii;] «.-■■■■: • -> '• M ' ! ■ ■"*: - 1 1 r 

; . ' , , ■ Jj ! { ■ •; i : rt,-o />:' 7". : J 0 ' U>" 

! ( , ' ! ' : ’ .( ■ ; ■ ; t.i )V : <i J 


a; 


i,u; i;. 


rl 


n o\l Diri 

; 


'", X V r [ i O' ; 6 X, ' ) ■' X;, ' I i> ri j 




■o'! ooo 


' : 1 i 




OXu 




9 0 ? . 




' ' iOC; ' " ’ ' ' . 

. ' ; ", 3 . . ' ; V - - 

y-. i-O rd ?'■' :'rx:y .i' 1 o,; da i~x -aa oox a..;, 'C' ; - 

■ 

■ ; ■ 

>o ' ■' 

. 

, , anid/Ofi '00 XjVlOtiXOdo x'f. iVX O © J IC ; e^XO^O©’! '!tO d,0!U# A‘ 



272 


boy’s study habits, as measured by the SSHA, are quite good, 
there are indications that the student is relatively weak in 
this area. He notes on several occasions, for example, that 
he finds it difficult to concentrate on his work. It would 
appear that the boy’s relations with his agemates are not 
completely satisfactory. There is a suggestion, for example, 
that he is submissive but that he harbours hostility toward 
others. The subject has moved about a good deal, and there 
is the possibility that his earlier education left something 
to be desired. Weaknesses in certain fundamental areas 
might well be making their appearance at a time when school 
work is becoming considerably more difficult. The boy has 
no clear vocational goal, and it is held that such indefi- 
niteness of plans may well make for poor academic motivation. 





••• V. ; ' . - : ' •. •• 




. ,-v.J. '/ j. • oj. r- i 9‘vaj.j 


^ \ t i • 0 '.' : r. o 

'} , 1 ■ ■' : khv: V 4 n ' ' 

j< s. ,• I .' . .> '. r-‘ : J ~‘v ■' 1 : • 


< - . : , ■ ' • : >- / ■ . * ■ 

:■ : . \ , ■ .• . : .■ ■ . ' ■ • ■ ■ • ' •• 

, . b- • > • : . /:• - •' o.v. •• -ii-.io 

r ax;} :i;>j -.I, \ . - ■■ 

i . ■ ' ^ ■■ : : X < u/ 

loo/ioa vn.xj z -d's xo : i-.x ‘..:.r.oriJ gn .?*;«#& $>d IJxn: $rt#Ls& 

. . . ' - i ' 


•• ; J . ! U'ii ■ „ : '' o . ■ . ' - ' -'■ '• ' '• ' * '' / ‘1 ‘‘ 

.. . . i ' i. ■ ' .- ■ 





273 


CASE NO. 2$ 

The student is rather slight, and is of average 
height for his age. He is quite reserved but is not 
uncooperative and, when the purpose of the study had been 
explained to him, was most willing to do what was 
expected of him. He is the middle child in a family of 
three boys. An older brother is a school teacher, and 
a younger one, aged six, is in elementary school. The 
father is an insurance adjustor and apparently fares 
quite well, financially. The mother is not employed 
outside the home. The student thinks a great deal of 
his father, but is much more reserved regarding his 
affection for his mother. He implies that he meets with 
a good deal of criticism at home and suggests that his 
mother is the author of it. 

The boy had rheumatic fever when he was very young 
and, at the doctor 1 s suggestion, he has avoided all 
strenuous sports. He enjoys spectator sports, however, . 
and is very happy when in the company of his peers. He 
wants to be accepted by his age mates, but believes that 
his bad temper and impatience work to his detriment. He 
feels that his relationships with girls are not especially 
cordial and wishes that they might be improved. 

The student seems to be quite certain as to what he 
will do in later life. He would like to attend college 





( .. 1 'u.!' i ; t .br;© 1 \ - 







& ;i t> k" 


LC ■ •• :)'■ 




< 




( 


! ;J* • '- ! - 


o..u' v ^v ;k>n v..- J't. 


•: i 

( - 




i : , 






C'i 


; ;! r i i f.f ' OHOi'.- 








CH' 




>o;, 1 < ; * J '• t .h U 










o it 


V DiiE 


c ■ 




. , - ’ ;r 


j .i. ' v -X 0.0 J i 1 .Xvj 0 J‘ . -' V 



271 ). 


and obtain a degree in commerce. He believes that he would 
then like to make a career in real estate. 

Two factors present themselves as having some 
possible influence upon the boy’s academic achievement. 

It is apparent that he has poor study habits and school 
attitudes, as these are measured by the SSHA. Of more 
importance, perhaps, is the fact that his relations at 
home are very unsatisfactory. He sees himself as being 
the recipient of a good deal of criticism and feels that 
his mother does not understand him completely. There is 
a suggestion that he feels her demands upon him are un¬ 
reasonable. 

(On a later visit to the school, a counselor noted 
that, by the time this boy had reached the mid-point of 
the grade ten year, his disinterest in school had 
degenerated into "complete apathy.") 


. „r \ " ' ' " '' - • 

, „f. 

.. .. - '■ : ■ - 1 
, ; , .. •>: ■■ •••• ■ { ! . ; 5 : : ' 

j. ; H ' i • L', i •O.- — ■ '•' .4 J - 

; . .. . - • ■■ • • •" / ' V-'^ ' 

• ; : ■ \:/:• ' ■ c 1 ' c • ■ ; 1 

_ 

. 

; :,;j •; , i. ; ..-y.cD.'c j.Wo ’>0 U'9u boO;, : i« HJ.O >’I 

c - • _ :) * 0 0 'a -v Oi . ! 


5 r I 




m>X$BiK&VZ B 


Jb --' o v.'i ; I V '. \ ^ *t / i } \ \ " ~. J 


.0 J : i Jlv 


. ( i • . ). ‘ C 


d; 


; ;.n 


.... 


• i i. :t 


X :. d ; ■' ' . - - | ‘"- 

[» - •{•, .... odru - ; 


275 


CASE NO. 29 

The subject is a tall, slender boy who wears 
glasses. He is very talkative, friendly, and cooperative. 
He is an only child. The father is a clerk in a super¬ 
market, and the mother is a housewife. The boy seems to 
enjoy close relations with his parents, and this is 
especially so in the case of the father. 

He is not especially interested in strenuous sports, 
but feels that he excels at bowling and billiards. His 
relations with his peers of the same sex appear to be quite 
satisfactory, but he is shy and ill at ease in the company 
of girls. 

The student is uncertain as to what vocation he will 
follow on leaving school, but expresses some interest in 
architecture or engineering. The boy likes draughting 
and feels that he would like to follow a profession in 
which he could make use of it. Apparently the parents 
have not as yet suggested what career they would like the 
boy to follow. 

It is difficult to determine what factors might be 
related to this subjects underachievement. It appears, 
however, that he is too self-accepting. While it is 
obviously desirable for an individual to accept himself, 
it is equally desirable for him to be self-critical to 
a certain extent. The student gives one the impression 



■ ' i: . '©I 

. 

.j; j;; i.i. ‘ ", .,r, o c A . < ; ' . ■ ; " -• ' O' ’ o ‘ ■ ■ ;; 

j i ■ . ■ ■ ■ ;• , 0 ■ • ■: •: . J/ : ■ c • ■ ' • ' 

■i ■ i. : . ■' ■ L' ( - ■ J .. ‘ U ' : ', ■ ' ' .'Of O ' 

» 1 > L ■ ‘ 


.) < J ; j;.' r;',n'\0v',' 0 ■ J v: wri. ‘ “ ‘>.1 jr- ;j i.VP 

r 'v • ■ . 0 .i ; ■ ‘1 j; ’ ? ; • ’ 

' ' ■ 'J. : 'i . ;■ ;; : J ■ J : j L ;»C- i - ■: ? • ' (\ 1 

,0* ,■ o , 

■ ;) j J .< ■ ..o- . ' o '•: J ' 



276 


that he has no problems or worries in any areas, personal 
or interpersonal. Either the boy does believe that he 
is near perfection in most respects or else he wishes to 
give the impression that this is the case, refusing to 
admit to others, and possibly to himself, that he has 
certain weaknesses and deficiencies. Whichever inter¬ 
pretation of the facts is correct there would seem to be 
little hope for improvement until the student learns to 
evaluate himself more realistically. 




C\.i V 


>1 .! .1 , 




Jo\ 


,, j: 'it! rr> ;; - ■ - f ' 

* 

, j; . ■ e .• : ■ 

; j » .... . ■ - '■ . * '- . i 

- . j; .. » iri 0VJ :MVX if.X&b >t R VA BBl r:-> / l C .v,-:'-' 

;• . r v . ■* ; .-'"I ;\'J u .J .:‘s:.v : i-'° 




i J j. i 


j \ '£ 


i o 








‘XD1. Vl -. i;- ■ ^ ‘.V3 













277 


CASE NO. 30 

The subject is a tall, thin, immature-looking boy. 

He is very plainly dressed. Although friendly and coopera¬ 
tive, the student is quite nervous and seems to find it 
impossible to relax completely. He tends to keep up a 
patter of conversation as he works and probably would like 
to give one the impression that he is quite sophisticated. 
He is the oldest child in a family of four and has two 
brothers and a sister. The father is a foreman at a 
chemical plant by day and accepts other employment at 
night. The mother is a bookkeeper at the same industry 
which employs her husband. The family engages in few 
group activities, and the boy tends to pass up infrequent 
picnics and family outings as being ”too tame.” He sees 
his father as being "the nicest guy in the world,” but 
suggests that his relations with his mother are not so 
cordial. 

The student had rheumatic fever when quite young and 
has no particular interest in strenuous sports. He enjoys 
less physically demanding pastimes, such as reading, shoot¬ 
ing, and being entertained by the radio and television. He 
seems to have few close friends of his own sex and age, and 
it is obvious that he has practically no contact with 
members of the opposite sex. The subject receives a very 


, 

. 

- 

■ 

. 

... C ' ../ >;*; . ■ ...... 

' 

■ 

Ol 0 ' 

i. 1 . . ! • 








{ 

•„.. <.. . , ■ ■' t . v ‘ ; r : v>l i ; 1 .- ' 


j „ ., ... ... V ; •: / i) ■ ■ ■ ■; 




. . 














278 


small allowance and complains that he is "broke" most of 
the time. Such lack of funds might explain his recent 
unsuccessful attempt to steal and sell car accessories. 

The boy feels that he would like to be a civil 
engineer, although his parents haven 1 t agreed on this 
vocation. His family has moved about a great deal, and the 
boy would prefer an occupation which would cause him to 
travel extensively. 

Several factors might be seen as exerting some 
influence on the student 1 s academic achievement. He has a 
low score on the SSHA, a fact which suggests that his study 
habits and school attitudes are poor. He is disinterested 
in school and reveals that he would stop at once, except 
that he does not wish to disappoint his father. His 
relations with his peers are unsatisfactory, a fact which 
the boy attributes to certain undesirable personality traits 
which he possesses. His relations with his parents are 
quite casual. The parents appear to be quite self-centered 
and show no great interest in the boy f s progress at school. 
Finally, there is a possibility that the subject is not 
completely well. He makes frequent reference to being tired 
and it might well be that his early illness has left him 
with a permanent disability. 



C <■ 









: i 


i. '• 




.':v 


f." O' 7 


O ' 



< ■ 


I 




, I 0 D . . 




£' 




XD O' 0 s- 


; r;' ’ I 


J 


0 





( 






\ ; V 1 £ 


j too 


S X". 


'o:i 


00: 



t. ■ ' ! - 


• x I i. d.: 


;:.U) 



go 




I OXC; 


oil . J: 






o: • 





i i 






279 


CASE NO. 31 

The subject is a tall, slim, boy who gives one the 
impression of being alert and n wide awake." He is 
cooperative, quick, and very interested in the work at 
hand. He is the oldest member of a family of four, and has 
two brothers and a sister. His siblings 1 ages range from 
three to fourteen. The boy and all the members of his 
family, with the exception of the sister, were born in 
England. The family has lived in Canada for about six 
years. The father is a surgeon and the mother is a 
housewife. The subject believes that his father is very 
strict and he also suggests that his mother is not as 
understanding as he might wish. 

He is very much interested in sports and has played 
on several junior high school teams. The boy devotes about 
twelve hours per week to delivering papers, an activity 
which he claims is his "favorite pastime." 

He is very uncertain as to what he will do when he - 
leaves school but he "thinks" he may be interested in 
civil engineering© His parents have never discussed his 
future plans with him and he has no idea what career they 
would like him to pursue. 

There are a number of factors which might have some 
bearing on the boy T s poor academic achievement© He is 


ii ' ! 


')' H; 




i '! ' V 0< 








a 3(i.. t... ; ; , r : 


o.. 


V' <■' . ■ i , : I.J ; J. 

an r,± ‘.k 11 J’Oiii i.t 


00 f ul?8 • On 


n.Lcn| 

0 


KOJOVO. 


.!'! anon;.- 

* YOCl Oil?' 


7 X 0 ’ 0 X 3 fj 


sir,; e 




i ;._l . . ■; . :/nx -J. 1 '.: a/in-/ -:>u 

* ; Lit j: . 

: , j;a : •: . ; < j nonv; anar annon ^vlavn:;' 

ld r i. i lO'V'i^x n £|a si a■■:*> ,:*_o arl .rfD;|i^ 

a an -o.nnLii : a a J.a Iconos aavBelj 

* a: J:vJ. o 

on a an- r-'n.; irx . .• acral ; oa; a ityi 


280 


obviously a "worrier" and earns very high scores on seven 
of the eight problem area scores on the SRA. Youth Inventory . 
His study habits and school attitudes, as measured by the 
SSHA, are not particularly good. The student quite freely 
admits that he lacks interest in school. He suggests that 
most of the boys in his class are "fun loving," so the 
possibility exists that his underachievement is related to 
the standard of achievement set by his peers. He has 
attended numerous schools (fourteen by his own estimate) 
in Canada and in Britain, and such a diversity of school 
offerings may well have adversely affected his education. 

The student is not self-accepting and believes that he 
possesses a number of undesirable personality character¬ 
istics. His relations with his peers are unsatisfactory, 
a fact which he attributes to certain of his objectionable 
traits. Finally, it is quite obvious that his relations 
with his parents are not especially cordial. The boy 
sees his father, especially, as being quite strict, 
demanding, and unapproachable. 




t 1 ij *. -J vf.J UUS • >J ,i_U i$.u. v • V ; 

* ' < ' 

* 

‘ t 

Joo^-ov-'CCoo.L CoCo c o:o v,i.: r ?. -oc'. 

, 

'«•,;! L .t^ae 5 f ? 7 c r Lr( vo .• ) 777 : f )3 p;;?/•: sc arc oavnockrB 

. 

c : , ' ! ;i i: ; ,-v •■J. r o><C U3 eoc: C '■<■ d'u& 0 . w 0 9-*>i co /C'c 

. 

* 

CC;OvJ.CO/of,OC -K '• 77 ■ ' ..7 7 CO' 0 C ‘>'1 /V/.C 77 ‘ wA ^ : •• ^ 

, ■ ' 0 ' •' ' ■ ' ' ' ' 

; ,:;C , 

, v Co 0 f :rjr pc ' ' p 5 r ' oc / 0 ‘C/'' : W eeen 

C ; ■ 0 00 0 -' ' 



281 


CASE NO, 32 

The student is a short, sturdily built boy, who is 
very neat in appearance. He is cooperative but apparently 
finds it difficult to concentrate and he is not a partic¬ 
ularly fast worker. He is the younger child in a family 
of two; and his brother is about four years his senior. 

The father is manager of a wholesale grocery firm, and the 
mother is a housewife. The family lives in one of the 
better residential areas of the city. 

The boy is very interested in sports and is very 
good at a number of them. He seems to enjoy relatively 
good relations with his peers of the same sex but, it is 
obvious that he has very little to do with girls 
socially. 

He declares that his future is n pretty well decided™, 
and he is quite sure that he wants to enter a bank when 
he has finished his grade twelve. His parents have given 
their assent to this plan but would also be quite happy 
if the boy decided-to attend university. They do not 
appear to be urging the latter course of action upon him, 
however, 

A number of factors were noted which might have some 
bearing upon the boy f s academic achievement. His low 
score on the SSHA suggests poor study habits and school 
attitudes. He is not especially interested in school and 





•:/ .. t ■ '. C.’: g: G <, goo.: o : io j Go; 

■ • 1 ■ * ; 

~0.‘ J •... ',< G'G'OO GO 0 ' .. i. : oi'GOGnVGO ii ’) - GGg O.'GiG.r G 0\C tf-bnji'2 




O 




<; 


LC 


o o: go:., '.gggg 


O oi 








■> i, 






<■ ' 


0 . 0000.0000 -'GO' , 





x ; Jjj. iOO 


. 






' 


r i;; 


. 


o Go • ' o I jj/o,- rG <. . : ; ' -o'-'G G G.o: oo g G;.'j- 

Goo: oi:< -vo:iT <ooG : : o .o'o i Gno jo oG GoG *-o ■ ivoJ odG j;i: 

t ■: 0 1 0 ; O.o OOOGG . Go ■ O. \0 ■: o: j ‘GO ■■ G' j. G,G ' \0' O;'! .O0‘ G' 0 GG 

. ■ 

o 

g : i . I'niGo; io. gc ■ o,ovj *tc■ J'o'ox g> OOGnxra i 

!, V.OG 0 0 * , ■ ; . ■: ' G; 'O' ■ & f \"'■ d ; ' < J.; ; > . 

.ioodoo j g c.c)-J:fir.a v;i jj jo aooq. nGoo; qoo :gg. o.dct no onooe 




282 


does not appear to be particularly well motivated 
academically• His relations with his father may be some¬ 
what strained. The subject seems to think highly of 
this parent but suggests that he does not feel free to 
approach him with his problems. He tends to worry a 
great deal about school, a fact which might have an 
adverse influence upon his academic progress. Finally, 
the boy finds it extremely difficult to concentrate. 

He makes frequent reference to his tendency to daydream 
although it is believed that such inattention is but a 
symptom of a more deep-seated problem - one which 
possibly centers about the boy’s home relationship. 




c 




cJ'on • o 



c. 




xcK „toiiw 


j : [ 


Do ..;j\ 


J 






) 


f so 1.1 r.’MJ: 


■i.rxj 


%> (•) ( 


: 0 


oil 


: r ;.t 


. : 


r 10L ' < 1 l J 


. . . 




283 


CASE NO, 53 

This student is a short, dark, chubby boy. He is 
quiet, slow, and reasonably cooperative. There is a 
reticence about him that makes it impossible for one to 
feel completely at ease when in his company. He is the 
younger of two children, having a sister one year his 
senior. He seems to be on close terms with his parents 
and is especially fond of his father. This parent is the 
branch manager of a farm equipment firm and apparently 
does quite well financially. The mother is a housewife. 

The boy is very much interested in sports, and notes, 
"The best thing I do is play sports.” He appears to enjoy 
quite cordial relations with boys of the same age but 
obviously has little social contact with girls. He has 
no hobbies and devotes little time to reading. He belongs 
to just one organized group, the Air Cadets. He has no 
paying job, and apparently few demands are made on his time 
by his parents. 

The subject has given a good deal of thought to 
animal husbandry as a career and seems to have a reasonably 
clear idea as to what is involved in this vocation. Pre¬ 
sumably his parents have given their consent to this choice 
of occupation by their son. 

Several factors might be considered as having some 






. 



. 

. . . . • . 5 wvV.C . : S 

;,-o 

. 



'. X / ' c \ - L: 







« 





. 



' 

) ' . ■ '.t 

c . : t , . 

4 

. V> >’ 

* 

* 

. <) >• ' '* ' J , 

o e r vs" ..'x . , :'-n, vA-d'C^l 

- .. , - v ' v . i /..v;.;.. i: u r Jx-r f' n •• >.■- ft;.- 'X.^Xo 

. 

■ .., , ... ' . t . i . . o ..' ■ 'v.c- ■ . . "J 


*X 



281*. 


influence upon the boy f s academic achievement. He has poor 
study habits and attitudes toward school, as shown by a low 
score on the SSHA. He admits that he finds it extremely 
difficult to concentrate and that he daydreams a good deal. 
The boy is a "worrier” and has earned quite high scores 
on those SRA scales which he finished. He does not appear 
to be particularly interested in school. While he realizes 
that an education is of great importance in life, he does 
not suggest that he enjoys the educative process. Finally, 
while his relations with his peers and parents seem to be 
quite cordial, the Guilford-Zimmerman survey indicates that 
he possesses a number of personality traits which might 
work to his advantage in interpersonal relations. 


. 

>0. . .. -I ■' c J. c 

, 1 in ... ... . . ' - - t. 


cJ J:: .. £ j; .. ... ;ot . . 

■ ■ ■■ — . '■ 

:;V'i c> ■:) ;; .v", t . c: ■’ u :-u s ..r J' . ■.' ^ < 

. 

C . . . 





285 


CASE NO. 34 

The student is of average height but is slightly- 
built. He is a pleasant, cooperative boy and is much inter¬ 
ested in this study. He is the younger child in a family 
of two, and has a married sister about seven years his 
senior. The father is a television technician and the 
mother is a housewife. The student seems to be on quite 
close terms with both of his parents, although he suggests 
that he would take his problems to his mother first for 
his father tends to worry excessively. 

He is not interested in taking part in sports but 
enjoys a spectator role. He is very fond of television 
and estimates that he spends about five hours a day on 
this medium of entertainment. An additional hour daily is 
devoted to the radio. He appears to have few close friends 
and states that "watching TV" is the activity which he 
enjoys most. He has very little contact with members of the 
opposite sex, socially. 

The boy is quite uncertain as to what he will do 
when he leaves school. He believes that he would be inter¬ 
ested in an apprenticeship of a mechanical nature, but 
declares that his father would like him to be an electrical 
engineer. He admits that he does not know what is involved 
in either of these fields. 


A number of factors were noted which might have some 







:i O' 


oc 


i; »o r:ro 


0 ; 


. ( 


do <•: (' : .f mOo or. (• Co 


< 20 .. ;i • \f > ; e ; p . sj { o;i 


i : 0 


I }v J: r; o o 


j J 


r ■' j; y _f r Oj 




■ 


nc 0 0 ' * ;i ■ 




:>;)]; r[ -j j; f ■ ;*! : ■ /r ' 0 :■ 


' 


) ; 


do-doo o 




. 


? 


O'. CTO 


co rj;j ■ ;}.d d -oiv/ o;l o. " • 


j 

i < 7 L ■ o f. f.r-‘ /'• o o -"dd; ooi:d o..\> ; ro o.: oodoO 

- 

O' j j\ c j d " • 1 o; d n: booh • ■ 0- •. d d:.j: 1 c on 



286 


influence on the subject 1 s academic achievement. He has a 
low score on the SSHA, suggesting poor study habits and 
attitudes toward school. He frankly admits that he has 
no interest in going to school. He has no clear vocational 
goal, a fact which might well make for weak academic 
motivation. He states that most of his friends do not do 
well in school and there is a suggestion that he may be 
doing poorly so as not to exceed the standard of performance 
which his peers deem to be desirable. Possibly the most 
important factor is the very poor opinion which the subject 
has of himself. He is very self-critical and believes that 
he possesses numerous undesirable and unworthy personality 
traits. If, for example, the student has convinced himself 
that he is not clever, not studious, and is not well-liked 
by his teachers then it is obvious that he has provided 
himself with an excellent excuse for underachieving. 


o 


T 


.CO 


( 0 : 




0 , 0 , 


j. ' i o ov' -tuo oi 


c f 


n.<; 


o\ 


OO'jcii c 




O oT- Oi . o' 


j■: o; ; 




■OiVOO, 




C o 


:c 








287 


CASE NO. 35 

The subject is a boy of average height and build. He 
has a "serious" look about him which might lead one to 
believe that he is quite a studious person. Subsequently 
it was found that this was not the case. He is interested 
in the work at hand, however, and was attentive and 
cooperative during the course of the study. The boy is an 
only child. His father is a commercial traveller and spends 
most of the week away from the home. The mother has a full¬ 
time job as a linoscribe operator and is away from the home 
all day. The child sees relatively little of his parents 
and admits that there are few family group activities. He 
seems to think quite highly of his parents but reveals that 
he does not feel free to discuss his problems with them. 

The boy does not care for strenuous sports and seems to 
have very little contact with his peers. He admits to having 
few close friends and explains that there are few boys his 
age in his neighborhood. Those that do live near him are 
"not his type." He reads a good deal and estimates that -he 
spends about three hours daily in watching television. 

The student is quite uncertain as to what he will do 
when he leaves school and declares that "the future looks 
dim." He thinks that he would like to be an electrical 
engineer but states that his father wants him to be a phar¬ 
macist. The boy seems to resent the fact that his parents 







: ' a ' : 




■ ■ ■ 


j . •> 0£, f' < 





c 








j j ,.i ': >. ■ ■. ■. ■. j 


1; V_Lf ;-o 




.< 




i., : a. >< 


. J . 







■ 

E k ■ c 

■ £ ■ j / 


>; • 




7/r V : V a. 


iji pJt ui ^.Utq irn-oa oppiw oxo-p 

, 

. ’ - ; ■ 

- j-J i'b;■. o.' vpXtbt.s'i -oXxjx Jxo xx 

;;; ., •; C ■ ; ,; - ,/ j - ' ■ v .j • j . ■ : * ■' ' 


288 


are trying to decide his future for him. 

There are several factors which might be seen as having 
some bearing on the student T s academic achievement. He has 
poor study habits and school attitudes. He is very self- 
critical and sees himself as being most unworthy in a 
number of respects. The boy has poor relations with his peers 
of both sexes, and it is obvious that he is unsuccessful in 
his dealings with others. It would appear that the boy 
feels respected by his parents. He is quite attached to 
both of them, and, to a sensitive boy, their prolonged and 
frequent absences from the home might well appear as rejec¬ 
tion. Finally, the boy has no clear vocational goal, and 
this fact may be making for weak academic motivation. 


. 




i 


. 

• >.* > •• f' 1 l " 



* 








' • •'' 1 : § 



cb. 








m ; ■ 

c ; 

~ 


J 1 : 1; ■ . 

. , 

■ 'f v. ; ,• . ■ , ■i.f 


. 

, 




: d .. i o:o 



: >:.) oo ^ocurjon 



c ; ; rl^od do 

. 


; .1:1 ‘ r ■ b oda 




- 

•- 



C 

t i . r\v ‘ xi; od 


. 

; ■: ‘ : o,. - ,h . old 



t A d . cAJ 


2$9 


CASE NO. 1 


Kuder Preference Record 


Scale Percentile 

Outdoors . $9 

Mechanical . $7 

Computational . 12 

Scientific ......... 75 

Persuasive . 77 

Artistic . 1 

Literary . $2 

Musical . 6 

Social Service . 66 

Clerical . 6 


SRA Youth Inventory 

Scale Percentile 

My School ..43 

Looking Ahead . 45 

About Myself ....... 5$ 

Getting Along With 

Others . 20 

My Home and Family . 31 

Boy Meets Girl.1$ 

Health . 12 


Things in General .. 65 


Indices of 
Underachievement 

Preliminary Index •. 52 

Final Index ..60 

Xmas Index 195$ •••• 55 


Taschuk - Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 


G-Z Temperament Survey 

Scale Percentile 

General Activity .. 

.45 

Restraint . 


Ascendance ... 

. 75 

Sociability . 


Emotional Stability 

.... 70 

Objectivity.. 


Friendliness .. 

.30 

Thoughtfulness .•.. 

.30 

Personal Relations , 

. 50 

Masculinity.. 

. 65 

Intelligence and Ability 

Test Results 

Test Year 

Results 

Laycock 1953 

I.Q. 120 

SCAT 195$ 

97th %±le 

Wechsler 195$ 

I.Q. 110 


75th %ile 

Verbal Scale 

I.Q. 113 

Performance Scale 

I.Q. 105 

SSHA Results 


Percentile "Wrong" Answers 

25th 

9 

Gough Predictive 

Scale 

Items Right: 

19 

McQuary Underachievement 


Scale 


Raw Score 
96 


Percentile 

7$th 


Items Right: 11 









































































290 


CASE NO, 2 


Kuder Preference Record 


Scale Percentile 

Outdoors . 32 

Mechanical . 78 

Computational . 27 

Scientific . 54 

Persuasive . 64 

Artistic . $3 

Literary ,. 75 

Musical . 6 

Social Service . 34 

Clerical . 75 


G-Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity . 4 

Restraint . 3 

Ascendance. 20 

Sociability .. 20 

Emotional Stability ... 20 

Objectivity . 30 

Friendliness .. 63 

Thoughtfulness . 10 

Personal Relations .... 78 
Masculinity. 82 


SRA Youth Inventory 

Scale Percentile 

My School . 75 

Looking Ahead . 60 

About Myself.2$ 

Getting Along With 36 
Others ........ 

My Home and Family . 54 
Boy Meets Girl ..... 3$ 

Health... 77 

Things in General .. 8 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 


Test 

Year 

Laycock 

1953 

SCAT 

1953 

Wechsler 

1953 


Verbal Scale 
Performance Scale 


Results 
I.Q. 101 
30th %ile 
I.Q. 117 
37th foile 
I.Q. 124 
I. Q. 103 


SSHA Results 


Indices of 
Underachievement 


Percentile M Wrong TT Answers 
25th 7 


Preliminary Index .. 63 

Final Index. 70 

Xmas Index 195& •••• 69 


Gough Predictive Scale 
Items Right: 16 


Taschuk - Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

Percentile 

50 th 


McQuary Underachievement 
Scale 


Items Right: 9 


Raw Score 
75 























































. .. ;• 

. ■ i 



•r:;" l 




') 














291 


CASE NO. 3 


Kuder Preference Record 


Scale Percentile 

Outdoors . 54 

Mechanical. 75 

Computational . 75 

Scientific . 9$ 

Persuasive . 9 

Artistic . 50 

Literary *. 4 

Musical . 3 

Social Service . 47 

Clerical . 69 


G-Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity . 50 

Restraint . 70 

Ascendance. 25 

Sociability. 5$ 

Emotional Stability .... 3$ 

Objectivity. 30 

Friendliness . 5# 

Thoughtfulness ... 50 

Personal Relations . 50 

Masculinity. 45 


SRA Youth Inventory 
Scale Percentile 


My School . 65 

Looking Ahead ...... 92 

About Myself . 65 

Getting Along With 

Others .37 

My Home and Family . 55 

Boy Meets Girl.60 

Health. 45 


Things in General .. 57 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 

Year Results 

1950 I.Q. Ill 
1954 I.Q. 106 
1953 BOth folle 
195$ I.Q. 109 

75th folle 
Verbal Scale I.Q. 102 
Performance Scale I.Q. 112 


Test 

Detroit 

Laycock 

SCAT 

Wechsler 


Indices of 
Underachievement 


SSHA Results 


Percentile "Wrong" Answers 


Preliminary Index .. 63 

Final Index. 73 

Xmas Index 195$ .... 71 


Taschuk - Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

Raw Score Percentile 

34 1st folle 


65 th 2 

Gough Predictive Scale 
Items Right: 16 

McQuary Underachieve ment 
Scale 


Items Right: 14 






















































in 


;: 


s' 


•' T C 








: :) 


./fl 



,.}0d 




) 





): . 


n )*y i 











292 


CASE NO, 4 


Kuder Preference Record 


Scale Percentile 

Outdoors . 7 

Mechanical ..3$ 

Computational . 19 

Scientific . 2 

Persuasive . 90 

Artistic . 34 

Literary . $7 

Musical .. 70 

Social Service . 35 

Clerical . $4 


G-Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity . £0 

Restraint . 25 

Ascendance . 70 

Sociability . 75 

Emotional Stability ... 77 

Objectivity .43 

Friendliness . 30 

Thoughtfulness ........ 10 

Personal Relations .... 64 

Masculinity . 55 


SRA Youth Inventory 
Scale Percentile 


My School ..33 

Looking Ahead . 45 

About Myself .1$ 

Getting Along With 

Others .37 

My Home and Family . 34 

Boy Meets Girl .1$ 

Health . 64 


Things in General .. 15 


Indices of 
Underachievement 

Preliminary Index .. k2 

Final Index.60 

Xmas Index 195$ •••• 66 


TaschuR-Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

Raw Score Percentile 

4$ 5th 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 


Test 


Year Results 


Detroit 1947 
Laycock 1953 
SCAT 195$ 
Wechsler 195$ 


I.Q. 104 
I.Q. 123 
90th %ile 
I.Q. 102 
54th $ile 


Verbal Scale I.Q. 99 
Performance Scale I.Q. 104 


SSHA Results 


Percentile "Wrong" Answers 
45th 11 


Gough Predictive Scale 
Items Right: 1$ 

McQuary Underachievement 
Scale 


Items Right: 7 

































































: , .'V. 
















293 


Kuder P reference R ecord 

Scale Percentile 

Outdoors. 34 

Mechanical. 60 

Computational. 82 

Scientific. 11 

Persuasive. 78 

Artistic. 83 

Literary.. 75 

Musical. 25 

Social service...... 11 

Clerical. . 78 

SRA Youth Inventory 

Scale Percentile 

My School. .. 70 

Looking Ahead....... 33 

About Myself. bfi 

Getting Along With 

Others. . .. 28 

My Home and Family.. 55 

Boy Meets Girl. 9 

Health... . 45 

Things in General... 57 


Indices of 
Un de r a c h 1 e ve m e n t 

Preliminary Index... 50 

Final Index.. 67 

Christmas Index, 

1958- ........ 57 


CASE NO. 5 

G-Z Temperament Survey 

Scale Percentile 

General Activity. 65 

Restraint. lip 

Ascendance. ... . 30 

Sociability.. ... 22 

Emotional Stability... 75 

Objectivity. 25 

Friendliness.... 1 

Thoughtfulness. 50 

Personal Relations.... 20 
Masculinity. 55 

Intelligence and Ability 
Test Re suits 

Test Year Results 

SCAT 1958 66th gile 

Wechsler 1958 I. Q. 99 

50 th $ile 
Verbal Scale I.Q. 10lp 
Performance Scale I. Q. 94 


SSHA Results 

Percentile "Wrong” Answers 
9th 18 

Gough Predictive Scale 


Items Right: l8 


Taschuk - Hepburn 
Piscrepancy Score 

Raw Score Percentile 

75 50 th 


McQuary Underachievement 
Seal e 

Items Right: 


6 








































































. , . w , r S i 


• •> * « • i: 

• r ‘ 

• * . - • • . o f •- 

- < ■ * 

.. 

****** 

.. .V. ' - 


. 

' 


. 







. 

. . „ 

. - 

. . . . ■ 

...... 

. 1 \ 


. , . 

, , . . . . . , ‘ ' 


. . 























294 


CASE NO. 6 


Kuder Preference Record 


Scale Percentile 

Outdoors .34 

Mechanical.99 

Computational . 60 

Scientific .. 63 

Persuasive . 70 

Artistic . 75 

Literary ..2$ 

Musical ...... .* 25 

Social Service . 9 

Clerical.77 


SRA Youth Inventory 

Scale Percentile 

My School . $7 

Looking Ahead ....... 13 

About Myself.45 

Getting Along With 

Others.19 

My Home and Family .. 55 
Boy Meets Girl ••••.• 19 
Health .. 31 


Things in General ..• 14 


Indices of 
Und e ra c hieveme nt 

Preliminary Index ... 56 


Final Index .... 73 

Christmas Index ..... $3 


Ta schuk - Hepburn 
Discrepancy Scale 

Percentile 

76th 


G-Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity . 4 

Restraint . 5 

Ascendance . 61 

Sociability. 21 

Emotional Stability ... 70 

Objectivity ..19 

Friendliness ........ 0 . 25 

Thoughtfulness . 55 

Personal Relations .... 26 
Masculinity .. $3 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 


Test 

Year 

Results 

Detroit 

1949 

I.Q. 119 

Laycock 

1953 

I.Q. 109 

SCAT 

195^ 

6$th file 

Wechsler 

1958 

I.Q. 103 

5$th fa ile 

Verbal Scale 

I.Q. 117 

Performance Scale 

SSHA Results 

I.Q. £9 

Percentile 

w Wrong” 

Answers 


76th 9 


Gough Predictive Scale 
Items Right: 11 

McQuary Underachievement 
Items Right: 7 


Raw Score 
94 




























































295 


CASE NO. 7 


Kuder Preference Record 


Scale Percentile 

Outdoors. 12 

Mechanical ••••••••• 20 

Computational 92 

Scientific ••••••••• 63 

Persuasive . 70 

Artistic. 23 

Literary. 67 

Musical. 57 

Social Service . 42 

Clerical. 92 


G-Z. Temperament Survey 
Scale Percentile 


General Activity ...... 92: 

Restraint . 7 

Ascendance ..<>.♦ . 70 

Sociability .. <,. 55 

Emotional Stability ... 64 

Objectivity. 25 

Friendliness . 5 

Thoughtfulness .. 1$ 


Personal Relations •.•• 7 

Masculinity ..35 


SRA Youth Inventory 

S c ale Percentile 

My School.. 34 

Looking Ahead .. <> £6 

About Myself.2$ 

Getting Along With 

Others ... • 65 

My Home and Family . <> $3 
Boy Meets Girl •••.•• 50 

Health .. 45 

Things in General ... 47 


Indices of 
Underachievement 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 


Test 


Year Results 


Detroit 1949 
Laycock 1953 
SCAT 195$ 
Wechsler 195$ 


I.Q. 123 
I.Q. 109 
93rd jSile 
I.Q. 121 
92 nd %ile 


Verbal Scale I.Q. 122 
Performance Scale I.Q. 116 


SSHA Results 


Percentile "Wrong” Answers 
11th 5 


Preliminary Index .. 5$ 

Final Index .. 67 Gough Predictive Scale 

Christmas Index ..o. 56 

Items Right: 19 


Taschuk-Hepburn 

Discrepancy Score McQuary Underachievement 

Scale 

Raw Score Percentile 


51 


10th 


Items Right: 


7 



















































c 0 




:<x 


j ‘ 



':) C 













296 


CASE NO. 8 


Kuder Preference Record 


Scale Percentile 

O u tdoors. 88 

Mechanical... o 69 

Computational . 50 

Scientific . 76 

Persuasive .. 25 

Artistic ... 23 

Literary.40 

Musical .00.0.....0. 10 
Social Service ..... 80 
Clerical ........... 65 


G-Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity . 50 

Restraint .. 50 

Ascendance. 28 

Sociability ...70 

Emotional Stability .... 90 

Objectivity .. 75 

Friendliness «.. 70 

Thoughtfulness 0 ....... e 25 

Personal Relations ..... 75 

Masculinity •.......... • SO 


SRA Youth Inventory 
S c ale Percentile 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 


My School .......... 32 

* Looking Ahead. 50 

About Myself ....... 2 

Getting Along With 

Others ........ 47 

My Home and Family • 45 
Boy Meets Girl ..... 60 

Health.. 76 

Things In General .. 28 


TeBt 

Year 

Results 

Detroit 

1949 

I.Q. 101 

Laycock 

1952 

I.Q. 100 

SCAT 

195 s 

64th faile 

Wechsler 

1958 

I.Q. 97 
44th foile 


Verbal Scale I.Q# 95 
Performance S c ale I.Q. 99 


Indices of 
Underachievement 


SSHA Results 


Percentile Tt Wrong ft Answers 


Preliminary Index •. 44 
Final Index ........ 69 

Christmas Index .... 54 


Taschuk - Hepburn 
Discrepancy Scale 

Raw Score Percentile 

31 1st 


92nd 0 

Gough Predictive Scale 
Items Right: 16 

McQuary Underachievement 
Scale 


Items Right: 7 



























































297 


CASE NO. 9 


Kuder Preference Record 


Scale Percentile 

Outdoors . 6$ 

Mechanical . 6? 

Computational .. 44 

Scientific .$2 

Persuasive. 52 

Artistic . 40 

Literary . 1 

Musical . 24 

Social Service ..... 95 
Clerical. 45 


G-Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity. 25 

Restraint . 38 

Ascendance . 5 

Sociability .. 29 

Emotional Stability .... 58 

Objectivity. 70 

Friendliness ....o...... 65 

Thoughtfulness . 30 

Personal Relations . 50 

Masculinity . 93 


SRA Youth Inventory 

Scale Percentile 

My School . 50 

Looking Ahead ....... 26 

About Myself .. 11 

Getting Along With 

Others ......... 12 

My Home and Family .. 54 
Boy Meets Girl »••»,. 19 

Health ... 30 

Things in General ... 8 


Indices of 
Underachievement 

Preliminary Index ... 45 


Final Index.. 60 

Christmas Index ..... 57 


TaschuR - Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

Raw Score Percentile 

66 35th 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 


Test 

Year 

Results 

S. Binet 

1947 

I.Q. 93 

Laycock 

1952 

I.Q. 36 

SCAT 

195^ 

78th $ile 

Wechsler 

1953 

I.Q. 103 
71st foile 


Verbal Scale I.Q. 110 
Performance Scale I.Q. 102 

SSHA Results 

Percentile "Wrong” Answers 
65th 4 

Gough Predictive Scale 
Items Right: 16 

McQuary Underachievement 
Scale 

Items Right: 7 



























































xiO 


£ 



0 








293 


CASE NO. 10 


Kuder Preference Record 

Scale Percentile 

Outdoors . 77 

Mechanical ... 60 

Computational .. 24 

Scientific .. 55 

Persuasive.10 

Artistic . 73 

Literary ..35 

Musical . 62 

Social Service . 73 

Clerical.. 45 


G-Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity . 50 

Restraint . 3 

Ascendance ...o........ 58 

Sociability. 58 

Emotional Stability ... 18 

Objectivity ..12 

Friendliness. 20 

Thoughtfulness . 58 

Personal Relations .... 50 
Masculinity .......20 


SRA Youth Inventory 

Scale Percentile 

My School ... • 84 

Looking Ahead .. 78 

About Myself ..75 

Getting Along With 

Others ....*•••• 71 
My Home and Family .. 91 
Boy Meets Girl ...... 50 

Health .. 94 

Things in General ... 97 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 

Year Results 

1949 I.Q. 88 

1953 I.Q. 102 

1958 69th foile 

1958 I.Q. 102 

55th Jjile 
Verbal Scale I.Q. 113 
Performance Scale I.Q. 90 


Test 

Detroit 

Laycock 

SCAT 

Wrchsler 


Indices of 
Underachievement 

Preliminary Index ... 51 


Final Index •••••»••• 7Z 
Christmas Index ..... 62 


Taschuk-Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

Raw Score Percentile 

93 75th 


SSHA Results 

Percentile "Wrong” Answers 
19th 8 

Gough Predictive Scale 
Items Right: 16 

McQuary Underachievement 
Scale 


Items Right: 10 






















































Jd-acog:^ 






') 





v o 




C •'! 




• o'. 


oo 



io 





299 


CASE NO. 11 


Kuder Preference Record 


Scale Percentile 

Outdoors . 2$ 

Mechanical .... .31 

Computational .... .. 12 

Scientific ..«. 55 

Persuasive * ........ 70 

Artistic. ...... 73 

Literary. ...... 91 

Musical ........oo.. 47 

Social Service ..... 76 

Clerical ... 56 


G-_Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity . 30 

Restraint . 10 

Ascendance.'.. 50 

Sociability.32 

Emotional Stability ... 10 
Objectivity ........... 4 

Friendliness . 4 

Thoughtfulness.• 45 

Personal Relations .... 4 

Masculinity . 2 8 


SRA Youth Inventory 

Scale Percentile 

My School.95 

Looking Ahead ...... 7$ 

About Myself ....... 94 

Getting Along With 

Others.$2 

My Home and Family • 99 
Boy Meets Girl ..... 57 

Health ............. 99 

Things in General ♦• 96 


Indices of 
Underachievement 

Preliminary Index .. 53 

Final Index ... 62 

Christmas Index .... 63 


Taschuk-Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

Raw Score Percentile 

9S Sist 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 


Test 


Year Results 


Detroit 1949 
Laycock 1953 
SCAT 1953 
Wechsler 195$ 


i.q. aa 
I.Q. 107 

£5th foile 

I.Q. 109 
73rd %±le 


Verbal Scale I.Q. 117 
Performance Scale I.Q. 9S 


SSHA Results 


Percentile "Wrong" Answers 
19th 10 


Gough Predictive Scale 
Items Right: 12 

McQuary Underachievement 
Scale 


Items Right: 12 






















































c 









y: 






300 


CASE NO. 12 


Kuder Preference Record 


Scale Percentile 

Outdoors.72 

Mechanical . $9 

Computational •. •.. . 60 

Scientific.. 42 

Persuasive .«...... <> 42 

Artistic .10 

Literary ..35 

Musical ..... • 14- 

Social Service ..... 63 
Clerical. ...... 93 


G-Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity . 10 

Restraint ...• 50 

Ascendance .... ♦ • 4 

Sociability.. •... 4 

Emotional Stability ... 50 
Objectivity ....... .... 3$ 

Friendliness.. 70 

Thoughtfulness .. 7 

Personal Relations .... 3$ 
Masculinity ..65 


SRA Youth Inventory 
Scale Percentile 


My School .... 97 

Looking Ahead ...... 39 


About Myself ....... 65 

Getting Along With 

Others ...ooo. $ 

My Home and Family . 31 


Boy Meets Girl ..... 19 
Health .. 29 


Things in General .. 15 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 


Test 


Year Results 


Detroit 194$ 
Laycock 1954 
SCAT 195$ 
Wechsler 195$ 


I.Q. 9$ 
I.Q. 91 
76th foile 
I.Q. 101 
52nd foile 


Verbal Scale I.Q. 109 
Performance Scale I.Q. 92 


Indices of 
Undera chievement 

Preliminary Index .• 57 
Final Index ........ 70 

Christmas Index.71 


Taschuk-Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

Raw Score Percentile 

76 52nd 


SSHA Results 

Percentile "Wrong” Answers 
22nd 12 

Gough Predictive Scale 
Items Right: 15 

McQuary Underachievement 
Scale 


Items Right: 


3 


















































.... . J 



} 






o 




'i: C. 


( 









X < 











301 


CASE NO. 13 


Kuder Preference Record 


Scale Percentile 

Outdoors ... $ 

Mechanical ..72 

Computational ....... 2 

Scientific ••<>• ..«••• 5& 

Persuasive. o.... 32 

Artistic •. . . . 64 

Literary .... . 3 

Musical o............ 74 

Social Service ...... 55 

Clerical .......41 


G-Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity.* 12 

Restraint •••• . 3 

Ascendance ... 30 

Sociability «oooo..«<?«. SO 
Emotional Stability ... 90 
Objectivity ........... 99 

Friendliness .. 50 

Thoughtfulness .. 3 

Personal Relations .... 55 
Masculinity «.. SO 


SRA Youth Inventory Intelligence and Ability 

Test Results 


Scale Percentile 


1 111 




Test 

Year 

Results 

My School ... 

33 




Looking Ahead ....... 

12 

Detroit 

1950 

I.Q. 108 

About Myself ........ 

3 

Laycock 

1954 

I.Q. 108 

Getting Along With 


SCAT 

1958 

87th $ile 

Others ........ 

3 

Wechsler 

1958 

I.Q. 118 

My Home and Family .. 

15 



90th foile 

Boy Meets Girl ...... 

8 

Verbal Scale 

I.Q. 122 

Health .............. 

12 

Performance Scale 

I.Q. 112 

Things in General .... 

14 





Indices of 
Underachievement 


SSHA Results 


Percentile f, Wrong ,! Answers 


Preliminary Index 

... 38 

30 th 20 

Final Index ...... 



Christmas Index.•. 


Gough Predictive Scale- 


Taschuk-Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

Raw Score Percentile 

4Sth 


Items Right; 20 


McQuary Underachievement 
Scale 


72 


Items Right; 10 



















































0 


0 








302 


CASE NO. 14 


Kuder Preference Record 


Scale Percentile 

Outdoors . 2 

Mechanical ..10 

Computational ....oo 97 
Scientific .....•••• 43 
Persuasive ••••»•.•• 16 

Artistic .. 11 

Literary... 9S 

Musical . 25 

Social Service . SO 

Clerical ..S9 


G-Z Temperament Survey 
Scale Percentile 


General Activity . 43 

Restraint. 70 

Ascendance . 70 

Sociability .•••• •<><,••• S9 
Emotional Stability ... 75 

Objectivity ..79 

Friendliness .......... 42 

Personal Relations .... 42 

Thoughtfulness . 55 

Masculinity ........... 35 


SRA Youth Inventory 

Scale Percentile 

My School .......... 5 

Looking Ahead ...... 3 

About Myself ....... IS 

Getting Along With 

Others ....... 12 

My Home and Family • 11 
Boy Meets Girl ..... IS 

Health.. 30 

Things in General ...14 


Indices of 
Underachievement 


Preliminary Index ...59 

Final Index ..67 

Christmas Index .... 5$ 


Taschuk-Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

Raw Score Percentile 

46 5th 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 


Test Year Results 


Detroit 1949 I.Q. 96 

Laycock 1953 I.Q. 10S 

SCAT 195S 90th %±le 

Wechsler 1953 I.Q. 105 

65th folle 

Verbal Scale I.Q. 120 
Performance Scale I.Q. S7 


SSHA Results 

Percentile ft Wrong” Answers 

92nd 2 

Gough Predictive S r ale 
Items Right: 25 

McQuary Underachievement 
Scale 

Items Right: S 

















































f 




J 


, 0 ’. 





( 





■ < ') 






303 


CASE NO. 15 


Kuder Preference Record 

Scale Percentile 

Outdoors . 50 

Mechanical . 37 

Computational ...... 73 

Scientific ...26 

Persuasive ••••••••• 16 

Artistic .14 

Literary ....••••••o 90 

Musical .. 6 

Social Service ..... 94 
Clerical ...•••.•••o 9 


G-Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity . 94 

Restraint ..25 

Ascendance .. 33 

Sociability .30 

Emotional Stability ... 41 

Objectivity. 50 

Friendliness .. 41 

Thoughtfulness . 42 

Personal Relations .... 50 
Masculinity.. 33 


SRA Youth Inventory 
Scale Percentile 


My School.93 

Looking Ahead »••••« 35 

About Myself ....... $5 

Getting Along With 

Others ....... 37 

My Home and Family . 33 
Boy Meets Girl ..... 35 

Health .33 

Things in General •• 94 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 


Test 


Year Results 


Detroit 1949 I.Q. 122 

Laycock 1953 I.Q* 34 

SCAT 1953 3?th folle 

Wechsler 1953 I.Q. 112 

30th °/o±le 

Verbal Scale I.Q. 103 
Performance Scale I.Q. 113 


Indices of 
Underachievement 

Preliminary Index .• 61 
Final Index ....... © 67 

Christmas Index . 0.0 54 


Taschuk - Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

Raw Score Percentile 


39 


SSHA Results 

Percentile n Wrong” Answers 
73th 4 

Gough Predictive Scale 
Items Right: 17 

McQuary Underachievement 
Scale 


1 st 


Items Right: 10 


















































0 







C 






0 




304 


CASE NOo 16 


Kuder Preference Record 


Scale Percentile 

Outdoors ..IS 

Mechanical .... .75 

Computational ...... 50 

Scientific ..37 

Persuasive. 23 

Artistic <>....32 

Literary... o 40 

Musical . 0 .• 70 

Social Service ...<>. 33 
Clerical . 47 


SRA Youth Inventory 

Scale Percentile 

My School »...»»•••. 32 
Looking Ahead ...... 39 

About Myself 33 


Getting Along With 

Others . • 0 .... 2S 
My Home and Family 0 30 
Boy Meets Girl ..... S 

Health ... S5 

Things in General •• 50 


Indices of 
Underachievement 

Preliminary Index .. 57 

Final Index... 6S 

Christmas Index .... 63 


Taschuk - Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

Percentile 

2nd 


G-Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity . 6S 

Restraint . 70 

Ascendance. 42 

Sociability »..<>• .*..o. 90 
Emotional Stability ... 31 

Objectivity. 73 

Friendliness ..45 

Thoughtfulness.. • 65 


Personal Relations .... 70 
Masculinity .......... <► 65 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 

Test Year Results 

Laycock 1953 I.Q. 109 

SCAT 1953 76th °Jo ile 

Wechsler 1953 I.Q. 109 

73rd folle 

Verbal Scale I.Q. 102 
Performance Scale I.Q. 116 


SSHA Results 

Percentile "Wrong 1 * Answers 
35th 6 


Gough Predictive Scale 
Items Right: 13 


McQuary Underachievement 
Scale 

Items Right: 12 


Raw Score 
41 






















































305 


CASE NO* 17 


Kuder Preference Record 


Scale Percentile 

Outdoors.. • • • • 34 

Mechanical. . 32 

Computational.* 20 

Scientific ••••••••• 35 

Persuasive... 74 

Artistic •••••o..... 37 
Literary 6 

Musical 1 

Social Service 90 ..o 63 

Clerical 37 


G-Z Temperament Survey 
Scale Percentile 


General Activity 33 

Restraint ....<>. 3 

Ascendance.... 25 

Sociability. 23 

Emotional Stability .•*. 50 
Objectivity o.»oo**«o*o. 73 
Friendliness ....g...... 33 

Thoughtfulness . 10 

Personal Relations * * * o o 90 
Masculinity * * ..o«. 31 


SRA Youth Inventory 
Scale Percentile 


My School *.42 

Looking Ahead * o •«•• 30 
About Myself ....... 45 

Getting Along With 

Others 23 

My Home and Family * 15 
Boy Meets Girl . o... 3 

Health .. *. . • . *.30 

Things in General • 0 12 


Indices of 
Underachievement 

Preliminary Index •® 62 
Final Index *.. . ..®» 70 
Christmas Index *••• 71 


Taschuk - Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

Raw Score Percentile 

93rd 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 

Test Year Results 

Laycock 1953 I.Q. 115 

SCAT 1953 39th jSile 

Wechsler 1953 I.Q. 121 

94th Jfile 

Verbal Scale I.Q. 113 
Performance Scale I.Q. 119 


SSHA Results 

Percentile ’’Wrong” Answers 
25th 13 

Gough Predictive Scale 
Items Right: 27 

McQuary Underachievement 
Scale 

Items Right: 5 


112 

















































o 


) 







c 


o 



i:\-0 &iurl 





‘100 


1:0 V 0 


0 



0 


0.00 






306 


CASE NO. 18 


Kuder Preference Record 


Scale Percentile 

Outdoors ... 59 

Mechanical . 49 

Computational .. 20 

Scientific .... .21 

Persuasive 95 

Artistic ..26 

Literary.... •. • 19 

Musical 14 

Social Service .. 0 .. 35 

Clerical .. 45 


G-Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity .....•• 30 

Restraint ..<>. ..... 30 

Ascendance ...... . .. 55 

Sociability ..... ....... 63 

Emotional Stability .... 12 

Objectivity .... 15 

Friendliness ........... 2 

Thoughtfulness ••••••••• 78 

Personal Relations ..... 20 

Masculinity ....... 73 


SRA Youth Inventory 
Scale Percentile 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 


Test Year Results 

My School ......... 98 

Looking Ahead ..... 94 Detroit 1949 I.Q. 9$ 

About Myself ...... 97 Laycock 1953 I.Q. 110 

Getting Along With SCAT 195$ 63th folle 

Others ...... 85 Wechsler 1953 I.Q. 107 

My Home and Family. 88 6$th fo ile 

Boy Meets Girl .... 85 Verbal Scale I.Q. 106 

Health .. 99 Performance Scale I.Q. 107 

Things in General ♦ 95 

5SHA Results 

Indices of 

Underachievement Percentile "Wrong” Answers 


Preliminary Index ..49 1st 19 

Final I n dex ....... 66 

Christmas Index .•» Nil 

Gough Predictive Scale 


Taschuk - Hepburn Items Right: 10 

Discrepancy Score 


Raw Score Percentile 
104 37th 


McQuary Underachievement 
Scale 


Items Right: 11 

























































307 


CASE NO. 19 


Kuder Preference Record 

G-Z Temperament Survey 

Scale Percentile 

Scale Percentile 

Outdoor •.. .. 42 

Mechanical ••••o.... 11 

Computational . . 20 

Scientific .77 

Persuasive ..76 

Artistic 0 ..... 40 

Literary ..... 15 

Musical. 62 

Social Service . ...o 37 
Clerical. 47 

General Activity e . * <>.. 25 

Restraint . 30 

Ascendance . 8 

Sociability. 16 

Emotional Stability ... 21 

Objectivity . 50 

Friendliness.. 70 

Thoughtfulness. . 65 

Personal Relations •••• 70 

Masculinity.. 45 

SRA Youth Inventory 

Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 

Scale Percentile 

Test Year Results 

My School... 93 

Looking Ahead o. • <> • 30 

About Myself • ..„. * 34 
Getting Along With 

Others *.« 94 

My Home and Family. 54 

Boy Meets Girl 0 ... 94 

Health.. 44 

Things in General . 89 

Laycock 1957 I.Q. 103 

SCAT 1953 31st #ile 

Wechsler 1953 I.Q. 116 

37th $ile 

Verbal Scale I.Q. 116 
Performance Scale I.Q. 113 

SSHA Results 

Indices of 
Underachievement 

Percentile M Wrong T< Answers 

32 nd 14 

Preliminary Index • 62 

Final Index ....... 73 

Christmas Index ... Nil 

Gough Predictive Scale 

Taschuk-Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

Items Right: 17 

McQuary Underachievement 

Raw Score Percentile 

Scale 

80 59th 

Items Right: 9 












































0 


L) 











Ov 



;c 







‘V OO- 


•- 7.00 




308 

CASE NO.. 20 


Kuder Preference Record 

G-Z Temperament Survey 

Scale Percentile 

Scale Percentile 

Outdoors ..30 

Mechanical.$9 

Computational .• $7 

Scientific. . . 75 

Persuasive ... 56 

Artistic ... 27 

Literary... 35 

Musical ..,. .1$ 

Social Service ..... 26 

Clerical ........... 94 

General Activity ..o... 25 

Restraint . 20 

Ascendance. 70 

Sociability. ..... 39 

Emotional Stability ... 55 

Objectivity. 45 

Friendliness ... 35 

Thoughtfulness ........ 35 

Personal Relations •••« 70 
Masculinity ...... 45 

SRA Youth Inventory 

Intelligence and Ability 

Test Results 

Scale Percentile 

Test Year Results 

My School ....... .. 50 

Looking Ahead ..... 45 

About Myself ...... 5$ 

Getting Along With 

Others ....... 53 

My Home and Family® $$ 

Boy Meets Girl .... 50 

Health... • . . * • 99 

Things in General <>.57 

Laycock 1953 I.Q. 10$ 

SCAT 195$ $5th jJile 

Wechsler 195$ I.Q. 107 

6$th foile 

Verbal Scale I.Q. 109 
Performance Scale I.Q. 102 

SSHA Results 

Indices of 
Underachievement 

Percentile ^Wrong 11 Answers 

96th 9 

Preliminary Index ..62 

Final Index.69 

Christmas Index ... 64 

Gough Predictive Scale 

Taschuk-Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

Items Right: 21 

McQuary Underachievement 

Raw Score Percentile 

Scale 

70 41st 

Items Right: 7 


Raw Score 
70 


















































C 

■ C 



i 


0 1.: : • . vC'Oi 


• 1 ; i 










309 


CASE NO. 21 


Kuder Preference Record 


Scale Percentile 

Outdoor . 42 

Mechanical. 93 

Computational . 16 

Scientific o. 87 

Persuasive ... • 77 

Artistic e.......... 26 

Literary . 9 

Musical.. 34 

Social Service ..... 64 
Clerical .......48 


G-Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity . 97 

Restraint • • •... • 2 

Ascendance ...... 81 

Sociability • .. 70 

Emotional Stability «•• 50 

Objectivity «... . 35 

Friendliness .......... 5 

Thoughtfulness •. 50 

Personal Relations •••. 58 
Masculinity. 55 


SRA Youth inventory 
Scale Percentile 


intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 


My School..... 

Looking Ahead »•••, 
About Myself «.... • 

Getting Along With 
Others ....... 

My Home and Family. 
Boy Meets Girl .... 

Health . 

Things in General . 


98 

Test 

Tear 

Results 

94 

Detroit 

1949 

IoQ. 97 

97 

Laycock 

Henmon- 

1953 

I.Q. 130 

85 

Nelson 

1957 

I.Q. 127 

89 

SCAT 

1958 

71st foils 

85 

99 

Wechsler 1958 

i.q. no 

75th file 

95 

Verbal Scale 

I.Q. 113 


Performance Scale I.Q. 105 


Indices of 
Underachievement 


SSHA Results 


Preliminary Index . 46 Percentile "Wrong” Answers 

Final Index <>...... 63 

Christmas Index 54 15th 12 


Taschuk - Hepburn Gough Predictive Scale 

Discrepancy Score 

Items Right: 20 

Raw Score Percentile 

89 69 th McQuary Underachievement 

Scale 


Items Right: 14 

















































0 



310 


CASE NO. 22 


Kuder Preference Record 

Scale Percentile 

Outdoors . 56 

Mechanical . 60 

Computational .. 39 

Scientific .16 

Persuasive . 67 

Artistic. 99 

Literary . 29 

Musical ..40 

Social Service . 55 

Clerical ..47 


G-Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity . 50 

Restraint . 5 

Ascendance . 70 

Sociability.85 

Emotional Stability .„. 31 

Objectivity. 3o 

Friendliness . 41 

Personal Relations .... 10 

Masculinity .. 21 

Thoughtfulness ........ 35 


SRA Youth Inventory 
Scale Percentile 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 


My School ... 

Looking Ahead . 

About Myself ...... 

Getting Along With 
Others ....... 

My Home and Family. 
Boy Meets Girl .... 

Health .... 

Things in General . 



Test 

Year 

Results 

87 




90 

Detroit 

1948 

I.Q. 100 

59 

Laycock 

1952 

I.Q. 123 


SCAT 

1958 

90th foile 

75 

Wechsler 

1958 

I.Q. 115 

99 



85 th foile 

67 

Verbal Scale 

I.Q. 118 

84 

Performance Scale 

I.Q. 106 

89 





Indices of 
Underachievement 


SSHA Results 

Percentile ft Wrong” Answers 


Preliminary Index . 

46 

32 nd 

8 

Final Index . 

51 



Christmas Index ... 

40 

Gough Predictive 

Scale 


Taschuk - Hepburn Items Right: 21 

Discrepancy Score 


Raw Score Percentile 
81 61st 


McQuary Underachievement 
Scale 


Items Right: 10 




















































311 


CASE NO. 23 


Kuder Preference Record 


Scale Percentile 

Outdoors .1$ 

Mechanical . 54 

Computational . 70 

Scientific .96 

Fersuasive... 6 

Artistic . 2 

Literary • • • •... $3 

Musical.... . o. 13 

Social Service 95 

Clerical..... 74 


G-Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity . 3$ 

Restraint . ••••••• 5$ 

Ascendance .. 3$ 

Sociability .... .3$ 

Emotional Stability .... 25 

Objectivity ..30 

Friendliness . 50 

Thoughtfulness . 57 

Personal Relations . 25 

Masculinity. 13 


SRA Youth Inventory 

Scale Percentile 

My School. $4 

Looking Ahead ....... 60 

About Myself ...96 

Getting Along With 

Others ... • 75 

My Home and Family .. 95 

Boy Meets Girl *.$5 

Health .. 99 

Things in General ... 91 


Indices of 
Underachievement 

Preliminary Index ... 60 

Final Index. 6& 

Christmas Index.51 


Taschuk - Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 


Raw Score 
130 


Percentile 

99th 


Test 


Year 


Detroit 1949 
Laycock 1953 
SCAT 195$ 
Wechsler 195$ 

Verbal Scale 
Performance Scale 


Results 

I.Q. Ill 
IoQ. 102 
$$th %±le 
I.Q. 127 
97th $ile 
I.Q. 11$ 
I.Q. 129 


SSHA Results 

Percentile ”Wrong n Answers 
2oth 6 

Gough Predictive Scale 
Items Right: 11 


McQuary Underachievement 
Scale 

Items Right: 9 





















































0 







D 


G 0 






f‘ ,; 3 o r o 


O t; 


d 


L G'C 




D 


P 


0 


0 0 ' 










312 


CASE NO. 24 


Kuder Preference Record 
Scale Percentile 

Outdoors ........... 13 

Mechanical .. 75 

Computational .. 37 

Scientific .$3 

Persuasive .34 

Artistic .. 35 

Literary .. 67 

Musical. 12 

Social Service ..... 34 
Clerical .<>. 55 


G-Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity .. 25 

Restraint . *.... 50 

Ascendance . 25 

Sociability...15 

Emotional Stability ... 32 

Objectivity. 21 

Friendliness . 55 

Thoughtfulness. 30 

Personal Relations .... 35 
Masculinity. 91 


SRA Youth Inventory 

Scale Percentile 

My School .. 20 

Looking Ahead . 7$ 

About Myself. 36 

Getting Along With 

Others .. 22 

My Home and Family •• 64 
Boy Meets Girl ...... 40 

Health. 30 

Things in General ... 57 


Indices of 
Underachievement 

Preliminary Index ... 57 


Final Index.. 63 

Christmas Index. 51 


Taschuk - Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

Percentile 

52th 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 

Test Year Results 

Laycock 1953 I.Q. 113 

SCAT 195S 93rd %ile 

Wechsler 1958 I.Q. 115 

85th %ile 

Verbal Scale I.Q. 120 
Performance Scale I.Q. 107 


SSHA Results 

Percentile ” Wrong” Answers 
11th 11 


Gough Predictive Scale 
Items Right: 14 


McQ.uary Underachievement 
Scale 

Items Right: 10 


Raw Score 
79 



















































m 





; 



i:c 




| j J' 











.0 


( ') 0 





313 


CASE NO. 25 


Kuder Preference Record 


Scale Percentile 

Outdoors. 78 

Mechanical •. . . 79 

Computational . 33 

Scientific «.. ♦ o.. •. 73 

Persuasive.10 

Artistic .. 54 

Literary . . 65 

Musical ...40 

Social Service ..... 65 
Clerical ....... 55 


G-Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity.. 20 

Restraint ... 10 

Ascendance . 28 

Sociability. 50 

Emotional Stability 55 

Objectivity.. 28 

Friendliness ..18 

Thoughtfulness . 63 

Personal Relations • ••• 55 
Masculinity...50 


SRA Youth Inventory Intelligence and Ability 

Test Results 

Scale Percentile 


Test Year Results 

My School •.. o ...60 

Looking Ahead.39 Detroit 194$ Ic,Q» 111 

About Myself .. 57 Laycock 1952 I.Q. 107 

Getting Along With SCAT 195$ 71st %±le 

Others... 45 Wechsler 195$ I.Q. Ill 

My Home and Family .• $0 77th %±le 

Boy Meets Girl •••••• 5$ Verbal Scale I.Q. 11$ 

Health .. $5 Performance Scale I.Q. 99 


Things in General ... $6 


Indices of 
Underachievement 

Preliminary Index ... 56 


Final Index.68 

Christmas Index ..... 61 


Taschuk - Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

Raw Score Percentile 

94 76th 


SSHA Results 

Percentile "Wrong” Answers 
5th 16 

Gough Predictive Scale 
Items Right: 14 

McQuary Underachievement 
Scale 

Items Right: 10 





















































0 




O' 




‘ x G 0 







314 


CASE NO. 26 


Kuder Preference Record 


Scale Percentile 

Outdoors. 34 

Mechanical... 2 

Computational .... o. 93 

Scientific . 34 

Fersuasive ..41 

Artistic . 23 

Literary . 31 

Musical ...... 0 . 9 

Social Service . 90 

Clerical . 71 


G-Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity . 13 

Restraint ... 25 

Ascendance •... .. 70 

Sociability .. 65 

Emotional Stability ... 50 

Objectivity .. 75 

Friendliness . 30 

Thoughtfulness. £0 

Personal Relations .... 45 
Masculinity... •. 65 


SRA Youth Inventory 

Scale Percentile 

My School *. 50 

Looking Ahead 0 ...... 70 

About Myself. 50 

Getting Along With 

Others. 66 

My Home and Family .. 70 

Boy Meets Girl.30 

Health___ ..... 97 

Things in General ... 77 


Indices of 
Und e r a c h i e-v em e nt 

Preliminary Index ... 60 


Final Index .68 

Christmas Index.57 


Taschuk - Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

Raw Score Percentile 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 

Test Year Results 


Detroit 1949 I.Q. 127 

Laycock 1953 I.Q. Ill 

SCAT 195$ 91st %lie 

Wechsler 195$ I.Q. 117 

39th %lle 

Verbal Scale I.Q. 106 
Performance Scale I.Q. 126 


SSHA Results 

Percentile w Wrong” Answers 
33th 5 


Gough Predictive Scale 
Items Right: 23 

McQuary Undera chievement 
Scale 


52 


1st 


Items Right: 10 





























































315 


CASE NO. 27 


Kuder Preference Record 


Scale 


Percentile 


Outdoors .45 

Mechanical . 37 

Computational .. 76 

Scientific ... $0 

Persuasive.34 

Artistic ..66 

Literary. 66 

Musical .42 

Social Service ..... £5 
Clerical . 10 


G-Z Temperament Survey 

Scale Percentile 

General Activity . 45 

Restraint . 25 

Ascendance . 19 

Sociability .. 50 

Emotional Stability ... 23 

Objectivity. 50 

Friendliness ..30 

Thoughtfulness .. 35 

Personal Relations .... 45 
Masculinity. 45 


SRA Youth Inventory 

Scale Percentile 

My School . 74 

Looking Ahead ©.© 92 

About Myself ........ 12 

Getting Along With 

Others. 45 

My Home and Family •. 30 
Boy Meets Girl ...... 49 

Health. 76 

Things in General ... 55 

Indices of 
Underachievement 

Preliminary Index ... 59 
Final Index ©....... • 69 

Christmas Index . 57 


Taschuk - Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 


Raw Score 
54 


Percentile 

16th 


Test 


Year 


Results 


Laycock 1956 I.Q. 110 

SCAT 195& 35th %ile 

Wechsler 195# I.Q. 103 

70 th foile 

Verbal Scale I.Q. 103 
Performance Scale I.Q. 105 


SSHA Results 

Percentile "Wrong" Answers 
73rd 5 

Gough Predictive Scale 
Items Right: 15 


McQuary Underachievement 
Scale 

Items Right: 13 
























































316 


CASE NO. 25 


Kuder Preference Record 


Scale Percentile 

Outdoors . 0 

Mechanical . 5 

Computational ...... 55 

Scientific .. 14 

Persuasive ...99 

Artistic . 4 

Literary. 56 

Musical . 6? 

Social Service ,.... 13 

Clerical . 99 


G-Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity . 15 

Restraint . 1 

Ascendance . 50 

Sociability. 50 

Emotional Stability ... 70 

Objectivity .. 70 

Friendliness . 15 

Thoughtfulness .. 10 

Personal Relations .... 45 
Masculinity . 4. 


SRA Youth Inventory Intelligence and Ability 

Test Results 

Scale Percentile 

Test Year Results 

My School . 21 

Looking Ahead ...... 45 Detroit 1947 I.Q. 149 

About Myself.37 Laycock 1953 I.Q. 140 

Getting Along With SCAT 195§ 93**d %±le 

Others ....... 46 Wechsler 195$ I.Q. 113 

My Home and Family . 75 51st $ile 

Boy Meets Girl ..... 73 Verbal Scale I.Q. 114 

Health .30 Performance Scale I.Q. 110 

Things in General .» 7$ 


SSHA Results 

Indices of 
Underachievement 

Percentile "Wrong" Answers 

Preliminary Index .. 57 

Final Index.. 65 30th 16 

Christmas Index .... 52 


Taschuk - Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

Raw Score Percentile 

73 47th 


Gough Predictive Scale 
Items Right: 19 

McQuary Underachievement 
Scale 


Items Right: 9 




















































0 













o 








317 


CASE NO. 29 


Kuder Preference Record 


Scale Percentile 

Outdoors. 61 

Mechanical . 57 

Computational . 90 

Scientific . 70 

Persuasive . 33 

Artistic . 13 

Literary. 54 

Musical o. •.. ..17 

Social Service 63 

Clerical .......... o 65 


G-Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity 97 

Restraint .. 70 

Ascendance . 73 

Sociability . 50 

Emotional Stability ... 75 

Objectivity . 97 

Friendliness .»• 55 

Thoughtfulness . 39 

Personal Relations .... 65 
Masculinity . . 52 


SRA Youth Inventory 


Scale Percentile 

My School . 5 

Looking Ahead ....... 50 

About Myself ........ 37 

Getting Along With 

Others ......... 12 

My Home and Family •• 15 
Boy Meets Girl 5 

Health..30 


Things in General ... 27 

Indices of 
Underachievement 

Preliminary Index ... 60 


Final Index ...67 

Christmas Index ••••• 52 


Taschuk - Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

Raw Score Percentile 

74 45th 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 

Test Year Results 

Laycock 1953 I.Q. 126 

SCAT 1955 96th jSile 

Wechsler 1955 I.Q. 116 

57th foile 

Verbal Scale I.Q. 124 
Performance Scale I.Q. 104 


SSHA Results 


Percentile "Wrong” Answers 

69 th 4 


Gough Predictive Scale 
Items Right: 19 


McQuary Underachievement 
Scale 


Items Right: 7 































































318 


CASE NO. 30 


Kuder Preference Record 

Scale Percentile 

Outdoors. 86 

Mechanical . 65 

Computational . 2 

Scientific . 25 

Persuasive . 55 

Artistic . 56 

Literary . 65 

Musical . 40 

Social Service ..... 42 
Clerical ..25 


G-Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity . 25 

Restraint . 5 

Ascendance . 20 

Sociability ..12 

Emotional Stability.... 38 

Objectivity ..30 

Friendliness . 63 

Thoughtfulness . 25 

Personal Relations .... 58 
Masculinity. 75 


SRA Youth Inventory 

Scale Percentile 

My School . 60 

Looking Ahead... 85 

About Myself «....... 58 

Getting Along With 

Others ........ 89 

My Home and Family .. 15 

Boy Meets Girl ..93 

Health .. 99 

Things in General ... 91 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 

Test Year Results 


Laycock 1953 I.Q. 109 

Otis 1958 I.Q. 108 

SCAT 1958 91st jJile 

Wechsler 1958 I.Q. 121 

94th folle 

Verbal Scale I.Q. 122 
Performance Scale I.Q. 112 


Indices of 
Underachie vernent 


SSHA Results 

Percentile "Wrong" Answers 


Preliminary Index ... 57 
Final Index ......... 58 

Christmas Index ..... 56 


Tasehuk - Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

Percentile 


20th 9 


Gough Predictive Scale 

Items Right: 11 

McQuary Underachievement 
Scale 


60th 


Items Right: 10 


Raw Score 


























































-L •,oc; : on 



::h 


o J: 


V 




''V 0 










319 


CASS NO. 31 


Kuder Preference Record 


Scale Percentile 

Outdoors . 45 

Mechanical .15 

Computational ...... $4 

Scientific . $0 

Persuasive .91 

Artistic . $ 

Literary . 75 

Musical . 25 

Social Service . 18 

Clerical . 94 


G-Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity ...... 17 

Restraint . 19 

Ascendance . 15 

Sociability . 5 

Emotional Stability ... 18 

Objectivity .. 7 

Friendliness 30 

Thoughtfulness ..73 

Personal Relations .... 45 
Masculinity ... .. 55 


SRA Youth Inventory 

Scale Percentile 

My School . $0 

Looking Ahead . $3 

About Myself ........ 64 

Getting Along With 

Others ........ $7 

My Home and Family .. 70 
Boy Meets Girl ...... 77 

Health. 84 

Things in General ... 77 


Indices of 
Underachievement 

Preliminary Index ... 60 


Final Index.. 68 

Christmas Index.60 


Taschuk - Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

Raw Score Percentile 

107 89 th 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 

Test Year Results 


Laycock 1953 I.Q. 102 

Laycock 1956 I.Q. 108 

SCAT 1953 91st %±le 

Wechsler 195^ I.Q. 119 

89 th foils 

Verbal Scale I.Q. 119 
Performance Scale I.Q; 112 


SSHA Results 

Percentile "Wrong' 1 Answers 
7 th 16 


Gough Predictive Scale 
Items Right: 17 

McQuary Underachievement 
Scale 

Items Right: 


8 

















































0 















320 


CASE NOo 32 


Kuder Preference Record 


G-Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

Outdoors.. 

...14 

Mechanical .«...., 


Computational ... 

...37 

Scientific . 

... 35 

Persuasive ....... 


Artistic ........< 


Literary.. 

...92 

Musical .... 

...33 

Social Service 

... 36 

Clerical .. 

...95 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity . 50 

Restraint . 5$ 

Ascendance .. 10 

Sociability. 30 

Emotional.Stability ... 5$ 

Objectivity *. 75 

Friendliness. 93 

Thoughtfulness . 18 

Personal Relations •••• 99 
Masculinity. 97 


SRA Youth Inventory Intelligence and Ability 

Test Results 

Scale Percentile 


, Test Year Results 

My School ... 70 

Looking Ahead ....... 50 Detroit 1949 I®Q. 127 

About Myself ........ 65 Laycock 1953 I.Q. 103 

Getting Along With SCAT 195$ $2nd %±le 

Others ........ 45 Wechsler 195$ I.Q. 104 

My Home and Family .. 54 60th %±le 

Boy Meets Girl ....o. 8 Verbal Scale I.Q. 113 

Health.. 30 Performance Scale I.Q. 93 

Things in General ... 27 


SSHA Results 

Indices of 
Ur»derachievement 

Percentile w Wrong n Answers 

Preliminary Index .. 61 

Final Index. ..70 9th $ 

Christmas Index .... 59 


Taschuk - Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

Raw Score Percentile 

76 52nd 


Gough Predictive Scale 
Items Right: 17 

McQuary Underachievement 
Scale 

Items Right: 7 



















































o ■ .L£<ra 


Oi jL 


JiiO 






321 


CASE NO. 33 


Kuder Preference Record 

Scale Percentile 

Outdoors . 73 

Mechanical..... 81 

Computational 75 

Scientific . 88 

Persuasive ... •«•. • • 5 

Artistic .. 34 

Literary ...12 

Musical .13 

Social Service ..... 43 
Clerical . 55 


G-Z Temperament Survey 
Scale Percentile 


General Activity <>.... 35 

Restraint . 30 

Ascendance . 30 

Sociability . 83 

Emotional Stability .• 85 

Objectivity . 55 

Friendliness ..16 

Thoughtfulness . ...«.o 65 
Personal Relations ... 91 
Masculinity. 74 


SRA Youth Inventory 
Scale Percentile 


My School .... ..8 k 

Looking Ahead ..... 0 . 83 

About Myself 0 . 80 

Getting Along With 

Others ...««o». 19 
My Home and Family «• 45 

Boy Meets Girl .. 8 

Health ... o 13 

Things in General ... 14 


Indices of 
Underachievement 

Preliminary Index ... 62 

Final Index.* 71 

Christmas Index ..... Nil 


Taschuk - Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

Percentile 

72nd 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 

Test Year Results 

SCAT 195^ 51st %ile 
Wechsler 1955 I.Q. 107 

6$th %ile 

Verbal Scale I.Q. 113 
Performance Scale I.Q. 99 


SSHA Results 

Percentile ft Wrong” Answers 

12th 12 


Gough Predictive Scale 
Items Right: 15 


McQuary Underachievement 
Scale 

Items Right: II 


Raw Score 
91 






















































c .v 


c 



1 ;:) c 


s UM'C 




dijod A 








-0 













322 


CASE NO. 34 


Kuder Preference Record 


Scale Percentile 

Outdoors .. 7 

Mechanical.. 64 

Computational ..97 

Scientific . 87 

Persuasive . 40 

Artistic .•••..«»••. 65 

Literary ..... . 35 

Musical ....13 

Social Service ..... 74 
Clerical .. 58 


G-Z Temperament Survey 


Scale Percentile 

General Activity . 1 

Restraint . 15 

Ascendance . 9 

Sociability . 10 

Emotional Stability ••«• 14 

Objectivity . 11 

Friendliness .. 30 

Thoughtfulness.... 0 72 

Personal Relations ..... 25 
Masculinity.35 


SRA Youth Inventory 

Scale Percentile 

My School ..91 

Looking Ahead ....... 7$ 

About Myself ..90 

Getting Along With 

Others ..37 

My Home and Family .. 16 
Boy Meets Girl ...... 30 

Health .. 76 

Things in General ... 28 


Indices of 
Underachievement 

Preliminary Index ... 61 

Final Index.. • • • 68 

Christmas Index ..... 33 


Taschuk - Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

Raw Score Percentile 

119 96th 


Intelligence and Ability 
Test Results 


Test Year Results 


Detroit 1949 I.Q. 105 

Laycock 1953 I.Q. 114 

SCAT 195S 37th j£iie 

Wechsler 195$ I.Q. 113 

81st %ile 

Verbal Scale I.Q. 117 
Performance Scale I.Q. 105 


SSHA Results 

Percentile "Wrong” Answers 
15th 23 

Gough Predictive Scale 
Items Right: 13 

McQuary Underachievement 
Scale 

Items Right: $ 




















































3 ' 3 


CASE NO. 35 


Kuder Preference Record 
Scale Percentile 


Outdoors . 52 

Mechanic al . 90 

Computational ...... $2 

Scientific . £6 

Persuasive 5 

Artistic ...... 53 

Literary . ••••••o... 75 

Musical. ... 2$ 

Social Service ♦ 30 

Clerical . 71 


G-Z, Temperament Survey 
Scale Percentile 


General Activity •...». 10 

Restraint ..5 

Ascendance • • • • 0 • <> •..». 30 

Sociability ..15 

Emotional Stability 0 o. 15 

Objectivity ..* 63 

Friendliness . . 1$ 

Thoughtfulness . 20 

Personal Relations .... 65 
Masculinity . 9$ 


SRA Youth Inventory Intelligence and Ability 

Test Results 

Scale Percentile 

Test Year Results 

My School . 42 

Looking Ahead.45 Laycock 1954 I.Q. 10$ 

Abouy Myself .. $6 SCAT 195$ $2nd %±le 

Getting Along With Wechsler 195$ I 0 Q 0 113 

Others.37 _ $lst folle 

My Home and Family .• 54 Verbal Scale I.Q. 110 

Boy Meets Girl.37 Performance Scale I.Q. 114 

Health .. 64 

Things in General . e . 37 

SSHA Results 

Indices of Fereentile "Wrong" Answers 

Underachievement 

~ 15th 1$ 

Preliminary Index ... 55 


Christmas Index ...o. 56 Gough Predictive Scale 


Items Right: 1$ 

Tasehuk-Hepburn 
Discrepancy Score 

McQuary Underachievement 
Raw Score Percentile Scale 

96 th Items Right: 


121 


9 


















































0 










0 "' ' f '. 


0 















APPENDIX A 


324 


COMPUTATION OF A PRELIMINARY INDEX OF UNDERACHIEVEMENT 


Grade nine departmental letter and stanine grades: 


Literature 
Language . 


B6) 


bM 


)English .. b5 


Social Studies . A 0 

Mathematics . 

Science . b5 

The stanine scores for English, Social Studies, 
Mathematics and Science are totalled, and the mean taken: 

English . 5 

Social Studies . 6 

Mathematics . ..... 4 

Science . 5 


Total . 20 Mean ... 5 

The mean so obtained is divided by the student’s 
SCAT percentile (here 90) and the result of this operation 
is multiplied by 1,000 in order to remove decimals. 


90)5 (.055 .055 x 1,000 = 55.5 or 56 

The PRELIMINARY INDEX OF UNDERACHIEVEMENT in this 


case is 56 












> c 

• ^ 







■ ' ' ’ . c • 









325 


APPENDIX B 

COMPUTATION OF A FINAL INDEX OF UNDERACHIEVEMENT 

Grade nine departmental raw or scaled scores: 


Literature . 

. 60) 

Language .. 

) English .. 56 
. 52) 

Social Studies .. 

. 63 

Mathematics.. 

. 50 

Science . 

.62 


The scaled scores for English, Social Studies, 
Mathematics, and Science are totalled, and the mean taken: 


English ... 

. 56 

Social Studies ... 

. 63 

Mathematics.. 

. 50 

Science . .... 


Total 


The mean so obtained is 

divided by the student T s 


SCAT percentile (here 90), and the result of this operation 
is multiplied by 100 in order to remove decimals, 

90)ITS (,604 .604 x 100 = 60.4 or 60 

The FINAL INDEX OF UNDERACHIEVEMENT in this case 


is 60 












5 



c 


5 




c >sm 


t 


( ‘x 0 







APPENDIX C 


326 


Lead 1 : 

Primer 


Lead 2 : 

Primer 
Lead 3 : 

Primer 

Lead 4 : 

Lead 5 : 

Primer 

Be Sure 


FIRST STRUCTURED INTERVIEW, "FREE TIME" 


In our first interview, I would like you to tell me 
about the things you do outside school. What do you 
usually do after school is over? 

a. Do you go in for any sports after school? 

b. What about school work at home? 

c. Do you help out in the store, garage, etc.? 

d. What do you do in the way of hobbies? 

e. What about clubs, Scouts, the Y, and other 
such organized groups? 

f. What do you do in the way of social activities, 
dates, and the like? 

g. Do you do any reading? What? Where do you get 
your books and magazines? 

h. Do you listen to the radio; watch TV; go to the 
movies? 

i. Do you do any shop or mechanical work? 

j. Do you work for pay? If so, how many hours per 
day? Per week? 

What do you do on the week-ends? 

a. Same as for Lead 1, modified. 

Tell me something more about your summer vacations. 
How do you spend your summers? 

a. 'What about swimming? 

b. Do you do any farm work? 

c. Do summers give you a chance to do pretty much 
as you want? 

d. What would you like to do next summer? 

What did you use to do a year ago? 

Of the things you do in your free time, what do you 
like best? 

a. Why do you like that best? 

b. How do you get along with other fellows, girls, 
adults? 

c. Do you have a "steady" girl friend? 
to Get: 


What he does (play, read, attend parties, work, do 
school work, loaf). 

Whom he doe's it with. 

His perception of his relationships with boys. 














c 



c- 








c 



' 





C ■' 



'Ti 


■f 













t 


: ; j i > 


IJ 




APPENDIX C, CONTINUED 


327 


His perception of his relationships with girls. (If 
he does not respond, this area may develop through 
questions about dancing and movies.) 

His perception of his relationships with authority, 
teachers, adults, etc. 

His perception of his ability in any of several areas 
(e.g., sports.) 

Evidences of continuing interests as indicated by 
activities pursued intensively for some period of 
time. 

His role in activities (leader, follower). 
Satisfaction derived from activities (mastery, 
prestige, belongingness, etc.) 




. 1 

- ' J - 

. c 

■;.£ ai: 









cl t) 0 


( ' ■ 

, 

: 

* 


APPENDIX D 


328 


Lead 1 : 

Primer 


Be Sure 


Lead 2 : 

Primer 

Be Sure 


SECOND STRUCTURED INTERVIEW, "SCHOOL" 


Last time we talked about your free-time activities. 

This time let's talk about what you are doing this 

year in school. 

a. What is your favorite subject? (Explore what 
he likes about it; things he does in that class; 
how he behaves.) 

b. What subject do you like least? (Explore.) 

c. Tell me about your other subjects. 

d. Tell me about your electives. How did you 
pick them? 

e. How do you feel about gym? 

f. What do you do in study periods? Do you study 
at home? How long? Do you have a room where 
you can study, free from interruption? 

g. What sort of grades are you getting? 

h. Do your grades give a fair picture of your 
ability? If not, why? 

to Get : 

Self-concept with respect to high school work: 
General ability 

Specific strengths and weaknesses; likes and 
dislikes, in terms of content and activity. 

Role in class, i.e., active versus passive. 

Attitudes towards teachers and toward school in 
general. 

Attitudes towards classmates. 

What course of study are you following in high 

school? (i.e., matriculation, business, etc.) 

a. Can you get the kind of subjects you want here? 
What kind of subjects would you like to have? 

b. With whom do you discuss your school plans? 

Do you ever discuss them with your friends? 

c. How do your parents feel about your school 
grades? Your school plans? 

d. (Where appropriate) Do you like school? 

to Get: 


Key figures in arriving at plans. 

Reasons offered for plans. 

If none, or indefinite plans, when does he expect 
to plan? Why postpone? 








:v. •. •• : 





APPENDIX D, CONTINUED 


329 


Lead 

Primer 


Be Sure 


Lead 4: 

Primer 

Lead 5.: 
Lead 6: 
Lead 2 : 
Lead 3: 


There are lots of other things you can do at school 
besides take subjects. What are some of the things 
you do? 

a. What do you think of the sports program here? 

b. What do you think of the clubs and other school 
activities? Assemblies? 

c. Are you holding any school offices this year? 
What? Did you in former years? 

d. What about the other boys and girls? How do 
you feel about the social life of the school? 

Is this a friendly school? 

to Get : 

Kinds of activities participated in, such as student 
government, sports, publications, clubs. 

Extent of participation, i.e., perfunctory versus 
active role. 

Kinds of satisfaction derived from participation, 

e. g., prestige, going along with the gang, direct 
enjoyment from the activity. 

How he spends his n free time n at school, (i.e., 
noon hours, study periods.) 

Self-concept with respect to activities. 

Do you plan to enter any of the extra-curricular 
activities? 

a. What are some of the activities which appeal 
to you most? (Get reasons for choice.) 

How does this year seem different than last year? 

What do you get out of going to school? 

If you were principal, what changes would you make? 

Have you ever been retarded a grade in school? Have 
you ever been accelerated? 










G, LOc:; 






0 







. c 


■.! i 



. . 











^ - 


0 






t 0.; ) .'■ GG 

: LO • 


. ' ■ ’ ' 


ii)zio G.t ' .0 






LiQOU 







330 


1 . 

Lead I s 

Primer 


Be Sure 


2 . 

Lead 1 : 

Primer 


APPENDIX E 

THIRD STRUCTURED INTERVIEW, "FAMILY" 


Area : Family in General 

We have talked before about your out-of-school 
activities, and about school itself. Another 
subject of interest to us, because it often has a 
lot to do with school achievement, is your family. 
Tell me something about your family. 

a. Tell me something about the various members of 
your family, who they are, what they are like, 
what they do. 

b. Which member of your family are you most like? 
How? 

c. Were you born in Canada? Were your parents? 
What languages are spoken in your home? 

d. Tell me about your other relatives. 

e. Did you ever live with anyone other than your 
own parents for any length of time? Are you 
living with your natural parents now? 

f. Are all of your brother and sisters living? 

to Get: 


Identification with or rejection of father and 

mother (role models). 

Identification or rivalry with siblings. 

Feelings of acceptance or rejection. 

Perception of role of father, mother, siblings, 

others in home. 

Attitude towards: Father’s occupation, clubs, etc. 

Family social status 

Family way of life 

Parental discipline, treatment, 

delegation of responsibility, 

fairness. 

Area : Activities of Family as a Group 

What do you and your family do together, as a group? 

a. Are there any places that you generally go with 
your family? 

b. Do you play games together, read aloud, sing, 
go for drives, watch sports, go on picnics? 





















c 



t/ 


* 


1 ;) 


; 


k ' ' 







5 




: > . i 








APPENDIX E, CONTINUED 


331 


3o 

Lead 1: 

Lead 2: 
Primer 

Be Sure 


4. 

Lead 1: 
Primer 

Be Sure 

5<> 

Lead 1: 
Lead 2: 
Primer 


Area; Parental Relationships 

Do you get to spend much time with your father, 
mother, or others? 

What do you do with your father, mother, others? 

a. Is your father at home much? mother? others? 

b. Would you like to be able to spend more time 
with anyone in your family than you do now? 

c. Do you do any work around the house with your 
father? (Get specific examples.) 

d. Do you ever play games with him? Catch ball, etc 

e. Has your family frequently moved from one place 
to another? 

f. Do your parents belong to a Home and School group 
to Get : 

Identification - rejection of parent. 

Acceptance - rejection by; parent. 

Perception of roles. 

Attitudes toward parental treatment. 

A r ea : Chores ( Responsibilities of the Boy ) 

How do the household chores get done? 

a. Are there things that you have to do around 
the house? 

b. How do you feel about doing these things? 
to Get: 

Organization of family for work; perception of 
his responsibilities. 

Area : Socio - Economic Status 

Where do you get your spending money? 

How do you use it? 

a. What things have you wanted to buy recently? 

Did you get them? 

b. Are you able to go out with others and do the 
things they do as often as you would like? 
























* 


% 





C'Q 




Q 


0 




c 


r 




J ' 




■ : 0 .' - 




J 


o'C 









r'j J„t ■ 1 GO - .l ; . : ‘1 


"■: s O i:; l : i 








Be Sure 


o. 

Lead 1 : 

Primer 

Lead 2 : 

Primer 

Lead 

Primer 

Be Sure 

7. 

Lead 1: 

Primer 


APPENDIX E, CONTINUED 


332 


to Get: 


Attitudes towards savings; use of money in family. 
Do they hoard, save, splurge? 

Plenty-scarcity. 

Area : Plans - Relationships 

Do you talk over your plans for the future with any 
of your folks? 

a. Do you think parents should help a boy choose 
his career? 

People generally have things that bother them from 
time to time. Do you ever talk these things over 
with your folks? 

a. Do you tell your parents your troubles? 

b. Do you like to tell your parents when something 
good happens to you? 

c. I suppose there are some things you don f t like 
to tell your parents. What sort of things do 
you wish you could get more help on from your 
parents? 

Do you think your parents understand young people? 

a. Do youi think you and your parents generally see 
things the same way, or differently? 

to Get : 

Acceptance - rejection feelings 
Perception of parental roles 
Attitudes towards family way of life; values; 
standards; up-to-dateness; etc. 

Attitudes towards parental treatment; discipline; 
delegation of responsibility; fairness. 

Area : Projection of Subject T s Familial Values 

What sort of home and family have you thought you 
would like to have when you are older? 

a. What do you think a father should be like? 

b. Any particular ideas about how you T re going to 
treat your children? 

c. Would you like to be a ? (Father 1 s 

occupation.) 















o 




L ■ , 




o;r 


i.t 'j i 



. 

o i. 


i;uv; ifio 


J • '.;v; i /.Co; 

.no 7 ;; o:■?*:I 

v ■' . • ’i ■' ‘ . ..' . 

: •. : ■!'■: J.y -.0 oo . ,j ; ' ; iiiov 


• yji 'r •! ■ o v ; ■ f ;<y • oi 

‘IT ■ V ' ■. ■ •; j o ■ 


- - 

/. jao'::;:v ; ■ro.i 



- y j : ' r <. -'"V '•d J; t 'O.i 

' : . - n > l , ' c , 


- " 




Lead 1 : 

Primer 


Be Sure 


Lead 2. i 

Primer 

Be Sure 


Lead 3 : 

Primer 


APPENDIX F 

FOURTH STRUCTURED INTERVIEW, "PLANS" 


333 


We T ve talked about school, your activities outside 
school, and your family. This time let T s talk about 
your plans for the future. What would you like to 
be by the time you are thirty years old? 

a. How did you decide on this occupation? Who 
influenced you? 

b. ll/hat would you do as a ? 

c. Why do you want to be a ? 

d. Most people have a general idea of the kind of 
men they want to be when they grow up. What sort 
of person do you want to be? 

e. How do you expect to achieve that ambition? 

to Get: 


Work values and attitudes 

Desire versus expectation (e.g., wishes versus 
perception of ability). 

Alternatives 

Reasonably planful versus haphazard 
Optimistic versus pessimistic 

Occupational goal, information, and reasons for 
choices. 

How far do you intend to go with your education? 

a. What sort of education do you want? Why? 

b. Do you expect to be able to get it? 

c. Do you think you can handle it? 

to Get : 

Type and level of education 
Clarity of plans 

What would you like to get out of work? Give 
choices as opportunity for elaboration. 

a. What are some of the reasons other people work? 
Which of those seem most important to you? 

b. What does your father think of his job? What 
does he think is a good job? What does he think 
of your job choices? 









' 

■ i O' 



I'rov/:.; .brr': 3-0 & I*. v( vbi&W', 

. . r;; :'Vv oCl- 

' 

/>:) ■ . 1 ■ 

; V . . :>i • q '^1( •.! • • .>Lv• 

' *1 . h 

: c ! . • v - taq&WO 

Hi; j ■■ c :. ■/ :.. ;>< ; 


.iX) ,rx\ c< ■ =, 

i ' ■ ■ ! 




J. T 



«... i: • -; ' jj; > ,.■ .' : ' 

ri: i]):>/■ 

: .. 
b: 

b;- : -. ■ • ,f •• 

• d . 





Lead 4: 

Be Sure 

Lead J5: 

Primer 

Lead 6: 
Primer 
Be Sure 

Lead 7: 
Primer 


APPENDIX F, CONTINUED 


334 


What would you like to get out of life? What would 
success be for you? 

to Get : 

Philosophy of life 

Values to be derived from work 

What problems do you see that might make it hard for 
you to achieve your ambitions? What might you do 
about them? Will you have to give up anything in 
order to achieve your ambitions? What? 

Raise problems we anticipate after we get this 
statement* 

How old would you like to be when you get married? 

a. Why then? 
to Get : 

Reasons for early, normal, or late marriage* 

What sort of person do you think you are? 

a* What are your strong points? 

b. What are your weak points? 

c* What do you like about yourself? 
d* What don f t you like about yourself? 
e. Do you think you are as strong, physically, as 
your friends? 








1 < - c • 


y. - 

•' 1 . ... ■ • ij , 

; 

r ' ’ V.'. ' v •. • ‘ l j;.1 

-> - ^ ( .'i' ' f; .U.L;'.-. / 

: 

: 

- ■ ‘ ' ■ i . •. • 

- J C -■ '• ‘ > 0 . v ; OO" 

.; j- 

: l -' •' V . f ■ ./ .M Q ; ; : }Xo WO' ( • 




• ■ ’ 


IC f r, f".Oc'y Cvi 

'3 >2 


• • ' ' . ' • 

VVJ- c\. :>r.:o<v': x:< v .. j'j 

" • • < '■■■■ o J ;k - . ; r • 

- l ' - C . ■" ’ ' - i : 0-. a" ..... J ! :0 

j 













APPENDIX G 

TASCHUK-HEPBURN INVENTORY OF SELF 


335 


DIRECTIONS FOR SELF-CONCEPT 

Everyone needs to know more about himself, but seldom 
do we stop to look at ourselves as we really are* On the 
following pages are statements used by young people to 
describe themselves* You are asked to matk each statement 
as directed below. Your answers are confidential and will 
not be read by anyone not connected with this study* Be 
honest with yourself as that your description will be a 
true measure of how you look at yourself* 

The letters following each statement have the following 
meanings: 

T true of me - a good description of me 
MT mostly true of me - but not completely true 

N neither true nor false - doesn T t apply to me 
MF mostly false of me - like me only to a small extent 

F false of me - not like me at all 

Read each statement and decide how true it is of you* 

Then circle and mark the letter or letters following each 
statement to indicate how true it is of you* 

EXAMPLES: 

a. I am an agreeable person T MT N MF F 

b. I am childish T MT N MF F 

Following statement (a) the letters MT are circled and. 
marked, indicating that the statement is mostly true of you, 
but not completely true. 

Following statement (b) the letter F is circled and 
marked, indicating that the statement is false of you, not 
like you at all* 

Please make only one mark after each statement. Complete 
all the items* There is no time limit, but do not spend 
too much time on any one statement so that you can complete 
all the statements during this class period. 

Name_ _ School_______ 









d 


oc 



Of! oj 

oro ;■ oUco l 


o 


C. O 


JO 






o 


j.c 



'A.OC. 





c , 


y.o .oc 


o 


i , 


[ 


d o* 


,c. 





. on. o 


not'I iq oldOOCri' 


c 




c 


JO 





f.C 




C . ‘ j 






L £i® 


GOO 


Od > 




APPENDIX G, CONTINUED 


336 


1. 

I am honest 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

2. 

I can T t stand criticism 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

3. 

I have many friends 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

4. 

People can depend on me 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

5. 

I have patience with others 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

6. 

I have a good sense of humor 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

7. 

I have confidence in myself 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

8. 

People who know me, like me 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

9= 

I am a lonely person 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

10. 

My teachers like me 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

11. 

I wear my clothes well 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

12. 

I understand myself 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

13. 

There is nothing outstanding 
about me 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

14. 

I make up my mind easily 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

15. 

Religion plays an important part 
in my life 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

16. 

I think clearly 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

17. 

I make a bad impression on people 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

• 

to 

i—1 

I am capable of looking after 
myself 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

19. 

I am loyal to my friends 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

20. 

I am likeable 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

21. 

I am brave 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

22. 

I am truthful 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

23. 

I am a flirt 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 


'e . 




. l . ■ i . 


Jiiono . ... 

i " ‘ r er: e V - // 

a ior:i ■ ovr,d 1 

..) o 1 ;■■■• i -: o .!. ;uo : 

■ ’ oonoxS &v&d I 

' -■0: '.! ■ • i J.o : .K:U ?cl ' rocr £: fW&ri 1 
x !'.(■->q li • 0:>.(::efr.tz;:>00 evee I 

" j;.. ? : re oJv; jIc[QO‘ l 

r career yienoX s u" I 

■ . ■ 8 iIo . 

oil id ; ire ’ 

.j'.rx I 


.: I Si c ■ j x iSOi ax TSM 

uc j'xodr 


o 'i '■ ; Jrrt’.'c . ye 


< 1 ■ I f - 


c ... 

: 


. 

e ■ re r eer X red' e -J X 


r 3 ' . ' ■ o 

: 1 T ' £ £ - •’ , 


i 

■ / "I 

j'e ■ iJ'iiecI ifiv 1C 






337 


APPENDIX G, CONTINUED 


24. 

I 

am kind 

T 

MT 

N 

25. 

I 

get along with others 

T 

MT 

N 

26. 

I 

have good self control 

T 

MT 

N 

27. 

I 

am ambitious 

T 

MT 

N 

28. 

I 

am intelligent 

T 

MT 

N 

29. 

I 

am attractive 

T 

MT 

N 

30. 

My feelings are easily hurt 

T 

MT 

N 

31. 

I 

am helpful to others 

T 

MT 

N 

32. 

I am attractive to members of 
the opposite sex 

T 

MT 

N 

33. 

I 

worry about little things 

T 

MT 

N 

34. 

I 

envy others 

T 

MT 

N 

35. 

I get along well with members of 
the opposite sex 

T 

MT 

N 

36. 

I 

am a happy person 

T 

MT 

N 

37. 

I 

am good at sports 

T 

MT 

N 

3d. 

I 

am easily discouraged 

T 

MT 

N 

39. 

I 

am unable to solve my problems 

T 

MT 

N 

40. 

Most people avoid me 

T 

MT 

N 

41. 

I have good common sense 

T 

MT 

N 

42. 

I 

am nervous (jumpy) 

T 

MT 

N 

43. 

I 

am clumsy 

T 

MT 

N 

44. 

I 

am considerate of others 

T 

MT 

N 

45. 

I 

like my parents 

T 

MT 

N 

46. 

I 

am a good dancer 

T 

MT 

N 


MF F 
MF F 
MF F 
MF F 
MF F 
MF F 
MF F 
MF F 

MF F 
MF F 
MF F 

MF F 
MF F 
MF F 
MF F 
MF F 
MF- F 
MF F 
MF F 
MF F 
MF F 
MF F 


MF F 



n 





0 ‘.£ 


- ' ■ ! } 





APPENDIX G,CONTINUED 


333 


47. 

I 

settle down to work easily 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

43. 

I 

am good looking 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

49. 

I 

have good taste in clothing 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

50. 

I feel at ease when others are 
around 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

51. 

I 

am just the right weight 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

52. 

I 

have good judgment 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

53. 

I 

am a good sport 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

54. 

I get along well with members 
of my own sex 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

55. 

I 

am shy 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

56. 

I 

have a lot of energy 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

57. 

I 

know right from wrong 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

53. 

People take advantage of me 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

59. 

I 

am easily embarrassed 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

60. 

I 

am restless 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

61. 

I 

worry about my health 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

62. 

I 

am respected by others 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

63. 

I 

am courteous 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

64. 

I 

am co-operative 

T 

MT 

N 

MF ' 

F 

65. 

I 

have good eyesight 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

66. 

I am a disappointment to my 
parents 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

67. 

I 

am neat and tidy 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

68. 

I 

daydream a lot 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

69. 

I 

am a hard worker 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

70. 

I 

am just the right height 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 




f: 

' ;i '_c 







X 



A'XO'w 


0 . 



: < . 

‘•E-i ,i L L? 


i , ! 


VI 








'0‘-. OV "Ml 


' . '/ v 

* 

. nWc vc ‘tc 

'i •.: : ■: . „ 

■'o.-: ■ :■ 

, i <' ." -I Oi. * 7 .. 

C Lf'CC/ ' j * q 

L: - ' cJ: \ f .77 

Li ' O . i. . d 

‘1 L 

* . . 

. o ; 

v ' ' ■ c -co 

ML . ' * : . 

% c. i;' o'- • y.. y. ' * o 

c.J-c M,: :-j; 

* 

■ ' 

'• c. , 




APPENDIX H 


339 


TASCHUK-HEPBURN INVENTORY OF SELF 
DIRECTIONS FOR SELF-IDEAL CONCEPT 

Everyone needs to know more about himself, but seldom 
do we stop to consider ourselves as would really like to 
be. On the following pages are statements used by young 
people to describe how they would like to be. You are 
asked to mark each statement as directed below. Your 
answers are confidential and will not be read by anyone 
not concerned with this study. Be honest with yourself 
so that your description will be a true measure of the 
kind of person you would like to be. 

The letters following each statement have the following 
meanings: 

T true of me - a good description of the kind of 
person I would like to be 

MT mostly true of me - but not completely true of 
the kind of person I would like to be 

N neither true nor false - not applicable to the 
kind of person I would like to be 

MF mostly false of me - like the kind of person I 
would like to be only to a small extent 

F false of me - not like the kinf of person I would 
like to be at all 

Read each statement and decide how true it is of the 
kind of person you would like to be. Then circle and mark 
the letter or letters following each statement to indicate 
how true it is of the kind of person you would like to be. 

EXAMPLES: 

a. I would like to be an agreeable person T MT N MF F 

b. I would like to be envious T MT N MF F 

Following statement (a) the letter T is circled and 
marked, indicating that the statement is true of the kind 
of person you would like to be. 

Following statement (b) the letter F is circled and marked 
indicating that the statement is false , and is not like 
the person you would like to be. 




0 i>xXi 

i'£i. 

- . . 


■j.fjoJo ti’iOL' oil ; J r;i ‘301 

)J ■ .Li ^ i.: (.• ii r 7 v • • -X • vi';.: 

. x c - . , -X; :ot 1 x ' •:*on. ■> v, .o • '•? ' .voX . < ' ; o 

. 

1 j : t ! , ■ iX 

: iOY;I 1 X'G.0 O Ix-i ' X' "X'C:■ ■ GV 'Vi'-X i "■ 

- 

J X.o ri • •/, .,n ; X.FJ . or r \, ' 'io ' - . X oo 

» 

: ol..uoXx u>v1 '"'o ■ . ; ; u .* oi.'-G''.,; ox.' gXm,. • o r ‘ 

: : : ' . 


o ■ , X: ? ’ c '■ ;• ■ . o. ' r boo: - ■ 

o. oX Sj! J: . ' •.. r .:ov. .! * x. :vi 








0 : ; 



‘X 


.; J- . XX" 

- : 

; X ■ ■;' ; . 

X uo gxIxl iijjjox-i jj'Oi 


. 0 J' n 

■ x j 

x. : X hi . nr * ;hi . x 

> i.X. 0.\ ' ■ ’ ’0o.. l 




> ; ()Li r i? -■ n • £.)■: v>J o:U: . ' Jj oi 


! < . 


; 


01 ; 


‘.1 . • J': J. OuX' (< \j X,: ... J . o •:; L.'X 0.i.. i.c\ 

7 V ... Jl' 1 .1J '': ... . c I 

* ■'.i.. . j o } < •- 

l,v. J; • > J: ’'i J\j J. 0;X.i \ ,f ) X. 1 . >'il.. i'0 ^O.i.'O.ixO ; 

;■ ■. ^ \i. X:. o..i: x .. x . X: x.•,;; | 

* 


APPENDIX H, CONTINUED 


340 


Please mark only one item after each statement* 
Complete all the items* There is no time limit, but do 
not spend too much time on any one statement so that you 
can complete all statements during this class period. 


Name_ 


School 


1. 

I would like 
criticism 

to be able to stand 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

2. 

I would like 

to be honest 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

3 o 

I would like 

to have many friends 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

4. 

I would like to think that people 
can depend on me 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

5. 

I would like 
others 

to have patience with 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

6. 

I would like 
person 

not to be a lonely 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

7. 

I would like 
of humor 

to have a good sense 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

6. 

I would like 
in myself 

to have confidence 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

9. 

I would like 
to like me 

people who know me 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

10. 

I would like 
me 

my teachers to like 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

11. 

I would like 
well 

to wear my clothes 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

12. 

I would like 

to understand myself 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

13. 

I would like it if there were 
nothing outstanding about me 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

14. 

I would like to be able to make 
up my mind easily 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 






■o.u Jo. ox ooo odd 

■,dd • f. ' 1 ■••.*!{ oo 

;j»Uivi GOu hnsqo ,;1 or. 

II;: ool led os hoo 


n 



;u;Gro ' o c .7 d i. d.o;o 


! 


< ■ d 7 : i I o < d . ■ : j. . i Is c . 

f:r;. 'FO duo-sd 


■i,oI o od od :coo.;dd fcljjo 1 ; 


. o. ’ c; ■ d doc . 

oo. j. / do 

, ■ • ; ; ' 07 - .d. . d; c l 

Jds .: \0. .fid 

L./i'-v..: . ' GDC 

Si:: O'did. Oj 

Gv • O v ■ '. __ 1 J-j.i C .. « 


o dolo i .. . . od d . ' lx ( 


d./.OOV;. du:: j .d.,ri; I OJ Odld d-d;o :7 d 

070 ' 070 d dd od oddo ■ Jid/o J! 
0.7 do od / vo; Jo i.o rood: e ■ , Jo od. o. 

(.o.;dd,L ddoeo I 

00 dd.- 0.0 JO ■' <"X 





341 


APPENDIX H, CONTINUED 


15. 

I would like religion to play 
an important part in my life 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

16. 

I would like not to make a bad 
impression on people 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

17. 

I would like to think clearly 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

18 . 

I would like to be capable of 
looking after myself 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

19. 

I would like to be loyal to my 
friends 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

20. 

I would like to be likeable 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

21. 

I would like it if my feelings 
were not easily hurt 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

22. 

I would like to be brave 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

23. 

I would like to be truthful 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

24. 

I would like not to be a flirt 

T 


N 

MF 

F 

25. 

I would like to be kind 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

26. 

I would like not to worry about 
little things 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

27. 

I would like to get along with 
others 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

28. 

I would like to have good self 
control 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

29. 

I would like to be ambitious 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

30. 

I would like to be intelligent 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

31. 

I would like not to envy others 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

32. 

I would like to be attractive 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

33. 

I would like to be helpful to 
others 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 










^o; : ., . d 


d 00 




i ij 


' ( 







APPENDIX H, CONTINUED 


342 


34. 

I would like to be attractive 
to members of the opposite sex 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

35. 

I would like to get along with 
members of the opposite sex 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

36. 

I would like not to be easily- 
discouraged 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

37. 

I would like to be a happy 
person 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

38. 

I would like not to be nervous 
(jumpy) 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

39. 

I would like to be good at sports 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

40. 

I would like to have good common 
sense 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

41. 

I would like to be considerate 
of others 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

42. 

I would like to be able to solve 
my problems 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

43. 

I would like to like my parents 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

44. 

I would like to be a good dancer 

T. 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

45. 

I would like to settle down to 
work easily 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

46. 

I would like to be good looking 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

47. 

I would like most people not to 
avoid me 

T 


N 

MF' 

F 

48. 

I would like to have good taste 
in clothes 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

49. 

I would like to feel at ease 
when others are around 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

50. 

I would like to be just the 
right weight 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

51. 

I would like to have good 
judgment 

T 

MT. 

N 

MF 

F 




APPENDIX H, CONTINUED 


52. 

I would like 

to be a good sport 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

53. 

I would like 
with members 

to get along well 
of my own sex 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

54. 

I would like 
energy 

to have a lot of 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

55. 

I would like 
wrong 

to know right from 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

56. 

I would like 

not to be clumsy 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

57. 

I would like 
others 

to be respected by 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

58. 

I would like 

to be courteous 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

59. 

I would like 

to be co-operative 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

60. 

I would like 

to have good eyesight 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

61. 

I would like 

not to be shy 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

62. 

I would like 

to be neat and tidy 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

63 . 

I would like 

to be a hard worker 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

64. 

I would like 
height 

to be just the right 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

65. 

I would like for people not to 
take advantage of me 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

66. 

I would like 
embarrassed 

not to be easily 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

67. 

I would like 

not to be restless 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

68. 

I would like 
my health 

not to worry about 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

69. 

I would like not to be a 
disappointment to my parents 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 

70. 

I would like 

not to daydream a lot 

T 

MT 

N 

MF 

F 


j'O-i 


( ( 


- 

.'VO A 

ii.ov; ; mo.!; ■ 

• - o 



dvijoc v; 

; 

‘.CO oO.C : 



i'oujjOv; J 

;■ ■, i 

mV. civnom 


0 .. .r.x 


VOis.llJ.O 0 d OJ' 

C>0 xt 

• 

blXJOVC 1 

' (: V,i 0 0- 


c ; LLl 

-.Jjjo'o i 

CVICVldO 

B JJ OO cl'OX;00 

: 0 J 

■ 

.Q.UTGVI I 

. ■■ ■ 0 



. 

: 00-3 9v 

l q4 

V 

bluou I 

'Coia -od o;i 

o on 

o;>VVC 

bJj/ovj I 

:j l>nv ch-.oii od 

j ’. o V 

i ’ 

ibliiO'O I 

•I .u'l’iii •• o ; 

Oj 

r r* 

bJjro'vc I 

‘I Ola x ] 

■ OCX 

'■ 

foil row I 

VOO, .10.: i. 

'*t .ion eXqooo 
9il a 

•xo'i 
.0 80 

V olirovJ . 
rntn£vi)j? 3 ■: ■;}■ 

xV.JVx ■■ 0 90 oJ 

V on 

oyirl 

5. jjow 2 


' - ' 1*1 ' ( ' 


< '' ■ • :,t 'Z O J ( : .; J j j y .. ' 

. 1 uC £»j i . r "j o 

llCl'Ii ; f 

ovi cv o on e J. [c.Luov T 
:; ^no r i;n; vu o;i' onsinj'nioq.T: 

nnoo'jl. o;/ o' 1 on obii.C b.bnx./' I 




344 


The 


1. 

2 . 

3o 

4o 


5 . 

6 . 

7 . 

8 . 


9. 

10 . 

11 . 


12 o 

13. 

14. 


APPENDIX I 

McQUARY UNDERACHIEVEMENT SCALE 
answers provided are indicative of underachievement 


(F) I have never had a fainting spell* 

(F) I have never been paralyzed or had an unusual weakness 
in any of my muscles. 

(T) I am apt to pass up something I want to do because 
others feel that I am not going about it in the 
right way. 

(F) I have at some time in my life belonged to a crowd 
or gang that tried to stick together through thick 
and thin* 

(T) If I were in trouble with several friends who were 
equally to blame, I would rather take the whole 
blame than give them away. 

(T) It is alright to get around the law if you don’t 
actually break it* 

(F) I have never been introuble with the law. 

(T) At parties I am more likely to sit by myself or 
with just one other person than to join in with 
the crowd. 

(T) I enjoy social gatherings just to be with people* 

(T) I do not mind being made fun of. 

(T) It is always a good thing to be frank, that is, to 
say what you think is true regardless of how others 
will take it* 

(F) I do not try to cover up my poor opinion or pity 
of a person so that he won’t know how I feel. 

(T) People often have misunderstood my intentions when 
I was trying to put them right and be helpful. 

(F) I tend to be interested in several different hobbies 
rather than to stick to one of them for a long time* 





t i,: : v,; 




/•uiv v 


X'-Xi ’'I' V X '"v .1 


‘ . . ' , j j 


O ' ' • 



•• 

A 



L { V j 
OX 't JO 
: 1; xi 


. ■ o i , 

OX " / l: ooo ' ■' v , x: x c 


o 


• r 


X ) 


Oiiv? < 

.)|(XX X ; >. 1 


o': 




.X 


? 



; xj;cxuix,.. no©cl •xtsv'&n BYBd x ( } 


I : . ; ' X 

• ;; ;i '• ; xx. Oo . • x \ : riocxxoq x; j.' eno xx x: 

a 


OCX' VOt,.iXJ 


* 

O v v t . .•' O':' ' ' ! "X X.X" XOO;. J , ; X' x"!' :■ [ . ) 

0‘lO:uTO v X ■ J X, ; XL. X ■' X‘ ' OX'T,'; g j :rjx,X, XX- X • 'X • 

, X . . ' 

X ! -x; ‘<:c ncxixxx' o ■i'xox x > •• :jx joygxi ox xxxl' xox ox 1 ( v x) 

* - 

x -x 'clx,vx xoxxic/'bnx'xix ovx.x rojlo oloo-x 

* - 


» 




345 


APPENDIX I, CONTINUED 


15. 

(T) 

16. 

(T) 

17. 

(T) 

IS. 

(T) 

19. 

(T) 

20. 

(T) 


I often memorize numbers that are not important, 
such as automobile licenses. 

I have a habit of counting things that are not 
important, such as the number of cracks in the 
sidewalk. 

Sometimes I am sure that other people can tell 
what I am thinking. 

I have more trouble concentrating than other 
people seem to have. 

If I were an artist I would like to draw children. 
I like parties and socials. 


W £ 






0 £ 




£■0,0: o, 




'.nd'nrKOi '-to. «t rooit 




ii o cv on, 

, - 

-•■■ ■ c v> n,' • . 




■ 

• ; • ; . . , ■ . 


r ; .'or;oo oldioon j B*yx.<n. ev 


o 


( ; 


346 


APPENDIX J 


GOUGH PREDICTIVE SCALE 

The answers provided -are indicative of achievement 


!• (F) I have had very peculiar and strange experiences. 

2. (F) I have very few fears compared to my friends. 

3. (F) I usually take an active part in the entertainment 

at parties. 

4. (F) It is always a good thing to be frank. 

5o (F) I don f t blame anyone for trying to grab all he can 
get in this world. 

6. (F) I am a slow learner in school. 

7. (F) Sometimes without any reason, or even when things 

are going wrong, I feel very happy and t! on top of 
the world. n 

&. (F) Parents are much too easy on their children 

nowadays. 

9. (F) Teachers often expect too much work from their 

students. 

10. (F) I think I would like to fight in a boxing match 

sometime. 

11. (F) I have often found people to be jealous of my 

good ideas just because they had not thought of 
them first. 

12. (F) People pretend to care more about one another than 

they really do. 

13* (F) The future is too uncertain for a person to make 

serious plans. 

14. (F) The man who provides temptation by leaving valuable 

property unprotected is about as much to blame for 
its theft as the one who steals it. 




, . n . t \ 

: ■ /V- V!y. : .:V;; 

! . >i ij ' - : . ■[ 


q •: i ■ 


■ 


'T ch) brio ‘I. .i/i o ■ i 
< ;■ \r ■ -r v fy ';b!; 


\,"'V 


;: 7 




. 




' 









bV ;■;} 
, 


r 


/ 


1 

: to.], ;VO :: 



.'.o; ■ 


if ’ r •'-j'.i'.O • •b «i* y,;''.-) 00.'! ■">f ,-y ; . 

. O 


‘ I.C S is sTj" . .v.;0 , 'i ii'lO'i.' t.lOUiu oob J : j sc 




l L o 


bob I ; : /- , : ;r . V . j 


'] 

J.o ;.bV .p(;. ];] wf 


; 'biiOit] a no b. oj j . b 4 ibq c3 bimbBotO' eXc/o.a‘1 •) 

- 

* 

*' J y s k> s sjb/.vo; o;( rx y ; rIT ’b ) 

■b : 1 l . be/: . 1 . i ( •; 

* - •- ' 0 ■ ■ ■ J ,r;o : ;! j \ 



H', bb eb fey.yob .( >o‘io 1 { 

O j : y , L ;^ ... ■ , ) : y or ,,. 

. 





APPENDIX J, CONTINUED 


347 


15. (F) I dread the thought of earthquakes. 

16. (F) I am bothered by people outside, on street cars 

and busses, and in stores, watching me. 

17. (F) I feel that I have often been punished without 

cause. 

13. (T) I seem to be about as capable and smart as most 

other people around me. 

19* (T) I like poetry. 

20. (F) It is annoying to listen to a speaker who cannot 

seem to make up his mind as to what he really 
believes. 

21. (F) I like to plan a home study schedule and then 

follow it. 

22. (F) Our thinking would be a lot better off if we 

could just forget about words like, tT probably,’’ 

”approximately," and "perhaps.” 

23. (F) For most questions there is just one right answer 

once a person is able to get all the facts. 

24* (F) It is alright to get around the law so long as you 

don’t actually break it. 

23o (F) I often lose my temper. 

26. (F) I sometimes feel that I am a burden to others. 

27. {F) I look up to my father as an ideal man. 

23. (F) Law breakers are almost always caught and punished. 

29. (F) I have a tendency to give up easily when I meet 

difficult problems. 

30. (F) The trouble with many people is that they don’t 

take things seriously enough. 

31. (F) Only a fool would try to change our Canadian way of 

life. 





■ . . . 










34 $ 


APPENDIX J, CONCLUDED 


32o (F) Even when I sit down to study it is hard to keep 
my mind on my assignment. 

33* (F) It is often hard for me to understand what the 

questions in a school test or exam are "driving 
at o" 

34. (F) I have to wait for the right mood before I can 

sit down and study<> 

35* (T) I plan very carefully about what school courses 

I will take* 





349 


APPENDIX K 

LEVEL OF ASPIRATION BLANK 


Name 


School 


Mathematics: 


Highest ..Lowest.Actual* 

Highest*.Lowest*.* Actual* 

Social Studies : 

Highest* *.Lowest •••«•• * Actual* 

Highest.* Lowest* * *.. * * Actual* 

Science: 


Highest.* *.. 



Highest.••.• 



Language: 

Highest..... 



Highest...•• 



Literature: 

Highest. 



Highest. 




(Like to make) 
(Going to make) 


Like to make) 
Going to make) 


(Like to make) 
(Going to make) 


(Like to make) 
(Going to make) 


(Like to make) 
(Going to make) 
















































350 


APPENDIX L 

FACTORS MAKING FOR SUCCESS 


Name 


School 


Which of the following factors do you feel are 
most important to success? Please rank order your 
answer. 


health •....education .....manners 

personality .....clothes .....neatness 

cleanliness .appearance .good 

looks 

always doing .....any other .....knowing 

what you are (Explain) the 

told T, right n 

people 















i$n 



..UK 


0 


£ .. 





ze du ovi‘ ds cm 





351 


APPENDIX M 

PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS 


Name__School__ 

Please underline all the words and phrases that 
apply to you. 

Friendly Patient Stubborn Jealous 

Capable Calm Bashful Self-Confident 

Excitable Cheerful Anxious Unhappy 

Quick-tempered Easily tired out Give up easily 
Often down-hearted Act on the spur of the moment 
Hard-working Easily ordered about Popular 
Say the right thing at the right time 
Always seeing the dark side of things 


Hard to get along with 










0 


i '■ 'J C.;. 


odd; 


j 





C 


•t jJO 




Ov- 


352 


APPENDIX N 
READING PREFERENCES 


Name 


School 


What parts of the daily paper do you enjoy most? 
Rank order your answer; that is, place number 1 by your 
first choice, number 2 by your second choice, etc* 


♦•..oworld news •••*•editorials • •••♦sports 

••••©local news •••••comics •••••articles 

on new 

•••••any other not advances 

mentioned above in science, 

(Explain) education, 

etc. 


Please rank order the types of stories or articles 
you like best in magazines. 


.romance •••••science •••••religion 

.sports •••••technical •••••current 

news 

• ••••mystery •••••politics .arts 


.®..,any other 
(Explain) 
















cu 


■'j';or' ;r' 


O 




*o ? o': o 





•70 j .; c ; 


s D . , . 

. :h 0 : 


• Q 


. j J:, "Op * , * * „ 


■u 


f * <* •* »r 



islo J:::)' 


\<3 j 


Uo/ny o 


*a‘0 




353 


APPENDIX 0 
DATA ON SIBLINGS 


Name_School 


List the children in your family, including 
yourself. Start with the oldest. 















j.GO.u 0 




J[ 


■- --c : % 












354 


APPENDIX P 

VOCATIONAL PREFERENCES 

Name____School____ 

It is possible to make a rough classification of 
occupations in terms of your general interests and 
abilitieso In the following list, indicate in order of 
preference (that is, number them 1, 2, 3* etc*) the 
groups given. The group you think would suit you best 
is number 1, the next best is number 2, etc. 

.. .Occupations involving business contacts with 

people, such as various fields of selling, 
promotional work, canvassing, etc. 

.. Occupations involving business detail work, 

such as clerical work, cashier, banker, 
stenographer and accountant. 

. Occupations involving social welfare work, 

such as IMCA director, welfare worker, Boy 
Scout executive, and nurse. 

..Occupations requiring special artistic 

abilities, such as musician, artist, interior 
decorator, and designer. 

•o..o... Occupations involving executive responsibilities 
in which you would n boss !f others, such as 
foreman, superintendent, office manager, etc. 

•••••••• Occupations involving scientific and technical 

work, such as engineer, chemist, architect, 
and medical technician. 

. Occupations involving constructive and mechanical 

work, as printer, mechanic, machinist, tool 
maker, etc. 

. Occupations which would involve little contact 

with others, such as trapper, lighthouse keeper, 
park warden, radar maintenance worker, and 
prospector. 
















A "<■ - , ... . „ . 9iu1 


. : 

do- i/xo 

■ 

:r.i.?u jj o' 



FJJ, 



c. 



i 




LO r : 




t 



. .. . , 


?■ 


' : ' • 




t 


10V/ 



&X.J03 ; i, r ; v J_ 

c ' 7 : 

* 





■ id ± J. .i 

t 

O ' . ’ • ■ 


■ -: 0 •: 


jQXdr.cw'jD 



JJC 

o j 


< i 



do ‘ dvxuo 



........ 

• t'-- c do . .i; ; 

‘ ' ' : ' ' ' t • ' ' 

*\V ■':•)/) v; •; 











355 


APPENDIX Q 

BILLS T INDEX OF ADJUSTMENT AND VALUES 


Self Instructions for the IAV 

There is a need for each of us to know more about 
ourselves, but seldom do we have an opportunity to look 
at ourselves as we are or as we would like to be. On the 
following page is a list of terms that to a certain degree 
describe people. Take each term separately and apply it 
to yourself by completing the following sentence: 

I AM A (AN) PERSON 

The first word in the list is ACADEMIC, so you would sub¬ 
stitute this term in the above sentence. It would read: 

”1 am an academic person.” Then decide how much of the 
time this statement is like you, i.e., is typical or char¬ 
acteristic of you as an individual, and rate yourself on 
a scale from one to five according to the following key. 

1. Seldom , is this like me. 

2. Occasionally , this is like me. 

3* About half the time , this is like me. 

4. A good deal of the time , this is like me. 
5* Most of the time, this is like me. 

Select the number beside the phrase that tells how much 
of the time the statement is like you and insert it in 
Column 1 on the next page. 

EXAMPLE: Beside the term ACADEMIC, number two is inserted 
to indicate that "occasionally” I am an academic person. 

Now go to Column 2. Use one of the statements given 
below to tell how you feel about yourself as described in 
Column 1. 

1. I very much dislike being as I am in this 
respect. 

2. I dislike being as I am in this respect. 

3. I neither dislike being as I am nor like 
being as I am in this respect. 

4. I like being as I am in this respect. 

5. I like very much being as I am in this 
respect. 

You are to select the number beside the statement that 













( : . . c 


0.1 i. 


s /o 




:0 o: 


c.,. _■ 


0 ■ J YJQ. 


•> ■ ■ / • - 


' -,o 

;) u . i .... 


: > 0 o ; J ;t ■ j.. 


•-0 


■ [ o ' ) , f' 

■ av ijUGoi 


>j o: vro 


V, o 






356 


APPENDIX Q, CONTINUED 

tells how you feel about the way you are and insert the 
number in Column 2. 

EXAMPLE: In Column 2 beside the term ACADEMIC, number one is 

inserted to indicate that I dislike very much being as I am 
in respect to the term ACADEMIC. Note that being as I am 
always refers to the way you described yourself in Column 2„ 

Finally, go to Column 3; using the same term, complete 
the following sentence: 

I WOULD LIKE TO BE A (AN) P ERSON 

Then decide how much of the time you would like this trait 
to be characteristic of you and rate yourself on the follow¬ 
ing five point scale, 

1. Seldom , would I like this to be like me, 

2 0 Occasionally , I would like this to be like me, 
3* About half the time , I would like this to 
be like me, 

4« A good deal of the time , I would like this 
to be like me. 

5* Most of the time , I would like this to be 
like me. 

You are to select the number beside the phrase that tells 
how much of the time you would like to be this kind of a 
person and insert the number in Column 3® 

EXAMPLE: In Column 3 beside the term ACADEMIC, number five 
is inserted to indicate that most of the time I would like 
to be this kind of person. Start with the word ACCEPTABLE 
and fill in Column 1,2, and 3 before going on to the next 
word. There is no time limit. Be honest with yourself 
so that your description will be a true measure of how you 
see yourself. 




















■ t ; v - . 
': X. r- ' ■;ro ; vr/.-; .* Ui'- <»& u d w j. >s^oii 

- 

■ - • Ic .yj jrV-Jc ' . • s • ,o - • 1 • 




i:v:jj ; C fVj.’Uloi ; 

‘: : 












« - 


1 



c 


OOj 


* , 






o 


■ f,(j i 1 Vi C' •:. j’ . ; £<,; ] •. f( "j 

. . 

‘ ‘ ' 1 . ■ ' 



.. 

);.J OL'ij ...A*- liX >.■<’ ^'.L'jior.ub J;OV j - ' 













APPENDIX Q, CONTINUED 
12 3 


S 0 

ac ademic 

2 

l 

r 

25. 

meddlesome 

1. 

acceptable 

— 

— 

— 

26. 

merry 

2. 

accurate 

—. m 

.. 

_____ 

27 . 

mature 

3. 

alert 

. 

_____ 

_____ 

23. 

nervous 

4. 

ambitious 

■■■ ■ 

-- 

_—_ 

29 . 

normal 

5. 

annoying 

-_ 

-- 

— 

30 . 

optimistic 

6. 

busy 

— 

. 

— 

31 . 

poised 

7. 

calm 

--— 

— 

——_ 

32 . 

purposeful 

3. 

charming 

■■ 

- 

— 

33 . 

reasonable 

9. 

clever 

- ■ 

■ 1 1 .11 

—__ 

34. 

reckless 

10. 

competent 

— 

—— 

. .I. 

35. 

responsible 

11. 

confident 


_____ 

. 1 , 1 

36. 

sarcastic 

12. 

considerate 


______ 


37. 

sincere 

13. 

cruel 

. 


, _ 

33. 

stable 

14. 

democratic 

. 

■ , 

_____ 

39. 

studious 

15. 

dependable 


in- , -n 

_ 

40. 

successful 

16. 

economical 

— 

______ 


41. 

stubborn 

17. 

efficient 

t -■ • in •" 


- 

42. 

tactful 

13 0 

fearful 

-__ 



43. 

teachable 

19. 

friendly 

■ 

r _ 


44. 

useful 

20. 

fashionable 


.... 1 1 

r 1, 

45. 

worthy 

21. 

helpful 

_____ 

-_— 


46. 

businesslike 

22. 

intellectual 

======= 

,,, ■ , n 


47. 

broad-minded 

23. 

kind 

—— 

■-- 

—— 

43 . 

competitive 

24. 

logical 




49. 

fault-finding 


•VUO. 


o 


0.U- ; K>'?£B 


00.1 


Ox <xIO V 





















