
University of Alberta Librai 


For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta 


Fairbanks, G.H. 

The cultural and the lingu 
background oil the old French 




























































































































































































0JC IfBBI* 

arawwaais 

am>axxMas 













































-11- 


UNIVERSITY OF aLBERTA 


TEE CULTURAL AND 


THE LINGUISTIC BACKGROUND OF 


OLD FRENCH 


DISSERTATION 


SUBMITTED TO THE GRADUATE FACULTY 
IN CANDIDACY FOR THE DEGREE OF 


master of arts 


DEPARTMENT OF MODERN LANGUAGES 


BY 


G. H. FAIRBx: 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


APRIL 4, 1938. 

















rvjL.'O.C'O 

38 - 

i fc " 


-lii- 


TEE CULTURAL AND 


LINGUISTIC BACKGROUND OF 


OLD FRENCH 


G. H. FAIRBANKS 








Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 



https://archive.org/details/culturallinguistOOfair 


IV- 


Table of contents 


INTRODUCTION. p. 1. 

THE CULTURAL BACKGROUND. p. 2. 

a. early people in gaul p. 2. 

I. THE EARLIEST PEOPLES p. 2. 

1. Primitive Peoples p. 2. 

2. Iberians p. 2. 

3. Ligurians p. 3. 

4. Phoenicians p. 4. 

5. Phocians p. 5. 

II. THE CELTS IN GAUL p. 6. 

1. Spread of the Celts p. 6. 

2. Celtic Language p. 7. 

3. Celtic Influence on the French 

Vocabulary p. 9. 

III. CELTIC SUBSTRATUM p. 12. 

1. Nasalisation p. 12. 

2. Palatalisation of *u f to f y T p. 14. 

3. Weakening of Intervocalic Conson¬ 
ants . p. 14. 

4. The change ’kt’ to ’xt ? . p. 15. 

B. ROMAN INVASION OF GAUL p. 17. 

I. INTRODUCTORY p. 17. 

1. Ethnology of Gaul at the time 

of the Roman Invasion p. 17. 


II. ROMAN INVASION p. 18. 

1. Inducements to Roman Invasion p. 18. 

2. Colonisation of Gaul p. 18. 

3. Spread of Latin p. 19. 

C. GERMANIC INVASION OF GAUL p. 24. 

I. GERMANIC INVASION p. 24. 

1. Causes of the Germanic Invasion p. 24. 

2. Germanic Invasion of Gaul p. 24. 

II. GERMANIC INFLUENCE ON FRENCH p. 25. 

1. Influence on Vocabulary p. 25. 

2. Influence on Word formation p. 26. 

3. Phonetic Influence p. 27. 

4. General Influence p. 29. 











V- 


'THE LINGUISTIC BACKGROUND 

A. THE LATIN LANGUAGE 

I. CLASSIFICATION OF LATIN 

II. PRONUNCIATION OF LATIN 

1. Vowels 

2. Consonants 

3. accent. 

III. VULGAR LATIN 

1. What is Vulgar Latin? 

2. The Accent in Vulgar Latin 

3. Distinguishing Features of Vulgar 
Latin 

B. PHONOLOGY 

i. palatalisation of gutturals 

1. First Palatalisation 

2. Second Palatalisation 

ii. nasalisation 

1. First Nasalisation 

2. Second Nasalisation 

3. Third Nasalisation 

4. Fourth Nasalisation 

III. DIPHTHONGISATION 

1. First Diphthongisation 

2. Second Diphthongisation 

C. MORPHOLOGY: TEE VERB 

I. GENERAL 

II. PERSONAL ENDINGS 

1. The Latin Personal Endings 

2. The Active Endings 

3. The Perfect Endings 

4. The Passive Endings 

III. MOODS 


p. 31. 

p. 31. 

p. 31 . 

p. 31. 
p. 31. 
p. 31. 
p. 32. 

p. 34. 
p. 34. 
p. 36. 

p. 37. 

p. 42. 

pr 42 . 
p. 42. 
p. 44. 

p. 45. 
p. 46. 
p. 47 . 
p. 48. 
p. 49. 

p. 49 . 
p. 50. 
p. 50. 

p. 53. 

p. 53. 

p. 54. 
p. 54. 
p. 54, 
p. 55. 
p. 57. 

p. 57. 












-VI 


IV TENSES 

1. Present Indicative 

2. Iresent Subjunctive 

5. Imperfect Indicative 

4. Past Definite 

5. Imperative 

6. Infinitive 

7. Gerundive 

8. Present Participle 

9. Past Participle 

10. Imperfect Subjunctive 

p. 57. 
p. 58. 
p. 59 . 
p. 59. 

p. 60. 

p. 61. 

p. 61. 
p. 62. 

p. 62. 

p. 62. 

p. 63. 

D. THE STRESS BURG OATHS 

P. oo« 

CONCLUSION 

p. 67. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

p. 68. 

















-Vll- 


LIST OF PHONETIC SYMBOLS. 

x - German 'ch' after a back vowel, as in *sprach*. 
^-English 'th' as in ' then* . 

Spanish 'b' as in 'hablado'. 

j- English 'y' as in 'yes', 

w-English 'w' as in 'wet', 

y - French 'u' as in 'une*. 
dj - English f j' as in 'just', 
z^ English 'z* as in 'zeal'. 

^ - French 'J' as in 'jouer'. 
ten -English 'ch* as in 1 child'. 
st ^ French nasal as in 'dent' (da). 

'e - French nasal as in 'main' (mb). 

^-French nasal as in 'bon' (bo), 
u ^French nasal as in 'un' (u). 
o - closed 'o'. 
o c - open 'o'. 

n - French palatal as in 'montagne'. 
oe - French vowel 'eu' as in 'peur'. 












• • • 

-VI11“ 


LIST OF ABREVIi-iTTONS. 

Fr., French. 

0. Fr., Old French. 

Mod. Fr., Modern French. 

Lat., Latin. 

Cl. Lat., Classical Latin. 

V. Lat., Vulgar Latin. 

3p., Spanish. 

It., Italian. . 

Port., Po rtugue se. 





























Introduction 

It is the purpose of this thesis to give an 
outline of the origins of the French language up to the 
point when we can say that the language is French and 
not Latin or semi-Latin. It will not discuss all of the 
points in this development but will rather discuss 
more fully the most important elements. Two points of 
view will be discussed, namely, the cultural and the 
linguistic. The cultural aspect will deal with the 
movements of peoples, their customs, their history, 
their political, social and religious institutions, but 
only in so far as these influence the development of 
the language which has in later periods taken its name 
from the Germanic tribe, the Franks. The linguistic 
aspect will deal with a few of the main philological 
changes of a purely linguistic character that have been 
brought about in time by the numerous, though minute 
and indistinguishable, variations between the speech of 
one man and the speech of any other man speaking the 
same language. 















- 












. 

■ 


■ 















' ■ . 









. 
















. 

- 

























- 


■ 


' 



















THE CULTURAL BACKGROUND 






























-2- 


A. EARLY PEOPLES IN GAUL 

I. THE EARLIEST PEOPLES 
1. Primitive People s. 

From the discoveries of anthropologists and 
archaeologists, we know that Gaul was inhabited by some 
type of Homo Sapiens as early as the Upper Palaeolithic 
mge. What form of language they spoke, we do not know, 
and any influence their language may have had upon 

i n 

succeeding languages is ^capable of being traced because 
of our entire lack of information about their language 
or languages. 

2• Iberians . 

At an early date the Iberians had spread from 
Spain over southern Gaul and even into Italy, Corsica 
and Sicily. The Phocians, arriving on the shores of 
Languedoc in the sixth century B.C. found them there, 
and the Greek geographer Strabo makes mention of them. 
With the exception of a few inscriptions of doubtful 
Iberian workmanship, we know nothing of their language. 
Discussion has waged about a few geographical names, 
such as 'Elimberrum*, the ancient name of the modern 
T Auch’, but we are not even certain whether the word is 
Iberian or Basque. The language of the Iberians, just 
as the primitive languages, has left no traceable 
influence in later languages. 







. 

. 




. 









. 












' X' 




f* 

















. • 

• ■ I..' 1 ; 




. 



. 




Sis 


















- 3 - 


3. Ligurians . 

In the thirteenth and twelfth centuries B.C. the 
Ligurians spread over Gaul and parts of Spain and Italy. 
They mingled with the Iberians, and gradually took over 
the eastern section of the latter’s territory, namely, 
the western bank of the Khone. "A cette epoque (600 av. 
J.-C.) la rive droite du Rhone appartenait encore aux 
Iberes, mais cent ans plus tard 1’historien Eecatee de 
Iuilet compte pa mi les figures les ’Elisyces’, dont la 
capitale etait Larbonne.” (1) The RhSne basin, in fact, 
was the part of Gaul most thickly settled by the 
Ligurians. 

The language of the Ligurians is considered by 
some philologists to belong to Indo-European, although 
we know very little more about it than the few geograph¬ 
ical names that have come down to us. The suffix ’asco* 
f asca ! , ’osco’, ’osca T , ’usco’, ’usca’ found in place- 
names is of Ligurian origin, and occurs with great 
frequency in eastern France, especially in the Rhone 
valley. The suffix occurs more than seventy times in 
twenty-five departments, nineteen of which are in the 
basin of the Rhone or its tributaries. Among them are: 

(1) Lavisse, Eistoire de France, Tome I, p. 13. 





















- 4 - 


Manosque (Manuasca, Ma'noasca) in Basses-Alpes; Nevache 
(Annevasca), in Hautes-Alpes; Greasque (Gratiasca), 
Tarascon (Tarusco), in Bouches-du-Rhone; Eranoux 
(Branoscus), in Gard; and Santoche (Centusca) in Doubs. 
Of these words with Ligurian suffixes, some of the roots 
are Celtic, some Latin and the others untraceable, and 
hence probably Ligurian. These fragments of Ligurian 
place-names are the only influence of the ancient 
imgurian on the Brench language, as far as we can tell 
from the evidence. 

4. Phoenicians . 

The Phoenicians made their appearance in the 
western Mediterranean about 1100 B.C. In less than two 
centuries they were masters of it, and had settled along 
the southern coast of Gaul, but only along the coast. 

It was not their aim to conquer the territory; they only 
wished to make trade connections, and consequently their 
influence was very superficial and is only seen in one 
or two place-names. On the eastern coast we find 
Monaco (Menouha), meaning. T a resting-place* or *a 
halting-place *. On the south-western coast the name 
Castel-Roussillon (Ruscino), on the river ret in 
Pyrenees-Orientales, is taken from a Semitic root mean¬ 
ing T chief* or *head*. When the Phoenicians came to 
Gaul they brought with them their gods, one of which was 




















. 



















■ 


. 

... 




. 


. 


. 

..... ... 












. . 


* j 








' 




. 










. 























- 






4 







































- 5 - 


/ / • 

Astarte. To her was consecrated Port-Vendres in ryrenees- 
Orientales. With the arrival of the Greeks and later of 
the Latins, the idea remained, hut the name changed with 
the mythology from A s tarte to Aphrodite and finally to 
Venus, from which latter name comes Port-Vendres (Portus 
Veneris). Just as the Phoenician settlement of Gaul 
was superficial, so was their influence slight, and it is 
only in one or two such isolated cases as have been 
noted above that their influence has remained to affect 
the French language. 

5. Phocians . 

With the decadence of Tyre in the eighth 
century B.C., conditions were favorable for the 
expansion of the Greeks outside of the Archipelago. 

About 600 B.C. the Phocians founded Lassalia (Marseille) 
and about twenty years later the Rhodians founded Rhoda. 
About a half-century later, 542 B.C., to avoid the 
domination of the Persians, the whole population of 
Phocia set out towards the w r est, some settling in Italy 
and the rest in Gaul. Their greatest period of 
expansion was the sixth century. During this century 
they expanded their influence from the Maritime Alps to 
Andalusia, but like the Phoenicians their interests 
'were in trade and commerce, and they did not seek to 
extend their domination inland. ?, Pour les Massaliotes 

V / 

comme pour tous les Hellenes? veritable patrie, le 















- 6 - 


theatre de leur activite, l'objet de leurs convoitises, 

/ /v 

c'etait la mer. Le continent n’et&it a leurs yeux qu'un 

v \ 

pays a exploiter. Ils ne cherchaient pas a le 
conquerir." (1) 

Their influence on the language of succeeding 
peoples is thus confined to geographical names. Among 
these are Nice, a symbol of their victory, and across 
the bay facing Nice, Antibes (Antipolis), further west 
along the coast Marseille (Mass&lia), and still further- 
west Agde (Agathe Tyche) signifying f good fortune*. They 
made one other contribution to the linguistic culture 
of Gaul: they introduced the Greek alphabet and the know¬ 
ledge of writing into Gaul, and this aspect of their 
culture, quite unlike any other aspect, even spread as 
far as the Rhine. 

II. THE CELTS IN GAUL 
1. Spread of the Celts : 

The Celts moved into Gaul from southern 
Germany. The date of the invasion is uncertain, but 
from the historical evidence we know that it was not 
before the seventh century, and very likely in the sixth 
century there was a slight infiltration of the Celts 


(1) Lavisse, Eistoire de France, Tome I, p. 21. 




















■ 






» 





. 












. 










. 

. 















' 

« 








- 


. 





























-?-• 


into Gaul. Three very definite migrations have been 
traced. The first migration in the middle of the fifth 
century B.C. was directed towards the Iberian Peninsula. 
This expansion left Celts settled in northern Gaul, west¬ 
ern Gaul and northern Spain. The second migration at the 
end of the fifth century B.C. is directed into Italy and 
further east and does not affect Gaul. The fourth 
century was the period during which the Celtic expansion 
reached its zenith. They had extended their dominion over 
the British Isles, the northern half of Spain, all of 
Central Europe except Switzerland and northern Germany, 
the northern half of Italy, the eastern nips, the basin 
of the Danube and all of Gaul with the exception of the 
Rhone basin, which was still held by the Ligurians. In 
the third century B.C. with the expansion of the 
Germanic tribes, the third migration of the Celts took 
place and this time they spread over the whole of Gaul 
mingling with the Ligurians in the Rhone basin so that 
when Hannibal in £18 B.C. made his voyage through Gaul he 
met only Celtic chieftans in authority. The Celts were 
now politically predominant in Gaul, but were losing 
ground in their other territories, and w T ould soon fight 
a losing battle for predominance in Gaul itself. 

2. Celtic Language. 

When Caesar entered Gaul he distinguished three 
peoples speaking three different languages. Everyone 









. 

. 
















■ 








. 









. 










. 

. . 






p 













t 

■ 






















■ 




_ 






















- 8 - 

knows the beginning of his Commentaries on the Gallic 
Wars: "Gallia est omnis divisa in partes tres, quarum 
unam incolunt Belgae, aliam Aquitani, tertiam qui ipsorum 
lingua Celtae, nostra Galli appellantur. Hi omnes lingua, 
institutis, legibus inter se differunt. Gallos ab 
.aquitani s Garumna flumen, a Belgis Latrona et Sequana 
dividit. ,T (1) The Aquitani of Caesar T s "Gallic Wars" 
are to be identified with the Iberians, whom we have 
discussed above. It is generally considered that the 
Celts brought with them the language called Celtic when 
they invaded Gaul. A few writers have argued on the basis 
of the inferiority of numbers among the Celtic invaders 
that the Celts spoke German and that they learned Celtic 
from the original inhabitants of Gaul. Such a supposition 
does not agree with the facts: it would require us to 
admit that Celtic was the language spoken in Gaul, Spain, 
Britain and Switzerland before the arrival of the Celts 
and that Celtic was spoken in these countries in the 
Stone Age. We infer that the Celts were speaking Celtic 
when they arrived in Gaul. The Belgae and the Celtae, 
then, both spoke a Celtic language, but were these 
languages the same or were they different as Caesar 
suggests in his Commentaries? It is certain that in 
Caesar 1 s time the Belgae and most of the Celtae spoke 
a language belonging to the Brythonic division of Celtic, 

(1) Caesar: he Bello Gallico; edit. Bice Holmes, d» 1. 






















. 






. . 






* 



, 













. 












. 

.* 


■ 

. 




' 




I 


. 











. 

































. 































. ... 

. 
















- 9 - 


characterized by the change of the Indo-European sound 
t kw t into the sound ! p f . There is some reason to believe 
that in some parts of Gaul the Goidelic division of 
Celtic, which retained the Indo-European f kw ! , was spoken 
and those who maintain this bring forward in support of 
the theory words such as 'Se'quana*, 'Sequani 1 (Seine) 
and the name of the town Vesontio (Besancon). This is 
still a disputed point as some Celtic scholars maintain 
that these names are Ligurian and not Celtic. "All that 
we can be sure of is that, if a Goidelic dialect had 
been spoken by the earlier invaders, it had been super¬ 
seded, except perhaps in certain districts, by Gallo- 
Brythonic." (1) The Celts, then, brought with them the 
Celtic language, most of them spoke the Brythonic 
division of Celtic and this language gradually became 
universal except in Aquitania. 

3. Celtic Influence on the French Vocabulary . 

Unlike the earlier languages of Gaul, Celtic 
had a considerable influence on the vocabulary of French. 
In many ways the French words of Celtic provenance 
reflect the culture of the Gauls, in that words that 
referred to things characteristically Gallic have 
survived and words that were of everyday usage have 
survived. Some rural terms of everyday usage s.re 
survivals of Celtic: O.Er. jante (felly); ruche (tree 
(1) Caesar: he Bello Gallico; edit. Rice Holmes, 


p.xxx. 






















- 10 - 


bark); O.Fr. charrue (waggon). Some common topographical 
terms have survived: O.Fr. combe (valley); lande (moor); 
O.Fr. rin (river); O.Fr. roche (cliff); borne (boundary). 

A few terms relating to beer and its preparation come 
from Celtic: cervoise (beer); O.Fr. lie (dregs), as do a 
few relating to their costume: broies (type of trouser 
worn by the Gauls); bouge (knapsack). A few names of 
implements of war are from Celtic: javelot, javeline 
(javelin); matras (javelin), and a few mining terms: 
mine (mine); Prov. lausa (slate). Some verbs and 
adjectives are descendants of Celtic: briser (break); 
braire (bray); the root of*petit* (small); and O.Fr. 

'maint* (many a). A number of suffixes: ritus (quay), 
briga (bridge), dunum (mountain), magos (field), durum 
(fortress) are found in composition with a great many 
place-nara.es from various parts of France. Some of them 
are: with T dunum T : Verdun, Laon, Lyon; with 1 durum f : 
Auxerre (O.Fr. Aucuerre<Altessiodurum); with f briga f : 
Deneuvres and Denevres (O.Fr. Benuevrec Donobriga), 
Escaudoeuvres (< Scaldobriga); with 'magos*: Caen (O.Fr. 
Cauem< Catomagos), Rouen (O.Fr. Ruuem< Rotomagos). 

Likewise the suffixes *-acum*, '-oialumf are of Celtic 
origin as in: Cambrai (< Camera cum), Aubigny (<Albiniacum), 
Bailleul (< Ballioialum). A number of Celtic tribes 
have given their names to modern villages, towns, cities 

and provinces of France: Velay (Vellavi), Ferigord 

















- 11 - 


(Petrucorii), Auvergne (ArverniO, Saintonge (Santones), 
Nantes (Namnetes), Paris (Parisii), Sens (Senones), 

Anjou (Andecavi), Touraine (Turoni). In reference to the 
numerals the old system of counting by twenties was 
introduced into Gaul by the Celts although it is not 
originally a Celtic characteristic. This numeration was 
very common in Old French and the forms f quatre vingts*, 
six vingts T , {sept vingts* up to ’ dix huit vingts* appear. 
Racine in the seventeenth century still uses f six vingts* 

Qfil 

and the hospice f ^uinze Vingts* was not found until late. 

A large number of French words are of Celtic 
origin, but although this is the case it cannot be said 
that for this reason Celtic has changed in any essential 
way the natural course of development of the French 
language. "Mais la liste de ces mots fut-elle beaucoup 
plus longue, on ne saurait dire pour cela que le 
vocabulaire au latin de Gaule ait eu une couleur celtique, 
d'abord oarce que ces mots demeurent malgre tout peu 
nonib reux, meme en a j out ant les douteux, mais surtout 
parce cue la plupart se retrouvent dans les langues 
romanes d'Occident, et qu'ils etaient done naturalises 
dans le latin de cette partie de l f Empire. fl (1) If we 
add to this the fact that the words have gone through the 
regular changes of words of Latin origin, we see that the 


(1) Brunot: Eistoire de la Langue Francaise des Origines 
a 1900, Tome I, p. 56. J 
















j 






' ■■ ■ 



















' 

, 



: 

















































. ■ 








■ 


























■ 

i 










. 














. 


, 




_ 















- 12 - 


Celtic has not, by way of vocabulary, changed the genius 
of the French language. 

Ill CELTIC SUBSTRATUM. 

although Celtic has not, by its influence on the 
vocabulary, changed the regular development of the French 
language, it is claimed by some that it has affected the 
phonological development of the language. This is the 
problem of the Celtic Substratum and, before we can 
answer the problem definitely, more research work will 
have to be done on it. There are, however, one or two 
conclusions that may be drawn from the data we have at 
present. The proponents of the Celtic Substratum Theory 
claim that four phonological changes are due to Celtic 
influence, namely: the nasalisation of French vowels, the 
palatalisation of ! u f to the weakening of inter¬ 

vocalic consonants, and the change of the sound , kt t to 
T xt ’ . 

1. Lasailsat ion . 

There were in French four periods of nasalisation: 
first, the vowels f a’ and t e t were nasalised during the 
preliterary period; second, the vowel (o' was nasalised 
at the end of the twelfth century; third, the diphthongs 
T ie’ and ’oue 1 were nasalised during the thirteenth 
century, and lastly, the vowels f i’ and 'u ! were nasalised 
during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. That 

Celtic had an influence far-reaching enough to affect 



















- 13 - 


the nasalisation during the latter three periods is 
untenable as a thesis. The date of the first nasalisation 
is indefinite. M. K. Pope (1) suggests the tenth 
century, and Brunot (2) suggests that it probably took 
place in pre-literary times. Celtic had died as a spoken 
language in Gaul by the fifth century, and it is very 
unlikely that the nasalisation of 'a* and T e' were that 
early, koreover, even if the nasalisation had taken place 
at a very early date, we would still have the problem of 
the nasalisation of the three later periods to explain. 

We could not assume that Celtic had an influence on the 
French vowels that started a process of nasalisation that 
lasted for twelve centuries. Nasalisation is not an un¬ 
common phenomenon in language development, and if we have 
to assume a simple phonetic change to explain the three 
late nasalisations, the first may be explained just as well 
that way. koreover, Portuguese, another Romance language, 
developed nasalisation without the aid of a Celtic Sub¬ 
stratum. If ssl Portuguese and ta such v/idely separs-ted 
languages as English (Eng. mouth, Ger. Mund) and Greek 
(Gk. hekaton, Lat. centum) had nasalisation not induced 
by Celtic, then it is the simplest explanation that 
nasalisation in French was a purely phonetic phenomenon. 

(1) M. K. Pope: From Latin to Modern French, p. 169. 

(2) Brunot: Hist. d.l. Langue Fr. des Origines a 1900, 

pp. 152, 157. 

















- 14 - 


Z . Palatalisation of , u t to f y \ . 

The date of the palatalisation is uncertain, hut 

there is one means of dating it that is quite reliable. 

The Latin ! culum* became ’cul* (kyl). "Les faits 
/ / 

epigraphiques et paleographiques viennent attester que le 
T c T prepalatal a garde sa prononciation explosive peut- 
etre jusqu’au Vile siecle." (1.) If this is so then the 
T u T must have been the back-vowel f u f and not the front- 
vowel T y f which 'would have acted the same as an T i f with 
the result that the word would have become 1 sul f . We 
assume then that the palatalisation took place later than 
the seventh century which would rule out Celtic influence. 
The sound occurs in some dialects of Portuguese and also 
in some Swiss dialects, neither of which were affected 
by Celtic, and is also a common phenomenon in the Indo- 
European languages. The simple explanation is again pure 
phonetic evolution. 

3. 'Weakening of Intervocalic Consonants . 

The labial unvoiced stop consonant *p f becomes 
voiced before the sixth century when it is in intervocalic 
position and then becomes confused with the voiced labial 
stop in intervocalic position and both become f v f (ripa> 
rive; faba>feve). The dental voiced and unvoiced stop 


(1) Nyrop: Grammaire Historique de la Langue Francaise, 
Tome I, p. 380. 























- 15 - 


consonants in intervocalic position follow exactly the 
same development and then disappear in the twelfth 
century (vita> vie; nuda> nue). The guttural stops like¬ 
wise weakened in intervocalic position. The process of 
weakening, even if it did begin at a period during which 
Celtic influence was possible, was a gradual one 
continuing until at least the twelfth century. It is 
hardly possible again that Celtic should have an influence 
on the language which would continue active for a period 
of eight centuries. The change is again not peculiar to 
French, but is in evidence in its sister language, Spanish 
which was not noticeably influenced by Celtic. In Spanish 
the weakening is still continuing to the present day with 
the dentals (Lat. amato, Sp. amado, amadho, amao). Still 
once more the simplest explanation is phonetic change and 
not some vague influence of Celtic. 

4. The change f kt f to *xt T . 

This change has not been satisfactorily dated 
except that it took place at an early period and quite 
possibly early enough that it may have undergone Celtic 
influence. Pope (l) suggests Celtic influence and, in 
fact, points it out as the change most likely of Celtic 
origin. Nyrop, Brunot and Lleyer-Liibke do not mention 
Celtic influence. The same development took place in both 

(1) M.K.Pope: From Latin to Modern French, pp. 5, 144, 






















16 - 


Spanish and Portuguese where the Celtic influence was 
negligible and on this basis it is probable that Celtic 
is not responsible for the change, (V. Lat. factu, Fr. 
fait, Sp. fecho, Port, feito; V. Lat. dictu, Fr. dit, Sp. 
dicho, Port, dito). 

Those most in favor of the Celtic Substratum Theory 
claim that all four developments are due to Celtic 
influence, while others such as Nyrop claim that Celtic 
influence is absurd, ^t the present the Substratum 
Theory is being vigorously refuted with reference to the 
Germanic and Old High German consonant shifts, where there 
was considerably more evidence in its favor than there is 
for the Celtic influence. If this opinion gains ground 
then the proponents of a substratum influence on French 
will have to recoil and agree with Nyrop: "Plusieurs 

savants . out soutenu cue le francais etait sorti 

d*un melange du gaulois avec le latin; c’est une opinion 
absolumerit fausse et dont l’absurdite a ete demontree 
d'une maniere irrefutable; le gaulois n T a meme influence 
que tres falblement la langue aui l f a supplante.” (1) 


(1) Nyrop: Grammaire Eistorique de la Langue 

Francaise, Tome I, p. 5. 
















- 17 - 


B. ROMAN INVASION OB GAJ.L. 

I. INTRODUCTORY. 

1. Ethnology of Gaul at the time of the Roman Invasion. 

As has been noted above, Gaul had been inhabited 

m ccjerrt 

by^mankind from the Uuper Palaeolithic Age. It had there¬ 
after been invaded by. Iberians, Ligurians, Phocians, 
Phoenicians, and Celts. It was later Invaded by Romans, 
Pranks and Normans. No pure race exists nor did it exist 
at this early period, and hence if any attempt is made to 
classify these peoples it must be understood that the 
classification is general and only takes cognizance of 
the predominant features of the people. The Pranks, for 
example, though predominantly Nordic, were a mixture of 
Nordic and Alpine. The inhabitants of Gaul before the 
invasions “were mixed. The Iberians and Ligurians were 
predominantly of Mediterranean stock. The Phocians and 
Phoenicians did not colonise Gaul and were, hence, too 
small in numbers to have any ethnological influence. The 
Celts are described by the early writers as being tall 
and fair-haired, and we know that they were dolichocephalic, 
The Norman and Frank invasions brought in more people 

who were predominantly Nordic, and yet we know that to¬ 
day the people of France are not for the most part of the 
fair-haired, tall, and long-headed type, there being, 
especially in Central France, e. very pronounced ALpine 














- 18 - 


elenient. Even such a short sketch of the ethnology of 
Gaul illustrates that Gaul has been racially mixed since 
prehistoric times, and, if the races of Gaul have been 
mixed, then there can not have been any ethnological 
influence on the development of the French language. 

II. ROMAN INVASION. 

1. Inducements to Roman Invasion . 

All the greater countries have been interested in 
building an empire as a source of raw materials and 
supplies. Rome considered Gaul as just such a source, A't 
that time Gaul was very heavily wooded and the fauna was 
abundant. Elk, aurochs, horses, cattle and especially 
the wild boar were plentiful. The Gauls excelled in 
ceramics and metallurgy and their mines of copper, iron, 
silver, gold and even tin were a great source of wealth, 
and had given Gaul a reputation of richness. The salt 
provisions and the woollens that they sent to Rome were 
greatly appreciated there. Gaul also served as a supply- 
house for slaves, an important commodity in Roman life, 
and for soldiers. Roads for transportation were not 
lacking, but they were not always in good condition. Gaul 
was an excellent colony for any country with imperial 
designs, and the Romans quickly annexed it for such 
economic reasons. 

2. Colonisation of Gaul. 


From 396 E.C., when Rome captured Veii, an 






















- 19 - 


Etruscan city, the Romans gradually became more powerful 
and spread their authority over more and more territory. 

In 191 B.C. Cisalpine Gaul came under the domination of 
the Romans. In 121 B.C. Transalpine Gaul was made a 
province and the Romans had started a series of incursions 
that was eventually to bring the whole of Gaul under 
Roman sway, and from then until 51 B.C., when Caesar 
conquered the whole of Gaul, it was in a constant state 
of disorder. Some Gallic tribes sided with the Romans 

and fought against their countrymen, if they could be 
called such, since there was no nationalistic feeling 
among the Gauls. With such disorganisation and lack of 
unity among the Gauls, the conquest was much easier. 

Although Gaul was now under the dominion of Rome, 
no systematic attempt was made to colonise the country. 
This does not mean that there was no influx of Romans at 
all. The Romans kept garrisons in Gaul, and although 
many of the soldiers were Gauls, many also were Romans, 
merchants came from Italy to trade with the Gauls. The 
soldiers, once their military service was completed, and 
the merchants quite often settled in Gaul as their 
permanent residence. Various state officials also came 
to Gaul. xUid with these Romans came the Latin language. 

3. Spread of Latin . 

The Romans made no attempt to eradicate the 
language of the Celts, but on the other hand they did not 





















- 20 - 


neglect to spread Latin wherever possible. "Seeing that, 
on the whole, the Romanising was not undertaken in an 
abrupt way, but was cautiously and patiently pursued, the 
Roman foreign rule in the Celtic land ceased to be such, 
because the Celts themselves became, and desired to be, 
Romans.” (1) It was advantageous for the Celts to learn 
the Latin language, because it was the official one. ”11 
(le latin) etait la langue officielle du gouvernement 

V / 

remain et de ses agents a tons les degres . Les 

Romains ne faisaient pas traduire leurs actes publics 
dans la langue du pays. C f etait affaire aux indigenes 
de les comprendre ou de se les faire expliquer." (2) The 
people had to use Latin in their litigations before the 
tribunals, in their fiscal dealings with the government, 
and in their transactions with the Roman merchants. 

Lot only was it advantageous for the Cauls to learn 
Latin, but there were other influences at work that 
tended to spread abroad Latin. As soldiers who had 
finished their military duty settled down they brought 
Latin with them among the ordinary people. Slaves, who 
had come from all parts of the world, had to have some 
means of communication with their masters, and that means 
was Latin. The Church, too, took its part in spreading 

(1) Mommsen: Provinces of the Roman Empire, Vol. I, p. 89. 

(2) Lavisse: P_ist. de Prance, Tome I, p. 390. 











■ 
















. 




' 


, ' 























, 


. 




r 















t 




, ■ 




. 






















• 






























| B H , ■ m II. m : 








■ • 


_ 




. 

i; 

* 


























- 21 - 


Latin. From the third century the Christian Church 
adopted Latin as its official language. Mommsen (1) 
speaks of its influence as being very great in the 
dissemination of Latin. The Church was responsible for 
carrying Latin into the outlying districts that would 
otherwise have resisted a change of language more success¬ 
fully. Another factor in the spread of Latin was the 
School. Directly after the conquest schools multiplied 

in Gaul so that Lavisse may say: TT Les illettres, somme 

A \ 

toute, ne devaient pas etre tres monbreux.” (2) Even the 
most humble army officers had to be able to read the 
watchword on the tablets on which it was written. Schools 
were formed for the children of army veterans. Students 
for all schools v/ere numerous. Secondary schools were 

established early, some of the more important being at 

# 

Treves, Lyons, Arles, Auvergne, Vienne, Toulouse, 
Marseilles, Hheims and Bordeaux, which last in the fourth 
century attained eminence. "The city (Bordeaux) on the 
Garonne in the days of Ausonius was recognized as the 
foremost school of rhetoric in the Roman world, and its 
fame attracted even Italian scholars.” (3) Latin was 
always considered the language of civilisation, the 
language of the educated man, while Gallic was considered 

(1) Mommsen: Prov. of the Rom. Emp., Vol. 1, p. 110. 

(2) Lavisse: Hist, de France, Tome I, p. 391. 

(3) Samuel Dill: Roman Society in the last Century of 
the Western Empire, p. 409. 


















. 















* . . 










. 




. 








: ‘ 


















*■. 




- 















- 




- 

. 

. 

- 

' f 











' 



















■ 


• * 



' 

. 










































- 22 - 


a barbarous language, with the result that anyone wishing 
to be considered cultured had to speak Latin. All these 
forces worked for the propagation of Latin with such 
success that Celtic survived only in some rural districts 
in the fourth century and was a dead language by the fifth. 

There is one other point that indicates the spread 
of Latin in Gaul. It is not a cause of the spread of 
Latin, but it shows how quickly Latin took firm root. 

That is the literary efforts of the Gauls. From the beg¬ 
inning rhetoric was a favorite study of the Gauls, and in 
the first- century it was two Gauls, L. Plotius and M. 
Antonius Gnipho, who opened the first schools of Latin 
rhetoric in Rome. Roscius, an actor of Gallic extraction, 
was another master in the art of rhetoric. A number of 
lawyers of Gallic descent were competent in this art, 
among them Vibius Gallus and Julius Florus, and somewhat 
later Domitius Afer and Julius Africanus. Trogue Fornpey 
was an eminent historian whose works were greatly 
appreciated. It is in the fourth century that rhetoric 
attains its zenith, but it is a rhetoric for the sake of 
rhetoric with almost complete disregard of substance. 

The letters of ££. Aurelius Symmachus and of Apollinaris 
Sidonius are examples of this. The most important 
representative of the poetry of the period is Ausonius. 

He is a master of grace, elegance and rhetoric, only too 






















- 23 - 


often neglects what he is saying for how he is saying 

it and yet has in his poetry an intimate, personal 

the 

touch that is new in A literature of his day. 












- 24 - 


C. GERMANIC INVASION ON GAUL 
I. GERMANIC INVASION 

1. Gauses of the Germanic Invasion. 

In the case of the Germanic invasion of Gaul, there 
were no such underlying causes as the desire for Empire 
building or the search for raw materials for the home¬ 
land as had been the case with the Roman invasion. At the 
time of the invasions the Germanic tribes were barbarous 
in comparison with the civilisation in Gaul and only too 
often they were merely seeking booty. Sometimes a feud in 
a tribe would cause one section of the community to 
migrate and they moved into Gaul. The tribes just north 
of the Rhine had waged war continuously from Caesar’s 
time with the Gauls on the other side of the Rhine, and 
they welcomed all opportunities for plunder. Moreover, 
there was at that time a ’’Drang nach Westen” of all the 
Germanic tribes, and, as the tribes in the North moved 
south and west, those into whose territories they moved 
were forced themselves to move south and west with the 
result that those near the boundaries of Gaul moved into 
Gaul. 

2. Germanic Invasion of Gaul . 

Nrorn Caesar’s time there had been a slight 
infiltration of Germanic tribes into Gaul but not until 

the third century A.D. was there a real invasion. The 














- 





- 

- 

• * 


• . ... — —. • • 





















• 





. 


. 







•[ 




■ 




» 


• 
















* 









\ k 

" 













: v ~ . U 












■ 







































- 


. 

j- r ’ 













- 25 - 


Romans had recognised this danger and had kept garrisons 
along the Rhine from the time of Caesar, but the garrisons 
were not always effective in keeping out the Germanic 
tribes, partly owing to internal wars. In 215 A.D. the 
first attack of the Alemannians was repulsed by Caracalla. 
In 241 A.D. the Franks attacked Gaul with such success 
that they overran most of it during the rest of the third 
century, and settled in Gaul. The Alemannians kept 
attacking Roman territory with considerable success and 
they too settled in Gaul, south of the Franks from the 
Main to the Alps. In the fifth century the Visigoths, 
the Burgundians and the Franks invaded Gaul. In 412 A.D. 
the Goths under Athaulf, the brother of Alaric, invaded 
southern Gaul and made themselves masters of Toulouse, 
Narbonne and Bordeaux. The Burdundians also came in the 
early fifth century and settled in the eastern part of 
Gaul. The Franks entered Gaul at the same time and 
settled in northern Gaul. These Germanic speaking tribes 
remained in Gaul and, since their number was never very 
large, they eventually adopted the language of the Gauls, 
which was, as we have noted, Latin at that time. 

II. GERMANIC INFLUENCE ON FRENCH 
1. Influence on Vocabulary. 

A very large number of words were brought into 

French by the Germanic speaking peoples. Among these 
were naturally many terms of war: garde, 0. Fr. guarae 



















. 





■ 




























. 








- . 










OJ 








' 






■ 



















’ 

. 

. 






























. 

. ' 




. 

. 




















. 


.. £ 

_ 




_ 
















- 26 - 


(warda); guerre (werra); guetter, O.Fr. guaitier (wahta); 
marechal, (marahskalk); and verbs: blesser, epier, escremir. 
There were names of weapons and clothes: brant (brand); 
broigne (brunja); eperon (sporon); feutre (filt); gant 
(^wantu); haubert, O.Fr. halberc, osberc (halsberg), which 
attest that the arms and the clothing of the Franks replace 
those of the Romans. A number of words pertaining to 
political and social institutions come from Germanic: 
echevin (^skapin); faide, a private war (faihida); gage 
(wadja); harangue, O.Fr. harengue (hring, a circle or 
assembly), and verbs of the same order: bannir, garantir. 
Some names of furniture and of utensils are of Germanic 
origin: banc (bank); fauteuil, O.Fr. faldestuel (faldistol); 
hanap (hnapp); canif (knif). Some names of foodstuffs 
also belong here: bacon (^bakko); rc>tir (raustjan). Some 
parts of the body took their names from Germanic: echine 
(skina); hanche (^hanka). Many names of persons are of 
Germanic origin such as: armand (Hariman), Arnoul (Arnulf), 
Beranger (Beringair), Bernard (Berinhard), Gautier O.Fr. 
Guaitier (Walthari), Guillaume (Wilihelm), Henri (Hainrik). 
2. Influence on Ford Formation . 

A more significant influence on French than the 
adoption of a number of isolated words, is the influence 
on word formation. The influence of Germanic on the 
word formation and on the phonology of French is not to be 























- 27 - 


confused with a substratum influence. The Germanic 
speaking peoples did not form a substratum, but merely 
entered the country and adopted the language of the people 
already there. Germanic gave French some suffixes that 
not only remained in French but that were productive. The 
suffix T -ing f gave the Old French ’-enc' 1 as in: balcenc, 
jaserenc, paisenc, or in modern French: brelan, chambellan, 
merlan, hareng. The suffixes '-hart* and 1 -wala 1 in 
Germanic names such as Eginhart, Nithart, Grimwald, 

Herwald gave French the suffixes 1 -art T and ? -alt T which 
were used to form derivatives from both Romance and 
Germanic roots: bastart, coart, hagart, gaillart, richart, 
vieillart; Renaud, lourdaud, heraut. From the Germanic 
adjectives of nationality such as f frankisk f and *thiudisk* 
were taken the suffix ’-isk* in the form ’-escum' T -esca f 
which in later form became f -eis r , 1 -ois’, ^ais* as in 
O.Fr. angleis, Mod. Fr. anglais, Mod. Fr. danois. The 
prefix f mes- r as in some Old French words: mesamer, 
mesaconseillier, mesdire, mesprendre, comes from the 
Germanic prefix ’mis-’. 

3. Phonetic Influence . 

another significant influence on trench was that on 
the sound system and the development of sounds. In the 
first place, the laryngal sound r h f which had disappeared 
from the Vulgar Latin was reintroduced in initial position, 
ouch Old French words as: hache (*hapja), haste (^haifst), 





























_ 


“ 

. 


. 

: 

• { • 































■ .! 









: : 




' 






i 









. 








. ' 






r * iN ,1 





• - 













■ 

f 


' 

■ 






- - - ___:_ 











- 28 - 


halsberc halsberg), helme ('helm), herberge (^heriberga) 
all come from the Germanic words written in brackets and 
they retained the pronunciation of the T h T in Old French. 
Another example of the reintroduction of , h t is the word 
T haut’ which is the result of a confusion of the Latin 
f altum T , Vulgar Latin f altu’ with the Germanic •hoh’. 

This T h f was only introduced in initial position and even 
there it did not last very long, dropping out of the 
pronunciation in kiddle French. The sound f x f (written ’h 1 
when preceding the consonants 'l 1 , T r T , and *n T had an 
unusual development in French. In the first words 
borrowed from Germanic the f x T was replaced by r k* 

(written 1 ch f ). Q.Fr. Chloevis (Hlo^awig), O.Fr. Chlotilde 
(Hlotilda). In the next series borrowed the restriction 
of the throat was replaced by a restriction of the lips 
with the result that T f ' was substituted for the T x T : 

O.Fr. floovenc (^Hlodowing), O.Fr. flanc (^hlanc), O.Fr. 
frime (^hrim). Later still when the Germanic T x f had 
weakened to f h ! either it gave in French the f h T or it 
disappeared. O.Fr. Loewis, O.Fr. hanap (hnapp). The 
bilabial fricative f w* of Germanic gave difficulty in 
pronunciation so that it was strenghthened to the sound 
' gw* as in such Old French words as : guarder (warden), 
gwerre (werra), guaite (wahta), guaaignier(waidanjan). 

This influence even carried over into Latin words which 








' 

'■ ’ 









. 

* 










' 










ip 












. 












- 








- ■ 














t 






* 

' ’ 

' 













■ 

. 


















- 29 - 


had the sound f w f in initial position as in the Old 
French words: guarait (<vervactum), guaster (<vastare), 
guespe [< vespa), guivre (<vipera). The Germanic ’w 1 
initial of a syllable or intervocalic followed the same 
development as the Latin T w f (written t v 1 ) in the same 
positions. Germanic also influenced the development of 
the Latin suffix f -arium T , f -aria f . This suffix 
developed irregularly into f -ier f , whereas 'ariiim', *aria 
as an integral part of a word developed into f air f , aire f 
as in: O.Fr. vair (Ovarium), aire (<area). This 
irregular change is explained by the influence of so 
many Germanic names with the suffix T -air f as: Autchari, 
Hlothari, Walthari which respectively give in Old French, 
Ogier, Lohier, Gautier. In Germanic the f a f was umlauted 
to f e f by the T i* in the following syllable, and this 
affected the Latin suffix t -arium l , ’-aria T so that its 
T a t was likewise umlauted to *e f v/hich following its 
natural development became diphthongised to T ie f whence 
the development ’-arium’, T -aria T '-ier 1 . 

4. General Influence . 

It has been suggested that Germanic influenced the 
accent of the GallO-Roman speech. Je know that the Latin 
of this period was spoken with a stress or expiratory 
accent, and if Germanic had any influence it could only 
have been to intensify the stress. That this is the case 








































■ 


l 


























. ' ’ 




. 










■ 






- 












. .. I 














_ . 








■ ! 














' 

■ 


; ■ 


’ ’ 




■ 










. i 










« - • ..... 




i 

. 



















. 


' 

















: > U, 


















- 30 - 


is suggested by the fact that the words in French have 
broken down more than either Spanish, Italian or 
Portuguese, and this breaking down is due to the stress 
accent of the language. There is, however, another 
explanation for this change, and that is that, by 
unsettled conditions in Gaul generally, the language was 
given greater opportunity for change and development and 
this would have allowed the stress accent to break down 
the words also. The fact that the Germanic migrations 
unsettled Gaul and left the language free to follow its 
own bent without interference from educationalists, 
grammarians, and political and social institutions is one 
of the most important influences that Germanic made on 
French. Pope says of it: T, The disintegration of political 
social and economic life led directly to a rapid and 
general local differentiation of speech; Germanic speech- 
habits exercised a direct and strong influence on vocabul¬ 
ary and pronunciation, and contributed, together with the 
general confusion of the times, and the low ebb of 
education, to a weakening of linguistic tradition, which 
left free play to the disruptive forces of sound-change 
and counter-balancing analogical creations, and made the 
period one of markedly rapid linguistic change". (1) 


(1) Pope: From Latin to Modern French, p. 12 
















. 











' 


















. ' 



* 







. 







. 



. 


. 


















' ■ 












' 
























. 









• 


■ 

if 












... ■ ' 








< 











_ 




















TEE LINGUISTIC BACKGROUND 










































- 31 - 


A. TEE LriTIN LaNGUaGE 
I. CLASSIFICATION OF LATIN 
Latin belongs to the 'centum 1 division of the Indo- 
European languages. This division into 'centum' and 
'satem' languages is an arbitrary one based on the 
development of the palatals. Although attempts made to 
set up a 'centum' unity and a 'satem' unity have been 
unsuccessful, we may still make the division. It seems 
fairly certain, in the development of the Indo-European 
languages, that an Italo-Geltic unity may be posited, and 
in later periods an Italic unity composed of Latin, Oscan 
and Umbrian. Latin issues from this Italic unity and in 
time takes precedence over the other Italic languages to 
such an extent that they become extinct. 

II. PRONUNCIATION OF LATIN 
There are a few features of Latin pronunciation 
that are important to note as they have a bearing on the 
future development of Latin into French. 

1. Vowels . 

The vowels 'e', 'i', 'o', 'u' each had two 

different pronunciations distinguished by quality. This 
is important since the vowels had different developments 
in the Romance languages. 

2 . Consonants . 

The consonant 'h' was pronounced in classical times 
as it is in Aodern English, but was dropped very early in 
















. 




















■ 




- 













■ - 

. 








• - 

■ 









. 







_ 






















- 38 - 


Vulgar Latin since it does not persist in any of the 
Romance languages. The palatals written T c f and f g T were 
pronounced respectively ’k* and *g T in all positions. The 
consonant T qu f was pronounced as English ’kw T . The * s' 
was unvoiced even in intervocalic position except when 
another consonant had dropped out: formosus (earlier: 
formonsus) pronounced *formozus f . The ! f ! had originally 
been bilabial but by classical times had come to be the 
labio-dental that we have in English. The Latin f v f and 
T i T when preceding a vowel were the semi-consonants trans¬ 
cribed phonetically by ’w f and 1 j T respectively, having 
the pronunciation of the English and , y t . The other- 
consonants were approximately the same as in English or 
French, it not being of anynimportance here to distinguish 
such slight differences as the tongue position for the 
dentals in which case it is believed that Latin approx¬ 
imated the English more closely than the French. (1) 

3. accent . 

The nature of the accent of Latin has been disputed 
by the authorities. Meillet says: r, En latin -- on entend 
ici par latin la langue fixee a Rome au Ille siecle 
le rythme quant it at if subsiste, et 1 * T, accentus M a garde 
son caractere qui consistait a n’etre autre chose qu’une 
montee de la voix tf . (8) Lindsay says on the same subject: 

(1) Lindsay: The Latin Language, p. 80. 

(2) Meillet: Escuisse d f une histoire de la langue latine, 

p. 129 . 














' : 




. 




























■ 








. 









r ? 


. 

















■ 

. 


! 


’ ' 

' 




1 














. 


















' 


. 









' 


* 


■ 

















' 












' 






' 

. 















- 33 - 


"When we turn our attention to Latin, we are confronted 
with the difficulty that, while the Latin grammarians 
often speak of their accent in terms properly applicable 
only to a pitch-accent, all the features of their 
language point to its having been a stress-accent”. (1) 
Laurand (2) resolves the problem by explaining that there 
was an expiratory or stress accent on the first syllable 
before the second century B.C. and that it then changed 
to a pitch or musical accent, and then later in the fourth 
century A.D. it again became expiratory. 

It is possible that Latin was only pronounced with 
the musical accent by a few of the cultured class, and 
that in the spoken Latin of Classical times the 
expiratory accent was the rule. It is often considered 
now that the poetry of the Classical period should be 
read with a musical accent, but we have no positive proof 
that it was so read and perhaps it was read with an 
expiratory accent. Lindsay points out, "That the Latin 
language of all periods, at which we have definite know¬ 
ledge of it, was a language of stress-accentuation, is 
proved by all the evidence at our disposal, and disproved 
by nothing except the silence of the grammarians". (3) 

(1) Lindsay: The Latin Language, p. 80. 

(2) Laurand: Manuel des etudes greccues et latines 

(Fascicule 71, C-rammaire historique la tine, 

p. 634. 

(3) Lindsay: idem, p. 151. 

























' 

. ■■ 





















" . 






* 





. 


. 

' 

. . 




■ 


















* 



















t • ■ f 







- 











ns 


. 





. 
















- 34 - 


The problem is: Can we believe this lack of evidence on 
the part of the grammarians? The study of accentuation 
and all the terminology used came to the Romans from 
Greece. It is quite possible that the writers on Latin 
accentuation, having adopted the language of the Greek 
authorities on Greek pronunciation which was a musical 
accent, might easily misuse the terms they had adopted and 
call a syllable T high T or 'low' when they should have 
called it T strong t or ’weak*. moreover, if the stress 
accent in Latin was accompanied by a higher tone, and such 
would seem to have been the case when we consider the 
pronunciation of the liodern Romance languages, then the 
grammarians could very easily have been misled in their 
use of terms that really apply properly only to Greek. 
Latin then had an expiratory accent which was probably not 
as strong as the one in English and was probably accomp¬ 
anied by a slightly higher tone. 

The place of the accent in Latin was governed by the 
Penultima Law to the effect that the accent was on the 
antepenult if the penult was short, e.g. de'coro, and on 
the penult if the penult was long, e.g. deco 7 ris. 

jlIjl • VTJi_iGaR Librii'. . 

1. ./hat is Vulgar Latin? 

There is a definite difference between the spoken 
and the written forms of a language such as Lodern 




















- 35 - 


English or French. The extent of this difference varies 
with the trend in literature. When the trend is towards 
a careful polishing of the language and the elimination 
of terms of every day occurence, as in eighteenth century 
England or seventeenth century France, then the difference 
is apt to be greater than when the trend is towards using 
common terms, as in France in the latter half of the nine¬ 
teenth century. This was true of Latin, and it is the 
spoken language that is called Vulgar Latin, and this 
language, not Classical Latin, is the immediate parent of 
the Romance languages. The Latins applied various terms 
to it: ’sermo inconditus", cotidianus’, usualis*, 
vulgaris 1 , pleb^ius*, proletarius’, rusticus*. 'We do not 
know the exact connotation of these terms, but they show 
that a difference existed and that the Romans recognised 
this. In the late Republic and the early Empire the 
speech of the educated had become highly artificial. 

Vulgar Latin was not the affected speech of the cultivated 
classes, nor was it the slang of the lowest classes of 
society, but it was the speech that the ordinary Roman 
used in his daily occupations. The Vulgar Latin period 
lasts from about 200 B.C. to 600 A.D. (1) 


(1) Vulgar Latin is not to be confused with the Latin 

of the Vulgate which is a learned form of Latin and 

is termed Church Latin as distinguished from Vulgar 
Latin. 




















_ 













- 36 - 


2. The accent in Vulgar Latin . 

The position of the accent in words remained the 
same in most Vulgar Latin words as it had been in Class¬ 
ical Latin. There were, however, a few cases where the 
accent had shifted. The vowels T e f and t i t in hiatus and 
in accented position were pronounced f j f and the accent 
fell on the following vowel: mulierem> mulierem; 
filiolum> filiolum. Likewise accented ’u’ in hiatus was 
pronounced t w t and the accent fell on the preceding 
syllable: bat(tjuere>battuere; consuere> consuere; 
tenueram >tenueram. The occurence of a stop consonant 
plus the liquid T r* ar the beginning of the last syllable 
caused the accent to shift to the penult: Cl. Lat. 
tenebrae 7.Lat. tenebrae, which is attested by 3p. 
tinieblas, and Fr. tenebre. In compound verbs the accent 
was shifted to the stem vowel providing that the compound 
nature of the verb was recognised: Cl. Lat. recipit ^V. 
Lat. recipit (It. riceve, Fr. recoit); Cl. Lat. renegat> 
V. Lat. renegat (It. riniega, O.Fr. renie). ./hen the 

compound nature of the verb was not recognised then the 

/ 

accent remained on the prefix: , colligo t remains as is 

attested by Fr. je cueille, It. Colgo. The numerals also 

changed their accent from the penult to the antepenult so 

/ / 

that the forms must have been T viginti T , ’tnginta 1 , 

1 quadraginta T . 















- 37 - 






3. Distinguishing; Features of Vulgar Latin . 

Apart from the change in accentuation of words, there 
are a number of other characteristics that distinguish 
Vulgar Latin from Classical Latin. It will be useful to 
note here a few of the more important of these character¬ 
istics. The use of words v/as often quite different from 
the usage of Classical Latin. any words were used with 


different meanings: comparare (to make ready) becomes 
’buy’ (Bp. comprar); focus (fire-place) becomes ’fire’ 
(It. fuoco); paganus (belonging to the country) becomes 


’p^gan’ 
journey) 


(Fr. paien); viaticum (belonging to the road 
becomes ’journey 1 (Sp. viaje); mulier (woman 


or 




) 


becomes ’wife’ (Bp. mujer). Many words are replaced by 

' 

other words from Classical Latin: ferre (carry) by portare 
(Fr. porter); emere (buy) by comparare (It. comprare); 


omnes (all) by toti (It. tutto); urbs (city) by civitas 
(It. citta); dies (day) by diurnum (It. giorno); hiems 
(winter) by hibernum (Fr. hiver). Vulgar Latin was very 
rich in diminutives and derivative adjectives whence the 
large number of diminutives in the Romance languages, 




particularly Spanish and Italian. It was also very rich 

* 

in compound words. "Then the compound nature of these 
words was recognised, it was customary to reconstruct 
them on the basis of the simple verb: ’commendo’ changed 
to ’commando’ (mando); ’redidit’ to ’rededit’ (dedit). 













■ 












. 

- • . ............ 


















. 




































. 














? 














■ , ■ 




















- 











' 

1 





















_ 








_ 



















- 38 - 


Rhen the compound, nature was not recognised, the verbs 

retained their own form and carried the accent on the 

/ / / 

prefix: colligo (lego), constitit (stetit), erigo (ago), 

inflo (fluo). 

The constructions of Vulgar Latin were also different 
from those of Classical Latin. Then we bear in mind that 
Vulgar Latin was the spoken language, we would expect the 
change to be one of simplification and such was the case. 
The word order was made simpler and more rational. The 
arbitrary separation of members of the sentence that 
logically belonged together was not permitted as it had 
been in Classical Latin. As the old comparatives and 
superlatives lost their precise meanings, the forms 'plus* 
and T magis f plus the adjective were substituted. These 
forms remained in the Romance languages: Fr. plus grand; 

Sp. mas grande; It. piu grande. The adverbs 'bene', 

, multum t , 'satis* were employed as intensives and these, 
too, have remained in the Romance languages: Fr. bien; 0. 
Fr. moult; Fr. assez. t L_agis T was also used to mean 'but': 
Fr. mais, Sp. mas. Final consonants (except 's' final 
which in G-auI remained) fell in Vulgar Latin (factum> factu 
and this fact reduced the distinguishing features of the 
different cases. This caused the cases to be expressed 
by different means. The genitive was supplanted by f de’ 
plus the ablative and occasionally by the dative. The 
dative itself tended to be replaced by 'ad* plus the 















- 39 - 


accusative. The ablative was not used alone but with f ab T , 
T ex ! and even more commonly by f de f . By the end of the 
Vulgar Latin period there remained only two cases (1), the 
nominative and the oblique. The old ablative absolute was 
replaced by a nominative absolute. with the breakdown of 
the cases the masculine and neuter forms of many nouns 
became indistinguishable and the two genders were merged.(2) 
In the verb forms the first and fourth conjugations re¬ 
mained mostly intact, but the second and third conjugations 
bedmhe confused so that mam/- verbs of the second 
conjugation passed over into the third and vice versa. The 
verbs of the third conjugation in , io t went over to the 
fourth conjugation. Of the verb forms some went out of 
popular use and were replaced by other locutions and of 
those that remained new tendencies were often in evidence. 
The gerund came to be replaced by the infinitive with the 
exception of the ablarive form of the gerund which came to 
be substituted for the present participle. The perfect and 
the passive infinitives dropped out of usage, but the 
present participle was retained both as a noun and an 

(1) In Rumanian three cases existed, a separate form for 
the dative having survived. 

(£) There -were many interchanges from one gender to another, 
but, after the dropping of the final consonants, It was 
the resultant similarity between the masculine and 
neuter genders that really caused the disappearance of 
the latter. 












'• ’ ... 

- 























• 





■ ' 











■ 































. 

. 




■ 

. ■ 










































• i 

. 





■ 








_ 



_ 

















- 40 - 


adjective to be confused with the gerund in the ablative. 
Under the influence of forms such as f carus est’ the 
forms T amatus est’ came to be ’he i_s loved’ and a whole 
passive inflection was built up on this basis. The 
perfect tense came to be supplanted more and more by 
’habeo’ plus the past participle. The old perfect was 
kept with the aorist meaning. The future tended to be 
confused with other tenses and was replaced by various 
forms. The one that has survived is ’habeo’ plus the 
infinitive (aicere habeo). 

1,0st of the phonological developments that we find 
partly or fully carried out in modern French had started 
in Vulgar Latin times. It is only necessary here to note 
some of the most important of them. In the accented 
position ’e’ and ’i’ fell together to produce a closed ’e’ 
Cl. Lat. verus, It. vero; Cl. Lat. minus, It. meno. The 
accented ’o’ and ’u’ fell together to produce a closed ’ 0 ’ 
Cl. Lat. hora, It. ora; Cl. Lat. mulier, It. moglie. The 
other vowels when long in Classical Latin became closed 
in Vulgar Latin and the short vowels became open, the 
diphthong ’ae’ falling together with short ’e ’ : Cl. Lat. 
bellus, It. hello; Cl. Lat. praesto, It. presto. The 
vowels ’i’ and ’u’ in hiatus, as we have noted above, 
become the semi-consonants ’j’ and ’w’ respectively. 

Vowels in the intertonic syllable began to fall in Vulgar 
Latin: Cl. Lat. asnera, V. Lat. aspra. The palatalisation 




















- 41 - 


of the gutturals also began in the Vulgar Latin period, 
but this question will be discussed later. The consonants 
’d T and ’b 1 in intervocalic position regularly became the 
voiced spirants T '^ f and 1 ^ T : Cl. Lat. videre^V. Lat. 
ve iere ; Cl. Lat. debere^V. Lat. de^ere. In the fifth or 
sixth century intervocalic * p ! and f t f were voiced to t b t 
and T d T : Cl. Lat. amatusn^V. Lat. amadus; Cl. Lat. ripaj> 

V. Lat. riba. Ey the fourth century the T l f had begun 
its vocalisation to t u f (Cl. Lat. multum^O.Fr. moult, mout j 
but the change was not co :pleted until the eighth or ninth 
century. 

These are the most important differences between 
Classical Latin and Vulgar Latin. They show the tendency 

i 

towards simplification of forms and syntax that is carried 
even further in French. The phonological developments 
give an indication of the essential phonetic character¬ 
istics that were at work causing the Latin language to 
change, characteristics that are the sane in the 
development from vulgar Latin to French as they were from 
Classical Latin to Vulgar Latin. The morphological 
changes show the language drift away from the inflectional 
type of language to the isolative type of language. 












- 42 - 


B. PHONOLOGY. 

The phonetic changes from Vulgar Latin to Old French 
are too numerous to outline here. It is only necessary 
for us to note some of the most important and far-reaching 
changes to understand the phonetic background of French. 

The ones that are most important are the palatalisation of 
the gutturals, nasalisation and diphthongisation. 

I. PALATALISATION OF GUTTURALS. 

1. First Palatalisation . 

t 

The first palatalisation to take place is that of the 
consonants f k f and 'g f when followed by a front vowel (’e 1 
or T i f ). It is the position of the vowel that causes the 
palatalisation, that is, the vowel, being a front vowel 
causes the consonant preceding it to be pronounced more 
towards the front of the mouth. When a guttural is 
pronounced more forward than it should be, then the tongue 
comes in contact with the palate, making the consonant a 
palatal instead of a guttural. 

as early as the second century A.D. the Latin group 
f ty* (fortjam) came to be pronounced T tsy f (fortsya). Along 
with this development was attracted the group T cy ! (faciam) 
which became pronounced also r tsy’ (fatsya). This last 
development took place before the fifth century. Finally 
the Latin T k* (written r c T ) before a front vowel even if 
that vowel was not in hiatus, became the sauie sound f tsy f so 





















- 43 - 


that V. Lat. T cervu T was pronounced 1 tsyervu', V. Lat. 
'mercede 1 pronounced 'mertsyede 1 and V. L. f placere f 
pronounced T rlatsyere f . At the same time the sounds T dy f , 
'gy 1 and f g T before front vowels had followed a similar 
line of development. All three when in strong position (1) 
had become f dj f : Cl. Lat. gelare^O. Fr. geler (pronounced 
'djsler 1 ); Cl. Lat. argentum>0. Fr. argent (ardjant); Cl. 
Lat. diurnum>0. Fr. jorn (djorn). The same consonants in 
weak position (2) had become the semi-consonant 
(pronounced as Eng. f y’)» Cl. Lat. t faginam t >0. Fr. famine 
(fajin); Cl. Lat. inodiare>0. Fr. enoier (enojer); Cl. Lat 
exagium>Q. Fr. essai (esaj); Cl. Lat. lac tern ;=><?. Fr. lait 
(lajt). In the sixth century unvoiced consonants in inter¬ 
vocalic position became voiced, which meant that the sounds 
*tsy T became f dzy f : ratsyone>radzyone; platsyere 
pladzyere; but when it was not intervocalic the sound 

remained: mertss^ede, tsyervu. In the late Old French 

• 

period, in the thirteenth century, the sounds , tsy t and f dj 
become T s’ and T 2 > T respectively: fortsya (cfortiam) >force 
(pronounced T forss> f ); mertsyede (^ mercedem) z^merci 
(pronounced ’mersi’): djoler (^ gelaregeler (pronounced 
(zeler T )* The other sound T dzy T which was developed from 

(1) a consonant at the beginning of a word or syllable is 
said no be in strong position. 

(2) Consonants in intervocalic position or at the end of a 
syllable before a consonant are said to be in weak 
position. 













- 44 - 


f k T in intervocalic position became f ydz T by metathesis of 
the f y T and was written T is f : radzyone> raison (pronounced 
T raydzon T ); pladzyere>plaisir (pronounced T playdzir f ). 

In the thirteenth century the sound f dz T was reduced to T z T , 
the sound r y T combining with the preceding vowel: raydzon-^ 
rezo (raison); playdzir>plezir (plaisir). This is also 
the present stage of the words affected by the first 
palatalisation, at least as far as the guttural sounds 
themselves are concerned. 

Z . Second Palatalisation . 

By the seventh century there remained, then, no 
t h T s’ or , g T s’ except those before T a T , f o f and f u T and 
those in foreign words that had been introduced after the 
palatalisation. By this period the Latin *a T , which had been 
a back vowel, was given a more forward pronunciation and 
now began to influence the gutturals and f g’. At the 
beginning of the eighth century all the f k’s T and , g t s ! 
in strong position and followed by a front vowel ( f e f , T i f 
or r a T ), were palatalised in most of France. This second 
palatalisation had a slightly different development from 
the first one. The process was the same; the consonants 
were pronounced with the tongue in a more forward position 
but the results were not quite the same. The sounds t k l 
and ’g T first moved forward to T ty T and T dy f respectively. 
The sound f ty T then became ’tch* (written ’ch 1 ): Cl. Lat. 





















- 45 - 


carrum>0. Fr. char (pronounced ’tchar’), Cl. Lat. arcam > 
0. Fr. arche (pronounced ’artcha’). The sound ’dy’ became 
’dj T (written ’g’ ) i al. la t. gamb^m > 0. Fr. jambe 
(pronounced ’djambs’); Cl. Lat. largam^O. Fr. large 
(pronounced ’lardja*), The same development took pl^ce 
with the foreign v.ords under the same conditions. The 
Greek word ’kikkon’^0. Fr. cliche [ enounced ’tchitcha’), 
and the Germanic word ’eskina’ ^0. Fr. eschine (pronounced 
’ estchins> T ). Later in the thirteenth century the sounds 
T tch t and ’dj T were reduced to ’ch’ and ’^’ and the words 
’arche’, ’char’, ’jambe’, ’large’, ’chiche’, and ’eschine’ 
were pronounced the same as to-day, at least as regards the 
gutturals. 

It will be noticed that many of these words retain 
the same written symbol ’c’ and ’g’ that was used in Latin 
(Lat. ceramc>Fr. cire; Lat. gentes;>Fr. gens), but a long 
period of development has intervened and the words in their 
spoken form would not be recognized very often as from the 
Latin. When we stop and consider the number of words that 
have been affected by these two palatalisations, we 
recognise at once the importance it has in the phonetic 
development of French. 

a 1. ilao.iiLl Sn'T10 L . 

The phenomenon of nasalisation is the effect of a 
neighboring nasal consonant on the preceding vowel. The 
soft palate is raised to pronounce the vowel and then, in 














- 46 - 


order to pronounce the nasal consonant, it must be 
lowered. If it is lowered too soon then the vowel is also 
nasalised. It is this process that has taken place in 
French whenever a vowel was followed by a nasal consonant. 

1. First nasalisation . 

The first nasalisation was that of the vowels ’ a T 
and T e T , which took place in the pre-literary period. 
"Whenever the vowel ’a' was followed by a nasal consonant 
plus another consonant it became nasalised: Lat. annum > 

Fr. an (pronounced 'an'). Similarly if it was followed 
by a TT palatalised 'n' (l) it became nasalised: Lat. 

montaneam >Fr. montagne (pronounced 'montane'), 
vowel T a f , accented and free, (2) followed by a nasal 
consonant, likewise became nasalised but this time to the 
nasal ’ey 1 : Lat. manum >Fr. main (pronounced 'meyn'); 
lanam^-Fr. laine (pronounced 'leyna 1 ). At the same time 
the vowel t e t is being nasalised by following nasal 
consonants. First the vowel 'e' either long or short, 
followed by a nasal consonant plus another consonant is 
nasalised to T, e' : Lat. ventum ?>Fr. vent (pronounced ’vent 1 ) 
Lat. vendersFr. vendre (pronounced 'vendra'). Before 
the "Chanson de Roland" this nasal had passed to the nasal 
'a': Fr. vent (pronounced 'vant'); Fr. vendre 

(1) An 'n' followed by an 'e' or an T i T in hiatus had 
become palatilised to the sound 'n'. 

(2) A vowel in an open syllable is said to be 'free': 
ca -pram, pa -1 re.m, na - sum. 





















- 47 - 


(pronounced ’vandra’). i'he vowel 'e 1 closed, accented and 
free, followed by a nasal consonant regularly becomes 
diphthongised to ’ey’ and then nasalised to the Lsal ’ey’: 
Lat. plenum ^Fr. plein (pronounced ’pleyn’); Lat. plenums 
1’r. pleine (pronounced ’pleyns’). There are now two nasal 
sounds: ’a’ and ’ey’. The latter gradually is reduced to 
the simple nasal ’ ef ’, so that the words ’main 1 , ’laine’, 
’plein’ and f pleine f are pronounced ’men’, ’len^’, ’pleh’, 
’plena’. This is as far as the nasalisation was carried 
in Old French. It was not until the seventeenth century 
that any further developments took: place. During that 
century, if the nasal consonant was final or supported by 
another consonant other than a nasal, the vowel retained 
its nasal quality but the nasal consonant was dropped. This 
meant that the words ’an’, ’main’, ’vent’, ’plein’, and 
! vendre T were now pronounced as in Modern French ’a’, ’me’, 
’va’, 'pie’ and’vadr’. In all other cases the nasalisation 
of the vowel 'was dropped ana the nasal consonant was- 
retained. The words ’annee’, ’laine’, ’pleine’ and 
’montagne’ were now pronounced ’ane’, ’len’, ’plen’ and 
’motan’, as in Aodern French. 

Z . Second Nasalisation. 

The second period of nasalisation affected the vowel 
’o’. This second nasalisation did not- take place until the 
end of the twelfth century. At this time the vowel ’o’ 
























- 48 - 


either open or closed, and followed by a nasal consonant 
was nasalised to the sound 'o’ : Lat. bonum^Fr. bon 
(pronounced ’bon ’); Lat. donum ^Fr. don (pronounced ’d5h’); 
Lat. pomam^Fr. pomme (pronounced ’pom^’). This trans¬ 
formation provided Old French with a third nasal ’o’. In 
the seventeenth century the same change was effected for 
the nasal ’o’ as had been for the nasals ’tf’ and ’a’, and 
the words ’bon’, ’ bonne’, ’don 1 and ’pomme’ were pronounced 
as in modern French ’bo’, ’bon’, ’do'’ and ’pom’. 

3. Third Nasalisation. 

The third period of nasalisation, in the thirteenth 
century, affected the diphthongs ’jL§’ and ’we’ which had 
come from the vowel ’e’ accented and free, open and closed 
respectively. The diphthong ’j_e’ when followed by a nasal 
consonant was nasalised to the sound ’j£ T : Lat. bene ^Fr. 
bien(pronounced ’bjen’); Lat. veniat^O. Fr. viegne 
(pronounced ’vjen>’). The diphthong ’we’ when followed by 
a nasal consonant was nasalised to the sound ’we’: Lat. 
foenum>Fr. foin (pronounced ’fwen’); Lat. avena^Fr. avoine 
(pronounced ’avwen^’). This nasalisation did not produce 
any new nasals to French; the nasals in this case are just 
the nasal ’e’ preceded by the semi-consonants ’j* and ’w’. 
.-xgain in the seventeenth century the same development took 
place as with the other nasals resulting in the modern 
pronunciation of the words ’bien’ (bje), ’ vie gne’vienne’ 

(vien), (foin ’ (fwe ), ’ avoine ’ (awan). 




































. , 




. 

■ 

( 















- 49 - 


4. Fourth Nasalisation . 

The last nasalisation, which does not take place 
until the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, is the only- 
one that has no roots in Old French, but it is exactly the 
same tendency of the language, the tendency of the nasal 
consonants to nasalise the preceding vowels. In this 
nasalisation the vowels ’ i T and ’u ! are nasalised to f i ' 
and T u T respectively, when followed by a final nasal 
consonant or a nasal consonant plus another consonant. By 
the end of the century the nasal t i* becomes the nasal t e f 
as in Modern French, and French is left with the four nasals 
1 a f , and T u T . Since this nasalisation took place 

at the same time that the nasals were denasalised before an 
articulate nasal consonant (ane^ane), the , i t and ! u f 
were never nasalised before a nasal consonant that was 
pronounced and the words with the nasals were pronounced the 
same as in Modern French once the l T t had become t 'e f : vin 
(vTVve), fin (fi^fe), singe ( sTz, ^ se^); un (u), lundi 
(ludi), emprunter (aprute). 

III. DIPHTEONGTSATION. 

^iphthongisation is the breaking of a vowel. The 
organs used in pronouncing the vowel do not retain the 
same position during its pronunciation, but change their 
position slightly which results in two vowels being pro¬ 
nounced quickly one after the other, one of them being 
sometimes a semi-consonant, and this make a diphthong. 

















- 50 - 


i 

The phenomenon may be purely phonetic, and its occurence 
in so many languages suggests that it is so. 

I 

1 . First Diphthongisation . i 

The first diphthongisation took place in Vulgar < 

Latin as is attested by its appearance in various Romance 
languages. In French the vowels ’e T and ’o’, accented, 
free, and open, are diphthongised to ’je’ and ’we’ 
respectively: Lat. ferum>F'r. fier (pronounced ’fjer’); Lat. 
pedem^Fr. pied (pronounced f pjed f ); Lat. novum^Fr. nuef 
(pronounced ’nwef’); Lat. bovem >~Fr. buef (pronounced ’bwef). 
The diphthong ’je’ has remained with only slight variations 
in the quality of the ’e’ which are largely dependent upon 
the individual words up to the present time: fier (fjer); 
pied (pje). The diphthong ’we’ lias gone through a series 
of changes that it has not been possible to establish with 
any degree of accuracy, and which culminate in the sound 
’oe’ (written ’eu’). Brunot and Bruneau (1) suggest the 
steps (wo,woe, de ): 0. Fr. buefp>Mod. Fr. boeuf (pronounced 
’bodf’); 0. Fr. nuef^Mod. Fr. neuf (pronounced ’no^f ’ ). 

2. Second Diphthongisation . 

The second diphthongisation took place after the 
Vulgar Latin period since they make no appearance in 
Spanish or Italian as the other diphthongs do, but on the 

(1) Brunot and Bruneau: Precis de G-rammaire Historioue 
de la Langue Francaise, p. 94. 




















- 51 - 


dfher 

^hand, it took place before the literary period since they 
occur in the early texts. In this case the vowels 'e* 
and T o T when accented, free, and closed, were diphthongised 
to the sounds 'ej' and *ou' respectively: Lat. me p> 0 . Fr. 
mei (pronounced 'mej'); Lat. florem^O. Fr. flour 
(pronounced 1 flour’). At the same time the vowel ’a* 
when free and accented was diphthongised to the diphthong 
'ej': Lat. patrem^O. Fr. peire (pronounced 'pejre'). 

This latter diphthong becomes monophthongised again to 
'e': 0 . Fr. peire p-Mod. Fr. pere (pronounced 'per'). The 
diphthong issued from the vowel ’e^ develops to the 

diphthong 'oj ' about the middle of the twelfth century. 
Towards the end of the thirteenth century it underwent 
another change. The vocalic element ' 9 ' took the 
character of a consonant becoming 'w' and the consonant 
element 'j’ became vocalic T e' and we have the diphthong 
’we ’: 0. Fr. inei^^oa. Fr. moi (pronounced 'mwe' ); 0. Fr. 
dreit^Mod. Fr. droit (pronounced 'drwe'). From here the 
development of the diphthong 'we’ ceases to be phonetic 
and becomes a matter of elegance. From the sixteenth 
century there were manners of speech that were considered 
elegant and some that 'were not. One of those considered 
elegant was the pronunciation T e' for the diphthong 'we' 
and this has survived in many words: claie, craie, raie, 
faible, frais, Francais, Anglais, in all of which words 














- 52 - 


the sound ’e’ has been substituted for the old diphthong 
’we’. //here the diphthong remained it develorjed to the 
sound ’wa’: ’moi ’ is pronounced ’mwa’ ; ’droit’ is 
pronounced ’drwa’. By the eighteenth century this pro¬ 
nunciation was beginning to be accepted and has remained 
to the present time in words such as: bois, croire, devoir, 
Its origin had been the popular language and with the 
Revolution it became the standard pronunciation. The 
diphthong ’ou’ becomes the sound ’oe’ before the twelfth 
century, .again the process is not accurately known but 
Bruneau and Brunot (1) set up the hypothesis that it passed 
through the stages: ou, oew, <5e. Examples are: 0. Fr. 
flours od. Fr. fleur (pronounced ’fl6^r’); Lat. mores 
Fr. moeurs (pronounced ’moer’); Lat. solum >Fr. seul 
(pronounced ’s6el’). This is the state of the diphthong 
in I odern French. 

This study of the palatalisation of gutturals, of 
nasalisation and of diphthongisation gives an outline of 
three of the most important developments of a purely 
phonetic nature that have taken place in the French 
language. 

(1) Brunot and Bruneau: Precis de Gram. Fist., p. 102. 














- 53 - 


C. MORPHOLOGY^ the verb. 

I. GENERAL 

i 

The verb in French underwent the regular phonetic i 

changes, but apart from these, was subject to the influence 1 
of analogy to a much greater extent than any of the other 
parts of speech. In a great many cases it is, however, the 
Latin verb that survives. In Latin three persons (the 
speaker, the person spoken to, the person spoken about) had 
been distinguished and personal endings had been added to 
the verb to indicate this. In French the same distinction 
was retained, moreover, in Latin the number had been 
distinguished by having a different set of endings for the 
singular and for the plural, and this also was kept in 
French. The tenses of the Latin verb had expressed the 
time of the action (as opposed to the ’aspect 1 expressed by 
the Indo-European verb) and this was retained in the French 
verb. In the course of time some of the Latin forms were 
lost and others were made to take their place. Latin had 
had two moods, the indicative and the subjunctive, to 
express reality and irreality or uncertainty or wish and 
these two moods were retained in French and a third, the 

conditional was added. Latin had had two voices, the 

active and the passive, to express whether the subject of 
the sentence was the subject of 

4he action or the object of it. These voices were retained 
in French. The French verb has obviously retained the 









■ 

. 









■ ' 






* 

• / 









* 

: 1 


- 



i .■ . 




J !. 


. 




' ? . 

• • ■ > 




. 






- 

’ r 

' 





i ■ ■ t SI 




i 


.. 


: 






. . . ' . 

: 






r- 


i ■ 

..'if,, a : 
















- 

» • : . 






. 


■ 




























- 54 - 


nain characteristics of the Latin verb, although its form 
has changed by phonetic changes so that it is not easily 
recognised as derived from the Latin forms. 

II. PERSONAL ENDINGS. 

1. The Latin Personal Endings . 

Latin had three distinct sets of personal endings, 
one for the active voice, with the exception of the perfect 
tense, one for the perfect tense, and one for the passive 
voice. The endings for the active voice were: -m (with 
one exception: '-o’ for the Present Indicative), -s, -t, 

-mus, -tis, -nt. The endings ior the perfect tense were: 
-i, -isti, “it, -imus, -is.tis, -erunt. The endings for 
the passive voice were: -r, -ris, -tur, -mur, -mini, -ntur. 

2. The active Endings . 

The active endings were kept in Old French in the 
form that they phonetically produced. In the first person 
singular the ending -m and -o' disappeared which left no 
ending for the first person: ain (amo), sail (salio ), 
vent (vendo), di (dico). The ending f -e’ of the first 
conjugation and the endings ’-s T of the other conjugations 
is a development of the seventeenth century, created by 
analogy with other forms. The endings f -s T of the second 
person singular was preserved and has remained to the 
present time: aimes, vends, dis. The ending 1 -t ? 
of the third person singular was only kept when it was 
















- 55 - 


support ed by another consonant: part. Otherwise it was 
dropped: aime. The appearance of f t f in other forms of 
modern French is an analogical creation at a later period. 
The ending ’-ons’ for the first person plural developed 
regularly and has remained in most tenses in French. In 
the imperfect and the present conditional tenses the 
Latin '-eamus 1 regularly gave ’-iens 1 , which was the end¬ 
ing for these tenses. The Modern form 1 -ions* is a 
confusion of f -iens f and 1 -ons* that took place in the 
fourteenth century. The Latin forms of the second person 
plural should have given ’-ez*, *eiz f , '-oiz 1 , f -iez*, 
f iz T depending on the vowel that preceded the personal 
ending, but the form *-ez f was generalised and has remained 
to the present time, as in the first person, the Latin 
*-eatis’ gave the ending 1 -iez 1 for the imperfect and 
present conditional tenses, and this form also has re¬ 
mained to the present. The irregular forms Mites 1 , 

'Stes’ and *faites* come from the Latin in a semi-learned 
form. In the third person plural the Latin ending ’-nt * 
has survived in written form but is only pronounced in a 
few forms such as: font, vont, vienaront. 

3. The Perfect Endings. 

The perfect endings are partly phonetic developments 
of the Latin forms and partly irregular formations. The 
first person singular in Latin is characterized by the 
ending T -i* which has remained in French in hiatus but 











... ■ ... 




... ”• 






■ 















' . v'- 






























.)? . "i . 





























- 56 - 


diSappeared after a consonant: 0. Fr. aiaai (amavi), 0, Fr. 
vin (veni). The endings 1 -s* in the second and third 
conjugations is a late development. In the second person 
singular the Latin (-isti) should have produced the ending 
f -st* hut the f t f has been dropped by analogy with other 
second person singular endings: chantas, finis. The 
ending 1 -t* which is characteristic of the third person 
singular in Latin was kept in French when supported by 
another consonant: dist (dixit), vint (venit), but was 
dropped otherwise: fu (fuit), aima (amavit). The , t t in 
the third conjugation in Modern French was a creation of 
the Middle Ages, but was never added to the first 
conjugation. The endings of the first person plural 
cannot be phonetically explained. The Latin should have 
given the ending ! -ains 1 . The , s t in the ending is taken 
from the second person plural, and the endings are of a 
semi-learned character, hence: fusmes, chants sines, 
rendismes. The endings '-astes 1 , f -istes*, *-ustes* of 
the second person plural are also not of phonetic, but 
of learned origin. The Latin ending r -runt T gave 
regularly T -rent f in French, but when the consonant 
preceding this ending gave a combination that was difficult 
to pronounce then a ? d r was added: aimerent, finirent, 
furent, voldrent, distrent. These latter forms have been 
regularised in Modern French. 













- 57 - 


4 . The Passive endings. 

The passive forms of Latin have not survived in 
French, having been replaced in Vulgar Latin by a different 
passive, so that the Latin endings were lost. 

III. MOODS. 

Latin conjugation is based on the opposition of the 
two moods, the indicative and the subjunctive. The 
indicative mood was composed of six tenses: present, 
imperfect, future, perfect, pluperfect and future anterior. 
The subjunctive mood was composed of only four: the 
present, imperfect, perfect, and pluperfect. The same 
tenses have survived in French, and in French the future 
and the future anterior subjunctive are missing as in 
Latin. The imperative mood has remained in French as in 
Latin, but the Latin future imperative has been lost. The 
infinitive mood had three tenses in Latin: present, past 
and future. French has lost the future infinitive but has 
retained the other two. The participial mood in Latin 
had a present participle active end a past participle 
passive which have both remained in French, but it also 
had a future participle active which has disappeared in 
French. 

IV. TENSES. 

Only some of the tenses in French derive their 


forms from Latin: some of them are remade or created forms. 










- ■ ... 




... 






























. 





' 



. 

«• 






• 

r 









. 



. . 






- 



* 




. ! 


, 












* 












' 







... V , . .. 

. 


. 










































- 58 - 


Nine of the tenses come from the corresponding tenses in 

Latin. These are: present indicative, present subjunctive, 
past definite, imperative, present infinitive, gerundive, 

present participle active, past participle passive. The 
French imperfect subjunctive also comes from a Latin tense , 
but not the corresponding one but rather the pluperfect 
subjunctive of j^atin. 

1. Pr ese nt Indicative . 

In Latin the present indicative was characterised 
by the thematic vowel f a T in the first conjugation and by 
other vowels in the other conjugations. Then's* final 
was weakened to f e f regularly, and all other vowels when 
final disappeared, so the Old French verb became character¬ 
ised by , e t in the first conjugation and by no vowel in 
other conjugations. a first conjugation verb was 
conjugated thus in the singular: chant, chantes, chantet; 
while other conjugations appeared thus: part, parz, part. 
Another characteristic of the Latin verb was that the first, 
second and third persons singular and the third person 
plural carried the accent on the root, while the first and 
second persons plural carried it on the first syllable of 
the ending. This caused cl double development of the verb 
in French so that we get cl conjugation: ain, aimes, aime, 
anions, arnez, aiment. Of these forms with a double root 
some of them have been regularised by analogy and some 
have kept their double form. 





























t ; 












Jl !* 

































- 59 - 


2. Pr e sent Sub junctive . 

The present subjunctive, quite the opposite of the 
present indicative, was characterised in Latin by the 
thematic vowel f e f in the first conjugation ^nd by the 
thematic vowel f a* in the other conjugations. With the 
weakening of final f a T and disappearance of other final 
vowels, the subjunctive had the form without vocalic ending 
in the first conjugation and the form with f e f in the 
other conjugations. The present subjunctive of the first 
conjugation was: chant, chanz, chant; while the present 
subjunctive of other conjugation had the forms: parte, 
partes, partet. The accent in the subjunctive was in the 
same position as for the indicative and the double develop¬ 
ment of roots that appeared in the indicative appears also 
in the subjunctive. The double root shows in the verb 
t amer t (amare) as it did in the indicative: ain, ains, 
aint, amons, amez, aiment. The forms of the subjunctive 
have also been levelled out to a certain extent by analogy 
but again many of them have remained. 

3. Imnerfect Indicative. 

mm ——— ———————■ ■ ■ ■ 1 ■ ' - — 

Vulgar Latin had had three types of imperfects, all 
taken from Classical Latin, amabam, habeham,^sentibam 
(sentiebam). mb an early period in Old French, all these 
became generalised in the type t habebam t and it is the 
endings of this type that became the endings of all the 
imperfects in french. The verb ’habebam* regularly 


















- 60 - 


produced the forms: aveie, aveies, aveiet, aviiens, aviiez, 
aveient. l'he forms of the first ^nd second pJural were 
affected by the forms of the present indicative ^nd 
dropped one of the "i’s”, which gu.ve in the Old French of 
the thirteenth century: avoie, avoies, avoit, aviens, 
aviez, avoient. The ’s’ and the ’ions’ of the first 
persons singular and plural are analogical creations of a 
later period. 

4• Past Definite . 

The formation of the perfect in Latin was very 
irregular; some were regular (amavi), some h^d reduplicat¬ 
ion (dedi), some changed the vowel of the root (veni), 
some wrere characterised by the consonant ’s’ (misi). In 
Vulgar Latin these were mostly generalised with the vowel 
’a’, ’i’ or ’u’ as distinguishing characteristic: cantai, 

partii, valui. These forms had no definite connection 
with such corresponding forms as may appear in Latin as 
’valui’. They gave in id French: chantai, parti, valui. 
The rest of the conjugations only differ by personal end¬ 
ings, whifch have been discussed above. The verbs with 

w h ic K 

reduplication A were confused for the greater part with 
those of the type ’parti’ conserved a mark of the older 
reduplication in the third persons singular and plural: 
rendiet (partit), rendierent(partirent). These forms were 

regularised at a later period to conform with all of those 
of the type ’parti*. In Old French the irregular past 










- 61 - 


definites, like the present tense, had tv/o series of forms 
according as the accent fell on the root or on the ending. 

We have the forms: vin, venis, vint, venimes, venistes, 
vindrent. In some of these verbs the forms were later 
regularised but in others they we re not. 

5. Imperati ve. 

The French imperative came regularly from the Latin 
imperative, but at a very early date the second person plu¬ 
ral became confused with the same form of the present 
indicative. In Old French the second person singular, 
having come from the Latin, had no ’s’ ending: aime, fini, 
tiena This ending was added at a later period through 
confusion with the present indicative but was not retained 
in the first conujgation: chante, finis, tiens. Old French 
added to these forms the first person plural ’chantons’ 
which was taken from the present subjunctive. 

6 . Infinitiv e. 

The Latin infinitive had four sets of endings, 'are*, 
’ere’, ’ere 1 , and ’ire’, distinctive of the four conjuga¬ 
tions. Since the vowel of the ending ’ere’ was not 
accented, it was dropped in French: Lat. pl&ngere >Fr. 
plaindre; Lat. vivere^Fr. vivre. The endings ’are’, ’ere*, 
*Tre *, when preceded by a palatal became ’ier*, *ir’, ’ir’: 

Lat. tr^ctare^O. Fr. traitier; Lat. placFre^O. Fr. 
plaisir; V. Lat. colligTre (Cl. Lat. colligere) p>0. Fr. 
coillir. The same endings 'when preceded by any other 



















- 62 - 


consonant became f er’, ’eir’, 'ir* : Lat. cantare >0. Fr. 
chanter; V. Lat. sapere (Cl. Lat. sapere) >0. Fr. saveir; 
Lat. punTre>0. Fr. punir. This variety of endings meant 
that the form of the infinitive was not closely connected 
with the conjugation in general, and this allowed analogy 
to have free play with the result that many of the in¬ 
finitives have been remade by analogy in later periods. 

7. Ger u ndive . 

The Latin gerundive had four forms corresponding to 

the conjugations: amando, monendo, regendo, audiendo. In 

Old French some of the regularly developed forms survived: 

plaisent (placendo), but the ending f -ant f became 

generalised, and now all the verbs have the ending f -ant f 

for the gerundive. The f en f as a sign of the gerundive is 

a late development. 

8. Present Participle . 

The Latin present participle also had four forms: 
amantem, monentem, regentem, audientem. .again the form 
for the first conjugation 1 * * * * * * 8 9 -ant 1 became generalised and all 
the French verbs have the present participle in f -ant f . 

9. Pas t Participle . 

In Latin the past participle was characterised by the 
ending f -tus f or 1 -sus 1 . In some cases the accent was on 
the ending ana in others it was on the root of the word. 
When the accent was on the root, the ending either dis¬ 
appeared in French or became simply a consonant. This left 













1 I 





































































• 




. 


. 

' 






- 



■ 

















. ' T 






. 


■ 

















* 


















- 65 - 


in Old French such past participles us: dette (devoir), 
faute (falloir), poids (peser), mort (mourir). When the 
accent was on the ending, the forms in French were 
comparatively regular: Lat. cantutum^0. Fr. chante; Lat. 
dornitum^O. Fr. dormi: V. Lat. * venduturu ^> 0 . Fr. vendu. 

If the ending 1 -e* was preceded by a palatal, it became 
T -ie 1 : Lat. tr^ctatuma-0. Fr. traitie. Like the infinit¬ 
ives, the participles were not an integral part of the 
verbal conjugation and were subject to a great deal of 
changes by analogy in later periods. 

10. Imperfect Subjunctive . 

The French imperfect subjunctive does not come from 
the corresponding tense in Latin. The imperfect 
subjunctive of the Latin had disappeared and French took 
its imperfect from the Latin pluperfect subjunctive. These 
form took the same vowels ’a’, 'i*, t u l that had been used 

to form the past definites. Vulgar Latin had had only two 
endings for the imperfect: 1 -assem* (cantassem) and ’-issem* 
(partissem, habuissem). Like the past definites, these 
became: chantasse, partisse, eusse. The full conjugation 
was: chantasse, chantasses, chantast, chetntissons, 

chantisseiz (chantissez), ehant&ssent. The other conjug¬ 
ations kept their characteristic vowel, T i*, or f u f , 
throughout. It was not until late that the T i T was 
dropped out of the conjugation 1 chantasse T by analogy with 





















- 64 - 


the other forms, a t a later period there was also a 
confusion with the first person plural ending for the 
imperfect indicative and the endings ’-ions 1 , ’-iez 1 were 
established. 

These are all of the forms of the rrench verb that 
are directly derived, from Latin. They show themselves to 
be a confusion of phonetically evolved forms, of analogical 
creations and semi-learned forms. The other forms of the 
French verb are remade forms to substitute for the Latin 
forms that had become confused by the phonetic changes. 






















- 65 - 


D. THE STRaSSBURG OaTHS. 

Since Vulgar Latin was the spoken language of the 
people, we have no texts in Vulgar Latin. m/e have texts, 
however, in Old French as early as the year 842. This 
document, the Strasshurg Oaths, was the result of an alliance 
between Louis the Pious and Charles the Bald against their 
brother Luther. Since the army of Louis spoke a dialect 
of Old High German, Charles swore the oath in that language, 
but Charles 1 army spoke Old French and Louis swore the oath- 
in Old French. Brunot reconstructs the oath as it w r ould 
have been in Vulgar Latin (sometimes called Gallo-Roman) 
thus (1): 

"Si Lodovigos sagramento cue son fradre Karlo 
jurat, conservat, et Karlos meos senyor de soa parte 
non el)lo suon tenet, si eo retornare non (el)10 
ende potsyo, ne eo ne neullos cui eo retornare ende 
potsyo, en nulla ayuda contra Lodovigo non (el)li 
ivi ero." 

The same part of the oath appears in the original 
text as (2): 

"Si Lodhuvigs sagrament, cue son fradre Karlo 
jurat, conservat, et Karlus meos sendra de suo part 
non lo suon tanit, si io returnar non l'int pois, ne 
io ne neuls cui eo returnar int pois, in nulla 
aiudha contra Lodhuvig non li iv er." 

The same text is reconstructed by Brunot as it would 

have been written in the Old French of the eleventh 

century (3): 


(1) Brunot: Histoire de la Langue Franchise, Tome I,p.l44. 

(2) Brunot: idem, p. 144. 

(3) Brunot: idem, p. 144. 




















- 66 - 


"Se Lodevis lo saireaent aue son fredre Charlon 
jurat, conservet, et Charles, messire, de soe part 
lo soen ne tient, se jo retorner ne l'en puis, ne 
jo ne neuls cui jo retorner en puis, en nulle 
aiude contre Lodevic ne li i ier. tf 

This gives an example of Vulgar Latin as it was 
spoken in the sixth century in so far as it can be 
reconstructed philologically, an example of the Old French 
of the middle of the ninth century and an example of Old 
French in the eleventh century. It is from the time of 
the Strassbur# Oaths that we have a language distinct 
from Latin, a language that we call Old French as 
distinguished from the Vulgar Latin or G^llo-Roman that 
preceded it. 



















- 67 - 


Conclusion. 

In conclusion it might he well to take a bird's eye 
view of the work covered in the thesis. First came some 
remarks on the peoples in Gaul before the arrival of the 
Romans, and on the influence those languages had on French. 
It would be well to emphasise here the fact that the 
influence of Gallic was superficial and not that of a 
substratum. Next the introduction and spread of Latin in 
Gaul was studied. From the linguistic viewpoint, some of 
the most important developments in the French language, 
those that form the back-bone of French, were studied. 
These, it can be seen, were of a purely phonetic character 
with learned, and analogical influences, but certainly not 
affected by the * so-called 1 Gallic substratum. The work 
shows the introduction of Latin into Gaul and its develop¬ 
ment into ci new language, Old French. 




















- 68 - 


BIBLIOGRaPHY 

Cultural 

Dalton: Gregory of Tours, history of the Pranks, 1927. 

Funck-Brentano: The Earliest Times, 1927. 

Kleinklausz: Charlemagne, 1934. 

Lavisse: Histoire de France, 1903, Tomes I, 2, and II, 1. 

Mommsen: Provinces of the Roman Empire, 1906. 

Rice Holmes: Caesar, De Bello Gallico, 1914. 

Samuel Dill: Roman Society in the Last Century of the 
We stern Empire, 1933. 

Samuel Dill: Roman Society in Gaul in the Merovingian 
Age, 1926. 

Linguistic 

Laurand: Manuel des Etudes Grecques et Latines, Fascicule 
VT, Grammaire Historique Latine, 1937. 

Lindsay: The Latin Language, 1894. 

Meillet: Esquisse d'une Histoire de la Langue Latine, 1931. 

Pope: From Latin to Modern French, 1934. 

Grandgent: Introduction to Vulgar Latin, 1908. 

Beeson: A Primer of Mediaeval Latin, 1925. 

Brunot et Bruneau: Precis de Grammaire Fistorique de la 
Langue Francaise, 1937. 

Brunot: Histoire de la Langue Francaise des Origines a 
1900, 1924, Vol. I. 

Heyer-Lubke: Grammaire des Langues Romanes, 1890, Vols. 

I, II. 

Nyrop: Grammaire Historique de la Langue Francaise, 1914, 
Vols. I, II. 

























- 69 - 


Entwistle: The Spanish Language, 1936. 

Bernard: Grammaire Espagnole, 1909. 

Grandgent: From Latin to Italian, 1927. 

Gamillscheg: Etymologisches ..orterbuch der franzosischan 
Sprache , 1928. 

Meyer-Liibke: Romanisches Etymologisches V/orterbuch, 1935. 
































































































































































































































