
( 


By 

Steve Boyko 

iili. 






0k UBBIS 

MWJiasnaaK 




University of Alberta 
Printing Department 












Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/currentpracticesOOboyk 






\ n w. ? \ ? 


ns 1 

tt 6 . 


ThE UNITORS ITY OF ALBERTA 


CURRENT PRACTICES IN EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES 
IN ALBERTA CENTRALIZED SCHOOLS 


A THUSIS SUBMITTED TO 
THE COMMITTEE ON GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE DEGREE OF 
MASTER OF EDUCATION 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


BY 

STEVE BOYKO 
RADWAY, ALBERTA 


Hay, 1959 





.. . 




ACKNOWLEDG-EffiNTS 


The writer wishes to express his appreciation for the 
assistance received during the preparation of this study. 

The helpful advice and suggestions for the preparation of 
the questionnaire and for writing the first draft of the 
thesis by Dr, H.T. Sparby, Dr. A.W. Reeves, Mr. A.W.E. 
Eriksson and Mr. W. Pilkington are gratefully acknowledged. 
The writer also expresses his gratitude to all the principals 
who completed the questionnaires, as requested, and made 
this study possible. 


iii 






ABSTRACT 


The purpose of this study was to gather facts and 
opinions from which a picture of existing practices in the 
field of extracurricular activities in centralized high 
schools of Alberta might be drawn. It was hoped that the 
study would help in some measure to clarify the problem of 
extracurricular activities for conveyed students, and to 
indicate recommendations for the improvement of extracurric¬ 
ular activities in centralized schools. 

A questionnaire was sent to ninety principals through¬ 
out the province. It sought information on (1) the nature 
and organization of extracurricular activities carried on; 

(2) the adequacy of physical facilities; (3) the time problem 
in scheduling; (4) transportation problems of conveyed 
students; and {5} opinions of principals regarding factors 
which might contribute to the improvement of extracurricular 
activities in centralized schools. 

A review’ of the related literature and the findings 
from 93.3 per cent returns of the questionnaire formed the 
basis of this study. The findings from the questionnaire 
revealed that 57.2 per cent of the senior high school students 
in attendance at the eighty schools investigated are conveyed. 
These boys and girls are underprivileged in the area of 
recreation and social development. 

iv 


; * ■■ 

. 

' 

' . 






- 0 


The rapid centralization of rural schools in recent 
years has caused a narked unbalance between the concentra¬ 
tion of pupils in a school and the physical facilities to 
accommodate them. While the physical facilities in some 
schools are more than satisfactory, those of many schools 
are quite inadequate. Many playgrounds are too small and in 
poor condition; a considerable number of gymnasium floor 
areas do not meet the recommended standards; and, there is a 
noticeable lack of additional indoor space for school 
activities. 

The findings reveal that extracurricular programs 
need re-adjustment and balancing with respect to athletic 
and non-athletic activities; activities for boys and 
activities for girls; intra-mural and interschool sports; 
and scheduling for hours convenient for conveyed students as 
■well as for town residents. 

Interest, ability, and special training are highly 
desirable qualifications of teacher-sponsors. Many teachers 
contribute unstintingly of their time to extracurricular 
work. The literature indicates that these teachers should 
be encouraged by assistance and concessions such as lighter 
teaching loads. 

The findings from the questionnaires show that the 
common practice is for teachers and students to work together 


v 








. 

' ' . , . ; ■ ' • :v 

- 


..... 


- . ,‘f'll o .‘ ■' 

■ 1 W 

• ; ' : ■' - — :>:.v : ■ , • ,V ' , . 

■' ^ 0 .. ... - . 

* 

■ • . . . ■ . ' • . : 
















' 















in sponsoring extracurricular activities. The related 
literature definitely supports this as the best arrangement, 
and disapproves of assistance by non-teachers. 

Schools find difficulties in raising funds for their 
extracurricular activities and the opinion is often expressed 
that school boards should subsidize these activities more 
generously. It should be pointed out that the contributions 
of school boards are often not easily recognized. They are 
in the form of buildings, playgrounds, equipment, light, 
heat, and teacher and janitorial services. 

In the light of these findings and conclusions, the 
following recommendations are suggested: 

1. Extracurricular activities should be carefully planned 
and organized as comprehensive and well-balanced 
programs, giving special attention to the problem of 
conveyed students. Effective policies for controlling 
over-participation in extracurricular activities 
should also have features which function to encourage 
participation of conveyed students. Furthermore, 
planning should be extended to the school division 
level for inter-school activities as a practical 
expedient in providing for the needs of conveyed 
students. 

2. Extracurricular activities should be scheduled dur¬ 
ing school hours as far as possible, so that conveyed 

vi 
















. 








. 






. 

- 














students may participate more easily. 

3. Methods of providing school time for extracurricular 
activities should be devised. 

4. Periodic evaluation and possible re-adjustment of 
practices in extracurricular activities is essential. 

5. School boards should give careful consideration to 
providing sufficient funds as well as adequate play¬ 
grounds and indoor facilities for school activities. 
Adequate facilities and funds are indispensable. School 
boards can give direct money grants to help defray 
transportation costs. 

6. Parents should be well-informed of the value of 
extracurricular activities and of the special problems 
of conveyed students. Parents should be willing to 
contribute to the school ! s efforts and to help 
conveyed students directly by driving them to school 
activities when that is necessary. 


vii 




































- 







TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PAGE 

LIST OP TABLES..... x 

CHAPTER 

I. THE PROBLEM AND DEFINITIONS OF TERMS USED . . 1 

The Problem. 1 

Statement of the problem. 1 

Importance of the study. 2 

Purpose of the study. 3 

Scope and limitations. 4 

Definitions of Terms Used. 4 

II. BACKGROUND TO THE PROBLEM. 6 

Growth of Interest In Extracurricular 

Activities . 6 

Importance of Extracurricular Activities . 10 

Participation in Extracurricular Activities 12 

Administration of Extracurricular Activities 14 

Scheduling Extracurricular Activities ... 15 

Facilities for Extracurricular Activities . 17 

Sponsorship of Extracurricular Activities . 20 

Controlling Extracurricular Activities . . 21 

Financing Extracurricular Activities ... 22 

III. PROCEDURE FOLLOWED IN CARRYING OUT 

INVESTIGATION .. 24 


viii 
























. . 

. . . . . » . , , , . ■ . . 

' 











CHAPTER PAGE 

IY. ANALYSIS OF FINDINGS FROM THE QUESTIONNAIRES 

TO PRINCIPALS. 28 

General Information . 28 

Outdoor Sport Activities . 31 

Non-Athletic Extracurricular Activities . . 37 

Facilities and Personnel . 46 

Y. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS. 67 

Conclusions. 67 

Recommendations. 69 

BIBLIOGRAPHY. 74 

APPENDIX 

A. Sample of Questionnaire Sent to Principals 78 

B... 87 

1. Sample of Letter Requesting Criticism 

of Questionnaire. 88 

2. Sample of Letter Accompanying 

Questionnaire ............ 89 

3. Sample of Follow-up Letter ..... 90 


ix 
















LIST OF TABLES 


table page 

I. Number of High School Teachers in Eighty-Four 

Alberta Centralized Schools . . . . ~.30 

II. Organization of Sport Activities in Eighty-Two 

Alberta Centralized Schools . 32 

III. Scheduling of Sport Activities With Physical 
Education Periods in Seventy Alberta 
Centralized Schools . 33 

IV. Playing Time For Inter-School Competitions in 

Eighty-Three Alberta Centralized Schools ... 34 

V. Responsibilities For Transportation of Conveyed 
Students Who Participate in Sport Activities on 
Out-of-School Time in Seventy-Seven Alberta 
Centralized Schools . 36 

VI. Scheduling of Non-Athletic Extracurricular 
Activities in Seventy-Eight Alberta 
Centralized Schools ... . 38 

VII. Methods Used by Sixty Alberta Centralized 

Schools For Providing Time For the Participation 
by Conveyed Students in Extracurricular 
Activities.40 

VIII. Opinions of Seventy-Two Principals Regarding 
Effects of Participation in Extracurricular 
Activities.43 

DC. Functions of a Controlling Policy in 

Extracurricular Activities as Ranked by Twenty 
Principals. 44 

X. Methods of Controlling Participation in 
Extracurricular Activities in Fifty-Seven 
Alberta Centralized Schools . 45 

XI. Size of Playgrounds in Seventy-Four Alberta 


XII. Playground Surfaces of Eighty-One Alberta 

Centralized Schools . 49 


x 

































■' 















TABLE PAGE 

XIII. Floor Surfaces of Gymnasiums in Sixty-Four 

Alberta Centralized Schools . 50 

XIV. Floor Areas of Gymnasiums in Fifty-Nine 

Alberta Centralized Schools . 51 

XV. Other Indoor Space Available For Extracurricular 
Activities in Sixty-Five Alberta Centralized 
Schools ..52 

XVI. Summary of Gymnasium and Other Indoor Space for 
Extracurricular Activities in Eighty-Four 
Alberta Centralized Schools . .... 53 

XVII. Other Facilities Available in Eighty-Four 

Alberta Centralized Schools . 54 

XVIII. Audio-Visual Aids in Eighty-Four Alberta 

Centralized Schools.. . 55 

XIX. Teachers Directing Extracurricular Activities 
in the Senior High School of Eighty-Four 
Alberta Centralized Schools . 56 

XX. Special Certificates Held by 149 Teachers Who 
Direct Extracurricular Activities in Senior 
High School Grades.58 

XXI. Rewards of 327 Teachers Directing Extracur¬ 
ricular Activities in Senior High Schools ... 60 

XXII. Assistance With Extracurricular Activities 
Received from Parents and Other People in 
Eighty-One Alberta Centralized Schools .... 61 

XXIII. Sponsorship of Extracurricular Activities in 

Eighty-One Alberta Centralized Schools .... 62 

XXIV. Factors Which Would Contribute Towards the 

Improvement of Extracurricular Activities in 
Alberta Centralized Schools . 


65 


















































. 




CHAPTER I 


THE PROBLEM AND DEFINITIONS OF TERMS USED 


Education in Alberta is based on the general phil¬ 
osophy of "education of the whole child" and "education for 
everyone". Since educators generally recognize and accept 
that extracurricular activities are productive of educational 
values which are in harmony with this philosophy, it follows 
that effective administration of extracurricular programs is 
an important responsibility of modern schools. Further, it 
follows that the benefits to be gained from such programs 
should be made available to all students. 

I. THE PROBLEM 

Statement of the problem . In recent years the rapid 
growth of centralization of rural schools in Alberta has 
created a group of students who are particularly underprivi¬ 
leged in this respect. When students are conveyed to school, 
it becomes very difficult to provide adequate time for their 
participation in extracurricular activities. This problem 
assumes even greater proportions at the senior high school 
level where conscientious teachers emphasize academic 
objectives and tend to minimize or entirely disregard the 
importance of emotional and social needs of individual 


students. 



















. 






















* : 












■ 


















2 


In addition to the problem of inadequate time, there 
is the question of unsuitable physical facilities. In their 
pre-occupation with the immediate problems of centralization, 
Divisional School Boards have often postponed consideration, 
or failed to take proper cognizance of the need for these 
facilities. Inadequate playgrounds, lack of indoor play 
space, shortage of equipment, lack of trained teacher-sponsors, 
and insufficient funds are problems that hinder proper devel¬ 
opment of acceptable extracurricular programs. 

Importance of the study . In viev^ of these problems 
peculiar to centralized schools in Alberta, a consideration 
of extracurricular activities is of timely importance. In 
Alberta there has been a relatively limited amount of research 
done in the area of the extracurricular. To the best of the 
writer’s knowledge, there have been only two studies that 
recognize the problems of schools where part of the pupils 
are conveyed. The findings of both are a valuable and timely 
contribution. One considers a particular topic, that of 
noon-hour supervision.^ The second is a study of extra¬ 
curricular activities in five schools which are in close 

■^Metro W* Budiak, lf Boon-hour Supervision in Alberta 
Schools in Which Part of the Pupils Are Conveyed” 

(unpublished M. Ed. thesis, University of Alberta, 1957). 









. . • * . : , .. ■ 

• ■ ■ . > ' •. 1 


- •• . ; u‘U I _ .. . . j , ■ ' [ : 0 

< . - . . i • . . 

. J - - - - % ' ■ . ■- . I ■ ■ 

• • l*v■--- - .Vu 

■ . ... , . . ; . . ; 

* ' ' • ■ • • ■ ■ ' - ■ : - -i- - ' • ’ •: \ ; 


. 






0 1 

■ 



• 


■; } ■ f.: 0 1: •. V : 



* 




. 







3 


proximity to one another. The need for further research is 
aptly expressed by a master teacher, one of the principals 
who responded to the writer’s questionnaire: 

I am quite interested in what you are apparently 
doing. There is probably no other area of school 
activities which has had less study, or, in practice, 
less attention. Extracurricular activities seem to 
grow on the whims and fancies of teachers or students 
and in most cases are ill conceived, ill organized 
and poorly executed. There are, of course, many 
schools and many teachers who have well-defined ob¬ 
jectives and policies, and therefore, effective 
programming in extracurricular activities; but as a 
major field in modem education, I feel that its 
general condition is at least bewildering. Some 
research should do much to clear up the existing 
conditions and possibly suggest the desirable and 
useful.° 


Purpose of the study . The purpose of this study is to 
gather facts and opinions from which a picture of existing 
practices in the field of extracurricular activities in 
centralized high schools of Alberta may be drawn. Observa¬ 
tions and suggestions of the principals of these schools 
should prove to be of practical and educational value. The 
writer hopes that this study will help in some measure to 
clarify the problem of extracurricular activities for conveyed 
students, and to indicate recommendations for the improvement 

2 J.W. Chalmers and R.E. Rees, M A Co-operative Study 
of High School Extra-Curricular Activities, Tf The Alberta 
Journal of Educational Research, IY (June, 1958}". 

^Permission to quote secured. 


















. 








' 





























































* 

























4 


of extracurricular programs in centralized schools. 

Scope and limitations . The population selected for 
this study consisted of ninety Alberta village and town 
schools in which about twenty per cent or more of the pupils 
are conveyed, and in which three or more high school teachers 
are engaged. The study w r as delimited to grades ten, eleven, 
and twelve. 


II. DEFINITIONS OF TERMS USED 

Extracurricular activities . Extracurricular activities 

are those student-initiated and student-organized events and 

undertakings which are planned for recreational purposes, and 

which carry educational value. These activities are subject 

to some measure of control and direction by the administration 
4 

of the school. 

Sport activities . Sport activities as used in this 
study refers to outdoor or indoor competitive games in which 
the participants are divided into teams. Some examples of 
such games are softball, basketball, curling, badminton, and 
ping pong. 

A sponsor . A sponsor is a person, usually a teacher, 

%/alter S. Monroe (ed.), Encyclopedia of Educational 
Research (New York: The MacMillan Company, 1952}, p. 424. 






















' 


















. 






















. 
































who undertakes the responsibility of directing and super¬ 
vising a student activity. 


5 


equipment . Equipment includes all apparatus and items 
required to carry on a given activity. 

Supervision . Supervision refers to the activity of 
the sponsor who, while he gives unobtrusive direction, also 
strives for the attainment of educational goals. 

Conveyed students . Conveyed students are those who 
are transported to school daily by school buses. 








CHAPTER II 


BACKGROUND TO THE PROBLEM 

This chapter presents a review of educational litera¬ 
ture related to the subject of extracurricular activities in 
the high school. There seems to be a dearth of literature 
bearing directly on the problem in Alberta schools. This is 
particularly true of extracurricular activities for conveyed 
students. It was felt, therefore, that a background of 
general information on extracurricular activities would be 
useful to serve as a setting for this study. This informa¬ 
tion is organized under nine headings in the follov^ing order: 
growth of interest in extracurricular activities, importance 
of extracurricular activities, participation, administration, 
scheduling, facilities, sponsorship, controlling, and financ¬ 
ing. 


I. GROWTH OF INTEREST IN EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES 

The story of extracurricular activities in the high 
school is not a new one. Although no definite chronological 
dates can be set, the history of the origin and development 
of these activities divides itself roughly into three periods 

3-H.C. McKown, Extracurricular Activities (New York: 

The Macmillan Company, 1952), pp. 2-3. 






























- 




















■ 








‘ 














7 


(1) the early period, when extracurricular activities were 
completely ignored by teachers who were concerned mainly 
with academic subjects, and to whom the social and physical 
development of pupils were matters of* little consequence; 

(2) the intermediate period, when teachers and school author¬ 
ities showed active opposition to student out-of-class 
activities; and (3) the period since 1920 to the present, 
when educators have been trying to capitalize on extracur¬ 
ricular activities and their inherent possibilities for 
education. 

This latter-time interest of educationists in the 
worth of extracurricular activities is mentioned by McKown 
when he calls attention to 

the books, magazines, articles, addresses, confer¬ 
ences, college courses, and even casual conversations 
that have been published, held, or given during the 
past two decades or so . . . for example, between 
1925 and 1940 about forty books were published in this 
field, and two magazines covering the general field 
made their appearance^ School Activities in 1929 and 
Student Life in 1934.^ 

With reference to the local scene, there is evidence 
of a definite interest among Alberta teachers in the extra¬ 
curricular. At least three pieces of research work in the 
field of extracurricular activities have been done at the 
University of Alberta by graduate students, namely, J.F. 


2 Ibid ., pp. 3-4. 














; 


. . • . . ■, . .. .. . .. ■ • • . ; 

. 0 . . ; ... ’ yi': . .... ... ■/ .1 -j ‘/ 0 & 

. , •• . ■■■ .. . ■ ' 

' . . . ■ ■ ' 

. v.. . , ... ■ .... X, ' ' 


, 


; 

; .. 


, 


, 

. ■. ■ ■.. i ■.. ., ; 




{ 


. ' 











8 


Watkin, 2 * E.C. Britton, 4 5 6 7 * 9 and M.W. Rudiak. 2 Then there is a 
study 0 conducted hy J. W. Chalmers, Birector of School Admin¬ 
istration, Department of Education, and R.E. Rees, High 

School Inspector, in 1955, In addition, three other graduate 

7 8 

students, John E. Hutton, Newman Kelland, and Arthur 
9 

Kratzman, are currently working on studies dealing with 
extracurricular activities or certain aspects of them. 

The writer of the present study believes that there 
has been a narked change in educational philosophy in 
American and Canadian schools during the last thirty years. 
Now, the viewpoint is that the "whole” child comes to school 


2 J.F. Watkin, "Extracurricular Activities in Alberta 

High Schools" (unpublished If. A. thesis, University of 
Alberta, 1938). 

4 E.C. Britton, "A Study of the Organized Community 
Life of Junior High School Students" (unpublished M.A. 
thesis, University of Alberta, 1946). 

5 M,W. Budiak, "Noon-hour Supervision in Alberta 
Schools in Which Part of the Pupils Are Conveyed" 

(unpublished M.Id. thesis, university of Alberta, 1957). 

6 J.W. Chalmers and R.E. Rees, "A Co-operative Study 
of High School Extra-Curricular Activities," The Alberta 
Journal of Educational Research , IV (June, 19 587*. 

7 John E. Hutton, "A Study of Extra-Curricular 
Activities in St. Joseph’s High School, Edmonton, Alberta,” 

(a study currently under way). 

Newman Kelland, "Prestige Value of Certain Aspects 
of the Educational Program in Alberta Composite High Schools” 

(a study currently underway). 

9 Arthur Kratzman, "Extra-Curricular Programs of the 
Composite High Schools of Alberta” (a study currently under way). 










. 






: 










• . 


c 

















9 


and that H all of him n must be educated. Attention must be 
given to his physical, emotional, moral, and social develop¬ 
ment, as well as to his intellectual growth.^ This view¬ 
point is amply revealed in current educational literature. 
MoKown states, for example: 

The theme of the new education is all-roundness . . . 
The child comes into the school mentally, physically, 
socially, spiritually, and vocationally. This newer 
education recognizes that in all of these phases the 
child is educable, and further, that he must be 
educated in all of them if he is to be a complete, 
well-rounded individual. 1 

Further evidence of this viewpoint is given by Thompson when 
she says: 

The strictly academic curriculum fails in fundamental 
ways to satisfy the needs of youth. A broader philos¬ 
ophy of education accepts responsibility for the total 
development of young people, helping them to greater 
extent in finding themselves in relationship to the 
world around them. School activities satisfy the need 
of youth to identify their personal interests with 
group interests and to know the sense of security which 
comes from belonging to a group.-** 2 

Concurrence with this fi new education”, as McXown calls it, 

is indicated in the following statements of the Department 


of Education of Alberta: 


10 C,R. Foster, Dxtra - Curricular Activities in the 
High School (Richmond, Virginia: Johnson Publishing Company, 
1925}, Chapter I. 

■^McKown, op . ci t ., p. 8. 

12 Nellie Detta Thompson, Your School Clubs (New Y~ork: 
E.P. Dutton and Co. Inc., 1953). 





















































10 


In the area of personal growth, the school has long 
neglected the field of moral and emotional maturity in 
favor of the more tangible area of intellectual achieve¬ 
ment. Likewise in the social field, our schools have 
emphasized the advance of technological science rather 
than the pressing problems involving human relationships. 

Personality is one of the most subjective phases of 
human development and possibly one of the most neg¬ 
lected by educators. 

The prime aim of the school is to assist each Alberta 
youth in his growth towards maximum self-realization. 

The following definite goals are included under this 
heading: 

1. Health and physical fitness 

2. Mental health 

3. The development of suitable recreational and 
leisure time activities 

4. The development of character manifested in 
sound habits of behavior in social relation¬ 
ships. 

The program of extra-curricular activities in any 
school can make worthwhile contributions toward the 
attainment of the above objectives. Section 13 (b) 
of the Revised General Regulations of the Department 
of Education reads as follows: 

,f The teacher, or, in the case of multiple-room 
school, the principal and staff shall be responsible 
for the organization of suitable extra-curricular 
activities and for the direction and supervision of 
the classroom and playground activities of the 
pupils. 


II. IMPORTANCE OF EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES 


Current educational literature indicates a general 


^* 3 Alberta Department of Education, Foundations of 
Education (Edmonton, Alberta: A. Schnitka, King's Printer, 
1949), pp. 7, 31. 

^^Alberta Department of Education, "The General Object¬ 
ives of Secondary Education, 11 Senior High School Handbook , 
1958-59, pp. 5, 6. 






















11 


agreement that extracurricular activities are an important 

factor in high school education. The last quarter century 

marks a period of acceptance. Educators are now recognizing 

extracurricular activities, and are beginning to foster them 

15 

as an integral part of the school program. Anna May Jones 

sums up the present-day attitude thus: 

The school wants to serve the social needs of 
young people. More school doors are open after 
three o’clock and more school windows are lighted 
for clubs, athletics, community services, and 
parent education.16 

Education for democracy is concerned with civic, 
social, and moral values, as well as academic knowledge. 
Several writers conclude that extracurricular activities 

17 

have a high potential value in this regard. Henry P. Smith 
presents the findings of a careful experiment which show a 
high correlation between participation in extracurricular 
activities and social adjustment among pupils. C.E. Poster 


*^^Paul B. Jacobson, W.C. Reavis, and James D. Logsdon, 
The Effective School Principal (Hew York: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 
19 55TTP* 302• 

■^Anna May Jones, Leisure Time Education (Mew York: 
Harper and Brothers, 1946) , pVT28. 

17 Henry P. Smith, ’’The Relationship Between Scores on 
the Bell Adjustment Inventory and Participation in Extra- 
Curricular Activities,” Journal of Educational Psychology , 
XXXVIII, January 1947, pp. 11-16. 

18 C.R. Poster, Extra - Curricular Activities in the 
High School (Richmond, Virginia: Johnson Publishing Company, 
1925), p. 9. 


















. 

. 

. 

‘ 












• ■ • • 

■ ~ • ■■ 







12 


states that moral training cannot be inculcated by giving 
children a set of maxims. The best moral training is experi¬ 
ence in group living, and it is for this reason that extra¬ 
curricular activities in school are a fundamental necessity. 
Prudence Bostwick emphasizes the need for wholesome activities 
in the following: 

Another need for youth is to grow toward emotional 
maturity . . . there must be provision made for many 
wholesome activities in which boys and girls w r ork and 
play together. Dramatics, forums, panels, dances, 
concerts, excursions to neighboring towns and to the 
countryside, picnics, and parties are essential. 

Through such informal and consuming activities boys and 
girls have opportunities to meet, to come to know each 
other well, and to build relationships with one another 
that are based upon individual and group values which 
are interrelated and interpreted.^ 

Opinions and convictions like the above lead to one 
conclusion: "The administration of extracurricular activities 

OQ 

is a major undertaking for those who direct modern schools. 


III. PARTICIPATION IN EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES 


There is some evidence in educational literature that 
extracurricular activities are accepted more in theory than 
in actual practice. The related literature indicates that 
some schools in the United States have elaborate, carefully 


■^Prudence Bostwick, A Functional High School Program 
(Danville, Illinois: The Interstate Printers and Publishers). 

20 X.V. Lottick, "The Evaluation of Ethical Discrimina¬ 
tion," Social Studies , 39:57-60, February, 1948. 









. 

. 






' 


.. 















13 


designed programs. On the other hand, the more conventional 

schools offer meagre and quite incidental programs, Some 

writers feel that this range of variations is due to the 

differences in the attitudes as well as abilities of princi- 

21 

pals and teachers. 

Surveys show that wherever extracurricular activities 

are carried on, they vary in type considerably. The most 

commonly reported are athletics, clubs of various kinds, 

school publications, music and dramatics groups, home rooms, 

22 

and student government organizations. 

Incomplete student participation in extracurricular 
activities is often indicated. Lack of motivation, and lack 
of attractive programs are obvious reasons for poor partici¬ 
pation. Two other factors commonly reported are that students 

lack the time, and that activities are often scheduled for 

23 

inconvenient hours. Sometimes full participation is 
rendered impossible by the nature of the activity, or by the 
character of its organization. For example, interscholastic 
activities are frequently criticized because student parti- 

21 Walter 3. Monroe (ed.J, "Extracurricular Activities,” 
Encyclopedia of Educational hesearch (New York: The Macmillan. 
Company, 195277 p. 424. 

22 Ibid . 

23 Ibid., p. 425. 



















< i 





■ '■ •. .... 

* 

t '. 0 

. 


. 


. 















14 


OA 

cipation is often limited to the favored few. 

IV. ADlvilK1STHATION OF EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES 

25 

One author suggests that if extracurricular activ¬ 
ities are to be meaningful learning experiences in the lives 
of pupils, careful organization and administration must be 
the keynote. Too often, extracurricular activities have 
been purposeless, and "just for fun". The same warning note 
is sounded in this statement: 

The general conclusion is that the philosophy 
underlying the values to be derived from extra¬ 
curricular activities is poorly defined, and that 
the practice of administering these activities is 
haphazard. 

Foster is quite emphatic also when he says, "Extracurricular 

activities must be as definitely planned as any other 

administrative or instructional facility for educational 
27 

objectives." Fretwell recognizes the same administrative 
weakness in sport activities. He says: 

^National Society for the Study of Education, "Extra- 
Curricular Activities," The Twenty-fifth Yearbook , Part II, 
1926. (Bloomington, Illinois: Public School Publishing 
Company), p. 95. 

25 Janet A. Kelly, Guidance and Curriculum (Englewood 
Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1955), p. 210. 

^National Society for the Study of Education, op « cit . , 

p. 96. 

07 

C.R. Foster, o£. cit ., p. 8. 


































' 














* 







' 

. 









■ 




; £ 
































15 


Perfunctory administration of intramural programs 
is a drawback. To get full participation in super¬ 
vised sports there is need for a comprehensive, well- 
administered plan supported by capable teachers and 
reasonable facilities. 28 

Authorities generally agree that there is an ever¬ 
present need for planning and organizing, re-assessing and 
re-organizing for successful extracurricular programs. 
Miller, Moyer, and Patrick speak for all when they say the 
following: 

Whether the cocurricular program in the high school 
is already established or is yet to be introduced into 
the school f s total program, the need for adequate and 
continuous planning remains the same. A program of 
student activities already operating satisfactorily 
cannot be expected to maintain its status quo unless 
decision making is based upon continued intelligent 
planning. Cocurricular programs hastily introduced, 
without careful analysis of the local problems in¬ 
volved have no possible chance for succeeding. The 
statement often quoted—the success of any undertaking 
is in direct relation to the thought and planning 
preceding the action—is just as pertinent to the 
success of the cocurricular program as to any other 
activity over which the sehogl has jurisdiction or 
for which it is responsible. y 


V. SCHEDULING EXTRA CURB ICQLAR ACTIVITIES 


The related literature reveals a definite trend to 


28 Elbert K. Fretwell, Extracurricular Activities in 
Secondary Schools (New York: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1931), 
Chapter XVI. 

29 £'ranklin A. Killer, James H. Moyer, Robert B. 
Patrick, Planning Student Activities (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: 
Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1956), p. 82. 










. 


. 

















. 




























schedule extracurricular activities during regular school 
time. So many authorities feel that a fixed period on the 
time table is best for the students and for the teachers. 
Miller, Moyer, and Patrick say that such procedure is sound 
both educationally and administratively. 30 Scheduling dur¬ 
ing school hours also best meets the needs of conveyed 
students. Spears says: 

The rural school which must load Its pupils into 
busses at the close of the class day need not deny 
them an enriched program. An appreciation of the 
factor that the present extracurriculum plays in the 
development of youth will cause the school adminis¬ 
tration to build the curriculum around these natural 
activities of^youth rather than omit them because of 
lack of time. 01 

32 33 

Two other writers, Kelly and Street, support the 
plan of integrating extracurricular activities into regular 
school time. The former takes the view that extracurricular 
activities are actually a social laboratory. Therefore it is 

as wrong for a teacher or student to take his social labora- 

34 

tory home as it is to take his science laboratory. McKown 


30 Ibid., pp. 304-306. 

31 Ii. Spears, The Emerging High School Curriculum and 
Its direction (New York: American Book Company), p. 115. 

32 Janet A. Kelly, Guidance and Curriculum (Inglewood 
Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1955), p. 211. 

33 W.K. Street, "An Approach to Leisure Time Activities, 
American School Board Journal > 119:17-18, July, IS49. 

34 E.C. McKown, Extracurricular Aotivities (New York: 

The Macmillan Company, 1952}, P* 18* 




























. :o. ; c:.D1 . 


. 

' ‘ ■ w" . . . . . ) 

* 

- 












' 






- 


















. 












e 








17 


says that activities should be scheduled in school time for 
two reasons. First, all pupils have the opportunity to 
participate—no one is penalized or discriminated against. 

Secondly, such official sanction to an activity adds con- 

35 

siderably to the dignity of the activity. One study 
indicates that students also prefer to have extracurricular 
activities, with the exception of social functions, on school 
time. 

In spite of an apparent desire of teachers and 
students to have extracurricular activities integrated with 
regular school work, official curricula give this matter 
little attention. 3 ^ Staffs have often overlooked how the 
extracurriculum might be integrated with the curriculum. 

Kelly says: 

Activities outside of school hours is still fol¬ 
lowed in some schools mainly because administrators 
have not been convinced that extracurricular activities 
have enough educational value to be scheduled during 
the school day. 37 

VI. FACILITIES FOB EXTRA ODERICULAR ACTIVITIES 
The importance of proper and adequate facilities for 

35 H.F. Brinegar, fi Pupil Attitudes Toward Extracurricular 
Activities, 11 School Review, 63:432-7, iTovember, 1955. 

^American Association of School Administrators, ff Youth 
Education Today, H Sixteenth Yearbook , 1938, pp. 62, 148-52. 

o7 Kelly, 0 £. cit ., p. 205. 







* 

* 

. 


- 

. . 





18 


the achievement of educational objectives is only too well 
known. C.P. Collins underscores this point w r hen he says: 

The overall purpose of the school building is to 
provide space and facilities so that the children 
may receive an education ... A good plant facili¬ 
tates a good educational program and permits good 
teaching. A poorly planned plant, whether new or 
old, imposes insurmountable handicaps on the educa¬ 
tor, the teaching body, the students, and the entire 
community. 

Since the objectives of extracurricular activities 
are coincident with the educational objectives of the cur¬ 
riculum, it follows that the necessary facilities and equip¬ 
ment should be provided. Lack of facilities tends to 
detract from the dignity and importance of extracurricular 

activities, dissipates energy, and promotes correlative 

39 

careless and slipshod procedures. 

To all appearances, however, it seems that to recog¬ 
nize a need is one thing; to provide for the need is another. 
Most school sites today are too small to provide adequately 
for the demands of a continually expanding educational 
program. 40 Referring to Alberta schools, one study finds 
that "the playground facilities appear to be inadequate not 


38 C , P . Collins, "Economy in School Building Practices,” 
The .alberta School Trustee , May, 1958, p. 4. 

3 %cKawn, op . cit . , pp. 17-25. 

^Research and Publications Committee, Uuide For 
Planning School Plants (Nashville, Tennessee: National Council 
on Schoolhouse Construction, 1953), pp. 26-27. 























. 













■ 

. : ■ ■ ' < 

. 

_ 

■ 



























































19 


only from the standpoint of variety, hut also from the stand- 
41 

point of repair." This study suggests two reasons; (1) 
school boards have insufficient funds, and (2) trustees are 

not well-informed with the aims and trends of education. 

42 

Another related study points out that the lack of proper 
and adequate facilities has often resulted in poor physical 
education programs. A more promising outlook both for 
physical education and for extracurricular activities is 
seen in a report by Alberta’s Minister of Education: 

I would like to call to your attention a feature 
of the new school construction program which has 
come very much to the fore during the past two years— 
the provision of gymnasia. During the five calendar 
years 1952 to 1956, inclusive, school projects com¬ 
pleted in these years contained no less than 178 
gyms.. During the first three of these years, 1952, 

1953, and 1954, 67 gyms were constructed, while dur¬ 
ing the last two years no less than 111 gyms have 
been provided. I believe it can be said, therefore, 
that school boards in Alberta included more gyms in 
the new school projects completed in 1955 and 1956 
than were provided during the entire preceding 
period of fifty years since the Province was first 
established in 1905.43 


^J*0. Jonason, "A Survey of School Grounds and 
Teacherage conditions in Eighty Schools in Central and 
Northern Alberta" (unpublished M.A. thesis, University of 
Alberta, 1940), p. 20. 

4 %enneth Grierson, "Physical Education in Alberta 
High Schools" (unpublished M.Ed. thesis, University of 
Alberta, 1955). 

42 Hon. A.O. Aalborg, "Address to 1957 A.S.l.A. 
Convention," The Alberta School Trustee , November, 1957, p. 9. 








. 

' 




« . 


* < \ . < 


• ( 

• ■ < 

5 . , . 














20 


VII. SPONSORSHIP OF EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES 

The opinion of authorities is that the sponsorship of 

extracurricular activities is properly the responsibility of 

the teachers. In the words of one authority, 

A teacher’s duties and obligations to students and 
community are not satisfied by closing the classroom 
door at the conclusion of a class. The direction and 
supervision of extracurricular activities are an 
important part of his duties—all, of course, subject 
to the test of reasonableness. 44 

The view that extracurricular activities should be considered 

a part of the regular program of the teachers is upheld by 
45 

McKown. Nevertheless, he recognizes the possibility of 
abuse, and warns against overloading teachers with work. 4 ° 
Another view emphasizes that sponsors should have 
interest, ability, and training as qualifications. Sponsors 
should be carefully selected, and in-service training devised 

A7 

to make persons more effective as sponsors." With regard to 
training Grierson 48 found that, in Alberta, the majority of 

44 Lee 0. Garber, n lxtra-Classroom Duties Without Pay, 1 * 
Nations Schools , LVI, December, 1955, pp. 72-3. 

45 McKown, 0 £. eft., pp. 17-25. 

46 Ibid.., p. 628. 

47 Paul B. Jacobson, W.C. Reavis, and Janes D. Logsdon, 
The Effective School Principal (New York: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 
1955), p. 314. 

48 Grierson, o£. £it. 















21 

teachers of Physical Education had little or no specific 
training. 

In order to get sponsors for their extracurricular 

activities, some schools have been approaching out-of-school 

people. Authorities do not look upon this practice with too 

much favor, as the following quotation indicates: 

Some high schools have found through unfortunate 
experience that it is unwise to have outside individuals 
acting as sponsors. 49 

VIII. CONTROLLING EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES 

Educational literature brings ait the need of 

encouraging the timid and hesitant students to participate 

in extracurricular activities, as well as to curb those who 

overparticipate. All pupils should participate, but not 

50 

necessarily to the same extent. When policies limiting 
participation are set up, the ultimate effect must be care¬ 
fully considered. Some pupils who may be highly motivated 
may not be given the chance to participate. Whatever restric¬ 
tions are set up, they should not create privileged and 

51 

unprivileged groups, for that is not democratic procedure. 

49 National Society for the Study of Education, 0 £. cit *, 
50 

McKown, 0 £. cit ., p. 602. 

51 Kelly, od. cit . t p. 217. 


p. 48. 




.. ... •: ' l . OX) 0 

: ... ; 

* 

’ ■ ' ■ '■ •' ’• v H 

• ‘ . V . • '0, 













22 


Problems of conveyed students are an example. 

52 

In his study, Monro found that students who came to 

school by van were not usually available for activities and 

as a result were not readily taken into the social groups of 

the school. These students, therefore, tended to form close 

associations among themselves—a socially undesirable thing. 

Extracurricular activities "accord young people a society of 

their own, a peer culture in which they can learn their 

53 

developmental tasks." This value should not be overlooked. 
Control, therefore, should be practised to the end that is in 
harmony with democratic principles. 


IX, FINANCING EXTRA CURB ICULAB ACTIVITIES 


When the argument is pressed, the general public 
usually agrees that extracurricular activities are an import¬ 
ant function of the school. However, the appreciation of 
their value is not great enough, for, 

. . . there is no general acceptance of public 
financial responsibility for their support. Instead 
the wherewithal is found by other means, some of 
dubious morality . . . and business men are called 
on for donations leuphemistically ealled P |dvertise- 
ments} toward school publications ... 04 


52 B.C. Munro, "The Structure and Motivation of An 
Adolescent Peer Group,” The Alberta Journal of Educational 
Research , III, September, 195?, p. 157. 

5 3 XCelly, 0 £. cit . , p. 206. 

54: J.W, Chalmers and RJS. Rees, ft A Co-operative Study of 
High School Extra-Curricular Activities,” The Alberta Journal 
of Educational Research , IV, June, 1958, p. 87. 











. . • 


( 


- 

■- 









c 

..... ' • . . 

• ■ 








■ . . 2i: < 

* ... • 

• . • 


. 




” 



23 


The general opinion of writers is that if extra- 

curricular activities are of educational value, they are 

worthy of spending tax money for. Such a procedure will 

accomplish two things at least: first, it will add to the 

dignity and importance of these activities; and second, 

because school money is being used, it will bring a demand 

56 

for better organized and better supervised activities. 


^yleKown, ojD. cit . , p. 582. 

^%ationsl Society for the Study of Education, ojd. cit . , 
pp. 113-114. 






CHAPTER III 


PROCEDURE FOLLOWED IN CARRYING OUT INVESTIGATION 

A questionnaire 1 for principals was prepared as the 
data-gathering instrument. The questionnaire sought back¬ 
ground information on the general nature and organization 
of extracurricular activities in centralized high schools, 
and gave particular attention to the problems and needs of 
the conveyed students in this regard. Thus it was necessary 
to consider such topics as scheduling of extracurricular 
activities, transportation problems of conveyed students, 
adequacy of physical facilities and personnel, and factors 
which might contribute to the improvement of extracurricular 
activities in centralized schools. The questionnaire was 
organized into sections with related questions appearing 
under the following headings: general information, outdoor 
sport activities, other extracurricular activities, facilities 
and personnel. 

The questionnaire was prepared after a study of a 

considerable portion of the related literature reviewed in 

Chapter II. Valuable ideas and suggestions for drafting a 

2 

questionnaire were obtained from Good and Scates , and from 

^See Appendix A. 

^Carter V. Good and Douglas E. Scates, methods of Research 
(New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, Inc., 1954), pp. 604-34. 








Eriksson. The first draft was criticized by the thesis 

committee. Next, the revised form of the first draft was 

4 

sent to ten principals, personally known to the writer, to 

be answered as a tryout for the purpose of revealing any 

ambiguity or vagueness in the questions. These persons were 

also asked to suggest additional pertinent questions which 

they felt might be included in this survey. As a result of 

this test, only one question was slightly revised. After 

the second draft was criticized by the thesis committee, the 

final draft was prepared. On May 7, 1957, the questionnaires 

5 

were mailed to ninety principals of Alberta centralized 
schools in v/hich three or more high school teachers were 
engaged and in which twenty per cent or more of the pupils 
were conveyed. Since the study was delimited to the senior 
high school grades of centralized schools, it was felt that 
the most significant information would be forthcoming from 
schools having at least one teacher per high school grade, 
and at least twenty per cent of the pupils conveyed. From 
the point of view of the number of conveyed students involved, 

3 A.W.B. Eriksson, "A Survey of Physical education and 
Health in .Representative One-Room Schools of Alberta” (unpub¬ 
lished M.3c/thesis, University of Washington, 1943). 

^See Appendix B for a sample of the letter asking for 
criticism. 

5 See Appendix C for a sample of the letter accompany¬ 
ing the questionnaire. 



. 

. 

. 

* 

' 

... 





26 


and the staff available for extracurricular work, schools of 
this size and type could be expected to have extracurricular 
undertakings of a variety and scope v/arranting consideration 
and study. 

These questionnaires were designed to provide data 
for two separate studies, the writer T s, and M.W. Rudiak f s. S 
Since the sane population was used for both studies, one 
questionnaire was prepared. It was felt that this procedure, 
besides being more expedient, would ensure a higher percentage 
of returns. Mr. Rudiak and the writer worked jointly in the 
preparation of the second and third drafts of the question¬ 
naire. Appendix A, however, shows only the portion of the 
questionnaire used in this study. 

The schools that conveyed more than twenty per cent 
of the pupils were determined from the ft 0peration Report 1956- 
57” compiled by the Department of Education. The mailing 
addresses of the principals of the schools chosen were ob¬ 
tained from a booklet entitled ^Accredited Secondary Schools 
in Alberta 1956-57” prepared by the Department of Education. 

7 

On dune 4, 13 57, a folio?/-up letter was sent to 

%etro W. Rudiak, ” Ho on-hour Supervision in Alberta 
Schools in Which Part of the Pupils Are Conveyed” (unpublished 
M.Ed. thesis, University of Alberta, 1957). 

7 See Appendix D for a sample of the follow-up letter. 



' 

. 

* 




> 
































27 


twenty-four principals who by that date had not returned the 
questionnaires. Eighteen more questionnaires were returned, 
making a total of eighty-four, or 93.3 per cent. The data 
received from the principals has been compiled and tabulated 
in Chapter IV of this thesis. 















CHAPTER IV 


ANALYSIS OP FINDINGS FROM THE QUESTIONNAIRES TO PRINCIPALS 

This chapter presents an analysis of the information 
received from the principals of centralized high schools 
covered in this study. The data are presented in tabular 
form and the discussion is organized into sections identical 
to those in the questionnaire. 

I. GENERAL INFORMATION 

The information from this section of the question¬ 
naire reveals that eighty Alberta centralized schools have 
an enrolment of 7,563 pupils in grades ten, eleven, and 
twelve. Of this total, 4,216 or 57.2 per cent, are conveyed. 
Four schools are not included in these totals because the 
number of pupils conveyed was not indicated. At the same 
time, the Annual Report of the Department of Education for 
June 19 57^ indicates a total enrolment for the province in 
grades ten, eleven, and twelve to be 30,058. ‘Thus the senior 
high school enrolraent in the centralized schools is 24.5 per 
cent of the provincial enrolment; the conves/ed students con¬ 
stitute 14 per cent of the provincial enrolment. 

■^Alberta Department of Education, vifty - Second Annual 
Report of the Department of education of the Province of 
Alberta, 1957 (Edmonton, Alberta: L.S. Wall, Queen's Printer 
for Alberta, 1958), p. 134. 


























. 

■ 




. 







29 


The number of high school teachers and their distri¬ 
bution in the eighty-four centralized schools is shown in 
Table I. A total of 434 teachers teach in the senior high 
school grades, Forty-seven schools have three or four high 
school teachers; seventeen schools have five or six; and 
fifteen schools have seven to nine. Fifty-nine schools have 
from three to five high school teachers involving a total of 
224 teachers. This is slightly more than half of all high 
school teachers in the schools surveyed. The remaining 
twenty-five schools have larger staffs numbering from six to 
as many as eighteen and involving a total of 210 teachers. 

The scope and effectiveness of extracurricular under¬ 
takings in a given school is partly determined by the number 
of teachers available for the work. From this point of view, 
some Alberta centralized schools are in a better position 
than others to handle their extracurricular work effectively. 




30 


TABLE I 

NUMBER OF HIGH SCHOOL TEACHERS IN EIGHTY-FOUR 
ALBERTA CENTRALIZED SCHOOLS 


Number of Teachers 
in Grades 

10, 11, 12 

Number of Schools 

Total No. of Teachers 

3 

24 

72 

4 

23 

92 

5 

12 

60 

6 

5 

30 

7 

9 

63 

8 

5 

40 

9 

1 

9 

10 

0 

0 

11 

0 

0 

12 

2 

24 

13 

2 

26 

14 

0 

0 

15 

0 

0 

16 

0 

0 

17 

0 

0 

18 

1 

18 


Total 


84 


434 













31 


II. OUTDOOR SPORT ACTIVITIES 

Table II summarizes the information about participa¬ 
tion and organization of sport activities asked for in item 
one of this section of the questionnaire. Many schools have 
their sports organized in more than one way. The games most 
frequently played by the boys are softball, curling, hardball, 
volleyball, basketball, touch rugby, and ping pong. The 
games most frequently played by the girls are softball, 
curling, volleyball, basketball, ping pong, and badminton. 

One of the least popular games is broomball. The writer 
believes that broomball is equally appealing to boys and 
girls. Since very little equipment is required, this game 
has possibilities for wider participation. It could add 
interesting variety to the intra-mural program of sports. 

Table II shows that more of the sports reported are 
suitable for boys than for girls. Boys can participate in 
all of the thirteen games listed. Games like hardball, 
rugby, hockey, and soccer, however, are hardly the kind of 
games one would recommend for girls. 

Most of the games are teacher-coached, with softball 
hardball, basketball, hockey, curling, and ping pong receiv¬ 
ing the greatest attention. These are also the games that 
are most frequently organized as intra-mural and inter¬ 
school competitions. Unorganized, free play is most common 



32 


in the case of softball, ping pong, touch rugby, and volley¬ 
ball. 


TABLE II 

ORGANIZATION OF SPORT ACTIVITIES IN EIGHTY-OTOx 
ALBERTA CENTRALIZED SCHOOLS 


Sport 

Activity 

Participation 

Teacher- 

Coached 

Organization 

Unorgan¬ 

ized 

Free HLay 

Boys 

Girls 

House 

Leagues 

Inter-School 

Competition 

Softball 

65 

73 

65 

26 

51 

30 

Hardball 

57 

4 

43 

13 

40 

12 

Basketball 

55 

51 

48 

33 

43 

8 

Volleyball 

56 

59 

40 

31 

18 

18 

Touch rugby 

54 

3 

34 

12 

25 

22 

Soccer 

IS 

1 

7 

4 

2 

9 

Hockey 

43 

2 

37 

9 

39 

4 

Curling 

62 

59 

50 

44 

41 

4 

Broomball 

6 

8 

6 

3 

2 

3 

Badminton 

25 

26 

17 

12 

7 

6 

Ping Pong 

52 

43 

20 

33 

8 

27 

Football 

2 

0 

2 

0 

2 

0 

Pingmington 

1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

1 


xTwo principals omitted this question. 
































■ 







































































33 


Table III summarizes the replies to item two of this 
section. It shows the extent to which sport activities are 
integrated with regular Physical Education classes, mile 
fourteen schools reported that Physical Education periods 
were not used for sport activities, seventy schools, or 83 
per cent, reported using these regular class periods for 
practices, house league games, and for inter-school competi¬ 
tions. Only twelve schools reported using Physical Educa¬ 
tion class time for inter-school games, while as many as 
sixty-three reported using this class time for practices. 

TABLE III 

SCHEDULING OF SPORT ACTIVITIES WITH PHYSICAL 
EDUCATION PERIODS IN SEVENTY* 

ALBERTA CENTRALIZED SCHOOLS 


Purpose of Scheduling with Physical Education Number 

of Schools 

For practising fundamentals . .... 63 

For house league games. £6 

For inter-school competitions . . 12 


^Fourteen schools do not schedule sport activities with 

Physical Education periods. 

Frequent comments of principals indicated that "for practices” 
meant instruction in the fundamentals of the game to all 
pupils whether they played on teams or not. If an integrated 
program of physical education and sport activities is well 



















. 








, 














■ : ■ 



















34 


planned for all pupils concerned, then the class time so 
spent is justified. In particular, justification for such 
integrated programming lies in that it does provide for the 
participation of conveyed students. 

An illustration of planning with attention to conveyed 
students was given by one principal in the following comment: 

The high schools in our Division all schedule some 
of their Physical Education periods for Priday after¬ 
noon. When an occasional inter-school game is arranged, 
the visitors use the noon-hour for travelling and the 
class time for playing. This allows vanned pupils to 
take part in inter-school competition. 

Table IY shows a summary of replies of eighty-three 
schools to item three of this section which asked for an 
indication of the time when inter-school competitions were held. 


TABLE IY 


PLAYING Tim POE INTER-SCHOOL COMPETITIONS IN 
EIGHTY-THREE! ALBERTA CENTRALIZED SCHOOLS 


Playing Time 


Number of 
Schools 


Noon-hour intermission 


12 


School time 


19 


After school hours 


63 


Week ends 


34 


xOne principal did not reply to this question. 






























■ 























• 







, 







■ 





' 






































, , 

■ 






• 





■ 







wm 










35 


Table IY shows that sixty-three schools hold their 
inter-school competitions after school hours; thirty-four on 
week-ends; and thirty-one either in school time or during 
the noon-hour intermission. In the majority of cases inter¬ 
school competitions are held on out-of-school time. Although, 
basically, this practice is sound, yet, it cannot be denied 
that conveyed students are at a disadvantage under this 
arrangement. They are faced with the problem of time and 
expense involved in travelling longer distances to such 
activities. Teacher-sponsors, too, are reluctant to devote 
their after-school time and weekends to extracurricular work. 

A partial solution to the problem of conveyed students 
is indicated in the following idea. Two principals suggested 
a maximum of four to six half-days a year for organized 
inter-school sports. 

In replying to item four of this section of the 
questionnaire, seventy-seven principals reported that their 
conveyed students participate in sports on out-of-school 
time; four principals reported no participation by conveyed 
students. Two principals reported that their schools have 
no sport activities on out-of-school time, and one principal 
gave no answer. 

The apparently high percentage of participation by 
conveyed students (seventy-seven schools) is actually mis¬ 
leading. Principals gave frequent qualifying comments such 







' 


• 






' 


« 


• 


, 

*5 

■ 




• 






. 












' 








- 


: 

■ 


. 




36 


as, "Activities after school hours are a rare thing here" 
and "Participation (by conveyed students) is very meagre*" 
This indicates that only a limited number of conveyed 
students participate. 

Table V summarizes the replies of the seventy-seven 
principals who reported that their conveyed students partici¬ 
pate in sport activities on out-of-school time. The question 
asked how the responsibility of transporting such students to 
and from the place of activity was being met. 


TABLE Y 


RESPONSIBILITY POP TRANSPORTATION OF CONVEYED STUDENTS 
WHO PARTICIPATE IN SPORT ACTIVITIES ON OUT-OF-SCHOOL 
TIME IN SEVENTY-SEVEN ALBERTA CENTRALIZED SCHOOLS 


How the responsibility is met 


Number of 
Schools 


The participating student is responsible for 


his own transportation.. 57 

The activity club is responsible. 9 

The Students 1 Union is responsible . 16 

The School Board is responsible 

(a) entirely. 5 

(b) in part. 13 

A service club is responsible 

(a) entirely. 0 

(b) in part. 2 

















































'.' < • 

.* 















27 


Table V shows that the cost of transportation is met 
by the participating students themselves in fifty-seven 
schools. The Students 1 Union helps in sixteen schools, and 
the activity club in nine schools. In thirteen cases the 
School Board pays part of the cost; in five cases the School 
Board pays the entire cost. In two instances a service club 
meets part of the cost. Comments of principals indicate 
that where School Boards contribute part of the cost of 
transportation, this contribution usually takes the form of 
providing a van. Students "chip in” to pay the driver and 
the gasoline as a matter of course. Often spectators are 
encouraged to come along for the ride and so help pay for 
the trip. 


III. NON-ATHLETIC EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES 

The section of the questionnaire entitled "Other 
Extracurricular Activities” deals with activities which are 
non-athletic. The replies to this section are summarized in 
Tables VI to X inclusive. Table YI summarizes the replies 
of seventy-eight principals for items one and two of this 
section. These items sought information regarding the type 
of activities and the time when these activities were carried 
on. Two principals reported that they had no activities of 
the non-athletic kind, and four principals did not answer 
these two questions. 




















■ 








. 

i 

. 






















* 






■ 




- 



















38 


TABLE VI 

SCHEDULING OF NON-ATHLETIC EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES 
IN SEVENTY-EIGHT ALBERTA CENTRALIZED SCHOOLS 


Number of Schools Scheduling 



Number of 


Activity 

For 


Activity 

Schools 

Reporting 

Noon 

Hour 

School 

Hours 

After 

School 

Hours 

Week 

Ends 

School Paper 

55 

32 

28 

30 

2 

Year Book 

44 

26 

23 

25 

2 

Dramatics 

36 

14 

20 

24 

6 

Glee Club 

30 

17 

14 

22 

3 

Jr. Red Cross 

29 

13 

19 

10 

1 

Band 

23 

8 

7 

20 

2 

Religious Club 

19 

8 

1 

12 

3 

Orchestra 

14 

2 

3 

12 

1 

Photography 

10 

7 

0 

3 

0 

Art Club 

8 

3 

5 

5 

1 

Handicraft 

4 

1 

1 

3 

0 

Science 

3 

2 

0 

2 

0 

4-E Club 

3 

0 

0 

3 

0 

Cheer Leaders 

2 

2 

0 

1 

0 

Army Cadets 

2 

0 

1 

2 

0 

Dance Club 

2 

1 

0 

1 

0 

Debating Club 

1 

1 

0 

1 

0 

Sea Cadets 

1 

0 

0 

1 

0 

Boy Scouts 

1 

0 

0 

1 

0 

School Patrol 

1 

1 

0 

1 

0 

Public Speaking 

1 

1 

0 

1 

0 



















• 














































































39 


The activities reported are listed in a descending 
order of frequency. The school paper and year book head the 
list, as might be expected for these traditional activities. 
Dramatics, Glee Club, and Junior Ked Cross come next in 
popularity. Work on school publications is carried on with 
about equal frequency during noon-hour, school hours, and 
after-school hours. Although school time and the noon-hour 
are used for dramatics and Glee Club, there is a tendency 
for more after-school scheduling for these activities. 
Scheduling for after-school hours is even more common with 
activities such as the band, orchestra, and religious clubs. 

Comments indicated that when an activity is carried 
on during school hours, it means that f! spares” and study 
periods are utilized. One principal stated that club meet¬ 
ings are held during the noon-hour intermission, while work¬ 
group sessions are held during after-school hours. Another 
principal reported a daily recreation period which is 
scheduled for the last half-hour of the school day. 

Table YII summarizes the replies to item three of this 
section which asks for an indication of methods for providing 
time for the participation of conveyed students in extra¬ 
curricular activities. Sixty schools, or 72.6 per cent, 
have some method of providing time for participation by 
conveyed students in extracurricular activities. The most 
common method, used by thirty-one schools, or 51.6 per cent, 










































• 




; i I ■ .... >• . .. . ; . -■ •... , j }' a .. , ‘irol 

■ 

- 

- • 

















40 


was correlating extracurricular activities with related 
school subjects, as, for example, the Glee Club with Music, 
the Drama club with Dramatics, or sports with Physical 
Education. Another method used by sixteen schools, or 26.6 
per cent, was shortening class periods on certain days of 
the week to provide an extra period for activities. A third 
method used by thirteen schools, or 21.6 per cent, was 
lengthening the noon-hour intermission and compensating for 
this by dismissing later in the afternoon, or by dispensing 
with recesses. Six schools, or only ten per cent, use the 
method of scheduling regular activity periods on the time 
table. 

TABLE VII 

METHODS USED BY SIXTY* ALBERTA CENTRALIZED SCHOOLS FOR 
PROVIDING TIME FOR THE PARTICIPATION BY CONVEYED 
STUDENTS IN EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES 


Method 


Number of 
Schools 


Lengthening the noon-hour intermission .... 13 

Shortening class periods on certain days to 

provide time for an activity period ...... 16 

Providing regular activity periods on the 

time table. 6 

Correlating extracurricular activities with 

related subjects . 31 


xTwenty-four principals gave no reply. 









41 


The method of scheduling extracurricular activity- 

periods on the regular time table is recognized by many 

authorities as being the most promising. Certainly it 

offers most in meeting the needs of conveyed students# 

2 

Miller, Moyer, and Patrick and several other authorities 
3 4 b 

like Street^, Kelly , and McKown strongly support this 
method. 

In contrast to the evidence of solid organization and 
excellent programs in some schools, there is in other 
schools an apparent lack of enthusiasm in extracurricular 
activities. In many instances little attention is given to 
the needs and the problems of conveyed students. Programs 
are haphazard and arrangements for participation are weak. 
Perhaps it is a sense of bewilderment that shows through, 
for instance, twenty-four principals gave no reply to item 
three of this section of the questionnaire. Is it disinter¬ 
est or frustration that prompts such comments as, 11 We have 
not solved this problem, ft and, ,f Bus schedules do not permit 

^Franklin A. Miller, James H. Moyer, Robert B. Patrick, 
Planning Student activities (Englewood Cliffs, M.J.: Prentice- 
Hall, Inc., 1956), pp. 304-306. 

3 W.K. Street, !, An Approach To Leisure Time Activities." 
American School Board Journal , 119:17-18, July, 1949. 

4 Janet A. Kelly, Guidance and Curriculum (Englewood 
Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1955T7~pp. 205, 211. 

5 

H.C. McKown, Extracurricular Activities (New York: 

The Macmillan Company, 1952], p. 18. 




















. 












' 






































































' "* : • 








42 


extracurricular activities." Another comment reads thus: 
"This year little is being done; weak staff; students unco- 
operative--do not care." Some principals maintain that if 
the interest is high, the conveyed students will come in 
spite of difficulties. In one case the conveyed students 
stay after school hours for extracurricular work and then 
find their own way home, or else spend the night in town 
with friends. The writer feels that such arrangements are 
of dubious merit. 

Table VIII is a summary of replies to item four of 
this section which asked for an expression of opinion 
regarding the effects of participation on scholarship. Only 
six principals, or 8 per cent, thought that participation in 
extracurricular activities lowers scholarship. Opinions 
regarding the second and third alternatives shown in the 
table were equally divided. Thirty-three principals, or 
46 per cent, thought that participation in extracurricular 
activities encourages better scholarship, and 46 per cent 
thought that it is neither beneficial nor detrimental to 
scholarship, flight principals commented that extracurricular 
activities contribute to social growth, encourage wholesome 
activities, increase pride and school spirit, and improve 
scholarship through personality adjustment. Sight other 
principals commented that the value of extracurricular 





) ' ■ 















43 

activities depends on the individual student and on the 
quality of guidance given by the teacher-sponsors. 

TABLE VIII 

OPINIONS OP SEVENTY-TWO PRINCIPALS*REGARDING EFFECTS 
OF PARTICIPATION IN EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES 


Effect 

Number 

Per Cent 

It lowers scholarship . 

6 

8 

It encourages better scholarship . . . . 

33 

46 

It is neither beneficial nor detrimental 
to scholarship . 

33 

46 


xTwelve principals did not express an opinion. 


Item five of this section of the questionnaire dealt 
with controlling policies and their purpose. The responses 
to this item are summarized in Table IX. Fifty-seven schools, 
or 74 per cent, have some sort of policy controlling partici¬ 
pation in extracurricular activities, and twenty schools, or 
26 per cent do not have such a policy. Seven principals 
did not answer item five. Of the fifty-seven principals who 
indicated they had a controlling policy, twenty ranked the 
functions of a controlling policy as shown in Table IX. 
Thirty-seven principals did not rank the functions, but 
merely checked one or more of the three alternatives as 




























. * • . - • . * - . * ;!,, . OQ 



. 

« 

‘ 










44 


being important. Thus, the first one was checked four times; 
the second one, thirty times; and the third one, eighteen 
times. These results are similar to those shown in Table IX. 
Both groups of principals indicate that, in their opinion, 
it is more important to encourage participation of all 
students, than it is to assure the participation of conveyed 
students. Educationally, this opinion is sound. However, 
the welfare of conveyed students should not be disregarded. 


TABIE IX 

FUNCTIONS OF A CONTROLLING POLICY IN EXTRA CURRICULAR 
ACTIVITIES AS RANKED BY TWENTY PRINCIPALS 


Function 

(No. 

1 

Rank 

of Principals] 

2 3 

Weighted 

Values 

To assure participation 
by conveyed students 

1 

5 

14 

27 

To prevent excessive 
participation by 
individuals 

7 

8 

5 

42 

To encourage wide parti¬ 
cipation among all 
students 

12 

7 

, 4 - ~ 

1 

1 o 

51 

Vi ‘X 


xValues of 3, 2, and 1 were given to ranks 1, 2, and 3, 
respectively. 


Item six of this section asked for a description of 
the methods used for controlling participation in extra- 








. 













i 






. 













































45 


curricular activities. The responses of fifty-seven princi¬ 
pals are summarized in Table X. Twenty-seven principals did 
not reply to item six. Of these twenty-seven, twenty did 
not reply because they followed no policy, as indicated under 
item five; and seven principals gave no answer. 

TABLE X 

METHODS OE CONTROLLING PARTICIPATION IN EXTRACURRICULAR 
ACTIVITIES IN PIETY-SEVEN ALBERTA CENTRALIZED SCHOOLS 


Number of 


Method Schools 

Individual and group counselling . 22 

Limiting a pupil's participation to a certain 

number of activities. 25 

Restricting participation on the basis of 

achievement in class . 29 


Table X shows that twenty-nine schools restrict 
participation in extracurricular activities on the basis of 
academic achievement; twenty-five limit a pupil's participa¬ 
tion to a certain number of activities; and, twenty-two 
control pupil participation by counselling. The responses 
to the second alternative reveal the additional information 
that eight schools limit pupil participation to one activity 
at a time, eleven to two activities, and three to three 
































. 






' 













i — . &£ : ' :■ ,, 













46 


activities. 

The responses also indicate that in many schools 
controlling policies do not follow hard and fast rules. The 
principal and staff usually decide each case on its own 
merits. Very often there is no need to apply a strict rule 
because in many schools certain limiting factors operate 
automatically. For instance, the activities are few in 
number, the students themselves are not enthusiastic, or the 
number of students who can participate is small. Two 
principals stated that students in their schools had to have 
a 50 per cent average before they are allowed to participate. 
One principal commented that restriction on the basis of 
academic achievement might be too severe for some students, 
and, therefore, not wholly desirable. 

IV. FACILITIES AND PERSONNEL 

The last section of the questionnaire deals with 
facilities and personnel, and is divided into ten parts. 

The information asked for in part one is summarized in Tables 
XI and XII. Table XI shows the size of playgrounds in 
seventy-four centralized schools. 

Three schools, or 4 per cent of the number reporting, 
have no playground for their senior high school students. 
Twenty schools, or 27 per cent, have large playgrounds of 
ten to forty acres. Twenty-eight schools, or 38 per cent, 
have medium-sized playgrounds of five to eight acres. 












■ 

, . 

■ 






* 




















47 

Twenty-three schools, or 31 per cent, have small playgrounds 
of one-half to four acres. In most schools the playgrounds 
are used by all children from grades one to twelve. This 
fact must be considered in evaluating the adequacy of play¬ 
ground space. 


TABLE XI 

SILS OF PLAYGROUNDS IN SEVENTY-FOUR* 
ALBERTA CENTRALIZED SCHOOLS 


Number of Acres 

Number of Schools 

Per Cent 

40 

1 

1 

20 

3 

4 

15-16 

2 

3 

11-12 

4 

5 

10 

10 

14 

7-8 

8 

11 

5-6 

20 

27 

3-4 

17 

23 

|-2 

6 

8 

0 

3 

4 


acTen principals did not indicate the size of their playgrounds 


Furthermore, a limited playground area becomes even 
smaller and less useful when it is cut up into parcels by 












■ 

. 














































































i 

















48 


scattered buildings. Out of seventy-one centralized schools, 
forty-nine, or 69 per cent, reported playgrounds that are 
broken up in this manner. Twenty-two, or 31 per cent, have 
playgrounds that are not broken up. 

The National Council on Schoolhouse Construction gives 
some guiding specifications for playground requirements in 
modern schools: 

Most school sites are too small. Modern schools 
require sites larger than were considered necessary 
a generation ago because of the continued expansion 
of educational programs, and the necessity for suf¬ 
ficient space for both present and future building 
needs . . . 

For junior and senior high schools, it is suggested 
that there be provided a minimum site of ten acres 
plus an additional acre for each one hundred pupils 
of predicted ultimate maximum enrolment. Thus, a 
high school of five hundred pupils would have a site 
of fifteen acres. 6 

The nature of the surface of a playground is another 
factor which may increase or decrease its usefulness. 

Table XII s umm arizes the data on playground surfaces of 
eighty-one centralized schools. 

The better playgrounds are grass covered, but not all 
of them are level or well-drained. Table XII shows sixty- 
five grass covered playgrounds, thirty-eight level, and 
forty-four well-drained. The poorer playgrounds are dirt 


^Research and Publications Committee, Guide For 
Planning School Plants, (Nashville, Tennessee: National Council 
on Schoolhouse Construction, 1953), pp. 26-27. 








i ; ' 

- 



■ 

- 

' 

* ■ 

■ 

. 

' 


t 











49 


surface, rough, and poorly-drained. Table XII shows thirty- 
six playgrounds with dirt surface, thirty-eight rough, and 
twenty-three poorly-drained. Table XII also shows almost 
twice as many grass covered playgrounds as dirt, an equal 
number of rough and level playgrounds, and about twice as 
many well-drained as poorly-drained playgrounds. 

TABLE XII 

PLAYGROUND SURFACES OF EIGHTY-ONEx 
ALBERTA CENTRALIZED SCHOOLS 


Nature of Surface 


Number of Schools 


Grass covered. 65 

Dirt. 36 

Rough. 38 

Level. 38 

well-drained . 44 

Poorly-drained . .. 23 


xThree schools have no playground. 


The National Council on Schoolhouse Construction gives 
the following directions: 

Play areas should be developed as slightly convex 
surfaces with the grounds sloping to the periphery 
where adequate drainage can be provided . . . the 
surface of the site should be in grass ... A good 
topsoil properly balanced to support vegetation is 


















: 


































* “ * *.■ 




























50 


required; and it should permit surface drainage 
without erosion. A sandy loam is considered 
best for school sites. 

The information on gymnasiums asked for in part two 
is summarized in Tables XIII and XIY. 


TABLE XIII 

FLOOR SURFACES OF GYMNASIUMS IN SIXTY-FOUR 
ALBERTA CENTRALIZED SCHOOLS 


Surface 

Number of Schools 

Per Cent 

Hardwood 

48 

75 

Concrete 

4 

6 

Tile 

10 

16 

Linoleum 

2 

3 


Table XIII shows that of the eighty-four schools surveyed, 
sixty-four, or 76 per cent, have gymnasiums. Twenty schools, 
or 24 per cent, do not have a gymnasium. Forty-eight 
gymnasiums, or 75 per cent, have hardwood floors; twelve, or 
19 per cent, have tile or linoleum floors; and four, or 6 
per cent, have concrete floors. w Gymnasium floors should be 
resilient and non-slippery . • • Hardwood ... is still 

7 Ibid ., pp. 28-29. 














. . 

. 

' 







■ 


















51 


considered by many as the best gymnasium floor for general 
*8 

use. tt 

Table XIV shows that thirty-six gymnasiums, or 61 
per cent, have floor areas under four thousand square feet. 

TABLE XIV 

FLOOR AREAS OF GYMNASIUMS IN FIFTY-NINEx 
ALBERTA CENTRALIZED SCHOOLS 


Floor 

Area in Square 

Feet No. of Gymnasiums 

Per Gent 

Under 

1000 . . . . 


7 

1000 - 

1999 . 


7 

2000 - 

2999 . . . . 


27 

3000 - 

3999 . 

. . . 12 

20 

4000 - 

4999 . . . . 

. . . 12 

20 

5000 - 

5993 . . . . 

. . . 10 

17 

6000 - 

7000 . . . . 

. . . 1 

11 "I" 1 . t 

2 


xFive principals did not indicate floor areas. 


Four thousand square feet is the recommended area if fewer 

9 

than five hundred students are enrolled. Twenty-three 

3 Ibid *, p. 95. 

^Kenneth Grierson, “Physical Education In Alberta^ 
High Schools,” Alberta Journal of educational Research , I, 
September, 1955, p. 39. 


































t 









• 















































. 

* 













«' • U * 










* • * 








































• * - 

























. . 














. . 













52 

gymnasiums, or 39 per cent, have floor areas between four and 
seven thousand square feet. Approximately seven thousand 
square feet is the area recommended for senior high schools}^ 
Table XV summarizes the replies to part three. It 
shows the indoor space, other than gymnasiums, that sixty- 
five schools have available for extracurricular activities. 
Twelve schools have access to a hall in the community; twelve 
have an auditorium available; forty-three have the use of a 
stage; twenty-seven have an activity room; three have a pro¬ 
jection room; and six a basement playroom. Nineteen schools, 
however, have none of the indoor spaces listed. 

TABLE XV 

OTHER INDOOR SPACE AVAILABLE FOR EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES 
IN SIXlY-EIVEx ALBERTA CENTRALIZED SCHOOLS 


Type of Space 


Number of Schools 


Community hall .. 12 

Auditorium. 12 

Stage .. 43 

Activity room. 27 

Projection room. 3 

Basement playroom. 6 


xl.ineteen schools have none of the indoor spaces listed. 


^Research and Publications committee, o£. cit . , p. 94. 


















■ 

. 

• • - . .'i ' 1 

, 




















































53 


Table XVI shows a summary of gymnasium and other 
indoor space in all of the eighty-four schools surveyed. 
Sixty-four schools, or 76 per cent, have gymnasiums, while 
twenty schools, or 24 per cent, have no gymnasium. Only 
five schools, or 6 per cent, have neither gymnasium nor any 
other indoor space for extracurricular activities. Fifty 
schools, or 60 per cent, have both gymnasiums and other 
indoor space. Fourteen schools, or 16 per cent, have gym¬ 
nasiums but no other indoor space. Fifteen schools, or IS 
per cent, have no gymnasiums, but do have some other indoor 
space• 


TABLE XV"! 

SMART OF GYMNASIUM AND OTHER INDOOR SPACE FOR EXTRACURRICULAR 
ACTIVITIES IN EIGHTY-FOUR ALBERTA CENTRALIZED SCHOOLS 


School Ho. of Per Cent 

Schools 

with gymnasium. 64 76 

without gymnasium. 20 24 

with gymnasium and some other space ... 50 60 

with gymnasium, but no other space ... 14 16 

without gymnasium, but some other space . 15 18 

without gymnasium and no other space . . 5 6 


The replies to part four of this section of the 









54 

questionnaire are summarized in Table XVII, and show what 
other playing facilities are available either on the school- 
grounds, or in the community. Most schools have access to 

TABLE XVII 

OTHER FACILITIES AVAILABLE IN EIGHTY-FOUR 
ALBERTA CENTRALIZED SCHOOLS 


Facility 


Number of Schools 


Skating rink. 67 

Curling rink. 72 

Basketball court . 54 

Badminton court . 31 

Soccer field . 30 

Rugby field. 39 

Hardball diamond. 67 

Softball diamond . 74 

Tennis court . 1 


several facilities of the types listed. The facilities 
most commonly available (in 50 per cent or more of the 
schools) in descending order of frequency are, softball 
diamonds, curling rinks, skating rinks, hardball diamonds, 
and basketball courts. Thirty-nine schools have access to 
rugby fields, thirty to soccer fields (in most cases rugby 























































■ 

■ ' 

, 

. 

















55 

and soccer fields are the same field}, and thirty-one to 
badminton courts. One school has access to a tennis court. 

Table XVIII shows that most schools have movie pro¬ 
jectors, record players, filmstrip projectors, and radios. 
Fifty-three schools have tape recorders; forty-one have 
public address systems; thirty-seven have filmstrip libraries 
and seventeen have inter-room communication. Equipment of 
this nature is of great aid in various club activities. 

TABLE XVII lx 

AUDIO VISUAL AIDS IN EIGHTY FOUR ALBERTA 
CENTRALIZED SCHOOLS 


Equipment Number of Schools 


Movie projector. 81 

Record player .. 81 

Filmstrip projector. 76 

Radio. 71 

Tape recorder. S3 

P.A. System. 41 

Filmstrip library . 27 

Inter-room communication . 17 


xThis table is identical to Table XXVIII, p. 48 , of M.W. 
Budiak's thesis, H Noon-hour Supervision in Alberta Schools 
in v/hich Part of the Pupils are Conveyed.” 


Part six of this section asked for information about 



















. 












. 
































■ 


. 











teachers who direct extracurricular activities and about 
their specialized training. This information is summarized 
in Tables XIX and XX. 


TABLE XIX 

TEACHERS DIRECTING- EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES IN THE SENIOR 
HIGH SCHOOL OF EIGHTY-FOUR ALBERTA CENTRALIZED SCHOOLS 


No. of 
Teachers 

High School 
Teachers 

Teachers 

from Lower Grades 

Teachers with 

Special Certificates 
(High School and 
from Lower Grades) 


No. of 

schools 

Total 

teachers 

No. of 

schools 

Total 

teachers 

No. of 

schools 

rota! 

teachers 

0 

4 

0 

52 

0 

27 

0 

1 

8 

8 

23 

23 

10 

10 

2 

20 

40 

6 

12 

23 

46 

3 

22 

66 

2 

6 

15 

45 

4 

11 

44 

1 

4 

4 

16 

5 

8 

40 



2 

10 

6 

4 

24 



2 

12 

7 

3 

21 



0 

0 

8 

1 

8 



0 

0 

9 

1 

9 



0 

0 

10 

1 

10 



1 

10 

11 

0 

0 



0 

0 

12 

1 

12 



0 

0 

Total 

84 

282 

84 

45 

84 

149 



















57 

Table XIX shows that 282 high school teachers and 
forty-five teachers from lower grades, or a total of 327 
teachers direct extracurricular activities in the senior 
high school. Of this total, 149 teachers, or 46 per cent, 
are holders of special certificates for the extracurricular 
work they do. A greater number--178 teachers, or 54 per 
cent—apparently do not have any special training. 

Table XIX shows that while twenty-seven schools have 
no teachers with special training, there are fifty-seven 
schools that do have a total of 149 teachers with special 
training. Table XIX further shows that while fifty-two 
schools do not have teachers from lower grades directing 
extracurricular activities in the senior high school, there 
are thirty-two schools that do. 

Table XIX also shows that four schools do not have any 
high school teachers directing extracurricular activities in 
the senior high school grades. Eight schools have at least 
one teacher each directing such activities; twenty schools 
have two; twenty-two have three; eleven have four; eight have 
five; while eleven have from six to twelve. 

The extent and nature of the specialized training 
possessed by teachers directing extracurricular activities 
are summarized in Table XX. This table shows that the 
teachers possess a grand total of 161 special certificates, 
of which eighteen are unclassified as to type. There are 



twenty senior certificates and 123 junior certificates. A 
certificate which was not definitely indicated "Senior" was 
counted as a "Junior" certificate. 

Table XX shows also that the teachers possess a total 
of sixty special certificates in the fine arts (Music, 
Dramatics, and Art), ten of which are senior certificates. 

Of the twenty Industrial Arts certificates, only three are 
senior; and of the forty-seven Physical Education certifi¬ 
cates, only seven are senior. 


TABLE XX 

SPECIAL CERTIFICATES HELD BY 14S TEACHERS WHO DIRECT 


EXTRACURRICULAR 

ACTIVITIES IN 

SENIOR HIGH 

SCHOOL GRADES 

Special 

No. of Jr. 

No. of Sr. 

Total Special 

Certificate 

Certificates 

Certificates 

Certificates 

Music 

19 

6 

25 

Dramatics 

23 

3 

26 

Art 

8 

1 

9 

Industrial Arts 

17 

3 

20 

Physical Education 

40 

7 

47 

Leadership and 




Recreation 

15 

0 

15 

First Aid 

1 

0 

1 

Total 

123 

20 

143 

Unclassified Certificates 

18 

Grand 

Total of Certificates Held 

161 









. 








. ■ ■ . 















































59 


Although the supply of teachers with special training 
for extracurricular work is encouraging, it is, in the 
opinion of the writer, far from satisfactory. Interest, 
ability, and training are highly desirable qualifications in 
teachers directing extracurricular activities. Kelly brings 
out the importance of trained teachers when she says, 

Teachers who assume extracurricular guidance should 
have training in social group skills, democratic group 
process, and in leadership training of young people. 

They should have thorough knowledge and skill to help 
young people in planning, in leading, in executing, 
and in evaluating activities. Inservice workshops would 
be an administrative means for achieving this skill. 

Item seven of this part of the questionnaire deals 
with rewards that teachers get for directing extracurricular 
work. The replies are summarized in Table XXI. This table 
shows that in eighteen schools, teachers directing extracur¬ 
ricular activities get some consideration for their services. 
A total of nine teachers in four different schools, or 5 per 
cent of the number reported, get special remuneration. 
Forty-six teachers in fourteen different schools, or 14 per 
cent, are rewarded by lighter teaching loads. The larger 
proportion, 272 teachers directing extracurricular activities, 

or 83 per cent, do not get any rewards or consideration. 

12 

McKown would hardly agree with such a situation. He says 


^Kelly, o£. cit ., p. 211. 
■^ 2 IIcKown, op . cit . , p. 628. 





60 


that teachers supervising extracurricular activities need 
assistance and concessions. This "extra" work should never 
become an overload. The National Society for the Study of 
Education supports this stand in the following statement: 

The administrative efficiency of any school is 
open to question when it is organized in such a way 
as to require a number of teachers for extended 
periods to spend more than an eight-hour day on 
school duties. 10 


tabu; XXI 

REWARDS OF 327 TEACHERS DIRECTING EXTRA CUR RICULAR 
ACTIVITIES IN SENIOR HIGH SCHOOLS 




Number 
of Schools 

Total Number 
of Teachers 

Per Cent of 
Teachers 

No rewards 

54 

272 

83 

Special 

remuneration 

4 

9 

3 

Lighter 

teaching load 

14 

46 

14 

Total 


72 x 

327 


xTwelve 

principals gave 

no answer to this item. 



Fart eight of this section considers assistance with 
extracurricular activities given by parents and other people 


^National Society for the Study of Education, "Analysis 
of the General Literature on Extra-Curricular Activities," 

The Twenty - fifth Yearbook , Part II, 1926. (Bloomington, 
Illinois: Public School Publishing Company). 





























. 






_ 












































































61 


in the community. The replies are summarized in Table XXII. 
This table shows that thirty-seven schools receive some 
assistance with extracurricular activities from parents and 
other people outside of school. On the other hand, forty- 
four schools receive no such assistance. The most common 

TABLE XXII 

ASSISTANCE WITH EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES RECEIVED FROM 
PARENTS AND OTHER PEOPLE IN EIGHTY-ONE* 

ALBERTA CENTRALIZED SCHOOLS 


Number of Schools 


Some assistance 37 

No assistance 44 

Type of Assistance 

Coaching teams 26 

Chaperoning at social functions 16 

Bringing in conveyed students 2 

Directing activities: 

Band. 6 

Chorus . 3 

Drama. 2 

Dancing . 1 

Photography . 1 

Public Speaking . 1 


xThree schools have no extracurricular activities 












* 

. 

- 












62 


type of assistance received is coaching school teams and 
chaperoning at social functions. Only two principals report¬ 
ed parents giving assistance by bringing conveyed students 
to their extracurricular activities. 

McKown is not very enthusiastic about having people 
outside the school involved in school activities. Regarding 
chaperoning at social functions, he says: 

No party should be held without competent chaperon- 
age. A failure to observe this and a resultant un¬ 
desirable episode may handicap the social program for 
a decade. Chaperons should be selected from among the , A 
teachers and occasionally from among interested parents. 

Part nine asked who sponsored the extracurricular 
activities. The replies are summarized in Table XXIII. 

TABLE XXIII 

SPONSORSHIP OF EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES IN 
EIGHTY-ONEx ALBERTA CENTRALIZED SCHOOLS 


Sponsoring Body 


No. of Schools 


School Staff . 42 

Students 1 Union. 63 

Community Organizations 

Service Club. 12 

Church . 1 

ATA Local. 1 

Home and School .. 1 

Private Individual . 1 


xThree schools have no extracurricular activities. 


^%eKown, op * cit ., p. 333. 
















. 

‘ 


. 
















' 

























63 


In forty-two schools, the teaching staff sponsors 
extracurricular activities, and in sixty-three schools the 
Students 1 Union is the sponsoring body. In most schools 
these two bodies work in conjunction with one another. In 
twelve instances a service club is the sponsoring body. 

There are sixteen instances of organizations outside the 
school sponsoring extracurricular activities. 

The National Society for the Study of Education warns 

that it is unwise to have outside individuals acting as 
15 

sponsors. School principals would be well-advised to give 
this matter careful consideration when organizing extra¬ 
curricular activities. 

The last part of this section of the questionnaire 
asked to what extent certain listed factors would contribute 
to the improvement of the quality and scope of extracurricular 
activities in a given school. Table XXIV summarizes the 
opinions of the principals who replied. 

It is the opinion of seventy-five principals that the 
factor which would contribute most to the improvement of 
extracurricular activities in their schools is teachers with 
training in specific fields closely related to extracurricular 
activities, such as physical Education, Music, Drama, and Art. 

^National Society for the Study of Education, op. cit ., 


p. 48. 




■ 




■ 

‘ 

"■ • : ■ r:; . 













64 


Among these seventy-five principals, fifty-seven thought 
that such teachers would contribute to a considerable degree; 
eighteen thought that they would contribute to a moderate 
degree. 

Table XXIV also shows that next to adequately trained 
teachers, most principals feel that large playgrounds in 
good condition, and adequate indoor space would contribute 
most to the improvement of extracurricular activities in 
their schools. Apparently the greatest need in this respect 
is for adequate indoor space, since fifty-six principals 
said this would help them to a considerable degree. 

The importance of personnel in extracurricular 
activities is again underscored by the opinions of sixty 
principals, who feel that lighter teaching loads would 
contribute to improved extracurricular activities. Lighter 
teaching loads or similar concessions make teachers more 
willing to undertake extracurricular work in their schools. 

Table XXIV sho?» T s that principals are divided in their 
opinions regarding more assistance from other people in the 
community. Twenty-seven principals felt that such assistance 
would help considerably; twenty-seven thought that such 
assistance would help only to a moderate degree; and twenty 
felt that such outside assistance would not help to any 
appreciable degree. 



65 


TABLE XXIV 


FACTORS WHICH WOULD CONTRIBUTE TOWARDS THE 
IMPROVEMENT OF EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES 
IN ALBERTA CENTRALIZED SCHOOLS 


Factors 

To a 

considerable 

degree 

To a 

moderate 

degree 

To no 

appreciable 

degree 

A playground of adequate 
proportions to accommodate 
the large enrolment of a 
centralized school . 

45 

16 

7 

A playground that is level 
and well-drained . 

43 

14 

8 

A roomy gymnasium or other 
adequate indoor space for 
group activities . 

56 

4 

5 

Teachers with training in 
such fields as Physical 
Education, Music, Drama, etc. 

57 

18 

5 

Remuneration for teachers 
doing extracurricular work.. 

25 

26 

17 

Lighter teaching loads for 
teachers doing extra- 
curricular work . 

27 

33 

14 

More assistance from other 
people in the community . . . 

27 

27 

22 

Provision of transportation 
by school hoard . 

24 

25 

22 

Greater financial aid by 
school board . 

24 

32 

14 

Sponsorship of activities 
by community clubs . 

18 

26 

20 

Pupil-teacher evaluation 
of the program . 

11 

44 

12 

Public relations program . . 

1 























* • • . > 

t I 













. 

- 





66 


A similar division of opinion exists regarding 
financial contributions of the School Board towards extra¬ 
curricular activities. Twenty-four principals thought that 
greater financial aid by the School Board would help consid¬ 
erably, while thirty-two thought this would help only to a 
moderate degree; twenty felt such aid would not help to any 
appreciable degree. 

Finally Table XXIV shows that only eighteen principals 
thought that sponsorship by community clubs would add consider¬ 
ably to the effectiveness of their extracurricular activities, 
and only eleven principals felt that pupil-teacher evaluation 
of their extracurricular programs would improve the program to 
a considerable degree. 

The importance of a public relations program in con¬ 
nection with extracurricular activities was mentioned by one 
principal as an additional factor. 



CHAPTER V 


CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 


I. CONCLUSIONS 

The conclusions listed in this chapter are drawn from 
the findings of the questionnaires received from eighty-four 
principals of Alberta centralized schools. Certain limita¬ 
tions of the study make the conclusions indicative rather than 
conclusive. 

1. Fifty-seven per cent of the high school population in 
eighty of the schools investigated, or at least 14 
per cent of the total high school population in the 
province are conveyed students. Because they are 
conveyed, these boys and girls are at a disadvantage 
and have special problems in the areas of recreation 
and social development. 

2. The practice of scheduling inter-school sports and 
other extracurricular activities at times other than 
during school hours is inconvenient and therefore dis¬ 
couraging for conveyed students. Such scheduling 
creates special difficulties of transportation and 
works a strain on a student’s time and money. The 
result is that very few conveyed students actually 
participate in activities so scheduled. 



68 


3* It is encouraging, however, to note that 72.6 per cent 
of the schools investigated have some method of pro¬ 
viding time within the school day for extracurricular 
activities so that conveyed students may participate. 

4. In areas where part of the students are conveyed, the 
practice of coordinating inter-school activities for 
a whole school division seems to have particular 
merit. Organization on a wider scale like that makes 
it possible to involve more students (and especially 
those conveyed) more often. Furthermore, heavier 
expenses and the school time used for such activities 
are more easily justified. 

5. Nevertheless, there seems to be a need in some 
centralized schools for a critical assessment and re¬ 
adjustment of certain practices in administering extra¬ 
curricular activities to assure the most benefit for 
the greatest number. 

6. Schools may recognize the possibility of involving 
conveyed students in extracurricular activities when 
these activities are correlated with regular school 
subjects and held during the school day. Xet such 
correlation is often handicapped by lack of suitable 
physical facilities. Thus, many playgrounds are too 
small, or in poor condition; some gymnasiums are not 
quite large enough; and, in many instances, schools 



69 


have no other indoor space for activities—no play¬ 
room, no stage, no activity room. 

7. School boards, as a rule, do not contribute directly 
to the financing of extracurricular activities. 
However, it is recognized that they do contribute in 
ways not appreciated, such as providing playgrounds, 
gymnasiums, equipment, and teachers. 

8. Most schools do not have hard and fast rules for 
controlling participation in extracurricular activi¬ 
ties, yet all follow generally acceptable principles. 
Too often, though, in such policies, the conveyed 
student is considered of secondary importance. 

9. Parents and other people outside the school provide 
only limited assistance with the school’s extracur¬ 
ricular activities. Where conveyed students are 
concerned, their assistance is negligible. 

II. RE C OMMEiNDA T10 HS 

The conclusions mentioned above are based on the find¬ 
ings of this study, and reflect current practices in extracur¬ 
ricular activities in Alberta centralized schools. They 
point to certain recommendations. Keeping in mind the 
limitations of this study and the varying needs and unique 
problems of different schools, the writer respectfully 
suggests the following recommendations in the hope that they 



. 






' « 

v 

. 

» 









t 










70 

may be useful as directives to better programs of extracur¬ 
ricular activities in centralized schools. 

1. Planning is imp or tan t . The values to be derived from 
an educational project increase with definite planning. 
Therefore, extracurricular activities should be care¬ 
fully planned and organized at the beginning of the 
year. It is at this early time that due consideration 
should be given to the problems peculiar to the local 
school, to the needs of individual students, and to 
the special problems of conveyed students. For instance, 
it is desirable to work out an effective policy for 
controlling participation in extracurricular activities. 
In schools where some students are conveyed, such a 
policy should function to encourage the participation 
of conveyed students as well as to control over¬ 
participation. Further, some principals indicated 
that planning on the school division level has merits. 
Valuable direct help for conveyed students can be 
realized through co-operative planning of the year’s 
inter-school activities among the schools in a 
division. Much can be done in resolving the diffi¬ 
culties of conveyed students through careful, 
business-like planning, foresight, and adequate super- 


vis ion. 










. 
















































• 


• 


























- 

. 
















71 


2. _^xtr acur ricular activities should be scheduled durinf; 
school hours as far as possible . besides gaining in 
stature and dignity, these activities thus become 
available to all students who wish to participate— 
those conveyed as well as those living in town. 
Furthermore, the teachers are then available for 
supervision, and they are more likely to give them¬ 
selves willingly and wholeheartedly to the job. 

3. Methods of providing school time for extracurricular 
activities shoul d be devised . Some principals have 
found the following to be useful and practical: 

(a) correlating extracurricular activities with 
related subjects. 

(b) shortening class periods on certain days to 
provide time for an activity period. 

(q) lengthening the noon-hour intermission and dis¬ 
missing later in the afternoon. 

(d) providing a regular activity period on the time 
table. 

4. continual evaluation of practices in extracurricular 
activities is ess an tial . The following seem to be the 
questions in greatest need of assessment and possible 
re-ad jus tment: 

(a) scheduling of activities for hours convenient for 
conveyed students as well as for town residents. 





































* 

< 

. 








. 
























- 

























72 


(b) maintaining a suitable balance between intra¬ 
mural sports and in ter-school sports. 

(c) maintaining a balance between athletic and non- 
athletic activities. 

(d) providing for a variety of activities such that 
there is a balance between activities suitable 
for boys, and those suitable for girls. 

5. Adequate playgrounds , indoor facilities , and funds 
for school activities are indispensable . Lack of 
proper facilities and equipment encourages slipshod 
and haphazard procedures with all their accompanying 
evils. Lack of adequate funds further aggravates the 
situation. School boards must be informed of the 
importance of extracurricular activities, of the 
special needs of conveyed students, of the require¬ 
ments in terms of buildings, playgrounds, and equipment. 
School boards can give direct grants. Grants of money 
to some responsible body, like a teachers 1 sports 
committee, are an acceptable and appropriate means of 
financing extracurricular activities. Money grants 

to defray transportation costs would tend to encourage 
wider participation by conveyed students. 

6. Parents can help conveyed students . Through an effect¬ 


ive public relations program the schools can inform 


















' 


- 













73 

the parents of the goals and aims of extracurricular 
activities, of the special problems of conveyed 
students--of what is being done and v/hy it is being 
done. Being properly informed, the parents should 
be willing to bring conveyed students to extracurric¬ 
ular activities when these are scheduled for out-of- 
school hours. This would be a direct aid for conveyed 
students, and an acceptable form of contribution to 
the school’s efforts. 








BIBLIOGRAPHY 





BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Aalborg, lion. A.O. "Address to 1957 A.S.T.A. Convention," 

The Alberta School 'trustee , November, 19 57, 

Alberta Department of Education. Foundations of Education . 
Edmonton, Alberta: A. Schnitka, Ring's Printer, 1949. 

Alberta Department of Education. "The General Objectives of 
Secondary Education," Senior High School Handbook, 1958- 
59. 

American Association of School Administrators. "Youth Educa¬ 
tion Today," Sixteenth Yearbook , 1958. 

Bostwick, Prudence. A Functional High School Program . 

Danville, Illinois: The Interstate Printers and Publish¬ 
ers. 

Brinegar, H. F. "Pupil Attitudes Toward Extracurricular 
Activities," School Review , 65:432-7, November, 1955. 

Britton, E.C. "A Study of the Organized Community Life of 
Junior High School Students." Unpublished M.A. thesis, 
University of Alberta, 1946. 

Chalmers, J.W., and R.E. Rees. "A Co-operative Study of 
High School Extra-Curricular Activities," The Alberta 
Journal of Educational Research , IY, June, 1958. 

Collins, C.P. "Economy in School Building Practices," The 
Alberta School ‘Trustee , May, 19 58. 

Eriksson, A.W.E. "A Survey of Physical Education and 

Health in Representative One-Room Schools of Alberta," 
Unpublished M.Sc. thesis, University of Washington, 1943. 

Foster, C.R. Extra - Curricular Activities in the High School . 
Richmond, Virginia: Johnson Publishing Company, 1925. 

Fretwell, Elbert K. extracurricular Activities in Secondary 
Schools . New York: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1931. 

Garber, Lee 0. "Extra-Classroom Duties Yifithout Pay," Nations 
Schools, LYI, December, 1955. 

Good, Carter Y., and Douglas E. Scates. Methods of Research . 
New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, Inc., 1954. 









































76 


Grierson, Kenneth. "Physical Education in Alberta High 
Schools.” Unpublished M.Ed. thesis, University of 
Alberta, 1955. 

Jacks, L.P. Education Through Recreation . Hew York: 

Harper and Brothers. 

Jacobson, Paul B., W.C. Heavis, and James D. Logsdon. The 
Effective School Principal . New York: Prentice-Hall, 

Inc., 1955. 

Jonason, J.C. "A Survey of School Grounds and Teacherage 
Conditions in Eighty Schools in Central and Northern 
Alberta.” Unpublished M.A. thesis, University of 
Alberta, 1940. 

Jones, Anna May. Leisure Time Education . New York: Harper 
and Brothers, 1946. 

Kohol, Albert E. "Factors Associated With School Drop-Outs,” 
The Alberta Journal of Educational Research, I, March, 

1955. ~ ~ 

Kelly, Janet A. Guidance and Curriculum . Englewood Cliffs: 
Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1955. 

Lottick, K.V. "The Evaluation of Ethical Discrimination,” 
Social Studies , 39:57-60, February, 1948. 

McKown, E.C. Extracurricular Activities . He?/ York: The 
Macmillan Company, 1952. 

Hiller, Franklin A., James H. Moyer, and Robert B. Patrick. 
Planning Student Activities . Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: 
Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1956. 

Honroe, './alter S. (ed.). Encyclopedia of Educational Research . 
New York: The Macmillan Company, 1952. 

Munro, B.C. "The Structure and Motivation of An Adolescent 
Peer Group,” The alberta Journal of a duoational Research , 
III, September, 1957. 

National Society for the Study of Education. "Analysis of the 
General Literature on Extra-Curricular Activities,” The 
Twenty - fifth Yearbook , Part II, 1926. Bloomington, 
Illinois: Public School Publishing Company. 














































- 


- 




Research and Publications Committee. Guide Tor Planning 
School Plants . Nashville, Tennessee: National Council 
on Schoolhouse Construction, 1953. 

Ronning, C.A. "A Study of An Alberta Protestant Private 

School, The Camrose Lutheran College." Unpublished M.A. 
thesis, University of Alberta, 1942. 

Rudiak, II.W. "Noon-hour Supervision in Alberta Schools in 
Which Part of the Pupils Are Conveyed." Unpublished 
M.Ed. thesis, University of Alberta, 1957. 

Smith, Henry P. "The Relationship Between Scores on the Bell 
Adjustment Inventory and Participation in Lxtra-Cur- 
ricular Activities," Journal of educational Psychology, 
XXXVIII, January, 1947. 

Spears, H. The Emerging High School uurr1culum and its 
Direction . New York: American Book Company. 

Street, W.K.. "An Approach to Leisure Time Activities," 
American School Board Journal , 119:17-18, July, 1949. 

Thompson, Nellie Zetta. Your School Clubs . New York: 

E.P. Dutton and Co. Inc., 1953. 

Watkin, J.F. "Extracurricular Activities in Alberta High 

Schools." unpublished M.A. thesis, University of Alberta, 
1938. 
























































- 



. 


















5 










APPENDIX A 


Sample of Questionnaire Sent to Principals 






79 


APPENDIX A 


CURRENT PRACTICES IN EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES 
IN ALBERTA CENTRALIZED SCHOOLS 


GENERAL INFORMATION 


Name of School . Name of Principal. 

Principal's Address . 

Total number of classrooms in the whole school....Grades. 

Number of teachers in Grades X, XI, and XII . 

The enrolment in (1) the whole school . 

(2) the senior high school (Grades X to 

XII) . 

Number of students conveyed in (1) the whole school . 

(2) the senior high school.... 


OUTDOOR SPORT ACTIVITIES 


1. In which of the following sports do your senior pupils 
(Grades 10-12) participate? Check for boys, for girls, 
or for both. Also please indicate how the particular 
sport activity is organized by checking in the appro¬ 
priate column. 
















80 


Sport Organized as Interschool Teacher Unorganized 

Boys Girls 

Activity_House Leagues Competition Coached Free Play 

Softball 

Hardball 

Basket 

ball 

Volley 

ball 

Touch 

rugby 

Soccer 

Hockey 

Curling 

Broom 

ball 

Badmin¬ 

ton 

■Ping 

Pong 

Others 


2. Are sports activities scheduled during Physical Bducation 
periods? 

(a) ••• for practices (b) ... for house league games 
(c) ... for inter-school games 

Comment . 

3. When are your inter-school competitions played? 

(a) ... during the noon-hour (d) ... during week ends 

(b) ... during school time (e) Please specify others .. 

(c) ... after school hours .. 

Comment . 

4. Bo conveyed pupils participate in sports when these are 

















81 


carried on during out-of-school hours? . 

If so, then what arrangements have you for the convey¬ 
ance of these students to and from the place of activity? 

(a) ... The individual pupil is responsible for his own 

conveyance 

(b) ... The particular activity club is responsible 

(c) ... The Students’ Union is responsible 

(d) ... The school board supplies conveyance: ... entirely 

... in part 

(e) •. • A service club or other community organization 

(please name) . is responsible: 

... entirely 
... in part 

(f) Please describe other arrangements . 


GTHDR DXYBA CURBICULAR ACTIVITIES 


1. In which of the following activities do your senior 
pupils participate? Please indicate with check marks. 

(a) ... Glee Club (f) ... Photography (k) ... Religious 

club 

(b) ... Band (g) ... handicraft (1) ... Science 

club 

(c) ... Orchestra (h) ... School paper Please specify 

others. 

(d) ... Dramatics (i) ... Year book (m) . 

(e) ... Art (j) ... Jr. Bed Cross (n) . 

2. When are the above activities carried on? In the spaces 
provided, please refer to the activities by letters. 

(a) During the noon-hour . 

(b) During school hours... 

(c) After school hours .. 


















. " • • 




' 



















82 

(d) Week ends . 

(e) Please specify other arrangements . 


3. What methods have you found to be practical in providing 
time for the participation of conveyed students in 
extracurricular activities: 

(a) ... Lengthening the noon-hour and dismissing later 

(b) ... Shortening class periods on certain days to 

provide an extra period for activities 

(c) ... Providing regular activity or club periods on the 

time table. 

(d) ... Correlating extracurricular activities with 

related subjects in order to utilize school time 
to best advantage, e.g. sports with Physical 
Education; Glee Club with Music, etc. 


Comment ... 

(e) Please describe any other useful methods 


4. What is your opinion regarding participation in extra¬ 
curricular activities generally: 

(a) ... It lowers scholarship 

(b) ... It encourages better scholarship 

(c) ... It is neither beneficial nor detrimental to 

scholarship 


Comment . 

5. Do you follow a policy of limiting or controlling 

participation? ... If yes, please rank the following 
reasons in order of importance: 

(a) ... fo assure participation by conveyed students 

(b) ... To prevent excessive participation by individuals 
















83 


(c) ... f i‘o encourage wide participation among all students 
Please specify any other reasons . 


6. Please describe your method of controlling participation: 

(a) ... Individual and group counselling 

(b) ... Limiting pupil participation to . 

activities (one, two, etc.) 

(c) ... Restricting participation on the basis of class 

achievement 

Please state others .. 

PRC1LITIHS AND PDRSQNDLL 

1. What is the area of your playground in acres? .... Is the 
playground broken by buildings? .... Is the surface of 
the playground: 


(a) ... grass 

(e) 

... rough 

(e) 

... well-drained 

(b) ... dirt 

(a) 

... level 

(f) 

... poorly-drained 


£. Have you a school gymnasium? .... What is the area of the 

floor space? . square feet. Is the floor 

(a) ... hardwood (b) ... concrete (c) ... other. Please 
describe . 

3. What other indoor space have you available? 

(a) ... community hall (c) ... stage 

(b) ... auditorium (d) ... activity rooms 

Please state others ... 

4. Which of the following are available and how many have 
you of each: 






















. 





' 












■ 








. 

■ - ... 










. 








. 







84 


(a) 

... skating rink 

(e) .. 

(b) 

... curling rink 

It) •• 

(c) 

... basketball courts 

(g) 

U) 

... badminton courts 

(h) .. 



Others 


. rugby fields 
. hardball diamonds 
(h) ... softball diamonds 


5. Which of the following equipment do you have in your school: 

(a) ... filmstrip projector (e) ... record player 
.. movie projector (f) .. 


(b) 

(c) 

(d) 


filmstrip library (g) . 
P.A. system (h) . 


radio 

tape recorder 

inter-room communica¬ 
tion 


Others . 

6. (a) How many of your senior high school staff direct some 

extracurricular activity? . 

(b) How many teachers from lower grades direct activities 

in the senior high school? . 

(c) How many do have special training? . Please 

indicate the nature of this training e.g. Junior or 
Senior certificate in Music, Drama, Art, Industrial 
Arts, Physical Education, Leadership and Recreation 
courses: 


8 . 


How many of these teachers are rewarded for their 
extracurricular work: by: 

(a) ... special remuneration (c) ... other compensation 

(b) ... lighter teaching loads Please specify . 

Do you get any assistance from parents or other people in 

the community with your extracurricular activities? . 

What is the nature of this assistance: 












. 

















































































85 

(a) ... coaching school teams 

(b) ... chaperoning at social functions 

(c) ... directing club activities such as ... bands; 

... choruses; ... drama. 

(d) Please list others . 

9. By whom are the extracurricular activities sponsored: 

(a) ... staff members (c) ... service club or other 

community organization 

(b) ... Students 1 Union Please list others . 







t. * ;♦ 

• * 4 H « 4 » 4 - .... . 










86 


10. In your opinion, to what extent would the following 
factors contribute towards the improvement of the 
quality and scope of your extracurricular program? 
Please check in appropriate columns: 


To a To a To no 

a actors considerable moderate appreciable 

_ degree _ degree degree _ 

(a) A playground of adequate 
proportions to accom¬ 
modate the large enrol¬ 
ment of a centralized 

school _____ 

('bT A playground that is 

level and well-drained __ 

(c) A roomy gymnasium or 

other adequate indoor 
space for group activi¬ 
ties _______ ___ 

(d) Teachers with training 

in such fields as 
Physical Education, 

Music, Drama, etc. ____ 

(e) Remuneration for teachers 
doing extracurricular 

work __________ 

(f) Lighter teaching loads 

for teachers doing extra- 

curricular work ___________ 

(g) More assistance from 

other people in the 

-community ________ __ 

(h) Provision of transporta- 

tion by school board _ _____ 

(ij Greater financial aid by 

school board _ ' ___ 

(j) Sponsorship of activities 

by community clubs _ .. _ 

(k) Pupil-teacher evaluation 

of the program _ . _ 

Please state others. 








































APPENDIX B 

1. Sample of Letter Requesting Criticism of 
Questionnaire 

£. Sample of Letter Accompanying Questionnaire 
3. Sample of Follow-up Letter 














83 


APPENDIX B.l. 


Radway, Alberta 
March 30, 1957 


Enclosed is a proposed questionnaire which I plan to 
use as the data-gathering instrument for my Master’s thesis. 
It is necessary to test it before the final draft is made. 

Therefore, I am taking the liberty of asking you and 
a number of other principals to fill out this questionnaire 
as it applies to your school. Any criticism, comments, or 
suggestions you can give will be most helpful. Please 
indicate any ambiguity or vagueness in the questions. If 
you feel that other questions or information should be 
included in a survey of this sort, please feel free to 
suggest it. 

Since I must present this questionnaire before my 
thesis committee during the Easter Week, I -would appreciate 
it if I could have your response before that time. Thank 
you kindly for your most valued assistance. 


Respectfully yours, 


S. Boyko. 


























I 

1 












































89 


APPENDIX B.2. 


Vilna, Alberta 
May 7, 1957 


Dear Principal: 

Your kind co-operation is respectfully solicited in 
completing the enclosed questionnaire which will serve as 
a basis for two separate M.Ed. theses. It was prepared 
under the guidance and approval of our thesis committee 
headed by Mr. H.T. Sparby, Professor, faculty of Educa¬ 
tion, University of Alberta. 

The centralization of schools in recent years has 
created some urgent problems in noon-hour supervision and 
extracurricular activities. We feel that you, as a prin¬ 
cipal of a centralized school, are in a position to offer 
valuable information on these problems. It is hoped that 
this information will lead to suggestions and recommenda¬ 
tions which will be of value to teachers, principals, and 
administrators. 

The questionnaire is essentially of a check-list 
type which will enable you to complete it with a minimum 
of" time and effort. Please follow the directions as given 
in the body of the questionnaire. We v/ill treat your 
answers with confidence. 

If at all possible, kindly complete and return the 
questionnaire in the enclosed stamped self-addressed 
envelope by May 25, 1957. 

After compiling the data received from the question¬ 
naires, we will be glad to send you a summary. Please 
indicate whether this is your wish. 


Yours sincerely, 


M.W. Rudiak 

Principal, Yilna School 


S. Boyko 

Principal, Radway School 


. 

■ 

■ 

* 

- 

- 













90 


APPENDIX B • 3 • 


Vilna, Alberta 
June 4, 1957 


This letter is an appeal of principals to a principal 

Could you spare fifteen minutes this weekend to com¬ 
plete and return the questionnaire we sent you on May 7th, 
entitled, rf Current Practices in Boon-Hour Supervision and 
Extracurricular Activities in Alberta Centralized Schools?” 

We know you are a busy man: we are principals. How¬ 
ever, the questionnaire is essentially of a check-list type 
and can be completed quickly. 

Our theses can be completed adequately only if we 
obtain a high percentage of returns. Your co-operation will 
be regarded as a personal favor. Please don T t disappoint us 

The data from the questionnaires will be compiled. 

We will be glad to send you a summary if that is your wish. 


Yours sincerely, 


M.W# Budiak 

Principal, Tilna School 


S. Boyko 

Principal, Badway School 





















1 








