
B29737 




































Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https ://arch i ve .org/detai Is/cu rtis 1900 















~e i a y s— 


ORIGINf DISTHIBUTIOB -and- 


-by- 


COMPOSITION. 


C. Arthur Curtis 
















CLAYS 


The term clay is generally applied to those earthly 
materials occurring in nature, the most prominent prop¬ 
erty of which is plasticity when wet. They can thus he 
molded into any desired form which is retained when dry, s 
and if heated to redness the material becomes hard and 
firm. Physically, clay is composed of minute particles 
of a mineral nature, in all stages of decomposition rep¬ 
resenting many different chemical compounds such as oxides 
silicates, carbonates, hydroxides, Etc., together with 
any organic material which may be present. 

Clays do not occur primarily in nature but are always 
of secondary origin, resulting from the decomposition of 
rocks such as feldspars, micas etc., The agents of den¬ 
udation cause the disintegration of rock and the result¬ 
ing material is often transported far from its original 
locality and deposited whene the transporting agencies 
are checked. Where the clay overlies the rocks from which 
it was formed it is termed a "’residual** ! clay. When form¬ 
ed by deposits of sediment, it is called a sedimentary 
or transported clay. The latter are classified ass- 



< + «, 


< 



-2- 


(a) Marine clays, or those formed by sedimentary de¬ 
posits in the shallow waters along the continental 
shelf, 

(b) The Lacustrine clays, or lake beds, the material 
being brought in by inflowing waters, 

(c) Flood plain clays, formed in wide river valleys 
during periods of high water, 

(d) Drift, or Boulder clay deposits formed directly by 
glaciers, 

(e) The wind formed clays sometimes called ‘'Loess” • 

The clay beds are frequently changed after depos« 
ition, the weather and percolating water being the 
chief agents. These changes are chiefly chemical and 
may be classified as 

(a) Change of color, 

(b) Leaching, 

(c) Softening, 

(d) Consolidation. 

The principal cause of change of color is the 
oxidation of the iron in the clay, although it may also 
be due to carbonaceous matter. 

The percolating water contains a small quantity of 
caroonic acxd which inci?ea,ses its solvent properties, 




. 


. • ■ 






' is 0 


. . ' • 

■ 

bQl'Zi 


„ ... ...... 

■ 

'. • : •. 






i 


< 


• . 







-3- 


especially in regard to calcium carbonate. The upper 
layers of a clay deposit usually contain less lime than 
the lower^while residual clays from lime-stone contain 
little or no lime carbonate• 

The processes of weathering break up the particles 

/ 

in the deposits either by disintegration or by dissolv¬ 
ing out the soluble constituents which have served as 
cementing materials. The clay is thus rendered mors 
plastic, and injurious minerals such as pyrites are 
disintegrated. Many manufacturers, recognizing the 
benificial effect of weathering on the clay, spread it 
out on the ground for months, or sometimes years. 

The consolidation of clays is due, either to the 
formation of limonite crusts, producing hard sandstone¬ 
like chunks and sometimes concretions, or to the form¬ 
ation of shales under the pressure of overlying mater¬ 
ial, the cohesion of the particles being increased by 
the decomposition of mineral matter around the grains. 

The clays of Canada are nearly all boulder clay, 
being of glacial origin, although the drift often is 
re-deposited forming clays of the flood plain and lac¬ 
ustrine variety. Two ice sheets, not co-incident in 
time, swept over the Western Plains. The Cordilleran, 


■ i: x 


* . 




:: 

... i 

•. • • • • • « ■- ... ... . ■ ...: ■: : • ' ' 

, • \ 

■ /: . - .- , ■■ ; 

. t ■ ■ . r . . ■ ■ V : 1 ': ■: . : :• ■ 

♦. j < :' • 

r 

.. . < : ■ • k : . t.\ 

< .. - ' 'i . Kill 

. .. 






. .. 









-4- 

extending south-easterly from the Rockies, has been 
traced as far east as Calgary. Row much farther it ex¬ 
tended is not known, though probably many miles, since 
the upper boulder clay is largely charged with its 
stones, Whether this ice field reached the Edmonton 
district is doubtful, since the cordileran deposits 
found there may be derived from the coarse material 
brought down by water from more westerly points. 

The Keewatin glacier advanced in a south-westerly 
direction, the glaciated area including the Edmonton 
district, although it does not seem to have extended 
more than fifty miles farther west, except to the isouth 
near the International Boundary, where archean boulders 
are found near the foot hills. 

prom the characteristics of the morainic deposits, 
the Cordilleran can be distinguished from the Keewatin. 
Y/hen both occur, the former is below, thus indicating 
the order of time in which they occurred. 

The clays covering the plain from Edmonton to 
Calgary are chiefly lacustrine, a glacial lake covering 
this region. The boulder clays are seen along the rivese 
where the valleys are cut 150 feet below' the surface. 

The lower layers are much like the upper, where there 
are two deposits. Between them an interglacial silt 




t 


I 


. . . 


< 






-5- 


oocurs containing fragments of both archean and Bocky 
Mountain formation• V/here they overlap, the Keewatin 
glacier evidently advanced over a Cordilleran deposit 
wprking over the materials which it contained and 
mingling the stones of the two ice sheets. 

The character of the deposits in the immediate 
Edmonton and Strathcona district has been shown by 
A. P. Coleman in his paper on the drift of A^lberta. 

The following paragraph is quoted from that article.*® 
tt At the descent from Edmonton towards the bridge 
leading to Strathcona typical boulder clay is seen be¬ 
neath a few feet of the vaguely stratified clay forming 
the surface of the plain. The thickness of till varies 
from 10 to 15 feet, and the stones contained in it are 
largely Archaean, though there are some Bocky Mountain 
quartzites, and also local stones, such as siderite 
concretions and bits of coal. Under the till is soft 
sandstone 6 or 8 feet thick and then gravel or a crumbl¬ 
ing conglomerate, both probably belonging to the Laramie 
The pebbles of the conglomerate, often several inches 
in diameter, are entirely of Bocky Mountain origin, so 
far as seen, and may have furnished part of all of the 
quartzites found in the overlying boulder clay.. 






-6- 


11 In Strathcona on the south side of the Saskatch- 
e w an s xiu i I air sections occur, thpugh more obscured by 
landslips. At one place near the point where the road 
from the bridge reaches the general level of the plain 
the boulder clay is covered with coarse gravel followed 
by stratified clay and loess-like clay.,.. The Pebbles 
in this gravel are sometimes a foot in diameter and 
include both Archse an and Rocky Mountain stones 

The clay analyzed by the writer, was obtained from 
Andersons Brick yard, Strathcona. The deposit-As evidently 
of the flood plain variety, occurring as it does in the ' 
somewhat level plain between the side of the valley. 

It is therefore probable that it is formed of both 
Cordilleran and Keewatin materials* brought down by the 
Saskatchewan and its tributaries, and deposited where the 
river over flows its banks. This will account for the 
relative coarseness of the materials compared with 
lacustral deposits. 

A physical examination of the sample was made in 
the following manner 

A weighed mass was boiled to disintegrate the 
particles, then transferred to a large bottle, shaken 













up with water, allowed to settle one minute, decanted 
to a second "bottle, settled three minutes, decanted to 
a third bottle, settled ten minutes, decanted to a 
fourth bottle, settled one hour and decanted to a fifth 
bottle. This process was repeated four times, the 
some volume of water- being used for each washing. A 
Microscopic examination of each of the different masses 
was made after which they were filtered, dried and 
weighed. The result is appended. 

One min. clay Average size of Particles—.0521 m.m. 
28#—-3 m « « « « v — .0415 * 19 

37 #— 10 w * « w « « — *0261 39 99 / 

26#—1 hr. " w b " w " — .0122 H " 


55# -over 1 hr " " M ** —.00275" " 

The absorptive power of the clay was determined 
by treating 50 grs. air dried clay or. a moistened 
filter paper with a known mass of water, then after 
repeating the operation many times weighing the filtered 
water. 


50 grams of clay absorbed 24 grams of water, 

The absorptive pov/er of the sample •• 48#. 

The sample was obtained several months before it 
was analyzed. Being kept in a warm, dry atmosphere, 
most of the moisture evaporated. Attested sample, 





< 




< 









; 


XJ! 


t 




-8. 


after being kept 10 to 12 hours, at 103’— 104* C. 
showed a loss of only 1*64 % of moisture* 

The loss on ignition was more marked,a weighed 
mass showing a decrease in wteight of 7*46 per cent* 

This includes 1.64 per cent of moisture, leaving a 
net loss of 5.82 per cent. 

The chemical composition of the clay was determined 
as follows 

A weighed quantity of the clay was ignited, fused 
in a platinum crucible with Sodium carbonate and Pot¬ 
assium carbonate, and dissolved in hot water and hydro¬ 
chloric acid. The liquid was then evaporated to dryness 
on a water-bath, taken up with water and hydrochloric 
acid,evaporated to dryness again, treated with water 
and hydrochloric acid and filtered on an cashless filter. 

The filter and precipitated was then ignited, weighted, 

acid 

treated with hydrofjuoxic ^ and a few drops of sulphur¬ 
ic acid, evaporated, ignited and weighed. The difference 
in weight indicates the silica. 

The other constituents were determined from a sec¬ 
ond weighed quantity which was ignited, treated with 
sulphuric and hydrofluoric acid, evaporated to dryness 
and the residue dissolved in hydrochloric acid. The 






• • 




-9 


solution was made up to a known volume. An aliquot 
part of this solution was treated with zinc and sul¬ 
phuric acid to reduce the iron to the ferrous state 
and then titrated with a standardized solution of 
potassium permangate. This gave the percentage of 
iron present. 

A second aliquot part was made alkaline with amm¬ 
onia, the alumina and iron precipitate filtered, off on 
an ashless filter, ignited and weighed. This gave the 
amount of iron and alumina. The percentage of alumina 
was determined by deducting the percentage of iron 
previously obtained* The filtrate from the iron and 
alumina was heated to boiling and treated with enough 
Ammonium oxalate to convert all the magnesium and 
calcium into oxalates. The precipitate of Calcium ox¬ 
alate was filtered on an ashless filter, washed with 
hot water, ignited and weighed. The healing and weigh¬ 
ing was repeated until the weight become constant. 

This gave the amount of lime present. 

A saturated solution of micr©cosmic salt was added 
to the filtrate from the Calcium,oxalate, then treated 
with ammonia until the solution was decidedly alkaline 
and a so?uution of ammonium nitrate added. After standing 



. . 


■ $ , . , . : !vO 

• ... ...... t .. v\ •: 

* 

‘ . . . ; ■ 

. • . • •• . ... ' * - ' .■ 

ill ' . 

. : 

u. v : . ■ . ‘ t 3' j .; 

■ ■ ,i: • .• 

. b .. . 

t ■ ■ ..' . . . — 

* ■ '■ .. •• ■ 




10 - 


twenty four hours the precipitate was filtered off, 
ignited carefully and weighed as magnesium pyrophos¬ 
phate. From this the magnesia was determined* 

The alkalies were determined from a third aliquot 
part of the original solution* To this was added an 
excess of borium hydroxide, boiled and filtered/ The 
filtrate was evaporated to dryness, treated with water 
and ammonium carbonate to remove the barium, filtered, 
evaporated to dryness, heated to redness, dissolved in 
water and filtered into a weighed crucible* The liquid 
was then treated with hydrochloricaacid, evaporated to 
dryness, heated do dull redness, and weighed as pot¬ 
assium chloride and sodium*chloride* The residue v/as 
dissolved with a little v/ater and treated with plat- 
in ic chlcrHLde. After evaporating nearly to dryness, 
the residue v/as dissolved in a little water and an 
equal volume of alcohol. The dissolved sodium salts 
were removed by filtration and the precipitate diss¬ 
olved by washing with hot water* This filtrate v/as 
evaporated to dryness and weighed as potassium plat- 
inic chloride, from which the potash present was de¬ 
termined. The Soda v/as then determined by difference. 
The analysis showed the clay to have the follow¬ 


ing. composition;- 






t 


rJ 4 \“ 






5 


13 Cli:4 






T 


*?r 


t 


■ ’ 




- 11 - 


Silica.•54*16 

Ferric Oxide* .. •••••••••••••••5*63 % 

Alumina .. 17 *35 % 

Magnesia .. .,.. . • • *2*79 $? 

Lime . .... *4 *27 % 

Potash . .1*50*^ 

Soda. ... . *50 % 

Moisture .. 1*64 % 

Loss on ignition...... 7*46 % 


Below is appended a comparative table of the 
composition of various clays, compiled by H. Ries* 
(Next Page) 














' 





TOTAL •••»••••••«• (99^42 99*96 98.56 |00*60 99.89 100.0(1100.04 99.751 99,50 




















4 - 








* 








- 13 - 


Comp ared with the above, the clay from Anderson’s 
brick yard appears to be an average brick clay. 

ECO N OMIC _ VALUE . 

The economic value of the clay deposits may be 
extmated from the large number of manufactured clay 
products. 

Probably few persons realize the many different 
applications of clay in either its raw or burned con¬ 
dition. These varied uses can best be indicated by the 
following table, compiled originally by R» T. Hill and 
amplified by Ries, from v/hose book the table is taken. 

1.Domestic; 

Porcelain, whiteware, stoneware, Polishing brick, 
bath brick, fire kindlers. 

2.Structural: 

Brick;- common-front -- pressed-- ornamental, 
hollow, adobe. 

Terra Cotta; Roofing tile; Drain tile; paving brick 
chimney flues; chimney pots;<jLoor knobs; Eire proofing. 

3.Refractories*- 

Crucibles and assaying apparatus; gas retorts; 
fire brick; stove and furnace brick; blocks for fire 
boxes; mold linings for steel castings. 





t 













14 


4. Engineering:- 

Puddle; Portland Cement; railroad ballast; water 
conduits; turbine wheels; electrical conduits; road 
me&al• 

Hygienic 

Bathroom fittings, sinks, washtubs, pitchers, sewer 
pipes, ventilating flues, vitrified bricks® 

6# Decorative 

Ornamental pottery, terra cotta, majolica, garden 
stands, tombstones® 

7.Minor Usesfj* 

Paint fillers; Electric insulators; scouring soap; 
chemical apparatus; ink bottles; Emery wheels; batter;/ 
cups; pipes; pedestals; umbrella stands; plaster; alum® 

Clays, as has been shown, contain Silica, iron, 
alumina, lime, magnesia, potash, soda and sometimes 
titanic acid. The purpose for which a clay is adapted 
depends partly on the proportion of the elements present 
but also on its physical properties such as plasticity, 
fusibility, and refractory properties. A chemical anal¬ 
ysis alone is.as a general rule not sufficient to deter- 
mine the economic value of any deposit. 















































































































































































































































