
For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 



$ if. isb-V, 


A DESCRIPTIVE SURVEY OF THE ALBERTA DIVISIONAL 
AND COUNTY SCHOOL SUPERINTENDENT 




SSBlfflttS 
A 


by 


■< s ® 
v 

, ..A; > 


Stephen Paul Hencley 
May 1958 




Wmm 

*? Y* 1 i 





















@X HMDS 
aaa&aiMis 












\°>S3 

* 13 


A DESCRIPTIVE SURVEY OF THE ALBERTA DIVISIONAL 
AND COUNTY SCHOOL SUPERINTENDENT 


A Thesis 
Presented to 

The Committee on Graduate Studies 
Division of Educational 
Administration and Supervision 
Faculty of Education 
University of Alberta 


In Partial Fulfillment 
of the Requirements for the Degree 
Master of Education 


by 

Stephen Paul Hencley 
May 1958 





Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/descriptivesurveOOhenc 


ABSTRACT 


The primary purpose of this investigation was to 
survey and consolidate information relative to provincially- 
appointed-and-paid superintendents of schools. High school 
inspectors were not included within the scope of the study. 

Most of the information presented in the study was 
obtained from forty-seven questionnaires which were returned 
by Alberta*s fifty-seven superintendents. The first two 
chapters were based upon information made available by Mr. 

W. E. Frame, Chief Superintendent of Schools for Alberta. 

The findings of this study are summarized as follows: 

(1) Superintendents must present a variety of academic and 
personal qualifications to qualify for this position. 

(2) There are strengths and weaknesses in the present 
method of employment of superintendents. 

(3) The average superintendent had spent five years in 
training prior to appointment. Sixty-one per cent of the 
superintendents have spent less than one year in improving 
training since appointment. In June, 19 56 , there were 
twenty-six principals and twenty-five teachers with higher 
academic qualifications than the superintendent in the 
inspectorates reporting. 

(4) Teaching experience of superintendents had been concen¬ 
trated in junior and senior high school grades. 


■f 

* • ■ . ' : — - " 

, 

; : ' ■' v. •••■ - 

. 

„ f‘ * , . ■ 

, 

. 

* • 

' 

. 

. : • ■ C ; 

. • 







(5) More than one-half of the superintendents had been 
principals of schools of four to ten rooms prior to appoint¬ 
ment. Village and town administrative positions account for 
eighty per cent of all such positions held prior to appoint¬ 
ment. 

(6) Supervision of instruction and preparation of reports 
and correspondence account for fifty-six per cent of the 
average superintendents time. Involvement in adminis¬ 
tration takes approximately one-third of his time. Super¬ 
vision and administration appear to take equal amounts of 
of his time. 

(7) The average superintendent spends eighty-four per cent 
of his time in duties pertaining to the local area to which 
he is assigned, and sixteen per cent of his time in duties 
assigned by the Department of Education. 

(8) There is a great variation with respect to the amount 
of administrative work required of superintendents in the 
different divisions. 

(9) Superintendents find many satisfactions and difficulties 
in their relationships with their boards. 

(10) The most-harassing problems of superintendents are the 
teacher shortage; administrative duties; public relations; 
office and clerical duties, and problems related to super¬ 
vision. 


" 

, 

. 

, 


* 


■ 

. 


« 


- 





ii 


A CKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The writer wishes to express his appreciation for 
the assistance received during the preparation of this 
study. The helpful advice and observations on the 
development of the thesis by professors H. T. Sparby, 

A. W. Reeves, and E. W. Buxton are gratefully acknow¬ 
ledged. The writer also wishes to express his appreciation 
to Mr, W. E. Frame, Chief Superintendent of Schools for 
Alberta, for valuable information on the criteria used 
in the selection of superintendents and for pertinent 
comments with respect to the present status of super¬ 


intendents 


* 

. 

, 

■ , . '; 

• V ■ ' ' 11J. . . . C. ; 

• : ■ ! . ■. ■ " • 

♦ 




iii 

TABLE OP CONTENTS 

CHAPTER PAGE 

I. THE PURPOSES OF THIS STUDY. 1 

II. METHODS OF SECURING AND ORGANIZING DATA ... 5 

III. SELECTION OF SUPERINTENDENTS .. 8 

Method of Selection, 8; Qualifications 
of Superintendents, 9; Main functions 
of Superintendents, 12; How salaries 
affect selection, 15; Summary, 21. 

IV. LEGAL STATUS OF SUPERINTENDENTS. 24 

V. TRAINING OF SUPERINTENDENTS .. 32 

Training Prior to Appointment ....... 32 

Training Following Appointment ....... 36 

VI. TEACHING AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPERIENCE .... 42 

Teaching Experience ... ........ . 42 

One-Room Schools, 42; Rural Consol¬ 
idated Schools, 43; Village Schools 43; 

Town Schools, 45; City Schools, 46 ; 

Conclusions, 47* 

Administrative Experience • <»••• 0 * • • 4S 

VII. DUTIES OF SUPERINTENDENTS. 52 

Supervision of Instruction, 52; In-Service 
Training, 55; Public Relations, 58 ; 

Organization of the Units of the School 
System, 60; Planning and Improving School 
Plants and Facilities, 62; AdministratIon 
of Personnel, 62; Auxiliary Services, 64 ; 

Work for the Department of Education, 64 ; 
Attendance at Board and Sub-Divisional 
Meetings, 66; Reports and Correspondence, 

68; Rank of Duties According to Time 
Taken, 70; Local and Provincial Division 
of Time, 70. 













n *- 4 r - ■ > ’ r f /■ :. c r 

; ' v n 

r\. 0 pi 



• . 

♦ c! ■::e 4:0: 4 : 




. ■ : 

: , '. r t :• ' ‘ 44: £ : 

r 

10 


tv ^ • 

; " r < ''• = •! ' ' ■ : 

:> oe'T-. 




i\ -p^ 


'■ o' ri Q k ok oo ■:*t - ru ;" .00 


?• 



iv 


CHAPTER PAGE 

VIII. INVOLVEMENT IN ADMINISTRATIVE DUTIES. ... 73 

Hiring and Placing of Teachers, 73; Hiring 
and Placing of Principals, 73; Hiring and 
Planning the Work of Special Supervisors 
and Helping Teachers, 75; Hiring of School 
Van Drivers, 76 ; Hiring of School Care¬ 
takers, 77; Improving School Caretaking, 78; 
Organizing Pupil Transportation Services, 79; 
Planning Attendance Areas, 79; Surveying 
Building Requirements, 81; Planning School 
Buildings and Teacherages, 81; Deciding 
and Arranging Repairs to Buildings, Grounds, 
and Equipment, 83; Planning and Organizing 
Pupil and Teacher Supplies, 84; Organizing 
and Operating Divisional Libraries, 84; 
Operating Rental Schemes, 85; Organizing and 
Improving Health Services, 86; Planning 
Services in Special Areas, 87; Planning 
and Organizing Special Programs of Instruc¬ 
tion, 88; Budgeting for School Operations, 

88; Conclusions concerning administrative 
Duties, 90; Concentration of Administrative 


Duties, 91« 

IX. SUPERINTENDENT-BOARD RELATIONSHIPS ..... 95 

Most Satisfying Relationships ...... 95 


Support of the Superintendent, 95; 
Board's abilities and attitudes, 96 ; 
Superintendent-Board Teamwork, 97; 

The Superintendent's Advisory Role, 97; 
Minimum Interference, 98. 


Most Difficult Relationships ••••••• 98 

Sub-Divisional Attitudes, 99; Policies, 

99, Teaching Personnel 100; Adminis¬ 
trative Duties, 101; Others, 101. 

X. PROBLEMS OF SUPERINTENDENTS .. 103 


The Teacher Shortage, 103; Adminis¬ 
trative Problems, 104; Public Relations, 
105; Clerical Duties and Office Work, 
107; Supervision, 107; Demands of the 








’ 





r 







V 


CHAPTER PAGE 

Position, 108; Salaries, 109; Board 
Politics and Sub-Divisional Attitudes, 

169; Others, 109. 

XI. SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS . . 112 

BIBLIOGRAPHY.. . 125 

APPENDIX.. 12? 












* 























vi 

LIST OF TABLES 

TABLE PAGE 

I. Gains and Losses in Yearly Salary Reported 

by Superintendents at Appointment . . . . . 17 

II. Comparison of the Superintendents ! Salaries 
With the Salary of the Highest Paid Prin¬ 
cipal in Each of the Forty-Six Divisions 
and Counties, June 30, 1957 ........ 18 

III. Teachers and Principals Earning Higher 

Salaries Than Superintendents in June, 1957 19 

IV. Academic Qualifications of Forty-Seven 

Alberta Superintendents at Appointment . . 34 

V. Years of Academic Preparation Beyond Grade 

Twelve at Appointment .......... 35 

VI. Teaching Certificates Held by Super¬ 
intendents at Appointment * . . . . . . . . 36 

VII. Academic Qualifications of Forty-Seven 

Alberta Superintendents in June, 1957 ♦ * * 39 

VIII. Number of Inspectorates in Which One or 
More Principals Have Attained Higher 
Academic Qualifications Than the Super¬ 
intendent in June, 1957 .......... 40 

IX. Number of Inspectorates in Which One or 





- • 

v . ■ . • • - ' 

- • • ,0 

* * - 4 « 0 

' 

^ * • * * . « ‘ 

- 

* 

• •£ :::! ! '.’ V.o *•/.. ; 

- V ■ ' -v: :■■" ; 

- " « - » 4 » • 




vii 

TABLE PAGE 

More Teachers Have Attained Higher 
Academic Qualifications Than the Super¬ 
intendent in June, 1957 *•••»*.«.. 41 

X. Number of Classrooms Administered by 
Principals Prior to Appointment as 

Superintendents , . , . . . . . , , 50 

XI. Percentage of Time Spent by Forty-Two 

Alberta Superintendents in Supervision 
of Instruction • 55 

XII. Summary of the Work of Fifty-Five Alberta 
Superintendents for the Year Ending 

June, 195b * » « * .. 5b 

XIII* Percentage of Time Spent by Forty-Two 

Alberta Superintendents in In-Service 

Training.*.. 58 

XIV. Percentage of Time Spent by Forty-Two 

Alberta Superintendents in Administration 
of Personnel ••••••••••«•••• 64 

XV* Percentage of Time Spent by Forty-Two 

Alberta Superintendents in Work for the 

Department of Education .. 66 

XVI. Percentage of Time Spent by Forty-Two 


Alberta Superintendents in Correspondence 













viii 


TABLE PAGE 

and Writing Reports ....o....... 69 

XVII. The Teacher Shortage as a Problem Area 

of Superintendents 104 

XVIII. Administrative Duties as a Problem Area 

of Superintendents • •••••••.••. 105 

XIX. Public Relations as a Problem Area of 

Superintendents , . . . . . 106 

XX. Clerical Duties as a Problem Area of 

Superintendents • ••••••• . 107 

XXI. Supervision as a Problem Area of 

Superintendents ...... ....... 108 















O' 


■ 






ix 

LIST OP FIGURES 

FIGURE PAGE 

1. Academic Qualifications of Forty-Seven 

Alberta Superintendents at Appointment .... 33 

2. Years Spent by Superintendents in Improving 

Their Training Following Appointment ..... 37 

3. A Comparison of the Academic Qualifications 

of Superintendents at Appointment and at 

Present ••••••••• . ..... 38 

4. Teaching Experience of Alberta Superintendents 

in One-Room Schools 43 

5. Teaching Experience of Alberta Superintendents 

in Village Schools ....... ...... . 44 

6. Grade Levels at Which Alberta Superintendents 

Gained Their Experience in Village Schools . . 44 

7. Grade Levels Taught by Alberta Superintendents 

in Town Schools . «•••••••.. 45 

8. Teaching Experience of Alberta Superintendents 

in Town Schools ............... 46 

9. Teaching Experience of Alberta Superintendents 

in City Schools .. 46 

10. Grade Levels Taught by Alberta Superintendents 

in City Schools ............... 47 











X 


FIGURE PAGE 

11. Administrative Background of Alberta 
Superintendents •*••••••••••••.,. .49 

12. Supervision of Instruction, as Ranked by 

Superintendents with Respect to the Importance 

They Attach to This Duty and the Time They 

Spend in Its Performance .............54 

13. In-Service Training, as Ranked by Super¬ 

intendents with Respect to the Importance 

They Attach to This Duty, and the Time They 

Spend in Its Performance . 57 

14. Public Relations, as Ranked by Superintendents 

With Respect to the Importance They Attach 

to This Duty, and the Time They Spend in 

its Performance • ••••••••••...•. 59 

15« Percentage of Time Superintendents Spend in 

Public Relations ...... . ... 59 

16 . Organization of the Units of the School 

System, as Ranked by Superintendents With 
Respect to the Importance They Attach to This 
Duty, and the Time They Spend in Its 
Performance 61 

17. Percentage of Time Superintendents Spend in 









0 










XI 


FIGURE PAGE 

Organization of the Units of the School 
System • •••...•.* . • . . • . 6 l 

18* Planning and Improving School Plants and 

Facilities, as Ranked by Superintendents With 
Respect to the Importance They Attach to This 
Duty, and the Time They Spend in Its 
Performance • ••••••••• . . „ • • • • . 62 

19. Administration of Personnel, as Ranked by 

Superintendents With Respect to the Impor¬ 
tance They Attach to This Duty, and the 
Time They Spend in Its Performance ...... 63 

20. Auxiliary Services, as Ranked by Superintendents 

With Respect to the Importance They Attach to 
This Duty, and the Time They Spend in Its 
Performance • •••••••••• 65 

21. Work for the Department of Education, as Ranked 

by Superintendents With Respect to the Impor¬ 
tance They Attach to This Duty, and the Time 
They Spend in Its Performance •••••.••• 65 

22. Attendance at Board and Sub-Divisional Meetings 

as Ranked by Superintendents With Respect to 
the Importance They Attach to This Duty, and 
the Time They Spend in Its Performance • . • • 67 








1 ■•••&! 


« ♦ • 











-;Cj otf CfDOi.[3. f ? ;. 



- 

, . * 

• - * • * * 

, :'• " ' >' " i : " 


v r 


,' o 


■ 

t 


■ 





, 






, 

- 






xii 

FIGURE PAGE 

23. Percentage of Time Superintendents Spend in 

Board and Sub-Divisional Meetings ....... 67 

24* Reports and Correspondence, as Ranked by 

Superintendents With Respect to the Impor¬ 
tance They Attach to This Duty, and the Time 
They Spend in Its Performance • 68 

25* Percentage of Time the Average Superintendent 

Spends in the Performance of Ten Duties . * ♦ . 71 

26* Administrative Arrangements in Divisions and 

Counties for Hiring and Placing Teachers 0 . • 74 

27. Administrative Arrangements in Divisions and 

Counties for Hiring and Placing Principals . . 75 

28. Administrative Arrangements in Divisions and 

Counties for Hiring and Planning the Work of 
Special Supervisors and Helping Teachers ... 76 

2Q. Administrative Arrangements in Divisions and 

Counties for Hiring School Van Drivers ... 77 

30. Administrative Arrangements in Divisions and 

Counties for the Hiring of School Caretakers . 78 

31• Administrative Arrangements In Divisions and 

Counties for Improving School Caretaking ... 79 

32. Administrative Arrangements in Divisions and 

Counties for Organising Pupil Transportation 
Services .•••«••••••••••••«• 80 







''r c: 1 . vJ - 

r.'.0 o ' b^n :\;* r :.v 

* ■ 










io 

■ 

: ■' r- .* ‘.Cj •; ■' r. ■/ \ ; ■■ 1 .■ • : ■ * ’> 

. 

. ' . i '■ • . : 






■ 


S. v f:'7o : "’| 

* * 0 n 0 0 * • " * 11 * * * * . 








xiii 


FIGURE PAGE 

33* Administrative Arrangements in Divisions and 

Counties for Planning Attendance Areas . . . . 80 

34. Administrative Arrangements in Divisions and 

Counties for Surveying Building Requirements . 82 

35* Administrative Arrangements in Divisions and 
Counties for Planning School Buildings and 
Teacherages . . . . ............. 82 

36. Administrative Arrangements in Divisions and 

Counties for Deciding and Arranging Repairs 
to Buildings, Grounds, and Equipment . « . . . 83 

37. Administrative Arrangements in Divisions and 

Counties for Planning and Organizing Pupil 

and Teacher Supplies .. O .*..o..... 84 

38. Administrative Arrangements in Divisions and 

Counties for Organizing and Operating 

Divisional Libraries ..•••••••»••• 85 

39* Administrative Arrangements in Divisions and 

Counties for Operating Rental Schemes ..... 86 

40. Administrative Arrangements in Divisions and 

Counties for Organizing and Improving 

Health Services 87 

41. Administrative Arrangements in Divisions and 

Counties for Planning Services in Special 









xiv 

FIGURE PAGE 

Areas; Shop, Home Economics, and Circuits . . . 88 

42. Administrative Arrangements in Divisions and 

Counties for Planning and Organizing Special 
Programs of Instruction; Gifted, Retarded, 

Remedial, Accelerated ...•.••.••••• 89 

43« Administrative Arrangements in Divisions and 

Counties for Budgeting 89 

44• A Comparison of the Number of Times Super¬ 
intendents Mention Certain Problem Areas in 
Listing Their Most Harassing Problems .... Ill 




' 

4 , d * „ 8 „ . * * ■ * « • , 

- 

. a , * 






CHAPTER I 


THE PURPOSES OP THIS STUDY 

This study is a descriptive survey of the status of 
school superintendents serving in Alberta ! s school divisions 
and counties. The study is limited entirely to those super¬ 
intendents who are appointed and paid by the province through 
the Department of Education, No attempt is made to include 
data relevant to locally-appointed-and-paid superintendents 
functioning in cities and larger town districts. The study 
is further limited in that inspectors of high schools, 
although appointed and paid by the province, are not 
included within the scope of the study. 

One purpose of this study is to determine the factors 
affecting the selection of superintendents. What are the 
methods by which prospective candidates are brought to the 
attention of the Department of Education? What qualifica¬ 
tions are expected of the present superintendent of schools? 
What main functions of superintendents prompt such a list of 
qualifications? How does salary affect selection? The 
answers to the above questions form the basis of the chapter 
dealing with the selection of superintendents. 

The study assesses the legal status of superintendents. 


■ 

’ 

■ 1 

nr r;_ &r>ra f -■ /• ;;cc ,-fi ; o.::j ^r. 

•••:' ; ••'• 

* ' . - . ■ ~ - ' 

# 

' 

p 

■ ' ' 


ot, p,'l ir- "v o '• 'o ■: c->j s L r ; • 

or!' ;!■' i:, ' ;oo v' ■: . v *. r’orff 

\;o •• . •. ; ■ r j *. •' v-co-v: e:vt Wo i'<r:>or’Z:~c- r •vt.oIJ 

: • • : ' ■ - ■ l •- ■ 

: . " •' • ?.ko;. ;■■■•-' ' JjjOp 

•' ■ ■ * r‘ . ■ ‘ :! ' ;■ ; ■ ■ cW . ... HB 

* EO.t 


s l u ': : 6n j . £ . ,ui, :> • r! $ i I z . s • I ©■ v c <• u©o b t x\ v : a o t'.W 



2 


What powers are assigned to superintendents by The School 
Act in Alberta? Do superintendents tend to become chief 
administrative officers of boards in divisions and counties? 

Is there merit in considering the idea that superintendents 
be locally employed? 

The study presents the background of academic training 
possessed by the present supervisory staff. What training 
had been acquired by superintendents prior to appointment? 

How much training has been completed since appointment? What 
is the present status of superintendents with regard to 
training? How does the academic training of superintendents 
compare with the academic training of teachers and principals 
serving in divisions and counties? 

The teaching and administrative experience of super¬ 
intendents is presented in this study. Experience is 
categorized as follows: in one-room schools, in rural 
consolidated schools, in village schools, in town schools, 
and in city schools. The administrative backgrounds of 
principals, who are now superintendents, is traced by 
examining the types of schools in which they had served, and 
the number of rooms which they administered. Any lack of 
administrative or supervisory experience is noted. 

The study presents the duties of school superintendents. 


r,v;odn&br: 

c:; r ,• : : 4 :. v; y ■ ca X <: i ;. ' ■ ■£ - ‘ - f • ■ 

B C( 0 o' 

n - ■ ■ i ; • c • - ' f * : '" A 


; • • v’l :V ; ■ •• 0 •' " ; ; : -■ 


: . ':::ar:r> >£‘0 - • 

: o •;' •;oXc>’:• .0 v;. C Xc0 0 1 0 cf 

0 *. P. t ’ j 

v y c< f 0 f’ X ,*.! C‘C 0 ‘.:■ " <'/; U C-‘ L; i 


. 


' . : 

■ ■ ,• 

l 

F;ov.X-■[ : 'X .v' r.iv:-. ; “r. c; Xa'nx v ’ o'i 

cd ■■ 1 : 0 1 '.. f;X VI v X . 

; :■ -c-.X: 00 '.0 0.;i: ^ dnc ad ax 

J •"Xo i/tlt 

■ ' • ‘ 

\ •••■ r 0 r; ''0 

■ ii'v; 

i* aoi ' . ' t ’ 

■0 3 ‘: 0 axe 


‘ 0 Jd.,;- q::X 


' t 

In 


* 


. ^ 

• x ■ . 


?X :x\i Fo-y,;’' ex: -...t: 

1 

* 

• ■■■■■■ ; •: .• 00;r0 00 0- * : a *. 0 :. : £ 

• • rr •- r 7 0 f* r. <S *a 

0 x ‘X0 e.'sd a.000R0‘:0[ 'xxii'i a e>dT 


3 


First, the rank of importance superintendents attach to ten, 
broadly-encompassing duties is noted. Second, the time 
superintendents allot for the performance of these ten duties 
is examined. Third, the time superintendents spend in these 
duties is averaged. Through these means, a composite 
picture of the average Alberta superintendent is evolved. 

In addition, the study analyzes the origin of the ten 
duties. How many of the superintendents 1 duties are pre¬ 
scribed by the Department of Education? How many are local 
in origin? How much time do superintendents spend in per¬ 
forming provincial duties? How much of superintendents’ 
time is taken in performing duties of local origin? 

The study assesses the involvement of superintendents 
in eighteen administrative duties which are thought to be 
representative of those found in divisions and counties. 

The most-favored administrative arrangement for the perfor¬ 
mance of each of these duties is outlined. An analysis is 
given of the administrative areas in which involvement of 
superintendents has become concentrated. 

The study reviews the relationships existing between 
superintendents and school boards. What relationships do 
superintendents consider most satisfactory? What relation¬ 
ships present the most difficulty? 


0 ••••: •• v : • do ' . • £ f>onBd' ; i:oq : [ r o 


gi 


. 


: ; t d Had d- :• ooco • •, ' 07-7 ogo oo". d d.;' r o ■ '' ol :: 

t 

; * . v >q ■ t 

, ;■ v - : 7 ’ d' : 


O .• i> 

si 


... .• •,, , : *• • * ••• • ■ • , ■■. v- < ’ : 

• • d 

l^aol e tr z :■'■■■■.i n i '-v.. ’ :c o !; .d . !'■ 

_• •; V i •; rreq 3 od.;iO r :: ‘0.0 ’ - ' 0 0'- •• - '• o 

' ■ d ■ foi • ' 2 

?ni £« C - >1 eeitfi ■ ' n • ' ■ . ■ ’ 


O r-:f r , 0 o r ro riO.I: d ." 1 geni'O jv* uB'fO B jo: LOlio'. :. ' • i do • *1 

4 ' . . ■ d . ' • 


:: d 0 . . . d 

'00 or 

0 0 O d BO' : 

o 


• . • r • 

* 

.o 'ol od 

-:■: d 

.. • - O;- '• ‘ O c 

. ... v jV ;V - 

(ode, ■ ~ - o 


o 

•o o ertd do ft 




tdi £ .? n x ; . 

* 

- • ehl aitm .' • 

.oo ?.0*rr €0.1 cl- 00 : ' 0 



What are the most harassing problems with which 
superintendents must contend? The final purpose of this 
study is to assess the opinions and viewpoints of super¬ 
intendents with respect to these problems* 



. 













CHAPTER II 


METHODS OP SECURING AND ORGANIZING DATA 

The major portion of this study is based upon infor¬ 
mation contained in questionnaires completed and returned by 
superintendents* A copy of the questionnaire and the form 
letter used is Included in the appendix* Of the fifty- 
seven questionnaires forwarded to school superintendents, 
forty-seven were completed and returned. This represents 
a return of over eighty per cent. 

Not all superintendents completed every item of the 
questionnaire, however. In one instance, i.e., the per¬ 
centage of time devoted to the performance of super¬ 
intendents 1 duties, the number of replies fell to forty- 
two. This represents a seventy-five per cent return for 
this item. All other items of the questionnaire had a 
greater percentage of replies. 

Items of the questionnaire dealt with the training of 
superintendents, their teaching and administrative experience, 
their duties, their involvement in administrative duties, 
their remuneration, their relationships with boards and 
others, and their opinions of the most difficult problems 
in their inspectorates. 


Responses of superintendents were collected and 




- 

* 

. 


' 

. , • ■ , ' . . ■ • . e ' 

' t 

. 

* s • e.i ■■ 

, •• 

* 





6 


categorized to form the basis of the various chapters of the 
thesis. Some responses were very subjective in nature. The 
chapter based upon superintendent-board relationships, for 
instance, was based upon the subjective opinions expressed 
by superintendents regarding their estimates of the most 
satisfying, and most difficult aspects of these relation¬ 
ships. It was found necessary to collect all the statements 
found in this part of the questionnaire, and then fit them 
into suitable categories. The same procedure was adopted 
in the chapter dealing with the statements made by super¬ 
intendents with respect to their most harassing problems. 

The data presented in all figures, and in all but 
one table, are based upon information taken from the question¬ 
naires. The data in the table mentioned as the exception 
are taken from another source.-*- 

The chapter dealing with the selection of superinten¬ 
dents was written after consultation with Mr. W. E. Frame, 
Chief Superintendent of Schools, for the Province of Alberta. 


1 

Department of Education, Province of Alberta, Fifty- 
First Annual Report. 1956. Edmonton: Queen 1 s Printer, 1957* 

P. 13. 









. ' T ■ • 


* 

, . 

. „ 


■ 


. 

. 





' X ‘ , 

. 











The chapter is based almost entirely on correspondence 
received from Mr* Frame, and on materials made available 
from him. 

The chapter dealing with the legal status of Alberta 
divisional and county superintendents is based upon sections 
of The Alberta School Act, upon comments made by Mr* Frame 
in a letter to the investigator, and on parts of an article 
written by Dr* G. L* Mowat.^ 


G* L* Mowat, "The School Superintendent in Alberta,” 
The Canadian Superintendent , Volume V, (May, 1957), P* 26-31. 





00 rto -to .1- • ■ teo? r &' •' 1 

- 


| ' • 

. 


Bct- 30 .n: -io Oirfsde '.'At .-Vw *ii.r vo'- ■»*:* o «■»« 

ano'-fost noqu .*&• - ai atfci*; . ■ :1« - :•■ : * 1 r;:l ”' * v: ’ 

' :: --: - - ov ’ - - »• ' 

- , : 

. . . ' ; 


t •' . . 

. * - ' « , r ' • :j 




CHAPTER III 


SELECTION OF SUPERINTENDENTS 

This chapter has two main purposes. First, it 
traces the methods by which prospective superintendents are 
brought to the attention of the Department of Education. 

Second, it outlines the qualifications deemed necessary for 
superintendents in Alberta. 

Method of selection . Since vacancies for the position 
of superintendent are not advertised, vacant positions may be 
filled in two ways. First, a candidate may apply to the 
Director of Personnel for the Government of the Province of 
Alberta. Such an application will be considered when 
vacancies occur. Second, a candidate may be offered a 
position by the Department of Education. Candidates may have 
been suggested or recommended by superintendents, high school 
inspectors or special subject supervisors. This list of 
suggested or recommended candidates is added to the list of 
voluntary applications. Following review and screening, 
suitably qualified persons may be offered positions by the 
Chief Superintendent of Schools. Candidates who accept the 
offer are brought to the attention of the Minister of 
Education, who may, thereupon, appoint them as superintendents. 
Placement of the successful candidate as superintendent-at- 








* 

'' ' ‘ < 
„ "■ ' ■ ’ 


< 

£*; ' ■ ■ 

- 

, 

, 

, : 

, 

' 

, 

■ ■ ' ■ . v ' ■: ' V ■ ; . f.. ;■ - .v;.i . ; ' 

, 

-■ — : - J! U;.k. : ..;v •, o Jt: ucoxjIx 



9 


large, or superintendent of a school division or county, is 
left to the discretion of the Chief Superintendent of Schools. 


Qualifications of superintendents . In the year 1919, 
Mr* G. W. Gorman, the Chief Inspector of Schools, outlined 
the qualifications necessary for school inspectors. 

Those eligible for appointment to the position of 
inspector of schools for the Province of Alberta are 
required to be graduates of universities of recognized 
standing, and to have completed a course of professional 
training meeting the demands of the Department of 
Education, for the issuing of first class certificates. 
Successful and extended teaching experience in the 
public schools of the province is a further requisite. 
Appointments are provisional. At the end of two years, 
provided services have been satisfactory, the appoint¬ 
ments are made permanent by the Minister of Education. 

In addition to having broad academic and professional 
training, supplemented by varied teaching experience, our 
inspectors should possess also personal qualifications 
which fit them for the type of public service which has 
come to be part of the work of inspection. Many of the 
members of the present public school inspection staff 
have been taken from principalships of schools in the 
smaller centres, in which positions they were responsible 
for the direction and supervision of the work of all the 
public school grades, in addition to the classroom 
instruction of the advanced pupils. It will thus be seen 
that these men are familiar with the rural and elementary 
school problem through their work as teachers. It is of 
the greatest importance that inspectors should possess 
this background of experience in order that they may have 
the mental perspective necessary to insure insight and 
sound judgment in dealing with a variety of conditions 
and problems, and so readily adjust their thinking and 
procedure to the sane application of educational policy.1 


W. Gorman, n Report of Chief Superintendents of 
Schools," Fourteenth Annual Report . 1919 . Department of 
Education, p a 47, Edmonton: King ! s Printer, 1920. 













10 


During this investigation, the foregoing statement of 
necessary qualifications was submitted to Mr* W. E* Frame, 
Chief Superintendent of Schools, with a view to determining 
the extent to which present criteria for selection of super¬ 
intendents may have changed from those in effect in 1919* 

In reviewing Mr. Gorman’s statement of qualifications, Mr* 
Frame wrote as follows: 

At the present time, we prefer to take on our 
strength people with two degrees which involve a study 
of content courses offered in our public and high 
schools and also professional training as educationists. 

We are particularly anxious that people coming on our 
staff have a good grounding in philosophy, child 
psychology and administration* Although we do not 
demand it, we are always happy if we can get a reason¬ 
able number of superintendents who have specialized in 
elementary and junior high school pedagogy...we always 
look for people who have served successfully as principals 
or administrators in some type of educational work. 

All persons entering the civil service are on one 
year’s probation; in other words, I am pointing out that 
this probationary period is imposed by the personnel 
department and not by the Department of Education. I 
cannot recall a case of where a superintendent has had 
his appointment terminated with us at the end of the 
first year, although I suppose it could take place. At 
the end of the first year, the Department of Education, 
if it is satisfied with a new appointee’s work, recommends 
permanent appointment. 

We place great stress on the personal qualities of the 
people appointed to the supervisory staff, though the 
terms of reference are very vague -- almost non-existent. 

A superintendent by sheer personality and ability as an 
administrator has to sell himself to the board or educa¬ 
tional committee with which he is working* 

Every now and then, of recent years, we have been able 
to appoint people who have been principals of large junior 




\':o o":I© 


■ 


■ 

















<! 

■ 

'' " . ;■ *■ ■: ; ■" 

* 

t 

* 

_ ■ 

»*. 

• ■■ ■ 

„ 

. 

, 

* 

. 

' ' - ' • - '■ , ■ / V. • ' ■ 

, 

< r.rv • -kn - s ; 

.. ;. , r ; = :.: -v.;:. ; </ • ' " ■' ■ ' 

*■ , '• . ’ • 1 ' 

' , . 1 ■ ■ -■ 

' 







■ 




11 


high schools or schools serving pupils of the first nine 
grades* Such persons have a better grasp of the elemen¬ 
tary and junior high school work than do persons who 
have been working in the high school field for a consider¬ 
able period* 

During the last ten years a great deal of central¬ 
ization of school services has taken place with the 
result that there are now only about six hundred isolated, 
one-room schools in the Province* This means that recent 
appointees may not be as conversant with rural conditions 
as were their predecessors; however, the change in 
conditions resulting in a greatly decreased number of one- 
room, rural schools, has rendered this experience less 
necessary* 

I might add that superintendents have fewer independ¬ 
ent school districts under their jurisdiction than was 
the case formerly. Many of these people deal with one 
group only, that of the divisional board or the school 
committee of the county council. 2 

In commenting upon the change in personal and academic 
qualifications required in the role presently played by 
superintendents, Mr. Frame outlines the changing functions 
of supervisory personnel. These changing functions have 
called for a re-assessment of the criteria for selection, 
in order that personnel may be better suited to discharge 
their responsibilities. 

Before the advent of large units of administration, 
the inspector of schools was the representative of the 
Department of Education, and in addition to endeavoring 
to improve instruction, his duty was to see that The 


Letter to the investigator from W. E* Frame, Chief 
Superintendent of Schools, Department of Education, Province 
of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, dated April 29, 1957* 




/ ' oc-.-.vv 

_ • - 


8. f : ? -V' r V V" ' 


; :u; ' 

. 


! ; •/ 





< ■ ■ 

' 


_ , ' - *• ‘ ’ 

r '.o 'o CiT * - •' * : 

I ©rioa *io h*:p; 

. 

■ 

eo ; ■ V ; 

' 

‘ '\ r :, • r o<" ! 

< ' " ' 

» 


' : ’ 1 





♦ * ■ 

: < 


‘.'"r 4 :^.v:vc 3‘tM.’c 

, 


' 

' 

< :' ■' • ‘ 





12 


School Act and the Regulations of the Department were 
carried out. Two important changes have taken place: 

(a) Although he is never referred to as such, the 
superintendent should be -- and usually is — the chief 
executive of the area in which he works. It is possible 
that many trustees and committee councillors voluntarily 
regard him as such, without actually being aware of the 
fact. It would be unwise of a superintendent to insist 
on the designation in his territory, in spite of the 
fact that he performs all of the duties pertaining to a 
chief executive. (b) The superintendent must avoid, at 
all costs, allowing his board to get the impression that 
he is anything in the nature of a watchdog allocated to 
a division to see that the wishes of the department are 
being carried out. It is true that he is an employee of 
the Department and his final loyalty should be to it in 
the last instance, but until that point is reached he 
should behave toward his board or committee much the same 
as a locally-appointed-and-paid superintendent working 
in the city would regard his board. He is the advisor 
of the board or committee and should be loyal to it 
unless a serious situation, highly detrimental to the 
proper functioning of educational services within the 
area, should arise.3 


Main functions of superintendents . The main functions 
of present superintendents resolve themselves into three main 
categories, namely, regulatory, supervisory, and administrative. 
Prior to the formation of school divisions and counties, the 
regulatory function received much more emphasis than at 
present. The growth of educational competence among boards 
and their employees probably accounts, in part, for the 
changing emphasis to the supervisory and administrative 
functions required of superintendents. Mr. Frame emphasizes 



E. Frame, op . cit . 










, 

-- 

. 


, 


- 

„ 


. ■ ' 





. •: 

■ 




13 


this aspect in the following remarks: 

Under present conditions the superintendent is much 
more concerned with the improvement of instruction than 
his prototype, the inspector. The latter used to have 
such a large territory that very often the best he could 
do was to visit his schools once a year, evaluate the 
work being done and give the teachers concerned a few 
words of advice. The Department has endeavored to 
reduce the number of teachers for whom the superintend¬ 
ent is responsible to a sufficiently low number to enable 
him to pay more frequent visits to classrooms — this in 
spite of the additional administrative work that he is 
called upon to do. The men presently on our force usu¬ 
ally give the teachers the impression that they, together 
with the principals, are partners in endeavoring to make 
the teaching service more effective. This accounts for 
the holding of institutes, workshops, and co-operative 
supervisory projects within the area, the object of which 
is to work together to discover areas of weaknesses and 
then work out ways and means of improving them. It is 
my opinion that the superintendent should subtly endeavor 
to make something more than administrators and legislators 
out of his trustees and councillors. Without alloi/ing 
them to become aware of it, and without making himself 
tiresome, he should keep before them the fact that they 
are educators. It is a good plan for a superintendent 
to keep a folder for each trustee or councillor and 
place in it, from time to time, information concerning 
educational developments. From time to time this infor¬ 
mation that he volunteers may fall on deaf ears, but 
sooner or later these people become more aware of the 
importance and the real nature of the work that they are 
doing, i.e., maintaining an effective educational service 
for the welfare of the children of the area. 

The superintendent must always make his board or 
committee aware of their responsibility to their elect¬ 
ors by virtue of being selected by their fellow citizens 
to direct the proper educational service. The super¬ 
intendent, as their technical advisor, has a great 
responsibility, that of continually making the trustees 
and councillors aware of the authority that rests in 
their hands. In carrying out this duty he should, if he 
sees the board about to do something that is contrary to 
The School Act or the Regulations, draw this to their 
attention, but after having made sure that they under- 








14 


stand the situation he should not continue to nag them 
if they should decide to disagree with him. Theirs is 
the final responsibility to act. The superintendent has 
done his duty when he gives his advice. 

Although the superintendent in an ideal situation is 
the senior administrative officer (without bearing the 
title), he should not allow himself to become too in¬ 
volved in low-level administration. In this capacity 
he should work on the policy level and allow persons 
hired for the purpose to do the detail work. He should 
endeavor to arrange his services so as to be able to 
spend as much time as possible on supervisory work, as 
that is the field in which his specialty lies. 4 

Such then, are the apparent and hidden qualifications 
sought for in superintendents. On October 1, 1954, the 
Department of Education in Alberta issued a formal mimeo¬ 
graphed page entitled, "Qualifications Expected of Candidates 
for the Position of Superintendent of Schools." This 
statement mentions one or two qualifications not mentioned 
previously, and therefore, is worthy of note. The qualifi¬ 
cations mentioned are reproduced below. 

N.B. The qualifications outlined herein are for 
purposes of guidance only. Excellence in some respect 
may be deemed to compensate for under-qualification in 
some other, with the exception of items 1 and 2. 

A candidate for appointment as a superintendent of 
schools (Department of Education) shall be expected to 
present by way of qualifications the following: 

1. Possession of a permanent teaching certificate 
issued by the Minister of Education. 


4 

W. E. Frame, op . cit . 



* 


, 


;e c :r Tp r-V} 


C.i rfOi U; " B 

\ ' pfJC -> 0 J'. 




.. . •; v* ■ : - : iB' v ; : 

1 

' - : 

. , ■ . v v: ' ' '■ ' 

- 

* " ■ ' ' 




e . ; r • 


•" > 4 !• r* "..r " 'S :•: ■’ 

r r, x i ! M 0 r Jh'.f; r - 0 d ff '■> i■ 'Ci 



htoI u :0 ij o t i.’.u . ■ ' ' C’0!: I : & p : ' > ocio one uls 

„ 


. rr; - .■ ■ : ■ . . : ■ ; 






« * 

• 

0 




; 

■ 




n ' ' ■ 




, 

- • ■: ■ : :r>- r, ■■ ) ~ 

■ 


• 




'. ' i' U 


a lex ■ i 

' 

t .0':,' ro 




qi\ uo i'lid-'ior* t a\oso c) timam 

.moct b 

. 

' 

. 


«, ’ ■ 










15 


2. Possession of a bachelor^ degree from the University 
of Alberta, or the equivalent from some other Univer¬ 
sity. 

3. Possession of one year T s graduate study. 

(The combination of 1, 2, and 3, shall be such that 
the amount of professional as opposed to academic 
training shall equal two years.) 

4* Superior mental capacity as evidenced by quality of 
scholastic record. 

5. Teaching experience of not less than five years. 

6. Administrative experience as vice-principal, prin¬ 
cipal, or supervisory officer of not less than two 
years. 

7o Evidence of compatibility and assumption of respons¬ 
ibility in relation to community, professional, and 
social organizations.5 


How salaries affect selection . A comparison of the 
salaries of superintendents with those of the highest-paid 
principals and teachers, in each inspectorate, reveals that 
salary probably plays an important negative part in the 
selection of superintendents. The better-paid and more 
experienced principals and teachers face the possibility of 
a sizeable reduction in salary upon appointment to the super¬ 
intendency, if they should be appointed at the starting level 
of salaries set for superintendents. 


Department of Education, Province of Alberta, 
!, Qualifications Expected of Candidates for the Position of 
Superintendent of Schools.” Mimeographed page, October 1, 
1954. 























'V.'i 


.. • - 












ft: 


’ .: o o'' : o" ■' £ 








' 

a • ; ' 


‘ ‘ 1 , f ■ • /O : ■ 

• ■ b e a o e ' 

, . ' 






16 

For most teachers and principals, the opportunity to 
become superintendents comes after years of successful 
experience in teaching and administrative positions. The 
median age of appointment for the present supervisory staff 
was thirty-seven. By this time, eligible candidates are 
usually married men with families, who keenly feel the need 
for increased rather than decreased remuneration. The 
prospect of losing as much as thirteen hundred and ten 
dollars in yearly salary, (a loss reported by one super¬ 
intendent appointed in 1954 ), must act as a considerable 
deterrent to many who might otherwise like to fill the 
position. 

Table I shows that twenty-five of the present staff 
gained in salary upon appointment, whereas seventeen lost 
salary. Of recent years, salaries in the teaching profession 
have increased greatly. As a result, in the period between 
1950 and 1957, a majority of newly-appointed superintendents 
were reduced in salary in comparison with the salaries they 
had received in principalships. Although five men appointed 
in this period gained up to four hundred dollars upon 
appointment, nine others lost up to thirteen hundred and ten 
dollars. Of the latter group, two received reductions up to 
two hundred dollars a year; two were reduced between two 
hundred and four hundred dollars a year; one was reduced 





a■ a ."C,a 



« . 

, .. 




... , 4 *■••• v 






■■■ « ■ ‘ ■ 

* 


bc :>£7 orir 1 ' v= 





. ... . 

ssr yo 

■ 

' 




-•a . 

. ■ 

■ 

■ 

i f. &r .. ■ ' >■; >:• " ' 

. ■ , „, .... :. *i f 

* 

■ 


Ilf' 



. 

e, :.C 



r : . 

j t:cJ 1 y-...y : n: a-a i:yt. 

4 



:cy; : y:t?/ 2 v t ':q ■■ - - •• r : 

' '' ' ' ' : * 




■ ■: ’ c. 


' yii-y. : ■■ ’ - r >'- . O r :&\1 

« 

; .c r I- ---; 

, rvv ' ■ t 

r> , 

c" ; : ''■ecva';- 1 ! ; ('■■■ r,i ' . ■ *■■: -\jy t-v/'t-?; . • J .Coj ) :■ ,r o 

h^o-j .a s'Co /■ L-;,c. r ;:o-- centre: <r..c;o , l foetfbitttfi 




17 

between six hundred and eight hundred dollars a year; three 
were reduced between eight hundred and one thousand dollars 
a year, and one was reduced thirteen hundred and ten dollars 
a year, 

TABLE I 

GAINS AND LOSSES IN YEARLY SALARY REPORTED BY 
SUPERINTENDENTS AT APPOINTMENT a 


Year of 
Appointment 

Number Reporting 
Gains 

Number Reporting 
Losses 

$1 - $500 $501 

- $1200 

$1 - $600 $601 - $1400 

1930 - 

1939 

4 

2 

2 0 

1940 - 

1949 

7 

6 

5 1 

1950 - 

1957 

5 

0 

4 5 


a Data obtained from questionnaire responses 


A consideration of the salaries of superintendents in 
comparison with the salaries of the highest paid principal in 
each inspectorate in June, 1957, throws some further light 
upon the negating influence that salaries must play in the 
selection of superintendents. The salaries reported by 
superintendents in June, 1957, range from five thousand five 
hundred dollars to seven thousand three hundred and twenty 












>;■;/ V ; 

■ .V.;. ' --v- • ■ • ■■■ ' ■ ' 

• ■ : • ' • ' ‘ ' <' 

. • 


- 


- 

‘ 

rtl. 

„ 

- : ‘V t -:.«t 

, 

o » 







18 


dollars. At the same time, the salary range of the highest 
paid principals was between five thousand five hundred 
dollars, and eight thousand four hundred dollars. Five 
principals in divisions and counties earned salaries in ex* 
cess of the highest possible salary for superintendents in 
Alberta. Table II shows that in most inspectorates, the 
principalship is as well paid, or better paid, than the 
superintendency. There is little financial inducement for 
qualified men to accept positions as superintendents. 

TABLE II 

COMPARISON OF SUPERINTENDENTS 1 SALARIES WITH THE 
SALARY OF THE HIGHEST PAID PRINCIPAL IN EACH OF THE 
FORTY-SIX DIVISIONS AND COUNTIES, JUNE 30, 1957 a 


Yearly Salary 

Number of 
Superintendent s 

Number of 
Principals 

$5500 - $5999 

3 

9 

$6000 - $6499 

10 

14 

$6500 - $6999 

12 

11 

$7000 - $7499 

21 

7 

$7500 - $7999 


4 

$8000 - $8499 


1 


a 

One superintendent did not report his salary nor 
the salary of the highest paid principal. 









.J. ? ' - " '• " 

. 

* 






. 
















. 


*10 



, 









19 

In our present society, prestige is measured by both 
position and monetary reward. It is evident that, of recent 
years, the prestige of superintendents has suffered because 
of salary. An examination of Table III shows that forty- 
five percent of the reporting divisions had from one to 
eight teachers, or principals, in a higher salary category 
than the superintendent. There were sixty-one such higher- 
paid teachers and principals in the forty-seven areas. 

TABLE III 

TEACHERS AND PRINCIPALS EARNING HIGHER SALARIES 
THAN SUPERINTENDENTS IN JUNE, I 957 


Number of Teachers and Number of Inspectorates 

Principals Higher Paid in Which This Occurs 

Than the Superintendent 


1 


7 


2 


5 


3 


4 


4 


2 


5 2 
6 1 


8 


1 


Present methods of determining salaries for teaching 











' 




' ■ 


# 




























20 


personnel, in Alberta, allot certain basic amounts of money 
for different levels of training* The spread in basic salary 
between one year of training, and the degree level, is 
usually about twelve hundred dollars. A master ! s degree 
usually increases basic pay another five, or six hundred 
dollars. In addition, increments are provided for the years 
of teaching experience. These usually equal, or surpass, 
fifty percent of the basic rate payable. Laddering of 
increments, (providing one or more additional increments for 
each successive year of training completed), further works 
to the financial advantage of better-trained personnel. 
Allowance for the principals administrative and supervisory 
duties is commonly based upon the number of rooms under his 
jurisdiction. The greater the number of rooms, the greater 
the allowance* 

Who, then, is most likely to accept appointment? It 
seems that, unless superintendents* salaries are augmented, 
or unless candidates disregard financial loss, the most 
likely prospects will be younger men, who have not advanced 
too far along the increment ladder; men who have not 
completed too much advanced training, and men who are not 
administrators of large schools* For these, sizeable 
reductions in salary would not be necessary, upon joining 
the supervisory staff. 


. 

* 

, ■ - " 1 ' '■' ’ ' : * 

* 

■ 

■■■ '• VT< '• * 

a , - 

ri-; ;■■■■■ :■ ■ ■ • •’ ■ t ' 

* 

. 

t : 

, 

■ T - . 

, 







21 


Summary , Candidates for the superintendency must 
present a variety of qualifications. Although there are no 
formal examinations for candidates, each must be a university 
graduate, with at least a year of graduate study. Other 
requirements include a permanent teaching certificate, five 
years of successful teaching experience, and experience in 
administrative positions. 

Superintendents must present excellent personal and 
leadership qualities, in order that they may satisfactorily 
fill their implied positions as chief executive officers of 
large administrative units. Not only must they know what 
is outstanding in educational practice, but also, they 
must lead boards and teachers in recognizing and accepting 
these practices. 

Administrative ability of a high order is necessary, 
in order that the superintendent may function effectively 
with his board in setting, and activating, the policies 
governing all phases of education in the inspectorate. 

Superintendents must be competent in each of the 
three roles they play. They must interpret, and fulfill, 
their regulatory, supervisory, and administrative roles in 
a way that will satisfy their boards, and the public. They 
must be educational leaders, in all respects, in the area to 



. 

■ ■ ' ■ '■ « 

. 


- ■ 






v •' t 

* 

, - , • 

• ■ ■ ■ ■ 


, 














„ 


, 






22 


to which they are assigned. 

Since salaries play a negative role in the acquisition 
of the most highly-trained and experienced personnel for 
future superintendents, upward revisions seem necessary. 
Beginning salaries for superintendents should probably not 
be lower than the average of the salaries paid to the best- 
remunerated principals in the province. 

Although the salary scale for superintendents was 
revised a few months after the returns for this study were 
summarized, an examination of the top salary payable to 
superintendents, shows it to be still below the salaries of 
some of the highest-paid principals in divisions and counties. 









' - 

a ■ 

, 

' 







■ ■' r " 

' 

, : : < • r '■ ’ ' 

, ■ ‘ 

.1 

"to '■ -1 





CHAPTER IV 


LEGAL STATUS OP SUPERINTENDENTS 

The legal status of the superintendent is defined in 
law* The Alberta School Act defines his status as advisory, 
supervisory, and regulatory* 

In practice, however, the superintendent is called 
upon to perform many administrative duties in the area to 
which he is assigned* His status with his board, or school 
committee, often depends upon his ability to deal with 
administrative problems* 

As a civil servant, he must interpret the School Act, 
and the Regulations of the Department of Education as they 
apply to educational matters in his area* His status as a 
civil servant precludes public opposition to the policies 
laid down at the provincial level* 

Present legislation vests authority with regard to 
educational matters in the elected boards in areas to which 
superintendents are assigned* The superintendent performs 
his duties, other than inspection, subject to the direction 
of the board* Mr. W. E. Frame, Chief Superintendent of 
Schools, describes one aspect of the superintendents status 
as follows: 


. 

, , • 

ft' t 

ft 

. 

ft 

i) r :I ' • •".( i r Xo ; '■ ■ 0 

„ ' • . •' 

: - c.j r r <■ ’ r / ** L * d .1 : '■ 

: ■■■u: r ' if c : ' t r. ; ‘ t) - M 

t . 

t 





24 


Th© superintendent must always make his board or 
committee aware of their responsibility to their 
electors by virtue of being selected by their fellow 
citizens to direct the proper educational service. 

The superintendent, as their technical advisor, has a 
great responsibility, that of continually making the 
trustees or councillors aware of the authority that 
rests in their hands. In carrying out this duty, he 
should, if he sees the board about to do something 
that is contrary to the School Act or the Regulations, 
draw this to their attention, but after having made 
sure that they understand the situation he should not 
continue to nag them if they should decide to disagree 
with him. Theirs is the final responsibility to act. 

The superintendent has done his duty when he gives his 
advice.1 

The duties of the school superintendent in Alberta 
are given as follows, in Section 199 of the School Act: 

The superintendent shall,- 

(a) confer with the board of the division and advise 
the board concerning the educational problems and 
needs of the division; 

(b) attend all meetings of the board, and exercise, 
subject to the direction of the board, general 
supervision over all schools, teachers, property 
and services under the jurisdiction of the board; 

(c) assist the board in the discharge of its duties; 

(d) exercise the powers of an inspector of schools with 
respect to the total area to which he is assigned 
by the Minister; 

(e) confer with and advise the board of any non-divi- 
sional district in that area which has not appointed 
a superintendent concerning the educational problems 
and needs of the district.^ 


1 

Letter to the writer from W. E. Frame, Chief Super¬ 
intendent of Schools, dated April 29, 1957* 

2 

The School Act, Province of Alberta, 1952, Sec. 199* 





■■ '• «, 








» 

. 












■ 

: 

'' ' 

... .. ; v . ... 

■ 

. !:* 1 . 

4 


4 




- 


, 

e ?.a ;t 


f a a . 




25 


Other than the regulatory power assigned in sub¬ 
section (d) of the foregoing, it is evident that the primary 
duty of the superintendent is to confer with boards, and to 
advise them concerning educational problems and needs in 
his area. His general supervision over schools, teachers, 
property, and services in the division, is subject to the 
direction of the board. 


Nevertheless, in practice, the superintendent assumes 
responsibility in administrative and policy-forming matters. 
Mowat, in writing of the relationship of the superintendent 
to his board, has very clearly indicated this. 

While he is appointed and paid by the province, the 
superintendent rapidly develops a loyalty to and iden¬ 
tification with the board of the division to which he 
is assigned. School boards look upon him as a valued 
advisory officer, and frequently, as evidence of the 
high degree of confidence in which he is held, the 
superintendent in effect becomes the chief administrative 
officer of the board. In conjunction with other 
provincial personnel he plans attendance areas, arranges 
for surveys of building needs and organizes pupil 
transportation services; by resolution of the board he 
may hire and place teaching staff; in many other matters 
he may shape policy and put it into practice to the 
degree that he holds the confidence of his board.3 

It is becoming increasingly recognized that efficient 
operation of large administrative units such as the Alberta 
school division or county, is contingent upon intelligent, 
long-range planning. Further, there is a growing conviction 


^G-. L. Mowat, ”The School Superintendent in Alberta”, 
The Canadian Superintendent , Volume V, (May, 1957), P« 27. 





...r: 

r " ' 

• '• '' •• 
..... ■ e - V ' 

p _ • ' , ; 

, o: : ' ‘ «■' ’ : * 


^0; : :.'.-r:; oo ;■ ,.o oro" or ■■■■,•' 



• 

»■ ■ ' ■ ■ - 









"■ o:': ' y- ...' - 

\ •- . : 

iu: -r 4 ; o t 7 ‘ r ' oo.i 

a 

' 

o: •or;' o - ;j ;L:. o 

rooo : :o r:Tlo r'.C.;. : V r ;;J‘ ; :V ■: 

o .. o ■■ ■ .... • • " * v ■ ’ 

L £ AO- " ' , ’ 


< ’ ■■ ‘70 ‘ r ;i o • ' !“ . ■' • 








26 


that expert, professional advice is necessary in formu¬ 
lating long-range policies. Moreover, the idea that time, 
and knowledge of a professional nature are necessary in 
carrying out planning and policies, is becoming more current 
in the thinking of boards and school committees. It seems 
likely, therefore, that the close-working relationship 
presently existing between the board and its secretary, and 
the superintendent, will eventually create an arrangement 
whereby the superintendent and the secretary will become the 
strong, executive arm of elected boards. It seems essential 
that power and authority remain the prerogative of elected 
boards. Moreover, planning and policy should follow sound, 
professional advice. The implementation of planning and 
policy should, and does, fall upon the executive arm of the 
policy-setting body* It seems clear that the more the 
confidence of boards grows with regard to superintendents, 
the more likely it will be that superintendents will 
become chief executive officers of their Inspectorates. 

Would boards sooner accept superintendents as chief 
executive officers if they became locally, rather than 
provincialiy, employed? The possibility of having locally- 
appointed superintendents had been considered and rejected 
at the time of the formation of the large administrative 



. 





'■V, ‘V : ' '' - 


. ' • 


- ' ? 

< 



t ' 




, 

. 



, 

, 

■ 

t ' t 


• 

- • . :>• 



: 'J : 


* :•« r.\.‘ ■ L-" 


. 

i . 

- : 

■ 

. 







27 


units in Alberta*4 The present arrangement of provincially- 
employed supervisory personnel is widely accepted. However, 
the alternative is by no means forgotten. The possibility 
of employing superintendents locally is being discussed, 
from time to time, by both trustees and superintendents. 

Some of the disadvantages of the present arrangement 
may be summarized as follows. The main functions of present 
superintendents are advisory and supervisory. These are the 
purposes for which they are selected and specially trained. 
It is clear, however, from the replies of superintendents, 
that increasing demands are being made upon their time for 
the performance of administrative duties. As has been 
mentioned earlier, the esteem in which the board holds 
superintendents is very often dependent upon the skill with 
which they are able to attack and solve administrative 
problems. These problems may not be delegated at present 
for, by and large, neither the province, nor the school 
boards have provided superintendents with assistants. A 
further disadvantage arises from the civil service status of 
superintendents* Their civil service status precludes 
voicing of objections, publicly, with regard to provincial 


T. C. Byrne, n The Evolution of the Provincial 
Superintendent”, The Canadian Superintendent . Volume V, 
(May, 1957), p. 10. 





* ' 

r 

4 

* 

p 

■■ 

. 

♦ 


. 

„ ' "■ . t 








* 






28 

policies. They may freely voice these objections to the 
Department of Education, however. 

An advantage of having superintendents provincially- 
employed is that they are, more or less, removed from the 
pressures generated in boards and areas to which they are 
appointed. Prank, even critical evaluation of plans, 
policies, and trends is made possible. Under present 
arrangements, superintendents need not be compromised by 
concern regarding their futures. 

A further advantage of the present method of employing 
superintendents is that the Department of Education has 
become a focal point for good educational thinking and 
practice in the Province. The present supervisory staff has 
ample access to every form of assistance from the Department. 

The superintendent is mentioned in The School Act in 
many connections. Some of the more important sections are 
reviewed in the balance of this chapter. 

The board is obliged to consult the superintendent 
regarding educational problems and consider his recommend¬ 
ations. The board may then accept, or reject, these 
recommendations* Section 186, sub-section (b), of The 
School Act states: 












- 




? 

* 








« 



* 




• , . - „ .. • 'jfi'i 









29 


The board of a division shall,- 

(b) consult the superintendent concerning the educational 
problems and needs of the division and consider any 
recommendations which the superintendent may make with 
regard thereto*5 

The superintendent is required to hear any represen¬ 
tations regarding school buildings, furniture, equipment, 
and the betterment and extension of educational facilities 
in any divisional district* Section 190, sub-sections (c) 
and (i) state: 

The board of a divisional district,- 

(c) may make representations to the superintendent of 
the division as to the maintenance, repair and 
extension of the school and other buildings of the 
district and any furniture and equipment therein; 

(i) may make representations to the superintendent and 
to the divisional board as to the betterment or 
extension of the educations.1 facilities for residents 
of the district*^ 

A duty that is sometimes required of a superintendent 
of schools is that of official trustee* Mr* G-. W. Goman, 
former Chief Inspector of Schools, stated some of the 
conditions which led to the appointment of official trustees* 
Some of the reasons are still valid today. 

In some cases, owing to local jealousies, petty 
politics or general lack of interest in educational 
affairs, it is found necessary in order to conserve the 
educational interests of a community, to appoint an 
official trustee to temporarily administer the affairs 


5 6 

The School Act . Province of Alberta, 1952. Ibid . 











, 






' :i; : " 

- 


, 

■ 








■ • 




. 

„ 



? 

■ 

f 

„ 



e 






30 


of the school district. The procedure is adopted in 
extreme cases and only after a careful investigation of 
conditions has been made. This policy is necessary also 
when owing to careless administration districts become 
financially involved. As soon as its business affairs 
are in order, an early return to local control is sought 
by the official trustee ... This work requires tact, 
sound judgment and good business sense. It is now 
performed exclusively by our school inspectors and with¬ 
out added remuneration of any kind, or expense to the 
district concerned. The results obtained from their 
services in this capacity have been highly satisfactory. 
Thereby, the financial standing and the educational 
effectiveness of many schools have been vastly improved. 
Interested ratepayers have indicated their appreciation 
of the excellent services rendered by inspectors in this 
particular regard.7 


The legal status of the superintendent acting as an 


official trustee is given in Section 74 (a): 


(1) The Minister may appoint an official trustee to 
conduct the affairs of any district or division 

(a) who has the powers and duties conferred by this 
Act upon a board and its officers, and 

(b) who shall be remunerated out of the funds of the 
district or division or otherwise as the 
Lieutenant-Governor in Council may determine. 

(2) Upon the appointment of an official trustee the 
board, if any, of the district or division for which 
he is appointed ceases to hold office as such. 

(3) An official trustee may hold office until the date 
of the organization meeting of a board elected 
pursuant to an order of the Minister 

(4) Where an official trusteeship in a division is to be 
terminated the Minister by order may fix the days, 
times and places 

(a) for the receipt of nominations for the office of 
trustee for each subdivision, and 


^Department of Education, Province of Alberta, 
Fourteenth Annual Report . 1919 . King*s Printer, Edmonton, 
ISfiOi p7"6?. 






' 


_ : t . . 



















\ 






- ""..I: ,i 





. • 




;b 

‘ 











■ 









* 

* 

* 

•: i' tuiiv '>o " r o- •.‘‘"Bxn 

r 

, 










- 


„ 


■ ' J , . ; '■ .■ . i 









31 


(b) for the holding of any necessary election .8 
The superintendent of schools may recommend the 
establishment of a night school.^ He may not attempt to 
deprive a child of any educational advantage for failure to 
take part in religious instruction in a school.-^ Promo¬ 
tions made by teachers are subject to his approval.H His 
certificate as to the educational standing of a child is 
final and conclusive.^ Suspensions of pupils from school 
must be reported by principals to the superintendent.^ 

The superintendent may exempt children from school attend¬ 
ance for specified periods.14 h© may recommend the 
exclusion of mentally retarded children from school.^-5 He 
is designated as the attendance officer for the area of his 
inspectorate.!^ 


8 

The School Act , Province of Alberta, 1952. 

9 Ibid .. Section 394, (2). 

1 0 Ibid .. Section 391, (1), (2). 

~*~ hbid .. Section 3^5, (g)« 

12 Ibid .. Section 327. ^ Ibid .. Section 366 . 

14 Ibid., Sections 397, 398, 400. 

15 rbid., Section 182 (d). 

16 


Ibid .. Sections 401 - 409, inclusive 






























■ < 












■ * : 







• 






























• 




£ . ■ 





















■ 




























„ ■': ; r . 

- 







, ■ ■ • *. « . 





, , 


. 


. ■ V " " '■ ■ '• . ' - 












CHAPTER V 


TRAINING OF SUPERINTENDENTS 

This chapter presents the academic qualifications of 
superintendents prior to appointment and traces further 
training acquired following appointment. An analysis is 
made of the number of years superintendents had spent in 
academic training prior to appointment, together with the 
teaching certificates for which they had qualified* A 
comparison is made between the present academic qualifica¬ 
tions of superintendents and the academic qualifications of 
teaching personnel in forty-seven inspectorates. 

I. TRAINING PRIOR TO APPOINTMENT 

The most striking aspect of the training of super¬ 
intendents is the variation in academic training at the time 
of appointment. Figure 1 reveals that almost one-half (49 
per cent), were appointees who had attained one bachelor*s 
degree only. Ten per cent of the appointees had attained 
one master*s degree and one bachelor*s degree. This is the 
highest qualification that had been attained by any member 
of the present supervisory staff, prior to appointment. 

Table IV lists the actual degrees that had been attained by 
all superintendents prior to appointment. 




, 







~ 

, " 

~ 


. 






, 










33 

Many superintendents were engaged in further study 


at the time of appointment. It should be noted that neither 
Figure 1, nor Table IV account for periods of training that 
had been completed between degrees. 




One Two One One Master f s 

Bachelor ! s Bachelor ! s Master^ and one 
Degree Degrees Degree Bachelor*s 

Degree 


Qualifications at Appointment 


Figure 1® Academic qualifications of forty-seven 
Alberta superintendents at appointment. 

An analysis of the number of years that had been spent 
by superintendents in academic preparation beyond the grade 
twelve level, shows that some superintendents had spent twice 
as much time as others. Table V, on page 35* shows that 
although three superintendents had completed seven years of 
training prior to appointment, others had completed only 
three or four years. 


















’ ‘; . " • 

1 


. ' ' • 










;]■! rr*?. rS'i /.uf^s "'IA 


: • • ' . 








; rnO'^A ttOS.3 B'liM w* ? r. r.i Jsd'-;c4>£.(yu:..c..c^£>q0'C ■?; 






' 

■ :■ 

!|fv 

BV/O. 

n •• • 

t\'> ■ J3G 





'■ -A- L 




, *( 

__ 

■ 

* 











34 


TABLE IV 

ACADEMIC QUALIFICATIONS OF FORTY-SEVEN ALBERTA 
SUPERINTENDENTS AT APPOINTMENT 



Number of 


Degrees Held 

Superintendents 

Percentage 


Bachelor’s Degrees 



8 

17 

B •Ed• •••*•••••••• 

7 

15 

B.Sc. ••••••••••■• 

8 

17 


6 

13 

B*Sc. , B •Ed• •o • • • 

4 

8 

Master’s Degrees 

M.A* •(••••••••(• 

6 

13 

M.Sd* •••••••••••• 

3 

6 


Master’s and 
Bachelor’s Degrees 


M.A., 

B•Ed• ••••• 

1 

2 

M.A., 

B•Sc• ••• • • 

2 

4 

M.Edo, 

B « A • ••••• 

2 

4 



















35 


TABLE V 

YEARS OP ACADEMIC PREPARATION BEYOND GRADE TWELVE 

AT APPOINTMENT 


Years of Number of Percentage of 

Training Superintendents Superintendents 


3. 1 2 

4 . 13 28 

Between 4 and 3 . 2 4 

5 . ..... 12 26 

Between 5 and 6 ..... • 3 6 

6 . 12 26 

Between 6 and 7 • • • • • • 1 2 

7 . 3 6 


By allowing one-half year of training to each super¬ 
intendent who reports that his training status had been 
between two successive years, at the time of appointment, 
it is possible to calculate the approximate average number 
of years of training held at appointment by the super¬ 
intendents. This approximate average is five years. 

Since Department of Education policy states that 
excellence in some respect compensates for under-quali¬ 
fication in some other, it must be assumed that excellence 
in some other respect compensated for the lack of a full 
year of graduate study on the part of thirty-four percent 
of the appointees. 
















AO 










' 






: : 








or! ■ ,;vw ' 

. ■' 


ru,>e vOv'*’ 


cdtfp: 1 :01 




. 


;0 


;/§? v 8 


- 


I C 


■ j; .. 

O’". Oll'A-ir, riA •'S'.BO O'Oot-'nr'X ‘Xt l £;$0 ftXhOC* $$«t a 








36 

From Table VI it may be seen that nearly eighty-five 
per cent of the appointees held Professional, or equivalent, 
certificates at appointment. Only a few held the older 
First Class certificate. 


TABLE VI 

TEACHING CERTIFICATES HELD BY SUPERINTENDENTS 
AT APPOINTMENT 


Certificate Held 

Number of Superintendents 

Professional 

23 

High School 

10 

Academic 

6 

First Class 

8 


II. TRAINING FOLLOWING APPOINTMENT 

Seventy-five per cent of the responding superintendents 
have engaged in further study following appointment. The 
periods that have been devoted to this further training are 
shown in Figure 2. It is clear that sixty-one per cent of 
the superintendents have spent less than one year in further 
training following their appointments. Of these, twenty- 
five per cent have spent no further time in improving their 
training. The remainder have devoted from one to four years 
to further training. 







! -i 

ci. ro !>, 




: .6.0' $£•' 

. ’o.o ; 

« 6 ■; 

o •: 6 '... 

:7 f 666 



;trr : c 6" ( ■ : 6 


r; 






' 






" 





- fi. . 6 . -i ,.:'6 : ;• . 6 : \6 6;0-O 6 •' ' ’ ' 0.0 1 0- 6 ■ r - - !'CV i'V^ 

.0:6 or . o * ■ : ■ 6 ^ ? ' 6 0 o ‘ 0 ■ " r\- 6 

' ■ . •' • r .; • 

* 

i ' : ■ • 

■ „ 

; 

* 

■ ‘ 







37 

Table V, on page 35, shows that thirty-four percent 


of the superintendents had spent six years, or more, in 
training prior to appointment. This may account, in part, 
for the fact that one-quarter of the superintendents have 
taken no further training following appointment. Super¬ 
intendents with six or more years of training may have felt 
that this training was sufficient for the position. 

w 20 H 


•p 



ABODE 
Years Spent in Improving Training 
A - None 

B - Up to One Year 
C - Between One and Two Years 
D - Between Two and Three Years 
E - Between Three and Four Years 

Figure 2. Years spent by superintendents in improving 
their training following appointment. 

How does the present training of superintendents 
compare with the training they had at appointment? Figure 3 
shows, that although forty-nine percent of the super¬ 
intendents had qualified for only one bachelor T s degree at 


















<D 


















; 



’ 




*«) ).L 




38 


appointment, at present, only twenty-four percent of the 
superintendents remain in this qualification category. The 
percentage of superintendents who presently hold two 
bachelor*s degrees is nearly double the former percentage. 
Although some increases are evident at the master*s degree 
level, and beyond, Figure 3 shows that sixty-one percent of 
the supervisory staff have not qualified for degrees beyond 
the bachelor ! s level. 



Degrees at Appointment and at Present 

A.- One Bachelor’s Degree 
Be* Two Bachelor’s Degrees 

C. - One Master’s Degree 

D. - One Master’s and One Bachelor’s Degree 

E. - Two Master’s Degrees 

F. - One Doctor’s and One Bachelor’s Degree 

Figure 3. A comparison of the academic qualifications 
of superintendents at appointment and at present* 


Table VII shows the degrees held by forty-seven 
Alberta superintendents in June, 1957# 




















T s 







-J5 


! s 












39 


TABLE VII 

ACADEMIC QUALIFICATIONS OF FORTY-SEVEN ALBERTA 
SUPERINTENDENTS IN JUNE 1957 


Degrees Held 


Number of Superintendents 


Bachelor's Degrees 


B.A. 1 

B.Ed. ... 5 

B.Sc. 5 

B.A., B.Ed. 12 

B.Sc., B.Ed. .. 5 

B.A., B.Paed. ••••••••••••• 1 

Master's Degrees 

M.A. 4 

M.Ed. 4 

M.A., M.Ed. .. 1 

Master f s and 
Bachelor 1 s Degrees 

M.A., B.Ed. . 2 

M.A., B.Sc. 1 

M.Ed.,B.A. 2 

M.Ed., B.Sc. 2 

Doctor's and 
Bachelor's Degrees 

D.Edo, B.Sc. ............. 1 

Not Reported ••••••••••••« 1 

































1 





40 


How do the present qualifications of superintendents 
compare with the qualifications of principals? In almost 
two-thirds of the inspectorates, the superintendents 1 
qualifications compare very well* There are some principals, 
however, who are better qualified academically than their 
superintendent* Table VIII shows that in seventeen 
inspectorates, one or more principals have attained higher 
academic qualifications than the superintendent* 

TABLE VIII 

NUMBER OP INSPECTORATES IN WHICH ONE OR MORE PRINCIPALS 
HAVE ATTAINED HIGHER ACADEMIC QUALIFICATIONS 
THAN THE SUPERINTENDENT IN JUNE, 1957 


Number of Principals with Number of Inspectorates 

Higher Academic Qualifications in Which This Occurs 

Than the Superintendent 


One Principal 

10 

Two Principals 

5 

Three Principals 

2 


Table VIII shows that in June, 1957, twenty-six 
principals, in seventeen inspectorates, had higher academic 
qualifications than the superintendent assigned to the 
inspectorate. 







' 

t , ■ . . ;: . ' 

* 

' ■ 

■ 


y 






i 










* 

■ .. a ■ ~ ; 


C 0 " t ' 

* 









41 


Some teachers have also attained higher academic 
qualifications than the superintendent. 

Table IX shows that in June, 1957, twenty-five 
teachers, in ten inspectorates, had higher academic qualifi¬ 
cations than the superintendent. 

TABLE IX 

NUMBER OF INSPECTORATES IN WHICH ONE OR MORE TEACHERS 
HAVE ATTAINED HIGHER ACADEMIC QUALIFICATIONS 
THAN THE SUPERINTENDENT IN JUNE, 1957 


Number of Teachers with Number of Inspectorates in 

Higher Academic Qualifications Which This Occurs 

Than the Superintendent 

One Teacher 3 

Two Teachers 4 

Three Teachers 1 

Four Teachers 1 

Seven Teachers 1 


It is clear that, in many inspectorates, superintend¬ 
ents have been assigned to supervise and direct the work of 
personnel who have attained higher academic qualifications 
than the supervisor. The effect of this anomaly has not 
been investigated. 











CHAPTER VI 


TEACHING AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPERIENCE 

This chapter traces the teaching and administrative 
experience of superintendents prior to appointment. Their 
experience has been categorized as follows: in one-room 
schools; in rural consolidated schools; in village schools; 
in town schools, and in city schools. Their administrative 
experience is traced through the types of schools in which 
they had served, and the number of classrooms they had 
administered. 

I. TEACHING EXPERIENCE 

One - room schools . Only thirty percent of the super¬ 
visory staff had not taught in one-room schools prior to 
appointment. The rest report a wide variation in the grades 
that had been taught. Some superintendents report elemen¬ 
tary grades only. Others report combined elementary and 
junior high school grades. Still others report combined 
elementary, junior high school, and senior high school grades. 

Figure 4 illustrates the number of years super¬ 
intendents had spent teaching in one-room schools prior to 
appointment. It is evident from this figure, that two- 






,0 1 S O- . :>C ■ ".‘l 






- ,■ J 


■ - 


; 


n; ; , f'■ f. ; ; '■ C- 



thirds of the staff had spent a relatively short period of 
one to three years in this type of school. Only nine men 
had spent more than four years in one-room schools. 


03 



1-3 4-6 7-9 10-12 

Years of Teaching Experience 


Figure 4. Teaching experience of Alberta super¬ 
intendents in one-room schools. 

Rural consolidated schools . Nearly eighty per cent 
of the present supervisory staff had not taught in rural 
consolidated schools prior to appointment. Nine men had 
taught one to three years, and one had taught over seven 
years in this type of school. 

Village schools , Seventy-two per cent of the present 
supervisory staff had acquired teaching experience in village 
schools. It is evident, from Figure 5, that the experience 
of more than half of these had been limited to a short 
period of one to three years. Others had taught from four 
years to over twelve years in village schools prior to 
appointment. 






















44 


Twenty-five per cent of the supervisory staff had 
taught at two different grade levels in village schools• The 
experience of these men has been included at both levels in 
Figure 6 . 



1-3 4-6 7-9 10-12 Over 12 

Years of Teaching Experience 

Figure 5* Teaching experience of Alberta super¬ 
intendents in village schools. 



1-6 1-9 7-9 7-12 10-12 

Grade Levels 

Figure 6 . Grade levels at which Alberta super¬ 
intendents gained their experience in village schools. 







' 






( 

■ 








-A 









- 


« . ' ; " ' *: e ;?o : ■ : d 


d 










45 

Figure 6 shows that the teaching experience of super¬ 
intendents, in village schools, had been concentrated at 
the junior and senior high school levels. 

Town schools . Sixty-four percent of the supervisory 
staff had had experience in town schools, prior to appoint¬ 
ment. Figure 7 shows that this experience had been almost 
exclusively acquired in senior high school grades. 



1-6 7-9 7-12 10-12 


Grade Levels 

Figure 7. Grade levels taught by Alberta super¬ 
intendents in town schools. 

Figure 8 shows that some superintendents had had 
lengthy teaching service in town schools, prior to appoint¬ 
ment. Seventeen of the supervisory staff had taught more 
than seven years in this type of school* Two of these had 
taught more than twelve years. Fourteen, however, had 







" ' ’ C * ' 

* 


. • •' • ? 

. 





- • .-J 

l 






- 

. 









had fewer than six years of teaching experience in town 
schools, prior to appointment. 


46 



Years of Teaching Experience 

Figure 8. Teaching experience of Alberta super¬ 
intendents in town schools„ 


City schools . Just over fifty per cent of the 
superintendents had had teaching experience in city schools, 
prior to appointment. Figure 9 illustrates this experience. 


CO 

-P 

ft © 

o r d 

C2 

© 

© -p 

h a 
S ft 

B u 

is; <d 
ft 
3 
CO 


16 

12 

8 


II 


1-3 


4-6 


7-9 10-12 


Years of Teaching Experience 

Figure 9. Teaching experience of Alberta super¬ 
intendents in city schools. 



























• ~ ■ 










• . 












. - r 








- 

' 


- 


♦ 

te 





47 


Figure 9 shows that most of the superintendents, who 
had taught in cities, had done so for short periods of one 
to three years. Figure 10 shows that, once again, the 
preponderance of teaching time in cities had been spent at 
the junior and senior high school level. 


GO 

-p 


G 

<H <d 

o 

G 

U <D 
<D 43 


& C 
© 



Grade Levels 

Figure 10. Grade levels taught by Alberta super¬ 
intendents in city schools. 


Conclusions . Although some service is reported at 
all grade levels in the different types of schools, it is 
apparent that the present supervisory staff has been chosen 
mainly from men who had spent the major portion of their 
teaching time in junior and senior high school grades. This 
is understandable, since administrative experience is 
expected as a qualification for the position of superintend¬ 
ent, and this experience is gained mainly in principalships. 
A problem is posed by this circumstance. 
















. 


. 








„ 


- 






: '-' J T s' • >;t 


























0 ' 




* 








. . ' - • „ ' 

, 










48 


Following appointment, most superintendents find that 
the preponderance of their duties and responsibilities in 
instruction, and in aiding teachers, lie in the elementary 
and junior high school grades. Since backgrounds of the 
majority of superintendents suggest administrative capability 
and competency in high school work, it appears that for many, 
appointment brings duties and responsibilities for which their 
past classroom experience has given little preparation. 

II. ADMINISTRATIVE EXPERIENCE 

The present supervisory staff has been chosen largely 
from persons who had served in various administrative 
capacities in Alberta schools. Only six superintendents had 
not had experience as principals prior to appointment, 
although two of these six had filled vice-principalships. 

Some had filled several administrative positions. Sixteen 
had filled two such positions; four had filled three, and 
one had filled five. 

Figure 11 clearly indicates a village and town school 
background in administration for most of the present super¬ 
visory staff. In this figure, all administrative positions 
that had been held by superintendents in each type of school, 
are totaled. In interpreting Figure 11, it should be 
remembered that some superintendents had filled several 


~ 

* 

. , 

, 

. 

' 

, 

a 

, 

. 

- 

- 

t- 

* 

' V • , . f'j ‘ ' . ;j C : r. ' 


49 

administrative positions prior to appointment. The adminis¬ 


trative positions included in Figure 11 are the principal- 
ship, vice-principalship, assistant principalship, and 
subject supervisor. 



None Rural Cities Villages Towns 

Consolidations 

Administrative Positions Held 

Figure 11. Administrative background of Alberta 
superintendents. 


Figure 11 shows that approximately eighty per cent of 
the administrative positions that had been held by super¬ 
intendents prior to appointment, had been held in villages 
and towns. 

What size of schools had been administered by 
superintendents prior to appointment? Table X shows that 
twenty-three of the forty-seven reporting superintendents 
had been principals of schools of four to ten rooms. The 
average number of rooms that had been administered by this 














* 


;! •• ■ ; ry . .f vv| 








50 


TABLE X 

NUMBER OP CLASSROOMS ADMINISTERED BY PRINCIPALS 
PRIOR TO APPOINTMENT AS SUPERINTENDENTS 


Number of Rooms 
Supervised 


Number of Superintendents 
With This Background 


0 

4 


7 

8 
9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

Over 20 


6 

1 

3 

7 

3 

7 

1 

1 

3 

3 

1 

2 

2 

1 

3 


3 
















































51 

group was just under seven* Another fifteen superintendents 
had been in charge of schools with twelve to eighteen rooms. 
The average number of rooms that had been administered by 
this group was just under fifteen. The remaining three 
superintendents had been principals of schools with over 
twenty rooms. 

Prom the foregoing data, it may be deduced that sixty- 
one per cent of the present supervisory staff either had not 
served as principals prior to appointment, or else that their 
experience in principalships had been limited to schools of 
ten rooms or under. 



* 

* 

^evo ’\o r. _f r.-'•;> --r:-,* rc-.v ri^d '-r.'.O^vs 

* 

- ' 

r ?: Vr :-■ ;■•• a.u? - : o x - aJ: . y rs ocv *. 

...r: .-Cr; " . ' " ' ' ' V:... 

* ; ■ 



CHAPTER VII 


DUTIES OP SUPERINTENDENTS 

This chapter deals with ten duties which broadly 
encompass the work of superintendents. The ten duties are 
analyzed in three ways. First, an analysis is made of the 
importance superintendents attach to the duties. Next, an 
analysis is made of the time that superintendents spend in 
the performance of each duty. Finally, the percentage of 
time superintendents spend in the performance of each duty 
is calculated. In these analyses, a normal year is taken 
as the standard. 

Forty-seven superintendents estimated the order of 
importance of the ten duties. However, only forty-five 
ranked the duties from the standpoint of the time required 
to perform each, and only forty-two estimated the percentage 
of time spent in performing each duty. 

Supervision of instruction . Supervision of instruction 
here relates to the activities of superintendents during 
classroom visitations. This duty relates to all activities 
promoting the improvement of the teaching and learning 
situation in individual classrooms. 


Supervision of instruction is the duty that is most 




■! j ■ : . '■ • , ■ ' ; 

'■t '•.‘•ioq'.u'e J'r 

'..0 f ::l btr '■?. Hi • ■ ■ - J;; ' 

. : * 

. ■ 

- v £ ;;’■ ■■ • p* v erfXo '• ;i lo daxcr-bnBch: sv..'lo rr;o\r 
- ' y\, . y : • ' ' * '• 

. 

• rr. r r- py [, ■: • - 

* 

i\> i ny;.: ^ytib ... y &.!: -yy j-uyjnab '*.0 ao.i iJ: vy:yqiR< 



53 


uniformly ranked by the superintendents, not only with 
regard to its importance, but also with regard to the time 
required for its performance. 

Figure 12 indicates that over ninety percent of the 
superintendents regard supervision of instruction as first 
in importance as a duty. Moreover, only one of the super¬ 
intendents places this duty outside the first two ranks of 
importance. 

Sixty-nine percent of the supervisory staff state 
that supervision of instruction takes more of their time 
than any other duty. No superintendents rank this duty 
outside the first three ranks from the standpoint of time 
required for its performance. 

The discrepancy between the superintendents’ estim¬ 
ates of the importance of supervision, and the time they 
spend in its performance, might suggest that pressure of 
other duties is preventing some superintendents from 
spending as much time in supervision as might be required. 

In interpreting Figure 12, it should be noted that 
superintendents ranked ten of their duties: first, according 
to their estimates of the importance of the duties; second. 


, 






. V ■ 

-’V ■ ■■ C : ■ ' 'S ' ■ 

. 




• 



, 


, • • 

■ 

« 

: 

. 


r-^bcn ■' • qsre • t ; 

■ : '' ' 5 ' 


* 


, . . 



















54 


according to their estimates of the time required for the 
performance of the duties. The duties were ranked in 
descending order of Importance, from one, to ten. 



Ranks Assigned to This Duty 

Figure 12. Supervision of instruction, as ranked by 
superintendents with respect to the importance they attach 
to this duty and the time they spend in its performance. 

Table XI shows that more than half of the supervisory 
staff spend less than thirty per cent of their time in the 
supervision of instruction. The remainder spend between 
thirty and fifty-five per cent of their time in supervision. 

Table XII shows that, in 1956 , fifty-five Alberta 
superintendents spent 4 , 453.5 days in supervision, out of 










* 

„ • , 




. .... £ . - | 

. 

v : 

■ ^ j: ' t 

• ' *Z L \ 







55 

a total of 14,616.5 working days.^ This was 30.4 per cent 
of their time spent in supervision. The superintendents 
surveyed during this investigation report an average of 
thirty-two percent of their time spent in supervision. 

TABLE XI 

PERCENTAGE OP TIME SPENT BY FORTY-TWO ALBERTA 
SUPERINTENDENTS IN SUPERVISION OP INSTRUCTION® 


Percentage of Time Spent 

Number of Superintendents 

11 - 

20 . 

3 

21 - 

50 . 

23 

31 - 

40 . 

11 

41 - 

50 . 

4 

Over 

50 . 

1 


a Five superintendents did not report on this item. 


In - service training . This duty is distinguished 
from supervision of instruction in one way. In-service 


X Pifty- First A nnual Report , 1956 . Department of 
Education, Province of Alberta, Edmonton: Queen’s Printer, 
1957. P. 13. 

























56 


TABLE XII 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK OF FIFTY-FIVE ALBERTA SUPERINTENDENTS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDING JUNE 30 , 1956 * 


Duties 

Total Days 

Average 

Number of days spent in work of 
supervision. . . 

4 , 453.50 

80.97 

Number of days spent in investi¬ 
gation or administrative work 

2 , 522.50 

45.86 

Performance of duties as official 
trustee .. ..... 

165.00 

3.00 

Attendance work ...... 

233.75 

4.25 

Examination work for Department ». 

80. 25 

1.46 

Reports, correspondence, office 
duties ..... 

4,531.00 

82.38 

Special work for Department other 
than above 

400.00 

7.27 

Attending meetings of Divisional 
boards ... o o.. 

1,059.25 

19.26 

Attendance at conventions, field 
days, sub-divisional (annual) 

848.00 

15.42 

Curriculum work for Department 0 .. 

61.00 

1.11 


262.25 

4.77 

Total 

14,616.50 

265.75 


^Fifty-First Annual Report, 1956 . Department of 
Education, Province of Alberta, Edmonton: Queen's Printer, 
1957. P. 15. 























57 


training is here taken to mean group activities involving 
superintendents and teachers. Conventions, institutes, 
work with principals 1 associations, and co-operative super¬ 
intendent-staff projects are included. 


Figure 13 shows that thirty-one superintendents rank 
in-service training as second in importance among their 
duties. Others rank it from first to seventh in importance. 
The rank of this duty with respect to the time it requires, 
is estimated by different superintendents to lie between 
the third and tenth ranks. Most men, however, place it 
third, fourth, or fifth. Again, there is a wide variation 
between the importance rating of this duty, and the time 
superintendents spend in its performance. 


GO 

■p 

© 

o £ 
© 
U -P 
© £ 
,Q tH 
S Jh 

3 © 

£3 pH 

do 


40i 


30 ■ 
20 - 
10 - 
0 


1 2 


dZD 


Importance 
Time Required 



Ranks assigned to this Duty 

Figure 13. In-service training, as ranked by super¬ 
intendents with respect to the importance they attach to 
this duty, and the time they spend in its performance. 









, 

' 

' . - - ■ 


. . \ ■ ~ ■' '' ■ 

_ 

# 

■; .. . • 


. •. •• ■ i ■' " :'v’ 


< ■ ’ 


r : * •') v •' • ; . - >' - ' 

■ * 

. 






■ 









c • ? 












. " 

Y 'Y.f.:' ; . • Y'iY' ' < >'t 

. 





58 

Table XIII Illustrates that ninety per cent of the 
reporting superintendents spend ten per cent, or less, of 
their time in in-service training. The average percentage 
of time superintendents spend in the performance of this 
duty is eight per cent. 


TABLE XIII 

PERCENTAGE OF TIME SPENT BY FORTY-TWO ALBERTA 
SUPERINTENDENTS IN IN-SERVICE TRAINING 


Percentage of Time Spent 

Number of Superintendents 

# 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

o 

H 

1 

H 

38 

11-20 .. 

2 

21-30 . 

2 


Public relations . Public relations includes advice 
and information to parents and teachers. It is evident, 
from Figure 14, that superintendents vary in their estimates 
of the importance of public relations. Most superintendents 
place it third, fourth, or fifth in importance as a duty. 

No pattern emerges from the superintendents* ranking 
of public relations with respect to the time they spend in 
its performance. Figure 15, however, illustrates that more 
than half of the men spend less than five per cent of their 
time in this duty. 

















59 


w 

-p 


© 

O r O 
P 
P © 
© -P 

& p 
b *h 

M * 

s © 

ft 

p 

CO 


15 

10 

5 

0 


Importance 
Time Required 


n ru i iUldLl J 


123456789 10 


Ranks Assigned to This Duty 

Figure 14* Public relations, as ranked by super¬ 
intendents with respect to the importance they attach to 
this duty, and the time they spend in its performance. 



Percentage of Time 

Figure 15, Percentage of time superintendents 
spend in public relations. 

































:: ■ ■' ■. - t l 


■ • 


, 







jjd'-j 


, _ 

» Rfl "■ * '• 









60 


Organization of the units of the s chool system . 

This duty includes the following: implementation of changes 
in board policies; planning changes in attendance areas; 
consultation with principals with regard to grade placements 
of new teachers, and courses to be offered by them; planning 
and implementation of services in special subject areas; 
implementation of division-wide programs, such as testing 
programs* 

Figure 16 shows that opinions of superintendents vary 
extensively with respect to the importance of this duty, 
even though forty percent of the supervisory staff rank it 
third, or fourth, in importance. 

The ranks superintendents assign to this duty, with 
respect to the time required for its performance, also shows 
diversity, No distinct pattern is evident. Superintendents 
in different areas are spending varying amounts of time in 
the organization of the units of the school system. 

Figure 17 shows that over four-fifths of the super¬ 
visory staff spend up to ten percent of their time in the 
performance of this duty. The remainder spend between 
eleven and twenty percent. It is evident that some super¬ 
intendents spend four times as much time as others in the 
organization of the units of the school system. 






, 


: 


: 

„ 


* 










, 




t . ' 

» 

„ - 

~ . , '• . 

. 

* 

. 





61 



Ranks assigned to This Duty 

Figure 16 . Organization of the units of the school 
system, as ranked by superintendents with respect to the 
importance they attach to this duty, and the time they 
spend in its performance. 



Percentage of Time 

Figure 17. Percentage of time superintendents spend in 
organization of the units of the school system. 















t 





- 




. v Mo or"; 


62 


Planning and improving school plants and facilities . 
This duty is heavily weighted in numbers of superintendents 
who rank it sixth to tenth, in both importance, and time 
required for its performance. It is evident that only 
twenty-five percent of the superintendents have placed this 
duty in the first five ranks. Figure 18 shows the other 
ranks to be well represented. 



Hanks Assigned to This Duty 

Figure 18. Planning and improving school plants and 
facilities, as ranked by superintendents with respect to 
the importance they attach to this duty, and the time they 
spend in its performance. 


All the superintendents spend less than ten percent 
of their time in planning and improving school plants and 
facilities. The average percentage of time that the super¬ 
visory staff spends in this duty is five per cent. 

Administration of personnel . Figure 19 shows that 


the superintendents’ estimates of the importance of this 




















. 

4 

- 

•' -.V 

4 






5 

% \\ ■' ' ' 

, 

- 

* 

...T. . . " •. 







. 



































63 


duty fairly well parallels the time they spend in its 
performance. However, superintendents again vary a great 
deal, not only in their opinions of the importance of this 
duty, but also in the time taken for its performance. The 
greatest number rank this duty fifth and sixth in importance. 
Although no superintendents rank this duty first from the 
standpoint of time, most other ranks are evenly matched 
from the standpoint of numbers. 


© 

G 

ft <D 

o'd 
G 
G © 

© -P 

• 9 . c 

E- *H 

3 G 
© 
ft 

£} 


15 H 

10 

5 

0 


I ! Importance 
■■I Time Required 


EL 


iflnlillrhrl^ 


10 


Ranks Assigned to This Duty 

Figure 19. Administration of personnel, as ranked 
by superintendents with respect to the importance they 
attach to this duty, and the time they spend in its perfor¬ 
mance. 


Table XIV indicates that ninety percent of the super¬ 
visory staff spend ten percent, or less, of their time in 
the administration of personnel. The average percentage of 
time they spend with this duty is six percent. 

















. 

-■ •- • < • •' . " o ■ ' , : ‘ 


„ 

■ • X . .■■■:*.■: .• .;■■ •.■>:■■ ■ -a ; : • 

• • ^ c.tt , ■ v. ' ■ • ' X;. 

, 






| 


:■% 

. 



, 













. 

. 

* 


C ’ t ■ 

* 






64 


TABLE XIV 

PERCENTAGE OP TIME SPENT BY FORTY-TWO ALBERTA 
SUPERINTENDENTS IN ADMINISTRATION OP PERSONNEL 


Percentage of Time 

Number of Superintendents 

1-5 . 

. 25 

6-10 . 

13 

11-15 . 

3 

16-20 . 


21-25 . 

► 1 


Auxiliary services ; health , transport , rental schemes . 
It is clear from Figure 20, that superintendents relegate 
this duty to the ranks representing least importance. 

Eighty-seven percent of the staff rank this duty from 
seventh to tenth in importance. This duty is apparently 
not too time-consuming. Seventy-five percent of the super¬ 
intendents rank it from seventh to tenth in order of time. 
Ninety-seven percent of the supervisory staff spend less 
than five percent of their time with auxiliary service 
duties, with the average percentage for all superintendents 
being four percent. 

Work for the Department of Education ; curriculum . 
trusteeships , examinations . The involvement of many super¬ 


intendents in work for the Department of Education is 


























65 

relatively slight. Figure 21 shows that about one-half of 
the supervisory staff rank this duty ninth or tenth in 
importance, as well as in the time required for its perfor¬ 
mance. 



Ranks Assigned to This Duty 

Figure 20. Auxiliary services, as ranked by super¬ 
intendents with respect to the importance they attach to 
this duty, and the time they spend in its performance. 



Ranks Assigned to This Duty 

Figure 21. Work for the Department of Education, as 
ranked by superintendents with respect to the importance 
they attach to this duty, and the time they must spend in its 
performance. 






















o ■ 














. 







66 


It is apparent from Table XV that eighty-five per¬ 
cent of the supervisory staff spend five percent, or less, 
of their time in work for the Department of Education* 

The average percentage of time all superintendents spend 
in this duty is four percent* 

TABLE XV 

PERCENTAGE OP TIME SPENT BY FORTY-TWO ALBERTA 
SUPERINTENDENTS IN WORK FOR THE DEPARTMENT 
OF EDUCATION 


Percentage of Time 

Number of Superintendents 

1-5 . 

36 

6-10 . 

4 

11 - 15 .. 

1 

16-20 . 

1 


Attendance at board and sub - divisional meetings * No 
superintendent ranks this duty first in Importance, and 
fully two-thirds of the men rank it in the last four cate¬ 
gories of importance. Figure 22 shows that only one-third 
of the superintendents rank this duty In the second to 
seventh ranks of importance, even though this duty is 
required by law. 


Figure 23 shows that, although two-thirds of the 















- 




- ; 









: - 


*■. 

- 

, ■ 

: " «, 4 

- 






67 



Ranks Assigned to This Duty- 

Figure 22. Attendance at board and sub-divisional 
meetings as ranked by superintendents with respect to the 
importance they attach to this duty, and the time they 
spend in its performance* 



Percentage of Time 

Figure 23. Percentage of time superintendents spend 
in board and sub-divisional meetings. 






















_r r* ' ■ 1 •' i ■ ' I '■ » : 

' ; ■ • 

' ; . ;• - . „ 


■ - ■ ■ 

* ...■ ' '• '• 






68 

superintendents rank this duty from fourth to seventh from 
the standpoint of time required for its performance (see 
Figure 22), over ninety percent of the superintendents 
spend less than ten percent of their time at board and sub- 
divisional meetings. The average percentage of time that 
superintendents report for this duty is seven percent* 

Reports and correspondence * Although none of the 
supervisory staff rank this duty first, or second, in 
importance, there is diversity in their estimates of its 
importance* Each rank below the second is fairly well 
represented in numbers of superintendents. Some concen¬ 
tration, however, is evident in the middle ranks of impor¬ 
tance. 



Ranks Assigned to This Duty 

Figure 24* Reports and correspondence, as ranked by 
superintendents with respect to the importa.nce they attach 
to this duty, and the time they spend in its performance. 


The striking aspect of this duty is the amount of 



















. 1 . ' 

■f 

«' ■ 

* 

- 

« 

v ' , ; • 

■ ' ; t • 

. 

* 


. 

. 

• :■ c;.: ;•••• ■: . *-•: - 

. 














. 






- 


rtf ' ~ 


69 

time that superintendents report for its performance. Over 
seventy per cent of the supervisory staff rank this duty 
first, or second from the standpoint of time required for 
its performance. Although many superintendents rank this 
duty low in terms of importance, it is evident that the 
supervisory staff spends a great deal of time in its per¬ 
formance. 

Table XVI shows that more than half of the reporting 
superintendents spend up to twenty per cent of their time 
in preparing reports and correspondence. Nearly one-half, 
however, spend from twenty-one to forty-five per cent of 
their time in this duty. The average superintendent spends 
twenty-four per cent of his time with reports and corres¬ 
pondence. 

TABLE XVI 

PERCENTAGE OP TIME SPENT BY FORTY-TWO ALBERTA 
SUPERINTENDENTS IN CORRESPONDENCE AND 
WRITING REPORTS 


Percentage of Time 


Number of Superintendents 


1-10 .. 5 

11-20 .. 17 

21 - 30 9 

31-40 10 

Over 40.......... 1 



























70 


Hank of duties according to time taken . The ten 
duties discussed on the previous pages, may now be ranked 
with respect to the average percentage of time that super¬ 
intendents spend in the performance of each. Figure 25 
shows that supervision of instruction, and the preparation 
of reports and correspondence, account for fifty-six per¬ 
cent of the average superintendents time. Each of the 
other duties takes less than ten percent of the average 
superintendents time. 

Local and provincial division of time . All of the 
ten duties, except work for the Department of Education, 
and time superintendents spend in the preparation of 
administrative and teacher reports for the use of the 
Department, may fairly be allocated to the local area to 
which the superintendents have been appointed. 

If the twenty-four percent of time the average super¬ 
intendent spends with reports and correspondence is arbi¬ 
trarily cut in half, with half designated as a provincial 
duty and half as a local duty, a fair estimate of the divi¬ 
sion of the average superintendents time is possible. On 
this basis, the average superintendent spends eighty-four 
percent of his time in duties pertaining to the local area 


















■ 

• ■ • . ■ • ■' / ' r'-C '.V; 

, 

1 

. 

;! ;to ■■ 

■ 

< ■. ■ '■ 

■ : ■ - . ' ' J 




-■ • ■ • ' ’ ' ' •' ; •' - .■ 

- 

-" 

* 

. 





Percentage of Time 


71 



Duties 

'*A - Supervision of Instruction 
B - Reports and Correspondence 
C - In-service Training 

D - Organization of the Units of the School System 
E - Board and Sub-Divisional Meetings 
F - Administration of Personnel 
G - Public Relations 

H - Planning and Improving School Plants and Facilities 
I - Work for the Department of Education 
J - Auxiliary Services 

Figure 25 . Percentage of time the average superinten¬ 
dent spends in the performance of ten duties. 







- • * ' ' r 

■ 1 

‘ • 

: ■' \oc. ; / 

~ ■ ; . - 

1 ’ - 

- 

' 

. 


r r’ ’ ; ‘ o : r> * * r . ’ ■ 

* ‘ •' • ' vr: ! ' c. <:•; c! . r "■ r, : ,r 











to which he is assigned, and sixteen percent in provincial 
duties. This estimate is very close to the result obtained 
by Rees in his study of the duties of Alberta superinten¬ 
dents.^ Rees found that eighty-three percent of the super¬ 
intendent’s time was spent in local duties, and seventeen 
percent in provincial duties. 


Ir.E. Rees, "Superintendents of Schools in Relation¬ 
ship to School Divisions in the Province of Alberta". 
Unpublished Doctor’s Dissertation, Northwestern University, 
Evanston, Illinois. 1947* 



, 

- r 

—■ 

- 

* ■ 




, , , 

« 

. 


CHAPTER VIII 


INVOLVEMENT IN ADMINISTRATIVE DUTIES 

This chapter assesses the extent to which super¬ 
intendents are involved in eighteen administrative duties 
common to school divisions and counties* 

Superintendents indicated their involvement in each 
duty by checking the questionnaire description which most 
accurately described the arrangement that had been evolved 
in their inspectorates for discharging each duty. Forty- 
five superintendents reported their administrative involve¬ 
ment. 


Hiring and placing of teachers . Figure 26 shows that 
superintendents are very active in this administrative duty. 
Half of the divisional and county boards delegate this duty 
entirely to superintendents. A further forty-two per cent 
of the boards expect the superintendent to discharge this 
duty with some help from the board and secretary-treasurer. 

Hiring and placing of prin c ipals . Although fifty- 
one per cent of the boards delegate the hiring and placing of 
teachers to the superintendent, it is evident from Figure 
27 that only twenty-seven percent of the boards do so with 
respect to principals. 








- 

■ " ' • 4 ■ 

* 


■ 

./ \■ ; = . -V;.*/: v :. v.** J : r 

- ■ * . •• 

, 


* 

« 

- 

; i- ’ ' ’ • :r : ..V' • " ;■ :> ' c :y xO 


. - ■ : ' • ' #' 1 ' ■ . ■ 


- 




- 











Number of 
inspectorates 


74 



A w B C D E P 


Administrative Arrangements 

"A - The board has delegated this duty entirely to the 
superintendent 

B - The superintendent discharges this duty with some 
help from the board and secretary 
C - The superintendent, board, and secretary act as 
equal partners in discharging this duty 
D - The board and secretary discharge this duty with 
some help from the superintendent 
E - The superintendent acts in an advisory capacity 
only with respect to this duty 
P - This duty is not applicable to the inspectorates 

Figure 26* Administrative arrangements in divisions 
and counties for hiring and placing teachers* 





~ 

- 

- 

- 

- 

. 






75 

Boards appear to be more concerned with the hiring 
and placing of principals than with the hiring and placing 
of classroom teachers. 



Administrative Arrangements 8 - 


Figure 27• Administrative arrangements in divisions 
and counties for hiring and placing principals. 


a The legend for this figure is identical with the 
legend for Figure 26, page 74. 


Even so, it is apparent from Figure 27 that in 
eighty-seven per cent of the divisions and counties, the 
major responsibility for the hiring and placing of prin¬ 
cipals rests with the superintendent. 


Hiring and planning the work of special supervisors 
and helping teachers . This administrative duty is not 
applicable to forty per cent of the divisions and counties. 











; ' ; ' . '• . ‘ r "'' : i: : 

• • 

- 

, . ' • ’ .i 

• • « 

- : ■■ ■ ■: : •; " .• ■: . •- ' t-r 

»• 

' 

. 

. 





76 

figure 28 shows that, in the remainder, twenty-seven per cent 
or the boards delegate this duty to the superintendent® An 
equal percentage of boards expect the superintendent to 
discharge this duty with some help. Clearly, the major 
responsibility with regard to this duty lies with the super¬ 
intendent in fifty-four per cent of the divisions and 
counties * 



Administrative Arrangements a 

Figure 28. Administrative arrangements in divisions 
and counties for hiring and planning the work of special 
supervisors and helping teachers. 

a 

The legend for this figure is identical with the 
legend for Figure 26, page 74. 

Hiring of school van drivers . Superintendents 
apparently have very little responsibility with regard to 
hiring van drivers. No division or county expects him to 
assume major responsibility for this duty. Figure 29 
shows, however, that superintendents are expected to give 











77 

some help in twenty-four per cent of the inspectorates* In 
sixty per cent of the inspectorates, superintendents act 
only in an advisory capacity* 


CO 

© 

Sh -p 
O cti 

u 
u o 

© -p 

,0 o 
g © 
3 & 

£5 CO 

c 

M 



Administrative Arrangements 8 - 

Figure 29* Administrative arrangements in divisions 
and counties for hiring school van drivers* 

£L 

The legend for this figure is identical with the 
legend for Figure 26, page 74. 


Hiring of school caretakers * Figure 30 shows that 
superintendents act primarily in an advisory capacity with 
respect to this duty. Sixty-two per cent advise only. In 
three divisions the superintendent act3 as an equal partner 
to boards and secretaries in discharging this duty* 


It is very difficult to understand why six super¬ 


intendents report this item as not applicable to their 







, ■ • " r ■ 

* 



, 

, 

a , ‘ 5 ■ :: ; 

4 - ' 

■ 

„ ■ - 

:• HP. £,£ ?:. d 

. 

. . '' 









78 


areas• Some kind of custodial service must be necessary 
for all schoolso 



Administrative Arrangements 8 - 

Figure 30. Administrative arrangements in divisions 
and counties for the hiring of school caretakers. 

a The legend for this figure is identical with the 
legend for Figure 26, page 74. 

Improving school caretaking # Although twenty-seven 
per cent of the superintendents report that they act as 
equal partners to boards and secretaries in improving school 
caretaking, it is evident, from Figure 31 that superintend¬ 
ents are not deeply involved with this duty. Twenty-nine 
per cent report that they give some help with this duty. 
Another twenty-nine per cent act in an advisory capacity 
only. In most inspectorates, therefore, boards and 









« 


















; 




„ 









* 

■ 

• ' • ' : V ' " ' ■' - ■*' < ‘ "■ • " 

- 

~ ■ - • 

, 










79 


secretaries seem to have assumed major responsibility for 
the improving of school caretaking. 


15 



A B G D E P 
Administrative Arrangements a 


Figure 31* Administrative arrangements in divisions 
and counties for improving school caretaking* 

£L 

The legend for this figure is identical with the 
legend for Figure 26, page 74* 

Organizing pupil transportation services * It appears 
that no division or county delegates this duty entirely to 
the superintendent. Figure 32 shows that, although there is 
considerable involvement of the superintendent in this admin¬ 
istrative duty in one-third of the divisions, in the 
remaining two-thirds, he is expected only to give some help 
or to act in an advisory capacity to the board. 

Planning attendance areas * Figure 33 shows that the 
most-favored administrative arrangement for this duty is an 

















80 



Administrative Arrangements 


Figure 32. Administrative arrangements in divisions 
and counties for organizing pupil transportation services. 


The legend for this figure is identical with the 
legend for Figure 26, page 74. 



Administrative Arrangements 

Figure 33. Administrative arrangements in divisions 
and counties for planning attendance areas. 

“The legend for this figure is identical with the 
legend for Figure 26, page 74. 
















■ 








4* 




d 


t 



* 







o 






r 


) : 



0 




r. 






" ; •: 

• • r * 

O'v > ■ ' .■■■:.;•, h‘> . ; ' ’/on i'w ‘i-J 




81 

equal partnership of the superintendent, board, and 
secretary. One-half of the inspectorates use this admin¬ 
istrative arrangement for planning attendance areas. 

It is clear from Figure 33 that twelve areas have 
delegated this responsibility to the superintendent in the 
main. In only eleven of the forty-seven inspectorates do 
the board and secretary assume major responsibility for 
planning attendance areas. 

Surveying building requirements . The equal partner¬ 
ship arrangement is most-favored by divisions and counties 
for surveying building requirements. Fifty-six percent of 
the areas operate under this arrangement. 

Superintendents are very active with respect to the 
surveying of building requirements. Figure 34 indicates 
that nearly ninety percent of the superintendents are 
working under arrangements which represent the most active 
involvement of the supervisory staff. 

Planning school buildings and teacherages . Figure 35 
shows that the most-favored administrative arrangement for 
planning school buildings and teacherages is the equal 
partnership of the superintendent, board and secretary. 

This arrangement is in effect in fifty-three percent of the 









, 

' 

, 

- 

' 

4 

. 

- 

. 

' 

4 

. 

4 




82 



Administrative Arrangements 

Figure 34. Administrative arrangements in divisions 
and counties for surveying building requirements. 

"The legend for this figure is identical with the 
legend for Figure 26, page 74. 



Administrative Arrangements 

Figure 35. Administrative arrangements in divisions 
and counties for planning school buildings and teacherages. 

The legend for this figure is identical with the 
legend for Figure 26, page 74. 






















... o 




' 

1 ' *t! ■ c : ’ 

„ : ■ -!•■•-' 

' ' c. \ *: . 7 ■: ‘ ■ ' 1 1 ' 


i ? 


• : v■ ■ J. 








".V 

.. ;S 


r 

~ 


O' .I 

' t- 




: ■' c ■ ‘.' V ■ : Cl * 


■ 

. - • ' ' c .. ■ * '. • ‘ .. ;. v . . 


. . 







‘ 




83 

divisions and counties. It is evident that ninety per cent 
of the divisions and counties favor administrative arrange¬ 
ments which involve the superintendent to the greatest 
extent* 


Deciding and arranging repairs to buildings . grounds . 
and equipment * No boards delegate this administrative duty 
to superintendents. Figure 36 illustrates that this duty is 
being handled mainly by boards and the secretary. Only 
thirty-three per cent of the supervisory staff appear in the 
three categories which represent the most active involvement 
of superintendents. 



Administrative Arrangements 

Figure 3 6 * Administrative arrangements in divisions 
and counties for deciding and arranging repairs to buildings, 
grounds and equipment. 

*The legend for this figure is identical with the 
legend for Figure 26, page 74. 















. 














. 






















4 






* . 










84 


Planning and organizing pupil and teacher supplies . 

The most-favored administrative arrangement for this duty is 
the equal partnership of the superintendent, board, and 
secretary. Forty per cent of the superintendents report this 
arrangement. It is evident from Figure 37 that two-thirds 
of the superintendents appear in the three categories which 
represent the most active involvement of the supervisory 
staff. 



Administrative Arrangements 

Figure 37. Administrative arrangements in divisions 
and counties for planning and organizing pupil and teacher 
supplies. 

*The legend for this figure is identical with the 
legend for Figure 26, page 74. 

Organizing and operating divisional libraries . Super¬ 
intendents appear very active in the performance of this 
duty. Figure 38 illustrates that forty per cent of the 
boards delegate this duty entirely to the supervising staff. 

































* 

% 














4 . 


* , ‘ I 


- 






. . 

' 
























85 

Another thirty-six per cent expect the superintendent to be 
primarily responsible for this duty. In only nine per cent 
of the inspectorates is the equal partnership arrangement 
in effect. In other words, eighty-five per cent of super¬ 
intendents appear in the three categories which represent 
the most active involvement of the supervisory staff. 



Administrative Arrangements 

Figure 38. Administrative arrangements in divisions 
and counties for organizing and operating divisional 
libraries. 

■*The legend for this figure is identical with the 
legend for Figure 26, page 74* 

Operating rental schemes . Rental schemes for school 
texts were generally adopted by school divisions and counties 
during 1957, although many areas had had schemes prior to 
the provincial plan which came into effect this year 0 Figure 
39 illustrates wide variation in the administrative arrange¬ 
ments existing for the operation of rental schemes. The 











- 

„ ■ • • 

- 




. 

t . 


, 

, . 

* 

- 

* 










86 

equal partnership arrangement is favored by most areas that 
have adopted schemes. 

Approximately one-half of the superintendents appear 
in the three categories that represent most active involve¬ 
ment of the supervisory staff. 



Administrative Arrangements 

Figure 39 • Administrative arrangements in divisions 
and counties for operating rental schemes. 

*The legend for this figure is identical with the 
legend for Figure 26, page 74. 


Organizing and improving health services . This duty is 
likely performed by health units and public health nurses in 
the forty-four percent of divisions that report it as non- 
applicable. Other areas are actively discharging this duty. 


Figure 40 illustrates that most of the superintendents 








~ 

. 

















- 




- 




- 

- 


■: . .1 . ' : • ■ 







87 


play only a minor role in organizing and improving health 
services• Only twenty-four per cent of the superintendents 
appear in the three categories which represent the most 
active involvement of the supervisory staff. 


w 

© 

P> 

o cd 

Jh 

L* O 
© -P 

o 

g © 

M A 

^ CO 
£ 
H 




Administrative Arrangements 

Figure 40. Administrative arrangements in divisions 
and counties for organizing and improving health services. 

**The legend for this figure is identical with the 
legend for Figure 26, page 74• 


Planning services in special areas ; shop , home 
economics , and circuits . Figure 41 shows that the super¬ 
visory staff is very active in this duty. Two-thirds of the 
divisional and county boards either delegate this duty 
entirely to superintendents, or they expect the supervisory 
staff to assume major responsibility for it. 

Figure 41 also illustrates that eighty-four per cent 
of the superintendents appear in the three categories which 

















/ 




■ • ■ 



















* 



» 











* « ■ 




~ 

•' . V ■ • . . : . , • ■ ■ ■ 



- 


■ ■ 



- 

* 










. 










»• 



• 



. 
























88 


represent the most active involvement of the supervisory 
staff. 



Administrative Arrangements 

Figure 41« Administrative arrangements in divisions 
and counties for planning services in special areas; shop, 
home economics, and circuits, 

~*The legend for this figure is identical with the 
legend for Figure 26, page 74* 


Planning and organizing special programs of instruc ¬ 
tion ; gifted , retarded , remedial , accelerated . Figure 42 
shows that this duty is almost entirely handled by super¬ 
intendents, Two-thirds of the boards delegate this duty 
entirely to superintendents. 

Bud geting for school operations . The most-favored 
arrangement for budgeting is the equal partnership. Just 
over fifty per cent of the superintendents report this 
arrangement in effect. Figure 43 shows that, in many areas, 
boards and secretaries are assuming much of the responsi- 






















#' 













89 



Administrative Arrangements 

Figure 42. Administrative arrangements in divisions 
and counties for planning and organizing special programs of 
instruction; gifted, retarded, remedial, accelerated. 

*'The legend for this figure is identical with the 
legend for Figure 26, page 74* 


25 


03 

© 

<H -P 
O Ctf 

u o 

© -p 

rO O 
£ © 
3 Oh 
3 © 
0 


20 • 
15 ■ 
10 

5 • 
0 




A* B C D E F 

Administrative Arrangements 

Figure 43. Administrative arrangements in divisions 
and counties for budgeting. 

‘"'The legend for this figure is identical with the 
legend for Figure 26, page 74 • 
























« 

. 

t . 









90 

bility for budgeting, even though most areas prefer the 
equal partnership arrangement. 

I. CONCLUSIONS CONCERNING ADMINISTRATIVE DUTIES 

Certain administrative arrangements seem to be favored 
over others* For instance, delegation of the duty entirely 
to the superintendent is favored by the majority of boards 
for the following: the hiring of teachers, the organizing 
and operating of divisional libraries, and the organizing 
of special programs of instruction* 

The arrangement whereby the superintendent discharges 
the duty, with some help from board members and the secretary 
is favored by the greatest number of divisions for the 
hiring and placing of principals, and for planning and 
organizing special instructional areas such as shop work 
and home economics* 

The partnership arrangement, whereby the super¬ 
intendent, the board, and the secretary act as equal part¬ 
ners is favored by the majority of divisions for planning 
attendance areas; surveying building requirements; planning 
schools and teacherages; planning and organizing teacher 
supplies; operating rental schemes, and budgeting for 
school operations. 


- ' „ 

* 

, 

r 

r . ' • • : . . . • 

, 

■ ‘ 

r ;_ ' 

, • ‘ ' • : r ‘ ? ’ 

• ■ ; • . ■ .... • . ’ \ ‘ ' •' 

. 

: o. ■■ ' ■ • ■ l : • ■: Zb 

- ■ 




91 


The arrangement whereby the board and secretary 
discharge the duty with some help from the superintendent is 
favored by the greatest number of divisions for improving 
school caretaking; organizing pupil transportation services, 
and deciding and arranging repairs to buildings, grounds, 
and equipment. 

Calling upon the superintendent to act as an advisor 
only, seems to be favored by most divisions for the hiring 
of school van drivers; hiring of caretakers, and improving 
school caretaking. It should be noted that improvement of 
school caretaking is handled by an equal number of divisions 
through the arrangement whereby the board and secretary 
discharge the duty with some help from the superintendent. 

Concentration of administrative duties . An analysis 
of the eighteen administrative duties previously discussed, 
shows that more than fifty per cent of the superintendents 
appear in the first three categories, (which represent most 
active involvement of the supervisory staff), for all but 
six of the eighteen duties. In the twelve administrative 
duties in which involvement is most pronounced, the extent 
of involvement varies from fifty-six to ninety-eight per 
cent of the superintendents. The six administrative duties 
in which superintendents seem least active, are as follows: 





e ' \ • -• ' '■ • r';;- ' n ' ' 


„ • 

* 


t ' 

. 

t ■ 


a 

. 


* 

, . ••• 7 X . ,• • > ■ 







92 


the hiring of van drivers; the hiring of caretakers; the 
improvement of school caretaking; organizing pupil trans¬ 
portation services; deciding and arranging repairs to 
buildings, equipment, and grounds; organizing and improving 
school health services. 

It is evident from the foregoing that school super¬ 
intendents in Alberta are involved and active in a large 
number of administrative duties. One of the interesting 
aspects of this involvement is the great variation in the 
divisions as to what is expected of the superintendent. For 
eleven of the eighteen administrative duties surveyed, 
(hiring and placing teachers; hiring and planning the work 
of special teachers and supervisors; improving school care¬ 
taking; planning attendance areas; surveying building 
requirements; planning school buildings and teacherages; 
organizing pupil and teacher supplies; organizing and 
operating divisional libraries; operating rental schemes; 
organizing and improving health services; planning services 
in special areas such as shop and home economics), the 
variation runs the full spread of five categories, i.e., all 
the way from delegation of the duty entirely to the super¬ 
intendent to the expectance of advice only from him. The 
remaining seven administrative duties show a variance in the 
involvement of the superintendent of two to four categories. 


, 

• • ■ - : • 

: 

- 

, 

- . ■" T ' '; I: .• 

: 

‘ ■ ■; ' i “ 

- ; : .* 

, 

, * ■ » 

- 

* 

, 

. • ■ ' . ' 



93 


Some of the factors which may account in part for 
this variation are evident. Involvement may depend to a 
certain extent upon the superintendents' willingness to 
assume these extra duties. It may depend, too, upon their 
administrative abilities and the confidence in which they 
are held by their boards. Their part in administration 
may be affected by the strengths or weaknesses of their 
boards along administrative lines. In any case, it is 
clear that superintendents in Alberta are involved, to a 
greater or lesser extent, in all the eighteen adminis¬ 
trative duties surveyed. 

In 1956, superintendents spent a total of 4,453*5 
days in supervision out of a grand total of 14,616.5 days. 
In other words, only 30.4 per cent of their time was spent 
in supervision.*** 

In the chapter dealing with the duties of super¬ 
intendents, the investigator established that in a normal 
year, the average superintendent spends thirty-two per cent 
of his time in supervision. (See Figure 25, page 71)* At 
the same time, the average superintendent spends seven per 
cent of his time in the organization of the units of the 


^Percentages based on figures taken from the Fifty- 
First Annual Report, 1956 * Department of Education,_ 
Province "of - Alberta, Queen's Printer, Edmonton, 1957* P* 13* 









•7.' • r'r'' o . v : 


■ . 

. 


.v ! i;:. ‘ • ' :'I r ' :* ; - O'" . . ■' : .. ;> 

‘ ‘ * • 

•• ■ ■ ' . • ■ . . ' 


r;'■ 

, 

r.. . •. ... ■ • ... 

■ v: 



, 



. 

* ■ ■ ■ 

< 


* * , . 

v r r ' : L 


. 

r 

, 



r,. ,,, ,.,,-.- e , T . ; ... ■■ •- • ■ 

" , ' 


- 


« , 

. 

1 



nt ■ o 


, 

■ *'■ . r t ' i ■ ■ 



94 

of the school system; board and sub-divisional meetings take 
seven per cent of his time; administration of personnel takes 
six per cent of his time; planning and improving school 
plants and facilities takes five percent of his time; involve¬ 
ment with auxiliary services takes four percent of his time 0 
Thus, at least twenty-seven per cent of the average super¬ 
intendent's time is spent in duties which are strictly 
administrative in nature. Moreover, the superintendent 
spends twenty-four per cent of his time in preparing reports 
and correspondence. Just what proportion of this twenty- 
four per cent is devoted to correspondence relating to 
administrative matters has not been assessed. Nor has it 
been possible to assess accurately how much of the time he 
spends in public relations is directly related to adminis¬ 
trative matters. Explanations of changes with respect to 
policy, whether it relates to instruction, administration, 
buildings, and so on, are often given by the superintendent 
in meetings, addresses, and reports. Since eight per cent 
of the average superintendent's time is devoted to public 
relations, it seems safe to assume that some part of this 
is devoted to administrative matters. 

Thus, at least one-third of the average super¬ 
intendent's time is devoted to administrative matters. This 
equals the time he spends in supervision. 





CHAPTER IX 


SUPERINTENDENT - BOARD RELATIONSHIPS 

Since boards and superintendents have a unanimity of 
educational purpose, it is logical that the best for 
education will only be achieved through understanding and 
co-operation between them* This chapter examines these 
relationships. 

Each superintendent was asked to list the most 
satisfying and the most difficult aspect of his work insofar 
as it related to his relations with his board. These lists 
were then tabulated and fitted into major categories. 

I. MOST SATISFYING RELATIONSHIPS 

Support of the superintendent . Fifteen superintendents 
mention their satisfaction with respect to the general 
acceptance, support, co-operation, and confidence accorded 
to them by divisional and county boards. 

Satisfaction in this area of relationships is evident 
in the response of the superintendent who states that "the 
board seems to have full confidence in my ability to solve 
all problems”. Another superintendent values ”the complete 
co-operation with and acceptance of my efforts by the 




- 

' 

. 

♦ 


* 

, ' . • ■ ■ ; ’ 

* 

. 

' 

■ 

. 

. 

' 

f 

. 

- 


96 

board, and the backing I get from them". Other members of 
the supervisory staff welcome the boards 1 general willing¬ 
ness to co-operate "in dealing with divisional administration" 
and "in all major matters of policy". In general, the 
support and confidence that boards accord to superintendents 
is exemplified in the statements of the two supervisory 
members who state that "the board places its confidence in 
my judgment", and "the board has supported the superintendent 
in all situations with parents or teachers that required a 
firm stand". 

Board’s abilities and attitudes . Another ten 
superintendents report satisfaction with the calibre, 
abilities, and attitudes of boards with which they are 
working. 

This satisfaction is indicated by one superintendent 
who states that "members of boards are serious and sincere 
in their efforts". Another superintendent appreciates 
"the board’s willingness to put itself out and take on 
responsibilities in order to assist in Improving school 
services". Other superintendents are pleased with their 
boards’ common desire to provide "good facilities , good 
business understanding", "good attitude toward centraliz- 





„ 

' 






■ 










■ 

- 



< • 

« 


i 

, . . • " ■ 

, 

* 


, 














97 


ation and provision of accomodations", and "progressive 
attitudes in improvement of buildings and equipment". In 
general, the statements of most superintendents would 
appear to support the position of the one who states that 
"it is the desire of the board to have good schools". 

Superintendent - board teamwork . Superintendents 
seem satisfied with the teamwork existing between boards 
and themselves in their efforts to improve the educational 
facilities and the administrative procedures necessary for 
well-organized school systems. 

One superintendent values teamwork with respect to 
"the general planning of buildings and equipment". A 
second superintendent mentions teamwork in "planning and 
consolidating general policies". A third man esteems the 
teamwork in evidence in "the organization of the services 
of the division". Still other superintendents feel that 
this teamwork facilitates "the planning of accomodations" 
and "the working out of staff appointments". Generally 
speaking, superintendents agree with the viewpoint of the 
staff member who expresses satisfaction with the teamwork 
evident in "working together on common problems". 


The superintendent T s advisory role . The advisory 








, 

. 

' . v :.<v, >:t *%&': : v .a 

, 

■ 

. 

' ’ rr- 

* 

. O.' . ■ ■ . , . •; ' • " • ■ ■ ■ r 

. 

■ . - j" ■ . . 

* 

a . 

* 

, 






98 

opportunity and the willingness of boards to accept advice 
regarding good educational practice is mentioned as a further 
satisfying aspect of the superintendents position. 

This satisfaction is illustrated by the superintendent 
who states that "the board respects my opinions and trusts 
me to make them work or stand up". Other members of the 
staff appreciate the fact that "the board accepts the super¬ 
intendents recommendations as to staff, transfers, needed 
equipment”, and that "advice from the superintendent is 
accepted as being genuinely in the interest of pupils”. In 
general, superintendents value the opportunity ”to advise 
the board on general policies” and ”to guide and advise the 
board on sound educational practice”. 

Minimum interference . Two superintendents mention 
a minimum of board interference as a satisfying aspect of 
their relations with boards. One of these finds a "minimum 
of interference with respect to teaching staff”. Another 
states that "certain aspects placed in my hands are not 
meddled with”. 

II. MOST DIFFICULT RELATIONSHIPS 

It would be naive to assume that difficulties are not 
present in relationships between boards and superintendents. 




























* 





. ■ 

- 






. 

„ 



. 



- 








:• '• ■ • -,o 





0 

. 

' 

, 

. • • 

. 

. 



99 


In such a close relationship, there are likely to be some 
frictions generated from time to time. The following pages 
indicate some of these frictions. 

Sub - divisional attitudes . The most-mentioned diffi¬ 
culty seems to stem from a feeling that trustees sometimes 
present narrow, sub-divisional attitudes. One superin¬ 
tendent expresses the opinion that there is a "tendency of 
board members to take too much responsibility for their own 
sub-divisions and to be relatively uninterested regarding 
others, except insofar as they have a bearing on their own 
area"• A second superintendent deplores the fact that 
there is a "considerable amount of working for ! my town 1 on 
the part of one or two trustees”. Other superintendents 
find that difficulties arise over ”the tendency to do sub- 
divisional ’horse-trading’ over development of educational 
facilities”, ”the tendency to act as sub-divisional trustees 
instead of divisional trustees”, and ” the tendency to trade 
one sub-division against another”. The cause of difficulties 
in this area of relationships is forcefully summarized by 
the superintendent who states that "some individual board 
members have failed to rise to their responsibilities and 
’grind their own axe’”. 


Policies. The lack of well-defined policies and the 











■ 


■ 








- 


• , 




- 








4 














;■ . r - • r 

- . 

, 

* 

' 


. ■ 




4 




100 


setting aside of established policies apparently leads to 
difficult relationships in some divisions and counties. A 
member of the supervisory staff states that difficulties 
arise when trustees put "parochial or personal consider¬ 
ations in the way of constant policy". Other superintendents 
find it difficult to induce trustees "to establish a definite 
policy and follow same", or "to get the board to establish 
sound, long-range policy, or even to formulate one". 

Teaching personnel . It appears that administration 
of teaching personnel presents an area of difficulty in 
relationships. This is especially true with respect to 
appointments, placements, and transfers. Some feeling is 
expressed by superintendents that ambitions and prejudices 
of trustees sometimes interfere in this area. 

This difficulty is illustrated by the superintendent 
who states that "prejudices of board members sometimes get 
in the road of perfectly good appointments and transfers". 
Concern is felt by another superintendent with respect to 
"matters on which individual ambitions of board members are 
concerned - teacher appointments and centralization". One 
superintendent deplores the "unjustified criticism and 
personal prejudices with respect to members of the staff". 
Other superintendents find it difficult to "place teachers 











■ 


' ' . ■ 

■ 

V 

- 


Ic 


. ■' ■ ■■■■; ' < . 




. o," • ■ s 1 ■ , r 



4 

■ ■ 

, 









■ T ■ > C ' . r ‘ ,• J ;; ; :l; :: Ci> 









* 







101 


to the satisfaction of the board”, and to "secure proper 
consideration for the staff”. Generally speaking, comments 
of superintendents seem to support the viewpoint of the 
supervisory member who states that difficulties arise from 
”board interference with personnel management". 

Administrative duties . Although superintendents are 
involved in many administrative duties, it is noteworthy 
that only five list this as an area affecting relationships. 
A typical comment with respect to this difficulty is made 
by the superintendent who states that the "board is inclined 
to push responsibilities off on the superintendent and to 
overload him with jobs some person other than he could, and 
should, do”. Another superintendent expresses concern over 
the number of "administrative details which the superin¬ 
tendent must handle because of the neglect or forgetfulness 
of trustees”. A third member of the supervisory staff 
deplores the inclination of his board "to leave too many 
minor administrative details to the superintendent". It 
would appear that superintendents who report difficulty in 
this area would agree with the staff member who states that 
"too much of the work is left to the superintendent". 

Others . One superintendent expresses concern with 
respect to "removing pre-conceived ideas" of board members. 








- 



- 

, 










. 



' 


v 

. 

* 

l ■ ■: ■ 




, 


•• 


■ ■ •' 


. 

. 

i 

‘! . ;jd *1,' 




' 






« 







■ 







Another considers it difficult "to have the members of the 
board individually, or as members of committees, assume 
responsibility for making decisions in minor administrative 
matters"* Still another feels that "too often the board 
does not take itself seriously enough and lets one member 
talk it out of its own better judgment". A fourth super¬ 
intendent is concerned over the "board ! s failure to dele¬ 
gate authority", while a fifth feels that difficulties are 
arising between the superintendent and the board over 
"discipline in schools, particularly where suspensions and 
dismissals are concerned". Still other superintendents 
express concern over "the supervision done by the board", 
"the board 1 s attempt to lay blame on the superintendent 
for strictly board errors", and "the board T s inclination 
to give more time to administrative problems than to 
supervisory problems". 

It is noteworthy that five superintendents report 
"no difficulties" or "none too difficult" with respect to 
superintendent-board relationships. 


: <: •• - . '■ . 1 ■' ‘ T v : • ’ , or *: 

. 

: ' u ■ •: • ■ . V;' ■ ■ 5 : “V 

. 

Of C 

■ *i 

- - : . • ' 

. 

* 

, ' • 

, 

, 




CHAPTER X 


PROBLEMS OF SUPERINTENDENTS 

This chapter presents an analysis of the problems 
that superintendents believe to be most harassing with 
respect to their work and positions* 

To provide information for this chapter, the question¬ 
naire requested superintendents to list not only the least 
attractive aspects of their work, but also the most harassing 
problems associated with their positions* Each of the one 
hundred and ninety-eight statements made by the supervisory 
staff was analyzed, and the statements were fitted into 
several major categories. 

The teacher shortage * Since this is the most-mentioned 
problem of superintendents, it may be correct to conclude 
that the present teacher shortage is the most harassing 
problem of Alberta superintendents. The teacher shortage 
is mentioned forty-nine times in the statements of super¬ 
intendents* Some mention it twice, first as a general 
shortage, and again as a shortage at the high school level* 

Many superintendents did not qualify the shortage as 
being applicable to any grade level, but mentioned it only 
as "the teacher shortage”, or as "the shortage of teachers”* 




' .C- > ' 



■ 

; .2-l>/1 -v n,‘l 



„ 


•: ' ' 

;i r v t' :: r ■' " ■■ ■ ■ *: ■ r 

* • 


. 

' - 

„ • ' f- 

* . 

■. 

! 


v- 


. 

; 1 ■ ■ ' ‘ ■' • 


L; V ' ' <’j C '' V -J 'VM AlJJj 1 ;i'cn 

■ 

v r 

* • , 



104 

Others qualified their statements. Judging from the replies 
of these, the shortage of teachers is most acute at the 
junior and senior high school levels. Table XVII shows the 
number of replies showing concern with respect to the 
teacher shortage. 


TABLE XVII 

THE TEACHER SHORTAGE AS A PROBLEM AREA OP SUPERINTENDENTS 


Problem Number of times mentioned 

by superintendents 


The shortage of teachers 45 

The slow decline of staff 

qualifications .. 1 

Summer frustration - staff juggling • 1 

Pressure in July and August regarding 

staff problems .. 1 

Acceptance of poor teachers to keep 
classrooms open •••••.•••••••••••••• 1 

Total .... 49 


Administrative problems . Judging from the thirty- 
eight times that superintendents mention administrative 
problems, administration is the second-ranking problem area 




















105 

of superintendents. Table XVIII shows that the enforcement 
of compulsory school attendance is the most-mentioned 
problem in this area. 


TABLE XVIII 

ADMINISTRATIVE DUTIES AS A PROBLEM AR.EA OF SUPERINTENDENTS 


Problem Number of Times Mentioned 

by Superintendents 


Enforcing school attendance •••..••• 8 

Providing and improving school 

plants .. 5 

Trusteeships ....... 4 

Providing and improving equipment ... 4 

Long board meetings 4 

Pupil transportation .. 3 

Organizing centralizations . 3 

Administrative detail .. 3 


Providing high school facilities in 
small centers .. 

Helping isolated districts ....o..... 2 

Total ...... 38 


Public relations. Problems relating to public 


relations are mentioned thirty-five tunes by members of the 





















106 


supervisory staff. Problems in this area most often stem 
from parent-teacher-pupil altercations, and from the relations 
fostered by the prolonged salary negotiations of teachers. 
Table XIX shows the problems mentioned by superintendents 
in the public relations area. 

TABLE XIX 

PUBLIC RELATIONS AS A PROBLEM AREA OF SUPERINTENDENTS 


Problem Number of Times Mentioned 

by Superintendents 


Dealing with parent-teacher- 

pupil altercations . 11 

Dealing with strained relations 
resulting from long periods of 

teacher salary negotiations ..•••.•• 6 

Dealing with problem teachers ....... 5 

Dealing with criticisms of schools 

and teachers . 4 

Dealing with complaints of parents .. 

Dealing with prejudice regarding 
centralization .. ••••••••• 

Dealing with pressure groups . 1 

Teacher-board relations .. 1 

Strained siiperintendent-secretary 
relationships ... 

Superintendent-board relations ..«••• 1 

Total .... 35 



















107 

Clerical duties and office work. The clerical work 


required of superintendents is mentioned thirty times as 
a problem of the supervisory staff. Table XX shows that 
office work, correspondence, and the writing of teacher 
reports, are the foremost problems in this area. 

TABLE XX 

CLERICAL DUTIES AS A PROBLEM AREA OP SUPERINTENDENTS 


Problem Number of Times Mentioned 

by Superintendents 


Office work and correspondence 15 

Writing reports on teachers ,,.•••••• 9 

Preparation of the annual report .... 1 

Shortage of office help. •••• 4 

Amount of literature coming to the 
superintendent T s desk •••••••••.••••* 1 

Total .... 30 


Supervision . Problems related to the superintendents 1 
supervisory role are mentioned twenty-three times by the 
supervisory staff. Table XXI shows that the problem of 
improving instructional deficiencies is the foremost problem 


in this area 




















108 


TABLE XXI 

SUPERVISION AS A PROBLEM AREA OP SUPERINTENDENTS 


Problem Number of Times Mentioned 

by Superintendents 


Improving instructional 

deficiencies .. 13 

Finding enough time for supervision • • 3 

Promoting acceptance of the 

principal^ supervisory role ••••••••• 3 

Providing in-service training ...••••• 2 

Providing instruction for 

exceptional children .. 1 

Noon-hour supervision . 1 

Total. 23 


Demands of the position . Seven superintendents 
mention the time-demanding nature of their work as a foremost 
problem. One of these states that it is difficult to find 
11 enough time to do what I would like to do". Others are 
concerned over "very long hours", and the lack of time for 
studies or post-graduate work”, and "for personal study and 
reading". Their viewpoint is well summarized by the super¬ 
intendent who says that there is "too much to do - too busy". 

Salaries. Pour members of the supervisory staff 


mention inadequacy of salary as one of their foremost prob- 



















109 

lems. Another superintendent states that he has difficulty- 
in balancing his personal budget. It is evident, however, 
that only ten per cent of the supervisory staff consider 
salary as one of their foremost problems. 

Board politics and sub - divisional attitudes . Five 
superintendents consider board politics and sub-divisional 
attitudes to be foremost problems in their inspectorates. 

One of these finds it difficult to "get each trustee to work 
for the whole division, instead of his own sub-division". 

Others find that "local politics", "board politics", and the 
"selfishness of a few individuals" cause major problems. 

It would appear that these five men would agree with the 
superintendent who states that one of his foremost problems 
is centered around "local politics - ’deals’ are the rule 
rather than the exception". 

Others . There is a striking variety in the problems 
mentioned by some superintendents. One of these states that 
his foremost problem is "living in a small community" with 
the attendant "cultural and educational lack, living conditions 
and loss on property." Another finds difficulty with "curbs 
by non-professional educators - board members". Still 
another is concerned over "interference by the A.T.A. as an 
organization". A fourth superintendent mentions "Department 
of Education-board articulation" as a foremost problem. One 







. 

■' - kJ; -v ■ r { '':o -P'- f oJ ' 1- n r 4 

, 

* 


, 


, 




' 


4 

- 

„ 



. r 

* 

’ ’ ~ 


. 

, 

■; ' •. 

*- . - . 

* , . 

. 


■ 






* 


no 


member of the supervisory staff finds that a major problem 
stems from "religious and racial differences in the community”, 
while another has difficulty "handling two bi-lingual districts 
and fringe areas". Still other superintendents are concerned 
with the major problems caused through "having to stay away 
from home", "handling cases of mental deficiency", and the 
"lack of well-qualified board members". It is evident that 
there is no dearth in the variety of the problems facing 
divisional and county superintendents. 

Figure 44 shows a comparison of the number of times 
each problem area is mentioned by superintendents. If the 
intensity of these problems may be judged by the number of 
times each is mentioned, the following order of problem 
areas emerges: (1) the teacher shortage, (2) administrative 
duties, (3) public relations, (4) clerical and office 
work, (5) supervision, (6) board politics and sub- 
divisional thinking, (7) salaries, (8) others. Figure 44 
shows that the first five problem areas are the most common 
in Alberta f s divisional and county superintendencies. 


* 

» 

„ 



, 








* 




- 


. 

- 


/ - : v t 




. 
















Number of times 
Mentioned 


111 



Most Harassing Problem Areas 

*‘A - The Teacher Shortage 
B - Administrative Duties 
C - Public Relations 
D - Clerical and Office Work 
E - Supervision 
P - Salaries 

G- - Board Politics and Sub-Divisional Attitudes 
H - Others 

Figure 44* A comparison of the number of times 
superintendents mention certain problem areas in listing 
their most harassing problems* 













.cix 




' 


































- 

- 


- 


~ 


- 


- 


' ‘ 


‘ 



* 











CHAPTER XI 


SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

Candidates for the superintendency must present a 
variety of qualifications. Although there are no formal 
examinations, university graduation is expected of all 
candidates. The Department of Education prefers to appoint 
candidates with two degrees who have a good grounding in 
philosophy, child psychology, and administration. Other 
qualifications expected are as follows: a permanent 
teaching certificate; one year of graduate study; two 
years of administrative experience; superior mental 
capacity; evidence of compatibility and assumption of 
responsibility in relation to community, professional, and 
social organizations. 

In order that they may satisfactorily fill their 
implied positions as chief executive officers of large 
administrative units, superintendents must present superior 
personal and leadership qualities. Not only must they 
know what is outstanding in educational practice, but also, 
they must lead boards and teachers in recognizing and 
accepting these practices. 


Administrative ability of a high order is needed by 



« 

•’ V t 

* 

• ■ ' •’ ' ' , • ' - r r. • , r ; 


: ■; • • 1 : : *’ ; ‘ v A/-,• 

■ • •" ■■ ' ■/ . • 


S. ! . 'u * \ r r '■■■j:/:.. 


■ 


"• :>0 : ■ ■ V' ■ -ri •, 





* 

F , : ' 









113 

superintendents to ensure effective functioning with boards 
in setting, and activating all policies governing education 
in inspectorates. 

Superintendents must be competent in each of the roles 
they play. They must interpret, and fulfill, their regu¬ 
latory, supervisory and administrative roles in a way that 
will satisfy their boards and the public. 

Since salaries apparently play some negative role in 
the acquisition of the most highly-trained and experienced 
personnel for the superintendency, upward revision of the 
salary scale seems necessary. Beginning salaries for super¬ 
intendents should probably not be lower than the average 
of the highest salaries paid to principals in divisions and 
counties. 

There are indications that a new status may be 
emerging for divisional and county superintendents. Their 
present legal status is advisory, supervisory, and regula¬ 
tory. In practice, however, they are being called upon to 
perform many administrative duties in the areas to which 
they are appointed. 

It is becoming recognized by boards and school 
committees that efficient operation of large administrative 



■' " ‘ ‘ ■ ’: : * : . ;■ : , •• .:!■ *■<. i r 

„ 

* 


•• : ' ; • • - . ■/ . - r; ■ ; y ■>■ r. 


■'' 'c: : .> ;. v •; • 

■ ' - ;.r v .' J ‘}; o . . . i: / ;• 

i 




~ : " < • 

, ■ 

* 






114 


units is contingent upon intelligent, long-range planning. 

That expert, professional advice is necessary in formulating 
long-range policies appears to be a growing conviction. More¬ 
over, the axiom that time and professional knowledge are a 
necessity in activating plans and policies appears to be 
increasingly accepted by boards and school committees. The 
fact that boards are delegating many administrative duties 
to superintendents, and actively involving the superintendents 
in many others, appears to support the above conclusions. 
Further support is evident when we consider that eighty-four 
per cent of the superintendents time is devoted to duties of 
local origin. This alone seems to indicate that many 
functions previously performed by boards have now become 
functions that are being discharged by superintendents. 

Since most of the superintendent’s time is spent in 
duties of local origin, research is indicated to appraise the 
relative merits and demerits of local employment of these men. 

The obvious strength of provincially-appointed super¬ 
intendents is the independence accorded to the staff. Frank, 
even critical evaluation of board policies and plans is made 
possible by this arrangement. Superintendents may presently 
advise, and strongly recommend courses of action which 
may be in opposition to the wishes of individual trustees 


• ' ■ <■' 

- 


* 





' ' 







■ 



. 



* '■! 




P, 


- . ■ 







’ . ' ■ ■ ■ ‘:; 

. 

* 

* 

<• 

; : ' ; !■: ■"\ : : ■ ■ r ? <■ ■: • , • ■ ■. ^ 

' “ c' ') ■ < • 1 r r r, hr:.- e • 




115 

without being compromised by concern regarding their futures 0 

Alternatively, however, the lack of board control 
over provincially-appointed superintendents may result in 
an impasse which could be detrimental to both the board 
and the superintendent. 

Although the period of time that had been spent by 
superintendents in academic training prior to appointment 
varies from three to seven years, the average member of 
the supervisory staff had spent five years in academic 
training. Most superintendents have spent little time in 
improving academic training since their appointments. 
Sixty-one per cent have spent less than one year. Only 
thirteen per cent have devoted more than two years to 
further academic preparation. 

In June, 1957, seventeen inspectorates had one or 
more principals who had attained higher academic quali¬ 
fications than the superintendent appointed to the area. 

There were twenty-six such principals in the seventeen 
inspectorates. At the same time, twenty-five teachers, in 
ten inspectorates, had attained higher academic qualifi¬ 
cations than the superintendent. 


± ■ 

■ ~ ; ; ' 

* 

. 

, 








1 


' y;. ,p 







~ 


~ : 

* 





116 


Some remedial action is indicated if the proper 
relationship between the supervisor, and the supervised, is 
to be maintained. Superintendents should probably possess 
both the leadership qualities, and the training necessary, 
to place them in a rank which is equal, or superior, to the 
ranks of the personnel they are appointed to supervise. 

Two things might be done. First, the academic quali¬ 
fications required of new appointees might be raised to the 
equivalent of the master ! s degree or above. Second, the 
position might be made attractive enough in all respects to 
induce people with this training, and other suitable qualifi¬ 
cations, to seek appointment. 

Further research is necessary to determine the best 
type of education for superintendents. How much general 
and professional education should they have? Should their 
education be mainly theoretical or practical? Should their 
education include the broad fields of educational history, 
philosophy, psychology, methodology? Should they be trained 
in public relations, in order to cope effectively with 
unfavorable public action and reaction? Or should the 
education of superintendents be more specialized and limited 
to studies involving finance, administration, supervision, 
and school plants? 


o Lv:./. '.•..''O'OO .0.:.;.’: ■■■ i T : ;'.YV 

4 h 

^ *;*t*:t '■ .. ;;p • ' ■. , r ■ :! r : ':r,) 

■■ Y .■ i'W't / r. r -y r , o-’ 

* 

. i : oo' ■ t ?; * o " ;■■■'■■;,: ■ - <,• r • ■ "• ■:.o ;. r < '■. •.: ■ /,o, ■.»'. 

r> : 

- ■■. . 0 ; ■ . . . ; < ;• 

0 ' , 

Cj .• • ’ . ■ .. ■ ■ •. 

« 

■ 

, 

- 0 O' • .'.O..' V V) , : t ■ 

' Y •-> c-r' ' % r \ •: ' 

ol-: off*:- ncxuo/i 1 \ fJ ■ c-vn'.u "7/ 

.;VV 0 , : ; <_:■ ,7;'j'lrrf) .1 fiY 7 v 0 i\ !.. V o' • V O' 

- , 

* 









117 

The teaching experience of superintendents had been 
varied prior to appointment. Seventy percent of the staff 
had taught in one-room schools; seventy-two percent had 
taught in village schools; sixty-four percent had taught in 
town schools, and fifty-three percent had taught in city 
schools. 


The fact that the preponderance of this teaching 
time had been spent in high school grades must have posed 
a problem for most of the appointees. Following appoint¬ 
ment, most superintendents found that the preponderance 
of their duties and responsibilities in instruction, and 
in aiding teachers, lay in the elementary and junior high 
school grades. Since backgrounds of the majority of super¬ 
intendents suggest administrative capability and competency 
in high school teaching, it appears that for many, appoint¬ 
ment brought duties and responsibilities for which their 
past classroom experience had given scant preparation. It 
appears that more appointments of people engaged in elemen¬ 
tary and junior high school work would effect a desirable 
balance. 


The present supervisory staff has been chosen to a 
large extent from persons who had served in various adminis¬ 
trative capacities in Alberta schools. A decidedly village 


■ l*mq 




■ 




■ .... 




- 



'■ • 


V 










. 

- ' 

1 ■ ■ . ... ' , / ’ • v • • ■■ 

' 

V 





• . ■ ■ 


118 


and town school administrative background is apparent* 

Eighty per cent of all the administrative positions that had 
been held by superintendents prior to appointment had been 
held in villages and towns* 

There is variation in the size of schools that had 
been administered by the present supervisory staff. Four 
had not served in administrative positions prior to their 
appointments* One-half of the superintendents had been 
administrators of schools of four to ten rooms. The rest 
had administered larger schools of eleven to twenty or 
more rooms. 

More research is indicated with respect to the 
administrative experience required for successful performance 
in the superintendency. Should appointments come from 
administrators of larger schools, or is experience in the 
administration of smaller schools sufficient? What are the 
relative merits of appointing older, more experienced 
principals, as opposed to younger, better-trained principals 
with less experience? Should appointment be a recognition 
of lengthy and successful teaching experience, or should it 
be recognition of successful performance in the principal- 
ship? 


■ ■ ' 

, 


■ 

■ 

r ; ■■ ■ ■. : " • >.r ' 

- 

: 

: ' 


; or :;no ! T 

. * 

* 

? " 






. ' . ' o J ■ i. : ' r 








' 


- t , 

■ • : ■ • 

t 

- 



119 


Although there is variation in the opinions of 
superintendents regarding the importance of many of the 
duties they presently perform, it is possible to gauge the 
time that superintendents spend in their performance* Super¬ 
vision of instruction and the preparation of reports and 
correspondence account for fifty-six per cent of the average 
superintendent’s time* Of this fifty-six per cent, thirty- 
two per cent is spent in supervision, and twenty-four per 
cent is spent in correspondence and the preparation of 
reports* Each of the other duties that he performs takes 
less than ten per cent of his time* The rank of these other 
duties from the standpoint of the time required for their 
performance, is as follows: (1) in-service training, (2) 
organization of the units of the school system, (3) attend¬ 
ance at board and sub-divisional meetings, (4) administration 
of personnel, (5) public relations, (6) planning and improving 
school plants and facilities, (7) work for the Department of 
Education, (8) auxiliary services* 

The average Alberta superintendent spends nearly 
eighty-four per cent of his time in duties pertaining to the 
local area to which he is assigned* Only sixteen per cent 
of his time is devoted to duties assigned by the Department 


of Education, 


... r .C 





• 


• 


- 




i ■ ■ 




, 




~ 


‘XV 

















■ 









* 

• JL 



• 

•' 





- 


- 


,s 



* ' ' ' 

• 





‘ 





ci 




4 ■ ' 



, 

. 8 . 



•: • •;. v ‘ • • ;■ ' . r.(; : 

■ r ' • r ■'■' i*; .T: ‘T • ■ ' 

, 

■ 

■ 1 * ,■ 8-r • • •: oi " \ < r". '• 08 

, 1 . 

i; ■ ■ i. r O 0 0 • 0 0 : J. ;! f 1 8 8 * 0 ■ 

' 

. 

. ^ • •' ■ - 
' I ... . ■ .•• i 



120 


Superintendents are actively involved in the perform¬ 
ance of administrative duties in their inspectorates. An 
interesting aspect of this involvement is the great variation 
with respect to what boards expect from superintendents. 

For eleven of the eighteen administrative duties surveyed, 
the variation runs the full spread of five categories, i.e., 
all the way from delegation of the duty entirely to the 
superintendent, to the expectance of advice only from him. 

The other seven administrative duties show a variance of two 
to four categories. 

Certain administrative arrangements seem to be 
favored over others by virtue of the fact that a majority of 
divisions have adopted them. Twenty-three boards, for 
instance, delegate the hiring of teachers to superintendents. 
Other administrative areas in which delegation of the duty 
to superintendents is most-favored are: organizing and 
operating divisional libraries, and organizing special 
programs of instruction. 

The arrangement whereby superintendents discharge 
the duty, with some help from the board and secretary, is 
favored by the greatest number of divisions for the hiring 
and placing of principals, and for planning and organizing 
special programs of instruction, such as shop work and 


. . ' * ?. '■ ■ 


* 

■ 


: ":: r :; f. ■ '.:o 1 




■ 


■ 


c ; - 





„ 



r -, • etc " I:'- •' ■ 


■ 


. 


' 1 

_ * 


* 





, 





' 


b.r r ; L- < 

. r j { 

■ 

- 


• if.--:' 1 : • ’ 'V "■ €>>' 


S. '.I ' ‘ 

. 

: scfrtsFv: eciTJl'Xoqj/fr, 

» 

c-g v.?: h '"*<■ ‘ysK ; ••••<: *' ! c:: ^.r : w -t ■■ f-d.:'' : ^^:v\o‘x 

? 

:• •• ... . c •- ; . \ . ■ ■ 4 ' ' 4 ' • • : • 





121 


home economics* 

The partnership arrangement, whereby superintendents, 
boards, and secretaries act as equal partners, is favored by 
a majority of divisions for planning attendance areas; 
surveying building requirements; planning schools and 
teacherages; planning and organizing teacher supplies; 
operating rental schemes, and budgeting for school operations. 

The arrangement whereby the boards and secretaries 
discharge the duty, with some help from the superintendents, 
is favored by the majority of divisions for improving school 
caretaking; organizing pupil transportation services, and 
deciding and arranging repairs to buildings, grounds, and 
equipment. 

Calling upon the superintendent to act as an advisor 
only, is favored by most divisions for the hiring of school 
van drivers; hiring of caretakers; improving school care¬ 
taking, and organizing health services. 

The six administrative duties in which superintend¬ 
ents are least active, are as follows: the hiring of bus 
drivers; the hiring of caretakers; the improvement of school 
caretaking; organizing pupil transportation services; 
deciding and arranging repairs to buildings, equipment and 


♦ 

' 

.. • • v . '' • ■ 

• ', /■ : i-j ■ 

„ '"fj '•'}r, r:e r ; ■ 

‘ 

„ ■ ■ ' - • • : ■ ■ " • ■ 

•: ■ . # . •; ", ■ ;* v;'■ • w : : u ' '' 

* 

- ' • ; - 

- 

• ' „ : / : ■■■ ■' > 

‘if-. 

... t;t . 

- 





122 


grounds; organizing and improving school health services. 

Some of the factors which may account for these 
variations are obvious. Involvement may depend to a certain 
extent upon the willingness of superintendents to assume 
these extra duties. It may depend, too, upon their adminis-* 
trative abilities and the confidence in which they are held 
by their boards. The part they play in administration may 
be affected by the strengths or weaknesses of their boards 
along administrative lines. 

The average superintendent spends approximately one- 
third of his time in matters dealing with administration. 
This equals the amount of time he spends in the supervision 
of instruction. 

Superintendents state that the most satisfying 
relationship existing between them and their boards is the 
support, co-operation and confidence they receive from the 
trustees. Satisfaction is expressed concerning the calibre, 
abilities, and attitudes of boards; the team-work existing 
between boards and superintendents; the willingness of 
boards to accept the advice offered by superintendents, and 
the minimum of interference encountered. 


Some relationships between superintendents and boards 


-Vi: 

■ 

. 

~ , ' , 

* 

'0 -' r-i' : , .. ' * . ■ ; . ; • 

* 

■; : ' e- 

fv • ‘ oi : r;;& , : i r:' ■. • ■ ■ ‘ '■ : ■ ■■, ;>• - _. ■ 

* 

' 

' 

- ‘ f 

- 

« 




123 

cause difficulties. Narrow, sub-divisional attitudes on the 
part of trustees are most often mentioned by superintendents 
as causing difficulty. The lack of well-defined policies or 
the setting aside of established policies apparently leads 
to difficulties. Appointments, placements, and transfers of 
personnel are seemingly affected by the ambitions and 
prejudices of trustees. Concern is felt by some superintend¬ 
ents with respect to the administrative detail and respon¬ 
sibility allocated to them. 

The most harassing problems superintendents mention 
in connection with their work are: the teacher shortage; 
administrative duties; dealing with situations that have 
resulted in poor public relations and lack of rapport among 
teachers, pupils, and parents; the office and clerical 
duties required of superintendents; supervisory problems, 
especially the improvement of instructional deficiencies; 
the heavy time demands of the superintendency; inadequate 
salaries; board politics and sub-divisional attitudes of 
trustees. 

Implications for further research . It appears that 
this study only begins the research that may be done with 
respect to superintendents. Some further problems that 
need investigation are posed in the following questions: 





- 

' 

r ]V 0‘•• ' 0 t L 1 ■ • ; ,.r r 

„ , ■ , 

■ r ' ‘ -U ■: ■ v ■. • ■■■■' v e .. v;.;' .. •, .r ■ '; ■ 

. 

. 

- ' ■ ■' ■' . f x ' •: : •; ■. ; v: ■. !' s : ■ "■ X; . 


: 

•' .0 5 ' -.1' “ , : ' : ■ ' •’ 

- ' - 

■ 


r 

■ ’ ■ - '■ * * : • . ■ : , ' r V •. .. 

x 

i : : ; - ; £ 

r 




124 

What are the relative merits and demerits of local employ¬ 
ment of school superintendents as opposed to provincial 
appointment? How much general and professional education 
is necessary for this position? Should this education be 
theoretical or practical in the main? Should education be 
broad and include educational history, philosophy, psychology, 
and methodology, or should it be specialized in the fields 
of finance, administration, supervision, and school plants? 
Should public relations be stressed? Should appointments 
come from administrators of larger schools, or is exper¬ 
ience in smaller schools sufficient? What are the relative 
merits of appointing older, more experienced principals, as 
opposed to younger, better-trained principals with less 
experience? Should appointment be a recognition of lengthy 
and successful teaching experience, or should it be recog¬ 
nition of successful performance in the principalship? 

What relationships exist between superintendents and secret¬ 
aries? Superintendents and principals? Superintendents and 
teachers? Superintendents and communities? Superintendents 
and personnel of other branches of the Department of 
Education? Should these other branches perform functions in 
local administrative areas, or should the superintendent 
represent such branches at the local level? 


; ‘ • . • .v:- ■ . ... 






ec ' • ' ;j 





„ 

f ' 

■ • : - • ■ , „ ? ■ 

>V • '• .i 

- „ 

■ 

r 

• - 

- ' . ' • 

: ‘ r r ■: n.. ; . 1 ■ 

- - ■ 1 - o 

r , -)H !:'0 - : r. ■■ '■>. -■ ■. !> - . : ! V n ' 

oJ;-" ? 4 V"‘o;r! •. “iv.\ ir:? ■' : ■.* tv j oriole :! 

r 1 O ;1«: ‘,:j ,f; ■ . o : ' •■ . •> f • b' <: . ' i 01 M " b( i B 

• 

. 

' . ■ ■ ■ : ■ 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 





BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Blanchard, B. E. "Tentative Criteria in the Selection of 
Superintendents," National Association of Secondary 
School Principals Bulletin , 40:53, October, 1956. 

Byrne, T. C. "The Evolution of the Provincial Super¬ 
intendent," The Canadian Superintendent, Volume V, 
(May, 1957), P. TGI 

Department of Education, Province of Alberta, Fifty - First 
Annual Report , 1956 » Edmonton: Queen’s Printer, 1957. 

Department of Education, Province of Alberta, "Qualifi¬ 
cations Expected of Candidates for the Position of 
Superintendent of Schools". October 1, 1954. (Mimeo¬ 
graphed. ) 

Gorman, W. "Report of Chief Superintendent of Schools", 
Department of Education, Province of Alberta, 
Fourteenth Annual Report , 1919 . Edmonton: King's 
Printer, 1920. p« 47« 

Mowat, G. L. "The School Superintendent in Alberta", 

The Canadian Superintendent, Volume V, (May, 1957)• 

p. 2U-5T. 

Osborne, R. W. "How Superintendents Spend Their Working 
Hours", The Nation’s Schools , 55s53— 55, June, 1955* 

Rees, R.E. "Superintendents of Schools in Relationship 
to School Divisions in the Province of Alberta", 
Unpublished Doctor’s Dissertation, Northwestern 
University, Evanston, Illinois. 1947• 

The School Act , Province of Alberta. 1952. 





























APPENDIX 



THE ALBERTA SCHOOL SUPERINTENDENT 


I. TRAINING 


(a) Please place an X opposite the degrees you held at 
the time of your appointment as superintendent: 


no degree 
B.Ao 
B.Ed. 
B.Sc. 


M.A. 

M. Ed.3 

D. Ed._ 

Ph.D. 


Others (please specify) _ 

(b) Teaching certificate held at time 

of appointment _ 

(c) Total number of years spent in 
academic preparation prior to 

appointment _ 

(d) Period spent in improving training 

since appointment yrs._ mos. 

(e) Present qualifications 

1 . Degrees _ 

2. Partial Degrees __ 

(f) Number of personnel in your 
inspectorate with higher academic 
qualifications than superintendent 

acting as 1. principals __ 

2 . teachers _ 


a. 


II. EXPERIENCE PRIOR TO APPOINTMENT 

One room Rural Village Town City 
Schools Consol. Schools Schools Schools 
Schools 


Years as teacher in 


Elementary grades 
Junior High School 
Senior High School 

b. Years spent as 

Subject supervisor 
Asst. Principal 
Vice - Principal 
Principal 


Number of rooms supervised as principal 



































» - 

* » 

• - « * 


■ 

, 

■ 

, 

* 

. 

« 


. 

- 

■: 





























2 


III. PERSONAL 

(a) Age at appointment 

(b) Year of appointment 

(c) Present age 

(d) Number of divisions or counties in 

which you served as superintendent _ 

(e) Longest service in any division _ 

(f) Shortest service in any division _ 

IV. DUTIES 

Below are listed ten duties which are probably 
common to superintendents. 

COLUMN 1 - Please list these duties from 1 to 10 in the 
order in which you estimate their importance. 
Use number 1 for most important. 

COLUMN 2 - Please list the duties according to the time 
you must spend in performing each duty. Use 
number 1 for the duty that takes most time. 

COLUMN 3 - Please estimate the percentage of time spent 
in the performance of each duty in a normal 
year. 

COL. 1 COL. 2 COL. 3 

1. Supervision of instruction _ 

2. In-service training (Convention 

Institutes, Principals Assoc.) _ 

3. Public Relations (Include infor¬ 
mation to parents, teachers) _ 

4. Organization of the units and 

services of the school system __ 

5. Planning and Improving school 

plants and facilities _ 

6 . Administration of personnel 

(hiring, placing, etc.) __ 

7. Auxiliary Services, (health, 

transport, rental schemes) _ 

8 . Work for Department (Trustee¬ 
ships, Exams.,Curriculum) _ 

9. Attendance at board and sub- 

divisional meetings _ 

10. Reports and correspondence ______ 

V. ASSISTANTS TO SUPERINTENDENTS 

Please indicate the number of personnel provided by your 
board to assist you in your duties: 


Assistant Superintendents 
Helping Teachers 























■ 

. 


- 


* 

„ 

* 


, 

- 

. 

« 

X 

- 

. 

. 

Jr-*' t JvO'.iSfr O' ' - 

- 








- 

■ 









3 


Special Subject Supervisors 
Clerical or Stenographic 

VI. TYPES OP SCHOOLS SUPERVISED 

Number of One-room schools 

2-4 rooms 
5-10 rooms 
11 - 15 rooms 
16 - 20 rooms 
over 20 rooms 


VII. Remuneration 

Highest salary prior to appointment 
Salary at appointment 
Present salary 

Salary of highest paid principal in 
your inspectorate 

Number of personnel in your inspectorate 
higher paid than superintendent 


VIII. Please state the most satisfying and most difficult 
aspect of your work in relation to: 

Superintendent - Board Relationships 

Most satisfying _ 


Most difficult 


IX. Please list the three aspects of your work that you 
consider least attractive: 

1 . _ 

2 . ____ 

3 . __ 


What are your three most harassing problems? 

1 . ____ 

2. ___ 


X 































_ 

• 

• • 




- 





* ■ 

_ 



• 





■ 

' 

' * " ' '■ ;v ' xr 

- : 

■ ‘ ;! :• : . 




A 











4 


Below are listed some administrative duties in which super¬ 
intendents become involved to some extent. Please check the 
column which best describes your situation according to 
the descriptions below: 

1. The board has delegated this duty entirely to the super¬ 
intendent . 

2. The superintendent discharges this duty with some help 
from board members and the secretary-treasurer. 

3® The superintendent, board, and secretary-treasurer act 
as equal partners in discharging this duty. 

4* The board and secretary-treasurer discharge this duty 
with some help from the superintendent. 

5® The superintendent acts in an advisory capacity only. 

6 . Not applicable in this area. 


1 2 3 4 5 6 

1. Hiring and placing teachers _ 

2. Hiring and placing principals _ 

3. Hiring and planning the work of 
special supervisors, helping 

teachers, etc. _ 

4o Hiring of bus drivers ____ 

5® Hiring of caretakers __ 

6. Improving school caretaking __ 

7o Organizing pupil transportation 
services 

8* Planning attendance areas __ 

9. Surveying building requirements _ 

10. Planning buildings (schools, teacher- 

ages, etc.) _ 

11. Deciding and arranging repairs to 

buildings, grounds, equipment _ 

12. Planning and organizing pupil and 

teacher supplies __ 

13. Organizing and operating divisional 

libraries __ 

14. Operating rental schemes 

15. Organizing and Improving health 

services __ 

16. Planning services in special areas; 

home ec., shop, circuits, etc. _ 

17. Planning and organizing special 
programs of instruction; gifted, 

retarded, remedial, accelerated _ 

18. Budgeting for school operations __ 






























. 

' - • 

. 

4 



- j > ! r 

. 

, 

* 

4 












? * 

" 

' r 

















Warner, Alberta 
August 12, 1957 


Dear Kr. 


Very likely the questionnaire I forwarded to you in 
June reached you at a yery busy time and you have not had the 
opportunity to give it consideration, I am taking the liberty 
of forwarding another copy, just in case the first was mislaid 
or lost. 


Because of the very small number of people who are to 
he contacted in this study, results are not valid unless a very 
high percentage of replies are received. Some seventy percent 
of the original questionnaires have been returned. Results are 
being tabulated at the present time and. t&e overall picture 
emerging is very interesting. 

Would you please take a few minutes to complete the 
enclosed material? 


Allow me to thank you for your time and. trouble in 
anticipation of your assistance. 


Yours sincerely. 


Steve Hencley, 
Superintendent of Schools, 
County of Warner bo. 5. 











