THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE ENGLISH PROGRAM 
IN THE SECONDARY SCHOOLS OF ALBERTA 


by 

Stanley William Sawicki 
April, 1958. 


DIVISION OF SECONDARY EDUCATION 





©XHIBBIS 

wawmw&ais 

w»wmsis 














i 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE ENGLISH PROGRAM IN THE 
SECONDARY SCHOOLS OF ALBERTA 


A THESIS SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR 
THE DEGREE OF MASTER OF EDUCATION 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


by 

STANLEY WILLIAM SAWICKI 
APRIL, 1958 





ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


The writer wishes to express his appreciation for the encouragement 
and assistance received during the preparation of this work. To Dr. H. S. 
Baker, who gave generously of his time and advice during most of the time 
that this thesis was in preparation, the writer expresses his gratitude. 
The helpful advice and pertinent observations on the development of the 
thesis by Dr. H. T. Coutts, Mr. W. Pilkington and Miss M. Caldwell are 
gratefully acknowledged. 


iii 







. 

. 














■ ' . . 



























THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE ENGLISH PROGRAM IN THE 


SECONDARY SCHOOLS OF ALBERTA 
SYNOPSIS 

The purpose of this study is to describe the evolution of the 
English curriculum in the secondary schools of Alberta. Each of the 
five chapters which make up the main body of this study describes the 
English programs that have been prescribed in the schools of the 
province. 

The curriculum which was introduced in the North-West Territories 
in 1902 remained in effect after the formation of the Province of Alberta 
for a period of seven years. The traditional concept of formal discipline 
was an important influence on the curriculum which was primarily designed 
to meet the needs of the few who intended to teach or to attend university. 
In 1912 the provincial Department of Education issued a curriculum under 
its own auspices* but few changes were made and these were mostly of a 
minor nature, consisting largely of an emphasis on oral reading. 

The first definite break with nineteenth century type of curriculum 
came with the revision which began in 1922. Changing concepts of the 
purposes of secondary schools, increased enrolments» and protests against 
the formal type of education then in vogue created demands for a liber¬ 
alization of the curriculum. Educators realized that the needs of 
students who were not preparing for higher education must be met. 

The complete reorganization of the curriculum which began in 1937 
introduced a program in which literature and language were combined into 
one subject. The program was marked by a widening of the range of 

iv 







Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 






https://archive.org/details/developmentofengOOsawi 


literature selections, an emphasis on functional grammar, and an attempt 
to relate composition more closely to the student*s life. 

The trend toward unified courses was reversed to some extent in the 
195^ revision when separate courses in language and literature were set up 
in grades X and XI. In grade XII these two sections of the English 
program were integrated. The notable features of the 195^ curricula were 
the adoption of the unit method, the introduction of a grammar and usage 
handbook, and the provision of five periods a week for language in grades 
X and XI. 


v 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I. INTRODUCTION . 1 

II. THE ALBERTA HIGH SCHOOL ENGLISH CURRICULUM FROM 1905 TO 1912 3 

Literature . 4 

Composition.... 11 

Grammar. ... 14 

Summary... 16 

III. THE ALBERTA HIGH SCHOOL ENGLISH CURRICULUM FROM 1912 TO 1922 19 

Literature . 20 

Composition. 22 

Grammar....... 24 

Summary....... 26 

IV. THE ALBERTA HIGH SCHOOL ENGLISH CURRICULUM FROM 1922 TO 193? 28 

Literature . . 3° 

Composition......... 

History of English Literature . 38 

Summary..... 39 

V. THE ALBERTA HIGH SCHOOL ENGLISH CURRICULUM FROM 1937 TO 195^ 4l 

Integration of Literature and Language . 43 

Language..... 44 

Grammar...... 4? 

Literature . 50 

Remedial English and Developmental Reading. 51 

Summary..... 53 


vi 































































CHAPTER 


PAGE 


VI. THE ALBERTA HIGH SCHOOL ENGLISH CURRICULUM AS 

INTRODUCED IN 195^. 57 

English Language 10 and 20 . 63 

English Literature 10 and 20... 74 

English 30 ...... 73 

Elective Courses in English . 82 

Summary. 83 

VII. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS .. 86 

BIBLIOGRAPHY.... 95 

APPENDIX A. 97 

APPENDIX B. 99 

APPENDIX C. 101 

APPENDIX D... 105 

APPENDIX E. 107 

APPENDIX F. 110 

APPENDIX G.......... 113 


































































CHAPTER I 


INTRODUCTION 

The purpose of this study is to describe the evolution of the English 
curriculum in the secondary schools of Alberta. Each of the five chapters 
which make up the main body of this study describes one of the English 
programs that have been prescribed in the schools of the province. The ways 
in which each curriculum differs from those which preceded it are pointed 
out and the reasons for the changes• as far as can b© ascertained, are given. 

The curriculum which was introduced in the North-West Territories in 
1902 remained in effect after the formation of the Province of Alberta for 
a period of seven years. The traditional concept of formal discipline was 
an important influence on the curriculum which was primarily designed to 
meet the needs of the few who intended to teach or to attend university. 

In 1912 the provincial Department of Education issued a curriculum under 
its own auspices, but it will be shown that few changes were made and that 
these were mostly of a minor nature. 

The first definite break with the nineteenth century type of 
curriculum came with the revision which began in 1922. Changing concepts 
of the purposes of secondary schools, increased enrolments» and protests 
against the formal type of education then in vogue created demands for a 
liberalization of the curriculum. Educators realized that the needs of 
students who were not preparing for higher education must be met. 

The complete reorganization of the curriculum^which began in 1937, 
introduced a program in which literature and language were combined into 


' . ■ • . ! .r.'i 1 v / 

drc ■ ”1 ■ ■ • 1 r • cri • ■ ' tn .■ . 

. ' 

'xo;: .■■■:, \S.. u'.vJyct. oiJ rn "l tv *4' rd d. .{izv:mri ; :SC>^X " 

I *ia • . . 

©3 ' i i f ■ ’ ■■ ; .. • . . . \o 1 i 

v : ... \o: : . . o; ’ <>.’ vdl or: ! 10 e.:/.A:a oio Xo....;; 

■ ’ •. • . ;: jft;l C X l 

. . ' •: 1 . : . ■ 


. 




xj 




- ■ 


■ 


' ' 




\ : ■ 




0. ■ ' f;A - ' ’■ 

a 1 : 1 ; 


• rU . ■ i; ./T'l o .■ ' a :) j 




. *> ■.. ... 






• (jj 


•Y O'. 




; v ' r ■ 


1 ‘ 






2 


one subject. The program was marked by a widening of the range of 
literature selections, an emphasis on functional grammar, and an attempt to 
relate composition more closely to the student's life. 

The trend toward unified courses was reversed to some extent in the 
195^ revision when separate courses in language and literature were set up 
in grades X and XI. In grade XII these two sections of the English program 
were integrated. Some of the notable features of the 195^ curricula were: 
the adoption of the unit method, the introduction of a grammar and usage 
handbook, and the provision of five periods a week for language in grades X 
and XI. 

The main sources of information about curricula during the early 
years were the annual reports published by the Departments of Education of 
the North-West Territories and of the Province of Alberta. For the period 
after 1922, various handbooks and curriculum guides were the main sources. 
Textbooks were used also to provide information; their usefulness for the 
purposes of this study was limited, however, by the fact that it was found 
difficult to obtain those that had been used during the early years. 

For curriculum-makers who plan curricula, and for the teachers who 
put them into effect in the classroom, a knowledge of the past should provide 
understandings which will aid each group in performing its task. It is 
hoped that this study, by making such knowledge available, will be of 
benefit to both of these groups. 


' 



' 







. 






v: i u 










. 






'■ ' •• 




■ 


f 


' ! 


T 





CHAPTER II 


THE ALBERTA HIGH SCHOOL ENGLISH CURRICULUM 
FROM 1905 TO 1912 

When the province of Alberta was created in 1905» one of the major 
responsibilities assumed by the new government was the administration of 
the educational system. Many vital problems demanded immediate attention, 
the most pressing perhaps being the provision of schools for the rapidly- 
increasing population. In addition, it had been only three years since the 
curriculum had been revised. It is not surprising then to note that the 
new government was content to keep in effect the curriculum which had been 
inherited from the Territorial government. 

This curriculum had been the work largely of one man—Dr. D. J. Goggin, 
who had been Superintendent of Education of the North-West Territories from 
1892 to 1903. In this post he was directly responsible for many tasks which, 
as the educational system grew, were later handed to various departmental 
officials. Among these was the job of curriculum construction. Dr. Goggin 
drew up course outlines for a complete curriculum revision which took place 
in 1902. It is perhaps misleading to say that course outlines were drawn 
up inasmuch as the main part of curriculum construction then consisted of 
choosing a textbook and assigning it to be studied. In teaching a course, 
teachers adhered closely to the text. However, Dr. Goggin did provide 
several pages of e^lanation and comment on the courses at the time of the 
revision. In his introduction to the reading and literature course, for 
example, he outlined the purposes of silent reading, oral reading, supple¬ 
mentary reading and sight reading, and suggested teaching methods for the 





















■ ii 


. ; ’ ' ' 1 ! ' • ■ }'n 






4 

various sections. These will be referred to in subsequent parts of this 
chapter. 

Schools in which the secondary standards were taught were few and 
far between (only in Calgary and Edmonton in the early years) and enrol¬ 
ments were small. It was the hope of the authorities that graduates of 
the secondary schools would augment the small numbers of well-qualified 
teachers and so help solve one of the department*s most burdensome problems. 
Teaching certificates were in fact equated to the work of the standards. 
Students who successfully passed the Standard 71 examinations were eligible 
for the Third Class Certificate and so on up to the First Class Certificate 
for successful Standard VIII candidates. 

The Alberta educational system had been patterned after the Ontario 
system with its organization into standards rather than grades. The system 
was composed of elementary schools divided into five standards (which would 
take the average student seven or eight years to complete), and a secondary 
school system of three standards. At the end of Standard 7, students sat 
for public-school leaving examinations, while the students of Standards VI, 
VII and VIII also had to write government examinations. 

In the remainder of this chapter, the subjects which made up the 
English program are examined from the standpoint of aims, subject matter 
and examinations. The opinions of inspectors and examiners which are 
quoted provide some idea of the way in which the courses were taught, 

literature 

English literature was one of five subjects in the English program, 
the others being English composition, reading, English grammar and rhetoric, 



& 

. 

■ 

. 

" <i:7 *v- 

■ 

• ' ‘ . 

' 


' . ' . ' . 

• ' - . ' . ‘ . . 

X IX 

. • • • G%: J :£ t ( . i 0 t ■ /■■■■:' - ' . £ . * i 

. i - • 

' 

. 

' 

< ■' ' >i. ■:■■■:; if 

. 

' 

i ' .■ • d 




5 


and history of English literature. All of the above except history of 
English literature were required subjects in every standard; the latter 
was an optional subject in Standard VIII. 

As mentioned above, detailed outlines of the courses were not to be 
found in the course of studies. There was a list of prescribed selections, 
preceded by a short introductory paragraph which stated that the class was 
to make "a thorough study" of the selections. The complete introduction 
to the literature course for all standards read as follows: 

English Literature.—A thorough study of the subject matter, structure 
and language of each prescribed selection. Memorisation of fine 
passages.^ 

Dr. Goggin had elaborated on the last requirement by writing elsewhere 
in his annual report: 

Selections of poetry and prose inculcating reverence, love of 
country, love of nature and admiration of moral courage are to be 
committed to memory and recited. * 2 

The first quotation above would indicate that the method of teaching 
literature was to make a rigorous, line-by-line analysis of each prescribed 
selection. 

In prescribing the works to be studied, it was the practice to 
change the selections from year to year, in a cycle. The titles listed 
below, which were among those prescribed for 1903* should serve as an 
adequate sample of the type of reading which students were required to do. 

^Department of Education of the North-West Territories, Annual 
Report, 1902, p. 84. 

2 Ibid., p. 67 . 











- 


... 

■ 

' 









O 












' 








Standard Vis 


6 

Ivanhoe , and the poems on pages 1-108 of an anthology- 
edited by Saul and McIntyre (The Copp, Clark Co.) 

Standard VII: Alexander * s School Anthology of English Poetry . 

Books II and III , The Merchant of Venice , Silas 
Mamer . 

Standard VIII: Tennyson's The Palace of Art , Locksley Hall , In 

Memorium ; Milton's L'Allegro , II Penseroso , Lycidas , 
Comus ; The Merchant of Venice , HamletT ^"” 

It will be noted that all of the prescribed selections were works which had 

been traditionally accepted as great works of literature; no attempt was 

made to include the works of contemporary authors. 

In addition to the literature in each grade, there was also a course 
entitled "reading." The books prescribed were not to be studied as strenu¬ 
ously as those in the literature courses. Judging from the prescriptive 
paragraph quoted below, and from Dr. Goggin’s comments* these selections 
were to provide students with practice in oral reading. 

Reading— A general knowledge of the subject-matter of the books 
prescribed for reading. These books are for independent supplementary 
reading rather than study. Practice in oral reading. 

Dr. Goggin elaborated on the above statement as follows: 

Through silent reading pupils acquire the habit of mastering by 
themselves the contents of a long selection and the relation of its 
parts to the whole. This careful study of the subject matter has not 
infrequently been accompanied by a lack of sufficient individual 
practice in oral reading. The pupil's analysis of the selection 
shows his grasp of its thought, but oral reading reveals his 
appreciation of it.-^ 


^Ibid ., pp. 84-89. 

4 Ibid . 

^Council of Public Instruction of the North-West Territories, 
Report 1896 , p. 20. 





























■ 














c 

. 

■ 


' ' 

; 

. 

♦ ’ - ' 

■ 

. 

' ' 

•* 

. 

. 





? 

These are the works which were prescribed for "independent supplementary- 
reading" in 1903: 

Standard VI: Evangeline , Lady of the Lake , Christmas Carol, Vicar 

of Wakefield , Tales From Shakespeare . 

Standard VII: Tennyson's The Princess , Enoch Arden , Ode of the Death 
of the Duke of Wellington , Ruskin's Sesame and Lilies, 
Irving*s Sketch Book , Scott's The Talisman . 

Standard VIII: Sohrab and Rustum , Browning's The Lost Leader , Rabbi 
Ben Ezra, The Grammarians Funeral and other poems, 

De Quincey's Flight of a Tartar Tribe , Macaulay's ^ 
Life and Writings of Addison » Thackeray's Pendennis . 

What were the aims and objectives of these courses? While the course 
of study itself does not include a statement of aims, the words of Dr, 

Goggin provide at least a partial answer. 

In Standards III and IV character studies are introduced and the 
pupils are led gradually to look on literature as an interpreter of 
life, as an "effective agency for cherishing within us the ideal." 

The improvement in the teaching of this subject has come chiefly 
through the sympathetic study of it by our teachers. More and more 
they are coming to feel the vitalising, spiritualising influence of 
the best literature, to believe that it "awakens within us the diviner 
mind and rouses us to a consciousness of what is best in others and 
ourselves," and to desire that their pupils shall share in their 
treasures and receive guidance and encouragement from the master 
minds. It is this that has made the teaching of literature so 
generous and inspiring.' 

Later, writing a general introduction to the whole course of studies, Dr. 
Goggin stated: 

...In history and literature he reads of the real and ideal acts of 
men and of nations and so may receive instruction in duty, guidance in 


^Department of Education of the North-West Territories, Annual Report 
1902 . pp. 84-39. 

^Council of Public Instruction of the North-West Territories, 

Report 1896 , p. 21. 






































»' ft: ... 




■ 


tiW :. " 


•r; <1 ' s' • J' 

. 

‘ ■ ' 

: 

; . . 


i ■ 

.... _ . . ... .. . 

• - , ■ , ■ ' . • 


: 'Vc- vpi.r?-: 


' 






8 

action and inspiration for effort, and thus his political duties and 
rights become clearer. He is led to form judgments on the moral 
qualities of deeds performed by those he reads about and this has a 
reflex effect upon his own acts...After all, the truest test of a 
school is the character of the life the pupil lives in it each day. 

The school is a social organization in which pupils live as well as 
work. Each has work to do for himself and for others, responsibilities 
to bear, opportunities for self denial and self sacrifice, pleasures to 
share and enjoy with others, recreations to be used rationally.^ 

In these words, Dr. Goggin, who was known as a man of high ideals, moral 

conviction, and deep religious sentiment, expressed his firm belief in the 

ability of literature to enrich and improve the lives of the students. 

The government examinations which were given in each standard were 
reprinted in the annual report. Unlike the modern English examinations 
in which there is a heavy emphasis on ability to read and interpret select¬ 
ions which are new to the students, the examinations of this early period 
consisted mostly of questions based directly on the material which had 
been studied in class. Therefore, these questions give an indication of 
what was actually taught in the classroom. 

The 1903 literature examination in Standard VIII contained these 
questions on Milton and Shakespeare. 

A. 1. In L 8 Allegro and II Pens©rose "the likings and tastes 
expressed by the type of character portrayed are meant 
to be contrasted. The one poem is the counterpart of 
the other." Show this by reference to (a) the companions 
desired by each, (b) the pleasures of each during the 
different periods of the day. 


Q 

°Council of Public Instruction of the North-West Territories, 
Report 1900, pp. 21-22. 

^Department of Education of the North-West Territories, Annual 
Report 1903. pp. 178-9- 








' '! 

. . 


t ■ 

j- • : i' •; .■' f : ■ ' ■ s. • , w' ( ■ 

’ V . ' ' : ' j , ' ■ 

: r :-r :rv ; I' . ■/.: vy m,,' c - .r'Jv/iuv y l V; v w .r.fi 

' 

■ : . >< •. .. . ", . 


t ' ' * • . ■' “ ■ :j< J 

- ‘ ' ■' .! :: :V‘i i $ j... . ' *;<> V/-) .• V : ‘,hy" :;,i ,C0 

‘J 

’ 

■ 

. . .. 1 

1 ’ ... 









' ' • ' . ■■ . . 








B. 1 


9 

By a brief analysis of the events in each act and the 
purpose of each act, show that Hamlet proceeds by well 
considered steps to the final denouement. Compare in 
this respect The Merchant of Venice , 

2. Discuss Shakespeare's use of the comic or grotesque 
element in Hamlet.9 

In the course of studies, Shakespeare's plays were included under the head¬ 
ing “Poetical Literature", which would seem to indicate that the plays were 
studied as poetry rather than as drama. However, the students' knowledge 
of the feelings, attitudes, and development of the characters was often 
tested. 


On most examinations, there appeared quotations from poems which had 
been studied during the year. Students were asked to identify authors, to 
explain the thought of the passages and also the meaning of certain 
italicized words and phrases. In other questions, students were required 
to: 

(a) give estimates of excellencies and defects of an author's 
poetry, 

(b) point out irony and humour, 

(c) quote lines which illustrate beauty of sound or figurative 
language, 

(d) name speakers and give context of quoted passages. 

The nature of this study is revealed in the following excerpt from the 1902 
Annual Report. 

Prose ( Talisman ) 

1. What is the use of the first chapter? 

2. What contributions to the progress of the plot are made by the 
visit of Kenneth to the chapel at Engaddi? 

3* What part is played by Philip of France in the development of 
the plot? 10 


10 Department of Education of the North-West Territories, Annual 
Report 1902, p. 110. 










. 

. 

. ■ 











. 

. 

. 

V )!. • ' - 0 

. 


. . ■ " ■■ o 


' 

Jd • ' Jon . ? : . *;• 

. .. : , ic, .... ... '. . ; 








; • 1 ' ■ ’ y3 , U. 

. 















































■ 





10 

Other questions on the same paper ask for comments on the use of disguise, 
the use of nemesis, and the historical accuracy of the novel. 

Did the curriculum as outlined achieve the desired objectives? The 
comments of the sub-examiners shed some light on this question. 

Standard VI - Literature 

The power to analyse selections and appreciate relations of parts to 
wholes is improving but the power to interpret selections is weak. The 
memorising of fine passages has been done intelligently. 

There is much room for improvement in expression. The subexaminers 
believe that if the study of words, figurative language, and sentence 
structure were emphasized more, even if less emphasis had to be given 
to the study of plot and the method of the author, greater power and 
better taste in composition would be developed... 

Standard VII - Literature 

The answer papers in poetical literature reveal a satisfactory know¬ 
ledge of the subject matter and a general appreciation of its literary 
value. Evidently the teaching has been on sound lines. In general 
scholarship and power of interpretation these candidates are much in 
advance of those in Standard VI. 

In the Prose Literature where the candidates have been taught along 
the lines suggested in the Programme of Studies the answers are quite 
satisfactory. Where an orderly method has not been followed the results 
are poor. The art of the author and the literary value of the selection 
seem to be appreciated.^ 

Comments such as the above seem to indicate that the students were 
adequately prepared to answer the questions which appeared on the examinations. 
Whether the student did "feel the vitalising, spiritualising influence of 
the best literature" is another question. The Superintendent of Education 
himself had written, "The character of the work done in our schools cannot 
be measured in any broad way by examinations. I have said that even as 









or 




. 


. 

' ' ' 

■ 

J 


. 




■ [ ' 

.vj'j 


. 

' 








■ ' 




i 


■ 

■ *WJ 




' 

' 

. 






d w . v > ' h ; 

- - 

. 

























evidences of intellectual power they are not entirely trustworthy 


,12 


11 


Composition 

As in the literature course, the requirements for composition were 
stated in a brief paragraph, but Dr. Goggin*s views on the aims and method¬ 
ology of composition teaching were given in his general introduction to 
the whole curriculum; from these the teachers were able to get some guidance. 
The actual statement of requirements informed teachers that students® 
compositions were to be based chiefly on subjects from the books prescribed 
for general reading, although letter writing was also prescribed. In eval¬ 
uating the work of the students, teachers were to pay more attention to 
the student*s ability to write good English than to his knowledge of the 
subjects. There was a warning that "work palpably defective in point of 
spelling, writing, punctuation, or division into paragraphs will not be 
accepted at examinations." In addition, teachers were directed to give 
instruction in the fundamental principles of rhetoric.^ 

The course as outlined above was an outgrowth of Dr. Goggin’s view 
of the aims of composition, which are quoted here at some length. 

The aim in all Standards is to lead the pupils to express themselves 
simply and clearly on any topic about which they have thought or read. 

The work in each Standard is divided into two parts - the first or 
"real" concerning itself with the expression of thought, the second or 
"formal" concerning itself with the structure of the sentence and later 
the paragraph and theme. 


12 Ibld .. p. 17-18. 

•*-3 jbid ., pp. 84-89. 








. ■ 


:•{ • 1 ' ' : 

■ ' 

• - c> ir. ;jj 

. • • • •• • ; ■!•• • • ■ •' 1 -O'! 

, ■ ; • • , ' ■ - 

- ■ 

. . 

• ■ , : ‘ . : , , ' : :• ■ )' 

’ ’ I ( ' 

' , . .. ... . ■; . ' , .- o : 'J' ■' : " ' ?r*A 

. 


. ; ' •• : f ' ,. ; ro ” 'J *.' ■ . ‘"J ? 

' • : -J ' ' • . . ' 1 

,, . ..... • • : j 

■ 




■ 





12 

The pupils gather thoughts from the lessons in history, literature, 
geography and other subjects, learn how to arrange them and, after 
giving oral expression to them, write them with due regard to the 
mechanics of composition. Errors are corrected from the standpoint 
of thought and but one or two considered in any lesson. By a series 
of sentences on the blackboard the pupils are led to see the nature of 
the error observed by the teacher. Each pupil then reads his own 
composition to discover whether he has made this error and to correct 
it if he finds it. Self-criticism and self-correction are aimed at. 

In the higher Standards there is added analysis of typical passages 
of prose to discover their essential characteristics. Through this 
analysis the study of structure is emphasized. In the order of 
thoughts depends the clearness of their presentation. Some knowledge 
and appreciation of style is also secured.^ 

Of all the subjects on the secondary school curriculum, composition received 

the most attention from the school inspectors and the sub-examiners. These 

officials consistently expressed dissatisfaction with the classroom work 

in the subject and also with the results as revealed on the examinations. 

Such expression of opinion as the following are found: 

In no other subject is the standing of pupils as low as in composition. 
In the higher grades too much stress is placed on the reproduction of 
the substance of lessons in reading, history, etc. The scholars should 
be encouraged to narrate their own experiences (real or imaginary). 

The adoption of a more original type of work should result in greater 
interest and a greater power of thought expression. * 1 -^ 

(G. J. Bryan, Inspector of Schools for Southern Alberta) 

In a very considerable number of schools composition does not receive 
the attention which it deserves, the training in the subject being con¬ 
fined to the reproduction of stories contained in the reading lessons. 

This is useful and important practice in composition but it does not 
take the place of formal teaching on the subject. 1 ® 

(J. A. Fife, Inspector of Schools for Edmonton) 


^Council of Public Instruction of the North-West Territories, 
Report 1896 , pp. 21-22. 

1 ^Department of Education of the North-West Territories, Annual 
Report 1903 , p. 54. 

1 ^Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report 1909 , p. 44. 








. v •; ■ , 

* '■ - 

. 

. 

’ : *i ' • ■ •! . J t;<; • - J' 

- 

■ 

. 

. 

■ ' ■ 

■ 

• . i: ■ ?od; 's ix ' - : ■ ; 

, 

■ 

■rm ■ ■■ ■ 

. . 

■ . 


. 









13 

It is interesting to compare the above remarks with the opinions expressed 
by the sub-examiners in the 1902 annual report* Commenting on the work on 
the essay examinations for Standards VI, VII and VIII, they stated: 

The work is not satisfactory. The English of the essays is inferior 
to that of the answer papers in literature. In description the results 
are good but in narration, especially where conversations are given, 
there are many weaknesses. Exposition is quite below the standard 
expected. 

The subexaminers suggest that candidates should be given much more 
practice in composition based upon the prose literature, and particularly 
upon topics demanding direct narration and exposition. 

There was whole-hearted agreement on one point: the standard of 
achievement in composition was not high enough. But whereas the inspectors 
felt that there was too much stress on "reproduction of the substance of 
lessons in reading, etc.,” the sub-examiners emphatically endorsed that 
teaching method. Three methods of improving compositions were suggested: 

(l) encouraging students "to narrate their own experiences," (2) more formal 
teaching of the subject, (3) more practice in composition based upon the 
prose literature. 

Dr. Goggin’s remarks and the criticisms quoted above provide a 
picture of the nature of composition teaching during the period. Compo¬ 
sitions were based on the work in other subjects, especially literature 
and history. There was much formal teaching of the principles of rhetoric. 
Students analyzed passages of prose to discover their essential character¬ 
istics; then they could apply the knowledge thus gained in improving their 
own writing. These were the main emphases of the course, but it is apparent 

-^Department of Education of the North-West Territories, Annual 
Report 1902 , p. 19. 








u 

' 





.3 ‘io 0 . ' ■ 












. 












. 






- 












. 

. 

- 

■ 






. ( 










14 

that there was a healthy state of disagreement amongst educators on the 
question of how composition should be taught# Such a state of disagreement 
left the way open for improvements. 

Grammar 

The first requirement of the program of studies for English grammar 
and rhetoric was a general knowledge of the high school grammar textbook. 
Teachers were to provide definite instruction in the choice of words, in 
the structure of sentences and of paragraphs, and in the simple forms of 
narration, description, exposition and argument. The textbooks were listed 
as follows: 

Standards VI and VII - Syke’s Elementary English Composition 

Standard VIII - Burt’s Elementary Phonetics » Summer’s Handbook of 

Poetics, Genung’s Practical Elements of RhetoricT ^ 

The teaching of grammar had two main objectives: to improve the 

ability to write and speak good English, and to provide training in thinking. 

Dr. Goggin had written, "Through the logical forms of subject, predicate 

and modifier, grammar reveals the essential nature of thought and hence the 

formal study of it is valuable as a training in thinking." With respect to 

the other objective, it was realized that the study of grammar made only a 

very limited contribution to correctness of expression. 














. 

, 

■ • 

■ 

t 

' ■ • ' 1 . 

1 ■ ■ 

c "■ ' ' , 

. 

: \ 

; 







15 


Correct speaking depends more on the forms of speech heard and 
read than on the rules of grammar, hence considerable attention is 
given to the correction of errors in the language used by pupils. 

John Seath, the author of a grammar textbook published in 1899* bad stated 

that correctness of expression is only a secondary purpose of the study of 

grammar, and that it is "constant practice, under never-failing watch and 

correction, that makes good writers and speakers."^® The foremost reason 

then for the teaching of grammar was that it was considered to be valuable 

as an intellectual discipline. 

In their reports, the sub-examiners and inspectors frequently 
expressed dissatisfaction with the work in grammar. In 1902 the sub- 
examiners noted that "the power to analyse sentences correctly and method¬ 
ically is somewhat weak... They consider analysis an excellent test of a 

21 

candidates power and urge special attention to it." 

The views of the purpose of grammar which have been outlined above 
were a reflection of the theory of mental discipline which influenced 
education strongly during the nineteenth century. The study of logically- 
organized subjects, such as grammar and mathematics, was believed to 
exercise the mind and so improve the ability to think. If the student found 
the subject difficult, so much the better: by winning through to a knowledge 

^Council of Public Instruction of the North-West Territories, 

Report 189& , p. 22. 

20 

John Seath, The High School English Grammar , Revised Edition, 
Toronto: Canada Publishing Company Limited, 1899* pp. 16-1?. 

^-Department of Education of the North-West Territories, Annual 
Report , 1902 , p. 20. 











It 

' ■" " - . . V '■ ' . : • ■- ' : ' 

, 








■ 






■ ■ 

. 

? 


■ 






■ 

■ 






■ 



' 


• 


■ 

« 
















16 


of the subject, he would be better trained. It was believed that there 
would be a transfer of training from grammar to other fields. The solving 
of grammatical problems (as in sentence analysis) would provide a training 
in logical thinking which could be used later in solving the problems of 
life. 


This system of teaching grammar was not without its critics. 

Inspector' C. Sansom offered this criticism; 

But it is perhaps in the teaching of English Grammar that the purely 
formal element is most in evidence. Grammar is undoubtedly one of the 
most poorly taught subjects on the curriculum, and the essence of the 
trouble lies in the formal way in which it is handled. It is very 
seldom, to take one instance, that the study of the objective case or 
of the subjective complement is directly associated with the proper use 
of pronouns. Pupils spend years learning definitions, picking out 
clauses, and parsing words, with scarcely an idea as to the real purposes 
of it all. In the rural schools the course of studies in this subject 
is practically a dead letter. 

The methods of teaching grammar which had become traditional during 
the nineteenth century were carried on in Alberta during the early years of 
the present century, but there were those who were critical of the prevailing 
ideology and who were looking for improvements. 


Summary 

Educators generally will agree with Dr. Goggin* s definition of a 

school as a place where ’’the pupil must be prepared as a member of society 

23 

to live a worthy life and earn a respectable living.” However, they 


^Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report 1913» pp. 96-97. 

^Council of Public Instruction of the North-West Territories, 
Report 1900, p. 21. 








- 


■ 

: 

- 

"> *. v ■; ' ‘j'. ■ ■ i .v:- ;■ 

- 

. 

. 

, ' v 

‘' : 1 " ■ : 'K. ; r 

- 

* ' ■' ' ' ' O loia'jj; 


■ 




j ' ,{ 

■ 







. 









17 


disagree in their views of how this purpose can be achieved. One group 

claims that there is a certain body of knowledge which the pupil must learn 

before he takes his place as an adult member of society. According to this 

group, the school is, in a way, a repository of this knowledge and must 

discharge its responsibility of handing it on to the pupil. Those who hold 

the other view suggest that the child rather than the culture be taken as 

the starting point in determining curriculum. We should learn all we can 

about the child; his growth, intellectual and emotional development, his 

needs, and so on. Then the curriculum can be built to foster this growth. 

And, as always in human affairs, there are those who will take a stand somewhere 
between the two. 

The underlying assumption of the English curriculum described in this 
chapter was that it was the school*s function to transmit the cultural 
heritage to the students. This assumption was especially evident in the 
literature and reading courses. Certain works of literature had come to be 
accepted as being the great masterpieces of the language and, unless a 
student had read and studied some of them thoroughly, he had not really been 
educated. Therefore, regardless of a student®s abilities and interests in 
high school he was required to study those works which, because of their 
literary worth and because they had stood the test of time, had been accepted 
as classics. In other words, the curriculum was of the type which has been 
labelled "subject-centred. M 

The choice of literature and the method of teaching it were determined, 
once the above assumption was adopted. The study of literature was thought 
of as a type of character training. By reading and studying the works of 
the "master minds," an individual would come to a realization of what was 


. 

■ . ' - • ■ • '■ t V "V ■ : . 

. * i 

■ 

■: ■ 



' 


. 

• 

t ■ i i '" j. • l 1 i' 

" 

■ 

* ■ ‘L.: fi r:.r n.' \;i 









• 

■ 




n 

. 





, • ; •; v■ . 








■ 








. 





H 



< 1 





■ •• •: 

- 






■ ■ r. ■*; 







' ,4 

., ' i ■ i" .. 

vf- -1 













' 





18 

best in himself and in others and would thus develop a set of high ideals. 
He would read about noble actions and characters as described by the 
greatest writers and be inspired to emulate them. The classics were chosen 
rather than contemporary works because their worth had already been proven. 

The emphasis in composition assignments was on reproduction of 
material which the student had studied in other subjects. However, there 
were those who felt that the work should be more closely related to the 
experiences of the students. Grammar and rhetoric were taught, in a formal 
manner, as a separate subject from composition. Grammar was justified on 
the grounds that it gave excellent training in logical reasoning and that, 
because of its difficulty, it built moral fibre. 


- 

' ' ' 

- 

: 

• ' • ' ' ' ' 


' 


CHAPTER III 


THE ALBERTA HIGH SCHOOL ENGLISH CURRICULUM 
FROM 1912 TO 1922 

When the province of Alberta was created in 1905 • the new department 
of education was faced with the problems of organization, and therefore 
found it convenient to continue with the curriculum which had been intro¬ 
duced in 1902. The first step toward the introduction of a new curriculum 
was taken several years later when a committee of "prominent educationalists 
of the province was appointed by the Minister of Education to consider the 
revision of the program of studies, and to make such recommendations as 
might be deemed desirable with a view to its improvement.""^" 

In its first attempt at curriculum revision, the department of 
education was not prepared to go very far beyond the scope of the Goggin 
curriculum. Even though sources such as inspector's reports indicate that 
there was criticism of the curriculum and of teaching methods, the inertia 
of tradition was too great to be overcome in one bound. Therefore, the 
description of the curriculum will show that although there were a few 
innovations, the English curriculum was to remain basically unchanged for 
ten more years. 

that 

It will be noted at this time, the term "standards" was abandoned 

A 

and the "grade" system was introduced. The twelve grades were divided into 
an elementary division of eight grades and a high school division of four 

■^Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report , 1912, p. 81. 


















r 




, 








' ' 






. 




« 



























20 

grades. Government examinations were to be written by students in every 
grade from grade VIII to grade XII. 

Literature 

This section will describe three points of difference between the 
literature courses which were introduced in the 1912 revision, and the 
courses which had been introduced in 1902. However, because the type of 
literature prescribed was unchanged, there was probebly no great modifi¬ 
cation of the teaching of literature in the high schools of Alberta. 

It was apparently believed that the literature courses as taught 
before the revision had been too difficult for the students in grades IX 
and X. "In grades IX and X it is intended to acquaint the students with 
a number of the easier selections from several of the simpler forms of 

literature, and especially to create a reasonable measure of literaiy 
2 

appreciation.In the upper two grades, the increased knowledge and 
maturity of the students would allow more emphasis to be placed upon 
”comparative study and more critical interpretation.” These statements 
indicate that an attempt was being made to adapt the courses to the 
abilities of the students. 

In the previous chapter it was noted that, in the opinion ©f Dr. 
Goggin, the primary objective of literature study was character develop¬ 
ment or moral training. It is surprising to find that in the 1912 
curriculum, no reference was made to that objective. The curriculum-makers 

^Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report 1913, p. 200. 













. 




■ 

. 


















, . - ' ■ • 














■ 

- 


, 


■ 






« 









had a much narrower view of the aims of literature. 


21 


There are several ends to be gained by the course as here outlined. 
The work should be covered in such a manner as to arouse in the student 
an interest in his work, foster a taste for good reading, and, in the 
end, leave him with the power of intelligent and correct literary- 
interpretation. . .the chief aim must be to teach the pupil to understand, 
interpret and appreciate our best literature,^ 

These were no mean objectives in themselves, yet they mark an interesting 

departure from the values which most other teachers of literature see in 

the subject. 

Teachers were directed by the course of studies to pay increased 
attention to oral reading. It was felt that effective oral reading was 
an important tool in achieving the chief aim of the course: an understand¬ 
ing and appreciation of literature. 

In grades IX and X special attention must be given to oral reading. 

It should be made clear that by oral reading is meant the expression 
of an author’s thought in spoken language. If stress is put upon the 
thought the student is brought face to face with the fact that he 
cannot read any selection the meaning of which he has not clearly 
grasped from the written signs. Such reading can become an exceptional 
means of self-culture and of literary interpretation.^ 

In view of the fact that there was such stress on oral reading, it 
was natural that the course of studies should discuss voice training. 


In order that this expression may be interpretative in the highest 
degree attention must be given to voice training and the general laws 
that underlie vocal expression. In voice training care must be taken 
to develop strength, improve quality and increase flexibility. Some 
students have naturally very thin or weak voices which, by proper 
exercises, may be readily strengthened. Some have disagreeable tone 
qualities which may be remedied by the careful teacher. There are 
other students whose voices are flat or stiff and the tone monotonous, 
Proper exercises in interval and scale work will remedy these defects, 


3 lbid . 

4 Ibid . 

-’Ibid. 




' 

. 




- 


* 




« 












» • 

. 


- 








» 


. 









. 











22 

Such a course would depend for its success on a teaching body 
well-versed in the techniques of voice training. It has, unfortunately, 
been impossible to determine whether such training was provided either 
through Normal school courses or through a program of in-service training. 
There is some evidence, however, that the objectives of the course with 
regard to oral reading were not being realized. Inspector M. 0. Nelson of 
Wetaskiwin wrote: 

The greatest fault in this subject is a lack of emphasis and 
expression which may be accounted for by the fact that in most cases 
the child does not thoroughly understand the subject matter of his 
reading lesson... Truly, but a small percentage of the pupils graduat^ 
ing from our schools can read with naturalness and proper expression. 

The main differences between the literature courses as introduced in 
1922 and those which they superseded was in the stress laid on oral reading. 
There was a minor change in that the collateral reading which had formerly 
been listed in the course of studies as a separate subject was now incorpor¬ 
ated into the literature program. However, the reading materials listed for 
study were much the same works that had been in the old courses. There is 
no indication of any official advocacy of changes in methods of teaching. 

In a word, changes in the literature program were made only in details and 
not in fundamentals. 

Composition 

The requirements for the composition courses in the four high school 
grades were set forth in a short paragraph for each grade. The quotation 

^Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report 191^* pp« 81-82. 








, 


' 












■ 


: ' 

. " .... 








. t v . 

. 















■ 


. 

* ' :•., • • ' ' •> fr ■■ -Ji • 





23 


below, which was the prescription for grade IX, illustrates the type of 
course outline which was provided. 

Short compositions based chiefly on subjects chosen from the texts 
prescribed for collateral reading. Special attention will be given to 
narrative themes and to the principles treated of in pp. 1-88 of the 
prescribed text; due attention will also be given to the section 
devoted to letter-writing and to the treatment of common errors, the 
use of capital letters and the rules of punctuation as treated in the 
appendix. Text Book: Manual of Composition and Rhetoric (Gardiner, 
Kittredge and Arnold. 

Because specific sections of the text were prescribed, there was no need 
for any lengthy statement of the composition courses in the program of 
studies. Teachers were merely required to teach the parts of the textbook 
which had been assigned, and to make appropriate writing assignments. 

In grade X the course prescribed for grade IX was to be reviewed, 
and in addition a number of other sections of the above textbook were to 
be studied. Special attention was directed to the principles of description 
and to letter-writing. As the student went on to grade XI, he would once 
again review the work of the previous two grades and would also study the 
parts of the textbook dealing with exposition and argument, and with 
sentences. Finally, In grade XII, this work would be continued and 
instruction in the principles of rhetoric would be given* 

The composition courses as outlined above were so much like the 
former courses that they can hardly be called changes. Compositions were 
still to be based on the students* reading. The curriculum made no allow¬ 
ance for ranging outside rigid limits in search of suitable topics for 
composition. Nowhere can there be found any suggestions that these topics 

^Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report 1913» Edmonton, p. 201. 








. - : : *■ : " : ' ' ' ' * ■ 

■ ' i 

. 


■ 


' 

' 







. 



• 




















' 



• 







' 




■ 











































i 



























• 



• 

















' 





, 

. 

. 





24 

be related to the students 1 own lives and out-of-school experiences. The 


teaching method was primarily one of teaching the principles of certain 
types of composition, such as narrative, argument, and exposition, and of 
providing practice in writing these types. Once again, teachers and students 
were cautioned that "work palpably defective in spelling, writing, punctuation 
of division into paragraphs would not be accepted at examinations." 


Grammar 


Grammar as a separate subject was to be taught only in grades IX 
and X. During these two years the students were to obtain a "general know¬ 
ledge" of Chapters I to XVII of the prescribed textbook, which was The High 
School Grammar , revised edition , by John Seath. There was to be a general 
and also detailed analysis of passages and the students were also required 

Q 

to study the grammatical values of words. 

To gain a more complete idea of the course, it is useful to glance 
at the chapter headings from the above text. The following chapters were 
the ones prescribed for grade IX. 


H 

H 

The Sentence and Its Components 
Words, Phrases, Clauses 

III. 

Classes of Sentences 

According to Composition and 

VI. 

The Syntax of the Parts of Speech 

VII. 

Verbs 

VIII. 

Nouns 

Words, Phrases, Clauses 

IX. 

Pronouns 

X. 

Adjectives 

Words, Phrases, Clauses 

XI. 

Adverbs 

Words, Phrases, Clauses 

XII. 

Prepositions 

XIII. 

Conjunctions 

XIV. 

Interjections 













■ 

. • t ; ; - , • ■ < 

: . f * * . . s . ' • ' 


. : ' j ‘ *. : ;' ■. h '• J. < 






:■ 










■ 




■' -i; -.v ■ 'i • . . • '.'Jlv’SL 

■ 


. 






■ - 





c 

. 



• - • 






25 

In grade X the following chapters were prescribed: 

I. Introduction 

The English Language, English Grammar 
V. Word Formation 

Derivation, Composition, Inflection 
XV. Infinitives, Gerunds, Participles 
XVII. Historical Outline^ 

The text was featured by a logical, and usually lengthy, development 
of the topics. The intricacies of "shall” and "will" and "should" and 
"would," for example, are dealt with exhaustively, as is also the 
subjunctive. 

Although the programme of studies did not list the aims of the 

teaching of grammar, it may be assumed that the authorities gave tacit 

approval to the aims which were described in the textbook. In the preface 

the author wrote, "this edition has been constructed in accordance with the 

view that, while English grammar is a science with important practical 

applications, it is, when properly studied, an intellectual discipline of 
10 

the highest order." 

Seath saw another great value in the study of grammar—a cultural 
one. He wrote: 

Nor are we content with merely using language; we want to know 
something of what language is, and to realize what it is worth to us; 
for the study of language has a great deal to tell about the history 
of man and of what he has done in the world...And, as language is the 
principal means by which the mind’s operations are disclosed, we 
cannot study the mind’s workings and its nature without a thorough 
understanding of language. For all these purposes, we need that 
knowledge of language and grammar to which the study of English 
grammar is the easiest and surest step. ^ 


9John Seath, The High School English Grammar , revised edition , Toronto, 
Canada Publishing Company (Limited), 1899» pp. 7-8. 

10 Ibid ., p. 5. 








' 

1 £ ■ 






i'fi 



.-V 





- 


■ 

• 



' 

■ ■ 

* 



' 



. 






, • 


- 

. 


. 



4 

' 


' : ' r , 


. 


J ' ’ : . ' 


« 

' 

‘ 


t ' ■ r • 

* 

1 ^ ■ ■■■.; ■ ,r| 

' ■ 

■ 


' ’ • ■ ’ ■ ■■ ' • X (‘j 


' 






26 

The textbook writer also refers to the contribution which the study 
of grammar might make towards correctness of expression. However, he states 
that it is constant practice, rather than knowledge of grammar, which makes 
good writers and speakers. And so grammar is justified on other grounds— 
those of intellectual discipline and cultural value. 

Summary 

In spite of changes in a few minor details, the 1912 curriculum 
could hardly be called a new curriculum. Basic principles and emphases 
were unchanged; it was still mainly a subject-centred curriculum. In 
literature, for example, a knowledge of the great literature of the past 
was considered essential. It was the teacher’s duty to see that the students 
read the classics, studied them in detail and learned to interpret and 
appreciate them. The student was required to study various types of 
composition and was expected to master the principles of composition and 
rhetoric. And when he wrote his themes, he was to base them on something 
he had studied in school. 

The English curriculum was organized in a formal way, as the arrange¬ 
ment of studies in composition would illustrate. From a study of narrative 
composition in grade IX, the pupil would progress in each grad© to other 
types of composition which increased in difficulty. Thus he studied 
description in grade X, exposition and argument in grade XI, and after 
reviewing these topics, he studied the principles of rhetoric in grade XU. 

Why did the objective of formal intellectual discipline receive such 
emphasis? During the nineteenth century and the first two decades of the 
twentieth, the primary purpose of the high schools was to prepare students 



■ 

* 

■ • • , • 

* 

. 

* 

' • T ‘ 

: - . o; - : .* ■■ 1 ■- •' : > : 

. ■ ’ "ii ■ . ' ' 

- 

' 

' 

. 

■ 

. 

. 

. 

I ' : 


27 


for university and normal school. It was believed that they would be 
better prepared for the rigors of university life if their high school 
studies had been difficult and disagreeable. But even if a student did 
not go on to a higher education, the type of training his mind had received 
in high school would enable him to meet and solve the problems of life 
more effectively. 

Therefore, as the basic objective - intellectual discipline and 
preparation for university - of the high schools of Alberta remained the 
same, the 1912 curriculum was, to all intents and purposes, the same as 
the one which it replaced. 









. 




> 

, 






l . 

• « ■ ::-i ■ I; ' . Gilt; v *.•/:: ~ f. r '' , i 

- 




















CHAPTER IV 


THE ALBERTA HIGH SCHOOL ENGLISH CURRICULUM FROM 
1922 TO 1937 

In the early years of the twentieth century the objectives of 
secondary school education in America underwent considerable change. 

Whereas the main function of these schools had been to prepare students 
for university, now they had to meet the needs of the ever-increasing 
number of students who were attending high schools with no intention of 
proceeding to higher education. In 1918 the Commission on the Reorgan¬ 
ization of Secondary Schools issued a report in which were enunciated the 
"seven cardinal principles of education." These laid heavy stress on the 
contribution which education must make to the development of the student 
in such phases as health, command of the fundamental processes and worthy 
home membership. This report was highly influential in curriculum develop¬ 
ment after World War I. Another report which influenced English curricula 
was issued by the National Joint Committee on English. This report stated 
that inasmuch as most high school students go right into "life" upon 
graduation, the English course "should be organized with reference to basic 
social and personal needs. 

Many teachers took issue with the view of Etaglish as a formal subject* 
It was claimed that forcing the child to pay attention to the forms of speech 

^National Joint Committee on English, Reorganization of English in 
Secondary Schools . Bulletin No. 2, Government Printing Office, Washington, 
1917s p. 26. 























- 

. 

* 

■ 




, 

. 


















• • 

■ * 

. 




29 


and writing resulted in "stultifying indifference, mere memory of words 

without real significance and an utter failure to establish right habits of 

2 

speech or of interpretation." The feeling was growing that the detailed 

study of grammar and rhetoric and the doing of lengthy exercises in sentence 

analysis did not result in enough improvement in the students' language 

skills to justify the time spent on this work. 

Therefore, it was advocated that the detailed teaching of the rules 

of grammar and rhetoric be either partially or completely abandoned. It 

was proposed that, since language skills must ultimately be used in social 

situations, they be taught in such situations. That is, the course should 

be made up of experiences of "social value" which would give the students 

practice in communication. "The pupil must speak or write to or for somebody, 

with a consciously conceived purpose to inform, convince, inspire or enter- 

3 

tain." The material for oral and written work should be taken from the 
experiences of the pupil-from his school work and also from his outside 
interests such as play, amusements, work, home activities, etc. It was 
recommended also that the exercises have, as far* as possible , a purpose such 
as writing an article for the school paper. Thus the report stressed that 
English must be "social in content and social in method of acquirement." 

There were new trends also evident in the teaching of literature. One 
of these was the greater emphasis placed on interest and enjoyment. The 


2 Ibid., p. 2? 
3 lbid ., p. 2? 



* 


- 

ft 


• 






, 

. 


. 

j 


■ 


' 


. 




' 

• • 


- 


■■ ; 1 ''' • . "• : \L. , - V 

i'l " 

. 

' 

' 


■ 



'■ ■ 



30 

report stated: 

Literature chosen for any given school should make a natural appeal 
to the pupils concerned, for without interest, which depends upon this 
appeal, there will be no enjoyment; without enjoyment, there will be no 
beneficial result. 

Classic literature was still heavily favored although it was admitted that 
modern literature had a legitimate place in high school work. The advantage 
of current books and magazines was that they quickly won the interest of the 
students and therefore if they had a high ethical or social message they 
could well be included in the curriculum. 

Literature 

The curriculum-makers wrote a statement of the values and aims of 
literature which, when compared with that found in the previous program of 
studies, is notable for its length and comprehensiveness. In the statement 
first place was given to the "value of literature in preparing the student 
to be a good citizen and a co-operating member of society.""* The Handbook 
went on to state that literature acquaints the student with his culture, 
brings him into contact with a variety of human experiences, reveals wisdom 
in the conduct of individuals, arouses admiration for great personalities 
and noble deeds, and develops the ability to judge human conduct. In 
addition to the above aim, four others which are summarized below, were 


Zt Tbid., P. 64. 

■5Alberta, Department of Education, Handbook for Secondary Schools . 
Edmonton, 1930, pp. 24-25. 

















- 










t 

. 

- 








• ♦ 

■ 

- 

: r '-' \„ ‘ ‘t t 










listed: 


31 


1. To provide the students with a worth-while leisure time activity 

2. To train the students to develop standards of taste and appreci¬ 
ation so that they will become intelligent "consumers" of 
literature 

3. To appeal to the emotions and to the creative imagination, 
especially of the "elite" who will become producers of 
literature 

4. To develop in the student a concept of style,which would 
eventually enable him to express his own thoughts and 
feelings more effectively. 

The literature course^ in each grade was divided into two parts, the 
first of which was literature for class study. The intensive method was to 
be used in teaching the selections prescribed in this part of the course. 
Teachers were provided with detailed instructions on how to teach various 
forms of literature such as the drama, the novel, the short story and poetry. 
With regard to the Shakespearean play,for instance, it was suggested that 
there be three readings of the play, and the points to be taught during 
each reading were outlined. Instructions on the teaching of the novel were 
equally detailed. 

The second portion of the literature course, entitled supplementary- 
literature, had two sections: obligatory and recommended. All students were 









' 































































32 


required to read the selections under the former heading and to write a 
test on them. The recommended list provided material for students who 
desired to read more widely. Most of the obligatory and recommended works 
(of which there were about six or seven in each grade) were novels, although 
there were also collections of short stori.es and one Shakespearean play. 

They were generally "lighter in vein" than the selections prescribed for 
intensive study, although they all had "reasonably high value as literature. 
The hope was expressed that the student would derive interest and entertain¬ 
ment from them during his leisure hours. 

In choosing the literature to achieve the aims outlined above, there 
was still a heavy emphasis on the classics. There were, however, a number 
of selections in the supplementary literature which young people would find 
easier to read and possibly more enjoyable. In grade IX a number of short 
stories by Canadian authors were assigned while in grade X the biography of 
George Washington Carver was read. 

The choice of reading material for each grade was to some extent 
governed by the abilities, interests and maturity of the students. The 
material in grades IX and X was largely narrative, but in grades XI and 
XII "subject matter possessing deeper qualities of thought, and requiring 

g 

greater powers of interpretation, has been introduced." The curriculum- 
makers apparently were in agreement with one of the principles underlying 





' ■ ■ 



v V ■*/ v'-' 


. 1 . 




. 





' 





■ 

• 



' 


■ 


• 



• 






. 



- 

■ 









. • 











' 





• 








• 







• - 

















■ 




33 

the grouping of literature as expressed in the Hosic Report. 

...there is always a best time...when, because of certain dominant 
tendencies in the pupil, a book makes its strongest appeal with the 
minimum help from the teacher because it presents the maximum interest 
for the student. Such psychological moments the teacher should seek 
for, in order that upon this natural interest as a foundation he may 
develop a progressively higher and finer interest in the best literature 
without the danger of arousing that general distaste which is the fatal 
result of so much of our teaching.^ 

A number of topics to be taught in connection with the study of poetry 
were prescribed for each grade. A study of rhythm in verse was required in 
the first two grades of high school. Grade IX teachers, however, were 
restricted to teaching the foot of two syllables; in grade X, they were 
allowed to continue with the foot of three syllables. In grades XI and XII 
students proceeded to a study of special stanzaic and structural forms of 
verse: the Spenserian stanza, the sonnet, the epic, the lyric and the drama. 
It is interesting to find the drama listed in this section of the work. The 
dramas assigned for intensive class study were Shakespeare’s plays and the 
emphasis was on teaching these as dramatic poetry. 

A suggestion was made in the course of studies that some time be 
devoted to the study of current literature, that is, newspapers, magazines 
and periodicals. The purpose of the study was to develop M a love for the 
best and most wholesome current literature."^® 

Memorization of choice passages was to be insisted upon. It was hoped 
that the pupil’s mind would become "a storehouse of stimulating thought, 
beautiful pictures and fine phrases" and that the results of the memorization 


^National Joint Committee on English, Reorganization of English in 
Secondary Schools , Bulletin 191?» No. 2, Washington, D.C., Government 
Printing Office, p. 69. 

























. 


. 






























■ 













. 































• 











' 










, 








• 


. 







t 
















• 







• 






* 






1 


, 

: 


. 











■ 


. 

. 

. 

. 


: - * ♦ ■ , 





would be "higher ideals, a larger vocabulary and a finer choice of words 



It was recommended that instruction in reading be given in connection 

with the courses in literature. However, oral reading was no longer empha- 

12 

sized as it had been in the previous program. 


Composition 

The Handbook set forth two values and aims of the study of composition. 

First, the pupil was to be trained to use the English language as "an 

13 

intellectual instrument, which facilitates and conditions thought." 

Second, he was to be trained in the use of the English language as a medium 
of communication. "He should acquire, and even master, the art of egression 
in speech and writing." Vocabulary study was pointed out as an important 
aid in achieving these aims. 

Three suggestions were offered which, it was felt, would do a great 
deal to offset the bad effects of out-of-school influences. The first of 
these was that the teacher should always set an example in the use of 
acceptable English. The teacher should also take pains to set up an "ideal 

14 

of good English" in the class. Finally, all the teachers in the school 
should co-operate with the English teacher in improving both written and 
oral English. 

The Handbook dealt with both written and oral composition. The aims 
of the teaching of written composition as set forth in the Handbook can be 

Ibid . p. 26. 
l 2 Ibid ., p. 26. 

13 Ibid .. p. 36. 

^ *lbid ., p. 36. 















- 














- • ' • . • ■ 


. 

- 

. 






35 


summarize briefly as follows 

1. To lead the pupil to form an ideal of correctness in the details 
of written expression... 

2. To develop...the ability to write a clear and effective 
paragraph... 

3. To develop...the power to write a friendly or business letter... 

4. To develop...the ability to make an outline... 

5. To develop in senior pupils the ability to write a paragraph or 
longer composition...with some vigor and individuality of style. 

In a paragraph which discussed different methods of teaching com¬ 
position, this point was emphasized: "No amount of reading or formal 
teaching of the principles of rhetoric will take the place of practice in 
writing."^ In other words, if the students are to learn how to write, they 
must write. 

What should they write about? "People express themselves best about 
the things with which they are familiar, and in which they are interested. 
Therefore, it was recommended that the subjects chosen should be within the 
range of the student*s knowledge and should have a personal interest for 
him. Hoitfever, a recommendation was also made that the student occasionally 
be required to do research and then write essays on topics with which he is 
relatively unfamiliar. 

In addition to selecting topics in which the student is interested, 

the teacher should motivate the student by "surrounding the work...with an 

i ft 

appearance of reality.The suggestion was made that the compositions be 


15 Ibid., pp. 37-38. 
l 6 Ibid .. p. 39. 
17 Ibid., p. 39. 


18 Ibid .. p. 39. 










- * 

• 








« 







, ' : •' : . 

. 






■v 0- ' .■ : 



- *.!. / . 









' 

- 


. 

■ 







36 

used as articles in a school paper or that business letter-writing 
situations be taken from the newspaper want ads. 

The curriculum-makers took cognizance of the composition teacher®s 
problem of finding sufficient time to mark the writing assignments. 

Therefore, it was suggested that no teacher should have more than three 
classes in composition at any one time. It was also strongly recommended 
that both literature and composition be taught to any one class by the same 

teacher. ^-9 

The most important aims in the teaching of oral composition were 
20 

summed up as follox^s: 

1. To increase the pupils’ power to answer...questions clearly. 

2. To develop...correct pronunciation and clear enunciation. 

3. To develop the ability to...organize and deliver a talk. 

4. To train the pupil to contribute his share to informal 
discussion. 

5. To give the pupil confidence in himself in any public speaking 
situation. 

The Handbook stated that more time should be spent on oral than on 
written composition, because oral expression is used much more than written 
expression. In discussing the choice of subjects in oral composition, the 
importance of familiarity with and interest in the subject was re-emphasized. 

In conjunction with the work in written and oral expression, the 
course of studies gave an extensive list of topics which were to be studied 
in each grade. The principles of composition and rhetoric were dealt with 
in great detail. 







• • : ' 

. 

. 

, 

. 




. . . 

■ ■ • . . . 

* • ■ 

. 

, . ' : 


























3 ? 

The study of some of the types of composition was to be carried on in more 
than one of the high school grades. Description, for example, after being 
briefly introduced in grade IX, was to be taught more extensively in grades 
X and XII. The writing of the paragraph was carefully taught in grade IX 
and was then reviewed in grades X and XII. The outline for paragraph study 

in grade IX is fully quoted below to illustrate how detailed the curriculum 

21 

requirements were. It should be remembered that this was only one of 
sixteen sections in the composition outline for grade IX. 

7. The paragraph 

(a) What a paragraph is 

(b) The mechanical arrangement of the paragraph 

(c) Two main kinds of paragraphs 

(d) The rhetoric of the paragraph 

The principles of paragraph structure 

(i) The topic sentence 

(ii) Unity 

(iii) Coherence 

(iv) Emphasis 

(e) Application of the principles of paragraph structure in 
writing of isolated paragraphs 

In publishing such a detailed outline for the composition courses, 
the curriculum-makers weakened the emphasis of their own statement that 
practice in writing is of paramount importance in increasing effective 
expression. Many teachers, when confronted with such a list of rules and 
principles, would teach the subject point by point, more from the standpoint 
of covering subject matter than of giving practice in language skills. 
Evidence that this actually happened in many cases is provided by the 


^Alberta, Department of Education, Handbook for Secondary Schools » 
Edmonton, 192?» p. 50. 






' J r 

' 

' 




















' 






. 




38 

reports of school inspectors. 

The new course in composition...is misinterpreted by many teachers. 
This may be the fault of a too detailed course in the theory part of 
the subject* which by some teachers was interpreted to mean that con¬ 
siderable emphasis had to be placed on this...phase of the work. In 
these schools the students were not getting the necessary practice in 
expressing their ideas in good written English; that is, the practical 
essay work was not receiving sufficient emphasis. 

The treatment of composition is not the best in many...schools. The 
theoretical side of correct and effective expression in speech and 
writing is receiving too much emphasis. Too much time is being spent 
on devising exercises for the sake of exemplifying principles. The 
value of these principles should appear more frequently in connection 
with the projects upon which the students are engaged, and should find 
a meaning throughout the course in terms of the actual compositional 
activities of the students. 2 

It is evident that composition was still studied in a formal manner. 
The study was to take place within a framework of the rules of composition« 
rhetoric and grammar rather than through experiences of social value. The 
curriculum did, however, stress the importance of assigning topics which 
were interesting to the student. 


History of English Literature 

A survey course in the history of English literature was provided as 
an optional course in grade twelve. The period covered by this course was 
from the "beginning” (of English literature) to the death of Ruskin, with 
the period after the accession of Queen Elizabeth to receive the more 
thorough study. In teaching this course, the teacher was instructed that 
"considerable emphasis should be placed on prominent movements and tendencies. 
By the time the pupil has completed his fourth year course he should be able 

IT 1923 

Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report. , pp. 23-24. 






4 


' ,.. 

. 

. 

, 


. 








. 







. 





* 














. - 




: •• ' ’ 

















39 

to place the whole range of the course in English literature in its true 

23 

historical perspective." 

Summary 

In one respect the literature course in this revision differed little 
from previous courses. The selections to be read and studied were largely 
drawn from the classics. The poetry of Keats, Burns, Byron and Browning, 
the prose of Tennyson, Hawthorne, Dickens and Lamb, and the plays of 
Shakespeare were found in all the high school grades. 

However, for the first time since the formation of the province, a 
considerable number of selections from Canadian literature were placed on 
the literature curriculum. In grade IX, selected stories from Canadian 
prose were prescribed under supplementary literature. In addition to these 
selections, several poems by Canadian authors were found in the grade X 
course. 

There was a new emphasis also on taking the students' interests into 

account. "In English 1 and 2 the material is largely narrative and has 

been chosen because of its inherent interest for pupils of the junior High- 
24 

School grades.” This recognition of the importance of the student's 

interest in his work was reflected in the composition course. 

People express themselves best about the things with which they are 
familiar, and in which they are interested. The teacher of composition 
should keep this truth constantly in mind in assigning themes for pupils. 
For the most part, subjects should be chosen within the range of the 
pupil's knowledge, and as far as possible should have an individual or 
personal interest for him. 

^Alberta, Department of Education, Handbook for Secondary Schools , 

1927, p. 64. 

2 4 Ibid .. p. 25 . 

25 Ibid., p. 39. 







' ... ' ' . : i - .' I- o . '.. r <Kf 

. 


' 

■ J -' ’ - " ■ . 1 '• 

e - ' % ! " L ■■ ; f • r’y 1 \. : J > • • f < : 'v 7 • ■< ■, ■ ‘ . \ / . . . ' ' > '.'I ' 

• ■ • , . 

. 

. . ' ■ ' ■ • • f■ . 

t • , • ' ■ ■ 

.... ■ . . . . 

' ■ i- l: ■ • ; : ' ' ' • •; j : t l ' * 

, 


' 


& ’ ' ' ' ' i : ' . • ■ 

...” 

’ 





’ 









. 


: ... ■ '.. 




U : 1 





. 

, }' 


.. .‘V ... .... . t ..'J. • f 

_ 

i 






40 


This viewpoint had been expressed in the Hosic Report in 1917. "Such 
individual treatment requires that each pupil do much writing and speaking 
on subjects familiar to him,..All theme work should be made as real and 
vital as possible." ° 

There were no separate grammar courses. Grammar was included, 
however, in the composition courses and, as indicated by the list of topics 
in the program of studies, was to be studied in considerable detail. By 
integrating the study of grammar and composition in one course in each grade, 
it was felt that the student would be assisted more effectively in achieving 
correct, effective expression. 

Summing up briefly, the following seem to be the main influences 
which were responsible for the changes in the curriculum: 

1. The desire to acquaint the students with more current literature, 
especially that written by Canadians 

2. The desire to introduce literature which was more interesting 
for the students 

3. Assignment of writing themes based on the students' experiences 
rather than on subject matter 

4. Relating grammar more closely to written work. 


^National Joint Committee on English, Reorganization of English in 
Secondary Schools , Bulletin, 1917* No. 2, Washington, D.G., Government 
Printing Office, P. 5^ and p. 56. 













- 

- 

. 


' 




■ 




. 

















* . 

.. , ■ 









CHAPTER V 


THE ALBERTA HIGH SCHOOL ENGLISH CURRICULUM 
FROM 1937 TO 1954 

Beginning in 1937» sweeping changes were made in Alberta*s 
educational system from grade I to grade XII. A radical departure in the 
matter of organization was the introduction of the junior high school. 

Grades VII, VIII and IX were set up as a separate unit from the six grades 
of the elementary school and the three grades of the senior high school. 
Another important change was the abandonment of provincially administered 
departmental examinations in grades VIII, X and XI; students in these grades 
were now to be promoted on the teachers’ recommendation. 

But as far-reaching as such changes were, the one which received 
perhaps the greatest attention was the introduction of the enterprise or 
activity method. While enterprises were to be used primarily in the 
elementary grades, the influence of this idea was to be felt in the junior 
and senior high school grades as well. Committee work, research and reports, 
field trips and so on were all attempts to put into practice the "learning 
by doing" theory. 

An indication of the thinking of the officials in the department of 
education which led to the reorganization of the whole school system, 
including curriculum, was provided in the 1939 Annual Report. 

During the depression years the number of pupils seeking instruction 
on the high school level more than doubled. A large percentage of these 
had neither the interest in nor the capacity for advanced study in the 
subjects of an academic programme. Had there been opportunity for employ¬ 
ment, many of them would never have entered the high schools at all. It 












■ 


- 








■ 

. 










, ■ 





. 

. 

- 
















42 

soon became evident that a more flexible curriculum, with a frank recog¬ 
nition of the educational value of the so-called "practical" subjects 
and some attempt to study the aptitudes of the pupils, was the next step 
in programme building. 

Many other factors were responsible for the changes which were being 
brought about in the curricula. Some of these were the fruits of the ever- 
increasing amount of educational research which was being carried on in the 
United States and Canada. Research into individual differences, for 
instance, resulted in the realization that all students should not be 
forced to study the same materials at the same rate. Increased knowledge 
about the growth of children showed that it was unrealistic to expect all 
the children in a grade to achieve the same standard in every field of 
subject matter before being promoted. The attention of educators was more 
and more directed to the growth patterns of children in determining the 
content of the curriculum. When research revealed the wide variation in 
the skills and abilities of students in any one class, the necessity for 
greater flexibility in curricula to meet the varied needs of the pupils 
was realized. The individual differences also showed the need for programs 
of remedial instruction. 

Research into the learning process undermined belief in the theory 
of mental discipline, and it was also revealed that there was little 
transfer of training from one subject to another unless the teaching 
specifically aimed at such transfer. These findings led to changes in 
attitude toward the teaching of grammar. In addition, new concepts of 

■^Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report , 1939, p» ?• 





, 

















■ 




. 






' 


. 








• ■ 


» 



. 













f 



1 








• 



r 




' 







i 






■ . ' ■ 







43 

grammar which were evolving from the work being done by linguists were to 
lead to changes in English courses. (The reader is referred to the section 
on grammar which follows in this chapter.) 

Integration of Literature and Language 

In all previous programs of study, literature and composition had 

been taught as separate subjects. In the courses as introduced in 1937* 

however, they were united to form one subject—.English. In all three high 

school grades, English was allotted one period per day on the timetable, 

which was a considerable reduction in time devoted to this subject as 

compared with previous curricula. However, the curriculum-makers 

emphasized that composition was to be the responsibility of the teachers 
2 

of all subjects. It was hoped that drill in the principles of correct 
and clear expression would be a part of the teaching of all classes. It 
was anticipated that following this practice would compensate for the 
reduction in time in the English courses. 

The question of how to divide the time between language and literature 
activities in the English course naturally arose. The program of studies 
provided this answer: 

No prescription is made in regard to the division of time between 
language and literature. The standard of achievement of the class is 
the deciding factor; but it is suggested that from one-fifth to two- 
fifths of the time devoted to English be.spent on teaching the principles 
of clear and correct expression.^ 

^Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for the High 
School, Bulletin II , Edmonton, 1939* p. 3. 
















, - ' *3 


. 




. " " ' 

■ 

- 

. 

■ 

















- 







44 

The teacher was therefore to use the standard of achievement of the class 
as the basis for deciding on the time allotment for language and literature. 
However, the program of studies stipulated that about two-fifths of the 
time be devoted to teaching clear and correct expression; this would mean 
that, regardless of the standard of achievement, more time would be spent 
on literature than on language in the average class. 

In the statement of objectives of the English course, six points 
were listed. Of these, the first dealt with the development of the pupil*s 
ability to egress himself "clearly, correctly and if possible effectively 
in oral and written English." The other five objectives were those which 
are more specifically the objectives of the study of literature. Improve¬ 
ment of the student’s reading ability was mentioned in three of the 
objectives. He was to be trained to read audibly, intelligently, system¬ 
atically and with understanding, and was also to be taught to recognize 
and appreciate good literature. One other outcome recognized the contri¬ 
bution which literature can make to the development of the child in these 
terms: 

Through a wide range of reading, to extend and enrich the pupil's, 
experience, and to develop his ability to interpret his environment.^ 

Language 

The programme of studies brought to the attention of the teachers 
three important factors to be kept in mind in all language teaching. The 


^Ibid., p. 3 




. ' 

- 






. 














■ 














. 









45 


first of these was that "the pupil must have something to say." This 
would make the teacher responsible for assigning topics which were 
interesting and meaningful for the student. Secondly, the teacher was 
reminded that the student, in writing or speaking on a topic, must have 
some specific reason for saying what he said. The importance of motivating 
the work of the student was thus emphasized. The third factor to be kept 
in mind was that the student "must have that knowledge of the technique 
of expression which will enable him to say what he wants to say clearly, 
correctly and effectively. 

A number of topics were listed, the study of which would increase 
the students’ ability to write clear and correct English. These were: 

Denotative and connotative power of words; variety in sentence 
structure; use and meaning of subordinate clauses; paragraph building; 
collecting, selecting and arranging material for presentation. 

It was assumed that students would already have studied the mechanics of 

writing, such as spelling and punctuation, and that these skills would not 

require much further teaching in high school. 

The language textbooks, Expressing Yourself , had been chosen with 
these factors in view and a brief description of them will further 
illustrate the concepts and principles which were basic to the new English 
courses. Each textbook began with a unit which was intended to motivate 
the students’ language work. Included were chapters with such headings as 
"Wby You Should Learn to Express Yourself Well" and "What You Seek As a 


•^ Ibid ., pp. 4-5 • 

^Ibid., p. 5» 







, 

. 

. 

cion Id 

- 


■ < • 


: ' * : ■ • • • ; :••••• 


’ v. >tos 

- . 

. 

. 











46 

Student of English." Self-rating charts and achievement records were 
suggested as further motivation. 

In the three textbooks, twenty-four chapters dealt with the develop¬ 
ment of skills in composition (both written and oral), five with reading 
skills and six with grammar. The majority of the chapters on composition 
were devoted to developing skill in some particular form such as the social 
letter, the paragraph, description (Vsing English to Describe n ), and argu¬ 
ment. Each of these chapters was written with the aim of teaching rules 
and principles which would help the student to master the particular form 
of composition. There was a generous number of suggestions for writing 
assignments, most of the topics being related to some aspect of the student’s 
life. He was at all times encouraged to write and speak on topics which 
were meaningful for him. 

Of the six chapters on grammar, four were in the grade ten textbook 
and one each in the other two. They were written in the traditional styles 
a definition, a few examples, and a number of exercises. There can be 
little doubt that, at least in grades eleven and twelve, the English course 
provided less time for direct teaching of grammar than had been provided 
for in earlier curricula. There were no parsing exercises and, while many 
teachers no doubt still used that method of teaching, the trend was away 
from lengthy, detailed analysis of passages. As the authors stated, "We 
have sought to make our assignments not merely compositions, but important 

7 

and reasonable practice in the types of expression required in daily life."' 

?H. H. Wade, J. E. Blossom, M. P. Eaton, Expressing Yourself , Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin Company, 1939. 





- 

, ' ' 1 

■ 

r , : r • • ■ 5 

■ . 

< 

. • 


« 

■ ' ' ■ : ' 

tivJ ■ ■ ' ' 

;■ ' , ■' ■■ r v\. ' r:.- ' ** ? •• .■ [J 

; 

. 

• ' • • i - • ' i ’ 


♦ . '' ' « . . - . ; • ! !!' 


Grammar 


47 


During the eighteen nineties and the first three decades of the 
twentieth century, many educators became strongly dissatisfied with the 
grammar courses as they were then being taught. The findings of research 
into grammar and language usage showed that some of the ideas about grammar 
then current were in error. New ideas were brought forward and these led 
to important changes in high school grammar teaching. 

First, research in psychology destroyed the belief in formal 
discipline, that is, that if a person solved difficult grammatical problems, 
his brain would be exercised so that he would be better able to solve other 
mental problems. This belief had been one of the main arguments in support 
of the teaching of grammar. Educators now realized that there was actually 
little, if any, transfer of training from grammar to other subjects. 

Moreover, research showed that there was actually little relation¬ 
ship between knowledge of grammar and the ability to write and speak well. 
Educators came to the realization that knowing about the language did not 
mean that one could use it effectively. 

Finally, there was a widespread revolt against the methods of teach¬ 
ing grammar. Students had been made to analyse sentences endlessly, so 
much so that sentence analysis came to be an end in itself and made little 
contribution to the students’ ability to express themselves effectively. 

Many teachers felt that it would be far more worth while for the students 
to write their own sentences and correct their own errors than to analyze 
sentences written by others. Grammar was to be functional, that is, to be 
used directly in improving language skills and correcting errors. 















. 


. 








- 




















.* ■ • ■ ■ • ■- : •' - . . V • 


: ’ ? • ; • " ■ - •• ! - " l ' 





‘ 







48 

Also coming under severe criticism was the traditional concept of 
correctness in language. 

For generations the English language has been taught to children 
and youth as a set of fixed facts and principles, a logical structure 
of rules which govern the use of English in speech and writing. 
Deviations from this fixed set of rules have been considered to 
constitute errors; the observation of these rules presumably resulted 
in the correct use of English. This static and authoritarian point 
of view had persisted despite certain objective and glaring evidences 
to the contrary and despite the published work of generations of 
competent linguists who have without exception repudiated the author¬ 
itarian position.8 

Educators in the field of English were beginning to accept the concepts that 
correctness rests upon usage and that all usage is relative. Pooley defined 
good English as: 

...that form of speech which is appropriate to the purpose of the 
speaker, true to the language as it is, and comfortable to speaker and 
listener. It is the produce of custom, neither cramped by rule nor freed 
from all restraint; it is never fixed, but changes with the organic life 
of the language.9 

All these new ideas resulted in a trend away from the teaching of grammar 
as a set of rules to be learned and followed, toward an emphasis on func¬ 
tional grammar. 

The statements in the program of studies regarding grammar were quite 
in line with the thinking of the time, as is shown by the following 
quotations.^ 


^National Council of Teachers of English, The English Language Arts . 
New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, Inc., 1952, p. 274. 

^Robert C. Pooley, Teaching English Usage , New York: Appleton- 
Century Company, Inc., 1946, p. 14. 

10 Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for the 
High School, Bulletin II , 1939, pp.5-6. 













' 

. 


. 

* 

■ 


* 








- ■ : ' 


. 

. c . ■ . 




- 




49 

...Some knowledge of grammar is...essential to the correct usage of 
the English language. However, teachers of grammar should bear in 
mind that they are dealing with a living language, which cannot be 
fettered by rigid rules of grammar. Usage can eventually "wear down" 
the most logical grammatical rule. It seems advisable, then, to 
restrict teaching to those simple elementary phases of grammar which 
actually function in improving and clarifying the sentence. 

As for...parts of speech and their use and arrangement in sentences, 
it has yet to be demonstrated conclusively that an exhaustive study of 
classification of the parts of speech and the technicalities of the 
relationship of sentence parts actually improve language usage. 

The improvement in sentence structure resulting from practice in 
the analysis of long, involved sentences has probably not been 
commensurate with the time and energy spent on such exercises. 

Emphasis in the present English course has shifted from sentence 
analysis to sentence building, the assumption being that it is more 
important from the standpoint of improving his expression, for the 
pupil to be able to use a subordinate clause in a sentence of his 
own than to be able to recognize a subordinate clause in a given 
sentence. 

Most of the essentials of grammar have been taught in the inter¬ 
mediate school. Hence the major function of the high school course in 
language is (l) to maintain the skills already acquired, (2) to make 
habitual the language habits which cultivated usage now demands, and 
(3) to concentrate on clarifying and improving the writing of 
sentences. 

A curriculum guide which was issued in 1946 once again emphasized the idea 

of functional grammar. It was stated that "through a definite, systematic 

and progressive study of grammar for two years from the functional (that is, 

usable) point of view, students achieve style in writing and speaking, as 

well as accuracy of expression. 1,11 A list of minimum requirements for each 

12 

grade was included in the course outline. 


11 Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for the High 
School, Bulletin 1, 1946, p. 35. 

l^See Appendix. 











. 










. , :-ls ■: ' v ' J'3 ■ • - ■■ 

' 








• ' 


,3 

. 

. 

. 

, ■ ’ ' ' • 1 : ■ ' " • ■ ?■ t < ■ 


* 





















Literature 


50 


In the list of objectives of the English course, three were con¬ 
cerned specifically with the improvement of the reading ability of the 
students* Two other objectives, those of enriching the pupil*s experience 
and of developing ability to appreciate good literature, were to be 
achieved through a program of reading. The curriculum-makers had a strong 
hope that a habit of reading and appreciating good literature would be 
formed in high school and would continue through life. 

There was a shift in emphasis from the '’intensive*' teaching of 
literature to the "extensive." Students were to have a wide choice of 
selections to allow for individual differences in taste and ability. The 
material in the textbook was graded "to keep pace with the widening exper¬ 
iences and interests of the student and with his growing ability to compre¬ 
hend and appreciate good literature•There is an indication here that 
the curriculum-makers were aware of the research which had been into the 
reading interests of high school students and that some attempt was being 
made to develop in students a liking for reading on the basis of those 
interests• 

In connection with the above statement» it may be noted that there 

14 

was "an increase in the number of selections from contemporary writers." 

^Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for the 
High School , Bulletin II, 1939, p. 7. 

^Xbid ., p. 7* 























* 






- 




. 


. 

. 

. 






. 










- 






. 

. 


■ 










• - ' • ■ '.: ■ ■ 














• . 













51 


No longer was the course to be confined to a study of classics, many of 
which it was realized, were beyond the student's capacity to understand 
and appreciate them. The teacher was to satisfy himself that his students, 
within the limits of their capacities, understood the meaning of the 
selection under discussion. 

No rigid prescription was made as regard methods. Teachers were 
urged to "vary their method to suit the selection and the students. 

Some selections could be left after a first reading and little discussion, 
while others would require more intensive study. Once again, there was a 
reminder that students were to be allowed the widest possible freedom 
within the limits of the course. It was pointed out that if students were 
allowed to select their own reading, the wide variety of selections read 
by them would necessitate the use of small-group discussions rather than 
class teaching. 

Remedial English and Developmental Reading 

The findings of psychology on the subject of individual differences 
are reflected in a discussion of remedial English in the program of 
studies. 1 ^ Research had shown that reading abilities of grade X students 
range from the grade V to the university level. Since a student whose 
reading level is below that of most of the students in his class is 
severely handicapped, teachers were urged to give remedial instruction in 




. 








. 








. 








52 


reading. Remedial instruction in language was also recommended. The 
program of studies had nothing to say about how remedial instruction was 
to be given except to state that suggestions could be found in the 
practice books in language. 

Even greater concern for the improvement of reading was displayed 
in the curriculum bulletin which was issued in 19^6. This concern was 
manifested by the introduction of a section entitled ’’Developmental 
Reading,” which was a term applied to the improvement of reading for 
comprehension. It had been realized that reading skills are basic to a 
student’s success in high school and that many of them are seriously 
hampered by deficiency in these skills. Therefore, developmental reading 
was made compulsory in grade X, and the prescribed workbook was to be used 
by all students. This workbook consisted of fifty exercises which were 
designed to improve various reading skills, such as comprehension, rate 
of reading, ability to pick out the central idea, vocabulary, arid the 
reading of graphs. 

In further pursuit of the aim of improving reading skills, a reading 
test was given in September to all grade ten students in the province and 
provincial norms were published soon after. Teachers were then advised as 
follows: 

Having studied the tables given, and compared the achievement of his 
own class with that in the other schools, the teacher should devise a 
remedial programme for each individual, if possible, or if that is not 
feasible he should suit his remedial instruction to the three groups in 
the class, viz., the high, low and middle. 1 * 


1 ^Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for the 
High School , Bulletin 1, 19^6, pp. 28-31* 







. 










•\-i. • 


. 

; 






i 

;!■' ■ .f ; " *: ■ i ' c.r;: , 

- 


, 






. 






. 

. 


. 








. 


. 




53 

Thus, a program of remedial reading which had been suggested in the 1939 
bulletin was now made compulsory for all grade ten classes. In addition, 
rather than being an adjunct to the regular work in English 1, develop¬ 
mental reading was made an integral part of the course. 

The principle of allowing for individual differences in reading 

ability was observed in a change in literature textbooks for grade X 

18 

which was made in 1946. The Magic of Literature , Book III , a collection 
of poems, short stories and essays was prescribed for those students who 
had achieved an A or B standing on the grade IX departmental examinations, 
while Let * s Read , Book III was assigned for those entering grade X with a 
C standing. The assumption was that those students whose achievement had 
been low in grade IX were probably hampered by poor reading skills. The 
textbook therefore contained less difficult reading material, and also 
provided exercises designed to improve reading skills. 

Summary 

Until 1922, the curriculum in Alberta high schools had been rigidly 
prescriptive, each subject consisting of a certain well-defined body of 
subject matter which had to be studied and at least partially mastered by 
every student, regardless of his ability or interests. By 1922 however, 
when the curriculum was re-organized, educational thought was veering 
towards the principle that the starting point of any curriculum should be 
the student himself—his needs, interests and abilities. This principle 


ISjbid., p. 34 








, 

* 

- . . 

i 

? ’< 

' . ... .* V- 










* ’ < 










54 

had influenced the construction of the English curriculum at that time to 
a slight extent. In 1936, however, the break with the traditional cur¬ 
riculum was made more definite. The needs and interests of the students 
were the determinant of a great part of the new programme in both literature 
and composition. The free reading list, for instance, was greatly widened 
in scope so that books which had a greater appeal for young people were 
included. While books which had been on the curriculum for decades were 
still retained, new books by contemporary authors were now placed on the 
list. The program of studies had stated: "Sufficient material has been 

included in each of the three courses to allow for individual differences 

19 

in taste and ability" 7 In addition, the "extensive" teaching of 
literature had been recommended inasmuch as it would allow for the reading 
and teaching of a wider variety of selections. 

Another evidence of the concern which the curriculum-makers felt 
for meeting the varied needs of the students was the provision of the 
developmental reading section and the recommendation to teachers that they 
institute remedial programs. While even the early curricula had laid stress 
on student development, it was not until the period under discussion that 
the wide variation in rates of development of students in any one class 
and therefore of the need for individualizing instruction (at least to 
some extent) was fully recognized. The teacher was advised that the pro¬ 
gramme of studies was not intended to be rigidly prescriptive and that he 

^Alberta, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for the 
High School , Bulletin II, 1939, p. 7* 







..... ... j ■ ■ • ■ * ■ ■' ■■ t'-- v • 1 ; - ■ 

. 




■ 

' 

' 

. 




•i 




. 


■ 










1 

* 





. 







. 











. 

■ 




■ 

. 


. 


















55 


should therefore adapt the course to fit the needs of the class. To 
assist him in this task, at least in grade ten, the textbooks assigned 
for literature were designed for students on two different levels of 
ability. 

The centering of interest on the student and his needs was carried 
on in composition and language work. Ideally this work should grow out of 
his experiences, interests and problems. Topics for written and oral 
composition should have some meaning and significance for him. The problem 
of motivating the student in writing and speech activities would be lessened 
if he were encouraged to express himself on topics of vital concern to him. 

Another significant departure from previous curricula was the com¬ 
bining of literature and composition into one course. The programme of 
studies stated: 

...the course is set out in sections, for the sake of simplicity, 
but In practice these divisions should partly or wholly disappear; 
the English course will thus be integrated and fused into an entity 
so that all the activities mentioned come into play through 
participation in life experiences. 0 

There had been a definite trend towards integration of school subjects in 

the United States, as evidenced by the publication of such works as "An 

21 

Experience Curriculum. " and the practice had been adopted by many school 
systems. In practice, most teachers in Alberta maintained the division 
between language and literature. However, because the amount of literature 

20 Albert a, Department of Education, Programme of Studies for the 
High School, Bulletin 1, 1946, p. 37. 

^National Council of Teachers of English, An Experience Curriculum 
in English , New York: Appleton-Century Company, Inc., 1935. 










. 

» 

* 

- 



■ 

. 




I 


- 















. 

« • '• • : : • , '• 
















56 

remained considerable and the programme of studies stressed reading, the 
ultimate effect was to reduce the amount of time spent on expressional 
activities. The programme also provided for a reduction in the amount of 
grammar to be taught and insisted that such teaching emphasize the idea 
of functional grammar. 

Summing up briefly, the following seem to be the main features of 
the curriculum during the period reviewed in this chapter: 

1. Integration of literature and all language activities into 
one subject 

2. Introduction of more reading material which has greater 
appeal for young people 

3. Emphasis on a program of remedial English and developmental 
reading 

4. Allowing teacher freedom to adapt course to fit the needs 
of the class 

5» Emphasis on extensive rather than intensive teaching of 
literature 

6. Treatment of grammar as functional rather than as a formal 
study 

7. Basing of expressional activities on interests of young people. 


' 

. 













. 

























CHAPTER VI 


THE ALBERTA HIGH SCHOOL ENGLISH CURRICULUM AS INTRODUCED 

IN 1954 

In an educational system as centralized as that in Alberta, any 
curriculum represents a synthesis of the thinking of an informed group 
of educational leaders. In formulating the English curriculum, the group 
takes into account a wide variety of factors: findings of research, 
evaluation of teaching methods, advances in psychology, public criticism 
of education, teacher reaction to present curricula, need for articulation 
between high school and university, demands of special groups, and so on. 
Ideally, a vigorous research program should be continually carried on for 
the purpose of evaluating present procedures and effecting desired 
modifications. Valid research findings and a steady evolution of 
curricula would take place hand in hand. The limited amount of research 
in Alberta up to the present has not been sufficient to carry out such 
an extensive evaluation of the educational program and has therefore had 
little effect on curriculum revision. Lacking an extensive participation 
in curriculum construction by the teaching body, the process of curriculum 
revision has taken place on the initiative of the Department of Education. 

It has been noted that the curriculum in effect at the formation 
of the province had been written by one man— Dr. D. J. Goggin. The 1912 
revision had been prepared by "a committee of prominent educationists" 
while subsequent reorganizations had been written by committees of 
departmental officials and teachers who worked within the framework of 


■ 

<•'' .i . ’ • ■ • - i .■ x i\ • o’. '■ zn-Azf. 














’ 

■ 






. 






■ 














■ 







principles enunciated by an over-all curriculum committee. The latter 

groups, as has been noted, were composed of departmental officials, 

school inspectors, teachers, and representatives of various organizations 

and groups throughout the province. 

The curriculum which was introduced during the years 1937-1939 

remained static during the period of the Second World War. After the War, 

however, the Curriculum Branch of the Department of Education began to 

take steps towards another revision of the secondary school program. 

Subcommittees were set up in the various subjects, the first being the 

Subcommittee on Mathematics in November, 19^7* while the Subcommittee on 

English was set up in April, 1950. The members of the Subcommittee^ were: 

Dr. H. T. Coutts, Faculty of Education, University of Alberta.Chairman 

Dr. H. S. Baker, Faculty of Educa^on, University of Alberta 

J. B. Bell, Vermilion High School 

Dr. J. W. Chalmers, High School Inspector 

Miss Ruth Godwin, Western Canada High School, Calgary 

M. D. Meade, Principal, Edson High School 

Professor F. M. Salter, Department of English, University of Alberta. 

W. S. Waddell, Victoria Composite High School, Edmonton 

In addition to the above, Mr. Morrison L. Watts, Director of Curriculum, 

and Mr. A. B. Evenson, Associate Director of Curriculum, attended meetings 

of the Subcommittee and participated in the discussions. As a result of 

the labors of this committee, the new English program in grades X and XI 

was introduced in September, 195^. and the grade XII program a year later. 

For the guidance of all persons who were engaged in curriculum 

building, a curriculum guide was prepared by a special Subcommittee on 

1 Alberta, Department of Education, Senior High School Curriculum 
Guide for English , 1955* P« 2. *Note: C. S. Bawden was renlced by J. B. Bell* 
















- 

■ 

. 



. 

. 

, 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 










, . * - • , 







Objectives which had been set up by the Department of Education. This 


guide outlined the purposes of modem secondary education in Alberta, 
discussed the nature and needs of the adolescent and pointed out the 
implications that these matters have to the teacher. Since the principles 
enunciated in the guide served as at least a partial basis for the develop¬ 
ment of the English courses, it is informative to review them briefly. 

In its statement of objectives, the Subcommittee shifted the 
traditional emphasis on subject-matter mastery to the growth and develop¬ 
ment of young people. "The prime aim of the school is to assist each 
Alberta youth in his growth toward maximum self-realization."^ This shift 
in emphasis* which was occurring in schools throughout Canada and the 
United States, was clearly described by Alberty. 

Traditionally, the curriculum maker tended to stress the facts, 
understandings, and skills needed in adult life, and was concerned with 
adolescent development largely to the extent of finding out what the 
student was capable of learning at a given level. Only recently have 
curriculum-making groups sought to discover the needs, problems, and 
interests of young people and to utilize them directly in determining 
suitable curriculum materials. The new conception of the individual 
as a dynamic whole, and of learning as an active process involving 
continuous interaction with the environment has made it imperative to 
give the study of adolescence a significant place in curriculum 
development.3 

To construct a curriculum based on the above emphasis, it is 
necessary to understand the characteristics and needs of youth. "We must 


^Alberta, Department of Education, Curriculum Guide for Alberta 
Secondary Schools , 1950, P* H* 

3h. Alberty, Reorganizing the High School Curriculum , New York: 

The Macmillan Company, 19^7* as quoted in Alberta, Department of Education, 
Curriculurn Guide for Alberta Secondary Schools , 1950. 















. . 










. 

- 

. 

- 




. 














. 







6 o 


begin with live boys and girls if we want to help them grow."^ Many 
studies in psychology in recent decades have provided a wealth of infor¬ 
mation about the growth of adolescents which may guide curriculum-makers 
in developing curricula. To determine needs of students, the curriculum 
committee may develop its own list through a study of local youth or may 
use or adapt any of the numerous lists which have been developed in 
various studies. 

In addition to meeting the needs of the students, the curriculum 
must also take the social demands of the culture into account. “The 
preservation of our democratic social order is basic to our educational 
objectives.Therefore, it is incumbent upon curriculum-makers to be 
familiar with the characteristics of the democratic social order. A 
section of the Curriculum Guide was devoted to outlining the trends in 
our present economy, and the characteristics and traditional values of a 
democratic society. 

The above three paragraphs show that educational authorities in 
Alberta had taken the stand that “the social demands of our culture and 
the adolescent needs largely determine our general objectives.” These 
objectives, when translated into "clearly discernible goals of secondary 
education", laid heavy stress on the child-centred approach to education. 


DeBoer, John J., Kaulfers, Walter V., Miller, Helen Rand, Teaching 
Secondary English , New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., 1951, p.205. 

5Alberta, Department of Education, Curriculum Guide for Alberta 
Secondary Schools , 1950, P* 5« 

6 Ibld ., p. 5. 







































' 






■ 

. 



















■ 




- 





- 














The functional objectives of secondary education were given as:'* 

1. Personal development 

2. Growth in family living 

3. Growth toward competence in citizenship 

4. Occupational preparation 

The high school English program could make a special contribution 
toward the achievement of some of the definite goals which were included 
in the above objectives. Some of these, which are found under the first 
objective, are:^ 

iii. Intellectual achievement 

a. Ability to think rationally, to express thought clearly 
and to read and listen with understanding; 
d. an understanding and appreciation of cultural heritage. 

iv. The development of suitable recreational and leisure-time 
activities. 


vi. The development of a pattern of values, attitudes, and ethical 
ideals which furnish justification for good habits and culminate 
in a philosophy of life which recognizes the importance of 
religion. 

To achieve its objective, "the curriculum must be based on sound 
9 

principles of learning". While there are different theories about the 
learning process, research in educational psychology has indicated the 
validity of many principles* It is therefore possible 

for curriculum construction and classroom practice as well to be based on 
these principles. To illustrate briefly, it has been shown that learning 
is more effective when there is some purpose for the learning. Another 


?Ibid ., p. 10. 
8 Ibid ., p. 11. 

9 Ibid., p. 13. 














62 


verified conclusion is that whole learning built around vital experi¬ 
ences is more meaningful than the learning of isolated facts. 

Findings in educational research in recent decades have made a 
strong case for the unit study method. It was strongly recommended in 
the Alberta Curriculum Guide that this method be used wherever possible, 
and its advantages were listed. 

1. Unit teaching recognizes that learning takes place most 
effectively in terms of wholes rather than fragments. 
Psychologically, this means that emphasis is placed upon 
significant and comprehensive problems, concepts, or 
activities rather than upon piecemeal activities which the 
student must somehow fit together. 

2. Unit teaching recognizes that learning takes place most 
effectively when there is an understanding and acceptance of 
goals to be achieved, and when there is full and free par¬ 
ticipation in planning for the attainment of those goals. 

3. Unit teaching recognizes the necessity for providing for 
individual differences in rates of learning and interests. 

4. Unit teaching provides a sound basis for evaluation. We may 
conclude, then, that unit teaching as it is being carried out 
at the present time involves (l) a broad comprehensive problem, 
(2) a series of related learning activities so organized as to 
promote common learnings for the entire group. 

The implications of the above ideas for the English program are 
well summarized in a definition of a good curriculum as prepared by the 
National Council of Teachers of English. 

...a good curriculum in the language arts is one which helps the 
students to develop through the normal stages of their growth into 
mature mastery of language and understanding of literature, to the end 
that they may use these powers intelligently for the enrichment of their 
own lives and the improvement of the society in which they live. 11 


^ Q Ibid ., pp. 22 - 23 . 

■^National Council of Teachers of English, The English Language 
Arts , New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, Inc., 1952, pp. 14-15. 







. 








. 








- 







- 

- 































Before proceeding to a discussion of the English courses, it should 


be pointed out that a new system of numbering all high school subjects was 
introduced. The English program for the high school consisted of: Grade X - 
English Language 10 and English Literature 10, Grade XI - English Language 

20 and English Literature 20, Grade XII - English 30• These courses were 
constants, to be taken by all students as requirements for the High School 
Diploma. Two elective courses were also offered in either grade XI or XII: 
English Literature 21 (Survey of English Literature) and English Language 

21 (Creative Writing). 

English Language 10 and 20 

In the statement of goals for the English program, the Subcommittee 

on English quoted those which had been set up by the Commission on the 

English Curriculum of the National Council of Teachers of English. The 

ten goals in the list stressed the contribution which English must make to 

the growth and development of the individual. The first goal was, in fact, 

12 

"wholesome personal development". 

The Subcommittee listed five emphases for the language program as 

suggested by the above-mentioned goals. As these had an important bearing 

on the language courses, they are quoted rather fully.^ 

1. Critical thinking. Language communication can be no more 
effective than the thought processes which underlie it. 

Specific attention must therefore be given to the nature and 
means of thinking clearly, to the processes of reasoning, to 
the devices of propaganda, etc. 


12 Alberta, Department of Education, Senior High School Curriculum 
Guide for English , 1955 * p» 6. 


1 ^ Ibid ., pp. 6-7. 























■ 








■ 






. 












- 

. 




. 

' ■ 


..... ; • 

• : '.V.-:i.. 

















2 


64 

Mass inodes of communication. Facility in reading and interpret¬ 
ing printed materials remains, as ever, important. With the 
further growth of radio, however, and with the advent of tele¬ 
vision, accurate and discriminating listening grows daily more 
important. This new course therefore gives substantial emphasis 
not only to reading and writing but to speaking and listening. 

3. Democracy and group processes. The bearing of the two foregoing 
emphases on group processes is obvious. The success of a 
democracy depends, pre-eminently, on the ability of its citizens 
to think clearly, on their understanding of the media by which 
ideas reach them, and on the intelligent interpretation of 
these ideas. A further need is the understanding and effective 
use of parliamentary procedure. 

4. Daily life and vocation. The purpose for which the great 
majority of high school students must learn to communicate are 
practical rather than literary. Much attention is therefore 
given to such activities as letter writing (both business and 
social) and factual exposition. 

5. Realistic grammar and usage. 

The above five emphases could be reduced perhaps to one: an 
emphasis on the practical. The curriculum-makers hoped that the courses 
as outlined would have beneficial results in the day-to-day life of the 
students, that the attitudes, understandings and skills acquired by them 
would enrich their lives after they left school. 

In commenting on the development of an English program, the afore¬ 
mentioned Commission on the English Curriculum stated: 

Makers of a good curriculum in the language arts must seek out the 
kinds of situations in which people actually speak, listen, write, and 
read outside the classroom and try to employ in the training of young 
people the same general motivations and the same general social atmos¬ 
phere if adequate techniques of responding to the situations are to be 
developed. In the ideal curriculum, the life problems of the students 
provide these situations. 

The Alberta Subcommittee on English adopted a similar criterion at one of 


l^National Council of Teachers of English, op . cit ., pp. 13-14. 



. 

. 

- 

■ 

. 





- 

























65 

its first meetings. "What will be the language activities of the students 

after they leave the high school?" 1 '* In other words, the content of the 

language courses must be chosen to fit the students' needs. 

After they leave school, people find that the type of writing which 

they do most often is letter writing; therefore, a language program should 

provide the student with wide experience in this form of writing. Many of 

the students will have to prepare reports and so will need to know how to 

find information for reports as well as how to write clearly and concisely. 

They may often be required to write short articles of a paragraph or two— 

articles of a descriptive or expository nature. Almost all people attend 

meetings and so they should understand parliamentary procedure. 

Basing its decision on needs such as the above, the Subcommittee 

chose the English for Today series of textbooks. 1 ^ That these books had 

been written with a view to meeting the needs of high school youth can be 

judged from a perusal of the unit headings. 

17 

Language 10 

1. Understanding Parliamentary Procedure 

2. Knowing How to Think 

3. Building Paragraphs 

4. Improving Your Reading 

5. Improving Your Listening and Speaking 

6. Using the Dictionary 

?. Writing Description 

8. Writing Social Letters 

9. Knowing More About Radio and Television 

1 ^Minutes of Meeting of Subcommittee on English, Oct. 17, 1950* 

•^See Appendix 

17 Martha Gray et al, English For Today , Grade Ten (Canadian edition)* 
Toronto: Longmans, Green & Co., 1954, p. 














- 














. 




. 

































































, . ■: 


. 











Language 20' 


66 


18 


1. Preparing Reports 

2. Learning to Write Expository Articles 

3. Increasing Your Vocabulary 

4. Reading Newspapers Intelligently 

5* Writing For the School Newspaper 

6, Learning to Speak and Write 

7. Learning Business English 

People spend nruch more time in reading magazines and newspapers, 
viewing television, listening to radios and attending motion pictures than 
they do in reading books. Therefore, students should be prepared to use 
these modes of communication intelligently. The school should assist them 
to improve their tastes and to develop independent judgment, powers of 
discrimination, and critical standards. Units were therefore provided in 
all three high school grades for the study of the mass modes of communi¬ 
cation . 


A feature of the new curriculum was the establishment of language 
as a separate subject, with an allotment of 175 minutes a week (that is, 
a daily period of thirty-five minutes). This more than doubled the amount 
of time devoted to the language program. The increase in time was in 
accordance with the view of the Subcommittee which stated: 

While, in view of the increasing enrolment in the high school 
during the past half century, the general level of English language 
usage is probably better than is stated by critics of pupils leaving 
our schools, there remains a need for still more improvement. 


lS Martha Gray et al, English For Today , Grade Eleven (Canadian 
edition), Toronto: Longmans, Green Sc Co. , 1954, p. 

1 ^Mimtes of Meeting of Subcommittee on English, July 4, 1950. 







* 
































- 














1 • . 




• • ■ « 






67 

When the amount of time devoted to English had been reduced by the 

1937 revision, it had been stated that every teacher was to be a teacher 

of English. It was hoped that the adoption of this principle as a matter 

of school-wide policy would ensure sufficient practice in language skills 

to make up for the decrease in time for the English class. The curriculum- 

makers were basically sound in their thinking, as research has shown that 

significant improvement in language usage results when teachers in other 

subject-matter fields insist upon correct usages and forms in all written 
20 

and oral expression. In the years after 1937» it became obvious that the 
concept of ’’every teacher a teacher of English” did not receive wide 
acceptance in the high schools of Alberta. Few schools adopted a concrete 
program to put the concept into actual practice and the teachers, left to 
their own devices, took little action to implement the policy. The Sub¬ 
committee recommended therefore that the language program be increased to 
five periods a week in order to provide sufficient time for the teacher to 
’’organize, guide and evaluate the language experiences of high school 
pupils. ” 21 

The Subcommittee was careful to point out to the teacher that the 
main intention in increasing the time allottment was that students receive 
more actual practice in composition activities. 

2 ^Walter S. Monroe, Encyclopedia of Educational Research , The 
Macmillan Co., New York, 1941» p. 455. 

2lMinutes of Meeting of Subcommittee on English, July 4, 1950. 








V 








. 

. 


- 












. 


■ 











68 

One of the requirements of the new program is that students should 
spend more time than heretofore in the actual practice of language 
skills—specifically, in more oral discussion and writing...It is 
suggested that the equivalent of two periods per week should be 
devoted to writing and revision in the classroom, and that at least 
every two weeks each student submit a paragraph, theme, letter, or 
similar assignment for the teacher*s appraisal. 

It was the contention of the Subcommittee that "a language program 
should be in accord with the findings of research in the field of language 
instruction.” 

If research in language learning points up any secure finding, it 
is this: we learn to speak, listen, read and write effectively by 
speaking, listening, reading and writing—that is, by engaging in 
purposeful language communication. ^ 

The influence of research is seen in the following statement which indicates 
the teaching method to be used in language. 

In the past, language teachers have tended to operate on one of two 
different assumptions. One is that the way to become proficient in 
language communication is to study about language, especially the 
grammatical or other principles thought to govern its use. The other 
is that the way to become proficient is to use language—to get a great 
deal of experience in practical situations which involve speaking, 
reading, writing, and listening. 

It now seems clear that both approaches are important. Surely no 
language program can move very far unless students become involved in 
practical situations requiring the use of language. And just as surely, 
no such program can be truly educative if there is not going on, 
concurrently, some more theoretical work devoted to appraisal and 
improvement. The total process, then, is circular; students have 
language experiences which provide opportunity and motivation for study 
about language, which, in turn, enables them to have better language 
experiences. 


^Alberta, Department of Education, op. cit . , pp. 8-9. 

^Alberta, Department of Education, Junior High School Curriculum 
Guide for Social Studies-Language , Edmonton, 1955* p. 7. 



















' 










■ 


. 






m 69 

There are thus two main jobs for the language teacher. One of 
these is guiding the language activities of students, and criticizing 
the results. The other is conducting a more formal program of 
language study, often with remedial emphasis. These two phases will 
not, of course, always be completely separate. * 2 **' 

The above quotation indicates that although "the theoretical work 
devoted to appraisal and improvement" grows out of the language experi¬ 
ences of the pupils, such work need not be haphazard. There is still a 
need for systematic, direct teaching of language principles. 

The best evidence indicates that an effective language program must 
provide systematic instructional opportunity in definitely scheduled 
language periods in which fundamental skills can be presented clearly 
and fixed firmly by means of properly motivated drill. ^ 

At its first meeting, the Subcommittee accepted this principle: "A 
language program should be in accord with recognized principles of learn¬ 
ing, with special emphasis upon developing motivation and meeting the 

26 

accepted needs of youth." The practical means of putting this policy 

into effect was the unit method. "A unit is a cross-section of experi- 

27 

ence based upon some unifying theme or language skill." This method of 
organizing the experiences of pupils in the language program had been 
accepted by a large body of progressive teachers and had been strongly 


^Alberta, Department of Education, Senior High School Curriculum 
Guide for English , Edmonton, 1955 * PP» 7-8. 

2 ^Walter S. Monroe, op. cit ., p. 455* 

^^Minutes of Meeting of Subcommittee on English, July 4, 1950* 

2 7phe Department of Supervisors and Directors of Instruction, The 
Development pf a Modem Program in English , Ninth Yearbook, National 
Education Association, Washington, D.C., 1936, p. ?6. 



























. 

' 

■ 


■ ' ... r.- .-...... 

■ 










70 

advocated by the National Council of Teachers of English. 

Oral and written composition are taught as a part of pupils' daily 
activities. In the progress of the unit or in the life of the secondary 
school, opportunities arise for discussion of problems, for writing 
letters, for setting down and disseminating ideas. No longer is the 
"teacher-selected topic" the basis of speaking and writing. The 
particular interests of the boys and girls concerned are now recog¬ 
nized as the resources of oral and written composition. As a result, 
teaching methods are being improved so that pupils may engage with more 
freedom, ease, and effectiveness in the composition activities natural 
to them.28 

The Subcommittee recognized that the unit is a practical way to motivate 
students' work in language. 

Language skills consist of listening, speaking, reading and writing. 
Proficiency in these skills cannot be developed in a vacuum. Effective 
language teaching involves adequate motivation in a meaningful situation. 
A language unit, if chosen with an eye to class level and interest, is 
especially valuable in dealing with the more "practical-minded" student 
to whom literature as such makes a very limited appeal, and who tends 
to be inarticulate about personal experience. ° 

The unit is more than merely another way to organize subject matter; 
adoption of the unit method brings about a modification in classroom 
procedures. Since the content of a unit is not specified or strictly 
limited, it is almost a necessity for teacher and students to plan the 
work together; therefore, the unit method tends toward more democratic 
procedures. The students will also tend to take a more active part in the 
activities of the class than they do under traditional lecture and text¬ 
book methods. Research, field trips, committee work, reporting, and 
preparing of displays, charts and other visual aids are the types of 


2S National Council of Teachers of English, The English Language 
Arts , Appleton-Century-Crofts, Inc., New York, 1952, p. 185. 

29Alberta, Department of Education, o£. cit. , p. 22. 












■ 










. 

. 

■ 

. 

. 


; 








- 


. 






. 


t 



















71 

activities upon which students become engaged. The strong emphasis on the 
unit approach in the Curriculum Guide and in the organization of the text¬ 
books has to some extent forced teachers to modify classroom procedures in 
the direction outlined above. 

The authorities recognized that even after years of having read 
about the unit method, teachers still might be unable or unwilling to adopt 
it. Therefore, it was pointed out to teachers that: 

Classroom procedures will require some modification. Those who have 
spent many years trying to "give" language and literature, combined, in 
five periods per week may find it hard to break the habit of using all 
language periods on the time-table for formal teaching. But this 
practice is to be discontinued. No longer should the majority of writing 
assignments be given in the last few minutes of the teaching period, with 
the actual creative work to be done as homework, although this kind of 
assignment will still have its place.3° 

The Subcommittee was deeply concerned that stress in the language 
program be laid on the communication of ideas. While mechanics are 
important, it is what the student says that matters most. Teachers must 
guard against the tendency to confine their evaluation of the student’s 
writing to a counting of mechanical errors. It is necessary to place the 
emphasis on what the student says and how clearly he expresses his meaning. 

A language program should place stress upon the cultivation of 
ideas and upon the organization of clear and correct expression of 
them; that is, upon the communication of meaning.31 

Greater emphasis should be placed upon the effective expression 
of ideas from the meaning approach.31 

More attention must be given to providing students with "something 
to say", as language cannot be taught "in a vacuum". More emphasis 
must be placed on ideas and their organization.-* 2 


3° Ibid ., p. 19. 

^Minutes of Meeting of Subcommittee on English, July 4, 1950. 

^ Minutes of Meeting of Subcommittee on English, October 17» 1950. 



/* : , ' ' ’ . v - * ' ■ - . '« • 



- 

■ 

. 


. 

. 








. 




■ 




72 


Concentrating on the communication of meaning tends to reduce 
emphasis on the rules of composition or the principles of rhetoric. In 
the past, one of the student*s main tasks in language has been memorizing 
these principles; it is obvious, however, that this memorizing is sterile 
unless the student is placed in such vital situations that he finds 
something that he truly wishes to write or talk about. His main attention 
should be concentrated on expressing his ideas clearly, forcefully and 
even with style. The meaning approach implies also that reliance on rules 
of grammar be lessened. ’’Evidence proves that.. .matters of style...may be 
taught quite as effectively without grammatical knowledge as with it, if 
emphasis is placed upon clarity of thought and effectiveness of expression 

alone.Research has shown that teaching the rules of grammar and compo- 

necessarily 

sition does not A result in an improvement in expression. The Subcommittee 
seems to have had valid grounds for stressing the meaning approach. 

The above description of the language courses has outlined the basis 
for the language activities in the two grades. Any language program 
however consists of two parts: the writing and speaking activities and the 
study of language principles, grammar and usage; in other words, the 
circular process referred to above. To assist teachers and students in 
this latter part of their work. An English Handbook , prepared by Professor 
M. H. Scargill at the request of the Department of Education, was pre¬ 
scribed for use in grades X, XI and XII. The book tends to: 

-^Dora V. Smith, ’’English Grammar Again”, The English Journal , 

27 (October, 1938), pp. 643-649. 







. 

. 

■ 

. 

- 


. 

. 

. 

■ 

. 




. 








73 

describe rather than prescribe usage patterns...[itIplaces consider¬ 
able emphasis on the syntactical approach. The student is led to 
understand that article-adjective-noun is a common sequence of words 
in an English sentence and from this that a word like stone in a stone 
house is an adjective in function even though it is the name of something 
just as is stone in He threw a stone . The stress throughout is placed 
on developing clarity of thought with respect to language.^ 

The Handbook was not intended as a textbook on which regular 
language lessons were to be based. The hope was expressed that students 
would develop a research technique in dealing with their individual 
problems in grammar and usage. Normally, the student would use the book 
as a reference in correcting specific difficulties which he encountered. 

From time to time, however, it might be necessary for the teacher to teach 
a lesson on some widespread difficulty. Such an approach to grammar and 
usage was: 

based on the assumption that through the junior high school grades 
pupils have so acquainted themselves with fundamental grammar and 
usage concepts that they will be able to clear up many of their 
individual difficulties with a minimum of assistance from the teacher. 
Suitably chosen examples could be used to show the class as a whole 
how to do this kind of job. Simple illustrations might be chosen— 
for example, confusing the use of adverbs and adjectives. 

...The teacher during his marking should devise some simple method 
of recording the nature and frequency of various types of pupil errors. 

In a subsequent language period he will direct the attention of his 
class to the elimination of these errors by teaching the language 
principles upon which acceptable usage is based. In doing this, the 
teacher will focus attention upon that section of the handbook which 
gives the pertinent information. ^ 

The curriculum-makers hoped that by the time a student completed 


^Alberts., Department of Education, Senior High School Curriculum 
Guide for English , 1955> P* 22. 


35 Ibld ., p. 21. 






















. 

. 























74 

high school, he would habitually have recourse to the handbook whenever 
he was confronted with problems of grammar and usage. The language 
program would thus make a valuable and lasting contribution to the 
individual’s striving for effective expression. The groundwork for 
this habit had begun as early as the intermediate grades. The language 
textbook in grade IX, for instance, had one section organized in such a 
way that it could be used as a grammar and usage handbook. The handbook 
habit, begun in junior high school and strengthened in the senior high 
school^would be of benefit in the post-school life of the individual. 

English Literature 10 and 20 

The aims of the literature courses are clearly set forth in the 
curriculum guide: 

Literature provides a source of enjoyment and profitable experiences 
as varied as life itself. From this source we draw in order to 
motivate ourselves to read, to study, and to enjoy. 

In doing so we hope to achieve a number of purposes. One is to 
broaden our understanding of other people and of ourselves. Few 
subjects taught in school offer such possibilities for developing 
youth in the art of human relations as does the study of literature. 
Through literature we meet people of all kinds and learn to under¬ 
stand them—their ideas, their ideals, their problems, their emotions* 
their character. Through an understanding of others we are often 
able to develop those qualities which help us to understand ourselves. 
Literature helps us to crystallize our ideas, refine our emotions, 
and develop our standard of values. Literature, too, helps us to 
extend the range of our knowledge, and provides vicarious experiences 
that contribute to our development. Through literature our imagination 
is stimulated as poems, short stories, novels, and dramas create the 
illusion of reality, sometimes carrying us into the far away, the 
long ago, and the unusual. 

To the purposes suggested above we should add two others. First, 
we should acquaint high school pupils with a part of their literary 
heritage as twentieth-century Canadians. Second, we should help them 
develop standards that will enable them to choose discriminatingly from 



. 

, 

» 


* 

. 






the vast number of periodicals and books available to them. 


75 


36 

The time allotment for literature in grades X and XI was to be 105 
minutes, or the equi'valent of three class periods, per week. The basis 
of the program in Literature 10 was the textbook, Creative Living 4,37 
and the leisure reading program. In Literature 20, to the textbook 
Creative Living £ and the leisure reading, was added the study of one 
Shakespearean play chosen from the following: Julius Caesar , Richard II, 
The Tempest . In adapting the course to meet the needs and interests of 
his class, however, the teacher was not necessarily limited to the above 
books. He was encouraged to supplement them with selections from news¬ 
papers , magazines, plays, and collections of prose and verse. 

The statement of aims stressed the part which literature can play 
in the development of personality and character. In some previous 
curricula (for example, the 1937 program), the study of literature seemed 
to have been regarded as a means towards the end of improving the reading 
skills of the students. In the present curriculum, the cultural and 
humanizing influence of literature was emphasized. 

The Creative Living Series of textbooks was regarded as "an ideal 

3S 

reading program for use in Canadian schools." 

^Ibid., p. 36. 

37see Appendix 

3 8 Ibid., p. 38. 

















' 

- 






■ 



















The way in which the...Series is organized allows maximum scope 
and range in the selection of reading material, as a glance at the 
table of contents...will indicate. Almost every literary form 
(excluding, of course, the novel and the full-length play) is repre¬ 
sented. The moods of the individual pieces are varied, including 
everything from the deepest tragedy to the lightest whimsy. While 
a contemporary outlook is maintained, it is balanced by the obser¬ 
vations of the past in the selections from traditional literature. 
Literary quality is unquestionably preserved .^ 

The literature textbooks, like those in language, were organized 
in units, the titles of which are given below. 

Literature 10 


Unit 

I 

The Individual 

Unit 

II 

Humanity 

Unit 

III 

Love and Affection 

Unit 

IV 

Appreciation 

Unit 

V 

Creative Living 



Literature 20 

Unit 

I 

Individuals 

Unit 

II 

Our Community 

Unit 

ni 

Our Surroundings 

Unit 

IV 

Action, Thrills, and Laughter 

Unit 

V 

Toward Creative Living 


The curriculum guide strongly recommended that unit organization 
and procedures be used. In addition to experience units such as those in 
the textbooks, type units based on the drama, the essay, the short story, 
the lyric poem, etc., could be used. 

As indicated in the above quotation, there was a refreshing variety 

of selections in the books. Amongst the short stories were some, such as 
The Three Strangers and The Cask of Amontillado , which had appeared on 
curricula previously, while others had up-to-the-minute titles like 


39jbid., p. 38. 










' 

. 

. 

. 



• -v , - Jill . e.cW 

- 










. 













77 

A D a ~t e With Dora and Prelude . The choice of types of poems was equally 

varied; there were poems by Bums, Blake, Keats, Byron, Ogden Nash, 

A. E. Housman, Robert Frost, Carl Sandburg, Vachel Lindsay and many others. 

Essay writers were represented by Winston Churchill, Christopher Morley, 

William Beebe, Paul Gallico, Robert Benchley and William Lyon Phelps. 

Developmental reading was not forgotten in the revised program. A 

chapter in the Language 10 textbook entitled "Improving Your heading" 

provided instruction and practice in this field. The practice book 

Mastering the Reading Skills , however,was dropped from the curriculum 

after only a year or two of use and so was not prescribed. In a section 

largely reprinted from the 1946 Bulletin, teachers were reminded of the 

importance of reading as "the basic tool for work in...all subjects in 

which the written word is used." In place of a special workbook, "the 

literature texts provide material suitable for practice in at least some 

of the developmental reading skills. As an adjunct of the literature 

40 

program, developmental reading is to receive direct attention." 

As in the 1946 Bulletin, there were several pages devoted to a 
discussion of the leisure reading program. The objectives of this program 
were: 

(a) to establish and develop the reading habit 

(b) to provide enjoyment through reading 

(c) to develop literary taste, especially in relation to 
the longer literary work. 1 

^ Q Ibid ., pp. 7-8• 

^3- Ibid ., p. 51. 










- . . 








78 


It was recommended that a minimum of two class periods per month be 
devoted to leisure reading and that a part of the evaluation of the 
student's performance in Literature 10 and 20 be based on the leisure 
reading requirements. The students' reading was expected to have 
"variety, scope and quality". Over two pages of the Handbook were 
devoted to listing forty-two activities which could be used during 
leisure reading periods and suggestions were made of practical ways of 
evaluating student progress. The attention devoted to outlining the 
leisure reading program indicates a desire on the part of the curriculum- 
makers that teachers apply more effort to make this part of the course 
more of a teaching device than had formerly been the case. With more 
time in the over-all English program, teachers would probably be freer 
to stimulate the leisure reading. 


English 30 

The new grade XII program in English, which was introduced in 1955* 
was given a time allotment of 175 minutes a week. Language and literature 
were united into one subject; the reason for this departure from the 
practice in grades X and XI was given in the curriculum guide. 

The divorce of language from literature, however convenient in 
teaching practice, may create a false impression, the student tending 
to separate the two into tight individual compartments, instead of 
seeing them as complementary aspects of a unity—English. Purposeful 
integration will serve as a corrective to this "separation" point of 
view and the higher degree of maturity found at the grade XII level 
should make it possible to lead students both to a keener appreciation 
of literary forms and to a higher skill in expression. Indeed, many 
of the literary works presented in Thought and Expression were chosen 
as lending an immediate impulse to student effort in the field of 
original composition. 1 *' 2 


^ 2 Ibid ., pp. 64-65* 







. 




. 

• i . .. 












- 

: W r i. 

, : ■ 

- 

. 





The textbook Thought and Expression was especially prepared for 

the course by certain members of the Subcommittee on English, The book 

was divided into six chapters, each^except the first,being devoted to a 

treatment of some literary form. Chapter One, entitled "Reading", was a 

developmental unit with a strong emphasis on style appreciation. The 

headings of the other five chapters were: 

Chapter Two - Studying Magazines 

Chapter Three- Studying and Writing the Essay 

Chapter Four - Reading, Studying and Writing the Short Story 

Chapter Five - Appreciating Drama 

Chapter Six - Appreciating Poetiy 

The textbook was to be supplemented by a Shakespearean play (one of 

Hamlet , Henry IV , Part I, Macbeth , Romeo and Juliet ) and the leisure 

reading program. 

The teacher was expressly advised that sixty percent of the total 
time for English 30 be devoted to practice of language skills. The topics 
for discussions, essays, reports, etc. would be based primarily on the 
students' study of literary forms. In the first part of each chapter in 
the text, the elements and principles of the literary form were discussed 
and innumerable exercises in language—both oral and written—were 
suggested. Many of the exercises encouraged creative writing. Each 
chapter also included a number of selections for study and enjoyment. The 
great number of suggested exercises was due to the desire "to meet the 
need of students of differing levels of maturity, interest, and ability". 


4 3 ibid ., pp. 64 ff. 
















‘ 
















































- 

. 



. 

, • 


. 

















The use of An English Handbook was to be continued in grade XII. 


80 


The student entering grade XII will normally have had two years' 
experience in using the handbook of grammar and usage. He can reason¬ 
ably be expected to have some knowledge of its contents, and to have 
acquired a fair measure of skill in applying those contents to the 
solution of language problems. In grade XII, at his higher level of 
maturity, and building on the accumulation of the previous two years, 
he will be expected to increase this knowledge and skill. The handbook 
is to be considered his indispensable reference in the mastery of 
language. 

The study of "formal grammar," as such, will bulk no larger in 
English 30 than it does in Language 10 and Language 20. Hox-jever, the 
use of the handbook over a period of three years should acquaint the 
student with the significant principles of English grammar, and with 
the terminology of grammar and usage. 

Grammar, to justify itself, must be a tool used to develop accuracy 
and effectiveness of expression. Upon this assumption the "handbook 
approach" to the study of language is based. Grammar, like any other 
subject, has its own specialized vocabulary. Familiarity with this 
vocabulary is an integral part of the student's language equipment. 

Student and teacher need a common grammar and usage vocabulary in 
the discussion of language problems...A knowledge of the terminology 
of grammar and usage is a requirement of the English 30 program.^ 

A comparison of the English examinations of early years with more 
recent examples tells much about the changes in the English program during 
the past five decades. The early examinations were based almost entirely 
on testing knowledge of the subject matter of the courses. In the litera¬ 
ture examinations, there were detailed questions on specific novels, plays 
and poems which had been studied, while in the composition and grammar 
examinations lengthy passages were presented for grammatical analysis. 
Essays were based largely on subject matter, and knowledge of the 
principles of rhetoric was also tested. 


**Ibid., p. 66. 






. 


, 

■ 

. 












. 























81 

In contrast, the examinations of recent years have attempted to 
test the student's power rather than how well he memorized facts and 
rules. In the June, 1957i examination the largest number of marks were 
awarded for the ability to write good, clear prose. Students were required 
to write an expository paragraph, an article on leisure reading and an 
original essay of three hundred words. Nearly one-quarter of the total 
marks were given for these questions. Other questions tested the 
student's understanding and appreciation of selections from essays, short 
stories, dramas and poems. There were also questions on vocabulary, 
figures of speech, dramatic terns, language techniques and on writing 
techniques such as the use of dialogue and the effectiveness of endings 
in short stories. 

If it is true that, as Alberty wrote, "the learning products which 
are actually tested are the determining factors in curricular planning 
and learning" an analysis of the June, 1957» English examinations 
would indicate that English teachers in Alberta are devoting their efforts 
to providing the students with such abilities, understandings and skills 
as: 

1. Ability to write clear, forceful prose 

2. Ability to write well-organized paragraphs 

3. Ability to read various types of literature, including 
Shakespearean dramas, with comprehension 

^Harold Alberty, Reorganizing the High-School Curriculum , Revised 
Edition, New York: The Macmillan Company, 1953* P* H- 









. 











. 






* 



















■ 












* 


- 

' 













4 


82 

Ability to judge style of literary selections and to judge 
between good and bad writing 

5. Competence in language techniques, with some understanding 
of grammatical terms 

6. Development of a good vocabulary 

7. Acquaintance with types of magazines 

8. Discrimination and taste in choosing magazines 

Elective Courses in English 

A survey course in English literature was provided as an elective 
for grades XI and XII, with a credit value of three to five credits. It 
was suggested that "only those grade XI students who have an interest in 
literature and who have the capacity to handle such a broad expanse of 
material should be directed to this course. Grade XII students with 
interest and competence in English should be encouraged to include English 
Literature 21 in their programs. The course was to follow the organi¬ 
zation of the text. English literature was divided into nine periods from 
the Anglo-Saxon to the Modern Age, the latter occupying nearly one-third 
of the text. 

For those students who are interested in creative expression, 
English Language 21, a course in creative writing, was provided. The 
procedure was to be that of individual rather than class instruction. 

"The teacher will encourage each student to develop his ability along his 

^Alberta, Department of Education, Senior High School Curriculum 
Guide for English , 1955* P* 

















' 













. 


. , 






















. 

* 

. 






« 





83 


particular line of interest, and will adapt the instruction to indi- 
47 

vidual needs." The English Language 21 course consisted of five units: 

(a) Journalism 

(b) Short Story Writing 

(c) Play Writing and Radio Script Writing 

(d) Essay Writing 

(e) Verse Writing 

Summary 

There were six major points of difference between the courses 
introduced in 195^ and 1935 and the ones which they superseded. Most far- 
reaching in its implications perhaps was the emphasis on meeting the 
accepted needs of youth. The language program aimed at providing the 
students with many opportunities to express themselves in situations and 
on topics which were meaningful to them and which would have a practical 
value for them in life. The courses provided many experiences in letter¬ 
writing, speaking, organizing and giving reports and studying the mass 
modes of communication. In short, the language program was designed to 
provide experiences which would enable the student to become a useful, 
thoughtful citizen, able to express himself with competence in the many 
situations he would meet in life. 

A second important change was the increased emphasis on the unit 
approach to the study of both language and literature. This method 
provided a practical way for the teacher to make use of the interests 
and experiences of the pupil as a starting point for the work in English. 
It also allowed greater flexibility in adapting the courses to the indi¬ 
vidual differences found amongst the members of any class and provided 
effective motivation for expressional activities. Planning and carrying 


4 7 lbid .. p. 72. 

















' 


























' 




84 


out the work of the unit provided more opportunities for practicing 
democratic procedures in the classroom. In literature, the organization 
of the course around broad themes offered greater possibilities of attract¬ 
ing the interests of the pupils. 

A third feature of the new program was the increase in amount of 
time allowed for language activities. Whereas teachers had formerly 
taught language for two or three periods a week, they now had five. There 
are several reasons why the increase in time should bring about an improve¬ 
ment in language skills. First is the fact that the course simply provides 
more time for the students to practice those skills. The teacher would 
also have more time to check on students* work and give more individual 
instruction during class periods. Because his marking burden would thus 
be eased, he would be free to give more assignments. The Subcommittee 
had seen the necessity for the increased time allotment in one of its 
earliest meetings. 

Since the present concept of every teacher a teacher of English 
has not always produced desired outcomes and since there is 
insufficient time for the teacher of English language to organize, 
guide, and evaluate the language experiences of high school pupils, 
the time devoted to the secondary school language program should be 
extended.^ 

Another change in the English was the emphasis on the communication 
of meaning. There was a recognition of the importance of developing 
motivation in language work, for students must have ideas which they want 
to express if they are to improve in language effectiveness. They must 
have something to say and should be assisted to organize and express their 

^Minutes of the Meeting of Subcommittee on English, July 4, 1950. 



■ 

« 

. 








. 

. 

. 












- 

. 


. 

- 








85 


ideas as clearly and forcefully as possible. It was felt that in the 
past there had been M too much emphasis on the formal aspects of grammar 
and too little on the significant phases of good usage".^ 

Related to the above point was the new approach to grammar and 
usage. The students were to learn the grammatical concepts which would be 
of direct benefit to them in improving their writing and speaking. To 
assist them in the discussion of language problems, they were to acquire 
a knowledge of the terminology of grammar and usage. Grammar was to be 
learned in close conjunction with the compositional activities and as an 
aid in increasing effectiveness in those activities. 

Finally, the separation of language and literature in grades X 
and XI has been noted. By allowing the teacher and the class five 
periods a week during which they could concentrate on the task of improv¬ 
ing language skills, the Subcommittee hoped that language efficiency would 
be increased. However, it was believed that the grade XII student’s 
greater maturity would enable him to profit from an integrated course in 
language and literature. 

In summary, the Subcommittee hoped to achieve the aims of the 
English program by attempting to meet the needs of the students, by provid¬ 
ing for more time for mastering language skills, by adopting the psycho¬ 
logically sound unit approach in both language and literature, and by 
incorporating a grammar and usage program based on modem concepts of 
language. 

^^Minutes of Meeting of Subcommittee on English, October 17, 1950. 











, 

, 

. 










■ 








? 


, 













■ 




■ 












CHAPTER VII 


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 

The story of the teaching of English in Alberta for the last fifty- 
two years is one of increasing liberalization of the curriculum. Factors 
which have given impetus to this trend can be roughly divided into two 
broad classes: those which have been concerned with education as a whole, 
and those which have been concerned more specifically with the field of 
English. 

In the first group of factors there are four concepts or develop¬ 
ments which have influenced curricula. The most important perhaps is the 
adoption of the concept of "education for all", which has transformed the 
secondary schools in the last fifty years. During the nineteenth century 
the high schools were highly selective, being devoted primarily to 
preparing students for higher education. They were reserved for the elite 
and so tended to perpetuate class distinctions. Early in the twentieth 
century, however, searching reappraisals of secondary education were made. 
One of the basic requisites of a democratic society is an educated, 
enlightened citizenry. The democratic ethic demands that all citizens 
have equal opportunities to be educated to the limits of their capacity. 
And so educators are faced with the responsibility of providing secondary 
education to increasing hordes of students—a non-select group whose 
abilities, interests, needs and motives are infinitely varied. Educators 
must continually strive to devise a secondary school curriculum which 
will provide a general education for all without sacrificing the academic 


























- 

4 

?. T ’ 


















... 






standards demanded by those who wish to be prepared for higher education. 

Another important trend has been the movement toward a more 11 child- 
centred" curriculum. The idea that "the prime aim of the school is to 
assist.. .youth in his growth towards maximum self-realization" is by no 
means a new one. Educators and philosophers throughout history have 
accepted this aim. But to achieve it, educators have followed widely 
divergent routes. In the early secondary schools on this continent, the 
proper development of the individual was to be achieved by providing the 
pupil with a knowledge of a certain clearly-defined body of subject matter 
and by training his mind through formal discipline. During this century, 
educators realized that if the school is to assist youth to grow and 
develop, it is necessary to know how such growth and development takes 
place. Curriculum-makers begin with this knowledge and build a curriculum 
which will guide the pupil toward greater maturity. They attempt to 
choose and incorporate in the curriculum those experiences and activities 
which foster the personal growth and development of the child. 

Another force which has caused changes in curricula is the ever- 
increasing body of knowledge which is being accumulated through research. 
The findings of research in education, psychology, and the other social 
sciences force a continual examination of curriculum, teaching methods, 
textbooks, and all parts of the educational system. The study of indi¬ 
vidual differences has led to construction of curricula which are flexible 
so that they may be adapted to the varying needs of the students. 
Educational psychology has widened knowledge of the learning process. It 
has been shown that most learning takes place when the subject is closely 


* 

. 

■ 

. 

- 

, 

. 

. 

. 

. 



88 


related to the interests and experience of the learner. The adoption 
of the unit method was prompted by this principle of learning. Reference 
has been made in previous chapters to the contributions of research to 
the teaching of English. 

The fourth influence on the development of curriculum was the 
abandonment by most educators of the theory of mental discipline. This 
change in thinking led directly to a transformation in traditional methods 
of teaching grammar. It had been claimed that grammar logically taught 
was good training for the mind. Research however challenged the formal 
discipline theory and also showed that traditional methods of teaching 
grammar had little or no effect in improving students' ability to express 
themselves. 

The other broad group of factors which have influenced English 
curricula are those which are more directly related to the teaching of 
English. These are outlined briefly below. 

1. The intensive study of relatively few literature selections 
by the whole class has been replaced by extensive study of a 
larger number of selections. Coryell'slstudy showed that 
"students taught by the extensive method profited as greatly 
as pupils by the intensive method in informational achievement 
and excelled the intensive group in other factors like interest, 
enthusiasm, breadth of reading interests, and power to express 
ideas about it." This is not to say that specific selections 
are no longer taught and discussed in detail by teachers and 
students. However, many selections are now read to provide 

^Walter S. Monroe, Encyclopedia of Educational Research , The 
Macmillan Co., New York, 19^1» p. ^63. 







„ 

- 












. 






. 


. 





. 

, 




. 

* • 






89 

an understanding of oneself and one’s fellow men, to develop 
appreciation, or simply to provide enjoyment; it is no longer 
considered necessary to dissect and analyze every work in 
detail. 

2. Research into the reading interests of young people has brought 
about changes in the reading requirements in high school 
literature courses. Not only have the selections to be found 
in literature texts become more attractive and interesting but 
the free reading lists have been greatly extended to include 
every type of good literature that young people might read. 
Educators have been greatly assisted by the increase in the 
number of books written for young people. The wider choice of 
books encourages students to read more, and their wider reading 
can result in greater power of discrimination and judgment in 
the selection of books. 

3. Because educators have realized that much contemporary litera¬ 
ture is of excellent quality as well as of inherent interest 
to young people, many examples of this type of literature have 
been added to the lists of classics which have traditionally 
been found on English courses. The contention of some that 
only literature of the past can lead to the attainment of the 
aims of the study of literature is indefensible. A student’s 
understanding and enjoyment of a book is conditioned by his 
context of experience; the more modern books are more easily 
placed by him within that context and so will generally be 





. 


’ 

. 

. 







90 

more readily understood and enjoyed. It is psychologically 
sound to motivate the reading of students by providing more 
interesting books. 

4. In language, the emphasis now is on engaging the pupils in 
writing and speaking activities based on their interests and 
experience. While much written work will continue to be based 
on subject matter in literature, social studies, science, and 
other courses in the curriculum, the motivational value of 
relating assignments to the life of the student is now 
recognized. The adoption of the unit method assists teachers 
in motivating written and oral expression. The theme of the 
unit may be some topic of interest to young people ("Knowing 
More About Radio and Television") or it may be the development 
of some language skill ("Learning Business English"). Whatever 
the unit may be, it provides the pupils with many opportunities 
to write and to speak. 

5. In learning how to express themselves effectively, students 
must do much writing and speaking. The emphasis now is on 
actual practice rather than on learning the rules of composition 
and rhetoric. Only through extensive practice will students 
learn to organize ideas and to express them clearly and 
correctly. It is the responsibility of the teacher to arouse 

in the students a strong desire to improve their language skills, 
to guide them in the improvement of those skills, and to provide 
countless opportunities for them to express their ideas. 










* .■ . « > ,J : ' • 

- 

. 

. 


■ 




■ ' 


. 















6. Research indicates that formal study of grammar does not 


91 


necessarily help students to express themselves more effectively. 
Therefore, the tendency today is to make grammar teaching 
functional, that is > to teach that grammar which will make a 
direct contribution to effective expression. 

Pupils are no longer asked to follow the logical outline of grammar 
as an organized body of knowledge, beginning with the parts of speech 
and ending with the nound clause. Rather they are asked to speak and 
write, to note wherein their speech and writing are effective or 
ineffective and to discover how the known principles of usage or 
sentence structure can help them to overcome the specific weaknesses 
in their own expression. 

?. There is now a more realistic view of the matter of "correct¬ 
ness" in language. It is generally agreed that the proper 
standard of correctness is the conformity of the language one 
one uses to accepted usage rather than to its adherence to 
prescriptive rules of grammar. It is also recognized that 
there are levels of usage. What is correct or acceptable in 
informal, colloquial speech is not necessarily so in formal 
writing. 

8. There is a new stress on a developmental approach to reading. 
Development of reading skill is a continuous process; it 
cannot be assumed that reading need be taught only in the 
elementary grades. There are certain reading skills that the 
high school must teach. To mention only a few, the student 
should develop skill in skimming, locating information, 
noting details, getting the central meaning of a paragraph, 
and following directions. Developmental reading units have 

^National Council of Teachers of English, The English Language 
Arts , New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, Inc., 1952, p. 286. 











- 




* 




, 
















. 

. 

' 

. 







been included in the grade X and grade XII textbooks, and teachers have 
been urged to set up a program to improve reading. 


92 


In summarizing the evolution of the English curriculum in Alberta, 
three basic trends are seen. First, the curriculum is being modified 
because of the prevailing concept that in a democracy, all must be 
educated to the limits of their capacity. This implies that the curricu¬ 
lum must take into account the range of abilities and interests of the 
students now attending high school. Second, curricula are being con¬ 
structed which will assist the individual in his personal development. 

The emphasis is on a child-centred rather than a subject-centred 
curriculum. Third, there is a greater dependence on research as a guide 
in curriculum revision. 

The development of the English curriculum in Alberta in recent 
years seems as a rule to have been based on sound principles. However, 
with regard to future developments the writer suggests the following 
points for the consideration of curriculum-makers and teachers. 

Research has indicated that an individualized laboratory technique 
is highly effective in the development of language skills. In the 1955 
Curriculum Guide there does not seem to be a sufficient emphasis on the 
necessity of individualized instruction in language. The Subcommittee 
on English recommend that at least two periods a week be given to work¬ 
shop procedure and that teachers should force themselves to use group 
techniques when pupils are asked to write. It was stated that various 
methods can be developed for giving on-the-spot assistance to pupils. 
These instructions hardly seem sufficient; a section of the curriculum 


■ 

. 

- 

, 

■ 

. 

- 


' ■ 

■ 






93 

guide or a separate brochure which more fully explains workshop procedures 
and group techniques in the teaching of writing would be of benefit to 
teachers. 

Research has shown that grammatical concepts must be taught and 
re-taught. It is unrealistic to assume that students come into high 
school from grade IX with a working understanding of fundamental grammar 
and usage concepts. Teachers should be informed that it is often neces¬ 
sary to re-teach even the simplest concepts. Some students even in grades 
XI and XII have difficulty distinguishing between simple and complex 
sentences, are often unable to recognize adjectives and adverbs, and are 
reduced to helplessness when faced with adjectival and adverbial clauses 
and phrases. Instead of complaining bitterly about the ineptitude of 
their colleagues in the lower grades, teachers must patiently teach 
grammar so that the student will eventually be able to use it function¬ 
ally to improve his writing and speaking. 

In the last analysis, the curriculum is not what is found between 
the covers of a curriculum guide but what actually goes on in the class¬ 
rooms of the province. It is the contention of the writer that it is 
unrealistic to expect teachers through mere reading of the curriculum 
guide to reach a point in their thinking at which a curriculum committee 
arrived only after years of thoughtful deliberation. A system must be 
devised of providing teachers with more insight into the thinking which 
results in curricular changes. Superintendents and inspectors of schools 
cannot be expected to perform this function alone. Institutes and 
conventions offer a partial solution, and the formation of English 



94 


teachers’ organizations on a local or province-wide basis would bring 
about improvements. Finding solutions is bound to be difficult but the 
benefits which would accrue in the form of better English teaching would 
amply repay the effort. 








' 




. 





























BIBLIOGRAPHY" 


95 


A. GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS 


North-West Territories, Council of Public Instruction, Report , Regina, 1896 . 

North-West Territories, Report , Regina, 1900. 

North-West Territories, Department of Education, Annual Report , Regina,1902. 

North-West Territories, Annual Report , Regina, 1903. 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report , Edmonton, 1909. 

Province of Alberta, Annual Report , Edmonton, 1913* 

Province of Alberta, Annual Report , Edmonton, 191^* 

Province of Alberta, Annual Report , Edmonton, 1923* 

Province of Alberta, Annual Report , Edmonton, 1931* 

Province of Alberta, Handbook for Secondary Schools , Edmonton, 1927, 

Province of Alberta, Handbook for Secondary Schools , Edmonton, 1930. 

Province of Alberta, Junior High School Curriculum Guide for Social 
Studies-Language , Edmonton, 1955* 

Province of Alberta, Programme of Studies for the High School , Bulletin II, 
Edmonton, 1923* 

Province of Alberta, Programme of Studies for the High School, Bulletin I, 
Edmonton, 19^6* 

Province of Alberta, Senior High School Curriculum Guide for English , 
Edmonton, 1955* 

Province of Alberta, Minutes of Meetings of Subcommittee on English, 1950. 

National Joint Committee on English, Reorganization of English in 

Secondary Schools , Bulletin No. 2, Washington, D.C., Government 
Printing Office, 1917* 


















































; 

. 




















. 




, 

- 












. 


- « 

















• . • - 

■ 




96 


B. BOOKS 


National Council of Teachers of English, An Experience Curriculum in 
English , D. Appleton-Century Company Inc., New York, 1935* 

National Council of Teachers of English, The English Language Arts , 

New York, Appleton-Century-Crofts, Inc., 1952. 

National Education Association, Department of Supervisors and Directors 
of Instruction, The Development of a Modem Program in English , 
Ninth Yearbook, Washington, D.C., 1936. 

Pooley, Robert C., Teaching English Usage , D. Appleton-Century Company, 
Inc., New York, 19*+6. 

Seath, John, The High School English Grammar , Revised Edition, Toronto, 
Canada Publishing Company Limited, 1899. 

Wade, H.H., Blossom, J.E., Eaton, M.P., Expressing Yourself , Grades 10, 
11, 12, Boston, Houghton Mifflin Company, 1939. 























- 










... 








. 


- 




■ - ■ . . .... 

, 








APPENDIX A 


97 


Prescribed Textbooks and Examinations for the year ending June 30, 1907.* 
Standard VI 


Reading: prescribed books: 

Scott's The Lay of the Last Minstrel (Riverside Literature 
Series No. 134 or Macmillan's Pocket Classics) 

Macaulay's Lays of Ancient Rome (R.L.S. no. 45) 

Dickens' The Cricket on the Hearth (R.L.S. No. 58) 

Goldsmith's The Vicar of Wakefield (R.L.S. No. 78 or 
Eclectic English Classics) American Book Co., (Morang & Co.) 

English Composition: no text 

English Literature: Poetical and Prose Literature . Vol . £I» edited 
by Saul and McIntyre (The Copp, Clark Co.) 

English Grammar and Rhetoric: Syke's Elementary English Composition 

(The Copp, Clark Co.); The High School Grammar , revised edition, 
(Canada Publishing Co.) 


Standard VII 


Reading: 

Coleridge's The Ancient Mariner (R.L.S. No. 80) 

Macaulay's Essay on Lord Clive (Macmillan's Pocket Classics) 
Addison's Sir Roger de Coverley (Macmillan's Pocket Classics) 
Arnold's Sohrab and Rustum (Eclectic English Classics) Morang 
& Co. 

English Composition: no text. 

English Literature: Tennyson's The Lotus Eaters , Ulysses , St . Agnes Eve , 
Sir Galahad , Tears , Idle Tears , The Princess , The Brook , Ode on 
the Death of the Duke of Wellington , The Charge of the Light 
Brigade (Select Poems 1907* The Copp, Clark Co.) 

Ruskin's Sesame and Lilies (Gage & Co.) 

Shakespeare's Julius Caesar (Rolfe) 


English Grammar and Rhetoric: As above 

Teacher's reference: Genung's Practical Rhetoric (Ginn & Co.) 



















































. 


' 

. * 1 ' ! - 

■ 












. ' . i ' 


. .. • . • ... . 

■ ’ .' . • 







Standard VIII 


98 


Reading: 

Thackeray's Vanity Fair (Church), Morang & Co. 

Hawthorne's The House of the Seven Gables (R.L.S. No. 91) 
Browning's The Lost Leader (R.L.S. No. 115) 

Wordsworth's Excursion , Book I (Maynard's English Classic 
Series No. 25) 

English Composition: no text 

English Literature: Tennyson's The Princess (Bates), The .American Book 
Co. (Morang & Co.) 

Shakespeare's Hamlet (Rolfe) 

Milton's Paradise Lost, Book I, Macmillan's Pocket Classics 
(Morang & Co.) 

Southey's Life of Nelson (Eclectic English Classics) The American 
Book Co. (Morang & Co.) 

English Language and Rhetoric: Lounsbury's English Language . Part I, 
revised edition 

Guinmere's Handbook of Poetics. (Ginn & Co.) 

Genung's Practical Elements of Rhetoric (Ginn & Co.) 


EXAMINATIONS 

Standard VI 

English Literature 
Essays 

Standard VII 

English Literature 
Essays 

English Grammar and Rhetoric 


Standard VIII 


Literature (Tennyson and Hawthorne) 
Literature (Shakespeare and Milton) 
English Language and Rhetoric 


* Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report , 1906. 




























APPENDIX B 


99 


Prescribed Textbooks and Examinations for the year ending June 30, 1913. 

(The courses were listed by grades rather than by standards for the first 
time during this term.) 

Grade IX 


English Literature 

Poetry: Whittier — Snowbound 

Selections from English Narrative Poems 
Prose: Hawthorne — Tanglewood Tales 

Ruskin — King of the Golden River 
Collateral Reading: Scott — Ivanhoe 
Longfellow — Evangeline 
Church — Stories from Homer 

Composition: Manual of Composition and Rhetoric (Gardiner, Kittredge 
and Arnold) 

Grammar: The High School Grammar (Seath), revised edition 


Grade X 

English Literature 

Poetry: Scott —■ Marmion 

Shakespeare — As You Like It 
Prose: Eliot — Silas Marner 

Addison — Sir Roger de Coverley 
Collateral Reading: Scott — The Talisman 
Parkman — The Oregon T rail 
Macaulay — Lays of Ancient Rome 

Composition: as above 

Grammar: as above 


Grade XI 

English Literature 

Poetry: Shakespeare — Coriolanus 

Tennyson — The Coming of Arthur 
Selections from Palgrave 1 s Golden Treasury 




































' 

•' 


. 

7 






















... • . ' 

.i . . . .• . ’ML Li . no3 v . •' 


*■ ; ri} 

' 








100 


Prose: Macaulay — Essay on Milton 

Goldsmith — Vicar of Wakefield 
Collateral Reading: Morley — Burke 

Dickens — David Copperfield 
Tennyson — The Princess 

Composition and Rhetoric: as above 


Grade XII 


English Literature 

Poetiy: Shakespeare — Macbeth 

Milton — Minor Poems 

Selections from Palgrave 1 s Golden Treasury 
Prose: Emerson — Representative Men 

Burke — Speech on Conciliation 
Collateral Reading: Beowulf 

Spenser — Faerie Queene , Book £ 

Carlyle — Bums and Scott 
Shakespeare — Henry V 

Composition and Rhetoric: no text 

English Language and History of Literature: 

Lounsbuiy — English Language , Part I, revised edition 

Gummere - Handbook of Poetics 

Halleck - History of English Literature 


Examination Subjects 


Grade IX: 
Grade X: 
Grade XI: 
Grade XII: 


English Literature, Composition, Grammar 

English Literature, Composition, Grammar 

English Literature, Composition and Rhetoric 

English Literature (two papers), Composition and Rhetoric, 

English Language and History of Literature 


* Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report , 1912 





































■ 


































' 






• . • 

« 






: 

: ' 











101 


APPENDIX C 


Outline of Courses of Study and Prescribed Textbooks (for the school 
year 1925-26 unless otherwise specified) 

English 1 — Literature 

I. An elementary study of rhythm 

(a) The foot of two syllables 
Iambic, trochaic and spondaic feet 

(b) The line 

Monometer,..heptameter verse 

(c) Scansion of regular iambic and trochaic metres 

II. An intensive study in class of the prescribed selections from a 
two-year cycle 

A. Poetry (a representative selection) 

Old Ballad: Sir Patrick Spens 
Aytoun: The Buriel March of Dundee 
Shelley: The Cloud 

Austin: A Voice from the West 
Browning: The Glove 
The Bible: Ecclesiastes 

B. Prose (a representative selection) 

Dickens: A Christmas Carol 
Lamb: Timon of Athens 

Hardy: The Three Strangers 

III. Supplementary Literature 
Obligatory 

Tennyson: Enoch Arden 
Hawthorne: The Wonder Book 

Selections: A Book of Canadian Prose and Verse (Dr, E.K. and 
Mrs, E. H. Broadus) 

Recommended 

Stevenson: Kidnapped , David Balfour 

Homer: Odyssey (Butcher and Lang* s translation) 

Cooper: The Last of the Mohicans 
Duncan: Dr. Luke of the Labrador 


























' 








. 









. 






. 

: 

' 



English 2 — Literature 


102 


I* The study of rhythm in verse continued 

(a) The foot of three syllables 
Dactylic and anapaestic feet 

(b) Rhyme 

Beginning rhyme, end rhyme 
(l) Single (2) Double 

(c) Special metres 

Blank verse, dactylic hexameter 

(d) Scansion of easy blank verse and dactylic hexameter verse 

II. An intensive study in class of the prescribed selections... 

A. Poetry (a representative selection) 

Shakespeare: The Merchant of Venice 
Doyle: A Private of the Buffs 
Seeger: I Have a Rendezvous with Death 
McCrae: The Unconquered Dead 

B. Prose 

Dickens: A Tale of Two Cities 

III. Supplementary Literature 

Obligatory 

Scott: The Talisman 
Parker: Seats of the Mighty 

Tennyson: Selections from the Idylls — The Coming of Arthur . The 
Holy Grail 

Recommended 

Scott: Kenilworth 
Wallace: Ben Hur 
Doyle: Micah Clarke 
Washington: Up From Slavery 

English 3 — Literature 

I. An elementary study of special stanzaic and structural forms of verse 

(a) The Spenserian stanza — its form and use 

(b) The Sonnet 

(i) Shakespearean 

(ii) Miltonic 

Their forms and thought 

II. An intensive study ... 

A. Poetry (a representative selection from 22 items) 

Shakespeare: Julius Caesar 

























103 


Tennyson: Lancelot and Elaine 
Browning: The Boy and the Angel 
Coleridge: Kubla Khan 
Wordsworth: Milton , thou shouldst be living at this hour 
B. Prose 

Macaulay: Essay on Warren Hastings 
Knoblock: Milestones 

III. Supplementary Literature 

Obligatory 

Dickens: Oliver Twist 
Blackmore: Loma Doone 
Longfellow: Evangeline 
Recommended 

Kipling: The Light that Failed 
Eliot: The Mill on the Floss 
Goldsmith: She Stoops to Conquer 
Sheridan: The School For Scandal 

English 4 — Literature 

I. A study of the subject matter of poetry 

(a) The Epic 

The characteristics of the epic and its more important forms 

(b) The Lyric. The characteristics.,. 

(c) The Drama 

The characteristics of dramatic poetry and the more common forms 
of the drama 

II. An intensive study... 

A. Poetry (a representative selection from 12 items) 

Shakespeare: Macbeth 

Milton: II Penseroso , Lycidas 
Byron: Lachiny Gajr 

Wordsworth: Lines Composed a Few lilies Above Tintern Abbey 
Dryden: Alexander 1 s Feast 

B. Prose 

Ruskin: Crown of Wild Olives 
Carlyle: Essay on Bums 












































III. Supplementary Literature 


Obligatory 

Shakespeare: The Tempest 
Lytton: Harold 

Stevenson: Travels with a Donkey 
Gaskell: Cranford 
Recommended 

Thackeray: Henry Esmond 
Barrie: The Little Minister 
Bronte: Jane Byre 
Trollope: Barchester Towers 
Hemon: Maria Chapdelaine 

























■ff'.i: v'" . r ;;c .,1II 


: 





■ 

. 

. • 

1 - ■ 

: ■ 
















APPENDIX D 


105 


Textbooks as prescribed in Programme of S tudies for the High School, 
Bulletin II, 1939 

English 1 


Literature 

Foetzy: A Selection of English Poetry (Part l), Macdonald and Walker 
Drama: One play to be chosen from the following: 

As You Like It — Shakespeare 
Midsummer Night 1 s Dream — Shakespeare 
Silver Box — Galsworthy 
The Admirable Crichton — Barrie 


Language 

Expressing Yourself , Book II , Grade X—-Wade, Blossom and Eaton, 
Canadian Edition, Houghton, Mifflin and Co, 

English 2 

Literature 

Poetry: Anthology of Poetry — editor, W, J. Alexander 
Essays: Essays of Yesterday and Today — Tinker, editor 
Short Stories: Selected Short Stories — Ryerson Press 
Drama: one of: 

Abraham Lincoln — Drinkwater 
Julius Caesar — Shakespeare 
Milestones — Bennett and Knoblock 
Richard of Bordeaux — Daviot 
St , Joan — Shaw 
The Tempest — Shakespeare 


Language 

Expressing Yourself , Book III , Grade XI 































I 



















English 3 


Literature 

Poetry: Poems Worth Knowing — C. E. Lewis, editor 
Essays: Essays of Our Times — Sharon Brown, editor 
Drama: Two Plays 


One of: 

Hamlet 

Macbeth 

Henry IV, Part I 

Romeo and Juliet 

One of: 

Loyalties — Galsworthy 

R.U.R. — Capek 

St. Joan — Shaw 

What Every Woman Knows — Barrie 

Language 



Expressing Yourself , Book IV, Grade Xil 





















107 


APPENDIX E 


The following quotations have been included in order to give a 
clear idea of the grammar requirements as outlined in Programme of Studies 
for the High School , Bulletin 1, 1946 . 


The outline of grammar for each grade is sketched under the heading 
Functional Grammar; it will be the duty of the teacher to make the appli¬ 
cations in writing and speaking. It is felt that the successful application 
of this knowledge to the language habits of the students is one of the most 
important parts of the entire language course. The outline indicates only 
the minimum attainment for every student; any teacher should feel free to 
carry his class further in grammar than is suggested in the outline. No 
effort is made here to suggest methods of teaching, as this is left to the 
judgment of the individual teacher. 


English 1 


Functional grammar: 

(a) Recognition of subject and predicate in simple sentences. 

(b) Selection of bare subject and bare predicate in simple sentences, 
involving the noun and verb and pronoun as parts of speech. 

(c) Recognition of the principal clause or "main thought" in a complex 
sentence, and the selection of subject and predicate in this 
principal clause. 

(d) Use of the pronoun as a noun substitute. 

(e) The noun and pronoun as object of a verb, and the recognition of 
the object. 

(f) The adjective as a describing or modifying word used with the noun 
and pronoun. 

(g) The adverb as a describing or modifying word used with the verb. 


English 2 


Functional grammar: 

(a) The phrase as a second modifier of nouns, pronouns and verbs. (N.3. The 
adjective and adverb were taken up in grade ten. The phrase is thus an 
extension of the adjective, or the adverb.) The preposition should be 
taught, if it is not known. 

(b) The adjective clause as a modifier of the noun and pronoun; how the 
adjective clause is punctuated. 









. . 



' 





vr. ■ 













(c) The adverb clause as a modifier of the verb; how the adverb clause 
is punctuated. The conjunction should be taught the first time it 
is encountered with clauses. 

(d) The noun clause, used chiefly as subject. This is the most 
difficult type of clause for students to recognize and use. 

(e) The compound sentence and the conjunctions and, but, or. 

(f) Explanation of the verb "to be", when encountered. (N.B. The main 
stress in grade eleven is on the sentence and its parts. The hope 
is that the teaching will help in constructing sentences and in 
writing, and lead to some appreciation of style.) 


English 3 


Functional grammar: 

(1) A review of the work of the previous two years and a further study 
of the parts of speech. 

(2) The noun: Case— subjective, i.e. subject of verb, and predicate 
nominative; possessive case; objective case, i.e. object of verb 
and object of preposition; number in nouns. 

(3) The verb. Kind: transitive, intransitive; knowledge of the parts of 
the verb is assumed, e.g. the present, past, past participle. Person— 
the same as that of the subject. Number— the same as that of the 
subject. Voice, active and passive. Mood, stress the indicative, but 
mention the subjunctive as required. Tense— present, past and future, 
and the main kinds of these, e.g. the indefinite, imperfect (progressive) 
and perfect. 

(4) The adjective, study of comparison only. 

(5) The adverb, modifying verbs, as before, but in addition its function 
as a modifier of adjectives and adverbs. Kinds of adverbs, time, 
place, manner, degree. Degree of adverbs — positive, comparative, 
superlative. 

(6) The conjunction requires special emphasis as it is so important in 
writing. Kinds, subordinate and co-ordinate. 

(7) The study of special and more difficult forms of the verb and noun, 
i.e. the infinitive, participle and gerund. 

The following new textbooks were assigned by Bulletin 1, 1946. 




• . i . ' . Oi . - ' ■ J-C • • --- • 

' 

' • £ • 

' 

, , ■ ... :: . ,'f ’ 

... 

jr-c,.- , . . ( ■ 


. 

. „ ■ ’ . 

4 

. 

: • • 

■ ... - . " • • v • ' » 

■ : t • - • 

. -i ■ ... ’ C •• •• J 


. \ 


■ 




. ;; 








.. ' . 

, .. v • 

, . / 

. 





• 

• 

• 




■ 






. 


. 


’ 



• 

' 

‘ • • 










109 


English 1 


Literature 

The Magic of Literature , Book III , Fty-erson. (For A and B students) 
Let* s Read , Book IV , Henry Holt (For C students) 


English 2 


Literature 

Essays: A Book of Good Essays . Sealey. 


English 3 


There were no changes in prescribed textbooks, except that Shaw’s 
St . Joan was deleted from the list of plays and was replaced by Maxwell 
Anderson's Elizabeth the Queen. 









APPENDIX F 


no 


Textbooks as prescribed in Senior High School Curriculum Guide 
for English , 1955 


Literature 10 

M. M. Boyd (editor), Creative Living , 4, W. J. Gage & Co. Limited, 
Toronto, 1954. 

Literature 20 

E. W. Buxton (editor), Creative Living , W. J. Gage & Co. Limited, 

Toronto, 195^* 


Language 10 

Martha Gray and Clarence W. Each, Ehglish For Today , Grade Ten , 
Canadian edition revised by M. D. Meade and W. S. Waddell, 
Longmans, Green & Co., Toronto, 1954. 


Language 20 

Martha Gray and Clarence W. Hach, English For Today , Grade Eleven , 
Canadian edition revised by M. D. Meade and W. S. Waddell, 
Longmans, Green & Co., Toronto, 1954. 


English 30 

H. T. Coutts, et al, Thought and Expression , Longmans, Green & 
Co., Toronto, 1955• 

To be used in all grades: 

M. H. Scargill, An English Handbook , Longmans, Green & Co., 
Toronto, 1954. 


A Sample of Selections from Creative Living , 4, Creative Living , £ 
and Thought and Expression 


Poetry 


W. E. Henley, Invictus 

Robert Browning, Davids Song from 11 Saul 11 
Shakespeare, Sonnet xxix 
Archibald Lampman, Evening 



























































• - 








: ... • .< : 

.. 






. 













■ 




• ■ : 




- 









William Rose Benet, The Skater of Ghost Lake 

Gene Fowler, The Jervis Bay Goes Down 

Robert Service, The Ballad of the Ice-Worm Cocktail 

Markham, The Man with the Hoe 

W. W. Gibson, The Ice-Cart 

Robert Frost, Mending Wall 

Francis Thompson, To a Snowflake 

Ralph Hodgson, Stupidity Street 

Wordsworth, The World Is too Much With Us 

Carl Sandburg, Cool Tombs 

Shelley, The Cloud 

Shelley, Ode to the West Wind 

Vachel Lindsay, The Flower-Fed Buffaloes 

Browning, Andrea del Sarto 

George Lanigan, A Threnody 

Byron, The Eve of Waterloo 

Milton, Lycidas 


Short Stories 

Carl Stephenson, Leiningen versus the Ants 
W. Somerset Maughan, The Verger 
Ehimanuel Winters, The Welsh Are Like That 
Frank Brookhouser, Easter Egg 
Ring Lardner, Haircut 

James Thurber, The Secret Life of Walter Mitty 

Saki, Mrs . Packletide 1 s Tiger 

Eric Williams, The Wooden Horse 

Galsworthy, Quality 

Hawthorne, The Ambitious Guest 

0. Henry, A Retrieved Reformation 

H. C. Burner, The Love-Letters of Smith 


One-Act Plays 

Gwen Pharis Ringwood, The Courting of Marie Jenvrin 

Susan Glaspell, Trifles 

Louis N. Parker, The Monkey 1 s Paw 

Hans Sachs, The Strolling Clerk From Paradise 


























































112 


Essays 


William Allen White, Mary White 
Bruce Hutchison, Canada the Unknown 

Charles S. Brooks, On the Difference between Wit and Humour 
Winston S* Churchill, Early Life 
Paul Gallico, The Feel 

Knute Rockne, The Qualities That Make or Mar Success 
G. Lowes Dickinson, A Sacred Mountain 
A, P. Herbert, About Bathrooms 
Randolph Bourne, What Is Opinion ? 

Joseph Addison, The Vision of Mirza 





















... 

, 

; .. ■ _ t 

- 

, 


. 
















113 

APPENDIX G 


The departmental examinations in English 30 for June, 1957, are 
described in this appendix. The questions that are quoted and summarized 
below may be compared with those in Chapter H. 

For many years before 1936, there had been two examinations in English; 
one in literature and one in language. Beginning in 1956, however, the two 
three-hour examinations were treated as two sections of one examination, in 
keeping with the integration of language and literature in the English 30 
course. Part A consisted of three sections: Poetiy, Drama, and the Original 
Essay; Part B consisted of five sections: The Magazine, The Short Story, 

The Essay, Language Techniques and Leisure Reading. 

Representative questions from each of the sections are summarized 


below. 

Section I - Poetry 

1. Vocabulary 

2. The poem The Com Husker and a paraphrase of it were quoted. 

The question required the candidate to "show differences between 
prose and poetiy with respect to rhythm, diction, intellectual or 
emotional appeal content, pattern, etc." 

3. Figures of speech 
Section II - Drama 

4. An explanation of several dramatic terms was required. 

5. Questions which tested the student's understanding of the 
implications of an excerpt from Our Town were asked. 

6. Comprehension questions on an excerpt from All 1 s '//ell That Ends 
Well. 




' 




- 

, 

. • . ■ ■ 



1 1 

!>*. ' 






- 

. 



• 









• 



. 

. 




- 

' 

. to Sort 

. 

« 

' 

• ■ j: ' ’ . . : i J ■ 'J/ vi-J.. n ■ 

. . . : 

• . J ' \ 

: ' > y ■ ■ v .• 

■ 

• • • • • 

/ .'i, ;. r 


Section III*- The Original Essay- 


114 


7* Write an essay of approximately 300 words about clothing. Your 
essay may deal with national costumes, service uniforms f 
religious vestments, academic habiliments, or your own school 
sweater bedecked with crests and awards. But it must be one 
essay, not three or four separate ones strung together like 
beads on a string. 

OR 

Shakespeare is recognized as the greatest writer of drama that 
the English language has yet produced. Plot is essential to 
drama. 

Write an essay of about 300 words in which, without summarizing 
the plot of a Shakespearean play, you discuss its plot with 
reference to probability (Is the outcome of the plot likely?), 
motivation (Do the characters have sufficient reason for acting 
as they do?), dramatic unity (Can any parts of the play be 
omitted?), and other elements. Although you are not expected 
to summarize the plot, you are expected to refer to it for 
specific instances and examples. 

Section IV - The Magazine 

9. The student was asked to write an expositoiy paragraph of not 
more than 75 words on one of the following questions. 

(a) What is the name of your favorite magazine and why does 
it appeal to you? 

(b) Why is the fiction in pulp magazines often described as 
"escape literature"? 

Section V - The Short Story 

10. This question required that a series of excerpts from short 
stories be matched with descriptions of the styles in which 
they were written. 

Given a story beginning, the student was to summarize an idea 
for a satisfactory completion of the story, or was to write a 
paragraph or dialogue to heighten the impression of the emotion 
felt by the character. 


12. 


. 

' ■ J: 

■ 






« 

■ 

' 

* 














■ 


i 

■ 


. . 


■ 
















■ 






- 












■ 


■ ■ ’ 

. 


1 ' - ‘ ' i ; • • 1 








Section VI - The Essay 


115 


14. Student required to identify type of writing and to comment on 
appropriateness of style. 

Section VII - Language Techniques 

1 6 . Grammar: predicate adjectives, appositive adjectives. 

Section VTII - Leisure Reading 

18. Write an article of 100 to 150 words in which you discuss some 
of the qualities which enable you to distinguish between good 
and poor literature in your leisure reading. 







. 







- 















