
For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta 


Smith, Wesley 

The development of grain inspection in 
Canada. 1937. 























0.x MBB1S 
mwebsiimis 







—ry-—i -m 

Of 

. ... ... .... -jj . 


7/esley Smith, B.Sc. (Agr. ) 


A Thesis 

submitted to the University of Alberta in 
partial fulfilment of the requirements for 
the decree of Master of Arts, 

Master 7 s programme - five graduate courses 
in addition to this thesis. 


Edmonton, Alberta. 

Department of Political Economy May, 193 


















COT 1 


Introduction 


CHAPTER 1. 


Page 

. 1 


1. The Canadian grain inspection system a 

part of the development of Canada . . 1 

2. Grain inspection defined . 1 

3. The relationship of the producer and 

consumer to each other ........ 

4. The development of trade regulation .... 

5. The origin of commodity inspection .... 

6. Necessity for the study of early acts . . . 

7. Scope of the grain inspection system . . . 

8. Importance of grain inspection . ' 

9. Ohje&t of the present sturdy ....... 

CHAPTER 2. 

The origin of state controlled commodity inspection 

1. Private inspection ...... . . 

2. Inspection hy municipal organizations . . . 

3. The lapse of commodity inspection . . . . . 

4. State controlled commodity inspection . , . 

5. Grading facilitates the transfer of the 

consumer T s discrimination to the 
individual producer ......... 


CHAPTER 3. 


Introduction of commodity inspection into Canada. . 

1. Inspection introduced to promote foreign 

trade . ....... 

2. Types of commodity inspection . . . 

3. Consumers 1 inspection in Nova Scotia . . . 

4. Producers 1 inspection in lower Canada, . , . 

(a) New France, ----- 1763 ...... 

CTo) Province of Quebec, 1763-1791 . . 

(c) lower Canada, 1791-1841. , , . . . 

5. Commodity inspection in Epper Canada , . , 

6. Acts related to commodity inspection , . . 


to cr- cr> to ^ (T> cr» £0 ^ co to cr> ^ 

W CQ ^ CO (T» O w r-i H rl rl W 02 CV} Cv> CO CO CO CO CO lO vD 



















Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/developmentofgraOOsmit 





12 


Contents 
CHAPTER 4 

Commodity inspection uhder the supervision of local 

comnerdial organizations . •••••68 

1. The economic situation during the early forties 

of the 19th century.68 

2. The Board of Trade.72 

3. The inspection system ..75 

CHAPTER 5 

The extension of commodity inspection to the 

marketing of grain .83 

1. Condition promoting grain grading in 1863 ... 

2. The wheat grades of 1863 ........... 86 

3. The grades of other grain. ( 

4. Standard samples of grain . 92 

5. The inspection service of 1863 .. ( 

6. The settlement of disputes . .. 1GQ 

CHAPTER 6 

Centralized control of grain inspection ....... 101 

1. Greater uniformity of inspection is made 

possible under the General Inspection 

Act of 1873 . 104 

2. The consumers 1 preference becomes more 

evident in the wheat grades of "873 , . 108 

3. Provisions respecting grain generally .... 115 

4. A decrease of local influence on the 

inspection service ........... 115 

5. miscellaneous acts affecting grain inspection 120 

CHAPTER 7 

Che growth of grain inspection to ns.tional importance 183 

1. The consumers 1 preference promotes the 

classification of wheat according to 
variety and district of origin ..... 125 

2. Other grain ................. 129 

3. Commercial grades ..129 

4. Changes in the inspection service bring 

greater uniformity of grading. ..... 131 


6. The weighing of grain 188 













































iii 


Contents 
CHAPTER 8 

Government administration and supervision of 

grain inspection.141 

1. The settlement of the prairies.141 

2. Dissatisfaction of the farmers.143 

3. The consumers T discrimination was "brought 

closer to the producer by changes in the 
inspection service on 1899 ....... 145 

4. The response of statutory grade definitions 

to changes in production ........ 150 

(a) Buckwheat grades . 154 

(b) Flax grades . ..155 

5. The foreign grain inspection act- ...... 156 

6 . The Packaging and Sale Act .. . 159 

’'A n he C-?t Inspection Act of 1904 ...... 161 

8 . The Department of Trade and Commerce .... 162 

CHAPTER 9 

The extension of grain inspection to include the 

regulation of non-grading activities ...... 163 

1. The transportation problem of western Canada 163 


. T1 investigation of producers 1 complaints 

hy royal commission .......... 169 

4. The Manitoba Grain Act assists the producer to 
receive the results of the consumers 1 

discrimination . . ...... 170 

. (a) The warehouse commissioner ..... 171 

(b) Loading platforms ......... 172 

(c) Car distribution ..... . 173 

(d) Terminal elevators ......... 175 

CHAPTER 10 

j entralized control and administration of grain inspection 

177 * 

_. -iii. o ana da Grain Act consolidates legislation 

respecting grain inspection ...... 173 

2. The board of grain commissioners unifies 

supervision . 179 






































IV 


; in grade definitions more clearly 

interpret the consumers 1 2 3 4 5 preference . . . 180 

4. The inspection service assumes increased 

importance.184 

CHAPTER 11 

Recapitulation ..187 

1. The grades of grain . ..187 

2• The settlement of disputes.209 

3. The growth of the.inspection service ..... 210 

4. Administration of inspection acts.211 

CHAPTER 12 

Factors influencing grain inspection . 213 

1. Population.213 

2. Production . ..214 

3. Marketing technique.. 218 

4. The farmers 1 influence on grain inspection . . 219 

5. The flour milling industry . 220 

6. The grain trade.221 

7. Consumption ................. 224 

8. The development of trade regulation ..... 227 

9. The hoards of trade. . .. 232 

10. Crain inquiry commissions . ..... 233 

CHAPTER 13 

A comparison of Canadian and foreign grain inspection 

systems . .. 234 

1. The United States. 236 

2. Protein grading .......... . 242 

3. Creat Britain ........ . 243 

4. The origin of the f.a.q_. system ..246 

5. The Argentine and Australia ......... 250 




















































■ 




I 





















rH 02 tO ^}« m *D H 02 tO 


V 


CHAPTER 14 

Conclusion.253 

. The consumer demands uniform grading . 254 

. The producer demands the full extent of the 

consumers 7 discrimination . 257 

. The problem of grading G-arnet v/heat.259 

. The problem of moisture classification .... 264 

. The problem of controlled production ..... 270 

. The future.272 

APPENDICES 

. Excerpts from statutes . 275 

. Charts . ..... 293 

. Tables.300 

. Bibliography. 356 



















•••••••••o . .O rl W [Q ^1 in lO 

H Wn^H^vDJSCDO>H rH c\2 to LO «X> cs i—| CVJ «^iniDl>-COO>HHHHHHH 


vi 


LIS? 0? EXCffRPTS FROM STATUTES 

Scotia, 179.3, c 4. 

" " " rT ,f , 1838, c 4. 

" » " ,T 11 , 1864, c 85, R.S. 

!T Tt IT Lower Canada, 1795, c 3. 

Grain grades of 2i863. 

” " 1873 

" " 1885 

" " 1888 

tt TT 189-5 

" TT 1896. 


LIST OF CHARTS 


Wheat production 

and 

inspection, 

1921 

-1931. 

Barley 

IT 

IT 

IT 

IT 

IT 

Oats 

TT 

TT 

IT 

IT 

IT 

Rye 

TT 

IT 

TT 

IT 

IT 

Flax 

IT 

TT 

IT 

TT 

TT 

Buckwheat 

TT 

TT 

TT 

TT 

TT 

Origin of 

classes 

of 

statutory wheat 

grades 


LIST OH TABLES 


Trade 

in flour of 

ports of 

Hova Scotia, 1807-1828. 

Standard weight per hushel 

of the different kinds of 

grain and the 

date established. 

Price 

of wheat at 

Toronto, 

1863. 

Changes in statutory grades of white winter wheat. 

IT 

IT 

TT 

red winter wheat. 

TT 

IT 

IT 

mixed winter wheat. 

IT 

TT 

IT 

spring wheat (eastern). 

TT 

IT 

IT 

goose wheat. 

TT 

TT 

IT 

Manitoba hard wheat. 

TT 

TT 

TT 

Manitoba northern wheat 

TT 

TT 

IT 

winter wheat (western). 

TT 

TT 

IT 

amber durum wheat. 

TT 

TT 

TT 

eastern oats. 

TT 

TT 

IT 

western oats. 

TT 

TT 

IT 

barley (eastern). 

TT 

TT 

TT 

” (western). 












via 


17. Changes in statutory grades of rye (eastern). 


18. 

tf 

T? 

TT 

TT (western). 

19. 

rr 

ti 

TT 

peas. 

20 . 

TT 

TI 

TT 

corn. 

21 . 

IT 

TT 

TT 

buckwheat. 

. 

tr 

TT 

TT 

flax. 


23. Wheat production in Canada prior to Confederation. 


24. Oat 

TT 

TT 

TT 

TT 

25. Barley 

TT 

TT 

TT 

TT 

26. Rye 

TT 

TT 

TT 

TT 

27. Pea 

TT 

TT 

TT 

TT 

28. Corn 

TT 

TT 

TT 

TT 

29. Buckwheat 

TT 

TT 

TT 

TT 

30. Wheat productior 

i in Canada, 



31. Oat 

TT 

TT 



32. Barley 

IT 

TT 



33. Rye 

TT 

TT 



34. Pea 

TT 

T! 



35, Corn 

TT 

TT 



36. Buckwheat 

TT 

TT 



37. " 

TT 

TT 

J 

1932. 


38. Flax 

TT 

TT 

• 



39. Distribution of 

rye acreage 

in Canada. 


40. " 


corn 

TT 


41. " 


pea Tr 

TT 


42. tT 


flax " 

TT TT 


43. Wheat inspected 

in Canada, 

1921-1931. 


44. " 

TT 

western 

Canada. 



45. Inspections of Kota wheat. 

.46. TI red durum wheat. 

47. Oats inspected in Canada, 1921-1931. 


48. Barley 

TT 

TT 

TT TT 

49. Rye 

TT 

TT 

TT TT 

50. Peas 

TT 

TT 


51. Corn 

TT 

TT 


52. Buckwheat 

TT 

TT 

, 1921-1931, 

55. Flax 

TT 

TT 

TT TT 


54. Exports of grain, 1872-1873. 

55. Percent of grain production inspected, 1921-1931. 

56. Acreage of grain crops in Canada. 

57. Production of grain crops in Canada. 











Chapter 1. 
INTRODUCTION. 


The Canadian grain inspection system is a product of 
Canada’s growth and development. It is a product in the 
sense that it germinated and grew in a medium of favorable 
economic and political conditions. Its life is character¬ 
ized by change in structure brought about through the 
influence of changing environmental factors. Its present 
form and status is the cumulative result of its 
development^ 4 

Grain inspection is a specialized form of trade 
regulation which facilitates the transfer of the consumers 1 
discrimination to the individual producer. In Canada we 
have a tendency to regard grain inspection simply as a 
means of protecting the producer and to overlook its 
importance as a method of taking greater advantage of the 
consumers 1 preference. This attitude is enhanced by the 
great distance separating the producer and consumer of 
Canadian grain, and by our close association with one 
phase obscuring the operation of the system as a whole. 
Emphasis on the protective feature of grain inspection 
probably arose as a result of changes in the system in 
response to the demand of farmers for relief from practices 
alleged to have discriminated against them. Protection has 






"but f*'O' other producers, 


been sought, not from consumers, 
i.e,, producers of time, form and place utilities, 
protective features of the grain inspection system are 
"based on social ethics and not on favoritism, and a * 
designed to transmit, so far as it is economically 

sihle, the preferences of the consumers, indicated by 
price, to the initial grain producer. 

In the development of grain inspection the importance 
of "both producer and consumer is more fully realized by 
considering a simplified situation. Our modern economic 
life is “based on specialization and trade. Tach member 
of society produces some good or service to be exchanged 
for other goods and services, Goods and services are 
produced for exchange and trade is inevitable. The actions 
of individuals in society are closely interrelated. The 
producer, whose incentive is profit, has the choice of 
producing any one of a large number • of■commodities or a 
number of kinds or Qualities of one particular commodity. 
Te will produce that which yields him the greatest profit, 
since it will enable him to attain the greatest 
satisfaction of his wants. His profits will depend on cost 
of produetion and selling price. The consumer T s preference 
for a commodity is based on its utility to him, but the 
satisfaction of his preference is confined to that which 
s produced. In exercising his preference for a, particular 









3 


commodity or a particular quality of a commodity, the 
consumers 1 discrimination between different commodities 
or qualities is registered in the price of that article. 
Price carries that discrimination back to the producer. 

The effect of price relative to producers 1 costs is shown 
in the amount produced. Supply in turn affects price. 
Hense, the producer and consumer are inseparably bound 
together, and in promoting closer trade relations 
commodity inspection is an important link. 

The trade relations of individuals are influenced by 
certain characteristics of human nature which tend to 
introduce trade regulation. Each member of society is 
motivated by his own self-interest. His right to look out 
for himself is not questioned, but,.in the pursuit of 
self-interest, people vary in their adherence to moral 
standards. Basically man is an animal possessing animal 
characteristics and tendencies which influence his 
behaviour* At a very early date man T s self-interest induced 
him to become a social animal, since by associating with 
others of his species he secured certain benefits from 
society which he could not obtain individually. At the 
same time, he found it necessary to restrict his personal 
liberty to promote the success of society. These 
restrictions became our social laws. One of our earliest 
codes of social behaviour is the Ten Commandments which 
contains the social law "Thou shalt not steal™. Certain 






Ol-a 


J ' A. 

C* J. 


o 

' w . .! *• . .wv ‘ - -- { ■-■• -v. v •./■*£ s» 

Av*"- V. U -tf- *.*J 


t. J — . xy 


tvi xt X «J v) .. Qv 4. ., & .. V i-J.v_-.-jJ xw 

■ ■■■■ 0 Vv) 0 •■>.- •-’ r ■ X ■ . -, ' vj \! t: v- JU .1 € v- J. ’ - 

r •; •-.' f - be. .j ! '-*5 (■ C» •« «»*'.. r vi. f *uCj » 0 w -w x<. 

•» • - .-. . -•.' . ■ -J ! i. 


a i 


O x XX 


c ^ 


' ‘ i b t- >v 1, —. . - _ j 








(■’■o-t- \ a . XC.X. -v 

■ 


,Vt 



Vi. 'it. >W. •> .:.xO - v/V- r. -■-Jy.'V-' ' C- 


X v . . .. Ci j . t J 1 u 


> A.* -i_ 




O •• .- W 1* 


xv ,v>V -.x.-xxv? .. i.. • v« 


•■> -• - -« 


p - 


' •- 4 - V/ • - 




i •- i- ■ 

? < l 


*-» J- v. . ■ w xi.— 

y x. - j. ^ x v.'* »i. 


- -.{ 






. 












4 


organizations have "been formed for the purpose of teaching 
the observance of social laws, and although they have 
improved the moral standard of our civilization they have 
not eliminated those animal characteristics and tendencies 
against which social laws are necessary. The satisfaction 
of the animal law of self-interest meets opposition from 
the social law of property, and when the former is the 
stronger theft is the result. In our civilization many 
forms of theft have "been developed against which social 
regulation is necessary. The practice of fraud, one form 
of theft, has "been responsible for much of our trade 
regulation. 

In direct trade relations between consumer and 
producer self-interest will promote a personal examination 
or inspection of the article exchanged. Inspection may be 
undertaken by the consumer to guard against loss from 
misrepresentation or to satisfy his preference for certain 
qualities. If the consumer has the choice of a number of 
products or qualities of one product, he will discriminate 
against that which does not satisfy his preference. His 
demand for the less desirable product will be weak and he 
will be induced to accept it only at a lower price. In 
direct trade the consumers 1 discrimination is transferred 
directly to the producer. Knowing that the consumer will 
inspect a purchase, the producer 


may also inspect and 








5 


qualify his products to meet the preference of the 
consumer and to avoid the latter T s unfavorable discrimina¬ 
te. He may simply examine his product for certain defects. 
If the product is found defective, it may not he offered 
for sale to the eonsumer. This type of inspection is 
practiced by manufacturers of automobiles and other 
articles. In addition to simple inspection, the producer 
may also sort his product into classes or grades to 
facilitate its acceptance by the consumer. Due to the 
vagaries of nature, agricultural products cannot be 
produced to conform to a certain standard of quality, 
although a product, portions of which may vary in quality, 
may be sorted into grades that have become standardized. 
Depending on the use of a product, different consumers 
will have different preferences for, or will readily 
accept, different qualities or grades of a product. In 
direct trade, a producer will set his grades according to 
the preferences of the consumers with whom he trades, and 
a close relationship is evident between a producer f s 
grading system and the consumers 1 preference. 

In trade relations the exchange of goods 

between producers and consumers is indirect through a 
group of middlemen, and, in the absence of grading, the 
scale of the consumers’ discrimination , as indicated by 
price, may not be transferred in its full extant to the 
initial producer. Individual shipments of grain, foe 






( 








f 


' ‘ •» ' 

« 




* • i *. ‘ 






I 

















6 


example, are so small that it is not economical to retain 
their identity from producer to consumer. When a number of 
small shipments are hulked together their identity is lost, 
and an opportunity is created for an unfair practice 
since there may he nothing to prevent the inclusion of 
some lots of inferior quality or value. It may he to the 
self-interest of a grower to produce grain of an inferior 
qu&lity. His contribution will then lower the average 
quality and price of the hulked shipment, hut the reduction 
in the price he receives may he more than offset by his 
extra profits from producing inferior quality. When the 
quality of a shipment is lowered, the consumer will 

discriminate against it and the whole group of producers 

■ 

will suffer whose separate lots made up that shipment. 

In addition, the community or nation will suffer whose 
shipments are lowered in quality and price since the 
buying power of both the producer and the nation will he 
decreased. The self-interest of certain producers may 
cajise injury to their fellow-countrymen, and in 
consequence, the soeiaJ. lav/s of coinmodity inspection and 
grading have been instituted. 

Since social laws, including trade regulation, 
commodity and grain inspection, have been enacted to 
restrict the malicious self-interest of certain individuals, 
it is true that grain inspection in Canada does protect 






■ 

< 

• . 








«• 

















' 











7 


the producer. Since all beneficial legislation protects, 
not one hut all classes of society, the inclusion of the 
term protection in a definition of grain inspection 
appears unnecessary. In the Canadian grain inspection 
protection is secured by the adoption of practices and 
methods seeking to establish that close contact between 
producer and consumer existing in direct trade but lost 
in the development of ’' . 3 1 trade. Grain inspection 

in Canada is a specialized form of trade regulation that 
facilitates tha transfer of the consigners T discrimination 
to the individual producer. 

It is extremely difficult to trace the origin of 
commodity inspection. Such work would necessitate the 
examination of both ancient and modern literature of 
numerous foreign countries, and the value of such an 
undertaking is questionable. It is indeed beyond the 
scope of the present study. Commodity inspection, like 
many other institutions and practices, may have been 
introduced into North America, but, evidence points to 
its origin in the United States. The manner in which 
commodities were shipped, the kind of container and 
transportation difficulties together produced a situation 
peculiar to North America, which resulted in commodity 
inspection. The early inspection acts of the United 
States were so simple end for many years operated so 
















* 

- > *'■ 

■ * - • - • • ' 

■ff > 




' ) f • 


- • -r - y • r%^fy ~ 

» Kt<) ^ * • • ■•» • - -r - 

- > • ' - i' i ( *• V 

. 

'• r ; + ' r^*> •- ■ *> . > > r - ~ v -• 

'• r» •> r 14 ■ , ,*r ’• *%***. , ei 4.,Ai ' >r . •. 









••' * cjf «■' r - ’ 


■ / 






' ’ « 1 ' - J ’ ' f f ‘ - U *“ ' ' - -* • - ' • - 

. 

" .• r »• * ^ r. 4-^. • . * ' * n «« * n 




. -r. •*■ • v-> - - 




( O! ■ ’ ‘ Vx • '- • , ,. . 

, >• 1 ■ • V • • T ' ,rn 


i 











■’* ' VT ' ° ***" ' O . ~.,v. i ,*)•!• .tJL’j ■ 





8 


unsatisfactorily that one would assume that they were the 
creation of legislators unguided by foreign experience or 
example. It is probable that commodity inspection is of 
comparatively recent origin since the articles inspected, 
being bulky, did not extensively enter commerce of 
ancient times. 

Commodity inspection was introduced into Canada in 
1785 but it was not until 1863 that this service was 
employed in the marketing of grain. The first "grain” 
act was modelled after inspection acts for other 
commodities because the grading and inspestion systems 
regulated by them had been proven by experience to work 
satisfactorily under the existing economic conditions. 
These acts had been revised and improved frequently 
before their use as a basis for drawing up our first 
"grain" act. To fully understand the grain inspection 
system inaugurated in 1863, it is necessary to trace the 
development of these earlier commodity inspection systems. 
In addition to the inspection &cts, there are several 
groups of acts which should be consulted in a study of 
the development of grain inspection. These acts are 
important because they or parts of them have been 
incorporated in the grain acts or because they authorized 
the formation of organizations which have or have had an 
influence on grain inspection. 








. 















































9 


The Canadian grain inspection system includes the 
organization in charge of, the principles underlying the 
operation of, and the method of graifl. inspection. The 
term fT grain inspection” has been taken here to mean the 
regulation of all those phases of marketing dealt with 
in the Canada Grain Act. One activity regulated by this 
act is grading which may be defined as sorting a commodity 
into classes differing in quality , and a grading 

system is one organized for the purpose of performing 
that function. In order to grade a commodity it is 
necessary to examine or inspect it. Grading involves 
inspection but the inspection of a commodity does not 
necessarily mean that it is graded. Early activities of 
commodity inspection were confined to grading, and the 
practice grew up of using the two terms interchangeably. 
This practice has persisted, to some extent at least, to 
the present day, but the term inspection is reserved here 
for a much wider field of activity than that involved in 
grading. It will be shown that commodity grading, or 
inspection as it was formerly called, was first established 
to prohibit adulteration, a form of fraud. As fraud and 
discriminating practices became apparent in other branches 
of grain marketing, the scope of inspection acts, which 
had dealt only with grading, was enlarged to provide a 
means of correcting these abuses. These later regulations 











t ■ 








' 








■ 

























. 






























10 


and those concerning grading are similar in that they both 
attempt to correct abuses by facilitating the transfer of 
the consumers 1 discrimination to the individual producer. 
If we accept this broad meaning of the term it is 
apparent that grain inspection occupies a very important 
place in the marketing of Canadian grain. 

The grain inspection system is important because of 
its control over the marketing of grain. The Canada G-rain 
Act gives to the Board of Grain Commissioners, who 
administer the act, certain specific duties and power 
"to make regulations or orders. ( . ! . governing any other 
matter relating to the handling of grain". This wide 
power gives the Board of Grain Commits si oners virtual 
control over the practice of handling grain. They act as 

a governor on the grain trade to see that all, especially 

:? under the competitive system. ■ 

the producer, receive A play and justice^ The importance of 

the grain inspection system is more fully realized when 
we consider the place of eminence occupied by the grain 
trade in the economic life of Canada. Wheat, the most 
important product handled by the grain trade, has for 
many years been Canada’s leading export commodity. In 
recent years Canada has become the world’s leading 
exporter of wheat. These two facts indicate the importance 
of the grain trade in the economic life of Canada. The 
bulk of the population of Canada is dependant on 
















. 

r w ' t •*: 

fk- . 






' 






' 












. 








11 


agriculture, and grail ’ 

product. The price Train commands on the world’s 

governs to a large extent the size of the farm income. 

This in turn is reflected in all those lines of activity 
concerned with the marketing of the crop, and in all those 
industries dependent on the agricultural population for a 
market. Grain is the most important commodity of western 
Canada and the crop return is an index of the prosperity of 
that region. The grain inspection system is concerned only 
\ith the handling of grain. It does not control price, hut, 
hy controlling certain handling charges, it has some 
influence on the proportion of the world price received hy 
the farmer. The importance of the grain inspection system 
as an institution in the economic life of Canada is that it 
exercises a large measure of control over the marketing of 
that group of products which have such a potent influence 
on the prosperity of the country. 

The Canadian system of handling grain is reputed to 
be the most efficient in the world. It is not the intention 
iere to prove or attempt to prove that this.efficiency, 
or that the importance of the grain trade, or that the 
ligh quality of Canadian wheat is the result of the 
Torlc of the grain inspection system. The stand taken is 
that grain inspection arose as a result of the presence 
of certain predisposing factors, and that it 










12 


continued in use as 
natural handicap - a 
handicap favored the 
the establishment of 


one of the means of overcoming a 
1onr expens 5 ve rail haul• Such a 
adoption of bull: handling of grain 
gro.des and the sale of grain by 


j 


certificate. The ftmction of the Tain inspection system, 
in addition to protecting the grain 'producers and 
merchants of this country, is to control the marketing of 
in sucl m nner as to inspire in the fore:' 
buyer that confidence essential for the continuance of a 
marketing system which makes possible the profitable 
production of v.i oat in western Canada. This is accomplished 
by recognizing the consumer’s preference in establishing 
Trades and in maintaining their uniformity. 

The grain inspection system is of a dynamic'nature. In 
the course of its development certai ""'iciples have been 
evolved. Although it has reached a high state of perfediion 
it is not perfect nor can it remain static. Changing 
conditions call for adjustment in the system, and if it is 
to function in the manner intended it must adhere to certain 
well defined principles. At the present time changes are 
advocated which are of a fundamental nature. Recently 
separate grades have been provided for Garnet wheat. Some of 


the changes suggested are an Increase in the number of 
classifications for moisture content, and that grading 


based on protein content. The 


outcome of the present v/orld 


-neat situation v;i H have an influence on production 








13 


and grain inspection in Canada since production is one of 
the primary factors influencing inspection. The restriction 
of production which has been freely advocated in recent 
years may properly he considered the work of the grain 
inspection system because it is an attempt to adjust the 
actions of the individual producer to the consumers 1 
preference and discrimination.' 

The grain inspection system, like other institutions 
cannot remain static'. It must change with changing 
economic conditions 1 . Unless changes are made in the proper 
direction, those advantages we now enjoy from the 6peration 
of the present system will diminish. To assist us in 
making these decisions, a study of the development of 
grain inspection will reveal those principles which have 
been followed in bringing our system up to its present 
state of efficiency and which must be followed if it is 
to continue to function in facilitating the transfer of the 
consumers 1 discrimination to the individual producer. 














































. 




' 








Chapter 2. 

THE ORIGIN OF STATE CONTROLLED COMMODITY INSPECTION. 


The Canadian grain inspection system is a comparatively 
recent development of commodity inspection. The latter 
emerged in the United States as a specialized form of 
trade regulation designed to remove the cause of the 
foreign consumers* unfavorable discrimination. Foreign 
trade was a very important factor in the early development 
of North Anerica. European commercial organizations opened 
up the country in their search for furs. Later, agriculture 
was encouraged to increase trade. As the settlement grew 
a considerable volume and variety of commodities became 
available for export. Some products were perishable which 
necessitated their being packed in barrels or casks to 
avoid damage during transport. The shipment of commodities 
in sealed containers of unknown origin creates an 
opportunity for fraudulent packing which is difficult to 
trace. In most communities some individuals take advantage 
of every opportunity, honest or otherwise, to secure 
personal gain, and commodities, particularly flour, were 
adulterated during the early years of the North American 
settlement. The foreign ^ ?r on whom the first fraud 
loss fell protected himself by offering less for the 
commodity from those areas known to practice fraud. 























15 


The loss was thus transferred to the community 
perpetrating the fraud, hut part of it was borne by 
persons not responsible for the fraud. For the welfare 
of the New York colony in which fraudulent packing of 
flour was common some form of regulation was necessary to 
prevent injury to the community from practices of a 
comparatively few dishonest persons. The regulation 
adopted prevented the exportation of the adulterated 
commodity, but to detect adulteration inspection was 
necessary. 

The emergence of commodity inspection under state 
control on this continent was accomplished in four stages:- 

1, Private inspection by the fur traders, - 1653; 

2, Inspection by municipal organizations, 1653-1694; 3, A 

lapse of commodity inspection, 1694-1741; and 4, State 
controlled commodity inspection, 1741--, (1) 

Private inspection is that practiced by individuals 
and by commercial organizations, since the latter act as 
and for the individual. The inspection'may be either the 
producer or consumer type. Private inspection is usually 
confined to an individuals or to a firm ! s own goods or 
prospective purchases, but it may be undertaken by a 
private individual or firm as a service for others. The 

(1) The dates of the periods apply only to the colony of 
1 New York where commodity inspection first came under 
state control. 


































, 


< 








— 

, 





* 

' 


















* 








16 


Hudsons’ Bay Company of London, England, now operate a 
fur grading system and grades a large part of the furs 
entering the world’s fur trade. Commodity inspection 
condueted By the Board of Trade in certain cities of the 
United States is regarded as being state controlled since 
the early Boards of Trade were incorporated by the 
government for the purpose of providing inspection services. 

Commodity inspection conducted by or under the 
direction of the trading companies engaged in the early 
fur trade of North America may be regarded as being of a 
private nature. Their charters granted them exclusive 
trading privileges and public administrative authority 
within the boundaries of their domain. Although they 
performed the functions of a government, their policies 
were influenced by the shareholders demand for dividends. 
Some companies discouraged all enterprise except that 
associated with the production of fur. In areas where 
such a policy was pursued any inspection that may have 
been practiced was private in nature since the company 
had a monopoly of trade. Other companies encouraged 
agricultural settlement to develop trade for their 
organization, and any inspection that may have been 
practiced by the company or under its direction may be 
considered private so leng as the company retained its 
jurisdiction over the country. 




















t" 

” 






c 


















. 
























17 


About 1653, the Dutch West India Company inaugurated 
an extensive colonization program in tftfiat is now the state 
of New York. Population increased rapidly especially in 
the rural areas. The character of the country settled 
influenced the tredd of agricultural development. The 
heavy forest covering this area prevented a rapid 
expansion of cultivated land. Poor transportation 
facilities restricted the exchange of commodities. These 
two factors imposed the adoption of a more or less 
self-sufficient form of mixed farming. The crops and 
livestock produced were chiefly those introduced from 
Europe since the diet of the early American settlers 
tended to encourage the cultivation of those food crops 
to which they had been accustomed. Wheat was their chief 
bread grain and it soon became one of their most 
important crops. Small quantities of wheat were soon 
available to exchange for those commodities which could 
not be produced on the farm. This wheat found its way to 
the seaboard towns where it was manufactured into flour 
and exported. 

Disputes soon arose between the settlers and the 
Company. The settlers objected to the administration of 
the governor, and after many disputes, protests and 
delegations, finally succeeded in securing a modified 
form of municipal self-government. In 1653 New Amsterdam, 


















- 


























♦ 
















. 

. 







. 

















■ ■ 

. 












18 


later named New York, was incorporated by the Company as 
a city, but the Company through its charter retained the 
right to veto the actions of the council and also to 
remove them from office. 

As a result of the increased agricultural production, 
certain industries sprang up of which the most important 
was flour milling. The manufacture of flour was permitted 
by private individuals but the Company, primarily interested 
in the trade of the colony, desired some control over the 
industry. To centralize the industry for the purpose of 
control and taxation , the Company granted the city of 
New Amsterdam a bolting monopoly which gave the citizens 
of that city the exclusive right to mill all flour in the 
colony. 

No reference has been found to substantiate the 
existence of a flour inspection system during the closing 
years of the Dutch Company T s reign, however it is probable 
that one did exist. With their control over the industry 
and trade of the colony the Company were in a position to 
make regulations against practices injurious to the trade. 

If the need had arisen the Company undoubtedly would have 
instituted some sort of regulation in the flour milling 
industry tending to maintain the goodwill of their foreign 
customers. If such regulation took the form of inspection 
it would be classed as privately controlled due to the 










i 



" 

{ 






. 



c 













* 


' 


( 

* 

< < ' 







19 


authority vested in the Company. 

Commodity inspection in New York, if such did exist, 
passed from private to municipal control when the Dutch 
colony was taken over by the English in 1664. The following ' 
year the bolting monopoly was confirmed by the English 
governor (1). In 1674, T, the Mayor and Aldermen of New York 
advised the Governor of the colony T That it was absolutely 
necessary for the good and reputacon of the country, That 
floure be viewed by a sworn Officer, and none suffered to 
be shipped abroad but such as shall be fine bolted... 1 
and marked with the town brand" (2). The date of establish¬ 
ing flour inspection has not been ascertained, however, 
flour exports were subject to inspection previous to the 
close of the period of municipal control in 1694. It is 
apparent from the above quotation that flour inspection 
was instituted to rove foreign trade. 

An expansion of the settled area following a policy 
encouraging immigration produced a situation which resulted 
in the lapse of commodity inspection. When the production 
of wheat was confined to an area close to New York city, 
the*bolting monopoly created no great economic hardship, 
but when, following the expansion of agricultural 
settlement, wheat supplies were drawn from distant areas 

t.(i; Chas. Byron Kuhlmann, The Development of the Flour 

Milling Industry in the United States, pp 10-11; quotes 
New York Journal of the legislative Council, 111 Dart 2, p 3 
(2) Kuhlmann, p 11; (quotes N.Y.Colonial Documents^, 111 337. 





















' 








. 



. 




















20 

the bolting monopoly discriminated against the distant 
producer. Transportation was crude and expensive and the 
necessity of minimizing shipping charges tended "to compress 
the bulk and concentrate the value of the article" (l)t 
High transportation charges favored the location of flour 
mills near the source of wheat supplies, but this was 
opposed by the bolting monopoly. "As time passed, the 
bolting monopoly met considerable opposition particularly 
from the Albany merchants who wished to ship their flour 
directly to New England towna. In 1684 they appealed to 
the Governor and Council for a repeal of the bolting 
monopoly, but were unsuccessful” (2). "The planters 
throughout the province are said to have set up bolting 
machines in defiance of it, and in 1694 induced the 
legislature to repeal it” (3). 

The repeal of the bolting monopoly removed an obstacle 
to the efficient marketing of wheat but it also discontin¬ 
ued a practice tending to maintain or improve the quality 
and price of flour'. Governor Cornbury in his report to the 
English Board of Trade thought the repeal of the bolting 
monopoly was a blow to the trade of the colony. "Till 
that time nobody was permitted to bolt but the citizens of 

ffiffiXXfflSE (l) Hugh Gray, Letters from Canada, p 201. ~ 

(2) Kuhlmann, p 11; quoted N.Y.Jr of the Legislative 
Council V 62. 

(3) Kuhlmann, p 11; Quotes N.Y.Colonial Documents, IV 461, 














21 


New York; then Bolters were under rule, proper Officers 
being appointed to view all the flower that was exported, 
so that no bad commodity was suffered to go out'. But in 
that year (1694) an Act of Assembly was passed whereby all 
persons in the Gountry as well as the City were permitted 
to Bolt; By which means two great inconveniences hapned, 
one (which is the greatest) is, that the commodity is 
vitiated, for the Country Bolter being under no rule of 
Check, does not care what the commodity is, so it passes 
out of his hands; so that he very often mingles Indian 
Corn Flower with his wheat flower; this being discovered 
in the West Indies has so cried down our flower that the 
Pennsylvania flower sels for three shillings the hundred 
more than ours; Whereas the New York flower used formerly 
to exceed Pennsylvania flower one and sometimes two 
shillings the hundred.*.” (1) 

In the absence of inspection flour packed in barrels 
presumably passed unopened from the millers to the final 
consumer. The practice of packing commodities in barrels 
arose out of the methods of transportation existing at 
that time, Hugh G-ray points out the importance of 
compressing bulk and concentrating value, and in 
addition says, "when flour is well packed, it is not so 

(1) Kuhlmann, p 12; quotes N.Y.Colonial Documents V 57. 












e ' J 






22 


subject to receive damage as wheat would be; It resists 
water better" (lh It was difficult to trace adulteration 
to individual millers when the flour was packed in barrels 
and was not inspected. The consumer, in self-protection, 
naturally sought those sources of supply shipping 
unadulterated flour. In offering a lower price for New York 
flour, the consumer discriminated against the producers 
residing in the market area tributary to New York. 

Receiving less for their flour, the New York millers were 
forced to pay less for their wheat supplies. The 
discrimination against New : York flour was passed back to the 
initial wheat producer. The gains of the dishonest.miller 
involved losses to other millers and farmers. 

The removal of the discrimination against New York 
flour was supported by the New York merchants. Lower 
prices for New York flour meant a lower farmer purchasing 
power and a restricted buying power on foreign markets. 

The removal of the cause for complaint against New York 
flour, it was argued, would raise its price and bring 
more business to the city. While this would benefit the 
New York merchants, it would also benefit the initial 
wneat producers. The miller, receiving higher prices for 
his flour, in a competitive situation, would pay the 


(1) Hugh Gray, p 201 































< 







23 


farmer more for his wheat. Adverse discrimination of the 
consumer was passed b$ck to the initial producer. Could 
not favorable diocrimination follow the same course? 

The New York merchants attempted hut failed in 1698 
to have the bolting monopoly restored. They attempted to 
enforce inspection on country bolted flour by imposing a 
tax on country bolted flour passing through New York for 
export, but met opposition from the legislature. They were 
successful, however, in having a state system of inspection 
adopted in 1741. From 1750 on "the Inspection system 
seems to have been fairly successful. At first it seems to 
have been confined to preventing adulteration and short 
weight" (IK 

The adoption of inspection did not remove the 
discrimination against New York flour. In addition to 
adulteration and short weight, quality was a factor 
entering into the determining of the consumers 1 preference. 
The attempt to overcome the discrimination against New 
York flour resulting from the consumers’ preference for 
quality led to the adoption of grading in the inspection 
system. 

In 1768 the New York Chamber of Commerce advocated 
grading to improve quality as a means of meeting 

(1) Kuhlmann, p 13. 














































. 






















. 







24 

competition from other colonies. It was proposed that,- (1) 

"1. The flour should be graded as to quality, as well 
as to its merchantability. The Inspectors should 
consider not only the color and texture of the flour, 
but should carefully examine (either by mixing up a 
little of the flour into a cake and baking it, or by 
some other effectual experiment) whether it has not 
been injured by being ground too close, or in some 
other way so as to prevent its rising and making 
light, white bread. 

2. That barrels should be marked with the name and 
address of both inspector' and manufacturer. 

3. That inspection should be improved by centralizing 
responsibility in one inspector.” 

Where several independent inspectors were competing for 

fees they were afraid to grade each lot of flour strictly 

on its merits (2). Grading was incorporated into the 

flour inspection system of New York in 1768 or 1769, of 

Virginia in 1772 (3), and of Pennsylvania in 1784 (4). 

In the adoption of grading we see again an attempt to 

avoid the consumers 1 2 3 4 discrimination against a particular 

group of producers, but we also see an attempt to facilitate 

the transfer of the consumers 1 discrimination, whether 

favorable or otherwise, toward the individual producer. 

The consumer does discriminate in his purchases. When he 


(1) Kuhlmann, p 13; quotes Stevens, Chamber of Commerce 
Proceedings, 30. 

(2) Kuhlmann, p 14; Quotes Stevens, Chamber of Commerce 
Proceedings, 30. 

(3) Kuhlmann, p 21. 

(4) Kuhlmann, p 32. 








♦ 



i 



















c 



< 


t 











25 


deals with individual producers, his discrimination is 
transferred directly to the producer. When he deals with 
a group of producers acting as one unit, his discrimination 
falls on the whole of the group. When unfavorable 
discrimination fell on a group of producers as it did in 
New York, the group attempted, through inspection and 
grading, to remove the discrimination against it by 
improving their product. The attempt was only partially 
successful. The climate of New York was more unfavorable 
for the production of high quality wheat and flour than 
it was in certain other wheat producing colonies. 

A system of marketing which places all qualities of 
the product in one class is not conducive to the 
improvement of the general quality of the product. There 
is no inducement for the individual producer to improve 
the quality of his product above the average because the 
slight increase in price resulting from an improvement of 
the average by the addition of his superior quality will 
not compensate him for his extra trouble and expense in 
producing high quality. There is every inducement for the 
individual producer to lower the quality of his product 
because, he will profit by the difference between the. cost 
of producing his low quality product and the cost of 
producing an average quality product. In attempting to 
remove the discrimination against their flour, the New York 
















26 


merchants realized the importance of improving its quality. 
They must also have realized the difficulty of increasing 
the average quality without additional compensation for the 
production of that portion of the commodity which would 
raise the average'. 

To lessen or remove the discrimination against a 
group of producers, it is necessary to install some 
system, such as grading, which encourages the production 
of high quality. The consumer does not discriminate 
against the producer as a person but against the producers 
product. In simple trade relations the discrimination is 
carried by the product to the individual producer. If the 
producers bulk their product into one lot, the 
discrimination is against the product of the group and is 
carried by the product to the group, and each producer is 
treated alike. As long as the product of a group is bulked 
together, there will be a tendency to lower quality and 
increase the discrimination against it. The group cannot 
remove or lessen the discrimination against it unless it' 
favors the individual producer who raises the average 
quality of the group 1 s product. 

It is possible to discriminate between high and low 
quality of a product by differences in price, then bulk 
the high and low qualities together, and raise the average 











27 


quality of the hulked product, provided the spread in 
price or range of discrimination is sufficient to 
discourage the production of low quality and encourage 
the production of high quality. This practice may he 
followed where the commodity flows in a steady stream 
between producer and consumer as in the case of oil from 
different wells hulked together in a common pipe line. 

Grain does not flow in a steady stream between producer 
and consumer. It flows in intermittent lots or shipments. 
Shipments may he of different quality or all shipments 
may he of one quality hut made up of smaller lots 
possessing varied qualities. If high quality production 
is encouraged by the payment of premiums, the average 
quality of the grain should improve under both the above 
systems of shipment. However, since certain defects or 
inferior qualities cannot he readily removed from grain, 
more will he gained by retaining the identity of the grain 
exhibiting marked variations in quality. The separation 
of a commodity into lots having different qualities is 
commonly called grading. By sorting a commodity into grades 
according to the consumers 1 preference, the transfer of - 
the consumers 1 discrimination toward the individual 
producer is facilitated. The premium paid by the consumer 
for the grade or quality he prefers is carried by the 












28 


grade back to the producer whose product is classified 
into that grade or quality. Likewise, the discount of the 
consumer for low quality is transferred hack to the 
producer of low quality or grade'. 























TF5 INTRODUCTION OF COTUTQDITY INSPECTION INTO CANADA 


Commodity inspection was introduced into Canada to 
promote the development of foreign trade. The early 
ins cl ' j terns of Canada (1) v/ere 
reproductions of those originating in certain of the 
American States. Once established the Canadian systems 
developed in a manner characteristic of their Canadian 
environment, hut for many years were not free from the 
influence of the United States. 

Canada (1), like New York and certain other, states, 
suffered from the unfavorable discrimination of the 
foreign consumer causepL by her exportation of low Quality 
and adulterated products. The consumer naturally' wishes 
to secure the greatest value for his money. Variations 
in the value of an agricultural commodity are largely 
based on quality. Tf separate lots of a commodity varying 
1 ity are offered for sale at a uniform price, tl 
consumer will select that which has the higher qualii 
This action on the part of the consumer will result i] 
price spread between the higher and lower quality portion 

(1). Upper and lower Canada. 


































. 











' ■ 




. 


























- 





















, 
















(SO) 

of t! o product. The spread in price between the different 
qualities of r. commodity will ’become fixed at a point 
where equal value and satisfaction are secured with a 
piven expenditure of money. The discrimination of the 
consumer against a low quality product is transfe t 
through price to the producer or the producing country, 
he have seen (1) that New York flour was discriminated 
against in the foreign market and that she attempted to 
increase the price of her flour hy improving its quality 
through the adoption of an inspection system. An 
improvement o^ the quality o^ on export commodity 
would tend to lessen or remove the discrimination 
against it in a foreign competitive market and 
consequently improve its price. Little direct evidence 
has "been secured proving that Canadian exports were 
discriminated against on the foreign market, hut indirect 
indie fce! ! 1 sit bion xisted 

title reambl f our ear: oil acts clearly 

explain the purpose for which they were enacted. The 
first inspection out of the Province of Quebec (2) wa: 
entitled, TT An Ordinance to prevent the exportation of 
unmerchantable flour and the fa. 1 2 se taring of bread and 


(1) . Page 21. 

(2) , Statutes, Province of Quebec, 1785, c 5, 
















( 81 ) 

flour casks". In the preamble of another early act (1) 
the purpose of the act is more clearly stated,- "Whereas 
Pot and Pearl-ashes are articles of increasing consequence 
in the exports from this Province, and it would tend to 
the improvement of the quality thereof, and have other 
beneficial effects that the same should he ascertained 
previous to their being shipped for exportation; TTr . The 
practice of inspection with a consequent improvement of 
quality by Canada T s competitors would presumably place 
Canadian products at a disadvantage in the foreign 
markets. To regain her position on the foreign market 
Canada was forced to improve the quality of her exports. 

To achieve this result she adopted the practice of her 
competitors, commodity inspection. 

Although commodity inspection intimately concerns 
the producer of the article inspected, it is not without 
importance to the nation. In the early days of inspection 
it was the nation rather than a particular group of its 
citizens that sought the benefits of inspe&tiori. New 
countries such as Canada and the United States were 
desirous of securing a large importation of capital goods 
to further their development. These were secured by 
encouraging the immigration of settlers and capital, by 

(!)• Statutes, Lower Canada, 1795, c 2V 





. :C . • ' '• 0 - 

• ' . : ■ ' U 

. '■ \% 

' ' 

' 

* 







;• c • ■ 

. ;; 





' 




‘ ‘ 


. -it . 











( 33 

placing loans in foreign lands, and by developing 
foreign trade. Since a greater value of exports resulted 
in a greater volume of imports for domestic consumption 
and development, the governments adopted policies 
tending to increase the production and quality of 
commodities for export. Commodity inspection became a 
measure of national economy to further the development 
of the country. 

Commodity inspection in both Canada and the United 
States is closely linked up with early settlement. In 
many respects the early development of both countries 
is similar. Both rapidly increased their population and 
their demand for foreign goods. The early settled areas 
were heavily forested and favored the adoption of 
similar forms of mixed farming. Poor transportation 
facilities impelled an inland location of processing 
industries, and the use of barrels for shipping commodities'; 
Both countries suffered from the unfavorable discrimination 
of the foreign consumer, and both adopted commodity 
inspection to remove the cause for complaint. 

In other respects, however, the early Canadian 
settlement differed from that of the United States. The 
colonies of the United States, distributed along the 
Atlantic coast, had approximately equal access to the 
sea and more or less similar climates which encouraged 






('»> 

but slight variations in their development. The Canadian 


colonies possessed widely divergent climatic and 
geographic features which promoted a varied development 
of commodity inspection in the several colonies. The 
trend of agriculture in Nova Scotia, which necessitated 
the importation of certain staple food crops, produced 
a set of conditions leading to the adoption of an 
inspection system for the protection of the consumer. 
Commodity inspection in lower Canada, now Quebec, 
developed similar to that of New York. The inland location 
of Upper Canada, now Ontario, retarded the development 
of commodity inspection. These differences make it 
necessary to study separately the development of commodity 
inspection in each area. 

The chief influence of the differences in the 
settlement of the Canadian colonies on commodity inspection 
was in the development of two types of inspection?. The 
type of inspection practiced in any particular country 
depends on whether that country is a surplus producer or 
consumer of that commodity. Countries on an import basis 
may practice inspection to protect their consumers. 
Countries on an export basis may initiate inspection for 
the benefit of the producers or the country at large. 
Inspection therefore is directly related to production. 

So long as the Canadian colonies maintained an identity 










( 34 ) 


independent of each other, the two types of inspection 
for one commodity continued to exist. When the colonies 
were federated into a Dominion with the sole authority 
to regulate trade resting with the latter, the Dominion’s 
status as a surplus producer or consumer determined the 
type of inspection to he retained"; 1 

CONSUMERS’ INSPECTION IN NOVA SCOTIA . 

Commodity inspection in Nova Scotia was first 
adopted to protect the consumer. Nova Scotia early became 
an importer of wheat and flour because natural impediments 
to grain production forced farmers to grow other crops. 
Trade regulation designed to protect her as a consumer 
and importer of grain and grain products took the form 
of consumers’ commodity inspection. 

Although the wheat acreage of Nova Scotia expanded 
with the increase in population, the total production 
never became great. The losses occasioned by the ravages 
of rust and insect pests forced farmers to turn to some 
other crop with the result that the Maritime provinces 
have long been importers of wheat and wheat flour. It is 
doubtful whether statistics are available to show exactly 
when the Maritimes became dependant on foreign supplies of 
wheat. A census taken in 1827 shows Nova Scotia had a 
population of 123,630 and a wheat production of 152,861 









■ 










• ; 


' 






< 











(Z§) 

bushels (l)f. The per capita consumption of home grown 
wheat was less than 1.3 bushels per year. This is 
probably less than the normal requirements (2) and the 
deficiency was made up by imports. Haliburton (3) showed 
that Nova Scotia’s flour imports exceeded her exports 
during the first quarter of the 19th century. Nova 
Scotia has long lost her importance as a wheat producer. 

Nova Scotia’s position as an importer of grain 
had a direct influence on the legislation she enacted 
for the regulation of the grain traded Her wheat supplies 
were drawn from the United States and the Canadas but 
trade restrictions, reciprocal trade relations, wars 
and patriotic motives confined the bulk of her grain 
trade at various times to either one of the above 
countries. The manner of measuring grain in the export 
countries (4) was such that shipments were often short 
when they arrived at their destination. Evidently part 
of this loss fell upon the importer and Nova Scotia 
early enacted legislation which shifted this loss to the 
exporting country. In 1792 Nova Scotia passed ”An Act 

(1) '. Census of Canada, 1870-71, vol 4, p 94. 

(2) . The per capita consumption of wheat in Canada from 

1922 to 1931 was 4 ( .4 bushels r . Canada Yearbook, 1933,p2& 

(3) r . Thos. C. Haliburton, Historical and Statistical 

Account of Nova Scotia. Joseph Howe, Halifax, 1829, 
v 2, p 388. See table #1 appendix. 

(4h The manner of measuring grain is described on page Si 















( 36 ) 

to revive and amend an Act establishing the standard 
weight of grain and appointing proper officers for 
measuring Grain, Salt, and Coals, etcv IT (1). The act 

or 

referred to as being amended was a tempoxty act passed 
some time previously and suffered to expire (2)'. This 
act continued in force, with many amendments, until the 
Dominion assumed control of commodity inspection in 1873. 

The inspection acts of Nova Scotia, insofar as 
grain was concerned, established a consumers* inspection 
system. The section dealing with grain in the Inspection 
Act of 1864 designated the standard weight per bushel 
of the different kinds of grain, required all imported 
grain to be sold by weight and to be weighed by a 
government official. Most of the provisions are concerned 
with weighing and measuring, but, since the measurer was 
required to advise the purchaser on the condition of the :? 
grain, the act was a grain inspection act (3). The act 
did not provide for grading grain. The 1864 act and a 


(1) 1 2 3 . For excerpts from this act and a later amendment 

see appendices #1 and #2. 

(2) . Information supplied through the courtesy of the 

Provincial Librarian, Halifax, Nova Scotia. 

(3) . R.S. of Nova Scotia, 3rd series, 1864, c 85. **0f the 

Regulation and Inspection of Provisions, Lumber, 

Fuel and other Merchandise** 1 . See appendix #3 for 
excerpt of that section of the act concerning grain. 













< 




< 


. 














( 


< 







( 07 ) 


weighers 1 act (1) of the same year both trace their 
origin to the act of 1792, 

A consumers 1 inspection act is designed for the 
protection of the consumer. It may pass the consumers 1 
discrimination back towards the producer, but does so 
only in achieving its objective, the protection of the 
consumer. 

The present Canadian grain inspection system is a 
producers* system and developed apart from the consumers’ 
systems in Nova Scotia or other parts of the world. 

Grain inspection in Nova Scotia had but slight 
association with the development of grain inspection 
elsewhere in Canada. However, the sale of grain by weight, 
now included in the Canada Grain Act, was in all 
probability instituted in the surplus producing areas of 
Canada in response to similar legislation enacted by 
importing countries such as Nova Scotia". 

PRODUCERS* INSPECTION IN LOWER CANADA . 

Commodity inspection in the Canadas differed from 
that of Nova Scotia and the Maritimes in that it was 
instituted to further the growth of foreign trade rather 

(1). R.S. of Nova Scotia, 3rd series, 1864, c 11. "An Act 

providing for the appointment of weighers and 
measurers of grain"£ 













■‘2 ' ' ' ' . 5 1 








. . . — 

' 








* '' 



v . r 1 




' ;?o ': Y-:.. ;r‘; V 

■ 

* 





















than to protect the consumer of the article inspected. 
Inspection was thus limited to that portion of the 
commodity exported and, as a result, a greater development 
of inspection occurred in the lower province due to its 
accessibility to the sea. The changes in the inspection 
system which took place up to 1841 were inspired by the 
desire to build up foreign trade. The competition of her 
competitors forced Canada to adopt these changes if she 
wished to maintain her position in the foreign markets 

The introduction of commodity inspection into 
Lower Canada may be studied in three periods; ly The 
pre-inspection period, closing with the French rule in 
1763; 2, The inauguration of inspection in the 

Province of Quebec between 1763 and 1791; and 3, The 
extension of inspection to different commodities and the 
adjustment of the inspection systems to the needs of 
lower Canada betwaen 1791 and 1841. 

1. New France,- 1765. 

New France was the second area in Canada opened 
up for settlement, but commodity inspection was not 
adopted as a state policy while the colony remained 
under the administration of the French*. Due to 
environmental conditions crop production fluctuated 
violently from year to year. In some years wheat was 












(? 9 ) 

available for export, in other years crop failures 
necessitated importations from France. The internal 
administration of the country was such as tb discourage 
the habitant from producing more than would supply his 
own needs 1 . When the colony passed into the hands of the 
English, it could scarcely supply its own needs. In the 
absence of permanent trade, state controlled inspection 
of commodities did not develop. 

2. The Province of Quebec, 1763-1791 . 

The loss of foreign trade, threatened by the 
exportation of adulterated and short-weight commodities, 
prompted the Province of Quebec to adopt commodity 
inspection. The conditions promoting this action were 
similar to those described for Hew York. These conditions, 
however, were associated with problems peculiar to th*0 
Province of Quebec, and centre around the influence of 
race and religion on governmental policy. 

When Hew France passed into the hands of the 
English, It was renamed Quebec and given a constitution 
which permitted the retention of certain old French 
laws and customs (1). In commercial affairs the old French 
laws were to govern the French people and the English 
lav/s the English people. The clergy and noblesse opposed 


(l)v The Quebec Act, 1774. 













( 40 ) 


the English Laws and institutions and protested their 
use in commercial affairs (1). The Governor, wishing 
to obtain the goodwill of the French-speaking people, 
did not enforce the use of the English commercial laws 
by the English-speaking people. Commercial affairs in 
the Province of Quebec were governed by the French laws. 

The development of commerce in Quebec v/as obstructed 
by many obstacles not found. in other American colonies. 

The subjection of a conquered race is usually accompanied, 
for a short time at least, by a resistance to the rule of 
the victors'. In Quebec there v/as a lack of respect for laws 
in general, and the insistence 'on the retention of their 
own lav/s and customs permitted practices injurious to 
the English merchants'. Some of the handicaps to trade 
were inadequate bankruptcy legislation, the difficulty 
of settling commercial disputes, and the debasement of 
coinage'. 

To escape some of the difficulties obstructing 
commerce, a plan was advocated of settling dispdtes out 
of §ourt. The proposal was submitted in 1777 and 1787 
by the merchants of Montreal and Quebec to the English 
government. It consisted of incorporating Chambers of 
Commerce clothed with authority to settle certain types 

(1). Adam Shortt & Arthur G. Doughty. Documents relating 
to the Constitutional History or Canada 1759-1791. 
Sessional paper #18, 1907; p 404. King's Printer, 
Ottav/a. 





. 

■ ?» £ ; . nlu ■ 

‘ x: o . 

:' ' ■ . ' . o J 

■ 'V 




- 

, 





x ■ dx .. ■ x; c o vcxx 

c x. ■ ‘ x “ . • : 

c ", v •: :• " ■ " ' : x -::.m ; ' 


■- 


■ ‘ X 

1 







* 

■ 

XXX ' ■ • « -X- •' ■. 

• : x •: ; ■. r ... x:: 

* 

' 


. 


- ■ o 








5 
















(41 *.) 

of disputes. The idea was not approved of by the English 
governments The method finally adopted to overcome the 
friction between the two races was to divide the Province 
of Quebec into Upper and Lower Canada in the hope that 
the French-speaking people would observe and adopt the 
superior laws and customs of the English. This division 
of the colony cut off Upper Canada from the seaboard 
and retarded her development of commodity inspection 1 . 

Under the administration of the English agriculture 
was stimulated in the Province of Quebec. Wheat production 
and exports increased but, at the dame time, fluctuated 
violently from year to year. In 1779 the country suffered 
such a severe crop failure that it was necessary to 
import wheat. Wheat prices rose so high and the suffering 
of the people became so great that government grading 
and storage was advocated to prevent market corners. 

The proposal was submitted by a committee of merchants 
from Montreal and Quebec (1>. They asked for the erection 
of public grain storage buildings to be placed in charge 
of well qualified storekeepers who should inspect all 
grain received, clean it, grade it, and store it-. The 
grades were to be numbered: 1, 2 and 3'. Wheat thus stored 
should be delivered to those holding receipts for the 

(lh Adam Shortt & Arthur tf. Doughty, Canada and Its 

Provinces. Edinburgh University Press, 1913. v 4,p 544 














( 42 ) 


different grades, certain deductions "being made for waste 
and shrinkage. Grain not officially graded and certified 
was not to he exported. These pioneer elevators were to 
hold between ten and twenty thousand bushels. A similar 
scheme was proposed again in 1787, but it, like that of 
1779, was rejected. 

The first inspection act of the Province of Quebec 
was passed in 1785 (1). Its title indicates its object - 
"An Ordinance to prevent the exportation of unmerchantable 
flour and the false taring of bread and flour casks". 
Another act passed in 1788 (2) provided for the inspection 
of fish. The contents of these acts are unknown to the 
writer so their method of operation cannot be discussed. 
Full details of the early inspection systems of Canada 
will be given in the next section^ 

Details are meagre concerning the introduction of 
these early inspection acts. Undoubtedly they are to be 
found somewhere in the archives of Canada but they are 
not available to the writer. It would seem, however, 
that their introduction was fostered by the merchants 
of Montreal and Quebec. The merchants conducting the 
wholesale trade of Canada were English many of whom 
migrated from the United States where flour inspection 

(1) . Statutes, Province of Quebec, 1785, c 6. 

(2) . Statutes, Province of Quebec, 1788, c 5. 















. 




. 








. 

. • 














^ •• 




••; • 


C .. 


















, ■ ■ ■ . : : 
{ t 







(43) 

had "been practiced for many years. It would seem only 
natural that they attempt to introduce those practices 
and customs with which they were agreeably familiar. 

3. Lower Canada, 1791-1841 . 

Increased agricultural production and export trade 
following the growth in population led to an extension of 
inspection to various commodities entering foreign 
commerce. Improvements in the inspection systems were 
necessary to achieve the object of inspection, the 
preservation of foreign trade. 

Britain 1 s loss of the United States colonies and the 
conquest of New France directed large numbers of her 

immigrants to the latter, renamed Canada. Following the 

of * 

American War of Independence, large numbers A United Empire 
Loyalists emigrated to Canada rather than remain under 
a non-British flag. Emigrants from Britain chose Canada 
for the same reason. These two movements resulted in a 
very large increase in the population of Canada. Since 
agriculture was the chief industry of the country, the 
large influx of people meant a large increase in 
agricultural production. 

Agriculture in Lower Canada continued on a diversified 
basis. Wheat, although its production continued to expand 
until the close of the period (1841), was gradually 















( 44 ) 


being replaced by crops more immune to crop pests and the 
vicissitudes of nature. As these newer products became 
discriminated against on the foreign market, they were 
subjected to inspection to improve their quality. Beef 
and pork, pot and pearl-ashes, and lumber, in addition 
to those commodities whose inspection was instituted 
prior to 1891, were subjected to inspection in lower 
Canada (1). 

None of the inspection acts passed in Lower Canada 
dealt with grain, and the delay in extending inspection 
to that commodity may be attributed to the relatively 
small volume of production and the ease of ascertaining 
quality. Hugh Gray (2) reports the average value of 
commodities exported to Britain and British establishments 
for the five years ending 1809. These figures show that 
the export value of wheat was more than double the value 
of any other inspected commodity exported. The delay in 
inspecting grain was not due to the small volume produced 
as compared with that of other commodities, but rather, 
it was due to the small proportions of savings made or 
losses prevented to the total value produced. Wheat, 
threshed by primitive methods, was often contaminated 

(1) . See bibliography for list of inspection acts. 

(2) . Hugh Gray. Letters from Canada, p 180. 














(45) 

with weed seeds and other trash, but these admixtures 
could be seen and could often be removed by mechanical 
separation. Moreover, the presence of foreign matter was 
probably taken care of by dockage or adjustment in price. 
On the other hand, beef, pork and fish could not be 
examined without opening the barrel, which examination 
was difficult due to the nature of the container. 1 Another 
geason for the delay of grain inspection was that the 
identity of graded or inspected grain was difficult to 
maintain, whereas the reverse was true of packaged 
products. Just what volume of production is neeessary 
to justify grain inspection is not known, but it would be 
considerably more, expressed in terms of value, than other 
early inspested commodities. The greatest annual wheat 
production of lower Canada between 1791 and 1841 was 
three and a half million bushels. 

The inspection acts of lower Canada were designed to 
prevent the fa lling off in foreign trade threatened by 
the exportation of sommo&ities adulterated in qu&lity 
and short in weight. It was also expected that inspection 
would improve the quality of the commodity produced, but 
we have seen (p 24) that some inducement must be offered 
to the individual producer of high quality products the 
to raise the average quality of the country’s production. 












' 


- 




' 




■ 




. : . . C .;.o • 

' 

v 




'' 








- 




» " . 






: 




. . : ; 




' 

v: 










( 46 ;) 

This may he accomplished by grading. The early Canadian 
inspection acts inaugurated inspection systems whose 
dominating function was grading. Grading and the 
maintenance of the identity of the grades through the 
channels of trade facilitates the transfer of the 
consumers 1 discrimination toward the individual producer 
Grades are based on the variations in those qualities 
preferred by the consumer, and the payment of premiums 
for those qualities which he prefers tends to discourage 
the production of those products with inferior qualities 
By encouraging the production of high quality and 
discouraging low quality, grading tends to raise the 
average quality of the commodity and increase its value 
on the foreign market. An improvement in the quality of 
her products increases a country’s foreign bargaining 
power by tending to remove the discrimination against 
her products 1 . 1 Grading removes the discrimination against 
the group of producers and places it directly against 
the individual producers who are responsible, in the 
absence of grading, for the discrimination against 
the group. 

In the early inspection systems of Canada, the 
grading of exports v/as compulsory. The introduction of 
new practices frequently is opposed by those it injures. 












( 47 ) 

Grading discriminated against producers of low quality 
products and no individual producing low quality products 
will voluntarily accept a lower price for that product. 
Unless grading were compulsory he could export without 
inspection and defeat the purpose of the act. The greatest 
social "benefit from grading occurs when all the exports 
are graded "but that is only possible by compulsion until 
the producers realize the advantages of grading as a 
marketing practice. The inspectors were authorized to 
board and search any vessel suspected of exporting the 
commodity ungraded, Shipments of ungraded commodity 
were subject to forfeiture and the officers of the vessel 
carrying the ungraded commodity were subject to fine*.' 

A grading act wh:eh facilitates the transfer of the 
consumers 1 discrimination to the individual producer 
should establish grades and an inspection service. The 
grades should be based on the consumers* 

preference, and the grader or inspector must impartially 
interpret that preference 1 . In addition to these two 
functions it is desirable to reduce the friction as much 
as possible between the producer and consumer or the 
person who interprets the consumers* preference. Disputes 
will arise over grading, and, unless settled, will 
result in a loss of confidence in the service. Where 
possible some means should be provided for settling 


















(48) 

disputes. The inspection acts of Lower Canada fulfilled 
all these requirements'. 

A grade is a description of a consumers 1 preference 
and the person or body establishing grades Bhould consider 
the consumers 1 preference. The consumer does not buy a 
grade because it is a grade, but because that grade has 
certain qualities. He accepts grades because grades are 
or should be based on the qualities which determine his 
preference'. 

An act of 1795 (1), one of Canada 1 s earliest 

inspection acts, designated three grades of pot and 

pearl-ashes; first sort, second sort, and third sort. 

The grades were not defined, being named only. Possibly 

some private instructions or regulations were given 

inspectors to assist them in their work of grading. These 

instructions are analagous to those now issued by the chief 

inspector concerning grade qualifications not contained 

in the statutory grade definitions. In case such 

instructions were not issued a.tendency existed for 

variation in the grading of different inspectors and of 

each inspector at different times during his tenure of 

office. On the other hand, the tendency to variation 

was minimized by several factors which promoted uniform 

grading. There were very few inspectors, few grades, 

(l) Statutes of Lower Canada, 1795, c 2. 














( 49 ) 


...id a .iu’npc.v- t'yclj 1] 3 f tl commodity .Inspected. 

ce grades describe and carry the consumers 1 
-• t3 roducer, tl c lately they are 

'■ it \ fci greater the range of discrimination, 
indicated "by price spread, carried to the producer. The 
line ‘of division between two grades is an arbitrary ore. 

If that line is broad and indistinct there will be consid¬ 
erable overlapping of the grades'. 'Then over' 1 apping occurs 
the averages of the top and bottom grades will be closer 
together than if the division between the grades is distinct 
This poini aj be illustrated in the following diagram (1). 


Variations 
of quality 

— nrov- — 

Grade X —8— 

— 6 — 

-4_ 

Grade Y ---5— 

_ 

Situation TT A TT 


Averages of 
the grades 


—7.5— 


— — < 0 ,5 — 


— 10 — 

—- 9 — 

—8— Grade X 

—«— 

— 3— Grade Y 


_ o _ 

Situation VB tT 


Suppose there be ten variations of quality divided between 

the two grades, and that we assign a numerical value to e 

unit of variation. In situation r A TT the line of division 

between the grades is distinct and five variations 

of quality enter each grade. Assuming the 

(l) The validity of this ill le s eerl 

special assumptions which may not correspond with actual 
oonditions. 





















( 50 ) 


the quantities of each variation are equal, the average 
quality of grade X is 8.0 and of grade Y 3.0. The difference 
between the two averages is five units of variation. 

Where the line of division between the two grades is 
indistinct as in situation T, B", six or more variations 
of quality may enter each grade. The averages of the 
grades are 7.5 and 3.5 and the difference between the 

two averages is four units of variation. Distinct 

a greater 

division between grades results in r range of quality 
between the averages of the top and bottom grades. 

The object of grading is to encourage high quality 
production by the transfer of the consumers 1 2 discrimination 
to the producer. If the range of the consumers’ 
discrimination is narrowed by the use of indistinct or 
broad grade divisions, the grading system does not fully 
accomplish it objects The defect is partially corrected 


by defining grades. 

Grades were first defined by statute in Canada in 
an inspection act of 1804 (1) for beef and pork. The 
proportions of the various cuts of meat were prescribed 
for the different grades (2). 


(1) Statutes of lov/er Canada, 1804, c 9. 

(2) The second and third grades of beef contained some 

of the neck and flank along with choice cuts of meat-. 












* • 







( 51 ) 


"Mess "beef shall consist of the choicest pieces 
Of Oxen, Cows or Steers well fatted, the shin, 
shoulder, clod and neck shall be taken from the 
forequarters, and the legs and leg-rounds from 
the hindquarters,... " 

Of all the commodities graded during the introductory 
period of inspection in Canada, grades were defined for 
only beef and pork. The necessity of grade definitions 
seems to be imposed by the variable nature of the 
commodity itself. Beef is beef no matter from what part 
of the animal it is secured, yet it is difficult to think 
of beef without associati^ng it with that part of the 
carcass from which it originated. With the great variation 
in the value of the cuts of beef and the contents of 
barrels of beef, undefined grades tended to overlap and 
nullify the results of grading. G-rades described by 
definitions promote closer grading by an inspector and 
more uniform grading by different inspectors. There is 
less overlapping of grades with the result that the 
averages of the different grades exhibit a wide range of 
quality*. The greater the range of quality between the top 
and bottom grades, the greater the range of price spread 
carried by the grades to the producer. 

Two terms, commonly used to-day in the grading of 
grain, became associated with commodity inspection during 
this early period? The word "Rejected" was associated 
first with commodity grading in 1806 when inspectors were 












t 







c ■ 









* 


. 






( 




























' 












. 




























(52) 

directed to brand such flour found to he unsound or 
unmerchantable (1)V After 1818 (2) it was permissible to 
export rejected flour. In classifying a certain quality 
of flour as rejected this term came into use as the 
name of a grade 1 2 3 4 . In 1829 (3) inspectors were directed 
to "brand the word Condemned 1 on every cask which he 
shall discover to contain Ashes fraudulently adulterated 
with stone, sand, lime or any other improper substance". 

During the introductory period of commodity inspection 
in Canada, the grades or their definitions did not change. 
Although inspection was extended to five groups of 
commodities (4) , grades were defined by statute for only 
one group, beef and pork. The changes in grades occurred 
later in the development of commodity inspection?. 

The second essential of a grading system is the 
establishment of an inspection serviced Someone must 
grade the commodity and the person who has performed this 
service throughout the history of inspection is the 
inspector or his deputy. It is essential that the inspector 
properly perform his duties and to achieve this end, 

(1) Statutes of lower Canada, 1806, c 4, s 7, 

(2) Statutes of Lower Canada, 1818, c 3', s 

(3) Statutes of Lower Canada, 1829, c 24, s 3. 

(4) Lumber, fish and oil, flour and meal, beef and pork, 

pot and pearl ashes 1 . 





. 















* 

<■ c 


t 




( 


t 


< < 

K l 















(53) 

numerous regulations were incorporated in the inspection 
acts defining his duties, salifications and appointment*. 

In 1795 (1) inspectors were appointed by the 
government, and they have been appointed "by the government 
to this day with the exception of a period from 1841 to 
1873. The act mentions no hoard of examiners to pass 
judgment o;i an inspector’s qualifications, hut undoubt¬ 
edly the government considered his fitness for the position 
when making the appointment*.’ He was remunerated for his 
services through the collection of fees which were 
definitely stated in the a ct (2)*. He was required to take 
an oath of dffice in which he swore not to deal in any 
way in the commodities he inspected. These regulations 
tended to secure impartial judgment on the part of the 
inspector. These provisions were embodied in all the 
inspection acts passed in both Upper and Lower Canada 
for the succeeding twenty yearsv 

In the year 1818 the flour inspection act was 
amended (3) to provide for the appointment of a board of 
examiners to examine candidates for the office of inspector*. 

(1) Statutes of Lower Canada, 1795, c 2 r . 

(2) Statutes of lower Canada, 1818, c 3. 

(3) Fees for inspecting all commodities were at first paid 
directly to the inspector** Since 1899 fees for inspect¬ 
ing grain have been paid into an inspection fund 
administered- by the government or Board of Grain 
Commissioners and the inspector remunerated by a 
fixed salary. 
















(54) 

This hoard was created to ensure the appointment of 
capable and efficient inspectors and to avoid the 
possibility of appointing those unqualified for the 
position'. Inspectors in 1839 were required to "furnish 
sureties for the fulfilment of the duties of their 
office,..'." $1)>. 

Deputy inspectors were appointed by the inspector 
but the appointment was confirmed by the government. 

The inspector was held responsible for the acts of his 
deputy. The deputy was an employee of the inspector. He 
had to be recommended by the board of examiners, take 
oath of office, furnish sureties to the inspector, and 
was paid by the inspector. 

The first change in the appointment of inspectors 
was made in the flour inspection act of 1818 (2) when 
the Governor was empowered to appoint persons to 
constitute a Board of Examiners for the purpose of examin¬ 
ing candidates for the office of inspector. Inspection 
acts for other commodities were quickly ammended to 
provide for the creation of Boards of Examiners, but the 
number of members on these Boards was not specified in 
the acts until 1824 when the flour inspection act (3) 

(1) Statutes of lower Canada, 1839, c 10V 

(2) Statutes of lower Canada, 1818, c 3. 

(3) Statutes of lower Canada, 1824, c 11^. 















( 55 ) 


called for the appointment of at least five skilful 
persons. One may surmise the reasons for the formation 
of the Boards of Examiners, Hitherto inspectors had been 
appointed directly by the government. In making 
appointments, the government undoubtedly took into 
consideration a daddidate’s qualification for the 
position, but it is probable that appointments were 
influenced by party politics. There was a possibility of 
appointing inefficient inspectors and this danger would 
very likely be overcome by an examination of the candidates 
before appointment'. 

These early Boards of Examiners were not paid for 
their services. In their oath of office they swore not 
to "receive any fee, reward, or gratuity whatever, by 
reason on any function of my office of examiner,,," (1 ) f . 
Inspectors were appointed or "commissioned" for an 
indefinite number of years so that examinations of 
inspectors were infrequent. The examiners could also 
require the attendance of experts to assist with 
examinations. 

Commodity inspection is a service which cannot be 
performed free of cost. When the service is operated by 
the government the costs may be borne out of the general 
revenue of the country or they may be levied as a direct 

charge against the article inspected. Wherever possible 

Cl) Statutes of "Lower Canada, 1839, c 10, 












? 









< 






(56) 

it has been the policy of governments to charge inspection 
costs to the person or article concerned. This is 
especially true when governments have limited revenues as 
they were during the early history of Canada. In cases 
where a service, such as grading, is directly beneficial 
to a particular group of its citizens, the cost of that 
service should be borne by the group who receive the 
direct benefit. 

Inspection costs have been levied as a direct charge 
against the inspected commodity ever since this service 
was first introduced into Canada. Early inspection costs 
were paid for by "the person or persons applying to the 
Inspector to make such inspection" (l) f . These costs were 
in the nature of fees and were paid direct to the 
inspector, "the said Inspector shall have and receive 
sixpence current money for every hundred weight of Pot 
or Pearl ashes so inspected" (2) ; . The fees were definitely 
stated in the act. 

The regulations governing the inspector were all for 
the purpose of ensuring his impartial judgment « His oath 
of office, surety, qualifications and manner of appoint¬ 
ment achieved that purpose. 

(1) Statutes of Lower Canada, 1795, c 2, s 2, 

(2) Ibid. 




















Commodity inspection is an activity which is 
dependent on the exercise of human judgment*" Inspectors, 
being human, are subject to the human frailty of making 
mistakes, but, provision has been made in all our 
inspection acts to reduce inspector’s mistakes to a 
minimum. The rigid qualifications required of inspectors 
tends to minimize accidental mistakes, and the prevention 
of his dealing in any way in the commodity he inspects 
tends to reduce intentional mistakes. Inspectors, however, 
are not the only persons who make ki stakes. A mistake may 
be made by the person who challenges the inspector’s 
judgment. 

Mistakes in grading, regardless of who makes them, 
lead to disputes. Mistakes must be corrected and disputes 
must be settled if confidence is to be maintained in the 
grading system. Mistakes and disputes are most amiably 
adjusted by arbitration, usually a third disinterested 
party. This practice is followed in the grading system. 

Our modern civilization has established a third 
disinterested party, the law courts, for the settlement of 
disputes, but : there are many objections to the use of the 
Law courts for the settlement of trade disputes. The 
courts are expensive, act slowly, and often lack the 
technical knowledge required for an authoritative verdict 











( 58 * 

on certain types of trade disputes. The settlement of 
disputes over the grading of commodities requires a 
specific form of knowledge not usually possessed hy the 
law courts. To avoid the objections to the use of the 
law courts, special courts known as boards of arbitration 
hase been set up in the inspection systems to settle 
disputes over grading. 

A board of arbitration to settle grading disputes 
was established by the inspection act of 1795. The 
formation and operation of this board was based on the 
following principles: the board passing judgment on the 
dispute was composed of representatives of both parties 
of the dispute and of the person or body authorizing 
such board to act; the judgment of the board was final; 
the cost of the appeal was borne by the loser of the 
appeal (1). These principles have been adhered to during 
the whole history of commodity inspection in Canada, but 
the manner of putting these principles into practice has 
varied from time to time (2). The method of settling 


(1) See Appendix 4 for excerpt of that section of the 
act dealing with disputes 1 2 . 

(2) The modern grain appeal tribunal is composed of 
representatives of the buyers (grain dealers), 
sellers (farmers), and the body (government) 
authorizing the formation of such tribunal. Technically 
there has been no deviation from the principles laid 
down in 1795 but in actual practice the quorum of 
three which dscides on a particular case may not 
include a farmer representative. 












(59) 

grading disputes adopted in the inspection act of 1795 
was followed in all the inspection acts pf lower Canada. 
No changes were made in the method until after 1841. 

COMMODITY INSPECTION IN UPPER CANADA . 

Upper Canada early adopted commodity inspection but 
her inland location retarded the development and 
improvement of her inspection systems'. However, she was 
the first surplus grain producing area in Canada to 
inaugurate the sale of grain by weight, a practice which 
improved the marketing of that commodity. 

Being under the same necessity as other colonies of 
developing foreign trade, Upper Canada passed legislation 
providing for the inspection of several commoditiesCl ) r . 

In many respects the inspection systems established in 
Upper Canada during this period were similar to those of 
the lower province. In other respects, however, they 
differed from those of the older colony by the omission 
of several important features of commodity inspection. 
They provided no means of settling disputes between 
inspectors and the public, grades were named only, and 
the regulations governing inspectors scarcely changed 

(l) Flour, Pot and Pearl Ashes; Beef and Pork; and Fish, 
See bibliography for complete list of inspection acts 
and amendments with date of enactment. 











(60) 

during the life of the acts. No hoards of examiners were 
provided. Lower Canada frequently amended her various 
inspection acts to adjust her inspection systems to 
changing conditions and to incorporate new features 
developed in the technique of inspection. The inspection 
acts of the upper province remained comparatively 
static (1). 

The simple statical nature of the Upper Canadian 
inspection acts indicates that the inspection systems 
operating under them were not extensively used (2)'. 

Upper Canada had no seaport and practically all her 
exports had to pass through Montreal.' Since inspection 
was not necessary for domestic consumption, products for 
export may have been regularly inspected at Montreal 
under the inspection laws of Lower Canada. With her 
export products inspected under the lav/s of a neighboring 
province, there would be little demand for change in 
the inspection systems and laws of Upper Canada. She 
contributed little to the improvement of existing 

(1) The comparative activity of inspection legislation 
in Upper and Lower Canada is indicated by the number of 
acts and amendments passed. See bibliography. 

(2) If commodities are not inspected, or if there be no 
increase in the quantity of commodity inspected, there will 
be no change in inspection acts. The production and 
marketing of Pot and Pearl ashes has not increased during 
the past 60 years and the acts governing the inspection of 
these commodities for 1873 and 1927 are practically 
identical. 












( 61 ) 

inspection systems, "but took a step in another direction 
which later was embodied in grain inspection. 

Like all other new colonies, Upper Canada proceeded 
to produce grain. Her wheat production "began about 1780 
and surpassed that of the lower province in 1840. With an 
outlook for large Increases in supply, Upper Canada 
sought some means of improving her wheat marketing 
technique. The first improvement was introduced in 1835 
by a sales act. 

The sale of commodities by measure ascertained 

volumetrically is one of the customs brought to this 

country by early settlers. While practical for small 

transactions this method of measuring was found 

unsatisfactory for shipments of large volume 0 Hugh Gray, 

describing measuring in 1808, says,- 

tf It seldom happens that the number of bushels 
shipped at Quebec holds out at the port of delivery, 
which arises from the manner of measuring in Canada. 
A half bushell is used in general; and they are 
extremely dexterous in measuring. The grain is put 
in and out of the bushel so quickly, that it has 
not time to feel its own weight, as it were, and 
settle down. I know of an instance of a man having 
measured, and put into the sacks in which it is 
carried on board, 6400 half bushels in the space of 
eleven hours and a half, which is near ten times 
a minute." (1) 


(1) Hugh Gray, Letters from Canada, pp 200-201, 












(62) 

Grain has long "been sold by the bushel, but it only 
since 1835 that the bushel has been determined by weight 
in the grain exporting areas of Canada. The system of 
measuring described by Gray resulted in short-measure 
shipments. The foreign consumer in self-protection 
devised a system of sale by weight, although the weight 
was expressed in a capacity standard. Nova Scotia 
adopted sale by weight for grain as early as 1792. The 
shortness of Canadian grain shipments was found through 
the purchase by weight in the importing countries. To 
put her marketing technique on the same basis as that of 
her foreign customers, Upper Canada in 1835 (1) adopted 
the practice of selling grain by weight expressed in 
bushels. 

The sale of grain by weight expressed in bushels 
necessitates some definite relationship between pounds 
and bushels. The,statute providing for the sale of grain 
by weight established a standard weight per bushel for 
the different kinds of grain. The preamble of this act 
indicates the manner of determining the standard weight 
per bushel 

(1) Statutes of Upper Canada, 1835, c 7. 












(63) 

"Whereas it is expedient and hecessary that 
a uniform standard weight, equivalent to the 
Winchester bushel, should be established for 
the different kinds of grain and pulse 
exposed for sale. 1 2 * *." (1). 

While the standard weight per bushel established in 

Upper Canada in 1835 may have been determined from 

weighing a bushel of Canadian grain, it is probable that 

the standard weight per bushel of grain in foreign 

countries was considered in establishing the same in 

Upper Canada. The shortage of the grain shipments from 

Canada were due to the difference in the method of 

determining the quantity of the shipments at Canadian 

ports and at ports of delivery. 5 When Hugh Gray wrote in 

1809 and until 1835, the number of bushels in a shipment 

waw determined with half or bushel measures. Nova Scotia 

since 1792 and other importing countries determined the 

number of bushels by weight as we do to-day. 

The standard weight per bushel of the different grains 

established in 1835 have remained unchanged until the 

present day (2). No standards were established for 

buckwheat or flax because these grains at that time were 

not important in the commerce of Upper Canada. 

(1) Statutes of Upper Canada, 1835, c 7. 

(2) See table #2, Appendix, for the weights per bushel 

established for the different grainsv‘ 











(64) 

D # ACTS RELATED TO COMMODITY INSPECTION , 

The Canada Crain Act is most closely associated 
with the early commodity inspection acts, hut, there are 
several other groups of acts which have played a part 
in the development of grain inspection. One of these 
groups deals with weights and measures. 

Our weights and measures acts were introduced to 
overcome a situation existing during the latter part of 
the 18th century. This situation existed in all the 
Canadian colonies and that of Quebec is typical of what 
occurred elsewhere'. The Quebec Act of 1774 permitted 
the retention of certain Canadian customs which included 
the use of Canadian weights and measures. English 
weights and measures were introduced after Hew France 
was ceded to England r . Both sets of weights and measures 
were in constant use. Considerable confusion was created 
by the use of different standards of weights and measures 
although such confusion was not to be compared with the 
difficulties that arose from variations in each standard. 

The situation is well expressed in a report of the 
Merchants of Quebec presented in 1787 to the Committee 
of Council (1) in the latter 7 s investigation of 

(1) Committee of the legislative Council, 












( 65 ) 


commercial affairs. The report, in part, is as follows;- 

"Article 16th. That a standard should he fixed for 
Weights and Measures throughout the Province. 

Observation - To regulate the Weights and Measures 
on a permanent Basis throughout this Provinee 
would tend to the facility of commerce and the 
prevention of frauds. Great abuses exist at this 
time, scarce two weights or two measures are 
found exactly alike - It is not the use of French 
measures for grain, etc., and English Wheight for 
Flour and the like that creates difficulties, The 
custom has been long understood, and well established 
in those particulars, but it is the irregularity 
thereof that requires amendment.” (1) 

lower Canada in 1779, adopted the Avoirdupois 

pound and two standards of capacity, the Winchester 

bushel and the Canada minot. The act provided (2) - 

..the Canada minot hereinalso before mentioned ... 
shall be held and considered as the standard 
measure of this Province for measuring all rents 
payable in Wheat or other grain of any kind and 

also for measuring of all Salt, Wheat, - or 

other grain of feed... where no special contract 
or agreement has heretofore been or shall hereafter 
be made to the contrary..." 

"...the English Winchester bushel. 1 2 , .shall be held 
and considered as the standard measure of capacity 
in this Province for measuring all Salt, Wheat... 
and other grain or feeds, where such articles have 
heretofore been or shall hereafter be specially sold 
or contracted by such measure." 

The reason for the adoption of two measures of capacity 


(1) Shortt & Doughty, Documents relating to the 
Constitutional History of Canada, v 3, p 617. 

(2) Statutes of Lower Canada, 1792, c 7. 











( 66 ) 


in Lower Canada is that both were in common use. The 
Canada minot had long been in use in New France and the 
Province of Quebec, and was employed by and familiar to 
a larger portion of the population than was the Winchester 
bushel. The Winchester bushel was introduced into Quebec 
after 1763 and was, up until 1799, used principally by 
the English, a minor portion of the population. 

Variations in weights and measures existed in Upper 
Canada as well as in the lower province, but it was 
Upper Canada that made the first move to correct the 
situation. In 1792 (1) she passed "An Act to Establish 
the Winchester Measure and a Standard for other Weights 
and Measures throughout this Province". Upper Canada 
adopted the Winchester bushel aw the standard of dry 
measure and the avoirdupois pound as the standard of 
weight. Unlike Lower Canada, she adopted only one set of 
standards because her population was predominately 
English and only English weights and measures v/ere in 
common use. 

The object of the Upper Canadian act was to obtain 
"an uniformity of weights and measures". The first act 
(1792) was found ineffectual to the attainment of that 
object" because no official standards were secured with 

which to compare those in commercial use 1 , 5 This difficulty 

was remedied in 1823 (2) by an appropriation for .the- 

(1) Statutes of Upper Canada, 1792, c 3, 

(2) Statutes of Upper Canada, 1823, c 16. 















( 67 ) 


purchase of a set of official standards. The Secretary 
of the Province was to furnish, at the districts 
expense, a set of standards to each district to he used 
hy the inspector of weights and measures of that district*. 

The weights and measures acts of Canada were nibt 
associated directly with inspection acts hut they were 
closely linked up with the sale of commodities. The same 
reasoning may he applied to weights and measures as was 
applied to the hulking of variations in quality of a 
commodity into one class. If there is no standard weight 
or measure or if there is no penalty for failing to use 
the standardized weight or measure, the tendency will he 
for the weights and measures to become smaller and smaller. 
The average hushel or the average pound will decrease. 

To protect himself against fluctuations in weight ot 
measure, the consumer will adjust his price accordingly. 

He may even go so far as to discriminate against certain 
light weights and measures. The standardization of 
weights and measures is a necessary adjunct to the 
transfer of the consumer 1 s discrimination to the 
individual producer. 



, 

' < 




. 





• 



• 

. 

















t' “ 










» 
























, 










Chapter 4. 

COMMODITY INSPECTION UNDER THE SUPERVISION OF 
COMIUSRCIAL ORGANIZATIONS. 


The demand of commerce and agriculture for a more 
efficient marketing system to meet a situation of low 
prices introduced changes in both the practice and 
supervision of commodity inspection. A closer supervision 
of inspection was obtained by delegating certain powers 
, to local commercial organizations. This change together 
with the adoption of improved inspection technique 
carried the consumer 1 s discrimination closer to the 
individual producer'. Both changes were incident to the 
growth and development of the country. 

The growth and development of a new country is 
visible in many forms of human activity. Institutions 
become adapted to the changing conditions of economic, 
political and social life. Various organizations come 
into existence seeking the removal of impediments to 
trade and industry. The increase in population necessitates 
more government and countries with democratic ideals will 
delegate certain administrative and legislative duties 
to local self-governing bodies. These and many other 
changes characterize the growth and development of the 

Province of Canada during the period from 1841 to 1863. 






. 


■ 

. • 

, 

' ' * 

* 

• * . •; \. v v\ 1 

» 

( 

. 










( 69 ) 


The settlement of Canada occurred in a period 
favoring the spread of European civilization to new 
lands. The growing industries encouraged the colonization 
of new lands to provide markets for their manufactured 
goods. On "becoming more highly industrialized, certain 
European countries "became more dependant oil foreign 
food supplies. Cheap ocean transportation facilitated 
the exchange of commodities "between distant lands. 

Canada was one of the countries affected "by this growth 
of international trade, "but frer growth was predominately 
agricultural. The English policy did not look with favor 
on industrial expansion in the colonies because it meant 
a loss of overseas markets for English manufactures. 

With her one-sided development, Canada T s prosperity was 
largely dependent on foreign markets and these were not 
favorable to Canada during the early forties of the 
19th century. Canada had to meet competition from other 
exporters of raw materials and the repeal of the com 
laws, removing the preference she enjoyed with the mother 
country, weakened her "bargaining strength. The economic 
outlook in Canada was not bright’. She was pov/erless to 
improve matters dependent on factors of foreign origin, 
"but she did improve her marketing machinery to partially 
alleviate the situation. 







( 70 ) 


The development and maintenance of her foreigh 

has 

market is a problem that A confronted Canada for the past 
150 years. In several periods during her history the 
problem has been very acute. Toward the close of the 
eighteenth century her foreign market was threatened 
by adverse discrimination resulting from the exportation 
of adulterated and short-weight commodities and she 
adopted commodity inspection to relieve the situation. 
About the middle of the 19th century the problem again 
became acute as a result of her weakness in competing 
on an open market due to the poor classification and 
unreliability of the quality of her products. Her 
strongest rival was the United States whose dominating 
position was strengthened by the high quality of her ' 
exports secured with the assistance of commodity inspecti 
Canada attempted to strengthen her position by 
improving the quality of her exports by improved 
inspection practices 1 . 

^During the introductory period of commodity 
inspection in Canada the advocates on inspection changed 
their views respecting the manner by which inspection 
would accomplish its objective. The early inspection acts 
attempted to prevent the exportation of adulterated,and 
presumably low quality, products. A strict adherence to 










(71) 

this policy would defeat the purpose for which the acts 
were established. Low quality in agricultural products 
may be the result of nature’s caprice and not the wilful 
deteiWtion by man. Under similar circumstances the 
domestic consumer has just as strong a preference for 
high quality as the foreigner. What is to become of a 
large portion of a product having low quality as a result 
of unfavorable climate if it cannot be exported? If 
exports are confined to the high quality portion of a 
product, it is conceivable that the total volume and 
value of a product exported may be less than if exporta¬ 
tion is unrestricted. When this was discovered emphasis 
was shifted to grading which tended to increase export 
values by the encouragement of high quality production. 

As a consequence of this change of attitude it became 
permissible to export Rejected and Condemned grades. 

As long as an institution assists the development 
of an industry, that institution will grow and develop 
with the industry. By facilitating the transfer of the 
consumer’s discrimination to the individual producer, 
commodity inspection tends to improve the quality of the 
product and enable the industry to compete more 
successfully with similar industries in foreign countries. 
Canada was confronted with foreign competition and she 
met that competition by adapting existing institutions 











, 









. 

, 














- 















(72) 

to the problems of the day. The two institutions we are 
particularly concerned with during the period of 1841 to 
1863 are the Boards of Trade and commodity inspection. 

The Boards of Trade . 

One form of development found in a new progressive 
country is the growth of her institutions. People 
organize themselves into associations to achieve a 
common objective unattainable by individual effort. An 
organization that meets with some measure of success has 
new objectives thrust upon it. This is especially true 
if the organization is the sole representative of a 
particular industry or trade. 

One of the institutions springing up in the early 
commercial life of Canada w^s the Board of Trade. As its 
name suggests, this organization is interested in 
commercial affairs. Its objective is to promote the 
welfare of the community which is advanced by following 
two courses of action - attracting trade to the community, 
and regulating trade. It is in the latter activity that 
the Board of Trade exerted its influence on commodity 
inspection. 

The Board of Trade or Chamber of Commerce idea was 
conceived in the early years of the Christian era (1). 

ri) Program of Activities for Canadian Boards of Trade ’ 

and Chambers of Commerce - The Canadian Chamber of 
Commerce, Montreal, 1929, 














(73) 

Certain silversmiths met in the market place of Ephesus 
and, fearful lest the influence of Paul ! s teachings 
would turn many away from the worship of idols, protested 
against his doctrines and tried to get an injunction 
against him. later developments of the idea are found 
in the Mediaeval Guilds, in the Hanseatic towns of the 
Middle Ages, and, from the close of the 14th century, 
in the organization of Chambers of Commerce in 
continental Europe. The Anglo-Saxon race is responsible 
for the development of Boards of Trade or Chambers of 
Commerce as we know them, i.e., voluntary organizations 
without government assistance. St. Helier of the 
Channel Islands and Hew York each had a Chamber of 
Commerce in 1769, Glasgow in 1783 and Montreal in J822. 

The desire for better trade regulation led to the 
first attempt to form a Board of Trade in Canada. In 
the natural course of business, disputes do arise. The 
courts provide-a means of settling disputes but they act 
very slowly and are very costly. Added to this handicap 
was the existence of the old French civil law under 
which business was forced to operate during the early 
years of British rule in Canada, In 1777, and again in 
1787, a committee of merchants from Montreal and Quebec 
sought permission to organize a Chamber of Commerce with 
authority to establish a board of arbitration for the 











(74) 

settlement of disputes out of court (1). The scheme was 

"between 

rejected "because the government feared a conflict A tne 
civil courts and the proposed commercial courts. 

During the first quarter of the 19th century two 
Boards of Trade were organized in Canada. The Quebec 
Chamber of Commerce was formed in 1809 (2) and the 
Montreal Committee of Trade in 1822 (3). Neither 
organization possessed authority to regulate trade but 
they suggested changes for the improvement of trade 
relations. In 1841 both organizations were incorporated 
by special statute as Boards of Trade with authority to 
appoint boards of examiners to examine candidates, for the 
office of inspector, and to appoint a board of arbitration 
to settle certain types of trade disputes. From 1841 to 
1874 some seventeen Boards of Trade were incorporated 
by special statute. In the latter year a general 
Act made it unnecessary to incorporate such organizations 
each by special statute. 

The Board of Traders association with commodity 
inspection has been through their board of examiners. 

(1) Canada and Its Provinces, v 4, pp 531 and 545. 

(2) P.Gr.Roy, Bulletin des recherches historiques, October, 
1925, pp 393-395. 

(3) Program of Activities for Canadian Boards of Trade 
and Chambers of Commerce. 








( 75 ) 


At first the duties of the examiners were confined to 
the examination of candidates for the office of inspector. 
Later their duties were extended to include the 
arbitration of disputes over grading and the approval 
of standard samples selected by the inspedtor. For a 
short time the Gouncil of the Board of Trade appointed 
inspectors. Through their examiners the Boards of Trade 
supervised the inspection service to promote the transfer 
of a greater range of the consumer 1 s discrimination 
closer to the individual producer 1 . 

The Inspection System. 

The demand for improved trade regulations resulted 
in changes in all branches of the inspection system. The 
changes were all designed to widen the range of the 
consumer’s discrimination transferred by the grades to 
the individual producer. The grades were improved by • 
definition and by the use of standard samples. Both these 
devices tended to distinguish more definitely the line 
of division between grades. The need for closer 
supervision of commodity inspection to promote a more 
impartial judgment in the work of grading prompted the 
government to delegate the supervision of inspection to 
local commercial organizations.interested in the operation 
of that service. Additional means were provided for the 


























‘ 




. 




















(76) 

settlement of disputes, and grading was extended to many 
commodities for the first time, 

.Canada introduced commodity inspection to improve 
her foreign trade by removing the cause of the foreign 
consumer’s discrimination against her products. She did 
not accomplish this objective by preventing the exportation 
of adulterated, low quality or short-weight commodities, 
but by improving the average quality of exports through 
shifting the discrimination, by grading, against 
Canadian producers as a group to individual producers. 
Compulsory inspection played its part in introducing the 
system, but, once inspection became established and the 
public realized the benefits of grading, it is doubtful 
whether compulsion was necessary to maintain grading as 
a marketing practice. The premiums received for products 
of superior quality is an inducement to continue the 
grading system. After 1841 commodity inspection was not 
compulsory. 

During the period of 1841-1863 the greatest change 

in the inspection system occurred in the grades. The 

grades are the medium for carrying the consumer’s 

preference to the producer. Improvements in grades are 

consequently quite effective in facilitating the transfer 

of the consumer’s discrimination to the individual 
producer. Until 1841 definitions had been used for 








(77) 

describihg the grades of only one commodity, hut 
following 1841 the grades of many commodities were 
described by definition. 

In addition to definition grades may be described 
by standard samples which were first employed in the 
Canadian grading systems in 1841. A statute (1) of that 
year provided,- 

"...and it shall be the duty of each of the said 
inspectors of Flour and meal, to govern himself 
so far as may be possible to one uniform standard 
of quality for each description of flour and meal..." 

In 1848 inspectors were further instructed (2),- 

"to procure proper samples of Flour of the several 
qualities aforesaid, inspected in New York, and to 
quide himself by such samples. Tf 

Two years later (3), inspectors were required to select 

or make up their own standard samples for the grades named 

and defined by statute. A consolidating statute of 1859 

(4) made the selection of standard samples subject to 

the approval of the board of examiners. 

(1) Statutes, Province of Canada, 1841, c 89. 

(2) Statutes, Province of Canada, 1848, c 6. 

(3) Statutes, Province of Canada, 1850, c 29*. 

(4) Statutes, Province bf Canada, 1859, c 26. 











( 78 ) 

A standard sample (1) is a sample selected to exhibit 
physically those properties and qualifications of a grade. 
In other words, it describes a grade. Our other common 
method of describing grades is definition. Grades are 
described by both methods, depending on the nature of the 
commodity. At one extreme are perishable commodities, 
such as live hogs, whose grades cannot be described by 
sample because the sample itself is perishable. At the 
other extreme are commodities whose grades cannot be 
described adequately by definition because of the 
difficulty of expressing variations in those properties 
characteristic of the commodity. Between these two 
extremes is a group of commodities whose grades can be 
described most effectively by a combination of definition 
and sample. Standard samples were first employed to 
describe flour grades but the practice soon was adopted 
for other commodities. 

Another means adopted in 1841 of utilizing the 
inspection system to improve economic conditions involved 
a closer supervision of inspection to increase the 
inducement for high quality production through the 


(1) Some ambiguity exists in the interpretation of the 
term "Standard”, To some it means a sample while to 
others it is a gr a de definition. "Standard" is used 
here with the former meaning, but to avoid confusion 
it will be referred to as a "standard" sample. 












( 79 ) 

transfer' of a more intensified consumer’s discrimination 
to the producer. Until 1840, the Canadian grading systems 
were operated hy inspectors without any very considerable 
supervision. The inspection systems were controlled by 
statute but poor transportation and communication 
facilities prevented close supervision from the seat of 
government'. Government supervision of inspection became 
more difficult after the union of Upper and lower Canada 
on account of the increased area under one administration. 
The financial plight of the government in the early 
forties deterred it from setting up its own organization 
to supervise commodity inspection. Realizing the need 
for closer supervision and considering the financial and 
geographical handicaps, the government delegated the 
supervision of commodity inspection to a private local 
commercial organization with which they clothed with 
special powers. This organization was the Board of Trade. 

Following out the policy of local supervision, 
corresponding changes were made in the inspection 
service. In 1841 inspectors were appointed by the Mayor 
of the cities or the Warden of Chief Municipal Officer 
of any other place where inspection was authorized (1). 


(1) Statutes, Province of Canada, 1841, c T s 88 &89, 
1842, c 6. 






( 80 ) 


The hoards of examiners were appointed by the Board of 

Trade instead of formerly by the government. The Board 

of Trade was authorized to elect from among its members 

a board of arbitration with - 

"power to arbitrate upon and give their award in 
any commercial case or difference which shall be 
voluntarily referred to them by the parties 
concerned. TT 

Disputes respecting grading were not referred, for some 
time, to this new board of arbitration. Inspection acts 
enacted or amended in the years immediately following 
1841 continued to provide for the formation of a board 
of arbitration appointed by a Justiue of the Peace to 
settle disputes over grading. Before grading was extended 
to grain, disputes ovef grading were settled by the 
board of examiners acting as a board of arbitration. 

A change in one other act of this period should be 
noted. The act of Upper Canada (1) establishing the 
standard weight of grain was passed again in the 
legislature of the Province of Canada. At first (2) it 
only applied to Upper Canada but the following year, 

1854, it was amended to include Lower Canada as well. 

A standard weight per bushel for buckwheat appeared for 
the first time. This crop had long been grown but had 

(1) Statutes of Upper Canada, 1835, c 7. 

(2) Statutes, Province of Canada, 1853, c 193. 









( 81 ) 

l>een unimportant in commercial trade channels. The 
establishment of a standard weight per bushel indicated 
that buckwheat was finding its v/ay into commerce, 

Grading brought to the shores of Canada the 
discrimination, both favorable and otherwise, of the 
consumer but, when first introduced, it is questionable 
whether the favorable discrimination was passed back to 
the initial producer. Grading was performed at a few 
seaports and, unless that grading was anticipated in the 
interior (1), it is doubtful whether the benefits from 
grading left the hands of the exporter who possessed 
the commodity when graded. Acting in his own self-interest 
the exporter would attempt to retain for himself any 
benefit in price resulting from grading. Competition 
for business would eventually induce the exporters to 
pass part, perhaps all, of the benefit towards the 
producer. 

The premiums paid by the consumer for high quality 
products eventually reach the producer but they must first 
pass through the hands of the middlemen before doing so. 
Each group of middlemen will retain the premiums for 
themselves as long as possible. Competition, however, 

(1) A good example of anticipated grading is found to©day 
in the Canadian grain trade. In buying grain the country 
elevator agent anticipates the grade he exoects to 
reveive when the grain is later submitted for official 
grading. 










( 82 ) 

will then force them to pass the premiums to the next 
group in the marketing chain located closer to the producer 1 . 
Toward the close of the introductory period of inspection 
in Canada the discrimination of the consumer was passed 
from the exporter situated at the seaboard ports to the 
merchants located in the interior. The Board of Trade 
who were interested in promoting the welfare of their 
community saw that a benefit would accrue from inspection 
to their city or town just as it would to the country 
at large. The Boards of Trade in establishing commodity 
inspection at interior points carried the consumer’s 
discrimination closer to the producer. 
























Chapter * 5, 

THE EXTENSION OF COMMODITY INSPECTION TO THE 
MARKETING OF GRAIN. 


The increased importance of grain in commerce and the 
realization of the benefits to be derived from grading 
led to the extension of commodity inspection to the 
marketing of grain. The inspection of grain was 
authorized and controlled by a statute differing very 
little from other commodity inspection acts. The system 
of inspection used for the first time in the grain trade 
in 1863 was developed in the marketing of various 
commodities during the preceeding 70 years. The growth 
and changes in commodity inspection have been discussed 
in the preceeding pages. Since grain inspection is the 
subject of our study it would be well to examine the 
system as it operated under our first grain act. 

One factor promoting the extension of inspection 
to the marketing of grain was the increased production 
of grain. Between 1851 and 1390 the cultivation of wheat 
in Upper Canada, now Ontario, assumed its greatest 
relative importance. In 1851 Upper Canada produced over 
twelve million bushels of wheat (1). By 1861 a total 






(I) Census of Canada, 1870-71, v 4, p 195. 























( 84 ) 

yield of 24,620,425 "bushels was harvested from 
1,386,366 acres (1). The -r r wheat acreage was 
due partly to high prices and partly to a number of 
circumstances which encouraged immigration, colonization 
and the settlement of the country. Railway construction, 
the Crimean war, reciprocity with the United States and 
the American Civil War all tended to encourage the 
production of wheat in Canada. Since relatively little 
wheat is consumed on the farm, increased production 
resulted in increased marketing of grain. The sale of 
grain by sample is slow and expensive while sale by 
certificate is more expeditious and economical. Grading 
and sale by certificate had been practiced for over 70 

years in the marketing of some commodities and the method 

/ 

appealed to the grain merchant. The increase in the quantity; 
of grain handled promoted the adoption of practices 
lowering the cost of transacting business. Sale by 
certificate arising out of the practice of grading 
encouraged the adoption of grading in the marketing of 
grain. 

Another factor promoting the inspection of grain 
was the desire to take advantage of the benefits to be 
derived from grading. No period of depression immediately 


(1) D.A.MacGibbon, The Canadian Grain Trade, p 16 











(85) 

preceeded the first grain act as had preceeded the 
introduction of inspection to Canada and the important 
changes in 1841'. On the contrary, official grain 
inspection was established during a period of prosperity. 
Both prosperity and depression influence the introduction 
and amendment of commodity inspection. Prosperity, 
favoring a high standard of living, intensifies the 
consumers’ demand for high quality products, while 
depression intensifies the producers’ demand for higher 
prices. A more exacting discrimination on the part of 
the consumer together with the competition among dealers 
for grain would tend to pass that discrimination hack 
closer to the producer. To do this it would he necessary 
to install some system akin to official grading. 

Throughout the history of grain inspection instances 
have occurred where practices received official sanction 
after they had been in use for some time. The desire of 
the grain trade for official sanction of pradtices which 
developed in marketing was in all probability instrumental 
in bringing the first grain act into force. 

The grain act of 1863 dealt only with grading. No 
attempt was made to control such non-grading marketing 
activities as are at present regulated by the Canada 
Grain Act. 





















>v. 









( 86 ) 




The Wheat Grades of 1865 . 

During the 70 odd years of grading prior to grain 
inspection in Canada a number of principles were evolved 
respecting grades. These principles were observed in 
establishing the grain grades of 1863. The grades of wheat 
clearly illustrate the fact that a grade describes the 
consumers 1 preference. The consumer of bread desires a 

light white loaf. This preference in turn creates a 

m»li 

preference for that class of wheat which will.and bake 
into the desired quality of bread, and accounts for the 
division of wheat into classes. 

The consumers 1 preference for a certain (quality of 
bread is also the basis for dividing a particular class 
of wheat into grades. Different lots of any variety of 
wheat will vary in the quality and quantity of bread 
that can be obtained from it. The preference for a 
particular quantity or quality of bread secured from wheat 
creates a preference for wheat having certain properties. 
To the extent that these properties are the basis of 
grade classifications, the grades carry and describe the 
consumers 1 various preferences. 

A greater range of the consumers’ discrimination is 
transferred to the producer if the grades have definite 
limits. Sharp lines of division between grades are 


' 

















* 





' 


. 


, 


. 

, : ' . 












, 

. 














, 




, 














(87) 

obtained by the use of definitions and standard samples. 

The employment of these devices in the grading of grain 
promotes uniform grading throughout the season and the 
territory under the jurisdiction of the inspection act. 
Uniformity of grading lessens the risk to the consumer 
of loss from fluctuations in grades and results in a 
higher price paid to the producer for high quality grades 
and in a lower price paid for low quality. The use of 
definitions and standard samples in describing grades of 
grain tends to widen the range of the consumers 1 2 3 
discrimination transferred to the producer. 

The wheat grades defined in 1863 may be divided into 
four classes - white winter, red winter, spring and 
rejected. Some, possibly all, of these classes existed 
in the marketing of wheat prior to the introduction of 
official grading (1). In making a study of prices, 

Michell (2) found the existence of spring and winter 
classes as early as 1853. Including the two No. 1 springs 
and rejected, a total of nine grades of wheat were defined 
(3). The definitions were more simple than t&ose of to-day, 

(1) Commercial grades of wheat were officially established 
in 1891 but existed unofficially before that date. 

(2) Michell, H. Statistics of Prices. Statistical 
Contributions to Canadian Economic Histppy, v2, p 59. 

(3) See appendix 5 for definitions of grades established 
in 1863. 








( 88 ) 

"but much more comprehensive than those of other grains, 

A weight requirement was included in the definitions of 
only the spring wheat grades. 

The division of wheat into four market classes was 
“based on milling and “baking .quality. In 1863, as now, 
the consumer of “bread preferred a white loaf. The miller, 
catering to the consumers 1 preference, naturally sought 
those classes and varieties of wheat which he could mill 
into a flour possessing those qualities necessary for 
the production of the preferred type of bread. The miller 
also sought those wheats yielding large quantities of 
flour. The preference of the consumer for a certain 
quality of bread created, in turn, a preference of the 
miller for a certain quality and class of wheat. In 
exercising his preference the consumer discriminated between 
different flours. The miller, in turn, discriminated 
between different wheats. This discrimination was 
expressed on the market by price. Data on prices for all 
classes of wheat are not available. Michell gives wheat 
prices at Toronto for 1863 (1). For that year fall wheat 
averaged twelve cents a bushel more than spring wheat. 

The class of wheat best meeting the market 
requirements in 1863 v/as white winter. It had a large 


(1) Michell, p 59. See table # 3 appendix 











( 89 ) 


percentage of starch, which is whiter than gluten, and a 
white hran which did not discolor the flour. White winter 
wheat, in the opinion of millers at that time, yielded a 
maximum of superfine flour. Red wheat, "both winter and 
spring, was not liked "because of the orange tinge it 
imparted to the flour. It was extremely difficult to 
make a complete separation of bran from the flour on 
account of the type of the filling machinery in use. 

Wheat was ground as finely as possible with the old 
burr-stone mills and then bolted. The bran was ground up 
with the flour and, if the bran was other than white, 
the flour was discolored. 

The discrimination against spring wheat was due to 
its objectionable red color, low quality and milling 
difficulties. Spring wheat matures later than winter 
wheat and is subject to greater damage from fall frosts 
and immaturity. Added to the late maturity of spring v/heat 
was the slow methods of harvesting which lengthened the 

harvest season and increased the danger of climatic 

associated 

damage to the grain. Light weight is usually^with low 
quality resulting from adverse climate. Only the spring 
wheat grades carried weight requirements indicating that 
the cause of light weight was more common in spring than 
in winter wheat.' Even at this early period spring wheat 
may have contained a considerable proportion of Fife 


















. 














. 


* 

. 


) 








(90) 

wheat so strongly objected to ten years later. The Fife 
wheats were hard and difficult to mill with the burr-stone 
mills. 

The Grades of Other Grain . 

The act of 1863 defined, in addition to those for 
wheat, grades for oats, barley, peas, rye and corn. Their 
definitions (1) were quite simple indicating their 
relative unimportance on the markets as compared v/ith 
wheat• 

The relative unimportance of other grain on the 
market was due to the small volume of production and to 
the small percentage of the crop reaching the central 
markets where it would be subject to grading. In 1861 
the production of wheat exceeded all other grains except 
oats. Oats and some of the other grains are feed grains 
and being consumed on the farms do not reach the central 
market. Statistics are not available giving the quantity 
of grain inspected in Canada during the early years of 
inspection. Assuming the uses of grain to-day and 70 
years ago are similar, the percentage of production 
inspected should be similar for the two periods. By using 
the present percentage of total yield inspected, we may 

(1) See appendix for definitions of grades. 











































( 91 ) 


estimate the probable quantity of grain inspected during 
the early years of grading. This estimate together with the 
volume of production is as follows;- 


Estimate of Production Inspected, 1863. 


Production Percentage of Estimated Quantity 
1861 (1) crop inspected inspected 

1921-1931 1863 


Wheat 

27,274,779 bu 

81.5 

22,229,000 bu 

Oats 

38,771,370 " 

11.1 

4,304,000 

Barley 

5,103,636 

29.8 

1,5.21,000 

Rye 

1,817,373 

61.5 

1,117,000 

Peas 

12,250,173 

0.6 

74,000 

Corn 

2,591,151 

0.1 

3,000 


These figures are probably high because inspection was 
not compulsory, however, they indicate the relative 
importance of the different grains on the market. 


(1) Census, 1870-71, v 4, pp 273-319. Figures for 1863 
are not given. The year 1861 is taken as representative 
of condition in 1863, the year official gffl grading was 
established. 

■ 



















< 















( 92 ) 


Standard Samples of Grain , 

The use of standard samples to describe grades 
became an established practice before the extension of 
grading to grain. Standard samples, like many other 
grading practices, were adopted in our first grain 
inspection system (1);— 

"16. Each Inspector of Grain Shall,,at his own expense, 
provide sufficient samples of each of the qualities of 
the different kinds of Grain, of which the standard is 
hereinbefore fixed; such samples to be approved by the 
Board of Examiners, and to be renewed as often as may be 
required by the said Board; and the same shall be deposited 
with the Secretary of the Board of Trade , and kept by 
him as standard samples, by which the Inspector shall be 
governed in establishing the several qualities of Wheat 
and other Grain." 

Standard samples were adopted to make grading more 
uniform. This was the same objective that led to the use 
of grade definitions. 

It has been pointed out that the nature of the 
commodity determines the method or methods employed in 
describing grades and we may enquire at this point why 
both methods have been used to describe the grades of 
grain. Grain is extremely variable. Each class of grain 
has certain properties for which it is desired, and the 
extent or degree to which it possesses these properties 
determines the value of the grain for any particular 


(1) Statutes, Province of Canada, 1863, c 3, s 16 










(93) 

purpose. In the case of wheat, the properties desired by 
the miller and consumer are freedom from impurities and 
high filling and baking quality. These properties are 
affected by a large number of factors. Impurities may be 
easy or difficult to extract, or may produce different 
results in the manufactured product. Milling and baking 
quality is influenced by the variety of wheat, by the 
condition of the grain when marketed, and by damage from 
weathering, disease, frost and immaturity. These factors 
may operate singly or in combination with varying degrees 
of intensity, and are responsible for such wide variations 
in quality that scarcely two samples of grain are exactly 
alike. 

One problem faced in defining a set of grades is that 
of making an equitable division of the factor ot factors 
used as a basis for grading. Where this factor can be 
expressed quantitatively the problem is camparatively 
simple, but where the factor or factors cannot be so 
expressed grade definitions cannot completely describe the 
grade. The factors now used in defining wheat grades are 
purity as to variety and foreign matter, weight per bushel, 
percentage of hard vitreous kernels and soundness. All 
these factors indicate quality in wheat and all, with the 
exception of soundness, can be or are expressed 
quantitatively. 










( 94 ) 


Soundness implies the absence of defects. Some of 
the defects which affect the soundness of v/heat are 
greenness, frost, immaturity, weathering, sprouts and 
disease. How, may we ask, is one to measure the damage 
caused by frost, immaturity or any of the other defects 
found in wheat? Even though we could measure this damage, 
we have not solved the problem because soundness is only 
an indication of quality in wheat. Quality in wheat refers 
to the milling and baking quality and its most 
scientific measure is the baking test. Modern business 
requires a rapid method -of grading and forbids the use 
of the expensive time-consuming baking t4st as a 
commercial means of grading wheat'. One of the closest 
approaches to a scientific measure of quality in wheat 
is the protein test, but it has certain disadvantages 
which will be discussed in a later chapter. The protein 
test determines the quantity but not the quality of the 
protein. Protein quality varies in different varieties 
and we would still have to rely on the exercise of human 
judgment to make a varietal determination. 

The grades of wheat are not easy to define. During 
the past 70 years ourlegislators have made some 
improvement in grade definitions but grades are still 

defined in abstract terms. The object of a grading system 
is to grade the commodity and definitions are but a means 





(95) 

to that end. Our grades are defined, in part, in general 
terms and if used alone definitions would he inadequate 
as a sole means of attaining our object. We define grades 
by statute to maintain an -uniformity of grading from year 
to year. We instruct our inspectors to grade according 
to the act, but, because the grades are defined in 
abstract terms, we also supply our inspectors with 
standard samples so that they'will be aided in their 
work of grading by comparison as well as by interpretation. 

When grading, an inspector is faced with the problem 
of judging quality and unsoundness attributed to various 
combinations of different factors. To assist him in this 
work standard samples have long been used, A standard sample 
exhibits the maximum limit of unsoundness or the minimum 
limit of quality permitted in the grade of which it is the 
standard sample. V/hen grading a line sample, an inspector 
may compare it with the standard sample in determining the 
proper grade to which the grain belongs. Standard samples 
are also useful in assisting the inspector to maintain 
uniformity in his grading from day to day and from month 
to month. 












( 96 ) 


The Grain Inspection Service of 1663 , 

The inspection service established under the grain 
act of 1863 did not differ from that of other commodity- 
inspection acts. The principles underlying this branch 
of the inspection system might well be reviewed to show 
how they function in transferring the consumers’ 
discrimination to the grain producer. Grading facilitates 
the transfer of the consumers’ discrimination to the 
producer, but, unless the grading be properly performed, 
the producer will not receive the full benefit from it. 
Accurate grading is promoted by placing certain 
restrictions on the appointment and qualifications of 
inspectors. 

The close supervision of grain inspection in 1863 
by a local authority interested in that serviee promoted 
accurate grading and the proper performance of the duties 
of inspectors. Inspectors were appointed by the Council 
of the Board of Trade from among those candidates 
certified as qualified for the position by the board of 
examiners. The Council of the Board of Trade could 
remove any inspector and appoint another if it were 
shown that the duties of the office were not properly 

performed. Although not an employee of the Board of Trade, 













- 










' 














■ 










< ' , ' ' ' 















■ 






■ 

. 

. 





























■ 

Ou. 












( 97 ) 


nevertheless, he retained his office by their will and 
pleasure 1 . Inspectors appointed their own assistants as 
directed by the Council of the Board of Trade, but it was 
required that assistants be examined and approved by the 
board of exam'nersV Two sureties of $1500.00 each were 
required of inspectors. 

Both inspectors and their assistants were required 
to take an oath of office in which they swore not to 
deal in any way in the commodities v/hich they inspected. 
This regulation removed the influence of personal gain 
as an aid in securing impartial judgment on the part of 
the inspector. 

Inspectors were appointed by commission and their 
remuneration consisted of fees collected for their 
services. The fees charged for inspection were definitely 
stated in the earlier commodity inspection acts but fees 
for inspection under the first grain act were set by the 
board of examiners. Out of the fees collected, the 
inspector paid his assistants and maintained his own 
office. By having his fees set by a third party the 
inspectors were prevented from overcharging for the sake 
of greater personal gain or price cutting to increase 
business. A fixed schedule of fees tended to promote more 

stable business relations. The fixing of fees by the local 
board of examiners was a weakness of the act which was 









( 98 ) 


corrected, at a later date. 

Following the practice established in the inspection 
acts which preceeded it, the first grain act provided 
for the creation of a board of examiners. Appointments 
to this board were made annually by the Council of the 
Board of Trade.in those cities where such an organization 
existed and where inspection was authorized. The board 
of examiners consisted of "five skilful persons" of whom 
three were to constitute a quorum. Examiners could not 
be removed from office by the Council which appointed them, 
however, this would cause little inconvenience as they 
held office for only one year. Each examiner was required 
to take an oath of office y he was not remunerated for 
his services as examiner. The duty of the board of 
examiners was to examine applicants for the office of 
inspector or assistant inspector. Those elegible for 
appointment were recommended to the Council of the 
Board of Trade. The board of examiners was also charged 
with making a tariff of inspection fees and with acting 
as a board of arbitration to,- 

"decide all disputes arising between an Inspector and 
any party employing him, regarding the quality and 
condition of any wheat or other grain submitted to him 
for inspection." 

The Board of Trade membership included merchants of 









(99) 

various commodities. Those members elected as examiners 
presumably were grain merchants with a knowledge of how 
grain inspection should be conducted. 

There is little in the act concerning the method of 
grading. Inspection was not compulsory. Weekly reports 
were sent to the secretary of the Board of Trade. A 
clause of the act outlined the method of determining the 
weight per bushel,- 

"the bushel, half bushel, or quarter of a bushel, shall 
be placed on a flat floor, and filled with a scoop 
large enough to fill it at one time and shall be struck 
with a roller 2J- inches in diameter." 

The act is not clear as to who should weigh inspected 

grain but indicates that this work was performed by the 

inspector,- 

"a bill of inspection shall be furnished... specifying the 
quantity and quality ascertained by inspection." 

The inspector or his assistant gave a bill of inspection 

for all grain inspected. This "bill" specified the 

'quantity and quality of the grain, the charges thereon, 

and the name of the store or vessel or number of the car 

wherein the grain was inspected. A certificate might also 

be given, when requested, to the shipper. 











( 100 ) 


The Settlement of Disputes. 

The methods of settling disputes over grading were 
those followed in other inspection systems. Where a 
Board of Trade existed, disputes were settled by the 
board of examiners acting as a board of arbitration. 

When a dispute arose between an inspector and the owner of 
grain, application for an appeal was made to the secretary 
of the Board of Trade who summoned the board of 
arbitration to report their opinion on the dispute. Their 
judgment was final. Where no Board of Trade existed, 
disputes were settled by a board of arbitration appointed 
by the local Justice of the Peace. This latter method was 
used in 1795 and is fully described in appendix #4. The 
cost of the appeal was borne by the loser of ihe appeal. 











Chapter 6. 

CENTRALIZED CONTROL OF CRAIN INSPECTION. 

The stimulus to the development of Canada following 
the prosperity of the 60 T s produced two important changes 
in the Canadian Grain Inspection System.which carried the 
consumers T discrimination closer to the individual 
producer. One chagge concerned the control of inspection 
which was made possible by the British North America Act. 
The other change involved the grade definitions in which 
the consumers 1 preference became more evident. Centralized 
control promoted a greater uniformity of both grades and 
grading than was possible under the control of several 
provinces. 

The British North America Act gave the Parliament 
of Canada exclusive legislative authority over the 
regulation of trade and commerce. In 1873 the provincial 
inspection acts were consolidated in one Dominion statute, 
the General Inspection Act. Uniform practice throughout 
an area tends to produce a uniform product or a uniform 
grade. A uniform grade tends to increase price because the 
consumer will be relieved of the risk of quality 
fluctuations. An increased price resulting from a superior 










( 102 ) 

product or grade is evidence of a widder range of 
discrimination "being carried by the grades to the 
producer. 

The uniform practice of grading in Canada is the 

result of centralized control promoted by the authority 

invested in the Dominion Parliament. The constitutional 

acts governing Canadian legislatures up to the time of 

Confederation did not specifically outline the matters 

coming within the legislative jurisdiction of the colonial 

governments. These acts (1) stated that the legislatures,- 

"shall have power and authority to make ordinances for 
the peace, welfare and good government.. 1 , with the consent 
of his Majesty’s governor." 

All colonies were free to enact legislation concerning 
their own trad6 and commerce with the result that matters 
controlled by legislation varied from colony to colony. 

The British North America Act of 1867 united the 
Canadian provinces into one dominion. Under this act it 

(1) Quebec Act, 1774. 

Constitutional Act, 1791. 

Act of Union, 1841. 

The quotation is taken from the Quebec Act and is 
also found in the other two acts. 







( 105 ) 


was declared (1),- 

"that the exclusive Legislative Authority of the 
Parliament of Canada extends to all Matters coming within 
the Classes of subjects next hereinafter enumerated: that 
is to say;- 

2. The Regulation of Trade and Commerce. 

17. Weights and Measures. ,T 

The above clause was inserted in the act to define the 
field of legislative authority between the Dominion and 
provincial governments. Matters concerning the grain 
trade were thus brought under the jurisdiction of one 
authority which promoted uniformity to the extent that it 
was affected by legislation throughout the Dominion. 

The extension of autonomy to the Canadian colonies 
has been slow and gradual, but such extension has been 
in keeping with the economic and political development 
of the country. It delayed for a time the introduction of 
commodity inspection and one method of supervising 
commodity inspection (2). However, it must be remembered 
that changes in legislation are usually desired before they 
are obtained. During the tenure of each of the early 
constitutional acts, one of the groups of acts rejated 

(1) British North America Act, 1867, s 91. 

(2) Wheat grading and the incorporation of Boards of 
Trade were refused in 1777. 












(104) 

to commodity inspection made its first appearance. 

Commodity inspection was introduced during the life of the 
Quebec Act, the regulation of weights and measures by 
statute commenced under the Constitutional Act, and the 
Boards of Trade were first incorporated by a legislature 
whose powers were obtained from the Act of Union. The 

policy adopted in 1867 of federal control over certain 

in a 

subjects ito'd greate# uniformity of grain inspection 
throughout the Dominion. This policy has enabled Canada 
to attain two notable achievements,- a very efficient 
grain marketing system and the superiority abroad of her 
certificate final. 

Greater Uniformity of Inspedtion was made possible 

u nder the General Inspection Acts of 1875 and 1874, 

The newly created Dominion of Canada passed her first 
commodity inspection act in 1873 (1). This act repealed all 
commodity inspection acts of the different provinces, 
and placed commodity inspection on a uniform basis 
throughout the Dominion. Some commodities had been subject 
to inspection in more than one province, and the sections 

(1) Statutes, Canada, 1873, c 49, u An Act to Amend and 
Consolidate and extend to the whole of the Dominion of 
Canada, the Laws respedting the Inspection of Certain 

















(105) 

of the 1873 act providing for the inspection of these 
commodities were consolidations of provincial acts or 
parts of them. The section of the act concerning grain 
inspection was taken from a statute of the Province of 
Canada (1). The Dominion act provided one general form of 
inspection service for all commodities. Separate sections 
contained the grade definitions and those special 
provisions peculiar to the grading of each commodity. 

The act of 1873 introduced changes in grain inspection 
to meet the needs of changing political and economic 
conditions. Under the authority of the British North 
America Act the government assumed more direct control 
over grain inspection. In 1873 the government appointed 
inspectors, reserved the right to make regulations 
governing inspectors and to designate and define the 
districts where inspection was to he practiced. A change 
in the varieties of wheat grov/n led to changes in the 

STAple articles of Canadian produce”. The commodities 
inspected were: flour and meal, wheat and other grain, 

"beef and pork, potashes and pearl ashes, pickled fish 
and fish oil, hutter, leather and raw hides, and 
petroleum. 

(1) Statutes, Province of Canada, 1863, c 3. 









(106) 

grade definitions. An order in council of July 8, 1873, 
named the Minister of Inland Revenue to administer the 
act. 

The General Inspection Act of 1873 was repealed 
after one years operation, hut the new act (1), in so far 
as grain inspection was concerned, differed very little 
from the old act. The adoption of the Imperial hushel 
necessitated changes in those grade definitions carrying 
minimum weight requirements. The regulations governing 
the hoard of examiners were changed, and provision was 
made for the settlement of disputes between inspectors. 
Between 1874 and 1885 amendments to the act removed the 
discrimination against Red Fife wheat, designated new 
inspection districts and provided additional means of 
examining inspectors. 

The change of commodity inspection from a compulsory 
export basis to one of voluntary market practice required 
a different means of defining areas subject to an 
inspector’s authority. Commodities for export concentrate 
in a few central ports and when inspection was introduced 
inspectors were appointed for those ports or cities. 

(l)Statutes, Canada, 1874, c 45. "An Act to make better 

provision, extending to the whole Dominion of Canada, 
respecting the Inspectin of Certain Staple Articles of 
Canadian produce." 













' 













7 


« 


! 


: 


c 














Later, when inspection came under the supervision of the 
Boards of Trade, the inspectors were appointed for the 
territory or city where the Board of Trade existed. So 
long as inspection was in the hands of the Boards of 
Trade there were inspection districts although they may 
not have Been specifically mentioned in the statutes. 

When commodity inspection "became an established 
marketing practice, inspectors were located at inland 
points. While inspectors were appointed by the Board of 
Trade, the area for which the Board of Trade was 
organized was also the area in which the inspector was 
authorized to inspect. When the inspectors became appointee 
of the government it became necessary to define the 
districts in which they operated. The act of 1873 (1) 
provided that certain inspection districts be designated 
by the Governor in Council within which the inspector w^s 
to act. Following the passing of this act s number of 
inspection districts were defined by order in council. 

In 1883 Winipeg was made an inspection district and the 
Board of Trade at that place was given all the powers 
hitherto held by similar organizations in other cities. 


(1) Statutes, Canada, 1873, c 49, s 1. 

















\ . 

«* 

■ t 

' 

K 

■■ *• •• . t 

■ 

. . .. ... 

, 

. 





(108) 

The Consumers 1 Preference becomes more evident in 

the Y/heat Grades of 1873, 

The 1873 definitions of wheat grades record a conflict 
over varietal discrimination in grading. The consumer 
continued to prefer a white loaf of bread and his preference 
was extended to those classes and varieties of wheat which 
milled and baked into the desired type of bread. The 
consumers 1 preference was registered in the grade 
definitions. The farmers 1 motive in producing wheat was 
profit, and he grew those classes and varieties of wheat 
which yielded him the greatest net returns. The wheats 
milling and baking into the preferred type of bread 
were not the most profitable to produce. The farmers’ 
profit motive induced him to grew those varieties of 
wheat most suitable to his climate. These new wheats 
were inferior in milling and baking quality, and the 
discrimination of the consumer was not strong enough 
to discourage their production. 

The 1873 wheat grades were modifications of those 
defined ten years earlier. The revisions consisted of a 
greater discrimination between classes and varieties of 
wheat, a renaming and rewording of the spring wheat grades, 
and the addition and omission of some clauses to and from 












V 


r 


t 




x 



(109) 

the winter wheat grades (1). These revisions were the 

reflections of two tendencies intensified during the 

decade. One tendency was the insisted, possibly increased, 

preference for a white loaf, and the other was the 

increased production of- inferior milling wheat (2)*. 

The preference for a white loaf has existed for many 

years. It is believed that this preference had been 

increasing during the decade of. 1863-1873, but the 

evidence supporting this contention is somewhat indirect. 

The preference for a white loaf is greatest in those 

countries having a high standard of living. During periods 

- . 

of prosperity people are better able to satisfy their 
demand for a higher standard of living. In the decade of 
1863-1873 the world experienced an era of prosperity. 

Since the preference for a white loaf comes from people 
having a high standard of living, a higher standard of 
living produced by prosperity will increase or at least 
maintain the preference for a white loaf. The preference 
of the consumer for a white loaf is registered in the 
1873 grade definitions discriminating between red and 
white winter wheat and between-winter and spring wheat. 

(1) See appendix 6 for grade definitions. 

(2) Inferior according to the milling technique of the 
time. 







t 















. 




' 








. 







( 110 ) 

The most evident factor responsible for the 
discrimination in wheat varieties is that of wheat 
production. Coincident with an increased volume was a 
change in the quality of production. The farmer in pursuit 
of profit turned to those varieties whose production 
yielded him the maximum net return. White winter wheat, 
although commanding the highest price per bushel on the 
market, was disliked by the farmer because of its low yield 
and non-resistance to disease. Red winter wheat was 
preferred by the farmers over white winter, but spring 
wheat was gradually replacing winter wheat due to the 
introduction and popularity of a new wheat subsequently 
named Red Fife. 

The history of Red Fife wheat has been told in many 
texts and bulletins and need not be repeated here except 
to show its influence on the grading of wheat. Fife wheat 
was introduced into Canada in 1841 (1) : . It was hardy, a 
heavy yielder, and soon became popular with the farmers 
because it was profitable to produce. By 1870, 60f* of the 
total Ontario wheat crop was spring sown, and the most 
important variety was Red Fife. Red Fife wheat differed 
from other varieties in that it was difficult to mill. 

(1) Reginald A.H.Buller, Essays on Wheat, pp 216-217/ 












(Ill) 


The kernels were very hard and could not he grouild 
satisfactorily in the old stone mills. When it became 
mixed with wheats of softer texture, it interferred with 
the milling process. Mixtures of wheat varying in texture 
produce less flour and more bran in the flour than wheat 
of uniform texture. 

While the production of Fife wheat was small, the 
millers did not object strenuously to it. A small quantity 
mixed with other spring wheats could be milled without 
suffering any great loss, but when the volume of Fife 
wheat increased they experienced difficulty in milling 
mixtures containing a large proportion of it. Such mixtures 
were disfavored because the different portions of the 
mixture had different milling properties and interfered 
with the process of milling. The millers’ objection to 
Fife wheat was recorded in the clause of the act 
preventing it from grading any higher than No. 2. 

The same three classes of wheat established in 1863 

were maintained in 1873. However, the preference of the 

consumer for a white loaf and the farmers’ choice of 

variety for the most profitable production resulted in 

greater evidence of discrimination in the act between 

various classes of wheat. Mixtures of spring and winter 

wheat were classed as spring wheat indicating that winter 
wheat did not detract from the value of spring wheat 










(112) 


but that the reverse was not true. . White winter wheat 
had to be pure but red winter wheat could be made up of 
either pure red or mixtures d>f red and white winter 
wheats. The order of preference as indicated in the act 
was white winter, red winter and, lastly spring wheat. 

Ten grades of wheat were defined in 1873 as against 
nine in 1863. In redefining the grades, one spring wheat 
grade was dropped while two new winter wheat grades were 
added, No. 3 winter and rejected winter. A purity 
requirement added to the winter wheat grades brought out 
the discrimination between the different classes of wheat. 
No. 3 winter narrowed the winter grades formerly existing 
thus bread. tag the range of the discrimination transferred 
to the producer. The-addition of rejected winter avoided 
the necessity of classifying unsound winter wheat along 
with similar wheat of an inferior class. The terms ,T well 
cleaned" or "reasonably clean" were substituted for the 
expression "free from admixture of other grain". 

At the 1874 session of Parliament certain grade 
definitions were amended (1) as a result of the adoption 
in 1873 of a new standard of dry measure (2). The Imperial 
bushel was larger than the Winchester bushel(3). To retain 
the same weight of grain per bushel under the new standard 
of measure, changes were hecessiary in those grade 
definitions carrying minimum weight requirements. The 










(113) 

changes were as follows 

No.3 Y/inter wheat from 55 to 56£ lhs per bushel. 

No 1 2 3 .2 Spring " " 56 to 58 " " ,f 

No.3 " ,f ,T 54 to 56 i " " " 

The changes are not wholly accounted for by the 

difference between the two bushels. 

In spite of the market discrimination against it, 

Red Fife continued to replace other varieties of wheat. 

It became extremely popular in western Canada because of 

its suitability to the climate of that region. In 1883 

the government removed the duty on Red Fife used for 

seed purposes and the Canadian Pacific Railway transported 

Red Fife seed free of charge. The change in the attitude 

toward Red Fife was due to two inventions in milling 

machinery. 

The invention of the purifier in 1870 and the 
rolling mill in 1875 enabled millers to secure the 
preferred type of flour from wheat formerly considered 
inferior. Until then, wheat was ground and then bolted, 
but it was extremely difficult to make a complete 
separation of bran from flour. The first step in the new 
process coarsely ground the wheat into flour, middlings 

(1) Statutes, Canada, 1874, c 45. 

(2) " " 1873, c 47. 

(3) One Imperial bushel equals 1 31/1000 Winchester bushelsi 










I 





(114) 


and Iran, The middlings were run through a purifier, 
reground and holted. This process made it possible to 
produce a higher grade of flour than was possible with the 
old burr-stones. The Red Fife wheat was benefited most 
by this new process because it brought out its 
unsuspected high quality. Mr. E. W. B. Snider of St. 

Jacobs, Ontario, is credited with the honor of being the 
first (1875) to make this introduction into Cahada if 
not to all America (1). 

Red Fife wheat was better adapted than other wheats 
to Manitoba and the North West Territories. Large 

quantities were coming onto the market as a result of the 

. 

opening up of the west and the demand for hard spring 

wheat. The grading discrimination against Red Fife 

from v/estern Canada was removed in 1883 (2) upon the request 

of representatives from the Winnipeg Board of Trade, 

the millers, railways and public generally. The removal 

of the discrimination did not apply to other parts of 

Canada because it was not requested (3) : . 

(1) H. H. Manchester, A Pictorial History of Milling. 

The Northwestern Miller, Feb, 3 1926, p 456. 

(2) Statutes, Canada, 1883, c 29. 

(3) Hansard, 1883, p 829. 











(115) 

Provisions Respecting Grain Generally, 

General provisions governing the grading of grain 
first appeared in the 1873 act. They were (1);— 

"No grain that is warm, or is in a heating condition 

shall he graded. 

In the inspection of Grain, the weight alone shall 
not determine the grade. 

All Inspectors shall make their reasdns for grading 
grain, when necessary, fully known hy notation on 
their hooks. 

All wheat shall he weighed, and the weight per 
Y/inchester bushel entered on the Inspection Book." 

The second and third clauses of the above quotation 

have been carried unchanged through the various grain 

inspection acts up to the present lime'. The fourth clause 

was changed in 1874 to conform to the change in the 

standard measure of capacity. From 1874 to the present 

this clause remained unchanged. Grain affected hy the 

first clause was graded "condemned" after 1885. 

A Decrease of Local Influence on Grain Inspection . 

To further the government’s policy of centralized 
control, a few changes in the inspection service were 
introduced hy the act of 1873. Inspectors were appointed 
hy the government in place of the Board of Trade, hut 


(1) Statutes, Canada, 1873, c 47. 















- 


.n 







t 





< 










they were examined “by a "board of examiners appointed either 
"by the Board of Trade or the government if no Board of 
Trade existed. In place of a recommendation, candidates 
for the position of inspector received a TT certificate of 
qualification” upon successfully completing an examination 
"by the examiners. The government could also '’appoint as 
an inspector under this act, without a new examination, 
any person who has "been an inspector of the same article 
under any act hereby repealed". The government also 
reserved the authority of requesting, when necessary, 
the inspectors to appoint deputies. These changes were 
necessary to "bring the inspection service more directly 
under government control. 

The act of 1763 stated that " The Board of Examiners 
... shall make a Tariff of the Inspectors 7 fees for the 
several services which may "be required of them, and may 
from time to time, as circumstances may require, re-model 
and alter such Tariff,-". The inspector was interested in 
the total fees collected "because it was from such fees 
that he was remunerated for his services. The Board of 
Trade was also anxious to have as much grain as possible 
brought to their city or town 1 . Both these factors would 
exert some influemce on the tariff and may also have 
resulted in differences in grading between tv/o points. 












(117) 

Inspection fees were again, the first time for grain, 

stated in the act of 1873, but fees for ,f re-examination 

and all services connected therewith” continued to be set 

by the Council of the Board of Trade or if there be none 

by the Govemor-in-Council (1)(? When the Boards of Trade 

"at any place for which a grain .inspector is appointed” 

were authorized to license weighers they were also 

instructed to "establish a tariff of fees to be paid them”', 
ersure 

To A impartial judgment, examiners were not permitted 
to accept any form of remuneration for their services 
as examiners. While such a provision promoted impartial 
judgment, it did not offer any inducement for the 
examiners to take the trouble to examine candidates. 

This situation resulted in an amendment in 1884 (2) 
which authorized the government to appoint as inspectors 
any person v/ho has qualified under some other Board of 
Trade. Inspectors were permitted to examine their 
assistants in case the board of examiners failed to do so. 

The General Inspection Acts of 1873 and 1874 
continued to provide for the formation of boards of 
examiners in a manner similar to that outlined in the 
act of 1863. In those inspection districts where no 

(1) Statutes, Canada, 1873, c 49, s 12. 

(2) Statutes, Canada, 1884, c 33, s 1. 
























< 


. 

, 










- 








. 










, 




{ ' - 


























































(lie) 

Board of Trade existed, the appointment of the hoard of 
examiners was made by the government, hut, where a Eoard 
of Trade was incorporated, appointments continued to he 
made hy the latter body. Several changes were made in the 
duties of the hoard of examiners. The new hoard consisted 
of three examiners. In place of recommending successful 
candidates to the Council of the Board of Trade, each 
succensful condidate was given a certificate of examina¬ 
tion. This change was necessitated hy the change in the 
method of appointing inspectors who were required to have 
a "certificate of qualification from the proper hoard of 
examiners". Another ahange relieved the examiners from the 
duty of drawing up a tariff of inspectors fees hy 
incorporating such tariff in the act. 

The following year the membership of the hoard of 
examiners was increased to five of whom three were a 
quorum. In special cases the Board of Trade was permitted 
to name additional examiners to make up a quorum. At the 
same time examiners were permitted, for the first time, 
to collect a fee for the examination of a condidate for 
the position of inspector or deputy. This change was 
necessary to induce them to act as examiners. 

The acts of 1873 and 1874 are not clear regarding 
the settlement of disputes. Where a Board of Trade existed, 


































- 



























( 11 $) 

the "board of examiners acted as a "board of arbitration, 
but the wording of the act indicates that this practice 
applied only to disputes arising from the grading of flour 
and meal:- (1) 

"Provided always that if any dispute arises between 
the Inspector of deputy Inspector for any of the 
said cities of.,., and the proprietor or possessor 
of flour or meal, with regard to the quality or 
condition thereof... " 

From the discussion of the House in connection with 
amendments to the Inspection Act in 1885 (2), it would 
appear that the board of examiners settled disputes over 
the grading of grain as well as of flour. Where no Board 
of Trade existed, disputes over grading were settled by 
a board of arbitration appointed by the local Justice of 
the Peace. 

The possibility of disputes between inspectors was 
clearly foreseen and legislation was enacted to meet the 
situation. In 1874, provision was made for differences 
arising (3),- 

"between inspectors as to the true quality of grade 
of any article inspected by any one of them and 
re-inspected by another; such differences shall be 
definitely determined by reference to such board of 

(1) Statutes, Canada, 1873. 

(2) Hansard, 1885, p 1318. 

(3) Statutes, Canada, 1874, c 45. 











( 120 ) 

"arbitration or other authority as the Govemor-in- 
Council may appoint for that purpose.” 

No orders-in-council were passed creating a board of 

arbitration to settle the above type of dispute except in 

the case of disputes arising from the grading of flour (1). 

Miscellaneous Acts affecting Grain Inspection . 

The influence of changes in several acts, not directly 
associated with grain inspection, extended to the inspection 
of grain. These acts are the Weights and Measures Act and 
the Board of Trade Act. The Weights and Measures Act of 
1873 adopted the Imperial bushel in place of the 
Winchester bushel. The changes this act made in grain 
inspection have been considered in the discussion on 
grade definitions. 

Until 1874 Boards of Trade were incorporated by 

special statute, but the applications for the formation 

of these organizations became so numerous that it was 

decided to provide for their incorporation under one 

uniform statute, the Board of Trade Act (2). The formation 

of these organizations is described in the act as follows 

"1, Any number of persons not less than 30, being 
merchants, traders, brokers, mechanics, manufacturers, 

(1) Order-in-Council, Oct.9, 1879. 

(2) Statutes, Canada, 1874, c 51. 












( 121 ) 


"managers of banks, or insurance agents, and being 
residents of any village, town or city having a 
population of not less than 2500, may associate 
themselves together as a Board of Trade, with all 
the privileges and powers conferred by, and subject 
to all the restrictions of this act." 

The above section was repealed in 1876 (1), and a new 

section substituted authorizing the formation of a Board 

of Trade in a county or district in addition to a village, 

town or city. A district was defined as one "established 

for judicial purposes by the Legislature of the Province 

v/herein the same is situate". This amendment opened the 

door to commodity inspection in sparsely populated areas. 


(1) Statutes, Canada, 1876, c 34, s 1. 


















Chapter 7 


THE GROWTH OF GRAIN INSPECTION TO NATIONAL IMPORTANCE 


The supervision of grain inspection "by local Boards 
of trade failed to obtain the maximum benefit from 
inspection when that service assumed national importance. 
Since the inception of grain inspection in 1863, grain 
production had increased enormously. The greatest impetus 
to increased production was the opening up of the west. 
Settlers poured into the prairie provinces soon after the 
linkage of eastern and western Canada by an all-Canadian 
transcontinental railway. The invention of the purifier 
and the rolling mill brought out the intrinsic value of 
the Fife wheats. These wheats were well adapted to the 
climatic conditions of the prairies. There grew up a 
strong demand for hard spring wheat, and,as a consequence, 
the production of wheat in western Canada rapidly expanded. 
With two large areas producing wheats of different 
qualities, adjustments were necessary in the inspection 
system. The Boards of Trade, who supervised inspection, 
were local organizations with a local outlook, To achieve 
the maximum service from grain inspection over a wide area, 
it is necessary that its supervisors or administrators 
should have a wide or national policy. This was not 

possible with the local Boards of Trade. From 1885 until 











( 123 ) 


the close of the century, the limitations of local 
supervision became apparent. Although the administration of 
grain inspection was-not centralized until 1899, several 
changes in the dying years of the century alleviated some 
of the weaknesses of local supervision. 

The General Inspection Act of 1885 introduced changes 
attempting to overcome the weakness of local supervision. 

A standards board was created to select uniform standard 
samples for the whole of the Dominion. Four years later, 
a second standards board was set up to select the standard 
samples for western grain. The act of 1885 provided for 
the appointment of a chief inspector, and a few changes 
were made in the regulations governing inspectors and 
examiners. The grades of wheat were completely revised. 

A number of grades were defined for grain grown in 
western Canada. Commercial grades were officially 
introduced in 1891. These changes tended to widen the 
range of the consumers’ discrimination carried by the 
grades to the producer. 

During the early colonial period, inspection was 

designed to protect foreign trade by preventing the 

of 

exportation A low quality or unmerchantable products. 
Inspection was compulsory. Later, when emphasis was placed 
on the improvement of quality, inspection was made 
voluntary. It was argued that the premium for high quality 




< 

* ' ■ 

















( 124 ) 

would induce the owner to have his product inspected. 

This attitude is brought out by the discussion in the 
House on this point: 

"With regard to voluntary inspection, when an article 
is inspected compulsorily, the inspection largely 
loses its value. Unless it is optional with the 
parties to have their property inspedted, and unless 
that inspection is worth something, there is no 
object in having it inspected. If the inspected 
article, by reason of the standard established, is 
made more valuable to the public, therein lies the 
value of inspection". (1) 

In addition to those found in the Inspection Act, 
changes were also made in other acts affecting grain 
inspection. In 1886 (2) an amendment to the Board of 
Trade ict required that those eligible to associate as 
members of a Board of Trade to be residents of a district. 
A district was defined as, "a city, county, town, village, 
or judicial district within and for which the board is 
established under this act". An amendment in 1894 (3) 
extended the definition of "district" to include a 
Legislative Assembly electoral district of the North West 
Territories. These amendments provided for the formation 
of Boards of Trade authorized to administer inspection in 
areas previously denied the right to organize, and was 
especially beneficial to western Canada. 

Cl) Hansard, p 1309. 1885. hr Dundas. 

(2) Statutes, Canada, R.S. 1886, c 130. 

(3) Statutes, Canada, 1894, c 23. 












( 125 ) 


The consumers 1 Preference promotes the Classification 
of Wheat by Variety and District 
Although the 1883 amendment lessened the 
dissatisfaction with the grades established in 1874, it 
did not remove the objection, growing stronger every year, 
of one set of grades for all the wheat grown in Canada. 
Representations from Boards of Trade, grain dealers, and 
others interested in grain were instrumental in bringing 
about a further amendment to the grade definitions in 
1885 (1) This amendment greatly increased the number of 
classes and grades of wheat. G-rades were defined for 
five classes of spring wheat: Manitoba Hard and Northern 
Spring for wheat grown in western Canada; Spring wheat and 
Canada Hard wheat, a new class for the Fife wheats, applied 
to eastern Canada; and the fifth class, Goose wheat, was 
provided for soft wheat grown anywhere in Canada. 

A very high standard was set in defining the grades 
for Manitoba hard wheat. The definitions used in 
Minnesota were consulted in defining the Manitoba grades, 
but the standard set for Manitoba w&eat was much higher than 
anywhere else on the continent. Manitoba wheat was of a 
\rery high quality, and, by setting very high standards, it 
was hoped that a premium would be paid for such quality. 

(1) Statutes, Canada, 1885, c 66. See appendix # 7. 











< 











( 126 ) 

Extra Manitoba Hard wheat was a grade consisting of IOO 96 
pure Red Fife wheat. The other two grades in the class 
contained at least 85^ of Red Fife, The three Northern 
Spring wheat grades were lower in quality, consisting of 
50?& of Red Fife. The Canada Hard wheat class was for the 
Fife wheat grown in Ontario, Although the volume of this 
class of wheat was not great, it was felt that the 
grading of such wheat should he provided for. 

The principle changes in the winter wheat grades were 
the addition of an "extra white winter", and of two mixed 
winter grades. Two grading terms were described in the act 
for the first time; "no grade" for damp grain, and 
"condemned" for grain badly bin burnt or badly mixed with 
foreign grain or seeds (l). 

The 1885 grade definitions were a considerable 
improvement over those of 1873. In many cases the quality 
standard was considerably higher, and individual grades 
were more fully described. Practically all definitions 
had a minimum weight requirement, and those provided for 
western grain also had a varietal requirement. Omitting 
"no grade" and "condemned", the total number of statutory 
grades was increased from 10 in 1873 to 24 in 1885 ! , The 
increase was obtained by creating new classes of wheat 


(1) See appendix # 7 for grade definitions. 












( 127 ) 

rather than increasing the number of grades in each class. 
Each class of wheat had certain distinctive characteristics, 
and, by keeping each class separate, the various consumers 
were permitted to satisfy their preference for wheat 
possessing specific properties. The discrimination of the 
consumer for wheat of certain qualities was facilitated 
by creating new wheat classes. 

Up to 1885 grades of grain had been defined and 
changed only by statute, but, in that year, a departure 
was made from the practice previously followed by giving 
the G-overnor-in-Council authority to modify grade 
definitions: 

"2. The GrOvemor-in-Couneil may also, from time to 
time, modify the classification hereinafter provided 
for, in respect to any article subject to inspection 
under this act; and such modified classification 
shall be in four successive issues of the Canada 
Gazette, and upon completion of such publication 
shall have like force and effect as if herein 
enacted”. (1) 

out 

'?he reason for this change was brought^by the discussion in 
■;he House on the amendment: 

T, It is possible that the necessity may arise, in the 
interest of trade, for modifying the classification 
without waiting for the meeting of Parliament to get 
power to dc so. Last year a difficulty arose with 
respect to the classification of llanitobe wheat; 
there was no power under the Act to classify it or 
to fix the standard as high as the wheat would bear, 


(1) Statutes, Canada, 1885, c 66, s 2. This section was 
repealed in 1899, c 5, s 2. 









(128) 

"and consequently injustice was done to the trade 
of Manitoba. I (Mr. McLellan) think it is 
desirable'in the interest of the producer, that 
this power should be given to the G-ovemor-in- 
Council. M . (1) 

The first modification of grades by the G-overnor-in- 
Council came in 1888 (2). The changes consisted of the 
addition of a No. 1 hard white Fife grade for western 
Cahada, the omission of the two Canada hard wheat grades 
for Fife wheats grown in Ontario, and the omission of 
No. 3 Northern spring. The percentage of Red Fife 
required in the three Manitoba hard wheqt grades was 
lowered. The Northern Spring grades were changed in name 
to Manitoba Northern. The remaining spring and winter 
wheat grades remained unchanged. 

In 1895 the grade "Extra Manitoba Hard" was 
discontinued, and No. 1 Manitoba Hard was redefined with 
a higher standard of quality which placed it between the 
former "Extra" and"No.l" (3), The following year the 
standard of quality was raised in the grades of No.’s 
1 and 2 Manitoba Hard (4), On October 20, 1897, an order- 
in-council added the "Extra Manitoba Hard" grade as it 
was defined in 1888. 

(1) Hansard, 1885, p 2550. 

(2) Order-in-council, Aug. 9, 1888. See appendix # 8. 

(3) Order-in-council, Oct. 14, 1895, See appendix # 9. 

(4) Order-in-council, Sept. 26, 1896. See appendix # 10. 









x . 






t 4 

< 








( 129 ) 

Other G-rain 


Changes in the grades of other grain appeared only 
in "barley and peas. In "both cases the number of grades 
wa.s" increased which increased the range of the consumers 1 
discrimination transferred to the producer. Wo. 2 "barley 
was divided into two new grades, Wo. 2, and Wo. 3 Extra; 
while Wo.3 "barley was split into Wo. ! s 3 and 4. Minimum 
weight*requirements were added in the lower grades. The 
number of grades of peas was increased "by placing a Wo. 3 
between Wo. 2 and Rejected. 

Commercial grades 

The grades defined for grain from v/estern Canada 
were set at a very high standard. This action was taken at 
the request of the west and was found satisfactory in 
most years^*because the grain generally was of a very high 
quality. In certain years, however, western grain was of 
low quality due to some unusual climatic condition. It was 
found that in such years the bulk of the crop did not fall 
into those grades defined by statute. One way out of the 
difficulty was to lower the grade definitions, but the 
trade was already experiencing unfavorable results from 
such a practice. It was felt in the House of Commons (1) 
that the high standard of quality as defined in the statute 

(1) Hansard, 1891, p 4299. 













(130) 

should remain constant, and that additional grades called 
commercial grades should he provided in case the quality 
of the crop fell helow average. Y/ith this object in view, 
the government amended the General Inspection Act as 
follows (1) : 

TI If any considerable portion of the crop of any one 
year has any marked characteristics which exclude it, 
to the prejudice of the producer, from the grade to 
which it would otherwise belong, the examiners (2) 
may establish a special grade and choose a sample 
of such grade to be the standard therefor; and in 
such case they shall distribute samples of such 
standard to the several inspectors for their 
guidance, and the package containing the Sample so 
distributed and the Certificate given by the 
inspectors in relation to such grades of grain shall 
be marked ’commercial grade 1 . The Governor-in-council 
may reject the standards in this section mentioned 
if he deems them to be unfairly or improperly 
chosen, and he shall forthwith cause others to be 
chosen in their place by such manner as he directs". 

This amendment legalized a practice which had grown up in 

the grain trade. In the debates reported by Hansard 

reference is made to the grades of ,f Ho', 1 Hard Commercial", 

"Ho. 1 Hard Frosted", and etc. Ho such grades were defined 

d y statute and the grades and the certificates covering them 

were illegal. 

The creation of commercial grades increased the 
number of grades into which wheat of a particular class 
could fall. It also avoided fluctuations in the quality 
’ 1) Statutes, Canada, 1891, c 48, si. 

2) Examiners refers to the representatives of the board of 
examiners serving on the standards board* 








£9X1/50 39fj-P 










of a grade from year to year when only a limited number of 
grades were available. The addition of commercial to 
statutory grades permitted a wider range of the consumers 1 
discrimination to be transferred by the grades to the 
producer. It also lowered the risk of fluctuation in the 
quality of grades incident to the frequent adjustment of 
grade definitions to the quality of the crop. Commercial 
grades, therefore, facilitated the transfer of the 
consumers’ discrimination to the producer. 

Changes in the Inspection Service bring greater Uniformity 

of Grading 

The appointment of a chief inspector was first 
provided for in 1885 by an amendment to the G-eneral 
Inspection Act (1). Although grain was only one of the 
commodities for which a chief inspector was appointed, 
the discussion in the House centered around grain inspection 
(2). It was hoped that this official would help to unify 
grading throughout the country, but,as his territory was 
large, and as he was remunerated from fees only, it was 
impossible for him to keep in close touch with all parts 
of the country. The chief inspector was empowered to 
arbitrate disputes between inspectors over grading, and 

!l) Statutes, Canada, 1885, c cc, s 1. 

2) Hansard, 1885, p 1309. 















(132) 

also to act as a third means of settling disputes between 

I 

inspectors and the public 1 2 3 . 

A few changes occurred in the regulations governing 
inspectors. In 1894 it was found that inspectors at 
Montreal and Port Arthur, due to the large .crop exported, 
made a very good thing out of grain inspection (l) 1 . To 
prevent such large ”salaries”, an amendment was passed in 
1895 (2) empowering the Governor-in-Council f, (a) to reduce 
and amend the tariff of inspection fees, and (h) to 
apportion the fees "between inspectors and the government”. 
For the purpose of verifying the statement made "by a 
grain inspector of the quantity of grain inspected by 
him at any elevator, "the hooks kept in connection with 
such elevator shall at all times he open to inspection 
hy any duly authorized officer of the Department of 
Inland Revenue”'. 

The hoards of examiners were instructed in 1885 to 
send delegates to form a standards hoard for the purpose 
of selecting uniform standard samples. In 1895 (3) the 
examiners were permitted to collect fees for their 
services as examiners. This departure from a policy 

(1) Hansard, 

(2) Statutes, Canada, 1895, c 24. 

(3) Statutes, Canada, 1895, c 24. 








4 . ' ? : ' 









<' •' ' 


■ t ' 

. ■ - •• '• .C 

t 

. 

' 

<7 

, . 

- 

. . 

. ’ ■ ' : V . '- 

, 


























(133) 

adopted in 1818 promoted the attendance of examiners at 
examinations. 

An additional method of settling disputes was 
provided for in the 1885 amendment. ,f The chief inspector, 
when such disputes were referred to him whether they he 
between Inspectors or between Inspectors and the public", 
was empowered to act in the same capacity as the hoard of 
arbitration appointed by a Justice of the Peace or the 
Board of Trade'. In the same year the board of examiners, 
acting as a board of arbitration, were permitted to name 
additional examiners for the occasion in the absence of 
a sufficient number. The choice of any of the above methods 
of settling disputes was optional 1 . 

The G-rain Standards Board . 

The selection of standard samples, originally the 
work of individual inspectors, was transferred to a 
standards board to promote greater uniformity of grading. 
From 1863 until 1885 the inspector selected the standard 
samples of grain for his inspection point. Due to the 
human element in interpreting abstract grade definitions, 
standard samples "made.up" by individual inspectors 
varied at different inspection points. Since the standard, 
samples are employed to assist inspectors in grading, 
differences in the composition of standard samples result 









(134) 

in differences in grading. The lack of uniformity in 
grading narrows the range of the consumers 1 discrimination 
transferred "by the grades to the individual producer, and 
restricts the realization of the benefits from grading. 

The variation in grading resulting from the use of 
different standard samples was corrected in 1885 by the 
creation of a standards board to select one uniform set 
of samples for the area coming under the jurisdiction of 
the act. 

Standard samples assist the inspector to make sharper 
divisions between the various grades, but the use of 
standard samples varying in quality at different points 
nullifies their original objective. The selection of a 
standard sample to exhibit physically a written description 
of a grade is a matter of judgment, and individuals differ 
in the selection of a sample to conform to 'their 
interpretation of the definition. Differences in standard 
samples produce differences in grading* because, if the 
inspector uses standard samples to assist him in grading, 
and if those samples differ, grading tends to differ 
between inspectors or points using different standard 
samples. With an increase in the number of inspection 
points in the grain growing areas of Ontario, the weakness 
of the individual selection of standard samples became 
nore apparent. 



















, 

• ■ ' 

U' ad'C ' ■' ' 
1 

' 













■ 






















. 



















(135) 

The grain standards board, first created in 1885 (1), 
was composed of delegates, not over three, from the boards 
of examiners of cities where grain was inspected. The 
meetings of the standards board were called by the Council 
of the Toronto Board of Trade, and were held between 
August 15th and October 1st of each year. Representatives 
from three inspection points were required to make a 
quorum. If the standards board failed to assemble or to 
select standard samples, the Governor -in-Council was 
authorized to select standard samples by some other means. 

Differences in interpreting grade definitions led to 
the formation of two standards boards, one for eastern 
and one for western Canada. The act of 1885, creating the 
first standards board, also defined grades for eastern 
-and western Canada. This standards board selected fthe 
standard samples for all the grades, but those selected 
for western grain were not satisfactory to the people of 
the prairies. .Although represented on the standards 
board, western Canada was permitted to send so few 
delegates that it was powerless to secure the quality 

(1) The standards board did not originate in the grain 
inspection system. The general Inspection Act of 1873 
created a flour standards board. The Consolidated Statutes 
of Canada, 1859, contain several revised inspection acts 
which may provide for a standards board. This volume is 
not available in Edmonton. 







■ 

c *j.:o ? 

■ 

t 















, 



■ t 







( 136 ) 


of standard samples desired* In 1889 representations to 
the Dominion government obtained an amendment to the act 
providing a separate standards hoard for western grades. 

The argument advanced was that, since Manitoba grades 
applied only to western grain, it was only fair that the 
standard samples for those grades should be selected by 
those most interested in the grades, namely, the people 
of the west. The amendment was as follows; (1) 

"3, The standards for grain grown west of Port 
Arthur shall be chosen by a board of persons not 
exceeding eleven in number annually appointed by 
the G-overnor-in-Council, five of whom shall be a 
quorum; such board shall be selected from the Boards 
of examiners of applicants for the iffice of 
inspector of wheat and other grain and from duly 
appointed grain inspectors,- which examiners and 
inspectors are resident at Port Arthur or west 
thereof;.. 

The standards board for eastern Canada was made up as before* 
except that western cities were not represented, and the 


maximum number of delegates from each city was reduced 
from three to two. The difference in the organization of 
the two boards was due to the small number of Boards of 
Trade authorized in the west to supervise grain inspection. 
The Eastern standards bpard continued to be appointed by 
the Boards of Trade. 

The principle established in 1885 of one uniform set 
of standard samples for the whole Dominion was not 


(1) Statutes, Canada, 1889, c 16, s 3 















( 137 ) 

violated "by the 1889 amendment. Each hoard only selected 
the standard samples for those grades of grain defined for 
their respective areas. 

In 1891 the standards hoards, were instructed (1) to 
"establish a special grade, and choose a sample of such 
grade to he the standard therefor". These "special grades" 
known as commercial grades are not defined hy statute. 
Definitions do accompany commercial grades, hut they are 
fundamentally different from those of the statutory grades. 
Definitions of commercial grades supplement the standard 
sampie while statutory grades are first defined and the 
sample selected to supplement the definition. 

After the grading of different inspectors had been 
made more uniform hy the use of uniform standard samples, 
variation in grading from year to year became evident, 
which the commercially administered standards hoard failed 
to correct. The quality of a grain crop varies from year 
to year depending ofi the character of the season. Between 
1888 and 1899 the grain trade attempted to adjust the 
grades to the quality of the crop. Grade definitions 
were frequently changed hy order-in-council and the 
composition of standard samples fluctuated annually, To 
avoid loss from fluctuations in grades, the foreign 


(1) Statutes, Canada, 1891, c 48, si 











( 138 ) 


"buyer lowered his price and shifted the risk to the 
producer. .To remove this risk and to facilitate the 
transfer of the consumers 1 2 discrimination to the producer, 
the inspection act was amended to provide greater control 
over the work of the standards "board. In 1892 an 
amendment authorized the government to reject the standard 
samples selected "by the standards "board, and to appoint 
the members of "both standards "boards (1). The personnel 
of the standards "board appointed "by the Boards of Trade 
was subject to frequent change. The board of examiners 
from which the members of the standards board were 
selected held office for one year only. By making 
appointments to the standards board more permanent, it 
was hoped to stop the tendency to gradually lower the 
quality of the Standard samples. Variation in grading 
from year to year continued, however, and was not remedied 
until the government assumed the responsibility for 
administering the inspection service. 

The Weighing of Grain 

The Inspection Act of 1863 required the inspector to 
give a "bill of inspection" specifying the quantity and 
quality of the grain he inspected. Evidently the inspector 
was responsible for weighing. In 1865 (2) an act was passed 

(1) Statutes, Canada, 1892, c 23 

(2) Statutes, Canada, 1865, c 6. 
















(139) 

giving certain Boards of Trade power to appoint a Board 
of examiners to examine candidates for the position of 
weighers or assistant weighers. This act does not appear 
to have Been used for fcegulating the weighing of grain. 

Until 1887 there was no system of controlling 
weighing in grain elevators. In England weighers were 
licensed and sworn, and, when a dispute arose as to the 
weight of a shipment of grain, the law operated in favor 
of the English Buyers who held a certificate of weight from 
a sworn and licensed weigher. 

To overcome the tendency to dispute oBer weights of 
grain, an act was passed (l) conferring on Boards of 
Trade authority to license weighers. The Board of Trade 
was empowered to pass a By-law requiring all weighers 
employed in grain elevators in the district to Be licensed. 
The Board, upon Being satisfied as to the fitness of the 
applicant, was authorized to issue him a license. An 
amendment in 1891 (2) provided that weighers Be appointed 
By the government upon recommendation of the Board of 
Trade, and the,t inspectors or their assistants, upon 
recommendation of the Board of Trade, would Be eligible for 
that position, 

(1) Statute's, Canada, 1887, c 37. 

(2) Statutes, Canada, 1891, c 47, 










(140) 

An order-in-council of December 2, 1395, set out 
definite regulations concerning weighers and weighing. 

The weigher was to have sole control of the scales and 
was to issue a weight certificate on a prescribed form. 

He was subject to the same penalties as grain inspectors 
for incorrect weights. He had to take an oath of office, 
give proper bonds before starting work, and could appoint 
his assistants subject to approval by the Department of 
Inland Revenue. He was allowed 25 cents per car for 
weighing. 












Chapter 8 

GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION AND SUPERVISION 
OF GRAIN INSPECTION 


During the years 1899 and 1900, two fundamental 
changes were made in the Canadian grain inspection system. 
In the former year the government undertook the administra¬ 
tion and supervision of inspection, and in the latter 
year the scope of grain inspection was enlarged to include 
the regulation of non-grading activities. Both changes 
were the result of conditions arising out of the shifting 
of the centre of grain production tc> western Canada which 
so altered the technique of grain inspection that each 
change is treated in a separate chapter. The present 
chapter will he devoted to the change in the grading 
system. 

The agricultural settlement of the western provinces 
was the result of the natural overflow of population from 
the east. The influx of people into western Canada, 
however, was not a gradual movement of population from 
Ontario, the province adjacent on the east of the Canadian 
prairies. A large tract of land unsiii table for agricultural 
purposes separated the agricultural regions of Ontario and 
Manitoba, and deflected the gradual movement of population 

westward from Ontario through the United States. When the 


















(142) 

Great Plains area of the United States became filled up, 
the movement of population turned northward to the 
Canadian prairies* This movement into western Canada was 
accelerated about the time the railways entered the region. 

In addition to the population movement, a second 
factor, railway construction, promoted the agricultural 
settlement of western Canada. Although the movement of 
population into new regions is followed by the construction 
of railways, the first railway to cross the Canadian 
prairie had not settlement as its primary objective. It 
was the wish of the Fathers of Confederation to unite all 
the British North American colonies into one Dominion. 
British Columbia v/as separated from the British colonies 
of eastern Canada by a vast stretch of practically 
uninhabited land devoid of an all-Canadian route of 
communication between the two areg-s. British Columbia was 
induced to enter Confederation in 1871 by the promise 
of a railway linking it with eastern Canada. This promise 
was fulfilled by the building of the Canadian Pacific 
Railway which reached Winnipeg in 1883. Following the 
completion of the railway to the Pacific coast, agricultural 
settlement rapidly increased in western Canada. 

Still another factor should be noted which materially 
assisted in the opening up of the west. This factor was the 
Increasing demand for hard red spring wheat. The invention 









( 143 ) 


of the purifier in 1870 and the rolling mill in 1875 
■brought changes in the milling industry which enabled the 
miller to produce the most desired quality of flour from 
the hard red spring wheats. These wheats formerly had befen 
held in disrepute. It was also fpund that the highest 
quality of hard red spring wheat was produced under the 
arid and serai-arid climate of the prairies. The discovery 
of the west T s ability to produce a high quality .wheat 
together with the rapidity of bringing large areas of 
cheap virgin prairie under cultivation added to the impetus 
of agricultural settlement in western Canada. 

The influence of western grain on the grain inspection 
system was felt during the very early years of the 
agricultural settlement of the Canadian prairies. In a 
previous chapter it was noted that in 1883 the discrimina¬ 
tion was removed against Black Sea and Flinty Fife wheat 
grown in Manitoba and the ITorth West Territories. In 1885 
separate grades were established for wheat grown in the 
/vest. In 1889 western Canada secured its own standards 
board. 

During the closing years of the 19th century, the 
farmers of western Canada became greatly dissatisfied with 
conditions surrounding the grading and marketing of grain, 
dome of their complaints were the direct result of grain 
.nspection outgrowing its means of supervision. Grain 








( 144 ) 


inspection had become national in character but still 
remained under local supervision. Other complaints arose 
out of the operation of the elevator monopoly. These 
latter complaints occupied a more prominent place than did 
those concerning grading. 

Many organizations were interested in the proper 
conduct of the grain trade. One of these, the standards 
board, was composed of representatives of both the grain 
trade and the producers. Along with their work of selecting 
standard samples, they also made recommendations to the 
Dominion government affecting the grain trade in western 
Canada. Early in 1899 representatives from the western 
standards board recommended (1) that final inspection be 
at Winnipeg, that standards (definitions) be permanent, 
and that.inspectors be remunerated by salary in place of 
the fee system. 

The 1899 amendment of the G-eneral Inspection Act 
brought some fundamental changes into the Canadian grain 
inspection system. The most important changes were the 
governments assumption of the supervision and administra¬ 
tion of grain inspection by making inspectors officials 
of the government• Winnipeg inspection was made final; 
a survey board was located at Winnipeg; no certificate was 
to be issued east of Fort William for a grade higher than 
the western certificate; the purchase of grain subjedt to 


(l) North West Farmer, April 20, 1899 











( 145 ) 

inspectors grade and dockage; no mixing of grain in 
public terminal elevators; and a number of regulations 
governing the operation of elevators* It was provided 
that the grade definitions could not be changed except 
by act of parliament* In the following year flax grades 
were defined for the first time, and,in the intervening 
fcrears up to 1904, every year saw some change in the act. 

In 1904 all the provisions respecting the inspection 
of grain were removed from the G-eneral Inspection Act 
and placed in the Grain Inspection Act of that year (1) 
where they remained for two years. In 1:906 t&ey were 
returned to a general act called the Inspection and Sale 
Act. This act continued in force until 1912.when the part 
dealing with the inspection of grain was incorporated 
in the new Canada Grain Act. 

The Consumer T s Discrimination was brought closer to the 

Producer by changes in the Inspection Service in 1899* 

The increase of grain production in western Canada 
was responsible for introducing several important changes 
in the inspection service. These changes improved the 
inspection service and increased the facility with which 
the consumer 7 s discrimination was transferred to the 
producer. 

■ ■ 1 » ■ ■ ' - - . ■■■ ■■ ■ ■■■■ ■ ■ -■■■■- ■ ■ - > 

(1) Statutes, Canada, 1904, c 15. 




















( 146 ) 

The change in the basis for remunerating inspectors 
was one which tended to more uniform grading. In Ontario 
the volume of inspection at various inspection points 
did not exhibit such wide variations as in western Canada. 
The bulk of the grain from western Canada passed through 
one inspection point and the post of the inspector at 
that point was a lucrative one. We have already observed 
that the government made provision to prevent high, 
"salaries" at a few inspection points. Under the fee 
system, there would be a tendency at inspection points 
handling a small volume for higher grading to induce 
the flow of grain to that point. The change to a salary 
basis was advocated by the Winnipeg grain exchange and 
the western standards board. 

The act of 1899 (1) also created the inspection 
district of Manitoba which included all the territory 
west of Port Arthur. This change segregated the 
administration of inspection in western Canada from that 
of eastern Canada. The offices of the inspection division 
were moved from Fort William to Winnipeg and grading at 
the latter point was made final. This speeded up the 
unloading of railway cars at lake terminals as it avoided 
delays attended on inspection at the time of unloading. 


(1) Statutes, Canada, 1899, c 25. 









( 147 ) 


A western survey "board was created for western Canada 
with headquarters at Winnipeg. This too speeded up car 
unloading as it permitted the settlement of disputes over 
grading in a much shorter time than when the survey "board 
was located at Toronto. With final inspection at Winnipeg, 
it was possible to protect against the grading, if found 
unsatisfactory, and institute proceedings for a survey 
before the identity of the grain was lost in the terminal 
elevators. In 1899 if the owner or producer was dissatis¬ 
fied with the inspector 1 s grading, he could appeal to the 
chief inspector, whose decision was final, unless further 
appeal was made to the Survey Board within 24 hours. 

Another type of dispute over grading developed in 
western Canada concerning the purchase of street grain 
by country elevators. The section of the act governing 
this form of dispute is self-explanatory; 

Tf 15. Whenever there shall arise a difference of 
. opinion between any farmer selling wheat and any 
wheat buyer as to the grading of such wheat, the 
farmer while taking the price offered for his wheat 
as of lower grade than that to which, in his opinion, 
it belongs, may insist on a sample being selected 
and agreed on between buyer and seller, which sample 
shall be parcelled and sealed and sent to the Chidf 
Inspector at Winnipeg, and the said Chief Inspector 
shall.grade the said wheat without delay and make a 
return of his grading to both parties, and if the 
said Chief Inspector finds the said wheat to be of a 
higher grade than that on which the price had been 
already paid, then the said buyer shall pay to the 
farmer aforesaid the difference between the £)^*ice 









< 


' '■ 









i 














t 


■ 
















( 148 ) 




"which he had already "been paid and that which should 
have been paid in the first instance had the grade 
afterwards fixed by the Chief Inspector been agreed 
upon at the time of the sale". 

The office of chief v/eighmaster was created in 1899 
and was to be filled by appointment by the Governor-in- 
Council. His duties were to be defined by order-in-council 
and included the appointment of weighmasters and 
assistants, and the adoption of rules governing weighing, 
subject to approval by the Minister of Inland Revenue. 

In 1900 Weighmasterswere to supervise and control the 
.weighing of grain subject to inspection; to issue a 
certificate of weight showing the car number, car initial,' 
where weighed, date, contents and weight. The fees for 
carload lots in and out of elevators was 25 cents and for 
cargoes 30 cents per 1000 bushels. The office of Chief 
Weighmaster and Chief Inspector could be combined. In 
1903 the act was amended to provide for the appointment 
of a chief weighmaster and assistants for east of Manitoba. 

Continuing the policy adopted during the period 
1885-1899, end accepting the recommendation of the western 
standards board, the government brought the selection of 
standard samples more completely within their own control. 
In 1899 the selection of standard samples for the 
statutory grades was made one of the duties of the chief 
inspector. The standards board was thus relieved of this 









(149) 

duty but they continued to select the standard samples 
for commercial grades. Although the selection of standard 
samples by a standards board promoted the use throughout 
the country of uniform samples, the standards board is 
not free from influence tending to variation in samples 
from year to year. The members of the board include grain 
merchants and farmers who may be influenced by a short 
sighted policy to either raise or lower the quality of 
the standard samples. In 1903 the appointment of persons 
to the standards board v/as made permanent ,T until superceded 
and replaced by other appointments". 

The changes introduced into the inspection service 
were primarily designed to protect the producer. That 
protection, however, was obtained by carrying the consumer’ 
discriminations and preferences more distinctly and more 
clearly to the producer. The consumer preferred uniform 
grades and more uniform grading v/as promoted by removing 
the influence of salary on the grading of inspectors, by 
providing more uniform standard samples from year to year, 
md by facilitating a closer check-up on inspectors work 
through the possibility of more frequent appeal. The 
producer was further protected by providing means for 
ensuring correct anticipated grading by local country 
elevator agents. 












( 150 ) 

The Response of Statutory Grade Definitions to Changes in 

Production , 

At the commencement of Government administration and 
supervision of inspection, one of the fundamental changes 
effected in defining grades was that statutory grades 
could not he altered hy order-in-council. This change was 
introduced to avoid the fluctuation in quality of grades 
which was discrediting Canadian grain on the European 
market. 

During the period 1899-1912 a number of changes 
were made in the grades of wheat (1). Some grades were 
discontinued, others added; some lowered and others raised; 
and some reworded. Both "Extra Manitoba Hard" and "Ho 2 
Manitoba Hard" were discontinued. These, along with "Ho 1 
Manitoba Hard" were known as the export grades during the 
ninties. With permission to export Manitoba northern grades 
and with permission to mix, the Manitoba Hard grades have 
not been exported, and, with the exception of Ho 1 Manitoba 
Hard, have been discontinued. One factor largely 
responsible for the discontinuance of such high quality 
grades is the expansion of wheat acreage into areas less 
capable of producing high quality wheat. About 1926 so 
little wheat graded Ho 1 Hard it was suggested that that 


(1) See tables 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 appendix. 










151 


grade "be discontinued, but a few years later, under 
exceptionally favorable weather conditions, creditable 
quantities of this grade were produced. 

Another point of interest in the wheat grades during 
the first decade of the present century is the classifica¬ 
tion of Alberta Red Winter wheat in 1906. Red Fife wheat 
is a late maturing variety, and quite frequently is subject 
to injury from frost. Attempts to overcome Red Fife’s 
handicap led to the introduction of winter wheat into the 
southwestern portion of Alberta. The climate of this area 
ms favorable to winter wheat, and large quantities of it 
7 ere grown before the introduction of Marquis. 

The statutory oat grades of eastern Canada were 
Increased in number in 1899 and again in 1904. In both 
years the increase was obtained by splitting up the lower 
grades. In 1904 four classes of oats were defined; white, 
black, mixed and clipped. Hitherto there had been only one 
?lass. Eastern grades were used in western Canada until 
L904 when a separate classification was defined for the 
Latter region. Western oat grades carried a much heavier 
weight requirement than those for the eastern inspection 
division. 

Hot all the interesting historical points concern the 
statutory grades. In 1901 considerable dissatisfaction was 

created over the commercial grades of ”Alberta Oats TT . 




' 




c 






: 

. 









. 


. 

, 
















152 


In that year o a ts grown in Alberta were frosted. The 
grain standards hoard established new grades for frosted 
oats and named them Alberta oats. Complaints were raised 
over the use of the word Alberta for such oats. It was 
claimed that Winnipeg grain combine sought to prevent 
Alberta dealers from fulfilling their contracts with the 
army,then engaged in the Boer war. The complaint was 
answered by Mr. C.N.Bell, secretary of the Winnipeg Board 
of Trade:- "The Resolution reads as follows; T owing to 
the differences in the general character of oats grown 
this season in some districts of the North West Territories, 
hereby resolved that such oats shall be graded as follows; 

No 1 Alberta oats shall be plump, clean and reasonably 
free from other grain and weigh not less than 37 pounds 
per bushel. No 2 ,Alberta oats shall be reasonably clean 
and reasonably free from other grain and weigh not less 
than 36 pounds per bushel. Above applies only to injured 
grain, Sound grain grades as defined in the act TTT (1). 
frosted oats have since been defined as feed oats. 

The only change occurring in the eastern barley 
grades was that a weight requirement was added to No 4 
barley. Eastern grades of barley were used in western 
Canada with provision in 1899 to use the name Manitoba. 

1) Edmonton Bulletin, December 6, 1901. 







■ • 




















153 


In 1904 western barley grades were defined which were 
similar to those of the east except that they were named 
Manitoba, and No 3 carried a weight requirement. 

The only change in the rye grades during this period 
occurred in 1904. V/eight requirements were added to the 
eastern grades, and two grades, No T s 2 and 3, were made 
out of the former No 2. In the same year western rye 
grades were first defined. They were similar to those of 
eastern Canada prior to 1904. 

Two new classifications, "Marrowfat 11 and "Mixed", 
were added to the grades of peas in 1904. The marrowfat 
grades were similar to those of the white except in 
variety. A requirement of freedom from bugs and worm 
eaten peas was added to the two top grades in both classes. 

A great increase in the number of corn grades 
occurred in 1904. Hitherto there had been only one grade 
each of white and yellow corn, both undefined. The new 
grades consisted of No T s 1, 2 and 3 for both white and 
yellow. The grades of these classes of corn were defined 
for the first time. Mixed corn which formerly graded 
No T s 1 and 2, after 1904 graded No T s 2 and 3. The name 
only was changed. 

















154 

Buckwh eat Orates 

Considerable quantities of buckwheat have been 
produced in Canada for many years. In 1851 over two million 
bushels were reported from the area now included in the 
eastern inspection division (1). Production has slowly 
increased until it now averages, for the past ten years, 
approximately ten million bushels annually. 

In 1860 buckwheat production in Upper Canada exceeded 
that of rye, but, unlike the latter, it was excluded from 
the grains graded tinder the inspection act passed a few 
years later, 1863 (2). Its omission from the grain inspection 
act of that year and until 1904 was due to its relative 
unimportance in the grain trade. During the last ten years 
only 3 to 4 per cent of the total buckwheat production 
has passed through the hands of grain inspection officials 
(3). 

When buckwheat was first inspected in 1904 only 
741,041 bushels were graded out of a total production of 
approximately five million bushels. Buckwheat T s unimportance 
in the grain trade is due to its limited utilization in 
3ommerce and industry. The quantity used for human 

>1) Compiled from census returns. See table 29, appendix. 

!2) Census of Upper Canada, 1860-61. Compare tables 26 & 29. 
,3) See chart 6, appendices. 










155 


consumption is small. It has no superiority over our 
standard feed grains for feeding livestock, consequently, 
its production is restricted largely by its utilization 
on the farm. 

Since there is little demand for its grain beyond 
what can be fed on the farm, there is little incentive to 
promote buckwheat production in the strictly grain growing 
areas. The bulk of our buckwheat now comes from the mixed 
farming regions. 

The grades of buckwheat defined in 1904 consisted of 
Ho T s 1, 2, 3, 17o Grade and Ho Established Grade (1). The 
definitions were quite simple and have undergone little 
change since that date. 

Flax Grades 

Another grain graded for the first time during the 
period 1899-1912 was flaxseed. It was not until the 
opening up of the west that flax for seed was grown to 
any appreciable extent in Canada. Elax is peculiarly 
adapted to pioneering conditions on the prairies, and, 
when new settlers poured into the prairie provinces, flax 
production increased very rapidly. Flax is essentially a 
cash crop. Even though relatively small quantities were 
produced, practically all of it found its way to the grain 

(1) See appendices, table 21. 










156 


markets. 

Grades of flax were first defined in 1900. The grades 
were lTo T s 1, 2 and Rejected. The definitions contained 
weight requirements,'and a maximum percentage damage 
permissible. In 1904 the percentage of damage permitted 
in the different, grades was increased. 

The Foreign Grain Inspection Act 

The tendency for commodities to seek the cheapest 
route to market often directs their shipment through 
foreign countries. The flow of grain through a foreign 
country in response to cheap transportation rates is well 
illustrated on the North American continent Cl ). The United 
States harvest matures several weeks earlier than the 
Canadian. Montreal is on the direct line to Europe from 
the Y/estern States, and while water navigation continues, 
has the advantage of a cheaper and more direct mode of 
transportation. The facilities for handling grain at the 
port of Montreal are superior to those at the port of New 
^ork. As a result, the advantages of the St. Xawrence 
route attract heavy shipments from United States lake 
terminals to Montreal. Later in the season much of the 
Canadian crop reaches the Atlantic seaboard through ports 
Df the United States because navigation on the St. Lawrence 

>1) Rpt. Royal Grain Inquiry Commission, 1925, p 146. 











157 


river closes about two weeks earlier than it does on the 
Great lakes and because of the desire to place the grain 
in a more favorable export position than that of winter 
storage at the head of the Great lakes. The explanation 
for a large movement of United States grain through the 
port of Montreal and a large movement of Canadian grain 
through Hew York and other United States Atlantic ports 
rests chiefly on seasonal changes affecting the St. 
lawrence route. 

The St. lawrence is encumbered with several natural 
barriers which prevent the navigation of ocean-going 
vessels to the upper reaches of the Great lakes. Shipments 
of grain on lake carriers must be broken up and reassembled 
into ocean cargoes at ports accessible to deep-water 
vessels. The St. lawrence route passes into Canadian 
territory where at the port of Montreal grain shipments 
are transferred from lake to ocean carriers. Shipments of 
United States grain by the St. lawrence route must therefore 
be broken up in the territory of a foreign country and the 
problem of inspecting this grain early confronted exporters. 

Until 1900 no legislation was provided for the 
inspection of foreign grain passing through Canada. For 
some time (1), considerable quantities of grain from the 
Jnited States had been shipped to the European market by 


(l) Hansard, 1900, p 4681. 








158 


Jway of the port of Montreal. Inspectors at Montreal had 
"been in the habit of giving a voluntary inspection 
certificate on this grain, but it was discovered that this 
certificate had no legal value because the Canadian 
inspectors had no authority to inspect foreign grain. On 
this ground, European buyers refused to accept the 
Canadian certificate. The grain came from Chicago and 
Duluth and shipments had to be broken up before reaching 
the Atlantic seaboard. At Montreal it was handled in 
elevators in the same manner as Canadian grain. As little 
of this grain was consigned direct from Chicago or Duluth 
to European importers, the United States 1 certificates 
'..ere discredited because the grain could not be shipped 
in bond. The result was that this grain reached Europe 
technically not inspected. At the request of the Montreal 
Corn Exchange Association and Chicago shippers, the 
government overcame the difficulty by passing in 1900 
an n Act respecting the Inspection of Foreign Grain" (1). 

This act provided for the inspection of foreign grain 
in transit through Canada. G-rading was based on a special 
set of standards established by the board of examiners of 
bhe Board of Trade for the district where such inspection 
book place. Inspection certificates covering such grain 


1) Statutes, Canada, 1900, c 40. 



























< 






' 




■ 








5 










- 

' 










. 


















159 

stated that the grain was of United States production. 

The act was repealed in 1904 (1) “but its provisions 
with a few amendments were incorporated in the Grain 
Inspection Act of the sr :.e year. The standard samples 
were selected by the standards board in place of the 
examiners as in 1900, and the Governor-in-Council retained 
the right to reject such standards. A peals were handled 
similarly to those arising from the inspection of 
Canadian grain. 

Although the Foreign Grain Inspection Act was short 
lived, its provisions have been incorporated with little 
change in the various acts governing the inspection of grain. 
These provisions have been grouped together in one section 
in the Grain Inspection Act from 1904 to 1906, in the 
Inspection and Sales Act from 1906 to 1912, and.in the 
Canada Grain Act from 1912 to 1950. When consolidating the 
Canada Grain Act in 1930, the provisions respecting the 
inspection of foreign grain were distributed in various 
parts of the act. 

An Act respecting the Packaging and Sale of Certain 

Staple Commodities. (2) 

There was a tendency in legislative circles during the 

1) Statutes, Canada, 1904, c 15. 

2) Statutes, Canada, 1901, c 26. 























i 









* 
















< 
























* 


• • 











































160 


the early years of the present century.to bring all 
regulations concerning the sale of a particular commodity 
under the jurisdiction of one department and of one 

fe. Regulations concerning weights and measures were 
affected by this tendency. Prior to Confederation the 
legal weight per bushel of various seeds and grains had 
been defined in Sales Acts. After Confederation the Sales 
Acts v/ere consolidated in the Weights and Treasures Acts 
which were administered by the Minister of Inland Revenue. 
As trade and commerce grew the weighing of commodities 
increased in importance. One of the grievances of farmers, 
during the early development of the grain trade in 
western Canada, pertained to the weighing of grain. It, 
along with other grievances, became the subject of inquiry 
by the Royal Commission of 1900. Since weight is so closely 
linked up with other factors in the sale of commodities, 
it was natural that all these considerations be regulated 
under one act. Consequently, there was a tendency to 
transfer legislation concerning the legal weight per 
bushel of grain to those acts and departments of the 
government regulating other phases of marketing that 
commodity. 

In 1900 grain inspection was placed under the 
administration of the Department of Trade and Commerce, 
and the following year legislation concerning the legal 









161 

weight per bushel of grain was transferred from the 
Weights and Measures Act to an "Act respecting the 
Packaging and Sale of Certain Staple Commodities". This 
act remained under the administration of the Minister of 
Inland Revenue, thus separating it from commodity inspection, 
but the provisions concerning weight per bushel were 
brought together with other regulations concerning the 
sale of commodities. Provisions respecting the legal 
weight per bushel remained in this act and under the 
administration of the Minister of Inland Revenue until 
1906 when they were incorporated in the Inspection and 
Sale Act (1) administered by the Minister of Trade and 
Commerce. This last step brought the legal weight per 
bushel and grain inspection under the control of one act 
and the administration of one minister. 

The drain Inspection Act of 1904 (2 ) 

For some time the grain business had been assuming 
dimensions of increasing importance. It was decided in 
L904 to bring the inspection of grain under, a separate 
ict and not include it with that of a number of other 
commodities. The Grain Inspection Act consolidated in one 
measure a very large number of amendments introduced from 

!l) Statutes, Canada, R.S. 1906, c 85. 

2) Statutes, Canada, 1904, o 15. 













time to time, and also assimilated to some extent the 
law as it then existed between the two divisions of 
eastern and western Canada(l). The act was purely a 
grading act. Special provisions were made for each of the 
two inspection divisions. Separate sets of grades were 
defined for each division. After a life of only two years, 
this act was put hack into the Inspection and Sale Act 
which replaced the General Inspection Act in 1906 (2) 

The Department of Trade and Commerce 
An act of 1887 (3) created the Department of Trade 
and Commerce and charged the minister of the new department 
ivith the administration and execution of acts relating to 
trade and commerce generally. It was not until 1901 (4) 
that grain inspection acts came under his administrati6n 0 
These acts included the Manitoba Grain Act, the G-eneral 
Inspection Act, and an Act respecting the Inspection of 
foreign Grain. These acts or the parts of them that refer 
bo grain have since been consolidated into the Canada G-rain 
Act which is at present administered under the direction 
Df the Minister of Trade and Commerce. 

1) Hansard, 1905, p 3126, 

2) Statutes, Canada, R.S. 1906, c 85 

3) Statutes, Canada, 1887, c 10. 

4) Statutes, Canada, 1901,c 30. 



















t 












Chapter 9 

THE EXTENSION OF CHAIN INSPECTION TO INCLUDE 
TEE REGULATION OF NON-GRADING ACTIVITIES. 

The second fundamental change introduced into the 
Canadian grain inspection system at the close of the 19th 
century was the extension of inspection to include the 
regulation of non-grading activities. Grain inspection 
was defined in the introductory chapter as the regulation 
of all those phases of marketing dealt with in the 
Canada Grain Act. We have seen that commodity inspection 
arose as the result of an attempt to overcome fraud, and 
that the benefits accruing from commodity grading led to 
an extension of that service to the marketing of grain. 

It was alleged that fraud was practiced in other phases 
of grain marketing, and efforts to curb it resulted in 
an extension of grain inspection to include the regulation 
of non-grading activities. Until 1900 the Canadian grain 
inspection system was restricted to the grading and 
weighing of grain. 

The regulation.of non-grading activities by the grain 
inspection system arose out of conditions and practices 
surrounding the operation of elevators in western Canada. 
The situation may be traced to the influence of the 
natural vegetative covering,and the rapidity- of settling 

















164 


the prairie area on the increase of agricultural 
production and the demand for railway transportation. The 
prairie region was characterized hy the absence of tree 
growth which permitted the rapid cultivation of virgin 
land. In a very few years a new settler could bring all 
his prairie farm under the plow with little more labor 
and expense than was required in the ordinary working of 
cultivated land. In addition to the rapid increase of 
cultivated land on individual farms, there was an extensive 
influx of immigration which increased enormously the area 
in crops and the agricultural production. At the same time, 
unlike eastern pioneer settlement, production was largely 
for market and necessitated transportation facilities to 
carry the grain to the ultimate consumer. Although railway 
expansion was tremendous it could not keep pace with the 
demands of agricultural production for transportation. The 
cheapest route for grain to reach market was by rail to 
the head of the lakes and then by water to the eastern 
seaboard. The shortness of. the season for harvesting and 
marketing the crop made it necessary that as much of the 
srop as possible be rushed to the lake ports before winter 
set in. As a result, the ordinary rolling stock of the 
railways was insufficient to cope with the needs for 
transportation during the period between the time that the 











- 












■ 












































t 


'* 

























165 


g ra i n first became ready for shipment and the time when it 
would "be too late for it to he shipped in vessels at lake 
ports. As a consequence, there was great difficulty in 
finding proper accomodation for storage of the grain, which 
was brought in at country points faster than it could he 
shipped out. 

Before the modern elevator was introduced into western . 
Canada, grain was handled at country shipping points in flat 
warehouses. The railway at that time had insufficient cars 
to transport the grain to the head of the lakes as rapidly 
as it was received at the country shipping point, and every 
fall its equipment was congested with grain. "To obviate 
such difficulties and to encourage the erection of elevators 
to store, ship and handle grain, the Canadian Pacific 
Railway Company offered...to parties who would build 
elevators of a capacity of at least 25,000 bushels,.... 
protection from the competition of grain loaded through flat 
warehouses, or direct from farmer T s vehicles, or otherwise 
than through standard elevators" (1). Elevators were thus 
given a monopoly on the handling of grain. The elevators 
provided more storage space than the flat warehouses and 
also speeded up car loading. 

If there was an elevator at his shipping point, a farmer 
’/as obliged to ship his grain through the elevator. It was 


(1) Report, Royal Crain Inquiry Commission, 1900 






























: r • -;i.;. o' o 

o 


' 






1 




. 


•; r\ 


- 


. 










t • 







166 


not long "before numerous complaints arose. The same prices 
were offered by the different elevators at a shipping point, 
and farmers concluded that there must "be an elevator coinbine 
which set the price of grain to the disadvantage of the 
farmer. When delivering street grain, the farmer often 
disagreed with the grade and dockage offered "by the elevator 
operator, "but, what could he do about it? The farmer had to ; 
accept the grade and dockage offered or take the grain home. 
Farmers also believed that they were given short weights 
and that when their grain was special binned its identity 
was lost. 

For a long time friction had been growing in western 
Canada among the transportation companies, grain companies, 
farmers and all those engaged in the handling and storage 
of grain. "The grievance of the western grain growers in 
regard to the shipping of their grain was projected into 
the Federal Parliament when Mr. James Douglas, member for 
East Assiniboia (N.W.T.) introduced, in the session of 1898, 
a T bill to regulate the shipping of grain by railway 
•companies in Manitoba and the North-West Territories 1 . Its 
main features called for a legal recognition of the right 
of farmers to ship their grain through flat warehouses and 
to obtain cars for direct loading from the wagon. Although 
the bill failed to emerge from the Railway Committee of the 























* 


< ' I 








* ■ 


X ■ " '■ : i 












a 






, ' 


, 




- 


■ 
























167 

House, the right of the C.P.R. to refuse cars to farmers 
had "been publicly challenged in the legislature from which 
the railway had derived its charter” (1), ,T The threat of 
federal regulation...was not without effect on the C.P.R. 
Before the 1898 crop began to move, the company announced 
that it would furnish cars to farmers who wished to load 
direct. This service was, of course, subject to conditions 
of car supply 9 and elevators still enjoyed an effective 
priority in distribution. If a farmer obtained a car, it 
was by favor of the company, not by virtue of an enforceable 
right. At the best the concession was of advantage only to 
farmers living sufficiently near to"the railway to be able 
to load the assigned car within the twenty-four hours before 
demurrage began to accrue. Without the right to order cars 
to flat warehouses where long-haul wagonloads could be 
accumulated., the company’s announcement meant little to the 
more removed homesteader. A great many shipping pointy, 
moreover, were not equipped with loading platforms, and 
there was no obligation on the part of the railway to 
furnish them tT p2). 

,T The belated action of the C.P.R. did not forestall, 
therefore, the reintroduction of Mr. Douglas’s bill in the 


1) Patton, Grain Growers Cooperation in Western Canada,p 20 

2) Ibid. 










168 

following session, with an added clause calling for the 
appointment of a government inspector to supervise the 
shipment and handling of grain "between country points and 
terminals. The discussion of the western members 1 represen¬ 
tations "before a special committee of the House revealed 
such conflict of fact and opinion, and suggested such far- 
reaching implications, that the Laurier ministry "became 
convinced of the necessity of a fuller and closer investi¬ 
gation of the question than was possible within the 
committee rooms of. the House. Accordingly, before the close 
of the 1899 session, the government announced the appoint¬ 
ment of a Royal Commission on the Shipment and Transporta¬ 
tion of Grain in Manitoba and the North-West Territories^ 1) 
In addition to the appointment of the Royal Commission, 
an amendment of the General Inspection Act in 1899 
alleviated some of the dissatisfaction of western farmers. 
"The Governor-in-Council may make such regulations as he 
deems necessary for the governance of inspectors in their 
work of inspection and as to the method of dealing with 
public elevators and grain warehouses, and may require the 
owners of such public elevators and warehouses to take a 
license and to make such periodical statements and re-turns 

(1) Patton, p 21. 














169 

of their receipts and shipments of grain as to him seems 
necessary for the information of the I'inister of Inland 
Revenue"(1)• The 1899 act of amendment also contained a 
schedule of "Regulations with respect to Wheat and other 
Grain grown west of Port Arthur". These regulations dealt 
with the grading of grain, hut one section, 15, was 
designed to alleviate one of the farmer’s complaints - 
namely, the disagreement as to grade and dockage between 
the farmer and the country elevator operator (2)^ 


The Investigation of Producers 1 2 3 Complaints by Royal 

Commission 

The Royal Commission appointed in 1899 were asked to 
investigate the following grievances:- (3) 

1. That the vender of grain is at present subject to 
an unfair and excessive dockage of his grain at 
the time of sale; 

2. That doubt exists as to the fairness of the weights 
allowed or used by owners of elevators; 

3. That the owners of elevators enjoy a monopoly in 
the purchase of grain by refusing to permit the 
erection of flat warehouses where standard elevators 
are situated and are able to keep the prices of 
grain below its true value to their own benefit 

and to the disadvantage of others who are specially 
interested in the grain trade, and of the public 
generally. 

(1) Statutes, Canada, 1899, c 25, s~57 

(2) Statutes, Canada, 1899, c 25. See page 147. 

(3) Sessional Papers, 81a, 1900. 






































170 


After taking evidence at various points throughout the 
west and reviewing the grain inspection system of 
Minnesota, the commission in their report of March, 1900, 
submitted a number of recommendations which that year were 
embodied in the Manitoba Grain Act. 

The Manitoba Grain Act assists the Producer to 

receive the results of the Conoumers T Discrimination 

The Manitoba Grain Act (1), although a federal statute 
applied only to the inspection district of Manitoba. It was 
from this area that the grievances originated respecting 
the handling and shipping of grain. Grain production in 
Ontario was on the decline and was not attended with such 
factors which produced the grievances originating in the 
west. The Manitoba Grain Act v/as not concerned with the 
grading of grain as this service continued to be administer 
ed under the regulation of the General Inspection Act. The 
subject matter of the Manitoba Grain Act consisted of 
regulations seeking to control the alleged discriminatory 
practices concerned with the handling and shipping of 
grain. The appointment of a warehouse commissioner was 
provided for to carry out the provisions of the act. 

1 chief weighmaster, with his assistants, was given control 
and supervision of all weighing at terminals. Special 


(l) Statutes, Canada, 1900, c 39. 

























* ' ' 







171 


sections of the act dealt with disagreement as to grade 
and dockage, car distribution, the regulation of country 
and terminal elevators, loading platforms and grain 
buyers generally.- 


The Warehouse Commissioner 

The regulation ©f the grain trade by means of the 

Manitoba Grain Act necessitated the appointment of an 

official to carry out its provisions. The act provided (1),- 

"The Governor in Council may appoint an officer, to 
be known as the Warehouse Commissioner for the 
District of Manitoba, who shall hold office during 
pleasure, and who shall be subject to the control 
and management of the Department of Inland Revenue, 
and who shall in his oath of office declare that he 
is not directly or indirectly pecuniarily interested 
in the grain trade; and the salary of the said 
Commissioner and the security to be given by him 
shall be determined by the Governor in Council." 

The duties of the Warehouse Commissioner as outlined in 

the act were (2), 

"(a) to require all elevators, warehouses, mills and 
grain commission merchants to take out an annual 
license; 

(b) to fix the amount of the bonds to be given by 
the different owners and operators of elevators, 
mills and flat warehouses, and by grain commission 
merchants; 

(c) to require the persons licensed to keep boolcs in 
forms approved by the commissioner or by the 
Governor in Council; 



(1) Manitoba Grain Act, 1900, c 39, s 3. 

(2) Ibid, s 4. 









172 


"(d) to supervise the handling and storage of grain, 
in and out of elevators, warehouses and oars; 

(e) to receive and investigate all complaints made in 
writing, under oath, of undue dockage, improper 
weights or grading, refusal or neglect to furnish 
cars within a reasonable time, all complaints of 
fraud or oppression by any person, firm or corporatio 
owning or operating elevator, warehouse, mill or 
railroad, or b„ n in commission merchant, and 

to apply such remedy as is provided by statute; 

(f) to enforce rules and regulations made under this 
act, and to report to the Minister of Inland Revenue 
such changes therein as he deems advisable; 

(g) to institute prosecutions at the Government 
expense whenever he considers a case proper therefor. 

In 1900 a warehouse commissioner was appointed. He 

was placed in charge of what has been classed here as 

non-grading activities. Between 1900 and 1912 there were 

was in charge 

in reality two grain acts whose administration^of two 
officials working independently of each other but both 
under the Minister of Trade and Commerce. In 1912 the 
warehouse commissioner was replaced by the Board of Grain 
Commissionersmwhose duties have since grown to include the 
regulation of all matters relating to the handling of grain 


Loading Platforms 

Regulations concerning loading platforms arose out of 
;he desire on the part of farmers of avoiding the necessity 
of being forced to ship their grain through the country 
elevators. They, the legislators at Ottawa and the Royal 
Commission, felt that an alternative method of shipping 












173 


thferr grain would result in a more satisfactory treatment 
of the farmers by the elevators. Until the railways removed 

the monopoly in 1893, no grain loaded over a platform was 

an 

taken at shipping points having A elevator. The Manitoba 
Grain Act compelled the railway companies to erect platforms 
at country shipping points upon due application being made 
by a specified number of farmers to the warehouse commission 
er. The regulations contained a clause requiring the loading 
to be done in 24 hours, 'which clause operated against the 
extensive use of the loading platform. The present Canada 
Grain Act provides for the erection and maintenance of 
loading platforns, but these Railway structures are little 
used for loading grain.(1) 

Car Distribution 

The main purpose of the Manitoba Grain Act was to give 
fche farmer greater freedom in the shipping and marketing of 
lis grain, and make him less dependant upon the privileged 
elevator companies. Much was expected from the increased 
use of flat warehouses, but-very few of these structures 
’/ere built after 1900. The real alternative to marketing 
through the elevator was loading over the platform. The 
legal right to load over platform was of little advantage 
■;o the shipper, however, unless the railway supplied cars 
ns well as platforms when and where they were needed (2.). 

(g.) Patton, p 31. (I.' UacGibV-i, p 90. 

















174 


The crop of 1901 exceeded all previous western records 
and the strain on railroad equipment was accordingly acute. 
Elevator companies as well as farmers were embarrassed "by 
the car shortage. The farmers complained that the elevators 
obtained the preference in the allotment of cars which were 
locally available. Informal indignation meetings were held 
at many points and finally led to the formation of the 
Territorial G-rain Growers Association in December 1901. 

During the winter of 1901-2 the first grain growers 
convention passed resolutions requesting amendment to the 
Manitoba Grain Act to provide (a) compulsory erection of 
loading platforms, (b) that railways be compelled to supply 
farmers with cars to load directly from vehicles, and (c) 
that during a car shortage railway agents, apportion 
available cars in the order in which they are applied for. 
The recommendations were incorporated in the Manitoba Grain 
.Let. 

The 1902 crop was heavier than that of 1901, and the 
U.P.R. failed to allot cars according to the amended car- 
distribution clauses of the Manitoa Grain Act. The aleft 
M erritorial Grain Growers Association, failing to secure 
better car distribution, laid formal complaint with the 
Warehouse Commissioner against the C.P.R. agent at Sintaluta 
The agent was found guilty, fined fifty dollars and the 
decision sustained in the supreme court. The shipping 








175 




amendments of 1902 were redrafted in 1903. They set forth 
the proce?dur.e to "be followed in the allotment of cars, 

.and included numerous safeguards for the protection of the 
farmer shipper. At each shipping points railway agents 
were required to keep car-order hooks of a form approved 
hy the Warehouse Commissioner. Sach applicant, whether 
elevator company or individual farmer, was given a number 
in the order of application. Where an applicant required 
two or more cars, he was required to make two or more 
applications as the case might he. Cars were to he allotted 
strictly in the order of application, and no applicant 
could obtain a second car until all preceeding applicants 
had received one. If an applicant did not take his car, it 
should he assigned to the next in order, and heavy penalties 
v/ere prescribed for selling or transferring the right to 
a car. All railway agents were further required to post 
daily a record showing the name and application number of 
each shipper to whom cars had been allotted during the 
preceeding twenty-four hours. 


Terminal Zlevetors . 

A complaint strongly voiced against the terminal 
elevators was that of mixing. It was argued by farmers and 
others that mixing lowered the quality of the grades, that 
the value and price of the grade fell in consequence, and 


t 















176 


that the farmer suffered. As a result of these protests, 
the Manitoba Grain Act was amended to prohibit the practice 
of mixing. All elevators located at a point declared to 
be a terminal were required to take out a license from the 
warehouse commissioner. The person receiving the license 
was required to give a bond. The act specifically mention¬ 
ed his duties, which were: to receive grain for storage; 
no mixing of grades was permitted; to issue a warehouse 
receipt for grain received; and to give a weekly statement 
of grain in store. 

The operation of terminal elevators was permitted 
upon application for and receipt of a license from the 
warehouse commissioner. Control over the licensee was 
maintained by the possibility of cancelling the license. 

The same sort of control was exercised over country 
elevators, flat warehouses, commission agents and track 
buyers. 









Chapter 10 

CENTRALIZED CONTROL AND ADMISISTRATION OE GRAIN INSPECTION 


The last step in "bringing grain inspection under the 
direct supervision and control of the government was 
accomplished in 1912 with the passing of the Canada Grain 
Act. Although grain inspection previously had "been under the | 
administration of one department, the actual supervision 
was divided "between several officials. These officials 
worked in harmony, "but there was an absence of control 
invested in one official or "body in direct touch with the- 
problems and workings of the system. The act brought the 
supervision and administration of grain inspection under 
one body, the Board of Grain Commissioners. The Board were 
given wide powers over certain phases of grain inspection 
which enabled them to adjust the system so as to increase 
the range of the consumer 1 s discrimination transferred to 
the individual producer. At the same time, they v/ere 
sufficiently in touch with the whole system to avoid 
adopting measures tending to discredit the system in the 
eyes of the consumer upon whose confidence rests the 
successful operation of grain inspection in Canada. 












( 178 ) 

The Canada Grain Act Consolidates Legislation 


Respecting Grain Inspection 

The Canada Grain Act consolidated into one statute 
the legislation affecting the grain trade previously 
found in the llanitoba Grain Act and in part 2 of the 
Inspection and Sale Act. One of the important changes 
introduced was the creation of a Board of Grain Commission¬ 
ers to take over the duties of the warehouse commissioner 
and to supervise the inspection department. A number of 
changes were made in the definitions of the statutory 
grades. 

A revision of the act in 1925 was based on the report 
of the Royal §rain Inquiry Commission of that year. The 
Commission found no grave irregularities, but made 
numerous suggestions covering various aspects of the 
trade (1). Recognition was given to the operation of 
private terminals or mixing houses. Provisions were 
incorporated in the act to provide for the operation of 
the wheat pools and in connection with the opening of the 
western route for export. 

The Act was revised in 1927 and again in 1930. In 
1929 r provision .was made for the appointment of 
assistant commissioners to take over part of the 


(1) liacGibbon, The Canadian Grain Trade, p 67. 












( 179 ) 


investigational work: of the Board and to establish a 
closer relationship v/ith the producer. 

hie Board of Grain Commissioners Unifies Supervision 

The Canada Crain Act provides for the appointment 
by the Governor-:n-Council of a Board of Grain Commissioners 
who T, shall devote the whole of their time to the 
performance of their duties under this act”. The duties 
assigned to the Board in the 1912 act were quite numerous. 

.t'with the control of those phases of ■ 
trade that were specified in the act. Considerable 
discussion arose in the House concerning the extent of the 
power given the Board. Farmers from the west wanted it 
independent from the government, but, since the goverhment 
was responsible for the act, it was necessary tl ' the/ 
government exercise some control over the Board. This was 
accomplished by making their actions subject to the 
approval of the Governor-in-Council, for example; ”The 
Board may, with the approval of the Governor-in-Council, 
make regulations...”. Their powers and duties have been 
extended from time to time and the matters on which they 
now may make regulations take up almost three pages of the 
act. They are still subject to control by the Governor-in- 
Council; (1) 


(1) Statutes, Canada, 1930 c 5, s 15. 











0180 ) 

® a 

"by the Governor in Connell and shall cease to have’ 
effect as from the date of its disallowance of 
which notice shall he given forthwith in the 
Canada Gazette". 

To facilitate the policy of maintaining intimate 
contact with conditions throughout the country, four 
assistant commissioners were appointed in 19X9*.The section 
of the act (1) providing for their appointment defines 
their powers and duties; 

"Subject to the provisions of subsection 3 of this 
. section (2), each of the assistant commissioners 
shall have like powers and duty to receive and 
investigate complaints and also toake investigations 
without complaint received and make findings 
thereon, as by the Act is given to and imposed upon 
the Board or any commissioner, and in addition thereto 
shall exercise and perform such other powers and 
duties of the Board or of a commissioner as the ‘ 

Board with the approval of the Governor-in-Council 
may authorise". 


Changes in Grade Definitions more clearly interpre 

the Consumer T s Preference 

Changes were made in the grades of practically all 
classes of grain. These changes include the redefining 
of some grades, the addition of new grad.es, and the 
omission of others. 


(1) Statutes, Canada, 1929, c 9. 

(2) Subsection 3 is as follows; "There shall be an appeal 
to the Board within 15.days by any person dissatisfied 
with a decision of the assistant commissioner". 









— catJ8SJ3X0 

Ab'Tq qcios ho 
o ho Holsatmo 






(181) 

Eastern wheat grades have changed very little in the 
past thirty 3 p , indicating little demand for < 
as a result of decreased production. In accordance with 
the change in the method of definition adopted in 1930, 
all grades were redefined with "but little change in 
composition. Extra white winter was omitted from the 
statubory grades in 1925. 

The hard red spring wheat grades v/ere all redefined 
to permit the inclusion of Marquis. There appears to have 
"been an increase in the quality requirements of No 1 Hard 
and No ! s 1 and 2 Northern. No 4 which had been a 
commercial grade was made a statutory grade in 1930, A 
number of winter v/heat grades were discontinued in 1930 
on account of the decreased production of that wheat. 
Grades v/ere provided in 1925 for Amber and Red Durum 
and Kota wheats. The latter two v/heats failed to meet the 
expectations of those who advocated their production, and 
the grades for these v/heats v/ere omitted from the act in 
1930. 

Practically no changes have been made in the eastern 

V. 

oat grades since 1904. Western oat grades have been 
changed in 1912, 1925 and 1930. In 1912 the higher grades 
were renamed, grades provided for black and mixed oats, 
a. number of feed grades v/ere provided for frosted and 
lirty grain, and the qualifications of the higher grades 















. 

- 







■ 

' 










■ 



, 


' 







. 





( 183 ) 


were raised. The division of the oat classification into 
two groups, sound and frosted, is dependent on the 
consumers demand for porridge oats. Frosted oats possess 
a black discoloration in the suture or crease which is 
objected to by the consumer of rolled oats and oat meal. 

In 1925 the top grade, Ex 1 C.W., was abolished. 

Very few oats grade higher than 2 C.W., and the existence 
of two high quality grades, neither used to any extent, 
was not warranted. In 1950 all grades, whose definitions 
contained a definite maximum percentage of impurities, 
were redefined. The weight requirement of both l!o T s 1 
and 2 C.W. were raised. G-rades for black and mixed oats 
were discontinued as very few black "tame" oats are grown. 
Feed grades were lowered in quality and several lov/er 
grades added. The trend of change in the higher oat grades 
appears to have been upward, and that of the lower grades 
downward. Carelessnes of production, such as the use of 
dirty land, may account for the increased number of feed 
grades. 

Eastern barley grades have changed very little. In 
1912 a weight requirement was added to the definition of 
[To 1, the last of the grades to be so defined. The grades 
were redefined in 1950 with very little change. 

The western barley grades had a few weight requirements 





(183) 

added in 1912. An entirely new classification was given 
in the act of 1930. Three classes were recognized, .? row, 

6 rov; and Trebi, each containing three grades, Uo T s 1 and 
2 and Ex 3 C.W. Barley of lower quality that Ex 3 was 
placed in a general class. Two new low grades were added. 
All grades were more rigidly defined by stating the 
maximum percentage of impurities in each grade. 

Practically no change has "been made in the eastern 
rye grades. Western rye grades, first defined in 1904, 
remained unchanged until 1925, when weight requirements 
were added and the number of grades increased. These 
changes followed closely the rapid increase of production 
culminating in 1922. The grades of 1930 were more strictly 
defined with added qualifications respecting ergot 

A weight requirement was added to the corn grades in 
1912. In 1930 grades were more definitely defined,mand 
one new low grade, No 3 Mixed, was added. 

Practically no changes have been made in the pea 
gradws except the addition of weight requirements in 1912. 

The increased production of flax which reached its peak 
in 1912 accounted for the addition of one nev; grade the same 
year. At the same time the weight requirement was lowered 
due to lower quality coming onto the market as the result 

of the expansion of production into newer less favorable 
areas. The number of gra,des was increased again inml930. 














, 


« 

. . 


■ 




















■ 























■ 








, 

■■ -.ACtl 

,'tr 











a 








(184) 

Eastern buckwheat grades, established in 1904, have 
undergone practically nc change. Western buckwheat grades 
were provided in 1925 due to the introduction of that 
crop into Manitoba. In 1930 western grades were more 
rigidly defined. 

?he Inspect/on Service assumes increased importance 

Government control of the inspection system has 
grown to include the selection of standard samples for 
the commercial grades though nominally this work is still 
performed by the standards board. At present tentative 
standard samples of commercial grades are made up by the 
chief inspector, tested for baking quality in the grain 
research laboratory, and submitted for approval to the 
standards board. One third of the ipembership of the 
standards board consists of government officials. The 
Board of Grain Commissioners has power to ”nomjnate or 
arrange for the nomination” of the remaining members of the 
standards board. Government control in the selection if 
standard samples is now practically complete. 

The standard samples, whose development was traced 
in preceeaing pages, have been used until recently for 
all grain graded in Canada, but the increased practice of 
mixing in terminal elevators has necessitated the adoption 
of a special sample called the TT standard export sample”. 






, 








' 








(185) 

Before mixing developed, all lots of any particular grade 
were binned together, and export shipments closely 
resembled the country average of that grade. In the practice 
of mixing, various qualities or grades are combined in 
a Quantity of grain-to produce a mixture v/hich, when 
graded, will possess 1<he mimi 1 requirements of 

for that particular grade. Not all terminal elevators were 
permitted to mix grain for export shipment. Those that 
practiced mixing export grades carry ing the minimum 
quality requirement. Those denied the right to mix export 
grades resembling the country average of that particular 
grade. Such a situation resulted in a tendency to 
variation in the quality of export shipments. The export 
shipment of any particular grade may carry the average 
or the minimum quality of that grade. Uncertain of the 
quality he will receive in buying a. particular grade, the 
foreign importer will?, adjust his price to take care of 
the risk of loss he might sustain (1). The cost of this 
risk is ultimately borne by the producer to whom it is 
transferred by a reduced price. The exporter, receiving 

(1) due to the operation of the Lake Shippers Clearance 
Association the quality of a shipment, whether average 
or minimum grade, cannot be ascertained at the time 
of the sale. 











( 186 ) 

less for his ' . , ill, 3 pmpetii ive conditions, 

pay less fur his ^rain. Similarly, this reduced price 
is transferred through the various grain dealers to the 
farmer. 

To maintain the quality of export shipments above 
the minimum^the standard export sample is employed. This 
sample consists of "3 parts of grain equal to the general 
average of the grain assigned to that grade...” and "one 
part of grain equal to the quality of the standard sample 
of such grade” (1). No principles are violated in the use 
of standard export samples. The object of their use is to 
promote uniformity in the quality of the grades exported. 


1) Statuses, Canada, 1930, c 5, s 31 









Chapter 11 
RECAPITULATION 

The factors that Influence and have influenced the 
development of grain inspection are many and varied. They 
have been discussed in relation to their effect on the 
system as a whole at different periods of development. 

To make our study $ore complete they should he related to 
certain phases of grain inspection over the whole period of 
our study. The important phases which should he considered 
are the grades of grain, the inspection service, the 
settlement of disputes and non-grading activities. 

THE CRAPES OF GRAIN 

The changes occurring in the grades of grain during 
the past 73 years are numerous and varied. They may he 
enumerated as follows 

1. An increase in the number of grains graded. 

2. An increase in the number of classes and grades of each 
grain graded. 

3. The defining of grades for areas producing different 
equalities in grain. 

4. More complete grade definitions. 

5. The addition of commercial grades for grain of low 
quality or unusual quality. 

6 . The selection of more uniform standard samples. 












(188) 

The movement of grain into trade channels is one of 
the factors determining whether or not a grain is to he 
graded. In 1863 grades were provided only for those grains 
of commercial importance at that time. At a later date, 
grades were provided for the grading of flax (1900) and 
buckwheat (1904). Flax for seed was not extensively grown 
previous to that date, and buckwheat, while considerable 
quantities were produced, was of little commercial 
importance. 

A grade conforms to differences in the consumer T s 
preference. The sharper the distinction between grades 
the more readily will a particular quality of a product 
find a consumer who will be entirely satisfied with that 
quality. Grades are more sharply defined by the use of' 
definitions, llany new qualifications have been included 
in the definitions such as: weight per bushel, moisture 
content, ^variety, color, texture, purity and quality factors 
depending on the use to which the grain was ptLt. This has 
increased the number of grades, but it gives the consumer 
a greater range of selection- and enables him to choose that 
which meets with his entire satisfaction. This greater 
?ange of selection enables a greater range of discrimination 
bo be carried by the grades to the producer. 

Canada 1 s first grain grades were defined in 1863. This 
step was taken because grain production had reached such a 











' 






. 

’ 
















, , 












. 

4D 

' 
























. 










. 








( 189 ) 




volume that substantial benefits would accrue from the 
adoption of Tading. In 1860 the total grain production of 
Canada was between 90 and 100 million bushels. The two 
most important crops were wheat and oats with a total 
production of 28 and 45 million bushels respectively. 

Grades were established for six different grains, and,with 
the exception of corn, all grades were described by 
definition. 

There has also been an increase in the number of classes 
of many- of our grains. This increase is accounted for by 
the introduction of new varieties, and by differences 
produced in one variety by variations in climate. In some 
3ases varieties have fallen off in production, and their 
grades have been omitted from the statute.- 

Hot .only have the individual grades been changed but 
we have developed several kinds of grades,- statutory, 
commercial and off grades. The statute of 1863 defined all 
grades so that all grades were statutory. Statutory grades 
are difficult to change and often the condition which the 
change was proposed to remedy had often passed before the 
change was actually made. In consequence, therefore, there 
grew up a group of grades- which were designed to alleviate 
1 emporary conditions. These grades are called commercial 
grades. 





( 190 ) 


The consumer also desires a uniform product. At first 
grading was not uniform. Differences existed "between the 
grading of different inspectors, and even the grading of 
one inspector differed at different seasons of the year 
and from year to year. Standard samples were introduced 
to assist the inspector to grade more uniformly. Later 
the standard samples were selected "by one body to produce 
a greater uniformity of grading throughout the country. 
Finally, the standard samules were selected "by one 
permanent authority so that uniformity was maintained 
from year to year. 

The changes in the grades of each grain are so 
numerous that they are more effectively discussed 
separately. 

Wheat 

Wheat was one of the first crops grown in Canada. 

In terms of value it is Canada 1 s most important crop, to¬ 
day. Omitting fluctuation attributable to weather conditions 
its production has been constantly increasing. At the same 
time as total volume increased, production in different 
areas of Canada has risen and fallen. The centre of 
production has gradually shifted westward into regions of 
different .ciimate producing differences in the ouality 

of the wheat grown. iTew varieties fyave been developed to 














!,j 

















r 

< ■ 

. 














( 191 ) 


permit profitable wheat production in areas unsuitable 
for the older varieties. The shifting of the centre of 
production has been responsible for many of the changes 
in the grading of wheat. When grading was first instituted 
in 1863, the classes of wheat graded were white winter, 
red winter and spring. A newljr introduced variety, Red 
Fife, was at first discriminated against, but its 
popularity finally led to its acceptance in the grade 
classifications. The shifting of the centre of production 
to Manitoba together with inventions in the milling industry 
placed this wheat in a premier position with respect to 
quality. 

With the spread of rust and weeds the centre of 

/ 

production shifted from Manitoba to Saskatchewan, but at 

the same time new varieties were introduced into the 

former province to meet the rust situation. Kota and 
Were 

durum wheats ^introduced and grades defined for their 
grading. With the extension of wheat production into 
areas of shorter frost free season, a demand grew up for 
earlier maturing wheats than the old Red Fife. 7/inter 
wheats were introduced into southwestern Alberta. Western 
grades of winter wheat were defined in 1906. Marquis 
wheat was introduced and replaced its parent as the main 

f/heat variety of’the prairies. The grades of hard red 








( 192 ) 

spring wheat were amended to admit of its inclusion into 
those grades. In later years still other varieties have 
"been introduced and provision made for their separate 
grading (1). The shifting centre of production has promoted 
the cultivation of new varieties, and these, possessing 
different milling qualities, have been responsible for a 
number of changes in the grade definitions flf wheat (2). 

In some cases the newly introduced wheat has not 
lived up to its expectations. Its production has declined, 
and with its disappearance from trade channels its grades 
have been abolished. Such wheats are Kota, Red Durum, 

Canada Hard and Alberta White and Mixed winters. These 
'heats may still be graded under the commercial grades. 

The vagaries of climate have been responsible, no,t 
only for the introduction of new wheat varieties, but also 
for the introduction of commercial grades. Statutory grades 
ared defined by statute and only changed with great 
difficulty. Frequently, sudden changes in production 
require the existance of special grades and these are now 
provided in the commercial grades which formerly were 
intended to include grades of low quality. 

Changes in the grade definitions of wheat have 
nany and varied. These changes are illustrated in tables 

(1) G-arnet wheat. 

(2) See chart # 7, appendix. 






(19 3 ) 


4 to 12 inclusive (appendix). These tables also show the 
probable trend of quality as indicated by the *rade 
definitions. A word of caution is necessary in interpreting 
these trends. They, in part, are based on abstract 
definitions which to different persons and at different 
periods may have a different meaning. This point has been 
discussed elsewhere. These trends do not indicate the 
trend of quality within a grade as the definition is the 
minimum grade requirement. When mixiiig was permitted, the 
tendency was for the export grades to seek the minimum 
quality requirement of that particular grade. These trends 
indicate that the quality of the wheat grades has remained 
fairly stable. 

v Oats 

In the number of bushels produced oats, until 1925, 
was Canada 7 s most important crop. In 1926 it was surpassed 
in total bushelage by wheat and since then has held second 
place of importance. The large production of oats is due in 
part' to the relatively high yield per acre and to the 
relatively lov^/eight per bushel. On the basis of total 
weight produced the status of the oat crop would be 
considerably lowered, although it would still remain an 
important crop. 

Oats, however, is of less commercial importance than 



















. ' 





















(194) 

wheat due to its limited utilisation in industry. As a 
grain for work horses it cannot he excelled, and it has 
valuable properties for feeding growing livestock. The 
human consumption of oats is restricted. During the past 
decade the trend of oat production has been slightly 
downward due to the increased use of motor power in both 
city and farm. This tendency is plainly observed in 
chart # 3 (appendix). 

From 1921 to 1931, only 11.1^ of the total oats 
produced have been inspected (1). The relatively small 
bulk of oats inspected has had its effect on the statutory 
grade definitions. Eastern grades, first defined in 1863, 
have been amended fopx times in seventy years. Western 
grades were first defined in 1904 and have been subject to 
more frequent chagge due to the more rapid changes of 
production in a new country. 

Changes in eastern grades of oats have resulted in 
an increase in the number of classes and grades. In 1904 
four classes were defined (2). Previously only one 
classification had been provided. The increase in the number 
of grades in a class has been derived from splitting up 

(1) See appendix table 55 and chart 3. 

(2) See appendix table 13. 







(195) 

of former grades with a slight tendency to lowered quality 
in 1904. 

Changes in western grades of oats have had a tendency 
to raise the quality of the higher grades and to increase 
the number of low quality grades. The former tendency is 
enhanced by the relatively small percentage of the total 
oat production entering commerce and by the relatively low 
value per bushel which prevents the distant shipment of 
low quality. The latter tendency has been due to the place 
of oats in the cropping system. As a rule oats are not 
given the preference on clean land. Usually they are 
grown on land too dirty for wheat, and the crop is 
consequently dirty. One of the important factors used in 
defining the higher grades of oats is freedom from foreign 
matter and other grains. Although definite percentages of 
foreign matter permitted are given for the first time in 
1930, they have existed many years previous to this date 
(1). The lower grades ar4 damaged oat£ and contain heavy 
admixtures of foreign materialC 2) .■ 

Earley 

Barley is Canada 1 2 s third most important grain. It is 

(1) See Dawson Richardson Publications T td. annual booklet 
on Western Canada grain Grades. 

(2) See table 14, appendix. 












( 196 ) 


cultivated mainly for animal food, for malting, and to some 
extent for hay. Its extensive use on the farm restricts 
the auantities entering trade channels. Between 1921 and 
1931, 29.8^ of the total production passed through the 
hands of the gradin'- officials (1). 

The increase of "barley production has "been gradual 
and in keeping with increased livestick production. Although 
wheat during the "boom years commanded very high prices 
which tended to specialization in that grain, "barley has 
maintained its position of importance in the cropping sydtem 
Barley 1 s use as a late sown crop and as a cleaning crop 
prevent its extensive substitution by other grain crops. 

The effect of barley production on grades has been 
to increase the number of classes and grades without a 
general tendency to lowered Quality. Since 1885 there has 
Deen little change in the eastern grades. 7,-estern grades, 
lowever, have experienced more change. In 1930 three classes 
/ere established, 6 row., 2 row and Trebi. These classes 
and the lower grades were provided because of the market 
iemands of different industries and countries for 
particular oualiti s of barley. 

l)See chart 2, appendix. 






( 197 ) 

Rye 

Rye is a crop which has quite a wide variety of uses. 
It is utilized for "bread,cover crop, hay crop and green 
manure. The grain is not extensively used for feedln" 
livestock, consequent?^, when grain is harvested 1 
finds it way into trade channels. During the period of 
1921-1931, 61.5^ of the total production was inspected (1). 

Changes in the rye grades have "been' infrequent. With 
an increase in production, eastern grades have increased 
in number by splitting up former grades with no apparent 
lowering of quality. We stern grades have followed the shine 
tendency, but the additional grades have been obtained 
by dividing those of lower quality. 

The limited use of peas has inhibited large or rapid 
increase in production. As a human food only small 
quantities are consumed. Peas can seldom be used alone 
for stock feed on account of digestive troubles which they 
cause. For most classes of livestock, peas should be fed 
in combination with some other feed. These factors have 
restricted pea production although it has been grown for 
many years. Another factor tending to decreased production 


(1) See table 55 and chart 4, appendix 













(193) 

is the prevalence of the pea weavil which so seriously 
affected the yield that pea production became unprofitable. 
The Canadian production of peas now amounts to only l£ 
million bushels (1). Prairie production runs about 30 to 
40 thousand bushels, and in the past six years none 
has been inspected C2)• Inspection of peas is also quite 
li *ht in the eastern inspection division. In 1926, 10,560 
bushels were inspected, and in 1931 only 10( (2). 

The changes in the grade definitions have been few 
in number (3). 

Changes resulting from production have been due to an in 

increase in the number of classes of peas grown. Until 

1904 grades were defined for only white peas-, but in that 

year grades for marrowfat and mixed peas were added. Orades 

for peas were first defined in 1863. ?ea grades were omitted 

from the inspection acts from 1873 to 1885. Other changes 

in pea grades have resulted from attempts to improve grade 

definitions. Insect damage was made a factor in 3ihg 

special 

in 1885, and weight per bushel in 1912. ITo^pea grade 
been provided for the western inspection division. 

(1) See table 34, appendix. 

(2) See table 50, appendix. 

(3) See table 19, appendix. 














(1990 

Corn 

Corn is one of Canada’s oldest crops. During the 
early settlement period, it was used as a substitute for 
wheat when the latter crop failed, hut now it is used 
chiefly as a feed for livestock. In 1860 Canada produced 
2i million bushels of corn (1). By 1900 the to’ 
was in excess of 25 million bushels. Since the beginning 
of the century, .production has decrease until now it is 
approximately five million bushels annually. Three-fourths 
of Canada’s corn acreage is now devoted to the production 
o^ fodder corn, 

Although grading was provided fofr com at a very early 
date, it is hot a crop which is handled very, extensively 
in commerce. Most of our corn is consumed on the farm And 
consequently, only a small proportion of the total 
production in officially graded. In the last eleven years, 
less than 100,000 bushels of Canadian corn have been 
inspected, 3 et our total production for the same period 
haw been almost 100 million bushels (2). 

Com production in Canada is centered in Ontario. 

Small acreages are found in the prairie provinces where 
it has been recommended as a summerfallow substitute and 

(1) See table 57, appendix. 

(2) See table 51, appendix. 











(200 ) 

a cleaning crop (1). It is not a crop that is particularly 
well adapted to the prairie climate, consequently, it 5 
production has tended to decline. Fifty-five thousand 

t v 1 ■tf'V* 

"bushels have Yhaan graded in the western inspection division 
"between 1919 .and 1927, and none sine{1928. cial 

grades are provided for corn of western production. 

Grades for corn : ere named in 1863, "but not defined 
until 1873. Until 1904 only one grade was defined for each 
of v/hite and yellow corn. Lower grades of these classes 
fell into the mixed grades. In 1904 three grades were 
defined for "both yellow and white corn and two grades for 
mixed corn. The moisture content was added as a factor in 
the definitions in 1912, and the weight per "bushel and more 
specific qualifications added in the 1930 definitions (2). 

Corn has "been the most "backward of all our graded 
grains in receiving rigidly qualified-grade definitions. 
This condition is explained "by the relative unimportance 
of Canada 1 2 s corn crop in the grain trade. In some years 
considerable Quantities of corn are imported from the 
United States for feeding purposes. 

(1) About 2200 acres were sown in 1920. Ho separate returns 
of corn acreage are given in the 1931 Yearbook for the 
prairie provinces. 

(2) See table 20, appendix. 








( 201 ) 

• Flax 

The establishment of flax grades is one of the 
developments of the settlement of western Canada, Census 
returns prior to Confederation do not report the production 
of flax for seed although flax fibre production is reported 
at a very early date. Separate returns for flax seed 
production do not appear in the census reports until 1891 
although small quantities of seed'were produced at a much 
earlier date (1). It is not known whether this seed was 
produced ' for the purposes of seeding or the 

manufacture of linseed oil. In 1890 only 16,236 acres 
were sown to flax for seed from which 138,844 bushels 
were harvested (2). By 1900 the flax acreage had increased 
to only 23,086 acres. A rapid expansion of flax production 
occurred in the first decade of the present century and 
reached a peak in 1912 with over two million acres and a 
production of over 26 million bushels (3). The great 
increase in flax production occurred with the opening up 
of Saskatchewan (4). In 1900 Saskatchewan had less than 
Ifi of the flax acreage of Canada, but by 1910 that province 
accounted for over Q7f° of the Canadian total. In the same 

(1) See table 54, appendix. 

(2) See tables 56 and 57, appendix, 

(3) See table 38, appendix. 

(4) See table 42, appendix. 










( 202 ) 


years, acreage for the Dominion increased from 23,086 to 
582,185 acres. 

The sudden increase of flax product.'on n western 
Canada is due to two factors - the market demand and the 
adaptability of flax to pioneering conditions on the 
prairies. "Flax in North America is grown almost entirely 
for its seed TT (l). "Although linseed oil is used to some 
extent for food in Russia and India, its sole use in 
America is industrial. Its drying properties make it a 
convenient binder in many preparations, such as paint, 
varnish, linoleum, oilcloth, patent leather and printer 1 s 
ink....America is the world 1 s largest user of linseed oil. 
Due to the abundance of our forest reserves, frame buildings 
are more numerous and the use of paint is more common than 
in any other country. In recent years the combined linseed 
crops of the United States and Canada have several times 
been insufficient for domestic needs"(l). 

Flqx is a shallow-rooted crop and is easily crowded 
out by weeds. It is subject to disease when grown 
continuously on the same land. For these reasons it does 

v 

best on newly-turned prairie sod, and it is a common pioneer 
crop of the prairie. It can be sown late in the season, 
and a new settler, during his first year of settlement, 




(1) ihitbeck and Finch, Economic Geography, d 82. 












( 203 ( 

may devote a greater acreage to flax than to any other crop 
Commodity inspection has certain financial advantages, 
"but, unless the grades can "be assembled quickly in 
commercial quantities, the benefits from grading will be 
nullified by ' d handling charges, Tt is essential, 

therefore, that a sufficient volume be produced before 
grading will be financially successful. The small volume 
of flax: produced during the 19th century delayed the 
establishment of grades in that commodity until 1900, The 
grades then established were in response to the increasing 
production in the west. ITo special grades are provided 
for flax grown in the eastern inspection division. 

Although the volume of production was small v/hen 
flax grading was instituted, nevertheless, it apparently 
was stifficient to benefit the producer by the adoption .of 
grading. Unlike some of- the grains graded, flax is 
essentially a cash crop as is indicated by the proportion 
of the total production ?nspected(1). 

Grades for flax were first defined by statute in 
1900. The changes in the grades during the past 36 years 
are the result of changes in production rather than 
changes in the consumer T s preference. There has been a 
rise and fall in the volume of production and a reduction 


(1) See chart 5, appendix. 


















3 















' 

■ 

. 









( 204 ) 

in quality. The reduction in the quality of flax grown in 
western Canada is indicated in the changes occurring in 
the statutory grade definitions (l)and is due to the 
extension of production ‘into areas less adapted to its 
cultivation. Since flax is commonly sown late, its harvest 
is late, and it is subject to damage from frost. It is also 
suject to disease when grown continuously on the same land. 

Some of the changes in the grades of grain have been 
in response to changes in production, hut, at the same time, 
grades are defined according to differences in the 
consumers’ preferences. These two statements may appear 
contradictory and warrant further explanation. There are 
four kinds of change in grades;- the addition of 
qualifying factors to the definition; the rearrangement of 

the definitions of a group of grades; the addition of new 

eyjstinp 

grades to a group of * grades; and the addition of new 
classes or groups of grades. The addition of Qualifying 
factors to the. definition more sharply mark the line of 
division -between grades and brings greater uniformity to 
the.grading. This change is in response to the consumer’s 
preference for uniformity of grades. The rearrangement 
of the definitions of a group of grades establishes a 
new classification. Both the old and the new classifications 


(1) See table 22, appendix. 







(205 ) 


are based on the consumer’s preference. In establishing 
a classification, the different grades should be available 

n 

alter the quality of the crop that one or two grades are 
not available in commercial quantities, then a change in the 
classification is warranted. This change may take the 
form of abolishing certain grades or may involve the 
rearrangement of the line of division between grades. In 
any event the new classification is based on the consumer’s 
preference. The addition of new grades to an existing 
classification permits the consumer to exercise a greater 
range of selection. This change may involve the whole or 
only part of the classification. Changes in production 
which greatly increase the volume of grain whose grade 
or classification exhibits a wide range of quality warrant 
a reclassificatiQn based on the consumer’s preference to 
permit a greater range of selection. The addition of new 
classes of a grain permits the consumer a greater range of 
selection from the range of quality which may have 
increased as a* result of changes in production. 7 n or exai 1 , 
fche cultivation of .Garnet wheat was a change in production, 
lamet increased the number of qualities available in 
wheat. The separate grading of garnet segregated the Garnet 

qualities from the qualities of other wheats. The 





(. 206 ) 


distinguishing feature of the new class was based on the 
consumer’s preference. 

The changes in flax trades have occurred in three 
stages: in 1904 an increased percentage of damaged seeds 
was permitted in the various grades; in 1912 thevwejght 
requirement was reduced; and in 1930 a new low grade was 
defined and heat damage was permitted in two gradesCl). 

The weight requirement for all grades of flax is lower than 
the legal weight per bushel and probably represents what 
a measured bushel of a particular grade of flax should or 
does weigh. The legal weight per bushel of flax was 
raised from 50 to 56 pounds in 1898 to conform to the 
standard adopted in other countries. In 1912 the weight 
requirement of flax grades was lowered on account of 
shrinkage and drying msi wgit difficult to secure the 
weight required in the grades previously defined (°) 

Buckwheat 

Although a comparatively old crop in Canadian 
agriculture, the slow increase of buckwheat production 
and its cultivation for farm consumption have delayed its 
official grading and promoted little change in the statutory 
grade definitions. When agricultural statistics were 
included in the census, buckwheat was one of the first 

crops whose production was reported. Buckwheat, however, 

(1) See table 22, appendix. 

(2) Hansard, 1912, p 3176. 











(207) 

is a crop of minor importance. Since very early times its 
production has been Below that of wheat, oats or Barley, 

But until 1920 it has exceeded that of rye. 

Buckwheat is produced for farm consumption rather than 
for industrial utilization. It is grown more extensively in 
the mixed farming areas where it used as a feed for live 
stock and as an improver of run-down soils. In 1932 
Ontario and Quebec produced over 86 ft of the Buckwheat 
grown in Canada. These areas practice a more y less stable 
form of agriculture in v/hich live stock plays an important 
part. The maintenance of soil fertility is an important 
consideration in the agriculture of these provinces. In 
recent years the tendency has Been to grow feed crops, 
utilize those crops in the feeding of live stock and return 
to the soil^s much as possible of the elements removed By 
the crop. Buckwheat has a place in such a system of 
farming. The swing to live stock production has-been 
favored By the competition from cheap fertile prairie' 
soils forcing eastern farmers out of specialized rrain 
production. The change from grain to live - stock production 
is slow But accompanying it is an increase in the production 
of feed crops. Buckwheat production has Been favored By 
this change in type of farming. It has also Been favored By 
the decreased production of two other eastern feed crops, 
peas and corn. Buckwheat production has increased slowly ; 







( 208 ) 


steadily. 

The losses from rust, weeds and soil depletion in 
Manitoba in recent years have induced farmers of that 
province to engage more extensively in mixed farming. 
Buckwheat was one of the crops introduced as a feed crop, 
but it has not gained a string foothold. The prairies are 
naturally adapted to grain farming, and every effort will be 
made to continue in grain farming as long as possible and 
profitable. Durum wheats and new varieties of common wheat 
have been introduced to avoid the rust hasr:!. New methods 
of tillage have been devised to combat weeds. The use of 
commercial fertilizers has been favorably received and 
promises to become an established practice. The introduction 
of increased live stools production in certain parts of the 
prairies has been delayed, consequently,- certain feed crops 
are little grown. In Manitoba the acreage sown to buckwheat 
has declined from 16,00C acres in 1926 to 5*700 acres 'in 
1932. Practically no buckwheat is grown in Saskatchewan 
or Alberta. 

In anticipation of increased production in Manitoba, 

western grades were provided for buckwheat in 1925. Pifty 

\ 

cars were inspected from the 1924 crop, but for the years 
1928 to 1931 inclusive only eleven cars received official 
grading. The quantity of buckwheat grown and inspected in 
western Canada at the present time does not warrant the 









(209 ) 


existance of special grades for. it, yet it is interesting to 
note that the grades for western buckwheat are more rigidly 
defined than for eastern Canada (1). The most plausible 
explanation of this seems to he that more attention has been 
paid to western grades and that care and completeness of 
definition have extended to all western grades. The changes 
in defining buckwheat grades have been very few and occurred 
in 1930. Changes have not been the result of production but 
of changes in method of definitionC2)• 

THE ST rim IT!iEIT m 0? DISPUTES 
The principles governing the settlement of disputes 
adopted in 1795 have been maintained with very little 
change up to the present time. Disputes over grading are 
referred to an appeal board whose decision is final. The 
chairman of the appeal board is a government official who 
calls together other members of the board when necessary, 
formerly this duty was performed by a Justice of the Peace 
vho did not act personally on the board. In place of each 
iisputant naming members of the board, members are now 
appointed by the government. Producers and grain companies 
2 ,re both represented on the board. 

In addition to the appeal board, grades may now be 
changed by the inspection department. Grading is usually 
l) See' table 21, appendix. 














- 


, 


• 







• 











« 

, 






(.no) 


. if his grading is questioned, the 
sample may “be referred to the inspector who has authority 
to cl ang ade. A request may also he made to secure a 

new sample at unloading, and that sample used as a basis 
for grading. In this case the grade may he changed at the 
point of unloading, or at the original ins] 
before submission to the appeal board. 

TITS G-ROV/TII OF TIES IKSR5CTI0IT SERVICE . 

An inspection service comprises the officials and the 
work they perform under an inspection act. The central 
figure in a grading system is the inspector. It is he who 
inspects and grades the commodity, and it is around him 
that the whole inspection service is built up. At one time 
the inspection service contained only inspectors, although 
an appeal board was temporarily appointed from time to time 
to settle disputes. The inspector performed all the work 
involved in commodity inspection except the settlement of 
disputes. As the volume of inspected commodities increased, 
and as increased production necessitated improvements in 
the inspection system, various officials were add~d to the 
service from time to time. Some of these have relieved the 
inspector of some of his duties, others have been placed in 
control of him. 

The board of examiners was appointed to pass upon the 








( 211 ) 

qualifications of inspectors. A standards board selected a 
set of standards more >rm than he could do alone. Tie 

came under the supervision and control of a chief inspector, 
warehouse commissioner, and board of grain commissioners. 

The weighing of grain, which he formerly performed, is now 
handled in another branch of the service. Tiuch of the work 
formerly falling to the inspector is now performed by 
assistants. In the modern grain inspection office to-day, 
samplers collect and bring the samples to the office, a 
clerk writes the certificates, and a helper prepares the 
sample for grading. The actual work of grading is pe-formed 
by a deputy who works under the personal supervision of 
the inspector. 

Airiri^hATicz: c? i;:s:^c n ioi: act~ 

It has been rather difficult to obtain definite data 
on what minister or department of the government was 
responsible for the administration of early inspection acts. 
After Confederation the practice was adopted of naming, by 
order-in-council, a certain minister.of the government to 
administer particular ' tes, but, his decisions were 

made in the name of, and presumably in conference with, 
the Governor-in-Council. This policy was continued until it 
became necessary for the government to assume more direct 

control over inspection services. This step threw such a 






( 212 ) 


volume of "business on the G-OYern or-in-Council that it 
became necessary for crown ministers to more directly 

administer certain statutes and resulted in naming in the 

y 

act the minister, instead of the Governo"^-in-Council, to 
administer the act, With the increase of departmental 
business resulting from a greater extension of services and 
vermental control, it has further "become necessary to 
delegate the administration of certain statutes to civil 
servants. In the latter situation the minister and the 
official have "both "been named in the act. 

An order-in-council passed on July 8, 1873 > named the 
"inister of Inland Revenue to administer the General 
Inspection Act. Although the Department of Trade ahd Commerc 
liras created in 1887, it was not until 1901 that the minister 
of that department was charged with the administration of 
lets relating to grain inspection. The administration of 
these acts now rests with the Minister of Trade and Commerce 
hut has "been delegated to the Board of Grain Commissioners. 

In 1885 a chief inspector was appointed , "but he was 
:iot given full control over the grading system until 1901. 
The chief inspector in 1899 and inspectors in 1901 "became 
government officials whose salary was paid out of government 
Glands. The chief inspector has continued in charge of the 
grading service until the present time. 





Chapter 12 

FACTORS INFLUENCING- GRAIN INSPECTION. 


From the foregoing review of the development of 
grading the various classes of grain, v/e may now proceed 
to a discussion of the factors affecting grain inspection. 
These may he classified as follows 

1. Ecological. 

(a) Population. 

(b) Agricultural technique and production. 

(c) Marketing technique. 

2. Social Interaction. 

(a) Producers. 

i. farmers 

ii. the milling industry 

iii. the grain trade 
(h) Consumers. 

i. internal 

ii. external 

(c) Regulators. 

i. government 

ii. Boards of Trade 

iii. hoards of inquiry. 


Populatio: 

The influence of population on grain inspection is so 
closely associated with that of other factors that it has 
been difficult to segregate in a pure form. Population has 
exhibited certain characteristics on which other factors 
are based. It forms the basis of production, consumption 
and trade. 








( 214 ) 


The movement of population to this continent promoted 
the development of North America. This movement was 
initiated "by the call of cheap virgin land, independence 
and financial security. The demand for the necessities of 
life promoted the adoption of agricultural pursuits. As the 
movement grew it occupied the interior plains and made 
this continent one vast productive region. Not only did 
this movement Bring people to this continent, it also 
brought their civilization - their industry, habits, 
customs and institutions. These people and their 
civilization had to be adapted to the environment of their 
new home. The development of one part of that civilization, 
the grain inspection system, is the subject of our study. 

Productio: 

Agricultural production resulting from the movement 
of population to this continent is one of the most 
important factors affecting grain inspection. The influence 
of production on grain inspection has operated chiefly 
through the grade definitions. Grain production is partly 
dependent on the utilization or consumption of the crop, 
but we wish here to confine our attention to ecological 
considerations. 

The agricultural settlement of the west was favored by 
the comparative advantage enjoyed by the great plains 












( 215 ) 


region for the production of cereal grains. Prairie lands 
were fertile, cheap and easily brought under cultivation. 
The topography of the country permitted the use of large 
machinery which, together with high yields and low priced 
land, made a low cost of production. The climate of the 
region was favorable for the production of high quality 
wheat. Aided by cheap transportation, the great plains area 
was able to successfully compete in grain production 
against less favored areas lying closer to the consumer 
market. As a consequence, grain production increased in 
the great plains and declined in the eastern half of North 
America and in parts of Europe. 

The production of grain crops is influenced by the 
character of the climate in which they are grown. As the 
tide of migration swung westward, new regions with 
differing climates were successively opened up for 
settlement. Crop production in the new area was governed 
by different combinations of economic and ecological 
factors. Wheat, being a pioneer 1 s crop, was produced in 
large quantities in all the new regions. At the same time 
wheat production in the older regions declined due to the 
adoption of other crops found to be more profitable under 
the changing conditions. As a result we have had a gradual 
movement westward of the centre of wheat production. This 
same tendency is exhibited in the production of other 







( 216 ) 


grains although not to the same extent as with wheat. 

The movement Westward of the centre of gr in production 
has accounted for many changes in the definitions of grades. 
Climate has a marked effect on the quility of crops. The 
shift of the centre of production from Ontario to western 
Canada was from a humid to an arid and semi-arid region. 

This change of environment affected the quality of wheat 
produced. New varieties were grown to cope with new 
climatic conditions. When these came on the market grades 
were provided for them. The Quality of wheat, more so than 
any other grain, is governed hy its climatic environment, 
and the grades of wheat have been subject to frequent 
revision. In no other crop has variety played such an 
important part in grade definitions. 

The movement of ^the centre of production has been 
responsible for the increased production of some crops and 
for the decreased production of others. Flax was not 
extensively grown until the opening up of the west with 
conditions favorable to its cultivation. Corn production 
failed to move westward with the shiftin' centre of grain 
production into western Canada. The cool nights of the 
prairies are not conducive to heavy yields of corn. Oats, 
barley and rye now have their centre of production in the 
v/est. 

Climate has also affected the number of grades.in 




















, 




* 

' 


' 










■ 







■ 

■ 










( 217 ) 


the different classes of grain. Commercial grades were 
provided in 1891 for grain injured by climate. The lower 
grades of oats are those damaged "by frost. Climate is 
responsible for the inclusion, in both statutory and 
"ercial grade definitions and classes, of the terms 
tough, damp, frosted, heated, sprouted, feed (oats), 
commercial and rejected. Other terms incident to climate 
are smutty, rusted and special (wheat 4, 5 and 6). 

Another production factor in addition to climate has 
influenced grain inspedtion. This factor is production 
technique. When the centre of grain production moved from 
Ontario to western Canada, threshing moved from the barn to 
the stack, to the stook and now in many cases to the 
combine. While perfectly justified on economic grounds, 
this change in threshing methods has resulted, in some years, | 
in the marketing of large quantities of tough and damp grain' j 
Grades must be provided for such grain. The rapid increase 
of production during the early years of settlement 
suddenly threw large quantities of grain on the market in 
a very short time. The congestion of handling facilities 
encouraged the introduction of modern grain elevators. In 
recent years the motor truck delivers grain so rapidly to 
the elevators that handling facilities are again congested. 

The solutmon to the present congestion has not been 
■i'ound.- 









( 218 ) 


Agricultural practice has also been felt in the grain 
inspection system. The choice of varieties of poor 
tiling and 'baking quality, the mixture of varieties, 
grains and weeds, and the failure to control disease have 
all necessitated amendment and an increase o£ gradeu. Pea 
production in Ontario has fallen off because of the 
prevalence of an insect pest. Pea grades contain 
qualifications for freedom from worm eaten and buggy peas. 
Restrictions on ergot in rye have considerably increased 
in recent years. 


fanketing Technique 

Grain inspection is a part of our marketing system. 
Commodity inspection, from which it developed, originated 
as the result of the practice of fraud easily perpetrated 
and not readily discovered because of the use of certain 
mar""'i ; practices. Commodities were shipped in barrels. 
Inspection originated to detect adulteration. 

Since grain grading was inaugurated, one of the 
important changes in marketing technique-'has been from 
sack to bulk handling. The handling of grain in bulk is 
greatly facilitated by the existence of grades. 














■ 





( 219 ) 


The Farmer T s Influence on Grain Inspection . 

The influence of the farmer on grain inspection in 
Canada, has been "both individual and collective. Acting 
individually, his self-interest has promoted an adjustment 
of his production program to secure the greatest profit 
for himself.- He has adjusted his farming operations to the 
various types of enterprise, classes of crop and variety 
of grain according to the needs of the day.Durigg the 
early years of his settlement throughout all parts of 
Canada, he became interested in the production of wheat 
because that crop, to him under his conditions, was the 
most profitable to grow. As his community grew ol-der, other 
forms of farm enterprise became more profitable, and wheat 
production in his region declined. History may repeat 
itself in certain sections of western Canada. The farmer, 
through his choice of crops, has accounted for the rise and 
fall of flax production in western Canada, and the 
changing trends in all classes of grain. He also adjusts 
his farming activities according to the most profitable 
variety of grain to produce. The profit motive induced him 
to grow varieties discriminated against on the market, such 
as the Fife wheats in 1873, Garnet wheat to-day and a host 
of other varieties. 

While the influence of the farmer acting individually 








has "been almost entirely upon production, his influence 
collectively as a farmer’s organization has been directed 
towards marketing. During the early years of the present 
century, farmers "believed they were the victims of 
fraudulent and .discriminatory practices ;he grain trade 
and organized farmer’s organizations to seek redress. They 
have requested and secured, either directly through their 
own efforts or indirectly through the recommendations of 
grain inquiry commissions, changes in legislation affecting 
grain inspection. They have formed their own commercial 
organization to compete against private corporations 
against whom they had a grievance. Collectively, their 
influence on the grain inspection system has "been to "bring 
to the attention of our legislative "bodies those 
imperfections of the system as they affect the producer 
and to suggest changes for its improvement. 

The preference for a commodity or any particular part 
of it originated from the consumer. In the case of "bread 
wheat, this person is the housewife-. The miller, interpretinf 
the consumers’ wants and manufacturing to supply the consumer.’ 
market, discriminates "between wheats having different 
milling and "baking porperties. These preferences have "been 
3 Trnsis for defi 1 classifying is of wheat. 

Previous to 1870, when the old "burr stone mills were still 
in use, the white winter wheats yielded more flour of a 








( 221 ) 


ligher quality than other groups of wheat on the market. 
Phe miller’s preference for white over red wheat is 
reflected in the higher prices-paid for these wheats 
ind also in the grades defined in the inspection act 
of 1873. The introduction of the purifier in 1870 and 
the rolling mill in 1875 provided the miller with 
machinery which enabled him to manufacture the desired 
quality of flour from whe; ts which formerly produced 
only a low grade flour. The change in milling methods 
resulted in a change in the miller’s preference for 
various wheats and was reflected in the inspection act. 
The influence of the milling industry on grain inspection 
has been to register the consumers T s preference for a 
white loaf and the miller’s ability to satisfy that 
want with the wheat and machinery available to him. 

The Grain Trad< 

The grain trade may be said to comprise all those 
individuals and corporations directly or indirectly 
interested in the marketing of "rain. The grain trade 
is the channel through which grain is carried from the 
producer to the consumer. Those engaged in the business, 
aturall^ , ek a profit on their operations, Competition, 
however.j is keen and advantage must be taken of all those 
methods and practices which will enable them to secure 







(°°°) 


a profit on their services. 

llany practices and methods in the grain "business 
which v:ere the natural outgrowth of circumstances at the 
tigie of their origin developed to a form which injured the 
producer. We still have with us individuals whose self- 
interest is not governed by moral considerations. Some of 
these have "been engaged in the grain "business. Fraud has 
"been practiced in the handling of grain, hr': our-grain 
inquiry commissions have not found it nearly as prevalent 
as had "been supposed. 

Many of the regulations in the .grain act have arisen 
as the result of the elevator monopoly during the early 
years of settlement in western Canada. However justified 
the C.P.R. were in granting a monopoly to encourage the 
introduction of standard elevators, the monopoly at a 
later date appeared to work unjustly against the farmers. 
The monopoly was "broken, and in the fight for its 
retention it "became necessary to enact legislation 
concerning flat warehouses, loading platforms, car 
distribution and the ear order book. 

Another practice criticized was that of mixing in 
terminal elevators. Farmers and others believed that the 
quality and consequently the price of grain was lowered 
to the disadvantage of the farmer. It was many years before 
it was realised that while mixing did slightly lower the 









( 283 ) 

quality of the upper grades it also provided an increased 
demand for and raised the price of the"lower grades. 

While some of the pr ^'/ces developed in the grain 
trade discriminated against the farmer and necessitated 
legislation governing them,, at the same time, practices 
have been developed which have increased the efficiency 
of marketing, decreased the spread in price between the 
consumer and producer, and "benefited the farmer. The use 

chinery in handling grain, the practices of hedging, 
telegraphic and radiographic communication of price 
changes, mixing, the organization of grain exchanges and 
recommendations for the improvement of the grading system 
have all helped to reduce the middlemens 1 costs to the 
benefit of the producer. 

The grain trade has been responsible for making our 
grain marketing system as efficient as it is. V/hile some 
of the methods have been questionable and have necessitated 
regulation, on the whole it does not warrant the lack 
of respect many hold for it. The influence of the grain 
trade on the inspection system, in addition to developing 
methods and practices requiring regulation, is to 
interpret the foreign consumer T s preference and demand for 
certain grains and certain Qualities of grain. This 
interpretation together with that of the miller is reflected 
in price and ultimately leaves its mark on the grade 


definitions 










( 224 ) 

Consumption* 


Another factor of importance in the development of 
grain inspection is that .of consumption. It acts directly 
on the system itself and also indirectly through production. 
Since grades, together with price, are the means of 
projecting the whole range of the consumers T preferences 
toward the producer, the consumer T s preference and changes 
in it will have an important influence on the grades. 

The consumer T s demand for the various grains has 
varied during the seventy years of grain grading. With 
respect to the utilization of Canadian grown grains, 
consumers may he divided into two groups - those who 
produce as well as consume grain, and those.who consume 
hut do not produce grain. From the latter group has 
originated the greatest part of the demand for flax, 
wheat and rye. The former group have created most of the 
demand for oats, harley, peas, corn and buckwheat (1). 

During the past 73 jrears the production of wheat, oats, 
harley and buckwheat has been one of steady increase, 'iye 
production remained fairly constant until 1918 when it 
took a sudden rise due to its use as a substitute for 
wheat on the arid lands of southern Alberta and Saskatchewan 
The peak of production was reached in 1922. Production 
continued to fall off until 1925 when it rose again to 
another peak in 1930. Corn production reached its peak in 


(1) See table 55, appendix. 









( 225 ) 


1901 and has s:'nce graft 11; ' 1 ' 1 .en off. The production of 

peas was fairly constant from 1860 to 1900, hut in the last 
twenty year? it has gradually declined. Flax production 
was ouite small until the beginning of the present century. 
It increased gradually and then took a sudden jump to 
reach a maximum in 1912. Sine then production has fluctuated 
violently hut on the whole has had a tendency to decline. 

The fluctuation in the production of corn, rye and peas 
has been due to changes in its utilization by the consumer 
who in this particular instance also belongs to the 
producer group. The production of flax has fallen off due 
to ecological factors. 

The consumption of grain acting through the factor of 
production has been responsible for the rate of change 
in the grades of our grains. Those grains for which there is 
a strong demand have had their production increased 
rapidly and their grades changed frequently. The production 
of grains with weaker demand has increased less rapidly, 
and the changes in the grades have been fewer. The tendency 
for the rate of change in grade definitions to follow the 
rate of change in production is brought out in the grade 
definitions of the two inspection divisions - eastern and 
western. 

In addition to acting indirectly through production, 






consumption also directly influences grain inspection. In 
this instance the influence is "between th6' different 
qualities within a specific grain and 'not between grains. 
The consumer 1 s preference has been translated and written 
into the grade definitions. There is little evidence that 
the ultimate consumer’s preference has changed. He still 
wants flour that bakes into a white loaf. His demand for 
porridge oats may have decreased due to the increased use 
on prepared breakfast foods. The preference of the 
intermediate consumer, the miller, the baker and the 
brewer has changed. The use of Improved milling methods 
has changed the miller’s preference for wheats, but he 
still manufactures $ flour that bakes into a light white 
loaf. Research in the baking industry has created a 
preference for wheats and flours possessing high water 
holding capacity and great baking strength. Research has 
shown the importance of the scutellum in malting, and,by 
pointing out the advantage of the broader and larger 
scutellum in the kernels of 2-row barley, developed the 
brewer’s preference for this type of barley. These changes 
are the basis of modifying grade definitions. 










( 227 ) 


he Development of Trade Regulation 
Canada, the United States, Australia and Argentina are 
all large producers of grain, hut only the first two 
mentioned countries have well developed grain inspection 
systems*. Why, may we ask, did grain inspection develop in 
North America and not in the Southern Hemisphere? The 
answer to this question reveals the presence of an 

important factor essential to graini inspection. Since the 

after 

inspection of grain was not initiated until A that of other 
commodities, we may assume that grain inspection was an 
extension of the idea of commodity inspection to grain. 

Also, since commodity inspection commenced at an earlier 

date in the United States than in Canada., we may well loo]: 

/ 

to the former country for the answer to our question. 

The above four mentioned countries have all large areas 
suitable for the production of grain, all are comparatively 
new, and all are sparsely populated. But there, so far as 
our present study is concerned, the similarity ends. The 
early agricultural production differed in the two areas. 

In North America a self-sufficing form of mixed farming 
was practiced because poor transportation facilities 
prevented any great exchange of commodities, and the 
difficulty of removing the heavy forest covering prevented 

the extensive utilization of land. Settlement in the 








( 228 ) 

Southern Hemisphere was assisted by railways and occurred 
on grass lands which encouraged specialised production in. 
the form of ranching. 

Up to the middle of the last century only the eastern 
half of north America, was settled. This area, whose 
western boundary was approximately 1000 miles from the 
Atlantic seaboard, was settled before railway transportation 
was introduced. As the forest growth which covered this 
area could not be removed rapidly, there was a tendency on 
the part of farmers to make an intensive use of their 
cleared land. This involved the growing of crops as opposed 
to ranching. Transportation facilities were very inefficie t 
and expensive, and encouraged the production of as many as 
possible of the farmer’s needs either on the farm or in the 
vicinity where consumed. Surplus production v/as forwarded 
to market. Inefficient and expensive transportation also 
necessitated the concentration of value in the farm product. 
Flour mills followed the extension of wheat acreage, and 
wheat was usually milled into flour near the area where 
grown, livestock was marketed as beef and pork packed in 
barrels. Hides were exported from the community as leather. 
Pot and pearl ashes, a bye-product from the burning of the 
forest growth, was refined and exported in barrels from 
the community wheaee produced. 







( 229 ) 


One of the outstanding characteristics of farm products 
produced during this early period is that many of them 
reached the central market packed in barrels. Th:s form of 
container was necessary to protect the product from damage 
during transportation to market. The influence of 
transportation on the manner of shipping is brought out in 
the writings of early writers. Farm commodities were shipped 
in barrels and sold by the barrel. Although it was understoo 
that a barrel should .contain a certain quantity, such 
standard was a trade .practice and not a law. Dishonest 
persons, therefore, could without legal liability put less 
in a barrel than was the customary trade practice. Such 
fraudulent practice, short-weighting, did develop during 
the early settlement of both Canada and the United States. 

The- buyer, to protect h?'mself against such fraud, made due 
allowance for short weights or traded elsewhere. The 
foreign buyer apparently did trade elsewhere for we find 
the governments becoming concerned with the loss of this 
trade. Governments then, as now, are interested in th 
development of foreign trade, and made regulations seeking 
to protect that trade. Since trade was falling off as a 
result of fraudulent practices, thepolicy pursued by the 
government was to prevent the exportation of fraudulently 
packed or adulterated commodities. To do this it was 
necessary to adopt some means of inspection, it is this 





. 






( 










, 













, , . . ■ 






, 




, 









(" 30 ) 


inspection that v/as the "beginning of commodity inspection 
and grading. 

The conditions surrounding the early settlement of 
CTor.th America did not exist in either Argentina or 
Australia. Both had a comparatively narrow strip of forest 
along the coast fir ' colonized, hut aided "by the railways 
settlers passed hy this area in favor of the grass plains 
of the interior. The early type of agriculture followed 
was ranching, and the products exported were wool, hides, 
dried meat and meat extract. Such products, with the i 
exception of the last named(l), were not shipped in sealed 
containers and did not require a system of government 
inspection to detect fraud. The important era of settlement 
in Both countries occurred with or after the introduction 
of railways. With this superior means of transportation, 
as compared to that existing during the early settlement 
of North America, there was a tendency to export raw rather 
than finished prodiicts whose method of shipment and ease of 
adulteration led to the adoption of government inspection 
in forth America. 


(1) Heat extracts were produced in a few plants, as 
compared with the number of flo'-’r mills in forth America, 
and many of the plants were under the control of firms in 
Europe. Adulteration under such conditions was less likely 
to occur as the perpetrator of the fraud could he more 
easily located and there would he less inducement for a 
subsidiary plant to defraud its parent concern. 









( 231 ) 


We have just seen that commodity inspection arose as 

the result of an attempt to overcome fraud. In all 

inspect5 on 

probability A originated in ITofcth America. Commodity 
inspection, however, is but one form of trade regulation, 
and trade regulation originated in the dim and distant 
past, and has been extended in many different directions. 
When it became necessary to regulate the marketing of 
commodities, it found expression in inspection acts, 
weights and measures acts, and sales acts. Trade regulation 
is continuing to expand for at the present time we hear of 
tariffs, trade agreements, quotas, price control and 
acreage reduction. .Within the grain trade, trade regulation 
has also expanded. At first it was confined to grading, 
but nov/ it includes all those matters relating to the 
handling of grain. The development of the grain inspection 
system is dependent on the development of trade regulation 
because what it attempts to accomplish is the regulation 
of trade. 

Trade regulation may be effected by various organizat¬ 
ions, but in the early development of North America it was 
assumed by the government. It is true that trade regulation 
in the form of inspection was inaugurated during the early 
history of the city of New York by the millers and merchants 

of flour. Their authority, however, was only local and was 










disregarded outside the limits of New York. Since the 
regulation of tfcade does oppose the satisfaction of 
individual self-interest, it must,to he effective, originate 
in an authority which has jurisdiction over all individuals. 

It is true that a voluntary association may institute 
trade regulation, hut it lacks authority to compel its 
members to adhere to its edicts. Membership in an 
association, although it may he advantageous to the 
individual, is purely voluntary. If membership is not 
advantageous to the individual, he may withdraw from and 
cannot he compelled to join and accept the regulations of 
the association. To he effective trade regulation which 
embraces a state, province or nation composed of 
individuals in numerous walks of life must emanate from 
the government. 

The Boards of Trade . 

The influence of the Boards of Trade on grain 
inspection is now confined to an advisory capacity. In the 
past, however, their influence extended to an administrativej 
capacity as well. It was the Board of Trade or Chamber of 
Commerce who first advocated state controlled commodity 
inspection in Ne# York, and who advocated commodity 

inspection m Canada. During the early years of commodity 








. 














. 


, 


































































(235) 

inspection they were intrusted with its supervision, and 
they introdticed memy methods and practices which have 
continued in use until the preseht time. Their influence 
on inspection during its formative years was due largely 
to the absence of other organizations and to the 
government:*s abstention from business enterprise. 7/hen 
grain inspection grew beyond local control, the Boards of 
Trade failed :'n their administration of it. 

Grain Inquiry Commissions 

Numerous complaints have been lodged at various times 
against practices and conditions in.the grain trade. Most 
of these complaints have originated from farmers, but some 
have come from various branches of the grain trade. Along 
with these complaints have been requests for legislative 
changes to remove the cause for complaint. Some complaints 
have resulted in direct legislative changes, but those 
complaints involving drastic changes have been referred to 
a commission for investigation. During the past 35 years 
the grain trade has been subject to the scrutiny of 
numerous commissions. The recommendations of these 
commissions have been the basis for amending the grain act. 
The influence of grain inquiry commissions has been one of 
interpreting the changes necessitated in the growth and 

development of the grain inspection system 0 








Chapter 13 

A COMPARISON OP CANADIAN AND FOREIGN GRAIN INSPECTION 


SYSTEMS 


Numerous commissions investigating conditions and 
practices in the Canadian grain trade frequently have been 
referred to and have studied at first hand grain inspection 
in foreign lands. Their studies have "been pursued in the 
hope of finding some practice which they could recommend 
for adoption in Canada, hut in recent years they have 
reported favorably on the superiority of Canadian methods. 
The Royal Grain Inquiry Commission of 1925 summarized 
British opinion of grain inspection in Canada in very 
complimentary terms,- "The Canadian system of handling and 
exporting grain is considered by importers and bankers, 
and the trade generally, as being the best in the world - 
most expeditious, most economical. TT (1). The Saskatchewan 
Royal Grain Inquiry Commission of 1928 after comparing 
Canadian with foreign grain inspection conclude,- "It is 
evident that Canada has nothing of profit to adopt from the 
grading systems of even the most advanced wheat producing 
and wheat exporting countries which constitute her 
severest competition 11 (2). 

(1) . Rpt. Royal Grain Inquiry Commission, 1925, p 189. 

(2) . Rpt. Sask, Royal Grain Inquiry Commission, 1928, p 106. 

























- 


. 








« 

; 

- „ ■ ' 











( 235 ) 


While a review of foreign grain inspection systems 
may reveal very little which can he incorporated 
profitably in our own system, nevertheless, it may he 
employed to confirm some of the principles evolved in the 
study of grain inspection in Canada. Differences in the 
factors affecting inspection will, of course, result in 
differences'in the inspection systems influenced hy those 
factors, hut there are certain fundamental principles 
underlying inspection which are common to all systems. 

A knowledge of these principles and the ability to employ 
them in evaluating "foreign introductions" will assist us 
materially in directing the future development of our own 
system which is essentially dynamic. It is with this 
purpose that a review of foreign grain inspection is 
undertaken. 

Grain inspection systems may he classified into two 
groups depending on their origin. In Canada and the United 
States, both grain exporting countries, grain inspection 
p/as instituted hy the producer or the producer country, 
while grain importing countries developed inspection to 
protect their consumers. The origin of grain inspection 
provides us with tv/o types of systems, producer and 
sonsumer. In both types the consumed T s preference is of 

paramoxmt importance since commodity inspection is a 







(236) 

means of trade regulation which facilitates the transfer 
of the consumer’s preference to the individual producer. 

Both types of inspection are accepted by all parties 
concerned. The grades determined by the Canadian grain 
inspectors are accepted in consumer countries because those 
grades are based on the consumer’s preference. A producer’s 
system must consider the consumer’s preference otherwise 
the consumer will not accept the producer’s i , 

and the system will have little value in transfering the 
consumer’s preference to the producer. Consumer’s inspection 
systems extend to producing countries - the f.a.q_. system 
of England is used in the purchase of grain in Australia 
and the Argentine. Both systems are alihe in, one respect - 
they facilitate the transfer of the consumer’s preference 
to the producer - but they differ considerably in method. 

The producer’s system is the more complicated because it 
aims to carry a wider range of the consumer’s preference 
to the producer. 

THE LIT I TED SPATES 

Grain inspection in the United States is very 
similar to that found in Canada. This similarity is due 
.Largely to the adoption in Canada of methods and practices 
ieveloped in the United States during the early years of 

inspection and too the similarity of the development of 






(237) 

the two countries. Commodity inspection originated in the 
United States and was subsequently introduced into Canada. 

Our early inspection acts appear to have been drafted from 
similar acts of the United States. The New York standard 
samples of flour were used as a basis for flour grading 
in Canada until as late as 1860. The Minnesota grades of 
hard red spring wheat were used as a basis for defining 
grades of similar grain in our General Inspection Act of 
1885 (1). In 1900 the Royal Commissions recommendations 
adopted in the Manitoba Grain Act were the result of a 
careful study of grain trade regulation practiced in 
Minnesota and the Dakotas (2). These and many more instances 
indicate the similarity and close relationship between the 
grain inspection systems of the two countries. 

Although grain inspection in Canada and the United 
States is similar in many respects, there are certain 
fundamental differences between the systems of the two 
countries. The control of grain inspection in Canada is 
vested in the Dominion while in the United States it is 
divided between the federal and the various state governments.. 
In the United States a controversy has existed for many 

(1) Hansard, 1885, p 1307. 

(2) Rpt. R I Commission 1900, Sessional pagers, 1900, 

#81 (a), pp 6-12. 



















( 238 ) 


years "between federal and state governments over the 
authority to regulate commerce. The commerce clause of t'] 
constitution would seemingly give the federal government 
authority to regulate commerce, "but, where this authority 
not "been exercised, the states, whether rightly or not, 
have assumed this power and strive to retain it (1). Until 
1916 the grain grading system, or rather systems, of the 
United States were under control of various state 
governments and B 0 ards of Trade, These organizations had 
their own inspection systems, appointed their own inspectors 
and defined their own grades. To promote uniformity in 
grain grading and also to stimulate production of the 
highest quality grain, the federal government in 1916 
passed the United States G-rain Standards Act which 
established one set of standards (grade definitions) for 
all grain entering interstate or export commerce. Although 
this act added one more voice in the control of grain 
inspection, it brought a uniformity of grades which 
previously did not exist. However, so many other phases of 
grain inspection in the United States are under state 
governement and private administration that the control 
of grain inspection may be regarded as divided. 

(1) Dorsey Richardson, Constitutional Doctrines of Justice 
Oliver Wendell Holmes, John Hopkins University series 42, 

#3, 1924, p 60. 













Centralized control is a factor which facilitates a 
greater realization of the "benefits to he derived from a 
•oducer 1 s system of ■ ctlon. The c< T s 

preference is transferred by price through the grades 
to the producer. Uniform grades, uniform grading and sharp 
lines of division between grades promote wide price 
spreads between the different grades. Although grain grades 
in the United States are now defined by one central 
authority, many other factors not under federal control 
tend to produce variations in grades and gr-ding. Divided 
control over grain inspection is not conducive to that 
uniformity of grading which is necessary to a maximum 
realization of the benefits of the inspection system. 

The United States G-rain Standards Act gave the 
Secretary of Agriculture authority to fix and amend 
standards of quality of various grains. The actual work 
of grading was left to the inspection departments of the 
state governments. After 1916 alih states adopted the 
federal grades as a basis for grading. Although the 
inspection departments remained under control of the state 
authorities, the United States Grain Standards Act 
required all inspectors to be licensed by the federal 
government. The grading of inspectors is checked for 
uniformity by federal supervisors. Appeals from an inspector 
grading are made to the supervisor of the district, and a 







(240) 

further appeal from the supervisor’s decision may he made 
to the Board of Review at Chicago. If this Body fails to 
settle the dispute, final appeal may he made to the 
Secretary of Agriculture. There is no provision in the act 
controlling non-grading activities. 

Although grades and the work of inspectors under the 
Grain Standards Act tend to uniformity of grading, 
variation in grading is apt to he caused through other 
means. There is no federal provision for the selection 
of standard samples. The sources of information are 
conflicting, hut it would appear that state inspection 
departments select standard samples. In Minnesota, rT The 
hoards (Boards of .Grain Appeal at Duluth and I.Tinneapolis) 
are required to meet annually in joint session and 
establish grades of all grain to he known as Minnesota 
Grades™ (1). It is improbable that the Minnesota Grades r? 
are what we would call grade definitions because the 
United States Grain Standards Act prohibits the use of 
any other grades than those established by the federal 
Secretary of Agriculture. In all probability the Minnesota 
Grades TT are similar to Canadian standard samples. Since 
standard samples are used by inspectors in their work of 
grading, their selection by different authorities who 

(1) llmiesota Legislative Manual, 1933, p 161. 









differ in their interpretation of the definition tends to 
variation in the samples in different states. The use of 
varying standard samples will result in a lac]: of uniformity 
of grading. 

Another source of variation in grading may occur 
through the authority of the Secretary of Agriculture to < 
amend grades. The modification of grades "by Order-in- 
Council was permitted in Canada from 1885 to 1899. The 
practice was discontinued "because frequent changes in grade 
classifications resulted in a loss of confidence in the 
Canadian certificate "By the foreign importer. The 
European miller wants uniformity of grades and grading,- 
n We want uniformity in grading, so that we may know what 
to expect - uniformity throughout the season and the same 
uniformity throughout, the years JT (1). % Again, IT If these are 
impaired-in any way - if grades are lowered "by degrading 
or mixing either intentionally or unintentionally, the 
British miller v/ill know it and the price will "be, lowered 
in consequence” (2). As long as the TT nited States exports 
wlieat anti' sells that wheat "by certificate, it will "be 
necessary to maintain uniformity of grading if she expects 
to receive the full "benefit that should accrue from the 


(1) & (2). Rpt. Hoyal G-rain Commission, 1925, p 176. 








( 242 ) 


the operation of her grain inspection system. This 
uniformity cannot reach such a high degree of perfection 
where control* is divided, where standard samples vary 
and where non-grading activities are under local control 

*rotein Grading 

Efforts have been made at various times to introduce 
into Canada a method of grading which has been received 
with considerable favor in the United States, This method 
uses the protein test as a basis for determining the 
quality of a particular lot of grain. The protein test has 
been used for a number of years in flour mills as an aid 
in maintaining from year to'year a uniform brand of flour. 
The practice as a method of grading was brought into 
prominence in certain American Markets after the close of 
the great war. The. demand of bakers for flour with a high 
protein content was reflected through the millers upon 
the American wheat market(l). Wheat possessing a high 
protein content was in demand. Often a thin wheat grading 
low by the official grading system possessed a higi 
protein content and in some cases commanded a higher 
price than grain grading two or three grades higher 

(1) The Canadian G-rain Trade, p 218. 
















( 243 ) 


the official grading system. This fact was pointed out 
as an example of the limitations of the official grading 
system in determining the actual value of the heat. 

Such interest was aroused in Canada that a thorough 
investigation v/as made into the feasibility of using 
protein content as a "basis for grading Canadian wheat* 

The report of the investigator pointed out that there is 
an essential difference in the situation in Canada and :'n 
the United States?.. The United States has a large domestic 
market which absorbs QOfi of the crop of hard wheat. 

Canada exports approximately 70^ of her total crop. 

V/orld conditions determine the price of export v/heat, 
whereas local conditions determine the protein premiums 
in the United States. 


fhfhf HI 7 7 

Britain is the centre of the world 1 s grain trade and 
to it grain comes from all grain exporting countries,. It is 
iere that the world 1 s grain inspection systems are brought 
together and compared insofar as they affect the British 
niller. The buying anc*" selling af imported grain is * ly 
3onducted on the basis of four distinct standards of 
quality (1). 

!l) Rpt. Marketing of Wheat, Barley and Oats in Engl 
and Wales; H.M. Stationery Office, London, 1928. 












1. Certificate Final* ./here government gri 

the country of origin raid the grain i inspected prior 
shipment, the production of the proper certificate, 
as to grade, must “be bed as final on the question 

of quality. 

. _ _ 1 )le. A 

the basis for sale* The seal 3 mp3 Is 3 os^.ted with 
the London Corn Trade Association for production when 
called for. 

3. Fair Average . This is arrived at in the country of origin 

oil the "basis of representative samples from all districts* 
The name of the authority deter: he standard and 

the place where the current standard samples may "be seen 
are duly notified to the trade. 

4. Fair Average Quality . This is determined by the L u ndon 
Corn Trade Association from samples representing the 
deliveries, at time of discharge, in all ports of the 
United Kingdom and Continent, of grain of any one type 
or description. The method of determining this ”fair 
average quality” is briefly as follows:- samples are 
drawn in the course of discharge by the buyer f s and 
seller’s agents. These samples are sealed and forwarded 
to the Association along with particulars regarding 
vessel, quantity, description of grain, and period 
shipment. A committee meets once a month and, after 
inspection of the samples makes up the standard 
proportionately to the quantities represented by the 
samples. The- committee is then in a position, if called 
upon, to arbitrate in regard to any particular load 
which departs from the f.'a.qj. standard so determined. 

It is 'on this f.a.q. basis that the bulk of the trade 
is now conducted, and about 100,000 arbitration 
samples arerreceived by the Association in the course 
of a year. 


Canada and the United States are the only two 
countries from which grain is accepted on the certificate 
final plan. Recently however, Hr. E.B.Ramsey, chairman of 
:he Board of Grain Commissioners, in giving evidence 












( 2413 ) 

before the agricultural committee of the House of Commons 
stated "the United States final grade certificate is not 
now being accepted in Europe" (1). Some grain from Canada 
and the United States is also sold on the sealed sample 
plan. The f.a r .q> sample "constitutes the standard - quality, 
weight per bushel, color, moisture content, cleanness, 
soundness, etc. - which will be delivered on contract, 
failing which an arbitration will be held and matters 
adjusted between buyers and sellers. A fair sample of the 
shipment is taken by the authorized agent of the Corn . 

Trade Association of the port where the cargo has been 
landed. Two disinterested arbitrators are appointed 
the arbitration committee of the local Com Trade 

sociation ! . Failing to agree, these choose a third, and 
if a satisfactory settlement cannot be arrived at the 
natter is referred to the whole committee for final 
Judgment. Should the grain be adjudged under the 3 rd 
of the f.a.q,. sample, the seller must compensate the 
buyer up to a stated amount per cental or vice versa” (2). 
Australian and Argentine wheats are dealt ‘n on the f.a.q 
jontract. In the case of Russian and Indian wheat special 

;1) Rdmonton Journal, May 30, 1934, p 8. 

2) Rpt. Royal Grain Commission , 1925, p 175. 





























? 


























% 


t 









( 246 ) 


clauses have been added to the f.a.q,. contract. These 
wheats are usually very dirty and the standard adopted 
is that known as "clean terms" in which clean grain is 
used to i ... , 1 it is on the cleaned 

sample that adjustment is made in price. 

In the markets of Britain grain is bought and sold 
on the certificate final or f.a.q,. contract basis. 
Liverpool, however, has in addition a special grade of 
wheat - "Liverpool contract grade" - for tender on future 
delivery contract (1). "It is true that not much wheat is 
actually Rendered in this way, but the point of interest 
is the existence of the grade and the system of selling". 
V/heat, Liverpool contract grade, is understood to be 
milling wheat "in fair merchantable condition ( a sli<pjit 
dry warmth not to be objected to/! The grade admits three 
general classes of wheat, namely, American red wheat grown 
east of the Rockies, Argentine and Australian wh at, 

lie Origin of the f.a._,_. System 
The sale of grain on an f.a.q,. basis is a trade 
practice and not a law, consequently, its development is 
more difficult to trace than that of commodity grading 
instituted by statute. To facilitate an inquiry into the 

(1) Rpt. Marketing of 7/heat, Barley and Oats in England 
and Wales, p 86. 








t 









c 


$ 




? 


c 


i! 






< 



< 









( 247 ) 

Va.c;. system, let, us assume 

prior to the adoption of present trade practices. In our 
assumed situation, the prospective "buyer would personally 
am? e the gra? offered for sale'. He would visit the ship 
and with his probe secure a sample as nearly representative 
of the shipment as it was possible for him to secure. On 
the basis of this sample he would make his offer. 

The hold of a ship usually is filled so full that it 
is impossible to secure a truly - representative sample (1). 
Knowing this the seller can easily TT trim TT his shipment to 
deceive the purchaser. The buyer may adjust his price to 
protect himself against the suspected fraud, but the 
seller aware also of this practice may increase the amount 
of his deception. The battle goes on in a vicious circle.. 
Under this system of trade the buyer is at the mercy of 
the seller, but the seller is also operating under • • 
handicaps. If he experiences any difficulty in disposing 
lis shipment, he has demurrage and storage charges adding 
bo the cost of his sale. In our assumed situation both buyer 
and seller sxiffer and each seek some means of improving 
their position,- the buyer to avoid loss from fraud and 

1) This same condition occurs when 'rain cars are loaded 
■;oo full. When a proper sample cannot be secured, a provis¬ 
ional grade is given and the certificate marked "hold full" 
indicating that the grade is subject to correction when the 
car is unloaded. 














, 



* ' 


■ 










■ 











( 248 ) 


the seller to lessen handling charges. 

To avoid the heavy expense of displaying a whole 
cargo of grain offered for sale, the seller could sell by 
sample, A sample could he forwarded ahead of the cargo 
and the shipment sold before the ship arrives in port. 

Such a practice would relieve the seller of handling 
charges will waiting for a sale. It would also enable 
buyer to purchase for future delivery. Sale by sample, 
however, implies that the sample represents the shipment, 
and the buyer to be induced to trade under such an 
arrangement would have to be guaranteed that the shipment 
was as good as the sample. 

Having once established a sample market for grain 
transactions, fraud once again becomes a factor tending 
towards the development of the f.a.o. standard. If a 
sample is not truly representative of the shipment, some 
adjustment is necessa-ry otherwise the value of sample 
selling is worthless. This adjustment would take place 
upon the delivery of the shipment, A common method of r 
settling disputes is to refer the matter to a third party, 
usually the law courts. There are certain disadva tapes 
attending the settlement of certain types of trade disputes 
by law so a trade court or board of arbitration is sat up 
for the purpose of making adjustments between sample and 
3argo. 









The last step in the development of the f. c.. o_ system 
is the extension of sample selling as the result of 
economic expediency. If the Board of Arbitration make 
adj 3 it between sample and cargo, why have more than 
one sample? Each cargo may he different, hut they are all 
about the same. Even if there are differences it is 
immaterial because the differences are adjusted by the 
Board of Arbitration. The same line of .reasoning may be 
applied to a number of shippers and to all the shipments 
exported from a particular port or country. Such is the 
system to-day. A sample is made up from the average quality 
of grain from that particular country and that sample 
represents the fair avdrage quality of the country T s 
shipments. It is upon the f,.,q, sample that the 
arbitration is made. 

The principles back of the f.a.q. system are sample 
selling and arbitration for variations- between sample 
shipment. The factors influencing the development of the 
system are the practice of fraud and economic expediency. 
The factors of production, fraud and economic expediency 
are responsible for the development of both the grading 
and the f.a.c. systems. Why may we ask - 

factors produce different results? The f.a.q. system is a 
consumer’s system developed to protect the consumer from 








( 250 ) 

the producer, or the buyer from the seller. The gr 
system is a producer’s system developed to protect the 
producer from other producers. 

Tin: at m:? the aitp aitstraxia 

The f.a.q, system of buying and selling grain in 
Britain has been adopted in both the Argentine and 
Australia. The Argentine wheat grower may sell his wheat 
on sample through a broker at central markets or direct to 
the local grain merchant, representing one of the large 
dealers, at the local country point on f.a.q> st: »d (1). 

If sold by the latter method, he receives 96^ of the sale 
price, less charges. The balance is settled for fter th 
15th of 'larch, the date when f.a.q,. standards are made at 
Buenos Aires. If he sells by the former method, a sample 
Is taken at the thresher, half of which is retained by the 
farmer and the other half forwarded to the Exchange. 
Settlement is made on the f.a.q_. standard. 

The f.a.q,. standard in use in the Argentine is 
the same f.a.q,. standard in use in great Britain for the 
purchase of Argentine wheat. The Argentine f.a.o. 
standard, known in Britain as the rT fair average", is made 
ip in Buenos Aires and Rosario. The selection of the 


1) Rpt. Sask. Royal Grain Commission, 1928, p I 









(251) 

British fa.qf. standard for the purchase of Argentine 
wheat in Britain has already Been described. 

The system of handJ' j the grower’s grain in 
Australia is verj 'lar to that of the Argentine* Within 
recent years, however, jrain grading has been advocated in 
Australia, In 1927 New South Wales passed a wheat act (1) 
providing for the establishment of grades and standards of 
wheat in accordance with the recommendations of a wheat 
standards board. Definite action to establish grades has 
not yet been taken (2). In reviewing the situation regard¬ 
ing grain grading in "Australia, the International Review 
of Agriculture states, "It will be seen that while grading 
is essentially a matter of expert judgment, -its effective 
carrying out depends upon certain mechanical devices which 
are inseparable from bulk or elevator handling. The 
adoption of fixed grades in Australia is now merely a 
cuestion of time TT (3). Wheat for export from New South Wales 
is marketed on the basis of a single standard known as the 
f.a.q_. This standard is fixed annually by a committee of 
nembers of the Sydney Chaiytoer of Commerce and two 
government representatives. Samples obtained from each of 

!l) Statutes, New South Wales, 1927, c 6. 

,2) New South 7/ales Yearbook, 1931, p 212. 

,3) International Review of Agriculture (Int. Institute of 
Agriculture) No. 3, March 1928, p 261. 









( 

the wheat districts are weighed, and an average struck, 
which is used as a standard in all wheat exportations. 

A "second grade" standard of 56j Ihs was fixed on Feb. 9, 
1951, for "bagged wheat of the 1950-51 season. The first 
standard averaged 60 - 62 rbs. Two thirds of the wheat is 
"bagged on farms. Forty percent of the wheat exported is in 
"bags. 

In spite of the advantages of trading on the certificate 
final, the British miller objected to Australia 7 adopting 
a certificate final plan. The objection is that if the 
ouality of the grain is of lower grade than that specified 
in the certificate, the miller has no redress, whereas 
under an f.a.q> contract, adjustment would be made by the 
board of arbitration. 









Chapter 14 
(5 CLTTS3 


Guided by those principles which fad'litate the 
transfer of the consumers 7 preference to the producer, 
adjustment has "brought a large measure of satisfaction 
with the operation of the Canadian grain inspection system. 
To maintain public approval, future adjustment of the 
system must he based on those principles underlying its 
success. 

Regardless of hov; satisfactorily it may operate at a 
given time, an economic institution cannot maintain 
public approval and remain static. Changing-conditions 
necessitate adjustment if the institution will continue to 
serve the public and enjoy their support. ’Then an 
institution gets 17 out of line T? with economic conditions, 
some persons or classes of society suffer, and they voice 
their dissatisfaction with the operation of the institution 
by criticisms and complaints. It has been criticism together 
with the ability to correctly adapt the institution to 
changing conditions that has brought the Canadian grain 
inspection system a large share of public approval. 
Criticisms of the Canadian grain inspection system have 
come from three economic groups, - the consumers, the 
producers and the middlemen. 














( 254 ) 

THE CONSUTER DHTJUTDS If: IFOR?.: GRAPHIC 


The consumer may not know or care to know how a gr-dingi 
system operi ^es, hut he is Ti lly concerned with the 
quality of the evades offered to him for sale, lie does not 
huy Ho. 1 northern wheat because it is graded Ho. 1 
Northern, hut because Ho. 1 Northern wheat has or he 
expects it to have certain definite qualities, Irrespective 
of whether he purchases by grade, by sample, or by f.a.q. 
standard, the consumer buys wheat accordin 'ts quality. 
Because .it is economical and expeditjjtjkis, purchase by grade 
is preferred provided quality is that expected. On the 
British Corn Exchanges samples of wheat from differ: 
countries are on display. Among the samples are to be 
found standard samples of Canadian export grades. The'buyer 
of wheat compares the quality of the different samples on 
exhibit, and on the basis of quality he makes his bid or 
price. If he buys by sample and the shipment is inferior 
to the sample, he can secure an adjustment in the contract 
price. If he purchases by grade, certificate final, he can 
secure no compensation for loss when the shipment is inferior 
to the sample of that grade on display. 

Unless the quality of grades is maintained uniformly 
throughout the season and from year to year, the Canadian 
grading system is threatened with the loss of public esteem, 









< .* ' 








■V ' 




■ -'ry 


t 





c 


0 * 












( 255 ) 


decay and possibly extinction. Tt has been pointed out 
that the British importer has no redress from loss 
occasioned by the receipt of a shipment inferior in quality 
to that of the standard samples on display. Furthermore, 
he is under no obligation to purchase grain by grade or 
certificate final. He only employs that system of 
purchasing because it is economical and expeditions. If the 
gains from such a method of buying are wiped out by losses 
from inferior quality, he will find other means of buying 
our wheat. He has developed a method of sale by sample 
for grain originating from Argentina and Australia in 
which adjustment is made for variation in quality between 
sample and shipment. In the final analysis the British 
importer buys Canadian grain by sample, but accepts the 
shipment as officially graded without provision for 
adjustment because he has confidence that the quality of 
shipment is equal to that of the standard sample. If that 
confidence is lost the foreign importer may go so far as 
to abolish the Canadian certificate final as a method of 
purchasing grain. If such an event does occurthe Canadian 
grain inspection system will have failed as a method of 
trade regulation facilitatin'* the transfer of the consumers 1 
discrimination to the producer. 

The Canadian government, however, has no intention of 




t 


■ 


■ 





* 

• ■ ■ ' : 







n 


; • :T j 


; • ' ‘ ' 

■ 

' 

' 




; 


.permitting practices detrimental to the reputation of tl- 

grain inspection system. For years complaints have been 

received, respecting the lack of uniformity in Canadian 

grades, and as a consequence, many devices have been 

incorporated in the grading system. The use of definitions, 

standard samples, standards boards, the central!: ' c' 

control in one govern ’ .1 body, the prohibiti 

export grades in terminal elevators, together with the rigid 

check on export cargoes have reduced variation in grades 

and grading to a minimum. Variation in the quality of grades | 

continues to exist. The variation in quality of Ho, 2 

Northern at Vancouver and Atlantic ports, due to the 

different proportions of Garnet entering that grade, 

resulted in the establishment of separate grades for 

darnet wheat. Those variations in grades and i ig, 

arising as a result of changes in production or the 

development of new trade practices, will be remedied to 

retain the confidence of the foreign importer. 

/ 

There are, however, certain variations in grades and 
grading beyond the control of man. The quality of a grain 
'irop is largely dependant on climate. In some years the 
characteristic defect of the crop may be sprouts. In other 
* It may be frost, immaturity, color or excessive 


moisture. 


Ho two crops are exactly alike. 


Tne appearance of 








(257) 

a grade in any one year may differ from that of other yet , 
hut,so far as it is humanly possible to determine by 
critical observation supported by the evidence of 
laboratory analysis, the quality of the grade is 
maintained from year to year. 

the PKOFJ-ga de::;i:ds tts p t tx of tfb c oitsumfr's 

piscrtmmtatioit 

Most of the criticism levelled at the grain inspection 
system has come from producers. The farmer is the one who 
has the most to benefit from the proper functioning of the 
grain inspection system since it is a method of transferring 
the consumer 1 s preference to him. Most of those who 
criticise the grading system fail to realize'the importance 
of the consumer in establishing and maintaining grades; 
Producers have complained of the grading being too strict, 
too rigid. As a matter of fact the grading of their grain 
has been given the benefit of the doubt. Being human their 
self-interest encourages them individually to want a little 
more, to lower the qualifications so that their grain will 
grade higher. The adoption of such a practice may in the 
short rur result in small pecuniary gains to particular 
individuals, but in the long run it will result in greater 
losses to the prodiicers as a whole. The foreign importer 

of Canadian wheat wants the quality of the grades maintain ed 
at a constant level. The foreign buyer of Canadian gr? 























(258) 


is "buying sight unseen and only does so "because he has 

confidence that we will maintain the quality of our present 

product. If his confidence is misplaced, he has no redress. 

at 

The next time he "buys our grain he will "buy it*a low enough 
price to insure him against any loss he mayo expect. If we 
lose the confidence of the ’foreign "buyer in the Canadian 
certificate final, we only stand to lose. He will insist 
on "buying "by sample and the grades which are determined "by 
our inspection system, which does transfer the consumer 1 s 
preference to the producer, will not "be accepted. This 
situation is now reported of the United States grading 
system. 

Another criticism of the grading system is that of 
incompetence. Mistakes are made, it is true, "but thesg are 
very rare. Grain inspectors are men of long experience who 
grade more samples in a week than a farmer does in a lifetime 
Host grain is shipped through elevators, and the elevator 
company 1 s agent at the inspection point checks the inspector 1 
grading. The criticism of incompetence may "be dismissed 
unfounded. 

Another criticism of the grading system does not 
properly "belong to it. Grading at country elevators may 
vary "but that grading is not official. Grain companies are 
in business to "buy grain and if, to get volume, they offer 
nore for the grain, fcy giving it a higher grade, that is 


























(259) 

their bur i is. When the grain companies return to grading 
for ouality and not for competition,growers should have no 
complaint respecting; grading. This complaint was one of the 
causes of the recent farmer T s strike at TTyrnan. 

In any dynamic institution such as the grain inspection 
system constant change is necessary if any degree of 
perfection is to "be maintained. Whe] arl ft 
are out of line with the changing conditions, complaints will 
of course" arise. Complaints usually precede the amendment 
the thing complained of. The grain inspection system is 
designed to transfer the consumer T s discrimination to the 
producer, and,when parts of it "break down or need 
adjustment, complaints indicate the need for investigation. 

In investigating complaints' and introducing the .necessary 
adjustment, the Board of drain Commissioners, in whose care 
this delicate machine is entrusted, are able to keep the 
system working smoothly and efficiently. 

TTTB PHOBIC OF CRADIIT C CAF-TBT hTEA m 
One of the most pressing problems which has confronted 
the grain inspection system during the last few years has 
been the grading of Garnet wheat. This new wheat is favored 
by the farmers of certain areas, but it is disliked by the 
miller who interprets the consumer’s preference. The market 

discriminated against Carnet and against t/ose ports 









(260) 

shipping large quantities of Garnet. This discrimination, 
however, fell upon the ^rowerw o? Uarquis wheat as well 
as upon the producers of Garnet. Such a situation was 
contrary to the principles of grain inspection an ^ 
provision was made to correct it. After August 1, 1935, 
t ' s been graded separately(ly. 

The extension of agricultural settlement into new 
areas has created a demand, from growers, for and resulted 
in the increased production of new earlj ’ing ts. 

In recent years the expansion of the wheat acreage in the 
prairie provinces has "been northward into regions 
characterized hy a shorter frost-free season than that 
lying adjaceht to the United States "border. The standard 
variety, Marquis, suffered from severe injury from climate 
in the northern regions and quite often the crop was of a 
very poor quality. In response to the demand of farmers 
for early maturing varieties, several new wheats were 
developed. One of the new wheats, Garnet, satisfied the 
demand for early maturity and high yield "but is of inferior 
milling quality. A conflict developed over the production 
and grading of Garnet. Some farmers wished to continue the 
production of Garnet hut feared an increased discrimination 


(1) Statutes of Canada, 1934, c 26. 









(261) 


against it if Garnet grades were established. Farmers 
growing Marquis wanted separate grades for Garnet to reduce 
the discrimination against the mixtures containin'- their 
wheat. The grain trade, millers and others Interested in 
the quality of Canadian wheat discouraged the production 
of Garnet. 

The farmer 1 s profit motive will encourage him to grow 
Garnet if it, in spite of discrimination, is the most 
profitable wheat to produce under his conditions. The 
farmer is interested in the net profit per acre, and he will 
grow those crops and varieties whose production will 
return him the greatest net profit. The farmer finds 
Garnet a profitable wheat to grow. He will continue to 
&row Garnet so long as there is more profit in it than .in 
some other crop or variety. The Garnet grower rightly 
feared a price*spread between the Norther] 
grades. If the discrimination is' great enough to wipe out 
the -advantage of yield and early maturity, Garnet 
production will decline. If not,Garnet production wili 
Likely increase. 

An increase of Garnet production will tend to increase 
:he total acreage devoted to wheat in the western provinces. 
Areas in the north central portion of the prairie provinces 
3 iow restricted because of early fall frosts to the growing 










(262) 

of coarse gra:ns may be expected to devote renter 
attention to the cultivation of wheat. New areas may be 
opened up for settlement in the northern parts of the 
provinces. 

Garnet wheat is inferior in milling and baking quality 
to that of marquis and will be discriminated against 
whether it be* in pure form or mixed with other varieties. 
Mixtures of two qualities into one group will, if equal 
payment is made for each, f t avor the production of the lower 
quality. The quality of that group or grade will decline 
and ultimately the result will be a lower price for the 
group or grade. This situation actually existed. At 
Vancouver which received the larger percentage of Garnet 
the spread between lTo T s 1 and 2 Northern (1) was greater 
than at Winnipeg. Mixing may conceivably lower the total 
value of the two wheats. The miller does not want mixed 
wheat because mixtures are often difficult to mill. Mixing 
may also decrease the blending value of a wheat and 
Canadian wheats are wanted in Bri' for blending. 

The inferiority of Garnet as a milling wheat was 
concisely stated by Dr. Geddes (2) to the Agricultural 
Committee of the Alberta Legislature (3). Garnet requires 

(1) Garnet is not permitted in ITo. 1 Northern. 

(2) Chemist, Grain Research laboratory. 

(3) March 12, 1934. 












(263) 

a longer tempering period and a higher moisture content in 
tempering process. Mixtures of Garnet with Marquis and 
Reward offer serious difficulties in milling. The water 
absorbing ualitq of !• uv t florr ' • 

Marquis’. The protein in Garnet is inferior to that of 
Marquis. The protein content is also lower. The spread in 
quality between Garnet and Marquis increases the further 
one goes north. The blending quality of Garnet, due to its 
yellow color, is inferior to that of Marquis. The 
objectionable color can be removed by bleaching hut some 
countries prohibit the bleaching of flour. 

The mixing of Garnet and Marquis in the northern 
grades narrows the range of the consumer 1 s discrimination 
transferred to the producer and defeats the purpose for 
which the grain inspection system was established. The 
addition of large quantities of Garnet to TTo. 2 northern 
lowered the quality of that grade in the opinion of the 
miller and foreign importer'. The mixture was of less value 
than pure Marquis and presumably of greater value tl an 
pure Garnet. 

The establishment of Garnet grades is entirely :* 
accord Mth the principles underlying grain inspection. 

The consumer prefers the separation of the different 
qualities'.. The producer is entitled to the fruits of his 
Labor but not to lower quality and price of the product 










(264 ) 


grown by other producers. 

titf frobt ft: of roiSTUR F cias^tf tcatio:: 

Recent requests for a finer division of the consumer’s 

discrimination have resulted in a proposal to adopt 

narrower intervals "between the definite moisture class'" 

tions. The proposal, advocated in the Alberta legislature, 

was submitted to their Agricultural Committee for 

consideration. The resolution, in part, is as follows;- 

,T .. .Whereas the existing regulations do not provide 
for a scaling of the penalty imposed which is the 
same whether the wheat shows a moisture content of 
14.5 or 17, which is manifectly unjust; and Whereas 
..." ( 1 ) 

On March 12, 1974, the Agricultural Committee tool: evidence 
from members of the Board of Crain Commissioners, officials 
of the federal grain inspection staff, and representatives 
of grain companies and farmers. 

The proposal, if 3 pted, ould increase the nujnber 
of wheat grades by approximately 25f?. At present there are 
three moisture intervals, dry, tough and damp, separated 
by two definite moisture classifications, 14.5 and 17 y. 

The proposal sought to establish three definite moisture 
classifications, 14.5, 16.0 and 17.0 and incre se i'r 
tiumber of intervals to four. 

Cl) Taker from the evidence submitted t~ tTTiT Apr: c ultur-1 

Committee, Alberta legislature, March 12, 1934, on 1 
"Moisture Content of Wheat"-. 
















It was hoped that an Increase in the number of moisture 
classifications would scale down the penalty n ov excessive 
moisture. Since the proposed change divided the prose] 
tough classification, it might reasonably "be expected 
that the proposed TT drier 1 11 tough would he penalised less 
heavily than the present tough. The former hut not 
latter expectation was realized in a trial hy the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, The practice was abandoned before 
it had operated a season. In giving evidence before the 
Agricultural Committee, Dr, D. A. MaeGibbon (1) quoted the 
findings of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool respecting their 
trial of increased moisture classifications:- (2) 

,T ...People with grain meeting 14.5 and 15 were still 
getting as much discount as they were before, an£ the 
people between 16 and 17 were going to get a higher 
discount. There was not ^oing to be much benefit to 
the farmers in trying to work out a system of that 
kind, and after very carefully reviewing the whole 
thing said that the practical difficulty of operating 
did not make it desirable and recommended going back 
to simpler methods ir . 


Objection to an increased moisture classification was 
voiced by the grain companies. Mr. Settle of the-Gillespie 

Crain Company pointed out that the limited bin space in 

ouhtry elevators would add to the cost of handling If 

[1) Member of the Board of Grain Commissioners. 

12) Evidence submitted to the Agricultural Com ' t = 

March 12, 1934. 






















, 

V 


, 












* 






. 











« 

























( 266 ) 

number of grades v/ere increased. The .rofits of a country 
- va ^. . ] >ge j let erm3 

handled hut the quantity of -rain handled at any shipping 
point is confined to that produced in the <3 ' strict. 
Provision for handling an increased number of grades 
would not increase or decrease the quantity of grain 
handled at any country shipping point, but it would 1 
up farmer’s deliveries. It is difficult to see how the 
slowing up of deliveries would affedt the cost of handler 
grain in country elevators. Some elevator costs are in 
direct proportion to the quantity of grain handled and, 
since the quantity of grain produced in a district has no 
relation to the number of grades, the rate of delivery 
has no influence on direct costs. Other elevator costs, 
such as interest, depreciation,and salaries, are annual 
charges against the total volume of business and ..re not in 
the least affected by the rate of delivery except in c .j 
the elevator operates only a part of a year, and unless tkc 

of 

competing A elevator companies results in providing facilities 

sufficient to all farmers to deiive] '’ the time 

wish to deliver except in unusually heavy crop years. 

Sven though -an -incre-r.se in the..number of yrries *; 4 

increase-the -cost of Jiandlifig ' ■ 

the,increased costs v/oulf not bej ."borne, by the yrcfu 

companies hut by the farmer’s. 












( 267 ) 

The real objection of the grain companies to an 
increased number of grades seems to ar’se from their fear 
of the effects of competition. The practice of farmers 
delivering grain as rapidly as poss'ble ■ nd the desire of 
grain comj ni s to handle a large volume would tend, if 
the rate of delivery were decreased, to introduc 
unorthoddx practices in the competition for business. 

There would appear to be no objection by terminal elevators 
to an increase in the number of moisture classifications 
because grain with excessive moisture is dried previous 
to storage. 

An increase in the number of moisture classifications 
by decreasing the rate of handling at country shipping 
points may be objectionable to those farmers forced to 
provide farm storage facilities. Some farmers male no 
provision to store grain on the farm. As soon as threshed 
or combined, grain is hauled direct to the elevators. If 
delivery at the country elevators .ere retarded, some f rm 
storage might be necessary which would add to the cost of 
crop produetior. 

An increase in the number of grades does perm: 
greater range of discrimination by the consumer, but little 
will be gained 13 increase in the number of gredee 
based on variations of a dockage factor. Some defects of 
grain are inherent in the grain and cannot be removed from 















( 263 ) 


the grain or its finished product. Other defects such as 
foreign material and excessive moisture am removed, if 
’ jectionable, from the grain before it is manufactured 
into the finished article. The miller dries his ’..'heat to 

i percentage of moisture preparatory 
the milling process. Wheat for export is dried to 
percentage of moisture considered safe for storage. The 
discount attributable to the presence of excessive 
moisture is due to the cost of drying and to the loss in 
weight in grain incident tib the removal of excess moisture 
G-rades are no more necessary to indicate variations in 
: ojsture e ontent than t.iey are i 
in foreign matter content. 

The discrimination against excessive moisture may be 
distributed more equitably and with finer intervals of 
variation by treating it as dockage rather than as a ba s 
ior grade classifications. If - ssive moisture were 
treated as dockage, deductions could be made for the 
quantity of excess moisture and for the cost of dry.h •. 

A method of discounting dockage for excessive moisture 
:s suggested as follows;- 












( 269 ) 



tt a n 

A 

rtgit 

Weight of grain delivered 

6000 Its 

6000 lbs 

Percentage of excess moisture 

0.2 f 

2.2 <f> 

Pounds of excess moisture 

12 Its 

132 lbs 

ITet weight of dry grain 

5988 Its 

5868 lbs 

Bushels of dry grain 

99-48 Bu 

97-48 bu. 

Market price of dry grain 

82 <f 

82 i 

Cost of drying 

2 i 

2 { t 

Price of tough or damp grain 

80 i 

80 i 

Bet value of load 

$79.84 

$78.£4 


The two examples chosed in the above.illustration would 
both grade tough and bring the same _)rice per bushel under 
present regulations. By treating excessive moisture cm 
dockage, the true value of each lot of grain v/ould be' 
determined. The difference in the price per bushel on the 
the basis of gross weight is . $ which 

wholly accounted for by the diffei'ence in moisture coi-.te: '. 

Objection would be raised*by the grain corapa] 
the adoption of a practice such as outlined as above. The 
determination of accurate moisture content for each load o^ 
street grain purchased would greatly increase the work of 
elevator operators. In the busy se 
nab] 

the existing methods of moisture testing. Additional help 










( 270 ) 

would "be required which would increase the handling charges. 
Unless the gains from treatin'- excessive moisture as 
dockage were greater than the extra cost of handling, the 
adoption of the practice would he economically unsound. 

There might also he a delay in completing farmer’s grain 
sales. The present method of moisture determination 
raires about J ‘ \ minutes and, unless a more rapid 
method were discovered, the objections of the grain 
companies are well founded. The objection to treating 
excessive moisture as dockage could ,ot he made ag; 'rst 
the sale of grain in carload lots since the moisture 
content is determined at the time of official inspection. 

TUT rkCTiiri" ‘7 COrTROlLTU TP.07)T T ^TT 
The control of production has received serious 
consideration in recent years, hut, up to the present t' , 
the problem has not been linked up with the grain inspection 
system. Control of both production and marketing has been 
advocated for some commodities. The unrestricted growth of 
iistribution and marketing agencies has resulted in a 
situation promoting very large price spreads between the 
producer’s selling price and the consumer’s purchase price. 
?he grain trade has not received recent criticism on 
excessive price spread. In fact manj of x he char ev 

handling grain have been regjilated for a numbe^ of years. 









( 271 ) 

These charges have been set so as to permit a reasonable 
profit by the grain companies hut at the same time prevent 
exploitation of the farmer. 

Production control of ;raih has been directed,in the 
last few years, towards the regulation of factors • 
supply. Price is the medium by which the consumer 1 s 
discrimination is transferred to the producer. Price, 
however, is largely controlled by the interaction of 
supply and demand. Abundant supplies together with 
decreased effective demand have lowered the price of grain. 
Producers and producing countries have attempted to raise 
prices by reducing the production or supply. This has been 
attempted by a curtailment of acreage and by export ruot? s. 

In some respects there is a similarity between state 
ilation influenei] uality and quantity of production. 
Both quality and quantity of production are factors 
influencing the price paid hy the consumer. The consumer 
prefers high quality and large quantity. In the Matter 
nstance he is enabled to secure his supplies at ■ low 
price. The consumer T s discrimination respecting 
is confined to those qualities offered for sale at a 
^iven time. The spread price between < Lfferent qualiti< 

Ls to a certain extent influenced by the quantity of each 
quality offered fo] , Discrimination respecting 







( 272 ) 


quantity is made between the particular commodity and a 
number of other commodities, substitutes and moi 
Although the consul ;ive a premium for high quali 

the producer may find it more profitable to continue low 
quality production. While the consumer may prefer low 
prices, the producer T s profit motive encourages him to 
adopt such production practices as return to him a 
maximum profit. Crain inspection has been 

system of trade regulation facilitating the transfer of the 
consumer 1 s discrimination to the producer. Up to the 
present it has been concerned only with transferring 
discriminations respecting quality. There seems to be 
no reason why it should not be concerned with transferring 
discriminations respecting quantity. 

TUT 7UTUHE 

The development of grain inspection has been and will 
be guided by certain definite principles. Briefly st ted 
these principles are: the consumer demands uniform 
grading; the consumers preference is the basis 
classifications; the producer is entitled to the frvUts 
lis labor; and the control of individual liberty or class 
privilege is necessary foir the promotion of social elfare. 
Canada is growing grain and will continue to grow grain 
some time to cone. Canada has a grain inspection system 






( 273 ) 

which undoubtedly will function in future. Conditions in 
future will change as they have in the past and necessitate 
corresponding change in the grain inspection system. If the 
system is to facilitate the transfer of the consumer T s 
discrimination to the individual producer, that c' ange 
must be .guided, and what better juid is there than the 
experience of the past. 







/ 













APP^NDTCPS 















g^5 

APPENDIX 1 
Excerpt from the 

STATUTES OF NOVA SCOTIA, 1792, c 4, s 11 (1) 


"And he it also enacted, by the authority aforesaid, That 
all grain exposed for sale, shall not he deemed 
merchantable, unless it he of the following standard 
weight, to say:- 

Wheat shall weigh per hushel fifty eight pounds Avoirdup- 


Rye " 

TT 

IT 

TT 

fifty six 

IT 

" oise 

Indian Corn " 

If 

TT 

TT 

fifty eight 

TT 

TT 

Barley 

TT 

IT 

IT 

forty eight 

TT 

TT 

Oats " 

TT 

TT 

TT 

thirty four 

IT 

TT 

Pease 

TT 

TT 

TT 

sixty 

TT 

TT 


And that all such grain, as may he imported or brought to 
market for sale, shall he, on request of the purchaser, 
inspected and measured hy the sworn inspectors of such 
town or port, where the same shall he brought for sale, 
and that the inspectors shall he allowed and paid the one 
half hy the purchaser, and the other half hy the seller, 
at, and after the rates hereafter mentioned, for hig 
attention and trouble therein, to say, for measuring all 
grain (oats excepted) two shillings per hundred bushels, 
and for oats, one shilling per hundred bushels." 


(1) Supplied through the courtesy of Miss Annie F. 
Donohue, Librarian, legislative Library, Halifax, Nova 
Scotia. 













.c76 


APPENDIX 2 
Excerpt from the 

STATUTES OF NOVA SCOTIA, 1838, c 4, s 11 (1) 


And he it further enacted, That all G-rain and Corn 
hereinafter mentioned shall not he deemed or considered 
merchantable, unless the same shall he respectively of the 
undermentioned weight, that is to say:- 


Barley 


Wheat 

Rye 

Indian 

oats 

Malt 


when foreign or imported, fifty-two pounds 
Avoirdupoise, per hushel and of the production 
of this Province, forty-eight pounds Avoirdupoise 
per hushel. 

sixty pounds Avoirdupoise, per hushel. 

fifty-six " n ,T ,T 

Corn fifty-eight TT rT TT 

thirty-four " " " " 

thirty-nine ,T TT ,T " 


(1) Supplied through the courtesy of Kiss Annie F. Donohue. 














277 

APPENDIX 3 
Excerpt from the 

REVISED STATUTES OF NOVA SCOTIA, 1864, c 85 
"OF THE REGULATION AND INSPECTION OF PROVISIONS, 
LUMBER, FUEL AND OTHER MERCHANDISE" 


Grain and Corn 

55 . Merchantable grain and corn shall he of the following 
weight per bushel, viz; wheat sixty pounds; foreign barley 
fifty-two pounds; and if the produce of the Province 
forty-eight pounds; rye fifty-six pounds; Indian corn 
fifty-eight pounds; Oats thirty-four pounds and malt 
thirty-nine pounds. 

56 . All wheat and barley not the produce of the province 
shall be sold by weight, and the number of pounds in the 
last section established as the standard weight of a 
bushel thereof respectively shall be deemed to represent 
a bushel of such wheat or barley. 

57 . All grain and corn sold on board of and intended to be 
delivered from any vessel, shall be weighed and measured 
by a sworn measurer: but grain or corn .may be exported 

or sold in a store without his intervention, unless the 
purchaser require to have the same weighed or measured 
by such officer. 

58 . If the measurer shall find the same heated, or in any 
other respect unmarketable, he shall inform the purchaser, 
and shall not take any account thereof unless at the- 
request of the purchaser. 

59 . The grain measurers shall receive from the seller for 
inspecting and weighing or measuring grain or corn, at the 
rate of fifty cents for every hundred bushels. The measures 
used by them shall in all cases be struck with a straight 
stick rounded at the edges. 













P.78 

60. If any person shall sell or deliver any grain or corn 
in violation of these provisions, he shall forfeit ten 
cents for every "bushel of such grain or corn. 

61. If any grain measurer shall undertake to attend the 
weighing and measuring of grain or com from more than one 
vessel at the same time, or shall "be guilty of any 
neglect or derelection of his duty, he shall forfeit a sum 
not exceeding twenty dollars for each offence. 







9 


APPENDIX 4 
Excerpt from the 

POT AND PEARL ASH INSPECTION ACT 
Lower Canada, 1795, c 2, s 3 
* * * * * * * * * * 

iii. Provided also and he it further enacted, that iff any 
dispute shall arise between such Inspector and any 
possessor of such Pot- and Pearl-ashes, concerning the 
quality thereof, upon application to any of his Majesty’s 
Justices of the Peace within the city, town or place 
where the same may happen, such Justice of the Peace shall 
and is hereby required to issue a warrant to three 
indifferent persons of skill and integrity to be viewers, 
to view and search the said Pot- or Pearl-ashes as the 
case may be, one of the said persons to be named by the 
said ^Inspector, another of them to be named by the 
possessor of such Pot- or Pearl-ashes, and the third to 
named by the said Justice, which three persons shall be 
duly sworn carefully to re-examine the said Pot- or Pearl- 
ashes, as the case may be, and make report as soon as 
conveniently may be of the qlality thereof as they s&all 
find the same. And the said Justice is hereby empowered 
and required to give judgment agreeable to the report of 
the said three viewers or any two of them, which judgment 
shall be final; And in case the said Jot- and Pearl-ashes 
or any part thereof are adjudged to be of the quality or 
qualities as distinguished by the Inspector, the said 
Justice is hereby authorized to direct the said Pot- or 
Pearl-ashes to be branded by the said Inspector agreeable 
to such distinction, and shall also award the owner or 
possessor thereof to pay to such Inspector six-pence 
current money for each hundred weight of such Pot- or 
Pearl-ashes as shall be adjudged as aforesaid, with 
reasonable costs and charges of re-examination. But in case 
the said Pot- or Pearl-ashes or any part thereof shall, 
upon such trial to be found to differ from the said 
Inspector’s judgment thereon, the same shall be branded 
according to the report of the said viev/ers so approved 
aforesaid, and the costs of such re-examination, so far 
as the same may be found to differ from the survey and 
opinion of the Inspector, shall be paid by the Inspector. 












APPENDIX 5 
Excerpt from the 

STATUTES OF THE PROVINCE OF CANADA, 1863,c 3 
"AN ACT RESPECTING THE INSPECTION OF WHEAT AND OTHER GRAIN" 


13. The following shall "be the standards of Wheat and 
other Grain 

Wheat 

White Winter - Shall “be sound, plump, and free from 
admixture of other Grain. 

White Winter - Shall he sound and good, hut less 
free from other Grain than No. 1. 

Bed V/inter - Shall he sound, plump, and free from 
admixture of other Grain. 

Red Winter - Shall he sound and good, hut less free 
from other Grain than No. 1. 

Spring - Shall he sound, plump, and free from 
admixture of other Grain, and weigh not less than 
61 pounds per Winchester hushel. 

Spring - Shall he soun£,free from admixture of other 
Grain, and weigh not less than 59 pounds per 
Winchester hushel, and shall consist of two grades - 
No. 1 Bright and No.l. 

No. 2. Spring - Shall he sound, hut less free from other 
Grain than No. 1, and its weight shall not he less 
than 57 pounds per Winchester hushel. 

All unsound, damp, or very dirty Wheat of whatever kind, 
shall he classed as T Rejected T . 


No.l. 
No.2. 
No.l. 

No.2. 

Extra 

No.l. 









4 


t 






« ... ■ t 





:0 


4 4 




* 







* 4 


< 








t 









?81 

Peas, 

No.l - Shall "be clean, sound and white, 

No.2 - Shall he sound, mixed. 

All unsound, damp, or very dirty Peas shall he classed 
’Rejected 1 . 

Corn 

Pure White - Pure Yellow - Mixed and Rejected-Shall 

he classed according to its quality. 

Oats 

No.l - Shall he clean and sound. 

No.2 - Shall he sound hut too dirty for No. 1, 

All unsound, damp, or very dirty Oats shall he classed 
as IT Rejected". 

Rye 

No. 1 - Shall he sound and well cleaned. 

No. 2 - Shall he such as is too dirty to he classed as No 

Parley 

No. 1 - Shall he plump in the herry, well cleaned, sound 
and bright in color. 

No. 2 - Shall he sound and clean. 

All unsound, damp, or very dirty Barley shall he classed 
as T Rejected T . 


******* 













28 2 


APPENDIX 6 
Excerpt from the 

THE GENERAL INSPECTION ACT, 1873, c 49 


Winter Wheat 

No. 1 White V/inter Wheat shall "be pure White Winter Wheat, 
sound, plump and. well cleaned. 

No. 2 White Winter Wheat shall he pure White Winter Wheat, 
sound and reasonably clean. 

No. 1 Red Winter Wheat shall he Red or Red and White mixed, 
sound, plump and well cleaned. 

No. 2 Red Winter Wheat shall he pure Winter Wheat, Red or 
Red and White mixed, sound and reasonably clean. 

No. 3 Winter Wheat shall include Winter Wheat not clean 
and plump enough for No. 2, and weighing not less 
than 55 pounds to the measured Winchester bushel. 

Rejected Winter Wheat shall include Winter Wheat damp, 
musty, or from any cause so badly damaged, as to 
render it unfit for No. 3. 


Spring Wheat 

Iio. 1 Spring Wheat shall be plump and well cleaned. 


No. 2 Spring Wheat shall be sound, reasonably clean, and 
weighing not less than 56 pounds to the measured 
Winchester bushel. 

No. 3 Spring Wheat shall be reasonably clean, not good 

enough for Ho. 2, weighing not less than 54 pounds 
to the measured Winchester bushel. 



















All Spring Wheat damp, musty, grov/n, “badly “bleached, or 
from any other cause unfit for No. 3 shall “be 
graded Rejected. 

A mixture of Spring and Winter Wheat shall “be called 

Spring Wheat and graded according to the quality 
thereof. 

Black Sea and Flinty Fife Wheat shall, in no case, he 
inspected as higher than No. 2. 









t 








* 

















. *84 

APPENDIX 7 


Excerpt from the 


GENERAL INSPECTION ACT, 18.85, c 66 


56. The grades of grain shall "be as follows:- 

Spring Wheat 

Extra Manitoba hard wheat shall he sound and well cleaned, 
weighing not less than sixty-two pounds to the bushel, and 
shall be composed of red Fife v/heat grown in Manitoba or 
the North West Territories of Canada. 

No 1 Manitoba hard wheat shall be sound and well cleaned, 
weighing not less than sixty pounds to the bushel and 
shall be composed of at least eighty-five per ceht of red 
Fife wheat grown in Manitoba or the North West Territories 
of Canada. 

No 2 Manitoba hard wheat shall be sound and reasonably clean' | 
weighing not less than fifty-eight pounds to the bushel, 
and shall be composed of at least eighty-five per cent of 
red Fife v/heat, grown in Manitoba or the North West 
Territories of Canada., 

No 1 Canada hard wheat shall be sound and well cleaned, 
weighing not less than sixty pounds to the bushel, and 
shall be composed of at least eighty-five per cent of 
hard wheat. 

No 2 Canada hard wheat shall be sound and reasonably clean, 
weighing not less than fifty-eight pounds to the bushel, 
and shall be composed of at least eighty-five per cent of 
lard v/heat. 

No 1 Northern spring v/heat shall be sound and v/ell cleaned, 
weighing not less than sixty pounds to the bushel, and 
shall be composed of at least fifty per cent of Red Fife 
'/heat, grown in Manitoba or the North '.Test Territories of 

Canada. 

jo 2 Northern spring wheat shall be sound and reasonably 
3lean, v/eighing not less than fifty-eight pounds to the 

'7e! h !ife a SheI^ 1 gr^m 0 ?g P ftIlit8la a Sr 1 !tl t H^^;Y?l ] b cent of 

Territories of Canada. 










No 3 Northern Spring wheat shall comprise all wheat of the 
above mentioned varieties, fit foh warehousing, and 
weighing not less than fifty-six pounds to the bushel, not 
good enough to be graded as No 2. 

No 1 Spring wheat shall be sound and well cleaned, weighing 
not less than sixty pounds to the bushel. 

No 2 Spring wheat shall be sound and reasonably clean, 
weighing not less than fifty-eight pounds to the bushel'. 

No 3 Spring wheat shall comprise all wheat fit for ware¬ 
housing, not good enough to be graded as No 2, weighing 
not less than fifty-six pounds to the bushel. 

Rejected Spring wheat shall comprise all wheat fit for 
warehousing, but too low in weight or otherwise unfit to 
be graded as No 3. 

G-oose wheat. No 1 shall be plump and well cleaned, weighing 
not less than sixty-one pounds to the bushel. 

G-oose wheat, No. 2 shall be plump and reasonably well slewed, 
weighing not less than fifty-nine pounds to the bushel. 

G-oose wheat, No 3 shall comprise such as is not good enough 
to be graded as No 2, reasonably clean and weighing not 
less than fifty-five pounds to the bushel. 

Winter Wheat 

Extra white winter wheat shall be pure white winter wheat, 
choice in color, sound, plump and well cleaned, weighing 
not less than sixty-two pounds to the bushel. 

tfo 1 white winter wheat shall be pure white winter wheat, 
sound, plump and v/ell cleaned, weighing not less than 
sixty-pounds to the bushel. 

No 2 white winter wheat shall be pure white winter wheat, 
sound and reasonably clean, weighing not less than fifty- 
jight pounds to the bushel. 

Ho 1 Red winter wheat shall be pure red winter wheat, sound, 
plump and well cleaned, weighing not less than sixty-two 
pounds to the bushel. 











No 2 Red. winter wheat shall he red winter wheat sound and 
reasonably clean, weighing not less than sixty pounds 

to the bushel. 

No 1 Mixed winter wheat shall be white and red winter 
wheat mixed, sound, plump and well cleaned, weighing not 
less than sixty-two pounds to the bushel. 

No 2 Mixed winter wheat shall be white and red winter 
wheat mixed, sound and reasonably clean, weighing not 
less than fifty-nine pounds to the bushel. 

No 3 Winter wheat shall include winter wheat not clean and 
plump enough to be graded as Ho 2, weighing not less than 
fifty-seven pounds to the bushel. 

Rejected winter wheat shall include winter wheat damp, 
musty, or from any cause so badly damaged as to render it 
unfit to be graded as No 3. 

All good wheat that is slightly damp shall be reported and 
entered on the inspectors books as ,f no grade' 1 , with the 
inspector’s notations as to quality and condition. 

All wheat that is in a heating condition, or too damp to 
be considered safe for warehousing or that has any 
considerable admixture of foreign grain or seeds, or is 
badly binburnt, whatsoever grade it might otherwise be, 
shall be reported and entered on the inspector’s books 
as "condemned", with the inspector’s notations as to 
quality and condition. 

Any material admixture of "rice wheat", otherwise knovm 
as "goose" or "California" wheat, or of red-chaff wheat 
with other descriptions of wheat, shall exclude the parcel 
from regular inspection. 

All wheat shall be weighed, and the weight per bushel 
entered on the inspection book. 


( grades were defined fc r com, oats, rye, barley 

and peas) 







< 






< 


X 


















o 0*7 


Provisions respecting Grain generally. 

No grain that is waim, or is in a heating condition, 
shall he graded. 

In the inspection of grain, the weight shall not alone 
determine the grade. 

All inspectors shall make their reasons for grading grain, 
when necessary, fully known by notation on their books. 







/ 













°©8 

APPENDIX 8 
Excerpt from an 

ORDER IN COUNCIL, August 9, 1888 


44 The grades of grain shall he as follows:- 

Spring Wheat 

Extra Manitoba hard wheat shall he sound and well cleaned, 
weighing not less than sixty-two pounds to.the bushel, 
and shall h,e composed of at least eighty-five per cent of 
hard red Fife wheat, grown in Manitoba or the North V/est 
Territories of Canada. 

No 1 Manitoba hard wheat shall be sound and well cleaned, 
weighing not less than sixty pounds to the bushel, and 
shall be composed of at least two-thirds of hard red Fife 
wheat, grown in Manitoba or the North West Territories 
of Canada. 

No 2 Manitoba hard wheat shall be sound and reasonably 
clean, weighing not less than, fifty-eight, pounds to the 
bushel, and shall be composed of at least two-thirds of 
hard red Fife wheat, grown in Manitoba or the North West 
Territories of Canada. 

No 1 hard white Fife wheat shall be sound and well cleaned 
weighing not less than sixty pounds to the bushel, and 
shall be composed of not less than sixty per cent of hard 
white Fife wheat, grown in Manitoba or the North 
Territories of Canada, and shall not contain more than 
twenty-five per cent of soft wheat. 

No 1 Manitoba northern wheat shall be sound and v/ell 
cleaned, weighing not less than sixty pounds to the bv ’ 9l 
and shall be composed of at least fifty per cent of hard 
red Fife wheat, grown in Manitoba or the North Vest 
Territories of Canada. 

No 2 Manitoba northern wheaj shall be sound and reasonably 
clean, of good milling qualities, and fi for warehousing, 
weighing not less than fifty-eight pounds to the bushel, 
and shall be composed of at least fifty per cent of hard 
red Fife wheat, grown in Manitoba or the North West 
Territories of Canada. 











289 


No 1 Spring wheat ) 

) 

No 2 Spring wheat ) 

) 

No 3 Spring wheat ) 

) 

Rejected spring wheat ) 

) 

Goose wheat No 1 ) 

) 

G-oose wheat No 2 ) 

) 

y 

Goose wheat No 3 ) 


defined as in 1885 
(see appendix 7) 


V/inter Wheat 


All winter wheat grades defined as in 1885 
(see appendix 7) 

Provisions as to all grains. 

No grain that is warm, or is in a heating condition, shall 
he graded. 

No wheat or other grain that has been subject to scouring 
or treatment by use of lime or sulphur, shall be graded 
higher than No 3. 

In the inspection of grain, the weight shall not alone 
determine the grade. 

All inspectors shall make their reasons for grading grain, 
when necessary, fully known by notation on their books. 

Samples furnished to inspectors shall be made to conform, 
as strictly as possible, to the conditions and terms 
specified in the foregoing classification. 

The above modifications Shall not come into force until 
the 1st of September, 1888. 








290 


APPENDIX 9 
Excerpt from an 

ORDER IN COUNCIL, October 14, 1895. 


Spring Wheat 

No 1 Manitoba hard wheat shall consist wholly of wheat 
grown in Manitoba or the North West Territories of Canada, 
and shall be sound and well cleaned, weighing not less 
than sixty pounds to the bushel, and shall be composed of 
at least two-thirds of hard red Fyfe wheat. No wheat which 
has been subjected to scouring or brushing for the removal 
of smut or other fungoid growth, shall be included in 
this grade. 


No 2 Manitoba hard wheat ) 

) no change from 1888 except 

No 1 hard white Fyfe wheat ) in arrangement of definition 

No 1 Manitoba northern wheat ) 

) 

No 2 Manitoba northern wheat ) 


Spring wheat ) 

) 

G-oose wheat ) 

) 

Winter wheat ) defined as in 1888 

) 

Corn ) 

) 

Oats ) 

) 

Rye ) 


Barley (same grade definitions as in 1888 but the 

following clause was omitted.) 

All barley grown in Manitoba or the North 7/est 
Territories of Canada, shall be graded as above, 
but shall be distinctly classified by inspectors as 
"Manitoba” barley. 


Peas 


) defined as in 1888 








291 


Provisions as to all Grain 

In the Inspection of grain, inspectors are to be 
governed in their interpretation of the foregoing 
classification by the standard samples selected by the 
board appo'nted for that pivrpose. If, however, they are 
called upon to grade any wheat, which, as to v/eight, is 
not equal to the weight of such standard sample, they are 
not, if they deem it otherwise equal to the standard 
sample, to reduce the grade, provided the weight is equal 
to that required by the legal definition hereinbefore 
given. 

Neither shall the inspectors decline to grade any 
v/heat, other than No 1 Manitoba hard, because it differs 
in its constituent parts from the standard sample, 
provided it is, in respect of soundness, cleanliness and 
the proportion of hard wheat contained therein and its 
general milling qualities equal to the standard placed in 
their hands for their governance. 

Nor shall the restrictions mentioned in grade one as 
to scoured or brushed wheat apply to any of the other 
grades fixed hereby. 

(paragraphs 1, 2, 4 and 5 of the 1888 classification 
continued in 1895) 

(paragraph 3 of the 1888 classification omitted) 















292 


APPENDIX 10 
Excerpt from an 

ORDER IN COUNCIL, September 26, 1896. 


Spring Wheat 

No 1 Manitoba hard wheat shall consist wholly of wheat 
of wheat grown in Manitoba or the North West Territories 
of Canada, and sh&ll be sound and well cleaned, weighing 
not less than sixty-one pounds to the bushel, and shall 
be composed of at least three fourths of hard red Fyfe 
wheat. 

No 2 Manitoba hard wheat (defined as in 1895 except that 

the minimum weight is increa. od 
from 58 to 58£ lbs per bushel) 

No 1 Manitoba northern ( defined as in 1895) 

Ho wheat which has been subject to scouring or brushing 
for the removal of smut or other fungoid growth shall be 
included in any of the above mentioned grades. 

No 2 Manitoba northern ) 

) 

No 1 hard white Fyfe wheat ) 

) 

No 1 Spring wheat ) 

) 

No 2 Spring wheat ) defined as in 1895 

No 3 Spring wheat ) 

Rejected spring wheat ) 

G-oose wheat No 1 ) 

) 

Goose wheat No 2 ) 

) 

Goose wheat No 3 ) 


( grades of all other grain defined as in 1895 ) 










Chart # 1 

WHEAT PRODUCTION AND INSPECTION 

Production - 

Inspection - 


M 

rH 

0 

& 

m 

2 

PQ 

fl 

o 

•H 


0 


d 2 
w 



1931 


19m 


1923 


1925 


1927 


1929 























Million Bushels 


294 


Chart # 2 

BARLEY PRODUCTION AND INSPECTION 


Production 

Inspection 



1921 1923 1925 1927 1929 1931 
































Million Bushels 


296 




Chart # 4 

RYE PRODUCTION AND INSPECTION 

Production - 

Inspection - 



. ■ ■ ■ ‘ .. . —- 

1923 1925 1927 1929 1931 



















297 




Chart # 5 

FLAX PRODUCTION AND INSPECTION 

Production - 

Inspection - 















298 

Chart*# 6 

BUCKWHEAT PRODUCTION AND INSPECTION 


Production 

Inspection 




















Chart # 7 Origin of Classes of Statutory Wheat Grades 



EASTERi: DIVTSFOII 




















































300 


Talle 1 

TRADE IN FLOUR OF PORTS OF NOVA SCOTIA, 
1807, 1814, 1821 and 1828 (1) 


Year 

Imports 

Exports 

1807 

30,136 bbls. 

2,989 11113. 

1814 

5,523 " 

3,850 " 

1821 

60,446 " 

15,742 " 

1628 

77,094 " 

26,721 " 


(1) Compiled from data presented *by Thos. C. Hal Hurt on 
in "Historical and Statistical Account of Nova Scotia", 
1829, v 2, p 388, 













301 

Table 2 

STANDARD WEIGHT PER BUSHEL OF THE DIFFERENT 

KINDS OF GRAIN AND TITE DATE ESTABLISHED (1) 


Nova Scotia 

Upper 

Canada Dominion 

of Canada 


1792 

1835 

1 

1853 

1 

1873 

1898 


c 4 

c 7 

c 193 

c 47 

c 30 

Barley 

48 

48 


* 


Buckwheat 



48 



Corn 

58 

56 




Flax 




50 

56 

Oats 

34 

34 




Peas 

60 

60 




Rye 

56 

56 




Wheat 

58 

60 



1 


(1) Compiled from statutes of the Legislatures. 







































Wble 4. CHANGES IN STATUTORY GRADES OF WHITE WINTER WHEAT (Eastern) 



































































-:v; :y •' 











Table 5 CHANGES IN STATUTORY GRADES OF RED WINTER WHEAT (Eastern) 






?04 



d 

4* 


d 


• 


0 

• CQ 


0 


CO 


P 

PcP 


P 


,o 


d 

fc| rH 


d 

d 

rH i 


•H 

• 


•H 

* >-» d 

o 


«*rH O P 


•2 

'd rH 0 d 00 

CO 


d Pi0 ^ aJ 



0 fO H 1 ) IQ 

O' 

rd 

0 0 0 


rd 

d •* «* d O 

I—1 

0 

d - -Pi .4 


0 

rd P 4 C) 4 - 

> •» 


« 

-d fl-p ^ 


« 

0 d a o op 



0 d d o 



d d d w 

ai 


rH 

p ^ 0 


CM 

d oh a! iR. 0 



P OH^ 



Pc W Pc 0 C 

> ,d 


O 

Pc CO O lP 


O 

rH 

d r- 

\ > 



* 

nd 


d 

*» d 


d 

p 


0 

*d d 


0 

p 


P 

d 0 


-P 

° d 


d 

P rH 


d 

co d 


•H 

o o 


•H 

0 



0 



•* i— 1 CO 



>a CQ 

o 


•d op 


rd 

"HP 

cr> 

»d 

0 «H 


0 

rd rQ rH 

r—1 

0 

d - 


« 

0 d 


« 

PcO 



d d oo 



0 a o 


CM 

o in 


rH 

d P 



0 CO 



P rH 


O 

d d 


O 

Pc Pc 


Id 

d 0 


fn 




Pc Pi 




^ • 



+% 



d 

rd CQ 

d 

*d c 

■I 



0 

d 

0 

d d 



-P 

d rH 

-P 

d 0 



d 

O 

d 

o rH 



•H 

CO rH CM 

•H 

CQ C 

) 




i— 1 tO 

£= 


TO 


IQ 


- 0 


- >SrQ 


00 

rd 

rd > ^ 

rd 

rd rH rH 


00 

0 

0 «d 

0 

0 ,0 


rH 

P4 

d *0 

P4 

d d O 




pc d 


d to 



rH 

0 a d 

CM 

0 C 

) 




d d <i> 


d CO 



O 

d rH rH 

O 

d d 



J2? 

Pc Pc O 

Id 

Pc 0 






d 




rd 







0 








d 


d 



d 

•H 

0 


d 



0 

a 

-p 

rd 

0 



P 

• 4* • 

d 

d 

rH 



d 

^ Pc^d 

•rH 

d 

- O 



•H 

a 0 


rd 


CO 


08 d d 


rd 0 •* >3 


P- 


• r-l d 

»d 

0 rd rH 


00 

»d 

« Pc 0 

0 

d’Hri^ 


rH 

0 

rH 

P4 

S P d 



P4 

d - o 


d 

o s 




o rd 

CM 

O 0 CO o 



i—1 

d *h 


P CQ 




fd P H 

O 

rd *H d 



O 

0 O 0 

Id 

0 ,d 0 




d 0 £ 


d £ d 




d 







•H 



d 



• 

a d 

• 


0 0 



' 

o d 



0 Hi 




d **0 



d p 



rd 

- -<H 

rd 

4% 

<H o • 



0 

rd Pc d 

0 


_ d 


CO 

P4 

d S 0 0 

« 

d * 

i co a -h 


to 


P p 0 .d 


d o co o d 


00 

i — 1 

O H d -P 

CM 

o o 0 d d 


i — 1 


CO Pc<H O 


w *tf)r-I <H tcO 



O 


O 





Id 


Id 





p 

d 

o 

•H 

CQ 


CQ 

d 

iH 

o 

p 

d 


d 


0 

-p 


d 


<d 

p 

•H 


=5 


(D 

0 

CO 

CO 

0 

rd 

d 

& 

d 

0 

£ 

O 


d 

o 

F*c 
















ion 






































Table 6.CHANGES IN STATUTORY GRADES OF MIXED WHITER WHEAT (Eastern) 







?or lower grades see white winter wheat classification 






























. 






































Table 7. CHANGES IN STATUTORY GRADES OF SPRING WHEAT (Eastern) 





















































































307 

Tafcle 8. CHANGES IN STATUTORY GRADES OF GOOSE WHEAT 

1885 

1930 

No 1 Goose 7/feeat 

No 1 Goose Wheat 

plump, 

well cleaned, 

61 11s. 

sound, plump, 
clean, 

61 lbs. 

No 2 Goose Yfheat 

No 2 Goose Wheat 

plump, 

reasonably well cleaned, 

59 lbs 

sound, 

reasonably clean, 

59 lbs 

No 3 Goose Wheat 

No 3 Goose 'Wheat 

not good enough for No 2, 
reasonably clean, 

55 lbs 

reasonably sound, 
reasonably clean, 

55 lbs 

No 4 Goose Y/heat 

fit for warehousing 




























Tafcle 9. CHANGES IN STATUTORY GRADES OF MANITOBA HARD WHEAT 












































































































































Table 11. CHANGES IN STATIST OH Y GRADES OF 
WINTER V/HEAT (Western) 


1906 


No 1 A.R.W. 



1912 


No 1 A.R.W. 


62 lbs 


No 



62 lbs 



Ho 


1930 


No 1 A.R.W . 

6Of' hard kernels 
red wlnty, fig lbs, 
well mnVurea\ pr? c 


ree of(damage, free 
. ftrom f \_> 7 , 

lfi cereal grains, 


other wheats 


tard,J red winter, 
.alBan.fiUJLfrS-. 


“7^ 

inter, sound, 
Iza lbs V . 


No 3 JL-R-W- 


L-Q 


nardjred winter, no-f clean 
Wu^aunjL..enough.-£or 



berta Winter 


r white,' 
kernels, 
prac 
fnaged 
re&s free 



UW .V/y 

-V« Q O Cl fffll 1 


d or white 
re'as well \atured, 
els, 

; reas frefe frdrn 
foreign \matter, 

eer£s*l^;rains, 

j 29& durum, 

red <k White^/bbujid, 20f* other v/heats 


[white v/inten, np 
clean and safer d 
!enough Z 

56 lbs 
No/3r^.l{/V 

•VI 


iplump, \cleajjr, 61/lbs J 
50?* re ^whea t 
N~6>2-A ,.I07 . 


red & whiteV sound, 
plump, Idea/, 59 lbs 













































t 


311 

Table 12. CHANGES III STATUTORY GRADES OF AT"BER 

DURUM WHEAT 

1925 

1930 

Ho 1 C.W.Amber Durum 

Ho 1 C.W .Amber Durum 

sound, clean, 62 lbs, 
75# hard amber kernels, 

5# spring or winter 
wheat, ## red durum 

Mindum or equal; well matured; 
prac: free from damaged kernels; 

62 lbs; 75# hard amber kernels; 
free of foreign matter; 

4# other grain; free of red durum; 
5# other v/heat. 

■No 2 C•'.'•Amber Durum 

Ho 2 C.W.Amber Durum 

sound, reasonably 
clean, 60 lbs, 60# hard 
amber kernels, 10# spr 
& winter wheat, 10# 
red durum 

Mindum or equal;well matured; prac 
free of damaged kernels; 60 lbs; 

60# hard amber kernels; free of 
foreign matter; 1# other grain; 

59 s red durum; 15# other wheat. 

Ho 3 C.W.Amber Durum 

Ho 3 C.W.Amber Durum 

reas sound, reas clean, 

58 lbs, 45# hard amber 
kernels, 15# spring & 
winter wheat, 10# red 
durum 

reas well matured, 58 lbs, reas 
free of damaged kernels,30# hard 
vitreous kernels, free of foreign 
matter, 2# cereal grains, 10# red 
durum, 15# other wheat 

Ho 4 C.W.AMBER Durum 

Ho 4 C.W.Amber Durum 

reas clean, 55 lbs, 

20# spring & winter wheal 
IO 96 red durum 

56 lbs, reas well matured, frosted 
& damaged, reas free of foreign 
matter, 2J# foreign matter & cereal 
grains, 10# red durum, 20# other 
wheat 

Ho 5 C.W.Amber Durum 

Ho 1! C.7/.Amber Durum 

reas clean, 55 lbs, 25# 
spring & winter wheat, 

10# red durum 

54 lbs, frosted or otherwise 
damaged kernels, reas free of 
foreign matter, 3# cereal grains 
& foreign matter, 10# red durum, 

25# other wheats. , 

ITo 6 C.V/.Amber Durum 

Ho 6 C.W.Amber Durum 

Unfit for Ho 5 

damaged & light weight, reas free 
of foreign matter & cereal grains, 
10# red durum, 30# other wheat 
































• 5 


t 



< 



« 









5 





Table #i; Changes in statutory grades of eastern oats. 


1863 1873 1899 1904 1930 



sound 


sound 


,as’. clean :ReAs 
eas. freef(rea 
rom other—xro; 


sound 
(too dirt: 


Sound 


sound 
(■coo dirt 
jSor No i 


NO.C 4 JflfHITE No. 4- WHITE 
sound - :sordid 
(otherwise (otherwise 
hot equal : not equal 
tOkNo 3 ) -— t eNo 3| 

28 iba. 28 r&n" 


REJECTED REJECTED 
-un aeUnd ^===^uri s o un d ^ 
=rery dirtyl^diz^ty 


any otherrrf(iny other— 
cauae unfit cause unfit 
for No 2) forlTo 3} 


(real. JTree 


No. 1 WHITE No. 1 WHITE 

clean ; clean 


•sound 


(reas. free (reas. free 
free others* from other 

n) - -grain) 

34 lbtf. 34 lb*. 


from crbher plump 
grain) 


No. 2 WHITE No. 2 WHITE 


clean 

free 

other 


No.P5"WHITE - No^3~ WHITE 
sound 

oo dirt^ -{jfcoo dirty 
r~ E^pr No 2) 
r26zibs. 


REJECTED 


IBLACJK OATS ) 

MIXED OATS f 1,2,3, & 4 
CLIPPED OATSJ 
Definitions same as for 
White oats in both years 
except Clipped oats 
weigh 38,36,34 & 32 lbs. 

































































I r . 
















> 


( 
























Table 14. CHANGES IT STATTTORY GRADES 0? 


OATS CWestem) 












































































































Table # 16 CHANGES ITT STATUTORY UAHI.UY GRA5? < ‘- (Western) 


1904 

1912 

1930 

Ian. 

No 1 C .17. 

1 CW 6 Rov.' l 1 CW Trebi 1 CW 2 Row 

plump, soun 
clean, free 

gr; 

L, bright, 
from other 

> 

48 lbs 

50 lbs 50 lbs 

0.A.C.21 Trebi Two Row 

sound, 95fi pure, 

no seeds, no wild oats, )total 

pr. c free from other grainJprac frei 

No 2 Man 

No 2 CW 

2 CW 6 Row | 2 CW Trebi T 2 CW 2 Row 

S011TP, rers 
free from o 
48 

clean, reas 
;her grain, 
lbs 

49 lbs 1 49 lbs So lbs 

O.A.C. 21 , Trebi 1 Two Row 

sound, 95# pure, 

i# seeds, wild oats,} , , , .. 

\f other grain ) total V 

No 3 Ex Han 

No 3 Ex CW 

3 Sc CW 6 P 4 3 Sc CW Trel 1 r Sc cw . 

same as 2 ex< 

5ept color 

O.A.C. 21 Trebi Two Rov; 

A# | 22 »|* 2$‘ w JSS e A.4§ V * 8 

Ipgs other grain Jto.al l..v 

No 3 Man 

No 3 CW 

No 3 CW 

47 lbs, any variety,.slight frost, 
immature, weather stained, shrunken 
damaged, sweet. 

1 hb seeds. 696 wild oats,) total 

S7 e># otfter grain J xomax tv 

shrunken, s! 

45 : 

.ight damage, 
.bs 

No 4 Man 

No 4 CW 

No 4 CW 

46 lbs, damaged, stained, sweet, 
ds, 

10# other grain ; IO 5 S 

equal to 3 < 
wei, 

except in 
jht 

Rejected 

damp, musty, 
badly damage* 
mixed with 
other grai] 

i, 

i 

No 5 CW 

42 lbs, damaged, badly weathered, 
seeds, 18# wild oats,; -«- 0 4 ..,p 

IQfi other grain ) " 

No 6 CW 

excluded on acdt of weight, 
admixtures; up to 5# heat damage, 

3# seeds, 25f; wild oats,} total 
25^ other grain ) 25^ 

No H e< 

ected in statutory grades 


















































G 


T 
























































































Table #1 y Changes In statutory grades of western rye. 


1904 1912 1925 1930 



1 Canada Western 


pvell oleahed 
free of e'rgot 


sound 
(w^ell 


leane 


.ell J > 
cleaned) _jpl' 


leaned/) 


No. 2 Canada Western 


s-otmd 


scti matter (1) 
n'ntrff wheat 
matter & grain 


No. 3 Canada Western 


slight /damageX 
UZf ergot (1) ) 

If foreign matter 
3f grain^not^ Wheat 
5 'f for. mat ter & grain 


REJECTED REJECTED 


unf it 


No. 4 Canada Western 


REJECTED 


;n matter 
nrrt^wheat 
matter & grain 


(^x-clu&erd from preceed* 
ing grades on account 


(l) maximum limits 


& OTHER GRAIN 


































































518 

Table # 19. Changes in Statutory Grades of Peas. 




1863 

1885 

1904 

1912 


No.l 

clean 

sound 

white 

No.l 

not worm eai 

Ho • 1 

en 

free from b\ 

No.l 

Lgs 

64 Its 

No.l \r i J c 

No .2 
sound 
mixed 

No.2 

Mod. clean 

::o.2 

reas. clean 
reas free f] 

No. 2 

'om worm eat' 
62 lbs 

ITo.2 Vaiite 

reas sound 

>n & bujQr pat 

v/hite 

IT o. 

too dirty fc 
worm eaten 

No.3 
r No 2 

No.3 

60 lbs 

No.3 './hite 

worm eaten 

or buggy 

Rejected 

unsound 

damp 

very dirty 

Rejected 
damp, worm 
eaten or 
otherwise 
unfit for #! 









Marrowfat 

sami 

Grades 1, 2 

5 as above 

and 3 




Mixed Peas 

Mixed Peas 


sound 

sound 

defined as foi 
ivhite except 

?OT* - 



w WJ. J 






















































Table # 20* Changes in Statutory Grades of Corn. 


1863 

1373 

1904 

1912 

1930 

.-ure White 

Thite Corn 

ITo.l Viliite 


r ~~TT(T.~i White 


white 

sound, dry 
clean 

16$& mois* 

;ure 

cool and sweet 
under 5fj other corn 
57 lbs 

• (see 
mixed 
corn) 

(see 

Ho.1 Corn 

f 

ITo.2 White 


ITo.2 V/hite 

white, (1 ry 

sound 

reasonably 

clean 
pL6£ mois- 

;ure 

cool & sweet, 55 lb: 
nder 5# other corn 

(see 

No.2 

Corn) 

ITo.3 White 


ITo.3 White 

white, sou 

unfit for U 

nd, dry, 
o 2 

19^ mois* 

reasonably clean 

;ure 

cool L sweet, 53 lb 5 
under 5 ft other corn,* 

:?ure Yellow 

fellow Cori 

ITo.l Yellow 

) 

same d< 
)white < 

) 

jfinitions as for 
except as to cblor 

L 

Ho. 2 Yellow 


yellow 


Mixed 

ITo.l Corn 

ITo.2 Corn 


ITo.l Mixed 


sound, dry, 
nixed,plum] 
■/ell cleane 

sound, mi 

d 

peed, dry ; 

L6 <?o mois - 

reas clean 
;ure 

cool & sweet, 57 lb*, 
under other corn 

ITo.2 Corn 

: ITo.3 Corn 


ITo.2 ”ixe§ 

dry, mixed, dry, mixe 
?eas clean, 
lot plump 
enough for 

ITo 1 

d, reas < 
16«& mois 

Llean, sound! 
iture 

cool & sweet,55 lbs 
under bfi other com 

Rejected 

- ; 

Rejected Rejected 


Ho 3 Mixed 




lined, cool,sweet, 
inder 5^ other corn 
reas clean, 53 lbs, 

19$6 moisture 





























































320 


Table # 21. Changes in Statutory Grades of Buckwheat. 


sound,clean,dry. sound, dry, 


free from other 
grain, 50 lbs 


Eastern Division 


1904 


No.l 


1950 


ITo.l 


Ho; 2 


sound, clean, 
dry, 48 lb s 


Western Division 


1925 


Ko.i c 


sound, clean, 


ell matured, 
prac free from 


No 


sound, not 
clean enough 
for No. 2, 

45 lbs 


No Grade 


damp, fit for 
warehousing,too 
dirty for No. 3 


No Established 


Grade 


clean, 50 lbs free fromoothei'damage & forwjji 


grain, 50 lbs 


ter, 5C 


No 


sound, dry, 
clean, 48 lbs 


sound, clean, 
reas free from 
other grain, 

148 lbs 


No 


reas sound, 
45b lbs 


No. 4 


damaged 


No. 2 


. 

well mat 
rea 


ell, 

free from 
dam: 5 , to fre 
of wild oats, 

2?o other grain, 
2^ total for. gn t 
matter, 48 lbs ! 


No. 3 C.V/. 


reas sound, 
reas clean, 
reas free from 
other grain, 

45 lbs 


Rejected 


1930 


1:0.1 c 


No 3 C. 


reas well matu¬ 
red, reas free 
from damage a 
wild oats, 

3?:■ other grain, 
total forei¬ 
gn matter, 

45 lbs. 


No. 4 C 


damaged, 
heat damage, 
prac free of 
seeds, reas 
free of wild 
oats, 5^ othar 
grain, -total 
foreign matter 


































































ro cji 


Table # 22 



Changes in statutory grades of flax 



Black - grade definitions 
Red - trend of grade changes 


der 4 


ected 




















































































Table # 23. Wheat production in Canada prior to Confederation. (1) 

- - i, f — . --- ■ ■ y . . ■ i 

1734 1842 1844 1848 1851 - 52 1860-61 


3 

CVi 

brl 

> 

c3 

u$ 

3 

rH 

o 

D- 


to 

o- 

* 

0ft 

•t 

m 

•ft 


CD 

CVI 

CT> 

o 

|| 

01 


rH 

£> 

02 

ID U 

H 

CO 

CO 

CVI 

CD 

CD II 

o? 




#ft 

•ft 

•ft 





02 


00 







02 


c- 

ID 

O 

co : 


ID 


ID 

CO 

LCD 


CO 


rH 

cD 

ID 

i 

cr> i 

O? 


at 

0ft 

#ft 

0ft 

0ft 


o- 

cD 

02 

co 

O 



O 

CD 


cD 


CVI 

CVI 

cO 

o 

CVI 




0ft 

A 





02 

CO 

! ; & 




rH 


rH 


to 

t> 

o- 

co 

lO 

LQ 


cr» 
02 
CD 

02 

CT> 


02 

02 


CO 


02 

cr> 

CD 

O'* 

to ! 

o- ; 



-Bj 

•rH 

■P 

O 

O 

O 

•H 



• 

CO 

£ 

a5 

c6 

M 

ra 

nd 

Fh 'cJ 

• 

o3 


h ai 

0) aJ 




(D pj 

£ g 

• 

o 

£ ^ 

FH GJ 

o «J 


$2h 


> 

P O 


(1) Compiled from census returns. 













































Table # 2^-. Oat production in’ Canada prior to Confederation (1) 





? nn 










































I 












Table # 25. Barley prod-action in Canada proir to Confederation (1) 


GO 

rH 


?°4 


cv> 

CO 

rH 


s 


co 

CO 



d 




•H 




•P 

rA 



O 

o 



O 

•H 



CO 


d 

• 


U) 

nd 

M 

Oo 

d 

U «J 


t> 

p 

<D £ 

W 

o 

£ ^ 

Ph c3 


£3 

0 pq 

P40 

4 


H 



£> 

lO 

cr» 


cvi 

tO 

m 

to 


«3 
rd 
?-i c3 
Q> 3 
£ flS 
o o 


CVJ 

LO 

00 

O* 

CVI 


cn 

tO 

cn. 

o 

£> 

o 

t- 

CO 


rH 

LO 

tO 

cr> 

to 

o 

1 

«* 


«% 

•* 

«* 

•* 


CO 

CT> 


rH 

iH 

! H 

O 

CVJ 

tO 

cr> 

CVI 

CD 

(T> 

to 

CVJ 

CVJ 


CO 

CVJ 

to 

CO 




•% 

«% 

* 

H 




CVJ 

CVJ 

lO 

CO 

lO 


o 

O 

CVJ 

to 

lO 



cr> 

o 

LO 

to 

rH 

1 

* 

O 

CO 


C"- 

tO 



•% 

#% 

«% 

0* 


1—1 


to 


LO 

lO 

h 

LO 


cr> 

o 

CVJ 

cr* 

cr> 

CO 


rH 


to 


to 

H 






•* 







rH 





c- 







CVJ 



CO 




o- 




* 

* 

* 

•* 

* 


CO 




LO 



H 




1—1 







LO 




»d 

0- 

-p 

P 

O 

P< 

0 





























Tattle # 26. Rye production prior to Confederation. (1) 




tfl 

rH 

CVI 

o» 

iH 


o 

CO 

o» 

l C" 

<£> 


t> 

rH 

rH 

o 




«* 


«* 

1 

* 

cr» 

* CO 


*> 



lO 

P- 


t- 

O 



o> 

CD 

I CO 

<£> 






00 





i rH 

rH 







CO 


cr> 

CV 

CT> 

to 


CV 

CV 

CO 



H 1 


CV 

0% 

* 


•* 

** 

H 


CV 

1C 

cr> 

vD 


o- 

CV] 

1 10 




CO 

CO 



CO 

CV! 




cr* 

CV 




CV 



* 

* 


«* 




«£> 

lO 





CV! 





CO 



to 

E'¬ 


er* 

<£> 

<X> 

CV 

<T> 

CV 


GJ 

*d 



•H 

M 


aj 


+3 

o 




O 

•H 


GJ 

• 

O 

£ 


O 

M 

CO 

03 

»d 





Pi 05 

u 

PH 

<ri 

3 

0 P 

0 


> 

£ Pi 

ft g3 


PH 

o 

H 

0 PH 

5 

ftO 

3 

O 

3 


03 

a 

+3 

<D 

Pi 

CO 

03 

£ 

0 

o 

£ 

o 

0 


Ph 

£ 

o 

o 


rH 


0 

-P 

Pi 

o 

ft 

0 

Pi 

-P 

o 































































production.prior to Confederation (1). 


( 327 ) 


tO 


o 

to 

CO 

I —I 


CM 

lO 


LO 

CO 


CO 

CO 

rH 


<r> 

O 

O 

rH 

o 

CM 

CM 

cr> 

tO 

o 

lO 


CM 

CO 

rH 

0* 

m 

•% 

•» 


LO 

o 

CO 


vi* 

rH 

rH 

LO 


CM 



CM 

CO 

tO 








CM 


CM 


LO 

LO 

LO 

-tH 

<J> 

C- 

CM 

O 

CO 

CO 


CM 

CO 

CM 

£> 

•» 

«« 

•» 

0% 

• 


CM 

CO 

rH 

cr> 

CO 

tO 

CO 

O 

CD 



to 


rH 



0% 





rH 


CM 


lO 

lO 

lO 

£> 

CO 


cr> 

10 

to 


C7» 

to 


o 

o 

o 


CO 

CM 

CM 

LO 



•H 

•P 

O 

o 

o 

•H 

a3 

cJ 

• 

CO 

£ 

fd 

rd 

1 

ra 

Pi aJ 

Pi d 

• 

a! 

d 

0 P 

0 P 

F3 

{> 

£ P 

PH 0 

£ P 

• 

o 

0 Pi 

PiO 

o o 

PH 


£3 pq 

P> 

pH 


-p 

0 

u 

m 

P 

CQ 

0 

O 

e 

o 

p 

«H 

r d 

0 


o 

Pi 

0 

Pi 

-P 

O 



























Table # 29. Buckwheat pro auction prior to Cu:v~ operation 


( 330 ) 


* 


* 


C*~ 

o 

H 

tS 

in 

o 

CO 

H' 


co 

CO 

in 

rH 

CO 

to 

vO 

o 

Vi' 


•% 

«% 

m 

•* 

#» 

O 

in 

H' 

CO 

o 

CD 

in 

cr- 

o 

Vi' 

in 



rH 

<X> 

CO 

CO 

vO 


i—1 


vf 

CO 

O 

C 

CO 

rH 

CO 

O 

vO 

vf 

«» 

m 

«% 

•* 

o 

cr> 

O' 

CO 

£> 

CO 


CO 

rH 

vO 

vO 

in 


to 


to 

O- 

ITJ 

CO 

CO 


* 


O 

CO 

CO 


vO 

CO 

’ 

CO 

in 

to 



•H 





-P 

c 




O 

•H 




O 

£ 

d 

o3 


CO 

02 

*d 

*d 

• 



JH d 

JH d 

M 

d 


U> £ 

o d 

• 

> 

% d 

Pi d 

^ d 

pq 

o 

<1) fq 

PiO 

o o 

• 

5^ 

& 

H-' 

iH 


co 


co 

in 

co 


o 


CO 


-p 

Q> 

U 

m 

d 

o 

6 

o 

d 

<H 

<D 


Pi 

O 

o 


o 

-p 

rH 

< 

C 

M 


CO 




Not reported. 























( 229 ) 


cn in 

Canada* 


Year 

Acreage 

Prod’n 


600 ac. 


1901 


85,305 

190° 


93,569 

1903 


78,496 

1904 


69,029 

1905 


106, 

1906 


3 , 

1907 


97,105 

1908 

6,610 

112,434 

1909 

, 

116, 

1910 

i t 

, 

1911 

, 

220,924 

1912 

' , 

224,If 9 

1913 

11,015 

53 , ' 7 

' 

10,294 

161,2 

1915 

15,109 

, 

1916 

15,370 

' , 

1917 

, 

, 

1918 


3 , 

1919 

, 

193,260 

1920 

, 

263,189 

1921 

72,261 

, 

1922 

22,423 

. , 

1923 


,3 

1924 

22,056 

: , 

192-5 

, 

. 

1926 

, 

£07,3 

1927 

, 


1928 

24,119 

566 * 7 

1929 

24,898 

304,520 

1920 

279,872 

1931 

, 

, 

1932 

1933 

27,182 

428,314 


Year 


Acreage 
ac. 


?rod T n 
000 Tdu. 


1868 

1869 

1870 

1871 

1872 

1873 

1874 

1875 

1876 

1877 

1878 

1879 

1880 
1881 
1882 

1883 

1884 

1885 

1886 

1887 

1888 

1889 

1890 

1891 

1892 

1893 

1894 

1895 

1896 

1897 

1898 

1899 

1900 


1,647 


,367 


2,701, 




21, 52 

, 

16,724 

2,3 

, 

23,3 

, 

, 

72 211 

, 

, 

, 

38,000 

30,921 

45,443 

42,816 

, 

9, C ' 

, 

20,872 

5, 

42,145 
48,182 
41,347 
12, 5C 
41,066 
32,970 
47,118 
6 , 
>,813 
, 















It 

H ( 





(C"0) 


31. Oat roductior. in Canada. 


Year 

Acreage 

Production 

' . 

1851 


13,169 

1860 


45,626 

1870 


42,489 

1880 


70,439 

1890 

3,961 

83,478 

1901 

5,368 

151,497 

1908 

7,911 

250,377 

1909 

9,303 

353,466 

1910 

8,656 

745,393 

1911 

9,631 

365,179 

1912 

9,968 

1,629 

1913 

10,434 

404,669 

1914 

10,062 

313,078 

1915 

11,556 

, 

1916 

10,996 

• 410,211 

1917 

13,313 

, 3 

1918 

14,793 

j,313 

1919 

14,952 

394,387 

1920 

15,850 

530,710 

1921 

16,949 

, 

1922 

14,541 


1923 

14,388 

, 

1924 

14,491- 

, 

1925 

12,556 

402,296 

1926 

12,741 

383,416 

1927 

13,240 

439,713 

1928 

13,137 

452,153 

1929 

12,479 

782,838 

1930 

13,259 

423,148 

1931 

12,871 

328,278 

1932 

13,148 

391,561 










< 


4 


4 


<3 


4 



4 








TaBle # 

U"i) 

32. Barley productJon 

In Canada. 


Year 

Acreage 

000 ac. 

Production 

000 fcu. 


1851 


1,392 


1860 


5,691 


1870 


11,496 


1880 


16,845 


1890 

868 

17,223 


1900 

872 

, 


1908 

1,746 

, 


1909 

1,865 



1910 

1,283 

, 


1911 

•1,522 

' , 


1912 

1,581 

, 


1913 

1,613 

, 


1914 

1,496 

, 


1915 

1,718 



1916 

1,803 

42,770 


1917 

2,392 

, 


1918 

3,154 

77,278 


1919 

2,646 

56,389 


1920 

2,552 

63,311 


1921 

2,796 

59,709 


1922 

2,600 

71,865 


1923 

2,785 

76,998 


1924 

3,407 

88,807 


1925 

3,524 

87,118 


1926 

3,647 

99,987 


1927 

3,506 

98,938 


1928 

4,881 

136,391 


1929 

5,926 

102,313 


1930 

5,559 

135,160 


1931 

3,768 

67,383 


1932 

3,758 

80,773 














t 


t 





1 




t 




c 












(332) 


Talle f 33. 

Rye Production in 

Canada. 

Year 

Acreage 

Production 


000 ac. 

000 tu. 

1851 



1860 


1,877 

1870 


1,064 

1880 


2,097 

1890 


1,341 

1900 

177 

2,317 

1908 

100 

1,711 

1909 

91 

1,715 

1910 

115 

1,542 

1911 

131 

2,492 

1912 

127 

2,428 

1913 

119 

2,300 

1914 

111 

2,017 

1915 

122 

2,486 ' 

1816 

148 

2,876 

1917 

212 

3,857 

1918 

555 

8,504 

1919 

753 

10,207 

1921) 

650 

11,306 

1921 

1,842 

21,455 

1922 

2,105 

32,373 

1923 

1,448 

23,232 

1924 

891 

13,751 

1925 

643 

9,159 

1926 

754 

12,179 

1927 

743 

14,951 

1928 

840 

14,618 

1929 

992 

13,160 

1930 

1,448 

23,018 

1931 

771 

T , 722 

1932 

774 

,938 












t 


< 


! 


< 


4 

4 

4 


4 

5 
C 
4 
! 
C 
i! 


C 

S 

5 










(” 3 ) 


Table # 34. Production of peas in Canada 


Year 

Acreage 
©0© ac. 

Production 
000 t>u. 

1851 


4,485 

1860 


12,297 

1870 


9,906 

1890 


14,824 

1900 

670 

12,349 

1910 

355 

4,808 

1911 

295 

4,666 

1912 

260 

3,913 

1915 

219 

3,952 

1914 

206 

2,362 

1915 

196 

3,464 

1916 

152 

2,218 

1917 

199 

3,026 

1918 

236 

4,313 

1919 

230 

3,406 

1920 

186 

3,528 

1921 

1$3 

2,770 

1922 

179 

3,170 

1923 

169 

2,898 

1924 

180 

3,240 

1925 

183 

3,411 

1926 

145 

2,635 

1927 ' 

151 

2,795 

1928 

154 

2,588 

1929 

125 

1,980 

1930 

129 

2,571 

1931 

83 

1,369 

1932 

85 

1,518 













Table 7," 35, 

(334) 

. 


Year 

Acreage 



000 ac, 

000 bu. 

1851 


2,19C 

1860 


2,364 

1870 


3,80S 

1880 


9,025 

1890 

195 

10,711 

1910 

294 

14,322 

1911 

322 

19,185 

1912 

298 

16,950 

1913 

278 

16,773 

1914 

256 

13,924 

1915 

253 

14,368 

1916 

173 

6,282 

1917 

234 

77763 

1918 

250 

14,205 

1919 

265 

16,940 

1920 

292 

14,344 

1921 

297 

14,934 

1922 

318 

13,798 

1923 

318 

12,600 

1924 

295 

"1,998 

1925 

239 

10,564 

1926 

210 

7,815 

1927 

132 

4,262 

1928 

139 

2,241 

1929 

152 

5,183 

1930 

161 

5,826 

1931 

132 

5,449 

1932 

130 

5,057 














(585 


Table # 56. Buckwheat production in Canada. 


Year 


Acreage Production 

OC : a©. t>u. 


1851 


2,071 

1860 


CO 

o 

l. 

1870 ‘ 


5, 726 

1880 


4,901 

1990 


4,995 

1900 

262 

4,547 

1908 

291 

7,153 

1909 

282 

7,806 

1910 

358 

7,103 

1911 

372 

8,441 

1912 

399 

10,517 

1913 

381 

8,572 

1914 

354 

8,626 

1915 

344 

7,866 

1916 

342 

5,976 ' 

1917 

396 

7,149 

1918 

548 

11,576 

1919 

445 

10,551 

1920 

378 

8,995 

1921 

361 

§,530 

1922 

431 

9,701 

1923 

440 

<3,744 

1924 

442 

11,412 

192-5 

474 

10,546 

1926 

457 

9,882 

1927 

471 

10,090 

1928 

503 

10,899 

1929 

516 

10,470 

1930 

490 

10,903 

1931 

335 

6,917 

1932 

368 

8,424 























(326) 

Table i'- 37. Buokwhe .t production 


, 19^2 (1) 


Acreage 

Yield 


Prince Edward Is, 

2,600 

71,0< 

bu. 

ITova Scotia 

4,100 

99,000 


New Brunswick 

42,100 

863,000 


Quebec 

116,900 

2,794,000 


Ontario 

197,000 

4,511,000 


Manitoba 

5,700 

86,000 


Saskatchewan 


— 


Alberta 


— 


British Columbia 


— 


Total for Canada 

368,400 

, 





(1) Cana da Y e aria o ok. 























Ta*ble # . 

(r-7) 

Flax production in Canada 


Year 

Acreage 

Product 5 or. 



000 ac. 

000 tu. 



16 

139 


1900 


172 


1908 

139 

1,499 


1909 

138 

2,213 


1910 

582 

4,245 


1911 

879 

10,176 


1912 

2,022 

26,130 


1915 

1,553 

17,539 


1914 

1,084 

7,175 


1915 

463 

6,114 


1916 

658 

8,260 


1917 

920 

5,935 


1918 

1,068 

6,055 


1919 

1,093 

5,473 


1920 

1,428 

7,998 


1921 

533 

4,112 


1922 

565 

5,009 


1923 

630 

7,140 


1924 

1,227 

9,695 


1925 


6,237 


1926 

738 

5,995 


1927 

476 

4,885 


1928 

378 

3,614 


1921 

382 • 

2,060 


193(7 

582 

4,399 


1931 

627 

2,465 


1932 

454 

2,446 
















. 




5 









' le # 59. Distribution of Rye acreace in Cejmda. 



1890 

1900 

1910 

1920 

r> t? T 

oT • i-J • • 

12 




• 

CO 

• 

h* 

1,688 

1,018 

350 

226 

it.b. 

376 

188 

24 

266 

Que. 

25,939 

19,546 

11,077 

9,238 

Ont. 

92,663 

1 1,916 

92,731 

104,538 

Han, 

951 

937 

2,738 

125,982 

Sask. 

97 

1,296 

754 

117,851 

Alta. 

18 

1,043 

6,672 

124,592 

B.C. 

358 

730 

376 

1,858 1 

Total 

122,102 

176,679 

114,728 

484,708 

/ 



_ 


































Table #4 i :. Distribution of pea acreage in Canada. 
1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 


(S'!' ) 


o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

00 

o 

CO 

o 

o 

o 

LO 

o 

o 

rH 

CVJ 

CO 

CO 

cvj 

o 

CO 

to 

co 

o 




H 

00 

o 

1—1 

rH 

rH 


CP 




CO 

00 





CVJ 










rH 

(—i 

£s 

IH 

o 

rH 

CO 

tO 


LO 

LO 

H 

tO 

rH 

co 

o 

to 

CO 

CVJ 

rH 

tO 




CVJ 

cp 

to 

cp 

rH 

rH 





0b 



0% 



0% 




cp 

on 


rH 


H 

CO 




CVJ 

0 





«H 










rH 

to 

CP 

CO 

LO 

tO 

CO 

to 

rH 

CVJ 

rH 

CO 

o 

CO 

cp 

CP 

to 

CO 

LO 

O- 

CP 


r-i 


CVJ 

CP 

CVJ 

Cv? 

CVJ 

lO 

rH 




0b 

•% 




0b 

•% 




o 

iH 




rH 

LO 




CO 

CVJ 





LO 





CO 





to 

00 

to 

C" 

CVJ 

I>- 

to 

tO 

(P 

CP 

o 


LO 

o 

CO 

LO 

o 


to 


CVJ 

1 — 1 

i—5 


cr> 

00 




CP 

CO 





0b 




•% 

0b 



rH 

o- 

o 




CVJ 

o 





00 





c- 





LO 





to 

to 


CVI 


1—1 

to 

LO 

fc- 

o 

LO 

LO 

CO 


o 


CVJ 

Cv? 

O 


c- 

CJ 

rH 

00 

o 


to 

CVI 

rH 

to 

CO 



0% 

0* 

0% 




•% 

0% 


H 

rH 

LO 

CO 




CVJ 

LO 




LO 

to 





CVI 




iH 

o 





CP 










<tf 

• 






• 

• 



M 

• 


• 


• 



• 


• 

CO 

• 

O 

■p 


CG 

•P 

o 



• 

FQ 

2 

a 



rH 

• 

aJ 



• 

O’ 

o 


CO 

< 

pp 

o 


H 












( 341 ) 


le # 42. Distribu'' 'lax Acreage in Cana 



1890 

1900 

1910 

1920 

1930 

P.E.I. 

75 

28 

22 

66 

— 

1T.S. 

83 

— 

— 

3 

— 

N.B. • 

92 

57 

5 

11 

— 

Que. 

2,878 

, 

1, r '82 

1,776 

5,300 

Out. 

6,775 

6,388 

8,780 

16,296 

5,200 

Han. 

6,089 

14,404 

34,684 

130,311 

, 

Sask. 

83 

227 

506,425 

916,647 

431,999 

Alta. 

70 

100 

30,885 

103,326 


B C. 

91 

1 

2 

217 

o 

o 

to 

Total 

16,236 

, 

582,185 

1,172,653 

531,800 











(M2) 


Table # 43. Wheat Inspection in Canada. 


Year 

Western 

Eastern 

Total 

1921 

,6 , 

853,510 

232,459,810 

1922 

297,256,700 

1, 57, 

298,694,324 

1923 

389,058,988 

262,299 

389,321,207 

1924 

' , 

1,758,264 

216,147,974 

1925 

352,535,240 

3,179,356 

355,714,596 

1926 

5, 2)21,3 

823,720 

336,845,045 

1927 

397,160,280 

13,200,830 

410,361,110 

1928 

466,250,000 

23,386,872 

489,636,072 

1929 

220,000,000 

9,485,538 

229,485,872 

1930 

288,695,000 

8,835,503 

297,530,5G3 

1931 

258,866,000 

185,000 

259,051,0^0 











( 343 ) 

• I 'nspccted in v/estern Canada. 


Year 

Spring 

Winter 

Yo, cars i 
./inter 7/he a 

1905 



214 

1906 



809 

1907 



1,545 

1908 



3,034 

1909 



1,156 

1910 



1,202 

1911 



2,700 

1912 



1,525 

1913 



984 

1914 



216 

1 :i5 



742 

1916 



166 

1917 



139 

1918 



49 

1919 



34 

1920 



79 

1923} 

231,569,325 

36,975 

29 

1922 

v , 

62,300 

48 

1923 

389,025,756 

oo,2 •- 2 

25 

1924 

214,368,670 

21,040 

16 

1925 

v , 

25,460 

' 19 

1926 

, 

26,500 

20 

1927 


308,880 

234 

1928 

465,393,810 

856,190 

635 

1929 

219,201,680 

798,320 

587 

1930 

288,262,434 

432,566 

313 

1931 

258,719,120 

146,880 

104 















( 34 * 1 ) 


Table " 45. Inspections of ICota 7/heat. 


Year Ho. of cars Bushels Percent of 

Inspected total wheat 


1926 

1052 

1,409,680 

inspected 

0.4 

1926 

331 

478,325 

0.15 

1927 

63 

83,060 

0.C15 

1928 

25 

33,685 


1929 


Ho inspections reported 



ITo inspections were reported for the 1924 crop. 

















("•TO 



lie # 46. Inspections 

of Red 

Durum wheat. 

Year 

No'. of cars 

PAishels 

Percent of total 


Inspected 


Y/heat inrpected 

1924 

50 

65,750 

0.03 

1925 

72 

96,480 

O’. 07 

1926 

181 

, 3 

0.07 

1927 

94 

124,080 

0.02 

1928 

86 

115,940 

0.02 

1929 

5 


0.004 

1930 

3 

4,100 

0.001 



























( 346 ) 

Table 47. Oats inspected in Canada. 
OOO omitted 


Sfear 

Western 

Eastern 

Total 

1921 

62,412 

118 

62,530 

1922 

48,944 

1,825 

50,769 

1923 

82,987 

459 

83,446 

1924 

49,952 

1,972 

51,924 

1925 

53,694 

2,865 

56,557 

1926 

27,464 

1,831 

29,295 

1927 

38,576 

1,122 

^9,699 

1928 

44,756 

1,663 

46,420 

1920 

16,965 

465 

17,430 

1930 

32,325 

527 

32,762 

1931 

41,510 

566 

42,076 































(r: 8) 



Table 9. Ry 



Year 

7/e stern 

Eastern 


1921 

5,754 

149 

5,903 

1922 

12,051 

97 

12,149 

1923 

7,011 

16 

7,027 

1924 

5,565 

1171 

5,737 

1925 

5,472 

136 

5,608 

1926 

7,849 

8,665 


1927 

12,360 

8,728 

21,088 

1928 

8,627 

7,233 

15,860 

1929 

5,380 

748 

8,128 




■ 

1930 

7,750 

1,829 

9,759 

1931 

3,000 

2,93" 

, n 8 8 













(- 49 ') 


Ta"ble .. 50 . Inspection of pear in C vna&n 


Year Western 

Division 


Eastern 


1905 

1906 


0 


531,950 

, 


1910 

1914 

1915 

1916 

1917 

1918 

1919 

1920 

1921 

1922 

1923 

1924 

1925 

1926 

1927 

1928 

1929 

1900 

1901 


0 

0 

0 

0 

e 

0 

0 

9 

0 

0 

0 

e 

0 

0 

o 

0 

0 

0 


, 

3 , 
f 

4,100 

29,888 

, 

15,063 

, 

, 

10 , ' 

, 

0 

0 

0 

1,0c 










t 

4 




« 






















Table 

(350) 

51 . Com ir.npectio; in C .dr 


Year 

Western 

Division 

Eastern 

Division 

Total 

1907 

0 

2,510,919 

2,510,919 

1908 

0 

4,227,321 

4,227,921 

37 V 50 

1909 

1919 

1920 

0 

7,000 

2,000 

276,853 

1921 

5,000 

6,350 

11,350 

1922 

16,000 

11,051 

27,051 

1923 

7,000 

19,239 

20,209 

1924 

2,00 C 

16,291 

18,291 

1925 

5,000 

5,387 

li ,"27 

1926 

3,500 

0 


1927 

7,500 

0 

7,500 

1928 

0 

0 


1929 

0 

0 


1930 

0 

0 


1931 

0 

6,600 

6 , 600 




■ 








































( 351 ) 

52. Tuclcwheat inspected in Canada* 


Year 

7/e stem 


Total 

1921 

— 

302 


&922 

12 


521 

1923 

9 

102 

111 

1924 

50 

1,093 

1,143 

1925 

29 

301 


1926 


227 


1927 

8 

206 

214 

1928 

i 

226 

227 

1929 

2 

54 

56 

1930 

4 

236 

240 

1931 

4 

238 

242 






















( 352 ) 

Ta*ble # 53 # Flax incpectdd in Canada, 
000 omitted 


Year 

Western 

Eastern 


1921 

2,784 

— 

2,784 

1922 

3,362 

— 

3,362 

1923 

5,263 


5,363 

1924 

8,348 

— 

8,348 

1925 

5,865 

— 

5,865 

1926 

4,704 

— 

4,704 

1927 

4,116 

— 

4,116 

1928 

2,992 

— 

2,992 

1929 

1,540 

- . 

1,540 

1930 

4,132 

— 

4,132 

2:931 

1,913 

— 

1,913 











( 353 ) 


Table 54 . Exports of grain, 1872-1873 (D 


Barley and Rye 
Flax 

Flaxseed 

Corn 

Oats 

Peas 

Wheat 


, , . 

8,124 cv/t. 
887 bn. 
706,619 In.. 
629,467 bn. 
1,128,027 bn. 
4,379,741 bn. 


(1) Sessional Papers 


Table £ 55. Percent of grain ^rodnction insi 


Wheat 

81.5s* 

Oats 

11.1 

Barley 

29.S 

Rye 

61.5 

Peas 

0.6 

Corn 

0.1 

Flax 

81.6 

Bnehwheat 

3.0 










Tatile # 56. Acreage of grain crops in Canada, 



Wheat 


Barley 


1870 

1,646,781 




1880 

2,366,554 




1890 

2,701,213 

3,961~556 

868,464 

132~102 

1900 

, 

5,367,655 

871,800 

176,679 

1910 

, 

8,656,179 

1,383,094 

114,”23 

1920 

17,835,754 

13,879,257 

2,043,669 

484,708 

1930 

24,898,000 

13,258,700 

5,558,700 

1,448,050 


Corn 

Peas 


?lax 


1890 

195,101 


295,307 

16,736 

1900 

360,758 

" , 

261,726 

, 

1910 

293,951 

355,191 

357,513 


1920 

204,775 

113,465 

252,941 

1,17 , 

1930 

161,400 

129,000 

490,000 











X 

t <: 




5 < 

? ’ 

' 

5 


< 



,? ' < 







(^■ 5 ) 



Table # 57. 

Production of 

Grain crops 

' 


Wheat 

Oats 



1851 

15,260,285 

23,168,448 

1,391,615 

. r 9,.?89 

lc60 

28,212,760 

45,685,764 

5,701, ' 


1870 

16,725,878 

48,889,853 

1 1,496,c"8 

, 

1880 

"2,850,859 

70,459,151 

16,844,868 

> i 

1890 

42,725,572 

, 

17,222,795 


1900 

55,578,368 

151,497,'07 

"7,"84,366 

2 |316!793 

1910 

152,077,547 


28,848,310 

*| r, /l n n-| q 

1920 

226,508,411 

>4,9 ,21 

42,956,049 


1930 

379,872,000 


,16 ,- 



Corn 

Peas 

Buckwheat 

Flax 

1851 

2,1 , 

4,485,430 

2,071,352 


1860 

, 

18,296,955 

, 


1870 

3,803,830 

9,905,720 

3,726,484 


1880 

, 

(1) 

4,901,147 

* 

1890 

10,711,380 

14,823,764 

, 

138,844 

1900 

25,875,919 

12,548,943 

1, 17,1 


1910 

14,417,599 

4,788,916 

7,102,353 


1920 

10,822,278 

, 

t, 

9, 

1930 

, ,00C 

2,37 ,; 

’ . ■ V 



* Hot reported 
(1} Inc lude d w i th t> e an s. 















356 





BIBLI0 O-RAFRY 



STATUTES RESPECT 

WCr CO'^DIT 

Y P T C'" r7,/ ’ ,r * , T0TT 

PRIOR TO 


COUPE 

DERATION 



1. Province of Q 

ue'bec f 1763-1790. 



Flour 

1785,c 6 




Fish 

1788, c 5 




2. lower Canada, 

1791-1840. 




Pot and 

Pearl Ashes 

1795, c 2 





1822, 

c 

9 (a) 



1824, 

c 

11 (a) 



1829, c 36 





1832, 

1859, 

c 

10 (a) 




22 (a) 

Flour and Heal 

1806, c 4 




1818, 


3 (a) 



1822, 

c 

2 (a) 



1825, 


17 {a) 



1839, c 10 





1839, 

c 

59 (a) 

Beef and 

Pork 

1804, c 9 




1823, 

c 




1824, c 22 
1839, c 15 



Fisheries ifi G-aspe 

1807, c 12 





1808, 

c 

31 (a) 



1812, 

c 

A. & 



1824, 

c 

i fa) 



1818, 

c 

4 * 



1829, 


42 (a) 



1831, 

c 

27 (a) 



1833, 

c 

3 * 

Fish and 

Oil 

1823, c 16 





1824, 

c 

23 (a) 



1825, 

c 

18 (a) 



1827, 

c 

16 * 



1832, 

c 

4 * 



1834, 

c 

9 * 



1839, c 65 



* 





(a) Act of amendment 




* Continuing act only 









t 




X 

X 




c 


( 


5 




« 

X. ' 

■ 

■ 5 


1 


5 












Lumber 


357 


1808, o 87 

1811, c 4 (a) 
1813, c 6 * 
1815, c 15 
1817, c 2~ * 
1819, c 7 

1883, c 13 (a) 
1825, c 16 


3. Upper Canada, 1791-1840 

Flour, Pot and Pearl Ashes 1801, c 7 

1825, c T (a) 

Beef and Pork 1805, c 8 

1840, c 25 (a) 

Fish 1840, c 24 


4. Few Brunswick 


R.S. 1854, c 94 (incomplete) 


k 

^ • 


ITova Scotia (incomplete) 

Grain, Salt and Coal etc. 


Weighers and measurers of 


1792, 

c 4- 
1816, 

c 4 

(a) 


, 

c 21 

(a) 

1878, 

1851, 

c 85 

R.S. (a) 


3 

c 85 

r.s. (e: 

1864, 


R. . 

3rd ser'e: 

grain 


• 


1864, 

c 11 

R.S. 

3rd seriei 


I. ' P Canada (United Canada) 1841-1873 


Pot and Pearl Ashes 

Beef and Pork 
Flour and Meal 

lumber 



1842, c 6 
1854, c 11 

1855, c 95 (a) 
1863 (2), c 7 (a) 


1864, 

O v (aj 

1841, c 88 


1850, 

c 50 

1841, c 89 


1848, 

c 6 (a) 

, 

' ; 

. 

c 47 

1860, 

c 26 (a) 

1842, c 7 


1843, c 35 


, 



1846, c ' 6 (a) 

, : . 
: , 




358 


Butter 1848, c 7 

Sole Leather 1859 C.S., 

13 51 , 

Rav/ Hides and Leather 1864, c 21 

1866, 

, 


o 51 
c 24 ( 


FEDERAL STATUTES RESPECTING GRATH INSPECTION 

1. Gnneral Inspection Act, 1873, c 49 

2. General Inspection Act, 1874, c 45 

1876, c 33 (1) 

1880, c 20 

1881, c 22 (1) 

1882, c 25 (1) 

1883, c 29 

1884, c 33 

1885, c 66 

3. General Inspection Act, R.S. 1886, c 99 

1887, c 36 (1) 

1889, c 16 

1891, c 48 

1892, c 23 

1893, c 35 (1) 

1894, c 36 (1) 

1895, c 24 

1898, c 25 

1899, c 25 

1900, c 38 

1901, c 24 

1901, c 25 

1902, c 11 

1903, c 24 

1904, c 14 

4. Fanitoha Grain Act, 1900, c 39 

1902, c 19 

1903, c 33 
1906, c 28 


(1) Amendment does not concern grain inspect:* on 













5. Manitoba Grain Act, RQS. 1906, o i 
1908, c 45 
1912, c 33 

5 . For 

>ection Act, 1904, c 15 

1905, c 14 

1906, c 18 


B« 3 ispection and Sale Act, 1906, 



3 9 , 

c 21 



3 

c 35 



3 

c 36 



1911, 

c 15 (1) 



1913, 

c 25 



1914, 

c 10 



3 , 

c 36 


9. Canada 

Crain Act, 1912, c 37 



1913, 

21 



1914, 

c 33 



1915, 

c 10 



1916, 

c 6 



1919, 

c 40 



1919 

(2), c 6 



1920, 

c 37 


10, Canada 

G-ra in 

, 1925, c 33 



1927, 

c 41 


11. Canada 

Crain 

Act, H.3.,1927, c 

86 


1929, 

c 9 


12. Canada 

Crain 

Act, C.S. 1930, c 

5 


1934, 

c 26 






760 


STATUTES RESPECTING SUBJECTS AIIIED TO 


irae: j*’s?ECTio:r 


1. Y/eights and UensureL’ Acts 

Upoer Canada, 1792, c 3 
1823, c 16 

Lower Canada, 179°, c 7 
Dominion of Canada, 1873, c 47 

2. Sales Acts 

Canada, 1835, c 7 
Province of Canada, 1853, c 193 

3. Constitutional Acts 

Quebec Act, 1774 
• Constitutional Act, 1791 
Act of Union, 1841 

ric , 

4. Weighers Acts, Dominion of Canada 

1887, c 37 
1891, c 47 (a) 

Province of Canada, 1785, c 6 

5. Packing and Sale of Commodities Act 

1901, c 26 

1902, c 32 

6. Inspection of Staples Act, 1901, c 30 

7. Department of Trade and Commerce Act 

1887, c -10 
R.S. 1906, c 82 
1918 

8. Board of Trade Act 


Province 

of 

Canada, 

1841, 

c 

90 




1841, 

c 

92 

Dominion 

of 

Canada, 

1874, 

c 

51 




1876, 

c 

34 









/t'eral p^h^pu'Ces 


761 


Duller, Rej5.nr.ld A.H. 

Essays on * ,r heat. Hacmillan Z. Co. H. v . 1919. 

G-ray, hugh 

Letters from Canada. Longman, Hurst, Reese & Orme. 
London, 1809. 

Haliburton, Thomas 0. 

Historical and Statistical Account of '’ova Scotia. 

Joseph Hove* Halifax 1829. 2 r* 

Kuhlmann, Chas. Byron 

The Development of the Flour Milling Industry in 
the United States. Houghton ? r ifflin Co. 1929 

UacGibbon, D.A. 

The Canadian G-rain Trade. Hacmillan & Co. 1932 
Kichell, H. 

Statistics of Prices: Statistical Contribution:’ 
to Canadian Economic History. 2 v. 

Patton, Harold S. 

G-rain Growers Cooperation in 7/estem Canada,. 
Harvard University Press. .928. 

Richardson, Dorsey 

Constitutional Doctrines of Justice Oliver Hendell 
Holmes. John Hopkins University. Series 42 "? t 19° 

Shortt, Adam and Doughty, Arthur* G. 

Canada and its Provinces, Edinburgh University 
Press. 1913. 

’.Thitbeck, R.E. & Finch, Y.C.Z 

Economic Geography, T.IcGraw-Eill Book Cc. 1924 


















36 2 

goverhtettt doctr'hmts /j T, n reports 

Canada Year Books. 

House of Commons "Debates. 

Reports, Board o^ G* ' i Commissioners. 

Reports, Census of Canada. 

Report, Royal Commission on Shipment and Transportation 
of Grain in Manitoba and K.Yf.T. 1899-1900. 

Sess. Paper 81 - 81b, 1900. 

Report, Royal Grain Inquiry Commissio , - 

Sess.paper #35, 1925. 

Report, Saskatchewan Royal Inquiry Commission, 1928 

Short, Aram & Doughty, Arthur 1. 

Documents relating to the Constitutional History of 
Canada, 1759-1791. Sess. paper #18, 1907. 


’’zzrr’rrj.i ar^o 

Edmonton Bulletin, Dec. 6, 1901. 

Edmonton Journal, Maj 

Evidence on Moisture Content of "Theat submitted to the 
Agricultural Committee, ' "Berta I ;is3 'e. 

International Review of Agriculture 

Manchester, H.M. 

A Pictorial History of Milling 

northwestern Miller, Eel. 3, 1926. p '56 

Minnesota Legislative Manual, 1953. 

Hew South 7,'ales, Statutes, 1927. 

Hew South Males, Year Bool . 

ITor T West Farmer, April 20, 1899. 














t 



c 


















Program o' Activities for Canadian "or *a o' r< do 

Chambers of Commerce. The Canadian Chamber of Corn 

, 

Report, Marketing of Wheat, Barley and Oats in England 
raid Wales. H.M. Stationery Office, London, 1923. 


Roy, £.9. 

Bulletin des recherches historjejies, oct., 































University of Alberta Library 



0 1620 0567 9160 


B29745 


















































