Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta 


Diller, D. 

The early economic development of 
Alberta, previous to 1905 - 1923 * 













































H ^ R A R E'Y F C Of Oi IC D IV'JII 0 P 2-T? S I 
0 "S’ A Tj.B R R T A. 

(PHWIOTJS TO 1205). 

Dorothy Diller. 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/diller1923 


CONTENTS. 


T. Physical Features and Resources, 

Location, 

Area. 

Surface Features. 

Southern Section. 

Central Section. 

Northern Section. 

Resources. 

« Climate. 

Soil. 

Areas of Greatest Productivity. 

Stock-raising Possibilities, 

Coal. 

Other Minerals. 

II. The Fur Trade. 

The French Period, 1750-1769. 

Free Trade and Rivalry, 176S-1S21. 

Monopoly of the Hudson’s Bay Company, 1821-1870. 
The Purchase of the Northwest by the Bondnion. 
Effects of the Fur Trading Period on Economic 
Progress, 

III. Early Testing of Agricultural Possibilities./^*? 

IV. Preparation for Settlement, 1870-1881./»' 

Conditions in the Northwest at the Time of the 
Transfer to the Bom inion. 




ii 


Tasks Awaiting the Government. 

The Establishment of Law and Order. 

Mounted Police. 

Growth of Self-Government. 

Indian Treaties. 

Government Surveys. 

Land Regulations. 

Communication Effected with the Outside World. 
Attainment of a Transcontinental Railway Policy, 
Progress and Settlement during Hie Decade, 

V. Ranching. { 

Cattle Ranching. 

Small Beginnings. 

Government Leasing System and the Beginning of 
Ranching on a Large Scale. 

Early Difficulties. 

Growth of Markets. 

Decline of Cattle Ranching. 

Horse Ranching. 

Sheep Ranching. 

VI, Railway Development,1885-1905. 

Main Line of the Canadian Pacific Railway. 

Branch Lines. 

Effect of Railways on the Economic Development. 
Effect on River Transportation. 







iii 


VII. Agriculture, 1830-1905. 

Beginning of Mixed faming in Calgary District 
and Central Alberta, 1381-1905. 

Growth of Mixed Farming in Central Alberta,ISSl 
Beginning of Irrigation and Mixed Farming in 
Southern and Southeastern Alberta. 

Wheat growing in the South. 

VIII. Coal Mining. 

Discoveries of Coal Fields. 

Growth of the Industry. 

IX. Summary. 











PHYSICAL FEATURES AND RESOURCES 


Until 1870 the territory which constitutes the 
present Province of xAlberta was part of that vast area 
comprising Rupert’s Land and the Indian Territories* 
which was under the administration of the Hudson’s 
Bay Company. In 1870 it passed over with the rest 
of these lands Into Dominion control and "became part 
of the North West Territories of Canada, The official 
history of Alberta began in 1882 when the four provi¬ 
sional districts of Athabasca, Alberta, Assiniboia 
and Saskatchewan were organized. In 1905 the district 
of .Alberta, the western half of Athabasca, and a strip 
of Assiniboia and Saskatchewan were joined to form 
the province of Alberta* This comprises the territory 
bounded on the east by the hundred and tenth meridian 
on the south by the international boundary at the 
forty-nin th parallel, on the southwest by the Rocky 
mountains, and'on the west by the hundred and twen¬ 
tieth meridian, and on the north by the sixtieth 
parallel. The province Is 750 miles in length, 400 
miles wide at its widest part and 175 miles a its its 
narrowest. This embraces an area of 255,285 square 
miles, of which 252,225 square miles are land and 










2,360 miles are under water. The whole province 
is a vast plateau sloping eastward and northward from 
the line of the Booties. Except for the Bocky 
mountains and the foothills east of them it consists 
mainly of rolling prairies, broken by numerous 
rivers which have their sources in the mountains. It 
is divided naturally into three section correspond¬ 
ing to three different drainage systems. 

Southern Albe ta extends north from the boundary 
for about two hundred and forty miles to the Red Deer 
river. This comprises an area of about sixty thousand 
square miles. A small portion of the south of this 
section is drained by the Milk river, a part of the 
Mississippi system, which flows through Alberta for 
about sixty miles near the border. In the main, 
however, southern Alberta lies in the basin of the 
South Saskatchewan and its tributaries of which the 
largest are the Old Man’s, the B rt w and the Bed Deer 
Bivers. This was formerly the great ranching country. 

It consists of open prairie in the east with a mountain¬ 
ous and foothill region, about sixty miles in width 
along the western side. There is considerable timber 
in the foothills, but east of them is found the short 
grass characteristic of the prairie. The rivers run 
at a depth of from two to three hundred feet below the 






































' 'V t 


. 




































prairie. Numerous oouleee extend from the river 
valleys. The lakes in this section are small and 
shallow. 

Central Alberta, about sixty five thousand 
square miles in area, extends from the Red Deer River 
to the height of land running diagonally across the 
province between the Peace and Athabasca rivers, 
about sixty miles north of Edmonton. This section 
is about a thousand feet lower in altitude than 
southern Alberta. It forms a plateau, sloping east¬ 
ward, drained by the North Saskatchewan and its 
chief tributary, the Battle river. The main surface 
difference between this part of the province in 
its natural state and the southern part is it s 
higher and heavier vegetation. The foothills are 
well wooded, while nearly the whole of the rest of 
this region consists of what is known as "park country” 
that is, of alternate stretches of wooded and prairie 
areas. Willow scuub and briars are common throughout. 
The timber consists of soft wood ¥ari©ti@s, chiefly 
grey willow and poplar, with areas of spruce along 
the rivers. While not valuable for export this timber 
has proved useful to settlers for fuel and building 
purposes. There are a number of small lakes in this 




4 


region• 

Northern Alberta comprises an area of about a 
hundred and thirty thousand square miles. It is 
drained by the Peace and Athabasca rivers and their 
tributaries, all forming part of the great Mackenzie 
system. This section is still lower in altitude 
than eentr&l Alberta. It varies from about two 
thousand feet in the southwest to one thousand six 
hundred feet in the northeast. It resembles Central 
Alberta in that it consists of alter^nte open and 
treed areas. A great portion of it, however, is 
heavily timbered. The river valleys, especially, 
are thickly forested with spruce and poplar. This 
section is more broken by hills than the other prairie 
areas of the province. It has a number of important 
lakes including Lake Athabasca and Lesser Slave Lake 
which form part of the Mackenzie river system. 

Many of the lakes of northern and central Alberta 
contain abundant supplies of fish, especially white 
fish and pike. In the days of the fur trade the fish 
supply was an important consideration affecting the 
location of posts. 

Numerous fur bearing animals are found in northern 
Alberta and the territory to the north of it. The most 
important kinds are heaver, muskrat, fox, otter, marten, 
fisher and lynx. 



0 


Other hinds more widely distributed throughout the 
protince, particularly in the foothill regions, 
are timber wolves, prairie wolf, wolverine, coyote, 
black, brown and grizzly bear, weasel (ermine) and 
badger. In the early days, before the coming of the 
white man, great herds of buffalo reamed the southern 
plains. 

With the exception of its wealth of coal, the natural 
resources of Alberta are of an agricultural nature. 

A factor of primary importance, therefore, in deter¬ 
mining the value of these resources is climate. The 
climate of the province offer several rather serious 
limitations to agricultural development. Its general 
features are those of an interior region in a northern 
latitutde, far removed from the ameliorating 
influence of large bodies of water. This means 
long winters, and great extremes of heat and cold 
between summer and winter. ,Modifying influences 
occur as a result of nearness to the Rocky mountains 
and variations in altitude. Climatic zones within 
the province do not on the whole correspond with 
the different drainage systems. 

The three climatic factors of the greatest impor¬ 
tance in connection with agricultural possibilities 





6 


are precipitation, temperature and winds. Precipi¬ 
tation is not heavy in any part of the province. 

It varies from eight to nine inches in southern and 
southeastern parts to from twenty to twenty-five 
inches in other parts (X) There are apparently at 
least three zones of precipitation although sufficient 
data has not "been .collected to accurately define them. 
The dry zone is southeastern Alterta in the neighbor¬ 
hood of “ledicine Hat. The semi-dry zone would appear 
to extend in the form of a semi-circular belt around 
the dry zone, including the remainder of southern 
Alberta, with the exception of the foothills. The 
humid zone includes the foothills, central, and 
probably northern Alberta.(2) The following table 
shows the average annual precipitation over a 
period of years, for representative points: 

Average Annual Precipitation 
(in inches) 

m — — 

G. H. Cutler. ,T The Climate of Alberta in Relation 
to Crop Production". It is estimated that one acre- 
inch of water will produce about bushels of wheat. 
( 2 ) 

Very little data is available on precipitation 
in northern Alberta* '//hat data there are, however, 
indicate that i t would be included in the humid zone. 
Annual Weather Reports, Department of Agriculture. 












7 


t 

Dry Area• 


Mft rH ftlnp TTp> t 

.. .12*79 

( 3) 

Mn r*l And .. 

.13.63 


Semi-dry Area. 



Lethbridge... 


$>) 

Calgarv. 


e: 

Humid Area 



Edmont on■ 


(s' 

Pincher Creel:........ 


fe) 


The question of the seasonal distribution of 
precipitation is as important as that of the annual 
amount. The part that falls during the growing 
season is what counts most in crop production. 

The seasonal distribution of rainfall in Alberta 
is very favorable, Prom data collected for repre¬ 
sentative points in the province during a long 
period of time it is estimated that the average 
proportion of the annual precipitation which falls 
during the four growing months. May, June, July 
and August, is sixty-three per cent for the semi-dry; 
and sixty-four percent for the humid(6). It is 

this fortunate seasonal distribution of the rather 


(3) 1885-1914 Meterological Service of Can.l921ppll5-325 


(4 


1895-1914, Ibid. 

(5) 1906-1913 "Canda and Its Provinces"XXp585 

(6) G.H.Cutler:Tables for average monthly at 

Edmonton, M. Bit, 1884-1919. L thbridge 1902-19, 


j 
























3 


scanty rainfall which makes crop production possible 
in southern Alberta* It means* also, dry autumns and 
favorable conditions for harvesting, throughout the 
whole province. 

The type of rainfall is another important con- 
sideration. Heavy downpours often clay or puddle the 
surface soil, and are largely lost as run-off. The 
best type of rain is one which falls slowly enough 
to be carried into the soil to a depth where it will 
not be exposed to rapid evaporation. From this stand¬ 
point, Alberta rainfall is of a very favorable type* 
although less so on the open plains than in the 
park country. 

Part of the total annual precipitation falls 
in the form of snow® (1) The amount and duration of 
the snowfall is a factor of importance because of 
the protection which a covering of snow furnishes to 
winter crops. In the northern and central parts 
of the province snow remains on the ground during 
a large part of the winter; in the southern and 
southeastern parts it is the exception for it to 
remain for long periods. 

A small amount of precipitation falls in the 

(1) The areas of lightest snowfall coincide with those 
of least rainfall. The annual amount ranges from SOin. 
in the southeast to 60 in® in the northfG. H. Cutler) 






. 




* 






































9 


form of hail. Hall storms during the months of July 
and August often cause considerable damage to crops. 
Sufficient data has not been collected to show whether 
they are particularly prevalent in certain parts (l) 

Wide variations from the average amount and 
seasonal distribution of precipitation frequently 
occur &nd often cause crop failures. Several instances 
may be given. The average precipitation at Calgary is 
about 17 inches. In 1892 it was only 7.9 inches, 
while in another year it was as high as 34.1 inches. 

The average for Macledd Is about 15.6 inches; in 
1904 the amount was 5.34 and in 1909 23.9 inches (2). 

It would appear that departures from the average are 
most frequent in the southern and southeastern parts 
of the province. 

The question of temperature is equally as 
important as that of precipitation. The two main con¬ 
siderations bearing on agricultural pursuits are 
length of the growing season, and total amount of heat 
available during that season. The length of the 
growing season is measured by the number of days between 
late spring and early fall frosts. A short growing 
season is the most serious limitation to agriculture 
in northern and central Alberta. The following table. 

Tl) G. H. Cutler7 — — 

&. H. Cutler, 











10 


shows the average number of days in the frost free 
period for representative points in the province, 
based on observations covering a period of forty-three 
years (l). 

Average Number of Days between Late Spring and Early 
Fall Frosts* 


Southern Alberta* 

Medicine Hat*. .. .122. 

Lethbridge.*102 

Macleod..102 
Calgary** 87 
Central Alberta. 

Edmonton.•«.. ..94 

Northern Alberta 

Vermilion*. .59 


The length of the growing period is greatest in 
southeastern Alberta* It decreases rapidly in a 
northerly and north-westerly direction. 

However, the disadvantage of a short growing 
season in the ncrth is counterbalanced, to some extent, 
by lower altitude and longer days of sunshine in the 
summer* These conditions increase the total heat 
available during the summer* A table of the mean 
temperature for the three summer months at different 
points in the province will serve as an index of the 
(i) ibid. 














11 


the comparative amounts of heat avaialable during 
the growing period at these points. 


M3 an Summer 

Temperature * 

Southern Alberta. 

Medicine Hat....., 


Le thbridge.* 


Ma cleod.......... 

.61.4 

Calgary.......... 

(1 

Central Alberta* 

15dm on t on 

( 

... ,59. 

Northern Alberta. 

Athabasca Landing., 


.Fort Chipewyan... *. 


Fort Dunvegan..*.•, 

.....5?J 3) 


As this table indicates summer isotherms in 

Alberta run almost north and south(4) R. L* Stupart, 

o 

director of the Dominion Meteorological service, stated 
in 1907: " A i$ean summer temperature of 57*5 degrees 
provided it remains for two months, is safe for plant 
growth. The summer isothermal of 57.5 degrees. 

TlS 1885-1914 Meteorological "Service of Canada, 1921 . 

pp.115-125. 

(2) 1895-1914. Ibid. 

(3) 1909 only. E* A. Breble:"North American fauna"p20. 

(4) . The first person to record this fact was John 
Macoun, in his "Manitoba and the Great Northwest n , 
published in 1882* 





















12 


leaves almost the whole of Alberta south of it. tT (1 ) 
While 4?» the summer is of a fairly uniform charac¬ 
ter throughout the province, differences in latitude 
are reflected in lower temperatures in the north 
before the end of August. 

The following is a tfeble of mean winter tempera¬ 
tures, from December to March. (2) 

Calgary,***»»**»»»♦^^ 


Edmonton...........14" 

Fort Dunvegan......1° 


Fort Chipewyan.....5° (2) 

In the case of temperature as of precipitation, 

occasional seasons vary widely from the average. 

Thus in 1907 and 1911, early fall frosts occurred 

throughout the -orovinee; in 1916 a June frost froze all 

grain crops; in 1917 a July frost destroyed all 

wheat that was in the blossoming stage. (3) 

The third important climatic factor is wind. Winds 

of high velocity shatter ripened grain, and cause 

soil drifting and excessive evaporsfcion. Available 

information indicates a low wind velocity in the 

wooded areas of the province, and a rther high velocity 

in the open plain section of the southeast, where soil 

drifting is a serious difficulty. H urricanes are 
TIT Canada and Its Provinces, XX' p.586 

(2) G.H.Cutler 

(3) 










13 


practically unknown in the province. 

The Chinook winds are a characteristic feature 
of the Alberta climate. They are warm, dry winds from 
the west. They blow most frequently in southern 
Alberta, which is known as the "chinook belt", but they 
also occur in the Peace Kiver district. Winter Chinooks 
often cause a rise in temperature of as much as sixty 
degrees in a few hours. They produce conditions 
favorable to stock-raising, as they keep the gr^ass 
exposed for winter pasturage. Summer Chinooks, 
however, are unfavorable to crop production because 
they cause excessive evaporation of plant moisture. 

Another notable feature of the Alberta climate is 
its dry clear atmosphere. The dryest atmosphere is 
in the area of idest precipitation, highest tempera¬ 
ture and highest evaporation, namely southern Alberta. 

A dry atmosphere leads to early maturity in plant growth. 
In the case of Alberta, it is one cause of the high 
quality of wheat grown, and of the relatively small 
amount of infection of rust and other fungus diseases. 

The statement is sometimes made that the climate 
of Alberta is gradually changing. It is claimed that 
the bringing of large areas of land under cultivation 
lessens the danger from unseasonable frosts, or again 




14 


that it tends to increase precipitation* 

Available records of weather conditions in the jcr ovince 
however, do not indicate that any appreciable change 
has occurred since the collection of data began (l) 

In this connection it is interesting to note the 
opinion of J. Warren Smith of the United States Weather 
Bureau, to the effect that the bringing of land under 
cultivation does not tend to increase precipitationf2) 

He bases his statement on the results of experiments 
conducted over a ueriod of fifty years in semi-arid 
portions of the Western States, 

Alberta's most valuable resource is its fertile 
soil* The extent of arable land is of primary interest. 
It is estimated that from the total land area of 
161,877,000 acres, sixty odd million acres should be 
deducted to cover the rough land of the mountain slopes 
and foothills, and other areas unsuitable for 
agriculture* This leaves a hundred million acres of 
arable land(3). In general, the surface soil of the 
arable land is exceedingly rich in organic matter an d 
in the minerals necessary for plant growth. Underneath 

the surface, the whole province is covered with a bed 
of friable or sandy clay* 

Tl )’ GThTGu tier; “Weather reports," "Department of Agri* 

( 2 ) Monthly Weather Review U*S* Weather Bureau D@e*1919 

(3) Statesman’s Year Booh, 1922. 








15 


No extensive scientific examination of the 
composition of the soil in different sections of the 
province has yet been carried out but its general 
nature, except in certain northern parts, is known 
from practical experienced!) 

The soil regions of the province correspond fairly 
closely with the climatic zones* There are four main 
soil types(2). 

The prairie type extends over southern Alberta, 
with the exception of the foothill district. It is 
a sandy loam, rather light in color and rich in 
minerals, especially nitrogen* Owing to scanty rain¬ 
fall, the characteristic natural growth of this 
region is short grass* The soil, therefore, contains 
but little humus* 

The foothill soil type occurs along the southwestern 
boundary region. It is a deep black loam, the blackest 
in the province, due to its large humus content. 

The central soilt type is a dark brown loam, con¬ 
taining more humus and less nitrogen than the prairie 
soil, but less humus than the foothill type. This 

soil extends over Central Alberta and into some parts 
of the north. It is found in the Grande Prairie dis¬ 
trict, and along the Peace river valley. Intermixed 


f.)Unaer the direction of the Prov. Dept, Agri, work was 

hegun in X9S1 on Soil Survev of thp p« n , T •- -i 

ia the south has so Pa? been ^ 8 Sml1 

Kill .A . Or»i o . 






16 


with this fertile soil in the north, however, are 
areas of what may be called the northern soil type. 

They are regions over which the surface soil has been 
burnt off by prairie or forest fires, leaving only a 
thin covering of surface soil, from one half to three 
inches thick in low places, and exposing the sub-soil 
on knolls and ridges. 

In addition to these four main kinds of soil, small 
pockets of sand and smaller patches of gumbo are 
scattered throughout the province. Such areas vary in 
extent from a section to several townships. 

The relative productivity of different parts of the 
province is determined by a combination of the factors 
of soil and climate. (i) The most productive area 
has been found to be in the southern foothill region, 
where there is both sufficient rainfall and a fertile 
soil. Central Alberta and the Grande Prairie district 
of the north rank second in productivity. The least 
productive area, owing to insufficient rainfall, is 
southeastern Alberta. Productivity gradually increases 
with an advance from the dry to the semi-dry area. The 
natural fertility of the prairie soil becomes evident 
upon the occurrence of occasional wet season in the 
south. At such times the wheat yield per acre is much 
X1 ) ?rofessorT7 - A. Wyatt .’ Department of Sc-llsTf 









17 


higher in that part of the province than in other 
parte (1). Also, the combination of scanty rain¬ 
fall with a soil rich in minerals produces a hard 
wheat of high quality* 

As a stock-raising country, Alberta has great 
natural advantages, early demonstrated by the herds 
of buffalo .which roamed the plains and wintered in 
the foothills* One favorable feature is the 
abundance and variety of natural vegetation. At 
least ninety-six .different varieties of grass have 
been identified, and of these, forty-six make good 
hay fg). The wild pea and vetch which thrive in 
many places make excellent pasture* Cultivated 
grasses and fodder crops, such as alfalfa,.do well 
in the irrigated districts of southern Alberta. The 
foothills and the western part of the.prairies are 
particularly well adapted for ranching. The short 
prairie grass is very nutritious, and cures on the 
stalk in the. fall, providing winter pasti\rage* 
Numerous coulees furnish natural places of shelter, 
while mountain streams and springs furnish a 
sufficient water supply. 

Aside from its agricultural capabilities, the 
most important resource of the province is its wealth 

“IlJ Crop Statistiesl911-1921.Dept. AgriTl921,p.74 

2 ' Haroourt; Canada an & Its Provinces'!^,p589 











18 

of eoal fl). Nearly the whole southern half is 
underlain by one or more coal formations. It is 
estimated that liberta contains about fifteen 
percent of the coal reserves of the world, or about 
eighty-seven percent of the reserves of Canada (2). 
Dowling in the "Coal Resources of the World" estima¬ 
tes that the province contains an actual reserve of 
over 386,360 mllliontons and a probable reserve of 
about 673,550 million tons, making a total reserve 
of about 1,059,910 million tons of coal, 

A ide variety of grades are found in the 
different coal basins of the province. The quality 
varies from a lignite of medium quality, underlying 
the prairies, to an anthracite at the front ranges 
of the Rockies, There are, however, no large 
deposits of anthracite coal. The quality of coal 
in the different districts depends on the two 
factors of age,and pressure. As to the factor of 
age, there are three- coal bearing horizons, each 
belonging to a different geological as*e and 
separated from one another by formations from 700 

jTi J * A. Allan: "Mineral Resources of AlbertaT™ 

Summarizes reports of Dawson, McConnell, Tyrrell 

an< L I)owling TOr tiie &eo1 * Survey First Annual Report 
pp46-8. Second pp,37-40 
(2) Second Report p.40 










19 

to 3000 feet in thickness. £he three horizons -in 
order fran t e oldest to the youngest are: 

(1) Kootenay formation (lower cretaceous). 

(2) Belly River format!on(middle part of upper 

ere taceous ) 

Edmonton formation (uppexmost cretaceous) 

The coals from the lower formations, on account 
of their age, and the greater weight to which they 
are subjected, are of a harder and better quality than 
the others, and more suitable for steam and coking 
purposes. 

The effect of pressure, the other factor deter¬ 
mining quality is seen by the fact that the grade of 
coal in a single horizon improves towards the moun¬ 
tains, due to the fact that there the coal seams have 
been more intensely compressed by the stresses from 
mountain building forces. This explains the general 
improvement in quality noticeable in passing from 
east to west. 

The Kootenay coal measures are exposed princi¬ 
pally in the front ranges of the mountains or in 
the foothills from the Boundary as far north as Yellow- 
head Pass. This region includes a number of important 
coal basins in which the grade varies from bituminous 
to anthracite. 






30 


The chief outcrops of the Belly River formation 
occur in the Lethbridge basin, and along the foothills 
as far as Peace River, Dowling estimates that this 
formation covers an area of 25,974 square miles, and 
contains an actual and probable reserve of 189,450 
million tons. The quality of coal ranges from 
bituminous to sub-bituminous• 

The Edmonton formation contains two horizons. 

The upper-most seam occurs near the top of the forma¬ 
tion, and varies in thickness from about five feet, 
south of the Bow River, to a maximum of twenty-five 
ffeet on the North Saskatchewan west of Edmonton, 

About five to six hundred feet below the upper seam 
a number of seams occur near the base of the forma¬ 
tion, They extend from near the Boundary to the 
vicinity of Morinville, north of Edmonton, Dowling 
has estimated that the actual area in this formation 
containing available coal is 25,235 square miles, 
which will produce 383,235 million metric tons. To 
this may be added a probable reserve of 27,170 square 
miles, which would produce 417,261 million metric tons 
The quality varies from bituminous to lignite. Much 
of it may be classed as sub-bituminous. The term 
"domestic coal" has been applied to the grade of coal 

mined ffom this horizon. 






31 

In conjunction with this great supply of 
coal the presence of iron ore of even moderate 
quality would-be a most valuable asset as the basis 
of future industrial development. Although iron 
occurs in several forms no deposits have as yet been 
found of a size and quality to warrant development, 
either within the province or in adjacent regions 
to the north or in British Columbia. 

Besides coal a number of other minerals of 
much less economic value are found within the 
province, (l) Natural gas is widely distributed 
throughout the underlying rocks. However, it is only 
in the southeast, in the neighborhood of Medicine 
Hat, that it is of the "dry" variety, which is the 
most available for use. Tar sands which may prove 
valuable occur along the Athabasca Biver. The 
existence of tar sands and natural gas indicated 
the presence of petroleum, but the location of 
large reservoirs of oil is still a matter of con¬ 
jecture. Besources of clay and shale suitable for 
the manufacture of brick, tile and pottery are 
widely distributed throughout the province. Salt 
springs and deposits of rock salt of commercial 
value occur in northern Alberta. Gold is found 

(1) Allan: First and Second Annual Reports. 







in small quantities along racet of the rivers rising 
in the Rocky Mountains, It is found in paying 
quantities only on the Peace and the North Saskat¬ 
chewan rivers * 










£3 


OHABT II ' 

THB ffUK TBADB 

Alberta as a province, did not come into 
existence until 1905. It was, before that, part 
of the North West Territories, but the separate 
political history of the Territories dates only 
from 1870. Previous to that date Alberta was merely 
a part of the whole Northwest. It has, therefore, 
no early history distinctly its own. The history of 
the early development of Alberta can be treated only 
as a part of the general history of western develop¬ 
ment * 

The exploration and opening up of the North¬ 
west was due Chiefly to two causes. It was to some 
extent, as Black remarks in his history of Saskat¬ 
chewan (1) ff the practical outcome of an impractical 
dream”, the result, that is, of the long-cherished 
hope of finding, a Northwest passage to India. It 
was this hope which actuated the work of LaVerendrye, 
who may be said to have opened the way for the 
exploration of Western Canada. La^Verendrye himself 
pushed westward as far as Portage La Prairie in 
Canada, and the Missouri Talley in the Present State 
of Montana, while his sons journeypd westward through 
(1) "Saskatchewan and the Old North West " p5. 







PA 

what are now the Northern States, to the Rooky 
Mountains•(l } • But the other far more important 
cause of western development was the impetus which 
the fur trade gave to exploration. The search for a 
Northwest passage was a costly project, and was 
abandoned for long intervals, so that for many years 
the only attraction which the Northwest held for the 
outside world was the wealth in furs. It was the 
hope of gain that led traders to penetrate farther 
and farther into the wilderness; the story of the 
openin up of the Canadian west is, for the most part, 
the story of the extension westward of the fur trade. 

Three distinct periods may he noted in the 
furtrade insofar as it concerned the early history 
of the West. These were:- 

(1) The French regime. This period, the beginning of 
which can only be indefinitely set as some time 
previous to 1750, lasted until 1769. 

(2) The period of free trade, following the English 
conquest of Canada, lasting from 1769 until 1821. 

This was a period of rivalry, first among indepen- 
dent traders then among Companies® 

(3) The period from 1821 until 1870, during which 
the Hudson's Bay Company had a monopoly of the fur trade 
(1) Black pp31.32. 




Little is known of the actual extent of the 
fur trade carried on in the far west of Canada during 
the French regime, but there is evidence to show that 
it was carried on there to a certain extent, and that 
French fur traders were the first white men to enter 
the present province of Alberta. There is, for 
instance, the testimony of de Niverville, one of a 
party of exploration under LeGardeaur St. Pierre, who 
in 1750 took up La Verendry’s work where he had been 
obliged to drop/it. St. Pierre relates in his journal 
that De Niverville gave him an account of "what he had 
learned at the settlement he made near the Rocky 
Mountains that a party of Indians who were going to 
war met with a nation loaded with beaver, who ?/ere 
going by a river which issued from the Rocky Mountains 
to trade with the French who had their first establish¬ 
ment on an island at a small distance from the land. 

The Indians positively asserted that the traders were 
not English"(1) This indicates that the French 
traders had penetrated as far as the Rocky Mountains at 
least some years before 1750, There are also records 

of the existence of a French fur post. La Jonquiere, 
somewhere near the base of the Rockies. Accounts 
differ, however, as to its location and the date of 

"History of the North West" Xp86 


ill Begg: 









of its establishment.01). 

Rivalry between French and English traders in 
the regions near Hudson's Bay began with the establish¬ 
ment of the Hudson's Bay Company in 1670, when that 
Company was given a monopoly of the fur trade and 
absolute control of the Territories drained by rivers 
flowing into Hudson's Bay. However, competition 
scarcely extended into the interior. The English 
adventureres were content to remain at their oosts 
on the shores of the Bay, trying to induce the 
Indians to bring their furs to them. Even then the 
Hudson's Bay Company seams to have exercised a power¬ 
ful influence over the Indians of the interior# 

Father Lamorenerie, a member of St. Pierre's expedi¬ 
tion of 1750, relates several Instances of this 
influence, saying of the English: "the Indians being 
so greatly afraid, their threats alone are able to make 
them undertake anything."f 2 ). The only English trader 
who pushed westward in rivalry with the French at 
this time was Anthony Hendry# In 1754 he went up 
the Saskatchewan River as far as the forks, and into 
the country of the Blaekfeet Indians of Southern 
Alberta. He is the first man of whose entrance into 

Alberta we have any definite record# ( 3 ) _ 

Tl) Davidson: "(The North West Company™. 

(2) B eg g I: p.85 
(3 ) Black, p.34 






2? 


With the fall of New France in!759, the 
activities of the French governmental officials in 
connection with western trade ceased. Its control 
passed entirely into the hands of the English. The 
license system of the French was abolished and free 
trade was established. This was followed by a rapid 
development of independent trading organisations with 
their headquarters in Montreal and Quebec. Some of 
these organizations, which were composed chiefly of 
Scotch merchants, took: into their employ experienced 
French voyageurs and outfitted them for long trips 
into the "pays d ! en haut", the remote Indian country. 

In other cases some of the partners themselves 
decided to penetrate the Indian Territory and carry on 
the trade. Among these early traders operating from 
Montreal were the Frobishers, Thomas and Joseph, Currie 
Finlay, Peter Pond and Alexander Henry. All of them 
reached the present province of Saskatchewan (l). The 
first of them to enter Alberta was Peter Pond, who in 
1777 reached Lake Athabasca, and the next year estab¬ 
lished the pioneer fort in that region, thirty or 
forty miles south of the lake, on the Athabasca River. 
This was the only fort in that region until 1785 (2). 
The famous Fort Chipewyan on Lake Athabasca was built 


(St Black 

(2i :#cken 


sP&E 6 'f7#yage 




p.12 








28 

in 1788 by Roderick Mackenzie, a cousin of the 
explorer, Alexander Mackenzie, 

During this period of rivalry each trader 
was concerned only with his own immediate interests, 
paying no attention to the permanent welfare of the 
trade. This resulted in quarrels among traders f 
Indian disorders and trade losses. The merchants 
who were outfitting the traders soon realized the 
advisability of combining their interests, and as 
a result, a eompny of the traders at Sturgeon Lake 
was organized in 1778 with Peter Bond at its head. 
This was the origin of the famous North West Company 
formed as such in 1785 by a union of the most promi¬ 
nent Canadian merchants and traders. Within a short 
time this became a powerful rival of the Hudson’s 
Bay Company. After the formation of the North West 
Company the practice of private merchants sending 
out traders gradually died out. There were a number 
of unsuccessful attempts at this, the last instance 
on record being in 1806 (1), By about 1798 the fur 
trade may be said to have passed from the hands of 
private individuals into the control of companies. 

Some idea of the extent and value of the 
fur trade at this time is given by a statement in a 
(1) Begg I,p. 96 ' " ’ 







;9 


letter written by Mr. Charles Grant, a fur trader, 
to General Halderaand, in 1780. He states that on an 
average the fur trade in late years had procued an 
annual return to Great Britain of £200,000. (1) 

A bitter struggle of nearly forty years was now 
waged between the Hudson’s Bay Company and the North 
West Company, which was of some significence in the 
development of the west because of the impetus it gave 
to exploration. 

The "Nor-Westers”, after they were organized as 
a Company, continued their energetic efforts to gain 
the western trade. They pushed on to the north and 
west far ahead of the older companies and built forts 
on the Peace River, Lfeke Athabasca and the Greater 
and Lesser Slave Lakes. It was under the employ of 
the North West Company that Alexander Mackenzie made 
his trip to the Athabasca region in 17,87, end 
subsequently carried out his expeditions to the Arctic 
and Pacific Oceans.(2). A little later, at least 
three other explorers of note appeared among the trader 
of the Company. Most important among these was David 
Thompson, who was sent to the Northwest by the Hudson’s 
Bay Company, but joined the rival Company in 1797. He 
traversed many hitherto unexplored portions of Alberta, 
as well as the region west of the Rockies. He pene- 


tr5(TbitT7^tnr~———-— —- -- 

„In 1792, Mackenzie wintered in 
ver at the mouth o W ire E 


__ Alberta, on the Peace 
River (Davidsoto p.63) 









30 


trated the country of the Blackfeet Indians, and it 
is probable that it was he who established Bow Fort, 
near the present site of Calgary in 1802 (l) Between 
1808 and J811, both he and Alexander Henry, the 
younger, also a North West Company trader, travelled 
extensively throughout the regions of the upper 
Saskatchewan River, adding considerably to the scanty 
knowledge of the country (2), Daniel Harmon was 
another "Nor-Wester". It is from his journal, 
written between 1800 and 1819 while he was stationed 
at various-posts on the Peace and Athabasca valleys, 
that we have almost the first mention of the agricul¬ 
tural possibilities of those regions. It might be 
noted that although these, and many of the other 
famous explorers of the West were fur traders, their 
explorations were often carried out in suite of the 
companies Tfehey represented, rather than because of any 
encouragement gfeiven by them. (20* 

Competition engendered by the formtion of the 
North West Company proved effective in spurring the 

Hudson f s Bay Company into activity. As noted before, 

(1) Black, p 43 

(2) J. B. Tyrrell: "David Thompson’s Narrative": Harmon's 
"Journal" Mackenzie's "Voyages";Preface: Burpee: Search 
for the Western Sea", p.167. 

(3) Begg I. pp.207-214 













31 


this Company, prior to this time, had taken very 
little interest in exploration, hut kept close to the 
forts on the Bay. The advent of free trade had aroused 
them from their lethargy sufficiently to send Hearne * on 
an exploratory trip in 1770. In 1774 he established 
Cumberland Mouse, Mow the forks of the Saskatchewan. 
Aside ffom this one instance, however, the Company took 
no active steps in trading by interior posts until the 
formation of the new company. After that event the 
old Company displayed great zeal in competing for the 
trade of the interior. During the next twenty years 
it extended its forts from Cumberland House to the 
Kocky mountains, planting them beside those of the 
rival company in many cases. Westward from Cumberland 
Souse this famous line of forts, representing both 
companies, included fort a la Cotine, fort George, 
fort Pitt, fort Victoria, and two forts, near the 
present site of fort Saskatchewan, in which the city 
of Edmonton had its beginning. These were fort Edmon¬ 
ton, built by the Hudson’s Bay Company in 1795, and 
fort Augustus, built by the North West Company in 

1708 . Still farther west were Rocky Mountain House 
and Jasper House. On a line further north, in the 
Athabasca and Peace regions were fort Chipewyan, 












32 


Vermilion and. Macleod. Chesterfield House on the 
South Saskatchewan and Bow Fort on the Bow River were 
were established during the period of rivalry, hut had 
to be abandoned within a few years owing to the hostility 
of the Blackfeet Indians. 

The activities of the North West Conroany in the 
far west proved so successful that during the early years 
of the struggle they possessed almost a monopoly of. the 
trade of that region at the expense of the Hudson’s Bay 

[a) 

Company. The rapid growth of the Canadian company’s 
trade is shown by the.fact that in 1738 its value did not 
exceed -£40,000, but before the end of the century its 
annual value was very near €120, COO, This company poss¬ 
essed certain advantages in the early years of its strug¬ 
gle with, the eider company. It was so organised that it 
offered greater opportunities for advancement to its 
employees than did its rival. This, as might be expect&d^ 
secured for it more devoted and more energetic service. 

Also it employed chiefly French Canadian voyageurs .and 
traders, who. were much more popular with the Indians 

and much more successful in dealing with them, than tie 

(4) 

Orkney men employed by the Hudson’s Bay Company, 

(1) A A as of Canada, 1906, p.32, 

(2) Davidson; ’’The North West Company’*, p,71, 

(3) Bryce: '’Remarkable History of the Hudson’s Bay 
C ompany 11 p. 12C , 

(4) Davidson,p.7i. 





33 . 


As the struggle continued, however, the Hudson's Bay 
Company itself Began to employ French Canadians to 
some extent, and displayed greater activity along all 
lines, until it finally succeeded in destroying the 
Canadian Company's advantage in the North West. The 
North West Company, too, was weakened by internal 
quarrels; in 1798 a number of traders seceded to form 
the XY Company, hut they reunited with the ! *Nor-Westore ;f 
in 1805. The. Company also suffered from competition 
with an American fur Company west of the. Hookies, 
and from troubles with the Indians of that region. 

During the later years, quarrels between rival 
traders often resulted in bloodshed and the destruct¬ 
ion of forts, became of increasingly frequent occurrence 
The Indians were plentifully supplied with liquor by 
both Companies and were frequently incited to crimes 
by one side or the other. The disturbances increased 
with the founding of the Red River Colony by Lord 
Selkirk in 181S, as this threatened to cut off import¬ 
ant punting grounds of the North West Company. The 
fur trade/itself suffered under such conditions, and 
profits dwindled. Both Companies were becoming ex¬ 
hausted. Accordingly in 1815 the North West Company 
made overtures for union, but Lord Selkirk, who 
















34 


owned a controlling share of Hudson’s Bay Company 
stock, was unalterably opposed to such a plan. His 
death in 1820 opened the way for coalition, and in 
1821 the two Companies agreed to unite under the 
name of the Hudson’s Bay Company. The North West 
Company transferred all its property to the new Com¬ 
pany, and its partners became members of the latter. 

An Act was passed by the British Parliament in 1821 
by which all the rights and privileges of the two 

old companies were conferred upon the new one. It 

( 

was given in addition the exclusive right of trade for 
twenty-one years in all the lands either east or west 
of the Rocky Mountains, not included in the original 
charter. These lands were known as the Indian Territ¬ 
ories, while the land granted in the original charter, 
namely, that drained by rivers flowing into Hudson’s 
Bay, was known as Rupert’s Land. In 1838 the exclusive 
trade license was extended for a further period of 
twenty-one years. 

The Hudson’s Bay Company thus became, as Begg 

says in his history, "the inheritor and representative 
of all previous fur companies",(l) and for some years 
did practically what it pleased in Rupert’s Land and 

(1) Page 159. 




35 . 


the Indian territories. It was the sol^aource of 
supply for the Indians, who were the only inhabitants 
of the country except for the Company's servants and 
the Bed Biver settlors, and the only market for the 
disposition of their furs. This state of monoply and 
the cessation of rivalry among traders resulted in 
conditions of comparative peace and order in the 
Northwest, beneficial both to the Indians and to the 
fur trade itself. One important achievement was the 
gradual reduction of the liquor traffic which the 
Company effected. We are able to form some idea of 
the numbers of Indians the Company was dealing with 
at this time, as an estimate as accurate as was poss¬ 
ible was made in 185? from information gathered during 
several years prior to that. The total number of 
Indians in Bupert's Land and the Indian Territories 
was found to be between fifty-five and fifty-six 
thousand. (1) The numbers frequenting the various 
posts of the Company in Alberta were as follows:- 


Fort 

Chipewyan 

3,750 

tt 

Lunvegan 

400 

W 

Vermilion 

250 

fT 

Fond du Lac 

150 


fl) Estimate by Sir George 
of 1857, p 67. 


Simpson- Report of Committee 






36 • 


Fort 

Fdmonton 

7,500 

rt 

Rocky Mounts! n House 

6,000 

n 

Lac la Biche 

500 

ft 

Lesser Slave Lake 

400 

ft 

Jasper House 

£00 


Total.......... 

19,150 (1) 


Various instances of the flourishing condition 
of the Company f s trade at this time may he given* The 
total number of trading posts increased from 136 in 
1836 to 154 in 1856. ( 2 ) The number of plain-hunters 
in the North West also increased rapidly. These plain- 
hunters were a very important class of employees, 
being the men sent out on the annual summer and fall 
buffalo hunts to obtain supplier of pemmican, dried 
meat, robes and skins. The number of "buffalo carts" 
sent out with these hunting expeditions at successive 
periods wrere as follows:- 


Number of Carts. 

1820 .. 540 

1825 .. 680 

1830 ....a.820 

1835 .. 9V0 

1840 ......-...........1270 (3) 


(1) Report of Committee of 1857 - Appendix, p 365. 

(2) Begg I. p 207. 

f3 ) Begg I, p 219. 
















37 


The Company also "began to use ox-carts, to a 
large extent for transporting its supplies overland, 
instead of sending them by canoe or boat. At this tim$ 
about 1840, there were from 300 to 500 of these wooden 
carts sent annually into the Saskatchewan district. 

The trail ran from Fort Carry to Carlton, about 150 
miles northeast of the present city of Regina, thence 
up the Saskatchewan valley to Fort Pitt, on the river 
northwest of Battleford, near the boundary of Alberta, 
and thence to Edmonton, 

It is interesting to note the effect which the 
change in methods of transportation had on the import¬ 
ance of Fort Edmonton. The two old forts were destroyed 

by Indians about 1807, and a little later, two new forts; 

* 

were erected farther up the river. These in turn were 

- 

abandoned and two new forts were built near the present 
site, about 1819. (1) After the union of the fur com¬ 
panies in 1821, the two forts were amalgamated under the 
name of Fort Edmonton. Here an extensive trade was 
carried on both with the Indians of the mountains and j 

of the plains; many even of the Blackfeet and Piegans 
came there to trade, as there was no post in Southern 

Alberta. Because of its position at the head of navi- 
(1) Edmonds: A Brief History of Edmonton, p 4. 








38 . 


on the North Saskatchewan, Fort Edmonton was for many 
years the chief distributing centre of the fur trade 
of the Northwest* With the change from canoes to 
ox-carts for transportation, it lost this position 
in favor of Fort Carlton, the centre of the buffalo 
trade. Edmonton did not regain its former importance 
until the coming of steam navigation on the Saskat¬ 
chewan in the eighties* 

As might be expected, the Hudson ? s Bay Company 
made large, profits during the period it had a monoply. 
No figures are available for the early years, but it 
is known that between 1839 and 1856 the average annual 
profits were £ 65,573, or an average of 12 % on the 
capital invested*(1) The capital stock increased 
from £400,000 in 1821 to £ 500,000 in 1857, partly 
by means of profits carried to stock. (2) It was 
also estimated in 1857 that the total amount of wealth 
sent to England from the fur trad© up to that time was 


£ 20,000,000 (3). Of course it is impossible to say 
how much of this came from the West, but certainly 

it contributed a large share* It is true of the 

West, as of Canada as a whole, that part of the wealth 

taken from it by English capitalists through the fur 

( 1 ) Testimony of Edward Ellis before the Committee of 
British House of Commons, 1857 - p 326* 

2) Encyclopedia of Canada XI p 51. 

( 3) Myers pa story of ^anadiaif Wealth , p 135* 









59 


trade, was later re-invested in railways and other 
projects for its development* 

The almost feudal rule exercised hy the Hudson’s 
Bay Company over its territories was unchallenged until 
the early thirties. About 1835, however, events occurr¬ 
ed which began to interfere with the Company’s mon- 
oply of trade, and to undermine its authority in 
maintaining law and order. In the first place the 
Red River settlers began to assert their right to 
free trade. In 1834 some of them began importing 
goods from England and the United States, At first 
they did this for their own use, but later, as they 
grew bolder, for trade and speculation. However, they 
did not dare to trade in furs until after the occur¬ 
ence of the Sayer trial, in 1849, This event Begg 
calls the death knell of the Company’s trade monopoly. 
The Company tried to exercise its authority in punish¬ 
ing an infraction of its exclusive right to trade. 

The trial aroused such a demonstration of public 
opinion against the Company that the case had to be 

dropped. After this, the petty traders openly traded 
in furs as well as in merchandise. The Company made 
no more attempts to use its authority to suppress them, 

but trusted to a competitive struggle in which it 







40 


possessed all the advantages of superior resources 
and an established position. As far as the North 
West was concerned, any free traders who ventured 
there were practically at the mercy of the Company’s 
officials because of the impossibility of obtaining 
supplies through any other source. As a result, 
there was very little free trading west of the Red 
River Settlement until American traders began coming 
into Southern Alberta from the Missouri Valley in 
1866 . 

At the same time as the Red River settlers were 
asserting their independence, a feeling of opposition 
to the Company was growing up in the Provinces of 
Canada. A petition sent by the Toronto Board of Trade 
to the Legislative Council of Canada in 185? represents 
the state of public opinion in Ganada on North West 
matters at this time. In this petition the Company is 
designated as n a Company to all intents and purposes 
foreign to the interests of Canada, and owing no res¬ 
ponsibility to her ,T . The Company’s legal rights to 
its chartered lands is challenged and its trade monopoly 
declared harmful and unjust. Several dispatches were 
sent by the Canadian Government authorities to the 
3ritish Parliament, requesting an inquiry in regard 

to the Company’s rights and privileges. The result 










41 


of this agitation was the appointment in 1857 of a 
Committee of the House of Commons i rT to consider the 
state of those British possessions in North America 
which are under the administration of the Hudson’s 
Bay Company, or over which they possess a license to 
tradeV The Canadian Provinces sent Chief Justice 
Draper to England to represent their interests in the 
investigation. In presenting their c ase to the 
Committee, Draper claimed that the interests of Canada 
were involved in the inquiry in the following connect** 
ions : - (l) in regard to the settlement of dis¬ 

putes as to the true "boundary of Canada; (2) in the 
interest of maintaining the Northwest as a British 
possession; and (3) Because of the fact that the 
people of Canada Xoohed to that territory as a country 
in which they ought to he permitted to extend their 
settlements. 

The Committee heard the testimony of a large 
number of witnesses, including travellers, missionaries, 
traders and officials of the Company, among them. Sir 
George Simpson, Governor of the Company from 1821 to 
1856. The report of the Committee was to the follow¬ 
ing effect: - Canada should he allowed to annex to her 











42 


territory the Red River Settlement, and any portion 
of the land in her neighborhood that might be avail- 
able to her for the purpose of settlement, as soon as 
she was willing to open and maintain connections with 
such territories and assume government over them. 

The connection of the Company with Vancouver Island 
should be terminated. Whatever the validity of the 
Company’s right to its chartered lands, it was highly 
desirable that it should be allowed to retain its 
exclusive trading privileges in these lands for.the 
time being at least, as an open competition in the 
fur trade would be demoralising to the Indians, and 
result in the destruction of the fur bearing animals*Cl) 
Following' this report, the grant to the Company of 
Vancouver Island, which expired in 1858, was not renew¬ 
ed, nor was the license for exclusive trade in the 
Indian Territories, which expired in 1859, These 
events, as well as the whole agitation, served to 
weaken the authority of the Company in the lands it 
still held by-charter, that is, Rupert’s Land. Ex¬ 
ploratory expeditions were sent out by the British 
and Canadian governments under Palliser, Dawson and 
Hind in 1857-1863, These further weakened the prestige 
of the Company, as they were regarded as forerunners 
(1) Report, oommittee of 1857, pp. 10-14. 

i 














43 


of a change of sovereignty, There was the additional 
fact that in a part of its territory the fur trade was 
no longer profitable. This is made clear in a report 
by Captain Butler in 1871 to Lieutenant Governor 
Archibald of Manitoba on conditions in the Northwest.(15 
He says: TT The fur trade of the Saskatchewan district 
has lbng been in a declining state; great scarcity of 
the richer description of furs, competition of free 
traders, and the very heavy expenses incurred in the 
maintenance of large establishments, have combined to 
render the district a source of loss to the Hudson’s 
Bay Company, This loss has, I believe, varied annually 
from £2,000 to £6,000. M Doubtless partly because of 
this decline in the profits of the trade, as well as 
and partly on account of the increasing difficulty of 
maintaining law and upholding its authority, the Com¬ 
pany was not unwilling to enter into negotiations for 
transferring the territory to the Canadian government. 
With the aid of the Imperial Government, an agreement 
was reached in 1869, by which the Hudson’s Bay Company 
surrendered its lands to the Dominion Government. They 
received in return £300,000 and retained certain lands 
around its forts and one-twentieth of the land in the 
Fertile Belt, that is, the country between the North 

Quoted in Mac£ a@ : "History of Alberta” pp.216,241. 














44 . 


Saskatchewan Siver and the international boundary , 
extending from the Lake of the Woods to the Kocky 
Mountains. The formal transfer of the territory took 

place in 1870* 

The effect of this long period of the Hudson’s 
Bay Company’s possession and trade monopoly on the 
development of the West has been a matter of controv¬ 
ersy. It is claimed that the policy of the Company 
retarded settlement for half a century at least. Fur 
trade and settlement cannot of course exist success¬ 
fully side by side, and the Hudson’s Bay Company, as. 
a purely fur trading concern was naturally opposed to 
the settlement of its territories. Many of the 

officials, like those of all the previous fur companies 

- 

spread abroad disparaging reports of the resources 
and of the agricultural, capabilities of the country, 
with a view to discourag^^mmigration. As an example 
of this practice, the statement of Sir George Simpson 
before the investigating committee of 1857, may be 
mentioned. As Governor of the Company for thirty-eight 
years, he had travelled extensively over its territories*: 
His report of their agricultural possibilities were 
very discouraging; he said plainly: ff I do not 
think that any part of the Hudson’s Bay Company’s 
territories is well adapted for settlement; the 






45 


crops are very uncertain."As the majority of 
witnesses gave reports of a ipucli more encouraging 
nature, it would appear that Sir George Simpson's 
observations were colored somewhat by his regard for 
the interests of the Company. 

By a vote of the shareholders in 1866, any policy 
of colonization on the part of the Company was absolut¬ 
ely condemned. Evidently no encouragement was offered 
to settlement while the Company was in possession . 

But in any case it is extremely doubtful whether there 
would have been any disposition for settlers to cone 
in during this period. The Canadian Northwest was a 
remote and almost unknown country, with no means of 
communication with the East and with no markets for 
produce. Until the provinces of Canada were themselves 
united and prepared to adminster the country and open 
up communication with it, it offered little induce¬ 
ment to settlers. 

Moreover, it is probable that the possession of 
the Canadian West by the Hudson's Bay Company was the 
chief cause of its remaining British territory, instead 
of being absorbed as part of the United States, into 
whose territories directly to the south, settlement 
was advancing. The claims of the United States in the 







46 


Uorthwest were made clear by a treaty signed with 
Russia in 1814, in which the fifty-fourth parallel 
was named as the boundary between Russian and American 
territory. When the boundary between Canada and the 
United States was actually settled by the Treaty of 
Ghent in 1814, Britain was able to successfully base 
her claim to the territory between the fifty-fourth 
and the forty-ninth parallels upon its occupancy by 
the Hudson’s Bay Company. 

Another great service rendered by the Hudson’s 
Bay Company was the establishment of a tradition of 
peaceful dealings with the Indians. It was largely 
due to the Company’s policy towards the Indians, that 
Canada was enabled to take possession of Rupert’s Land 
without being troubled by Indian outbreaks such as 
characterized the settlement of the Western States. 
Although there can be no doubt as to the beneficial 
results for Canada of the Company’s Indian policy, the 
question of the actual treatment accorded the Indians 
has been the subject of much dispute. Considerable 
light is thrown on the question by the evidence given 
by witnesses before the Committee of 1857. It is quite 
clear that the policy of the Company was based on 
their realization of the fact that the preservation of 









47 


the Indian tribes, and the maintenance of friendly 
relations with them, was essential to the carrying 
on of the fur trade. As a result, a sort of pater¬ 
nalistic rule was established. In accordance with 
this the Company made no pretence of dealing fairly 
with the Indians in paying for their furs; Company 
officials admitted that large profits were made from 
the traffic with them, fl) At the same time the 
Company undertook to supply the Indians with food, 
clothes, ammunition and, when necessary, medical care, 
whether they could pay for these things or not. As 
this plan was based purely on commercial advantage, 
there was often a scarcity of supplies at the Company ! s 
posts, the aim being to furnish the smallest amount 
possible, consistent with keeping the Indians alive 
and able to hunt. Officials of the Company claimed 
that owing to the improvident nature of the Indians, 
such a method of keeping them dependent on the Company 
was the only possible way of dealing with them. At 
any rate, it proved successful in maintaining peace 
and order. 

In addition to the historical fact of the ab¬ 
sence of Indian disorders in the West during the 
Hudson’s Bay Company’s rule, we have the testimony of 










48 


sovoral impartial observers of conditions in the 
West at the time of the transfer of the country to 
Canada, to the effect that this freedom from Indian 
troubles was largely the result of the course follow¬ 
ed by the Hudson's Bay Company. Both Palliser and 
Macoun held that opinion. The former records in his 
journal (1) that the Indians of the North Saskatchewan 
Valley had been for many years on the best of terms with 
all travellers which fact could n in some measure he 
accounted for by the Justice and good faith which 
characterized all the dealings of the Hudson*s Bay 
Company with.them. n 

Following the purchase of the Northwest by the 
Dominion.Government, the Fur trade gradually passed 

to the far north. The way was opened at last for the 

■ 

settlement and development of the Prairie Provinces. 




(1) p. 18. 











CHAPTER III 


49 


EARLY TESTING OF AGRICULTURAL P0SSI3ILITIES . 

Luring the period of the fur trade the common 
belief of the outside world was that Northern Alberta 
was a frozen wilderness and Southern Alberta an arid 
waste. The policy of the fur companies was to en - 
courage this belief. Nevertheless it was inevitable 
that the true nature of the country should gradually 
be made known by the reports of some of the companies 
own traders and explorers. In this way Alberta®s 
agricultural capacities first became well enough known 
to attract settlers. 

The northern portions of the province were first 
penetrated by fur traders. From the north, therefore, 
came the first indications of agricultural possibi¬ 
lities in the form of evidences of great success in 
the cultivation of crops and gardens around the fur 
posts. The first report was in connection with Peter 
Pond, who in 1778 established the pioneer fort in the 
Athabasca district (l) We have this record about him 
in MacEenzies* Voyages:(2) "In the fail of theyear 

($• About thirty mTTes above the" mouth of the Athabasca 

River (bavidson: The North West Co. p.40) 


(2) Voyages - p 129 













50 


1787, when I first arrived at Athabasca, *?r. 'Pond 
was settled on the banks of the Elk River, and had 
farmed as fine a kitchen garden as I ever saw in 
Canada Mackenzie himself observed that he had no 
doubt that the soil of this region would prove pro¬ 
ductive. "if a proper attention were given to tts 
preparation". But on the whole, Mackenzies reports 
of the North West were not optimistic. In a note at 
the end of his Voyages where he gives a brief geogra¬ 
phical outline of the whole western portion of 
British North America from the standpoint of opening 
it up, he designated a region extending from St. 

Mary’s Strait to the Pacific, bounded on the souths 
approximately, by what has since become the Interna¬ 
tional Boundary and on the north by "the Rrozen Sea 
and Hudson’s Bay", thus including the territory in 
which we are interested, and says of it: "The whole 
of this country will long cdntinue in the possession 
of its present inhabitants (the Indians) as they 
will remain contented with the produce of the woods 
and waters for their support, leaving the earth in its 
virgin state. The proportion of it that is fit for 
cultivation is very small, and is still less in the 
interior parts; it is also very difficult of access 

and whilst any land remains uncultivated to the south 








51 


of it, there will be no teraptaticn to settle. 

Besides, its climate is not, 1 general sufficiently 

genial to bring the fruits of the earth to maturity 

Of course Mackenzie had actually explored only 

q ompara lively small parts of these regions. 

The next recorded report on the fertility 

of the Northwest was of a more encouraging nature. 

In 1808, Daniel Harmon, an agent of the North 

West Company stationed at Dunvegan on the Pea^e 

River, wrote in his Journal: "Our principal food 

will be the flesh of the buffalo, moose, red deer 

and bear. We have a tolerably good kitchen garden 

and shall not want the means -of a comfortable sub- 

(!) 

si stance"^ # And again in 1809: ff We lave cut down 
our barley, I think it is the finest that I ever 
saw in any country” while after speaking of the 
luxuriant growth of his garden in 1810 he expresses 
his opinion that "m r hea t, rye, barley and oats would 

(tt \ 

grow well on the plains around us”.' i 

The early reports from the north apparently 
attracted little attention in the outside world. 

The years that followed witnessed the bitter 

5" I " Journals" pTTlT'™ _ ____ - ~ 

(S')' Ibid p * 146 

Ibid p.152 








s tbetween tbs t-vo great fur companies and the 
extension of their posts throughout the Saskatchewan 
valley. Only a few reports of attempts at agriculture 
around these posts have been preserved. Among them was 
that of Ross, a fur trader, who visited Fort Rdmonton 
in 1825. He made the following note on its agricultural 
activities; M Attached to the place are two large' parks 
for raising grain, and the soil being good, it produces 
large crops of barley and potatoes; but the spring and 
fall frosts prove injurious to wheat, which in conse¬ 
quence seldom comes to maturity. M ^^ 

The first scientific explorations in the province 
began In 1357. In that year two official explorations 
were sent to. explore a great stretch of territory ex~ 


- 

tending across the central and southern parts of the 
province. They resulted- in the application, for the 


first time, of the term ’'fertile belt'* to that terri¬ 
tory, The expeditions were those of Captain Palliser, 

(o ) 

loo/-6v a and of S.J.Pawson 

(1) H Er .1 ef His t ory of Rdmo nt on” p, 6 . 

(2) Cattain palliser was commissioned by the British 
government to explore M that portion of British Hohth 1 
America which lies between the northern watershed 
and the frontier of the United States, and between 
the "Red River and the Rocky Mountains” and endeavor 
to find a practical routs through it. 











53 . 


and Professor Hind (X) 1857-8. In Professor Hind’s 
report, published in 1860, he wrote: "The discovery 
of a fertile belt of country extending from the Lake 
of the Woods to the Rooky Mountains, paves to this 
part of British America a more than passing interest”, 
and In another place: ”North of the great American 
desert there is a broad strip of fertile county ;:, 
rich In water, wood and pasturage, drained by the 
North Saskatchewan, and a continuation of the fertile 
prairies of the Red and Aseiniboine River's. It is a 
Shy si cal reality of the highest importance to the 
interests' of British North America that this: ccntin- 

H 

uoue belt can be settled and cultivated. (2) 

In Captain Palliser’s report, published in 1863, 

he describes a fertile belt of country lying between 

the great American desert to the south and the northern 

forest area. This includes all of Alberta south of 

the North Saskatchewan with the exception of an arid 

patch in the south where the ceAntral desert region 

o f the United States ’’extends for a short way in to 

(1) The Dawson expedition was sent by the government of 
the united Canadas to examine the resources of the 
Red River Colony and the Assiniboine and Sashatche- 
want country (”The Unexplored West” p2.Bept. of 
the Interior) 

(&.) Quoted from ”The Unexploited West" p.2 










54 


Canada, forming a triangle having for its base the 

o o 

49th parallel from longitude 100 to 110 and with 

( 1 ) 

its apex reaching to the 52nd parallel of latitude" 
Palliser says that this fertile belt would he valuable 
for mixed agricultural purposes; its grain growing 
capabilities were not yet proved. 

These official reports established as an actual 
fact the existence of rich arable regions in the 
North-west, Furthermore, they captured public atten¬ 
tion in England and Canada by the use of the phrase 
"fertile belt" to describe them. 

However, this term was applied in so far as Alberta 
was concerned, chiefly to the North Saskatchewan 
Valley, The reports did nothing to dispel the popular 
impression that the land to the north was a frozen 
waste, destined so to remain, while Passlier's report 
at least, strengthened the belief that southern Alberta 
was arid and altogether useless for agriculture(2) 

As late as 1871, Butler in his "Great Lone Land" des¬ 
cribed it as "arid, treeless, and impossible of settle¬ 
ment, "(3) A change in the tone of sta.tme.nts about the 






(1) ^Journals* p, 7 

;2 ' "Hournals"- General Report, p 7 

(3, p.374 Captain Butler had been commissioned by the 

Territorial government in 1871 to investigate and 
report upon conditions in the Northwest, 













-55 


south occurred after the inauguration of the Boundary 
Survey in 1872, With this, and the coming of the 
Mounted Police in 1874, more favorable reports began 
to be circulated, particularly in regard to ranching 
possibilities. 

The next exploration of importance after Palliser I 
was that of Professor Macoun, carried on intermitten¬ 
tly from 1875-1880, his observations appearing in 
1882 in his "Manitoba and the Great North West". He 
supported Palliser r s reports of the Saskatchewan 
Valley, but did his best to correct the prejudice 
against the southern plains. He examined that country I 
carefully and claimed that the arid appeamace of a 
large part of it was the result of prairie fires and 
not a natural climatic feature of the country,(l) 

He also extended his observations noth to the Peace 
and Athabasca regions, and submitted considerable 
evidence in regard to their agricultural possibilities(2jj 
He told of the luxuriant growth of gardens and 
natural vegetation, noted the finest barley he had 

ever seen, growing at Port Vermilion, and gathered 
grain from Port Ghipewyan which was awarded a Medal at 
the Centennial Exposition at Philadelphia in 1876, 

'^7 ^ anit0 " ba and the Great North West" pp.103 144 

(2) Ibid pp31, 109-140 










Macoun'i noted regretfully in the preface to 
his hook that Canada T s Northwest, no doubt destined 
to be the granary of the world, had for long years 
been a blank on the map* But this was no longer 
true when he wrote. Favorable reports had begun to 
circulate and to have their effect in attracting 
settlers. Preparation had been made for a more 
complete realization of agricultural capacities by 
settlement and cultivation. 














57 


IV 

Preparation for Settlement -1870-1881 

With the transfer of Rupert's land, and the 
North West Territories to the Dominion in 1870, these 
lands were at last ready to he opened up for coloni¬ 
zation and development. But before any settlement 
was possible, the Dominion Government was faced with 
the necessity of carrying out a number of difficult 
tasks by way of preparation* The first decade after 
the purchase was largely taken up with the attempts 
of the government to deal with these problems. It 
was thus a period of preparation for development 
rather than one in which any actual development took 
place * 

The nature of the tasks with which the governmen 
was faced can best be appreciated after a study of 
existing conditions in the Northwest at the time of 
the transfer, A very clear picture of conditions 
is given by Butler in a report to Lieutenant Governor 
Archibald in-1871 (1), 

The only settlement of any size in the whole of 
the territory purchase", was the Red River Colony, 

(T) HaeRae, pp £16-240, Captain "Butler of the British 

Army, was commissioned in 1871 by the Lieutenant 
Governor of the Northwest Territoires to investi¬ 
gate conditions in the Saskatchewai| valley. 










56 - 


Por the rest, the country was inhabited only by 
the Indians, the Hudson’s Bay Compay traders, a few 
free traders, miners and missionaries. Shore were 
a few Roman Catholic missions with halfbreed settle¬ 
ments surrounding them, the ones in Alberta being at 
St. Albert, Lac la Biche and Lac Ste. Anne* These 
date from some time previous to 1857 as they are 
mentioned by Dr. Hector in his reports contained in 
Palliser T s Tf Journals ” fl) Cold had been discovered 
in many of the rivers of Alberta, but few miners 
had come,in, owing to the impossibility of obtaining 
supplies* Washing for gold was confined almost 
entirely to the forts of the Hudson’s Bay Company. 
The largest settlement of miners was around Port 
^dmontcn, where, in 1874, there were a dozen or 
so (2). In southern Alberta, where there were no 
Hudson’s Bay forts, there were no settlers. John 
MeLougall, who came to Edmonton in 1870 to establish 
the first Melhodist Mission in Alberta, says in his 
rf Western Trails in the Parly Seventies”: ”At this 
time there was not a bona fide settler south of the 
North Saskatchewan”. 

Tlil "Journals” General Report p.78 ~ ' - 

(2) Edmonds; a Brief History of Edmonton, p 11. 










-59 


Thus the Indians were still the principal 
inhabitants of these lands. At this time about 
thirty thousand of them (l) inhabited the plains which 
are now a part of the three prairie provinces. They 
were still leading a nomadic life, subsisting on game 
and fish and still engaged in endless bloody feuds 
among themselves. Their numbers of course, can only 
be estimated, as no census was taken until 1881- These 
Indians were of many different tribes (2). The two 
principal tribes inhabiting Alberta were the Blackfeet 
and the Crees. The Blackfoot Confederacy, including 
the Blackfeet, Piegans, Bloods and Or os Ventres, 
occupied the south Saskatehwan district of southern 
Alberta, In all, they numbered between eight and 
nine thousand. To the north of them, along the North 
Saskatchewan River were the Plain Crees, numbering 
about seven thousand® A continual state of warfare 
existed between these two tribes until in 1871, when 
a permanent peace was concluded between them. There 
were, in addition, a number of lesser tribes in Alberta. 
Among these were the Wood Crees, in the wooded country 
northeast of the Plain Crees; the Sareees, in the 
Battle River District, the Assiniboines, in the foothill 
west of the Blackfeet; the Chipewyans, in the Athabasca 

(l,) Dafoe Economic Development of the Prairie Province® 

/Canada and its provinces.XX p276 

MacRae pp235-238 description of Indian tribes 













60 


district and the Beavers along the Peace River. This 
gave a total population of between sixteen and seven¬ 
teen thousand* 

There was at the time of the transfer of the North 
west a greater feeling of discontent and uneasiness 
among the Indians with respect to the white man than 
had ever previously existed. The Riel Rebellion had 
broken the tradition of peace in the North west. 
Distorted rumours as to its cause reached the Indians 
of the far west. This filled them with alarm as to 
the intentions of the Dominion government to deprive 
them of their lands. 

The unfortunate policy of the American government 
towards the Indians of the country south of the Sask¬ 
atchewan was another cause of uneasiness. A state 
of hostility had long existed between the ^American 

settlers and the tribes of Sioux. Blackfeet and Piegans 

(A) 

tVrv- U '' 

which developed about this time into a ear of extermi¬ 
nation on the part of the American government. The 
culmination of this boundary warfare occurred in the 
Cypress Hills massacre in Southern Saskatchewan in 
1873 when fifty-six Indians were shot down by American 
traders who accused them of horse stealing. A large 
amount of free trading was also carried on in 






——- 








-61 


southern Alberta, chiefly by American traders from 
Fort Benton, on the Missouri, First coming up in 
1866, within the next few years they built a chain of 
forts in southern Alberta from which they carried on 
a considerable trade in buffalo robes and other furs 
in return for whiskey. Lieutenant Governor Morris 
of Manitoba reported that in 1873, American traders 
in this and other neighboring regions had shipped out 
of Canada $50,000 in buffalo robes and $100*000 in 
other furs. 

This whiskey traffic was the cause of increasing 
o 

disorder, pverty and misery among the Indians of sou¬ 
thern! Iberta and Saskatchewan. The Introduction of 
smallpox among the Blackfeet Indians in 1870 is 
attributed to these traders from the Missouri valley. 
The disease spread to the Grees and from them to all 
the western tribes, causing terrible suffering and 
great loss of life. 

The misery of the Indians was further increased 

by the rapid disappearance of the buffalo, which 

_ n 

occurred during this decade. The suddeness of their 
disappearance may be seen by the fact that when the 
Mounted Police arrived in 1874, they rod© for days 
across the prairies without losing sight of the 














62 


immense herds, hut in 1879 their numbers had been 
reduced almost to extinction. Probably their rapid 
disappearance at this time is explained by their 
wholesale slaughter for the fur market. MacBae in 
His History of.Alberta (1), quotes Colonel Herchmer, 
formerly Commissioner of the Mounted Police to the 
effect that the extinction of the buffalo was inten¬ 
tionally carried out by the Ameri can military author! 
tions in order to reduce the Sioux to submission® 

The numbers of robes exported for successive yeards 
during this period from Forts Maoleod and Walsh, 

shows the rapid decrease: 

Fort Madeoa Fort dish 


1877 

30,000 

18,375 

1878 

13,000 

18,375 

1879 

5,764 

8,617 


Canadian authorities in the West realized what was 
taking place, and in 1877 an Ordinance was passed 
by the Horth West Council, forbidding the wanton 
destruction of the herds, and establising a closed 
season. But the very destitution of the Indians 
for whom this was meant as a protection, made it 
such a hardship for them that it. was impossible to 
insist on enforcement. This led to its repeal the 

(l.)p377 















63 


the followin'' year. Small wonder that the Plains 
Indians, seeing the rapid disappearnace of their 
chief means of subsistence, were reduced almost to 
desperation. 

The increasing feeling of uneasiness among the 
Indians and the disorders in Southern Alberta, plainly 
showed the necessity for the Dominion Government to 
establish some agency for maintaining law and order, 
and guaranteeing the security of life and property. 

IIo effective agency was in existence. After the 
purchase of the Northwest by the Dominion, the Rupert’s 
Land Act was passed in 1369, to provide for the 
temporary government of the new Territories. It pro¬ 
vided for the appointment by the Governor-General-in- 
Council, of a Lieutenant Governor and Council for 
Manitoba and the North West Territoris, to make laws 
and administer justice. The governing officers of 
the Hudson’s Bay Company were to continue their 
functions, as Justices of the Peace (l) In 1870 
Lieutenant Governor Archibald of Manitoba was appoin¬ 
ted Lieutenant Governor of the Territories. The first 
Council for the Territories was appointed in 1873 (2) 
While a legislative and judicial governing authority 

(T) -1£. H. Oliver, Canadian Archives No. 9 11 p‘~974 

(2) Ibid. p. 988 











64 


was thus established, no agency existed for enforcing 
the law, save the Hudson’s Bay Company. The Company, 
however, had never exercised its governing power to 
any extent, because as a commerical concern it was 
dependent on the good will of the natives (l) In the 
days of its monopoly rule there was little need for 
the exercise of governmental authority, but with the 
introduction of free trade, conditions were changing, 
and there were present steadily increasing elements 
of disorder. 

Other urgent tasks awaited the Dominion Govern 
ment by way of making lands available for settlement, 
Indian claims had to be extinguished, the boundary 
between Canada and the United States determined, 
surveys carried out and legal means provided for 
acquiring or transferring lands. 

Equally urgent was the necessity of providing 
some means of communication with the outside world. 

At this time the easiest means of access was through 
the United States by way of the Missouri River. For 
many years after 1874, the supplies for the police 
station of Fort Macleod and Fort Walsh were forwarded 
by ox-carts from Fort Benton after being sent up 
the Missouri by steamer from Bismark; Butler noted 

1 ' Butler’s Reports, MacRae, p.216. 





65 


noted in his report that the first supplies to reach 
Bdmohton hy ox-cart from Fort Benton, arrived there 
in 1870. The only alternative means of access was by 
ox-cart over the old Hudson’s Bay route from Fort 
Garry by way of Forts Carlton and Pitt. Fort Garry 
itself could be reached by two routes, neither of 
them very easy. One route was over Canadian soil 
by a journey of fourteen hundred miles, up the Great 
Lakes and then over the combined land and water trail 
frorft Prince Arthur’s Landing (Port Arthur) to Fort 
Garry. This was the route followed by the Wolseley 
expedition in 1870. The other way was by rail, 
through the United States to St. Paul, within 400 mile 
of Fort Garry, thence over ox-cart trails. There 
was of course at this time, ng public postal service 
to posts in the Forth West. The nearest means of 
telegraphic communication with the ^ast was through 
Helena, Montana. 

With this examination of the problems involved 
in opening up the new territories for settlaent , it 
remains to be seen to wha t extent the government was 
successful in solving them. 

The first step in the establishment of law and 
order was the sending out of the Rojzal Forth West 














-66 


Mounted Police in 1874. In that year an 
expedition of three hundred were sent out under 
Colonel French, their destination being the junction 
of the Bow and Belly rivers. Fort Macleod was built. 
There the main body of the troop passed the winter, 
a detachment being sent to Edmonton. Forts Saskat¬ 
chewan and Walsh were built the next year. At the 
approach of the troops, the American freebooters 
abandoned their posts and fled across the border; no 
more trouble was experienced from them. With their 
influence removed, the Mounted Police were able 
materially to improve conditions amorg the Indians, 
who had been reduced to great poverty and misery by 
the whiskey trade and the ravages of smallpox. The 
Police won the respect of the Indians at the outset, 
by the justice and firmness of their treatment. They 
were remarkably successful in their dealing 3 with them, 
especially in the difficult task of preserving peace 
between them and incoming white settlers. The 
presence of the Police in the country was a valuable 
factor in making possible its settlement and develop¬ 
ment. 

The grew th of governmental institutions pro¬ 
ceeded gradually in the North West Territories. The 







67 


The first important step was the passing of an Act 
for the organization of the North West Territories 
in 1876. To quote from Sir Wilfred Laurier ’"previous 
to this the Territories had been administered under 
no special form of government. (1) This Act separated 
the office of Lieutenant Governor of the Territories 
from that of Lieutenant Governor of Manitoba. It 
provided for the appointment of the Lieutenant Governor 
and an advisory Council of five members by the Gover- 
General-in-Council. The Lieutenant Governor and his 
Council were vested with executive powers, and with 
legislative powers in regard to matters of local 
concern. The Act also provided that when any district 
not exceeding a thousand square miles in area attained 
a population of one thousand adults, it would be 
erected into an electoral district, entitled to 
elect a member to the Council. A Legislative Assembly 
was to be formed when the number of elected members 
of the Council should reach twenty-one.(2) 

The taste of quieting the Indian titles to the land 

wa s accomplished by means of a number of formal _ 

(lJ Lebates of House of Commons, 1905 ~ p!424 

(£J Canadian Archives No. 9, IXpl075; the first session 
of the Tetritorial Council was held at Livingstone on 
Swan River in 1877. Thereafter sessons were held at 
Battleford until 1882, when the seat of government v/as 
transferred to Regina. 








-68 


treaties “between the Indians and representatives 
of the Crown* The whole area of the West was 
covered hy a succession of such treaties, eight in 
number, which it took twenty-nine years to complete. 

The first of these treaties was made in 1871. The 
first five treaties covered principally the lands of 
the present provinces of Manitoba and Saskatchewan. 

The lands of Alberta were dealt with by Treaty Number j 
Six, Seven and Eight. Treaty Number Six, with the 
Cree Indians, was concluded in 1876, at Forts Pitt 
and Carlton. The land ceded embraced an area of about 
a hundred and twenty thousand wquare miles in the 
Saskatchewan jalley in Alberta and Saskatchewan. (1) 
For some years previous to the making of this 
Treaty, there had been a growing feeling of discontent 
among the Crees,. who feared that their lands were 
going to be taken from them without compensation. 
Memorials from their Chiefs were sent to the Lieutenant 
Governor, and forwarded to the Dominion authorities, 
who were very slow in taking action* Apparently the 
treaty was concluded Just in time to prevent an out¬ 
break among the Crees. 


(3LJ ?or boundaries of land covered by treaty see 
MacRae, p. 316. 













69 


Treaty Number Seven, with the Biackfeet Indians, 
was carried out by Lieutenant Governor Laird, at 
Blackfoot Grossing in 1877.(1} The lands of 
southern Alberts were ceded by this treaty. The 
last treaty, Humber Nine, covering the Peace and 
Athabasca districts was not made until 1899. The 
boundaries of the Territory ceded by this treaty 
were very irregular (Si. In general the' terms granted 
to the Indians by these treaties were as follows: 
a present of twelve dollars and an annuity of five 
dollars for each man, woman and child. Twenty-five 
dollars instead of twelve was given to each chief 
and fifteen to each headman. Reserves were set apart 
on the basis of 640 acres for a family of five. 

Farming implements, seed grain, cattle and everything 
necessary for carrying on agricultural operations 


were supplied. The carrying out of these treaties 
without the occurrence of any disturbance or bloodshed 
was a remarkable achievement. This is especially true 
in the case of- Number Seven with the Blackfeet, in 
1877, at a time when an Indian war was being waged 

the_U nited States in the regio n directly to the south 
lohn Macdougall of Edmonton was ore sent at this 
transaction. 
vP J EaeRae. p.447 




















70 


With the treaties settled, the slow work com¬ 
menced of inducing the Indians to settle down quietly 
in their reserves and become self-supporting by 
farming. When the government surveys were made, 
about 1,000,000 acres were set aside as Indian 
Reserves. The largest of these is the Bl C0( i 
Reserve of 354,600 acres or 540 square miles in 
SouthernAlberta, The other reserves are: the 
Blachfoot Reserve, 50 miles east of Calgary, of 
470 square miles or 308,800 acres; the Piegan, 

93,400 acres in extent; The Stony 69,720 acres; 
the Sarcee, 69,120 acres; the Saddle Lake Reserve 
of 82,560 acres; and several smaller ones. (X) 

During the first few "ears after the treaties, 
the Mounted Police experienced considerable diffi¬ 
culty in Deeping the Indians on their new reserves 
and in preventing them from hilling the cattle 
and stealing the horses of the early settlers and 
ranchers. Rally in his "Range Ren” notes '-that it 
was not until about 1835 that the Indians of the 
south had settled down quietly and begun, to engage 
By 1900 all of the Indian tribes except the Sareees, 
had become nearly self-supporting»{2) 

(1} Deo Thwaite: Alberta - p.82 
Rally - The Range Lien - p .356 









71 


In connection with the treaties, it is interesting 
to note the estimate of the Indian population of 
Manitoba and the Territories which was obtained from 
the treaty payments. This estimate showed a decrease 
in population of about one-third since the days of 

‘ the fur trade. This gave the number as thirty-thousand 
as compared with the estimate of forty-five thousand 
made by Sir. Geroge Simpson in 1857. 

A necessary step towards opening the country for 
Settlement was the carrying out of government surveys. 
As a preliminary step, the work of marking the forty- 
ninth parallel, the boundary between Canada and the 
United States, was begin in 1872. It was done by a 
Joint Commission representing the American and 
Imperial Governments, who in that year began working 
westward from the Lake of the Woods. They completed 
the lire to the Hooky Mountains in 1874, The govern¬ 
ment survey began in Manitoba in 1871. A block 
system was adopted. This was copied from the one in 
use in the Western States. The unit was the section, 
one mile square divided into quarter sections of 
160 acres. Hach Township was divided into 36 sections 
which were numbered from the right hand lower corner 
across the base of the township and back again. A 90 

(l) Begg II - p.132 









72 


foot road allowance was given in the Manitoba 
surveys; when the surveys extended to the Territories 
this was changed to 66 feet. The survey began at 
the international boundary by the Winnipeg Meridian 
which was designated the First Prime Meridian. The 
ranges from this meridian were numbered east and west, 
and the tgpships north from the boundary. At intervals 
to the westward. Second, Third and Fourth Prime 
Meridians were to be determined, and ranges numbered 
west from them in a similar way. Provision was made 
for the n jog” resulting from the narrowing of the 
meridians as the lines ran north. The whole country 
was thus laid out in a regular checker-board system.. 

The great advantage of this system was that it 
made reference and location easy. The disadvantage 
was that roads did not follow the natural levels of 
the country, but went up hill and down. This has 
greatly increased the difficulty and expense of con¬ 
structing and maintaining roads throughout the lest.' 

The survey was completed in Manitoba in 1873, and from 
the n on was gradually extended into the Territories 
as settlement required. By 1876, detached settlements 
had grown up in the present provinces of Saskatchewan 
and Alberta which called for surveys. As it was 











73 


necessary that these isolated surveys should corres¬ 
pond to those already existing, a special survey of 
the Worth West Territories was begun in that year. This 
was called the Standard Outline Survey. The object 
of this survey was to determine the main or standard 
meridians and parallels, to serve as a basis of exten¬ 
sion, at any points desired, of-the block surveys. By 
1878 this work had been carried westward to the fourth 
Prime Meridian, which later became the eastern boundary 
of Alberta. During 1878 and 1879 the main base lines 
and meridians were determined within the territory now 
included in this province, and thereafter the block 
surveys were gradually filled in to meet the demand, of 
settlers. There is still a narrow strip of unsurveyed 
land in the northern part of the province. 

A system of land regulations was framdd for 
Manitoba in 1871. Although the regulations were altered 
from time to time as applied to the Territories, the 
main principles of the original plan were adhered to. 

The terms granted for homesteading and pre-emption 
were very liberal. A homesteader on a quarter section 
was required to pay a fee of $10.00 at the time of 
making his application; cultivation and five years 
residence then entitled him to a patent. The period 















































































M 















74 


of residence was later reduced to three years, with 
only six months residence required out of every twelve# 
The pre-en^tion for an additional 160 acres was purchas¬ 
able by a homesteader at |‘1#00 an acre, without condi¬ 
tions of residence and improvement* The lands exempted 
from homesteading and preemption were: the lands 
allotted to the Hudson's Bay Company viz. Sections 8 
and 26 out of every township: lands reserved for 
schools later designated by an Act passed in 1879 as 
sections 11 and 29; wooded areas were set aside to pre** 
serve a permanent supply of fuel and building timber; 
sites for towns or villages; mineral lands, including 
coal reserves; (l) and r ailway reserves* 

In connection with the problem of railway 


reserves the government pursued a most unfortunate 
policy# They constantly changed the regulations, while 
they maintained throughout the firm purpose of meeting 
the cost of a transcontinental road by the sale of 
western lands. Successive schemes were adopted which 
involved the reservation from settlement of large block 
of land along the railway (2) Agitation on the part 
of settlers led to the abandonment of each plan in turn 
until finally an arrangement was made with the Canadian 

(lJ»Coal districts were later set apart In Alberta (1 ] on 

the South Sask. near Med* Sat (2$ on north Safek. 
near Edmonton (3 Jon the Bow River $4) on the Belly* 

(2) Canada and Its Provinces XX pp,292-3 

















75 


Pacific Hailway Syndicate in 1881. Under this plan 
the government reserved all the odd-numbered sections 
throughout the west for railway purposes, and threw 
the remaining even-numbered sections open for home¬ 
steading. 

The continual changing of regulations had a most 
discouraging effect on immigration. The dissatis¬ 
faction and agitation which the measures caused, 
served as a warning to prospective immigrants agai nst 
entering the country. Thousands of settlers turned 
aside for this reason, into Minnesota, Montana and 
the Dakotas.(1) Manitoba, of course suffered parti¬ 
cularly in this regard, as it was more open to settle 
ment than the Territories, but the development of 
the latter suffered indirectly through the retarda¬ 
tion of settlement in Manitoba. 

The first attempt to open up communication with 
the outside world was the project of a road by which 
the western prairies were to be made accessible 
from British Columbia, In 1864 a road was opened 
from Yale, the head o navigation on the Fraser 
River, across the Cascade Mountains, to Cariboo, in 
the plateaus between the Cascade and the Rocky 
Mountains. At that time the feasibility of continu¬ 
al) Ibid.p.202; Begg IT, gp.3.82 #90. 

















76 


-ing 'he road across the Roctoy Mountains range 
through the Yellow Head Pass was pointed out, hut 
although the project was discussed, it was never 
carried out* 

The more important question was that of communi¬ 
cation with the East* The first efforts in this direc 
tion were those directed toward making the Ked River 
Colony more accessible from the East* Fort Garry 
received its supplies chiefly .from Dt. Paul* Up to 
1872, these were "freighted” by ox-cart, but in that 
year steamers doine* a general carrying trade began 
running on the Red River between Winnipeg and Moorehead 
about two hundred miles northwest of St* Paul* This 
marked a great advance in ease of transportation* (1) 

The next step was an attempt at improving the 
Canadian route to Winnipeg, the "amphibious" Dawson 
road from Port Arthur* The history of this route 
goes back to 1858. when the explorer, Dawson, reported 
favorably upon the feasibility of a combined land and 
water route from Thunder Bay to Fort Garry* Construc¬ 
tion of the road was begun in 1868. It was opened in 
1870 as a route for the Wolseley expedition to the 
Red River Valley. In 1874 it was put into operation 

(T}-Hudson 7 w Bay Company steamers had been running on 

the river for some years, but they carried only the 
Company's supplies (Canada and its Provinces XZp.287) 

















77 


as an immigrant route. However, its use proved so 
eostly and unsatisfactory that it was abandoned in 
1876. The result of this abandonment was to divert 
the whole stream of immigration to the United States, 

CL- 

as the only remaining means of success from the eastern 
provinces was expensive and difficult. This was in 
summer, by rail to Collingwood or some other lake port 

> 

steamer to Duluth, rail to Moorehead (about 300 miles 
south of Winnipeg) and steamer via Red River to Winnipeg.! 
In winter the route was rail to .Iff©orehead , and stage 
from there to Winnipeg. 

In the meanwhile, steamer service was being opened 
between Winnipeg and points on the Saskatchewan River. 
Navigation of the Saskatchewan by steamer was first 
projected in 1871, when Sanford Fleming^in connection 
with his railroad survey, reported that the Saskatche¬ 
wan was navigable from Grand Rapids at its mouth to 
Edmonton. In 1875 the Hudson’s Bay Company steamer 
"Northcote !T made its first trip between Winnipeg and | 
Edmonton. Until 1881 there was only the one steamer 
of any size on the river; this did not by any means 

furnish adequate facilities, and the banks of Grand 
Rapids were often piled ' igh with freight seeking 
transport to Prince Albert or Edmonton. Both freight 
and passenger rates on the steamer were very high 
( 1 ) See footnote ( i } p # 7 P 










78 


These achievements toward opening up communi¬ 
cation with the ^est were merely preliminary steps 
to the much more important undertaking of a trans¬ 
continental railway within Canadian territory. 

Sentiment in favor of the idea had been aroused in 
Canada by the fear of the United States forestalling 
Canada in the building of a transcontinental line with 
a view to opening up and annexing the Canadian North 
West. A report from the United States Sehate Committee 
on the Pacific Railway, dated 1869, shows that Canada 
had reason for such fears. The report reads: "The 
Pacific Railway seals the destiny of the British 
possessions west ox the 91st Meridian. They will 
become so Americanized in interests and feelings that 
they will be in effect severed from the new Dominion, 
and the question of their annexation will be but a 
matter of time'J(2) The project became a practical 
problem with the entry of British Columbia into the 


Dominon in 1871 on the condition that a transcontinental 


{Ij The following rates adopted in 1880, were a modifi- 
cation of former years: 

Psesenger 

^Lower Port Garry Cabin Deck 

To Victoria, Pt. Saskatchean 


&bEdmonton $70.00 


Preight 


$ 35.00 


Rates per oound 

Victoria... 

Port Saskatchewan,6±# 
Edmonton.,«««. 

J B©gg II y leg 



























79 


railway "be completed within ten years# This was 
followed by an Act of Parliament providing for t e 
construction of the proposed railway hy private enter¬ 
prise, aided hy public grants of land and money. 

That same year an exploratory survey to determine 
the route of the railway was sent out under the direc¬ 
tion of Sandford Fleming. This continued working 
until 1879. The main line, from the Red River west¬ 
ward, as surveyed by Fleming, ran north of the route 
finally chosen. It followed the Saskatchewan Valley, 
passing t rough Edmonton and the Yellowhead Pass# 

This route would have passed to the north of all the 
existing settlements, and was bitterly opposed by the 
settlers, especially those of Winnipeg. Fleming ! s 
motives in choosing this route were: (l) to open up 
to settlement what he Judged to be the most fettile 
and promising parts of the prairie region: (2) fo 
have the railway touch at convenient points, the 
lakes and waterways which promised facilities for 
traffic in connection with it. This route was 
finally abandoned in favor of one directly west 
across the prairie from Winnipeg, through the Ricking 
Horse Pass. 

The years 1873 to 1881 were marked by unsuccessful 
attempts on the part of succesiv© governments at 









80 


Ottawa to prosecute the construction of the trans¬ 
continental line. The only practical result of 
these efforts was the partial completion of one section 
of the line between Port Arthur and Winnipeg, and of 
other sections in British Columbia. In 1081 an agree¬ 
ment was made with the Canadian Pacific Hailway Syndi¬ 
cate to carry out the project. Under this agreement 
the Company were to complete the road by 1891. It 
was given a cash subsidy of a hundred million dollars 
and a land grant of twenty-five million acres to be 
selected in Manitoba and the Territories, (l) In 
addition it was given a monopoly for twenty years of 
the construction of branch lines south of the main 
line. 

In brief, the chief progress made in this decade 

toward providing transportation facilities for the 

West, was the adoption at last, of a definite railway 

policy and the agreement wit the Canadain Pacific 

Railway Company to carry the work through to a rapid 

conclusion. The development of the West had, of 

course, been greatly hampered during this period by the 

lack of markets, and difficulty of access to immigrants. 

:Prospective settlers who were obliged to go by way 

of the United were often induce d by officials 

GTJ This grant was later reduced to 18,206,986 acres. 

-The Company selected 2,500,000 acr a s in Manitoba, and 
:the remainder 15,706,986 ac. in ' It*. & Sask. 















81 


of the American government or py American railways 
employees to settle in some of the Western States 
or Territories. Much immigration was deflected from 
Manitoba and + he Territories in thia ray. 

The construction of a telegraph line came some-* 
what ahead the railway. A line was finished 
from Pembina to Winnipeg bn 1871, and was carrdd 
from Winnipeg to Battlef oit\ and further west in 
1876. But for several years, after being carried 
700 miles out from Winntpe y the line .Tided nowhere 
in particular, 18 miles from Mm on ton. A teXegr.wn 
of ten words from Winnipeg to the end of the line 
cost p£.50. lor delivery at Admcnton, j£lO.OO extra 
was charged. (1) This line was extended to Mmonton 
in 1879. llo regular postal service was provided 
between Winnipeg and western points such as Admcnton, 
Macleod and Calgary uhtil 1876, For several years 
after that the mails were carried by hull-carts in 
summer and dog-teams in winter. 

As mihht be expected under such conditions as 
have been described , the actual amount of settle¬ 
ment in what is now the Province of Alberta during, 
this ten year period, was very small. Black, in 
his "History of Saskatchewan" remarks of this stave 

(1| Black -History of Saskatchewan p 20£ 


















82 

in we stern development, that why 00 few immigrants 
presented themselves requires less explanation than 
why any one stayed in the country if he could get 
away. The whole of Canada was suffering from com¬ 
mercial depression during the period 1873-1879, which 
tended to retard western development. The actual 
extent of settlement may be seen from figures taken 
from the census of 1881, the first census taken of 
the North West Territories. The population by dis¬ 
tricts is given as: 

Total 

'White Population Indian Popn. 


Edmonton 

800 

2,326 

3,216 

Edmonton North 

159 

1,000 

1,159 

Bow River 

400 

2,875 

3,275 

Peace River 

277 

2,038 

2,315 

Athabasca 

200 

8,000 

8,200 


Edmonton during the decade 1871-1881 had become 


the centre of a growing settlement. In 1879 a steam 
saw and grist mill had been built there to serve the 
wants of the surrounding settlers. During that 
winter, the settlers of White Fish lake and Lac La 
Biche brought their grists in sleighs 120 and 170 
miles to this mill. Settlements had also grown up 
around the Mounted Police Forts at Calgary, McLeod, 

















83 


Pincher Creel: and Port Saskatchewan. Morris in his 

’ T Indian Treaties’ 1 describes McLeod in 1877 as ’’quite 

a village, with excellent shops, and a blacksmith shop 

supplied with coal from the Belly River”. In 1875, the 

first cattle, a few head were broughtinto the Pincher 

Creek district, and the first ranch located about three 

miles below Port McLeod. In 1876 a few more cattle were 

brought in, and some of the Mounted Police w r ho left 

the force that spring, located land with their scrip 

in that district, The 1881 census gives a small amount 

of information about the extent to which farming was 

carried on in Alberta, although no figures were given 

for the Edmonton and Bow River districts. The other 

districts were given as follows: 

Bu. of Acres But of Bus. Bus. Acres of Tons 

Potatoes of of of of 

Wheat. Wheat Barley Oats. Hay Hay 

Edmon. II. 16,455 918 20,254 18,119 3,671 1,022 2,042 

P .River 290 -- —— - --- - 

Athabasca 2,370 3 63 207 ------ 190 378 

Ro figures are given for the number of live s took 
or amount of occupied lands in the different districts 
but only for the Rorth West Territories as a whole. 

jjfr p 

The whole of the Territories contained 18,763 head 
of live stock (1) the total amount of occupied lands 


(!•) Can. Year Book 1892 






84 

was 28,833 acre$, with the total number of occupiers of 
lana 1,014. (1) 


(!) 


Gan. Year Book 1886 














85 


V. 

BAU8HTNG 

It has already been noted that the pioneer 
industry of Alberta, the fur trade, was confined 
chiefly to the northern part. The fur trade, however 
has very little relation to present conditions. 
Agricultural development, rather, has been from South 
to North. The first stage, developing in Southern 
Alberta, was devoted almost entirely to ranching. 
Until the coming of the railway, in 1884, ranching 
was almost the only industry of Alberta. There 
were three types of ranching: cattle, horse and sheep 
ranching. By far the most important of these was 
cattle ranching. The area devoted to the industry 
was southern Alberta, that is to say, the part of 
the Province south of the Hed Deer Biver, and South 
western Saskatchewan, or Assiniboia, as it was then 
called. Dpring the best ranching years', from the 
early eighties to the middle of the nineties, half 
.a million square miles of this territory were held 
by a small number of ranchmen on lease from the 
Government. Bor the greater part of this time this 

was used as open range. 

The advantages which southern Alberta, particu¬ 
larly the foothill district, offered for grazing 

purposes have already been noted. In the foothills 







66 


there was a la rge variety of extremely nutritious 
wild grasses, including buffalo grass, blue-joint, 
timothy, oat-grass and many others.. Besides being 
very nutritious, these grasses possessed the peculiar 
' property of curing on their stalks in the Fall, thus 
furnishing Winter pasturage. The coulee and brushy 
river bottoms furnished natural shelter, and made 
it possible for cattle to graze outside during, the 
winter. The prevalence of Chinook winds ?/as another 
advantage. The Fall Chinooks helped to cure the 
prairie grasses; the Winter Chinooks Melted the snow, 
at internals exposing the grasses for pasturage. In 
the foothill regions there was an abundant supply of 
water from springs and mountain streams. In the 
open plains to the East, however, scarcity of water .... 
always proved a difficulty to stockmen. Under such 
conditions as these offered by Southern Alberta, 
the cost of raising live-stock was limited chiefly \o 
the cost of labor in such connections as the semi¬ 
annual round-up, branding and the putting up of 
.hay as an insurance against exceptionally cold weatherl 

The advantages offered for ranching by Southern 
Alberta were not unknown, to Montana stockmen As 
soon as the location of the Mounted Police gave assur- 



















87 


ance of Haw and order, they "began crossing the 
border with herds of cattle. The first herd of 
range cattle, numbering twenty-two head, was brought 
from Montana in 1878 and placed on the range near 
Macleod (l). A. number of other small herds were 
brought in that year. However these early ranchers, 
starting on a small scale, suffered considerably 
from Indian depredations, which so discouraged them 
that in 1879 most of them returned to Montand (2) 

In 1880 the Dominion Government opened the way 
for ranching on a larger scale by beginning a system 
of leasing large tracts of lands at srery low prices. 
The main provisions of the regulations in respect 
to grazing lands, as first issued, were as follows:- 

(1) Leases were granted for areasnot exceeding 
one hundred thousand acres, for a period of 
not more than twenty-one years: 

(2) Lessees were required to pay an annual rent 
of $10.00 per 1,000 acres: 

(3) Within three years they were required to have 
placed on their land one head of live stock for 
eveyy ten acres.(3) 

(It Kelly: The Range Men - P}.20 
(2? Kelly: ' P48 

(S 4 The total number of live stock to be kept on a 
given range was definitely limited. 














9S 

(4) After placing the required number of cattle, 
the lessee might purchase land within his 
leasehold for a home farmaand corral at the 
price of §2.00 per acre fl « As a further 
encouragement, the securing of a lease enabled 
the lessee to bring cattle ffora the United 
States free of duty. 

It will be noticed that the system of restricting 
the number of cattle to be maintained on the leases 
was adopted in Alberta instead of the Montana 
system of paying a rental per head in order to 
present overstocking. The Alberta plan proved the 
better one, as it did not lead to the early destru¬ 
ction of the prairie grasses on the range, such as 
was experienced in the Western states(2). 

Regulations were later put into force setting 
j apart certain areas suitable as watering places, 
for the use of all ranchmen. These areas were 
reserved from settlement. 

Leases of large areas in the choicest districts 
of South-western Alberta were immediately taken 
up by a number of large companies, financed by 
cap ital from Eastern Canada and England, Within 

the next few years the ranches thus establish ed 

(1^ Annual Report Department of Interior 1885 p.33 

(S v " " 

It is stated in the report these estimates are 
too small. 









were stocked with herds from Montana, A few of the 

most famous of these pioneer ranches of Alberts 

might be mentioned. The first one to be stocked 

was the Cochrane Ranch, part of the herds for whi■h 

were brought up from Montana, in 1881. It was 

first located in the foothills West of Calgary} but 

later moved Sopth to the Waterton Lakes District, 

near the American border. Other well-known ranches 

were the Walrond, the Oxley and the Bar U, all 

stocked between 1882 an 1884. During these years 

a number of small ranchers were establishing 

themselves in the Calgary, Macleod and Fincher 

Creek Districts. By 1884 41 companies and individu 

als held a total of 2,782,690 acres on lease, 

chiefly in the Western foothill region as far North 

as Calgary. Six of the 41 lessees held leases for 

100,000 acres each; ten more held over 50,000 

acres each (1) In 1885, the earliest year for 

which figures are avaiaMe, it was estimated that 

there were on the ranges in Southern Alberta and 

Assiniboia, 46,936 cattle, 9,694 sheep and 4,313 

horses (2). They were all on the open raise, 

none of the large leases, at any rate, being fenced 

7 -t-$— these_ jj.rst years a sin -le so ni-ann ua 1 
annual Report DepartmenT“oF”lnterior lES5"'p.£3 

n n it ft r? ft 

(It is stated in the report that these estimates 

are too small) 













9C 

round-up was held for the whole of Southern 
Alberta. The last big round-up of this kind was 


held in 1885, near Macleod (1). The cattle had 
so increased in numbers by that time that it was 
decided by the ranchers to hold separate round-ups 
thereafter for the different districts. Southeastern 
Alberta was not taken up by ranchers until several 
years later than the foothill region. She first 
big ranch in the Medicine Hat district was started 
in 1886 by the Medicine Hat Ranching Company. 

Within a few years there were nearly as many cattle 


in this district as on the ranges to the west(2). 

Although ranching was established as a prosper 
oue industry by 1884, there were a number of 


serious difficulties with which the early settlers 
had to contend, and which caused them considerable 
loss. For a number of years the Indians were a 
source of worry and loss. They first hefiame trouble¬ 
some in 1878, when they began to suffer from the 
scarcity of the buffalo. Prairie fires in that 
year drove many of the remaining herds of buffalo 


south to the Missouri valley, where they were 
slaughtered in large numbers. The Dominion Govern¬ 
ment had not made sufficient provision for treaty 


payments. The consequence was that 

(!•; Kelly P.178 
Ibid, p.318 


the Indians, who 














who. were starving, helped themselves to the cattle 
on the range. Colonel Macleod, the Mounted Police 
Commissi ner t thought it wiser not to deal severely 
wi th the Indians until "better provision was made to 
support them, *s he did not wish to cause an outbreak 
Indian thefts continued to be a great source of loss 
during the first few years following the disappear¬ 
ance of the buffalib, that is, until the early 
eighties. After that the Mounted Police kept the 
Indians fairly well under control.(1) Some troubled 
was anticipated with the southern. Indians when the 
Siel Rebellion occurred in the Saskatchewan valley 
in 1885. However, it caused merely a ripple of 
excitement, owing partly to the action of Grow/foot, 
the Blackfoot Chief, who refused to allow his Indians 
to $oin the tribes of the Korth. In fact, the 
rebellion proved beneficial rather than otherwise to 
the rancher$ as the presence of the troops from the 
East made a market for their cattle. 

The early ranchers sustained many losses owing 
to car&leso methods and Inexperience. This it a-.: 
at first believed to be unnecessary to put up hay 
or make any provision for .Vinter feeding:. However, 
except! rally sever Winters, such as those of 1882- 
3 and 1886-7 caught them unprepared, and seriously 
(:'i) Kelly y.2lo. 






reduced their herds. According to Mounted Police 
records for 1887, the losses sustained that winter 

in the varions distrlets awarared ahout fiftrrrs 

rer cent. The disasters of that year showed the 

danger of relyinr entirely on winter pasturage in 

the open, and it ‘became customary thereafter to put 

up a certain amount of hay for winter. 

The system of open ranges also proved unwise 
in some respects. It meant a deterioration in "breed¬ 
ing, as good breeds and scrubs were all turned loose 
together. Prom the first the quality of the cattle 
as a whole deteriorated, partly for the reason noted, 
partly because many inferior animals were brought in 
later by the wholesale importation of Stockers from 
Manitoba and the Eastern Provinces. The climax of 
deterioration was reached in 1902, when the impor¬ 
tation of Mexican stackers began. This practice 
died out within a few years in about 1905. 

The open range system also led to an overcrowd¬ 
ing of .the choicest ranges, and to the destruction, 
during the Summer, of the best and most sheltered 
winter ranges. The first departure, from the open 
ran-e? system occurred in 1885, when an attempt was 
made to fence in the Cochrane range. Owing to the 
jealousy of rival ranchers, the attempt was unsuccess 
















-ful. After this initial failure, however, the 
practice of fenein in the ranges was gradually 
ad op ted. 

Prairie fires were another source of loss. Many 
fires were caused "by the carelessness of the Indians 
or of the ranchers themselves. It was finally dis¬ 
covered that sparks from railway locomotives caused 
many of the fires. In 1895 the Canadian Pacific 
j Railway "began plowing fireguards along its trades. 
This resulted in a considerable diminution in the 
number of fires. (1) 

Por many years the timber wolves in the foothill 
region, tool: heavy toll of the young stool:. In suite 
of many petitions, neither the Dominion nor the 
Territorial Government would establish a bounty on 
! wolf shins. In the early nineties an association of 
the stockmen of Couth-western Alberta finally offered 
a bounty. This led to an energetic campaign against 
the wolves, and a consequent reduction of losses from 
this cause. (2) 

Another source of annoyance to the cattlemen, 

especially those near the International Boundary^ was 

the tendency for American cattle todrift on to the 

Alberta range. The Montana ranges were dried up by 
£l) Black; History of Saskatchewan. p433. 

(2) x-elly: The Rangemen. p226. 












94 

successive droughts during the earl; eightiesand 
it was suspected that the cattlemen here purposely 
drove their herds across the. border. In addition 
to Mounted Police patrols, the Alberta ranchers kept 
line riders to drive American cattle back. The 
over-crowding of the Montana range also led to 
wholsale importation of rather poor quality of stock 
from that region. This led the Canadian Government, 
in 1886, to impose e duty of twenty per cent, on 
American cattle. 

Another difficulty which began very early, 
and which has persisted to the rreeent day, was the 
frifcction between cattlemen and sheepmen, Sheep were 
introduced at about the same time as cattle. As 
they crop the grass very close to the ground, sheep 
spoil a range for cattle for about two years. The 
cattle owners resented their introduction, and there 
were frequent clashes between the two kinds of 
ranchers. In 188£ the Government passed a regulation 
prohibiting the grazing of sheep on Dominion lands. 
This was changed in 1884 to a regulation which laid 
out restricted areas for sheep. Ho sheep were allowed 
to range from the boundary line on the South to 
the High River and the North fork of the Bow on the 





















North, and from the summit of the Rockies on the 
West to the Eastern boundary of Alberta on the 
Fast (1). This regulation remained in force until 
189©. There was, however, great uncertainty among 
ranchmen as to what parts of the country were open 
to sheep grazing and it would appear from official 
records that neither the officials of the Territorial 
Government or the land agents of the Department of 
the Interiorwsre very certain about the matter. 
Accordiigply, in 1893, new regulations were passed 
prohibiting the grazing of sheep in any part of 
Alberta West of the Calgary and Bdmonton Railway, 
the Bov, Belly and St. Mary’s Rivers to the 
International Boundary. All of Alberta Hast of 
St. Mary’s River and South of the South Saskatche¬ 
wan River was set apart exclusively for the grazing 
of sheep. In all other partssof Alberta it was 
necessary to have the consent of the Minister of 
the Interior to obtain a grazing lease for sheep. 
Finally, in 1903, the regulation were changed once 
more, setting apart four separate areas in Southern 
Alberta and Saskatchewan where the grazing of sheep 

(li Annual Report, Department of Interior - 1885 
Dorn. Lands p.32 







was permitted (l). The frequent changes in regu¬ 
lations are indicative of the constant friction 
which existed between cattlemen and sheep ranchers. 
The slowness of the Territorial Government in 
passing bsrand ordinances was another cause of annoy¬ 
ance to stock owners. Although badly needed, such 
ordinances were not passed until 188, when penalties 
for using another man’s brand were made legal for 
the first time (2), The need for stock inspectors 
was also ignored for many years by the Government; 
their appointment did not take place until 1897, 

Alberta cattle did not suffer from disease to any 
great extent. This was largely due to careful 
supervision from the beginning, by the Dominion 
Department of Agriculture, In 1884 a policy of 
veterinary inspection and quarantine was adopted 
in regard -to cattle imported from the ; //estern States. 
The quarantine regulations were altered in 1887 
and 1888, an^/again In 1892, becoming more restrictive 
w r ith each change. The only disease which ever 
became serious was manee. This appeared in 1899, 
in the Lethbrid e District, from which it spread 
over the entire Southern part of Alberta. Through 
efforts of the Alberta Stock Growers’ Association, 


vl) Blue:MS Development of Sheep 
v 2i MQlly: The Bangaman p,226* 
e 


Industry p,6 














97 


of the Southern District, dipping stations were 
established throughout that district. By the 
treating of cattle by dipping, and by strict enforce¬ 
ment of quarantine regula tions^the disease wan almost 
eradicated by 1902, One other serious outbreak of 
mange occurred during the years 1905-7, 

As the various associations formed by the stock- 
ment exe cised considerable influence in the develop¬ 
ment of the ranching industry, their development 
might be briefly noted. The first association was 
formed in the Macleod District in the early eighties. 
Gradually other separate ass ocaitions developed in 
the different districts, such as Calgary, Lethbridge 
and Medicine Hat. By 1887 the district organi¬ 
sations had amalgamated into two large associations, 
one for the South and one for the North, The larger 
and more influential of these was the Alberta Stock 
Growers 1 Association, with headquarters at Macleod. 

In 1889, however, a gitation began among the ranchers 
of the Calgary and High Eiver Districts for an 
organization, with headquarter.' at Calgary, to be the 

leading one in the Province, As Calgary was the 
largest town in the whole ranching area, it was felt 

that the Northern District should assume the leader- 
ship. This was brought to pass in 1895 when the 








Oft 

»C 

Live Etock Growers’ Association, embracing all 
+he District Associati ns of Alberta, was organized 
with its headquarters at Calgary.(l) 

The growth of cattle ranching can best be 
studied in connection with the development of markets 
Even before the coming of the railroad, the ranchers 
did not suffer from a lack of markets. The I.-G. Baker 
Company, with headquarters at Fort Benton, Montana, 
and branch stores at Calgary and Macleod, brought in 
all the animals the ranchers had to sell. This company, 
in turn, furnish 1 the supplies required for the 
Indian Reservations, the Mounted Police stations and 
la + er, the railway construction camps. 

Conditions were greatly changed by thec oming 
of the Canadian Pacific to Calgary in 1883, and the 
beginning of transcontinental serviee In 1886. The 
coming of the railway marked the beginning of the end 
of ranching, as it opened up the way for settlement 
on a large scale, and this, of course, meant the 
fencing in of the range. ^ ts immediate effect, however, 
was to greatly stimulate the ranching industry by 
opening up wider markets Within a few years Alberta 
cattle were bein shipped to the Eastern provinces, 

Great Britain, British Columbia and Chicago. 

(1) Kelly pp. 164, 225 . 















The first shipments of Alberta cattle were 

to Manitoba and the Eastern provinces fl). There 
are no figures available as to the total numbers 
shipped during the first years of export. The 
British market was the next to be' developed. The 
first experiment in sending cattle directly from 
Alberta to England was made in 1886. The experi¬ 
ment proved fairly successful, with the result 4hat 
shipments to England increased steadily during the 
next few years. Most of the Alberta cattle sent to 
British markets were sold there to English or Scotch 
stockmen to be fattened. 

The first shipment from the range to British 
Columbia was made in 1890. This market did not 
become an important one until after the building of 
the Crow's lest Pass Railway in 1897, 

Some idea of the growth of the cattle industry 
during these years may be gathered from the inrasee 
in the number of cattle on the range in Southern 
Alberta and Assiniboia, as showjn in the following 
estimatesf- (2 ) 

(XI Annual Reports, Ee par time nt of "interior, 1884 if. 

{2>i Annual Reports of Commissi ai er of Grazing and 
Timber Lands - Lepartment of Interior (The 
reports state that the estimates are all too low) 








ICC 

IfumBer" of' oat tie 


.... 46,936 

1886. 74,999 

1887.............. 101,382 

1888 . 108,361 

1889 . 106,968 

1890 . 117,659 

1891 . 121,116 

1892 . 139,283 


After 1892, no figures are available for the 
number of cattle on the range as distinguished from 
those owned by farmers. 

The establishment of the British embargo on cattle 
in 1892, resulted in a period of depression for the 
cattle industry of alberta in common with other 
parts of Canada. The terms of the embargo necessi¬ 
tated the slaughter of Canadian cattle within a few 
days of their arrival in England. This resulted in 
a great reduction in the prife of Canadian cattle 
in the British market. For one thing, it was impos¬ 
sible to delay sale while waiting for a favorable 
market. In the second place, it meant that the 
cattle were slaughtered when in very poor condition, 
thin and bruised from their long journey. Alberta 
cattle suffered* particularly in this regard, owing 
to poor transportation facilities "on the Canadian 
Pacific to Montreal. It was estimated that cattle 
from the ranges suffered a loss in weight of nine 

or ten per cent during the trip to England (l). 

(1$ Kelly ;p.54 
























1 01 
*vi 

Average prices for Canadian steers on the English 
market drooped in 1892 from A 50.00 to $35.00 (1.) 

In spite of this, shipments from the Western 
ranges to England continued to grow♦ The number 
shipoed in 1893 was 6, 500 followed by an increase 
the next year, in 1895, the North West Mounted 
Police records estimated the output of the ranges 
at 25,000 fat cattle, most of which were urchased 
by Gordon and Ironsides of Winnipeg. (23* In 1896 
50,000 cattle were shipped from the ranges by the 
Canadian Pacific. Of these, 12,600 came from 
Alberta. Of the 50,000 cattle, 18,000 went to Great 
Britain and 2,000 to British Columbia. (3) 

Another result of the cattle o mb as go for Alberta 
was an increase in the importation of Ontario and 
Manitoba stoekers, that is, young cattle brought in 
to be fattened. The first importation of Ontario 
stockers was in 1899. For a few years these fehip- 
ments were small. Then, with the decrease in 
stockers sent from Eastern Canada to England as the 
result of the embargo, there was a corresponding 
increase in the number sent t the Western ranges. 
•In 1892, 7,000 stockers,were imported from Manitoba. 

Cl J Blue ; “p7§ ~~ 

($. Blue ; p.8 

(3} department of Interior, 1897, dep. Min Rep.p XjJL 










1C3 

and Ontario (1).; from 1893 until 1897, thousands 
were imported annually. In 1900 the numbers imported 

were - 

11,434 from Ontario and 

24,896 from Manitcba( 3-1 The bulk of these 

were marketed in the form of live stock shipments 

to Great j^itain, from stock yards at Winnipeg or 

Montreal, There were no live stock. centres West of 

Winnipeg, The exports Mast of live stock from 

'Southern Alberta from 1901 to 1904 were:- 

1901,..13,631 

1902. .,,,,..21,557 

1903..16,937 
1904 «55,631 

The loss and waste consequent upon live stock 

shipments from the ranges to Great Britain led to. 

agitation for the development of a larger dead meat 

trade in their place. Encouragement for such develop 

ment was given by the erection of an abattoir and 

cold storage plant in Calgary in 1899 by P. Burns. 

In 1905 however, the dead meat export from Alberta 

was still insignificant in amount f35). 

The completion of the Crow's Best Pass Railway in 

1898, from Lethbridge to Kootenay, ended the period 

of depression which had begun with the enactment of 

: the British cattle embargo. By opening up the 

d7""Blue : p. 9-~-—. ..-— 

4 Report Bep t. of Agri • N .W.T• 

(3J ” »* »» ff 


1900, p.53 
1904 p.45 

















the Kootenay mining district, it furnished Alberta 
ranchers with a narket for butcher cattle which could 


not qualify for the Eastern export trade* The figures' 
for live stock cattle shipments from Southern Alberta 
tc British Columbia from 1901 to 1904. were;-(l) 


.6,627 
.7,506 
.6,447 
.8,093 


1901 

1902 

1903 

1904 


About 1897, the shipment of Alberta cattle to 
the United States began, consisting chidfly of stockers,(2) 


The ranchers of the Weste'r A n otates had been receiving 


Stockers from Manitoba and Ontario, but the supply there 
was not sufficient to meet the increased demand in 1897. 
Consequently the demand passed to Southern Alberta and 
Assiniboia. In 1899, 35,000 cattle were exported from 
Manitoba and the Territories to the United States. There 
are no records which show what proportion of these 
came from Alberta (3). In the meanwhile the decline 
of ranching was gradually going on owing to the advance 
of settlers and the consequent fencing in of the range. 

Bather, an evolution was going on in the pastoral 

■ 

industry from ranching to mixed farming. Difficulties 

between squatters and ranchers had begun even before the 

coming of the railway. Squatters settied near springs 
(1.} Hep or t , Dep t, of A gr i cui ture , “Bi v if . Tll9G4p. 















other choice parte of the ranges. Some were 
legitimate settlers, others simply speculators who 
had to be paid to move away. With the coming of the 
railway, and consequent increase of settlement these 
difficulties increased. In the following year, 1884 
2,000 immigrants came to Alberta (l) Both the Govern- 
mentand the Canadian Pacific Railway took active 
measures to promote colonization. The policy, of the 
Government can be .seen in the successive changes 
made during the next few years in the regulations in 
respect to leases for grazing lands. In 1885, all 
even-numbered sections of the grazing lands were 
thrown upan to homestead, pre-emption or sale, such 
homestead entry or purchase rendering the grazing 
lease void. All ie§^fes granted thereafter were 
subject to cancellation upon two years* notice. The 
rent for leases was raised from §10.00 to §20.00 
per 1,000 acres. In 1887 it was further enacted that 
leases could be granted only after public competition' 
except in the case of actual settlers. This resulted) 
in a great falling off in the number of applicants 
for leases. Finally, in 1893, new regulations were 
.issued, providing that all leases which did not 
provide for the withdrawal of lands for homestead 
(!) Kelly; p.172 















1C5 


or preemption purposes would be terminated in 
December 1096. Then, or during the interval, lessees 
werepermitted to purchase not more than ten per cent 
of their leaseholds at ml.25 per acre* It was open 
to them to accept leases drawn up under the new form 
for the unexpired portion of their term of twenty-one 
years '(1). By 1895 all except nine of the old .leases 
had been relinquished. After 1894 no new leases 
were granted of more than 6,000 acres. 

After 1884 settlement in the South advanced 
steadily. The growth of farming operations is shown- 
by the fact that in 1890 there were 20,000 acres 
under cultivation in the Calgary District and 6,313 
acres in the neighborhood of Madeod (2). In 1893 
American settlers first began coming into Alberta in 
large numbers. In 1898 a tide of American immigration 
set in, as a result of the colonisation campaign of 
the Honourable Clifford Sifton, Minister of the 
Interior. The earlier settlers in the South engaged 
chiefly in wheat growing by dry farming methods. 

Later settlers hy the development of irrigation 

projects, began mixed farming. As settlement advanced 
it encroached more and more on the open ranges. 

* Rancher after rancher was forced to sell out his 

pt:rt Annual Reports Dept, of Int. 1882-1894 

(2 4 ,Zally;p.g52 










1 Co 


herds owing to lack of grazing lands. By. 1900 the 
day of the open range had definitely passed (l). 
Ranching on a small scale still remained an important 
industry in the South. 

During these years the number of livestock in 
Alberta was increasing, but they were passing from 
the range to the farm. According to the census figures 
for 1901 there were in that year in the North West 
Territories 591,739 cattle, 176,463 horses, and 154,152 
sheep, showing an increase c " 324 per cent for cattle 
446 per cent for horses and 237 per cent for sheep 
over the last previously recorded figures, those for 
1892. 'The evolution of the livestock industry fr 
ranching to farming is shown by the figures giving 
the number of acres held under graving leases in the 
North-west Territories, and the number of lessees for 
successive years after 1885 (2). After 1890 the 
area under range decreased, while the npiaber of lessees 
was increased by the addition of numbers cf ..mall- 
seal' farmers. The increase in their numbers led tc 
an increase in the area under lease after 1900. 

CT3 Blue. p. 1 ~ ~~ ~~~~ ~~ ““ 1 ~~ 

(2J ^elly p,5 

There were no records for Alberta alone until 1903. 














,7 


Aoreas under 


e a s 3 


Kumb< 


litL-S < 


i 


1885 

-2,098,670 

-58 

1886 

. T , T -*. 3,793,792 

-101 

1887 

- 4 . f 344 

-132 

1888 

-3,252,378 

----108 

1889 

-- 3,113,878 

•-115 

1890 

-- ^,288,347 

-- — 126 

1891 

.. 2,213,677 

-138 

1892 

.—— 1,081,209 

— 142 

1893 

- 1,579,285 

— 159 

1894 

-1,298,871 

156 

1895 

.. 908,991 

— 176 

1896 

--- 269,967 

268 

1897 

—-- 264,155 

— - 420 

1898 

-- 361,697 

— - 535 

1899 

..- 554,533 

— 705 

1900 

--- 610,051 

— 804 

1901 

682,921 

942 

1902 

-- 1,272,847 

908 

1903 

.- 2,147,567 

— 978 

1904 

. 2,292,540 

-889 

1905 

. 2,328,113 

745 


The figures for the exports of cattle from the 
ranges are another index of the decline of ranching. 
Exports increased steadily fr cm 1898 190^; Tan cl •-^ 

were selling out during these years* The figures for 

the years 1901 to 1905 were (l) 

Number of cattle exported from 6. Alberts. 
~- — 24,148 

.—33,809 

_.-..31,488 


1901 

1902 

1903 

1904 

1905 


■45,098 

■45,266 


After 1905 the exports from the ranges decreased 
rapidly. There are no records available for range 
cattle alone after this date. 


(1} Annual Reports - Department of Agriculture, 
North lest Territories. 











































108 


There are no complete figures available for 
the proportions of fat cattle and stocleers in the 
total shipment?. The exports of fads cattle reached 
their highest point in the years 1898 and 1899. The 
number was estimated at 12,000 in 1898 and 20,000 
in 1899. Pat cattle exports fell off rapidly after 
1900 (1). The export of stochers, however, 
increased until 1905; in that year the last large 
shipment of stocher cattle from the ranges tooh 
place (2) The Dominion Land Agent at Red Deer 
wrote in his report for 1905 "Host of the cattle¬ 
men in the South are reducing their herds, or dispos¬ 
ing of them entirely, and turning their attention 
to the raising of thoroughbred stoch". Cattle 
ranching on a large scale, was definitely on the 
decline after 1905. 

The development of horse ranching paralleled that 
of cattle ranching, to a large extent. There were, 

of course, horses on the ranges of Southern Alberta 

/1 '• 

before there were cattle, but they were the native 
"Indian pennies". Prior to the coming of the 
Mounted Police in 1874. there were very few, if any, 
well-bred horses to be found in Alberta. As soon 

as the Police came, the Dominion Government esdtab- 

(1J Annual Reports Interior. Estimates f urni she'd "by" 

C.P.R, & Gorden and Ironsides, Cattle Dealers , Wpg. 

( 2 ) Annual Reports, Agriculture, Alberta 1906,p.70 











-lished a number of farms in connection with the 
forts to breed a supply of horses suitable for the 
force* One of the earliest of these farms was 
situated near Pincher Creek* Although a few good 
horses were raised on these farms, as well as by 
settlers near the fort: , the supply was not sufficient ;j 
to satisfy the needs of the Police for remounts * 

In the early eighties horse breeding began as a 
regular industry. It was started with the hope of 
furnishing hcrses for the British Army. Many fine 
cavalry hcrsefba were bred during the first years, but 
the British Market for them failed, and they were 
used as plow horses. It was not until about 1886 
that horse ranching was established as a profitable 
industry* It was carried on at that time, chiefly 
in the Calgary and Iiacleod Districts* The estimates 
of the numbers of horses in that region, as given 
in the Report of the Department of Interior, vary 
from 7,000 to 10,000* Duringthe next two years the 
industry developed rapidly. A large number of 
horses were importedfrom Oregon, British Columbia 
and Ontario. By 1888 the number of horses in Southern 
Alberta and Assiniboia had increased to 23,868 

(1J Estimate - Department of Interior - Annual 
Report - 1889: Dorn. Lands Branch p*28 













no 


Many of them were of good quality, as is shown by 
the fact that the Mounted Police obtained all their 
remounts in the Territories that year* 

During’ the next three years, however, a number 
of horses of poor quality were brought in from Montana 
and Oregon, and the quality of Alberta horses greatly 
deteriorated. In 1891 the Mounted Police were 
unable to obtain more than 100 suitable re-mounts in 
the Territories. The raachers experienced great 
difficulty in finding any market for their horses* 

They had chiefly inferior breeds, for which prices 
in the Rast were very low, owing to a general trade 
depression, ana to the increasing use of electric 
street cars. During the period of depression which 
followed, lasting until 1898, many horse ranchers 
sold out and went into cattle ranching instead* 

In 1898 the Klondike Gold Rush began. This created 
a great demand for saddle horses and pack horses of 
all kinds* Cayuses and Indian Ponies were bought at 
the prices of good horses* The Commissioner of the 
Mounted Police stated in 1899 that the prices of 
horses had increased about fifty per cent owing 
to the gold rush. 

At about the same time, the late nineties, an 





Ill 


influx of settlement began, creating an ever-increasing 
demand for farm horses* Ranchers began to turn their 
attention toward the breeding of horses suitable for 

farm work. 

Then followed the Boer War, which created a demand 
for saddle horses, thus further stimulating the 
industry. 

Practically coincident with the end of the Boer 
War, however, came the .discovery that Winter wheat 
could be grown successfully in Southern Alberta. 

This nean t the end of horse ranching on any large 
scale, just as it meant the end of cattle ranching. 
Horse breeding 'passed gradually to the farms* The 
census figures for 1901 Vive a total of 176,462 
horses in Alberta a large proportion of which were 
farm animals. 

The third branch of ranching, the sheep industry, 
also had its beg|inning in the early eighties. 

The first flocks were brought into the Southern 
range country from Montana and Wyoming, and were 
breeds characterized by small carcasses and heavy 
fleeces. As the sale of mutton later proved more 
proved more profitable than that of wool, ranchers 
introduced varieti/es designed to increase the 

















T fl Q 
X 

the weight of the carcass. ■ In 1885* the first year 
for which there are figures recorded, there were 
about 10,000 sheep on range (l) 

The restrictions imposed by the Government 
Regulations of 1882 and 1884, restricting the grazing 
of sheep, greatly discouraged the sheepmen. The 
industry practically vanished in the country South 
of Macleod and Lethbridge. After 1890 the industry 
improved and la rge numbers of sheep were brought in. 
Those in Alberta were chiefly in the Eastern part 
of the range country, the largest- fleck being on 
lands of the Alberta Railway and Coal Company, near 
Lee *s Creek (2) . The total number of sheep on the 
ranges had increased by 1890 to over 44 ,- ; jQ, but 
the larger cart of these were in Assiniboia (3). 

In 1893 a serious outbreak of scab occurred. This 
led to the placing of an embargo' on Canadian sheep 
by the British Government. The embargo, coupled 
with losses from the disease, gave a serious set¬ 
back to the industry. This period of depression 
was ended by the openin t up of markets for mutton 
in British Columbia, after the Crow’s Nest Lass 
Railway was completed in 1898. Owing to competi¬ 
tion of Montana mutton growers, the Alberta sheepmen 

1, Annual Report I)e 1 . In* . 1^86 Lorn. Lands Branch p38 

2. " " " " 1891 p.23 No figures of 

numbers on range are available 












Ill 


did not derive much benefit from the new market for 

a year or two. However, beginning about 1899, sheep 

ranching in Alberta became very profitable, in spite 

of unfavorable grazing regulations. The numbers of 

sheep increased and the quality.was improving, (l) 

The census figures for 1901 show 154,152 sheep in 
' 

Albertaand Assiniboia. About 70,000 of these were in 

/ 

the Lethbridge. District. However, sheep ranching like 
the other branches of ranching was beginning to suffer 
from the fencing in of the range. As far as large 
scale operations were concerned, it was at an end by 

1905 (2) 



(Blue: p.3 (Ho figures of numbers on range.are 
available). 

( sX Blue ; p5* 






RAILWAY DBVRLOPMBHT, 1885-1905 


The great est constructive work in furtherance 
of the economic growth of Alberta between 1880 and its 
formation into a province in 1905 was the completion of 
a transcontinental railway and the partial development 
of a railway system. The greater part of the railway 
system of the province, however, was constructed after 
1905. 

■ 

Alberta was, of course, the last of the 
prairie provinces to be reached by the Canadian Pacific 
Railway. The main line was laid as far as Calgary in 
1883, and in 1884 Ms in operation to TT edicine Hat and 
Calgary. Previous to this. Fort Bentpn on the Missouri/] 
had been the distributing centre for Alberta, but this 
position was now assumed by Calgary. A stage line 
was immediately put into operation between Calgary and 
Rdmonton, remaining in operation until 1891. It took 
five days to make this Journey by stage, (l) In November 
1885, the Prairie §nd British Columbia sections of the 
Canadian Pacific were Joined, and in the following jear j 
transcontinental se vice between Montreal and Vancouver 
was inaugurated. The Canadian Pacific telegrpah line 
from the Atlantic to the Pacific was completed in 1885. 

3j-ue j.iS. Development of transportation in the H.W." 












The work of filling in branch lines within 
the province proceeded very slowly at first;'in fact 
only one line was built before the nineties. This 
lack of branch lines to give access to the central 
and northern parts of the province was one cause of 
the lack of immigration into these districts during 
the years from 1880 until the later Mneties. The 
construction of branch lines was carried on, with 
government aid in the form of land grants and sub¬ 
sidies, either by the Canadian Pacific Railway or by 
separate companies closely connected with the Cana¬ 
dian Pacific. That compesny later purchased or 
leased all the branch lines built during the period. 

The only line constructed during the eighties, 
was the Galt line completed as a narrow-guage road 
in 1885, by the North-Western Coal and Navigation 
Company(l) This line ran from Dunmore Junction on 
the main line of the Canadian Pacific near Medicine 
fiat, to Lethbridge (110 miles) and opened up for 
development the coal mines of the Lethbridge district. 
Previous to its completion some coal from the mines 

had been carried in scows down the Belly River to the 
Canadian Pacific Railway at Medicine Hat. In 1800 
the line was extended from Lethbridge to Coutts, on 

(ll Annual Report. Dept. Int.1886. Rep. Dep. Min p.33 





116 

on the international boundary (65 miles) by the Alberta 
Railway and Goal Company. In 1891 this latter company 
t ;olc over the oart from Dunmore Junction to Lethbridge, 
and in 1893 relaid it as a broad-guage line. Subse¬ 
quently, the Canadian Pacific Railway leased the whole 
line until 1897. In that year it purchased the Dunmore- 
Lethbridge portion, preparatory to extending it as the 
Grows Nest Pass Railway. 

In 1891 the Calgary and Edmonton Railway was 
completed from Calgary to Strathcona. This opened 
up to settlement that territory between Calgary and 
Edmonton, and caused such an influx of immigration 
into the Red Leer district that it was found necessary 
to establish a sub-agency for the Relief ;n Lands 
department at Red Leer in the following year. Connec¬ 
tion with Edmonton was not made until 1902, when the 
Edmonton, Yukon and Pacfic Company built a branch 
line between Strathcona and Edmonton. In 1892 the 
Calgary and Edmonton line was extended south from 
Calgary to the Old Mauls River (104 miles). The 
whole Calgary and Edmonton line was then leased by the 
Canadian Pacific Railway. 

The construction of a branch line from Lethbridge 
to Cardston was begun in 1899 by the Alberta Railway 

and Irrigation Company. This was completed to Spring 

w 44 







1 

117 

Coulee in 1900, and finally extended to Cardston in 

1905. 

The most important line constructed in the nineties 
was the Crow f s Nest Pass Railway from Lethbridge via 
Iacleod through the pass to Kootenay. After consider¬ 
able agitation over the aid to be given by the govern¬ 
ment to this project, an agreement'was reached in 
1897 by which the government agreed to grant a subsidy 
of §11,000 a mile, in return for. which the company 

handed over to the government some valuable timber 

' 

limits in British Columbia, agreed to a reduction in 
freight rates, and undertook to operate the railway undel 
the control of the Railway Committe of the Cabinet(l) 

The line was completed in 1898. Its construction has 
a most important effect in bringing a revival of pros¬ 
perity to the ranching and farming industries of 
southern Alberta which had been depressed for some 
years, owing chiefly to lack of markets. With the 
new line giving access to the recently developed 
mining regions of the Kootenay and the Klondike, 
these markets became avaialable for the cattle, hay 
and dairy products of southern Alberta, 

The laying of a second transcontinental railway 
through the province, that of the Canadian Northern, 

(1.)-Encyclopaedia of Canada II p.217 










was projected "before 1905* Work was begun in 1903 
on the line from Winnipeg to Edmonton* It was com¬ 
pleted in September 1905 fl) With the construction 
of this railway settlement began to extend into the 
eastern part of central Alberta. 

With the exception of this single line of the 
Canadian 1 or them Railway, the province in 1905 
was still entirely dependent on the Canadian Pacific 
Railway for transportation facilities. The total 
mileage in operation by that company within that 
pr ovinc e including leased 1ir ■ s ,as 1060 (2 } 

The construct!on of the Canadian Pacific Railway 
and its branch lines itimm&ated the growth ’and pro¬ 
bity of the province in many ways. Immigration 
increased rapidly as a result of the joint efforts 
of the railway company and the government (2). In 
fact, the organised advertising and immigration 
work carried on by the company in Eastern Canada 
England, and the United States, proved more effective 


/l* Brief History of Edmonton p.li 

Railways and Tel :• phones , ■ Alberta Annua 1 Report 
(3j Innis History of the G.P.R. p 129, ISO* 

Oarnavon: Speeches on Canadian affaire pp.315-32 








11 * 

than the work of the government agencies (1). Armies 
f laborers were imported to do construction work, 
and some of them remained as settlers (2). The demand 
for labor which construction caused, was also a groat- 
assistance to homesteaders, hundreds of whom obtained 
work on the railways. The comparer assisted the deve¬ 
lopment of agriculture by such means as reduced rates 
on the importation of pure-bred stock, and the free 
transportation of seed grain (3). 

In one way, however, the building of the Canadian 
Pacific proved detrimental to progress. This was in 
connection with the land grants made to the company, 

and to the railway companies whose lines it acquired 

/ • 

by leasing. The Canadian Pacific Hallway was allotted 

the odd-humbered sections in a twenty-four mile belt 
along the main line and branches, and in the Saskat¬ 
chewan, Battle and Bed Beer River districts. In 1884 
a grant of 300,000 acres was made to the Alberta 
Hailway and. Coal Company, and in 1890, 1,900,000 acres 
were allotted to the Calgary and R dm on ton Railway 
Company. All the odd-numbered sections in the Best 
were reserved from homestead entry to permit the 

Jafoe, Canada and i"ts Provinces. -.302 

[Z$ Bo statistics are avaialable but apparently only a 
small proportion remained (Sess. Papers 5(2) 1885; 

54, 1900) Many of the laborers were Orientals. 

(W Agri. JERRI. RPTS. 1899. p.lo;1902 pp44, 96. 






120 

railway companies to select their lands at leisure. 

As the companies were enabled to finance construction 
by issuing land grants bonds on the security of their 
lands, they were under no necessity of hurrying in the 
choosing of their lands. In most cases the selections 
were not complete until twenty or more years after 
the grants were made (1). The existence of the 
unoccupied odd-sections was a barrier to settlement. 
They separated the settlers, prevented school organi¬ 
zation and the erection of municipalities, and 
increased the danger of prairie fires. The railway 
lands in the Canadian Pacific Railway belt were 
exempt from taxation, which resulted in their being 
held to a large extent for speculative purposes. The 
Dominion Land agent at Edmonton wrote in this connec¬ 
tion, in his annual report to the Department of the 
Interior in 1897: "The existence of railway lands, 
exempt from taxation, and held always at piices In 
advance of their actus 1 value, presents almost the 
only obstacle to rapid settlement of the Territories" 
Before noting the effect of the coming of the 

railroad upon river transportation, the development 
of steam navigation on the Saskatchewan after 1880 
might be traced (3), Cp to that year the Hudson T s Bay 

(1$ Innis, "History of the C.P.R. pp 254-5 

(2) Material taken from MS by John Blue: Development of 
transportation in the Northwest, 




IP 4 ! 

i>A» 2 . 

Company had a monopoly of steam traffic on the river. 

In that year the Co&pany opened the traffic to all 
traders and did a general transport business* Altoge¬ 
ther the Hudson’s Bay Company spent considerable stuns 
of money to improve navigation on the Saskatchewan 
and was able to induce the Dominion Government to 
supplement it's expenditures. Up to 1884, over $121,000 
had been spent t Its steamers were taken over aid 

operated by the Winnipeg Transportation Company in 
1881. This company operated six steamers on the 
Saskatchewan River, from Grand Rapids to Edmonton, 
n the north branch, and to Blaekfoot Grossing on 
the south branch. The Galt Coal Company of Lethbridge 
were using three small but powerful river boats to 
carry coal down the Belly River to i&ediciaa Hat. 

The Hudson’s Bay Company was also the pioneer 
of steamboat transporation on the northern rivers, 
the Athabasca, Peace, Slave and Mackenzie. The S.S, 
Grahame was built at Athabasca Landing in 1882. and 
the S. B. Wrigley at Port Smith in 1887. Pour more 
steamers were built within the next few years. They 
operated from Hudson’s Hope on the Upper Peace River 
to Pend du Lac at the east end of Lake Athabasca, 
down the Mackenzie River to Port MacPherson, and up 

the Liard Hiver to Fort Nelson. In 1900 the Northern 








1 r >Q 


Transportation Company entered the north and estab¬ 
lished a fleet of steamers, which they operated on 
the Athabasca River and on the Lesser Slave Lake. 

The coming of the railway with its branches to 
Edmonton and Prince Albert was a death bibow to steam 
navigation on the Saskatchewan River. In 1886, 
however, the steamboats sere still competing with 
the railroad in carrying freight to Edmonton, and 
giving much cheaper rates. "It cost $2.50 per 100 
pounds to bring flour by railway and stage route, 

while it cost only $1.80 to bring it by steamboat. 

r 

On general merchandize, the rate by rai.l and stage 

was $4.50 compared with $2.90 by steamboat. As 

late as 1896 the S.S. Northwest arrived at Edmonton 

(i) 

•with a thousand sacks of flour." 

The construction of the railway also caused a 

change in the route of transporation to the Hudson’s 

.. 

Bay Company posts in the north. After 1883, the 
main highway to the north was from Edmonton ovrland 
to Athabasca Landing by ox-cart, wagon or other 
conveyance. There, connection was made with the 
Hudson’s Bay Company steamers, and the Athabasca, 
Peace and Mackenzie River steam system. (2) 

(1) Blue: p 12. 

(2) Blue: p,15. 

















VII 


1*33 


A GRIOULTPRR, 1880-1905 
Ranching in Southern! Alberta was the first 
stage in the agricultural development of the Province, 
But this-was merely a passing phase of development, 
suited only to pioneer conditions and a sparsely 
settled country. Settlement and intensive cultiva¬ 
tion occurred with the growth of mixed farming and 
grain growing. 

A number of factors, however, tended to retard 
progress in agriculture during the fifteen years* 
following the coming of the transcontinental rail¬ 
way. Southern Alberta was 'believed to be an arid 
region suitable only for grazing. Immigration to 
Central Alberta was discouraged Bor a period of five 
or ten years by the occurrence of the Riel Rebellion 
in 1885. This was an uprising of the Indians and 
halfbreeds of the Saskatchewan valley caused by the 
extension of the Government land survey. Its fctorm 
centre was in Saskatchewan. Incidentally the 
crushing of this rebellion permanently banished the 

fear of Indian disorders and definitely gave place 
and security to the Northwest, 

The lack of’transportation facilities throughout 

the whole of the Province except the strip along the 








124 


main line of the Canadian Pacific was another cause 
of stagnation. The construction of branch lines did 
not begin until the nineties. 

Great dissatisfaction among settlers resulted from 
the Dominion Government’s policy in connection with 
land regulations. 411 the odd numbered sections in 
the West were reserved from homestead and preemption, 
to oermit the raiIways to seclect their grants. In 
1882, the even numbered sections in the railway belt 
and south of it were also withdrawn from entry. It 
was claimed that this action of the Government 
retarded settlement and injured the reputation of 
the country. Travellers, seeing the land along the 
railway uncultivated would suppose it was unfit for 
cultivation. Large tracts of land in the most 
fertile districts were granted to colonization 
companies. Two such companies carried on operations 
in Alberta. In 1882 the Edmonton and Saskatchewan 
Land Company was allotted 216 square miles of land 
in the vicinity of Edmonton, Part of this land was 
settled at the time the grant was made (l) In 1888 

the Canadian Agricultural and Colonizatian Company 
was organized. It received in Alberta, five tracts 
of ten thousand acres each. These we'-4 situated 

Lafoe: Canada and its Provinces XIX p»166 



near Lunmore, Stair and Ban try, in the Medicine 
Hat district, and near Namaka and Langdon in the 
neighborhood of Calgary. 

Settlement which then proceeded gradually followed 
the construction of the Canadian Pacific in 1883 
mainly in the Calgary district, was composed largely 
of farmers who intended to engage in stock raising, 
i'or several years they were concerned almost entirely 
with ranching on a small scale, but by degrees small 
areas were put under cultivation for grain and fodder 
crops. The completion of the Galt railway in 1885 
between Lethbridge and Medicine Hat promoted settle¬ 
ment for mixed farming purposes in the Belly river and 
Port Macleod country. 

In 1887 the nucleus of an important Mormon settle¬ 
ment in the Cardston district was made by the en-ry 
of sixty Mormons from Utah upon lands along Lee T s 
Creek. They established mixed farms, paying'pa rti- 
cular attention to dairying. To /their efforts was 
due the founding of the dairy industry in the Southern 
part of the Province, In 1888 the first creameries 
were established. One cheese -'actory and two creamer¬ 
ies were established in the foothill district Lest, 
of Calgary, 

Luring this decade ffcm 1880 to 1890, little 







development occurred in Central Alberts or as it 
was then 'mown, Northern Alberta, excent a gradual 
increase of settlement and mixed farming in the 
ne 1 ghb orh ood of IS dm on ten. The la rge s t mov ~ me n t 
into that district occurred in 1887 when there was 
an influx cf settlers to the Sturgeon river valley, 
especially along the south bank. Settlement developed 
very gradually along the Bed Deer and Battle rivers, 
and along the stage line between Calgary and Edmonton. 
Apparently trying to make his report of conditions 
in that region as optimistic as possible, the 
travelling immigration agent of the Dominion Govern¬ 
ment wrote in 1887 that on the road between Edmonton 
and Ga the- greatest distance between farms was 

twenty miles (1) 

Thus, during this decade, the chief development 
-in agriculture in Alberto was that of mixed farming, 
c cnf ined lar gs 1 y to the Calm- rr d 1 s tri.c t al ong the 
Canadian Pacific and the vicinity cf Edmonton* A 
small start had been made also in the dairy industry- 
in the foothill region west cf Ca3erary end in the 
Eormon settier?nt abont G.rdst n. 

Figures from the_ census of 1891 indicate the 
progress of agriculture in the various iistriets. 


1 


Deport of Interior, 1888 















U 7 


They chow almost exclusive attention to ranching, 


ns 


th the above Except! 

f Alberta 


. in 


!letr»lo n d di ctriet 


a jl_l 


out 


i caj.ga.r 



- OPI 

ilati m 

i jfl jL o ♦/ J- ♦ 




Occupiers of 

Dis f rict 


■opulati 

. .ana • 

Gal ary 

Red Deer 

and 

11,199 

1 } lj jL 1 

Macleod 


, us 

397 

JE&mcn t on 


6,875 

75£ 

(i) 

Total 


£",£77 

£, 160 


Product!on 

of ifield or ops 



Wheat 

Oats 

District 

Acres 

Bushels 

Bushels 



Spring 

Pall Acres Bushels 



Wh ea t 

Ihe a + 

Cairarr "■ 

R 3 1 2 ■ r 

net 

£.016 

£9.734 

£.019 14.608 375.571 

Macleod 

527 

6.£01 

77 0,393 5.7.897 

Ed?r: ,n ton 

£. 5£8 

55.373 

1.525 3.271 137.959 

(1) 




Total* ' 

5.071 

91.308 

3.051 £2,272 571,127 


Barley 

Potatoes Turnips & Roots 


Acres 

Bushels Acres Bushels Acres Bushel 

Calgary : 

Re Deer 

and 

1.329 

£9.707 

,"~J 226 51.589 

Macleod 

170 

3.021 

290 32.504 106 12.358 

Edmonton 

1.834 

56.689 

202 49.916 30 6.093 

/i i 

Total ' 

3.323 

89.417 

1.178 186.990 362 70.040 


(1^ Refers to provi i il district of Alberta, that 

part of the present Prcv. south of a line practically 
coincident with the 55th oar. The population and 
production of Athabasca, the northern" district, 
were negligible at this time. 


































ize 


Hay 

Tons 

Calgary ajid 


Ked Deer 

30.836 

Ilacle od 

4,805 

Edmonton 

9.882 

Total 

45.523 


Animals and Animal Products 



Horses 

Dairy 

Cattle 

Other horned 
Cattle Sheep 

Hogs 

Poultry 

Calgary 
Red Deer 

and 

11,134 

5,104 

47.311 

10.820 

1.933 

30.957 

Made od 

6.413 

2.940 

80.757 

3.616 

744 

10,306 

Edmonton 

3.367 

2,925 

6.415 

. 1.621 

2,488 

17,239 

Total 

20.914 

10.969 

133.483 

16.057 

5.165 

58.502 


Dairy Protects 



Pounds of 

Homemade 

Butter 

Pounds of 

Homemade 

Cheese 

Calgary and 
Red Deer 

243.061 

18.034 

llacle od 

64.146 

620 

Edmonton 

98.799 

3.660 


406,106 

22,314 


In 1892, following the completion of the 
Calgary and Edmonton Hailway, the development of the 
mixed farming country between Calgary and Edmonton 

(T) Sc separate figures are available for cattle on the 

range. This makes' it impossible to tell the number on 
small farms. 
































began* This was then Known as the Red Deer district 
or as "Northern Alberta". During the next ten years 
the largest part of the gradually increasing immigra¬ 
tion into Alberta massed into this region, chiefly 
to that part ^est of the Calgary and Edmonton Railway. 
The great bulk of the settlers w r ere Americans but 
several foreign settlements were started, notably 
one of Germans in the Leduc district, and one of 
Galicians along Beaver Greek near Edmonton. 

The figures of the homestead entries at the 
different land agencies in Alberta from the opening 
of the first one at Calgary and Edmonton in 1884 
until 1900 show thepxend of settlement* There is 
a marked increase in the entries for "Northern Alberta" 
after 1891. 

(l) 

Homestead Entries 



GaIgary 

Red 

Lethbridge Edmonton Deer We task!win 

1884 

25 


4 

1885 

137 


42 

1886 

303 

24 

70 

1887 

,N 

o figures 

available 

1888 

122 

81 

57 

1889 

265 

5 

77 

1890 

312 

95 

117 

1891 

218 

57 

419 90 

(i) .Annual 

Reps, Dom. hands 

Agent, Dept. of -^ht. 







C~nrim ** 4 - 


> n> -rv 


Red 



Calgary 

Lethbridge . 

Edmonton 

Deer 

Wetaskiwin 

1892 

224 

63 

601 

369 


1893 

307 

94 

570 

268 

309 

1894 (14 months 
564. 

223 

1149 

944 

355 

1895 

103 

118 

' 204 

214 

314 

No 

figures available for 

1896 and 1897 

1898(fi 

seal year 

123 

} <2) 

195 

623 

195 

Included in 
Edmonton. 

1899 

208 

326 

886 

325 

Agency 

1900 

438 

293 

1.033 

706 



As indicated "before, mixed farming was a opted 
from the beginning in Centra 1 Alberta• Oats were 
gradually developed as the staple crop* Smaller crops 
of spring wheat were grown Barley was grown as a 
fodder crop, and considerable attention was given to 
dairying. 

During the ten years following the completion of 
the Calgary and Edmonton Railway, a number of small 
towns sprang up along the line. We taskiwin, Ponoka, 
Lacombe, Red De©r and ©Ids, each the centre of a 
mixed farming community. By 1897 there were nine 
grain elevators in the north, four at Edmonton, two 

( 1.) Annual Reports Dominion Lands Agen 4 ? Dep~J of Int. 

(2) June 30, 1897, June 30, 1898. 












131 


at teduc and three at Vetaskiwin. (l) 

The econstruction of the Crows Nest Pass Railway in 
1898 meant a period of increased prosperity for the 
farmers of the region. It caused^a reduction of 
nearly one half in the freight rates- to the Kootenay 
mining district, which was the principal market for 
the dairy products of the South. 

Although after 1901 ®r 1902 the field of greatest 
activity was again transferred to Southern Alberta,, 
the central part shared in the extraordinary develop 
ment of the whole Province which began at that time. 

»*ith the projection of additional railways into the 
-rovince, settlement extended to the eastward of the 
Calgary and Edmonton. 

By 1905 homesteads were taken up a hundred miles 
east of Edmonton towards the VermiMon Valley, along 
the proposed route of the Canadian Northern Railway. (z) f 

Comparative figures for the three main crops' for 
1 ~ P » ' t ^ 9 first year for 'which records were compiled, 
and for 1904, will show the advance of agriculture 
in Cental Alberta. (3) 


(1} Report 

(J5 


Edmonton 

n 


■ and 


Agt 


Inter! or 

ft 


Bom 

rt 


ends 

TT 

the 


1898 

„ __ 1906 

Annual Report Agriculture NWT 1904 p.15,1904 is 
last year for which estimates are given for the 
same district as those givenin 1898. 

Central Alberta includes the Edmonton, Wetaskiwin, 


llitr!e?fe. LaooiBb9 * Ponoka . Inniefail Olds andEidsirary 







132 


Spring Wheat Oats Barley 

^ 1V - --h.ls A-:'"-'. . ~ 1. a a ' . b 1 ' ' „ . 

1898 25,940 reo.ao CC,:::! I, ..a ... AA-' 

UOi ~ 1'0.7^3 A 'il\866 55.115 1446,m 

There are no figures for live stock available 
except for Alberta as a whole. 

The growth of the dairy industry which was begin¬ 
ning to assume importance deserves mention. For a 
number of years after its small beginnings in the late 
eighties the industry made scarcely any progress. It 
was confined almost entirely to the Cardston and 
: western Calgary districts. By 1895, about 48,000 
pounds of cheese were being shipped annually from the 
Cardston district to British Columbia. 

Dairying gradually developed in Central Alberta 
with the spread of settlement to that region. The 
beginning of government assistance in 1896 ga e the 
fist stimulus to the industry. In that year $15,000 
was voted by Parliament for the establishment and 
maintenance of creameries in the ..Northwest Terri¬ 
tories • This marked the beginning of the government * s 
co-operative dairying system in Alberta which proved 
most successful, Four government creameries were 
established in Alberta in 1897 a 4 ' Calgaryj; Edmonton, 








13 3 

Red Deer and We task! win. Prom thi time on, the 
dairying industry in Alberta made steady progress. 
3y 1905 there were P’overnmen^ creameries in opera¬ 
tion at 14 points in the Province, The following 
table . shows the increase in production It- tween 1898 
and 1905, 



Pounds of 
nutter lifgd , 

7a lue o f 

Product, 




1898 

164, 188 

30,868 

1899 

£37,186 

49,706 

1900 

£95,024 

59,435 

1901 

061,498 

50,£7£ 

190E 

£78,438 

58,261 

1903 

457,4.11 

89,516 

1904 

416,191 

85,766 

1905 

813,430 

173,671 


For many years the Calgary district was the 
' only part of' southern Alberts which was considered 
suitable for culiivati i. Inter st in the other 
j more arid sections as farming lands was first mani¬ 
fested in the nineties in connection with a realisa¬ 
tion of the possibilities of irrigation in these 
regions. Although there had been attempts at irri¬ 
gation on a small scale by individual farmers previous 
189*3, no att©htlO;nWas given to extensive projects 







until that year, when the cancellation of the 3a rge 
grazing leases went into effect. 

The following year the government passed the 
Horthwst Irrigation Act hy which the right to the use 
;of all water in the irrigation area hecane vested in 
the Crown. Almost immediately a government irrigation 
surrey was begun, in order to provide for the intelli¬ 
gent control of the water. During And following the 
survey, a number of small irrigation works were under¬ 
taken as well as several large ones fl) Of the 
latter the Calgary Irrigation Company was the pioneer. 
Their enterprise involved the irrigation of an area 
of 45, 000 acres west and wouthwest of Calgary.. The 
construction of their canals was completed in 190£. 

Ahother large project was that of the Springbank 
Irrigation Canal, designed to irrigate 30,000 acres 
west of Calgary. Construct! :n was begem in 1894 but 
only a small portion had been completed by 1905. The 
moot important of the early irrigation schemesw s 
that of the Alberta Hallway and Irrigation Company 
which began work on the St, Mary’s ©r Galt Canal in 
1895. The Canal, which was designed to irrigate an 
a<fB& of 1,000,000 acres south and southeast of 
I Lethbridge was completed in 1900. When the Company 

(1) Report on Irrigation in NWT. Int. 1903 appendix. 







135 

began operations this land was unoccupied, except 
gs a ran^e for a few herds of cattle. In 1899 the 
Company entered into a colonization arrangement with 
Mormon Communities 'in the Western States, whereby the 
latter were to do construction works on the canal 
for which they were to receive as part payment land 
owned by the Company. About 2, 500 Mormon settlers 
came in during that year (1)• Settlement of the 
area progressed steadily most of the settlers taking 
up mixed farming. In 1901 a beet sugar refinery was 
erected in the village of Raymond, and the cultiva¬ 
tion of sugar beets be an in that district. 

By 1903 there were 469 miles of canal constructed 
in Southern Alberta, capable of irrigating an area 
of 614,684 acres. Owing to the occurrence of a 
number of wet seasons at the time of their completion 
little use was made of these irrigation systems , 
except the Galt canal, until some years later. The 
extensive irrigation project of the Canadian Pacific 
Railway Company was inaugurated in 1903, but very 
little work was done on it prior to 1905. 

Of more importance to the development of Southern 
Alberta than these early irrigation projects was the 
’’dry farming" invasion, which began about 1902. This 
(i) Pa-oar t. of Agric. N.W.T. 1899,15,93. 





136 

was a ort of the immense flow of immigration which 
began to enter Alberta at the beginning of the 
twentieth century. This influx of settlers was 
partly the result of the energetic campaign for 
immigration carried on in Europe and the United 
States by the Hon. Clifford Sifton, who becamse 
Minister of the Interior in 1896, and partly an over¬ 
flow of the immigration to the Western States, where 
the limit of free farm lands had been reached. 

The greater part of this tide of immigration Into 
Southern Alberta consisted of American settlers. Many 
of these were from the Western States and were familiar 
with dry farming methods, the practice, that is, of 
keeping land fallow every second or third year for 
the purpose of storing moisture. Experiments in 
dry farming with a view to the raising of fall wheat 
ere begun by the new settlers. Such experiments 
carried on during 1897 and 1898 first demonstrated 
the possibility of raising wheat in Southern Albertai l) 
By 1903 the successful growth of fall feheat was 
fully established^the Only problem which remained 
was to discover the best variety. The solution to 
that problem had been MndioatPA "by the introduction 

(iJReport Red Beer Agent Inter* or 1898. p.£7. 

Southern Alberta includes the*Calgary, Lethbridge, 

Madeod and Bincher Creek districts. 





137 


in 1902 of the first "Turkey lied" wheat, Prom 
experiements with this resulted the production of the 
famous Alberta Hed ,f variety* Xn 1904 the acreage 
under fall wheat in Soutthern Alberta was 7,090 
with a yield of 121,201 bushels.fi) 

The attention of farmers in the Southern par t 
of the Province was turned toward wheat growing for 
the first time by these experiements with fall wheat. 
The result was a period of almost exclusive attention 
to wheat growing in that region which made Southern 
Alberta famous as a wheat district* This period 
was Just beginning at the time of the formation of 
the Province in 1905. 

Advance in settlement and agricultural development 
was fairly rapid for the Province as a whole between- 
1900 and 1905. This is indicated in summary form by 
the'following tables of immigration, pouplation and 
agricultural production. 

Immigration records for Alberta begin with the 
year 1901* The following table indicates the rate 
of increase after that date. 

(1)Annual Report Agriculture HWT 1904 p.110 

► 
















. 







































































. 












. 













' 


















1901 


13 


1902 

1903 

1904 

1905 


Immigran* Enf--rl n r A1 borta 


6,923 

12.071 

13,407 

10,217 

12.765 


She increase in population is shown by a eompari 

son of the census figures for 1891, 1901 and 1906. 

Population of Alberta. 

1891 25,277 

1901 73,022 

1906 185,412 

The number of homestead entries; furnish another 

index of the development. The increase of entries 

after 1900 is shown by the following table, (l ) 

Calgary Edmonton snd Lethbridge R ad Leer 
We taskiwin' 


1900 

(fiscal 

438 

3 ) 

1,033 

2?3. 

706 

1901 

802 

1,631 

524 

846 

1902 

1495 

2,144 

893 

1,149 

1903 

2383 

3,244 

1,543 

1,489 

1904 

2609 

2,597 

1,945 

1,460 

1905 

2113 

3,094 

1,786 

2,629 

1906 

2082 

4,601 

1,751 

3,859 


snnua± reports Jominion -land Agent, Jept. o^f Interior 













13$ 

The numbe of homestead entries should he 
supplemented by figures on land sales by the Dominion 
Government and the Railway Company but separate statis¬ 
tics for Alberta land sales are net available. 

The following comparative figures for agricultural 
products for 1901 and for 1905 (1) show the progress 
made during these years: 

Cm: y ">:■ luctioy. . 

wheat Oa ts Barley 

Acres Bushels Acres Bushesl Acres Bushels 


1900 

43.103 799,839 118.025: 

: 3.781.259 

11.099 287.345 

1905 

147,8353.035.84.3 311.545 

11.728.314 

80.900 2231*186 


Live Stoch 




Horses Dairy Cattle 

Other Cattle Cheep 

1901 

93.001 46.295 

329.391 

800.266 

1906 

226.554 101,245 

849.387 

154,2C r 


*wine 

Poultry 


1901 

46,0.63 

225,798 


1906 

114,623 

-- 



Incidentally it might be noted that little, progress 
had been made in the poultry industry. In 1898 eggs 
for consumption in Alberta were being iraper ted in 
large quantities from the Eastern Provinces (2). As 


(lJ Census of Prairie Provinces in 1905-6 

(2* Geo. Harcourt, Territorial Report Agri.1898.pp57-60 



























140 

scarcely any poultry statistics are included in 
agricultural reports "between 1898 and 1905 there 
was apparently little progress in the industry 
during thesy years. The hog industry, also insigni¬ 
ficant until 1900, showed signs of growth after 
that date. In 1899 fresh pork, "bacon and ham were 
heine imported from the United States and Eastern 
Canada. By 1904 there were five pork packing 
establishments in Alberta, two at Edmonton, two. at 
Calgary, and one at Innisfail• Urom these places 
fresh and cured pork was being exported to Winnipeg.flj 




(3*.) Territorial Report Agric. 1904. p.50 







141 


VIII 

COAL MINING 

Next to agriculture, the most important factor 
in the development of Alberta has been coal mining. 
The first record of the discovery of coal was by 
Mdward Umfreville, a fur trader in the employ of the 
Hudson’s Bay Company. This recore appears in his 
"Present Slate of the Hudson’s Ba$" (l) published 
in 1789. (£). To Alexander Mackenzie, however, is 
commonly attributed the honor of the initial dis¬ 
covery (2). This is incorrect, as his statement of 
having found a seam of coal on the banks of the 
Mackenzie river in 1789 first appears in his "Voyages" 
published in 1795 (3). Peter Fidler, in a journey 
across the plains in 1793, found coal on Red Leer 
river® These two seams are recored in Arrowsmith’s 
map of 1801. Nearly all subsequent travellers and 
explorers mentioned the presence of coal in their 
reports, but for many years no one had any idea of 
the extent and importance of the formation. 

(Tv -14 9. This book is not available. The reference 
is taken from Burpee -"Search for the Western Sea ?f pl76 
B. Tyrrell: Bowling: History of the Discovery of 
Western Coal Fields p.l 
(3.) burpee. p.176 






142 


The first scientific statement concerning the 
coal resources was madd by Dr. Hector, the geologist 
who accompanied the Hind-Palliser Expedition of 1057- 
1863. His reports were published by Palliser in his 
"Hournals" in 1873. (l) Hector discovered coal at 
various places in the mountains and plains, including 
the Big Horn coal field on the North Saskatchewan; 
the BrazesLu valley (near the nresent mines at Nordegg) 
and on the Snake river. He was the first to point 
out that great areas in Alberta were underlain by 
cretaceous coal formations which were part of such 
a formation- extending from the Laurentian axis on the 
; northeast to the Hocky mountains on the west. 

Dr. He ctor did not visit the great coal fields 

now being mined in the Crow's Nest Pass; these were 

first reported upon, though not mapoe§, by Lieutenant 

( 2 ) 

Blakeston about 1858. 

G. M. Dawson, of the Geological Survey, began 
; his exploration of the boundary line across the plains 
in 1877, His conclusions, to the effect that the 
coal beds exposed on the boundary line were either 
cretaceous or tertiary, were published in 1875. 

Sandford Fleming, in hi: reports based on his explora¬ 
tory expeditions 1873-79, for the location of a railway 

UJ"Journals" po.113, 1858;p.*26 ~~IR6Z ""- 

(2) Dowling: p.B 








143 


line, made further contribution:; to the knowledge 
of Alberta coal fields. Dawson resumed work in the 
southern portion of the mountains in 1881, and made 
discoveries which led him to predict that coal would 
be found in Crow’s Nest Pass. J. B* Tyrell, of the 
Geological S , carried on explorations in Central 

Alberta, as far north as Edmonton, in 1885 and 1886. 
After the publie ation of re p o r t s and maps.by Dawscn 
and Tyrrell, the presence of coal in the province 
first became well enough known to influence settlers 
to seek lands where they would be assured of a fuel 
euooly. oince that time, minute examinations ?f the 
Alberta coal resources hove been carried out for the 
Geological Survey by heConnell and Bowline. The 
latter particularly has carred on extensive investi¬ 
gations and published valuable reports (l). 

Until 1905, the cool mining inud'stry of Alberta 
was in the pioneer stage of exploitation. Even in 
; its early period, however, it greatly assisted the 
| settlementand growth of the province by supplying 
| local fuel need.? and helping railway construction. 

Nad the plains and foothills not contained cool 
suitable for locomotive purposes, much of the railway 
• construction work in. the mountains would of necessity 
(l) Gaol.Surv.Can.,No,11723. 








3/4 


have been postponed. The beginning of the industry 
as one of commercial importance dates from the laying 
of the Canadian Pacific Hail wav. 

However, the first coal seam to be opened in 
the province was at> Lethbridge, in 1881. In 188# 

001710 this coal was transported in eccws 1 n the 
Belly River to H-dieine H/ t, and f - ; \ -• G 
suitable for the roe of the. Canadian Pacific Hallway. 

| The Company purchased 9,000 tons of this coal in 

1884. That same year seams of lignite coal of poorer 

" 

duality were opened at Medicine Hat and 6,000 tons 
| :f it v,er ? reported to Winnipeg, (l) The construc¬ 
tion of the narrow guage Galt Railway from Medicine 
- , in 1085, made the Lethbrid 

available in larger quantities for the use of the 
railway and also enabled it to be placed on the 


Winnj)eg market. Competition in the market due to the 

. 

entrance of this coal, led to a general reduction in 
'-•es in Winnipeg and throughout 41 
Prices fell to Plaster'] levels (2). 

'/'wen the Canadian Pacific Hailway reached the 


mauntains, coal 

(t r Heper 1 ” Lepi * 

(2) Mines Report, 
( i Allan, linera 


i ) 

was being brought all the way from Ohio 3 ' 

~ - a th-‘- In 4 ' ai or 1885: H ~ 7 itfin xia 
Hept. of Interior 1886 ,f ,f ' » xxvii 

-l Resources of Alberta, 2nd report p38 













145 - 


The construction work in the mountains led to the 
discovery of anthracite coal in the Bov.' Pass near 
Banff, in 1883* Shortly after, high grade bituminous 
coal was found at Ganmore. These coals were immediately 
put to use in connection with the heavy construct! n 
wort through the mountains. Systemstifi operation of 
these mines did not begin until 1891. Uy 1893 the 
anthracite product began to replace the imported hard 
coal on the Winnipeg market, (l) The anthracite mines 
at Anthracite were abandoned in 1903, and others opened 
at Bankhead, on the same seam. 

The next mines to be opened on a commercial scale 
were those in the Edmonton district. The coal here, 
which was of a lignite or sub£bitumimms variety, had 
been mined for local fuel purposes from the beginning 
of s e t * 1 e iant. Mining operations gradually became 
more extensive with the growth of settlement. Export to 
Calgary benan in 1895, following the completion of 4 :he 
Galrary and Edmonton kailway. 

The -..nee hill mines of lignite coal, near Calgary, 
were brought into operation on a small scale in 1893. 

Until 1900, the Lethbridge mines had the largest 
output of any in Alberta, while Ganmore and Anthracite 
had the next largest. In 1897, the coal production by 


(1) Begg III, p.451 




















(l) 

districts was estimated as follows : 


U6 


Lethbridge.- .180,000 tons 


Canmore.,. 75,000 ,T 

Anthracite...20,000 ” 

Edmonton and Okotoks. 4,000 
Knee Hill.......--- 2,000 


There was at this time a very small local 
demand for coal. Host of the Lethbridge coal was 
shipped to Montana, toe Canmore output went chiefly 
to the railroads, coal from Antiiractie was marketed 
in Winnipeg. After 1900, the output at Lethbridge 
decreased for a few years owing to a falling off in 
the market for it in Montana, the Canmore mines taking 
first place in volume of output. By 1903 however, the 
increase in local demand, due to the growth of settle¬ 
ment, was sufficient to induce a steady increase in 
the Lethbridge output. 

The construction of the Crow’s Nest Bass Hailway 

in 1897 led to the discovery of what proved to be the 

largest producing field in the province, that of the 

Crow's Lest Pass. The actual development of the 

Alberta sections of this field did not begin until! 

1901, when mines were opened at Frank. (2) In 1903 

additonal mines were put into operation at Blairmore, 

(1* Report Dept, of Interior 1898 p.19 

" TT Public Works NWT 1901. p 25ff. 









147 


Cowley, Bellevue and Coleman. The output from the Bass 
was just becoming large enough to be of impcr tanee in 

1905. 

There are no figures available for the annual coal 
production by districts previous to 1905. Such records 
as are given however, indicate a steady increase in 
output for all the districts after 1901. This was due 
not only to an increase in the local demand caused by 
the growth of settlement, but also by the beginning of 
manufacturing on a small scale, (l). 

A summary of the development of the coal industry 
of the province frxs& the beginning of commercial 
production at Lethbridge in 1885, until the formation 
of the province in 1905, may be obtained by a glance 
at the figures showing the annual production for these 
years* 

Annual Production of Coal in Alberta (2). 

Short tons 


1886 

34,220 

1887 

74,162 

1888 

115,124 

1889 

97,364 

1890 

128,753 

1891 

174,131 


f? rrit ° rial K P ts * Bept* h Pub• Vfas. 1901-1905. 
Canada" r £ §£ & p a f§ hlet " Ahe Prod * of coal in 








146 


(Continued) 


Short tons. 


1892 

1893 

1894 

1895 

1896 * 

1897 

1898 

1899 

1900 

1901 

1902 

1903 

1904 

1905 


178,970 

230,070 

184,940 

169,885 

209.162 

242.163 
315,088 
309,600 

311,450 

340,275 

402,819 

495,893 

661,732 

931,917 


-o recapitulate: The first Is^rge increase in 
output was noticeable in 1891, due to the opening 
up of the Anthracite and Canmore mines: contribution 
from the Edmonton and Knee Hill mines helped to 
produce the increase in 1893; in 1902, the output 
of the Crow T sliest Pass mines caused an appreciable 
increase. In 1905, the output of the Alberta coal 
mines was just becoming large enough to be of 


economic importance. 





IX 


SUMMARY 

The granting of provincial autonomy found 
Alberta in readiness to enter upon a period of rapid 
economic growth and prosperity. A review of develop¬ 
ment prior to 1905 will show how, slowly hut soundly, 
the foundations were being laid for a more rapid 
advance. 

With the purchase of the Northwest by the 
Dominion in 1869, Alberta had ceased to be merely a 
fur preserve for the Hudson’s Bay Company, follow¬ 
ing the purchase, And the preparation for the 
settlement of the country, the fur trade passed to 
the extreme northern part of the Province, and 
bey nd to the north and northwest, into the Mackenzie 
valley. Although the trade declined in relative 
importance, it still remained considerable in amount* 
Some idea of its value, which of course varied from 
year to year, is obtained from the census figures 
for successive periods:- 

Value of fur Production of 
the Northwest Territories: 

1881.. 

1891.. 


1901 


428,177 

208,425 

146,517 










550 

Edmonton has remained the dis+ribu 4 ing centre 
for the fur country to the north. The bulk of the 
fur trade has continued to be in t e hands of the 
Hudson's Bay Company, but numerous smaller companies, 
as well as private individuals have gained a share 
in it. 

.Vith the passing the fur trade to the north, 
agricultural development began with ranching in 
the south. As we have seen, this industry reached 
the height of its importance in the nineties , and 
began to decline about 1900, with the advent of 
settlers and the restriction of the ranges. By 
1905 it was chiefly confined to small scale proprie¬ 
tory ranches* 

Mixed farming, involving stock-raising, dairying 
and crop production had its small beginnings in 
the western foot hill country, in connection with 
ranching, .Vith the extension of the real lway it 
spread to Central Alberta, The tendency for settlers 
to go beyond the line of the rai lways led i foe- 
even into the Peace fiver valley. 

In the semi-arid region of southwestern Alberta, 
irrigation projects were planned and, over small 
areas, put into operation after 1898. The irri¬ 
gated districts ere devoted to forage crop.., pasture 








151 

and sugar "beats. These meant stock-raising and 
dairy farming. Only a small part of the south, 
however, was included in the irrigation schemes• 

A period of great prosperity for the whole of 
southern Alberta began about 1903, following the 
discovery that wheat could be successfully grown 
there by dry farming methods. 

The only industry, besides agriculture, which 
had attained economic importance, was that of coal¬ 
mining. In 1905, the expert of Alberta coal was 
first becoming large enough to have an appreciable 
effect on the American and Canadian markets. 

Immigration, which ha. 3 begun to trickle slowly 
in with the coming of the Canadian Pacific Railway, 
increased steadily during the latter nineties, 
til with the beginning of the twentieth century 

it was nouring in. In 1906, the copulation of 

(i) 

southern Alberta was 80,933 , Central Alberta 

( 2 ) (3 ) 

99,349 , and Northern Alberta , 4,948 , a total 

of 185,413 for the province. 

Following the growth of population and the 

development cf agriculture and coal-mining, came the 

beginning of urban life. The rapidity of the rise 

from te ho 4 o. ! ' , , .A' n k . - ’ ..• ... into towns 

(l)-South of the Red Deer River. 

fH rom H - ed D ser River to Lac La Biche. 

(5j- eace River district. 





















































































TK9 

and cities, was a remarkable feature of the years 
from 1900 to 1905. The growth of villages and towns 
occurred largely in connection with the development 
of agriculture; they were points at which elevators 
or creameries were located, and centres of supply 
for surrounding farm settlements . In 1906 there 
were five cities, eighteen lowland thirty-three 
villages in Alberta, with a total urban population of 
58,033, as compared with one city, Calgary, six 
towns and twenty-one villages In 1901. This shows 
an increase of £05 precept in urban population 
during those four years. It is, however, almost 
impossible to draw any hard and fast lines between 
rur&l and urban population in a country where agri¬ 
culture, in its widest sense, is almost the only 
industry. 

The five cities of the province in 1906 were 
Calgary, Edmonton, Lethbridge, Medicine Hat and Wetaski 
win. 

Calgary was founded as a Mounted Police Post in 
1875. For a number of years it was simply a stoppin- 
place on the Port Benton trail to Mdmonton, one of the 
supply centres for the ranching country. It grew 
rapidly after the coming of the Canadian Pacific 







153 

Hallway, which made it the distributing centre for 
Alberta. in abattoir an? cold storage plant were 
established in 1899 by P. Burns, and the next year 
the Canadian Paci.'ic Hailway round houses and 
workshops were completed. The population of the 
city in 1906 was 11,967* 

Edmonton’s early importance as a fur-trading post 
has already been noted, as well as its growth after 
1870, as the centre of a mixed farming district* 

In 1882 a boom occurred as the result of rumours 
that the transcontinental railway was to pass 
through it* A large number of Edmonton lots were 
sold in Winnipeg at that time* The boom collapsed 
of. course, when the Calgary route was chosen for 
the railway. The discovery of gold in the Ulondyke 
in 1898 led to a revival of activity in Edmonton, 
which became the out-fitting centre for hundreds of 
miners. It was incorporated as a city in 1904 and 
in 1905 was chosen as provisional capital of the 
province. This choice was confirmed in 1906 at the 
first session of the Alberta Legislature* The 
completion of the Canadian northern Hailway from 
Winnipeg in 1905, assured the economic welfare of 
the city by putting it on a transcontinental line. 

In 1906 it had a population of 11, 167, very nearly 




154 


( 1 ) 

the came as Calgary. 

Of 'he three smaller cities, Iled'icine Hat was 
the largest, with a population of 3,020, Starting 
as a supply center for the eastern ranching district 
it owed its growth to the fact that it was oh the 
main line of the Canadian Pacific Bailway, and to 
its supplies of coal and natural gas, Lethhrid , 
coming next with a popul tion of 2,313, was almost 
entirely a mining town, Wetaskiwin, in the heart 
of the mixed farming and grain growing district of 
central Alberta, grew up gradually as an elevator 
point after the building of its first elevator in 
1897, Its population in 1906, when it was incor¬ 
porated as a city was 1,652, 

Of the towns, ail but four were on lines of the 
Canadian Pacific Bailway; Macleod, Claresholm and' 
Okotoks.on the Calgary-Macleod line; Cardston and 
Baymond on., a southern branch; Olds, Innisfail, 

Bed Deer, Lacombe, Ponoka and Strathcona on 
the Calgary and Admonton line. Of the four remaining 
towns, St. Albert, Port Saskatchewan, Vegreville and 
Vermilion, the last three were on the line of the 
recently constructed Canadian northern. All but 
two of the villages were.on the Canadian Pacific 
Bailway. 

'• -ensus 1901. 


k 






155 


Manufacturing, chiefly in connection withagri- 

cultural products, mis just beginning. In 1901 there 

were fifty-six manufacturing establishments in Alberta 

w’th an invested capital of $1,141,049 and an annual 

output wi.th an estimated value of $1,313,320. Among 

these establishments were fourteen making lumber 

products, eleven butter and cheese factories, seven 

flour and grist mills, five brick, tile and pottery 

plants, and a brewery and packing plant. In 1905 

the number had increased to a hundred and twenty estab 

lishments, with a capital of $5,545,821 and an out- 

( 1 ) 

put valued at .^5,116,782. These figures show the 
very small part that manufacturing played in the 
economic life of the province. 

Along those lines of agricultural and industrial 
development for which its resources were fitted, the 
province was on the eve of a period of rapid growth. 

As Air Wilfred Laurier put it in introducing his 
- a ill into the House of Commons for the establishment 
\ of the government of Alberts, "As the nineteenth c 
century has been the century of the United 3ta+ a s, so 
the twentieth would be the century, of Canada. .Ahereas 
;ir the phenomenal rapidity'of development of the 
Western States, every other consideration has been 
(1). Canada Year Book, 1912, 










sacrificed to that of rapid growth 


1^6 

, we have been 
satisfied with slower progress. Our institutions 
in our Northwest, have been developed by gradual 
stages, sc as to ensure at all. times, among these 
new communities, law and order and the restraints and 
safe-guards of the highest civilisation". 












157 


DIB1IOGRAPHY 


Alberta, Government Reports, 

pa] t nt of Agriculture, Annual Reports 1906il921 

Handbooks, 1909,1911,-21 

Department of Public Works, Annual Reports, 1906-1921 

Department of Railways and Telephones 

Annual Rep or ti , 1915 

Allan, Pro''". -T. a. 

Mineral Resources of Alberta First and Second 

Annual Reports* 

Atlases of Canad , 1906, 1915 
Begg, Ale#: 

"History of the North West" (3 vols) 

Black N• F. 

"Saskatchewan and the Old North West" 

Blue, ’John 

MSS. on various'phases 
Alberta, ■ 

(USB. in Provincial Library) 


Bryce: 

"The remarkable. History of the Hudson’s Bay Compai 
Butler, Gapt. U F. : 

"The Great Lone lend" 

Burpee L. J.: 

"Highways cf the Fur Trade", 

. 

j£ 




IC'S 


Canada and Its Brovinoe8, IX, XX 
Canadian Annual Review, 1901-1921. 

Census of Canada, 1881, x891-lcul 
Censu.. of irairie Provinces, 1906 

Cutler, Prof, G. H. : 

MS:"The Climate of Alberta in Relation to Crop 
Production" 

Davidson C. J.: 

"The North West Company" 

Denny Cant, C, A. 

"The Birth of a Province#(MS in Provincial Library 
Bowline; I), B *: 

"The History of the Discovery of Western Coal 
Fields" (See Geological Survey Reports) 

Edmonds A.; 

"A Brief History of Edmonton" 

"Broad Horizons" 

Edmonton Bulletin, riles from 1880. 

Edmonton Journal, Files from 1906 
Ferrir: 

Catalogue of Reports of Geological Survey of 
Canada, Do. 11723; 1920 
F 1 ain;, Sd f or d: 

England and Canada Survey Reports 




. 



























15 ® 


Geological Survey of Canada. 

Memoirs: 24E. -1912 
l5 - 1913 
£8E- 1913 
47 - 1914 
65 - 1915 

Grant G. N.: 

"Ocean to Ocean" 

Griffith 0. M. : 

"The Dominion of Canada" 

Harmon, Daniel: 

"A Journal of Voyage and Travel in the Interior 
of North America" in "The Trail Mahers of Canada 1 ' 
He nry Alexan de ?. : 

"Travels and Adventures in the Indian Territories" 
1809. 

Hind Prof. H. Y.: 

"Narrative of the Canadian Exploring Expedition, 
1860." 

Hopkins, Caste11: 

"Encyclopaedia of Canada" 

Innis, E. A.: 

"History of the Canadian Pacific Railway." 

.^ane , Pajil* 

"The Wanderings of an Artist. 

Kelly, L. V.: 

"The Range Men". 




Laut, Airies: 

"The Conquest of the Great Horth West." 

Mackenzie, Alexander; 

"Voyages from Montreal to the frozen and Pacific 

Oceans" • 

Macoun, Prof. John; 

"Manitoba ana the Great Horth West" 1882 
HacRae A. 0. : 

"History of the Province of Alberta." 

MoDougall, Rev. John. 

"Cn Western Trails in the. Sarly Seventies" 

Milton and Gheadle; 

"The Horth West. Passage by Land" 

Morris J, M. : 

"Treaties of Canada with the Indians" 

My e r s, Gus ta vus *. 

"History of Canadian Wealth" 

Hewton, Rev. William: 

"Twenty Years on the Saskatchewan" 

Horth West Territories, Government Reports. 

Department of Agriculture, Annual Reports, 1898 -1904 

Department of Public Works, Annual Reports, 1898-1904 
Oliver E. H. : 

Archives of Canada Ho. 9 "The Canadian Northwest, its 
Early Develppment and Legislative Records" j 






16(1 


ballister, Captain 'Johns 

"Journal Reports Relative to the Exploration of 
British America, 1857, I860." 

Parliamentary Reports; 

"Report of the Committee of the House of Commons to 
Investigate the State of the British Possessions 
Administered "by the Hudson*s Bay Company, 1857." 
Preble, JB. A. ; 

"Korth American Fauna Ho. 27. A Biological Investi¬ 
gation of the Athabasca-Maekenzie Re-ion.” 

Robinson, H. M. ; 

"The Great Pur Land." 

Sessional Papers. 

Agriculture, Annual Reports, 1880-1921 
Interior, Annual Reports, 1880-1921 
Southesh, Earl of; 


"Saskatchewan and the Rocky Mountains". 
Statistical Year Book of Canada 1898-1921, 

Thwaite, Leo: 

, 

"The Province of Alberta" 

Tyrrell, J. E; 

"David Thompson *s narrative of his Explorations 
Western Canada.1784-1812". 


in 


"Unexploited West, The" Handbook, Department 

Willson, Seckles: 

"The G^eat Company." 


of Interior 

i 



















