


For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


@X IIBM* 
MTOiRSiiiiais 

aiBmawsis 























THESIS 


"THE DIVORCEMENT OE MAGIC EROM RELIGION" 
or more fully 

"THE ELIMINATING OE MAGIC EROM RELIGION 
BY ISRAEL'S PROPHETS, WITH SPECIAL 
ATTENTION TO THE PSYCHOLOGY INVOLVED." 


A DISSERTATION 

Submitted to the B.D. Committee of the 
Senate of the University of Alberta 
In candidacy for the degree of 
Bachelor of Divinity 

by 

Emanuel J. Heuer, B.A., 


University of Alberta 
April 11, 1936. 




Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/divorcementofmagOOeman 


i 


COHEEHTS 

The Definition of Magic. 

The Definition of Religion. 

Magic and Religion in Babylonia. 

Magic and Religion in Egypt. 

Magic and Religion in Israel Before the Eighth Century 

Prophets. 

The Religion of the Eighth Century Prophets. 

Magic and Religion during the Exilic and Post-exilic 

Periods. 


i 




i 

I 

I 




- ■ 





BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Brown, Driver and Briggs 

Caird, Edward 
Coe, G • A. 

Hadfield, J.A. 

Harper, W.R. 

Lang, Andrew 
Moffatt, James 

Oesterl.y and Robinson 
Povah J.W. 

Smith J.M.P. 

Smith, W.R. 

Wright, W.K. 

The Abingdon Commentary 


"Hebrew and English Lexicon 
of the Old Testament." 

"The Evolution of Religion." 
"Psychology of Religion." 
"Psychology and Morals.” 
"International Critical Commen¬ 
tary—Amos." 

"Magic and Religion." 

"The Holy Bible, a New 
Translation." 

"Hebrew Religion." 

"The New Psychology and the 
Hebrew Prophets." 

"The Origin and History of 
Hebrew Law." 

"The Prophets and their Times." 
"Religion of the Semites.” 

"A Student’s Philosophy of 
Religion." 


Encyclopaedia Brittanica. 
Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics 
Hasting’s Dictionary of the Bible. 





. 








. 


: T 


or a 


t ; - ' 





-x.- 


THE EEFIHITIOlS 0 # MAGIC 


Belief in magic is found everywhere, from the dawn 
| of human consciousness to modern enlightement, from 

A 

primitive man to the scholar of today. The magical 
j practices and “beliefs of today may appear to have no 

I 

connection with the magic of the past because of our 
; clever rationalizations and interpretations;but it cannot 
: be denied that many of our beliefs, and often our highest 

I ( 1 ) 

beliefs, both in the secular and religious spheres, 
have their roots in primitive magic. This development of 
magic through human history^together with the fact that 
among the various groups of primitive people magical 
beliefs and practices were so different, places many 

W Ay o f 4 tj 

obstacles in the^attempt to define it. So many conflict¬ 
ing theories have been advocated by men who have 
thoroughly studied the subject that a tyro hesitates to 
define. 


Perhaps it would be wise to begin with several 

definitions as they are found in various articles on 

(2) 

magic. The Encyclopaedia Brittanica gives the follow¬ 
ing: "Magic is the practice of maleficent arts which 


involve the use of magico-religious power with perhaps a 
secondary idea of the use of private arts, which are to 
benefit, hot the community as a whole, but a single 

(1) G.A. Coe, "Psychology of Religion." p.90 

(2) Eleventh Edition, Vol. 17 p.306 









on t 




: ' 


i X, ' - M 


'.t 0 


l 


| 


i'jjnno o 


. . ! 




-id- 


individual." As it stands this definition is somewhat 
; incomplete which incompleteness is however made good in 
the remainder of the article on "Magic." To complete 
this definition it is necessary to explain what is meant 
hy magico-religious power. 

An example will he the hest explanation. This 
magico-religious power is like the belief in Mana found 
; among the Melanesians. To quote again from the same 
article this Mana "is a force, an action, a quality, or 
a state; it is transmissible and contagious, and hence is 
associated with taboo; it may be regarded as material and 
seen in the form of flames or heard; it is the power 

which is inherent in certain spirits,-it may also be a 

force inherent in some inanimate object such as a stone 
which causes yams to grow. But it is a spiritual force 
and does not act mechanically; it is the power of the 
magicians and of the rite, the magic formula itself is 

, , t 1 ) 

mana. " This same "mana" is also the secret of a 
warrior’s bravery as well as an animal’s courage. This 
partially explains why a South African warrior, for 
example, may not eat hedgehog, because the animal is 
thought to be cowardly and the eater would himself become 
a coward; on the other hand the flesh of lions is fit 
meat for brave men because they at the same time transfer 
its courage to themselves. 

(1) Encyclopaedia Brittanica, XI Ed. Article "Magic.” 











3- 


Another fact which should be mentioned in a defin¬ 
ition of magic is that f, magic is sometimes made to depend 

( 1 ) 

upon the activity of demons and spirits,” or as Owen 

( 2 ) 

C. Whitehouse words it, "Magic rests on the basis of a 
belief in evil and destructive spirits, to whose baleful 
influences man is daily exposed, and which can be counter¬ 
acted by certain incantations, whereby the countervailing 

| 

name and power of the higher beneficent gods are invoked.** 

| 

Magicians are often, though not always, believed to have 

an animal helper the assistance of which is obtained by 

(3) 

going into a trance. The use of names is also a factor 

in magical practices. Human beings and. even spirits may 

be coerced by the use of their names, hence names of the 

dead are forbidden lest the bare mention of them disturb 

their ghosts and also for the same reason the names of the 

(4) 

gods are often kept secret. Whitehouse gives the 
following description: "Magic may, in its historic sense, 
be best described as the special and abnormal agency, 
whether through words or acts, whereby certain superhuman 
personal powers are constrained either to create evil (or 

good) or to avert baleful effects." 

- 

The definition of magic to be used in this paper 

(1) Encyclopaedia Brittanica "Magic." 

(2) Owen C. Whitehouse, Has ring 1 2 3 4 s Dictionary of 
the Bible Vol. I p. 591 

(3) Ency. Brit. "Magic." 

(4) Whitehouse, Hasting’s Vol. Ill p. 207a 










t c • C; ( 



i 


; ■ 




4- 


| 

employs in part the terminology of the above two defin¬ 
itions. Magic is the practice of maleficent or beneficient 
arts, using either objects, words, or acts, or all to¬ 
gether in accordance with certain formulae and ritual, 
which are believed to bring under control all-pervasive, 
impersonal, supernatural powers, either to create evil or 
good for an individual, or a group, or to avert baleful 
effects imposed upon individuals or groups by demons or 
spirits at the instigation of another magician, witch, or 
sorcerer. Or, in other words f -magic is fundamentally an 
approach or attitude toward a power other and greater than 
man in which mysterious and impersonal methods of control 
are sought or employed. 

Magic had its beginning with primitive man. He was 
surrounded by many phenomena which he could not explain, 
yet which so directly influenced his life that he had to 
learn to live with them as best he could. In thus seeking 

i 

to live with these phenomena he developed that art which 

we call magic. This practice of magic involves the belief 

in the operation of certain laws. It demands certain 

conditions. Chief among these laws lying at the base of 

( 1 ) 

magical practice is that of sympathy. It is, however, 

improbable that primitive man began with the law of 
sympathy. He probably began with concrete instances and 
arrived little by little at abstract ideas of magical 

(1) Ency. Brit. ’'Magic.” 










»■ 




power. For example, disease <W death, were a mystery to 
early man. He could detect no difference between a man 
stretched out helpless in a hut and the warrior who march¬ 
ed about the village, except that the former was incapable 

of walking. Nor could he see any difference between a 

I 

dead man and a living man except that the former was 

i 

completely quiet and still. Such things, he argued, must 
be caused by demons and spirits and from this basic 
belief he developed such a complicated system of magic as 
almost to defy definition. 

This law of sympathy takes one of three forms, 
either contiguity, homoeopathy, or contrariety or 
antipathy. 

The law of sympathetic contiguity is based upon the 

belief that a part of He body such as hair or finger-nail 

parings, or merely something which has been in contact 

with the body such as clothing or an arrow, continues to be 

as one with the body. Thus by burning hair or finger-nail 
j p&ri-nys (l) 

: N or clothing the body of the person t o whom these be¬ 
longed or were in contact with, is injured. There is a 
practice among the Melanesians, when an arrow is found, 
of placing it either among cool leaves or among hot ashes 
depending upon whether it had wounded a friend or a foe 
thereby causing the wound either to soothe and heal or to 
become inflamed. Other primitive peoples drive nails 


(1) See Whitehouse, Hasting’s Yol. IV p. 602b 







-0- 


into a footprint thinking thereby to injure the foot which 
had made the print* 

The practice of homeopathy is based on the sympathetic 
law that like produces like. A good example of this is 
: the burning of the wax likness or image of a certain 
■person in order to bring evil upon that person. Another 
jform of this law is the subtracting of certain body fluids 
from the sick believing thereby to remove disease. 

In certain respects the third form of the law of 
sympathy, namely contrariety or antipathy is at work in 

the above two forms. This third form is based on the 

x 

assumption that remedy produces the contrary when it cures 

A 

the like. Also, like by producing like expels its 
contrary. 

The above mentioned laws consist chiefly in acts but 
there is always a certain amount of ritual connected with 
them. As already indicated names play a very important 
part in magic, their efficiency being dependent upon the 
law of sympathy. Deities are thereby invoked to cast or 
to remove spells. The following is an example from 
Babylonian exorcism: 

"But I by the command of Marduk lord of charms, 

By Marduk the master of bewitchment. 

Both the male and female sorcerer. 

As with ropes I will entwine. 

As in a bird’s snare I will catch. 














* 


•. }* 








' 









As in a net I will overpower, 

As in a noose I will throttle, 

As a fabric I will tear#” 

The magician is not an impostor* Psychology teaches 
us that even among modern people there is a marked tend¬ 
ency to forget the unpleasant. We easily forget those 
instances when a ’’pet” theory of ours fails, but we always 
remember the occasions when it succeeds and from the 
' latter occasions we draw our conclusions. The same would 

1 

be true of the savage, for human nature, in this sense, 

( has changed very little, if at all. He would still belieoe 

| in the law of sympathy in spite of its failures, for these 

failures would be simply disregarded or explained away. 

(1) 

Andrew Lang says, "The Australians, when their magic 
fails, merely say some other black fellow is working 
stronger counter magic.* 1 2 Thus the magician could always 
e:s£ape by unconscious rationalization. It would be 
unjust to accuse him of pure invention of these explan¬ 
ations. On the other hand, he would take note of every 
instance in which his magic was successful. These 
instances would in time give him the proper ritual to be 
followed in certain cases. He would continue his practice 
with a wholehearted belief in the ritual and in himself as 

a magician. 

( 2 ) 

Freud explains the psychology of magic as follows: 

(1) Andrew Lang, "Magic and Religion" p.56 

(2) Freud, "Totem and Taboo," English. 








- 8 - 


"Since similarity and contiguity are the two essential 

i 

principles of the processes of association of ideas, it 
must he concluded that the dominance of association of 
ideas really explains all the madness of the rules of 
magic* We can see how true Tylor’s quoted characteristic 
of magics ’mistaking an ideal connection for a real one , 1 
proves to he. The same maty he said of Frazer’s idea, who 
expressed it ir^lmost the same terms: ’men mistook the 
order of their ideas for the order of nature, and hence 
imagined that the control which they have, or seem to have, 
over their thoughts, permitted them to have a corresponding 
control over things.’ But on closer consideration we must 
sustain the objection that the association theory of magic 
merely explains the paths that magic travels, and not its 
essential nature, that is, it does not explain the 
misunderstanding which bids it put psychological laws in 
place of natural ones. We are apparently in need here of 
a dynamic factor.” This dynamic factor Preud finds in 
primitive man’s wishes. ''The motives which impel one to 
exercise magic are ea ily recognized; they are the wishes 
of men. We need only assume that primitive mai hac great 
confidence in the power of his wishes. At the bottom 
everything which he accomplished by magic means must have 
been done solely because he wanted it. Thus in the 
beginning only his wish is accentuated." Again-"The 


principle which controls magis is 


’Omnipotence 















- 9 - 


( 1 ) 

of thought. ,w 

Because magic may be both beneficent and maleficent 

it falls naturally into two parts "We have to do with the 

art with which the Babylonian systems make us familiar, 

whereby the superior deities or good demons are influenced 

;to exercise their good offices to avert evil, i.e. whereby 

counterspells or charms are worked. This art may be 

called ’sacred magic. 1 On the other hand, we have to do 

with the Black art called sorcery whereby evils are 

wrought on the unfortunate human victim through the power 

of the evil eye, etc., by the male sorcerer, or more 

frequently through the female witch who is able to summon 

( 2 ) 

supernatural powers of darkness to his or her aid.” 

Demonology is connected with magic in two ways. 

First, as stated above, magic is sometimes made to depend 
on the activity of demons and spirits and second, the 
magician usually has a spirit helper (generally an 
animal); but magical powers are not limited to those who 
are so aided. 

"Magic is an attempt to influence the course of 

events, divination to foresee them; but divination is 

. (3) 

frequently regarded as magical." The magical content 

of divination lies in its frequent attempt to force the 
powers that be to reveal coming events and at times to 

(1) Above quotation was taken from J.W. Povah, 
"The Hew Psych, and the Hebrew Prophets." 

, p. 27 (footnote.) 

(2) whitehouse, Hasting’s Vol. Ill p. 207a 

(3) Ency. Brit. "Magic." 











- 10 - 


force them to bring certain events to pass* In the 
Old Testament Balak believed Balaam could thus force 
events* 

"Soothsaying, though separate from magic is neverthe- 

:less closely associated with it. It may be defined as 

( 1 ) 

involving an abnormal mode of obtaining knowledge." 

i 


! 


i 

1 


(1) Whitehouse, Hasting’s Vol. IV p. 598a. 
















. 

' : .. ■ . - 
: ; 





























-.LI¬ 


THE DEFINITION OF RELIGION 

A definition of religion is even more difficult than 
a definition of magic. Firsts because we must seek to 
describe something which lies primarily within man by 
making use of such outward manifestations as enter our 
observation. Again, it is almost impossible to approach 
such a definition with a purely disinterested attitude. 

The temptation is to make the definition suit one’s 
personal religion in such a manner that the latter may in 
no way be discredited or lowered. The tendency is to give 
one’s own valuation rather than a definition. However, 
one must earnestly seek that historic imagination which 
will enable him to forget for the moment the high plane 
which religion today has reached and to live in the period 
being studied. 

There are many definitions of religion and the 
method to arrive at a definition to be used in this paper 
will be similar to that used in arriving at a definition 
t>f magic. 

Coe in his Psychology of Religion^ ^takes nbjection 

to any definition involving the term "belief” but this 

objection has little point for us because we are dealing 

with religions which involve belief. Also, strictly 

( 2 ) 

primitive religion lies outside the scope of this 

(1) Coe, "Psych. Rel." p.59f 

(2) e.g. Fetishism, totemism, etc. 














' ! '- f ■••• ■ 





paper. Coe defines religion in terms of social values 


and their conservation. He quotes Ames. "Religion is the 

u) 

Consciousness of the highest social values," and 

I ■' 

Wright."Religion is the endeavor to secure conservation 

( 2 ) 

of socially recognized values." The latter definition 

is much more true of Israel’s priests than it is of its 

prophets. The prophets had a forward-look not recognized 

by the above definition. Coe’s definition may be quoted 

;if only for the sake that it drives home the fact that 

religion is something progressive rather than static as 

indicated by the thought of conservation of values. He 
(3) 

says,, "We must think of religion as an immanent movement 

within our values, a movement which does not terminate 

in any simple set of thought contents, or in any set of 

particular values." Although this definition may be 

somewhat advanced beyond the period being dealt with it 

makes clear that any definition of religion must allow for 

(4) 

progress. As Coe says elsewhere^ "Religion asks, ’What 
would satisfy the reciprocal good-will of men toward one 
another?’ and as a result it finds itself in the 
profoundest discontent with things as they are." This is 
very true of Israel’s eighth century prophets. It is, 

. || 

however, not a priestly idea. 

( 5 ) 

Wright’s definition is similar to Coe’s. "Religion 

I I) Coe, "Psych. Rel." p.7! 

2) ibid. p. 62 

3) ibid. p. 72 

4; ibid. p. 240 

5) W.K. Wright, "A Student’s Phil, of Rel." p.47 
























0 




■ ) 


- 




V,.. n. ' ! 







) 







> : 


i. .. _ 



■ 







, ! 





-lo- 


is the endeavor to secure the conservation of socially 
recognized values through specific actions that are 
believed to evoke sore agency different from the ordinary 
ego of the individual* or from other merely human beings, 
and that imply a feeling of dependence upon this agency." 
Giving some of the terms in this definition a broad 
jmeaning it is quite applicable to both early and late 
religion. Thus "conservation” includes quantitative 
increase of material goods and also enhancement or 
intensification of the values, such as bravery, loyalty, 


etc. Under "agency" he includes the idea of ''manat 

( 1 ) 


euoa says 


'Religion is that part of human 


experience in which man feels himself in relation with 


powers of psychic nature, usually personal powers 

... f ’ ■ \ *" * 

V / 

and makes use of them’,’ I’ra.zer- defines religion as 


"a propitiation or conciliation of powers ( conscious or 
personal agents) superior to man which are believed to 
direct and control the course of nature and of human life. 1 ’ 

The propitiation however, must be regarded as personal 
and not as purely ritualistic. By saying the propitiation 
must be personal is meant that it must be similar in 
nature to the methods employed in the relationships 




(1) 

Coe 

2 

i.e 

( 3 ; 

J.G 


i.e. spiritual. 

3) J.G. Erazer, "The Golden Bough" 2nd edition 
, 63 (Quoted from Ency. Brit.) 
















between men. That is f the worshipper must seek the deity*s 
favor by pleasing him, by being obedient to his commands 

: 

and by giving him his due honor just as a loyal subject 
seeks the favor of his sovereign* Any ritual used in 
this propitiation must be designed to think of the 
relationship with the deity as personal* As soon as it 
fails to do so it immediately drops into the sphere of 
magic* One may add, however, that this does not mean 

| 

that the deity must be conceived of as moral* He may be 

1 

regarded as unmoral, even as immoral and yet be 
approachable by personal propitiation. 

I 

In conversation with Dr* A*S. Tuttle religion was 
defined somewhat as follows: "Religion is the recognition 

UlniL. 1 7 


of some power outside, greater, and beyond man and the 
attempt to establish a friendly and helpful relationship 
with that power with a view to harmonize life and to 
secure the strength which enables man to do what he cannot 
do by himself and to find in that relationship the bond 
of unity and harmonious fellov/ship among men.” In 
primitive times it was religion conceived of as a blood 
relationship to the deity which held the tribes together. 

From the above definitions and information the 
following is put forth as the definition of religion to be 
used in this paper* Religion involves the recognition of 
a superhuman power (or powers), originally conceived of as 
impersonal, but within the whole period covered by this 









1 

. 

' 


- 

. 

'I o; o v.J .. C■ 

\ ' r 

<t . - 

. .;; l 

: . .. , ■ . . , "■ ' .. ‘ ' ‘z 

, 

. , • . ■ .. . 

i: u:. ;! ;w ■ i. • • 

(. ' v ■ . ;• 

. 

.. .; l . :! •'j ' . ’ . \i ... , •: . : v ■;.■ 1 

. 

1 . . . i .;. , ;• " '.. ■; > 

. 

'./'Hf ' 

. • j - .• i . 1. / Z :l: X .. i 

:• . f.:-v • .' I ' ..ir v 

■ - ■ ' ■ 






. 








- 15 - 


paper regarded as personal, and the attempt to establish 
an ever more friendly relationship with this power 
chiefly by means of obedience and propitiation that it 
may be induced to do for man what he cannot do for himself^ 
and in the view of the prophets, that he may progressively 
rise to high social values. 

A few comments may be necessary. The phrase 
"originally conceived of as impersonal" is intended to 
convey the idea that in later times this power was regarded 
as personal. The thought of progress is contained in the 
words "an ever more friendly relationship." Man cannot 
do everything for himself and this gives him a feeling 
of dependence upon something beyond himself. In natural 
religions his chief concern is for concrete, material, 
practical things such as food, water, protection from 

I 

storms, victory in war, posterity, counsel as to what to 
do in important crisis in human affairs. In the ethical 
religion advocated by the eighth century prophets the 

emphasis is on justice, goodness, honesty, fairness and 

. 

other similar virtues. Only when religion becomes an 
individual matter, as with Jeremiah, does man concern 
himself with purity of heart, forgiveness oi sins, and 

(X) 

other such virtues of an inner spiritual nature. Also, 
religious practices are of a social nature, binding man 

(l) Jright, "Student’s Phil, of Rel." 
pp. 41 - 42. 














. 








-16 


ever closer together and Ccm st&-n t (y I&rgr**7>g. their 
j scope to embrace,not only the tribe or the nation^but all 
, mankind. Herein lies one of the distinctions between 
! magic and religion. The former emphasizes the individ¬ 
ualistic and is at times anti-social while the latter 
is generally social and seeks the welfare of the group. 

A shorter definition of religion may be added. 
Religion is a personal approach or attitude toward a 
I power other and greater than ourselves with a view to 
1 establish helpful and harmonious relationship with that 


power 







- 17 - 


the differ::: itiatiqii of magic from religion 

That magic and religion are very closely related 
cannot Toe denied. Many of the practices found in magic 
are found also in religion. In defining and describing 
either magic or religion one must constantly use terms 
and phrases applicable to both• liras Owen C. Tlliiteliouse 
says, "Magic is a tern used by us to connote a certain 
range of acts standing in very close relation to ancient 

religion, yet hardly forming a normal or essential part 

( 1 ) ( 2 ) 

of lt 9 n The Encyclopaedia Brittanica places a part 

of the cause of this difficulty to distinguish magic 

from religion in the tendency of primitive psychology to 

anthropomorphize and personify animals and objects. 

Fetishism is recognized as a primitive form of 

religion, but it is notable how well the characteristics 

of magic fit into a description of it, "For the essential 

point of what is called fetishism,if we use that name for 

any general phenomenon of religion, is just this, that 

the worshipper lias no thought of really devoting 

himself to ends which are represented as belonging to his 

god, but desires only, by propitiation, if propitiation 

is necessary, by magic if magic will avail either, in 

other words, by begging and bribing or by fraud and force 

— to use the god for his own purposes. In this sense 

(1) Hasting's Vol. Ill p. 206b 

(2) Ar t i cle 11 : agio". 









the spirit of fetishism is the dark shadow which 
accompanies religion in every stage, from the savage who 
makes presents to the medicine man of his tribe up to 
the Christian, who prays, not that God’s will may be done 

(i) 

ibut that God may be got to do his will.* 1 

Thus it is clear that magic and religion have much 
in common. The idea of "mana” is found in both religion 
land magic. Prayer, like magic, often seeks to control 
the deity, rather than persuade, to force him to protect 
the worshipper from all sorts of evil. Prayers spoken 
with one’s eyes open or in a posture other than one of 
those accepted by the worshippers or omitting the name 

[ 

of Jesus are regarded as ineffectual. This idea is 
!entirely in accord with the magical belief that the 
:minute correctness of the appeal or ritual counts and not 
1 the motive for the appeal. Baptism even today is believed 
by many to have magical content (but it is for the most 
part an unconscious belief.) Multitudes wear amulets 
upon a cord around the neck to invoke a particular saint, 
to protect the wearer from harm. However, it should be 
noted that official religion condemns magic and its 

( 2 ) 

practices. "You shall not allow any sorceress to live.” 
Then too traffic with the gods of conquered people is by 
the conquerors condemned as diabolical magic. 

There must, however, be differences between magic 

(1) Edward Gaird,'’Evolution of Rel.” Vol. 

1 p. 225 

(2) Ex. 22:18 



















■ 

. 






t :\ 








. .. 4.0. t 


. 

. 

' * 






. 

. 








j 


' 








• -J.;j j 










< . ‘ 



• 











Q 

• 

- 

' j ■ 

: 

• 


V 

. 


;.r 

. 


. . 



.. .> .; .: ' ij 


' 


i - ■ 





• 







< l . 

t 




















- 19 - 


(1) 

and religion. Coe says, "As to the relation of magic 

(S) 

to religion, three positions have been held. Frazer 
at one time was of the opinion (subsequently modified) 

that religion arose because magic, which preceeded it, did 

(3) 

not work. Leuba contends at great length that magic 

and religion are separate in origin and in inner principle; 

the mark of magic being control of hidden powers; that of 

(^) 

religion persuasion of psychic beings. King holds that, 
though religion and magic have a common root, magic is or 
tends to be, an individual, non-social, and often anti¬ 


social use of the same sort of powers that religion 


employs." 

Thus it is clear, there are genuine and profound 

differences between magic and religion, first: "Religion 

organizes life's values and seeks them socially; magic 

fixes upon any particular value and seeks it individually, 

or at least independently of the larger social order. 

Because it lacks the social quality of religion, magic 

magnifies wonders, and glories in supposed events and 

(5) 

connections that lack moral significance." Coe is over¬ 


emphasizing the distinction on social grounds. The line 
of distinction cannot be drawn hard and fast on this basis. 


Even religion at times is anti-social, and magic is often 

i l) Coe, "Psjtch. Rel." p. 89 
2 ) Frazer, "Golden Bough." 

3J "A Psych. Study of Rel." Part II 
4) Irving King "Development of Rel." Ch. VII 
(5) Coe, "Psych. Rel." p. 91 












- 20 - 


used for the advantage of a group. 

The second distinction is this, many of the magical 


practices are entirely inexplicable, while religious 
are exph'tAkie 

practices^generally ^ . 


The believer in magic does 
not know and could not possibly explain why he changes 
his course on seeing a black cat in front of him or why 
he refuses to walk under a ladder. He may have 
rationalizations but no knowledge regarding the origin of 
and the reason for these practices. On the other hand 
the follower of religion has an explanation. His 
practices have a purpose. He partakes of the Lord's 
Supper to be drav/n nearer to God, to commune with him. 

He may partake of it simply because God commanded him 
to do so (but in doing so he communes with God in a 
personal way) which fact places it immediately in the 
realm of religion. There are, however, those who feel 

that something unexplainable is done for them when they 
eat the consecrated bread and drink the wine. Thus their 
action is magical. They cannot say what is done for them 
nor how it is done. This indicates that in order to be 

certain in our distinctions we must know the mind of the 

. 

worshipper as well as the ritual he practises. 


Then third, as Coe also indicates, religion seeks 
the assistance of the superhuman power or deity, as the 
case may be, by pleasing the power or deity as one 
person seeks to please another. Hoah's sacrifice was a 











e n 


V.' -j ' c 




t 


personal propitiation which greatly pleased the deity. 

a) 

He "smelled the soothing fragrance" and immediately 
; promised never again to permit another deluge. Magic, 
on the other hand, seeks to force, to coerce, to control 
the existing powers to act according to the will of the 
| magician. This is v/ell illustrated in the story of Balak 
and Balaam. The former believed in magic, thinking that 
all that was necessary was to curse the people 

! whom he wished to harm. The latter believed in religion. 

! He insisted on first determining the will of the deity 
(there is, however, magic in his method of doing this) 

because he did not believe it possible to successfully 

■ 

apply force. This comparison of force with propitiation 
affords a very notable and practical distinction between 
magic and religion. Here again the difficulty is to kr>6w 
the thought of the performer. It is often impossible 
to say whether or not the intention is to force the 
: power or deity, when the worshippers mind is not 
indicated. 

The above distinction is really that of the 
impersonal and personal approach. Magic approaches the 
deity in an entirely impersonal way. The ritual must be 
correct. The slightest slip may cause failure or even 
the counter effect. The motive of the person does not 
count. Nor does he employ any of the methods in his 
(1) Gen. 8:21. 










« 



'lip: l 





■ £ t C *1 


, : n A 







approach that he employs in normal life with his fellows. 
But religion does use these approaches from normal life 
even in its ritual and eventually it was thereby enabled 
in its noblest conceptions to dispense with ritual entirely 
The distinction between divination and the prophetic 


revelation of the future is also easi.y drawn. The ideas 


of force and*entreaty must be applied. Divination is 
magical in that it seeks to force the powers that be to 
reveal the future by using sacred lots, oil on water, 
entrails of animals, flight of birds, and other such 


methods. The prophets entreated the deity to reveal to 


them directly by inspiration or vision. Often they simply 
waited until the revelation caw^spontaneously. There are 
jthus a number of marked distinctions between magic and 


the 


religion. The most valuable of these is the impersonal or^ 

the 

personal approach employed by the magician or^worshipper. 


There is much debate and difference of opinion among 
scholars as to which of these, magic or religion, came 
first in the history of mankind. "Dor our traditional 
Western thought, magic and religion are always more or 
less consciously contrasted with one another, whence 
students have often unwarrantably assumed that the two 
are radically heterogeneous, and that they represent 
i successive strata in the mental development of mankind. 
3ome investigators argue that magic is the earlier and 





















23 - 


ruder product (e.g. Frazer), while others (e.g. Srman) hold 
iit to "be a debased corruption of the nobler phenomenon of 


,U) 


religion. It, however, matters little here whether 

magic grew out of religion or religion out of magic be¬ 
cause, as the last few pages have indicated, they were so 
Iclosely associated as to be inseparable. This will be 
;further demonstrated in an examination of Babyloniar? and 


Egyptian religion. The same will be seen to be true of 


the religion of Israel. The prophets of the eighth 
century B.G., and later, purged their religion of magic to 
a. large extent. How far they went in this purging is one 
| of the problems this paper must answer. 


i 




(X) Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, 
Vol. VIII, p. 262b. 








■■ • 

. 





• : • • ' . . - 




' . ; : 



' 




. . 






■ 








- 


- - 



<■ •- q 

:> i:. ' , f . 










i 

' ■ ■ ‘i 






V" 


■ 




' f 

. ; ~ if 

* 


. . : f 




‘3 v 


r . . n .. 

■:! : o 

‘ ' t . .L ■ "... , ' 

. 

' 



1 l ■ 






. 

- -• 











MAGIC AM) RELIGION IN BABYLONIA 

If one were to read in Hasting’s Dictionary of the 
Bible under the article entitled, "Religion of Babylonia*’ 
subtitle "Incantation rituals" with one’s hand placed 
over the title it would be impossible to say whether one 
is reading an account of religion or of magic so closely 
are the two interwoven. The next few pages consist 
largely of a summary, together with quotations, of the 
above mentioned article. 

Appeal was made to the gods against the demons through 
the medium of priests acting as exorcizers. The power of 
I the priests lay in the use of the proper words which 
would serve to check the action of the demons, accompanied 
by certain symbolical rites, such as ablution and 
purification. Thus prayer in Babylonia consisted of the 
uttering of certain appeals to the gods in which the 
essential thing was the use of the correct words rather 
than the motive which prompted the appeal. Thus there 
developed an elaborate ritual of the correct formula to be 
used in a certain case (and thus force the deities) to 
relieve a person from evil spirits. These formulae were 
grouped to form a temple ritual, and the priests, after 
observing which formula was most effective in given cases, 
would note the success of that formula and use it again 
in similar cases. Many of these series of formulae have 
been found during excavations. 























4 


/ 






25 - 


One series consisting of 16 tablets, is known as the 
"Evil Demons*" Another consisting of 9 tablets was called 
"Head-sickness," because a goodly portion of it was 
devoted to formulae for ridding individuals of various 
diseases that had their seat in the head and were due to 
some demon that had taken up its abode in the human body* 

d) 

Again, two series bear the names "Maklu" and "Shurpu" 

|respectively, both terms having the sense of "burning" 

and owe their designation to the prominence assigned in 

, 

them to the burning of effigies of the demons or of the 
witches who contro3Ied the demons, as a means of getting 
rid of their baneful influence* Ho fewer than ten 
different kinds of material are prescribed for the making 

i 

of the images--wax, earth, bronze, honey, clay, pitch, 
sesame flour, pitch with clay, and two varieties of wood* 
(One of them cedar, the other has not yet been identified.) 
By the "law of sympathy" any affliction brought upon the 

! 

image would also come upon the intended victim. Thus 

images are not always burned* They may be buried, or 

submerged in water, or placed in paths and on bridges to 

be trampled on, or even given a dose of poison. But all 

these actions are intended to force similar evils to come 

upon the intended victim* If the image can be rescued 

from its fate by someone else, e.g. finding a buried or 

submerged image, the evil can be averted and made of no 

(l) Erom the same root as "saraph", "seraphim h the 

Old Testament. See Isaiah Chap* 6 















effect* 

As among the gods, so too among the demons, functions 
were divided which occasioned the use of the correct 
ritual to counteract the function of a particular demon. 
These rituals thus form a distinct division of Babylonian 
religious literature and we are probably justified in 
assuming that they represent the oldest division. The 
conservative instinct led to the retention of the old 
primitive religious utterances in these rituals while the 
impressive hymns and the often strikingly beautiful 
prayers inserted amidst a jumble of incantation formulas, 
represent the attempt to give to the old beliefs a more 
spiritual interpretation. 


The following is a good example. The first part merits 
the designation of a hymn, embodying imagery and conceptions 
that appear to transcend the intellectual horizon of 
belief in the efficacy of sacred formulae. 


”0 Nusku, great god, chief of the great gods, 

(l) 

Guardian of the offerings of all the Igigi 


Pounder of cities, restorer of sanctuaries; 


Brilliant day, whose command is supreme; 

( 2 ) 

Messenger of Anu, obedient to the decrees of Bel; 


Mighty in battle, whose attack is powerful. 
Husku, glowing, overthrower of enemies. 


(1) A designation for the throng of heavenly 
deities or spirits. 

(2) The god of heaven. 
















27 - 


( 1 ) 


Without thee no sacrificial feast is held in 

E-kur: 

Without the Shamash the judge does not execute 

any judgement . n 

"Up to this point we appear to have before us a 
hymn composed in honour of Husku that might appropriately 

! 

have been sung in connection with a sacrificial ritual in 
;a temple erected in honour of the god in question. The 
following lines, however, reveal the real purpose of the 
invocation. The victims, about to burn the images of the 
evil powers that have brought about his misfortune, is 
represented as saying: 


. ( 2 ) ( 2 ) 
"I, thy servant (so and so) son of (so and so) 

( 2 ) 

Whose god is (so and so) whose goddess is (so 

( 2 ) 

and so) 


I turn to thee, I seek thee, I raise my hands, I 

prostrate myself before thee 

j 

Burn my sorcerer and my witch; 

:: 

May the life of my sorcerer and my witch be taken 

n 

hold of and destroyed! 

Let me live that I may praise thee, and in 

humility extol thee.” 

Or similarly: 


.3} 


"On this day, arise to my judgement: 


li Quoting from Hasting’s. 

2) Appropriate names to be inserted. 


3) Address is to the fire-god. 



... • :: 7,7 1 . ’ SJO il? C . 





. 



' ... m‘, r.;-ioo oi 7; : ,7 


■. . 

. . . .. . ofuiiU 7 . .-7 .. ■; 

. ; 


77 7 . :"i . .7/ V . •, .7 

.7 


1 . ,, \ . t .. 

> » 

. ... . J • ■ - O'; . .7 7k . ■. ' . V O 

* . V.7 - .7 77 

. ' \ , 


; u. 






Suppress the mischief, overpower the evil. 

As these images tremble, dissolve and melt away, 
So may the sorcerer and sorceress tremble, 

dissolve and melt away* rt 

Correlative to the belief in the power of the priest 
to exorcise the evil demons, we find among the Babylonians 
the belief in the power of certain individuals over the 
demons, with a view to bringing other individuals under 
their influence# This is more commonly ascribed to women 
than to men# It is often very difficult to distinguish 
between a demon and a witch. The strange and weird 
impression made by individuals who are of deformed stature, 
like dwarfs, or who have unusual features, unusually large 
or unusually small eyes, or otherwise presenting a 
grotesque appearance would prompt the conclusion that such 
persons possessed unusual powers and were capable of 
working mischief. Because evil was associated with demons, 
it was a logical conclusion that these* strange individuals 
were in league with the demons, or were actually evil 
spirits that had assumed human shape. Diseases were 
generally attributed to demons working at the instigation 
of a witch or sorcerer or to demons working independently. 
The incantation rituals clearly betray this composite 
character aiming its exorcizing rites sometimes at v/itches 
and sorceress and sometimes at demons directly. 

These passages, with their appeal to the great gods of 

















t ' 

: • . 

' 


■■■'v . ;ni i ' v ^5 ■ 'jvl - l r ,-a x ' 

. 


' /: i 


■no-' / ; . i fv. v I SC 







I , . V. sit! 

• I 






- 29 - 


Baby Ion in a purely magical rite, together with their 
;occasional noble religious expressions, clearly indicate 
jhow inseparable are magic and religion among the 
|Babylonians* 




I 

j 


i 


i 








MAGIC AND RELIGION IN EGYPT 


Among the Egyptians there existed the practice which 


;they called "hike" (from the Coptic ) whereby they 

. 

jsought to force the gods and the spirits of the dead to 
grant them their wish, when the more common methods such 
as requests, prayers, commands, promises, or threats failed 

The best translation of "hike" into English is by the word 

I 

! "magic" and its practice or use is best understood by 
i"magic power*" The use of this magic "postulated special 
powers in its user and always made a greater or lesser 
demand upon faith*----So far as Egypt is concerned, there 


jcannot be the slightest doubt that 'hike' was part and 


parcel of the same ‘Weltanschauung* as created religion 

(i) 

which it deeply interpenetrated*" 


"Prom the Egyptian point of view we may say that there 
was no such thing as ’religion*, and there was only ‘hike 9 5 
the nearest English equivalent of which is ’magical power.’ 
The universe being populated by three homogeneous groups of 

beings--the gods, the dead, and living human persons- 

their actions, whether within a single group or as between 
one. group and another, were either ordinary or uncanny 


("hike"). But the gods and the dead were somewhat uncanny 
themselves, so that all dealings with them or performed by 
them were more or less *hike‘. It was only when men 


1) Ency. Rel. and Eth. VIII, 


p. 262b 
























treated them ordinarily, and as man to man, that all 

this"quality of 'hike 1 was reduced to a minimum, as in the 

case of spontaneous prayer and the letters to the dead- 

in fact, just in those rare instances where the solemn 

a) 

phraseology of ritual was avoided . n This personal, 
man to man relationship, is characteristic of religion, 
the use of the ritualistic belongs chiefly to ’’hike 11 or 
magic* 

In these the chief connection between magic and rel¬ 
igion is seen in the use of the names of certain gods, 
especially that of Horus, in the oral rites used. The 
description of Egyptian gods and their functions is very 
difficult not only because of the many gods in their 

religious system but also because of the distinctions in 

| 

the individual forms and functions of one god which are 

found in various localities. Thus the god Horus, according 

( 2 ) 

to A. Wiedemann, has no less than nine independent 
jindividual forms. 

A few quotations from oral rite using the name of the 

I 

god Horus may be givens "Thou flyest before the sorcerer, 
before the servant of Horus, as soon as he mentions the 

name of Horus, or the name of Seth the Lord of heaven. He 

| 

raiseth his scimitar, and smiteth thy forearm and thy 
throat. Thou fallest upon the ground on which thy loin¬ 
cloth is spread, and there thou gropest in quest of thy 

(X) Ency. Rel. and Bth. VIII, p. 263a 
(2) Hasting's Ext. Vol. p. 184t> 








■ . . « •• 



.. , 

• - ■ v* • 

• > ■■■ 

., ‘ 


J: i i.f 


. 


.. ." 0 


.; J 

1 



ij ..... .. - . • ••• -• ■ ., 

. • . . 

. 

* 

■ 

. 

' , . J . . . .. , r . •' . 

... f ' ■ 

... . j • .. . . . • ; . ; 

■ 

. 

t .... . . ..... i. C- . . -. - ■ • 

...» . ' . . . .i 



i , .. ... i . . . • - 





. ... •: v • 


l 




32- 




i 






! 

I 

| 


| 

I 

i 

I 




heart# So dost thou die, and the report goes forth from 

the house of Re r that Horus has conquered the disease#” 

Sometimes a magician frustrates the aims of the 

enemy by a simple veto# Other times he uses commands 

warnings and persuasive means# In the last resort he 

employs curses which are often severe and daring* On 

such occasions the magician is apt to disclaim his 

responsibility and place it on another god. However he 

generally summons one or more of the gods to his aid. 

’’Hail to thee, Horus, thou art in the town of Hundreds, 

thou sharp-horned one, who shootest at the mark*-I come 

to thee, I praise thy beauty; destroy thou the evil that 

(i) 

is in my limbs . n 

As a rule the magician either identifies himself with 
the god or considers himself a servant of the god. 

The manual rites of the Egyptians fall into two 
classes, the active elements and the negative or 
precautionary elements. The former, as in the case of the 
Babylonians, involves the use of images, made of wax, clayj 
or other materials, whereby the magician seeks by 
sympathetic means to bring harm or good to an individual. 
Tying and untying knots is also an Egyptian form of magic, 
the common number of knots being 4,7 and 12# 

The negative elements consist of the wearing of 
amulets, images, beads, or knots to ward off evil and to 
(l) Ency. Rel. and Eth. VIII p. 265a. 


i 
















- 33 - 


| protect the wearer. "If the poison pass these seven 

i 

1 knots, which Horus has made on his body, I will not 

(i) 

allow the sun to shine." 

The above descriptions of Babylonian and Egyptian 
religion are only mere glimpses. Hundreds of pages would 
be required to deal adequately with them. Yet this brief 
j summary makes it possible to examine the earlier writings 
j of Israel and to determine whether there too magic and 
religion are interwoven. In some ca.ses we may find the 
idea of magic hidden underneath the account of the event, 
i the account being written during a time when that 
! particular form of magic had been outgrown or rationalized 


(l) Ency. Rel. and Eth. VIII, p. 266b 
























34 - 


MAGIC AND RELIGION IN ISRAEL BEFORE THE EIGHTH 
CENTURY PROPHETS 


In passing over to a consideration of the part which 
magic played in the reiigiun of Israel the surprising fact 
is, not that there is so much of magic, but so little, to 
be found. The neighboring peoples employed much more magic 
in their religion than did the Israelites. Still there is if 
a significant amount of it to be found in Israel. The 
Old Testament contains many examples of pure, simple magic. 


The most important are perhaps those which are connected 

a) 


I with the prophets Elijah and Elisha. J.M.P. Smith may 

ibe correct in maintaining that, because these two prophets 

I 

j "are both credited with deeds that are strangely alike' 1 
; and because "the narratives are full of legendary and folk¬ 
lore elements" therefore grave doubt as to their historicity 
!arises. Even so, they reflect the beliefs of the people 
I of the time, having arisen very shortly after the death of 
I these prophets. For this reason they may well be used 
here. 




Both Elijah and Elisha are credited with the magical 


feat of making a widow’s supply of oil go much farther 

( 2 ) 

than it normally would. In Elijah's case he is 


authenticated as a man of God in the eyes of the widow by 


(1) J.M.P. Smith, "The Prophets and their Times" 
pp. 36, 37. 

(2) I Kings, 17:1-16 and II Kings 4:1-7. 















I 


- 35 - 


causing her jar of meal and flask of oil never to give out 

i 

iby simply commanding her to give him the last cake baked 
itherefrom which cake she had intended for her son and 
herself before they died When she saw his power she add- 
jressed him as a man of God. Elisha’s performance is 
(similar. The poor widow is simply ordered to shut herself 

*in with her sons and pour the oil from her flask into as 

! 

;many flasks as she could borrow from her neighbors. As 
soon as all were filled the oil stopped flowing and she 


had enough to pay her debts. 

Elisha is regarded as so charged with magical power 
that he need only speak to cause the leprosy of Haaman to 

(i) 

pass to his own servant Geha,zi. Even after his death 

his body retained such power that when another dead body 

was hurriedly and carelessly flung into his tomb and came 

into contact with his body, it immediately sprang up 

( 2 ) 

alive. 

Elisha was also an adept in the use of sympathetic or 

(3) 

as it is sometimes cs,lled, imitative magic. The 

i 

prophets followers had brewed a mess of pottage and on its 
being tasted it was immediately apparent that in the 
(gathering of the herbs some of poisonous variety had been 

I 

jincluded. The prophets realized that to eat it meant 
death. Then Elisha, by simply adding a bit of harmless 

(1) II Kings 5:27 

(2) II Kings 13/20-21 
(3; II Kings 4:38-41 











. . . . . •: ■■ ' ‘ . V, ;; - 

■j ■ ' ' - ' i 




36 - 


l 


meal,-made the entire mess harmless* The thought behind 

{ 

this is that like produces like, the harmless meal 
therefore produced harmless pottage. Another very 
I interesting instance of this type of magic is found in 
II Kings 6:5-7* Here is an account of how a member of the 
prophets' guild dropped his axe-head into the water. 


Elisha is called to the scene and raises it to the surface 
by cutting a stick (probably in the shape of the axe-head) 
and throwing it into the water at the spot where the axe- 

(U 

head fell. This again is sympathetic magic, the axe- 

head swims because the wood swims* 

Jacob also was able to employ sympathetic magic to 

( 2 ) 

I his own advantage* He had arranged with his father-in- 
jlaw, Laban that he would tend his flock and receive in 
return for his services all the spotted or striped sheep. 


Eor this reason he planned to have as many spotted lambs 


as possible in the flock. This was accomplished by 
placing pealed poplar trees "in the runnels of the watering- 
!troughs at which the flocks drank; they bred when they 


1 came to drink, and as they bred in front of the sticks 
!they brought forth young that were striped, speckled, and 
spotted." Jacob was cunning enough to arrange that the 
strongest animals should breed under these circumstances. 
One of the important beliefs in the realm of magic is 


(1) Oesterly and Robinson, "Hebrew Rel." p.89. 

(2) Gen. 30-37-39. 

































| the belief that clothing and other objects which have 
jbeen associated with a magician or other supernatural 
person in some mysterious way contain his power, or spirit 

(a 

or character* Thus m II Kings there is the account of 


how Elisha requests to fall heir to Elijah’s spirit and 
does so by receiving Elijah 1 s mantel. With it he is able 
to perform feats similar to those of Elijah such as 
parting water in a stream. The guild of the prophets saw 

him do this and all were foreea thereby to acknowledge, 

( 2 ) 

"The spirit of Elijah rests on Elisha." 

A note may here be added that belief in such magic 

' continued all through the history of Israel right uo to 

(3) 

Jthe time of Paul. People in his day were cured of dis- 

I eases by simply acquiring bits of his clothing. Again, 

a woman was cured of a severe illness in Jesus' day by 

( 4 ) 

simply touching the tassel of his garment. 

Regarding the narrative in II Kings 6:18-20 where 

the 

Elisha is credited with power of striking blind and giving 

(5) 

i sight again, Oesterly and Robinson say, "in the text 

it stands, it is Yahweh who actually does this, but at 

Elisha’s bidding." They imply by this statement that in 

|the original text Elisha actually performed the deed 

;himself but that a later editor desirous of eliminating 

(l) Whitehouse, Hasting’s, Vol. IV, 602b. 

(£' II Kings 2:15 
{z) Acts 9:12 

(4) Luke 8:44 

(5) Heb. Rel. p.90 


9 






















some of the magic made Yahweh ( jnn' ) responsible for 


the deed. The same may be true of the event dealt with 


in the following paragraph and the possibility of it 
being true of other instances must constantly be kept in 
mind. 


In II Kings 2:19-22 there is a good illustration of 
I a magical act in which an incantation is used. Oesterly 


and Robinson are of the opinion that an incantation 
must have been in the original account but has been 


deleted by a later editor. It is not impossible that the 


words from Yahweh, ’*I hereby heal these waters, never 
again shall they cause death or miscarriages 3 J may have 
originally been words commanded by Yahweh to be said as 
an incantation. Although salt has purifying, sustaining 
and antiseptic qualities the act is magical. Elisha used 
a new flask, which was y practically speaking,unnecessary. 

He believed that the deity healed the waters, and not the 
action of the salt. A similar performance is attributed j 


to Moses. The waters of Mar ah v/ere found to be bitter, 
whereupon Moses appealed to Yahweh who showed him a 


certain tree. The tree was cast into the water which 


immediately became drinkable. 


(3) 


The so called "Song of the Well" 


a bit of very 


is 


ancient poetry. In it the form of magic called rhab- 


domancy is illustrated. As the well faas being dug the 



a) 


Heb. Rel. p. 88 
Ex. 15:25 
Hum. 21:17-18 














'.J 


■ 





j .( 



:' j ' 






' 











-39- 


chieftains of the tribe were waving their wands and stave; 
probably to insure success in finding water. It is 
remarkable that in so many instances wands are employed 


to obtain power over water. A few may be cited. Moses 

(1) 

turned the waters of the Nile into blood with a rod, he 

( 2 ) 

parted the water of the Red lea using a wand, he struck 

(3) 

a rock to produce water at Kadesh, Elijah used his 

(4) d:d a; 

rolled up mantle, as also Elisha, his successor. 


Most of the magic ascribed to Moses is of this type. 
When Yahweh gave him his commission to lead the Israelites 


to freedom he was to employ rhabdomancy to prove his 

( 6 ) 


authenticity. According to Oesterly and Robinson only 
in three cases can the references to Moses 1 magic rod be 

These 


regarded as coming strictly under the head of magic 

(V) 

are Moses* rod turning into a serpent, the holding up of 

( 8 ) 

his rod by assistants to insure victory in battle, and 


the other instance already mentioned, where he draws water 

(9) 

from a rock. "These are clear instances in which the 


powers of the magic rod are believed in. The thing is, 


however, of animistic origin, though this origin has been 


quite lost sight of; but it is, in reality, a spirit which 
is supposed to reside in the rod and to eflect wliai is 


required. An echo of this is to oe seen in the fact that 

, ( 10 ),, ( 11 ) 

the rod is stated to be f the rod of God. 


Ex. 14:15 This seems to be a later addition. 


Mum, 20:11 
Ex. 7:1? 

II Kings 2:8 
II Kings 2:14 
Heb. Rel. p. 90 


(7 


(8 


10 } 


. 4:2 ff. 
Ex. 17:8ff. 
Mum. 20:8 ff. 
Ex. 17:9 


[11) 0. & R. Rel. Heb. p.90 











o. 









-40- 


El isha also employed rhabdomancy. When the widow 

i 

[reported to him that her hoy was dead he immediately sent 

Gehazi, his servant, to place his rod across the child*s 

face. Exactly what he intended to do thereby, is not 

known* It may have been a first attempt to restore life 

to him or merely a means to prevent his spirit from 

going too far away. The rest of the story affords another 

interesting illustration of sympathetic magic together with;. 1 

the use of magical numbers. Elisha went up to his own 

room where the child had already been placed by its mother 

|and prayed to Yahweh. The religious significance of this 

jprayer is, however, discounted by the employment of such 

;sympathetic and numeric magic as stretching "himself over 

the child, putting his mouth on the child’s mouth, his 

eyes on the child’s eyes, and his hands on the child’s 

hands, till as he crouched over the child, its flesh grew 

•warm. Rising up he walked to and fro, and then went and 

stretched himself seven times over the child, till it 

opened its eyes." The magic content here is obvious. A 

similar story is attributed to Elijah, who believes as 

the widow does that Yahweh killed the child. He revives 

( 2 ) 

it by prayer and crouching over the child three times. 

One cannot help but realize the marked contrast between 
these accounts and, for example, that of Jesus’ raising 

(1) II Kings 4:17-37 

(2) One is inclined to regard the prayer as 
introduced later. It may originally have 
been an incantation. 





















- * - 1 V • • f 









i. 




. ( 1 ) 

of Lazarus. Jesus also prayed but then he called 
Lazarus as he would have called him to come out of a 
house. The method is entirely personal, without the 
slightest trace of magic. 

Regarding the event which took place shortly before 

Elisha’s death, it will be wise to quote from Oesterly 

( 2 ) 

and Robinson, "Another striking piece of imitative magic 
is recounted of Elisha in II Kings 13:14-19, he tells 
Joash the king of Israel to take bow and arrows; then he 
lays his hands upon the king’s hands (that constitutes a 
magical act), and bids him open the window eastward, i.e. 

] in the direction of Syria, looking from Samaria, where 
this takes place. Bext he tells the king to shoot an 
arrow,-which he does, whereupon Elisha utters an incantat¬ 
ion: *A victory-arrow from Yahweh, a victory-arrow 

against Aram (Syria).* That is the first part of the 
ritual. Then follows the imitative magic. Elisha bids 
the king smite the ground with the arrows; he does so three 
times; he ought to have done it five or six times, then 
he would have wholly defeated the Syrians. Since he has 

only done it three times, he will only gain three 

j victories over them." 

| 

Sympathetic magic is also found in the narrative 
which gives the reason why the Philistines returned 

(1) John 11:43 

(2) Heb. Rel. p. 89. 


















k a.) 

the Ark of Yahweh, and the method in which this was done. 
The Ark was in alien country and therefore its magical 
potency brought a curse instead of a blessing. Its 
presence caused tumours and mice, so in sending it back 
the Philistines employed a bit of. sympathetic magic to 
make certain that it also took away the plagues it brought, 
five golden tumours and five golden mice were placed beside 
the Ark which had been placed on a new cart drawn by two 
milch cows never before harnessed. Thus the Ark was sent 
away. It is true that the Philistines performed this act, 
but the Hebrews wrote the account and the validity of the 
act is not questioned. Once again in its own country the 
Ark brought blessings rather than curses, at least this 
may be assumed from the manner in 'which the household of 


Obed-edom was blessed during the time the Ark remained 

(a) - . 

in his house. 


There is some uncertainty whether or not the raising 

( $ 

of the bronze serpent in the wilderness by Moses is 

(4) 


sympathetic magic or not. Oesterly and Robinson, however, 
say it is possible to regard it as imitative magic. 

It has already been indicated that Elijah and Elisha 
are credited with power to control running water. Elisha 
and Moses are said to have healed biiier and impure 

(1) I Sam. 6:1-11 

(2) II Sam. 6:11 

(3) Hum. 21:4-9 

(4; Heb. Rel. p. 89 (ft. note) 


Elisha 




































-A 




>.'■ : . , :.ri 


. -V <; v . - 

... - . : '. .... . . . . 




-43- 


drinking water. "Samuel is represented as bringing rain 

j 

by calling unto Yahweh at harvest time, that is, during 
! ( 2 ) 

| the dry season." Similarly Elijah was regarded as being 

lable to hinder the coming of rain as well as to cause rain 
(3) 


I to come. 

It would perhaps be fairly difficult if not 

impossible to find a method of rain-making similar to that 

employed by Elijah. A part of this difficulty is due to 

the late editing of the account and to the changes made 

by the editor. To point out just where changes were made 

would be fairly difficult, but to indicate such instances 

jwhich are of the nature of rain-making magic is 

comparatively easy. It will be noted that the purpose 

of the whole event is to bring rain. With this intention 

'Elijah goes to show himself to Ahab. The prophet and the 

Baal prophets each put their God to the test. The deity 

which answers with fire, probably originally with lightning ; 
(4) 

and rain, was to be considered the real God. After 
Baal fails to answer, Elijah proceeds to build an altar of 

| 

stones, dig a trench around it and then to pour water over 
this stone altar. According to the Encyclopaedia of 


Religion and Ethics "Stones are often supposed to 
possess the power of bringing rain, provided they are 

(1) I Sam. 12:16-18 

(2) 0. and R. Heb. Rel. p. 88 

(3) I Kings 18:1-46 

(4) See v. 38 

(5) Vol. X p. 562 

















*■ 












-44 


brought into contact with water. 


■No doubt the fact 


(X) 


.that stones are often regarded as the abodes of spirits 
accounts for their use as rain-maJcing charms. Also, 
"pouring water is a common feature in ceremonies for the 
procuring of rain in some parts of the world.” There can 

I ' 

be little doubt as to the significance of Elijah’s pouring 
;the water over the stones. After Yahweh’s answer with 
jlightning, the prophets of Baal were not simply slain, but 
Iwere taken down to the brook Klshon and there slain that 
jtheir bloodmingle with the waters. This again is 
!significant* Immediately thereafter Elijah heard the 
:sound of the downpour of rain. He hurried to the top of 
Mt. Karmel and. there crouched down with his head between 
jhis knees. This strange posture also suggests a magical 
’explanation. The magical element is again seen in that 
the servant was commanded to go and look seven times. 
lAfter the seventh time the rain came down so fast that 
jAhab had to hurry home lest the rain stop him. 

^Necromancy is a part of ancestor worship which falls 
lunder the heading of religion,but in the very name 


necromancy lies an implication of magic. " (2) j?rom the 

(5) 

account of Saul T s visit to the w r itch of Endor it is 
iclear that the Israelites believed in the validity of 
necromancy, but at the time the account was written it was 

(1) Early Israelites regarded stones as the 
abodes of spirits. 0. and R. Rel. Sem. p<25 

(2) Ency. Brit. art. "Magic. !i 

(3) I Sam. 28 















regarded as an evil practice. Saul, in seeking advice as 
to how to deal with the Philistine menace, had tried to 
iget an oracle in all the legitimate ways known to him. 

But all of them, dreams, sacred lot and prophets, had 
failed him. In despair he disguised himself and sought 
out the witch of -^ndor whose practice he himself had 
condemned. The scene in her dwelling was a typical seance 
where necromancy is practiced. It was night, the light 
in the house was dim. Saul requested to have Samuel 
brought up,but Saul himself did not see him. The:witch 
described Samuel and Saul recognized the description and 
I told him of his trouble. In ai faint voice, probably one 

a) 

such as Isaiah describes so well,"ghosts that cheep and 
Jgibber in low murmurs," Samuel replied "tomorrow you shall 
fall with your sons at 3 ^our side. ” Is it any wonder that 
Saul did fall? 

As has already been suggested, Saul had forbidden tie 

traffic with mediums and wizards having banned them from 

I the land. Although the Covenant code contains no 

!condemnation of necromancy as such there is a condemnation 

( 2 ) 

of witches or sorceresses. This is a further indication 

that the Israelites must have believed in necromancy for 
(3) 

as F.B. Jevons says, tf A wizard----has always been 

punished as a criminal all over the world by the people 

who believe in the possibility of such commerce. 11 One 

(1) Isa. 8:19 

(2| Ex. 22:18, Lev. 20:27. 

(3) tf.B. Jevons, Hastings Vol.I 5.6121) 




































reason for this condemnation may be their anti-social 
character. The Book of Chronicles represents one of the 


causes of Saul’s death as being "because he had consulted 

(i) 

a medium. " 


The efficacy of curses plays a very large part in 

( 2 ) 

early Israel. The Covenant Code commands that the man 


who curses his father or mother must be put to death. 

The reason for this severity was due to the belief that 

| 

| anyone who curses his parents brings actual disaster upon 

them. Therefore he must be punished just as he would be 

j 

| were he to use bodily force to d o them harm. 

i 

It is to be noted that the firm belief in the terr¬ 
ible power of the curse is plainly connected with the 


irresistable efficacy of the solemnly invoked divine 

(3) 

name. "Abimelech succumbs to the curse of Jotham ; 




Micah escapes the effects of his mother’s curse by prompt 
restitution of the money he had stolen from her; and his 


| mother at once removes the curse by pronouncing a formula 

(4) 


of blessing, in which the name of Yahweh is invoked; 


the curse of Elisha in the name of Yahweh brings summary 

(5) (6) 


destruction upon forty-two children." 

. 

Such a belief in curses was very valuable in a 
community in which little law prevailed to regulate 


matters between individuals. The value of an oath, which 


(!) I Chron. 10:13 

(2) Ex. 21:17 

(3) Judges 9:20, 57 
Judges 17 :_1 ff. 


(6) E. Kautzch,Hastings 
Ext. Vol. p. 640 
(ft. note.) 


II Kings 2:24 




































: . 



















UD 











- 47 - 


U) 

was so often used at trials, was directly dependent 

upon the belief in the potency of the curse. Thus an 

innocent person may says “May Yahweh kill me if I am 

guilty of this crimel“ A guilty man would never say such 

a thing. Ho matter how serious his crime, he would rather 

confess on being suspected than fall into the hands of 

Yahweh." In a similar way covenants were maintained. When 

a covenantors made or cut (for such is the derivation of 

the word) an animal was slain and cut to pieces and those 

-ei 

partaking in the covenant walk^ between the pieces 
symbolizing, if not saying, “May Yahweh do to me as we did 


to this animal if I prove unfaithful in this covenant." 

Hot only curses, but also blessings were regarded as having 

magical potency. A blessing once correctly pronounced 

could not possibly be recalled or altered. It was 

considered as forcing the deity to carry it out. A good 

example of this is found in the narrative regarding Jacob 

( 2 ) 


and Esau. Although Jacob employed fraud and lalse 
pretences to obtain his father's blessing, it was consider¬ 
ed as binding throughout the ages. Isaac in this case 
sxhibitedno feelings of a personal nature toward Yahweh. 

The whole performance was impersonal and once performed was I 
binding, hence it must be regarded as magical. 


Closely connected with the belief in the magical 
efficacy of curses and blessings is the beliei in trie 

(1) Ex* 22:11 

(2) Gen. 27:35 f. 














magical potency of the written or spoken word, especially 

of names. The Hebrew practice of hanging a so-called 

Mezuzah over the right door-post involves an ancient belief• 

(i) 

iis the magic potency of written words and names. The 

Mezuzah (DT ITD - lit. "a door-Dost.") contains the "Shenai! 
that iSjthe passage found in Deuteronomy 6s4-9 and ll:13-2lj I 
The same words were contained in Amulets which were to be 
bound as a sign upon the hand and for frontlets between 
the eyes. Both of these items containing written words or 


names having mysterious potency'were held to possess a 

magic and protective efficacy. Such beliefs are by no 

means extinct today. In fairness, it may be added, that 

the Jewish Rabbis today do not regard their Mezuzah as in 

V 2} 

anyway magical. Rabbi Risen says 5 J, The Mezuzah on the 

door-post is not a charm to ward off evil or to bring good 

luck. It is a reminder that the Jew is to regard the home 

as a sacred institution. !I nevertheless, its origin is 

magical and it has always been so regarded by the masses. 

Oesterly and Robinson say f, the custom is at least pre- 

Christians it is refered to by Josephus (Antig. IV, 8:13); 

the Rabbis in Talmudic times attributed to it a protective 

power against demons, and this doubtless was the original 
(3) 

purpose of it.'* 

Amulets such as mentioned above were permitted in 

(l) Whitehouse, Hasting f s Vol. IV p. 602a. 
(2J "The Scroll" c. Dec. 12, 19.35 
(3) Heb. Rel. p. 99 



















( 







- 49 - 


Israel, only those of foreign origin were forbidden. In 

later Jewish literature the amulet was called a "kemea 11 
I 

j /?)• It is interesting to note that this name is 

mentioned in connection with phylacteries ). "in 

I all spells, charms, incantations, amulets, and other 
i 

! prophylactics, stress is always laid on the mysterious 
potency and significance of the name. 1 Iff omen* involves 
'omen 1 '. Hame to the ancient Semite involves reality and 
personal power-. To this tendency the etymologiz¬ 

ing efforts and plays on ?/ords in the O.T. are probably 
j due, viz. to the endeavor to discover in the name a clue 
| to the underlying power that shapes individual destiny. 


■As his name, so is he* says Abigail of her wrong-headed 
husband Kabal. 'Pool is his name, and folly is with him. 


The combination of the name of deity with a newborn child 


1 was therefore quite explicable.---Hence those names-which 

( 2 ) 

contain the name of deity possess a special potency.” 


This is true of human names and is just as true of 
(3) 

the Divine name. Knowledge of the divine name is of 


vital importance, for this is the condition of being able 
to use it in invocation which according to primitive 

I **>- 

notions has a real efficacy giving the person who invokes 
the name a certain power over the name invoked, so that he 
| can compel its aid. This explains why in so many 
religions the name of the deity is kept studiously secret 


(1) I Sam. 25:25 

(2) Whitehouse, Basting's Vol. IV p. 604a. 

(3) Kautzch, Hasting's Ext. Vol. p. 640b. (ft.nt.) 








' 

* 

.... : - 




. , 



- 50 - 


: lest it might he abused through being invoked by the 
improper party. There is a trace of this in the Old 

a) 

Testament. Jacob, on his journey toward his brother 
Esau, struggled one night with a mysterious man, originally 
perhaps a manifestation of Yahweh. Toward the end of the 
struggle Jacob said, 5, Tell me what is your name" but the 
man only answered, "Why ask my name?” and did not reveal 
it. In the case of Manoah and the angel, who had 
predicted the birth of Samson, the angel answered, • "Why 
ask my name?” and then added the significant words, "it 
is not to be uttered.’ 1 Here the manifestation of Yahweh 
refuses to give its name and thereby escapes any further 
annoyance, as it were. It may even be possible that the 
commandment not to take the name of Yahweh H in vain” 
originally meant not to invoke it improperly and thus 
compel action. 

Another aspect of magic in Israel to be mentioned is 

: so apparent that it need only be mentioned and not 

( 2 ) 

enlarged. As Coe says, "Traffic with the gods of a 
conquered people is by the conquerors condemned as 

| diabolical magic.” That the people of Israel did have 

i 

| traffic with the gods of the Canaanites is indisputable. 

One need only glance at a few pages from 1 or II Kings to 
be convinced. This Commerce with ot: er gods was violently 
opposed by the eighth century prophets. 

(1 J G-en. o 2 s 30, Judges 13.18 

(2) Coe, "Psych. Rel. ?J p. 91 























i 







r 





- 51 - 


In the intermingling of magic ana religion there 
are generally two processes or tendencies in operation. 

The first is the tendency, chiefly among the common people, 
for religious ritual to degenerate into magical practices, 
iiany are of the type of mind that tends . to regard the 
ritual as a means of forcing or controlling the deity. 

The second tendency is found most frequently among the 
priestly classes. It is a process of rationalization 

whereby elements that were originally magic are reclothed 
nd retained in religion. 

An interesting example of thus rationalizing and 

retaining in religion an element that originally belonged 

to magic is the use of sacred numbers, especially the 

number "seven.” It is to be found in the oldest writings 

and traditions of Israel right down to the latest of the 

priestly writings. The origin of the sacredness of the 

number seven is probably foreign and "if c ±01 eign s o nx* c s 

is to be sought for the growing disposition to connect 

’seven’ with religious notions, the influence of Babylonia 

( 1 ) 


Suggests itserf most rea,dily." 


t must be recognized 


lowever, that the adjective"sacred"was latter attributed to 
the number when its magical content was lost sight of. An 
example or two will illustrate the early magica,! content 
of the number seven. Samson 1 2 s superhuman strength Was 

/ 2 ) 

attributed to the "seven plaits (of hair) on his head."^ 

(1) Ed. Koenig, Easting’s, Vol. Ill, p. 565b. 

(2) Judges 16:13 and 19, II Kings 4:35-37. 






















When these were cut off, his strength failed him f and not 
until they grew again diid'.he regain his superhuman 
strength. Elisha, while employing sympathetic magic to 
resucitate a dead boy, stretched himself seven times over 
the body, touching hands to hands, and lips to lips. 

ur ,, 

After the seventh time the boy opened his eyes. When 
Haaman came to be cured of leprosy Elisha would not even 
come out to see him but sent him v/ord to bathe seven times 
in the Jordon. This Kaaman did reluctantly and was cured 
of his disease. 

' | 

Other numbers were considered to have magical power 

by the Israelites, but none of them ever equaled the 

potency of the number seven. This magically potent number 

’’seven” later became sacred and occupied an important 

place in priestly ritual. Blood was to be sprinkled seven 
(2) (3) 

times, seven animals were to oe sacrificed, and many 

other instances could be quoted. 

j|!i 

By far the most interesting is its connection with 
the swearing of an oath. To swear means literally, to 
j 5, seven” oneself or as W.R. Smith says 5 ”to come under the 
linfluence of seven things.” Thus seven ewe lambs figure 

I • (4) 

jin the oath between Abraham and Abimeleck at Beersheba.” 

The seeking and obtaining of an oracle is very easily 


U) 

Lev. 

4:6, 17, 8:11, 

14:7 

ff. 16:14 

, IS 

:4 Kings 


II 5 

slO 




■ 

(3) 

Hu. 

21:8ff* Esak. 45 

: 23 

II Chron. 

p Q . 

21 

Uj 

J . R. 

Smith, "Rel. of 

the 

Semites’ 1 

P # 

182 

U) 

X Hi 

r>gs» ^’.33-3 7 



















- De¬ 


classified under the first tendency mentioned in a former 
paragraph, namely, the tendency for ritual to degenerate 
| into magic. Many would regard it as soothsaying out 
| that is the result of losing sight of the fact that the 
J deity is, by- means of some mechanical device, revealing 
! the divine -will. 

Saul had gone to the witch of Bndor to obtain an 
! oracle or to determine ho?/ the omens read. Israel, as 

well as her neighbors, was a firm believer in omens. 

( 1 ) 

Jacob is told by Laban that the omens indicate he 
; should remain in his service. How the omen was obtained 
in this c 

methods. 

( 2 ) 

Egypt. 

: the colors and formations of oil floating on water. 

Among the means attempted by Saul to get an oracle 
; before he went to the witch the sacred lot is mentioned. 
This method of using the sacred lots in connection with 
the "ephodh" or image of the deity was perhaps the one 

i 

most widely used in early Israel. Here again there is 
difficulty in determining the exact nature of the practical 
j The difficulty is due to the alteration and deletion of 
| passages., by later writers and editors. This statement is 
; substantiated by the fact that the ?/ord T? OK (ephodh) 

(1) Gen. 30s27 

( 2 ) Gen. 44s2-15 


,se is not stated but Israel practised various 
One was the divining cup used by Joseph in 


The method here is probably by means of noting 1 


- 



















- 54 - 


has two distinct meanings, the one apparently derived 


from one phase of the earlier meaning. In the earlier 
literature the word "ephodh" no doubt refered to an image 
of the deity. Such references as Gideon's use of 1700 
shekels of gold of the spoil he had taken, in the making 


of an "ephodh" and his setting it in Ophrah make it 


> \ 


impossible to regard it as anything other than an image 


The account of Mi cab's "ephodh" among the other household 

(2) 

gods reinforces the former reference. Other instances 


could be cited but these two will suffice to illustrate 


the point. 


However, the word "ephodh" later took on an entirely 


different meaning having reference to a garment worn by 
the priest. This derivation was probably obtained from 
the cie-alf which was apparently cast about the shoulders 
of the image. Dealing as we are with the earlier times 
we can safely take the word of ICautzch, that in these 
times the "ephodh" was simply an image of the deity. 


There are several notable examples in I and II 
Samuel of the use of the "ephodh." In I Samuel 14s2 and 
3 Saul it is under the pomegrante tree seeking an oracle 
by using the "ephodh." Again in 14sl8 f., but in this 

case Saul interrupts the priest Ahijah in the consultation 

* 

because of the growing tumult in the Philistine csmp. 



Judges 8s26 f. 

Judges 17s5 

Kautzch, Hasting's Ext. Yol. p. 641b. 














* 




) 






- 55 “ 




More illuminating is the account of Saul’s seeking to 
determine by means of the sacred lot the reason for 

Ya hw'ehls di-nger his con sequent reluctance to give an 

V 1 ) I 

oracle regarding the question of attacking the Philistines.' 

This passage renders a suggestion of the manner in which 

the sacred lots were used. Apparently the image either in j 

itself or in its ^garment had a pocket containing the sacred 

lots. The priest placed his hand upon the "ephodh" and 

drew out the lots which were so constructed that they 

could give a positive or a negative answer or also no 

(2) 

answer at all. Oesterly and Rooinson offer the-'following 


interesting suggestion. "These, the ’Mrim and Thummim,* 
were probably flat stones, white on one side and black on 
the other. If both fell white side upwards the answer 
was in the affirmative, if black side upwards then a 
negative; if they differed, no reply was vouchsafed to the 
question." The use of the ephodh as the image of the deity 

(3) 

and the prayer uttered by Saul force one to realize the 
religious nature of the whole act. In I Samuel 23:9 ff, 
there is an interesting example of David using the ephodh. 
Me was being pursued by Saul and had taken refuge in the 
tovra of Keilah. He was uncertain as to what would befall 


him so he summoned Abiathar to bring the ephodh to him. 




His first question was as to whether Saul would come to 


(IJ I Samuel 14:37-44 

(2) Heb. Rel. p. 150 

(3) v. 41 latter part of the verse is from the 
Septuagint. 



















■) 




- 





1 ' 







Keilah. The question was answered positively. The 
second was whether the citizens of Keilah would hand him 


over to Saul. Again the answer was positive, so David and 


his men took to the hills. 


a) 


Somewhat later he consulted the ephodh as to the 
advisability of pursuing the Amelekites to rescue the 



(2) 

On two other occasions we read of David- consulting 


Yahweh but the method is not mentioned. One can see how 
easily the use of the ephodh could, in the popular mind, 

degenerate into magic. 

In concluding this section a note on sacrifices may 
be added. Because of their ritualistic tendency, i.e. 
•'seeking to influence the deity one is tempted to class at 
least early sacrifices as magical. When Hoah offered his 
sacrifice at the end of the flood Yahweh could not help 



wall in full view of his enemies, the kings of Israel, 



what they believed to be an irresistible appeal to 

( pO 

\ o J 

Chemosh. !! 

But in each of these cases, as with sacrifice 
generally, there is a persona,! relationship which lifts it 



W.H. Bennett, Hasting’s Yol. Ill p. 411a 



II Sam. 2si f. o:19 


Gen. 8/20-22 
II Kings 3s27 





















* ... • 

* 


■ r ' fi 








- 07 “ 


at onee out of the realm of magic and into the realm oj 
religion* During Xoah’s sacrifice Yahweh smelled the 
M soothing fragrance” and-blessed Noah, just as Jacob bless 
ed his son after eating the meal he had prepared for him. 

The sacrifice which the King of Moab offered Chemosh was 
the greatest he could bring, but it "was also the most 
personal. That sacrifice, even in its origin was not 
magical, is further substantiated by the following 
quotations; TS.B. Tylor-regarded the rite as simply ■ 




the offering of a gift or bribe to a divinity, precisely 
analogous to the gift or bribe that might be offered to an 
Oriental potentate and for analogous reasons--to secure 
| favour or to avert anger. As the gods recede from man, 

I the gift becomes more and more an act of homage and self 

abnegation. *» — K* Smith-When the god. is angry, 

his favor can be restored by an act of communion between 
him and his v/orshippers; and the victim is the non-human 
member of the clan (i.e. the totem.) When the nomad 


ceases from his wandering life and becomes an agricuituri 

a) I 

ii i 


the sacrifice is not so much a communion as a tribute 

But in spite of all this, sacrifice may be magical, 

| 

depending upon the attitude of the worshipper. The varioisj 
j attitudes account for the existence and apparent/y equal 
validity of several theories regarding magic. Thus W. 
Robertson Smith holds that sacrifice was a rite of 
(l) Ency. Rel. and Eth. Vol. XI p. 36 


























- 58 - 


! 


! 






: 






communion with God. Another interpretation says it is a 
substitutionary offering. A third view regards it as a 
gift to Yahweh. Lastly, Wundt, says that the sacrificial 
act mysteriously brings the power of the Deity into 

U) 

direct touch with the person offering the sacrifice. 

This last view could easily be classified as magical. 

If the ritual be regarded as ipso facto influencing the 
will of the deity then it belongs in the sphere of magic. 
To save sacrifice from magic the personal element must 
be retained. The worshipper must seek to please the 
deity in all things in which he believes the deity takes 
pleasure and not place his sole reliance on the act of 
sacrifice. This is the big mistake that the Israelites 
made according to prophets like Amos, in short, Amos 
would regard the sacrifices at Bethel as pure and simple 
magic. 


(i) 


Taken from J.M.P. Smith "The Origin and 
History of Hebrew law.” pp. 154-155. 











-oy- 


THE RELIGION OP THE EIGHTH CENTURY PROPHETS 


| 

i 


s 




i 


I 


j 

! 




In Israel of the eighth century two religious 
movements can be detected, one among the prophets or for¬ 
ward looking religious leaders, the other among the people 
or religious followers. The first is a movement from a 
maximum of magic with a minimum of spiritual insight to a 
minimum of magic with a maximum of spiritual insight. The 
second is the tendency found among the common people to 
permit pure religious ritual to degenerate into mere 
magical practice. The one seeks to eliminate material 
things while the other seeks to increase and magnify them. 

The former movement is well illustrated in the story 

(i) .. 

of Balak and Balaam. The account is found in JE, the 
latter of whom may be regarded as the first of the writing 
prophets, thus placing the story at the beginning of the 
period to be considered. 

Balak, king of Moab, feared the people of Israel as 
he saw their myriad clans encamp on the desert near his 
kingdom on their way to conquer Canaan. The best thing 
he could do to protect himself and the worst thing he 
could do to harm Israel was to lay an effective curse 
upon them. With this in mind he sent his servants to 
summon Balaam from Pethor on the Euphrates and asked him 
to pronounce the desired curse. In his opinion the mere 
(1) Num. 22-24 


m 




















-ou- 


pronouncement was all that was necessary for he said,”I 

( 1 ) 

: know---that he whom you curse is cursed.” Balak 
"believed in magic. Balaam on the other hand was beginning 
to break away from magical ideas. He did believe in the 
efficacy of the curse but he did not believe that he 
could compel the deit3^ t^barry out whatever curse he 
uttered. He insisted on first determining the intentions 
of Yahweh regarding the future of Israel. This he did by 
seeking an omen through the religious sacrifice of seven 
bullocks and seven rams upon seven altars. The whole act 
is religious yet the number seven is indicative of magic. 
It is probable that he also examined the entrails of the 
animals and observed the flight of birds, the latter 
thought being suggested by his going up to the top of a 
hill where such observation could be easily maHe. All the 
omens were favorable for Israel and, to Balak*s surprise, 
Balaam blessed Israel. Balak became angry and demanded 
Balaam*s reason for doing so whereupon he replied, “Must i 
I not be careful to say v/hatever Yahweh gives me to say?” 
Such a conviction is religious, not magical. Balak did I 
not yet give up 5 but summoned Balaam to repeat the sacrifice 
and if possible to get an answer unfavorable for Israel 
but the result was as in the first case. As the account 
now stands a third attempt was made but again Israel was 
favored. ”This made Balak*s anger blaze against Balaam; 

(1) Hum. 22:6 






• • : . . . 

.. n.: - ■' i i:T. ■ 

. 

. • : : ;; . •• 

. 






■ 




J. x. . x 


ifl 

. , - , r ' 

. 


•i, ... V ... 




■ 

. • ;■ .. , . i. 


... . ; 


■ • 

. ,1 .• ' " " .. . . - ■. 

t • . . 

, . - l ■ 

. \- t . :.> . v: « 0 siovi-- i.u;r 

• ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ • • fin < 

■ . ■ v. <3 - --X ■ * • 'it ~ X'rf.! x 

• ' 

■ ’ 

., .. !..... i ' . ’ ... i .. .. v c i'ni 

* .. •• 1' • v v' ’ 1; •* - 

. . . • •. v, . .. i ■••• 

. .... . 1- : 




... :;.a . 




i.). 











-61- 


he-told him,---’Be off with you; away home!’ " Balaam 

I then rose to his full prophetic height and said "Whatever 
Yahweh says, I say," and with no recourse to any sacrifice 
or omen he pronounced another blessing upon Israel. 

This movement away from the outward, material, ritual¬ 
istic practices toward an inner, spiritual insight had its 
greatest advocates in the persons and work of the eighth 
century religious leaders. Its development can be traced 1 1 
through the writings of Amos, Hosea, Isaiah and Micah 
until it finally reached its greatest height, as far as 
the Old Testament is concerned, in the prophecy of 
Jeremiah and in chapters 40 to 50 of the book of Isaiah. 
jWith the appearance of Ezekiel’s priestly codification of 
the prophetic truths which were a part of his inheritance, 
the movement did not merely stop but began to move in the 
opposite direction. The voice of the great prophets was 
silent. Such prophetic voices as were heard came from 
minds that were priestly in attitude. Religion was at the 1 
mercy of the priestly tendency toward conservation and of 
the common people’s tendency toward degeneration. Magic 
again was permitted to remain undisturbed. 

Before examining this movement more closely it will 

be necessary to state the psychological basis of religion 

' 

to be used in this paper. 

Much has been made of the functioning of the 
unconscious or subconscious mind and of the sex instinct in 





















5 




t ' 


■. * 



62 - 


| religion. Some would account for all religious 
! manifestations and practices in terms of the subconscious 

I „ 

mind and the sex instinct. Others give the latter very 
large place in religion. That sex plays a part in 
religion cannot he denied, but it is not as dominant as, 
for example, Freud would have us believe. On the other 

! 

hand it cannot be denied that in our religious thinking 
there are processes and integrations taking place of which 
we are unaware,but that does not necessarily mean that 
they belong to the subconscious mind. 

We must look for the activity of God in the immediate 
; consciousness rather than in the subconscious. Only in 
cases like that of the Apostle Paul where there has been 
a repression of religious impulses which formed a complex 
that eventually dominated the conscious mind, can it be 
said that the chief factor in religion is the subconscious 
mind. Once the revolution has taken place then religion 

;i; 

operates in the immediate consciousness. It is difficult 
to say whether the prophets had an experience similar to 

1 

Paul’s but the probability is that they did not. Those 
religious processes and integrations of which the 

(i) 

individual is not aware may be explained by what Hadfield 
calls the religious sentiment or ideal. He defines a 
sentiment as'an accepted constellation of instinctive 

(l) J.A. Hadfield "Psychology and Morals" p. 24 

















., u 





! C - •' 








- 63 - 




! 


emotions about the nucleus of an event, thing, person, or 

ideal 1 '. Thus, at the base of all religious thinking and 

activity lies the religious sentiment. 

( 1 ) 


Taking a cue from Wright the religious sentiment of : 
the eighth century prophets may be described somewhat as 
; follows: The primary object of their religious sentiment I 
1 is Yahweh whom they seem to regard as quite alone, having 
no subsidiary objects, such as angels, associated with him*' 

He communicates directly with his prophets. The instinet- 

- • ■ -• * -- - - •.* . • . 

■ ■ 

Iive emotions or tendencies grouped about this primary 
|object are chiefly three, as far as the prophets are i 

concerned. Named in the reverse order of their influence 

they are gregariousness, fear and sex, including love and 

‘ 

tender emotions. Regarding the word love Oesterly and 

( 2 ) 

Robinson write - f, The Hebrew word 1 ~0 ll *chesed* (is) 

quite untranslateable in English. It means love but more 

than love, for it is not merely an attitude adopted by one ; 

person to another, but that essential quality of the soul i 

from which love, sympathy, pity, devotion, all spring. It 

may produce an attitude of the inferior to the superior, 1 

of man to God. It may imply the attitude of the superior 

«* 

to the inferior, of God to man. Or, again, it may be the 
attitude of equals to one another, of man to man. In any 
case it implies a full appreciation of and a complete 

(1) Wright. H A Student’s Phil, of Rel." p.222f. 

(2) 0. & R. Heb. Rel. p. 207. 


















, ... 




■ 


■ 


- . .. f):fO 






i .. 























. -V - ... -a 




- 




. 




' . -.'• ■■ < 


. . 

« • » • ■ - •• « ‘ ' - ■ 


: ' •• ... ci., I. ; -J i - - 

\ <; •: ■ 


J . 




. 





- 64 - 




! 


i 


i 




devotion to a personality'.' Another word for love used 

frequently by the prophets is ’aheb’t f] y ) , including 

derivations from this root* It has also a very wide 

range of meanings, being used to refer to physical sexual 

relationships, love toward a son, a friend, a master, a 

neighbor, and God, and also to the Divine love toward 

(X) 

individual men, the people Israel and righteousness* 

Such then would be the religious sentiment of the prophets, 
the instincts of gregariousness, fear and sex forming a 

psychological constellation about the primary object, 

. 

Yahweh. This religious sentiment they accepted as their 
ideal and it thus influenced and guided all their thinking 
and all their activity. 

Grouped around the religious sentiment and together 


■ ' ' • '■ '■ g' 

with it are : first, such non-specific tendencies as 
imitation, suggestion and sympathy; second, such complex 
emotions as awe and reverence; third, such sentiments as a, 
are felt toward goodness, pufcity of heart, wisdom, justice, 
etc. Awe and reverence may also be regarded as forming a 
part of the religious sentiment itself, being a sublimation 
of fear* 

It is evident that the religious sentiment is not the 
same for all of the prophets but varies for each individ¬ 
ual. With certain men one or more of the constituents or 

(l) See Brown, Driver and Briggs, "Hebrew and 
English lexicon of the Old Testament", 
pp. 12 f* 


< 



















. 

. 

. t ■ - - ! - 


t‘ I ■ 1 ■■ ■' 

■ 





• 







. 





. 




















■ 


ju o~.- 

. 


... x:j n 

. 

. Jj 


■ ;• 



.:) ■: 






• 


V •: :5 o 


.■'Dz 

.Oil. 







VO.. 










t 

x ; 


. 1 

. 








" 


- ; 






. 

iVS. 

....; . 

- 

... i 

■ 




... : . ... . 


* 



■ : 







J 




* 




i j 




• r 


. 

■ 








. 'Ji 




- 00 - 


associates of the sentiment will predominate. Amos 
places his chief emphasis on justice, Hosea on love, 

Isaiah on awe and wisdon, Micah on holiness and righteous¬ 
ness and Jeremiah on love and purity of heart. A 
comparison may he drawn between Isaiah and Micah. The 
former was reared in Jerusalem, and seems to have had 
some connection with the ruling house and with the 
priests. He would thus regard the temple as very valuable 1 
if not essential to religion. With him the gregarious 
instinct would be stronger than with Micah who was reared 
in the country and had little or no use for the temple. 
Again, this gregariousness is almost nil in the case of 
Jeremiah. 


Before dealing with each of the prophets individually 


it will be wise to take account of some general psycholog¬ 


ical principles regarding prophecy. 

From the above description one can easily understand , 
that there is something about religion which is 
mysterious and unexplainable to the individual, some 
processes of which he is unconscious. These need not be 
relegated to a so-called unconscious mind but may more 




profitably be regarded as the operation of the religious 


sentiment. 

( 1 ; 

Coe is quite correct in maintaining that a 


religious instinct does not exist, Religion is the 
(1) Psych. Rel. pp. 325, 324. 


:!» 111 /. 











result, not ol an instinct, "out of a certain grouping of 
i ... (1) 

jseveral instincts. Wright correctly says that in a 
strictly scientific sense there is no religious instinct, 
jbut popularly the religious sentiment may be regarded as 
religious instinct. The intuitions of religious leaders 
are quite similar to those of the artist or poet. The 
whole environment of the man acts and reacts upon his 
sentiments, generally unperceived, until a.thought 
crystallizes and suddenly breaks forth with such clarity 
and vividness that it appears to be-an entirely new 


a 




revelation. "There is no evidence that a religious 
intuition (or insight) ever occurs--without dependence 
upon his own accumulated experience, and without 


cd 


upon the historv of his people." "That the inspiration 

process in religion is in no sense separate or peculiar 
will be clear to anyone who will examine literary and 
other artistic inspirations and then note the parallel ways 

(3) 

in which new ideas arise in the common life." Coe is 


(4) 

not alone in the expression of such viet/s. Caird puts 
it thus, "Yet the most violent revolution to which human 
nature can be subjected can never be more than the 
emergence into light of something that has been growing 
for a long time beneath the surface, what seems at first 

(1) Students Phil, of Rel. p. 2Si 

(2) Coe, Psych. Rel. p. 323 

(3) ibid. p. 199 

(4) Ed. Caird. Evolution of Religion Vol. I 
• P. 200 




















• ■ • - < - ' , 

. 




. 

‘ 

* 




■ 




r h 





' 


- 








' 

: -i .' • . 




- 




■ti ■-... . 

..... . 




- 




, ; 

























•• ... 1 ■ .. .. 


c 


< . ■ > ,* 

5 ' . . 


i — 


an absolute change is never other than the summed up 
result of a series of variations; and the final touch 

which makes the elements crystallize into a new form can 
he regarded as its real cause only by superficial 
observers. 11 


The prophets were keen observers of the events which ! 


(i) 


transpired both at home and abroad. As Davidson says, 
"Events furnish the occasion of the prophet’s intuitions | 


but they do not set bounds to them." The nature of their j 
sentiments was the final determining factor. Thus -ooth 
Isaiah and Micah saw the sins of Jerusalem, both saw the ! 
rising power of Assyria but the former believed the' city 
would not be destroyed even though a mere remnant be 
spared while the latter believed in the entire destructions 
of the city. This is easily understood if one remembers 
that Isaiah lived in Jerusalem while Micah lived in the 
country. 

The prophet’s keen analysis of events greatly 
assisted him in breaking the imagined connection v/hich 




magic regarde as real. Magic taught that a, connec 


ui 


existed between the magical incantation and ritual ana 
the end desired. 3o too, the Israelites, especially i the. 
prosperous days of Amos’ prophecy, believed there was a 

real connection between worship at the shrines and 

national success and prosperity. But the rising power iri 
(l) A.B. Davidson, Hasting’s, Vo±. IV p«ll2b 















the north and the "rife disorders on Samaria f s hill" 
forced the prophets to teach that the real connection is 
between morality and success. Time proved they were 
correct. 

With the prophets the religious sentiment was a 
strong, powerful driving force which compelled them to 
action, often against their will. The combination of 

such powerful instincts as fear and sex make it impossible t 

(2) 

to restrain the sentiment. Amos says, "When the-Lord 
Yahweh speaks, who can but prophecy? 1 * It is a well known 
fact that Jeremiah had a profound dislike•for public life. ; 
He would far rather have spent a quiet life in his native 
village. Anathoth. Jut Yahweh had spoken to him. He 
overcame his childish fear and timidity and continued 
proclaiming the message in Jerusalem in spite of chains, 
prisons, and dungeons. Such is the power of the religious 
sentiment. 

An important dynamic psychological factor common to 
both magic and religion is to be found in man's wishes. 

Magic was employed to gain such things as man wished to 

have but could not obtain by natural means. The error 

. 

which magic made was that it mistook imagined connections 

for real onesj for example, it assumed that there remained 

a potent connection between a footprint and the man who 

made the print. These false connections had to be broken 

fll Amos 3:9 
(2; Amos 3:8 














■ 











: 






~ 



( 



t. 






j 

jbefore magic could be eliminated from religion* Man’s 


|wishes are also a determining factor in-religion. The 
I prophets desired certain relationships to become*actual# 


>v they prophecied that these relationships would 
|become facts* These prophecies were' the expression of * 

|their high moral nature and were therefore in-line, as it 


were, with the development of religion,resulting in their 

i 

|gradual acceptance by the people. They were thus establish 
ling genuine and lasting connections between their wishes 
|and their realization. "How the prophets regarded them- 

jselves as exponents of the essential principles of this 

| . 

authentic revelation (d7 Ifl-TdrZ)- of Yahweh. —-Being 

j 

ben imbued with the spirit of revealed religion and 


seeing all things in the light of its principles, -they — 
were able to develop those principles in their application 
to new situations as they arose, and bring forth new truth 
from the depths of their inspired insight into the mind 

a) 

and character of God.” However, they regarded these 
new ethical demands of the deity as having always been 
demanded by him and thus they read their own aspirations 
back into history and regarded the desert days as a time 
of pure, noble, ethical religion. 

The idea of wishes as a psychological basis-of-~^* 

( 2 ) 


prophecy is also expressed-by Coe, "Ethical - progress 

jin any direction is initiated by some individual-whose" 

& ■ ■ • . 

(1) J. Skinner, Prophecy and Religion, p.3 

(2) Psych. Rel. p. 192 







satisfaction and dissatisfactions are different from - 
those of other person-s* Thi'rHs is ethical* originality*,* which „ 
becomes creativeness whenever it effectively* organizes and 
propagates itself. — -The degree of the•originality >in- a• 
particular case has to be- determinedas well as may be, by ; 
historical study of the entire situation*^ i 

The activity of the prophets which resulted in the 
eliminating of magic from religion may be divided into 
two parts. The first consists of such direct opposition 
as is found, for example, in the prophecies of Isaiah 
against necromancy. The second may be regarded as indirect 
opposition. They were uncompromizingly opposed to the 

a) 

worship of idols in high places. Owen C. Whitehouse says, 

"The prophets habitually associate magic with idolatry. 11 

Hence, in opposing - and removing idols they also opposed 

and removed a certain element of magic such as the 

fertility cults which were in all probability based on 

sympathetic magic. Their opposition, however, was chiefly 

because of ethical reasons. It may be added that, even in 

( 2 ) 

the W J” document, carved metal idols are opposed ?/hich 
practically constitutes an opposition to magic, because 
the carvings and drawings Mere probably made for their 
supposed magical effect. 

Another phase of indirect opposition is found in 

(1) Hasting’s Vol. Ill p. 210b. 

(2) e.g. Ex. 34:17 













!Jewish monotheism which did much to destrojr magic. 
jHowever monotheism chiefly destroyed the practice hut not 
;the belief in magic. The very fact that the Mishna so 
often condemns the practice of magic is an indication that 
'the belief persisted. But as Welhausen says of the Arabs, 
’’The old gods are deposed and degraded into the position 
of demons* " Traffic v/i-th these old gods or demons was 
!regarded as magic. Therefore, as Yah?/eh gradually became 
the only God, and the prophets taught that he alone must 
|be worshipped, in so far as the people obeyed their teach- 

iings, the practice of magic gradually disappeared. However 

i 

|this ethical communion with the divine advocated by the 

I 

(prophets was accepted only by a minority of the people 

( 2 ) 


I 


probably because the ceremonial was so much easier. 

It is interesting to note the prophets do not so 
much as mention any such forms of magic as rods or arrows 
or any form of divination, not even the Urim and Thummim. 
They make no use whatever of magical numbers. Iff or do they 
employ anything that may be classed under sympathetic 


magic. Ho miracles such as are attributed to Elijah and 

i 

Elisha are attributed to these eighth century prophets. 

| ( 3 ) 

When Amos came into conflict with Amaziah he merely 

| argued with him. Were he a man like Moses he would have 

: turned his rod into a serpent, or a man like Elijah he 

(l) Whitehouse, Hasting*s Vol. IY p. 603a 
(2} Coe, Psych. Bel. p. 184 
(3) Amos, 7:10-17 


















( 


'■ i - . 


■ 


U 











■ 


. 




o.L 







:would have struck him with blindness to prove his 
authenticity. Magic in the work of these eighth century 
men was conspicuous by its absence. 


The prophets very often seek to convey a message to' 


their people in the names they give their children. There 


was, however, nothing magical about these names, they were 
merely symbolical. This can be clearly seen in the names 

(i) 

Hosea gave his children. They are deliberately chosen 


so that they can be changed later. 


The so-called "E" document presents a rather strange 
mixture of magic and religion. This is probably due to 

i 

jits composite character, but it indicates that the compiler 
| had not clarified his thinking- in the matter. "1" may be 


|regarded as the first of the writing prophets,bringing his- 

|message to the people in the form of stories. The compilox 

; ( 2 ) 

is a firm believer in rhabdomancy. Moses was to take the 

rod and’work portents with it to prove his authenticity. 

(3) 

The incident ?/here Moses-held his-divine rod while 


standing on the top of a hill is said by Oesterly and 
(4) 

Robinson to come under the head of magic. "E" represents 

j Yahweh as revealing- his will and the future in dreams such 

(5) 

I as those interpreted by Joseph out he also retains the 
belief in omens. In Numbers 31:1 Balaam builds seven 
altars to obtain an omen but the compiler fails to record 

(1) Hosea ,Ch. 1 

(2) Ex. 4:17 

(3) Ex. 18:8 ff. 

(4; 0. and R. R e l. HeQ. p.90 

(5) Gen. 20 
















. 1 . ■ .. 






. 

V 


1 ' , ' • ' 0 

. 






•- i. 








' 


. 


. • 


)■' ■; ). ... i; 













• . 



- i ■ 




“ i . . X* : f; 





x 

u 

















the examination of the entrails of the sacrificed•animals 
and the observation of the flights of birds, probably- 
indicating his lack of trust in such omens. -The facts 
that the animals were sacrificed and that Balaam went to 
the top of a hill indicate that the above mentioned 
methods were in the original account of the story. In the 
section of the Jacob and Laban story which belongs to 5, E n 
there is no magic emnloyed to produce a large flock of 

(i) 

striped, speckled and mottled sheep. It is revealed 

'to Jacob in a dream that Yahweh is thus favoring him 
because of Laban’s harsh treatment. Again in numbers 11: 
16 ff there is an account of the seventy sheiks of Israel 
prophesying. Their prophesying, hOY/ever, does not seem to 
be mere contagion as two of the seventy were inside the 
camp yet they also prophesied. Most noteworthy is the 
absence of any ritual or music employed to cause the 


spirit to come upion them* 

(2) 

There is one verse which Moffatt attributes to 
”E M but which seems to come from a much later period. 
However if it does belong to H E W - it represents a glimpse 
of a truth which was destined not to be realized for many 


j centuries and, perhaps, has not yet been fully realized 

■ 

i today. It reads: 


H Jacob needs no omen$ 

Israel tries no magic arts; 



Gen. 31:9 ff 
Hu. 23:23 





















. 






f 








- 



- 


i 

' 








' 

■ v ■' - V ; - 












■ 


')• 


* 






■ • 

, 1 • . \ . . > • '■ 
• . ‘ J 












- 

- ; ; ' ■ >:: ■ 






- ... 















* 


< 







-7 4 - 


It is revealed- to Jacob and to Israel 


What God will do.” 


As this verse stands in Moffat'c's translation it represents 

the first direct protest against magic. There are other 

conceptions of religion to be found in "IS”. Yahweh speaks 

to common people by means of dreams but not so with his 

jservant Moses, to him he speaks directly, openly, with no ' 

(l) 

dark sayings, because of his faithfulness. Yahweh also 

listens to Moses* prayers when he pleads on behalf of his 

people. He answers the prayer and demands no sacrifice. 

Two examples may be cited. Once because of Yahweh * s 

( 2 ) 

|anger a fire oroke out in the camp, but a prayer from 

Moses caused Yahweh to stop it. Again, on the occasion of 

(3) 

lAaron's making the golden calf, Yahweh threatened to 

, 

jdestroy the people entirely f but was persuaded not to do 

|so by Moses. If such relinquishing were to be obtained 

according to priestly authors a. sacrifice would have been 
" (4)' 

necessary. Here, however, the relationship between 

Moses and Yahweh was entirely personal. ”E” could not 
j think of that relationship being extended to all the 
Israelites, yet it was a long step in the right direction. 

The prophet Amos of Tekoa makes no direct reference 
to magic yet his work as a prophet did much in the way of 
eliminating magic from religion. The dominating factors 

(1) Hu.' 12:6-8 

( 2 ) Hu. 11:1-3 

(3) Ex. 32:11-14 

(4) cf. II Sam. 24:24 and 25 


















' 






G G 


' 





. 


'i.; 


o 


iJ 


\ ' 
; 


. 













in and around Amos* religious sentiment are tender emotion 
and justice and these two are closely knit together. One " 
may say that the former brought the latter into existence. 
While on his travels he saw how the poor were abused, he 'l 

could not but sympathize with them and severely denounce ! 

(1) 

the system that permitted such injustice. Harper 
indicates that because Amos was a nomad his attitude can M 
be largely explained from the general nomadic opposition 
to luxury. His nomadic prejudices led him to regard it as 
sinful apart from its exploitation of the poor. In spite 
of his severe condemnation,those who indulged in luxury, 
even at the expense of the poor, felt quite safe. The 
| Israelites in general and especially the wealthy classes 
| regarded the offering of sacrifices as all that was 
| necessary. If they were punctilious in their sacrifices 

; it mattered little or nothing what they did in everyday 

. 

life. 

Thus Amos ”main contention is that ritual as a 

(2) 

; substitute for social virtues is an abomination. w 

; That the people did regard sacrifice as a substitute for 

| social virtues is evident. They could, for example, "sell 

; the needy for a pair of shoes” and “loll on garments 

: seized in pledge” when they knew that these practices were 

( 3 ) 

strictly forbidden in the Covenant Code. Such behavior 

(l) W.R. Harper, Internation Critical 
Commentary, ''Amos.” 

(2} J. Raylor, Hasting’s Vol. I p. 87a 
(3J cf. Amos 2:6 ff. and Exodus 22:22-27 

\j 



















. : 






- 


. ; 


: 








■ 


i' 1 . 









* — 


I so grated on Amos* religious sentiment that he could no 
longer remain silent and he was fully convinced that the 
words he uttered were the words of Yahweh. But the 
psychological explanation is that previous experiences and: 
observations enterejinto or gathered themselves about his : 
religious sentiment determining how it would react when '|| 
some event would cause these hidden thoughts to crystalize. 
In this case the event which caused their crystallization 
was probably a feast in Samaria* To regard the utterances 
as Yahweh’s message to the oeople, it is not necessary to 

(i) 

I say they were obtained in an ecstatic trance. Povah says 

I that the prophets sometimes spoke under ecstacy. That may 

■ 

I be true, but such ecstatic utterances are scarcely to be 

found in Amos. A comparison of his visions with those of 

. 

| Ezekiel, which are obviously more of the ecstatic type, 

| will indicate the rationality of Amos 1 visions. The care¬ 
ful literary form in which they are given also bears this 


out* Thus one may say that even the small element of 
magic usually present in the ecstatic vision was missing 
in Amos. 

(2) 

In his opposition to idols and even more so in his 

opposition to the immorality of the high places Amos was 

indirectly, but violently, opposing magic. To offer 

- (3 

sacrifices at the shrines was only to pile sin upon sin. 

These piled up sins would eventually result in the most 

(1) Povah "1\T. Psych, and Heb. Prophets. ?l p. 102 
(2| Amos 526 
(3; Amos. 4s4-5 











:/. V 


7 * 








i 


i 







C 


O' J 


„K 





’ 














The people did. not 


Ui 

| terrible consquence imaginable. 

mistreat the poor on the Sabbath or on feast day s^ but the 

only reason for their refraining from doing so was the 

( 2 ). 

fear lest they overstep a ritualistic command. Such 
sacrifices, however, were of no use unless accompanied by 

/ , x > } 

justice and honesty. The opposition to the high places 

was at the same time an opposition to the magical fertility 
cults, and when the high places were eventually destroyed 
a large element of magic was also destroyed. 

A part of this opposition may also be explained by 
the fact that Amos himself was a poor man and could thus 


sympathize with the poor generally. It is a noteworthy 
fact that the criticism of the rich usually comes from the 
poorer classes. 3y this is not meant that Amos was 
(prompted by selfish motives but it does help explain how 
he arrived at the messages he uttered. 


Although magic is not directly mentioned in his 

writings, it has no pls.ce in his thinking. Yahweh cannot 

! be forced to give an oracle but oracles are dependent 

(4) 

! upon moral behavior. Yahweh demands justice, equity, 
(5) 

| and honesty. The truly religious method of obtaining 

Yahweh T s favor is by means of obedience to his moral 

( 6 ) 

■ requirements and by prayer. Ho doubt Amos often wished 
! Israel would give up sacrificing and would learn to pray 


and to live a just and pure life. 


(l) Amos 

5:7 ff. 

(4) 

Amos 8:11 

(2) Amos 

8:4 f. 

5 

0. and R. Heh. Rel. p.205 

(3) Amos 

5:21-24 

6 

Amos. 7:2-3 

















- i O 


* 

In the writings of Hosea we find a much more direct 

and emphatic condemnation of magic. The chief factor in 

his religious sentiment Was the sex instinct or love. 

There are several reasons for this. The sexual metaphor , 

used in describing the relationship between the worshipper , 

( 1 ) 

and the deity was only too common in the ancient east. J 
It was used in two ways, as a picture of a wife and her 
husband and as a picture of a child and its father. Again 
the prevalent magical fertility cults practised upon the 
high places with their sexual immorality were violently 
opposed by the prophets because of moral reasons. It wou 1b' 
be impossible to speak of them without the use of sexual 


| terms. 

I 

The third and the most important reason for the 
predominence of the idea of love in Hosea’s religious 
sentiment is his own domestic experience. The generally 
accepted interpretation of this phase of his writings is 
somewhat as followss The marriage of Hosea and Gomer was 
at first a sincere love match. They lived together for a 
time and were faithful to one another. Then after the 

! birth of their first child Gomer became unfaithful and 

. 

i began to keep company with other men. Hosea speaks as 

I 

though the second and third children,born while Gomer was 
still with him, were illegitimate. Then, because Gomer' 
had not been able to sublimate her very strong sex 
(1) 0. and R. net). Rel. pp. 206, 207 




















iOt 













i 


0 ' 




; • - ( ; , qo 

■ 









c 






1 — 


' 


instinct, she went from had to worse till finally she had 
left Hosea and found herself being sold as a slave. .When 
Hosea heard of this he found he still loved her in spite 
of her sin, and bought her at the slave market. He brought: 
her home and first put her to a test to determine whether i 
or not she had repented,after which 'he again took her to | 
himself as his wife. 

When Hosea realized that he still loved Gomer it also 

i 

|dawned upon him that in a similar way Yahweh still loved 
Israel, though the latter was still living a life of shame. 
He saw also that as Gomer ! s sex instinct began and ended 


in the nurely physical it' was purely external and was 

a) 

also purely selfish. Hosea opposed this externalism and 

(2) 

searched for the inner springs of action. • The cults of 


the time grossly misrepresented God because the people 
did not understand him just as Gomer did not truly know 
Hosea. 

".hen Hosea brought Gomer home again he told her "Tor 

. 

manv a day you must remain mine, you must not play'the 


harlot, you must have nothing to do with a man--and I will 

( ^ j 


have nothing to do with you. u The giving up of her 


harlotry and of her paramours was to be permanent bu' 


after many 


she was again to be ais wile 


Similarly, , 


Israel wag to leave forever her sacrifices on the heights, 


(1) J.¥, 


ovah 


(?) 0. and R. Heb 


Psych, and Ileb 
Rel. p. 207 


ronhets 


(3) Hosea 3s3 






















j Sc\cre<i 

I her A stones, her epliod and oracle, but after many a day 
she was again to return to God and have a Davidic king. 
But never again must she return to such physical and 
external things mentioned above. Israel was to live a 
spiritual life with Yahweh. He would allure her into the 
desert and there he would speak to her heart, he would 
"betroth her in a bond of goodness, and of justice, in 

U) 

kindness and in love." What room would there be for 


I 


I 


■ 




i 


externalism and magic in such a religion? 

Hosea was a man of intense emotions yet he v/as able 
to think clearly. His beliefs v/ere so strongly 
henotheistic that for ail practical purposes they were 
monotheistic. This gave no space to foreign gods, nor 
to demons, both of which were regarded as magical. The 
same is true also of the other prophets# 

In Isaiah we have, it seems, a very interesting 
example of a secondary sentiment taking the place of the 
primary sentiment, that is, the vanishing of one ideal 
and the growth of another. Apparently Isaiah was closely 
connected with the royal house. He regarded King Uzziah 
as his ideal and thus his dominent sentiment was 
patriotism. But the king died, and for a while Isaiah 
was lost. Then he saw the Lord, high and lifted up, he 
was filled with awe and reverence, and began to work in - 
his cause. The religious sentiment had become his ideal, 


(l) Hosea 2:14 and 19 

















A " 







0 i/ 


K 

















;. i ■. - o 





< 







' the controiing factor in his life, yet the national 

sentiment was still very strong. 

In regard to the eliminating of magic from religion 

the important teaching in Isaiah is his opposition to | 

necromancy. All higher prophetic teaching was opnosed to Jj 

( 1 ) 

this practice hut Isaiah is the most outspoken. Why did M 
he oppose necromancy? There are perhaps two answers to 
he given. He regarded Yahweh as awful and majestic, so 
lofty that nothing earthly could come into contact with 
him nor he compared with him. But the wizards and mediums 
spoke or caused the spirits of the dead to "cheep and 
j gihher in low murmurs." Such practice was entirely 
. incompatible with his conception of Yahweh. Again, he 

i 

j says, "Why consult the dead on behalf of the liying?" His 
■ conception of an after life cannot he described by the 
| word "life." It was a mere existence of the spirit in a 
! shadowy realm. The spirit had no genuine reality and, 
j worst of all, it had no communion with God. 

It was unfaithfulness to him to ask such a spirit for 
, guidance. 

Generally, the conceptions of the prophets were far 
ahea,d of their times. The religion of the masses was far 
behind them and in this case it still tolerated necromancy, 

’ One of the sins of Manasseh,who lived half a century 
later than Isaiah,w T as the instituting of mediums and 
wizards. 


(l) Isaiah 8:19 ff. 29:4 















9 . - 


( 






0 


... 




' .. • 




o 


' 









- 82 - 


Mi c ah and Isaiah were contemporaries* Both held a 
similar conception of Yahweh* He was a holy and righteous 11 
God and he alone was to be worshipped. Their background 
however was quite different, Micah being a man from the 
country. Like Isaiah he was strenuously opposed to sorcery 1 
wizards, idols, sacred stones, in fact anything their 
hands had made including the Temple at Jerusalem contrary 
to Isaiah who said the Temple would not be destroyed. He 
had a high religious ideal but he also had a sentiment of 
dislike or hatred toward city life. He believed all evils 
came from the city, which existed only to exploit the 
country people. Perhaps in his opinion the above mentioned 
jmagical practices were carried on in the Temple itself. 

Many prophets, he calls them false prophets, practised 
divination and thus led the people astray. This evil was 

u) 

increased by the fact that they divined for money. In 
Micah’s case it is also true that his lofty conceptions of 
Yahweh made him practically a monotheist and thus he left 
no room for magical practices. 

Luring the reign of Manasseh in the middle of the 
seventh century any prophet who dared in any way to oppose 
the idolatry practised by both king and the people was 
promptly put to death. The prophets were forced to work 
secretly, and the result was the book of Deuteronomy. This 
book may be considered as an attempt to preserve for later 
(1) Micah 2:5 ff, 3:5 ff, 3:11 



















: 









* : f:.. 





,c 





generations the achievements of the eighth century 
prophets. It sought to codify their teachings and thus set 
out in clear, unmistakable terms how an individual must 

i 

live in order to live according to the will of Yahweh. It 
gave examples which were intended to indicate how love 
toward man and God should manifest itself. It strictly 

u) 

opposed such practices as necromancy and such low forms 

(2) 

of religion as were practised by Israels neighbors. It 

(3) 

laid great stress on the personal relationship in religion. 
There is a noble prayer in I Kings 8 which is falsely 
attributed to Solomon. The viewpoint is too exalted even 
for Israel’s so-called wisest king. It is of interest to 
note that according to verse 35 when rain is desired the 
people must pray for it. This leaves no room for such 

rain-makings as that of Elijah. The Book of Deuteronomy 

, 

is a decline from the highest prophetical truths but the 

I 

fault lay with the people who interpreted its letter, not 
its spirit,and thus made it ritualistic. For example, they 
would leave some of the olives and grapes on the trees 
and vines for the poor, but they would carefully pick all 
other fruits because these were not mentioned in 
Deuteronomy’s commands. 

Apparently the prophet Jeremiah taught the principles 
of Deuteronomy for a time but he soon learned that to do 

(1) Dt. 18:10-12 

(2) II Kings 17:14-17 (The books of Kings are to be 
considered as part of Deuteronomy being history 
rewritten from the Deuteronomic point of view.) 

(3) Dt. 8:5 






- ' • 

.'■ '■ : ■; • • ■' : ! . t< . V ) 

- 

';v ..■ • ' ■ o ;■ ... v 

• ’ 

' 

• . . - • 

- 


J i - - -: Vj I r j': 

V... ' : 

. 

. 

. . 


. 



■ 

■ 


. 

r : 

• ' 

‘ 

V. 

< 

> 

■ '.r h ' ' . 


' 

' ■ 

1 



• 

■ 

r : t ' •• •" 



' 





* 

* 


' 

■ 



, 

• ■ 

' 


. » / ' " 

' . f 




: 

• ■ • : ; ' 

' “.V!. 





so was not only useless 5 but harmful. He realized that the 
tendency of the common people was always toward externalism 
and magic and that this tendency was making Deuteronomy a 
book of ritualistic practices, rather than a summary of 
prophetic truths. This realization culminated in his 
Hew Covenant which was to be written on the hearts of men. 

Jeremiah has many characteristics similar to those of 

i 

Hosea but he rises to even greater heights. From the 
terminology employed in his writings one gathers that the 

chief element in his religious sentiment or ideal is sex, 

I 

that is, love and tender emotion. But he himself remained ’ 
unmarried. The physical element did not enter into his 

thinking, his thoughts were entirely spiritual. Thus it 

' 

is evident that the love metaphor he used d<id not come 

ed 

from his own experience. He seems to A borrow, directly 

from Hosea in several instances. He carried the thought 

I 

of faithfulness to the limit when he insisted on the 

the 

purity of 4 heart or, in more modern terms, the purity of 

the whole personality. Gregariousness playedalmost no 

dble to 

part with Jeremiah. He was conceive of religion continuing 
without the Temple and its gatherings. 

It is not surprising that magic is not mentioned in 
Jeremiah. Magic is an external practice. The prophet 
carried his opposition to externalism so far that he even 

(1) 

regards the temple as a hindrance to spirituality. He 

(1) Jer. 7 and 26. See A.C. Welch, in 
’•Abingdon Commentary* n p* 678b. 












- 


f ■ 


j *t l ' ' D ‘1 ' - 


- 


. } 


















i 


-«D- 


I 




i 

i 




predicted, as did Micah, the utter destruction of the 

Temple but his motives were much higher than Micah’s* 

Jeremiah saw that the people placed such emphasis on the 

Temple itself as to forget whose dwelling place it was 

meant to be* Jeremiah also regarded dreams as mere 

( 1 ) 

formations within the prophets mind* He warned them 

against uttering "their own illusions" as though they 

were messages from Yahweh. "If a prophet has had a dream,' 

then let him tell his dream; but he who has a word of mine 

then let him tell it faithfully*” nothing external was 

to enter the content of true prophecy* ' 

( 2 ) 

In Jeremiah’s Hew Covenant the highest point in the 

religion of the Old Testament is reached* Yahweh asks 

nothing external, not even a law book nor anyone to teach 

the law or the commands of God, but all individuals, both 

the great and the small will have the law written within 

their hearts* Everyone will faithfully follow the 

dictates of his own heart which will be entirely in accord 

Y/ith the will of Yahweh* All past sins wall be forgiven 

and the people will live with the Spirit of God wathin 

their heatts. This Hew Covenant is hardly exceeded even 

in Jesus' teaching. After this high point has been reached 

there is a marked and rapid decline* Because the people 

interpreted Deuteronomy as having such ritualistic 

significance this decline may be regarded as beginning 

(1} Jer. 23:27 ff. and 29:8 
(2) Jer. 31:31-34 









. 














■■ 


n . . I 






• 



1 

■ ' 1 f Cl rn 








. 



t 1 .-..s' 

* 



;j ' ; . . • .. v ■. o / not 









-86- 


jWith this hook for which the prophetic authors had such 
high hopes. The decline continued in Ezekiel and became 
most marked in the later writings both priestly and 
|prophetic. There is, however, one outstanding exception, 

I that of chapters 40 to 55 Isaiah, written toward the end of, 
the exile. They contain a conception of religion surpass¬ 
ing, in part, even that of Jeremiah. Yahweh was to be 

' 

| the God of the nations and Israel was to be his missionary, 

j proclaiming and demonstrating true religion Mishpat) 

(i) 

to all the world. These chapters severly oppose the 

worship of idols even moving them as mere handmade objects 
They are utterly worthless. The author of Isaiah 40 to 55 
J did not fail to appreciate Jeremiah as Ezekiel failed to 

the 

Ido. Jeremiah was the pioneerof^idea of individual 

. 

I resoonsibi-ity, Ezekiel merely borrowed from him and 
amplified what he had borrowed, but the great prophet of 
the exile rose to noble conceptions of personal and 
spiritual religion. 


Isaiah 42:1-7 

Isaiah 41:28 and 44:9-20 






















. 








t ' • ■■ . <- 



-87 


MAGIC AND RELIGION DURING THE EXILIC AND 
POST-EXILIC PERIODS 

It does not come as a surprise to find in the 
prophet Ezekiel a much greater amount of externalism and 
magic than was found in Jeremiah and his predecessors* 

There are several reasons for this. Ezekiel was a member 

i a) 

jof the priestly family which had officiated at the 
temple ever since it had been built and would naturally 

! 

lay stress on ritual. Even though Judah was in captivity 
and the temple lay in ruins he regarded this as only 
temporary and Yahweh would again restore them to Jerusalem* 
■Without a people Yahweh could not exist as a living God* 

In describing the restoration Ezekiel pictures a glorious 
temple and an elaborate ritual complete in every detail. 

It is, however, not true that he transformed the ideals of 
the prophets into rules and dogmas, and destroyed spirit¬ 
ually free and moral religion. M His age required the 
expression of religious ideals in external, concrete forms. 
The great mass of the people still needed the temple, the 
sacrificial systems and other institutions as means of 
communion with God, and it is exceedingly doubtful that 
the religion of Jehovah could have survived without them. 
That later generations exaggerated the importance of 
externals until finally the spirit was altogether lost 
(l) Ezekiel 1:3 







• 

- 






1 

' 





. 


• 

■ 

- 




• 

■ 

. 

1 









- ■' 


‘ ' :: % ' ' 


■ 

’ ' r. 


% 

- 






' ' 



• 









' 
























sight of was not the fault of Ezekiel. The ritual does 

by no means exhaust the religious interests of the prophet.. 

Again and again he insists that a pure and righteous life 

( 1 ) 

is an essential part of true religion." Yet, regardless 
of Ezekiel’s motives, his codification of ideals and stress 
on externalism furthered the regression of religion towards 
magic. 

Some have held Ezekiel to have been a cataleptic but 

that is now generally not accepted. But "he was certainly 

(2) 

psychic, subject to trance and ecstasy, and gifted with 
(3) 

second sight. Many of his prophecies were given in 
the form of symbolic actions, and it seems to be certain 
that these were actually performed. Such actions in 
Semitic thought are more than mere symbols; they are 
’sympathetic magic,’ tending to produce the results of 

(4) Or. the other 

which thejr are symbolic. " A J.M.P. Smith says that many 

of these symbolic actions were not actually performed but 

( 5 ) 


took place in a trance. 

Still a third factor which accelerated the downward 
movement of religion was Ezekiel’s environment. Isaiah, 
chapter 47, contains a vivid description of Babylon’s 
magical practices employihg spells and mighty magic, magic 
craft and cunning, astrologers, star-gazers and calcul¬ 
ation of the future, month by month. Naturally all this 

1) W.L. Wardle. Abingdon Commentary p. 715 

2) Ezekiel 8:lf, ll:lf, 24:lf, 33:lf, 37:lg. 

3) Ezekiel, 8:16, 11:13, 24:1 
4j Wardle, Ab. Com. p. 714 

5) "Prophets and their Times," pp. 162, 163 








. 

< 

, 

" 

- 

1 ' - _ * J •: -; v : 

t . • . 

* O * j - • ...j. j 

. 









V 






■ 







I 


-89- 1 

influenced Ezekiel. One must take into account the 
prophets inheritance, temperament and environment in forming, 
an opinion of him, and doing so one is able to understand 
and appreciate the prophet’s constructive work. 

j 

The priestly codes and documents contain much that is 
magical. In Exodus 7:8-13, a part of the "P w document, 

Moses and Aaron are given the power of rhabdomancy, whereby 
they could change their rods into reptiles, to prove their 
authenticity. The rhabdomancy here is not only tolerated 
but advocated, commanded by Yahweh. The Egyptian magicians 
could do the same but their*s were mere clever tricks ; but 
Aaron’s magic was more potent and his rod swallowed up the 
Egyptian rods. This is a document written about 500 B.C., 
two centuries after the great prophets. 

Numbers 5, a part of the "P" document, contains an 
illuminating bit of ritualistic magic employed by the 
priest to determine whether a woman had been unfaithful to 
her husband. If a man had only a fit of suspicion he 
could bring his wife, together with a cereal-offering, to 
the priest. The priest placed her in front of Yahweh, 
dropped some dust from the floor into holy water, then after 
a conditional curse was written and the writing washed 
dov/n into the water the woman was made to drink it. If 
she was guilty the water would cause her thighs to shrivel 

I 

and her belly to swell; if innocent no harm would follow. 

The priestly writings placed great stress on the use 













: 











- 90 - 


of phyiacteries and fringes, or more correctly, tassels. 

_ x U) 

These are mentioned m earlier writings, hut the most 
detailed descriptions as to their construction and use 
j are to he found in "P". The practice of wearing phylacter¬ 
ies is justified by a passage in Deuteronomy 6:8 which says 
"You must tie them on your hands as a memento, and wear 
( them on your forehead as a badge." Originally, they were 
I not regarded as magical but their close resemblance to 
I such amulets as were tolerated in Israel soon made the 
; phylacteries take on magical significance. It is evident 
i that amulets were employed as prophylactics, i.e. as a 
means of counterworking the evil influence of witchcraft 
and demons. Some Jewish amulets consisted of inscribed 

I 

- objects bound up in leather cases. It was believed that 
(2) (5) 

the "Shema" were words containing special powers. 

Considering this together with the fact that phylacteries 

consisted of small leather cases containing inscribed bits 

| of parchment, one of these being the !, Shema" 7 it is 

! impossible to escape the conclusion that these were, at 

least by the masses, considered as magical. The priestly 

i writings prescribed their use. The tendency to regard 

the ritual commanded in "P" as magical is increased by the 

fact that, unlike "D", "P" gives no reasons for obeying 

the rites, except perhaps the phrase, "Because Yahweh is 

(1) Dt. 22:12 

(2) Deut. 6:4-9 and 11:13-21 

( 3 ) Ihitehouse, Hastings's Vol. IV, p. 604 























t - - 




■r 




















( 














holy 


The magical content of tassels is also evident. A.R.S, 

(i) 

Kennedy says, “When we attempt to go behind the 


prescription of the Torah there is reason to believe that 
we have here an ancient custom, (the practice of wearing 


tassels was known to the ancient Persians as appears from 


the monuments of Persepolis) perhaps with originally 


magical or superstitious associations, taken up and 


impressed writh a new significance by the HebJiw legislat¬ 


ion. ” That the people regarded them as magically potent 


is seen in the H.T. account of the Y/oman with the 


hemorrage being cured by touching the tassel of Jesus’ 

( 2 ) 

robe. 


The prophets’ opposition toward idols and necromancy 


is carried on also in the priestly writings. They will 


permit no other gods nor idols to be worshipped. YahY/eh 


alone must be worshipped by the Je^rs. Hecromancy was also 

(3) 

severly denounced. Leviticus. says Y/izards and mediums 


are not to be consulted because such consultation is 


deserting Yahweh. Also "any man or woman who is a medium 


or a Y/izard must be put to death. u Chronicles, which was 
v/ritten from the priestly point of view, says Saul was 

(4.) 

slain on the battle field because he consulted a medium. 


Judaism had been purged but little of magic. Sven 

(1) Hastings Vol. II, p. 69a 

(2) Lk. 8:44 

(3) Lev. 19:31, 20:6 and 27 

(4) I Chron. 10:13-14 











jthe post-exilic prophets tend toward externalism. Haggai 

I 

s,nd Zechariah advocate the rebuilding of the temple in * 
order to obtain material prosperity. Malachi says ail the 
hardships of the returned exiles have come upon them 
because they offer blemished animals at sacrifices. Very 
little is said about spiritual relationship to Yahweh. 

The writer of Daniel as late as 165 B.C. says that 
Daniel and his companions were ten times better than ail 
the magicians and enchanters of Babylon. The status of 
magic in Judea may best be described by Quoting O.C. 

u) " * 

Whitehouse. 

5, As a matter of fact, however, the mass of the people 
could not be delivered from the influences of their time, 
and troubled themselves little about the religious 
scruples of their teachers, and----were delivered up to 
the superstitious tendencies and practices of their age. 
Hence the Mishna (Sota 1 x 13) deplores that jealousy and 
magic were ruining society. Indeed we even hear of 
distinguished Rabbis practising magic, e.g. Eliezer, son 
of Hyrcanus, who at the request of Akiba was able, through 
a charm, to fill an entire field with gourds, and by means 
of another formula to transfer them to a single place, 
(Sanhedrin 68a in Blau, p. 26). Jesus Christ was regarded 
by His countrymen as a magician, and was called by them 
Bal’am (Sank. 106b, Sota 47b.). According to the Gospel 
(1) Hasting’s, Vol. Ill p. 211a. 















narrative (Mt. 12:24 f.), He was even called a sorcerer 
who worked His wonders in league with Beelzebub. Tobit, 
Ch. 6, clearly illustrates how thoroughly demonology and 
magic practices had taken hold of the Jewish people.” 

On the whole, the eighth century prophets would have 
regarded the post-exilic period as one of apostasy. Hew 
fruits of their labors were to be seen, due perhaps to the 
severity of the times and the human tendency to travel the 
easier and more pleasant road of ceremonialism. Hot until 
several centuries later were their teachings and ideals,in 
partjrealized. Even today religion may profit by studying 
the words of these great and godly men. 





























































































B29744 







