B29737 





V 


For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 











































HOLL1NGER 
pH 8.5 

MILL RUN F3-1543 







U/v^^ 



thesis 


11 Chaucer’s Transition from Allegory 
or Artificial Art to Realism.” 



R 


H 


DOBSON 



CHAUCER'^ TRANSITION FROM 


ALLEGORY OR ARTIFICIAL ART 

TO REALISM. 


An Allegory is a figurative representation 
conveying a meaning other than and in addition 
to the literal. It is distinguished from a 
metaphor by being longer sustained and more 
fully carried out in its details, and from an 
Analogy by the fact that one appeals to the im¬ 
agination and the other to the reason. It has 
been a favorite form of literature with every 
nation. The Hebrew/s used it for their religions 
teaching; there are numerous instances to be found 
in the classics; and it was a favorite device in 
European literature. 

In mediaeval times the use of the allegory was 
very prevalent. Allegorical interpretations were 
employed wherever reason or fancy could possibly 
introduce them. Religious interpretations and 
moral interpretations of natural history were pop¬ 
ular forms of the use of the allegory. From these 
it was a short step to allegorical invention. This 
particular form of literary expression, to us very 
wearisome, seemed to have some special appeal to 
the mediaeval type of mind, and was exceedingly 
popular. 






2 


It reached the climax of its perfection at this 
time and thereafter speedily declined. The 
cause of this decline was the fact that the artif¬ 
icial conventions had "become so cumbersome that 
they destroyed the very desire that they were in¬ 
tended to stimulate. 

On the other hand Realism deals with life, its 
emotions and actions in its actual surroundings 
and conditions. This is not an ideal artificial 
condition but plain facts of human life and exper¬ 
ience, even though at times coarse and brutal. 

Our aim in this thesis shall be to show 
Chaucer’s transition from this artificial art to 
his place in the forefront of realism. We can 
not however, say that Chaucer’s poetry ever lacked 
touches of Realism nor can we deny that some of 
even his, late poems were partially allegorical in 
nature. 

English poetry of the thirteenth and fourteenth 
centuries was largely influenced by French examples, 
this was due to the fact that English language and 
poetry had not reached a universally accepted form, 
while the French had been established by its pop¬ 
ularity. This accepted form of French poetry was 
inventive allegory based on various classic myths 
(Costa Romanorum) or the popular tabliaux. 

These allegorical poems were not without their 
charms. Though rather wearying to the modern 
studentnthey had many attractions for the readers 
of that period. The various points which prove 
tedious to present day students, were considered 
the best of ornaments. Typical of these artific¬ 
ial embellishments and machinery were, the dream. 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/dobson1910 


3 


the May morning, the garden, the fair company, etc. 

In this class of poetry the plot was of 
minor consideration and showed little dramatic 
arrangement. Sometimes it was interesting ehough 
but apparently more by chance than by design. The 
real interest centred around the artificialities of 
the poem. Each poet might arrange these various 
"set pieces” in new combinations, yet they were the 
same bowers, flowers, sunrises, sunsets, song-birds, 
etc., which had been used by every "courtly maker" 
for the past hundred years. The language used was 
stilted and full of long quotations from the classics, 
while the characters were most unreal. The metre 
as shown in the Roman de la Rose, which Chaucer trail- 
slated in the same original metre, is the octosyllabic 
couplet in common use by the French poets. This 
metre prevented the use of descriptive words, which 
were replaced by flow r ery phrases. 

Chaucer f s early life was spent at the English 
court under the patronage of John of Gaunt. Here 
he would naturally feel the influence of French 
poetry of the day. He had access to many French man¬ 
uscripts which only the richer classes could afford. 

It would seem that Chaucer had been totally unaware 
of the existence of any literature save French and 
Classical English until his first embassy to Italy 
in 1370. 


Among the manuscripts which fell into his 
hands, we are certain that there were those of 
Guillaume de Morris, Joan de Meurig and Machault. 

His latent genius was stirred by the Romaunt de la 
Rose, and he set himself to the translation of it. 

The Romaunt de la Rose was the universally acknowled¬ 
ged masterpiece of French poetry, and the delight of 
the Court so that this poem was the most natural 
selection for Chaucer, as he was French in descent and 
his life and education at Court nad familiarized him 
with the French language. In France this poem was the 
dominant work of poetic literature, "and the source 
whence every rhymer drew for his need"-- down to the 












4 


period of the classical revival# In England the 
influence was only slightly inferior upon both 
matter and form of poetry. 

In his translation Chaucer stuck very closely 
to the original text, thereby acquiring the germs 
for felicitous phrases such as the famous designa¬ 
tion of Nature as "the vicaire of th*Almighty Lorde" 
which he uses in the Pariernenf of Foules. But the 
main service which the work of this translation 
rendered to him was the opportunity of practic¬ 
ing and perfecting a happy and ready choice of 
words. The Romaunt de la Rose exercised on Chaucer, 
an influence greater than any other single work, 
supplying him with poetic forms and machinery, 
which he was slow to outgrow and with reminiscenses 
of particular passages which leave their trace in 
some of his best and latest work. For example, 
the Prioress is a pleasant, tender-hearted but 
rather affected person who cares more about fine 
manners than about austerity: Hints for this char¬ 
acter are evidently due to memories of the Romaunt 
de la Rose. 

The Romaunt de la Rose was the v r ork of tv T o 
authors Guillaume de Lorris and Jean de Meung. Be 
Lorris who wrote the first part was not remarkable for 
original genius but brought together the thoughts 
and sentiments of his own time in Book I. He was 
fortunate in the discovery of a new subject which he 
treated with ingenuity. Instead of a narrative of 
warlike adventures he gives his readers a psysho- 
logical romance in which a combination of symboliza¬ 
tions and personified abstractions supply the char¬ 
acters of the moral conflicts represented. After 
writing about one fifth of the 22,000 verses of 
which the original French poem consists, Be Lorris 
who had executed his part of the task in full sym¬ 
pathy with the spirit of the chivalry of his times, 



r X 





died, and left the work to he continued by 
another trouvere. Jean de Meting took up the 
thread of his predecessors poem, and trans¬ 
formed the chivalrous allegory into a popular 
satire. The spirit of the poem was wholly 
changed. De Dorris had set out to write an 
allegory of life and de Meting wrote on every 
topic of mediaeval life in the mood of a bitter 
satirist. While DeLorris supplied Chaucer with 
his appropriate phrasing and furnished the proper 
allegorical machinery for artificial poetry, yet 
De Meung was to Chaucer a storehouse from which 
he constantly drew. De Meung*s keenest satire 
was directed against women and the clergy and 
Chaucer imitates him in this respect as may be 
seen in the depictions of Wife of Batl and the 
Monk. Chaucer*s own intellectual life may be 
described as a transition from the standpoint 
of De Dorris to that of De Meung. 

Chaucer*s work as translator of the 
Homaunt de la Rose, though it helped him in the 
ways already mentioned, hindered his genius. 

As an inimator he adopted the allegorical style 
for many years. This styde did not encourage 
the dramatic talent which was inherent in him, 
and constantly seeking expression. While seek¬ 
ing for the right vehicle for his poetry, he 
adopted this artificial style always giving to 
it such touches of nature and real feeling that 
we realize his uneasiness of mind. He was but 
following the examples of many other writers, for 
the Romaunt de la Rose was widely imitated by 
writers of all nations. 

In another and very different way was 
Chaucer the imitator of Machault. To him he 
went for metrical help, pleasant rhymes and 
harmonious sounds. Machault had introduced the 
ballads rondeaux and vlrelais and of these 
Chaucer copied not a few.. He imitated the form 
and very often the subjects in these shorter poems. 

































6 


He seemed never to be seeking the expression of 
thought but rather attempting to reach perfection 
of style and versification. Chaucer was never a 
true exponent of the lyric art. He did not 

hq.ve the passion and fire, nor the airy fancy 
necessary for theproduction of successful lyrics. 

He was by nature the narrator of tales, rather 
than the singer of ballads and rondelays. 

Machault'* s poems then furnished the models 
for Chaucer*s imitations and Machault was well 
suited to teach this eager pupil 9 already poss¬ 
essed of great poetic qualities, anxious to ob¬ 
tain skill in the technique of his art. In 
spite of Machault 1 s prosiness and insufferably 
long debates about points of amorous etiquette, 
he was a musician as w r ell as a poet and had a 
lasting concern for art and harmony. He was ever 
testing new groupings of verses and fresh com¬ 
binations of rhymes. Chaucer learned well of 
this master,and his verse forms became equally 
harmonious and intricate. The first words of 
Machault *s Hid de la Marguerite were so grace¬ 
ful that Chaucer embodies them in his Prologue 
to the Legend of Good Women and dwells on the 
graceful thoughts of the 

"dayesye of all flcures flour 
Fulfill of vertu and of alle honour. 11 

Chaucer may also have translated Machault f s 
Book of the Lion as he mentions this -work of his 
pen at the end of the Parson*s Tale.. However, 
no trace of this translation has been found among 
his extant works. We have Machault 1 s Lay de 
Plour with its varied and difficult stanzas re¬ 
produced in form in Chaucer f s Compleynt of Anelida. 
Two of Chaucer*s most successful metres, the seven 
line stanza and the decasyllabic couplet’were 
borrowed from Machault. 

To such contemporaries as Froissart Heschamps 
and Otto de Granson, Chaucer was indebted for cer¬ 
tain subjects. Some of the works of these 
authors he translated word for word as in his 
Compleynt to Venus 11.79-82, where he gives us 





r 


r 


i 




r 


v 


t 





7 


the English for de Granson’s stanzas. In 
his Meroiles Beaute he was probably working 
along the lines of two short poems by Eus- 
tache Beschamps. The passion displayed by 
Chaucer in the first and second of these 
models is not the lyric passion but rather 
an example of his powers of imitation,for 
in the third group he scoffs at his style 
and sentiment. But this practice on bal¬ 
lads, rondeaux, etc., made possible the 
burning stanzas of Troilus and Criseyde 
where he view in passion with Boccaccio. 

In the Prioress’s Tale, this training enables 
him to bring into play all the resources of 
a highly trained style in order to suggest 
a suave artlessness. Possibly his art un¬ 
trained, might not have been equal to the task 
of portraying the energy and vividness of the 
couplet of the Knights 1 Tale. His comic 
verse, strong and of peculiar piquancy, with 
its strong, regular rythm, which is yet 
supple enough to render the inflexions of 
the speaking voice, is in some part the re¬ 
sult of the long and varied exercises in 
lyrical expression, by which he prepared 
himself. 


Chaucer also interested himself some¬ 
what ironically in the tensons of the com¬ 
parative merits of tne leaf and the flower. 

He shows this interest in the Prologue to 
the Legend of Good women. He also assoc¬ 
iated himself with the symbolical worship of 
the "Marguerite” (or dayesye) which in the 
latter half of the century, out of regard 
for some great ladies of that name, dis¬ 
placed the worship of the rose. Chaucer was 
a reader of the works of many other French 








- 








I 

















8 


writers, and inevitable touches are discovered 
in his own poems from these writers. To some 
he owes plot ideas, to others a phrase or line 
of poetry, but to de Lorris, de Meung and Ma- 
chault is his principal debt. 

The intellectual influence of the Romaunt 
de la Rose and the metrical influence of Mac- 
hault, stand out as the two important factors 
contributed by French literature to Chaucer’s 
development. In his reading and translation 
Chaucer became saturated with the spirit of 
these writers, and never entirely threw off 
their influence. For years he was the"courtly 
maker 11 , though from the beginning of his orig- 
inal poetry we find a trace of impatience with 
the limitations of this method of expression. 

The decadence of this style of poetry had 
already begun in France, though it was not yet 
noticeable. It was stifled and exhausted by a 
maze of convention and allegory. It was dying 
from the very ideal to which Chaucer strove to 
add new lustre, and which would have proved his 
undoing, but for his tendency to realism and his 
good fortune of creating for England a literary 
language; and being the first to use it for 
poetical purposes. 

The chief of Chaucer’s Allegorical poems 
are the Book of the Duchess, Parlement of Foules, 
House of Fame and Prologue to Legende of Goode 
Women. The Book of the Duchess belongs to 
what we might term his first or French period 
when the influence of the Romande la Rose was 
strong in his mind. This poem is original 
in substance though not in form. The Parle- ^ 
ment of Foules and House of Fame were written 
towards the end of the second period when the 


- 









■ . 

" 

' 


























T 















■ 


9 


Italian influence dominated him. The Legende * 
of Goode Women was written just prior to his 
planning for his great poems, the Canterbury 
tales. Yet this flow of allegorical writings 
was not uninterrupted fur we find interspersed 
through the various periods typical realistic 
poems or parts of poems, e.g. Troilus and Cri- 
seyde, which depicts vividly in so many placed 
Chaucer as a realist, is followed by the Alleg¬ 
orical poems the Parlement of Foules and the 
House of Fame. 

All these poems are markedly allegorical 
and present the typical allegorical machinery— 
the May morn, the lover*s dream, the garden, etc. 
The Book of the Duchess written in 1369, on the 
occasion of the death of Blanche, Duchess of 
Lancaster, is Chaucer f s first original allegory. 
In it an elaborate framework is constructed 
around the essential theme of the poem. This 
framework is purely conventional and shows many 
of the devices borrowed from the Romaunt de la 
Rose. The elegy commences with a proem, in 
which he tells how, being unable to sleep and 
suffering from an incurable disease, (inflicted 
by merciles beaute) he has a book brought him, 
wherein he reads from the Metamorphoses of Ovid, 
the story of Clyx and Alcyone, reaching the 
point where Alcyone dies on the third day. 

Chaucer stops reading here, as he has discovered 
a new deity, Morpheus, the god of sleep. He 
vows to pay Morpheus a feather-bed, and a pair 
of doves, and then falls asleep on his book. 

While sleeping he dreams that he is awakened 
one May morning by the song of birds. It was 
"The most solempne servyse 
By note that every man 
Had heard. ,T 




10 


The windows of his room are painted with the ' 
stories of Troy and the walls with the Romaunt de 
la Rose. He hears horns and joins the hunting party 
of Octavian (Edward III) He strays aside and meets 
a knight in black who sits under an oak lamenting. 

He asks the cause of his grief and the knight (John 
of Gaunt) complains that Fortune in a game of chess 
has cheated him and stolen his queen. He had al¬ 
ways been Lowe’s tributary and one day chanced upon 
a company of fair ladies where he fell in love with 
"the goode faire white." He describes her beauty 
and goodness at great length. He pleads his lowe 
to her, and she refuses him, but at the end of a 
year yields to his suit and they are married, Chaucer 
here gives a lovely picture of the chivalrous ideal 
of marriage 

"For treuely that swete wyght. 

When I had wrong and she the ryght, 

She wolde always so goodily 
Forgive me so debonairely: 


And thus we lyved full many a yeare 
So wel, I kan not telle how." 

After some unnecessary questions it appears that 
the knight now laments the death of his peerless 
wife. Chaucer replied "Is that your losse? .by 
God it is routhe." Then the Emperor is seen re¬ 
turning from the hunt to his castle, and as a bell 
rings for noon, the poet awakes and determines to 
commit the dream to poetry. 

Such is the story and throughout it abounds 
with artificial conventions as found in the Romaunt 
de la Rose. We have the dream and the awakening 
on a May morning. In the book of the duchess he 
is awakened by the song of birds while in the Rom¬ 
aunt de la Rose he goes to the woods to hear the 
birds sing. These are the stories on the windows 






II 


and walls of the poet’s room, corresponding in idea 
to the pictures on the outside of the garden walls 
in the Romaunt de la Rose, There are the allegor¬ 
ical characters as Love, Fortune and "the goode 
faire white." Everywhere are long tedious dis- 
-courses. There is a fair park of singing birds 
instead of a garden. Even the portrait of the 
Knight’s lady is rather an assemblage of fair 
qualities than a description of a real character. 

In this description of his lost lady, there are 
touches of Machault. Chaucer has happily appro¬ 
priated Machault’s verse and thought and converted 
it into something beautiful. We find in this pic¬ 
ture by Chaucer perhaps the most life-like picture 
of maidenhood in the whole range of our literature, 
beginning: 

" I saw her dance so cornelily 
■*............. .not overthwart. " 

Another touch of Machault is found in the above 
mentioned ideal of marriage, which in part is a 
pretty close translation of some lines of Machault ! s 
Jugement due bon roi de Behaigne. 

in writing this poem Chaucer called to his 
aid all his stores of knowledge and all his art. 

He embodies in this elegy his previously written 
story of Clyx and Alcyone, an imitation of Ovid 
and uses many lines from Machault. In the Book 
of the Duchess, in spite of the borrowed conven¬ 
tions and the artificialities, the subject being 
original, and the touches of Hature genuine, the 
tale is one of simplicity and truth, told in a 
natural, effective manner. There is a certain 
realness and freshness that provides a lasting 
charm to this allegorical poem which was not found 
in the models provided by Chaucer’s teachers. 

















. 


. 









IE 


In the Parlement of Ponies however, the pro¬ 
duction seems so English, so fresh from Nature's 
own inspiration, so instinct with gaiety from 
Chaucer's own heart, that one is apt to overlook 
the undeniable vestiges of French and Italian in¬ 
fluence, It shows how Chaucer v r as beginning to 
select as well as to assimilate the loans. He 
still is on the beaten paths but merrily on the 
alert for touches of nature and real life* 

In the Parlement of Ponies, the source of 
his imagery as well as the subject is English* 

The vivacity and joyousness of his temperament 
enhance his passages of dialogue and add force 
and freshness to his passages of description* 

Even when enumerating his list of birds and trees 
he gives graphic descriptions true to details. 

His style here seems to be perfect and as for 
composition, his poem carries out to the full 
what he intends it should. It expresses the 
mind of Chaucer both through the comic dialogues 
of the birds in their assembly end the music of 
its solemn verse. The idea is French, as the 
device of the Parlement of birds is a French idea 
older than the Rornaunt de la Rose. It would seem 
that Chaucer is still holding back and practising 
on familiar ground and is gradually working into 
his poetry all he can manage from Italian books. 

It is one of Chaucer's masterpieces and shows 
many traces of his reading, yet the spirit, gaiety 
humor and love of nature are Chaucer's, and as a 
whole the poem is as original as Shakespeare's 
”As you Like It". 

Chaucer exhibits in this poem a tendency 
to escape the limitations of the allegory in many 
ways. One striking illustration of this escape - 
is noted when the goose rushes in with a certain 
resolution which provokes uproarious ridicule of 
other birds led by the sparrow-hawk. 







I 





IS 


By far the most note?/or thy poem written 
during the time when Chaucer was most subject to 
Italian influence was Troilus and Criseyde. It 
was a tragedy according to Chaucer's own defin¬ 
ition. It was a lengthy poem partly translated 
and partly adapted from Boccaccio's Filostrato. 
Nevertheless the poem is so transformed, and the 
characters so changed that it seems a different 
tale. Chaucer discarded more than one-half of 
Boccaccio's work and added about twice as much 
of his own composition. 

Boccaccio's Filostrato is undoubtedly a 
masterpiece. It is the most beautiful of those 
poems, in which Boccaccio expressed the voluptu¬ 
ousness of his sojourn in Baples and his youth¬ 
ful passion for Maria d'Aguino, the daughter of 
King Robert. She comes to us as a true woman, 
not idealized, whose charm, beauty and fickleness 
were brought out by Bocaccio in various stories. 

At once a realist and romantieist, he was able, 
in the framev/ork of an impersonal tale, to por¬ 
tray the vivid picture of a heart stricken by 
love, in a psendo-homeric garb. His Filostrato 
is one of the most enthralling accounts of com¬ 
pelling passion. In this he centres the interest 
around three characters Criseyde, Troilus and 
Pandarus. 

This poem supplied the data upon which 
Chaucer built the first great love-poem written in 
the English language, one which had no equal un¬ 
til Shakespeare wrote the story of Romeo and Juliet. 
His his poem, Chaucer preserved almost all the 
passionate descriptions which indicate that he 
introduced hardly any alterations in the char¬ 
acter of Troilus, the brave warrior enslaved 
by love. Criseyde is changed somewhat from 



14 


-the portrait we have of her by Boccaccio, while 
Pandarns, the youthful friend metamorphosed in¬ 
to the worldly-wise, cynical uncle of Crisey&e, 
whp alternately jokes with her and causes her 
to laugh until her sides ache, and gives ques¬ 
tionable advice. Just here Chaucer gives us a 
fine display of his power to depict a human char¬ 
acter. Pandarus is for all time a typical light 
comedy character. Chaucer does not use the black¬ 
est of colors to paint him nor does he create a 
monster of vice, but with fine dramatic instinct 
he invents a good-natured, loquacious go-betw r een, 
full of proverbial philosophy and invaluable ex¬ 
perience, who admirably practises as well as 
preaches his art. He might seem unreal and im¬ 
possible if Chaucer had not succeeded in impart¬ 
ing life to him. In this we can see that, fol¬ 
lowing the example of Boccaccio’s invention, 
Chaucer breaks away from the conventional rules 
and depicts real, living persons. 

Although a modern author might have told 
this tale in a shorter and more pointed form, 
he could not have put into it more individual¬ 
ity nor shown more true insight into human 
affairs. The story is outstandingly realistic. 

The scene is undeniably pictured in London. We 
are sure of this by the reference to the cobble¬ 
stones etc. , which -would apply to London of that 
period. Other mediaeval touches Chaucer makes 
are the references to Troy as a moated and tur* 
reted city of the middle ages. Again in Book V 
he advises those who are disappointed in love 
to turn to religious affairs and to love Him who 
dies upon the Cross. Also in the signatures 
of the letters of Troilus and Criseyde, the 
French n La vostre C” etc. , is used. 



, - ' V,- ' - 














15 


Chaucer T s realism is brought out in this 
poem in very many ways. In the long speeches 
of Troilus, the fearful lover, the bashfulness, 
the uncertainty of the victim of the divine 
passion, is well portrayed. Criseyde, on re¬ 
tiring to her chamber to ponder over the first 
revelation of Troilus* love for her is realis¬ 
tically portrayed. 

"Criseyde arose, no longer there she stayed, 

But straight into her closet went anon. 

And set her down, as still as any stone. 

And every w r ord gan up and down to wind. 

That he had said, as it came to her mind." 

Again when she sees her -lover riding past in 
triump, she muses as follows 

"So like a man of armes and a knight 
He was to see, filled full of high powers, 

For both he had a body and a might. 

To do that thing, as well as hardiness." 

"And aye the people cried, "Here comes our joy. 
And, next his brother, holder up of Troy." 

How' skillfully does he depict the scene where 
Troilus falls in love with Criseyde at first 
signt and further does he depict with deep- in¬ 
sight, the gradual awakening of the love in the 
heart of Criseyde. Chaucer sympathetically tells 
of the love scenes between them and prolongs it 
in the first part of the poem while he hurriedly 
passes over the later unpleasant part which tells 
of the unfaithfulness of Criseyde. 

How wonderfully natural is the description 
of Criseyde f s bevy of lady visitors attracted by 
the news that she is shortly to be surrendered to. 
the Creeks! They come to console her and remain 
to gossip, while poor Criseyde wishes they would 
depart as her heart is burning all the while with 
love for Troilus, of which they know/ nothing, num¬ 
erous other examples might be quoted to show' his 





16 


vivacity and the keeness of his wit, his playful* 
humor, his true estimates of character and his 
sense of dramatic fitness. 

In Boccaccio's poem the author's aim had 
been to paint sentimentality hut Chaucer's aim was 
to reflect actual life. In this work Chaucer 
is part English and part Italian hut in his 
last great poem he will he wholly English. We 
may note here that the step is not far from the 
easily imperfectly realized conceptions of Chau¬ 
cer’s to his perfect depictions in Troilus and 
Criseyde and the Canterbury Tales. It was a 
natural step from the description of Pandarus 
to the Wife of Bath, and from the goose in the 
Parlement of Poules to the Miller, etc. After 
writing the dramatic story of Troilus and Criseyde 
Chaucer turns once more to the conventional 
allegory and gives us the two uncompleted poems 
of the House of Pame and Legend of Good Women. 

Chaucer seems to delight once more in the 
freedom of allegory where he can linger over 
details or bring in extraneous matter, as in 
his disquisition on dreams and the epitomized 
story of Yirgil f s -tieneid. He wanders on from 
one point to another of his allegory, seeming 
to glory in a half mischievous way, in the 
privilege of dallying here and there to give 
self-revealing glimpses of his daily life, his 
reading, character and turn of mind, ami his 
readers enjoy this abandon of mood which he 
displays In his return to the allegory. Here 
he allows his thoughts to wander at will and he 
is not hound down by the necessity of making 
definite progress towards a definite end. 

While reading the House of Pame we can 






I 


J 


I 


r 



i 












17 


almost watch the poet at work. It is his plan 
to write a comedy on the model of Dante only in 
a lighter vein, choosing an ethical theme in¬ 
stead of a religious one and he bethinks him of 
the notable description of Dame in Virgil and 
of her palace in the Metamorphoses of Ovid. With 
the aid of a little disquisition on dreams from 
MacrobMs he twists these various strands into 
a very original poem and then puts it aside until 
he can think of a suitable and effective ending 
which never occurs to him. The poem might be 

described as that of Dante retold by a humorist. 
It is not a parody but verse and tone are in a 
lower key. It is an elaborate working out of 
the allegorical treatment but the allegories 
are of his. own making. But the allegory is not 
the best thing about the poem. He has not the 
capacity for the sustained purpose and careful 
artifice which are the chief conditions of a 
good allegory. Reality has too many attractions 
for him and he cannot remain a slave to fancy 
very long. 


Even at the outset of his remarkable 
journey Chaucer’s humor cannot resist a touch 
of realism and he works up a discussion with 
the eagle on the question of natural sciences 
which he claims should not interfere with the 
work of a poet. He humorously shows us the 
anxious teacher and the unwilling pupil. An¬ 
other happy touch of Chaucer's humor is the 
question of the various rewards bestowed by 
Fame upon the claimants for favor, including 
the ready grant of evil fame to those who de¬ 
sire it ahd the scarcity of those who wish 
their good works to remain in obscurity and to 
-be their own reward. In his talk with the eagle 






18 


he tells us more about himself than he does in 
any other poem. 

The House of Fame, which is a dream 
poem, might almost have been written on a wager 
to show that he could bring in everything trad¬ 
itional and most common in the old artificial 
poetry and yet be original and fresh through 
it all. The framework of the allegory is worn 
very lightly while the poem teems with personal 
touches e.g. his matrimonial experiences. In 
this poem he adopts the tone of a shrewd and 
humorous spectator rather than of a novice awed 
by the mysteries into which he was being init¬ 
iated. The whole poem leads up to nothing 
more than a description and the platitudes that 
the decrees of fame are capricious and that 
rumor exaggerates and distorts. Chaucer used 
his humor, his imagination and his learning to 
enrich this poor theme but he could not round 
off the poem to his liking so he left it. The 
old forms wdiich he used so successfully for 
the sportive Parlement of Foules, failed him 
in his more ambitious attempt and he may have 
received his first hint that the proper sub¬ 
jects of his poetry were not mystological ab¬ 
stractions but the men and women he saw around 
him. It is not a little remarkable that both 
the House of Fame and the legende of Goode Women 
were both left unfinished. These immediately 
precede the Canterbury Tales. It seems as if 
Chaucer was casting about for some new method of 
expression which should exactly suit him and 
was unable to satisfy himself in either of these 
poems, which yet contain such admirable work. 

' This poem offers much in its details that 

is characteristic of Chaucer's genius., as point- 






19 


ting in the direction Chaucer was subsequently 
to follow. We may specially note the company 
thronged in the House of Rumor, shipmen, pil¬ 
grims, the two most numerous kinds of travell¬ 
ers in Chaucer ! s age, fresh from seaport or 
sepulchre with scrip hrimfull of unauthenticated 
intelligence. He here takes the opportunity 
of enumerating the writers he most admires, e.g. 
Josephus, Homer, Boccaccio, Virgil, etc. 

In those poems wherein he returns.to 
the allegorical after his realistic efforts he 
shows no hostility towards the allegorical. He 
readily returns to it after writing such a real¬ 
istic poem as Troilus and Criseyde. It seems to 
be merely a reaction where he comes back to the 
old form after throwing off his apparent res¬ 
traint in the other class of poetry. 

The prologue alone in the Legende of 
Good Women is allegorical. In the second part 
he tells the story of good women but the theme 
seemed to grow monotonous and he became tired 
of it. Consequently he leaves it only par¬ 
tially completed. We can notice as he proceeds 
that the subject is rather distasteful to him, 
i.e. he finds it difficult to portray all women 
chaste and beautiful, when history or myth does 
not make them so, and the men all libertines or 
vicious. We may notice a flippancy in dealing 
with some of the characters for example, in the 
question of Aeneas and Dido in the cave episode 
where he slyly adds that the author makes of it 
no mention whether any accompanied them. Again 
in Phyllis, the second last of his legends, in 
a frolicsome, sportive and flippant mood he 
advises the women ll trusteth, as in love, no man 
but me." 



20 


The prologue has all the external machinery 
of the allegory, the May morning, the birds, the 
garden, etc. The poet went out to kneel by 

his favorite flower, the daisy. Then on his 
return home, he sleeps and dreams that the God 
of love may be seen coming through the garden, 
leading by the hand a noble queen and followed 
by nineteen beautiful ladies in royal habits. 

The poet is condemned for the books he has 
written disparaging to woman and is made swear 
that he will sing the praises of women who 
have been faithful all their lives. 

The rules of the task demanded that he should 
create a new order of humanity where the -women 
were perfect and the men faithless and heartless. 
Chaucer was well able to do this in a single in¬ 
stance or even more but he could not prolong 
these fictions. He graphically describes the 
meekness, patience and purity of a woman 1 s heart 
as well as its devotion and bitter anguish. But 
his temperament was such that he could not con¬ 
tinue this interminably and his enthusiasm began 
to pall. He cannot help becoming ironical over 
his heroines and their troubles. 

In the second part the allegory is done away 
with entirely and the poet gives free play to his 
simple and kindly humanity. The poems enabled 
him to discover wherein his genius lay and It is 
not improbable that one of his reasons for leav¬ 
ing it so abruptly was in order to carry out the 
larger and better plan of the Canterbury Tales, 
wherein all his genius was at last to have full 
scope. 


Chaucer now enters upon a third period which 
may be.described as the English period. It is 





21 


'true that even in this period he does not absolute - 
ly break away from all allegorical influence but 
in it he depicts real characters and gives detail¬ 
ed descriptions characteristic of each. Especially 
in the prologue to the Canterbury Tales is this 
noticeable. Here he gives life portraits of the 
.different members Of the company, so real that 
they are vividly impressed on our minds, and re¬ 
main so, only becoming more and more vivid as we 
read through the Tales* Their stories are not 
always real or original* In some cases the 

tales appear to have been written before he had 
arranged the definite plan of the Canterbury Tales. 

Chaucer’s conception of the scheme seems to 
have been original. It is possible that the idea 
entered his mind after reading Boccaccio’s Becamer- 
one* Boccaccio, in his great work tells of a com¬ 
pany of seven ladies and three men who had fled 
from Florence to excape the plague and who took 
refuge in a beautiful garden, and there to while 
away the time, each tells ten stories, mostly of 
amorous adventure, until the complete hundred are 
finished. It is customeiy to say that Chaucer 
received his plan from these tales. If he did, 
adopt the Italian -work as his model, he so 
changed it that one can scarcely see any vestiges 
of the original in it. Instead of following the 
gruesome plan of Boccaccio v r here these people flee 
from the suffering around them to fritter away 
their time amid those amorous scenes, Chaucer 
happily hits upon the plan of depicting a band 
of thirty pilgrims out on a holiday. 

It had long been the custom to make annual 
pilgrimages to the tomb of Thomas Becket, and 
although at this time the question of the relig¬ 
ious benefit derived from them was questioned. 









22 


still it was looked upon as a holiday and was 
freely participated in by all orders of society. 
Thus we may look upon the party as a represen¬ 
tative holiday party leisurely wending its way 
towards Canterbury. These take the place 

of the heartless, careless people of Bocaccio’s 
stories. Whether he was consciously improv¬ 
ing on the Italian model or not, the fact re¬ 
mains, that the conception of the scheme is 
a much happier one than that of Boccaccio. 

Chaucer shpwed his impatience at the res¬ 
trictions in the class of poetry which he had 
been writing prior to the Canterbury Tales, by 
his occasional restlessness and cynicism in the 
Parlement of Poules and Legende of Good Women, 
etc., and seemed to be casting abort for a new 
plan. He seemed quite capable of estimating 
what he had done; as few authors had a sounder 
judgment, so much self-knowledge, or so critical 
a spirit. He was still living at his house in 
Greenwich along the Canterbury Hoad, where the 
pilgrims flocked to Becket f s shrine. Probably 
the sight of so many pilgrims of all classes, 
nobility, artisans, women etc., awakened in his 
mind the possibility of making such a poem. If 
he had known Boccaccio*s work at this time, he 
must have realized the greater possibility in his 
own scheme, for Boccaccio’s tales depicted people 
all of one rank of life, while this contained 
people of all ranks. Whenhe had discovered 

or hit upon this idea, the rest was very easy, 

He, at once commences to describe these pilgrims, 
their manners, dress and rank, and the individual 
characters. As a result we have the inimitable 
prologue. The nest step w r as to arrange that 
each character tell an appropriate tale. While 
in the Beca^ierone the framework has little re- 






» 




25 


lation to the stories told; in the Canterbury 
Tales it is one of the most important features 
of the whole work. 

The plan which Chaucer decided upon was 
to first describe this assemblage of persons 
from various classes and calling in life all 
bent on reaching one goal, and also to tell of 
the v r ay in which they agreed to amuse themselves 
by the way. In a prologue this was to be 
accomplished and the succeeding series of poems 
were to the stories told by the pilgrims en route. 
Then in order to prevent a feeling that the 
stories were merely a collection of poems chosen 
at random and most unskilfully arranged, he links 
them to each other by the interludes or dialogues 
among the members of the little band* The devel¬ 
opment of the character of the host in these links 
is also a strong factor towards preserving the unity 
of the plot. 

At the beginning of the Canterbury Tales w^e 
are placed in the heart and centre of English life; 
amidst the gay bustle and confusion of a band of 
gay pilgrims of all ranks and orders of life, gath- 
ered for a holiday jaunt. These circumstances and 
chance meetings suggest possibilities of serious and 
humorous situations and conversations. The meeting 
place is the Tabard Inn in Southwork, the host of 
which is the typical, jolly man of the world; Harry 
Bailey. After they have paid their reckoning Harry 
Bailey, treating them as an equal, steps in with 
the proposal that on their journey of the following 
days they while away the tedium of the long hours 
of travel by each telling four tales, two out and 
two back, and the one who tells the best tale shall 














































* 








, 

, 




.. 














shall be rewarded with a dinner at common expense 
on their return to the Tabard Inn. All gladly 
welcome this means of diversion. 

The host appoints himself as judge, critic 
and master of ceremonies, and on the morrow when 
the journey has been Started, he calls on the most 
important member to commence his tale viz. the 
knight. 

Such was Chaucer's plan for his collection of 
tales. If hisscheme had been followed out there 
would have been one hundred and twenty tales in 
all, but there are actually only twenty-three 
tales told. Yet these bring out the most salient 
features of Chaucer's plan wdiich was intended to 
lie in its variety of characters and the effects 
of their tales and societjT- upon each other. 

Each character is distinctly marked out in 
the prologue and the characteristics given there 
are sustained throughout the poem; in the connect¬ 
ing passages between the tales and the prologue 
to each particular tale, as well as in the tales 
themselves. The prologue presents a long array 
of life-like portraits aptly sketched in a few 
masterly words. These characters are so genuinely 
human that they are as typical today as then. 

Many an artist has sought to put on canvas these 
wonderful portraits, out they stand out so vivid¬ 
ly in our minds that the task seems almost unnec¬ 
essary. 

In the tales Chaucer shows a wide variety of 
stories. He deals with both the romantic and the 
real. As examples we have the Knight's Tale and' 

„ the Squire's Tale as typically romantic tales, while 










25 


*the Miller, Reeve etc., tell teles typically 
realistic. Besides these we find the ordinary 
typical mediaeval stories and sermons, e.g. 
Melibens and the Parson’s tale; also the devel¬ 
opment of the old fabliaux as in the Honne 
Preste’s Tale. According to Chaucer’s plan 
these tales are well mixed and v/e have so great 
a variety that they do not become tedious. He 
also managed to arrange that what some one of 
the raconteurs says may incense another of the 
company who can scarcely await his chance to 
tell a tale disparaging to his travelling com¬ 
panion. 


Some of the most amusing specimens of 
Chaucer’s realism, which show/ his humorous 
insight, and observation are to be found in the 
links which connect the tales. The host calls 
upon one member of the company to contribute his 
share of the outlined program. Druing the ensu¬ 
ing tale, some remark w/hich may intentionally 
or not, seem pointed at one of his fellow-travell- 
ers, stirs that one to a desire for retaliation. 

The latter can scarcely await his opportunity to 
recite some incident as a counter-thrust at the 
last speaker’s expense. This sparring is 

never carried too far, for mine host, is ever 
on the alert to preserve the good spirits of his 
little company. He interferes where necessary 
and sets matters right. His criticisms are 
very revealing as to his view/s of life in general 
and he never hesitates to voice them. These are 
usually accepted, in good part, but sometimes cut 
too deeply for kindly acceptance, as in his crit¬ 
icism of the Pardoner’s utterances and revelations. 
The Pardoner becomes angry, but the courteous 
knight restores peace and "Anon they kiss and 


Va 


I 








I 












26 


and ri&en on hir way.” One special occasion 
of sparring and matching of wits occurs "between 
the Reeve and- Miller, with their vulgar attacks 
upon the occupation of the other. Other minor 
difficulties occur, all told in Chaucer*s own 
slyly humorous or mildly ironical style. The 
Prologues spoken "bysome of the characters "before 
their tales are also very human. Noticeable 
among these is that of the Pardoner and the one 
spoken by the Wife of Bath. In each of these 
the handling is masterly. 

The Pardoner was typical of numerous such 
men who roamed through England. He is a humorous 
rogue. When called upon by the host to tell 
"some mirthe or japes right anon,” to drive from 
their minds the horrors of the Physician’s tale, 
he declares he must first stop at a nearby inn 
and n wol both drinke and eten of a cake.” This 
he does, then makes a cynical confession of all 
the tricks of his trade; after which he tells the 
tale of the three roysterers and their voilent 
deaths, with much sternness. This character 
must have been drawn from life, and drawn by the 
clever pen of an artist in the portrayal of char¬ 
acter. The leaving out of the prologue to his 
tale would have meant the loss of an amusing re¬ 
cital of the practices of this dealer in indul¬ 
gences. The country people could not doubt a 
man who could quote scripture and who attacked 
vices just like their own parson. It is well 
to remember that he delivers his eulogy of sob¬ 
riety on coming out of a drinking-booth. 

Some diverting situations occur which add 
realistic touches to the series of narratives. 
Sometimes the master of ceremonies does not allow 
















































27 


the narratives to run their course, but interrupts 
as in the case of Chaucer f s own tale of Sir 
Thopas. He says his "eres aken n and he cannot 
tolerate such "dogerel." At his bidding the 
rhyming is broken off, and the tale of Melibens 
is given in prose. We moderns are inclined to 
wish Sir Thopas, a clever parody full of sly hits, 
had been allowed to reach a conclusion in preference 
to the long, tedious moralising on the virtue 
of forgiveness. 

The quarrel between the Cook of London 
and the Manciple, ending with the drunken cook's 
fall from his horse, is quite diverting and real. 

Some of the outstanding characters with 
whom we feel quite well acquainted ere we leave 
them, are mine host, the pardoner-, the parson, 
the Wife of Bath and the Prioress. 

Harry Bailey, mine host of the Tabard Inn, 
becomes a past master in his own calling. He 
knows full w T ell how* to amuse and control crowds 
like this. He is a -worldling, full of shrewd 
insight and ready to voice popular sentiment on 
any and all subjects. He does not dislike a 
scurrilous tale, but cannot see any reason for 
preaching, and quickly calls for a "merrie tale" 
whenever some pious sould has' touched the hearts 
of the little band by some religious moral or more 
serious narrative. He is ever on the alert 

for hints of Lollardry and ever impatient of too 
much show of learning. He scoffs at the timid, 
laughs with the boisterous, speaks his mind freely 
on all occasions, and manages the pilgrimage 
with much address of a bold and blustering sort. 

He is an excellent contrast for such characters 






,. „ . . V, ■ ■ 
















t 

. f 






































, 






■ 






c 

e 












28 


as the Parson and the Clerk of Oxford, the relig¬ 
ions and studious types, Chaucer does not give 
us a detailed description of the host but brings 
him in so vividly on so many occasions that after 
reading the Canterbury Tales no character stands 
out portrayed so graphically as his. 

We have already spoken of the Pardoner and 
his open vaunting of the prevalent trickery and 
knavery practiced by his ilk, under the cloak of 
religion. How well has Chaucer given us the 
picture of his opposite, the truly religious 
parson, simple and godly, brother to the honest 
plowman.’ He lived only to serve Cod and his 
parishioners. He cares nought for the collecting 
of tithes, but no weather could prevent him reach¬ 
ing the sick or unfortunate. He lives the pre¬ 
cepts be preaches, helps the needy and sinful but 
does not hesitate to snub the obstinate whether 
of high or low estate. His story is a sermon on 
Penitence and Confession, penance and absolution 
ending with a retraction of Chaucer * s "translac- 
iouns and inditings of worldly vanities” i.e. 
Troilus, Book of Fame, etc., the sinful ones and 
many others forgotten. This retraction is be¬ 
lieved to be spuriously interpolated by Homan 
Catholic monks. Here we see Chaucer’s sympathetic 
handling and his sincere respect for a truly good 
man*. 


He paints with some humor but also with 
respect, the Priorness lisping her "Stratford- 
atte-Bowe" French, and being very careful and 
conscious of her deportment, who tells so perfect¬ 
ly the story of the little Christian boy murdered 
by the Jews because of his love for the Blessed , 
t Virgin. Such stories were very common in the 









29 


Middle Ages, and we can imagine the store of 
these religions tragedies which would be treas¬ 
ured in convents, both in the manuscripts and ' 
in the minds of the religious occupants of the 
convents. The story is perfectly suited to 
its narrator, and is beautiful in its touching 
simplicity. 


In strong contrast is the Wife of 
Bath who is the very essence of satire against 
women. In her prologue she is just as free 
in her unblushing revelations of herself and her 
most intimate relations with her five husbands, 
as was the Pardoner in his confessions. She 
is the typical, fell^blooded, sensuous, vulgar 
woman, who, nevertheless, does not seem to real¬ 
ize her own character, but rather glories In 
her ’’taking v r ays” with the men and her clever¬ 
ness in managing them and their money. She 
glories in dress, Her story is such as we 
would expect from her, being of a sort that 
would tickle her own fancy. She loves to 
parade her good clothes and irreproachable con¬ 
duct at church and on holy days. She freely 
offers to advise all maidens in their love 
affairs. Chaucer*s handling of the character 
is masterly. In all ranks of life we find 

this type. 


Chaucer derived some of his tales from 
the french fabliaux. The tales told by the 
Miller, the feeve,the Shipman, the friar, the 
Somnour and the Merchant belong to the fabliaux. 
Some of the originals of these tales have been 
found while others have not. The Miller*s 
tale belongs to the latter class, the original . 
* of which has not been found. Chaucer embodies 
these tales in his great scheme and gives them 










/ 
















30 


certain English characteristics. In the 
prologues to the tales and the connecting 
links these various personages are described. 

The description of the Hiller himself is 
typical of a certain class whom Chaucer often 
saw, with his reddish beard and bn his nose 
the famous wart surrounded by a tuft of hair, 
the two black holes of his nose and his mouth 
as big as a furnace. In the Miller's tale 

he mentions the clerk as belonging to Oxford. 

He sends his knave and wench to London also. 

The expression “harrow and alas” were in common 
use in England as a cry against wrong or aggress¬ 
ion. By these and other instances Chaucer 

manages to arrange these fabliaux, though derived 
from a foreign source, so that they appear typical 
of English life and character. 

From this short outline we may see how 
Chaucer, the grand translator and imitator of 
the artificial poetry of Prance, is awakened by 
the realism of Italian art in poetry and becomes 
the realistic chronicler of English life at the 
end of the fourteenth century. Chancer was 

a realist from the beginning, as we see by the 
realistic touches in his most artificial poems, 
and needed but a view of the new, realistic field 
of literature to convince him of his possibilities 
in this realm. After some experimenting with the 
new form finally breaks away from the use of 
time-worn allegories and with real enjoyment and 
enthusiasm plunges into the realm of Realism. 

The result of this is the splendid poem “The 
Canterbury Tales . 11 


The End 











