



6x UBBI* 

otmbswwis 

attmairais 











UNIVERSITY OP ALBERTA 
LIBRARY, 


Regulations Regardin g TA tst-e a:. A. " Iss sr tat ions 

Typescript copies oi theses and dissertations for Raster * s 
and Doctor’s degrees deposited in the University of Alberta 
Library, as tlie Official Copy of the .acuity of G-ractuate studies, 
may be consulted in the Reference Heading Room only. 

A second copy is on deposit in- the Department under ../hose 
supervision the work was done. Some Vs parments are willing to 
loan their copy to libraries, through the interlibrary loan 
service of .the. University of Alberta Library. 

These theses and dissertations are to be used onlg with due 
regard to priority rights, of the author. written permission of 
the author and of the Department must be obtained through the 
University of Alberta Library 'when extended passages are used. 
When permission has been granted, credit must appear in the 
pub11shed work• 

This thesis or dissertation has bepn used in accordance 
with the above regulations by the persons listed "below. The 
borrowing library is obligated to secure the signature of each 
user. 


Please sign below: 


Late 


Signature 


insiitution 


























































Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/effectofcalciumcOOearl 


THK UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


THE EFFECT OF CALCIUM CHLORIDE ON 
THE BASIC PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF SOILS 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE ST DIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE RKQUIRIMENTS F. R THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF SCIENCE 


FACULTY OF ENGINEERING 


DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING 


by 


EARLE JARBINE KLOHN 


EMOMTQN, ALBERTA, 


September 30, 1952 







I ^<£.*5 » “b 

& TO 


University of Alberta 

Faculty of Engineering 
Department Civil Engineering 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have 
read and recommend to the School of Graduate Studies for 
acceptance, a thesis entitled ,! The Effect of Calcium 
Chloride on the Basic Physical Properties of Soils”, 
submitted by Earle Jardine Klohn, B.Se., in partial 
fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Hast r 
of Sc. 


PROFESSOR 

PROFESSOR, 


Date 


PROFESSOR 







SYNOPSIS 


This research program was set up in an effort to determine the effects 
of calcium chloride on the basic properties of soil. It was also desired 
to verify some of the effects credited to the use of calcium chloride. 

The early phases of this research program were devoted to reviewing and 
summarizing the current literature available on calcium chloride and its 
effects on soil properties. 

The results of the tests reported herein were obtained in the soils 
laboratory of the University of Alberta. 

The tests included in this research program were: Atterberg Limits, 
hydrogen ion concentrations, moisture densities, unconfined compressive 
strengths, miscellaneous classification tests, cation analysis, and chemical 
analysis. 

The majority of the compaction tests and unconfined compressive 
strength tests were run on local Edmonton clay or mixtures of this clay 
and glass spheres, most of the hydrogen ion concentration tests and 
Atterberg Limit tests were run on miscellaneous soils obtainable in the 
soils laboratory. 

Two special clay mixtures were prepared for check tests on the con¬ 
clusions drawn from the main body of testing. The first of these special 
clays was a 5G - 50 mixture of clay and glass spheres to which 1 percent 
by dry weight of soil of MH 4 C 1 , CaCl2> and NaCl was added individually. 

The second special clay was obtained by saturating each of two samples 
of the same clay with M4^1 and KaCl respectively. The Nii4 and ha clays 
thus produced were halved and tested. One half of each sample was treated 
with GaClp. 

The majority of the soils treated with calcium chloride had the 
admixture added in percentages varying from 2/3 to 2 percent by dry weight 
of soil. Dry densities were corrected for calcium chloride content as 
based on a chemical analysis. The compaction machine used was the Harvard 
Apparatus. The comp active effort applied ranged from 3 layers at 25 blows 
per layer to 5 layers at BO blows per layer. 

The results of the compaction tests on the Ldmonton clay and clay- 
glass mixtures indicated no appreciable change in density with small per¬ 
centages of calcium chloride. The larger percentages of admixture cause 
some decrease in density. From the results of a limited number of density 
tests on the first of the specially prepared clays it was concluded that 
an increase or decrease in density was possible when calcium chloride was 
added to a soil. The cation present in the original soil determining which 
would occur. 

Llo change in unconfined compressive strength occurred when the 
ndmonton clay was treated with calcium chloride, however the cla^-glass 
mixture suffered a decrease in strength with the addition of calcium chloride. 
Further test results are necessary before a full evaluation of strength 



















. 

















- 

< 










• 




















, 

. 

. 
















. 

' 

. 




















Synopsis (Contort,/ 


effects can be made, however, it would appear that the cations associated 
with the soil play an important role. 

Tests were made to determine the effect of calcium chloride on the 
pH yalue of soils. In every case a decrease in pH occurred* These results 
were taken to indicate occurrance of base exchange* 

results from a large number of lirait tests show that calcium chloride 
had a definite effect on the plasticity of a soil. It was found that the 
highly plastic soils were the ones effected most. It wa.s also discovered 
that soils from the same locality and hence probably containing the same 
clay minerals and exchangeable ions, had their plasticity values altered 
in the same general way. The results of tests on the two specially 
prepared clays indicated that the plasticity of a given clay depended to 
a large extent on the cations associated with the clay. ±hus it was con¬ 
cluded that calcium chloride when added to a soil taxes part in a base 
exchange reaction. The cations involved in this exchange determine 
whether the net result is an increase or decrease in plasticity. 

The ability of calcium chloride to attract and hold moisture is another 
factor which effects the physical properties of a soil. Calcium chloride 
treated soils are able to retain contact moisture and thus are benefited 
by the effects of apparent cohesion* 






..i mjL it 

The author wishes to express his appreoiati m 
to Bean -U •••!. hardy for Mo helpful assistance ana 

t this 

edcuent is also made to Brunner ;!ond Canada Limited 

- ! ■ ■ ; 1 I i : I . # 





INDEX 


A. SYNOPSIS 

B. SCOPE Page 1 

Co REVIEW OF CURRENT LITERATURE 2 

1. Properties of Calcium Chloride 2 

2« Effects of Calcium Chloride on Moisture 

Density Relations 3 

3. Effects of Calcium Chloride on Moisture 

Properties of the Soil 6 

4* Effect of Calcium Chloride on Soil Strengths 7 

5. Effect of Calcium Chloride on Plasticity 8 

6* Effect of Calcium Chloride on pH 8 

7. Miscellaneous Effects of Calcium Chloride 8 

D. THEORY 10 

!• Compaction Theory 10 

2. Effect of Contact Moisture on Strength 11 

3* Physiochemic a1 Theory 13 

(a) Ionic and molecular compounds 14 

(b) Ions 14 

(c) Molecules 15 

(d) Valence 15 

(e) Electrolytes 16 

(f) Space lattice 16 

(g) Clay minerals 18 

(h) Solid liquid interface reactivities 19 























































































(i) Base exchange 21 

4. Electrokinetics 27 

5* Application of Colloidal Theories to 

Clay Technology 28 

S. METHODS OF PROCEDURE 33 

1 # Moisture Density Tests 33 

(a) Glass-clay mixture 36 

(b) Clay mixture 37 

(c) Ground Glass mixture 38 

2. Unconfined Compression Tests 38 

3. Atterberg Limits 39 

4* Hydrogen Ion Concentration 39 

5* Miscellaneous Tests 40 

6* Glass Manufacturing 41 

7« Measurement of Mineral Gels 43 

8# Preparation of Special Clays 43 

(a) Procedure #1 43 

(b) Procedure #2 44 

9 * Outline of Procedure Used For Cation Analysis 45 

(a) Displacement of cations 45 

(b) Determination of cations 46 

(c) Calculation of results 46 

F. RESULTS 4-8 

1* Hydrogen Ion Concentration (pH) 48 

2. Atterberg Limits 51 




















































3* Results of Tests on Edmonton Clay 59 

(a) Compaction test 59 

(b) Unconfined compression test 61 

(c) Atterbcrg Limits 62 

4. Results of Tests on Clay-Glass Mixture 62 

(a) Compaction test 62 

(b) Unconfined compression -test 62 

(c) Atterberg Limits 64 

5. Results of Tests on Ground Glass Mixture 64 

6. Measurement of Mineral Gels 65 

7* Cation Analysis 66 

8. Specially Treated Clays 68 

(a) Clay mixture #1 68 

(b) Clay mixture #2 69 

G* DISCUSSION 71 

1® Results of Previous Investigations 71 

2* Results of Present Research Progran 72 

3* Practical Signficance of Results 75 

H. CONCLUSIONS AND RE CMMMUATIQMS 77 

I. BIBLIOGRAPHY 80 

83 


J. APPENDIX 



































I 


. 

















. 

. 


















- 












LIST OF TABLES 


Table No. Title Page 


1. Base Exchange Capacity 23 

2. Plasticity Values 32 

3. Plasticity Values 32 

4. Hydrogen ion Concentration Determination 49 

5. Effect of Calcium Chloride on the Plastic 

and Liquid Limits of Soils 53 

6. Effects of Calcium Chloride on the Plastic 

and Liquid Limits of Soils. Test Results 
Grouped According to Location 55 

7. Soil Samples Used in Test Program 56 

8. Summary of Compaction Test Results on 

Edmonton Clay. 60 

9. Limit and Unconfined Co pressive Strength 

Results for Edmonton Clay 61 

10. Summary of Compaction Test Results on 

Clay-Glass Mixture 63 

11. Limit and Unconfined Compressive 
Strength Results for Clay-Glass 

Mixture 65 

12. Aramonium Acetate Extracted Cations 67 

13* Cations as Percent of Total Extracted 67 

14. Summary of Te t Results on Clay Mixture 

#1 68 

15. Summary of Test Results on Clay Mixture 

#2 


69 









' 






. ■ 

















* 
















































LIST OF FIGURES 


Figure No. 

Title 

Page 

1 * 

Silicon Oxygen Tetrahedron and 

Aluminum Hydroxyl Octahedron 

17 

2 . 

Tetrahedral Silicon Sheet and 

Gibbsite Sheet 

17 

3. 

Preferential Adsorption 

20 

4. 

Relationship between ! Zeta and 

Thermodynamic Potentials 

28 

5. 

Forces of Attraction and Repulsion 

For Clay Particle in Water 

30 

6 . 

Forces of Attraction and Repulsion 
for Clay Particle in an Alkaline Medium 

30 

7. 

Basic Components of Harvard Apparatus 

34 

8 . 

Use of Harvard Apparatus 

35 

9. 

Collar Remover For Harvard Apparatus 

35 

10 . 

Sample Ejector for Harvard Apparatus 

35 

11 . 

Beckman Electric pH Meter 

40 

12 . 

Ball Mill Used For Crushing Glass 

42 

13. 

Compaction Curves For Edmonton Clay 

60 

14. 

Compaction Curves For Edmonton Clay 

60 

15. 

Compaction Curves For Edmonton Clay 
and Glass Mixture 

63 

16. 

Compaction Curves For Edmonton Clay 
and Glass Mixture 

63 




- 1 - 


THE EFFECT uF CiiLOim CiiLUflDfl 
m THE BASIC PHiaiOAL PROPERTIES OF SOILS 


SOorS 

This research program was set up in an effort to deterisdne the 
effects of calcium chloride on the basic properties of soil. It was also 
desired to verify some of the effects credited to the use of calcium 
chloride. The early phases of this research program were devoted to 
reviewing and summarising the current literature available on calcium 
chloride and its effects on soil properties. 

The basic properties investigated in this research program were; 
the Atterberg limits, the hydrogen ion concentration, the unconfined 
co /pres si ve strength and the compaction characteristics. 







2 


oaVUSW OF CUaabN’f LITSKAiUfiB 

This information was compiled from numerous studies mad© to evaluate 
the effects of calcium chloride on soils, these studies were selected 
from those available in various engineering publications, (see 
bibliography) 

Properties of Calcium Chloride 

Calcium chloride is a white odorless material which possesses both 
deliquescent (able to dissolve and become liquid, by attracting and 
absorbing moisture from the air) and hygroscopic (able bo readily absorb 
and retain moisture i properties. 

As would be expected, calcium chloride lowers the vapour pressure. 

A lower vapour pressure means slower evaporation, thus a solution of 
water and calcium chloride does not evaporate as rapidly as water alone. 

Pure water in the soil freezes solid at a temperature just below 
its freezing point, however a solution of calcium chloride and water 
does not freeze solid at, or just below, its freezing point as only a few 
ice crystals are formed, Phis ice is composed of- ^onriy pure water which 
upon being frozen releases its calcium chloride. Thus the concentration 
of the remaining solution is increased, this in turn lowers its freezing 
point. Because of this mechanism, a solution of calcium chloride freezes 
solid at a temperature well, below the freezing point of pure water. 

The surface tension of a calcium chloride solution is slightly 
greater than that of water. However this increase in surface tension 
is relatively small. 





























■ 










. 




. 













. 



. 











. 












. 
























■ 

. 















- 3 - 


The commercial calcium chloride used was a basic salt, having a 
pH value of slightly over 10 for solutions with a concentration ranging 
between 10 percent and 2.5 percent, (concentration is expressed as weight 
of salt over weight of water) Further dilution of the solution caused 
the pH value to decrease somewhat. 

Effects of Calcium Chloride on Moisture Density Relations 

In recent years, under the auspices of the Ww-dttee on Soil 
Calcium Chloride Roads* 1 , Highway Research Board, considerable work has 
been done on the role of calcium chloride in compaction. Following is 
a resume of the results obtained from a series of tests carried out at 
the University of Maryland by A. Morgan Johnson (7>. 

Six typical A-2 soils were chosen for the tests, three friable and 
three plastic. Bach of these soils was split into 5 samples, one sample 
was used for compaction of the untreated soil and an additional sample 
was used for each diff'e ent percentage of admixture. Tests were run on 
soils having 0, 1, 2 and 3 percent of calcium chloride added. 

Three compaction tests were run on each sample. The compactive 
efforts used were: (l) 6 inch drop—-5.5 lb hammer, (2) 12 inch drop— 

5.5 lb hammer, (3) 18 inch drop—10 lb hammer. The soil from test »1 
w was pulverized, dried and re-used for tests 2 nd 3. it was then dis¬ 
carded. irlasticity needle readings were taken on the compacted soil. 

In all tests, conditions were held as constant as possible with each sample 

being wetted, allowed to partially dry, then rewetied for the test. 

Test results appear to be very consistent and indicate a carefully 

carried out program. A study of the results leads to the following 

conclusions: 


(7) Numbers in brackets refer to bibliography, 































' 




. 



























. 








4 






























4 


(a) Basins dry unit wei ghts on total weight 

of solid matter (includes calcium chloride) 

(i) With a constant compactive effort and increasing percentages 
of calcium chloride the moisture density curve moves up and to 
the left, 

(ii) For the two lower comp active efforts the increase in density 
obtained from the addition of 0.5 percent calcium chloride is 
approximately 1.7 lbs per cu ft. Additional calcium chloride 
caused additional increases in density but the rate of increase 
was not as high* 

(iii) With the highest compaetive effort used the increase in density 
was lower than that obtained with smaller compactive efforts. 

(b ) basing dry unit weights on dry soil alone (corrected dry density) 

(i) For the two lower compactive efforts, the lowest percentage 

(o,5) of calcium chloride caused the greatest increase in den¬ 
sity. Percentages over 1 percent caused little or even negative 
increases in density. 

(ii) For the higher compactive effort the increase in density was 

almost negligible at lower percentages of admixture and negative 
for more than 1 percent admixture, 

A. Morgan Johnson (7) in his paper presents a plot on semi-log paper 
of, dry density versus compact!ve effort, for the various percentages of 
calcium chloride used. This plot illustrates that with increasing per¬ 
centages of calcium chloride less compactive effort is required to obtain 
a given density. The densities used however include the weight of the 
calcium chloride. If the densities are corrected for the weight of calcium 



































* 


























■ 

■ 






. • 















. 


. 

. 








~ 5 - 


chloride, it is seen that this relationship is true only for small per¬ 
centages of calcium chloride and lighter compaetive efforts* 

The penetration resistance readings decreased with additional 
increases in calcium chloride* This was taken by Johnson to indicate 
greater workability and thus better placing in the field* 

In his paper on the effect of calcium chloride on compaction, loder 
(26) reported, ”The general trend of the data indicated that for a given 
compaetive effort the density of a soil calcium chloride mixture was 
higher in most cases than that of soil alone. However this was not 
consistent, for in acme cases the density of the soil admixture combina¬ 
tion was less than that of the soil alone, in some other cases tne lower 
percentages of calcium chloride resulted in higher densities than did 
higher percentages of the admixture . u 

Using densities corrected for the calcium chloride content, it 
was found that with the majority of soils the lower percentages of cal¬ 
cium chloride caused the greatest increases in density* 

Yoder (26) also shows plots of density versus number of blows for 
several soils. These plots illustrate that with the addition of calcium 
chloride to a soil mixture, a given density may be obtained with less 
compaetive effort. 

It may be noted that the results from Yoder *s study are in agreement 
with those'of Johnson (7)* thus it would seem that calcium chloride 
when added in small percentages usually increases the corrected dry den¬ 
sity. 'This effect is more pronounced with the smaller compaetive efforts. 

From the results of the forementioned studies, it appears that with 
low percentages of calcium chloride and small conp&ctive efforts, the 
calcium chloride causes higher corrected densities and at the same time 








. 

■ 




. 

















. 
















. 

' 

« 






- 6 - 


it replaces sane of the water in the voids, thus causing a still higher 
overall density. VtLth higher percentages of calcium chloride and larger 
compactive efforts, the calcium chloride replaces some of the soil as well 
as the water. Trds may lead to higher overall dry densities, but the cor¬ 
rected densities drop off. 

In any event the addition of calcium chloride decreases the voids. 

It does not seem reasonable to include this additional weight of calcium 
chloride in the dry density however, as it becomes part ox* the //fcr /</phase 
when the soil becomes saturated and thus Cannot add directly to the strength 
of the compacted soil. 

Effects o f Calcium Chloride on iioisture Properties of the boil 

It has been definitely proven that the addition of calcium chloride 
to the soil decreases the rate of drying. Xoder (26) ran several drying, 
and drying and rewetting tests. From these tests he concluded, “dalcium 
chloride retarded the drying out of soils when subjected to accelerated 
drying. The results of the drying and rewetting tests showed that the 
moisture contents of the specimens containing calcium chloride were lower 
after the drying and jetting cycle than those with no calcium chloride. 

This was probably due in part to the Higher densities of the specimens 
which contained calcium chloride,” 

Yoder also measured the amount of swelling occurring in both the 
treated and untreated samples. From these measurements it was seen that 
the calcium chloride treated soils in general swelled more than the tin- 
treated soils. At the same time, their final moisture contents were 
generally lower* 




























. 








. 









' . - 























- 









. 




















































- 7 - 


As was previously mentioned, the addition of calcium chloride to 
the soil apparently increases the workability of the mix. It has been 
suggested (26) that the moisture when in calcium brine fom is more active. 
This would allow the development of higher strengths. 

The following quotation regarding the effect of calcium chloride on 
the moisture films surrounding the soil particles is taken from the pro 
ceedings of the Highway desearch Board, Vol. 16-2 (1936) (22). 

"It has definitely been proven that moisture films exert a tre¬ 
mendous bonding action and that this action is increased as the thickness 
of these films is decreased. Research has es ablished that calcium chloride 
admixtures produce thinner moisture films than pure water. In a stabilized 
road, calcium chloride exists as films surrounding the particles. The 
great surface area of the fines acts as a storage space for the moisture ,* 

effects of Calcium Chloride on Boil Strengths 

Yoder (26) reported a slight decrease in penetration resistance with 
the addition of calcium chloride to the soil for most of the soils tested. 
This was true even though the uncorrected dry density and in many cases 
the corrected dry density was higher for the treated soil than the raw 
soil, 

Knight (26) found that when unconfined compression tests were run 
on treated and untreated samples, the latter appeared to have the higher 
compressive strengths. However the untreated samples could not be jacked 
from the mold to be tested at high strengths as they would not retain 
their form. This was taken to indicate a lack of cohesion. In any event 
insufficient tests were run to allow the drawing of any definite conclu¬ 
sions. The limited results obtained do however, indicate the direction 
to be taken in future research. 










. 


























' 


















- 8 - 


Affect of Calcium Chloride on Plasticity 

This property has not been as extensively investigated as compaction* 
or the moisture relations, Yoder (26) reports 11 a tendency for calcium 
chloride to lower both the liquid and plastic limits of some of the soils 
tested.** These results however did not seem to be consistent as some 
soils were apparently uneffecbed, while others had either their liquid 
or plastic limit or both decreased. Further work should be done on this 
soil property, 

Affect of Calcium Chloride on pH 

Yoder (26) found that the addition of calcium chloride to the soil 
caused the pH of the soil to decrease. This was despite the fact that 
the pH of calcium chloride itself* shows the salt to be basic. Further¬ 
more* most of the decrease in pH took place with low percentages of ad¬ 
mixture, 

Miscellaneous Affects of Calcium Chloride 

Those miscellaneous effects not covered in the foregoing sections 
will be briefly listed below. In all cases this information has been 
collected from the current literature, (see bibliography) 

1, Calcium chloride controls the moisture content generally 
within the desired limits and has a more uniform and lasting 
effect than water, 

2, By conserving moisture, the plasticity of the clay component 
is maintained over a longer period, permitting compression of 
the aggregate into a denser mass with thinner and consequently 
stronger and more lasting binding films. 









. 














. 



. 


















. 






























. 

. 















9 


3 . Bases require less clay when constructed and maintained with 
calcium chloride* 

4 # Calcium chloride apparently aids in the absorption of bituminous 
priming materials. 

5. The movement of excess clay in a base to the road surface is 
accelerated by the increased workability caused by the calcium 
chloride. 

6. The presence of constant moisture tends to cause milky mineral 
gels to exude from most rock fragments. These gels form a small 
film of natural cement on the surface of the soil particles, 
which together with continued shrinkage compaction, greatly 
enhances the structural stability of the base course. Calcium 
chloride promotes and accelerates this process. 

7. Capillarity causes calcium chloride in solution with the bottom 
layer of the base course to migrate to some extent to the top 
layer. This will tend to improve the top course even after the 
bituminous surface is placed and will accelerate the knitting 
together of the base and surface mat. 

Calcium chloride due to its brine action lowers the susceptibility 
of the base to frost damage. 

9. Calcium chloride due to its ability to draw and hold moisture 
is widely used as a dust pallative. (This was the first use 
highway engineers made of the salt.) 

















i Jpl 

, 


I 



- j 






























I 

u 

1 






* 












■ 










■! 











. 

. 








, 



















































- 10 - 


THtiOitY 

Compaction theory 

Boil compaction involves the relationship between moisture, density 
and compactive effort. The moisture density curve.is a graphical illus¬ 
tration of this relationship* An increase in the compactive effort 
causes an increase in the maximum density and a corresponding decrease 
in the optimum moisture content* Several explanations have been suggested 
on the theory of the moisture density relationships. In general these 
may be grouped together under three theories. 

<3Z) 

The lubrication theory is presented by Proctor/ the originator of 
the compaction test* This theory assumes that the soil particles are 
lubricated, by the addition of water up to the optimum point. Compaction 
from that point on tends to compress the water in the voids, this dissl¬ 
ates the compactive effort, and causes hydrostatic uplift resulting in 
lower density. 

Another theory is that of Hogentogler Jk) this theory considers the 
water fliras surrounding the soil particles, the thickness of these films 
and the variation in adhesion by which the water is helci to the soil 
particles as related to the film thickness. Up to the point of optimum 
moisture content, increased thickness of the water films aids in compac¬ 
tion, and from that point on, it is detrimental. 

A third theory is based on surface tension. It is assumed that the 
surface tension of the water adds to the compaction up to the point of 
optimum moisture content. Beyond this point this force is destroyed. 

In all likelihood the true explanation of the compaction process 
is a combination of two or more of the above theories. Hogentogler*s 






. 








■ 


1 













































































- 11 


"film theory" deserves special attention as its reference to the water 
films provides the basis for the possible explanation of the effects of 
chemical admixtures on the density relationships. This feature will be 
discussed at a later point in this thesis. 

There are three very good reasons for co pacting soils. These are 
permeability, settlement, and shearing strength. Compaction decreases 
the permeability and settlement at the same time increasing the strength. 

From a study of the comp ction curve and zero air voids curve, it 
is seen that a soil compacted at optimum moisture content has the smallest 
void ratio. Thus a minimum moisture content is attained if the soil is 
saturated. This results in smaller settlements. 

In general, the strength of a soil varies directly with the moisture 
content. Thus the shearing strength of a given soil should be a maximum 
near the maximum density. 

The above conclusions have been verified to varying degrees by 
field observations. Other factors however, effect the settlement and 
strength characteristics of compacted soils. The most important of these 
/s the moisture content at the time of compaction. It has been found 
that higher strengths are obtained when the soil has been compacted 
on the dry side of optimum. (This is after saturation.) Compaction on 
the wet side of optimum is also claimed beneficial by some engineers. 

The aoove mentioned factors are not of too much importance in this program 
and are mentioned only to indicate their presence. 

dffect of Contact Moisture on Strength 

As an aid in explaining the surface behavior of liquids the concept 
of surface tension is widely used. In using this concept it is assumed 














. 













' 

- 

. 


. 










. 

„ 

- 







. 


■ 










































' 







• 




- 12 - 


that the surface of the liquid is in tension. In other words the 
surface may be thought of as a stretched rubber membrane. It is known 
that no such condition actually exists and that the interaction of surface 
molecules causes a condition analogous to a surface subjected to tension. 
However, the surface tension concept explains the surface behavior so 
well that it is not necessary to go into the actual molecular phenomena. 

Whenever a curved thin flexible surface is under tension, equil- 
librium requires that there be a difference in pressure between the inside 
and outside of the surface. The basic relation between the radius of 
curvature, the tension and the pressure difference may be obtained by 
considering a cross section of the surface and equating the forces. 

(Page 13S, Ref. 17) Thus it is found that the pressure difference 




te * 2fs 


me 


7s ~ 3~ts''72r<r e* T&srs'so r? j y^y 

</&</(?/&S& tr er' 


a/z expression may be . V for computing oho rise in capillary 
tubes. It is at once seen that the height of capillary rise depends on 
the diameter of the capillary tube. It is also evident that if the 
pressure in the tube above the meniscus is atmospheric, the water in the 
tube must be in tension. Thus the capillary water exerts compression 
forces on the soil. These forces can be very high in fine grained soils. 

From the foregoing discussion, it may be seen that water is capable 
of exerting considerable compression on the soil skeleton. The value 
of this compression depends on the radius of curvature of the capillary 
opening. Although capillary water is usually associated with the soil 
overlying the water table, it may occur in a form known as contact 
moisture. At points where soil grains touch or nearly touch, water 
perculating through the soil will collect. This water may be held in 





- 



























. 




V ,, V-'. * 










. 










' 






13 - 


place by surface tension indefinitely, providing it is not subject to 
evaporation. Similarity the individual grains in moist cohesionless 
materials are pulled together by the surface tension at the boundary 
between the water and air. The force with which the individual soil 
grains are pulled together is known as the contact pressure. This 
pressure can be fairly high for densely packed sands and has the same 
effect as if the sand had some cohesion. The overall effect of thi3 ap¬ 
parent cohesion is higher shearing strengths. Immersion of a sand in 
such a state destroys the menisci and consequently the apparent cohesion. 

The role of calcium chloride in soil stabilization may be readily 
tied into the above discussion. Calcium chloride because of its 
delequeseent and hygroscopic roperties attracts and retains contact 
moisture. This contact moisture supplies the base course with apparent 
cohesion thus giving it a higher shearing strength. Although it has been 
claimed that calcium chloride increases the surface tension of water, 
this increase, if any, is very small and thus it would seem that the 
real bene it obtained from the salt is the retention of the contact 
moisture. 

Fnysicochei deal theory 

The following pages are devoted to reviewing some of the basic 
principles of physicochemistry. ofnee the physical and chemical 
characteristics of a soil have a very great effect on its properties, 
it is imperative that these characteristics be studied, rreece (12 ) 
in his paper presents data that has been collected and. correlated by 
the Corps of Engineers as the first step in their program of geotechni¬ 
cal research. Much of the following information has been drawn from 


rreece*s article 













. 











. 

_ 









































. 
















♦ 


14 


Ionic and Molecular Compounds - The atom consists of a nucleons 
surro ndeci by electrons* which are orderly arranged in a series of orbits. 
The nucleous contains the total positive charge of the atom which is also 
equal to the atomic number. The number of electrons associated with each 
atom is equal to the positive charge on the nucleons. Thus every atom 
is electrically neutral. 

It may be noted by studying the electronic arrangements of several 
very inert gasses, that in every case* with the exception of helium* the 
outermost orbit contains eight electrons. From this it may be inferred 
that a complete outermost orbit means stability. 

Those atoms which do not have complete outer orbits are chemically 
active and tend to acquire stability by completing their outer orbits. 
There are three ways by means of which an atom may complete its outer 
orbit* these are; gaining, yielding, or sharing* electrons. 

Generally* as in the case of sodium* where there are only one or 
two electrons in the outer orbit, the atom completes its orbit by 
yielding electrons* this makes the next inner complete orbit its outermost 
one. If the atom has more than four* it tends to gain enough additional 
electrons to complete its outer orbit. 

The third method by which completeness may be attained is the 
sharing of electrons. This is the case for those atoms having three or 
four electrons in their outer orbit. Energy is required to remove elec¬ 
trons from their orbits. lien there are three or four electrons* the 
available energy is usually not sufficient. An example of sharing is 
given by carbon tetrachloride. 

Ions - When an atom loses or gains electrons it is called, an ion* 
Gince the charge on the nucleons of an atom remains unaltered the loss 



V 




- 













. 
















• 



* 


. 








• 


















- 15 - 

or gain of an electron by an atom results in the atom having a net 
positive or negative charge. Ions always retain their identity, that 
is they do not unite structurally to form molecules. Compounds composed 
of ions are called ionic or ©lectrovalent compounds. The electrostatic 
forces holding the ions together are known as electrovalent bonds. 

These bonds are broken when the compound is dissolved and the individual 
ions become free to move about in the solution. This separation is called 
dissociation. 

Molecules - When electrons are shared by atoms the atomic structures 
must merge at the shared electrons. The structure thus formed is known 
as a molecule. Since no electrons are gained or lost the atoms remain 
neutral and the molecule does not have any electric charge. The electro¬ 
static forces holding the atoms and the molecules themselves together, 
are called eo-valent forces. 

When atoms combine co-valently the electrons may be closer to one 
of the atomic nuclei than the other. This means that the centre of the 
negative charges may not coincide with the centre of the two positive 
charges. This results in a moment of electrical force called a dipole 
moment. Water is a typical example. In effect these dipoles orientate 
themselves like small bar magnets when in the vicinity of a positive 
or negative ion. 

Valence - A valence may be defined as the number of electrons an 
atom must yield, gain or share to complete its outer orbit. An 
atom which loses electrons to complete its outer orbit has a positive 
valence. An atom which gains electrons to complete its outer orbit has a 
negative valence. As a matter of convenience, charge is used to describe 
ions, and valence is used to describe molecules. 











. ' - :> 


















* 






. 












' 








■ 

* 








■ 






. 




, 




* 




. 








, 














, 











- 16 


To illustrate a valence acting as an unbalanced charge, assume 
only three chlorine atoms are available to react with a carbon atom. 

This leaves the carbon atom with one incomplete valence, this valence 
would act as an attractive force to attach an additional chlorine atom. 

We may thus think of both excess charge on an ion and. the unsatisfied 
valence on a molecule as the source of electrostatic attractive forces. 

n .actrolyt es - An electrolyte is a substance which when dissolved 
in a suitable solvent will conduct electricity. All ionic compounds 
are electrolytes. When an electric field is applied to dissociated 
ions, the positive (cations) ions migrate to the cathode while the 
negative ions (anions) migrate to the anode, it is this movement of 
ions which carries the electric current through the solution. Molecules, 
having no electric charge, tend to orientate themselves in the field, 
thus molecular compounds generally are not electrolytes. 

It should be remembered that the atoms which unite to form either 
co-valQnt or electrovalent compounds are electrically neutral. While 
individual atoms may gain or lose electrons the total charge with res¬ 
pect to -foe compound formed must be equal, i.e. a solution cannot have 
an electric charge. However, concentrations of ions, due to an unequal 
distribution throughout the enti e volume of the solution will result in 
differences of potential between parts* of the solution even though the 
solution as a whole is electrically neutral. This point is very import¬ 
ant as will be seen later, 

bpace Lattice - On combining to form crystalline solids, ions or 
molecules always group themselves in that geometrical pattern resulting 











































. 

































. 










































• 









' 


































- 17 


in the greatest degree of electrical neutr all nation, i.e,, a balance 
of electrostatic forces within he structure is attained* A unit cell 
is the name -iven to the most elementary grouping of this kind* 

The silicon-oxygen tetrahedron and the aluminum-hydroxyl octahedron, 
(fig. l), ere typical co-valent unit cells and these are the principal 
constituents of the lattices of the various clay minerals* These cells 
are bonded together by electrostatic forces to produce the elementary 
lattice structures called the tetrahydral and gibbsite sheets* 

Remembering that the electrostatic forces holding the atoms together 
are due to the valences of the individual atoms it may be seen that the 
cell is electrically neutral only if all the valences are balanced or 
saturated. If this is not Hie case, the cell will tend to establish a 
bond with any other compatible atom within its field of attraction. 

Referring to figure 1, it is seen that each of the four oxygen atoms 
has a single unsatisfied negative valence. Thus the surface of the cell 
will exert an electrostatic force on any atoms or ions in its environ¬ 
ment having an unsatisfied positive charge or valence* If the tetra¬ 
hedron could exchange its four oxygen atoms for hydroxyl ions, it would 
then become electrically neutral. 

In figure 2, it is seen that the atoms at the ends of the sheets 
have unsatisfied valences simply because there are no more adjacent 
atoms. A situation similar to this would occur if the silicon atoms in 
the tetrahedral silicon sheet were at a. surface and thus did not have 
the four upper oxygen atoms. 

Thus it is seen that the electrostatic forces which may be exerted 
by a crystalline particle are due principally to unbalanced charges or 
unsatisfied valences occurring at the edges, surfaces and corners of the 
particle. 'These surfaces, edges and corners are structural discontinuities. 












































■ 
















. .. 





























































/ 





















18 


thus it may be stated that the greater the number of discontinuities 
per unit volume, the more active the matter will be electrostatically. 

It then follows that the finer the grain siae of a soil, the greater the 
number of discontinuities per unit volume and hence the greater the effect 
of the physicochemical characteristics of the soil on its mechanical 
properties. 

Clay Minerals - The clay minerals may be split into three main 
groups, this grouping is based on their lattice structure. The three 
main groups are; kaolinite, illite and montmorillonite. Within eacn of 
these three groups exist numerous variations of the basic lattice structure. 
The three groups take their names from their principal member. The 
schematic diagrams for these three groups are r&porUJ' /&*<?*<* (sjbJ, 

The k&oliniie lattice is made up of a tetrahedral silicon sheet 
and a gibbsite sheet. This structure is electrically neutral and in 
addition there exists considerable affinity between the adjacent hydroxyl 
and oxygen ions. This results in tight bonding both within the lattice 
and between adjacent lattices. 

The montriiorilionite lattice is similar to the kaolinite lattice 
with an additional tetrahedral silicon sheet. This additional sheet 
causes a marked change in the mineral. Whereas with kaolinite the oxygen 
and hydroxyl layers showed a marked affinity for one another, the two ox¬ 
ygen layers in the montmorillonite interfaces do not. Adjacent lattices 
are not bound together, the space between lattices being filled with 
orientated water dipoles. The amount of pater .resent varies considerably, 
as a result the overall thickness of the lattice may vary as much as 100 
percent, it might be noted that because of this fact montmorillonite 






















■ 














- 






















































. 


















■ 





















19 - 


clays are highly swelling, The mechanism . Ss that described above. 

The illite lattice is similar to the montmorillonite lattice with 
the exception that aluminum atoms may replace some of the silicon atoms. 
This electrical unbalance is partially compensated for by the addition 
of potassium atoms, These atoms are located between adjacent lattices. 

The overall structure is fairly strong and water cannot penetrate 
between the lattices* With respect to strength we have kaolin!te, illite 
and lastly montmorillonite * 

For all three clay minerals the basal cleavage planes are at the 
interfaces between adjacent lattices, however since cleavage along these 
planes does not creak any valence bonds the separation does not increase 
the total surface attractive forces. However basal cleavage is always 
accompanied by fracturing along planes perpendicular to the basal cleavage 
planes. This latter iractaring severs valence bonds and thus increases 
the number of unsatisfied valences, hdges of clay particles are therefore 
greater contributors to electros atic forces than are cleavage surfaces, 
other factors being equal the number of unsatisfied valences should be 
proportional to the total surface area. 

Holid-niquid interfac e ina ctivities - The solid-liquid interface is the 
only interface we are interested in as it is the one applying to a clay 
water system. Since the unique properties of clay are all associated 
with sane degree of moisture we are concerned with only that two phage 
interface of a solid-liquid. 

Free surface energy is the work that must be done to increase the 
surface of a liquid against the force of surface tension. Thefree 
-fSWSftgfflBFenergy of a liquid always tends to be as small as possible as a 















































' 

, 













- 

















■ 

* 

■ 

■ 


* 













- 20 - 


liquid tends to diminish its surface area. 

There are two methods by which a liquid may decrease its free 


sr?<? t! A <? c/ 


/r7<=-?4'+ caf 


our f ^ ee- energy* The first''is to decrease its surface area, the second 


is to increase the concentration of the solute in the boundary film of 
the solution. The latter process is called adsorption. Tor a solid-liquid 
interface this may be described as the tendency of the solid to attach 
to its surface a layer of the solute from the solution with which it is 
in contact. The net result is a greater concentration of the solute 
at the interface than in the bulk of che solution. 

Adsorption is a- preferential process. A solid will adsorb those 
ions producing the least soluable compound. The reason /s that the 
least soluable compound mil have the smallest amount of free surfaoe 
energy. In the above discussion it was assumed that the solid was in con¬ 
tact with a solution having only two kinds of ions, one of which was 
preferentially adsorbed and the other acting as & counter ion. Figure 
3 illustrates a case of preferential adsorption. 





3 













































- 21 - 


In figure 3 it xd.ll be noted that the silver ions are adsorbed by 
the silver broird.de solid giving the solid a positive charge. The 
nitrate ions form the counter layer. As would be concluded from the 
diagram both attractive and repulsive forces exist in the environment of 
the adsorbed and cornier ions. The adsorbed layer and its counter 
layer are generally known as the double layer* tines there is a dif¬ 
ference in sign between these two layers, a potential difference must 
exist across them. This potential difference plays a very important 
role in the properties of the clay minerals, lore will be said about 
the double layer a little later on. 

Base Exchange • There are three types of base exchange. 

These may be classified as follows: 

1. Exchange within the lattice structure 

2. Exchange external to the lattice 

(a) At primary and secondary interfaces 

(b) At primary interfaces only 
(c/ At edge surfaces only 

3. Upon negative organic groups. 

An example of the first type of base exchange is given by the re¬ 
placement of aluminum or silicon atoms from the montmorillonite and 
illite lattices. The three sub-types a 5 b and c are exemplified by 
montmoriIIonite, illite and kaolin!te. The third type will be entirely 
omitted here* 


There are several factors effecting base exchange. If it will 
result in a decrease in the degree of hydration or in a lower net charge. 

























- 22 


the addition of new ions may result in base exchange. Listed briefly 
are some of the factors governing base exchange* 

1. Size of the ion, (This is the ion together with its hydrated 
husk.) 

2. How firmly the ion is held in place. 

3. Strength of electrostatic forces. 

With respect to firmness of attachment, ionic size is taken as that 
of the ion plus its water husk. In general it might be stated (5) that 
as the ions change from hydrogen to tri-valent to di-valent and finally 
to uni-valent cations, not only does the size of the ion increase but 
also does the hydration of the ion. 

“Jenny (2l) visualliaes clay particles as plate shaped crystals 
hich hold adsorbed ions on their surfaces. Because of heat motion and 
Brownian movement the ions are not at rest, but oscillate and, at some 
times may be a considerable distance from the wall* The cation of an 
added electrolyte may slip in between the negative wall and the positive 
oscillating ion, the former becoming adsorbed and the latter remaining 
in solution as an exchanged ion. from this point of view the more loosely 
an ion is held, the greater the average distance of oscillation and the 
greater the likelihood of replacement, and conversely the closer the 
cation sticks to the surface the less readily it will be replaced. Binee 
the average distance of oscillation corresponds directly to the average 
thickness of the double layer, it i-iould follow the clays with high zeta 
potentials should have adsorbed ions which are easily exchangeable." 

The following information (10) is introduced here as it pertains 
to base exchange within the lattice itself. Acidity is developed when 
a hydrogen clay is treated with a neutral salt. The clear salt extract 



















* 














' 
















. 





















. 
























































23 - 


444 44 - 

is usually found to contain A1 ions and in a secondary measure Fe ions* 
There are two distinct fields of thought on the mechanism of this 

44 

exchange. The first believes that the A1 ions are directly replaced 
by the added cations and the subsequent hydrolysis of the aluminum salt 
gives rise to the observed acidity. The other opinion is that the 
added cation replaces the hydrogen ion. According to this theory, the 
hydrogen clay reacts with the salt to produce a free acid which dis¬ 
solves the aluminum or iron oxides from the clay. 

From the results of worlc performed by the Physical Chemistry and 
Colloid Research Laboratories, University of Calcutta, it would seem that 

4 + 4 

the reulacementof A1 ions is a direct process in which the cations of the 

+4 + 

added electrolyte replace the AL ions* Some hydrogen ions are also 
replaced in the process. 

It might be again stated that base exchange occurs within the 
lattice, within the double layer and upon negative organic groups. This 
latter case is not of interest in this discussion. Table 1 gives the 
average limits of base exchange capacity for the three principal clay 
minerals. 


Table 1 

.dAoL iJilGhhlGL CArAGIlX 


Soil Type 

Capacity ifdlli-eqaivalents 


/1Q0 gms. 

iiaolinite 

3-15 

Illite 

20 - 40 


liontmorillonite 


60 - 100 




























' 




. 

, 










- 










■ 


























■ 




























- 24 - 


The following paragraphs cover in a general sense some of the 
factors effecting the process of cation exchange, Much of this 
information has been drawn from the reference M Cation Exchange in boils* 1 
by Kelley(8}. 

Cation exchange is a relatively reversible process and in some 
cases completely reversible. The rate of exchange is very rapid with 
as little as a few minutes required in some cases for the majority of 
the exchange to occur. 

The cation exchange process is very complicated and as yet all 
•the factors effecting it are not completely known. In soiae instances 
whereas the factor effecting the reaction is known* the exact manner in 
which this factor works is not clearly understood* There are an abundance 
of theories attempting to explain the mechanism of base exchange. Whereas 
almost all of these theories appear to apply to one or more cases, when 
an attempt is made to apply them to the general problem they fall short. 

in recent years much progress has been made in the study of base 
exchange in soils. Ferh* 38 tne greatest step forward was the discovery 
of the crystalline clay minerals. This discovery meant that base ex¬ 
change in soils could now be credited to the crystal structure and lattice 
composition of the clay minerals. 

In the formation of the clays the arrangement of the electro negative 

_ •*+ -r+ -e~f- 

OH and 0 ions and the electro positive Si, Al, Fe and Mg ions is such as 
to cause the taking up of cations from the surrounding medium. These 
cations are held by electrostatic forces on the exterior of lattice 
layers. Dissociation of these cations tends to occur and consequently 
they are replaceable by other cations in solution. The above view on 




















' 






- 















■ 


‘ 




■ 

. 







* 












' 































- 25 - 

cation exchange is now generally accepted by soil scientists* The 
concepts used in presenting this theory vary but for the purposes of this 
thesis the double layer concept of Gouy-Freundlich vail be used* It is 
realized that the existence of the double-layer as idealized herein 
possibly does not exist* however the use of this concept has been rather 
general and as a result it affords a means of correlating test results 
to similar results obtained by other workers* 

The actual process of cation exchange is affected by several factors. 

A brief run down of these factors will now be given. 

Concentration - the effects of concentration on cation exchange 
are seen to depend on the ion being replaced and nature of the replacing 
ion. For example a dilute solution containing Ca ions will replace Ka ions 
from the soil -whereas a concentrated solution of ha ions is required to 
replace Ca ions from the soil. A highly concentrated solution of ions 
may be thought to be able to replace the existing exchangeable ions by 
virtue of sheer numbers. 

Size of ion - From the evidence available it would appear that 
the smaller the overall size of the ion plus its water of hydration, the 
greater its replacing power. This is not true in all cases, however, but 
depends to some extent on the ion being replaced arid the replacing ion. 

hatio of Soil to Solution - It has been found that the greater the 
volume of the solution used with a constant weight of soil, the greater 
the cation exchange, (the concentration of the solution being constants 
From the above paragraphs it is seen that the relative replacing 
power of the different cations depends on the interplay of several factors: 
(l) kind of material on which the exchangeable cation is held, (2) degree 
of saturation with that cation, (3) nature of exchangeable cation and 






. 






. 










































* 































. 

. 

. 








• ■ 




~ 26 ~ 

cation replacing it, (4; the kind of liquid involved. Other factors 
may also be involved. Thus it is evident that no one set of concrete 
rules can be given for the relative replacing power of the various ions 
as this varies with the conditions under which the exchange occurs. 

It might be noted that cation exchange is not necessarily a 
colloidal phenomenon* Many substances of colloidal dimensions do not 
exhibit cation exchange. Thus it might b© concluded that the cation 
exchange depends on certain types of surfaces* A clay in the colloidal 
size range has a tremendous surface area per unit weight thus presenting 
a large surface area for the exchange to take place. 

The following paragraphs indicate the nature of the exchangeable 
cation usually associated with alkaline and acid soils. 

Neutral and Slightly Alkaline Soils - Calcium is usually the 
exchangeable ion present in the greatest amount with these soils. 
Magnesium comes next, although in some soils it may he the most abundant 
ion. smaller amounts of exchangeable & and Na are usually present. 

Acid ooils - As might be expected these soils contain'exchangeable 
H ions. The addition of metallic cations to an acid soil will replace 

the hydrogen ions. This is what occurs when lime is added to an acid 

+■+- 

soil. These soils are also usually very low in Ca ion content. 

■+ 

Alkali Soils - These are soils which contain an amount of ha ions 
in excess of that found in other soils. The history of the soil and 
salts with which it has coae in contact with during past times determines 
the amount and type of cations present. Medium to slightly alkaline soils 

•♦-f t+ -t 

usually contain large amounts of Ca and Mg as well as se*r?<? ha. 
























■ 














* 




- 






' 





















' 






. 






















































27 - 


^lectroki tie ti c s 

The foregoing considerations have all been concerned with static 
reactivities, that is to say they were not dependent upon the relative 
displacement of the solid and liquid phases. The electrokinetic phenom¬ 
ena however are dependent cn the relative displacement of one phase with 
respect to the other* 

In discussing adsorption one layer was seen to be preferentially 
adsorbed while the other ions swamed about as counter ions, This 
adsorbed layer is called the fixed layer and consists of the adsorbed 
ions plus orientated water dipoles. Any movement of the bulk of the 
liquid must be against this fixed layer rather than the surface of the 
solid* 

The counter ions form the other layer of the double layer* Actually 
the fixed and counter layers both contain ions of opposite charges* 
However one sign dominates and for our purposes will be considered to 
be the ion in each layer. 

The first mathematical treatment of the double layer was ^resented 
by Helmholtz. His concept of the double layer has been changed con¬ 
siderably, however the modern mathematical treatment is still based 
upon his assumptions. The concept of the double layer now generally 
accepted is that of Gouy-Freundlich. The fixed layer is taken to be 
relatively thin and atwched to the surface of the solid phase. The 
diffuse or counter layer is taken to extend outwards a varying distance 
from the fixed layer. The boundary between the fixed arid diffuse layers 
is also the boundary between the immobile and mobile water* The water 














' 














' 






















* 


















, 














. 



















- 28 - 

may be thought of as very viscous at the boundary becoming less 
viscous with increasing distance from the boundary, until at some 
distance it becomes ordinary water. 

The thermodynamic potential is the maximum potential difference 
between the solid and liquid, measured some distance back from the 
influence of the douhl© layer. Figure 4 shows the relationship between 
the zeta and thermodynamic potentials. 

As previously stated the zeta potential is that portion of the 
potential drop which exists between the boundary separating rigid and 
diffuse layers and the outer limit of Hie diffuse layer. 

The thickness of the adsorbed layer depends upon the adsorbed io 
the amount of adsorbed water and the concentration of the bulk of the 
solution. Any increase in the concentration of the solution causes an 
increase in the number of ions in the diffuse layer, this decreases the 
thickness of the double layer which in turn decreases the seta potential. 

A high enough concentration may cause the double layer to collapse and 
reform with a reverse in sign. 

Application of Colloidal Theories to Clay Technology 

Johnson and Davidson ( 5 ) in their paper, "Clay ‘Technology and Its 
Application to Soil Stabilization* present a survey of modern trends in 
colloid reasoning. This paper combines the theoretical ith the practical 
and points the way towards a better understanding of the parts played 
by the clay minerals and the counter-ions associated with the colloidal 
portions of the clay minerals. In the discussion to follow illustrations 
from the above mentioned paper will be used. 













* 

. 




■ 



































- 































+ 




/Zx'fe/ 

J&7</ /*7ofs& A&y&’S'S 

+ 


Z?oc< A Ag /e? 


vyg’S' 


/? - fA/cfr/7e , ss of Aty^/-* 

& - fA so/crs7 £>* 5 of* <A/AA!cs^ <?• Ary*?/-’ 



£ ~ Zp/a f%> fe/?f/&f 
£ v TA^/'/tro <Ay/?&s??so 


















29 


The application of colloid reasoning to the behavior of clay 
minerals is a relatively new science. Until recently the largest 
stumbling block was the size of the clay mineral particles. The col¬ 
loidal size range is generally believed to lie between G.5 to G.GG1 
microns. &aolinite particles fall in the size range from 5 to 0.2 
microns. Recent investigations have proven the smallest dimension of a 
kaolin!te particle to be approximately one eighth the diameter of the 
particle. Similar findings have been made for the other clay minerals. 
Thus with one dimension of the particle well within the colloidal range 
the applicationof colloid theory may be readily applied to the clay 
minerals. 

The seta potential and the effects on the properties of clay of 
changes in this potential is of great importance in soil stabilisation. 
Small additions of various electrolytes can cause very great changes in 
the value of the seta potential. -B e .ending on the value of 7~6<? clay 
particles may be highly dispersed if zeta is at a maximum or if the 
value falls off the particles bend to agglomerate. The properties of 
any clay mineral change greatly depending on whether the particles are 
dispersed or flocced. 

Figure 5 serves to illustrate the forces of attraction and repulsion 
present for a clay particle in water. The forces of attraction are 
produced by the affinity of the unsaturated aluminum or silicon bonds 
for the adsorbed layer, and also by the affinity of the adsorbed layer 
for the diffuse layer. The forces of repulsion are caused by the counter 
ions themselves. The zeta potential is a measure of the forces present 
at the adsorbed-diffuse layer boundary. The hydrogen ion because of 
its very small size is able to crowd into the water hull In sufficient 




















* 


. 


. 


























- 


















, 















4 


/Mea'/urn y farj 









* 

* 

V* 



ts/i/as* 


t27?S<6*&?fo*z 



f/jc/re* 


6 


7?sSt&/rc'& 











- 30 - 


numbers to neutralize the charge of the adsorbed hydroxyl ions. Thus 
the zeta potential is approximately zero, and agglomeration takes place. 

The flocc thus formed would be loosely packed as the attractive forces 
would be weak. 

Figure 6 shows the effect of placing the clay particle in an alkaline 
medium. As a general rule the overall effective size of the ion increases 
as you move from hydrogen to tri-valent to di-valent to uni-valent ions. 
This means that fewer counter ions will be located within the water hull 
and as a result the forces of repulsion shift away from the surface. The 
net result is repulsive forces at the interface, this causes the colloid 
particles to remain dispersed. With the colloids well dispersed closely 
packed systems may be had by compaction. 

Considerable work has been done on the effects of different cations 
on the physical properties of soils, in the examples to be discussed, 
synthetic mixtures of quartz and clay mineral were used. The exchangeable 
ions considered are sodium and calcium. 

'Table 2 gives the soil constants for three synthetic mixes used by 
Johnson and Davidson (5). it will be noted that very little difference 
is evident between the Ca-xaoliriite and Ma-kaolinite mixes. This is 
what might he expected as kaolinite has a very low exchange capacity. 

The results of similar work performed by andell, Loos and breth (5) 
are given in table 3. Here the very marked difference between Ca-mont- 
morilionite arid Ha-montmorillonite may be readily noted. Worthy of special 
mention is the obviously large effect of the counter-ion on the properties 
of the mcntmorillonite. This is in direct contrast to the results 
obtained for kaolinite. The reason for this large effect is probably 

(Figures 5 and 6 were redrawn from reference 26 .) 


















. 










, 




V 









































. 



















. 

. 






explained by the high base exchange capacity of montmorillonite. when 
sodium is the counter-ion montmorillonite cart take up more water, thus 
the large increase in limit values* These two tables serve to illustrate 
the effects on the physical properties of soil of a change in the clay 
mineral and (or) counter-ion* 

Density is another soil property affected by the zeta potential. 
Considering a clay with a low seta potential one might expect that 

tao u /t/ 

the primary particles v be bonded together in aggregates. $hea such a 
soil is compacted part of the compactive effort must be spent in break¬ 
ing up these aggregates and driving them into position. Also of importance 
is the fact that the clay mineral when aggregated does not evenly coat 
the non clay particles. On the other hand a clay with a high zeta po¬ 
tential will have its individual particles well dispersed because of the 
repulsive forces present at the interfaces. Thus it should be expected 
lo compact easier, and at the same time evenly coat the non clay particles. 
Where cohesion is the major factor the strength of a soil will depend to 
a large extent on how well the individual particles have been coated by 
the clay mineral. If this last statement is accepted it can be readily 
seen how the clay mineral and counter-ion affect the strength of soils. 






















. 






, 

















' 

























■« 

































































- 32 - 

TABUS 2 

PLASTICITY VALUSS 
(After Johnson and Davidson) 



Calcium 

Sodium 

Sodium 


Aaolinite 

Aaolinite 

Bentonite 

Liquid Limit 

13.9 

13.9 

48.3 

Plastic Limit 

10.5 

11.1 

15.6 

Plastic Index 

3.3 

2.8 

32.8 


TAELS 3 



iiiTLifcBSiiG PLASilUlTX VALU&S 


(After Endell, Loos* 

and Breth) 


Material 

Liquid 

Plastic 

Plastic 


Limit 

Limit 

Index 

quartz:Aaolinite 




9 a 

16.3 

15.5 

0.8 

7* 3 

19.0 

12.8 

6.2 

1*1 

21.6 

12.8 

8.8 

oa 

65.3 

35.7 

29.6 

quarts i Qa-montiriorilioni te 




9*1 




70 

52.5 

17.B 

34.7 

1*1 

75.3 

21.9 

53.4 

0*1 

140.6 

49.5 

91.1 

Quartz *La-iiontmorillcnite 




9*1 

47.3 



7*3 

s 122.3 

10.5 

103.8 

1*1 

214.0 

23.5 

190.5 

0:1 

475.0 

47.0 

428.0 














33 - 


methods of R-ioc&DUHS 

It is the purpose of this outline to clarify any questions which 
might arise with respect to procedures and their possible effects on the 
consistency and validity of the results. 

In setting up the original research program it was decided that as 
a first approach to the problem an attempt should be made to separate the 
chemical and physical effects of calcium chloride on a soil. In order 
to carry out this procedure it was necessary to obtain a chemically inert 
material with particles in the same size range as those of a typical soil. 
Pyrex glass was chosen for this purpose. 

Three separate materials were prepared for testing. These were: 

(a) A natural clay soil. 

(b) A mixture of this natural clay soil and glass bead; . 

(c) A synthetic soil made up entirely of glass. 

It was thought that by comparing the effects of calcium chloride on 
each of the above three Axes it could be determined whether or not these 
effects were chemical or physical in nature. 

As the research program progressed however, it was found that several 
modifications and additions to the original testing program wore necessary. 
The following pages are devoted to a comprehensive outline of the various 
test procedures used throughout this entire program. 
moisture Density foots 

The Harvard Compaction Apparatus (22) was used throughout this 
program to determine the moisture density relationships. The small 
amount of soil required with its use and the relative speed and ease of 
& tion ere deciding factors in choosing this apparatus. 















■ 











. ' 






. 











































































































34 


figure 7 shows the basic components of the* apparatus. 





i'he mold, A Figure 7, is machined of brass* its inside diameter 
is 1 5/16 inches and its length is 2.816 inches* inis gives a volume 
of 1/454th of a cubic foot which means that tne net weight of the 
compacted soil is numerically equal to the unit weight in pounds per 
cubic foot, i’he extension collar, E Figure 7, fits over the top of 
the mold, the whole assembly being held during compaction Dy the 
stirrups, D figure 7, arid the base, C Figure 7* 

Also shown in Figure 7 are the tampers. They consist primarily 
of a wooden handle, inside of which is a compressed spring, and a 1/2 

and 

inch brass rod, He handle is grooved to fit the hands v as the operator 
pushes down the load is transferred from the spring to the tamper. When 
this load, becomes equal to the prestres3 the spring begins to deform- 
This is easily felt by an experienced operator and may also be seen 
between the top of the handle and the brass adjusting nut. fhe tamping 
force can be changed by using springs with varying degrees of stiffness. 





















. 

. 





' 


















3 5 


The tamper by virtue of its Kneading action is thought to simulate 
the action of a sheepsfoot roller. Figure 8 illustrates the use of 
this apparatus. 




/=sy sss'e* 


tss'<?> s<? 



























- 36 - 


Useful accessories to the Harvard apparatus are shown in Figures 
9 and 10. Figure 9 illustrates use of the collar remover. This device 

prevents gouging and shearing of the top fit ..;: .on on removal of the 

collar prior to trim ing* The collar remover is constructed of aluridnum 
and brass* Figure 10 shows the sample ejector in action* The ejector 
is designed to push out the soil specimen from the mold with the least 
possible disturbance* This is essential if the specimens are to be 
used for unconfined or triaxial tests. 

From the results of correlation tests (31) carried out on a local 
soil with the Harvard apparatus it was found that by using 5 layers, 25 
blows per layer and a 20 pound tamper, densities eo parable to those of 
a standard Freetor were obtained. The optimum moisture contents obtained 
however were consistently ligher than those from the standard rroctor 
test* The moisture content density curves, while similar in shape appeared 
■e slightly sio; i C r the Harvard apparatus. At Harvard these curves 
were found to check more closely with the field curves than did the Froc- 
tor test* fils point was not however checked for our local soil. 

Briefly outlined below are the procedures followed for each set of 
compaction tests run. Twelve complete compaction tests were run on each 
of the materials investigated. These tests were run with 0, 2/3, 4/3 and 
6/3 percent calcium chloride. These percentages refer to the actual 
weight of flake calcium chloride added, no correction being made for 
its water content* 

Glass-Clay mixture - Approximately 2000 grams of glass was selected 
for the tests. The material was then mixed with 500 grams of clay and 
weighed out in 200 gram lots. To each lot the desired amount of water 
was added, the material was then thoroughly mixed, placed in a pint sealer. 






















































• 









. 





' 

■ 





' 

























' 













- 














~ 37 - 

sealed and set in the moist room for at least 18 hours. Moisture 
density tests were then run using the Harvard Apparatus. 

In order to determine the effect of calcium chloride on the den¬ 
sity with various compactive efforts three different compactive efforts 
were used on each of the four mixtures for both samples, thus a total 
of 12 compaction tests was run on each of the samples investigated (glass- 
clay, clay), inevery case 5 layers of soil and the 20 pound tamper were 
used. The only variation was in the number of tamps per layer, which 
viere 25, 40 and 60. The entire specimen was taken for moisture content 
determnation. Upon the completion of one set of tests all the material 
was oven dried and re-used for the next set of tests. The only reason 
for re-using this material was the inability to obtain sufficient material 
for all the tests. 

For those mixes containing calcium chloride the following procedure 
was used. The oven dried glass was weighed and the required percentage 
of calcium chloride was added in solution with water. The glass was then 
thoroughly mixed, oven dried and split up into 200 gram lots. The desired 
amount of water was then added to each 200 gram lot and the material mixed, 
stored for 18 hours, then co pacted. 

At the end of each set of tests a representative sample was taken 
for chemical analysis of the calcium chloride content. 

Olay fixture - Sufficient clay was prepared to ensure that none of 
this material would be re-used. About 20 kilograms of clay were air dried, 
broken up, and quartered. One quarter was used for each set of compaction 


tea os 



. 




- 













. 

. 




















’ 
















For each set of compaction tests the clay was wetted to a 
moisture consent of approximately 20 percent then air dried to approx¬ 
imately 5 percent* For those tests in which calcium chloride was used 
as an admixture the calcium chloride was added with this initial water* 

Af ter being redried the clay was 3 pl.it into 200 gram lots, water 
added, mixed thoroughly, stored for 18 hours and then used in the com¬ 
paction test. As before the entire specimen was taken for moisture 
content determinations. At the end of each set of compaction tests, a 
representative sample was taken for chemical analysis of calcium chloride 
content. 

Trior to running any of the foregoing compaction tests the material 
used was in each case that as sing a #10 sieve. This was deemed a 
necessary procedure to obtain consistent results using a mold of such 
small volume. In every case ell work was done in the moist room. 

Ground Glass mixture - A synthetic soil made up entirely of glass 
was prepared. It was intended to run a complete series of tests on this 
material as was done for the glass clay mixture. Difficulties were 
encountered in obtaining consistent test results with tills material, thus 
all tests on the ground glass mixture were discontinued. 

'Unconfined Compression Tests 

These tests were run on each of the samples, at each of the four 
different percentages of admixture. In every case the tests were run 
at optimum moisture and density for the compaction procedure using 5 
layers and 25 tamps per layer. 

Having found the optimum point from the compaction test, three lots 
of 200 grams each were prepared at tills moisture content. The procedures 
followed in compacting this material wore the same as those outlined 















. 







. 











. 












. 
































■ 

* 

, ' :> 










previously for the various moisture density tests. 

JiJach specimen was weighed, the wet unit weight determined and then 
pushed from the mold. The soil specimen itself was then weighed, set 
up in the unconfined apparatus, covered with a membrane and broken. 

The purpose of the membrane was to reduce moisture loss during testing. 
The specimen was then weighed again, dried in the oven and the moisture 
content at the start and end of the test determined. The apparatus used 
for the unconfined tests was of the controlled stress type. 

Atterberg Limits 

Atterberg limits were run on each of the samples for the four 
different percentages of admixture used (0, 2/3# 4/3 and 6/3). In every 
case the soil was prepared in accordance with A.S.f .m. designation D423-39. 
It was then set in the moist room a minimum of 18 hours before testing. 

The mechanical method was used for determining the liquid limit, rlastic 
limits were determined from the soil remaining after running the liquid 
limits. 

The Atterberg limits were also determined on several miscellaneous 
soils available in the lab. In every case the same procedures were 
followed. 

Hydropen Ion Concentration (pH) 

The hydrogen ion concentration of every soil used during the program 
was determined. The Beckman electric pH meter, model H2 was used 
(Figure 11). 

















V 




. 




















































. 

. 








■ 


















•• ■ S' • 




. 



- 40 - 



At the outset of each set of pH determinations the meter was 
checked as recommended by the manufacturer. A standard buffer solution 
with a pH of 7.0 was used. Each soil was tested at three dilutions, 

(l) thick paste, (2) medium paste, (3) thin paste. This procedure 
served to check both the readings and the degree of buffering in the 
solution. Between each pH determination the electrodes were very 
carefully washed with distilled water and wiped dry with tissue paper. 

The electrodes used were the saturated calomel type as the reference 
electrode, and a glass electrode. The calomel electrode had a fibre 
thread in its tip. 

jiiscellaneous Tests 

Grain size determinations were made on all material used in the 
program. In all cases a representative sample was obtained by repeatedly 
splitting the sample. Hydrometer analyses were run as outlined in the 
A.S.TJty. Procedures for Testing Soils. The material used in these tests 


was discarded, 





























. 




. 










■ 




. 

















. 



. 








- 41 - 


Specific gravities were run on that material used in the moisture 
density tests. The procedure used was that given by A,S,T,h, designa¬ 
tion D854-43T. Two or more tests were run in each case to ensure cor¬ 
rectness. 

Artificial grading curves were established for the glass and glass 
clay mixture. These curves were designed to give the best possible 
grading for the materials used and at the same time conform as closely 
as possible to toe specifications for surface courses. 

Glass Manufacturing 

Glass spheres were obtained from toe Flex-O-Lite Manufacturing 
Corporation, St. Louis, Missouri, The smallest size available however 
contained very little material finer than a number 200 sieve, bince 
sizes down to 1 micron were desired, it was decided to manufacture these 
sizes ourselves. 

The procedure followed was very simple as actual spheres were not 
required. Approximately 4 pounds of pyrex glass was broken up and 
placed in a small ball mill (Figure 12), Sixteen 42b gram steel balls, 

1.85 inches in diameter were used. The machine itself is 20 inches long, 

28 inches in diameter and is turned at 36 r.p.m, by a 1 1/2 h.p. motor. 
flSoort fwo gallons of water were added, the drum sealed and the ball 
mill started. It was run intermittently over a two week period for a total 
of approximately 20 hours. 

The ground glass was removed from the mill and oven dried. It was 
then split into several small portions and placed in tall form beakers. 

At this stage the material was dark brown in color, due to the presence 
of iron oxides. A solution of 6 normal hydrochloric acid was added to 






























. 




. 


. 








• . 




. 











. 

. 

























* 

. 






■ 










1i 


. 













42 


the beakers, a few cubic 06 ers of nitric acid were also added 
to act as a catylist. The beakers were then covered and heated for 
8 hours* Next they were allowed to settle for 18 hours* 




The next step was to carefully draw off the liquid from the top 
of each beaker. Tills liquid was all saved, allowed to settle for three 
days, then the upper portion was drawn off and discarded. The lower 


<zsr</ 


portion was washed into a beaker, diluted with distilled water v allowed 
to settle. The material left in the bottom of e ach of the beakers, 
after the liquid had been drawn from the top, was diluted with distilled 
water and allowed to settle for three days. The whole procedure was then 
repeated as outlined above, as a result of this successive decan nation, 
all the iron oxides were dissolved, and removed by the hydrochloric acid, 
the hydrochloric acid itself was then removed by repeated dilution. 

The glass finally obtained was as clean and colorless as that 
purchased with the notable difference being of course in the shape of 


















i 




- 43 - 


the particles. All the glass was mixed and divided with a sample 
splitter for use in the lab program. A grain size determination was 

also made. 

Measurement of Mineral Gels 

It has been stated that most aggregates when subject to constant 
moisture exude milky mineral gels. These mineral gels form a natural 
cement which tends to bind the aggregate more firmly together. Further¬ 
more calcium chloride is claimed to aid in this process. As a check on 
this claim, two washed aggregates were selected and split into three 
portions. To these portions 0, 1 and 2 percent calcium chloride was 
added. The samples were then allowed to sit for three months. At the 
end of this time a check was made to determine the effect, if any of the 
calcium chloride. 

Preparation of Special Clays 

Two different sets of procedures were followed in preparing the 
clay samples for a series of comparison tests* 

Procedure #1 - A large sample of clay was chosen and quartered. 

The St. Joseph’s High School clay sample was used. To each of the four 
clay samples an equal weight of glass beads was added. Thus four iden¬ 
tical samples, each consisting of a 50-50 mixture of clay and glass were 
obtained. The grading curve for this mixture is given on page 119 of the 
appendix. 

One percent by weight of CaOlg, ^aCl and MB4C1 was added to each 
of the three samples, the fourth sample was not treated. The salts were 















. 































. 

* 







. 









. 





















1 






























- 44 - 


dissolved in sufficient water to produce a soil mixture with a moisture 
content of approximately 30 percent. In order to have identical mixtures, 
the untreated sample was mixed to the same moisture content using distilled 
water. 

Each sample was allowed to air dry and was then crushed and stored 
re dy for use. The following tests were then run on each of the four 
samples; Atterberg limits, moisture density, and unconfined compression 
tests. The procedures used in running these''were identical bo those 
procedures outlined previously. 

Procedure #2 - As in the first procedure, a sample of Et. Joseph*s 
clay was taken and split into two portions. Each of the two portions 
thus obtained was then saturated with a chosen cation. The following 
paragraph briefly outlines the procedure followed in saturating the clay 
with the desired ion. In this case the two ions used were fta and NH 4 . 

A ten percent (by weight of water) solution of iaCl was mixed into 

a large bottle with the soil. The ratio of soil to solution was 1 gram 

of soil per 5 grams of solution. The soil solution was periodically shaken 

for about 8 hours and then left soaking for 24 hours. At the end of this 

period the soil-NaGl solution was well agitated, poured into large Buchi er 

funnels, and filtered under a constant vacuum. The filtrate was washed 

with distilled water and the leechate discarded. The filtrate thus 

collected was air dried, crushed and stored for testing. The same proced- 

+ 

ure was carried out in obtaining the UH 4 saturated clay. In this case 
NH 4 CI W as the salt used. 

Each of the two saturated clays thus obtained were then split into 
two parts. To one part of each clay a 2 percent (by weight of soil) 
solution of calcium chloride was ad; ed, to the other two parts distilled 













. 








# 









. 

. 















. * 

. 








■ 




- 













. 










- 45 


water was added. All four specimens were then air dried, crushed and 
stored for testing. Atterberg limit tests were then run on the samples 
The procedures followed in running the Atterberg limit tests were identi¬ 
cal with those previously outlined* 

Outline of Procedure Use d F or Cation Analysis 

The following procedures are copied directly from a report submitted 
to the author by the soils physics lab. Department of Agriculture, 
University of Alberta, The tests outlined in these procedures were 
performed on four of the soils used in the research program. 

*The pH was determined using a Beckman glass electrode on a n thick M 
soil paste* The thick paste was made by stirring distilled water into 
the soil till the saturation point was reached. The surface should 
glisten but no free water should appear. pH was then determined after 
15 minutes standing to allow for equilibrium. 

Displacement of Cations 

Cations were displaced from the soil using normal BH4Ac in a 
centrifuging procedure as described by Richards* This involved shaking 
with normal KH4Ac solution about 5 volumes to one of soil. After shaking 
and allowing to stand overnight the extract was removed by centrifuging. 

The soil was then similarity treated 4 more times, but during these treat¬ 
ments was centrifuged, immediately after shaking. References are avail- 

- J r 

able to show that about 90-95^® saturation with the displacing cation (H&4 ) 

takes place during the first shaking* 

The MH4Ac extracts so obtained, were made to 250 ml volume from which 
20 ml were taken for estimation of extracted H . 




















. 


. 































. 













. 


* 












. 


. 








. 

























































- 46 - 


The remaining 230 ml were evaporated to dryness, the NH4Ac driven 
off by heating and treatment with aqua regia, and extracted cations 
again brought into solution with *25N HGL* 

Determination of Cation 

Ca*and Mg were determined on a portion of this H solution 11 by 

4 4 

standard chemical procedures. Ha and K were determined on other por¬ 
tions of the "solution” using the Beckman flame photometer* Extracted 

4 

H was determined by measuring the drop in pH of the BiHAc extract brought 

-f 

about through contact with the soil sample* H was found in only one sample 
(where the soil pH was below ?)♦ 

Sulphate (SG4“) was determined on a portion of the "solution” by 
turbidimetry after addition of barium chloride. Since most of the water 
soluble cations are combined as sulphates, the amount of sulphate pre¬ 
sent is an indie tion of the amount of water soluble cations present* 

Calculation of results 

The results were all calculated as rnilli equivalents (^.E.) per 100 
grams air dry soil, sometimes called &•£*/** This figure is just the 
percent divided by the rnillo equivalent weight, i*e. the -^equivalent 
weight/LOGO of each ion. '^hen expressed in equivalents or in h.E. the 
figures are comparable chemically in combining ability and may be added 
and subtracted at will* This is net possible when results are expressed 
on a percentage basis. 

♦Equivalent weights of the cations concerned are:~ 

H + 1.00, GsT 20.04, 12.16, Ha + 23.0, K* 39.1* 

















. 












. 

. * . 



























r'. 





















. 









- 47 - 


The sum of extracted cations was found by adding the h */lOG gms 
of H , Ca + , hg*, and K*, By subtracting the 0O4 from the 11 sum” 

to eliminate the water soluble cations, an estimation of exchange capacity 
is obtained,” 













































































































































- 48 - 


INSULTS 

The following paragraphs are devoted to a discussion of the 
various best results* All test results are presented in tabular form. 

Hydrogen Ion Concentration ( pH ) 

The results of several hydrogen ion concentration detemanations 
are shown in table 4. As can be seen from an inspection of these 
results the addition of calcium chloride caused a corresponding decrease 
in the hydrogen ion concentration. This was true for every soil tested. 

The soils tested cover a range in pH from 5*3 to 8.2* with the 
majority of soils having a pH be Ween 7.0 and 8.0. I Oder (26/ ran 
several pH determinations on soils with pH’s ranging from 4.4 to 7.4* 
with the majority of soils tested having a pH of less than 6.0. He also 
found* that in every case the addition of calcium chloride caused a de¬ 
crease in the pH value. Thus it would seem logical to assume that the 
addition of calcium chloride to a soil produces a corresponding decrease 
in the pH of that soil. 

Another point to be noted from table 4 is the fact that as a 
general rule the biggest change in the pH occurs with the initial addition 
of calcium chloride. Additional calcium chloride causes a smaller 
decrease in pH in most cases and in a few instances practically no 
further change at all. 

As previously rioted (page ZZ ) the addition of a neutral salt to a 
soil will cause a decrease in the pH of that soil. The reason for this 
decrease has been accredited to base exchange between the salt and the 
clay mineral. In this instance the soils were treated with calcium chloride* 

















* 






- 



























. 

. 








% 


















, 












' 


































- 49 


TABLE 4 


HXDHCGiSrJ ION CoHCENTEATION DBT&KMINATIOH (pH) 


Sample 

Pereent 

CaCl 2 

Thick 

Paste 

pH Values 

Med. 

Paste 

Thin 

Paste 

Average 
pH Value 

1 

0 

7.55 

7.58 

7.70 

7.62 


1/2 

7.0 9 

7.10 

7.08 

7.09 


1 

6.67 

6.87 

6.88 

6.8? 

2 

0 

7.62 

7.66 

7.71 

7.66 


1/2 

7.20 

7.23 

7.28 

7.24 


1 

7.03 

7.08 

7.08 

7.06 

3 

0 

7.20 

7.20 

7.24 

7.21 


1/2 

6.65 

6.89 

6.90 

6.88 


1 

6.72 

6.78 

6.80 

6.77 

4 

0 

7.75 

7.72 

7.77 

7.75 


1/2 

7.33 

7.34 

7.40 

7.36 


1 

7.10 

7.18 

7.18 

7.15 

5 

0 

7.95 

7.90 

7.92 

7.92 


1/2 

7.41 

7.47 

7.59 

7.49 


1 

7.32 

7.32 

7.38 

7.34 

6 

0 

6.85 

6.90 

6.95 

6.90 


1/2 

6.69 

6.70 

6.75 

6.71 


1 

6.48 

6.58 

6.56 

6.55 

7 

0 

6.00 

5.90 

5.98 

5.96 


1/2 

5.68 

5.89 

5.90 

5.69 


1 

5.76 

5.80 

5.81 

5.80 

8 

0 

5.34 

5.41 

5.45 

5.40 


1/2 

4.95 

4.98 

4.98 

4.97 


1 

4.60 

4.80 

4.80 

4.60 

9 

0 

5.30 

5.30 

5.38 

5.33 


1 

4.75 

4.80 

4.90 

4.82 

10 

0 

6*22 

6.22 

6.28 

6.24 


1/2 

5.86 

5.90 

5.98 

5.92 


1 

5.02 

5.90 

5.90 

5.07 

11 

0 

6.60 

6.68 

6.70 

6.66 


1/2 

6.30 

6.30 

6.35 

6.32 


1 

6.10 

6.10 

6.15 

6.12 








- 50 


TABLE 4 (CONT , D) 

HIDKOGEK ION CONCfiHTiiATION DE'i'SSMINATION (pH) 


pH Values 

Sample Percent Thick he d. Thin Average 

CaClg Paste Paste Paste pH Value 


12 


13 


14 


15 


16 


17 


ie 


19 


20 


21 


0 

7.60 

7.60 

7.63 

7.61 

1/2 

7.32 

7.32 

7.35 

7.33 

1 

7.17 

7.17 

7.18 

7.17 

0 

7.47 

7.49 

7.55 

7.51 

1/2 

7.20 

7.20 

7.20 

7.20 

1 

7.18 

7.19 

7.21 

7.19 

0 

7.56 

7.60 

7.60 

7.59 

1/2 

7.12 

7.12 

7.20 

7.15 

n 

JL 

7.10 

7.09 

7.10 

7.10 

0 

7.78 

7.82 

7.90 

7.83 

1/2 

7.50 

7.50 

7.50 

7.50 

1 

7.21 

7.22 

7.30 

7.24 

0 

7.40 

7.50 

7.50 

7.47 

1/2 

7.21 

7.21 

7.22 

7.21 

1 

7.02 

7.11 

7.11 

7.08 

0 

8.18 

8.18 

8.21 

8.19 

1/2 

7.61 

7.69 

7.69 

7.66 

1 

7.45 

7.50 

7.46 

7.47 

0 

7.90 

7.90 

7.98 

7.93 

1/2 

7.30 

7.30 

7.40 

7.33 

1 

7.00 

7.10 

7.20 

7.10 

0 

7.55 

7.58 

7.61 

7.58 

1/2 

7.16 

7.19 

7.20 

7.18 

1 

7.15 

7.15 

7.15 

7.15 

0 

7.80 

7.80 

7.80 

7.80 

1/2 

7.42 

7.49 

7.50 

7.47 

1 

7.30 

7.30 

7.30 

7.30 

0 

7.89 

7.89 

7.89 

7.89 

1/2 

7.11 

7.10 

7.10 

7.10 

1 

6.9© 

7.00 

7.00 

7.00 

0 

8.12 

8.25 

8.25 

8.21 

1/2 

7.20 

7.29 

7.28 

7.26 

1 

7.10 

7.10 

7.10 

7.10 


22 
















51 


which has a pH of slightly less than 10 for the concentrations used. 

Yet in every case the addition of calcium chloride caused a decrease in 
the pH of the soil treated, even though many of these soils were acid 

with pH values of 4 or 5# 

The results of these pH determinations strongly indicate that 
base exchange between the calcium chloride and the clay mineral is 
occurring. If this were not the case, an increase rather than a de¬ 
crease in pH would be expected when calcium chloride was added to the 

soil. 

Atterberg Limits 

All limit results have been tabulated and are shown in table 5* 
Several attempts were made to correlate these results with the pH 
determinations but little success was attained. 

A second approach was attempted in which those soils from one 
locality were grouped together. The results of this grouping are shown 
in table 6. From table 6 it can be seen that a definite trend appears 
evident for most groups. This is especially true for the Prince George 
and Penhold samples. The notable exception is tne tiainwright material 
which does not appear to follow any definite trend. 

Table 6 would seem to indicate that the effect of calcium chloride 
on a soil depends on the origin and thus nature, of the soil. That is to 
say soils from one locality might'be expected to be composed of the same 
clay minerals and contain the same replaceable cations. This being the 
case, several samples from any one locality should be expected to behave 
generally in a similar manner when treated with calcium chloride,. This 
is especially true if base exchange is the mechanism causing tne changes 

















































- 




. 



























. 

■ 





. 

. 





. 































. 


















52 - 


in the properties of the soil. Thus it would seem that table 6, 
although not conclusive because of insufficient data, can be taken 
as an indication of base exchange occurring in the treated soils* 

Table 7 gives the location and classification of those soils used 
in the pH determinations and Atterberg limit tests. The classification 
is based on visual inspection plus the location of the soil on the plas¬ 
ticity chart. 

From a study of table 5 it will be seen that tnose soils exhibiting 
the highest plasticity values also show the largest change in limit 
values with the addition of calcium chloride. This is what should be 
expected, as highly plastic soils are usually the montroorillcnite type. 

As was stated previously, montinorillonite is the most active of the clay 
minerals and has the highest base exchange capacity* Thus the higher the 
percentage of montmorillonit© type clay mineral in a soil, the greater 
the exchange capacity of that soil, and hence the greater the possible 
variation in physical properties should base exchange occur. 

if the above statements can be accepted as correct, then it 
follows that the results of the limit tests indicate base exchange is 
occurring between the calcium chloride and the cla>. This borne 
out by the fact that the highly plastic (montmorilioniue) soils show 
the greatest change in limit values when treated with calcium chloride. 

One item which should be mentioned with respect to the limit results 
is the amount cf error possible in these results, several factors have 
been fo nd to influence limit test results. Hues© ares operator errors, 
method of drying and preparing samples, time of mixing, amount of 
water added at time of mixing, length of time of soaking, and variations 
wit i different machines* 




























' 







.. 






































. 

. 








■ 




































- 53 


TABLE 5 

EFFECT OF CALCIUM CHLORIDE OK THE PLASTIC MB LIQUID 
LMIS OF SOILS 


Sample 

Percent 

CaCl 2 

W1 

Wp 

x P 

If 

1 

0 

34,5 

20.7 

13.9 

8.4 


1/2 

36.4 

20.7 

15.7 

10.7 


1 

36.6 

21.2 

15.4 

10.2 

2 

0 

37,7 

18.0 

19.7 

8.8 


1/2 

3£.6 

20.2 

18.4 

14.0 


1 

37.2 

17.6 

19.6 

11.1 

3 

0 

50.2 

25.4 

24.6 

11.4 


1/2 

a.6 

28.3 

23.3 

14.3 


1 

52.0 

23.1 

28 .9 

15.6 

4 

0 

69.9 

28.3 

41.6 

16.9 


1/2 

77.8 

26.5 

51.3 

23.1 


1 

78.0 

30.8 

47.2 

19.9 

5 

0 

60.2 

26.5 

33.7 

14.5 


1/2 

65.2 

27.7 

37.5 

19.3 


1 

65.3 

30.5 

34.6 

17.3 

6 

0 

61.0 

33.5 

27.5 

10.8 


1/2 

66.5 

34.0 

32.5 

15.5 


1 

65.4 

31.9 

33.5 

15.0 

7 

0 

69.7 

26.1 

43.6 

9.6 


1/2 

68.5 

32.4 

36.1 

19.1 


1 

68.9 

32.0 

36.9 

16.1 

e 

0 

54.5 

32.0 

22.5 

8.4 


1/2 

60.4 

36.3 

24.1 

14.6 


1 

60.8 

35.3 

25.8 

14.3 

9 

0 

81.6 

32.3 

49.3 

16.9 


1/2 

73.8 

31.2 

42.6 

29.6 

10 

0 

84.1 

30.3 

53.8 

21.7 


1/2 

79.7 

34.7 

45.0 

20.8 


1 

78.9 

32.5 

46.4 

5.8 


Hon Plastic 


11 












54 


.['ABLE 5 (CoMTIMUED) 

EFFECT OF CALCIUM CHLORIDE OR THE FLaSTIC ARD LIQUID 
LIMITS OF SOILS 


Sample 

Percent 

CaCl 2 

W1 

Wp 

ip 

If 

12 

0 

23.0 

18.8 

4.2 

10.0 


1/2 

24.4 

17.7 

6.7 

8.0 


1 

23*9 

16.3 

7.6 

6.3 

13 

0 

41.8 

20.9 

20.9 

13.6 


1/2 

40.4 

21.6 

18.8 

6.1 


1 

40,2 

21*3 

18.9 

9.6 

14 

0 

52.4 

22.4 

30.0 

9.6 


1/2 

53.9 

25.5 

28.4 

9.2 


1 

51.1 

23.5 

27.6 

10.8 

15 

0 

28.9 

16.7 

12.2 

11.7 


1 

30.9 

18.3 

12.6 

9.4 

16 

0 

85.4 

31.2 

54.2 

22.3 


1/2 

77.2 

31.0 

46.2 

14.3 


1 

74.8 

30.4 

44.4 

14.6 

17 

0 

25.4 

16,2 

9.2 

7.9 


1/2 

24.4 

16.3 

8.1 

8.6 


1 

24.8 

15.9 

8.9 

9.8 

18 

0 

53.5 

24.1 

29.4 

13.3 


1/2 

49.6 

22.7 

26.9 

11.0 


1 

45.9 

22.1 

23.6 

10.0 

19 

0 

34.2 

10.3 

15.9 

11.4 


1/2 

31.8 

15.3 

16.5 

8.9 


1 

31.2 

16.0 

15.2 

9.6 

20 

0 

43.3 

22.9 

20,4 

11.3 


1/2 

42.4 

20.0 

22.4 

12.8 


1 

41.5 

20,0 

21.5 

10.5 

21 

0 

30.9 

15.7 

15.2 

7.8 


1/2 

29.8 

15.6 

14.2 

5.8 


1 

2 9.9 

15.5 

14.4 

6.0 

22 

0 

31.6 

17.4 

14.2 

6.9 


1/2 

31.8 

15.9 

15.9 

5.0 


1 

33.8 

16.4 

17.4 

12.4 











55 - 


6 

EFFECT OF CALCIUM CHLOitlDft Ofo THd PLAiiTlC AND LIQUID JULIUS OF ooiLS. 
fiSoT ALGOL i'G Aii& G&QU1LD ACCOiiDIwG Lo LOCATION 


Prince George 

W1 

Wp 

ip 

If 

Increased 

13 

13 

11 

18 

Decreased 

6 

5 

7 

1 


Waimiright 

m 

Wp 

ip 

If 


Increased 

4 

5 

3 

1 


Decreased 

3 

2 

4 

6 



Penhold 

Wi 

Wp 

Ip 

If 

Increased 

0 

1 

1 

2 

Decreased 

8 

7 

7 

6 


AcKernan 

m 

Wp 

ip 

If 

Increased 

0 

0 

2 

1 

Decreased 

4 

4 

2 

3 


Calgary 

m. 

Wp 

ip 

If 

Increased 

2 

0 

2 

1 

Decreased 

0 

2 

0 

1 









































IABLB 7 


SoIL SAfoFL&S 0SBD IN iLBf FitoGtiAh 


No. 

Location 

Depth 

General Classification 

1 

Prince George B.C. 
Gta. 6 00 

0-12" 

Brown silty clay low to 
medium plasticity 

2 

Prince George B.C. 
Sta. 6 00 

12-24" 

Inorganic clay medium 
plasticity 

3 

Prince George B.C. 
Sta* 6 00 

36-48® 

Inorganic clay laedium to 
high plasticity 

4 

Prince George B.C. 
Sta. 18 00 

24-36" 

Highly plastic inorganic 
clay 

5 

Prince George B.C* 
Sta. 18 00 

36-48" 

Highly plastic inorganic 
clay 

6 

Prince George B.C* 
Sta. 45 00 

0-12“ 

Highly plastic inorganic 
clay 

7 

Prince George B.C. 
Sta. 45 00 

12-24" 

Highly plastic inorganic 
clay 

8 

Prince George B.C. 
Sta. 45 00 

36-48" 

Medium to highly plastic 
clay 

9 

rrince George B.C* 
Sta. 51 00 

24-36" 

Highly plastic inorganic 

clay 

10 

Prince George B.C. 
Sta* 51 00 

36-48" 

Highly plastic inorganic 
clay 

11 

Aitimat B.C. 
Smelter Site 

55’ 

Gray silty fin© sand 

12 

Wain,fright Alta. 

N.S.l U-3 

17’ 

Light brown sandy silt 
very slightly plastic 

13 

Wainwright Alta. 

S.A.3 U-2 

14' 

Brown silty, sandy clay 
medium plasticity 

14 

Wainwright Alta. 

S.S,3 U-3 

17' 

Slightly sandy brown 
silty clay, plastic 









- 57 - 


TABL£ 7 (CON'J'Dj 



SOIL SAMPLES 

USED IN Z 

OUT PROGRAM 

No. 

Location 

Depth 

General Classification 

15 

Wainwright Alta. 

S.fa.5 U-l 

3.0* 

Brown silty sandy clay 
medium plasticity 

16 

Penhold Alta, 

Hoi© fr 1 

10* 

Light brown highly 
plasticclay 

17 

Penhold Alta. 

Hole § 2 

15* 

Very sandy silty clay 
low plasticity 

18 

Penhold Alta. 

Hole # 3 

5* 

Light brown slightly 
silty plastic clay 

19 

Penhold Alta. 

Hole # 4 

15* 

Very sandy silty clay 
low plasticity 

20 

Edmonton Alta, 
"kchernan" U-l-3 

15’ 

Brown slightly sandy 
clay medium plasticity 

21 

Edmonton Alta. 
n McKeman B 0-2-4 

19* 

Dark brown sandy silty 
clay slightly plastic 

22 

Calgary Alta, 

14th St. Bridge 

51 1 

Dark brown very silty 
clay 

23 

Edmonton Alta. 

St. Joseph’s 

School 

8* 

Dark brown highly 
plastic clay 

























' 


















































, 















. 





















- 58 - 

In order to e3„iininate as many of these errors as possible all 
drying, preparing and mixing of samples was carried out by one techni¬ 
cian. Originally it was intended to apply this policy to all phases of 
the test, however circumstraces prevented this. It was found impractical 
to always have the same technician and machine available at one time. 

It was also found impossible to have 8aeh sample soak for exactly the 
same period, however in most cases a soaring period of from 24 to 48 
hours was maintained. 

In view of the aforementioned factors some variation in test 
results must be expected. The exact magnitude of the experimental 
errors was not determined, however it is not believed to be large 
enough to appreciably effect the results other than perhaps a few border¬ 


line cases 




















- 






■ 




. 


■ 






. 













. 




H I 


































■ 










■ 












- 59 


ilesuits of Tests on Edmonton Clay 

The r . suits obtained from the various tes ts run on the ,, ^dmonton ,, -fc 
(St, Joseph*s School) clay will all be discussed under the above heading. 

Compaction lest results are presented in table 8, ‘Tills table gives 
both corrected and uncorrected dry densities. Figures 13 and 14 present 
summaries of the compaction curves obtained• All original compaction 
curves are shown in the appendix. Figure 13 is drawn up to show the 
relationship between density and compactive effort while figure 14 
shows the relationship between density and percent admixture. 

The results of the compaction tests appear to be quite consistent. 
From figures 13 and 14 the following conclusions can be drawn, 

(a) with increasing compactive effort increasing densities are 
obtained. However the rate of increase drops off with 
increased compaction, 

(b) With increases in admixture a corresponding increase in 
density is obtained. 

In the a.ove discussion no correction was mad© for the weight of 

the added calcium chloride. When this correction is made, it is found 
that no increase in density occurs for the clay tested. In fact the 
density decreases slightly with additional admixture. 

In accordance with the principles outlined in the discussion on 
base exchange, an increase, or decrease, or perhaps, no change in 
density migh be expected with the addition of calcium chloride to the 
soil. An increase in density would occur if displacement of the 

* The material referred to in the text as "Hdmonton” clay, was obtained 
at a depth of 8* from an excavation for St, Joseph*s High School in 

Sdmonton, Alberta, 




















, 



. 




■ 




. 
























































. 










- 60 


iHlilah 6 

OULu Adi OF COi-iFACTION T&tiT itaiSULTS ON LDmONTCh OLAY 


Increase in Increase in 

Percent Uncorrected Uncorrected Corrected Corrected 
CaCl2 Dry Density Density Dry Density Dry Density 



5 

layers 

29 blows 

per layer 


0 

110.7 



116.7 


2/3 

119.2 


0.9 

118.6 

-0.1 

4/3 

119.3 


0.6 

118.1 

-0.6 

2 

119.9 


0.8 

117.9 

-0.8 


9 

layers 

40 blows 

per layer 


0 

119.9 



119.9 


2/3 

119.6 


0.3 

119.2 

-0.3 

4/3 

120.1 


0*6 

118.9 

-0.6 

2 

120.2 


0.7 

118.6 

-0.9 


5 

layers 

80 blows 

per layer 


0 

120.0 



120.0 


2/3 

120.2 


0.2 

119.6 

-0.4 

4/3 

120.6 


0.6 

119.4 

-0.6 

2 

120.8 


0.8 

119.1 

-o.9 


Notes 

Uncorrected densities are those dry densities computed without 
correcting for the weight of calcium chloride contained in the 
soil* 

Corrected dry densities are corrected for the weight of calcium 
chloride contained in the soil* The correction for calcium 
chloride content was bused on the actual amount of calcium 
chloride in the sample as determined, by a chemical analysis. 



















±tgjE|ptp: 


>Mf>frCT/ON 


HUGHES OWENS 315G 20x20 

















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































- 61 - 


original ion by the calcium ion caused an increase in the zeta potential. 
Conversely any base exchange causing a decrease in the zeta potential 
would result in lower densities. It is also probable that if calcium were 
the original cation, the addition of calcium chloride would have no effect 
on the density. In fact too much calcium chloride might cause lower den¬ 
sities as it would tend to displace both soil and water in the compacted 
specimen. For the Edmonton clay used in these tests the cation analysis 
showed calcium to be the major replaceable cation. 

From the test results it is indicated that for the Edmonton clay the 
use of calcium chloride caused a slight decrease in the corrected dry 
densities* This decrease was so small in some instances that no change 
in density could actually be stated to have occurred. 

Unconfined Compression Test results are tabulated along with the 
Atterberg limit results in table 9. 

As can be seen from table 9 the clay mixture showed fairly consis¬ 
tent strength values throughout the range of admixture used. A more 
extensive testing program would be necessary before any conclusions could 
be drawn from the unconfined compression test results, 

TABLE 9 

LXFilT AM) UHC0NFIM5D CCM-RESSIVE STRENGTH 
RESULTS FOR SBMCKTGK CLAY 


Percent 

Ca0l2 

m. 

Up 

ip 

If 

*Unconfined 
°omp. Sir. 

s 

73.4 

30.3 

43.1 

15.9 

2.25 

2/3 

74.6 

30.4 

44.2 

16.6 

2.39 

4/3 

73.8 

29.4 

44.4 


2.30 

2 

73.9 

30.2 

43.7 

13.3 

2.21 


* Average of three tests 










. 











. 


■ 














. 

















































. 








. 




f '■ " V ■. p:.i V. « 





- 62 


Atterberg Limit results are presented In table 9. The variation 
in results with the addition of calcium chloride is so slight that when 
experimental errors are considered no change can be said to have occurred* 
This might be expected as calcium was already present as the exchangeable 
ion in the clay. 

Results of Tests on Clay-Glass fixture 

All tests run on the clay-glass mixture will be discussed under the 
above heading. 

Compaction Test results are presented in table 10. This table 
gives both corrected and uncorrected dry densities. Figures 15 and 16 
present summaries of the compaction curves obtained. All original 
compaction curves are shown in the appendix. Figure 15 is drawn up 
to show the relationship between density and compactive effort while 
figure 16 shows the relationship between density and percent admixture. 

The results of the compaction tests appear to be quite consistent. 

The same discussion as was applied to the density results from the 
ddmonton clay may be equally as well applied to the clay-glass . ixture. 

The additional calcium chloride did not increase the corrected densities. 
In fact in most cases a slight decrease was obtained. 

Unconfined Compression Test results are tabulated along with the 
atterberg limit results in table 11* 

The untreated clay-glass mixture had a higher strength value than 
any of the treated mixtures. The unconfined compressive strength for the 
untreated mixture was 1.27 tons per square foot whereas the strengths 
of the treated samples ran at about 0*80 tons per square foot. 





























♦ 


































. 


. 







- 63 - 

TABLE 10 

SmiAdX OF COMPACTION TEST RESULTS 
ON GLAX-GLASS MIXTURE 

Increase in Increase in 

Percent Uncorrected Uncorrected Corrected Corrected 
CaClj? Dry Density Density Dry Density Dry Density 



5 

layers 25 blows 

per layer 


0 

90.8 


90.8 


2/3 

91.0 

0.2 

90.6 

-0.2 

4/3 

91.4 

0.6 

90.4 

-0.4 

2 

92.0 

1.2 

90.6 

-0.2 


5 

layers 40 blows 

per layer 


0 

91.5 


91.5 


2/3 

91.7 

0.2 

91.3 

-0.2 

4/3 

92.2 

0.7 

91.3 

-0.2 

2 

92.5 

1.0 

91.1 

-0.4 


5 

layers 80 blows 

per layer 


0 

91.6 


91.6 


2/3 

92.1 

0.5 

91.6 

0.0 

4/3 

92.5 

0.9 

91.6 

0.0 

2 

92.8 

1.2 

91.5 

-0.1 


Note ; 

Uncorrected densities are those dry densities computed without cor¬ 
recting for the weight of calcium chloride contained in the soil. 

Corrected dry densities are corrected for the weight of calcium 
chloride contained in the soil. The correction for calcium chloride 
content was based on the actual amount of calcium chloride in the sample 
as determined by a chemical analysis* 





















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































64 


A tentative explanation for the variation in strength of the 
glass-clay mixture might be obtained by use of some of the colloidal 
concepts. From a colloidal standpoint it might be argued that in the 
case of the untreated clay the individual clay mineral particles are 
dispersed waereas the addition of calcium chloride causes these particles 
to form aggregates. (Calcium chloride when added to a solution of the 
Edmonton clay caused complete flocculation to occur.) In the dispersed 
state compaction spreads the clay mineral evenly about the inert material. 
If the clay mineral is not dispersed compaction does not evenly cGat the 
inert material, The net result of thus latter condition ould be a 
lower strength. Insufficient test results are available at present to 
prove the correctness of this last statement. 

Atterberg Limit results are presented in table 11. These results 
show a decrease in liquid limit and plasticity index with increasing 
amounts of calcium chlori.de. The mixture which originally had a plasti¬ 
city index of 3,7 became non-plastic with the addition of 4/3 percent 
calcium chloride. 

It might be pointed out that the clay-glass i fixture was mad© up of 
20 percent Edmonton clay and BO percent glass spheres (by weight). The 
original untreated .-.lixture was only slightly plastic and it was very 
difficult to obtain accurate Atterberg limit results. For this reason 
the limit results on the clay-glass mixture may not be as indicative 
as those limits on the pure clay. 

desalts of Tests on Ground Glass fixture 

Originally it was planned to run a complete series of tests on 
an all glass mixture. This would have permitted a comparison of the 

















. 
















. 


















■ 


















. 

. 

V J 


* 












- 




■ 

. 












































- 65 - 


effects of calcium chloride on an inert material to the effects of 
calcium chloride on a soil. However in attempting to obtain compaction 
curves for the all glass mixture it was found that accurate moisture den¬ 
sity curves could not be obtained because of the tendency of the glass 
mixture to "bleed" when compacted in the Harvard mold. As a result 
of these poor test results the use of the glass mixture was discontinued. 
Data for the ground glass mixture is given on pages 5B to 63 of the 
appendix. 


TABLE 11 

LIMIT AMD DNCQMFIM COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH 
RESULTS FOR CLAY-GLASS MIXTURE 


Percent 

GaClg 

WL 

^P 

i P 

If 

-*Unconfined 
Comp. Str. 

0 

18.6 

14.9 

3.7 

7.1 

1.27 

2/3 

16.6 

14.9 

1.7 

5.7 

0.80 

4/3 

16.7 


0,0 

6.4 

0.83 

2 

14.0 


0.0 

6.0 

0.82 


* Average of three tests. 


Measurement of Mineral Gels 

On examination of the six samples of gravel which were set aside 
to soak for three months no difference could be discerned betinreen calcium 
chloride solution soaked samples and the water soaked samples. In both 
cases some cloudiness of the solution could b© seen but the amount of 
excretion of mineral, gels, if any, was deemed too small to be determined 
with any degree of accuracy. It seems probable that the amount of 
mineral gel excreted by any given aggregate will depend on the mineral 











. 










■ 




. 











. 

. 






. 

. 

. 

















































. 














- 66 - 


composition of that aggregate. The effect of calcium chloride, if any, 
should also be expected to depend on the mineral composition of the 
aggregate. 

Cation Analysis 

Tables 12 and 13 given the results of the cation analysis. It 
is at once seen that Ca + and hg * are the predominant ions in the 
soils analysed. 

It is very interesting to note that samples number 23 and number 
13 which contain a very high percentage of calcium as the exchangeable 
cation showed little, or no change in plasticity when treated with calcium 
chloride. On the other hand samples number 4 and number 8 which contain 
lesser amounts of calcium- chlorid e as the exchangeable ion both showed 
large increases in plasticity when treated with calcium chloride. 

These results would seem to indicate that the plasticity of a given 
clay depends upon the exchangeable cations present in the clay. This 
being the case, any change in the cations associated with a particular 
* clay should result in a change in the plasticity of that clay. The two 
samples showing the large change in plasticity when treated with calcium 
chloride both contained relatively high percentages of exchangeable cat- 
ions other than Ca. 'The two samples showing little change in plasti¬ 
city when treated with calcium chloride contained ap roximately 73 per¬ 
cent calcium as the exchangeable ion. From these results it may be 
concluded that the addition of calcium chloride to a given soil can alter 
the plasticity of that soil. 





. 


' 














. 





1 






. 

































67 


tabus 12 

mmiWi ACETATE EXTRACTED CATIONS 

(Cation data in E.E./lOQ grains air dry soil) 


Sample 

H 

-4 -V 

Ca 

-+* 

Mg 

Ha* 

sc 4 

Sum of 
Extracted 
cations 

Exchange 

cations 

23 

0 

44.6 

11.4 

1.1 

.9 1.9 

56.0 

56.1 

15 

0 

33.0 

9.9 

1.0 

.8 .9 

44.7 

43.8 

4 

0 

18 .6 

15.6 

1.3 

.8 .8 

36.5 

35.7 

8 

11 

10.7 

12.1 

.5 

.6 .3 

35.1 

34.6 





TABLE 13 





CATIONS AS 

PERCENT 

OF TOTAL EXTRACTED 


Sample 

pH 

H 


Ca + * 

-t-t 



23 

7.6 

0 


77 

20 

2 1.6 


15 

7.75 

0 


74 

22 

2 1.8 


4 

7.6 

0 


52 

43 

4 2 


8 

5.2 

31 


30 

34 

1.4 2 



Whether the plasticity increases, decreases or regains unaltered 
will depend upon the exchangeable ions present in the original soil 

























68 - 


Specially Treated Clays 

Two types of clay mixtures were prepared for testing. The first 
mixture, referred to hereafter as H Clay Mixture #1” was made up of a 
50-50 fixture of “Edmonton” clay and glass spheres. (For details of 
this mixture see page ^3 .) The second mixture referred to hereafter as 
“Clay Mixture #2" was prepared by saturating several “Edmonton” clay 
samples with various cations. (For details of this mixture see pagevy#) 

Clay Mixture #1 results are tabulated in table 14. All original 
data are given in the appendix. 


TABUS 14 

SlfeiAEf OF TEST RESULTS OH CLAY i-: IXTURS #1 


Admixture 

Ho Salt 
Added 

C&CXg 

NaCl 

HH4C1 

Liquid Limit 

38.5 

39.9 

36.7 

40.3 

FI as tie Limit 

13*6 

15.0 

13.3 

17.5 

Plasticity Index 

24.9 

24.9 

23.4 

22.8 

Optimum Density 

110.0 

109.5 

111.0 

108.2 

Corrected Density 

110.0 

108.8 

110.2 

107.4 

Optimum Moisture 

16.0 

16.5 

15.6 

16.6 

#Unconf. Comp. £>tr. 

2.5 

2.2 

2.1 

2.0 


^Average value from several tests. 


On examining the results given in table 14 it is seen that no 
large differences in the physical properties of the treated soil are 
at once evident. The unconfined compressive test results show practi¬ 
cally no difference in strength for the three treated mixtures. In fact 
all three treated mixtures appear to have lower compressive strengths 
then the untreated mixture. 
















. 




■ 







' 




♦ 


















. 




. 













. 






. 














. 








« 




■ 













■ 













The moisture density results indicate that the N1I4C1 treated 
clay produces the lowest densities and the NaGl treated clay produces the 
highest densities while the CaCl 2 treated clay showed a slight decrease 
in density. These results however are for from conclusive as only a few 
tests were run. They serve at best to indicate the type of variation 
to be expected when a clay is treated with various different cations. 

The limit results show calcium chloride to have no effect on the plasti¬ 
city index of the clay. NH4C1 appears to decrease the plasticity. 

However once again it should be stated that tne results are too few to 
permit any definite conclusions being drawn. 

Clay Mixture it2 results are presented in table 15. Several points 
should be noted in these test results. 

(a> The ha* saturated sample had a plasticity index nearly 
5 percent higher than that of the NH4 saturated sample. 

(b) The addition of calcium chloride to the ha* saturated sample 

caused the liquid limit to decrease whereas the addition of 

•+ 

calcium chloride to the NH4 saturated sample caused the liquid 
limit to increase. 

lALLM 15 


SUMMARY OF TEST EXULTS ON CLAY miXTUiu*, if 2 


Material 

Liquid 

Limit 

Plastic 

Lindt 

Plasticity 

Index 

Untreated clay 

73 

30 

43 

Na* * saturated clay 

35.4 

14.4 

21.0 

Na + - saturated clay 
plus 2> CaClg 

33*9 

12.8 

21.1 

KH4**-. saturated clay 

32.2 

16.5 

15.7 

NH4 - saturated clay 
plus 2f° CaCl 2 

33.3 

16.9 

16.4 

















. 






. 










. 








. 


* 




























. 

. 






















' 









■ 



















• 70 - 

These results definitely show that the liquid limit* plastic 

limit and consequently the plasticity index vary with the cation present 

in the clay. In addition the introduction of calcium chloride to the 

two samples caused further small changes in the limit values. The Ha- 

saturated clay showed a decrease in liquid limit when calcium chloride 

was added whereas the NH4 + - saturated clay showed an increase in liquid 

limit with the addition of calcium chloride. This result is what should 

be expected since calcium ions are believed to fall somewhere between 
■+ -+■ 

the NH4 and Ha ions with respect to their effects on plasticity. 

One very interesting feature of the above series of tests was the 
remarkable effect the treatment had on the plasticity of the original 
clay. The clay used in this series of tests had a liquid limit in the 
vicinity of 70 percent prior to being treated* As can be seen from the 
above table, after the saturation treatment the values of liquid limit 

~y 

were out almost inhalf. This is despite the fact that ha-clays are noted 

for their high plasticity. In this case the original clay, which contains 
■+ ■+ 

chiefly Ca as the exchangeable ion was far more plastic than the artifi¬ 
cially produced sodium clay. A tentative explanation for this is that 
the soaking process used to saturate the clay somehow destroyed much of 
the plasticity of the original clay structure. Another possible explana¬ 
tion is that in filtering the treated clay, some of the smaller grains 
passed through the filter. The latter possibility does not seem likely 
in view of the care exercised in filtering. * 


































. 




. 


. 












. 




. 

























. 

. • 
































- 71 - 


DISCUSSION 


Results Cf Previous Investigations 

At the outset of this research program, a fairly comprehensive 
review of the existing literature on calcium chloride and its effects 
on soils was made. From this review the following important facts were 

obtained. 

Small percentages of calcium chloride (one percent or less) when 
added to some soils caused higher dry densities to result, increases 
in density up to approximately 1 l/2^» of the original dry density were 
obtained* This benefit was not obtained in most cases when higher 
percentages of calcium chloride or higher compactive efforts were used. 

In other words when less than one percent calcium chloride was added to 
the soil and a relatively small compactive effort was used, same increase 
in density was obtained. This was not true in all cases as the occasional 
sample showed a slight decrease in density. 

Calcium chloride when added to a soil was found oc have a definite 
effect on the Atterberg limits. The exact effect varied however with 
the various soils treated. In some instances an increase in liquid 
or plastic limits occurred in other cases a decrease was noted, tone 
of the samples treated showed no notable changes. 

The hydrogen ion concentration, (pH) value of the soil was found 
to decrease with the addition of calcium chloride for every sample 
tested. This was despite the fact that calcium chloride had a pH value 
which was higher than that of the untreated soil. The s oils used in this 
program had pH values ranging from 4*4 to 7*4* 




. 




















. 

* 








. 

' 




. 

. 














« 

























- 72 - 


Penetration resistance values for calcium chloride treated soils 
were lower than for the untreated soils, even though the densities of 
the treated soils were as high as or higher than the densities of the 
untreated soils* The results of a very limited number of unconfined 
compressive strength tests indicated a decrease in strength for calcium 
chloride treated soils# 

Results of Present Research Program 

The purpose of this research program was twofold. First it was 
desired to confirm those results obtained by previous investigators, and add 
to these results where possible. Second it was desired to determine the 
reason, or reasons, for the changes in soil properties caused by the 
addition of calcium chloride* 

That portion of the testing which overlapped the work of previous 
investigators produced a reasonable correlation of test results. The 
hydrogen ion concentration (pH) results showed a decrease in value in 
©very instance that calcium chloride was added. Atterberg limit test 
,results varied, some samples showed an increase in limit values, others 
showed a decrease, while some samples did not appreciably vary. The 
density tests while very thorough were limited to one type of clay. 

(This does not include specially prepared clays.) ‘The results of these 
tests definitely indicated that for the particular clay tested the 
addition of small percentages of calcium chloride had no appreciable effect 
on the density. The addition of larger percentages of calcium chloride 
appeared to cause the density to decrease. 

In an attempt to obtain the reason or reasons for the changes in 




















■ 






















- 

♦ 



















■ 




* 










soil properties brought about by the addition of calcium chloride, 
several different approaches to the problem were attempted. The net 
result of this work indicated that base exchange was one of the chief 
factors causing the changes in soil properties. 

An analysis of the limit results showed that those soils from 
one locality, tended to behave in a similar manner when treated with 
calcium chloride. This was true whether the change in limits caused 
by the addition of calcium chloride was an increase, a decrease or 
unap; j reelable * 

Further analysis showed that the clay sample already containing 
a high percentage of exchangeable C&^was not effected by the addition 
of calcium chloride. Two other samples with lesser percentages of 
exchangeable Ga*but containing appreciable amounts (40 percent) of 
exchangeable lag*”* (and in one case also exchangeable ) showed large 
increases in plasticity with the addition of calcium chloride. 

The results of limit tests on ha and HH4* saturated clays gave 
the following results. The ft sh saturated clay had the highest liquid 
limit, lowest plastic limit and consequently highest plasticity index. 

The BH4* clay had the lowest liquid limit, the highest plastic limit 
and lowest plasticity index. The addition of calcium chloride to these 
two mixtures tended to decrease the limit values of the ha"*- saturated 
clay and increase the limit values of the hh4 + - saturated clay. This is 
what would be expected if base exchange were the cause of these changes 

•r t 

as the calcium ion lies somewhere in between the Na and NH4 ions. 

As was discussed previously, the thickness of the water films 
around the clay particles is considered to be a measure of ‘the plasticity. 








. 







' 








- 




- 


► 





. 






















■ 











































- 74 - 


When base exchange occurs, the thickness of these moisture films is changed, 
this causes a change in the plasticity of the soil* 

It might be mentioned that those samples showing the greatest change 
in plasticity value with 'the addition of calcium chloride were in every 
case highly plastic soils* As a general rule the highly plastic clays 
are usually montmorillonite in nature and as a result have the highest 
base exchange capacity. 

The pH results were very consistent in that every soil treated 
showed a decrease in pH, This decrease in pH was usually largest for 

the first increment of calcium chloride added. This decrease in pH is 

++ +- 

believed to be caused by the replacement of A1 ions and some H ions 
from tiie clay by the Qa ion. Thus the decrease in pH can b© taken to 
indicate base exchange. 

The results of the density tests carried out on the M ndmonton { ‘ clay, 
and clay-glass mixtures seers to indicate very little change in density 
with the addition of calcium chloride, A very limited number of den¬ 
sity tests carried out on NH 4 CI treated and HaGl treated clays (Clay 
mixture il) indicated a change in optimum density could be obtained. 

The haCl treated clay showed a slight increase in corrected dry density 
whereas the MH4C1 treated clay showed a decrease. The clay used in 
these tests was the Edmonton clay which is definitely a Ca-clay, 

These results would seam to indicate that an increase or decrease 
in density can occur when a clay is treated with calcium chloride, 

Whether the density increases or decreases will depend on the exchangeable 
ions present in the clay. 
















' 












* 
















. 


* 






















. 






























. 



















- 75 - 


Insufficient results were obtained to draw any conclusions as to the 
effect of calcium chloride on the unconfined compressive strength, of 
soils. The results obtained do indicate however that no appreciable 
change in strength occurred when the Edmonton clay was treated with cal- 
cium chloride. It is to be remembered that the Edmonton clay is a oa-clay. 

A synthetic clay-glass mixture (Clay Mixture u. l) when treated 
with calcium chloride, ammonium chloride and sodium chloride showed an 
apparent decrease in strength for all three added salts. Insufficient 
results are available however to draw any definite conclusions. 

From the results of the tests carried out in this program and 
previous testing programs it would seem certain that base exchange is 
one of 'the chief factors causing physical changes in calcium chloride 
treated soils. In the field another factor probably has a considerable 
effect on the properties of calcium chloride soils. This factor is 
th© deliquescent and hygroscopic properties of calcium chloride* 

Because of these properties calcium chloride treated soils are able to 
retain moisture for longer periods. This retention of moisture undoubtedly 
increases the strength of the soil by the medium of apparent cohesion. 

For those soils containing very little clay, this last factor is probably 
of more importance than the base exchange. 

Practical Significance of Re s ults 

This research program x*as mainly directed at uncovering some of the 
basic effects of calcium chloride on soils, A review of th© results does, 
however, yield several factors of practical significance. These factors 




‘ 





. 


. 










. 
















- 76 


are briefly discussed in the following paragraphs. 

The effect of calcium chloride on the plasticity of a soil is a 
very promising factor. It is possible that in the future calcium chloride 
may be used to reduce the plasticity of soils which are at present un¬ 
acceptable for highway construction because of their high plasticity values. 
A simple check on the feasibility of such treatment would be to rim limit 
tests on treated and untreated samples of the proposed soil and note the 
effect of calcium chloride on the limit values. 

From the limited density results obtained, it would seem likely 
that for some soils the use of calcium chloride would .increase the 
density obtained in the field. For other soils a decrease in density 
might be the result. An expedient method for determining this would 
be to run several laboratory density tests on treated and untreated soils 
and note the effect of calcium chloride on the density values. 

The chemical effects of calcium chloride on a soil should be 
expected to be quite permanent in nature as the Ca ++ ion is not easily 
replaced by other ions. Thus any changes in the physical properties of 
a soil brought about by treatment with calcium chloride might be thought 
permanent. Additional research is required before definite recoin enda- 
tions can be made on the practical application of the research results. 


9 




















- 





















' 






: . 


























. 










CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 


From the results of this research program the following conclusions 
may be drawn, 

1. The addition of calcium chloride to a soil has varying effects 
on the Atterberg Limits, The Atterberg Limit values may 
increase* decrease or not change at all. The actual change in 
limit values will depend on the exchangeable cations in the soil 
and the type and amount of clay mineral present in the soil. 

2. The addition of calcium chloride to two Ca-clays had no effect 
on the Atterberg Limit values, 

3. For a given soil sample th liquid sad plastic limits depend 
upon the exchangeable cations in the soil. 

4. The addition of calcium chloride to a soil causes a decrease 
in the pH of the soil. 

5. For the " .dmonton" clay used in the detailed density tests* 
the addition of 2/3 percent calcium chloride nad no appreciable 
effect on the density. Higher percentages of calcium chloride 
caused appreciable decreases in density. 

6 . The addition of calcium chloride to a Ca-clay (’’Edmonton” clay) 
had no appreciable effect on the unconfined compressive strength. 

7* The addition of calcium chloride to the glass-clay ixture caused 
a decrease in the unconfined compressive strength. 

Tiie results of this research program also gave the following indications* 

1. Highly plastic soils exhibit the greatest change in plasticity 
when treated with caleium chloride. 


















. 



. 






































. 














































- 73 


2. The reason for the greater effect of calcium chloride on highly 
plastic soils is probably due to the fact that these soils con¬ 
tain montmorillonite which has the highest base exchange capacity 
of the clay minerals. 

3. The plasticity of a given soil depends to a large extent upon 
the exchangeable cations associated with the clay mineral thus 
base exchange will alter the plasticity of the soil. 

4. A decrease in the pH of the soil with the addition of calcium 
chloride indicates base exchange is occurring between the 
calcium ion and the clay mineral. 

5. A sodium treated soil produces higher densities than the untreated 
soil. 

6. An ammonium treated soil produces lower densities than the 
untreated soil. 

7. A calcium treated soil falls somewhere in between these two 
extremes. 

3. Excess percentages of ny salt added to a soil may tend to 
produce lower densities and strengths because the excess salt 
neutralizes the charges on the colloids causing flocculation. 
Energy is then required in compacting to break up the floes. 

9. Semis cations by reason of their small size neutralize the colloids 
even when present in anal! percenta es. These cations should 
be ejected to cause lower strengths and densities. Hydrogen and 
ammonium are examples. 

The results of this research program agree reasonably well with those 
obtained by previous investigators. Fairly conclusive results have been 
obtained with respect to density, Atterberg Limits and pH values. Future 
research work on this problem is required in more detail with several 
soils from different localities having a variety of replaceable cations. 
















. 

. 

. 














' 









■ 

« 


. 

* 

. 




: 


. 

















' 

. 

























79 


A suggested approach for future research is given below. 

1. Select 6 or more soils containing different exchangeable cations 
(different percentages.). 

2 . Obtain a large sample of each soil so' that no soil is re-used. 

3. Run pH f s, limits, unconfined, compressive strengths and perhaps 
a set of density tests on each soil. 

4. Add 1/2 to 1 percent calcium chloride and repeat the series of 
tests. 

5. Add 1/2 to 1 percent of NH4cl and repeat the seriesof tests. 

6 . Add 1/2 to 1 percent of MaCl and repeat the series of tests. 

The results of a series of tests such as those outlined above, 

should definitely show where calcium chloride could be used to advantage. 
The additional results from the JSB4C1 and HaCl tests should be sufficient 
to explain the mechanism of base exchange. 







80 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1. ELLEMAN* J. H. 

"Calcium Chloride Surface Consolidated Roads”- 
Highway Research Board Vol. 20 (1940) 

2* HAUSER* E.A. 

"Colloidal Chemistry of Clays" - Ghem. Review 
Vol. 37 (1945) 

3. HAUTH, W. E. and DAVIDSON, D. T. 

"Studies of Clay Fraction in Engineering Soils”- 
Highway Research Board Vol. 30 (1950) 

4. HAVEN* YOUNG and DRAKE 

"Some Chemical Physical and Miner ^logical Features 
of Soil Colloids” - Highway Research Board 
Vol. 29 (1949) 

5. JOHNSON* A. L. and DAVIDSON* D. T. 

"Clay Technology and its Application to Soil Stabiliza¬ 
tion" - Highway Research Board Vol. 27 (1947) 

6. JOHNSON* A.M* 

"Laboratory Experiments with Lime-Soil Mixtures"- 
Engineering Experiment Station, Purdue IJniv. 

Reprint No. 48 (1949) 

7* JOHNSON* A.M. 

"The Role of Calcium Chloride in Compaction of 
Some Granular Soils" - Highway Research Board 
Vol. 26 (1946) 

8* KELLEY* W. P. 

"Cation Exchange in Soils" - A. C. S. Monograph 
Series No. 109 

9. LAWS* W. D. and PAGE, J, B. 

"Silicate of Soda as a Soil Stabilizing Agent"- 
Ohio State University (1946) 

10. MUKHERJEE, J.N., CHATTERJEE* G.* and BANERJEE, B.M. 

"Liberation of H AX and F© Ions From Hydrogen 
Clays by Neutral Salts" - Journal of Colloidal 
Science Vol. 2 (1947) 

Ho PETTY* Maj. B. H.* WOOD* J.E. and TRIBBLE* J. F. 

"Report of Committee on Granular Stabilized Roads 
Highway Research Board Vol. 24 (1944) 




- • - 








. 


, - - ' V" ' 1 ' : 

, , 


. 






, . . . .... 

Mr ypS.”! ‘l.c , , : " : 

r .'jju.cn s *2 eH .U 


• ' o,£ r.' . i oj.?. v;J>,-1 :A . .v< .;<r : 

. ; £ ... •.*••• • rpr.' - * ! c;h.r.c-.r.UC i.cc .a 

., ;•. . . .A 

* . * . . 

. i I ■ b \ yA 1 

■ " 

» ♦ > •• bn- 

4 n ■ 

„ . ; . 1 ; t . • . . ■. . . ■ ■■ W: ( n 

•i ' ;i i 

• - ■ . M . , 

crx-c 


* . , - : ■ . : 1 ■>< 1 : ' 

* •' 

% 

, ' . • . ■- f : 

- . Is 1 . E( & BM &JbQ& ' 

i. ' ' • ■ i . • : 


♦ f. * ■ 


c c \ •; v . i; t'• '. j i, j -J y " ‘<a •: JV U 
. V - '< i.'.' ‘j:; 


* • t • ? 

:/ ■ . :£ I\ •. 4 ’ . ...” 

. • / '<'<■ s :■ a . \ j 

... ,JU I ' 


J.f 


. . , . 

: -...[j < J'i ■ \ 

. 









~ 8i " 

BIBLIOGRAPHY (PORT'D) 


12. PR ECE, E. F. 

"Geotechnics and Geotechnical Research" • Highway- 
Research Board Vol. 27 (1947) 

15. RUSSEL, r. • ' f 0R3.iAl, tf v B. and A .DREWS, R. K. 

"Influence of Initial Moisture and Density on the 
Volume Change and Strength Characteristics of Two 
Typical Illinois Soils" - Highway Research Board 
Vol. 26 (1946) 

14. SLATE, F. 0. 

"Use of Calcium Chloride in Subgrade Soils For 
Frost Prevention" - Highway Research Board Vol. 22 
(1942) 


15. SLESSER, C. 

"Movement- of Calcium chloride and Sodium Chloride 
in Soil" - Purdue Univ. Techn. Bulletin (1944) 

16. SULLIVAM, J. D. 

"Physico Chemical Control of Properties of Clay"- 
Transactioas Electrochemical Society (1939) 


17. TAYLOR, D. W. 

"Fundamentals of Soil Mechanics" - Chapter 8, 

John Wiley and Sons 

18. TER AGHI, K. AMD PECK, R. B. 

"Soil Mechanics in Engineering Practice" - Article 4 
John Wiley and Sons 

19. TSCHEBOTARIOFF, G. P. 

"Soil Mechanics, Foundations and Earth Structures"- 
Ghapter 5, John Wiley and Sons 

20* WEIGHER, G. 

"Some Physico-Chemical Properties of Clays"- 
Journal Society Chou leal Industry Vol. 5 (1931) 

21. WEISER, H. B. 

"Colloid Che istry" - McGraw-Hill 

22. WIIFGRD, DOWHEY, BRIGGS, HOGItiTOGIER, KMiGHT, ELL SHAN and BURGRAFF 

"Use of Calcium Chloride in Road Stabilisation" - 
Highway Research Board Vol. 18-11 (1933) 














. 




. 






. . 












. . 






* 

. 
























JL 








- 8’2 “ 


BIBLIOGRAPHY (GOUTM)) 


23. WILSON, S. D. 

"Small Soil Compaction Apparatus Duplicates 
Field Results Closely” - Engineering News Record 
Nov* 2 (1950) 

24. WiNTERKORN, H. F. 

"Physico-Chemical Testing of Soils and Application 
of the Results in Practice” - Highway Research 
Board Vol. 20 (1940) 

25. WIN TER KORN, fi« F. # McALPIN, G. W. and MAIM? RT, R. C. 

”A Laboratory Study of the Soil Stabilizing Effect¬ 
iveness of a Complex Salt of Abietic Acid” - 
Princeton Univ. Tech* Development Note Mo. 35 (1944) 

26. YODER, E. J. 

"The Effect of Calcium Chloride on the Oompactive 
Effort and Water Retention Characteristics of Soils”- 
Highway Research Board ¥ol* 27 (1947) 

27. YODER, E* J. and WOODS, K* B. 

"Compaction and Strength Characteristics of Soil - 
Aggregate Mixtures” - Engineering Experiment Station, 
Purdue Univ. Reprint No. 31 (1947) 

28. AMERICAN ROAD BUILDERS ASSOCIATION 

Technical bulletins ambers 120 and 127. 

29. BETTER BASES FOR OTTER SURFACES 

Technical bulletin - Brunner Kond Canada Ltd. 

30. CALCIUM CHLORIDE AS0.3C1 TION DETROIT MICH. 

Technical bulletins numbers 25, 26 and 29. 

31. CORRELATION O' I ® 00 PACTI - TO LOCAL SOILS 

Fourth Year Student Project - Univ. of AlOerta (1951) 


3Z. C 0 r?pf?c T'/osJ o/r SO/JLS 

7&ch rt/ca. / //& /'/n 


s?c/m £ &/* 




se. 










- 83 - 


APPEMDH 

All original data sheets computations and curves are presented 
in the appendix* 


Data 

Pages 

Glass Spheres 

1-3 

St* Joseph’s Edmonton Clay- 

4-28 

Mixture of Glass Spheres arid Clay 

29 - 57 

Ground Glass 

58 - 63 

Atterberg Limits 

64 - 117 

Clay Mixture #1 

118 - 131 

Clay Mixture #2 

132 » 136 









. 











. 








► 




































1 


DATA FOR GLASS SPHERES 


The following two pages contain that data obtained in 
the laboratory for the glass spheres used in this research 


program. 












UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 
DEP'T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

SIEVE ANALYSIS 


PROJECT. 


3rwr 


//V' 


<ve 


SITE 


SAMPLE dr<c*?j3 




LOCATION 


H.QJLE.. 


DEPTH 


TECHNICIAN 


^ D AT E yTenJ3e/s7 


Dry Weight 
mple 

Sieve 

No. 

Size of Opening 

Weight 

Retained 

gms. 

Total Wt. 
finer Tnon 
gms. 

Perce nr % Finer Than 
finer Than B&Fis Grig. 

sample 

Inches 

Mm. 

Dry Weight 
led No. 4 

No, 







. 















y + Tare 










3/4 

191 0 




i 

! y 


3/e 

9-52 




s 


4 

•185 

4-76 





Passing 

4 






. i 

Dry Weight 
>g No ^ 

^0 








1 0 

•079 

2-000 




| 

20 

•0331 

•840 




1 

t 

y + Tare 

40 

•0165 

•420 




1 


6 0 

•0097 

•250 




i 

ry 

100 

•0059 

• 149 





j-. -.. - - 

200 

•0029 

•074 




i 

f 

Passing 

200 






i 


iption of Sornple _ * 


of Sieving _ «?■/? . ft 


Method of Preporation 

X 

Re marks 






jtz&'&z. 




75 ^ 


c. 


7^ 


Gravel Sizes 


Sand Sizes 


IS 


eve 


Si 4 


& 


i 

■q 







J 


j 





[ 


- 

r 

-t 

n 

"r 

“T~ T 




cn 

I 







i 










\ 


\ 



Zt .. 



J 









\ 

Va 

TT T 

. fT M • ! 

mm 











~4 

JL 

Y'?-\ - 





A/. & 




APT'T'xFA? 


r~ 

-4- 

. a .-iinii- 

tu =4-— 








's?7'se ’< 

~$'''7rxr’s. 


i 

i 











i 

1 

- 

i— 





/Vo. 



V 


S*S.~-'< Jtz 

^ 1 

m 

T H 

\ 





/ 


# 

i£l 


<7^0 £X 

i 

! 

l J 

\\ 





JE 


XT 

70 

sc7/o 

- 300 yU 

r 

i 

\ 







3 


tr 


ys<o - 

*PSO yCZ 

1 

i 







¥ 


& 

/s 

&o - 

7<^0 7* 

r 

\ 

■ ... | 

\ 






M"' 


xr 

/s 

-rrr‘ 

-73*0 77 

i 

1 

\ 

l ($) 












,1 

- ,— 












I 

' \ 

1 

w 











{ <3 

{ l 

L 

l 











1 

\ 

1 

1 

i 











j 

A 

\ 





r 







! 


1 




i 

Li- 

p- 

l 

\ 

1 f 

L. 



4s 


L- 


i L 



1 






M: 

L 

. j - 


MJ 



\ 

L 


hJ 

K, 




,0 

10 

Grain Size-Mra. 

1-0 

Note; M IT- Grain Size S 

D CT 

<cq le 

1 

















































































































































































































3 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 
DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

SPECIFIC GRAVITY 


PROJECT 

AS 


SITE 

SAMPLE 


33 f sV'A~/e’A3S 

LOCATION 

HOLE 


DEPTH 


TECHNICIAN -r ■ DATE <*/■■/ 


pie No. 


-V 

"3 

k No. 

3 

3733 

<& ■ 

lod of Air Removal 

3S3?<?<7£3s*sr A 

Sor' 


W+S 

A/ff.cZ 9/S 

£33 30 

perature T 

A?/> & S ?0 O 

A' Ay 

w 

<37*3 & 


porating Dish No. 



jSomple Dry + Diih 



f Dish 




3 <'77 3y-o7 


3& ... 

37 \ 


<?. 37 

a?-37 

W b*w+s * Weight of 

flask + 

water ♦ 

sample at T°. 

,/7cs. 


Wp + w = Weight of 

flask + 

water at T° (flask calibration curve). 


W s = Weight of 

dry soil 


W- 




G s * Specific gravity of soil particles Wk^” 

Wp+ W-FS 


prmination of W s 

from wet 

soil 

sample: 




iple No. 



Sample No. 



tainer No. 



Container No. 



(Sample Wet +Tare 



Wt.Test Sample Wet4-Taro 



Sample Dry + Tare 



Tare Container 



Water 



Wt.Test Sample Wet 



e Container 



W s 



of Dry Soil 






sture Content W* % 






icription of Sample 

A? ss 


3V<b /& 



30 

73?*? ^3 

33 



marks: 373P3> rv 


£3^ 7333" 

3v4rf*r 


<27** 


^33333 


/ A33" *3^37 £337 



33*7?, 



^£1 

1 

VA 

% 

\ 












































































































































































DATA FOR ST. JOsBPH«S EDMONTON CLAY 


The following twenty-three pages contain that data 
obtained in the laboratory for the ’’Edmonton” clay used in 


this research program 







- 5 - 

CHEMICAL ANALYSIS 

The following results are copied from reports submitted 
by the Provincial Analyst* Samples were taken for analysis at 
the c applet ion of each set of tests in order to check on the 
calcium chloride content* 


St* Joseph's Edmonton Clay 


Percent Commercial Percent CaCln in Sample 

^lake CaClg added by Chemical Analysis 

2/3 0*53 

4/3 1.05 


2 


1.49 












NIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

EP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 


PROJECT 


SSI/ 


<3. A/ 


SITE 3'TT c/o S 




SA MPLE 


LOCATION 


"/?s*70s%/ r-'iW" 


HYDROMETER TEST 

HOLE DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN xTc'sc: DATE Z?*C/s/ 


Temp- 

Time 

Elapsed 

Time 

Rh 

Rh 

- R tr f c m 

0 

m.m. 

R h +m r c d 

w % 

W % 
Basis Orig 
Sample 

Remarks 

/ /C /■ */ 


o 

— 


- 

— 

- 

— 

— 



S/ s 

39.8 

SS3 

o. o *>7 

JSC 

96 6 





* 30 

39 s 

330 

. O6o 

39 7 






/~ 

33 9 

399 

<o99> 

39/ 

99 3 





>e 

38-3 

3a/-8 

,0 3/ 

3S.S 

#9 8 





9 

J/9 

3/f 

• OZZ 

3/6 

87 3 





s 

So / 

Jo 6 

,o/6 

JO & 

a s6 





37 

*7-a 

S/S3 

. o ojt 

Z 0-0 

779 





70 



.ocsS 

*>S3 

698 





/xs 


3? 3 9 

. oo9f 

/?3./ 

6 3.8 




/•/:3a 


/93 

*>o.</ 

. oofo 

ZO‘3 

S6 O 



’ 

of:*. s 

3 /V - 

/SO 

/3.0 

. oe/f 

/J-9 

37* 




/J29 

S/7* 

//J 

//• 7 

oo/e 

//<? 

Jo 9 



\ 

08130 

jo 7*. - 

/O? 

/o* & 

» ooof 

/o 3 

































































////<>& 


and 


rtneter No.s__ 

"V^" * s^T7C R h + m t” c d^ ,= — 
us correction = c m = 
sing agent used 


Graduate No. 


o>. S 


( R h +m t~ c d) 
and 




__respectively 

Amount so? <- r - **■ 


tionvfor change in density of liquid due to addition of dispersing agent = c<j 
Cm = & _and r espectively 


fic Gravity of Solids = G, 


>e: 73 


iption of Sample / r /?7' 

Method of Preparation S/j 0% ~ 

f JT7<* 8 a: a/ y 

SS7 C?t7< S7 30 0 ^ /t 


So ^ S8> /<? 




Remarks 







Initial Moisture Content 

Dry Weight of Sample 

iner Nn. /7~/ 

Container No. ^ \ 

ample Wet + TnrA /Si'* SO 

Wt SnmpiA (w«t/Dry) t Tar-s* . 3/63/ 

ample Dry + Tare s3^*^9 

Tare /S'/*. 6<S 

ater Jo/ 

Wt- fWet/Drv') Soil 3*9. €>3 

Container 66-*9*? 

: Dry Soil e> 3 &0 

Dry Weight from Initial 

Mn :- + nrr . too x Wt- Wet Soil _ -r'x / 

1 Moisture uT % y a <8 

Mossture- 100 + init- Moist.% { 

___i 





































































































































































































































Note: M IT Grain Size Scale 




























































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 
DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

SPECIFIC GRAVITY 


PROJECT rwsrsss 


SITE c /o*4T/*a 


SAMPLE 

LOCATION 

HQ-LE 

DEPTH 


TECHNICIAN ^ 


DATE O^As/s-S 


nple No. 

/ 

£ 

sk No. 


3 

hod of Air Removal 

/y7 /z>cs+*/=> 

c/*?crc*^/*7 

►w+s 

7<?/' Y& 

7 a *63 

tperature T 


7?/ S ° C 

►w 

7 <= 

6*7*7*/ 

iporating Dish No. 



! Sample Dry + Diih 



e Dish 





e 


^73 

7’7'Z 


* Weight of flask * water ♦ sample at T*. 

W b *w = Weight of flask + water at T® (flask calibration curve). 

W $ = Weight of dry soil 

G s ^Specific gravity of soil particles 


W c 


+ W 




±JL 


termination of W s from wet soil sample: 


nple No. 

/ 


Sample No. 

xf 


gainer No. 

c/~ 


Container No. 

/7 


1 Sample Wet +Tare 

/3o.~/7 


Wt.Test Sample Wet + Taro 



Sample Dry +Tare 

/££>*’8 


Tare Container 

77 */ 


Water 


* 

Wt.Test Sample Wot 

737 


;e Container 

7»29 


W s 



of Dry Soil 

*779 





isture Content 'W' % 



L 

36g 



scription of Sample •• 


marks- 

































































































































? 






















































































































































































































































































































so 


UNIVERSITY of 

ALBERTA 

PROJECT. 


SITE 

S7 T' c/(p ^7=5^ 'J- 4 

DEP’T of CIVIL 

ENGINEERING 

SAMPLE 

/ ^<=5<r /Wr7<- cTsC&Y 

SOIL MECHANICS 

LABORATORY 

location 


ATTERBERG 

LIMITS 

HOLE */5Z DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN sF s=>. DATE^^/fe 


uid Limit 





/* 


/*. 


/ 




id 12 .. 


±L 2 X 






7 -l. 


JZ21S2. 


fogy 


22 -£L 


/oh 3/ 


# 9 - 9 / 


9 S o£ 


22S± 


gzy-s 




•jrr ojL 


(- ■ 90 


(..OS 


g- 19 


2 ZL 




ZhJeZ 


97 - 22 . 


2 jL *£. 




SjhM 


?2 <23. 


9-sX> 




/o■ 


4 £ 


»• feS~ 


.P.JPP/L. 


73 / 


»o -7 


yo r 


y<g •/? 


Average Values 

7 iU 


Plastic Limit 


Irjal-N.Q- 


Container No- 


Wt- Sample Wet+Tqre 


Wt- Sample DrytTore 


Wt- Water 


Tare Container 


Wt- of Pry Soil 


Moisture Content 30 - 3 30-6 




l/ /W- 




sy- tsr 




s> 


L. 9*4 




«•- 122 . 


gy- ^3 


& -^sV 


zlsh. 


z /?o 




£&-°P 2 


Z£. 909 


0 - btx 


ST 3 .-...sr/ 


3 .- gS~* 


Shrinkage Limit 


Trio! No- 


Container No 


Wt-sample Wet+Tare 


Wt- Sample Dry +'Tare 


Mfll&L 


Tare Container 


Wt-of Pry Soil Wo 


Moisture Content 4ArV 0 


Vol- Container 


Vol- Dry Soil Pot Vo 


Shrinkage Vol- V-Vo 


Shrinkage Limit "U/g 


VS * 


eat.wo) 


Description of Sample: 


Remarks: ^ y« 


8 9 10 15 20 25 30 40 

Number of Blows 




































































































































































































// 


PROJECT 

/-/V 

SITE 

yr". C f jT jf-f-sCSOOJL 

SAMPLE 

yss4?ssxy s&xsp’j 'T'/tr fxsry 

LOCATION 


HOLE 4&<Ve DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN ^ ^ ^ DATE^^/i^- 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 
DEP*T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


Liquid Limit 


I No- 


of Blows 


Vo 


J£*l 


V2, 


/Z • S' 


/z 




fainer No- 




/? /z 


# zo 


/? x% 


i y 70 


2JL 


Sample Wet tTare 




9 7 Z9 






9? ^ 




Sample Dry -f Tore 


7? it? 


?t • toO 


90 ^ 


7*> /? 


90 93 


99* 79 


Water 


y. /z 


6". t>9 


97 


7* fit 


?:-£i 


7 • /3 


3 Container 


7/09 


2AJLL 


77 bb 


Ak-AL 


2A2£l. 


79- 93 


of Dry Soil 


7- 99 




Z..Z£. 


JLWL 


»• frc? 


?• yr 


Jture Content *ur% 


6” 




?0(e> 


!2jJL 


2SL± 


go - fc 


$ 




Average Values 


^1= 


UT p = 




Container No- 


Wt- Sample Wet+Tore 




Wt- Sample Dry±Tare 


Ip * 




Wt-of Dry Soil 


MoistureContent% 3fe - & zd$ loo 


Plastic Limit 




Wf- Water 


Tore Container 


/5./C 


Sto • 750 


sy. rVi 


/&S7 




L-22X 






S&37Z 


jQiJAk 


SL2SZ. 




/b. 4. 


SSjJ&ZZ 


5y. 964 


o • y/V 




/ 


Shrinkage Limit 


Trial No 


Container No 


Wt;.S a n?.pJ^-We±± Tgxe 




Wt- Sample Dry +Tore 


mmi&L. 


Tore Container 


Wt-of Dry Soil Wo 


Moisture Content -ur7 0 


Vq|. Container 


Vol» Dry Soil Pat Vo 


Shrinkage Vol> V-Vo 


Shrinkage Limit 








Description of Sample: 


Remarks; v» e»- c<>. 




8 9 10 15 20 25 30 

Number of Blows 


40 




















































































































































































































/z 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 

PROJECT /v 

SITE *r«t*ry 

SAMPLE A/s&ASscy /zu.s+sr'sf <~*.A?y 

LOCATION je'&sn'#*/r<>*/ 

HOLE ^ l <&<?& DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN ^ DATE/^f^/^c’ 

Liquid Limit 

1 No. 

/ 

X. 

5 

V 

5“ 

£, 

of Blows 

V3 

_ 

vy 

/••? • s' 

/2. 

J7L 

tainer No- 

OO 

07 


v/V5 

17V2 

Otra 

Sample Wet +Tare 

9 S' 9/ 

S’s'-sv 

//9-?y 

/oo • 4,^, 

SY- /3 

• /0 

Sample Dry -f-Tare 

99 ■'ii 


// 3 03 

93 97 

79 97 

90 99 

Water 

G> • ST 

?5" 


6 4>? 

y. /£> 

7 JJ 

e Container 

?oo*/ 

&9-/7 


7s'. V3 

6? S'2. 

7/- 90 

of Dry Soil 

9■ X9 

? 5Z* 

9-S-i- 

9. sV 

JO.9* 

9 09 

sture Content 1*/% 

70 9 

77 O 

70 S' 

7?- 3 

7* / 

7# JU 










































































































































































































73 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

COMPACTION TEST 


PROJECT 




SITE 


SAMPLE <r//rr 


LOCATION 7 r: </€>***>//*s 


HOLE 2 <r*C/z DEPTH 


TECHNICIAN ^<7-7(7. DM£/e&&/TS 


al Number 

/ 

2 

s 

¥ 

S' 

£ 

7 

Mold No- 








Wt- Sample Wet + Moid 

29S63 

20770 

26y.cs 

27/60 

27/30 

27076 

2676/ 

Wt’ Mold 

/s-*<>7 

/S7c7 

794*07 

/s¥o7 

sx¥o7 

/**■ 67 

sr¥o7 

Wt- Sample Wet 

7o¥*76 


7/4*96 

s/7 33 

//723 

776. <9 

SSJ-7¥ 

Volume Mold 








Wet Unit Weiaht lb-/ft 3 

/*7¥6 

/0?63 

S/¥-9t> 

S/73'3 

7/7 23 

7/6 S9 

sss/¥ 

Dry Unit Weight lb-/ft-^ 

&¥? 

£72 

69 6 

<?<?£ 

9*2 

S6¥ 

6/7-7 

Container No 

7-69 

0-72 

(7-S2 

C/S/ 

(7-29 

(7-2 

(7—77 

Wt-Sample Wet + Tare 

76023 

/77-tO 

777-66 

/9/02 

792-90 

S?ss6 

797/9 

Wt- Sample Dry T-Tare 

760 70 

/*'*'■£? 

77292 

s*¥#3 

/Sr-79 

S7*63 

y/o ?¥ 

Wt- Water 

7 9 S3 

2*9/ 

2600 

T’6 69 

277* 

26/3 

2667 

Tare Container 

S3 66 

6S¥s 

62-90 

?X0S 

79S6 

£>776 

7/* * 

Wt- Dry Soil 


0720 

S962 

909* 

9*23 

6S2S 

7977 

Moisture Content 

*33-0 

.££i' 

260 


S<?7 

279 

337 


ec 


=i 


u 


Max’ Unit Wt- = »<> g7 ft’ 
Opt. Moist- -Hit % 


i!?s: 


\ 




m 


2? -TT7- JW 

Moisture Content % 


x 


s 


Method of Compaction 

A/&r/S?o'*?/ez? 




Diam. Mold __ 

Height Mold _—— 

Volume Mold _ 

No- of Layers_ 

Blows per Layer 
Ht- of Free Fall 
Wt- of Tamper_ 


7LZ7Z. 42± 


A?. 6/6 7/7 > 


0.0 0220 //* 


2S 


2*0 // 


Shape of Tamping Face, 
Description of Sample_ 


Rem arks 


W 














































































































































































































































. 








































' 











■ 

















































— 




UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

COMPACTION TEST 


PROJECT tk&ss sas 


SITE 


SAMPLE y rvc 


LOCATION 




HOLE &. 6 / Cla c£> DEPTH 


TECHNICIAN 


</ 


DAT 


il Number 








Mold No- 








Wt- Sample Wet + Mold 

4sy. *6 

46898 

k 7 /• 46 

470-O<o 

46777 

4*393 

77/-3 7 

Wt- Mold 

/*Y-o7 

/s*o7 

/S'* 07 

33 *. o c 7 

/S-*C7 

3$*Cj 

/S'9 oy 

Wt- Sample Wet 

/o3. 4 ? 

//*8/ 

//7 S9 

//S'-7? 

/'3,6f 

///76 

//7-3* 

Volume Mold 








Wet Unit Weiaht !b-/fi 3 

/OS-*9 

//V 4' 

7/7/9 

//S'-7 9 

//3. 

///■76 

77790 

Dry Unit Weight lb-/ft-^ 

<9*. 9* 

<70- 3 

<?0 9 


<9*7-6 

397? 

777 

i . .. ... — 

Container No 

sr*7 

<7-97 

<76 7 

</'3 

c /6 

3'43" 

C/-37 

Wt- Sample Wei + Tare 

/*44o 

/994k 

39*3/ 

400*9 

/<&#?£ 

/yo/Ts 

s&y.rs 

Wt- Sample D r y *f Tare 

/? 

379- e<? 

33900 

/7k3o 

36Z-/9 

764.03 

/sy-/ / 

Wt- Water 

/yo7 

4**4 

46 33 

47 9? 

4779 

48-38 

/v 4 ■> -3 y 

Tare Container 

iT ?/6 

93. 3"a 

67-37 

#*49 

<90/4 

e*jzz 

79-0/ 

Iwt- Drv Soil 

e*os 

9&.30 

9*63 

&7of 

<9707 

77-ef 

77/4 

Moisture Content 

446 

ZT-< 

474 

344 

9*2 

96-S 

49-9 





Method of Compaction_ 

Diam. Mold _ s-S/:? ss?. 

Height Mold _ 

Volume Mold , 

No- of Layers_ 

Blows per Layer_ 40 

Ht- of Free Fall___ 

Wt- of Tamper_ 40 SS 


£> - O 0440 /t 


Shape of Tamping Face 
Description of Sample_ 


e> 


Remarks 


£> 4 /- 

Moisture Content % 


































































































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

COMPACTION TEST 


PROJECT 


//V <r 


SITE 


s-r- </o 


^■< 30 / 00 / 


SAMPLE M/gs/sy /rx.s7sr?<r s's./ry 


LOCATION se /pz+Tcr**/ -r'#*/ s?<. 


HOLE &* 0 2 DEPTH 


TECHNICIAN ^c/. ^ DATE 


1 Number 

/ 

3 

3 

*7 

3** 

6 

7 

Mold No- 








Wt- Sample Wet + Mold 


067-78 

67776 

37/69 

37/3*/ 

069-/6 

37/79 

wt- Mold 


73*07 

70/07 

/a/.o7 

73/07 

/or/07 

/ S '*07 

Wt- Sample Wet 

706.33 

7/3 7/ 

7/7-03 

//76Z 

7/7** 

7/0-39 

"773 

Volume Mold 








Wet Unit Weiaht lb-/ft 3 

y*6 36 

7/37/ 

//7-oS 

//7 6 Z 

777 9/ 

7/3-39 

7/770 

Dry Unit Weight lb-/ft- 3 

#6 7 

69 6 

&:/ 

. 4.7.r 

69 0 

3S-c~ 

90S 

Container No 

c/~6 7 


c7~?o 

3-69 

t/~<7o 

V-63 


Wt- Sample Wet + Tare 

77*70 

77969 

/70-70 

3*3 99 

76336 

79700 

/ 3*0/6 

Wt- Sample Dry -FTare 

76**0 9 

700.38 

/736C 

77630 

700/8 

76 9/3 

70377 

Wt- Water 

&.<?/ 

> c *4.0/ 

36/o 

0769 

0009 

00-79 

0^/33 

Tare Container 

47-27 

66.03 

376*7 

36-37 

7073 

67/6 

337-0/ 

Wt- Dry Soil 

06.70 

6963 

5 *•?*■ 

6973 

0770 

333/ 

<3070 

Moisture Content 

*3/ 

. *6-1 

337 

30 9 

330 

33*6 

09-0 



Method of Compaction_ 

37&£iA37££L<T. 


Diam. Mold 
Height Mold 

Volume Mold _ 

No- of Layers__ 

Blows per Layer 
Ht- of Free-Fall 
Wt- of Tamper_ 


7-3/3."L±. 




SSf. 


0 ooz/o 7V S 

3~ 


6>c 


/J. 


Shape of Tamping Face 
Description of Sample.. 


Remarks 


£0 36 3Z 

Moisture Content % 














































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

PROJECT //**>*/$ /a/ <?-3 

SITE *3 <So s *'*>*'' s jr&soa/. 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SAMPLE /SstSASxy s&axts 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

LO C AT 10 N >7Z 3/v 

COMPACTION TEST 

HOLE 6.6 7 & tfxCA DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN yr -c/./t< DATE sri- 


1 Number 

/ i 

x 

3 

V 

s 

6 

r 

Mold No- 








Wt-Sample Wet + Mold 

3^703 

363*7 

Z68V7 

377/7 

37/90 

a:7*'+> 

36790 

Wt’ Mold 

/f +07 

SS+*7 

/S+07 

y^lr-oy 

/Sr-e>7 

y***7 

/s+«7 

Wt- Sample Wet 


/O ?-0O 

y /^70 

y/7/° 

y/7 33 

y/639 

y/3.33 

Volume Mold 








Wet Unit Weiaht Ib/fP 



ss*< yo 

//?/* 

//7 83 

7/6-3? 

S/7S7 

3ry Unit Weight lb*/ft 3 

d?r.o 

07 7 

90.0 

90 e 

9# 3 

<339 

sys 

Container No 

S-7? 

y-yo 


7-'? 

: + 

7-3/ 

o'-S3 

Wt- Sample Wet + Tara 


SfjS.»o 

SS3-7Z 

/Sifi? 

/S3.6/ 

77"? 

/<93. £>& 

Wt- Sample Dry + Tare 


S6?e7 

/??■'* 

/ 39.73 

33333 

363 ys 

t>3? 

Wt- Water 

/?#/ 

3333 

33.5'? 

36.33 

£7-+? 

30.07 

7<?c>7 

Yare Container 

79+7 


6#?S 

S3 30 

S977 

73 s# 

7/ 9 / 

Wf- Dry Soil 

tfS'./O 

07-7? 

?o33 

ye?£ 

9*33 


03.00 

Moisture Content 

33-3 

333 

373 

390 

s°Y 

S/.0 

J3S 



Method of Compaction__ 




330 


Diam. Mold _ 

Height Mold - 

Volume Mold _ 

No- of Layers__ 

Blows per Layer 

Ht- of Free Fall__ 

Wt- of Tamper_ 3 0 


//? 


f/ 


S' 


... s 


~7J 


Shape of Tamping Face. 
Description of Sample^ 


Remarks 


^ S3 

Moisture Content % 


36 












































































































































































































































































































































/y 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

PROJECT 7W337S s*S <? 3 

SITE 39 </<? s»<s»^ 

DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SAMPLE ///^/ ycuArjxro 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

LOCATION 9z?/*roA7 *^0*7 s=7,c 

COMPACTION TEST 

HOLE 9 67 £ DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN yTcX Sc'. DATE 9t3&/39 


il Number 

/ 

9 

3 

9 

<7 

6 

7 

Mold No* 








Wt- Sample Wet + Mold 

sPS&79 

96799 

777779 

97*80 

736930 

97*69 

977 9 0 

Wt- Mold 

736.07 

/fV .07 

73607 

/0-6o7 

73*7o7 

73</.o7 

/36o7 

Wt- Sample Wet 


773 33 

777.08 

//?Y3 

773733 

A7V-/ 

77733 

Volume Mold 








Wet Unit Weiaht lb/ft 3 


77333 

//703 

//77J 

77393 

7/77/ 

7/7 33 

Dry Unit Weight lb/ft- 3 

9*r& 

<996 

9* 9 

996 

970 

90 e 

9// 

Container No 

*7-3* 

9-38 

9-68 

7-69 

9-39 

9/ 

3-9 

Wt- Sample Wet + Tare 

77990 

/9860 

. ST''" 

79797 

771*70 

73739 

73763 

Wt- Sample Dry + Tare 

73330 

767.37 

/tY.97 


76390 

79679 

79308 

Wt- Water 

/930 

939/ 

set s9 

9768 

9990 

996/ 

96 37 

Tare Container 

o7> 

7970 

7609 

AVe6 

3976 

33-93 

3380 

Wt- Dry Soil 

9376 

97-69 

90 89 

<e?Y3 

~3W 

90*83 

9798 

Moisture Content 

996 

7 

989 

S/o 

jet> 

993 

see. 9 



Method of Compaction 


3/y /*? 


9 976 /*? 


£?.d>0 j?*?O / Y * 


Diam. Mold 

Height Mold 

Volume Mold 

No- of Layers__£. 

Blows per Layer 4*0 

Ht- of Free Fall_ 

Wt- of Tamper 9*o 


Shape of Tamping Face 
Description of Sample 


Remarks 


36 






















































































































































































































































. 


























































ye 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

TEST 


PROJECT 

TW/tTfsS 

s/y <r xt ". 

SITE 

jr' c/o 's Sc-yso *>x 

SAMPLE 

S//6/S6 y 

<ss ssy 


LOCATION 


HOLE e>- * rZ DEPi H 


1 Number 

/ 

ye 

3 

*7 

0 " 

6 

7 

[Mold No- 


/366.0* 

^70 39 


*7/- 73 

e6 y 7 / 

£70-6# 

Wt- Sample Wet + Mold 

/*7o 7 

/9*707 

s37o7 

scr7*7 

s*r7*7 

/sr7*>7 

/S~7 0 7 

Wt- Mold 

yo6 6o 

/// re 

s/6 3 a* 

S/6- os 

//? 36 

s/jrey 

S/6 6/ 

Wt- Sample Wet 








Volume Mold 








Wet Unit Weiaht IbVfP 

yo6-6o 

/// 9 * 

ss6.se 

//* O s 

S/736 

s/93? 

//66/ 

Dry Unit Weight Ib/ft- 5 

*6 9 

6? 3 

9/9 

96/ 

*9 7 

66 7 

?/3 

Dontainer No 

/r-9 


S -90 

y9~7 

l/-&3 

c/-96 

-r^23 

Wt- Sample Wet + Tare 

/73 J?3 

/SOS? 

/7*/2 

7*992 

y<76 so 

7*0 /* 

/y7?7 

Wt-Sample Dry "Mare 

y^.3o 


/73/S 

79*7? 

/6*.o9 

/9/33 

/2? 68 

Lt- Water 

/? 99 

2273 

3779*7 

2703 

2*0/ 

2*86 

2*29 

Tare Container 

69 27 


S/-6^ 

67*79 

7* 97 

6 see 

332? 

Wf- Dry Soil 

07 03 

<99- 

9^-9/ 

960 7 

6*9/9 

66/0 

7/-3? 

Moisture Content 


29*/ 

S7-S 

ye?. 7 

... f/9 

33 0' 

277 


















































































































































































































































































































































/r 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

COMPACTION TEST 

PROJECT Tv-t'd/y ^ 

SITE or' c/o 's 

SAM PL E T/yy/A/zy A?//fsr'/' c-c^ry 

LO C AT 10 N s 6 r 'y>s+r?*//y.a*/ 

HOLE /■ 33 2 DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN yr </ Ac*. DATE Sat/?/S 

it Number 

/ 

j< y 

7 

*7 

S' 

A 1 7 

Mold No- 








,Wt- Sample Wet + Mold 

*/? 

/S 6 6 79 

77 06 

* 77 3 V 

c 7/63: 

67-63 

- 7 o vS 

;Wt- Mold 

ysVo 7 

/rfo? 

/s¥oy 

/S'V *7 

/sV .6 7 

/ crV 0 7 

/S-V.07 

Wt- Sample Wet 

/O'/Vo 

/// y 777 

S'/S.?? 

/s7 77 

/// znsr- 

7/7.07 

7/6 7* 

Volume Mold 








Wet Unit Weiaht lb-/ft 3 

/#y. 

77J?*7* 

7/6. 7? 

7/777 

s/yss' 

77 9. S'/ 

7/6 ?/ 

Dry Unit Weight lb-/ft 3 

S3 S 

33 & 

97/ 

y/>.? 

S7-? 

c?J '• 

9/0 

Container No 

7^/S 

T'76 

y< / 

X^/O 

7^6 3 

7^ V 

7'"<? 

Wt-Sample Wet + Tars 

/Va /7 

74*6-00 

730-97 

y/TS.k! 7 

763-0? 

/V /66 

/SOS? 

Wt- Sample Dry + Tare 

// / & 

/33-4> O 

7 3'/ 

7 6 30 

/sC&.Vo 

//? 63 

/SS/7 

Wt- Water 

790.3 7 

33* Vo 

sc S’-36 

*36.93 

376? 

33 e¥ 

/Z*7Z 

JTare Container 

SV66 

33.63 


3 S'-*3 

33-39 

3*77 

jy.so 

iWt- Dry Soil 

36. 4fV 

S3? 3 

9773 

9077 

?o // 

SV33 

9/37 

'Moisture Content 

*39?/ | 

7 3-V 

39 6 

SO 3 

Y.SSV 

/7&-Z 


Max- Unit vn- = 9'-4'/U* 
Opt- Moist- % 



Method of Compaction_ 


Diam. 

Mold 

/ s/3 

//?. 

Height 

Volume 

Mn 1 d 

TP. 3/6, 

/s? 

Mold 

£• &o SS 30 yt 

No- of 

Lavers 

5 “' 


Blows 

per Layer 

7'tT 


Ht- of 
Wt- of 

Free Fall 
Tamper 

sCO 

/J 


Shape of Tamping Face 
Description of Sample^ 


o 


R e m a r k s 


*9 <es 

M oisture Content 
















































































































































































































































































































































































































- 
















































*0 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

PROJECT rvjEY/.- 

SITE *7 <so*c scaso^a. 

OEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SAMPLE A/S <? AS s y ,r? & ysc ST a. AX S 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

LO C AT 10 N /*& s>o<£?/is v~&as /&/ -s'**? 

COMPACTION TEST 

HOLE &*<?/,. DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN Ar: DATE 7**/* ' 


al Number 

/ 

* 

Jf 

* 

£* 

6 


Mold No- 








Wt- Sample Wet + Mold 

*6* ?& 

*4 37/ 

97*". s3 

7? 7*?. /3 

7770. 0? 

*67. so 


Wt- Mold 

7**07 

7**0 7 

7 *o 7 

73*07 

7**07 

7**07 


: Wt- Sample Wet 

70 9 <?/ 

//*./* 

7/0// 

®//6> ss 

y/6 37 

ySjT -O r 


Volume Mold 








'Wet Unit Weiaht lb-/ft^ 

/o9. Vs 

//*. s* 

7/0 sr 

//3./S 

7/6.37 

7S*0 T 


'Dry Unit Weight Ib-Zft-^ 

d?7 3" 

90* 

9Jt./ 

9** 

<99./ 

*6 -* 


Container No 

7-1*/ 

7^/9 

*/3 

y^/* 

7</r 

r*-3 


iWt Sample Wet + Tare 

/** 7* 

/**/* 

/S'*?o 

7*7 .73 

7**s;.& 



i Wt- Sample Dry + Tar® 

7*/ 3 f 

M *37 

Ar3 70 

7** 73 

/s' 7 7? 

7/776 


| Wt- Water 

3/. 39 

S3. ?8 

.7 <29- 3*0 

76 SO 

,37*' 

7397* 


• Tare Container 

33'- 5-o 

3 *6 76 

36 o / 

3'3- 3S 

3380 

3*09 


;Wt- Dry Soil 

& 7 -&* 

90 6/ 

9***9 

7/ <6® 

99.93 

9*67 


‘Moisture Content 


/C- 

73* 

AC 9 -# 

S/.o 

33.0 




Method of Compaction__ 

A/ s r.ez . ■***/* oss/s/t? 


Diam. 

Mold 

7 3/3 


Height 

Mold 

*3/6 

/SX 

Volume 

Mold 

0.00. 

■co /Y 

No- of 

Lavers. 

* 


Blows 

per Layer 

*o 


Ht- of 

Free Fall 



Wt- of 

Tamper 

str'C 

S3 

Shape 

of Tamping 

Face 

O 

Descrii 

ption of Sample 



Remarks 




Jest 

Moisture Content % 


















































































































































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

PROJECT s^y 

SITE J'rr 3^/007 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SAMPLE yS/sZs/y y yzwsTVe <?x/ry' 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY - 

LOCATION jr~&srr**/'rl0AS 

COMPACTION TEST 

HOLE tZt&'Z’ DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN DATEy^y^? 


al Number 

/ 

.? 

3 


s' 

0 

7 

Mold No- 








Wt- Sample Wet + Mold 


**968 

*7/70 

*7*.&6 

X73oo 

^67 70 

360 6o 

Wt' Mold 



y37.0 7 

/3<7o7 

/^¥.o7 

/s*<>7 

yoW.oy 

Wt- Sample Wet 

y/o 03 

//s'.*; 

/'7*3 

yy0.0/ 

y/7 7? 

y/f'.S? 

y/V.03 

Volume Mold 








Wet Unit Weiahf lb/ft 3 

y/*03 

yy?r */ 

yy/33 

7/0 0/ 

y/7 73 

yyV'43 

yy^03 

Dry Unit Weight Ib/ft-^ 

&9 7 

9/0 

7*2 

<733? 

70 3 

072 


Container NO' 

7- 6 3 

7^3* 

77 

7^6 


Try/' 


Wt- Sample Wet + Tare 

/¥&* ?6 

s*&'39 

/f-o.ys- 

/<AP 6 7 


y*o. 93 

y^o".6S 

Wt- Sample Dry + Tare 

/*/.*?7 


S*0/j? 

/330X 

/er/s- 

733-00 

/47*>.oo 

Wt- Water 

*?/ 6 / 

7??77 

*>363 

*6 6S 

*7'jy 

27-/3 

^•360 

Tare Container 

3/7& 

scr so 

3*73 

37 03 

36 97 


S*<&9 

Wf- Dry Soil 

#7^7 

72oo 


73 s? 

Toys 


7/77 

Moisture Content 


2^.9 

27 & 

3&- 7 

306 

JJ?M 

26-0 



Method of Compaction_ 


Diam. Mold _ 

Height Mold - 

Volume Mold _ 

No- of Layers^_ 

Blows per Layer 
Ht- of Free Fall 
Wt- of Tamper_ 


X 3/3 y/z 


yh. 


<p.0Oje&O /*/ 








Shape of Tamping Face. 
Description of Sample^. 


<D 


Remarks 




































































































































































































































































































>82 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

TEST 


PROJECT 


SITE 


SAMP L E_ y S'S 'r'/t' cx.&y 


LOCATION y^a / _ / S/ yvy 

HOLE ' 6*67^ DEPTH ~ 


] 1 Number 

/ 9 

3 

¥ 

ss 

6 

' / 

Mold No- 








Wt-Sample Wet tM old 

26 S’. So 

267 90 

■ > 3o 

< ¥-63 

,<. 7A/6 

s69So 

y 7C. 37 

Wt- Mold 

/s¥o 7 

/s¥o\? 

/¥¥o7 

STS 07 

S 0 

7 

y '7*7 

Wt- Sample Wet 

///■ ¥3 

//3&J 

s/6 

///■S/ 

///<=>? 

//¥.>' 

/A 9 3 ¥ 

Volume Mold 








Wet Unit Weiaht lb-/fP 

/// ¥3 

SS3 83 

//& ‘33 

//? 6/ 

//7°? 

s/¥r 

S /6 ¥ 

Dry Unit Weight 


yO O 

:• y 3 

906 

&;■</ 

96- 7) " 

9A6 

Container No 

7tS ¥ 

r-- V 

7^7 

7' 

/S'so 

S? & 


<Vt- Sample Wet + Tore 


s¥6 90 

ssb-S'S' 

S S3- 6 7 

/ 6?6 39 

/&S /6 

yj / 

Wt- Sample* D r y -r Tare 

S3? 6 *o 

SS/S^Oa. 

/.<S-3o 

/ 6 6 / 

SS<F 6 / 

/r s/o 

y / 

Wt- Water 

a. 2 76 

£3.98 

/■ - So “7 

< 7-o 6 

737 68 

A 9 -0 

*36-67 

tare Container 

so <99 

' J?¥77 

3393 

6 °/ 

6707 

< 66 - O 

S 3 . .<0 

m • Dry Soil i 99 97 

90-r ¥ 

9Asy 

90.60 


<96-70 

97: / 

i i , 

Moisture Content | 

26 -¥ 

*?¥ 

,z?9 

37-o 

33. S 




Method of Compaction_ 


. .Sl*L'3. /..Li. 

, y . 9/6 s'*?. 

0 AY 


Diam. Mold . 

Height Mold. 

Volume Mold 

No- of Lovers 5 __ 

Blows per Lover *2 s' 

Mt- of Free Fall___ 

Wt- of Tamper_ A 6 


Shap8 of Tamping Face 
Description of Sample. 


Remarks 






















































































































































































































































































































































































































































J?3 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

COMPACTION TEST 

PROJECT 77/47*/* /*/ C 3 

SITE 

sr~ 

CSO 3 /77*4/ 's 3CA/OCX- 

SAMPLE ¥//<&sSjc x /oit/wr'/t' 

<rx try 

LOCATION x7 rv-v 77 x 

HOLE 

sd.o g <Tcz<r/e DEPTH 


TECHNICIAN 

DATE 

Number 

/ 


s 

V 

3" 

d* 

7 

>ld No* 








N Sample Wet + Mold 

7/67. fc 


37737 

/7xV.< 

4>?70 

7/6S74 

JP* ?4>3 

• Mold 

/f¥o7 

sr¥o7 


S*¥<>7 

/s¥.«? 

crtfoy 

/S*o7 

• Sample Wet 

7 /S S 3 

7/973" 

777x0 

77* o£ 

7/S 63 

7/*'S 

4/7/<Z> 

lume Mold 








t Unit Weiaht lb-/ft^ 

77F S3 

//& S5~ 

So 

776-C& 

//3.63 

7/*7S 

7 /S/6> 

\ Unit Weight 1 b•/ft 


93.0 

<?/¥ 

9<?- ~ 

397/ 


9/-3 

ntainer No 


7^3 

r-7 


T'-SS 

s'-70 

7-so 

! Sample Wet + Tare 

Mi * y 

/ 70-74, 


/s-a‘*>7 


'*¥s-&r 

/7oGr 

! Sample Dry + Tare 

/SOTFO 

7^9F? 


73**9 

sAf-&r 

//r3-7 

7c7 o' 

Water 

S3 ¥9 

36 ■<€> 

C6 77 

£7 S~8 

730/19 

ZS7S 

739/ 

e Container 

j??6o 

S3?. 09 

36 97 

SS.SS 

ssse 

S3 S3 

JS.S3 

; Dry Soil 

Jf0 6? 

ys.< 3 

97 V3 

906 / 

<96*7 

SZo* 

9/*S 

isture Content 

jeer- 9 


393 

30* 

SS7 

3*7 

J36/ 



Method of Compaction_ 

/zsfstt’/r*vss<*r 


Diam. Mold Z ^ 

Height Mold __ s *__ 

Volume Mold o-&&7a?g /y_ 3 

No- of Layers_ £2 _ 

Blows per Laver 

Ht- of Free Fall_ 

Wt- of Tamper_ 76 

Shape of TompinQ Face - 
Description of Sample 









Rem arks 










Moisture Content % 


T 


































































































































































































































































































I 

u 















































' 


. 
































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

COMPACTION TEST 


PROJECT 

yy/zSsss /V <?. 37 

SITE 

3 7" c/ 

SAMPLE 

y/x3x<x y sM&xxrs rs<r <rx sy 

LOCATION 

yyx-ryy. 

HOLE 

<ecZ depth 

TECHNICIAN Sc/--*'. DATE /s3 


Number 

/ 

3 

3 

s 

S' 



old No- 








f t- Sample Wet + Mold 

S66-39 

373 <3 

Z7Z79 

373/9 

37437 

369.7a 


t- Mold 

ysSay 

/s9o 7 

SS-Voy 

/s /07 

yr/a 7 

/S7c>7 


t- Sample Wet 

y/3 33 

//& '/S' 

y/<& 6 7 

s/933 

y/6.30 



Dlume Mold 








et Unit Weiaht lb-/ft^ 

y/3 33 

y/S> /S 

y /6 67 

XT'S. /.< 

S /6 3o 

ys7- 33 


y Unit Weight lb-/ft- 3 

699 

93-7S 

9/3 

906 

<9Z& 

<&S/ 


bntainer No 

S'S 

r-y 

33S 

73/3 

s¥ 

3- 7 


t- Sample Wet -1- Tare 


ySS93 

yS399 

ys/ZO 

S63.36 

s/SSS 


t- Sample Dry -r Tare 

SS3- 96 

/S? fc 

/3+ 6 ? 

/36 -6c 


X/ 6 -S& 


it- Water 

3.3. <99 

/ 5. S3 

* 6 #■C 

3Z7T3 

3/. S3 

3737 


ire Container 

S3 & & 

3697 

3*77 

J 6 ^/ 

So & 9 

36- 97 


if- Dry Soil 

S<3- S 8 

?£?3 

9/9& 

9 a. 6 / 

<9/3 7 

7?* / ’ 


oisture Content 

XX O 

379 

379-3 

so-S 

33.3 

3</3 



\ 


Max- Unit Wt- =SSg£ ! /f»’ 
Opt- Moist- % 


X 







4 






s: 


Method of Compaction_ 


Diarn. Mold _ 

Height Mold - 

Volume Mold _ 

No- of Layers___ 

Blows per Layer 
Ht- of Free Fall 
Wt- of Tamper_ 


3 yy? . 

ro 

s' 

<? 6 > 




4 


4 


Shape of Tamping Face 
Description of Scmple_ 


Remarks 



















































































































































































































































































































































■ 



































TPS' 






PROJECT 

/*J 



UIMIVLROI 1 I V\ HLO U\ 1 H 


SITE sr: c/os/s/*// 's 

DEPT 

of CIVIL ENGINEERING 


SAMPLE 

///&//< V /9/S4<fyyO 


SOIL 

MECHANICS LABORATORY 


LOCATION 3 r k>/^tOA/'r‘o// 

#7* r# 

TRI-AXIAL COMPRESSION 


HOLE 0.0. 2 &*-C/z DEPTH 


T££ttNJCJAN 

chine Data:- 



DescriDtion of Samole:. 

hine No. 

g 








Iliolication Factor 




„oading 

Block -I- Piston (gms) 

99 / 







SPECIMEN 



DATA 




J JJ'V...’ 

ecimen 

■,i* ■ - -- 

Number 


\ 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

teral Pressure ) 


& 


C 


0 

ngth 

inches 



3#3 


3 . 03 


7303. 

e a 

sa- cms. 



S7/ 


#.7/ 


#. 7/ 

ft lum e 

c c- s. 








1/ Unit Weight Ibs/cuft. 


9*. S' 


9*2 



"•Volume Soil Solids 







iii Tare + 

Soil + Water at start 





j?o#.oo 


/#3J8 

H Tore + Soil + Water at end 


ST/73 


**0790 


/##./# 

ii Tare + 

Soil 



/6 *SS 


/#/.o6 


ss-s-69 

limber and weiaht of Tare 


79.38 


9077 


4*4*3 

1 Soil 


90.30 


94 89 


9* #4 

B 

, if A r A 

Weight of water 


*■<94 


#499 


*449 

t Tore 

8S * 

Moisture content 


#98 




*?9 6 

Dearee of saturation 







l u ' 

8 St 

Weight of water 

% 


#4-87 


#6.&4 


#4.9? 

Moisture content 


#97 


#9-6 


j??. *7 

Degree of saturation 








1 

Dial 

Rdg 

Strain 

Area 

07 

Load 

on 

Pan 

Dial 

Rdg- 

Strain 

z 

Area 

<Tt 

Load 

on 

Pan 

Dial 

Rdg- 

Strain 

Area 

JT 


<7/co 




0 

4*oo 




0 

993o 





09*o 




3TO 

9#9* 




30 

9300 




L 

ee*o 




/oo 

9/30 




ycc 

9/#o 




. 

.847* 




/s*o 

#970 




S30 

943'0 




? 





#40 

S/SO 




300 

##60 





#330 





#S30 




3sro 

#630 





#400 




3oo 

#330 

i 



3oo 

0894 




b 

776* 




330 

#0/0 


?s6 

/-#/ 

33o 

#0*0 




? 

7930 




3*0 

7#30 

S'-6 

9-3* 

7-9/ 

3SO 

7930 





29#* 

7-7 

$»/r 

3-/3 

370 

/4Z0 

6-3 

9-3o 

#oo 

3#o 

776* 

*7 

93s 

3.06 


/699* 



3-/? 

*oo 

7/30 

Bo 

9*7 

3/3 

*60 

7034 

6-t 

?.3<A 

3-/7 



— 


— 

¥£o 

OS/2 




*/o 

73S0 

7-r 

9.93 

#■#9 

> 

6sr*o 


9*9 







**o 

69** 

e-e 

r*6 

3-3/ 


4ojc 

/o.f 

9/e 

*3/ 






*fo 

0//X 

'/93? 

e*zp 


|J 

S/S, 

evose 


























































J 











\ 







/ 


















/ 




; 

\ J 







\ 





/ 







i 






v 





/ 






1L 

r 






jf 





/ 













9/&Ar 

a 







[ 





&</* 

•St'S. 

S'. 






1 



1 











_ 









































































































































2 >£ 


PROJECT 


/>✓ C?.<2 

SITE 

cSo 

0^A/'* JC/^OCXL 

SAMPLE 

/Ss <?/*//y 


LOCATION 



HOLE£ 

■67A. «^<^DEPTH 


INIVERSITY of ALBERTA 
>EPT of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
OIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

“RI-AXIAL COMPRESSION 


TECHNICIAN 2T. <SVM\L,<2/?/92 


ie Potos- 


Descri ption of Som ple 


No-__ 

lication Factor. 




iding Block ■+■ Piston (gms). 




SPECIMEN 


DATA 


men Number 


ra I Pressure ) 


inches 


202 


202 


202 


sq. cms. 


&ZJL 


&77 


077 


m e 


c- c- s- 


Jnit Weight 


lbs/cu-f t 




6 




Volume Soil Solids 


ere ± Soil Water at start 


/¥992 


/SV?6 


/¥??¥ 


ore ± Soil + Wat er at end 


/¥f.#e 


/ 90.77 


/?973 


are ± Soil 


723.70 


/26 69 


/2302 


jer and weight of Tore 


7~-¥ 


33.9o 


r^/3 


36o f 


7^/6 


0363 


Soil 




9° 6 ? 




re 


Weight of water 


26/4 


263 / 


26/2 


Moisture content 


29 0 




2?o 


Degree of saturation 


Weight of water 


J? 6 o? 


26/2 


2996 


Moisture content 


20 e 


22 3 


23.3 


Degree of saturation 


Dial 

Rdg 

Strain 

Area 

r 

err 

Load 

on 

Pan 

Dial 

Rdg- 

Strain 

Areo 

<r« 

Load 

on 

Pan 

Dial 

Rdg- 

Strain 

Area 

SI 

9970 




o 

9'9o 




o 

973o 




99oo 



j 

9o 

9//0 




9o 

9620 




9S?o 




/oo 

9000 




/oo 

9900 




9260 




/9o 

3370 




/9o 

9370 



r~ 

<?S»ro 




<oo 

37oo 




200 

9220 




\ 89oo 




22 o 

" 3 foo 




29o 

9o3o 



— 

316 o 




3oo 

\ 3260 




3co 

3790 



j 

1 3?7o 




$3* 

So 6 o 




33o 

0620 



" 1 

3Z3o 


- 


J9c 

7920 




39o 

0990 




3790 




33o 

7630 




320 

0390 




poo* 




4-oo 

7 ? 6 o 




•foo 

0/9o 




73oo 




?Xo 

7 200 

7o 9 

932 

2.29 

?2o 

7970 




76 So 




¥3o 

69oo 

3/2 

t-9? 

2Z3 


7690 




7+ro 

733 

9 ¥o 

2 30 

4¥o 

6SS6 

936 

9'6o 

2.30 

49o 

799o 

773 

9/S 

/?3fj 

73X0 

7?? 


23? 

¥ 9o 

3//i 


/S~& 


¥6o 

79oo 

326 

92 b 

2¥3\ 

70 So 

2 99 

?96 

2 36 






vW 

ysoo 

932 

960 

2 9/ 

s//4 

Fwer 








960 


€/?/e 

&& 





























1 

1—1 

_ 

T" 




/ ~ 

1 





A 



1 

_ 






f 

A 




t / 




p 

V 







□ 





1 / 



1 

[_ 

\ 

! 





/ 

□ 





1 / 



| 


\ 

I 





i / 






V 

1 


1 

f~j 


y- 





\J— 

~ 

_ 




JLw-- 

7 


j 

M 

MBSSS 

y* 

——— 




zZ 

mmmm 







1 











































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 
DEPT- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

TRI-AXIAL COMPRESSION 


PROJECT ^ 




SITE 


sr: c/o s^A>sy , 's s<r*'oo<c 


SAMPLE y *V<c?sry<r <r<cv?y 


LOCATION r~osyy 

HOLE ~ZHJL jjaESsE DEPTH 


TECHNICIAN (//K DATE ^rg/tsr,e 


:hine Dota:- 


Description of Sam ple 


hine No-. 


76 


tiplication Factor_ 

Loading Block Piston (gms.) 77*/- 


SPECIMEN 


DATA 


ecimen Number 

l 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

teral Pressure (era* ) 


0 


0 


O 

noth inches 




<282 


*7* 

ea > sqcms- 


<777 


477/ 


43 7/ 

lume cc-s- 







y Unit Weight Ibs/cu-ft- 


9*7 


5 9 


f*>? 

• -Volume Soil Solids 







• Tare + Soil + Water at start 


y3/oo 


y36 jo3 


/32*9 

Tare + Soil + Water at end 


ys'/. s?9 


/339o 


y**7s 

Tare + Soil 




7*9*9 


y*4.0£ 

mber and weight of Tare 

7*/ 

33.93 

7^/9 

78*6 

7^yo 

33.33 

• Soil 


9023 


y/o? 


9/09 

fore 

est 

Weight of water 






^•<7 

Moisture content 


289 


287 


<28 9 

Dearee of saturation 







ter 

est 

Wejght of water 


26/3 


26.0/ 


Z 6./3 

Moisture content 


208 


*8 6 


28 7 

Degree of saturation 








Dial 

Rdg 


Strain 

i— 


Area 


or 


Load 

on 

Pan 


Dial 

Rdg- 


Strain 

L- 


Area 


<r. 


Load 

on 

Pan 


Dial 

Rdg- 


Strain 


Area 


61 


9*30 


9360 


9 + 6 o 




36 


270 


30 


36o 


2&L 


yoo 


J2*. 


yeo 


£30 


6+o 


2£o 


OQQ 


/3o 


o&G 


+3o 


2 oo 


ses'o 


20 O 


&£&G 


A&O 


23o 


6/o 


6&L 


8 * 6 o 


ZZ 2 o 


3oo 


330 


Joo 


370 


SVG 


J33l 


coo 


33o 


030 


jZ*C 


4/00 


y36o 


+00 


736o 


3? 


££21 


7// 


6?So 


73 


90/ 


12 0? 


9*0 

m. 


Soo 


+20 


260 


78 


2*L 


/# 


7/0 


s* 


fi ZL 


£72 


693o 


£3L 


973 


327 


49.0 


6920 


l7L 


222 


2 -*34 




93 


9 93 


226 


¥3o 


2&l 


£2. 


<923 


330 


¥3o 


80 00 


yo s’ 


9 94 


£12 


2920 


/o- 


£12 


£££ 


+60 




+7Q 


300 

62+Q 




£2£ 


233 


+60 


222 


yo.c 2 


233 


s*yy F2? 



¥9o 




m 

=£ 











































































































































■ 






















































^■3 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 
DEPT of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

TRI-AXIAL COMPRESSION 


PROJECT rw^s/s 


SITE 


OjC 


SAMPLE 


y <rz./?y 


LOCATION 




HOLE depth 


TECHNICIAN </■ ^ DATE Ar< 


line No- 


iine Dotaj 


Description of Sam ple 


so 


plication Factor 
fading Block-+• Piston (gms.)., 


SPECIMEN 


DATA 


cimen Number 


eral Pressure KfFtfi ) 


gt h 


i n c tve s 


* 8 * 


*3* 


*3* 


sq. cms- 


3 77 


3 7/ 


3 7/ 


u m e 


c c- s- 


Unit Weight 


lbs/cu-f f 


Volume Soil Solids 


Tore + Soil Water at start 


y¥7S9 


yS*.y* 


yS930 


Tore + Soil + Wot er at end 


y¥?S9 


73*0* 


/s¥67 


Tore + Soil 


y*a-99 


/*S3/ 


/*6>3c 


iber and weight of Tare 


//'3S 


*9*3 


7^9 


33 SO 


7^/7 


34 48 


Soil 


9/ 74> 


97.8' 


9 s 6 * 


ore 

st 


Weight of water 


*6 6o 


*63' 


*6 so 


Moisture content 


je?.o 


*9* 


* 8 ? 


Degree of saturation 


f e r 
st 


Wejght of water 


* 6.40 


*4 7/ 


*4.37 


Moisture content 


7? To 


*9/ 


*8 3 


Degree of saturation 


Dial 

Rdg 

Strain 

Area 

or 

Load 

on 

Pan 

Dial 

Rdg 

Strain 

Area 

<r« 

Load 

on 

Pan 

Dial 

Rdg- 

Strain 

/ 

Area 

61 

9*7/> 



' 

a> 

7*96 




6 

9/30 




/3a 




So 

*oo 




So 

060 




<???* 




/ao 

OSO 




/o* 

6960 




&9o 




73o 

S9oo 




/So 

77o 




69a 




*ao 

460 




*oo 

SSo 








*So 

390 




*9o 

*70 




/aa 




Sac 

OSo 




Soo 

9So 




7730 

S96 

9*/ 

/?/ 

3So 

y4>3o 




SSa 

39a 




9So 

4 96 

93/ 

*osr 

jeo 

*70 

7-/7 

%?? 

*o9 

9ac 

6&oo 

3-o/ 

998 

z/z 

/9o 

7 36 

9</¥ 


¥60 

6?SO 

8-so 

9-so 

*./* 

9*o 



<? 09 

7 S9 

*70 

» 7080 

7 77 

9V* 


¥*o 

6/o 

9-y/ 

7-63 

* /9 

93o 

3** 

yo-/ 

970 

ZZ3 

yy/A 

~y?/P3 

y? 




/o-9 

973 

ZX/ 

¥96 

S?8o 

s9-9 

yo*o 

*-/? 





99c 

yfy/yi 


'jo 


¥So 

y//* 


P 








































/ 

) 










/ 







t 





r\ 






/ 






/ 

/ 





\ 






/ 






/ 






\ 






L — 






/ 







\ 









771 




































































































































































































































































































DATA FOR GLASS CLAY IXTURE 


The following twenty-seven pages contain that data obtained 
in the laboratory for the glass-clay mixture used in this research 


program. 




30 


CHEMICAL ANALYSIS 

The following results are copied from reports submitted by 
the Provincial Analyst. Samples were taken for analysis at the 
completion of each set of tests in order to check on the calcium 
chloride content. 


Glass-Clay Mixture 


Percent Commercial 
Flake CaClg added 

2/3 

2/3 

2/3 


Percent CaCl^ in sample 
by Chemical Analysis 

0.54 

0.54 

0.56 


4/3 

4/3 

4/3 


1.04 

1.00 

0.97 


2 

2 

2 


1.41 

1.36 

1.32 






*■/ 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

SIEVE ANALYSIS 


PROJECT 7?*?***' 

/AS 0 % s/ r ~. 

SITE /vr/*cr s>/0 


SAMPLE 

<r>//ry 

LOCATION 

HOLE 0-0% &*<?/* 

DEPTH 

TECHNICIANS / AT 

DATE 


i Dry Weight 

ample 

Sieve 

No. 

Size of Opening 

Weight , 
Retained 
gms. 

Total m. 
Finer Than 
gms. 

Percent 
Finer Than 

% Finer Than 
Baj?l$ 0/ig. 
sample 

Inches 

Mm. 


jl Dry Weight 








ined No. 4 








N « 








ry + Tare 










& 

1910 





ry 


3 /e 

9-52 






4 

•185 

4-76 





Passing 

4 







1 Dry Weight j 

r /So 


TTs'Ao 




- - 

ing No-4 ** 

4-©- 

■070“ 

-2-00-0 

S3T 7# 

AS7? 

5' 


No- 

-fre- 

n 7 . "^4- 
"■ UJJI 

- ■040 

/<£ ~03 

/?/?/ 3 

<&<7-s 

<?&/ | 

rv + Tare 4c 

4-0- 

OHy 0 

-420- 

/se>. 07 

730773 

S?3-3 

<S^?v? f 

/0° 

00 

/V£l£l3 

\J\J ff 


4**6 

s7*/ 7 

3~7 4 

^76 

) r y /¥& 

tw 

-005-9 

■440" 

<70 773 

63 <7 

y?sr.s 

/ es'*s' 

s?oo 

200 

•0029 

•074 


y? c 

77 4 

/74 

Passing 

200 



ft? 00 




:riDtion of S a m d 1 e 


v^r 

Method of 

Preparation ^0/s/r^^ . 

r ///=^ > /e , cp^r/^/// y 



^ s&TASy? rrtt&kS 

7 7^ /TX/yy 

^ <f>0 f 


/^//s/jr/s^Ts? 



Remarks 






1's of Sieving /C^ 7 

sTs^/y^jP ^ 


. . .- . 














































































































































































































sz 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 


HYDROMETER TEST 

HOLE *> o J? <r/i DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN ssrcS- z*'. D ATE 



Temp 

Time 

Elapsed 

Time 

K 

R h 

=R/ h+ c m 

D 

m.m. 

R h +m t ~c d 

\N 3° 

w % 

Basis Orig 
Sample 

Remarks 







0^ct7- 


94*6 

/9 3 








• 060 



/<?■£ 



< ’ a 





094 


9/Z 

/08 








■ 0 3/ 


0 ?e 

/ 0 O 








ozz 


07 3 

/?■$ 








Oft 


0 */ 

S7° 








■ 009 / 


77/ 









. cose 

* 

49-0 

/</.o 








■ o<?W 


6 3.8 

/*& 








. 0 O </0 


JT 6 C 

/f'Z 








. OO/y 


37.0 

7* 



• 





. oc/o 


joy 

4Z 








. 0 OQ<) 


£ 8 / 

3T7 
















































































PROJECT /as 


SITE 


SAMPLE ^rs?rT'csse>j< i r j 


>meter No.s 
ioo Ss 


and 


Graduate No. 


W s ‘ s^T^ + m r c d>= 
cus correction = c m = 
irsing agent used_ 


(R h +m t - Cd) 
and _ 


respectively 


Amount 


ction for change in density of liquid due to addition of dispersing agent = c^ 

Cd =_ and r espectively 

ific Gravity of Solids - G s ___ 


"0 0 4 . 


‘iption of Sample 

<eo g " $r' c/o^jT/pas's 




^JL 




Method of Preparation 


Remarks 

£X- 








initial Moisture Content 


Dry Weight of Semple 


r No._ 

pie Wet + Tare 
pie Dry + Tare 


Container No-_ 

WL Sample (We?/Dry) 1-Tare 
Tare____ 


ontainer _ 

ry Soil _ 

loistur® 


Wt- CWet/Dry) Soil_ 

Dry Weight from Initial 

Mnic + nra- > 00 X Wt-Wet So il _ 

Moisture- ^"oTTnit Moist .% 










































































































































































































































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

SPECIFIC GRAVITY 

H U---—— 

PROJECT xw' <T^T- 

SITE yofss*r 

SAMPLE 

LOCATION 

HOLE <S>-0 2 <5a DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN ^ o' ^ DATE 

.1 -- 

mple No. 

/ 


isk No. 

AT 


thod of Air Removal 

t'Z’&SsC <6T , £2 

z^e* c/cssvt 

♦w*$ 

'7-7 7<p 

3?<7 s'# 

nperature T 

797. & 

&£•/ 

l«-W 

/ 7 

6 S''- 93 

aporating Dish No. 

— 

— 

!. Sample Dry + Di$h 

— 

— 

re Dish 

— 

- 



<6 

W 

77 '7 

77 srv 

Wt> tW a. s * Weight of flask + water + sample at T °. 5s - tr* 

^b + w = Weight of flask + water at T° (flask calibration curve). 

W s = Weight of dry soil w 

G s ' Specific gravity of soil particles = W s +W b v w "W b +,;+ s 


.‘termination of W s from wet soil sample: 


ample No. 



Sample No. 



bntainer No. 



Container No. 



t. Sample W'et +Tare 



Wt.Test Sample Wet + Tare 



t. Sample Dry +Tare 



Tare Container 



t. Water 



Wt.Test Sample Wet 



are Container 



W s . 



it- of Dry Soil 






oisture Content 'W' % 







description of Sample: _____ . .. . _ 























































































































































































M 0 I S T U re O o ri i e 11 i 


S'** 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 
DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 


MECHANICS 


LABORATORY 

LIMITS 


Limit 



PROJECT g-£.Klgl~. 

SITE '7*s<e'¥s3 /*/ 


SAMPLE /vf/*r'cs*>4r 

<?S sx/ey' 

LOCATION ^ <Sx*?sS 


HOLE <?•<> £ <r* 

DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN &■*?. 

DATE &/C)^/3i 


5 4 

Z>1 

3 6 . S £ 
9Q-XZ 

71- Zt> 


18-97 


17 


9^ 

eo.os 

7 4>-C!) 

3-4^ 

Go. 79 


I S 84 


Zl-G 


\Q 

4-q 

3Z-G7 
6 6-77 
3.90 
7 o-47 


\8 \ o 


2l-4>- 


VO 
4-9 
8G.18 
6 Z- 50 
3.7^ 
t>4 z 


U&6 


2 - 1.4 


Plostic Limit 




Container No- 


Wt- Sample Wet+Tore 


Wt- Sample Dry-fTare 


Wt- Water 


Tare Container 


Wt- of Dry Soil 


Moisture Content % 144 WO 


Be 


CO.21 


5^44 


• 7 £ 


S4-44 


i.oi 




>377 


59 08 


• 49 


S4 49 


4-S^ 




59-91 


5R.08 


■ 8 3 


SV27 


S. 87 


14-1 


Shrinkage Limit 


trial No 


Container No- 


PtLSample Wet-fTore 

Wt- Sample Dry 7-Tare 




Tare Container 


Wt- of Pry Soil Wc 


Moisture Content 


Vo I • Container 


VoL Dry Soil Pat Vo 


{ Shrinkage 


Vo! • V-Vo 


Shrinkage Limit 




S4> 1^1 
54-^3 




SZ-46 


V. 7* 


14.9 


& 


sy. y c 

'TTFs 


6Z 


S3.o3 


£*£. 


i£Z. 


/3rf 


6>3gZ 

8t> 




S3 67 




/<*/ 




C^..oo) 


Description of Sample: 


Remarks: /s 

dj’ST' 








7 8 9 iO 15 

Number of 



r2r*s&re 

sxA?T"TrxrA/ 


<t t — 

^ c / SC- 






























































































































































































































































































































































36 


UNIVERSITY of 

ALBERTA 

PROJECT rW3Ss7 s.«s c. 3 

SITE 

d£p’t of CIVIL 

ENGINEERING 

SAMPLE s+r/xr 

SOIL MECHANICS 

LABORATORY 

LOCATION *?//& jc **se&es 

ATTERBERG 

LIMITS 

HOLE 0 47 Z <r«.C6 DEPTH 

TECHNICIANS^. /^3-</3 DATE </&*//3c 


Liquid Limit 


oi No 
of Blows 


d2L 


6373 

2£Z 

6£2.C 

2LA 1 


Irjql-NQ.- 


Wt- Water 


Trial No 



y'/e 


< 33-77 

62 93 

3.*¥ 

j££2L 

S6 6X 

/fJ 


/2 


92.63 

69¥6 

222L 

73-37 

/*•? !- 

222. 


7.72 

22. 


<9726 

6/ 3 £ 

3-/>6 

jis'.s'e 

/3-63 

77./ 


Plastic Limit 


Container No- 


Wt- Sample Wet-Hare 


Wt- Sample Dry-Hare 


Tore Container 


Wt of Pry Soil 


Moisture Content % 




rvi6? 


*¥.¥/ 


6 


rT>r. 7/7 


222 


799 


33/3 


39/>7 


.76 


*ZZ£ 


-.33 


/*■*' I /<v I 


39 


36/3 


9375 


3/5 


376 / 


2/2 


Shrinkage Limit 


Container No 


Wt- Sample Wet + Tare 

Wt- Sample Dry -f Tare 




Contginer 


Wt-of Pry Soil Wc 


Moisture Content -ur°/c 


Container 


Dry Soil Pat Vo 


Shrinkage Vol- V-Vo 


Shrinkage Limit 




27.23 


94.7/ 

32 


39-/3 


936 


MA 


Ay*- =-../// 


H = ^ C^wT" x ,0 °) 


Description of Sample: 


Remarks: //■ 




<s>6 




f gpsj6«r /?**///' 37■ «' 


8 9 10 15 20 25 30 

Number of Blows 


























































































































































































































































































































































>*7 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTER8ERG LIMITS 


PROJECT -r'+fATS/s sa/ 


SITE 


SAMPLE <TSy*ry 


LOCATION /£?as& . 

HOLE S-33Z &£& DEPTH 


TECHNICIAN ^ <✓: ^ DATE 


Liquid Limit 


3l No 


/ 


of Blows 






3/ 


ZZ-. 


<£?Z? 


7'/z 


itainer No- 


S'*? 


c/~3 




t/73 




£'~"7o 


Sample Wet flare 


*3 


/<?/ 57 /&y /<7 




s&ySS> 


?¥■¥<* 


Sample Dry f lare 


36 ■ ss 




2*7? 


S0* 7? 




Wester 


sseo 


S/o 


S».63 




dL£L 


S- 


re Container 


4403 


&S--V9 


ffj// 


0ZJt£ 


2£ZM. 


of Dry Soil 




ys^fe /6S9 


434 / 


A&/2L. 


/f'JJL 


isture Content y j%\ si r . ?3~ 


SJH'- 



/S/s 


SZZZL 


SZg- 


*30 / 


Plastic Limit 


Trial No 


Container No- 


Wt- Sample WetfTore 


Wt- Sample DryfTare 


Wt- Water 


Tare Container 


Wt of Dry Soil 


Moisture Content % 


Shrinkage Limit 


Trial No 


Container No 


Wt Sample Wet +Tare 


Wt- Sample Dry -f Tare 


u.W-t;-W.fltg.L 


Tare Container 


Wt-of Dry Soil W< 


Moisture Content 


,VoI • Container 


Vo I- Dry Soil Pat V© 


hrinfcaqe Vol- V-V© 


Shrinkage Limit 


vs = ^ C^ xl0 °) 


Description of Sample^ 


Remarks: Zos*jlo a/+ y* o/?s£?s*/ 


&&JS/&SS -r~ 






SJL. 


jszsfrc rzrsys 4 v. zZassl..-- 


7 8 9 iO 15 20 25 30 

Number of Blows 
















































































































































































































































































































































































3<& 

UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 

PROJECT /?i/ r/r 

SITE 

SAMPLE 

LOCATION sta/c? crZArj’* 

HOLE OEPTH 

TECHNICIAN DATE/^^/^e 

Liquid Limit 

al No- 

/ 

V 7. 

6 

V 

sr 

c=> 

. of Blows 

3Y 

v y 

3 V 

? 

9 

9-<r 

ntainer No. 

1 

0 ? <3 

7 7 (o 

7 c? b" 

17// 

77? 

• Sample Wet t Tare 

9Z /V 

/OC > otr 


S’?-?? 

90 • 

< 9? • (e» JL 

Sample Dry +Tare 

.90-.fi. 

9?- 


?? W 

sV 

v*. 09 

-Water 

/ */ 

7. 0/ 




7 !>*, 

re Container 

?o (#9 

?7' 06 

(&* yy 

?5/3 

7/ Ko 

4>9 -9? 

■ of Dry Soil 

/o /</ 

/O O / 

/? b? 

/Y - 4 / 

/0> 69 

/<f // 

isture Content Tji/% 

/Z- 9 

/7 5 

/I 6 


-8 ■ 

7 


Average Values 


Ur p s 

s 


V- 
If ‘ 
If 


Wt- Sample Wet-I-Tore 




Wt- of Dry Soil 


Plastic Limit 


InuLJl^ 


Container No- 


Wt- Sample Dry tTare 


Wt- Water 


Tare Container 


Moisture Content % 


sfSes/ -- 


Shrinkage Limit 


Trial No 


Container No- 




Wt- Sample Wet+Tare 


h* 



Wt- Sample Dry -Hare 


Wt Water 


:s 


Tare Container 


Wt-of Dry Soil Wo 


Moisture Content mt% 


Voi- Container 


Vol- Pry Soil Pat Vo 


'y 


Shrinkage VoL V-Vo 


Shrinkage Limit V; 




/c 


M - */• C^wT" x 10 °) 


Description of Sample: 


Remarks: 


7 8 9 10 15 20 25 30 40 

Number of Blows 

















































































































































































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of 

ALBERTA 

PROJECT 

/V . ^ ^ 1 

SITE 

DEP T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SAMPLE 'r'cs/P/tT 

c?/" CTyC/^y 

SOIL MECHANICS 

LABORATORY 

LOCATION 7* 7=7*0 


COMPACTION 

TEST 

HOLE 0-o £ C7£ 

DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN ^r.o^/K 

DAT t.c7/?AS S~/3 


3 ? 


Number 

7 

z 

s 

* 

or 

& 

7 

told No- 








1 1- Sample Wet + Mold 


,30?60 

&&S-.Z7 




S7?7Z3 

ft- Mold 

/O'/.CJ 

3^.07 

/s -*07 

/37:07 

/**#07 

/ 3-^07 

7**07 

t- Sample Wet 

7^3.33 

/^33"3 

/S/s?o 

/so .</& 

/7?fZ7 

7*?7S 

7/33776 

olume Mold 








let Unit Weight ,lb-/fp 

/jer-33 

S*S-*3 

ss/yeo 

/Jo 

7/37737 

//?7/J 

/ 2?7/6 

ir y Unit Weight lb-/ft-^ 

7/3.0 

^ZL£ 

SS.S3 

774 67 

7*8 

//¥. S’ 

Z*J 1-7. 

ontainer No- 

7-S4 


(/-73 

</-V4 

c/s-j? 

*-9S 

C/-3Z 

It- Sample Wet + Tare 

./?**> 

Sf/Z? 

sr*37 

/S/007 

/?//? 


77*30 

t- Sample Dry + Tare 

/S3 o * 

/Sf'S'O 

S&s'l f 9 

/r* 8? 

/76f? 

706 73 

778*2 

it- Water 

7.*/o 

7/7? 

7/TS# 

/3 72 

/Vso 

t¥.JS 

7*63 

are Container 

70 

S?ore 

<$e-vs 

8>//5' 

4*?o 

r¥o? 

7o£? 

f- Dry Soil 

//£ -7/ 

/SS'9’3 

// 70 s 

//37<7 

7/779 

//*./>¥ 

70 S 3 S 

oisture Content 

&■ ?¥ 

//> 7 & 


//3.C3 

s&sv 

—772? 

/tf¥o 






Max* Unit Wt-t* 
Opt- Moist- -/£&. % 


x 


x 


S 


t 


/</ 7J - 7# 

Moisture Content % 


X 


K 


L 


Method of Compaction_ 

l/*r/&Z> /V7*?<rAS//sSAr 

Diam. Mold ^AJL/JL "*• 
Height Mold — ifL . 

Volume Mold __ 

No- of Lavers 
Blows per Layer 

Ht- of Free Fall_ 

Wt- of Tamper 


< 9 . *o&j?o St' 3 




Shape of Tamping Face, 
Description of Sample_ 


R e m a r k s 


76 



































































































































































































































































































aiMi 

































































































4*0 


UNIVERSITY of 

ALBERTA 

PROJECT Tf/ATS/S 

s*s cTxT 

SITE 

DEP T* of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SAMPLE yr~<cS/€ > , c? 


SOIL MECHANICS 

LABORATORY 

LOCATION x#«/0> ^2//*7e>2S 

COMPACTION 

TEST 

HOLE * * / e7/ 

DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN 2~ c/ 

DAT E 


il Number 

✓ 

/? 

3 

* 

3* 

4 


Mold No- 





232*9 



Wt* Sample Wet + Mold 

*7**3 

7?#*76 

236/8 

233-6/ 


*773-7 


Wt- Mold 

/J*o7 

/JV.*7 

/S '*07 

7J/o7 

/37*7 

73**0 7 


Wt* Sample Wet 

72/.S6 

/Jo*? 

732-2/ 

/27S* 

/23.2Z 

723. SO 


Volume Mold 








/Vet Unit Weiabt Jb/fP 

72/. S6 

/3o- 69 

732 2/ 


723-22 

723S'0 


)ry Unit Weight ib/ft-^ 

//27 

//** 

//?. / 

/sf-lL. 

7/3. 3 



Container No 

</~*7 

C/-76 

#-73 

1/-32 

£7-33 



Vt- Sample Wet + Tare 

736.72 

/#S3/ 

*/*.3/ 

/?33f 

/yr-7s 

7?/£S 


Vt- Sample Dry -FTare 

/77»~/ 

733.20 

2o/ So 

730-00 

73*30 

73022 


Vt- Water 

?*' 

72/7 

/3o/ 

73.3/ 

7**7 

/J.J3 


Tare Container 



33// 

43.73 

77?' 

7733 


Dry Soil 

s/2/6 

7/77* 

//3/<? 


77*3? 

/*7*Y 


Moisture Content 

32/ 

yo.s? 

//o 

/20S 

7232 

73-*? 




Method of Compaction_ 

s/x?/2t//72 9 2> /vrx?<ry///#2' 


Diam. Mold 7*3/3 /?/r - _ 

Height Mold *L&/A 

Volume Mold 0.00220 /O'. 3 

No- of Layers 3* 

Blows per Layer **& _ 

Ht- of Free Fall__ 

Wt- of Tamper 270 7* 

Shape of Tamping Face 0 

Description of Sample__ 


Rgmnrks 7x*S _ 

ss tussT'zr s2x/s/ry#2 

Z?> /rToss zr'<^/22 r 


Moisture Content % 




















































































































































































































































































' 


































































































4^/ 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

COMPACTION TEST 


PROJECT 7V/y// 

c* 

SITE 

SAMPLE Af/zc '7"*'zests’ 

cl^L 

LOCATION s?a/o ss 

HOLE I <7* 

DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN <7. S0. 

DAT E <S*?a// s'*8 


1 Number 

7 


3 

* 

S' 

6 

7 

/lold No- 








Vt- Sample Wet + Mold 

£77 36 

*079* 

£6969 

#0S.O9 

30**6 

£&»Wo 

?7?e? 

Vt- Mold 

s 09.0 7 

ys9o7 

ys^o7 

/s¥.o7 

7^07 

77*907 

/ 7-9.07 

/t* Sample Wet 

/23.£9 

/£7.8f 

730.77 

73/. o* 

730/0 

7^37.33 

/yyyy 

'olume Mold 








fet Unit Weiaht lb-/ft^ 

7*3*9 

7 £7.89 

73077 

73/os 

/S070 

73/33 

/x?0ez 

ry Unit Weight lb-/ft- 3 

/' ¥ 6 

//7 <7 

//?o 

. /I* Z- 

S/7.0 

-370 0 

/// 3 

ontainer No 

(7-90 

</-72 

t/~30 

(/ '76 

0-36 

S-30 

0-90 

ft- Sample Wet + Tare 

£o9.73 

/y* oz 

#08.09 

/ys- 9 o 

79000 

*0030 

*06 3£ 

ft* Sample Dry -f Tore 

/7S--3Z 

700. 60 

/96+i 

' 70S 70 

70/60 

yys-ti 

79*00 

ft Water 

S 9/ 

/°?£ 

7/67 

/?70 

/30O 

7*96 

77 87 

are Container 

4/ 67 

68.9/ 

779/ 

4>\>00 

60o? 

779/ 

0/69 

ft- Dry Soil 

7/9-70 

s/7/9 

7/00/ 

7/7*0 

7/3.0/ 

777-78 

770 87, 

loisture Content 

S7» 

008 

969 

7003 

7/ 0 

1. y*- 6 

7*0 . 



Method of Compaction ___ 

y/^?/eyy?/e is a*/??///*'# 


Diam- Mold 
Height Mold 
Volume Mold T 

No- of Layers_ 

Blows per Layer 
Ht* of Free Fall 
Wt- of Tamper,_ 






SST 


<?■ A 1 

0 


60 


*o /4 


Shape of Tamping Face 
Description of Sample. 







































































































































































































































































































































































































































































*43 


UNIVERSITY of ALfeERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

COMPACTION TEST 

PROJECT TW^f/s ,*s s.sr: 

SITE 

SAMPLE /is/sy/'T'css&se' (/x-svy 

LOCATION / 

HOLE 0-67 2 DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN s7. 7 s^ DATE <3*///3£ 

al Number 

7 5 

£ 

y 

* 

3 

4> 


Mold No- 








\ Wt- Sample Wet + Mold 

£’73'. 47 

*7?*e 



/333-0* 

^<3033 


; Wt- Mold 

77* o 7 

/3*07 

73*07 

/s-**7 

s*f<.oy 

73*07 


: Wt- Sample Wet 

77? /. SS 

7,33.3/ 


73077 

/<e?*7 

7734*7 


-Volume Mold 








;Wet Unit Weiaht lb-/ft^ 

/£/■ 33 

/serfs 

/£#.Vr 

73037 


77/4*4 


3 Dry Unit Weight lb-/ft- 3 

773. o 

//r. 7 

//?* 

//<?7Z 

7/4 • / 

7/7*3' 


Container No 

7^/4 

r= 3* 

7^/£ 

r-7? 

7^s?J 

7^/3 


;Wt-Sample Wet+Tare 

7 3370 

/&*?* 

/6*eo 

763 97 

744 90 

74>/*0 


; Wt- Sample Dry + Tare 


7*7. o 9 

ss*79 

734 43 

70340 

/*7S-9 


- Wt- Water 


93/ 

//<?/ 

S/TS* 

7330 

73S’/ 


-Tare Container 

S9-6S 

sf? fo 

3*474 



34.07 


-Wt- Dry Soil 

7/£>ys 

//3V9 

s/7 0 3 

7/733 

77337 

7/7 33 


^Moisture Content 


< 3.7 

9M‘ 

70-3 

SSST 

/*■*/■ 



































































































































































































































































- 

' 
















, . 








































■ 































































77 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T* of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 


PROJECT t*&/j /as <? 


SITE 


SAMPLE /W/x 'r'cs/z>4t q/j' <7/A7 7 


LO C AT 10 N cy//?JS 7/W7£/eJ 


COMPACTION 

TEST 


HOLE 

* 67 3 a*c%? 

DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN TT.i/ /t* 

DAT E <7*?/*//jT* 

al Number 

/ 

X 

3 

7 

3* 



Mold No- 








Wt- Sample Wet + Mold 

272.07 

*82.0/ 

X£7?£ 

7? £><7 98 

xsxoe 



Wt- Mold 

73*9.07 

/s¥o7 

/r/o/ 

///o7 

/j/07 



Wt- Sample Wet 

7X7 00 

/X7 99 

/JO?/ 

730. <7/ 

/X793 



Volume Mold 








Wet Unit Weiaht ib-/ft^ 

7X70 

/*7- ?? 

/JO?/ 

/JO*/ 

7X773 



Dry Unit Weight lb-/ft-^ 

//9. e 

//7-e 

//<?■? 

7/73 

7'72 



Container No 

7^-79 

r-x 3 

7^/6 

r*-/x 

7^/3 



Wt- Sample Wet + Tare 

/6X68 


/63?/ 

/*//?? 

/*??* 



Wt- Sample Dry + Tare 

y3S7/ 

yttOX 

Z?X*7 

/J-/37 

/¥?*» 



Wt- Water 

9-X7 

70.3*3 

//*7 

/X9X 

//•*¥ 



Tare Container 

38.XO 

SS/7? 

J3-6S 

S//4, 

34 0/ 



Wf- Dry Soil 

//**/ 

//*.73 

//JVE 

7/4-4* 

//J39 



Moisture Content 

£>0? 

9*7 

70 Of 

7/e? 

7/93 





Method of Compaction_ 

/+?&<!4r/C *£1 


Diam. Mold _ 
Height Mold _ 
Volume Mold _ 
No- of Layers. 


/3/3 //?. 


s?.6>/6 


7/7 




JL. 


Blows per Layer 
Ht- of Free Fall 
Wt- of Tamper_ 


7* 


/V //. 


Shape of Tamping Face O 
Description of Sample,_ 


Remarks 


& 7o /* 

Moisture Content % 





































































































































































































































































. 


■ 















































































Vs- 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 


Ea&j££i 


SITE 


sample— 


LOCATION 


HOLE DEPTH 


of? 




al Number 

/ 

_ 

3 

9 




Mold No- 








Wt- Sample Wet + Mold 

£79. <P£ 

£8307 

£34/0 


£$S'9£ 



Wt- Mold 

/rM or 

/J-V 07 

/sy .07 

/s9o7 

/SV-ey 



Wt- Sample Wet 

/£*T'&S 

/£9 0c 

VS£PB 

/So 99 

/£7'$S 



Volume Mold 








Unit Weiaht lb/ft 3 


S&9-0O 

/S£03 

/So 9? 

/£7etr 



Dry Unit Weight lb-/ft-^ 

//$£ 

//£> 6 

/So/ 

// 4 S 0 

/... 



Container No- 

/r-se 

t/-S9 

T^/¥ 

(S-?C 

7^/6 



Wt- Sample Wet + Tare 

/?/- 9° 

/$7 9o 

/6S-9o 

*?//■& 

/40' 79 



Wt- Sample Dry H- Tare 

/8£7S 

/ 77 9-0 

/S3sr 


/9797 



Wt- Water 

?./£ 

/O'ZTO 

7/8 / 

/S'SO 

73 $8 



Tare Container 

48 3o 

S-9/t 

738$ 


S38S 



Wf Dry Soil 

//$ . 98 

/'■esv 

//<?' 7/ 

//S' 38 

//JSZ 



Moisture Content 

7e3 

eee 

907 

/*'4 9 

//?£ 




Max’ Unit Wt- *&<>■& > ff- 
Opt- Moist- - ?? % 



Method of Compaction 
///7/e c/>?/?£> 


Diam. Mold 
Height Mold 
Volume Mold 
No- of Layers. 
Blows per Layer 
Ht- of Free Fall 
Wt- of Tamper 


/S/3 yr?. 


x? 8/8 




/y3 




Shape of Tomping Face 
Description of Sample, 


- Remarks 































































































































































































































■ 











































. 






. 




































4*6 


PROJECT r-^s/s // 

<r^ 

SITE 

SAMPLE /*7/*'r'cs/€ > £ r 


LOCATION /sa//p <r//?y 

HOLE S-33 / t?a <?/* 

DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN /SS/S. 

DAT E /^S/y /s'S 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

COMPACTION TEST 


al Number 

/ 

* 

s 

<7 

zT 

S 


Mold No- 








Wt-Sample Wet + Mold 

*799/ 

*9/ 99 

/9s.9o 

793.3* 

779-39 

7,973/9 


Wt- Mold 

//Vo? 

/ zr9 07 

/fVc? 

/s-V -07 

SS9*7 

Sj/<>7 


Wt- Sample Wet 

/sirs'. 7# 

//?* 9/ 

/3o/3 

/*?.*/ 

SsSST&S 

S/79.97 


Volume Mold 








Wet Unit Weiaht ib/fP 

7**79 

/*& 9 ' 

73*73 

/*9*9 

/sL /.£/ 

/c 9-S/ 


Dry Unit Weight lb-/ft- 3 

//9 0 

/'Z. £ 

//<99 

SS6 7 

//*/ 

sssz 3 


Container No 

1/-7Z 

S-/3 

/'£>/ 


S'<99 

S' <73 


Wt- Samole Wet + Tar@ 

//Sog 

79 /sro 

<e/7*o 

s// y*> 

79397 

/c/c- 9o 


Wt- Sample Dry + Tare 

S3>9. 97 

/9o.S7 


/993 a: 

/Sts'? 

79?.*/ 


Wt- Water 

9 6 / 

S0-*3 

7/9/ 

/c4>7 

/ 3-9-? 

/*?? 


Tare Container 

S>9 79 

OS/?3 

<9797 

<936 6 

7799 

9/79 


Wt Dry Soil 

y/6 06 

S/7-** 

7/733 

//S'6>t> 

/// *>o 

y/SSZ 

~i 

Moisture Content 

& zs 

9 7? Z 

soys' 

To.-.?/ 

77.03' 

1 .77-37. 



:a- 


s- 



Mox- Unit Wt-=^<3./ft’ 
Opt- Moist- = 9'/ % 


=* 


-V 














2s 


Method of Compaction_ 

//j?7&4//77e , s> s*///<r//s*/ t e' 

/ S/3 J/p- 


Height 

Volume 

Mold ^ 9/6 

7* 

Mold 000**0 7/ 1 

No- of 

Layers 


Blows 

oer Laver 


Ht- of 

Free Fall 


Wt- of 

Tamper 

sJ 


Shape of Tamping Face 
Description of Sample.. 


Rem arks 


Moisture Content % 


/S 





































































































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP'T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

COMPACTION TEST 


PROJECT rts/rs/s /as 

<7-2. 

SITE 

SAMPLE s*r/arT'*tA?4T 

sr/s/y 

LOCATION s7a/o < 00 / 7 x 0 xr/h/rr^rs 

HOLE 7 33 2 <T« C?/* 

DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN /c/ 

date 7/asjrT? 


al Number 

s 

2 

3 

0 

0 



Mold No- 








Wt- Sample Wet + Mold 


203. 70 

20 x 03 

2S3 

200.73 



Wt- Mold 

720.07 

/s'*/. 07 

/sV.o? 

/S'# *>7 

70^07 



Wt- Sample Wet 

/ 2 X 77 

'29-07 

737 x 0 

729-03 

720.03 



Volume Mold 








>Wet Unit Weiaht 1 b*/ft' 5 

'**'7 


737 x 0 

,8983 

720-00 



s Dry Unit Weight lb-/ft- 5 

s'** 

779 9.1 

s/77 

"S' 

S'* ' 



Container No 

0-72 

7-XX 

r-xs 

1/-4/ 

t/-03 



Wt- Sample Wet +Tare 

773.33 

,200.02 

7r'¥9? 

8 / 3 /z. 

'2793 



Wt- Sample Dry + Tare 

727.30 

/?7*« 

202/6 

2*297 

,7983 



Wt- Water 

9*7 

20 x 2 

//03 

'2¥X 

/34b 



Tare Container 

00 7S 

7 #.?* 

8348 

8794 

0303 



Wt- Dry Soil 


S/Sf7 

7/9/# 

7/3:0/ 

///0*0 



Moisture Content 

?8/S 

888 

99V 

70-0/ 

72.0/ 





Method of Compoction_ 


Diam. Mold _ 
Height Mold _ 
Volume Mold _ 
No- of Layers. 


7 3/3 sss. 

2 0/0 ssr 

0>.0 0 2 S 0 /*/ 3 

sr 


36*- 


Blows per Layer 
Ht- of Free Fall 

Wt- of Tamper__ 

Shape of TompinQ Face 
Description of Sample_ 


& S&3 


Remarks 








or 


rv/' ro/'Vr's 


Ssy/ 0 T~ . 7/o 

/S A/O ATO/fiT 






~7aS4T £>&SaS^& 2 sa/sT 

sa/cm/s T/s^r r»/&0&/7&/ . 


/C0c/?r><o*/ 
































































































































































































































■ 
























































































UNIVERSITY of 

ALBERTA 

PROJECT y/z/^s/s /*/ 

SITE 

DEP T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SAMPLE 

<ru/?y 

SOIL MECHANICS 

LABORATORY 

LOCATION 

COMPACTION 

TEST 

HOLE S SS £ <7o<~/< 

DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN o^c/y^ 

DATE aZvrSsZ’ 


1 Number 

/ 

3 

3 


S' 



Mold No- 








Wt-Sample Wet + Mold 

379 6^ 

3*3. S'9 

3**90' 

3*#/S 

3*0-36 



WT Mold 

/s'# *7 

/S'#*7 

/s-¥.«7 

/*-■/. 07 

/S '#07 



Wt- Sample Wet 

/3^5'S' 

/39.s~* 

yS/&£ 

/So. // 

/*4.Z9 



Volume Mold 








Wet Unit Weiaht lb-/ft^ 

SMS? 

/39*X 

/3/*S 

/30-// 

sxs*ey 



Dry Unit Weight lb-/ft- 5 

//* 7 

ss?' 

/30-3 


0/?* 



Container No 



#-73 


/-s'* 



Wt- Sample Wet + Tare 

30#/O 

3/360 

/99*/r 

3/7-00 

/77.V9 



Wt- Sample Dry + Tare 

/9SU9JZ 

30339 

y*79* 

30^*9 

y*339 



Wt- Water 

&&S 

yos/ 

//#Z 

/3z/ 

/S/O 



fare Container 


as aa 

*&<// 


7**9 



Wf- Dry Soil 

7/A*?* 

y/*S3 

//f.f-7 

/'*73 

y/ 3/0 



Moisture Content 

JZ*?. 

<07* 

J0103L. 

Sf/rr. 

//■A? 





Method of Compaction_ 


Diam. Mold_ 

Height Mold —_ 

Volume Mold_ 

No- of Layers___ 

Blows per Layer 
Ht- of Free Fall 
Wt- of Tamper_ 


SiI/2 ^ 




j.ac&z* /y 3 




A* /J* 


Shape of Tamping Face, 
Description of Sample^ 


Rem arks 


Moisture Content % 








































































































































































































































;v 

























. 


































































4*7 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

COMPACTION TEST 

PROJECT r^/rs/s //v* 

SITE 

SAMPLE -r^rvffxr cp^ 

LOCATION y'Z's+s-c? c“s:*ry 

HOLE xP-o 2 <r<* C7/? DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN xT o< yVT DATE 

1 Number 

/ 

X? 

3 

9 

S' 

6 


Mold No* 








U\- Sample Wet + Mold 

#73 f 3 


*4+79 

#33 Mo 


jesf/6 


m- Mold 

/s'*/ a 7 

7*467 

/f¥.o7 

/f*07 

7*4.67 

yf9r£>7 


tft- Sample Wet 


/#eo9 

/So 

/*7-3Z 

z#3.ee 

73//? 


Volume Mold 








Met Unit Weiaht Ib/ft 3 








)ry Unit Weight lb/ft- 3 

//s'# 

//3 0 

ssro 

S'7* 

S/S# 

y#o.o 


Container No 

7 

/?<? 

t/S<9 

£7-/9 

i/So 

js-o/o 


N t- Sample Wet + Tare 

/999# 

/rs 90 

/??7* 

#03/6 

+e/#Vo 

#00-30 


Mt- Sample Dry -l-Tare 

/efts- 

/#/97 

/<9#/9 

/9o*77 

7=03-77 

/S96t 


m- Water 

#77 

773 

//s'# 

AF39 

7# 4/ 

///f 


Tare Container 

7* of 

<7*93 

67*7 

7433 

<?OZE 

7*73 


Wt- Dry Soil 

//S4o 

//6o¥ 

//<7 67 


y/ff7 

//&.#& 


Moisture Content 

7 

S’ tr<£ 

274 

/0#3 

709/ 

99-/ 




Method of Compaction_ 

. ** . *? *?*'/*/*& _ i±35ggi^a ar 

/3'&-'JSL 


Height 

Volume 

Mnld 


/st 

Mold 


No- of 

Layers 



Blows 

per Layer 



Ht- of 

Free Fall 



Wt- of 

Tamper 

#o 

/4 

Shape of Tamping 

Face 

O 


Description of Sample 


Remarks 


Moisture 


// s3 

Content % 



























































































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of 

ALBERTA 

PROJECT 7W*rs/f ss* 


SITE 

DEP T- or CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SAMPLE 

OX A?** 

SOIL MECHANICS 

LABORATORY 

LOCATION <?a. /?y 

COMPACTION 

TEST 

HOLE £ <r<* <?/* 

DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN XT<7 AT' 

DATE XjS&Sjrx 


ial Number 

i 

/ 

X 

s 

V 

s' 

/ 


Mold No- 








□ Wt- Sample Wet t Mold 

X7/ #/ 

X///3 

X/4& 

XS3 <//> 

X/7&9 

XGS3/ 


S Wt- Mold 

7/40 7 

/jrV*¥ 

/£9o7 

74/4:07 

/S 407 

/S4oy 


\ Wt- Sample Wet 

/XX- 74 

/X7o* 

/ 3 o/jr 

7*40? 

7X7.0? 

737X4 


^Volume Mold 








5 Wet Unit Weiaht lb-/ft^ 

/XX7*4 


/7o/S 



737X4 


3 Dry Unit Weight lb/ft 3 

//<// 

///-/ 

//Vo 

777 0 ' 

SS 3 . 9^ 

7/44 


Container No 

7^/0' 


7^/6? 

r/'4 

7^/X 

•7~'~/3 


■n Wt- Sample Wet + Tare 

/S'? 33 

7f/?o 

//XX/ 

7/3-74 

7 // 0 X 

7/7X4 


: Wt* Sample Dr y + Tare 

74/7X 

/ 4?oo 

SS7./7 

/St-SA 

/4/ox 

/3~370 


= Wt* Water 


9 

7/0/ 

7*33 

/TOC 

// s4 


-Tare Container 


X9&3 

3X730 

33 & 0 


3/07 


“wt- Dry Soil 


7/7/7 

//*7? 

/'*9S 

//3-Z6 

774/9 


^Moisture Content 

73S 

&99 

4 3 R 

/ovy 

//■¥# 

9 6<S 



Max* Unit wt- ^W.*?V ft* 
Opt* Moist- g.fiZ. % 



Method of Compaction_ 

yi 4/?C 9 X//7/7 


Diam. Mold _ 

Height Mold - 

Volume Mold__ 

.No- of Layers_ 

Blows per Layer 
Ht- of Free Fall 
Wt- of Tamper 




as? 


<?-00*9X0 /*/* 


4o 


\eo /J 


Shape of Tamping Face 
Description of Sample^ 


6> 


Remarks 


? " 

Moisture Content 


7 







































































































































































































































JT/ 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

COMPACTION TEST 

PROJECT s*<s tr xr 

SITE 

SAMPLE y+7'xrr 


os' <rssry 

LOCATION fasti's XA>s*~>&es 

HOLE 

g <?Se DEPTH 


TECHNICIAN > 


DATE/-T 

*x&7$7* 

lal Number 

/ 

* 

3 

9 

I 

--- — 

Mold No* 








5Wt-Sample Wet + Mold 

*7??o 

303.99 

*ex&9 

797 

*00 03 



5 Wt- Mold 

y^c7 

7**o? 

ss'itoy 

7*9<>7 

y^o7 



: Wt- Sample Wet 

7**73 

/X?42 

73707 

7*9 3? 

A«X 



- Volume Mold 








i> Wet Unit Weiaht lb/ft 3 

s**73 


y3707 

7* 9 3*7 

7*6-77 



: Dry Unit Weight 1 b-/ft* 3 


S/.fAL 

730/ 

S'7*.. 

S'* 7 



Container No 

7^3 

7*/ 

7^/7 

7^3? 

7^7? 



^Wt-Sample Wet + Tare 

/S&co 

S63 37 

y&X0O 

s63.se 

,6-77# 



: Wt- Sample Dry + Tare 

/Vf/9 

7*3** 

7*9.37 

73709 

7X7*7 



- Wt- Water 

<373/ 

7*y* 

//*? 


7**9 



-Tare Container 


3373 

S*f37 

3^77 

3330 



:Wt- Dry Soil 

//7SO 

//?*? 

7779? 

77*3* 

77379 



^Moisture Content 

7. *3 

<0. XO 

9*0 

/063 

ss*Z 




Max* Unit Wt-=/^'/ft* 
Opt- Moist- 



Method of Compaction_ 


Diam. Mold _ 

Height Mold -- 

Volume Mold _ 

No- of Layers,_ 

Blows per Layer 
Ht- of Free Fall 
Wt- of Tamper_ 


y3/3 


3&s6 /s?- 




/Y* 


£>o 


<eo /<£ 


Shape of Tamping Face 
Description of Sample . . 


Rem arks 


o 













































































































































































































































■ 















































■ 










































3 /^ 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA* 

DEPT' of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

TRI-AXIAL COMPRESSION 

PROJECT 7/s/?s/S /*/ C7/T 

[SITE 

SAMPLE s<sr/?C'7'cs/?se' &/*' 

LOCATION 6 ?//?SS ^ <?/./?y 

HOLE S.o / <T~<?/z DEPTH 

TECHNICIANS^-DATE ..Of**'./.S'* 


:hine Data:- 

-“- 

Description of Sample: 

:hine No. ^ 


tiplication Factor 

<J. spf. *• /</ <9 % 

loading BlockPiston (gms.) ^ 

<o z>. ~ //<£? 7 **79 */ 15 


SPECIMEN 


DATA 


ecimen Number 

l 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

feral Pressure [m ) 


<0 


<0 


0 

ngth inches 


S’S’/ 


/?&/ 


£ <5V 

ea sacms. 


# 7 / 


6> 7/ 


<*7/ 

lume ccs. 







y Unit Weight Ibs/cu-ff- 


///£ 


// 7 * 


S'7 7 

• -Volume Soil Solids 







i Tare + Soil •+• Water al start 


/LL So 


/ 6 3-/9 


/<-S67 

Tore + Soil + Wat er at end 


/YS <63 


/<3S 03 


/6f.b7 

Tare + Soil 


/YY.yc 


/Y*39 


/*/-#?\ 

mber and weight of Tare 

7^ L 


7^/3 

36 0 / 

7^/sc 


• Soil 


S/6JO 


//6 36 


////3 

ifore 

BSt 

Weight of water 


/2 90 


/sS.So 


/z-7.4 

Moisture content 


// / 


//a 


/* 9 

Deqree of saturation 







It ' 1 

»er 

est 

1 - 1 

Wejght of water 


/x>.?3 


/S.6S 


/S 6 8 

Moisture content 


/09 


/o 8 


/ 0 - e 

Degree of saturation 








Dial 

Rdg 


Strain 


Area 


or 


Load 

on 

Pan 


Dial 

Rdg- 


Strain 
2 — 


Area 


<r, 


Load 

on 

Pan 


Dial 

Rdg 


Strain 
£ 


Area 


61 


93X0 




^300 


/9Q 


SCO 


s ?</0 


+CO 


£ 2 ° 


3900 


Y° 


&?oo 


Yo 


/So 


660 


60 


f>2o 


60 


ILL 


<£90 


#0 


ILL 


So 


/SO 


^£0 


/CO 


/SO 


/Oo 


&oo 


ILL 


ZL*o 




<?./</ 


/*o 


1 LLL 


ill 


£30 


073 


/£p 


2 lo 


/</° 


Z&o 


680 






/60 


330 


6 6 


933 


/6 o 


/oo 


30* 




ZLL. 


LZL. 


12 * 


2 L. 


LIZ. 

9 9s? 


ILL. 


*Ll!L 


3/c 


Z 2 L 


LfZ 


ZLL 


3/0 


77 


/fo 


&60 




9X3 


?07 O 


< 9.0 


996 


ILL 


/?o 


ojo 


sv 




ILL 


730 


6*3 


930 




^2. 


s3c<P 


6 770 


ILL 


939 


/CO 


300 


<3/0 


6 7 


939 


3 s/. tr/?Sy 


S?LL 


6 £00 


73 


9*9/ 


1 /JL 





£ 


3 


5 


-V 


: 


■N 














































































































































. 
























' 



































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 
DEPT of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

TRI-AXIAL COMPRESSION 


SITE 

SAMPLE /v7/x T'**/**r 

c*s <r/sy 

LOCATIONS < 8 a.sjs 

s/W's’/9*r8 

HOLE o,'o % cT* <?/s 

DEPTH 


P.K9AEGL 


tt/z^sas 






TECHNICIANS. 


■DATE 


chine Data:- 

chine No_ 


De-scri p t ion of Sample - J/A/rr/zjc S"3 


/<?(? 


Itiplication Factor_ 

Loading Block -+- Piston (gms) 




SS'. 7 9ST7 


0. /H. 




O’ O. 


//• 




SPECIMEN 


DATA 


jecimen Number 


3 1 e r a I Pressure (<n*r ) 


MJJL 


inches 


/P 8 / 


AS 87 


2>87 


e a 


oq. cms. 




#7/ 


S-7/ 


lu m e 


c c- s- 


6* Z 


*Z.£ 


£ZS 


y Unit Weight 


lbs/cu-f t 


//7-Q 


//<A3 


/a t y 


Volume Soil Solids 


• Tare ± Soil -j- Wafer 


t start 


Zonfy 


0 / 6 7 


SO*?/*/- 


• Tare + Soil + Water at end 


ASo'Zf 


ASc/SO 




Tare •+• Soil 


/<?e<co 


ass so 


A?**/-/ 


mber and weight of Tare 




7*°? 


ca-azs 


7**6 


c/-3S 


7*36 


Soil 


//</•// 


A/6 CO 


//6<e>S 


fore 

est 


Weight of water 


/so/ 


S3 V'O 


S33& 


Moisture content 


UJJ 






/a?: 


/78 ! 


Degree of saturation TV g 


SrA/seS //• <G 


"■7 


"7 


ter 

est 


Weight of water 


//. A’ 


as 


OC/CA /^. 


Moisture content 


cYA/^cf — a/s, a/ /'e’A-cA/7 


1 Dial 
Rdg 

Strain 

c 

Area 

or 

Load ! 

on 1 

Pan 

Dial 

Rdg- 

Strain 

Area 

01 

Load 

on 

Pan 

Dial 

Rdg- 

Strain 

Area 

67 

?JA4 

c.o /6 

8-7* 

c 

o 

//oo 

0 

8-7/ 

O 

! 0 

9700 

0 

8 7' 

0 

3370 

0 034 

3 86 

0-X3 

So 

8870 

0 . 0/9 

8 86 

0-23 

So 

9300 

c.o/9 

8-83 

G23 

7o 

0-O3o 

SfS 

0 39 

Jo 

&*/o 

0 ojz 

9.00 

0-39 

30 

8900 

0 OS 6 

8 98 1 

c-39 

79oo 

o 066 

9/7 

o 99 

9o 

79/o 

0 092 

9 AO 

o99 

90 

So 60 

0036 

90 9 

0-98 

7*760 

0 079 

9 39 

o s9 

80 

76 So 

JOS'S 

9.20 

0 88 

So 

89*0 

0096 

9/9 

0-83 

723C 

co87 

9 9/ 

c.e9 

60 

7360 

0*002 

9*9 

0-63 

60 

8/90 

0089 

9 . 2 / 

0-08 

0 78 

6330 

0 o ?9 

933 

0.79 

70 

70 So 

0 . 07 /s 

9 39 

07S 

70 

7880 

0 068 

f-32 

6S30 

o./Xo 

7-67 

~C-63 

SO 

67^0 

0 089 

9 3' 

O-SS 

80 

7800 

0 073 

998 

0-85' j 

3930 


?*? 

0 9/ 

?o 

&9& 0 

0.096 


0-9* 

9o 

7/00 

0.of3 

96/ 

0 97 J 

&7/A 4 

7 

+/ J/ 


/oo 

Sir//, , 

r 0 > A 

v/ 


/oo 

/=&//. St 

> A/9 

3 Z/A 

7^/2 

11 - 













-— 

.1 

































“- 

Pyl 















\ 


f 


1—-" 




\ 







) 



j 








— “I 

v 









l l 

. 

















[ 









\ 









j _ | 

- — < 






V 









1 

j—— 








— 1 

' 







; 

1 















_ 





























r 












1 


. : 












1 


- i 










i 

L. 























































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

PROJECT TZheSsS /*/ <7^. 

SITE 

DEPT of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SAMPLE 2/r/ss 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

LOCATION j£///r/e^s Z . 

TRI-AXIAL COMPRESSION 

HOLE *>■« 2 <?«. &!e DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN jgr.- <S .7/.. DATE .jStte&J/* 

:hine Data:- 

Description of Sample: 

hine No. ^ 

7?x V Z?A/A/s/y^y //S */ ^/Z*/ 3 

-iplication Factor ^ 

o s+7 ~ /o s Z 

finding Block -+• Piston (gms.) o 

<?■ &- - //s 7 ^/z/ 3 


-1- 


SPECIMEN 


DATA 


ecimen Number 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

teral Pressure (<W ) 


o> 


& 



nqth inches 


2-S' 


£ £>' 



ea sq.cms. 


<& 7/ 


s?7' 



lume ccs. 







y Unit Weight Ibs/cu ff- 


//&7Z 


//&■ 4 



\ • Volume Soil Solids 







• Tare + Soil ■+■ Water at start 


/<£>0 o7 



1 


Tare + Soil* Water at end 


S^f-77 


/&S.C& 



Tare + Soil 


M/.o'S 


/0’S. so 



Imber and weight of Tare 


£76o 


32. or 



• Soil 


/s7-ye 


//77? 


1 

fore 

est 

Weight of wafer 


7^49 


/*&# 



Moisture content 


/0‘ £> 


/0-6 



Degree of saturation 







: t e r 

est 

Weight of water 


/*?/? 


Z£79 



Moisture content 




/o<Z 



Degree of saturation 








Dial 

Rdg 


2/29. 


Strain 

g— 


Area 


Load 

on 

Pan 


Dial 

Rdg 


t?7* 


Strain 

i- 


Area 


cn 


Load 

on 

Pan 


Dial 

Rdg- 


Strain 


Area 


<JT 








22- 


240 


70& 


e&7* 


6*> 


tr&o 


IZ2 


So 




66 o 


/oo 


£So 


?7Q 


/So 


/yo 


Z2o 






JSO 


A>& 


&94o 


/c VO 


/So 


S'o 


/oo 




660 


2 ft?. 


jeso 


4?q 


222 . 


23o 


Sjeoo 


6 3 


9-30 


/'X* 


7630 


2 4> 


9*9 


AiSL 




3*//z ~/?/Z'a 


























































































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 
DEPT of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

TRI-AXIAL COMPRESSION 


PROJECT /sss c*. uT. 


SHE. 


■SAM P LE_ /*/ 

LOCATION^ 

HOLE *Lj£ZjLx3Lt& DEPTH 


TECHNICIAN DATE 


ichine Dotos- 

ichine No-_ 


Description of Sample 




Implication Factor_ 

Loading Block 4-Piston fgms.) ?*• 6* 


SPECIMEN 


aecimen Number 


DATA 


aterol Pressure {$?* ) 


?nqth 


inches 






776' 


rea 


sq- cms. 


iZfl 


&ZL. 




blume 


c c- s. 


y Unit Weight 


Ibs/cuft- 


776. / 


776S 


7/6S 


Volume Soil Solids 


,t- Tare + Soil + Water at start 


7.4 


/66/Q 


/43.6c 


I- Tore + Soil + Water at end 


/03 3S 


/.4.zm 




N Tore + Soil 


/s/.ss 


7**75 


ts/ss 


imber and weight of Tare 


Zj:.Z£. 


S3.ee 


77:^1. 


sece 


S3.es 


Soil 




Z'7.4.?'. 


/SZ4Z 


if ore 
est 


Weight of water 




Z£12 




Moisture content 




so. S' 


f 


Degree of saturation 


fter 

est 


Weight of water 




ZSJLZL 


j*££L 


Moisture content 






^tu3- 


Degree of saturation 


3 

Dial < 
Rdg ' 

Strain 

Area 

or 

Load 

on 

Pan 

Dial 

Rdg- 

Strain 

r 

Area 

CT« 

Load 

on 

Pan 

Dial 

Rdg- 

Strain 

/ 

; Area 

: si 


,5 *9*0 




o 

<?** c 




o 

9**o 



I 


ysso 




Sc 

<7 3So 




Sc 

96 So 





97*o 

) ns* 

7jC t 


*o 

9/70 




t<* 

9*00 




,L 

97*o . 

sr 



to 

0996 




6c 

9360 





9S*0 




So 

667C 




So 

9SSC 





97*49 

#7 

*.?* 

. *70 

/co 

0 730 




7co 

9/oo 

S-6 

69* 

5- 70 


yoSo 

3/ 

y<*> 

.679 

/Sc 

6600 

SS 

900 

.470 

/So 

69/c 

S3 

?o/ 

•677 


£>e6o 

37 

96* 

.7*7 

7*o 

6*So 

77 

90* 

■70? 

7*c 

67/o 

*o 

9ce 

•762 




r/» 


/So 

0X9* 


9// 

.039 

7*0 

S//S 

555 

<P 


_ 

7 ’**“ 





760 

*A/A 

'/TAT/ 








r 

















-% 




f^^ssss^ssa 

■%. 








. I 







1 




l 




_ 


7 





A 




/ 




_ 

J 






n 




/ 




_ 

/ 





1 / 





L 




_ 

/ 





l / 





l 





VL 

_ 




1 / 





J 



1 

■ 














E 

. 












- . . 










i 





































_ 















n 















LJ 

L 


r . M 



, , 


. 

JL . 



. 



L_J 
























































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 
DEPT of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

TRI-AXIAL COMPRESSION 


SITE 

SAMPLE OS' 

LOCATION 


HOLE 7 33? 

.<lg<2£..DEPTB 


IfJLHKLCJAN ^3 */ /s. DML/7S3/S/ 


;hine Dota:- 


Descri p tion of Sam ple • 


hine No-. 


Mplication Factor 








oading Block -s- Piston (gms)SL2 jf£. 




SPECIMEN 


DATA 


ecimen Number 


teral Pressure iett ) 


hqt h 


inches 




9 3 / 


e a 


sg. cms. 


j£.22 L 


&72L 


3 7/ 


lum e 


C c. s 


y Unit Weight 


Ibs/cu-f t 


s/3 7 


7<2:9. 




Volume Soil Solids 


Tare + Soil + Water at start 








Tare+ Soil+Wa ter at end 








Tore + Soil 




/S'Sza 




mber and weight of Tare 


3-7/ 


7S£6 


6/xe 


S>SSo 


Soil 


3793 


78/. o 9 




fore 

est 


Weight of water 


//6Z 


m 


'<26. 


Moisture content 




936 


/0'S*' 


Degree of saturation 


fter 

“est 


WeJght of water 


//*ro 


//#<? 


//so 


Moisture content 


Z.Z& 




/O' 0/ 


Degree of saturation 



Dial 

Rdg 

Strain 

\ 

Area 

or 

Load 

on 

Pan 

Dial 

Rdg- 

Strain 

/ 

Area 

<r« 

Load 

on 

Pan 

Dial 

Rdg- 

Strain 

Area 

61 


9J3C 




0 

9370 




o 

9 Xfo 




» 

973o 




So 

93X0 




Xo 

9/90 




> 

?7SO 




<to 

9X30 





7060 





f'¥e 




6 ° 

9/6o 




So 

8 ? 6 o 





j?o7« 




So 

90 So 




30 

33So 




9 

f?7<> 




/ 0 O 

39Yo 




/OO 

37X0 




> 

39/0 




//o 

SSSO 




/SO 

3630 

X3S 

SfX 

0-63 

P 

3 SSo 

/9 


o63 

/Xo 

33oo 

XOX 

3*9 

0 - 6 ? 

s/c 

3S/0 

xS 6 

8-f<4 

0'63 

9 

379o 

X/ 

3-90 

O' 79 

/SO 

37X0 

X3/ 

3 9X 

0 '?Y 

/So . 

3Y9o 

888 

S ?6 

o-7¥\ 

0 

8730 

X3 

8.9Z 

oSo 

/Yo 

S63o 

X68 

3'9S 

<?7f 

/9o 

83?<> 

3-38 

9^S 

0'79\ 

9 

36Xo 

£7 

876 

MS’ 

/So 

SS/o 

3-o& 

Sf? 

oSS 

/So 


S/SjO 



o 

s# 

€TS?A?a 

rc> 


/** 

SAt 

Xfr/e* 

?& 








































r 

/ 

L 

















/ 







/ 












T 







/ 






\ 


J 



j 

* 







/ 






\ 


4 



f 


























/ 



















f 









j 


























7d/S 

f £*S* 

9S 

0A8f/ 

srg4 















\ 











<7S 

77/xr 


* /f 

s<m 



















































































































































^7 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEPT of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

TR1-AXIAL COMPRESSION 

PROJECT £~.*r 

SITE 

SAMPLE -r'<*/exz r ' s/y 

LOCATION ^ <S//P3S ******* 

HOLE *■*> f <fV<^0EPTH 

TECHNICIAN ^T c/. *r. DATE ****■/& 

ochine Data:- 



Description of Sample: 

achine No 
i jltiplicati 
if. Loading 



on Factor /TP 


Block ->* Piston (gms.) 99/ 





SPECIMEN DATA 

Ipecimen Number 

l 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

.ateral Pressure (r## ) 


o 


o 



.ength inches 







uea sq.cnns. 


*7/ 


8 7/ 



'olume ccs- 







)ry Unit Weight Ibs/cuft- 


//8Z 


//S>3 



\s z -Volume Soil Solids 






i 

1 Vt- Tare + Soil -t- Water at start 


s38-36 


ysx X/ 



Vt- Tare + Soil + Water at end 


y3836 


/6/?s 


I 

Vt. Tore + Soil 


/P7/o 


/SYo? 



lumber and weight of Tare 

7^ S 

zrs* 

7^/6 

88 6 S 


j 

Vt- Soil 


//7 8o 


7/799 


i 

... i 

iefore 

Test 

Weight of water 


//s6 


///* 


i 

Moisture content 


9Vr 


?■¥£ 



Degree of saturation 







After 

Test 

Weight of water 


/or 6 


/P86 



Moisture content 


f-3Z 


<7*7 



Degree of saturation 








ad 

fn 

an 

Dial 

Rdg 

Strain 

x 

Area 

av 

Load 

on 

Pan 

Dial 

Rdg- 

Strain 

Area 

<r. 

Load 

on 

Pan 

Dial 

Rdg- 

Strain 

Area 

61 

o 

yo¥o 




8 

97SO 









>o 

OXO 




So 

67o 









70 

e?7° 




/o 

6 /o 









6* 

?/o 




60 

S9o 









90 

8¥c 




SO 

76o 









OO 

76o 




AOO 

36o 









Y0 

7/0 




/So 

3/o 








♦ 

So 

66 c 




Sy ?0 

ZSo 

/7 

8 66 

0 69 






?o 

6 oo 

/6 

#86 

o. 73 

/3o 

/CO 

/s 

#87 

0.79 






’/o 

SXc 

/S 

#87 

0 8 o 

s/o 

<?YO © 

xx 

8 9/ 

6-80 






'30 

S39o 

Z 3 

6 9* 

OSS 

/So 

3*94 

7?y&>X 

£> 







So 

SYS* 

r/tpy&A 












































































/ 












7 






/ 












/ 







/ 












Z 1 







/ . 









\ 










t - 









| 
















i 















j 















_J 















J 






























i 1 


































































































































































- 58 


DATA FOR GROUND GLASS 


The following five pages contain data obtained in the 
laboratory for the ground glass used in this research program. 












S9 


. 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 


PROJECT rwssss /a/ 

<7.0. 

“1 


SITE 

t?S 0 >CSs*S£> <9x./?ss- 


DEP’T* of 

CIVIL 

ENGINEERING 


SAMPLE 

ss 

>00 

SOIL MECHANICS 

LABORATORY 


LOCATION Xs=/si 0T0s*fo a/ xcm/ 

HYDROMETER 

TEST 


HOLE 



DEPTH 


technician 

</.//. 

DATE 0J60/3s\ 

— 

Temp- 

Time 

Elapsed 

Time 

Rh 

• Rh 
-Rh+ c m 

D 

m.m. 

R h +m f c d 

W 3o 

W % 
Basis Orig 
Sample 

"1 

Remarks 

r 


/ 3 :oo 

a 

- 







fxe 



/7 

076 

0/6 

0 / 0 / 

07*9 

96*/ 






30* 

*3.6 

0 /.o 

• o&o 

06*3 

9/0 






/"* 

00*9 

S3 3 

.0 30 

03/ 

6/6 






x 

/&¥ 

/ 0*0 

.o9¥ 

SfS 

66*0 







/i7s 

/ 0 .S 

.OS 8 

/SS 

33*6 



1! 

S3 *9 


s 

/00 

SS'.* 

£ 

.os/ 

ssf 





j?3■? 


/6 

cp Z 9 

/ ' 3 

97 

o/y 

96 

33*6 



j 1 



So 

* 6 / 

3/7. 

. O/x? 

6 0 

S3 S’ 






77 

* ¥* A 

¥¥ 

0079 


76 6 




03*0 


7/ 

° 0 . S 

S3: . 

oojj 

s-¥ 

//7 






/So 

* 3/ 

' 3*/ 

.oc£/ 

36 

/J7 




03*9 


/So 

# S? 

S3 

, .oo// 

SS 








V ... , f 

Jr. *r 

_ *7 

o&/3 

3/ 

/*>■? 




J3<£7 


S 

* 0 * 

7f6 

.<90 JC 

. S3 

6 -c 







* /.y 

0*0 

OOS9, 

0*6 

0*3 

# 






e s e 

/* 

, o 0/9 

SO 

S-S 






/?%? 

* /o 

S3 

. 00*0 

/7 





0 * 6.0 


/?%? 

• 

0*6 

. 00 /J 

0*6 

6 / 














rnmfltflr and 

S-FS9 


Graduate No- 



Or" 

too Ss 
Wc Sc — 

rru- cTVr 

j 

fRw+ rr 

If- Cd) 






X 11 . 









iiscus correction = c 

m — 


and 

- 

r 

espectively 


Dersina aaent used 


60 7 90S? 



Amount 0 & <?*<?* 


rection for 

" 1 - 1 —r"-— 

change in density of liquid due 
ca = aNid 

to addition of dispersing agent 
respectively 

= c d 

icific Gravity of Solids = 

G s 

^p. 



















>cription of 

Sample 




Method of Preoaration 





ir& op / 0 /fr? . 






Remarks--- 























Initial Moisture 

Content 



Dry Weight of 

Sample 


nfninav Klr> 

Container 

No- 




• Sample Wet + Tare 

Q/imnU •+■ Tni’o 




Wt. Samole fWet/DrVi + Tare - 




Tare 





• v-/ VJ 1 U p I t w 

. Wnfpr 





Wt- Cwet/Dry) Soil 

re 

Container 




Dry Weight from 

Initial 



of 

D r v Soil 



Moisture^ 

too x Wt-Wet Soil _ 

S03 

tial 

Moisture uT C7q 

6 >* 6 > 


ioo+ Ini t- Moist % 








































































































































. 





























































































<go 



Note; M IT Grain Size Scale 







































































































































































































































































/ 


UNIVERSITY of 

DEPT of CIVIL 
SOIL MECHANICS 


ALBERTA 

ENGINEERING 

LABORATORY 


PROJECT 


s*y cT.^. 

SITE_ _ i 

SAMPLE 

<$/?0CSA/O 


LOCATION 

HOLE 


DEPTH 


mple No. 

/ 


isk No. 

3 


thod of Air Removal 



♦w+s 

677/3 


nperature T 

733.6 * 


>w 

6 try# 3 


pporating Dish No. 



Sample Dry + Diih 



-e Dish 




•ye.s'S 



7?. Z?/3 


Wb*w«-$ * Weight of flask + water + sample at T°. 

Wb + w = Weight of flask + water at T° (flask calibration curve). 

W s = Weight of dry soil w 

G s 5 Specific gravity of soil P ar,,cl « s : w s ^-W b , w -W b+w+s 


. termination of W s from wet soil sample: 


mple No. 



Sample No. 



itainer No. 



Container No. 



1 Sample Wet + Tare 



Wt.Test Sample Wet + Tore 



Sample Dry +Tare 



Tare Container 



Water 



Wt.Test Sample Wet 



e Container 



W s 



of Dry Soil 






listure Content 'W % 







f scription of Sample 


marks: 
































































































































Note-. MIT Grain Size Scale 























































































































































































































































































S3 


UNIVERSITY of 

ALBERTA 

PROJECT 

s*S <? S 

SITE 

DEP T* or CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SAMPLE 

<?Z S/o<aa/0 

SOIL MECHANICS 

LABORATORY 

LOCATION 3 < 7 zs?ss 3 z*zsa&\ es 

COMPACTION 

TEST 

HOLE 0 a 7 CZrC/a 

DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN AS <Z. AS. 

DAT E A 


il Number 

A 

& 

3 

9 

s 



Mold No- 








Wt- Sample Wet + Mold 

/ 3 S 9.99 

3463 ? 

3*637 

<266 0? 

*'Z 7 Z 7 

/ 67 ss~ 

7767 /° 

Wt- Mold 

/sVo7 

/s/o 7 

ss-Soy 

ys'Say 

zs/07 

/Si*07 

/S/07 

Wt- Sample Wet 

ZoS.?Z 

// 7 ? 3 Z 

S /3 So 


//S^o 

//?** 

Z/ 3 -os 

Volume Mold 








Wet Unit Weiaht lb-/ft 3 

/oS 9*3 


Z/T’So 


7/3 Zo 

7/393 

//3oS 

Dry Unit Weight lb-/ft-^ 


S 

<96 6 

9 * 

. 97,9.. 

<966 

96.0 

Container No 

7^3 

s/s 



7^7 

7^*3 

7^/9 

Wt- Sample Wet + Tare 

Z 3 & 0 /Z 

/stse 

Z /4 6/ 

/ 79/79 

Z 99/3 

/So /? 

/67 ce 

Wt- Sample Dry + Tare 


/SoSS 

330.39 

33379 

Z 330 Z 

933. So 

y/ 73 o 

Wt- Water 

/ 3 .ro 

/6 00 

/S~-0£ 

/S7c 

/6// 

/6 6? 

/r*s 

Tare Container 

3 79-0 9 

31*46 

**77 

3 &/?o 

3697 

33/39 

33.60 

Wf Dry Soil 

9*. S 3 

rsez 

960 / 

9 Sf? 

9403 

9 * 4 / 

/o?.oo 

Moisture Content 

/S</ 

/6 7 / 

/ZVf 

/6*£ 

7679 

/ 7 S/ 

,/UL. 




n 


it 


Max- Unit Wt^S/L^'/ft- 
Opt- Moist- = % 


15 




L 


/</ 

Moist 


*4 s& 

u r e Content % 


Method of Compaction 


Z/*rA7t./A?Ar& 

sp0a9O°AAAa/a*' 


Din m. Mold 

Z 3/3 ASd - 

Height M n 1 <t 

/> &/6 A A 

Volume Mold 

O.OO&XO fY 3 

No- of Layers 

s 

Blows per Layer 

733* 

Ht- of Free Fal 1 

Wt- of Tamper 

770 77 

Shape of Tamping 
Description of Sa 

Face & 

m pie 


SoTto/>/?<? Soaz 

<7</syss 

su//rS S9/3 


ZS S/Pot/s/4? 

SAjSSS 

/?*//? &/S3o 


c/SsA/4 zT/s 

//A77e>t/A&ei 

/zZ/rzA/sA/S. a*ss/>S Sr 

SSAA/S/C 

Zr 

Rpmnrks y 

///A? A- <SA9 S/S 

- ySo/e 

tZsas a£S//3paS _ 774/*— 

nS/Z/ASZ 0S 

7763 S3 

&/AA* 7?s300a/SsA*/ t/*SZ? • 

jjT/'. iS'm 7/ - 

A/.e. 

x.-z>A?rzr A/os 

fr/OcsA/Z 


A. <o 




















































































































































































































































































i 











































































































64 - 


DATA FOR ATTERBERG LIMITS 


The following fifty-three pages contain that data obtained 
in the laboratory for several soil samples used in this research 


program. 


















. 

* 



































































- 65 - 


NOTE RE DATA FOR ATTEii ERG LIMITS 


In order to obtain as large an assortment of data as possible, 
the series of Atterberg Limit tests were ran on commercial samples 
entering the University soils lab* 

• y. ••• 

Three sets of limits were required on this material; the first with 
no calcium chloride added, toe second with 1/2 percent calcium chloride 
added and the third with 1 percent calcium chloride added. In order to 
save time and effort, the values obtained by the University of Atterberg 
Limits (zero percent calcium chloride; were used* This meant that only 
two more limits on this material were then required. This was an import¬ 
ant factor where only enough soil was left to run at the most two sets 
of limits. 

The following table lists those limit results obtained from tests 
run by the commercial soils laboratory of the University of Alberta. 


•^Sample 

Number 

W 1 

Wp 

Ip 

If 

1 

34.5 

20.7 

13.9 

8.4 

2 

37.7 

18.0 

19.7 

8.8 

5 

50.2 

25.4 

24.8 

11.4 

4 

69.9 

2 Q .3 

41.6 

16.9 • 

5 

60.2 

26.5 

33.7 

14.5 

6 

61.0 

33.5 

27.5 

10.8 

7 

69.7 

26.1 

43.6 

9.6 

8 

54.5 

32.0 

22.5 

8.4 

9 

81.6 

32.3 

49.3 

16.9 

10 

64.1 

30.3 

53.8 

21.7 

12 

23.0 

18.3 

4.2 

10.0 

13 

41.8 

20.9 

20.9 

13.6 

14 

52.4 

22.4 

30.0 

9.6 

15 

28.9 

16.7 

12.2 

11.7 

16 

35.4 

31.2 

54.2 

22.3 

17 

25.4 

16.2 

9.2 

7.9 

18 

53.5 

24.1 

29.4 

13.3 

19 

34.2 

18.3 

15.9 

11.4 

20 

43.3 

22.9 

20.4 

11.3 

21 

30.9 

15.7 

15.2 

7.8 

22 

31.6 

17.4 

14.2 

6.9 


These samples contained zero percent calcium chloride, 
#See page of thesis for key to sample numbers. 





































1 






















L 




PROJECT 

rr+sj!* *-ss <? 

SITE t " 

SAMPLE 


LOCATION 

sy.c. 

JdLQLE 

'/& 2 cTa<r6 DEPTH o ' 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


TECHNICIAN 


DATE 


Liquid Limit 
































































































































































































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 

PROJECT 7W<es/s //V 

S i T E /?/,€>/*<9se 7" 

SAMPLE 6+oo 

LOCATION 

HOLE /^ <Ta <?/e DEPTHS'-'/' 

TECHNICIAN DATE +0^0 

Liquid Limit 

al No- 

( 


3 

V 

‘5 

<£> 

. of Blows 

VO 

3? 

39 

5 


C4» • £7 

ntainer No- 

V- SI 

1 / - 3 X 

l7-3e> 

1/-3/ 

1/- 

\/- 51 

■ Sample V/et t Tare 

9/-ST7 

72 • 

?/ • Sfl 

• 5<* 

93 X/ 

?/•CO 

Sample Dry TTare 

H701 .. 

7 7 • VO 

S5-y5 

?y • Y/ 

Y 7 • 57 

/y* Y* 

• Water 

V- 55 

V • 2.u* 

• £75 

5 • 75 

S ’ <+/\ 

• / -A 

're Contoiner 

75 • ft 

<<> 5 - V 5 

‘09 

77 X9 

77 • 56 

v/ 

• of Dry Soil 

is . /V 

/ 2 - 5 ? 

t 7 - 3 fe> 

7 j • 5>* 

7 5 * -A 0 

/ y • c / 

fist ure Content Ttf% 

3V. 6* 

3 y • V 

3 7 • S 7 

Va • 5 

y* • y 

V3 • 5 


Average Values 



Plastic Limit 


■IrJg.I.-NQr. 


Container No- 


Wt- Sample Wet-t-Tore 


Wt- Sample Dry-i-Tare 


Wt- Water 


Tare Container 


Wt- of Pry Soil 


Moisture Content % X / ■ 2s 2*0* 5 






55 • 5A. 


55 07 


0- Vf 


SZ7X 




:bo 




jr<w5 


<?.y* 


5W9 


£ -5/ 


» X A o 


56 • 6 A 


56 <9? 


7>-5? 


55-5A 


X-5&? 


2./ •/ 


Shrinkage Limit 


Trial No 


Container No 


W1 Sample Wet+Tore 


Wt- Sample Dry +Tare 


.WtWateL 


Tare Container 


Wt- of Pry Soil _Wc 


JMoisture Content 

‘WoI - Container V 


Vol- Dry Soil PotVo 


Shrinkage Vol- V-Vo 


Shrinkage Limit h4/ t 


M = ^ GwT" * ,0 °) 


Description of Sample 


Remarks: / % C^CI^ 


7 8 9 10 15 

Number 


20 25 30 

of Blows 









































































































































































































































































































































































































— 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERSERG LIMITS 


PROJECT 

<r. ^ 

SITE 

SAM PLE f'r'**? 6^ & o 

LOCATION /=*/&/*/cr/£- 

{fAF'o/v&jsr &cr. 

HOLE '/* f cTaC/* 

DEPTH /-X? ' 

TECHNICIAN 

DATE 
























































































































































































































































































































































































































69 


PROJECT '7^4rs/’s 

SITE 

SAMPLE 

6 i^&O 

LOCATION 

c5 xT • L • 

HOLE_ Zl 6Zc6r DEPTH /- X* 

TECHNICIANS*^. 

>r DATE +6T#/>z: 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 
DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOU. MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERSERG LIMITS 









































































































































































































































































































































































































































































- 




UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEPT- of CIVIL ENGfNEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


PROJECT 




SITE ^ 


SAMPLE > 

/rV <c5 -^00 

LOCATION 

s&<~- 

HOLE 

r % &*£*/*. DEPTH 34"+ 8“ 


TECHNICIAN s? sS DATE c/*t*//SjZ 


Liquid Limit 






























































































































































































































































































































































•r/ 


UNIVERSITY o 

DEP’T- of CiVlL 

SOIL MECHANICS 

ATTERBERG 


ALBERTA 

ENGINEERING 

LABORATORY 

LIMITS 


PROJECT 


SITE ■r' 

SAMPLE 

LOCATION 


HOLE / & X <T<* DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN ^ 

< DATE/C$x^c» 
































































































































































































































































































































































































































7 * 


PROJECT rZ'&s* 


SITE x" 

SAM PL E 'frzr. /<sPt'<?o 

LOCATION 


HOLE 0.3T £ Slzry'z 

DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN 

DATE '^T&y/s’/S’ 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


Liquid Limit 


iai No- 


jU 


). of Bio^s 
>ntainer No- 


9S 




Vs" 


//■S' 


/ o■ if 


// O 


l/^ 


V 3 


V* 


V S' 




\/ 7 


t- Sample Wet t Tare 


9V • <?V 


99-09 


99 79 


/OO •97 


9X 90 


*7 77 


Sam pie Dry -Har e 


??• 90 


91 9t~ 


% 5 oo 


9V-57 




75 • 97 


t- Water 


S'- /V 


S' 


¥ • 99 


(d ■ 9/L 


5 9b' 


5- II 


are Container 


7/ ■ 77 


9S V? 


79 Oh 


97- tO 


90 


\°i 


t- of Dry Soil 


7 * IjL 


7■ 53 


(*■ 97 


7 97 


6- 95 


6-4,7 



78 9 10 15 

Number 


20 25 30 40 

of Blows 





















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































73 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 
DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTER8ERG LIMITS 


PROJECT Tfrjej/3 /*/ 

SITE s&s/e 

SAMPLE /*^ J7-77. 

/<? 

LOCATION 

<5^ & <r 

HOLE S-o % 

DEPTH*'-*?' 

TECHNICIAN 

DATE ^^TJ/s'yC 


Liquid Limit 


i a 1 No- 

/ 

Z 

S 

V 

S' 


>. of Blows 

¥9 

ZX 

ZJ 

1/ 

II- S' 

JO 

intainer No- 

4-9 

4 -// 

4- IX 

n -/*/ 

P) - (S 

o -xo 

!• Sample V/et + Tore 

77 • 07 

70-00 

%+-9c 

?0 ■ 6'6 

£7 Si 

V7 • 7/ 

I- Sample Dry +l'are 

72, *70 

% 5-SO 

fo-na 

/3 • 7? 

75a/ 

*G • 70 

f- Wafer 

V • 07 

0 - so 

V 9* 

7 

It, /O 

U • // 

ire Container 

OS- ?3 

?¥ * fcr 

71 -*3L* 

1? 

(o? - *0 

7X‘ & 7 

t- of Dry Soil 

L -V7 

? ■ ss 

t, S? 

7 • 50 

7' XI 

f 1 3 

pisture CorAntTi/% 

7Z • X 

7 c * o 

7¥ - y 

9S • ¥ 

S V • 6 

?V / 























































































































































































































































































































































































































































TV 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOU. MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 

PROJECT xv*/ <r 

SITE y" 

SAMPLE 

LOCATION & <?. 

HOLE '/£ £ Sbcr/e DEPTH J ' 

TECHNICIAN yy/.sr.As. DATE <S~*s/>~z 

Liquid Limit 

i a 1 No- 

1 

X, 

3) 

•~h 



i. of Blows 

37 

39 

3 9 

*9 

9 • tr 

/O 

ntainer No. 

a-K 

ft - 5 

/9- 4 

a- 7 

n-/o 

/?- // 

;• Sample Wet +Tare 

■ bC 


*9 • 

VC M* 

? 3 • 5X* 

9<9- xC 

• Sample Dry + Tare 

/ (* 4 7.X. 

77 • 


74 

79 * 40 

V$ -79 

• Water 

5 • 0? 

5*. 93 

7/5 

5 ‘ 44 

& • / 7- 

CO • 9i£» 

ire Container 

• Ob 

U> V- /O tey 

7i ■ Pi 

-/• yr 

i?9 • <3? 

7V • 9i" 

: of Dry Soil 

V ' lb 

9 • (*)& 

// • 59 

7 * 3u» 

9- 33 

S’ • V9 

)isture Content 10 % 

</ • 3 

U>/ • 3" 

u>7 S 

7 5 9 

7.3 *9 

7x 7 

























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBER6 LIMITS 


PROJECT 






SITE 




S.AMP.LI. 


^7^ 


<7 0 


LOCATION ^^sA/fscr & <r. 


HOLE & DEPTH <=>-^» 


TECHNICIAN 


DAT E 


Liquid Limit 



V3 


9-f 


<7-r 


/o 


A ZX 


V/ 79 


1/6-7 


1/37 




9b -?S 


79 •'57 


??■ 90 


71-76 


9/ • OS 


7/ 30 


21lJ2£ 


/O 


S-9sO 


S 07 


7 


Jsl 


9S 


UL:IL 


(o7- 37 


7/ • 5 9 


?/ 


7-W 


*• ?S 


/0-6S 


(o7 


73 0 


73- O 


73-3 


Plastic Limit 


Irjq-L-NJL 


Container No- 


Wt- Sample Wet+Tore 


Wt- Sample DryiTare 


Wt- Water 


Tore Container 


Wt- of Pry Soil 


3 f. 


S7- 13 


5 (a *? 


j2Ja£ 


S4-S9 


/ * 79 


Moisture Content %| 3V-V 35-7 5/*£ 


3. X 


S'S'-7/ 


SS-/C* 


O (*! 


(S3 3S 


lllL 


e V 


S% V7 


SS-7/ 


O • 7U 


S3 XI 


X.- W 


Shrinkage Limit 


Trial No- 


Container No 


Wt- Sample Wet-f Tare 


Wt- Sample Dry +Tare 


Wt-Water 


Tare Container 


Wft of Pry Soil Wo 


Moisture Content *xr 9 J c 


Vol • Container 


VoL Dry Soil Pot Vo 


Shrinkage Vol- V-Vo 


^Shrinkage Limit 


M=^ Gwr 2 - x ,0 °) 


Description of Sample: 


Remarks: -^9* Ca>Cf K 





















































































































































































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 
DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


PROJECT 

J /✓V' c- • 

SITE 


SAMPLE 


LOCATION 

& < ■ 

HOLE /I cT/j’ DEPTH 



























































































































































































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 
DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


PROJECT /as 


SITE /zrss? 

SAMPLE 


LOCATION 

£T <r. 

hole; 

'/x-?C2<r4 DEPTH /-<?' 


















































































































































































































































































































































































































- 


79 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTER8ERG LIMITS 


PROJECT tWjG'JSS 

s*r <r 

SITE 

SAMPLE . 

*-o o 

LOCATION -5V. 

hole /£ <r«<r4 oepth r-r' 

TECHNICIAN 

. 


Liquid Limit 


iai NO' 


. of Blows 


7CL 


v / 


V 0 




9-* 




ntainer No. 


S iO 


4-5 


Sample Wet tTare 


l /-Al 


l/- 


i/-bS- 


[/-&9 


/ O\o • 


9 / • 54 


#9- ?i 


tEV 


Sample Dry TTore 


/£>:?. ; 




• 1 




//9u, * /y 


* z. • 7& 


fr5 9 a. 


97’ 75 


Wafer 


J2 l 


5*0 




2 JLL 


o'y 


y- v/ 


ire Container 


90 • ax 




7x • r t 


9<i 


7/ (9 




of Dry Soil 


y * 7 <2 


y • gy 




. 79 


//•/<* 


jisture Content vS/o 


(oS- 7 


* 9 - 7 


«» J ‘ u? 




/t> 



Plastic Limit 


Trial.No- 


Container No- 


Wt- Sample Wet+Tore 


Wt- Sample DryTTare 


Wt- Water 


Tare Container 


Wt--of Dry Soil 


Moisture Content %| 5X 5 5J-& 


4:C. 


5U Al 


SV-37 


fl- fey 


„§3:.£2. 






55 9X 


59 7/ 


O. 7/ 


• y<* 


7-<L<T 




59’ I 3 


5 " 7-50 


AJQ 




A 59 


3X/ 


Shrinkage Limit 


Trial No- 


Container No 




Wt Sample Dry + Tare 


wiMsfeL 

JTflra P. n 


Tare Container 


Wt-of Pry Soil Wc 


Moisture Content -ur7 c 


Vol- Container 


Vol- Dry Soil Pat Vo 


Shrinkage Vol- V-Vo 


Shrinkage Limit 


IS. = ^ 


CwT" * l0 °) 


Description of Sample: 


Remarks: 


/ % 


7 8 9 10 15 

Number 


20 25 30 40 

of Blows 



























































































































































































































































































































































































PROJECT risse-s-s* 

//</ 

SITE 

f 0-0 TV 

SAMPLE </*'-'** 

LOCATION 

&<r. 

HOLE ^ da*?/* DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN 

DATE 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 
DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


Liquid Limit 


i◦ I No 


3 . of Blov^s 


2JL 






/ (r> 


/ (o 


/ 7 


pntai nsr No- 
t- Sample Wet + Tore 


l J HJU 


1/37 


U -5u» 


V/ 5 7 - 


17 3/ 


1/V 3 


va- V3 




7 3 • 5>y 


7?-?y 


77- 9>l. 


• vy 


t- Sample Dr y f Tare _ 


77 


7 ?. vr 




73 • 6y 


V*.- 5^7 


VV • 63 


t- Water 


V • Vi" 


v. 76 


5-- V3 


5*- JU 3 


S'- V7> 


5-- V/ 


are Container 
t- of Dry Soil 


69- 5T7, 


7/' 7^3" 


6V-£V 


■ir/•■■£?.. 


73 • ?;f 


vr yj 







































































































































































































































































































































































































' 





- 


<&/ 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


PROJECT 


/as <r xr. 

SITE 


' Spo-tt) 

SAMPLE 

Jruzr. »o 

LOCATION 


sr <? 

HOLE ^ 

g 

DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN — 

DATE 


Liquid Limit 


a 1 No- 

/ 

X. 

3 

V 



. of Blows 

¥S 

V6 

VS 

/9 

/ 7 

/ 7 

ntainor No- 

1/76 

l7?V 

1 7/0 

V 30 

V A7 

1 / X5" 

• Sample Wet + Tare 

$$ • *56 


i/7- 7$ 

//O . XJ 

9 3*7/ 

SO? /? 

Sample Dry + Tare 

7% 0 7 

9¥- L, X 

V!-O? 

/OA. 5 *7 

SU, 

yy - 50 

■ Water 

7 x<t 

i 0 • 

io <w 

7 • ^7 

9/9 

9 6^ 

re Container 


vz-sy 

69 ‘ 69 

90- ll> 

69-97 

9V *<2 

■of Dry Soil 

/X • cl 

/xo 5 

n 70 

/X • X) 

/y s-y 

/6^ $0 

isture Content 

S7-Z. 

S' 7 O 

6-6*7 

<£>V-V 

6*5 * X 



Wt.Wd.fer. 



Plastic Limit 


Trial No- 

/ 

X. 

6 

Container No- 

**•/«./»• 

*%Y 


Wt- Sample Wef+Tare 

$!>- 766' 

sv- 


Wt- Sample Dry+Tare 

5V- 7*5 

5V- 


Wt- Water 

0- 67>c 

0 • 6-67 

0-V3/ 

ITare Container 

5"/ • *65 



Ijwf• of Dry Soil 

/•9*r> 

/ 

X XU 

jjMoisture Content % 

35*- O 

39-9 

lie:.!? 


Shrinkage Limit 


Container No 


Wt- Sample Wet +Tare 


Wt- Sample Dry -t-Tare 


Tare Container 


Wt-o f Dry Soil W< 


Moisture Content 


Vo I* Container 


4%oi* Dry Soil Pat Vo 


Shrinkage Vol- V-Vo 


Shrinkage Limit Vg 




CV-' 00 ) 


Description of Sample; 


Remarks; /Vo Cl t. 






































































































































































































































































































































' 


' 
























































. 











































< 5 =Vc> 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T* of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTER3ERG LIMITS 


PROJECT 



SITE 

>5r//p/V/p r" 


SAMPLE 

^y -^00 

LOCATION 

& - <r. 

HOLE 

y?j? <&<vi 

DEPTH 7 

TECHNICIAN 

DATE ^jr/y /irz 


Liquid Limit 


riai No 


A 


v 


! 0 - of Blows 


4L 


7S 


o 


n 


no 


/>L- O 


ontainer No- 


4-/ 


4'X. 




jQ± 




/?' 7 


/t- Sample Wet + Tare 


7* 9/ 


%XOb 


9,S- LI 






y 3 / y 


/t Sample Dry -FTare 


7 b 9b 




7? • (aO 


79 ■ I X 


7V 4,4. 






tft- Water 


3Ll££. 


.5':. g. 


U> • 97 




7 9/ 


7 • /? 


'are Container 


Stk—.±L 


- Ok .7 


4? ^ 


77 ■ / 9 


U* - XI 


7 • yS 


/!• of Dry Soil 


7- vy 


?• 


/o ■ bV 


7 - fV 






ioisture Content "u/% 67 ./ 

t’ 


^5T- 9 

Average Values 

vj\- 73-8 

3 / • x. 



L7- V 


S4- 4 


*4 • y 


Sv -o 


Plastic Limit 


.Ir.j Q.LJtSL 


Container No- 


Wt- Sample WettTare 


Wt- Sample Dry-tTore 


Wt- Water 


Fare Container 

Wt- of Dry Soil 




Sh • 


53 • ?? 


(a(o 


Si *9? 


X.- 10 


Moisture Content % 33 -0 3 / - a 3/ 3 


/?. 


5^-3/ 


5V. 6/ 




33- 37 




-7. 


•yr 


ss-k>4 


7 <° 


<TbXi 




Shrinkage Limit 


Trial No 


Container No 


Wt-Sample Wet +Tare 


Wt- Sample Dry H-Tare 




fare Container 


Wt-of Pry Soil Wc 


Moisture Content w% 


Voi • Container 


Voi- Dry Soil Pat Vo 


^■Shr inkage Voi- V-V< 


•!.Shrinkage Limit 


M = -ur C^ 2 -* l00 > 

Description of Sample:_ 


Remarks: LL. % Co^ti* 


7 8 9 10 15 20 25 30 40 

Number of Blows 




















































































































































































































































































































































































PROJECT 


777 < 7 ^. 

SITE 

77^7^0 ■'sr 7" 

f J 

SAMPLE 



LOCATION 


5 s cr. 

HOLE_ 

S' £ 

DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN - 

DATE 


UNIVERSITY 

DEP’T of CIVIL 

SOU. MECHANICS 

ATTERBERG 


of 


ALBERTA 

ENGINEERING 

LABORATORY 

LIMITS 


Liquid Limit 


ai No 




































































































































































































































































































































































































. 







































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


PROJECT 


SITE 




SAMPLE 




LOCATION 




HOLE. 


/J* DEPTHS ‘-<X£ 


TECHNICIAN ^ DATE s /jr/jr* 


Liquid Limit 


a I No- 


. of Blows 


±L 


±L 


V3 


//• r 


// • 


// -5- 


ntainer No. 


Aj£ 


1/ ?L> 




v 6 / 


iLZ/ 


1/ 9 


Sample Wet tTare 


,2£iik 


ZZili 






9 • Q 7 




Sample Dry TTare 


■2.2-/L- 




2/-o*l 


.Z*-7.r. 


YX'Zy 


7> - 77 


Water 


& ■ >LO 


5~- ^ / 


Qi 


£jl &L 


£ -M> 


2^ 


re Container 


21 . 


6<r ST? 


7S • /£ 


jb-z-ar. 




6^-0 j- 


of Dry Soil 






£s 


7 - ?V 


2-4LL 


9..:. It 


isture Content Tjj% 


22Ll2L 


23Luk 


77' C 


kQ;..Z. 




/ / 


n 


Average Values 

■Zcf z 


^l s 
UT p = 
toT s = 

Ip 5 

h * 
If 






Plastic Limit 


lr.lqJ-.NA 


Container No- 


Wt- Sample Wet+Tore 


Wt- Sample Dry TTare 


Wt- Water 


Tare Container 


Wt- of Dry Soil 


Moisture Content % 


/«>-£■ 


i>&- 7 </</ rsr s/2 


3"- 




5V • VOJL 










£1221 


A M 


/6.X 


■5%, - /$/ 








2^0. 


±Ai3L 


Shrinkage Limit 


Trial No 


Container No 




iMoisture Content -ur% 


Vol - Container 


V ol- Dry Soil Pat Vo 


8 9 10 15 20 25 30 40 

Number of Blows 


Wt Sample Wet -fTore 


Wt- Sample Dry -PTare 


mMalZL 


T are Container 


Wt-of Dry Soil Wo 


Shrinkage Vol- V-Vo 


Shrinkage Limit 


*4 = ^ C-^WT-* ,0 °) 


Description of Sample: 


Remarks: / v 7- 


6/ 


























































































































































































































































lllttlw 






























































- 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


PROJECT 


SITE 


- d?y*sr 

SAMPLE as-* 

' / «- 

c£S-3 

LOCATION 



HOLE 0° ? 


DEPTH /7-Z-/7 &' 


TECHNICIAN A*y. 


DATE si/**'/s'' 


Liquid Limit 


iai No- 

/ 

A. 

5 

V 

s 

io 

i. of Blows 

V 7 

3»3 


/* 5" 

/ 3 6' 

/ 3 5' 

mtainer No- 

17 3/ 

(/ 3L 

L/ 3 S' 

y 3 7 

7 3? 

1/37 

I- Sample Wet t Tare 

?o vy 

76' Of 

/0Z 3Z 

??•/* 

7<? VZ 

77 5'Z 

]■ Sample Dry TTare 

97 l*>5 

f / • 57 

?7 ?? 

frV-£? 

?7'/3 

7V 7d? 

\- Water 

* • ?/ 

5 • t>'o 

V 3V 

3 6'r? 

3 7.7 . 


ire Container 

75 frfr 

£6'- *3 

77 9/ 

7/-2? 

7V 36* 

7*0-9f 

L of Dry Soil 

/ 3 • 75" 

/<^ c>? 

ZO 07 


/* 77 

/V ^7 

Disture Content ii/% 

xo ■ y 

7./* 7 

Z/■ b 

XG, / 

Z5 9 

x*-7 

















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of 

ALBERTA 

PROJECT tWjEJ/S 

<? je' 

SITE 

■■r' — <7rYsrr 

DEP’T of CIVIL 

ENGINEERING 

SAMPLE,v. * ' 


SOIL MECHANICS 

LABORATORY 

LOCATION us*rsA/*4s/&/ a/'t' yYx. rs? 

ATTERBERG 

LIMITS 

HOLE 

DEPTH /Ye-W 

TECHNICIAN 

DATE /SX 


< 5 ^ 


Liquid Limit 


ial No* 

/ 

Z, 

3 

V 

5" 

<6 

i. of Blows 



30 

.. 7 

7 

7 

ntainer No- 

/7£> 

7 /9 

7 76 


l/6>Z 

t/?9 

• Sample Wet + Tare 

9 y • vs" 

?<?• 3.L 

? V7/ 

74 *7/ 

9? t-y 

V(./S 

• Sample Dry +Tcre 

9/' 7<7 

Y7 Z< 

70 • ZZ 

73 -Z% 

9 3 • 9o 

S7- 

• Water 


?-o? 

.. 3 • vy 

3 63 

3 • 9V 

v-trz 

ire Container 

1 50 • /Z 

7¥. 3 S' 

• iT<9 

£ 0-6^. 

?o • z/ 

66- OZ 

•of Dry Soil 

// ■ 6'S 

/z • 9o 

/V • 7Z 

/ Z ■ &9 

/3 • 69 

/ 6 • 6y 

jisture Content ii/Vo 

Z3- 7 

Zv? 

zs - 7 

zsr -9 

.** 

Z?- 9 


30 








X9- 


zx 


\ 




/o 

L 


\ 




LI 


Average Values 


Plastic Limit 






Vs s ~ 


V 


J.7 


<¥o 


Trial No- 

/ 

z 

3 

Container No- 

A-H. 

/?*z 


liwt* Sample Wet+Tare 

rv- 97 

s"3* n 


Wt- Sample Dry +Tare 

try- tT3 

S' 9- 77 

S"V • 03 

Wt* Water 

o • VV 

6*9/ 

0 • Va" 

Tare Container 


5Z-V6 

57-6/ 

HWt- of Dry Soil 

Z-y? 

Z- 3/ 

Z-9Z 

!]Moisture Content % 

/7*7 

. / 7:7, 

/9* (6 


Shrinkage Limit 


ITTT 

FFFtt 


ffi 


( X 

tiffl 


ffl 


Trial No* 


(Container No 


jWt- Sample Wet-f Tare 


|Wt- Sample Dry -t-Tare 


WJUtffllfiL 


(Tare Container 


jWf- of Dry Soil Wc 


7 8 9 10 15 20 25 30 

Number of Blows 


40 


Moisture Content *at% 


VqI« Container 


Voi* Dry Soil Pat Vo 


Shrinkage Vol* V-Vo 


Shrinkage Limit Vi 


IS. = ^ 


C^,,oo) 


Description of Sample 


Remarks; >4, 7f> Cl_ 



























































































































































































































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 
DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


PROJECT TSVX: J ✓ S 




SITE 




sample. 




3* 


LOCATION 


'rlzr 


HOLE ^ DEPTH / 7 x 

TECHNICIAN DATE 


Liquid Limit 


rial No« 


lo. of Blows 


11 




3 j> 


// 


/O • 5' 


✓/ 


ontainer No- 


V X 


i/ */ 




is' 5" 


U ?o 




/t- Sample Wet t Tore 


i/o x r 




9L 


yc • is 


/ 06 "- 4 >V 


?>y 


/t- Sample Dry TTare 


/ov?? 


*?V-V 3 




.Z 4 .:Z 3 - 


r -?/ 


V<? • /v' 


1 t- Water 


r- 3 <^ 


*• /? 


*V- ZCc 






5". 


are Container 


*>• 


7/ 9* 


?</CXo 


sv 


SU-c-4 


A9- y>- 


ft- of Dry Soil 


A3-Jr* 


xx-q? 


21.l2.± 


2±l2£ 


1 xl 2 SL 


xo-sy 


loisture Content ai /%1 A 5 )-/ 


A.V O 




< 4 : 3 . 


>Q • 7 


^<W 


.23 


Average Values 

,es? 


w. 


Container No- 


ur p =. 


Wt- Sam ole Wet+Tare 


Wt- Sample Dry+Tare 


*P 5 

h * 
if. 


.Z£ 


6 3 


Wt of Dry Soil 


Moisture Content 


Plastic Limit 


IMJiL 


Wt- Water 


Tare Container 


JL 


£J5- 


*V- 9fO 


^y- <°a 


-< 2 :. 1 Z£ 


£~X\.ALL 


7- *aV 


/& 


e. k. 




54- V-osT 


0 • ^6/ 




/• Wi 


/6 


T. 


Zli±±L 


r?'Of£. 


O ■ iX! 


tt-o?r 


/ • 9yo 


/6* 3 


Shrinkage Limit 


Trial No 


& 


2 V 


2 * 




m 


Islg 


Container No 


Wt-Sample Wet+Tare 


Wt- Sample Dry -t-Tare 


M-W-flilL 


Tare Container 


Wt- of Dry Soil W< 




Moisture Content w% 


Vol• Container 


Voi- Dry Soil Pat Vo 


Shrinkage Vol- V-Vo 


Shrinkage Limit 


M = ^ (?wT** ,0 °) 


Description of Sample 


Remarks: / °A c*-C/, 


7 8 9 10 K5 20 25 30 40 

Number of Blows 










































































































































































































































































<&& 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 

PROJECT YY&'f/s /a/ 

SITE ss t' — d7 Y*/ 

SAMPLE 7 - ^-vc* ' 

LOCATION 4t/*?sA/aSs&/4A/r' y^r/r. 

HOLE ^ DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN dp.^sY. DATE^^j^ 

Liquid Limit 

i a 1 No- 

/ 


3 

y 

5" 

£» 

3. of Blows 


^7 

X 7 

9 5' 

9 

9 

Detainer No- 

Y 7/ 

l '71 

^75 

i/ 7 y 

1/7 5" 

1 / 76 

t- Sample Wei tTare 

y 7 oo 

7 9- /O 

77 3<7 

96 • 

95U 

fi 79 

t- Sample Dry + Tare 

15 *7 

7t>'• 9? 

73 7% 

97 • <7/ 

73 

77 96 

t- Water 

3 93 

. 3/3 

5 s'i 

V • 60 

H *9 

5'- 93 

are Container 

7i- TUo 

. «- V/ 

69-39 

95- 6 / 

79 07 

6 »S* • 

t- of Dry Soil 

? • 3/ 

7 *5(0 

*•99 

S • HO 

9 66 

/T. 36 

oisfure Content w% 

9.LlJL 

V/- X 

c Li 2 ... 

. V7..-.Z... 

H7- 5' 

97- O 


































































































































































































































































































































































































































■ 




































<*?<? 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


PROJECT 

SITE 

— try*? 

SAMPLE - 


LOCATION 

T' /^XL rxr 

HOLE ^-jr f <T<*rXr 

DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN c/s+?. 

DATE 


Liquid Limit 












































































































































































































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of AL8ERTA 

DEP*T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


PROJECT 

//✓ 

SITE 

r' 

SAMPLE 

^**3 - & 

LOCATION 

M/J7/A/CC/ >€>/<? AS r~ A7sC-r'*? 

HOLE /o Z DEPTH /zs-Ms' 

TECHNICIANS^. DATE /s'Z 


Liquid Limit 


iai No* 

/ 

>L 

3 

V 

S' 

£> 

o. of Blows 

37 

5b 

37 

% -S' 

9 0 

*• o 

ontainer No. 

0 5 

t/v 


\//o 

1/ // 

1/ /9 

t- Sample Wet t Tare 


<?y V3 

/ O 3 • 

frfr ■ x*7 

70X9 

9UT -S3 

t Sample Dry TTare 

fry- AjV 

*3 yz 

9(a- 99 

9Z> v/ 

M ■ 33 

fry ■ >wj 

t- Water 

V- frz, 


(a- Vb 

S' - frfc 

6"* 9/ 

6' 6>3 

ire Container 

?6'- 

7t- Ct 

ro- cr 

<*9 59 

7/ /fc. 

7V • 3.0 

t- of Dry Soil 

91> 

/■$ Yt, 

!h-90 

! 6- o>o 

/5>7 

/y • ?y 

oisture Content Ttf% 

37 5 

3jL^ 

.3 V* y 

VtT'0 

9V-? 

vy 6 


- 4+ Average Values 



Plastic Limit 


y/ * A I 

Trial No- 

/ 


3 


Container No- 

#0. 

y - c>. 

nr. 

14^ D S ^ ^ 

Wt- Sample Wet+Tare 

55- 57 

s'v-y* 

tr<o ■ 9s 

P 

Wt- Sample Dry+Tare 

S5oc 

S'* *39 


- ----- 

Wt- Water 

C-S / 

sv 

C- t9 

Ip -- 

Tare Container 

SXfcC 

57-7/ 

S5-C5 

I,. 

Wt- of Dry Soil 

2.90 


5X5 

Ti S 

Moisture Content % 

JUi 

>U> >o 

<, / • 3 

*T --- 

Shrinkage 

Limit 




Trial No 


Container No 


Wt-Sample Wet + Tare 


Wt- Sample Dry T-Tarc 


MlliL 


Tare Container 


Wt-of Dry Soil Wo 


Moisture Content 


Voi» Container 


Voi- Dry Soil Pat Vo 


Shrinkage Voi- V-Vo 


Shrinkage Limit Vg 


C 


V-Vc 

Wo 


x I 


oo) 


Description of Sample: 


Remarks; 


/% CcuCi. 


7 8 9 10 15 20 25 30 40 

Number of Blows 























































































































































































































































































































































rs 


PROJECT rWjerss* ^ 

SITE 4€SArs«s*s*?s*A*y 


SAMPLE 


LOCATION 


HOLE ^ 

DEPTH /7-o'~/7.?' 

TECHNICIAN 

DATE /*>-'/ 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


Liquid Limit 


ial No- 


V 


o- of Blows 




H. S' 


V 5* 


/°'S 


/ / • a 


//• s' 


ontainer No- 


V 


* S 




/? /5" 


0/9 


\/9 


t- Sample Wet tTare 


/0*>- 07 


9/ *7 


/ov • o/ 


/ 00 ■ 


/OL ■ 3o 


/O? 9? 


t- Sample Dry iTare 


9z • vy 


?/ OZ 


9/ • *7 


** S'O 


<7£> *z 


96 o* 


t- Water 


/c? • 5* 


/o z* 


/ Z - 5*V 


// • s'a 




// • ?£> 


3re Cental ner 


7/ • /* 


Uo X7 




. oo 


79 /*> 


gg 


t- of Dry Soil 


Z/ - 30 


ZO 75* 


Zb' 5'V 


ZO 


/? Z9 


Z/ 09 


oisture Content'u/% 


99 7 


Vf.5* 


y?- / 


5"^» • V 


t>7- Z 


tr (• • y 










5 




ft 




o 


-H- 

‘-t- 


± 


N 


jL_L 




Average Values 
W t = 


-UTp'- 

M = 

Ip = 






Container NO' 


Wt- Sample Wet-Hare 


Wt- Sample PryTTare 


?•<£ 


it* 


t+ 


1\ 




RTf 


Hffiffl 


1 


:i: 




51 


p 

m 


■ 


' 


Ut: 


Hr 


j.Shrinkage 


Wt- Water 


Tare Container 


Wt- of Dry Soil 


Moisture Content % Zz- 3 Zz- *T zz-V 


Trial No 


Container No 


Wt-Sample Wet+Tare 


t 


7 8 3 10 15 20 25 30 40 

Number of Blows 


Plastic Limit 


Inq.J-.NQ: 


/ 


/3 o. 


5V-6W 


3Y* >/4 


0 - 3Z9 


£ZJJZ 


/ 979 


a.so. 


S5- 9oz 






s~y 7?^ 


/• 36y 






6^ V7S 


o • 


57 • 9^3 


/ • frzz 


Shrinkage Limit 


Wt Sample Dry -LTare 


mmt 6 l 


Tare Container 


Wt-of Dry Soil Wo 


Moisture Content *ur7 £ 


i Vo I - Container 


VoL Dry Soil Pat Vo 


Vo! • V*Vo 


Shrinkage Limit ~Wg 


IA = *ur 


r v-v 

L Wo 


100^ 


Description of Sample- 


Remarks: 
































































































































































































































































































































































































«^e 


PROJECT 

<rrxr. 

SITE u/*r/*/o<s/e> / 

— <fy>u7 

SAMPLE SsT 3 


LOCATION *?'*/<*/*?/*?, 

</r 'T'A? 

HOLE <£> -s' £ DEPTH /^V^' 

TECHNICIANS^. 

DAT 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 
DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


Liquid Limit 































































































































































































































































































































































. 















































































73 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 

PROJECT 7^T'*£'3/5 ss*S X* x57 

SITE ti' -1° 

SAMPLE j xr s <*r-zr 

LOCATION s y^/L r>F 

HOLE // <&<T/> DEPTH /7 ' -<7 9' 

TECHNICIAN — D A T E ,5^/5V 

Liquid Limit 

'rial No- 

/ 


3 

V 

5 

(o 

Jo- cl Blows 


3<7 

3/L 

/JU -5 

/t. • s' 

/S' 

Container No- 

1/ X. X, 

U A. Y 

yJ i? 

1/ 3C7 

^ 59 

1/V<? 

Vt- SGmple Wet + Tare 

HO • 9ls 

/£/' /3 

<?<,- /c? 

III • LO 

79 9b 

<7 x ■ 9i 

t Vt Sam pie Dry + Tare 

/O 3 /S' 

95' try 

Y X / u? 

/cv- ?/ 

7yL’9C 

9 r • /cj 

H \• Water 

VJ 

S'- STY 

k - 

7. V? 

(o- Yfe 

7-7S 

fare Container 

9 7 • SY 

tfV /LC? 

6>9 9Y 

9tf' /3 

bo 79 

70 <o 7 

Vt- of Dry Soil 

/Y - 

// •&>&> 

fl • 79 

/V /<? 

H// 

/V Hi 

Moisture Content'U/% 


5"o • / 

/ 

5*5 

5V- / 

..S3,7 


Average Values 
j r/./ 



Plastic Limit 


Trial No- 


Container N o- 


Wt- Sample Wet+Tore 


Wt- Sample Dry-t-Tare 


Wt Water 


Tare Container 


Wt- of Pry Soil 


Moisture Content % 


4 A 




S'5' 


o • yy 


53 - <9 




zv-y 


& ^ 


57 05 


5*^ sr 


<7- V b 


SV-97 




X3 • 3 


/3- a. 


5/- W 


57 


c- 


sv 7 / 


53 


^3-7 


Shrinkage Limit 


Trial No 


Container No 


Wt- Sample Wet -fTcre 


Wt Sample Dry T-Tare 


rnrnisi. 


Tcre Container 


Wt- of Dry Soil Wo 


Moisture Content -ur% 


Vol ■ Container 


Vo I* Dry Soil Pat Vo 


Shrinkage Vol- V-Vo 


Shrinkage Limit *U/ g 


M = ^ (?WT- x ,0 °) 

Description of Sample _ 


Remarks: 


/% C^CI. 


7 8 9 10 15 20 25 30 

Number of Blows 





































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































PROJECT rVx-y// xw' 

SITE 


SAMPLE jr. ^ 

— 

LOCATION */<*"*/ 

atssr' /&A. 

hole cogsltsyi 

DEPTH S-0-&0' 

TECHNICIAN 

DATE /^rs 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T* of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


Liquid Limit 


rial No- 


o. of Blows 


33 


30 


3G 


//- 


/X 


/ 2- 


ontainer No. 


4 /V 


A /3 


& X 




/9/y 


/? x ^ 


t- Sample Wet+Tare 


9o- <P<9 


99-ZX 


2ZJ>SL 




9 V- 97 


9x 


t- Sample Dry TTare 


ZZlAJL 


SV- 19 


97 • 30 




90-<*Ce> 


9(» • 7X 


t- Water 






6"* 29 




5*. 2 / 




are Container 


frfT- /9 


70 ZO 






7V- 95" 


-76" 


t- of Dry Soil 


/X VS 


Aj- 99. 


/9 2Y 


/&-/€ 


/6" • 7/ 


JJL22L 


oisture Content 'ur% 


Z7- O 


27-9 


27 V 




22 Z. 




■?* 


£ 


* 


5 


Average Values 




Container No- 




Wt- Sample Wet+Tare 


T*A = 


Wt- Sample Dry+Tore 


t p 


If * 

It". 


//7 


ifiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 


Plastic Limit 


IrlqlJlp..: 


Wt- Water 


Tare Container 


Wt- of Pry Soil 


/9. P. 


5*- 99L 




0-797 


tT?-V7.V 


H - 75!T 


Moisture Content % /&>• 7 /£• t> /<*9 


4 S. 


0V/ 


s“7-V/3 


<?• fri? 


^3 S>y 


?■ ?/? 


/p.t: 


JE>£Z 


V33 


0-73** 


tU OK 


jLm 


Shrinkage Limit 


Trial No 


Container No 


H 


So 


\ 


Wt.Sqm^,i„WlL±Tar,e 


Wt- Sample Dry H-Tare 




Tore Container 


Wt-of Dry Soil Wo 


Moisture Content 4*/*% 


Voh Container 






'ol- Dry Soil Pot Vo 


Shrinkage Vol» V-Vo 


Shrinkage Limit "U/g 


2uC = -ter 


C^-.oo) 






Description of Sample: 


Remarks; 


7 8 9 10 15 20 25 30 

Number of Blows 




40 















































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 
DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


PROJECT 'tsy^tj-ss <r *r 

SITE 

'S'r' — yV^ 

SAMPLE 


LOCATION 


HOLE 

DEPTH Jr- 

TECHNICIAN 

DATE 


Liquid Limit 


ia I No- 


>. of Blows 


Hk. 








/$ <r 


/S 


mtainer No- 


(/yo 


i/v 


V i' X. 


1 /V9 






t« Sample Wet +Tore 




22. 


F,(o • ST) 


s?y • ?/ 


9Z/o 


V?>- F) 


I- Sample Dry -Hare 


6'/ 




ILL,. 




S 4 • o o 




f- Water 


C. V 


<T- Gi, 


2.:2<Z.. 




6-07 


ire Container 


■2l. 


.21: .g.r.. 


,.^Li2 




7/ • ^ 


t>Z-o/ 


t- of Dry Soil _ 

oisture Content *u/% 


/</• 


Zl£L 




AbLZ£- 


,/.X..2£ 


IT- 6? 


3^7 


V/ • S 




Y2’1 


~\wt-Sample Wet 4-Tare 


liWt Sample Dry H-Tare 


Tare Container 


Wt-of Dry Soil Wc 


Moisture Content w% 



Plastic Limit 


Trial No- 

/ 


$ 

Container No- 


/3- 7 : 

/*. c. 

Wt- Sample Wet+Tare 

5* ii/ 


sr-m 

Wt- Sample Dry+Tarc 

T*: W.9. 

5V • £>/£> 


Wt- Water 


■m 

£ • / f/ 

Tare Container 

i'3- -tV 


yy-su 

Wt of Dry Soil 



3 • 09o 

;MciSiure Content % 

/$ - 7r 

/? * 

/*■•' 


Shrinkage Limit. 


Dry Soil Pat_Vo 


V-Vo 


:«t ( Shrinkage Limit V| 


lA = 


* l0 °) 


Description of Sample 


V\ e /* £ i 





























































































































































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 


PROJECT /*/ 


SITE cc7s?/a/ uS^>/<3sY 7" 


SAMPLE — c<r-/ 


LOCATION &//rsA/4c"e/<sMr' 

S7sC 'ryr 

HOLE Z <T* <Ts& DEPTH S& - ' 


Liquid Limit 

ol No. 

/ 

7L 

3 

. V 

5" 

(o 

. of Blows 

3o 

2-9 

3o 

/o 

/o 

9- i>" 

ntainer No- 

0? 

11 / 9 

^ V 3 



1/ 9o 

• Sample Wet + Ta»e 

S"7 5*. 

9V- Uo 

/ob <49 

79-79 

frV-/£ 

97- bC, 

Sample Dry -i-Tare 

tb ■ /& 

9o (o'? 

99- if 

7/97 

£v /V' 


■ Water 

V- 7J 

/■■9b 

*•// 

V. 


V • ot 

re Container 

(*> 5/7 

7V 5-i. 

ft' *1 


£<r - ST6* 

9/ • s'7 

•of Dry Soil 

/ 3- 9sT 

/(*• 

/ 3 • 9-r 

/2.-/Q 

// • S'? 

// 73 

,isture Content vj°/o 

bo. b 

,30l.> 

3 

..... 24L£. 

3V • ? 

BV ■<£, 

















































































































































































































































































































































- 


















































97 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 

PROJECT T'/YZ'S/s sa/ 

SITE /'ZUTa/a--/ oz. & , *=><?/£> 7" 

SAMPLE 

LOCATION &p>isas0a& 

HOLE Caff* DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN <*/ *=>- DATE 

Liquid Limit 

al No. 

J 

,2 ' 

3 

V 

S' 

6 

• of Blows 

iz 

. 39 


/<9 - s' 

/o 

/ O 

ntainer No. 

1/ 36 

1/ 37 

^37 

1/ VZ 

l/vi 

17S~% 

• Sample Wet t Tare 

«-/•&«■ 



F3- 33 

9? 7i 

<rc, • 

Sample Dry +Tare 

76--S-} 

77 -*y 

67-/3 

7 6>-<W 

9X 32- 

79-i/ 

■ Water 

6- / 6' 

.3T- *7 

S'/C, 

6 (o9 

6 • «/- 

£'*\ 

re Container 

69- 0/ 

77- is' 

(pO-79 


?s'- ?3 

7/-90 

of Dry Soil 

7- Si 

£>• 

.*>•?/ 

7-/Z 

& • 99 

7-3/ 

isture Content ijj% 

S3- O 

• 5* 

?/ V 

94-L 

93/ 

9 



8 




f o 


s 




Average Values 

fL 


Container No- 


hA 3 -_ 


Wt- Sample Wet+Tore 


Wt- Sample Dry 4-Tare 


3 


Tore Container 


it * 
if = 


Wt of Dry Soil 


Moisture Content % 


rTTTTTTTTTTT 


Trial No 


Container No 


Plastic Limit 


Ir-iaiJlQ.: 


Wt- Water 


/ 


S^L 


tTs*- oo 


5~V- 79 


O- 7/ 


S7 oo 


Z- Z? 


3±JL 






s%> • 


J2-2L 


53-17 


2. V/ 


3 


4-X. 


S£ * 6/ 


5~s' n 


7% 


53- 3b' 




3/ •</ 


Shrinkage Limit 


0 


B 


Wt;a.qmpie Wet+Tare 


Wt Sample Dry -t-Tare 


mjfltfll&L 


Tare Container 


Wt-of Dry Soil Wo 


Moisture Content -ur% 


Vol- Container 


Vol- Dry Soil Pat Vo 


Shrinkage Vol- V-Vo 


Shrinkage Limit 


IA- ^ 




Description of Sample; 


Remarks: 


8 9 10 15 20 25 30 

Number of Blows 


* 




































































































































































































































































1 _____£1 


UNIVERSITY of 

ALBERTA 

PROJECT 

/v 

SITE 

/7/AP**c>/e y" 

DEP’T of CIVIL 

ENGINEERING 

SAMPLE 


SOIL MECHANICS 

LABORATORY 

LOCATION /%f///ox £> 

ATTERBERG 

LIMITS 

HOLE 

'/££ ^^DEPTH/oW*-?' 

TECHNICIAN s?ccs ^ DATE.^/f./r-c 


Liquid Limit 


a 1 No- 

/ 

7 . 

3 

V 

5 

U 

. of Blows 

7 5 7 

7 5 y 

7 V/ 

V 0-7 

/v / 

7c o 

ntainer No. 

77 V 

1 / 7 S 

1 / 7 / 

l 777 

i/src' 

i /79 

• Sample Wet TTare 

V xL 

V 3 

YL 

/ O? 

/ <^> 

/A' 

• Sample Dry TTare 

79 / 7 , 

V/* 7 / 

7 ^ 6 , 2 , 


34 

W- ?£? 

• Water 



7/07 

// 

, 4 - HO 

73 -73 

re Container 

if- *77 

7-90 

5 '- Lt 

is Ho 

9 ' 90 

6 // 

• of Dry Soil 

US' 57 

90 /U 

(sr 5 -/y 

7 - 7 - V? 

r/ ■ 97 

bO OX 

>isture Content 'ur% 

7 - H 

6 - 7 / 


7 -C 

7 • 7 b 

7 7 / 


& 




- 


s 




1 


3 


Average Values 

77-Z 


M =- 

i p =__£^L_ 

it *_a? i!_ 

it*- 


Wt- Sample WetTTore 


Plastic Limit 


JiiflJ Njl 


lontainer No- 


Wt- Sample Pry TTare 


Wt- Water 


T a re C o n t a i n e r 


Wt of Dry Soil 


Moisture Content 




fULjtil 


2zL 


c ■ V*?? 


23. 


/ - 57 £• 






Z2l 


sy C j 


vvr 




/ • PC? 


5/C 


A 


„2i: 22 




2 • ?/c 


i ~j V>U 


JL222 


3/ 


Shrinkage Limit 


Trial No 


Container No- 


Wt- Sample Wet 4 -Tare 




W t- Sample Dry -t-Tare 




7V 


Zl 


K 


i 


s ; : 




Tore Container 


Wt-of Pry Soil Wo 


Moisture Content 


Vo I • Container 


VqI- Dry Soil Pat 


| 


Shrinkage Vol- V-Vo 


Shrinkage Limit 






Description of Sample 


Remarks: 


!' *4 


7 8 9 10 15 20 25 30 40 

Number of Blows 


- 


j 




































































































































































































































































5^ 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

atterberg limits 

PROJECT 7~**r3/s c?^r 

SITE zp ,*rs *»**■<? & 

SAMPLE 

LOCATION ip 

HOLE ^ cT&oVr DEPTH s* ' 

TECHNICIAN ^ DATE^^y'^ 

Liquid Limit 

il No. 

/ 

7 

3 

V 

S' 

Cp 

of Blows 

vy 

VV 

vy 

(o • b>' 

<0 • 6^ 

u s 

plainer No- 

& • 

v /y 

4X3 

9 x</ 

4>X6~ 

9^ 

Sample Wet + Tare 

*Y • Vj 

9o -S5- 


go- 

<rs" s~y 

V/ 

Sample Dry +Tare 

?Y yo 

YV- 3:f 

77* 37 

7V 

7/ 

7* 6,6 

Water 

(j> (*C 

k ■ STL- 

S'* 

(e. ■ CcfO 

7 yo 

V • 6ro 

'e Container 

sy 


70 /? 

(pGp 

(e> 3'* A. A 

6>* 09 

of Dry Soil 

y uc 

y-/ 3 

? /? 

7-9^. 

V V7 

9 6'? 

isture Content ii/% 

7/- Jo 

7/* A, 

7/ / 

**> ' </ 

* 3 ^ 




IdgJ-^j.9.: 


Container No- 


Wt- Sample Wet-fTore 


Wt- Sample DryfTare 


Wt- Water 


Tare Container 


Wt- of Pry Soil 


Moisture Content 


✓3 ■ c 




.m. 


O- 57* 




/■ 




.^2-g/Jf. 


Voy 


• bc>7 


*L±1JL 


A-Q±A 


o - </ jo • a 1 50-7 


rt.C. 




5Z>- oz9 


O' 6 7V 




-<• n± 


Shrinkage Limit 


Trial No 


Container No 


Wt-Sample Wet 4-Tare 


Wt- Sample Dry -t-Tare 


EfilSi 


Tore Container 


Wt of Dry Soil Wc 


Moisture Content w7 c 


Vo! • Container 


Dry Soil Pat Vc 


Shrinkage Vol- V-Vo 


Shrinkage Limit t</ 8 


M = ' t * / ' (?w 


-Vo 


x IOc0 

✓ 


Description of Sample 


Remarks: / cVC/ 








































































































































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


PROJECT 


SITE 


SAMPLE - 


LOCATION 

HOLE *-og <r3 -<rvi 

DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN 

DATE 






































































































































































































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 

PROJECT 'r'^Asrssy ^ *r 

SITE /^aTaz/y^sc ip &’//*>/=><?*? r' 

SAMPLE A+sexs - 

LOCATION /^aTa/zy<?^ & 

HOLE C-*<r/r DEPTH ' 

TECHNICIAN DATE /t**7/*>/*z 

Liquid Limit 

ial No- 

/ 

2 

3 



<2 

|). of Blows 

30 

•£( 


7* y 

x- y 

o 

[intainer No- 

H /o 

t) // 

& / 3 


.•7 /&> 

*9/7 

jh Sample Wet t TGre 

'<V ■ j 

W- 5/ 


/ ■ 5 S 

v</ yc 

f'O • lx> & 

I- Sample Dry TTare 

%f • 

/ * Si 1 

• / 

7/ V 

7/ 

?7' L S' 

t- Water 

j- / 

2 • 95 

-? • oo 

5 -7/ 

5- ^ 

3- to/ 

ire Container 

0 >' • Cr C 

fat/ . 2 2 

i-7 • i7 

cs> S • / 6" 

7 /. y V 

f-v V/ 

t- of Dry Soil 

/5 • £ ? 


/X • 7fc> 

/2&9 

/3 7.7 

/7- y<? 

oisture Content 

. 5 • 9 

... 23:7 . 

-£5-5* 

>29 * 3 

J 

7^- 7 


Average Values 

7 ^L. 


.T-ri.ql.-N.Q-: 


Container No- 


Wt- Woter 


Tare Container 


Wt- of Dry Soil 


Tare Container 


Vo I - Container 



Wt- Sample Wet+Tore 


Wt- Sample Dryf Tare 


/?- 


oV- <?/ 


c// 


C - 


5'5 • 


/' 


Moisture Content% //• v /£> • 5 I 




/3- K 


SG-Q7/ 


T - 6 






2- 159 


/ 3 . X 




yr- ^6/ 






/ 


Shrinkage Limit 


Trial No 

C ontainer No 

Wt-Sample Wet+Tare 


Wt Sample Dry -TTare 


Wt- of Dry Soil _We 


Moisture Content *&r7 c 


Dry Soi l Pat Vo 


^Shrinkage Vol- V-V° 


Shrinkage Limit 


m (?wr- x ,0 °) 

Description of Sample:_ 


Remarks: Vz % 




















































































































































































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


PROJECT 

/sy/ <r *r. 

SITE 


SAMPLE 

/+Kcryjf - ~xr 

LOCATION 

Jd QUl 

saf a.<r/i DEPTH ssr' 

TECHNICIAN DATE 


Liquid Limit 


Trial No- 

/ 

7- 

3 

¥ 

i> 

£ 

^o- of Blows 

5 ST 


12 

2 ' 5 

X ’ 

9 -5" 

Container No- 

VI 


Vi 

V(o 

/■? 

'-99 

Vt- Sample Wet TTare 

o 

v7- 


y ?;? 

?v-4y 

77-09 

Vt Sample Dry TTare 

w-cy 

- zv 

* V / 

y -5.r 

7:> • 

73 • V7 

Vt- Water 

i • -IM 

- 69 

5 • *> V 

3-V* 

9- 9*> 

6*9 

Tare Container 

a ■ 9i \ 

&¥•/" 

- 7 y' 

3 • ^4^ 

// 

66- W 

Vt- of Dry Soil 

/3 -99 

/9- tn 

/bXT7 

//b'9 

/:>' - 5*5' 

/z$y 

Moisture Content Tx/% 

"> / t 

.Z. -, : V 

Zb? 

ZV‘ 9 

X9V 

.. ^ 































































































































































































































































































































































/e-? 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL. MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


PROJECT 




SITE 


SAMPLE 

LOCATION 


muL 


& g <r<*<r/z depth 


TECHNICIAN 


DATE 


Liquid Limit 


ial No 



iSs. 

ft ^ 

frO 3.V 

7a>" V? 

L(* 

9 • 


fro - 2 


V 

7. 

J Vzj 

7fr- 60 

V O/ 

7Z. O l 

6~9 


9 


i/y^ 

fro • V2. 

7fc • 39 

y • oy 

0>9 

yc 


(pO. v 


V/7/ 

frc • 0* 

frx • 0$ 

9o* 

~7frZ(- 

C> ■ 77 


tf 9 - 7 


Plastic Limit 


Ir i q..l. Nq- 


Container No> 


Wt- Sample WetfTare 


Wt- Sample Dry+Tare 


Wt- Wafer 


Tare Container 


Wt- of Dry Soil 


Moisture Content % 


/ 


ft. H 


cf£ /s' 


tT5~ - tT 7 


O 6~s 


6' 3- /:>' 


-e- y*. 


^3 9 


ft>P. 


s'^-y.o 


5V- 


o- yfr 


79 


/•9ff 


^ ^ 


/3 /. 


5y-fr3 


SV- 


0- 6"7 








Shrinkage Limit 


Trial No 


Container No- 


Wt Sample Wet-fTare 


Wt- Sample Dry 4-Tare 


|. Wt-Water 


■tU Tare Container 


Wt- of Dry Soil Wo 


Moisture Content w°U 


Vol • Container 


rhVoi- Dry Soil Pat Vo 


Sh rinkage Vol- V-Vo 


Shrinkage Limit w 9 


l/ s * -tLT 




Description of Sample: 


Remarks-. 


7 3 9 10 15 

Number 


20 25 30 40 

of Blows 












































































































































































































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTER8ERG LIMITS 


PROJECT 

^•^ r ' 

SITE r' 

SAMPLE 

3 

LOCATION & 

s&X. '7'/* 

HOLE OS F C'aS/z 

DEPTH ' 

TECHNICIAN - 

DATE sZe'z / 

























































































































































































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 

PROJECT <r*r 

SITE c? /^/yfv«v/pr' 

SAMPLE /Versrr?*//? ^/TA/r 

LOCATION 

HOLE / <Tcr ^ DEPTH a~ ' 

TECHNICIAN DATE 

Liquid Limit 

ial No- 

/ 

z 

3 

<9 

S~ 


d. of Blows 

3/ 



/z*«r 

/*/■ r 

s' 

Dntainer No- 



^ v- 

v vs* 


V/65" 

t- Sample Wet + Tare 

S7' 7/ 

9 / • 6V 

y/-6/ 

^7'6.7 

?s 

9i/7 

t- Sample Dry + Tare 

f/ • 7 

^6-y^ 

g’VT's: 

iA- OV 

Si ■ !9 

V 7- *'9 

t- Water 

. if- 8V 

5"- sV 


v-r* 

6 - sy 

J~ 7? 

3 re Container 

. £>?• 91 

73 frfT 

7C- 69 

A-/5 

7/ 9o 

77- /V 

t- of Dry Soil 

■/■ 7..9C 


/y- os 

9’9/ 

// • x9 

/£> • .7S 

oisture Content'w%j 4*5". / 

W 9 


42-7 


..vt-y. ... 




















































































































































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 


DEP’T of CIVIL 
SOU. MECHANICS 

ATTERBERG 


ENGINEERING 

LABORATORY 

LIMITS 


PROJECT 


/-V «r-yr. 

SITE 


&//&. 

SAMPLE . 

rV/Vc? 


LOCATION 

^*.4rA/Ai r C/L£? 

/&jCY?3 

HOLE 

ogCaCfr DEPTH ' 

TECHNICIAN 

DATE^Ctf^yy^ 





















































































































































































































































































































































































































s*7 


PROJECT ysis 

SITE 22> 

’r' 

SAMPLE sSatattZ*'* 


LO CAT 10N & 


HOLE 2 Sb 

DEPTH sar ' 

TECHNICIAN 

DATEy#^p/6>e 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


Liquid Limit 


rial No- 


o. of Blows 


JLL 




Jl£. 


ontainer No- 


A <Z7 


jg..i Q 


V S' 


ILL 


09 


Vi 3 


ft- Sample Wet t Tare 


yc- zi 




/07-/9 


jQH a 


22-2! 


Y! • ^ 


ft- Sample Dry f Tare 


ZkL-J.1. 




LQLZjL 


/oo • OJU 


SLL-LL 


ZZM 


ft- Water 


9? 


JLuZl 






$jJLL 




are Container 




7C A ? 


iz c±L 


o£ 


■71.-fe; 




ft- of Dry Soil 


/? • 37 


/V ■ A 


.12.22. 


IL2±L 


LL2lZ 


/ / / 9 


loisture Content'u^’/o 


<2 








• s' 








jfc 


II 


Average Values 

S/& 


' ur l= 

X P ^ 
^ * 
If* 






Container No- 


Wt- Sample Wet+Tore 


Wt- Sample Dry+Tore 


Wt- of Pry Soil 


Plastic Limit 


Trial No 


Wt- Water 


Tare Container 


Moisture Content 




5 ~i UY7 


SSJH2L 


Q: Alii 


57 • 757 


/.:Jp.Z2. 


/if'/ 


aL 


A-A. 


fY-zos 


0 • 300 


67 - 


/■M 


/gjL 


>9 


y~6 - 


SWjV 


£ V5Z? 






/s~ tr 


Shrinkage Limit 


Trial No 


Container No 


N 


Wt-Sample Wet+Tare 


Wt- Sample Dry -PTore 




Wt-Water 


5V 


Tare Container 


V 


ft 


Wt-of Dry Soil Wo 


Moisture Content w*io 


Vol* Container 


Vol- Dry Soil Pat Vo 


3X 


V 


Shrinkage frbl» V-Vo 


Shrinkage Limit W 9 


IA - 


C^.ioa) 


lo 




Description of Sample: 


Remarks: M. *A C*. Cf. 


7 8 9 10 15 20 25 30 40 

Number of Blows 










































































































































































































































' 





































































































S0<5> 



















































































































































































































































































. 










































mm* 































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

PROJECT 7 S'* 

SITE ~s+T * " 

DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOU. MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTER6ERG LIMITS 

SAMPLE S7 7 y 

LOCATION s&cr's? 

HOLE <?-o £ <r<T<T/& DEPTH^P-x*" 

TECHNICIAN DATE /r* 

Liquid Limit 

Trial No- 

/ 

^ ■ 

3 

V 

S' 

<6 

No. of Blows 

3J? 

36 

36 

7 

7 

7 

Container No- 

</~6 9 

9-67 

* -xT-iT 

. S'3 

^ o"~3 

6/~so 

Wt- Sample Wet + Tare 

707. 

6>/9s 


?r-*' 

733*7 

4&C 70 

Wt- Sample Dry +Tare 

?<!?■ &/ 

7730 

<79 39 


77/6 

7709 

Wt- Waver 

JT.S3 

9 /s 

9 £& 

¥■'9 

9// 

3 3/ 

Tare Container 

06 ¥9 

67-3's' 

693o 


63.37 

*929 

Wt- of Dry Soil 

73 33 

r ?■ 

/<? 39 

9 3C 

<?*.? 

770 

Moisture Content "u/% 

V/-6 

♦'-'•Z 

973 

99-¥ 

4*96 

991 - 















































































































































































































































































































































































- 


PROJECT c*.*' 

SITE "/+7 * " 

SAMPLE / ~ 3 

LOCATION sT&s*? <?*/'*'* 

/=Tx T*=r 

HOLE & X 

DEPTH/*' ' 

TECHNICIAN ^ A'. 

DATE 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 


SOU. MF.CHANICS 

ATTERBERG 


LABORATORY 

LIMITS 































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































/// 




UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


PROJECT 



SITE 

** c* 

- // 

SAMPLE 

4^'/ ' 3 


LOCATION s<f r '&'xrc>AS y^o^V 

HOLE 


DEPTH/^-^o' 

TECHNICIAN - 

DATE 


Trial No- 


Liquid Limit 


Z 


V 


No- of Blows 


VS” 


Vi" 


¥■ & 


yy s' 


/y • o 


/y - s' 


Container No. 


I/// 


1//9 




*/ *9 


l/SO 


1/X9 


Wt- Sample Wet + Tare 


9/ 7K 




/ 07 ■ 6>L 


zz.?*: 


/<?<? • 5V 




Wt- Sample Dry -i-Tare 


EdT 3*9 


?$ VS' 


/<M • OX* 


7Z-70 


yy- sx 


1£ZL± 


Wt- Wafer 


5-. 6V 


S' OO 




& - Ob 


6 • 


Tare Container 


?r/b 


7*/ 5Z 


9 7 • 5 * 6 ' 


£, 0-79 


VP .69 


Lb-CX. 







































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































SS3T 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 

PROJECT /></ <r-'CT- 

SITE " 

SAMPLE 

LOCATION -r^r 

HOLE ^ DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN DATE /?* 

Liquid Limit 

Trial No- 

/ 

z 

* 

V 

T 

<*> 

^o- of Blows 

3T 

■iX 

33 

//-..r: 

//• y 

//■tr 

Container No- 

# /r 


VC/ 

V 9 o 


i/ 

Vt- Sample Wet t Tare 

%9- XL 

9c ' 

//y $7 

/oxx? 

W- gfc 

€9-9.9. 

N t- Sample Dry TTare 

SV-V9 

</o * 

/&/X 

97- A<i 

. n 

*3' 97 

tft- Water 

y - 77 

A • Z9 

Cs, • X.X. 

y y? 

v-./r. 


fare Container 

&?• 

1,9-9A 

27 - 9/ 

*7- ?T7 

Ay • 

Ay 

A/t- of Dry Soil 

/C • 6V 

2/ htt 

X! 


/yve. 

/S' • fcO 

Moisture Content uj% 

JS- 9 

Z9'/ 

/ 


5X\Q. 

.3^.. ... 


>1 


ii 


ic 


o 
S 




Si 



Average Values 

/??£ 


' u/ r 


Wp= 


y.fA. 




V 
if * 
it*. 


Z££. 


>r^ 


intf i i i’ ij Qitn 

~^^l $hri 


!; 


7 8 9 10 15 20 25 30 40 

Number of Blows 


Plastic Limit 


I rJq-L-to: 


Container No- 


Wt- Sample WetTTore 


Wt- Sample Dry-Hare 


Wt- Water 


Tore Container 


Wt of Dry Soil 


Moisture Content % 


*> a- 






£UL±&k 


S3.JJ1 


/• 9 7 s' 


/C,* 


n.* 




sr-o%*> 


sy- 


O' t** 


sx- 


t- 9XC 


ZSiZ. 


~ol> 




5% • 5^-5' 


sio /yj 


0±X< 


IhlLt 


Z:±M. 


/s tr 


Shrinkage Limit 


Trial No 


Container No- 


Wt-Sample Wet+Tare 


Wt- Sample Dry T-Tare 




Tare Container 


Wt-of Pry Soil W< 


Vol - Container 


Vol- Dry Soil Pat Vo 


Shrinkage Vol- V-Vo 


Shrinkage Limit *u/ig 


M o i st u r e Content ur% 


IS* = 




Description of Sample: 


Remarks: V *. % C«-tl 














































































































































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 

PROJECT 7^<F>Vjr 

SITE " 

SAMPLE 

LOCATION 

HOLE S’* SXr DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN DATE /-rj? 

Liquid Limit 

'ial No- 

t 

2 


V 

5 

C 

o. of Blows 

VL 

9/ 

v/ 

/5~ 

/£> 

/5 5 

ontainer No- 

i/ 60 

«7^r<r 

i//y 

V79 

I/O/. 

1/ 50 

t- Sample Wet t Tare 

70 

/o 2 yy 

99 9^ 

fO 7 • 

/Of 09 

/oc-Vo 

t- Sample Dry +Tare 

9V- to 

97- 2.0 

91 ■ 91 

99 • y/ 

90 • 55 

/°<9- 7.9 

t- Water 

V- (*o 

tr - xV 

5- 55 

5- ?y 

5-CP9 

(* ■ f 6 

are Container 

0/ 

7i ■ 90 

7V- 37 

79 ■ 9 3 

^O- X/ 

?0 -6>9 

t- of Dry Soil 

lb • 09 

/S'- JO 

/y•sy 

/s* v$ 

7^ 19 

/9-5j? 

oisture Content '\jj% 

\ 7 


^?* V 

61 / 

3/ 2. 

•5/3 




Average Values 

^2. 


' U/ T 

'UTp- 

t*4 ' 
Ip * 
If ' 
It". 


yVfS' 


Zi<£ 

£.o 


Container No- 


Wt- Sample Wet+Tore 


Wt- Sample Dry flare 


Tore Container 


Wt- of Pry Soil 


Moisture Content %i /s' 3 /tT»S~ 


Plastic- Limit 


XriaJ-Jl^ 


Wt- Water 




fV; 755 , 




£:.7.gk 




/• 




zk: 




.2L7*± 


o » $y/ 


flLkZa. 




fr V/35. 


r; -oov 


54 fcrk 


0-3Vfr 


SV- V57 


7 


/£JL 


Shrinkage Limit 


Trial No 


Container No 


3i 


Wt-Sample Wet+Tare 


Wt- Sample Dry -fTare 


3 E> 


Wl-Wflf£L 


Tare Container 


v 


Wt-of Dry Soil Wo 


Jo 




Moisture Content ur% 


VoL Container 


Vol- Dry Soil Pat Vo 


Shrinkage Vol> V-Vo 


Shrinkage Limit w 9 


is 


M - ^ * ,0 °) 


Description of Sample*- 


■■■SSSSSSiiiSnnSmSnmHiH 


Remarks: I % C^Ci, 


7 8 9 10 15 20 j 25 30 40 

Number of Blows 























































































































































































































































7*9 




UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTER8ERG LIMITS 

PROJECT -Tas/^JS* 

SITE siA ** TT/es&G'sz 7 ' 

SAMPLE XoT* ** 7 

LOCATION <9** 7* 77^y /7smr 

HOLE DEPTH ^ s'*?' 

TECHNICIAN <*?./&. D A T E s*2T<? 

Liquid Limit 

Trial No* 

/ 

3? \ 

3 

/ 

9 

* 

No. of Blows 


JS<? * 

33 

7'A 

7/. 

7 

Container No. 


_ 

*7 


<7? 

90 

Wt- Sample Wet t Tare 


70^33 

<96 

rs'-re 

9*7<¥ 

sos 76 

Wt- Sample Dry TTcre 

<96?. 

r<9 *>e 

<7/. 

9* *3J? 

77-00 

*V"?7 

Wt-Water • 


993 

9s* 

3-7* 

s:o<f 


Tare Container 

7373 

<9/ o 9 


7*0* 

070< 

<9k?6? 

Wt- of Dry Soil 

sSrs 

/7-73 

. 7* *6 

/*s& 

S*Z* 

79 9& 

Moisture Content 

. . 


3AJ3S 

37 9b 

394 

39& 





















































































































































































































































































































































































































' 



































































UNIVERSITY of 

ALBERTA 

PROJECT /✓v 

SITE /S ** 3T7 

DEP’T- of CIVIL 

ENGINEERING 

SAMPLE 

SOIL. MECHANICS 

LABORATORY 

LOCATION *?/ey 

ATTERBERG 

LIMITS 

HOLE ^ <r / S** depth ars-tr*' 

TECHNICIAN - DATE /SS 


Liquid Limit 


Trial No- 


No. of Blows 


7.V 


7? 


50 


7 S 


/c o 


/c 


Container No. 


I >50 


M 5 X. 


V0% 


\J 4 y 


i'/r 


v/ 7/ 


Wt- Sample Wet + Tare 


/c /•96 


?/ • SY* 


/JO « O/ 




/a: ?/ 


95 v; 


Wt- Sample Dry -f Tare 


• *7 


22Li.v 


/£V S"6 


/oo • 66' 


yy. a 6 


frg- 


Wt- Water 


y • 53 




y yy 


5~ • tr 


y • 7^ 


Tare Container 


yr • l-9 


OX • V7 


?7- 


gfc . V? 


9^- 6 5 


7<T • 7.0 


Wt- of Dry Soil 


/6 / 3 


/y 


ZZ i& 


/y //. 


/<o • A.5 


5-fc 


Moisture Content "u/% 



3/ • *■ 


55" 5 


.3-/ 3 


±1& 


Plastic Limit 


Trial No- 


Container No- 


Wt- Sample Wet+Tare 


Wt- Sample Dry + Tare 


Wt- Water 


Tare Container 


Wt- of Dry Soil 


4-K- 


Sb"- 


53"- /8t 


C- ,i„ 


5>?j/ 


/ 70 A. 


Moisture Content % /S** / / 5~- V /&> • 6 


/3 


5Y-*/,y 


5V- 5>r 


f • 3?* 


5X C 


7.-5T? 


e. c. 


7/5 


- 35V 


O - 63? 


5*3 ♦ //; 


-l *V5 


Shrinkage Limit 


Trial No- 


Container No 

Wt- Sample Wet +Tare 


Wt Sample Dry + Tare 


WE.Water. 


Tare Container 


Wt-of Dry Soil Wc 


Moisture Content -ur°/ c 


Vol- Container 


Voi- Dry Soil Pat Vo 


Shrinkage Vol- V-Vo 


Shrinkage Limit 


is, = -u/~ 




Description of Sample: 


Remorks: ! /x,Vc 


7 8 9 10 15 20 25 30 40 

Number of Blows 


























































































































































































































































































































































■ 



































MB 

































































s'7 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


PROJECT 


s*S 

SITE 



-SAMPLE 



LOCATION 


.HOLE^ 

/ So.*/* 

DEPTH 5V-m' 

TECHNICIAN - 

DATE /srz 























































































































































































































































118 - 


DATA FOR CLAY IXTURE #1 


The following thirteen pages contain that data obtained 
in the laboratory for "Clay Mixture #1" which was used in this 
research program. 







"7 


















































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


PROJECT <- *r- 

SITE 

SAMPLE & 

- S'o 


LOCATION ^ 



HOLE <r ° Z 


DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN xf 

T c/: 

DATE stYA7/e/r* 


Liquid Limit 






























































































































































































































































































































































































/&' 



UNIVERSITY of 
DEP’T- of CIVIL 

ALBERTA 

PROJECT <r^ 


SITE 


ENGINEERING 

-SAMPLE 3-0-,ro **,**-„***- 


SOIL MECHANICS 

LABORATORY > 

LOCATION y <?sc*ry' 


ATTERBERG 

LIMITS 

HOLE /•<? / DEPTH 


TECHNICIAN DATE 


Liquid Limit 


































































































































































































































































































































PROJECT //v' *r. 

SITE 

SAMPLE fo ~6~o 


at* 

LOCATION &/:*ros S 

y 


HOLE /-«4* 

DEPTH 


TECHNICIAN 

DATE /v*/**/*"* 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


Liquid Limit 



IX 

v (* 

9 / • az 

4 ■ 9 / 

fro • oV 

iX 2L 


//• s - 

iLX 

2£jJsT 

*4 • <<?'■> 

6>W/ 

// • 

HO' ^ 


/j_jr 

v $ 

/otr Hu 
/o o • He, 

■ t> o 

f.XXL g , 

JAUJL 

Ho'V 


//• tr 

(/// 

y ; • y V 

frz- 

• /&> 


Plastic Limit 


Trial No- 

f 

z 

3 

Container No- 


4./. 

/5-X. 

{Wt- Sample Wet+Tare 


snr-arsy 

r4*0Vi 

jwt- Sample Dry+Tare 

SV- 0*9 

f?/ii 

i-5-*7ZS 

[Wt- Water 

b ■ $yo 

0 -Wg 

6 • 50^ 

[Tare Container 


S</9te 

5^ -Voi" 

Wt- of Dry Soil 


a • /*3 

Z- 4-L3 

[Moisture Content % 

j 

/5'3 

/ilZ 


Shrinkage Limit 


Trial No 

Container No 


Wt-Sample Wet-P Tore 


Wt- Sample Dry H-Tare 


mMsti&L- 


Tare Container 


Wt- of Dry Soil Wc 


Moisture Content juir% 


Container 


Dry Soil Pat Vo 


Shrinkage Vol- V-Vo 


Shrinkage Limit W e 


k/S * -W- 




Description of Sample: 


Remarks: 


7 8 9 10 15 

Number 


20 25 30 

of Blows 

































































































































































































































































































































' 










■ 































■ 










































































UNIVERSITY of 

ALBERTA 

PROJECT 'rWATSss sas 

SITE 

DEP’T- of CIVIL 

ENGINEERING 

SAMPLE jro ~s~c> /WsX’r-'er/e*’ oa' 

SOIL- MECHANICS 

LABORATORY 

LOCATION J &x.sr3s 

ATTERBERG 

LIMITS 

HOLE ^/vVcT/ DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN >Tc/^ DATE 












































































































































































































. 















. 





. 



















































■ 








' 

































































73 ft 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP'T* of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

COMPACTION TEST 


PROJECT 

T'*f'se*/s 

s*s <?. sT- 

SITE 

SAMPLE 

S'O - jTc? 

/s/sbC s'es/*^ c?/r 

LOCATION 

<7/.srv 

/7sS/> <3 A STS* 

HOLE 


depth 


TECHNICIAN DATE 


Trial Number 

/ 


3 

¥ 





Mold No* 








c 

o 

Wt- Sample Wet + Mold 

37/99 

¥793o 

¥3/Sr 


¥3cs7 

277'* 


c •»- 

cr> a 

Wt- Mold 

/jV^7 

/Mo7 

/sr</.o7 

/M 07 

/Mo7 

/rr¥o7 


- c 
a> — 

Wt- Sample Wet 

//79Z 

7*373 

/* 7 7 “7 

7*7 B8 

/*6./o 

/*s 09 


> L- 

w. 

<D 

Volume Mold 








E CL) 

Wet Unit Weiaht lb/ft 3 

/'7 7 X 

-yv?79- 

M’77S 

7*738 

//- 6 sc 

7*3 09 


DO 

Dry Unit Weight Ib/ft-^ 

/o¥o 

-jCIZ'SL 

///>// 

/?*?/ 

Sc 7 69 

703 3/ 


£ 

Container No 


7^7? 

¥ 

i/-7y 

7^/6 

7^3 


2? c 
c o 

Wt-Sample Wet TTare 


76* c/ 

/6o.6c 

<ec*/¥ 

ysT3/3 

M3 9/ 


0 ’JO 
P n 

Wt- Sample Dry + Tare 


/Vs <73 

/¥3-o6 

/33 9 r 

73993 

/JOS? 


v c 

k*~ 

Wt- Water 

Moo 

76 33 

/7-o~* 

73 *3 

73/3 

73 77 


3 b 

t *r: 

Tare Container 


36 or 

33-30 

7**? 

33 6S 

3*09 


to 03 

0 03 

Wf- Dry Soil 



/*>?*>% 

/C0-6Z 

706.30 

9303 


EO 

Moisture Content 

/s¥o 

/sr./sr 

/6C/ 

/A-73 

1 /77*. 

L 



Method 

1 of Compaction 


/SATA? V/T/CO 

/t AT <7ASS*S4T 


Diam* 

Mold 

/ 3/3 

/st 

Height 

Volume 

Mold 

3-B/6 

SSI 

Mold 

o oo^Zo /Y 3 

No- of 

Layers 

sT 


Blows 

per Layer 



HI- of 

Free Fall 



Wt- of 

Tamper 

*o 

7A 



Shape of TompinQ Face 
Description of Sample.. 


Remarks. 


TX's'r: 


2 o 






































































































































































































































































































































































' 

























































































7S03- 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

COMPACTION TEST 


rnuoc .\j i '//v c--. c. 

SITE 

SAMPLE 

j90 - 3*0 


LOCATION 

<r< *?y 

<r £ <£V &s-s 

HOLE 7*1 <r<*<?//e 

DEPTH 


rial Number 

/ 

2 

3 

V 

* . 1 

6 

■ - A . 


Mold No- 








d 

Ot 

Wt-Sample Wet-rMold 

27*25 

*77-47 

*0/29 

20/3/ 

20 /. o 9 

27939 


>c 

Wt' Mold 

/st9o7 

/s' 1*0 7 

73**7 

7>'?.o7 

/S'*. 07 

7*7 07 


c: 

cs 

Wt- Sample Wet 

7/0/6 

7*3-00 

/27-2Z 

7Z7?? 

/27 0 Z 

72 S'32 


L- 

V- 

Volume Mold 








O 

+— 

O) 

Wet Unit Weiaht lb-/ft^ 

7/0*6 

/23> 0 O 

7737X2 

/27-** 

727-02 

72*32 


Q 

Dry Unit Weight ib/ft-^ 

/o*. <7 

707 23 


706-67 

/077? 

7**9* 



Container No 


7*/ 

7^/3 

-s'-SO 

2-9 

-rc.s* 


jS 

Wt-Sample Wet + Tare 

/S'S-** 

/S &06 

76 TP 70 

762 69 

/6o-66 

7*6* 


n 

Wt- Sample Dry ~F Tare 

737*7 

/*/ <5*0 

/ 4b7.2o 

/ <73.90 

/&-*•/ 

/37-3Z 


i c 

Wt- Water 

/3 03 

/6 *6 

/7 ?o 

7079 

/9-o2 

70 92 


11 

Tore Container 

3*0/ 

3393 

3*76 & 

3**3 

3 * 0 / 

S3.68 

I 

1 

1 (p 

Wt- Dry Soil 

70 * 6*6 

70737 

707 s'* 

70037 

7o6 63 

703-7* 


Q 

Moisture Content 

/3-2Z 

7*3? 

76 3? 

/739 

. //<*V 

Ys&Z?.. 




Method of Compaction 




» 

L Di a m • 

Mold 

/3/3 S3 - 

1 — H e i a h t 

Mold 

2 .0/6 />? 

u Volume 

Mold 

O 00220 // 

1 No- of 

Layers 

* 

II Blows 

per Layer 

2 S' 

1 Ht- of 

Free Fall 


Wt- of 

Tamper 



Shape of TompinQ Face. 
Description of Sample_ 


& 


Rem arks- 


M oisture Content 


/to 







































































































































































































































































































































































































































■ 




■ 



































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

COMPACTION TEST 

PROJECT risTTSss tv *.*. 

SITE 

SAMPLE 3 TO - j'o /X3s*r -T'es/e^ 

LOCATION 3 * 

HOLE ~7of /vtt ZT DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN e7 7T DATE /r2 

Trial Number 

/ 

2 

3 


or 

0 

7 

c 

C 

Mold No- 








Wt- Sample Wet + Mold 

*•69 77 

27SCZ 

20007 

20/-00 

23/30 

2777/ 

*76.** 

xz +~ 

CPC 

Wt- Mold 


7**07 

7**0? 

7**07 

7**07 

7**07 

7**07 

*5-- 

Wt- Sample Wet 

77* 7o 

7 * 0 . 9 * 

7*6-7* 

7*7*7 

7*7*3 

/* * 6 * 

/X2SS 

> L 

w 

0) 

_♦— 

c <v 
OQ 

Volume Mold 








Wet Unit Weiaht lb/ft 3 

//s'7o 

7*0.?* 

7*6.7* 

■770 

7*7*3 

/2S6<7 

722 33 

Dry Unit Weight !b •/ f t 3 

70S7 

7*6 3 

//020 

7/0 ss 

/'O* 

7 * 7.0 </ 

/o 2 M' 

c 

a> - 

c 

c o 

Container No- 

7^23 

7^3 

7^/0 

VZ'/f 

r-s? 

r^s 


Wt- Sample Wet + Tare 

73'*(39 

7 S 202 

/JT^ 

70*<*T7 

7000 ? 

/SXSo 

70S 93 

o -- 
On 

Wt- Sample Dry 4-Tare 

/*237 

720&S 

/* 2 ?o 


7*37.e 

73/9/ 

724 S3 

i«c 

w*“ 

Wt- Water 

72.02 

7**7 

76*6 

/7O0 

/7'7 

70.09 

73 3* 

3 fc 

4- 

Tare Container 

20.29 

3*09 

3233 

36-63 

33-30 

29 40 

2903 

O as 

Wf- Dry Soil 

/O&O 0 

706-36 

77002 

7/0.0/ 

70992 

/o9.0/ 

?6-76 

SQ 

Moisture Content 

s/ss 


7*00 

/s'*// 

7 S ’6 

77-33 

7? *7 



Method of Compoction_ 

a2/7<t*//3/2 


Diam. Mold _ 

Height Mold - 

Volume Mold_ 

No- of Layers_ 

Blows per Layer 


/ 4L- 

20/6 /n 

&OQZ0 /?* 

S’ _ 

23” 


Ht- of Free Fall_ 

Wt- of Tamper_ 2o 

Shape of Tamping Face <S> 
Description of Sample_ 


Rem arks__—— 

X /g>Q/vf rr/r 






































































































































































































































- 














































































































S*Y 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

COMPACTION TEST 

PROJECT <7- 

SITE 

SAMPLE S'# - 

LOCATION <$/.//** f 7*77/7 

HOLE /■*£ Af#* C/ DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN /S' • c7- AS DATE /*T/?*e/rA 

rial Number 

/ 

S 

3 

* 


0 

7 

Mold No- 








.0 Wt- Sample Wet + Mold 


zr/St 

£70*9 

£74 ?o 

730*9 

SZ&y.oo 

S70 03 

tioWt- Mold 

/s-V-o? 


/r*o? 

7S**7 

/S*<>7 

/r*'o7 

sS9<>7 

II Wt. Sample Wet 

//7/S 

/£ 0 ■/</ 

/s*sz 

77*03 

//4ZZ 

/SS<?3 

/S396 

[^Volume Mold 








I Wet Unit Weiaht Ib/ft- 5 

//7/S 

/#*■'¥■ 


/£?■** 

7*4 S t 

/£>93 

/*3 ?6 

,Q Dry Unit Weight Ib/ft-^ 

703-72 

70S3 

707 6 


7*0 S 

/*6- 40 

soy.V- 

Container No 

7'i/-J V 

7^-/3" 

7^/ 

7^x?V 

r^/o 

r-* 

7<-s¥- 

!nW1*Sample Wet-fTare 

/6&* *3 

/ss.ee 

7S&SO 

7 S 993 

70/S/ 


/S3-4o 

S’^Wt* Sample DryH-Tare 

7S*. 93 

/+* 3S 

7*7 ss 

/*‘*7* 

/^3/e 

s*oSO 

/33 0o 

Wt- Water 

/3*S 

S‘£?c> 

/6 

/7*?3 

/&09 

S9 3? 

79.00 

\ ^ Tare Container 


S</.66 

33 93 

3*77 

jw: ts"? 

S3 Jo 

j 3 .ee 

l%Wt- Dry Soil 

/o*a? 

7oS7S 

/076 s 

/07 7& 

/e>7*y 

7*4 70 

99 9S 

iQ Moisture Content 

/S77S 


S07S 


/6S 

70/3 

/re 

























































































































































































































































































































■ 














































































































//S& 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 
DEPT of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 


PROJECT tW^/s /*/ 




SITE 


SAMPLE 3o - j'a /isf/rs 


LOCATION 




HOLE 0 0 2 depth 


: 


Machine Data:- 



Description of Sample. 

{Machine No 
Multiplicati 
«Vt Loading 



on Factor 36 


Block Piston (gms.) S+* 


SPECIMEN DATA 

Specimen Number 

l 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

Lateral Pressure ) 


0 


0 


0 

Length inches 




/?-*2 


79*2 

Area sq. cms. 


#■7' 


S7/ 


07' 

{Volume ccs. 







i Dry Unit Weight Ibs/cu-ft- 


// 0 .S 


/o? < 


/ 08 . 0 

Gs= * Volume Soil Solids 







Wt- Tare + Soil + Water at start 


/77S* 


73939 


yr?-7o 

Wt- Tare + Soil* Water at end 


777 38 


73930 


73960 

Wt- Tare + Soil 


/3?28 




/*<=>. A 

Number and weight of Tare 

7~e/-3l7 

S'*#? 


je.33 

-r -73 

333d 

Wt- Soil 




sores 


708 3 A 

Before 

Test 

Weight of water 


/76 / 


77/8 


773? 

Moisture content 


/6 2 


/6 y 



Degree of saturation 







1, After 

Test 

Wejght of water 


7730 


/7*9 


77+9 

Moisture content 


/£ / 


76 e 


/* ' 

Degree of saturation 






1 

L - 1 


.oad 

on 

Pan 

D i a 1 
Rdg 

Strain 

Area 

err 

|Load I 

I on 1 
Pan 

Dial 

Rdg 

Strain 

Area 

<r« 

Load 

on 

Pan 

Dial 

Rdg- 

Strain 

Area 

"! 

0 

96*0 




0 

<9/70 




0 

?33o 



' 1 

30 

<?0OC 




3o 

/CO 




/oo 

+3o 




\/CO 

G9/0 




/OO 

*9 00 0 




/3o 

3/0 




73o 

790 




/3o 

*83o 




200 

/3o 




200 

8*0 




7300 

830 




23o 

e?*c 





++o 




2S0 

330 




3oo 

8+0 




3oo 

/80 




3oo 

769c 




336 

770 




3ZO 

o3o 




320 

63o 




360 

70/0 



1 

I J+o 

79/0 




J9o 

M+o 




3?° 

600 



t 

) 

36o 

7?o 




36° 

//o 

730 

9+0 

793 

+00 

3?o 




380 

370 




380 

66+0 

8?6 

?** 

zoo 

+/O 

jLHQ 




+00 

3+0 




<700 

3300 

/3*o 

/oo 

200 

+20 

070 




+2o 

o3o 




+30 

ZSA/se 

79/8/ 




4>8+o 

+ 33 

96+ 

23o\ 


S«3C 









¥60 

800 

70 + 


238 \ 

</6o 

3*0 








V 

+80 

£000 

7*3 

23* 


</So 

o3o 

/o7 

976 

3+7 





A 

¥?* 

3/77 

'/?/&/ 


C 

_ * 


3+00 

73 f 

foo 

23/ 


! 

4 








320 

<7+3o 


/o + 

23/ 


/ 





pq 

3\ 


j 

1 

3+o 



r Z> 

1 


f 

/ 





v 


j 







.p 

v 




-A.. 

V4 




/ "a 





/ 





Vl 



\ 


r / 

\ 





/ 




\ \ 



_ 1 


\—r 

1 









v 

\/ 


1 

1 7 

7 











j * 












j/rVe 


W¥7T j 














-]_ J 
























































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 
DEPT of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

TR1 : AXIAL COMPRESSION 


..EflQJECT 


SITE 

sample 

0~O — 

LOCATION 


HOLE 

DEPTH 


Machine Dato:- 

Machine No-_ 


Multiplication Factor_„ 

Wt-Loading Block -f- Piston (gms. 


3TO 




TECHNICIAN 


Description of Sam ple _ 


SPECIMEN 


Specimen Number 


DATA 


Lateral Pressure ) 


Length 


inches 








Area 


ig- cms- 


0 7 / 


077 


0 7/ 


Volume 


c c- s- 


Dry Unit Weight 


Ibs/CU- f f • 






So#* 


G S = 


Volume Soil Solid 


Wt- Tare + Soil -t- Water 


start 








Wt Tare + Soil -{-Water at end 




76**0 




Wt. Tare + Soil 


/*/*' 




7*3 




Number and weight of Tore 


33 *o 


7^/7 


36 68 


r-2„ 


3*o/ \ 

/OSS? 


Wt- Soil 


yo# 7/ 




Before 

Test 


Weight of water 








Moisture content 




ZZ^L 


S£^.. 


Degree of saturation 


After 

Test 


Weight o ? water 




/J-JO 




Moisture content 


/6 8 


77 / 


/6-8 


Degree of saturation 


Load 

on 

Pan 

Dial 

Rdg 

Strain 

"T 

Area 

■] 

07 

Load 

on 

Pan 

Dial 

Rdg 

Strain 

Area 

07 

Load 

on 

Pan 

Dial 

Rdg- 

Strain 

Area 

51 

o 

?o*L tTO 




o 

9/70 




0 

97*0 





760 




700 

&9*o 




soo 

*70 




700 

€> yo 




J?po 

*90 




7*6 

*70 




yzro 

8 ?/& 




Z*o 

730 




xfoe? 

4 Z 00 




! 7:Oo 

670 




3 oo 

7*00 




x3*o 

<99*0 




i *.fo 

yso 





7000 




300 

860 




1 < &o 

72 o 




*Oo 

**00 




33o 

070 




! 320 

7730 




*30 


777?/: 

'7P 


*7° 

78oo 




i 36o 

770 









*co 

*60 



J 

i 380 

6 ?oo 





/ 

/ 




*/o 

300 



1 

y-oo 

* 0 O 






/ 



v 

*20 

300 



I 

If 

*/o 

/ 6 o 










*30 


/o?* 

97S 

zzz\ 


j r?7o 





/ 





*Yo 


/Z 3 

ffY 

•^ r3 j 

/so 

73o 





1 / 






£Z£° 

/Y/ 

/* '* 

3 Z3 \ 


Too 

/£3 

16 . 0 * 

Z TO 


V 





*60 

3/6* 

’77797 

-C> 

\ 

j 

*fo 

7*0 

/Y* 

/czo 

zze 










i 

*60 

*7*o 

/ 6 c 

/**C 

zzz 










_! 

f7o 

j$sS, 

^-V=77. 

47/P 


i 







-M 
















J 4 




— 

7\ 











J 

/ 


j 

-«—* 


7 

t 1 














j 


F7 


r—-— 













T 

i 

I- 
















- j . 

1 

vL. 

—J 










87 V 8 

<T.: 

- £. i 

Z* J 

It 














s 


















































































































































































































































/jro 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEPT of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

TRI-AXIAL COMPRESSION 

PROJECT /a, 

SU£ 

SAMPLE * 7 - 4 /^^ 

LOCATION 0 ^ c'Vc a* > y <$ r x./7Ji 

HOLE sf. *** c-/* DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN ^^ ; DATE 

Machine Data;- 

Description of Sample: 

Machine No- ^ 


Multiplication Factor 50 


Wt. Loading Block Piston (gms.) too 





SPECIMEN DATA 


Specimen Number 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

Lateral Pressure {em ) 







Length * inches 







Area sqcms. 







Volume ccs. 







Dry Unit Weight Ibs/cu-ft- 







Gs= -Volume Soil Solids 







1 Wt- Tare + Soil -+■ Water at start 


Ibl-io 


/fcV07 


n>x bn 

1 Wt- Tare + Soil + Wat er at end 


/b7 00 


162-9* 


102 *2 

Wt* Tare + Soil 


199-49 


/vr 37 



i, Number and weiqht of Tare 

T 19 

3?- SO 

r 29 

77 

T IS 

34 u> 

Wt- Soil 


no 1,9 


ho- <00 


no 78 

Before 

Test 

Weight of water 


t7'<o<o 


17 70 


/ 7 *9 

Moisture content 


/&* 0 


f(o O 


)? (0 

Degree of saturation 







After 

Test 

Wejght of water 







Moisture content 







Degree of saturation 








oad 

on 

‘an 

Dial 

Rdg 

Strain 

Area 

or 

Load 

I on 
Pan 

Dial 

Rag- 

Strain 

Area 

<Ti 

Load 

on 

Pan 

Dial 

Rdg- 

Strain 

Area 

37 

\° 

9*40 




>0 

9930 




O 

9 440 




00 

*90 




too 

2*0 




/oo 

28o 




SO 

JU> 




ISO 

090 




Iso 

190 




lOO 

82 bo 




200 

8t20 




200 

viio 




U-O 

*470 




2*0 

9 30 




2*0 

7VP 




100 

79 ST) 




A 80 

1 30 




280 

£572 




ixo 

(0*0 




3 00 

7S4.0 




3 00 

370 




\8Q 

300 




320 

b3 O 




370 

IfO 





b9$0 




390 

270 




390 

711Q 




to 0 

7X0 




360 

b*SO 




3<oO 

710 

b li 

9 30 

1-9* 


*00 




3*0 

900 




380 

340 

7 2<o 

490 

2’0$ 

n>a 

0*0 




90Q 

£8*0 




900 

b7S0 

9-»V 

9 X* 

2-02 

’IXQ 

*S*o 

19 3 

10-1* 

^* 02 ] 

920 

300 

I4-L> 

io-4 

20} 

4xo 

sue 

WftP 



Ho 

9 800 

17-0 

10 • * 

x10 

990 

94SO 

17 7 

/Ob 

208 






hoc 

3 7*0 

20 1 

no 

2-10 

460 

3200 

Xx 1 

n-2 

X-ob 






HQ 

SMg 




980 

S Ml 

LAA 6 .D 




















r^l 1 





















J 


r —\ 





A -- 

L 





1 











/ 

\ 











f / 

I 




v 

j 





v 

J 





y~ 

t= 





J — 





— ^ 












H. 



















..... 

<r = 

e.Q? 
















J 






























































































































/S/ 


Multiplication Factor ( _ 50 

Wt Loading Block •+• Piston (gms.) tQO 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 
DEPT of CIVIL ENGINEERING 
SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

TRI-AXIAL COMPRESSION 


PROJECT 'Tts&ss 

/V C jT. 

SITE 

SAMPLE S* 

A//JT 7V/PV?" O/' 

LOCATION Ctxry S 


-HOLE /V'/r Ty 

DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN 

_.j 


Machine Doto:- 


Machine No-. 


D escriptio n of Sam ple 


—j 


SPECIMEN DATA 

Specimen Number 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

Lateral Pressure [ens ) 







Lenat h inches 







Area sq. cms. 







Volume ccs- 







Dry Unit Weight Ibs/cuff- 







Gs= -Volume Soil Solids 







! Wt- Tare + Soil -+- Water at start 


/S7*Xb 


/bXSO 


tbO • TO 

Wt- Tare + Soil+ Water at end 


/Tf* /3 


/ux 9? 


i 60 70 

Wt* Tare + Soil 




193 ?T 


l*/X V? 

Number and weight of Tare 

T it 

il - 3? 

T-H 

Zb 62 

T9 

iso/ 

Wt* Soil 


(07 X3 


/07-iO 


/<>7 >? 

i Before 

Test 

Weight of water 


/» fe5 


/I-21 


JS 9/ | 

Moisture content 


n v 


/7 S 


17 / j 

Dearee of saturation 






f 

After 
, Test 

Weight of water 







Moisture content 







Degree of saturation 








Load 

on 

1 Pan 

Dial 

Rdg 

Strain 

Area 

or 

Load 

on 

Pan 

Dial 

Rdg- 

Strain 

Area 

<r. 

Load 

on 

Pan 

Dial 

Rdg- 

Strain 

Area 

57 

o 

9Z/0 




o 





o 

9/ 51 




so 

txo 




TO 

/ 9o 




so 

ovo 




ioo 

o/o 




zoo 

O5o 




/oo 





ISO 

22 60 




/TO 

2290 




ISO 

no 




XOQ 

9bZO 




zoo 

bio 




ZOO 

SZO 




2JXO 

S/0 




xzo 

Tt>0 




ZX o 

910 




Z90 

Voo 




190 

990 




Z90 

3 9o 




ZbO 

JL%0 




ZbO 

300 




AbO 





a«o 

no 




Z 20 

J5TO 




z%o 

130 




300 

7950 




3oo 

7990 




300 

7970 



J 

A 10 

loo 

s*s 

9-X! 

/ *?t 

3X0 

TOO 




3Z0 

29D 



1 

3*/0 

SSO 

S29 

Vie 

/*?£* 

3 VO 

S90 




390 

loSO 




360 

xso 

6 * 9S 

9*3£ 

y- 73 

3TD 

9X0 




360 

9ZO 




35fO 


\et> 



360 

ZbO 

7 * 20 

9*39 


370 

A TO] 

6*>9 

9* 3V 

/ • 991 






370 

020 

7%l 

9 *6 

lii 

320 

090 

2l*£ 

9*90 







320 

6290 


9* 55 

2*00 

390 

6 29 0 

2-oo 

9:9?, 

.^192] 


t -V 




390 

sue/ 




VoO 

SW6 





k \ 




















r—% 















A 





--VJ 










\ 





. A-, 





r\7 





/ \ 










T Y 










Y 










\ \ 





— 1 



j 















L_j 













jr= 

X*. 4 

































































































































































































































- 132 


DATA FOR CLAY MIXTURE #2 

The following four pages contain that data obtained in the 
laboratory for M Clay Mixture #2" which was used in this research 
program. 









UNIVERSITY of 

ALBERTA 

PROJECT 'rw* e ’*ss 

r/'. 

SITE 

DEP’T- of CIVIL 

ENGINEERING 

SAMPLE €/eer's 


SOIL MECHANICS 

LABORATORY 

LOCATION 

sxs/rx sSa y 

ATTERBERG 

LIMITS 

HOLE /Vr fries' 

1 DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN a: 

DATE^y/^/Jx? 


Liquid Limit 



: 7 




t + * i. 


2‘5 


-fe« 

79 ■ >L? 

3 3 


/ 3- '/C 

3 9 -A 


??• 7 

.x.l. 

rt - y. 

? - 


I// 


^£ 


> ■ > -• 

^ - 'y / 

35 ?- ? 


Plastic 

Limit 



Trial No- 

/ 



Container No- 

/y- 7 . 

/v. fi . 

4 - >S. 

Y*/t- Sample Wef+Tare 

— «> - 5"/’ 

r^T- /. 7 

57 > - / - / 

Wt- Sample Dry+Tare 


3 L - V // 

\ SS'. $C 3 

Wt- Water 

r- 3 ^/ 

a* v j 4 - 

7 - jvJ 

Tare Container 

3 ” 3 - / v/ 

3 ” 

5*3 : fv 

(Wt- of Dry Soil 

< 7 .- ^v 7 

.2 - 7 iv.. 

< • ‘ 7 / / 

Moisture Content % 

^ /.Z. 

>L- 

/v • 3 ? j 

Shrinkage 

Limit 


_J 

F |lrial No- 

> 



ijOonfainer No- 

/ 3 *ry. 


' 

jlVVf- Sample Wet -t-To re 

- • y rjy 



Iwt- Sample Dry -ETaro 

^ 



jjiWt- Water 

r • 


1 

j- Tare Container 

57 •gAV 


J 

11 Wt- of Dry Soil Wo 

- - 

/h'£. 

yv'-V i 

D Moisture Content -ur% 

/>■ • •/,- 


f 

lilvol. Container V 




|yol* Dry Soil Pat Vo 




jiShrinkaae Vo!- V-Vo 




-tlshrinkaae Limit ' 





M = C^wT* x l0 °) 

Description of Sample;__ 


Remarks; 

























































































































































































































































































































































































UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


PROJECT sa/ 

s€-. 

SITE 

SAMPLE Sto <s0*er's 

<rx.s?y 

LOCATION SA?7~<v/?A?r'<e'z> s/f 

HOLE S? <?*<?** 

DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN 

DATE So/* /S’S 


L i q u i d Limit 


ia I No- 


9L 


o. of Blows 


3^ 




3S 


7 5* 


7 ■ S 


7- S 


onfaine? No. 


1/3 


\Jy 


i/ 


1/7 


I/? 


t- Sample We t + Tare 


joi Vl 


91 9S 


/os -07 


9V-/? 


97 - 12 * 


/o i -oo 


t- Sam pie Dry -Mere 
ft- Water 


99 3 / 


?o ot- 


/oo - 9/ 


9 o • Z/ 


9 2. XO 


9 ? 92 * 


9 SO 


99 


V- i(o 


s /z 


V- is 


are Container 


?s- 


/ 79 - o; 


O 2-i 


90 ■ o9 


-l 7 


9? os 


/3 - 99 


't- of Dry Sojj__ 

oisture Content 0*/%! 3 ^ - 9 


7 2 os 


7 5 ?? 


70-/7 


J 3 OZ 


JO 79 


\o- o 


39 o 


39 * 3 


3?T 


Plastic Limit 


Trigi No- 


:onfainer No- 

Wf- Sample WeHTore 

Wt- Sample DryiTare 

Wt- Water 

Tore Container 

Wf of Dry So il 
Moisture Content 


Shrinkage Limit 


ier No- 


iWt-Sample Wet+Tare 


W t- Sample Dry -More 


Container 


-|t D wt- of Dry Soil 

1 itl fifl.-vief-1sr u Oor.fcf 


II^I Moisture Content w% 



/3.U 
737 

3% ' V^fc- 

iLJ-Li 

S"V -9VV 

Z 9 7 z 

JZ ?9 


0-1/. 

~V-fa>3 

rv- u 37 

tT-z - 3 y/ 

. • Gi 9 
/Z ■ b‘3 


B-/ 

2 <i? 
S? c<i? 
•sc 
09 <o 


/z /V 


rjjj {|Voi‘ Dry So i l Pat Vc 
jtijj iShrinkQqe Vol- V- Vo 


Shrinkage Limit 




ss-n >9 


S9 - 




• S97 


z - z?y 


/ T • 




7 2-90 


~Vo 


*4 (?w. 
Description of Sample 


IQO) 









































































































































































































































































































































































, 














































































































PROJECT 

/V 

SITE 

SAMPLE *r: cso^r's 


LOCATION 

r? 

HOLE oSJs*' DEPTH 

TECHNICIAN sr 

DATE *’<? /Y/sz 


UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 

DEP’T- of CIVIL ENGINEERING 

SOIL MECHANICS LABORATORY 

ATTERBERG LIMITS 


Liquid Limit 


































































































































































































































































































PROJECT -rW^r^ss 

SITE 

SAMPLE frr 

<rxs-?y 


LOCATION 

r £? <^/rV 


HOLE /£" X f+f/r 

DEPTH 


TECHNICIAN 

DATE yc/yt/s^ 















































































































































































































































































































































B29766 




