

For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


(3x aiBias 

aiBaaaitsBS 














THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


EFFECTS OF GROWTH OF THE INHERITANCE OF LEARNING 


THE MEANING OF THE GROWTH OF SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION 
FOR EDUCATION 

FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE 


A DISSERTATION SUBMITTED 
TO THE COMMITTEE ON GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE DEGREE OF 
MASTER OF EDUCATION 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


BY 

IAN CHARLES MACDONALD 
EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


SEPTEMBER, 1956 





-ii~ 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 


The undersigned hereby certify that they 
have read and recommend to the School of Graduate 
Studies for acceptance, a thesis entitled EFFECTS OF 
GROWTH OF THE INHERITANCE OF LEARNING and subtitled 
THE MEANING OF THE GROWTH OF SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION 
FOR EDUCATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE 
submitted by IAN CHARLES MACDONALD 
in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the 
degree of Master of Education*, 


PROFESSOR 

PROFESSOR 

PROFESSOR 

October 1956 
































t s 


















. ',.0 : ; ■. ' 






, 





















-111- 


ACKN OWLEDGMENTS 

The writer wishes to acknowledge his indebtedness to Dr. J. A. 
Anderson, chief chemist of the Board of Grain Cominis si oners, Winnipeg, 
for a fundamental contribution to the development of thought in this 
thesis; and to Mr. C. F. B. Stevens, assistant to the president. Pulp 
and Paper Research Institute of Canada, Montreal, for making valuable 
material available from his own theses on scientific communication and 
methodology. 

Assistance in searching out information concerning scientific and 
technical publication, the problems of search and documentation and 
scientific education, was freely given by many persons. On this ac¬ 
count, the writer wishes to express his appreciation to the following: 
Dr. Eugene W. Scott, executive secretary, Interdepartmental Committee 
on Research and Development, Washington, D. C.; Dr. Howard A. Meyerhoff, 
administrative secretary, American Association for the Advancement of 
Science, Washington; Mr. J. ¥. Perry, research associate, Centre for 
International Studies, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Mass.; Dr. Wallace Waterfall, executive secretary, American Institute of 
Physics, Mew York; Mr. W. H. Cook, honorary secretary, Royal Society of 
Canada, Ottawa: Mr. J. Bird, secretary, Association of Special Libraries 
and Information Bureaux, London, England: Mr. D. N. Lowe, secretary, 
British Association for the Advancement of Science, London, England; 

Dr. W. F. Hewitt, Jr., Des Moines Still College, Bes Moines, Iowa; 

Dr. H. F. Boulind, secretary, Science Masters’ Association, Cambridge, 
England. 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/effectsofgrowthoOOmacd 


-iv~ 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PART I 

THE GROWTH OF SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION 

PAGE 

INTRODUCTION 1 

CHAPTER 

I GROWTH OF LIBRARY COLLECTIONS 5 

II VOLUME OF SCIENTIFIC PUBLICATION 12 

I--THE RISE OF PERIODICALS 13 

II--STATISTICS OF ABSTRACTING 16 

Primary Publication in Physics 17 

Primary Publication in Chemistry 23 

Primary Publication in Biology 28 

Exponential Growth in Physics 

and Chemistry 34 

III— FIGURES AND ESTIMATES 37 

1. Character of the Rate of Growth 37 

2. Volume of Current Output 39 

3. The Accumulation of Information 43 

Net Conclusions 45 

Origins of the Outburst 46 

IV— PROSPECTS AND PROBLEMS 48 




-V- 


CONTENTS 


PART II 

HOW THE GROWTH OF SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION 
AFFECTS SCIENTIFIC ENDEAVOR 

RESULTANT DIFFICULTIES AND PROBLEMS 

PAGE 

INTRODUCTION * 52 

What Scientists Say 52 

Dynamics of Growth 56 

Expansion of the Human Species 57 

The Growth of Learning 59 

Prelude to Analysis 6l 

CHAPTER 

I EFFECTS OF VOLUMETRIC GROWTH 63 

INTRODUCTION 63 

I--EFFECTS OF INCREASE IN CURRENT OUTPUT 67 

Locating Pertinent Papers 68 

Circulation Slowed Down 73 

Approaches to Solution 76 

II—EFFECTS OF ACCUMULATIVE GROWTH 77 

Search and Documentation 79 

"Loss" of Information 82 

III—EFFORTS TO IMPROVE INTERCOMMUNICATION 89 


IV—SUM ARY 


101 





-VI- 


CONTENTS 


PART II 

PAGE 

CHAPTER 

II INCREASING SPECIALIZATION 10U 

I—BENEFICIAL EFFECTS OF CONCENTRATION 106 

II—ADVERSE EFFECTS AND DIFFICULTIES 113 

III—SUMMARY 122 

III ASPECTS OF COMPLEXITY 125 

I—COMPLICATION OF ORGANIZATION 126 

II—DIVISION IN PHYSICS 129 

III—DECLINE OF AUTONOMY 133 

lo In Macro cosmic Physics 135 

2 0 In Microcosmic Physics 139 

3o In Reducing Chemistry to Physics lU5 

U® In the Biological Sciences lij .8 

IV—MEANING OF COMPLEXITY 153 

Generation of Description 156 

Why Divide and Isolate? 158 

Physiology of Description 162 

Dealing with Complexity 166 

Solution by Probability 170 

Summing Up 173 

V—FURTHER CONCLUSIONS 17U 

Need for Reviews 175 

Group Research 176 

Better Mathematical Tools 179 




CONTENTS 


PART II 

PAGE 

CHAPTER 

IV COMMUNICATION AND LANGUAGE 181 

INTRODUCTION 182 

I—LANGUAGE IN COMMUNICATION 18 5 

II— ART OF PRESENTATION . 189 

III—FUNDAMENTAL FORMULATIONS 193 

IV—MATHEMATICS 198 

V—SEMANTIC CONSIDERATIONS 203 

VI—PLAIN ENGLISH 209 

VII— NET CONCLUSIONS 214 

PART III 

MEANING FOR EDUCATION 

FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE 

INTRODUCTION 21? 

The Growth and Education 219 

"Advancement of Scientific Knowledge" 22? 

"Scientific Knowledge" 232 

CHAPTER 

I RESOLUTION OF PROBLEMS 236 

I—MORE KNOWLEDGE 238 

Change in Vocational Requirements 239 

Fundamental Focus 244 





-Vlll- 


GONTENTS 


PART II 

PAGE 

CHAPTER 

I II— DEMAND FOR MORE TIME 246 

III—FURTHER SPECIALIZATION 250 

IV—DEPTH AND BREADTH 255 

Concentration and Selectivity . 257 

Import of Design 258 

Design for Depth Plus 262 

,,T dses n of "Liberal Arts" 262 

V—BETTER EDUCATION 263 

Need and Sources of General Ideas 264 

Acquiring the Arts of Inquiry 26? 

VI—CONTINUOUS LEARNING 2?3 

VII—THREE REMAINING PROBLEMS 274 

II DESIGN AND STILE 277 

III GENERAL APPLICATION 283 

IV CAPACITY OF THE INDIVIDUAL 286 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


291 




-IX- 


LIST OF FIGURES 

Figure Page 

1. Growth of library Holdings 10 

2. Younger Libraries * Growth 11 

3. Rate of Publication in Physics Abstracts 21 

4. Rate of Accumulation in Physics 22 

5. Rate of Publication of Abstracts in Chemistry 26 

6. Rate of Accumulation in Chemistry 2? 

7. Rate of Publication of Abstracts in Biology • 32 

8 . Rate of Accumulation in Biology 33 

9. Growth of Information in Physics and Chemistry 3 6 

LIST OF TABLES 

TABLE PAGE 

I Basic Demands of Growth 
Limiting Conditions 

Penalties and Pitfalls 237 

II Design for Education According to 

Principles Educed from the Analysis 

of Growth and Its Demands 2G0 









. 




. 


' 



- 

. 








• •• ; < * ' • ‘ L > 








■ 































' 










-X- 


SYNOPSIS 


This thesis had its genesis in the idea that the manifest growth 
of human knowledge and information must have a bearing on some of the 
educational questions which are being so widely debated nowadays. The 
writer set out to discover whether the growth and its effects on sci¬ 
entific and technical endeavor would give up any firm or even unequivocal 
answers to the questions. The results of the inquiry are submitted here 
in three parts, the first dealing with the raw data of a quantitative 
nature, the second with the effects of growth upon scientific and tech¬ 
nical endeavor, and the third with the meaning of the growth for sci¬ 
entific education and for education generally. The first two parts are 
mainly analytical but synthetic toward the end. The third is for the 
most part a synthesis. 

In Part I it is shown that useful scientific information is growing 
exponentially: the published volume is doubling in a period approximating 
fifteen years. The current output of useful papers (1953) is estimated 
to lie between 350,000 and 750,000 per year. Gross output probably ex¬ 
ceeds 1,000,000 per year. Rate of output is rising and noxv is much 
higher than it was even twenty years ago. The 20-year accumulation 
(1934--53; which must be considered actually or potentially of value to 
current endeavor in science is estimated at between 5*000,000 and 
10,000,000 papers. The gross accumulation is much greater. Even the 
"useful" accumulation of the 20-year period almost certainly dwarfs the 
output of the xdiole of the nineteenth century. 

The accelerating growth in the present century is seen as originat¬ 
ing in a concentration around the period 1885-1915 of the fruition of 



-xi- 


earlier planting, of further discovery in fundamental science and of 
adventurous application in technology. The whole process resembles a 
chain reaction. Given the inquiring mind and human initiative and 
enterprise, knowledge gives rise to more knowledge with growth, pro¬ 
ceeding exponentially. As the result of growth, the disparity between, 
on the one hand, the current output and accumulated production of the 

l 

many minds and, on the other, the limited capacity of the single mind 
to read and understand and use the material, becomes enormous. This is 
the single most important factor tending to retard the growth. 

An.examination of the development of living things and of human 
society shows that growth is characterized by certain "general dynam- 
ics"--increase in dimensions or mass or numbers, increasing specializ¬ 
ation, growing complexity and development of systems of intercommunica¬ 
tion. The growth of the human inheritance of learning is, above all, 
thus characterized. In Part II, therefore, the effects of the growth 
of scientific information are examined in relation to these dynamics. 

Analysis shows that, from the volumetric standpoint, the growth 
is making it difficult, if not impossible, for the individual to keep 
up with current output even in a narrow” sector or a limited field; 
slowing down. the circulation of information--the lifeblood of science; 
making search and documentation exceedingly and increasingly difficult; 
slowing down and interrupting communication with the past upon wrhich 
present achievements must be founded; in general, reducing intercom¬ 
munication. The most immediately practicable and useful answrers seem to be 
bringing about better wrriting of papers; teaching investigators how, r to 
make better use of the literature in its present form. 

































































. 




. 














































' 












-xii- 


As the disparity between the output of the multitude and the capac¬ 
ity of the individual grows, specialization increases. It is shown that 
specialized concentration of inquiry has been very fruitful as long as 
it has been complemented by efficient intercommunication. But special¬ 
ization also has adverse effects which hinder endeavor and bedevil in¬ 
quiry. These effects, including narrowing of attention, reduction of 
communication and fragmentation of knowledge, are described. 

The growth also gives rise to more and more complexity in the 
organization of knowledge and endeavor. At the same time, investi¬ 
gators are confronted with more, and more complexity in the systems of 
the natural world which they are studying. The greater part of the 
available mass of "useful" scientific information has been obtained 
largely by autonomic analysis and is analytical in character. Even 
the embedded, knowledge bears the impress of analytical origins. The 

-t 

day of autonomic analysis is by no means done—indeed, it seems in¬ 
dispensable --but the appearance of more and more complexity makes its 
application increasingly difficult. 

These points are brought out by means of an extended analysis and 
it is concluded that the situation demands radical departures from the 
predominantly analytical modes and traditions of mathematics, language 
and thought. 

Other ways of overcoming the problems of complexity, it is shown, 
depend heavily upon the improvement of communication and the use of 
language. 

The analysis of the effects upon scientific and technical endeavor 
comes to a focus in the conclusion that the growth is demanding, 




















* 

























. 





































' 




■ 
















-xili¬ 


es peci ally , ever more and better communication. For education, this 
means that the student must be fitted out with a better command of the 
conventional languages which are the means of communication. This is 
a very large part of the learning required of him. And the task is such 
that command of languages, including mathematics, and of the arts of 
communication must be sought almost throughout the period of formal 
education. 

In Part III, the problems of endeavor, arising from the growth, 
are transformed into problems of education, seen as a series of demands 
of the growth set over against limiting conditions. A resolution of 
these problems is effected, with further drafts upon the analysis of 
Part II, by means of a set of principles. These principles are shown 
to be inferred necessities of the growth. Bv applying them, a design 
is developed for a program of formal education for fundamental inquiry. 

It is submitted that this design is necessitated by the growth. Since 
formal education, in itself, cannot fully meet the demands of growth, 
an integral feature of the design is the adoption of the principle of 
"continuous learning as the business of a lifetime". 

The design and. style of education required for fundamental inquiry, 
it is then submitted on the basis of the argument to this point, also is 
essentially that required for any form of scientific or technical in¬ 
quiry. Moreover, since practically all domains of knowledge are char¬ 
acterized by growth and its dynamics, the essentials of the design are 
required in education in general. After the submission of these general¬ 
izations of the conclusions respecting education for fundamental sci¬ 
entific inquiry, it is shown that the capacity of the individual can be 


increased by making harder intellectual or "academic" demands in education. 






. 

. ■ 
















. 






































. ' 






, 








-xiv- 


The thesis is intended to be read by and to serve a wide audience, 
ranging from students to practitioners in education and in. science. For 
the benefit of the former, an effort has been made to present it in plain 
language as much as possible, and considerable over-simplification has 
been employed. However, the discussion will be found rather abstract 
in certain sections, and it may also be found that some of the ideas 
or combinations of ideas are by no means simple or easily grasped. The 
use of abstract or highly generalized terms is partly due to the need, 
for compression. 

The case presented in the thesis rests not only upon the evidence 
adduced, in the form of figures and facts and the testimony of scient¬ 
ists, technologists, educators and businessmen, but also upon the co¬ 
herence of the structure of thought and the consistency of the argument. 
In the first two parts, the argument will be found to be fairly detailed. 
In the third part, and especially in the last three chapters, however, 
it is stripped down, both to make the essentials stand, out and, again, 
to secure compression. At this stage, it is assumed that the reader 
will take advantage of the cross-referencing or that he will recognize 
the main parallels without the reiteration of relevant sections of the 
preceding analysis. Alternatively, he may carry forward in his mind 
what has gone before. Citations from other literature also are briefer 
in the third part, in most cases, and a full appreciation of their 
import may require an examination of them. 


< ' 




; . 1 ■ ;; ■ 


. . 






''.; od 










■ ‘ > 




, • TV'"; ’ • ' 


‘ 


1 V' . ' : . 


. ‘ ' ■ * J 












o . 






. 


























PART I 


THE GROWTH OF SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION 

INTRODUCTION 

This inquiry was begun on the assumption, bom of the common under¬ 
standing of the present day, that scientific knowledge is undergoing 
rapid growth.'*' But the reality and the character of any such growth 
were questions of such prime importance to the inquiry that they could 
not be left to be merely assumed. It was clearly essential to establish 
or to demonstrate them insofar as might prove possible, with some fom 
of empirical evidence, before endeavoring to show the impact of growth 
upon education for the advancement of scientific knowledge. 

Accordingly, the writer* s search of the literature was devoted at 

p 

the outset to the discovery of such evidence. 

In the course of the search for and the assembling of this evidence, 
it became plain that the initial assumption would have to be modified to 
accord with the nature of the available data. To begin with, growth, 
though it has certain qualitative aspects, as will be shown in the 
introduction to PART II, required demonstration in quantitative terms. 
This demanded measurement of knowledge, and it was apparent that 


iThe italicized terms should be taken in popularly understood senses 
unless and until otherwise defined. 

^ Literature is being used in the general sense of published informa¬ 
tion, not in reference to verbal works of art® 



























. . 












. 


































, 



















- 























. 










only knowledge in published form is susceptible of measurement; 
that is, in terms of number of books, of papers, of articles, of 
pages or of lines* 

Now, knowledge, as the term is commonly understood, means estab¬ 
lished and worthwhile information—the wheat which has been winnowed 
from the chaff by inquiring minds during the course of time® It is 
not, however, possible to say x*ith any measurable degree of accuracy, 
or, for that matter, in any quantitative and measurable way, what pro¬ 
portion of published material would be knowledge in this sense® For 
purposes of measurement, therefore, one is compelled to take published 
material, or at least some particular fom of it, in the gross. When 
thus taken, it can be described, with strictness, only as information® 

This neutral term accordingly was adopted by the writer for 
describing the scientific material which is to be considered quantita¬ 
tively in PART I. When the term knowledge is used, as it may be occa¬ 
sionally, it should be taken in its popular meaning, as described in 
the preceding paragraph. 

What was to be meant by scientific ? This question also had to be 
decided according to the necessities of measurement. When the published 
material, or the selected form of it, is taken in the gross, it includes 
not only information about so-called fundamental and applied science but 
also information about so-called technology. In a large quantity of any 
measurable fom of this information, it would be an enormous, if not 
actually impossible, task to separate the scientific from the technical 

























• ■ ■ ■ 






* 







* 






*' l L'l 

, 








' ' '■ . 




♦ 


t * 








. 






* 





-3- 


with a view to determining the proportion of the former; and, in any 
event, the result would be of doubtful accuracy because the boundaries 
between scientific and technical information are in reality vague and 
could only be drawn arbitrarily. 

For purposes of measurement in PART I, therefore, scientific in¬ 
formation had to be taken to mean both scientific and technical infor¬ 
mation* This will not preclude reference, where appropriate, to science 
and technology or to scientific and technical information, but no con¬ 
fusion should result from such usage when the context is carefully con¬ 
sidered. 

Having decided that scientific information would offer the only prac¬ 
ticable measure of growth, the writer searched the literature for figures 
on the volume published. No single, comprehensive set, precisely suited 
to the needs of this inquiry, was found. Indeed, nothing of the kind 
appears to be available; for no full and accurate accounting could be 
presented at the Royal Society Scientific Information Conference in 
London, 19U8, or at the International Conference on Science Abstracting, 
convened by the United Nations Educational, Cultural and Scientific 
Organization in Paris, 19h9» At both conferences, the lack of any such 
accounting was regretted and admittedly handicapped the delegates in 
their deliberations.3 


3These conclusions are drawn from a detailed study of the reports 
of the two conferences. 
























* 

- ■ . . • • 




. 




















* 
























- 

* r j 










, 

, 


















-li¬ 


lt will become evident in due course that this is merely a symptom 
both of the confused and duplicatory manner in which the information is 
published and of the extent to which the volume of the output has inun¬ 
dated the scientific community. 

However, figures have been found or compiled which substantiate 
the fact of growth and delineate its main aspects and those of the 
resultant accumulation. The numerical evidence, such as it is, re¬ 
ceives support from the appraisals and estimates of leading scientists 
who have become deeply concerned over problems raised by the growth of 
published scientific information. 

















' -'d 






* 






- 






CHAPTER I 


GROWTH OF LIBRARY COLLECTIONS 


Before considering the growth of scientific information alone, it 
is illuminating to see what has been happening to published information 
as a whole, which is represented by the collections in large university 
or central libraries* 

Dean Louis N* Ridenour, of the Graduate College at the University 


of Illinois, statess 


Professional librarians have for some time been concerned 
about the problems created by the constantly increasing size 
of the great research collections*••.The problem is that the 
size and cost of every research library are growing, not at a 
constant rate, but at an ever-increasing rate....every library 
is on the whole following an exponential law of growth... any 
quantity governed by an exponential law doubles its size in a 
given time, regardless of what that size was to start with.** 


The statistical evidence for these assertions, as found in American 


university libraries, is shown in Figures 1 and 2, in which the exponen¬ 
tial rate of growth is brought out clearly by the use of a logarithmic 


scale* It is little short of startling to see that the holdings of ten 


libraries founded earlier than 1831 have, on the average, been doubling 
every sixteen years throughout the past century and a quarter (Fig. 1), 


while those of ten smaller libraries, of more recent origin, have been 
doubling in the still shorter period of eleven years (Fig. 2). 


Some slowing down is indicated by the curve in the second figure, 
and Ridenour states that the Harvard and Illinois libraries individ¬ 


ually show some slowing down in the period 1920-^8, Harvard 9 s time to 
double dropping, for instance, from sixteen to twenty-eight years. The 


^Louis 
and 8. 


N. Ridenour, Bibliography In An Age Of Science , pp. 5, 6 







































* 






t ' « 







: e 




1 

.... 

.... t 

«* 





. 


■ 






. 


* 


* 














* 

’ 






. ■ . 







Northwestern library, on the other hand, has maintained its doubling 
every twelve years throughout the period of 1920-50, and Dr* Ridenour 
observes that the slackening probably reflects "the inadequacy of con¬ 
ventional library methods” in the face of the flood of scientific, 
technical and other literature*^ 

The persistent acceleration in rate is a salient and troublesome 
characteristic of the growth* It forecasts ever-increasing difficulty 
for human minds, which have their limitations, in striving to keep 
abreast of what is new, even in a very narrow sector of any field of 
endeavor* 

Today, the rate of growth has become very great, as a result of 
the long period of acceleration. This is shown by Fig. 1* Between 
i 860 and 1880, some 50,000 volumes were added, but during the twenty 
years between 1920 and I 9 U 0 the increase was not far short of being 
twenty times that figure, and in only ten years following 19l*0 it was 
on the order of thirty times as great, or 1,500,000 volumes. Xmagina- 
tion balks at the thought of trying merely to read, let alone under¬ 
stand and master, even a small fraction of such a mass of literature® 

It will be noted that the 19li0-50 increase is approximately half 
of the 120-year accumulation represented by the average holdings of 
these ten university libraries* This emphasizes a most significant 
aspect of the accumulation. Its mountainous size is mainly due t© 
additions of comparatively recent date. On the average, these libraries 
acquired about ninety-three per cent of their accumulation after 1900 
and approximately 6? per cent between 1933 and 1950* 



■ 

V 

' 




' 




, . 

• ■ : ■ '• ■ ■■ 1 

* 

' 

* • 








, 










■ ** • 

• ’ ■ . 


: r " ' t; • ! .o 

* 


, 

. 

- 

. 





-7- 


It might be thought that their acquirement of such increasingly 
great numbers of volumes in comparatively recent decades or years does 
not reflect a corresponding situation in the writing and publication 
of books but rather large-scale efforts to bring the library collec¬ 
tions up to date. Any such supposition would be denied, however, by 
the statement of Hewitt, based on a study of numerical evidence, that: 
"More than 5,000,000 books—over one-third of all those published since 
the invention of printing from movable type—appeared in the years 
1900-1*0. " 6 

While the evidence may not be deemed conclusive, it strongly sug¬ 
gests that the library collections have grown thus rapidly and on such 
an enormous scale in recent years, not because librarians have been 
collecting at an especially rapid rate and, so to speak, bringing their 
collections belatedly up to date, but because the output of writers and 
publishers has rapidly mounted to these astonishing proportions in 
recent times| that is, during the first half of the present century, 
and especially during its second quarter and probably thereafter. 

What is more, to speak only of the average accumulated holdings of 
more than 3,000,000 volumes in the ten older libraries referred to by 
Ridenour does not tell the full story of the accumulation of books. 
Harvard University®s library, alone, holds considerably more than 
5,000,000 bound volumes, while the American Library of Congress in 
Washington, D.C., which is described as "perhaps the largest library 
in the world", ^ holds 8,500,000 "volumes".® 


^W. F. Hewitt, Jr., Journal of Chemical Education , April, 19h9 f p* 191# 
^ Science f August 6, 19U8, p. 2. 

®Ridenour, op , cit., p. 18. 














• ' ~ ' . : •; : . .V. • . -i tu 

* . 

: v ; ■ r: •■l’..-' 

r ' < ' 








* 


. 

■ x ' 4 8' 1 

■"". 

^ : \ 

. 

' 




■ 


,. * 

. < t 






l ' •' « 








-8- 


Even this huge figure falls short of the grand aggregate of printed 

books, Ridenour cites an estimate of l5,U00,000 up to 19^0 by LeRoy C* 

Merritt, and describes it as conservative* In 19U0, Merritt placed the 

Library of Congress holdings at 6,200,000, then less than half of the 

grand aggregate, and the number of different titles held by all U#S* 

9 

libraries together at 10,000,000—less than two-thirds* 

The Library of Congress, incidentally, is credited with an aggregate 
collection of about 29 , 000,000 bound volumes, manuscripts, maps and other 
items* 

To return to the question of the number of bound volumes, R*R. Shaw 
states in Bibliography In An Age Of Science that estimates of book produc¬ 
tion since the beginning of printing vary from ten to twenty millions, 
while estimates of periodical articles would vary even more widely but 
“would certainly run over 100,000,000” without counting non-trade pieces 
and archives and manuscripts* 

Figures such as those cited above are merely estimates and may not 
be much better than “guesstimates” but they agree quite well on the order 
of size of the present accumulation when it is measured in terms of the 
bound-volume unit* It is safe to conclude, therefore, not only, on 
Ridenour* s evidence, that book holdings have been growing exponentially 
and now are growing at a very high rate, but also that the accumulation 
of books has become mountainous* 

It would be pleasant to be able to record that one can easily ascer¬ 
tain what proportion of this accumulation consists of scientific informa¬ 
tion but such is not the case* As will be seen in CHAPTER II, a new 


9 Ibid . 

^ Science . August 6, 19lt8, p. 2. 




















* 

: , : 

^ ■ 

, •: t : 

* 



. 




- 






- 




' 




, . ;; ■ , .... 

* 

. 






: 




„ 








• 4 






* 
























-9- 


tack had to be taken to get some statistical assessment of the growth 
of scientific information. 

The purpose of CHAPTER I has been to set the scene, or to indicate 
the larger setting, against the background of which the matter of 
scientific information will be considered, and also to present a 
picture which will be essential to an understanding of certain of the 
most general ideas to be put forward at the end of this thesis. 




































' - ' :v V'I:;;;/ 

. 















- 10 - 


GROWTH OF LIBRARY HOLDINGS 




























// 














/ 






- 

/ 






// 













4 

+ 4 

> 

7 





* 

&A 

W 

/ 

T~ 



















<SV/ 














/ ® 







/ 






/ 

/ 

// 







* 







'/ . 







u 1H0U ibtJU lyu 

o ig? 

o rjw rgso 


YEAR 


3,000,000 

I,000,000 

800,000 

600,000 

400,000 

300,000 

200,000 

100,000 

80,000 

60,000 

40,000 

30,000 

20,000 

! 0,000 


Figure 1 — "Growth of average holdings of ten univer¬ 
sity libraries founded earlier than 1831. Libraries 
included are those of Harvard, Yale, Columbia, 
Princeton, Pennsylvania, Brown, North Carolina, 
Virginia, Rutgers, and Georgetown. Data from 
Rider (Fremont Rider, 'The Scholar and the Future 
of the Research Library'). 1 ' -- From Louis N. Ridenour, 
Bibliogranhyln An Age of Science, p. 7. 


AVERAGE HOLDINGS FOR TEN LIBRARIES 







































































- 11 - 


YOUNGER LIBRARIES* GROWTH 



































S ' > 







.sax 






/• 

r X 






sy 





* 

/ 

' 4 

s y 

sf 






jB 















' 







V 






/Zy 


























X s 
r ✓ 

/ 








!B7^ 1880 !8$r "1900 19!0 19?0 1930 1940 

YEAR 


Fig. 2 -- "Growth of average holdings of ten university- 
libraries founded since 1849. Libraries included are 
those of Chicago, California, Illinois, Cornell, 
Minnesota, Western Reserve, Iowa State, Oberlin, 
Rochester, and Syracuse. Data from Rider, page 6." 

-- From Ridenour, on . cit .. p. 10. 


,000,000 

800,000 

600,000 

400,000 

300,000 

200,000 

100,000 

80,000 

60,000 

40,000 

30,000 

20,000 

10,000 


AVERAGE HOLDINGS FOR TEN LIBRARIES 



















































































1 







' 

























































CHAPTER II 


VOLUME OF SCIENTIFIC PUBLICATION 

Since figures could not be obtained to show what proportion of 
library book holdings consists of scientific information, another 
tack had to be taken in an effort to establish the fact and the 
rapidity of the growth of this kind of information and to discover 
the characteristics of its growth. Once the new direction had been 
taken, it became evident that, in any case, scientific books alone 
could not have provided a full and accurate picture of either growth 
or the present situation. 

From the standpoint of working scientists—though they do use and 
consult the inf omation in books—the more important part of the pic¬ 
ture is constituted by the papers and articles published in the 
scientific journals and other periodicals. These writings, and espe¬ 
cially papers in professional journals, form the basic record of orig¬ 
inal scientific information! and working scientists of necessity use 
them regularly, with the aid of abstracting and indexing services, for 
their daily work and especially for research. 

Fortunately enough, into the bargain, papers and similar forms of 
primary publication offer some precise figures on the volume of 
scientific information and the character of its growth, as will be 
shorn in the course of the present chapter. 
























































, 


. 




- . ' , - • 
. 












10 


■ 

— 










. 




< ■ 

’ 

■ 




. 




















I—THE RISE OF PERIODICALS 


The growth of scientific periodicals, the media of primary publica¬ 
tion, in itself tells something about the volumetric growth of scientific 
information. 

Broadly speaking, these periodicals originated around 300 years ago, 
when scientific societies were formed in Italy, France and England. It 
was 288 years ago that the Royal Society of London began the publication 
of its Transactions— the only periodical of that formative period which 
has endured to the present day. At first, the publications were general 
in their coverage, but with the closing years of the eighteenth century 
came the development of the journal confined to a particular branch, or 
at least to closely allied branches, of scientific endeavor. During the 
nineteenth century, journals became progressively more specialized in 
the modern manner, with consequent multiplication of their number. 

The numerical increase may be illustrated by the fact that between 

1810 and 1910, among the journals dealing with physics in all its 

branches, eighty new ones appeared.^ The increase in the number of 

periodicals regularly received and abstracted by the British journal. 

Physics Abstracts ( Science Abstracts Section A) is indicative of the 

12 

trend during the twentieth century. The figures are informally 
tabulated below 


Year 

1899 

1909 

1919 

1929 

1939 

19U9 

195>2 

Number 

108 

1$0 

110 

183 

275 

Uu3 

669 


^E. N. da C. Andrade, n The Presentation of Scientific Information*'. 
Royal Society Scientific Information Conference (191$) Report a p. 3$* 

^The increases shown probably represent new periodicals only in part, 
being due also to more extensive coverage of existing journals. 

^The figures were compiled by the writer from the journal. 





























t 


t ; .T 








* 

. 



; !' : ‘-'tit . ,;S 




—V : . 

"* .. 

- 






■ ' . ■■ ' •(. ‘.a 


. 






♦ 










* ^ ' 






















. . . , • 


























The 1909-19 decline probably was mainly due to wartime reduction 
in publication; between 1939 and 19L6, similarly, the number decreased 
from 275 to 2U5® 

More comprehensive information, for the present century, is pro¬ 
vided by the World List Of Scientific Periodicals, The First Edition, 
published 1925-27, listed 25,000 periodicals. The Second Edition (193U) 
gave a total of 36,000 and the Third (July, 1952) approximately 50,0Q0, 1 ^ 
Thus the number, according to this listing, doubled during the second 
quarter of the century. It is interesting to note, incidentally, that 
in 1951, in chemistry alone, fifty-seven new journals appeared,^ 

Growth of periodicals, however, is not fully described by reference 
to increase in numbers alone. Many of them have individually increased 
in size. Journals of the American Chemical Society offer a notable il¬ 
lustration, though probably an exceptional one in view of chemistry® s 
exceedingly rapid expansion during the present century. 

In 1878 or 1879, the society published a total of 250 editorial 
(non-advertising) pages, in one journal; in 1910, nearly 5,000 pages 
in four journals; in 1930, 11,000 in five; in 1939-1*0, 19,000 in five; 
in 19^8, 26,000 in five, after a falling off during World War 11,^ 

The 1952 figure was 25,637, in six journals. Doubling of size, as 
measured by pages, in little more than ten years is suggested by the 
increase from 11,000 in 1930 to 19,000 as the war began. This, it 
should be noted, is a peacetime rate of growth® 


■^race 5, Gay, Secretary, World List of Scientific Periodicals , 
letter to the writer, Oct. 20, 1952®" 

^E.J. Crane, Chemical and Engineering News, Feb. 25, 1952, p. 789 

■^Arthur B. Lamb, Chemical and Engineering News , Oct. 3, 19U9, p, 28U3 

























t 

















- 15 - 


These two sets of figures, on the number of periodicals and the 
number of editorial pages in American chemical journals, suggest the 
rapidity with which the volume of scientific information has been in¬ 
creasing during the present century. The data they provide, however, 

are sketchy. To obtain a better picture, figures on articles and 

17 

papers must be consulted. 

Before considering figures for the present century, note, for 
comparative purposes, what happened during the nineteenth, as in¬ 
dicated by the Royal Society Catalogue of Scientific Papers, which 
was confined to ’’pure” science. Between 1800 and 1863, the average 

number of papers published annually was only 3,097, but between l 87 h 

18 

and 1900 it was 22,616, or seven times as large. 

Judging by the production of papers, then, there was a substantial 
rise in the rate of publication of information in "pure” science during 
the nineteenth century. 

19 

The total for the century was more than 786,000® This is a large 

figure, but it shrinks by comparison with twentieth-century output. 

According to the figures of the International Catalogue of Scientific 

Literature a again limited to "pure” science, it was exceeded in only the 

2n 

first thirteen years of the present century! 


17 

‘For the sake of simplicity, only the term papers will be used 
henceforth in this thesis*. 

• ^Royal Society Empire Scientific Conference Report , p. 697 . 
Mature. July 25, 1925, p. 129. 


20 Ibid 































, 








. 

. 
















• * t 

* 









. 


. 





t * .V 




i 




. 


. 






















II—STATISTICS OF ABSTRACTING 


The journals which provide abstracts, or summaries, of current 
papers, offer the most accessible continuous record of the volume of 
scientific publication. The writer has, therefore, compiled figures 
on the numbers of abstracts published annually by three such journals 
which cover physics, chemistry and biology. 

The papers represented by the abstracts-—papers which are pub¬ 
lished in periodicals—of course vary individually in length or size® 
But that is a matter of little moment in view of the fact that the 
annual totals of abstracts run into the thousands. The number of ab¬ 
stracts, therefore, may be taken as a reliable meausureof volume of 
publication, and is so taken by scientists, themselves. 

The abstracting journals selected: 

21 

Physics Abstracts ( Science Abstracts Section A), the "only 
major abstracting service in English devoted wholly to 
physics ".22 

23 

Chemical Abstracts the world* s leading journal of the kind 
devoted to chemistry.^ 

Biological Abstracts. ^ comparatively new and probably not 
equal to others in its field, but available in the 
Rutherford Library, University of Alberta® 


23-Published in London, England* Abstracts numbered® 

^Dwight E. Gray, Study of Physics Abstracting , American Institute 
of Physics, Final Report . June 30,1955* p. 7® 

2 ^Published in Washington, D.C. Number of abstracts reported 
annually in Chemical and Engineering News . 

2l »Its pre-eminence today seems beyond question. 

^Published in Philadelphia. Abstracts numbered. 








































T 


. 


, 


- 


' « 

' 










. . 

- 



* : t 

< 

• ♦ ' • < ..::jv t r 




■cJ: " r i 










- 17 - 


Primary Publication In Physics — In Fig. 3, the following points are 
evident on inspections 

1. From 1900, or 1922, to 1951, there was a fourfold increase in 
number of abstracts published annually. 

2. No persistent upward trend developed prior to World War I. 

There was a falling off during the war. After it ended, a persistent 
upward trend appeared. 

3. Volume of publication fall off, again, during World War II, 
but the rate accelerated between 19kh and I 9 U 89 It decelerated there¬ 
after, yet rose to a peak of 9,900 in 1951® In terms of what any one 
man can read, let alone understand, in a year, this is a huge output. 

The 19U8-51 increases in rate undoubtedly were exaggerated by the 
postwar publication of the results of wartime research and in partic¬ 
ular by delayed postwar publication of results in nuclear physics which 
were considered of secret nature.Since 1 9h9$ with the backlog 
largely overtaken, publication has probably been in the course of a 
return to "normal” though the 1952 drop, no doubt, also represents 
the continuance of restictions on publication in the nuclear branch. 

A somewhat similar configuration, embodying much smaller changes, 
is evident after World War I. 

Even when seme allowance has been made for these considerations, 
however, the slope of the curve after the last war indicates a higher 
rate of increase in the volume of publication than was evident in the 


^^Paper restrictions in Britain also were limiting publication in 
Physics Abstracts immediately after the war—to about 200-300 abstracts 
per month, as Sir Clifford Paterson informed the Royal Society Empire 
Scientific Conference, 19U6'— Report Vol. 1, p. 771* 








, « — 

. 

- 




- 

* : 


. 




. 




♦ 


4 _ t‘ • - '' <•: . ••. nam 








- ' 


' 

',' r ;V, ir.-I 'Tp.Xii 

. ' 1 




' 






. 
















: 

t 


• t • 






late twenties and the early thirties* While it is as yet too early to 
be certain about its permanence, such a development would accord with 
the twentieth-century blossoming of atomic or nuclear physics and 
related branches of the science* 

The expansion of endeavor in nuclear physics has, of course, be- 

27 

come especially marked since the war* In 195>0, Nuclear Science Abstracts 
found in some 630 periodicals a total of 6,?5l papers worth abstracting 
for its specialized service, and in its Volume 5, for 19?1, the number 
had risen to 7»3U6* These figures, for this branch of physics (and 
chemistry) alone, are not far short of the totals in Physics Abstracts 
for the same year* 

No abstracting journal, not even Chemical Abstracts * it is safe to 
say, covers the literature pertinent to its field, exhaustively* Its 
editors select what is deemed "useful" or "of interest”* Judging by 
results of the Study of Physics Abstracting carried out by the American 
Institute of Physics, Physics Abstracts has fallen considerably short 
of full coverage of pertinent papers* 

Among more than 1,000 American physicists, 5 l percent rated its 
"breadth of coverage of articles of physics interest” as "good” and 1*3 
percent rated it as "medium", while "increased coverage was the line 
of improvement most strongly recommended."^ 0 

In 1951* however, progress toward fuller coverage in certain sub¬ 
ject areas in physics was reported* 2 ^ (The final report of the In¬ 
stitute* s Study, it should be noted, was put out in June, 1950*) 


^^Published by the Technical Information Service, United States 
Atomic Energy Commission, Oak Ridge, Tenn. 

pQ 

Dwi^it E* Gray, 0£. cit * * p. 8. 


25L. 


4 7* 


P_v» nw 


r% <ey rs tr An m in+ II 01^1 

















* 

V. , 3 

- 






















. 




, - t 



* 








. 

. 




' 


_ , . 

. 


. 

* 

t .: ' : 

, 

• < t 1 % ; 1 i 






* i i 

. . ... . 







-19- 


This aspect of Physics Abstracts indicates that the volume of pub¬ 
lication in physics (and in branches of science of pertinence or 
interest to physicists) has been even greater than is shown by Fig. 

This applies equally, of course, to Figure U, the curve of which 
depicts the rate of accumulation of material abstracted by this service. 
The 1925-3? sector of the curve indicates that this rate tends to in¬ 
crease, or to be exponential, in peacetime. However, because of the 
postwar effects noted above, and the deceleration in the Fig. ii, curve 
after 1951* it is too early to say with certainty whether the present 
peacetime” period will confirm that rate of accumulation tends to be 
exponential. 

In any event, it is clear from Fig. h that since about 1925 the 
rate of accumulation or growth in the volume of literature concerning 
physics has become much higher than it was during the first quarter of 
the century. Moreover, the accumulation has become tremendous in 
amount, totalling about 195,000 papers for the fifty-three years. 

What is much more significant, nearly 70 percent of it dates from the 
last twenty-seven years, and about fifty-five percent from the last 
twenty years. 

Since searches for relevant information in papers are not usually 
carried back farther than twenty years, only this fifty-three percent 


3°The phrase in parentheses indicates the fact that an abstracting 
service for a particular division of science stretches into other divi¬ 
sions. It has to, for there is much Interweaving and overlapping and 
boundary lines can only be drawn arbitrarily. 

3-k)n the other hand, the curve for the last three years probably 
understates the case, due to security restrictions on publication. 

























. 










- 




X 






* 








- ril 






. » 










% ^ / 












* 




. 


. 




. 

' 




can be considered strictly as still useful information, but there are 
undoubtedly many other papers published more than twenty years ago 
which still would be worth examination by same scientists far specific 
research or information purposes. 





RATE OF PUBLICATION IN PHYSICS ABSTRACTS 


2L 



siovHisay 













































RATS OF ACCUMULATION IN PHYSICS 


- 22 - 



Section A, Physics . 



































- 23 - 


Primary Publication In Chemistry — In Figs. 5 and 6, depicting volume 
of publication in Chemical Abstracts from 1907 to 1953, certain features 
similar to those in the Physics Abstracts graphs are apparent, but they 
are on a greater scale. The expansion of chemistry has been and con¬ 
tinues to be exceedingly rapid during the present century. 

Chemical Abstracts , it should be noted, undertakes to cover the 

32 

chemical literature of the world completely. Today it "is recognized 

33 

to be the most complete of the abstracting journals." 

The following points are evident from inspection of Fig. 3>: 

1. From 1907 to 1953, there was much more than a seven-fold in¬ 
crease in the number of abstracts of papers published annually, the 
figures for the beginning and the end of the period being about 8,000 
and 61,000 respectively. 

2. Volume of publication of papers in chemistry was rising, on the 
whole, strongly before World War I. After the wartime decline, it re¬ 
sumed the climb, more steeply at first (due, no doubt, to postwar pub¬ 
lication of the results of wartime work), but after 1922 taking pract¬ 
ically the same uptrend as during the pre-191h period* 

3* The decline during World War II was more pronounced than that 
during the first war but the postwar upturn also was more pronounced in 


3^Dr. E. J. Crane, editor of CA, states that is has covered the 
literature more nearly completely in recent years than it did early in 
the century, but that comparisons of recent and early periods still are 
reasonably valid, because the approach to completeness was easier in 
the early years when chemistry was little developed in many countries. 
Chemical and Engineering News . Sept. 10, 19uli, p. ill78. 

^F. S. Boig and P.W. Howerton, Science . Jan. 11, 1952, p. 2£. 
















~ ; . .. • _ ; .... ' • 


< . ■;;;.. 


* 


: * - ' ' .. ‘ ■ : v 

“ 

. 

♦ ' t .“- 

■. 


c 




t .. 


, 






* 

, 


. 




c 




. 








t 














, 










the second case. Indeed, it looks as though the curve will now maintain 
a much steeper peacetime slope than it did prior to each of the two wars, 
which would mean a much higher rate of increase in the volume of primary 
publication in chemistry. If the 19U7-53 slope should be maintained, 
the rate of increase will be about 5,000 papers per year, or two and a 
half times the pre-World War II rate. 

The eleven-year graph for abstracts of both papers and patents, it 
will be noticed, closely parallels that for papers alone. 

The rate of accumulation in chemical papers, as indicated by ab¬ 
stracts, is depicted by the Fig. 6 curve. The 1925-35 sector shows 
that this rate tends to increase or to be exponential in peacetime. 

This conclusion is partially confirmed by the curve for the present 
postwar period. 

As in the case of physics, it is clear that the rate of accumula¬ 
tion or of growth in the volume of information has become much higher 
since about 1925 than it was during the first quarter of the century. 
Moreover, had the two wars not intervened (see Fig. 5), chemists might 
well have been turning out papers during the second quarter at a much 
higher annual rate than has actually been achieved, and it is possible 
that as a result the second-quarter rate of growth might have exceeded 
that of the first quarter by a still greater margin. Such a result 
would not necessarily follow, of course, but it is conceivable. 

If the current annual output of primary literature in physics— 

9,000 papers--can be called huge in relation to individual reading 
time, then the output in and related to chemistry—more than 61,000 
papers, or more than 73,000 papers and patents—can only be described 
as staggeringl 





■ 




* 


t 


■ 


- 



* 

♦ . • ■ 

' 

*• ■ 


* 


« 


. 

* 


- 

r . 

I 









The figures for physics abstracting show a 53-year, twentieth- 
century accumulation of about 195*000 papers, but even this large 
figure shrinks in comparison with the accumulation in chemistry, which in 
the lesser period of hi years has mounted above 1,317*000 papers. This 
total does not include the new information accumulated in patents and 
they have been abstracted at the rate of about 10,000 per year during 
the past 11 years. 

In chemistry, as in physics, most (actually, 79 per cent) of the 
new information dates from the last 28 years, while 60 per cent dates 
from the last 20 years. The latter, at least, must be considered 
still useful information. Not all that accumulated during the twenti¬ 
eth-century period prior to 193k can be left out of the reckoning 
altogether; nor, for that matter, can everything published during the 
nineteenth century. And it is estimated that during the past 100 
years, "the volume of chemical knowledge has expanded at least 100- 
foldi" 31 * 


3i *J.W. Perry, "The Crisis In Compiling and Correlating Chemical 
Literature," address to M. I. T. symposium on "Machine Techniques for 
Information Selection", June 11, 1952, p. 1. 

























* 


y '■ ; 

, » 


* 













• « 

• , • 

* * • t - • ' 

' 



RATE OF PUBLI CATION OF ABSTRACTS IN CHEMISTRY 



sicmusay 


3 


Fig. 5 — Annual totals of abstracts published by Chemical Abstracts . 






























































THOUSANDS OF ABSTRACTS 


- 27 - 


RATE OF ACCUMULATION IN CHEMISTRY 



YEAR 


Fig. 6 - Cumulative totals of abstracts of papers published by 
Chemical Abstracts. 


































































- 28 - 


Priroary Publication in Biology — The evidence taken from Biological 
Abstracts must be viewed with some ^servations, as will be shown at 
the end of this sub-section. Fig. 7 suggests that the rate of publica¬ 
tion in biology has been rather irregular, as compared with the rates 
for physics and chemistry and especially the latter. The BA graph for 
biology bears only a slight resemblance to its counterparts for the two 
physical sciences. 

In the present postwar period, up to 1951* an upward trend appeared 
to be established, and the 1951 peak of more than 38,UOO papers was well 
above the previous, 1930-31 peak of 30,000. During the past two years, 
however, the rate of publication has declined again. This could scarcely 
be ascribed, as in the case of physics, partially to securitjr restrictions 
on publication, but it might be partly due to a comparative exaggeration 
of the 191*6-51 trend as a result of delayed publication of papers ac¬ 
cumulated during the war. 

The rate of accumulation or growth of biological literature, as 
shown by this particular abstracting service, has exhibited a slight 
tendency to increase, or be exponential, during the past decade or so. 

This is indicated by the X9UO-51 sector of the curve in Fig. 8. On the 
evidence in hand, however, it cannot be concluded that this is a char¬ 
acteristic feature which is likely to be evident in the futures 

It may be noted, incidentally, that publication in biology, as re¬ 
flected by Biological Abstracts . was not so adversely affected by the 
war as was publication in the physical sciences. This would not be 
surprising. 

The outstanding piece of evidence to be gained from Fig. 8 is that 
a mass of biological information, including agricultural and medical 


















• 



» 

* .v : 


* ■ ' : ' ■' ■ ! 

„ 

t • . , ' - ' : ; r°fi- 

, : ■■ ..I" 1 ' ; : M t 


' • • t ; ';; . = ■ - &<! 
: . ' ' , ' ' 


, , ^ ■ 


, 


< t . ' 

i’v. 

; . • t . . ■ 

, • _ ; '.g* ■ * 



, 

; 




-29- 


information, comparable to that in chemistry, has accumulated during the 
second quarter of the century. The service began operations in 1927 and 
through 1953 had abstracted a total of 675*000 papers. Of these, 5l5*000 
date from the last twenty years and would be considered essential, say, 
for purposes of bibliographical search in depth. 

Data from other sources and from other abstracting services operat¬ 
ing in much the same field strongly suggest that the data from Biological 
Abstracts are decidedly incomplete. This could account, in part at any 
rate, for the comparative irregularity of the graph in Fig. 7* 

Although ihe aim of BA ,f is to abstract as soon as possible any com¬ 
munication relating to research in biology, agriculture and experimental 
medicine worth recording”, of the 6,000 pertinent research periodicals 
and about U,000 pertinent commerical publications, it was covering, on 

35 

September 1, 19^7, only 2,500. 

In that year, it produced only 26,600 abstracts, and in 19US it 

turned out slightly less though in the latter year Excerpta Medica. 

. 3 6 

operating in much the same field, published 50,000 abstracts. Fur¬ 
ther, the Quarterly Cumulative Index Medicus published by the American 
Medical Association, Chicago, Ill*, which in 19h9 began recording the 
number of articles listed in each volume, reports 27,566 for the second 
half of 19lt9, 60,321* for 1950, 59,003 for 1951, and 61,1*20 for 1952. 37 

The foregoing figures do not indicate a persistant increase in the 
volume of publication in biology, agriculture and medicine. On the 


^International Conference on Science Abstracting Final Report. 
UNESCO,"l9E9, p. 122. — 

^Ibid., p. 70. Excerpta Medica is published in Amsterdam.. 

-^Magdalene Freyder, Librarian, letter to the writer, March i|, 195lu 























♦ 








* 






' 














, 






e 

- - ' • 








■ 












t 
















1 r t 












other hand, figures drawn from Current List of Medical Literature (Armed 
Forces Medical Library, Washington, D.C.), for a recent period of com¬ 
parable brevity, do suggest a persistent upward trend. In CLML, the 
total listings for 1950-51, 1951-52 and 1952-53 (twelve-month periods) 
were, respectively, 85,000, 96,000 and 100,8l6, while the estimated 
total for the first half of the next twelve-month period was 60 , 000 , 
suggesting a 1953-51* total of around 120,000. 

In this publication, the total number of listings or references 
is much greater than the actual number of papers referred to, as a 
single paper may be mentioned a number of times| but that would not 
necessarily exaggerate either the percentage increase or the trend. 

The chief weakness of the suggestive evidence cited is that it covers 
only a very short period of years. 

Over a very long period. The Agricultural Index offers some ev¬ 
idence of a persistent upward trend, and indeed an accelerating increase, 
in the volume of publication in agriculture and biology. The number of 
pages in this publication’s 1939-1*2 issue, covering 36 months, was 
double the number in its 1916-18 issue, 23 years earlier, and the 
estimated number for 1951-51* (36 months) was double that for 1939-1*2. 
These comparisons suggest a doubling period of about 23 years between 
the two wars, and of approximately 12 years since early in the last 
war. The writer cannot say whether this great difference is partly due 
to an increase in the degree of cross-referencing in the index, and 
partly due also to an increase in coverage of periodicals; but, even 
allowing for such factors, the halving of the doubling period would 
indicate a very rapid increase in the volume of publication and also 
acceleration in the rate of accumulation. 















t 



• - 


< 


- 

' 

* 








t • * . 


. r 


























. -x 




. 


- 










-- 

, • 




In spite of gaps in the evidence, the writer would conclude that 
primary publication in biology, agriculture and medicine has been grow¬ 
ing rapidly, at least since the late thirties and probably since the 
twenties, during the present century. The accumulation of information, 
even in the past twenty years, certainly is mountainous, and it may 
possibly be increasing exponentially. 



























' 




. 














































ABSTRACTS 


RATE OF PUBLICATION OF ABSTRACTS IN BIOLOGY 



YEAR 


Fig, 7 --- Annual totals of abstracts published by 
Biological Abstracts . 











































THOUSANDS OF ABSTRACTS 


RATE OF ACCUMULATION IN BIOLOOY 



YEAR 


Fig. 8 — Cumulative totals of abstracts 
published by Biological Abstracts . 






























































































































-3U- 


Exponential Growth In Physics and Chemistry — Leaving aside biology 
and its allied sciences, and taking physics and chemistry together, it 
is evident from Fig* 9 that their published infomation (primary) has 
been growing exponentially. 

The trend for the 25-year period from 1915 to 19U0 is very con¬ 
sistent and shows a doubling of the accumulation of information every 
nine and a half years* The new trend, which commenced in 19U5 after 
the falling off during World War II, shows a slower rate of doubling, 
every thirteen and half years, but again leaves no doubt that the 
information is growing exponentially. 

Doubling every thirteen and half years would mean, to put it 
another way, growth at the rate of slightly more than five percent per 
annum* 

Undoubtedly, the combining of the cumulative totals from Physics 
Abstracts and Chemical Abstracts involves duplication^ their fields 
overlap and sane papers are abstracted in both journals* This over¬ 
lapping probably has become greater during the recent postwar years, 
when both journals have been striving to improve their coverage of 
pertinent literature. However, because of security restrictions, both 
journals® coverage of nuclear material, whether relevant to physics, 
to chemistry or to both, cannot be complete. The first factor, an in¬ 
crease in duplicatory abstracting, would exaggerate the postwar rate 
of growth. The second, incompleteness of coverage due to security 


3®The cumulative totals of abstracts published by the two journals 
(round figures), from 1906 through 1953, were combined and plotted to a 
logarithmic scale. A figure of 8,000 abstracts was arbitrarily assigned 
to CA for 1906, the year before it began publication. 








s 






% . ‘ 

* 

• V ■■ 




. 


V 






, 




. 


* ■ 




* 

i ■ -■ (Of 

. . 








< t " ' ’ • ' • 

. 













- 35 - 


restrictions, must have the opposite effect. It is not possible to say 
•what is the net effect, but it seems very probable that the postwar 
rate of growth shown by the graph is fairly close to the mark. 




THOUSANDS OF ABSTRACTS 


- 36 - 


GRCWTH OF INFORMATION IN PHYSICS AND CHEMISTRY 


2,000 

1,500 
















fc 


p 






A' 

ijr — 








/ 









A 








> 









<& S’ 








r * 

r 







A 

A A 

5 







A 

<X> y 








\ 

\ 

\ - 










800 

600 

500 

400 

300 

200 


100 


1906-1915 


1920 


1925 


1930 1935 1940 

YEAR 


1945 


1950 


1955 


Fig. 9 — Cumulative totals of abstracts published by Physics Abstracts and 
Chemical Abstracts from 1906 through 1953* Data compiled by the writer. 

































































- 37 - 


III—-FIGURES AND ESTIMATES 

The foregoing data on abstracting do not give a picture of the 
growth of all scientific information and it may be doubted whether a 
precise picture of such magnitude can be secured. Additional evidence 
will be cited hereunder, however, and from the combined evidence three 
sets of qualified conclusions, which appear to be warranted, will be 
drawn as to the growth of scientific information and its salient 
aspects. 

1. Character of the Rate of Growth — More than a century ago, 
Friedrich Engels expressed the belief that science increases in geom¬ 
etric progression^ that is, exponentially. This view is held by many 
scientists today. In 19h9 9 the overall growth in the volume of 

scientific literature, which constitutes the only available yardstick, 

39 

was estimated at five percent per year. At this exponential rate, 
the time to double would be a bit more than fourteen years. 

Dr. Vannevar Bush of the United States suggests, however, that 
science does not increase in exponential fashion indefinitely. When 
a lid is removed it bursts out exponentially, in his view, but as time 
goes on it levels off, until a great new opportunity opens. 

The writer* s abstracting data show that the present century has 
brought an exponential burst in physics and chemistry at least, one 


P. 


3%oyal Society Scientific Information Conference (19^8) Report. 
235 * ~ 


h< kd -Century — The Social Implications of Scientific Progress , 
verbatim account of discussions at Mid-Century Convocation, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, 19ii9, p. 93* 





























. 

















- 

. 


* 







* 










. ' . 


* 

- 














- 38 - 


more pronounced during the second quarter than the first, and one inter¬ 
rupted by war* This exponential burst, or growth, it should be noted, 
is representative, not merely of physics and chemistry in a narrow sense, 
but also of closely allied sectors of mathematics, geology and biology, 
as, for instance, geophysics and biochemistry* Furthermore, the sub¬ 
mitted data on biological abstracting give some evidence of exponential 
growth, and these data cover not only biology in a narrow sense but 
large sectors of agriculture and medicine. 

All that evidence, moreover, can be considered conservative, on 
the following grounds. All scientific literature may be described as 
information but not all of it is considered by working scientists to 
be useful and pertinent information. What is recorded in the abstract¬ 
ing journals is only part of the published whole. It is that part 
which editors carefully select as being new and useful for the most 
part, or at least ”of interest”. In the face of the modern flood of 
information, with the many difficulties (to be shown in PART II) it 
presents, selection probably is being made more carefully and re- 
strictively today than ever before, in spite of efforts to improve 
coverage. The writer therefore considers the evidence from abstract¬ 
ing, which he has submitted, to be a conservative measure of the rate 
of growth in useful information for recent years.^ 

Accordingly, it is considered highly probable that scientific in¬ 
formation, and even useful scientific infomation, as a whole, has been 
growing exponentially during the greater part of the present century, 
and that, as many Western scientists believe, it is doing so today. 


^Useful * that is, for the further advancement of scientific know¬ 
ledge and understanding or for practical and technological purposes. 









- » 






. 




- 






* • i.r-J 


• * ■ ' : ■ 

• : 

J 

. . : • • ' 




. : ' : r a l 

. ' 1 r '.rr : - - ■ . 

: . • . 

■ 

, • •. ' \ "■ f.-xJ ' 

■ 

’ . . ‘ ' • 









- 39 - 


There are additional, general and non—statistical reasons for ex¬ 
pecting such a development* As will be shown after further numerical 
data and estimates have been considered, not one lid but many lids, to 
borrow Bush* s figure of speech, were lifted around the turn from the 
nineteenth into the twentieth century* 

2* Volume of Current Output — The total number of papers now being 
published annually in all fields of science (including technology) can 
only be estimated roughly* 

Abstracting could conceivably provide conservative figures, but 
unfortunately not all abstracting journals number their items or re¬ 
port on the number of their items, nearly every division and sub-divi¬ 
sion of science is abstracted by more than one journal and there is 
much duplication and overlapping. Consequently, as the Royal Society 
and UNESCO conferences found, it is not feasible to get at total figures 
via abstracting. 

Furtermore, while the output of papers in 5f pure n science during 
the nineteenth century and the first thirteen years of the present one 
has been catalogued, nothing along this line is being done today, so 
far as the writer has been able to ascertain. The International Cata¬ 
logue of Scientific Literature listed 85,519 "pure” papers for 191Q,^ 2 
but it is hard to say whether such an annual output would be exceeded 
today, in view of the rapid rise of applied science and technology, and 
even more difficult, if not impossible, to say how much the difference 
might be. 




fature . July 25, 1925, p. 129 
















. , '■ 










t 










■ 


. 






r " ■ . . ' 


















































* 






, 

* 








. . • , 









In any event, available figures and estimates on current output 
almost certainly embrace fundamental and applied science, and tech¬ 
nology to a very great extent, so the question must be approached in 
terms of the broad definition of scientific information adopted for 
the present inquiry. 

For chemistry, physics, biology and allied sectors of science, the 
three abstracting journals from which graphical evidence was drawn give 
a 1953 output of approximately 10U,000 useful papers. In spite of over¬ 
lapping between these three services, this figure must be rated conserv¬ 
ative. If Biological Abstracts were replaced by Excerpta Medica, for 
instance, the output would exceed 120,000, and if by Quarterly Cumula¬ 
tive Index Medicus » 130,000. But this figure would fall far short of 
covering the whole of science. Even to cover the physical and biological 
sciences, without the social group, would require additions for engineer- 
ing, geology, some sectors of zoology, etc. A few years ago, the 
Engineering Index of the U.S. Engineering Societies library was men- 

) Q 

tioning about 50,000 papers and articles annually. Adding this figure 
and making rough additions for other physical and biological sciences 
and for social sciences, one could "guesstimate” an output of at least 
250,000 useful papers per year for the present time. 

There is much to suggest, however, that even this figure would be 
on the low side. 

On the basis of a study carried out in the London Science Library, 
S.C. Bradford and E. Lancaster Jones calculated that (presumably before 
World War II) "less than half the useful scientific papers published are 


^hoyal Society, o£. cit., 19U8, p. 389 

































x 


















* 

* r. ■ ■ ■ t 






-• * 


< 0 . 


















, 

* 

, « 







The American Chemical 


abstracted in the abstracting periodicals...” 

Society denies this charge with respect to Chemical Abstracts and the 
British Department of Scientific and Industrial Research differs sharply 
with the Bradford-Jones calculations. These disagreements make one 
wary of doubling the figure of 250,000 to allow for incompletness of 
coverage on the Bradford-Jones basis. 

On the other hand, they also calculated that (presumably before the 
war) ’’about 750,000 useful papers were...recorded in 15,000 useful pe¬ 
riodicals each year.”^ Even if this figure were nearly halved, on the 
assumption that their allowance for incomplete coverage was almost 
entirely mistaken, the indicated output of useful papers would be about 
1*00,000 per year prior to the war. If this should be approximately 
correct, the corresponding figure today would be considerably higher. 
Figs. 3, 5 and 7 indicate that it could be thirty-three and one-third 
percent higher, or roughly 535,000. Applying the same increase to the 

J 7 

Bradford-Jones figure of 750,000 would give 1,000,000. 

From the foregoing, one would conclude that the current output of 
useful papers is greater than 250,000 per year, and possibly 500,000 or 
more. 


^Royal Society, op. cit., 191*6, p. 735® 

^The Bulletin of the Intelligence Section of the British department 
concludes, October, 1951, that ’’despite all the assertions to the contrary, 
at least ninety percent of the useful scientific and technical papers are 
eventually abstracted.” Cited in Editorial, ’’Lost-Literature Legend,” 

W. J. Murphy, Chemical and Engineering News , Feb. 11, 1952, p. 5o5® 

k^Royal Society, op. cit ., 191*6, p. 735* 

^Whether or not they have included psychology and social sciences, 
the writer does not know with certainty. 






















4 , J, 








- 










» « » 

. 

. 

% ■ 

. ■' 




; 


- 












, 








, 


. . , 








5 t ' ■ ■ 

. 

« * 















Estimates made by leading scientists in recent years would favor 


the view that production lies close to 1,000,000 per year. Four of 
these estimates are listed below: 

(1) Sir Henry Tizard, president, British Association for the 
Advancement of Science, 19h8--l,000,000 o 4 

(2) M. Taube, 19^9—1,000,000 to 1,850,000. 

(3) Prof. Pierre Auger, head of the department of natural sciences, 
UNESCO, 19U9—1,000,000 to 2,000,000 in more than $0,000 
scientific and technical periodicals.^© 

(U) Ralph R. Shaw, librarian, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 

19U9—some 1,850,000 "important, good or average articles” 
in 1*0,000 periodicals.^ 1 

While Walter J. Murphy, editor of Chemical and Engineering News , 

has expressed doubt that there are anything like as many as $0,000 

$2 

scientific periodicals, his contention would appear to be outweighed 
by the compilation of the World List of Scientific Periodicals (cited 
on page ll*, above) and by statements (3) and (1*) immediately above. 

The above estimates, or perhaps "guesstimates”, at any rate suggest 
that the useful output lies at the least, in the range of $00,000 to 
1 , 000 , 000 . 

Taking the whole series of estimates into consideration, one would 
be inclined to subscribe to Sir Henry Tizard* s 1,000,000, though this 
output might well involve some papers of doubtful worth. Any figure 


^%oyal Society, op. cit ., 191*8, p* 21 

^Froc . Am. Phil . Soc .. June 10, 19k9» p. 2i*8-$2. 

5°UNESC0, op. cit. 19h9, p. 122. 

5 l Ibid . . p. 122 

"^"Lost-Literature Legend", C. and E. News . Feb. 11, 1952, p. 5o5. 




















' 



* 




* t 

i. v : ■ 





a-) 


V 




, 




!■ • . ' 

. . * *■• .... 




' . * . 

, f ' 










, 

•i ' " , ■ f v- ;■ ; . ' . I'.,'; 

, ' • ■ 

t t - V. ■' ■ 

: .. ■ • : 












. t ? ♦ '' •• • : 

. 

• , t , * ;M t 


* 


• V 






- ' 





which might be taken as reasonable would doubtless be determined in 
part by the definition of "useful information" or "knowledge"® 

All the foregoing leaves patents out of account, and some propor¬ 
tion of them deserve place with the papers in the category of useful 
information. As has already been stated, useful patents in chemistry 
alone have been running around 10,000 per year during the past decade. 

It has been estimated that before the war the annual output of patent 

53 

specifications in all countries was approaching 200,000. It is pro¬ 
bably higher today, so useful patents might add as much as 100,000 to 
the estimated output for papers. 

The writer believes 350,000 would be a bedrock figure for the 
whole scientific output of useful papers and patents and that it is 
more likely to lie in the range of 500,000 to 1,000,000 per year. 

3. The Accumulation of Information — The gross output of scientific 
papers over the past two or three centuries certainly runs into a good 
many millions, but in view of the rapidity with which the great majority 
become more or less passe there is little or no point in going farther 
back than 1900 in any calculation. Indeed, as the writer has stated, 
working scientists would consider only the output of the past twenty 
years, with seme exceptions for outstanding work of earlier date, as 
being actually or potentially of use in current endeavor. 

The numerical data already presented in these pages offer several 
ways of making rough estimates of the accumulation of useful papers 
during the twenty years, 193U-53* 


53 

J.E. Holmstrom, Records and Research in Engineering and 
Industrial Science , p. 15?. "" 














, 














t . 


- 


















t t t 


. 




. 

v 


■ .. ■■ 


* - < 




. . 







For instance, the graphs covering abstracting in chemistry, physics 
and biology give a total of about 1,U21,000. Allowances for the incom¬ 
plete coverage by the cited abstracting services in physics and biology 
would boost the figure close to 2,000,000* 

However, this would cover only chemistry, physics and biology* As 
previously noted, the U.S. Ehgineering Index a few years ago was men¬ 
tioning about 50,000 papers per year; if one arbitrarily assigned 
engineering an average annual output of 2^,000 useful papers this divi¬ 
sion of science would add 500,000 to the 193U-53 total. Further addi¬ 
tions from geology and other divisions or subdivisions of the physical 
and biological sciences would bring the total well above 3,000,000, 
which would still leave out of account much in psychology and the 
social sciences* 

Again, one rai$it work from the International Catalogue 1 s listing 
of 800,000 papers in "pure” science for the first thirteen years of 
the present century. Publication at this rate would, give 1,230,000 
papers in twenty years. Assuming the rate for recent decades to be 
comparable to that of the century*s first thirteen years, 1,230,000 
would be the estimate for "pure” science 193^-53* The tremendous 
upsurge in applied science and technology, the evidence of which we 
see today on every side, suggests a much greater output for them than 
for "pure" science. One might, therefore, estimate the total to be 
three to four millions in the physical and biological sciences alone. 

A high proportion of this probably would fall in a useful category. 

Taking a reduced rate of U00,000 useful papers per year from Brad¬ 
ford and Jones, about 8,000,000 would be indicated for 193U-53, this 








. . 

. t 

• ? t 


o . ■ - 

- 

I; ; 

« 


t, 

* 


t 

' 



. ' ■ i 




- 




















t 

. 





* 






• 







< 





t 


, 






-w- 


figure possibly including more than just the physical and biological 
sciences. Their actual pre-war estimate of the rate—750,000—-would 
give 15,000,000, applied over the twenty years under consideration 
here* This may be suspected of being much too hi$i$ though Tizard 1 s 
19U8 estimate of a million papers per year would give at least 5*000,000 
for 19L8-52 alone, part of this total probably not falling in a useful 
category. 

The writer would estimate the 193^-53 accumulation, in the physical 
and biological sciences alone (including, of course, technology), to be 
three to four millions of useful papers, and possibly as high as 8,000,000* 
To these lower and upper extremes, additional subdivisions of psychology 
(not covered under biological headings) and the social sciences would 
doubtless add some millions. Even the lower estimate indicates a for¬ 
midable mass of published information. There must be, in addition, tens 
of thousands of books, some proportion of which contain material either 
not found in papers or so differently presented as to acquire fresh merit. 

Net Conclusions — The inferences drawn in the preceding three sub¬ 
sections may be briefly summarized, without their qualifications and 
reservations, as followss 

(1) Useful scientific information or "knowledge” is grow¬ 
ing exponentially nowadays and thus doubling in a certain 
period of years. This period, at the present rate of growth 
about thirteen and a half years for chemistry and physics 
alone, is probably not many years longer for science as a 
whole. 

(2) Today, this information is being poured out, via 
publication, at a rate lying somewhere between 350,000 and 
750,000 papers per year. The gross output of papers (and 
articles) probably exceeds 1,000,000 per year and may run as 
high as 1,850,000, these figures including a very large amount 
of material not deemed useful by abstracting services. 










* 




* , 














~ *xo 








































* 


- 

, 
















— _ ... 


: d 




♦ • 

. ' . : ; 





The rate of output today is higher than ever before and 
much higher than it was only twenty years ago. Except during 
the world war periods, it has been rising practically through¬ 
out the first 53 years of this century. 

(3) The twenty-year accumulation for 19314-53, which must 
be considered actually or potentially of value to current 
endeavor in science, amounts to between five millions and 
ten millions of papers. This is ’’useful information”. The 
gross accumulation, including material not falling in that 
select category, is much greater still. 

The information accumulated during the period 19314-53 
almost certainly exceeds the accumulation of the preceding 
thirty-three years of this century and probably dwarfs the 
accumulation of the whole of the nineteenth century. 


Origins of The Outburst — The general picture thus painted will 
scarcely surprise anyone, though some of the details may. It is widely 
appreciated today, even by laymen and women, that science and technology 
have experienced a tremendous upsurge during the first half of the 
twentieth century. The main reason for this development, which has 
brought about and is continuing to bring about radical changes in 
human life, is to be found in scientific advances around the turn of 
the century. 

Within the period of 1885 to 1915, say; there was a remarkable con¬ 
centration of the fruition of earlier planting, of further discovery in 
fundamental science, and of adventurous application in technology. To 
borrow and modify Dr. Bush’s metaphor, many lids, not merely one, were 
lifted during that period. 

A sampling of major advances should suffice for illustration of 
the point. These advances includes 

(1) Reconstruction of the foundations of mathematics, 
begun much earlier, and still incomplete. 

(2) The beginnings and initial development of modem 
atomic theory. 






t ■ 


" - 












- 

-- 

, j. t • • < • 












t i-j 'r: . 1 ‘ )r& d 




' t ' ■ 





, 1 ■ ; vi'i .1 ufl: r 




: ' d "t : iYj'l 

■ 

' 5 . ''' . 

* 

, 










» . . 


















(3) The discovery of the quantum of action or energy, 
which in due course created a revolution in thinking and re¬ 
search in physics and chemistry* 

(U) The rediscovery of the Mfindelian rules of genetic 
inheritance. 

(5) Production of the special and generalized theories 
of relativity, the first giving rise to the now famous equa¬ 
tion respecting the equivalence of mass and energy which led 
to the development of atomic energy. 

(6) The discovery of radio waves, x-rays, the electron 
and radioactivity, and the prosecution of related research, 
out of which much of modern physics has arisen. Also, the 
invention and patenting of the first electronic valve. 

(7) Invention of the motion picture* 

(8) The introduction and development of the automobile 
and the airplane powered by the internal combustion engine. 

(9) The commencement of modern experimental psychology. 

(10) Clarification and settlement of the molecular 
structures of basic organic compounds. 

(11) Great advances in knowledge of the physiology of 
the central nervous system and of the digestive system! dis¬ 
covery of internal regulation by chemical secretions. 

These fundamental discoveries and developments, with others of com¬ 
parable date (Charles Darwin* s two great works were published, for in¬ 
stance, in 1859 and 1873)* are the more immediate causes of the unprece¬ 
dented outburst in science which characterizes the present century. 

Its roots actually lie much deeper in the past, and it has been aided 
and abetted by the ever-increasing application of power machinery in 
industry and by other socio-economic advances® But the essential cause 
of the outburst has simply been growth of knowledge, and the upsurge 
has consisted in further growth of knowledge or useful information in 
the midst of even greater growth of information as a whole. 

Given the inquiring mind and human initiative and enterprise, the 
process resembles a chain reaction. Knowledge gives rise to still more 










- 




, 




. 














, , 


* 

' 




« • • • 


t t ■ • ■ ■ ■ 

♦ • ' - t ‘ijcijy.brtt 





• \ 





• 









. 



-U8- 


knowledge, with growth proceeding exponentially* This, at any rate, is 
the way things have gone so far, judging by the evidence available. 

IV—PROSPECTS AND PROBLEMS 

What of the prospects of the future? 

The graphs forecase continuance of a high rate of growth and this 
growth will be on a vast scale. That should mean ever faster and 
greater growth of scientific information as a whole, both useful and 
non-useful, in the future. Other considerations lend strong support to 
these expectations. 

The first is that the scientific output of Soviet Russia, where a 
population of nearly 200,000,000 indicates enormous potentialities, is 
rising rapidly, despite obstacles put in the way of some forms of sci¬ 
entific inquiry by the Communist dictatorship (prior to 1955* at any rate). 

Secondly, defeated Germany and Japan are rapidly recovering the 
positions they held before the war among the leading producers of 
scientific information or knowledge. 

Third, at this date of writing, early in 1955, a recovery from many 
of the worst effects of the war has been achieved in most parts of the 
Western world at any rate. This should be favorable to the expansion 
of scientific endeavor and its body of information. Any relaxation of 
international tension will have a similar effect, if only because it 
will improve international communication between scientists. 

Neglecting for the time being factors tending to retard the growth, 
one thing certainly to be expected is a greater annual output of sci¬ 
entific information via primary publication. Moreover, if the indicated 
rate of growth in physics and chemistry during the postwar period should 




j. 


- 













, 








* t 





* 

. 








C ■' ! 

. 








v : • 


* 




a ' i ■ 








* 

. 












« 




be maintained, the accumulation of information in these sciences will 
double every thirteen and a half years. The writer cannot say with 
certainty whether the whole of published scientific knowledge is in 
like case; but it seems probably that its rate of growth is and will 
be comparable, for a tremendous amount of research and development 
also is being done in such divisions as biology, medicine, engineering 
and geology, to say nothing of the social sciences. 

In anthropology, indeed, the postwar accumulation of new fossils 
and novel experimental evidence has been so rapid that scientists in 
this and closely related fields have not yet had time to digest it and 
publication of the comprehensive results of thorough study of it has yet 
to be completed#** 

The most important single factor tending to retard the growth is 
the enormous disparity between, on the one hand, the volume of both the 
current output and the accumulated production of the many minds, and, 
on the other hand, the limited capacity of the single mind to read and 
understand. New knowledge must be founded on past knowledge and there 
is the rub today. As J.W. Perry puts it in respect to chemistry, 
"Building future achievement on past accomplishments is a task which 
has bee one increasingly difficult. 

The difficulty of keeping up with even the current output has been 
graphically and colorfully described by Sir Edward Appleton of Great 
Britain. In 19U8, he observed: 


ta 

Perry, op, cit., p. 1. 

*See, for instance, Ralph Linton, The Tree of Culture . 












* 




* 










. t 






4 4 























4 


„ * 


* 

- 


* , * . 4 




. 


. ' ^ 4 














- 50 - 


Science has been well served in the past by the publica¬ 
tions of the learned societies and academies, and by the sci¬ 
entific journals. But the spate of scientific publications 
is now such that is becoming extremely difficult to keep 
abreast with events on even the most limited sector of the 
scientific frontier. 

This spate of scientific publications may, I think, be 
illustrated in the following way. If anyone set himself the 
task of merely reading—let alone trying to understand—all 
the journals of fundamental science published, and worked 
solidly at his task every day for a year, he would discover 
that at the end of that year he was already more than ten 
years behind! If the same constant reader (I think we may 
well call him a constant reader) had included the technical 
literature as well, he would find himself about 100 years 
behind in his work after 12 months* effort! 

,.,My library contains many a lengthening file of unread 
journals. The great majority of those journals will never be 
read—and still less understood--by me,55 

The working scientist, of course, is faced not only with the task 
of keeping up with the current literature but also, whenever he under¬ 
takes a new piece of research or endeavors to develop a new and unify¬ 
ing or illuminating theory, with the task of digging into the accumula- 
ion. While, according to the general practice, he may dig no deeper 
than twenty years, he still will have a time-consuming and laborious 
job on his hands. It is obvious, too, that the process of accumulation 
must make the task confronting the student, starting out in science, 
ever larger and more difficult®* 

Suppose the number of papers in all divisions of science and tech¬ 
nology is doubling every fifteen years, which appears likely to be the 
case. The resulting growth will be offset by the practice of consider¬ 
ing papers more than twenty years old to be passe . But even when 


^Royal Society, op, cit ,, 19^8, p, 20, 

^The exponential growth may show an approach to a limit in due 
course. This could be due to the difficulties it creates. 










' * : 

- 

! v.o ; 

. 

i 

* : V « 

» 












. ■ 

- 








■ 




- ' . t .no :■ 




- 


- 

: - • : !!■ 




* ' 


t 

# 

. * • ; '■: I 



. . t 1 <. 


. * 







- 51 - 


wold hat" is sloughed off at this rate, the number of papers would be 
doubling every forty years in the net result. Disregarding various 
ways of getting around the problem for educational purposes, this 
would mean that every second generation would be faced with a doubled 
accumulation,. 

This is putting the thing baldly, of course, for the growth has 
brought reactions which are partial answers to its problems* The most 
obvious reaction has been a corresponding growth of specialization, 
but this, as will be shown presently, raises another set of problems, 
Within science and technology, indeed, a whole family of problems has 
arisen out of the growth of information and knowledge. Many of these 
problems concern or indirectly affect education for scientific endeavor, 
to say nothing of education as a whole. 

The problems of growth as they lie within the bosom of science will 
be discussed analytically in PART II of this thesis. Those which are 
also educational problems or give rise to educational problems will be 
sifted out of the mass and considered in PART III. 





' 







- 


* 










* 




, r oK ‘ it ■ ’ ' </■.*• '.-i:;- :i: jr:.T 

. ' '■ . -y 7 : • . 







4 • ' ■■ ' 




■' in. -I. ’• 

4 ■ 

. 

. 








,1C 










































PART II 


HOW THE GROWTH OF SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION 


AFFECTS SCIENTIFIC ENDEAVOR 


RESULTANT DIFFICULTIES AND PROBLEMS 

INTRODUCTION 

In PART I of this thesis, evidence was presented to show that sci¬ 
entific and technical information is being turned out yearly at a very 
high and ever-increasing volumetric rate, that the accumulation of this 
information has reached tremendous proportions in the present century, 
and that this accumulation is still growing exponentially. It has also 
been suggested tentatively that the twentieth-century spate of publica¬ 
tion confronts both working scientists and students of science with a 
whole family of problems. 

The existence of.such a troublesome and challenging situation has 
been recognized by scientists in many Western countries since the war, 
if one may .judge by the deliberations of the Royal Society Empire Sci¬ 
entific Conference in 1946, and by the convening of the Royal Society 
Scientific Information Conference in 194$ and the UNESCO-sponsored 
International Conference on Scientific Abstracting in 1949. The last 
two conferences were called for the specific purpose of seeking solu¬ 
tions to problems presented by the growth of published information in. 
science and technology. 

What Scientists Sav --As further evidence of recognition of difficulty 
one finds in scientific and technical writings of the postwar period 






























































■ 





' 











































■ 



















- 53 - 


many references such as the following: 


There is a growing mountain of research. But there is 
increasing evidence that we are being bogged down today as 
specialization extends. The investigator is staggered by 
the findings and conclusions of thousands of other workers-- 
conclusions which he cannot find time to grasp, much less to 
remember, as they appear. Yet specialization becomes in¬ 
creasingly necessary for progress, and the effort to bridge 
between disciplines is correspondingly superficial. 

• ....The summation of human experience is being expanded 
at a prodigious rate, and the means we use for threading 
through the consequent maze to the momentarily important 
item is the same as was used in the days of square-rigged 
ships 


It has clearly become impossible for the average sci¬ 
entific worker to keep up with the progress in his own field 
unless he devotes a major part of his time to reading; and 
there is a grave danger of good scientific work being lost 
permanently because it vras not appreciated -when published. 


But these torrents and rivers of current literature pour 
themselves into libraries, adding without cease to what is al¬ 
ready there. Not all scientific data exhaust their possible 
usefulness in the period when they are still fresh, and what 
w r e have to consider (in Section III of the Conference) is the 
exploitation of accumulated masses of literature many times 
as great as those whose current survey is the problem of Sec¬ 
tion II: how to ensure that....from the millions upon millions 
of references accumulated in the large central libraries which 
serve the world as a whole, the scientist can be provided with 
the best and most relevant material for his own thought and 
work at any particular moment... every man's reading time is 
limited...3 


Indeed this growth of science (at a dizzy and ever-accel¬ 
erating speed) has become the outstanding characteristic of 
civilization today. 


"h/annevar Bush, "As We May Think," Atlantic . July, 1945* p. 101. 

2 

Editorial, "Rationalization of the Literature of Scientific Re¬ 
search," Nature . June 8, 1946, p. 746. 

3 

J. E. Holmstrom, Royal Societ y Scientific Information Conference 
(194S) Report . p. 78 

^Arthur B. Lamb, "Publication—Lifeblood of Science," (Priestley 
Medal Address to Am. Chem. Soc.), Chem . and Eng . News, Oct. 3* 1949* p. 2841. 























. 











































































: 






. 


. . 


- 54 - 


Human progress depends on knowledge and learning, and 
the capacity for these is conditioned by intelligence. Most 
scientists are already aware that the progress of science is 
being impeded by the fact that the most brilliant men simply 
do not have enough learning capacity to acquire all the de¬ 
tails of more than increasingly narrow segments of the field 
of knowledge. Only a very stupid person can believe that 
mankind is already intelligent enough for its own good. 5 


As J. E. Oppenheimer points out in his introduction to 
these 10 accounts, no scientist, let alone any layman, can 
be acquainted with more than a small part of the immense 
endeavor of modern science; the literature covering the work 
of the world’s scientists during the past 50 years is so 
staggering,.both in volume and diversity, as to defy even 
tabuiation. 


The day is long past--if indeed it ever existed except 
in legend--when the whole of science was the expert province 
of any one man....Most scientists will follow^ with pleasure 
what is written in the reports; few r will fail to find in 
them something that is new, or newly clear; but none, I think, 
will recognize in himself any real technical competence, any 
basis for sound critical judgment, or for new discovery or 
new understanding, except in a very, very limited part of the 
broad field of contemporary science. 


In some respects the world of science today resembles a 
group of nonsocial animals.with very little group information. 
According to Flynn (2), ’’....the acceleration of research and 
the increase in research publications are world-wide,. .We are 
threatened with being choked with the flood of our own research 
production. 


It has become a truism to say that no scientist can read 
all that is published of value to him and. still have time for 
his own research.9 


^George Gaylord Simpson, The Meaning of Evolution . p. 331* 

£ 

Scientific American , (mid-century symposium), September, 1950, p.19 
^J. R. Oppenheimer, ’’The Age of Science 1900-1950," ibid .. pp. 21-22. 

8t r 

1'. F. Hewitt, Jr., "Science Communications, Science . August 3, 

1951, P. 134. 

Q 

7 B. M. Crowther, "Scientific Abstracting," Research . January, 1951, 


p. 2. 





















. 

£ 






. 






I .. ' 






















' 

.... 

















• • 



■ 






. 















- 55 - 


In many countries the efficient pursuit of research will 
soon become impossible under present conditions owing to the 
ever-growing difficulty of documentation and in spite of the 
increasing specialization in the sciences.^ 

....let us emphasize that human limitations are the funda¬ 
mental consideration. If we could read several thousand times 
as fast as we actually can, if our memories functioned perfectly, 
no crisis would exist.H 


• ....the problem which affects us all in these strenuous 
days....is that of digesting the surfeit of information which 
floods the world in a blizzard of ever-settling paper. We 
are all overwhelmed by too much to read...The problem is how 
to sift it. 

Such Quotations as these could be multiplied many times but they 
suffice to suggest that the growth of scientific and technical informa¬ 
tion and the rate at which it is being produced and published today do 
present difficulties and problems, in the view of many scientists. 

Just how and, to what extent is the growth affecting scientific 
endeavor? 

A few answers to this question have been suggested in PART I in a 
general way. In particular, it has been noted that the growth has 
created an enormous disparity between, on the one hand, the great and 
ever-increasing output of the multitudes of workers, and, on the other, 
the strictly limited capacity of the single mind to read and understand 
and master information. 


lOjacques Avias, Universite de Nancy, France, letter to Science . 
February 29, 1952, p. 250. 

W. Perry, "The Crisis in Compiling and Correlating Chemical 
Literature, M address to M. I. T. symposium, June 11, 1952, p. 3• 

12 Sd.itorial, The Aeroplane . April 3, 1953. 










: ^ ' ■ ... - 

.... 

■ ... . 











































’ 






- 56 - 


This is the general result and the main effect of the growth. But 
it has had subsidiary effects and the situation now is further complicated 
by steps which have been taken in an effort to overcome or at least to 
escape the basic disparity. Since the situation is thus complex, an 
analysis is needed to show the main aspects and important details. A 
systematic approach to this analysis and a framework for its verbal 
presentation, together with considerable illumination, can be obtained 
from certain dynamic features of growth. 

Dynamics of Growth — Life, whether considered as a whole or as repre¬ 
sented by a particular population or organism, is distinguished from in¬ 
animate organizations of matter by its interdependent capacities for 
reproductive growth and selective adaptation. All growth means, by 
definition, increase in dimensions or mass or numbers. But reproduc¬ 
tive growth, inasmuch as it can be sustained only by a struggle for 
food, and because selective adaptation plays a vital role in this 

. 

struggle, has led to specialization and diversity in the structures 
and functions of living things* This makes them complex. Concurrently, 
because of the inherent interdependence of the parts of any organism and 
the persistence of interdependence within and among populations, physio¬ 
logical and.social systems of intercommunication have developed. 

These characteristics of growth are disclosed in the net results of 
biological evolution over hundreds of millions of years. Viewed in the 
large, the main lines of development show increasing specialization and 
complexity in the integral structure and the internal functioning of 
representative organisms, and correlative growth, specialization and 
improvement of their internal systems of communication and also of their 
sensory means of communication with the environment. 


















































































































- 57 - 


All this is exemplified by the tremendous advance from the sup¬ 
posed original living molecule or protogene to the one-celled. or pos¬ 
sibly non-cellular protozoan and by the further advance of comparable 
magnitude from the protozoan to man or other multi-cellular* animals. 

In the first of these stages, the living cell became a specialized and 
complex unit; in the second, the multi-cellular organism arose and be¬ 
came increasingly specialized and complex in internal structure and 
functioning, as well as unified and in man's case ’’governed” by its 
neural and glandular systems of internal communication. 

At the.same time, biological evolution and the spread of life over 
the globe have produced marvels of specialization and diversity in the 
external form and functioning of organisms. Particular types of fauna, 
such as certain insects, have developed complex ’’societies” in which 
specialization in social functions is extreme and rudimentary forms of 
social communication tie the community together. And the interdependence 
of various plants, insects and, animals has created the complexity of the 
so-called ’’balance of nature”. 

Expansion Of The Human Species — In the evolution of human society 
and in the multiplication and spatial expansion of the human species 
the dynamic,characteristics of growth have come to full flower. 

So far as one can see at the moment, every other form of life, in 
the course of complex interaction with environment, and complex competi¬ 
tion and co-operation for food and for a place in the sun, has restricted 
its evolutionary possibilities, as compared to man’s, and this through 
the selection of some kind or degree of specialization in form and func¬ 
tion which limits its adaptability in relation to the diversity of 





environmental conditions on earth, to say nothing of the universe out¬ 
side earth. In some cases, such specialization has, to all intents 
and purposes, brought evolution to an end by reducing adaptability 
virtually to zero; e.g., certain social insects, which have existed 
much as thejr exist today for perhaps SO,000,000 years. 

The human species appears to have escaped the environmental blind 
alleys of biological evolution, so far at least, in virtue of having 
attained what is, in relation both to natural and to social environ¬ 
ments, a more potent level of physiological specialization and com¬ 
plexity than any other species and also a far more flexible and adapt¬ 
able kind of specialization in external form and function. It is 
sometimes said that man has specialized in adaptability and there is 
some value in that conception of the net results of his biological 
evolution though these results appear much too complex to be char¬ 
acterized by a phrase. 

The physiological and functional results of human evolution are 
apparent in ’’modern*’ man’s unique combination of 'assets--”his erect 
posture, his free-moving arms and hands, his sharp-focusing eyes, a 
brain capable of fine judgment and decision as well as of keen percep¬ 
tion, and the power of speech.”^' It is a historical fact that this 
combination has conferred on man far greater environmental adaptability 
than any of the higher animals possesses; but even when the historical 
results are set aside, insofar as a human being can mentally set them 
aside, the combination seems to be of such a nature that it was bound 
to give man a great and vital advantage in adaptability. 


13 


‘arleton S. Coon, The Story of Man , p. 12. 










-59- 


As a matter of record, at any rate, man's combination of locomotory 
manual, visual, mental and communicatory capacities enabled the human 
species to spread over the globe and dominate it, to achieve an ever¬ 
growing command of the natural environment, to convert the energy re¬ 
leased by that achievement into social structure, and to generate a 
new sort of evolution in which learning is accumulated and transmitted 
from generation to generation through the medium of social organization. 

This new sort of evolution, characterized by the inheritance of learn- 

A 

ing, is not exclusively a human creation or possession, but man's 
version of it, as compared with the primitive forms possessed by other 
animals, has reached such a pitch of development that it may be con¬ 
sidered unique on earth. 

The Growth- of Learning -- In the whole process of human development 
outlined in the above paragra,ph--a process which history discloses with 

a wealth, of detail that need not be repeated he re--learning seems to the 

(ill " ' SHI 1 

writer to be the end product of greatest value, not only because it has 

endured in spite of the deaths -of individuals and of social units, but 
also because it has proved capable of ensuring that man shall maintain 
and indeed increase his adaptability. Individual men or societies of men 
may freeze onto a given set of ideas, onto a given level of command of the 
natural environment or onto a particular sort of social structure. 

Both ideas and social institutions may become exceedingly rigid .and 
even ossified. History is replete with examples of both. But always, so 
far, the growth of learning has eventually broken the frigid grasp or shattered 


^Learning is used here in a very broad sense including information, 
knowledge, customs, living habits, beliefs, etc. 





. 


■ 


' 






■ 












■ 

■ 




. 



































■ 





• 

















f 



- 60 - 


the stone which threatened to imprison men in an alley as blind as any 
of those into which other animals have been led by their biological 
specialization in external form and function. 

However, in learning, as in command of environment and in social 
organization, growth characteristically involves ever-increasing spe¬ 
cialization, complexity and intercommunication. The volumetric in¬ 
crease in information, alone, makes specialization or division of 
labor an*inescapable necessity for the single mind, on account of its 
limited capacity and the corresponding limitations of individual human 
working time and energy. Specialization usually fosters and certainly 
makes possible more volumetric growth; but, at the same time, it inev¬ 
itably increases the complexity of the structure of learning and also 
the requirements in communication for bridging between specialties and 
specialists and keeping the whole structure in a coherent state. 

Unfortunately, specialization may degenerate into a narrowness so 

I 

debilitating that explorers who reach the verge of the unknown will 
lack the expeditionary strength to advance far into its depths and will 
be unable to do more than make a few pin-pricks in its immensity. Sven 
when many expeditions join forces they may bog down under the burden of 
their larger organization’s complexity or end up with incoherent results 
due to inadequate communication. 

Such effects and problems of growth are discernible to some extent 
in the whole course of evolution by the inheritance of learning, just 
as they can be seen in the course of biological evolution. They have 
become much more evident and more widely recognized in the field of 
learning today, however, and this mainly because scientific and tech¬ 
nical information, in demonstrating, especially during the present 























. 
























■ 








































' 





- 61 - 


century, an unprecedented capacity for growth, has revealed them in 
extreme form.*^ 

Prelude to Analysis -- In making this study, the writer has taken as 
his first general hypothesis that the accelerating growth of scientific 
and: technical information now is affecting scientific endeavor in many 
diverse ways and. thus giving rise to serious difficulties and a whole 
family of acute problems. The bibliographical evidence found to sup¬ 
port that hypothesis mil be presented in the main body of this Part II. 

A "linear program" or breakdown based on the dynamics of growth will be 
used to sift and analyze the evidence. Accordingly, the discussion will 
be related first to volumetric growth, then to specialization and com¬ 
plexity, and finally to communication and language, with some overlapping, 
and, necessarily, with due regard to interconnections. 

It has already been stated that the vehicle of the new form of 
evolution is social organization. One part of this organization--formal 
education--has been charged with the main task of transmission~-espe- 
cially, today, with respect to scientific and technical learning. If 
growvth of information is creating difficulties and problems for sci¬ 
entific endeavor, so also for scientific education. This wras the 
waiter's second general hypothesis at the outset of his inquiry. In 
order to confirm it, further analytical argument and a synthesis will 


•^General references for this and the preceding twro subsections: 
George Gaylord Simpson, The Meaning of Evolution ; Alfred Korzybski, 
Manhood Of Humanity ; Julian Huxley, Man in the Modern World : Norbert 
Wiener, The Human Use of Human Beings : Herbert Butterfield, The Origins 
of Modern Science 1300 - 1 BOO : V. Gordon Childe, Man Makes Himself . What 
Happened in History : Carleton S. Coon, The Story Of Man : George Sarton, 
The Study of the History of Science . A History of S cience : G. L. Jepsen, 
et. al.. Genetics . Paleontology and Evolution . 





































-62- 


be submitted in Fart III. The aim Mill be to show "The Meaning, of the 

Growth of Scientific Information for Education for the Advancement of 

A 

Scientific Knowledge 1 '. 

Some references to the educational aspects also will be made in Part 
II, however, and it therefore seems advisable to make explicit, at this 
point, two assumptions which underlie the thesis as a whole and its 
educational meaning in particular. These assumptions are as follows: 

1. That the growth of scientific knowledge, as of all 
human knowledge, is good and therefore every effort should be 
made to ensure the continuance of this growth. 

2. That its continuance depends at bottom on continued 
growth in fundamental science; that is, in knowledge sought 
for its own sake, rather than in knowledge sought for fairly 
specific and so-called practical purposes. 

This does not deny that fundamental science is fructified 
by applied science and technology, as well as vice versa. But 
it is taken as a warranted assumption that fundamental science 
is the primary field, of endeavor and that, if it were not sown, 
growth in all fields would subside and eventually cease alto¬ 
gether . 


Knowledge is defined here as that information -which is used for 
further inquiry and thought and thus gives rise to more information. 

This pragmatic definition obviously includes what is commonly 
termed knowledge; that is, the structure of generally accepted data 
and theories which is the foundation for further inquiry. 

It does not exclude erroneous information which, experience has 
demonstrated, may be useful, or errors, >111011 may be fruitful. But it 
does exclude information which, permanently buried, or lost, is not used. 

It has nothing final to say about the nature or quality of know¬ 
ledge. This caution is strongly urged by the common assumption if not 
conviction, that what has yet to be discovered dwarfs what has been dis¬ 
covered; the former may possibly give us a different conception of know¬ 
ledge. Caution also avoids foreclosing against the possibility that 
future discoveries may render useless any existing information which 
has not yet been used. 











- ' ■ V \ v '■ 












. 




. '' m ' - : '' r'*i " r: 7 ;v i 







. 




' ' ' . ' • ' ' ' Vi ' ; 

■ . ' • ■' . ■ ;;I;| 

. 










. 



- 








































. 

' 






CHAPTER I 


EFFECTS OF VOLUMETRIC GROWTH 


INTRODUCTION 

A clear appreciation of the significance of these effects and re¬ 
sultant problems requires at the outset a recognition of the importance 
of intercommunication in scientific endeavor. Some testimony on its 
importance will therefore be presented at this point, though the matter 
■will be considered at greater length in Chapter IV"* 

In Butterfield's analysis of the scientific revolution of the six¬ 
teenth and seventeenth centuries, it is shown repeatedly that the best- 
known figures in the revolution were not giants standing alone, but 
great men standing on the shoulders of those who had gone before and 
thus doubly able to see farther than their predecessors. Much of what 
appears in Galileo's juvenile works, for instance, though not all of 
it, had been anticipated by a school of Parisian thinkers in the four¬ 
teenth century and had been carried on as a consistent body of teaching 
into the sixteenth. Galileo read the works of certain of these writers. 

Nor was Kepler an isolated genius, but rather a product "of the whole 
movement of renovation" which was taking place at the end of the six¬ 
teenth, and also the inheritor both of the teachings of one, Maestlin, 

15 

and of the excellent, though chaotic, observational data of Tycho Brahe. ' 
Thus, even in those years before the advent of primary publication and 
mechanical means of communication as we know them today, information was 


PP. 


15 

Herbert Butterfield, The Origins of Modern Science 1300-1800 . 
8, 9, et. al. 















































* 







































. 








■» r 


. 




- 64 - 


handed down and exchanged in verbal form, to the consequent advancement 

of knowledge; and there can be little doubt that the road up would have 

been far harder and longer if Galileo, Kepler, Newton and others had 

not been able to profit by the very considerable intercourse which was 

then spanning both time and space within the European community.* 

Considering the matter further in historical terms, Stevens has 

shown, largely through an analysis of the history of chemistry, that 

"science depends for its existence upon communication not only between 

scientist and scientist, and scientist and technician, but also between 

scientist and philosopher....If these communications are sufficiently 

reduced, science will not only cease to grow but wall shrink.... 

He adds, "....due to the cultural nexus of civilization as a whole, 

the suppression of scientific communications wall stunt not only 

science, but also technology and ideology, and hence in. the long run 
17 

civilization itself." ' 

Again, Conant testifies: 

The important fact w r hich emerges from even a superficial 
study of the recent history of the experimental sciences (say, 
since 1850) is the existence of an organization of individuals 
in close communication with, each other. Because of the exist¬ 
ence of this organization, new ideas spread rapidly, discoveries 
breed more discoveries, and erroneous observations or illogical 
notions are on the whole soon corrected.!^ 


16 

C. F. B_. Stevens, Thesis on The Factors of Scientific Progress . 

Chapter III, The Communications of Science, ms. p. 126. 

17 Ibid . . p. 127. 

l^James B. Conant, Science and Common Sense . p. 17. 

ANewton w^as greatly indebted, for one, to Robert Hooke, who all but beat 
Newton to the draw on gravitational theory. In modern times, Einstein, was in¬ 
debted to Fitzgerald for the "contraction"; and Einstein believes that if he 
had not formulated the Special Theory of Relativity then Paul Langevin of 
France would have succeeded in doing so. 


























. 














.... 




. 





















. 











. 
























' 







- 65 - 


He also remarks that the thousands of experimental sci¬ 

entists who are going to their laboratories tomorrow were not able to 
communicate with each other rapidly and easily there would be no modern 
science. 

The essential part played by free and rapid communication also is 
emphasized by Compton and illustrated with an account of the birth of 
nuclear fission in January, 1939, and the subsequently rapid dissemina¬ 
tion of the information from Germany to Denmark, the United States and 

France; within less than a month the discovery of Hahn and Strassman 

20 

had been confirmed and extended in a half-dozen other laboratories. 

Similarly, Oppenheimer emphasizes that the synthesis and resolution of 

the quantum theory of atomic systems during the twenties ’’involved the 

21 

collaboration of scores of scientists from, many different lands”. 

Holmstrom describes science as ”a living, organic thing, dependent 

22 

for its vitality on good circulation of the blood—information”. Lamb 
remarks that ’’the prompt and widespread communication of new findings 
is essential” if they are to be of use. If they remain undisclosed, 
they might almost as well not have been made. ’’Publication is the 
lifeblood of science.”^ 


19 

Ibid .. p. 15. 

^Karl Compton, Mid-Centurv -- The Social Implications of Scientific 
Progress . p. 23* 

21 

J. Robert Oppenheimer, ”A Science in Change .” Second Reith Lecture, 
The Listener . Dec. 3, 1953, p. 941. 

22 

J. Edwin Holmstrom, Records and Research in Engineering and 
Industrial Science . p. 3* 

‘^Arthur B. Lamb, ’’Publication—Lifeblood of Science,” Chem . and 
Eng . News . Oct. 3, 1949, p. 2342. 






























■ 














' 



























-66- 


Scientists, in short, are highly interdependent, and scientific 
endeavor is maintained, stimulated and advanced by intercommunication. 
The latter could scarcely be considered any more essential today than 
it was several centuries ago but it looms larger in the whole picture 
nowadays, not only because the improvement and the extension of print¬ 
ing and publication and of the mechanical means of transmitting inform¬ 
ation have greatly increased the capacity for, and so the volume of 
intercourse, but also because the exponential growth of scientific 
information is continuously and perhaps exponentially increasing the 
requirements in communication. 

That the requirements should, be increasing in proportion to growth 
is only to be expected in the light of the dynamics of the process. 
Growth demands and fosters more and more specialization, which fosters 
more growth and also increases complexity, thus requiring more and 
better intercommunication, both contemporaneous and retrospective. 

Since the basic currency of the exchange is printed, language, 
whether verbal, mathematical or graphical, and the transactions are 
carried out chiefly by means of primary publication, the requirements 
in respect of the latter also are being increased by the relentless 
growth of the information. At the same time, however, difficulties in 
keeping primary publication, and so intercommunication, up to require¬ 
ments are increasing in variety and severity, judging by the biblio¬ 
graphical evidence to be cited in succeeding pages of this exposition. 





















\ 















































- 67 - 


I—EFFECTS OF THE INCREASE IN CURRENT OUTPUT 

Taking a. view which may well be conservative, the writer has es¬ 
timated that useful scientific information is being published at a 
rate lying somewhere between 350,000 and 750,000 papers (and patents) 
per year and that the gross output probably exceeds 1,000,000 per year 
(p. 45 above). In the experience of working scientists, the most im¬ 
mediately apparent effect of the rise of current output to this very 
high level is the overwhelming demand it imposes on the reading time 
of the individual, even in a narrow sector of science. Scientists and 
editors of scientific publications in Great Britain and the United 
States, with one exception the writer has noted, state that is has be¬ 
come impossible for the individual to keep abreast of current informa¬ 
tion and progress in his sector, let alone in a wider field, in the 
time at his disposal after he has attended to his research, teaching 
and research, or industrial work .^*^^ 

The exception noted, Conant, considers the task of keeping up with 
the current literature "far from hopeless", though time-consuming. He 
rests his case on (l) the narrowing of the individual’s sector of 
interest through specialization, (2) the availability of abstracts and 
indexes, (3). the reduction of the load resulting from, the practice of 


^See Reference No. 55 , PART I ? p. 55, and References Nos. 2, 9, 

11, 12, PART II, pp. 53-4-5, above. 

^Royal Society, pp. cit., 194&: -Sir Henry Tizard, p. 21; J. D. 
Bernal, p. 54; Paper No. 1, p. 235; K.0. Michaelis, Paper No. 12; et. al . 

p Z 

^ International Conference on Science Abstracting . UNESCO, 1949, 
p. 30. 

2 ^J. ¥. Perry, pp. cit., p. 1. 

2 %. R. Ranganathan and J. W. Perry, "External Memory and Research," 
(UNESCO paper)! Journal Of - Documentation . March, 1951, p. 11. 

































































































' 










- 63 - 


ref erring, in a given paper, to previous publications bearing on the 

29 

subject, and (4) the selectivity of the editors of journals. 

In the more or less contrary views cited earlier, it should be 
noted, the factors Conant cites to support his assertion were largely 
or entirely discounted beforehand; for the other men refer mainly to 
the current literature of primary publication in a restricted sense, 
which has'been preselected by editors, to narrowly specialized reading, 
and in part to the mere perusal of abstracting journals and indexing 
services. Conant’s view probably is shared b]r others, but the weight 
of opinion uncovered by the -writer’s search of the literature is against 
it. Moreover, the task of keeping abreast by reading has only begun 
when the pertinen^papers have been located through abstracts or indexes; 
the appropriate issues of journals or reprints of papers may then have 
to be obtained from, distant libraries or publishers and the reading 
undertaken. The first of these tasks may not only be time-consuming 
but difficult or even impossible of accomplishment, while for the 
second, it has been estimated,the time available may be strictly 
limited to between four and five hours per week for laboratory workers. 

Locating Pertinent Papers -- Returning to the first step, that of 
locating the. pertinent paper or information, it must be recognized: 

(l) that the quality of abstracting and indexing services varies con¬ 
siderably and those which may be available to the scientist may not 
serve him well in respect of coverage, selection, editing, or organiza- 


2 < ^J. B. Conant, op. cit .. pp. 20-21. 

30 

J. D. Bernal, Royal Society, op. cit . . 1948, p. 54. 









. 

. 





. 


. 




. 







- 69 - 


tion for access:^ and (2) that even where the scientist has been ex¬ 
ceedingly well served in the past and is so served today—in chemistry, 
for instance—abstracting and indexing, themselves, are becoming less 

effective in the face of the ever-increasing volume of primary publica- 
32 

tion. 

This is scarcely surprising. The size of the abstracting task in 
chemistry is manifested both by the publication in Chemical Abstracts 
of 61,000 items in 1953 and by the employment of 600 abstractors and 
50 assistant editors even in 1943.-^ The abstracting journal itself 
requires indexes, which are of special importance, and of such volume 

O I 

that 65 O words of index are published for every 1,000 words of abstract. ^ 
On top of current indexing, there is the decennial index; CA's fourth 
edition of the latter was in the midst of publication in 1943 and re¬ 
ported complete in 1950 ; it contains 2 , 000,000 entries, 15 , 000,000 
words, and is equivalent to 100 books of 350 pages each; because of 

increased size, it may soon become necessary to publish it every five 
35 

years. ' 

Wading into either the current or the decennial index in search of 
pertinent or prospectively pertinent abstracts is, alone, a time-consuming 
task; and when the search relates to a broadly defined subject even these 
exceptionally good indexes of 0A may prove virtually useless. 


31 

Tenor of numerous discussions in Royal Society, op. cit., 1943. 

32 

J. W. Perry, op. cit . 


Eng 


33e. j. Crane, ’’The Production of an Abstract Journal,” Chem . and 
News . July 26 , 1943, pp. 2190-92. 

34, 


ibid.. 


35 


Crane, Chem . and. Eng . News . Feb. 20, 1950, p. 540. 


M T T 


3^Perry, ’’Development Program for Machine Indexing,” paper to 



























































■ 





















'I 

> f- ■ 'n j 












* 




. . I 




. 

- 




- 



















- 70 - 


Perry does not mean to suggest that subject indexes have outlived 
their usefulness. Indeed, he deems it highly probably that chemists 
will have to rely more and more on such indexes for compiling and cor¬ 
relating needed chemical information, inasmuch as the era of the clas¬ 
sical handbooks, Beilstein and Gmelin (the latest edition of the former 
embraces publications only through the year 1929) is nearing its end. 
Nevertheless, though the conventional subject index serves well for a 
search within a narrow informational range, its use becomes increasingly 
difficult and tedious as the range is extended, and. the range must be 

extended or broadened to make fully effective use of the store of 

37 

chemical information." 

It might be said that chemical publication is an extreme case be¬ 
cause its growth during the present century has been exceptional. On 
the other hand, the growth and present size of CA and its indexes are 
partly reflections of the excellence of the service they provide for 
chemists. To the extent that this is the case, it maybe said that 
the better the abstracting and indexing facilities for locating pert¬ 
inent papers, the more time-consuming and difficult becom.es the task 
of location. This is merely another way of saying that certain prob¬ 
lems of growth which these services are designed to solve eventually 
re-appear in the services, themselves. Growth evidently is much like 
the hydra-headed monstei/of mythology. 

It has already been pointed out, moreover, that the number of pages 
in The Agricultural Index probably has quadrupled since the 1916-13 
issue (page 30* above). Similarly, in Physics Abstracts the subject 
index has nearly tripled since 1919 and the author index since 1929. 


37 

Perry, "Crisis in Compiling and Correlating Chemical Literature 

PP.5-6. 


»! 




















, 























































■ 










. 

















- 71 - 


Considering the growth of indexes and the increases in the annual 
numbers of abstracts, it is quite clear that more and more time and 
energy are being required to find pertinent papers, even through these 
comparatively time-saving media, and even when the search is confined 
to current literature of comparatively recent date. In the case of 
Chemical Abstracts , the extent and the quality of the coverage assure 
the chemist of finding a high percentage of pertinent information, so 
long as his range of interest remains comparatively limited.. The sci¬ 
entist using any one other index or abstracting journal may, as a re¬ 
sult of a greater degree of incompleteness in its coverage, have to 
spend less time in a similarly confined search, but the percentage of 
pertinent information he can locate will be smaller in most cases. 

If he is to increase the percentage, he must consult more than one 
index or abstracting journal and so spend more time on his search. 

That is to speak of current search when interest is confined to 
a limited range. But the search cannot always be so confined. In the 
first place, the scientist often must escape the limitations of his 
specialization if he is to keep abreast of, let alone advance, know¬ 
ledge in his field in a large way or on a broad front. In the second 
place, because the advances of scientific knowledge are thinning or 
banishing boundary lines and coalescing branches, subdivisions and 
even the major traditional divisions of science, the inquirer is being 
compelled more and more to cross or ignore the border lines of the 
past. When for such reasons the range of interest is broadened, the 
task of finding a high percentage of pertinent current information is 
much increased, as a greater number and variety of indexes and abstract¬ 
ing journals must be consulted. 


































































' 


















' 



- 72 - 


Thus, if a medical scientist should undertake to keep abreast over 
a broad range of interest, he might find it advisable to search not 
merely the Current List of Medical’ Literature , but also Quarterly 
Cumulative Index Medicus and Chemical Abstracts : for, while each covers 
some hundreds of journals in common with the other two, there are hun¬ 
dreds which any two do not cover in common.Judging by preliminary 
evidence, moreover, Biological Abstracts and/or Excerpt a Me die a. might 
have to be searched as well—for the same reason--!! he should want to 

3' 

ensure the location of a very high percentage of pertinent information. 

It may seem paradoxical, but it is unfortunately the case, that the 
task of making such a comprehensive search, would be increased both by 
the lack and by the extent of overlapping in appropriate indexing and 
abstracting services. The first factor demands consultation of a num¬ 
ber of services, while the second makes the actual scanning duplicatory 
in part and therefore wasteful of some time. 

To the extent that the scientist may fail to meet such search re¬ 
quirements as the above, apposite papers or pertinent items of informa¬ 
tion are likely to be missed and to remain, for his purpose, buried in 
the mass. To the extent that they are missed, he will fail to keep 
abreast of information within his range of interest, and his research 
will be handicapped, impaired or duplicatory. 


Sanford V. Larkey, Helen G-. Field and Williamina a HImwich, Welch 
Medical Library, Johns Hopkins University, ’’Abstracting and. Indexing 
Services in the Medical Sciences,” mimeograph, pp. 9-10. 


39ibid. 









































































* 










. 


















































- 73 - 


Circulation Slowed Down — Ascertaining the location of pertinent in¬ 
formation may consume considerable time even when the scientist is merely 
trying to keep abreast of developments in his sector or field. But he is 
not necessarily out of the woods once he has finished scanning abstracts 
and indexes* Periodicals or reprints of papers have still to be obtained 
and, if the appropriate ones are not available at his institution or 
plant, obtaining them will take days or weeks or even months and may be 
discouragingly difficult or virtually impossible. As was stressed re-' 
peatedly at the Royal Society Scientific Information Conference in 194$, 
the means of providing scientific workers with copies or reprints of 
individual papers are often so inadequate that they seriously reduce 
the usefulness of abstracts and indexes. 

Such conditions adversely affect the whole circulation of science. 
The circulation is slowed down further by delays in publication. Some 
time lag no doubt is inescapable, as journals appear at periodical inter¬ 
vals and publishers or editors have to.judge, select and handle the 
material; but the postwar testimony on delayed publication shows that 
the situation has got rather out of hand as a result of the inundation 
of journals by original submissions. 

The Royal Society conference was told that the average delay in 
publication of a paper in the Journal of the Institution of Electrical 
Engineers (Great Britain) had risen from seven months in 1937 to eight 
in 1947; Proceedings of the Physical .Society , from five to six months; 
Proceedings of the Royal Society , from four to ten months.^ A submis¬ 
sion by the Royal Society showed the following backlogs in hand in 


40 


Royal Society, op. cit .. p. 288. 































. 














■ 

■ 










































- 74 - 


Britain: various biological sciences, three years; chemistry, fourteen 
months to two years; engineering, nearly two years; geology, several 
years; physics, about a year; mathematics, acute--the Journal of the 
London Mathematical Society had a twelve-year backlog in terms of pre¬ 
war rate of publication 

True, this was in 1947, when, probably, the journals were still 
eating into the accumulation of papers which had met with wartime de¬ 
lays in publication. Moreover, it was admitted that the British delays 
were about twice those for comparative or corresponding American jour¬ 
nals.^ Yet in 1951 it was reported on behalf of the American Inter¬ 
departmental Committee on Scientific Research and Development that 
publication had become 11 something, of a stumbling block to useful, re¬ 
search” because of ”an ever-increasing backlog of acceptable papers 
awaiting publication”. In 1949, in spite of significant increases 
since 1939 in the numbers of pages published by the journals, the 
average time between receipt of a paper and its publication was 7.6 
months for twenty-two primary journals and 10.7 months for three re¬ 
view journals.^ 

Another American source stated in 1951 that the flood of litera¬ 
ture had become so overwhelming publication in appropriate journals 
”is often delayed from three months to three years” and "the penalty 
in terms of duplication of effort alone is enormous” 

^ Ibid .. Paper No. 24. 

42 Ibid . 

Z 2 

■^Eugene ¥. Scott, ’’Primary Publication,” Science . Oct. 26 , 1951? p. 3 

^The Center for Scientific Aids to Learning, M. I, T., Interim Report 
to The Carnegie Corporation of New York, p. 12. 




































' ■ ij 


■ 






■ 


' 


















. 




. 












- 75 - 


Evidently, even when the scientist has located and obtained ap¬ 
propriate journals or papers, and has, if possible, found time to read 
them, he cannot keep abreast of the work of those laboring apart from 
him in his sector or field. Except insofar as he may be in direct com¬ 
munication with others through inter-laboratory exchanges of information, 
personal contact, scientific gatherings and the like, his reading is 
bound to be months or years behind. 

That, at any rate, was the condition of affairs as late as 1951. 

It can scarcely be better today. In the first place, it is virtually 
certain that the volume of scientific (and technical) endeavor, de¬ 
manding publication, has grown considerably since then. In the second, 
the government support for research, termed ’'tremendous’ 1 by Jurgens in 
1949, has also increased, and greatly, during the last three or four 
years in the United States, Britain, Canada and other Western countries. 
Jurgens pointed out that this support, while cause for rejoicing inas¬ 
much as it increases scientific endeavor, puts an extra burden on the 

journals of the scientific societies, at least in the United States 

45 

where Congress frowns on publication by government agencies. Scott, 
similarly, noted in 1951 that, while the backlog condition indicated 
for 1949 was not serious, "the factors of fixed journal incomes and in¬ 
creasing expenditures on scientific research" had not yet had their 
full impact. ^ 


^Marion A. Jurgens (former head of the editorial branch, scientific 
information division, U. S. Office of Naval Research), Science, Aug. 26 , 

1949, p. 209. 

^Eugene W. Scott, on. cit., p. 3. 
































. 




































I 

' 














' 

. 






- 76 - 


To repeat•, with added emphasis, what was said in the second para¬ 
graph of this subsection, the main adverse effect of the increase in 
rate of current output has been to slow down the whole circulation of 
scientific information. The braking effect is increased by the limita¬ 
tions on the individual scientist’s reading time. When, for this 
reason, or any other, pertinent information fails to reach his mind, 
circulation is halted short of its goal--communication is interrupted. 

Even if he should find time to keep up essential reading, how much 
of the information thus noted can he master, store in memory and recall 
as needed without further recourse to the printed page? The ratio of 
information available on recall to information read, if it were measured, 
would in all likelihood be disturbingly small. The gap between the out¬ 
put of the multitude and the capacity of the single mind is increasing 
all the time. 

Approaches To Solution -- The preceding subsections have dealt with 
the adverse effects of increased current output of scientific informa¬ 
tion. There are, of course, items on the other side of the ledger. 

The growth represents a higher volume of scientific endeavor—a promis¬ 
ing and welcome development. Insofar as the information consists of 
new knowledge, it also represents advances in science. Undoubtedly, it 
reflects considerable progress in research and the amassing of much new 
knowledge. 

But a great many scientists and scientific organizations in both 
Britain and the United States are convinced- by evidence on every side 
that this progress is far slower and more limited than it vrould. be if 
the sheer abundance of primary information were not slowing down the 
















































■ 

' 























. 


. 






- 


. ' • ' r* 






. 






' 












- 77 - 


circulation and reducing intercommunication. The former must be speeded 
up and the latter much increased, they are certain, if the potentialities 
of current endeavor and current information are to be fully realized and 
if growth of knowledge is to be maintained at a high rate or, if possible, 
accelerated. 

Accordingly, there have been repeated calls, particularly since the 
end of World War II, for reorganization of publication, n rationalization 
of the literature,” ‘’standardization of documentation,” and application 
of machine techniques to the task of speeding up the interchange of ab¬ 
stracts and papers. As will be shown further on in this chapter, good 
beginnings have been made, yet there are serious difficulties and high 
barriers in the way: and, broadly speaking, these difficulties and bar¬ 
riers have to do with that all-important facility—communication. 

II— EFFECTS OF ACCUMULATIVE GROWTH 

The problems of search and documentation and of reading, discussed 
in the preceding section, are greatly aggravated when the scientist is 
not merely, or not only, trying to keep abreast of the current litera¬ 
ture but seeking information retrospectively, going back, say, as many 
as twenty years in order to locate relevant information and. thus prepare 
for a piece of new research, the writing of a comprehensive review or 
the production of a book. 

In science, the necessity of building present achievements on past 
accomplishments cannot be escaped. It is just true of this branch of 
endeavor and knowledge that it is cumulative in an exceptional sense. 

One can enter, say, literature at almost any point in its long 











. 














, 



■ x 



















o 






V 


























history and, with a modest background in what went before, gain a con¬ 
siderable understanding of what Plate or Shakespeare or Dickens meant 
to say, though, of course, the study of such writings•will be more ef¬ 
fective and profitable in proportion to one’s knowledge of the histor-' 
ical setting and of the literary antecedents of the men whose work is 
under study. 

In science, the student may concentrate largeljr on end results in 
school and. early undergraduate studies, but on specializing he must 
follow more of a step-by-step procedure along a. particular path until 
eventually, as he makes an approach to the boundary between the known 
and the unknown, he must master cumulative details bearing on his'own 
investigation, must in effect follow in the footsteps of his immediate 
predecessors and check on the footprints of his contemporaries, in order 
to equip himself for pioneering and to choose a promising trail across 
the- frontier. 

TJJie main reason for all this, it might be said from one standpoint, 
is that scientific endeavor is in the highest degree a social affair. 

Its body of knowledge, or at least of information, grows by the fruitful 
interplay of many minds, by men standing on the shoulders of their pre¬ 
decessors so they can peer farther into the new and unsettled land be¬ 
yond the frontier and chart a course to productive soil. Accordingly, 
the growth of science--to re-emphasize a vital point—depends on the 
maintenance of highly efficient and effective intercommunication, which 
must he not only contemporaneous but retrospective. To the first kind 
of intercommunication, the volume of the current output of information 
has become a serious obstacle: to the second, similarly, the sheer bulk 























































. 










/ 

. 





























. 


■ 












. 


























r 










- 79 - 


of the accumulation of information has become a substantial, barrier, 
which gives every sign of becoming higher before it can be success¬ 
fully breached or surmounted. 

Search and Documentation — The gross aspect of the problem of bulk, 
which confronts the scientist engaged in retrospective search, documenta¬ 
tion and reading, can be roughly appreciated from reference to PART I of 
this thesis. The writer estimated (page 46, above) that the twenty-year 
accumulation of useful information, 1934-53* amounts to between five and 
ten millions of papers. A search through any such mass--even with the 
assistance of indexes, abstracts, catalogues, reviews, summaries and 
other forms of reference—would be quite impossible for the single mind. 
But even if attention w T ere confined to chemistry, alone, the twenty-year 
accumulation confronting the scientist would, be close to 300,000 papers 
(page 25), while, if he were dealing only with physics, he would be 
faced with a total of more than 100,000 papers (page 19). 

Only specialization, of a narrow sort at that, permits the individ¬ 
ual scientist to make effective use of the accumulation of information: 
yet, even if he should have to attend only to the ten thousandth part of 
chemistry or the thousandth part of physics, he would be faced with a 
formidable task in searching out, reading, collating and mastering the 
information relevant to his inquiry. "Even for the scientist who is 
highly specialized, the amount of published information is too great 
for him to find, out by his own attempts at exhaustive reading all that 
may be relevant to his work."^ 

«$> 

47 


S. R. Ranganathan and J. W. Perry, 00 . cit .. p. 11. 






























































■ 








■ 




















- 80 - 


That is to say that the highly specialized scientist cannot, under 
present conditions, attain full coverage of the literature for research 
purposes, though "many.... spend up to two to three months or more search¬ 
ing literature before they can start collecting apparatus to attack a 
US 

particular problem". 

The difficulties result not only from the oppressive bulk of the 
literature-but from the increasing, specialization, diversity and com¬ 
plexity of the information, as recorded, and from the nature of the 
scientific worker’s requirements. The complexities of recorded infor¬ 
mation, of course, are simply faithful reflections of the complicated 
structures of scientific endeavor and scientific knowledge. There is 
a close and continuous interaction between the pursuit of inquiry, the 
amassing and recording of information and the establishment of know¬ 
ledge, and the three are bound to exhibit the same characteristic fea¬ 
tures—those which arise out of the fundamental, dynamics of growth. 

So, also, with search requirements and procedures. As a result 
of extreme specialization, "each new finding, often any one experiment, 
extends the range of knowledge by no more than an infinitesimal amount. 

A single observation or experimental., fact is virtually insignificant; 
it acquires value only by correlation with other observations and facts, 
and the relationship is not always obvious.But, the development of 
a. comprehensive theory or any advance whatsoever may require the review 
and collation of a great many pieces of information scattered in both 


Marsden, Royal Society,, op. cit .. 1948, p. 18. 

^Centre for Scientific Aids to Learning, M. I. T., Interim Report , 
p. 36. 





































. 

. . 






■ 
























' 




. 






- 














- 81 - 


time and space, and also the use of data from some other branch of the 
science previously considered quite unrelated to that in which the in¬ 
quirer is specializing. 

The search may be further complicated, and required to be extensive 
to the point of being exhaustive, by the consideration or the calculation, 
founded on ample scientific experience, that some single piece of informa¬ 
tion may be decisive and all-important, may provide the key to the inquiry 
or to the problem.^ 

Since Perry, and Ranganathan and Perry to a lesser degree, refer 
largely to chemistry, their darker views of the difficulties probably 
should not be taken as applying literally to all divisions of science. 

The accumulation of physics, for instance, is about one-eighth that in 
chemistry for 1934-53> and a retrospective search confined to narrow 
limits should not be as difficult in physics as in chemistry. 

Biology taken as a whole, on the other hand, may not be much or 
any better off than chemistry; for their accumulations are probably 
comparable in magnitude; both sciences are involved in the difficulties 
of classification and of management of literature consequent upon the 
seemingly endless multiplication of organic compounds; and, even if 
biology should be less troubled In this way because much of organic 
chemistry lies outside the biochemical area of coalescence, biology 
carries the burden of additional difficulties of a similar character, 
though less subject to increase, in zoology and paleontology. 


^J. B. Holmstrom, cited in report on Royal Society conference, 
1948, Nature . Aug. 21, 1948. p. 284. 













:■"' ; 

. 


































' 


















































. 

- 



- 82 - 


In any case, considering the primary scientific literature as a 
whole, it was widely held at the Royal Society conference, 1948, that 
the sheer mass and growth of the information was, in various ways, 
causing the loss of knowledge—pertinent papers never being seen by 
the workers who could make use of the findings in those papers.^ - 
This requires some discussion. 

" Loss 11 Of Information -- This is largely a matter of surmise or 
general estimation and accordingly a subject of some dispute. A few 
supposedly ’’classical 11 cases have, however, been cited. 

Pollard, mentions two instances of "lost discovery”: (l) The re¬ 
markable French patent specification of Penaud and G-auchot, describing 
in 1876 the modern airplane, which was not brought to light until 1916; 
(2) Mendel's two papers on the laws governing the inheritance of 

characters in plants and animals, which lay in obscurity for thirty- 

„ 52 

four years. 

The first seems to have been a true case of. loss yet such was the 
desire of men to conquer the air.that human ingenuity was able to make 
it good within less than, say, forty years. More than half a century 
passed, -how r ever, before Fleming made good the loss of Tyndall's dis¬ 
covery of penicillin which was recorded in the Philosophical Trans ¬ 
actions of the Royal Society, also in 1876. 

Mendel’s results undeniably went unheeded by the scientific men 
of the late nineteenth century. Though published in the widely- 
circulated’ Proceedings of the Brno Natural History Societjr in 1866, 


^Royal Society, op. cit . . 1948, p. 235* 
5^ 1 bid. .. Paper No. 24 














































- 


























. 








- 83 - 


they were ignored and then forgotten until read almost simultaneously in 
1900 by Correns, Tschermack and de Vries. Perhaps the best explanation 
is that men’s minds were not ready for Mendel's data in 1866—the time 
was not ripe—and once ignored they were soon forgotten. By 1900, how¬ 
ever, at least three men were capable of appreciating their significance— 
a fact which strongly suggests that the time was then ripe indeed, as a 
result of advances in related knowledge. 

Much the same can be said of the publication, in 1906 and again in 
1910 , of the Russian botanist Tswett's description of the "chromato¬ 
graphic method” for the isolation and identification of chemical sub¬ 
stances. In its time, his work failed to attract the attention of 
chemists on a wide front, even though it had been anticipated in part 
by D. T. Bay of the United States in 1900 and by F. F. Runge of Germany 
in I 85 O and was being used by petroleum chemists prior to 1906. In 
1931 9 however, Tswett’s work was brought out of obscurity to meet 
specific needs and there then began the vigorous and widespread develop¬ 
ment and application of chromatography which have enormously benefitted 
organic chemistry. 

Thus, though chromatography was given only United use for decades, 
once chemistry became ripe for it exploitation proceeded very rapidly. 

Stevens cites another instance: "Willard Gibbs’ paper on the Phase 
Rule, buried in the Transactions of the Connecticut Academy; this was so 
far ahead of its time that physical chemists spent the next twrenty years 
developing similar ideas, while it remained almost wholly unknown. "53 


53 


C. F. B. Stevens, ojd. cit., Chapt. Ill, ms. p. 28. 
























' 















































• 







































While conceding that it was far ahead of its time, one may doubt, in the 
light of Lynde Phelps Wheeler's biography of Gibbs, that it was altogether 
"buried" or "almost wholly unknown"; for Gibbs was careful to send re¬ 
prints of his work to a. "Who's Who" of nineteenth century scientists. 

The Gibbs case appears similar in one respect to those of Mendel and 
Tswett: as for their discoveries so for the phase rule, recognition, 
appreciation and use had to await a more advanced state of development 
in appropriate areas of science. 

These five cases tell us that information of very great import has 
been lost to view long enough to be without issue, has been ignored or 
left unexploited for various reasons, or has been set aside because it 
was ahead, of its time. In themselves, they do not justify any conclu¬ 
sions as to the likelihood, or the frequency of loss of material of com¬ 
parable or of lesser importance. It must be kept in mind, however, that 
permanent loss is, by definition, indetectable, and that even instances 
of suspended animation or temporary oblivion are the less likely to be 
uncovered the more they are likely to occur. One must fall back, there¬ 
fore, on general estimation based, on the character of the circulation of 
information and the difficulties involved in maintaining it under the 
impact of exponential growth. 

r / 

While Conant and perhaps Murphy dissent,' 9 there is a substan¬ 
tial weight of opinion for the conclusion that losses, in one form or 


5^-J. B. Conant, op. pit., p. 21. 

55 

¥. J. Murphy,'Lost-Literature Legend," Chem . Eng . News . Feb. 11, 
1952, p. 505. 





























. • 












































. 


. 




For example, Bush, 


another, have been and are occurring.57,5$,59,60 
referring to the Mendel case, has said "this sort of catastrophe un¬ 
doubtedly is being repeated all about us, as truly significant attain¬ 
ments become lost in the mass of the inconsequential." Stevens remarks: 
"There seems no doubt....that an appreciable proportion of scientific 
and technical knowledge passes out of reach every year, and that, were 
scientific intercommunication reduced, this loss would rapidly increase. 
Crowther believes that the mass of published material, enormous though 
it is, "has submerged beneath it, like an iceberg, ten times its volume 
of unpublished work, in fragmentary or negative form, or else in inac¬ 
cessible reports, which contains a quantity of raw* material of possible 
value ."^ 

Certainly, there are many good reasons for expecting some losses: 
sheer mass of information may bury alive an item of outstanding sig¬ 
nificance; search may, for various reasons, fall short of completeness; 
the item may be unobtainable by the individual worker even after he has 
determined by search when and where it was published: papers out of line 


56 

Royal Society, on. cit .. 1948. 

5?S. C. Bradford — "Sources of Information on Scientific Subjects, 
Engineering . Jan. 26, 1934? pp. $5-6; "Complete Documentation", Nature . 
Jan. 18, 1947, pp. 105-6; Royal Society Empire Scientific Conference, 
1946, Report . Vol. I, pp. 735-6. 

5$e. H. Huntress, cited by J. ¥. Ferry in "Information Analysis for 
Machine Searching", Arnerican Documentation . August, 1950, p. 133• 

59Vannevar Bush, "As We May Think," Atlantic . p. 101. 

60 C. F. B. Stevens, ojd. cit., Ch. Ill, ms. p. 32. 

^B. M. Crowther, Research . January, 1951, p. 2. 


























, 


























■> 




. 










































. 


























- 86 - 


with the fashions set by well-known research workers may be ignored and. 
fail to be carried along even as references; advanced or unorthodox 
theories are unlikely to get attention from the majority of workers and 
may eventually pass out of sight; extremely difficult conceptions may 
suffer a like fate; and so forth. 

Side by side with loss of information, loss of time and effort oc¬ 
curs as a result of duplication.^'" 5 ^ ? 6 L, 65 . p r ins of the Dutch Patent 
Office, for example, once calculated that, in a large collection of 
German patent applications, 65 percent were refused and a further 31 
percent limited becaxise the inventions were already wholly or partly 
known. ^ 

In contrast to loss, information which has been shown to be incor¬ 
rect may be carried along in the accumulation just because it is re¬ 
ferred. to in succeeding papers and in books over a considerable period. 

• Undoubtedly, many erroneous experimental findings and contradictory 
generalizations find their way into print in the first place. They meet 
various fates. A comparatively small proportion of such experimental 
findings may be checked by other scientists by repetition of the experi¬ 
ments, or the author of the original paper may discover his own error 
and publish a correction. Otherwise, the findings may drop out of 


62 

63 


Royal Society, op>. cit .. 1%6, p. 637. 


Centre for Scientific Aids to Learning, M, I. T., ojc. cit . p. 12. 
^Rorbert Wiener, op. cit., p. 135. 

6 5r. L. Meier, "Research as a Social Process," Research . October, 
1951, p. 465. 

66 Roya.l Society, 00. cit ., loc . cit . 






























































■ 

. 


. 


v 




. ■ 


. 















- 87 - 


circulation either because they fail to lead, to predicted results in a 
further stage of the same course of inquiry or because they fail to fit 
■within an approved conceptual scheme. 

When perpetuated, however, they can be misleading to many thousands 
of students and. scientists. An interesting example, though perhaps an 
exceptional one, is provided by the case-history studies of the Kallikaks, 
Jukes and Edwards, familiar to many students of sociology, education and 
eugenics. The Kallikak and Juke family lines were long held up as 
examples of inheritance of mental deficiency and of predisposition to 
criminality, but it now is recognized that the methods used in gather¬ 
ing the family histories were highly uncritical and that the studies 
therefore gave a distorted, picture. Moreover, even if the data were 
unbiased, no valid conclusions regarding the genetic component of the 
traits in these families can be drawn, simply because it is impossible 
to judge separately the parts played by genetic factors and by the very 
unfavorable environments which persisted generation after generation. 

As Carmichael indicates, these studies and the conclusions drawn from 
them have been severely and justly criticized, but before they were 
thus brought to trial and convicted of error they had exerted a. pro¬ 
found influence upon thinking in sociology and education.^7 

Again, Butterfield sets forth a mass of evidence which leaves little 
doubt that Galileo never successfully performed any such experiment as 
dropping two bodies of different weights from the Tower of Pisa, though 
the story of such a success has been repeated over and over again by 
historians of science and has been recounted, to generations of schoolboys. 


^Leonard Carmichael, Manual of Child Psychology , p. 453 















- 








. 


































■ 

























The supposed experiment has even been described as "one of the outstand¬ 
ing achievements of scientific history" and references to it can be noted 
in the most recent of scientific literature. True, Galileo, himself, re¬ 
ports he tried the experiment several times in his youth, but he secured 
the opposite results to those popularly credited to his experimental 
genius. The perpetuation of this myth—one among the many discovered 
in historical writings as a result of critical research'—would not have 
mattered very much, if it had not led to a general supposition that 
experiment was the foundation of the contributions of Galileo and others 
to the scientific revolution of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. 
Butterfield makes it abundantly clear, however, that any such supposition 
is erroneous. The trick was turned primarily, not by new evidence or 
additional observations, but by transpositions in the minds of the sci¬ 
entists, by looking at the old bundle of data in a different way, giving 

/ rt 

the'data a new set of relations and a new framework. 

This happens to be a most significant point, which has an important 
bearing on the advancement of scientific knowledge and the improvement 
of the popular understanding of science in our own day. It will be 
considered further on in this study, mainly in PART III. 

To sum up very briefly what has been argued so far in section II, 
the accumulative growth has made retrospective search and documentation 
both increasingly necessary and ever more difficult, has in all likeli¬ 
hood resulted in "loss" of or failure to use significant information, 
and thus has slowed down, restricted and even disrupted that communica¬ 
tion with the more immediate past which is essential both for the con¬ 
tinued growth of information and for the discovery of new scientific 
knowledge. 
























































. 










. 

. 







































' 






' 


. 


1 






- 89 - 


Of course, adverse effects are not the only nor even the main re¬ 
sults of the volumetric growth of scientific information. It represents, 
as mentioned, before at the end of section I on page 76, a gratifying and 
productive increase in the volume of scientific endeavor; effective pro¬ 
gress is being made, one may be certain, and much new knowledge is being 
amassed. Nevertheless, scientists and scientific organizations are con¬ 
cerned about the adverse effects and. convinced that, if the potentialities 
of current endeavor and of the current and the accumulated information are 
to be fully realized, the whole process of current and retrospective inter¬ 
communication, so vital to scientific endeavor, must be much improved. 

Ill—EFFORTS TO IMPROVE INTERCOMMUNICATION 

Means of improvement have been proposed for each of the three main 
stages of the process by which the results of scientific endeavor are 
made generally available through publication. (Much information or know¬ 
ledge also is exchanged- directly, person to person, but this is more a 
matter for consideration in Chapters III and IV of the present part of 
thi s study.) 

1. The process of disseminating information by publication begins 
with the recording of results. 

Bush has envisioned, as partial substitutes for writing down re¬ 
sults during experiment, the use of a minicamera worn on the forehead 
and. dry photography which would give immediate prints. He and others 
also foresee the possibility of a ’’vocoder. 1 which would type running 


69Vanneva.r Bush, ojd. cit . . p. 102. 












































































■ 












■ 


' 





- 90 - 


results or the final paper when talked to.^ Unfortunately, this would 
require a special form of language—being sought through information 
theory—which would, be even less intelligible to the inexperienced 
reader than the scientific jargon of one specialist may now be to a 
specialist in a very different field. In other words, attempting in 
this way to solve a communication problem by the application of tech¬ 
nology gives rise to still another problem in communication. What is 
more, probably few workers, without greatly improving their command of 
their native tongue, would be capable of writing a good paper by dicta¬ 
tion; it is difficult to escape the necessity of writing things down on 
paper, a procedure which is recommended by its proven value both for 
thinking things out and for reporting the results of thought. 

Naturally enough, the need for writing clear and concise papers has 
been urged in many quarters, notably at the Royal Society conferences 
and-by editors of journals and other periodicals. As will be shown in 
Chapter IV (below), the art of writing needs more emphasis and teaching 
throughout the education of scientists (including engineers and tech¬ 
nologists) . 

More and better summaries and review papers also have been widely 
urged, again notably at the Royal Society conferences. It should be 
noted, however, that complete search and successful collation are pre¬ 
requisites of summation and reviewring. 

2. For improvement of the second stage, involving publication and 
dissemination of literature, many proposals have been made to "rational- 
ize the literature”, "standardize documentation”, speed up the delivery 


?° Ibid .. p. 103 . 




































































































- 91 - 


of current information and widen the circulation of information.^ >?2, 
73>74,75,76 Except for increased use of pre-prints of papers, these 
proposals usually require such things as more systematic organization 
of publication, elimination of duplicatory periodicals, merging of 
journals, universal systems of classification and restriction of vari¬ 
ous periodicals to certain fields or areas of science, and thus demand 
agreements between professional associations, publishers, editors and 
other individuals. Agreements can be and have been reached within na¬ 
tional borders and, to far less extent, at the more difficult interna¬ 
tional levels;- but the independence and the preference for freedom of 
action of practically all concerned appears, on the evidence of the 
fteyal Society and UNESCO conferences, to preclude any comprehensive 
ordering of publication and of the literature on an international 
basis, and this despite the basically international character of sci¬ 
entific endeavor. To put it another way, all-inclusive plans for 
systematizing intercommunication from the ground up demand an imprac¬ 
tical degree of international uniformity;' they would also be very 
costly. 


7lRoyal Society, on. cit .. 1946. 

72Royal Society, op. cit., 194$. 

73UNESCO Abstracting Conference, op. cit . 

^"Rationalization of the Literature of Scientific Research," 
Mature . June 8, 1946, pp. 745-8. 

75p a .ul A. Woke, "Considerations on the Utilization of Scientific 
Literature," Science . April 13, 1951, pp. 339-403. 

^Dwight E. Gray, "Standardization in Technical Information Ser¬ 
vices," Physics Today . March, 1951, pp. 8-9. 




















. 




. 

' 

. 




































. 










. 















- 92 - 


In any case, such an ordering, involving a considerable degree of 
direction, restriction and rigidity, is mistrusted by many scientists 
for reasons which may be stated as follows: 

(a) It would be at variance with, and -might inhibit or reduce, 
that freedom from control and direction which is generally recognized 
as essential to the advancement of scientific knowledge. Long experi¬ 
ence has shown, that discoveries are of unpredictable and uncontrollable 
origin. ¥ith that in mind, most scientists, though perhaps not as high 
a proportion of engineers and other technologists, believe that rigid 
ordering of the publication and circulation of information, as of actual 
research work, would reduce the chances of discovery, in the net result, 
even if it speeded up and facilitated communication along designated 
mainlines. 

(b) Crowther expresses the view somewhat differently and in more 
detail as follows: 

It has become a truism to say that no scientist can read 
all that is published of value to him and still have time for 
his own research. If this is so, it is a symptom of that 
wastefulness which is associated with laissez faire in the 
economic sphere. Some of the proposals which have been made 
to alleviate the condition recognize this, in effect, by im¬ 
posing a stricter order on the system and directing its 
activities along more rigidly delineated channels.... such 
proposals have had scant support. Most scientists feel in¬ 
stinctively that the cause of science is best served if they 
individually have access to all the available information, even 
if the problem of making use of it is a difficult one. In 
many specific instances, of course, a, co-operative effort can 
be ma.de by establishing an organization to collect and sort 
all information of value on certain subjects and make the re¬ 
sults available to the appropriate people. But it is likely 
to be the less successful, the more the subjects are specu¬ 
lative, with ramifications too nebulous and widespread to be 
commanded by a limited staff. A cut-and-dried subject, with 
well established associations, may be served successfully in 
this way, but this not the stuff of fundamental scientific 
advance. 11 Science," said Sir David Chadwick, "is like spots; 
it may break out anywhere. 


























■ 





■ 





























• 
















' 

















- 93 - 


(c) Ordering of the literature usually, if not always, requires 
some form of master classification, as for the Universal and the Dewey 
decimal systems. Such a classification of knowledge sooner or later 
will be rendered obsolete by the discovery of new knowledge which does 
not fall clearly within any of its compartments; if, in spite of this, 
the classification should be maintained then it is likely in time to 
deceive or to mislead its users and so become self-defeating and prejudi¬ 
cial to the advancement of knowledge. 

3. The third stage of the process of intercommunication through 
publication brings the library into play. It has long had a vital role 
but there is a growing appreciation of the fact that the importance of 
the functions it does perform and of others it could perform is increas¬ 
ing along with the level of the current output of information and the 
size of the accumulation. ”....finding a fact in the library is usually 
a good deal quicker than finding it in the laboratory: consequently the 
more of the prior art the researcher has access to, the more rapidly his 
work will go—for ’he who ignores the past is doomed to repeat it , . ,, ^° 

On the other hand, it may be even quicker to ask the man who knows 
or is very likely to know the desired fact. 

But still, asHolmstrom observes: 

Knowledge is built up and is adapted to practical ends 
not only through direct questioning of nature but also through 
collation--the placing side by side in new and fruitful con- 
junctions--of elements of knowledge which have already been 
ascertained and recorded. These elements are to science what 
bricks are to architecture. 


7$C. F. B. Stevens, ojd. cit . . Oh. Ill, ms. 


p. 3. 




























. 










* 

















. 











-' -' * ' 




- 94 - 


It is a strange fact, however, that while every textbook 
deals as a matter of course with the experimental technique 
appertaining to its subject, the principles of collative 
technique are scarcely ever systematically considered but are 
left for intuition to suggest. Too often the experimenter 
and the practical, engineer are left unaware of the importance, 
equal to the laboratory, of the library, the bibliographical, 
bureau with its indexes and abstracts, the study and the com¬ 
mittee room... .Experimental research ought always to be pre¬ 
ceded by a search of the literature to see whether what is 
proposed, has not already been done—but because this is not 
well enough recognized and because the machinery is inadequate 
for it j “in almost every branch of applied science duplication 
and overlapping of experimental work continually occur.*' 

The selection of established material, sifting, arranging 
and thinking about it--bibliographical search and organization 
plus creative thinki.ng--has just as much right as experimental 
operations to be dignified by the name of “research* 1 .79 

That appraisal of library research emphasizes both the seriousness 

of the difficulties resulting from, the accumulation of information on 

.library shelves and the importance of overcoming them. 

It is not a proper part of the present study nor the intention of 

the writer to enter into a detailed discussion of modern solutions which 

have been proposed for improving library utilization but it is necessary 

to deal with these matters here along broad lines. Their consideration, 

though comparatively brief,, will sebve the additional and useful purpose 

of recording pertinent references through which more information on the 

topic can be acquired. 

Most of the proposals for improving library utilization have as 
their main purposes speeding up the search for information, and ensur¬ 
ing that the search will be more nearly complete or exhaustive. Two 
main avenues to this goal are seen: (l) more specialization of library 
services and staff: (2) the application of progressive technology to 
the recording, storage, cataloguing and selection of information in 
the library. 


E. Holmstrom, op. cit ., pp. 2-4. 





















* 















• 












< 










. 




- 95 - 


Consider (l) briefly: Libraries devoted to special purposes or 
special fields are M old. hat” and specialization among librarians, as 
among personnel in most fields, is an old story, but something new has 
been added in more recent years. It is suggested that research insti¬ 
tutions need information officers trained for or experienced in both 
scientific research and librarianship and thus able to undertake such 
tasks as searching the literature on behalf of research workers, pre¬ 
paring summaries of literature received, critically examining new 
developments and making introductory reports on them, reporting directly 
on meetings and conferences of interest to the staff of an institution, 

and so forth. The development of this new profession of information 

95 

officer as a bridge between laboratory and library has begun. 

In essence, the job of the information officer is communication. 
While he relieves another scientist of some of the spadework of com¬ 
munication, such as information searching and preliminary collation, 
he also, lengthens the lines and further complicates the process of 
communication. If this further division of labor--this further spe¬ 
cialization in an effort to overcome the difficulties created by growth 
of information--is to be highly effective, line leakage and the chances 
of information loss resulting from the further complication of the pro¬ 
cess must be kept to a minimum.. This, in turn, reouires that all con¬ 
cerned be highly efficient and accurate in sending and receiving mes¬ 
sages. The need for mastery of language, which is the currency of 


95william F. Hewitt, ^ r * -- "The Academic Literature-Science Unit, 11 
Journal of Chemical Education . April, 1949, pp. 191-2; "The Literature- 
Science Group in the Medical School," Medical Education . January, 1951, 
pp. 1-4; "Science Communications," Science . August 3, 1951, pp. 134-5• 





















' 


















- 


















































> 











- 96 - 


exchange, is accordingly increased or, looking at it from a different 
standpoint, a higher level of mastery of language is demanded 

The literature on ( 2 ) has become very extensive and the few ref- 
erences listed, below lead to many more. ow 

For improving recording and storage, scientists propose the use of 
microcards, microfilm, microprints and magnetic tape. Marvels of com¬ 
pression and considerable simplication of the physical aspects of 
storage could be obtained by these means. Bush has estimated, for 
example, that the Encyclopedia Britannica could be reduced to the vol¬ 
ume of a matchbox, a million volumes compressed into one end of a desk 
and the records in a billion books packed into a moving van. 

Looking to better search for and selection of pertinent informa¬ 
tion, punched cards have been used to some advantage and for experi¬ 
mental investigations, but it appears to be widely held that punched 
cards or ordinary accounting machines will not provide the answer. It 
is expected to come from some form of the rapid selector, an electronic 


ft An important point which will be considered further in Chapter IV 
of this part of the thesis and in Part III. 

^Royal Society, op, cit .. 1948; Vannevar Bush, op. clt .: Louis N. 
Ridenour, Ralph R. Shaw and Albert G. Hill, Bibliogra.phr In An Age of 
Science : J. W. Perry, "The Crisis in Compiling and Correlating Chemical 
Literature," "Development Program for Machine Indexing"; Philip R. Bag- 
ley, "Application of New r er Electronic Techniques to Information Search¬ 
ing"; Thyllis M. Williams, "Analysis of Information for Machine Indexing" 
(the se four papers were presented at the M.I.T. Symposium on Machine 
Techniques for Information Selection, June 10, 11, 1952); Centre for 
Scientific Aids to Learning, op . cit..; S. R. Ranganathan and J. ¥. 

Perry, op. cit .; J. W. Perry, "Information Analysis for Machine Search- 
ing," loc . cit..; Carl S. Wise and J. W. Perry, "Multiple Coding and the 
Rapid Selector," American Documentation . Vol. 1 No. 2: J. ¥. Perry and 
R. S. Casey, "Mechanized Searching," Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology . 
Vol. 8, pp. 449-467. 
























































- 

. 
































- 













- 97 - 


instrument based on principles originated by Bush before the war (and 
donated to the public without patenting or any other reservations), and 
initially developed in a project supervised by Ralph R. Shaw, librarian 
of the United States department of agriculture. 

Just as marvels of compression could be attained with microprinting, 
so marvels of speed in search and selection could be accomplished with 
the rapid selector, working on microfilm records. It was estimated in 
1949 that the instrument could make a complete review of all the entries 
which have appeared in Chemical Abstracts during the last thirty years, 
in fifteen minutesIt has since been estimated that it could be ex¬ 
pected to search the indexes to 5?000,000 documents per hour. What is 
proposed is simply the mechanization of the tedious, routine and repeti¬ 
tive tasks of scanning indexes and checking through files of papers or 
other items of information. This sort of work can be carried out with 
efficiency and speed by an automatic instrument such as the selector, 
much as the laborious and detailed manipulations of mathematics are 
speedily accomplished by computing machines. However, most of the 
mechanical devices so far designed for storage, for selection and for 
the final step, rapid, reproduction of the information in a handy form 
for the inquirer, have their limitations. This is true even of the 

c>p 

rapid selector, according to Shaw. 

No doubt, mechanical limitations can be overcome by technology in 
time. But the difficulties involved in applying technology to the 


^- Chem . Bng . News . July 4, 1949, p. 1955* 

rtp 

R. R. Shaw, BibliographyIn An Age of Science . Lecture 2, "Machines 
and the Bibliographical Problems of the Twentieth Century." 


























. 


























<cv 


■ 
















■ 










. 





. 






• • 








- 98 - 


improvement of library services go much deeper. The fundamental problems 
are human. The successful use of such technical inventions demands new 
and complex systems for the organization, classification and coding of 
information or knowledge, and for the interrogation of an automatic 
library system. Though these requirements are under close and continu¬ 
ous study, meeting them will be a great and time-consuming task involv¬ 
ing the efforts of many scholars; they may be satisfied within a decade 
or two, or even sooner, for the purposes of individual central libraries 
or particular nations, but they need to be satisfied on an international 
scale and no one can be sanguine about the pirospects of success in this 
arena. 

The magnitude of the whole task of adapting the present accumula¬ 
tion of information, with provision for future additions, and also 
adapting the library itself for the application of modern technology 
has been put in these terms: 

There is necessary an initial, decision as to what material 
should be selected for storage, and how it should be organized, 
classified, coded and stored; complementary to this is the 
choice of a method (or methods) for locating and utilizing the 
material. This initial phase is an intellectual task of the 
highest order, and nothing but the world-wide collaboration of 
the best scholars in each field will accomplish it. The 
critical tools for this segment of the problem are the experi¬ 
ence, the insight, and the organized judgment of scholars, all 
brought into action in permanently organized and determined 
groups. Without these, any attack on the library problem will 
remain a stopgap effort. No matter how successfully libraries 
are organized into smoothly operating engineered systems, there 
is a basic need, for intellectual guidance and control at the 
imput terminals. 

The second phase of the problem is thorough functional' or 
operations analysis to discover engineering characteristics. 

To design a modern library system, it is necessary to know how 
a. library is used., how its present or future use is conditioned 
by traditions of the letterpress era, and what are the potentials 

































. 

























































- 99 - 


of use for scholars not imbued with the limitations of present- 
day libraries....it cannot be undertaken as. a short-range plan. 

It will require a highly trained operations analysis team, 
guided by an extraordinary systems director, to live in typical 
libraries and among typical scholars for several years, in 
order to obtain a thorough understanding of their functions and 
interactions....®3 

The first paragraph quoted., it sometimes seems to the writer, comes 
very close to calling for intellectual solutions to the problems created 
by the growth, of information, as prerequisites to their solution by the 
application of technology . That may be a harsh dictum, but it serves 
to emphasize the magnitude of the obstacles likely to be encountered 
whenever efforts are made to solve the problems of growth by rather 
technological means. 

p-j 

If the views of Shaw and. Hill be accepted, ^ the second paragraph 
of the quotation does not tell the whole story of the engineering re¬ 
quirements. For full mechanization of a library or library system, they 
see-a need for definitions of the volume of information to be handled 
and the rate of increase to be expected.. The writer has already shown, 
in PART I of this thesis, that accurate figures for these physical 
characteristics of the literature of the whole of science will be very 
difficult to obtain. The present systemsof classification and. publica¬ 
tion have grown like Topsy and the resultant duplication and overlapping 
constitute a substantial obstacle to the compilation, of precise numerical 
data. Problems of international co-operation and collaboration also in¬ 
trude . 


S 3The Centre for Scientific Aids to Learning, M.I.T., op. cit .. 

pp. 49-50. 

^Views expressed in Bibliography In An Age of Science . 


































.... 

. 




.... 










. 




. 








- 










. ' 1 ' • : : 

















' . 

‘ 


















- 100 - 


Two other weaknesses of solutions by library mechanization deserve 
mention. First, comprehensive schemes of classification cannot anticipate 
future innovations in knowledge, viewpoint and research, yet it is just 
the unexpected turns which often lead to the most spectacular advances. 
Secondly, it may not be easy for the scientist to know what he is look¬ 
ing for until he has done some searching and he may thus run the risk of 
being made prisoner by the existing classification during his preliminary 
search, with consequent reduction of his chances of breaking away from 
established lines of thought and development. 

In sum, mechanization holds great possibilities for overcoming in 
the library the problems created by the growth of information, but com¬ 
prehensive mechanization demands intellectual and international achieve¬ 
ments in re-organization and reclassification of information and know¬ 
ledge which, if they do not prove wholly impractical, mil probably 
consume decades of time and be very costly. The elements of uniformity 
and rigidity inherent in such schemes, moreover, could be detrimental 
to the advancement of knowledge. 

Such considerations have led Stevens to conclude that ’’the most 
immediately useful answers 1 ’ to the problems of the accumulation ’’are, 
rather, the teaching of researchers how to write clear and concise 
papers, and how to use the literature in its present form”. Accord¬ 
ingly, Stevens and colleagues of the Pulp and Paper Research Insti¬ 
tute of Canada, Montreal, have prepared a ’’Guide to Report Writing” 
and a book on ’’Systematic Searching of the Scientific Literature” 

(which was still in manuscript at time of communication).^5 


^5c. F. B. Stevens, Assistant to the President of the Institute, 
letter to the writer, Aug. 1, 1952. 
















































































' 










































- 101 - 


IV—-SUMMARY 

This chapter has been concerned with the effects on scientific 
endeavor of the volumetric growth of scientific information. After 
emphasis on the vital role of intercommunication in scientific work 
and in the advancement of knowledge, it has been shown that the growth 
has been and presumably still is affecting endeavor in the following 
ways: 

(1) Making it extremely difficult, if not impossible, to keep up 
with the. current output even.in a narrow sector or a limited field, 
the difficulty increasing as the area of interest is expanded. 

(2) Slowing down the circulation of information—the lifeblood of 
science. 

( 3 ) Making contemporaneous search and documentation exceedingly 
and increasingly 'difficult. This problem is greatly aggravated when the 
search has to be retrospective as well. Complete or exhaustive search 
under a heading which requires the scientist to reach into a number of 
sectors and fields has become impractical in terms of time and effort, 
if not actually impossible, for most working scientists. 

(4) Causing at least a relative "loss” of information by burial in 
the mass. 

(5) Increasing the likelihood of correction failing, so that in¬ 
correct data and.theories may be carried along for many years and mis¬ 
lead both working scientists and students. 

(6) Slowing down and interrupting communication with the past upon 
which present achievements must be founded. 

(?) In general, reducing that intercommunication which is so vital 
to the advancement of scientific knowledge. 

































' 






























' 

■ 










- 102 - 


Four ways of overcoming or offsetting these adverse effects have 
been noted or discussed: 

(1) Bringing about better writing of papers. 

( 2 ) Rationalizing primary publication and the literature. 

( 3 ) Mechanizing libraries to make possible faster and more effi¬ 
cient search and documentation or communication with the past. 

(l) Teaching research workers how to make better use of the 
literature in its present form. 

Of these, (l) and ( 4 ) appear to offer the most immediately prac¬ 
ticable and useful answers to the problems of volumetric growth, and 
they lead to considerations of language and communication which will be 
dealt with in Chapter IV. 

Both ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) assume at least partial solutions of the very 
problems they are intended to solve, will be very time-consuming and 
difficult undertakings, and will be subject to certain weaknesses which 
could inhibit the advance. 

However, the growth of information, which is almost certainly ex¬ 
ponential in character, means that scientific (including technical) 
knowledge also has been and presumably still is growing very rapidly. 
While progress, in the sense of the advancement of knowledge, is being 
slowed down and interrupted by the adverse effects, the rapid growth 
of both information and knowledge holds the promise of further growth, 
though only so long, it is supposed, as the rate of expansion does not 
fall below an unknown level necessary to the maintenance of a "chain 
reaction". 

Detailed effects apart, the enormous growth of scientific informa¬ 
tion and knowledge has simply caused a tremendous increase in the dis- 

























































' 

. 








■ 










- 103 - 


parity between, on the one hand, the output of the multitudes of minds, 
and, on the other, the capacity of the single mind to search out, to 
read, to understand and to master the material. 

More and better intercommunication, speaking in very general terms, 
appears to be a large part of the answers which so far have been devised 
or envisaged for the problems created by the expansion of the literature. 
But mankind has always sought—more or less out of necessity—to offset 
or to escape the disparity between the output of the multitude and the 
capacity of the individual by increasing specialization or division of 
labor. Specialization has been developing along with the growth and 
has been increasing in some proportion to it. At the same time, informa¬ 
tion and knowledge have become more and more fragmented. These are among 
the most prominent effects of the volumetric growth, though not entirely 
due to it. They will be the subjects of analysis in the next chapter. 

The' discussion will deal mainly with specialization in endeavor, though 
some mention will be made of fragmentation of information and knowledge. 






. 






■ - 




' 

■ 



















■ 


. 




































CHAPTER II 


INCREASING SPECIALIZATION 

Specialization in human activities must be practically as old as 
mankind. It is something to be expected, from, the variations in genetic 
inheritance and environmental conditions, the resulting diversity of 
talents and.- capacities and interests, the high level of individualiza¬ 
tion in the human species, the teamwork -which is the concomitant of 
family and social life, the competitive element in endeavor, and the 
disparity between individual capacity and the demands of necessary or 
freely chosen tasks. It has been greatly increased, however, by the 
complex development which can be described as the growth of learning, 
and it has therefore exhibited a tendency to run wild in response to 
the acceleration of the growth of scientific and technical information 
in modern times. Concurrently with the increasing specialization of 
scientific and technical endeavor, the fragmentation of information and 
knowledge has proceeded to unprecedented, extremes. 

While this is widely appreciated in a general way, it warrants 
emphasis with a few illustrations. 

For example, increasing specialization in the areas of knowledge 
in which, scientists choose to concentrate their endeavors is shown by 
the evolution of the American Association for the Advancement of Science 
from a single small body into a very large federation of 207 affiliated 
and associated societies. Even more numerous than indicated by the num¬ 
ber of societies would be the areas in which individual effort is con¬ 
centrated in the course of actual research. 




























* 














. 





















' 
























' 








- 105 - 


The subdivision of recorded Information for purposes of subject 
classification and indexing indicates the extremes to which fragmenta¬ 
tion may be carried. The Dewey Decimal Classification, originated in 
the United States in 1876, now has about 10,000 divisions and subdivi¬ 
sions of subjects in its main tabulation, while the Universal Decimal 
Classification, its European derivative, uses 100,000. The list of 
subject index headings in Physics Abstracts showed six main sections-- 
General Physics, Light, Heat, Sound, Electricity and Magnetism, and 
Chemical Physics^ and a total of 77 subdivisions for thenyin 1930. 

But in 1951* after a reorganization and elaboration of the breakdown 
and a broadening of the scope of this abstracting journal’s coverage, 
there were 43 main headings and more than 1,000 subheadings. 

As Andrade has remarked: 

There is today a growing specialization in science which 
is inevitable. We no longer have men of learning writing for 
other men of learning, or.men of science writing for other 
men of science, or disciples of exact science -writing for 
other disciples of exact science, or physicists writing for 
'other physicists, or students of optics writing for other 
students of optics, or spectroscopists writing for other 
spectroscopists, but rather infra-red. spectroscopists writ¬ 
ing for other infra-red spectroscopists—and very soon they 
will have a journal of their own.^ 

The same point has been made by Norbert Wiener in Cybernetics and 
by many other-scientists. Because subdivision after subdivision has 
hived off from the traditional main divisions of science—-physics, 
chemistry, biology and mathematics--it is no longer strictly correct 
to call a man a physicist or a chemist, say, without restriction and 


coE. N. da 0. Andrade, "Presentation of Scientific Information," 
Royal Society of London, Proceedings Series B— Biological Sciences . 
Oct. 19, 1949, p. 333. 




























' 



. 


























' 







' 

' 




! • • 


















■ 


. 










-106- 


qualification, though for the sake of simplicity these titles persist 
in everyday speech. It is not merely that the organic chemist who runs 
into a problem in biology will be likely to turn it over to a colleague 
who specializes in the latter field, but, as Wiener notes, that a spe¬ 
cialist within organic chemistry will consider some other part of this 
big field strictly the concern of his colleague a few doors down the 
corridor. 

The effects upon scientific endeavor and the quest for knowledge 
have been various—both beneficial and detrimental, but, so far at 
least, leaving a balance heavily on the beneficial side. 

I—BENEFICIAL EFFECTS OF CONCENTRATION 

That specialization has vastly increased scientific knowledge, 
as well as the flood of information in which knowledge is embedded, 
there can be no doubt. As the disparity between the production of the 
multitude and the capacity of the single mind has relentlessly increased, 
as the frontiers of science and technology have widened and the potential 
size of the regions of the unknown has grown, the ground to be covered en 
route to the verge of the unknown has been kept within manageable bounds 
by narrowing the line of approach, and the effort to breach the frontier 
and to advance onto fresh ground has been, in most experimental and much 
theoretical work, concentrated at some promising point. The practical 
art of concentrating the attack has been brought to a high level of ef¬ 
ficiency. At the same time, specialization has provided the inquirer 
with a host of new and improved instruments for experimental attack and 
with a greater variety of mathematical tools for theoretical analysis 
and synthesis. The means of circulation and exchanging information, 
though they now show signs of bogging down in their own tracks, have 










. • ■ 1 




. 










v 






. 




SJ 


' 





■ 












. 








\ o‘ ■ o‘ i 































-107- 


also been extended and improved during, say, the past 100 years and more, 
and technical facilities for communication have advanced very rapidly 
during the last fifty years. 

The foregoing considerations, sketchy though they are, give sub¬ 
stance to the view, expressed from time to time,^7j88 that specializa¬ 
tion has been responsible to a considerable extent for the great modern 
advance in scientific knowledge. 

Certainly, it has been responsible to a considerable extent for 
the great increase in information and embedded knowledge, though the 
cautious mind might be inclined to shy away from the term advance as 
assuming, like progress . foresight of an ultimate goal, which must al¬ 
ways be difficult or impossible to define while knowledge is incomplete.& 

On the other hand, referring to the first clause of the above 
sentence, intercommunication, the synthesizing element in endeavor, 
has also contributed largely to the growth of information and, even 
more, knowledge. Specialization and intercommunication can be regarded 
as complementary essentials for endeavor, analogous to analysis and 
synthesis in methods of investigation. 

In specializing and in analysing, scientists are operating accord¬ 
ing to the rule divide and conquer or, it may be, divide and isolate 
and conquer. The underlying notion here is that of autonomy: that a 
part or aspect of nature can be investigated separately as though it 
were unrelated to other parts and aspects. This notion plays a vital 


87 

'Thomas K. Sherwood, Mid-Century The Social Implications of Sci ¬ 
entific Progress . p. 302. 

^Sidney Hook, ibid .. p. 311. 

^Entanglement in the philosophical argument here indicated is 
avoided in this thesis by the assumptions and the definition on p. 62 above. 





























’'l 






. 


. 




x 










•. t , r 


























. 








' 














. 




. 


' 


















-108- 


role in the methods of investigation; it is customary, for instance, to 
isolate a single factor for experimental study, to abstract a system 
from a larger context for mathematical treatment, and to consider a 
system as closed and self-sufficient for purposes of thought. 

But there is a complementary notion to that of autonomy; namely 
that nature is really one system, which means all its parts must some¬ 
how be interrelated. It is assumed then that, unlike Humpty-Dumpty, 
the fragmented picture of nature can somehow be put together again. 

This gives rise to such synthesizing activities as the formulation of 
general laws and structural theories. In part, and particularly when 
boundaries between larger specialized fields or major divisions of sci¬ 
entific knowledge are being crossed, intercommunication issues from 
this synthetic urge. It can also be said that synthesis aids in com¬ 
munication; for well-founded laws and theories and large conceptual 
schemes, considered as abstract and somewhat approximate representa¬ 
tions of empirical data and empirical relationships, constitute a means 

t 

of saying volumes in a most economical way. 

For all that synthetic formulations reduce knowledge to more manage 
able proportions and provide a shorthand which facilitates communication 
they do not by any means eliminate the necessity of specializing. The 
individual who would use them as his foundation for further investiga¬ 
tion or as a means of getting into contemporaneous or retrospective 
communication with other minds must, generally speaking, know the 
formulations' origins and what they mean precisely. Thus, he is com¬ 
pelled beforehand to acquire much underlying knowledge and to gain 
some mastery of the linguistic forms, usually mathematical but also 






















. 








' 


























h 








' 






-109- 


in part verbal, in which synthetic statements are made. This dual task 
is often long and hard. The more comprehensive and powerful and the 
newer and more relevant to current research are the synthetic formula¬ 
tions, the longer and harder the task is likely to be. As a result, 
the individual, with his humanly limited mental capacity and time and 
energy, is compelled to specialize in some degree during the preparatory 
period and at its end is equipped to use with precision and power only 
part of the potentially very advantageous synthetic structure of modern 
scientific knowledge. 

The case is similar for an even broader kind of synthesis which 
has appeared during the present century. This consists in the coalescence 
of major traditional compartments of knowledge. A number of old bound¬ 
aries have become more and more indistinct and a few have wavered and 
vanished. Physics and chemistry have flowed together, for example, and 
chemistry and biology have acquired much common ground in the biochemical 
region. In other cases, new knowledge, which sometimes takes the form 
of new specialties, such as crystallography, has cut sharply across old 
and arbitrary dividing lines and established bridges between long-stand¬ 
ing divisions and subdivisions. 

It is probably coalescence, primarily, which led Harlow Shapley to 
remark once to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences that specializa¬ 
tion had defeated itself. To a degree, yes; but the necessity of spe¬ 
cializing has not, by any means, been eliminated. 

Coalescence has been brought about partly by specialization but 
also by pursuing the ancient idea of atomicity to extremes of micro- 
cosmic subdivision. Thus, for example, the detailed understanding of 










' i 

- 










































"DC 




.- 'sd ■ i m 










. . ■ 




. . . : : !' ■ ; V'' ; V ■ 













L ■ • - ,. ' 












■ 

. 








r 

. 



- 110 - 


the electronic and nuclear structure of atoms and simple molecules, ob¬ 
tained by physicists during the present century and culminating in the 
quantum theory, has been applied to chemistry to weld its formless body 
of empirical knowledge into a powerful structural theory. Besides largely 
unifying chemistry, this has brought about the coalescence of physics and 
chemistry—at atomic depths. But, it is a long hard task to master the 
synthetic formulations of quantum statistical mechanics or those of 
physico-chemical thermodynamics which join together and at atomic depths 
unify physics and chemistry; so that, again, during the preparatory period 
the individual is compelled to specialize in some degree and at the end of 
it he usually has command of only part of the theoretical structure now 
forming the atomic foundation of the physical sciences. 

Similar observations could be made with regard to the lesser degree 
of coalescence of chemistry and biology at the molecular and atomic 
depths where biochemists carry out their more fundamental explorations. 

1 %. is, incidentally, the faith of many working in this region that 
a molecular structural theory will be found to n explain M physiological 
activity, and to enable them both to M predict 15 the action of an organic 
compound and to synthesize it for trial. This would mean a coalescence 
of microcosnue biology and chemistry more nearly approaching that of 
microcosmic physics and chemistry. 

However, that achievement is yet to come and it would not alter 
the present situation. 

It is unfortunately the fact that specialization in research work 
and to a lesser degree in higher education and knowledge is inescapable 
even for those who would take advantage of the powerful atomistic 
theories, which not only have been extremely successful in 




































' 









































































■ 


' 








-Ill- 


reducing the partitioning that makes the structure of scientific know¬ 
ledge a reflection of specialization in endeavor, but also offer the 
best of available conceptual machinery for increasing the strength 
and enlarging the scope of expeditions proceeding onto new ground in 
the physical sciences. 

Similarly, specialization seems inescapable for those—they are 
few today—who would take advantage of the structural formulations by 
which the late Albert Einstein (General Theory of Relativity), E. A. 
Milne (kinematic relativity) and others have attempted to weld together 
synthetically and comprehend with exceedingly abstract generality the 
macrocosmic aspects of matter and motion. 

These abstract efforts to grasp the thing entire have been largely 
left aside by the atomistic mainstream of twentieth-century physics. 
However, macrocosmic theorizing may get a new lease on life through the 
amassing of empirical knowledge of the astronomical universe. If this 
should happen relativists, field theorists and cosmologists will have 
a better day; but, like their counterparts concentrating on raicrocosmic 
physics, they will find themselves unable to escape the necessity of 
specializing in some degree. During preparatory education, budding 
investigators will have to make their way upward through ravines and 
clefts in the rock; and even when they have mounted to the high plateau 
of comprehensive generalization^ the detailed complexity and limitless 
size of the universe seen from that vantage point will surely compel 
'each one of them to fix his attention and concentrate his thought on 
,something much less than the whole. 







* 




■ v. • 


. ■ I '• --"Vi 




■ 














r- 




t 




' 


■ 





























- 112 - 


To sum up, then, the attainment of unifying formulations and more 
comprehensive generalizations at the microcosmic and macrocosmic ex¬ 
tremes of the present range of the physical sciences—an attainment 
which can be partly credited to specialized concentration of inquiry— 
has not eliminated the necessity for specialization in education and 
in further investigation, even at these extremes, to say nothing for 
the moment of vast regions lying, so to speak, between them. The ad¬ 
vantages secured through the unifying power and great scope of modern 
structural theories are partly offset by the consequent lengthening of 
the approaches to the growing points on the frontiers of the physical 
sciences, and the accompanying growth of information and embedded know¬ 
ledge. 

Still, it is also evident that the pursuit of fundamental knowledge, 
in the form of such theories, offers the best prospects for partial es¬ 
cape from the vicious cycle of growth leading to specialization, giving 
rise to more growth and narrower specialization. This is a strong 
argument for concentration of endeavor in fundamental areas of sci¬ 
entific knowledge; though in doing so investigators must reckon in the 
immediate future with considerable theoretical uncertainties and in¬ 
creasing empirical complexities at both the microcosmic and macrocosmic 
extremes. (This situation will be discussed in the next chapter under 
the heading of complexity.) 

As for the vast regions (referred to above) lying, so to speak, 
between the extremes—the farther they lie beyond the reach of funda¬ 
mental or comprehensive theories, the more they exhibit narrow special - 
| ization in education and endeavor, and fragmentation of information and 
knowledge. This is the general situation, at any rate: in most fields 




















. 














. 


J- ■ " '■ '' 'T- 
















' 

. n r v.. 


i 

' 

: 1 : 




- 113 - 


whether considered as fields of knowledge or of endeavor, the farther 
they lie from fundamental theories and. the more they partake of the 
nature of applied science and technology, then the more subdivision 
and separation into specialties and bits and pieces they are likely 
to exhibit. 


II— ADVERSE EFFECTS AND DIFFICULTIES 

It has been pointed out (pp. 108-112) that specialization cannot 
be avoided by the individual who is being educated for, or is making, 
investigations in the fundamental regions of physics, chemistry and 
biochemistry where modern structural theories are particularly applic¬ 
able and advantageous. Even where the theoretical tools are strongest, 
therefore, the student or the investigator is subject in some degree 
to limitation of knowledge and narrowing of vision. The disadvantages 
of such confinement are unfortunately increased by coalescence, for the 
latter adds to the need for reference to papers or information over a 
wider range. 

In other words, the advantages of penetrating any of these ter¬ 
ritories, dominated by atomic and molecular physics, in depth, are 
partly offset by increase in the required command of breadth of know¬ 
ledge. The underlying reason for the difficulty of combining depth 
and breadth is the familiar disparity between the time, energy and 
capacity of the individual and the output of the multitude—the lat¬ 
ter, in this case, as it is represented by the gross structure of 
scientific knowledge at any moment in time. 

The situation is somewhat different in the vast region now covered 
by the modern theory of evolution, but one is led to similar conclusions. 














. 










. 

























, 






, 












I 











This region embraces many fields, such as zoology, palaeontology, 
genetics, and others traditionally lumped together under the name of 
evolution. It is not possible for one man to penetrate every one of 
these big fields fully in depth. But Julian Huxley, George Gaylord 
Simpson, J. B. S. Haldane and others, on the basis of their own work 
and that of Sewall Wright, R. A. Fisher, C. D. Darlington, Ernst Mayr, 
Th. Bobzhansky, et_ al., have contrived to formulate what they call the 
modern synthesis of evolution (to which, wholly or in part, by no means 
all investigators in pertinent fields subscribe). This has been a re¬ 
markable achievement. 

In comparison with the quantum theory of atomic systems, this syn¬ 
thesis is less of a compact formulation and more of a diffuse and com¬ 
plex composite. As a result, it offers to the investigator, for further 
inquiry, not so -much a sharp cutting tool, as something more in the 
nature of a comprehensive framework embodying many features which give 
directional guidance; so, it can hardly be as useful as the quantum 
theory for the reduction of individual specialization, even assuming 
that the investigator has acquired a grasp of (and at least provision¬ 
ally accepted) its main structure. It seems rather large, complex and 
unwieldy either to be picked up handily by the individual or to be 
thrown as a whole into an attack on the frontier at any one point. 

Certainly, it offers a strong baseline for mounting various ex¬ 
peditions and must throw a flood of light on any relevant inquiry. But 
the individual investigator, when he comes to apply it to the penetra¬ 
tion of new ground in depth is likely to make piecemeal, rather than 
wholesale, use of it. Of course, he may be working entirely within its 
framework, either re-examining its foundations, filling in more detail 
or elaborating on one or more of -its elements. 








■ 

■ 


• ■ r:>;o.r*' 


• • • • 


. . : 


• • — - : 


, -i 


. : • r ' • 




r . 


<®fe 


















■ ‘ 




■ 


. 

















- 115 - 


No doubt in time this modern synthesis of evolution "will be refined 
and made more abstract and compact, which would make it a handier and a 
sharper tool for the individual. Yet, the more closely it thus approaches 
the character of atomic formulations, the longer and the more difficult 
will be the study required to gain effective command of it for its ap¬ 
plication as a whole. Moreover, in view of the variety, the range and 
in some case’s the grossness of the empirical data it subjects to syn¬ 
thesis, it seems unlikely that it mil ever be ma.de as sharp a cutting 
tool as the quantum theory. 

The foregoing appraisals of the synthesis of evolution re-emphasize 
the familiar difficulty or impossibility of escaping the necessity for 
specialization and also the need and the difficulty of combining breadth 
and depth—in the education and the endeavor of the individual investi¬ 
gator. 

As scientific knowledge, the synthesis of evolution partially satis¬ 
fies the need for breadth and depth. Quantum theory, likewise regarded 
simply as knowledge, probably satisfies the need even more. Accordingly, 
each will enable the investigator to meet the need to some extent in his 
work, once he has gained command of the theoretical synthesis. But to 
gain this command, it seems, he must specialize in his education. 

In the case of theory of evolution, its size and. complexity are 
likely to compel all but exceptional minds to make the educational ap¬ 
proach through one of the relevant fields of specialization, yet the 
very breadth and sweep of the synthesis would seem to call for a multi¬ 
pronged approach with bridging. Any one path may well be shorter than 
the path through physics to quantum theory but the student of evolution 
may find that any advantage of a shorter road is offset by the disad¬ 
vantage of having to make a multi-pronged or comparatively broader 













. 
















' 








■ 








































■ 

' 









- 116 - 


approach. On the other hand, in the case of quantum theory, though com¬ 
paratively less breadth may be required in the educational approach, the 
path may well be longer because the theory, the conceptual tool, has 
cut deeper before being applied to various fields so as to draw them to¬ 
gether. 

At any rate, it can be said, in a more general way, that individual 
limitations-of time and energy and capacity make it impossible to escape 
some degree of specialization on the educational road, and next to im¬ 
possible to secure both depth and breadth to such an extent that the 
investigator—sav, by the end of postgraduate study at university--can 
use such powerful conceptual tools as these to full advantage in all 
fields of their application. To the latter end, indeed, few but the 
most exceptional minds can get far within the suggested learning period. 
Nevertheless, while specialization and penetration in depth during 
learning sharpen the cutting edge of the investigator's mind and know¬ 
ledge, breadth of knowledge is needed both to give scope to his en¬ 
deavors and to enable him, if possible, to add to the all-important 
synthetic formulations of scientific knowledge. 

When one passes from fields where comprehensive syntheses have 
been achieved into any of the regions as yet untouched by this unify¬ 
ing process, or when one considers scientific or technical knowledge 
in the gross, it is all too true that the individual, as Simpson and 
Oppenheimer have pointed out (page 54 above), can only be competent 
in a very very limited part of the whole. Thomson puts it another way 
when he says, "Ignorance has become the most excusable of all human 

















• ■ 




.no • 














■ 






































- 








' 


' 










. 


















- 117 - 


failings.”^9 Thus, the investigator needs to broaden his range, yet he 
is "staggered" (Bush, p. 53 above) by the findings of thousands of other 
workers which he can find neither the time nor the capacity to grasp. 

There are a number of other effects and difficulties of specializa¬ 
tion which deserve brief discussion: 

1. Like growth, specialization feeds upon itself, bringing "the 
danger of continually narrowing the field of vision ”90 and carrying 
investigation "ever nearer to a point of diminishing returns”.91 It 
fosters a habit of avoiding the comprehensive approach to specific 
problems, and the practice of settling back in some obscure corner of 
a field of research where competition and duplication by others are 
most unlikely to occur—hence, the growth of picayune specialties, 
where the student comes to know more and more about less and less. 

Yet it is no less dangerous to become spread very thinly over so much 
ground that less and less will, be known about more and more; and the 
minutae of extremely narrow penetration in depth may prove to be of 
the utmost significance--if only their places in larger patterns or 
arrays of data can be seen. 

2. Another result, hindering the advancement of scientific know¬ 
ledge, is neglect of pertinent and even vital information outside the 


^9pavid Thomson, "Specialization?”, The Spectator . May 20, 1%9, 
p. 673. 

9^J. W. Perry, "Crisis in Compiling and Correlating Chemical Liter¬ 
ature," p. 2. 

91Perrv, "Information Analysis for Machine Searching,” loc . cit., 
p. 133. 








* 


' ' : ■■ 




























































- ■ 


- • 














- 118 - 


narrow sector in which the investigator happens to be concentrating his 
efforts. That is, while volumetric growth is making it increasingly 
difficult to search out, read, master and collate pertinent information 
over a wide range (pp. 69-72 and 77-82, above), the narrowing of effort 
may be persuading or leading the investigator simply to neglect or to 
ignore this vital task: specialization, though an attempt to meet the 
challenge of volumetric growth, may end bv compounding one of the worst 
effects of growth. 

Even when the inquiring specialist from one sector does undertake 
the task, it may lead him into other sectors of which he has no personal 
acquaintance and he may wrongly interpret results and ideas which have 
been obtained and formulated under special conditions not always clearly 
stated in published papers. The more wide-ranging the search must be, 
the more difficult it becomes to bridge successfully between one im¬ 
prisoning specialty and others which apparently have useful information 
to contribute to the inquiry. Yet the very extension of specialization 
makes bridging more and more necessary. The net result is to increase 
the chances of errors in understanding. 

Altogether, then, specialization tends to inhibit and to reduce 
cross-fertilization and mutual fructification through the interplay of 
minds, as vrell as that browsing which can lead to unexpected illumina¬ 
tion, by increasing the difficulties of successful intercommunication. 
Thus, again, it can and no doubt often does add to the difficulties 
created by growth. 






















. 
























. 








. 



















- 119 - 


3. As specialization grows, so also do special terminologies or 
dialects. Just because altogether new things create an unending demand 
for new terms and these terms so often provide for precision and com¬ 
pression in statement, the expansion and the elaboration of technical 
jargon appear to a considerable degree inescapable. For example, the 
paper title "Evidence for Exciton-induced Photoelectric Emission from 
F-Centers in Alkali Halides”, while it will seem three parts mystery 
to most laymen who are not chemists, consists almost entirely of highly 
specific terms which refer to definite procedures and elements in ex¬ 
periment and make up a compact statement. 

However, every new word needs careful justification. "Scientific 
jargon is not in itself scientific advance",^ 2 and the proliferation 
of the former means that to a considerable extent scientists in dif¬ 
ferent specialties do not speak the same languages and experience dif¬ 
ficulty in communication with each other.93,94,95*96 The problem does 

N. da C. Andrade, 0 £. cit .. p. 332. 

93john Dewey, "Unity of Science as a Social Problem," International 
Encyclopedia of Unified Science . Vol. I, No. 1, p. 34* 

94r. L. Meier, "Research as a Social Process," Research . October, 
1951, p. 465. 

95Robert K. Plumb, "Science in Review," New York Times . Jan. 3, 
1955, p. E9. 

96sir Edmund Whittaker, "Mathematics," Scientific American . Sep¬ 
tember, 1950, p. 41. 

























. 


- 












- 


' 








. 










f 
















.. . 






e ■ 


. . ‘ ’ . ' 1 ■ . 

• ^ : 

. 


. 














- 120 - 


not merely arise in communication through the publication of papers but 
in oral speech at professional meetings and conferences or in the pursu¬ 
ance of group research intended to cut across boundaries. Moreover, the 
best and most advanced ideas of the scientist who has moved onto rad¬ 
ically new ground may well be the most deeply imprisoned in technical- 
language . 

Communication between the scientist and the practical worker who 
lacks professional scientific training is even more likely to be im¬ 
paired or disrupted, by linguistic barriers, thus obstructing the applica¬ 
tion of knowledge to practical ends. Grodzlnski has cited this case: 

There have been many instances where the valuable know¬ 
ledge of the crystallographer has been of little help to the 
practical man because the possibility of mutual understanding, 
i.e. a common language between them, was lacking. This is re¬ 
grettable since the practical man has developed a system of 
identification of particular faces of diamonds which is vir¬ 
tually the same as that of crystallographsre, except that the 
names used are different.... 

Familiarity with current practice and contact with prac¬ 
tical men are of major importance to all scientists....In 
many instances his (the practician's) difference of opinion 
with the scientist is practically only a difference in mode 
of expression....In this way, I believe, many apparent con¬ 
tradictions between practice and experience on the one hand, 
and the scientific approach on the other, are to be solved 
and explained.97 

However, it would not be correct to speak of science as a Tower 
of Babel. Most of its specialized languages have a great many elements 
in common; and as progress at fundamental levels, in spite of proceeding 
along highly specialized lines, has brought about some merging of divi¬ 
sions and subdivisions of knowledge it has proportionately increased the 


^7p. Grodzinski, "Specialist Knowledge, Its Scope and limitations," 
Research . February, 1951• 















































. 


. . 







































. . 



• ' 
























' 












- 121 - 


areas in which common terms apply or translation is effective. 

Thus, Darlington, while admitting that many biologists in different 
branches speak different languages, does not agree with the view that no 
common speech ever will be or ought to be discovered for biology. Any 
such view, he believes, is being swept away by the advance, by the dis¬ 
covery of fundamental principles at the biochemical level which already 
have indicated a fundamental unity. 98 

Oppenheimer remarks that, although every science has its own language, 
dictionaries of translation exist and mark "an ever-growing understanding 
and unity of science as a whole". It is not always clear whether the 
dictionaries will be complete, he says, but between physics and chemistry 
they apparently are. "Everything the chemist observes and describes can 
be talked about in terms of atomic mechanics, and most of it at least 

can be understood."99 

On the other hand again, unifying systems have a way of breaking 
down in the face of scientific advances. "If one chooses to project a 
synthesis of known results, to build bridges between fields, to trans¬ 
late technical languages or one technical language into another, that is 
his privilege. But we can be confident that tomorrow's findings will 
spring the system and require a new technique and a new language."100 


9^C. D. Darlington, in Advancement of Science . Vol. 3, No. 10, 
1945, p. 125. 

99J. Robert Oppenheimer, "Uncommon Sense," Fifth Reith Lecture, 
The Listener . Dec. 17, 1953, P* 1036. 

lOOsidney Hook, Mid-Century . M. I. T., p. 314. 














. 

















' 

4 














. 








' 
















. 

.■ 













- 122 - 


SUMMARY 


The main conclusions of this chapter can be re-stated as follows: 

1. In the face of the ever-growing disparity between the current 
and accumulated production of the multitudes of investigators and the 
capacity of the single mind, specialization has long since become an 
inescapable necessity. With exponential growth of information, it has 
increased during the present century, probably at an accelerating rate 
in recent decades. It has now become extreme, and so has the accompany¬ 
ing fragmentation of information and embedded knowledge. 

2. Specialized concentration of inquiry and of inventiveness un¬ 
doubtedly has greatly increased scientific knowledge— 

(a) It has made powerful additions, in modes of attack, 
instruments, mathematical systems, logical systems and 
theoretical ideas, to the scientific tool-sets. 

(b) Complemented, of necessity, by effective intercom¬ 
munication between investigators, it has been partly respons¬ 
ible for the achievement of unifying formulations at the 
microcosmic and macrocosmic extremes of the physical sciences, 
and for the coalescence of physics and chemistry at the-former 
extreme. 

(c) Similarly, it has contributed to a partial merging 
of chemistry and biology in the microcosmic realm of bio- 
chemistry. 

(d) It has helped to bring about a modern synthesis of 
evolution, by providing synthesizing minds with results of 
concentrated cultivation in various related fields which 
could be brought together to form a comprehensive theoretical 
structure. 

Thus, specialization in scientific endeavor has been justified in 
the event, as long as it has been complemented by efficient intercom¬ 
munication. And as the former increases, the latter must become more 


efficient. 
















: > : 

- 












' 






















* 






’ 














. ■ 












. ‘ ' ■ ' ’ 









- 123 - 


Analogously, in methods of investigation, the ground-breaking of 
analysis needs to be complemented by the harvest of synthesis. 

Similarly, in the metaphysical assumptions of inquiry, the notion 
of autonomy is complemented—necessarily, it seems—by the notion of 
some systematic unity that can be discovered. 

3. There are obvious advantages to be secured from the unifying 
power and wide scope of such structural formulations or theoretical 
syntheses as are mentioned in 2., above. But these advantages are 
partially offset by: 

(a) the very growth of information and embedded knowledge 
resulting from the synthetic achievements, which adds to the 
load on the investigator; 

(b) the need for greater breadth of information and know¬ 
ledge—a need created by unification and coalescence--which 
not only adds to the load but makes better communication 
harder to achieve;. 

(c) the lengthening of approaches to vital growing points 
on scientific frontiers, which makes the educational road 
longer and harder. 

4. In vast regions of science and, even more, technology, which 
lie quite outside the fields or at least beyond the present embrace of 
major syntheses, modern endeavor has been hindered and current inquiry 
is bedevilled by such adverse effects of specialization a,s: unavoid¬ 
able individual ignorance, narrowing of vision, picayune concentration 
of attention, approach to the point of diminishing returns, neglect of 
pertinent information outside the specialty, misinterpretation of re¬ 
sults gathered from unfamiliar ground, loss or reduction of communica¬ 
tion, and reduction of cross-fertilization. 

5. Specialization of endeavor and fragmentation of information and 
knowledge are matched by the growth of specialized languages or dialects. 































; 




; 

. 

. 


.. 
























- 124 - 


These present barriers to comiminication; though, -where unification or 
coalescence has been brought about, most terms are common, or, at least 
translation is comparatively easy. 

6. Despite the difficulties (3., above) involved in gaining command 
and making use of major synthetic formulations, they offer the best 
prospects for partially escaping the vicious cycle of growth-specializa- 
tion-more growth-narrower specialization and so on. Their capacity for 
serving this end has been demonstrated in recent decades, notably by 
quantum theory. 

One would tentatively conclude, therefore, that scientific education 
should aim to equip investigators with tool-sets consisting of such 
formulations, as well as other fundamental principles. The more that 
investigators are fitted out along these lines, with due regard to other 
requirements, the more they should be able to escape the adverse effects 
of specialization, and the greater should be the power and scope of their 
inquiries. 

7. Still, it must be recognized that the individual cannot escape 
a considerable degree of specialization on his educational road; nor can 
he expect, by the end of the period of formal learning, to command such 
depth and breadth of knowledge as will enable him to take full advantage 
of the most powerful conceptual tools in all fields of their application. 

8. Finally, such investigators must reckon both with theoretical 
uncertainties, which still affect these tools, and with apparently in¬ 
creasing empirical complexities in both the microcosmic and the macro- 
cosmic fields of application. That is to say, the tools are not perfected 
and the objects of inquiry have not, by any means, surrendered all their 
mysteries. 

A few of these uncertainties but more especially the problems of 
complexity will be discussed in the next chapter. 
































. 












. 

















. 







CHAPTER III 


ASPECTS OF COMPLEXITY 

The volumetric growth of scientific information (Part I and Part 
II Chapter I) and the accompanying increase in specialization (Fart I 
Ch. II) have made more complex both the fabric of information and em¬ 
bedded knowledge and the pattern of scientific endeavor. This is to 
speak of the physical structure of the organization of information and 
endeavor, and in this sense to speak in "quantitative M rather than 
qualitative terms. 

This increase in the complexity of organization has been offset 
to some extent by qualitative gains in knowledge, insofar as these gains 
have taken the form of syntheses within divisions or subdivisions of 
scientific knowledge, or have brought about the coalescence or the sub¬ 
stantial unification of traditional divisions.^ 

Still, qualitative complexity has also been increased: by the 
appearance of uncertainties, contradictions and pa.rad.oxes—variously 
metrical, conceptual, philosophical or logical in character; and by 
the emergence of unsuspected detail and structure in some of the regions 
subjected to searching observation in recent decades. Such problems of 
complexity,-what is more, are especially evident in microcosmic physics 
and chemistry, which is just where qualitative gains of the past 
fifty years have been especially productive of major syntheses and of 
coalescence. They are also abundantly evident in biochemistry. 


See Ch. II, above, summarized in 2. (b), (c) and (d), p. 122, on 
these gains. 

























’ 


••• :• s n .IV.: 


















. 





















. 








;i ■ - . 






- 




. 










. • 

. 







. 





-126- 


The direct and indirect effects of growth indicated in the fore¬ 
going paragraphs now require some discussion. They will be considered 
in the order mentioned. 

I--COMPLICATION OF ORGANIZATION 

This complication, whether one refers to information and embedded 
knowledge, to endeavor or to both, is due to the simple multiplication 
of subdivisions and their interrelations, as the inevitable consequence 
of volumetric growth, of increasing specialization and of the ever¬ 
growing disparity between the output of the multitude and the limited 

ik 

capacity of the individual. That the complexity of organization has 
been increasing relentlessly during the present century and is continu¬ 
ing to increase seems beyond all doubt, especially when technical Is in¬ 
cluded in the descriptive category scientific for it is in technology 
that subdivision is carried to the greatest extremes. 

The complexity of both the fabric of information and the pattern 
of endeavor has increased the more rapidly during the past fifty-five 
years or so because the growth has been not merely vertical but 
horizontal as well. While things have been piling up in the tradi¬ 
tional fields long subjected to scientific exploration, the attitudes 
and methods of science have also been applied more and more widely in 
an effort to bring under their sway many additional fields of human 
interest. The latter development is exemplified by the great broaden¬ 
ing of the region embraced by the biological sciences and by the expansion 
of inquiry into the realm of the so-called social sciences. All this 


^See P. 80 above, for an earlier and somewhat different description 
of the situation. 

\ 




















. 












■ 








































. 






. 

' ' ■ 








. 




. i V 





-127- 


horizontal growth has brought within the purview of (more or less) sci¬ 
entific inquiry more complex materials and events. The physical sciences 
deal, so it seems at the moment, with the simplest features of the 
natural world, the biological sciences with more complex features and 
the social sciences with those still more complex. "The three are of 
sharply increasing orders of complexity and each includes the lower 
grades.>-^2 And so, the inclusion of these more complex subjects 
in the fold by horizontal growth has, to some extent, accelerated the 
complication of the structures of both information and endeavor. 

The present complexity of these structures has been emphasized 
by numerous scientists in their more popular discussions of science. 

Bush (p. 53 , above) has called the accumulation of information and 
knowledge a "maze". Conant remarks: "To disentangle the many threads 
in the present pattern (of knowledge) in any one subdivision of the 
highly complex structure of modern science is so difficult as to be 
almost a hopeless task..."^^^ Of endeavor, he remarks that work is 
carried on by tens of' thousands of specialists within an elaborat net¬ 
work of organizations and that this "civic" structure of scientific 
endeavor is extremely complex. 


^^Gr. G. Simpson, The Meaning Of Evolution , p. 312. 

1 DP 

See also Julian Huxley, Man In The Modern World . pp. 30, 114. 
10 3j. B. Conant, Science and Common Sense . p. 6. 



















. 




■ 

, 








. 













































-128- 


Ref erring to the whole, Oppenheimer uses a homely metaphor: 

It (’science' 1 ) is a vast house indeed. It does not ap¬ 
pear to have been built upon any plan but to have grown as a 
great city grows. There is no central chamber, no one cor¬ 
ridor from which all others debouch. All about the periphery 
men are at work studying the vast reaches of space and the 
state of affairs billions of years ago; studying the intricate 
and subtle but wonderfully meet mechanisms by which life 
proliferates, alters and endures; studying the reach of the 
mind and.its ways of learning; digging deep into the atoms 
and the atoms within atoms and their unfathomed order. It 
is a house so vast that none of us know it, and even the most 
fortunate have seen most rooms only from the outside or by a 
fleeting passage, as in a king’s palace open to visitors. It 
is a house so vast that there is not and need not be complete 
concurrence on where its chambers stop and those of neighbor¬ 
ing mansions begin. 

It is not arranged in a line nor a square nor a circle 
nor a pyramid, but with a wonderful randomness suggestive of 
unending growth and improvisation.104 

But there is no need to labor the point. Both the vastness and. 
the structural complexity of the house of science have been repeatedly 
indicated in preceding sections of this thesis and should be obvious 
even to the casual observer of the scientific scene. Indeed, the situa¬ 
tion in the house of science can be seen reflected in the technical, 
commercial and institutional complexity of modem life. 

In the second paragraph of the brief introduction for this chapter 
(p. 126 ), it was stated that the increase in complexity of organization 
has been offset to some extent by qualitative gains taking the form of 
syntheses or giving rise to coalescence or substantial unification. 

This is a general conclusion which seems reasonable on the face of the 
evidence. No useful purpose is likely to be served by arguing for it 
in any detail or by elaborating upon it. 


10y. Robert Oppenheimer, ’’The Sciences and Man’s Community,” 
Sixth Reith Lecture, The Listener . Bee. 24, 1953, P* 1075. 









♦ 

. 

. 









. 






. 























. ■ 






-129- 


Despite this mitigating factor, the structural complexity in in¬ 
formation and knowledge and in endeavor is such as to aggravate a num¬ 
ber of the difficulties and problems created in the first place by 
volumetric growth* ** and also by increasing specialization'?* Summing 
it up very briefly, this complexity constitutes an obstruction to the 
intercommunication so vital in scientific investigation, the situation 
worsening as the complexity increases,* 

II—DIVISION IN PHYSICS 

During the present century, the growth of scientific information 
and embedded knowledge has been accompanied by, or has resulted in trouble¬ 
some, yet also challenging, increases in the numbers of interrelated factors 
or variables with which the investigator apparently must deal in pressing 
his inquiry® This may be partly responsible for some of the uncertainties, 
contradictions and paradoxes which now are seen in theory, particularly 
in physical theory® At any rate, it certainly has been and is adding to 
the investigator*s difficulties, both in experiment and in the formulation 
of theory. The effect is to require the investigator to recognize and to 
grapple with more complexity in the situations or systems he is studying. 
Things no longer appear as simple as they once seemed—say, before the turn 


*See p. 101, above, especially (2), (3) and (7)o 

**See p. 123, above, conclusions 3. and lu, the latter being 
particularly relevant. 







- 




t 

i 

, 





. 


- 








<1 ' 

llotkkt iLUll ElM 

- 

t * 

* 

' 

, - - 


c i t ' * 


„ 


* 







-130 


of the centuryo This is generally the case both in the physical and in the 
biological sciences, to say nothing, for the moment, of the social sciences, 
where the systems under study might well be expected to be intrinsically 
more complex than those of physics and chemistry or even biology* 

Apart from that state of affairs, which will be discussed presently, 
there has appeared, in physics another complication* It originated in the 
formulation of the general theory of relativity and the discovery of the 
quantum of action within a few years of each other near the beginning of the 
century* 

At the time the special theory of relativity was published (1905), a 
fundamental unity, largely due to the work of James Clerk Maxwell, had 
seemed to be emerging in physical theory; and not only special relativity 
but, even more, general relativity seemed to advance things in the direction 
of simplifying unity. However, quantum mechanics also was in the process of 
formulation then; and it upset the applecart, for it generated a new and 
different stream of theory which proved formally incompatible with general 
relativity* 

Quantum theory became and remains today the mainstream of physics* 
Moreover, it has produced its own unification of physical theory at the 
microcosmic level, and also has been chiefly responsible for the coalescence 
of physics and chemistry, again at that level* In addition, the observa¬ 
tional evidence for quantum mechanics surpasses that for general relativity 
which is by no means conclusive* Yet the latter appears to be correct at 















♦ 





















^ t 












- 


- 


' ' i ’: ; . ' «, 

- 


' n * .; 













I '■ 








•131- 


the macrocosmic levelo Both being accepted, there exists a fundamental 
breach in physical theory which remains unhealed to the present day. Such 
unity as seemed to be emerging around the turn of the century has been lost. 

This is not necessarily a tragedy. Rather, the reconciliation of 
general relativity and quantum mechanics remains a challenge to physical 
theorists which ,! is perhaps the strongest guarantee we have of future 
progress in fundamental physics....”"*' 0 ' 5 

But there are these two fundamental physical theories and, correspond¬ 
ing to each, a different way of conceiving the nature of the physical world,, 
In certain respects, the two ways are opposed. For instance, general re¬ 
lativity ’’asserts that the laws of physics must be of such a kind that they 
hold good in any coordinate system”, while quantum-mechanical laws ’’pre¬ 
suppose a space-time with a definite geometry, and this geometry defines a 
preferred set of coordinate systems. It is true that the apparent 

opposition may be verbally resolved by concluding that the same laws do 

not apply to the microcosmic and the macrocosmic aspects of the physical 

. 

world. Nevertheless, the formal incompatibility of the two theories is 
widely regarded, not only as a complication, but as a breach in physical 
theory, and often is described as the central paradox of modem physics. 

The assertion of a breach rests on an implicit assumption that there 


io5 


pp, 


9 3-9b 
106 


Freeman J. Dyson, "book review". Scientific American, March 195U, 


Ibid, 



















• ' : ■ 'i. ; '■ 

: * „. „ 






' : • ' ^ 




















' 




* 

<. • 

5. 












-132- 


exists a unity of principle or law in the physical world embracing the 
whole range of events from microscopic to macroscopic, or at the least on 
an assumption that such a systematic unity of principle or law can be 
mentally conceived and rationally expressed,, That is to say, the situation 
can be considered a breach physical theory only upon the former, or at 
least the latter, metaphysical (or, if it be preferred, philosophical) 
assumption,. 

Since this assumption, regardless of the form it may take, presents 
a great challenge to the mind, it has been extremely fruitful* And the 
conception of a breach, to which it gives rise in this case, constitutes 
a spur to deeper thought and investigation which has already borne some 
fruit (via debate between Einstein, Bohr, et al„) and may yet produce even 
more* For this reason, the central problem of the breach is likely to be 
subjected sooner or later to a powerful attack by a great theorist; and if 
it should be solved, Dyson suggests, a host of smaller problems will be 
solved with it® 

On the other hand, as the past two or three decades have shown, it is 
a problem which can be largely and temporarily ignored without prejudice 
to the more immediate pursuit of a vast amount of productive investigation; 
and, for that matter, it may be that many more piecemeal inquires and a 
much larger accumulation of empirical data and of smaller scale theory will 
be needed to open the way for a sound attack upon it® 

In other cases where the investigator has to grapple with more com¬ 
plexity in the situations or systems he is studying, the problem is of 
fairly immediate concern because it presents a substantial barrier to the 
pursuit of significant inquiries® 

However, it may be said of most cases that the appearance of more 







-133- 


complexity has involved a weakening of the hold, or reduction of the 
applicability, of the notion of autonomy. This notion is, essentially, 
the assumption that a system or a single factor is isolable.'' On it, both 
experiment and thought have long been and still seem to be heavily dependent. 
Accordingly, its decline in relation to the subjects of investigation has 
created difficulty for inquiries in many scientific fields. 

In these pages, this situation—-as it has developed during the 
present century and as it stood in recent years—will be examined both 
in terms of the decline of autonomy and in terms of the appearance of 
more complexity. A series of illustrations will be used. 

III--ISECLINE OF AUTONOMY 

Brief references have already been made (above and pp. 107-8) to 
the idea of autonomy. Before going any farther with the idea, it seems 
advisable to make clearer what is meant by it and how it has played a 

central role in science. Spigelman has defined it as "the notion that 

. 

reality is separable into a number of closed systems, not importantly 
connected with each other ; that what happens in 'any one system is deter¬ 
mined almost entirely within that system itself; that the several parts 


"'The idea of autonomy was introduced on pp. 107-8, above, during 
the discussion. 

















c. 



























- 




. 


- 

» 




















4 






-134- 


and aspects of nature can therefore be investigated separately as if 

107 

unrelated to other parts and aspects. n 

In his view, the first important manifestations of the idea were 
in the key concepts of classical mechanics, such a.si 

The concept of the particle as a structureless mass-point 
^moving uniformly through a structureless space and time, un¬ 
affected by either. 

The concept of absolute space and time, separable from 
each other, from the matter and events they contain, from ob¬ 
servations upon them; neither affected nor affecting. 

The concept of mechanism, an organization composed of 
perfectly rigid parts, moving without deformation, no part 
internally - affected by any other or by influences from the 
outside ,1'03 

But, as its applicability to other fields soon became evident, 
according to Spigelman "its dominion gradually spread to all the 
sciences and fields of practice...."109 Thus, it was manifested in 
chemistry by the isolation of weight from all other aspects of chemical 
reactions; in Mendelian genetics by the conception of heredity completely 
'independent of environmental influences or of genes unaffected by the 
cytoplasm surrounding the nucleus; in medicine by attribution of 
diseases to faults in separable organs or functions of the body, or to 
invading germs alone. 

The decline or decreasing applicability of autonomy is mainly a 
twentieth-century phenomenon. Granted the view that the materials to 
be investigated in the physical, the biological and the social sciences 
are of sharply increasing orders of complexity (pp. 126 - 7 , above), its 


l°7j 0 seph H. Spinelman, "Can Science Make Sense?" in Harper 1 s . 

1951, p. 55. 

108 and 109j bid 


May, 










. 








' 

. 






. 

. ' . .,.... 




' • ' ■ a ■ ■ ■ j • ■ Mote il 












, 




















. 







- 135 - 


decline may be partly ascribed to the expansion of scientific inouiry 
in biology and into sociology (though this is getting ahead of the 
argument). But the analysis to follow will show that its hold also has 
been weakened in physics itself, at both the macrocosmic and micro- 
cosmic levels, and that it has been found of limited applicability in 
microcosmic chemistry. 


1. In Macrocosmic Physics — At this level, relativity theory showed 
approximately half a century ago that one cannot in all circumstances 


speak: 

of time apart from space, the traditional absolutist 
separation being replaced by the concept of a space-time 
continuum; 

of space apart from matter, for the latter affects the 
structure or the geometry of the continuum.—the gravita¬ 
tional mass of the sun, for instance, involves "a curva¬ 
ture of space-time'’ in its immediate neighborhood and, 
incidentally, thus makes possible one of the few empirical 
confirmations of Einstein's general theory; 

of matter apart from energy, for energy equals mass 
multiplied by the square of the velocity of light; 

of the motion of matter or energy through space apart 
from the observer, for a meaningful statement about the mo¬ 
tion demands reference to co-ordinate systems or, in other 
words, to observers, in a particular way—in general 
relativity it is asserted that the laws of physics must be 
of such a form that they hold good in any co-ordinate system 
(Gaussian) or, in other words, for any observer. 

Thus, relativity theory being accepted, the concept of absolute space 
and time (cited p. 134) ceased to be universally applicable: and so also 
the concept of mechanism (p. 134). In these and other respects, the 
hold of autonomy was weakened in macrocosmic physics, in that there was 
a reduction in the number of isolable factors. On the other hand, it 
is important to note, this did not mean an increase in complexity: a 
reduction in complexity actually was obtained, at the cost of greater 
abstraction and a further remove from empirical observation, in formulating 























. 




. 









































' 























- 136 - 


the laws and creating the relativistic synthesis of the macrocosm. 

More recently, as a result of the discovery of more and more macro- 
cosmic structure by means of better telescopes and accessory instruments, 
the empirical pictures studied by astronomers and cosmologists have taken 
on a more complex appearance. The more recent discoveries include: inter¬ 
stellar hydrogen gas or dust, as a significant feature of matter in space; 
ever more galaxies of stars; families of galaxies; colliding galaxies; 
more "redness” in the light from elliptical galaxies than in that from the 
spiral type, suggesting that the two types represent different stages in 
galactic evolution; further detail on the structure of our galaxy, and so 
forth. Although Bridgman has referred to all this as "the discovery of 

unsuspected physical structures....in the direction of the very large,"HO 
perhaps it was only to be expected that the improvement and extension of 

observation in astronomy, as in other fields, would bring to light more 
structure in the universe of stars and galaxies. 

In any case, astro-physicists are finding the new information useful 
for the formulation and testing of theories of the universe, both 
"evolutionary" and "steady-state"«'’ But Bridgman and others have raised 
the question of closed versus open systems: the universe may be open, 
yet such sweeping generalizations as energy and entropy in classical 
thermodynamics are founded on the assumption of a closed system. "How", asks 


U0 P.W. Bridgman, Mid-Century , M.I.T., p. 23h. 

'“'See, for instance. Scientific American , September, 1956, 














. . ' : . • 



















. . 




D. \ 'X 




■: v . \ • ■ 




« 


.... 




' 

&-J q <7 ;y± 






. 
















- 




i 
















-137* 


Bridgman, "shall we think about a truly open system?"*^ 

If "truly open system" be taken literally, then the answer probably 
would have to be that we can't think about such a system, as thought seems 
to demand defined or delimited systems for consideration* Yet investigat¬ 
ors seem to have found ways of theorizing about and experimenting with 
systems which are called open inasmuch as they are not isolated systems 
with defined boundary conditions in the usual sense* 

In cosmology, the evolutionary theory of the universe appears to leave 
open the question of whether the universe is a closed or an open system* 

On the other hand, in "steady-state" theories, a symmetry postulate (Bondi 
and Gold—the large-scale features of the universe are the same from every 
point of view in space and in time) may be adopted, leading immediately to 
the conclusion that the universe is an open system in a steady state; or 
continuous creation of matter (Hoyle) may be postulated and substantially 

the same conception of an open universe in steady state be derived there¬ 

in 2 

after* Whether the steady-state systems escape the second law of 

|H||y 

classical thermodynamics—that the over-all trend of events, in a closed 
system, is toward states of maximum disorder and toward the levelling down 
of differences—is a technical question which may be left out of this dis¬ 
cussion* They do not, at any rate, escape the apparent human need for 
delimited objects of study which is exemplified in the closed systems of 
autonomy* Perhaps one could say that the postulates mentioned simply per¬ 
mit a retreat from the supposed "openness" of the systems into one or both 
of: the definable region of equilibrium, which is spatially isolable; the 


in P.W. Bridgman, loc * cit * 

^^See George Gamow, "The Evolutionary Universe," and Fred Hoyle, "The 
Steady-State Universe," Scientific American , September, 1956, pp* 136-66* 








. 







. 
















































• • - r - 







■ 

; 

* 












, , 








, 

. ‘ ' 








-138- 


fixed conditions of steady state, which are temporally isolable. It is 
perhaps significant of this that Hoyle should have warned readers of a 
popular exposition of the steady-state theory against embarrassing 
questions as to whence comes the new matter and where goes the old. 

In physics, physical chemistry and biology in recent years, there 
has been considerable theorizing and some experimenting in regard to 
’’open” systems in which a continuous flow of component materials occurs 
but the system is considered, theoretically at least, to be constant as 
a whole and in its phases; that is, in steady state. ' The points made 
in the preceding paragraph again apply. 

Those examples illustrate how very difficult it is, in thought and 
experiment, to escape the apparent need for autonomy - which is not in 
any way to deny the usefulness of the work mentioned. In view of this 
need, however, one may wonder what is to be done if or when there emerge 
aspects of complexity which continue to resist the application of autonomy. 

In astronomy, the systems being rather large for experimenting in the 
laboratory sense, whether autonomy is applicable or not is chiefly of 
interest in respect to the formulation of theory. It is not necessarily 
becoming less applicable just because more and more structure, more 
empirical complexity, is being discovered in the observable macrocosm. 

This may well be a stage when the amassing of observational information will 
run ahead of the formulation of theory, until new regularities and a new 


H3r* 0. Davies, ’’Irreversible Thermodynamics,” Science News 28 May, 
1953, PP® Ul-63; Ludwig von Bertalanffy, "The Theory of Open Systems in 
Physics and Biology,’’ Science , Jan. 13, 1950, pp® 23-29® 







- 

vj * 

■ 

- • . ' ' • ’ ■ ••• : ''' 

. '• 

. 

* 

• ■. - ,, ■■ : ’• { ': ov; n.!. 

f r-:'.‘.0 • ' • • ' «. ■ ■ '■ ’■ ;;j - 

■ • 

. t 1 

' 



t 




• t 




' t 


V 




* 




. -■ . «. 
r 













-139- 


structure more complex than the old are seen, and a fresh synthesis can 
be formulated. To the discovery of the new "facts", analysis and autonomy 
doubtless will contribute. The synthesis, on the other hand, may re¬ 
quire new mathematical methods, partly because of resistance to autonomy. 

2. In Microcosmic Physics — The foundations and the main structure 
of the quantum theory of atomic systems were virtually completed about 
a quarter of a century ago 0 Besides creating a revolution in thought 
about the physical world, it has turned out to be an instrument of great 
power, bringing a new order into physical theory, merging physics and 
chemistry at the microcosmic level and giving a systematic structural 
form to fundamental theory in chemistry/'*' But that is not to say that 
it is or can be regarded as the final word. In common with other com¬ 
prehensive and fundamental theories, it shows some unsatisfactory 
aspects. These include limits to its applicability, contradictory or 
paradoxical implications, central principles about which there are 
logical and philosophical doubts, and epistemological uncertainties. 


‘*These points were brought out in Chapter II. 








■ 


: 


^ T ... 




.. <_ 






. 

' 

* 

" . 5, : : 


• ‘ in i; ' : id 

* 


„ 

€ ■" "f" J 

K vr ' ■ 


' t r 




t ’ '■ r o L 





















-140- 


Since 1930, it has also been faced with new problems arising from, the 
discovery of a multiplicity of fundamental particles—if such they can 
be called. For these particles or the new situation to which they give 
rise, it has so far failed, in spite of its power as an instrument of 
inquiry, to provide a satisfactory explanation. Nor is any such ex¬ 
planation by a new theory or conceptual scheme as yet in sight. 

In short, though quantum theory has been immensely successful and 
remains an exceedingly valuable instrument of inquiry, the scientific 
conception of the microcosm has again become rather uncertain and con¬ 
fused, and the situation in sub-atomic physics has become to a con¬ 
siderable degree open-ended and fluid. It is symptomatic of this state 
of affairs that Louis de Broglie, one of the architects of the theory, 
should devote part of his recent book. The Revolution in Physics . to a 
critical examination of the theory’s inadequacies, and should give vent 
to serious doubts about its central ’’principle of indeterminacy", thus 
lending support to the doubts about this principle long held and ex¬ 
pressed by Albert Einstein. Symptomatic, too, is Erwin Schrodinger’s 
description of the present conception of matter as being surrounded 
with 3 "mess of formulas”; for Schrodinger also is one of the architects 

"While the questioning of these men and others is based on abstruse 
considerations, it seems possible to ascribe the difficulties at least 
partly to the decline of autonomy within the framework of quantum theory, 
and to the defiance of autonomic conceptions by the multiplication of 
particles in the sub-atomic microcosm. 


H4Srwin Schrodinger, "What Is Matter?" in Scientific American . 
September 1953, p. 52 . 







' 




. 










. 


















. 















-iui- 


Within quantum theory, the isolability of the individual particle 
has certainly been lost and there are, indeed, some doubts as to whether 
the term particle remains appropriate. The central principle of in¬ 
determinacy holds that there is a complementary restriction on the ac¬ 
curacy attainable in the space-time location and the energy-momentum 
distribution of any particle; that is, it cannot simultaneously have a 
sharply defined position and a sharply defined impulse. Further, only 
the statistical probability of its appearance or its transition can be 
determined or predicted, and this only with reference to the whole com¬ 
plex situation created by selected experimental conditions. Another 
principle holds that any two particles of the same sort, such as two 
electrons, are in principle, as well as in practice, indistinguishable. 
Thus, the individual identifiability, and so isolability, of the 
particle has been lost. And while it is at least theoretically pos¬ 
sible to isolate an event involving a particle within a closed ex¬ 
perimental system, any intervention to study what takes place in such 
a system creates a unique situation governed by statistical uncertainty 
and admitting of prediction only in terms of statistical probability—■ 
which still leaves autonomy, for all practical purposes, out of the 
running where individual particles are concerned. 

In addition, the conception of the nature of the constituents of 
matter has been complicated by duality in evidence and conception. The 
duality of matter and energy , could be considered merely a case of 
linguistic archaism involving us in different names for different views 
of what is somehow the same thing. "What seems to be troublesome is 
particle-wave duality. It is a principle of quantum theory, for which 
















-a 


' t . '• 

K ■ ■' v ' . '■ i-i' - . v:T'’: -o a v.i 

' 

- 

t ' ' ' 1 ' 

■ 

: . * ’ ' . ■ , ' t-i-m 

. 

. 

5 • • ' ^ : t I A 

. 










b0Z£'-< 








. . 


' 

, r " ■ rla ^ •" ;; r . : ;.y;- •b.ii'lw’ 

, r ■ 




■ 

, 




* 








-142- 


thers is ample empirical evidence, that the fundamental constituents 

are, or act as, both particles and waves, so that both corpuscular and 

undulatory conceptions apply to physical, materials and events. This 

ma.kes the conception of matter (or energy) more complicated than it was, 

say fifty years ago, and undeniably puzzling. "Everything is at the 

1] S 

same time both particle and field", J but these two complementary 
states, the former discontinuous and the latter continuous in struc¬ 
ture, are so very different according to our traditional conceptions 
that we are inclined to conceive of them as being at opposite extremes. 
It remains a question whether two such dissimilar mental conceptions 
can be united or reconciled as empirical evidence and consequent 
principle, when guided by the habitual mental desire for the simplicity 
of singularity, would seem to demand? 

To say that formulation of theory has been defied so far by the 
multiplication of sub-atomic particles is not, of course, to suggest 
that such a situation will continue indefinitely. 

What has happened is that more particles have been discovered as 
observation has been extended into the field of so-called cosmic radia¬ 
tion and as the instruments and methods for studying microcosmic events 
have been refined and improved; while other new particles, such as the 
presumably iridetectable neutrino, have been postulated either to satisfy 
existing physical theories or to explain observations still in doubt. 

By various recent listings, the number of particles indirectly observed 
or else postulated had grown to twenty or more; and it seems to be quite 


^■^Erwin Schrodinger, ibid .. p. 53* 

^However, an escape from the dilemma and a denial of the existence 
of any dualism can be found in Henry Margenau, The Nature of Physical 
Reality , pp, 313-327. 





































■ 




























' 

■ , ■ ■ '■ ■ 

- "ibr' ; ' 


■ 







. 




. 










. 







-143- 


a common view that the number known may be limited only by the detecting 
capacity of physical apparatus, so that physicists variously postulate 
the existence of many more or even an infinite number. The empirical 
situation, then, has again become extremely complicated in microcosmic 
physics. And while a degree of classification of particles in orderly 
arrays has been achieved, many investigators expect that the situation 
will become still more complex before it will be resolved by a fresh 
conceptual scheme or synthesis. 

If the exposition in the foregoing paragraphs is not off the mark, 
then microcosmic physics now exhibits the following features: 

(1) To a considerable extent, there has been replacement of the 
comparative simplicities of autonomy by the complexities of inter¬ 
dependence . 

Under quantum theory, as far down the scale of size as it applies 
with ample empirical evidence in support, the individual particle has 
been found unidentifiable and therefore un-isoluble, except insofar as 
it can be objectified in a manner dependent on the means chosen for 
observation according to the experimental purpose of the investigator. 
Interdependence, apparently by necessity, has been introduced there. 

(2) In addition, an adequate description of microcosmic materials 
and events, within the quantum realm, demands the complementary use of 
two modes of description, as represented by W wa,ve-particle duality" or 

by the duality of corpuscular and undulatory conceptions of matter-energy. 
This brings in more interdependence. 

( 3 ) Increasing empirical complexity is apparent, nowadays at any 
rate, as a result of the discovery of a multiplicity of particles. There 
may be an infinite number of them, the proportion discoverable being 
dependent on the capacity of apparatus. 































• ! 














. 












- 










-144- 


Assuming that there are more particles, if not an infinite number, 
it remains a question whether the refinement and the improvement of 
instruments and methods will.permit investigators to go on detecting 
them with shorter and shorter life-times and with higher and higher 
energies. As it is now, detection is by indirection and the links in 
the chain of evidence are sometimes tenuous. This is to say nothing 
of particles which are postulated yet held to be indetectable accord¬ 
ing to present conceptions of electrical neutrality.^ Despite such 
difficulties, the search for fundamental constituents of matter seems 
likely to be pressed deeper still, and not merely because the limits 
of ingenuity and of apparatus have yet to be reached. There are com¬ 
pelling reasons for pursuing the search, among them the belief that 
the largely unsuspected structure discovered since 1930 will not be 
satisfactorily explained without more empirical information about its 
character and that of any sub-structure it may include. 

In efforts to acquire this information and in analytical thinking 
applied, to such efforts, it may be expected. that closed experimental 
systems and the notion of separable particles will continue to play 
prominent roles; empirical analysis demands a measure of autonomy and 
analytical thought finds it easier to deal in terms of separable objects 
than continuous structure. But according to the available evidence and 
present conceptions, so-called particles not only are individually un¬ 
identifiable and inseparable from experimental systems but they lead 
double lives as concentrations of material mass and high-density points 
in distributions of energy. With the discovery of arrays of extremely 
short-lived mesons, there is even less reason to conceive of so-called 
particles as separable units, and all the more to consider them as 

s The pursuit of inquiry is undermining this statement. Promising 



































" f 
























. 







. 
















-145- 


changelings which appear as high-points in the structure of interacting 
fields of something called energy. Thus, while it may suit the mode and 
the immediate ends of empirical inquiry to pick matter apart in terms of 
particles, when it comes to resolving the complexities of data so dis¬ 
covered and settling the paradoxes of present theory, by a unifying con¬ 
ceptual scheme, physicists probably will have to reckon even more than 
the architects of quantum theory with interdependence and interaction. 

In all likelihood, this will involve further dependence on the 
mathematics of probability. But it is not beyond the bounds of pos¬ 
sibility that novel ideas of great generality together with new 
mathematical methods mil. spring the existing system of theory. 

Altogether the situation in this end of physics is similar in many 
respects to that obtaining at the macrocosmic end.^ 

If the principle of autonomy has all but lost its place in the 
physical theory of the microcosm, much the same must be true of the 
areas of chemistry where the physical theory applies. But what is more, 

Lj 

the inapplicability of autonomy presents a barrier to the complete re¬ 
duction of chemistry to physics, as will now be shown. 

3. In Reducing Chemistry To Physics -- It could be shown that the 
grosser subjects of study in chemistry are less susceptible than their 
counterparts In physics to the application of autonomy and also less 
well explained and. understood in terms of comprehensive laws and 
principles; or to put it another way, that in the field of supra-atomic 
chemistry a comparatively greater degree of complexity prevails and a 


^See page 140, above. 











. 






















. 
















, 






.... 

■ ' '• ' i : : 

* 

' 










-146- 


comparatively greater degree of empiricism remains. It seems more 
significant for the present discussion, however, that even in atomic 
chemistry, where the application, of modern physical, theory has welded 
a formless body of empirical knowledge into a powerful structural 
theory, the resistance of complex situations to the application of 
autonomy makes it practically impossible to obtain exact quantitative 
results wanted for the reduction of chemistry to physics. 

This is exemplified in the twentieth-century effort to structur¬ 
ally clarify, to order, to simplify and to explain the empirical 
regularities of the periodic system of the elements by reducing them 
to the precise mathematical terms of the underlying laws of physics. 
The reduction has been accomplished to a degree which appears adequate 
for nearly all practical purposes yet it remains incomplete. Two dif¬ 
ficulties have been encountered. The first is that of reducing such 
empirical properties of elements as ,f characteristic smell’ 1 and also 
certain ill-defined chemical states to measurable quantities. The 
second, which is. pertinent to this discussion, has been outlined as 
follows: 

...there remains a second difficulty arising from limita¬ 
tions in the practical use of the theory to cover even well- 
defined experimental results. Continuing the quotation from 
Dirac, ’the. difficulty is only that the exact application of 
these laws leads to equations much too complicated to be sol¬ 
uble ’ . This is due to the fact that all chemical problems, 
even on the atomic scale, such as the interaction of two 
atoms, involve the interaction of a. large number of electrons t 
they are ’many-body problems ’ 

The exact calculation of any such many-body problem in 
Quantum mechanics (as in classical mechanics) is so hopeless 
that there exists in general a wide gap between the empirical 
facts of chemistry on the one side, and the fundamental laws 
of physics on the other. 'This gap is being bridged from both 
sides....(But) Ultimately we will find that the best use of 
























■ 






■ 













, 
















- 147 - 


the periodic table, for predicting or explaining properties 
of elements, depends on ’empirical rules aided and amended by 
theoretical insight. 

^The classical example of a many-body problem is the 
exact calculation of the motion of the planets in the solar 
system.146 

In cases involving the above difficulty, such as those of the 
lighter elements after hydrogen in the periodic table, approximate 
solutions have been obtained variously by disregarding the interac¬ 
tion of electrons, treating the many-electron system as though it 
consisted of particles in separate and definite states (that is, of 
isolable particles), using successive approximations (as for inter¬ 
dependent planetary motions), applying statistical methods. 

This situation in atomic chemistry provides a significant il¬ 
lustration of the way in which a complex situation, created by a multi¬ 
plicity of "variables"—elementary units and their interactions-- 
defies autonomy and therefore, with present mathematical methods re¬ 
sists the strict application of exact mathematical laws. It also 
shows how the difficulty may, with practically adequate results, be 
circumvented by treating the system as though the units were isolable, 
with the interactions non-existent, and using a system of approxima¬ 
tion, successive or statistical. 

From those considerations, two questions emerge* 

First, in the still more complex situations met in the biological 
sciences and the social sciences (the latter so-called) can we expect 


H. R. Paneth, "The Periodic System and the Reduction of Chemistry 
to Physics,” Science News 24, May, 1952, p. 66. The partial quotation 
from P. A. M. Dirac (1929), cited earlier by Paneth, was "that 'the 
underlying physical laws necessary for a mathematical theory of the 
whole of chemistry are completely known'." 


























. 








. 






















■ 






. 








































. 

. 

. '• ' 


1 . ' . 

1 

. ■ •' . . 








- 148 - 


to obtain adequate solutions and sufficiently precise predictions by 
such round-about methods of attack? 

Second, will it be.possible to formulate exact mathematical laws 
and comprehensive principles to cover such situations, without devis¬ 
ing new logical and mathematical methods giving direct or much more 
direct solutions of complex problems? 

The significance of these questions is emphasized-by the appear¬ 
ance of more and more interdependence and complexity in the situations 
currently being investigated at the deeper levels of the biological 
sciences, which levels supposedly involve the lesser complexities of 
biological materials and events. This state of affairs in biology 
and biochemistry vd.ll now be considered briefly, under the current 
sectional heading—’’Decline of Autonomy.” 

4. In The Biological Sciences — Within the scope of common know¬ 
ledge and common talk, and in a field of applied biology, the advent 
of the conception of psychosomatic medicine illustrates the decline of 
autonomy. It is clearly the case here that the conception of the body 
as something almost entirely independent of the influence of the mind 
has been given up. Moreover, as knowledge of physiology grows, it 
becomes increasingly plain that the brain and the mind (?) are depend¬ 
ent on the body in a very close way. For instance, serious mental ab¬ 
normalities (in "asylum” cases) have been greatly reduced by correcting 
nutritional deficiencies and feeding the patients with extremely vitamin- 
enriched diets. 

That there should be interdependence of mind, and body would seem 
only reasonable, yet its acceptance does represent a sharp change in 































. 


. 






. 














. 













- 149 - 


medical views which had long implied or tacitly assumed that the mind, 
and the body are largely isolable systems. 

Interdependence also has gained at the expense of autonomy, in 
medicine, with the rise of the view that disease must be ascribed to 
something more complicated than a single, direct cause, such as a 
disturbance in a separable organ or function of the human system, or 
an attack by microbes. 

Turning to the animal world, one finds interdependence appearing 
as a problem-child in recent years in the war between insecticides and 
insects and that-between antibiotics and microbes. In view of the 
roles played by mutation and natural selection in biological evolution, 
it was only to be expected that resistant strains could be present or 
could arise in populations of insects and of microbes, that they would 
survive the attacks with insecticides and with antibiotics, and that as 
a result of human persistence in chemical attack they would win local 
and even widespread dominance. Still, it is a disconcerting develop¬ 
ment; for in practice the indicated interaction and interdependence 
confront workers in these fields with very complex situations which are 
most difficult, if not impossible, to resolve permanently. The case 
is similar for rust and rust-resistant wheat. 

Returning to human physiology and medicine, one finds that during 
the past three decades there has been a large accumulation of evidence 
showing that the endocrine system is anything but self-sufficient and 
isolable. Bernard Donovan has commented: 

... .Whereas only a few years ago the endocrine system 
was thought to be self-sufficient and almost automatic in 
its action wre now know that, like most other bodily 
activities, it is under the control of the nervous system. 

It now remains for the physiologist to discover just what 







. 


. 















‘ 



. ■ • 






■ 

' 




. 



to I jnli 




. 


. 

. 


. 

, 










-150- 


\ 

is the substance that passes down the pituitary stalk to stim¬ 
ulate the gland. And we still have much to learn about the 
factors controlling the hypothala.mic regions which in turn 
regulate the pituitary gland. In fact, far from the pituitary 
gland being the conductor of the endocrine orchestra it is, in 
the words of A. S. Parkes, 'really just a marionette, activ¬ 
ated by different strings pulled, often simultaneously, by 
various members of the orchestra, as well as by members of 
the environmental audience. 'H? 

Again in this case, as inquiry is pressed deeper into the subject, 

interaction and interdependence appear as highly important factors, with 

which the investigator must certainly reckon ,in any attempt to formulate 

a comprehensive theory for the physiological process. 

Much the same could be said of the investigation of diseases. As 

already noted (p. 151 ), the doctrine that there is a single specific 

cause for each disease is no longer tenable. For...."disease is a 

complex process that depends on the interactions of an injurious agent, 

119 

a susceptible' patient and a particular environment." Natural, re¬ 
sistance may be a more important factor in microbial disease than the 
virulence of the germs, though in certain circumstances this can be re- 

$8 . o 

garded as a sufficient cause--"virulence is coming to be thought of as 

ecological. Whether man lives in equilibrium with microbes or becomes 

their victim depends upon the circumstances under which he encounters 
120 

them." Again, the picture of the interaction between virus and host 
is looking increasingly complex. Viruses used to be thought of solely 


x -*-?Bernard Donovan, "The Pituitary 01 and: Servant of the Brain," 
Science News 30, November, 1953* pp. 67 - 8 , 

-^%a.rl Meyer, cited by Theodore H. Ingalls in "Mongolism", Sci ¬ 
entific American . February, 1952, p. 60. 

■^9Theodore H. Ingalls, loc . cit . 

■^^Rene j. Dubos, "Second Thoughts on the Germ Theory," Scientifi c 
American . May, 1955, pp. 31-35, quotation from p. 35* 















. 

' 

. ■ 


. 


. 




■ -■ f ■■ ■ r . -cM 1 




























. 




. 

. 











-151- 


as foreign intruders but some are now being considered as bits of here¬ 
dity, similar to genes, in search of a cell. While there is, as so 
often is the case in science, no unanimity on virus-host questions at 
the present time, cogent views are expressed by one leading authority 
as follows: 

The difference....points up an important current issue 
in theoretical biology. The Pauling-Haurowitz view presup¬ 
poses that the general process of protein synthesis in the 
cells can be described in terms of physical and structural 
chemistry. There are many indications that above a certain 
level of biological complexity this orthodox approach becomes 
impotent. In the fields that involve specific activities of 
proteins and enzymes we seem already to be relinquishing the 
old objective of describing the phenomena in the terms of 
physics'and chemistry. Instead there is an increasing ten¬ 
dency to describe them in terms of replicating patterns which 
carry information or instructions from one part of a cell or 
organism to another. It is in line with the spirit of the 
times to believe that we shall soon see the conscious develop¬ 
ment of a M communications theory” of the living organism along 
these or analogous lines.121 

With all respect to the triumphs of the biochemical ap¬ 
proach, it is becoming more and more evident that the under¬ 
standing of the basic processes of biology may need an 
entirely different approach based on sequences of significant 
patterns. 

It may be that the next development of ’communications 
theory’ will be in the heart of the cell, where ’information’ 
seems to flow steadily from the genes to the functional and 
productive divisions of the cell, through chains of patterned 
macromolecules; no doubt the inevitable ’feedback’ controls 
are similarly mediated. In many ways the most effective way 
of picturing the activity of the influenza viruses, and per¬ 
haps of -many other viruses, is to think of them as a set of 
punch-cards maliciously inserted into vital parts of a 
fantastically complicated computing machine.-^2 

The second- of Burnet’s cited views, respecting interaction of genes 
and other parts of the cell, finds support in other quarters. The 


■^■^-Sir Macfarlane Burnet, ”How Antibodies Are Hade,” Scientific 
American . November, 1954, p. 78. 

122g ur net, "The Riddle of.Influenze Virus,” Endeavour . January, 
1955, p. 11. 


































• - 




. 




- 


, 








. 




. 










. 




' f 


- 








-152- 


accumulation of evidence is compelling specialists in various branches 
of biology to conclude that the nucleus, with its hereditary materials 
called chromosomes and genes, is not, as once was thought, the absolute 
ruler of the cell, but is partly under the control of the cytoplasmic 
structures outside its "wall", which structures it partly controls. 

The cell is now being regarded as similar to a feedback mechanism. "In 
cell differentiation we must be dealing with chemical cybernetic systems. 
While in certain respects the biochemistry of the hereditary material of 
the nucleus may be said to exhibit "far more simplicity than we would 
have dared to hope" (namely, in the gross structure and shape of some 
of its important macromolecules) ,-^5 investigation of the heart of the 
cell and of its apparently fundamental dynamics, is showing more and 
more interaction and interdependence. As an inevitable corollary, the 
picture, insofar as it can be perceived by the eye of the mind, is one 
of great complexity. 

On ranging through macrocosmic and microcosmic physics, and chemistry 

V . i 

and through various branches of biology and biochemistry, then, one finds 
that the hold of autonomy has been greatly weakened and that its applica¬ 
tion has been resisted or defied by the complexity of materials and 
events., i.e., by the sheer multiplicity of interdependent variables and 
their interactions. 


123see, for instance, C. H. Haddington, "How Do Cells Differentiate?" 
in Hcientific American . September, 1953? PP* 108-116. 

12 ^Ibid., p. 110. 

12 5p. H. C. Crick, "The Structure of the Hereditary Material," 
Scientific American . October, 195A> p. 54• 




























. 


















. 
























• ■ 






-153- 


IV—MEANING OF COMPLEXITY 

While essentially correct, the second part of the last statement 
above, like similar remarks about autonomy in preceding pages of this 
chapter, is too general; it requires clarification and definition. It 
is easy to see why when one considers what is meant by complexity . 

It is not attributed to a simple collection of objects, nor even, in 
common usage, to an aggregate of parts so long as the parts are con¬ 
sidered to be related to one another by no more than simple location 
in the space of ordinary perception.^ 

It would appear that complexity is ascribed to a static structure 
(or one so regarded) when it exhibits for the percipient a due multi¬ 
plicity and variety of interdependent parts and interrelated aspects; 
but the static threshold of complexity is ill-defined. Obviously, 
moreover, the attribution of complexity is founded on information about 
the elements of the structure, or if complexity be postulated then such 
information is at least assumed to be obtainable. This information (or 
knowledge, if the term be preferred) can only be obtained and made 
precise, or, even better, quantitative, by means of analysis; and in 


pile of bricks is an example of the second case. 

Even if the bricks should be made into a wall, the resulting 
structure is not normally regarded as being complex. For any chemical 
interaction between brick and mortar is considered short-lived, if not 
simply ignored;'the spatial pattern is regular and easily defined in 
terms of ordinary Euclidean geometry; the relationships between bricks 
are regarded as simply static, confined to vertically adjacent rows if 
the wall is not sufficiently high to demand special consideration of 
load-bearing properties, and consisting in the static support of each 
brick by the adjacent halves of those immediately beneath it; and the 
gravitational interaction between bricks can be and is ignored, since 


















. 




. 












. 




. 








' 


. 































































-154- 


general analysis can be regarded as an autonomic procedure. Thus* 
precise knowledge of complexity—and the comparatively certain attribu¬ 
tion of complexity—depends on and must be preceded by autonomic analysis. 
So it would involve a contradiction to hold that complexity, as being 
precisely known, defies the application of the principle of autonony 
for purposes of analysis . Even in speaking of any resistance of com¬ 
plexity to autonomic analysis, strict statements must be hypothetical. 

The object of study may, for instance, be assumed to be complex, and 
it may then be supposed that autonomic analysis of it will be difficult 
or even impossible, or that information obtained by such analysis will 
be incomplete, partially false or not susceptible to the formulation 
of a governing law or explanatory theory or comprehensive synthesis, 
whichever the case may require. 


it is negligible within the enormously more powerful gravitational 
field of the earth. 

If the bricks should be made into a building, however, the result¬ 
ing structure, though considered only in static terms, may be described 
as complex, because of the multiplicity and the variety of the load- 
bearing parts, of the stresses and strains, and of the structural 
patterns--to adopt in turn the ordinary visual, the engineering and 
the esthetic viewpoints, respectively. If it should be anything more 
than a simple structure of four walls, if it should reflect a combina¬ 
tion of engineering, architectural and esthetic purposes and consist 
of many different parts and patterns, it will almost certainly be re¬ 
garded as complex. 






























, 


























. 




. 




. 




■ 







-155- 


On the other hand, when the state of complexity is known by analysis, 
it could be held without any intrinsic contradiction, and might be found, 
that the complexity is such as to defy: (l) the application of existing 
law or theory, or incorporation in an existing synthesis: or (2) the 
formulation of a new governing law or a new covering theory or synthesis. 

So far in this section on meaning of complexity, only static struc¬ 
tures, or those so regarded., have been under consideration. Whether a 
physical system is regarded as static or dynamic depends on the in¬ 
vestigator's purpose, his methodology, the spatio-temporal scale to 
which he is working, and other factors. In any case, the dynamic states 
of a system usually are considered more general and more significant 
than its static states (real or hypothetical ); and the former are gen¬ 
erally more complex. What has already been said about the relations 
between autonomic analysis and complexity, except for one point, applies 
to.dynamic states or conditions or situations. The exceptional point, 
so it seems to the writer, is that the threshold of dynamic complexity, 
unlike that of static complexity, may be abstractly defined. The 
threshold does not seem to be represented, by the causal relation--A in¬ 
variably implies B—even if the relationship also should hold in the 
reverse direction, temporally speaking. The threshold seems to be 
reached when there is dynamic interaction between A and B, whether 
they be regarded as states, entities or elements of the system. The 
degree of complexity generally is increased when the number of mutually 
interacting or interdependent elements in the system exceeds the 
threshold level of duality, and the degree is radically increased x^hen 
there are qualitative differences in the respective natures of the 
interacting elements. 






























- 

. 














. 







- 

. 




■ 'V. - 




. 







■ 

























' 




-156- 


In the preceding section (III) of this chapter, it was shown by 
examples that investigators are finding it increasingly necessary to 
recognize the existence of and to contend with states of complexity in 
the systems they study. No doubt this attests the power of analysis, 
the human capacity for picking things apart and for seeing also how 
the parts go together. But how well are human investigators equipped 
to deal with a state of complexity in pursuit of the objectives of 
scientific inquiry? 

Generation of Description -- Scientific inquiry strives, to put it 
modestly, for orderly, codified, communicable descriptions of the world 
which will give predictions enabling or helping us to choose among 
alternative courses of action. In an ultimate sense, the alternatives 
among which we want to be able to choose are, broadly speaking, personal, 
social, political, technical or economic in nature. Within science it¬ 
self, however, they are, generally speaking, ways of proceeding further 
with inquiry. In the latter case, the typical function of prediction is 
to show whether the description already obtained or formulated is valid 
or not; at a minimum, whether or not the investigator is justified in 
making the description part of his base of action. As an acceptable 
part of this base, the description may, variously, suggest or stimulate 
further inquiry in the same direction, assist in inquiry in this direc¬ 
tion or in others, counsel termination of the line of inquiry, and so 
forth. Prediction is validated or invalidated, ultimately, by comparing 
it with the results of further observation. 

The generation of scientific description is a combined analytic 
and synthetic process. The investigator operates from a partially 
synthetic (put-together) base composed of accepted description, or 

















. ' 




























. 




















. 




















. 












-157- 


within the partially synthetic framework of this accepted description 
(existing information and embedded knowledge). And he usually takes his 
start from a hypothesis--.it may be in the form of a question--which inso¬ 
far as it postulates a relation between two or more things is synthetic 
in character. But then he proceeds mainly by analysis--observational, 
mathematical and verbal—until he comes to formulate constructs for the 
system, and. its states and to formulate a law or laws which will express 
his results and tie in with an existing body of description. 

Until these synthetic tasks are undertaken, the investigator pro¬ 
ceeds mainly by picking apart the system under investigation or by 
breaking it down, in one way or another, into smaller pieces. Not in 
every case, it is true, nowadays especially. It would be better to 
say that this is the traditional strategy, the one which has stood the 
physical sciences in good stead, has been largely adopted in biology 
(as, for example, in physiology, in genetics and in biochemistry) and 
has been applied to a limited degree in the so-called social sciences. 
What is probably more important, it is largely by the use of this 
strategy, especially though not exclusively in the observational stages 
of inquiry, that most of the fundamental description, now available, has 
been obtained. 

For its extensive use, there are good reasons. They form a tangled 
skein even when viewed at any given point in time; and of course the 
makeup of the skein has varied in the course of time. One cannot extract 
the reasons without oversimplifying them but it is important to see what 
some of them are and approximately how they have affected the course of 


scientific affairs. 



























h 

. 
















. 


































-158- 


Whv Divide and Isolate ? --To begin with, the natural world obviously 
has structure; it is not an amorphous mass. Moreover, its structure in¬ 
volves systems and some of these systems are evidently composed of 
elements. In addition, divide and conquer is an old rule of human 
action in many fields. No doubt that is all rather obvious. But there 
was nothing trivial about the application of the idea of divide and 
conquer to- problems of continua by ancient thinkers. It was perhaps 
inevitable that the problem of the mathematical continuum would be 
attacked in this way but to transform, say, a conception of the point 
structure of this continuum into a conception of the atomistic struc¬ 
ture of matter, as the ancient Ionian thinkers, Leucippus and Democritus, 
apparently did, was to take a bold leap in the dark. For observationally 
they had little information suggestive of a fine structure below the 
surface of matter. 

At any rate, the generalized concept of atomism was appropriated 
by investigators early in the life of modern Western science and has 
played a very important part in scientific experiment and thought ever 
since. In the field in which it has found its most natural place—the 
physics of matter--it has been pursued to the farthest extreme: from 
molecules to atoms, then to electrons and nuclei, and now to the 
’’interior" of the nucleus with its neutrons, protons, mesons, neutrino, 
etc. There is even speculation about the existence of fine structure 
"within" some of the "particles"; e.g. photon, electron. 

It has long since become evident that there are limitations on the 
data which can be obtained by observation of "particles", both sub-atomic 
and atomic; for these "products" of the subdivision of the atom cannot 
be strictly localized in space and time....(l) 































. 



' 










' 

• < ■■■ 

. 









. 

















. 






r? 

.... 






-159- 


Nevertheless, investigators by the ingenious use of indirect means 
of observation go on looking for more "particles'* or finer sub-structure, 
in keeping with the traditional observational procedure of analytical 
subdivision....(2) 


One good reason for continuing as in (2.), apart from the fruitful¬ 


ness it has demonstrated, is that the problem expressed in (l) has been 
met: by the resort to the calculus of probabilities for data involving 

measurement of variables; by considering the behavior of an atomic system 
as the totality of its reactions to physical operations when it is in a 
given prepared state; and by dealing, so to speak, all at once with this 
total behavior of the whole complicated system. 

Still, at .least one voice can be heard cautiously dissenting from 
the view that (2) is bound to be illuminating. Schrodinger remarks: 

....This counting, this pairing off, this whole manner 
of thinking has played a prominent role in discovering the 
most important physical theorems. It would seem impossible 
under the aspect that matter is a continuous structureless 
jelly. Thus atomism has proved infinitely fruitful. Yet the 
more one thinks of it, the less can one help wondering to 
what extent it is' a true theory. Is it really founded ex¬ 
clusively on the actual objective structure of ’the real 
■world around us’? Is it not in an important way conditioned 
by the nature of human understanding--what Kant would have 
called ’a priori *? It behoves us, so I believe, to preserve 
an extremely open mind towards the palpable proofs of the 
existence of individual single particles, without detriment 
to our admiration for the genius of those experimenters who 
have furnished us with this wealth of knowledge. They are 
increasing it from day to day and are thereby helping to turn 
the scales with respect to the sad fact, that our theoretical 
J ' ” ” " ’ , I venture to say, diminishing at 



^^Erwin Schrodinger, Nature And The Greeks . pp. $6-7. 
















_ 































. 

. 











- 160 - 


The use of the traditional strategy in question also is bound up 
with the apparent necessity for retaining the principle of autonomy. 

The essence of this principle, it will be recalled, is the assumption 
that the natural "world can be separated into closed systems. 

A further implication is that a system usually can be split into 
isolable elements or factors. This implication, so it appears, will 
not hold for.atomic and sub-atomic "particles" as they cannot be 
strictly localized. It may be doubted, moreover, whether it will hold 
for all constituents of biochemical systems because of the difficulty 
of experimenting i\iith them without disturbing them or killing the system. 

But set these points aside for the present. Why is it apparently 
necessary to retain the principle at least insofar as it implies closed 
systems'? 

As in the case of atomism, the nature of human understanding seems 
to- be involved in an important way. Turning to more immediate reasons, 
however, there appear to be two, which are interconnected, if Margenau’s 
views on relevant points be adopted.^^ First, the principle of autonomy 
is needed, in that we must have or must postulate closed systems, if 
causality or determinism is to be meaningful. Secondly: let causality 
be defined as temporal invariability of laws; then clearly it is a 
methodological component of scientific description and understanding, 
for it is incorporated as a methodological principle in those branches 
of science which have reached an advanced state of precision; that is, 
in practically all of fundamental physics, including quantum mechanics. 


l2 ?Henry Margenau, The Nature of Physical Reality . Chapters 16-19, 
especially Ch. 19 on "Causality”. 

























• , • ' ■ ■ . " ■■ ■ 

















. 








. 



. 


. 










































- 161 - 


It would not necessarily follow from this that causality is indispensable 
to scientific description and understanding but it would have to be con¬ 
cluded at least that the principle is demonstrably of great value. 

It must be admitted that causality, like epistemology, is a con¬ 
troversial subject. In particular, it is widely contended that causality 

does not hold in the microcosm and in quantum mechanics and, by inference 

128 

that it does not hold for the foundations of the physical world. 

Still, it seems undeniable that physical laws--the differential, 
partial differential, integral (transformable into differential) and 
ordinary equations from which predictions are obtained—express causal 
relations. Moreover, the causal nature of these laws and their capacity 
for giving predictions appear to be interconnected characteristics. 

Could one go farther and hold that this causal characteristic is a 
necessary condition of prediction? Necessary, that is, if the equation 
is to permit comparison with further observation (with experience) which 
will validate or invalidate the law. This may be too much to say; but 


128 

See, for instance: Hans Reichenbach, Philosophical Foundations 
of Quantum Mechanics : Jacob Bronowski, The Common Sense of Science ; et al 

The apparent opposition between these views and those of Margenau 
seems to be at least partly a function of the different meanings assumed 
for or assigned to key terms. Is there, for instance, any opposition 
between the view that causality does not hold for atomic and sub-atomic 
'’particles” or ’’entities”, for their individual actions on the micro- 
cosmic stage, and the view (Margenau’s) that causality simply does not 
apply to matters of fact? Moreover, if Margenau’s definition of 
causality be accepted, can it be denied that causality remains an in¬ 
tegral part of physical description and that it continues to play a 
vital role in scientific prediction even in quantum mechanics? Of 
course, one may not accept Margenau’s definition, on which his view 
of the significance of causality largely depends, or his epistemology. 

In this case, one may hold that causality has gone by the boards in 
the physics of the microcosm. 










r 


* 








. 




















. 




•i-l" • 

. 

■• T , ' r 

t : ' 

. , 




-162- 


if it should be so, and if the closed system should be necessary to make 
causality meaningful, does it follow that the former is a necessary con¬ 
dition or prediction? Perhaps the connections between autonomy and 
causality (Margenau's definition) are neither so straightforward nor 
so rigid. Nevertheless, the three appear to be closely bound together 
in the present methodology of physical inquiry and in.the physiology 
of physical description. 

Physiology of Description — After this brief exploration of some 
reasons for the extensive use in experiment of the strategy of analytical 
subdivision (which evidently is practically equivalent to what has been 
called, herein, autonomic analysis), it is necessary, in attempting to 
answer the question posed on p. 156 , to dissect physical description. 
Oversimplifying, the general features of its physiology appear as 
follows: 

(a) When the physical system in question has or is assigned a 
discrete form, as in point mechanics and Newtonian mechanics, then the 
typical law is cast in the form of an ordinary differential equation 
which expresses a unique and invariable relation between two states of 
the system, separated in time.^ The structure of the system is 


& The use of the singular term law involves, of course, some over¬ 
simplification, for more often than not a theory is embodied in a set 
of laws. However, these usually are of similar mathematical form; 
hence the term tvoical law . It should be noted that law is not being 
used in reference to such a fundamental and central principle of theory 
as the hypothesis of gravitational interaction in Newtonian mechanics 
or equivalence in general relativity. Indeed, law is being used in 
Margenau's sense: meaning a mathematical expression of a temporally 
invariable relation between two states. 






■ 














. 








V . ' • : . ; ' 











, ' •• 




8 







' 

- 




' 


. 














. ' ' • • . 
















. 




■ 

- 

• . . ' ' 

. ‘ ' 



-163- 


comparatively clean-cut in appearance, even simple and uniform in the 
case of point mechanics, and the state constructs are not very elaborate 
anatomically or mathematically (again, comparatively speaking). The 
material entities of the system, moreover, are clearly accounted for in 
the constructs. Yet when it comes to solution of the equations of mo¬ 
tion, which flow from the law(s), it is not possible to obtain "exact” 
solutions -for more than two material entities (point masses or astrono¬ 
mical bodies) at once. Results for three or more entities and for the 
whole system must accordingly be obtained by resort to "two-body forces" 
or, in the writer's terminology, to threshold cases of complexity, and 
successive approximation. That is, "exact" prediction fails beyond the 
threshold level of complexity involving the material entities. 

(b) When the system takes the form of or is regarded as a continuum 
with a highly abstract or extremely generalized structure, as in clas¬ 
sical electrodynamics and general relativity, the typical law is cast in 
the form of a partial (non-linear)' differential equation.^ The system 
is represented as a continuous field in which the concept of material 
particles or masses does not play a fundamental part. The system thus 
is simple, though abstract; the state constructs are mathematically 
elaborate. Conclusions that can be confronted with experience--that is, 
predictions—can be derived directly, but in the case of general 
relativity they are few (three in number) and far between. The advant¬ 
ages gained by the use of the continuous field construct--!reedom and 
generality--exact their price. For one thing, formidable mathematical 


%t should be noted, however, that a mathematical attack upon the 
mechanics of many-body systems has been initiated in connection with 
nuclear problems--Margenau, ojo. cit .. p. 190. 

^Thermodynamics is being ignored here, as being in several respects 
a special case. 






















. 








. 








. 




. ■ 




' 






























■ 

■ 






■ 






















' 












-164- 


difficulties may be encountered in the solution of specific cases for 
the purpose of prediction and test by experience. More significant 
for this discussion, it is difficult to regenerate the structure of 
material entities which has been excluded from the system construct. 

Thus, in electrodynamics the introduction of the electron has not 
been accomplished satisfactorily in the full sense. 

In the case of general relativity, the Newtonian description can, 
of course, be obtained as a first approximation. But apart from this, 
the application of general relativity to the traditional problems of 
celestial mechanics, other than orbital rotation observationally detect¬ 
able in the case of Mercury, has apparently not proved possible. Ap¬ 
plication even to the problem of two bodies has not been carried out, 
on account of the mathematical difficulties .*^9 

Could it be inferred, then, that the continuum form of description 
does not lend itself to the treatment of the complexities of material 
structure? 

'V 

It may be significant in this regard that when Einstein had, in 
1950, completed his second and last formulation of a unified field 
theory—by developing, as the primary requirement, a more complex 
system construct than that of general relativity--he found himself un¬ 
able to derive any predictions, conclusions which could be confronted 
by experience, and. he thought the accomplishment of this essential task 
probably would require new mathematical methods.^- 


129 H arold Jeffreys, Scientific Inference , p. 1&9. His statement 
was made in 1930. Presumably, it still holds. 

%on-linear partial differential equations form an unexplored jungle 
in the midst -of calculus. There are as yet no general methods of solving 
them and indeed they are not always solvable. 





' 

. 

. 

■ 

■ 

. 

■ 

. 































(c) One comes, then, to what might be lightly if rather inaccurately 
called.the hybrid form of description with respect to the constructs em¬ 
bodied in it: sort of discrete and sort of continuous. This is 
exemplified by statistical mechanics and quantum mechanics. Speaking 
generally, the system takes the form of or is regarded as a probability 
aggregate. The typical law is cast in the form of a partial differential 
equation (assuming, for quantum mechanics, Schrodinger’s formulation). 

Both system and state constructs are complicated and the mathematical 
treatment is elaborate. 

Considering- more particularly the quantum mechanics, it is evident 
that this descriptive system renders a workable account of the complexities 
of material structure by a combination of extended mathematical formalism 
and statistical treatment of quantitative aspects. In Schrodinger’s 
formulation at least, it.is capable of giving a. causal law according to 
Margenau’s definition of causality. And it gives testable predictions. 
Still, itr exacts its price, in the sometimes burdensome extremes of 
mathematical formalism, in rigidity due to the restrictions on prepared 
states and the extent of the mathematical superstructure, and in the ap¬ 
parently necessary agreement that entities of the system are not strictly 
localizable; that is, agreement that at a certain level of analytical 
subdivision the observer is confronted with an irreducible threshold 
case of complexity involving conjugate parameters. In the solution of 
equations for prediction, mathematical difficulties may be encountered. 
These may be due not only to the necessity of using, say, partial dif¬ 
ferential equations in accordance with the state construct, but also to 
the nature of "matter”; e.g.. 


the problem of pibn-nucleon interaction 





-166- 


in which results of a usable degree of precision cannot be obtained from 

power-series solution .of the equations, due, in effect, to the apparently 

130 

enormous strength of the nuclear binding forces. The successes of 
quantum mechanics have already been emphasized repeatedly. However, in 
spite of its achievements in the treatment of material structure, it is 
baffled, so far, by the many-body problem and is faltering in the face 
of the multiplication of "particles". 

Dealing; With Complexity — Altogether, the situation as regards the 
discovery, formulation and verification of physical description, when 
viewed in a somewhat over-simplified way, appears to be as follows: 

Insofar as the discovery or the postulation of elements or factors 
and of their relationships is necessary for discerning or devising the 
structure of the system under study, autonomic analysis is essential in 
observational investigation; and, in the microcosmic direction, the 
pursuit of analytical subdivision is justified. What is more, analysis 
is essential to obtain precise information regarding the complexity of 
the system. 

A system composed of interdependent or interacting elements is, to 
a degree, complex. The systems mentioned in (a), (b) and (c), above, 
therefore are complex. The degree of complexity depends on the number 
of mutually interacting elements and on the diversity of the elements, 
the threshold being represented by two interacting elements of the same 
kind. 

The fiction of the closed system plays a vital role in both the 
analytical and synthetic phases of the formulation of description. If 


130see, for instance, G. Feldman, "Meson Theory of Nuclear Forces," 
Science News 35, pp. 52-3* 












' 










■ 


. 














. 






- 








. 
















. 








' 






































-167- 


not necessarily indispensable, this fiction has proved extremely useful 
in the discovery of elements and structure, the expression of causal 
laws and the extraction of predictions from laws. In delimiting the 
system, it restricts the complexity, whatever may be its avowed function. 

Constructs function not only as representations of the composition 
of the system but as carriers of its complexity, thus, in general, making 
possible a. simplified statement of the nexus of law, comparatively free 
in an immediate sense of the burdens of complexity. 

The dependence on observational analysis and analytical thought for 
the discovery of the elements of description and their interactions is 
paralleled by dependence on analytical mathematics for the formulation 
of description in terms of constructs and laws to the end of prediction 
and test. But mathematics which are essentially analytical in function 
and form, such as the differential and integral calculus and the algebras 
of analysis, are demonstrably inadequate for the "exact" solution of com¬ 
plexity above the threshold level. So, for that matter, is the calculus 
of probabilities, which can be regarded as a mathematical means for 
glossing over complexity at a level of knowledge of the system at which 
its complexity seems irreducible. 

Constructs are in some degree conventional. Observational informa¬ 
tion is in some degree approximate. Accordingly, description carries 
with it some element of doubt as to its validity and is in some degree 
provisional. The more the description and its verification by predic¬ 
tion depend on probabilities and on successive approximations in terms 
of threshold cases, for the resolution of states of complexity, then 
the greater the element of doubt as to the validity of the description 
and the more provisional it must be considered. 





















































- 

' 







































































-168- 


These strictures may be partially escaped by requiring in the ob¬ 
servational test of prediction no higher degree of accuracy than was 
obtainable in the observational information underlying the formulation 
of the description. It may then be held that the description is veri¬ 
fied (or not) to a specified and appropriate degree of approximation. 

But then, as demonstrated by special and general relativity, more 
particularly the latter, in relation to the older mechanics, the 
degree of approximation may hide the fact that something of the 
greatest importance has escaped the net of description. 

Dependence on the fiction of the closed system adds to the provi¬ 
sional character of description or, viewing the situation in another 
way, signifies an inescapable degree of incompleteness in any descrip¬ 
tion based on finite human knowledge. 

The reader may apply the foregoing strictures to the older formula¬ 
tions of physical description—so-called classical mechanics, thermo¬ 
dynamics and electrodynamics, and statistical mechanics--to see where 
and with what closeness they fit. As to general relativity and quantum 
mechanics--special relativity is tied into the latter--something more 
needs to be said. 

Both these descriptions have been secured by pressing deeper with 
analysis--of the macrocosm on the one hand, and of the microcosm on the 
other. Thus pressed, analysis has disclosed new and stubborn problems 
of interdependence, as represented by: 

(1) interrelation of the action of the system and the 
process of observation--treated in general (and special) 
relativity; 

(2) physical interaction of moans of observation and 
object of observation, which significantly affects measure¬ 
ment at the finest extremes of microcosmic subdivision; 
















































. 

































- 




-169- 


(3) the interconnection of conjugate parameters associ¬ 
ated with indeterminacy in the localization of material 
entities—resolved by the use of probability distributions and 
elaborate mathematical formalism; 

(4) indeterminacy in measurement, indicating "real" 
limits to measurement--resolved, by indirect methods of ob¬ 
servation and the application of probability. 

General relativity.may be regarded, as a description designed to 
come to terms with the aspect of complexity indicated by (l); quantum 
mechanics, as one which involves, among other requirements, coming to 
terms with the aspects indicated by (2) and ( 3 ) wile also reflecting 
the necessities imposed by (l) and ( 4 ). 

Let it be said that general relativity satisfies the need of (l). 
What of its other purpose—the solution of the problem of gravitation 
or the problems of celestial mechanics? Its application to the latter 
must be regarded as the test of its efficacy. Perhaps one could say, 
in the terms of this discussion, that the solution it offers to the 
problem of complexity in celestial mechanics consists in the replace¬ 
ment of the concept of. action between material masses by the concept 
of uniform action between the gravitational property of the space-time 
continuum and each material mass. In this way it secures, as already 
noted on p. 135 above, a reduction of complexity, but at a price (vari¬ 
ously described on p. 135 and p. I 64 ) which includes the mathematical 
difficulty of fully verifying, and therefore accepting, the indicated 
solution of complexity in celestial mechanics. 

As to quantum mechanics, to say little of quantum electrodynamics 
and nothing of quantum thermodynamics, three remarks seem apposite in 
the present context: first, in spite of its successes, ,, many-body ,, 
problems remain to plague the investigator in observational tests; 















































. ' " 



















■ 


. 






























-170- 


second, the application of description to systems more complex than the 
two-body systems of the hydrogen atom and the hydrogen nucleus, which 
have provided much of the confirmed information, constitutes an extra¬ 
polation of the conceptual scheme and involves considerable approxima¬ 
tion in respect to observational data; third, the concept of particles, 
so long as it is retained, would seem to preclude resort to continuum 
constructs.in the classical sense on the chance that such a formulation 
might be useful or illuminating, yet it is interesting to note Bhabha’s 
suggestion that the electric charge of an elementary particle be regarded 
as a property of the electromagnetic field rather than of the particle, 
while considering the mass as an intrinsic property of the particle. 

Referring back, then, to the question raised on page 156 , it would 
appear that even in physics, generally regarded as the most advanced of 
the sciences, investigators are not well equipped to deal with states 
of complexity in pursuit of the objectives of scientific inquiry. This 
is to speak only of minimum objectives--the formulation and the testing 
of description--without regard to higher objectives such as understanding. 

Solution by Probability ? — On the basis of the Simpson and Huxley 
views cited on page 127 , one would expect that complexity will be, if it 
is not already, an even greater problem in biochemistry and in 
the biological and social sciences, especially in any efforts 
to reduce, say, biology to chemistry and physics. 


^3%omi J. Bhabha, "The Present Concept of the Physical World,*’ 
Science News 21 , p. 24. There is some analogy between his conceptual 
scheme and that of general relativity as it has been regarded above. 

^Recall, for instance, Burnet’s views cited on p. 151, regarding 
this reduction. It must be noted, however, that Linus Pauling seems 
confident that it will be accomplished, as witness his remarks in 
Science Digest . May, 1951, p. 5&, condensed from Engineering and Science . 











. 


. 














• ■ 




. 





















■ 


• • 










' . , 




. 


\ 

r{ , ; 


..v;.£fs. 









-171- 


Numerous examples of interdependence and interaction in biochemical or 
biological systems have already been cited—in the preceding section of 
this chapter. A good many of these, it should be noted, show diversity 
of interacting elements. In biology, as in the physical sciences, in¬ 
vestigators persist in trying to reduce the system to threshold cases of 
complexity involving only two elements; but when the elements are dif¬ 
ferent in kind it is bound to be harder than in, say, point mechanics 
to obtain an ’’exact” solution in the classical sense even for a threshold 
case. Indeed, it sometimes seems quite beyond our powers with the avail¬ 
able mathematics'and present modes of thought. But the last word has yet 
to be said; much of the development of biochemical constructs is still 
to come, and new mathematical methods, based on the concepts of communica¬ 
tion and feedback, are being developed and applied. 

Apart from these hopeful prospects, there is the mathematics of 
probability. Bronowski winders whether probability is the method which 
will lead to the rediscovery of commonality in specialized and subdivided 
science.^32 VJho can say? For what is probability? This is a question 
which is vexing many good minds today. Mathematically, in practice, it 
provides a means of measuring variation and making predictions of a 
provisional sort. In this way, it has long been the white hope of the 
social sciences and an important element in the biological sciences. 

But Bronowski is swinging a pretty wide loop when he says: 

Since the turn of the century the biological and social 
sciences have tended to turn away from the classical laboratory 
approach in which the variables of a problem are isolated one 
by one; instead these sciences accept the variations of nature 
and make the best of them. For this purpose the classical 
mathematics of exact quantities has proved useless, and as a 
consequence wrorkers.. .have built the beautiful mathematics of 
probability... 


132j 

acob Bronowski, op. cit .. pp. 94-5* 












. 


















' 












. 


. 












\ 






































- 172 - 


....The notion of isolating an experiment in a box and 
ticking off the variables that matter neatly on one's fingers 
is 50 years out of date. Today almost all research is unitary . 
and its field of inquiry is as wide as our experience .... The 
controlled laboratory experiment is dying . and in its place 
science draws its breath from the statistical analysis of the 
evervday variation in nature .133 

Both italicized assertions go too far. If they were true as they 
stand, one would have to conclude that quite enough variables are now 
known, that autonomic analysis need be pressed no farther. But no such 
conclusion is suggested by the actual endeavors of investigators--not 
even in mi.crocosmic physics, still less in biochemistry for example. 

The analytical search for biochemical variables, as for "particles", 
continues apace. Witness this statement by Waddington; "The whole of 
embryology suffers at present from operating too much in terms of com¬ 
plex entities. Instead of considering the development of nervous tissue 
or liver tissue, each of which contains many substances, we must be able 

to .investigate the development of some single substance. m 134 Th. e 

analytical search continues, moreover, in spite of two fundamental dif- 
ficulties: that of entirely isolating a biochemical system without 
killing it, and that of observing the action of such a system without 
disturbing the action. 

The use of the statistics of probability, as already suggested on 
p. 167, involves the risk that the investigator may actually be glossing 


^33 Scientific American, October, 1951* pp. 75-6. The italics are 
this writer's. 

h. Waddington, o£. cit., pp. 111-12. See also J. Z. Young, 
"The organization within nerve cells," Endeavour . January, 1956, pp. 

5-19. 































' 








. 


- 




































, 




■ 








. ' , , . /• . . . » !;• ir! 1 ^ • ’ 




- 173 “ 


over complexity, or ignorance for that matter, at a level where the com¬ 
plexity of the system seems irreducible, or more penetrating analytical 
knowledge seems unobtainable. The reality of this danger has been 
demonstrated in the social sciences, and perhaps notably in educational 
research where many investigations suffer not only from the indefiniteness 
of the variables selected for skilful statistical treatment but also, 
oddly enough, from premature or ill-founded assumptions as to the isol¬ 
ability of these variables and the closed state of their system. In 
cases suffering from the latter defect, one may search in vain for 
treatment on the basis of a "field of inquiry as wide as our experience." 
In the writer’s view, the application of probability is premature when 
analysis has not been pressed to the greatest possible extreme. Pre¬ 
mature application may still be useful as a temporary expedient but the 
incompleteness of the available information and the highly provisional 
character of the results need to be recognized and kept in mind. 

Summing Up -- The greater part of the available masses of "useful" 
scientific information has been obtained, largely by autonomic analysis 
and is analytical in character. Even the embedded knowledge, though the 
product both of synthetic thought and analytical investigation, bears 
the impress of its analytical origins. The day of autonomic analysis 
is by no means done, though inquiry has entered domains where it is in 
practice far more difficult than it has often been in the past and where 
accordingly more theoretical analysis is required. 

But, demonstrably, the eventual fruit of analysis is the revelation 
of complexity. And for treatment of complexity, with a view to the 
testing of description and even more with a view to the improvement of 












' 




- - ■ ■ ' • 

■ . ; ■■ - . ' - - -r rJr, r*-. ; :: *: vi-" 




■ 




' 








. 

' 












... - 








. 

1 rWfcd • ' ' 

' 













'' 











- 174 - 


theoretical understanding, the available mathematics have not proved 
altogether satisfactory^ One may suppose that new mathematical methods, 
geared to the requirements of synthesis more than to those of analysis, 
would, be helpful, could they be discovered or devised. This probably 
would involve radical departures from the predominantly analytical modes 
and traditions of mathematics, language and thought. The prospects 
therefore are highly problematical. 

V—FURTHER CONCLUSIONS 

This chapter has dealt with two main sets of problems arising out 
of complexity. The first set was considered in section I; the second 
set, in the succeeding three sections. Summarizing paragraphs appear 
at the end of section I and section IV. The reader is now referred 
back to the former, so that one.further point may be considered. 

The structural complexity of scientific information and embedded 
knowledge and of scientific endeavor probably tends to discourage 
individual investigators from undertaking fundamental work, especially 
in breadth as well as depth. And it has already been shown that some 
breadth is unavoidable if the inquiry is. to be in fact fundamental, 
notwithstanding the fact that the achievement of a fundamental break¬ 
through on the farthest frontier, say, of quantum theory would radically 
affect the greater part of modern physics and a large part of theoretical 
chemistry. That is, breadth in attack remains necessary though any success 


It must be remarked that by means of Pauli's exclusion principle 
and its deductive consequences efficient "explanations” have been formulated 
for certain forms of interaction of particles and even, in a way, for the 
"social action” of particles. But, again, the basis of these "explanations” 
is the threshold case of complexity, and. obtaining mathematical solutions 
for cases of greater complexity involves very extended and difficult computation. 
























■ 










. 










1 






- 

























■ 

V 







- 175 - 


would be magnified, in physics, by the degree of coalescence and unifica¬ 
tion already achieved in the physical sciences. 

There are at least three ways in which this adverse tendency may be 
offset.* 

Need For Reviews -- One of them is the preparation and publication of 
more good review papers and books, of a comprehensive sort, to secure 
some compaction of the available information and knowledge. A good deal 
along these lines has been accomplished since the end of the war. The 
task, of course, demands breadth of knowledge and breadth of approach, 
which are fairly rare assets, of snj individual scientist, but it may 
also be undertaken through organized conferences and symposia with 
publication of the deliberations and discussions. The latter approach 
is "old stuff"; but it certainly has become more practicable today than 
ever before in virtue of the improvement of mechanical facilities for 
communication and transportation, and there are general signs of its 
increasing use. 

Whether undertaken by individuals or groups, comprehensive reviews 
must cut across the boundary lines of narrower specialties if they are 
to serve their purpose well. This requires that they should communicate 
effectively to workers in diverse subdivisions. Accordingly, they must 
be presented to a considerable degree in commonly understood language— 
which leads one to the subject of the next chapter of this study. 

Another way in which the adverse tendency may be offset is simply 
by the improvement of fundamental theory or knowledge on the warranted 
assumption that this would secure more compaction and coalescence and 


^ Adverse because of the primary importance of fundamental inquiry 
which'is taken herein as a warranted assumption. 










. 

. ■ 






. 






• • 




. , ' ■ ' 


■■ 

• I 
















■ 






. I 

' 














■ 








- 176 - 


even unification of the structure. However, this is begging the ques¬ 
tion. One must pass on, therefore, to the third way—group research. 

Group Research — This, as it happens, could conceivably offer a 
partial answer to the second main set of problems arising out of com¬ 
plexity, as. well as to the first set. Accordingly, in dealing with it 
one is considering both sets. It must be said at the outset that there 
has been considerable debate concerning the merits and demerits of group 
research. Some of the demerits often cited are probably peculiar to the 


purpose—namely, practical application of fundamental knowledge—for 
which group work has mostly been undertaken in the past, and thus may 
not be inherent disadvantages of the method. This view is partly borne 
out by the many examples, which could be cited, of group attacks on 
fundamental problems which, especially when the group was small or 
consisted of no more than two or three very able investigators, have 
won a large measure of success. 

Weiner has summarized, in the following paragraphs, what has been 
done and what could be done with group research, and has at the same 
time brought out certain of the disadvantages: 

It may be thought that the development of invention from 
a sporadic manifestation of ingenuity to a large and universal 
technique has been solved by the great industrial laboratories, 
and by the employment of the mass attack. This is not so. 

Valuable as the great laboratory is, it is at its best in the 
process of development of ideas already open to inspection, 
and at its worst and least economical in the origin of new 
ideas. That it stood us in such good stead during the war is 
due to the fact that at that time we had a huge inventory of 
past science, not as yet employed for inventive purposes. Al¬ 
ready this inventory is beginning to run low. To replace it, 
we need a range of thought that will really unite the different 
sciences, shared among a group of men who are thoroughly trained, 
each in his own field, but who also possess a competent know¬ 
ledge of adjoining fields. 


No, size is not enough. We need to cultivate fertilit 
thought as we have cultivated efficiency in administration. 


U 


f 


■^Norbert Weiner, The Human Use of Human Beings , pp. 57-8. 











. 

. 

. .. 

■ . ' f . 

. 

•: : ; -r r.r r : 1 ' ‘ t "\ "■ ■ • . 

. 

....... 

. 

. 

- 

. 


• • iv ■ " ' • i 

. 

. t r • ■■ 

' 


• , • . ■ 

■ , • ' ' • ' 

' 

. • 

. 

• • • , . 'V r . : 









Scheele and Sebrell see a danger that data collection may supplant 


creative thinking in group research and that, as a result, the major 
syntheses of thought required for striking advances in science may oc¬ 
cur less frequently if too many competent investigators are involved 

136 

in co-ordinated research. 

Richter considers a choice between "free and design research”, or 
between ’’supporting the man' or the experimental design”, and plumps for 
the former. He adduces in support of his view the fact that in the past 
all but a few of the great discoveries were made by individuals, often 
working' in great isolation. He quotes Maurice Arthus ( Philosophy of 
Scientific Investigation ): 'Indeed it is not in the turmoil of social 
life, not through academic chats nor laboratory gossip that we come to 
see the light, that interpretations become clear, that experiments are 
conceived and conclusions reached. It is through solitary, profound 
and. sustained meditation. In order to make some progress in the ex¬ 
perimental sciences one must meditate a great deal.' Urges Richter: 

"Let us not take men away from their work for many useless conferences. 
Let us give them time to think consecutively. "-^-37 

Others refer to the importance, at least in the past, and the 
recent past, of the accidents of individual genius. On the other hand, 
Whitehead says: ’’....centuries ago mankind had to wait for the rare 
inspirations of genius. Today we can organize first-rate talent for 
research, and scientific theory steadily grows at an increasingly 


13&l. A. Scheele and W. H. Sebrell, "Medical Research and Medical 
Education,” Science . Nov. 16, 1951* P« 51&* 

137curt P. Richter, Science , July 24* 1953* PP* 9,1-2. 





































. 




























’ 














. 


. 


























- 178 - 


rapid rate. A little genius doesn’t hurt; but we are not stationary 
between the flashes."-*-38 

The debate goes on. Perhaps one could conclude as follows: 

Although group research has most, often been devoted to application 
of fundamental knowledge and most of the massive appropriations for it 
now are channelled, in this direction, so that it has, as practised, 
earned the-criticism of many scientists, it can serve the fundamental 
side well. As to members of the team, the requirements are stiff. 

They must be extremely able in their own specialties, and competent 
in broader domains or they will be unable to bridge the gaps between. 

They must also be able to talk and think in common terms. To what 
extent more than two or three men at a time could meet such demands 
is an open question. In any case, one suspects that, in addition, 
their attack must be ’’disorganized" in the sense that it should not be 
strongly directed and designed from without. As in the case of the 
individual worker, the; key to the most promising approach is given by 
the statement: Get a few good scientists and leave them alone. 

Obviously, close communication is essential if they are to achieve 
cross-fertilization or interfructification involving diverse fields of 
inquiry. Mere, again, one comes to questions of communication and 
language. 

But the most vexing problems of complexity in the subjects of sci¬ 
entific investigation are not likely to yield even to such group research 
alone. b r e shall remain largely dependent on the individual efforts of 


13^Alfred North Whitehead, ’’Education and Self-Education," Essays 
in Science and Philosoph y, P . 123 . 























' 






' 

































’ 

. 


' 







exceptional minds which have been nourished by enriched education. 


Better Mathematical Tools — In any form of attack on such problems 
of complexity as were brought out in the preceding two sections, the 
improvement of mathematical tools and methods seems very likely to be 
required. The postwar period has revealed some gains in this direction: 

m 

(1) The analogue computer, by which a mechanical system analogous 
to that under investigation can be set up, complete with devices for 
computing results according to the continuous-variable method of solu¬ 
tion. 

(2) The more flexible and faster digital computer, which, appropri¬ 
ately programmed, can rapidly provide the mathematical solutions of 
problems involving extended arithmetical computation, integration by 
summation, successive approximation, statistical- calculation, and so 
forth. 

( 3 ) The mathematical theory of communication and its offshoots and 
developments. Essentially, this is a statistical method for surmounting 
the difficulty which had been created by acceptance of the view that no 
physical measurement can resolve all the significant information con¬ 
tained in the record of a continuous variable. 

(4) T he feedback principle--illuminating as a concept applied to 
suitable systems; useful for the mathematical treatment of "linear” 
interaction, provided the system is a threshold case of complexity or 
is reduced to that level by simplifying assumptions. 

The literature on all four is large and growing; nothing is to be 
gained by citing any of it here. But two points deserve mention. 

First, none of these new developments seems as yet to get investi¬ 
gators much beyond threshold complexity with respect to systems and the 
testing of description by prediction. 





- 180 - 


Secondly, they are significant, among other things, of a growing 
postwar emphasis on the study of modes of communication and of com¬ 
munication as a key feature of biological and mechanical systems. 


The argument of this chapter and the two preceding it has pointed 


again and again to the increasing importance of communication and of 
effective use of language; twentieth century developments in scientific 
knowledge emphasize the value of reflecting on the structure and meaning 
of language and on linguistic modes of thought. These will be the topics 
of the following chapter. 



_ 











CHAPTER IV 


COMMUNICATION AND LANGUAGE 

The great size and complexity of the whole subject treated in Part 
II of this study made it impracticable, if not actually impossible, to 
follow a continuous line in developing the argument, though the presenta¬ 
tion in its broad outline follows an order derived from a consideration, 
in the introduction to Part II, of the general dynamics of growth. 

As a result, the closely related topics of the present chapter, 
communication and language, flow not only out of the immediately preced¬ 
ing discussion of Chapter III but, even more directly, out of the dis¬ 
cussions of Chapters I and II. At this point, therefore, it seems 
advisable to gather up and in some degree to draw together the threads 
of discourse, broken off at various points in the preceding chapters, 
which lead to the present topics. This will be done almost immediately 
in an introduction to this chapter but first it is necessary to deal 
briefly with two other points: 

(l) The word language, when used in a general sense without ad¬ 
jectival or other descriptive qualification, is to be taken to mean 
any or all currencies used in the exchange, or transmission, of inform¬ 
ation, i.e., words, numbers, the symbols of mathematics and logic, 
graphs, pictures, diagrams. Notice will be given of any major change 
in this specification. Minor shifts in meaning should be clear from 
context. 

(2-) The perception of structure and the observation of events in 
systems of the natural world, whether carried out by experiment or by 
other means, remain essential and indispensable to the conduct of 














■ 




• , • ■ ■■ ' ■ • 


■ 

■ 

. 










. 

. ' 

. :f , 














■ 


■ 








■ 






■ • 






















. 


. 







- 182 - 


scientific investigation--to the pursuit of scientific knowledge. This 
must be kept in mind while the importance of language and of linguistic 
and semantic considerations, to the whole scientific enterprise, is be¬ 
ing emphasized repeatedly in the present chapter. The role of observa¬ 
tion (including perception) in the generation and in the testing of 
scientific description has already been indicated (pp. 156-7 and p. 162 
et . seq .) but it will receive further discussion in the context of 
the present discussion and in the consideration of education for the 
advancement of scientific knowledge. 

Now, to pick up some threads.... 

INTRODUCTION 

The introduction to Chapter I began, it may be recalled, with this 
statement: 

”A clear appreciation of the significance of these effects and 
resultant problems requires at the outset a recognition of the impor¬ 
tance of intercommunication in scientific endeavor.” 

The ’’effects” and”problems” are those consequent upon the growth 
of scientific (including technical) information. 

That introduction continued with some testimony from scientists 
as to the importance of intercommunication, and concluded with this 
statement among others: ’’....the basic currency of the exchange (of 
information) is printed language, whether verbal, mathematical or 
graphical, and the transactions are carried out chiefly by means of 
primary publication...” 

The effects and problems due to volumetric growth of information 
were discussed in Chapter I. The general effect of growth may be 
described as the dwarfing of the capacity of the single mind by the 
















. • ' I--'.-' ‘ • - ' ' ' ■! 










' 




' 


• • 





■ 

■ 

• • ■ it i •, 

' 










• . ■ 


1 


: '. ’ 




■ 

■ 


' 

' 




. ; - 

■ 








.1. r , 




' t 


' 

. . . . ' ’ • 

‘ 

' 



















- 183 - 


output of the multitude. The essence of the difficulty lies in (pp. 76-7) 
"...the sheer abundance of primary information... slowing down (and ob¬ 
structing) the circulation (of information) and reducing intercommunica¬ 
tion..." The disparity between the individual’s capacity and the 
multitude's output, which continues to increase, clearly demands the 
improvement of communication between minds, which involves, for one 
thing, better command of language. 

In summarizing the conclusions of Ch. I (pp. 101-2-3) four ways 
of offsetting the adverse effects of the growth were put forward. The 
two most immediately practicable and useful are: bringing about better 
writing of papers and teaching investigators to make better use of the 
literature in its present form.^ The first obviously requires better 
command of language. The second is a matter of improving the means of 
getting into effective communication, both current and retrospective, 
with published information; it also demands better command of language, 
for more efficient reading, or scanning, and to grasp what is read more 
quickly and firmly. 

"...mankind has always sought--more or less out of necessity--to 
escape the disparity...(noted above)...by increasing specialization..." 
This last was the subject of Chapter II. In summarizing (pp.122-3-4), 
the writer concluded that specialized ccncentration of inquiry and of 


^The other two are: rationalizing primary publication and the 
i literature; mechanizing libraries. For details, refer back to "2.", 
pp. 90-93, and "3.", pp. 93-100. For the important relation to such 
, enterprises of linguistic precision, standardization of terminology 
and speech analysis, see also, for example. Centre for Scientific Aids 
to Learning, M. I. T., Interim Report . Ch. Ill, pp. 39-40, 51-2. 


















-18U- 


inventiveness undoubtedly has greatly increased scientific knowledge and 
therefore has been justified in the event, as long as it has been com¬ 
plemented by efficient intercommunication. As specialization increases, 
intercommunication must become more efficient. But unification and 
coalescence of traditional divisions of scientific knowledge, partly 
due to specialized concentration, demand of the investigator greater 
breadth of information and knowledge, which not only adds to the load 
on him but makes the improvement of communication all the more necessary. 

Better communication and better command of language also are needed 
to offset or to overcome such effects of specialization as individual 
ignorance (comparatively speaking), narrowing of vision, approach to 
the point of diminishing returns, neglect of pertinent information 
outside the investigator* s specialty, the growth of specialized dialects. 
They are needed, too, to prevent the reduction of, or better still to 
increase cross-fertilization and inter-fructification, despite increas¬ 
ing specialization (pp. 123 -U)* 

The implication of subsection 6. (p. 12U), which is relevant to this 
chapter, will be discussed further on; so also for the implications of 
sections II, III and IV of Chapter III. 

Its first section dealt with the increasing complexity of the 
structure of information and of endeavor—"an obstruction to the inter¬ 
communication so vital in scientific investigation, the situation 
worsening as the complexity increases." (p. 129). This complexity also 
tends (p. 17U) to discourage individual investigators from undertaking 
fundamental work, especially in breadth as well as depth; and breadth of 
attack is needed, as well as concentration. This adverse tendency may 






' 

. • I : t J- ' . ir ri f 

, 

. 

I 






r : • ' -o '• •• ■ ‘idl 








< ' t . ' r 

r 

? 1 

^ ’ " ' ' \ C i ^ ; ' ■ 

t . -V ; .. , 

* 

t - * 

* t, 


. . 


















, 










- 185 - 


be offset in part by the publication of more good reviews of a comprehen¬ 
sive kind, which require not only wide knowledge but great facility with 
common language; by conferences and symposia, involving efficient inter¬ 
communication by means of fairly common language; and by team or group 
research, which demands close and accurate communication. (See p. 1?8). 

So much, then, for picking up some of the threads and drawing the 
more obvious inferences to which they lead. Much has been said about 
the importance of intercommunication; it can hardly be over-emphasized. 

It will be given further emphasis, explicity or implicitly, in what 
follows. But the writer intends now to proceed with the exposition of 
this chapter from the standpoint of the importance of better command of 
language and with respect to the linguistic requirements of fundamental 
knowledge and inquiry. This will indicate part of the educational import 
of many of the conclusions reached in the present part of the study. 

I—LANGUAGE IN COMMUNICATION 

At a joint conference of the physics, engineering and psychology 
sections of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, 
during the association annual meeting in 1950, R. 0. Kapp of London 
University pointed out that reading, writing, listening and talking 
are now among the most important tools of science. Their efficiency, 
he continued, must be no lower than that of laboratory equipment. 

Poor presentation leads to waste of time and ineffectual work. There 
is, he emphasized, a need for a new technique of good exposition of 
specialist information. This requires special teaching.-^ 


xhe last two points will be considered further in the next sec¬ 
tion of this chapter. 





- 186 - 


As to reading, what has already been said in this study about the 
ever-growing difficulty of keeping up with masses of current informa¬ 
tion, in the strictly limited reading time available to the working 
scientist, makes it abundantly clear that every effort to increase the 
capacity to read rapidly and retentively will be well worthwhile. This 
is one way of mitigating the effects of the volumetric growth of pub¬ 
lished information. Actually, most investigators find themselves com¬ 
pelled to learn to read with selective intensity, to skim intelligently, 
a procedure which has its dangers but which can, with experience and 
care, be used to advantage. It must be remembered, of course, that the 
effectiveness of this sort of reading is largely dependent on the quality 
and extent of the reader’s fund of knowledge. 

What is more, the student must develop the art of learning by him¬ 
self from books, because he will have to acquire in this way a great 
deal more science and technology than can be included in his formal 
training. Wider mastery of this art, highly dependent on efficient 
reading, would permit the shortening of syllabuses now overcrowded.*^9 
Alternatively, it would permit the elimination of material better left 
to individual or to later learning and its replacement by more essential 
material. This would help in meeting the educational problem of cover¬ 
age, created by the growth. 

The need for good exposition on paper, to improve the circulation 
of information, was stressed throughout Chapter I. The individual 
investigator's need of a mastery of this art is pointed up by the 
estimate that 30 percent of research is the idea, 30 percent 


139Wing Cmdr. T. R. Cave-Browne-Cave, on "The Young Engineer”, 
annual meeting British Association, Nature, Sept. 11, 1%-S, p. 402. 

















■ 

' 






■ 

■ 



. 








■ ■■ 


... ■ ■: . r . " ' 1 ■ : ' • :: 




' 


' 




. • 


• • • :t ‘ ■ , J ’ . ' ' ' ' ■' ’ ‘ ' *" 

' 


. ■ I. 


• ■ ' ' 






■ t 
























- 187 - 


the experimental work and l±0 percent the actual writing up,^ Poor 
expositors will waste not only their own time but the time of many 
others. But they also waste good ideas; for the demands on the read¬ 
ing time of scientific workers are such that ideas badly expressed are 
often bypassed or ignored, even when they have intrinsic merits 
The educational implications are clear, though it would not do to foster 
in students* minds the belief that thoughts clothed in difficult or even 
inadequate language should be passed up for that reason alone. 

The influential effect of lucid writing, as well as the insignifi¬ 
cance of poor lecturing, is illustrated by the experience of Max Planck, 
the discoverer of the quantum of action. He received lectures from 
Helmholtz and Kirchhoff but, despite the eminence of these scientists, 
found their oral output dry, monotonous, boring and too authoritarian. 
’As a consequence, ' recalled Planck many years after, *we did not learn 
very much, because one only learns by asking questions.* He was able 
to fulfill his desire for scientific knowledge only by reading on sub- 

Lj 

jects of interest to him and these happened to be connected with the 
principle of conservation of energy. "He found the papers of Rudolph 
Clausius, written in lucid understandable language. Their illuminating 
clarity impressed him so tremendously that he became enthusiastically 
absorbed in their serious study. go he was led to what has turned 


■^^E. Marsden, Royal Society, op . cit .. 1948, p. 18. 
"^"Cave-Browne-Cave, ibid . 

■^Walter C. Alvarez, cited by Walter J. Murphy in C. 
Sept. 19, 1949, p. 2681. 


and E. News . 


^^Walter Meissner, Science . Jan. 26, 1951* 








' 

• ■ E 

■ 

. a.; ' 


' 

' 
















. 

' 

1 



’ 

, • , _ ,• . r ‘V>~> ' 

' 

! 

" . •• H 

• • r • 1 ' • •• i ■ ‘ ' i - . " 1 ' ' ’ 

■ * • !. t ••• !•••> . i'qf ’ ! 

. 























- 188 - 


out to be the most influential discovery in physics in this century. 

The want of clarity and brevity in many papers and the dearth of 
lucidity and style in larger expositions, such as reviews and books, 
have been repeatedly deplored since the end of the last war, especially 
by British scientists.144*145*146 The Royal Society conference, 1948, 
concluded that many defects of scientific periodicals and delays in 
publication are due to inadequate preparation of manuscripts. The 
conference therefore invited the society, in conjunction with other 
learned bodies, "to initiate a vigorous and sustained program designed 
to improve the preparation of papers".This was one of the main 
recommendations of the conference. The program, inviting appropriate 
action by teachers, laboratory directors, senior investigators and 
journal editors, was regarded as one of the few evident practicable 
means of offsetting the adverse effects of volumetric growth. 

The conference also recommended the production of more review 
papers and books, of critical, general and specialist sorts, made 
informative for non-specialists, where necessary, by clear exposi¬ 
tion and by generalized introductions and conclusions.*^ 

The foregoing and other considerations based on preceding chapters 
lead to emphasis on the reciprocal relation of clear exposition and 


-*-44R 0 yal Society, op. git . 1948. 

-*-^-5sir Henry Dale, Advancement of Science . January, 1948, p. 311. 

146 e . n# 

da C. Andrade, Proceedings . Royal Society of London, 
Series B, Oct. 19, 1949, pp. 331-2. 

-^TRoyal Society, op. cit .. 1948, pp. 197-8. 

12 » 8 Ibi d. T p. 201. 







' 


• - 

. • • • ' 

•• ' ' ■ ■ • 

. ' ■ ' 

' 

• ■ • , • 




• 








• 









■ 







■ 


• 

' 


- 


. 



■ 

‘ 

■ 

■ 


























- 189 - 


clear thinking and on the need and value of more plain English in sci¬ 
entific and technical communications—the wording of some of these 
communications has been variously described as fuzzy, muddy, emetic. 
Certain aspects of the relation between language and thought will be 
discussed in section III, below, and plain English in section VI. But 
first: a look at Kapp's ideas, mentioned on p. 185, above. 

II--ART OF PRESENTATION 

For reasons indicated in Chapter II and for reasons obvious to 
anyone who has taken a second look at a modern enterprise involving 
the application of scientific and technical knowledge, the communica¬ 
tion of scientific and technical information demands not only great 
care in presentation, but translation of special terms into language 
which can be understood by specialists in other fields and by those 
who, for want of a better term, may be called laymen. The person to 
whom the information is addressed may be a scientist or an engineer in 
another field; he may be an executive specializing in management without 
any scientific or technical training; he may be a shareholder or an 
“ordinary citizen” and in either case a layman in the sense that he is 
not a trained specialist in the subject being presented. Nearly every- 
one is, more or less, a specialist in one thing nowadays, and a non¬ 
specialist in practically everything else; hence the need for transla¬ 
tion and also for effective presentation. 

No doubt all this is obvious. But the task is by no means a simple 
or easy one. There are many pitfalls. 

For instance, science and technology often adopt terms of everyday 
speech for the statement of highly technical ideas; in such circumstances. 











• • ' or ' : : : ' 

" 

' - 










■ 




■ 

' ' 






. 

’ 




' 






. 










■ 

■ 

' 

■ 

■ 

■ 






- 190 - 


the terms may be used in very special ways and given special meanings 
of extreme refinement and precision; when an attempt then is made to 
devote the same terms to the presentation of the same technical ideas 

to laymen, the refinement and precision may be lost and the lay audience 

A 

may get a confused and mistaken conception of the ideas. This is 
exemplified by much that has been written about "relativity' 1 for popular 
consumption. (Einstein, himself, The Theory of Relativity , and Einstein 
and Infeld, The Evolution of Physics , may well have given the most 
dependable accounts.) 

The best treatment of the whole matter of presenting, and trans¬ 
lating, technical information, which has been located by the writer, is 
that of Kapp.At the outset, in a preface, Kapp emphasizes the dif¬ 
ficulty of mastering the art of presentation? 

I encountered a good deal of misapprehension as to what 
was required. I was told, for instance, that the whole of 
the ground ought to be covered -at school. I was also advised 
to abandon the idea of a special course in presentation and, 
instead, to use the laboratory reports as basis for training 
the students in the art of exposition, going over each student's 
report with him "sentence by sentence".' 

These suggestions revealed a serious under-estimation of 
the magnitude of the problems that the executive engineer or 
scientist has to solve in the course of his professional work 
when he is presenting technical information or reasoned argument. 


^The writer is frequently struggling with this difficulty in these 
pages, as he is addressing himself to laymen, including students, as 
well as to specialists. In all probability, he has not avoided the 
pitfalls entirely in sections of the study involving the presentation 
of technical ideas. 

1A9r. o. Kapp, The Presentation of Technical Information . 1948; 
at the time he was dean of engineering at University of London and 
Pender Professor of Engineering at University College; the book is 
based on four public lectures. 

















' 





■ ■ ■ ■■■ ■ i'u' : '£ " ; . 

. • 

1 . '• •• ' _ ' t 




' 


' 




■ 




. . • ' • 

■ ., •. 


, 






' • 




■ 


. 










’ ' - r ’ - 

. J . 


. • 








. 






■ > 


■ ’ ' 

' 

■ ■ ' ’ ‘ 

' 






' 
















r : ' • 


. 




, 




- 191 - 


These problems simply do not arise in such elementary factual 
statements as are contained in a student's laboratory reports. 

They are too advanced for the school curriculum. They are not 
problems in grammar and syntax. They are rarely problems in 
literary style. They are more often problems in logic and 
psychology. Teach a man to think clearly, and he is likely 
to express himself clearly; teach him to think about the per¬ 
son addressed, and he will have learnt the first lesson in 
the art of conveying information effectively from mind to 
mind. But teach him only how to turn out well constructed 
sentences and he may fail badly in the art of exposition. ^ 

Kapp notes that "the need for improvement in the standard of pre¬ 
sentation" has long been felt and has been "expressed with some insist¬ 
ence during recent years" by a number of learned societies in Britain. 
This also is true of the United States, though British scientists and 

engineers may have been more insistent until the last few years of the 
ik. t 

postwar period. He cites professional opinions as to the need for a 
broader base to the training of scientists and engineers—which demands 
greater mastery in the use of language. Among the broadening subjects, 
"what is generally called English" but what Kapp prefers to call "The 
Presentation of Technical Information" must, he holds, be given high 
priority. 

He emphasizes two points already noted herein? 

(l) "Talk and paper are, in these days, among the engineer's most 
important tools. He must learn to handle them well."^-52 


^OlbicL, Preface pp. ix-x. 

1 Ibid.., p. 1. 

^This was written in mid-1956. 
3-5 2 Ibid .. p. 5. 













, 

. 

. ' 

: ' 

■ 

• • ' 

■ 

■ • 


' . 



' ■' . ■ ■ • - 


6 '' ■ • ' • 

. - ... 


. 





■ ■ 



• , . • n 



' 

' 




. '.!' ■ bm 

• • . ■ ■ • ' ' . • r 

. 

i' ■ i r . v'f 




- 192 - 


(2) "The bad expositor, unless he has something unique and indis¬ 
pensable to offer in which case he has his readers at his mercy, may be 
a big producer and yet convey little to others. Quarrying in his mine 
is too hard. This is all too common. Well composed contributions to 

learned societies are all too rare.Those who neglect the problems 

of presentation will be neglected. "^53 

What is required for the presentation of technical information he 
calls "Functional English"—"English that any writer uses who expresses 
his meaning clearly and without ambiguity; who selects every item and 
places every sentence and every word so that it will meet the function 
assigned to it...." This "cannot be achieved without hard work. It 
requires of the writer many qualities, not the least of which are 
craftsmanship and clear thinking. Without training and practice a 
person can no more write good Functional English than play the violin.... 

The problems are too advanced for the school curriculum. Many of them 
can only be properly appreciated by the mature mind of the post-gradu- 
ate." 15 ^ 

Kapp is not alone, today, in these views. If they be accepted,then 
the study of presentation should continue throughout university, and be 
emphasized in any period of postgraduate studies, or in default of the 
latter, in the initial period of professional endeavor. This is to speak, 
in every case, of formal application to the task, with teaching or coaching 
if at all possible. Thorough study of English (or the appropriate vernacular) 


^•^ Ibid ., p. 6. 
-*-5^ Ibid .. pp.7-8. 








. 


' 






. 
















' 


b ' r ~ if 






- ■ ■ • : : / ■■ • 

■ ‘ 




■ 






. 

















- 193 - 


and of language generally is, of course, indispensable to lay a founda¬ 
tion for learning the especially difficult art defined by Kapp. 

But it is not only the presentation of technical information which 
demands a high-level mastery of clarity and precision in language and 
in thought. This is essential, at the same time, to gain command of the 
fundamental formulations or descriptions which are the centres of power 
and influence in the scientific realm. 

Ill—FUNDAMENTAL FORMULATIONS 

Such grand central stations in the networks of scientific knowledge 
are exemplified by the theories of relativity, of mechanics and thermo¬ 
dynamics and electrodynamics whether classical or quantum,of genetics 
and other parts of the modern synthesis of evolution that have been 
ordered in highly general and abstract terms, of chemical valency and 
other basic aspects of chemical processes, and by the sets of biochemical 
or physiological or engineering principles in which the degree of 
empiricism has been greatly reduced and the power of generality has been 
to a very considerable extent obtained. These hold each network together 
and dominate the pattern in any coherent part of it. They give access 
to many lines of development. The traffic on these lines proceeds in 
both directions. Growth at the end points may alter the character of 
the central station while changes in its make-up may decisively affect 
the nature and the direction of the development on any line or branch. 

New lines and stations may be generated from the old or spring up in¬ 
dependently to merge, perhaps, with the old network after some time; 
and new developments may take over control of the whole network. 

Hence the importance and the value of gaining command of the central 
stations. Hence also the need to avoid becoming permanently enslaved by 

















' 













' 


' 







‘ 

. 































’ 






' 











■ 






- 194 - 


their machinery; it may have to be modified or superseded, in a particular 
case, as investigation proceeds. 

But it would not be advisable to carry this rough and ready metaphor 
farther, for fear of straining it to the breaking point. It has sufficed, 
one would hope, to suggest some general reasons for gaining command of 
fundamental formulations or descriptions. More specific reasons, relevant 
to the argument in the present part of this study, can be derived from 
preceding chapters. Thus: 

1. This vital kind or part of scientific knowledge, being compact 
and having the power of generality, offers the best prospects of off¬ 
setting that dwarfing of the single mind which is the chief general 
effect of volumetric growth of information. (Ch. I). 

2. Likewise for partially escaping the prison-houses of specializa¬ 
tion and the vicious cycle of growth-specialization-more growth-narrower 
specialization and so on. (Ch. II, p. 124) • 

3. Bronowski may draw the long bow when he declares that “today 
almost all research is unitary and its field of inquiry is as wide as 
our experience"; but surely the more the investigator must reckon with 
interaction and complexity, with a multiplicity or interacting variables 
often differing in kind, the more he must widen his field of inquiry and 
broaden the scope of his knowledge and understanding (Ch. Ill, Sec's. II, 
III). These objectives, he can hardly hope to attain by laboring through 
the details of the numerous branch lines of a network, much less through 
those of numerous networks. Although many of these details must be 
studied in the course of learning, and the learning process is likely 

to be hard and long, he must strike primarily for the centres of power 
and influence—the fundamental formulations. 














. 





■ 








. 




■ ■ 






. 





' ' 












. 


















■ 

. 





. 




• . 















- 








- 195 - 


In any major division of a network, he may well be able to make his 
educational approach along a single important branch line; once he has 
reached the fundamental centre he will be in a position to fan out in 
other directions and grasp the larger scene. So also for thewhole of a 
network. 

In the physical sciences, for instance, a firm grasp of quantum 
theory may.be expected, in accordance with the degree of coalescence it 
has brought about, to put an able investigator in touch with a very 
large part of the basic network, and to place him in a strategic posi¬ 
tion to launch a potentially significant inquiry at some end point. 

This is a choice example, to be sure, but other regions of the sci¬ 
entific domain admit of the same form of educational attack even if the 
strength of position to be gained is much less. 

4. Before presenting the next reason, it seems desirable to recall 
certain points made in the preceding chapter, especially in Sec. IV. 
Scientific description is generated by a combination of analysis and 
synthesis (p. 156). Most of the fundamental descriptionsnow available, 
and more especially their empirical bases, have been obtained largely 
by means of the strategy of analytical subdivision (157). Bor its ex¬ 
tensive use there are good reasons (157-62). But its application is 
becoming increasingly difficult in the face of the necessity of reckon¬ 
ing more and more with interaction and complexity; and just where it 
has been most successful, in atomic and muclear physics, there now is 
some doubt as to whether it is founded on a valid conception of the 
structure under investigation (159). let the need for it seems in¬ 
escapable (for human minds)—(166-73). 

This situation appears to demand more and better theoretical 







- 196 - 


analysis (173), new mathematical methods geared more effectively to the 
requirements of synthesis (174), radical departures from traditional 
modes of thought (174), and fresh and daring conceptual thinking.^55 

These views, if they should be valid, emphasize further and from 
a somewhat different standpoint the importance of gaining command of 
fundamental formulations; for the investigator surely needs a strategic¬ 
ally located base of operations in the known before he can set off into 
the unknown with some hope of success. Of course, he must avoid, at the 
same time, becoming comfortably enslaved by the very virtues and advant¬ 
ages of the base. 

This applies especially to fundamental physics and particularly to 
the physics of the microcosm, but also to the chemistry of the microcosm. 
It applies also to biochemical and astronomical systems insofar as their 
descriptions have been formulated with fundamental generality. (Insofar 
as this is not the case, one may suppose that the systems are less amen¬ 
able to investigation by analytical subdivision than systems of the 
physical microcosm and/or that theory is comparatively less well ad¬ 
vanced.) 

None of the statements made so far in this section should be mis¬ 
construed as denying the vital importance, indeed the essentiality, of 
obtaining empirical information by observation and where possible by 
experiment; i ,e. . the necessity of establishing and maintaining empirical 
communication with the natural world. After all, this is required to 
obtain data and to test theory by prediction; and fresh data may at any 
time contradict and thus invalidate a theory or reduce it to the status 
of a first approximation. 


155see, for example, Vannevar Bush, '‘For Man To Know," The Atlantic . 

August, 1955, P. 31. 







- 197 - 


For that matter, there is, in strong emphasis on the study and the 
mastery of fundamental description, the danger that the character of 
the empirical information obtained by further inquiry may be narrowly 
predetermined by the established description. This danger is probably 
the greater, the more mature and encompassing is the description. But 
the possibility of escaping or minimizing the danger of such imprison¬ 
ment lies primarily in departures and perhaps especially in radical 
departures from well-travelled lines of thought; and such ventures into 
the unknown must still be launched from the strategic bases in the known 
which are provided by fundamental descriptions. 

Now, as repeatedly noted, these descriptions or formulations, con¬ 
sisting of laws and principles and of the sets of laws and principles 
known as theories, are founded on and tested by the data of experience. 
However, in the course of the construction of the description, a process 
which actually begins before the empirical phase of the inquiry is under¬ 
taken, the data are cast in the mould of conceptual thought and, eventually, 
submerged in the generality of its form. This form is built of symbols— 
those of verbal language, mathematics and logic, often including, say 
under the heading of mathematics, those of graphic representation, and 
those peculiar to regions of the scientific domain, such as the symbols 
of chemical formulae. So, to gain command of fundamental description, 
the investigator or student must serve a hard, apprenticeship in linguistic 
workshops. The languages to be mastered, whether one thinks of them as 
verbal, mathematical, logical, graphical, or regards them as peculiar to 
particular divisions and subdivisions of scientific knowledge, are highly 
specialized, in terms and in meanings. They also are highly precise. 

They are often relatively esoteric. The task of mastering them is, 


therefore, difficult. 




- 198 - 


It is partly, in some cases at least, a separable task, partly one 
which must be managed while command of fundamental description, and all 
that goes with it, is being acquired. The situation varies in these 
respects. But it does not seem too much to say, in any case, that the 
study of language and of specialized languages constitutes the greater 
part of the whole enterprise of learning in fundamental science. After 
all, language (to speak generally of it, once again) is the chief instru¬ 
ment of rational thought and the main vehicle of its final expression, 
though thought doubtless proceeds in less specific terms, at times, in 
many minds. 

One may distinguish from the dialects more or less peculiar to sci¬ 
entific specialties two main forms of language -which are in common use 
and which cut across all boundaries. They are the verbal and the 
mathematical, if, for the sake of simplification, one includes in the 
second category both the symbol systems of logic, and graphical 
representation. The writer proposes to consider next certain aspects 
of the study of mathematics—which is usually regarded both as the 
language of science and as a science—in relation to the objective of 
mastering fundamental description. 

IV - -MATHEMATICS 

There should be no need to emphasize the paramount importance of 
this subject in education for scientific work. But let Bell speak on 
the point: 

....the logical apparatus used in mathematics is incom¬ 
parably more varied, more subtle and more creative of new 












. fc . ':•••• " ••• 0 Of .Hi: 










. 
















■ 

. 
























. ‘ - • 

















'■ 

.r ' - 


















- 199 - 


combinations than that associated with any other field of 
knowledge...(mathematics is) the most efficacious method 
yet devised for human reasoning about the results of sci¬ 
entific observations and experiment.^56 

Today, in general, the investigator needs both a wider knowledge 
of mathematics and, for theoretical work at any rate, a better command 
of the mathematics essential to his endeavors. 

These two points are demonstrable in the case of physics. 

There was a time, now long past, when a working knowledge of the 
infinitesimal calculus sufficed for nearly all practical, and even for 
most theoretical purposes. This does not deny that statistical mechanics 
and thermodynamics, say, required a knowledge of the mathematics of prob¬ 
ability. But, in most cases, the investigator able to handle linear 
differential equations—still, to be sure, a happy hunting ground of 
physical scientists—and closely related mathematical modes, as well 
as ordinary algebra and Euclidean geometry, was pretty well equipped 
for his job. 

Nowadays, if he -would enter, say, the theoretical precincts of 
relativity, he will also need some knowledge of the calculus of tensors 
and of non-Euclidean geometry. Quantum theory demands, at a minimum, 
both the "calculus” and "probability”; but it also is expressed in the 
terms of the algebra of matrices and in those of the geometry of Hilbert 
spaces. Consider,then, the breadth and variety of mathematical knowledge 
required to delve deeply into both relativity and quantum theory. 

As to better command, it seems enough to note that it is required 
by the refinement of theory, the greater subtlety of ideas, the increas¬ 
ing diffuseness of conceptual schemes and the elaboration of mathematical 


156®. t. Bell, The Development of Mathematics . p. 546. 









' 












. 

. 






















. 

«’ 


. 

. 

. 

' 

. 

• ' 1 r ‘ ■' . ' * • ' \V' 





















- 200 - 


formalism which characterize twentieth century physics. It is made all 
the more necessary also by greater difficulties in observation and 
measurement, some of a novel sort, and by the more extended and tenuous 
nature of the linkage in chains of evidence. 

The case also could be illustrated in terms of chemical theory of 
the microcosm but what seems more significant for the future is the 
ever growing use of mathematics in the biological sciences. Witness, 
for example, how essential in the modern synthesis of evolution are 
the highly mathematical studies of mutation, natural selection and 
related matters whichviere made by R. A. Fisher, J. B. S. Haldane and 
Sewall Wright. In the early period after Darwin, theory of evolution 
was mostly a compound expression of words and ideas with very little 
mathematics, but the refinement and improvement of the theory, or, 
rather, of the theoretical elements of the synthesis, has demanded 
much more use of mathematical modes of reasoning and forms of expres¬ 
sion. It is, of course, generally regarded as an advance, as a sign 
of progress toward maturity, when theory is made more mathematical, or 
more abstract in form and more generalized in meaning. It may there¬ 
fore be supposed that the mathematical requirements of investigation 
in the biological sciences will grow in the future. 

The point of the importance of mastering mathematics is further 
emphasized, in rather special way, by the view that the multiplying 
problems of complexity will demand new mathematical methods geared 
more effectively to the requirements of synthesis.^ The writer 


*See pages 17k and 196, above, and Bush loc . cit. Some indirect 
support for this view comes from the National Science Foundation of the 
United States, which reports an urgent need for more or new pure mathe¬ 
matics. 




’ 

. 


. 

. • 




■ 

av ' - • 1; ' • 








. 

. 






- 

V" 

, 






- 

. 




. 










' 


' 




' 




■ 

• • 

1 









- 201 - 


envisions here rather radical departures from present modes but there 
also is, because of complexity and for other reasons, a continuing need 
for improvements in existing methods and tools for the application of 
mathematics to scientific investigations. Some gains in this direction 
have been made during the postwar period, as witness the mathematical 
theory of communication, operations analysis and the new computing ma¬ 
chinery.^ 

Perhaps the foregoing statements could be summed up by saying that 
the growth of scientific knowledge is dependent, for one thing, on the 
growth of mathematics--the most '’efficacious” medium of scientific 
thought. It is well to remember, however, that the relationship is 
reciprocal: according to experience, as in the case of quantum theory, 
for example, the growth of mathematics is dependent, for one thing, on 
the growth of scientific knowledge. So also for fundamental theory, on 
the one hand, and applied science or technology, on the other; growth 
in one stimulates growth in the other in many cases. 

As a wider and a better knowledge of mathematics comes to be needed 
for scientific investigation, particularly where fundamental theory is 
involved, the task of learning in mathematics becomes greater and more 
demanding. It may be granted at once that a student bent on becoming a 
scientific investigator cannot undertake, in the time available for his 
formal education, to invade the realm of mathematics both on as broad a 
front and to as great a depth as the student (a rare bird, indeed) who 
I proposes to specialize in mathematics itself. But the latter does not 

ii 

See pp. 179-80, above. 































t 






. 








> 

. 

. 








- 202 - 


really specialize in mathematics as a whole; the subject has long since 
grown far too big for that; indeed, in total and in major divisions, 
mathematical information and knowledge, and mathematical endeavor, 
reveal the familiar features of growth--increase in volume, multiplica¬ 
tion of branches, increasing specialization, coalescence of major divi¬ 
sions at fundamental levels, and increasing complexity. What the student 
of mathematics, per se . usually does, after making an initial approach on 
a fairly broad front, is to specialize increasingly, though after he has 
completed his formal education and practised his profession for some 
time he may broaden out again. The future scientific investigator, 
unfortunately, cannot always follow a similar procedure; nowadays, at 
any rate, in such a region as fundamental physics, he may be more im¬ 
mediately faced both with a need for breadth and variety and with a 
need for specialized depth, in his knowledge of mathematics. And, the 
formal learning time which he can devote to mathematics being limited, 
he is likely to find a choice of emphasis on one need or the other in¬ 
escapable . 

Here, as in most other subjects, one is confronted with the problem 
of how best to secure both breadth and depth, or with the question of 

| what would be the best combination of studies in both dimensions, within 

| ■ 

the limits of educational time. 

A generalized solution for this distressing educational problem 
will be proposed and discussed in the next- part of this thesis. 

At the present stage, and in this section, the final, double- 
| barreled point w r hich the writer wishes to make is that verbal language 
j plays a vital part in mathematics and that care and precision in the 
use of such language is essential to the study of mathematics, partic- 
! ularly at advanced levels and especially when the abstract approach to. 








- 203 - 


or attack on, the subject is chosen. This, notwithstanding the funda¬ 
mental roles of number and form and the increasing use of logical 
symbolism.^ Thus, mastery of verbal language, of the vernacular tongue, 
is required of the student of science for yet another reason, though 
usage in mathematics is highly specialized and abstract, as it is in 
scientific description. 

The need for care and precision in the use of words, in both science 
and mathematics, has been given fresh point during the recent decades by 
the realization that serious errors of thought and fresh ideas of great 
significance may long escape notice, because they are the prisoners of 
habit and custom within the structure of the vernacular tongue. These 
matters of semantics or linguistics deserve some discussion when the 
importance of verbal language is being shown and repeatedly stressed, 
as it is in this chapter. 

■ V—SEMANTIC CONSIDERATIONS 
* 

There are various opinions as to where the power of speech and 
verbal language should be ranked in any postulated heirarchy of the 
distinguishing characteristics of mankind.^57,15^jl59 s l60,l6l 


*The value of the abstract approach, at educational levels where 
the student can manage it, will be briefly considered in Part III. The 
advantages claimed for it are somewhat similar to those the writer would 
claim for an approach to scientific knowledge which is designed to get 
to fundamental formulations as soon as possible. 


■^Ralph Linton, The Tree of Culture , p. 8. 

^■^Carleton S. Coon, The Story of Man . p. 19. 

1 ^Kenneth P. Oakley, A History of Technology . Vol. I, pp. 18-19. 
■^^A. Somme rfelt, ibid .. p. 89, p. 105. 

J. Berrill, Man ' s Emerging Mind . p. 86. 












. 

. 

' 














' 




















- 204 - 


matter—the two stand high in any listing of the five or six character¬ 
istics; and verbal language is the main vehicle of human thought and of 
its transmission. Unfortunately, words are not only valuable servants 
of the mind but dangerous masters. Given full sway, they are likely to 
imprison the mind in a particular scheme of perception or to bind thought 
with particular conceptions and patterns of ideas. Raised on a verbal 
diet, the uncritical mind may learn to see the world only as others have 
seen it. 

It is one of the merits of scientific inquiry, that it has developed 
two ways of escaping imprisonment by words: mathematics (including 
symbolic logic) and reference to experience (experiment, observation, 
etc.). But these have made possible only a limited degree of freedom. 

Mathematics may be, in a sense, the science of number yet it depends 
heavily on words for fundamental argument and description; even the 
abstract language of logical symbolism rests on a scheme of verbal 
"referents". 

Reference to experience is only one main aspect of scientific in¬ 
quiry, and the other main aspect—conceptual thought--is very largely 
carried on in verbal terms, though also in terms of non-verbal form and 
imagery. 

Thus, scientific inquiry and scientific thought remain largely 
bound by the structure of verbal language and the patterns of ideas 
which have been built into its structure. For that matter, they are 
partly bound by the structure and the patterns of ideas of any and every 
language, or symbol system, or which they make use, though the degree of 
freedom is increased when the degree of abstraction is increased, as in 
























' 










. 

























. 








. 








, 




■ 













. 
















- 









- 205 - 


the symbol systems of mathematics and logic.^ 

To recognize that we are thus bound is, however, a big step in the 
direction of still greater freedom, and this recognition has come to 
flower in mathematics itself during the past 100 years or so and in 
scientific inquiry more generally, as well as in philosophy, during 
the present century. Two illustrative landmarks in the process of 
emancipation may be mentioned. 

First, in mathematics, there was the almost simultaneous, yet in¬ 
dependent, conception of non-Suclidean geometry by Lobatchevski, Bolyai 
and Gauss early in the second quarter of the nineteenth century. 

With considerable over-simplification, one may regard this conception 
as involving an escape from the prison-house of the term axiom , re¬ 
garded as meaning self-evident truth, through the gateway of the term 
assumption or the term postulate . into far wider or entirely new fields 
where mathematical creation might well be limited only by the capacity 

i 

of the imagination and the scope of deductive reasoning. 


%n the greater part of mathematics, thought is bound by the tradi¬ 
tional emphasis on analysis and limited in the synthetic direction by 
the lack or dearth of methods for obtaining "exact” solutions of inter¬ 
action beyond the threshold level of complexity. True enough, this 
seems to be largely due to limitations of human thinking, though it 
remains a question whether they are limitations inherent in the con¬ 
stitution of the "mind" or limitations created by habits of thought. 

^Since the impact of their discoveries was not strongly felt until 
the late sixties, when Riemann published non-Suclidean studies made from 
a more general standpoint, the original conception must be regarded as a 
landmark seen in retrospect. 

&«The new and much freer modus operandi is variously described as 
the postulational or the axiomatic method but in the latter case a dif¬ 
ferent meaning than the one mentioned by the writer is attached to axiom 
and to its adjectival derivative. In 1931? a century after the conception 
of non-Euclidean geometry, Godel showed that the method has inherent 
limitations. 
















, 


' ' ■ • 

' .. ' 








■ 







. : 




' ■ v • 

■ 

. 

. 

' 

..l . 

• • , 


' 

■ 


. 
















■ 






■" '*>- . .7 ! , "■ . • 1 ■’ ‘ " : 4 no 

' ' 

' 

; . ' ' 

■ 










it 
















- 206 - 


Second, in physics in 1905, there was Einstein’s re-casting of the 
meanings of length and time and simultaneity which enabled him to resolve, 
with the special theory of relativity, the contradictions which had ac¬ 
cumulated in empirical physics. This achievement involved an escape from 
the concepts of absolute length and time which had been tacitly accepted 
by Newton and by the generality of men as merely obvious to common sense. 
Subsequently, with the mass-energy equation deduced from the special 
theory and with the general theory, Einstein gave radically new meanings 
to the concepts of mass and energy and gravitation. These revolutionary 
changes implied that other commonly accepted meanings might be seriously 
defective and might veil the face of nature from the mind of man. 

Certain developments in twentieth century quantum physics could 
also be cited as illustrations of escape from verbal prison-houses into 
positions of greater freedom. 

The greater freedom thus obtained in the physics of both the macro¬ 
cosm and the microcosm is derived partly from new empirical information; 
there is no denying this. But it also is derived, from new conceptions 
of meaning or new ways of talking about the ’’facts”. Some of these 
’’facts”, such as the ’’constancy” of the speed of light in the case of 
special, relativity, had been well established for some years before 
’’new talk” showed how their systematic meaning could be reformulated.^ 

The importance of semantic considerations has been put by Bridgman 


•“The very system which relativity reduced to the status of a limited 
case—namely, Newtonian mechanics—was even more the result of giving the 
old bundle of data a new system of relationships by viewing the data from 
a new standpoint and talking about them in a new way. See Herbert Butter¬ 
field, op. cit ., Ch. I. 
















. 






. 

. • 












■ 


■ 




. 






• "-T ' • 

' 

' 

■ 

■ 


! 












- 




' 




. 












r 








- 207 - 


as follows: 

One of the new insights (which has been acquired in 
carrying out the program of science so far) is a growing 
realization of the importance of semantics to our whole 
intellectual enterprise....the full sweep of the implica¬ 
tions is, I believe, not realized even yet. The paradoxes 
of relativity theory were found to be associated with im¬ 
pressions in the meanings of such common-sense words as mass 
and length and time. The tacit assumption of common sense, 
that the intuitive uncritical meaning of these terms was 
adequate for describing nature, was refuted by the discovery 
of unexpected experimental facts. When the meaning of such 
a term as length, for example, was made by Einstein precise 
enough to deal with the physical situation, it was found that 
the meaning was not unique, but multiple, and not consistent 
with common-sense treatment. 

The physical world proves too complex to be dealt with 
by common sense. We are coming to see that the situation is 
similar in a much -wider setting, as indeed it would be a 
miracle if it were not, considering the uncritical and hap¬ 
hazard way in which the whole apparatus of common-sense 
thinking was evolved. 

So much, then, for those semantic pitfalls which are especially 
deep and particularly hard, since they are bound up in the linguistic 
inheritance of thought, for the mind to detect. In a more general way, 
the term semantics also is applied by many students of science to the 
difficulties and problems involved in communicating meaning clearly 
and unmistakably, and in maintaining clear understanding. These have 
been considered briefly in section III, above, and are fully discussed 
in Kapp's book, cited above. Nevertheless, Michaelson and Bohr make 
certain additional points relevant to the present discussion. The 
former, using the term language in the sense of verbal language, says: 


/ / £ 

Percy W. Bridgman, Mid-Century . M.I.T., p. 233* See also Stuart 
Chase, Power Of Words . for a popular exposition on semantics, linguistics, 
communication and related topics, and for a good bibliography of source 
books and papers. The reader is referred to these sources for further 
information on the semantic pitfalls of language. 



















. 

■ 

' 

_ 

. 

. 




' 


• ' 


. • , , 

, 

■ •- . • ■ I V • A:): , 


■ 


, ; ■ ■ 1 


' 




‘ 




■ 

' 




■ 




• ' . 

. 

' 








■ • :• :.■■ 

' 






. 























- 208 - 


Language as a means of communication has definite limita¬ 
tions. In all kinds of scientific and engineering literature, 
a graph, chart, tabulation of data, photograph or mathematical 
derivation is often worth a thousand words. A technical report 
is, however, seldom adequate unless the data and illustrations 
are accompanied by verbal explanation and evaluation. When we 
pass from....graphic or mathematical forms to that of word 
pictures, we step from the open highway of precise representa¬ 
tion....into the devious footpaths in the dense forest of 

language.1^3 

Without diminishing the importance of the other statements, in the 
above quotation, it is the point made in the third sentence to which 
the writer wishes to draw attention. Turning then to Bohr, one finds 
him, after remarking on the extent to which ordinary physical pictures 
fail in accounting for atomic phenomena, saying: 

In this situation, we are faced with the necessity of a 
radical revision of the foundation for description and explana¬ 
tion of physical phenomena. Here, it must above all be recog¬ 
nized that however far quantum effects transcend the scope of 
classical physical analysis, the account of the experimental 
arrangement and the record of the observations must always be 
expressed in common language supplemented with the terminology 
of classical physics. This is a simple logical demand, since 
the word "experiment" can in essence be used only in referring 
to a situation where we can tell others what we have done and 
what we have learned.^ 

While common language could be meant to include mathematics, graphs, 
charts and even photographs, it seems very likely that Bohr was thinking 
largely of verbal language, and in part at least of the plain and commonly 
understood vernacular, used with great precision and care. 

Thus, the two quotations may be taken as reminders that even in com¬ 
municating scientific and technical information within the fraternities. 


■^^Herbert B. Michaelson, "Semantics and Syntax in Technical Re¬ 
ports," C. and E. News . July 17, 1950, p. ^ 

-^Niels Bohr, "On The Notions of Causality and Complementarity," 
Science, Jan. 20, 1950, p. 52. 


















' 






■ 






. 







. 








. 








.... 




. 


. 




. 







■ 

. . 

■ 

< 

. 






. 










. 

. 


... . „ 




. 




' 




















- 209 - 


one must, in most cases, not only use verbal language but use it to some 
extent in the form of the plain vernacular. And the communication of 
such information cannot be limited to the initiates, whether of a single 
"frat house"—a single specialty--or of the whole fraternal order of 
scientists and technologists. Somehow, the substance of much scientific 
and technical information must be conveyed not only to "outsiders" who 
happen to engage in other, somewhat specialized pursuits, such as 
management and finance, which are essential to the maintenance of sci¬ 
entific inquiry, but also, though perhaps in a lesser degree to the 
so-called "general public", which really means the whole population- 
all of us who, regardless of vocational specialization, have citizen¬ 
ship as a common calling. These matters need some discussion. 

VI—PLAIN ENGLISH 4 

Some testimony has been presented above on the need for the plain 
vernacular, as well as specialized languages, in the presentation of 
scientific and technical information to initiates. One can see a number 
of reasons for its use, to some extent, in this field of communication! 

1. It is the leaven in the bread of specialized or, to use a popular 
term, "technical" discourse, without which such discourse may collapse of 
its own weight. 

2. It is common, in the case of any given tongue, to all investi¬ 
gators and is the only form of language by which bridges can possibly 

be built between any one specialty and any other. This, in the writer’s 


*The title reflects the fact that the writer is an English-speaking 
person. But he intends the discussion to apply to "plain talk", oral 
and written, in any tongue. Refer back to the end of section I of this 
chapter on the need and value of more plain English. 





. 

• . . ■' • • U : : c " . -r .\r-y - -rfr. :, r j 

' 








. 






. ■ ' 

- 


- 










... ' 

- ■ ; - - . ' . . r : ' ; 1 










' • • 




. 


■ 

' 

• . ■ 


- 210 - 


view, is one broad implication of Bohr's remarks quoted above. It has 
been repeatedly emphasized in the first three chapters of this part of 
the present study that intercommunication is essential to scientific 
endeavor; also, that communication is made difficult by the imprison¬ 
ment in specialized jargon of the best and most advanced ideas of the 
highly trained specialist.^5 Although the difficulties are reduced in 
some areas according to the degree of unification or coalescence achieved, 
there remains a great need for bridging between many specialties by resort 
to common language. This can be achieved in many cases by means of the 
common language of mathematics; but mathematics itself is composed of 
many specialties with particular terminologies and few, if any investi¬ 
gators, are able to handle them all. So, the plain vernacular remains 
the last resort for communication among specialists--notwithstanding the 
difficulties of translating specialized knowledge formulated in specialized 
language into vernacular terms. 

3. The human mind is-raised, largely if not mainly, on a diet of 
so-called common-sense thought about the objects and events which are 
evident at the level of the ordinary scale of everyday life. The founda¬ 
tions of the mental frame of reference are laid at this level. 

Aided and abetted by such immaterial instruments as imagination and 
abstraction and by a variety of material instruments and machines, 
thought ventures into the depths below this level and into the reaches 


■^Further to this point, see R. L. Meier, "Research As A Social 
Process," Research . October, 1951, P- 4&5• 

l^PQn the difficulties of translation and for a warning against 
translation, see E. Fein, "Causality, Relativity and Language," 
American Journal of Physics . April, 1951, PP« 211-13. 















- 211 - 


above and beyond it. But thought retains its hold on the original level 
and remains attached to the basic frame of reference common to all human 
minds. More, it has ultimately to return to this level and to refer back 
to this frame in seeking intelligible and generally communicable meanings 
for concepts discovered by venturing into or onto other levels of action.1^7 

In making this reference, the mind has to resort in some degree to the 
common language of everyday speech, to the plain vernacular, perhaps alone 
but more likely in combination with or supplementary to such other, common 
forms of language as the symbol systems of mathematics, logic and graphics. 
Accordingly, when the results of this thinking are being communicated to 
others, the plain vernacular, if not actually indispensable, is likely 
to be required to some extent in the exposition. 

If only for the foregoing reasons, plain English—in the sense of 
plain words used with precision and care--continues to be one of the 
elements indispensable for the communication of scientific thought among 
investigators and for the conduct of their thought. 

Of course, scientific inquiry is not self-sufficient. It is partly 
dependent on endeavor in other fields, such as management, finance and 
the like; and it needs a favorable climate of public interest and support, 
together with an educational system which will provide recruits for the 
ranks of investigators. In addition, the results of inquiry give rise 
to technological development on an ever-growing scale, and this develop¬ 
ment is becoming an increasingly important element in daily life and 


/ See Alfred L-andd', "Quantum Mechanics and Common Sense," Endeavour 
April, 1956, pp. 61-67; P. W. Bridgman, in Scientific Monthly . cited by 
Landd'; Jacob Bronowski, The Common Sense of Science . Of course, the re¬ 
turn needs to be made in a critical and questioning frame of mind if 
semantic pitfalls, discussed in the preceding section, are to be avoided. 
The results of venturing abroad inevitably modify the understanding and 
may modify the whole conception of the original frame of reference. The 
process works both ways. 


9 

























' . ' - ' 






. • 












. 




' : " - ■ ‘ 




‘ . ‘ ; • r; ■ ’ . • ' 






' 

' 




' 


' • • ' • • ■ \ ' : ■ 














' . ■ / 












' 












. 

. 

' • 






' 

. 







- 212 - 


human affairs® Accordingly, the nature and the meaning of scientific 
endeavor, and the results of inquiry, at least in a general way, must 
be communicated to an ever-growing audience of persons who are not 
scientific specialists® This makes it all the more necessary that the 
scientific (or technical) specialist should develop a clear and effective 
style of rt plain talk” (or writing)®-^o,l° y ,1 70,1/I 

Granted, there are limits, especially in detail, to what the most 
lucid thinker and writer can convey to the "untrained and often unre- 
ceptive" minds of the laity®^2 And some noted expositors of popular 
science, such as Jeans and Eddington, were subsequently found to be 
almost as misleading in some respects as they were lucid and informa¬ 
tive in others.^^ Nevertheless, there has been in past centuries and 
there is today much distinguished scientific writing which, on account 
of its clarity and precision and its extensive use of plain words, can 
be widely read and understood outside the ranks of the scientific spe- 
cialists® 1 ^^^ What is more, the clarity and simplicity which are 
wanted for communication to the laity are no less desirable, indeed 
are equally necessary, for communication to scientific initiates® To 


1 /o 

Andrade, op ® cit ®, loc ® cit ® 

•^%athleen Lonsdale, "Specialized Scientific Training and Citizen¬ 
ship," Research, October, 1950, leading article. 

lYO^arston Bates, "The Criticism of Scientific Books," Science , 

April 19, 1952, pp® U07-8. 

•^Bronowski, op ® cit., p® i|® 

l? 2 Editorial, "Some Limits to Popular Science," Endeavour , April, 1956® 
!73su san Stebbing. Philosophy and the Physicists ® 

1 ^Andrade, o£. cit®, loc ® cit ® 

-^Bates, op ® cit ., loc ® cit ® 



















- 213 - 


these requisites, for both purposes, may be added elegance and style, 
which are no mere ornaments either of prose or of thought. 1^6 Lucidity 
and elegance in thought and in style are reciprocally related and this 
partly explains why the best thinking and the best exposition, both for 
professional audiences and for the laity, so often are produced by the 
same persons. 

In speaking in the same breath of exposition aimed at a scientific 
audience and that aimed at the laity, one does not mean to overlook the 
psychological necessity of suiting the content and the vocabulary to the 
particular audience in view. But differences of this sort are relative. 
Whatever the knowledge which the listeners or readers may be supposed to 
possess, however familiar with technical vocabulary they may be expected 
to be, the expositor must strive for orderly presentation, for lucidity 
and for that elegance in expression which is as much the result of 
clarity in thought as of anything else. 

The need for this sort of presentation, for practice of the ’’art of 
plain talk”, is becoming greater and more urgent as the growth of sci¬ 
entific and technical information aggravates and multiplies the dif¬ 
ficulties and problems which have been discussed in the preceding 
chapters of the present part of this study. Communication is the life¬ 
blood of science and ’’plain talk" in vernacular terms, as well as in 
the terms of any other form of language which may be used, is essential 
to effectiveness in communication. 


176'iCommentary," Research . April, 1951 , PP* 145-7. 





- 214 - 


VII—NET CONCLUSIONS 

This chapter can be summed up very briefly. The main points are: 

1. The exponential growth of scientific and technical information 
and embedded knowledge, this ever-growing output of the multitude which 
dwarfs the capacity of the single mind, demands ever more and ever better 
communication, both to other investigators and technologists and to those 
who are not scientific and technical specialists though they usually are 
specialists in other lines of human endeavor. 

2. For the most part, communication is effected, and thought is 
conducted, in the terms of one or more conventional languages; that is, 
in w r ords, mathematical or logical symbols, graphs, charts, tables, dia¬ 
grams, photographs, sketches. While graphic terms, indicated by the last 
six items in the preceding list, are often worth a thousand words in com¬ 
munication and also find much use in thinking, scientific investigators 
are very largely dependent on words and abstract symbols, on the verbal 
and mathematico-logical forms of language, for their thinking and their 
communication. And inasmuch as growth demands that the investigator 
gain better command of fundamental description, in more fields of in¬ 
quiry, if possible, he needs to improve and to extend his mastery of 
those two forms of language. 

3. This is bound to be a hard and exacting and time-consuming task. 
From the educational standpoint, it obviously begins with reading, 

'riting and ’rithmetic; these are the foundations and no one should 
need to be reminded that a sound structure can only be built on solid 
foundations. But it goes far beyond the levels usually reached in school 
or even in undergraduate studies at university. The arts of "Functional 
English” and "plain talk" and the symbol systems of mathematics and logic 
must be mastered at far higher levels than have generally been regarded 


. 

' 

'• ■ ’ ' ‘ ' • . ■ > 

' 

1 ' ■ ' ■ 'i • " '• I ; '-'M i ‘ ;v ' *■ . r • * - rrr tryrt^gj 

' I ' ■ j ' • 

. 

. ‘ J ■ 

' 

' ■ . ' ' . • ’ • ' . • .. - ■ '■•.:••• 
j - ■ . ■ 

: I i : . . . . • 

- ,• r )VJ V • r ■■ ' : '■ •. 1 ■ r \ ‘ ‘ ;i ‘ ‘ X hi 

■>■!!' '• n ' '’ ' T ' JO ’ h '‘ : : i«j 

, .0' ! '• J • ■ i • ’ r ' i' J i ■’’/ ' .■ ' i U.-'V 

' V ; , ' •• r ; .-or cjr, ■u-.-Jf.n 

■ . 

t ■’ ' ' •. ”' - 


: ’ . : ' ' ■ ■ 

: • ' • . 

... ... , . - - r, ■ : ■ 

• : T: 

r 

'. r ' : ‘ ■ i , ” ; > : : 

/ ' •; ' f .; ■: 










- 215 - 


as necessary in the past. These subjects therefore require persistent 
study and application throughout the period of formal education. They 
probably need further, postgraduate attention if the higher levels of 
mastery are to be attained, if semantic pitfalls are to be avoided, if 
the prison-houses of verbal custom and mathematical tradition are to 
be escaped. 

4. In addition, the investigator must learn one or more symbol 
systems and one or more dialects which are very largely peculiar to 
particular divisions or subdivisions of scientific endeavor and know¬ 
ledge. Of these, chemical symbolism probably provides the outstanding 
example A 

5. Thus, the study of language (in the broad sense) constitutes a 
very large part of the task of learning confronting the student and the 
investigator. It is to a considerable extent a separable and necessarily 
separate part of the task, but it also is bound up in the whole business 
of acquiring knowledge, developing the power to think, learning how to 
conduct scientific investigations or how to put scientific principles 

to work. 

As stated at the outset of this chapter, its emphasis on the 
importance of language is not to be taken as reflecting upon the impor¬ 
tance of observation and experiment--the reference to experience which 


There is still another sort of language, a widely used foreign 
tongue, which the investigator would be well-advised to master, The 
English-speaking scientist can "get along" without "a second tongue" 
at this time, when the international use of English is increasing and 
translation services are being expanded. However, against any decrease 
in the need for French or German, say, one must set the ever-increasing 
need for Russian resulting from the rapid expansion of scientific 
endeavor in the Soviet Union. Since the foreign language "question" is 
not a proper part of this study, the reader is referred to pertinent 
literature on the proportions of scientific information published in 
various tongues, the increasing use of English and the prospects in 
regard to translation services. 










... ■ • . ' 

■ . i. . 

. 

•;■■ ■/ *••!* ‘ ’ - ' ’ 5 • • m • ! ‘ ' i:> ■;: . n -ti 

. 

. f 

■ < ' I » 

' e ’ ■■ ' '■ 




' 

• • • ' ' • ' 




, 

. 

. 

• • ' 



‘ 





- 216 - 


undergirds the whole structure of scientific knowledge. The '‘facts” of 
experience are essential both to the genesis and to the testing of sci¬ 
entific description. Indeed, it is the wedding of experience (in the 
sense of meticulously careful and accurate observation and experiment) 
to conceptual thought, even speculative thought, which distinguishes 
modern scientific endeavor from most of its ancient predecessors. How¬ 
ever, since this subject is surrounded by some popular misconceptions, 
it needs some clarifying treatment. The writer will take it up briefly 
in the introduction to the third part of his study, in the course of 
explaining certain features of the standpoint from which that part will 
be written. 




. 

' 




■ ' > • • 


• ■ ■ - • ' t *! ' . 0 ■ ' ‘ ffl -O 

: • 








' 





























































PART III 


HEARING FOR EDUCATION 
FOR 

THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE 

INTRODUCTION 

The first general hypothesis enunciated on page 6l, the writer sub¬ 
mits, has been amply confirmed by the testimony and the analysis presented 
in Part II. The present part of the inquiry takes its starting point from 
the second hypothesis mentioned on the same page. This can be put in the 
form of a question. Thus: 

Does the growth of.scientific information and embedded knowledge give 
rise to difficulties and problems in education for scientific endeavor?* 

The writer proposes to present an immediate answer to this question, 
with a general argument based on observation of the contemporary scene. 

*1pjrQ- •' 

It is obvious that'education is experiencing rapid growth, perhaps 
especially in Canada and the United States. The process is manifested 
by the following: growth of enrolment, currently exponential; expansion, 
specialization and diversification of physical facilities; persistently 
strong demand -for more teachers, generally exceeding supply; horizontal 
extension of curricula through more diversification and specialization; 
vertical increases in curricula through additions to required subject 


&For scientific . read scientific and technical , unless otherwise 
indicated in context and until otherwise specified. 







- 218 - 


matter and training; extension of the period of formal education required 
or needed for many lines of endeavor; extension of the period devoted to 
formal education by the individual in most cases. 

All this is due to a number of interacting forces, some of which can 
be seen in isolation. One is the very rapid growth of population; another, 
the widespread conviction that every young person should be afforded the 
greatest possible opportunity for formal education; yet another, the 
elevation of the general standard of material prosperity. 

No less evident as a contributing factor is the growth, specialization, 
diversification and complication of modern endeavor. But this accompanies 
and is derived from similar developments with respect to knowledge--in all 
fields but especially in the scientific. Moreover, the very rapid growth 
of population and the general improvement of material prosperity are 
mainly due to the growth of scientific knowledge. So, this growth may 
be held largely responsible, in the final analysis, for the general 
growth of education. 

In the manifestations of educational growth, one can discern the 
usual dynamic features of growth--quantitative increases, more and more 
specialization and growing complexity--and many of the difficulties and 
problems to which they give rise. This is particularly true, what is 
more, of education for scientific endeavor. 

The foregoing argument indicates an affirmative answer to the ques¬ 
tion at issue. The same answer has been indicated previously in Part II, 
though in a ’’spotty” manner, by showing that there are educational 
counterparts or derivatives of some of the problems of scientific 
endeavor which have arisen from the growth of information and embedded 
knowledge. This aspect of the consequences of growth now requires fuller 












' ' 

: ■ ■' • v ' ' •■■■■' r \ V'V-: ‘ : b -t'). 






' 


. 




. 


' 

■ 

' 






. 

' 








. 


' 








. 

' ' 

‘ ‘ ■ ' • r > . . 

■ 

. . . ‘ 

' 












- 219 - 


treatment, both to secure a firmer and more illuminating answer to the 
question posed on page 217 and to focus attention on major problems of 
scientific education. 

The Growth and Education — This analysis, to be more precise, will 
elucidate and describe explicitly certain educational problems, dif¬ 
ficulties and needs which, as a group, appear to arise largely from the 
growth of scientific information and embedded knowledge. Some of them, 
it will be evident, emerged in general education long ago, and have 
simply appeared in greatly aggravated form in education for scientific 
endeavor, as a result of the very high and ever-increasing rate of growth 
of the products of this endeavor. Individually, moreover, some are only 
partly attributable to growth and could be traced back to other factors 
as well. A few of those which are common to scientific endeavor and 
scientific education are more serious for the former. However, attach¬ 
ing such qualifications to the appropriate items is not essential for 
the purpose stated at the beginning of this paragraph, failure to attach 
them will but slightly reduce the capacity of the analysis to provide a 
firmer answer to the question of p. 217, and a simplified presentation 
is wanted. They will therefore be generally disregarded. 

It will also be evident that some of the difficulties or problems 
are of little or no moment at the lower levels of formal education and 
only become significant at higher levels, while others must be reckoned 
with practically throughout the educational process. For the present 
purposes, such considerations also will be disregarded. The analysis 


*The existence of such problems may be assumed for the time being 
or regarded as a provisional conclusion yet to be fully confirmed by 
the ensuing, abbreviated analysis, which will be based on relevant 
sections of Part II without making detailed references to them. 



























. i 




■ 















% 

. 

■ 


















. 


. 

































- 220 - 


will be made from the viewpoint of the whole period of formal studies, 
including those of a postgraduate sort, so that any difficulty or problem 
which arises or emerges within this period may be regarded as actually or 
potentially significant. 

1. With these preliminaries out of the way, attention may be directed 
first to the volumetric aspect of growth. This, it has already been shown, 
has given rise to a large group of difficulties and problems in scientific 
endeavor. Many of these are duplicated in learning, as it also demands 
reading, search and. documentation, use of the library, discovery of the 
correct or the most reliable information, getting and keeping up to date, 
accurate and efficient communication, as by instructors, and so forth. 

The larger the mass of information which students must tackle and 
instructors command, the more difficult these essential tasks become, 
and the greater likelihood of error and misinterpretation and misunder¬ 
standing . on the part of the student and the instructor and the person 
who prepares printed material, such as textbooks, for study. But the 
main problem is this: 

The volumetric growth is continuously increasing the 
amount of information and knowledge which the investigator 
needs for his work, and thus, also, the amount of ground 
which apparently needs to be covered in formal studies, and 
the amount or the period of time which apparently needs to 
be devoted to formal learning.... 

Yet the danger of overloading the mind and that of learn¬ 
ing merely "less and less about more and more" have to be 
avoided; it is advisable to reckon with the need for pace in 
learning; the student-investigator needs to be educationally 
equipped to begin scientific work early enough to get full 
advantage of youthful energy, originality and productivity; 
and his formal learning period cannot be indefinitely prolonged, 
nor his attainment of normal adult status, as wage earner and 
private householder, be indefinitely postponed, without detri¬ 
ment or threat to his personal well-being....(A). 







/ 



























. 













































- 221 - 


2. Volumetric growth leads to increasing specialization. The 
capacity of the individual is limited., and the amount of knowledge 
which he can command tends to become an ever smaller proportion of 
the whole as the output of the multitude grows. He concentrates his 
attention and his endeavor, moreover, not only to pass the more rapidly 
along the road to virgin territory, where he may hope to discover or to 
construct something new, but also because a concentrated attack on the 
frontier of knowledge or of enterprise, as experience has shown, offers 
a good prospect of successful penetration. Yet he runs the risk of 
making too narrow an approach, in which case he may succeed in making 
only a pinprick In the frontier, or may lack sufficient resources 
either to strike it rich or to build well. 

Specialization in endeavor requires specialization in learning, 
for the individual, travels the greater part of the road to the frontier, 
and in some cases most of this distance, as a learner during the period 
of formal studies. So increasing specialization affects education ex- 
tensively. It is as much a general problem of education as of endeavor. 

In the former as in the latter, it renders more likely the appear¬ 
ance of such defects as picayune concentration of effort, neglect of 
pertinent information outside a chosen field and narrowing of vision; it 
tends to cut down intercommunication and makes this more and more dif¬ 
ficult to achieve. It also increases the linguistic difficulties and 
requirements of learning, by adding to specialized terminology and 
multiplying dialects. It makes knowledge in some regions harder to 
approach and to understand, at the deepest levels, because it is more 


and more recondite. 
















. 




. 


















. 




. 



n 






. 




. 








* - v - 




* 

' 























. 













- 222 - 


But what is particularly disconcerting is this: Insofar as spe¬ 
cialized concentration of inquiry secures deeper penetration of the 
unknown, it pushes back the frontier and lengthens the road the learner 
must travel. This, given the limited capacity of the individual and 
the limits of educational time, fosters ever narrower specialization. 

The primary educational problem, to which increasing specializa¬ 
tion gives rise, may now be described: 

In learning as in endeavor—which is hardly surprising 
since each partakes of the nature of the other—specialization 
sooner or later becomes inescapably necessary for the individual. 
Limited capacity, individual talent and aptitude, and the 
demonstrated advantages of concentration of attention and 
effort--all these demand it. And it is essential for getting 
below the surface and plumbing the depths of knowledge in any 
region.... 

But with the volumetric growth of information and know¬ 
ledge any given degree of specialization becomes relatively-- 
with respect to the total mass—narrower and narrower. And 
as the frontier of knowledge is pushed back, and the road, to 
be travelled by the learner is lengthened, the degree of spe¬ 
cialization, measured by any fixed standard, is or tends to 
be increased. The disadvantages which may result from thus 
narrowing the approach have been metaphorically described. 

The danger is that the individual may, so to speak, "learn 
more and more about less and less until he knows everything, 
about nothing." This is certainly to be avoided.... (B) 

As already indicated, specialized concentration and sheer multi¬ 
plication of effort—guided by the strategy of analytical subdivision, 
and aided by the improvement and refinement of instruments, both material 
and non-ma.terial--has carried fundamental investigation farther and far¬ 
ther below the surface of things and events, and into their depths. Ac¬ 
cordingly, the student seeking mastery of fundamental knowledge must 
learn in greater depth than ever before. In many fields, moreover, if 
not in all, further increases in depth seem to be in prospect. Yet the 
volumetric growth of information and knowledge and the expansion of 
scientific inquiry into more and more fields of interest--these demand 






















. 

■ 














■ 

















I 1 ' ' . . 




. 

■ . ‘ ; ■ : ' '■! r r r ■' '■ i 


. 


' 

: ” ' T : • ' ’ ’ ■ ' ' ' 

.i •: ' ■ iuatie- 






' 




7 • • I • * 




, ' • 

> ’ - • . 


. 

' 

i 

' 


. 

: ‘ 1 .' 










- 223 - 


of the individual an ever greater breadth of knowledge, as repeatedly- 
shown in the preceding part of this study. Thus, another problem: 

The learner is faced with the need of achieving both 
greater depth and more breadth in his education, in spite of 
limitations on his capacity as an individual and on the time 
and effort he can devote to learning within the period of 
formal studies. How to meet this double need, or how best to 
satisfy it, is the troublesome question....(C). 

3. The problems that complexity presents for scientific investiga¬ 
tion have already been discussed extensively. Some of them have educa¬ 
tional significance. 

As the organization of endeavor and the structure of knowledge be¬ 
come increasingly complicated, it becomes more and more difficult for 
the student, like the investigator, to get a sense of the larger picture 
and a grasp of the interrelations of its parts so he can orient himself 
and his specialized studies. This is immediately obvious. 

It has been shown that the investigator, while still dependent on 
autonomic analysis, must reckon more and more with interaction and com¬ 
plexity, in observation and experiment and in the formulation of 
d.escription--the fruit of analj^sis is the revelation of complexity. 

In general, this means that scientific inquiry of a fundamental kind 
is becoming more difficult. 

The investigator in some fields also has to deal today with finer 
extremes of microcosmic subdivision and greater extremes of macrocosmic 
scale, likewise with more extreme conditions of "heat" or "cold" and 
pressure or vacuum, simply because earlier workers have been successful 
in carrying inquiry into these extremes. This process of digging into 
more and more extreme conditions is still going on, and it also increase 
the difficulty of inquiry. 








































. 

■ ' 

■ 

. 

. 

■ 

' 


. 

. 

■ 








-22k- 


The investigator nowadays must reckon, too, with departures from 
older certainties and simplicities, with acknowledged limits of measure¬ 
ment, with effects of the act of observation upon the entity or event 
or system under study, with longer and more tenuous chains of evidence, 
in one field or another. He may have to handle more subtle ideas and 
manipulate less distinct variables than his predecessors, say, of the 
nineteenth century. Again, the general effect is to make inquiry more 
difficult in various fields. 

To be sure, the improvements and refinements in technique and in¬ 
struments and understanding increase the power and the potentialities 
of inquiry. But in some ways they demand of the individual investigator 
deeper understanding, broader knowledge, more skills developed to a 
higher degree, more mental flexibility and greater versatility in ob¬ 
servation and experiment. 

It seems to be the case,then, that investigation on the whole is 
becoming increasingly difficult for the individual. The writer is 
thinking here of more or less fundamental inquiry. If this be granted, 
then it must be agreed that: 

The individual aiming for fundamental inquiry needs bet¬ 
ter, and probably more, educational preparation today than in 
the past, and the upward trend in requirements may be expected 
to persist. This tends to increase the difficulty and size of 
the educational task, and the time needed for it....(B). 

The investigator also needs, in nearly every field of 
inquiry, more and better mathematical knowledge than in the 
past. Here, too, the upward trend in requirements may be 
expected to persist. The question is how best to meet this 
rising demand during the period of formal studies....(E). 

The investigation of complex systems and the solution 
of problems of complexity appear to demand new mathematical 
tools and new modes of experiment and thought . How may an 












■ 






. 

' 


- 








. 
















. • 
































. 

. 






















. . . . 

















- 225 - 


individual best be prepared -with the known and the orthodox 
to discover the unknown and the unorthodox? How can imagina¬ 
tion and originality, and the '’holy curiousity of inquiry" 
(Einstein's phrase), be preserved and even strengthened dur¬ 
ing the long, demanding and sometimes deadening period of 
formal studies? The problem indicated by these questions 
probably is as old as human learning and is a permanent 
feature of the scientific scene. But with the growth of 
knowledge and the multiplication and strengthening of the 
adverse effects qf this growth, it is becoming more and. more 
pressing and acute, and harder to overcome....(F). 

4. As both fundamental inquiry and the education needed to under¬ 
take it, with some prospect of significant results, become, or tend to 
become, harder and more time-consuming, more individuals are likely to 
be discouraged from taking this educational road. As a corollary, 
formal studies are likely to be devoted more and more to preparation 
containing a large element of "vocational training". The trend in 
this direction has been strengthened in recent decades by social and 
economic pressures which, at bottom, may be ascribed partly to the 
growth of scientific and technical knowledge. Yet the value of "voca¬ 
tional training" for more or less professional work in the modern world 
is currently being called in question, above all by leaders in business 
and-industry. One may ask, then, this question. 

What'sort of education would best fit the individual for 
earning a living and meeting the responsibilities of citizen¬ 
ship in the world of the future? (It always is the world of 
the future for which education must prepare the individual.)....(G) 

This question certainly must be taken into account in any realistic 

attempt to solve the problems and to answer the questions described 

above, (A) to (F); for education "for the advancement of scientific 

knowledge" cannot be divorced from education for earning a living and 

meeting the responsibilities of citizenship. 

The general effect of the growth, as repeatedly pointed out in 

preceding sections of this study, is the dwarfing of individual capacity 





' 

■ 


. 








. 


. 

' 


. 


' 












. 

































- 226 - 


This has made ignorance M the most excusable of all human failings”. If 
the educational problems arising out of the growth can be summed up in 
a sentence, it is this: 

The central problem is how to mitigate individual ignor¬ 
ance, at the very least; to offset it or, even better, to 
overcome it to a considerable degree, if at all possible....(H) 

Failing the formulation and the application of means to such ends, 
individual ignorance, relatively speaking, may be expected to "increase”. 
The inversion is acknowledged by the quotation marks. One suspects that 
the relative diminution of the individual’s knowledge, to put things 
right side up again, could not go on indefinitely without the correlative 
growth of collective knowledge reaching a point of diminishing returns. 

The gap must at least be prevented from, widening without limit. 

It has already been shown in some detail that the growth and its 
effects demand the improvement of communication and therefore better 
command of language and the linguistic arts. While the attainment of 
the latter objective -would involve some additional demands on educa¬ 
tional time and effort, it also -would contribute to the reduction of 
some of the other educational problems and difficulties. Accordingly, 
these demands will not be regarded as the constituents of a specific 
and separable, educational problem; though the improvement of communica¬ 
tion may be considered just as necessary for increasing the efficacy of 
education as it is for increasing the efficiency of the process of inquiry. 

The foregoing exposition has not, by any means, exhausted the sub¬ 
ject of educational problems arising from the growth. In various ways, 
the growth has, for instance, increased the difficulty of adequately 
preparing, of recruiting and of retaining teachers, and aggravated 






- 

















: ' ' ' ' . ' 















. 






' 






















' 








r 






- 227 - 


financial problems by requiring the expansion and elaboration of school 
and university plants. These are but two of the additional points which 

could be made. But matters of that sort lie outside the compass of this 

A 

thesis. 

Answers for (a)-(H) will be proposed and discussed in the main body 
of this part of the thesis. Before this task can be undertaken, certain 
aspects of the standpoint from which it will be approached must be ex¬ 
plained and made clear. This will be done in the remainder of the 
introduction. 

“ Advancement of Scientific Knowledge ” -- The ultimate purpose of the 
writer’s inquiry is to discover and to show “The Meaning of the Growth 
of Scientific Information for Education for the Advancement of Scientific 
Knowledge.” The reality and the exponential nature of the growth of the 
information were shown in Part I. At the beginning of that part, the 
necessity of considering scientific information in a wholesale way was 
declared, and definitions consistent x-dth this requirement were assigned 
to the terms scientific and information . The meaning of the growth for 
scientific endeavor was shown in Part II. At the beginning of this part, 
it was evident that references would have to be made to (scientific) 
knowledge . at least as something embedded in the larger mass of informa ¬ 
tion . Accordingly, knowledge was given a pragmatic or open definition 
(p. 62 ) which seemed consistent with the nature of scientific inquiry 
and which would not involve any preconceptions as to the aim of inquiry, 
the promise of its pursuit in any particular direction or the value of 'a 
particular result of inquiry for ”the advancement of scientific knowledge”. 


*The foregoing analysis, it is submitted, amply confirms the affirm¬ 
ative answer, to the question on p. 217, indicated at the beginning of 
this introduction by a general argument. 
















- 228 - 


The definition thus served to keep the ensuing discussion open.* In the 
present part of the thesis, however, the argument must be focussed on a 
target— the advancement of scientific knowledge . On the face of it, 
this would seem to require definition. 

In what does advancement . in this domain, consist? Evidently, in 
the enlargement of the area of the known at the expense of the unknown. 
This suggests that the target is merely growth, in the sense of addition, 
to the existing body, of knowledge which may be of any and every sort 
whatsoever so long as it is new. The validity of such a definition 
cannot be denied. Every piece of new knowledge may mean an advance. 

In practice, however, as the first twm> parts of this study have shown, 
it is sometimes difficult to determine whether an item is new or not. 
Moreover, while it may be supposed that one item wall be more signifi¬ 
cant or more valuable than another, there seems to be no way of deciding 
the issue in advance of discovery and it is usually difficult to decide 
immediately on discovery. These difficulties, of course, are simply 
reminders of the obvious: the advancement of scientific knowledge 
involves the invasion of the unknown . 

That last word deserves to be emphasized. It suggests that among 
equally w, r ell-equipped expeditions the one most likely to strike it rich 
in unknown territory will be that which is most adaptable and flexible 
and the least burdened with commitments and directives. Experience con¬ 
firms this viewr with respect to scientific inquiry. Every investigation 


%hile there have been, admittedly, some departures from the usage 
demanded by this definition, the writer has endeavored to make the mean¬ 
ing in these cases apparent in context. 














. 

. 






‘ 










. 




■ 




. ' 

: 








n 










■ 











- 229 - 


involves a search for something new but the highly significant and fruit¬ 
ful, even revolutionary discoveries are most likely to be made through 
uncommitted investigation in an atmosphere of maximum freedom. It is 
under these conditions that the investigator is most likely to be ready 
to recognize the unexpected or to muster fresh tactics or to change his 
strategy in radical way, as is so often necessary if he is to ask nature 
the right question in the right way and thus make a vital discovery 
beyond the frontier. 

Now, that is essentially the spirit of fundamental inquiry, also 
called basic research or uncommitted research. It has already been 
taken as a warranted assumption, which underlies the present study, 
that the continuance of the growth of scientific knowledge depends, at 
bottom, on the growth of fundamental knowledge (p. 62). Thus, funda¬ 
mental inquiry is regarded herein as the primary field of endeavor, 
without denying that it is fructified by the search for new knowledge 
for specific application and by developments in technology. It may 

:; p fM 

also be viewed, as indicated above, as the form of inquiry most likely 
to produce highly significant and fruitful discoveries. For the ad¬ 
vancement of scientific knowledge, then, it may, with ample warrant in 
experience, be regarded as the primary form of inquiry, and will be so 
regarded here'. 

Accordingly, the -writer proposes, in discussing ’’education for the 
advancement of scientific knowledge”, to consider primarily and mainly 
education designed to fit the student for fundamental inquiry aimed at 
the discovery of new scientific (not including technical) knowledge. 


^This indicates the meanings which will be assigned to education . 
inquiry , scientific and knowledge . unless otherwise shown by context, 
in the ensuing discourse. 












-230- 


Various reasons could be submitted for taking this line. It could 
be shown, for instance, that many scientists and scholars see an urgent 
need for the devotion of more effort and money to fundamental inquiry, 
not only to redress the balance now lying heavily on the side of research 
for specified military and technical purposes, but also to build up the 
working capital of basic knowledge in order to offset the heavy drain of 
recent decades and to meet the severe demands that will be made on this 
capital in the future. Or it could be shown that in certain fields of 
application, such as aeronautics, for example, there is a crying need 
for new principles or knowledge, character unknown, which would enable 
the engineers and manufacturers to overcome some tough problems of cur¬ 
rent and near-future development in air transport and space flight. The 
advantages of hindsight also would permit one to demonstrate the enormous 
potentialities of major discoveries of a fundamental sort; the applied 
science underpinning modem society is derived from a comparatively 
small number of basic discoveries by a smaller number of outstanding 

' ' vv 

investigators and thinkers. The corollary to this is that experience 
has shorn fundamental inquiry to be immensely practical in the long run, 
though it must not be forgotten that effective application of basic dis¬ 
coveries usually demands much additional research by many brilliant 
investigators- and the concentrated efforts of many technologists.^ 


&A11 these points are brought out and repeatedly emphasized in re¬ 
spect to medicine (the technology of human health) and biology (the 
foundation of medicine) in Medical Research A Mid century Survey , Vols. 

I and II, edited by Esther Everett Lape and Associates. 










- : r j ■, ' • v ' . ' | • ' : ' ' ' v . ' • " 




' - 












. ' ' 
















■ 








1 : l : 












■ 




■ ' ■ 




• • 

' . ■ ' ' ' 








' 






• SJ 














-231- 


All that is to say that more fundamental knowledge, and accordingly more 
fundamental inquiry, is needed and would, in the long run, be of practical 
benefit; but to attempt to justify such inquiry on practical grounds is to 
run the risk of talking about it as though it were merely H applied" 
research parading in the disguise of academic gown and long hair. The 
one consistent reason so far presented for giving first place to educa¬ 
tion designed to fit the student for fundamental inquiry is that this is 
the primary field of inquiry for the advancement of scientific knowledge. 
Is there any other reason consistent with the scheme of thought being 
presented in this thesis? 

It is too early to say with certainty but a supposition may be 
entertained. It may be supposed that meeting the problems and the needs 
arising from the growth, which have been delineated in preceding pages 
of this introduction, will demand, in general, the sort of education 
which is designed to fit the student for fundamental inquiry, or at 
least strong emphasis on this sort of education. Whether or to what 
extent this may be the case remains to be seen. But if the supposition 
should be largely confirmed, then it would become necessary to consider 
how well the student, thus prepared, would be fitted for other forms of 
inquiry and for earning a living in the world of the future. These 
questions may require attention in concluding pages of Part III. 


*This is suggested, for instance, by the conclusions already drawn 
(in Sec. Ill, Ch. IV, Part II) respecting the value of gaining command 
of fundamental formulations for the purpose of meeting the problems of 
growth. 

^The question of education for earning a living has already been 
presented as part of (G). 













' 




- 













. 


' 




■ 

■ 

. 


• 

' 




T ' ^ - v ■’ • -; i; ' 











' 


' 


o : r 






• " 


. 


- 

. 

■ 

' 




, 

■ i 



. 


■ 











, 

























. 





-232- 


11 Scientific Knowledge ” — For the present and subsequent discussion, 
technical knowledge has been excluded from the compass of the term 
scientific knowledge ♦ Apart from this narrowing of its field, however, 
the meaning to be given to the term has not been indicated. No attempt 
will be made to define it with detailed precision, as that would be a 
long and difficult, perhaps an impossible task, but some indication of 
its meaning at this point will simplify subsequent discussion. 

To begin with a negative statement, scientific knowledge is not a 
finite collection of cut-and-dired empirical facts, nor does an isolated 
empirical fact represent such knowledge in any accurate way. Empirical 
facts are, however, among the elemehts of which it is composed, though 
they frequently appear in an abstract form rather than as data. Equally 
important as elements are the ideas or concepts and the so-called con¬ 
ceptual schemes with which empirical facts are systematically organized. 
But again, it may be said that an isolated concept or conceptual scheme 
does not represent scientific knowledge in any accurate way. What is 
essential is the combination of elements. Scientific knowledge could 
be roughly defined, then, as an intimate combination of empirical facts 
and generalized concepts systematically organized, or ordered, in accord¬ 
ance with conceptual schemes. 

Insofar as it conveys a static picture, that statement is still in¬ 
sufficient. None of the elements is immutable. Although dominant con¬ 
ceptual schemes are in many cases conserved for long periods of time 
and usually constitute conservative elements, they may be altered by 
the discovery of new data and by fresh ideas. And a fresh idea or the 
evolution of a conceptual scheme may demand a fresh interpretation of 

















. 

■ ■ 

' 




' 

• t 

' 

' 


. 












■ 



.... 






. 




■ ■ • 

. j I 


-233- 


old data, thus creating new facts, or it may indicate how new data can 
be obtained by further observation or experiment, again leading, pos¬ 
sibly, to new facts. (Facts are being regarded here as interpreted 
data.) Thus, scientific knowledge is a dynamic affair. Individually 

and collectively, its correlated facts and its networks of ideas are 

it 

subject to growth and change. So is the whole combination. 

Without growth and change, no advancement of scientific knowledge 
would be possible. This much is obvious. Nothing can advance by stand¬ 
ing still. It is quite clear from past experience, moreover, that ad¬ 
vancement is to be achieved by pressing into the unknown. But this still 
leaves the investigator with little by which to guide his endeavors. Is 
there not some sort or aspect of growth and change, some course of 
development in scientific knowledge, which may be regarded as partic¬ 
ularly favorable to its advancement? 

This is a controversial question. It must be recognized, to begin 
with, that advancement has been brought about in the past by many dif¬ 
ferent means—-by the discovery of new data, by fresh and original thinking 
or by the evolution of conceptual schemes, as already indicated, and also 
by new developments in mathematics, by advances in the practical arts, by 
the improvement of old instruments and the invention of new ones, and so 
forth. Generally speaking, there has occurred a complicated interaction 
of such factors, operating through the interplay of many minds; scientific 
endeavor is a speculative, social enterprise involving communication among 
many workers in diverse fields. Notwithstanding all this, the interaction 
of experimental investigation and conceptual or theoretical thinking may 
be regarded as the central feature of the process. It is this reaction, 

^See also Part II: Ch. Ill, Sec. IV; 


Ch. IV, Sec. III. 



' 

••• !'.oo brim 

\ ; • . • • '; ' . vfrr. r --V r 

r ■' i • 1 . :' i 

. • , 

\ 

' 

' 

• ■ : . 7 • 

. 

. 

. • 




. 



. 
























-234- 


past experience shows, which is fundamentally responsible for the ad¬ 
vancement of scientific knowledge, whether by small steps or by great 
bounds. Controversy appears whenever anyone suggests that development 
on one side of the reaction has more to do with advancement than 
development on the other. Thus, Conant seems to hold, while recogniz¬ 
ing all the complications noted above, that the mainstream of advance 
is defined, by lowering of the degree of empiricism and corresponding 
extension of the range of theory, and that, accordingly, the balance 
of power rests with the evolution of conceptual thought.Dingle, on 

the other hand, suggests that "the growth of the field of correlated 

o 

observations” is "the continuously progressive element in science". 

Thus, he seems to regard the balance as lying on the side of experi¬ 
mental investigation. 

"While it is merely a matter of relative weight or emphasis, Conant*s 
viewpoint will be adopted here, as it appears to be well supported by the 
development of scientific knowledge in the past. Into the bargain, it 
seems particularly appropriate to the present circumstances. The analysis 
presented in the preceding part of this study shows that there is a great 
and increasingly acute need for fresh and, indeed, revolutionary con¬ 
ceptual thinking—to overcome the imprisoning effect of the sheer mass 
of existing scientific knowledge, for instance; perhaps to achieve more 
coalescence with a view to countering the trend toward narrower special¬ 
ization; and certainly to resolve the problems of complexity. 


■^James B. Conant, On Understanding Science . 

2 

Herbert Dingle, in a review of Conant*s book. Nature, Oct. 9, 1948. 












- 235 - 


Unquestion ably, there also is a great need for further development and 
for improvement in experiment, and the field of correlated observations 
must continue to grow; but there is much reason for holding, not only 
that the advancement of scientific knowledge in the fairly immediate 
future wd.ll depend more on developments in conceptual thought than on 
developments in experiment and observation, but also that the latter 
will depend more on fresh thought than on the refinement and elabora¬ 
tion of equipment along established lines. This, at any rate, is the 
viewpoint herein adopted by the writer. 

A summary is now in order. Sight educational problems and needs, 
arising largely from the growth of scientific (and technical) informa¬ 
tion and embedded knowledge, have been discerned and delineated on the 
basis of the analysis in Part II, with designations (A) to (H). How 
are they to be met? What do they require in education for the advance¬ 
ment of scientific knowledge. In dealing with these questions, primary 
consideration will be given to educational preparation for fundamental 
inquiry and particular emphasis will be laid on the need and promise of 
fresh and original thinking; in addition, further draughts will be made 
on the fund of ideas developed in Part II. 















' 























' 

. 

. 


. 






, 


' 

. ■ IX : ! 

' 


























CHAPTER I 


RESOLUTION OF PROBLEMS 

On the following page, the rather involved and closely related 
problems described in (A)-(D) are set out, after dissection, in tabular 
form. It should be noted that the apparent demands of the growth, far 
from being.of the "once and for all” sort suggested by the very brief 
descriptions in the table, are persistent and have to be regarded as 
ever-increasing from the long-term standpoint. The adverse prospect 
in each case is what is to be expected if the attempt to meet the de¬ 
mand should exceed the limiting conditions. Each pitfall of reaction 
to the adverse prospect should be regarded as typical but not exclusive. 

For the purpose of making a more or less theoretical resolution of 
the problems, the number of variables involved will be reduced by 
specifying two assumptions: 

(a) The period of formal studies--to be regarded as a unit unless 
otherwise indicated, in context--should not, for optimum results, exceed 
twenty years. 

(b) The hereditary capacity of the individual has some stable upper 
limit; this assumption is not to be taken as implying that a statistical 
survey at the present time would accurately measure any such limit. 

These two assumptions fix the limiting conditions, except for (B) 
Primary. Here, the limiting condition rests on an assumption, based 
on Stevens' thesis, that there is a minimum of intercommunication below 

jr 

which returns would diminish . 1 


%ee p. 64, 


above; reference 16 . 
















. 




. 


. 




' 


. 











■ 


" ■ r 








. 


’ 

. 




. 








BASIC DEMANDS OF GROWTH 


-237- 


Q) 

P 

cd 

CD O 
X CO 

|h 

O 


I p 
*o Id 

p cq 
ft -H 
CO 


p 

o 


to 


, 

bO 

1 S’ 



o 

p 

CD to 

3 rH 



rH -H 

•H 

P 

bp 

P Td 

P 

•H *H 

(0 


CO 

-P O 



Tj o 

O 

CO 

P 

o E 

•H 

O P 

P 


1 

O 

• 

• 

•H 

p 

•H 

•H P 

P 

•H P 

to 


/-—■* 

P -P 

o 

o 

cm cd 

Cm 

p 

P 

-P O 

P 

Cm X 

p 


< 

P (0 

p 

p 

-P 0 

P 

O 

P 

O «M 

cd 

P cd 

p 


V 

P 

CO 

CO 

•H ft 

P 

o 

cd 

P 

p 

P O 

o 



£ O 

J 

1 

ft 

P, 


P 

•o Ch 

rH 

ft p 

o 


P 

-p £ 

/-N 

**-X 

«m 

5 

p 

rH 

P o 





P 

P -P 

<* 


O 

01 

•rH 


ft 

1 

p 


bO 


CO 

PQ 

"_/ 

'—/ 






p 


o 

fi 


• 





bO 



cd 

X 

-p 

£ 


o 

bO 




P 



bo p 

o 


to 

p 

P 




•H 

ft 


P rH 

•H 

bO cm 

CO 

p 

CO 




ft 

X 

P 


•H 

P 

P O 

•H 

p 

I 

• 

• 

p o 

cd 

P 


bO H 

P 

•d 

P 

p 

/—s 

cd P 

o 

o 

2 8 

o 

X 


P eg 

ft 

? ft 

•H 

-p 

< 

O X 

p 

p 

rH 

P 


o p 


O P 

s 

p 

V_ S 

H P 

CO 

CO 

p CO 

P 

ft 


rH P 

bO 


•H 

p 


P -p 

1 

I 

> o 

P 

CO 


o o 

P 

P o 

X 


CD 

P CO 


/—s 

X P 

> 



P Cm 

•H 

Cd Ph 



Q> 

> 

< 

<U 

< ft 

o 



ft 


3 



co 

O 


V_ / 





bfl 

















X 0 

rH 

CJ 

•H 

CO 

t>s 

«h 

P 













P 3 

cd 

> 

X) 

P 

O 

P P 


& 

1 





cm 

i—i 



CO 

cd P 

p 

•H 

p 

•H 


i ° 


✓-V 





o 

cd 



bO P 

>s «h 


rH 

p 

> 

r's 



cd 

<d 






P 



P O 

•H 


p 

•H 

P 

O ft 

1 

X 


P 


• 


>sX 


• 

•H *H 

P O 

> 

bO 


P 

•H 

o cd 

r—v 

P 


cd 


o 


P 



o 

-P ft 

•H 


p 

t>, O 

CO 

P o 

<$ 

o 

P 

E 


p 


•H 

> 


p 

•rH »H 

O P 

•H 

rH 

P 

CO 

P -H 


o 

o 

•H 


CO 


O 

•H 


CO 

E X 

Cd d 

P 

P 

•H 

X 

p 

P 


p 

cm 

P 


1 


cd 

X 


! 

•H p 

ftp 


P 

£ 

o 

o 

P 

P 

CO 


ft 




ft 

P 


M\ 

3 O 

cd p 


cd 

CO 

p 

p 

♦H 

P 


CO 



< 


cd 



<$ 

O 

o 


m 

ft 

ft 

3 


CO 





M- 


o 


















, 




P 














& 

o 

X P 




o 

•rH 





rH 









Cd 

P CO 




p 





cd 

be 




P 




X 

p 1 




cd 

H 



p 

F? 

p 



0 

3 P 




p 

cd^ 




o 

P 



d 

P 

•H 



E 

O -H 




o 

> ft 




p 

cd 



•H 

O 

P 



•H 

cd P 




o 

cd 




X 

X 



P 

cm 

P 



P 

P P 




p 

p 




P 

p 





cd 




P O 




CO 

bo >> 





X O 



P 

P 

p 



P 

P 




1 

bO 3 




P 

P o 



P 

O 

i—1 



P 

O cm 




/-X 

cd 




P 

cd p 



O 

Cm 




O 

P 




< 





3 

E CO 



I2J 





3 





'—H 





S 

P 


















Q 












3 



















P 



>5 




P 










P 


X 



rH 


P 


P 










p 


cd 



P 


O 


0 

i 









p 

X 

P 



> 


•H 


P 

£ 






1 P 



cd 

P 

P 



•H 


P 


cd 

o 






rH O 



P 

3 

3 



P 

P 

cd 


& & 

p 





P 

cd *H 



P 





ro 

P 

o 


J2 p 





p 

•H ft 



bC 

3 

P 



p 

P 

P 


<C Cd 

- bO 





3 

o cd 




ft 

P 



•H 

P 

X 


E 

P X 





P 

P C3 



3 

ft 

o 



rH 

P 

p 


•rH 

P P 





P 

ft-H 



P 

P 

E 



cd 

3 



p 

O rH 





P 

CO 



O 

X 




P 




ft 






ft 




ft 





cy 







/-N 


< 

CQ 

O 

ft 












-238- 


Now, the general question is how to go about satisfying the demands 
without exceeding the specified limitations and consequently incurring 
the penalties of excess, yet also without reacting to these hazards in 
such a way as to stumble into the pitfalls. 

I—MORE KNOWLEDGE 

The table presents specialization—which, given the ever-increasing 
character of the (A)-Primary demand, must in the long run mean further 
or increasing specialization—as a mode of escape from the difficulties 
involved in attempting to satisfy this (A)-P demand. As a matter of 
fact, specialization has long been used for this purpose in practice, 
not only to avoid both the penalty of excess and the pitfall of reaction, 
but also to elude the demand itself. It has already been shown, however, 
with Parts I and II of this study, that the hope of thus eluding the 
demand has, in practice, been disappointed. What is more, further spe¬ 
cialization can be pursued only at the risk of making its own adverse 
prospect a reality. It is, indeed, the considered conclusion of many 
scientists that this (B)-Primary penalty is already being incurred. It 
must be concluded, then, that, however useful specialization may be for 
avoiding the penalty and the pitfall of (A)-P, it will not suffice for 
eluding the (A)-P demand, nor can it be increased for this purpose 
without penalty. But, in any case, to elude the demand is not to 
satisfy it. 

One obvious requisite of any attempt to satisfy it is more room, 
as it were, in the curriculum or in the educational process, for what 
is essential to the acquiring of knowledge. 

In what way or ways, if any, could more room be obtained? 




-239- 


This question, of course, leads to a number of other, more specific 
questions. To begin with, let it be asked whether there is any material, 
now generally required of the student, which could be largely eliminated 
on rational grounds. In the present study, for the sake of coherence and 
consistency, an answer to this question should be sought in the nature 
and the effects of the growth. Do they tell us anything significant? 

In the writer’s view, they do indeed, as follows: 

Change In Vocational Requirements It has already been mentioned 
(p. 225 ) that the growth of scientific and technical knowledge and 
information is partly responsible for the development in recent decades 
of a trend toward more ’’vocational training” in formal education. This 
has gone far but in comparatively recent years there have been increasing 
signs of a reaction. The value of ’’vocational training” for more or less 
professional work in the modern world is being called in question, above 
all, at the present time (1956), by men engaged in business and industry. 
T What do the effects of the growth have to say on this question? 

The rapid growth of scientific and technical knowledge and the even 
more rapid development and diversification of technology on the basis of 
this knowledge have made accelerating change the dominant characteristic 
of economies, both national and supra-national. This whole process, 
moreover, is producing rapid and profound changes in social and political 
life; and it demands in the political and social spheres, at national, 
international and global levels, further transformationswhich are likely 
to be still more profound and unsettling than those already occurring.3*4, 

5*6,7,3,9 


^Louis N. Ridenour, Bibliography In An Age of Science . 

^Peter F. Drucker, "America’s Next Twenty Years,” Hamer’s . March, 









. • ■ ' • 

. 


■ 



. 

■ 



. 

v.. 



■ 







. 

■ 








■ 












■ 

... ■ : 

’ 

■ • 




: ■ 




; ' ' ’ ' ' ' . ’ 

• . . • • ‘ ■ ' : ' ' ' ' . ■ • : 
.... • ’ 




-240- 


As far as vocations are concerned, all this has three main effects. 
It is: 

(a) rapidly changing the requirements of existing vocations and 
forms of endeavor ; 

(b) rapidly diversifying vocational opportunities, creating new 
opportunities and gradually relegating some vocations to the obsolescent 
category; 

(c) generally raising the educational requirements for earning a 
living, to say nothing of those for meeting the responsibilities of 
citizenship. 

During the next twenty-five years, a period of time little longer 
than that now given to education to the "doctoral” level for scientific, 
and other professional endeavor, these processes of change in vocational 
requirements may be expected to go very far indeed. General trends 
doubtless can be foreseen and. forecast with reasonable accuracy for a 
decade or two ahead but most of the detailed effects, at the scale level 

)• , *Cj • ■ ' 

of the single vocational specialty, probably will remain unforeseeable 


April, May and June. 

5"Automation,” Labour Research . Vols. VIII and IX, 1955-56. 

^Harold H. Smith, "Education and the Control of Evolution," The 
Saturday Review . January 8, 1955* 

^Editorial, "Ton-Miles and Space-Travel," The Aeroplane . June 8, 

1956. 

^John von Neumann, "Can Vie Survive Technology?", Fortune . June, 

1955. 

^James Muir, Royal Bank of Canada "Monthly Letter", August, 1956. 


















■ 




' 





' 

















* 
















■ • 


• 


L ■ 


' 

1 


■ 



' 









V ;■ ■' I.: • 
























-2a- 


and unpredictable in any precise way. What is more, scientific dis¬ 
covery and technological innovation may, at any time within this com¬ 
paratively short period of a quarter-century, upset forecasts of general 
trends. 

All that is to speak only of the period during which a pupil now 
entering elementary school would be obtaining his education. The voca¬ 
tional possibilities and prospects in the subsequent period of thirty- 
five or more years, during which he would be earning his living in the 
full sense, will surely defy prediction in any but the most general terms. 

In view of the strong conservative element in human nature, there 
need be no fear that the main lines of human endeavor and the basic 
varieties of vocation, as now conceived, will in large numbers disappear 
altogether or be altered beyond recognition, even in the next sixty 
years; nor need it be feared that similar calamities will befall large 
numbers of the fundamental general principles underlying and governing 
practice; though there will doubtless be some developments of both kinds 
and there will assuredly be many new vocations as a result both of spe¬ 
cialization and of innovation. But almost certainly there will be, in 
the case of many existing vocations, numerous changes in the details 

and routines of practice and radical alterations in the modes and con- 

10 

ditions of practice; and of course there mil be many new vocations. 

That, both experience and current trends indicate, is the prospect; 
moreover, beyond ten or fifteen years ahead—the figures are merely to 
suggest the rough scale of time—most of the changes in details and 


10 See, for instance, "Signposting the Future," I and II, Petroleum 
Press Service . July and August, 1956, and "New Thinking", same source, 
August, 1956, regarding the oil industry alone; also, Eugene Ayres, "The 
Fuel Situation," Scientific American . October, 1956. 














-242- 


routines, and the radical alterations and innovations, probably will 
defy precise prediction. 

Granted these conclusions, it must appear futile, to say the least, 
to attempt to make formal education vocational by requiring much study 
of the "technical” details and the routines of current practice, which, 
in any case, are often found to vary, at a given time, from one com¬ 
mercial establishment or government department to another. Most of 
these things, even now, are better left to be learned on the job, as 
men engaged in industry and commerce are testifying in growing numbers. 
It will become increasingly necessary to leave them to be learned thus, 
if "graduates" are not to be left at the mercy of, still more if they 
are to be well fitted to meet, change in vocational requirements over 
the long pull. "Vocational training" in the sense indicated above, 
narrow "vocationalism", evidently is an educational mistake. It does 
not accord with the prospect of change in vocational requirements. It 
will not serve the interest of the student: quite the contrary. 

It is most important to note that these views are generally valid. 
Education for fundamental inquiry is the primary and the main concern 
in these pages; and it might be widely conceded, without the above 
argument, that "vocational training" is out of place in education for 
fundamental inquiry. But that is not what is being submitted here. 

The point is that "vocational training" is out of place in modern 
education. Kickover puts it this way in respect to that "practical" 
prof e s sion--engine ering: 

I do not believe that ’practical stuff’ should be or can 
be properly taught in a university. The reason is easy to 
see. Nearly all college textbooks are several years behind 
current industrial practice. Furthermore, they are written 
by men who do not have the latest ’practical’ information, so 
that the texts are obsolete even while they are being written. 






-243- 


The employer who wants a 'practical' engineering graduate 
is simply hiring a man who knows how to make the same mistakes 
that have been made in his plant for the past ten to fifteen 
years. 

At this point, some reader will be sure to think: "Ah, but that 
is to speak of college education and of those who are going on to 
college. What of the rest? Isn't their case different?" It is too 
early in the argument to attempt a full answer to this question, but 
one may note the important point — (c), p. 240—that generally the edu¬ 
cational requirements of earning a living are rising. Equally signifi¬ 
cant is the essence of what more and more men engaged in business and 
industry, men of foresight, are saying: "Stop trying to teach prospective 
employees the 'technical' details and routines of current practice. Leave 
that to be learned on the job. Give them some academe background, some 
skill in communication, some understanding of durable principles and the 
capacity to learn." These two points having been raised, the question 
will be left for later consideration, and the present discussion can be 
resumed on the original basis in which education for fundamental inquiry 
is the primary and the main concern. 

It is submitted, then, that "vocational training"--the learning of 
"technical" details and routines of current practice--must be reduced to 
a minimum during the period of formal studies.. .(l) 


^Rear Admiral Hyman G. Rickover, USN, "Engineering and Scientific 
Education," as included in a brief submitted by The Engineering Institute 
of Canada to The Royal Commission on Canada's Economic Prospects, p. 13. 
Admiral Rickover has directed American research and development for sub¬ 
marine propulsion by atomic reactor. 










. 




t .... ! - ■ • , ' 

' ■" ;• 

. ‘ 






' , ■: 








• ■ - v r • ’ ■ ,-f.i ■; j ; 










. 

' 




.3 ' 




. 


- 








, 

. f 


' 

































There is, then, this material, required of the student in certain 
courses, and in considerable amount, which, to say the least, could be 
largely eliminated on rational grounds D Here is one way in which more 
room can be obtained for an attempt to satisfy (A)-P. 

Fundamental Focus — One may be quite certain, however, on the basis 
of Part II of this study, that implementing (1) will go only so far to¬ 
ward satisfying (A)-P. Is there any other prospect of obtaining more 
room? 

In Chapters II and III of Part II it was suggested that fundamental 
formulations offered some prospects of meeting the problems created by 
the growth. In Sec. III of Ch. IV, these anticipative suggestions were 
developed into a set of ideas, the general import of which is that the 
investigator must gain command of fundamental formulations—the centres 
of power and influence in the scientific realm. The reasons for this 
view were elaborated pp. 193-7« Translated into educational terms, all 
this means that: 

Learning must be focussed on fundamental formulations (principles 
or descriptions) ......o ...... a .. (2) 

It will be recalled that these parts of scientific knowledge were 
described as “being compact..They have also been described as the 
shorthand of scientific knowledge. Thus, it may be expected that the 
student, by gaining command of them, will acquire knowledge in compact 
form. Moreover, as they have “the power of generality” and are the 
“centres of power and influence”, the more of them he commands, the 
better fitted he will be to increase his knowledge. As previously stated: 

“In any major division of a network, he may well be able to make 
his educational approach along a single important branch line; once he 









-alp¬ 


has reached the fundamental centre he will be in a position to fan out 
in other directions and grasp the larger scene. So also for the whole 
of a network.” (p. 195). 

This is to say that at a certain stage in his education he may well 
be able to proceed to the centre by specialization. In fact, this is a 
common practice, and many investigators do fan out in the course of 
their professional work, though many do not 0 The writer submits that 
more would, because they would be fitted to, if the principle of funda¬ 
mental focus were adopted as a cardinal principle of education for sci¬ 
entific inquiry and were generally applied. As to the need for and 
value of this Rickover testifies: 

Another important point that has been made clear to me 
in interviewing young graduates is that they know many facts— 
but they have not learned many principles. Principles are 
more important than facts and far more difficult to master. 

But once a principle is learned, it becomes a part of one and 
is never lost. The facts we learn are soon forgotten and 
their meaning changes with time. A trained man knows how to 
answer questions. An educated man knows what questions are 
worth asking. 

My concept of a good engineering course is one in which 
the student learns the principles of mathematics, of physics, 
of mechanics, of electricity, of metallurgy, and of chemistry. 

A thorough tinder standing of these leads easily to handling the 
facts associated with them,. 

Of course, some facts must be mastered in the course of mastering 
principles. But the principle of fundamental focus should be applied; 
the student should strike for the fundamental formulations. This not only 
will give him the most powerful kind of knowledge but will best fit him to 
acquire more knowledge. 

While (2) will enable the student to go farther toward satisfying 
(A)-P, it requires him, as Rickover remarks and as the writer has shown 


12 


ibid. 













„ 

. 









: 

■ 

' 

. 

* 

» 

* 

« 




. 






























-246- 


earlier in this study, to follow a harder road. Inhere a major formula¬ 
tion, such as quantum theory, is the objective, the road, also will be 
long; and as fundamental inquiry is pressed deeper the road tends to 
grow longer. Thus, in a way, in endeavoring to resolve the volumetric 
problem with (2), one is led back to the secondary problem of time. 

II—DEMAND FOR MORS TIM 

There is implicit in the Table I statement of (A)-Secondary, also 
(B), (C) and (D) Secondary, the view that it would be unwise to prolong 
the period of formal learning, and this view is expressed in assumption 
(a). Yet the demand for more time for learning remains. This demand, 
under such conditions, can only be met to any extent by allocating more 
time to learning within the given period of years and/or by permitting 
and enabling the student to economize on his expenditure of time. Among 
the proposals which have been made are the following: 

1. Lengthening the school week from five to six days. It is six in 
some European countries. 

2. Lengthening the school year. Rickover envisions the possibility 
of making the equivalent of two more full years available for learning 
before university, by adding thirty days to the present school year in 
the United States. The idea has already been applied in university to 
the medical course; e.g., at the University of Alberta. 

3. Permitting the so-called "gifted" or M superior” student to ad¬ 
vance through the school and university courses as rapidly as he is able. 
Alternatively, adopting what has been called a "stream" system: the 


"^Rickover, op. cit., p. 14. 




















• ' ■ ' . 1 . 












. 



• 











■ ,1 



. 





■ 









• 






■ 




. 

■ 

■ 




• 



■ 
























' 


■ 




' 




.. 

. 




■ 

. 

: ' • $'■ • 
















- 247 - 


individual student would have a choice of two or three streams and would 
follow the one most nearly suited to his capacity and rate of learning. 

4. Reducing, at least in university, some of the paraphernalia of 
education, such as required courses, required attendance at lectures, 
examinations, grades, credits and so forth.^ 

The corollary of 3* and 4. is that students would be put more on 
their mettle and would have to proceed with learning more on their own 
initiative. Reducing required attendance at lectures also would put 
lecturers on their mettle, and help to separate the sheep from the goats, 
among them; those who had formed the habit of wasting the time of their 
students, or boring them to tears, would come to realize this in time, 
as they discovered that the students most likely to ignore their lec¬ 
tures were the most able. 

5. Reducing to the very minimum the time-wasting practice of giving 
and taking "dictation** in class. For a very large proportion of the 

students, ‘'notes'* in class inevitably degenerate into stenography—the 

m nn 

almost automatic and practically unthinking transference of the teacher’s 
summary of information to the student's notebook so it can be studied and 
learned at some.later time. Except in very special circumstances, this 
is an appalling waste of time, which ignores the obvious fact that 
hundreds of man-hours have already been devoted to recording the informa¬ 
tion in books and filing the books in libraries. 

From the student's standpoint, and assuming good lecturing or teach¬ 
ing, class time should be devoted to intelligent and thoughtful listening, 
to gaining an understanding of the material and committing as much as 


^Henry Steele Commager, "The Problem Isn't Bricks--It's Brains," 
New York Times Magazine . Jan. 29, 1956. 








f: ■ 

. 

• t 

. 

. 

. 

■ 





. 











- 248 - 


possible to memory, to questioning and discussion. The learning thus 
achieved can be extended and consolidated by further study of textbook 
material, searching reference books, further questioning and discussion, 
observation and experiment, and writing essays or giving oral reports. 

6. In secondary schools especially, reducing the number and variety 
of courses offered to the student. Main targets: personal development 
courses, which in some school systems are among ’’credit" courses required 
of all students; optional specialties, which have multiplied greatly dur¬ 
ing the past two or three decades. The application of (l) and (2), of 
course, would have considerable effect along these lines, though their 
primary effect would be to alter the character of required courses, 
particularly in the sciences. 

7. Generally improving the quality of teaching and generally improv¬ 
ing the efficiency with which the process of education is conducted. 

These are continuing aims of teachers and educators, in the normal 
course of events. 

Bps 

The first and second of these proposals seem open to some objections, 
at least insofar as "universal” or "mass" education in Canada and the 
United States is concerned. For one thing, their implementation could 
conceivably lead into the pitfall of reaction envisaged for the prolong¬ 
ation (in years) of the formal learning period. 

To the third, on the other hand, there seems to be no valid objec¬ 
tion in theory. Far from being "undemocratic" as sometimes objected, 
it recognizes that there are individual differences in capacity for 
learning, and that what is a full or maximum opportunity for education 
for a student of average capacity is not such for a student of relatively 
superior capacity. It would, moreover, serve much the same purpose as 




' 


-2U9- 


lo and/or 2., without leading into the pitfall* It therefore seems 
preferable, though 1* and/or 2* may eventually become essential* 

Item lu offers some prospects for economizing on the expenditure 
of student time in university.While the suggested changes do not seem 
practicable for public secondary education on this continent, students 
at this level, as well as at university, need to be put more on their 
mettle and their own initiative* There is far too much spoon-feeding*'""''" 

This hinders the student in learning what is, above all, essential - the 
art of learning on his own initiative and by his own resources (see pp* 

273-U* below). Item 5o describes a common practice which is, in part, a 
symptom of spoon-feeding* Its reduction to a minimum would afford a 
substantial economy in the student's expenditure of time. 

Bound up in 6* is the question of what must be considered essential 
in education from the standpoint of the demands of the growth* An answer 
to this question is being developed in terms of the principles which are 
being educed in these pagesj it will be presented as a design for education 
in the next chapter. Item 7o does not come within the purview of this thesis* 
In conclusion, the writer submits as a "minimum” principles 
The student must be permitted and enabled to economize on his 

expenditure of time.• ••«*o.*.ooo*«»oo<>oo.•••••••«••••»•••••(3) 

Giving effect to this principle is regarded here as a matter of 
necessity due to the demand for more time created by the growth. It is 


* By "reducing examinations", Cornmager means, particularly, reducing 
tests during and at the end of each term. His ideas are based on tradi* 
tional practices at many universities in Europe and Great Britain* 

^Sidney Smith, "Brains Unlimited," Canadian Education , June, 195U, 
pp. 5-6 0 See also Thomson, pp* 2£0-5l, below. 











c. 
















- 250 - 


submitt ed that rational, unobjectionable and practicable means of put¬ 
ting it into effect are already known; e.g., 3*^ 4. and 5*, with 6. as 
a possibility yet to be fully examined. 

Eventually, it may also become necessary to allocate more time to 
learning, within a given period of years of formal education, as part 
of the effort to meet (A)-(B)-(C)-(D)-Secondary. 

Ill —FURTHER SPECIALIZATION 

As brought out in the second chapter of Part II in particular, con¬ 
centration of individual inquiry through specialization has been extremely 
fruitful in scientific endeavor in spite of certain dangers of specializa¬ 
tion. This concentration recognizes (a) the necessity of getting to the 
frontier of the unknown, (b) the accumulative character of scientific 
knowledge and the consequent necessity of travelling a long road to the 
frontier, (c) the fact that individual capacity is limited, and (d) the 
force of the rule—divide (and isolate) and conquer. It has advanced 
scientific knowledge by enabling many individuals to penetrate the un¬ 
known , most of them by small steps, a few by great leaps. But its 
fruitfulness also depends on effective communication of new information 
and knowledge among the many investigators. This is essential. 

To put it briefly, specialization not only is inescapable in educa¬ 
tion for scientific inquiry and in inquiry itself, but also ’’profitable" 
in inquiry. More, it is "profitable” in learning, for it permits the 
student to penetrate a subject in depth, to get inside it, instead of 
merely skittering along its surface. The case for specialization in 
learning has been put trenchantly by Thomson, as follows: 

It is not, indeed, in our techniques of imparting know¬ 
ledge that we have failed. It is in some respects because 
our techniques of teaching are so powerful that we have failed 



. • 

' 

' 


. 





























- 251 - 


to teach people to learn for themselves. We have encouraged 
them to be too passive and too limply receptive in their educa¬ 
tion, and have not concentrated on infecting children, before 
they, leave school, with that vigorous curiousity, that critical 
spirit of enquiry and thirst for further intellectual and 
aesthetic experience, which are the greatest legacy of a 
sound education. There is little doubt that the chief reason 
for this failure (to which, of course, there are some notable 
exceptions) is the underlying belief that they must ’know’ so 
much before they leave school, and to generalise studies more 
widely and for still longer would inevitably increase this 
tendency. It is broadly true that the more elementary and 
the more general the character of study, the more dependent 
is the student on the teacher. More has to be taken on trust, 
more learned by heart and stuffed into the memory, more pas¬ 
sively received as information. Only when he has penetrated 
deeper into his sector of study does the student 'get the feel 
for it’, and acquire both the ability and the self-confidence 
(and perhaps even the interest and the curiousity) to explore 
its further recesses for himself. If he never goes into it 
more deeply, the student will never acquire the spontaneous 
spirit of inquiry and the critical faculty needed for the 
vital tasks of self-education. Yet we intend to neglect this 
aspect more and more and sacrifice it to giving a smattering 
of knowledge about more and more subjects such as a maturer 
student could quickly acquire on his own from any public 
library. 

The place to rectify ignorance of other than a specialty 
is in the schools rather than in the universities, and there 
in the schools it is departmentalization rather than special¬ 
isation that is at fault... .What is needed is as much special¬ 
isation as now, but a difference in the method of study, so as 
to explose the interrelation of several different forms of 
knowledge 

It will be noted that Thomson speaks for the depth which can be 
obtained, which, within the limits of individual capacity, and in the 
face of the growth of knowledge in depth, can only be obtained by con¬ 
centration of effort through specialization. This depth, he regards 
as essential not only for knowing but also for acquiring the arts of 


^David Thomson, "Specialisation?”, The Spectator , May 20, 1949, 

p. 673. 











■ 


' 

: • , . • j 




. 

.... 














- 252 - 


learning and for preserving or developing the desire to learn. He also 
issues a clear warning against the superficiality from which specializa¬ 
tion is a mode of escape. 

It has been repeatedly shown in this thesis, and it is simply ob¬ 
vious, that specialization must be complemented by intercommunication. 
Were a specialist to be out of communication with others, he could con¬ 
centrate his effort and deepen his inquiries to the nth degree, yet he 
would not add one iota to the sum of human knowledge. It is postulated 
herein that he must not merely be in communication with others but in 
communication at least to some minimum extent. But there is more to 
the matter than that; for, as specialization increases, communication 
becomes more difficult, and a higher mastery of the arts of communica¬ 
tion becomes necessary.. The educational import of this need has been 
shown in Ch. IV of Part II, as series of conclusions respecting rising 
requirements in languages and the arts of communication. These conclu¬ 
sions may be regarded as a set of principles. 

Referring now to (B) Primary in Table I, it is submitted that any 
attempt to resolve the problem requires, for one thing, the adoption of 
the aforesaid ”principles" and their implementation at appropriate 
stages...(4)^ 

This is-a primary requirement. It means that the study and the 
improvement of the student’s command of languages and the arts of com¬ 
munication must be pursued with unrelenting vigor throughout the period 
of formal education—and, indeed, beyond. It is admitted at once that, 
insofar as the period of formal education is concerned, more particularly 
the last third of it, this will add to the load on the student; yet it 


^See Ch. IV of Part II and very brief summary pp. 214-16. 

















. 

' 












. 







- 253 - 


may be expected that the additional investment of time and effort will 
be offset by increasingly rich dividends of a qualitative sort as the 
student advances higher in formal studies and passes on into profes¬ 
sional endeavor. 

Still, the problem presented by the demand for further specializa¬ 
tion remains. Narrowing to the point of diminishing returns must be 
avoided. Indeed, even the present degree of specialization must some¬ 
how be mitigated or offset. There is inherent in it the danger of 
acquiring intellectual blinkers. 

Viscount Samuel observed in the British House of Lords a few years 
ago: M If a man leaves a technical school, or even a university, as a 
specialist, and nothing but a specialist, then, whatever degrees he may 
be able to append to his name, he is not an educated man.” 

That is putting it broadly. The man is not, in fact, adequately 
fitted out for work even in his specialty. Delaying the onset of 
single-track specialization appears to be the sine qua non of broaden- 
ing the foundation during the period of formal studies, and this 
broadening can only be achieved by stretching the student's mind over 
wider ground. Let it be supposed that, for this purpose, his science 
courses are to be broadened both in secondary school and during his 
undergraduate years at university, and his university program is to 
include further studies in the so-called humanities or liberal arts. 

The accumulation in both domains of scholarship is enormous, and in¬ 
exorably increasing; his capacity and time are strictly limited. How, 
then, is the broadening of science courses and of the undergraduate 
program at university to be accomplished without falling into the pit- 
fall of superficiality? Is it not, indeed, just this pitfall into which 











r 

. 


. 




« 

' 

. 

. 










' . 

. 




' 










. 


. 


























r 







1 ' 





-2511- 


much education in Canada and the United States already has fallen, and 
toward which education in Britain, according to Thomson, has recently 
been stumbling? 

Dale has put the question as follows: 

How are we going to produce astronomers, physicists or 
chemists today, with an adequate grounding also in the facts 
and conceptions of biology, or graduates in biology and 
medicine, with an adequate working knowledge of astronomy, 
physics and chemistry? And how can we continue to do this 
at the present rate of expansion and replacement of knowledge 
in all these departments, without producing what Newton called 
’little smatterers 1 , qualified rather for glib and pretentious 
talk over a wide range, than for serious participation in any 
special field of scientific inquiry? That, it seems to me, is 
bound to be a growing problem, an ever more serious dilemma for 
the educator in science as such* We cannot afford too close a 
specialization. A wide-ranging grasp of the achievements of 
science as a whole is an important factor of cultural value. 
Experience shows, indeed, how often important new growing 
points of science appear where fields of enquiry, which seem 
widely disparate, come newly into contact and establish a 
margin of common interest, as is happening at present with 
physics and biology,. On the other hand, I believe that a 
case could be made for the proposition that science can make 
its greatest contribution to man* s real education, to his 
intellectual and moral discipline, by awakening him to the 
ideal of an exact and comprehensive knowledge, a competent 
and critical grasp of the whole order of facts and ideas be¬ 
longing to one sufficient but limited range of scientific 
enquiry. How, under present and still developing conditions, 
can we devise a scientific education which is at once wide 
enough and, at the same time, intense enough at the chosen 
point, to produce men of science who are savants without be¬ 
ing pedants? 

Others will deal, with much greater experience than mine, 
with the need of the scientist for education beyond the range 
of the natural sciences and the danger of early specialization. 

I am certainly no advocate of early specialization, provided 
that the alternative gives something better than an unsub¬ 
stantial veneer,,,,"- 0 


*^Sir Henry Dale, in ’’Education of the Man of Science,” Advancement 
of Science, January, 19U8, p. 310„ 










c. 





’ A t 


c'.'-; ■ S’" < 0 ••01 - ; 

■' . ■ r -. ■■rtr !i '' t : . ’ 



li< : l ! pi 

1 

«, ■’ ’ ' ' ' 

^ , 1 : 

) *1 : 






- 255 - 


The problem of (B)-Primary, it is plain, is being transformed into 
the problem of (C)-Primary, in the course of the present argument. The 
question, then, is how to achieve both depth and breadth-actually, be¬ 
cause of the growth, ever greater depth and ever more breadth—without 
overloading the student and yet also without simply falling between the 
two stools. 

IV—DEPTH AND BREADTH 

In the present context, where the design of education for funda¬ 
mental inquiry is being sought, the resolution in principle of the 
problem (C)-P is determined by the following considerations: 

First, as specialization itself testifies, the impossibility of 
the individual keeping up with the increase in the breadth of the sci¬ 
entific domain has long since been accepted. 

Secondly, by the same token maintaining depth has been recognized 
as'a necessity, as being indispensable; and assuredly it is, for the 
investigator must penetrate the territory of the known in order to 
reach the frontier of the unknown; and today he must penetrate the 
known, in any one of many sectors, in very great depth. 

Third, if to learn and to master the arts of inquiry, including 
scientific “methodology", requires not only instruction but practice, 
and practice not only by slavish imitation but also by the heuristic 
system,^ then the student must do as the investigator does—he must 


%Ttese propositions are submitted at this point as though they 
were "iffy", because argument in regard to them has not yet been sub¬ 
mitted. It will be better placed further along in the chapter. 















. 

> ' 








' • • 



























. 







. 






■ 







. 


J, 












. 























“256- 


carry out inquiries in depth. For this, he must learn in depth.* 

The first point which these considerations determine is that depth 
cannot and must not be given up. When the student's limited capacity 
and time are being stretched in this direction—and increasingly as he 
proceeds through the stages of his education--bread.th can be obtained, 
so it seems to the writer, only by giving up the idea of "covering the 
whole range of knowledge"; that is, by giving up the idea of touching, 
more or less evenly, upon the whole range of human knowledge during the 
period of formal studies; upon this whole range during any part of the 
period; upon the whole range of scientific and technical knowledge, or 
of scientific knowledge alone, during the secondary part, say, in 
general or generalized science courses of the catch-all variety; upon 
the whole range of physics, of chemistry or of biology in so-named 
courses in the upper secondary grades, or in university; in short, upon 
the whole range of knowledge ostensibly embraced by any combination of 
courses called a program or by any particular course, until such time as 
the ultimate stage of single-track specialization is reached and the 
student-investigator is proceeding along his chosen path to the frontier 
of the unknown, this stage being deferred as long as possible. 

This may appear, at first thought, to mean giving up the idea of 
combining breadth with depth; but there is an alternative. It is: 

Concentrating learning, in depth, upon selected sectors of the 
whole range, or upon selected sectors of what is judged to be a 


*There is some suggestion here of learning preceding inquiry, 
though in general inquiry may be regarded as a refined form of learn¬ 
ing- -"One learns best by asking questions." 















. 


■ 




■ f - f J - ■ .' '■ ; 1 

■ 


. 




. 

1 ^ \ H 



, 

■ 














• « ■■ 1 . ■ • '■ ■ ■ ■ v ' ■ • : 

, 

1 , ifO 1 ' 






■ 

















■ 










-257- 


sufficient part of the whole range embraced by program or course, and 
establishing communication between these areas of concentration by 
whatever means may be judged best suited to the subject matter and to 
the stage of education—until the ultimate stage of specialization is 

reached.( 5 ) 

Concentration and Selectivity — What is proposed in ( 5 ) is the 
general form of a design for program and for course, which, though by 
no means entirely new, would, for the sake of combining depth and 
breadth, and in the face of the enormous and ever-growing volume of 
knowledge, call for a radical degree of concentration of student effort, 
and for a correspondingly high degree of selectivity in the choice of 
the areas of concentration in which instruction is to be given. It is 
perhaps superfluous to point out that the student who has the capacity 
and the time need not confine his learning in depth to the areas in 
which instruction is given. 

The design would, of course, be determined not only by (5v> but 
also by ( 2 ) which is closely akin to ( 5 ), by (l) and ( 4 ) to a lesser 
degree, and by ( 3 ) to a very slight degree. The designing of the pro¬ 
grams and the courses, for the education of students for fundamental 
scientific inquiry, according to these principles is, the writer sub¬ 
mits, a matter of necessity arising from the growth. 

Working out the design, say, of a common program for secondary 
school; the designs of the courses making up such a program, which 
doubtless would show individual variations; the designs of undergradu¬ 
ate programs leading ultimately to different are a s of specialization; 
and the designs of the courses making up these programs, designs which 
again, as in secondary school, would show individual variations—all 







-258- 


this detailed work would require the closely co-ordinated efforts and 
the collaboration of many individuals--specialists and experts in 
numerous fields. In short, it would require co-ordinating curriculum 
committees. These are already available but those which would be in¬ 
volved in radical revision of existing programs and/or courses might 
need to be reconstituted. At any rate, this detailed work does not 
fall within the scope of the writer's study, nor within his competence. 
The purpose of this study is to discover and to show the meaning of the 
growth. In the present chapter, the main principles which will determine 
the meaning are being educed. This task is not yet finished. 

To repeat, detailed designs for programs and courses are not going 
to be worked out here. Moreover, since all the determinative principles 
have not been educed, even the general features of a basic design cannot 
yet be described completely. Nevertheless, something more remains to be 
said, at this point, regarding the import of ( 5 ) when coupled with ( 2 ), 
and also with (l) and ( 4 ). 

Import of Design — For one thing, their adoption would involve the 
virtual abandonment of the popular idea that the student must learn and 
be able to recall on demand, at successive stages of his education, 
certain minimum amounts of specified factual information, drawn from 
numerous subdivisions, sub-subdivisions and sub-sub-subdivisions of 
each domain of knowledge he is required to study. Its abandonment 
wall be no loss: quite the reverse. In recent decades as the result 
of this idea, in Canada and the United States at any rate, curricula 
have become loaded down not only with inert ideas but with growing masses 
of fossilized facts and disinterred details. Although the human mind. 
















_ 






















- 

' 


. ■ 










- 

. 




















































' 







-259- 


fortunately enough, is able to cast this deadwood aside after a time, 
so long as it has to be carried along the stream of consciousness it is 
a burden on memory rather than a resource for the productive mills of 
observation and thought. This is not to deny the need and the value of 
factual information. It is to say, first, that the dwarfing of individual 
capacity by the output of the multitude has made nonsense of the popular 
idea described above, and, secondly, that the facts and the details used 
to educate the student must be kept alive or given a new lease on life. 

The adoption of the principles also would mean the elimination and 
replacement, at the very least the radical revision, of nearly all 
secondary and undergraduate courses of the following sorts: those which 
deal almost entirely with the ’’technical 1 * details and routines of cur¬ 
rent vocational practice; superficial catch-all courses, such as are 
common in secondary school in Alberta at the present time (1956); 
superficial broadening courses, such as are made prerequisite to, or 
required accompaniments of fairly specialized, undergraduate education 
for professional endeavor; so-called ’’broad general” courses; and so- 
called ’’survey” courses. 1 ^ 

The selection of areas of concentration within a specified range 
of knowledge, in accordance with ( 5 ), will be very difficult, but it may 
not be so difficult as would seem at first glance. At the outset, its 


*In the last four types, the aim may be sound; for it may be to 
bring several closely related sciences, or humanities, together; to 
reduce ’’departmentalization”; to secure breadth or to orient the stu¬ 
dent. But the practice is unsound when, in avo'idinSthe penalty of 
volumetric excess, the course stumbles into the pitfall of superfi¬ 
ciality; also unsound, though less so, when it falls short in respect 
to both depth and breadth. 





. 


















. 
















. 








. 










. 






. 














. 

' 















- 260 - 


difficulty would be eased by the adoption of (l) and by the abandonment 
of the popular idea that the student should know at successive stages, 
largely for its own sake, so much specified factual information. The 
principle of fundamental focus would be a guiding consideration of con¬ 
siderable utility. Long experience gained in choosing areas of concentra¬ 
tion for university programs and courses, and in years past for secondary 
programs and courses, also would be helpful. The extremely accumulative 
nature of scientific knowledge, and the necessity, so to speak, of "get¬ 
ting on stream",^ would be a determining factor in some cases at certain 
stages of learning, though this factor would not be dominant until the 
student is approaching and proceeding through the ultimate stage of spe¬ 
cialization. 

Finally, choices probably would be determined in some degree by the 
choice of the means of maintaining or establishing communication between 
areas of concentration. Experience and the literature on "broadening", 
"general education", and so forth, suggest a.number of possible means, 
such as: the use of "survey" material: linking up "everything of some¬ 
thing with something of everything";-^ historical approach, with particular 
attention to periods of greatest discovery, or to events capable of giving 
a sound appreciation of the methods, the nature and the import of scientific 
discovery-0,21,22; identifying and. isolating "the logical framework 


*See pp. 77-8. 

■^Report of British Committee on Postwar University Education (general), 
Advancement of Science . Vol. Ill, No. 9, 1944. 

^ ibid . Favor periods of greatest discovery. 

19j. b. Conant, oic. cit . Favors selection on the second basis mentioned. 
^Science Masters* Association, "The Teaching of General Science," report 

































. 










■ 


















' 


* 







■ 










' 







































. 



















- 261 - 


of each science from its factual content""vertical organization";^* 
exploration of all ramifications of a suitable area of concentration 
which (having been chosen for the purpose) has ramifications cutting 
across boundaries and through traditional divisions and subdivisions 
of the domain of knowledge :^ convergence (long-term) from two or three 
widely differing areas of concentration, the areas being parts of one 
domain (e.g., the domain of scientific knowledge)or domains them¬ 
selves.^ 

Most of these methods have been suggested for undergraduate studies 
or even postgraduate studies; the Institute of Physics was advised, for 
example, that historical studies in depth would be better left to the 
postgraduate level, as the student would need large funds of scientific 
and historical knowledge and a considerable degree of intellectual 
maturity. For secondary school, "survey" material, a connecting "main 


of general science subcommittee (revised). Nature, March 3, 1951. 

23- Ernst A. Hauser, "The Importance of Science in American Education," 
Science . June 8, 1951* pp. 643-6. 

^Institute of Physics, report of annual conference of the education 
group, "Education and Physics," Nature . May 12, 1951, pp. 762-4. 

2 3plenrik Bode, Frederick Hosteller, John Tukey and Charles Winsor, 
"The Education of a Scientific Generalist," Science . June 3, 1949. 

24- Leader on "Medical Education", Nature . Aug. 28, 1948. 

2 5Kathleen Lonsdale, "Specialized Science Training and Citizenship," 
Research . October, 1950. 

2 6p. Grodzinski, "Specialist Knowledge, Its Scope and Limitations," 
Research . February, 1951. 

2 ?F. A. Vick, "The Problem of Over-Specialisation," London Calling . 
June 21, 1956, p. 10. 






















• 1 • ■■ ' . (■; ' ■ '■ • J 


' 












’ 








. 


; "• ■ ■ ■ . *■ v ■ 1 v . - • 

■ - 

•: . • ■> : : ;■ ” ■ ' ‘ : • 1 

< 

*• • • - r, : ■ • . • ' ' ■ _ 11 ' . ... '• V ' ‘ ' • v ’ '' ; 


. 








' 


. 


. 


. 

' ' 
















. . 










- 262 - 


theme" and a modified historial approach with much anecdotal material 
might be among the suitable and feasible methods. 

Design For Depth Plus — However, the above list is submitted merely 
to show that prospective means of maintaining or establishing communica¬ 
tion between areas of concentration have been envisaged, Uhat the writer 
wishes to emphasize again is that depth must be secured through areas of 
concentration, so that the student will learn, or have an opportunity to 
learn, knowledge worth connecting up. In superficial courses, such as 
the writer has endeavored to categorize briefly, there seems to be much 
connecting up but even the connections become vague because, for lack of 
concentration in depth, what is supposed to be connected up remains com¬ 
paratively formless. 

The objectives envisioned by Dale, judging by the first two parts 
of this study-of the growth, have to be regarded as unattainable in any¬ 
thing remotely approaching the full sense, within the limited period of 
formal education. In this period, then, all that can be done is to aim 
toward them, to work toward them, and to lay a foundation which will best 
fit the student to continue working toward them when he has finished with 
formal education and is continuing to learn by his ov/n initiative and on 
his own resources. 

This foundation, the writer submits, must be designed according to 
( 5 ) and the other principles here being educed. 

" Uses"of "Liberal Arts " — Some study of the "liberal arts" or 
"humanities" is regarded as an essential part of secondary education 
practically everywhere in Canada and the United States, and indeed in 
the Western world. In fact, they are generally placed at or near the 
core of the secondary program. Generally, too, some further study of 






. 




. 

■ 

■ 






■ 




. 

- 








. 

• ’ ■ 

r i ! . ■ ■ ■ ! ■ ■ • 

. 





- 263 - 


them, because of their intrinsic value to the student, is required in 
the first year or two of undergraduate education, even when the student 
is "majoring" in scientific or technical subjects. In recent decades, 
they have also been seen as a means of "broadening" when the student 
is majoring thus, "with the result that degrees in arts have been made 
prerequisite to certain professional degrees, and "liberal arts" courses 
have been attached to scientific and technical programs even in the upper 
undergraduate years. 

In the argument of this chapter, the study of the "liberal arts" for 
the sake of their intrinsic value is not under consideration. As "broad¬ 
ening courses", however, they have been under consideration in this sec¬ 
tion, along with "broadening courses" dealing with scientific and tech¬ 
nical information and knowledge. In this role at least, therefore, they 
are subject to the argument already advanced. But "broadening" does not 
exhaust their "utility" for scientific education. Indeed, it may be 
suspected of being a superficial reason for their attachment to under¬ 
graduate and postgraduate science programs, and this may partly explain 
the superficiality w r hich so commonly marks the courses themselves. 

This anticipative statement will be substantiated in the following 
section, wrhere means of satisfying the demand (D)-Primary will be con¬ 
sidered. 


V—BETTER EDUCATION 

Problem (D), it will be recalled, was derived mainly from the 
analysis of complexity (Part II). The essential, points are that the 
growth is requiring investigators to reckon more and more with com¬ 
plexity in the objects of inquiry, and that this and other effects of 



























- 







. 





> 


















• 






. 




■ 




. 







































- 264 - 


the growth are making inquiry increasingly difficult. The obvious in¬ 
ference is that qualitatively better education is demanded for funda¬ 
mental inquiry—(D)~P. 

Of course that means that the quality of teaching needs to be im¬ 
proved but teaching per se . as already stated, does not lie within the 
purview of this thesis. It also means that the quality of programs and 
courses, their design and their content of knowledge, needs to be im¬ 
proved, and that the quality of learning, regarded as an activity of 
the student, needs to be improved. 

To put it all more generally, the investigator must have a better 
tool-set and therefore formal education must be improved by providing 
the student with, or at least offering him, a better set of the tools 
of existing knowledge and arts. 

Does knowledge mean simply scientific knowledge? An answer to this 
question will now be presented. 

Need and Sources of General Ideas -- It was concluded, in Sec. IV, 

Ch. Ill (Part II) that the solution of the problems of complexity pro¬ 
bably will involve radical departures from present modes and existing 
traditions of thought. A simply corollary was drawn in Sec. Ill, Ch. IV 
(pp. 195-6): that fresh and daring conceptual thinking is wanted. And 
on the basis-of Part II, it also -was concluded (p. 235, above) that 
"there is a great and increasingly acute need for fresh and, indeed, 
revolutionary conceptual thinking". Coupling these views with Conant’s 
standpoint, adopted herein, the writer submitted (p. 235 ) that the ad¬ 
vancement of scientific knowledge in the fairly immediate future will 
depend, relatively speaking, rather heavily on developments in con¬ 
ceptual thought. 








. 
















. 

























. 





. 



























■ 


■ x 

. 










. 

• 






. ■ • 
















' 

■ 







- 265 - 


Now, fresh conceptual thinking requires, for one thing, a fund of 
general, even speculative, ideas. Revolutionary thinking would probably 
make an even stronger demand.'^ This is historically demonstrable. While 
general ideas, and concepts of varying degrees of utility for investi¬ 
gators, emerge from observation and experiment, scientists are heavily 
dependent on borrowing from ’’philosophies and ideologies” such ideas as 

pc> 

they may see fit to borrow, find useful or hope to find fruitful; They 
are, moreover, indifferent ”to the philosophical matrix in which a promis- 
ing concept lies embedded.” 7 

It could be said, for that matter, that an idea drawn from any 
source whatsoever may be grist for the scientific mill. But, without 
going very far beyond the view which Stevens has confirmed with a 
historical analysis, the writer would submit that scientific investi¬ 
gators will continue to be heavily dependent, broadly speaking, on the 
’’liberal arts” or ’’humanities” for general ideas requisite to conceptual 
thinking. 

. Lj..„ ? .' . . . ~ 

To sum up: 

There is a great and increasingly acute need for fresh and even 
revolutionary conceptual thinking; this requires a fund of general and 
even speculative ideas and these will have to be drawn, as in the past. 


*An outstanding example of a general idea of great utility, which 
was originally .speculative, is atomism. It has been put to many and 
varied uses and has been tremendously fruitful in the development of 
modern science, as indicated briefly in Sec. IV, Ch. III. 

2 *0. F. B. Stevens, The Factors, of Scientific Progress., thesis ms., 
Ch. III. 

2 ^Ibid, p. 63* 














-266- 


largely from the "liberal arts”. 

This strongly urges that the study of the liberal arts, at least 
the main ones, be regarded, not only as necessary for the sake of their 
intrinsic value to the student, but also as a necessary and integral 
part of education for scientific inquiry. That is, they need not and 
should not be regarded, for scientific purposes, merely as useful for 
’’broadening" the student’s "cultural background". To acquire a better 
tool-set of existing knowledge and arts, the student must acquire, among 
other things, a better knowledge of the "liberal arts".( 6 ) 

This implies, to take the extreme position, that he should continue 
their study almost through the period of formal education. But they con¬ 
stitute, in their own right, another vast domain of knowledge (and inform¬ 
ation). Accordingly, their study is likely to involve much the same prob¬ 
lems and to be subject to much the same demands and conditions, as the 
study of scientific knowledge in preparation for scientific inquiry. 

Granted, there are very considerable differences in degree and 
variations in kind, but the situation as regards information and know¬ 
ledge in the "liberal arts" is. similar in general form: it also is 
characterized by volumetric growth of published information and know¬ 
ledge, increasing specialization, growing complexity (though complexity 
is a very ancient problem in "humane" studies) and rising requirements 
in communication-and language; and, from the educational standpoint, by 
demands such as (A)-(D)-Primary and (A)-Secondary, with similar limiting 
conditions, adverse prospects and pitfalls of reaction to excess (Table I). 

It is therefore submitted that: 

However far the study of the "liberal arts" may be carried for the 
purpose of ( 6 ) during the period of formal education, principles (l) to 
( 5 ) generally apply to this part of the program, except where patently 









' 

. 




























. 




-267- 


inappropriate, as well as to the scientific and technical part. Indeed, 
insofar as any of the principles will prevent overloading, it must apply 

with particular force to the former part.(6a) 

Before passing on, it may be noted that the argument here 'advanced 
for (6) is not far from that which Schrodinger has advanced for a return 
to the freedom of Greek philosophical speculation in search of clarifying 
and illuminating general ideas. Of course, other good, arguments could 
be and have been presented not only for the study of "liberal arts", such 
as literature, history, philosophy and political economy, by science 
undergraduates, but also for requiring depth ( 5 ) and fundamental focus 

Q O QQ o l 

( 2 ) in these studies.^ J 4 - 5 ^ 4 However, the'essence of the argument 
advanced by the writer is simply that the growth (of scientific and 
technical, and of "humane", knowledge and information) makes the adop¬ 
tion of (6) and (6a) a matter of necessity. 

Acquiring the Arts of Inquiry -- The phrase, "the arts of inquiry," 
is intended here to have a double meaning. That is, it is intended to 
refer not only to the arts of scientific inquiry, meaning the methods 
involved in scientific research, but also to the arts of learning. The 


3QErwin Schrodinger, Nature and the Greeks . 

3lAlfred North Nhitehead, Adventures of Ideas . p. 179, p. 1S6 et sea . 
The Aims of Sducatipn. 

32prederic Lilge, Mid-Century -- The Social Implications of Scientific 
Progress . pp. 31S-9; James R. Killian, Jr., ibid., pp. 453-4 et seq . 

33American Society for Engineering Education, "General Education in 
Engineering," cited by Benjamin Fine, New York Times Magazine . May 13, 
1956, p. Ell. 

34"The Purists" (at California Institute of Technology), Time . May 

16, 1955. 


























. 


.... 




. !r 










! 03 rr 


. •: T V V • :■ \ 


. 








. 

' 

. 






- 




. 












, 



-268- 


purpose in view is emphasis on the point, previously stated, that inquiry 
and learning are very much the same thing—one learns best by asking 
questions; i.e., by inquiring. It is almost superfluous to say that the 
student must acquire the arts of learning; but it may be reiterated here 
that the growth demands a better and better command of them, as well as 
the improvement by all possible means of methods of instruction. Now, 
this is no place for a lengthy dissertation on the arts of inquiry or 
learning; but some points must be made to round out the design for sci¬ 
entific education here being described. 

While classification is in some degree an arbitrary process, the 
arts of inquiry may be grouped under some such headings as these: 

Thought Observation and Experiment 

Technique Communication 

There are close and reciprocal relations among all four in practice. 
For that matter, thought may be regarded as a sort of communication within 
the mind, and observation and experiment as means of making sensory com- 
munication between the mind and its external environment more precise 
and fruitful. Moreover, under each heading is embraced a number of arts 
which, while in each case having much in common, nevertheless vary over 
a considerable range. But for the moment, for the sake of generalized 
argument, let Thought, Observation and Experiment, Technique, and Com¬ 
munication be considered as separate and distinct things. Now, the 
question is: How is the student to acquire them? The obvious answer: 

By receiving instruction and by imitating those who have already acquired 
them; ultimately, by practising them on his own initiative—heuristically. 

In this day and age, so marked as it is by technology, the idea in¬ 
evitably has got around that the most important of the four, for the 














■ 






■ 














. 

■ 


' 

• • • • 




. 






. 

. ■ - 











-269- 


student-invest! gat or to acquire, are observation and experiment and 
technique. In reality, however, the situation is the other way around. 

As technology develops, the individual becomes at once increasingly 
dependent on others and decreasingly dependent on himself with respect 
to the technical and practical arts; and as knowledge in a scientific 
region (say, physics) develops, the degree of empiricism being reduced 
and the range of theory extended, likewise. In these circumstances, as 
far as the individual investigator is concerned, both the possibility 
and the need of acquiring the technical and practical arts, those in¬ 
volved, altogether, in investigation, are reduced, relatively speaking. 
This is not to say that these arts become less than essential to the 
whole enterprise of investigation. They simply assume a position of 
relatively less weight and importance in that part of the enterprise 
which is the business of the individual investigator, whether he be 
engaged in fundamental or applied research (an arbitrary division, of 
course); and thinking and communication assume a position of relatively 
greater weight and importance in his part. 

At the same time, it is true, in society generally and in scientific 
inquiry as a result of the underlying growth of knowledge, the individual 
becomes, relatively speaking, increasingly dependent on the thinking of 
others though no less dependent on his own. This means, as already 
shown in this thesis, increasing individual dependence on communication. 
It does not mean, however, that the possibility and the need of the 
individual acquiring the art of thinking are reduced. For it is not 
thinking but knowledge and its technical fruit's which are multiplied 
and specialized; thinking remains a common and a highly individual art. 
Moreover, acquiring and practising it becomes increasingly necessary to 



' 

. 

. 

. 

■ 




C c ■ ' 

' 




















-270- 


resist and to offset, to mitigate, the growing dependence on the think¬ 
ing of others. 

The purport of that argument is that brain w^ork--thought and com¬ 
munication—is becoming an increasingly important element in the 
individual's conduct of his inquiry, wdthout making the technical arts 
any the less essential. One would infer, accordingly, that relatively 
more weight in formal education should be given to acquiring the arts 
of thought and communication. This view is supported by another con¬ 
sideration. Acquiring technical arts, somewhat artificially regarded 
as separate and distinct things, is becoming more and more a matter of 
instruction and imitation and less a matter of heuristic exercise of the 
physiological functions in which they are rooted, as they become more 
machine-like and uniform and less craft-like. Not so, the arts of 
thinking and communication. Harrison observes: 

The circuits of the mind improve vastly with use and 
exercise. Thinking in a given way brings an increased blood 
supply and more nourishment to the cells and synapses involved. 

The process we call learning consists of setting up mental 
switching patterns over and over again, to train certain cir¬ 
cuits and groups of switchboards to function together. The 
mind needs to be exercised and disciplined as well as to have 
its gates thrown open through interest. 

Disciplinary studies of the past, such as Latin and Greek, 
gave all sorts of little mental hooks on which associations 
could be hung. Science gives equally good associative locations. 
But so superficial is much of our modem education becoming that 
the necessary condensation nuclei for thought are not being 
provided for our citizens of tomorrow. 

Much-of the educative process in the schools today con¬ 
sists merely of instmotion and training, the conveying of 
facts and the development of skills. Teachers tend less and 
less to insist that the student learn to focus his attention 
on trains of thought which etch sharp patterns in the brain, 
instead of producing a chaotic opening and closing of mental 
switches at random, governed by the emotions of the moment.35 


35George R. Harrison, "How The Brain Works," The Atlantic Monthly . 
September, 1956. See also: Harrison, "Faith And The Scientist," Atlantic . 
December, 1953. Dr. Harrison is dean of the school of science at M.I.T. 





















-271- 


It would appear, then, that acquiring the art of thinking requires 
the exercise of thought in a program of formal studies designed, essen¬ 
tially, according to the principles already educed herein. Likewise for 
the arts of communication, about which enough has already been said, and 
which are included in the design according to ( 4 ). Moreover, the way to 
raise the level of mastery of these two closely related arts is simply 
to exercise them more and to a greater degree heuristically. These 
statements are submitted as.(7) 

Incidentally, judging by Harrison, who apparently bases his views 
on rapidly growing information and knowledge about the physiology and 
functioning of the brain, educators need not regard the so-called theory 
of discipline and the allied theory of transfer of learning as discredited 
by statistical studies of learning. One may suspect that, the fine arts 
apart, what often seems to be a special aptitude for one intellectual 
field may not r so much imply little or no aptitude for others as lack of 
time for others. Every man's time is limited. 

Put together again. Thought, Observation and Experiment, Technique 
and Communication compose the "methodology" of scientific inquiry, as 
such. Considering this as a single, though complicated, art, (7) applies...(7a)* 
To clarify its meaning in respect to "methodology" the following points 
are put forward: 

1. The so-called "problem solving" method commonly outlined in 
school does not accurately represent scientific "methodology" though 
it roughly describes the barebones of some of its constituents. It 
may be pedagogically useful in lower school but should be hung with red 
lights. 


*That is, the first and third propositions of (7) apply, when "art 
of thinking" is replaced by "art of scientific inquiry", "thought" by 
"the art", and "the art" is substituted in the third proposition. 



























. 












• 




























- 272 - 


2. There is no such thing as the scientific method.^ 5 ^ 

3* * Nevertheless, it has been possible to analyze out main elements 
common to many of the methods used in scientific investigation and to 
formulate with them a description of a common mechanism, procedure or 
process of pedagogical utility at appropriate (high) levels of educa¬ 
tion. Several such descriptions, some of them extremely complicated 
and subtle, are now available for study. Terminology varies. 33*38 
Numerous critiques of "methodology 11 also are available.* 

4. Proceeding according to Hoyle, adopting a described mechanism 
or using recommended strategy or tactics—none of these, in itself, will 
assure discovery. Chance, luck and many other imponderables play parts 
on the stage of scientific endeavor. Inquiry should be regarded as an 
art, odd though this may seem in science .39 

5. Experimental demonstration and imitative experiments have their 
place at appropriate levels during the period of formal education but 
the heuristic approach should be adopted as much and as soon as possible. 
The aim should be to get away from artificiality—a boring thing for 
gifted students—as rapidly as possible. "The teaching of science is at 


3^J. g. Conant, op. cit . . and Modern Science and Modem Man. 

3^F. S. C. Northrop, The logic of the Sciences and the Humanities . 

37 C . F. B. Stevens, On The Mechanism of the Scientific Method . 
thesis ms.; also private letter, Feb. 3, 1954. 

^Northrop, ojd cit . 

3%. I. B. Beveridge, "Teaching the Art of Research," Research . 
March, 1951, pp. 97-101. 

*In this study, numerous elements and aspects of scientific methods 
have been discussed in Part II, notably in Ch. Ill, Secs. Ill and IV and 
Ch. IV, Secs. III-V. 






















. 














• ' . 












. 

. 


. 












' 


■ ; y: 

' 



:O • 









. 

' 






■ k> 01 : • 







- 273 - 


its best when it is most like an apprenticeship. n Realistic research 

experience also is valuable for attracting students to careers in 
111 

science. 

It is not only by (6), (6A), (7) and (7a) that the student will 
acquire a better tool-set of existing knowledge and arts and a better 
education but also by (l)-(5). 


VI-CONTINUOUS LEARNING 

When all is said and done, the demands arising from the growth can¬ 
not be fully satisfied within the limited period of formal education. 

The sum of human knowledge now recorded is so enormous that even 
the greatly extended span of human life will permit the individual to 
master only a very small fraction of the whole. The accumulation of 
scientific knowledge, alone, is so large that even in this one domain 
the individual can hope to master only a small part of the total in a 
lifetime of endeavor. To cite Oppenheimer again: ”The day is long 
past—if indeed it ever existed except in legend—when the whole of 

) 9 

science was the expert province of any one man...." Still smaller 
must be the fraction which can be mastered during the limited period 
of formal studies. Thus, in this period of formal studies, learning 


^°J. Robert Oppenheimer, Mid-Century , p. b^bo 
^• Scientific American . November, 19^2, p. 2$. 

^Previously cited on p. 5Uo See also the two quotations immedi¬ 
ately preceding this one in the same group. The impossibility of 
individual attainment of universal knowledge in the scientific domain 
was brought out in Part I and in the introduction and first two chapters 
of Part II. 









- 274 - 


or education is, in reality, barely be,gun. To put it another way, formal 
education can only be a beginning and a preparation for learning which 
should continue throughout the rest of the individual’s lifetime; that 
is, throughout a period which is about twice as long as the postulated 
minimum period of formal studies. In attempting to decide upon the con¬ 
tent and design of formal studies, then, one must constantly be asking 
what it would be best for the individual to learn first and what would 
provide the best beginning and foundation for a lifetime of continuous 
learning 

Therefore, the necessity of continuous learning as the business of 
a lifetime must be accepted; and formal education, being only the begin¬ 
ning, must be designed to equip the student both for inquiry and for 
learning by his own initiative and on his own resources.(7) 

These two pursuits being very much the same thing, the student can 
be equipped for both with formal education of one design. The writer 
submits that this design should be according to (l)-(7a). 

VII—THREE REMAINING PROBLEMS 

Of the problems and needs of the growth, defined and described in 
the introduction to Part III, four have yet to be considered. 

Problem (S) presents a demand for more and better mathematical know¬ 
ledge. That is to put it simpler. Mathematics now is being regarded as a 
separate and distinct discipline like physics or history. It is somewhat 
more than this, almost a domain of knowledge like the sciences or the 


&The writer is indebted to Dr. J. A. Anderson, chief chemist. Board 
of Grain Commissioners, Winnipeg, for the essential suggestions leading 
to this point of view: private letter, Aug. 13, 1952. 






















' 



























. 
























■ 






. 








































- 275 - 


humanities. As such, it has been and is subject to the dynamics of 
growth and therefore, in itself, presents not merely the simple demand 
expressed in (E) but the apparent demands (A)-(D), as for scientific 
education though.on a smaller scale. Therefore, mathematical education 
for fundamental inquiry, whether scientific or mathematical, likewise 
must be designed according to (l)-(S), with some restrictions and modifi¬ 
cations to adapt a few of the principles to special characteristics of 
mathematical knowledge. (See Ch. IV, Sec. IV in Part II.) 

Alternatively, mathematics may be regarded as one of the sciences, 
in which case it would already have been dealt with in the resolution 
of (A)-(D). From a somewhat different standpoint, it may be regarded 
as a vital element in the art of scientific inquiry, but this 'would not 
eliminate the necessity of resolving, as before, the educational problems 
arising from: the growth of mathematical knowledge. 

As to (F), the design of education for fundamental inquiry according 

to the submitted principles .(l)—(S), or in accordance with the demands 

■ ' isl ■' . ' ' : . • " 

and necessities of the growth, surely would fill the bill as well as 

possible in the present and prospective circumstances and in the light 
of the biological and psychological knowledge now generally available. 

An important general condition attached to the preceding statement is 
that the deadweight load on the student’s capacity and time should be 
kept dawn insofar as may be compatible with other vital requirements; 
so also for the investigator’s capacity and time. 

Again, for (H), it is submitted that education according to the 
same principles (l)-(8), with particular emphasis on continuous learn¬ 
ing, is the best conceivable answer in the present and prospective 
circumstances and in the light of the human knowledge now generally 


available. 






















- 2 ? 6 - 


There remains, of course, the ever-present possibility that new and 
revolutionary discoveries may spring the existing system of knowledge 
and put some or all of the problems in a very different light, or that 
radical changes in the nature and capacity of the human individual may 
alter, on one side, the conditions under which the problems have to be 
resolved. 




. 
































. 







- r - ' \ 









































CHAPTER II 


DESIGN AND STYLE 

In combination, the principles (l) to (&), educed in the preceding 
chapter, show what the growth necessitates in education for scientific 
inquiry, not only with respect to form and content and design, but also 
with regard, to approach and style. 

When one looks at the gross aspects of the growth, it seems to. de¬ 
mand, above all, individual command of an ever-increasing volume of 
information and an ever-increasing amount of knowledge. The current 
tendencies, in the face of this obvious demand, are to try to cram more 
and more material into the formal program and into the courses, to 
generalize studies ever more widely and to give them early "vocational” 
focus. 

The attempt to cram in more and more material is foredoomed to 
failure. The vessel formed out of the capacity of the individual and 
the time for formal study, both limited, will hold only a fraction of 
the accumulation of knowledge and a still smaller fraction of the ac¬ 
cumulation of knowledge and information. 

Generalizing studies more widely resolves into an effort to em¬ 
brace breadth of knowledge and information. Breadth is important. But 
depth is vital; and the trouble with generalization for breadth is that 
it leads into the pitfall of superficiality. 

As for early "vocational” focus, if it does not lead to superfi¬ 
ciality in the form of emphasis on "technical” details and routines of 
current practice, which is a mistake--(l), it attempts to provide the 
student with ready-made answers for earning a living in the future. 




. 






. 

. 








■ 











, 




. 




. 


' ' • 

' 

■ 


. • 

. 

. 

■ 







- 278 - 


But as a result of the growth the future will be characterized by ac¬ 
celerating change, rapid innovation and instability—in specialized 
vocations as well as in other elements of life. 

It is necessary to resist the obvious demand and the current ten¬ 
dencies, and, so far as the form and the content of program and of 
courses are concerned, to enable the student to achieve increasing 
depth in his studies, and fund tal focus, along with as much breadth 
as selected areas of concentration will allow—(5)x(2). The best that 
can be done between these areas, within the period of formal studies, 
is to establish and to maintain and probably to improve communication-- 
at least until the student is approaching and proceeding with special¬ 
ization, when his studies may enable him to fill in intervening gaps 
in a particular discipline and even to draw two or more disciplines 
together. 

For the rest, getting hold of more knowledge and information must 
be left to continuous learning following upon the period of formal edu¬ 
cation--^) . This has an important consequence for the design of pro¬ 
gram and of courses; namely, that the arts of inquiry (learning) must 
dominate the dynamics of design. 

It has an equally important consequence for the student’s, and the 
educator’s, approach to formal, education: namely, that each stage should 
be seen, not as a preparation for doing a job or earning a living, nor 
as preparation- for assuming the responsibilities of citizenship, nor as 
’’preparation for life”, in the sense that once the education has been 
completed to some particular stage the individual is ready and prepared, 
but rather as preparation for the next stage of learning . The last stage 


of formal education to the postgraduate level is not excepted. 













■ 







. 


■ 


. 

















. 
















. 


































. 
















- 


























- 279 - 


To quote an industrial scientist: 

(Our colleges).... should pound home to students the fact 
that when they leave they are not educated....have a great 
deal more to learn....will not ever have time to learn it all.43 

Another man enjoying a somewhat similar position puts it this way: 

The fundamental difficulty with students who enter in¬ 
dustry is not aptitude but attitude. The present attitude 
arises from the emphasis which has been put in times past on 
vocational training rather than upon educational attitude to¬ 
ward learning. Thus, the graduate has tended to think of 
himself as someone who is prepared to. do something rather 
than as someone who is equipped to learn something....It is 
folly to try to equip students with memorized answers for 
every problem they vd.ll encounter in later life. An advancing 
world will not wait while one runs the file of his memory to 
see whether there is a ready-made answer. Proper education, 
whether ,it be scientific or otherwise, should provide an 
adequate background of values, thereby equipping the student 
with the ability to think for himself and to meet new situa¬ 
tions in terms of broad concepts rather than in terms of 
dated recipes.^ 

In Table II on the following page, an attempt has been made to set 
out the main features or components of a program of education for funda¬ 
mental scientific inquiry, in accordance with the principles educed in 
the preceding’ chapter and with the general ideas, respecting form and 
content of courses, design of program, dynamics of design and approach 
to formal education, which have been put forward in the present chapter. 

Some words of explanation are needed for a clear understanding of 
the table. (See below) 


^Charles- Allen Thomas, (Monsanto), Mid-Century . p. 324. 

^Ernest Mahler, president, board of trustees, Institute of Paper 
Chemistry, cited in C. and S. News . leading editorial. Sept. 12, 1949. 

^The Arabic figures on the left refer to the principles, the Roman 
numeral—IV—to Sec. IV of Ch. IV in Fart II, and (T) to the fact that 
science is the matter with which this thesis (T) is particularly concerned. 
In each section of the table, the first line, keyed to the reference figure. 










- 280 - 


C0NTINU0US LEARNING 




o p 
-p o 

-p = 
p s 

a) 0 

Xj -P 




y-> /-■> /- N 




to to to to 




1 1 1 1 


0 

1 1 

1 1 1 I 

1 I 1 1 


p 

1 I 

1 1 

till 


2 

1 1 

1 i 

till 


p 

1 1 

1 1 1 1 


cti 


1 1 1 1 


p 

1 1 

1 1 1 1 


O 

t 1 

1 1 1 1 


P 

1 1 1 

1 1 1 1 


05 

1 1 1 

till 


O 

1 1 1 

1 1 — 1 


CP 

1 1 t 

1 1 rH 1 

r: 



1 1 cti 1 

CO 


1 1 1 

1 1 P 1 

o 


1 1 t 

1 1 O P 

•1 : 


1 1 1 

1 1 *H 0 

p 


1 I 1 

1 1 P N 

cs 

0 

1 1 1 

1 1 O *H 


P 

1 1 1 

1 1 P rH 


cti 

1 ( 1 

1 I p Cti 

CD 

2 

1 1 1 

1 1 pH *H 

o 

P 

1 1 1 

i i r o 

S 

0 

1 1 1 

1110 

( 

P 


i i i P 


bx 


1 1 1 05 


P 

1 1 1 

i i i 


0 

1 1 1 

1110 


P 

! 1 1 

i i i P 


P 


1 1 1 o 


P> 

i i p 

1 1 1 B 



i 0 p 

i i i 



i B o 

i *-n i b( 



J *H P 

i P i P 



! P 

• cd l *H 



1 P 

• HIE 


£ 

on 

o 

1 p 1 O 
1 O 1 o 


0 

i p 

10 10 


P 

• 0 p 

1 P 1 P 


P 

l N 0 

1 P 1 


o 

! -H B 

1 0 1 P 


o 

I E P 

1 > 1 P 


0 

1 O O 

1 1 Cti 


CO 

1 P -H 

1 0 1 



= OP 

1 P 1 



b0 Op 

i 0 i bf 



p 0 0 

1 *H P P 



.. o . . 
P-*H P 
O -P cti 
CO 


Ph P 
Ph P 
cO 


CO 

-p 

0 0 

0 B 
i—1 cO 
X 0 
0 P 
a p 
0 0 


P P 

O O 
•H - 
P 

co X 


1 

2 

05 O 
CD O 
P CO 
Ph 

i & 


£ 

cm 

O 

p i 
p i 

O 

o 

P 

0 


0 1 


•H 

P 

B 

1 

Cm 

1 

P 


P 1 

O 

r -i 

0 


•H 1 


Ph 

B 

•H 


0 

, 

0 

C 

P I 

P 


i—i 

S 

0 1 

P 


w 

Ah 




o CO bo O 
»H «H cti i—I 
CO p 05 O 

P fcu) 2 P 

"‘Ml 

O 0 


to to 


05 
O 
•H 

P CH 

§'x 
0 

P uS 
P 
cti 


B 

i 

o 
•H 
P 
05 
05 g 
P X 
P P 
cti .H 
P 

i—) cti 
0 11 
O tut 


•H C 

P -r 

B i 

0 b 

rP *r 

P A 


to to to to 


to 


i 

i 

i 

l 

1 

1 

i 

1 1 

1 1 

1 1 

1 1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 


1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

bC 

i 

i 

1 1 

1 



1 

P 

i 

l 

1 1 

1 



1 

•H 

i 

l 

1 1 

O 



1 

0 

i i 

l 

1 /—> 

•H 



1 

0 

i i 

i 

1 0 

■P 



1 

0 

i i 

i 

1 p- 

0 



1 

P 

i i 

l 

1 X_' 

•H 



1 

o 

i i 

i 

1 1 

P 



1 

p 

i i 

0 

1 — 

2 




•H 

i P 

2 

1 !>* 

0 



P 


1 o 

o 1 

1 bC 

X 



•H 

P 

1 -H 

•H 

l O 

i 



2 

O 

1 P 

P 

l i—1 

i 



cr 

•H 

1 0 

X 

1 o 

i 



P 

P 

1 N 

O 

1 p 

i 



•H 

0 

1 *H 

’ -s 

0. 

1 o 

i 

P 

N, 

1 

N 

1 rH 


p 

i X 

i 

•H 


i —I 

•H 

1 0 

cv 


i p 

i 

rH 

S -H '-v 

0 

r—H 

1 *H 


X 

i 0 

i 

•H 

U"\ 

P 

0 

1 O 

N 


1 B 

i 

p 

P V 

P 

ip .H 

1 0 

> 

i — 

i 

2 

o X 

02 

p v.^H o 

0 P 

H 

i i 

1 


/—N 

B 

O X 0 

O 0 

i 

i i 

i 

O 

0 CH 

0 


•H 

/-- 

i 0 

i 

•H 

*H v —' 

P 

0 CH 0 

P l 

-3* 

1 2 

b0 

cm 

0 1 

P 

•H v — ' -> 

0 1 

v-' 

1 

P 

•H 

0 X 

2 

0 1 

B ‘ 


1 *H 

•H 

P 

£ -fc? 

Cm 

0 PI 

0 i 

X 

1 P 

0 

P 

Ph Ph 

1 

X P 

X 


1 X ^ 

0 

0 

B o 

P 

Ph Ph 

p 

p 

1 O/^ 

0 

•H 

0 P 

O 

B 0 

0 CH 

— 

1 0 CH 

P 

O 


«m 

0 P 

B ^ 

Ph 

1 pv-5 

O 

05 


1 


X 

X 


P 

1 


P 


— /^> 

0 

1 o X 

•H 

P 


P 


p co 

1 

1 «H 


P 

0 

0 


0 i 

p 

1 

O 

0 

bi) 0 

1 

0 

X 


1 -H 

•H 

1 

P 

X 

bO 0 

bO l 

0 

1 p w 

P 

— 

0 0 CHI 

0 

P 


0 

0 

El 

0 


0 0 

0 

CH 

•H 

0 

? 

X 

^X 

r > rH 

0 


P 

> 

o 

, ^ - -V 

rH ? 

X 

X 

2 

rH 

p 

B 


0 O 

Ph/^ 

0 

0 

Aci 

0 


0 P 

E 

U 

X 

0 




B X 

0 


l 

B 




0 


" . 

bn 

0 




hP 





1 

P 


P 

s: P 

X 

1 

P 

N 

•H 

P c 


1 

CD 

0 

~ *H 

p 

1 


CH 

0 

1 P 

X 

tm 

1 

1 

'd 

'— ■ 

X 

0 

P 

P 0 

O -H 

2 

I 

o 


O 

Cm O 

O 

1 

•H 

to 

0 

! 0 h—. 

X 

1 

P 


P 

r“N p 1-0 

p 

1 

O 



0 Ph'-' 


1 

0 


0 

vG Ph I 

II 

1 

P 


> 

>—' 0 0 

II 

1 

Ah 


•H 

1 *H 


1 



P 

X P 0 


bO 



0 

O 0 


2 ^ 
a* P 

P -H 
•H P 
p 

o 

05 

~p 
<aj 


r *H 

0 +3 

P cti 


cti p 
P *H 
CD ^ 
P 

•H 

c-l 


P 
O 
•rH 
P 
Cti 
•H 
o 
0 
P vH 
Ph^ 
Ph I 
Cti 0 


0 

•H 

P 

E-m XS 
P 

• §» 

0 0 

t 43 

cti X 
0 

0 *H 
P P 
•H P 

«H TO 
O 

0 

P 0 
P -H 

P 

•H r—I 

P **3 
O p 
•H W 
P 2 
cti 

O P 
2 2 
P P 
0 

0 

P 0 
O bO 
CH cti 
P 
P 0 
Ph 

0 O 
O £ 

X P 
0 

p 0 
». 0 p 

e p p 

cti -H P 
P Ckh *H 
be P 
O 0 Ph 
P P Cti 

Ph p 

p f c3 

•H *H 
O 

0 0 
P Ph 
O 0 
o 

p 
0 p 


0 
p 
p 

Ph 
O 

0 

P _ 

O P -H 
OP? 

0 Cm p 
POP 
P 0 
P P 

0 P 2 

£ cti p 
O Ph 0 


0 


P 

Cti 

p 

0 

S -r 


P 0 
0 P 
Ph P 

o 

<0 t>» 



















































- 221 - 


There is, finally, the matter of style. This is not an easy thing 
to define. But one may suggest some of the elements of style necessitated 
by the growth: emphasis on.learning as a process of inquiry; vitality and 
potency in the knowledge (or information) being acquired; focus on funda¬ 
mental principles of wide and general application—"facts should be re¬ 
garded as poisons, to be used sparingly and with discrimination"; flex¬ 
ibility rather than rigidity; room for the "trial and-trying movements" 
of the mind, and for browsing outside specified areas of study; an at¬ 
titude to science which brings out, at least before the end of secondary 
school and more intensively in the university stages, the influence of 
chance in scientific discovery, the uncertainty of scientific methods, 
the groping and fumbling and sheer guesswork which may enter into in¬ 
quiry; emphasis on imaginative thinking; liveliness. It seems to the 
writer that 'Such elements of style would be obtainable in large measure 
by design as proposed here, coupled with instruction of an appropriate 
character. Instruction has a vital bearing, of course, but is not be- 
ing considered in this thesis. 

Mathematics has become something of a bugaboo in American and 
Canadian education and is being 'widely regarded, at the present time, as 
a barrier to turning out more scientific and technical personnel to meet 


describes the feature or the component of the program; the lines of words 
below the first line indicate the emphasis at a particular stage or the 
sequence of emphasis through successive stages of education. Principles 
( 5 ) and ( 2 ) are applied where knowledge and information are of particular 
moment, so as to indicate the form of courses; "x" is used as a combina¬ 
tion sign. Below the initial line in each section, each item is posi¬ 
tioned horizontally so as to be approximately in line with the stage or 
stages or education to which it applies. Dash lines indicate extension 
through stages. 






- 282 - 


the growing demands of research, industry and defence. The writer sug¬ 
gests that the design, approach and style here proposed, applied to 
mathematics courses, would help matters considerably. A system which 
seems very much akin to that here proposed is on trial in a few U. S. 
Midwest high schools at the present time. It was devised by teachers 
of mathematics at the University of Illinois' College of Education.^ 

No doubt similar efforts are being made elsewhere; and certainly, much 
of what is proposed here has been proposed before, in respect to math¬ 
ematics and other scientific subjects. Bell, for instance, has long 
urged the abstract approach to mathematics—getting over the ground with 
the minimum of impedimenta and getting to the living parts of the sub¬ 
ject as rapidly as possible.^ 


^5see Time . July 23, 1956, pp. 78-9. 













. 









. 






. 

. 
































CHAPTER III 


GENERAL APPLICATION 

In the first and second chapters, the argument has been carried 
forward in search of the meaning of the growth for education for stud¬ 
ents intending to engage in fundamental inquiry. The conclusions have 
been submitted as a set of principles in Chapter I and their meaning 
for the design and style of such education has been submitted in Chapter 
II. Education for endeavor in applied science and for applied research 
cannot be ignored, however, as there is considerable reciprocity between 
development in applied and development in fundamental science—if, in¬ 
deed, any dividing line can be drawn other than arbitrarily between the 
two. As to education for applied work, it is submitted that: 

1. If this education had been the primary and the main objective 
in view when educing principles in Chapter I, the outcome would have 
been essentially the same. The arguments apply to education for sci¬ 
entific endeavor in general: likewise, the principles. 

2. Essentially the same design as for fundamental inquiry, and an 
essentially similar style, would serve best for "applied" up to the late 
undergraduate stage or the postgraduate stage. Partial confirmation of 
this view can be found in Rickover, Kendall, the design of programs at 
Massachusetts and California Institutes of Technology, and the design of 
programs in some British and European schools and universities.^*^ 


^Rear Admiral Hyman G. Rickover, op. pit. 

^J. T. Kendall, Advancement of Science . Vol;. Ill, No. 12, pp. 328-9. 












; 



. 















• 


. 






■ 














. 

. 








' 





■ ’ 

■ 


. 



. 



- 284 - 


3. Adaptation of the design and style to '‘applied" would involve 
little more than appropriate changes in content and accent, and some 
substitutions in respect to "methodology" and “practice" at the upper 
levels of university education—not until the postgraduate level, in 
Kendall’s view. 

In short, it is submitted that the principles and the essential 
elements and aspects of design and style apply to education for sci¬ 
entific and technical endeavor throughout the school stages and up to 
very high levels in the university stages. And why should they not, 
seeing that the principles were drawn from an analysis of the growth 
of scientific and technical knowledge and information? 

But, as already pointed out, knowledge and information in the 
"liberal arts" likewise have been accumulating at a high rate during 
the present century, and if this rate should not be exponential, on 

the other hand the accumulation has been proceeding for a much longer 

A 

time in the "liberal arts" than in the sciences. Scholarly endeavor 
in the "liberal arts"' also reveals some similar effects and problems 
of growth B 9 5 50,51 

It is, therefore, submitted that: 

1. Principles (l) to ( 5 ) are generally applicable in education; 


%ee Chapter I in Part I and Introduction to Part II. 

^See, for instance, Herbert Butterfield, Man Cn His Past, regard¬ 
ing history. Also, Ralph Linton, The Tree of Culture . especially p. v. 

5^See Leon Edel, "That One May Say This Has The Man," Hew York Times 
Book Review, June 24* 1956, regarding biography. 

53-T. S. Eliot, " The Frontiers of Criticism," regarding the criticism 
of poetry. 























. 







■ 

■ 

' 
























. 







■ 




. 






V.' ' 










■ 






■ 




























. 






















- 285 - 


(6) and (6a), with the substitution / "sciences' 1 for "liberal arts", 
would be of utility in designing education for endeavor in the human¬ 
ities; (7) is generally applicable in education, minus the special 
emphasis on scientific "methodology"; and (8) definitely is generally 
applicable. 

2 , The design can be regarded as common for education up to the 
end of secondary school, and requires only appropriate substitutions in 
respect to content, and some degree of adaptation, to be applicable to 
the study of the "liberal arts" as the main objective, and to education 
generally, at the university levels. 

One question is left--that submitted as (Or) in the introduction to 
this part: 

bhat sort of education would best fit the individual for earning a 
living and meeting the responsibilities of citizenship in the world of 
the future? 

The answer here submitted is: 

Education designed according to the necessities of growth; for not 
only are knowledge and information growing exponentially, and exhibiting 
the dynamics of growth, but human institutions—government, business 
and industry, urban centres, populations, educational systems--are 
growing rapidly, in some cases exponentially, and exhibiting these same 
dynamics and. generally similar effects and problems of growth.^ 


%egarding earning a living, see in particular pp. 239 - 44 , above, 
on change in vocational requirements; also, references cited; note con¬ 
tinuous learning, pp. 273-4. On growth of mass and complexity in institu¬ 
tions, and resultant problems, see Mid-Century . M. I. T., Ch. VI. Further 
to meeting responsibilities of citizenship in the world of the future, see 
G. G, Simpson, Meaning of Evolution . Chapts. 7, 11, 16-18; George Thomson, 
The Foreseeable Future (also on earning a living); C. S. Coon, Story of 
Man, Chapts. 11 and 12. On general education: Ian C. MacDonald, '^--Edu¬ 
cation's Primary Task" and five succeeding articles, Edmonton Journal . 
March 8-13, 1954. 

















CHAPTER IV 


CAPACITY CF THE INDIVIDUAL 

The criticism likely to be made of the proposals for educational 
program made in this thesis (in the preceding three chapters and also 
in the concluding chapter of Part II) is that, while they will be suit¬ 
able for "superior” or "gifted" students (or for the upper quarter in 
intelligence, or the upper third, or perhaps even the upper half), they 
will not suit the rest of the students—"too academic"—"excessive de¬ 
mand on the intellect"—and so forth. 

The first part of the answer to such criticisms is already con¬ 
tained in the design; that is, in (3) as expressed in a "stream" or 
enrichment system allowing for different rates of increase in "intel¬ 
lectual" capacity or in capacity for learning. As already stated on 
p. 24S, this is far from being "undemocratic"; indeed, quite the con¬ 
trary . 

It should be noted, moreover, that a "stream" system need not be 
viewed from the standpoint that it would permit the better students, 
the fast learners, to push ahead or to enrich their programs. This is 
a standpoint which one tends to take today because so much of present 
education on this continent is geared much too low for the fast learners. 
If the program were geared for the fast learners, a "stream" system would 
simply permit the slower students to proceed at a slower rate or would 
assume them likely to get somewhat less out of the program-- while set ¬ 
ting higher objectives for them and encouraging them to strike upward . 

There is another consideration of importance in this connection. 

In accordance with (7) and (£), the education would be based on the view 
that the period of formal studies is, to speak with extreme generality. 







-2S7- 


primarily for acquiring the arts of inquiry, for learning how to learn, 
for making a beginning in education, so the youngster will be adequately 
fitted out for carrying on learning as the business of a lifetime. This 
approach to formal studies would go far to eliminate the idea that the 
essential thing is to pass the grades one by one and year by year, and 
would foster, at the same time, the idea that there is no escape from 
the necessity of acquiring certain essential and mostly "academic" arts 
sooner or later—as, indeed, there is not--whether during the period of 
formal studies or after. And, as the old saying has it: "The sooner, 
the quicker." 

The second part of the answer has to do with the measurement of 
"intellectual 11 capacity, or capacity for learning, and with the growth 
of these capacities. 

The first thing to be noted about the measurement is that it in¬ 
volves a considerable margin of error under the best of circumstances; 
what is more, "I. Q. M fluctuates in the individual at various times 
due to emotional and other factors, and in fairly "uniform" groups at 

certain stages of growth and. development. These points have been brought 

52 

out clearly by the Denver Child Research Council. 

The second thing is that "I. Q." is a function of environmental 
care and "schooling" to a very considerable extent. This has been shown 
very strongly by the Child Welfare Research Station, University of Iowa. 
It studied 100 children of "mentally inferior mothers" (as measured). 


^^Oeorge W. Gray, "Human Growth," Scientific American . October, 1953* 























. 




. 

. 

' 










. 













. 














' 
















. 








-288- 


The children were placed under adoption and given good care and school¬ 
ing. Their "quotients” were measured at four stages. The medians at 
all stages were well above "average” for the nation and far above the 
averages of their true mothers and fathers.53,54 

It has also been shown by the induction tests of the United States 
Army during the Second World War. The measurements from these tests 
showed a high degree of relationship to available educational opportunity. 
"Where schooling was good, few men failed."^ 

The third point concerns the growth of "intellectual" and learning 
capacities with exercise. Harrison has already been quoted on this mat¬ 
ter (p. 2?0). Further: "There is evidence, as Hebb has suggested, that 
each experience leaves some phjrsical trace in the brain tissue. Brain 
cells are known to grow 7 bigger with use and atrophy with disuse; those 
who expect to-keep their heads in vigorous shape by using them as little 
as possible may be mistaken. 

Another point of importance is: "Evidently learning itself must be 
learned. Most of us'have never learned to learn, and have a hard time, 
therefore, ascending to the next rung of knowledge ."^ 


^George D. Stoddard, "Youth," Scientific American . September, 1951* 

5^-See also Theodore H. Ingalls, "Mongolism," Scientific Amcrican . 
February, 1952, regarding environmental care. 

^Douglas W. Bray, "Man’s Mental Resources and Tomorrow’s Needs," 
Saturday Night . April 9, 1955. Ur. Bray is research associate of the 
Conservation of Human Resources Project, Columbia University. 

5^James R. Newman, reviewing "Doubt and Certainty in Science" by 
J. Z. Young, Scientific American . March, 1952, p. 76. 


57ibid., p. 77. 
















-289- 


0 


Finally, it is encouraging to note Pauling's view: "We believe 
that significant progress can be made in the attack on mental deficiency 
by... .fundamental research employing the most powerful techniques of 
modern chemistry...."^ 

Two inferences are justified by this evidence: 

1. The "I. Q." measure, besides being subject to considerable 
error and wide fluctuations, is highly relative to the environmental 
situation of the individual, including the character of the education 
he has received prior to measurement. 

2. "Intellectual" and learning capacities can be very greatly 
improved by education, meaning especially mental exercise, and by cura¬ 
tive or remedial medical treatment. In addition, it may be noted in 
passing, mental deficiency is preventable by the improvement of health 
care, especially during the pre-natal period. 

Two further inferences may now be drawn: 

First, as education is improved, particularly in respect to intel- 
lectual work, the capacities of the population for intellectual endeavor 
and for learning will rise. This is to say nothing of the rise which 
may be expected from improvement in medical care. 

Second, the way to improve these capacities is to exercise them 
hard. Vigorous and sustained thinking is the key. 

Now, it may be said at this point that all that does not matter 
very much because the distribution of these capacities, in accordance 
with the laws of chance, mil continue to follow the "normal curve" 
pattern. We shall still have slow learners. But, granted that, it 


^Quoted in Time . Sept. 10, 1956, p. 66. 











' 









. . 









, 



























-290- 


remains true that the general level of intelligence, as measureable, can 
be raised by improving education,, It would therefore be folly to refuse 
to improve education in the intellectual direction* This improvement is 
precisely what is required for maximum realization of the inherited 
potential* Until every educational, as well as medical, effort is made 
to realize the potential of the brain and body, no one will know what the 
average or the general level of capacity could be, nor what inherent limit 
there may be to it* 

The foregoing, which is encouraging and promising, seems sufficient 
answer to any such criticisms as were postulated at the beginning of this 
chapter* As for persuading students to exercise their minds, that is the 
business of teachers and pedagogues* Pedagogy is said to have been much 
improved during the past few decades; further improvement should be 
possible* In any case, pedagogy would be much more effective, the writer 
believes^ if applied in education designed as herein proposed* 


Conclusion 

The "Meaning of the Growth of Scientific Information for Education 
for the Advancement of Scientific Knowledge" has been set out in this 
part of the thesis* More, it has been submitted that the growth cf human 
knowledge and information has an essentially similar meaning for education 
in general. The presentation in the concluding three chapters, the writer 
believes, has been sufficiently condensed and synthetic, and sufficiently 
enumerated and tabulated, to make a summary unnecessary* 










. 


* 


















-t 
























* 




. 






. 






. 










BIBLIOGRAPHY 


BOOKS 

Bell, Eric Temple: The Development of Mathematics , second 

edition. New York, McGraw-Hill Book Co,, 19U5® 637 pp. 

Berrill Norman J*s Man 1 s Merging Mind , New York, Dodd, Mead 
& Co,, 1955® 308 pp. 

Born, Max: The Restless Universe , London, Blackie, 1935® 278 pp, 

Bridgman, Percy W.: The Logic of Modern Physics , New York, 
Macmillan Company, 1938* 228 pp, 

Bronowski, Jacob: The Common Sense of Science ,, London, 

Heinemann, 1951. 15 U pp® 

Butterfield, Herbert: Man On His Past : The Study of the 
History of Historical Scholarship, London, Cambridge 
University Press, 1955® 

-: The Origins of Modern Science 1300-1800 , 

London, G, Bell and Sons Ltd,, 1950,™ 217 PP® 

Cannon, W.B,: The Way of An Investigator , New York, W,W, 

Norton and Co., Inc., 19U5. 229 PP® 

Carmichael, Leonard, editor: Manual of Child Psychology . New York, 
J. Wiley and Sons, Inc,, 19U6. 1068 pp, 

ifD:; V', 

Cassirer, Ernst: An Essay on Man . Garden City, New York, 

Doubleday & Co., Inc., 195U. 29 I 4 . pp. 

Chase, Stuart: Power of Words . New York, Harcourt, Brace & 

Co,, 1953® 308 pp. 

Childe, V. Gordon: Man Makes Himself. New American Library of 
World Literature, Inc,, 19"5l® 191 PP® 

—-: What Happened In History . Harmondsworth, 

Middlesex, Penguin Books Ltd., I 9 I 4 I® 288 pp. 

Conant, James Bryant: Education in A Divided World . Cambridge, 
Mass., Harvard University Press, 19W. 2^9 PP® 

---• Modern Science and Modern Man . Garden City, 

New York, Doubleday & Co., Inc., 195H® 187 PP® 

__ ; On Understanding Science . New York, New 

American Library of World Literature, Inc., 1951. lUU PP® 

____• Science and Common Sense . New Haven, Conn., 

Yale University Press, 1951® 371 pp® 














































c. 


ft 




k 


^ *i”* . :-Mo. : .■ t i:U i- r r? 

. « ^ ' r * r ’ • r . 

* 

* r < 


X) 








■;, r . s; r o.rs • ,1 

■5 t « ‘ i 



a 







-292- 


Coon, Carleton S.: The Story of Man* New York 
Alfred A* Knopf, 19*#. 67 H pp* 

Courant, Richard, and Robbins, Herbert: What Is Mathematics?. 
London, Oxford University Press, 19Ul. 521 pp. 

Dampier Whetham, W.C.D.: A Shorter History of Science. London. 
Cambridge University Press, 1929. 

Dantzig, Tobias: Number : The Language of Science , fourth edition. 
Garden City, New York, Doubleday & Co., Inc., 1951;. 3U5 pp. 

de Broglie, Louis: The Revolution in Physics . New York, Noonday 
Press, 1953. 310 pp. 

Dunn, L.C., and Dobzhansky, Th.: Heredity , Race and Society . 

New York, New American Library of World Literature, 

Inc., 19U6. II 4.3 pp. 

Eddington, Sir Arthur: The Phil osophy of Physical Science. 

New York, Macmillan Co., 1939. 230 pp." 

Einstein, Albert, and Infeld, Leopold: The Evolution of 

Physics . New York, Simon and Schuster, 1938• 319 pp« 

Einstein, Albert: Relativity: The Special and The General Theory , 
third edition. Toronto, Ryerson Press, 1918. 138 pp. 

Fisher, Robert Moore, editor: The Metropolis in Modern Life . 

Garden City, New York, Doubleday & Co., Inc.7 1955. Eoi pp. 

Holmstrom, J.E.: Records and Research in Engineering 
and Industrial Science ., London, Chapman and 
Hall, Ltd., 19U7^ pp® 

Huxley, Julian: Man in the Modern World . New York, New 

American Library of World Literature, Inc., 19 ) 48 . 191 pp. 

International Conference on Science Abstracting ; Final Report . 
Paris,. United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization, 1 9k9» 192 pp. 

International Encyclopedia of Unified Science , Vol. I, No. 1, 

Otto Neurath, editor. Chicago, University of 
Chicago Press, 1938® 

Jeffery, George B.: The Unity of Knowledge : Reflections on the 
Universities of Cambridge and London. London, Cambridge 
University Press, 1950. 71 pp. 






















































-293- 


Jeffreys, Harold: Scientific Inference. London, 

Cambridge University Press, 1931. 2k7 pp. 

Jennings, Herbert S 0 : The Biolo gical Basis of Human Nature* 

New York, ¥.¥. Norton & Co., Inc*, 1930. 38b pp. 

Jepsen, Glenn L., et . al., editors: Genetics, Paleontology 
and Evolution . Princeton, Princeton University 
Press, 19b9. k7h pp. 

Kapp, Reginald 0.: The Presentation of Technical Information . 
London, Constable, I 9 I 4 BI lt7 pp. 

Korzybski, Alfred: Manhood of Humanity , third posthumous 
edition in English. Lakeville, Conn., Institute 
of General Semantics, 1951. 

Kramer, Edna E.: The Mainstream of Mathematics . New York, 
Oxford University Press, 1951. 321 pp. 

Langer, Susanne K.: Philosophy in A New Key . New York, New 

American Library of ¥orld Literature, Inc., 19^8. 21*8 pp. 

Lape, Esther Everett, and Associates: Medical Research : A 
Midcentury Survey ; Vol. I: American Medical Research 
in Principle and Practice , 765 pp; Vol. II: Unsolved 
Clinical Problems in Biological Perspective , 7b0 pp. 

Boston, Little, Brown & Co. 

Leary, Lewis, editor: The Unity of Knowledge : Columbia 

University Bicentennial Series. Garden City, New York, 
Doubleday & Co., Inc«, 1955. 306 pp. 

Linton, Ralph: The Tree of Culture . New York, Alfred A. 

Knopf, 1955. 6 tTTpPo 

Margenau, Henry: The Nature of Physical Reality : A Philosophy 
of Modern Physics. New York, McGraw-Hill 
Book Co., 195>0. U79 PP. 

Mid-Century : The Social Implications of Scientific Progress . 
Verbatim Account of Symposium Conference, March 31j April 
1 and 2, 19U9, at Convocation of Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, edited and annotated by J.E. Burchard. 
Cambridge, Mass., Technology Press of M.I.T., 1950. 5ii9 PPo 

Northrop, F.S.C.: The Logic of the Sciences and the Humanities . 
New York, Macmillan Co., 19U7. U02 pp. 


Ogden, C.K., and Richards, I.A.: The Meaning of Meaning. New 
York, Harcourt, Brace & Co., 19361 363 pp. 




















































1 









s. 






? 


c. 


c. 





* 








t * 




t. 



t 








-29U- 


Planck, Max: The Philosophy of Physics , London, George 
Allen & Unwin Ltd,, 1936, 118 pp, 

Poincare, Henri: Science and Hypothesis , New York, Science 
Press, 1905* 196 pp. 

--: Science and Method , London, Nelson, 288 pp, 

Ridenour, Louis N,, et , al,: Bibliography In An Age of Science : 
Second Annual Windsor Lectures to University of Illinois 
Library School (1950). Urbana, Ill,, University of 
Illinois Press, 195l<» 90 pp, 

Reichenbach, Hans: Philosophic Foundations of Quantum 
Mechanics , Berkeley and Los Angeles, University of 
California Press, 19 Uu 182 pp. 

Royal Society Empire Scientific Conference (19U6) Report ; Vol, I, 
London, Morrison & Gibb Ltd,, for the Royal Society, 19U8, 

828 pp. 

Royal Society Scientific Information Conference (19U8) Report , 
London, Hazell, Watson & Viney, Ltd,, for the Royal 
Society, 19U8. 723 pp. 

Sarton, George: A History of Science . Cambridge, Mass., Harvard 
University Press, 195>2. 6l5 pp, 

- The Study of the History of Science . Cambridge, 

Mass., Harvard University Press, 1936. 75 pp» 

Schrodinger, Erwin: Nature and the Greeks . London, Cambridge 
University Press, 195>U. 97 pp. 

Simpson, George Gaylord: The Meaning of Evolution . New Haven, 
Conn., Yale University Press, 191*9® 361* pp."’ 

Singer, Charles, Holmyard, E.J., and Hall, A.R., editors: 

A History of Technology ; Vol. I: From Early Times to 
Fall of Ancient Empires. London, Oxford University 
Press, 1951*. 827 pp, 

Stebbing, L. Susan: Philosophy and the Physicists : An Examination 
of the Philosophical Views of Sir Arthur Eddington and Sir 
James Jeans. London, Methuen, 1937o 295 pp® 

-• Thinking to Some Purpose . London, Penguin 

Books Ltd., 1939® 2l*8 pp. 

Sullivan, J.W,N.: The Limitations of Science . New York, New 
American Library of World Literature, Inc., 19l*9® 192 pp. 

Thomson, Sir George: The Foreseeable Future . London, Cambridge 
University Press, 1955^ 166 pp. 

























































-295- 


Walpole, Hugh R.: Semantics . New York, W.W. Norton & Co., 

Inc., 19Ul. 261* pp. 

Weiner, Norbert: The Human Use of Human Beings ; Cybernetics and 
Society. Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 1950. 2 I 4 I pp. 

Whitehead, Alfred North: Adventures of Ideas . London, Cambridge 
University Press, 1933. 392 pp. 

-: The Aims of Education and Other Essays . 

New York, New American Library of World 
Literature, Inc., 19l*9. 166 pp. 

-: Essays in Science and Philosophy . New York, 

Philosophical Library, 191*8* 255 pp. 

-• Science and the Modern World ; Lowell Lectures 

(1925)o London, Cambridge University Press, 1930. 265 PPo 

Young, J.Z.: Doubt and Certainty in Science . Oxford, England, 
Clarendon Press, 19^1. l68 pp. 


INDEXES AND ABSTRACTING JOURNALS 


Agricultural Index , The: Subject Index to a Selected 

List of Agricultural Periodicals and Bulletins. New York, 

H.W. Wilson Co. Vol. 1 1916-18, Vol. 9 1937-1*2 and 
Vol* 13 1951-51* consulted for number of pages. 

Biological Abstracts : Covering the World* s Biological Research 
Literature. Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania. 

Vols. 1 to 27, 1927 to 1953, consulted for numbers of 
abstracts. 

Chemical Abstracts : Editor—E. J. Crane. Columbus, Ohio State 
University. Number of abstracts reported annually in 
Chemical and Engineering News . See Crane, E« J., 
next section, below,for references from which numerical 
data on abstracts obtained. 

Current List of Medical Literature . Washington, D.C., Armed 
Forces Medical Library. Vols. 19 to 2l*, 1950-1953, 
consulted for total listings. 

Engineering Index , The . New York, The American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers (1901-25). New York, 

Engineering Index, Inc. (1933-53), Highly selective, 
dealing with engineering as such; "pure science" only 
when particularly pertinent to engineering. 

Nuclear Science Abstracts. Oak Ridge, Term., Technical Information 
Service, United States Atomic Energy Commission. Vol. 1*, 1950, 
and Vol. 5, 1951, consulted for number of abstracts* 





















































<1 




t * 





t • * 







1 


!L '• 









-296- 


Physics Abstracts (Science Abstracts Section A). London, The 

Institution of Electrical Engineers In Association with The 
Physical Society, The American Physical Society and The 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers,, Vols. II, 1899, 
XII, 1909, 22, 1919, 32, 1929, U2, 1939, 52, 19h9, and 
55 , 1952, consulted for numbers of periodicals 
regularly received and abstracted; Vols 0 33, 1930, and 
51+, 1951, for subject index breakdown; Vols. I to 56, 

1898 to 1953 , for annual numbers of abstracts« 

Quarterly Cumulative Index Medicus. Chicago, The American 
Medical Association,, Numbers of articles listed for 
6 -month periods, July, I 9 U 9 , to December, 1952, Vols. 

U6-52, obtained by letter from Miss. Magdalene Freyder, 
Librarian. 


PAPERS, ARTICLES, REPORTS 

Advancement of Science ; Vol. Ill; No. 10—Place of Science in 
Industry; No. 11—Science in Education; No. 12—Research 
and Industrial Planning; No. 13—Civilization and the 
Pursuit of Knowledge, 19hl* 

Aeroplane, The; Editorial, "Librarians and Their 
Problems." Vol. LXXXIV No. 2176, 1953* 

—-; Editorial, "Ton-Miles and Space-Travel." 

XC;2336, 1956o 

American Society for Engineering Education; "General Education 
in Engineering." Cited by Benjamin Fine. The New York 
Times Magazine , May 3, 1956, p. Ell. 

Anderson, John Ansel; "Profile of Northrop* s views on scientific 
methodology." Reprinted from Chemistry in Canada , November, 
1950. 


-: "On Writing Scientific Papers." Bulletin of 

Canadian Journal of Research (N.RoC. No# 1691)» 


Andrade, E.N. da C.; "Presentation of Scientific Information" 
Royal Society of London Proceedings Series B-Biological 
Sciences 136:317-33, Oct. 19, 19^9° 

Avias, Jacques; "International Organization of Scientific 
Documentation Based on Legislation." Science 115* 

250-51, Feb. 29, 1952. 

Ayres, Eugene; "The Fuel Situation." Scientific 
American 195*U:U3-U9, 1956. 

Bagley, Philip R.: "Applicability of Newer Electronic Techniques 
to Information Searching." M.I.T.*s Symposium on Machine 
Techniques for Information Selection, June 10-11, 1952. 

Mi moArrrnnh _ TYr>_ 


































- 297 - 


Bates, Marston: "The Criticism of Scientific Books*" 

Science ll5:U07-9, April 18, 1952# 

Beveridge, W.I.B.: "Teaching the Art of Research*” 

Research l*:3s97-101, 1951. 

Bhabha, Homi J*s "The Present Concept of the Physical World." 
Science News 21, 1951, pp* 9-^5. 

Blackett, P.M.S.: Address to British conference on "The 

Place of Science in Industry"* Advancement of Science 
111:10:119-21, 1916 . 

Bode, Hendrik, Mosteller, Frederick, Tukey, John, and Winsor, 
Charles: "The Education of A Scientific Generalist*" 
Science 109:553-8, June 3, 19149® 

Bohr, Niels: "On the Notions of Causality and Complementarity*" 
Science lll:5l-U, Jan. 20, 1950* 

Boig, F*S., and Howerton, P*W*: "History of Development of 
Chemical Periodicals in the Field of Organic Chemistry*" 
Science 115:25-31, Jan. 11, 1952. 

Bradford, S*C*: "Sources of Information on Specific Subjects." 
Engineering (London) Jap. 26, 193U, pp® 85-6* 

--—: "Complete Documentation." Nature 159:105-6, 

Jan. 18, 19U7* Synopsis of paper read at l6th 
conference of International Federation for Documentation 
(Paris)* 

Bragg, Sir Lawrence: "Recent Advances in the Study of the 
Crystalline State." Science 108:1^55-63, Oct. 29, 19i$. 

Bray, Douglas W*: "Man 1 s Mental Resources and Tomorrow 1 s 
Needs*" Saturday Night , April 9, 1955, pp® 7-8* 

British Committee on Postwar University Education (general): 
Report# Advancement of Science III:9, I 9 I+I 1 ® 

Bronowski, Jacob: Reviewing Methods of Operations Research , 

by Morse and Kimball* Scientific American lS5:U:75-7, 195l® 

Burnet, Sir Macfarlane: "How Antibodies Are Made*" Scientific 
American 191:5:7U-9, 195U® 

---; "The Riddle of Influenza Virus." 

Endeavour XIV: 53:5-11, 1955® 




































) 




t 














- 296 - 


Bush, Vannevar: "As We May Think." The Atlantic July, 
19U5, pp. 101-6. 

--: "For Man to Know." The Atlantic 

August, 1955, pp. 29-31*. 

Cantril, Hadley, and others: "Psychology 

and Scientific Research." Science 110:1*61-1*, 1*91-7, 
517-22, Nov. 1*-18, 191*9. 

Cave-Browne-Cave, Wing Cmdr. T 0 R.: "The Young Engineer." 
Nature 162:1*02-3, Sept. 11, 191*8. 

Chemical and Engineering News : Editorial: "The Perennial 
Question." 27:37:2599, 191+9. 


Collins, D.C.: "English in the Science Course." Lecture to 
the l*6th annual meeting of the Science Masters' 
Association, London, January, 19l*9. Nature 163:185-6, 
Jan. 29, 19l*9o 


Commager, Henry Steele: "The Problem Isn't Bricks—It's 
Brains." The New York Times Magazine , January 29, 
1956, pp. 11, W, 72 andTIu 


Crane, E.J. in Chemical and Engineering News : 


"Growth of Chemical Literature." 

22:17:11*78-81, 11*96, 19UU« 
23 :l+:3<?6, 191+5. 

2i+:l+:5l9-20, 191+6. 
25:8:527-8, 191+7. 
26:8:551-2, 191*8. 


"Chemical Abstracts." 

"Chemical Abstracts." 

"Chemical Abstracts." 

"Chemical Abstracts." 

"The Production of An Abstract Journal." 

26:30:2190-2, 191*8 

"Chemical Abstracts." 27:8:529, 19l*9. 

"Indexing Plans of Chemical Abstracts." 


"Chemical Abstracts." 
"Chemical Abstracts." 
"Chemical Abstracts." 
"Chemical Abstracts." 


28:8:51*0, 

28 : 8 : 585 - 6 , 

29:9:790-1, 

30:8:798-9, 

31 : 9 : 911 +- 6 , 


1950. 

1950. 

1951. 

1952. 

1953. 



















- 299 - 


Crick, F.H.C.: "The Structure of the Hereditary Material.” 
Scientific American 191:li.*5U-6l, 195U® 

Crowther, B«M.: “Scientific Abstracting.” 

Research U:l-3, January, 1951® 

Dale, Sir Henry, address to conference on “Education 
of the Man of Science.” Advancement of Science 
IV: 16 , 19U8. ~ 

Davies, R.O.: “Irreversible Thermodynamics.” Science 
News 28, 1953 * pp® lfl- 63 . 

Davis, Watson: "The Rise of Science Understanding.” 

Science 108:239-U6, Sept. 3* 19H8. 


Donovan, Bernard: “The Pituitary Gland: Servant of the 
Brain.” Science News 30, 1953* pp® 6 l- 8 . 


Drucker, Peter F.: "America 1 s Next Twenty Years”: Series in 
successive 1955 issues of Harper 1 s Magazine: 

I. The Coming Labor Shortage. March pp. 27-32. 

II. The Promise of Automation. April pp. lfL-7. 

III. The New Tycoons. May pp. 39-UU® 

IV. Eleven Coming Issues in Politics. June pp. 52«9® 


Dub os 


, Rene J.: “Second Thoughts on the Germ Theory. 
Scientific American 192:5*31-5* 1955® 


if 


Dyson, Freeman J.: Review—A History of the Theories of 
Aether and Electricity "(Whittaker). Scientific 
American 190:3*92-1, 195U® 


Edel, Leon: “That One May Say This Was the Man.” The New 
York Times Book Review June 2it, 1956, pp. 1, 12. 

Endeavour: Editorial—“Some Limits to Popular 
Science”. XV:58*59-6o* 1956. 

Engel, Leonard: “Get A Good Scientist and Leave Him 

Alone." Harper 1 s Magazine , January, 195U, pp® 55-9® 


































- 300 - 


Fein, E.: "Causality, Relativity and Language,," American 
Joumal of Physic s 19sUs211-3, 1951® 

Feldman, G.: "Meson Theory of Nuclear Forces." Science 

News 35, 1955, pp. U2-5U® 

Grainger, Thomas H.: "The Emergency in Basic Science." 

The Saturday Review, July 16 , 1955, pp® 11-12, 63-5. 

Gray, George W 0 : "Human Growth." Scientific 
American 189:^:65-76, 1953® 

Grodzinski, P.: Commentary—"Specialist Knowledge, Its Scope 
and Limitations". Research U:2:5;, 195l, 1951® 

Harrison, George R 0 : "Faith and the Scientist." The 
Atlantic , December, 1953, PP® U8-53® 

--— s "How the Brain Works." The Atlantic, 

September, 1956, pp. 58-63 (drawn from his 1956 
book— What Man May Be ) „ 

Hauser, Ernest A.s "The Importance of Science in American 
Education." Science H3:61*3-6, June 8, 1951® 

Hench, Philip S 0 : "The Fragile Children of Discovery." 

The Saturday Review , Sept. 1, 1956, pp. UU-5. 

Hewitt, William F., Jr.: "The Academic Literature-Science 

Unit." Journal of Chemical Education 26:191-2, April, 19)49® 

-: "The Literature-Science Group in Medical 

School." Medical Education , January, 1951® 

—--• "Science Communications." 

Science llU:13U-5, August 3, 1951® 

Hodgins, Eric: "The Strange State of American Research." 

Fortune , April, 1955, pp® 112-15, 2ll*-2iu 

Ingalls, Theodore H.: "Mongolism." Scientific 
American 186:2:60-6, 1952. 




































- 301 - 


Institute of Physics: "Education and Physics." Report of 
the annual conference of the education group. 

Nature 167:762-U, May 12, 1951. 

Jurgens, Marion A«: "Research Publication: A Federal 

Responsibility?". Science 110:209-12, Aug. 26, 19U9« 

Kendall, J.T.: Address to conference of British Association 
for the Advancement of Science regarding "Scientific 
Research and Industrial Planning". Advancement of 
Science 111:12:328-9, 19U7© 

Labou r Research : Monthly bulletin published by the research 
department of the Canadian Congress of Labour (Ottawa): 
"Automation"—Part 1 in Vol. VIII, Nos. 10,11,12 
1955; Part 2 in Vol. IX, Nos. 1,2,3, 1956. 

Lamb, Arthur B«: "Publication—Lifeblood of Science" (Priestley 
Medal Address to 19U9 annual meeting of American Chemical 
Society). Chemical and Engineering News 27:1+0:281*1-3, 19U9. 

Lande, Alfred: "Quantum Mechanics and Common Sense." 

Endeavour XV:58:6l:7, 1956. 

Lape, Esther Everett: "The Basic Reason for Basic Research." 

The New York Times Magazine , Jan. 15, 1956, pp. 17, 60, 62. 

Lonsdale, Kathleen: Commentary—"Specialized Science Training 
and Citizenship". Research 3:10:1*37-9, 1950. 

MacDonald, Ian G.: I. Educations Primary Task; II. First 
Essential of Learning; III. Premium on Plain English; 

IV. Proper Study of Man; V. Essential Subject Matter; 

VI. Criticisms and Answers. The Edmonton Journal 3 
March 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 19^1u 

McKenzie, A.E.E.: "Science in Education." Advancem ent of 
Science 111:11:227-39, 19l*5o 

Meier, R.L.: "Research as A Social Process." 

Research 1*: 10:1+63-70, 1951, reprinted from 
British Journal of Sociology 11:2, 1951© 

Meissner, Walter: "Max Planck, The Man and His Work." 

Science 113:75-81, June 26, 1951© 

































- 302 - 


Michaelson, Herbert B.: ’’Semantics and Syntax in Technical 

Reports.” Chemical and Engineering News 28:29:2)416-8, 1950. 

Muir, James: Royal Bank of Canada ”Monthly Letter” (Why 
Education?), August, 1956. Mr. Muir is president 
and chairman of the bank. 

Murphy, W 0 J.: Editorial—’’Lost-Literature Legend”. Chemica l 
and Engineering News 30:6:5o5* 1952. 

Nature : Editorial—’’Rationalization of the Literature of 
Scientific Research”. l57:7U5-8, June 8, 19U6. 

—.—: Editorial—"Medical Education”. 162:311-11 

Aug. 28, 19U8. 

-.—Editorial—’’University Education in Natural 

Science.” 163:657-8, April 30, 19k9* 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert: ’’The Age of Science 1900-1950.” 

Scientific American 183:3220-3, 1950. 

-—: ’’Science and the Common Understanding”: The 

Reith Lectures, BBC. Printed in The Listener , 

Nov. 19, 26, Dec. 3, 10, 17, 2i*, 1953. 

Paneth, H.R.: ’’The Periodic System and the Reduction of 

Chemistry to Physics.” Science News 2I4, 1952, pp. 63-93. 

Pauling Linus: Quoted in ’’Genes and Mental Defectives”. Time 
Sept. 10, 1956, p. 66. 

--—— • ’’Chemistry and the World of Today.” 

(Presidential address to American Chemical Society, September, 
I9I49). Chemical and Engineering News 27:39:2775-8, 19^9° 

Planck, Max: ’’The Meaning and Limits of Exact Science.” 

Science 110:319-27, Sept. 30, 19h9* 

Plumb, Robert K.: ’’Science in Review.” The New York Times 
Magazine , Jan. 3* 1955* p. E9« 

Petroleum Press Service: ’’Signposting the Future—I.” Vol. 

XXIII No. 7, 1956, pp. 2U2-7. ’’Signposting the 
Future— II.” Vol. XXIII No. 8, pp. 282-8. 

’’New Thinking.” No. 8, pp. 277-8. 































- 303 - 


Perry, J.W.: "The Crisis in Compiling and Correlating Chemical 
Literature.” M<,I.T.*s Symposium on Machine Techniques for 
Information Selection, June 10-11, 1952. * Mimeograph, 12 pp. 

-—.— • "Development Program for Machine Indexing." M.I.T. 

Symposium. Mimeograph, 28 pp. 

-• "Information Analysis for Machine Searching." 

American Documentation 1:3:133-9, 1950. 

Periy, J.W., and Casey, Robert S.: "Mechanized Searching." 
Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology Vol. 8 , pp. U*9-67. 

Ranganathan, S.R 0 , and Perry, J.W.: "External Memory and 
Research." Journal of Documentation 7 : 1 : 10 - 1 ) 4 ., 195l® 

Research : Commentary—"Specialization and the 
Specialist". l*:10:ljli;-3, 1951® 

Richter, Curt P.: "Free Research Versus Design Research." 

Science 118:91-3, 1953® 

Rickover, Rear Admiral Hyman G., USN: "Engineering and Scientific 
Education." Address to the Sixth Thomas Alva Edison Foundation 
Institute, Nov. 21-22, 1955, reprinted in the Presentation to 
The Royal Commission on Canada* s Economic Prospects from the 
Engineering Institute of Canada, February, 1956. 

Robinson, Sir Robert: Presidential Address to the Royal 
Society of London, Proceedings Series B- Biological 
Sciences 136:xiii-xv, May 9, 19U9® 

Roe, Anne: "A Psychologist Examines 6 i; Scientists." Scientific 
American 187:5:21-5, 1952. 

Scheele, L.A., and Sebrell, W.H.: "Medical Research and Medical 
Education." Science 11I 4 :517-21, Nov. 16, 1951o 

Scientific American: "Automatic Control." Special issue—187:3, 
1952. 


-—•: "Fundamental Questions in Science." 

Special issue —189:3, 1953® 


"The Universe." 


Special issue—195:3, 1956, 
































JO I” :'_v r.,( 'I-V 










-30U- 


Scott, Eugene W.: "Primary Publication." Science llU:3, 

October, 1951® 

Smith, Harold H.: "Education and the Control of Evolution." 

The Saturday Review , Jan. 8, 1955® 

Smith, Sidney: "Brains Unlimited." Canadian 
Education IX:3:3-12, 1951u 

SpigeLnan, Joseph H.: "Can Science Make Sense?". Harper 1 s 
Magazine, May, 1951, pp. 5U-60. 

Steacie, E.W.R.: "Research in Its National Aspects." Paper 
to Scientific and Industrial Research Conference at 
82nd annual general meeting of Canadian Manufacturers 1 
Association, May, 1953® Industrial Canada , July, 1953® 

Stoddard, George D.: "Youth." Scientific 
American 185*3*101-8, 1951® 

Taube, M.: "New Tools for the Control and Use of Research Materials." 
Proceedings American Philosophical 
Society 93 * 3*21+8-52, 19U9® 

Thomson, David: "Specialisation?". The Spectator , 

May 20, 19U9, pp® 673-U. 

von Bertalanffy, Ludwig: "The Theory of Open Systems in Physics 
and Biology." Science 111:23-9, Jan. 13, 1950. 

von Neumann, John: "Can We Survive Technology?". 

Fortune, June, 1955 (reprint). 

Vick, F.A.: "The Problem of Over-Specialisation." 

London Calling , June 21, 1956, p. 10® 

Whittaker, Sir Edmund: f ’Mathematics." Scientific 
American 183*3*^0-2, 1950. 

Wildhack, W.A.: "Instrumentation in Perspective." 

Science 112:515-19, Nov. 3, 1950. 

Williams, Thyllis M.: "Analysis of Information for Machine 
Searching." M.I.T. Symposium 0 Mimeograph, 10 pp® 

Wise, Carl S., and Perry, James W.: "Multiple Coding and the 
Rapid Selector." American Documentation 1:2. 

Woke, Paul A.: "Considerations on Utilization of Scientific 
Literature." Science 113*399-^03, April 13, 1951® 

Young, J.Z.: "The organization within nerve cells." 

Endeavour XV:5?*5-19, 1956. 



































PAMPHLETS 


The Centre for Scientific Aids to Learning , An Interim Report 
to The Carnegie Corporation of New York 0 Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass., Committee for 
Scientific Aids to Learning, February, 1951. 52 pp. 

The Frontiers of Criticism . The Gideon Seymour Memorial Lecture, 
1956, T,S. Eliot, at the University of Minnesota. 
Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press, 1956. 20 pp. 

The New World of Research . A Special Report, Business Week , 

May 28, 1955. New York, McGraw-Hill Publishing Co., 

1955. 12 pp. 

Study of Physics Abstracting . Final Report. Dwight E. Gray, 
Director. New York, American Institute of Physics, 

June 30, 1950, 20 pp. 


THESES 


The Factors of Scientific Progress . C.F.B. Stevens. Manuscript 
available at University of California, Los Angeles, Library. 

On the Mechanism of the Scientific Method . C.F.B. Stevens, 

Pulp and Paper Research Institute of Canada, Montreal. 
Manuscript. 































' 





t 

' , 


* ' 

. - , 


1 






















