






















0.x UBil* 

JinWESMSIS 




Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/estimationofestrOOchat 






THE ESTIMATION OF THE ESTROGENIC ACTIVITY 


OF CERTAIN ORGANIC COMPOUNDS 


Leslie George Ghatten, B.Sc. 


A thesis submitted in conformity with the requirements for the 
degree of Master of Science by the University-of Alberta. 


School of Pharmacy 
University of Alberta 


1949 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 


The writer gratefully acknowledges the valuable 
criticisms and assistance given by Dr. M. J. Huston. 

He wishes also to thank Dr. R. B. Sandin for the 
invaluable aid and encouragement which he offered during 
the course of this investigation. 

He acknowledges also the assistance given by 
Dr. R. K. Brown. 

His thanks are also due to the Canadian Foundation 
for the Advancement of Pharmacy for making this investiga¬ 
tion possible during the summer months. 

He also wishes to express his appreciation to the 
University of Alberta Research Fund for the financial aid 
which they offered. 



; ■. . r 






i ■' ! : o .:'.; ■ ;.r 


■• o ; T. ' / ; > 




01 










TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Pag© 

Introduction 1-15 


Natural Estrogens 1-3 

A. Historical Background 1 

Chart One of Natural Estrogens 2 

B. Chemistry of the Natural Estrogens 3 

Synthetic Estrogens 3-13 

A. Those with cyclopentanophenanthrene nucleus 3 

B. Those without cyclopentanophenanthrene 

nucleus 4 

1* The Phenanthrene Series 5 

2. The Benzanthracene Series 5 

3. The Stilbestrol, Hexestrol and Dienestrol 

Series 6 

4* The Triphenylethylene Series 9 

5. The Diphenyl Methane Series 12 . 

6. The Diphenyl Propane Series 12 

7. The Ring-Closed Analogues 13 

Estrogens and Carcinogenises 13 - 15 

Statement of the Problem 16-17 


Procedure IS - 20 


Determination of Estrogenic Potency 18 - 20 

lo Method of Assay 18 

2, Method of Injection 19 

Experimental 21 - 40 


Chemical Synthesis 21-39 

1. Bis (p-nitrophenyl) Sulfide 21 

2. Bis (p-aminophenyl) Sulfide 21 

3. Bis (p-hydroxyphenyl) Sulfoxide 22 

4. Bis (p-hydroxyphenyl) Sulfide 22 

5. Bis (p-hydroxyphenyl) Sulfone 23 

6. Bis (p-methoxyphenyl) Sulfide 23 

7. Bis (p-hy&roxyphenyl) Salicylthetine 24 

8* Thiohydroquinone 25 

9. Bis (p-nitrobenzyl) Sulfide 26 

10. Bis (p-aminobenzyl) Sulfide 26 

11. P-methoxyphenyl Ethyl Methyl Chloride 27 

12. Bis (p-methoxyphenyl Ethyl Methyl) Sulfide 27 

13. 4*4 ! - dihydroxydiphenyl Disulfide 29 

14. Dibenzothiophene 29 







' fj 




:) 





*> 




'■ 




/- 


i 

K 




- 









Table of Contents 


15- 

Ddbenzothiophene - 5 - Oxide 

30 

16. 

3-nitrodibenzothiophene - 5 - Oxide 

30 

17. 

3-aminodibenzothiophene 

30 

18. 

3-acetaminodibenzothiophene 

31 

19. 

3-aminodibenzothiophene - 5 - Oxide 

31 

20. 

3-acetaminodibenzothiophene - 5 - Oxide 

32 

21. 

Dibenzothiophene - 5 - Dioxide 

32 

22. 

3-nitrodibenzothiophene - 5 - Dioxide 

32 

23. 

3-aminodibenzothiophene - 5 - Dioxide 

33 

24. 

3-acetaminodibenzothiophene - 5 - Dioxide 

34 

25. 

3,7-dinitrodibenzothiophene - 5 - Oxide 

34 

26. 

3 >7-diaminodibenzo thiophene - 5 - Oxide 

34 

27. 

3*7-dihydroxydibenzothiophene 

34 

28. 

2 - acetyldibenzothiophene 

35 

29. 

2,8-diacetyldibenzothiophene 

36 

30. 

3*7-diaeetyldibenzothiophene - 5 - Oxide 

36 

31. 

Heat Product of Cholesterol - 300 

37 

32. 

Heat Product of Cholesterol - 430 

37 

33. 

3-nitrodibenzofuran 

39 

34. 

3-aminodibenz ofuran 

39 

Results 


41 - 49 

Table 1 


41 

Table 2 


43 

Table 3 


47 

Table 4 


48 

Table 5 


49 

Discussion 


50 - 53 

Summary 

* 

54 

Bibliography 

• 

55 - 58 















INTRODUCTION 












NATURAL ESTROGENS 


A. Historical Background . 

Theories of the cause of ovulation and menstruation have been 
many and varied. In the past, most of them were steeped in folklore and 
superstition. It was not until late in the nineteenth century that the 
hormone concept of menstruation and ovulation was formulated. Although 
all the complexities of sex endocrinology are by no means understood even 
today, yet the gradual accumulation of data from many laboratories has 
served to clarify to some extent the puzzle of the menstrual cycle and 
related phenomena. 

Stockard and Papanicolaou (73) made an important contribution 
when they diseovered. that the vagina, as well as the uterus, undergoes 
definite cyclical changes. Allen and Doisy (2) demonstrated that the 
chronology of the sex changes could be conveniently and accurately 
studied from smears of vaginal secretion. These workers demonstrated 
the presence of an estrus producing hormone contained in the follicular 
fluid, and studied Its physiological effects. It was not until 1929 that 
the hormone, estrone (theelin), was isolated in crystalline form. This 
was accomplished almost simultaneously by Doisy, Veler and Thayer (32) 
in the United States, and by Butenandt and von Ziegner (11) in Germany. 
This feat was greatly facilitated by the discovery of Ascheim and Zondek 
(4) that this hormone is present in large quantity in the urine of preg¬ 
nant women. The exact molecular structure is now known and a number of 
chemically similar compounds have been isolated, each possessing varying 
degrees of estrogenic activity. 










CHART ONE 


THE NATURALLY OCCURRING ESTROGENS 







V EQUILINE 


VI EQUILENINE 




















































3 


B. Chemistry of the Natural Estrogens . 

The naturally occurring estrogens are derivatives of the 
perhydrocyclopentanophenanthren© nucleus (I). It is believed that 
estradiol (TV) is the active hormone secreted by the ovary. It has been 
extracted from the ovaries of sows by MacCorquodale, Thayer and Doisy (53). 
Estradiol has also been extracted from the urine of pregnant women and of 
pregnant mares. It is the most active natural estrogenic substance known, 
being six times as active as estrone (II) and sixty times more potent 
than estriol (III). Estrone and estriol, oxidation products of estradiol, 
are found in the urine, and have been extracted from the human placenta. 

Two very closely related estrogens, equiline (V) and equilenine (VI), have 
been isolated from the urine of pregnant mares. These compounds have 
approximately on©”third and one-tenth of the estrogenic activity of 
estrone, respectively. 

SYNTHETIC ESTROGENS 

A. Those with Cyclopentanophenanthrene Nucleus . 

Once the chemical structure of the natural estrogens had been 
established, it was possible to prepare some synthetic analogues and to 
modify the cyclopentanophenanthrene nucleus. 

The majority of the naturally occurring estrogens have a short 
period of action. Since treatment with estrogens is needed over compara¬ 
tively long periods in certain clinical conditions, various methods have 
been used to produce prolonged estrogenic effects without repeated admini¬ 
stration of the substance. One method which has been used is the subcutan¬ 
eous implantation of a tablet of an estrogen of low solubility. The 
substance slowly goes into solution and the effect may continue for weeks 





' ■ 


. 




. ■ - 


J~ ■ ■ _ j-yyry:: ■ • 1 ; 

' ■ ' - r >jr? ; r, : 

' ' 3 1 ■ 






0 . 




... . 


. O i ./ 


■ ' 


C T)'t 05 .T :.' oo - V >Of 


i: ; • . m , ■■ Y 




0. f ; • ; - •; ■ o;i 


) r;.‘ 


' i. i r .*) o e i ; 


^■ "00 '"OV'o ;O.V'r''fi ■; Y•; y rvc.-s-jo 






Y : : ' ' /v r ) Y ". : 


;•) i ] 


:' o 


v'; yy-'jiouyi^ i-ixtho 

: >yy rr. ;.Yv; oY' 'oy- v 


d ; J:o 


: ’ ■ - 




-JlV-i 'IX’-OC 


o • ' : 








4 


or even months* 

Prolongation of activity has also been achieved by administration 
of complexes from which the active estrogen is slowly liberated in the body. 

A number of such substances have been manufactured and used in clinical 
practice. Of these, the esters of estradiol (combination of estradiol with 
acids) are among the more important. Miescher et al (54) found that the 
duration of action of one such ester, estradiol benzoate, was several times 
that of estradiol. The compounds with two acid radicles, estradiol dipro¬ 
pionate and estradiol benzoate butyrate, have a still longer period of 
action. 

Recently, clinical interest has been shown in a substance 
produced by Inhoffen and Hohlweg (44) in 1938. These workers showed that 
it was possible to introduce an acetylenic linkage at the 17-carbon of 
estradiol. The resulting compound was called ethinyl estradiol (VIl). 

Unlike the natural estrogens, this derivative of the naturally-occurring 
substance was found to be active when administered orally. 



B. Those without Cyclopentanophenanthrene Nucleus . 

Even before the chemistry of the natural female sex hormones 
had been fully elucidated. Cook and Dodds with their collaborators (16,17,18) 














f 



f 


.! 




* 



11 




J.C 





- 






.o 





t 


■ 




t 









5 


undertook to synthesize estrogenic substances of similar structure. This 
endeavor was encouraged by the fact that estrogenic activity was apparently 
less specific than other hormonal activity, since it was shared by a group 
of sterols. 


1, The Phenanthrene Series. 


In 1933> the first compounds of non-steroid structure 
reported by these authors to possess estrogenic activity, were 1-keto-l, 
2,3?4-tetrahydrophenanthrene ( VIII;) and the corresponding 4-keto deriva¬ 
tive (IX). The activity of this series is low when compared with that 
of estrone. It was later recognized that activity of such low order is 
common to a large number of compounds. 




VIII. 1-keto-l,2,3*4- IX. 4-keto-l,2,3,4- 

tetrahydrophenanthrene. tetrahydrophenanthrene. 


2, The Benzanthracene Series. 


Cook, Dodds, Hewitt and Lawson (IB) found considerably higher 
activity for a series of 9,10-dihydroxy-9,10~dIalkyl-9>10-dihydrobenzanthra- 
cenes. They studied the effect of various alkyl groups on estrogenic 
activity; in this series the optimal activity was reached with the 






















( ' 


o' f. o vjs . 1: 


n 




O : ,( ') 










M ri‘. 




r 


/ • :r. 


' r ■ ;■ 










6 


di-n-propyl derivative (x). 



X. 9 ,lQ-dihydroxy-9, 10-di-n- propyl-9 , 10-dihydrobenzanthracene* 

3, The Stilbestrol, Hexestrol and Dienestrol Series. 

Dodds and Lawson (24) -undertook to ascertain whether compounds 
of simpler structure and without the phenanthrene nucleus would be 
estrogenic. Considerable activity was shown by certain compounds with 
only two benzene rings, particularly by stilbene (;X1) and 4*4* “dihydroxy- 
stilbene (XII). Attempts were then made, by these workers (25), to 
further simplify the formula by the elimination of one of the rings. The 
compound anol, p-hydroxy propenylbenzene (XIII) was tested and appeared 
to be highly active. When other laboratories attempted to repeat the 
result, however, considerable variation was found in the activity of 
different batches of anol - some having only slight potency. It was con¬ 
cluded that some batches of anol contained a contaminant, probably a 


dimeride of anol, 





















. ' 










. V . 


• r 1 ■ - : r 


■ 




> • c ; 




i- ■ v,: • 





fpr ) 


: l 


0 tb 




‘ 



'• •» ' ' |V > AD ; " r r J : -> 






7 



XI. Stilbene 



XII. 4> 4* -dihydroxy stilbene. 



XIII. AnoX (p-hydroxy propenyl- 

benzene). 

Campbell, Dodds and Lawson (12) tested the unsymmetrical 
dimeride, dianol (XIV)). This compound, though active, was not suffic¬ 
iently potent to account for the high activity of some of the lots of 
anol. The other possibility was the symmetrical dimeride, 4>4*"dihydroxy- 
L,B-diethylstilbene, later known as stilbestrol (XV). This compound was 
synthesized by Dodds, Golberg, Lawson and Robinson (27) and when tested 
on rats by the vaginal snesr method was found to be the most powerful 
estrogenic substance then known. Campbell, Dodds and Lawson (13) were 
able to isolate another residual substance, remaining from the anol 
crystallization. This compound was later known as hexestrol (XVI). 



XIV. Dianol. 


























iXO -,r ; ,• c , o. 


'>• J V , •; 








) • 






0 ;- 




- - . ^ 

>1' , I i : ;■ ‘ . ; .0 ' J , ■ ■ ; ; v f"> ' • ’• 

> 

. . ' a f ■;:, 


. i m . :oo i.ral- 








, 







8 





XVII. Dienestrol. 


The effect of the conjugation, of the two phenolic hydroxyl 
groups in stilbestrol and hexestrol, on estrogenic potency was the subject 
of a systematic study. The result is a very nearly complete series of 
alkyl and acyl derivatives. These compounds have an activity less than 
that of the parent compound. The placing of the hydroxyls in ortho and 
meta positions instead of the para position as in stilbestrol, as well as 
combinations of these in the same molecule were attempted. This, too, 
resulted in a reduction of potency. 

Mixed ether esters of stilbestrol exhibited a markedly reduced 


activity, with the exception of the monomethyl ether monoacetate prepared 
by Ludwig (52) which appeared to combine fairly high activity with pro¬ 
longed effect. 

























' j '■> 




■‘ : ' 

■; ' n.. , ." 


■ ■' : ■ r : 

: ' . : . ' ' " '■ 

• ’ 

'■ ■ > ' v *; 0 . : a ' 

■ : •' 

* r" . 


' 





9 


A large number of homologues of stilbestrol and hex©strol 
have been prepared by replacing the two ethyl groups with other alkyl 
radicles (27, 30, 31). None of the many homologues have an activity 
equal to that of the diethyl derivatives. The increase or decrease of 
even one methyl group causes a loss of one-half of the potency. A 
similar loss is obtained by keeping the molecular weight the same but 
replacing one of the two ethyl groups with a methyl radicle and the 
second with an n-propyl group. Moore and Volhiler (56* 57) found the 
methyl, isopropyl homologue only slightly less active than stilbestrol. 
Increased potency of branched-chain alkyl substituents, as compared with 
straight-chain groups, is not generally found in these or other series. 

A large number of estrogens are known which have the stilbene 
a double bond shifted into a side chain. The most important member of 
this series is 3,4-bIs(p-hydPoxyphenyl)-2,4-hexadIen@ or dienestrol 
(XVII). It was first prepared by Dodds, Golberg, Lawson and Robinson 
(28, 30). Another member of this series 3>4”bis(p-hydroxyphenyl)-2- 
hexene (XVIII), which is similar to dienestrol, was described by Wessely 
et al (74, 75). 



XVIII. 3,4“bis(p-hydroxyphenyl)-2-hexene. 

4. The Triphenylethylene Series. 

Since triphenylethylene is a phenyl-substituted stilbene, its 
estrogenic derivatives might be considered as stilbestrol variants. This 












10£ 



t ■ 





' o 


o ”f> ( 


< : ' • 


c 


:) 


It I - t 


o 



€ ‘ : : : . . . 






t 







... 


■ 



:.:i< o 






10 


group has certain distinct characteristics, however, so it will be 
considered separately. Robson and Schonberg ( 63 ) reported that triphenyl- 
ethylene (XIX) possessed remarkable duration of action when used in large 
doses. This was confirmed by Dodds, Fitzgerald and Lawson (26), who 
prepared several un substituted di-, tri- and tetraphenylen e s. According 
to Robson, Schonberg and Fahim (64), triphenylchlorethylene (XX) is 
twenty times more active than triphenylethylene. Halogen substitution 
has an enhancing effect on triphenylethylene. This has not been observed 
in other series of estrogens. Schonberg and his collaborators (64, 65, 

70) selected L,L-bis(p-ethoxyphenyl)-B~phenyl-B-bromoethylene(XXI) as the mo 
promising member of this series. Davies et al (22, 23), however, found 
L,L,B-tri(p-anisyl)-bromoethylene(XXII) more active. 




XX. Triphenylchlorethylene. 





















0 




'o'. 












f, 




'■ ! : ■ • ( y. e ■ > 'i~ o,,( r.J-*'/'> -Jf >•; •- - ; ^ 

'• ■■ ' < / ' t : . ' ; ■ ’ . ' 
















11 




XXI. L,L-bis(p-ethoxyphenyi) -B-phenyi-B-bromoethylene (D.B.E.) 




XXIII. 4,4®-dihydroxy-L~ethyl-B-phenylstilbene. 


Dodds et al (31) found that 4,4®dihydroxy-L-ethyl-B-phenylstilbene (XXIII) 
was not less than one-twelfth as active as stilbestrol and is thus the 
most active triphenylethylene derivative reported to date. 

It would appear that in the triphenylethylene series, as in 

































. * / a c J‘ 















' n. t 


' ; vi 





12 


the stilbene series, maximum activity is obtained with phenolic substi¬ 
tution of two rings attached to two different ethylene carbon atoms, 

5, The DiphenyImethane Series , 

Dodds and Lawson (24) found 4,4* -dihydroxydiphenyl methane 
XXIV) among the first simpler synthetic estrogens not containing the 
phenanthrene or dibenzanthracene skeleton. These authors (29) later 



systematically substituted the parent compound with alkyl groups, but 
none of the compounds tested was active at a dose level below 100 mgm per 
rat. Later, Campbell (24) prepared an alkyl substituted compound which 
was active at a dose level of 5-10 mgm per rat, 

6, The Diphenylpropane Series , 

Numerous combinations of alkyl substitutions, In the propyl 
linkage of diphenylpropane, were prepared. The most potent of these was 
benzestrol (2,4-bis(p-hydroxyphenyl)-3-hexane (XXV), This compound was 
reported by Stibbins and Blanchard (72) aid requires a dosage of 3 gamma 
per rat to produce estrus. 



XXV, Benzestrol. 
















n - 


f i ■. ' " ; " 


c\r &: v 


•vv • ; n ■: \t :o t 


■ 

ft : I»€>U 


, : ' 

’ ' .cm: o < •''' •: ;: \ r : y •:*: ,'i. : r '• i j;’( 7 . 1 . 
'Vi . ; : .y i \ i. £ ■ r J 




:t •• > J'. '”. t ai. 


’ ' ' ; Xt i > *. : i : ;> y > ; y 

1 ' '■ '■ - ^0lc.(r I7.\ r : . . V yr; ,v . c f . c > .<./ 

' ■ . ' . 

- - . 




■ t ; - : ■' r:; ; ’ • : : •; r .r . f t 


■ •: [ r 






. 




■; i.cr.r ■ 1 . 


. 
































13 


7. The Ring-Closed Analogues . 


After an exhaustive investigation of the stilbene series, 
interest, once again, centred on the ring-closed analogues. Saltzer 
(66, 67) succeeded in preparing 1-methyl-2(p-hydroxyphenyl)-3,4“dihydro- 
6-hydroxynaphthalene (XXVI) which possessed an activity comparable to 
that of stilbestrol. This worker also prepared 2—(p-hydroxyphenyl)-3- 
methyl-6-hydroxy-2,3-indene (XXVII). The diaeetate of this compound 
possessed the same activity as XXVI. 



XX VI. 1-m ethyl-2 (p~hydroxyph©nyl)-3 >4-d ihydro- 6-hydroxynaphthal me. 



XXVII. 2-(p-hydroxyphenyl)-3-methyl- 6-hydroxy-2,3-indene. 


ESTROGMS AND CARCINOGEN ISES 


The early work of Cook and Dodds (16, 17) on synthetic estrogens 
was instigated by the possibility of a correlation between estrogenic 
activity and careinogenises. The unexpected estrus producing property of 























> <. 




r 




!< 6 


;') '"5 O' 




0 


.0 :t ; I't . ;; r -.c' 



:7 ; : rr* 




o, j a 


nr.;: >"> on 



i 


:r; 


: ■.*; •) ft 




14 


5,6-cyclopentano-1,2-benzanthracene (XXVIII) and 1,2-benzpyrene (XXIX), 
two of the most potent carcinogens known, appeared at first to be of 
considerable significance. Later, however, it was found that the low 
order of estrogenic activity of these compounds was shared by many non- 
carcinogenic substances® It was also shown that many potent carcinogens, 
some of which possessed structural formulae similar to XXVIII and XXIX, 
did not possess any estrogenic potency. 




XXVIII. 5,6-cyelopentano-l,2-benzanthracene. XXIX. 1,2-benzpyrene, 


Leob (50) summarized the situation with regard to earcino- 
genises and estrogenic activity in the following manners- 

(1) There are substances which are both estrogenic and carcino¬ 
genic. 

(2) There are estrogenic substances which are not carcinogenic. 

(3) There are carcinogenic substances which are not estrogenic. 

(4) Even in cases in which compounds are both estrogenic and 
carcinogenic, there is no parallelism between the strength 
of these two activities. The most potent estrogens are not 
the most potent carcinogens and vice versa. 






















t. . 


t 


fi 


0 . 


; : ft 


t- 


* 


' :>■ 


K r ' 


,o o 


4 


0 


r 


r. 


r 1 ' . ' ■ ; 


a 


■ - if 


4 


n ’ 


i 















15 


An investigation of the carcinogenic activity of the natural female 
sex hormones was undertaken by several groups of workers* Solutions of 
estradiol and estrone were applied to the skin of experimental animals in 
repeated doses over a long period of time, just as the hydrocarbon deriva¬ 
tives of tar had been tested by Cook, Kennaway and co-workers (5, 15)® 
Negative results were obtained. 

Cori (19), using a series of rats which normally had a higher cancer 
incidence, was able to reduce the cancer rate to zero by ovariectomyzing 
the rats at the age of two months# If the ovariectomies were not performed 
until the eighth or tenth month, the cancer rate became almost as high as 
it was in non-castrated rats* Lacass&gne (48) succeeded in producing 
mammary cancer in male mice in which it normally would not have appeared, 
by injecting them with large doses of estradiol benzoate* 

As it is the purpose of this investigation to test synthetic 
organic compounds for estrogenic activity and not for carcinogenises, a 
detailed report on the experimental results in the latter field is not 
included* A fine summary has been prepared by Allen (3) which establishes 
the carcinogenic activity of many estrogens* 

The relationship of carcinogenic activity to estrogenic activity 
is obscure* The carcinogenic hydrocarbons may affect a greater variety 
of tissues, while estrogens more discreetly affect those tissues in which 
they induce growth processes during the normal sexual cycle (3)« Leob (50) 
believes that the mechanism underlying cancerous transformation differs 
from the normal proliferative changes in the sex organs, but that the 
former may ultimately depend on a long term proliferative processes. 

There may exist, therefore, only an indirect connection between the car¬ 
cinogenic action of the hydrocarbons of tar and the carcinogenic effect 
of estrogenic hormones* 




~\ r 
V- - 




"X : / V’, V' ' ' ■ '"‘I . • ■ • • : .: ■ '•» - ’ { X« 1 


)0 




‘l o r> 


* 


’ o 


* 


) 




3 




C ■ 


o' L'O'SC 


,n 


0 ' ' : 3 ’■ r ■' o 


0 ■ 



:e 



o n; r 


• ' o 




/X r)( 






STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM 




16 


The similarity between the physical, characteristics of benzene 
and thiophene and between their corresponding derivatives, and the 
similarity in the physiological behavior of certain of these compounds 
have been the subject of frequent speculation. In 1933, Erlenmeyer 
and Leo (35) advanced the theory that divalent sulfur contains a shell 
of orbit electrons similar to that of the group or w pseudo-atom”, 

-CH - CH-. This similarity in the electronic structure, known as isos- 
terism, was believed by Grimm (41) to account for the formation of mixed 
crystals and the similarity of many of the physical properties of the 
two series. In a few cases, isosteric compounds are interchangeable in 
serologic reactions and cannot be differentiated by the precipitin 
reaction (34)• 

Burger, Wartman and Lutz (10) studied the physical and pharmacolo¬ 
gical changes effected by introducing a thiophene nucleus into condensed 
ring systems in place of an aromatic nucleus. The first series investi¬ 
gated was dibenzothiophene (XXX), which may be regarded as pseudophen- 
anthrene, Alkamines derived from dibenzothiophene, characterized by the 
groups CHOHCH 2 NR 2 and CHOHCH 2 CH 2 NR 2 , were compared with the corresponding 
alkamines of phenanthrene (XXXI). There was a marked similarity in the 
analgesic action of the respective members of the two series (58). 

The orientation and derivatives of dibenzothiophene have been 
studied extensively by Gilman and co-workers (37, 38, 39)* 

Recently, Brown, Christiansen and Sandin (9) have prepared addition¬ 
al members of the dibenzothiophene series and found that some were 
carcinogenic. 








XXX. Dibenzothiophene 


XXXI. Phenanthrene, 


The purposes of this project Mere as follows 

(1) Since sulfur has many of the physical and physiological 
properties of the group -CH s CH-, it was decided to investigate the 
effect on estrogenic potency of such substitution in the stilbene 
nucleus. 

(2) Certain other similar sulfur compounds were prepared and 
tested for estrogenic activity. 

(3) Since dibenzothiophene is analogous to phenanthrene, some 
of the derivatives of which are estrogenic, and since certain derivatives 
of the former have been reported to be carcinogenic, it was thought to 

be of interest to test dibenzothiophene derivatives for estrogenic potency. 

(4) A miscellaneous group of compounds, the synthesis of some 
of which have been developed in the laboratory of Dr, R. B. Sandin and 
Dr. R, K. Brown, were tested for estrogenic activity. 




















o ( S.i } 




t \ 


s 


D r 0 


’ 


t ■ ' v 


„ £ 








0 


. T- i\ .7 ; • ;• • 













PROCEDURE 












18 - 


Determination of Estrogenic Potency 

1. Method of Assay 

The rats enployed in the tests were of the Wistar stock* 

The general principles with regard to weight* age of ovariectomy and 
use were those outlined by Allan, Dickens and Dodds (1), The average 
weight of the rats was 125 to 140 g., at about six to seven weeks of age. 
Vaginal shears were taken one week after the rats were spayed. The 
animals were not used for testing purposes until they had given several 
consecutive negative slides. Any rats that did not give a negative 
slide after several days were discarded. A rest period of ten days to 
two weeks was allowed between each test. The anears were taken by 
inserting an eye dropper, containing a small amount of water, in the 
vagina. The water was ejected into the vagina and withdrawn into the 
dropper. The contents of the dropper were placed on a microscope slide 
and allowed to dry. The snears were stained with Loeffler* s alkaline 
methylene blue solution for fifteen minutes, washed with tap water and 
allowed to dry. 

The ®nears were classified, by the method developed by 
Huston (43) 9 according to the following criteria;- 

Glass i . Preponderance of leucocytes associated with a few compact 
and squamous cells. 

Class ii . Predominance of compact cells with a few squamous cells 
and leucocytes. 

Class i3f». Compact cells -only in large numbers of a characteristic 

appearance with the stained part drawn in, leaving a white 
ring around the cell or part of it. 







ft' 




■ ' ■ ' • ft 


ft 


1 ■ • 


b$!P 


t 


o 



r> 












19 


Class iii . Predominance of squamous cells with a few leucocytes and 
compact cells. 

Class IV . Squamous cells only, 

i and ii are interpreted as negative. 
ii4% iii and iv are interpreted as positive. 

2. Method of Injection , 

Considerable difficulty was experienced in the administra¬ 
tion of the compounds to the animals, owing to their insolubility in 
water and in oil, and to their slowness of absorption after injection. 

A careful series of experiments shox^ed that sesame oil was the most 
suitable vehicle, and it was used for all oil soluble compounds. In 
some cases, it was necessary to dissolve the compound in a minimum of 
alcohol or ether, and sesame oil was added so that a suspension was 
formed which contained 1 ml. of the organic solvent to each 6 ml. of oil. 
This mixture appeared to exhibit no harmful effect upon the experimental 
animals. In the case of other oil insoluble compounds, a suspension of 
3.5$ white beeswax in sesame oil was used as the vehicle. 

In choosing the amount of the compound to be administered. 
Cook, Dodds, Hewitt and Lawson (IB) gave the greatest quantity that could 
be absorbed without causing sloughing or severe toxic symptoms in the 
animals. They chose a quantity of 100 mg. per rat as the arbitrary dose 
in all their experiments. This amount was adopted by us. Previous work 
(18) showed that it was advantageous to give the injections of the com¬ 
pound on consecutive days rather than all at once. The 100 mg. of 
material were mixed with 3 ml. of the vehicle, and 1 ml. of the mixture 
was injected subcutaneously at ten o* clock on three successive mornings, 
into different parts of the animal 1 s body. Great care was taken to 





, 





20 


ensure that no material leaked out of the needle puncture. Vaginal 
smears were taken six hours after the last injection and then on each 
morning at ten o’ clock and each afternoon at four o’clock for three 
successive days, or until the estrus change disappeared. In animals 
showing no change, morning and afternoon smears were taken for fourteen 
days. 

The correct spacing of the injections is very important (18). 
After a single injection, a fairly rapid absorption of estrogenic com¬ 
pound may take place during the first twelve hours and then fall off 
very rapidly until a slow, steady absorption of a snail quantity occurs. 
If all three injections are given in one day, then, by the end of the 
second day there will be only the absorption of the small quantity. It 
has been shown (18) that more estrogenic activity is required to initiate 
estrus than is needed to maintain an animal in that state. When the 
injections are given on three success.ve days, there are three separate 
peaks during the first sixty hours which give sufficient material to 
initiate estrus, if the compound is active. 






. ( 










m'i' •) - ", 


. 


' 




« 




I 









EXPERIMENTAL 








21 


Chemical Synthesis 


1. Bis (p-nitrophenyl) Sulfide ( 36 ) 


A solution of 37.5 g. of sodium sulfide (Na 2 S. 9 H 20 ) in 
250 ml. of ethylene glycol was added to a solution of 50 g. of p*»nitro~ 
chlorobenzene in 125 ml. of absolute ethanol. The mixture darkened 
characteristically, but the reaction proceeded smoothly. The reaction 
mixture was heated on a steam bath for three hours, during which time 
the color changed from dark red to orange, and crystals began to appear. 
The mixture was cooled and filtered. Glacial acetic acid proved to be 
the most satisfactory solvent for recrystallization (59)» Beautiful, 
long, flat, yellow needles were formed. 

Melting point 159°. Yield 14.2 g. (pure). 


2. Bis (p-aminophenyl) Sulfide 



BO g. of stannous chloride (large excess) were dissolved in 
150 ml. concentrated hydrochloric acid. 50 ml. of ethanol and 11 g. 


(o.o4 moles) of bis (p-nitrophenyl) sulfide were added to the solution. 

The mixture was heated and shaken until all the compound dissolved, then 
30 ml. of glacial acetic acid were added and the mixture was heated for 
another half hour. The solution was cooled, ice and 40% sodium hydroxide 
were added until the mixture was strongly alkaline, then extracted with 
successive portions of ether. The ethereal extracts were filtered into a 
dry flask and hydrogen chloride gas was bubbled in until no more precipitate 
of the dihydrochloride was formed. The precipitate was filtered off and 
dissolved in water, ice and 40% sodium hydroxide were added. The diamine 
precipitated out of solution, was filtered, washed with water and recrystall- 








■_ : 


o ■ 


.o 


v.t.o ::j ; n 


, ' Co • ' 


.c 




... ... ■ 


v 


( 


rx • ; 


o’ i v ’ 


c ’ r o.rJ.c 










22 


ized from a mixture of benzene and petroleum ether (36), 

Melting point 107 - 108°. Yield 4.3 g. (pure). 

3. Bis (p-hydroxyphenyl) Sulfoxide (71) 

25 g. of thienyl chloride were added gradually, from a 
dropping funnel, to an ice-cold solution of 25 g. of aluminum chloride 
and 45 g. of phenol in carbon disulfide. After each addition of thionyl 
chloride, the mixture was well shaken and the reaction which ensued was 
allowed to subside before a fresh portion of the acid chloride was added. 

The viscous mass, which resulted from the reaction, was 
allowed to stand for one hour and then decomposed with powdered ice. The 
carbon disulfide and unchanged phenol were removed by steam distillation. 
Contents of the flask were cooled and the acid liquid was decanted. The 
residue was crystallized from hot water, the sulfoxide separated as a 
flocculent precipitate. Melting point 190 - 193°. The compound was 
recrystallized from water. 

Melting point 195°. Yield 25 - 30 g. (pure). 

4. Bis (re-hydroxy-phenyl) Sulfide 

i 

10 g. of bis (p-hydroxyphenyl) sulfoxide were dissolved in 
100 ml. of glacial acetic acid, with the aid of gentle heat. To the 
solution, cooled to room temperature, was added a solution of 25 g. of 
stannous chloride in 50 ml. of concentrated hydrochloric acid. The mixture 
was heated on a steam bath for two hours and a yellow color was produced. 

The reaction mixture was cooled to room temperature and allowed to stand for 
twelve hours. 

The acid solution was diluted with several times its volume 
of water and extracted with snail portions of ether. The ethereal extracts 




. 


QjQ. 




. P DJ. 


:c; 


» 

■ ;)• ■ : 

. v.. r bwj :'*\ k o : 


■ o 


I.: j 


■■■■ - 7 . A *. 


! . - . 


; t. 


/i.vrt o.\ivo x< '■ 


\:o. ' p/o.i 




: w 


;:■[ i ; ■ ■ 1 : 


, 


to j: err; **! 2 - 

' 


,.r< 




23 


were evaporated to a low volume, then the remainder of the ether was 
allowed to evaporate spontaneously, leaving behind a crystalline residue. 
Melting point 145 - 148°. The material was recry stall iz ed from ether and 
decolorized with norite. 

Melting point 150 - 151°♦ Yield 6 - 7 g, (pure). 

c 12 h 10°2 s “ Calculated amount of sulfur - 14.68$ 

Analyses ---------- 14.37$ 

Krafft (47) prepared this compound by tetrazotizing the 
diamine. The original reference was not available and consequently our 
attempt to prepare the compound, by this procedure, failed. The analyses, 
however, shows that our compound is identical with that produced from the 
diamine. 


5. Bis (p-hydroxyphenyl) Sulfone (71) 

20 g. of bis (p-hydroxyphenyl) sulfoxide were dissolved in 
an excess of aqueous alkali hydroxide and a slight excess of potassium 
permanganate (17 g.) was added gradually to the solution. The mixture was 
warmed on a water bath. The precipitated oxides of manganese were removed 
by filtration. The filtrate was acidified with dilute sulfuric acid and 
was concentrated by evaporation, A crystalline precipitate appeared which 
was crystallized from dilute ethanol. 

Melting point 238 - 239°. Yield 11 g. (pure). 

6. Bis (p-methoxyphenyl) Sulfide (51) 

50 g. of anisole and 20 g. of thionyl chloride were placed in 
a 3-necked flask which was fitted with a stirrer, a reflux condenser and 
rubber tube leading to a small erlenmeyer. 20 g. of aluminum chloride, in 
small pieces, were placed in the small flask. The aluminum chloride was 











vi ' •; 7 







o.n \Y I, a 


'■rt v 


■( 


0- " ' Y.v 1 : 


' , .[< 


?• ■ 


7 nc 






;r \n 


/■ ‘7! 


) <L. 




24 


added little by little, and after each addition there was a vigorous re¬ 
action with the escape of hydrogen chloride and sulfurous acid. This was 
modified by cooling the reaction flask in an ice bath* The mixture was 
yellow in color at the beginning of the reaction, but this color changed 
to red, then to green, and finally to violet, and a viscous mass resulted 
at the completion of the reaction. £00 ml. of anhydrous ether were added 
and the mixture was heated on a water bath for a half hour. During this 
step, a large amount of hydrogen chloride and sulfurous acid escaped. The 
mixture in the flask was cooled and poured cautiously into ice-cold water; 
in order to destroy the excess aluminum chloride. The ethereal layer was 
separated from the aqueous portion, and the ether was distilled off on a 
steam bath. A thick oil was left behind which was cooled in an ice-salt 
mixture. Crystallization was started by scratching the sides of the beaker. 
The crystals were filtered off while- the mixture remained in the refrigera¬ 
tor, and were repeatedly crystallized from benzene. Norite was used to 
decolorize the compound. After several reerystall!zations, white crystals 
were obtained. 

Melting point 46°. Yield 3.5 g. (pure). 




7. Bis (p-hydroxyphenyl) S a licylthetine (71) 


L/UO 


5 go of bis (p-hydroxyphenyl) sulfoxide were intimately mixed 
with 2.9 g. of salicylic acid. This mixture was added to 33 g. of concen¬ 
trated sulfuric acid. A green solution was formed which was' allowed to 
remain at room temperature for one-half hour. It was poured into water, and 
a colorless precipitate of thetine sulfate separated. This precipitate was 
collected and warmed in aqueous alcoholic solution with barium hydroxide to 
remove the sulfuric acid. The filtrate from the barium sulfate was saturated 
with carbon dioxide and again filtered. Water was then added to the clear 





















'xo 









25 - 


solution to precipitate the thetine, which was purified by crystallization 
from aqueous alcohol* The compound was obtained as a colorless solid* 
Melting point 212°* Yield 2*7 g. (pure)* 

8. Thiohydroquinone (55) 

110 g* (1*0 mole) of p-aminophenol were dissolved in an excess 
of 10% hydrochloric acid (2*25 moles)* The solution was cooled below 15° 
and diazotized by gradual addition of 70g. (1*0 mole) of sodium nitrate* 

The temperature was maintained at 15 - 2(9 by means of ice* 

The solution of the diazonium compound was rim slowly beneath 
the surface of a hot solution of 224 ;( 1*4 moles) of potassium ethyl xanthate 
in 650 ml* of water* The reaction mixture was stirred vigorously and the 
temperature maintained at 70 - 75° to ensure complete decomposition of the 
intermediate diazonium compound. The temperature was raised to 90° and 
maintained for another half hour. The xanthate ester was then decomposed 
by adding 160 g* (4 moles) of solid sodium hydroxide and refluxing for five 
hours. The mixture was then strongly acidified with an excess of 50% 
sulfuric acid and further refluxed in the presence of zinc and benzene in 
order to destroy any disulfide which might have been formed* The crude 
thiohydroquinone separated as an oil; it was washed with dilute hydro¬ 
chloric acid and then with water, and distilled in vacuo. A clear color¬ 
less liquid was obtained* 

Boiling point 133 - 137° at 11 mm/fag. Yield 39 g* 

Nj' 

9*. Bis (o-nitrobenzyl) Sulfide 

, ;i 4$ 

10 g. of p-nitrobenzyl chloride were dissolved in 100 ml* of 
hot ethanol and a warm solution of 7*5 g* of sodium sulfide (Na^S^fi^O) in 
50 ml. of ethylene glycol was added slowly, with stirring* In a short time 





.0 


* 




.0 "> ’ ‘ 


W 


* 


O' 


< 


0 


( 


n 







;r.. o , ?•> 




1 '-'. : 0 ’.'.0 "*> 




;o.f 



\ > 


c O 


.! jl ' i'f. 











26 


crystals of bis (p-nitrobenzyl) sulfide began to appear. The mixture was 
allowed to stand for two hours. The precipitate was filtered off and 
crystallized from boiling ethanol. Norite was used to decolorize the 
material.. 

Melting point 151 - 153°. 

The material, was recry stall! zed from boiling ethanol; norite 
was used again to decolorize it. 

Melting point 156 - 157°. Yield 4*6 g. (pure) 

g 14 h X2 n 2°4^ s ~ Calculated amount of sulfur - 10. 3 &% 

Analyses iq.09$ 

Our sample checks with the one prepared by Price and Twiss (61), 
who used a somewhat different procedure. 

10. Bis (p-aminobenzyl) Sulfide 
100 ml. of ethanol and 12 g. (0.05 moles) of bis (-p-nitrobenzyl) 

/ A jJ'0O 

sulfide were added to a solution of 80 g. of stannous chloride (large excess) 
in 150 ml. of concentrated hydrochloric acid. The mixture was heated and 
shaken until all the compound dissolved, then 60 ml. of glacial, acetic acid 
were added and the mixture heated for another half hour. The solution was 
cooled and ice and 40$ sodium hydroxide were added until the mixture was 
strongly alkaline. It was extracted with successive portions of ether. 

The ether was filtered into a dry flask and hydrogen chloride was bubbled 
in. A white precipitate of the dihydrochloride should have been formed, but 
this did not occur. The solution turned crimson instead, and a snail amount 
of crimson precipitate was present. The mixture had an unpleasant odor, 
which may indicate that a, mercaptan was formed. Repeated attempts produced 


the same result, 





i 


r' > ■ -i ?-;• • " ^ ■ r: . 

v - • • / 


o:: 


o o 




; 


:0 





CO ' f 




. ; it / o r i 



: ' : 


0 



27 


4 

11. P-methoxyphenyl Ethyl Methyl Chloride (62) 

Dry hydrogen chloride was passed into a mixture of 135 g. 

( 1.25 moles) of anisole, 58 g. (1 mole) of propionaldehyde and 150 g. of 
concentrated hydrochloric acid, for three hours. The temperature of the 
mixture was maintained at 15° by means of an. ice-salt bath. The reaction 
mixture became turbid at first and then gradually assumed a dark red color 5 
at this stage, the mixture consisted of two layers. Ice-cold absolute ether 
was added, and the resulting ethereal, solution was poured into ice-water 
contained in a separatory funnel. The mixture in the separatory funnel was 
shaken and the dark red ethereal solution assumed an. orange color. The 
aqueous layer was extracted twice more with snail amounts of cold ether. 
These washings were added to the original, ether solution. The combined 
ether extracts were used immediately in the reaction described below. 

Quelet (£2) claimed a 15$ yield and it was assumed that this 
amount (34*5 g.) was obtained in the above attempt. It was necessary to 
assume this in order to calculate for the amount of sodium sulfide to be 
used in the preparation of bis (p-methoxyphenyl ethyl methyl) sulfide. 

Notes- The nomenclature used for Compound No. 11 was that 
proposed by Bernstein and Wallis ( 6 ). 

12. Bis (p-methoxyphenyl ethyl methyl) Sulfide 

To the cold ethereal solution from the previous reaction, was 
added a solution of 16 g. (small excess) of sodium sulfide (NagS^I^O) in 
100 ml. of water. The mixture was shaken vigorously, then set aside in the 
refrigerator and shaken occasionally over a period of thirty-six hours. An 
"unpleasant, garlic-like odor was evident from the onset of the reaction. 

The color of the mixture became dark brown. At the end of the thirty*-six 





> o 


.? ;o 


' 




:< :?,r,ow: t 


\ 














28 


hour period, the ether was distilled off by means of a steam bath and a 
dark brown, viscous residue remained* 

Several attempts were made to extract the residue with the 
following organic solvents:- petroleum ether (b.p. 30-60°), benzene, 
carbon tetrachloride, but these solvents were completely miscible with the 
residue and consequently were of no value. Ethanol and methanol were used 
and were found to be immiscible with the residual compound, but when the 
alcoholic fraction was separated and evaporated to dryness, no residue was 
evident. 

Steam distillation was attempted, but the residue was not 
steam distillable. The compound was recovered by shaking the mixture, in 

the steam distillation flask, with ether, separated by means of a funnel, 

,r\ 

and the ether evaporated off* 

r 

Vacuum distillation was next attempted, and a snail amount of 
cloudy, aqueous material distilled over at 18 ^/ism* The residual material 
in the flask would not distill further and became more viscous upon cooling. 
The distillate was discarded* 

It was thought that chromatographic adsorption might provide 
the solution to the problem. The following adsorbing agents were tried?- 
aluminum oxide, kieselguhr, kaolin, charcoal and talc. The method used 
was that recommended by Zechmeister and Cholnoky (76). None of the adsorb¬ 
ing agents tested were found to be of value. 

No further attempts were made to purify the compound. 

This compound was also prepared using ethylene glycol as the 
solvent for the sodium sulfide. This solved the problem of the immisci- 
bility with the ethereal layer and it was believed that there would be 
better contact between the p-methoxyphenyl ethyl methyl chloride and the 
sodium sulfide. The main disadvantage to this method was that the ether 



' 


? 3 




■> 


t 


o 





f( J’o 


t” 


I J ' 




;n 


“) f. 


o 






29 


appeared to "salt out" a considerable amount of sodium sulfide from the 
ethylene glycol. Except for this factor, the reaction appeared to proceed 
exactly as it did when water was used as the solvent for sodium sulfide. 

13. 4«4 g -dihydroxydiphenyl Disulfide (49) 

A mixture of 20 g. of phenol, 10 g. of sulfur and 50 g. of 
2 % solution of sodium carbonate in glycerol was heated at 120° for one 
hour. The mass was dissolved in boiling water, and precipitated by hydro¬ 
chloric acid. The disulfide was crystallized from alcohol as a pale yellow, 
crystalline material. 

Melting point 116°. Yield 10.2 g. (pure). 

14. Dibenzothiophene (37) 

500 g. of technical diphenyl and 208 g. of sulfur were melted 
together in a 5 -1. round bottomed flask, immersed in an oil bath. While 
the temperature of the bath was maintained at 115 - 120°, 25 g. of powdered 
anhydrous aluminum chloride were added over a period of one and one-quarter 
hours. The temperature was kept at the 115 - 120° range until the end of 

o 

the third hour and then the temperature was raised gradually, reaching 240 
at the end of the ninth hour. When cool, the mass in the reaction flask 
was extracted three times by boiling gently with 500 ml. of water, cooling 
and decanting the water. Then eight extractions were made with ethanol, 
boiling each time with a litre of the solvent and decanting hot.. The con- 
bin ed extracts were boiled with norite and filtered immediately through a 
hot Buchner flannel. Care must be taken to prevent crystallization in the 
funnel. It was sometimes necessary to boil repeatedly with norite in order 
to obtain colorless needles which appeared upon cooling the alcoholic 
solution. Further yields were obtained by concentrating the mother liquor. 





I 




-V 




n 


-•’> y • 7 ' . 










'o. ■ ■ 


;& .V 


■). , 0 


) 


) ' 


Or 


no 






30 


Melting point 98 - 98*5°, Yield 140 - 150 g. (pure)* 


15* Dibenzothiophene - 5 - oxide (9) 

o 

30 g* (0.163 mol©) of dibenzothiophene were dissolved in 
300 - 400 ml. of dry carbon tetrachloride, with the aid of heat. The 
resulting mixture was cooled to 0 - 5° and treated with chlorine, at that 
temperature, until 12 g. of chlorine had been added. The solution became 
reddish and the addition product precipitated partly from solution. About 
100 g. of ice and 100 ml. of water were added to the mixture and the stopper-” 
ed flask was shaken vigorously to permit hydrolysis of the addition product. 
The solid was filtered off and washed with water. The yield of dibenzothio¬ 
phene - 5 - oxide which melted at 174 - 180° was 31 g* The product was 
crystallized from benzene. 

Melting point 186 - 188°. Yield 22 g. (pure). 



16. 3-hitrodibenzothiophene - 5 - oxide (9) 


To an ice-cold mixture of 15 g. of dibenzothiophene - 5 - oxide, 
33 ml. of glacial acetic acid and 33 ml. of concentrated sulfuric acid were 
added, with stirring, 36 ml. of fuming nitric acid (sp. gr. 1.5) during a 
period of fifteen minutes. After the resulting clear solution had stood at 
0?5° for thirty minutes, it was poured into 200 g. of cracked ice. The 
gummy solid which was formed soon hardened and was filtered off and washed 
with water. The crude material, weighed 16 - 17 g. and melted at 201 - 205°« 
The compound was crystallized from ethanol. 

Melting point 209 - 210°. Yield 13 - 14 g. (pure). 


> 


17. 3-aminodibenzothiophene (9) 


X 10 g* of 3-nitrodibenzothi©phene - 5 - oxide were dissolved in 








o • . ' . « 




v;_ 


i 


' ; V - .. 


o 




■ K 


•) 


. ' 










f£ f( V'] 







31 


100 ml. of glacial acetic acid, with the aid of gentle heat. To the mixture 
cooled to room temperature, was added a solution of 51.5 g. of hydrated 
stannous chloride in 65 ml. of concentrated hydrochloric acid. The reaction 
was started by warming the mixture to 30 - 35°. The reacting mixture was 
left to cool at room temperature for twelve hours. The slurry was filtered 
tinder suction and the solid washed with a mixture of glacial acetic acid 
and concentrated hydrochloric acid (50 s 50). The solid was placed in a 
10% solution of sodium hydroxide and broken up by stirring. After two or 
three hours, the grey color had changed to orange. The solid, filtered free 
from the liquid and washed with water, was dried at 30 - 40°. The resulting 
crude material melted at 113 - 117°. Yield 8 g® The compound was crystall¬ 
ized from dilute ethanol. 

Melting point 121 - 122°. Yield 6 g. (pure) 

Notes- It is not possible to prepare 3~nitrodibenzothiophene 
by direct nitration of dibenzothiophene, because the 
nitro group always goes to the 2 position (21). Hence, 
the 3 amino compound must be prepared from 3-nitrodi- 
benzothiophene - 5 - oxide. 

IB. 3-acetamindibenzothiophene (39) 

3 g. (0.015 mole) of 3“a^inodibenzothiophene were dissolved in 
20 ml. of dry benzene and treated with 2.4 g. (0.0234 mole) of acetic anhy¬ 
dride for one hour, after reflux. The white solid was removed by filtration. 
Melting point 197 - 198°. Yield of crude material was 3 g„. The compound 
was crystallized from dilute ethanol. 

Melting point 199 - 200°. Yield 2.7 g. (pure). 

19. 3-aminodibenzothiophene - 5 - oxide (9) 


To a solution of 5 g. of 3-nitrodibenzothiophene - 5 - oxide 




' 0 " 




'. ; o :! : vV r 


0 ) ' 0 


£ o 


0 




32 


A/w 

in 60 ml. of glacial acetic ac3d were added 26 g. of hydrated stannous 
chloride in 40 ml. of dilute (6N) hydrochloric acid. The reaction mixture 
was kept at 40° for thirty minutes and then allowed to stand at room temper¬ 
ature for three hours. The mixture was then cooled to 0° and the yellow 
solid filtered off. The crude amine was liberated with sodium hydroxide 
solution and yielded 4 g. of a compound melting at 205 - 207°. It was 
crystallized from dilute ethanol. 

Melting point 208 - 209°. Yield 3.6 g„ (pure). 

20. 3-aeetaminodibenzotfatopfaene - $ - oxide (9) 

To a solution of 1.8 g. of 3-aminodibenzothiophene - 5 - oxide 
in 30 ml. of benzene* were added 4 ml. of acetic anhydride. The reaction 
mixture was allowed to stand for twelve hours. The light yellow solid, which 
was formed, melted at 262 - 26i°. Yield 1.9 g. (crude). The compound was 
crystallized from absolute ethanol to give yellow needles. 

Melting point 265 - 267°. Yield 1.7 g.(pure). 

21. Dibenzothiophene - $ - dioxide (3 8) 

To a cold mixture of 550 ml. of glacial, acetic acid, 200 ml. of 
50% sulfuric acid and 75 g. of potassium dichromate, were added 55.2 g. of 
dibenzothiophene. The mixture was kept at 60° and shaken for one half-hour* 
after which the temperature declined slowly. The reaction mixture was poured 
into cold water, and a yellowish, heavy precipitate was filtered off. The 
compound was crystallized from benzene. 

Melting point 230 - 232°. Yield 58 g. (pure). 

22. 3-nitrodibenzothiophene - 5 - dioxide (38) 

10 g. of dibenzothiophene - 5 - oxide were added to a mixture of 








. -V'o 


;) 




: < 




h 


V-.r r-£- 







33 


22 ml. of concentrated sulfuric acid and 22 ml. of glacial acetic acid. The 
resulting paste was cooled to 4°. 36 ml. of fuming nitric acid (sp. gr. 1.5) 

were added, with stirring, over a fifteen minute period, so that the tempera¬ 
ture was maintained between 4 and 6°. The mixture was kept at 4° for one 
half-hour and stirred occasionally during that time. It was then poured, 
with stirring, directly on ice and water was added. The gummy mass soon 
solidified and was collected by suction filtration and washed with water. 

The compound was crystallized twice from acetone and twice from 1,4-dioxane. 
Melting point 265 - 266°. Yield 9*6 g. (pure). 

23. 3 - aminodibenzothiophene - 5 - dioxide (69) 

5 g. of 3-nitrodibenzothiophene - 5 - dioxide were dissolved in 

60 ml. of glacial acetic acid, with the aid of heat. The resulting solution, 

cooled to room temperature, was treated with a solution of 26 g. of hydrated 

stannous chloride in 40 ml. of dilute (6N) hydrochloric acid. The solution 

o 

slowly became warm. It was kept below 40 for one half-hour, then at room 
temperature for three hours. The mixture was cooled in ice-water and filter¬ 
ed. The solid material was added to 100 ml. of wafer, and a saturated solu- * 
tion of sodium carbonate was poured slowly info it. The freed amine was 
collected on a Buchner funnel, washed with water, and dried. Melting point 
254 - 255° (crude). 

The compound was dissolved in ethanol, with the aid of gentle 
heat, but the temperature was never allowed to exceed 60°. Water was added 
to the solution and material was crystallized by cooling slowly to room 
temperature and then chilling with ice-water. 

Melting point 259 - 260°. Yield 1.1 g. (pure). 



O 'T o 


O 




* 






' 


ro< a 


v 


‘ ' 


! } 


) . 




: O'. 






0 






O'.’"■ Co. 


' 


O f !') 




. 








24. 3-acetaminodibenzothiophene - 5 - dioxide (39) 


A mixture of 1 g. (0.004 mole) of 3-aminodibenzothiophene - 5 
dioxide in 50 ml. of benzene was heated under reflux with 3 ml. of acetic 
anhydride for one half-hour. The compound crystallized when the mixture 
cooled. 

Melting point 322 - 324°. Yield 1 g. (pure), 

i r- 

25. 3.7-dinitrodibenzothiophene - 5 - oxide 

This compound was prepared by the author, using the procedure 
which was devised by Brown (8) but which has not yet been published. 

Melting point 257 - 258°. 

26. 3i7-diaminodibenzothiophene 

This compound was prepared by the author, using the procedure 
which was devised by Brown (8) but which has not yet been published. 

Melting point 172 - 173°. 

27. 3.7-dihydroxydibenzothiophene 

21 g. (0,1 mole) of 3>7-diaminodibenzothiophene were dissolved 
in 200 ml. of 50% hot sulfuric acid. The mixture was cooled as rapidly as 
possible, in an ice-bath, in order to deposit the diaminosulfate in very 
fine crystals. The paste was then cooled to 0° and tetrazotized by the slow 
addition of 7 g. (slight excess) of sodium nitrite dissolved in 50 ml. of 
50% sulfuric acid. The temperature was maintained at 0 - 5°, by means of 
an ice-bath during this step of the procedure. The paste dissolved as the 
reaction proceeded and at the completion of the addition of the nytrosyl- 
sulfuric acid mixtiire, the solution of the tetrazonium compound was yellow 







o.V' fi 


o 


\[ 


t ■ 


, 




"c. - ' c 


o 


or. 


< 


% 






■< n 


o 


c 


o 







35 


in color and no precipitate was evident. 

The solution was allowed to stand for a half-hour and was 
stirred occasionally during that tune. The tetrazonium compound was then 
poured, in a thin stream, into a mixture of sulfuric acid and water, which 
was boiling at 140 - 150°, The mixture changed color, going from yellow to 
green and finally to black. A great deal of tar was formed. By extracting 
the tarry material with ethanol, a compound was obtained which melted at 
230 - 240°. Analysis showed that the compound contained 4. sulfur 5 the 
calculated amount of sulfur for this compound was 14.Further purifi¬ 
cations had no effect upon the material and it was discarded. A similar 
end product was obtained with further attempts. 

It was thought that the compound might be prepared by treating 
4,4-dihydroxy diphenyl with sulfur and stannic chloride. This was similar 
to the procedure used in the preparation of dibenzothiophene. The reaction 
resulted in the formation of a tarry residue from which nothing could be 
extracted. 

\ • ' . ^ 

28, 2 -aeetyldibenzothiophene {37) 

A three-necked flask was fitted with a mechanical stirrer, a 
reflux condenser and a rubber tube connected to a small erlenmeyer. The 
reflux condenser was fitted with .an absorption tower which prevented the 
liberation of hydrogen chloride gas which was formed by the reaction. 

An attempt was made to carry out a Friedel and Crafts reaction 
in the following manner:- 30 g. ( 0.16 mole) of dibenzothiophene, 225 ml, 
of dry carbon disulfide and 13 g. (0.16 mole) of acetyl chloride were placed 
in the three-necked flask. 60 g. of powdered, anhydrous aluminum chloride 

_■ ~Jc 

were placed in the small erlenmeyer flask which was attached to the three¬ 
necked flask. Aluminum chloride was added gradually, over a period of one 












0 


O 




r. ■ 


■' o :u'j o 


n: 1 


e 


; ;x 




' 


o. 




■ 


■) 


^ ■ ‘i- 




: r> ••r'-o 'i l '' - 


t 












36 


hour, while the mixture was stirred vigorously* The temperature was main¬ 
tained at 10°* A great deal of tar was formed and the attempt to produce 
the desired compound resulted in failure. 

29. 2 a8-diacetyldibenzothiophene (10) 


< 


X 


A three-necked flask, having the same connections as described 
in the previous experiment was used. 




3*7 g. of anhydrous aluminum chloride were added to a solution 
of 5 g. of dibenz©thiophene and 2.1 ml. of acetyl chloride in 75 ml* of dry 
carbon disulfide at 10°, with vigorous stirring, otfer a period of thirty 
minutes. The mixture was stirred for forty-five minutes and then boiled 
under reflux for five hours. The mixture was poured onto ice and hydrochlor¬ 
ic acid, the solvent was driven off with steam, and the brown, oily residue 
was extracted into chloroform. The solvent was evaporated and the residue 
extracted with cold benzene. Attempts were made to crystallize the insoluble 
portion from ethanol but this failed and we were unable to produce the de¬ 
sired compound. 

Jr 

30. 3*7-diacetyldibenzothiophene - 5 - oxide 

An attempt was made to prepare this compound by using the same 
apparatus as described in the two previous experiments. 


7.6 g. (0.055 mole) of anhydrous aluminum chloride were added 
to a solution of 5 g. (0.025 mole) of dibenzothiophene - 5 - oxide and 4*4 g* 
(0.055 mole) of acetyl chloride in 200 ml. of nitrobenzene, over a period of 
one half-hour. The temperature of the solution was maintained at 5 - 10°. 

The mixture was refluxed for four hours. A large amount of tar was formed 
but no trace of the desired compound could be discovered, when extractions 
with chloroform, ether, benzene and ethanol were undertaken. 





I 


c 


f 


• { < ff 


'i 


^ i 






V 


r 




a 


•: f 


■6i 


? I b 








M'k' '•■ r ■.'■ 


03 


: > 


* 


* 


% 


r l 


V 


a: 


- i f 


o 


'.cl 



> 


£ r 


11 o c 


VO , '£ 

(>& c 

f.lU J.' 

£ ».t-. * % i 


: r 


■i/ 


>0 5 


I- ' 

3 


; O -It 




»i<: 1 ' 


r * 


? ” 


t 


■ ■■ ■ 






37 


31. Heat Product of Cholesterol - 300 (45) 


50 g. of cholesterol were melted in a beaker and the tempera¬ 
ture raised to 270 - 300° and maintained within that range for one half-hour, 
during which time the molten mass darkened, gases were evolved and a small 
amount of white sublimate collected around the rim of the beaker. The 
molten mass was allowed to cool and was then poured into petroleum ether 
(b.p. 60 - 80°). The solution was chilled and the unchanged cholesterol 
precipitated and was filtered off and subjected to further heating. This 
was continued until no unchanged compound could be recovered. 

This process produces A 4-cholestenone (XXXIX), B-eholesterol 
and traces of £* 3*5-cholest&diene and dicholesteryl ether, which are the 



9H- 


32o Heat Products of Cholesterol - 430 (46) 

The cholesterol was purified by converting it to the acetate (60). 
50 g. of dry cholesterol were boiled with 10 ml. of acetic anhydride for one 
or two minutes. The resulting solution was poured into water and the acetate 
precipitated. The acetate was crystallized from dilute ethanol. Melting 











t 




& 


• •: • 




. v XX '' 






r:> 


0 L f : ' 




j 




'• • ' - r. 


0 




:> ■; 






, 


c: '.) 


. 



‘ 


.0 





. '■ ; ' 




0 : x 





38 


point 114°* The purified acetate was saponified with potassium hydroxide 
in methanol (to avoid contamination with resinous products)* This compound 
was then recrystallized from petroleum ether (b.p. 60 - 80°). This batch 
of purified cholesterol was heated for a half-hour at 430°* It was found 
that nothing crystallized out when the molten mass was poured into petroleum 
ether; hence it was concluded by Kirby (46) that unlike heating at 300° for 
a half-hour, heating at 430 ° for this period altered all the cholesterol. 

The products of this reaction were Diels hydrocarbon (XXXIII) 
and methyl isohexyl ketone (XXXIV). 



XXXIII. Diels Hydrocarbon. 


HsC 



* 


XXXIV. Methyl Isohexyl Ketone 

w 


















39 


-y^ 


/ 


\ 


33* 3-nitrodibenzofuran ( 7) 

V 

10 g. of fuming nitric acid (sp. gr. 1 . 5 ) were added gradually, 
with shaking, to a solution of 10 g. of dibenzofuran in 40 ml. of glacial 
acetic acid, at room temperature. The mixture warmed spontaneously, and 
after several minutes a vigorous reaction set in, with the release of nitric 
oxide. When the initial reaction had ceased, the mixture was warmed on a 
water bath, and then allowed to cool. The crude product was filtered off 
and boiled with ethanol. It was then recrystallized from boiling acetic 
acid and shining, yellow needles were obtained. 

Melting point 181 - 182°. Yield 7 g. (pure). 

34* 3-aminodibenzofupan (20) 

V' 

4 g. of 3-nitrodibenzofuran were dissolved in 600 ml. of ethanol 
and a solution of 16 g. of stannous chloride in 80 ml. of concentrated hydro¬ 
chloric acid was added to it. The reaction mixture was heated on a steam 
bath for one half-hour. A solution of 40% sodium hydroxide was added to the 
mixture until it was distinctly alkaline and the amine precipitated. The 
compound was filtered off and crystallized from dilute ethanol, to give 
colorless needles. 

Melting point 94°* Yield 3 g. (pure). 




: : 


a s 


3 . .m 


f . !. f< fj 
n ■■ j • I ■ 










40 


Dr. R. B. 


The following compounds were prepared in the laboratory of 
Sandin and were very kindly provided for testing for estrogenic 


activity:- 

1* B(9-anthryl) acrylic acid (68). 

2. 2,3-dimethyl benzhydrol ( 42 ). 

3. 3 y 4-dimethyl benzhydrol ( 42 ). 

4. 2,5-dimethyl benzhydrol ( 42 ). 

5* 2,4-dimethyl benzhydrol ( 42 ). 


The following compound was prepared in the laboratory of 
Dr. R. K. Brown, and was very kindly provided for testing for estrogenic 
activity:- 

1. 3-acetaminodibenzofuran (40). 

In addition to the aforementioned compounds, certain members 
of the dibenzothiophene series were provided by Dps. R. B. Sandin and 
R. K. Brown. These were later synthesized by the author, the procedures 
of which are outlined in experimental data:- 

1. 3”&eetaminodib@nzothiophen@ - 5 - oxide. 

2. 3"acetaminodibenzothiophene - 5 - dioxide. 


'•'.O V'l'f 


\c.. 


rco a 


0' 


;i 




i 


n 


J o 


— 


t • 


r>*r 






JT 


fr ' ' 



on > 


.I: f • '■ \t:, : .n V r o. 


~ Off i ' ‘ :--r o r 

- '■ : : <"/ 





RESULTS 





41 


























































































42 




Suspension of 3*5% white beeswax in Sesame oil 
1 cc of ethanol in 6 cc of Sesame oil. 







































































____ THE DIBENZOTHIOPHENE SERIES - TABLE 2. ___ 

_ _ _ Melting Quantity Vehicle No.of Rats Number 

Name of Compound Chemxcal Formula Point Inj - ected Used Used in Positive 

______ (MGM) _ Test _ 


43 


































; 







- 44 - 










































I 


c't* 

o 




r 


i 


i 


j 

i 

. 

I 




o 

i 






t 


' 

t 


c 


.1 











____ TABLE 2 - Continued, ______ 

Melting Quantity Vehicle No.of Rats Number 

Name of Compound Chemical Formula Point injected Used Used in Positive 

_ (MGM~) _ Test _ 


45 










































_ TABLE 2 - Continued _ .. _ _ 

“ Melting Quantity Vehicle No.of Rats Number 

Name of Compound Chemical Formula Point Injected Used Used in Positive 

__ (MGM) _ Test _ 


46 



I 

O 

CQ 


§ 

0) 

•H P 
Q 0 
& 
O ft 
P O 
•H »H 

S ,P 

■P 


•H 


Q 

D- 


















__ THE DIBENZOFURAN SERIES - TABLE 3. ___ 

Melting Quantity Vehicle No.of Rats Number 

Name of Compound Chemical Formula Point Injected Used Used in Positive 

__ Test _ 


47 



a 

g 

(D 

0) 

rQ 


© 

-P 

•H 


vr\ 

a 

cn 

i 




a 


I 





































48 












































cfi 






i 

. 



(0 










0> O 


f.1 



1 


. 1 




























MISCELLANEOUS COMPOUNDS - TABLE 5 


49 



X 

o 

o 

o 

I 

X 

o 

II 

o 

X 


CQ -H 
£D o 

w 


8 

0) *-~v 

-P o 
03 O 
H O 
O <*> 
X ^ 
o 

Ch 

O 

■P 

a 

■g 

o 


0 

i s 

to o 
0 
w 


o 
h 
0 
“p 
iflo 
0 o 

fH 

2 ^ 
x —* 
o 

o 

-P 

0 

P« 

o 

£ 

0 

0 

w 


© 

0 

rO 

0 

•p 

•H 

'S 

1ft 

I 























DISCUSSION 






50 


The basic structure of the perhydrocyclopentanophenanthrene 
ring system (i) is common to the androgens, natural estrogens, hormones 
of the corpus Xuteum and adrenal cortical hormones. Substitution of 
various radicals, at different places on this nucleus, produces the 
differences in physiological activity. Relatively small differences 
of structure cause amazing differences of action. 

Up to the present, this nucleus has been found indispensable . 
for androgens, progestational and adreno-cortical action. In the case of 
estrogens, it has been possible to produce the same physiological action 
with compounds which appear to possess very little similarity of struc¬ 
ture to the natural substances. It is remarkable, too, that certain 
members of the stilbene and related series possess an activity not only 
equal to, but in some cases greater than, the natural products. There 
is a large and growing list of dissimilar chemical compounds which possess 
varying degrees of estrogenic potency, and it is very difficult to explain 
why compounds with such widely divergent chemical structures should ex¬ 
hibit the same physiological activity. 

It has been shown by Bimens (33), that the majority of estro¬ 
genic compounds possess one phenolic hydroxyl and the more potent synthetic 
ones possess two such groups, or a group, such as a methoxy, which may be 
converted to a hydroxyl by the organism. This is okly a partial explana¬ 
tion of the phenomenon, since there are many compounds which possess 
neither hydroxyl nor methoxyl groups and yet are capable of exhibiting 
estrogenic activity; for examples- stilbene (XI), triphenylethylene (XXX) 
and triphenylchlorethylene (XX). 

An examination of the tables shows that only two of the 
compounds tested show estrogenic activity in doses up to 100 mgn. per rat. 





* 


i' 




;•> 







n 




r> 




* 






, -o ' Q • 


< o 



0 


r 








;0 




.*} 




:' ; if ;n , .< 0 





■) 


ft ; rsri 




;T 


r> 


•itJ.-. : n. r 


V o rv 


', r 


;" 




51 


These two compounds are bis(p-hydroxyphenyl) sulfide and bis( p-methoxy- 
phenyl ethyl methyl) sulfide. Although their potency is much less than 
some other synthetic compounds, the fact that they possess ary activity 
is of considerable interest from a theoretical, point of view as they are 
the first sulfur containing estrogens reported. 

In view of the fact that these two compounds do show such 
activity and other closely related compounds do not, it is of interest to 
endeavor to correlate chemical, structure and physiological activity. 

Since bi s(p-hydroxyphenyl) sulfide contains two hydroxyl 
groups in its structure, and since bi s (p-methoxyphenyl ethyl methyl) sul- 
fide possess two methoxy groups, these compounds fall into the category 
proposed by Bnmens. This might explain why they possess estrogenic 
activity while none of the other members of the diphenyl sulfide and di¬ 
benzyl sulfide series do. In view of the suggestion of Emmens, it was 
thought that bis( p-methoxyphenyl) sulfide would produce estrus in the 
experimental animals. Its failure to do so may be due to the fact that 
the dihydroxy compound has a low potency and there was insufficient of 
the dimethoxy compound converted, in the animal® s body, to the dihydroxy 
compound to produce estrus. 

It is interesting to note that thiohydroquinone does not show 
estrogenic activity. This might be due to the fact that it only has one 
phenol group, whereas bi s( p-hydroxyphenyl) sulfide has two. 

It is also noteworthy that while certain members of the di¬ 
phenyl methane series are capable of producing estrus, the benzhydrol 
series, which has a similar structural formula, failed to show estrogenic 
activity. This might be due to the fact that there is only one hydroxyl 
group in the benzhydrol series, and it is in the aliphatic instead of 
aromatic portion of the molecule. 




D'’ T ' ' ■ • f'f ■ ■ ■ o 


r 


1 *: :■ -,r : r . ^ : v ' n 


i ■ 


o 1: 



"> -'S. j r :• -Hi c "i 


; r r; b 


> 







o 




; : 


n 


.0 


::o ' ' a ' ~ 





52 


Erlenmeyer and Leo (35) have advanced the theory that divalent 
sulfur contains a shell of orbit electrons similar to the group -CH = CH-. 

It was shown by Burger, Wartman and Lutz (10) that some compounds retain 
similar physical and pharmacological properties when sulfur is substituted 
for -CK * CH- in the molecule. These workers considered dibenzothiophene 
(XXX) to be ^pseudophenanthrene 1 *; consequently bis(p-hydroxyphenyl) sul¬ 
fide might be regarded as w pseudo-dihydroxystilbene t,f . 

The isosteric similarity between sulfur and -CH * CH- might 
explain why bis(p-hydroxyphenyl) sulfide exhibits estrogenic activity. 

The failure of bis(p-hydroxyphenyl) sulfoxide and bis(p-hydroxyphenyl) 
sulfone to prodiice estrus might be explained on the hypothesis that, while 
divalent sulfur is isosteric with -CH s GH-, tetravelant and hexavelant 
sulfur are not. On the other hand, the demonstration of estrogenic activ¬ 
ity of bis(p-hydroxyphenyl) sulfide lends further pharmacological evidence 
in support of the theory of Erlenmeyer and Leo. 

It is interesting to note that when the hydroxyl groups of 
bis(p-hydroxyphenyl) sulfide are replaced by hyrogens, nitro, amino or 
methoxy groups, the estrogenic activity is lost; the addition of one or 
two oxygens to the sulfur has the same effect. If a second sulfur - is inter¬ 
posed between the phenol groups, as in 4?4 1 dihydroxy diphenyl disulfide, 
this results in the complete loss of estrogenic activity. 

Although bis(p-metkoxyphenyl) sulfide possesses no activity, 
when a benzyl group with an ethyl side chain is interposed between the 
sulfur and each of the anisyl groups, as in bis( p-methoxyphenyl ethyl 
methyl) sulfide, the resulting compound is estrogenic. 

Bis(p-hydroxyphenyl) salicylthetine failed to produce estro¬ 
genic activity, possibly because the sulfur is tetravalent. 

The failure of 4>4 9 -dihydroxy diphenyl disulfide to produce 




.v ■■ 1 ' ■ o 


.rt 




■x *:' o 


o' f. :■ v • . ; .'! : •' ; 


o.rdvO ■ '■]: ( " i: r /rco 






\ 






o 




( 


f.> 




' 0 . 


0 ; ■* L; i I 


c ■ 



i- 


‘ 




) C 


0 










r 




'/'Mr;' 






■ ■ 







o 





*o *: >;,3 -■ i o 


,, - . . . . .. ^ .. - 




o: - < 













53 


estrus might be due to low solubility. We were unable to find a suitable 
solvent and it was necessary to administer the compound in suspension. If 
the compound possessed low potency, it is unlikely that a sufficient amount 
was absorbed to produce a response. 

It would be interesting to test 3*7-dihydroxy dibenz©thiophene. 
This compound is compatible with the explanation offered and might possess 
estrogenic activity. We have not been successful., however, in its synthe¬ 
sis. 


Certain workers (27, 30) have endeavored to explain the 
estrogenic activity of such compounds as diethyl stilbestrol, by stating 
that it was possible to arrange formulas in such a way (XXXV) that a 
spacial configuration similar to estrone, or other natural estrogens, was 
produced. 



It is difficult to see how bis(p-hydroxyphenyl) sulfide fits 
into such a theory. Indeed, the fact that it is estrogenic would seem to 
minimize the significance of such structural comparisons. 

The demonstration of sulfur containing estrogens opens up the 


possibility of substituting a radio-active sulfur in the nucleus as a means 
of following estrogen metabolism. This might be useful, particularly If 
more potent sulfur-containing compounds are located. 









.‘:o ' 





n 






* • ' o . ’ • • 








* 




SUMMARY 







































54 


1. Some new compounds have been synthesized, 

2. These compounds and others have been tested 
for estrogenic activity. 

3. Two sulfur containing compounds have been 
found to be estrogenic. They are bis(p- 
hydroxyphenyl) sulfide and bi s {p-methoxyphenyl 
ethyl methyl) sulfide. 










t ' •rr.::; - ' ' r ■ i / " : r.t ' »<• (c o : : ;v t 

■y -n . ' ■ v ; :r t. i rt ft q u' •:> - s 

' n , ■- v* n .• : *i ‘i. 

t J v ..' : n rev. ;uoo ; o> v ij tjs . r, n ■ - 

— ’ 9 

f ; f!' -; ,■ : ' " /: ■. ' ; 





BIBLIOGRAPHY 





55 - 


(1) Allan, H., Dickens, F. and Dodds, E.C.: J. Physiology 68, 343 (1930) 

(2) Allen, A. and Doisy, E.A. s J.A.M.A. 81, 319 (1923) 

(3) Allen, E. s Endocrinology 20, 942 (1942) 

(4) Ascheim, S. and Zondek, B.: Klin. Wochenschr. 6, 249 (1927) 

(5) Barry, G., Cook, J.W.., Haslewood, A.D., Hewitt, C.L., Hieger, I, 

and Kennaway, E.L.: Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) B117, 318 (1935) 

(6) Bernstein, S. and Wallis, E.: J.A.C.S. 62, 2871 (1940) 

(7) Boesche, W. and Bothe, W.s Ber. 41, 1940 (1908) 

(8) Brown, R.K.s Unpublished data. 

(9) Brown, R.K., Christiansen, R.G. and Sandin, R.B.s J.A.C.S. 70, 1748 

(1943) 

(10) Burger, A*, Wartman, W. and Lutz, R.: J.A.C.S. 60, 2628 (1938) 

(11) Butenandt, A. and von Ziegner, E.: Zeit. fur Physiol Chemie 188, 1 

(1930) 

(12) Campbell, N.R., Dodds, S.C. and Lawson, W. S Nature 141 , 78 (1933) 

(13) Campbell, N.R., Dodds, E.C. and Lawson, W.: Nature 142, 1121 (1938) 

(14) Campbell, N.R., and Chattaway, F.W.: Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) B130, 

435, (1942) 

(15) Cook, J.W., Hieger, I., Kennaway, E.L. and Mayneord, M.V. i Proc. Roy. 

Soc. (London) Bill. 455 (1932) 

(16) Cook, J.W., Dodds, E.C. and Hewitt, C.L.: Nature 131 , 56 (1933) 

(17) Cook, J.W. and Dodds, E.C.s Nature 121, 205 (1933) 

(18) Cook, J.W., Dodds, S.C., Hewitt, C.L. and Lawson, W.s Proc. Roy. Soc. 

(London) B114 , 272 (1933-34) 

(19) Cori, C.F.: J. Expertl. Med. 45, 983 (1927) 

(20) Cull inane, N.M.: J.C.S. 1930, 2267 (1930) 

(21) Cullinane, N.M., Davies, C.G. and Davies, G. I.s J.C.S. 1936, 1435 

(1936) 

(22) Davies, J.S. s Chem. Abstracts 28, 621 (1944) 

(23) Davies, J.S. and Elson, L.A.: Chem. Abstracts ^8, 838 (1944) 





. . 








t. 








(. • 







) 









. 





















f:'y 






r ;." : f, 










56 


(24) Dodds, E.C. and Lawson, W.: Nature 137» 996 (1936) 

(25) Dodds, E.C, and Lawson, W. s Nature 129, 627 (1937) * 

(26) Dodds, E.G., Fitzgerald, M. and Lawson, W.s Nature 140» 772 (1937) 

(27) Dodds, E.C., Golberg, L., Lawson, W. and Robinson, R.: Nature 141» 

247 (1938) 

(28) Dodds, E.C., Golberg, L., Lawson, W. and Robinson, R.: Nature 142 , 

34 (1938) 

(29) Dodds, E.C. and Lawson, W.: Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) B125, 222 (1938) 

(30) Dodds, E.C., Golberg, L., Lawson, W. and Robinson, R.: Proc. Roy. 

Soc. (London) B127, 140 (1939) 

(31) Dodds, E.C., Golberg, L., Grunfeld, E.I., Lawson, W., Saffer, C.M. 

and Robinson, R.s Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) B132, 83 (1944) 

(32) Doisy, E.A., Veler, C.D. and Thayer,: Am. J. Physiol., 22, 329 (1929) 

(33) Emmens, C.W.: J. Endocrinology 2 , 444 (1940-41) 

(34) Erlenmeyer, H., Berger, E. and Leo, M.: Helv. Chim. Acta 16, 773 

(1933) 

(35) Erlenmeyer, H. and Leo, M. s Helv. Chim. Acta 16, 1381 (1933) 

(36) Fuson, R.C. and Melamed, S.: J. Org. Chem. 12, 690 (1948) 

(37) Gilman, H. and. Jacoby, A.L.: J. Org. Chem, 2> 108 (1938-39) 

(38) Gilman, H., Jacoby, A.L. and Paeevitz, H.A.: J. Org. Chem. 2* 120 

(1938-39) 

(39) Gilman, H. and Nobis, J.F.s J.A.C.S. 67, 1479 (1945) 

(40) Gilman, H. and Avakian, S.s J.A.C.S. 68 , 58 (1946) 

(41) Grimm, H.: quoted by Erlenmeyer, H. and Leo, M. s Helv. Chim. Acta 

16, 1381 (1933) 

(42) Grunert, R., Nichol, J. and Sandin, R.B.: J.A.C.S. 62, 2254 (1947) 

(43) Huston, M.J.s M. Sc. Thesis, Page 17, (1941) 

(44) Inhoffen, H.H. and Holweg, W.s quoted by Dodds, E.C,: J. Pharmacy 

and Pharmacol. 1, 137 (1949) 

(45) Kirby, A.H.M.: Cancer Research 2> 519 (1943) 

(46) Kirby, A.H.M.: Cancer Research 5, 129 (1945) 

(47) Krafft, F.: quoted by Beilsteins Handbuch der Qrganischen Chemie 

6, 860 (1923) 





57 


(48) Lacassagne, A.s Compt. rend. 195, 630 (1932) 

(49) LeFevre, C. and Desgrez, Ch.: Compt. rend. 128, 1791 (1934) 

(50) Leob, L.: "Glandular Physiology and Therapy" Symposium American 

Med. Assoc., Chicago 1935, Chap. xiii. 

(51) Loth, F. and Michaelis, A.: Ber. 27, 2540 (1894) 

(52) Ludwig, B.J.: Chem. Abstracts 28, 3422 (1944) 

(53) MacCorquodale, B.W., Thayer, S. and Daisy, E.A.s J. Biol. Chem. 

115, 435 (1936) 

(54) Miescher, K., Scholz, C. and Tschopp, E.s Biochem. J. ^2, 725 (1938) 

(55) Miller, E. and Read, R.R.s J.A.C.S. 5£, 1224 (1933) 

(56) Moore, E.E.s Chem. Abstracts 28, 2456 (1944) 

(57) Moore, E.E. and Volhiler, E.H .% quoted by Solmssen, U.V.: Chem. 

Reviews 22, 481 (1945) 

(58) Mossetig, E,, Shaver, F. and Burger, A.: J.A.C.S. 60, 2464 (1938) 

(59) Nietzki, R. and Bothof, H.s Ber. 27, 3262 (1894) 

(60) Plimmer, R.H.A.: "Organic and Biochemistry** p. 348 (1938) 

(61) Price, T.S. and Twiss, D.F.s J.C.S. 95, 1725 (1909) 

(62) Quelet, R.: Bull. Soc. Ghim. 7, 196 (1940) 

(63) Robson, J.M. and Schonberg, A. s Nature 140, 196 (1937) 

(64) Robson, J.M., Schonberg, A. and Fahira, H.A.: Nature 142, 292 (1938) 

(65) Robson, J.M. and Schonberg, A. s Nature 150, 22 (1942) 

(66) Saltzer, W.: Chem. Abstracts 26, 5958 (1942) 

(67) Saltzer, W. s Zeit fur Physiol. Chemie 274, 39 (1942) 

(68) Sandin, R.B.: Unpublished data. 

(69) Sandin, R.B. and Brown, R.K.: Private communication, 

(70) Schonberg, A., Robson, J.M., Tadros, W. and Fahim, H.A.s J.C.S. 

1940, 1327 (1940) 

(71) Smiles, S. and Bain, A.W.: J.C.S. 91, 1119 (1907) 

(72) Stibbens, ,R.B. and Blanchard, E.W.: Endocrinology 26, 297 (1945) 

(73) Stockard, C.R. and Papanicolaou, G.N.: Am. J. Anat. 22, 225 (1917) 











t 







* 


«* * t 


t , • ; 














<1 




r , V . 





tS'O V7 $ 


' f ’ 


'."'Jciix'f v 


s-* 


:..'..„o ..v. ' « " p-x\ 


o 


58 


(74) Wessely, F. and Kleerdorfer, A,: quoted by Solmssen, U.V.: Chem. 

Reviews 27, 481 (1945) 

(75) Wessely, F., Kerschbaum, E., Kleerdorfer, A., Prellinger, F., and 

Zajic, E. i quoted by Solmssen, U.V.: Chem. Reviews. 2Z, 481 (1945) 

(76) Zechmeister, L. and Cholnoky, L. '’Principles and Practice of 
Chromatography” Page 47 (1941) 


. • . < r :« V , 




\ s > f ) 








. . • : 

' 


















