L^MALBATON 


OF THE 


I. YMM PROGRAM l| DIVISION 

Aft FOLLOWED BY THE 

CALGARY .PUBLIC SCHOOLS 


iail Martin Gillespie 













Sx UBMS 

jirasHismais 

ajBmaisiisB 



University of Alberta 
Printing Department 
















Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/evaluationoffourOOgill 



AN EVALUATION OF THE FOUR YEAR PROGRAM IN DIVISION 1 

AS FOLLOWED 

BY THE CALGARY PUBLIC SCHOOLS 


A Thesis 
Presented to 

the Faculty of Graduate Studies 
University of Alberta 


In Partial Fulfillment 
of the Requirements for the Degree 
Master of Education 




Earl Martin Gillespie 
April 1959 









































ABSTRACT 


The Four Year Program is an attempt on the part 
of the Calgary Public School Board to provide for slow- 
learners in Division 1. Its success in the field of 
subject-matter achievement has been measured by means 
of tests in arithmetic, reading, and spelling. There 
may be other aspects of the program, beneficial or not, 
which have not been measured. 

In order to evaluate the achievement of pupils in 
the program a group of Four Year pupils was matched with 
a group of Repeaters. The matching was done on a basis 
of sex, and mental age. The achievement of each group 
in the subjects mentioned was then calculated and means 
and standard deviations found. The t-test for matched 
groups was used to see if significant differences existed 
between the groups. 

A group of Three Year pupils was set up by taking 
a random sample of the population, stratified on the 
basis of sex. The achievement of this group was determined 
and compared with that of the Four Year Group. Differences 
were noted. 

Investigation showed no significant difference 
between the Four Year Group and the Repeaters, in any of 
the subjects tested. There was a slight indication that 


■ 

. 


> 




. 

















. 













the subject of arithmetic was being covered better by 
the Four Year Group. 

The Three Year Group proved to be significantly 
higher than the Four Year Group in all subjects. There 
was some indication that the Four Year Group reached a 
reasonable Grade 111 level in arithmetic. Reading 
achievement fell below that of arithmetic. The achieve¬ 
ment in spelling fell very low when compared to that of 
the Three Year Group. 

It was concluded that the Four Year Program 
attained some degree of success in the field of achieve¬ 
ment. This success was highest in arithmetic, and lowest 
in spelling where it appeared not to exist. 

Factors which might possibly have a bearing on 
lack of higher achievement of the Four Year Group were 
examined and recommendations made. These recommendations 
suggested ways in which the Program might be aided. 

It should be noted that the total effect of the 
Program has not been measured. It is suggested that 
further study be made of all aspects of the Program before 
a complete evaluation is attempted. 

In conclusion, it is recommended that the Four Year 
Program be carefully conducted under supervision, to dis¬ 
cover methods of improvement in both organization and 
instruction. Attention should be given to frequent 
evaluation of its progress. 








■ 









- 





■ 




■ 


- 










' 


' 

t 

■ 








. 




























’ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


The writer wishes to acknowledge the 
helpful suggestions and directions given by his 
advisor, Dr. J. H. M. Andrews, and by the other 
members of his committee, Dr. A. W. Reeves, and 
Dr. D. B. Black. 

Appreciation is also expressed to Mr. 
Robert Warren, Superintendent of the Calgary 
Public Schools, and his administrative and office 
staff, for their aid and cooperation in securing 
the necessary data. 













. 

- 







TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

1. THE PROBLEM . 1 

Statement of the Problem . 1 

Background of the Problem . 1 

Need for the Study. 3 

Definition of Terms . b 

Three Year Program . b 

Four Year Program. b 

Repeaters . 5 

Slow Learners . 

Limitations of the Study . 6 

11. REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE . 7 

Individual Differences .. 8 

Grouping . 11 

The Slow Learner . lb 

Organizing For Slow Learners . 16 

Grouping Procedures . 17 

Curriculum Adjustment . 18 

Summary. 20 

111. SOURCES OF DATA AND METHOD OF GROUPING _ 21 

Sources of Data . 21 

Achievement Test Data . 21 

Measuring Power in Arithmetic . 22 

Dominion Achievement Test in 

Silent Reading . 22 

Edmonton Spelling Test . 22 



































1 




















» f. *,* * 































Vll 

CHAPTER PAGE 

Intelligence Test Data . 23 

California Short Form Test of Mental 

Maturity . 23 

Program Placement . 23 

Method of Grouping . 23 

The Repeater Group ... 23 

The Four Year Group . 24 

The Three Year Group . 24 

IV. ANALYSIS OF THE DATA . 2? 

Preliminary Steps . 25 

Testing Significance . 25 

Results of Analysis .. 26 

V. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS . 34 

The Four Year Group and The Repeaters .... 34 

Achievement .. 34 

Un-Measured Factors . 35 

The Four Year Group and The Three Year Group 36 

Arithmetic . 36 

Reading . 37 

Spelling . 38 

VI. SUMMARY . 4l 

BIBLIOGRAPHY . 53 



















































' » • 

■ 


























. < 




































XIST OF TABLES 


TABLE PAGE 

1. Composition, and Matching of Groups . 2b 

11. Test Results: Group Means and Standard 

Deviations . 27 

111. Correlation Between Mental Age and Test 

Results of the Three Year Group . 27 

IV. Significance of Differences in Arithmetic 

Four Year Group and Repeaters . 28 

V. Significance of Differences in Reading 

Four Year Group and Repeaters . 28 

VI. Significance of Differences in Spelling 

Four Year Group and Repeaters . 29 

Vll. Significance of Differences in Arithmetic 

Four Year Group and Three Year Group ... 29 

Vlll. Significance of Differences in Reading 

Four Year Group and Three Year Group ... 30 

IX. Significance of Differences in Spelling 

Four Year Group and Three Year Group ... 30 
















i 












LIST OF FIGURES 


FIGURE PAGE 

1. Cumulative Frequencies of Arithmetic 

Scores of Each Group . 31 

2. Cumulative Frequencies of Reading 

Scores of Each Group . 32 

3. Cumulative Frequencies of Spelling 

Scores of Each Group . 33 










CHAPTER 1 


THE PROBLEM 

I. STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM 

The purpose of this study was to evaluate the 
success of the Four Year Program in Division 1, Calgary 
Public Schools, as measured by achievement in certain 
subject-matter fields. The evaluation was carried out 
with two questions in mind: 

1. Does the Four Year Group achieve in a manner 
significantly different from the Repeater Group? 

2. Does the Four Year Group achieve at a level 
comparable with the Three Year Group? 

II. BACKGROUND OF THE PROBLEM 

In September 1952 the Four Year Program for Div¬ 
ision 1 was introduced into the Calgary Public Schools. 
It was designed for slow learners, to permit them to 
progress through Grades One, Two, and Three, at a slower 
rate than the average learners. It would thus be poss¬ 
ible for them to avoid the need for repetition of one of 
these grades. To enable them to do this, the curriculum 
of the first three grades was examined and the subjects 
of reading, arithmetic, and spelling were selected for 





















2 


special attention. The subject matter of these sub¬ 
jects was divided into twelve units, or levels, and 
organized so that Three Year pupils would be expected 
to complete four units each year in Division 1. The 
Four Year Group was expected to cover three units each 
year. It would therefore take this group four years 
to cover the course. 

Selection of candidates for this program was to 
be governed by several factors. Low I.Q. was to be 
considered, but mental age seemed to give a better 
indication of maturity, so this measurement was given 
considerable weight. These indications of ability were 
obtained by the use of the Detroit Beginning First Grade 
Intelligence Test, early in September of the Grade 1 
year. Achievement was to be determined by the teacher 
during the first months of school. A pupil who fell 
behind by the end of the Grade 1 year was also con¬ 
sidered for placement in the Four Year Program. If 
achievement was very low, or poor because of causes 
other than a low learning rate, the child was obliged 
to repeat the grade. 

Selection of pupils for the program thus dep¬ 
ended partly upon objective measurement, and partly 
upon the subjective judgment of the teacher. 





) 















f*' ■ 










3 


Under this organization, the Four Year Program 
was initiated and it has been in operation for a period 
of six years. 


111. NEED FOR THE STUDY 

The Four Year Program has now been in operation 
since September, 1952. Several groups of pupils have 
completed the four years required, and have been pro¬ 
moted to Division 11. It should be possible at this 
time to obtain a measurement of the success of the 
program. 

The operation of the program requires willing 
and able teachers, who have been trained to follow 
the special procedures. The principal, also, must 
study, plan, and organize, to follow the program in 
his school. He must supervise its operation through¬ 
out the year to be sure that it is progressing in a 
satisfactory manner. To justify the extra burden of 
work upon the staff, the program should provide advan¬ 
tages not obtainable by repetition of a grade. This 
study might determine whether such advantages are 
provided or not. The knowledge obtained would be of 
value in deciding whether the program should be con¬ 
tinued, modified, or discontinued. 




I 




. 





- 




Throughout the report of this investigation, 
it must he remembered that only one aspect of the 
program is examined, that of achievement in certain 
subject-matter fields. Other aspects should also be 
considered before definite conclusions are reached 
regarding the total value of the program. 

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS 

Three Year Program . The regular program of 
studies followed in the normal course by the majority 
of Division 1 pupils is designated as the Three Year 
Program. It is carried on in three grades, each grade 
requiring one school year to complete. The progression 
is from Grade 1 to Grade 11, to Grade 111. 

Four Year Program . A special program for slow 
learners has been devised in Calgary. This program is 
officially known as the Four Year Program. It is an 
adaptation of the same program of studies followed by 
the Three Year Group. That program is divided into 
twelve units in each of the basic subjects. Pupils 
in the Four Year Program are expected to cover three 
of these units, or levels, each year. It therefore 
takes four consecutive years to cover Division 1, 
progressing from Grade 1 to Junior 11, to Senior 11, 




■•: *x 





5 

and to Grade 111. The subjects organized in this 
manner are arithmetic, reading, and spelling. 

Repeaters . In this study the term Repeater 
refers to a pupil who was required to repeat the work 
of any one grade in Division 1. Sometimes pupils have 
failed to achieve because of poor health or low atten¬ 
dance. Sometimes others have failed because they were 
very weak learners who lacked sufficient basic skills 
to progress even in the slower route. Repetition of 
the grade was considered best in these cases. Rep¬ 
eaters also spent four years in Division 1, but they 
did not follow a continuous program. 

Slow Learners . Slow learners, only, are to be 
selected for the Four Year Program. They are des¬ 
cribed in instructions to teachers as pupils of low 
1 . 0 ., 80 or under, and pupils of low achievement.^ 

They are to be identified by, rr the child’s rate of 
progress in the skill subjects; reading, arithmetic, 

and writing, combined with careful consideration of 

2 

the Detroit Test scores. 1 * 


^Calgary Public School Board, Teacher 1 s 
Handbook . 1956, 0 . 13 . 

2 

Calgary Public School Board, Promotion 
Reports . 1956, p.2. 
















I 






o 






























V. LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY 


This study is limited to the pupils who were 
promoted from Grade 111 to Grade IV in June, 1958, 
in the Calgary Public Schools. No pupils were in¬ 
cluded who took more than four years to complete the 
work of the division. Pupils in the Accelerated, or 
Two Year Program, were not involved. 

The success of the Four Year Program could be 
measured in various -ways. Its effect upon the social 
and emotional life of the child might be either good 
or bad. Perhaps the stigma attached to repeating a 
grade is avoided. Perhaps there are advantages to 
be obtained in proceeding with a group of mental peers 
These are worthy considerations, but they are not 
examined here. Only one phase of the program 
receives attention, that of achievement in subject 
matter. The subjects observed are arithmetic, reading 
and spelling and observations were confined to the 
scores on one battery of achievement tests. 

All conclusions drawn concerning the value of 
the Four Year Program are based upon these consider¬ 
ations. A complete evaluation of the program would 
require investigation of other factors. 



1 
















CHAPTER 11 


REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE 

There are a number of basic assumptions and con¬ 
victions which form the philosophy behind the Four Year 
Program, Several aspects of the educational growth of 
the child have received the attention and study of many 
authorities on learning. Upon investigation of the 
available literature it is soon discovered that many 
opinions are expressed which have not been proven exper¬ 
imentally. In certain instances there is such unanimity 
of opinion that one must give considerable credence to 
it; in others, the opinion expressed seems to be con¬ 
fined to one person only, and should therefore not be 
valued too highly. 

Another group of investigators has studied the 
various problems in a scientific manner and can provide 
conclusions based upon factual evidence. These con¬ 
clusions carry considerable weight, but further invest¬ 
igation is sometimes necessary before complete acceptance 
is possible. 

Both types of literature have been examined in 
the fields covered by this study. Their relationship to 
the Four Year Program is significant. 
















8 


The areas investigated will be dealt with in 
four sections covering individual differences, grouping, 
the slow learner, and organization. 


1. INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES 

Education authorities universally agree that 
children differ in ability. It is readily accepted that 
individual differences exist even among children of sim¬ 
ilar age and sex. Great advances in the scientific 
movement in education took place when this concept was 
accepted. The importance of this acceptance is summed 
up in the following quotation, 

As more and more became known through dis¬ 
coveries and experimentation, the principle of 
individual differences came to assume such an 
important place that no educational procedure 
is now possible of arrangement or research 
dealing with instruction, unless certain var¬ 
iations among children are first taken into 
consideration.! 

The existence of individual differences is also 

acknowledged by Gates, et al., who say that differences 

in the ability to do reflective thinking are differences 
2 

in degree. There is no sharp division between those 
who can reason and those who can not. 


Hf. A. Yeager, Administration and the Pupil . 
New York: Harper and Brothers, 19^9, p. L '3« 

2 

Arthur Gates, et al., Educational Psychology . 
New York: The MacMillan Co., 19^+9," pA'75. 










'W 








9 


Hightower studied the results of Stanford 
Achievement Tests given to 307 pupils in the Seventh 
Grade, finding a range in ability from 2.9 to 12.9 
in mental age.^ In Alberta, a similar study showed 
that the average range of reading achievement, 
expressed in grade scores, was five grades, while that 
of spelling was six grades. The range in arithmetic 

If 

was also five grades. 

These great spreads in grade level suggest that 
instruction should be given on an individual basis. 
Where such individual instruction is impossible, 
schools must seek a compromise of some kind. This is 
usually found in some method of grouping. 

The Calgary Public School Board, in a message 
to parents, indicates that the philosophy behind the 
Four Year Program is based upon this concept of indi¬ 
vidual differences. The message states, ®It is 
important that experiences which are offered to the 


^Howard W. Hightower, "Individual Differences," 
Educational Administration and Supervision . *+1:8, 
December, 1955, p.*+58. 

if 

G. M. Dunlop, S. Hunka, and H. Zingle, 
"Individual Differences in Alberta Schools," The Alberta 
Journal of Educational Research . 1:*+, December, 1955, 

pp. 9 - 10. 















10 


A 

child fit his own maturity level.' 1 This is further 
elaborated in instructions to teachers stating, "In 
every class a teacher will find that there is a wide 
range in the achievement, the ability, and the learning 
rates of the individuals who compose the class."^ 

In order to deal with individual differences it 
is necessary to discover these differences. This Is 
usually done by means of standardized tests. In Calgary, 
the test used in Division 1 is the Detroit Beginning 
First Grade Intelligence Test. This test has been inves¬ 
tigated by Powell in order to test its validity. Con¬ 
clusions reached indicate that the test does discriminate 

7 

the levels of intellectual ability.' It thus seems to oe 
a suitable test to use in order to locate possible can¬ 
didates for the Four Year Program. 


5 

Calgary Public School Board, Organization for 
Effective Learning . 195^? P*2, citing Gladys Jenkins 
et al., These Are Your Children . Chicago: Scott 
Foresman and Co., 19*+9, p.13* 

6 

Calgary Public School Board, Teacher 1 s Handbook . 
1956, p.13. 

7 

Frederick Powell, m A Critical Evaluation of the 
Detroit Beginning First Grade Intelligence Test," The 
Alberta Journal of Educational Research . 11:1, March 
1956, p.30. 

















a 













! 











11. GROUPING 


In the modern school, with its tendency to¬ 
wards crowded classrooms, it is impossible to provide 
individual instruction. The compromise solution is 
to group pupils of similar ability and attainment, a 
procedure which has found favor with many educational 
experts. Various methods of grouping have been dev¬ 
eloped with a definite tendency towards providing for 
a degree of homogeneity within the group. 

Monroe bases grading for purposes of instruction 
on the course of studies, and states, 

At any stage the object of a system of grading 
is to produce groups or classes that are fairly 
homogeneous as regards attainments at the moment, 
and also capacity to make a certain rate of pro¬ 
gress throughout the course of study as organized. 

Some authorities do not agree that ability 
grouping is completely successful. In his examination 
of research on the subject of class organization, 
Wrightstone pointed out that opponents of ability 
grouping stated that it produces relatively small 
change in the range of individual differences, and 


g 

Monroe (Ed.), “Grading and Promotion'' 1 
4 Cyclopaedia Of Education . New York: The MacMillan Co., 
1918, pJ26, 












f 






-Z 7 . . 











7 


K ; 


. l 




• 12 


that many differences in academic achievement con- 

Q 

tinue. He concluded, “'Thus far, research indicates 
that so-called homogeneous grouping is seldom very 
satisfactory .' 110 An Alberta study also agreed that 
although some lessening of the range of achievement 

was achieved by grouping, this reduction was not 

. 11 
great. 

Despite these adverse opinions, the majority 
of experts seem to favor the practice of homogeneous 
grouping. In a study of professional opinions on 
the matter of grouping, Sauvain showed that, “'About 
seven out of eight school officials believe that 
better work is done under ability grouping at both 
the brighter and slower levels, than w T ould be done 
without it. 1 * 1 ^ 


J. W. Wrightstone, RT, ¥hat Research Says About 
Class Organization For Instruction,’ 11 National Educ ¬ 
ation Association Journa l. XLV1:*+, April, 1957? p. 25^. 

10 

Ibid., p. 25^. 

11 

S.C.T. Clarke, “The Effect of Grouping on 
Variability in Achievement at the Grade 111 Level , u 
The Alberta Journal of Educational Research , IV:, 
September, 1958? p. 170. 

12 

W. H. Sauvain, A Study of the Opinions of 
Certain Professional and Non Professiona l Groups 
Regarding Homogeneous Ability Grouping . New York: 
Teacher’s College, Columbia University, 193*+? P* *+5. 


























_ 















13 


1^ lb 

Among other writers, both Pittenger and Reeder 
favor some type of homogeneous grouping. 

The following reason for grouping is given by 


Ingram, 


The purpose of the grouping is to allow 
children to work according to their ability, 
and thereby eliminate as much as possible 
failure and repetition of grades for the 
slow-learner and give added opportunities 
for the superior.15 

The policy of homogeneous grouping has been 
adopted by the Calgary Public School Board, as indi- 
cated by the statement, H, In an effort to meet the 
needs of individual pupils several programs have been 
organized for use in our schools. tr ^ 


13 

B. F. Pittenger, Local Public School Admin ¬ 
istration . New York: McGraw Hill Book Co. , 19*+1, 
pp. 298-9. 

14 

W. G. Reeder, The Fundamentals of Public 
School Administration . New York: The MacMillan Co., 
19^1, pp. 4-97-516. 

15 

Christine P. Ingram, Education Of The Slow - 
Learning Child, New York: World Book Co., 1935? P* 304. 

16 

Calgary Public School Board, Teacher 1 s 
Handbook . 1956, p. 13. 





















: 0 € 















111. THE SLOW LEARNER 


It is now necessary to examine the term slow- 
learner. Most writers agree that this term applies 
to those pupils somewhat below the normal intelligence, 
but still capable of reasonable achievement. In her 
reference to the term Ingram states, 

These pupils are very roughly indicated as 
those having intelligence quotients of from 
about 70 or 75 ? to 89, as determined by per¬ 
formance in intelligence tests. They comprise 
approximately 15 to 18 percent of the total 
school population.17 

The slow learner is defined by Featherstone as 
follows, 

There is no fixed standard or level of 
ability below which a pupil must be called a 
slow learner, but in common practice pupils 
with an I.Q. below 91 and above 7*+ are so 
labelled. ... the term slow learner should be 
interpreted consistently to mean slow in 
learning intellectual things.l° 

Kennedy-Fraser distinguishes between temporarily 
backward, I.Q. 100 or over, and permanently backward 
I.Q. below 80. There is an inference here that pupils 
needing remedial work are not necessarily slow learners 
and should not be treated in the same way. Methods of 


17 

Ingram, op. cit., p. 389. 

18 

W. D. Featherstone, Teaching The Slow Learner . 
New York: Bureau of Publications, Columbia University, 
1941, p. 3- 











- '' O. 

■J..J-0- '■ 






■ ■■ ■ 

i i O i 


. 

















15 


-diagnosis are discussed, and the opinion is expressed 

that the teacher is in a most strategic position for 

discovering the slow learner. Investigation into 

social and medical background are suggested as a 

19 

supplement to the use of intelligence tests. 

Since considerable attention is paid in Calgary 
to teacher judgment, his summary statement is signif¬ 
icant , 

... The teacher should not hesitate to place 
considerable reliance on his own subjective 
judgment, particularly after he has a good back¬ 
ground of practical experience, and after he has 
come to know the pupils pretty well in the 
intimate face-to-face relationship of the class¬ 
room. 20 

Maclin applies the term slow learners to children 

of limited intelligence range from 70 to 90 in the Binet 
21 

test range. Burt includes approximately the same 
range in his definition. He enumerates the causes of 
backwardness under the headings of Social Conditions, 
Physical Conditions, Sensory Conditions, Motor Defects, 


19 

David Kennedy-Fraser, Education Of The Backward 
Child . London: University of London Press, 1932, p. 18. 

20 

Ibid., p. 18. 

21 

Gladys Maclin, n Differentiation of Courses of 
Study in Denver for Slow Learning Children , w Elementar y 
School Journal, 30:2, October, 1929, p. 104. 































■ 







16 


22 

. Intellectual Factors, Temperament, and Character. 

The Calgary Public School Board, in its dir¬ 
ections to teachers, suggests that pupils of low 
I.Q., 80 or under, and pupils of low achievement he 
considered slow learners and included in the Four 

2*5 

Year Program. ~ In this case, selection contains 
both subjective and objective elements. 

IV. ORGANIZING FOR SLOW LEARNERS 

In most school systems it has been customary 
to require pupils to repeat grades if they failed 
to reach a satisfactory degree of achievement by 
the end of the term. This practice still operates 
to some extent, but opinion is growing that little 
is to be gained by this method except in special 
cases. 

Clarke studied promotion practices in Alberta 
schools and found a high rate of failure in Grade 1. 
He also found that there was little or no provision 
made for accommodating children of retarded or 


22 

Cyril Burt, The Backward Child, London: 
University of London Press, 1937 ? pp. 85-563. 

23 

Calgary Public School Board, Teacher 1 s 
Handbook . 1956, p. 13. 




















































■ 








24 

accelerated achievement. The Alberta Department 
of Education also called attention to the fact that 
non-promoted pupils do not achieve as well as poten- 
tial repeaters who are promoted. " This concept is 
reiterated by Wrightstone, who declares that children 
do not learn more by repeating a grade.^ 

With most authorities agreeing that non¬ 
promotion and repetition of a grade are not partic¬ 
ularly beneficial, other procedures are sought to 
improve the teaching of slow learners. 

Grouping Procedures 

Many authorities think that slow learners should 
be separated from the more rapid learners for the pur¬ 
pose of instruction. Burt notes that this may be done 

within a class, by means of special classes, or by 

27 

means of special schools. Kennedy-Fraser favors 
segregation, ^Therefore we argue for the segregation 


24 

S. C. T. Clarke, ^Promotion Practices and 
Policies in Alberta Schools,’ 11 The Alberta Journal of 
Educational Research 1:4, December, 1955 5 p. 24-34. 

25 

Department of Education, Alberta, Promotion 
Policies Report . 1955 5 p. 12. 

26 

Wrightstone, op . cit ., p. 254. 

27 

Burt, op. cijt., p. 574. 















■ ■ - -■■ 






■- - -A - _ .. - 










Ipiil 



. 





of the upper and lower levels of intelligence from 

the normal."^ He indicates that, '"There are several 

types of organization on a so-called ’"multiple-track’ 1 

plan, where provision is made for all grades of 
29 

intelligence. * r ‘ This type of organization provides 
a background for Calgary's Four Year Program. 

Charvo, writing about exceptional children, 
was in favor of segregation within the school, She 
writes, 

The needs of the majority of mentally 
retarded pupils will best be met in special 
classes in a regular school situation, where 
these classes are offered as a special service 
and considered as part of, agd not apart from 
the regular school program. 

Curriculum Adjustment 

There appears to be general agreement that the 
curriculum for slow learners requires special consider 
ation. Two plans are given concerning curriculum by 
Ingram. She states that one possibility is a slowed- 
down program that allows the slow learner extra time 


28 

Kennedy-Fraser, op. cit .. p. 56. 

29 

Ibid, p. 67 

30 

Mayme Charvo, and Dorothy Hamlin, '"Consider¬ 
ations in Adjusting the Instructional Program for 
Exceptional Children,” California J ournal of Elemen ¬ 
tar y Education XXV: May, 1957, p. 223. 





























V3 









19 


in the elementary school to complete the minimum 

essentials for entrance to Junior High School. The 

other plan requires lowered requirements. In either 

11 

case there is an adaption of the curriculum. The 

desirability of adaptation of the curriculum to the 

needs of different ability levels is also stressed by 
12 

Sauvain. 

Monroe suggests slowing down the program, 

mentioning a system of grading so devised that groups 

proceed along parallel lines. This system was known 

as the Cambridge system, and it could be systematized 

so that a given course of study would be completed in 

respectively seven, eight, or nine years, so far as 

11 

given individuals were concerned. JJ 

The Calgary Public School Board has adopted two 
of the approaches mentioned. It has grouped the slow 
learners, and has organized a slowed-down program which 
is known as the Four Year Program. 


31 




Ingram, 

op. 

cit. , 

p. 394 

32 




Sauvain 

, 0£, 

. cit. 

, p. 61 

33 



Monroe, 

OP. 

cit. , 

p. 126 






























20 


V. SUMMARY 

From opinion and research certain general 
conclusions may be drawn. 

1. Individual differences exist among school 
children and these differences require special atten¬ 
tion. They may be discovered by the use of standard¬ 
ized intelligence tests, supplemented by teacher 
observation and judgment. 

2. Grouping of children of similar ability is 
accepted by many as an aid in providing for individ¬ 
ual needs. 

3. Slow learners have been frequently identi¬ 
fied as pupils with I.Q.’s of approximately 70 to 90. 
Low achievement is a secondary indication of slow 
learning. 

4. Slowed-down programs have had some accep¬ 
tance as a means of dealing with slow learners. 

5. Organization of alternative routes for 
children of varying abilities has provided another 
means. 

These conclusions are apparent in the develop¬ 
ment of the Calgary Public School Board's Four Year 
Program for slow learners in Division 1. 




- 

- 

' 

„ ■ r. " 

■ ■' v ■ ; : : • C • : 

.1:..'r J: . '■ o ■ ..."o- 

■ 









. 






CHAPTER 111 


SOURCES OF DATA AND METHOD OF GROUPING 

The variables measured in this study were arith¬ 
metic, reading, and spelling. The nature of the data 
used, and the sources from which they were obtained, are 
given in detail below. The investigation was confined to 
three groups, a normal Three Year Group, a Four Year Group, 
and a Repeater, or control group. The Four Year Group and 
the Repeater Group were matched. A complete explanation 
of the formation of these groups is given in this chapter. 

1. SOURCES OF DATA 

All data were collected from official files of the 
Calgary Public School Board. They were obtained from 
reports dealing with achievement tests, intelligence 
tests, and year-end promotions. 

Achievement Test Data 

All Grade 111 classes in Calgary were given achieve¬ 
ment tests in May, 1958. These were administered and 
scored by the classroom teachers. Each school sent records 
of these tests to the Calgary School Board Office where 
they were filed. From these official records a copy of all 
scores were obtained to provide a basis for this study. The 
tests covered the subjects of arithmetic, reading, and 

























' 






































































22 


spelling. An outline of the tests used is given below. 

Meas urin g Po wer in Arith metic.^" The tests were 
prepared for use in grades three to eight. They con¬ 
sisted of three sections entitled. 

1. Understanding Arithmetic. 

2. Using Arithmetic Accurately. 

3. Solving Problems. 

The scores made in each part were added together 
to get a total score. This total was the official score 
filed with the School Board Office. There was a possible 
score of 125* 

2 

The Dominion Achievement Test in Silent Reading. 
This test was prepared for grades 111 and IV, and was 
essentially a diagnostic test in paragraph reading. Raw 
scores on the test were used for record purposes, the 
total score being 28. 

Edmonton Spelling Test .^ The test for Grade 111 
was used, containing a possible score of bo. Raw scores 
were used on the reports. 


1 

R. L. Morton, Measuring Power in Arithmetic . 

Grades Three to Eight . New York: Silver Burdette Co., 195*+. 
2 

Department of Educational Research, Ontario College 
of Education, Achievement Tests in Silent Reading . Type 11 
Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1953. 

3. 

Edmonton Public School Board, Spelling Test, Grade 
111, Unpublished. 












































o 









23 

Intelligence Test Data 

4 

California Short Form Test of Mental Maturity . 

This test provided the data on mental age. It was given 
to all Grade 111 pupils in May, 1958. Mental ages were 
used in matching groups as these measures are used in 
Calgary when arranging for group work. 

Program Placement 

Data concerning pupil placement in the Three Year 
Program, the Four Year Program, and the Repeaters, were 
obtained from the individual school promotion records 
which are filed each year in the School Board Office. 

This involved the examination of complete city records 
for the years 1955? 1958, 1957? and 1958. The names of 
2662 pupils in the Three Year Program, 139 in the Four 
Year Program, and 10b Repeaters were obtained. At this 
stage care was taken to exclude names of any accelerated, 
or Two Year pupils, pupils who took more than four years 
in Division 1, and pupils who were not being promoted in 
June, 1958. 

11. METHOD OF GROUPING 
The Repeater Group 

The total population of repeaters was obtained 
from the promotion records. This group totaled 10b but 
the number was reduced to 100 during the process of 
matching with the Four Year Group. The matching of the 
two groups was done on a basis of sex and mental age. 












. 





■X 







■ - . ■■ Iff 








24 


The Repeater Group finally consisted of sixty-two hoys 
and thirty-eight girls with a mean mental age of 112.15, 
and a standard deviation of 11.80. The proportion of 
boys to girls in the group was a result of the number of 
cases available. Mental ages were calculated in months. 

The Four Year Group 

From the 139 Four Year pupils, 100 were selected. 
Matching of the sex distribution of the Repeater Group 
was accomplished by including sixty-two boys and thirty- 
eight girls. When the final group was obtained it had a 
mean mental age of 112 . 15 , and a standard deviation of 11.70. 
The Three Year Group 

To select the Three Year Group, the test results of 
all schools were arranged alphabetically by pupils. A 
stratified random sample of sixty-two boys and thirty-eight 
girls was obtained, consisting of pupils who had taken three 
years. The proportion of boys to girls was kept the same 
as in the other two groups. 

The composition of the three groups is shown in Table 1. 

TABLE 1 

COMPOSITION AND MATCHING OF GROUPS 


Number Selected Mean Standard 


Group 

Population 

Boys 

Girls Total 

M.A. Deviation 

Three Year 

2662 

62 

38 

100 

116.70 

10.95 

Repeaters 

104 

62 

38 

100 

112.15 

11.80 

Four Year 

139 

62 

38 

100 

112.15 

11.70 










* 















O 










■ 














1 - - ■ 































CHAPTER IV 


ANALYSIS OF THE DATA 

1. PRELIMINARY STEPS 

The first step in the treatment of the data was 
to list all test scores for the pupils in each group. 
These scores consisted of mental age, arithmetic raw 
score, reading raw score, and spelling raw score. 

Means and standard deviations were then found for each 
group. Table 11 shows these figures. 

In order to compare results by means of the t- 
test for matched groups it was then necessary to find 
the correlation between mental age and achievement as 
shown by the Three Year Group. These correlations were 
obtained for mental age and each of the subjects tested. 
Table 111 presents these relationships. 

As a supplementary means of comparison, cumulative 
frequency graphs were prepared, showing group achievement 
in each subject. Figures 1, 2, and '3* show these graphs, 

11. TESTING SIGNIFICANCE 

The t-test for matched groups was used to discover 
the significance of differences between the Four Year 













































. 




























. 


















26 


Group and the Repeater Group. In the case of arith¬ 
metic, the difference between the means of the two 
groups was found, and the standard error of this 
difference was obtained by the formula for groups 
matched for mean and standard deviation. The value of 
t was then calculated, and the tables used to find the 
significance of the difference. The same procedure was 
repeated for reading, and spelling. 

Since the Four Year Group and the Three Year 
Group were not matched, the standard error of the diff¬ 
erence for unmatched groups was used in the calculation 
of the t value. 


111. RESULTS OF ANALYSIS 

The use of the t-test showed that there was no 
significant difference between the Four Year Group and 
the Repeaters in any of the subjects tested, at the .05 
level. The cumulative frequency graphs show a similarity 
of achievement of the two groups, with some apparent 
superiority on the part of the Four Year Group in arith¬ 
metic. 

In the comparison of the Four Year Group and the 
Three Year Group significant differences appeared at the 
.01 level. The cumulative frequency graphs show a much 
higher achievement by the Three Year Group than that 


■ • 










* 

























. 









' 


















. 


-2 7 


attained by the others. 

The results of this analysis are recorded in 
Tables IV, V, VI, Vll, Vlll, and IX, and in Figures 
1, 2, and 3* 

TABLE 11 

TEST RESULTS, GROUP MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS 


Group 

Mental Age 

M cr 

Arithmetic 
M cr 

Reading 

M cr 

Spelling 

M ex' 

Three Year 

116.70 10.95 

98.1 17.2 

18.76 

4.48 

22.10 4.06 

Repeaters 

112.15 11.80 

84.6 20.7 

13.38 

5.14 

16.58 5*l l + 

Four Year 

112.15 11.70 

87.3 19.7 

12.84 

5.60 

16.20 4.78 


TABLE 111 




CORRELATION BETWEEN MENTAL AGE AND TEST 

RESULTS 


OF THE THREE YEAR GROUP 




Arithmetic 

r » 

.44 




Reading 

r = 

.27 




Spelling 

r = 

.0? 





















28 


TABLE IV 

SIGNIFICANCE OF DIFFERENCES IN ARITHMETIC 
FOUR YEAR GROUP AND REPEATERS 


Group 

N Mean c r 

Differ¬ 
ence of 
Means 

t 

Significance 

Four Year 

Repeaters 

100 87.3 19.7 

100 84.6 20.7 

2.7 

1.0? Not 

significant 
at .05 level 


TABLE V 




SIGNIFICANCE OF DIFFERENCES IN READING 



FOUR YEAR GROUP AND 

REPEATERS 



Group 

N Mean cr 

Differ¬ 
ence of 
Means 

t 

Significance 


Not 

Significant 
.74 at .05 level 


Four Year 100 12.84 5.60 
Repeaters 100 13*38 5*14 


54 















29 


TABLE VI 

SIGNIFICANCE OF DIFFERENCES IN SPELLING 
FOUR YEAR GROUP AND REPEATERS 




Grout) 

N 

Mean 

Differ¬ 
ence of 
cr Means 

t 

Significance 

Four Year 

100 

16.20 

4.78 


Not 






significant 

Repeaters 

100 

16.58 

5.14 .38 

.54 

at ,05 level 



TABLE Vll 



SIGNIFICANCE OF DIFFERENCES IN ARITHMETIC 


FOUR 

YEAR GROUP AND THREE YEAR GROUP 




Differ¬ 






ence of 



Group 

N 

Mean 

cr Means 

t 

Significance 


Significant 

at 

10.8 4.12 .01 level 


Four Year 100 87.3 19.7 
Three Year 100 98.1 17.2 





























30 


.TABLE Vlll 

SIGNIFICANCE OF DIFFERENCES IN READING 
FOUR YEAR GROUP AND THREE YEAR GROUP 


Differ¬ 
ence of 

Group N Mean cr Means t Significance 


Four Year 

100 

12.84 

5.60 


Significant 

at 

Three Year 

100 

18.76 

4.48 

5-92 

8.08 .01 level 


TABLE IX 

SIGNIFICANCE OF DIFFERENCES IN SPELLING 
FOUR YEAR GROUP AND THREE YEAR GROUP 


Differ¬ 
ence of 


Group 

N 

Mean 

cr 

Means 

t Significance 

Four Year 

100 

16.2 

4.78 


Significant 






at 

Three Year 

100 

22.1 

4.06 

5.9 

9.*+ .01 level 


























Number of Pupils 


31 



Arithmetic Scores 

FIGURE 1 

CUMULATIVE FREQUENCIES OF ARITHMETIC SCORES 
OF EACH GROUP 


THREE YEAR GROUP 
FOUR YEAR GROUP 


REPEATER GROUP 






























I 





























































100 


Q« 



Reading Scores 
FIGURE 2 

CUMULATIVE FREQUENCIES OF READING SCORES 
OF EACH GROUP 

THREE YEAR GROUP ________ 

FOUR YEAR GROUP - 

REPEATER GROUP . 













































































































Spelling Scores 
FIGURE 3 

CUMULATIVE FREQUENCIES OF SPELLING SCORES 
OF EACH GROUP 


THREE YEAR GROUP 
FOUR YEAR GROUP 


REPEATER GROUP 





















































































































‘CHAPTER V 


CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
1. THE FOUR YEAR GROUP AND THE REPEATERS 

ACHIEVEMENT 

The data show that there is no significant differ¬ 
ence between the Four Year Group and the Repeaters in 
achievement in arithmetic, reading, and spelling. This 
appears to indicate that the Four Year Program, as it is 
presently operating, does not provide a better means of 
progress than does the repetition of a grade. 

The lack of difference may be due to the possibil¬ 
ity that some Four Year classes may suffer, by not being 
taught according to the philosophy underlying the program. 
In some instances very small groups exist in a classroom 
containing many pupils in the Three Year Program. 

Teachers, inexperienced in the program, can conceivably 
forget the aims and techniques, and can allow the larger 
group to dominate the smaller. There is always a danger 
that the Four Year Group may be made to adapt itself to 
the course of studies followed by the others. Classes may 
be combined to an extent injurious to the slower group, 

It is therefore possible for pupils designated as Four 








. 














■ 






' 






■ 


















? 

. 
























m 

. 








35 

Year pupils to be instructed in the same manner as 
Repeaters, and either repeat work already done, or 
skip sections of vital importance to them. 

To prevent incorrect practices in teaching, 
the Four Year Program needs, very careful organization 
and supervision by all those responsible for its 
success. Principals, especially, must be constantly 
vigilant to see that the spirit of the program is 
carried out. 

It might be noted that in the case of arith¬ 
metic the Four Year Group did achieve a mean 2.7 
points higher than the Repeater Group.. Although not 
statistically significant, this higher score might 
indicate that arithmetic is best learned by the slow, 
steady, continuous treatment, rather than by repetition 
of one particularly poor year's work. 

UN-MEASURED FACTORS 

It must again be emphasized that the Four Year 
Program exists for other reasons than that of increasing 
achievement in subject matter. The social and emotional 
aspects of failure and repetition have often been decried. 
The undesirable features of failure may not exist in the 
Four Year Program. This aspect of the program should be 
examined before a complete picture of its success is 









36 

obtained. It may be found that there are many bene¬ 
fits aside from achievement in subject matter. 

11. THE FOUR YEAR GROUP AND THE THREE YEAR GROUP 

Upon comparing the Four Year Group and the Three 
Year Group it was found that there was a significant 
difference between the two groups in each of the sub¬ 
jects measured. It is therefore evident that the extra 
year of instruction was not sufficient to bring the 
slow learners up to the same level of achievement that 
the Three Year pupils reached. It appears that the 
ratio of four years to three is not realistic. Per¬ 
haps the ratio should be five to three. If further 
study indicates that the four years is inadequate, and 
an increase in the number of years of the program seems 
unwise, a modification of the curriculum might be 
required. This might provide for additional emphasis 
on basic skills, with a corresponding lowering of require¬ 
ments in other subjects. A more detailed examination of 
the achievement in each subject may present valuable 
information. 

ARITHMETIC 


The mean score of the Four Year Group, in arith¬ 
metic, is 87.3* That of the Three Group is 98.1. The 































r ,' 








. . • 








... . , 





- • 



- 






. 


: 

' 






' 




... r-:. ■ 




c 4 

• ’ . 



■ 


. t- 




. 





■ . r 


"V 

- 




















37 


lower mean, however, does not indicate that the Four 
Year Program is a complete failure. Upon examination 
of Figure 1, page 30, it is discovered that approx¬ 
imately 55 percent of the Four Year pupils scored 
above the lower quartile score of the Three Year Group. 
It seems reasonable to state that any pupil in a grade 
who scores above the lower quartile is an acceptable 
pupil in that grade. On this basis the Four Year 
Program was at least 55 per cent successful in devel¬ 
oping satisfactory Grade 111 pupils over the four year 
period. Further, if we should accept the premise that 
only the bottom 15 per cent of a normal class would be 
considered for failure, we would find approximately 70 
per cent of the Four Year Group above this Three Year 
level. 

With these considerations in mind there appears 
to be a substantial degree of progress achieved in the 
field of arithmetic. There is an indication that the 
Four Year Program has operated reasonably well in the 
instruction of this subject. 

READING 


In reading, the mean score of the Four Year Group 
is 12.84, which falls 5*92 points below the Three Year 
mean of 18.76. Figure 2, page 30, shows that only 35 



r r 








. 
















. ■ - 


JO JfiOO TOO 












a ■" • 

















per cent of the Four Year Group scored above the 
lower quartile score of the Three Year Group. Only 
45 per cent scored above the lower 15 per cent of 
the Three Year Group. 

These figures indicate a much smaller degree 
of success in reading than in arithmetic. There are 
indications here that reading may be taught success¬ 
fully within the program, but some attempt should be 
made to discover better ways of doing it. As men¬ 
tioned previously, there is a possibility that the 
course has not been covered in the manner planned for 
it in the Four Year Program. 

SPELLING 


The Four Year mean score in spelling is 16.2 as 
compared to the Three Year score of 22.1. Here there 
is a large difference of 5-9 points. As shown by Figure 
3, page 31 5 only 25 per cent of the Four Year Group 
scored above the lower quartile score of the Three Year 
Group. Only 35 per cent scored above the bottom 15 per 
cent of the Three Year Group. 

A low degree of success for the program is in¬ 
dicated by these figures. It is possible that spelling 
is being neglected in the instruction of this group. 
Serious attention must be given to locating and 




. 

- 

? - 










- 

. 

. 
























remedying the weakness exhibited here. 


RECOMMENDATIONS 


Some suggestions have already been given 
regarding the future of the Four Year Program. These 
may be augmented by several specific recommendations. 

1. The Four Year Program should be continued 
until much more research has been done upon it. This 
should include a careful survey of social and emotional 
aspects. 

2. An investigation into school practices would 
show various methods of organization and perhaps find 
one of particular value. 

3. The extent to which teachers adhere to the 
pattern, as outlined in the program, could have much 
influence on its success. Proper operation requires 
study and training on the part of the teacher and the 
principal. The latter must also organize and super¬ 
vise to keep the program operating efficiently. 

4. The curriculum should be examined to see if 
curtailment or modification is necessary. It might be 
possible to increase achievement in the basic subjects 
by decreasing demands in the others. The basic sub¬ 
jects might be reorganized to stress the most essential 
aspects. 




4o 


5. Reading practices should he studied so 
that improvements could he made in achievement. An 
attempt should he made to discover the greatest weak¬ 
nesses of the Four Year Group, and corrective measures 
should be applied. 

6. A similar examination of spelling practices 
seems necessary. Various teaching methods should be 
tried, in order to find one, or more, which would he 
particularly valuable for slow learners. 

7. Further studies should he made of the various 
aspects of the program, as it continues in operation. 



CHAPTER VI 


SUMMARY 

1. THE PROBLEM 

The purpose of this study was to evaluate the 
success of the Four Year Program, in Division 1, of 
the Calgary Public Schools, as measured by a battery 
of achievement tests in the subject matter field. 

There were two questions to be considered. 

1. Does the Four Year Program Group achieve in 
a manner significantly different from the Repeater 
Group? 

2. Does the Four Year Group achieve at a level 
comparable with the Three Year Group? 

The Four Year Program for Division 1 was intro¬ 
duced into the Calgary Public Schools in September, 
1952. It was designed for slow learners, to permit 
them to progress through grades 1, 11 and 111, at a 
slower rate than the average learners, thus avoiding 
the need for repetition of a grade. To enable them to 
do this, the basic subjects in the curriculum of the 
first three grades were divided into twleve units or 
levels. The Four Year Group was expected to cover 
three units each year, for a period of four years. 

































































■ 




























42 

At the end of this time they would presumably be 
sufficiently grounded in the basic subjects to 
proceed to Grade IV. 

Candidates for this program were to be 
selected on a basis of low I.Q., (under 80) , or low 
achievement as measured by the teacher. Mental ages 
gave a good indication of possible learning readiness, 
and these measures were used in determining candidates 
as well. 

Since the program has now been in operation for 
six years, and several groups of pupils have completed 
it, it should now be possible to obtain a measurement 
of its success. 

Achievement in arithmetic, reading, and spelling 
was the only aspect measured. Others of importance, 
such as social and emotional effects, were not considered. 
Until these are measured, a complete picture of the 
success of the program will not be obtained. 

In this study, Three Year Program refers to the 
normal program, which takes three years to complete. 

Four Year Program refers to the special program which 
requires four years of continuous progress to complete, 
and Repeater refers to any pupil who took four years 
because of repeating a grade. Slow learners are des¬ 
ignated in the Calgary Public School system as pupils 






















































. 


. 


































of low I.Q. or pupils of low achievement. 

This study was limited to pupils promoted from 
Grade 111 to Grade IV, in June, 1958, in the Calgary 
Public Schools. No pupils who took more than four 
years, or less than three years, to complete the 
division were included. No attempt was made to measure 
any other factors than achievement in arithmetic, 
reading, and spelling. This was measured by one test 
battery given in May, 1958. 

11. REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE 

The literature related to the problem was exam¬ 
ined in four aspects, individual differences, grouping, 
slow learners, and organization for slow learners. It 
was found that two types of literature exist, the one 
being based upon observation and experience, and the 
other upon investigation and experimentation. Both 
types were considered of value. 

In the case of individual differences it was 
found that there was general acceptance of the concept 
that all children differ in ability and achievement. 
Investigators have shown that there is a spread of five 
or six grades of achievement in a grade seven class. 
Although recognizing that these differences are so great 
modern school systems find it impossible to provide 

















• ■ 




. 

• - 



' 






44 


individual instruction. A compromise is made by 
grouping pupils of similar achievement and ability. 

In order to group pupils in this manner it is nec¬ 
essary to discover the differences that exist among 
pupils. This is usually done by means of some stan¬ 
dardized intelligence test. In Calgary, the test 
used is the Detroit Beginning First Grade Intel¬ 
ligence Test. This test was studied and conclusions 
were reached indicating that it did discriminate the 
levels of individual ability. 

Many experts have advocated grouping as a means 
of providing classes of similar ability. There is a 
definite tendency towards providing for as great a 
degree of homogeneity as possible within each group. 

This homogeneity is often based upon achievement in 
the subject matter field in addition to considerations 
of intelligence. A number of studies have shown that 
the range of achievement in any group is only lessened 
to a small extent by homogeneous grouping. In spite of 
this adverse opinion, the majority of experts favor some 
form of grouping by ability and achievement. One inves¬ 
tigation showed that seven out of eight school officials 
favored homogeneous grouping, in its organization of 
grades, and groups within the grades. 






'To.:-xo nl 

rj 

. . ' ■ . 








■ ■. ' .... 








. 

• "'' : c ' ' ' 






















45 


Since the Four Year Program was devised for 
slow learners it is necessary to define the term. 

Most writers have done this by describing a slow learner 
as one whose 1.0. lies between about 70 and 80. One 
writer emphasizes that the term applies only to learning 
of intellectual things. Another is convinced that much 
subjective judgment on the part of the teacher is nec¬ 
essary in identifying a slow learner. The Calgary Public 
School Board suggests that an I.Q. below 80, and low 
achievement, indicate a slow learner. 

The matter of organizing for instruction of slow 
learners has been given considerable attention. At one 
time, failure and repetition of a grade was the common 
practice. Opinion is growing, however, that in many 
cases repetition is not of much value. Although the 
practice of repetition still persists, innovations are 
being tried. 

One means of providing for slow learners is to 
segregate them, either within the class, by means of 
special classes, or by means of special schools. There 
are several types of organization on a n multiple-track’* 
plan, where provision is made for all grades of intel¬ 
ligence. 

Another approach to the problem is to reorganize 
the curriculum. One writer states that there are two 






















. . 

■ 

. 

... 














' 
















: 


























46 


methods of doing this, one consisting of lowering 
requirements, the other being a slowing down of the 
program, allowing the slow pupil more time to complete 
it. This is the main feature of Calgary’s Four Year 
Program. 


111. SOURCES OF DATA AND METHOD OF GROUPING 

All data were obtained from official files of the 
Calgary Public School Board. The sources consisted of 
reports dealing with achievement tests, intelligence 
tests, and year-end promotions. 

Achievement test data were made up of scores of 
all Grade 111 pupils who wrote a battery of tests in 
May, 1958. The arithmetic test, Measuring Power in 
Arithmetic, consisted of three sections, Understanding 
Arithmetic, Using Arithmetic Accurately, and Solving 
Problems. There was a total raw score of 125 which 
was used in the data. The Dominion Achievement Test in 
Silent Reading, a diagnostic test in paragraph reading, 
was given. Raw scores were again used in all reports, 
the total being 28. For measuring spelling, the 
Edmonton Spelling Test for Grade 111 was used. This test 
had a possible raw score of 40. 

Intelligence test data were secured from the 
California Short Form Test of Mental Maturity. Mental 





. ' DM , - - ‘ ' , ' 




















. 

.. 







47 


ages were obtained from these tests. 

To determine the type of program each child 
was following, an examination of promotion reports 
for each individual school for the years 1955? 1956, 
1957, and 1958 was necessary. This provided the names 
of 2662 pupils in the normal Three Year Program, 139 
in the Four Year Program, and 104 Repeaters. 

Experimental groups were set up by matching 100 
Repeaters with 100 Four Year pupils, matching being 
done on a basis of sex and mental age. Sixty-two boys 
and thirty-eight girls were finally selected to form 
the Repeater Group, with a mean mental age of 112.15 
months, and a standard deviation of 11.80. The propor¬ 
tion of boys to girls was determined by the available 
number of each in the Repeater population. When 
selected, the Four Year Group consisted of sixty-two 
boys and thirty-eight girls, with a mean mental age of 
112.15 months and a standard deviation of 11.70. The 
Three Year Group was formed of a stratified random 
sample of sixty-two boys and thirty-eight girls obtained 
from the normal population of 2662. 

IV. ANALYSIS OF THE DATA 

All test scores for the pupils were listed for 
each experimental group. These scores consisted of 















. - 1 








' 




■ 



48 

mental age, arithmetic raw score, reading raw score, 
and spelling raw score. Means and standard deviations 
were found for each group, in each subject. 

In order to compare the matched groups, the Four 
Year Group and the Repeaters, correlations were found 
for the normal Three Year Group between mental age and 
subject scores. The t-test for matched groups was then 
used to determine significance of differences. It was 
found that there were no significant differences, at the 
.05 level, in any of the subjects tested. 

The Four Year Group and the Three Year Group were 
compared using the formula for unmatched groups. Signif¬ 
icant differences were found to exist at the .01 level. 

As a supplementary means of comparison, cumula¬ 
tive frequency graphs were prepared, showing group achieve¬ 
ment in each subject. 

V. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

FOUR YEAR GROUP AND THE REPEATERS 

The fact that there was no significant difference in 
achievement in arithmetic, reading or spelling appears to 
indicate that the Four Year Program is not superior to 
repetition of a grade. Before accepting this as true, 
further study should be made to discover if the program is 

















49 


being adversely influenced by some unknown factor, or 
factors. There is a possibility that the program is 
not operating as it was meant to operate. In some 
instances, a very small group of Four Year pupils is 
found in a large class of Three Year pupils. Teachers 
can forget the aims and techniques of the program and 
can allow the larger group to dominate. There is always 
a danger that the Four Year Group may be made to adapt 
itself to the course followed by the other group. 

Classes may be combined, resulting in Four Year pupils 
actually being instructed in the same manner as Repeaters, 
either repeating work already learned, or skipping sec¬ 
tions of vital importance to them. To prevent in¬ 
correct practices in teaching, the Four Year Program needs 
careful organization and supervision. Both teachers and 
principal must be constantly vigilant to see that the 
spirit of the program is respected. 

In the subject arithmetic, there seems to be some 
superiority on the part of the Four Year Group, since it 
does achieve a mean 2.7 points higher than the Repeaters. 
Although not statistically significant, this higher 
achievement might indicate that arithmetic is best learned 
by the slow learner in a slow steady continuous method, 
rather than by repetition of one particularly poor year's 


work. 




50 


There are valuable aspects of the program 
which have not been measured. The social and emotional 
effects of failure and repetition of a grade have often 
been decried. The undesirable features of failure may 
not exist in the Four Year Program. This aspect should 
be examined before forming final conclusions regarding 
the success of the program. 

FOUR YEAR GROUP AND THREE YEAR GROUP 

It was found that significant differences do 
exist between the Four Year Group and the Three Year 
Group, in all subjects examined. It is therefore 
evident that the extra year of instruction was not suff¬ 
icient to bring the slow learners up to the Three Year 
standard. It may be that the ratio of four years to 
three years is not realistic, and one of five to three 
might be correct. A modification of the curriculum 
might be necessary if further study indicates that the 
four years is insufficient to cover the course. 

When the results in arithmetic are examined on 
the cumulative frequency graph, it is noted that 55 
per cent of the Four Year pupils scored above the lower 
quartile score of the Three Year pupils. 70 per cent 
of them scored higher than the 15 per cent level of 
the Three Year pupils. Since Grade 111 pupils scoring 









. 























'51 


above the 15 per cent level are usually considered 
for promotion, this would indicate that a large per¬ 
centage of the Four Year Group did satisfactory work 
in arithmetic in Grade 111. The program may be con¬ 
sidered to have achieved a good degree of success in 
this subject. 

The success attained in reading by the Four 
Year Group was much less than in arithmetic. Here 
only 35 per cent scored above the lower quartile of 
the Three Year Group. Only *+5 per cent scored above 
the 15 per cent level. There is a slight degree of 
success shown here, but some investigation should be 
done to discover reasons for the lack of greater achieve¬ 
ment . 

In spelling only 25 per cent of the Four Year 
Group scored above the lower quartile of the Three Year 
Group. Only 35 per cent scored above the lower 15 per 
cent of the Three Year Group. This indicates a very 
low rate of success in teaching spelling within the 
program. A careful investigation should be made for 
causes of this. 

In conclusion several other specific suggestions 
are given, 

1. The Four Year Program should be continued 
until much more research has been done upon it. This 





















































. 














52 

should include a careful survey of social and emo¬ 
tional aspects. 

2. An investigation into school organizational 
practices would show various methods, and perhans find 
one of particular value. 

3. Teachers and principal should be well pre¬ 
pared and adhere to the spirit of the program. 

4. The curriculum should be examined to see if 
curtailment or modification is necessary. 

5. Reading practices should be studied and 
improved. 

6. A similar examination should be made of 
spelling practices. 

7. Further investigation should be made of the 


various aspects of the program as it continues in 
operation. 





-53 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

A. BOOKS 


Burt, Cyril. The Backward Child . London: University 
of London Press, 1937- o°4 pp. 

Featherstone, W. B. Teaching The Slow Learne r. New York: 
Bureau of Publications, Columbia University, 19^1. 

100 pp. 

Gates, Arthur, A. T. Jersild, T. R. McConnell and R. C. 
Chellman. Educational Psychology . New York: The 
MacMillan Co.', 19^9. ' 818 pp. 

Ingram, Christine P. Education Of The Slow Learning Child 
New York: World Book Co., 1935* *+19 pp. 

Jenkins, Gladys, and Helen Shacter, and William Bauer. 

These Are Your Children . Chicago: Scott Foresrnan and 
Co., 19 ^ 9 . 192 pp. 

Kennedy-Fraser, David. Education Of The Backward Child . 
London: University of London Press, 1932. 25*+ pp. 

Macomber, Freeman G. Guiding School Development In The 

Elementary School . New York: American Book Co. 1935* 
385 PP- 

Pittenger, B. F. Local Public School Administration . 

New York: McGraw Hill Book Co., 1951. 512 pp. 

Reeder, W. G. The Fundamentals Of Public Schoo l Adminis¬ 
tration . New York: The MacMillan Co., 19*5-1. 798 pp. 

Yeager, William A. Administration And The Pupil . New York 
Harper and Brothers, 19*+9. ^3 PP* 


B. JOURNALS 


Charvo, Mayme, and Dorothy Hamlin, w Considerations in 
Adjusting The Instructional Program For Exceptional 
Children, m California Journal Of E lementary Education 
XXV: May, 1957. pp. 216 - 26. 




















































54 


Clarke, S. C. T. "The Effect of Grouping on Variab¬ 
ility In Achievement At the Grade 111 Level,’" The 
Alberta Journa l of Educati o nal Research . IV:3? 
September, 1958. pp. 162-171. 

_ "Promotion Practices and Policies in 

Alberta Schools," The Alberta Journ al of Educational 
Research . 1:4, December, 1955* PP- 24-347 

Dunlop, G. M., S. Hunka, H. Zingle. "Individual Differ¬ 
ences in Alberta Schools," The Alberta Journal of 
Educational Researc h. 1:4, December, 1955? pp. 5-l4. 

Hightower, Howard W. "'Individual Differences," Educa ¬ 
tiona l Administration and Supervision . 4l:8, 
December, 1955? pp. 458-61. 

Maclin, Gladys M, "Differentiation of Courses Of Study 
In Denver for Slow-Learning Children," Elementar y 
School Journal, 30:2, October, 1929? pp. 104-10. 

Powell F. "A. Critical Evaluation of the Detroit Begin¬ 
ning First Grade Intelligence Test,"' The Alberta 
Journal of Educational Research . 11:1, March, 1958 
P. 30. 


C. ENCYCLOPAEDIA 

Monroe, (Ed.) "Grading and Promotion," A Cyclopaedia 
Of Education . New York: The MacMillan Co., 1918. 


D. REPORTS 

Department of Education, Alberta. Promotion Policies 
Report . 1955* 

E. UNPUBLISHED MATERIALS 

Calgary Public School Board, Division 1 Reports . 1954. 

___., Guid e For Promotions . April, 1952. 

____, Organization For Effective Learning . 

September, 1954. 

_____? Teacher’s Handbook, 1958, 23 pp. 





















































































































































