For Reference 















€tx OEMS 

IWMWIISK 

MMOaMEMlS 











Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/evaluationofsomeOOchar 


SYNOPSIS 


The purpose of this study was the evaluation of some 
aspects of art education in Alberta. 

The history of Alberta art education revealed many 
recurrent weaknesses and difficulties. The history also 
showed that these difficulties and weaknesses were apprec¬ 
iably lessened on the appearance of five influencing factors. 
These factors were as follows: 

(1) the employment of special art supervisors; 

(2) the attendance of teachers at summer schools for 
credit in art courses; 

(3) the acquisition by teachers of adequate teacher 
training; 

(4) the development by teachers of a suitable attitude 
towards art; and, 

(5) the special certification of teachers for teaching 
art. 

The art programs for the three levels of school organ¬ 
ization were studied to discover what made up the program as 
outlined. The aims of these programs were subsequently studied 
to discover what the programs were supposed to achieve. Sub¬ 
sequently a questionnaire was evolved for use with two groups 
involved in education: school superintendents and teachers. 

The data from the two sets of questionnaires agreed 
with considerable consistency, and pointed to two general 
conclusions. First, it was concluded that in all three levels 
of school there was insufficient opportunity for all school 

iii 













































: 





, 



children to experience art education. Secondly, it was 
concluded that in all three levels of school there was 
less than desirable progress towards achieving the aims 
of art education. These conclusions were supported in a 
subsequent study of samples representing the average art 
work from the three levels of school. It was therefore 
generally concluded that there was only partial attainment 
of the aims set forth for the art programs in the province. 


iv 












< il . ■ .jr. ,, ,/ :■) ■ ; i 







* 

. ■ i: . ^..'v ■ ?■ 

, 

' 













TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PAGE 

INTRODUCTION. 1 

CHAPTER 

I A BRIEF HISTORY OF ART EDUCATION IN THE PROVINCE 
OF ALBERTA .. 6 

II AN EXAMINATION OF THE PRESENT ART PROGRAM .... 36 

III AN ANALYSIS OF THE OBJECTIVES OF THE ART 

PROGRAM. 65 

IV THE METHOD EMPLOYED IN THIS STUDY . 6? 

V TREATMENT AND ANALYSIS OF THE DATA . 92 

VI CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS. 131 

BIBLIOGRAPHY. 140 

APPENDICES . 144 

A. Facsimile Standard Five and Six Drawing 

Examinations . 144 

B. Facsimile 1907 Professional Drawing 

Examination .. 146 

C. Facsimile 1909 Professional First and Second 

Class Examinations. 147 

D. Art Requirements for Teaching Certificates, 

1907 . 14S 

E. New Course of Study, 1912. 149 

F. Recommendations of the Eighteenth International 

Conference on Public Education . 154 

G. Questionnaire to Superintendents. 160 

H. Questionnaire to Teachers . 164 


v 

























- 




* 


j -ut ' - •’ .• ±L : .. 






\ 











TABLE OF CONTENTS 


(Continued) 

APPENDICES PAGE 

J. Questionnaire Study: Data for the Senior 

High Schools.. 16$ 

K. Questionnaire Study: Superintendents 1 Comments 

on the Senior High School Art Program. 171 

L. Questionnaire Study: Teachers* Comments on the 

Senior High School Art Program. 173 

M. Samples of the Average Two-dimensional Art 

Work from Alberta Schools. 175 

N. Informal Evaluation of the Examples of the 

Average Two-dimensional Art Work from Alberta 
Schools. 209 

O. Questionnaire Study: Data for the Junior High 

Schools . 211 

P. Questionnaire Study: Teachers* Comments on the 

Junior High School Art Program. 214 

Q. Questionnaire Study: Superintendents* Comments 

on the Junior High School Art Program. 215 

R. Questionnaire Study: D a ta for the Elementary 

School. 216 

S. Questionnaire Study: Superintendents* Comments 

on the Elementary School Art Program. 219 

INDEX . 220 


vi 
































i 






LIST OF TABLES 


TABLE PAGE 

I. Distribution of Superintendent Evaluations on 
the Attainment of Aim One of the Senior High 
School Art Program. 95 

II. Distribution of Teacher Evaluations on the 

Attainment of Aim One of the Senior High School 
Art Program. 95 

III. Distribution of Superintendent Evaluations on 
the Attainment of Aim Two of the Senior High 
School Art Program. 96 

IV. Distribution of Teacher Evaluations on the 

Attainment of Aim Two of the Senior High School 
Art Program .. 97 

V. Distribution of Superintendent Evaluations on 
the Attainment of Aim Three of the Senior High 
School Art Program. 9& 

VI. Distribution of Teacher Evaluations on the 

Attainment of Aim Three of the Senior High School 
Art Program. 9& 

VII. Distribution of Evaluations on the Attainment of 

Aims of the Senior High School Art Program . 99 

VIII. Relative Order of Evaluations on the Attainment 

of Senior High School Art Aims . 100 

IX. Summary of Junior High School Elective Art 

Courses .. 103 

X. Distribution of Superintendent Evaluations on 
the Attainment of Aim One of the Junior High 
School Art Program. 104 

XI. Distribution of Teacher Evaluations on the 

Attainment of Aim One of the Junior High School 
Art Program. 104 

XII. Distribution of Superintendent Evaluations on 
the Attainment of Aim Two of the Junior High 
School Art Program. 105 


vii 





















LIST OF TABLES 


(Continued) 


TABLE 


PAGE 

XIII. 

Distribution of Teacher Evaluations on the 
Attainment of Aim Two of the Junior High 

School Art Program . 

106 

XIV. 

Distribution of Superintendent Evaluations on 
the Attainment of Aim Three of the Junior High 
School Art Program .... 

10 ? 

XV. 

Distribution of Teacher Evaluations on the 
Attainment of Aim Three of the Junior High 
School Art Program... 

107 

XVI. 

Distribution of Superintendent Evaluations on 
the Attainment of Aim Four of the Junior High 
School Art Program... 

108 

XVII. 

Distribution of Teacher Evaluations on the 
Attainment of Aim Four of the Junior High 

School Art Program.. . . . ... 

109 

XVIII. 

Distribution of Superintendent Evaluations on 
the Attainment of Aim Five of the Junior High 
School Art Program ..... 

109 

XIX. 

Distribution of Teacher Evaluations on the 
Attainment of Aim Five of the Junior High 

School Art Program... 

110 

XX. 

Distribution of Superintendent Evaluations on 
the Attainment of Aim Six of the Junior High 
School Art Program... 

111 

XXI. 

Distribution of Teacher Evaluations on the 
Attainment of Aim Six of the Junior High School 
Art Program . 

111 

XXII. 

Distribution of Superintendent Evaluations on 
the Attainment of Aim Seven of the Junior High 
School Art Program ...... 

112 

XXIII. 

Distribution of Teacher Evaluations on the 
Attainment of Aim Seven of the Junior High 

School Art Program... 

113 


V11X 























LIST OF TABLES 
(Continued) 

TABLE PAGE 

XXIV. Distribution of Evaluations on the Attainment 

of Aims of the Junior High School Art Program .. 113 

XXV. Relative Order of Evaluations on the Attainment 

of Junior High School Art Aims . 114 

XXVI. Distribution of Superintendent Evaluations on 
the Attainment of Aim One of the Elementary 
School Art Program. 117 

XXVII. Distribution of Teacher Evaluations on the 

Attainment of Aim One of the Elementary School 
Art Program. 11$ 

XXVIII. Distribution of Superintendent Evaluations on 
the Attainment of Aim Two of the Elementary 
School Art Program. 119 

XXIX. Distribution of Teacher Evaluations on the 

Attainment of Aim Two of the Elementary School 
Art Program 119 

XXX. Distribution of Superintendent Evaluations on 
the Attainment of Aim Three of the Elementary 
School Art Program. 120 

XXXI. Distribution of Teacher Evaluations on the 
Attainment of Aim Three of the Elementary 
School Art Program .. I .. 120 

XXXII. Distribution of Superintendent Evaluations on 
the Attainment of Aim Four of the Elementary 
School Art Program... 121 

XXXIII. Distribution of Teacher Evaluations on the 
Attainment of Aim Four of the Elementary 
School Art Program. 121 

XXXIV. Distribution of Superintendent Evaluations on 
the Attainment of Aim Five of the Elementary 
School Art Program. 122 

XXXV. Distribution of Teacher Evaluations on the 
Attainment of Aim Five of the Elementary 
School Art Program. 123 


ix 


















.. 








: 











w'.. !•.! 
















LIST OF TABLES 
(Continued) 


TABLE PAGE 

XXXVI. Distribution of Superintendent Evaluations on 
the Attainment of Aim Six of the Elementary 
School Art Program... 124 

XXXVII. Distribution of Teacher Evaluations on the 

Attainment of Aim Six of the Elementary School 
Art Program. 124 

XXXVIII. Distribution of Superintendent Evaluations on 
the Attainment of Aim Seven of the Elementary 
School Art Program. 125 

XXXIX. Distribution of Teacher Evaluations on the 
Attainment of Aim Seven of the Elementary 
School Art Program. 125 

XL. Distribution of Superintendent Evaluations on 
the Attainment of Aim Eight of the Elementary 
School Art Program. 126 

XLI. Distribution of Teacher Evaluations on the 
Attainment of Aim Eight of the Elementary 
School Art Program .. 127 

XLII. Distribution of Evaluations on the Attainment 

of Aims of the Elementary School Art Program .. 127 

XLIII. Relative Order of Evaluations on the 

Attainment of Elementary School Art Aims . 12& 


x 

















. [Ci ' \ 















LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


GRADE PAGE 

I wax crayon painting . 177 

I collage; drawing coloured in wax crayon, 

mounted on coloured ground ... 177 

IV "The Nativity," wax crayon painting.179 

IV tf A Drowning Accident,"... 179 

V water colour..... 181 

V "In The Maple-Sugar Bush,". 183 

V "Travel,". 183 

V pencil drawing. 185 

V pencil drawing. 185 

VI pencil drawing. 187 

VI wax crayon painting (monochrome) . 187 

VI "Woody Wood-pecker,". 189 

VI Two Christmas card designs .. 191 

VII crayon batik design. 193 

VII painted pencil drawing... 193 

VII crayoned pencil sketch .. 195 

VIII collage; pencil drawings on coloured paper, 

cut out and pasted on coloured ground . 195 

VIII Two potato prints... 197 

IX linoleum block-prints. 199 

"Naturalistic craft," . 201 

Shaded pencil drawing .. 201 

(Art 10) "The White Mustang," pencil drawing . 203 

xi 





























f 




- 




% 



■J ' 




























LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


(Continued) 

GRADE PAGE 

(Art 10) india-ink and pencil crayon . 205 

XI (Art 10) india-ink with pencil shading. 207 

XI (Art 10) coloured pencil sketch .... 207 


xii 









- 

„ ... „ 







INTRODUCTION 


During the past fifty-one years the Annual Reports 
of the Department of Education have, almost without ex¬ 
ception, criticised the art program or its implementat¬ 
ion. Also, during this time there has been only one record¬ 
ed study of art education in Alberta . 1 2 This study found 

that *®not only (was) art often poorly taught; it (was) 

2 

just as often neglected . 11 This pointed to the need for 

further study of art education in Alberta. 

Background of the Study . It is characteristic of 
school programs that they should be periodically evaluated 
to be certain that the aims of a program remain valid and 
that there is progress in achieving the aims of that pro¬ 
gram. This is no less true of the art program than any 
other area of education. 

It was in view of the lack of such studies in the 
field of art education, and the frequent criticism of the 
art program by school authorities, that this study develop¬ 
ed. 


1. J.A.Forbes, Art Education - Its Cultural Basis, its 
Development, and its Application in Alberta Schools , 
(•unpublished Master®s dissertation, The University 
of Alberta, Edmonton, 1951) 

2. Ibid ., p.77. 






























. 

* 




. 

« 

- 



























2 


The Problem . The problem of the study was to discover 
to what degree the aims of art education in Alberta were be¬ 
ing attained. Such a study necessitates an evaluation, which 
poses two main considerations: 

(1) what is expected of a certain course of action, and 

(2) what is actually being attained? 

By applying these two considerations to an evaluation of art 
education it was necessary to know what the program and its 
aims were, and then attempt to discover how well these aims 
were being achieved. 

Limitations . This study was limited mainly to an ev¬ 
aluation of art education in the province of Alberta in terms 
of the aims of the art program in the elementary, junior high, 
and senior high schools. Resort to publications relating to 
the program and its aims was limited to the years prior to 
1956, while the experimental design was executed in the spring 
of 1957 . Bibliographic material was limited to those public¬ 
ations which had direct bearing on the problem, and which 
were available before the spring of 1957* 

Definitions . 

Aim -- The term is used synonymously with the term objective , 
as some publications tend to use the two terms interchange¬ 
ably. It is defined as the anticipated outcomes of a program 






. }L • . V •• 1 

c - . ... • .• • : i'i \ . •: 

* 

f 

. 


* d ~ .■ C 

<i -x.: ■ J 

. - .... 




• ? 

* 




. 


■ • t 1. ••> >r.v , ,, 

i ‘ ■ , , •• ; 


. 


3 


or part of a program, which are the goals of that program.3 

Art - It is conceived as a subject in its own right and as 

h 

a means of expression in the visual media• 

Creativity - The personal and inventive expression of the 
child, or individual, making full use of his potential 
power. Creativity gives a sense of confidence and satis¬ 
faction, as opposed to sterile imitation of another*s work.^ 
Expression - The extension and expansion of one’s perceptions 

and values through visual materials thus revealing one’s 

6 

perceptions and values to others. 

Other terms presenting difficulties in conveying 
intended meanings are defined as they occur in the text. 

Basic Assumptions . Two basic assumptions were est¬ 
ablished in the preparation of this study. As the purpose 
of this study was not to question the art program and its aims 


3* Cf. Curriculum Guide for Alberta Secondary Schools , 
(Curriculum Branch, Department of Education, Edmonton, 
Jan. 1, 1950) p. 10-11. 

*+. Cf. G. B. Groves, ’’The Eighteenth International Confer¬ 
ence on Public Education, Geneva, 1955," Journal of the 
National Art Education Association . IX, (January, 1956), 
P* 19. 

5. B. P. Genignani, ’’The Gifted Child in Art,” Seventh 
Yearbook of the National Art Education Association , 

(State Teachers’ College, Kutztown, Pennsylvania, 1956), 

p. 10. 

6. R. Hurst, H. Sutton, and J. Schwartz, ”A Study of Some 
Values Held by Students in Courses in Teacher Education 
in Art,” Seventh Yearbook of the National Art Education 
Association . (State Teachers’ College, Kutztown, 
Pennsylvania, 1956), p. 29 . 






















; 




, 




. 




< 

, 










* 






- . - . 

- - 

■ 

' 









b 


it was assumed that the art program and its aims as outlined 
by the Department of Education were valid. Secondly, it was 
assumed that an individual judgement is usually subject to 
limitations imposed by time, place, and availability of 
information. Therefore, the collective judgement of those 
co-operating in the questionnaire study was considered 
valid. 


Plan of Procedure . Chapter I was designed to provide 
background to the problem by surveying the history of art 
education in Alberta. This utilized a bibliographic approach 
based mainly on the annual reports issued by the Department 
of Education. 

Chapter II is an analysis of the subject of this 
study: the art program. This analysis was conducted in terms 
of pupil needs, pupil activities, teacher activities and 
the supplies and materials required to implement the art 
program. The source of information was Department of 
Education Bulletins on art education. 

Chapter III was designed to analyse and comment on 
the aims of the art program, these being the specific 
aspects of art education under study. Information was 
derived from the Department of Education Bulletins on art 


education 












■ 










. 








- 

. 

























5 


Chapter IV outlines the experimental design, which 
is a questionnaire study. 

Chapter V is a discussion of the data derived from 
the experimental design. 

Chapter VI deals with the conclusions made from the 
data. In addition, a part of the chapter deals with some 
recommendations which arise out of the conclusions. 


/ 













* . 




. 




CHAPTER I 


A BRIEF HISTORY OF ART EDUCATION 
IN THE PROVINCE OF ALBERTA 

This chapter is designed to provide a brief historic 
outline of art education in Alberta since 1905. As it is 
not within the purpose of this thesis to develop the topic 
fully, the material is limited to the aspects of art educ¬ 
ation under study. This outline traces the development of 
the art program and its objectives, and notes contemporary 
evaluations. Thus, some perspective on art education and 
insight into the present art program should be established. 

This survey is divided into four sections broadly 
representing fairly distinct periods in Alberta art educ¬ 
ation. In each section the type of program will be considered 
in addition to the teacher training required to implement 
that program. Also, some consideration will be given to evalu¬ 
ations of the art activities in the schools as made by offic¬ 
ials of the department of Education. 

The Initial Years 
(1905-1912) 

From 1905, the year marking the establishment of 
the Provincial Department of Education, until 1912, there 
was very little change in the program of art education 
for Alberta schools. 











* 


c 

• ' . ' 

, ' >s•' : : 






- . . 














<■ 


< «• 



* 



7 


The Program . The art courses, termed drawing , were 
to be taught as ”added means of expression” in which pupils 
were to draw in their blank books after observing type solids 
and objects. It is of interest to outline these courses. 

The work of Standard One required the teaching of geo¬ 
metric forms from the type solids and objects* Thus, the 
sphere, cylinder, and cube, as well as ”similar forms natural 
and artificial” were taught in terms of their wholes and parts 
(surfaces, edges, corners) in addition to the relationships 
and comparisons of these parts* Also, there was to be illus¬ 
trative sketching in connection with nature study. 

The work of Standards Two and Three continued that of 
Standard One and included the same type solids studied as new 
bisected wholes. Consequently the hemisphere, half cylinder, 
half cube, square prism, right angled triangular prism, and 
”similar forms natural and artificial” were studied, A s in 
the previous Standard the parts, surfaces, edges, corners, 
faces, and the relationship and comparison of these were to be 
taught. The geometric figures (triangle, square, rectangle) 
were to be taught from the solid forms. Classes drew objects 
based on these figures as well as illustrative sketches in 
connection with nature study. 

The studies of the three earlier Standards combined to 
form the basis for the work of Standard Four. The basic type 









• t . 



t t <; ; 


t * 

» 










, < 









* 


, . ■ ■ ■ t 


• 







. ' ' / '' V ' * 

.... 

* 


. 











solids were studied as variations: spheriod, ellipsoid, 
ovoid, cone, circular frustrum, pyramid, and square frustrum. 
The course included the teaching of the terms: circumfer¬ 
ence, diameter, radius, arc, centre, focus, and axis. As 
before, pupils did illustrative sketching in connection with 
nature studies. 


The drawing courses of Standards Five and Six were 

designed as courses in representation, construction, and 

decoration. Both were obligatory subjects and terminated by 

7 

Departmental examination. 


The Standard Two schedule of equipment, as suggested 

to School Trustees, serves to illustrate the type of art 

equipment in use at the time: 

pictures 

drawing boards 

blackboard compass 

sand modelling board 

sets of geometric solids 

coloured sticks and slats 

sets of Prang T s drawing models g 

box of coloured crayons (chalk) 


Reference to both the program as outlined above, and 
the examination papers of the period provides an indication 


7. Annual Report . Department of Education of the Province of 
Alberta, 196*7, P« $5 ff* 

See Appendix A. 

6 . Ibid ., p. 67 

It is of passing interest to note that some of these ma¬ 
terials were required "to provide busy work for Standard 
One." 





t ' • • • t . ■ 

~y- • ..yy. . •. * : ono ho/ 0, lee: f; ;,y . .odT 

. ’ . •. y.. . ' - ‘ O’ ..: < t ' t • . : : 

' • • /./... ■: o / :' •' , ■ ■ o . .. : ... .'. * . , :v . ■ 

o*:i: . L.y; y/: . ;/;*/.■/. ;yy.' '/.■;• , : *.yoy ... o.-r- y..'./ 

. . ■ / ■ ■ t . • ' 

• v o . : C:/v . .: ‘... . yi- . ■ y. \ r- 


* 

o - o v)J : ;*..o. ^o.,; 

r . -Ot : . O- ' .0. 

: - 'O. : ■ V* ‘ r. ' 

■ 

T ■ ■ 

■ 

< • ■ ’■' —c / - y ; , ; 0 y y, . ■ 






. . 1 . y v 

• ; V • 

• : - . . .. 

’ 

-«o.:./y 1 .... ..... Lo 

. 




9 


of the nature of the art program as well as what was expected 
of the student.9 One cannot escape the impression that the 
art program was primarily concerned with the visual represen¬ 
tation of objects which demanded close attention to factual 
detail. The whole approach to art appears to have been 
mechanical, similar to the art program in English schools 
dating from 1&5Q which has been described as a set course of 
study that was arranged in a scientific manner. Tomlinson 
wrote of this English art education as follows: 

Children were required to draw lines of varying pro¬ 
portions; these were developed into cubes, pyramids, 
and prisms; subsequently curved lines were developed 
into spheres, cylinders and cones. 10 

Writing on this approach to art as practised in the schools cf 

Ontario at the turn of this century Gaitskell termed such art 

t! Linear Drawing, n adding: 

Students were expected to perform a prescribed list of 
exercises in a prescribed manner. In the classrooms 
of the state-supported schools, skill, techniques and 
photographic copy of the objects drawn and painted 
were the values to be most admired. Little opportunity 
was afforded the child of expressing a personal view¬ 
point in his art. 11 


9. See Appendix A. 

10. Tomlinson, R. R., Pictures and Pattern-Making by Children. 
London, Studio, 1934, p» 10. 

The similarity between the English and Alberta programs 
probably explains the praise given to the teachers from 
England by the inspectors in their annual reports, such 
as those of 1912. 

11. Gaitskell, C. D., Art Education in the Province of 
Ontario . The Ryerson Press, Toronto, 1948, p. 8. 











41 



















• 






























„ . 

. 

i 








<' 











- 



























«• 
















; 





JL 



t 














. 










« 

■ f-U', 


, ■ . ■ 
c - , ? • 

* ■ * $ u ■.'•>. . , e 

■ 

< '■ - ' •• ' ■ • : : 

* X 

;[.f :• - < 

• • t • c < t 



10 


Teacher Training in Art . Reference to the problems in 
teacher training in art education does much to complete the 
picture of contemporary art education. The Department of 
Education annual reports for this period reflect considerable 
difficulties in the training of teachers for the art program, 
which must have inevitably affected the teaching of art in 
the schools. Mr. George J. Bryan, Principal of the Alberta 
Normal School, wrote in his 1907 report to the Department that, 
n . . . Drawing, (and) Art Work in its various forms, . . . 
are receiving increasing attention. It is impossible in a 
four month course to deal with these subjects in a thorough 
and systematic manner. . . n Subsequently he proposed an in¬ 
crease in the time devoted to teacher training as a means of 

12 

overcoming this difficulty. In his report for the ensuing 

year the Principal repeated this same criticism, and indicated 

that on completion of additional Normal School facilities a 

13 

longer course could be given in art. 

The certificates issued to teachers in Alberta during 
this period ensured some degree of training in art. 1 ^ 


12. Annual Report . Department of Education of the Province 
of Alberta, 1906, p. 39. 

13. Annual Report , Department of Education of the Province 
of Alberta", 1907, p. 3$* 

In this report the Principal expressed his impression 
that much more was being attempted in art education in 
some of the American cities he had visited than was 
being done in the schools of Alberta. 

14. Ibid ., p. 102. 

See Appendix D. 








...... 




v ■■ ■ . ... o' . 






■ 


- 










. 




J ! 












. t 




. . '■ . ' . 

■ 


Ox. 






i 1 -"t 

t 


- - ■ ' * 

* : . . 

- 

■ i - - - O v) j 










11 


Examination papers for the First and Second Class Professional 
Certificates reflect the type of art training received at the 
Normal Schools during this period. 3 ^ a s i n ^he case of the 
papers for the Standards Five and Six the Professional papers 
indicate a concept of art education that was, to say the least, 
highly prescriptive. 


Contemporary Evaluation . The reports to the Department 
of Education by the inspectorial staff provide an evaluation 
of the art program and the attainment of its objectives. 
Throughout the period under consideration there was not much 
favourable comment on the art program. Initial reports speci¬ 
fied art as receiving the least attention of any subject or 
indicated no progress at all in the subject. Writing in 190$, 
Inspector Ellis of Edmonton stated: 

Except in the short term school, the programme is 
fairly well followed. There is still, however, a 
lack of systematic work in nature study, drawing and 
writing. There may be some excuse, perhaps, with 
some teachers for slighting nature study, but I can 
see no plausible reason for discarding drawing and 
writing, two subjects which probably more than any 
others, illustrate the maxim ’Learn to do by doing, 1 
In an age like the present when the child is so often 
judged by what he can do one would expect to see the 
teacher err in the other extreme. 1 ^ 


15. See Appendix B. 

16. Annual Report , Department of Education of the Province 
of Alberta, 190$, p. 41* 









; ■ . si ■ ■ 

r. ■■'.iJi .i: ^ 




. 

' 


■ 












■ • 


. 


















■ ■ 




. . 

•. ' 


















; 




♦ 








-• ■ .. i .•. 


■ 




•>* . - 

* - ; < . 











12 


Evidence of the continuing nature of the problem is shown 
in the reports of the ensuing years when it was unusual 
for the inspector to report with favour on the teaching of 
art. These criticisms judged the teachers as not appreciat¬ 
ing the importance of such subjects as art, and not possess¬ 
ing sufficient knowledge of the subject. In sharp contrast 
to these unfavourable reports the urban areas of Calgary, 
Edmonton, Lethbridge, and Medicine Hat were reported to 
have suitable art programs due to the work of art super¬ 
visors. 

In referring to these examples one should keep in 
mind an approach to art in that particular period quite 
different to that of today. It should be noted that art 
was deemed to be a subject suited to systematic teaching, 
and it should be obvious from the above discussion that the 
lack of any apparent system in a program would probably 
cause it to be judged detrimentally. At the same time one 
should appreciate the concern expressed when the subject was 
deemed to have been slighted. 

The Introduction of the Twelve Grade School 
( 1912 - 1920 ) 

The Program . The school organization of eight stand¬ 
ards was changed to the twelve grade system in 1912. A new 
course of studies for Drawing in each grade also appeared 
in this year. This remained unchanged until replaced in 1920 . 



■ >. * ' r, 

. • 


* 

» 























- 








13 


These new courses were introduced as follows: 

Scope and purpose, - The work includes object, illus¬ 
trative and nature drawing, drawing to scale, letter¬ 
ing, colour study and colour work, and the study of art 
works. The object of the course is to develop a capa¬ 
city to use drawing as a common means of expressing 
ideas in masses, lines and colours; to increase the 
capacit}r of the pupils for the enjoyment of art and of 
nature through art; and to develop taste and accuracy 
in industrial work. The work may appeal to talent but 
should be valuable to all pupils on general grounds. It 
should be an expression of daily experience whether from 
casual observation, directed attention, incidents in 
daily life at home or at school, or from studies. 

The Course. - While all drawing resolves itself ulti¬ 
mately into representation, for convenience in teaching 
by organized progression, the subject is dealt with 
under representation, decoration, colour and construc¬ 
tion, the last named subject having relation princi¬ 
pally to the need for correlating drawing and the con¬ 
structive or industrial work of the two upper grades of 
the school. Decoration is an application of representa¬ 
tion through the conventional employment of types used 
in object drawing. While colour is made a separate topic 
and formal elementary lessons in colour seem necessary, 
it is expected that the subject of colour study will 
progress step by step with the work of representation 
and it should be studied with a view to progressive 
application to this work. 

Progression in Art Study. - There is no wide difference in 
the character of the work or in the educational results 
secured in the teaching of art in the various grades of 
the public school, apart from the utility aspect of the 
subject as an aid to manual or industrial work in the 
upper grades. There is, however, a difference with re¬ 
spect to the application of principles to practice in 
the upper half of the school period in contrast to the 
work of the lower half, and some difference in respect 
to freedom in the matter of allowing for individual 
choice. In the main, the office of the teacher in the 
lower grades is to arouse interest in the pupil in using 
the crayon or brush as a means of expression, coupled 
with the securing of manual facility and the recognition 
and appreciation of colour. In the fifth grade, the 
formal principles of perspective, light and shade, and 
compositions are introduced, outdoor sketching is carried 













14 


on, and greater complexity is involved in the colour 
work in relation to representation and decoration* 

In the upper grades considerable elaboration in deco¬ 
ration and design is expected; considerable progress 
should likewise be observed in the art quality of 
pupil’s works. The employment of scale and plan work 
is made a part of the course for the last two years 
for the sake of those who do not secure this training 
in manual training departments.17 

As the outline for each of the grades was quite similar to the 

former program it would appear that the same program had been 

utilized: merely recast into a new organization.*^ The 

studies persisted as predetermined, logically conceived 

entities arranged in a step by step progression. 


Teacher Training in Art . The type of training provided 

by the Normal Schools at this time may be ascertained from the 

report of the Principal of the Camrose Normal School: 

Art as a subject of instruction received about 30 
periods of fifty minutes each. Each period is used 
in part for instructional purposes, part for demon¬ 
stration as to a grade in school and discussion of 
method, and part for the suggestion of seat work 
growing out of the problem being treated. The course 
is divided approximately as follows: Pencils for ten 
lessons; crayons, five; water colour, eight; India 
ink and Japanese brush, four; charcoal, three; stick 
printing, two. In certain of the lessons, several of 
the mediums will be used. The importance of method 
is always kept before the class. The work is so or¬ 
ganized that the time the student required in the 
course outside the class period will not exceed one 
hour per w r eek. Suitable attention is also given the 
subject of picture study.19 


17. Annual Report, Department of Education of the Province 
of Alberta7 1912, p. 113 ff. 

IS. See Appendix E. 

19. Annual Report , Department of Education of the Province 
of Alberta, 1914, p. 52. 

























... > . 


- - . 




. . . .Lv 1 





• . * 




; ' 


5 ,. 

* ' t < 




,VI 









15 


That the limited four month training course for teachers was 

of some concern to the Department is shown in the 1917 Report 

in which it was stated, in part, that, "the limited time * . . 

which the prospective teachers are required to spend in 

training makes it impossible to do more than to introduce 

them to special subjects and to give them a point of view 

20 

regarding their place in the education of children," 

To meet the difficulties resulting from a short teacher 

training period the Department of Education established Summer 

School in the spring of 1913: 

Having adopted the policy of encouraging the develop¬ 
ment of instruction in the so-called special subjects 
and technical subjects in order that the schools may 
more adequately meet the educational needs of all 
children in the province, the supplementary training 
of teachers already in the service became a matter of 
immediate concern. To provide this training the organ¬ 
ization of a Summer School for the training of Teachers 
was authorized . . . .21 

Courses in art methods, design, drawing, and painting were 
offered. Art Methods I was concerned with such media as pencil, 
watercolour, charcoal, ink, crayon, paper cutting, and stick 
printing. The course was designed especially for teachers in 
the junior grades, with emphasis on methods of teaching the 
subject. Art Methods II dealt with making, collecting, and 
organizing drawings and pictures to illustrate phases of art. 


20. Annual Report , Department of Education of the Province of 
Alberta, 1917? p* 30. 

21. Annual Report , Department of Education of the Province of 
Alberta7 1914, p. 54* 











. • •••••■■ 

.. . : . ... - > ■ -- . - 

o 




■ 




r-o C'tOLi 


v . 






. ■ V ... : 


•X . ... /• J\ jl S . ' ■ '• ’ • 

J:Io"cci6- 






j. ’*■ . : ' . : : * 

0 ’b\ i. sit ■ ' -- . : : ' ' • . 




: ■ 




•rv'ies 

.< 

• . ' ■ . ' *. '. ..: 




« 


■ . ; ... ■. .. 






. ... ' , v ;:j . ,.. ./ 


' 


. 

. X 






. 

. 





16 


Design I was intended to give an insight into the teaching of 
design, the appreciation of beauty and the understanding of 
fundamental principles underlying arrangement and colour har¬ 
mony. It included historic examples of art, lettering, pic¬ 
ture composition, crafts decoration, and the use of stencils. 
Drawing and Painting I was offered to give increasing power 
in drawing and to develop a refined colour instinct by means 
of representation in charcoal, pencil, and watercolour. 

Painting and Drawing II was designed to carry on this work 

22 

at an advanced level. 

The summer sessions proved to be popular and drew in¬ 
creasing numbers of teachers. A special certificate was 
devised for teachers who completed thirty-three hours of 
instruction in each of the following courses: 

Design I Design II 

Drawing and Painting I Drawing and Painting II 

Art Methods I Art Methods II 

By 1917 eleven persons had completed qualifications for this 

^Elementary Art Certificate.” The intention of the Department- 

in devising this certificate is clear from the following 

statement by the Director of Summer Sessions: 

. . . teachers who hold (an art certificate) are in 
a position not only to teach the general subjects of 
the school course successfully, but also to strengthen 
in a definite and effective manner the instruction in 
the subjects in which they have taken special training. 


22. Ibid .» p. 5$ f 




' 

■ 

' 

. 


■ . ... 

. ; ... v'.' . .. '... ■ * V ' L ... • , 1 • 

. . \ 

. 

' • ■ : *. 

; ' 


: 


. •' ... . s , L 

' 

. 

• /: ... '• 




■ •: : 

'• ' ■ - - - ■ - ' 

■ : : ■■ V ' ;■ - ' ■ \ 








17 


By a wise selection of staff a local School Board 
employing a number of teachers can have at least one 
of them holding special qualifications • . ..3 


Not only was valuable art training provided for the 
teachers at summer school, but also during the winter under 
special arrangements made in Edmonton as reported by 
H r . J. A. Fife: 


During the year much interest has been shown in the 
improvement of teaching of the special subjects of 
the school course. By the co-operation of the Super¬ 
intendent, the Supervisors, and the Board, special 
courses have been given for the teachers in . . . 
art . . . and by arrangement with the Department 
special certificates are granted to those who satis¬ 
factorily complete the (course). This (course) has 
been largely attended, and much fresh interest has 
been created . . .. 


Contemporary Evaluation . Dne is impressed with the 
concern expressed by the educational leaders of the time on 
the value of, and need for art in the schools, as evidenced 
in their reports, and the establishment of summer courses 
in art for teachers. 

Host inspectorial reports of the period related that 
art was not well taught in the non-urban areas. They stated 
that art was either taught incidentally, or that it received 
scant attention, or that it was dealt with in a mechanical way. 


23 . Annual Report , department of Education of the Province 
of Alberta, 1917 5 p. ^5* 

2t. Annual Report . Department of Education of the Province 
of Alberta, 1916, p. 56. 


























' 

„ „ * 


















- 


. 


















Much concern was shown for the future of art education in the 
country schools, during the war period one inspector wrote 
of the wartime influence on some teachers who thought they 
should cling to what they thought were the w essentials” of 
education, omitting art. Another expressed the opinion that 
improvement in the rural schools would come only when there 
was a greater supply of qualified teachers available who 
were interested in the work. 

On the other hand conditions in the urban schools were 
reported differently. In his 1915 report the Edmonton Inspect¬ 
or noted a marked improvement in the teaching of art, and a 
corresponding improvement in the work done by the pupils. He 
attributed the gains to the stimulus given to the teaching 
of the subject by competent supervisors; to the interest taken 
in the study of art by the Art Society in Edmonton, many of 
whose members were teachers; and also to the influence of the 
summer school .^ Another inspector, on the subject of summer 
schools,wrote that, ”by degrees the good influence of the 
Summer School is becoming more apparent. It is seen in the 


25. Ibid ., p. 23 f. 

Tt is of interest to note that while the Edmonton School 
Board saw fit to employ four Domestic Science Super¬ 
visors they employed only one art supervisor. 

It is also worthy of mention that free art supplies at 
a cost to the public of fl.06 per pupil possibly 
contributed to the improvement of the work done by 
the pupils. 















i! 

; ' : ", :. v'' ; 

{ ■ : 

' 

• <■ 

, 

■ 

* 

- 

„ 







19 


efforts at teaching Drawing and Art . . . and in increased 

26 

professional zeal.” The pedagogical principles employed 
at this time in art education are evident from the complaint 
made that teachers seldom, if ever, made finished drawings 
in the presence of pupils to inspire good work. 

It is of importance to note other factors which influ¬ 
enced the development of art education during this period. 
During 1914 a special course was held for the benefit of the 
inspectorial staff. This course included ten 90 minute periods 
on art, amounting to approximately one-tenth of the instruct¬ 
ional time. During this same year special teachers and super¬ 
visors were recognized for grant purposes. This would natur¬ 
ally have had the effect of increasing the number of such 
personnel. At the same time large cities received a grant 
of twenty per cent towards teachers 1 salaries and ten 
per cent towards the cost of equipment, with more liberal 
grants made available to the smaller centres, aiming to assist 
in providing specialists and equipment in the special subjects 
area. 


Other factors influencing the art program were the in¬ 
troduction of new drawing books and the publication of an 
”Art Outline” by the Department. The Edmonton Inspector 


26. Annual Report , Department of Education of the Province of 
Alberta, I 9 I 5 , p. 85 ff. 




















. 

' ‘ ' - c 

4 


. 



' 

. 


' . 


* ' ‘ ■ •: ' 














: c 











. 





* * e 






20 


stated that these outlines were placed in the hands of the 
teachers and were followed conscientiously under "the sympath¬ 
etic direction of the supervisors."^7 Perhaps the greatest 
factor of all, however, was the occurrence of the World War. 
The consequent demand for both manpower and goods inevit¬ 
ably affected education. 

The Development of Art as an Elective Subject 

(1920-1935) 

In 1920 the Department announced a system of elective 
subjects for the Secondary School. Art became one of seven 
elective subjects. The student had to select three of music, 
algebra, geometry, agriculture, household economics, manual 
arts, and art. Two years later there was a further change 
which made art an elective subject in grade nine in addition 
to grades ten and eleven. Art then became one of fourteen 
electives of which the student chose to take five. 

The Program . The nature of the revised program in 
art was expressed by the Inspector of High Schools in his 
1924 report: 

. . . The new Art course of the second year as organized 
has many merits and few defects. It provides good 
training in theory for those students who intend 
to enter the teaching profession, and it (provides) a 
fairly careful basis for those who are looking to an 


27. Annual Report , Department of Education of the Province 
of Alberta, 1920, p. 18. 

















* ; . -O' 

. 

e - c 

■ ? • 

, 


, 

. , - 












. 


. 









21 


Arts Specialists 1 Course. If the Course as outlined 
is satisfactoriljr covered and the theory with illus¬ 
trative work bound in book form, this book should 
serve the student with helpful reference material 
when he or she is called upon to teach the subject. 5 

.... The course is an improvement in its organi¬ 
zation or material and limitation of topics. The 
Design and Colour Theory as applied to life problems 
is interesting and useful. The Appreciation of 
Architecture and Fine Arts contains far too much 
work to be studied thoroughly in such a short time 
aside from the difficulty in obtaining prints of the 
different buildings called for. 2 9 

. . . The Picture Study arrangement is good, but the 
provision for this work is too expensive for the 
average school. The course does not make very clear 
just how much the student is expected to know about 
the very large group of pictures assigned. The elim¬ 
ination of Pen and Ink sketches, I think, is a mis¬ 
take, as the majority of the students thoroughly 
enjoyed this part of the work. It is impossible to 
cover the Course in the time allotted, that Is, to 
touch on all the topics outlined, but there is not 
sufficient time for working out original problems 
illustrative of the principles learned. Thus the 
chief value of the Art Course, inspiration for artis¬ 
tic and original ideas, is lost in an attempt to mas¬ 
ter rules of theory. There is a general complaint 
among principals of schools that too much home study 
time is spent upon this subject .30 

The conditions described above were to be met under a program 

revision established in 1927 so that art would Tt be within the 

31 

grasp of the student with average ability and good application. 


2S. Annual Report , Department of Education of the Province of 
Alberta, 1924, p. 20. 

Cf. post. p. 26 . 

29 * loc. cit. 

Respecting the term "Fine Arts" Faulkner has pointed out 
in Art Today (H. Holt and Company, New York, 1941) that 
it is not defensible, for !f . . . if a product is not 
T fine, f is is not art." 

30 . loc. cit. 

31 . Annual Report , Department of Education of the Province of 
Alberta, 1927, p. 11• 






: . . , : : i - . '■ :■ c . 
















? 













■ 


. 1 . ,'i ' ' 

- ' . 



22 


Furthermore, a Curriculum Review Committee met in 192S and 
as a result of their work three of the exercises in Art I 
and two of the exercises in Art II were shortened and 
simplified. 

It may be readily observed that the art program re¬ 
mained much as it had been in the past, although there does 
appear to be some shift in emphasis away from rules of 
theory towards the expression of original ideas as shown in 
the citation above. Still, the courses were essentially a 
very prescriptive series of exercises. Although there were 
nominal changes in the courses, particularly in Art I, it 
is apparent that there was no radical departure from the 
program or the methods of the previous years. In essence 
the program remained unchanged until 1935. 

Teacher Training in Art . Curing the period under dis¬ 
cussion new courses in art were offered at the summer schools. 
Thus, Art Appreciation, High School Art Methods, Primary Art 
Methods, Landscape Painting, and Still Life Painting were 
offered. By 1931 provision was made for a High School Art 
Certificate. This was earned by five teachers within two 
years. 


An indication of some failure in the art program of 
the schools was given in reports of this time by the Princip¬ 
als of the Normal Schools. They continually stressed that 
in such subjects as art few of the students had much 



. 

- 

? 

* 

c • * 


' - 

- - • • 

• ■ V' " 

< c c ;, ! 




. 

. 

* 









■ 






23 


training. This made it necessary for the lecturers to spend 
too much time on fundamentals and too little on method. 

Contemporary Evaluation . The prevailing mood of opti¬ 
mism expressed in the reports of the last period under dis¬ 
cussion was distinctly lacking at this time. Inspectorial 
reports less frequently mentioned art. For instance, the 
192 & report from the Department carried only one reference 
to art: that by the Bassano inspector who reported that while 
most subjects compared favourably with those offered in the 
city schools, art did not. Again, in 1931, it was stated 
that art was one of the subjects which needed improvement, 
but that the work done by a few showed that much could be 
done to put art on a footing with other subjects.^ 

During this period of economic decline, high school 
enrollment increased, but enrollment in art courses declined 
seriously. In one year alone (1923) enrollment in the high 
school art courses dropped by one-fifth, while in the follow¬ 
ing year it dropped by 1,036 students despite an increase of 
2,0&0 secondary school students.^ This surely reflects some 
of the difficulties expressed regarding the high school art 
program. The High School Inspector reported in 1925 that the 


32. Annual Report, Department of Education of the Province 
of Alberta, 1931, p* 35 ff. 

33. Annual Report, Department of Education of the Province 
of Alberta, 1924, p* 2£ 











: .. d, . .. . . / •' ' • * 1 : 


H 

■ I.-1C 

‘ * - . ' / . ■ ; ' 

• :: ■ o y;v. . ... 


; ■ 


. - • , i' . s • 




c • 




-v; 

<j . - t' $ - a ■ : 

- «■■ v ■■ 

' * . ' ■ . t 














.c 




. ,, 




. c .. • . C 

: . e • / c 











24 


grade ten art course was too burdensome, and that it took too 
much home study time. It was also concluded that the course 
was much too elaborate to be carried out successfully in the 
ungraded school. Some indications as to the burdensome nature 
of the courses may be gained from reference to examination 
results. Twenty per cent of the Art I candidates and thirty 
per cent of the Art II candidates failed their courses in 

o I 

1926. By 192& fifty per cent of the Art II candidates 
failed their course.It was suggested by another writer 
that these results indicate that the standards were set too 
high or else the teaching was too poor.^6 

High school standards in art varied greatly throughout 
the province in the non-urban areas, and inspectors reported 
their attempts to impress teachers with the summer school 
services to overcome these difficulties. One inspector re¬ 
marked that, except in rare cases, the standard art appreciat¬ 
ion pictures were lacking, and for no reason whatever not 
ten per cent of the schools had taken up Picture Study. He 
wrote: 

Consequently, senior pupils are losing the benefits 
of appreciation of fine arts for their later days and 


34. Annual Report , Department of Education of the Province 
of Alberta, 1926, p. 17. 

35. Annual Report , Department of Education of the Province 
of Alberta, 192£, p. 19. 

36. Forbes, J. A., o£. cit ., p. 65. 












25 


the juniors lose the benefit of a very useful device 
as a means of oral language and communication.37 

Later the Chief Inspector concluded that the cost of art 

materials tended to increase the neglect of such study. 

On the contrary, urban school art programs were judged 
to be much better. For example, in his 1930 report the Chief 
Inspector of Schools related that, Tl a high standard of work 
is attained in (art) for which special supervisors (have been) 
re-employed by the School Board. Art exhibits in the great 

3 $ 

majority of classrooms may be graded excellent.” 

During this period there were frequent references by 
the inspectorial staff on the value of fall fairs. They 
stated that the fall fairs not only increased and renewed 
interest of parents in school work, but had convinced them 
of the value of such subjects of the curriculum as art which 
were previously regarded with disapproval. 

A New Approach to Art Education 
(1935-1953) 

A new program for both the intermediate and high schools 
was established during 1935. The next year marked the introduct¬ 
ion of the Enterprise approach to education in the schools 
of the province. 

37. Annual Report . Department of Education of the Province 
of Alberta, 1932, p c 36 f. 

3 &. Annual Report , Department of Education of the Province 
of Alberta, 1930, p. 34. 





* 

e 


. < ' ' . 

, '■ .■ - 

■ be 

* 

f s-■ 


, i.} 

* . . j.' 

* 


e 

c ‘ c 








26 


The Program . The grade nine art program became one of 

three elective (or optional) subjects to be chosen by the 

student from a group of seven such subjects. Writing on these 

subjects the Superintendent of Schools stated that the courses 

were of three kinds, including: 

. . . those designed to develop cultural appreciation 
and to train for leisure time hobbies and avocational 
pursuits. Amongst these will be courses in music, 
art, craftwork, and dramatics. . .39 

Coupled with this new approach to grade nine art, the 
art courses in grades seven and eight were broadened and cor¬ 
related (when applicable) with other subjects, especially 
social studies. 


Art soon became the most popular option in the one room 

school, perhaps because of the new program, described as: 

. . . much more suitable for the average student than 
the former course, since it opens possibilities for 
work beyond mere pencil, pen and colour work in which 
many pupils never showed much interest or ability. 

An attempt is being made to develop in the pupils the 
ability to enjoy beauty in all phases of life.^ 0 


Writing on the new high school art program in 1940 the 

Superintendent of Schools observed: 

Provision is still made for some formal instruction in 
. . . art; but this instruction is not to be scheduled 


39. Annual Report , department of Education of the Province 
of Alberta, 1937, p# IS. 

40. Annual Report , Department of Education of the Province 
of Alberta, 193$, p. 15 f. 















* 


. 

t ' ne .• 

4 




c ; ' ' • 

• - < ' 

< 

■ 

‘ 

■ 

. , 


i 







27 


for regular classes, being given only as the need arises 
in the course of classroom activities.^ 1 

It is very apparent that the approach to art education had been 

altered. No longer was it conceived in terms of an imposed and 

fixed formula. As this art program is the subject of other 

chapters no further reference to it is necessary at this point. 

In 1944 a radio series on art began with a program en¬ 
titled, tT The Adventures of Canadian Painting,” one of a series 
of six C.B.C. broadcasts aiming to enrich the art programs in 
the Western provinces. The influence of these broadcasts dur¬ 
ing the past decade can only be guessed, but it would seem 
reasonable to suppose that they have benefited both teacher 
and pupil greatly. 

During 1950 Bulletin Three, Handwriting and Art, was 
distributed for use in the elementary schools. As this Bulle¬ 
tin is subject to close scrutiny in later chapters further 
reference to it at this point is unnecessary. 

Teacher Training in Art . Following the initiation of 
the new program, in 1935 the Summer School enrolled large num¬ 
bers of teachers. In addition the Banff School of Fine Arts 
offered courses of value to the teacher, and obtained a large 
enrollment. In the 1936 report on the Banff School there is 


41. Annual Report , Department of Education of the Province of 
Alberta, 1940, p. 64 * 






« 




V ■ 


■ 

4 

' 




' 



, , . 




«■ ' ' '* ' : ' ilc ru 


iy •- ' Ji\ ; : : C<j.' >1 ;<: ■ ; 'X 




, 

' 


• • * '• • 

■ 

• 






* 


■ 


• 






28 


evidence of some lack of direction concerning the new art 
programs 

Inasmuch as art is to take a prominent place in the 
new curriculum for Alberta schools, and there is a 
lack of definite leadership in this subject within 
the Province, I beg to suggest that there be secured 
an unquestioned authority in this subject, as it may 
be taught in the schools who may in the summer of 
1937 give a direction that will be acceptable and b2 
necessary if this subject is to function as it should. 

This request appears to have been heeded in some degree in 

the form of a visit by a Montreal art specialist in 1938 

to the Summer Session at the Calgary Hormal School. She 

gave courses in art and lectured on "present day trends." 


In 19*+0 the Superintendent of Schools suggested that, 
"an entrance requirement in music and art be set up for the 
students who enter the School of Education." He also suggest¬ 
ed that, "... Elementary and Intermediate School Certifi¬ 
cates should not include automatically certification in 
Music, (and) Art. ,,if 3 During the previous year it was noted 
in the Annual Report that a new four-year B.Ed. program 
would soon be established and would allow for specializ¬ 
ation in one of six optional subjects of which one was 
art. 


H-2. Annual Report . Department of Education of the Province 
of Alberta, 1936, p. 7*+* 

43. Annual Report . Department of Education of the Province 
of Alberta, 19^0, p. 30* 

Despite a long history of development towards special 
certification of art teachers, it was announced in 1953 
that special certificates would no longer be required 
for teaching Art 10 (Art I). 














■ 


; 




i >. ' 

. 






































. 





29 


Contemporary Evaluation . Reports from the Department 
of Education vary considerably during these two decades under 
study. Following the institution of the new program there 
was some difficulty in making provision for the grade nine 
optional subjects. "While art was among the three most common¬ 
ly chosen options, only a quarter to a third of the teachers 
were specially qualified. At the same time fewer than half of 
the eligible schools had a grade nine art program. Less than 
ten per cent of the schools offered more than three optional 
subjects. The first evaluative remarks on the new program 
appeared in 1936: 

There appears to be little change in the method of 
teaching this subject and little change in the 
standard of attainment reached by the pupils. The 
results are generally on a par with those secured 
under the old course, however, there is evidence of 
slightly increased originality in the pupil’s efforts. 44 

In dealing with this statement another writer pointed out 

that the author thought in terms of ’’art as skill” and seemed 

to underrate the "slightly increased originality” in the pupil’s 

efforts, ”... which if true must surely commend the new 

program.”45 


By 1950 the junior high school art program was criti¬ 
cized for being formal and technical rather than creative in 


44. Annual Report , Department of Education of the Province 
of Alberta, 1936, p. 74. 

45. Forbes, J. A., op . cit ., p. 66. 







- 

- 

- 








* 

1 - : 


t « 


, ,1 

... < 

. 


- 












t v _ .. c • 


, ' • ’ . - 


. 








30 


its approach. It was thought that it was too much concerned 
with establishing principles rather than dealing with act¬ 
ual experience in sketching and painting. 

Initially, art in the elementary school was strongly 
criticized as degenerating into mere seat work or busy 
work; however, it was reported that teachers were improving 
their qualifications for teaching the subject and "better 
results should follow in the course of time."^ In the space 
of a few years there seems to have been a considerable im¬ 
provement as it was stated in the 1939 Report that, % . . 
pupil accomplishments are remarkably good, and the subject 
is proving its worth for the attainment of purposes related 
to the inner self or personality of the learner."^7 This wa s 
the first evaluative reference in the Annual Reports which 
emphatically related art and personality. In previous Reports 
art was generally reported in terms of the art product or 
the methods employed in teaching the subject. Further 
evidence of the acceptance of the new program in the elem¬ 
entary school was given in the 193S Report: 

. . . the enterprise work has resulted in a better 
type of A rt Work. Pupils are commencing to express 
themselves in a wider range of media. %iny who cannot 


46. Annual Report , department of Education of the Province 
of Alberta, 1937, p. 64 . 

47. Annual Report , department of Education of the Province 
of Alberta, 1939, p. 63. 





* ' 

. . ; . . , C . : c ■ ■ 

... ; ....- • o ■ 

i • t " - r 

•: . , . ■ •?', • . ■■ 

- . 

. „ f c 

\ , • •. . . t . ... . 

Jb‘ - ' 

• '.rV *' 

• : • 

*,• • , ■ - : ■ , .. . 

- .. '. ■ . . ■- 

: 

* * * 

* 

* * c 5 

■ t :■ . ... 





31 


easily use pencil and paints can quite effectively 
express themselves by means of cardboard, wood, or 
scrap-book collections. The art training thus 
appears to touch a larger group of pupils.43 

Following the institution of the new program it was 
thought, as is shown above, that the program was well re¬ 
ceived by those who attempted to practise it. However, 
within the space of ten years it was concluded that there 
was really little evidence of change as, Tt . . . it is one 
thing to issue a new program but quite another matter to 
make a radical departure.” 7 


The high school art program seems to have had a simi¬ 
lar fate. In 1937 the Chief Inspector of Schools wrote that, 
tt . . • classes and teachers become so enthusiastic about the 
new course that it is not uncommon to have requests for . . . 

six of the optional selections in Art I instead of limiting 

50 

them to two.”*^ Of the grade ten options, art was among 

those most commonly selected. It was further stated: 

For too many years culture studies, Music and Art in 
particular, were not pursued with the earnestness and 
sincerity that are essential if their vitality is to 
be maintained and inherent values derived from them. 


4&. Annual Report , Department of Education of the Province of 
Alberta, 1933, p. 64 . 

49. Annual Report , Department of Education of the Province of 
Alberta, 1951, p. 43. This admission is surely deplor¬ 
able when one considers that the author was writing on 
the art program, the prime purpose of which as stated by 
the Department, was to give enjoyment through self 
expression. 

50. Annual Repo rt, Department of Education of the Province of 
Alberta, 1937, p* 43. 













, t ' ■ 














. • , 

V ‘ ■ ■ » ■ •• ■ • . v . . v .< v; i <■ s./ WOii 


■ 

* ' 

* . > 


■ { v •; 



















c.T V 

V 




32 


Under the new program along /a long7 delayed change 
for the better is provided and the indications point 
in the direction of more creditable progress along 
these lines.2l 


As in the case previously mentioned, a decade later it 
was noted that, f, in spite of the intent of the revised course 
in Art to stress the appreciation of Art principles in our 
everyday lives and surroundings a large number of teachers 
have not changed their procedures from the . . . drawing and 
painting of the traditional sets of 'plates.™^ Again, in 
the following year: 

. . . although the course (Art I) has been revised in 
the direction of greater emphasis upon the application 
of art principles in everyday life, teachers are gen¬ 
erally adhering to the traditional methods, with the 
sequence: memorization of theory and principle, prac¬ 
tice in drawing and the painting and preparation of 
T plates. 1 However an encouraging number now have 
pupils collect examples of attractive materials, make 
an inductive study of these to discover the principle; 
then collect, criticize and suggest improvements and 
finally attempt some original work .... As a sub¬ 
ject related to life it should surely have its appli¬ 
cation in the selection of things to be purchased, 
dress, home decoration, more than in drawing of land¬ 
scapes or still-life, but the treasured book of plates 
prepared at Normal School still tends to form the 
text-book for every course in art.33 


There was slight improvement in the art program in the 
high school reported in 1941: "Art is less formal than 


51. Ibid ., p. 66. 

52. Annual Report , Department of Education of the Province of 
Alberti^l935, ? p. 4&. 

53. Annual Report , Department of Education of the Province of 
Alberta, 1939, p. 65 . 

Cf. ante. p. 21 














c 





03 







33 


formerly, and the subject is more generally approached through 
the integrated program, with the result that art becomes a 
part of the home and school environment. Free drawing at the 
appropriate level, and creative art are receiving more recog¬ 
nition as forms of expression natural to child life. tf ^ How¬ 
ever any gains made were soon lost, perhaps due mainly to 
wartime pressures. There followed a steady decline in the 
number of schools offering Art I and Art II until: 

Occasionally it is offered in schools where a talented 
teacher is available . . . the inspectors encourage 
the inclusion of art and music in the programmes of 
the schools, having in mind . . . teacher training.55 

Summary 

This brief outline attempted to show the series of ef¬ 
forts made to improve instruction in art. Initially art was 
very formally conceived, limited in scope and rigidly fixed. 

At this time there was evident dissatisfaction with the 
methods of teacher training and qualification in art. Art 
was subject to constant criticism except where there were 
special supervisors in which case successes in the program 
were reported. 

The re-organization of the schools into the graded 
system and the attendant changes in the art program did not 

54 . Annual Report , Department of Education of the Province of 
Alberta, 1940, p. 74* 

55. Annual Report, Department of Education of the Province of 
Alberta, 194$, p • 48. 







w’.. ■ : >...•■ . ■ '■ ■ X. ’ ' •' , 

. • • ',/■ ,..” ■ O ■■■ oltiq 




‘ ■ - • u.E.t 


■ „ ' • : i • 

C v V, j. O-jL-J. . 3':: t C. : O. ‘i;. i-.‘ a '• . : 


■ 




o ■ 

■ * . * 


\ 

*J .. : ■ - 




>;< ot J - J' . . , \ 3 . /; j 

’ .. ' ■ :.t ’ ' ... . ■ v ■ ... vi , 

>'•* • X 3j. ■■ U ~ t .. . 7 1: .'j.:;'- v'tgy 

■ - ••• •• - - -i • " *. .... . .. </... i, 

* ' ‘ - - • . ‘ . ; 

* 

' i.-KK..:. . X lo i g,IT 

' - u ‘: v.: ' • -'.:r : i.i i 


\ ' 



■ 


V 

s 

/. 

a v/, :v;. .. 

. 


■ 

■ 



* 

% 

1 



34 


materially improve the teaching of art as its basis did not 
change. Nearly all reports on art instruction in the rural 
schools were negative in contrast with those from the urban 
areas which employed art supervisors. 

After the program was changed in 1920 the usual feature 
of the reports dealing with art was criticism, whether in 
terms of the course as offered or in terms of the teaching 
of the subject. According to the Annual Reports the only 
bright area in art education at the time seems to have been 
in the urban areas at the high school level. At this time 
there was a provincial failure rate in both Art I and Art II 
approaching fifty per cent, and a steady decrease in the 
number of students interested in art. 

The new approach to art education commenced in 1935, 

barely became established in the lower grades when it was 

interrupted by the war years. It is apparent that the senior 

art courses never did become what was intended of them, 

because of the resistance to change by the teachers, then 

because of the shortage of teachers by reason of the war, 

and finally because of the extreme teacher shortage summed 

up in the 1953 Annual Report thus: 

The serious dearth of teachers who are specially qual¬ 
ified to offer instruction in art ... is much de¬ 
plored by superintendents because they so frequently 
observe the difference between a mere average covering 


.... . 

. . .. ... ■ ■ •; ) ■ . ■ " ■ 

, 1 -orio viI , ,. < iv~n:$o'. 

t 

. 

■ 

K 

« . . 

» 

: - . . ’ ' 

, 

e ■ 

: 

* « - ' 


35 


of the course, on the one hand, and the high interest 
and rapid development of pupils under the leadership 
of an enthusiastic and capable teacher, on the other. 


56 


Despite brief successes the resources available did not 
appear to be sufficient. War, economic depression and develop¬ 
ment hampered the development of art education. There was 
apparently an almost continuous shortage of suitable teachers 
qualified to teach art. Those who were sufficiently qualified 
seemed centred in the cities. 


If frequency of mention in the Annual Reports of the 
Department is any guide, there are, historically, four factors 
contributing to the success of art education in Alberta: ( 1 ) 
special certification for teaching art; ( 2 ) well trained teach¬ 
ers with a suitable attitude and interest towards art; ( 3 ) the 
employment of art supervisors; and (4) courses in art at the 
Summer Sessions. 

Having dealt with the history of art education in the 
province it is necessary to turn to an examination of the 
present art program in Alberta. 


56. Annual ^enort . Department of Education of the Province 
of Alberta, 1953* P* 31* 






CHAPTER II 


AN EXAMINATION OF THE PRESENT ART PROGRAM 

As an evaluation of present art education in Alberta 
is the subject of this study it was necessary to examine 
the program of art education in the province as set forth 
by the department of Education. It is here intended to 
examine the art program as suggested by the department in 
bulletins on art. 

It was found that the material related to the art 
program presented in the departmental bulletins may be 
grouped according to four main classification which are 
at once major factors in the educative process. These factors 
are: (1) the relationship between the pupil and art, (2) 
pupil activities in the art class, (3) teacher activities 
in the art class, and (4) supplies and equipment required. 

The examination was conducted in terms of the four 
factors shown above as they applied to the three levels of 
school: elementary, junior, and senior high. It should be 
stressed that in each of the bulletins on art for these 
schools it is stated that the materials presented is suggest¬ 
ive only, and the teacher using the bulletin is expected 
to develop his own ideas for a suitable art program. 


■ ■ . / 

• . 

* ' 

rj 

, 

c . . . • ' .> . . 
} < 

'■ c . 

■ 

t ' *'. « • : 

e 

* 




The Pupil and Art 


Perhaps it might be said that the chief participant 
in any school program is the pupil. It follows that much need 
be known concerning the pupil and his relationship to the 
school program. in the area of art education one is con¬ 
cerned with several factors relating pupil and art. These 
may be considered as the psychology of creative expression, 
which includes such elements as mental growth, interests, 
attitudes and the nature of the creative process. 

This section on the pupil and art attempts to syn¬ 
thesize this basic material as it may be found in the 
current school bulletins on art education. 


The Elementary School . Bulletin Three on handwriting 
and Art for the Elementary Schools sets forth some of the 
basic processes of child art.^ This material is synopsized 
as follows: 

Pupils in their first grade of the Elementary School 
will be in their second stage of artistic development, 
known generally as the stage of Child-Symbolism . Dur¬ 
ing this period of creative effort there is an attempt 
to place everything in its environment when painting 
or drawing. The child possesses sufficient experience 
to create ideas derived from his home, or local act¬ 
ivities, and is filled with a vigorous desire to tell 
what he knows spontaneously and naturally. Thus, he 
represents people and things by self-devised symbols. 

He uses these symbols, and signs, as a means of ex¬ 
pression: as a primitive language. 


57. Bulletin Three, Program of Studies for the Elementar y 
School . "Handwriting and Art," Department of Educat¬ 
ion of the Province of Alberta, Edmonton, 1950, p.21 ff. 









* 

* '■ 

. 

. . . . 

• ■ ■ * - ■ , 







K 








* 



















His painting and drawing will appear flat and static, 
and fragmentary in its illustration. Subjects will 
not be easily recognizable. The child is primarily 
concerned with making big, vividly coloured pictures. 
Often, he will make n x-ray !T pictures, or paint all 
the faces of an object in his two-dimensional repre¬ 
sentation. He will exaggerate the appearance of ob¬ 
jects according to their importance to himself. He 
will often paint the sun, or part of it, in one cor¬ 
ner of his painting, leaving the sky and horizon 
unconnected. 

Gradually the child discovers that there is some re¬ 
lationship between his drawing or painting and reality. 
As he gains experience his power to tell stories in 
pictures increases. The child at this stage paints 
what he knows and thinks, not what he sees. Conse¬ 
quently his paintings will be based mainly on his own 
experiences, especially in the home. Considering that 
art is a form of expression suited to the child it 
should be possible for the child to use the particular 
method and materials to which he is drawn by tempera¬ 
ment, his need at the moment, and the stage of his de¬ 
velopment. It is therefore unlikely, and undesirable, 
that an art class be homogenous in impression or 
reaction because of these variations among children. 

Elementary School children reach a third developmental 
stage, the Pseudor eali stic , during which a transition 
from symbolism to realism occurs. This transition 
period is not an easy one for the child. He is no 
longer interested in geometric statements of objects 
and consequently seeks help with his expression. His 
work is marked by increased observation and experience. 
During this stage he becomes a conscious designer who 
learns how to use lines, masses, and colour. He de¬ 
velops skill in overlapping objects in his pictorial 
work. However, he craves a change in art technique and 
a variety of activity is needed to maintain his interest. 


A considerable portion of the material synopsized above 
from Bulletin Three is derived in whole or in part from a 
pamphlet published by the Ministry of Education of the United 
Kingdom and which is of recent date.^ It is noteworthy that 


58 . Ministry of Education of the United Kingdom, Pamphlet 
Number 6, Art Education London, 1946, p. 1 ff. 







1. Xj ‘ XIIW ■ • ■ ijliB ' ;i: u£iJ:£C{ 8X1! 

.. . i ,,I. /: Ifu . XV'jI'. >X... . 

. 

J ' . vl ■ t I ■-X ’ ■ n.:’ ' • i,.;.* - -shod 

. ■ - . .. I... : . I / 

c . .•: Jo . . .... ) I ■ '■ 1 OC'io 

* 

r 

. J. , .. ,, : " 

: 



: ;• i: 






10 i ' * 


■0: 0:i i 


: 










■il- . 








t' , l v 

' •• l ' -or-*:; ’...O ,.I J ;■ iQh^n.fc# 

* ‘ • •; - - . ' I. : • 


r J 






39 


this pamphlet stresses the emotional and physical development 

of the child in dealing with his artistic development, and 

that this basic interrelationship is maintained in Bulletin 

Three. One should not fail to mention that this recognition 

of the psychology of creative expression conforms to the 

spirit of recent developments in art education as exemplified 

by thirty-six recommendations put forth by U.N.E.S.C.O. on 

59 

art education. 


While not exhaustive by any means, Bulletin Three out¬ 
lines a concept of the relationship of pupil to art suffic¬ 
ient for the classroom teacher to form the basis for an art 
program. 


The approach to art education for the elementary school 

is similar to that expressed by D'Amico: 

The child is the potential creator. He is a free natural 
being. His creativeness is born of real enthusiasm and 
joy of expression. He has no competition to fight, no 
ma rket to please, no price to set. He belongs to no 
cult and knows no "isms'. 1 He expends his energy on 
drawing and painting as he does in play. Art with him 
is a form of play, the spirit and imagination at play, 
revealing the true, innocent, child-like self. u 


59. Recommendations of the Eighteenth International 
Conference on Public Education (Geneva, 1955) 

See Appendix F, recommendations 8 and 30. 

60. D'Amico, V., op. cit ., p.241. 

It should be pointed out that this book is cited as a 
primary reference for teachers in Bulletin Three, in¬ 
dicating the importance attached to the book in 
implementing an art program. 



















- 

. 




. 

























































. 

























. 


.... , ' . 

* 











40 


The Junior High School . It seems strange that the 
examination of child-art as in Bulletin Three is not reiter¬ 
ated in the art bulletin for the junior high school. However, 
the stage of artistic development to which most junior high 
school pupils conform is shown in Bulletin Three, and is 
synopsized as follows: 

The Junior High School child is usually at the stage 
of artistic development termed Realization and Awaken ¬ 
ing , during which he develops sufficient confidence in 
himself to feel capable of dealing with almost all 
subjects. The child is conscious of his emotions and 
is ready to hide his limitations by assuming an atti¬ 
tude of indifference. His work reveals an increasing 
interest in three dimensional representation and grow¬ 
ing ability to use proper proportions. He demonstrates 
a more discriminating choice of colour. 

It might be assumed that the teacher in the junior high school 

grades would be familiar with the bulletins for the elementary 

school, which is, indeed, suggested in the junior high school 

Bulletin on Art. However it seems to the writer that if the 

information on developmental stages in art is justified in 

the case of Bulletin Three it would seem to be equally so in 

the case of the junior high school. However, the preparation 

of this bulletin will be dealt with later in this chapter. 


The Junior High School Curriculum Guide does deal with 

the relationship between art and the pupil as follows: 

The Junior High School child shows the power in form¬ 
ing compositions in almost any subject in which the 
expression of ideas and emotions is important. His 
work will tend to be either that of the "visually 
minded” who is concerned with factual representation, 
or that of one who feels an emotional reaction to 




. * 



■ / ' . - : . . . - , 

. ' ' ' 

*x,j* . , v.iu ;> ■ 

Kij l j. \i. >■ ;; ,, ;; .. . 








. 




r --- '-■■■ V' \ C . ... /... : / ;jJ 


. .. 

* 

• • '• . ,t ■ 


' 

■ 








interpret certain feelings generated by the subject. 

Both attempt to express themselves by exaggeration 
and distortion in their representation. 

The child should feel that he is moving along steadily 
towards a satisfying experience in art. By developing 
a sense of what is pleasing and satisfying he soon 
learns that good design and colour are important. As 
there is no dividing line between art and craft he can 
express himself in different materials depending on 
what is available and the physical set-up of the school. 
He should have some opportunity to do group work.so that 
he may be induced to fit into social situations. 61 

As in the case of the elementary bulletin, the classroom 

teacher is given some background on the relationship of art 

and pupil upon which to formulate an effective art program. 

The material appears to be a logical continuation of the 

material presented in the elementary school bulletin. 


The Senior High School . Bulletin Seven, dealing with 
art at the senior high school level makes very little ref¬ 
erence to the interrelationship of pupil and art. It is simply 
stated that some students need art either as a subject, to 


61. Junior High School Curriculum Guide for Art , (interim 
edition), Department of Education of the Province of 
Alberta, Edmonton, 1952, p. 1 ff. 

It should be explained in passing that Viktor Lowenfeld 
uses the term haptic , derived from the Greek hapitkos . 
to describe the child "who refers more to subjective 
feelings as body feelings, muscle sensations, or kin¬ 
esthetic experiences. n At the same time he uses the 
term visual to describe the child n who refers mainly to 
visual experiences." (Viktor Lowenfeld, Creative and 
Mental Growth . The Macmillan Company, New York, 1950, 
p. 130.) 
























. 










. 

. 













* 























































. 






42 


correlate with home economics or farm and home mechanics, or 
to qualify for teacher training.^ 

While Bulletin Seven lacks such information the Curri ¬ 
culum Guide for Alberta Secondary Schools does contain some 
information on pupil needs and development, but only on a 
general level and not particularly appropriate to the art 
program. The Guide refers to the school program as meeting 
the needs and interests of both matriculant and non-matriculant 
by diversified but consistent activities. Students should be 
taught to use leisure time well and to develop capacities to 
appreciate beauty and nature. The Guide stresses competent 
guidance as a need of youth. 

There is, however, really nothing on the development of 
senior high school pupils in respect to their art education 
contained in either of the above mentioned publications. The 
writer feels this is a serious lack. Information on the inter¬ 
relationship of art and pupil is no less valuable at the senior 
high school level than it is at the junior level. There may be 
some excuse for this in view of the poverty of information on 
art education at the secondary school level. There is genuine 
concern over the problem: 


62. Bulletin Seven, Programme of Studies for the High School . 
Department of Education of the Province of Alberta, 
Edmonton, 1946, p. 1. 

At this time the art requirement for teacher training 
is no longer required. 






• « 


„ . 


C .. 




, iLC- ■ 

. K : : ^ • ... • : - 

. 

* 

m ■ ii■■ J i: ■ r-j'.'i 'v.., ■:/,= o .' 

* : 

/: . :■ .. \< • , ■ 

M 

. 




* . 

t ai fit <xo ! i < •• 

* .. 

: 









« . 

- -■ < 






^3 


’’Art Education and Adolescence,” . . . The crucial 
nature of this theme is immediately apparent to all 
art educators. Although problems at the elementary 
level are, by no means, solved, it is clearly at the 
secondary level that the greatest problems confront 
the field. ... A strong case needs to be made for 
the essential nature of art activities for all adol 
escents and its contributions to their development. 

Nonetheless, there is information of value readily available 

from the same sources that provided suitable material for 

the bulletins previously discussed. It appears that art for 

the secondary schools was thought of in terms of a subject 

per se, without reference to the psychological bases of art. 


Pupil Activities in the Art Class 
The term, ’’pupil activities” implies that period which 
occupies the major part of the child’s time during the art 
class. Considering that the child is the chief participant 
in the art program, knowledge concerning the nature of part¬ 
icipation is important. As in the previous section this 
examination is devised for each level of school. The exam¬ 
ination of pupils consists in noting the suggested activitie s 
and elaborating on media and materials together with con¬ 
sequent changes or development in skills, attitudes, ideas 
and interests. 


The Elementary School .The program of suggested act¬ 
ivities for the elementary school is well detailed, aiming to 


63 . Art Education . Journal of the National Art Education Ass¬ 
ociation, January 1957, X:l, p.4. 








. „ . „ 

' 











• 


• 


















I 




' 














- 














• I 









. . 















44 


give the child experience in the use of wax crayons, tempera 
and water-paints, clay, plasticine, and finger-paints. By 
the end of the elementary school period the child is also 
expected to have had experience in construction work, frieze¬ 
making, figure sketching, and illustration. 

Free Brush Work . The program suggests much free brush 
work, ignoring the use of pencils or other drawing 
tools or outlines. Using the brush the child would 
execute colour areas, colour patterns done to music, 
rudimentary figure drawing, action pictures, story il¬ 
lustrations, still life, or non-objective painting. 

As a result of this work his product will reveal in¬ 
creasing accuracy in observation with, perhaps, some 
feeling for roundness, or form, and proportion. His 
work should reveal experimentation in colour, rhythm, 
shapes and patterns. The child should learn to express 
the feeling for action in living, moving and active 
figures. 

Pencil, chalk and crayon work . The Bulletin suggests 
that the child work in pencil, chalk and crayon for 
sketching, figure drawing, frieze-making, outdoor 
sketching, and designing. This work will gradually 
reveal increasing discrimination and observation. The 
child should show interest in rendering distance, pro¬ 
portion, detail, and form. In the last three grades 
design exercises could be done using lines, shapes, 
border patterns, and abstract natural forms. 

Modelling . It is strongly urged that the child under¬ 
take other types of activities. It is suggested that 
modelling may be used to help the child master the 
concept of a third dimension. A The student may model 
in plasticine, clay, papier machS, flour and salt, 
starch and salt, or asbestos. Modelling as well as 
carving (from soap) will enable the child to express 
ideas in contour and dimension. 

Other Media. Some other ideas for child art activities 
are: lino-cutting and printing, finger-painting, spat¬ 
ter work, stock printing, potato-cuts, weaving, puppet 
making, toy construction, and torn paper work. In ad¬ 
dition the child may do lettering and poster-making 
which involves the making of an alphabet, planning 
letters, and spacing letters* 









9 














45 


Art Ap p reciation . Dealing with appreciation it is 
suggested that the child gains in his appreciation 
through the study of design and colour in natural 
objects, by studying Canadian artists and their 
works, by seeing the work of the older grades, and 
by working in an artistically designed classroom. 
Development in appreciation is also expected to stem 
from neat clothing and workbooks. 


Stress seems to have been placed on the child gaining 
in his ability to express ideas and feelings, which relates 
to the concept of child-art as a primitive language. The 
child is encouraged to develop a distinctive style in his 
work. It may be readily observed that the elementary school 
child can have an interesting program of activities, suited 
to his development, through which he may further develop. As 
Faulkner wrote on the subject of such a varied program of art 
activities: 

All of them offer genuine possibilities for expressing 
one f s own personality, for coming to understand the 
experiences of others, in short, for richer individual 
and social living.°4 

In addition, the bulletin contains considerable elaboration 
on many of the activities that may be undertaken, including 
some step by step procedures designed to assist the teacher 
in his preparation for class. 

The Junior High School . The child may elect to take 
art in one, two or three years during his stay in the junior 


64 . Faulkner, et al, loc . cit 















5 , 








h6 


high school, if the subject is offered. It is evident that 
the art experiences of children will vary according to the 
number of years they elect to take art, other factors being 
equal. The Junior High School Curriculum Guide suggests that 
the program be considered in two sections. The first section 
"may be attempted in any grade and continued with increased 
growth and profit and continued throughout the three years 
if so desired. All features should be attempted each year."^ 
The second section suggests a wide choice of crafts which might 
be attempted in any year. 

Although it is said that art and craft should not be 
separated they are in the bulletin under discussion. The first 
section, referred to above, deals with "art" w^ile the second 
section deals with "crafts." In the first section it is urged 
that the junior high school child gain experience in colour 
and design, illustration, non-objective painting, lettering, 
poster-making, and life drawing. 

In summary: 

Section A o The child would continue the illustration 
commenced in the Elementary school but would show increas¬ 
ed powers of composition. He would also continue life 
drawing and thus become increasingly aware of body move¬ 
ment, proportion, effects of light and colour, and the 
emotional factors involved in dealing with the subject. 

He would also do exploratory non-objective painting; 
experimenting with colour, colour shapes and 


65. Junior High School Curriculum Guide for Art , p.10 









47 


sizes, discovering colour harmonies, intensities and 
hues. In addition he would make discoveries on the 
function of light, line and form. Non-objective work 
could develop into abstract painting, from which 
could develop illustrative design or easel painting. 
In this way the pupil may find his best way of 
painting to permit the communication of thoughts and 
feelings. 

The student would also make posters and do lettering. 
In this activity he might letter notebooks, charts, 
displays, monograms, textile patterns, borders, or 
make abstract compositions. He would become familiar 
with Gothic, Script, and Roman letters. In making 
posters he would learn to determine good poster size, 
colour, illustration , and lettering suitable for the 
idea being expressed. He would learn to make quick 
thumbnail sketches, rough sketches, and experiment 
with colour as well as research for his ideas. 

It is further suggested that the child execute stage 
settings for school plays, make animated maps and 
charts, as well as sketching outdoors. 


The Guide specifically states that separate exercises 
on colour and design are not advisable, but that both colour 
and design should be part of every activity undertaken in 
both Sections A and B. 


The section on crafts offers a wide choice of activities 

that may be a valuable experience for the child, depending on 

class interest, materials available, and the physical set-up 

of the classroom. This section is summarized as follows: 

Section B . The child could work on lino-cutting to 
learn design suited to materials, good use of line, 
the use of light and dark values, and to gain a con¬ 
sciousness of form. The pupil might engage in stage 
craft; working on such things as the box picture, 
puppet stage, stage models, or stage design. The 
latter might include experience in painting backdrops, 
building scenery, making properties and costumes, or 
lighting, depending on the needs, interests and 
abilities of the child. 




'.'‘v *. 

* ' 

• L.'. 







' 








t 


t 





■ 







- 




L. \; 











£ 


. 


V 





. : ' , ■; w : 

- 

■ ' 1 J . ... . ■ -• ■ 

. 

s . 1 ' 

‘ t i. . c , ■ q 

• i: . i: i 


. 


bno'.'o ) 


* 



















Some children might engage in needlecraft, applying 
principles that they have learned. Others might do 
stencilling on paper or cloth using simple designs 
in one or more colours. Still others may do one or 
more of the dying processes such as tie dying, twist 
and knot dying, or crayon batik. Pupils would per¬ 
haps experiment and attempt multi-coloured dying 
using either an evolved or predetermined design. 

Other suggested activities include modelling, plaster 
carving and casting, soap carving, and experimental 
design in miscellaneous materials. Leathercraft is 
also suggested where tools are available. 

Appreciation . It is suggested that during the course 
of his work the child will derive a sense of appreci¬ 
ation from the work of others in his class, and from 
a study of the work of artists throughout the ages. 


As in the case of the elementary school bulletin, there 
are many and varied activities for the pupil during his stay 
in the junior high school. The Guide features detailed in¬ 
structions for many of the activities suggested as a help to 
the teacher in preparation for the class period. The Guide, 
when properly used, should assist in developing a suitable 
art program for the pupil. 


The Senior High School . The program of activities for 

students of the senior high school was considered in two parts 

Art 1 (10) and Art 2 (20). These are synopsized as follows: 

Art 1 . Students enrolling in Art 1 are expected to 
"take” Art Structure, Design and Colour, in addition 
to performing home assignments, and maintaining a 
portfolio. 

Art Structure . This consists of making static and 
rhythmic forms in areas, Notan and colour patterns, 
and border designs based on alternation and repetition 
of shapes. It includes a study of surface patterns 

















c 






; 






‘ 








and the geometric subdivision of areas, and the use of 
simple motifs. 


Drawing and Colour . Drawing consists of working out 
single objects in line, line and shade, in addition to 
working out groups of objects to emphasize composition 
Students would work in dry brush, charcoal, or wash 
drawings in making compositions based on cones, cyl¬ 
inders, cubes, and manufactured objects or figure 
poses. Work in colour would consist of working out 
value arrangements for five colours, and intensity 
scales of seven or nine steps. 

Illustration . This is an application of composition, 
picture study, colour, and posed figure drawing. The 
student might do pen lettering as tone patterning and 
space filling. In addition he would study open and 
closed letters, initials and space fillers. 

Creative Design . The student studying this would work 
in clay, soap and papier m&che. Perhaps he might do 
potato or turnip printing, stencilling or leathercraft 

Picture Analysis . The work in picture analysis is to 
strengthen the student's concept of design and dis¬ 
cover the relationship of the parts of design. 

Crafts . The student may engage in material design and 
execute such things as gate-leg tables, end-tables, or 
chip carving in the wood-working areas. In the area 
of metalwork the student may design for sheet metal 
problems such as for contour, repousse, etched and 
saw pierced designs. He might work on problems in 
cement and forging. 

Interior Decoration . If the student engages in prob¬ 
lems of interior decoration he would study materials 
and collect samples. Scale drawings and elevations 
would be made in the study of space, scale, ratio, 
pattern, plain areas, colours, and colour relation¬ 
ships in wall and ceiling areas and trim. 

Costume Design . The student engaging in this would 
continue drawing and utilize the figure drawings used 
in sketching periods. 

Appreciation. The student may correlate his work with 
Social Studies or Farm and Home Mechanics by the col¬ 
lection and mounting, and criticism of illustrations 
for their fitness of purpose. Thus the student may 
collect illustrations of tools, weapons, utensils, 

















s 





c 


.beau 





50 


adornments, and the arts of Babylonia, Egypt, Greece, 
Byzantium, and those of the Medieval and Renaissance 
periods. 

Art 2 . Six activities are listed of which four con¬ 
stitute one year’s work. 

Period Studies . A review of painting and sculpture 
from pre-historic times to the twentieth century. 

Creative ^Design . This consists of such activities as 
working in lacquer, oils, or water-colours. It in¬ 
cludes the use of size and tempera for the decoration 
of walls, furniture, boxes, etc. He may do block 
printing for fabrics using bird, insect, landscape, 
flower or animal forms. Study would be made of 
rhythm, harmony, shape filling, line and mass. 

Illustration . The student would work on block printed 
illustration studying interchange, counterchange, 
stripe, ogee, brick, spot and sprig, diamond, square, 
and rectangular half-drop motifs. He might study 
illustration by pen, and wash and body colour. 

Lettering . If this study is taken the_student would 
study Johnson type, Roman and Modern Egyptian. In 
addition he may do gesso work, papier raach^f, and lino 
and wood printing. 

Painting and Composition . This includes still life. 

The student would do free hand work using charcoal, 
wash, and pen and brush. He would study composition 
of groups, rendering interiors, tree and plant forms, 
and flower forms. He would study landscape painting, 
as composition and interchange; figure drawing as 
construction, action, and proportion. 

Interior decoration . Those engaged in this study 
would continue the work of Art 1, studying proportion, 
uniformity, and functionalism. They would observe 
methods of treating surfaces and carry out full sized 
projects. 


It will be readily observed that there are a great 
number of activities that may be undertaken by the senior 
high school student. To the degree that organized activity is 
a valuable part of the art program, the courses are commendable. 









§ 










i 


t 







51 


It will be noted that the material contained in 
Bulletin Seven is not sympathetic towards the creative 
desires of students as is the case with the bulletins 
previously surveyed. At the same time it should be observed 
that the program becomes increasingly prescriptive through¬ 
out the three levels of school with respect to the activities 
that might be undertaken by the student. It would seem that 
as increasing attention is given to the attainment of skills 
and knowledge there is a decreasing interest in creativity. 

Teacher Activities in the Art Class 
It is here intended to summarize bulletin information 
concerning the role of the teacher in promoting effective 
pupil activity. As in the previous section, "teacher activity" 
implies that which occupies the major portion of a teacher*s 
time during the art period, contributing to the art education 
of the child. This includes knowledge and attitudes which the 
teacher takes into the class. 

In considering the teaching role this synopsis includes 
all that has been written in the appropriate bulletins and 
deals with this material under the following six generalizat¬ 
ions: personal preparation, preparation for classwork, motiv¬ 
ation, guidance, developing skills and knowledge, and evaluat¬ 
ing pupil work. 


























* 








# 

« . 










- r 

;■ 










1 

. 











































52 


The Elem en tary School . The teaching role in the 

elementary school art program was found to be as follows: 

Personal Preparation . The teacher must be able to 
recognize the signs and symbols of child expression, 
showing sympathy with that which the child wants to do. 

The teacher should know clearly what is wanted of art 
education and plan accordingly, following the suggested 
program and making such modification as may be dictated 
by local circumstances so as to foster sound attitudes 
towards art and develop skill and ability in art. The 
teacher must remember that the transition between 
Symbol ism and Realism is not an easy one for the child. 

He must overcome any false standards or perfection that 
may induce dictated lessons, copied pictures, or stilted 
results, and unenthusiastic children. Even if his own 
ability be not high, the teacher should attempt on all 
occasions to use art naturally and easily. 

Preparation for G l asswork . The teacher’s role is to 
see that opportunities and materials are provided to 
create the desire among pupils to engage in art activi¬ 
ties. He should prepare a file of visual aids materials 
for mounting in the classroom. 

Motivation . It is essential for the teacher to make all 
pupil contacts with art strong and favourable. The 
child’s first steps in art must be encouraged and his 
early mistakes minimized by the use of praise in gener¬ 
ous measure. The most important thing in the motivation 
of effective art work is to give the child some sense of 
personal achievement, some degree of success. The 
teacher should know how to stimulate the child to help 
him overcome timidity about colour and filling spaces. 

He might use nursery rhymes, stories or other subjects 
within the child’s range of experience. 

Encouragement is one of the major functions of the teacher. 
He should encourage the child to produce arrangements as 
they may be remembered or preferred, or give appreciative 
comments on interesting colours or shapes. He might en¬ 
courage those using unusual angles of perspective. Above 
all he must encourage the maintenance and confidence of 
the child in his own efforts. The teacher should en¬ 
courage the child to overcome his fears and help to es¬ 
tablish confidence so that the child will be able to rely 
on his confidence and imagination for creative ideas. 

Guidance. Teaching, coupled with the experience and 
practice of pupils, should enable children, as they 















•' . 















53 


progress, to acquire increasing control over tools 
and materials. Teaching consists of skill in know¬ 
ing how to lead when seeming to follow, how to 
inspire without unduly dominating, when to give 
instruction and when to stand aside and leave chil¬ 
dren to learn from their own self-guided efforts. 

He should supply proper guidance to reveal art prob¬ 
lems and art experiences to children but should not 
sell his ideas except to overcome inertia. 

Criticism should begin with praise, and be an honest 
appreciation. However, emphasis should be placed on 
the enjoyment in trying, and no attempt should be 
made to show the child how the work should have been 
done. 

Sufficient variety should be used to maintain interest, 
trying something different when the need for a change 
is apparent. 

Developing Skills and Knowledge . The teacher should 
not force the child to acquire advanced skill, but 
rather encourage individual style. The teacher must 
practise self-restraint and never touch up a pupil’s 
work or point out errors in perspective or proportion: 
instead he should encourage the child to observe more 
carefully when the child begins to notice his own 
errors. However, children should not be expected to 
have correct details in their work. At the appropri¬ 
ate moments the teacher might mention (but not insist 
on) improvements. He might, at the appropriate time, 
demonstrate how to mix colours and place them, and how 
to care for the brush. When the need arises, he might 
discuss questions of perspective, distance and form. 

When pupils become dissatisfied with their figure 
painting he might introduce ideas on how to observe 
people in action, and how to notice proportions in 
terms of head lengths. In so doing his aim should be 
to preserve the child’s freedom, encouraging the child 
to use this freedom and allowing him to grow through 
his own observation and effort. 

Evaluation . The teacher should freely display pupil 
work, taking care in the mounting and hanging of the 
work. Additionally pupils should be encouraged to hang 
their own work. However, the work should be removed 
between art periods to prevent copying. 










The chief factor in evaluation is the pupil. The art 
product is secondary to the development of the pupil. 
It is difficult to evaluate the art product because 
there is no accurate way of measuring development. 


In terms of the material presented in Bulletin Three 
the ideal teacher is primarily a sympathetic, informed indiv¬ 
idual whose main concern is in problems of motivation and 
guidance. As Gaitskell stated: 

Three generalizations can be made about the trend of 
teaching methods in art. First, considerable attention 
is being given to motivation, since it is believed that 
no significant expression can be forthcoming unless 
interest in a topic is aroused. Second, following 
motivation, situations are arranged in which pupils are 
faced with problems which they are expected to solve 
largely through their own efforts. Third, guidance is 
offered, but only when the pupil is ready for help and 
is personally aware that he needs help. It is claimed 
that these three methods tend to keep the art programme 
at a high level of creativeness, since provision is 
made for the pupil to act as initiator and con- ,, 

trolling participant of the activity which engages him. 


It might also be noticed that Bulletin Three contains 
an evaluation form for use by the teacher in assessing pupil 
work. This lists several areas in which pupils might be 
assessed, in addition, and perhaps more important, is an 
evaluation check list for self-evaluation of the teacher. 


If the teacher fulfilled the role set forth in the bull¬ 
etin it is quite unlikely that the children in the classroom 


66. Gaitskell, C. D., op. cit ., p. 11 





would have anything but an effective, enriched, and creative 
program of art education. 


The Junior High School . 

Personal Preparation . The art teacher should comprehend 
the relationship between art and society. 

He should study much from sources other than the Guide in 
order to develop a complete and purposeful art experience 
for the child. The study should include the community 
to see what it may offer for the art class. 

He should have a sound and thorough knowledge of colour 
and design so that he will be able to properly stimulate 
the child to see that it is made a part of each art ac¬ 
tivity. He should be able to recognize ability in 
pupils, and maintain class interest. He must be able 
to discriminate between the "visual” and "non-visual" 
type of child and be able to challenge both types. 

Preparation for Classwork . The teacher should program 
activities that attempt to fit the needs and interests 
of the children and which emphasizes creative activity 
that will develop a maximum degree of self expression. 

He will provide materials for the children to experiment 
with by adapting and changing techniques to suit their 
own purposes. 

Motivation . The explanatory or exploratory attitude 
should be allowed full freedom, for experimentation in 
various media in order to enable children to discover 
possibilities and limitations of each as a means to sat¬ 
isfy the urge to create. Creative expression without 
dictated lesson or direct criticism is desired. 

Guidance . The teacher should be able to give recognition, 
inspiration and guidance for the wide range of abilities 
found in all classes, with constant attention at all 
times to the discovery of special talents through wise 
direction and understanding. 

The teacher should call attention to the best in all 
fields; painting, sculpture, drawing, architecture, mo¬ 
tion pictures, and magazines. He should lead the child 
to discover and appreciate the contribution of art from 
all races and nations. It is his function to lead the 
child to realize that he has a vital part to play in 





















) 




* 












56 


contributing his share for the benefit of others. The 
teacher should facilitate study of artists 1 contribu¬ 
tions throughout the ages as a universal language 
where impressions of thought have been expressed. 

The teacher might lead the child to observe the impor¬ 
tance of good design and colour in the environment and 
dress. He should develop the child’s sensitiveness to 
his environment and encourage him to turn to it for 
incentive or to improve upon it. The teacher should 
strive to effect pupil recognition of the values of 
personal appearance, dress, poise, and grooming, using 
the home and family resources to teach effectively. 

It is urged that teachers develop the art program in 
harmony with the total growth of children, allowing 
for self-expression, extending the interests and capac¬ 
ities of the child. The program should reveal activi¬ 
ties which recognize the personal development of each 
child. The art product is subordinate to the total 
growth of the child. 

Developing; Skills and Knowledge . The teacher should 
enable the child to experience satisfying creative 
effort without causing him embarrassment through a 
lack of technical skill. He can provide an understand¬ 
ing of design, drawing and colour as steps in the 
sound knowledge and appreciation of art. He may en¬ 
courage space filling compositions, use of colour, and 
the use of observation and imagination in creating 
ideas. He may arrange exploratory lessons in non¬ 
objective art which encourages manipulation skills 
with the brush. The elements of art might be illus¬ 
trated by evaluating student paintings through experi¬ 
ence in colour, line, light and form. 

The teacher should challenge both the "visual" and "non¬ 
visual" type of child by encouraging the former to 
search out effects of light, body movement, proportion, 
etc., and the latter by stimulating the expression of 
feeling. 

Work should be provided in lettering, encouraging high 
standards, and developing habits of patience and ac¬ 
curacy in the students. He will help the child to 
grasp the principles of domination of ideas and arrange¬ 
ment of balanced parts through poster making. 

Evaluation. Direct criticism is not desirable. The 
child’s work should be judged according to adolescent 
capacities with allowances for the child to appraise 






. 

::j .iv.,.:.,' i-’v ‘'v: 

■ 

. 

-a n . : .V;, 

, 




■ ;;.=/■ . .■ ■: ' v,vv ; ■ ., \ J;: 

. .. • : 
r . 

. . . ■. . . , * ■ < 






t i«... 






his own work. The child should be helped to sense 
the need for self improvement. The teacher should 
display all the work of the child. 


57 


As with the previous bulletin under discussion the use 
of an art activity evaluation form is suggested in appraising 
the work of the children. It is readily seen that the pro¬ 
gram is a logical continuation of that in the elementary 
school. The program appears to be in keeping with contemporary 
developments in art education. 


The Senior High School . In this section we shall con¬ 
sider the Art 1 and Art 2 programs together. 

Personal Preparation . The teacher should become 
thoroughly acquainted with, the course in Art 1 and 
its objectives, details and methods. 

Art 2 is to be offered only by teachers qualified 
through advanced training in art and present day 
methods of art instruction. 

Preparation for Classwork * Teachers are urged to use 
the Bulletin Seven outline as a flexible guide for 
both Art 1 and Art 2. Exercises are to be planned 
after thorough familiarization and in keeping with 
the ideas of the course. The teacher may develop any 
phase of the program that is of interest. The course 
outlines are not restrictive. 

Motivation . Any phase of the art program that is of 
interest may be developed. Individual interest and 
originality is to be encouraged. It is urged that 
the class develop its own design problems. 

Guidance * The teacher is expected to apply principles 
of group dynamics and utilize direct experience as 
well as vicarious experience in the learning process. 
Provision should be made for individual differences. 

The teacher is expected to emphasize personal growth 
rather than mastery of subject matter; subject matter 
being considered the means to an end# 

























j J )ui saw 









vi 


■siJy.'i 




















58 


Developing Skills and Knowledge . In Art 1 the 
teacher should include the study of Art Structure, 
Drawing, and Colour in the work and elect subject 
areas from the remaining balance. The teacher might 
approach design by teaching application of design 
by filling areas with well balanced form and colour, 
and the development of line and mass problems. Draw¬ 
ing is to be taught as line, light and shade, and 
composition using objects and figures. The teacher 
is expected to develop a concept of colour as intens¬ 
ities, values, and its application to other areas 
in art. 

Evaluation , (nil) 


The role of the teacher, as suggested by Bulletin 
Seven, and in part the Curriculum Guide for Alberta Second¬ 
ary Schools , is notably lacking in comparison with the jun¬ 
ior high school and elementary school teaching roles previous¬ 
ly discussed. This may be due in part to the estimate that 
the senior high school teacher will be in possession of an 
adequate concept of his role as derived from other sources 
as a result of his increased training. T n addition we should 
note that there seems to be little continuity between the 
junior high school grades and those of the senior high school 
with regard to the teaching of art. 

Supplies and Equipment 

Each of the publications herein discussed suggests some 
of the materials and supplies required to effect the suggested 
program. These are listed for each type of school as follows: 




















- 













< 























, 
























The Elementary Schoo l, 

(a) Classroom equipment: 


59 


flannelgraph 
weaving looms 
bulletin board space 
available water supply 


(b) Tools and equipment: 

scissors 
bottles 
plasticine 
wax crayons 
oilcloth, linoleum, or 
varnished wood for 
plasticine work 
student’s eight colour 
boxes, or powder paints 

(c) Materials: 

clay 

paste 

gummed paper 
wrapping paper 
flour, or salt, or starch, 
or asbestos 
rainbow paper 


floor or desk easels 
examples of Canadian Art 
radio and/or phonograph 
equipment 

accessible primary 
reference materials 


coloured chalk 
pencils or crayons 
smocks or aprons 
clay modelling tools 
large water-colour brushes - 
long handled hog hair, or 
one-half inch varnish 
brushes 


old newspapers 
finger-painting materials 
quantities of waste materials 
coloured construction papers 
18 by 12 inch newsprint, 

craft paper, or mimeograph 
paper 


(d) Accessible references and equipment: 

Bulletin Three 

Primary references on art 

Secondary references on art 

(as listed in Bulletin Three, p. 45) 

16 m.m. film and filmstrips and projection equipment 
2 by 2 inch slides and projection equipment 
Audio-visual Aids Branch catalog, current edition. 


The Junior High School . 

(a) Classroom equipment: 
kettle 

basin or bowl 
bulletin boards 


letter press or mangle 
beaver board drawing boards 
examples of consumer design 











t '• 






;y.i : ■.; ::oo;r. c 7.y):G': xctc'1 

■ ' • 

' \ . „ 



« ... . ■> tj . ,i 

. 

... 











60 


(b) Tools and equipment: 

India ink 

poster colour 

penholders 

straight nibs 

brushes 

straight edge 

conte crayon 

china marking pencil 

hair brushes 

block-printing tools 

brayer 

printers ink 
glass sheets 
tablespoon or paddle 
turpentine or linseed oil 
charcoal, tempera paints, 
crayons or water-colours 


plasticine 

solvents 

electric light or flashlight 
wire 

scotch tape 
embroidery cottons or 
coloured wool 
sharp knives 
stiff brushes 
modelling tools 
dyes 
string 
beeswax 

soap and olive oil 
small, medium, and large 
spoonbill nibs 

one-half inch flat or number 
twelve round brushes 


(c) Materials: 


rubber cement and glue 
12 by 1$ inch newsprint or 
manilla 

18 by 24 inch papers 
cardboards 

white and black drawing 
papers 

rice and sugar papers 
carbon, graphite or chalk 
papers 

coloured cardboards and 
papers 

coloured cellophane 
flour sacking 
oilcloth or wax paper 
one-quarter inch brown 

inlaid battleship linoleum 


clay 

lumber 

cloth 

heavy cardboard or plywood 
rags 

scrap box of odds and ends 
black cloth or construction 
paper 

corrugated cardboard 
unbleached cotton 
stencil papers or stiff 
cellophane 

cottons or silk rayon 
boards 

Plaster of Paris 


(d) Accessible references and materials: 


lettering books 

examples showing the work of other artists 
counselling materials 

Junior High School Curriculum Guide for Art 

References suggested in the Curriculum Guide (p. 6) (p. 4 

in the 1955 ed.) . _ 

Art Appreciation pictures suggested m the Guide (p. 3oj 
(p. 36 in the 1955 ed.) 











61 


The Senior High School . 

(a) Classroom equipment: 

mounting boards 
press or mangle 

(b) Tools and Equipment: 

charcoal 

pens 

India ink 
spray gun 
oil paints 
size 

tempera paints 
wood blocks 
house paints 

(c) Materials: 

portfolio materials 
clay 

ingredients for: wax, 
fresco, egg, oils, and 
water-colour 

(d) Accessible references 


drawing objects 


brushes 

lettering nibs 
newspapers 
leathercraft tools 
water-colours 
colours 

lino-cutting tools 
wood-carving sets 


papers 

stencil papers 
lacquering ingredients 
linoleum 


and equipment: 


Bulletin Seven 

Coloured pictures as suggested in Bulletin Seven (p. 6) 
References for the various studies as suggested in 
Bulletin Seven. 


Despite some irregularities in the lists shown above 
one might assume that the teacher and pupil should have ade¬ 
quate supplies with which to carry out the suggested programs. 
Indeed, if the list of supplies could be used as an index to 
the program one might readily conclude that it is effective. 

Summary . Basically, both the elementary and junior 
high school programs, as indicated by the publications for 






a'Y't-u' ’ 

■ - 

o-y ' j. 

V x 

■ 



tv : J;j 


. - 


- 


- 


iJQ- 










. 














* 






: 



k>\ i, J v 






, 

; ' 1 ■ vt v' : J ; ■ 






. 

‘■>0 


. 


















62 


the teaching of art in these grades, seem to be on a contem¬ 
porary level of thought, especially in comparison with the 
information on the senior high school program. Indeed, some 
of the phrases used in Bulletin Seven seem to stem from the 
initial art program used in the province. 

One should not conclude this chapter without noting a 
few observations concerning the programs. If the developmental 
stage in creative art is important at the elementary school 
level, it is no less important at the junior and senior high 
school levels, and should be made a part of the course outline 
as in the case of Bulletin Three. This should be all the more 
true in view of art as a creative subject, and the emphasis on 
personal growth of the student. 

Many current writers stress the need to prevent the 
separation of art and craft in any way. This separation is, 
at least, suggested in both the junior and senior high school 
publications on art: first in the method of presenting art 
activities, and secondly in the suggested scheduling of these 
activities. 

As was previously noted there appears to be a tendency 
for the creative approach to art to diminish whereas the pre¬ 
scriptive approach and concern for attainment of skills and 
knowledge increases in the progression from Bulletin Three to 
Bulletin Seven. One might well wonder if it would not be true 



63 


that a constant concern for creative art throughout the 
grades would not only develop a high level of creativity but 
a correspondingly high level in the attainment of skills and 
knowledge* The organization of the senior high school courses 
seems to reject, or at least neglect, what is an accepted 
principle in teaching techniques in the preceding grades; 
"should techniques be taught? Surely the answer is that 
help should be given when the need is felt — when it is 
asked for."^7 

Those concerned with art education in Alberta are 
hopeful that the elementary bulletin which has been dis¬ 
cussed will soon be revised, as it has been in circulation 
for many years. The Junior High School Guide has been in use 
for four years and has been found satisfactory by the 
Curriculum Committee and the teachers using it. The Super¬ 
visor for Art in the Edmonton public school system finds 
that it requires supplementary suggestions due merely to 
its limitations as to size and simplicity. The present 
senior high school bulletin on art is presently undergo¬ 
ing revision* 

The preceding discussion is not intended to be evalu¬ 
ative, but rather to be informative and to provide background. 
The purpose of this study was not the evaluation of the art 


67* Tomlinson, R. R*, op « cit *, p. 34. 



- 

t - ■ * 


- ' i: ' r, • 

, 

; . 

. 

, - 

- i 

, ' ■ ' ■ ' C ' 

< * , . 5 • 






program as set forth, but rather to evaluate the degree 
of success attained with the program, ft is therefore 
unnecessary at this stage to comment further on the 
materials presented in this chapter, before the evaluation 
could proceed it was necessary to know what the aims of 
the program are. Consequently, the analysis of the aims 
and objectives of the art program just examined becomes 
the subject of the next chapter. 


, . easooya lo 

.. ; . , ■ -St :-3 : '■ • ' 

. - ■ ■ . -a ■■ : • '■ ■■ 

.1 - a ■ 

■ - Ul: ■ 

e ^ : . - ' ■ ■ 






CHAPTER III 


A SURVEY OF THE OBJECTIVES OF THE ART PROGRAM 

Whereas the previous chapter was concerned with the 
program of art education in the schools of Alberta this 
chapter is devoted to a survey of the objectives of that 
program. As the objectives embody that which the program 
is to accomplish a survey of the objectives was considered 
fundamental to the entire study. 

The objectives under discussion were taken from 
Departmental bulletins on art education, ^or purposes of 
definition, the objectives of the art program were con¬ 
sidered to be the anticipated end results of the art 
program, or part of the program. The objectives discussed 
herein are of two kinds: those which are explicitly listed 
as objectives, and those which are implicit in statements 
on other considerations. 

Before proceeding we should note the basis underly¬ 
ing the art program and its objectives. Philosophical 
publications of the Department of Education set forth two 
major premises on which a program of art education may be 
based. The first major premise is that n the curriculum 
for Alberta Schools should be founded upon principles that 
are compatible with the ideals of Christianity and 








' 




. 





; ; ;J 






. 

\ " ' 






... ’ . •• 

. ... .v • : : 


t 

a 




' 

* 











66 


democracy. tf ^ The second major premise is stated as being 
one of the seven traditional values of democratic society. 
This seems to lend considerable importance to art: ,T . . . 
democracy values aesthetics in every phase of the environ¬ 
ment ."69 This is re-stated in the Curriculum Guide as 
tT . . .(art finds) realistic basis in the influence of 
our natural environment upon life, past and present. n 70 
Statements such as these lend considerable weight to 
the place of art in education. 

While it is not intended to refute these bases of 
art education one would wish for further amplification. 

For example, one is led to wonder if it is indeed true, 
and on what grounds, that art is one of seven traditional 
values of democratic society. While this may be conceived 
as undoubtedly true in the case of an idealized democratic 
society, it can hardly be verified by referring to the 
democratic society of today. One finds that the vast major¬ 
ity of the population is wholly unaware of art, or uninform¬ 
ed and antagonistic towards art, apart from that of the 
commercial variety. One cannot help but ask for more 


66 . 

69. 


70. 


Curriculum Guide for Alberta Secondary Schools , p. 1. 
Bulletin One, Foundations of Education, department of 
Education of the Province of Alberta, Edmonton, 

1949, P. 17. 

Curriculum Guide for Alberta Secondary Schools, p. 7. 














. 






» 

. 



. 
















< ...... . ... .- . c 






67 


than platitudes, as a more satisfactory explanation of 
why art education is important is required. 

It was found that the objectives as stated in the 
departmental bulletins seemed to fall into two main class¬ 
ifications* Some objectives related to art, while the 
remainder related to the individual and his relationship 
to the community. This corresponds to Gaitskell's two 
categories: 

(i) art is included in the school program so that 
the individual may develop to the fullest extent 
of his needs and capacities; (ii) art is offered 
so that the individual may become a valued and 
co-operative member of his social group.71 

As will be seen, several of the objectives of the art 

program relate to the individual and the community 

rather than to art per se . 

As before, the consideration of these objectives 
is set forth in three parts for the three levels of 
school. In each case the explicitly stated objectives 
are noted, followed by a discussion of each. In addition 
some of the signs suggesting possible attainment of each 
objective are set forth, chosen from the Departmental 
bulletins. 


The Elementary School 

There were seven objectives stated for the elem- 
71. Gaitskell, 0 £. cit ., p. 19. 







< 

a 

* . 

t , 

, 

* 

: 

V. 

.■ • . . . i ; . ' : ; : ' ■ i. ■ 


t 

. 

: . ' c • 

» . 

. 

5 ' »vl^©tcfO 

* 








- ... ■ 





« : v € ■ 



68 


entary school. These are as follows: 

(1) to foster a desire and liking for art; 

(2) to develop an awareness of art as a continually 
satisfying form of expression; 

(3) to foster the desire to explore the environment 
as a source of experience; 

(^) to enable children to gain increasing control 
over art media; 

(5) to foster respect for the products of others; 

(6) to enable children to gain in accuracy and 
completeness of observation; and, 

(7) to develop the ability to plan and complete 
art projects. 

Not in this list of objectives, but in the bulletin 
termed an admirable objective in itself, is the aim to 
make all children happy with their art work.? 2 


Analysis of the material presented in the elem¬ 
entary school art bulletin reveals that in addition to 
the above objectives there were seventy statements giving 
direction. These statements varied in scope and purpose. 

Some were found to be sweeping in scope, such as envision¬ 
ing a distinctive school of Alberta painters. While many 
of these statements are concomitant parts of the object¬ 
ives shown above, many are not. An example of the latter may 
be seen in the following statement, already referred to: 
"happiness through their creative expression will in itself 


72. Bulletin Three, p. 2h. 




' 

■ - . ;) 

, 


- 

- ■ ’ 

9 

. .. 

' ■. 

, 





69 


be an admirable objective."73 

The objective — to foster a desire and liking for 
art — is re*-stated in the bulletin as developing general 
artistic sensitivity, developing imaginative and practical 
creative activity, developing positive attitudes towards 
art, and stimulating creative interest among others. The 
attainment of this objective in the elementary school 
would mean that the children would extensively utilize 
art in their home and school activities as a natural, 
desired activity. 

The development of an awareness of art as a continually 
satisfying form of expression as an objective of the element¬ 
ary school art program is re-stated as developing children 
to use art, developing satisfaction from art, developing 
creativity using some type of form, and so on. It would seem 
reasonable to suppose that this objective would be attained 
on the appearance of such signs as children eagerly partic¬ 
ipating in art activities both at home and, certainly, at 
school. 


The third listed objective, to foster the desire to 
explore the environment as a source of experience, is 


73. loc . cit 



* ' ' ' ' , r 

...... • , • 


• 

- 

— CP. 

c 

. 



c 

V 

* 


c 

. 






t ... 




. 







. 






• 



* 

* ' 





-• ■; ... 


, J.‘ $ - •. • . 





. . • 


I 

4 








70 


further elaborated upon. Pupils are expected to develop 
ability to gather ideas which are expressed in one’s 
own way, develop ability to explore for problems and the 
possibilities for their solution, develop appreciation of 
design in its natural aspect, and develop skill and ability 
to sketch outdoors, togather with many other suggested out¬ 
comes. The realization of this aim would probably be indicat¬ 
ed by the widespread utilization of the environment by 
children in their art work. A simple illustration would 
be the outdoor sketching trip. 

It is interesting to note that frequent reference 
is made to the environment is made in both the elementary 
school art bulletin and that of the junior high school. The 
environment is of great importance in education. As the 
dual importance of environment easily escapes notice it 
is worthwhile to note the underlying reason for its import¬ 
ance as expressed by John ^ewey, tf that senstive awareness 
to environment is the beginning of aesthetic appreciation. Tt ?A 
To this, one might add, "and creativity." 

An aim of the art program is to enable children to 
gain increasing control of art media. This is considerably 

74. Dewey, John, Art as Experience . 1934, quoted by Pearson 
R # , The New Art Education ,(revised) Harper and Brothers, 
New York, 1953, P* 4. 













, ? • ' , : • "• o*'j./.= util dvv a 

\ .. . ■ ■ ; . ■> ‘' ' > : c " 

■ t . ■ .. : ■: ' ' 

' t 

. ’ ■ ■ " . 

- 

* 

e 

i ..... ..... .. 

I '• ' 












71 


elaborated upon in the text of the bulletin. There are 
some thirty anticipated outcomes of the art program in 
this regard. Children are expected to become able to 
represent feelings, suggest form, illustrate stories, 
show increasing attention to detail and proportion, 
and develop individual performance, as well as learn 
various techniques in the use of colour, to cite only 
a few examples. The attainment of this aim of elementary 
art education would appear to be achieved when the art 
product of the children showed increasing development. 

Respect for the products of others is another aim 
of the art program. It is said that the expression of indiv¬ 
idual thoughts and feelings on the part of others merits 

respect by all. Inasmuch as this aim may be related to 

« 

appreciation it would seem to stand, if awkwardly expressed. 
Otherwise this statement of aim is isolated with little 
background in the text of the bulletin supporting its 
importance as an objective of the art program. It would 
seem that attainment of this objective would be indicated by 
awareness and interest in the work of others. 

Another aim of the art program is to enable children 
to gain in accuracy and completeness of observation. It is 
further suggested that children should learn to listen, 




.. 







« 

, ■ C 




* 






. 




• . 









- .* 








I 















72 


learn to discriminate pleasing colour and shape, and learn 
through one’s own self-guided efforts. The attainment of 
this goal would seem to be achieved when the work of the 
children showed increasing development. 

The last stated objective is to develop the ability 
of children to plan and complete art projects. Unfortunately, 
this objective did not receive much attention in the text of 
the bulletin. The only comments that might be related to the 
objective are in such vein as developing habits of careful 
workmanship. Further elaboration on this objective is needed. 
To some, emphasis might well be placed on tidiness — demand¬ 
ing neatness, without reference to the art project. To the 
writer, it would seem that the intent of the aim requires that 
ample provision be made for children to initiate and solve 
their own art problems. Attainment of the objective would thus 
be judged by the degree to which provision would be made in 
the classroom for children to initiate and solve their own 
art problems. 

In discussing these objectives it might seem that 
they are oriented wholly to art, which is not the case. A 
large body of material dealing with these objectives is or¬ 
iented to the individual and his personal and social develop¬ 
ment. It most surely commends the value of art in education 
when objectives of a general nature are assigned to it. 

However, this is not an isolated instance, for it is 


* 

- 






„ 








. 








\ , : . . v j : ;i • 


... . .. . j>- .■ > , L : -■ 7(;.rrw 

J: .. i.:. .. .. ■ ■ . 






, • , : :■ •: 7 ■ 










t 











73 


in keeping with a statement made by the International 

Conference on Public Education: 

... In drawing up a syllabus for art and deciding 
on the choice of methods, the aims of teaching the 
subject should constantly be borne in mind; the 
following aims should especially be taken into 
account: (a) educational aims: the cultivation, for 
example, of observation, imagination, expression, 
self-control, the capacity for sustained work and 
the ability to co-operate with others on group 
undertakings; . . .7; 

Many of the anticipated outcomes of the art program re¬ 
late to general education rather than art education. For 
example: 

to develop self-control and poise; 
ability to co-operatively develop projects; 
concern for neat and attractive workbooks and 
clothing; 

developing a desire to share in manual work; 
to develop a desire to share in research; and, 
to develop ability to assume leadership, 

are but a few aims in Bulletin Three conforming to this 

pattern. 


Generally, the teacher using Bulletin Three should 
have a reasonably clear idea of what the program is to acc¬ 
omplish. The fact that the relationship of specific object¬ 
ives and general education objectives is not too clearly 
stated may be confusing and disconcerting. 

It is related in Bulletin Three, almost as a 

75. Recommendations of the Eighteenth International Confer¬ 
ence on Public Education (Geneva, 1955)* 

See Appendix F, Recommendation number 7* 









• * • 

. . ' ' • •: • • 

. 

» « . . 

? ■ 

* 









* ■ • ' ■ 










. 

* 










74 


wish,that there should one day be a distinctive school of 
Alberta painters to express the spirit of the people of 
the province. The implication is that if the program of 
studies is adhered to such a phenomenon would occur. While 
this is an admirable goal it could not have been very ser¬ 
iously considered. If the suggestion was seriously held, it 
would seem reasonable to suppose that it be repeated in the 
bulletins for the junior and senior high schools, which is 
not the case. 


The Junior High School 


The objectives of the junior high school appear 
to be logical continuations of those stated for the elem¬ 
entary school. There are seven objectives listed for the 
art program, as follows: 

(1) the development of increased powers of observation 
and visual judgement; 

(2) the development of creative ability in all children; 

(3) the development of the special abilities of the 
talented children; 

(4) the development of a capacity for appreciation; 

(5) the development of socially acceptable habits and 
good citizenship; 

(6) to develop an understanding of design, drawing 
and colour; and, 

(7) the development of self-expression. 

It is readily observed that there is no abrupt change in 
the type of objectives expected at each level of school. 





* 

o 


. 












. 

« 

: « 





f 















:, 















t V '• - 












75 


It will be noticed that one of the above mentioned 
objectives is of the type previously discussed as a general 
education objective. In addition, the guide lists many 
outcomes of a similar nature that are to be expected from the 
art program. Some of these will be shown later. 

The aim of the art program to develop increased 
powers of observation and judgment relates directly to a 
similar statement of aim for the elementary school art program. 
Students are expected to develop sensitivity to their environ¬ 
ment, and develop a capacity for appreciation based on their 
observation. If this goal were being approached it would be 
reasonable to expect children to show increased development 
of line, form, space and pattern in their art product, inas¬ 
much as these elements of art depend upon their observation 
and judgment. 

An aim of the art program is the development of 
creative ability in all children. This objective appears 
to relate to the elementary school objective: to foster a 
desire and liking for art. It is stated that the art program 
should enable children to express themselves with originality, 
and develop ability to portray in some type of form. As it 
is stated in the guide that most lessons should be free from 
dictation, and experimentation be encouraged it, would seem 


S P*. ■ . 

. . J . .. . 

• ■ C ’ c • t 

* 

: 

. , ■ 



76 


that attainment of this objective would be marked by freedom 
in creative expression for all children. 

Another objective of the art program is to develop 
the special abilities of talented children. There does not 
seem to a related objective for the elementary school 
art program. Considering the importance of this objective 
one would not consider this an unsuitable objective for 
the elementary school program. Special talent is recogniz¬ 
able at that level, and is at a critical stage of develop¬ 
ment in these formative years. Supporting this objective, 
it is mentioned that such students should become aware of 
the occupational possibilities in art and exercise guid¬ 
ance. It seems that much more might be written to support 
this objective of the program. It is sparingly treated in 
the guide. The motivation of the specially talented and 
activities for the specially talented might prove invalu¬ 
able to the teacher. Ag it is at present there is not 
enough direction in the guide for the teacher to implement 
a program for talented children. 

As the guide suggests that teachers should prepare 
a variable program to discover and conserve special talent, 
it seems that an indication of progress towards attaining 
the objective would be found in the classroom featuring 
yaried activities designed to discover and conserve special 


- , r 

« 

* 

i. 

' t . . 

t . , ls = • 

• - 

. 

- . 

V 

•uv-.:’.va •. r-r cnS us 

„ • 

< 






77 


talent. While such a criterion is weak and ineffective, 
there is little else to be found in the guide by which 
to formulate a criterion. 

The development of a capacity for appreciation 
is another objective of the program. There is no equival¬ 
ent objective for the elementary school art program 
although the aim, to foster a desire and liking for art, 
might be so interpreted, ^elated to this objective are 
several outcomes: development of the desire to seek 
further knowledge, recognition of the personal values in 
art, and responsibility to artists of other lands. As 
teachers are urged to develop increasing awareness of beauty 
as provided by man and nature, attainment of this objective 
would be noted by evidence of such awareness. 

The art program aims to develop socially acceptable 
habits and good citizenship. There is no equivalent objective 
for the elementary school art program. It would seem that if 
this objective has a valid place in the junior high school 
program, it most surely should be an objective of the elem¬ 
entary school art program. The guide suggests many outcomes 
that are expected of the art program in developing the object¬ 
ive. A few are: development of ability to fit into social 
situations, development of traits of co-operation, and the 











. 

.... 

. 

c 

. ... • • i I 

, 


. 

: i, 

c 1 

: 

t - ■ t • 




73 


development of industry and initiative. Perhaps the only 
way open by which such an objective could be judged with¬ 
in the confines of the art program is whether or not child¬ 
ren did some of their art work in groups as co-operative 
undertakings. 

An objective of the art program is to develop an 
understanding of design, drawing and colour. There is 
not an equivalent objective in the elementary school 
program, although some seem approximate. There are more 
than thirty outcomes stated for this objective, all 
tending to emphasize it for the teacher. Achievement of 
this objective would surely be indicated by the applicat¬ 
ion of good design, drawing and colour, in the art work of 
the children. 

The final objective for the art program is that of 
developing self-expression. This objective, so stated, 
does not appear in the elementary school program, although 
there are many similar outcomes alluded to in the bulletin. 
Unfortunately, there is very little in the Curriculum 
Guide which assists in establishing what is meant by self- 
expression. The writer takes this term to refer to creat¬ 
ive activity initiated and executed by the individual. Attain¬ 
ment of this objective would be indicated by a classroom 
in which self-expression was encouraged. This would, no doubt, 



- 


:w ■ 

. • 


; . . c 




* 






. \ ■ ■- ' 

~ 


■ 






c 

t ' ■ 

• ■: 


e 




* 














be a classroom where a permissive atmosphere prevailed, 
and where children are actively encouraged to initiate 
and solve their own art problems. 


79 


Apart from the general education objectives, the 

junior high school art program seems to aim at developing 

creative ability, and enable children to grow in skills 

related to the techniques of expression. These should be 

evidenced in their art work if the objectives of the program 

are being attained. The importance of developing creative 

ability in all children at first glance appears to be a 

mere platitude. But it is more. 

All people have the hidden power to see and enjoy (art) 
and the right to that enjoyment. Also the power and 
right to create (art) of their own. That only the rel¬ 
ative few among our millions have developed their 
powers and claimed their right as appreciators or 
producers is one of the cultural tragedies of our time 
. . .. We can have no genuine civilization in the finer 
meaning of that term until the extraordinary develop¬ 
ment in the sciences, technics, and knowledge is bal¬ 
anced by a like development in the arts. . .76 


The Senior High School 


The statement of objectives for the senior high 
school appears to be rather meagre, or perhaps, all- 
inclusive. There are three parts to the statement of ob- 


76. Pearson, R., op 0 cit ., p. 5 







■; ■ • « V 

■ » - 

* 

■ 


. 

. l * 

' • « * 4 

* , . 

* 

|||(P| 










£0 


jectives, as follows; 

(1) to develop aesthetic standards in the mind of 
the student; 

(2) to enable the student to evaluate all works of 
art; and, 

(3) to aid in the release and direction of the creat¬ 
ive energies of the student. 

It will be observed that there is not much relationship 
between these objectives and those stated for the elem¬ 
entary and junior high schools. While there was some 
continuity from the elementary school program to the 
junior high school program, this continuity in object¬ 
ives is broken in the transition from the junior high to 
senior high schools, T or reason shown in connection 
with the topics shown in earlier chapters this lack of con¬ 
tinuity is regretable. 

The first objective, to develop aesthetic stand¬ 
ards in the mind of the student, is not developed in the 
high school bulletin for art. It is merely stated that 
the aesthetic discrimination of the student should be 
exemplified in notebooks, collections of poetic gems, 
and book reviews. The program aims to develop good taste 
and provide experience in applying criteria of fitness of 
purpose and beauty to applied arts. The development of 
aesthetic standards is based on a study of the basic 
principles of design. 


« 

. 

- 

* 

. ■' ■ c 

\ 

* 

* 

* 


* 

? < 


* 



The attainment of this aim of the program would 
seem to be indicated by students’ knowledge and applic¬ 
ation of the principles of good design. 

The second aim of the senior high school art pro¬ 
gram is to enable the student to evaluate all works of 
art relating to the individual, the home, and the com¬ 
munity. These evaluations would be products of aesthetic 
standards developed in the minds of the students. Helated 
outcomes of this objective are many and varied. S 0 me are 
as follows: understanding and appreciation of the cultural 
heritage, experience in the appreciation of applied arts, 
and knowledge of painting and sculpture from pre-historic 
to modern times. It seems that the objective might relate 
to that of the junior high school program: to develop a 
capacity for appreciation. If so, some continuity between 
the objectives of the two programs is revealed. 

Attainment of this aim of the art program would be 
indicated, as judged by the outcomes anticipated, by a 
finer discrimination, development of good taste, and in¬ 
creasing appreciation of art on the part of the student. 

The third objective of the program is the release 
and direction of the creative energies of the student. 












t t ' 

* 

■ 




c ' 


... 




• * 






• c 


, 




< t 

^ • V 





















32 


Related to this objective are such expected outcomes as 
the fullest realization of youth T s personal potentialit¬ 
ies, wide experience in the selection, adaptation and 
creation of beautiful form and colour, and power of art¬ 
istic expression, Ihe objective would seem to relate to 
that of the junior high school art program: to develop 
creative ability. 

The attainment of this objective would be indicated 
by the creation of beautiful form and colour in the work 
of the student. 

It should be noted that the Curriculum Guide f or 
Alberta Secondary Schools provides material relating to 
those objectives in the school program which are applicable 
to the art program. It is stated that the school program 
should aim for the fullest realization of youth’s person¬ 
al potentialities, occupational preparation, understand¬ 
ing and appreciation of the cultural heritage, consumer 
competence, and leisure time activity. These are obviously 
important aims for the art program. Some of them have al¬ 
ready been referred to in the preceeding discussion. 

It must, however, be assumed that these anticipated out¬ 
comes may not be related to the art program as there is 
no guidance in Bulletin Seven on the matter. 





I • { 


in . < .8*10 

» 

: 

. 


. . ‘ : * . . ' 

■ , 

: x 

o ^ 

“ •- ‘ : < f V> ' U' ' 0-- * ' " r . f ’ i ' ‘ \\ . ’ . *i ' 


■ ' ‘ ' 

< c 





33 


It must be noted that art appears to be thought of 
in Bulletin Seven, principally as preparation for other 
subject areas, including English, home economics, and 
farm and home mechanics. Much more is written on the need 
to teach English during the art period than there is on 
the need to teach art. ^he objectives for the program are 
much less detailed than those of the other two programs 
previously discussed. By comparison the junior high school 
art program shows a stronger idea as to what the art program 
is expected to attain. Ihe senior high school art objectives 
seem vague and uncertain, and if anything, reveal a narrow 
concept of art education. One would think that because of 
the increased time spent on the study of art at this level, 
together with the greater maturity of the students, there 
would be a need for greater certainty and clarity. However, 
it may be expected that the teacher at this level of school 
would possess a background of training which would not 
necessitate the delineation of objectives ~ a practical 
necessity at the other levels of the school program. In 
addition, it is possible that the objectives were written 
for the art program at a time when it was thought that only 
specialists would teach the subject. 

Considering the objectives of all three levels of 
school one immediately notes discrepancies, some of which 
have already been discussed. While the environment and its 


< 

5 C < 

« 

* 

. 

< * C ' 





* 


< 
























— 



- ,» 





< 






* 

• , 

. ' ■ 






8 >+ 


importance is the subject of objectives for both the 
elementary and junior high schools, there is no reference 
to it whatever in the senior high school art program, 

'there seems to be a shift in emphasis away from 
enjoyment of art, an objective for the elementary grades, 
during the junior, and particularly, the senior high 
schools. Also to be noted is the declining emphasis through 
the grades of ’’using art.” It seems to the writer that if 
these objectives are valid for one level of school, they 
should be, perhaps In modified form, valid for the other 
levels of school, 

The greatest co-incidence between objectives for 
the three school levels, and an example of the continuity 
mentioned above, may be found in the three objectives re¬ 
lating to creativity. At the elementary level the aim is 
to stimulate creative interest; at the junior high school 
level it is to develop creative interest; and, at the 
senior high school level it is to release creative energies. 

As related above, there is no reason why the object¬ 
ives of each art program should not relate to those of the 
other programs. To gain control over art media is an object¬ 
ive of the elementary art program, and none other. Does this 
mean that children completing grade six are skilled in the 
use of all art media? There is every reason why this object- 













• ■ 






* 


’ 

: 

I 

■ 




, 


■ 

. 










ive should hold for the junior high school as well as 
the senior high school. This also applies to the elem¬ 
entary school objective, to foster a desire and liking 
for art. If anything, this should be an objective for 
the senior art program rather than that of the element¬ 
ary school. 

It seems that much could and should be done to 
relate the objectives of the art programs to provide 
continuity throughout the grades. As has been shown, 
there is not very much relationship, except accident¬ 
ally, between objectives of the program at each school 
level. One cannot be sure if the term creative means 
the same thing at each level of school. A s art develops 
in a continuum the art program and its objectives should 
reflect this smooth development. 

^s the aim of this chapter has been merely to 
survey the objectives of the art program at the three 
levels of school, and not the evaluation of these object¬ 
ives, little more will be stated concerning them at this 
time. However, as some criticism of these objectives has 
been made, these objectives will be discussed further in 
another chapter. Particular reference will be made 
to the suitability of certain objectives of the program. 



.... 

« 

!, c • ' 


q • 

< : 

- 

* 


' 


t e^v 2 

Q 




* 








$6 


Having considered the objectives of the art 
program in Alberta schools, it was thought that there 
was sufficient basis on which to proceed with the ev¬ 
aluation. The next chapter deals with the methods employ¬ 
ed in the execution of the evaluation. 


- 


. 


. . 

















CHAPTER IV 


THE METHOD EMPLOYED IN THIS STUDY 

This chapter deals with the development and execution 
of the method employed to obtain evaluative material with 
which to conduct the study. 

Development of Criteria . Despite the desire to con¬ 
duct an all-inclusive evaluation of the art education pro¬ 
gram in Alberta it was soon apparent that only some aspects 
of art education could be studied. Nonetheless, it was 
thought desirable to obtain information of the type that 
would indicate the general level of art education throughout 
the province. As has been pointed out, there has been only 
one study to date on art education in Alberta. Consequently 
it was considered most desirable to obtain a general evalua¬ 
tion of art education in the province rather than a detailed 
study of a specific area of the subject, as such may follow 
later. 


It seemed that the most suitable approach to the 
problem was through the study of the program of art education 
and its objectives. In order to limit effectively the study, 
this was initially considered the norm against which the 
actual program in the schools of the province was to be 
measured. 





















. ' . ■ ■ • ~ 

* 

- 

. 

, . 

4 











, 








It soon became evident that the evaluation could not 
be made in terms of both the program and its objectives. 
Therefore the objectives of the program were selected as the 
criteria by which to evaluate the art program. As was pointed 
out in the previous chapter there were two hundred and five 
objectives isolated from the texts of the Departmental bulle¬ 
tins on art education. Obviously an evaluation in terms of 
so large a set of criteria would be impractical. It was 
therefore decided that the study could best be accomplished 
through the use of the specific objectives for the art program 
as explicitly stated in the Departmental bulletins. 

Fair and valid appraisal of the work of the school 
should be made in terms of the objectives which the 
school is expected to attain. Two questions should 
be asked; first, M What are we trying to do? fr and 
second, !t What evidence can we get to indicate how 
well we are doing? n 77 

Eighteen such objectives were chosen. Of the eight for 
the elementary school, seven were explicitly stated objectives. 
The eighth was included for reasons already noted above.^ Seven 
were included for the junior high school, and three for the 
senior high school. As was previously noted, there was 
originally one objective for the senior high school, but 
upon analysis this became three objectives.^ Thus eighteen 
objectives for art education became the set of criteria for 
this study. 


77. Curriculum Guide for Alberta Sec ondary Schools , p. 26. 

7$. CfV p7 §4. 




# 

, 


* 

. - 

« 


. : 

. •• I-- ■ e . : 

, 

• < • ■' ' •• "SO : • ' ■ •' 

"• e • • 

. 

. 




. 













$9 


Development of a Procedure for the Collection of Data . 
It was first thought desirable that personal observation 
of art education in some schools of the province might be 
suitable as a means to evaluate the art program. This ap¬ 
proach was discounted as impractical because of geography 
and time. In addition it would be too subjective. It was then 
decided to utilize the questionnaire technique to gather data. 
Because responsible persons could be approached with a quest¬ 
ionnaire it was concluded that the inherent disadvantages of 
a low percentage reply, and lack of familiarity with the term¬ 
inology employed could be reduced to a minimum. In addition 
it was concluded that the approach would be reasonably oject- 
ive as the set of questions could be the set of criteria 
already established, and by the same token those replying 
could not be unduly influenced in their replies. The quest¬ 
ionnaire method was seen to be an efficient way to secure, 
and afford suitable treatment of, the needed information. 

The questionnaire^ 0 consisted of a statement of the 
eighteen objectives against each of which the recipient placed 
a number symbol indicating an evaluation. The number symbol 
was chosen from five as follows: 

(1) evidence of no progress towards attainment of the 
aim — the aim is unknown or is ignored; 


80. See Appendices G and H. 




. 


- 

» 

. 

- 

■ 

• • • r ■■ . c V - 

. 

- 

-• >■ 

e - 

* ^ 

• i : 

: 







90 


(2) indications of little progress towards attain¬ 
ment of the aim — the aim seems to be neglected; 

(3) the appearance of some progress towards attain¬ 
ment of the aim; 

(4) indications of progress towards attainment of the 
aim; and, 

(5) evidence of attainment of the aim. 

In addition, a few questions were added concerning 
the number of schools or schoolrooms in the district, the art 
offerings available, and in the case of the elementary school 
a question regarding the number of classrooms in which little 
or no art program was offered. x In addition, space was 
provided for comment. 

The Population . As the questionnaire was designed to 
collect data in the form of an evaluation the population 
was confined to those of some responsibility closely 
connected with educational practice. Also, as it was 
deemed necessary to include as many schools as possible in 
all parts of the province, it was concluded that the super¬ 
intendents of schools should be the main population for this 
study. Consequently the questionnaire was dispatched to 
seventy-four superintendents established in the Public and 
Separate School Districts and County systems, rural, urban, 
and composite, throughout the province. 


gl. These particular points were included in the questionnaire 
to superintendents only. 




- 

: 












<5 ' 

K j: . >. " - 




, c ■. . . ■ . . ■ 

- «. 

* ■ 

... 





t .. . . 


* : ' ' t > 






. .... . 

. 





91 


As it was thought that another source of data would 
be valuable as a means of validation one hundred and twenty- 
five additional questionnaires were dispatched to teachers 
of art (and "helping teachers” where applicable) throughout 
the province. 

Having outlined the development of the method em¬ 
ployed in this study the writer turned next to analysis of 
the data gathered. 




- 




* 

























CHAPTER V 


TREATMENT AND ANALYSIS OF THE DATA 

The data collected from the returned questionnaires 
were tabulated and converted into percentages for ease in 
handling. As this study is essentially qualitative rather 
than quantitative, the use of statistics was confined to 
percentages. The writer is unaware of any suitable means 
by which data relating to art values may be subjected to 
statistical tests. It must be remembered that the numbers 
used in completion of the questionnaire were used as 
symbols only, and not as values. 

The chapter was divided into three sections to deal 
with the three school classifications. 

The superintendents returned forty-six replies*^ w h ere _ 
as the teachers who were approached to participate in the study 
returned sixty-nine replies,^ from which the data for this 


52. Sixty-nine questionnaires were mailed to superintendents. 
Sixty-seven per cent of these were returned. Of the 
forty-six returned, two were unsuitably completed, in 
addition to which twenty-two individual items were un¬ 
suitably completed and unusable. 

53. One hundred twenty-five questionnaires were mailed to 
teachers. Fifty-five per cent of these were returned. 

Of the sixty-nine questionnaires returned four were un¬ 
suitably completed, in addition to which eight individual 
items were unsuitably completed and unusable. 






- 

C 

. 

- 

. 


, 


. 

: e . . , 

- 

. 

* . 

. 

- 

: % 

. 




93 


study were obtained. In addition to the questionnaires indiv¬ 
idual samples of art work produced in the schools were sent 
by both superintendents and teachers. 

THE SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL 

The Program . Returns from superintendents showed a 
total of one hundred ninety-three senior high schools in 
forty-two divisions.^ Eleven schools in eight divisions 
were reported to offer Art 20 annually or biennially. That 
is, nineteen per cent of the divisions, or six per cent of 
the senior high schools included Art 20 offerings in their 

d r 

program. ' Approximately one-half of the Art 20 offerings 
were reported from two divisions, which suggests a concent¬ 
ration of these courses in the more populated urban areas: 
Calgary and Edmonton. 

The Art 10 program was more favourably reported. One 
hundred sixteen schools in forty-two divisions reported Art 
10 offerings, annually or biennially. That is, approximate¬ 
ly ninety per cent of the divisions, or sixty per cent of 
the schools offered the course. These course appear to be 
adequately distributed throughout the province, there being 
four divisions reported without an Art 10 program. 


£4. The term, division, applies to a superintended unit as 
reported by one superintendent, and as such includes 
urban areas, non-divisional districts, counties, and in 
some cases more than one division. 

£5o See Appendix J, showing complete tabulation of the data. 




• SI 


I. ... 

i 

t . • < : 

’ . '. U :. VtCii'.' ■ Z i - V. 

: : i<. ■ i-1?:sr ,;• ■ ••:• £c. 0 •:;-> ,i ■ •. •; ; .a. : 


. ■ 

■ 


t ■ „ . - 

■ t : 

. 

« . ' ■ ■ ; .• ... - 

. '.I . . ■■•j V • 1 



5 , ' 5 

r v; „f; -.J-;?. • 

< • . t ; -■ - . , 

* ■ .' i-.r 









94 


Thirty-five superintendents reported on alternate art 
programs. It was found that nine per cent of the senior high 
schools offered an alternate art program such as arts and 
crafts. Of the seventeen schools offering this course twelve 
were located in three divisions, showing considerable concen¬ 
tration of these courses geographically. It might be noted 
that whereas none of these three divisions reported Art 20 
courses, they did not offer less than an average number of 
Art 10 courses. 

It was also found that ninety per cent of the schools 
offering Art 10 courses do not offer Art 20 courses. 

^valuation . In the following summary of the data de¬ 
rived from the questionnaire each aim was considered separate¬ 
ly in terms of the superintendents 1 evaluation, the teachers T 
evaluation, and both combined. While it is difficult to make 
generalizations from such data it was nonetheless deemed 
important to indicate what was being attained. Therefore 
some generalizations were made on the strength of agree¬ 
ment among participants. At the same time some generalizations 
were not nearly so difficult to make when cast into negative 
form. 


(Aim One) n The principal aim of the senior art course 
is to develop aesthetic standards in the mind of the student.” 







4 

C ■?■■■■ ■ 

, 








, ' 










• ■ - *. 5 ■ 

< ' * ' 

. < 

J HX " 

- 

* • ■ X i 















95 


The majority of superintendents indicated that there was ap¬ 
pearance of some progress towards the attainment of this aim. 


TABLE I 


Distribution of superintendent evaluations on the attainment 
of aim one of the senior high school art program, n:37 

TT To develop aesthetic standards in the mind of the student,” 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

2 

5 

(3) evidence of attainment 

9 

24 

(4) indications of progress 

25 

68 

(3) appearance of some progress 

1 

3 

(2) indications of little improvement 

0 

0 

(1) evidence of no progress 


Indeed, they rated it somewhat higher than that, as is shown 
in Table I. The majority of teachers, however, indicated a 


TABLE II 


Distribution of teacher evaluations on the attainment of aim 
one of the senior high school art program. n:l? 

TT To develop aesthetic standards in the mind of the student.” 

i 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

3 

18 

(5) evidence of attainment 

6 

35 

(4) indications of progress 

a 

47 

(3) appearance of seme progress 

0 

0 

(2) indications of little improvement 

0 

0 

(1) evidence of no progress 



































































B S'CTij 0” 

se :.ri ■ ..." '■'o. ’’Vo " -., ' • ;: ■ 












r; : " . 1 :: '•. - : : v ' r " : : . - * - 














' 








. ,:.;r' • ! T' l1-tr.- i v : I. . ; 

•• L-rf- : ,-.e: v;.-'' UV; 

















































































96 


higher evaluation of the aim, as is shown in Table II. None¬ 
theless, it would seem safe to generalize by stating that 
there appears to be some development of aesthetic standards 
in the mind of the student. At the same time it may be stated 
that the aim is not being attained. 

(Aim Two) 11 The development of aesthetic standards 
enables the student to evaluate all works of art relating to 
the individual, the home, and the community." ^he superintend¬ 
ents indicated the appearance of some progress towards the 
attainment of the aim. As Table III shows, how r ever, the 
superintendents tended to evaluate the aim less highly. On 
the other hand the teachers in the majority indicated that 
there were " indications of progress towards attainment of 
the aim," as shown in Table IV. It would seem that as a 


TABLE III 


Distribution of superintendent evaluations on the attainment 
of aim two of the senior high school art program. n:38 

"To evaluate all works of art relating to the 
individual, home, and community." 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

1 

2 

(5) evidence of attainment 

3 

g 

(4) indications of progress 

24 

64 

(3) appearance of some progress 

9 

24 

(2) indications of little improvement 

1 

2 

(1) ev^ ence of no progress 


















- • . t ' ' ' : ■'■V 

C ' •' -- 

i 

C C •' e 

. .... : - 




















97 


group, the teachers rate the attainment of this aim at a con¬ 
siderably higher level than do the superintendents. It would 


TABLE IV 


Distribution of teacher evaluations on the attainment of aim 
two of the senior high school art program. n:l6 

"To evaluate all works of art relating to the 
individual, home, and community." 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

2 

13 

(5) evidence of attainment 

9 

56 

(4) indications of progress 

5 

31 

(3) appearance of some progress 

0 

0 

(2) indications of little improvement 

0 

0 

(1) evidence of no progress 


therefore be in order to state that in general terms, there 
is some progress in the development of aesthetic standards 
which enable the student to evaluate all works of art relat¬ 
ing to the individual, the home, and the community. However, 
it should be borne in mind that one-quarter of the superin¬ 
tendents considered that there were indications of little 
improvement towards attainment of this aim. 

(Aim Three) "The development of aesthetic standards 
aids in releasing and directing the creative energy of the 
student." As shown in Table V there was an even spread in 
the evaluations made by superintendents. In the majority 
(fifty per cent) they considered that the aim was appearing 





























C 

* 




: .. ■ ■ ... ■■ 


. , ■ < 






5 


■ 

\ ) ] 










0 










:.L .. . ... !. .V..■ f : 

t „ ' ■ • ' ' < ■" • , 


0 ' ; ' . . ■' ’ . ' ' ; '' • J " ■ -■ 

. : 





, . ■ 

- * 

i. 




























9S 


TABLE V 


Distribution of superintendent evaluations on the attainment 
of aim three of the senior high school art program. n:3$ 

Tt To release and direct the creative energy of the student. M 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

2 

5 

(5) evidence of attainment 

8 

21 

(4) indications of progress 

19 

50 

(3) appearance of some progress 

7 

19 

(2) indications of little improvement 

2 

5 

(1) evidence of no progress 


TABLE VI 


Distribution of teacher evaluations on the attainment of aim 
three of the senior high school art program. n:l6 


T1 To release and direct the creative energy of the student. 11 


Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

2 

L 13_ 

(5) evidence of attainment 

7 

33 

(4) indications of progress 

5 

41 

(3) appearance of some progress 

0 

0 

(2) indications of little improvement 

2 

13 

(1) evidence of no progress 


to show some progress, while one-quarter considered that there 
was little improvement,that aim appeared to be neglected. As 
shown in Table VI the teachers tended to agree fairly closely 
with the evaluations made by the superintendents. It would 
be reasonable to assume, therefore, that there is an appearance 


























































: ■ ; . • ■ 









■ 









' 

■ 








• 















. 

.< t ■ 

















; ; 







' 

■ 





' 

■ 'SOU'. 1'] 


v (!.C; o:* 

• ' • d. t 

[o xv 



















99 


of some progress in the development of aesthetic standards 
aiding in the release and development of creative energy, 
as shown by the art work of the student. 


TABLE VII 


distribution of evaluations on the attainment of aims of the 
senior high school art program. 


Attainment* i 



Aims 

5 

4 

3 

2 

1 

n 

Group 


f 

1 ° 

f 

$ 

f 

% 

f 

% 

f 




to develop 
aesthetic 

2 

5 

9 

24 

25 

68 

1 

3 

0 

0 

37 

superin¬ 

tendents 

standards in 
the mind of 
the student 

3 

18 

6 

J 

35. 

8 

47 

0 

0_ 

0 

0 

17 

teachers 

5 

9 

15i 

1 

27 

33 

62 

T 

2 


0 

54 

both groups 

to enable the 
student to 

1 

2 

3 

8 

24 

64 

9 

24 

1 

2 

j38 

superin¬ 

tendents 

evaluate all 
w r orks of art 

2 

13 

9 

36 

5 

31_ 

0 

0 

0 

0 

16 

teachers i 

relating to the 
individual,the 
home & community 

3 

5 

12 

21 

29 

56 

9 

16 

~r 

2 

54 

both groups | 

1 

releasing and 
directing the 

2 

5 

8 

21 

19 

50 

7 

19 

2 

i 

5 

38 

superin¬ 

tendents 

creative 
energy of the 

2 

13 

7 

33 

5 

41 

~0 

0 

2 

13 

16 

teachers 

student 

4 

7 

15 

2$ 

24 

44 

7 

14 

4 

7 

54 

both groups 

* symbols of attainment: 

(5) evidence of attainment; (4) indications 
appearance of some progress; (2) indications 
improvement; and (X) evidence of no progress 

of progress; (3) 
i of little 

• 


Considering these aims together in evaluating the 
senior high school art program, the data seem to reveal that 
some progress is being made in the direction of attainment 






























































































. 



























: 





























, 

. 




: 

' : 

- 























100 


of the aims of the art program. As Table VII shows, there is 
a strong measure of agreement among participants on this 
point. In evaluating the three aims sixty-one per cent of the 
superintendents indicated the appearance of some progress, 
while the balance of their evaluations fell on either side of 
this evaluation. In evaluating the three aims eighty-one per 
cent of the teachers indicated the appearance of some progress, 
or, indications of progress. The balance of their responses 
indicated evidence of attainment of the aims. In considering 
the data as a whole it would seem safe to conclude that there 
is some progress towards attaining the aims of the art program. 


TABLE VIII 


Relative order of evaluations on the attainment of senior 

high school art aims 

Group 

Rank j 

Aim 

Superintendents 

1 

i 

to devlop aesthetic standards in the 
mind of the student 

2 i 

to aid in the release and directing 
of the creative energy of the student 

3 

to evaluate all works of art relating 
to the individual, the home, and the 
community 

Teachers 

1 

to evaluate all works of art relating 
to the individual, the home, and the 
community 

2 

to develop aesthetic standards in the 
mind of the student 

3 

to aid in the release and directing 
of the creative energy of the student 




























, 



- 


- 




. „ 






























c t' 




























101 


Table VIII shows the order in which both superintendents 
and teachers rated the three aims in terms of their attainment. 
It will be noticed that the teachers and superintendents dis¬ 
agreed on the relative attainment of these aims. However, as 
the extent to which there is disagreement is not great, little 
need be said here on the subject except that it does point 
towards a differing approach to the subject of art education, 
and its application in the classroom, which point will be 
subject to further discussion in a later chapter. 

Twelve superintendents included comments on the senior 

high school art program in their divisions* These comments 

referred primarily to the difficulty of obtaining teachers 

who were interested in the subject, lack of funds, and the 

difficulties caused by a rapidly expanding school plant. 

Eight teachers included comments on the senior high school art 
$7 

program. 'These tend to validate the order of attainment of 
aims shown in Table VIII, and support the comments made by the 
superint end ent s. 

Over one hundred fifty samples of art work were sent to 
the writer as examples of the average work of students in the 
schools. A fair proportion of this work showed the art of the 
senior high school. As a further check against the evaluations 


86. See Appendix K. 
87 * See Appendix L. 
88. See Appendix M. 



,/ - • _ •.. -■ v: " ■ v- : .... i . 

. t '. 

‘ ' • • - . I • , ... , v 

? ••., . ■ V . •. . 

. . ... 


■. c s ■ • ■ ■ . . . . . 










: . ... , 1 

• ■ • . 

: ' ' ■ v : f\ 

• ■* >.i 

- ■ ■ qp. e ; 

■ \ ; .... .. . •.... . . . 

. 




. 

■ 




■ 





. 

o 





102 


made by the superintendents these became the subject of an 
informal study .^ The results of this informal study of the 
senior high school art work tend to agree substantially with 
the results of the questionnaire study: that there appears 
to be some progress towards attainment of the aims of the 
program. 


THE JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL 

The P rogram . Superintendents reported four hundred 

three schools in thirty-eight divisions. They also reported 

three hundred seventy-six schools in which junior high school 

art was taught. This approximates eighty-four per cent of 

the schools. All divisions reported schools in which art was 

90 

taught at this level, however, sixty-three schools were 
without art courses, annually or biennially. 

As shown in Table IX there is considerable variation in 
the extent to which children may elect to take art. Fully 
one-quarter of the schools do not offer art for more than one 
year during the pupil’s stay in junior high school. 

Judging from the data shown in Table IX there is a com¬ 
paratively good opportunity for children to experience art at 
the junior high school level, if it is offered at all. 


$9* See Appendix N. 

90. See Appendix 0, showing a complete tabulation of the data. 





103 


TABLE IX 


Summary of junior high school elective art courses 

Number of years a student 
may elect to take art 

Number of divisions 

Percentage 

one year 

eleven 

26 

one plus 
one or two 
two 

twenty-five 

60 

two plus 
two or three 
three 

six 

14 


Evaluation , The participants were asked seven quest¬ 
ions relating to the aims of the junior high school art pro¬ 
gram. The data derived from these questions follow. 

(Aim One) TT An aim of the junior high school art pro¬ 
gram is the development of increased powers of observation 
and visual judgement. Ir Nearly two-thirds of the superintend¬ 
ents considered that there was some progress towards attain¬ 
ment of this aim, while most of the balance thought it should 
be rated somewhat higher, as indicated in Table X. The 
teachers tended to show agreement, splitting their evaluation 
between appearance of some progress and indications of progress, 
thus rating somewhat higher than the superintendents, as is 
shown in the accompanying table (Table XI). it should be 
noted that the explanatory note accompanying the statement of 
aim in the questionnaires read, tT as shown by development 




























~ 




• ■ 

' 

» ■ ■ - . 


- 

- 

- , : 


» * 

r ' 

\ * 















104 


TABLE X 


Distribution of^superintendent evaluations on the attainment 
of aim one of the junior high school art program. n:42 

tT To develop increased powers of observation 
and visual judgement. TT 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

0 

0 

(5) evidence of attainment 

12 

2$ 

(4) indications of progress 

25 

60 

(3) appearance of some progress 

4 

10 

(2) indications of little improvement 

1 

2 

(1) evidence of no progress 


TABLE XI 


Distribution of teacher evaluations on the attainment 
of aim one of the junior high school art program. n:49 

n To develop increased powers of observation 
and visual judgement. tT 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

5 

10 

(5) evidence of attainment 

20 

41 

(4) indications of progress 

22 

45 

(3) appearance of some progress 

2 

4 

(2) indications of little improvement 

0 

0 

(1) evidence of no progress 


of line, form, space, and pattern in the work of children/ 1 
and that an evaluation of the aim is also an evaluation of 
the technical development of the children in art. In this 






























































V.- 




: ■ 


....... 


‘ : 




J'no 

■ 

. or:;:. x-v \ . : 


i silo I' ... 






i:ct . x •. . , . 

V 




■ ■ ■ 







■ 


, 



' : ' ; ; ' : i 

' . ■ ... 


















105 


respect, the conclusions reached for this particular aim 

should closely relate to the conclusions reached for the 

91 

sixth aim. Considering both teachers 1 and superintendents 1 
evaluations it would appear reasonable to state that there 
appears to be some progress towards developing increased 
powers of observation and visual judgment, and the develop¬ 
ment of line, form, space and pattern in the work of the child¬ 
ren. 


(Aim Two) Tt An aim of the art program is the develop¬ 
ment of creative ability in all children.” As indicated in 
Table XII the superintendents considered that there was some 
progress towards attaining this aim. On the other hand the 

TABLE XII 

Distribution of superintendent evaluations on the attainment 
of aim two of the junior high school art program. n:42 


”To develop creative ability in all children.” 


Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

2 

5 

(5) evidence of attainment 

13 

31 

(4) indications of progress 

18 

42 

(3) appearance of some progress 

8 

20 

(2) indications of little improvement 

1 

2 

(1) evidence of no progress 


teachers, as shown in Table XIII, considered that the aim 
should be rated much higher in attainment. 


91. Cf. p. 94. 















































. 






* 













, 























Vi) 








, 









c t 






























106 


TABLE XIII 


Distribution of teacher evaluations on the attainment 
of aim two of the junior high school art program. n:49 

Tt To develop creative ability in all children.” 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

13 

26 

(5) evidence of attainment 

22 

45 

(4) indications of progress 

12 

25 

(3) appearance of some progress 

2 

4 

(2) indications of little improvement 

0 

0 

(1) evidence of no progress 


It might therefore be safely assumed that the evaluation lies 
between the appearance of some progress and indications of 
progress towards the attainment of this particular aim. Per¬ 
haps the difference between the two sets of evaluations, which 
is rather large, may be accounted for by reference to the ex¬ 
planatory note, ”as shown by freedom in creative expression, 
free from dictated lesson.” Such explanation no doubt leaves 
considerable room for variation in the interpretation of the 
item. 


(Aim Three) ”An aim of the art program is the develop¬ 
ment of the special abilities of talented children.” Super¬ 
intendents showed an almost even spread of evaluations on this 
aim, centered about the middle value, as shown in Table XIV. 
Thus, it would not be unreasonable to assume that generally 
there appears to be some progress towards the attainment of 

























* 

. 

c.i:... 








t 


COS. 




< . 




• OVoi 




. ■ 


. ■ ' ■ 

' ’ [ . , r : , ■ tv;:; CVV V,.-■; ol t; . 

' : . . ■ 1 i / i : ( ■ 

■ V: ■,'■■■: . O.:. '>•/; \ / 

‘ 

■ ■ V . 

- . ■ ... • vi 

. 

. 

■■••••' Vv u;v:; ... . iBx^r, OuJ 'ZO'Sam. 

.... .... 

. . , ■ . . . .. 

■ l . • . j 

. ■ . 1 ■ 















107 


TABLE XIV 


Distribution of superintendent evaluations on the attainment 
of aim three of the junior high school art program. n:41 


"To develop the special abilities of talented children." 


Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

2 

5 

(5) evidence of attainment 

11 

27 

(4) indications of progress 

17 

41 

(3) appearance of some progress ! 

9 

22 

(2) indications of little improvement 

2 

5 

(1) evidence of no progress 


TABLE XV 


Distribution of teacher evaluations on the attainment of aim 
three of the junior high school art program. n:49 

"To develop the special abilities of talented children." 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

7 

14 

(5) evidence of attainment 

10 

21 

(4) indications of progress 

23 

47 

(3) appearance of some progress 

8 

16 

(2) indications of little improvement 

1 

2 

(1) evidence of no progress 


the aim, which is also paralleled in the evaluation by the 
teachers as shown in Table XV. Considering the data revealed 
in these tables in general there appears to be some progress 
in developing the abilities of talented children. At the same 






















































time it should be remembered that over one-fifth of the part¬ 
icipants in the study indicated that there was little progress 
in this direction. 

(Aim Four) ”An aim of the art program is the develop¬ 
ment of a capacity for appreciation. TT This aim was similarly 
considered by both groups. Superintendents considered that 
this aim was attained to the extent of some progress being 
made. See Table XVI. Teachers tended to rate the attainment 
of this aim somewhat higher, as shown in Table XVII. It 
would appear that there was some progress being made to dev¬ 
elop a capacity for appreciation. 


TABLE XVI 


Distribution of superintendent evaluations on the attainment 
of aim four of the junior high school art program. n:42 

T! To develop a 

capacity for appreciation.” 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

0 

0 

(5) evidence of attainment 

4 

10 

(4) indications of progress 

31 

74 

(3) appearance of some progress 

7 

16 

(2) indications of little improvement 

0 

0 

(1) evidence of no progress 






















■ - 

. 


- 

- ' '* 


- 









* 






: 















































109 


TABLE XVII 


Distribution of teacher evaluations on the attainment of 
aim four of the junior high school art program. n:49 

TT To develop a capacity for appreciation.” 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

5 

10 

(5) evidence of attainment 

14 

29 

(4) indications of progress 

20 

41 

(3) appearance of some progress 

7 

14 

(2) indications of little improvement 

3 

6 

(1) evidence of no progress 


(Aim Five) ” The junior high school art program aims to 
develop socially acceptable habits and good citizenship.” 
Superintendents evaluated this aim as being less well attained 
than the previous aims considered. As shorn in Table XVIII 
the majority of superintendents considered that there was some 

TABLE XVIII 

Distribution of superintendent evaluations on the attainment 
of aim five of the junior high school art program. n:41 


”To develop socially acceptable habits and good citizenship. Tf 


Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

2 

5 

(5) evidence of attainment 

3 

7 

(4) indications of progress 

20 

49 

(3) appearance of some progress 

14 

34 

(2) indications of little improvement 

2 

5 

(1) evidence of no progress 



















































: 


„ 

* 




: 





















































110 


progress towards attaining the aim, while a considerable 
percentage considered that there was little improvement 
towards attainment. The pattern of responses from the teacher 
group was almost identical, as shown in Table XIX, 


TABLE XIX 


Distribution of teacher evaluations on the attainment of aim 
five of the junior high school art program. n:49 

tT To develop socially acceptable habits and good citizenship.” 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

4 

g 

(5) evidence of attainment 

g 

16 

(4) indications of progress 

21 

43 

(3) appearance of some progress 

14 

29 

(2) indications of little improvement 

2 

4 

(1) evidence of no progress 


(Aim Six) ”An aim of the art program is to develop an 
understanding of design, drawing, and colour," The superintend¬ 
ent group was split between the appearance of some progress 
and indications of progress. As shown in Table XX it would 
be reasonable to infer that the superintendents considered 
that there was progress towards attainment of the aim. Table 
XXI shows a similar pattern of responses by the teacher 
group, with a slight tendency to rate the attainment higher. 

As pointed out earlier the evaluation of this aim should 
closely correspond to the evaluation of aim one. Heferring 

















* 


c 

























' 









t c 




j. . . L . ■. ■ ■■ i - ■ * ' ". ■■■' - ■' . 




* 


< < 


■ k ‘ 












Ill 


TABLE XX 


Distribution of superintendent evaluations on the attainment 
of aim six of the junior high school art program. n:42 


"To develop an understanding of design,drawing,and colour." 


Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

2 

_5 _ 

(5) evidence of attainment 

17 

40 

(4) indications of progress 

21 

50 

(3) appearance of some progress 

2 

5 

(2) indications of little improvement 

0 

0 

(1) evidence of no progress 


TABLE XXI 


Distribution of teacher evaluations on the attainment 
of aim six of the junior high school art program.n:49 

"To develop an understanding of design, drawing,and colour." 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

6 

12 

(3) evidence of attainment 

24 

50 

(4) indications of progress 

14 

2$ 

(3) appearance of some progress 

5 

10 

(2) indications of little improvement 

0 

0 

(1) evidence of no progress 


to Tables X and XI, one sees that the superintendents 
rated the sixth aim somewhat higher, although maintaining 
a similar pattern of responses. The teachers rated these 
two aims very closely. There is a reasonable degree of 






























- . • « : c ' 























V .. i‘ 


, 5 





























i) 


I (i I 

, 


















112 


relationship between these two items as should be expected, 
which indicates strength in the study. 

(Aim Seven) ”An aim of the art program is the devel¬ 
opment of self-expression.” As with the previously discussed 
aim, there was a split in the evaluations between indications 
of progress and the appearance of some progress. Table.XXII. 


TABLE XXII 


Distribution of superintendent evaluations on the attainment 
of aim seven of the junior high school art program. n :42 

tT To develop self-expression.” 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

0 

0 

(5) evidence of attainment 

13 

43 

(4) indications of progress 

16 

43 

(3) appearance of some progress 

5 

12 

(2) indications of little improvement 

1 

2 

(1) evidence of no progress 


The teachers’ group considered that there were indications of 
progress in the attainment of aim — a somewhat higher evalu¬ 
ation than was made by the superintendent group. Table XXIII. 
It might therefore be generalized that there is progress in 
the development of self-expression in the junior high school 
art program. 














* 


- . 

.. 

r 




* s ' : 












c 












; . ; 


- 

■ ‘ • . - ■■ ■ 

* 















113 


TABLE XXIII 


Distribution of teacher evaluations on the attainment of aim 
seven of the junior high school art program. n :49 

T, To develop self-expression.” 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

11 

22 

( 5 ) evidence of attainment 

21 

43 

( 4 ) indications of progress 

13 

27 

( 3 ) appearance of some progress 

4 

8 

( 2 ) indications of little improvement 

0 

0 

( 1 ) evidence of no progress 


By grouping the seven aims of the junior high school 
together and considering them as one an over-all pattern is 
discernible. (Table XXIV.) 

TABLE XXIV 


Distribution of evaluations on the attainment of aims 


of the junior high school art program. 


Attainment* 

n 

Group 

f 

5 

56 

i 

f 

4 „ 
fo 

f ' 

* 

% 

f 

2 

1° 

] 

f 

L 

56 

8 

3 

78 

27 

145 

50 

47 

17 

7 


285 

superin¬ 
tendent— 


15 

119 

36 

125 

38 

32 

2 

6 

2 

353 

teacher 

59 

10 

197 

32 

270 

42 

79 

14 

13 

2 

638 

both 

groups 


* symbols of attainment: 

( 5 ) evidence of attainment; ( 4 ) indications of prog¬ 
ress; ( 3 ) appearance of some progress; ( 2 ) indica¬ 
tions of little improvement; and ( 1 ) evidence of no 
progress. .... - 










































) J';'l 'o’ 'c'., -v.'" i ‘ . T 

» • /: ^ ' ;i ■; '• - • - ' ■ •' , ' ' 

' , . ■ . V ; ' , ... ; '■ _ 1/ i ■ .. ■' - 


■ 




l,: , ; ' 













' 


. ' i. 










: - . < V ., >■?> .\:. ••• 

• i •... .c &i. J\’i'XX 3r.o <iio.n o 




. 1 .. . :.o- 










114 


From the data shown in this table it could not be concluded 
that the junior high school art program is attaining the aims 
set for the program. The program could be said to be showing 
signs of progress. In the opinion of fifty per cent of the 
superintendents it appeared to be making some progress; in 
the opinion of two-thirds of the teachers it was showing 
progress. 


Table XXV shows the order in which both groups rated 
attainment of the seven aims. 


TABLE XXV 


Relative order of evaluations on the attainment of junior 

high school art aims 

Group 

Rank 

Aim 

S 

u 

P 

e j 

r 

i 

n 

t 

e 

n 

d 

e 

n 

t 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

(6) to develop an understanding of design, 
drawing and colour 

(7) to develop self-expression 

(2) to develop creative ability in all children 

(4) to develop increased powers of observation 
and visual judgment 

(3) to develop the special abilities of talented j 
children 

(l)to develop a capacity for appreciation 

(5) to develop socially acceptable habits and 
good citizenship 


1 

(2) to develop creative ability in all children 

T 

2 

(7) to develop self-expression 

e 

3 

(6) to develop an understanding of design, 

a 


drawing and colour 

c 

4 

(1) to develop increased powers of observation 

h 


and visual judgment 

e 

5 

(3) to develop the special abilities of talented 

r 


children 

s 

6 

(4) to develop a capacity for appreciation 


7 

(5) to develop socially acceptable habits and 



good citizenship 













« 


i ;■ : 















XI ■ ■ — , ■; 

; 








£ 


; ' / i 

• ■ / 


















115 


It will be readily seen that there was distinct agreement 
between the two groups concerning the relative order of 
attainment. In all but two aims both groups agreed; however, 
there is little change in the relative position of these two 
aims. While the superintendent group considered the develop¬ 
ment of design, drawing and colour as the aim showing most 
attainment the teacher group considered the development 
of creative ability in all children as the aim showing most 
attainment. Both group agreed that the aim of developing 
socially acceptable habits and good citizenship was the low¬ 
est in attainment, as shown in Tables XVIII and XIX. 

It would seem safe, on the strength of this large 
measure of consistency, to generalize to the extent that the 
junior high school shows some progress towards the attainment 
of aims for the art program. 

Six teachers commented on the junior high school art 
program, mostly on the subject of large enrollment and lack 
of facilities. One comment was particularly appropriate to 
the point previously raised. It showed that the aim of dev¬ 
eloping socially acceptable habits and good citizenship rated 
rather low. It was pointed out that although the curriculum 
guide for the junior high school cites the foregoing aim, and 
that children should work together in small groups as a means 


■■r : •• 

* 

- 

. . . \ , •" 








; 

■ 






. . • 






+ 

c : ■ ' N : ' ■ • : 




116 


to develop this aim, it also stressed a considerable number 
of activities which by their nature demand essentially in- 
dividual participation. This point will be returned to at 
a later place in this study. 

Nine superintendents commented on the junior high 
school art program, generally on the difficulty of obtaining 
suitable teachers for the subject, as teaching art depended 
greatly on the interest and ability of the teacher. Many 
found it difficult to generalize on the subject, A s in the 
case of the teacher comment previously mentioned, one super¬ 
intendent seriously questioned the suitability of the aim re¬ 
lating to socially acceptable habits and good citizenship as 

93 

an aim of the art program. ^ 

The results of the informal study of the samples from 
the junior high school tend to strengthen the previous gener¬ 
alization made on the attainment of aims of the junior high 
school art program.9^ 

THE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL 

The Program . Superintendents reported 3,226 elementary 
school rooms in forty-four divisions. Of this number four 
hundred one (over twelve per cent) had little or no art 


92. See Appendix P. 

93. See Appendix Q. 

94. See Appendix N. 














- 


„ 

. .. . 

- 


















. 

, 





, • 

- 

i 





117 


program. One school room of every eight had an unsuitable 
art experience for the children .^ 

Evaluation . In all but two of the aims there was a 
wider divergence of evaluation between superintendent and 
teacher groups than has been shown in the data relating to the 
other school levels. Nonetheless there is a strong pattern of 
general agreement in all of the elementary school aims. 

(Aim One) "An aim of the elementary school art program 
is to make all children happy with their art work." Superin¬ 
tendents generally considered this aim as between showing an 
appearance of some progress and indications of progress in 
attainment, as shown in Table XXVI. On the other hand teachers 


TABLE XXVI 


Distribution of superintendent evaluations on the attainment 
of aim one of the elementary school art program. n:44 

"To make all children happy with their art work." 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

1 

2 

(5) evidence of attainment 

18 

42 

(4) indications of progress 

24 

54 

(3) appearance of some progress 

1 

2 

(2) indications of little improvement 

0 

0 

(1) evidence of no progress 


as a group considered that the aim was quite close to attain¬ 
ment, as indicated in Table XXVII. Considering these two 


95* See Appendix R showing complete tabulation of data for 
the elementary school. 




















... ■ ' . 


I i - . . :. - 

^ •: ■ . ■ /. ... ■ : o -i v ' . 

■ - ■ . 

• ' , ", ' ■ : ■ 

i \ 

\ :. nil. n ;>'&■ J 

•• ' , : < . 

- . ' ■ • • • ' : 






v i n . 

1 





■ ■ • : : ...... : ci 

■ 






















nd 


TABLE XXVII 


Distribution of teacher evaluations on the attainment of aim 
one of the elementary school art program. n:31 

"To make all children happy with their art work." 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

14 

45 

(5) evidence of attainment 

12 

3S 

(4) indications of progress 

4 

14 

(3) appearance of some progress 

0 

0 

(2) indications of little improvement 

1 

3 

(1) evidence of no progress 


sets of evaluations together it would be a reasonable assump¬ 
tion that there are indications of progress towards making all 
children happy with their art work in the elementary school. 

(Aim Two) "An aim of the art program is to foster a 
desire and liking for art." Over fifty per cent of the super¬ 
intendents considered that there was an appearance of some 
progress towards attaining this aim, while one-third thought 
that the attainment for this aim should be rated higher. 

(Table XXVIII) The teachers reverse this pattern as the ma¬ 
jority considered that there were indications of progress 
towards attainment of the aim, as shown in Table XXIX. One 
might therefore generalize to state that there is an appear¬ 
ance of progress towards attainment of the aim. 

















; 

‘ 


' 


• . . 

. 

; . \ 

. ■ : ?;jx i 


■ 

. ■ ■ • v,. >, 

. - ' ■: .... . .... v ; .. '.• . 












119 


TABLE XXVIII 


Distribution of superintendent evaluations on the attainment 
of aim two of the elementary school art program. n:44 

Tt To foster a desire and liking for art.” 

Freo x uency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

2 

4 

(5) evidence of attainment 

13 

30 

(4) indications of progress 

23 

52 

(3) appearance of some progress 

6 

14 

(2) indications of little improvement 

0 

0 

(1) evidence of no progress 


TABLE XXIX 


Distribution of teacher evaluations on the attainment of aim 
two of the elementary school program. n:31 

”To foster a desire and liking for art.” 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

5 

16 

(5) evidence of attainment 

17 

56 

(4) indications of progress 

8 

25 

(3) appearance of some progress 

1 

3 

(2) indications of little improvement 

0 

0 

(1) evidence of no progress 


(Aim Three) ”An aim of the art program is to develop 
awareness of art as a continually satisfying form of expres¬ 
sion.” Superintendents tended to indicate that there appeared 
to be some progress towards the attainment of this aim. 


















































. • 

..... : . ; . v. ■ : •:., 


, 

. 

■ •' . . ' . 

■ 

.' .... i ■ ■ ' J " ) ■ ■ .’ ' 

‘ ■ . 

•.!. * '. . ... ■. . ■■ . /. . ‘ 


. . S'l 

. ; 

- '].• ■ ’ii". 

.• . . : 


' 

■ ' 


• ;• v • ■ I- 



. . ■ 



120 


(Table XXX) Teachers, on the other hand, tended to think that 
there were indications of progress towards attainment of this 
aim, as shown in Table XXI. A composite view would indicate 
progress towards attainment of the aim. 


TABLE XXX 


Distribution of superintendent evaluations on the attainment 
of aim three of the elementary school art program. n:44 

"To develop awareness of art as a continually 
satisfying form of expression." 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

0 

0 

(5) evidence of attainment 

14 

32 

(4) indications of progress 

21 

49 

(3) appearance of some progress 

8 

17 

(2) indications of little improvement 

1 

2 

(1) evidence of no progress 


TABLE XXXI 


Distribution of teacher evaluations on the attainment of aim 
three of the elementary school art program. n:31 


"To develop awareness of art as a continually 
satisfying form of expression." 


Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

7 

22 

(5) evidence of attainment 

12 

39 

(4) indications of progress 

7 

22 

(3) appearance of some progress 

4 

14 

(2) indications of little improvement 

1 

3 

(1) evidence of no progress 




































' ' i .1 , v'v ; : • Oo . J : ' V ' ' .JO 

' 

» 




. 














o. ..... •: ...... 

. 

■ 



■ 

• ■ • ■. 

.... > ■ ... 

. 





- 









vs v novo;../■ ;l; r vjnli 

€>01 

' 

- 






















121 


(Aim Four) TT An aim of the art program is to foster the 
desire to explore the environment as a source of experience. tT 
Over one-half of the superintendent group considered that 
there were indications that little improvement was made in 
attaining this aim. (Table XXXII,) 


TABLE XXXII 


Distribution of superintendent evaluations on the attainment 
of aim four of the elementary school art program. n:44 

"To . 

foster the desire to explore the environment 
as a source of experience." 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

2 

6 

(5) evidence of attainment 

4 

9 

(4) indications of progress 

9 

20 

(3) appearance of some progress 

24 

54 

(2) indications of little improvement 

5 

11 

(1) evidence of no progress 


TABLE XXXIII 


Distribution of teacher evaluations of the attainment of aim 
four of the elementary school art program. n :30 

"To foster the desire to explore the environment 
as a source of experience." 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluat ion 

3 

10 

(5) evidence of attainment 

6 

20 

(4) indications of progress 

10 

33 

(3) appearance of some progress 

11 

37 

(2) indications of little improvement 

0 

0 

(1) evidence of no progress 














































122 


Almost the same pattern of response was given by the teacher 
group, as shown in Table XXXIII, but at a higher level of 
attainment. This aim would therefore be considered to be 
neglected, there being indications of less progress than 
desirable. 

(Aim Five) ,T An aim of the art program is to enable 
children to gain increasing control over art media.” Super¬ 
intendents were in fairly general agreement that there was 
some progress in this direction, but at the same time it 
should be noted that one-quarter thought that there were 
indications of little improvement in this direction. 


TABLE XXXIV 


Distribution of superintendent evaluations of the attainment 
of aim five of the elementary school art program. n:44 

"To gain increasing control over art media." 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

1 

3 

(5) evidence of attainment 

12 

27 

(4) indications of progress 

19 

43 

(3) appearance of some progress 

12 

27 

(2) indications of little improvement 

0 

0 

(1) evidence of no progress 


(Table XXXIV). Teachers generally considered this aim to be 
showing an appearance of some progress, or indicating pro¬ 
gress, as shown in Table XXXV. 
















5 • t 

t ' 

t) 

_ , ■ 

“ ■ 








* y. • ' ■ 





























v ±i ; - - 

~ 



4 ' 



























123 


TABLE XXXV 


Distribution of teacher evaluations on the attainment of aim 
five of the elementary school art program. n:31 

"To gain increasing control over art media." 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

4 

12 

(5) evidence of attainment 

15 

48 

(4) indications of progress 

11 

37 

(3) appearance of some progress 

1 

3 

(2) indications of little improvement 

0 

0 

(1) evidence of no progress 


It would seem that a general evaluation would place attainment 
between these two views: that there is some progress in 
attainment of the aim. 

(Aim Six) "An aim of the art program is to foster 
respect for the products of others." One-half of the superin¬ 
tendents considered that this aim showed some progress towards 
attainment, while one-quarter considered there were indica¬ 
tions of little improvement in this area, as indicated in 
Table XXXVI. Teachers tended to view this aim as being some¬ 
what higher in attainment, considering it somewhat higher than 
the appearance of some progress. (Table XXXVII.) One might 
conclude that attainment is in the area of some progress being 


made 















I e 


. 





. : • 














V 


. 


■> I 



■ 



. 





• 


oO-./. 






pv>J:b$'J. :■ -lo/.o . a.. 

' « ■ ■ ‘ ' J . . . , ' J ^ ; v ; . y 




■V.'. • . ■ . ■■ ... • , ' . . 

. 























124 


TABLE XXXVI 


Distribution of superintendent evaluations on the attainment 
of aim six of the elementary school art program. n:44 

"To foster respect for the products of others." 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

0 

0 

(5) evidence of attainment 

10 

23 

(4) indications of progress 

22 

50 

(3) appearance of some progress 

12 

27 

(2) indications of little improvement 

0 

0 

(1) evidence of no progress 


TABLE XXXVII 


Distribution of teacher evaluations of the attainment of aim 
six of the elementary school art program. n:31 

"To foster respect for the products of others." 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

2 

7 

(5) evidence of attainment 

13 

42 

(4) indications of progress 

10 

32 

(3) appearance of some progress 

6 

19 

(2) indications of little improvement 

0 

0 

(1) evidence of no progress 


(Aim Seven) "An aim of the art program is to enable 
children to gain in accuracy and completeness of observation." 
While one-quarter of the superintendents considered that 
there were indications of little improvement in this area, 






































125 


the majority considered that there were appearances of some 
progress, as shown in Table XXXVIII. The teachers arrived at 
substantially the same conclusions , the pattern of responses 


being very close to that of the superintendents. (Cable XXXIX.) 

TABLE XXXVIII 


Distribution of superintendent evaluations of the attainment 
of aim seven of the elementary school art program. n:44 

tf To gain in completeness and accuracy of observation. ft 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

0 

0 

(5) evidence of attainment 

6 

14 

(4) indications of progress 

27 

61 

(3) appearance of some progress 

11 

25 

(2) indications of little improvement 

0 

0 

(1) evidence of no progress 


TABLE XXXIX 


Distribution of teacher evaluations on the attainment of aim 
seven of the elementary school art program. n:30 

"To gain in completeness and accuracy of observation. TT 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

2 

7 

(5) evidence of attainment 

6 

20 

(4) indications of progress 

15 

50 

(3) appearance of some progress 

7 

23 

(2) indications of little improvement 

0 

0 

(1) evidence of no progress 


Generally, there is an appearance of some progress towards 
attainment of this aim. 








































126 


(Aim Eight) TT An aim of the art program is the devel¬ 
opment of the ability to plan and complete art projects.” 

There was very close agreement between the two groups on the 
attainment of this aim. Superintendents in the majority con¬ 
sidered that there was some progress towards this aim; however, 
one-quarter of the number thought that there was little im¬ 
provement. (Table XL.) Teachers considered that there was 


TABLE XL 


Distribution of superintendent evaluations on the attainment 
of aim eight of the elementary school art program. n:44 

tT To develop ability to plan and complete art projects.” 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

1 

2 

(5) evidence of attainment 

7 

16 

(4) indications of progress 

24 

54 

(3) appearance of some progress i 

10 

23 

(2) indications of little improvement 

2 

5 

(1) evidence of no progress 


some progress in this area. (Table XLI). It might therefore 
be considered that the aim generally shows some degree of 
attainment. 

The eight aims of the elementary school when grouped 
together reveal an overall pattern which suggests that the 
elementary school art program, as a whole, appears to show 
some progress towards the attainment of objectives. As 






















B . 


: 


■ : - 




, 


















X) ' 





. 








. . ' . / • 








. 







, ■ t 

„ 











127 


TABLE XLI 


Distribution of teacher evaluations on the attainment of aim 
eight of the elementary school art program. n:31 

,f To develop ability to plan and complete art projects. ,T 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Evaluation 

1 

3 

(3) evidence of attainment 

10 

32 

(4) indications of progress 

15 

49 

(3) appearance of some progress 

4 

13 

(2) indications of little improvement 

1 

3 

(1) evidence of no progress 


Table XLII shows, a very small percentage of participants con¬ 
sidered the aims of the elementary school art program to have 
been attained, while still less considered that there was no 
progress. 


TABLE XLII 


Distribution of evaluations on attainment of aims 
of the elementary school art program. 

Attainment* 

n 

Group 

f ' 

fo 

1 

f 

. 

fo 

f 

fo 

f 

? 

% 

f 

L 

fo 

7 

1 

$4 

24 

169 

49 

84 

24 

6 

2 

344 

Superintendent 

3S 

15 

91 

37 

£0 

33 

34 

13 

3 

2 

246 

Teacher 

45 

9 

175 

29 

249 

40 

118 

20 

11 

2 

590 

Both groups 

^attainment of aims: (symbols) (5) evidence of attainment; 

( 4 ) indications of progress; ( 3 ) appearance of some progress; 
( 2 ) indications of little improvement; ( 1 ) evidence of no 
progress. _ .. . .--- 

































| iuJ: v. 0 ;.j.: . ..: ' ■ ■- - >.'■ V - L, ,v; ■ 

: 

v : . v 

: :. . t 

c) cii; . . i; • v . , 

' Oi- ' f : it tv 





. •. ■ . 

. ■ 

or,; c..'v; o'lOOO - o : r' '.ioo ■; , 








■ 

. 


. . 

i. ; . • ... ,.... . 

■ 


.. 




















■'■■■ • ( : 

• 1 , 


■., c. 





. ■ 


Ll ' 

: 







128 


TABLE XLIII 


Relative order of evaluations on the attainment 
of elementary school art aims. 

Group 

Rank 

Aim 


1 

(1) to make all children happy with their art 
work 

S 

w 

2 

(2) to foster a desire and liking for art 

P 

0 

3 

(3) to develop awareness of art as a continu- 



ally satisfying form of expression 

i 

4 

(5) to enable children to gain increasing 

n 


control over art media 

t 

5 

(6) to foster respect for the products of 

e 


others 

n 

d 

6 

(7) to enable children to gain in accuracy and 

0 


completeness of observation 

n 

6 

(8) the development of ability to plan and 

t 


complete art projects 

s 

7 

(4) to foster the desire to explore the 



environment as a source of experience 


1 

(1) to make all children happy with their art 



work 


2 

(2) to foster a desire and liking for art 


3 

(5) to enable children to gain increasing 

T 


control over art media 

e 

4 

(3) to develop awareness of art as a continu¬ 

a 


ally satisfying form of expression 

c 

■L. 

5 

(6) to foster respect for the products of 

n 


others 

e 

r 

6 

(8) the development of ability to plan and 

s 


complete art projects 


7 

(7) to enable children to gain in accuracy and 



completeness of observation 


8 

(4) to foster the desire to explore the 



environment as a source of experience 


Table XLIII shows the relative order of the aims with 
respect to their attainment as evaluated by both groups. The 








































129 


two groups are consistent. This large area of agreement 
tends to make the data more significant, '^here is only- 
slight variation in the order established by teachers and 
superintendents. Most noteworthy is the appearance of the 
aim dealing with the exploration of the environment as a 
source of experience, which was considered the least attain¬ 
ed aim by both groups. To make all children happy with their 
art work and to foster a desire and liking for art work— 
two closely related aims — both were considered the most 
achieved aims in the elementary art program. 

Thirteen superintendents commented upon the elementary 
school art program.96 The bulk of their comments reported on 
the quality of elementary school art depending upon the 
ability and interest of teachers, teachers having taken 
recent courses in art education, and the space and materials 
available with which to work. 

The informal study of the samples from the elementary 
school, of which there were a large number, tends to conflict 
with the generalization previously set forth. The results of 
this study indicate that in this elementary school art program 
there is little improvement towards attaining the aims set 
for it.97 


96. See Appendix R, showing complete data for the elementary 
school art program. 

97. See Appendix N. 



* 

, . ■ 

• ' 

9 

W-q!J >d: i'.ft- •. - > . - - , ;' ' - 'ft-/-- U' v; ; 

. 

, • : " ■ -v.-'' ' v L , :,S. r ' ‘ , J:, ' ■ 

- 

, 

. 



130 


The material set forth in this chapter provided con¬ 
siderable basis upon which to formulate conclusions. The 
significance of this material is discussed in the following 
chapter. 



CHAPTER VI 


CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

This chapter deals with the conclusions derived from 
the analysis of the data presented in the previous chapter, 
and materials from other sources, located in the appendices. 
In addition, two recommendations are presented. In plan it 
is similar to other chapters in that it is divided for the 
three levels of school organization. Included in this chapter 
is a section surveying the combined levels of school, a sum¬ 
mary of the more important conclusions, and finally, the pre¬ 
sentation of recommendations. 

It must first be noted that the conclusions relating 
to the attainment of the aims of the art program are valid 
in so far as sixty-seven per cent of the superintendents and 
fifty-five per cent of the teachers participating represent 
the considered opinion of all superintendents and interested 
teachers, as was included in the initial terms of reference 
for this study, Chapter I. 

It cannot be over-emphasized that in making the gen¬ 
eralizations that follow there are exceptions to be allowed. 
Obviously, many of the statements will not apply to all 
schools. However, it is a fact that there are so few except¬ 
ions that enables these generalizations to be made. 












, 





. , 

.. 


- 

- ' t. ' 

• C • 








. • 


- 

■ , • 








. • 


;■ 


132 


THE SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL 

(1) There exists an inequality of opportunity for 
students to study Art 20 . Merely six per cent of the senior 
high schools offer Art 20 courses, and approximately one-half 
of these are located in city school systems. While the pres¬ 
ent situation may be considered to stem from the serious 
shortage of teachers at the high school level, it should be 
recalled, as was pointed out in Chapter II, that there has 

^always been some difficulty in providing teachers for the 
senior art courses. 

(2) There exists an inequality of opp ortun ity for 
students to study Art 10 . Little better than one-half (sixty 
per cent) of the high schools offer Art 10 instruction. While 
it is no doubt true that there are two strong factors influ¬ 
encing this situation ( approximately one-quarter of the high 
school classrooms are located in one or two room schools 7 
and there is a severe shortage of teachers ) nonetheless the 
condition exists in distinct contradiction to the basis of 
art education in the high school: 

It (Art 10) is based on the assumption that all men 
and women need a full understanding of what consti¬ 
tutes beauty in form and color in the things that 
make up their ever-changing environment.99 

98 . Annual Report , Department of Education of the Province of 
Alberta, 195$, P* 35* 

99- Bulletin Seven , Programme of Studies for the High School, 

p. 3. 














jj , ) )H^,. , 

. 












’ 

■J. - :r : Ji “. 1 

.'ii£ 

... 

. ■ • .. \ 












■ 




. • v vV.U-.'0 ' 














k 


i . ’ ' 

O'low ■; ; ".co.^cr '.it :■ 


' 




■ 









■ 






■ 



* 


. 








, v ., . ■ ' : . • 


«’ 




■ 

. 












133 


Clearly, the opportunity does not exist for all men and women 
to gain this understanding in the high schools. 

(3) The aim(s) of the senior high school art program 
is (are) not being attained . The aim of the course is to 
develop in the mind of the student aesthetic standards by 
which to evaluate all works of art relating to the individual, 
the home, and the community and to aid in releasing and dir¬ 
ecting the creative energy of the student. The results of 
the questionnaire study reveal that there is only the appear¬ 
ance of some progress towards developing aesthetic standards 
in the mind of the student. The study of senior high school 
art work shows that there is only the appearance of some 
progress in the development of the application of the under¬ 
lying principles of good design — the application of aesthetic 
standards. 

There was only some progress made to enable the stu¬ 
dent to evaluate all works of art relating to the individual, 
the home, and the community: that powers of discrimination, 
good taste and appreciation are not being well developed. 

The data show that the releasing and directing of the 
creative energy of the student are attained only to the degree 
that there is some progress being made. This is confirmed by 
the study of the art products in which there appeared to be 
some progress in the creation of beautiful form and colour. 







Y 

, 

. 

Xsrx'. t 

. 

_ 

. 

, 













; x 






- oiiJ ,;yy?,. 




- 













134 


It must therefore be concluded that the aims of the 
senior high school art program are attained only to the degree 
that there appears to be some progress being made. 

THE JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL 

(1) There exists an inequality of opportunity for 
.junior high school students to experience art . Sixty-three 
per cent of the junior high schools offer art either annually 
or biennially. Thus a large number of students have no art 
experience during their stay in the junior high school, due 
in large measure to the large percentage of one- and two- 
room schools and the teacher shortage as previously mentioned. 
However, as almost thirty per cent of the students attending 
school leave during or upon completing the junior high school 
program, the importance of the junior high school program of 
art as a terminal course or courses cannot be stressed too 
much.-^® 


(2) The aims of the junior high school art program are 
not being attained . Not more than ten per cent of the part¬ 
icipants in the study thought that the aims were being realized. 
This is supported by the study of art samples from the junior 
high school. 


100. Annual Report, o£. cit., p. 137 








„ 





. . 

* 

c 

- ... 


c 






. 






- 










«- 


























135 


The aim of the junior high school art program to dev¬ 
elop increased powers of observation and visual judgment 
was considered to be attained to the degree that there appear¬ 
ed to be some progress. 

The aim of the junior high school art program to dev¬ 
elop creative ability in all children is not realized, except 
to the extent that there is progress being made. 

The aim of the art program to develop the special 
abilities of the talented children is achieved only in so 
far as there appears to be some progress in this direction. 

The aim of the art program to develop a capacity for 
appreciation is achieved to the extent that there appears to 
be some progress. 

On the aim of the art program to develop socially acc¬ 
eptable habits and good citizenship there are indications of 
little improvement towards attainment. 

The aims of the art course to develop an understanding 
of design, drawing and colour, and the development of self- 
expression -- the very core of the art course — shows attain¬ 
ment to the extent that there are indications of progress 
being made. 





. 



























. 


- . t 












* 





136 


THE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL 

(1) There exists an inequality of opportunity for 
children in the elementary school to experience art . Over 
twelve per cent of the elementary school rooms have little 
or no art program. The number of such schools reaches as 
high as fifty per cent within some divisions. 

(2) The aims of the elementary school art program are 
not being attained . Not more than nine per cent of the part¬ 
icipants in this study considered that the aims of the 
elementary art program were being attained. Twenty-two per 
cent thought that there was little or no progress in this 
area. 


Perhaps the most important of the set of aims for the 
elementary school art program — to make all children happy 
in their art work — is the most attained aim. It was shown 
in the questionnaire study that there are indications of pro¬ 
gress towards attaining this aim. Likewise, the companion aim 
of fostering a desire and liking for art was thought to show 
progress towards attainment. 

The aim of the elementary school program to develop 
awareness of art as a continually satisfying form of express¬ 
ion was attained to the extent that there were indications 
of progress. 














. 




, .... <« 


, . ■■ •• " 

. . ' . 






























137 


There were indications that the aim of the elementary 
art program to foster the desire to explore the environment 
as a source of experience was neglected and little improvement 
was apparent. 

There was some progress towards attaining the aim of 
enabling children to gain increasing control over art media, 
as well as the aim to foster respect for the products of 
others. 


The aim of the art program to enable children to gain 
in accuracy and completeness of observation was considered to 
be attained to the degree that there was some progress ob¬ 
served. The same conclusion was reached with respect to the 
aim to develop ability to plan and complete art projects. 

THE SCHOOL ART PROGRAM 


Viewed as a whole, the school does not attain the aims 
of art education which have been assigned it. At the elemen¬ 
tary level, often deemed the most important stage in art edu¬ 
cation, twelve per cent of the schools offer little or no 
art experience for the child, and when there is a better 
offering it falls far short of the aims it is supposed to 


101. TT . . . elementary classroom teachers can teach more art 
to more children in their critical formative years than 
all of the art specialists combined.” Hastie, R., Art 
Education , The Journal of the National Art Education 
Association, ”Nowis the Time.” Vol. VIII, no. 7, 1955 















. 


.. .. 

■ ' . 

■ 






\ 




• ^ ' ■ 

. , ; • .. .. . ... ■ - ' 


. . 




, 

. ; • • • • 

\ ■ . l . . - ' 

► . - 

‘iot Ir-oicMip ‘,.1:oi: 





136 


attain. At the junior high school level thirty-seven per 
cent of the schools offer no art experience to the pupil, 
and where art is offered, it too falls short of the aims set 
forth for it. At the senior high school level forty per 
cent of the schools do not offer Art 10, and ninety-four per 
cent do not offer Art 20, and once again, where it is offered 
the aims are not well attained. 

In all, the program of art education for the schools 
is considerably lacking both with respect to the availability 
of suitable courses and the achievement in the courses. 

SUMMARY 

This study set out to evaluate the art program in 
the province in terms of attainment of aims. Having determined 
what is the prevailing opinion on the attainment of the aims 
it is now possible to apply the information. 

It was mentioned earlier that an evaluation program is 
primarily concerned with two main factors: what, if any, 
progress is being made, and in what directing the progress 
is leading? 

It would appear from the findings, just summarized, 
that there is, generally, the appearance of some progress 
being made in the direction set forth by the aims of the 


courses 





-' 


: 




:■ . - • .i ' " 


( ' c 










« 

: 












* 











c • S. t • v" ; : . ,o .. ■ 

c ■ 






c 






139 


As has been shown, the degree of progress made to¬ 
wards attainment of the aims of the courses is less than 
desirable. 

RECOMMENDATIONS 

Two recommendations follow from the conclusions set 
forth on the preceding pages. 

(1) As there appears to exist an inequality of oppor¬ 
tunity for children in all grades of the school to experience 
art it is recommended that a study (or studies) be made to 
discover how art education may become available to all child¬ 
ren in Alberta. 

(2) As the degree of progress made towards attainment 
of the aims of art education appears to be less than desirable 
it is recommended that a study (or studies) be made to dis¬ 
cover the causes of this lack of progress so that a more effect¬ 
ive art program may be developed. 




- 
















■ d . • : ' • • • , 

' 3 



, 










- ' ’ . • , ; 

OB. OB o o• . ■ ■. o • o I' v^VQjB 










BIBLIOGRAPHY 








BOOKS 


Arnheim, R., Art and Visual Perception , Berkeley, University 
of California Press, 1954, 393 p. 

Barkan, M., A Foundation for Art Education , New York, The 
Ronald Press, 1955, 223 p. 

Barnes Foundation, Art and Education , Contributions by John 

Dewey, et. al., Merion, Pa., Barnes Foundation, 1929, 
349 p. 

Best-Maugard, A., A Method of Creative Design , New York, 

Knopf, 1929. 

Cole, N.R., The Arts in the Classroom . New York, The John 
Day Co., 1940, 137 p. 

D f Amico, V., Creative Teaching in Art , Scranton, Pa., 
International Textbook Co., 1942, 241 p. 

Dow, A., Composition . Garden City, N.Y., Doubleday, 1928, 

128 p. 

Ellsworth, M.. and Andrews, M. F., Growing with Art ,(books 

I-VI), Chicago, Ill., B. Sanborn and Co., n.d. 64 p* 

Faulkner, R., et al., Art To-Day . New York, Henry Holt and 
Co., 1941, 519 p. 

Fry, R., Vision and Design . New York, Brentano ? s, n.d., 302 p. 

Gaitskeli, C. D., Art Education in the Province of Ontario . 
Toronto, The Ryerson Press,~194§, 49 p. 

Gardner, H., Art Through the Ages ,New York. Harcourt-Brace, 
1936, 851 p. 

Gardner, H., Understanding the Arts . New York, Harcourt-Brace, 
1932, 336 p. 

Gibbs, E., The Teaching of Art in Schools , New York, Greenberg 
Inc., 1941. 

Gregg, H., Art for the Schools of America . Scranton, Pa., 
International Textbook Co., 1941, 193 p. 

Horne, J. M., The Art Class in Action . Toronto, Longmans 
Green and Co., 1941, 135 p. 





















t 



5 


« * 


t 


q t 


5 * l 



C 





C 






C 





$ 


K 


t * 
? 6 




? * * ' S 

e. 


c 



t 


t 


' 


■ii 











5 « 


t 




f 


t ■ 


c 


c » 


« * 






141 


Industrial Design Institute, The Nature of Creative Think ing. 
New York, New York University Press, n.d., 73 p. 

Johnstone, W., Child Art to Man Art . London, MacMillan and 
Co., Ltd., 1941, 143 p. 

Knapp, H. E., Design Ap proach to Crafts . Springfield, Mass., 
Holden Publishing Co., 1945, 13# p. 

Lowenfeld, V., Creative and Me ntal Growth . New York, The 
Macmillan Co., 1950, 2$6p. 

Lowenfeld, V., The Nature of Creative Activity , New York, 
Harcourt-Brace, 1939, 272 p. 

MacDonald, R., Art a s E ducation , New York, The Macmillan Co., 
1947, 309 p. 

Moholy-Nagy, L., Vision in Motion, Chicago, Theobald, 1947. 

371 p. 

National Art Education Association, Art and th e Adolescent , 
Eighth Yearbook, Kutztown, Pa., State Teachers 1 
College, 1957, 69 p. 

National Art Education Association, Research i n Art Education , 
Seventh Yearbook, Kutztown, Pa., State Teachers 1 
College, 1956, 141 p. 

Pearson, R., The N e w Art Education (Revised), New York, 

Harper and Bros., 1953, 266 p. 

Rannells, E. W., Art Education in the Junior High Sch ool, 
Lexington, University of Kentucky, 194§. 

Read, H., The Meaning of Art , London, Faber and Faber, 1931, 
159 p. 

Read, H., The Philosophy of Modern Art, New York, Meridian 
Books, 1957, 300 p. 

Read, H., Education through Art , Pantheon, New York, n.d., 

320 p. 

Richardson, M., Art and the Child , London, University of 
London Press, 194$* 

Todd, J. M., and Gale, A., En.ioyment and Use of Art in the 
Elementary School , Chicago, Ill., University of 
Chicago Press, 1933, 129 P* 






























u 



X '■ 






X 




X 


X 










x 








V 


t 





X 


X 



c &£,q: i 


X 









142 


Tomlinson, R. R., Children as Artists , London, Penguin, 1947, 
42 p • 

Tomlinson, R. R., Picture and Pa tter n-Making by Children , 
London, Studio, 1934, 120 p. 

Winslow, L. L., The Integrated School Ar t Programme , New York, 
McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., 1939, 391 p. 


ARTICLES 


Bender, L. "Art and Mental Health." Art E ducation Bulletin , 
Eastern Arts Association 13: 4-l§. September 1956. 

Groves, G. B. "The Eighteenth International Conference on 
Public Education Geneva 1955• " Art E ducat ion , 
Journal of the National Art Education Association 
9: 1&-21. January 1956. 

Orzehowski, J. J. "The Nature of Creative Activity as Applied 
to Childrens Art." Art Education , Journal of the 
National Art Education Association 10: 3-20. May 
1957. 


REPORTS AND MISCELLANEOUS PUBLICATIONS 


Annua l R eports , Department of Education, Province of Alberta, 
'‘'"1906-1956 incl. 

Art Education, Ministry of Education Pamphlet No. 6, London, 
"His’"Majesty f s Stationery Office, 1946, 56 p. 

Art Education for the Elementary Schools of Ohio , Ohio State 
Department of Education, Columbus, Ohio, 1954, US p. 

Bulletin I, Foundat i ons of Education , Department of Education, 
Province of Alberta, 1949* 

Bulletin III, Elementary School, Handwriting and Art , Depart¬ 
ment of Education, Province of Alberta, 1950, 4& p. 

Bulletin VII, Programme o f Studies for the High School , 

Department *of Education, Province of Alberta, 1946, 

30 p. 


















m i 

t . < ... ■ • ‘ «* 

... - ' . 

. e : . • t i 

< • ; 

■ 


• ‘... ■ . t . , - 

. 


i 














' 

, .: o J :j 


Jj, Si .'.ox i;\ 







' 

'■ 

\ 

-i : , v 

- 








t 


jo. ; : Hoi:ctri'- . *io 


, i ' •' J- V. - : 1. 1 


: t ■ - 


x. 


- • . 


. 




.ivN \o • ... x. ". 






...o Cv x v O'* 






<. -V ji -j , . ■"■■■ ;■ ... V • ■ . . I. • 

. .... < ■ ....: ... t ... ■ . j 1 ';. 








143 


Curriculum G u ide for Alberta Secondary Schools , Curriculum 

Branch, Department of Education, Province of Alberta, 

1950, 2$ p. 

Junior High School Curriculum Guide for Art ,(Interim Edition), 
Department of Education, Province of Alberta, 1952, 

3& p. 

Junior High School Curriculum Guide for Art ,(Interim Edition), 
Department of Education, Province of Alberta, 1955, 

36 p. 

Forbes, J. A*, Art Education — Its Cultural Basis, its 

Development, and its Application in Alberta Schools , 

unpublished Master 1 s dissertation, University of 

Alberta, Edmonton, 1951. 












APPENDICES 



144 


APPENDIX A 

FACSIMILE : STANDARD FIVE AND SIX DRAWING EXAMINATIONS 


The 1907 examinations for Standards Five and Six were 
one and one-half hour papers, each one prefaced with instruc¬ 
tions that students were to use drawing paper of convenient 
size without folding, and that one sheet was to be used for 
each drawing* Facsimilies of these papers follow: 


Standard V Drawing 


Values 

(14) 1. Make a complete drawing of the group. 

(The presiding examiner will place a 
chalk-box partially filled with cray¬ 
ons, below the level of the eye, with 
end and side toward candidate; the 
lid off and leaning against the corner 
of the box; and a blackboard eraser 
placed on the box across one corner, 
leaving the crayons exposed to view.) 

(10) 2. Make geometric views of the box, using 

a suitable scale. Indicate the scale 
used. (Candidates will use instruments. 
The presiding examiner will give the 
candidates the dimensions of the box.) 

(13) 3. Draw a suitable design for the front 

cover of a book. Print the title on 
the cover. 

(10) 4. Make a drawing of the left fist and 

wrist with the fingers towards you. 

(13) 5 . Draw from memory an ordinary lamp with 

the shade on it, the shade to be 
ornamented simply. 












Values 
( 12 ) 1 

( 10 ) 2 


( 10 ) 3 
( 10 ) 4 
( 12 ) 5 

( 2 ) 6 
(4) 


145 


Standard VI Drawing 


. Make a finished drawing of the group, 

(The presiding examiner will place before 
the candidates a chair on which are 
placed a pail and drinking cup, and 
against which is leaned a broom.) 

. Represent three apple barrels on a 
grassy lawn. The axis of the first is 
vertical; the second is lying on its side 
with side and end to view; the third 
barrel has one end on the ground and the 
other leaned against the second. 

. Draw a suitable border design for deco¬ 
rating a blackboard. 

. On a plate are placed an apple, a pear, 
an orange and a bunch of grapes. Draw. 

. Illustrate: "That old bridge still 
makes a hoary eyebrow for the gleam 
beyond it where the waters marry." 

The Brook. 

. (a) What principles should guide one in 
grouping objects for drawing? 

(b) Distinguish: picture, pattern, 
working drawing, ornament. 


CL C 0.000 


, 


i 1.0 ' ■ 

' 




’■■■-O' 

>00 led oo o 


• 




/ 


o :■ 








. 

t ... 

,o L, 







KKiOi : ft 







0 ‘ 







: 




» 




: 








1 .. . 

: 

t 




lv.; ... .. 

euj 







* 

.vi.‘I Jo JO; o 

. 





--wool; . 0 : n;:d:c::. 

‘lo .. •. 








. 




.'...10 Ol 



t ... ' - : ' 

• 




. 

. 

\ 

-Jd 



O' ill. 




Sind 



■ 

J 01 • 



■ 


0 /.Old -'.O 


r U uii 















. 



ii.i: 

*OOG 0 

.. .10 , cool ; 







■ 






< •! 

c '• 

' 







. 

. ox 




• . 












146 


APPENDIX B 

FACSIMILE:' 1907 PROFESSIONAL DRAWING EXAMINATION 

The 1907 First and Second Class Professional examina¬ 
tions in Drawing were two hour papers. A facsimilie of one 
1907 examination paper follows: 


1. State the undesirable tendencies in our 
system of education (a) mentally (b) 
physically (c) socially which manual 
training is intended to relieve. 

2. What are the aims of manual training? How 
may it be correlated with the usual sub¬ 
jects of study? 

3. Outline a lesson in cardboard work for 
Standard III. Show the working drawings 
for the model. 

4* Construct the model mentioned in the above 
question. 

5. Write a lesson plan for teaching the draw¬ 
ing of a cylinder in Standard II. Make a 
drawing of this model in accordance with 
your lesson plan. 

6. Make a shaded drawing of (a) an open book 
(b) a basket (objects to be placed in 
position by the presiding examiner). 

7. Design a cover for a book, using as a unit 
of repetition any conventional figure 
studied during the term. 

Draw from memory any object based on the 
square prism. 




' . . . . • , * .. .. 

v i:'•>) c. bn,.; o' /; J:< , .. . [ 


; 


r .::r ■’ c '‘00 b . ■ ; :co .; u.v . 

. ..o i ■ 




V 1 ..... ' \ ‘ .... J 'i V-> 

. ■ • • ' 

o.irot; '::.o 

•. 


. .‘i •. 


. . lYLB ■ l.^oV. 

• V - J y> • 




v .!!u ;; 




■wtv: it a..'. frj o' \ > ... ■ b ..-o I; 

• ; 

. . 




:• | B J ‘ ) v ..1 to . h'.Yl i. Jt)C) i i .... \. B ©Jitt 

O V OO ' , O J.) •• ■ '»’> j O J, . \ Vi 

. ; r ... . 


o • .../. : < o - v.. . •.... ; 

. 

. . ... 


S i.iv* .... : , tv...; Jc. . ' • .-if, 


' 

. 





147 


APPENDIX C 


FACSIMILE: 1909 PROFESSIONAL FIRST AND SECOND CLASS 

EXAMINATION 


(In the questions on writing, students’ penmanship will be 

considered part of the test.) 

1. (a) What do you consider the chief problems in the teaching 

of writing? 

(b) Discuss the place of copy-work with beginners and show 
clearly how you would use it. 

2. Regularity and neatness of form is not always consistent, 
in the early grades, with ease and freedom of movement. 
Discuss fully and show how you would try to meet any 
difficulties involved here. 

3. Group the small letters according to similarity of elements 
as you would teach them. 

4* Indicate the relation of manual training as a school sub¬ 
ject to (a) society (b) the child (c) the other subjects 
on the course of study. 

5. Outline a manual training course suitable for Standards I 
and II and III. Indicate the special values of each kind 
of work suggested. 

6. What principles should guide you in the study of a group of 
objects? Illustrate by making a finished sketch of such a 
group. 

7. Write a lesson plan for a type-form study of the cylinder. 











APPENDIX D 


ART REQUIREMENTS FOR TEACHING CERTIFICATES, 1907 


Third Class Certificate: 

Drawing 

Second Class Professional Certificate: 

Drawing 

Music 


First Class Professional Certificate: 

Theory and Practice of Music 

Theory and Practice of Drawing 

Theor}r and Practice of Manual Training 






, ■... . - ■ - ■' •• 


■ 

: ... . wr, ..U brio Os, . 

; :»5 0..f:' ■ ‘.'.u i: cN ' v f 

o.na:r . r Cv: f.'O-ioOB' 

' 

■ ■ 









149 


APPENDIX E 

NEW COURSE OF STUDY, 1912 


A new course of studies for all grades of the school 

in which Drawing was taught appeared in 1912, as follows: 

Progression in Art Study .- There is no wide 
difference in the character of the work or in 
the educational results secured in the teach¬ 
ing of art in various grades of the public 
school, apart from the utility aspect of the 
subject as an aid to manual or industrial work 
in the upper grades. There is, however, a 
difference with respect to the application of 
principles to practice in the upper half of 
the school period in contrast to the work of 
the lower half, and some difference in respect 
to freedom in the matter of allowing for indi¬ 
vidual choice. In the main, the office of 
teacher in the lower grades is to arouse inter¬ 
est in the pupil in using the crayon or brush 
as a means of expression, coupled with the 
securing of manual facility and the recognition 
and appreciation of colour. In the fifth grade, 
the formal principles of perspective, light and 
shade, and compositions are introduced, outdoor 
sketching is carried on, and greater complexity 
is involved in the color work in relation to 
representation and decoration. In the upper 
grades considerable elaboration in decoration 
and design is expected; considerable progress 
should likewise be observed in the art quality 
of pupil f s works. The employment of scale and 
plan work is made a part of the course for the 
last two years for the sake of those who do not 
secure this training in manual training 
departments. 

Mater ials.- The materials and utensils employed 
are as follows: 

The blackboard for free arm exercises, rough 
paper, drawing books in white and coloured 
papers (not less than 10 x 12"), and sketching 
pads, about S x 3". Soft crayons (other than 




M 


c 


.To ii i . > . • - ‘ 








. i 

< - 


■ 

. 


■ '• 

. ‘'-j x ' Jxocx t 







wax), and including charcoal, are required 
for the first two years work. HB pencils 
for all grades. A No. 6 (Reeves & Sons) 
brush is the most generally usefull for all 
grades, with a No. 4 added for the upper 
grades. Color boxes in four colors for the 
first four grades and in six colors for the 
upper four grades, with a tube of white for 
use with coloured papers added, will be suf¬ 
ficient. 

Grade I 


Representation 

Illustrative drawing; free illustration 
related to the child T s experience and to 
stories. Common objects, such as fruits, in 
line and mass. Simple landscape. Object 
drawing. The sphere and the cylinder. 

Decoration :- 

Border design using geometric figures, 
square, circle etc., and simple conventional, 
natural forms, booklet, valentines. 

Color :- 

Study of Standard colors. Use in designs 
and in representation. 

Grade II 


Representation :- 

Illustrative drawing; suitable for class 
and season of the year. Object drawing: com¬ 
mon objects in line and mass. The hemisphere. 
Memory drawing. Common objects, simple land¬ 
scape. Picture study. 

Decoration :- 

Easy patterns using geometric figures and 
conventionalized natural forms as units of 
design. Christmas booklet or card. Simple 
lettering. 

Color :- 

Study of six standard colors. Flat washes 
in ink and color. Application to design and 
representation. 











CV J 


i, : ■ 



















: 








151 


Grade III 
Representation :- 

Illustrative drawing; as in second year. 
Object drawing: common objects, fruits, 
vegetables and leaves. The cube, simple 
memory drawing: animals in mass. Games. 

Simple landscape. 

Decorat ion:- 

Conventionalizing in simple natural forms. 
Use in decoration of handwork. Simple 
lettering. 

Color :- 

Review work of the second year. Color 
schemes from nature used in design. 

Grade IV 

Representation :- 

Illustrative drawing: Exercises in com¬ 
position in line and mass. Object drawing: 
Trees, groups of leaves or fruit, animals. 

Use the type forms, the cube, cylinder and 
sphere in their application to object drawing 
and for the study of light, shade, and perspec¬ 
tive. Landscape. Memory drawing (of the 
objects mentioned above). Picture study and 
the life of the artist. 

Decoration :- 

Continue conventionalization of natural 
forms. Decoration of hand work. Lettering. 

Color :- 

Complementary colors. Effects of different 
combinations of color. 

Grade V 

Representation :- 

Illustrative drawing: Related to other 
school subjects. Continue studies in composi¬ 
tion in line, values and color. Continue 
study of perspective from outdoor and indoor 
examples, and by the collection of sketches 
illustrating its rules. Memory drawing. 



















. 


.Oi l 







; 


o'. 





1 

O \ 1 

v- : > • \. ... ■ : 1 . .... . / .: . .'. . : .':c 

.. ,i',v ... ! :iU‘I ! .cl .* J i... 

... . . . . ■•. o. ; , i . >1 / x 

. ■. . . 
















Sketching from Window 

Quick sketches of animals. Flowers and 
fruits in pure color and from direct hand¬ 
ling. Picture study and life of the artist. 

Decorat ion:- 

Simple historic ornament of Egypt. Book 
cover. Calendar. 

Color:- 

Review. Neutral values of colors. 

Grade VI 


Representation :- 

Illustrative drawing: As in the fifth 
year. Rules of perspective illustrated. 
Memory drawing. Sketching of door in various 
positions. Landscape. Picture study and the 
life of the artist. 

Decoration :- 

Simple historic ornament of Greece. 
Decoration of borders. Simple surface 
pattern. 

Color :- 

Review former color work. Greyed colors. 
Grade VII 


Representation :- 

Representation of objects as in the sixth 
grade. Illustrative drawing: as in the 
fifth and sixth grades. Memory drawing: as 
in the fifth and sixth grades. Sketching: 
as in the fifth and sixth grades, and 
furniture sketching. 

Decoration :- 

Simple historic ornament of Rome. Surface 
patterns from conventionalized natural forms. 
Individual work. 

Color:- 

Review color. Make scales in full, neutral 
and greyed colors. 

Construc tion:- 

Work lEgTcfr awing s. 














C i 







■ 




- : .. o; . 

■ 







' 


. 




CJ ‘ ■ 



v; 


t• o t: 








: 












- : .i . ; i:o : ■ _ 








Grade VIII 


Review of historic ornament of previous 
years. Continue each line of study with 
more attention to the underlying principles 
of beauty. More difficult working drawings. 
Pupils should work more independently, 
choosing and arranging models, selecting 
good compositions in outdoor work, and 
illustrating from a broader field. Criticism 
of work. 



' 

. \. 

: 

% vvv r . ' ■ 0 i • 

■ Jv. .... t ■ .'.o 

, ■ '' ■ ‘ ' 

' : :■ . V. *:,ij i, 






154 


APPENDIX F 


RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE EIGHTEENTH INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE 

ON PUBLIC EDUCATION 
July 1955 

TO THE MINISTRIES OF EDUCATION CONCERNING THE TEACHING OF ART 
IN PRIMARY AND SECONDARY SCHOOLS: 

The International Conference on Public Education, 

Convened in Geneva by the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization, and the International 
Bureau of Education, and having assembled on the fourth day 
of July, nineteen hundred and fifty-five, for its eighteenth 
session, adopts on the twelfth day of July, nineteen hundred 
and fifty-five, the following Recommendation: 

The Conference, 

Considering that art education, which makes an appeal to 
so many of the child f s activities, provides an important means 
of aesthetic, intellectual and moral education, and enables 
the teacher to find out what the child is thinking and feeling 
and to discover his artistic aptitude, 

Considering that, in the pursuit of learning, in the pur¬ 
suit of a profession and in the enlightened use of leisure, 
the skill and understanding acquired by studying art, encour¬ 
ages the appreciation of beauty in nature, life, production 
and art, 

Considering that art is an educational factor necessary to 
the all-round development of personality, and an important 
means to a deeper understanding of reality, 

Considering that the visual arts, as well as the other 
arts, can make a contribution to confidence and understanding 
among mankind, 

Considering that the multiplication of images, through 
photography, books, advertisements, films and television, to¬ 
day represents an advance as important as was the invention of 
printing, and that the visual education of children should 
therefore be more widely developed so as to guide their think¬ 
ing, cultivate their taste, and prevent their awareness from 
being blunted by vulgarity and ugliness, 












. 

. . Oo. . 0 ; ■ . ; , ; 

:.iui,ooci'oo 0 / - v o ;o'.oo‘"; i. . oo ■ , 

> - 




: 




. 








s 

o. , 








« •• - 



< ■ 






t v 

• 


. 

1 


• t 


. « 

V 


' 



«J i l XX 

. 

. 


t . 





t 0 ■- 

' 

j c 

i 



■ ■ . 



on ; ■ : . 


■ 

i 



~. 0 . 


: v ; > . O’ ... 





• 




. 





i 


. 



00':. 


M n Mt o. 




i ! 






.. 

i : S i \j .■ .... O M MO i :■ - 


: .. . O'. O .MO 0.0 . 1 . ' 

o o ...... m o -J oMl 

-.0 xr M. . t:UG 9 fl 


■; , 


;• m, • I..O.O'- o.i : 




...o Jo om : mo ' /• : ,ov ' 








155 


Submits to the Ministries of Education of the 72 member 
countries of UNESCO the following Recommendations: 

1. Art, that is to say, drawing, painting, modelling and 
other similar activities, should be taught in all primary 
schools; it should have its place as a subject in its own 
right and as a means of expression, and should contribute to 
the teaching of other subjects. 

2. Art, as a subject in its own right, should be compul¬ 
sory in most classes in secondary schools, and optional for 
the rest. 

3. Whether compulsory or optional, art should be coordi¬ 
nated with other subjects in the curriculum and with other 
school activities; this should be done whether or not the 
various subjects are taught by the same teacher. 

4* Because it is a valuable means of education in itself 
and because of its importance as a means of teaching skills, 
art should be regarded as of equal importance with other 
subjects. 

5. When drawing up time-tables, adequate time should be 
given for art as a subject in its own right. 

6. Since art demands individual rather than group teach¬ 
ing, art classes should be small enough to enable a teacher 
to give attention to individual pupils. 

7* In drawing up the syllabus for art and in deciding on 
the choice of methods, the aims of teaching the subject should 
constantly be borne in mind; the following aims should espe¬ 
cially be taken into account: (a) education aims: the cul¬ 
tivation, for example, of observation, imagination, expression, 
self-control, the capacity for sustained work and the ability 
to cooperate with others in group undertakings; (b) cultural 
aims: for example, the formation of taste, and the encourage¬ 
ment of an understanding of works of art and of a respect for 
them; (c) practical aims: the acquisition of skill useful in 
the school, in everyday life, or for professional purposes; 

(d) for the study of the child: to find out what children 
are thinking and feeling from a study of their work; (e) so¬ 
cial aims; to foster an understanding of the worldwide sig¬ 
nificance of art through an interest in and respect for the 
art of other countries, big or small, and to contribute to 
the bringing up the rising generation in the spirit of 
humanity and friendship among the nations and of peace. 












156 


3. The various stages of the mental growth of the young 
child and of the adolescent, as well as their interests, 
should be taken into account in elaborating the art syllabus 
and teaching methods. 

9* An important place should be given to the systematic 
teaching of the theory and practice techniques, but the sub¬ 
ject should be dealt with in such a way that the pupils 1 
activities are related to the needs of everyday life. 

10. In the secondary school, the appreciation of works of 
art and the history of art should be included in the curricu¬ 
lum; the teaching of the history of art should pave the way 
to an understanding of the evolution of art as being part of 
the development of civilization in each age. 

11. In the use of methods and the choice of subjects to be 
set, exercises to be carried out, and materials to be used, 
the teacher should be free to relate the work to local condi¬ 
tions and to the aptitudes and requirements of each pupil. 

12. The teaching of art should derive inspiration from 
artistic traditions both in the country as a whole and in the 
locality concerned. 

13. Encouraging children to find their own form of expres¬ 
sion by means of free drawing, painting, modelling, and other 
similar activities is a valuable method of teaching. 

14. So as to give the most gifted pupils opportunities of 
developing their aptitudes, and to make the study of art more 
attractive, it is desirable that a supplementary course with 
a flexible programme be provided for such pupils from 
different classes. 

15. It is much to be desired that, especially in primary 
schools, the equipment and materials required for art should 
be supplied free of charge by the school authorities or other 
bodies; materials obtainable locally should be used as far as 
possible. 

16. It is recommended that all post-primary schools should 
have specialist studio-workshops for art and crafts. 

17. The school should in itself provide an environment 
characterized by good taste and artistic understanding; this 
especially applies to the school building, the playgrounds 

and gardens, the internal planning of the school, its furniture, 
and the attention given to maintenance. 












































157 


1$. So far as possible, the pupils themselves should play 
a part, either individually or in teams, in the maintenance 
and decoration of the school, and in creating the setting for 
school festivities. 

19* Textbooks and all literature for boys and girls should 
be regarded as potent influences in the teaching of art; 
binding, paper, typography and illustrations should combine 
both to cultivate and satisfy the pupil f s taste and sense for 
design. 

20. It is recommended that the responsible authorities 
should supply such reproductions, casts, slides and films as 
may be required for the teaching of art; school libraries 
should contain a useful collection of books on art, both on 
history and appreciation and on techniques which the pupils 
can themselves put into practice. 

21. Like other mass media, the universal use of the cinema, 
which is undeniably a means of artistic expression, imparting 
news, and impressing ideas, sets teachers a problem to which 
great attention must be given; it is desirable to use the 
appeal of the cinema to children for good ends, and it will 

in fact be so used if care is taken during and after schooling 
to train their judgment and taste in respect of films. 

22. It is desirable to request the education authorities 
to examine ways of providing schools with television sets, 
and thus of giving art teachers even in the least favoured 
areas an excellent teaching aid; such provision would also 
facilitate the organization of correspondence courses for 
children and adults living at a distance from the centres of 
artistic culture. 

23. The growth of artistic appreciation on the part of boys 
and girls will be greatly facilitated by their familiarity 
with local resources, such as art galleries and museums, 
buildings of artistic and architectural interest, private 
collections, local crafts and industries, and popular and 
folk art, and with the beauties of nature, as well as by 
occasional visits to special exhibitions, films and other such 
events. 


24. The formation of circulating collections of reproduc¬ 
tions and of original works of art for schools of various 
kinds should be encouraged. 

25. Not only should exhibitions of childrens work be held 
in their own locality or country, but such exhibitions should 
be exchanged between one nation and another* 





















il O 


X j .l.'ci J 




; 










15S 


26. In view of the general character of primary education 
and the close links between the various subjects, it is de¬ 
sirable that art should be taken by the class teacher. 

27- The responsible authorities should pay special atten¬ 
tion to the pupil who is artistically gifted and ensure that 
he receives the best advice and takes the most suitable course 
of study. 

2£. The artistic outlook of the future primary school 
teacher should be a matter of real importance; practical in¬ 
struction in art and the teaching of the history and appreci¬ 
ation of art, and penmanship, should be included in the 
curriculum of the training college. 

29. Secondary school art teachers should be selected not 
only for their artistic and technical capacity, but also be¬ 
cause of their teaching ability and experience. 

30. In both primary and secondary teacher training great 
importance should be attached to psychology, particularly to 
the psychology of spontaneous expression in children. 

31. The buildings, interior planning and furnishing of 
training colleges should be such as to create an artistic 
environment for the future teacher; visits to buildings of 
architectural and artistic interest, and to exhibitions , 
including those of children T s work, will serve to enhance 
the student T s usefulness as a teacher. 

32. Conferences and refresher courses, both at home and 
abroad, should be encouraged in order to help teachers of art 
to perfect their knowledge of their subject, to keep up-to- 
date with the various outlooks which are encountered in the 
teaching of art, and to exchange views on all matters of 
common interest. 

33* It is very desirable to grant in-service teachers 
travelling and practical training scholarships, so as to give 
them opportunities of making a first-hand study of historical 
monuments, contemporary works of art, and teaching methods 
abroad. 

34* Collections of children T s work from the infant school 
to the latest stages should be formed for exhibition in train¬ 
ing colleges in order to illustrate methods of teaching art, 
both old and new; children 1 s work from other countries should 
be included; there is also the fact that these collections 
would provide a source for the circulating schemes described 
above m clause 23. 




159 


35* It is desirable that the teaching of art should be 
subject to the advice of artistically qualified organizers, 
supervisors, or specialist inspectors; if this is not possi¬ 
ble, the inspectors or advisers concerned should do their 
best to appreciate the requirements of art teaching and to 
encourage its development as far as possible. 

36. Secondary teachers of art should have training equiv¬ 
alent to that of their colleagues teaching other subjects, and 
the same status, standing and privileges. 






160 


APPENDIX G 


QUESTIONNAIRE TO SUPERINTENDENTS 


QUESTIONNAIR E 

This questionnaire is addressed to all Superintendents in 
the province as part of a study evaluating art education. 

The aim of this questionnaire is to elicit an evaluation 
on the attainment of aims in art education. Please complete 
and return this questionnaire at your earliest convenience. 

INSTRUCTIONS 

The questionnaire consists of three sections: one section 
for each school classification. In each section the first 
item (1) requires a numerical reply. The other items con¬ 
sist of a two part statement: an underlined assertion of 
an aim in the art program as given in the Department of 
Education Bulletins, followed by an explanatory note indi¬ 
cating some of the signs of attainment. These items are 
completed by placing a number symbol in the space provided. 
Each number symbolizes a degree of attainment as shown in 
the scale for evaluation. In forming each evaluation it is 
most important that two main considerations be kept in mind: 

(a) the trend during the past few years, and 

(b) the standards of the average or the majority of 
students. 

Please use the space provided to write any comments you may 
wish to add. 

Scale for Evaluation : 

5 symbolizes evidence of attainment of the aim. 

4 symbolizes indications of progress towards 
attainment of the aim. 

3 symbolizes the appearance of some progress 
towards the attainment of the aim. 

2 symbolizes indications of little improvement 

towards attainment of the aim: the aim appears 
to be neglected. 

1 symbolizes evidence of no progress towards 

attainment of the aim: the aim is unknown or 
is ignored. 











SECTION A 

The Seni or H igh School Art Program 

1. Please state the number of Senior High Schools in 
the Division, 


In how many of these schools is Art 2 offered on 
an annual or biennial basis? 

In how many of these schools is Art 1 offered on 
an annual or biennial basis? 


In how many of these schools is an alternate Art 
program offered on an annual or biennial basis? 


2• The pr i ncipa l aim o f the Senior art courses is to 
develop aesthetic standard s in t h e mind of the 
student , as shown by knowledge and application of 
the underlying principles of good design. 


3. The development of aesthetic standards enables the 

student to evaluate all works of art rela t ing t o 
the ind iv idual, the home, and the community , as 

shown by a finer discrimination/"development of 

good taste, and increasing appreciation* 


4. The development of aesthetic standards aids in 

releasing and directing the "creative energy of 

the student , as shown by the creation of 
beautiful form and colour in student work. 







































SECTION B 

The Junior High School Art Program 

1. Please state the number of Junior High Schools in 
the Division. 

In how many of these schools is Art offered on an 
annual or biennial basis? 

For how many years during the Junior High school 
period may the student expect to elect art? 

2. An aim of the Junior High School art program is 

the development of increased powers of observa¬ 

tion a n d visual .judgement , as shown by the 
development of line, form, space, and pattern 
in the work of children. 

3• An aim of the art program is the development of 

creative ability in all "children, as shown by 

freedom in creative expression, free from 
dictated lessons. 

4. An aim of the art program is the development of 

the special abilities o f talented chi ldren , as 

shown by varied classroom "activities designed to 
discover and conserve these talents. 

5. An aim of the art program is the development of 

a capacity for appreciatio n, as shown by an 
increasing awareness of Feauty provided by man 
and nature. 

6. The art program aim s to develop socially accept ¬ 
able hab its an d goo d citizensh ip, as shown by the 
children working in "small groups. 

7 . An aim of the art program is to develop an under ¬ 
standing of design, drawing, and colour, as shown 
by application in the art work of the children. 

3. An aim of the art program is the development of 

self-expression, as shown by the permissive 

classroom atmosphere. 






























































. 










163 


SECTION C 

The Elementary School Art Program 

1* Please state the number of Elementary school rooms 
in the Division. 

Please indicate the approximate number in which 
little or no art program has been carried out. 

2. An aim of the Elementary school art program is to 

make all children happy with their art work, as 

may be shown by children enthusiastic for art. 

3. An aim of the art program is to foster a desire 

and liking for art , as shown by children exten¬ 

sively using art. 

4. An aim of the art program is to devel op awareness 
of art as a continually satisfying "form of expres ¬ 

sion , 'as shown by children eagerly participating 
in t he art program. 

3. An aim of the art program is to foster the de sire 
to explo re the environment as a source of experience 

as shown by 'the utilization of environment as one 

source of inspiration. 

6. An aim of the art program is to enable children to 

gain increasing control over art me dia, as shown by 

increasing development in their art product. 

7. An aim of the art program is to foster respect fo r 

the products of others » as shown by an awareness 
and interest in the work of others. 

&. An aim of the art program is to enable children to 

gain in accuracy and completeness of observation 

as shown by increasing development in their art 

expression. 

9. An aim of the art program is the development of 

the ability to plan and complete art projects, 

as shown by children initiating and solving their 

own art problems. 


NOTE: If possible, please append two or three examples of two 
dimensional art work, representing the average work from the 
Elementary, and the Junior and Senior High Schools. 




















































APPENDIX H 


QUESTIONNAIRE TO TEACHERS 


INSTRUCTIONS 


The questionnaire consists of three sections: one section 
for each school classification. The items consist of a two 
part statement: an underlined assertion of an aim in the 
art program as given in Department of Education Bulletins, 
followed by an explanatory note indicating some of the signs 
of attainment. These items are completed by placing a num¬ 
ber symbol in the space provided. Each number symbolizes a 
degree of attainment as shown in the scale for evaluation. 

In forming each evaluation it is most important that two 
main considerations be kept in mind: 

(a) the trend during the past few years, and 

(b) the standards of the average, or the majority of 
students. 


Scale for Evaluation: 

5 symbolizes evidence of achievement of the aim. 

hr symbolizes indications of progress towards 

attainment of the aim. 

3 symbolizes the appearance of some progress 
towards attainment of the aim. 

2 symbolizes indications of little progress 

towards attainment of the aim: the aim seems 
to be neglected. 

1 symbolizes evidence of no progress towards 

attainment of the aim: the aim is unknown or 
is ignored. 


Please indicate your position 











165 


SECTION A 

The Senior High School Art Program 

1. The principal aim of the Senior Art courses is to 

develop aesthetic standards in the mind of the 

student / as shown by knowledge" and application of 

the underlying principles of good design. 

£• The development of aesthetic standards enables 

the student to evaluate all works of art relat ¬ 

ing to the individual, the home, and the community , 
as shown by a finer discrimination, development of 

good taste, and increasing appreciation. 

3• The development of aesthetic standards aids in 
releasing; and directing the creative energy of the 

student, as shown by the creation of beautiful 

form and colour in student work. 























Sr t 












- 

< 

- 


. ... 

- 

* . 


- ' ' • . . ' . 

. .. - . ' . 




































SECTION B 

The Junior High School Art Program 


1. The aim of the Junior High School art program is 

the development of increased powers of observa ¬ 

tion and visual .judgement , as shown by the devel- 
opment of line, form, space, and pattern in the 
work of the children. 

2. An aim of the art program is the development of 

creative ability in all children, as shown by 

freedom in creative expression, free from 
dictated lessons. 

3• An aim of the art program is the development of 
the special abilities of talented children , as 
shown by varied classroom activities designed to 
discover and conserve these talents. 

4. An aim of the art program is the development of 

a capacity for appreciation, as shown by in¬ 

creasing awareness of beauty provided by man and 
nature. 

5. The art program aims to develop socially accep ¬ 

table habits and good citizenship , as shown by 
the children working in small groups. 

6. An aim of the art program is to develop an under - 
standing~of design, drawing, and colour , as shown 
by application in the art work of the children. 

7. An aim of the art prog ram is the development of 
self-expression , as shown by the permissive 
classroom atmosphere. 































*' 

' ■ • _ ■ 

: • ... : r 5 ■' 

' 

. .. . ... 

. 

■ 

. 

. 

i t . ; ; _ ,• . : • 

* *: 

■ 

* 

. 

. - . . - ,, 

‘ ' , . • , . . ■ 

■ 

:.;•; *.■: .. ;; • .• c ... •.. ~ ?V;7 

: 






















167 


SECTION C 

The Ele mentary School Art Program 

1. An aim of the Elementary School art program is to 

make all children happy with their art work, as 

shown by children enthusiastic for art. 

2. An aim of the art program is to foster a desire 

and l ik ing for art , as shown by children exten¬ 

sively using art. 

3* An aim of the art program is to develop awareness 

of art as a continually satisfying form of expres ¬ 

sion , as shown by children eagerly participating 
in the art program. 

4* An aim of the art program is to foster the desire 

to explore the environment as a source of experi ¬ 

ence , as shown by the utilization of the 'environ¬ 
ment as one source of inspiration. 

3• An aim of the art program is to enable children 

to gain "incre'asing control "over art media, as 

shown by increasing development in their art 

product. 

6. An aim of the ar t p rogram is t o fo ster respect for 

the products of others , as shown by an awareness 
and interest in the work of others. 

7. An aim of the art program is to enable children to 

gain in accuracy and completeness of observation, 

as shown by increasing development in their art 
expression. 

&. An aim o f the art program is the development of 

the ability to plan and complete art pr o jects , as 

shown by children initiating and solving their own 
art problems. 


NOTE: If possible, please append two or three examples of 

two dimensional art work, representing the average work from 
the Elementary, and the Junior and Senior High Schools. 











































163 


APPENDIX J 


QUESTIONNAIRE STUDY: DATA FOR THE SENIOR HIGH SCHOOLS 

SUPERINTENDENT GROUP 

Number of 
Schools in 
Division 

Schools 

with 

Art 20 

Schools 

with 

Art 10 

Schools 

with 

Alternate 

EVALUATIONS* 

I 

AIM 

II 

III 

2 

0 _ 

1 

_ 0 

3 

4 

4 


2 

3 _ 

0 

4 

3 

4 


0 . 

6 _ 


7 

3 

3 

a 

0 _ 

__ _ 0 

7-3 


3 

3 


0 


_ 0 

3 

7 

3 


0 _ 

2 

_ l , 

7 

3 

1 

6 

o 

7 

7 - 

3 _ 

1 

7 __ 

9 

0 

9 


3 

. 3 

3 

a 

1 

7 

0 

3 

7 - 

_ 3 


1 

7 

o _ 

4 

3_ 

3 


n 

2 __ 

_ 4 

3 

2 - 

2 

5 

3 

5 




5 

i 

0 

n 

n 




/, _ 

i 

. 1 

o . 

3 

3 

3 








i 







a 

0 

3 

0 ... 

3 

3 

3 

3 

i 

3 _ 

o _ . 

4 

_ 3 _ 

3 

/. 

o 


_ n 

3 . 

3 

3 

*+•.--"i 

a 

o 

3 


J 

- f 1 

3 _ 

4 

i 

o 

1 

0 

5 

/. -- 

4 


o 

1 


> 

3 

H 

3 

3 

7 

0 

7 

o 

J 



6 

o 


- o 

0 

0 _^ 

0 

/, ... 

n 

n _ _ _ 

0 




L 

n 

i _ 


L 

- _ 3 

2 

1 

0 

i 

1 

3 

3_ 

2 

A 

1 

6 

0 

3 

2 _ 

2 

A 

0 

3 

n 

— 3 

_3 

3 


o 

3 

o .. 

3 

2 

4 

- -- 

o 

✓ - 

7 

o 

3 . 

3 

3 

£ 

o 

7 

n _j 

_ 3 

2 

1 

7 

7 

o 

7 

i 0 

3 

3 

2 

——-r- 

o 

5 

n_| 

3 

3 

2 

--5-- 

o 

n 

2 

o _ 

3 

3 

3 

- - 

-- 

o 

i 

o 




-- X- 

9 

n 

7 

0 

4 

3 

5 





4 

3 

4 



































































































































































































































































































169 


APPENDIX J 
( Continued) 


Number of 
Schools in 
Division 

Schools 
with 
Art 20 

Schools 
with 
Art 10 

Schools 

with 

Alternate 

EVALUATIONS* 

I 

AIM 

II 

III 

5 

0 

3 _ 

0 

4 

3 

3 

5 . 

1 

5 

0 

3 

2 

L 

6 __ 

0 

_ 6 


4 

2 - 

3 

_ 7 

0 

4 _ 

_ 0 

— *r -- 


J 

i. 

6 

0 

- i 


3 


3 

4 

0 __ 

2 

_ 0 

J 

3 _ 

3 

3 

5 

0 

0 

r _0 ... 




9 

0 

4 

4 

3 

_ 2 

3 

TO! 

?ALS 




193 

11 

116 

17 





* Symbols: (5) evidence of attainment, (4) indications of 
progress, (3) appearance of some progress, (2) indications 
of little progress, (1) evidence of no progress. Refer to 
Appendix H for wording of the aims. 

















































































:h 


- 

















































170 


APPENDIX J 


QUESTIONNAIRE STUDY: 

DATA FOR THE SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL 

TEACHER GROUP 

EVALUATIONS* 

AM I 

AM II 

AM III 

3 

4 

4 

3 

3 

3 

3 

4 

3 

4 

3 


3 

4 

4 

3 

4 

4 

5 

_ 4 

3 

4 


l 

4 

4 

4 

3 

4 

3 

3 


3 

4 

3 

4 

5 

4 


5 

3 

] 

4 

5 

4 

4 

3 

4 

* Symbols: (5) evidence of attainment, 

(4) indications of progress 

, (3) appear- 

ance of some progress, (2) indications 

of little progress, (1) evidence of no 

progress. Refer to Appendix H for 

wording of the aims. 
















































































: 




, :hv. i.'iicM- ■ *j.u st> u. v . • , : >< 

.... .. •. • . /:j : 

. , . , t . • . . ... 

.l . ..a : 

. . 





































171 


APPENDIX K 


QUESTIONNAIRE STUDY: SUPERINTENDENTS 1 COMMENTS 
ON THE SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL ART PROGRAM 


(1) ” . . . It is hard to rate such a large group of schools 
and individual classrooms since the degree of difference 
spreads so widely in many cases. Tf 

( 2 ) ”1 have seen some art in the various high schools and am 
therefore judging on a limited basis. I find (the) 
questionnaire difficult to interpret because of the 
general terms used.” 

(3) ff . . • The courses were not those requested, but rather 
those that could be offered to the greater number of 
pupils. ...” 

(4) ”Many schools are hampered by the difficulty of obtaining 
the necessary art materials and sufficient funds to pur¬ 
chase the same. Also, as in other options, the students 
likely to succeed in Art classes are limited to their 
choice of option because of a desire to obtain a particular 
Grade XII course.” 

(5) ”Only 6 classes in the Senior High School—art offered 
irregularly or occasionally.” 

( 6 ) ” . . . The (evaluation) is a very rough opinion because 
of the variation of practice. . . We have a fine arts 
pattern well developed in one (school), and are developing 
the other two. Junior High instructors have received 
recent courses in Art, but so far for High School has only 
one with any creative background. This will take time to 
remedy, but at present we range from highly formal to 
ultra-creative approaches. It is hard to assess such a 
situation. I feel our fine arts program has a long way to 
go yet, and feel that objectives are quite nebulous in 
this area.” 

(7) ”We don r t have trained or qualified Art teachers. Art is 
treated as a general elective that some member of staff 
has to handle to round out a good offering. And we 
couldn*t defend employing Art teachers except probably 
one in supervisory capacity.” 





172 


(£) "Art is taught in high school when a teacher indicates a 
willingness to teach the subject. This is rather infre¬ 
quent, but in the last few years it has averaged out so 
that Art is taught one year out of two." 

(9) (The releasing and directing of the creative energy of 
the student) "particularly emphasized. The instructor, 
while having no particular training has developed a real 
liking for the subject. Senior professional Art (night 
classes) also available to these people." 

(10) "Art has not received the attention it merits. We plan to 
correct this situation." 


' 

. .. c. .. 


■ 

< ‘ . : . . ... • . 

v . . . ... .. • r ,:. it . >' . V ■ 

.... 





. ' ' . .. . : 





• f 





. : 


v ) 








173 


APPENDIX L 

QUESTIONNAIRE STUDY: TEACHERS' COMMENTS 
ON THE SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL ART PROGRAM 


(1) "A civilization is judged by its cultural achievement. 
Whether it is high or low is indicative of the standard 
of the people. You stress the majority. What are they 
doing? That is one of the satisfying returns, where my 
work is concerned, that 95$ of the students can and do 
show, take hold, and produce well, the teaching, tech¬ 
niques, and appreciation, taught them.” 

(2) Tr A variety of media were experimented with, namely, pen¬ 
cil, crayon, chalk, charcoal, water and oil colors. Sev¬ 
eral styles were explored, accompanied by picture analysis 
of several schools of art that have influenced Canadian 
Art. Toward the end of the term style and medium became 
more optional , with some students excelling in style and 
medium of their choice. Copy work was discouraged, with 
exception of the lettering assignments. Several crafts 
were tried and students enjoyed lino-cuts. Sketching 
trips provided a variety of themes for subsequent 
assignments.” 

(3) !T The art program has been developed around these aims 
and assignments were slanted towards these ends (aims of 
the program). Considering the limited time and the aver¬ 
age ability of the students selecting this option, good 
progress is being made. Gifted students too are encour¬ 
aged to do their utmost in Art.” 

(4) ”In my experience, I have found that (the principal aim 
of developing aesthetic standards by which to judge all 
works of art) is easy of attainment, but (developing cre¬ 
ative ability) is much harder. For example, after pains¬ 
taking instruction and example, if you ask the students 
to shade in an outline of a still life, they will do it 
readily. If, however, you ask them to compose a still 
life, they will give you a much different response, and 
they will try to copy compositions from magazines. Never¬ 
theless, I believe that the aim of (developing creativity) 
is most important and should be striven for. If it is 
hard of attainment at school, I remain convinced that it 
will come to bountiful fruition after the student has 

had a few more years in life T s experiences.” 


tv 

















( 


t 




t. 















- 








t 

, : . - ■ . 

■ 

» 

. 


j; 

, ■ ‘1 

t xU 

- . 

. ' .. • ■ ■ 

t *•- t • ° .• ■ • " 

. • - - • . • « 

. 

•. . •: ■ - - C » 1 ■ 

i ’1 £ jX. O’, i.J ‘ i : £ o & 

' 

\ 










174 


(5) "Very difficult to evaluate. Try to (develop aesthetic 
standards) by exercises in design and discussion of prin¬ 
ciples. Art appreciation. Some work in interior design 
helps here. (Developing creative ability) I think all 
assignments help in reaching this aim." 

(6) "Right now (end of June) I feel, as always at the end of 
the school year, that little has been accomplished, though 
possibly quite a lot has been. Many teachers in art, and 
other fields too, have reported similar feelings of frus¬ 
tration at the end of June. Anyway it requires more than 
a year (one or two periods a day) to make a significant 
and lasting impression in the (aims of the art course)." 

(7) "The aims and achievements will vary with teachers. Em¬ 
phasis may be placed on decoration, craftmanship, experi¬ 
mentation for discovering hidden talent, appreciations 
through experience, preparation for technical studies, 
poetry in the broad sense and therefore aesthetic appre¬ 
ciation and integration of art into literature, architec¬ 
ture, music and general principles of design and pattern 
of order; development of cultural consciousness. What is 
lacking is teachers with enthusiasm and a suitable 
background of experience and ability." 


4iV,: 




0 : >' ■ V . : .... 

'. I : : . 




- 



... •. .: . . . » « • . 

. . 

. . '- L V • • ■ '■ ■ • ' ' - - 

.... ,, . , . i , • : sr-) ' ; .. 1 ■ . 

,. • ... t ; . 1 : / . 1 , - . . ' , K w ,*X-;; v 7 • . ; C’: 1- '■ 

, c'v .• .-.w . .-^'O c.v ; ;v. 

—.* . ... ■ • 1 5 ' v ■ •./ 

, ' . • » . ... 

(j j; u . -i . > i.- ., • j./ i'v : i.> J .*„<J 

. ,./ ■■ .... .. . ’. •. ■. 

. 1 v : ' J 

• ■ I...' ro ? ; - J ,h i: • r< . ■ ; . : 


t i v. I;.. o ... I:»'] ; ; a ■ c. r 

■ •. i oJ '. ■ - '. '. . ■ 

: ,... ■,.... , .. , .. o'.. ; . . , u. '. ;."i;. • 

... 

;!■ . • : V. . \ ; ■ . .. .u ■ 

e.M. v ' •. ... ;.. c.' : 

• . . ..L.. 











y 















175 


APPENDIX M 

SAMPLES OF THE AVERAGE TWO-DIMENSIONAL ART WORK 
FROM ALBERTA SCHOOLS 


On the following sixteen pages are examples from some 
grades representing the average type of work produced in the 
schools. The work was selected from over one hundred fifty 
samples mailed to the writer. 


Index of Examples 

Grade Page 

I Wax crayon painting ....(top) l£9 

I Drawn, crayoned, paper cut-outs on 

coloured ground . 1&9 

IV "The Nativity," wax crayon painting, motivated 

by art broadcast .(top) 191 

IV "A Drowning Accident," drawn and filled-in 

with wax crayon. 191 

V Water colours, pencil drawn and filled-in 

with colour . 193 

V "In the Maple-Sugar Bush," drawn and 

filled-in with coloured pencils .(top) 195 

V "Travel," drawn and filled-in with wax 

crayons . 195 

V Pencil drawing completed with coloured 

pencil .(top) 197 

V Pencil drawing completed with coloured pencil .... 197 

VI Pencil drawing completed with wax crayon ....(top) 199 

VI Wax crayon painting, monochrome . 199 

VI "Woody Wood-pecker," pencil drawn, water 

coloured, and redrawn with india-ink . 201 
























176 


Grade Page 

VI Christinas card design, pencil drawn, 

water coloured, lettered in india-ink.(top) 203 

VI Christmas card design, roughly pencil- 

sketched, completed with water colours. 203 

VII Crayon batik design..(top) 205 

VII Pencil drawing completed with poster paints. 205 

VII Roughly pencil-sketched, completed with 

wax crayons.•.(top) 207 

VIII Pencil drawings on coloured paper, cut out 

and pasted on black ground. 207 

VIII Potato print .(top) 209 

VIII Potato print (Notes The colours used in 
original are much more suitable than the 
photostatic copy indicates). 209 

IX Linoleum block-prints (Note: Two prints 
do not show to their best advantage as a 
result of the photostatic process). 211 

ns "Naturalistic Craft," pencil drawn and 

coloured. 213 

ns Shaded pencil drawing . 213 

ns (Art 10) "Assignment taken from literature, 

’The White Mustang,’" pencil drawing, shaded . 215 

ns (Art 10) India-ink and pencil crayon. 217 

XI (Art 10) India-ink, pencil shading .(top) 219 

XI (Art 10) Pencil sketched, pencil crayon 

colouring . 219 

















■’Vi 





‘ 

































17S 


Grade I, wax crayon painting . There were not very 
many grade I samples of this calibre. According to most 
authorities this exemplifies the type of work to be expect¬ 
ed from children in the early grades. 

It will be noted that the work is very direct and is 
uninhibited. The child has used a 'base-line' to which every¬ 
thing else in the picture is related. The great, smiling sun 
occupying one corner is typical of the age group. The tree 
and flowers, like the sun, are personified. The design is 
varied and interesting; filling the space pleasingly. In 
the original the colours are bright and effective; many 
colours, well combined. This is the type of work encouraged 
by art educators as natural expression from which children 
develop their creative expression to the maximum degree. 

Most samples from the first three grades of school 
are not as good. Many of the samples submitted as art work 
would not be so classified by the writer. For example, some 
papers were submitted as art but were really samples of 
science work. This is not to say that such papers cannot be 
artistically executed. It very often happens that such co¬ 
related exercises are the only art activities the child 
receives, and this must not be confused to be a genuine art 
lesson. 


Grade I. drawn, coloured, paper cut-outs on a coloured 
ground . There is evidence of considerable teacher mis-direction 
is this sample. It is un-natural for children at the grade I 
level to overlap objects as shown in the sample. 

Colours are extremely weak and ineffective, lacking 
the spontaneity of the first example. There were several sam¬ 
ples bearing these characteristics. In some cases drawings 
were actually made by the teacher (mimeographed) to be colour¬ 
ed by the children, and perhaps cut out and pasted into a pre¬ 
conceived pattern as shown in this example. 

Work of this nature is obviously stiff and unexpress- 
ive. It does not appear to be the product of the exploring, 
enquiring child. It possesses none of the spontaneity and 
vitality of the first sample. Instead, the child was forced 
to work by severe limitations: a sharp pencil, clumbsy scis¬ 
sors, and the preconceived ideas of the teacher. 


Other grade I work submitted . Two other samples of 
grade I work was submitted, both inferior to the first ex¬ 
ample cited. 



























ISO 


Grade IV. 11 The Nativity," wax crayon painting, mot- 
ivated by an art broadcast . This sample, like the first, 
is bright and uninhibited. The piece is effectively pattern¬ 
ed, showing perspective and over-lapping suitable to the 
grade level. The author used crayons well, ensuring that 
their characteristic,striking colour was allowed full 
play. It will be observed that the child used stylized 
representations for the figures; customary with children 
during the middle elementary school years. 


Grade IV, ”A Drowning Acciden t, ” drawn, and filled 
in with wax crayon . This sample, chosen because it repres¬ 
ents most work at the grade IV level, in contrast to that 
discussed above is weak and inhibited. It is at first 
apparent that the piece is poorly designed. The author was 
not conscious of pattern, or at the elementary level, 
space-filling. The lack of pattern is typical of virtually 
all work submitted for this grade, and is perhaps the most 
serious fault. 

The work distinctly lacks colour. What colour there 
is can only be described as an afterthought. It is not well 
applied and is obviously hurried. This is no doubt due to 
the author being permitted, or perhaps encouraged, to draw 
his ideas with a pencil. This is an example of children 
working without limitations. 

It will be noticed that the sample is dominated by 
two horizontal lines representing the beach and the sky¬ 
line. Nearly all samples submitted for the fourth grade 
show similar characteristics. The teacher could lead child¬ 
ren to improve over this fault by stressing pattern, and 
leading children to observe verticals, and how they may 
improve a picture. 

Other gra de II work submitted . Four examples of the 
work of the second grade were submitted for the study. 

The quality of the work was generally inferior to that 
shown in the first illustration. 

Other grade III work submitted . Eight samples 
of art work from the third grade were submitted. Some of 
this work was very poor, being copies from texts. In 
quality they were inferior to the "Nativity” cited abov e . 

Other grad e IV work submitted . Seven other pieces 
were submitted. In' general they were of a quality similar 
to that of ”A Drowning Accident,” discussed above. 













0?:.l 




. 






» 




* 










. 

' • 







* 

* 


1 





? 


„ 

. 








, 





. ■ 

. 









. 








■ 


































, 















* 

* 


















1$2 


Grade V. Water colour, pencil drawn and filled in 
with colour . This example illustrates the same weaknesses 
discussed in connection with the last sample. The use of 
pencil does not aid the author to escape “niggling" and 
so a disinteresting product results. The colours are very- 
weak because, as may be found in far too many samples, 
the children work with the tray of cake watercolours which 
are very difficult to employ. 

The lack of design, or pattern, in the product 
tends to point to a lack of teaching. It would seem that 
children are informed that they have an art period, and 
thereupon are left to their own devices without any guid¬ 
ance. 


It should be pointed out that this represents the 
poorest type of art work submitted for the fifth grade. 


Other grade V work submitted. . In addition to the 
five examples illustrated there were thirty-five other 
samples of the work of the fifth grade. While the critic¬ 
ism made above would not apply to many of the thirty-five 
there are traces of these weaknesses in virtually all. 

It is unfortunate that space would not permit ill¬ 
ustration of one very good piece portraying a view in the 
city of Edmonton from the McDonald Hotel. This particular 
sample was striking in its boldness, effective pattern, 
and excellent colour. It must be emphasized that such 
fine work is an exception. 










- 

. 

: t 

; 

. 

. 


. 

- 


. 

o 







f MAl»L IS-SlKAH-HUS 


H 


SV 




w . ■ 


(a re 














134 


Grade V. "In the Maple-Sugar Bush, 11 drawn and 
filled-in with coloured pencil . This example closely 
approximates what might be considered the average type 
of grade V work submitted. The techniques used might 
be improved upon. Coloured pencils are not a suitable 
medium for colouring; as shown in the example, the 
colour is weak, and lacks vitality. The author has 
tried to make an interesting pattern, and make a 
complete picture. The work tends to be somewhat monotonous 
and inhibited, but is expressed in the child's own way. 


Grade V. "Trave l ," drawn and filled- in w ith wax 
crayon . This example,* unlike the last, is vividly col¬ 
oured and is a reasonably effective portrayal. One can 
be sure the child executed that which he had in mind 
without distraction. So few of the examples submitted 
exhibited colour in all its effectiveness that one is 
led to wonder if the teachers are afraid of colour, or 
perhaps do not recognize colour. 

There were very few examples submitted which showed 
any attempt to portray things actually viewed by the 
child. In contrast there were many examples of work done 
to news stories, poems, and radio broadcasts. 





















, 




. 




„ : ? 




« 






- 

, 






















: - 




* 


















1S6 


Grade V. Pencil drawing, completed with coloured 
p encil . Although the photostatic copy does not reveal 
it the sample is coloured. However, the colours are so 
weak and ineffective, drawn with a pencil, that they do 
not show. This is typical of the poor use of colour. 

Also typical, is the copying employed. Far too many 
samples submitted were mere copies, showing no imaginative 
effort by the children whatsoever. It must be that for the 
teacher of this child, art may be equated with copying, 
there being no place for honest creative effort. 


Grade V. Pencil drawing, completed with coloured 
pencil . The child who worked to make this bird had more 
sense than the teacher. The child apparently knows that 
the bird must be vividly coloured. Armed with this know¬ 
ledge and faulty materials the child worked very hard to 
obtain results. Tired muscles must have been the inevit¬ 
able result of this hard work, using leaded pencil crayons. 
There is no reason why the teacher could not have had wax 
crayons and paints available for the child to use. 

The child tried to do more than merely represent 
a bird. He has suggested a tree and the sky. This points 
to the need for guidance to assist the child in solving 
the problems he has formulated for himself. 






■ c , . ' . . 


. 


* 

■ 

. 

. 


. 

. 

€ 




■ 

- 

/ . 











Grad e VI, Pencil drawing completed with wax crayon . 
This example is fairly typical of the work submitted at 
the sixth grade level. As stated for the earlier grades, 
many of the samples were of poor colour, although this 
example is improved. There is an attempt to blend colours 
and use colour to help tell the story. 

Many of the grade six samples were copies, and 
utilized weak water colours or pencil crayons* The bulk 
of all samples submitted were, as in the case of the ex¬ 
ample shown, executed on small papers, approximately 
nine by eleven inches in dimension. 


Grade Vi. Monochrome* wax crayon painting . This 
example is far superior to all other grade six samples 
in terms of design. It would seem that the teacher limit¬ 
ed the work to a monochrome and stressed pattern; thus 
getting strong results such as that shown. The use of 
wax crayons obviously made it relatively easy to pattern 
and lends to the rhythmic qualities of the work. 


Other grade VI work submitted . In addition to the 
three samples herein discussed nineteen other samples 
were acquired. There would seem to be no doubt that these 
are at a level similar to the first sample shown above. 

It was disturbing to note several feeble attempts 
at non-objective work. These lacked colour, pattern, 
shape, and any worthwhile attribute of art. Equally dis¬ 
turbing were some copies from the texts, presumably ill¬ 
ustrations for a story. 

There were some good examples of figure drawings 
submitted which showed an intelligent attempt to teach 
not only how to draw a figure, but how to relate it to 
other figures and other objects to compose a picture. 

This type of work, unfortunately, is an exception. 








4 


« 

4 


' . 

. : • ’ , 




















4 






• • 







- 















190 


Grade VI. "Woody Wood-peeker , 11 pencil drawn , 
water coloured, and re-drawn with ind ia-ink . This ex¬ 
ample illustrates the degree to which copying may 
take hold of the child. Unfortunately, there were far 
too many examples submitted which were copies. One 
would expect much of this student if the time, care 
and energy expended on the copy were devoted to the 
child’s own expression. 

It is very clear that teachers who permit work 
of this nature do not have an adequate concept of art 
education. It is not difficult to direct children of 
the elementary school into suitable channels, and work 
of this nature testifies that the teacher has made no 
effort to lead the art class. 









^ ,r.° 












192 


Grade VI. Christmas card design. Drawn, water 
c oloured, and lettered with india-ink . 

Grade VI. Christmas card design. Roughly pencil - 
sketched , completed with water colours • 


These two designs represent the few examples of 
non-pictorial work submitted for all grades. One finger 
painting and a few non-objective paintings were submitted. 
This may reflect the prevelant idea among teachers that 
art work is mainly pictorial; to illustrate a story. 

Both card designs appear to be original in content 
and subject to considerable painstaking work. Nonetheless 
the attempts appear to be stilted, based on stereotypes. 
This is particularly true of the verse shown in the first 
example. 


The second sample shows the result of teaching 
children to pattern; filling the space. The colours used 
are strong and very effective. 
























194 


Grade VII. Crayon batik design . This example is 
illustrative of the best work submitted from the junior 
high school. It is obvious that the teacher has directed 
the experience so the child was able to produce a colour¬ 
ful pattern rich in variety. The type of work shown in 
the example is easy for children to do, and they enjoy 
the work. There is no reason why teachers could not lead 
children to do more of this work, aiming for similar 
results. 


Grade VII. Pencil drawing completed with poster 
paints . The example shown is similar to many using the 
same subject. In all of these the result is stereotyped, 
being a rather dull and lifeless product. As in far too 
many samples, the objects are very small, leaving wide 
open spaces containing nothing. Here again, an alert 
teacher could do much to stimulate children into creative 
performance. 

Other grade VII work submitte d. In addition to the 
examples photostatically shown there were twenty-three 
other papers. Generally, the work corresponds to that 
discussed above in regards to quality. 

Perhaps the most striking piece is that of an 
object drawn and coloured three timess an exercise in eye 
levels and shading. The work is carefully executed, but 
is purely an exercise. The writer questions whether the. 
time consumed for the exercise is meritea by corresponding 
artistic achievement. 

There were several designs featuring repeat motifs. 
These were presumably for wall-paper or similar purposes. 
In one case the design was repeated fifteen times , each 
time drawn and coloured by hand. It is not unreasonable o 
suppose that ends and means have been confused in this ex¬ 
ample. When a repeated design is required a potato or 
linoleum print should be used, in this way the child will 
learn far more about repitition, and also something about 
block printing. 










I 

■ C ’ ■. 


, 






;/ V’ 1 •' ■ ';U:' . 







,, 

- ' 
























196 


Grade VII. Roughly pencil - sketched, completed with 
wax crayon . This sample illustrates the realistic portray¬ 
al of nature by a child aware of pattern, the need to fill 
space, shadows, and perspective. It will be observed that 
the perspective is linear, and by over-lapping objects. 

This example illustrates the type of art work ex¬ 
pected by art educators from children at this grade level 
who are oriented to the world by an objective point of 
view. 


Grade VIII. Pencil drawing on coloured paper, cut 
out and pasted on a black ground . This type of work can 
be very suited to children of the eighth grade when it is 
directed txjwards a higher level of attainment. The sample 
shown would be more appropriate from the elementary grades. 

It may be, however, that this example is the result 
of an exercise by the teacher to stimulate perception of 
over-lapping and pattern. 

As it is, there is little design, the work being 
dull and uninteresting. The piece lacks imagination; there 
is very little creative in the work. 







ipl 



•Hy 










Grade VIII. Potato print, abstract motif . 

G rade VIII. Potato print, bird motif . 


19 # 


The two examples shown illustrate the type of art 
activity that may be carried out in any class at little 
expense. To execute this printing process children go 
beyond the use of pencil and brush. They design, cut into 
the potato, and then print--a several stage process suited 
to their needs. The product shows that repitition, variat¬ 
ion, colour and texture have been observed. This is evid¬ 
enced by other work submitted from the same school. 

This is a very suitable type of project for the 
eighth grade as it tends to maintain their interest in 
art and breaks down stereotypes developed by the student. 
The knowledge and skill developed by this type of work 
may be applied to other areas of art. 

Unfortunately there were few similar examples, sub¬ 
mitted, indicating that very little of this type of work 
is being done in the schools. 


Other grade VIII work submitt ed. Four other pieces 
of work were submitted for the eighth grade. With a single 
exception, these are not of the standard discussed above. 
They* displayed similar faults to the work of the seventh 
grade level, previously discussed. That is, while these 
were exercises in repeat designs, the work was all execut¬ 
ed by pencil and paintbrush whereas a repetitive process 
might have been used: stencilling, linoleum printing, veg¬ 
etable printing, spatter-painting, or silk screening. 

The outstanding work submitted for all grades was, 
by unanimous choice of all who viewed the samples, a grade 
VIII watercolour painting entitled, "Winter.” Although not 
technically outstanding, within the reach of all school 
children, it shows sensitive composition and colour. 
































200 


Grade IX. Linoleum block prirts . While there were 
only a few grade IX samples submitted, this was unquestion¬ 
ably superior. The other samples from this grade were un¬ 
imaginative and trite. 

This example overcomes the principal objection to 
the medium in that it has actually been printed. It is 
a characteristic of the linoleum block, once it is cut, 
that it is not printed. In addition, the author has exper¬ 
imented with different colour effects, all of which tends 
to reflect suitable leadership and guidance on the part of 
the teacher. 

It might be added that this type of art activity, 
and the results obtained is what art educators advocate 
and anticipate from their students. 


Other grade IX samples . Three other samples for 
this grade level were acquired. As stated above these 
tend to be trite and inhibited. In these there is evidence 
of copying and effort to portray things the way some 
others have done. The results are dull and lifeless. 










. 

- 

. " ' 








* 


* 


* . ; ’ . 1 . 


* ;f > 



















202 


Grade not stated. "Naturalistic craft," pencil drawn 
and coloured . This work, submitted from the senior high school, 
is peculiar if only because of the description applied to it 
by its author. What is meant by the term "naturalistic craft" 
cannot be accurately assessed. 

The work appears to be a calendar copy. The piece shows 
signs of good workmanship: striking patterns, strong colour, 
and spatial dimension. If this could be applied to more origin¬ 
al activity the results should be surprisingly good. 


Grade not stated. Shaded pencil drawing . This work 
acquired from the senior high school is obviously at a level 
more suited to the seventh or eighth grade of the school. 

^'he teacher of its creator could surely do much to lead 
the child into creative effort by stressing pattern, rhythm, 
tone and line. It will be seen that these are weak in the ex¬ 
ample following. The areas within each space are large and 
untextured; dull and uninteresting. Some class work in the 
field of textures, pattern-making, and rhythm would do much 
to improve the art product. 







.< .. • 




. . 

. 

■ 


. 




« 












. . 

. 


c‘ c 

. 

■ - - 

; ‘ ■' ■ ' : ■ •' 



















204 


Grade not stated. "Assignment taken from literature , 
! The White Mustang, f,t pencil drawing, shaded . This work 
submitted from an Art 10 class shows how much the principles 
of art may be omitted from the work of the high school. The 
sample shows no composition, no pattern, and the shading of 
the piece is purely mechanical. 

Surely the use of literature for stimulation can 
suggest much more than a white horse. Here, the teacher can 
do much to encourage the child to add to the drawing, and 
at the same time teach composition. 

It is work of this kind which underlines the need 
during the elementary school period to have children make 
non-objective paintings, work in all-over patterns, and ex¬ 
periment to see how much they can do. This particular work 
suggests that its author has worked out a formula for horse, 
common among school children, but has not been allowed to 
work out any other formulae nor encouraged to improve upon 
expression. 




* 




. 

• • 










c •• •• 






* 

























































206 


Grade not stated. "Plate.” india ink and pencil 
crayon . This example from an art class of the senior high 
school (Art 10) exemplifies the type of art program current 
in the schools during the 1920’s when such plates were en¬ 
couraged as a constant source of reference for the student 
in later life. It will also be recalled that these plates 
were condemned by the Chief Inspector of schools a decade 
later. Nonetheless the practice continues as evidenced by 
this work acquired as a typical, average example of art 
work. 


It may be condemned first on the grounds that it 
is a mis-application of technique. A repeat design should 
be made by a repetitive process. Secondly, it is extremely 
doubtful if the time consumed in the tedious making of this 
plate was well spent. Its author would no doubt have created 
several original pieces during this time. 

The designs used are not very original, and tend to 
be rather monotonous. It would be very interesting to quest¬ 
ion the teacher of this child to determine what ends are 
supposed to be attained by its execution. Surely this is not 
an example of the tT release and direction of creative energies,” 
nor does it represent the application of aesthetic standards. 

It is regrettable that much of the art work submitted 
from the senior high school is not of a higher calibre. As 
judged from the samples it would appear that there is little 
direction given to the students. 




, X/?i 

. 

, • 

. ■ ; 

i. ■ • ■■; 

..c .. ■ ■ : •- i 

C ■ 

- M ' >. 

, . 

. 

,1.' ' 

v -■ • • • ' 

- : ■* -X ' i ' - r ‘ • . <0^2 

. 






















20$ 


Grade XI.(Art 10), india-ink, pencil shading . This 
sample is another illustration of mis-applied technique. 

In a repetition problem, as stated before, it is surely ev¬ 
ident that a repeating technique is required. In this sample 
much time was obviously expended in needlessly repeating each 
drawing and blocking-in with colid ink. The end result of all 
this labour is that the design is not suitable. While it may 
satisfactorily repeat itself horizontally, vertical repetit¬ 
ion would obviously be unsatisfactory. 

Grade XI. (Art 10), pencil sketched, pencil crayon 
colouring . While this sample is quite delicate, having some 
subtle features, it leaves much to be desired. The use of 
pencil crayons features much painstaking work to obtain 
good colours, and could have been replaced by watercolours 
for superior results. The design is weak, much like that to 
be expected from the seventh or eighth grades. 

Other work of the senior high school . Twelve other 
samples were secured from the senior high school level. The 
majority of these were deemed to be weak and more suitable 
as products of the earlier grades. Three samples of oil 
painting were submitted which were refreshingly different 
in the treatment of subject matter. 

The majority of work at this level of school is 
poor, showing little concern for good design. Texture, patt¬ 
ern, colour — virtually all aspects of art are ignored in 
the examples submitted. 






'' »; . - . . i. 

. 

- 

- 

.. ■ 

C v . ■ ■ ... 

. < • ;;n ; ■ 

■ 

■ . ^ : \ . ' V. . .. . . ^ __ ■ .. 

, . 

. 

~ . c ' ■ 

>. 

« 















209 


APPENDIX N 

INFORMAL EVALUATION OF THE EXAMPLES OF THE AVERAGE 
TWO-DIMENSIONAL ART WORK FROM ALBERTA SCHOOLS 


Twenty graduate students enrolled in an Art Education 
Seminar at the University of Washington comprised the group 
making the evaluation of the art examples. These students 
consisted mostly of elementary teachers, the balance being 
high school teachers and supervisors. The group examined 
each example, and then were provided with a check-sheet upon 
which they made a note of their evaluations* The check-sheet 
was almost identical to that used by teachers and superin¬ 
tendents in the questionnaires. 

The scale for evaluation was as follows: 

Considering the age and grade levels of the students 
doing the examples, the work for the three school levels may 
be considered to be: 

Item 

( ) showing attainment of suitable art standards (1) 

( ) showing progress towards suitable art standards (2) 

( ) showing some progress towards suitable art 

standards (3) 

( ) showing little progress towards suitable art 

standards (4) 

( ) showing no progress towards suitable art standards.(3) 

The data from this informal examination was as 
follows: 


Frequency Count of Evaluations: Items Shown Above 

f item 1 

f item 2 

f item 3 

f item 4 

f item 3 

School 

0 

4 

9 

3 

4 

Senior high 

1 

5 

10 

3 

1 

Junior high 

0 

3 

3 

11 

3 

Elementary 


As may be seen from the table above the general opinion 
seems to be in the area that the senior high school art prod¬ 
uct shows some progress towards suitable art standards, with 
a third of the group ranking attainment lower than that. 














PO f " 



'• 






• 


. , J ' > : ■' ■ v. 

■ 




:.o v j. je ■ • 



. k 

* 

, .. ‘ . . 1 . - .■ t . .. 

■ 

“ >■ - . • - ' • ' . 


■ . • ■ . -.."'I . , ■ 




< 

: 




l 


-cr*.. „ *U •. . .. : g: 

'• ... -.. •. v .. . ... v. . ; 


. 




: ■■ . , V 














' );:■■■ . ... .. • ;o . .. V. 

■ 







210 


The junior high school art program was rated high by 
the group, but still in the same area, while the elementary 
school art product was mainly considered to be in the area of 
showing little progress. 

Some comments by the group were: 

(1) "It seems as though most work was copied or has the appear¬ 
ance of being copied. Stress more individual expression. 

The paintings seem to have many limits on them." 

(2) "The work seems to stress neatness and attention to careful 
and frightened use of the medium. Everything is so realist¬ 
ic and unimaginative." 

(3) Tt The aims of art seem to be neglected." 

(4) "Emphasis is on copying stereotyped forms, it seems to 

me. Children are trying to be creative — need to see more - 
see (1) dark and light; (2) shape; (3) design." 




< t 

. , ' • 

-. ... • * 

, 

a 

: , 

... : . . : . 



211 


APPENDIX 0 


QUESTIONNAIRE STUDY: DATA FOR 

SUPERINTENDENT 

THE JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOLS 

GROUP 


Number of 
Schools in 
Division 

Schools 
with Art 
Program 

Number 
of Years 
Available 

EVALUATION OF AIMS* 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

VII 

9 

9 

2 

_ 4 

_ 4 . 

_ 3 _ 

_ 3__ 

3 — 

4 _ 

1_ 3_ 

27 

27 

1-3 








19 

19 

'2 

. 2 

_ 3 _ 

— 2 _ 

- 3 _ 

- 2 __ 

- 3 _ 

- 3_ 

27 

18-20 

1-2 

3 

_ 4 _ 

_ 4 _ 

_ 3 

2-1 _ 

4 _ 

3_ 


_10 

2 

3 

_ 3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

S 

4 

1 

.3 

_ 3 

3 

2 

1 

3 

1 


5 

1 

3 

_ 2 _ 

_ 1 

_ 3 __ 

2 

2 

2 

6 

6 . 

_ 1-2 

2 

_ 3 _ 

_ 4_ 

_ 3 _ 

__ 2 _ 

_ 3 _ 

_ 2 _ 

12 

10 _ 

1-2 

2 

- 3_ 

3 ' 

3 

_ 3 __ 

_ 3 _ 

_ 4_ 

7 - 


2-3 _ 

4 

_ 5- 

- 3 

_ 3 _ 

_ 3 _ 

- 4 - 

_ 4_ 

1 2 

7 

1 

3 

l 2. 

— 3 - 

_ 2 _ 

_ 2 _ 

- 3 - 

- 3 — 

28 

27 

3 

3 - 

_ 5 _ 

~ 4 — 

_ 4 _ 

- 4 — 

_ 5_ 

— -y — 

- 4 — 

7 

7 

1 

• 3 — 

_ 3 _ 

- 3 — 

_ 3 _ 

_ 2 _ 

_ 4 _ 

— 3 — 

7 

3 

3 

3 _ 

_ 4 _ 

_ 4 _ 

_ 3 _ 

,3 h 

_ 3 _ 

_ 4 


3 

3 

3 - 

_ 2 _ 

_ 2 _ 

- 3—^ 

1 

_ 4 _ 

_ 3_ 

14 

12 


3 

_ 3 _ 

__ 2 _ 

_ 2 - 

3 

_ 3 

4 

6 

6 

1 

. 3 — 

_ 4 __ 

_ 4 _ 

_ 2 _ 

_ 3 

_ 4_ 

4 

_ _ _ 6 

6 

If 

.3 

3 

_ 2 _ 

_ 2 

3 

3 

3 

14 

Q 

. 1 

.3 

_ 4 _ 

- 3 _ 

- 3_ 

_ 3 _ 

- 3 - 

_ 4_ 

3 

3 

2 

.3 

- 3 — 

- 4 - 

_ 3 - 

_ 5 _ 

_ 4 _ 

_ 4 _ 


2 

2 _ 

-1 — 

_ 3 _ 

_ 3 

3 

- 3 - 

- 3 - 

_ 3 _ 


16 _ 

2 








13 

13 

2 _ 

-2 _ 

__ 4 _ 

_ 2_ 

_ 3 _ 

- 3_ 

- 4_ 

_ 4_ 

7 

7 

3.-2 

.3 — 

,3- 

_ 4 - 

_ 2 _ 

_ 2_ 

. 4 _ 

_ 3 _ 

17 _ 

is 

2_ 

2 _ 

- 3 - 

_ 3 - 

_ 3 - 

_ 1_ 

_ 3 _ 

— 3 — 

1 

1 

_ 2 

4 - 

_ 4 _ 

_ 3 _ 

- 3 _ 

_ 3_ 

- 4 - 

— 4_ 

1? 

12 

2 _ 

4 — 

_ 4 _ 

_ 4 _ 

_ 3 _ 

- 3 — 

- 4 

_4 

7 

... 6 

2 -1 

. 4 - 

- 4 - 

_ 3 _ 

_ 3 _ 

_ 3 _ 

_ 4 _ 

-- *r — 

— 4_ 

tf 

a 

2 

4 - 

_ 4- 

_ 4 _ 

__ 3 — 

. 3 _ 

. 4 

3 

14 

n_ 

3 _] 

.4 - 

- 3 _ 

, 2 _ 

_ 3 — 

_ 2 __ 

- 3 - 

_ 3 __ 

6 

6 

. 1-2_ 

3 __ 

- 1- 

_ 2 - 

— 2 — 

- 3 — 

. 3 . 

_ 2 — 

12 


1 

. 3_ 

_ 2 — 

_ 2 - 

— 3 — 

_ 3 _ 

~ 3 - 

__ 2_ 



1-2 

.3 - 

_3 - 

_ 3 - 

_ 3 _ 

- 4_ 

- 3 _ 

_ 3 _ 

9 

7 

1 _ 

4 _ 

, 3 - 

_ 3 - 

- 3 - 

_ 2 _ 

- 4 - 

- 3 — 

1 

i 

2 








10 

7 

1-2 

.4 - 

_ 2 _ 

_ 5 _ 

- 3 - 

_ 4 _ 

_ 4 - 

- 4_ 




.4 

- 4 - 

_ 5 - 

- 3 — 

. 5 _ 

_ 4 _ 

- 4 — 

18 

12 

1 

3 - 

- 3 - 

— 4 — 

U 4 - 

- 2 _ 

_ 2 - 

t 4lJ 

















































































































































.tK 









. 

























































212 


APPENDIX 0 
(Continued) 


Number of 
Schools in 
Division 

Schools 
with Art 
Program 

Number 
of Years 
Available 

EVALUATION OF AIMS* 

I 

II 

Ill 

IV 

V 

VI 

VII 

Q 

Q 

2 

- 3 - 

_3_ 

_ 2 _ 

_ 3 __ 

_ 2 _ 

- 4 - 

— 4- 

7 ___ 

7 

1-2 

-3 _ 

_ 2 . 

_ 3 _ 

_3 _ 

_ 2 __ 

- 3 _ 

_ 3_ 

11 

10 

1 

. 4 _ 

— 3 . 

_ 2 _ 

_3 — 

_ 2 _ 

_ 3 - 

_ 4- 

Q 

Q 

. ... 2 __ 

- 4 - 

— 3- 

_ 1 

3 

3 _ 

3 . 

_ 2 _ 


4 

2 

- 3 - 

4 


3 

3_ 

- 3 - 

_ 3- 

7 


1 

_ 3 _ 

— 2 

_3 _ 

— 4 - 

_ 2 __ 

- 5_ 

__ 3 _ 

10 

7 _ 

2 

3 

— 4. 

_4 _ 

_. 4 _ 

- 3 — 

_ 3 _ 

- 4- 

TOTALS 

AV. 








403 

376 

1.9 









* Symbols: (5) evidence of attainment, (A) indications of 
progress, ( 3 ) appearance of some progress, ( 2 ) indications of 
little progress, (1) evidence of no progress. Refer to 
Appendix H for wording of the aims. 














































































3 * v" . 


' 





, ■ , . : 

, r ’', •- . . 1 . ■ • ■ . , ' . ,*.r ; 

■ 

- , 






















APPENDIX 0 





QUESTIONNAIRE STUDY: 

DATA FOR THE JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL ART 

TEACHER GROUP 

PROGRAM 








EVALUATION* 

OF AIMS 






I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

VII 


I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

VII 


3_ 

-4, 

— 3 _ 

_ 2 _ 

-4- 

-3. 

- 3- 


- 4 - 

- 5- 

- 3- 

-4- 

-3- 

- 4 

_ 2 _ 


5 

_ 3 

_ 3_ 

, 3_ 

. 3_ 

. 4. 

_ 3_ 


.4. 

- 5 1 

-3- 

— 4_ 

__ 2. 

_2 

—5- 

m 

4__ 

2. 

_3_ 

_ 3_ 

_3_ 

_5. 

__ 2 __ 


-4- 

-4J 

— 4- 

- 3- 

-3. 

- 4 

— 3 — 

— 

3_ 

5h 

. 4- 
_ 3. 

_5 _ 

_ 5_ 

. 4 _ 

_ 3_ 

4- 

-4. 

_4-_| 
— 5 — 


~4 - 
_ 3_ 

-4 
- 3. 

— 3 . 

-3- 

-3 

-3 

4 

. 

_ 2 _ 



_ 3_ 

_5__ 

_ 3. 

_ 3. 

_ 3_ 

_ 

4_ 

_ 5J 

_ 4 _ 

_5 _ 

«3- 

- 4. 

— 4 _ 


- 3- 

- 4. 

-5- 

_ 3— 

_ 2. 

_ 4 

__ 3_ 


3 _ 

_5j 

2 _ 

_3_ 

- 4 - 

- 4 

— 4_ 


4 - 

_3 . 

— 3- 

_ 3 _ 

_ 3 . 

_ 3 

_ 4_ 


4_ 

_4. 

__ 4_ 

_ 4_ 

. 4_ 

_4. 

k-4_ 


_4_ 

. 4. 

_4- 

-3 J 

_2 . 

-4j 

_ 4_ 

_. 

2 _ 

_4 

— 3 J 

_2_ 

~3- 

- 2 

- 4_ 


-3 - 

- 4 

- 3 h 

_2_ 

-3- 

— 3 


_ 

3_ 

_ 5. 

- 3_ 

_3_ 

—3_ 

- 3, 

_ 5 _ 


_3_ 

. 4. 

_3 j 

_3— 

_ 2_ 

-4. 

_ 4_ 


3_ 

_ 4. 

_3_ 

. 2 _ 

_ 2 „ 

- 3. 

_ 4_ 


-3- 

- 4. 

_ 4- 

_3_ 

_ 2 . 

_ 3 

- 3_ 


4 . 

_ 3. 

_3_ 

_4_ 

2_ 

- 4, 

_ 5_ 


_4 - 

_ 4. 

- 3 J 

^3^ 

_ 2 

_ 3. 

_3_ 


3^ 

. 4. 

2. 

. 4_ 

~ 3 _ 

_ 2 

_ 4_ 


.4, 

- 5 

-3. 

- 4h 

,3, 

_ 4. 

n 2 


3_J 

_ 3. 

2_ 

. 2_ 

- 3_ 

.4. 

_ 3_ 


. 4 - 

_ 3- 

LI 3- 

„ 4 - 

_4 , 

_ 3. 

r 4 _ 


4J 

_ 4. 

_ 5- 

. 2 _ 

_ 3 - 

- 5 j 

— 5— 


-5 - 

L-5. 

— 3 - 

-4 _ 

_2_ 

_4. 

U 3 _ 

_ 

3_ 

-5. 

-4- 

_ 1_ 

-1_ 

- 4i 

_ 4- 


-4- 

-3j 

^ 3- 

-.4 - 

- 3 - 

— 4 

U 3_ 


3_ 

. 4. 

_3_ 

_3_ 

_3_ 

-4. 

_ 4_ 


-4 - 

— 3. 

_ 3 - 

— 3 - 

_ 2_ 

— 3 

— 3- 


2l| 

_4. 

_ 3 . 

_1_ 

__ 2 _ 

- 3. 

_ 4_ 


_3. 

-4. 

— 2 _ 

L 5 - 

-3- 

- 5. 

L4_ 

_ 

3 _| 

-3. 

_ 2. 

_3_ 

-3_ 

- 4. 

_4_ 


-4 - 

-5. 

- 4 . 

-5 - 

-3- 

-4 

— 3 — 


4_ 

- 5 


-5- 

-4- 

— 2 . 

P-5— 


-4 - 

-4. 

-4 - 

-4_ 

- 4 , 

_4 

u 4_ 

_ 

3- 

-4- 

— 2 _ 

-3- 

-2- 

- 3 ■ 

—3- 


-3 - 

-3- 

— 2 - 

- 1_ 

-4- 

-4 

— 3 — 


3- 

- 4. 

— 3- 

-4- 

-3- 

-3- 

— 5- 


-3- 

-3- 

- 3- 

- 4 - 

-3- 

-3. 

— 3- 

-— 

4_ 
3 _ 

_3. 
L 5J 

_3 _ 

LtU 

_ 3 _ 
L3 J 

- 3_ 
[_2 J 

- 4. 

L 3 J 

_ 3_ 
uL 4 — 


-3- 
-3 J 

_ 4. 

- 2 J 

__ 4_ 
L3 J 

_ 2„ 
L 3 J 

-.1- 
r 2 . 

- 3 

L.2J 

L_4_ 

— 2_ 


* Symbols: 

(5) 

evidence of 

attainment 

, ( 4 ) indications of 


progress, (3) appearance of 

some progress, 

(2) 

indications 


of little progress, (1) evidence of no 
Appendix H for wording of the aims. 

progress. Refer to 

























n 






« 










214 


APPENDIX P 

QUESTIONNAIRE DATA: TEACHERS 1 COMMENTS 
ON THE JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL ART PROGRAM 


(1) (On the subject of the development of a capacity for ap¬ 
preciation) Tf A student who does not like art cannot 
through the set program, learn to like it. He may like 
one part, but dislike the next.” 

(On the subject of developing socially acceptable habits 
and good citizenship) ”The majority of work, as set out 
must be done alone. Each child has his own idea on Let¬ 
tering, Poster-making, Life Drawing, Lino-cuts, Needle- 
crafts, Modelling, Soap Carving, etc. None of these 
things mentioned is really large enough to be done in a 
group.” 

(2) ”The classroom art program is hampered by heavy enrol¬ 
ments. There is healthy ! progress towards attainting)* 
the above aims insofar as space and time for individual 
help permit. In its broad meaning, is (this aim) ever 
realized? Not to the degree I would wish. Here, our 
principal blocks the art periods together so that students 
have over one hour to pursue their art—this has helped 
tremendously in carrying out the aims of the program; 
single periods for art are deadly.” 

(3) "Have made sawdust masks, hand puppets, used soap carving.” 

(4) "Our school has very limited facilities; and these marks 
indicate the achievement. I feel we have made, not neces¬ 
sarily what was in the Course of Studies." 

(5) "Re (development of the special abilities of the talented 
children) lack of storage space and facilities has limited 
the range of activities to discover craft talent. An art 
department is new in this school and equipment is being 
gradually acquired, however." 

(6) "The permissive atmosphere permitting free self-expression 
may work rather well with the really talented youngster 
but I feel that the poorer student tends to make less 
progress than he would by formalized lessons and classes.” 




? 









c 















C* C 



















215 


APPENDIX Q 

QUESTIONNAIRE STUDY: SUPERINTENDENTS 1 COMMENTS 
ON THE JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL ART PROGRAM 


(1) "Actually, art work doesn't get too much attention in 
schools. Some good work relating to social studies and 
science." 

(2) "Two classrooms (of six) doing outstanding work." 

(3) "Hard to generalize—a wide variation with different 
teachers." 

(4) "Rather ambitious aims for an art program. There is very 
little or no evidence that the art program can be very 
helpful in (developing increased powers of observation 
and visual judgement; and, the development of creative 
ability in all children). In (developing socially accep¬ 
table habits and good citizenship) it is very doubtful 
that art contributes to these aims in most cases." 

(5) "This area I feel relatively happy about. We have had 
several good displays, and two rather good competitive 
prizes won. Well over half of the teachers involved have 
taken recent courses, and the rest seem to have rubbed 
off a little of the effect." 

(6) "Art has not been taught by qualified people and usually 
not even by those keenly interested in it and sometimes 
by teachers who hate the subject. This of course applies 
to classroom teachers; we have no specialists." 

(7) "There is a wide range of achievement in art depending on 
the ability and interest of each teacher." 

($) "No particular comments except that the aims are reason¬ 
ably well attained. Particularly true this year because 
the teacher is an enthusiast in this area." 

(9) "We have strong f art T teachers and weak teachers." 

(10) "We are not satisfied with progress here." 



1U 


: 







o j L':a 


\ 




. 


.'lo! , 







w 

- ' 





t 



















.... C ■ 

• .. ■ , . ..• . ' . . , ■ 

• . ..... V , '. ' - 

. , ■ v ... ■ ! v • ! ? 

c . . 











216 


APPENDIX R 


QUESTIONNAIRE STUDY: DATA FOR 

SUPERINTENDENT 

THE ELEMENTARY 

GROUP 

SCHOOL 


Number 

of 

Rooms 

Number 

with 

No Art 

Percent¬ 
age with 
No Art 

EVALl 

A] 

fATION* 

[MS: 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

VII 

VIII 

34 



4 

1 

3 

3 

4 

3 

3 

3 

640 


10 

1 

3 

3 

3 

4 

4 

1 

- S — 

3 

57 

? 


1 

2 

1 

2 

— — 

2 

— *r — 

1 

— 

3 

— j - 

2 

47 

5 

11 

. 4 

3 

1 

3 

3 

2 

— j ■ 

3 

■— — 

_2_ 

64 



. 3 

2 

— 1__ 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

16 _ 

1 

50 

3 

3 _ 

3 

_ 2 w 

1 

2 

2 

— —— 4# — 

3 

60 _, 

21 

33 

2 

2 _ 

. y — 

_ 3 __ 

__ 2 _ 

- ^ -- 

__ 3 

_ 2 _ 

3 

- y — 

_ 2 _ 

60 

10 

17 

. 4 

3 ^ 

3 

_ 1 _ 

_ 2 _ 

3 

— ' y « 

2 

2 

__ 16 

4 - 

25 

3 

3 _j 

_ 4 _ 

_ 4 _ 

u 4 - 

- x — 

— 4- 

_ 3 

_ 3_ 

42 

5 

11 

3 

- 2 -1 

__ 2 _ 

_ 2 __ 

L 3 __ 

- 3 

3 

3 

670 

0 

0 

4 

_ 5 . 

_ 4 _ 

5 

5 

— ,/ — 

_ 4 „ 

—- y 

4 

— -y — 

5 

3 . 

0 

0 

. 3 

_ 3 J 

2 

1 

/ — 

— 2 __ 

— ^ — 
3 

— *r - 

3_ 

- -y — 

_ 3_ 

27 

4 

14 

. 3 

- 4 

_3 — 

_ 2 __ 

_ 2 _ 

2 

y 

_ 2 _ 




■ 4 

- 4 - 

_4_ 

_ 2 — 

— 3 — 

_ 3 _ 

— 3 J 

3 

65 

10 

15 

. 3 - 

2 

— 2 -h 

1 

3—*. 

_ 2 _ 

— 3- 

-* -y — 

_3_ 

61 . 

0 ... 

0 

3 

_ 3 - 

_3 — 

__ 2 _ 

- 3 — 

- 4 _ 

_ 3 

_ 2 . 

47 

a 

16 

1 

3 

2 -1 

_ 2 — 

_ 3 __ 

— 3 - 

_ 3 . 

_ 3 _ 

31 

6 

___ 20 _ 

3 _ 

_ 3 _ 

_ 2 — 

L 2 

✓ ■ 

3 

3 

2 J 

_3_ 

7& 



4 

4 

_ 4 _ 

— 3 - 

- 3 — 

_ 3 _ 

— 2 

^ — 
_ 3_ 

106 

.10 

Q 

3 

4 - 

_ 4 __ 

_ 4 , 

_ 4 _ 

- 4- 

— 4 j 

-y 

_4_ 

27 

5 

IQ ... _ 

4 

_ 4 - 

— 4 ~ 

-4- 

- 4 — 

- 4 - 

" ■ ‘ *'r • 

— 4 . 

_4_ 

52 

10 

IQ 









51 

_ 0 _ 

0 

4 

1—4 

4 

2 

3 

4 

2 

1 

62 


__ 11 

. 3 

3 

3 

2 

_ 2 _ 

_ 3 _ 

_ 3 . 

_ 3_ 

46 

7 

15_ 

4 — 

_ 4 _ 

_ 3_ 

- 2 — 

— 3 — 

— 3 - 

_ 3 J 

_ 3 _ 

16 

4 

25 

3 

- 3_ 

_3 — 

_ 2 _ 

_ 2 _ 

_3 - 

_ 2 

- -y 

_3_ 

55 

6 

0 

4__ 

- 4- 

_ 4 - 

— 3- 

4 

3 

- 3 - 

_ 4_ 

57 

10 

18 

3 __ 

_ 3 _ 

_ 3 — 

_ 2 _ 

3 

3 

— 3 - 

_4- 

37 

— 15 

43 

3 

• 2 

_ 3- 

_ 1 _ 

_ 2 __ 

- 3- 

_ 2 

_ 3 _ 

79 

0 

0 

3 

- 3 - 

_ 2 ^ 

— 2 - 

- 2 — 

_ 2 _ 

— 2 - 

_3_ 

43 

15 

15 

- 4 

-4 - 

_ 3 _ 

_ 2 _ 

_ 2 _ 

- 3 - 

- 3- 

_ 2 - 

50 

10 

20 

- 3 — 

_ 4__ 

__ 2 - 

_2 - 

_ 4 _ 

_ 3 _ 

— 2 - 

_ 3 _ 

74 


40_ 

4 — 

- 4 - 

_ 4__ 

4 - 

_ 4 — 

- 4_ 

— 4 - 

— 3- 

2L 

10 

42 

4 

4 - 

— 3 — 

- 3 — 

- 3 — 

- 3 - 

— 3- 

_ 4_ 

22 

4 

1 8 









2& 

Q 

33 _ 

4 - 

_ 3 _ 

_ 3 « 

— 3 — 

— 4 — 

- 4 - 

_ 4 

— 3 - 




4 - 

- 5-1 

-4-1 

- 5-J 

- 3 - 

J-3- 

L 3 - 

— 4 J 






















































































































































































217 


APPENDIX R 
(Continued) 


Number 

of 

Roans 

Number 

with 

No Art 

Percent¬ 
age with 
No Art 

EVALU 

AX 

ATION* 

MS: 

I 

II 

Ill 

IV 

V 

VI 

VII 

VIII 

60 

30 

so 

3 - 

__ 3- 

3 

__ 3 _ 

_ 3 _ 

_ 4 

_4 

_3 

79 

20 

25 

4 _ 

— 3 . 

_ 4_ 

_ 2 __ 

_ 4 _ 

_ 2 

_3 

_ 3 

34 

4 

12 

. 3 _ 

— 4 . 

— 4 ^ 

_ 2 _ 

_ 3 . 

_ 2 . 

_ 3. 

_ 3 

40 

TO 

25 

- 3 - 

— 3 - 

_ 2 _ 

— 1 — 

_ 2 _ 

— 3- 

___ 2 , 

_ 2 

20 

. 3 .... 

40._ 

.3 — 

_3 _ 

4 

2 

- 2 _ 

_ 2 - 

_ 3 . 

_1 

23 

n . 

0 

4 

✓ — 

3 „ 

__ 4 _ 

_ 2 _ 

_ 4 — 

_ 2 J 

— 3. 

_ 3 

30 __ 

10 

33 

4 - 

— 3 - 

_3 ~ 

_ 2 __ 

- 4 - 

_ 3 _ 

_ 3 

_ 4 

40 

IS 

33 

3 

— 3 . 

__ 3_ 

__ 2 __ 

3 

2 

3 

2 

TOTALS ' 

AV. 









3192 

397 

12 










* Symbols: (5) evidence of attainment, (4) indications of 
progress, ( 3 ) appearance of some progress, ( 2 ) indications of 
little progress, (1) evidence of no progress. Refer to 
Appendix H for wording of the aims. 









































’ ' : : 


r X;. 










. 


... 





. 


■ 

- . 


[i 
o'. 




























































- 


£ 



















. . 








: 


' ' ■ y t .c V 

- '■ .. ■ .. . .. - : tQ'V. ' ' | 

. 















APPENDIX R 


QUESTIONNAIRE STUDY: DATA 

FOR THE 

ELEMENTARY SCHOOL 




TEACHER GROUP 




EVALU. 

AI] 

ATION* 

MS: 

I 

II 

Ill 

IV 

V 

VI 

VII 

VIII 

3_| 

3 

3 

4 

3 

2 

4 

4 

5 

4 

4 _ 

3 

4 

3 

3 

4 

5 _ 

. 5 

_ 3 _ 

3 

4 

3 

_ 3 

2 

5 

5 

5 

2 

_ 3 

3 

. 3 

3 

4 

4._ 

. 4 ... 

4 

„ 4 

. 4 

4 

4 

4 

3_ 

4 

2 

4 

3 

2 

3 

4 ... 

_ 3 ... 

4 

5 

4 

3 

3 

3 

4. .. 

4 

5 

2 

3 

4 

3 

3 

5 

4 _ 

5 

3 

4 

4 

4 

3 

4 . 

3... 

_ 3 

_ 2 

4 _ 

3 

2 _ 

3 

3 

4 _ 

. 2 _ 

4 

3 _ 

2 

3 

3 

4 

.___ 3 

2 

2 _ 

3 _ 

4 „ 

2 

4 

1 

2 

1 

2 

2 

_ 4 

5 

3 

5 

_ 5 

5 

2 

. 4 _ 

___ 2 

3 

4 

3 

_ 3 

2 

L_ 3 

.4 

3 _ 

2 

3 

5 

L_ 4 

3 

.. 3 

_ 4 

4 

3 _ 

3 

3 

4 _ 

4 _ 

_3 

4 

4 

_ 3 

3 

5 

4 ... . 

3 . 


4 

3 


3 

3 

*5 


4 

3 

4 

_ 2 

1 

4 

4 

3 

3 

3 

4 

3 

3 

3-4 

3 

4 ,_ 

2 

3 

4 

2 

2 

4 

_ 3 

.. 4 

5 

5 

3 

4 

4 

5 

4 

4 

3 

5 

2 

3 

3 

3 

4 

4 

. 3 

3 

.... 4 

3 

3 

3 

5 

. 4 

3 _ 

5 

. _. 5 __ 

3 

4 

4 

4 

4 

2 

__ 3 _ 

_ 3 

3 

4 

3 

4 

_ 5 

3 

4 _ 

4 

3 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

h- 4 

4 

4 

4 

Zj, 

3 

2 

3 

2 

2 

2 

3 

4 

2 

2 

3 

2 

3 

2 

3 

4 

5 

4_ 

4 

5 

4 

3 

* Syr 
progi 
Of 1] 
Apper 

Qbols: (3) evidence of attainment, (4) indications of 
?ess, (3) appearance of some progress, (2) indications 
Lttle progress, (1) evidence of no progress. Refer to 
idix H for wording of the aims. 










































































































































































































































: 





■. ■ ,■ <, . ■ ~ . i: : . v 

:: i:j o*.: jhi ‘ ,; ; , ' , < , v; 

. 















219 


APPENDIX S 

QUESTIONNAIRE DATA: SUPERINTENDENTS 1 COMMENTS 
ON THE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL ART PROGRAM 


(1) TT In two of our elementary schools (of twenty-seven) aims 
and objectives are well understood and attained.” 

(2) tT We have strong ’art’ teachers and weak teachers.’ 1 

(3) "I feel that the objectives are reasonably well attained. 

In fact we built an art course specifically for our sys¬ 
tem and youngsters in this area have the benefit of 
professional instruction once a week. 

(4) ’’Here again so much depends on the teacher. The range is 
from excellent to poor.” 

(5) ’’Elementary Art superior ... to junior and senior high 
school because it appears more purposeful there.” 

(6) ’’Again, this is a mixed situation. Here ’everyone’ teaches 
art, and many are just not enthusiastic. Art broadcasts 
serve these teachers as almost the total program. About a 
dozen have recent courses and are doing a good job. How 
does one assess the hypothetical ’average’ teacher?” 

(7) The above aims are those set forth by art enthusiasts. 

Art enthusiasts will say that they are all realized to 
some considerable extent. No one knows whether they are 
or not or whether they can be realized. Probably they 
are realized in some individual cases.” 

(&) ”We seldom see art lessons in progress.” 

(9) ”1 have seen some outstanding work this year. . .” 

(10) ”In general, the degree of success in the students’ art 
attainment appears to be directly related to the ability 
of the teacher to lead and direct the art activities of 
the class.” 

(11) ’’The greatest need is for teachers who are interested in 
developing an art programme in their rooms. Some prac¬ 
tical training would, of course, be invaluable.” 

(12) ’’Media and space are restricted.” 


r v.., 1 , I .. I i 

. x x j, X.j ) ;.1 ) m l '• /i . ,. J/..; •v.j.jw . ■ : u C : 

. X > : ■> o ■ i ■ . . . .. 

, ' : 


- 


• ‘1 --.Li: 

• 


;» j\: ,c 

iih ,:XX:.... X-, . 





. •. ,X. X . X 

J' : i "• 1 .. v. 



.. . 


i Ci. ) ■ (XX J X I; U 



U . v v 1 




. 





. . . .. 





. . , -.X 




X 

i .. 

xX: ■. ■ ot;-u XuuiUJi: 


" : Q. v : • 


, 


X • C 


1 . 

. 





v 






, 



: w . o .'X 




T 




. X X ;■ 



■:X. vX'. i .t- X'. 

. 





; ' ... '■ ' ,•. 

X •' X' 


O'j. ‘ ; . i J Xi "X; 


. 

"> ':... •<.../•': 


’ v. , ... . . . 

, 



• 



. 





. 





. . . 

> • ■ ? do ■ .. .. . , 

;• X ...: - \ • . v •. . c . X , v 

' X; • : v.' 1 .):. . ,X ,.IU> i,j. X vKi- jiw X-. 

. 

^s. ■ .. ;:J: j c; > . ../• •. .. . (IX' 

. . •_ ... • . ■: 

. •... : .. : . . . X. /.u .. ; X, 

. 




220 


INDEX 

Activities; 

pupil, 43-51; 
teacher, 51-53 
Adolescence, 43 
Aesthetic standards, £0,94 
Aim, 2 

Aims, 4,103,117,155; 

attainment of,116,126, 

129,133,134,136,138; 

relative order of, 123; 
suitability of, 35 
Alberta, studies of art in, 1; 

painters, 63,74 
Analysis of data, 92-130 
Appreciation, 45,4$,49,77,103-9 
Art, 3; 

activities, 47; 
alternate programs of, 94; 
as an elective, 20; 
creative, 33, see also Creative; 
education, 25; 

examples of school, 101,175-203; 
history of Alberta, 4, 6-35; 
materials — cost, 25; 
offerings, 93; 

- Outline/ 1 19; 
program, 4,7,12,20,26,36; 
projects, 72; 

- Society/ 1 13; 

Structure, 4$; 
supervisor, see Supervisor 

Audio-visual aids, 157; 

Authority, 23 
Assumptions, 3 

Banff School of Fine Arts, 27-$ 
Basic assumptions, 3,10,132 
philosophy, 65 
processes, 37 
Bassano, 23 
Batik, 193 
Beauty, 26 
Bryan, G.J., 10 
Bulletin Three, 30 


Calgary, 12; 

Normal School, 23 
Camrose, 14 
Certificate, 10; 

Elementary school, 16-7; 
high school, 22 
Oertification, 14$ 

Chalk, 44 
Change, 6; 

in emphasis, 34; 
of method, 29-31; 
in program, 22 
Christmas cards, 191-2 
Cinema, 157 

Circulating art exhibits, 157 
Citizenship, 77-$,109-10 
Classroom,156; 

equipment, 59-60; 
teacher,153 

Colour, 49,7$,110,150-2; 

Collage, 177-9,195-6 
Collection of data, 39 
Commentary; 

superintendent, 101,116,171-4 
21S 21Q* 

teacher’ 115-16,214 
Composition, 50 
Compulsory courses, 155 
Conclusions, 131 

Contemporary evaluation, 17,23,29 
Control of media, 122 
Co-ordination in art, 155 
Copying, 190 

Cost of art supplies, 13,25 
Costume design, 49 
Craft, 62 
Crafts, 46-9 
Crayon, 44 
Creative, 35; 
art, 62 

artistic ability, 75,79; 
design, 49-50; 
expression, 39; 
ideas, 52; 
interests, 34; 
methods, 30; 





< 


c 



c 


c 



c 


< 





?' 


c 





221 


Creative (continued) 
processes, 37 
Creativity, 3,51; 

development of, 105-6; 
release of, 32,34,97 
Criteria, development of,37 
Criticism, 53; 

of the program, 1 
Cultural; 

appreciation, 26; 
studies, 31; 
tragedy, 79 

Curriculum Review Committee, 22 


Damico, V., 39 
Data, 5; 

collection of, 39; 
superintendent, 163,211,216; 
teacher, 170,215,218; 
treatment, 92; 
results, 133 
Decoration, 150-1,152; 

interior, 49-50 
Democracy, 66 
Design, 49-50,73,110; 

costume, 49 
Development; 
of art, 6; 

of child-art, 33,41-2; 

of skills and knowledge, 53, 

56,53 

Dewey, John, 70 

Distribution of evaluation, 99, 
113,114 
Division, 93 

Domestic Science, 13; see also 
Home economics 
Drawing, 7,13,49,73; 
examination, 144; 
pencil, 135-6,193-6; 
pencil, shaded, 201-2 
"Drowning Accident/ 1 179-30 


Edmonton, 12,13,63; 
Art Society, 18 


Education; 

differing approaches to art, 

101 ; 

general, 73 
Eighth grade, 153 
Electives, 20,26 
Elementary school, 37,43,52,59, 
67,116,13 6,216,213,219; 
and intermediate certific¬ 
ate, 23 

Ellis, Inspector, 11 
English, 33; 

schools art program, 9 
Enjoyment, 31 
Enrollment, 23-4 
Enterprise, 25,30-1 
Environment, 70,121 
Equipment, ol; 

for Standard I, 3 
Evaluation, 1,2,53-4,56-7,33,94, 
96,103,117; 
art examples, 209-10; 
distribution of, see 
Distribution; 
order of,100-1; 
student, 31 
Examination, 3,24; 
drawing, 144 

Examples, student art, 175; 

evaluation of, 209-10 
Expression, 3; 
creative, 39 


Factors, art program, 36 
Failures in program, 11 
Fall fairs, 25 

Farm and home mechanics, 42,33 

Faulkner, R., 21,45 

Fife, J.A., 17 

Fifth grade, 151 

Forbes, J.A., 1 

Formal methods, 26-7 

Fourth grade, 151 

Free brush, 44; 

materials, 156 





222 


Gaitskell, C.D., 9,54,67 
General education, 73 
Genignani, B.P., 3 
Geometric figures, 7; 
terms, 6 

Gifted, 76-7,106,156-6 
Grants, 19 
Groves, G.B., 3 
Guidance, 52-3,55-6,57 


Happiness, 117 
Haptik, see Haptikos 
Haptikos, 41 
Hastie, R., 137 
Helping teacher, 91 
Historic summary, 33; 
factors, 35 

History, Alberta art, 4,6-35 
Home economics, 42,63, see also 
Domestic science 
Home study, 21,24 
Hurst, R., 3 


Illustration, 49,50 
Importance of equal programming 
in art, 155 

"In the Maple-Sugar Bush," 163-4 
India-ink example, 207-6 
Ineoualities of opportunity; 

Art 10, 132-3; 

Art 20, 132; 
to experience art, 136; 
junior high school art, 134 
Initial years of art education, 6-12 
Interest, 53 

International Conference on Public 
Education, 39, 154 
International Society for Education 
through Art, 139 


Junior high school, 40-1,45,55,57,59 
74,102,134,211-2,214 


Leisure, 154 
Lethbridge, 12 
Lettering, 50 

Limitations to the study, 2 
Lowenfeld, V., 41 


Materials, 60,61,101; 

free, 156 
Media, 44; 

control, 64,122-3 
Medicine Hat, 12 
Methods; 

changing, 29,31; 
creative, 30; 
formal, 26-7; 
of study, 67; 
teaching, 156 
Modelling, 144 
Monochrome, 167-6 
Motivation, 52,55,57 


National art exchange, 157 
"Nativity," 179-20 
"Naturalistic craft," 201-2 
New course of study,1912, 156 
Non-visual, 55-6 
Normal school, 10,14,22; 
Calgary, 26 


Objectives, 66,74,27; 

survey of, 65, see also 
Aims 

Observation, 53,56,103,124-5 
Offering, 102, see also Elect¬ 
ives 

One, grade, 150 
Ontario, 9 

Opportunities, see inequalities 
Option, 29,46, see also 
Elective 
Outcomes, 62 


Painters, see Alberta painters 
Painting, 50 
Pearson, R., 70,79 











c * 








* c 


c 


c 


t 


« 

e 


c 


c 








c c < 





« 5 « 




5 



* 

C 


C ** ? 




C < 


) 



223 


Pencil, 44, see also Drawing 
Periods; 

in art education, 6 
studies, 50 
Personality, 30,45 
Philosophy, 65 
Plates, 22 
"Plate," 205-6 
Population of the study, 90 
Preparation; 

for class, 52 , 55,57 
personal, 52 , 55,57 
Primary schools, 155 
Print; 

linoleum, 199-200 
potato, 197-8 

Procedure for the study, 4 
Program, 4,7,12,20,21,26,87, 
93-4,102-3,116-7,137,156; 
alternate art, 95; 
change 22; 

co-ordination of,1555 
development of, 6; 
failure, 11; 
importance of, 155; 
present, 36; 
timing, 155 

Progress, satisfactory, 152 
Progression, 13,14,149 
Projects, 126 
Pupil activities, 43 
Purpose of art, 13 
Pseudorealistic, 3$ 


Qualifications, 17 
Questionnaire, 5,$9; 
replies, 92 


Radio, 27 
Realism, 52 

Realization and awakening, 40 
Recommendations, 5,39,73,139 
Reference books, 59-61 
Representation, 150-2 
Respect, 123-4 
Rural areas, 17-24 


Satisfaction, 119-20 
School; 

buildings, 156 
decoration, 156 
grades, 12 
Schwartz, J., 3 
Scope and purpose of aims, 13 
Self-expression, 56,73-9,156 
senior high school, 41,48,61,79, 
93,132,166-9,171 
Seventh grade, 152 
Sixth grade, 152 
Sketching, 152,207-9 
Skills, development of, 53,56,58 
Social studies, 26 

Socially acceptable habits, 77,109-10 
Studies on art education, 1,139 
Summary, 138,139; 

history, 33 
Summer school, 15 
Supervision, supervisor, 12,18,20, 

159 

Supplies, 53 
Sutton, H., 3 
Symbolism, child-, 37,52 
Systematic teaching, 12 


Talented, see Sifted 
Teacher; 

roles, 51; 

training,10-1,14,22-3,27,33,153- 
!59; 

training colleges, 158 
Teaching trends, 54 
Technique, 63 
Television, 157 
Texts, 177 
Theory, 20-1,33 
Third grade, 151 
Tomlinson, R.R., 9,63 
Tools, 59,60,61 

Training, see also Teacher training, 
period, 15 
"Travel," 183-4 
Trends in teaching art, 54 
Two, grade, 150 




c 


t " « 




c 




C 






? • t 





c 


c 


« < < 


c 


C • « 


• c < « 

« » ■? 01 


s 


( 


c ' c 


c t 




c • ? c 


c 


1 t « e 


e 


t 


t 


c 


c 

c 


« t . « t < 



< 


{ 


? 


c 


t 


c 


< 





L c 





c 


< 


fij'U; 


C 


-’■«■’ C 



C 


5 


k v * 



:< .;;Li D 1 1 

















224 


United Kingdom, ministry of 
education, 33 
U.N.E.S.C.O., 39,154 
Urban schools, 13,25 


Validity, 131 
Visual, 41,55-6; 

education, 154; 
minded, 40; 
non-, 55-6 


War, 35 
Wartime, 13 
Watercolour, 131-2 
Wax crayon painting, 177-3 
"White Mustang,’ 1 203-4 
’’Woody Wood-pecker,” 137-3 


X-Ray, 33 


e 

.. e ■ ' ...■ ' ■ 

t ■ •• c 


/ t .■ 

’ ■ ' t 1 

• ■ • ( 

< - A c 

c • • c. . 


5 '■ V , 

i' < : 

c 

< 

t ■ 





















