


For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


0X iUBJtlS 

TOMBSlTOtl 

aBBSMIJlSIS 










































UNIVERSITY OF AIHERTA 


SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have 
read and recommend to the School of Graduate Studies 
for acceptance* a thesis entitled THE EVOLUTION OF 
SCHOOL GRANTS IN ALBERTA* submitted by Ivor G* Dent* 
B.A.* B.Ed.* in partial fulfilment of the require¬ 
ments for the degree of Master of Education® 



Professor 

Professor^ 

Professor 


September 2l** 1956 










































THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


An abstract of 

THE EVOLUTION OF SCHOOL GRANTS IN ALBERTA 
a thesis of 11*2 pages 
by 

Ivor G* Dent 


Senior governments have for many years made 
available monies by -way of school grants to local 
authorities in the Alberta area* This method of 
financing education had its first beginnings in 18?8 
and has been followed ever since® During the inter¬ 
vening years many changes have been made in the 
Alberta school grants structure* These changes have 
come as a result of the interplay of various factors 
—some of which can be assessed and others which 
defy understanding* This study is an attempt to 
follow the changing scene and to comment upon it 
whenever possible* 








The trend in school grants has been toward the 
Alberta government carrying an ever-increasing burden 
of educational expenditure* both in actual outlay 
and in the proportion of expenditure assumed® These 
grants have always contributed a greater proportion 
toward rural education than to urban® 

It has long been the policy of the provincial 
government to assume a greater share of the financial 
responsibility for areas with a low per-pupil 
assessment® Another government method which has 
been used in recent years to equalise educational 
opportunity in Alberta has been the provision of 
realistic transportation grants based on distance 
travelled and pupil capacity of the vehicle, rather 
than the earlier, and inefficient per conveyance grant. 

As a common measure within the grant struc¬ 
ture, the classroom unit has been retained throughout 
the major portion of Alberta f s history. However, 
critical factors have been given due consideration 
as the grant structure reflected the demands of an 
evolving complex society. Peculiarly enough, care of 
the handicapped has been steadily improved without 
strong pressure from the general public. 

In the past decade, the Inability of real 
estate to support increased capital outlays has 
necessitated the introduction of government schemes 
for subsidizing construction of school plants. This 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/evolutionofschooOOdent 


is perhaps the most significant factor in the trend 
toward increased provincial expenditure for education 
purposes* 

The tax-reduction subsidy has created an 
anomaly which is apparent when one attempts to 
rationalize the principles of the grant structure* 

Federal financial aid is as yet a contro¬ 
versial factor. However, it is evident that since 
municipal and provincial governments are becoming 
hard-pressed by the need for expanding educational 
facilities, some form of compromise is necessary. 
There is nothing in the British North America Act 
of 1867 to prevent the federal government from 
giving education aid to the provinces* 




THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


THE EVOLUTION OF SCHOOL GRANTS IN ALBERTA 

A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF EDUCATION 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


by 

Ivor G. Dent 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA, 


September, 1956 




CONTENTS 


Chapter Page 

I. THE PROBLEM.. .. 1 

II. THE EARLY YEARS .. 7 

III. SCHOOL GRANTS FROM 1905 UNTIL 1920. ... 29 

IV. THE GRANT PICTURE FROM 1921 UNTIL I9k5. . 52 

V. FROM 19h6 TO THE PRESENT. ........ 63 

VI. EQUALIZATION. .. 79 

VII. TRANSPORTATION. ............. 9h 

VIII. OTHER GRANTS AND CONDITIONS ....... 102 

IX. SUMMARY ................. 129 

X. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 

FURTHER STUDY ............... 139 

Bibliography ••••••••••••••••••• ±k3 





















LIST OF TABLES 


TABLE PAGE 

I. COMPARISON OF PER PUPIL INCOME FROM 
REQUISITIONS, EQUALIZATION GRANTS, AND 
OPERATIONAL GRANTS. 89 

II. GOVERNMENT SCHEDULE OF APPROPRIATIONS 

FOR TRANSPORTATION FOR 191*6.. . 98 

III. COMPARISON OF THE AMOUNTS EARNED IN 

EDMONTON AND BERRY CREEK PER PUPIL BY 
CLASSROOM GRANT. ............ 107 

IV. COMPARISON OF THE PER PUPIL ASSISTANCE 
FROM EQUALIZATION AND TAX REDUCTION 
SUBSIDY GRANTS IN REPRESENTATIVE SCHOOL 
UNITS . ............ 116 

V. A COMPARISON OF CAPITAL GRANTS TO 

DIVISIONS (AND COUNTIES), URBAN SCHOOL 
DISTRICTS AND ALL SCHOOL UNITS. 120 

VI. CAPITAL GRANTS IN CERTAIN REPRESENTATIVE 

SCHOOL UNITS ............... 122 

VII. REVENUE IN ALL SCHOOL UNITS DURING 

REPRESENTATIVE YEARS BETWEEN 1905 AND 

1951*. .... ............. 121* 

VIII. REVENUE IN URBAN AREAS IN REPRESENTATIVE 

YEARS BETWEEN 1905 AND 1951* . 126 


IX. REVENUE IN RURAL AREAS IN REPRESENTATIVE 
YEARS BETWEEN 1905 AND 1951*. ...... 


127 


















ACKWODJLEDGEMENTS 


To the following who have so generously 
contributed help and material the writer 
offers grateful acknowledgements in particular* 
Mr. H. C. Melsness* Hr. E. J. Hanson* Dr. S. 

C. T. Clarke* Mr. H. E. Balfour, Mr. A. Bredo* 

Mr• H. M. Smith* Mr. A. K. Dean* Mrs. Mae Cox* 
and many others. 




CHAPTER I 


THE PROBLEM 


Diaring the past seventy years education, in the 
area which now comprises Alberta, from being a tiny- 
infant which required very little financial sustenance, 
has become a voracious giant requiring tremendous 
sums from the public purse* The sources of finances 
needed to keep Alberta 8 s education system alive have 
been (and still are) revenue from property taxation, 
grants from parent governments, and fees from students* 
Income from the Federal Covernment is no longer ©f any 
great magnitude, and student fees never have contributed 
any significant amount toward educational revenue in 
Alberta® 

Government support of education in Alberta 
began at a time when the population was sparse and the 
amount of money needed was small* As the years have 
gone by education, like many other services in society, 
has become complex and expensive® The burden for the 















! ' ' ' ; 

' V 

'jt :, U ‘ 


! 


















2 


costs of education has presented a local and provincial 
problem which did not exist at the time that education 
was made a provincial responsibility. Because local 
school boards and the Provincial Government have to 
share the responsibility of paying for education* each 
group is bound to feel that the other is not carrying 
the share of the burden that it should. 

The purposes ©f this study are t© indicate the 
evolution of government school grants throughout the 
years that education has been a factor in Alberta* to 
examine some of the major grants of the recent past and 
the present* and to point up the general grant picture 
of Alberta in such a way that areas in need of further 
study my be assessed more easily by anyone interested 
in the financing of education in Alberta. 

During the years of government aid to the schools 
of (what is now) Alberta* the grant structure has 
changed from including only one simple grant which was 
designed to pay one-half of the teacher’s salary to a 
multiplicity of grants which was designed to meet widely- 
varying conditions® There are now per classroom* per 
pupil* transportation* handicapped pupil* construction* 
tax reduction subsidy* abnormal enrolment* equaliza¬ 
tion* and other types of grants* all of which have 
evolved to fill a definite need or as the result of 
vociferous efforts of certain citizens or legislators. 


■ 














3 


An examination is required of the present grant 
structure in the light of whether during its checkered 
growth it has developed into a vehicle which is out of 
proportion, and whether it now fills adequately a 
present need* This study is designed to assist with 
the examination by giving the background of the Alberta 
grant structure and studying some ©f the present features* 

The sources used for this study were information 
and regulations obtained from the Alberta Department of 
Education, legislation of the Province of Alberta per¬ 
taining to school grants. Reports of the Council of 
Public Instruction of the North-West Territories, and 
certain Ordinances of the North-West Territories* 

Related studies dealing with school grants in 
Alberta are limited to a certain extent* But an 
important study which brought many of the school 
finance problems to light was School Finance in Canada , 
in which the School Finance Research Committee under 
the directorship of M* E* LaZerte, analyzed, compared, 
and made recommendations for improvement of the school 
finance situation in the Canadian provincesAnother 
treatise which has a bearing on the present study is one 

^■School Finance Research Committee, School Finance 
in Canada , Report of the Canadian School Trustees *' 
Association, 1955* 












t ■ • 
































' 


















































k. 


by K. F. Argue, which he entitled. Financing Education in 
the Canadian Provinces * 2 In his study, which was sponsored 
by the Canadian Teachers® Federation, Argue analysed the 
factors which form the basis of need for federal educa¬ 
tional aid in Canada and suggested methods of distribution 
of such aid* In a previous study, entitled A Small Fund 
Equalisation Grant for Alberta Schools ,^ Argue had 
applied Mort®s principles of equalization to devise a 
suggested procedure by which equalization could be 
attained in Alberta Schools* This study, however, was 
limited in its practical implications because the data 
used was rather limited* 

Allan A. Gibb produced The Setting Up of a 
Minimum Educational Rrogram in Alberta and an Inventory 

of the Cost to the Provincial Government *^ In this 
study Gibb suggested a uniform divisional tax to 
support a foundation program supplemented by provincial 
grant to obtain uniformity* The school districts would 
receive aid equal to the median amount provided for 
the school divisions under Gibb*s plan* 

2 K. F* Argue, Financing Education in the Canadian 

Provinces , An unpublished! study sponsored by the Canadian 
teachers*' Federation, Rutherford Library, University of 
Alberta, 19kl. 

%• F. Argue, A Small Fund Equalization Grant for 
Alberta Schools , An unpublished paper on file at the 
University of Alberta, Edmonton, 1937® 

^Allan A. Gibb, The Setting up of the Minimum 
Educational Program in Alberta and anTnvintory of "Che 

'Uo¥t~tbTthe Provincial Iio¥iSrtent^ an"unpubITsEed 

B*Ed. “thesis, RutherfbFcTla&'iry^ Edmonton, 19h2* 
























. s. , 


" 












... - 







' 


' 







5 


■j ? 










■ 


- 




















s 


In The Equalization of Educational Opportunity in 
the Province of Alberta / Arthur W® Reeves developed a 
plan of provincial aid to education based upon a satis¬ 
factory minimum program* and suggested a line of progress 
which could be followed in the gradual implementation of 
complete equalization. Three other publications* 
although of American origin* are pertinent to some parts 
of this study* viz** State Support for Public Schools *^ 
by Paul R® Mortj Amount of New Aid Required for State 
Equalization Programs *^ by E. S* Lawler ; and School Funds 
and Their Apportionment *^ by E® R. Cubberly. 

This study begins with a description of the early 
school grants in the North-West Territories® Changes 
in the grant structure during the time that Alberta was 
part of the North-West Territories and during the period 
that Alberta has been a province are followed in chrono¬ 
logical order* This is followed by a thematic presenta¬ 
tion of various features of the more recent grant picture 
and indications of the comparative benefits derived from 
government grants by various school units (and in some 
cases all school units)® Where possible* within the 


^Arthur W. Reeves* The Equalization of Educational 
Opportunity in the Province ~of Alberta ® Unpiblishe<r~ " 
Doctor®| dissertation* Stanford University* 191*9® 

®Paul R® Mort* State Support for Public Schools® 

Bureau of Publications* Columbia* 1926. 

?E. S® Lawler* Amount of New Aid Required for State 
Equalization Programs * Bureau of Publications* (Jolumbia* 1932 
&B. P. Cubberly* School Funds and Their Apportionment * 
Bureau of Publications* Columbia* 19"(56.. . 



































. ■« 








.. 


































6 


limited scope of this study, observations and suggestions 
are made, conclusions which my be reached are indicated, 
and areas where further study might prove fruitful are 
included* 





CHAPTER II 


THE EARLY YEARS 


Education began in what Is. now Alberta before 
the time that state-aided education had become a common¬ 
place in most civilised countries of the world. Con¬ 
sequently leadership in establishment of schools In 
Western Canada was left primarily t© the efforts of the 
organized churches. This phenomenon was merely a tiny 
reflection of the middle nineteenth century world 
educational scene. 

These early attempts to provide the populace of 
the western Canadian plains with education were doomed 
to failure almost before their inception. The only 
children in the area at that time were the red-skinned 
offspring of the nomadic Indian tribes and their half- 
breed cousins. These children were moved about con¬ 
stantly* making it almost impossible for classes to be 
carried on* when the pupils were frequently being up¬ 
rooted and moved elsewhere.^ Because there was only a 

^I. Gore sky* The Beginning and Growth of toe~Alberta 

School System * An unpublished Master of Education thesis* 
Tftuther ford library* University of Alberta* 19hh,) p. llj* 











8 . 


limited number of missionaries engaged primarily in 
spreading the gospel, and only secondarily in teaching, 
their work educationally speaking could be described as 
less than successful.^ 

Although early conditions permitted only sporadic 
attempts at education, from about 1859 on there began a 
continuous growing effort to provide educational faci¬ 
lities for the children of the North-West Territories® 

In that year three nuns arrived at Lac Ste. Anne to set 
up a school to teach the Indians and Metis of the 
surrounding area.^ From that time on Education never 
looked back. The Lac Ste. Anne school soon had many 
counterparts, both Protestant and Roman Catholic, 
throughout the Territories. 

While in control of the North-West Territories, 
the Hudson 9 s Bay Company did very little to enhance the 
cause of education for other than their employees* 
children. Even before 1850, the children in residence 
at the Hudson* s Bay fort in Edmonton attended classes 
conducted by various missionaries who exchanged teach¬ 
ing of the three R*s for their board and keep.^ 

2 Ibid.» p. 15. 

3lbid ., p. 11. 

iiEdmonton Journal, March 17, 1956, p® 5- 









f : _ • 












m 








i u. 


■ 




1 J 


. • 




■ 
















9 


One of the first secular, non-company schools in the 
North-West Territories was started at Edmonton in 1881. 

It was financed by voluntary subscription for three 
years.5 a one-room school was erected (at a cost of 
$968) from the funds raised, and a group of Edmonton 
pioneers bonded together to guarantee the $500 salary of 
the first teacher 

Although the North-West Territories came under the 
jurisdiction of the Canadian Government on June 27, 

1870, very little was done about starting state-aided 
schools for some years. In l8?ii legislation was passed 
by the Dominion Government which was designed to regu¬ 
late and control the activities of schools engaged in the 

upbringing and education of orphaned children of the 
7 

Territories . 1 

The first request for direct government assis¬ 
tance to education in the North-West Territories came 
from the settlement of St. Laurent in north-western 
Saskatchewan. They sent a petition to the North- w est 
Territories Council in 1877, asking for financial assis¬ 
tance to help defray the expenses of erecting a school 
house and supporting a teacher. The Council could not 
grant the aid requested because no funds were set aside 

5gVa.~ McKee, The Story of Edmonton School District 

No. 7, 1885 - 1935 , (Edmonton, 1936)7^5.. .““ 

^Edmonton Journal , March 17, 1956, p. 5* 

?E. H. Oliver, The Canadian North-West, (Ottawa, 1915), 
Vol. II, p. 103k. ”. 









I : : V . 









.) f j. {' 


; , 


> 















j ' •: . , ■ i 

» 




i 







10 


for such purposes • But in 1878 the petition was forwarded 
by the Lieutenant Governor of the Territories to the 
Minister of the Interior along with a strong plea for 
educational help. The North-West Territories Council 
felt that the Dominion Government should be made aware 
of the peopled desires in educational matters.® 

As a result of the Lieutenant Governor's plea and 
the St. Laurent petition* the Dominion Government 1 s 
Minister of the Interior suggested the setting up of 
School Corporations to raise funds through the medium 
of taxation. The Minister suggested that if the funds 
raised by taxation were insufficient* the North-West 
Territories Council should place an amount in the esti¬ 
mates to provide for the difference." The Lieutenant- 
Governor acted accordingly* and included a $2000 item 
in the 18?8 estimates for the aid of schools.^ This 
was the first major step toward state-aided schools in 
the area which included what is now the Province of 
Alberta. 

On July 1st* 18?9 5 the Honorable David laird* 
Lieutenant-Governor of the North-West Territories* sent 
a telegram to Ottawa asking that the Dominion Government 
help the pioneer schools of the Territories by paying 
one-half the teacher's salary.^ Although nothing came 

®I. Goresky* op. cit .* pp. 21 - 22. 

9Ibid .* p. 16. 

I Qlbid .* p. 2 3* 

Uxbid.* p. 23. 








' 

. 

u: ! 

: 1 ] 








;* 


\ : , 












’ . :? J .v - ' 

. ;v •: : .A . 




' 


v-j\. C' jJ.'v OLh, Ou Lit 






. 


r > 


. 

- / - ; 











11, 


of this suggestion until more than a year later, Laird’s 
idea did form the basis upon which the early school 
grants were paid. 

On November i*th of 1880, the Governor-General in 
Council signed an order agreeing to grant aid to schools 
of the North-West Territories by paying one-half of the 
teacher’s salary for any school in which the minimum 
daily attendance was not less than fifteen pupils # 12 These 
grants-In-aid began in the year 1881 and direct assistance 
to local school boards of Alberta has been made avail¬ 
able in varying forms and amounts by the parent govern¬ 
ments since that time® 

Even at this early date, the Government of Canada 
stated that such an order was not to apply to Indian 
children living in the Territories®^ Indian children 
have been discriminated against since as a result of 
this and other similar legislation® 

Then in I 88 I 4 , the North-West Territories Council 
passed an ordinance providing for the organization of 
schools in the Territories.^ Besides access to revenue 
from direct taxation, the local boards were provided with 
direct financial support from the parent government, 
which could be obtained when certain conditions were met® 


^A® E. Forget, School Laws and Other Educational 
Matters, in Asstniboia,"Wrmcj^Mward Island, the^orCE ^ 

WstTer rxiories “anO to m^oba ® (Ottawa, l89h)V p.HSIjT” 

13Ibid., p. 6ii. 

^North-West Territories Ordinances, Victoria, 

Chapter 

























































- 

















12 


To obtain these grants for the school district* the 
teachers were required to send the school register to the 
Council of Education together with a form stating the 
number of days school had operated during the quarter* the 
daily attendance, the religious denomination of each 
child* the number of boys and girls in attendance* and the 
amount of salary earned by the teacher for that quarter 
This statement had to be certified as correct by the 
chairman of the Board. 

The form was to be accompanied by a receipt 

signed by the teacher* showing that he had received one- 

half of his quarterly salary which for that quarter 

could have amounted to a maximum of $200. This receipt 

was declared by the North-West Territories Council to 

be facie evidence in any law court that such pay- 

17 

ment had been received. This was designed possibly to 
forestall falsification of such receipt by the teacher 
under pressure of the Board. This pressure could have 
been the result of a school board’s desire to pay a smaller 
salary to the teacher and yet obtain the maximum govern¬ 
ment grant. 

The government of the North-West Territories 
agreed to pay half the amount of the teacher’s salary 



’Ibid .* Article 93. 


X ^Ibid .* Article 95* 











> 


. /■ 








t 





■ ■- - '■ - ' - ■ .M 








* .. . . ' ' M ■ > • ■ • 








. ' 



















13 


to a maximum of $1*00 per year if the average daily attend¬ 
ance of the school had been at least ten pupils* This 
grant was transmitted to the treasurer of the Board and he, 
in turn, was required to send proof to the Council of 
Education that the teacher had received the other half 
of his salary* 1 ® 

The teacher was protected from loss of salary in¬ 
curred through illness* The Ordinance insisted that the 
teacher be discharged at the end of the quarter, but he 
was to receive his full salary, even though he had been 
unable to keep the school in operation all the required 

days* There was to be no loss of government grants for 
19 

this year* The Act also stated that an annual salary 
of under $300 or a tenure of less than three months would 
be considered as non-compliance with the Ordinance 
It is interesting to note that, even at this early date, 
provisions were made to protect the interests of the 
teachers in our pioneer settlements* Teachers were 
probably hard to find. 

Obviously during the first years of school aid 
in the North-West Territories grants could be obtained 
as long as a school had been set up with at least 
fifteen—later with ten—children in attendance, and 

^Ibid *, Article 9li* 

^ Xfaid *, Article 95. 

2 Q Ibid *, Article 96. 







' . . > 







■ : 














> 
























a qualified teacher installed. Such was not the case for 
longj the basis of aid to schools was changed considerably 
in 1885. 

Grants were no longer made on the basis of half the 
salary paid the teacher. The qualifications of the 
instructor became of primary importance in determining the 
amount of aid given. Under this enlightened legislation it 
was possible for the district to obtain $250* $ 300 * or $350 
according to whether the teacher®s certificate was third* 
second or first class. Since this grant was the same 
whether the employee of the Board was male or female *23- 
equality of the sexes was inherent in the legislation. 

Because school attendance was rather irregular 
during the early years of education in the Territories* 
grants designed to correct this situation were soon 
introduced. In schools where the average attendance was 
at least eight pupils* an annual grant of $2.00 per child 
was authorised for every pupil who attended classes for 
one hundred school days* and this amount was raised to 
$2.50 if he were in attendance for one hundred sixty days 
or more.22 To stimulate a desirable educational atmos¬ 
phere* grants up to the amount paid under the aforementioned 
capitation grant could be earned if the Inspector of Schools 
reported favorably on the operation of the school. 23 

2lNorth-W@st Territories Ordinances* Victoria* Chap. 3 

(1885)* 

2 2ibid .* Article 85(2). 

23ibid.* Article 85(3). 

















15 


An incentive to keep the size of each class between 
twenty and forty pupils was provided by way of grants paid 
for additional teachers.^ 4 This, in the writer*s opinion, 
was progressive legislation for the day in which it was 
passed. 

The Act also provided a grant of $1*00 per subject 
for every child who wrote what we would now call Depart- 
mental Examinations • 25 

In the following year, the Act of 1885 was amended 
in such a way that aid was provided, at the rate of $2.00 
per pupil, for those who had attended ninety days. 
Provision was also made for a grant of $1.50 per pupil 
for those who had attended only fifty days. It would 
seem that the grants were beginning to take into account 
more of the factors involved in frontier schooling. 

The next year, 188?* produced an entirely new 
Ordinance t© replace that of 1885 and its amendments. 

Grants for certification of the teacher remained at the 
same level as before, 2 ^ but the daily average attendance 
required was cut still further to six pupils, and with a 
favorable report of inspection this figure could still be 
doubled. 2 ® However, this ointment did not come without the 
proverbial fly. The capitation grant had a ceiling of 

$100 for any one school.^ 

4lfeid . 3 Article 85(10. 

2 5TEI5 ., Article 85(5). 

26North«West Territories Ordinances, Victoria, 

Chapter 

2?North-West Territories Ordinances, Victoria, 
Chapter 9l(lj. 

2 ®Ibid », Article 91(3). 

2 ^Ibid ., Article 91(2). 















' . } 



































16 


The detrimental effect of overloaded classrooms 
again received enlightened attention in that any school 
with an average daily attendance of thirty pupils or more 
could receive an additional certification grant for a 
second teacher." The legislation went on to state that 
these grants for more than one extra teacher could be 
obtained for every twenty pupils in average daily 
attendance®"^ This set of provisions indicated clearly 
that the Council of Education of the North-West Terri¬ 
tories was concerned with the fact that a desirable 
educational atmosphere is obtainable only in situations 
where the teacher is not overburdened® 

In 1888 the Act was revised in two main ways. 
First, in the area of teacher certification, the school 
boards were again given an incentive to hire teachers of 
higher qualifications by the provision of a grant of 
seventy-five per cent ©f the teacher’s salary, if he had 
a first-class certificate. For teachers holding second- 
and third-class certificates, the Act provided grants 
of seventy and sixty per cent respectively.32 

That the certification of teachers was considered 
of prime importance by the North-West Territories Council 

^ Q Ibid ®, Article 91( lia). 

3- knbid ., Article 91(ltb). 

^North-West Territories Ordinances, Victoria, 
Chapter 591) Articleb) { c )1T 





















































17 


is obvious, when we take into consideration the fact that 
all the schools in the area earned approximately $98,000 
in grants in the period between September 10, i860 and 
September 2, 1891. Revenue from grants of all other types 

33 

was only in the neighborhood of $11,000 for the same period.^ 
The second major revision showed an obvious design 
on the part of the legislators to stimulate school attendance 
in the rural areas. This was done by the provision of 
special grants ranging from $60.00 per year in schools 
where attendance reached seventy-five per cent of enrol¬ 
ment, down to $35*00 in schools where only fifty per cent 
attendance was attained.3^ 

As the population of the North-West Territories 
increased, further educational facilities were demanded 
by the settlers and subsequently met by the Legislature. 

In 1890 special provision was made for the support of 
separate high school rooms. This change took the form 
of an additional grant of $350 to a room with fifteen 
children in attendance, under the supervision of a duly 
accredited high school teacher.35 

As measured by frontier standards, the schools in 
the North-West Territories had attained a highly satis- 

^ ^Report of the Board of Education for the North - 
West Territoriei^T^TBp'O^T ^pTTSrr 3 " 

^-North-West Territories Ordinances, Victoria, 

Chapter SSTTBBBTT^ 

3 5North-West Territories Ordinances , Victoria 
Chapter l5~( 1890), Article 17 1Z 









. i 






18 


factory level, and there can be no doubt that the liberal 
support given them from the Dominion treasury during the 
developmental years was in no small part responsible for 
this fact.36 The people responded favorably to the 
munificent bounty which was theirs, and the quality of the 
schools reflected their appreciation.3? 

The School Ordinance was again revised at the 1891-92 
session of the North-West Territories Council. The basis 
for school aid again changed and with the change, 
simplicity in the computation of grants seemed to dis¬ 
appear forever. The government of the Territories agreed 
to pay seventy per cent of the teacher ! s salary as long 
as it was not in excess of |360 for a third-class 
instructor teaching in a room which had an average 
daily attendance of between six and ten pupils.' But 
that was not the whole story. 

The aforementioned amount was increased by $5 for 
every child in excess of tenj in addition, $25.00 was 
added for each pupil who was in any of the grades above 
Standard III. To these amounts there was added $2?.00 or 
$50.00 depending upon Whether the teacher held a second¬ 
er a first-class teaching certificate.^ 

James Brown, !, The Report of the Secretary of the 
Board 11 , The Report of the Board of Education for the North- 
West Territoaes^l'OT^^^O^IH?! , p/THH 

3'^J* Hewgill, The Report of the Board of Education 
for the North-West TerritoHe¥'TbF'lB^l)-9l , jCppT 3,"‘p.“3T = 

^North-West Territories Ordinances, Victoria, 

Chapter 28(1591-92), Section 12(a). 

3 9ibid .. Section 12(b,c,d). 










r 






vf •. ■ • 











19 


A further session of the North-West Territories 
Council brought forward an entirely new Ordinance in 1892« 
Instead of the grant being paid in such a way that it could 
not exceed seventy per cent of the teacher's salary, a 
district could now obtain up to one hundred per cent of 
that amount* The appropriation for schools was provided 
by taking seventy per cent of an amount calculated as 
follows: 

(a) Schools having a daily average attendance of six to 
ten pupils were credited with $1^20®DO* 

(b) Five dollars were credited for each child over a 
minimum enrolment of ten* 

(c) For each child in a higher standard than III, an 
additional f18.00 were provided* 

(d) Twenty-five dollars were provided if the teacher 
held a second class certificate* Fifty dollars were 
provided if the teacher held a first class certi¬ 
ficate* 

The amount payable under (c) above was not provided 
if the pupil for whom it was made available had spent more 
than three summers or two entire school years In the same 
standard* Provision was made also for payment of grants 
when the daily average attendance was below six. If a 
medical certificate accompanied the forms showing that the 
children were absent because of illness* 

^ QWorth-West Territories Ordinances , Victoria, 
Chapter 92{lti$T). . “ 








. : . r £j, ' ■ 


. 

* 

- 1 

; ' ;• 1 , . '■ J. ;• . ' ...".. • ■’\ 

■ 

. ' I • v U . ' . 












20 , 


The Act of 1892 was much more liberal than the one 
which preceded it* This fact caused grants to jump from 
approximately $81,000 in 1892^" to $111*,000 in 1893*^ 

After 1892 the position remained quite static until 
1896, at which time the grant structure was again changed, 
and Separate schools were set up.^ The latter problem 
had been the subject of much controversy during the inter- 
vening years .W* Under the provisions of the new Ordinance 
each school with an average daily attendance of six or 
more pupils was to receive #1.1*0 per pupil for each day it 
operated up to a maximum of 210 days.^ In addition to 
this the school was given the sum of $1.50 per year for 
each child in average daily attendance.^6 

Advanced certification of teachers was still re¬ 
cognized as a valuable factor and the first class teacher*s 
certificate brought an addition twenty cents per day, 
while a second class teacher 1 s certificate earned ten cents 
for the board.The three types of grants mentioned so 
far were not to exceed a ceiling of seventy per cent of 
the teacher 8 s salary. A favorable inspector*s report was 


^ •North-West Territories Ordinances , Chapter 38(1892), 
Victoria. 

^ ^North-West Territories Ordinances , Victoria, 

Chapter lllb93). “ ” 

^North-West Territories Ordinances, Victoria 
Chapter 2(1896), Articles'1*5 to 1*9 inclusive. 

IwSchool Laws and Other Educational Matters in 
Assiniboia, jfrince"Edward Island, the North-West Territories 

and Manitoba, (Ottawa, 1891*)', Passim. 

^ Report of the Council of Public Instruction of the 
Nor th-WesIT territories, (ifegina, 1596), p. 10. 

U6 ibid. ~~ 

l*7XbTcL, p. 11. 




















: 

J 

••• : . ■ s 


. 

• • 





. 


* 

• 








• ' ' ■' 




' 

; ‘h. : ' ) 

’’ K ' 

■ 


- 

• ' ; i- : • 



. 




• 

' ' ' ' K ■ 

- 



. . .V ; ' . • . 





’ 




. 




■■ ■ . 







v 

• ■ 




!“ /; 












v 
















21 . 


also considered of some value, although the most that could 
be earned by this item was fifteen cents per day for each 
classroom.^ 8 At this time the differential between the 
high school classroom and the lower grades was diminished 
to the extent that the two were separated only by an 
additional grant of $75.00 to the higher institution.^ 
These latter two grants could send the total appropriation 
over the ceiling of seventy per cent (of the teacher’s 
salary)® 

The above system of grants was designed so that the 
greatest revenue could be derived from such factors as 
the number of days school was open, the average daily 
attendance, and the class of certificate held by the 
teacher. The system served to keep the taxes low in the 
pioneer settlements, and gave practically the same aid 
to all districts regardless of their area, population, 
or wealth.5® 

The Dominion Government agreed to hold two sections 
of the land in each township in trust for the purpose of 
using the revenue derived to aid and promote education. 5^ 
This would provide 302,000 square miles of North-West 
Territories land for the benefit of the school districts®^ 

The grant structure remained much the same for some 

years after 1896. In 1898 the Superintendent of Education 
’ .-——— 

1*9 Ibid ® 

5 0Report of the Council of Public Instruction of the 
North-West Territories, (ftegina, 1$66], p® 16". 

5 lReport of the Council of Public Instruction of the 

North-West Territories , (Regina, 1896), p® 13. 

' ~'~5^Ibid® .~~ 








- 






. 

































































« 










22 


of the North-West Territories suggested a change. He 
felt that if the fixed portion of the grants were to be 
reduced and the attendance grants increased* greater 
incentive would be provided the local authorities to 
keep attendance at a higher level. He suggested that the 
parent government should wield coercive authority to keep 
the children in regular attendance at school. ^3 

Except for minor adjustments in the intervening 
years* no major changes were made in the grant structure 
between 1896 and 1901. During this time the government 
of the North-West Territories recognized contribution to 
the education of the deaf as one of its responsibilities. 
The government began to pay transportation costs to schools 
where the special needs of deaf children could be met* 
and contributed a substantial portion of their tuition 
and board expenses.51* The Council of Education also began 
to carry some of the financial burden involved in training 
teachers for the schools of the Territories 

In 1901 the Assembly passed The School Grants 
Ordinances which changed drastically the entire grant 
structure of the North-West Territories. Under this 
Ordinance schools were divided into two major categories* 

rural and village or town schools. 

^AjmuaT^port of the Council of Public Instruction 

of t h e North-West Territ 

^The~ Annual Report of the Department of Education 
for 19Q6 *"°prT87~^‘ 

^ Xbid . 














A -> 









■ 








r 








„ 














: 












23 


Each rural district containing 6,lt00 acres was 
given a grant of $1.80 for each day that school operated. 
For each 160 acres less than the 6,lj.00 stipulated, the 
grant was increased by one cent per day$ for each 160 
acres which it was larger than the 6,1|00 the grant was 
reduced by one cent per day.By the introduction of 
this innovation the Council hoped that the district area 
would be kept small enough to allow the pupils rather 
easy access to the school. For every day over 160 that 
the rural school was kept open, an additional forty 
cents was provided.^7 

Professional training at this time was considered 
to be of less importance than previously. The Board 
could earn only ten cents per day by employing a teacher 
with a first-class professional certificate.^ 

Under the provisions of this Act a type of grant 
was instituted which was designed to give the rural school 
boards the incentive needed to attempt to keep the daily 
average attendance of pupils at a high level. As is 
stated above, the Superintendent had suggested three years 
previously that such a move was necessary. To meet this 
need, the Act provided a grant which increased on a 

graduated scale as the percentage of school attendance 

^North-West Territor ies Ordina nces, Victoria 

Chapter 3i( 

5 7Ibid ,, Section 3^X)(b). 

5 8lbid ., Section 3(l)(c). 











2k 


went up. If the daily average attendance was over forty 
per cent, five cents were granted for every day school 
operated. An additional five cents per day were provided 
for each ten per cent increase in average daily attendance 
until, at an attendance of eighty-one per cent, a maximum 
was reached which made it possible for the school con- 
cerned to earn up to twenty-five cents per day.^9 

Town and village school districts did not fare as 
well as their rural counterparts in any of the grant 
areas mentioned, except for appropriations based on teacher 
certification and inspection. Schools received ninety 
cents per day for every day school was kept open, which 
was only half the amount earned in the rural districts®^ 0 
To earn equivalent percentage attendance grants, it was 
necessary for the urban settlements to attain a ten per 
cent higher average daily attendance figure than was 
necessary in rural schools.^- 

It was possible for both types of schools to earn 
up to an extra fifteen cents each day school was kept 
open if the inspector 1 s report was favorable.^ 2 ^ 
minimum attendance of six pupils was still a requirement 
in all schools for the receipt of grants. The town and 
village schools were again to be favored with an annual 

£ 9Ibid ., Section 3(l)(d). 

^ Q Ibid 9J Section 3(2)(a). 

6 llbid ., Section 3(2)(c). 

6 2 Ibid ., Section 3(3). 














-- 








• ' ' 


1 




■ 


> / ■ ■ ! 













• - i' ‘ ■> > *7’ ) , : ' 'I . . 





























25 


grant of $75*00 for each room maintained exclusively as 
a high school classroom, if the enrolment was at least 
twenty.^^ The maximum number of days for which grants 
were payable was 210 and equivalent grants were to be 
paid for each room in a multi-roomed school as long as 
the minimum enrolment in each room was twenty children*6U 
Grants were not to be paid in excess of seventy per cent 
of the teacher*s salary.^ 

It is of interest to note that transportation costs 
were a problem even in 1901. In eases where two or more 
districts had entered into an agreement to operate a 
common school, the district which provided the conveyance 
was given a grant of sixty cents per day. 66 

The grant structure remained much as it had been 
set up in 1901 until 1913* except that one major amendment 
was made in 190H* The differential in the appropriation 
between rural and urban settlements was somewhat nullified 
by the reduction of the daily rural school grant to $1.20 
per day, from the previous $1.80.6*7 

The school population increased relatively slowly, 
but steadily, in the North-West Territories. In the 
entire area, including the Yukon, there were fewer than 

6 ^Ibid ., Section 3(H)* 

6Hibid. 

6 5lMd . 

66 Ibid ., Section 3(10)* 

67Nor th-West Territories Ordinances , Victoria, 
Chapter l5(l90H), Section 1. 

























' 








i. i 


. 












3 












... /. . - ■■ 














. 














. , ’ . ’ ,.*• I • 

. 






26 


three thousand pupils in 1886. By 190? there were approxi¬ 
mately fifty thousand children attending schools in Alberta 
and Saskatchewan alone. 68 The growth of school population 
constituted a growing demand on the coffers of the Territor¬ 
ial administration and since this purse was rather 
inelastic, the average amount spent on each pupil and 
the percentage of total expenditure used for education 
were both bound to drop considerably. 

In 1892 the Territorial government was given control 
of the allocation of funds received from the Government of 
Canada. From this time on, the percentage of total expendi¬ 
ture devoted to education declined, and per pupil grants 
slipped from $23.00 in 1891 to $6.00 in 190l*. 6 ^ For the 
first few years after the North-West Territories were 
set up, the major revenue was derived from appropriations 
by the Dominion Government. As time elapsed and settlement 
increased, expenditures on education and public works were 
bound to grow in magnitude. Although government grants 
to education increased from $121,000 in 1893 to $268,000 
in 1901*, the percentage of total expenditure on education 
dropped from forty-three per cent to twenty-four per cent 
in those years.By 1903 the early paternalism toward 
schools shown by the government of the North-West Territories 

68 E. J. Hanson, A Financial History of Alberta, 190? -* 

19?Q , Ph.D. dissertation, Clark University^ 'T??27”GEapier IT 

6 9 Ibid . 

7 °Ibid . 








27 


had faded to a great extent* In 1903 the parent govern¬ 
ment contributed $21ii,000 to education. The local dis¬ 
tricts raised almost double that amount by tax levies 
during the same year.*^ 

The North-West Territories legislation has left 
with us many legacies, large and small, which have in¬ 
fluenced school grant structure of Alberta during the 
ensuing years. There has been in all subsequent legis¬ 
lation, and still tends to be, a clearly marked pattern 
of preferential treatment toward the rural areas in the 
appropriation of grants. Urban areas have been, and 
presently are, under-represented in the legislature 
of this Province, and as long as that is the case, it 
seems unlikely that the school grant structure will be 
resolved on, what some would call, an equitable basis. 

As the Territories became more settled, there was 
a tendency to force the burdensome task of raising school 
funds onto the shoulders of the local authorities. This 
trend has continued through the years in Alberta, despite 
the fact that educational costs continue more and more to 
assume the proportions of an oppressive giant 5 while 
the direct revenue sources of local governments tend 
to remain static. 

As was mentioned earlier, Indian children were 
excluded when the education grant structure was first set 


^Ibid. 





































■ 




























28 


up by the North-West Territories Council in I88I4.® These 
children led such nomadic lives that it was impossible to 
make proper provision for them. Up until the last three 
or four years, schools for Indians living on reservations 
have been decidedly inferior. Treaty Indians, under the 
control of the Dominion Government, have never caught up, 
educationally speaking, with their white and half-breed 
counterparts® 






CHAPTER III 


SCHOOL GRANTS FROM 1905 UNTIL 1920 


The formation of the Province of Alberta out of a 
portion of the North-West Territories was not marked by 
any major immediate change in the manner used to determine 
school district appropriations* The method of assisting 
school boards had undergone many changes during the forma¬ 
tive stages of western development* and the grant struc¬ 
ture which had evolved during those years was a relative¬ 
ly satisfactory one* Host certainly the government dealt 
generously with the school boards of rural Alberta, 

In 1906 the Alberta rural school population was 
lit*576* In the same year* lit*208 children attended 
classes in urban centres,^- Although the population 
difference was very small* the total provincial grants 


^The Annual Report of the Department of Education 
in Alberta for 1910* p« lit* 











30 


paid to the two groups were quite unequal. The rural 
areas received $93*000 from the provincial government 
in 1906* while the urban communities had to content 
themselves with $50*000.^ This meant that the government 
paid approximately $6.1*0 for the education of each rural 
child and at the same time provided only $3.5>0 to help 
educate each urban student* The differential* which was 
inherent in the 1901 legislation of the North-West 
Territories Council between town and rural educational 
grants* was destined to set a pattern in Alberta that 
persists even today. 

Basic changes in government grant policies during 
the early years of the Province were few. However* one 
innovation which was brought about in 1908 is worthy of 
mention. In that year the Alberta Department of Education 
began to distribute a free copy of the Alexandra School 
Readers to every pupil registered in the Province. These 
readers* which had been compiled and manufactured for 
the provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan* were an out¬ 
right gift to the pupil* and a new one was issued each 
time the child was promoted to a higher standard.^ 

The first major revision of the grant structure 

after Alberta became a province was brought about in 
2 

The Annual Report of the Department of Education 
of Alberta for 1906 * p. 26. 

3Tbe Annual Report of the Department of Education 
of AlberWTorT^d* p. lg. 













31 


1913 , with the passage of the School Grants Act of 1913• 
Under the terms of the new act the rural and urban settle¬ 
ments were again to be treated as separate entities in 
computing the amount of the grants. The government may 
have had good reason for providing larger ©rants to rural 
settlements than to urban centres. In rural districts the 
school taxes were based upon acreage, the maximum being 
ten cents per aere.k Such a provision would necessarily 
put a definite ceiling on the local revenue of a school 
district. The annual reports during the early years of 
the Province make it quite clear that the education 
received by rural children was far below the level of that 
for urban children. Rural pupils did not attend school 
as regularly as was desirable, the teachers moved about 
much more frequently, and the school buildings were 
often inadequate. The government may have felt that by 
providing greater financial assistance to rural areas, 
the school conditions there would be improved enough to 
justify the added expenditure. The basic daily grant to 
rural school was changed by the 1913 Act to $1.10 per room, 
with provision for an extra thirty cents per day during 
the first four years of operation.- 

forhe Annual Report of the Department of Education 

of AlberfFTor^lRll , pT~31V 

" ^Statutes of Alberta, b George V, Chapter 15(1913), 
Section 3(l)(a)(b). 




























32 


The daily grant to town and village districts was 
changed in such a way that the smaller districts received 
greater proportionate assistance from the Government than 
did the more populous districts. This was done by paying 
a basic daily grant of one dollar per day per room to those 
town and village districts employing twelve teachers or 
fewer. If the number of teachers employed was between 
thirteen and forty the daily grant per room was reduced 
to seventy-five cents. This procedure was followed so 
that districts employing from forty-one to one hundred 
teachers received sixty cents daily, one hundred one to 
two hundred teachers fifty cents, and if over two hundred 
teachers were employed by one district the grant was only 
thirty cents.^ 

Provision was made in the new Act, as had been done 
earlier, to reward schools which received a favorable report 
from the inspector. The maximum daily amount that could be 
earned in this manner was still fixed at fifteen cents 
and the actual amount depended on the grading given to 
the school by the inspector.^ With respect to this grant, 
the Department of Education expanded a practice which 
had begun in 1901, At that time the Department had re¬ 
served the right to pay one-half the Inspection Grant by 


6 Ibid , 5 Section 3(2), 
7Ibid ,3 Section 3(3). 





33 


supplying the school with an equivalent value in approved 

o 

library books. With the Act of 1913* the entire grant 
could be met in this manner,9 

The Act also continued to provide a $75*00 yearly 
grant for every room operated exclusively as a high school 
(above grade eight) classroom. The daily average attend¬ 
ance necessary for such a room to receive the grant was 
reduced from twenty to fifteen students,^ 0 It was also 
made possible for schools to collect a partial amount of 
the high school grant by giving any district., which had 
six pupils or more in grades above the eighth, $1*0,00 
annually®^" To ensure free education to Alberta children 
up to the end of high school, the Government refused to 
pay the high school grant to ary district which charged 
tuition fees® Whether such fees were collected from 
residents or non-residents made no difference®-^ 

Once again a burden fell on the backs of the 
village and town units® Even if a district were willing 
to pay fees for its high school students to be educated 
elsewhere, the loss of the high school grant would act as 
a powerful deterrent to fee-collection by the district 

which provided the educational facilities® 

®The Annual Report of the Department of Education 
for 19067 pT lR® ~~‘ 

^Statutes of Alberta, k George V, Chapter 19(1913) * 
Section 3(3), 

^ ffiEhid ®, Section 3(5), 

^TbicL, Section 3(h)* 

1 2ftm ®, Section 3(7). 
















■ . ■ 










J 


































3h 


The new Act made it possible for consolidated 
(amalgamated) school districts to receive eighty cents 
per day for each approved conveyance that it had in 
operation for the transportation of pupils. 13 This was 
twenty cents daily more than had been provided by the 
1901 Ordinance. As far as consolidated districts were 
concerned the Government encouraged such amalgamation by 
providing the districts involved with the same grants 
as they would receive if they each operated their own 
school. 1 ^ Although the grants offered to consolidated 
districts were generous by comparison, nevertheless the 
costs of operation turned out to be higher than in the 
average rural district. 

Expenses probably were greater in consolidated 
districts because of the cost of conveying pupils to and 
from school. World War I had begun a year after the 
1913 Act came into effect. A labor shortage resulted, 
making it necessary to pay conveyance drivers a higher 
salary and causing the costs of fodder to skyrocket. 1 ^ 

The consolidated districts were, however, the 
forerunners of the present large school units and it is 
of interest to see such early encouragement of that 
advanced idea. 


13 Ibid ., Section 3(6)(b). 

^Ibid ., Section 3(6)(a). 

13 The Annual Report of the Department of Education 
for 1 9 1 8,TT2TT~~^^ 

































35 


Although the 1913 Act embodied many of the principles 
which had grown up during the preceding years, it also had 
some unusual features# Teacher certification, which had 
been a factor previously in the computation of government 
grant, was no longer considered under the provisions of 
the new Act. The quantity, rather than the quality, of 
teachers became significant, particularly in relation to 
urban settlements# This is an attitude which is not 
without its proponents among the supporters of the 
present regime* 

The number of instructors employed came to be of 
greater importance than the average daily attendance of 
the pupils. As a matter of fact, daily attendance was 
considered only when related to computing the grant for 
high schools, and for monies provided for transportation 
of pupils to and from school. 

In the past the area served by a rural district had 
been a factor carrying considerable weight when the 
Department computed appropriations. This method of 
determining grants was dropped entirely under the new 
Act. The fact that transportation costs were considered 
under the 1913 legislation may have indicated a trend 
in the thinking which accepted the notion that in a 
sparsely settled country, the most efficient education 
can be rendered in larger school plants, even if the 
children are required to travel a goodly distance to school* 
School population had increased throughout the years# 
No longer was the Province dotted everywhere with one- 






36 


roomed schools. Multi-roomed schools were beginning to 
appear. This situation was recognized in the 1913 legis¬ 
lation by the provision of grants especially for non¬ 
teaching supervisors As was natural before the advent 
of the school divisions, the supervision grants applied 
only to the town and village school districts. 

The year 1913 also witnessed the institution of 
the first grants designed primarily to stimulate education 
in ®n-academic fields. Rural districts were enabled to 
earn added income from government sources if they were 
willing to include courses in agriculture and school 
gardening on their curricula. ^ In a like maimer urban 
settlements were encouraged to provide their students 
with instruction in manual arts, domestic science, art, 
music, and physical culture* ° Government support of 
agricultural instruction in the rural schools resulted 
probably from farmers demanding vocational education for 
their children. Technical education was in existence 
before 1913 in the larger cities. Support was given to 
technical education, not to help the large urban centres, 
but to encourage its inception in smaller cities, towns 
and villages.^ It would seem from an examination of the 
1913 changes that the people of the rural areas strongly 
influenced the Alberta Government, just as they appear to 
do today. 

Ifelbid., Section 3(7). 

i 7lbid ., Section 3(l)(c). 

I foCbid ., Section 3(2)(f). 

l^The Annual Report of the Department of Education 
for 1913 ^ p. 11. .. ~ 
























- 
























































- 

. 
























37 . 


The 1913 Act was designed to help the rural dis¬ 
tricts, particularly those in their first four years of 
operation. It was felt that such districts would require 
this time for their population to increase to the extent 
that a school could be supported locally, and enough land 
broken to bring the income of the populace to a level 
where they could pay a greater share of the expenditures 
for education. 20 On the one hand, the legislation was 
designed to raise the grant income of the newer rural 
districts above what it would have been. On the other 
hand, it left the income almost the same as it had been 
in the older rural districts, unless agriculture was 
taught—in which case it would be slightly higher than 
before. Small graded schools were expected to earn almost 
what they had in the past, and income was to fall off 
gradually as towns grew into cities. It was felt that 
since larger centres of population would necessarily be 
wealthier than other school districts, they would be left 

by the legislators to their own resources to a greater 

99 

extent. 

One of the features of the grant structure, set up 
in the early 1890 s s, which was retained in the 1913 legis¬ 
lation, was the provision that grants were not to exceed 

£$The Annual Report of the Department of Education 
for 1913 rp7Tb..~~~~~. .~~~ ~ 

2 1 Ibid ., p. 20. 

2 2 Ibld . 












' 
























© 










38 


seventy per cent of the amount paid in teachers ? salaries® ^ 
This regulation was destined to persist until 1918, at which 
time it was removed from the statute books. 

The Alberta Department of Education not only began 
early to assist with vocational education in the schools, but 
it also started, in 191U, to encourage the school districts 
to offer similar training opportunities to the adult popu¬ 
lation in many small urban centres® The Legislature was 
particularly interested in making taining available to the 
workers in the coal-mining centres such as Coleman, Frank, 
Coalhurst, and Drumheller*^ 

A special government grant provided for fifty per 
cent of the cost of tuition up to a yearly district msud- 
mum of $250*00. The Department probably hoped that the 
students would be willing to provide for the other half 
of the teaching costs by paying tuition fees. The local 
school board was expected to, and in every case did, pro¬ 
vide the money needed to pay the costs of local management, 
accommodation, light, heat, janitor service, and, if 
applicable, any deficit in salary charges.^ Provision for 
adult education in such an early time in the history of 
Alberta was a remarkable phenomenon for so young a country® 

^Statutes of Alberta, i* George V®, Chapter 19(1913), 
Section 3(7). 

^Statutes of Alberta, 8 George V®, Chapter 39(1918), 
Section 3(t). 

^The Annual Report of the Department of Education 
for ~ 








39 


During 1917 the Province of Alberta set up a school 
in Edmonton to provide educational facilities for mentally 
defective children. 27 The original enrolment was nineteen 
pupils, and plans were made to increase the facilities 
rapidly. Despite the early inception of this programme, 
there is still a need for more accommodation of this type 
in Alberta. The present school for the mentally defective 
is located in Red Deer, but the time taken before a child 
can gain admittance is reported by parents to be almost 
interminable. Within a few years of instituting a school 
for the mentally defective, the Government began to provide a 
special grant to cover half the salary of teachers employed 
to instruct the mentally retarded pupils in various dis¬ 
tricts. By 1922 five such rooms were operating in city school 
28 

districts. Classrooms for the mentally retarded are 
still being operated in many of the larger centres of 
Alberta. 

In 1918 the basic daily grant to rural school 
districts was reduced from $1.10 to $.90 per room. This 
reduction may have resulted from the fact that during the 
first World War greater prosperity was in evidence in the 
rural communities. Another factor which may have influenced 


2 7 Ibid ., 1918, p. 15. 
fficbid ., 1923, p. 19. 























, 





\i : L , 
















' 

■ 



*J. •... n 


■7 




■ ■ 




- 








: H 






























v 









MU 







ko 


the rural grant was the feeling (which seemed to be common 
among the officials of the Department of Education) that 
rural school boards economized less than did the urban 
school boards. 29 go that this reduction would not act as 
a deterrent to any district’s desire to open a school* an 
initial rural grant of $15 per school was instituted. The 
inspection grant which had previously been set at fifteen 
cents per classroom daily was reduced to ten cents after 
a rural school had operated for four years* to five cents 
daily in town districts employing fewer than thirty-one 
teachers* and to three cents daily in town districts 
employing more than thirty instructors. Fifteen cents daily 
was provided for every non-resident pupil taking classes 
above the grade eight level .^ 

The School Grants Act was amended again in 1919 and 
one of the evils affecting high school education* that of 
accommodating non-resident students* was corrected. The 
grant to secondary education was increased materially to 
those schools that had made provision for instruction of 
nonpresident students. 

Once again the rural districts derived greater 
benefit from the new regulations than did their urban 
neighbors. The daily grant to rural schools was set at 
one dollar per room* which was ten cents a day more than 

29lbid., 1916, p. 12*. 

^Statutes of Alberta, 8 George Chapter 39(1918), 
Section 3. 













§ 




■ .■ ■ : 










' 




' ' 






! ‘ ■ 




> 


; x.x4x 

S ' ' ' ' , 

. • 1 .<< Vj V .‘..'f : I - ' i' ■ ‘-V '• ' 

•: ■' : j. ' > r ' J J . .1. , "■ 

, .. , . 

. , X : ■ \ ' • 

1 - ;: 'X u * 

. ... • ■ 1 r ‘ 

* 




, . 


they had received under the 1918 amendment. Provision was 
made to double this sum in two-roomed rural schools if the 
qualifications of the senior teacher were acceptable to the 
Department of Education .^ 

If, however, there were at least six children enrolled 
above grade eight attending classes in the senior room, an 
additional daily grant of one dollar was paid by the Alberta 
Government. This sum was not advanced to any school which 
charged fees for non-resident students, or to any school 
which did not retain a qualified teacher in the senior 
room. 32 The Government now showed its willingness, by 
the introduction of this measure, to carry a fair portion 
of the buobden of educating high school students from areas 
which did not provide their own high school facilities. 

Further financial assistance was given to rural 
school districts operating a senior room if it were 
equipped for community use. The Government agreed to pay 
fifty per cent of the equipment cost up to a maximum of 
$250.00.33 This could provide a considerable sum when 
compared to some of the grants earned under other provi¬ 
sions of the Act. It is inconceivable that any school 

3^statutes of Alberta, 9 George V, Chapter 32(1919), 
Section 3,l(a)(b)(c). 

■^Ibid., Section 3*l*(d). 

33“"“ 

Ibid ., Section 3>lj(e). 








) 




' 


' 







board would not consider the students 1 needs first when 
they provided the equipment which was to be designated 
as useful to the community® 

The change in the Alberta educational structure 
was closely related to the progress made in the provision 
of grants for the purpose of transporting pupils to and 
from school® A two-roomed rural school began to receive 
a grant of $1.50 daily for every conveyance which it 
operated,^ and districts which provided transportation 
to other schools were given financial assistance at the 
discretion of the Minister of Education. 35 An interesting 
feature of the transportation structure, which reflects 
the fact that the mechanical age was making its advances, 
was the provision of an additional special daily grant 
of $1.00 to consolidated districts for the purchase of 
a motor vehicle.36 The grant for motorised conveyances 
was added at a time when the motor vehicle was being 
improved rapidly, although its reliability was still in 
question in. the minds of some people® It must have 
required some vision on the part of the proponents of 
such a grant to realize that motor vehicles were capable 
of performing the pupil transportation function. Some 
must have realized that roads would be improved upon 

^Ibid ®, Section 3,1,(f)* 

35 ibid ®. Section 3*(12). 

^°Ibid® 3 Section 3*3,(d). 








• • 







































... ' 




■ 




) 











. - 


' 











U3. 


enough during subsequent years to provide the certainty 
that reliance could be placed upon such conveyances* even 
under the rigorous climatic conditions experienced in 
Alberta, 

The $15,00 initial grant which had been provided 
in the previous year was continued under the 1519 legis¬ 
lation* and the inspection grant was set at fifteen 
cents daily*37 

Rural schools which provided instruction in 
science* agriculture* school gardening and many other 
types of non-academic education* continued to receive 
consideration on much the same basis as they had in 1913• 
The Province provided half of the cost of upkeep for the 
school garden to a maximum of $l5*Q0$paid any qualified 
teacher giving instruction in agriculture or school 
gardening a grant of $25*00j provided half the cost of 
equipment needed to give instruction in household econo¬ 
mics to a maximum of $l5*00| and gave qualified household 
economics and manual training experts $20,00 annually, 3^ 
Non-academic subjects* which today provide the basis for 
much controversy* had arrived to stay. 

The legislators who passed the 1919 Amendment 
recognized the fact that rural teachers would be difficult 
to obtain and even harder to hold if no provision were 

3 3jbid .* Section 3* (g)(h), 

3 %bid ,* Section 3 , (i)( j)(k)(l). 





'■ , ! 





















' 







made for them to live a relatively private and comfortable 
life. The Government provided incentive by way of special 
grants to local school authorities for the erection of 
comfortable teachers 1 houses. The local board was re- 
quired to build the teacherage according to plans pro¬ 
vided by the Department of Education. The structure was 
to cost over |1000, to be adequately furnished, and to 
be situated on at least five acres of land. If the 
structure erected by the local board met the Inspector * s 
approval, one third of the cost of the building and its 
furnishings were paid by the Province of Alberta .^9 

Before 1919 the Province had provided fifteen 
cents per day for library purposes during the first four 
years of a school*s operation. This appropriation was 
cut to ten cents daily for every classroom, after the 
school had been in operation for four years, and depended 
upon the maintenance of a f, minimuin efficiency” grading as 
shewn by the inspector’s report. As was becoming cus¬ 
tomary, the town and village schools were dealt with less 
generously. If the urban district employed fewer than 
thirty teachers, the grant provided was five cents a day 
for every classroom in operation! if mere than thirty 
teachers were employed, three cents per classroom was 
paid.^ 

3 ?The Annual Report of the Department of Education 

for 1919 j~l>rX0T . - - - --- — 

~G°Ibid., p. 9h. 









An initial library grant of $15*00 had been added 
in 1918 to the aforementioned amounts when a new school 
was opened.^ In 1921 the School Libraries Branch sent 
out 96,920 volumes valued at $ 55*735 to 2,863 centres.^ 

But the library "bonanza” did not last long. In 1923 the 
School Grants Act was amended in such a way that any school 
which had been in operation for six years was disqualified 
as far as receiving library grants was concerned. ^3 By 
192li the amount expended by the Provincial Government for 
the payment of library grants had dwindled to approximately 
$ 9 , 000 .^ 

The 1919 legislation did provide more liberal grants 
to the urban districts than before. Although larger units 
continued to suffer, the inequalities of 1913 were greatly 
reduced in smaller village and town districts. An urban 
system which did not employ over forty teachers received 
the same daily grants per room as a rural district. If 
the number of teachers employed was forty-one to one 
hundred, the daily grant was reduced to eighty cents, and 
if more than one hundred teachers were retained it was 
further reduced to sixty cents.^ Classrooms providing 
instruction to more than five pupils in grades above the 

^Ibid., 1908, p. 95. 

k 2 lbid., 1922, p. 88. 

^Ibid., 192b, p. 93. 

W-ibid., 1925 , p. 87 . 

^statutes of Alberta, 9 George V, Chapter 32(1919), 
Section 3(2)(a,b,c). 













' 






























eighth received an additional grant of $2.00 daily, provided 
that non-resident students were not charged tuition fees.^ 
Consolidated school districts were again given the 
grant which would have been provided to the districts 
involved had they continued separate operation* Where 
more than five pupils were in attendance in grades above 
the eighth under the instruction of a qualified teacher, 
an additional daily grant of $3*00 was provided.^ con¬ 
solidated districts received many of the smaller grant 
advantages provided to rural districts® 

Preferential treatment of consolidated school 
districts probably came as the result of a desire of some 
members of the Department of Education staff to see 
corrected many educational and financial difficulties 
experienced in small school districts® These people 
probably recognized that only by enlarging the school unit 
could adequate educational opportunity be provided to 
the children of many n finanedaily marginal” areas® Even 
though early recognition of a partial solution to the ills 
affecting some small districts was made, large school 
divisions did not appear until many years had passed. 

Secondary education, which had suffered seriously 
during the years preceding 1919, was once again given 

^Ibid *, Section 3(2)(d)* 
k^Ibid., Section 3(3). 



■ , ■: >' . }' iJi v i w -V* 

’ 

' . ■ ...... : V- ' ' ■;>: ■ >• • ./ A: ^' 

. ' ■ ■; .. ' t : j . <A t: ■ /v.C V' A, 


. 

, ■ . • ' ■ : 

. ■ ■ • • j 

■ ■ » A" ‘ ■ 

, . •; ' ■ • ■ •' 




A'' :A . A A \ A:' iA : v Ata >ij .V'. :,AA> >\ A v • 

' 

• . ’ - 




• : 





1*7 


better treatment under the new grant structure. Dis¬ 
tricts which operated a high school room and did not 
employ more than twelve teachers were provided a daily 
grant of $2.00. If more than twelve teachers were employed 
the special grant for high schools followed the trend 
(which had been strongly established) toward lower grants 
for larger school units* and they received $1.50 daily. 

High schools not charging fees to the non-resident pupils 

} R 

were given an added daily grant of $1.50. 

Although the Provincial Government had begun six 
years earlier to provide grants for education in the 
technical fields the 1919 legislation showed significant 
gains which will be enumerated in some detail here. 

Districts which employed more than thirty teachers and 
gave instruction in household economics* manual arts* 
commercial subjects* music or art* were provided with grants 
equalling twenty per cent of the salaries of qualified 
teachers so engaged. The Government paid ten per cent 
of the cost of equipment which was needed to instruct 
classes in these subjects. 

■Where fewer than thirty teachers were employed* or 
where two districts combined for the purpose of providing 
technical education* fifty per cent of the teachers® salar¬ 
ies and equipment costs were borne by the Government.*^ 

Section 3(1*). 

^9Ibid., Section 3(5). 

5°Ibid., Section 3(6,7). 







: • J ( i ! ■; n ... ■; -y J 


>j . ■ 

• . 










* - .. ' . 


■ . . ' ■ j , . i n ■] : 

, O •' ... : V 1 ; ■ ; : '/ ■ 

= • .. ■ . L-. > ; 

. > ' ■ 1 


. 

« 

* 


When night class instruction was provided by 
districts not employing more than thirty-teachers, the 
Government paid fifty per cent of the instruction costs* 

If technical subjects were taught at nighty the percentage 
of the cost supplied by the Government was sixty* Where 
more than thirty teachers were employed the government 
paid forty per cent of tuition costs 

We may be tempted to think of the present teacher 
shortage in Alberta as a rather momentary situation 
unique only to the past few years. Such is noir the case. 
Except for the depression years, there never has been an 
excess of teachers available* Through the years the 
Alberta Government has used a variety of devices to 
provide the schools with adequately trained personnel* 

One inexpensive method of doing this, which has 
persisted for many years, was the provision of summer 
school facilities to teachers who might wish to improve 
their qualifications* In 1913, eighty teachers took 
advantage of the opportunity to improve their qualifi¬ 
cations at a cost to the Government of $2,893* By 1917, 

'303 teachers were enrolled In summer classes which 
required a Government expenditure of $7,877.^ 

The Alberta Government has also made loans available 
to students of education. In 1920, $28,000 was expended 

5•‘ ■Ibid ,, Section 3(80(9). 

^he Annual Report of the Department of Education 
for 1917, p. U2. 


















. 




. 




















. 





' . 




•. •</> J. 


. - ••• > ; : ; ;• • 




, 


: 

. -■ 




. , 1 . ' i 


• i . 















h9 


in this way.^3 Loans of various types have been made to 
many education students during the history of the 
province, although the practice was discontinued for some 
of the depression years, during which time there were a 
great many more teachers than there were positions 
available. 

In 1920 the Federal Government re-entered the school 
grant picture of Alberta by providing aid in the form of 
grants designed to promote industrial, technical, and 
commercial education. The Dominion Government grants pro¬ 
vided fifty per cent of the expenditure made by the pro¬ 
vinces for such education. Although $1*2,000 was made 
available in the first year of the plan, Alberta was able 
to claim only |29,000 of that sum. However, the excess 
accrued to the interest of the Province, with the under¬ 
standing that it be used when technical and commercial 
education was more fully developed. The entry of the 
Dominion Government into this particular |rant area 
stimulated the development of facilities to handle the 
approved types of education. Not only were new centres 
of instruction established, but older facilities were 
expended and improved.*^ 

Under the terras of the B.N.A. Act, education in 
Canada falls exclusively within the jurisdiction of the 

33 Ibid., 1920 , p. 38 . 

^Ibid., p. 125. 









b- i 












K." r . V • .1 b 









■ ' 






- 











, 




50 , 


provincial governments. As our society becomes more 
complex, there is a tendency toward including a wider and 
wider variety of subjects under the general term ''education**. 
Not only does this fact increase the number of children to 
be educated, but it moves the education frontier into 
fields where a piece of chalk and an area of blackboard 
are no longer sufficient as the sole learning aids. With 
the movements toward more training in commercial, technical 
and related subjects designed to fit the child for earning 
a living and making an adequate adjustment in a complex 
society, comes a great multiplicity of expensive teaching 
aids. No longer is it possible for the smaller units of 
government, with their limited sources of income, to 
finance the ever increasing demands of the educational 
giant. 

The assistance supplied by the Federal Government 
in 1920 for these expensive types of education was very 
welcome. However, it was not magnified to the extent that 
might have been desirable in subsequent years. Lack of 
federal aid has created many of the same educational 
finance problems in the United States as in Canada. Some 
of the reasons for this lack of assistance are fear of 
federal control of education, sectional disagreement over 
equalization payments, opposition of religious groups, 
strained federal finances, and racial differences throughout 
the country.The same factors stop federal education aid in 

^Harold M. Groves, Financing Government^ New York, 

Holt, (cl9li5), P. li 99. - -— 






. bn . ■ 

• . . ; . >- * 

- ' 

‘ > ' . i ;>V'n 









" - ' : j. 








■ 

. • ' . ■ >■; : 

■ >h$ 

« ’ - ■ . n :*}. .r . ■■■< ; j I 


■ ' . ■ ■■ 




51 . 


Canada, where we have a constitutional guarantee which 
makes education a provincial concern. 

There have been suggestions that the B.n*A. Act 
should be redrafted in such a way as to remove the emphasis 
on exclusive fields of separate jurisdiction. Education 
powers could be exercised jointly either by Dominion 
legislation establishing standards in education which the 
provinces could amplify and administer on agreed terms, 
or by joint administration as is done now in policing and 
justice.^ 

John Ise wrote: 

Economic productivity depends not only on 
the technical efficiency of individual firms, 
but on wise government policiesj and such 
policies are possible only in a country where 
there is a fairly high-level of social and 
economic intelligence®' 5 

In this paragraph he was pointing out that the 
country as a whole derived direct economic benefit from 
a well educated population. Despite this federal interest 
in education, federal grants have assumed very little of 
the financial burden of the public schools. This is an 
area which requires much enlightened thought, and 
subsequent action on the part of the Canadian people* 

This study is not designed, however, to delve deeply 
into the desirability of federal aid for education. That 
subject has been dealt with adequately elsewhere* 

56 H . McD. Clokie, Canadian Government and Politics ; 
Toronto, Longmans Green, pV 255T ~ ~ 

^John Ise, EconomicSj New York, Harper, (cl9ii6)$ p® 59* 













- ' :■}?' i < -,*?;• 

■, j '-// . . , 

' ■ • : > - .1 .■ 




.y . . 

■ 

•'' *J rh^v ■ ; 0 '. o 

i 


! ’ , 




. . 

. 








■ 







CHAPTER IV 


THE GRANT PICTURE FROM 1921 UNTIL 191|5 


The grant structure of Alberta was not changed 
significantly during the 1920‘s, although there were 
several small innovations which should not be disregarded. 
In 1921 the Provincial Government yielded to 
pressure of opinion in rural areas to supply funds for 
equipment to provide hot lunches for pupils. The grant 
was designed to pay fifty per cent of the costs of the 
equipment and was not to exceed the sura of $15,00.^ 

The Provincial Government continued during the 
19 20 9 s to encourage the amalgamation of school districts 
into consolidated units and began to make more effort 
to encourage rural districts to enlarge their plants to 
prevent the evils inherent in an overcrowded classroom. 


^The Annual Report of the Department of Education 

for 19217 p. lllu .... “ 









53 


During 1920 and 1921 many rural districts that had an 
enrolment of more than sixty pupils erected a two“roomed 
school and hired a second teacher. The Provincial Govern¬ 
ment encouraged such action by providing a daily grant of 
$3.00 for the senior room. If any of the pupils in the 
senior class were in grades above the eighth* the daily 
appropriation was raised to $3.50. The daily grant for 
the junior room in such a school was fixed at $1.00.^ 

A grant of $2.50 daily was provided to any consolidated 
school which had an average attendance of six pupils in 
grades above the eighth."^ 

Like the Territorial administration* the Provincial 
Government continued to accept as their responsibility 
the burden of paying for the education of the deaf* dumb 
and blind. The costs of this type of education had 
grown considerably during the intervening years. In 
1899* the North-West Territories Gouncil had provided 
$2500 for the education and transportation of deaf pupils J 4 
In 1923 the amount expended on escorting the deaf and blind 
children to and from the schools and paying the costs of 
their tuition in other provinces amounted to $38*500. The 
Alberta Government gave the Canadian National Institute 

2 Ibid .* 1922* p. 12. 

%bid . * p. 20. 

^North-West Territorie s Ord inances * Victoria* 

Chapter 1(1855). 












X - - v: I 


•} 























. • / 


X > y h : 








i : 














. 








■ 





5k 


for the Blind an annual sum of $5000, which barely covered 
the expenses of the organization for the work it performed 
in this Province.-’ 

During the 1926 session of the Alberta Legislature, 
the School Grants Act was amended in such a way as to 
encourage the low assessment areas within the Province to 
keep their schools operating for the desired minimum of 
160 days per year. If the total assessment for any dis¬ 
trict was below $75*000 and more than $70,000, the dis¬ 
trict was given a special grant of twenty cents daily. 

For every subsequent drop of $5000 in the assessment, 
there was provided a corresponding increase in the grant 
of twenty cents per day, until a daily maximum of $2.80 
was reached. This ^special 1 * g^ant was applied to 661 
single-roomed schools during the year in which the legis¬ 
lation was passed. 

Equalization of educational opportunity through 
greater financial support to the schools of poorer areas 
was being discussed by educators in the United States 
during the 1920* s. Some schools in almost-destitute 
areas of the province were closed for the greater part 
of the year, and the staff of the Department of Education 
was concerned about the education of the children in such 
places. Probably the discussions in the United States 


^The Annual Report of the Department of Education 

for 192li , p. 157 











55 


were not without their influence on the Alberta educational 
scene* And most certainly the method of meeting the problem 
devised by the Alberta Government showed almost immediate 
results* 

The average length of time which the schools involved 
operated showed an immediate increase of six days over the 
previous year*^ The Chief Inspector of Schools felt that 
this amendment to the School Grants Act was the primary 
influence which contributed to the lengthening of the 
school year in areas where the school tax constituted an 
unmanageable burden.^ Most certainly the tax load was 
lightened for many of the poorer school district 1 s 
citizens. The special grants were mentioned favorably 
in many of the subsequent annual reports by the school 
inspectors* Their sentiments are expressed in Economics 
of Public Finance whose authors state: 

,r When grants-in-aid for education are 
distributed inversely to the ability (as indi- 
cated by per capita income) of local school 
districts to provide adequate educational faci¬ 
lities ^ the level of education in these districts 
where per capita incomes are relatively low can 
be raised. **8 

As the world moved unwittingly toward the depression 
years the grant structure of Alberta remained much as it 
had been set up after the major amendment of 1926. Hhen 
the recession arrived* however* that very amendment was 
the one feature of the educational grants which made it 
6Ibid . 3 1926, p. 9. 

7lbid., p. 36. 

8Edward D. Allen and 0. H. Brownlee, Economics of 
Public Finance; New York, Prentice, (cl9lt7), p. 1(78. 















. 















. 


« 

' 

■ ■. v:' ’:<v. 

■. 

; - - - . - • ; ■. ; ; 

- . I' ; . '' . 

■ 

. 

. 


! ' ■ v, ’ 

. 






56 


possible for a great number of the Alberta school districts 
to continue to operate in the face of the adverse conditions 
which prevailed. Its provisions made it possible for a 
good many other districts to operate for an adequate 
period of time during the year, and without it many of 
the pioneer settlements could not have opened schools at 
all.^ Although the equalization grants (as they came to 
be called) were not set up originally for such an exigency, 
they served the purpose of alleviating educational distress 
in many of what came to be the most severely distressed 
districts. 

Two small innovations crept into the grant picture 
in 1930. In that year the first sight-saving class in 
the Province was set up in Calgary and was provided with 
a grant of #875*^ Such classes have been in operation 
in Alberta ever since and have been favored with direct 
financial assistance from the Provincial Government. 

The other new grant instituted in 1930 was rather 
small and was significant to a tiny segment of the popu¬ 
lation only. In that year an act was passed by the 
Provincial Legislature making $10,000 available to assist 
in the education of needy ex-servicemen 1 s children. 

?The Annual Report of the Department of Education 

for 19317 p. T. -- 

“T^Ibid., 1930, p. 12. 

•^Statutes of Alberta, 20 George V, Chapter iUt(1930), 
Section 3. 










57 


In 1931 $6,375 of the appropriation was used to assist 
131 children. 12 In subsequent years the amounts spent 
for this purpose soon exceeded the $10,000 appropriation. 

By 1931 the impact of the depression was beginning 
to make a mark on education which was reflected to a 
certain extent in the government grants. The Department 
of Education made promp payment of the grants earned in 
the fall term of 1930, and the subsequent payment of 
grants, where necessary, monthly rather than at the close 
of the term as had been the procedure. This move enabled 
many boards and teachers to finish out the school year. 1 ^ 

In the same year the Government began to encourage 
the school boards to cut their expenses by erecting schools 
by voluntary effort. A $200 grant was given for each 
school so erected to pay for mill-work and hardware. 1 ^ 

This appropriation was later cut to $50*00 as the depression 
worsened. 

In 193ii. the procedure of placing a maximum on the 
grant to school boards based on a percentage of the teacher’s 
salary was resurrected. Legislation was enacted making 
it impossible to earn a grant above seventy-five per cent 
of the salaries paid. 1 ^ 

12 The Annual Report of the Department of Education 

for 1931,”p.“l3T ” 

^ 3ibid .j p. 9. 

%bid ., p. 90. 

•'-'’Statutes of Alberta, 2b George V, Chapter 32(1 93b), 
Section 1*(7). 

























■ 





























■- 












































. - 







* 




* 








58 


A legislative committee was set up in 1935 to study the 
condition of education in Alberta. It£ twelvth recommen¬ 
dation, which follows, is particularly interesting s 

"That, in the study of taxation now being made, 
and in any changes made pursuant thereto, parti¬ 
cular attention be given to the financing of 
rural education, in order that the cost of a 
service which is admittedly the concern of every 
citizen may be more fairly distributed and 
educational opportunity equalized to the full¬ 
est degree possible 8^® 

Some important amendments were made in the School 
Grants Act during the sitting of the legislature the 
following year. Daily grants to all types of schools 
underwent reductions of at least ten per cent, and in 
some cases as much as twenty per cent. At the same time 
the period during which all grants were to be payable 
was increased from 160 days for special grants, or 180 
days for normal grants, to 200 days for both sorts.^ 

Although this move was not designed to reduce the 
total amount of the grants provided by the Provincial 
Government, it did have a tendency to coerce school boards 
into extending the length of their school year. Because 
of this double-edged revision, costs of school operation 
in many instances went up without a subsequent increase 
in the amount earned by provincial grants. That the 
changed conditions had the effect of lengthening the school 


l^The Annual Report of the Department of Education 

for 1935 ,~P~ IS.' ~~ — 

UStatutes of Alberta, 1 Edward VIII, Chapter 87(1936), 












. . i 


' 

■ 








1 












r 














, i 

. 








. > 

■ . ; . ■ C * > '' > 






























■ 


: ■ 






■ 





. 




















59 . 


year in many areas was proven by a statement made in the 
1936 Annual Report of the Department of Education. 

In 1938 the impact of the depression was still 
being felt, with consequent reflection in the school 
grants. In that year the Department of Education evolved 
a plan to extend financial assistance in the form of 
special grants to certain districts having salary arrears 
in excess of $£00.00 To benefit by this provision, the 
school districts in question had to collect a required 
percentage of their taxes. 

Districts designated as Special Areas found it 
particularly difficult to meet their financial obliga- 
tions because the income from the taxable property bore 
no effective ratio to their financial obligations. The 
legislature made available a special annual grant of 
$100,000 to assist the operation of the Special Areas. 

If the Area were to benefit under the provisions of 
this special grant, the Government insisted that the 
amount actually collected in taxes be at least equivalent 
to the average annual amount actually collected over the 
.previous five-year period. 

In the following year the Special Areas grant 
privileges were extended to all school divisions and 
districts which included any territory designated as a 

1 P 

±0 The Annual Report of the Department of Education 
for 1938,-p73 T. ' 












' 




■ ■ ■ . . :■ 









H'X ; . ,J i 

. 

. 

■ . 

. >0 • ■ 

- 












, 




■ 


■ 










60 . 


Special Area. The saine type of special consideration was 
given to all school divisions and districts in which the 
average assessment per operating classroom was comparatively 
low. 1 ? 

In addition the Department of Education made special 
grants available to all the units previously mentioned 
and to many other weak divisions which were burdened by 
large salary arrears. The payment of grants in these 
cases was made conditional on the board’s undertaking to 
make cash collection of taxes and clearing of part of 
their heavy indebtedness to their former or present 
teachers. The Department stipulated that the funds 
advanced must be used in paying the arrears in proper- 
tion to the amount due to each teacher. Payments to 
school divisions for the purpose of clearing up salary 
arrears were made in 1939 and subsequent years on a 
dollar-for - dollar basis. Even though the school units 
received this government assistance, salary arrears 
persisted for some time after the depression lifted. 

In 191*0 the Dominion-Provincial Youth Training 
Program was begun. This was an educational program^ 
undertaken jointly by the Dominion and Provincial Govern¬ 
ments , which was designed to build up a supply of pro¬ 
fessional and technical personnel to fill positions which 

19 Ibid., 1939, p. 51. 

20 Ibid., p. 52. 



. 


j. 







• ) ■■■ 


















Si 


obviously would be vacated as the world conflagration 
moved toward a climax* It did much to assist many who 
found it impossible to continue various types of educa¬ 
tional activity because of the dire financial straits 
experienced by many families during the depression. The 
fields in which assistance was given were many and varied, 
and the cost of the program was borne by the governments 
on a fifty-fifty basis 

By 19ii3 the teacher supply had altered so drastically 
from what it had been during the depression years that 
the schools boards of Alberta began to experience serious 
difficulty in obtaining teachers. Isolated schools, 
which had always been considered the least desirable from 
the teacher ! s standpoint, were particularly hard pressed. 

To alleviate this situation in the sparsely settled 
areas of the Province, the provincial government began to 
provide isolation bonuses to teachers who would agree to 
teach in such areas. Bonuses offered varied from flOO 
to $200 and served to induce over four hundred teachers 
to instruct the students in the isolated and pioneer areas 
of the Province,^2 j n 19^5 the Provincial Government 
altered the financial range covered by isolation bonuses 
to provide incentives which varied from $5>0 to $25>0, In 
that year $7h teachers took advantage of the government’s 
offer.^3 

2 1 Ibid ., 291 * 0 , p. 8 . 

22 Ibid., 191*3, p. 55. 

23 Ibid., 191*5, p. 35. 





. 




• ■. 










. 






. 

. 









. 













62 


During the depression years relatively few changes 
were made in the Alberta school grant structure. This 
probably resulted from the fact that the Alberta Government 
was hard-pressed to meet its financial obligations. The 
depression was a time during which governments were not 
desirous of assuming new obligations* for fear that they 
would be unable to cope with the financial drain which 
might be entailed. However* the Department of Education 
did operate within the framework of the existing grant 
scheme in ways that made the lot of the severely depressed 
school units more bearable. 

The war which followed had the effect of putting 
more money into people*s pockets and into public coffers* 
at all levels of government. Under the war conditions 
the government tended to leave the grants alone. Possibly 
this was due to a desire on the part of the government to 
await indications that a new depression would not begin as 
soon as the war ended, Whatever the cause* the grant 
structure remained almost static during the war years. 

The schools of Alberta had operated* by the time 
the war ended* many years under basic grant conditions 
which had been devised for another “era 11 . It is not 
surprising that many renovations in the grant structure 
began in 19^5* the year that the war ended. 






. ' . > V •. .. 




























■ 












* 




















. 

■ 



























CHAPTER V 


FROM 19ii6 TO THE PRESENT 


In 19 U6 a new grants act was implemented in the 
Province which was designed to increase grants to areas 
where the assessed valuation per school classroom was 
below average* It reduced the grants where assessed 
valuation was above average and permitted the almost 
complete discontinuance of ”special” grants by the 
institution of definite formulae for the calculation 
of grants 

The new regulations provided a basic annual grant 
of |1Q0 for every elementary classroom* Recognition of 
the fact that educational costs increase at the higher 
grade levels was accepted and is shown by the following 
summary of the 19U6 regulations governing the annual 
grants. 


^-The Annual Report of the Department of Education 
for 19i|6y p. ~~" 






- 






. 













; >. . ) . 

■ ■ . l ; r ; 





Intermediate (Grades 7 - 9) $2?0 

High (Grades 10-12) $500 

Elementary (Grades 1 - 6) + Intermediate $150 
Elementary, Intermediate and High $300 

The government continued to support classrooms in which 

instruction was given to sub-normal, hard of hearing, and 

to children with deficient sight by providing a grant 

equal to one-half of the teacher*s salary. The grant for 

supervisors was paid at the same rate as that provided to 

2 

the classroom teachers of the grades under supervision. 

During the years preceding 19 W transportation 
costs in the school divisions particularly had become a 
significant item of school expenditures. The new grants 
provided assistance according to a complicated schedule 
which paid approximately $10*00 for each mile of van route 
over which a van operated throughout the year.^ 

The previous equalization grant was replaced by 
the institution of a complicated procedure which the 
writer will atempt to outline here* The number of rooms 
which were to be used in the calculation of this grant 
was to be the number of classrooms in actual operation® 

To this figure was added a room for each supervisor and 
vocational teacher employed and a portion of a room was 
credited to the division for every child whose trans¬ 
portation was provided by the school board* This last- 
mentioned figure varied with the distance that the pupil 
was transported. 

2 The Alberta Gazette , Vol.1(2, 191(6, pp. 5U3-5U. 
^Ibid. 










. 


' . > 







■ 



































65 


The transportation innovation provided a further 
equalization feature within the equalization grant. Before 
this time transportation grants had been paid according 
to the number of conveyances which the school unit operated. 
Now the grant in divisions receiving equalization was to 
be determined by giving to the classroom a ‘’weighting" 
which depended upon the distance that each child required 
transportation. The "weighted" classroom became the basis 
upon which equalization ©rants were paid. 

The assessment for each district or division was 
computed according to the following procedure. If any 
of the units lay within a city* town* or village* the 
land in that portion of the division was rated as it was 
for the purpose' of computing the Social Services Tax. 

To that amount was added the valuation of buildings and 
improvements which were on the land. The assessment for 
the rest of the division (district) was that used for the 
purpose of computing municipal taxes. This latter compu¬ 
tation was to apply similarly to improvement districts 
and Special Areas. 

In town and city districts the ©rant was increased 
to $9*00 annually for each $1000 which the average 
assessment per classroom was below $100*000. Village 
districts received a like ©*ant for every $1000 which the 
average assessment was below $105*000. In consolidated 
school districts having an average assessment per classroom 
below $ 110*000 and in rural districts with an average 
assessment per classroom below $ 120 * 000 * assistance was 

















) i i 






.. J ■ ' .V . 

? ' ' C. ' - l. ; . -A ? .-•■ . ■■ > 

- - ' ' ■> ' >i &X 






•' . ■ V ' 

. ■ ’ 


:: .. ) ' A.'. J 









. 

) * 


. 


).{ 







66 


given according to the following schedule: 


Average Assessment 
per Classroom 


Amount paid per $1000 
below the minimum average 
assessment 


$0 to $2l*,999 


$16.00 

13-00 

11.00 

10.00 

9.00 


$25,000 to $1*9,999 
$50,000 to $7U,999 
$75,000 to $99,999 
$100,000 to $119,999 


Districts and divisions offering instruction in 
vocational, technical, industrial, agricultural, commer¬ 
cial, shop, and home economics subjects continued to 
receive provincial aid at the rate of $1500 annually for 
each teacher so employed. In addition the Provincial 
Government agreed to provide twenty-five per cent of the 
cost of equipment so long as it was not in excess of $200.00 
for each teacher giving instruction in the aforementioned 
subjects. Where two or more districts together provided 
vocational instruction the Government paid fifty per cent 
of the travelling expenses, fifty per cent of the original 
investment in equipment and fifty per cent of the cost 
of an subsequent equipment purchased so long as it was 
not in excess of $100 per teacher annually. 

The I¥ovineial Government continued to assume a 
previously accepted responsibility by agreeing to pay 
twenty-five per cent of the costs of special equipment 
purchased for the purpose of giving instruction in science, 
art, music, and physical education. This grant was to 


'. J . 

























* 

























67 


apply to purchases of projectors and radios but was not to 
exceed $300 per unit or $10,00 per teacher* whichever was 
the greater. 

Assistance was continued to divisions and districts 
that made night instruction available to adult students. 
Units employing not more than thirty teachers were pro¬ 
vided with fifty per cent of the tuition costs when 
instruction was given in ordinary subjects only* and the 
percentage was increased to sixty if vocational classes 
were included. Inhere more than thirty teachers were 
employed* forty per cent of the cost of instruction 
was assumed by the Provincial Government. 

Some other features of the new provisions which 
were either begun or continued in 19 J 4.6 were: 

(a) Schools (e.g. mission) in unorganised territories 
were provided with a $500 annual grant. 

(b) Parents in unorganized territories were given a 
daily grant of $ 1.50 if their children were kept in 
attendance at a school. 

(c) A special grant could be paid at the discretion of 
the Minister of Education if in the opinion of an 
Inspector of Schools it was necessary for the con¬ 
tinuance of school operation. 

(d) A special grant was provided at the discretion of the 
Minister for the erection of a first or other school* 
or for a teacher’s residence, 

(e) Grants were provided for attendance at a teacher's 
institute* convention* school fair* teacher illness 



68 


(up to twenty days), and if the school were closed 
not over thirty days on account of an epidemic* 

(f) The total grants to be paid to any division or dis¬ 
trict were not to be in excess of eight per cent of 
current expenditureJ 4 

The practice of paying bonuses to isolated teachers 
was continued during 1916* During that year 629 such 
teachers received between $$0*00 and $250*00, depending 
upon the degree of isolation of the school*^ 

Although the 1916 arrangements differed markedly 
in many of the methods used for the computation of grants, 
the underlying philosophy followed the patterns which had 
been obvious for many years* For example, equalization 
between districts having a low or a high average assess¬ 
ment per classroom was given added emphasis, though 
the differential had been of considerable magnitude 
previously* Those districts with low average assessments 
were given a further advantage under the new grant pro¬ 
visions and as might be expected those with a higher 
average assessment suffered reductions in their grants* 

In the subsequent years, the grant structure 
remained much as it had been set up in 1916* However, 
because of increasing operational costs nearly all of the 
major types of grants were revised upward during the 
years following 1916* 

'-‘Ibid ., pp. 51*3-51*8. 

^The Annual Report of the Department of Education 

for 1916,"p* 16. 












69 . 


To enumerate each of the grant increases as they 
occurred during the years between 1946 and 1956 would 
serve no other purpose than to confuse the reader. 

However, the pattern of spiraling appropriations which was 
begun in 1946 repeated itself yearly diiring the following 
decade. Because of this fact, the writer will mention 
only those revisions which changed the actual grant fea¬ 
tures, and will complete the picture by presenting the 
details of the 1955 regulations toward the end of this 
chapter. 

In 1947 the Alberta Legislature found it necessary 
to provide an additional #1,500,000 for school grants. 

This money was used to almost treble the basic daily 
classroom grants, to increase the grant for each school 
bus by $50.00 annually, to raise the amounts paid under 
the equalization provisions, and to cover the costs 
incurred by changes in many of the minor regulations.^ 

In 1948 the Alberta Government began to pay an 
amount equal to 3 i per cent of the teachers* salaries 
into the Alberta Teachers 1 Association pension fund. The 
Government contributions in the first year of this agree¬ 
ment amounted to $320,000*^ 

6 Ibid,, 191(7, pp. 111-1X2, 

7 Ibid., 191(8,' 




. 

c 







■ 




' 




. 








' 



























■> . 

. ' . 1 . . : ■ ■ 

. * . ■. 

i 










' 





70 


Assessments were revised during 19i|8 and since 
many of the changes increased the assessed value of 
property the amount which the Government was obligated to 
pay under the equalization terms was reduced 0 To prevent 
drastic reductions to school units which benefitted 
heavily under this grant* it was necessary to increase 
the appropriations provided under the equalization clause 
and also those made under the provisions of the other 
major clauses*® 

The equalization grant had been inaugurated during 
a period in which financial conditions in the sparsely 
settled rural areas were such that it was almost im¬ 
possible to operate a large public enterprise such as 
education. As the years passed* general financial con¬ 
ditions improved and the equalization grant became more 
difficult to manage equitably. The changed assessments 
of 19lt8 began a trend toward reduction of this type of 
grant. In ±9h9 the equalization grants were reduced by 
ten per cent in most divisions* 6J per cent in three* 
and remained unchanged in six divisions which were 
sparsely settled.^ In 1950 equalization grants were 
reduced still furhter while other types of grants parti¬ 
cularly classroom and transportation* were definitely 
increased. 

8 Ibid ., p, 103. 

?The Alberta Gazette, Vol. b5, 1 9h9, p. 879. 






- 









b i 

. 








71 . 


The Alberta Government felt that the spiralling 
costs of education up until 1950 had created hardships 
which were felt by all the school units and therefore 
began to shift the weighting from equalization grants to 
those based on classroom operation and transportation®^ 

Conveyance of pupils to and from school, by this 
time, had become quite an expensive item. The method of 
providing grants to help defray transportation costs 
was revised in such a way as to benefit the divisions which 
had the greatest number of pupils to transport. Compu¬ 
tation of transportation grants was placed on a daily basis 
and the average g^ant paid for smaller busses (which 
carried between eight and sixteen pupils) was approxi¬ 
mately ten cents per mile. Busses which were used to 
transport more than fifteen pupils but fewer than thirty- 
six received grants which were almost fifty per cent 
higher, and vehicles carrying more than thirty-five 
pupils received almost double the grant paid for the 
smaller conveyance.*^ 

By 1952 many of Alberta’s urban communities 
were experiencing a growth which could only be described 
as phenomenal for this part of the world. This post¬ 
war boom created a terrific demand for expansion of school 

^°The Annual Report of the Department of Education 
for 1950 ; p. lfe. ~ ~~ 

~^The Alberta Gazette, Vol. 1*6, 1950, Section b. 












, 








1 1 

. 
























72 


facilities and communities which previously had been over¬ 
burdened by high educational costs found themselves faced 
with expenditures which were beyond their revenue-raising 
capabilities. In 1950 the Alberta Government had passed 
the School Borrowing Assistance Act (mentioned later in 
some detail) which was designed to help alleviate some 
of the distress caused by the necessity for plant expan¬ 
sion. However, this Act was not designed to relieve the 
added burden (of salaries, equipment and supply, and 
administration) which was created by the relatively sudden 
upsurge of school population. To take care of this new 
problem the Abnormal Enrolment Grant was created. The 
only districts (divisions) which received help under the 
new provision were those whose pupil enrolment increased 
at a greater rate than did the average provincial enrol¬ 
ment. To determine whether assistance was to be given 
to a specific school unit the percentage increase of 
enrolment for the province and for each unit was to be 
computed annually. If the percentage increase in any 
district or division were greater than the average 
Alberta increase, the district or division was given 

$20.00 for each student over the provincial average 
12 

increa.se* 

^The Alberta Gazette , Vol. 1*8, 1952, p* 676* 






. 




- • . 


























. 









. 



' 








. 






























73 


In 1951; the grant structure was scaled upward 
quite sharply 3 this was followed by small increases in 
the next year. As mentioned earlier, this 1951; revision 
fitted into a pattern which had been started shortly after 
the war ended, and which has been continuing ever since. 

As an indication of the changes that have occurred during 
the past ten years, the grant provisions as they stood 
at April 1, 1956 will be enumerated here. 

The daily classroom grant had reached $1000 per 
year by 1955 * and was paid for every home economics. 
Industrial arts, and commercial teacher, as well as for 
every principal and supervisor, whether in charge of a 
classroom or not. The grant was doubled if the teacher 
were in charge of a classroom in which only handicapped 
were taught. 

The Alberta Government began in 195k to pay forty 
per cent of the amount spent by the division on trans¬ 
portation, forty-five per cent of the amount spent by the 
parents for transportation (in sparsely settled areas) and 
fifty per cent spent on transporting teachers of special 
subjects from one school to another® 

An annual grant of $10,00 per pupil was insti¬ 
tuted in 1955, and. by that year the amount paid by the 
Government for every pupil enrolled above the provincial 
average had been raised to $100. 

By 1951; the equalization grant was once again on 
the increase and in 1955 it was set at $2,00 per annum 
per pupil in town, village, and consolidated districts for 


* 












. 


■ ' t iC. 

• .. 

. 

; .. ... „ y >\ ' 

.. 

J r >.. ' . . . 

. 1 - . 

' ' - - - : , # 


5 • . , . ' ' . . 





7lw 


every $1000 which the assessment was below $110,000, 
$115,000, and $120,000 respectively. In rural districts 
where the assessment was below $130,000 assistance was 


given according to the following schedule: 

Average Assessment Amount Paid per 

Annum Per Pupil 


Below $1*0,000 $9.00 
$1*0,001 - $ 50,000 8.00 
$ 50,001 - $60,000 7.00 
$60,001 - 170,000 6.00 
$ 70,001 - $130,000 3.00 


For the purpose of computing the equalization grant 
each teacher employed was to count as a classroom and where 
pupils were conveyed to another district, rooms were 


added according to the following schedule: 


No. of Pupils Conveyed Room Equivalent 


6 - Hi. 

15 - 29 
30 - 59 

For each additional 30 
pupils or fractional part 
thereof 


0.3 rooms 
0.5 rooms 
0.7 rooms 


0.2 rooms 


The Department of Education agreed to pay fifty 
per cent of any grants paid by school boards to organisa¬ 
tions for the education of handicapped children. The 
ceiling for this grant was set at $2250. In addition, the 
Government agreed to provide one third of the cost of 
special equipment, up to $350 for isolation bonus, and 
$60.00 annually for each dormitory student. 

The new grant structure continued to give assistance 
to school boards that provided instruction in evening 




.. 


. . „ ; ' ... 

. 


, 




■ 


... ) 

.. .... . . • ■ . •. 

>' • .... : ' 








1 1 
















75 


classes. The rate was set at $1.25 per hour for every 
teacher so employed and this amount was raised to $ 1.50 
hourly if instruction were given to New Canadians. 

When a new district was formed, a grant of $5000 
was provided to give the new area the impetus needed to 
build its first school. Schools in unorganized terri¬ 
tories (e.g. mission schools) were to be provided an 
$1800 annual grant if the teacher employed held an 
Alberta teaching certificate, and $1350 if it were 

issued elsewhere.^"3 

During the depression and the subsequent war, 
capital expenditure for school plant expansion and 
replacement was drastically curtailed. With the emergence 
of the post-war boom, a gap of fifteen years had to be 
bridged. Added to these general factors, Alberta ex¬ 
perienced rapid expansion of industry and a subsequent flow 
of immigrants during the decade following 19b5 which mag¬ 
nified the expenditures necessitated in all fields handled 
by government enterprise. The school systems which have 
begun in recent years to take a huge proportion of munici¬ 
pal revenue, found it particularly difficult to fulfill 
their obligations without further revenue from other 
sources. The only other significant source of revenue 
open to school units, besides the avenue of direct 

^Grant Regulations ((Orders in Council No. b3b/55 j 
771 a/ 55> 1122/55 and 529/567/ Department of Education for 
Alberta, April 1, 1956. 

















. 

' • - • ' • . "i J • ‘ : 








. 

. . 


' 




■ 




.... 1 ■ : ‘ , ■ : > . : ' •. 

, . 




- -v. • • ■ :: 



■ J r . .. ■ • • • . 




1 : ' ■ .. . ; , > 













76 . 


taxation, is the provincial government. Local pressure 
began to make itself felt. 

As a result the Alberta Government passed the School 
Borrowing Assistance Act in 1950 which provided a $3,000,000 
revolving fund from which school boards could borrow money 
for the purpose of expanding their school plants. The 
Government set up a three-member board which was empowered 
to decide whether or not the school unit needed the assis¬ 
tance, and, if so, the amount of financial help required. 

Under the terms of this Act, the school division 

was allowed to borrow without interest up to twenty-five 

per cent of the expenditure approved by the Board from 

the revolving fund. Only one-half of this amount had to 

be repaid (in ten yearly instalments) so that 12 \ per cent 

of the approved capital expenditure was in essence a 

direct grant. The Act also made provision for a guarantee 

of interest payments on other debenture debt incurred by 

the school unit for plant expansion purposes.As the fund 

grew the total amount loaned out was never to exceed 

$6,000,000, and no division was ever to be allowed to 

owe more than $1,000,000 to the fund at any one time.^ 

In the following year the School Borrowing Assistance Act 

was amended. It now required the school unit to repay 

only one-third of the amount borrowed.^ This, in effect, 

increased the direct grant for approved plant expenditure 

to 16£ per cent. 

3 

^Statutes of Alberta, Ik George VI, Chapter 65 ( 1950 ). 

Statutes of Alberta, 15 George VI, Chapter 79 (l95l)* 




















. ' ■ . .) 










■ ) ■ 






















X X 
















. . 




■ 

. . r. . , , 





. 

’ 

' 

. 












77 


In 1252 the Alberta Government passed a new act 
which replaced the one passed in 1950 for the purpose of 
assisting school units to erect or buy buildings. Under 
the new legislation the Government agreed to defray 
twenty-five per cent of the costs of approved construction 
or purchase, and to provide a 3| per cent loan from the 
revolving fund for another twenty-five per cent of the 
cost. The loan was to be repaid at the same rate as other 
debenture loans taken out on the same structure. 

During each of the years following 1952 the pro¬ 
visions of the School Buildings Assistance Act were 
improved upon until in 1955 the grant per classroom (or 
its equivalent) ranged from $5000 in a school of fewer 
than six rooms to $1000 in a school of more than sixteen 
rooms. If the building is constructed of brick and steel 
(or other permanent materials) the grant is increased 
by ten per cent. In 1955 it was made possible for the 

school unit to borrow whatever money it required for 

37 

building purposes from the government. 

Ever since 1880, twenty-five years before Alberta 
became a province, grants have been paid by senior govern¬ 
ments to aid the children of this area to obtain the 
minimum education thought necessary to equip them for 
life in what was then, as now, the modern world. The 
first aid to education came as a mere trickle from the 

■^Statutes of Alberta, 1 Elizabeth II, Chapter 8 

(1952.) 

^Statutes of Alberta, ij. Elizabeth II, Chapter 9 

(1955). 














. 

. 




















. 

'"•/ . ,r.;* 






'.X •: 










■ - 























. 



• 











• 













- 









78 


Dominion Government’s coffers and was designed to pay 
one-half of the teacher’s salary. Now the grants come 
from the treasury of the Alberta Government, are measured 
in the millions of dollars, and are extended over a great 
multiplicity of provisions. The contribution to education 
made by the Dominion Government remains as it was—a mere 
trickle—-for many reasons. 





CHAPTER VI 


EQUALIZATION 


During the early years of education in Alberta 
many government grants were provided to all types of school 
units according to set and definite schedules. Very 
little recognition was given to the fact that equal ^ant 
payments do not necessarily create equality of educa¬ 
tional opportunity. At that time, since the entire pro¬ 
vince was relatively new, great discrepancies in the 
wealth between one part of the province and another had 
not had time to come into existence. All areas were 
equally poor. Therefore, such factors as population 
density, proportion of population in classes, school 















. ... ■■ -• - 








: . ■ : • • 



* 

. 













80 


unit, size, duration of settlement, and wealth of the 
inhabitants did not need to be considered* However, as 
more and more settlement took place, the better areas of 
Alberta soon came to be more densely populated and the 
slower growth of population in sub-marginal areas began to 
pose a peculiar set of problems as far as municipal and 
school finance were concerned* 

The necessity for consideration of the aforementioned 
factors did not exist before Alberta became a province, 
nor to any great extent during the early years after 
Alberta attained provincial status* However, as the 
province began to approach maturity the inequality of 
educational opportunity was bound to increase* With the 
widespread growth of the philosophy that all should be 
given an equal opportunity to benefit from education, 
equalization became a strong factor which influenced the 
provincial governments* 

The principle of equalization, according to E.S, 
Lawler, embodies three fundamental featuress 

(1) The state government prescribes an educational 
mirdmum which it will try to provide to each 
child* 

(2) Taxes for school purposes must bear on each 
citizen according to his ability to pay* 

(3) The costs of minimum education must be borne 
equally by all, and each child must receive 
reasonable educational opportunity.! 


S* Lawler, A Technique for Computing the Amount 
of New Aid Required far State Equalization Programs , 

'Columbia, 15357~*p7 1* 





„ . ■. 

- 

'v • 

« " ■ ... 

■ 

* .. 


1 ■ ' 

■ . . >*j .. . .. 


: ■ ' :• ,» ; ■. i. 1 

- 
















81 , 


Since the equalization features of the provincial 

grant structure are the best method known to equalize 

opportunity for education, the writer feels that the 

grant legislation in this field is of primary importance* 

It became evident before the depression that poorer country 

areas in the United States and Canada could not maintain 

an adequate level of services from their own resources. 

During the depression such areas were the most depressed 

and at a time when the need for money was greatest, revenue 

was reduced and educational opportunity in the poorer 

c> 

areas was necessarily curtailed.~ 

Since the people of a country are its most vital 
resource, the education of each child should be of primary 
importance to all levels of government. Migration within 
the country is at a high level, with movement from rural 
to urban areas, from less industrialized to heavily 
industrialized areas, and from poor to wealthy areas. The 
young citizens of a locality today may be the older citizens 
of tomorrow in another area. Their education is vital 
to the province (the nation) as a whole if an intelligent 
citizenry is to exist to perpetuate our ideas of democracy. 
The costs of educating the children to a desirable minimum 
must be shared by everyone if society is to prosper and 
progress.3 

%. H. Hansen and H. S. Perloff, State and Local 
Finance in the Natio nal Economy , p. £k, 

~”^Xbid., pp. 11*2-114*. 









82 


Equalization is a strong feature of the Alberta 
school grant structure and well it might be, if for no 
other reason than to educate some of Alberta* s junior 
citizens to the extent that they realize there are far 
better places to reside and to raise their children within 
the province, than the locality in which they are now 
located. Sortie areas of Alberta are not suitable for 
settlement and the sooner people realize this, the sooner 
the need for equalization expenditure in those areas will 
cease to exist. 

If it is assumed, as is done in the 1955 LaZerte 
study, that equalization means “making available to all 
children an acceptable minimum program of education* 1 ,^ 
then efficient and equitable methods of obtaining this 
objective must be developed. Whether equalization 
should be based on land assessment only requires study. 
Examination of a hypothetioqlcase may help to point up 
the problem. 

Let us assume that two districts, A and B, have a 
uniform assessment (which probably would be true 
in Alberta) and a mill rate of twenty-five. When the 
number of pupils attending school is divided into the 
total assessment. Division A is found to have a per-pupil 
average assessment of $5*000 and Division B a per pupil 
average of fij.,000. The requisition revenue will be $125 

^School Finance Research Committee (Director, M.E. 
LaZerte), School Finance in Canada, 1955* P* 90. 






' - • • ■ • ■ 'J' •'*' 

- 

. 

• - • • f . • ; 

. , f 

* 

i : • ' ■ . ; 

- 

• " ■ ' . ■ . 













83 


and $100 in Divisions A and B respectively. If it is 
assumed that the desired minimum cost of education per 
student is $200, the government will provide a grant of 
$75 to A and $100 to B. In theory equalization will exist. 

But should not other factors be considered if true 
equalization is the goal? For instance, if the topography 
of Division A makes transportation difficult and expen¬ 
sive, or if a great number of pupils live a great distance 
from the school, then the space factor tends to disrupt 
equalization. One of the divisions may hire a well- 
qualified teacher while the other subsists with a "six- 
week trainee"| the average number of children per classroom 
may vary considerably! one division may require a new 
school. These and many factors could disrupt the concept 
of equalization. This area of thought is in need of 
further study. The factors affecting equalization should 
be recognized and assessed. The ultimate aim possibly 
could be the development of a single basic grant derived 
by application of a formula which makes provision for 
equation of as many variables as it is possible to assess. 
To some extent this is done in Alberta at present. 

Although the first Alberta equalization grant (as 
such) was provided in 1526 to assist the low assessment 
areas of the province, equalization was a principle which 
became inherent in many legislative actions beginning in 
1501, at which time the School Grants Ordinance divided 









' 








- 




. 










' 










. 


. 




« 















. 


s 

• - 













. 


« 























■ vj ; ■ ' 

■ 


81 + 


the schools into rural and town categories* It was felt, 
even at that time, that the towns, with a more compact 
population settled on relatively valuable property, could 
take a greater share of the responsibility of providing 
education for their inhabitants* Therefore they received 
less in the way of provincial grants than did their 
country cousins. In the rural areas, districts containing 
61+00 acres were given a daily grant of $1*80, with the 
provision that for each 160 acres less than the stipulated 
61+00, the grant was to be increased by one cent daily 
and decreased by a like amount for each 160 acres which it 
was larger than the 61+00. By 1913 the idea of equalization, 
if not the actual word itself, was firmly entrenched in 
the Alberta school grant structure. 

Equalizatio n was a feature of many other grants 
between 1901 and 1926. The mere procedure of helping a 
school district to defray the costs of transportation, 
for example,has an equalization effect. Urban districts 
do not benefit from assistance given under the category 
of transportation, because their population is capable of 
reaching the schools through their own efforts. In 1901 
the first transportation grants were provided and these 
have grown in magnitude ever since to the extent that 
transportation is an extensive addition to the amount 
earned from government grant in the rural areas. 

During the early 1920*s the equalisation principle 
received considerable attention in the United States, 




85 


particularly after the idea was discussed by the Educational 
Finance Inquiry of 1923.5 Very little time elapsed 
before it was a feature of the Alberta school grant 
structure. One of the specific reasons for its early 
inception in this province was that retention of teachers 
in the poorer areas became difficult as they were often 
called upon to wait until the districts finances were 
adequate to pay their salaries. Equalization spread 
quickly in the ^nited States too, and by 1930 thirty-five 
states feature^- some type of equalization in their school 
grant structure.^ 

Although some writers warn that an increase in 
state subsidies to the very small, weak school districts 
may be an expensive method of prolonging the life of an 
Inefficient organism,? which could be replaced easily by 
inclusion in a larger school unit, the principle of 
equalization is firmly established on the North-American 
continent. 

As is mentioned in Chapter III, the first actual 
equalization grant was instituted in Alberta during the 
tenure of the 1926 legislature. Before that time the 
schools in the low assessment areas were operating on a 

^Paul R. Mort, Federal Support for Education ; 
Columbia, p. 53* 

^E. S. Lawler, A Technique for Computing the Amount 
of New Aid Required fo~Stafe Equalization Programs ; 

Columbia, 1932, p. 2.~“ 

^Chris A. DeYoung, Budgeting in Public Schools; 
Chicago, 1950; p. 136. 

















. 


















■ 








' : 






> a.' *.i 

i 

























86 


shorter school year to make up for the fac o that their 
revenue was low. Encouragement was needed, in the form 
of added financial assistance, to have them atteirpt to 
educate at least 160 days annually. The incentive pro¬ 
vided was in the form of an additional grant of twenty cents 
daily for every $5,000 which the assessment was below 
$75,000. In the following year the schools which received 
this additional support operated an average of six days 
longer than they had in the previous year. Equalisation 
grants therefore have been a part of the Alberta school 
grant structure since 1926. Although the methods of 
application and the amounts themselves have been altered 
through the years, the principle is still in effect. 

Since the changing methods of computation are described 
in earlier chapters, they will not be repeated in 
detail here. 

The depression of the 1930* s forced an additional 
equalisation feature upon the Provincial Government. 

Many of the pooer districts fell behind drastically in 
the payment of salaries, with the consequence that holding 
teachers (even though there was a great surplus) to the 
poorer jobs became a difficult task. To alleviate the 
situation in 1938 the Provincial Government began to extend 
financial assistance in the form of special grants to 
districts having salary arrears in excess of $500. In 
the same year the Government set up a special fund of 


. 



















■ 


i 



















87 


$100,000 to assist school operation in Special Areas* In 
the following year the additional help for Special Areas 
was extended to all school districts in which the average 
assessment per classroom was unreasonably low. The 
Provincial Government insisted that the money provided 
from the special fund be matched by an equivalent amount 
raised by local taxation, and that the added revenue be 
used to clear up present and past salary arrears. 

No discussion of the equalization topic could 
possibly be considered complete without mention of the 
larger school units for which legislation was passed in 
1936. Operation of schools by small districts in Alberta, 
as in many parts of Canada and the world, gave rise to 
serious inequalities of educational opportunity. Dis¬ 
tricts that were capable of adequately paying their own 
way were often neighbored by districts where the ability 
to provide educational facilities was almost negligible, 

A quotation from B, A, Fletcher, referring to conditions 
in Nova Scotia might equally well apply to the pre-1936 
Alberta situation: 

“Shifts in population and wealth have accentuated 
this growing inequality between district and 
district. Some school sections in Nova Scotia 
are spending today on education $1*0 per child 
per year and others only $3* A district with a 
high tax rate may be giving its children a 
meagre education, in a school building that is 
a mere shack, with a poorly-trained teacher and 
no proper equipment. A neighboring section, 
with a low tax rate, may be providing a modern 





88 


educational programme, with well-trained teachers, 
high school instruction, modern school buildings 
and ample instructional materials. 

Studies have been done which describe in detail 

the equalization effect on larger school units. It is 

not intended to repeat them here. Suffice it to say that 

the rapid expansion of the larger divisions in Alberta 

removed many of the local inequalities of educational 

opportunity. An interesting area of thought which cannot 

possibly be discussed here would be extension of the 

principle of equalization to make the entire province one 

financial unit, or even the entire Dominion. 

That the equalization grants distributed by the 

Government of Alberta partially equalise the educational 

opportunity (as measured financially) in the Province can 

be determined by a study of Table I (page 89 ) in this 

chapter. 

Where the assessment, and consequently the re¬ 
quisition, is high, no equalization grant is paid. For 
example. Clover Bar has an average per pupil assessment 
of $18,708 and received no equalization grant in 1955• 

Lac la Biche with an average per pupil assessment of 
$1216 received $119 for each child in attendance at 
school. A similar situation exists between wealthier 
Edmonton and poorer West Jasper Place or Beverly. 

®B. A. Fletcher, The Next Step in Canadian Educa ¬ 
tion, Toronto, 1939; p. 11. 



















' 

. 


■ . 










> 

. 





■ 





















. 

• . V 


. 






■ 








89 


TABLE I a > b 

COMPARISON OF PER PUPIL INCOME FROM REQUISITIONS, 
EQUALIZATION GRANTS, AND OPERATIONAL GRANTS 


District or 
Division 

Enrol¬ 

ment 

l951*-55 

Asses. 

/p 

(Dec.31 
1951*) * 

Req. 

/P 

0G(less 
EG) /p 

o p* 

1 

Total 

OG+EG 

/p 

Total in¬ 
come /p 
from OG + 
EG + Req. 

Edmonton 

29,058 

6,392 

122 

h2 

-- 

1*2 

16b 

Med. Hat 

3,100 

1*,578 

lib 

k3 


t * 

1*3 

157 

Drumheller 

1,255 

2,1*90 

65 

bo 

1- 

11* 

51* 

117 

West Jasper 
Place 

2,3U 

2,273 

63 

bo 

33 

73 

136 

Beverly 

767 

3,039 

8h 

b3 

22 

65 

11*9 

Bowness 

1,136 

2,017 

50 

1*6 

bo 

86 

136 

Clover Bar 

2,0?2 

18,708 

271 

63 

— 

63 

331* 

Vulcan County 

1,61*1 

9,398 

238 

89 

— 

89 

327 

Wheatland 

1,620 

8,557 

235 

82 

— 

82 

317 

Foothills 

1,366 

9,097 

237 

76 

— 

76 

313 

Berry Creek 

152 

15,071 

289 

in* 

125 

239 

528 

Lac Ste. Anne 

2,221 

2,71*1* 

88 

65 

70 

135 

223 

Eds on 

2,026 

2,358 

59 

69 

j 

92 

161 

220 

Lament 

2,t68 

1*,911 

118 

70 

1*3 

113 

231 

Lac la Biche 

1,1*00 

1,216 

33 

56 

119. 

175 

208 


a Araounts shown in Table I are in dollars, to the 
nearest whole dollar* 

^The figures for this table were derived from informa¬ 
tion supplied by the Department of Education for Alberta. 

The enrolment figures are those for the 195U-55 school year. 
The assessments, requisitions, and grants used to derive 
the figures are for the year 1955• 

/p 5 per pupil OG » operational grants 
EG s equalization grants req. « requisition 




























































J 













: ■ 






















90 , 


When a comparison is made in the requisition column 

between Clover Bar and Lac la Biche, we see that if each 

were left entirely to its own devices. Clover Bar could 

spend $271 annually for the education of each child but 

Lac la Biche could only provide 033*00 annually per pupil 

for education. But there is a difference of potential 

requisition income which is not shown by this table. 

Actually Clover Bar has a requisition rate of litjjr mills, 

while Lac la Biche operates on a requisition rate of 27j 

miils. Let us suppose that both divisions had operated 

on a requisition rate of twenty-five mills. Then the 

annual per pupil income (from requisitions) in Clover 

Bar would be $1*68.00. In lac la Biche annual income would 

be only $30.00 per pupil. Differences in mill rates 

and assessments make it almost impossible to compare 

accurately the educational financial burden carried by 

each citizen in various divisions. However, great 

differences of burden are indicated. We cannot approach 

equalization of tax burden without equitable assessment 

9 

and equalization of mill rates. If Lac la Biche were 
expected to even approach the per pupil income potential 
of Clover Bar, the school division of Lac la Biche would 
soon tax itself out of existence* 


E. LaZerte, The Road Ahead j Edmonton, 1955, P* 16 


















j >■' 


I..;, i.i...-. .'■■■.• • 

. 

. 


* 














- 












' ' . ; • 




•' ' • • • . ' . L ■ r 

« 










...... . .. •, :• . : ■ ;•( J 


: .. ... , , . . 


* • ’ 


. 
















* • , 


















91 - 


In the column which shows operational grant figures 
a wide variation between grants paid to urban and rural 
centres is noted. The per pupil operational grant was 
approximately $1*3 • 00 in Beverly and $16*00 for the year 
1955 in Foothills, a rural school division. When the total 
amounts received from operational and equalization grants 
are added to the amount of money raised by requisition 
(on the right side of Table I) the levelling effect of 
these two provincial grants is observable. From the 
three sources considered. Lac la Biche can now expend 
$208 per pupil, while Clever Bar is able to make a per- 
pupil expenditure of $33h* This is a much healthier 
situation than would exist if each had to depend on local 
sources only for its income. The per pupil income dis¬ 
crepancy between Edmonton and West Jasper Place shows 
a similar reduction in the right-hand column. 

Although it is not intended that Table I cover 
the entire grant picture, equalization between urban and 
rural commimities is pointed out. It is also apparent 
that equalization between wealthier and poorer communi¬ 
ties, within each of the urban and rural categories, is 
an important feature of the provincial (educational) 
grant structure• 

Each of the four western provinces of Canada 
operate an equalization scheme of one sort or another* 
Because equalization existed in 1951 in every western 
province, the average amount paid by provincial grant to 


















. 


■. 










■ 

. 

■ 



’ 
















92 


classrooms in low assessment areas (less than $60,000 per 
classroom) was, in every provihce, more than double that 
paid in high assessment areas (more than $180,000 per 
classroom)o Despite that fact, in every province mentioned 
the school tax rate was considerably higher in low assess¬ 
ment areas (where the ability to carry the burden is least) 
than the rate in high assessment educational unitsThis 
would indicate that Western Canada still has some distance 
to move before equalization can become a reality. 

Many officials of the Department of Education for 
Alberta feel that equalization of opportunity in education 
is a necessity, and attempt to work irith that end in mind. 
Education is a very costly public service, but is the most 
remunerative in terms of increased provincial output* Only 
if the Province provided education (of every type) on 
the same basis as it is provided in the armed forces could 
the burdens entailed be taken entirely from the individual 5 s 
shoulders. Since the huge local and provincial tax 
burden which such a scheme would entail would not be 
acceptable to the general public, equalization through 
the process of provincial grants is probably the best 
possible answer for the present. Complete financial 
equality of education opportunity does not exist in Alberta 
(nor in very many other places) today. But a belief in 
that philosophy exists and can be discerned quite easily 


l°Ibid., p. 19 






93 


when one studies the grant structure. Much remains to 
be done toward giving all an equal opportunity. Many 
obstacles, physical, economic, social and political, have 
yet to be surmounted before equality of educational oppor¬ 
tunity will become a reality. 

If a comprehensive study of Alberta equal! zation 
should be desired the reader is referred to The Equalization 
of Educational Opportunity in the Province of Alberta , 

by Arthur ¥. Reeves.In his study an equalization plan 
based upon a satisfactory minimum of education, and a 
method of instituting such a plan into the Alberta grant 
structure, are proposed. 


^•Arthur ¥. Reeves, The Equalization of Educational 
Opportunity in the Province of Alberta , Unpublished Doctor’s 
dissertation," Stanford Dniversity, ? 



















■ 




..... . ; 




* 


. 












* 




. 


















CHAPTER VII 


TRANSPORTATION 


TA/hen education began in the area which is now 
Alberta, parents of the pupils were expected to accept 
the responsibility of conveying the children to school, 
if the distances were such that conveyance was necessary* 
In 1901, the parent government (then the Dominion 
Government) assumed a portion of the first costs of 
transportation by granting sixty cents daily to any 
school district which was responsible for conveying 
pupils from one school district to another* From that 
small beginning in 1901, costs of transportation have 
grown into a huge expenditure. In some rural divisions 
conveyance costs are equal to one-half the total of 
teachers' salaries* In many divisions over sixty per 
cent of the pupils are now conveyed to school*^ The 
total expenditure on transportation by an of Alberta's 


■^h< 


ie Annual Report of the Department of Education 
for Alberta for 19$$, p* "~22* ” ‘ " ' —— 













95 


school units was more than five and one-half million 
dollars in 19 5i|.’ The amount contributed by the pro¬ 
vincial government to the above sum was in the neigh¬ 
borhood of two million dollars. 

In 1913 the first statutory provision for complete 
consolidation of school districts was made. Since such 
action involved more pupil travel than had been necessary ' 
previously, the normal grant earned by such a consoli¬ 
dated unit was increased to eighty cents per day for 

3 

each approved conveyance. Again districts that operated 
no school, and had their children transported to another 
district, were given special consideration. The amount 
in such cases was not definitely stated (although it was 
not to exceed the total amount which the school district 
could earn if it operated its own schools) but was to be 
determined by the Minister of Education.^ 

During the years following the 1913 enactment, 
which made provision for consolidation, the Department 
of Education, through its inspectors, encourages union 
wherever they thought such consolidation would be bene¬ 
ficial. As is pointed out in Chapter II, the consolidated 
districts were more expensive (than their single unit 
counterparts) to operate during the ensuing years because 
of the expense of conveying pupils to and from classes. 

g Ibid ., p. lW*. 

3 Ibid., 1913, p. 13. 

^Ibid., p. 18. 













; " : . i y.-jp 





















96 , 


However, many inspectors felt that the level of instruc¬ 
tion, the increased attendance, and the number of years 
which pupils continued in school, more than made up 
for the larger expenditure which conveyance involved* 

As mentioned in Chapter II, in 1919 two-roomed 
rural schools were provided with a grant of $1*50 daily 
for each conveyance operated® An additional $1.00 
daily was added for each motor vehicle operated. Other 
transportation grants were supplied at the discretion 
of the Minister of Education. 

The number of consolidated school districts increased 
steadily during the 1920*s and 1930’s® Although the costs 
of education in such units increased, the citizens residing 
in the districts affected realized that the advantages 
derived gave their children greater opportunity for 
adequate education. Transportation enhanced the value of 
schooling in consolidated districts, but in turn increased 
other costs. Pupils attended school from one to three 
years longer than in other districts and daily attendance 
increased. This necessitated hiring more teachers and 
teachers with higher qualifications, which, of course, 
added to the price of education.^ Rapid development of 
motor transportation tended to make consolidation a more 
desirable feature during the early years and construction 
of new roads made union much more feasible. 


^Ibid., 1921, p. 20. 






' 

- ' t 

' 

- 
















■ 










; 








. 

■ 








4 














* 

















97 


With the inception of legislation providing for 
large school divisions (in 1936) the trend toward 
“wheeled students” surged forward and by 1938, the amount 
expended for conveyance of pupils was $121,000.^ 

Between the years 1919 and 1914* the only signifi¬ 
cant changes in the legislation affecting the transporta¬ 
tion grant picture was a reduction of the daily grant 
from $ 1.50 to $1.00 and legislation allowing all types 
of school units to benefit.^ 

In 191+6 the grant for vans was placed on a more 
realistic basis. An intricate schedule, which took 
into consideration the number of miles travelled daily, 
was instituted. The 191+6 schedule of grant payment 
follows in Table II.(page 98) 

Horse-drawn vans received payment at seventy-five 
per cent of the above schedule. Where it was necessary 
for divisions to assist financially parents who trans¬ 
ported their own children to the schools, the Provincial 
Government assumed twenty per cent of the costs.^ 

In 191+7 the 191+6 schedule was made to apply to 
any conveyance, whether horse drawn or not, just so long 
as the pupils were transported. If fewer than eight 

^Annual Report of the Department of Education 
for Alberta, 19377"“ 

"^Statutes of Alberta, 6 George VI, 191+2, Chapter 
177* Section 61. 

























: 


# 




i "■ *'Qi " ■ - >' 



■ 







98 


TABLE II 


GOVERNMENT SCHEDULE OF APPROPRIATIONS FCR TRANSPORTATION 
FOR 19li6 9 


Miles per round trip 

Yearly appropriation 

per day 

in dollars 

Less than 1? 

■ 

150 

15 - 19 

205 

1 

o 

CM 

255 . . 

25 - 29 

305 

30 - 3k 

350 

35 - 39 

390 

1,0 - 14, 

1,30 

1,5 - 1,9 

1,65 

50 - 51, 

1,95 

55 - 59 

525 

60 - 6h 

51,5 

65 - 69 

565 

70 - 75 

585 

Over 7? 

600 

...... . i 


children were carried in the van a proportionate grant was 
provided.10 

In the latter part of 19b7 the mileage allowance 
which provided for shorter van routes (under five miles) 

9 Ibid. 

l^The Alberta Gazette 9 Vol. 19bl} P» 18?. 


























































99 


was almost doubled and increased by approximately ten 
per cent for the longer routes (over seventy-five miles)# 
Proportionate increases were made in the amount provided 
for the other routes* with the percentage (of increase) 
decreasing as the number of miles increased#^* The 
amounts again were increased slightly in 191*8# By that 
year a route of under fifteen miles received an annual 
payment of $325 and one of over seventy-five miles 
received $675#^ 

In 1950 another factor besides miles travelled 
was taken into consideration# The capacity of the buses 
was added to the basis upon which appropriations were 
computed# Buses with a capacity of eight* but less 
than sixteen (which travelled less than fifteen miles 
daily) received a daily grant of $2#1*0. Those with a 
capacity of sixteen to thirty-five received $3*60 daily* 
and those with a capacity of thirty-six or more received 
$1*#80 (if the distance travelled was still less than 
fifteen miles)# Buses which travelled over sixty miles 
daily received grants according to the following scales^ 


Capacity 

Grant (in dollars) 


8* less than 16 16*less than 36 36 or 

more 


5.00 


6.90 


9.20 


Although setting up larger school divisions was 
begun in 1936* legislation which gave realistic consideration 
n Ibid#* p, 353* 

1 2 The Alberta Gazette * Vol# 1*1** 191*8* pp# 617-618, 
^ The Alberta Gazette * Vol. 1*6* 1950, p# 270. 












■ 













♦ 

. 














100 


to the enlarged transportation problem caused by unifi¬ 
cation was very slow in following. A flat grant per unit 
fails to take into consideration the cost variables* 
some of which are differences in roads* distances tra¬ 
velled* wages paid drivers, load carried per unit* and 
so forthu^ Two of the major variables (mentioned above) 
were considered in the 1950 legislation—load carried and 
distance covered* but were not considered in any way 
before the early 191*0* s. 

In 1953 transportation grants were placed on a 
straight percentage of costs basis. The Provincial 
Government agreed to pay forty per cent of the Board's 
actual expenditure for the conveyance of pupils and 
forty-five per cent of the amount paid by the Board to 
parents for conveying their own children to school.^ 

With this innovation cost variables are no longer con¬ 
sidered separately* the Inefficient receive subsidization 
and equalization is somewhat negated. When a service 
(given by the boards) is paid on a percentage of cost 
basis those units which are most able financially to 
provide good facilities benefit to the greatest extent. 
Putting transportation grants on a percentage of cost 
basis removes the equalization factor (derived from 


•^John Almack and James Bursch* The Administration 
of Consolidated and Village Schools ; Massachusetts* 

Cambr idge * (cl92F)T~ 

^Government of the Province of Alberta School 
Grant Regulations* T?557^ ~~ 































* 




. 






« 




. 














101 , 


transportation grants) between wealthier and poorer 
rural school units. 

Transportation grants of any type present an 
equalization feature between the costs of rural and 
urban education however. Urban centres do not benefit 
from transportation grants to any great extent, but there 
is no such expenditure needed within cities and towns. 
Therefore the money is paid to school units which need 
it for the purpose of transporting students. Usually 
(though not always) the urban centres have greater 
revenue for education per student than do the rural 
areas. The transportation grant, fcy paying a part of a 
service only where the need exists serves to equalize 
opportunity of education between urban and rural areas* 





• . ; ‘' • • <1 


. • •: '*:c 



■ 
















or J • ■ 









CHAPTER.VIII 


OTHER GRANTS AMD CONDITIONS 


Although the Alberta Department of Education 
regards other grant areas as basic* for the purpose of 
this discussion the term basic grants will refer to those 
derived on a per pupil* per teacher* or per classroom 
basis. Grants of other types will not be ignored* but 
will also receive attention in this chapter. Since the 
beginning of government aid to schools* grants of the 
aforementioned types have constituted a major portion of 
the provincial monies earned by Alberta school districts. 
Many of the other grants* now considered basic by the 
Provincial Government* had little place in the early 
years of Alberta*s educational structure. 

As is previously stated* the first government 
grant toward education in the area now comprising Alberta 
was a per teacher grant. The earliest Dominion grants 
to the North-West Territories schools provided an amount 
equal to one-half of the teacher's salary. 



103 


Grants which are paid on the basis of the number 
of teachers employed provide a certain equitable distri¬ 
bution of aid to school districts* A teacher must receive 
his salary whether he teaches four pupils or forty, and 
salaries always have been a large item of Alberta school 
expenditure; they were particularly so in the early years 
before education became as complex as it is today. 

However, it would be impossible to fulfil adequately the 
needs of each community by using the number of teachers 
employed as the only basis for the determination of grants. 
It would be equally impossible to determine fully the 
amount of grant money that should be provided by con¬ 
sidering only the number of classrooms in operation. 

These two methods of grant computation have a host of 
related deficiencies, when used to the exclusion of 
every other type of grant. 

One early deficiency experienced in Alberta was 
that teacher grants alone did not provide the necessary 
incentive to keep the daily average attendance at a 
healthy level. To offset this difficulty, in 1885 a. per 
pupil grant was provided, which, although small, was 
based on the number of children in average daily attend¬ 
ance in the classroom. The amount paid was $2.00 annual¬ 
ly for every child who attended classes for one hundred 
school days and $2.50 if the pupil were in attendance 
for at least 160 days. 

























-- 5 i ■.» 

• > „• ;v 






i ' •- • ' ' : 






' 


















In 1892 the grant structure was changed in such a 
way that emphasis was placed on grants for classroom 
operation. A school with a daily average attendance of 
from six to ten pupils was provided with a basic grant 
of $29^.00. Three dollars and fifty cents was added 
annually for each child over a minimum enrolment of ten, 
and $12.60 more was paid for each pupil in the third 
standard or higher. Examination of the foregoing figures 
makes it clear that in most cases the greater portion of 
the grant revenue would be derived from the classroom 
grant. 

Hew legislation, which was passed in 1896, fixed 
the grant structure more solidly on the classroom basis. 
The school was credited with fl.ltO per pupil per day, 

$1.50 per year for each child in average daily attendance, 
and up to twenty cents daily for teacher certification. 

The amount earned by these types of grants was not to 
exceed seventy per cent of the teacher*s salary. Since 
salaries were low at that time, every district which 
operated a school received nearly equivalent government 
aid. 

In 1901 the basic grant to rural schools was set 
at $1.80 daily and ninety cents daily was paid to urban 
districts. This was a new feature of the grant structure 
—to pay urban and rural centres at different rates. 
However, the largest portion of the school grant was 
























; ' - '■ '• ‘ • 


) 




10 ? 


to be provided on the classroom basis. Where the popu¬ 
lation was sparse and the number of children per class¬ 
room relatively few, the teacher still had to be paid. 
Since teachers* salaries, particularly then, were large 
items of school board expenditure, seme differential in 
the size of grants to different types of districts was 
inevitable. This early forerunner of equalization set 
the stage for subsequent years. In 1926 the equalization 
grants came into being, transportation grants grew at a 
phenomenal rate during the century, and other types of 
grants were developed which reduced the inequality of 
educational opportunity that came into existence between 
urban and rural settlements. 

It would be repetitious to go through all the 
major and minor revisions that occurred after Alberta 
became a province. This is done in previous chapters. 

The purpose of the first pages of this chapter is to give 
an indication of the early trends in the basic grant 
structure so that it is possible to see the early evolu¬ 
tion which led eventually to the appropriation picture 
of today. The grant emphasis has been (since Alberta 
became a province) and still is, on the classroom or 
teacher basis. During the 1920‘s, 1930*s and 191*0*s 
emphasis on classroom grants slipped somewhat, but by 
19?U the basic grant per classroom had reached $1000 


a year 



















> 






’ 


■ 


, 


. 






* 












- ... 




■ 


' 


■ 


. 






. 



106 


A comparison of two very different school omits 
may possibly help to point up the fairness of computing a 
large portion of the grants on a per classroom basis* 

For this purpose Edmonton, the largest Alberta school 
unit in terms of enrolment, and Berry Creek, the rural 
school division with the loosest 195k enrolment, will be 
used* A glance at Table III (page 10?) will show some 
interesting facts for consideration*^ 

The average enrolment per room for Edmonton was 
thirty-four pupils, while in Berry Creek the number of 
pupils in each classroom was eleven. Both school units 
received $1,000 per classroom but in Edmonton the amount 
per pupil earned by classroom grant was $29*00, and in 
Berry Creek $92.00. 

Suppose the classroom grant had been paid on a 
per-pupil basis of $29*00, or $92*00, or an average of 
the two figures. No matter what amount (of the three) 
had been chosen. Berry Creek would still have had finan¬ 
cial difficulty. The problem in Berry Creek is one which 
does not exist in Edmonton. The population is sparse 
and the average classroom must be underpopulated, or 
transportation costs must skyrocket. The costs of 
operating a classroom with eleven pupils are nearly as 

^Although Table III does not show this fact, it 
should not be forgotten that an annual per-pupil grant 
of $10.00 is still an existing basic school grant. 









. 

-« . 

. . ... 











107 


TABLE III* 

COMPARISON OF THE AMOUNTS EARNED IN EDMONTON AND BERRY CREEK 
PER PUPIL BY CLASSROOM GRANT 


f 

t 

Edmonton 

Berry Creek 

. - . a 

No. of rooms 

853 

lit 

Total enrolment 

.. 

29,058 

152 

Average enrolment per room 
(nearest whole number) 

3h 

11 

Total classroom grant 
(1955 regulations) 

$853,000 

$11^,000 

Per pupil amount earned by 
classroom grant (to 
nearest dollar) 

$29 

$92 


*The figures for the first three items were obtained from 
the annual Report of the Alberta Department of Education 
for 195?. The total classroom grant was derived by 
using the Alberta School Grant Regulations for 1955* 


high as those in one which has thirty-four. The per-pupil 
costs of education are much higher in a sparsely settled 
rural community than those experienced in an urban centre* 
It would be almost impossible for Beriy Creek to operate 
the school system efficiently on the same per-pupil cost 
basis as that which Edmonton is able to use. 

The tendency in the school grant structure is toward 
higher classroom grants. Such a tendency moves us toward 
equality of educational opportunity between urban ( or 
thickly populated) centres and sparsely settled rural areas. 


















































- 





108 


As is mentioned in Chapter I\F, the financial drain 
on certain Alberta communities, due to the rapid post-war* 
growth of school population, constituted a new problem 
which demanded government attention. In 1952 the Alberta 
Government met the situation ty the creation of the Abnormal 
Enrolment Grant. To describe the method by which the grant 
is determined a quotation from the 1956 Alberta Grant 
Regulations follows; 

,s During each fiscal year there shall be 
determined the percentage, if any, by which the 
net enrolment in the schools of the Province at 
the end of the immediately preceding complete 
school year has exceeded the net enrolment one 
year earlier. With respect to any district 
or division in which the percentage of increase 
has exceeded the percentage for the Province, 
the number of pupils by which the increase in 
enrolment has exceeded that represented by 
the percentage for the Province as a whole 
be determined. There shall be paid during the 
fiscal year a grant of one hundred dollars 
($100.00) for each of such pupils.” ^ 

When this grant was first instituted the amount 

paid for each of such pupils was twenty dollars. However 

this amount was soon increased to $100 as it is at 

present. 


Since the cities of Alberta have grown at a more 
rapid rate than have the rural areas this grant has 
benefitted urban centres to a greater extent than the 
rural areas. The total amount paid by the Provincial 
Government under the terms of the Abnormal Enrolment 


%he figures shown in this paragraph were obtained 

from the Alberta Department of Education. 





. . -■ ' r ■, ' 

. 

. 


J 

' I. ■ " . - 

■ ■ ' ' - • '■ •' 

1 \ ! - . •, v, . . ■ ■ : f, v, ; ‘ ' ‘.‘A 

■ 

1 ■ 

' . 

■ 

« ’ . * 




















■ 








109 


Grant was $1*10,000 for the 1951*-55 school year, and 
$1*1*0,000 will be paid during the 1956-57 school year. 

Of the total amount granted for the 1956-57 school year, 
$30l*,000 will be of benefit to Alberta cities, and $136,000 
is the amount of payment to rural areas.* 

Because the money provided under Hie terms of the 
Abnormal Enrolment Grant is based on the enrolment gain 
of the previous complete school year, payment is made, 
of necessity, one year later than the need actually arises 
in the school unit. 

This particular type of grant assumes that increased 
enrolment creates a momentary situation which it is possible 
to alleviate by payment in one lump sum. Such, some 
believe, is not the case. They feel that when enrolment 
takes a sudden surge upward, financial problems (for 
example, costs of constructing classrooms, extension of 
administrative services, and the sudden drain on supplies, 
furniture, etc.) arise, which affect the situation for 
some years. This grant, because of the momentary swelling 
of the board*s coffers, presents a problem as far as 
consistent budgeting is concerned. 

The Abnormal Enrolment Grant is one which usually 
benefits school units which have a fairly high average 
assessment per pupil. However, the grant was designed to 

^he figures shown in this paragraph were obtained 
from the Alberta Department of Education. 























110 


help meet a specific need* This need has continued to 
be created by the necessity for providing educational 
facilities for pupils whose parents have not yet con¬ 
tributed to the income of the school unit* The larger 
urban centres have been particularly hard-pressed since 
the end of the second world war because of this rapid 
expansion* This grant has, to a limited extent, helped 
alleviate a unique situation. 

The first grants which were designed to assist 
school boards to pay for the education of handicapped 
children came into existence before the turn of the 
century* In 1899 the North-West Territories Council 
passed legislation which provided $2^00 to assist with 
the education and transportation of deaf children to 
and from specialized schools in other areas.2 At that 
time most severely handicapped children were regarded 
as being uneducable. Indeed, they were. It must be 
remembered that very little research had been done in 
the area of education for the handicapped* Half a 
century has increased the demands made on society from 
many sourcesj one of these being the provision of 
education for handicapped children. Many such children 
are able to profit from education to such an extent that 
they can no longer be thought of as burdens on society. 

^North-West Territories Ordinances, Victoria 
Chapter TTWTf7~~ -— 






4 



' 


. 

- 




'.Vi;," 






• . . 






■ 



. 





. 




. 



. 





* 



■' . ; 




■ 





Ill, 


From the acceptance of partial responsibility for 
the education of the deaf in 1899, the field has grown, to 
include those who are blind, hard-of-hearing, deficient 
in sight, mentally incompetent, low in intelligence, 
cerebral palsied, hospitalized,,and others. Even when a 
language difficulty presents a handicap to efficient 
education (as with the new Canadians) society now accepts 
a certain added responsibility. Unfortunately Alberta 
still has a relatively sparse population, and much is 
done to help the handicapped in urban centres which cannot 
be matched adequately in rural areas. However, the 
idea that all who are educable should be given an 
opportunity to learn is spreading, and it is to be 
expected that within a very few years few gaps will 
exist in this extensive educational area. We seem to 
have come to agree with what an English barrister of 
more than fifty years ago thought when he said, M The 
education of the crippled child is not philanthropy— 
it is enlightened self-interest.”3 

When Alberta became a province it continued to 
accept the responsibility of paying for the education of 
deaf mutes. In 190$ seven pupils were sent to Winnipeg 
for instruction, at a cost to the Government of over 

3Report of the Committee on Special Classes 
(White House Conference on Child Health and Protection); 
Special Education: The Handicapped and the Gifted ; 1931, 
p. i9. ~~ ~~ — 




















■ ' •. ; 






. 

• /' ' ■ ■ * ■ ' •' 












' ' t f, ' ' 

. 

• *. , )■ : J , ' 

■ 

O 

s' *j i : i , i 
















j ’ > 









112 


$2100.^ In 1951*, 113 deaf or blind children were sent 
out of the province for training at a cost of over 
$116,000*^ The per pupil expenditure for this type of 
education had grown from approximately $300 to over 
$1000 annually. 

By 19514 more than a dozen teachers were employed 
to teach children in hospitals throughout the province. 
Grants of up to $1000 per teacher were provided by the 
Provincial Government. In the same year there were 
thirty Alberta classrooms operated exclusively for the 
purpose of giving a realistic education to children 
with various types of handicaps.^ The grant provided by 
the Alberta Government to help school boards educate the 
handicapped was $2000 per teacher. 

The 1956 Grant Regulations provide for a grant of 
fifty per cent of the amount paid by school boards to 
any organization which provides instruction for handicapped 
children. The ceiling for such a grant is $2,250 for 
each teacher so employed. In addition, the Provincial 
Government has indicated that it will pay a grant equal 
to eighty per cent of any contribution made by school 
boards for capital purposes to an organization for the 
education of the handicapped. The ceiling on this type of 
grant is $5000 per classroom.? 

i +The Annual Report of the Department of Education 
for 1906 , p. 18 . “ 

3 Ib id., 1955, p. 1*3. 

6 jbid ., p. 1 * 3 . 

?The Alberta School Grant Regulations , April 1, 1956; 

pp. 8 - 97 “ — 








■ I ‘ : \ [ *.. 

.' ' 

* .... 





















"■ 


o 







- 

’ 

■ 










. 




' 

. 










113 


School units and organizations have not extended 
their facilities for education of the handicapped enough 
to create a significant grant demand for this type of 
education. However, it is to be expected that within 
the next few years education of handicapped children will 
create quite a drain on the public purse at both the local 
and provincial levels. 

Since the end of World War II costs of nearly all 
goods and services have increased rapidly. This situa¬ 
tion has been reflected in the expenditures made on 
education. To meet the added costs of education the 
Alberta school boards found it necessary to requisition 
more and more money from the municipal government. The 
average school mill rate in Alberta divisions had 
increased from 23*7 in 1950 to 30.76 in 1951u^ Revenue 
derived from a property tax (as with any type of tax) 
has a practical limit. When a tax reaches such magni¬ 
tude that there is danger of destroying the source of 
revenue some means must be found to correct the situa¬ 
tion. Requisition rates were moving steadily upward at 
a time when income of the taxpayer in rural areas was 
relatively static. 

In 1955 the Provincial Government introduced the 
Tax Reduction Subsidy in an attempt to stabilize requisi¬ 
tion rates for school purposes at twenty-five mills. How 

^The Annual Report of the Department of Education 

for 1955, p. 106T"™ 
















































> (' o'■ ■ 













. • . . .0 : 


















lilt. 


a school unit would benefit from the Tax Reduction Subsidy 
is best described by the following excerpts from the 1955 
Grant Regulations: 

"21 (l) Any district or division that in 1955 
requisitions upon the municipality or 
municipalities which are its collecting 
authorities at a rate not exceeding 25 
mills(exclusive of certain legally 
authorized special and additional 
requisitions) shall be paid a tax reduc¬ 
tion subsidy grant in the amount deter¬ 
mined by subtracting 25 from the quali¬ 
fying mill rate hereinafter defined 
and multiplying the result by the total 
assessment as of December 31, 195k, 
or such total assessment figure as may 
be approved by the Minister of Education. 

(2) In each district and division the 
qualifying mill rate shall be the 1951s- 
average basic requisition rate less the 
amount expended in 195k from current 
revenue for capital purposes converted 
into mills, or 2*5 mills, whichever is 
the lesser, plus the amount of the 
operational deficit in 195k converted 
Into mills. 

(3) Notwithstanding the preceding provisions, 
the 1955 requisition may contain over 
and above the basic 25 mills, additional 
mills for the recovery of deficits, and 
additional mills not to exceed 2.5 for 
capital expenditure from current reve¬ 
nue.” 9 

In the first year of payment (1955) the Tax 
Reduction Subsidy was instrumental in providing to the 
school units $7,090,000 in additional government grants. 


? The Alberta School Grant Regulations , April 1, 1955, 
pp. 15 -"137"” 

Note: School units which did not qualify for T.R.S. were 
to be paid an amount equal to thirty per cent of 
any increase not exceeding five mills in the 1955 
basic requisition rate over the 195k basic rate. 

^The Annual Report of the Department of Education 

for 1955,T.“l0k7“ .... — ~ 
























115 


It has been claimed that the Tax Reduction Subsidy 
is actually an equalization grant. An examination of the 
benefits derived from the Tax Reduction Subsidy and the 
Equalization Grant in certain representative districts 
and divisions should help us to assess this claim. (See 
Table IV, page 116.) The operational grants have been 
omitted so that the comparison -will be simplified. The 
operational grants for the particular units studied are 
included in Table I. 

Edmonton, which has a per-pupil average assessment 
of $6392, received $1*0.00 (per pupil) by Tax Reduction 
Subsidy. Drumheller, with a per-pupil assessment of 
$21*90 received $21.00. The equalization grant of $ll*.Q0 
which Drumheller received brought the pupil grant in 
Edmonton and Drumheller closer together. The Tax 
Reduction Subsidy has the opposite effect by making the 
grant spread between the two districts greater. The 
per-pupil assessments in West Jasper Place and Bowiess 
were relatively similar. But the per pupil Tax Reduction 
Subsidy was much larger per pupil in West Jasper Place 
then it was in Bowness. 

When urban centres are compared to rural areas it 
is found that the cities and towns derived the greatest 
benefit. The average per-pupil earning from the Tax 
Reduction Subsidy in urban areas was over $33*00 while 
it was approximately $18.00 in the rural divisions and 


counties 








>0 












:; • ‘ 








. 








: 












• i .> 




116 


TABLE IV 

COMPARISON OF THE PER PUPIL ASSISTANCE FROM EQUALIZATION 
AND TAX REDUCTION SUBSIDY GRANTS IN REPRESENTATIVE SCHOOL 


UNITS 


District or 
Division 

Asses. 

/? * 
(Deo. 31 
195b) 

- “1 

R./p 

E.G./p 

TRS /p 

(1955) 

Tot.EC 

&TRS 

/P 

?Tot. inc. 
(Req., EG 
&TRS) /p 

Edmonton 

6,392 

122 


1*0 

ho 

162 

Medicine Hat 

l*,578 

m* 


29 

29 

lh3 

Drumheller 

2,1*90 

63 

111. 

a 

35 

98 

West Jasper Place 

2,273 

63 

33 

iii* 

77 

11*0 

Beverly 

3,039 

81* 

22 

ho 

62 

lh6 

Bowness 

2,017 

50 

ho 

27 

67 

117 

Clover Bar 

18,708 

I" 

271 




271 

Vulcan County 

9,398 

238 


33 

33 

271 

I ... 

Wheatland 

8,557 

235 


17 

17 

1 

252 

Foothills 

9,097 

237 


10 

10 

21*7 

Berry Creek 

15,071 

28 ? 

125 

2 

127 

ijl6 

Lac Ste. Anne 

2,7U 

88 

70 

19 

89 

177 

. 

Edson 

2,358 

59 

92 

50 

lh2 

201 

Lamont 

It, 811 

n8 

1*3 

26 

69 

187 

Lac la Biche 

1,216 

33 

n, 

5 

121* 

157 


# /p » per pupil R ” requisition EG ~ equalisation 
grants TRS “ Tax Reduction Subsidy Tot. s total 


Vulcan County, which received no equalisation grant, 
was given a per-pupil grant of $33*00 under the terms of 
the Tax Reduction Subsidy. Lac la Biche received $119.00 








































































£Y • ' ' 









117 . 


per pupil by equalization and only $5*00 per pupil by 
the Tax Reduction Subsidy grant# 

A clearly defined pattern is difficult to find, 
when the actual revenue derived from the Tax Reduction 
Subsidy is studied. However, urban areas seem to enjoy 
the greater benefit. 

A good equalization grant should have the effect 
of decreasing the difference of educational opportunity 
between wealthier and poorer areas. The Tax Reduction 
Subsidy does do this in some cases. For example, it 
gives nothing to Clover Bar while the per-pupil benefit 
to Edson is $50.00. At the same time Vulcan County, 
which is relatively wealthy, received $33.00 per pupil, 
while the lac la Biche benefit was $5.00 per pupil. 

The benefits derived from the Tax Reduction 
Subsidy are inconsistent with the theory of equalization. 
Urban centres which enjoy greater population density 
derive the greatest benefit. In more than one case (of 
the fifteen school units examined) a wealthy district 
derived far greater benefit than did a poorer district. 
"When working out an equalization grant the first considera¬ 
tion is the need of the various areas. This grant 
requires a great amount of revision to have a definite 
equalization feature, or even to make it consistently 
beneficial to aU areas. 





118 


The latter part of Chapter IV describes the School 
Borrowing Assistance Act and its amendments which were 
passed in the 1950*s. Under the terms of the 1950 legis¬ 
lation one-half of the amount borrowed (12§ per cent of 
the capital expenditure) did not have to be repaid to the 
government. This provision actually meant that the 
government was making a grant equal to 12§ per cent of 
the amount which school boards spent for building pur¬ 
poses. 

A grant that is based on a percentage of the total 
costs operates in such a way that the school units which 
are already the wealthiest derive the greatest benefit* 

In this instance the school units which possessed a cer¬ 
tain amount of money for building purposes were able to 
obtain financial aid for capital expenditure. The 
school units which could spend the greatest amount per 
classroom built were the ones which received the greatest 
per classroom grant. 

In 1951 the government changed the legislation so 

that only one-third of the amount borrowed had to be 

repaid. This increased the direct grant for approved 

school expenditure to 16 2 per cent. In the following 

3 

year the Provincial Government agreed to defray the cost 
of twenty-five per cent of approved capital expenditure. 
As the percentage of costs, which the government was 
willing to defray, was increased year by year, the 
potential advantage to wealthier units increased. 






. ■ 









•• 








































! / V'' • ; 


. 


i 





'* x ■ ) > 


■ 


■ ■ 1 \ ‘ - i ‘ 






* ‘S'it 




119 


In 2S5h 9 however, the Government introduced new 
legislation which changed the basis on which construction 
grants were to be determined. A definite sum was provided 
for each classroom (or its equivalent) according to the 
size of the school unit to be erected. Four thousand 
dollars per classroom was provided when the school build¬ 
ing was to contain fewer than six classrooms. A school 
authority which was planning to construct a school 
containing six to nine classrooms was given a per class¬ 
room grant of $1^00. Five thousand dollars per classroom 
was provided for a school of from six to nine rooms, and 
$6000 per classroom was given if the school was to contain 
more than fifteen classrooms. An additional ten per cent 
was added to these amounts if the structure were built of 
brick and steel or other permanent materials. Provision 
was made to equate other than classroom accommodation in 
terms of standard classrooms, so that all types of 
instructional facilities would receive grant considera¬ 
tion.^ In 1955* the rates at which the school units 

were given assistance for construction purposes by govern- 

12 

ment grant were revised upward by |1000 per classroom. 

Table V (page 120) indicates the extent of growth of 
construction grants since their inception, and a comparison 
of the advantage taken of this type of grant by urban and 
rural areas. 

llStatues of Alberta, 3 Elizabeth II, Chap. 95(1951*). 

"^Statues of Alberta, 1* Elizabeth II, Chap, 9(1955), 

















■ . ' ' ‘ • : 






■ 






. , . 












■ 


r, 






• ' 














- 


. 











- 















120 


TABLE V ** 

A COMPARISON OF CAPITAL GRANTS TO DIVISIONS (AND COUNTIES), 
URBAN SCHOOL DISTRICTS AND ALL SCHOOL UNITS 


Year 

Divisions and 
Counties (1951* 
-55 enrol* 
ment 108,997) 

All Alberta Town and 
City School Dist¬ 
ricts (incl. separate] 
(1S5U-55 enrolment 

93,730) 

All School Units 
(195^-55 enrol. 
212,705) 

1950 

203 

591 

759 

1951 

116 

1275 

2150 

1952 

k3k 

836 

1353 

3953 

1127 

125k 

2k36 

195k 

1959 

2k06 

k5ko 

1955 

2568 271(8 

5633 


*The data contained in this table were derived (or ob¬ 
tained) from figures contained in the Comparison 
Statements issued by the Department of Education for 
the years 1950 to 1955* 

+A11 amounts indicated are to the nearest thousands of 
dollars. 


In 1950 the total amount expended by the Government 
to assist with construction was approximately $759*000. 
During that year divisions and counties received grants 
which totalled approximately $203,000, while urban 
centres were given grants of $591*000. As the years 
passed school units derived greater benefits from this 
type of grant, except in 1952. In 1955* the Alberta 
Government provided more than five and one-half million 













































. 


. 

, 


V 



•• 

' 

, , . . t 


. 
















■ 





• 




















' ■ ' '( ‘ ! 




. 





. 


, 

’ >'}• 

fs 



■ 







o % ■ . • 

. 


, 

. 

' 










) 






.■ n 












121 


dollars to assist with capital school expenditure$ the 
school divisions (including counties) obtained a grant 
of $2,568,000 which was almost as great as that received 
by the urban school units. 

Table VI (page 122) is included to give an indica¬ 
tion of how certain representative school units benefitted 
under the terms of the construction grants. 

The change in the basis for computation of con¬ 
struction grants from a percentage of costs basis to an 
actual per classroom grant was probably designed by the 
Government as a move toward equalization. The cities 
and wealthy rural areas usually have more money to spend 
per classroom when building schools than do the smaller 
towns and poor rural settlements. If a grant is based 
on a percentage of total cost, the school unit which 
is capable of spending the greatest amount is the one 
that receives the greatest government help* It is the 
school unit which actually needs the least government 
assistance. 

The government and its officials probably could 
see very little sense in helping some school units to 
provide their students with extra facilities, while some 
areas of the Province could not even replace their 
antiquated classrooms. Placing a significant grant on a 
per classroom basis would provide many poorer areas with 
the incentive needed to replace or enlarge their schools. 




122 


TABLE VI 

CAPITAL GRANTS (TO THE NEAREST THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS) 
IN CERTAIN REPRESENTATIVE SCHOOL UNITS 


District or 
Division 

1950 

1951 

1952 

1953 

1951* 

1955 

Edmonton 

360 

5W 

322 

1*55 

573 

892 

Medicine Hat 

lli 

1*6 


58 

200 

66 

Drumheller 


1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

West Jasper Place 

6 

33 

2 

62 

71 

80 

Beverly 


9 

1 

33 

Hi 

Hi 

Bowness 


3 

... ! 

21 

16 

29 

82 

Clover Bar 

—" - 1 

8 

H 


102 

108 

106 

Vulcan County 

L ' -J 


62 

108 

30 

8 

Wheatland 

16 

51* 

8 

13 

3li 

126 

Foothills 

lb 

7 

19 

21 

i* 

23 

Berry Creek 



•-. . ' ' 




lac Ste. Anne 

7 

3 

6 

Hi 

80 

103 

Eds on 


5 

9 

5 

i 

97 

Lament 


61* 

3 

8 

56 

59 

Lac la Biche 

. 




25 

2 li 


School authorities -wishing to provide many extra facili¬ 
ties could do so at their own expense * For the future a 
possible procedure would be to ascertain what amount is 
needed to provide the minimum classroom facilities and to 
make that figure the basis for the government grant. In 
that way every child in the Province would be assured of 































































































* 









123 


at least adequate educational facilities* and many school 
units could further provide their students "with many 
desirable extra conveniences* 

Government grants to education have increased 
during recent years: particularly is this true of the 
years after World War II* Not only have grants shown 
a net increase* but they have come to make up a greater 
portion of school board revenue than in earlier years* 
Examination of Table VII (page 121}.) shows some interesting 
changes between 1905 and 195h* 

In 1905 the school grant revenue was in the neigh¬ 
borhood of $121,000 out of a total revenue of $517*000. 

The grant income represented approximately twenty-three 
per cent of total income. Between 1905 and!192Q the 
rate at which government grants were increased fell 
behind the rate at which other forms of educational 
revenue advanced. In 1920 and 1925 government grants 
represented only eleven per cent of the total educational 
revenue of the school boards. 

During the depression* requisition revenue re¬ 
mained somekhat static* while at the same time grant 
revenue advanced. Probably this was because revenue 
from land taxation was one of the most severely curtailed 
sources of government income. In 1930 and 1935 provincial 
grants represented fifteen per cent of the income obtained 
by school boards. From the beginning of the war until 
1951; the Provincial Government assumed an ever increasing 





















' 















V ) 






.. 











: 

. ■ 












. 








■ 


















TABLE VII 


12l|* 


REVENUE (ALL SCHOOL UNITS) IN THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS 


Year 

Provincial 1 Requisition 
Grants 

Other 

Income 

Stu¬ 

dent 

fees 

Total 

Income 

% of total 1 
contributed 
by govt, 
grant 

1905 

121 

377 

17 

2 

517 

23 

1910 

301 

1,278 

75 

7 

1,661 

18 

1915 

51(0 

3,733 

160 

7 

h,kko 

12 

1920 

886 

6,89l( 

21(5 

25 

8,050 

11 

1925 

1,085 

8,197 

251( 

106 

9,61(2 

11 

1930 

l,59b 

8,855 

261 

151( 

10,861( 

15 

1935 

1,1(32 

7,1(90 

307 

Ihl 

9,370 

15 

19U0 

1,870 

8,681* 

267 

158 

10,979 

17 

19U3 

2,lbh 

9,672 

3U8 

181 

12,31(5 

17 

191(5 

3,01(2 

10,856 

330 

208 

H(,l(36 

21 

191(8 

6,1(58 

15,51(8 

1(83 

62 

22,551 

29 

1950 

7,769 

19,619 

797 

78 

28,263 

27 

1951 

9,700 

21,880 

728 

6b 

32,372 

30 

1952 

10,937 

25,211( 

763 

106 

37,020 

30 

1953 

12,801 

28,136 

832 

no 

1(1,879 

31 

195U 

15,835 

31,28U 

997 

103 

1(8,219 

33 


*The data in Tables VII, VIII and IX were obtained 
(or derived) from figures contained in the Annual Reports 
of the Departeent of Education for the years indicated. 

•►Revenue shown in Tables VII, VIII and. IX does not 
include debenture revenue or other types of income pro¬ 
cured by borrowing* 

*Where totals of Tables VIII and IX are apparently 
inconsistent with the totals shown in Table VII, the 
explanation is that all figures were rounded off to the 
nearest thousands of dollars* Furthermore, in some 
cases, the figures pertaining to Separate Schools had 
to be omitted from Tables VIII and IX because they were 
not categorized as urban or rural. However, there is 
no significant difference in the final figures* 





















































125 


Tables VIII and IX (pages 126 and 127) show urban 
and rural revenues and the percentage burden carried by 
the Provincial Government in each case for the same years 
as covered by Table VII. 

It will be noted by examination of Tables VIII and 
IX that the proportion of revenue derived from the Pro¬ 
vincial Government by urban settlements never has been 
as great as that of rural areas. 

Examination of Table VIII shows that in 1905 the 
Provincial Government paid $14*,000 toward urban education. 
This amount represented nineteen per cent of the total 
urban school revenue. During the next decade the Pro¬ 
vincial Government carried a smaller proportionate load. 
By 1915 the proportion was only seven per cent. In 1920 
the Provincial Government supplied nine per cent of the 
urban school revenue. The proportionate amount carried 
by the Government (and to some extent, the actual amount) 
remained almost stationary (near ten per cent) until the 
end of World War II. After World War II the amount 
expended by the Department of Education on urban educa¬ 
tion increased rapidly. In 1951* the Government contri¬ 
buted $3,972,000 toward urban education, which was 
twenty-two per cent of the total urban school income. 

Examination of Table IX indicates that the lowest 
percentage contributed by the Provincial Government to 
rural education was reached in the twenties. At that 
time only fourteen per cent of rural income was derived 


















. . 




i 









126 


TABLE VIII 

REVENUE (URBAN) IN THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS 


Year 

Provincial 

Grants 

Requisition 

Other 

Income 

Student 

Fees 

Total 

% of total 
contributed 
by Govt. 
Grant 

1905; 1*1* 

181* 

1* 2 

231* 

19 

1910 

106 

650 

61 5 

822 

13 

1915 

151 

1,956 

75 3 

2,215 

7 

1920 

1*60 

4,299 

158 17 

4,931* 

9 

1925 

601* 

5,221 

195 

76 

6,096 

10 

1930 

666 

5,382 

151 

113 

6,312 

11 

1935 

637 

It, 790 

215 

107 

5,71*9 

12 

mo 

675 

5,229 

106 

150 

6,160 

11 

m 3 

617 

5,1:51* 

95 

167 

6,333 

10 

m5 

691* 

5,917 

117 

169 

6,897 

(est) 

10 

(est) 

ms 

928 

5,876 

125 

51 

6,980 

13 

1950 

1,397 

8,21*8 

216 

1*7 

9,908 

11* 

1951 

1,981 

9,651* 

189 

36 

11,860 

17 

1952 

2,1*03 

11,216 

21*0 

73 

13,932 

18 

1953 

3,066 

12,520 

271 

71* 

15,931 

19 

1951* 

3,972 

13,971 

363 

58 

18,361* 

22 


from government grants. In 1935 the provincial grant to 
rural education was lower than in 1930. However , the 
total 1935 rural income was lower than in 1930* and the 
actual proportion of the province^ load increased by two 
per cent. From the beginning of World War II until 1951+ 






















































127 


TABLE IX 


REVENUE (RURAL) IN THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS 


Year 

Provincial 

Grants 

Requisition 

Other 

Income 

Student 

Fees 

Total 

Income 

% of total 
contributed 
by govt* 
grant 

1905 

76 

193 

13 

1 

283 

27 

1910 

19? 

628 

Hi 

1 

838 

23 

1915 

389 

1 , 71*7 

85 

i* 

2,225 

17 

1920 

1*25 

2,595 

86 

8 

3,111* 

Hi 

1925 

1*81 

2,976 

59 

30 

3,51*6 

Hi 

1930 

928 

3,1*73 

110 

111 . 

li,552 

20 

1935 

795 

2,720 

91 

35 

3,61*1 

22 

191*0 

191*3 

1,195 

3,1*55 

163 

8 

1*,821 

25 

1,526 

! 

it, 218 

261 

Hi 

6,019 

25 

191*5 

2,31*8 

1*,939 

213 

39 

7,539 
(divs. 0 : 

,31 

ily) 

191*8 

5,375 

9,009 

31*1* 

2k 

ll*,752 

36 

1950 

6,372 

11,371 

581 

32 

18,356 

35 

1951 

7,719 

12,226 

539 

28 

20,512 

38 

1952 

8,535 

13,995 

561* 

33 

23,090 

37 

1953 

9 , 731 * 

15,615 

561 

36 

25,91*6 

38 

1952* 

11,863 

17,313 

631 * 

1*5 

29,855 

1(0 


the government assumed a greater and greater portion of 
the costs of rural education* The proportionate load 
carried by the government increased from twenty-five 
per cent in 19l|0 to forty per cent in 1951|* 




































































128 


Examination of Tables VII, VIII and IX would seem 
to validate certain conclusions. One of these is that 
the Provincial Government has always assumed a greater 
proportion of the rural financial education burden than 
that for urban areas. Secondly, there is a trend toward 
the Province assuming a greater portion of the financial 
burden for education. 

An interesting sidelight is given by a comparison 
of the amount of income for education (per pupil) in 
1905 and 1951 ;. In 1905 there were 21 ;, 251 * children in 
Alberta schools. The per pupil income in that year 
was approximately $21.00, of which $5.00 was contributed 
by idle Provincial Government. In 1951 ; there were 212,705 
pupils attending Alberta schools. The amount of per pupil 
income was approximately $ 227 . 00 , of which the Provincial 
Government contributed $ 71 ;. 00 .^ 


^These figures were derived by dividing successively 
the current revenue and the total grants by the enrolment 
and rounding off the final figures. 













o 






. 














* 




. 


. 


, 




. 

, ; . 


* 


- 

, 

* : 

. 




* 


















































CHAPTER, IX 


A SUMMARY 


At the time that Canada became a nation, education 
was placed completely under the jurisdiction of the 
provincial governments. Education was not the force in 
our society which it is today. All children did not 
attend school and many who did received education for 
fewer years than did their descendants. Equipment needed 
for Canadian education of the nineteenth century was much 
less expensive than that needed to provide children with 
the skills and knowledge necessary to cope with the 
complex society of the present. 

The B.N.A. Act was drawn up in such a way that the 
provincial sources of revenue were determined with 
regard to the costs of the services for which the govern¬ 
ments of the day were to be responsible. However, it was 





130 


impossible to foresee that some government services, 
like education, would experience phenomenal growth, while 
others would grow at a rate which did not outdistance 
the sources of revenue. 

As the Alberta area became settled people began 
to expect educational facilities. This demand for help 
was met at first by- the federal government and later by 
the provincial government. In meeting the needs of all 
areas, various factors had to be considered by the 
governments. Inhere population was sparse and distances 
great, transportation had to be provided. Where the 
population was poor, equalization demands had to receive 
attention. The school grant structure of Alberta developed 
the wa y it did as the result of a multiplicity of factors, 
among which the financial load to be accepted by the 
two levels of government, local and provincial (and 
earlier, federal), played no little part. 

To better understand the present situation, we 
often have to study what has gone before, and examine 
what we now have in the light of past events. 

The Canadian government during the last twenty 
years of the nineteenth century began to assist local 
governments of the North-West Territories to finance 
education. During the years which the Alberta area was 
under the jurisdiction of the federal government, the 










. 


„ 




, 

' 







. 





. 










- 




131 


grant structure was changed periodically. One principle, 
however, was retained from the time of the first grant 
during the entire North-West Territories period. The 
major portion of the grant was placed on a per-teacher, 
or per-classroom basis. 

During the latter years of the period in which 
Alberta was part of the North-West Territories, certain 
significant features began to appear in the grant 
structure. A most persistent feature first appeared 
in 1901, at which time rural schools were given higher 
grants than their urban counterparts. Another factor, 
intended to keep attendance at a high level, was the 
provision of grants in 1901 based on the average daily 
classroom attendance. This was done in order that local 
authorities would apply the necessary pressure on some 
parents to keep school attendance at a reasonable level. 
Proportionate payment of certain types of grants if the 
average monthly enrolment drops below a certain level 
is still a feature of the grant regulations of Alberta. 
Acceptance of responsibility to assist with the education 
of handicapped children can also be traced back to the 
North-West Territories administration. Their assistance 
to education of the deaf, dumb, and blind was the fore¬ 
runner of government aid to the education of children 
suffering from a great variety of handicaps. 

In the years immediately following the formation 
of the province of Alberta, very few changes were made 




* 

H • / v 

* 


















■ 


. 


. 
















- 




. 








. 


132 


in the grant regulations. During Alberta's first fifteen 
years as a province, however, certain basic changes did 
occur. One such feature which emerged during those years 
was the practice, begun in 1913, of paying a smaller 
daily basic grant for the operation of school units which 
employed a greater number of teachers than those employing 
only a few. This particular regulation had the effect 
of making the governments proportionate contribution 
to education in urban areas drop to a lower level than 
at any other time in the history of education in Alberta, 
Table VIII shows that the government contributed only 
seven per cent of the total cost. Fortunately government 
contribution to education has not been determined by 
the factor of size (of school unit) during the most of 
Alberta*s grant history and unit size by itself is not 
one of the factors recognized as a valid grant-determiner 
today. Many factors such as transportation needs, popu¬ 
lation density, and local economic wealth, determine the 
ability of an area to finance education. The number of 
teachers employed by a school unit is not necessarily 
one of them. Every classroom has a basic level of 
operational costs (determined particularly by teachers' 
salaries, utilities, minimum furnishings, etc.) below 
which income should not fall. Probably recognition of 
this fact has had an influence on the Alberta school 
grant structure. 




. 


■ 








. 
























, 



. 




• ) ■ 










* 




* 

, 












133 


One basic grant of today is determined by the number 
of classrooms in operation and this classroom grant is 
equal ($1000 per year) in all school districts and 
divisions. Factors other than the basic classroom grant 
provide the differential of financial aid which exists 
at present. 

During the early jrears the Province began to 
encourage union of smaller school districts into consoli¬ 
dations, and because of the increased area involved, 
grants to help pay costs of pupil transportation began 
to attain significance. In some divisions the trans¬ 
portation costs of today exceed one-half of the amount 
paid in teachers’ salaries. 

Qualification of the teacher had been of some 
significance during much of the time that the schools 
of Alberta were under the North-West Territories adminis¬ 
tration. This consideration was dropped during the early 
years of the Province, and has not been considered to 
any noticeable extent in the grant structure since. The 
change was caused possibly by the fact that teachers with 
qualifications of any kind have been at a premium during 
the greater part of this province’s life. 

During the first fifteen years that Alberta was a 
province, the first aid for vocational and related types 
of education was begun. This type of education has 
become an expensive addition to the traditional ’’reading, 



; lV v ■> ; 

- 


. • ‘ . 1 ' '3 & f; 


■ . 


' 















13k 


■riting, and , rit3imetic n of past years, and therefore 
needs government help to be carried on adequately. In 
1920 the federal government began to make limited con¬ 
tribution to education through the “technical 11 medium. 

In 1926 recognition was given to the fact that 
inequalities existed in tax-paying ability between 
school districts. This recognition was made apparent 
by the incorporation into the school grant structure of 
an equalization grant, which was designed to assist the 
school districts that experienced the greatest difficulty 
in obtaining adequate requisition revenue. Other factors 
(mentioned elsewhere) which helped to effect equalization 
in Alberta were the growth of transportation grants and 
the formation of larger school units. 

During the depression years the provincial govern¬ 
ment grants remained almost static and the growth of 
revenue from government grants that had gone on ever 
dince Alberta became a province was almost stopped. 
However, the grant revenue was not affected to the extent 
that requisition income was, particularly in rural areas. 
These facts combined so that the percentage cost of educa¬ 
tion assumed by the Provincial Government increased in 
rural areas considerably above what it had been. A slight 
percentage rise in the amount of revenue received from 
the Provincial Government was experienced in the cities 
also. This may have had some influence on the government, 
as the percentage of revenue carried by the Province 


I 

, 










. 










4 ■ ' 

* 

' 

. 

* 



135 


began to increase during the war. In recent years (when 
more provincial revenue has been available) provincial 
contribution to education has been over the thirty per 
cent level when all areas are considered. A comparative 
study of the revenue derived by the Alberta school boards 
from all levels of government and the comparative govern¬ 
mental ability to carry the load is aliost an essential 
within the next few years. 

In 19l;6 the first of many major renovations in 
the school grant structure emerged. Most of these changes 
were in the nature of increasing the grants derived 
from various of the sub-grants included in the provincial 
structure. This was done in some cases by changing the 
method by which the grant was computed. The process of 
renovation continued during the subsequent years because 
educational costs continued upward. 

By 1950 the Alberta classrooms were experiencing an 
acute disruption caused by the increased enrolment, 
spiralling educational costs, and the demand for replace¬ 
ment and repair of plants. The situation was as acute 
in many urban areas as it was in some of the divisions. To 
alleviate the first-mentioned of these ills (specific 
to only certain of the divisions and districts) the 
Abnormal Enrolment Grant was instituted. 

The Abnormal Enrolment Grant was devised to help 
the school units that were experiencing growth to the 








. 

' 

. 

. 

. 

■ 







■ 


. 


. ■ 

. . 


' 

. 

. t 








. 






. 


. 

•iSR: 



136 


extent that operational revenues were falling behind 
operational costs. This grant worked specifically to 
fillthe gap between the time that the child entered 
school and the parent began to contribute to the requisi¬ 
tion revenue of the school unit. 

In an attempt to assist the school units in meeting 
the added costs of education during the 1950's, nearly 
all grants were increased to some extent. 

The Government had provided a small grant during 
the depression to assist school districts to pay for the 
costs of hardware and millwork when they erected a 
school by voluntary labor. Provincial assistance for 
school construction did not really emerge, however, 
until recent years. In 195>0 the School Borrowing 
Assistance Act was passed. This initial Act was followed 
in subsequent years by legislation which made more build¬ 
ing benefits available, until it is now possible for the 
school unit to obtain up to 17700 for each classroom (or 
its equivalent) constructed. Because this grant is now 
made as a fixed sum per classroom rather than on a 
percentage of costs basis, it helps the poorer rural 
areas to attain a minimum standard in their school 
construction. Those school units which are relatively 
wealthy should be able to finance "extras 11 that would 
hot have been possible at an earlier time. 

In 1901 the federal government assumed a small 
share of the costs of transportation in districts that 







. 














* 






. 






« 














137 


were forced to expend money for the purpose of conveying 
pupils from one school district to another. From this 
small beginning, transportation costs have risen to 
imposing heights. In 195>1* the total expenditure of all 
provincial school units was more than five million 
dollars for transportation. ^ This sum was expended almost 
entirely by rural school units. In the cities, larger 
towns, and villages it is possible (because of density of 
population) for the pupils to get to the schools under 
their own power, or by using the transportation system 
which is already in existence. 

Transportation grants are made almost entirely to 
rural areas. The need for special transportation to 
and from the school exists only where sparse settlement 
creates an undesirable "space factor"* The transporta¬ 
tion grant exists, and should exist, to fill a specific 
need. If school needs could be recognized (this does 
not mean assessed) as easily in other areas as they are 
in the realm of transportation, there would be no "need” 
for this thesis. 

Large sums of money are being spent on education 
in Alberta today. How and where this money is expended 
depends upon a set of rules and regulations which have 
grown up during the last seventy years. This growth has 


^The Annual Report of the Department of Education 
for Alberta, 1955* p. 11*3 • 

















* 




. 






. 















. L ••• ,1 " ' ; : , 




, 








.. • .... 




- 

. 

. 






136 


not taken place in a vacuum. During those seventy years 
this Province has grown from a pioneer area of the world 
to one of the most modern. It has caught, kept pace 
with, and even passed many other parts of the world in 
the field of education endeavour. But to maintain the 
position of superiority now enjoyed, evaluation must 
be carried out constantly in all fields which determine 
the level of education, including the financial; mistakes 
must be recognised and accepted; and fair educational 
opportunity must be placed at the disposal of each 
child, despite vociferous pressure groups. 



. 

. 

4 








- 











































' 


























CHAPTER X 


CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FURTHER STUDY 


Conclusions 

!• The trend in educational grants is toward the 
Provincial Government contributing an ever-increasing 
amount of money for education. From the modest sum of 
|Hi3^000 in 1906, the provincial coffers increased their 
benificence to the sum of 115,835*000 in 195U, and 
estimates for 1957 are in the neighborhood of $27*000,000. 
Not only have total government grants increased, but 
the proportion of expenditure carried by the provincial 
Government has increased significantly since the early 
years of education in Alberta. 

2. In recent years the Provincial Government has 
contributed to rural schools approximately double the 
percentage of that contributed to urban schools, even 
though the Province seems to be shifting from an agri¬ 
cultural to an industrial economy. 








' 



• ) . i: ' o 1 *>V . .. 


V ' ’)') '7 ■ 




















.. 









3. The equalization grant tends toward increasing 
the equality of educational opportunity in areas which 
have a low per-pupil assessment. 

lu Although conveyance costs have been a factor 
in rural education for over half a century, the intro¬ 
duction of large divisions and counties necessitated 
changes in the structure of the transportation grant. 
Distance travelled and pupil capacity of the vehicle 
replaced the inefficient per-conveyance appropriation. 

5. The basic grant has varied in structure but 
has maintained the classroom (or teacher) as the funda¬ 
mental factor for grant determination. This has given 
a basis for equality within the grants. 

6. A significant addition to the grant structure 
has been the assumption of a portion of the fixed capital 
outlay by the parent government. 

7. The tax reduction subsidy, a recent innova¬ 
tion, appears inconsistent in its application. 

8. Specific needs are predominant determinants of 
the present grant pattern, as witnessed by the classroom 
grant, the transportation grant, the capital grant, the 
abnormal enrolment grant, and the equalization grant. 

9. Government assistance for the education of 
handicapped children in Alberta has grown considerably 
since the turn of the century. 












- 


* 














- 


* 






- 




* 








* 





. 


. 













- 


iia. 


10, The indigenous system of grants-in-aid to 
education has been the product of an evolutionary process 
in which the ‘‘survival-of-the-fittest” grant has not 
necessarily been the predominant factor. 

Recommendations for Further Stucfy- 

1. The tendency for local governments to have 
exploited to the utmost their last sources of revenue has 
created a situation where future increased financial 
demands of education will have to be met by either the 
provincial or federal governments. A study of the 
relative capacities of the three levels of government 

to meet the inevitable added burden is a necessity. 

2. An analysis of the relative costs of urban and 
rural education should be made 5 along with a study de¬ 
signed to analyze the ability to pay these costs, in order 
to ascertain whether the relative weighting of grants 
should be changed. 

3* The possibility of a synthesis of the present 
multiple-grant pattern into one comprehensive grant based 
upon a formula that would take cognizance of all rele¬ 
vant factors and reflect the principle of equalization of 
educational opportunity should be examined. 












■ 

























' 





* 













!|. The phenomenon of initial construction costs 
to meet the needs of an ever-increasing school population 
requires serious study. 

5* The inherent contradictions created by the 
implementation of the tax reduction subsidy provisions 
demands investigation. 

6* A statistical study is needed to determine 
whether real government expenditure per pupil through 
successive decades has increased or decreased. 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Hl3. 


A. BOOKS 


1. Allen, E. D. and 0. H. Brownlee, Economics of Public 

Finance , New Yorks Prentice~HaTrTTnc7^T9ll7l 

2. Almack, J. C, and J. F. Bursch, The Administration 

of Consolidated and Village Schools. Boston: 
"Houghton' Mifflin C ompany, 19 25 . 

3. Clokie, H. McB., Canadian Government and Politics. 

Toronto, Longmans Green and Gompany, T9l*li'. 

1*. Cubberly, E. P., School Funds and their Apportion - 
ment . Columbia : ~ Bureau of Publications, 1906. 

5. DeYoung, C. A., Budgeting In Public Schools# 

Chicago s John S. Swift Company, 1950. 

6. Fletcher, B. A., The Next Step in Canadian Education . 

Toronto: The Macmillan Company of Canada Ltd., 
1939. 

7. Groves, H. M., Financing Government . .New York: 

Henry Holt and ""Company," 19 1*5 . 

8. Hansen, A. H. and H. S. Perloff, State and Local 

Finance in the National Economy . New York: 

¥. ¥. Norton and Company, 19 hk* 

9. Ise, J., Economics . New Yorks Harper Brothers, 191*6 

10. Lawler, E. M., A Technique for Computing the Amount 

of New Aid Required for State Equalization 
'KFogrlras ^.Columbia: Bureau" "of "Publications, 1926 

11. Mort, P. R., State Support for Public Schools . 

Columbia: “Bureau of Publications, 1926."" 


B. GOVERNMENT SOURCES 


1. The Alberta Gazettes, Edmonton: Queen's Printer for 
Alberta, Vol. 1*2, No. 10, 191*6. 

Vol. 1*3* No. 3, 191*7. 

Vol. 1*3* No. 6, 191*7. 

Vol. 1*3* No. 11, 191*7. 

Vol. 1*5, No. I!*, 191+9 • 

Vol. 1*6, No. 1*, 1950. 

Vol. 1*8, No. 9, 1952. 
























- 


' .* • 

. 

• * 












lilt. 


2. The Annual Reports of the Department of Education of 

the frrovinee of Alberta, Edmonton: Queen*s 

Printer of Alberta, 1^06 - 1956* 

3. Forget, A. E., School Laws and Other Educational 

Matters in Assinlboia, prince EdwardTslaDj., The 

North-West^erritorTes, and Manitoba. Ottawa: 

'i'he Queen’s Printer of Canada, "Ibjlu 

k. Government of the Province of Alberta Grant Regulations 

^ or the Department of Education, Edmonton: The 

Alberta Department of Education, 1955 - 1956* 

5. Oliver, F. H., The Canadian North-West, Its Early 

Development and Legislative Records , 2 vols.j 
Ottawa,The &ing*s Printer, 15lk-I9l5. 

6. North-West Territories Ordinances 

--^aptiF'5^1I5Iir-~- 

Chapter 3 of 1885* 

Chapter 10 of 1886# 

Chapter 2 of 188?# 

Chapter 59 of 1888. 

Chapter 15 of 1890, 

Chapter 28 of 1891-92. 

Chapter 92 of 1892. 

Chapter 38 of 1892. 

Chapter 1 of 1893* 

Chapter 2 of 1896. 

Chapter 1 of 1899. 

Chapter 31 of 1901. 

Chapter 10 of 190lu 

7. Reports of the Board, of Education for the North-West 

Territories 

1890-91. 

1896. 

1898. 

1900. 

8. Statutes of the Province of Alberta, 

Chapter 19 of1^1 J. 

Chapter 39 of 1918. 

Chapter 32 of 1919. 

Chapter bb of 1930. 

Chapter 32 of 193k. 

Chapter h3 of 1935. 

Chapter 87 of 1936. 

Chapter 65 of 1950. 

Chapter 79 of 1951. 

Chapter 81 of 1952. 

Chapter 95 of 195k. 

Chapter 9 of 1955. 
































C. UNPUBLISHED MATERIALS 


115 . 


1. Argue, K. F., "A Small Fund Equalization Grant for 

Alberta Schools* n Unpublished paper on file at 
the University of Alberta, Edmonton: 1937. 

2. Gibb, A. A., "The Setting Up of the Minimum Educational 

Program in Alberta and an Inventory of the Cost to 
the Provincial Government*" Unpublished Bachelor 
of Education thesis, Rutherford Library, University 
of Alberta, 19l*2. 

3. Gore sky, I., "The Beginning and Growth of the Alberta 

School System," Unpublished Master 1 s of Education 
dissertation. The University of Alberta, Edmonton: 

1914*. 

1*. Hanson, E, J., "A Financial History of Alberta." 

Unpublished Doctor’s dissertation, Clark University, 
1952. 

5. Reeves, A. W., "The Equalization of Educational 

Opportunity in the Province of Alberta". Unpublished 
Doctor’s dissertation, Stanford University, 191*9. 


D. PUBLICATIONS OF LEARNED ORGANIZATIONS 


1. Argue, K. F*, "Financing Education in the Canadian 

Provinces". A study sponsored by the Canadian 
Teachers’ -Federation, Rutherford Library, The 
University of Alberta, Edmonton: 19i*l* 

2. McKee, G. A., The Story of Edmonton School District 

No* 7, 1889 - 1935 . The Edmonton Public School 
Board," Edmonton s 1935. 

3. School Finance in Cana da. A Study by the School 

finance Research Committee (Director- M. E. 
LaZerte) of the Canadian School Trustees’ 
Association, 1955. 

1|. Special Education: The Handicapped and the Gifted . 
Report of the Commit iee ~on Special Classes,"~tHe 
"White House Conference on Child Health and Pro¬ 
tection, Washington: 1931* 

E. NEWSPAPERS 

1. The Edmonton Journal, March 17* 1956. 













* 

■ 



. ■ • 

... . 

« 






/■ 











t. *H--i 


























