






(3x amis 

mmmmmn 













UNIVERSITY OF ALL'iETA 
LIE V ; -iRY 


Regulations 


Ci 111,w 


iss.rtations 


[ • sci . t c * 1 i >j ;] £ s a ... di ssei tat. i n a: tor ? s 

and doctor ! z do; rets deposited in the Unive;- s.ity of Alborta 
jdbrary, as the ffic: al Copy of the ^acuity of Or iduat tudies, 
>nsul 13d ii 1 th( sference . 3a i n 1 o«> : . ly . 

A second copy is on deposit in the Department under whose 
si >ei Lsi< n the work was done. >me apart ents are willing to 
loan their copy to libraries, through the interlibrary loan 
.. vice the University of ilberta Library. 


These theses anc- 
regard. to priority ri 
the author and of the 
University of Alberta 
When permission has b 


. dissertations are to be used only with du 
ghts of the author. frit ton permission of 
Department must be obtained through the 
Library when extended passages are used, 
een granted, credit must appear in the 


b 


i 1ish d work. 


This thesis or dissertation has been 
with the above regulations by the persons 
borrowing library is obligated to secure 


used in ; ' accordance 
listed below . The 
t he 1 s i '■ _nature of each 


user . 


Please sign below: 


iiaatur 


Ins titution 


Date 

































. 











Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https ://arch i ve. org/detai Is/fou ntai n 1951 



TEE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


ETHICS AND LANGUAGE 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO TEE SCHOOL OE GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF ARTS 


FACULTY OF ARTS & SCIENCES 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHILOSOPHY) 

by 

T. H. Fountain 

EDMONTON, ALBERTA 
July 15,1951 









. 


. 


- • I i ' . ; 


















ABSTRACT 


The thesis is divided into three sections. The first is an 
introduction and consists of a few general remarks on the theory of 
Ethics and Language with brief comments on some of the earlier writers 
on the subject. 

The second part is a summary of 11 Ethics and Language** by 0. L. 
Stevenson. In this book he discusses the emotive meaning of words with 
particular reference to ethical terms and concludes that ethical terms 
have strong emotive meaning combined with a descriptive meaning that is 
necessarily vague. He then uses this conclusion to further his theory 
that ethical judgments are based on attitudes. He recognizes that attitudes 
in turn are strongly influenced by beliefs and that reason plays a large 
part in the formation and altering ©f attitudes and consequently ethical 
judgments. Nevertheless he insists that the emotional side of human nature 
also plays an important part and he is critical of traditional writers in 
the field of ethics for their failure to recognize this fact consistently. 

The third part consists of a critical analysis in which I find 
more to defend than to criticize in Stevenson 1 s position. An attempt is 
made to defend his theory from attacks based on other theories of ethics. 
Some opinions are also advanced on the belief in God and its relationship 
to this theory, which I consider to be a necessary and logical supplement 
to Stevenson’s work. 





SECTION I 


INTRODUCTION 







1 


The following thesis is a review of the theory of language as 
it affects ethics. This theory is gaining an increasing amount of 
attention which will probably gain momentum in the immediate future. 

Not all of the interest has been of a favorable nature, however; in 
fact the opposition from many quarters has been strong and bitter. 

Several writers have contributed to this theory including 
such writers as Ayer and Bertrand Bussell, whose views are almost 
identical, and also Carnap, R. B. Perry, and G. E. Moore. Several of 
them have been severely criticized by champions of traditional ethics 
on the ground that they were undermining the structure entirely. And 
it cannot be denied that enthusiasm for their theory, together with 
the brevity of the work, in some cases led to a forthright bluntness 
which gives the appearance of pressing the attack with a vigor calcu¬ 
lated to conpletely route traditional writers on ethics. 

Ayer, for instance, begins with a brief discussion of 
verifiability which to him always means testing in an empirical manner. 
He does include as verifiable, in a loose way, any statement for which 
we could outline the steps necessary to verify it, even though these 
steps may not be physically possible. Such a statement, for example, 
would be one concerning the existence of mountains on the other side 
of the moon. All statements, not verifiable in an empirical way, are 
dismissed as nonsense. Imagine the shock to an admirer of Kant and his 
apriori knowledge. Such statements if permitted to pass unchallenged 
would mean the end of all metaphysics, to say nothing of many of our 
most cherished beliefs. It is little wonder that the counter-attaok 
was bitter and clamorous. 




i 


fr'H i 





i'OA; ; siJ 




■ vl 







J 


’) 



’ £' t * 1 







2 . 


But Ayer does not leave his reader to surmise what the result 
of this theory might he, for he proceeds with all dispatch, and ruthlessly, 
to attack one hy one most of the cherished and venerable shibboleths of 
ethical tradition. The direct forcefulness of his logic, however, is 
difficult to counter. Very briefly, his reasoning might be summed up 
as follows. 

A noun is the name of a person, place, or thing. In order, 
therefore, to have a complete language any object in experience should 
have its linguistic counter-part in the form of a noun. Surely there 
can be no guile in such a prosaic gambit; but let us proceed. 

The mind tends to assume that the converse of any true state¬ 
ment is also true. And this applies to our ideas concerning language. 

There have, however, crept into our language, many nouns for which there 
is no counterpart in reality. The Unicorn has taken on a definiteness in 
appearance that makes it most difficult to fully realize, at all times, 
that it is purely imaginary. The naming of an object presupposes its ex¬ 
istence. So with respect to G-od, Ayer bluntly says "the existence of the 
noun is enough to foster the illusion that there is a real entity corres¬ 
ponding to it”. Metaphysics then becomes necessary to supply a world to 
house these ’things’ which have no existence in the world of experience. 

No wonder he met with indignant criticism from some quarters'. 

With the same innocent approach he considers the adjective. An 
adjective modifies a noun. In the sentence, "Grows are black” there is no 
question that "black” describes "crows”. This prepares the way for uncon¬ 
scious error in analysing sentences of parallel construction. Tor instance 




* 

. ■ " •' • • 

* * • • v r * *. 

' . • . ; 


' 

j I ; '■ 








- * 


r 







. 



-;V": 

, 



. 

• . t . V. 







. . 









' 







, 











• 





' • - . ' 

• 

• 




. 

. 

• 





! 




■ 




• 

* 


■ 








■ 



* ■ 

■ 


• v ;■ - • • ; 

. 





3 . 


we are prepared "by analogy to accept that, when a picture is said to be 
beautiful, the word ’’beautiful” modifies ’’picture”. Such, however, is 
not the case. A psychologist would find that such a statement would 
describe for him the emotional and mental state and development of the 
speaker, rather than the picture. The word ’beautiful’ described the 
speakers reactions and attitudes towards the picture. 

Ethics abounds in such words as G-ood, Right, Duty, and many 
others which describe the speaker’s attitudes rather than the deeds them¬ 
selves. Putting ethics on such a personal basis as this, however, was 
certain to draw the charge of an attempt to undermine ethics entirely. 

I have attempted to give a few examples of Ayer’s abrupt but 
incisive logic to illustrate the impact of the more recent approach to 
ethics on the works that precede it. The other writers mentioned above 
have adopted similar positions which they presented with varying degrees 
of abruptness. 

Despite the first shock to traditional beliefs in ethics, how¬ 
ever, the fact remains that there is much of common-sense and logic in the 
new theory that will undoubtedly appeal to the man in everyday walks of 
life. It may well be that ethics has lost its appeal for many people be¬ 
cause of the impedimenta in the way of quasi-myths and metaphysics with 
which it is burdened. If these accretions of the past are a hindrance to 
a livelier interest in, and forward advance of, ethics, then Ayer and 
others have served a useful purpose in such ruthless pruning. It would 
seem evident that, unless our ethical development can begin to close the 
gap and overtake our scientific advancement, we stand in peril of being 
mastered by the things of our own creating. 


V 

, ; . ' '■ ' 

- 

■, •. • ■ i - i r ' 

. 

X - ' ' ;• 






*). 


■ 

: 


. ■ ' -i: ' ■ "" ' • .. • ' ' , ‘ 

■ ' • i . . 

. 


> 










' 


; 






' 


, 










4 


This is not to he interpreted as a demand to stop the forward 
march of science, as has been proposed by not a few, but rather as a plea 
for an advance in ethics in a common-sense fashion that will have meaning 
for everyday people. If man is still to be the ‘’measure of all things” 
such advancement is imperative, for this is a fact which is easily lost 
sight of, when scientific advancement outstrips ethical and philosophical 
development on the part of society as a whole. We cannot afford to allow 
ethics to remain an esoteric doctrine wrapped in mysteries that can be 
penetrated only by those few students with the will, energy, and ability 
to penetrate them. 

I have left the mention of C. L. Stevenson until the last, not 
only because he is one of the most recent writers on this problem, but 
also because his writing is more mellow and on the whole more constructive 
then that of the first men in the field. The earlier men appear, at least, 
to be more interested in clearing the attic of its accumulation of old 
relics and cobwebs, while Stevenson, probably realizing that that part had 
received sufficient attention, is more concerned with refurnishing the place 
left overly bare by the others. 

A considerable part of what is to follow therefore, is a review of 
‘Ethics And Language’ by C. L. Stevenson. I wish to make this acknowledgment 
full and complete at this time as it will obviate the necessity of constant 
footnotes, all of which would read: “Ethics and Language by C.L.Stevenson”. 

I shall attempt to put into quotation marks any longer passages 
taken directly from the book, but the occasions on which I shall probably use 
words or phrases of the author will be too numerous to permit of this at all 
times. When a writer’s style and language creates a strongly favorable impres¬ 
sion for its clarity and forcefulness, it is almost impossible to summarize his 
work without unconsciously using many of his phrases and expressions. 


J .J ... ' ■' 

I 0 i •. 

• . ' ... 

■ 

j; ]'/ :f ■ ■■ . .... ~ v ' ; « ' ;■ - - - 






J « , ; . < : : • • : 

, •:// ,. .. .. ■, . , '■ - " 

. 

. 

iJ.f. \ a ' :f ■'}.^r : 

,.v-i v 3#PS$ fctl* ; l-IS vX'I ; , • 

t " ' ‘ '' ■ ■ 


. 

■ 






) 




’ 

' ' v ' ' '■> 

' ' ' - "> ’ " ■- ' - '' - 

. .. , . ' - ! 

. 

/■ 

: 

id o 

■ 

1 

• t . : . 






SECTION II 


SUMMARY 

of 

ETHICS AND LANGUAGE 

Ly 


C. L. STEVENSON 






5 . 


I Agreement and Disagreement 

In discussing this topic Stevenson limits most of his remarks 
to a discussion of disagreement. Most, if not all, that is said would 
have equal application to agreement, hut the choice is deliberate because 
disagreement is usually more obvious and striking. Also an attempt to 
resolve the disagreement will demand a scrutiny of the basis for disagree¬ 
ment which may prove illuminating, whereas agreement will lead to no such 
examination and so the actual basis will probably pass unnoticed. 

Disagreements fall into two large and not always well-defined 
groups. The first of these consists of disagreements in belief. This 
type includes all disagreements in science, history and other fields of 
information that depend upon the cognitive side of the intellect. When two 
persons disagree about such matters, each one will attempt to give a proof 
to support his point of view, while he may be quite prepared to revise his 
position in the light of further information. Such disagreements are so 
common, not only among scientists, but in everyday life, and may develop 
about any one of a multitude of commonplace topics, that they require no 
great enlargement here. 

The second type is one that has received much less attention in 
the past but is none the less prevalent. This is disagreement in attitude. 
Such disagreements are rooted in oppositions of aspirations, desires, purposes 
and similar feelings which are based on the emotional side of human nature. 
Disagreements of this sort are exemplified by opposing opinions concerning 
what musical records to buy, or what guests to invite to dinner. Disagree¬ 
ments of this type involve an opposition of attitudes towards the same object, 
usually of approval and disapproval, combined with the attempt on the part of 
one at least to alter the attitude of the other. As in the case of disagree¬ 
ment in beliefs, however, each may be quite willing to alter his own attitude 





-i 








. 








- 


; icf 















. 




, 















- . ' 


n 






„ 








. 









>s f- 






■ 









2 








- 



,: u . . ■ „ 






6 


in view of what might he brought out during the course of the discussion. 
Disagreement of either sort does not necessarily lead to acrimonious and 
hitter dispute, hut may rather lead both parties to a sincere desire to 
re-examine his own position. The fundamental difference between the two 
types is that one is concerned with how matters are to he explained or 
described; the other with how they are to be approved or disfavored. 

The attitudes of others may be a subject for belief on ray part. 
It is therefore possible to disagree in beliefs concerning the attitudes 
of others while the parties to the disagreement may agree in attitude 
themselves. Disagreement in attitude, then, must not be confused with 
disagreement in beliefs concerning attitudes. 

There is no attempt here to isolate a person’s attitudes from 
his beliefs. So much has been said and written about the manner in which 
our attitudes affect our beliefs and vice versa, that no one would 
seriously suggest that they could be compartmentilized. The interplay of 
effects, one upon the other, is so intricately woven that it might be 
compared to the mutual influence between a speaker and his audience. Since 
this is true, it follows that a disagreement is not necessarily of one 
sort or the other exclusively. 

A change in our beliefs concerning an object may cause a change 
in our attitude towards it. A disagreement in attitudes may rest upon a 
difference in beliefs, one of which is in error. Once the false belief is 
corrected, agreement in attitude may be immediate and complete. In such a 
case the disagreement in attitude is only apparent, the real disagreement 


is in belief 




\ ‘ \::V ' • ‘V f* 

, • i la ; ■ ■ , ( 

r . - cf -o . ! ' - • - r; 

• ' ; ' " J. • 

, i • ' 



’: -.v u 






/fj: " u 


• •• .. i:, • 






g\s 


-■■ ’ • ■ 


. 


,.r - ; f >r , * \ ’■ 

' : J ' .i J ? 

. 

<r • ? , 3 > .i. 

.1 ' : o i -i '/ ■ . .. r : /' ;i ■ S3 . ' '' £ <y l .o’ 






7 


Disagreements majr exist in "beliefs only, accompanied "by agree¬ 
ment in attitudes "but on the other hand we may have complete agreement 
in "belief accompanied by disagreement in attitude. This latter is of 
particular interest for it seems to have escaped the notice of many 
traditional writers on ethics who paid little heed to attitudes. Even 
those who start out in a promising manner usually end by basing all dis¬ 
agreement in attitudes upon disagreement in beliefs. Even the hedonists, 
says Stevenson, who placed such store on desire, based desire on the belief 
that this or that object would contribute more to our happiness than to our 
dissatisfaction . ’’This I fear attributes to desires and attitudes a logic 
which I fear is all too often not present or at least not obvious.” 

The basing of disagreement in attitude exclusively on disagree¬ 
ment in beliefs is a natural consequence of any attempt to make ethics a 
branch of any science be it psychology, biology or sociology. Disagree¬ 
ments in science are always based upon differences in beliefs. In an 
effort to correct this one-sidedness the present author is naturally prone 
to over-emphasize disagreement in attitude, but, as he says, any over¬ 
emphasis in this direction will be more than balanced by the preponderance 
of counter-emphasis in practically all other works on the subject. 

Unless an object is to be evaluated in ignorance we must have 
beliefs about it and any belief has a potential bearing on ethics. This 
is particularly true when evaluating means to an end, but the beliefs become 
less diversified when the issue is concerned with ends in themselves. The 
beliefs, however, are but preparations for guiding and directing attitudes. 
It is this final crystallization of attitudes into approval or disapproval 
which is influenced, but not in any fixed manner, by cognition, that identi¬ 
fies ethical issues from those of pure science. 



i J- ■ : : ■ : 


■ 


S ■'■■■ .. • . i 



«. '■ ■ n .' . . •'■ • ■ . ’ ,, ,; r • <’ j 


. V. ■ -v./ • n r.• • • .> • ■ -y 

• ; 


. > ■ ■ . ■>; : ; • ^ 

■ J fi - . 

V« * 


; . 




■ 

I ■ • ■ ■ j 


a • r?l 

i : , ' 

'■ 

■ 


. 

fi " '• 

•: ' ■ ' 1 ' / ;; r,.' .. r: ' ' L • .y. „■ J •. ' - 

' - 

' • 

■ 


■ ' ' •’ ' L • : • , • - « 



' 

. 

• 1 






8 


Both parties to a wage dispute may agree in the "belief that 
higher wages will cause higher prices "but this agreement in belief will 
not cause any agreement in attitude and the argument may continue in 
spite of beliefs which may be held in common. It is not what facts 
people believe, but what people believe about those facts, what attitude 
they adopt towards them, that makes the difference in many cases. 

The fact that temperament, social needs, and environment, as 
well as group pressures, will influence attitudes more than factual beliefs 
is the reason that peoples of different racial characteristics will disagree 
more sharply in ethical than in scientific matters. 

Since belief and attitude each plays an important role in ethics 
a study of their intimate relationship is necessary to an understanding 
of the problem. 






,; , ' ■ : ' .■ ' ■ ■ ^ - 

- *■; J- A M 1 . O •,) ' i - - , 

. 

■ ! , ■ . 

!o a,a ; . 

. 



' 






9 


II. Working Models 

A study of the terms and methods of ethics gives rise to the 
following working models. These models are over-simplified and so must 
he used with caution. They also frankly stress attitude at the expense 
of belief but with proper caution they can be helpful in promoting an 
understanding of ethical terms. 

''This is good" means "I approve of this; do so as well". 

"This is wrong" means "I disapprove of this; do so as well". 

An example of agreement might be given as follows; 

A. This is good. 

B. I fully agree; it is indeed good. 

Freely translated this would mean. 

A. "I approve of this; do so as well" 

B. "I fully concur in approving of it; continue to do so as well" 

Disagreement might be illustrated by the followings 

A. "This is good" 

B. "No, it is bad" 

According to the method of translation here used this would mean. 

A. "I approve of this, do so as well" 

B. "No, I disapprove of it; (You) do so as well". 

In each of these models it is shown that ethical terms have two 
distinct parts to the meaning. The one is declarative and indicates the 
speaker's attitude; the other is no less important and is imperative in 
nature, being an attempt to command the approval or disapproval of the 


hearer 


" ' ‘' ' 0 ' <; " >, ' rX •, ./■ - $ I f 

.-r . /•' . v ■ • : ■ . ' • v f . J r j , ' 

t ♦ 

a* .l> $$'rwz ,tf l ‘u>X .i-d a&i) :■ iJ r x&<iQ*tq r&xv jjpgff - ;u-: 

. • • •' . i 11 ' : 11 

. ' .• . : ■■ ... ■ - J * . «. *i 

. 

i 

1 ; c. r ' ’■ '• ' . ' : ( ■ . i; 

, .... 

’ 



■ r ; a* ; •• ;-lt : . 




■ 


: 

. 

, :'j • f . . • s . :U.[ ■ J: * , . : J l Jft IV ‘ 



10 


It may be true that, in some cases, the terms are used tenta¬ 
tively in the hope that others will agree, which will strengthen our 
own attitudes, or it may be that we are inviting disagreement and dis¬ 
cussion in order to arrive at clearer truth, in the light of which we 
might revise our own attitudes. But the violence of the disagreement, 
and the challenge which we frequently feel when another makes an ethical 
judgment would indicate that the stronger imperative is, in many eases, 
nearer to the truth. 

It is this imperative part of ethical statements that relates 
ethics to attitudes and distinguishes it from science. Since an impera.- 
tive cannot be proven and any request for proof would be foolish, ethical 
statements cannot be proven entirely as scientific statements can be. This, 
however, should not be taken to mean that ethics has no rational foundation. 

We do not respond to an imperative by saying “Prove it 55 but we 
frequently do ask “Why ? 15 We ask for a reason, which, though it does not 
prove the imperative, may support it in such a way that we are convinced 
of the rightness of the command. So in the case of ethics we may be unpre¬ 
pared to alter our attitudes because we are told to do so, but we are open to 
reason and conviction. Rational arguments may influence beliefs which stood 
in the way of immediate acceptance. 

The “Why?” of the hearer indicates opposition of attitude and a 
probable disagreement in belief. The reasons given attempt to alter the 
belief in order that the opposition in attitude may be resolved. A man is 
seldom asked to prove that he approves of this or that, his own attitude is 
usually accepted on its face value as it appears in his judgment or statement, 
but he may frequently be called upon to produce reasons why his attitude should 


be accepted by others 



$ I 

- •: ' A > : - . ' 

, ' : ■ • r ■ . . A' V ■■ 

. ■ • - - : ' : ■ i • ■ 

' 1 ' J'J: : ", V 

: • . a . ' . . I ~ ' 



. , Tf-fi 





. 





' 





* ■ 

. : 

, ■ . ' : . . • • ' ' .-.<<• . • ': ■ •: v, j 

, 


o • \l J . 




11 . 


Any attempt to stress the role of attitudes in ethics, opens the 
way for the criticism that ethics is now at the mercy of the caprice and 
whims of human attitudes and emotions. This is probably one of the reasons 
why traditional writers have chosen to emphasize the role of belief. Sup¬ 
porting reasons have no logical compulsion and if ethics requires agreement 
in attitude as well as in belief, have we any right to assume that agreement 
in belief will result in agreement in attitude? Would complete factual 
enlightenment on the part of all people rule out the possibility of rival moral 
and ethical codes? The answer is we do not know. 

The exhortatory nature of an ethical judgment, however, cannot be 
translated into a simple imperative without some distortion. A command for 
approval will elicit but superficial symptoms, while an ethical judgment is 
much more forceful although it is more subtle. Commands, too, are usually 
unilateral while ethical judgments are frequently open to counterinfluence. 

It is at this point that a study of language and meaning would be helpful. 

Many words, on account of their history in emotional situations, 
acquire a power to express or evoke attitudes, distinct from their use to 
describe or designate them. This additional meaning which is not descriptive, 
and, therefore, not quite definable, is emotive meaning. Many interjections 
defy an attempt at definition for they have no descriptive meaning at all, the 
entire meaning is emotive, expressing the feelings of the speaker and arousing 
vicarious feelings in the hearer, ’Alas® and ’hurrah® might be offered as 
examples. This same sort of meaning often attaches itself to words which 
also have declarative meaning. It is the suggestive nature of the emotive 
meaning of words, that gives to them such a power to influence others. 






• : ■ W •' . 






. 









f 






v ■ : :T! ■ " ’"I , V ' ' ■ (I ' "- 1 

' ' ’ 

■■ ' r.' 0 /„r \ {;;■ ■' ' t \7. .l ■. 1 7 •• '■ 

. : , 

r- :• : - ■ , /' ""r ^ 7 - 7 . ‘ ' \ - ■ ‘ ' > ; - 

. " ' i F' : 77 -.ij: ■■■: ■- 77 ! V ; '■ ; 

. ; . V, : j 777.77 7 :sJ. ‘77. i J 7. 5 . ' ' r . 777 • '• , ' ‘ ' 777. 

■ v: - >. r ‘ 7 7. 7 . , '■> •• 


■ , 


.< ■■ r 


'i. ; 'r ' 7.' ; ; 'rv:-.!; 7 "7 7 ■- ' r 


r :- -n , ' ’ ' 




! 


’ 




; , r - ■ • 




' ■ V -■ 7 7 7'' ,i‘ I V iZlftUti-Wl '7 7 •: * ’ ’ J.' . ' 




‘>7 ■ 7r V .7’.,- vi: . 77 , 


' '■ 






12 . 


In addition to the emotive meaning of most ethical terms, a 
further difficulty is presented "by the vagueness of their declarative 
meaning. This vagueness is not the same as the ambiguity which some 
words have. Some words have two or more distinct meanings which can 
he separated by careful scrutiny of the context. Vagueness, on the 
other hand covers a whole range of meanings which shade, one into the 
other, just as in the spectrum it is a matter of opinion where red ends 
and orange begins. It is not our purpose to remove this vagueness but 
rather to point out its existence and by analysis to render it no longer 
a source of error. Because of their vagueness, however, we have the 
choice of making the meaning of such words rich or poor, broad or narrow. 

So far, then, we have seen that ethical words have a bifocal 
meaning. One function is akin to imperatives and is based on the emotive 
meaning. The other meaning is descriptive or declarative, which is attended 
by a vagueness which cannot be removed as we shall discover later, but which 
must be recognized if we would avoid errors. 





. 

1 

• :< • ' * >■ 

. 

■ •. 

■ 

J" :. ■ ■ ' : .. v i • ■ .. .. • • : 

■ 










' 


■ . ' , i ' . ■ ■ ■ • 


, 1 ' ‘ ■ •' "• 


• ' i ' ' , 

. i I •• : J ■ : r.;C 


■ 


, V' - ,.f ' 7 >0i 1 ■. - , . J •• . . ! o; 

. ■ ' . • i 7 7 \ • ■ ■' ■ i. • •; ' r '- 
























13 . 


III. Some Pragmatic Aspects of Meaning 

Groans, laughs, sighs and similar manifestations give vent to 
emotions, and the relationship is so intimate that if the manifestation 
is checked, the degree of the emotion is frequently lessened. Interjec¬ 
tions are hut slightly more conventionalized examples of the same thing, 
the physical expression having become localized in the vocal chords. They 
are a step beyond the first type of manifestation, however, in that they 
differ in different languages while the former do not* 

It is, however, a different thing to express an emotion than 
to describe it. In fact the naming of an emotion is frequently a poor 
medium for giving vent to it. 

Interjections not only give vent to the speaker 9 s emotions but 
affect the hearer vicariously. It is this emotive power of words and 
interjections that evokes such strong reactions from the audience to a 
well acted drama. This power is not to be attributed to phonetic suita¬ 
bility or onomatopoeia for one may not respond at all to an interjection 
in a foreign language. The power depends rather upon the conventions that 
have grown up in the long history of their usage. Once an interjection 
becomes ingrained it tends to remain. Interjections and slang do come and 
go but at their own pace and not by fiat as do scientific words. They tend 
to run their own sluggish course which cannot be accelerated or retarded. 

Many words with descriptive meaning also carry a strong element of emotive 
meaning as well. 

Charles ¥. Morris, being carried away by this thought, went so far 
as to say that the meaning of a word must be given in terms of the psychologi¬ 
cal reactions of those who use it. But the same word may arouse entirely 
different reactions in different people . Notice the different reactions to 


. 


. •.*; . - ■ CJ -• i. ;X.f. •! . tv djjfil .Jflj » 










‘ .. •: 1 4 . . ' 

' ' f ' • ' ■ ‘ ' ' 

' ■' J •• ■' - ... " ' •; . ■ ' . . • 

.• . . T • n : . ; ic 

, 

* ' 

. 

• : • • ■ 

, 

. 

. .. ' v .. , . ,■ 



14 . 


the word ’Toronto 1 among a group of Canadians. To define a word in 
terms of the associations or aura which it carries with it is open 
to the same objection. A term should have at least some stability and 
constancy. To go further into the problem then, let us consider more 
closely what we mean by the power of a word to affect the emotions of 
others. 

A consideration of an analagous situation might prove to be 
helpful. A stimulant has the power to affect a person. The effect 
produced, however, will vary greatly with different people and with the 
same person at different times. These variations may be attributed to 
causes which fall into two main categories. The one category would in¬ 
clude all those variations in the history or preparation of the stimulant 
itself. One cup of coffee may differ from another due to a host of 
differences which range all the way from the seed from which it was grown, 
the climatic and soil conditions attending its growth, up to the culinary 
method used in its final preparation. The other category would include all 
factors which pertain to the individual receiving the stimulant. These would 
include his former use or lack of use of the stimulant as well as his physical 
and mental state at the time. In fact a person may by constant use become 
immune to the normal affects of a stimulant, or in his present state of 
fatigue may fail to respond as he is wont to do. 

Because of these variations in response or even lack of response 
entirely, it would probably be more accurate to say that a stimulant had a 
disposition to produce a response, rather than a power to do so. The mental, 
nervous, and physical condition of the recipient might be called the attendant 




. • ■ 1 

■ ... . >).;: i ' 

. 






, t 

, 






, - 




, 

. 






„ 


. ■ : : Ci i 

■ 


* 




TV 




■ ' , ' ■ ■ 

' 






15 . 


circumstances and these may cause wide variations in the reactions 
produced even though the disposition could he considered constant. 
Variations in the preparation of the stimulant itself, however, which 
may cause variations in the response, do so through variations in the 
disposition itself. These latter factors might he called the basis of 
the disposition. Variations in the response then are due to variations 
in the basis of the disposition itself and also in the attendant 
circumstances. 

The meaning of a symbol in the psychological sense might, by 
analogy, be taken to mean a dispositional property of the sign to elicit 
certain reactions in the hearer, which will vary with the attendant 
circumstances. Such a view would enable us to consider the meaning to 
be more or less constant, while allowing, at the same time,for wide vari¬ 
ations in the psychological effects. This over-simplification however, 
contains some weaknesses which must be noted. 

One obvious weakness is that this view gives no test for deter¬ 
mining when a word has changed its meaning, for differences in reaction 
can be attributed to variations in attendant circumstances, further the 
disposition might be more properly attributed to the hearer than to the 
word itself. Since meaning is assigned to the word, however, we shall 
continue to assign disposition there as well. It must be noted, however, 
that the basis of the disposition is in the hearer, rather than in the 
word. Thus the attendant circumstances might be taken as the immediate 
condition of the hearer, while the basis of the disposition would include 
the past training and experience of the individual, finally, to eliminate 
the possibility of assigning meaning to nonsense syllables, which might 


- 


■) ", •; 






■ 






' 


. 








' 










' 












■■j • 







■ 


, ■ •• • ; , , : ■ , • i 


. 


•. ' 






r ol\ 
























... 






■ 




I r v,! 'I 








. , 






'. : o j j'i : 








affect a hearer, we must assign meaning only when it is the result of 
an elaborate process of conditioning which has attended the use of 
the symbol. 

Words also have a passive disposition. That is, from the 
speaker’s standpoint, they have a disposition to be used. We require 
words for our thoughts and there is a mutual influence which takes place, 
in that words clarify our thought, while further thought will lead to a 
better choice of words. This interplay between words and feelings or 
thoughts is so complex and intimate that the over siiaplification of our 
analogy is abundantly clear. The definition of one term makes use of the 
complicated dispositions of other terms which already exist. The linguis¬ 
tic development of the individual, then, can only take place in a linguis¬ 
tic environment which has developed over a long period. 

To apply what has been said to emotive meaning in particular, we 
might say that the emotive meaning of a word is its disposition to evoke 
responses in a range of feelings or attitudes. Feeling designates an 
effective state that reveals its full nature to immediate introspection. 

An Attitude, on the other hand, is much more complicated and is itself a 
conjunction of dispositional properties. Thus the disposition of a word to 
call forth attitudes is of the second degree, for its response is a combina¬ 
tion of dispositions. 

The responses to a word will vary greatly with the attendant cir¬ 
cumstances so that a speaker who cleverly prepares his audience, by fostering 
their faith in his judgment and establishing the proper rapport, can greatly 
enhance the disposition or at least the reaction to a well-chosen and highly 
emotive word. Many spell binders owe their success to an understanding of 
such methods. It is to be recognized, however, that the use of emotive mean¬ 
ing is not always to be deplored, its bad effects lie in its abuse. 




... J:# ■ 


; ' ' 


f r 




.- ■ f . 






' 

• •' : 

:3 7 ■ S'. -i . ■ - • • i .. . * 








* 

, . r ; .■ ■ . •. •. r , ; ; : 

: 

' 

. ' 




' ’ i •... ; . £ 


' ’• • ■ : J -:c :: .y. IXAp 






- • :J 








‘ ' i'S* ' «#/& ' ; - 7 Jf0 




' 




• . 1 ’ ' • " s • ■ ,r : ' ff f. 










■ 



17 . 


The fact that a word will cause emotive responses cannot he 
explained merely hy saying the word has a disposition to cause such a 
response. The causes are much more complex. One might as well assume 
that a complete explanation of why a hall bounces is given hy saying 
that it has a disposition to bounce. Nevertheless, to say that an object 
has a disposition to bounce may add to our knowledge of the object. 

The present theory of meaning presents some difficulties when 
we consider descriptive meaning. The natural conclusion would be that 
descriptive meaning is the disposition of a word to produce cognitive 
mental processes. This, however, leads to a problem of great difficulty 
for psychology, which is the nature of cognition. Many attempts have been 
made to explain it, only to be discredited later. 

Stevenson, more recently, has favored the view that cognition 
is a disposition to action. This view has some merit as it explains why 
a person may hold a belief without acting upon it. But it is fraught with 
difficulties also. The possible responses to a simple belief are so many 
and varied that it is difficult to say that the response arose from any one 
particular belief. It is also equally difficult to distinguish between cog¬ 
nition and all other dispositions to action. 

Furthermore the simplest act is not the result of one belief but 
of many. For instance a man puts on his coat because he believes it to be 
cold but he must also believe that the coat will keep him warm. Change any 
one of the dispositions and the action will change. 

A similar situation exists in astronomy where the motion of one 
heavenly body is influenced by many or all other bodies. Now even if the 
affect of one cannot be isolated, it is still possible to consider what 




18 


effect a change in one would cause, if all other factors remain constant. 

Fully recognizing the danger of over simplification of analogies, 
Stevenson still suggests that cognition must "be considered after this 
fashion. Acknowledging the greater complexity that exists in psychology 
and the lack of ability to postulate constancy in the other factors, he 
still suggests that such an approach to cognition is worthwhile. This is 
not to he taken as a defense of behaviourism, nor is it intended to supp¬ 
lant, but rather to supplement introspection. In fact it is not offered 
as a complete definition of cognition but rather it is used to show the 
difficulty of arriving at such a definition. We shall be content to say 
that descriptive meaning is a disposition to affect cognition. 

Stevenson also mentions the further problem of how words can 
combine to give sentence-meaning to the whole statement but makes no effort 
to discuss it at length. Such discussion might be of interest but is not 
necessary to the present work. He does, however, deal with another problem, 
namely, the problem of how words take on a precision of descriptive meaning 
necessary for communication, 

Humbers at first are vague in meaning for the individual. Gradually, 
however, he learns that five twos are ten, ten is one more than nine, and a 
multitude of other relations which give definiteness to the number ten. This 
is the same as the linguistic rule that relates all symbols to each other and 
by such relationship each gains in precision. As Sapir says ,! The product grows 
with the instrument. 

All the linguistic rules of definition, syntax and grammar, contri¬ 
bute to this definiteness of meaning which words acquire. Thus descriptive 
meaning might be defined as follows t! The descriptive meaning of a symbol is 
its disposition to affect cognition, provided that the disposition is caused 





19 


"by an elaborate process of conditioning that has attended the signs use 
in communication, and provided that the disposition is rendered fixed, 
at least to a considerable degree, by linguistic rules* 1 . Descriptive mean¬ 
ing may be assigned to a new term if linguistic rules relate it to words 
already in use. 

The vagueness of the descriptive meaning of a word is roughly 
inversely proportional to the number of linguistic rules governing its 
use. When a word becomes subject to less and less rules its vagueness 
may increase to the point where it has no meaning whatsoever. The point 
at which this condition is reached, however, is, itself, vague. 

The development of emotive and descriptive dispositions are not 
isolated. Many signs have both. A word which refers descriptively to some 
desirable or undesirable thing may acquire emotive meaning on that account. 
Nor are changes in the one accompanied by simultaneous changes in the other. 
Emotive meaning tends to change but slowly and frequently lags behind when 
descriptive meaning changes. 

This point is very important to later discussions and so we shall 
call that part of emotive meaning which is not a function of descriptive 
meaning, that part which does not change at the same time that descriptive 
meaning changes, independent. Some words have emotive meaning that is 
entirely independent, as in the case of ejaculations, others in part only. 
The difference in emotive meaning between a word and its descriptive synonym 
is independent although this test is rough because it fails to recognize the 
independent emotive meaning common to both. 




■ 

, ■ ' ■ . 
If '■ . . 




■ 

e.‘-, ; .--’''X 1 : X : : • : ' 

, ■ 

4 

'• • • / 5 ’ ■ ' 




m..x 


' u’ . '■ . - > 












. ' : : [-J ' ■ ' . ' ■ 


* 

■ ;• V- J:X; ;■ -."n,, xi; , 

■ 1 l X • : 


, 


•i ; : : . 5 , , : 








■ ■■ , - 












20 


A similar case in point is that of the metaphor which, we are 
told, is not to he taken literally. Some metaphors transfer the emotive 
meaning of one word to another. Such a metaphor as "He is a prince" tends 
to bestow upon the subject the laudatory emotive meaning which pertains to 
prince. But metaphor is more than this. Its essential force lies in what 
it suggests rather than says. This suggested meaning is vague and the 
vagueness is its prime virture for it gives scope to the imagination. Any 
attempt to give a literal interpretation of a metaphor removes the vagueness 
which is its charm, and so is never successful. Because the literal meaning 
cannot be realized in the ordinary way, the emotive meaning is heightened 
or intensified. 

Emotive and descriptive meaning are in extremely close relation¬ 
ship and are aspects of a total situation rather than parts of it. For the 
sake of analysis we consider them separately, but any attempt at separation 
is, of course, artificial. 

Emotive meaning may serve a useful purpose although it is not 
considered to be in very good standing with some writers. This disfavor 
is the result of several causes. One is the abuse of its function by 
unscrupulous mob pleasers. Another is due to the tendency of some writers 
to use emotive meaning as the limbo to which they relegate any aspect of 
language that is not useful to science. Thus it becomes the catch-all for 
incoherence, ambiguity, and all other linguistic difficulties. The reverse 
in many cases might be nearer to the truth. For instance some words seem to 
have a disposition toward confusion and it may be that the word has acquired 
an emotive meaning because of this unpleasant quality. 

The emotive meaning may be a nuisance to those who would remain dis¬ 
passionate and detached in discussion but it is not an unmitigated evil as is 
confused meaning. 


, 

. 

‘ ■ - • .. •. .t: j; : 

■ •. - .■ • ,, • . ■ r. 1 . ; v 


. 

■ 

. 

* 

. 

* 

, . ■ : . . > 

* ' • ■' • - , 7 / 

. 



21 . 


IV. First Pattern of Analysis 

The emotive meaning of a word defies definition, any attempt 
to approach it would he more successful if the attempt was made to 
characterize it hy some code of appropriate symbols, such as exclamation 
marks or asterisks. This renders it almost impossible to find synonyms 
for many words, because if the descriptive meaning is very much the same, 
it is highly improbable that the emotive meaning will be equivalent. 

The emotive meaning of the word “good" varies greatly with the 
attendant circumstances and runs the full range from being strongly ex- 
hortatory to a reversal of the usual disposition when used with a tone of 
voice suggestive of “goody goody n . The characterization of ethical terms, 
therefore, is fraught with difficulties and must proceed slowly. 

The word “good” may be used in cases where the emotive meaning 
is completely checked, or practically so, and the word is used as purely 
descriptive. In such a sentence as “Rubbers are good for keeping the 
feet dry“, the emotive meaning is ignored or intended to be. Any disagree¬ 
ment will be based on belief and not attitude. Again when used in an histor¬ 
ical sense, that is to describe something that was approved in the past but 
is no longer approved, the word is used in a sense in which the emotive 
meaning is entirely inactive. 

Sthical terms always have a double function, emotive and descriptive 
and these vary greatly with the context. It is usually the case that as one 
increases the other tends to decrease although this is not always so. But 
even when the emotive function is strongly predominant, the term will still 
give some information in a descriptive way. Knowledge of the speaker is of 
assistance in arriving at this information. For instance, a knowledge of 
the speaker's tastes would help greatly in deciding what is meant when he 
declares this book, or that piece of music, to be good. 




' t . ’. ! . i. * , jj 


■ • . i : 

■ 

i ,v»- ‘i.i. ■: V ' J .■rci •; 

: r-, .. 

. • v ’ "• 

» ■ ■ . . . - 

, • . i' " ’ . . .. '. 




V (i y. ‘ .. ? 

( 



1 

' i " i :. 

. 




1 ' • 

o 

, 

, ' < v " •) . ,i 


. 

’ 




: l . v-. • . ,■ ; ■, 

. 

‘ 

. 


- 

. ■■■■.' 



. , 


■ ■ • 

■ 


\ . u ofr, i./ u 


. 


« ' -■ . ■ •.■ . 


i i; -d /dr:r :l cl\ 

: 

• .. „ j / - ‘ ( : 

>: 


22 . 


Now does the statement "X is good 11 actually mean what it leads 
the hearer to conclude or does it merely suggest it? Probably the more 
correct answer is that it suggests it, for our conclusions are intimately 
related to our knowledge of the speaker. Since all people use ’'good” in 
many different senses the question now arises: n Do we use our knowledge of 
the speaker to determine in what sense he is using it at the time, or do we 
merely accept it as indicating his approval, and then use our knowledge to 
decide what sort of thing would be likely to meet with his approval? 

The answer is seldom if ever possible, for ’’good” is always vague 
and the distinction between actual meaning and suggestion is often beyond 
precise demarcation. Por any word, it is only after a great many rules are 
precisely settled, that the distinction between meaning and suggestion 
becomes clear. In the case of ethical terms the rules are in the process 
of becoming, and so we may accept or reject them without violence to con¬ 
ventional language. Once the individual accepts the rules of his choice, 
he can then define B good°, but the definition will be as peculiar to the 
individual as was the original choice of rules. The finished product, how¬ 
ever, will not be the same as the raw material. Wittgenstein once said, 

H To remove vagueness is to outline the penumbra of a shadow, a sharp line 
is there after we draw it, not before® 5 . 

The word "good” can be given a wide and complicated descriptive 
meaning in which case the suggested conclusions are correspondingly reduced 
The emotive meaning will then depend upon the descriptive meaning and will 
not produce the desired reaction in the hearer unless speaker and hearer 
agree on the descriptive definition. This is simply another example of the 
intimate relationship between belief and attitude. 


. 




.. . ■ • ■ ■ y. . . t . ■. . ■. t "x 

■ ; : v- .r : , ' . . / ; . ' ; ", J r • • ■ 

V’C'C ' ■■ ' rc^ 

'■ • : . i ■ 




r 




' ' , ■ ■ ' 

• * ■ . 


u ; ' 

' •: j -■■■■" 1 •: ■. ’ •- ' : - i: i v -YiVi, ' "Y( 

; : ' --r ' : j ' ' ■: • ■/.!.' 

i M • ; \ L •} - 

■ ' f , 

■ . 

» 




>: ' 









i 




■ " £ •: :?■ 

' 

■ 



* 


. 



23 


On the other hand., the descriptive meaning may he limited 
■until the word “good 11 may come to mean nothing more than the approval 
of the speaker. As this limiting process goes on the suggested con¬ 
clusions begin to expand. If the emotive meaning depends upon suggested 
conclusions it is quasi dependent. This may he the ground for error 
because the suggested conclusions may differ between the parties to a 
discussion. Thus we may find agreement in attitude based on apparent 
agreement in belief, but the actual disagreement or divergence which 
exists remains concealed. This furnishes a ready weapon to those who 
would exploit error. Those with a sincere desire to avoid error should 
support their ethical judgments with reasons which clearly designate rather 
than suggest what is meant. 

The first pattern is an analysis of ethical terms which limits 
the descriptive meaning to a reference to the speaker's attitudes, and 
considering any other information as conveyed by suggestion. Consideration 
of the second pattern, which would assign complete and full descriptive 
meaning to ethica.1 terms, will be postponed to a later chapter. 

For the purposes of the present discussion the word "good" will 
be used as a type of all ethical terms. Even here however, it is not to 
be considered in its narrower moral sense. It is just as suitable for 
the context "He is a good fellow", which may mean likeable rather than moral. 

Moral attitude may be distinguished from others somewhat as follows. 
If a person morally disapproves of a certain kind of conduct, he will probably 
feel indignant or shocked to discover it in others, and conscience-stricken 
if he discovers a propensity for it in himself. If his attitude is merely 
that of disliking the conduct, his feelings will be less strong and more of 

the nature of displeasure or annoyance. 


, ' • .. • . - ■ 

; . .. ■ , . ... ' ... 

. 

,. . • ■ I. "I ■ ■ " ■ 

. 

■ ' ' • 

. ' . i 

o ■ r ■ : ... ! ■ ,• . , . V J ‘f ^ 

.... . * * 

■ 

, - , ‘ • O ■’ •. '" 

„ 

, 

' 

. • 

' •' • -I : 

. 


24 . 


A study of the origin of moral attitudes is not necessary to 
the present work yet a few remarks might he helpful. The origin of 
moral attitudes cannot he ascribed to training alone, for the precepts 
must appeal to some spontaneous inclination to respond. Nor does the 
training itself depend entirely upon punishment and rewards. Some 
teachers can exert more influence hy a smile or frown than can others 
hy any means whatever. The effectiveness depends rather upon the prestige 
of the teacher. Children accord a position of authority to some and deny 
it to others and being unversed in human pretenses, their classification 
will not always agree with that of organized society. And who can say 
that their innocence of human guile does not often bestow a clarity of 
discernment that is often denied to their elders. Once authority is 
recognized, influence is assured. 

The nature of the moral feelings developed by training is often 
more constant than the direction of these feelings. Men may lose interest 
in one cause and espouse another but the degree of fervor for the new cause 
will be much the same as the enthusiasm for the former in the earlier stages. 

In moral judgments the object is probably presented more for the 
approval of the hearer than of the speaker. In other cases the referent is 
more definitely the approval of the speaker. It is also true that the refer¬ 
ent is the attitude of the speaker at the time of speaking. When a speaker 
makes an ethical judgment of an historical character or event his remark means, 
11 I now disapprove or approve of these events which once took place 11 . The 
tense of the verb refers to the time of the deed, the judgment is always in 
the present. 



25 


If this pattern appears to give too much emphasis to the atti¬ 
tudes of the speaker, it must "be remembered that the speaker is frequently 
a hearer and is himself influenced by the judgments of others as well as 
by the social conventions and mores. 

Principles, too, may be declared good with the descriptive mean¬ 
ing of the first pattern. In fact we tend to judge the individual event 
by the class in which it falls. The saving in effort compensates for the 
insensitivity to individual peculiarities. Thus the first pattern is not 
limited to individual cases as might be supposed. 

Since the emotive meaning suggests the speaker®s approval we could 
by the first pattern do without descriptive meaning at all. The extent to 
which the first pattern approximates common usage, however, can be readily 
observed by a simple example. Suppose a person to say "I approve of this 
but it is bad’ 1 . It may be that he means that other people consider it bad 
and he wishes to assert his independent judgment but if no such explanation 
is possible, then we are surprised by his self-contradiction. 

Stevenson can find little ground for the elaborate distinctions 
between "good” and "right” which are me.de by some theorists. The chief 
distinction is to be found in the usages of idiomatic language. We usually 
use ’’good” to describe persons and things and "right” to describe actions. 

For example we would say ”It is considered right to promote the reading of 
good books®’. Because of the use of ’’right'® to describe actions some feel 
that it is more effective in promoting laudable action, but ’’good” will 
have much the same effect though less directly. To describe a book as "good” 
will probably lead the hearer to read it. The emotive values and range of 
ambiguity are but slightly different, however, and it is idiomatic usage that 


prevents a simple identification of the terms 



26 


"Duty" and 11 obligation" and "ought" are also used to judge actions. 
They are not synonymous with "right" however. Right is less coercive; it 
praises for commission, the others censor for omission. Men are punished 
for dereliction of duty and awards are bestowed for actions beyond the 
call of duty. Many deeds are considered right and noble that are not 
deemed to be obligatory. 

There is a tinge of menace which attends duty or obligation and 
we are more inclined to use the terms when we feel that the action is 
contrary to the natural inclinations of the hearer. Without an understan¬ 
ding of human nature the use of these words may cause serious conflicts of 
attitudes yet when used wisely they may give a constancy of direction which 
may be welcomed by the hearer. To know one’s duty and to do it may be a 
welcome relief from the inconstancies of impulse. 

The first pattern, like all analyses of ethics which are based 
on attitudes is liable to the charge of superficiality and the promotion 
of self-interest at the expense of moral ideals. If an object is good just 
because any speaker declares it to be so, then ethics has no more stability 
or certainty than the caprice of any man’s approval. 

But speaker implies hearer, and unless the hearer is abjectly 
submissive to the speaker he will soon disagree with any attempt on the 
part of the speaker to assume unto himself the final decision on what is 
good and what is not. The first pattern is an attempt to state a linguistic 
rule not to bestow any special powers or right of decision on any speaker. 
When I say that a thing is good I mean that I approve of it and seek the 
approval of others but that is far from saying that when I declare anything 
to be good, it is indeed good. 


,i . v ■ - : !I J- . - 0 ..... ■ ■ ., - r y <• ■ •- , • 

,/ , . :. .. "... ‘ ' >. ' .■<: . JI.'O C - • '> 

■ . ■ ■' .. - . ' * ■ 


. 


. . 




■ . . 

- • .' . ■ ■ 

1 

* 

i ■ 


' / • ' iuon 

„ 


' 

T ' ■ 

, ' ' 1 ■ •' 

■ ' ' ' 

'■ r, ■ 1 Q* . r . >. * ' ’ • ?./ '' * •• 

. 

. j p r ' ■■ ;i 

j: v;-.' . x „■■■■<■& aw-.n £ h,■:■<£,£ s,l, ::^i£p£ 'XX 

.. • : ' '' ■ 





27. 


According to the first pattern, then, if a speaker declares 
his approval of an object, no further descriptive meaning would be 
added by saying it is good. They are not equivalent, however, because 
of the much greater emotive strength of the latter. The first describes 
the speaker's attitude, the second does that too but also attempts to 
influence the attitude of the hearer. The word "good" is used when I am 
prepared to recommend the object for the approval of others which, of 
course, may be withheld. 

To say that anyone's approval is sufficient to make an object 
good, is simply to say that the hearer will always agree. The moral 
chaos predicted by the critics would depend upon the supine agreement 
of the hearer with every judgment of the speaker. The critic says the 
"Good" is that which is worthy of approval, not merely that of which any¬ 
one person approves, but the emotive meaning, which seeks the approval 
of others is tantamount to presenting the object as worthy of the hearer's 
approval. Then too the emotive force is frequently used tentatively, as 
an invitation to discussion and counter influence rather than as a request 
for immediate agreement. 

Stevenson agrees to a point with the critics of ethical naturalism. 
Normative ethics is more than a branch of psychology and ethical judgments 
have a function in directing attitudes. But to explain ethical terms in 
psychological language is not to reduce them to psychology but rather to 
distinguish them from psychological statements. Emotive meaning and disa¬ 
greement preserve the directive influence upon attitudes which moral judg¬ 
ments so manifestly have. 



. ’ - 0 • • i ‘ '• 


■ 1 9 , ■ i 

■ ■ « - r ' 

vi j 

, 



■ . • ■ , 1 

. 



• ■ ' : ■ " 5 


. 1 





■ ' .. 

' 

. 

' 



. 

■ • 

. 

. 

• ‘ 

. ■ v 5 ' ' - ! i >* 

. 





. • 


■ 


< 

■ 




28 


To surround ethical terms with other-world mystery is another 
thing. The nonnaturalists assign to ethical terms a special laudatory 
emotive meaning and ethical agreement will hinge on whether or not people 
believe the object judged to possess this very special quality. But how 
are we to recognize this mystic quality? Some claim to do so by intuition, 
ignoring the pitfalls of introspection. In the absence of a more lucid 
explanation than has yet been given, this special quality can be considered 
as a shadow cast by confusion and emotive meaning. 

The Sophists saw something which Plato failed to see because his 
idealism and romantic theories blinded him to some of the starker truths 
of reality. Being more disillusioned they saw that "right 1 ’ and "duty” 
are words which are all too often used by the unscrupulous dictators or 
politicians to bend a gullible public to their will, while the public shout 
in turn because of their moral inertia. But we cannot turn our backs upon 
the world because of cynicism any more than we can abolish its ills by 
creating fancied realms. The ideals must be struggled for and by the use 
of those very words "right” and "wrong" otherwise the use of these words 
will be left to the swindlers, with all the emotive force which these words 


carry, 



29 


V. First Pattern Method 

•‘Matters of taste are not to he disputed". This dictum is 
useful in many circumstances. Few people have any desire to influence 
the sensations of the palate of another and even when the desire might 
exist the futility of prolonged argument is obvious. Even in the matter 
of attitudes, timidity or aloofness may he sufficient to deter any attempt 
to exert an influence, especially in those cases where the motive is not 
strong. But as the iss\ies become more important the urge to asset oneself 
becomes stronger. Those issues which concern us all are too vital to per¬ 
mit of a passive tolerance. 

The means by which influence is exerted is no less complicated 
than the motivation. A leader, whose prestige is well enough established, 
may redirect the attitudes of his followers by a word. This, however, 
requires proper conditioning on the part of the followers and a degree of ego¬ 
tism or arrogance on the part of the leader which most of us deplore. 

Most people prefer not to have, nor to be, moral dependents. Thus 
we, as hearers, demand reasons, and as speakers prefer that the hearer might 
express his own attitude with reasons. In other words, we prefer to consider 
both sides of the question and arrive at agreement that may well be a middle 
course. Even if the agreement is not reached and the attitudes remain diver¬ 
gent, the discussion may have been helpful to both parties. 

The reasons given must not be considered as logical proofs; their 
relationship to the judgment is rather psychological. They explain why we 
urge this or that attitude. This is not as uncompromising as Ayer*s position 
in which he demands the same logical proof in all fields as would be expected 
in science. Stevenson recognizes that just because ethical judgments cannot 
be proven logically, there still remains the possibility of fruitful discussion 
through the medium of supporting reasons. 




' 

'J. ' . 

' 

: ■ i. ‘ ■■ • ♦ <■■■ ■ - f - 

....... . - ; -• - ' ■ , :; - 



, ; . •: ? . 






i ,! 




» - ’ : 

r ; 'v i ; r .Co ■ i.J . i 




. 

■ , 


■ 






' 


' 


... 

’ 

T 

• ■ . ■ 

- 

... 1 . 

' 

) 

, 


30 . 


The first pattern methodology then becomes quite simple. Any 
statement from any field which any speaker might consider as likely to 
alter attitudes may be adduced as a reason for or against an ethical 
judgment. Its effectiveness will depend upon whether or not the hearer 
believes it and also whether he accepts it as sufficient reason for 
changing his attitude. But because the speaker thought it pertinent, 
it is to that extent a reason, whether it is effective or not. 

Stevenson at this point gives examples of ethical arguments 
and their forcefulness is enhanced because of their faithful delineation 
of every day conversation. 

The first group of examples illustrate cases in which the hearer 
attacks the speaker on the grounds that he is not truly describing his 
attitude. The attack may point out the contradictions that exist between 
the present judgment and other judgments made by the same speaker and may 
suggest that he is merely trying to convince himself by auto suggestion. 

Or the atta,ck may be based on the apparent inconsistencies between the 
speaker’s words and his actions. As these examples progress the error 
of treating ethical language as purely cognitive becomes more and more 
apparent, yet this is the common practice in traditional works on ethics. 

A second group of examples are based on cases where the dispute 
is not based on questioning the truth of the judgment in describing the 
speaker's attitude but rather on questioning or correcting his belief on 
which the judgment is based. In these cases an attempt is made to cast 
more ligjit on the nature and consequences of the object being judged. 

A further group deal with arguments based on motives and psycho¬ 
logical reasons related to the judgment. It is commonly agreed that selfish 

interests often put a different light on what would otherwise be considered 
highly laudable actions. In these examples arguments are advanced in every- 


• \ ; ■ : ■ ■ f ■) . V,. A s,'i c ■,' .. f .' J > ' ■ v " ' •' 



• 






' 

■ 

t 


■ ■' , ; . ■ 




■ i - • ' - • • . v ' 


, 

4 ' • f ■ '•: . ' v. - » 

; ■ ' ' X' ' ' 


• • 

f< •• • - , J .. f'. 

... . j- - ■ ^ V O' 

. / :) J v ■ 

, '• . ' ■ " ' 



r 

' 4 , 





. 

‘ 

■ 














• 


. . 



• 


• 


• 


ex 






1 









• f. r • 


- 



- ' 

' 



■ 

• 




' ' • {' ' ' 

, 

» 



31 


day language but which are strongly reminiscent of Kant*s Categorical 
Imperative. The down to earth quality of the examples, however, makes 
the demand for special a priori faculties of reason, seem rather far¬ 
fetched. It is quite obvious that the same maxim, judged in accordance 
with Kan^s Imperative, might lead to different conclusions by different 
people. Thus the Categorical Imperative, even if understood by all people 
would not be an answer to the confusion and differences of opinion on 
ethical questions* 

An investigation of the origin of some of our attitudes is 
frequently illuminating and often disillusioning. The mysterious power of 
conscience and other-world support often appear as naive conceptions in 
the light of a thorough investigation of origins of attitudes* 

Appeals to Authority is another weapon used in influencing others. 
The effectiveness, however, will depend tipon the prestige of the authority 
in the mind of the hearer. The same is true of the appeal to public opinion. 

Ethical arguments often deteriorate into the ad persona type, in 
which the person attacked counters with a list of the shortcomings of the 
speaker. It evades the issue entirely and is made in the hope of silencing 
further criticism or argument. The success will depend upon whether the 
other party is more concerned with evading humiliation or exerting influence. 

All examples are oversimplified as most ethical arguments contain 
complications that no example could show. In fact a single judgment may be 
supported by a whole systematized body of beliefs. Such for example is the 
case in political party literature but an analysis in detail may well disclose 
nothing more than an elaborate interweaving of the various types of reasons 
given separately in the examples. 








; ■ 




i 


- 




-i; - 



' 

■ 

, 


' , ’ ' ' v •. 


' 

, 

. ■ . ! 







■ 











32 


The above examples deal with disagreements between persons. 

We now consider the case of an individual who is trying to persuade 
himself of the rightness of a certain course of action. The indecision 
is not a case of searching for a solution, it usually springs from an 
excess of preferences. It is based on a conflict of attitudes. 

The reasons which a man will consider in striving to resolve his 
difficulty are much the same as those he would use in trying to convince 
another. He might consider the origins of the conflicting attitudes, 
search for motives to see if they are merely selfish; in short, his pro¬ 
cedure will be the same as if he were arguing with a friend. And this is 
what one would expect, for those arguments which his mind suggests as being 
effective in persuading others, because he thought they would be convincing, 
will probably be even more effective when used to persuade himself. 

The difference between practical and theoretical Reason is not a 
difference in the reason itself but in the use to which it is put. Nor is 
a man, engaged in an ethical conflict, pursuing a psychological enquiry. 

His mental processes may be a subject for study by a psychologist but this 
no more makes it psychology itself than are the subjects which anthropologists 
study, themselves anthropologists. A man may investigate and draw his reasons 
from many fields of knowledge in attempting to resolve an ethical conflict and 
ethics, therefore, cannot be made a branch of any science, not even psychology. 

Finally, it must be fully recognized that, while further knowledge 
on the part of one or both disputants may result in agreement, this is not 
always so. Differences in attitude may persist even when complete agreement 
in belief may exist, based on full knowledge. This is particularly true in 
judgments concerning those things in short supply and which all men want. The 



' n 


' T 


r ■ • 'O 



'• 


' 




■ 










33 


assumption that ethical agreement can always he obtained, by reasons 
which alter beliefs is unfounded. Logical arguments may supply the 
necessary reasons for agreement but they still may not be sufficient. 


VI. Persuasion 

Attitudes depend upon a variety of contributing factors of 
which reason is only one. Persuasion is one of the strongest of these 
non-rational factors. It depends upon such things as rhetoric, tone of 
voice, gestures, apt metaphors, and the establishment of rapport between 
speaker and hearer. The redirection of attitude is attempted by the 
direct method of exhortation rather than the indirect method of altering 
beliefs. For some this method may be very effective while for others the 
results will be transitory if it is not supported by reasons. But for 
even the most rational people, reason supported by persuasion will probably 
be more effective than reason alone. Persuasion is not irrational although 
it is nonrational. 

One of the most common methods of persuasion is to back up a judg¬ 
ment with emotive words such as obligation or duty. Since our language has 
few if any terms that are entirely emotive to the exclusion of descriptive 
meaning, there will be few cases of persuasion that are devoid of rationality. 
Similarly, since most ethical terms are strong in emotive meaning, there are 
few cases of pure rationality without some element of persuasion. 

Metaphors belong on the side of persuasion rather than rationality. 
It is the suggestive element rather than the literal interpretation that makes 
the metaphor such an effective figure of speech. 






34 . 


Many beliefs are but wishful thinking but are stated with such 
seriousness and semblance of profundity that the belief itself is persua¬ 
sively supported. Statements of doubtful factual truth such as "Crime 
does not pay" are usually enunciated in such a manner. 

An entire didactic novel, which is based on verifiable fact may 
solicit the reader* s approval or disapproval in such a subtle manner that 
the whole book might be a case of persuasion on a large scale. 

In some cases a judgment may be supported by what appears to be 
a reason but which is stated in such a confused way that it is not under¬ 
stood and its effect is persuasive rather than rational. The choice of 
the confused words may be deliberate or not, but the sentence takes on an 
emotive force dependent on confused meaning. 

The fact that the more obvious forms of persuasion are used by 
politicians, propagandists and revivalists, does not mean that these cases 
exhaust all the forms of persuasion. In its less conspicuous forms it is 
as ubiquitous as choice and even finds its place as a sort of auto-suggestion 
in almost all of our personal deliberations. 

In many cases of personal conflict we wish to end the unpleasant 
state of indecision as soon as possible. We often feel that prolonged deli¬ 
beration may fail to resolve the conflict and any decision is better than 
continued perplexity. So we hasten the decision and defy the consequences. 

In such cases we persuade ourselves by methods much the same as we use to 
persuade others. 

Many times when a person explains his attitude to another he is more 
concerned with convincing himself than his hearer. So it is in private deli¬ 
beration we frequently imagine ourselves explaining our actions to some 






. 


. ' • 




■ 1 



:t i ' '-t' ' ■;' • 


; -m ■ \ -:-v 4li-* 

■ 

' ■ 





. 


. 

tv 

' ‘ ' : -' ' "'■■■■' • ‘ 1 


. 

• 

> • 



. ' 






* 





• 



: 


, 




, ■ ' , . ' '■ • . ■ r : " ' ■ ! ' ■ ■ 

. 

. 

■ 

• ' 


35 . 


imaginary person and usually someone whose opinions we respect or fear. 
Even our inner thoughts are carried on through the medium of words and 
language, so in self-persuasion the same slogans and labels are used 
as are used to persuade a listener. Self-persuasion in some ways is very 
similar to rationalization hut it differs in that rationalization implies 
self-deception. We have no need to feel ashamed of self persuasion as 
we would of self-deception. 


VII. Validity 

Ethical arguments frequently make use of formal logic. Where 
this occurs the ordinary rules of validity will apply. It is nonsensical, 
however, to discuss the validity of persuasion. It may he ineffective or 
objectionable but it is not invalid. 

In logical arguments conclusions are drawn from facts and these 
conclusions are subject to the ordinary tests of validity. In ethics we 
also draw conclusions from factual reasons but they are not demonstrably 
nor inductively valid in the same manner as are scientific conclusions. 

It may be that the ordinary rules of validitjr need supplementing to include 
these conclusions. 

Valid and true mean much the same thing. A difficulty is presented 
when we attempt to apply either of these words to ethical judgments. The 
beliefs on which the judgment is based may be true or false, even the descrip¬ 
tive meaning may falsely describe the speaker’s attitude, but to attempt to 
discuss the validity of the attitude itself is to distort the meaning of 
validity beyond its recognized function. Validity does not apply to ethical 

methodology in so far as it departs from logic and scientific methods. I 
may not understand why a person has adopted the attitude which he has, but 















. 




- ’ 


$1 
























■ 



I 



















i M 

" x ..o; 


36 . 


that is not the same as being able to declare it to be invalid. 

This dismissal of validity may open the way to misunderstand¬ 
ing. It may be assumed that since validity does not apply to ethical 
judgments, no grounds for choice between them exists. There are other 
grounds for choice, however, which the moralist may use to free his 
choice from mere caprice. 

Even though the method chosen to redirect attitude is not 
subject to the tests of validity its choice will be based on many con¬ 
siderations. Eor some people the reflective habits have devitalized 
emotions and persuasion or exhortation is needed to promote action. If, 
however, it is felt that the attitude is based on ignorance of the true 
nature of the object judged, then rational methods should be used. If 
the aim is enlightenment rather than indoctrination, rational methods 
are usually preferred. It will also be the choice of those who seek 
mutual discussion and enlightenment. Thus there are many considerations 
which lead to the choice of method and the choice is not always based on 
effectiveness alone. Persuasiveness may be more effective for quick but 
temporary results but still the speaker may choose the slower, less certain, 
but more permanent rational methods. The choice of methods is itself an 
ethical problem and subject to a variety of considerations as wide as in 
the case of any other ethical problem. 

To moralize about the ways of moralists is quite reasonable. There 
is nothing more vicious in this chain than there would be in a psychologist 
studying the psychological effects of a study of psychology. In fact both 
examples are desirable, and might be illuminating if carried on in a suffi¬ 


ciently detached manner 




* ■ 

, 

. . . 

, 

. 

<* 

. ■ ■ 

« 

. 

, . • 


;/ . 



' 


. 

. ■ 






37 


The present work is an attempt to analyse rather than evaluate 
ethical methods. However, a certain amount of evaluation is unavoidable 
as well as necessary. Any writer must evaluate in order to decide how 
much development to allot to the various topics and in defending his work 
he will not he disinterested and will use those methods he considers to he 
most effective. Some evaluation is also necessary to prevent the reader 
from making hasty and false evaluations of his own. 

It is highly prohahle that many readers, on first learning of 
emotive meaning and the use that is made of it hy politicians and propa¬ 
gandists, would consider all emotive meaning as suspect. In order to guard 
the reader against this too comprehensive conclusion, it is necessary for 
the writer to evaluate emotive meaning sufficiently to show that persuasion 
is not always shameful. At times it is quite commendable and in any event 
its abolition is impossible. 

At this point Stevenson at some length arrives at much the same 
conclusion as Ayer reaches much more succinctly. The conclusion is that 
ethical terms describe the attitude or reactions of the speaker rather than 
the object judged. So long as this is recognized it is simplicity itself, 
but the tests of validity obviously cannot be applied. 

Even when a change in attitude is caused by the reasons advanced 
by the speaker, the reasons cannot be said to lead validly to the truth or 
rightness of the new attitude. If I deliberately act in such a way as to 
force the fulfillment of a prediction one could scarcely say that my actions 
established the truth of my prediction by valid means. I did not establish 
its original truth but merely acted in such a way that it later came true. 
Validity has quite a different relationship to truth than this. 







. 


£ V . 

- 


, • • / v . . 


' 

■i 

V • 

. ■ 


- 



- . • 


. ' r• ... it . • : ' ‘ •. ■ • r ■ . 

,■ ' '• . 

, ■.' : v , ' . j , . ■: - 










, 

£ tf .. 



. J.. ~ 1 , 



•: 0' \ v ;i t ■ to \ ■ V.' - 




■ 



... 

■ 



• v i . ■. 


j ii v 

• ; : ; ' 

. 


. 

V. v. 

“ V s €1 



* 





o- i 

■ ■ ’ • f; J • • . ' ' - 






•: * 

. 

» 



• 

1 • . o 





. 

r ) i ■ i 

>. • , . ' ■ • •' ■ >• t . )■ ■ 

. 

. 

V • ' : . ... . • ; ; 1 v .r . i.J: ".J :?.c 

. ' ' ■ ' :../■> ' I ' ■ ' J - ~ '. v ■' , ' ; •' 






38 


In ethical discussions the word true frequently has a meaning 
which is not the same as in other cases. For instance if some speaker 
makes an ethical judgment and the hearer agrees hy saying ’’That is true”, 
the reply has not the same meaning as it would have in a scientific dis¬ 
cussion. In an ethical discussion, it is tantamount to repeating the 
original speaker’s words hut with this difference, that the descriptive 
meaning now refers to the second person’s attitudes rather than those 
of the first person. 

Any attempt to list the valid conclusions that might he drawn 
from given reasons, would he hut to list the conclusions which the writer 
would accept. He would again he describing his attitudes. 

Hume suggests that even in scientific methodology our distinctions 
between valid and invalid are reflections of our psychological habits. When 
we say that a conclusion is valid, all we really mean is that we find the 
evidence sufficient. That is not always to say that it is sufficient. Scien¬ 
tists do not agree with Hume hut if they did there would he no great strain 
in applying validity to ethical judgments. One difference would still remain, 
however, for in science one and only one conclusion can he valid for a given 
set of facts hut this is not the usual state of affairs in ethics. 


: i 






' 




: •, ’ v r \ -!/' j„? ' n i - it:] 


' 


« 


/ j ■ ■ , 

: j : )Xo .'V; • ' ' " ■■■ • ? ■■ : ■ '■ : t.l . ’ .... ■■ 1 v i 




. . i 



, ■ ; : ; . ' : ■' • v ' 
.... c ■ ' ■ 

i ] 

'/v? > .r.' : . • ■ ' ' ' 

. . • • > : f ’ . r> ’ ■) * ■ . ‘ v 

, ' ■ ■- 







VIII. Intrinsic and Extrinsic Values 


The fact that we have progressed so far without any mention 
of intrinsic and extrinsic values or any discussion of ends as opposed 
to means, shows how far Stevenson has departed from the traditional 
approach to ethics. 

The traditional writers made the distinction as soon as possible 
and then concentrated on ends. The ends were the H Good H , the means were 
good only in a secondary sense basking, as it were, in the reflected glory 
of the end to which they led. The ethical specialist needed only to con¬ 
sider ends, as the question of means was a scientific problem which could 
be left to others. Once the major premise of the end was firmly establi¬ 
shed, the whole then had the validity of any and all logical syllogisms. 
This theory is called by Stevenson the specialist theory. 

Some philosophers find comfort in this theory as they find in it 
an excuse for an ignorance of science. Even if the ends proposes are un¬ 
attainable, the defense is that the end is still practical as a goal to 
be approximated. 

Applying intrinsic values to the first pattern we might say that 
we approve of X intrinsically when the approval is in complete disregard 
of all its consequences upon other objects of our attitudes. Extrinsic 
approval would be approval based exclusively on the consequences of the 
object. A person of course may approve of the same object in both ways 
or he may approve intrinsically and disapprove extrinsically or vice versa. 

The terms intrinsic and extrinsic values are synonymous with 
ends and means when we approve. In the case of disapproval, however, this 
is not true for to say that a thing is bad as a means, would mean that it 
is ineffective. The judgment would be more scientific than ethical and is 

not what is meant by extrinsically bad. 

The specialist theory is based on certain assumptions. Agreement 


■ 

7 o . ■ \ 

r ’■ •-/: \' v " : - 

I ■ \ ' ■ • 

. 

. 


' ■ '' - I . 1 




• : i: . ■ " . - • 

. 




- ' 


J 4 ‘ ' , r . 


, 





fu: 

■ ‘ ■ ■ 


■ 


o.: l:r> . ■' ' ? , r r :>I :. - ? 

■ ■ 

• 

* 

■ ■ ; ■' ... I*:.: ■ r . Si 


f . . - ' ' 

v 

; ■ ' • f O' .1 '■ 

'>1 " \h / oo $ 

■ ■ 


- 


. : 


• 


' 

, ■’ . ' ■- ■■ •: • ' 


• 


- : 

„ ' ' 




40 


on intrinsic value is presupposed by, but does not itself presuppose 
any other type of ethical agreement. If Y is an indespensible step to 
Z, then agreement on Z as an end implies agreement on Y. Thus agreement 
on ends is indespensible and furnishes the only problem peculiar to ethics. 

If agreement on ends does not involve evaluation of means or of the conse¬ 
quences of the end itself, then the specialist theory is a sound principle 
of ethical methodology. Let us proceed to examine these assumptions more 
closely. 

There are four basic types of agreement in attitude. Two persons 
may agree on the intrinsic value of X, but they may still disagree on the 
consequences of X. Yet they may still agree that X has intrinsic value. 

They may agree that X leads to Y which, both agree, is desirable, so they 
agree that X is good extrinsically. Or one may approve of X as an end while 
the other approves of X only because he considers it to be a means to some 
other end. Finally they may agree in approving the extrinsic value of X 
but one may have one end in mind while the other person believes it will lead 
to a different end ultimately. These types are basic but possible of many 
variations. 

Now some of these agreements are not based on agreement of ends. 

Two men may favor peace as a means to each person* s ends but the ends may 
be widely divergent, the ends, however, need not be opposed and so there 
need be no disagreement. Lack of complete and positive agreement does not 
necessarily imply disagreement. The defense of France is an end for French¬ 
men, but it is a means to Englishmen, yet both agree that it is good. So 
long as there are forces which cause people to pursue divergent ends, each 
man 1 s end being uniquely related to himself, then common aims cannot be ends. 



, \v.'v r ; ;; 




, • 




> . • ''i 


■ ; •' t :Xoi 3 ■ »* ' •• .. '/■ 


J /.• o r: ■. ' v \ ■ ■ r -• 

. 





. 






. : . > ; k •-. ; 


■ i ' : •/ •. ■ • ) fi ■ 







.' . '' « ■; 


1 , 




, 

' 


.. . : ■ ■ ■ 




1 • : 



41 


Free private enterprise is not an end, it is a means, or furnishes the 
conditions under which each man may pursue his own private end. Thus 
agreement in approving free enterprise implies lack of agreement on ends. 
Agreement on ends is not presupposed hy agreement of all other types. 

Analysis soon reveals that ends, though they must not be dis¬ 
credited, may be ascribed an exaggerated importance. There is no reason 
why we must reject any agreement at all, until we have attained complete 
agreement on ends. Where many persons agree in approval it is probably 
agreement of a compound nature, in which some approve intrinsically, 
others extrinsically and still others both extrinsically and intrinsically. 
Observation of the variety and shades of approval accorded to some subject 
of vital interest is evidence of the many variations possible. Even in 
the case of two persons the agreement may be a mixture of two types, in 
which case it might be termed complex. 

An afternoon walk is valued both intrinsically for the pleasure 
which it affords, and extrinsically for its beneficial effects. This 
psychological effect might be termed reinforcement, a person’s extrinsic 
and intrinsic values reinforce each other. Reinforcement also occurs if 
some object is a means to several desirable ends but is not considered as 
an end itself. Whenever people’s attitudes are reinforced agreement is 
likely to be complex. 

Because of the exaggerated importance of ends, many objects of 
approval are presented as ends which are more of the nature of focal points. 
The speaker hopes for complex agreement but his insistence on calling it an 
end leads to quite serious confusions. 




42 


In spite of the insistence by many on the end, most men have 
a plurality of ends. Psychological hedonism considers pleasure as the one 
end of life. But pleasure is not one and indivisible. When I desire some¬ 
thing for any reason at all, its attainment affords pleasure. In this sense 
I desire pleasure and seek to avoid the pain of disappointment. But this 
does not make the object a pleasure in itself. It is this confusion that 
gives to psychological hedonism its plausibility and obstructs our clear view 
of the actual plurality of ends. 

Intrinsic attitudes are not an immutable part of a man's nature. 

If so, those who would attempt to direct or redirect them would be defeated 
before they started. Intrinsic values are determined by habituation. Thus 
what we first desired as a means only, frequently comes to be desired as an 
end in itself. P eople who begin by agreeing in approval of X as a means 
may later agree in approving X as an end. How else can we explain the 
general agreement in the desire for money as an end in itself. This agree¬ 
ment in ends presupposes agreement of another sort to begin with. 

G. W. Allport gives many examples of objects which were at first 
desired as means later becoming desired as ends. The musician who first 
desires technique as a means to artistic expression later comes to value 
it for itself. Now although this is an old theory we shall call it the 
Allport theory because of his defense of it. 

Wilhelm Wundt points out another consideration. X, first sought 
as a means to Y, may later be found to promote Z, which is also desirable. 
Thereafter X may be sought as a means to sf^less than to Y. Examples in 
industry where the by-product is found to be as valuable as the original 






.. 






.... 

, 

, . c «; . . X ■ ft: • ■ ' ■'•i X ' « ■ ' V • - : ft I 

. 

, . •. ■> t c< " x-. X.' X '-XX -.ex, ' X ;-fJp x; lover a«* v* ... ^ 

, ‘ .’ • • j ' 

■ 1 t ■ ■ . ' ‘ ■- - ‘' ■ J ■ ~ 

. ■. -.' . . -. • - • • I 

. .• . • • x -■ •' - r 

. • .. • - .* • 

. . ' xl Ltt* 

■ ‘ ,■ ■ ." rT ■ •’ x X ‘X 'X xt 

. 

' a. X 

«vj . :> i “ X:v\/ r * .1 < h 1 

x -;X X.; .X j .mU X.."* -' .-a. • X.''-.j/ x:o I X 

■ 

■ - ... ‘ - X X ‘ • 

-. \i . ■ • ." . t : • X a ?.:• 

- ' 










. 








. 





. 


■ 




’ 




XX ' 




X. 



, 

. 



v rX 


;oo J" X ..ty X i 

• 

■■ V 




' 

- 





. 



;• • x 


. • x. 

X. .. o -... ' 





'. ■ . x . 



' 





.. 


' • ■ 


, -V 




■ 






^3 


objective, are numerous. Although Wundt did not go so far, it seems a 
logical extension to say that one might at first be indifferent to Z 
but later come to value it as much or even more than Y. Such has been 
the case in industry at least, 

Now it is obvious that Allport's theory and Wundt's theory 
supplement rather than oppose each other. But together or singly they 
show that ends do change and that means do pass into ends which is a 
direct contradiction of the assumptions of the specialist theory. 

A moralist who strives to promote the acceptance of the 
intrinsic value of X may overcome the lack of agreement of his hearers 
by pointing out the desirable consequences of X. His hearers then accept 
X, but as a means, although they may later come to value it as an end in 
itself. Now the moralist himself must reject the specialist conception of 
ethics, if he is honestly to make use of such means of promoting agreement. 

As a matter of fact the causes and effects of ethical judgments lie in many 
fields. On the other hand, to attempt to establish ends without considering 
means or consequences is to deny oneself the use of rational methods alto¬ 
gether. The only method then available for a direct alteration of intrinsic 
attitudes is persuasion. Ignorance or refusal to discuss means, and insis¬ 
tence on agreement in ends only, forces the specialist to compensate by the 
vigor of his pronouncements. But persuasion alone seldom produces permanent 
results and the specialist would not limit himself to this method if he were 
aware of what he was doing. 

The study of means is wholly indispensible to ethics and one 
wonders why philosophical moralists ever denied it. But probably there has 
been more denial in words than in actual practice. Each tentative application 



% ; ■ ;■ , ; . '.r ■ >. ,! i •. J ■. c< is j :r 1 •.>. f J 

. 

„ . J ' • ■ , 'vs <\ rv r 

- • .. • ' : • 

v.- ■; v i; ':v i ■: . v ‘ o i:j f - : rw " v > X ■; :' F :\ r ■■■■'v ; X\‘ rrl:;.; . 

■ - • , . • ■ 

' «, , 

’ ... ‘ 

: -V i ' - ' v ' 

... } , ‘ : . ■ ■ ' 

i 


. 

■■ ' 'V''.. . ' 

. 

, ;v ,L ' ■ ‘ .* : ‘ ' ■ . v •*.: f 

, 

' 




of a principle "becomes a secret test which guides its formulation. 

Otherwise the study of the a priori moralists would "be a kind of 
mental archeology. One must admit that it did require a great deal 
of time and experience on Kant’s part to discover those a priori 
principles which were supposed to he there all the time and not to he 
based on experience at all. 

An interesting example is that of utilitarianism. Bentham 
and Mill point out the fact that the ultimate end which can he used 
to prove everything else cannot itself he proven. It is impossible to 
prove the ultimate end for it must he accepted without reference to its 
consequences, for then it would cease to he the ultimate end. The need 
for support, however, led them to give attention to sanctions. Nor did 
they seem to realize that a person might accept the end for the sake of 
the sanctions and to avoid the pain of disapproval of others. Thus con¬ 
sequences reappear in a different form. Unwittingly they do not recommend 
general happiness as a sole end hut as a means to many ends. Actually the 
good is recommended more as a foce.1 aim than an ultimate end. This mixture 
of discernment and confusion is very common in ethics. 

The specialist’s concept then has nothing in its favor and is 
contrary to common sense. One may specialize in many fields hut in estab¬ 
lishing and defending standards of moral conduct it is impossible to speci¬ 
alize. All things are in question here. An emphasis on ends to the exclusion 
of means and consequences is an emphasis on conclusions to the exclusion of 


reasons. 


o ; .. ' ' i yywto' d. 

■ 

. 

■ : o r■' 1' 

. 

\ 

. 

. 

< ' ■ 

. 

• • " 

. 

' 

. 

- 

' 

. 

. 


The specialist's conception which reduces all else t6 logic 
and science except the evaluation of ends, would make it feasible to 
reduce ethical methodology to a consideration of ends only. The objec¬ 
tions in the present chapter should be sufficient to prove that an 
emphasis on intrinsic value does not permit one to ignore the use of 
reasons about matters of fact. 

For this reason Stevenson has chosen "good" rather than 
"Intrinsically good" as central to an analysis of both meanings and 
methods. The term 'good' leads to many more types of agreement and 
which are much closer to the types of agreement encountered in every 
day life. 


IX. Second Pattern of Analysis: Persuasive 
Definitions 

The first pattern of analysis took the descriptive meaning 
of good to refer to the speaker's attitude of approval; whatever else 
might be included was suggested, and depended upon our knowledge of 
the speaker and the type of object which he would be likely to approve. 

It is at least obvious that since good has a vagueness, which is at 
times an advantage, there is a large element of suggestion in addition 
to definable meaning in the word. 

The second pattern considers the possibility of the word refer¬ 
ring to certain qualities in the object, and taking the speaker's approval 
as suggested by the emotive meaning. This of course does not imply a 
strict definition but a scheme for many variable definitions. If a speaker 


' • , ■ r ' . 1 . 

.. . * h'.V - .. 

V = i, 7 i ■ r„> r> v ■ J : 7 e 7 r ou 

' c ■ • ' • ' : 1 ■> ■ > ' • 

* 

: J ' ,{ f> “ ■; V, ‘>.0 SvV > 1 7- £* ©•$1.7 > 

' 

•;/ v" ■ i. ■ 

. 



■ - : V ; 7 i ' ■ ■: 

i 

■ ■ .. • . . 1 ' 

7,o " :■? X-o \;g o;o7 ; 7 7o. : O r o;'o7 7-i*s , 707 ovi 
• • . ,7" : ,; 7 , : ... 0, ; VO;.' : >0 V .7: 7o : • '7 

' .■ . 1 ‘ 1 ' ! ’ v > • 

I s lf ; 'I u. 7 . 7 70 rl • -o,-;,. I 7 a] **-orU y <v 

1 

1 ■, : ; . ■ „ 

i: ,r> ' 

. 


46 . 


is asked what he means hy a good president he will enumerate the quali¬ 
ties which he would consider desirable or admirable in a president. This 
of course is not a definition of good; but if his list of qualities are 
accepted, then good, so to speak, is granted a local and temporary meaning 
which would be quite different for discussions of other things. Any defini¬ 
tion of good when singled out from living context would, however, seem odd, 
strained and somewhat artificial. 

The Hedonists, the Utilitarians, the Stoics, and many others have 
defined good in various ways, and any one of the definitions is permissible 
from a linguistic stand-point. We may disagree but the disagreement must 
be based on other than linguistic reasons. When any normative principle 
comes to be an accepted doctrine, good may come by habit to suggest it. 

Common usage permits a great variety of definitions but the greater content 
which the second pattern seems to offer, ends by making no essential difference 
to normative ethics. Nor does it become more objective; and the consideration 
that it makes ethical judgments more amenable to logic and validity is more 
apparent than actual* The second pattern reveals less of new content, and 
more of linguistic complexity than is at first realized. In view of the 
strong emotive meaning, to choose a definition is to plead a cause. The 
disagreement in attitude by the first pattern, may reappear as disagreement 
on definition in the second. Thus Stevenson chooses to call the definitions 
which the second pattern involves by the name of persuasive definitions. 

Because the definition makes no substantial change in emotive mean¬ 
ing, it is used, consciously or unconsciously, to alter people's attitudes. 

We feel we should approve of those things which are good and if we accept 
another person's definition of what constitutes good we are permitting him 

to direct our attitudes. It is easier to reject his definition than it is 


to seek evil and eschew good. 


, 

t 

. 

' . i ' 

, ' 

. v • '': ■- ■: ' 

. 




, 



' 

,, . ' * 

: 


-.! ; 

■ 

! <J ' • 



, 












. 









' . . "• •" - r . . *' 

. 

' 

. <■ 

■ i : ffl : ' 

, 

* 

'■ , ; .. • J- .T-'f-V.!! -VaX. i :*.■ :■ Ci , . • : . ;v ' 

*' v. ■ v^X" Xp Tv:;- r-' >.3^ >X' . '.Ayt :f- >1X >£* 

' 

' 

... • t • 

. 


47 - 


When something becomes known by a name rich in emotive meaning 
people more readily admire it. If I can persuade others to include my 
preferences in their definition of good, and exclude thos things which 
are counter to my inclination, then their agreement on ethical judgments, 
and therefore attitudes, is assured. Since changes seem natural due to 
vagueness, the hearer is often unaware of the fact that he is being in¬ 
fluenced. The definition is frequently doubly persuasive by removing 
emotive meaning here and adding it there, and frequently in a much more 
subtle way than is possible under the first pattern. 

A definition is not always persuasive and if proper care be 
taken to avoid such a situation, it need not be; but many are, both in 
intent and effect. Our language abounds in words such as ’culture’ which 
are vague in descriptive meaning and rich in emotive meaning. These lend 
themselves as ready weapons for subtle influence and persuasion. Each man 
seeks to bestow them on the objects of his own choice. Many debates about 
whether this or that person is a poet, or statesman, or musician, depend 
largely on the definition of these terms, though perhaps not entirely. 
Persuasive definitions are often recognizable by the speaker purporting to 
tell us what true culture or real charity is, as distinct from the mere 
shell. It is an attempt to wed the laudatory emotive meaning to the speaker’s 
own choice of descriptive meaning. In these cases the words ’true' and ’real’ 
take on an emotive meaning rather than the descriptive meaning which they 
usually have; it is an additional persuasion to accept the definition 


offered, since most people accept what is true and genuine. 



: 0 ' 

’ 't • ■ . . X ' ■ c 

■ r: rij ■’ </-. J ■ ’ t .! 0-0' I ).£ it X • ^ i! C?i?« '$j.‘III 

. r :;r ’j • ' j , t ; :.j .. ■ -J ■ > . -• •' ' ■ : >;r 

V ■ ■ r - : . :v : ; ■ J . . ■. 

' 

V '■ . ■- • '• . • .. , • ' >:-■ .. . . . : : , 

. j ■ ■ ■ ( • ■ .•■ • i: 0 ■ : . , • ‘ , ..i . ... , . i< 

< 

* : ' flnj 

■ . • tm. ; : '. : . - . 

' ■ ’ ■ •• f ' ' • .. Ini 

.. •. '. : ' ■ ' . L4 .' . / 

- ■ ■ 

• . ' ; ' , ,‘ 

' 'C, 1 , ■ ■ ■ ' * 


* * ~ •* «j f ' , ■ J 

• " ’ . i ' ’ 

■ J • • . 




■ • - • - 





. ■ 

L t ; -. ; . 

. I 

. 



48 . 


Salesmanship abounds in similar examples. The real estate 
agent doesn't sell houses, he sells homes; the brewers will define 
true temperance, and the dictator will rant about true freedom and 
democracy. Truly one might ask "What's in a name?" The question, 
however, is not whether to reject persuasion but which persuasion to 
reject. Not all persuasion is that of the rabble-rouser, and those 
with unselfish objectives must use persuasion to win people away from 
more reprehensible leaders. Even definitions in a science such as 
economics will cause disagreement because it appears to cast a stigma 
on certain groups, when that was not the scientist's intention at all. 

The choice of a word which may have emotive meaning in some other con¬ 
text may be sufficient to create the stigma unintentionally. 

Sometimes, however, the emotive meaning is not used uninten¬ 
tionally and many writers on economics have departed from detached 
science to plead a cause by the subtle use of emotive meanings in their 
definitions. It is a further commentary on human nature that we are 
much quicker to detect this effort at propaganda when it is used to pro¬ 
mote some principle distasteful to us than when the principle is one in 
which we believe. In the second case, the persuasion must be blatant 
indeed before most people even suspect its presence. 

It would be a pity to prevent learned economists from exerting 
the influence which their knowledge makes possible and frequently worth 
while. It would be an equal pity if they should obscure the distinction 
between their work as scientists and as reformers. 


. - ■ : , X/ •: 


■ ":•» ; ; . rv.io# k or- , .* 

' ' • , 

V; : ,1 f V '/ I.( l ' ' "X OX - 3 D.tX' ' 

, 

' Y J: . 1 J " lj "X: 1 

t; 

V, ; ; . : ' . . X ' ■- \ '' i '■ 

• • ,■ 

■ ■ ' ‘ . ■ 

: 

■' • ' ■ ■ <” „,.L-c • ' - i'e ' ( ' 

. 

» 


V ' .“'l t '-'CO '>■> ’ ‘ ■- ■ - --<■' X 

. ; r« ‘ J ■ 

' 

:■ ; " -J - , :> ' 


M • • 


. 


1 1 . . . . • : f v i 

. 


■ ‘ •; ■ i■ ; .\.l .•. 'fi r>,c. . 

'I: a ' . ' • 

■ ■ ) v . ; : X, r>j • 0 r j n ’ 




' ' ' ' ' 


• r ■ r ■ 

■ 

• ■, v- ' 

, 

* 

■ f . ■ • : ■ . r Xv’> ■ 

• - : ' " J‘ v * 

■; 

.i ■ "Q \ 

' 

. • r- -':J W.: ■ /> Xo.XX 








49 


Any definition of ‘good’ along second pattern lines, any attempt 
to fill in, in detail, the qualities meant by 1 good', is not likely to be 
entirely neutral and is less likely to clarify ethics than to participate 
in it. Since the attempt to influence attitudes is implicit in the defini¬ 
tion we now support our definition with reasons, just as in our first 
pattern we supported judgments. 

What has been said regarding 1 good 1 applies, more or less, to 
all ethical terms, although the boundaries may be somewhat narrower in 
some cases than in others. The Utilitarians have their own character¬ 
istic definitions, which Bentham claimed to be the first real meanings, 
for such words as ought, right, duty and justice. The lexicographer 
often evades the difficulty by listing numerous definitions and typical 
contexts. Another method of avoiding difficulties is to adopt a very 
general manner and say justice has something to do with the distribution 
of goods, or with equality, etc. So far as common usage goes, the ana¬ 
lyst can do no more than indicate a range of meanings to which the term 
justice is susceptible. Even for any one writer there will be a range 
of meanings though albeit a narrower one. Any attempt to single out one 
special meaning for exclusive use is an evaluative effort and the defini¬ 
tion becomes persuasive. 

Some writers attempt to combine the work of the analyst and 
moralist; and there is nothing to prevent this combination provided proper 
caution is observed. Analysis is a narrow specialized task; evaluation is 
by no means specialized. Should anyone think, then, that the habits of 
mind which fit one for an analyst, fit him also for the task of evaluation, 
his work would probably lead to confusions. Such confusion is conspicuous 
in the writings of Sidgwick and others. 











1 1 

1 ■ ■ : p 1 .. : ' . J ; . j 

1 .; 

. 

' ' ■II 

■ 

■ ■ ■ ■■ \ ■ • :j■'J.; '! . , ' v „'j r> -vr.r - v 

. .• . ' c / . . ' • 

' i . • . j . 

>V : J 

. 

' 

♦ ' ■ • • • 

* 

' 

' 

. 

, 

, 



50 


We often say that a writer has a high or low standard of 
justice, depending on what ideals he applies it to, and whether they 
clash or concur with our own. 

Plato, like many other writers, was earnestly perturbed by the 
vagueness of ethics with its attendant oppositions and persuasions. He 
sought to overcome this by defining his terms, yet, ironically, these very 
definitions involved the same persuasion; and in a way that veiled and 
confused it by making it appear to be purely intellectual analysis. 

In the first pattern we declare those things of which we heartily 
approve to be good; in the second we define good to mean those things of 
which we heartily approve. 


X. Second Pattern: Method 

The effect of any persuasive statement lies in the combined 
use of both emotive and descriptive meanings. The emotive meaning evokes 
approval or condemnation, while the descriptive meaning indicates the ob¬ 
ject on which it is bestowed. Without both, persuasion would lack either 
force or direction. 

This helps to point out why first pattern definitions are not 
persuasive while second pattern definitions are. In the second pattern 
the combination of emotive meaning and direction are combined in the 
definition itself. In the first pattern the combination takes place in 
the judgment, the latter being the persuasive counter-part of the former. 

In one we define good in terms of X, Y and Z, in the other we simply predi¬ 
cate it to X, Y and Z. Either procedure is persuasive and equally open to 


£0 ' 


. 


j ' 




■ ■. 




.. ■ T> 


.jpi 












.»; , ■. u ; , ■ f .ci' 






; • 


■ ■ ■ 






oV 






. 

■ 

# 

. ■ . f ■ . . .1 ■ V.1 / v 1 n ■ ■■€ 

4 


1 


. 


; ■ '‘ j': v: 0 v ' ' ' : ''W 

*1',’ 


t i I: O' ■ ■ ^ ' ■ £ ■ ■ 


- r - ’ :? r: '£ ■’ 




. . 

; ;vo ■ e r,r ■ . i : ' • 


. 




v t X |c ■ • . ' t '■ 




>C- On y ; 


. 




51 . 


counterpersuasion. The sole difference lies in the difference in time 
when the combination takes place. It is simply a problem of whether to 
get the persuasion and influence settled as early as possible or to 
postpone it to subsequent contexts. The reapportionment to different 
contexts in no way augments or diminishes the persuasive element. 

Some may feel that because by the second pattern it is possible 
to define 'good' in some detail, once this is done it is above criticism, 
and what remains to be settled is but a matter of science and logic. But 
because the vagueness involved permits each man to fill in his own details, 
or formulate his own definition, it also enables each man to reject the 
other man 1 s definition. In ethics, unlike science, the analytical character 
of a judgment is not sufficient to establish it. 

Nor does the apparent greater content of the second pattern indi¬ 
cate a richer mind. If one man defines good in terms of many qualities and 
another adopts the colder manner of the first pattern, it does not mean that 
the first man has a richer moral sense. The second man might declare each 
of the qualities listed by the first man to be good, taken one at a time. 

Any content which the first pattern appears to omit can always be made to 
reappear. It is simply a difference in linguistic mechanism. Nor is the 
one pattern more or less subjective than the other. 

Stevenson now considers in some detail, the manner in which 
second-pattern judgments can be supported by reasons. Even though they 
are analytical they may still require support. 

First we might consider the case of two persons who use the 
word 'good 1 with the same descriptive meaning. Then any disagreement 
should be resolved by empirical tests to determine whether or not the 

object, which is the cause of the disagreement, meets the requirements 


of the definition 






r . ; 






q 


, * ttl l 

Y 

. 

, , " 

• ■' .. - .!' 7 :' »■" 

' ' 

■ 1 ■ . ■ '■ ; ' > , • •' : « V 1 t 





. 




-:j. . • • ■ • • 

' 


‘ 


' ■ 




. 






- 










' L-:- ■ r ■ ■ • '• '■ 




1 " r . , 

. 

. 



52 


In the second place A might take •'good” to mean conducive to 
X and Y while B considers it conducive to Y and Z. So long as the dis¬ 
pute hinges on whether or not an object M leads to Y, the disagreement 
may he resolved without the difference in definitions becoming apparent. 

A third example might be the case where B admits that M leads 
to Y but refuses to acknowledge it as good because it does not also lead 
to Z. In order to win the approval of B, A might proceed to show that 
M actually does lead to Z, although A, himself, has no particular interest 
in Z. The opposition is emotive rather than logical because each man is 
logical according to his own definition. The argument is really an ethical 
one, despite the appearance of being factual. The logical relations have 
no ethical significance if they have not determined the attitudes which 
each man holds. 

Finally, they may agree in believing that M leads to X and Y 
but not to Z. Then logically A will be justified in considering M to be 
good and B in deciding otherwise. Yet they may still argue even when they 
can see no way of altering their beliefs, national methods may be power¬ 
less to resolve such disagreement for the disagreement is not based on 
error or disagreement in belief concerning M but in attitude only. 

Rational methods may still have a place, hov/ever, but in a different 
way, for the argument will turn more and more towards the definitions. This 
is only reasonable for it is here that the difference lies. Reasons may now 
be advanced in an effort to lead the other party to alter his definition. 

For instance if A can show B that Z is really not desirable B may be persuaded 
to drop it as a necessary condition of the good and agreement will follow. 





..... 


.... • . • . . . ; 

. ■ ’ 


, ■ ■ ■ 


.. •. ,, - r / 1 ' | 


4 )o. : 4" r ■’ > 

• . » ; - f ■ 

te|j; ' his< ‘v i o<-u-r 

, . \ ■ • ■ 


. ■ v .... ; ,. ; f r , - / ■. - : 

i ' ' " ■ 

• 

-- ■ • - ■ , . ' • ■ : ■ 

4 


* 



• - „ . ■ - •» / ■ ■ ... ■ t:>; ok'V: :t i?. $ v •: 


* 





' - ■' - : 


■ ' 

■ f',u vTiii. 0 - '4 .. 

/. -■ ' • : 



■■ 

■ 



, 


• , - 

: ' - 

# 

• 


' •• . $ V ' - 

L; •" '' ' ' '.i' ■ - 


53 


In fact disagreements in attitude according to the second 
pattern usually centre around the definition and so the rational 
arguments are advanced in order to lead the hearer to alter his 
definition. But in this case just as in the first pattern, the 
reasons give psychological rather than logical support to an emotive 
statement. In the first pattern the reasons support ethical judgments; 
in the second they support persuasive definitions. Ultimately the re¬ 
lation between beliefs and attitudes is psychological and changing the 
pattern will not change this fundamental fact. 

In the second pattern, because the difference may lie either 
in the definition itself, or in the belief concerning the object judged, 
it is often difficult to determine where the real difference is* But 
wherever it lies, rational methods are effective only when the differences 
in attitude are rooted in differences in belief. So far as the reasons 
that may be used are concerned, however, the two patterns do not differ in 
the least. 

The artificially simplified examples might lead to the conclusion 
that the second pattern calls for a clear cut crystallized definition. As 
a matter of fact our definitions of ethical and other emotive words are 
frequently quite tentative. When we encounter some object which agrees with 
our definition, yet reveals qualities or consequences which are abhorent to 
us, we are usually quite ready to alter our definition in the light of this 
new fact. 

Intrinsic and extrinsic values offer more difficulty for the second 
pattern as they would require two distinct definitions of good. However, a 
person*s attitudes are fortified in so many complex ways that it is quite pos¬ 
sible that there is no object which he values solely in an intrinsic manner. 











. • ■' 

■ 

' 

- 


jt j . ■ J 

> 

■ 









♦ 


rj ' .Cl 












i 


, 

■ 

: 






■ ' 


, ' • .1 -■' ■ "• 


. ‘ 

■ 


, , J ^ ■ ‘ ■ 


. 

• ' 


54 . 


Each height attained opens up new vistas and probably the only real end 
of the struggle is death. Any objective is but a spring board from which 
the spirit of man leaps on to greater heights - or depths. 

A persuasive definition can be supported by further persuasion. 
A speaker may use any available argument in an attempt to persuade his 
hearer to alter his definition to conform with that of the speaker. A 
multiple persuasion ma.y be involved by defining one persuasive word in 
terms of other words which are themselves persuasive. Thus persuasion 
is neither more nor less common in either pattern. 

The second pattern may at first seem to be more analytical, 
but this is more apparent than real for ethics is not merely the analysis 
of terms but rather the use of them. The effectiveness of the different 
patterns will differ with the circumstances and individuals involved. 

Some people are greatly impressed by the scientific method and so are more 
readily influenced by what they consider to be the analytical detachment 
of the second pattern. So long as the Idols of the market place obstruct 
clear understanding, however, confusions will always exist and so the 
choice of pattern is always difficult. 





55 . 


XI. Moralists and Propagandists 

A moralist is one who endeavors to influence attitudes and 
does so by use of reasons, persuasion or exhoration. But so does a 
propagandist. How then do they differ? 

The fact is that moralist and propagandist are both emotive 
words and the difference is in their emotive meaning only. Emotively 
the words are antonyms, descriptively they are synonyms. Those who 
foster attitudes of which we approve, are, for us, moralists. Those 
who exert their influence in behalf of a cause which we dislike or 
fear, are propagandists. Any attempt to define the words more clearly 
would probably result in persuasive definitions which would not clarify 
the descriptive meaning at all. It is possible but extremely difficult 
to define these terms with sufficient detachment to avoid persuasion. 

When we consider the efforts of those who have tried to do so, we a,rrive 
at the conclusion that we can scarcely distinguish one from the other. 

In fact if all emotive meaning could be successfully grounded then all 
moralists would be propagandists and all propagandists would be moralists. 

In fact the same person is a propagandist to those who do not approve of 
his influence and a moralist to those who do. When educators lead their 
students to impartially consider any ethical or political theory which is 
distasteful to any group, they are usually charged with indoctrination. In 
the face of such strongly emotive words it requires great strength of 
character to continue to pursue whatsoever things are true. 

Eor scientific purposes the emotive meaning of propaganda must be 
neutralized. This is not, of course, the purpose of those who warn people 
against propaganda, or who expose it. Their effort is to build up a counter- 


' 


. 








•;; o 


. 

■ ■ 




' 

. 

r " ■ : " S:j 2 v. ■; ol' 

. 

■ : , : J . .. - - ’ ■■ ‘ ' ' ■ • - ■■■'■ 1 1 ' 

' 

. .. , ' . • ■ -.v ‘ : ■ 




, 




■ 




■ . •' • • ' 

* 

, 

- ■■ : . ' 

, ■ , ■ ' , Jv 


■ , 


' 

■ • ' 





■ ■ ■ ’ ■ i . ■ ■ . . 

' 

. - .. ■ ... ..■ .. . ' ". . .. , -• ' Vi " • .. '"'.i..''.-' 




56 . 


influence to tha.t of the original propaganda. Vaguely used, the term 
propaganda can forward an emotional plea for emotional apathy, suggesting 
that because of their frequent abuse, emotive words should lose caste 
entirely. This is inadvertent overpersuasion. 

I am reminded of an old query: "Can one be unemotional about 
emotionalism?", which seems to have some pertinence here. It is usually 
the case that writers and speakers will themselves use highly emotive 
words in exhorting others to beware of all emotive words. Walter Millis 
in an article entitled "Propaganda for War" remarks that the concept of 
propaganda is an incomparable propaganda device. It is necessary to point 
out, however, that not every use of the term propaganda is propaganda. 

G-reat care must be taken, however, in any scientific discussion 
of these words, lest the emotive meaning, which was presumed to be neutra¬ 
lized, may arise to exert an influence which discredits or lauds the in¬ 
fluence of others, contrary to the intentions of the speaker. 


XII. Some Delated Theories 

John Dewey* s theory on morality and ethics is in many ways similar 
to the present view but differences do exist. Dewey would say that the state¬ 
ment, "This is good" or "This is desirable" would mean "This is to be desired". 
Now the "to be " is used by Dewey as a prediction, it has, as he says, a de jure 
quality that is based on predictive aspects. Now Stevenson would say that 
"to be" is also quasi-imperative, but Dewey, if he noticed this aspect, does 
not emphasize it. His over-emphasis of the predictive quality leads him to 
identify the emotive meaning of a word with what it predictively suggests. He 


explains away the hortatory, quasi-imperative meaning, rather than explaining it 












•- 




. 


















■ . ' 


■ r . , ■. 

O ■ v : 

. ' ’ ' . . • " ' ‘ ■ ■ . ' 

• ■ • t r . 

, ' v 7 r .• 1 r 

. 

. ' K, 

. , ■ • ' , 

. 

, 

' 

’ i i 


- ■ ■ . JCit 

"HJ . ■ 












57 


Now this obliteration of the distinction is important to a 
study of language, it is also important because of its tendency to 
absorb all disagreement of attitude into disagreement of belief. It 
seems to maintain that normative ethics is uncertain only because all 
beliefs about the future are uncertain. 

It is possible that A might say "X is good*' and B might declare 
"X is not good”, and both might be-.fully confirmed by experience. Because 
Dewey does not specify whose attitudes are in question, he misses this 
point entirely and seems to assume that divergent predictions will not 
occur. Further, even though A & B may agree on all predictions about the 
future, they may still disagree in attitude. Dewey insists that all ethical 
judgments are predictive while Stevenson recognizes this as only one linguis¬ 
tic possibility among others. 

Dewey, however, is not content to analyze but also desires to exert 
an influence so that if he avoided fully persuasive definitions he came 
perilously close to them at times. He urges that the only ’real 1 meanings of 
ethical terms are predictive ones. 

On many points, however, Stevenson & Dewey agree and on the points 
of difference Stevenson is less inclined to reject Dewey 1 s views, than to 
round them out and qualify them. 

It may be that Dewey's absorption with personal conflicts obscured 
emotive meaning, for in personal decisions emotive meaning is much less con¬ 
spicuous than in inter-personal arguments. 



, 
















• u . ■ . ' r. 















i 


t■ -■ i ■■ 























, 


■ ■ 





































58 


The present theory, with variations, has become quite popular 
and many writers have recently made their contributions, ' In their 
eagerness to expose the differences between ethical and scientific judg¬ 
ments, however, they have at times given the impression, due to the brevity 
of their remarks, that ethics has no foundation at all, Ayer is quite definite 
in rejecting metaphysics so also is Carnap, However, Stevenson finds more to 
defend than to attack in their works. Y/hen they imply, however, that ethical 
statements are neither true nor false, Stevenson maintains that it would be 
more accurate to say that they can be true or false but that the descriptive 
truth may be insufficient to support the emotive force, 

R. B. Perry, another writer on the same theory, tends to make 
ethics another branch of science by neglecting disagreement in attitude 
and emphasizing agreement and disagreement in belief about attitudes, or 
as he calls them, ^interests”, Hor does he recognize the effectiveness of 
emotive ethical terms in changing attitudes. In an effort to apply demo¬ 
cratic principles he also suggests that objects are better or worse, depen¬ 
ding upon which is approved or disfavored by the greater number of people. 

Thus better is reserved for the support of the majority. This implies that 
any dissenting minority must approve the worse and loath the better. There 
is an element of pragmatism in this view. Stevenson objects to this view, 
although I fear that there is a large element of truth in it. The possibility 
does exist, that anyone who approves of that which the majority disapprove is 
in danger of becoming a moral outcast. Stevenson, however, declares these 
definitions of better and worse to be persuasive and therefore to be suspected. 



, 

. 

a; . ' • 

« 


. 

. 






■ 

' J : : U, ' .. 

' ■ I ‘ ' ■ 








, 

' • , 

"eipjj ate I 

' v. > ,;? * ’>.■ , i:-.; . ■ j. " 

, 

. 

, 

* 

, i 


■ ,C\> 

' 




. 




' 


« 


• ' : ■ • ' ' ' 1 • 


59 . 


G-. E. Moore in writing on this theory asserts that "Propositions 
about the good are all of them synthetic". His argument is based on the 
assumption that ethical terms cannot be defined in naturalistic terms. 

Stevenson, however, affirms that the descriptive meaning can be exhaustively 
defined in naturalistic terms, but no analytical judgment in ethics is 
incontrovertible because one can disagree in attitude with the persuasive 
definition that makes it analytic. The main difference between Stevenson 
and Moore lies in the fact that where Moore would refer to a naturalistic 
fallacy, Stevenson would point to a persuasive definition. In other respects 
there is a close parallel between the two points of view. 

Of all traditional philosophers, Hume came closer to the present 
view than any other. In fact he suggests that virtue is "whatever mental 
action or quality gives to a spectator the pleasing sentiment of approbation". 

If he means by spectator, one who had full and clear factual information about 
the action, then there is a similarity with the present theory. Hume, however, 
assumes that all informed spectators will have approbation for the same objects, 
thus assuming that all ethical disagreements are rooted in disagreement in 
beliefs. But if people should disagree, nothwlthstanding beliefs, then nothing 
would be either virtue or vice. By neglecting a disagreement in attitudes only, 
Hume oversimplifies and overintellectualizes ethical arguments. 

Those who have had any appearance of success in making normative 
ethics a natural science have only done so by giving a persuasive definition 


at the outset 




■ * 

• ; y . - '■> •* ‘ f 







- 

•V: • f , • j 

f 




: 1 > 



• 

. 





■ 



' . . 


, 


\ ,. ls. 

i »: •: t 

» ■ 



. 

' ■ ■' 


. 



• v ■> • : • •• 

.. ' . 

• '. ; 



k 0v. vlT"V.'i 


■ 



li;. .r f v dJ ■" 

' 


uJsii ii J 

: j n : •: 

' 


- LI ■ swt 


' f 1. 1 .. 

. 

« 


, 

- 

• u ■ ;:v ■ 

• 

• 

• ■ ■ 

■ 



f. 

' 

. 

; I 

■ A 

■ ; • ) . ^ • '{ 


« 



\ . 

• . 

: o 3 

■ i 

.. .. 

... ' 

• ‘ f V 

• ; ■ 


6o. 


XIII. Further Observations on Persuasive Definitions 

An understanding of the second pattern depends upon little 
more than an understanding of persuasive definitions. The examples given 
earlier do not cover all the possibilities, however, and some further 
explanations are necessary. 

The examples above were all of the nature wherein the descrip¬ 
tive meaning was altered while the emotive meaning was left roughly constant. 
The inverse procedure is equally important and prevalent. In an argument 
concerning culture for instance, an apponent might say "Culture is only super¬ 
ficial, it is sensitivity and originality that really count". Here the effort 
is to neglect the descriptive and to shift the emotive meaning. The mutation 
here is not an example of persuasive definition, however, as it involves a 
linguistic change rather than a change in definition, although the aim is the 
same. There is a separation and reuniting of descriptive and emotive meaning, 
although, since emotive meaning is not part of the actual definition, this 
cannot be classified as a change in actual definition. Any attempt to change 
the emotive force of a term, may conceivably be successful under certain cir¬ 
cumstances, but can scarcely be linguistically classified as a change in 
definition. 

There are, however, mixed statements that attempt to change both 
descriptive and emotive meanings at the same time. For instance, by urging 
others to identify honor with their own standards and personalities, the 
laudatory effect is enhanced, while the bearer is left free to fill in his 
own descriptive details. This is not entirely a persuasive definition, for 
the speaker does not go into a detailed definition but in a subtle manner, 
which is persuasive in itself, leaves the hearer who has been properly con¬ 


ditioned, to fill in his own details 


■ 


• ' ‘ • - • ! ' • ‘ ! ' - 


, ' V- 8*2 




-if. ;.J '■ 


v.‘ 


' ' • ' 

... . ~' ! : C U ■ ' 

■ ■ • 

: • , . . . Y , : . ■ • • • * ■ ■ •' • ' 5 : 

• " ; . 1 ... • Y , ■ ' 


.. ., ,r $ . , ca ■■ •• • ... y ■ • y? 1 

■ 


; ' ’ • }p ' ■ 


" • 


: 

' ■ ...' '• 






: i J. > ■ u ..i yv'yy; 

■ ; • ■ • ■ : . 




■ . > .. .. 


'; 





.., r v ..y ; ,Y- . •>. :■ ' ■ v - 

■ ' 

■ 1 YY" . •' j';) -Y' ’[ 

' ■* ' 

■ 

... 











6l 


Thus persuasive definitions shade gradually into mixed state¬ 
ments which in turn shade into persuasive quasi-definitions which attempt 
to change emotive meaning only. And persuasive definitions are related to 
statements that persuade without defining. Now let us consider how they 
are related to statements that define without persuading. 

No definition, no matter how detached and no matter what the 
field of research, can he entirely devoid of influence on the hearer. The 
choice of definiens implies that these are the matters of importance, and 
this choice reflects the speaker’s attitudes. Even scientific terms tend 
to acquire prestige. Thus we cannot insist on no emotive force hut only 
that it he practically negligible. Detached definitions do direct the 
hearer’s attention and so may affect his opinion of what is important hut 
here their pressure on attitude practically ends. Their effect on attitudes 
is indirect rather than direct. 

Their influence, too, is much narrower, affecting only what is 
judged important as a part of knowledge, while persuasive definitions affect 
ones judgment of a much wider range of subjects. Any definition, however, 
may clarify a given statement, and that statement in turn may become the 
reason for a moral judgment. If the scientist uses terms such as legitimate 
procedure and similar emotive words, his definition must still he classified 
as persuasive, enen though scientific in appearance. It is to he noted 
further that scientists may agree on what is important as a part of knowledge 
and still disagree in approval or disapproval of these things. Scientists do 
not necessarily agree in ethical judgments concerning atomic power. 


. 

. 

« 

■ • -■ f , , 


S.'i , x'.‘< . . i. v ■ v j ; ■ i . ; Pf ‘ ,, 

, . . 

. 


. 

1 

. 

... > ■ ■ 




* - ’) . j 

. 

■ 

- • " ' 




. P 


62. 


Further, it must "be recognized that theorizing, though motivated 
by curiosity does not rely on that alone. Native curiosity usually must 
"be reinforced by a feeling of need or desire before it will have the neces¬ 
sary force to carry through to the acquisition of knowledge. Knowledge, 
however, is the aim of research, even though the knowledge may be sought 
only as a means to other ends. An attitude toward X as a means to Y remains 
as an attitude toward X despite Y. 

In the narrower field of science, considerations of what is impor¬ 
tant to knowledge usually leads to little or no opposition, although opposi¬ 
tion is not impossible. Our search for knowledge of immediate practical 
application is motivated by curiosity reinforced by many other desires and 
purposes. It is obvious that convergent purposes will lead to agreement on 
what knowledge is important, on the other hand, opposed purposes may still 
lead to a desire for the same knowledge. If one man wishes to promote, and 
another man to oppose, some development, they both will need to know its 
causes, as this knowledge is essential for either purpose. The fear of 
opposing uses of the same knowledge will greatly affect the dissemination of 
knowledge but will not cause any disagreement as to its importance. 

There frequently are differences of opinion as to what is important 
but these seldom develop into oppositions in which we strive to alter the 
attitudes of others. Few men know what knowledge they may require next to 
further their aims, and so they tolerate, or accept, and usually go further, 
and approve of other men developing knowledge in which, at present, they have 
little or no interest. Strong conviction in the superiority of their 
own methods, or professional jealousy, may cause opposition of a bitter 
kind, but this is not frequent and it is probable that as science advances 


further, oppositions will tend to become less frequent. In the broader field 


- 

. 

. 


vr . 


















1;,f. , : ;; : ' ' 



. 

. ■ i ( 

' . t 

\n ■ vX • \ ; • ■ . if-r*. . *■ 






r f ; 4 .- :j ay f " ‘ 




■ 1 . 


lixcy \ti*a • v ;; r '-:ro * f a t -" 






s , ' / ■. i • • ■:! ■ ... 




• 


A. C ‘ ' . '".i ■! ■ i 






■ 












< 






- 

. 

■ 


63. 


of ethical judgments, it is to he hoped that the same will he true, hut 
since ethics affects the whole personality, the hope is less confident. 

Some definitions in science are so forcible in their redirection 
of attention that they approximate persuasive ones. Such definitions might 
he called re-emphatic. For example when we say, 11 Infinity is not a number 11 
we are choosing to use number in a narrow sense, for in a broader sense it 
might be extended to include infinity. This sort of statement is often made 
to people who do not pay enough heed to distinctions and it has a quasi impera¬ 
tive element, urging them to pay more attention to differences. On the other 
hand, a statement such as 11 All emperical statements are hypothesis 11 has the 
effect of broadening the meaning of hypothesis beyond its usual meaning and 
is made to people when we wish to direct their attention to similarities or 
analogies which we feel they are neglecting. The temporary confusion caused 
by such statements in the hearer*s mind, is exploited in the interests of 
causing him to give further thought and observation to the matter and so to 
clarify his meanings and classifications that he may avoid greater confusions 
later on. In these examples emotive meaning is of little concern. 

There are others, however, in which re-emphatic and persuasive 
functions combine. Re-emphatic definitions are marked by an element of 
paradox and surprise, persuasive ones by emotive meaning, and so they may 
overlap. For Instance if art is defined so as to exclude photography it 
might be used to emphasize the differences between photography and the other 
arts. It might also be used to deny the laudatory title of art to the work 
of the photographer, thus it serves both purposes. Many similar examples can 
be given, some of which may be used unconsciously and others consciously. In 
fact a re-emphatic definition made by one person to direct attention only, ms.y 


, 

; : ; , . 0 ' ( ' U • -- 

•-; ■- .■ • • -• ;■ \ r < :■ ' i, ' j.'V - 

•V? 1 ■ v • ’" . 


■: c . ■ . ■ ' " „ . '' 






•. j 


< . u -U-;. v. ' ■ ' - 

, . • . 

• V .: ; ■( 11 ; ' ; a " ' > ) :J\ ' ; >' ' < 1 : v ; ' 

i ' ■' . " • -■ 

i. < ■■ 


... v - .L 

■v r 

. 

" . ‘ !: f 

. 


. 


J ' ■ ■ ’ 


.• 




Li) 


. 

* 


. 1 




■, t ■■ f : J ^ , : ' ‘ ' ' Wfcr ;• ‘ : ' '* ' - : • ’ '.; 






. 






. 

' 

/ t k ! < »'i m v d j .iH^r ,*K> y’s LtOiti* v- V--*- u r 

;■) ;■ J ;”.ru. -i it O-lo 1 iJ.il: 


■ ■; ■ / ' '• 




64. 


be used later by another person to redirect attitudes towards groups or 
individuals. Because of the obvious value which a re-emphatic definition 
or statement may have, its use is accepted by the most severely detached 
inquirer, thus the persuasive element ma.y gain admission by its association 
with the re-emphatic element. 

It cannot be questioned that re-emphatic definitions have served 
a purpose where nothing less than such a shock would serve. Ayer, and others, 
in their re-emphatic definition of nonsense, have helped to point out a- crucial 
philosophical problem that probably would have gone unnoticed without the ele¬ 
ment of shock in the definition. 

In legal cases, judges are frequently called upon to define terms 
which the legislators left vague. Whether or not those people who live in 
trailers should pay a property tax depends upon the definition of dwelling. 

Thus the definition is intimately bound up with the ethical problem of who 
should pay taxes. Such definitions, therefore, resemble persuasive ones ex¬ 
cept that the emotive meaning is replaced by the full mechanism of the law. 
Persuasive definitions, while lacking the legal sanctions, do bring emotive 
effects into play and so are similar in making certain words important ethical 
instruments. 

These examples prove in an arresting way the folly of taking 
definitions as trivial or merely verbal. Many definitions, the persuasive 
ones, the re-emphatic ones and many detached ones that clarify concepts, may 
be of central importance to the outcome of highly important issues. 




' 

’ • • . . , 








. ■ 


, ■ 

■ :• •.\ , ‘i " •' • 1 ' . 


' 

. ■ ■ ' 

, , ;: • . ' . : , ■ ' .. 

•• % . - 

•' - : ■ l • ; 

I .. v'- 

. • ' '• - : 

.:i; 1 : ’ ■ '■ 

■ • [. . • J * 

, ' ■ ; .. ■ * A ■ ■ 

, 







65. 


XIV. Avoidability: Indeterminism 

A great deal of confusion surrounds these words. In many 
discussions the words are confused with each other to such a degree that, 
if they are not considered as synonymous, the participants cannot tell 
clearly, which one is the cause of the difficulty. 

To clear up the difficulty at the outset, and leave the broader 
discussion until later, we will attempt to outline the distinction in broad 
terms at this point. An avoidable consequence or action might be taken to 
mean a result which could have been avoided if the person had made a differ¬ 
ent choice. The person, however, did not make that different choice. Nor 
does avoidability, in itself, take into consideration the closely associated, 
yet different, question of whether or not the choice was free or indeterminate. 
Indeterminism, on the other hand, is concerned with whether or not we have any 
freedom of choice in the first place, If our choices are preordained then there 
is little use in talking about what might have happened if we had chosen 
differently. 

In physics it might be intriguing to speculate about objects rising 
instead of falling, if the laws of gravity were different, but this does not 
imply indeterminism in physics. By the same token avoidability does not neces¬ 
sarily imply indeterminism in psychology. Avoidability has to do with the 
results of a different choice but nothing to do with the causes or avoidability 
of the choice itself. These points will receive further discussion later, but 
so much is necessary at the outset in order to proceed at all. 

A definition of choice might seem to be necessary but, without 
denying its possible value, for the present purposes, the definition can be 
left undecided within extremely broad limits. The customary range of meanings 
will suffice for present requirements. 


. : 


■ 

r 

- / .j • r > , ' .1 b ■ f. ■ ' ' ■ 

' . . • ; i i > 

• . • 

• . • , • ■ , N * i ■ . ■ • ■. ■ .■ ■ / * ■ . i ‘ . -• • - 

• • • . , • •. , >■ :.-c ' • -'W •• 

• ■ 




66. 


In making ethical judgments about past actions, we have no 
hope of changing that act which is past and gone, hut rather to influence 
future actions. Thus even those ethical judgments which seem to judge 
past deeds only, are made with the purpose of exerting their influence in 
the future. Even when we judge characters in a novel, our purpose is to 
lead or deter our listeners from taking this or that character as a model 
for subsequent conduct. 

Now if an action is unavoidable, it is not possible to influence 
it and so we refrain from judging such acts. It would be futile for instance 
to tell a person that he ought to grow taller. An ethical judgment of an 
^voidable action may lead the person to make a different choice next time 
and so to avoid the consequences of his choice. In some cases the results 
are unavoidable, the circumstances being such that no matter what the choice, 
the result would have been the same. An ethical judgment under such circum¬ 
stances will have no effect and so will be futile. 

If choice, then, is a factor in controlling the action, an ethica,l 
judgment, by altering a man's attitudes, may in turn influence his choice and 
subsequently his actions. If choice is not a factor in the result, which 
would have been the same in any event, then ethical judgments have no power 
to control actions and so the wise person refrains from making them. 

This account emphasizes the intermediate steps by which ethical 
judgments influence actions, first by influencing attitudes, which in turn 
affect choice. But is not choice nothing more than attitude in action. If 
choice is the manifestation of the will, then is the will not the manifestation 
of our attitudes or dispositions to action. If, however, this be conceded, the 
redundancy is more of an inelegance than an error. Choice is but an intermediary 

in any event and since the altered attitude may not be put to work, then choice 



67. 


as attitudes at work is quite acceptable to the present account. 

Further if anyone wishes to think of choice as some unique psychological 
phenomenon he is at liberty to do so, provided he will consider it as 
something which can be guided by attitude. 

The judgment of avoidable acts may be made with the purpose 
of influencing the individual who performed the act or it may be made 
as a precedent to influence others in similar circumstances. Judgments 
of unavoidable acts may have a harmful effect in causing humiliation to 
the performer and terrifying others, unnecessarily, concerning matters 
beyond their control. Such judgments then may cause pointless fear in 
the hearer or indignation leading to loss of prestige in the speaker. 

Traditional writers, because of their emphasis on the cognitive 
aspect of language, have over-looked the quasi-imperative nature of 
ethical judgments. They, therefore, failed to notice the present relation 
between avoidability and ethical judgments. A parallel analysis has fre¬ 
quently been given with regard to avoidability and punishment, however. 

In fact since an ethical judgment is a sort of verbally mediated 
punishment, causing humiliation when directed to the performer of the act, 
or a probable change in attitude, which is a sort of indirect punishment, 
on the part of others to whom the judgment is addressed, then to speak of a 
parallel is rather an understatement. Both punishment and ethical judgments 
have that same element of forward-looking, preventive or reformative natures. 

All punishment is not preventive or reformative, however, and in 
spite of what it ought to be, the fact remains that much of it is vindictive 
in nature. It springs from many motives and usually mixed ones. The same is 






< i > ■ ' 1 ■ - : . i • ■ <' 

...r: .■ - - ' ■ .i ■ ' J • ■■ •' ! 


' 

. 








■ o *>:: // .i " ! i ■/ • .:n: ' • l- p- 

V 

, 

• f ;•:? / -• * c . ■ -v 

i- . f : ,r • ' a o it;:\ , r .;‘ j o fr> . L. v/'.r X'ji 

■ 

i '; • r •' r J ••• ; •’ ' 

: 7 • ' . " ' : ' - '■ "■ ■ 

' ' .7 ‘ ■ , • ' • ' ' ’ 


. 






- 


: ^ ’ 
























68 . 


true of ethical judgments. We do not always desist from judgments in the 
face of unavoidability. The motive may he more of the nature of giving 
vent to our own feelings than an attempt to control actions in the future. 

Thus to assume that all ethical judgments are forward-looking 
is an over simplification. It underestimates the impassioned blindness of 
some of our judgments and suggests that all our judgments are calculated. 

We do usually accept unavoidahility as a reason for withholding judgment 
hut this is frequently due to the fact that we are creatures of habit, 
rather than cold calculation. 

If a man performs an act whose consequences are deplorable hut 
he acted through ignorance of the consequences, should he he censured? This 
usually depends on whether or not his ignorance in turn was avoidable or not. 

In the army, ignorance of duly published orders is no excuse, because ignor¬ 
ance of orders is quite easily avoided by referring to the daily orders, which 
are posted in conspicuous places. The man is, therefore, censored both on 
account of his act and his ignorance. 

But some actions, while avoidable, are difficult to control. As 
the difficulty increases our willingness to judge tends to decrease. We are 
less inclined to judge an older person, not just from consideration of their 
feelings but because we feel they are more set in their ways and therefore, 
more difficult to influence. We usually withhold judgment in the case of 
the addict and take more direct steps to cure him. 

Judgments, too, may be withheld out of kindness, sympathy, or lazi¬ 
ness without any consideration of the probable effectiveness. Yet avoidability 
remains of special interest because it has become a part of the profound but 
intuitive wisdom of everyday life. 


. 

< 

' 

■ ; •. , . ■ : ■ • • .1 • . . * . J •■■■•' - ■'.i ' • ‘ 

. ■ .... J. ■ 

, 

■ 

''s'. . 03 • 

■ 

. 

■t. . . ' • • o . ' ,: /; • ■ v :; 

. ’ • 

* 

' ' 



69 . 


The problem of determinism of choice is often confused with 
avoidability of consequences. It must be reiterated that an action may 
be avoidable regardless of whether or not the choice of it is determined 
or indetermined. Avoidability is of interest to ethics but determinism 
is of little consequence and would not require any attention if it were 
not for the confusion which exists. 

There are those who insist that ethics demands indeterminism of 
choice, for if choice be determined, which to many means preordination, 
then there is no hope of influencing choice and the chooser is a sort of 
automatum swept forward by immutable forces. 

This, however, simply removes one problem to introduce another. 

For if choice is indetermined then no one can forsee his choice, it will 
depend on nothing but chance, neither precept, nor example, nor personality 
can influence it for it is not determined and that excludes all determing 
influences. 

Now it is foolish to argue that any psychological event is entirely 
cut off from all preceding ones. To some extent then a man’s choice is deter¬ 
mined by a great many factors. This, however, does not introduce complete 
fatalism. In fact an ethical judgment may itself be one of the fa-ctors, and 
indeed an important factor, in determining a man's future choices. 

It is only when we judge actions in the past that we are struck by 
the immutability of the choices and consequences. When we realize that ethical 
judgments, even though frequently expressed in the past tense, are always for¬ 
ward looking, then we also see that they can be a factor in influencing future 
choices. When we judge a past action we surely do not expect to change that 
which is already history, but the purpose of the judgment is to influence 
future choices under similar circumstances. 







. 

•. . . : f ■ V > *i‘ J ‘ ■ 1 


■ . . 

. 



« 

, 

, 



- 

' 


:v • .... , ■ f ■- ■ ■'% ■ 


. 



• 


’ 






■ 


.. 

' 

. "I.:'- i> v o ' : 


■ 


„ 


70 . 


Probably a closer approximation to the truth than either deter¬ 
minism or indeterminism is a combination of both. No one who does not 
forget all psychology, can possibly support complete indeterminism, nor 
can any one who observes every day actions believe in complete determinism 
which is synonymous with preordination or fatalism. The truer picture would 
present our choices as partially determined but with enough latitude to be 
subject to influence by the introduction of new factors if they be strong 
enough. 


XV. Practical Implications 

In conclusion let us consider some of the implications of the 
theory just developed. One of the major problems of ethics is its relation 
to science. 

Traditional ethics have tended to distrust science and adopt the 
other-worldliness of mataphysics as the basis for ethica.1 authority. Many 
ethical writers, having little scientific knowledge or training, urge a 
return to the teachings of Aristotle and Plato as more worthwhile than modern 
science which they distrust. The fact is, however, that modern thought is the 
natural development of the processes and principles laid down by earlier 
thinkers. The traditional ethical writers would, then, chew upon the roots 
and at the same time reject the fruit as poisonous. 

This distrust of science is based primarily on a misunderstanding 
of science and what science is attempting to explain. For instance, these 
writers, deplore what Gerald Heard calls the "mechanomorphic cosmology of 
modern science 11 in which conception they believe science reduces man to an 


,! offshoot of a universal machine 11 . 


: : •: : ‘ • r '■'? v dvd, " : 

: 

• - • . , r- ; •. ■ • ' ehU • •' 




, 

- \d Iv. -r-ft/. ').d:d, : d f ■‘v'■ 

S ,;v: n >-J -i ' " — x i j -I'X 

■ •; / • ■ 

. ' . ,, ‘ ' 1 " ■••• ’ *' ‘ ‘ ' ' 

t 

• .. :.t; •.. -•; ; ' ,j : • ■ j; * ■ i •...!' X ‘:: ’t.X • ■ ■:. i; 3 d 


3 






■ 





: 

, 




71 


The obvious fact is, however, that even if science did believe 
that all men’s actions could be explained from a complete knowledge of 
the chemical and physical structure of human organisms, together with 
complete knowledge of environment, science would still have to explain 
those actions as they are. Now we know that some acts are motivated by 
altruism, benevolence, and other laudable motives and it would be the job 
of science not to explain these motives away but rather to explain their 
presence. 

Much the same can be said of the view that mind is a mere product 
of the body which is practically the same as epiphenomenalism. No scientist 
would dogmatize about this view but even if the view were accepted there is 
no ground for maintaining that it would have grievous moral implications. We 
all have plenty of evidence from everyday life, that the mind does concern 
itself with ethical problems and is influenced by moral judgments. Whatever 
theories science may advance as to the origin of mind in human beings, there¬ 
fore, cannot be presumed to threaten our knowledge of how the mind functions 
at present. Any science that would present to us a picture of the mind that 
is not in accordance with observable facts concerning the mind as it functions 
from day to day would soon be rejected by scientists generally, just as readily 
as it would be by moralists. 

If the ethical implications of science are distorted by those who 
distrust science, it must also be acknowledged that they have been distorted 
also by those who accept scientific theries with premature confidence. Those 
who speak on moral issues from the point of view of some narrow specialized 
field of science, would not be content with such a level of speculative 
generality in their own laboratories. 








, 



■ •; : ■ 1 •' i. ' . -■ •. J ’.. ' 1 " 

■. ' • f. -'a.'/ • . . . S V; L : 

. • j ' 

•: ; ■■ .■ ;; ... . . rv',?. : i‘. > -V.' , ■< - r v r i::€ r r . r Ir 


, 









. : : 0 ' ' '■ 


■ 


' 0 

* 


■if •; s ■ ■ 

















. 









• • ■ 1 ■' 

■ 1 ' 


• 






. 


nf i riv: 




9. : 

. 

' c . 


■ 

. J ., .. 







r. •••' -yw.nl 

r : ■. :: .. 7. 

' 

■ - ,t 


: ■ ; n V i ■ 





■ . .. ,■ ■. ,* •; J m " •: i\. '■ j>,, ■ ■ ■ .■: ■' ■ X‘: : : « 

. 3 c ii . 

• ’■ • ■■ i > .. .. " I ■ y 1 J.. ? ' ".n ■1 

. ' > ’ ' • ’ 

, 

, • T - /■ - -v »*' '■■■', • IS yyj: I'.-ra.'' 'i • " I 

r ! ' , ■ : • -> 

... ‘ i: v ( ‘ ■■ ' -r 1 ' < '' 

* • ■ ■ > , ' 

< 


72 . 


Just as there are those who would condemn science on very- 
limited acquaintance with the subject, so there are those who "become 
overawed and are carried away "by their enthusiasm for the scientific 
method and whose enthusiasm stems from generalizing from a very "brief 
acquaintance. These enthusiasts are apt to attempt to encompass the 
whole of nature within the Confines of their own theory. This viewing 
of the world through the small end of a funnel, comes uncomfortably 
close to developing a scientific mythology where the sweep of evolution 
or some other theory is presented with more dramatic appeal, than scien¬ 
tific thoroughness. 

Although those who feel that we have too much science, are mis¬ 
taken in considering science to he an enemy, they have a strong point in 
the fact that an absorption in science to the exclusion of the humanities 
leads to an emphasis on the cognitive side of the intellect. Feeling and 
acting are essential sides of the personality which must not be neglected 
without the risk of onesidedness which is just as undesirable as is dis¬ 
played by those who base all judgments on feeling and intuition without 
proper research or understanding. 

Now let us consider how a writer on normative ethics might proceed 
in view of the theory which has been developed. Let us assume that he is 
writing for mature, intelligent people and that he decides to adopt the 
method of examining both sides of a normative question, weighing the reasons 
which support his conclusions against those which might be used to attack them. 

Bearing in mind that any statement of fact that may be likely to 
direct attitudes, may serve as a reason for an ethical judgment, the writer 
will realize that he will require knowledge that is extremely diversified, 

not only in order to give reasons for his conclusions, but to insure that he 
is not making serious omissions. 


r ■ : ■;; .■• ■' ' ■ ■ ; . f ■,■ ; : ... ; : ' ■ : 

1 ' 

■ 

. 

, • , •: '•) . * v ' ■; ■ V : A 

, . • ■'«; ... • : -• ' I - 

’ ■ ‘ 

t ; ■ •• e ’ • ' 

n'i : \ • - <o.\ '■ j l ■ • ‘ 

, . ■ ' .1 ' . . • - •: : ■ • 'X i . ' J ■ 

>> ... , • .• . • ' •. • ’ •: ! - ' • • r .- •'» 0.0 

. . : \ • \ . . . ' ' i ' . : < •• ■ : ' ' 

' 

• ' 

' -J • j:..' " ■' . . ■ 

. 

1 . ' 

. 

■ ■ ' ■ ■ ■' 

; 

. t -■ : 

■ . ■ • ' ' ’ - ; . ■ '■ . ‘ Vi ■ 


, 




73 . 


He must not deal only with ultimate ends, for the discussion on 
the specialists’ theory of intrinsic values has shown that people have a 
plurality of ends in view. His unifying principles, if he must have them, 
will he focal aims. These are valued partly as an end hut largely as an 
indespensihle means to a multitude of other desirable ends. I believe that 
Stevenson is closer to the truth in this respect than those who talk about 
ultimate ends for I find it extremely difficult, if not impossible, to evaluate 
anything without at some time, considering its consequences. The question of 
why, usually arises, sooner or later, in discussing or promoting the desirabi¬ 
lity of any quality. Why should men be honest? Why is truthfulness of so 
great importance? Even Kant’s Categorical Imperative is an invitation to 
consider the consequences of an act, if it should become universal practice. 

Thus ultimate ends are more elusive than has often been supposed. 

Our imaginary writer, then, must begin with the middle principles,or 
concerns of everyday life. He may eventually arrive at some all-embracing 
aim but he must recognize that the first principles are the last to be arrived 
at, for their comprehensiveness makes them most difficult to formulate. Certainly 
he must avoid the error of assuming the end to be a sine qua non to all enquiry. 

He must also make use of science but not as a specialist in science 
but in a way inimical to specialization. It has been shown that our attitude 
towards X becomes reinforced when we believe that it will lead to Y. Now this 
belief must be predictive for if we wait to see if X will lead to Y, the infor¬ 
mation may be too late. To convince a critical mind beforehand that X will 
lead to Y may require a detailed knowledge of many different fields of science. 
Reliable predictions can only be made from a detailed use of sciences and not 
by a gesture at their more impressive concepts and generalizations. 


- J. . " • '• 1 •' : . . rj ■ .. f ' tr. ' 

■ /■ i ) ■ < 

, • 

p . . ..... .. ... ■ ■ V * --v. .i.. • 

* V i;m ■ * ; , ■- : J 

* ' • 

. . : - •- ' - '■ ' , 

I . , •. j ... ' ' . . ' • ' " ■- ' ‘ . 

, 

. 

■ , . ■; a \ . ■ t ' i . 

' . ... . 

• / . ' ' • . •" 

: . ■ ' .. . X. V OO, ’ J 

; - ' .' ' 

' ... : . • ' ■ ' )i ’ 



74 


What shall we say about the use of persuasion? Persuasion can 
serve the useful purpose of supplementing rational reasons. Not only can 
it give the impulse to action that is needed in some cases even after the 
reasons have convinced the hearer of the rightness of the conclusion, but 
it can sometimes lead the hearer to study and analyze further on his own 
account. Mature, intelligent people will not be led to accept a conclusion 
by persuasion without rational reasons, but the persuasion of the speaker 
may lead the hearers to investigate for themselves and it may not only 
supplement, but also stimulate thought. 

The use of persuasive language, however, must be properly controlled. 

It is a characteristic of mythology that the two uses of language, emotive and 
descriptive, are fused in such a way that the poverty of the descriptive mean¬ 
ing remains hidden. To avoid this, the moralist must, for long periods, 
severely avoid emotive language to be sure that in testing his conclusions, he 
is adopting a cautious scientific approach and not a mere semblance of it. Once 
the rational reasons are sufficiently weighed, however, it may be not only 
necessary, but desirable to use persuasion to overcome the apathy or false 
opinions of the hearers. Emotive meaning then is a valuable supplement to 
descriptive meaning but should never be used as a substitute for it. 

Thus the present theory which is but a prolegomenon to further enquiry, 
will help to make illusory conceptions of certitude give way to conceptions more 
commensurate with the problems they seek to resolve. When a subject is poorly 
understood, one conceals his insecurity from himself and others by pretending 
to certainty. As the study develops, however, the inquirer can recognize, 
without loss of confidence, that his conclusions may meet intelligent opposition 










, • • i.ta • ■ * t>< • • •• • ■ J ■ r* 

- 

. 


. 

■ r v v . • r ' 

. 

■ 

■ 

. 

, 

. • ' ' ' ■ ' ' ‘ 

• i 

, 



75 


and. may require correction or modification in the light of further 
experience and reflection. This does not necessarily lead to skepti¬ 
cism or cynicism hut only to the turn of mind that is resolved to abide 
by those conclusions which seem most trustworthy, while recognizing that 
living questions are too complex to be answered once and for all by any 
simple formula. 










• i ' . r ' ' • • ' 

■ . • . i . : .1 ’ 

V 


■ i , •• •• ■ . ...1 


. 








SECTION III 


CRITICAL ANALYSIS 








76 . 


This theory of ethics, which is probably more clearly and 
fully expounded by Stevenson than by any of the other writers, is 
bound to attract a great deal of criticism. In fact it has already 
been the subject of quite bitter attacks and no doubt will be subjec¬ 
ted to a great deal more. Nor can the other theories on which the 
criticisms are based, be dismissed lightly. Nevertheless I find more 
to defend than attack in Stevenson’s position. 

Before proceeding to a consideration of specific criticisms 
and reasons for defending Stevenson's theory, I feel that it is necessary 
to point out that the purpose here is to discuss ethics as it is, not 
ethics as it should be. Any person who has given much thought to ethics 
will probably have his own opinions, or dreams, if you will, of what 
ethics should be. This is what makes the subject so intriguing. Thus 
it would be quite possible for any writer to write two entirely different 
books on the subject, one of which would be analytic in nature, describing 
in a more or less detached manner how the human mind operates here and now 
in the field of ethics; the other work would be more Utopian, in which the 
writer would expound his ideals of what ethics should be in the best of all 
possible worlds. The second book, however, would not be about ethics, it 
would, on the contrary, engage in it. The philosopher has now become a 
moralist. 

To take an analogy from the field of aesthetics, a philosopher 
might, and does analyse what constitutes a.rt and what gives it its appeal 
for the observer; but it is only an artist who can improve art. The writer 
in the field of aesthetics may criticize Beethoven's works but it would take 
another Beethoven to write them, let alone improve upon them. In other words, 


■ 


, 

1 

! 

f him ; • ' QvizU £ 

! ; . 


. 

. 

...■ ■ ■ -fit . ■■ ■■■■ ; •*■ 

■ 


■ ■ ■■ 

1 






/o , - ' • « 




77. 


the writer must turn artist if he would improve on art as it now is. To 
criticize or evaluate existing art is one thing; to produce "better art is 
another, 

Stevenson's work is definitely analytic and as such is an attempt 
to analyse ethics as it is and not as it should be. Such work is obviously 
valuable and necessary, no matter what objective the student of ethics 
might have in mind. Even those moralists who study ethics only for the 
purpose of improving it, would be committing a serious error in concentrat¬ 
ing exclusively on works describing ideals only; for those who would raise 
ethics from its present state must first study and determine what that 
present state is. Any improvement must begin at the point where ethics is 
at present. It is the raw material on which one must work in any attempt to 
raise the standards. The analogy from aesthetics is not completely parallel 
(as indeed few analogies ever are) for the reason that few people are musicians 
or artists, while all people engage in evaluative efforts and so take part in 
ethics. It is sufficient for present purposes, however, if it helps to illus¬ 
trate the fact that the analysis and observation of ethics on the one hand, and 
the attempt to teach or improve ethics on the other, are two distinct and 
different types of endeavor. 

Not all philosophers, when writing on the subject, have kept this 
point sufficiently clear in their minds. The result is that in much of the 
traditional works on ethics there is a constant confusion which makes it 
difficult, if not impossible, to tell whether at any given time the writer is 
describing ethics as he believes it to be, or as he believes it should be. 

Since there is a continual admixture of the two occupations, observation and 
analysis on one hand, and moralizing on the other, and this being done uncon¬ 
sciously in many cases by the author, it is little wonder that the reader 
cannot make the distinction, if, indeed, he is aware that such a distinction 


exists 



78. 


A case in point which illustrates the previous argument and at 
the same time is of considerable, if not central, importance to what is 
to follow, is the matter concerning authority in ethics. Many and heated 
arguments could be developed over whether or not there should be such 
authority. Some people feel very strongly that there should be, and find 
any other proposal abhorrent to them, among these I would include Kant, who 
labored prodigiously to support his view. Others, who are more individual¬ 
istic are just as firm in their belief that, since each man is equipped with 
reasoning powers of his own, while, at the same time, no man is infallible, 
the acceptance of,or attempt to impose a final authority in the field of 
ethics is to be deplored. In this school I would include Hume, who is also 
a protagonist of no mean stature. But that is not the question for the 
analyst. As an analyst he is not concerned with whether or not there should 
be a final authority; he is concerned, rather, with the question of whether 
or not there is such an authority. 

How if any person or group chooses to accept any person, or book, 
as the final authority, then that book or person is indeed an authority for 
them. But are those who refuse to accept that authority wrong in so refusing? 
Ethics being what it is, and lacking in so many ways that property of being 
demonstrable as are scientific investigations, is it possible to declare this 
person or that book to be the one and final authority in ethics? Even those 
who declare that there must be some authority disagree violently at times on 
what that authority should be. 

To turn again, briefly, to aesthetics, we find that the same situation 
prevails there. Many people feel that there should be some authority in matters 
of art but cannot agree on what that authority should be. So we have the groups 

of surrealists, impressionists, classical, and many others, each offering them- 










. 

, ' ■ • . . / ■ , ' '. 


- 






■ .1 •• ' ■ 


. 




■ ■ . ■ ' • 


. 


0. :.r • • , V*’ i / o ' ^ ^ ' 1 


I 

. • 

: •• ■ ,vr, •; -i - i& 

■ ; . • : ; ■ ■ •< • ' • • • - ' 

... - • • 

V ' : ' • ' • ‘ - ’ : ' ‘ " : "' 

. 

. • -« ' ' 

. 





79 


selves most willingly as authorities in all matters pertaining to what 
constitutes real art. This last is very reminiscent of Stevenson's persua¬ 
sive definitions, and since it was unconsciously so, it is another illustra¬ 
tion of his power of observation and analysis. 

It would seem to he no more than simple logic to assume, however, 
that if some final and indesputible authority exists in either field, men 
of intelligence and good-will would he more unanimous in recognizing and 
accepting it. Since so many scholarly and learned people have disagreed 
so much in matters pertaining to both ethics and aesthetics, it is very 
doubtful indeed, if any final authority in all matters pertaining to either 
ever has or does exist. At least it is safe to say that no authority at 
present exists which is recognized by all men. 

This point is essential to any attempt to defend or criticize 
Stevenson's viewpoint, for I believe that most of the criticism and certainly 
the most bitter, will come from those who believe that there should be some 
authority in ethics; those critics who recognize this will make the frontal 
attack by declaring that this theory undermines all authority, or as they 
may put it, sweeps away all the foundations of ethics. As a corollary to 
this, they go on to point out that ethical judgments are left now to the 
caprice of the individual who makes them. Other critics, who do not recog¬ 
nize so clearly in what source their opposition is rooted, will make the more 
devious attack of proclaiming that Stevenson and his fellow writers, remove all 
content and stability from ethics. Let us consider each of these criticisms 
separately, albeit the difference is more apparent than actual. 

Turning first to those who attack openly on the grounds of authority, 
they have been answered in part by what precedes, but their criticism is worthy 


of more consideration 






. ' ; ; • ■ ; , ■; J.u' ul ; X X: «v ■ ; . ■ [ / XX: ’ 




1 


Jr::-..: : , ' 




v ./rj.r? '/v .. X ■ ■'rl-.w-xj.oeaoo.rj v X c-aiti# ba\ '..t.;-r. cvic 

«. X. ■ -x - X. . -■■ ■ • ' . ' ■ - • ’ '• 

v , : ' ,} oX ,j. ■>: ; M. 31 

f,: - , X ' 

: . • - !. ' ■ X■ ■ . ' • :< *i x * . 

■ V ; X. , X . • ■■ • > ' . •• • X. . • ■ ; i ‘ X;; o:;. 

: ' i'V .r , 

' ■ 

, •; , XX'. ■ •/ . ■ rx, Z >■: . ■ tcj 

, .. • 0 ■ , . . 






;1 -X. 'xv- n: ’ ■ X,; 'xx 


j , : X 1 “ XX 




" : • .r ; X.; !. • qef?r M 1 ' ■ ■ ■ X * ! xoi * : 


X 




■ . . 


. i u X X 




■ 


. 






. ■ r 












, ’ : ■’ - 




■ 









80 . 


In the first place I believe that their criticism misses the 
target to the extent that their own convictions concerning authority are 
more firmly rooted in the feeling of certainty that there ought to he than 
in any certainty that there is. To whatever extent this is true, and I 
believe that in many cases it is considerable, they are criticizing Steven¬ 
son for describing ethics as it actually is, and not as it should be. 

This in turn, simply means that Stevenson knew well how to keep his efforts 
as an analyst separate from any inclination to moralize. He does not say 
that there should or should not be an authority in ethics, he merely described 
it as he believed it to be. 

I have always felt that probably the weakest part of Kant 1 s philo¬ 
sophy is his argument for the existence of God and Immortality. The first 
time I encountered it, it seemed to lack the power and closely knit logic of 
the rest of his philosophy. In fact in his first great work, 1 Critique of 
Pure Reason’, his position is that of an agnostic and he asserts that if we 
cannot prove the existence of a God, at least we have shut off all possibility 
of disproving HimJ’Soth parties beat the air and fight with their own shadows, 
because they go beyond the limits of nature, where there is nothing they can 
lay hold of with their dogmatic grasp” . At this point he leaves the matter 
in his Critique of Pure Reason. 

In the Critique of Practical Reason, however, he goes on to modify 
to some extent his position adopted on these matters in the first book. Then 
in his Metaphysic of Ethics he goes further and brings back those very realities 
which the reason has been proved incompetent to know. Eis progress from one 
position to the other is somewhat as follows. 


1 


Critique of Pure Keason P. 75& Mullers translation 






, i .. (Ol'i ! J 


v . ; ,tj a.I 


, ;$ ■ : 


a;;' j r-X j; \ ; ' X X ■. - X '■"> : -X 

■ , \... : ■: i : v ■' -J rr. ‘ V ... ' . . 

.. . ' /- . ; ■ -:,l .. - - ■ j , ■ '■ : - 

■ .. - • 

■ ; 

, ' 

cfi';• { v\.L ■ * '■ ■ 


. ■ • 


r- 

• i‘ . 




■■ riea -j “ i* ■ -in 

xJ 0 . I ' 


' 

. • • : 

• ... . ■ . .. ■ ■■ • : - ■ ■ : :: j ' ; 

. 

: ' • ‘ f • ■ j l 

\ \ ' 

• . r . ' ■ > > ‘ • 




t 1 'mm i 




■ y ' - 

' It : ■ V-, ■ ,, i\o‘, 


* 

. i- 




X'-': - a 













81 


The moral will presupposes freedom of action. The moral •’ought 1 ' 
has no meaning unless what I 11 ought" to do, I can do. Now the world of 
phenomenon, in which reason is operative, is a world of cause and effect and, 
therefore, purely deterministic. Therefore, there must he a noumenal or 
real world in which my actions will have that freedom demanded hy my moral 
will. Thus because of a feeling of moral obligation he would deny the 
validity of the phenomenal world or the world of reason in favour of a world 
which we cannot know but which our feeling of moral obligation demands. Then, 
too, although he was no willing disciple of hedonism, he felt that those who 
acted in accordance with the moral will should have their reward in the form 
of happiness. Since this is obviously not the case in this world, we are 
compelled to postulate a future life in which we may enjoy the rewards of 
our moral deeds. This necessitates further a Supreme Being who will see to 
it that our rewards are just. 

This is a long way to travel from his original position of agnosti¬ 
cism and all of it based on a feeling of what one ought to do. It may be that 
in Kant's case the base was staunch enough to support the superstructure but 
it is a matter of considerable doubt whether such is the case with all human 
beings. 

After all, Kant was always an admirer of his mother who was deeply 
religious and it is possible that he felt impelled to vindicate her beliefs. 

At any rate his reinstatement of these verities which his reason led him to 
say he could never know, seems inconsequential in manner and lacking in that 
driving force with which he declared them to be unknowable in his earlier work. 

Now this is establishing Authority with a rather indelicate hand. 

Yet many who would attack Stevenson for his la.ck of authority would quote Kant 
as their Authority in philosophy for their criticism. 






. 

, 











, ■ 

« ? i ■ 

. 


, 



J ;ir nJ. ov 







• lo t> 'iiM'.oi ■ aC/AV. 







. .. i,. i • '' *' ' * - 


, 





i J' ■ w . -o 










j 








. 




. 


... • X.: h. '■ ' - • ^ . ' ' ■' ' ' ' ' ' ' 

♦ 




. 

■ 


«;■. i '■ 

* 






Jjri . . mi ■ • ■■ 






* 







82 


Moreover, as has teen mentioned, "before, those who insist on 
authority are far from "being in agreement on what that authority should. 

"be. In fact there is not one authority "but many different authorities 
which are favored "by different people. 

Is it not possible, therefore, that each individual accepts as 
his authority that person or book which he favors, or which presents as 
good, those things which he has a predeliction to accept? If so, is the 
authority the cause or the result of his own ethical judgments? When I 
find a book which agrees with my own attitudes on ethical matters it 
carries more weight and authority than one which disagrees. It is always 
gratifying to find one’s own judgments supported by a writer, especially 
if he be one of some renown, and it is but an easy step to proclaim him as 
an Authority. In so doing, of course, I too, become an authority by proxy 
and shine in the reflected glory of my newly found champion. 

Others, I fear, accept authority in the spirit of the psychological 
hedonist, through hope of reward or fear of reprisal. This is especially true 
of those who accept Supernatural authority. I believe it was Hobson who sug¬ 
gested that we should accept the Supernatural authority because if it didn* t 
exist we hadn’t lost much and if it did we stood to gain enormously. What 
sort of faith is this! I have seldom heard such tawdry and cheap reasoning. 

I should hope that any Supreme Being worthy of acceptance as an authority in 
ethics would be astute enough to see through such a patent gamble as that. 

Ho, I fear that the demand for authority is based on the feeling of 
a need for one rather than on the certainty that one actually exists. I 
therefore, feel that Stevenson’s Critics are not philosophically sound in 
attacking him becau.se he does not recognize authority in ethics. 




r>. . ■ ' ■' " ; ' ' 








' ■ 


■ '■ 









* 

' 


.] • , • •) • -*. . >• ' 

. ' 




• 






- 


■ 



. 

■ - 













■ 





* 

■ 












■ 















■ 


, 






• 









. 






£ ■- 3 x£> 






■ 








:.. . ■; • <’C 


e 









' 

. 











! ' 



' 














■ 



























, 












' 

. 



83 . 


Even those people who demand authority will urge one to be 
guided by his own conscience. Now there is little or no evidence to 
prove that all men's conscience will give them all the same direction 
under similar circumstances. After all, how much of a person's conscience 
is but the dicts/tes of his attitudes and beliefs? 

I find in the field of education that those who have some theory 
to advance usually have some Authority which they quote with proper inton¬ 
ation of voice and seriousness of mien. This is supposed to silence all 
critics and confound all non-believers. I have also discovered that if one 
reads widely enough he can find other equally eminent Authorities which could 
be quoted to put the original speaker to route. Authority is often the big 
stick or the persuasive element needed to put across ones own favorite theory. 

Since ethics is becoming, how can there be a final authority? Even 
in the Bible we can see a developing and growing moral code and there are few 
churchmen who do not believe that we must continue to grow and develop. Even 
those who accept the Bible as their authority do not accept all of it, and 
who is to be the second authority who shall pick and choose the particular parts 
to be accepted from the first? 

So far as leaving ethics to the caprice of the individual who makes 
the ethical judgment is concerned, isn't that to a large extent what happens 
when the individual chooses his authority or that portion of it which he 
presumes to know by intuition to be the important or pertinent part? 

Stevenson does not say whether or not there should be some final 
authority in ethics, he merely implies from his analysis that there is not. 

It would seem to me, however, that the movement is away from authority. I 
do not mean that there necessarily ever was an authority in the real sense of 




' • 







|ex’ <;j • , • - 

* 

; 1 •' 

* 

. ; .1 , i. ' ■ ... j [ , 

, • .. 








■ ' 



- *;-■ f i Lr. ■ , - J. 1 .• 


t j 1 u.h in 


. • : ■ ' ' • S '■ 

' •' < .• • • • 

, ;, v ,. . x ; i n-’J ;i^;9no:' cvv <- 

, ; ■. «•> • ■ ■_ -v:• ■' 


ot 


OjI '.I.\c u; " •' ! 'J-o :y,.cv. M 

1 ' 

i: • ■ • ■■■'■■ - : 

VJ-: Ja 

: . : ' ' ■ . : 

« 


■ d ■ , C ; • i. v- ■ - -■ ■ ‘ 








84 . 


the word hut certain persons or hooks were advanced as authorities and 
accepted by the majority. In the earlier ages all, or nearly all, men 
had some authority which they recognized. Authority is traditional, not 
only in the field of ethics hut in the field of politics and many other 
fields as well. The present trend is away from such authority in all 
fields. 

This demand for authority springs in part from a feeling that 
the masses cannot he trusted to know what is good for them or for society 
as a whole, and in part from a feeling of the need for some strong pillar 
on which to lean. Many people tire of the sense of drifting when thrown 
on their own resources and long for a stronger hand at the helm. This 
sentiment is quite well expressed hy Wordsworth in his H Ode to Duty 1 ’. 

In the field of politics, as democracy began to supplant more 
absolute forms of authority, many people, and not all of them among the 
ruling classes, were bitterly opposed to such changes. They made gloomy 
predictions about the anarchy and lack of stability which they felt would 
surely follow. Even today there are many who are doubtful of the final re¬ 
sults of democracy with its reliance upon the good judgment of the masses, 
and have nostalgic longings for the days of more firmly established authority. 

It is only natural, since the majority felt that it was right to 
challenge the power of long established authority in the field of politics, 
that a similar movement should take place in ethics. After all, the decision 
of what is right in politics is an ethical problem, and it would be strange 
indeed if ethics should have been unaffected by the trends in other fields. 


< g ;v. ... .... la * • V ■ J < t ': o Jrro n« di > 

. 

.• : . . ■ • ' 

. ; • ' . ’ : 

* 


1 


ft ; t ; "... , ' . ' . i ’■ J 

-sir 

f ' ' ■ . 

. 

' 

. ■ : ' • j • 


. 






< 




. 









85 . 


It is also to be expected that such a trend in ethics would be 
met by the same type of bitter attack and for the same reasons. Not only 
have the champions of tradition and authority seen their position attacked 
and their strength diminished in the field of politics but now they are 
faced with this attack on another front. For Stevenson's position in 
ethics is of the same nature as that of the champions of democracy in 
politics. If the masses can make the decisions for society on political 
issues, then why can they not make the judgments on ethical questions? 

The consequences of authority in ethics have not always been 
desirable. The contention that the individual should accept his code of 
ethics ready made has, in many cases, evoked more in the na/ture of lip- 
service than deep conviction. The imposition of standards from without 
has often resulted in a shallow formalism devoid of real spirit. In many 
cases the code was too strict for the individual to support with honest 
conviction and the result was either open rebellion or hypocrisy. Christ's 
denunciation of the scribes and Pharisees is a striking description of what 
sometimes happens when men accept moral or ethical codes which are imposed 
by authority without conviction. "Ye blind guides which strain at a gnat 
and swallow a camel ——ye are like unto whited sepulchres which indeed 

appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all 
uncleaness. Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within 
ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity" 

Even Kant, the champion of Idealism, left each man to fill in his 
own details. Apart from the fact that his Categorical Imperative is based 
on a priori knowledge which gives to it, for most people, a mystical 6ther- 
worldliness, it refrains from filling in the details and shows that Kant 

felt that he could leave that up to the individual. 

1 

Matthew 23: 24 - 28 












1 ; < 


X ■ ' - t ‘ 


















, ; X. i s.;- '\'.j ■ '• 




















i 




. .. 


. j 


. 

1 O’'; j !.'} , ci. mV •'* ff •. 1 








' :• fOi) 


1 . . .. 


f ’ 

. 


i * ■' 




X hm ' ■ ■ 








S .. ; , : .O' X , X . ‘ X • ■ i ' ' fOI ■ • 

. 




86 


What has been said concerning Authority is not intended in any 
way to prevent any person from being influenced by others, or exerting an 
influence of his own. It is only reasonable that those who have pondered 
deeply, the problems of ethics, should exert considerable influence on 
those less capable or less willing to do so, 

Stevenson may not acknowledge any final authority but he is quite 
insistent on the fact that individuals do influence, and are influenced by 
others. Each individual is still free to read and ponder the teachings of 
the great men of the past as well as listen to his contemporaries. If he 
finds any of these convincing enough then his attitudes and beliefs will be 
affected accordingly. 

Such an atmosphere in the field of ethics is a healthy one nor 
need any one fear that it would permit too much license where an individual 
may depart too far from the generally accepted norms, for his hearers would 
soon put him straight or laugh him out of court. But not only is it a 
reasonable and acceptable theory of what ought to be; but it is a faithful 
delineation of what actually is. That, as was said earlier, is its greatest 
strength and defense. 

With changing conditions and new and vexing problems always arising, 
no guide book ever has, or indeed ever could be written, that would supply the 
answers to them all. The individual is, therefore, thrown upon his own judgment 
whether he will or not, and it is by discussion, influence, and counter-influence 
that decisions and attitudes are finally formulated. 

At first the judgments are tentative and open to counter influences 
and gain in strength or are abandoned according to the support or criticism 
which they elicit from others. A study of the origins of many of our firmest 

beliefs and most authoritative dogmas will show that they too had much the same 
sort of humble beginning. 






, ' ‘ . . ' 

.d" 1 

Mu ./ 

















. 









1 






• 







, 






•' M 















- I-X r, 

t 









' 



L> / . ' , ■ : X ■ ' 








‘ 

. ' 













■ ; • u 





j : : (. 

- /, V IS' vV ■ . . •»; \ V i*’’ ‘ , - r - r '’- • XO 

i. ■ ■ -t . . , • '<:> V ■ O 

• ... • :• : - ; ' ■ ' , i ./ r ' ' ’ • ‘T 

, , , ' / 

„ 

: • .r • •. r "rroo -- % ;v<\'m i 

* 

. 

' 

■ •' < ' ■" ' ,/ ■ . •' • ■ ' 

i i 



87 


Because Stevenson refuses to recognize Authority or some special 
and limited group of objects which, because of their mystical properties, 
constitute the •’Good 11 , and because he recognizes that every individual has 
the right to make ethical judgments, there is no reason to assume that 
each individual is thought of as an isolated cell creating his own code of 
ethics without influence or guidance from others. What is much nearer the 
truth is that Stevenson’s theory visualizes each individual as drawing freely 
on the influences and teachings from as wide a choice of sources as possible, 
accepting and partly constructing his own code. And when it is constructed 
it is his own. After all the subject is Ethics and Language and Stevenson 
would as soon postulate that each man should create his own language inde¬ 
pendent of any influence from others, as that he should create his own complete 
code of ethics in that manner. The anology would be closer if we compared the 
individual aspects of a code of ethics with the features peculiar to the 
individual in each man* s vocabulary. 

Just as some people’s vocabularies are richer than others, so there 
are variations in the standards of ethics amongst different individuals. If 
any man would converse with his fellows, however, he must not depart too far from 
the common stream of language, and this need to communicate intelligibly puts 
a definite limit on the degree of originality and individualism that he can 
permit himself in his choice of words and modes of expression. In like manner, 
a man’s concourse and need to associate with others will set limits to his 
choice of an ethical code. 

In the field of language, too, each person is free to create new 
words or expressions. Some few meet with general approval and become pa,rt of 
our language, the others meet with a cold reception and are soon dropped even 


■. A ... ;> 

• • & {■ 

. , .;. .... ■ ■ v - J ■) •. : ■ -• . - ♦"■ ■ ■ " -^ ■ ' f1 ^ 

J ■ . ... • . '• ■ '■/ , ■ 1 r .. O.' - • ■ . 1 'V .. 'll': • • 

•, i; ." , •. ■ Uo:> jj ■ 1 ■ ’1 • - - 1 '■ ' -J vl i> . : . 

' 


' '■ ' 

. . ... 

_ . ,■ • . • • -• ..: . .: ■ f:. 

• • • ■ ■ s f * ' . " 


si c 


' ! 



s vi : - 

■ ■ ■ $ Oti 


, • ■ ‘ ' 1 

i. 'it ' *i v - • 

. 


• . ' ' ' '••• y ' 

' 

, 

... ..... 

•, • , • ' :.i 

• ■ ' • 







88 . 


"by the originator. Beca/use of the fortuitous chance that no idea of a final 
and absolute authority in language has arisen, no one's sense of propriety 
is too seriously shocked by these attempts to enrich our language. With the 
exception of the fact that the growth of slang is deplored by many, there are 
few who do not regard this freedom to create new words and expressions as a 
sign of health and vitality in our language. Nor do they insist that all 
additions must be made by some privileged specialist or tribunal. It is 
generally recognized that in order that our language may keep pace with, 
and meet the needs of, our constantly changing world, new words and expressions 
must be incorporated into our language. And each or any person is free to 
offer his proposal without let or hindrance. Since language is of concern and 
interest to all, any person is free to make his contribution which will be 
accepted or rejected on its own merits and not because of any question of the 
right of the individual who offers the contribution. Such is the atmosphere 
that prevails in the field of language where men may acquire prestige and 
influence through study and scholarship, but where no final and absolute 
authority is recognized. 

It may we 11 be that ethics would take on more vitality and begin to 
keep pace with the changes which are occurring in other fields, if each man 
was encouraged to ponder the problems and offer his own contribution to 
their solutions. Ethics is, or should be, of at least as much concern to 
everyone as is language, and since the one thrives on a reasonable degree of 
freedom of the individual, it is quite probable that the other would also. 

Bernard de Chartes, in the twelfth century, is said to have remarked: 
"We are dwarfs standing on the shoulders of giants". All scholars recognize 
that occasionally during the history of mankind there have appeared individuals 
of unusual intelligence and insight who have raised our sense of values and 


i 

. J i ‘ ') «' . ' 1 

.. 

.j ... , i .«a *1 f J: ;<■' i" v -j <. 

' • 

. : • .. . | m u • . •; v. 

■ •: : .i ■ • •' 



• : v ' ' ' ' ■ ' 


. 


:.i J' j. C -i 


, • - r 

. . 

■ •.. 

. ■. ■ ii Liric i v 

,-'j •- • J : 


• 

, 


• • ■ i 



1 



on j :<r.r •/£:.'?>€' :J. J fl' 

« 




. 




• 

■ 

■ . • 

. 

v.u i '• ■■ : v ; vj: 



■ 

< 


\ • . .i: Ol — '" L '' ' ) /' 


' 



89 


ethical judgments to a higher plateau. But to accept any of these as a 
final authority is to crystallize ethics at that level and to create 
"barriers to any attempt to scale the next height. But since our advance¬ 
ment in other fields, particularly in science, no longer recognizes harriers, 
it is increasingly necessary that our evaluative efforts should keep pace. 

After all, there is no denying that even a dwarf, standing on the shoulders 
of a giant can see a little farther and has a slightly wider horizon than 
has the giant, and may he able to see above the next rise, which the giant 
can not quite discern. Albeit the dwarf need not be unmindful of his van¬ 
tage point. 

As for influence, Stevenson does not visual a cessation, but is 
apparently more concerned with the danger that there might be too much. 

The highly emotive content of most ethical terms gives to many speakers a 
power to influence, which, in many cases, is far in excess of their sincerity 
or depth of penetration. This may well be the cause, consciously or uncons¬ 
ciously, of Stevenson’s rather slighting remarks concerning specialists, and 
his ignoring of any final authority. The words ’specialist 1 and ’authority’ 
are themselves highly charged with emotive meaning and exert such a strong 
influence on the minds of many, that the critical and evaluative judgment 
of the hearer is often stultified if not completely stunned. 

So far as methodology is concerned, many of Stevenson’s working 
models are reminiscent of the methods of Socrates. What we know of Socrates 
would lead us to believe that he frequently made judgments in the hope of 
stimulating* argument and evoking counter influence; and I can well imagine that 
he was frequently disappointed when the debate and interchange of ideas, which 
he loved, did not ensue. Other men of later ages may have looked upon Socrates 




90 . 


as an Authority hut there is no evidence to even suggest that he so con¬ 
sidered himself. His concern was that others might become wiser, not that 
they should consider him wise. He admonished others to "Know Thyself" not 
to listen only to Socrates. Yet none need deny his influence or contribution 
in the field of philosophy and particularly ethics. 

Little need be said concerning the criticism that Stevenson's theory 
would remove all content from ethics. After all, if the critics mean some 
fixed content which they believe to be the be-all and the end-all of ethics, 
they are probably right, but this opinion of some sacrosanct content is so 
intimately interwoven with the idea of authority that in answering the one 
criticism, the other one is answered also. 

If, however, the critics fear that ethics would have no content 
whatsoever they are far from the fcruth. With the influence from our social 
heritage as well as discussion with our contemporaries, there is no reason 
to believe that our ethics may not only be as rich, but with Stevenson's 
discussion on methodology in mind, there is good reason to hope that it may 
grow in depth and richness. 

One of the consequences of the acceptance of a final authority, 
is the belief that the world is about to move away from a golden age, if it 
is not already on the move. Things are not like they were in the good old 
days and probably never were. Some men have wider horizons than others but 
all have horizons beyond which they cannot see. This has been true in the 
past and will continue to be true in the future, but ethics being of such 
vital concern to almost everyone, it is quite probable that each man will 
look as far as his vision will permit. Hor will he scorn the aid of others 
in his attempt but will rather climb upon their shoulders in order to extend 

his view. And those of greater stature will be only too pleased to give what 
assistance they can in helping to give to others a broader outlook. 


-- • -'V 




/ L! v 








: . ' • . • : ‘ " ' 

J 1 ' ■ ■ . ' 

, : I ; r :• , . • > 

. 

, 

• «;i •* -■ , "Vf ;»• • 










fr ... . - .... . ■; . ' 




v ■ j • ; r; -“r v ; Uy "■ u ‘ : ' ' 

. 

' 

. 

. 


. 



• 






' 









■> r 




; ; V J <\QC; < di! i: .1 -r v .. ' ; 












91 . 


I find in Stevenson's theory, however, a timely and much needed 
warning against undue influence from others. Emotive meaning as he says, 
is a ready weapon for those who would mislead, and this knowledge should 
have some salutary effect on those who are inclined to follow charlatans. 

"Not every one that saith unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom 
of heaven". Lest those who believe in authority might argue that belief in 
authority would keep men from following charlatans one need only ask them if 

they really believe that it has done so in the past. After all the devil can 

quote scripture and the charlatan and hypocrite can quote authority. In fact 
it is quite possible (although Stevenson does not suggest it) that much of 
the emotive strength of ethical terns sterns from a belief in authority. Man 
is not likely to become emotive about words as such but rather about what they 
represent or about who uses them. The reverence for authority in ethics may 
therefore be, in part at least, the cause of the strong emotive meaning which 
ethical terms have. Unfortunately, however, this emotive meaning attends the 
word no matter who uses it, be he charlatan or sincere moralist, provided of 
course that he can persuade his hearers to believe in his sincerity. 

There is, in philosophy, as in so many other fields, a tendency 
to present many problems in the form of a dilemma, a choice between two alter¬ 
natives. That, that is not white, must be black. This has led to a great 

deal of waste in time and energy in acrimonious dispute and determined effort 
on the part of one to annihilate all others before proceeding with his own 
point of view. 

This is noticeable in the attitude of many towards ethics. Either 
ethics is based on Authority or on reason. Authority would include not only 
some person or book, or supernatural Being who gave to mankind a complete and 
finished code by divine revelation, but would also include conscience, which 

1 Matt. 7: 21. 


' 

; i,.. ■: 7 - ■ ■■ ■ . i. • < ..u ■ ■ ' - '• 

■ I ■ > ■ f : t'.-I >• x * ; ; 

■ ' ■■ ' : ■_ 7 - ■ ; > ■ •' ' O .v 

, : ’ . . ‘ " . ' 




' 

■; ; j. I : . ' ' :.l < ' ' ' ' « ". - !r 1 , ' ‘ <’ ‘ ' \ 

. 

i t > 1 - * 

a, 

’ 

' ; . , f J .. r , ■ ' " J ' cv Iv. 7,07 ■ r ; S r J o f:..* 

. ' ■ . J ‘ • • - ' ' 

f 

, 

. 


■ 






' 

• , - • • 




J ' 




: 




7 , ■ " 




' 


■ . 








92 


according to prevalent opinion, is the voice of G-od speaking within us. 

Those who cannot find it possible in their minds to accept the one, feel 
impelled to turn to the other. Their acceptance of the one position is 
not always prompted "by settled conviction or at least enthusiastic endor- 
sation, so much as "by their inability to accept, or aversion to, the other 
alternative. A little thought about other possibilities, however, would 
seem to reveal that such do exist. 

Stevenson, I believe, has recognized this fact and so will be 
liable to draw some fire from both camps. Even Ayer, for instance, who 
thought along similar lines and was one of the first men in the field, is 
a much more thorough-going empiricist and logician than is Stevenson, Ayer, 
with his impatience with metaphysics and a priori knowledge, and his cold 
analysis of the way in which language can mislead us, leaves the feeling 
that he would summon all subjects including ethics to the bar of cold and 
impartial reason. So that it is doubtful if he would be entirely satisfied 
with Stevenson's position. Stevenson is more tolerant of the place of 
feeling and emotion than would meet with the full approval of Ayer. 

Although Stevenson does not recognize any final authority in ethics 
he is not in the camp of those who would base all ethics on reason and so 
cannot be termed an out-and-out intellectualist. For instance, his discussion 
of emotive meaning is not in the nature of a constant warning nor does he 
present it as an unreleaved source of error. He says that the use of emotive 
meaning is not always to be deplored, its bad effect lies in its abuse. At 
another point he asserts that since an imperative cannot be proven and any 
request for proof would be foolish, ethical statements cannot be proven 
entirely, as can scientific statements. " This, however, should not be taken 


to mean that ethics has no rational foundation. 11 Again in discussing the 





* 

v,.- v- 

r 

• •• ••••:. , - x. f •• • ■ ■■ : . ; :;.ir " ' J •- ■ ' 1 


■ 


5 -f . > ; ‘ ■' ' r : ■' <■ 

•> ■ if - - •' ', - 




' 


. 

r •; c«:} JO ; ;.Tf •) - 1 V ' 

, { ■ ' ■ •' ' ^'' • • '■ 

. 


93 . 


development of ethical ideas in a child he says that the child's ethics 
is not entirely the result of teaching for there must he within the child 
some disposition to respond to the training. This may not he the a priori 
knowledge of Kant hut it is not the tahula rasa of Locke. 

These examples, together with his insistence on attitudes in 
ethics, to say nothing of his discussion on the feeling or emotive side 
of human nature and how too much stress on the intellect tends to dry up 
these important springs in the personality of man, would indicate consider¬ 
able divergence between Stevenson and Ayer. 

In his Analysis of how the mind operates in the field of ethics, 
Stevenson does not base all ethical judgments on reason. He says that to 
base all our desires and aspirations on the belief that this or that will 
contribute more to our lasting happiness "Attributes to desires and attitudes 
a logic which I fear is all too often not present or at least not obvious." 

Thus, while acknowledging that beliefs may and do influence attitudes, (and 
also reminding us that attitudes may affect beliefs) he still finds that 
many ethical judgments are based on emotions, or feelings, or attitudes, rather 
than on reason. Her can this be seriously doubted in my opinion. 

For instance Plato and Aristotle are both recognized as men of out- 
standing intellect and reasoning ability. Nor would either be likely to express 
an opinion on an important issue without due consideration. Nevertheless we 
find them in disagreement concerning democracy. Plato, with the altitudes of 
one of noble birth, (although there are exceptions) is very critical of demo¬ 
cracy where "the horses and asses come to have a way of marching along with 
all the rights and dignities of free men———and everything is just ready 

to burst with liberty". 

1 

Republic, 56 3 * 



; i • : c ' ■' 

: 1 

. 

• ... ■ ) ■ , " ' : i; 

. ;■ . i ; r ^ c , VJ 1 U :i :ro: ■ ' i : ^ 1 * ' ;i - -• 


•, • • ; ... . -v I •: . «■ :■ •• ^ ^ : i - 

, 

„ { ' : 

r j .. ;j -r, ' ;■ - *>r,l ' ,/ J 

. t \' i v / ' •• - r ‘ • < • ■'* t^rr tdiv*"* 

.. v ' ; '. T J: ; . J. ( , - V. " ■ 1 ' ' ' *■'- 1 Cl C± ' 

■ r ) « ":i'" I ■ C r 0 :> • • ; t ' ^ •' ' ■ ] 1 ' < ''' i; " 

. , f J, ' : '■ V ■ ■ " ''**•” ' ‘ ' 1 " ; ^ :v ° J " : ' 

, - ■ • , • ’ ' ' ' 1 ' : 

. . - . ' * 1 
... ■ ' f - ^ ' ' ' 


: , w • ' . 0 ■ •> '••• 

■ . .; , v • : • • ' ' • ' ' • f ■ ' 

1 -r ■ V >'. ■ v.ro t • ■ • '■ 0 

. f , .r-.. --r ':o . - ' itrt -■ ' r.- • ' • ’ . r - r - 

I ■■ ' • • ' ‘ 

, / , .' ' “ ■■ 








94 . 


So Plato would, divide society into stratas in which the lower 
would have little or no more freedom than slaves. Only the few would 
qualify for the positions of dignity, although these philosopher kings 
would "be chosen on merit and not heredity. Once this was established 
he would rule it with a rod of iron and not consider any change, as any 
change would then be away from the best. There is evident here the germ 
of the idea for Nietsche's world of the Superman. 

This is the theory of the specialist, which Stevenson deplores 
and it is quite obvious that Plato’s philosophy might be used as a spring¬ 
board for launching an attack on Stevenson. Yet Plato's stand regarding 
democracy is compounded of at least as much attitude as reason. 

This is evident, for Aristotle, who followed Plato and had 
probably as good powers of reasoning, shows no such antagonism towards 
democracy. In fact we find him quite dispassionately declaring that 
mere numbers may give a certain stability and massive wisdom in affairs 
of government; and while the individual members of the multitude may be 
inferior to a chosen few, yet, taken collectively, their wisdom may con¬ 
ceivably be superior, since they supplement one another. How Aristotle 
did not believe that democracy was the best form of government under all 
circumstances but he did not consider it to be the evil thing that Plato did. 

Stevenson's theory concerning ethics is not so far away from 
Aristotle's opinions concerning democracy in matters pertaining to politics. 

Many people find it difficult to distinguish between ethics and 
social customs. Some people show the same indignation at a breach of etiquette 
as is usually reserved for breaches of ethics or morality, and so appear to 


■ . 

;• .. i ■' • .. ... •• i i ‘j■ i >. • o; 

- ■ ■ • ... . . • . r • ■:» ' 

■, .i ' r:> ' \ 1 '■ ■ -■ ■ <■ " 

.. ■ . • 

. f 

, :■ - (■ 

_ 1 

;.: . ■ ■ t - ■■ . " ■ ' ■ ' ‘ f 

,.• : • •',« :'\F 

r •; • ... r .. • o' •' •' • , I. ' ' v J v.L 


r> v ,;i,; '//' i u ! "' i. r, : n ; • j iV t .. .' 

J- .. / ' • / ;. . ■ • • :* .■■.‘■■■''I .•••• 

,• / a. : , ■' '• :V- ' . ; ■ . , ' :■ 

. • ' - Sx O' l • • : 

•; -, . " ; . ' • • A" 

. : .; i > • , - . .• \ Iv ■ ■ •> - - •' '‘ v • - ; 

, • ■/ ■ - ■ 1 i 

’ 

* 

r -■ m to “to a* t to* Jbowsv: v m &jtVBu e£ 



95 . 


make no distinction whatever. But ethics itself is a word with considerable 
emotive meaning and somewhat vague descriptive meaning so that it is not 
possible to draw the line too sharply. For instance, there is the well- 
known custom that in case of disaster, such as a ship-wreck, the women 
and children should be first to be saved, and many are the tales of heroism 
and virtue and high ethical standards of those who have perished in its 
observance. Now it could be argued that this is not ethics at all, but 
merely an exaggeration of the social custom of showing deference to 
ladies. If so, however, it is carrying ordinary politeness to a consider¬ 
able extremity* 

Whether or not it is a question of ethics, it is not based entirely 
on reason. Even most women would admit that some ladies are less worth the 
saving, than are some of the men who perish. Cold reason would surely dictate 
that the order in which people should be saved should be based on some con¬ 
sideration of merit, worthiness, and possibility of future service to humanity, 
rather than on sex alone* This, and many other examples of those cases which 
lie on the border between ethics and social custom, go to show that in these 
cases at least, feeling and attitude seem to have as much influence as does 
cold headed reasoning. It may be that reason will ultimately cause a change 
in attitude in some of these cases but these mores and customs are slow to 
change as is the case with emotive meaning of words, and it cannot be accomplished 
by fiat. 

Now many of these mores have the same significance for many people as 
do the dogmas and beliefs of ethics and morality. In fact those who make a 
virtue of cleanliness adopt as their motto, the saying that, “Cleanliness is 
next to godliness 11 , and most of them believe that the saying is in the Bible, 


* 

» 

, , • . . ' ’ 

' ■ i ' 

. 

- " ;l 

;■ t ' < ■ ' 

+ 


;j ■ a ■ 0 ■ ■ 

. ■ ■■■■., :■ h H ‘ 

Hiirwn OJ -...fv'ir i. / ’ V ;T'i ■ ' , ' ■ '■ i : ' Jv ' ; 

: ... , J • o.j' o- : , ,J .•.-•••■ X XO &n. ;ui >4* > ..u d 

' 

/ ; ■; . : .j ' u . a >: • : Z ■ ■ ■ ■ >-■ ■ 


- . . ... • . 1 " i 

? ' 

: ■ - . - ' 4 „ ; ‘ ■ ; , ; . , ■ , oj, : ■ ' - • '-'Xl 




. 


vv J:I: : ;d r. id 


. CM ) „ U ' iivf <> V •' it 




96 


attempting ■unconsciously to give to their belief a supernatural authority. 

This is a form of anthropomorphism which is not often recognized, hut it 
is of the nature of an inverted cause and effect, in which the individual 
sincerely believes that he is identifying his beliefs and principles with 
the will of God when he is actually identifying the will of God with his 
own cherished beliefs and principles. This is an interesting point and we 
shall return to it later, but we must now continue with our consideration 
of social customs and ethics. 

Since social customs seem to merge into ethics and ethics into 
morality, so that it is well nigh impossible to outline clearly the boundaries, 
what is true of the one should, it would appear, have some truth in the others. 

Because social customs do not have that sanctity for most people that 
is so common in the fields of ethics and especially the narrower field of 
morality, people are more willing to observe objectively the origins and basis 
of our social mores and customs. Here, surely, we discover that though there 
may have been some reason for their origin, their continuation and present 
force in many cases is based more on feeling and attitude than on reason. 

And their authority is based on the individual 1 s fear or reluctance to 
incur the displeasure of society rather than any other source whatsoever. 

Yet it would be blind folly to attempt to deny their force. 

ITow as we cross the ill defined border into the field of ethics it 
is only reasonable that feeling and attitude should continue to have some 
weight in our ethical judgments, although many of the more fundamental pre¬ 
cepts of morality have plenty of good reason behind them as well. 

In fact Stevenson declares that our endeavors and activities in the 
field of ethics is a function of the whole personality including intellect, 
feeling and will. And this, to me, is nearer the truth than those who would 
base ethics on either intuition or feeling on the one hand, or reason alone 


on the other 




'• ■' ' ■ .'. r ;; ' : j ■ ■ , ■ - 

, ; ■"! . ■,. J ^ • ... ' . ‘ ■ J "■!-1 '' 0 > ; >•' ■ >, 

S. i i i .!. i : . :« * ; , • '> ' r 1 ■ • ■ v i . ; 

. ■ ■■.-. a . i . ■ ; ■ .' d • i J •. 

- 

. ' , • . : - ■ ■ . ... . . .' • i ' . .' 

, 

(.J.i , i. • ; r ;.j I ■ j t " <4 . :> ;{.• 

■ i. ‘ ■ : . . . : ■■ , ■; ■■ .’ ' /J ■ . /' V V i'u . , 0 l i 1 J 1 

■ . J ■ • • ' •••'.■• - ' ■ .! - K •. ’■!' 

/'id ; ■ v V ’ ' < ' ■ ■ , . ' >f.t 

. , . • 

! a (•. ;■ ' ■ ■" y 1 f.i 

. i • .i'. ; ' ' v 

{ ; I •: ■■ ■! •" 1 , r - ‘ i . : /;• . >•: 

. 

, 

; ■ ■ l v ■ ; 

; . : ' : ' • •' ... • i'i 

' 

•; i '■ , ;v ' ' : ' ■ i.'o ». X • , . ■ - :. I ' ; • - •' ^ •• ' 

, ; , > . • ■■ / ■ •.' o ' 

/ • i’ ■ u ■,!•.; .:••• ' .■ t..: v ! . - “ n:X 

j 5 :h J: •' X ’ • ’iJ '-■! J.■’ "i J. . .v-f.SX 

» 



97 


Hothouse in "The Rational Good 11 makes it quite clear that the 
Rational is a synthesizing or unifying principle. The extent to which 
this Process has progressed in any individual life determines that indivi¬ 
duals personality. Once this principle becomes operative and a unity of 
personality begins to manifest itself, the declaration that ’’This is Good" 
implies that the object is in harmony with the personality. Moreover man's 
feeling of oneness with his fellows impels him to promote harmony in society 
as well as in his own individual life. 

Although Hobhouse presents a dualism in the matter of the Reason, 
along similar lines to those of Kant, while Stevenson says that he fails to 
see this separation of Reason itself, but attributes the distinction to the 
use to which the reason is put, in many other ways he is quite close to the 
position adopted by Hobhouse. Nor is he very critical of other points of 
view and spends but little time in trying to point out weaknesses in other 
men* s philosophies. In fact one can detect a middle of the road course 
which has some of the elements of that very harmony applied to philosophy 
which Hobhouse sets as his aim in "The Rational Good" . 

Just as the idea of absolute authority in ethics holds some repug¬ 
nance for most men who think much, or attempt to look beyond the surface, so do 
most people shrink from the theory that ethics can be reduced to cold reason 
where man is left to go it alone. The warmth of the spirit seems to be missing 
and most people consider it as an attempt to squeeze all of life into a test- 
tube. Just as the belief in the dignity of man leads the individual to believe 
that he should be permitted to ponder these vital problems and to make his 
own contribution, and, therefore, that the last and final word has not been 
written, so that some belief leads him to feel that man is more than a machine 



ti f 


0 1 




f ■' ' 




: 




u 










■ j 


o 




; mi ■ ‘; '■.1 v“ 






i . A ' . f- ' 


! ' 




j 






•/;! I 




Vo r jqnf r;. * x\x 





• > ' 


j 








"■f'if ,'S 




: ■ 1 «'0 0 






98 


operating on mechanistic principles, albeit of great complexity, that can 
be measured and calculated and adjusted to function with unerring mechani¬ 
cal efficiency. 

In the field of education this conflict is constantly before us. 

Nor is it likely to be resolved in the forseeable future. This is but 
natural as ethics invades or permeates every field of human endevor. The 
conflict in education is between those who consider education as a leading 
out or developing of the personality of the pupil, on the one hand, and those 
who consider the child as an empty vessel or tabula rasa into which the 
educator pours or imprints wisdom and knowledge, on the other. 

It is interesting to note that since educational theory is written 
by the educators rather than the pupils, Authority appears to be reversed in 
this field. The champions of the development theory advocate the child- 
centred school wherein the child may express his own nature and where his own 
conscience, if you will, should be his final guide. These schools are visual¬ 
ized as institutions where Authority is at a minimum, in fact the more advanced 
thin kers along these lines, appear to believe that the efficacy of such schools 
is inversely proportional to the amount of Authority which the teacher has or 
asserts. The supporters of the tabula rasa theory, however, scoff at the notion 
that the child has any conscience or personality until he is given one, and the 
only school worthy of the name is one in which the teacher has full authority 
and makes ample use of it wherever, and whenever, necessary. In fact the 
teacher who fails to have complete control of the direction and conduct of 
all classes is failing to do his duty. In the broader field of ethics, however, 
those who believe in conscience are more inclined to believe in Authority and 
those who believe in the tabula rasa of Locke, are critical of Authority. 


! ' r > - • ' cadi , ■ ; 

■: " ' j . : V',; '. h • ; 


. ■ : 

, 

, ■ • 

, • V ■ 11 ' ' : ' V --•.••• ' £ • V 1 ' '■ y 

.. . . • ■ ‘ isi»i 


T 

• "■ . r 

■ 

- , ■. . ;■ : f . . 1 ■' ; ’< '>s ■" - 

; : ■ r 'J i' ■ ■; r: ■’ 

< 

■ 

■ 

. "n ) •) ' t r • ■' ’ r.j/r; : • -I ' - ^ 

, 

‘ . 

' ‘ ’ ■ ' ' r • 


99 . 


This confusion, however, is not actual but apparent, for in ethics we are 
in the position of the pupil and so are looking through the other end of 
the funnel. The educator who would limit the powers of the teacher would 
increase those of the students and vice versa. Even in the field of ethics, 
those who believe in the Authority of conscience as the voice of God within, 
are much more inclined to believe in the authority of their own than in 
those of others. 

Now these conflicting theories have always caused bitterness in 
the field of education and sometimes one will predominate and at other times 
the other. Thus the pendulum swings from one extreme to the other. But many 
dispassioned observers believe that the schools function best when the pendulum 
is at the middle of the swing. No amount of effort, however, seems to be able 
to stop it from carrying on to the end, which is the other extreme. 

Since either extreme becomes more or less ridiculous it would appear 
that there is some measure of truth in both and that the path of wisdom, (or, 
as Aristotle would say, virtue) would lie in the middle course in which each 
is given due consideration but neither is forgotten or lost from sight. 

So in the field of ethics. Since hums.n nature and the complete 
personality is more than intellect, and wisdom is more than knowledge, ethics, 
which is the expression of the entire personality, cannot be based on either 
feeling or intellect alone. Those who base their ethics on feeling only are 
just as ridiculous as are those who go to the extreme in education, and we 
all have met enough examples to prove it. Those who would base their ethics 
on the intellect only, would probably end by being just as ridiculous, although 
since few, if any, have ever succeeded completely in doing so, the examples are 
not so easily discovered. 




lijK’ 


: f Zi'u 


f;; t v) •' j .. n\' 


btiuyx 




■ : 


v •.;! 1 ' V :'' U. ■ ' ;• vi: a J. 


f 


. ! 


, 


a r . ■ ' 




• ■ fcU 


o j-.o*”'.' 


. 




■ . 


?■■■•■■.£■ XX; J ‘-‘dX 



i: •' ^ 




C'U 




• >q 


0,1 


r. • ■ i ■ ' ' 

' ■ " ' . ♦ 

; Xr . f■ , ' ■ .. . ' . ■■ u ' . X ■ ■ , . Iri; j X sW': - :i 

• ■ ' 1 ■ • • !)'■ ' •' ’' ■' r - " r ■' >'■ • j ’ : ; • ; ; 






100 . 


Hume is accepted by many as the outstanding champion of empiricism 

and looked upon as one who carried Rationalism, or logic to its limits. Yet 

Hume makes some illuminating confessions and remarks, for example: 11 1 am 

affrighted and confounded with that forlorn solitude in which I am placed by 

my philosophy. When I look abroad, I forsee on every side dispute, contra/- 

diction, anger, calumny and detraction. When I turn ray eye inward, I find 

nothing but doubt and ignorance. All the world conspires to oppose and 

contradict me; though such is my weakness, that I feel all my opinions 

loosen and fall of themselves, when unsupported by the approbation of others. 

Every step I take is with hesitation, and every new reflection makes me dread 

an error and absurdity in my reasoning —--—Most fortunately it happens 

that, since reason is incapable of dispelling these clouds, nature herself 

suffices to that purpose, and cures me of this philosophical melancholy and 

delerium, either by relaxing this bent of mind, or by some avocation and 

lively impression of my senses which obliterates all these chimeras. I dine, 

I play a game of backgammon, I converse, and am merry with my friends; and 

when, after three or four hours’ amusement, I return to these speculations, 

they appear so cold, and strained, and ridiculous, that I cannot find in my 

1 

heart to enter into them any farther.” 

Or again in Bk. I, Pt. IV, 2 (P.218) we find him saying ”As the 
sceptical doubt arises naturally from a profound and intense reflection on 
those subjects, it always increases the farther we carry our reflections 
whether in opposition or conformity to it. Carelessness and inattention 
alone can afford us any remedy. Eor this reason I rely entirely upon them; 
and take it for granted, whatever may be the reader’s opinion at this moment, 
that an hour hence he will be persuaded there is both an external and an 
internal world.” 

1 Bk. I, Pt. LV, 7 ( A condensed quotation, taken from Aik in* s Philosophy of Hume) 





101 . 


Thus we have the testimony of no less an authority on reason and 
reflection than Hume, himself, that human nature is more than intellect 
and reason, and that man must turn to comfort his spirit "before the warm 
glow of feeling and emotion. 

What man has ever succeeded in so training his desires, and 
emotions, and aspirations, his hopes and his fears, that they would always 
come to heel and acknowledge the complete mastery of cold reason? Or, indeed, 
what man ever would completely desire to lead such a life? On the other hand, 
to expect unreasoned submission to authority or to propose that all ethical 
judgments should be based on intuition or feeling is to deprive man of all 
dignity as an intelligent being. Down the one road lies uncontrollable fears 
and doubts and the isolated loneliness that leads to insanity; down the other 
lies either hypocrisy and insincerity, or unreasoned folly and fanaticism. 

Stevenson maintains that ethics is a function of the whole persona¬ 
lity and insists that it cannot be reduced to a science, which would be too 
intellectual and narrow, yet he does enlarge on the rational element and points 
out how beliefs can and do influence attitudes. With this I am in agreement. 

I remember being asked, on an examination, whether ethics was based on feeling 
and intuition, or on reason. At that time I plumped solidly for reason. If 
I had it to answer now I would say, ’’both". Man should not, indeed in the 
interests of mental health, he dare not, be too scornful of his feelings and 
emotions, Man cannot live by bread alone, no matter what he decides that 
bread to be. 

No discussion of ethics would seem to be complete without some 
reference to G-od or a Supreme Being. Those writers who have attenpted to 
do so have always seemed to evade the issue or beg the question* Yet here, 
one feels that he is beyond the limits of pure reason and so on rather infirm 


•-/ .;>ri 






J • ' , 


nr 




i 




■ * 


f 










X 




'.)■ 


JO 


r V [' [ - r : ‘.C '■ 


r f .. 


■ 




X f V, : .' T • - v.fi 


: :r 


« 


. 



:■ 'Jr 




)0 




-Vi \ ■' 


(1<K: ■ ■■■ - 






OJ 


■ ■ Vi .1 - 0 ■' 


JJru r ;t rro- c'tvXXfKl yffi'f 


no v- - • % v 










X 




; U Jar. 


■ 


• - 




,> i.j.f' : v i. : r Ci ■ ■ "••j" 


M i , fi . -V '■ v i. r :c a 




r\ 



' ' IT 


Xvo 


:■ 1 oJ 


; - .• X 

- ' • • r r r ’ "J' J ‘ ’ - ff 




102 . 


ground, so that the reasons for such evasion are quite apparent. 

Stevenson makes no effort to discuss it in any way. He does speak 
slightingly of those who base their ethics on metaphysical authority hut 
that is the only reference and that is not very direct or conclusive. 

After all it is one thing to deplore the idea that some men speak with 
the authority of God or the belief that God has certain representatives 
whose judgments have all the supernatural power behind them, or again, to 
assume, as so many do, that once they believe in God, then all they need 
to do is to turn their eyes inward and God will make the judgments for them. 
On the other hand, it is another thing to deny the existence of God entirely. 

One thing can be said with some degree of certainty. It is, that any 
attempt to prove the existence of God by reason, is doomed to failure. One 
of the most interesting, though one of the least logical, parts of Kant’s 
works is his proof of, or grounds for the necessity of postulating, the 
existence of God. It would seem to me that in this he displayed one of the 
blind spots which all men have and of which Kant had fewer than most. It 
will be recalled that because of the moral will and feeling of ’’Ought” Kant 
proceeded, through the equally strong feeling that obedience to that Impera¬ 
tive should be rewarded, to postulate the necessity of a God. 

Kant, however, very logically points out that the appearance of 
external designs in nature is not a conclusive proof of Providence. There 
are in nature many instances of waste and chaos, of useless repitition and 
multiplication. He therefore, advises the theologians who use the idea so 
much, to abandon it. Yet Kant seems to have assumed a universality and 
consistency in the moral law that I fear is no more apparent than consistency 
of design in nature. Thus it would seem that his ’proof 1 is open to the same 
objections as is the one based on design in nature. The only universality 


which I can discover in the moral law is what might be termed an interest in 



103 . 


morality or ethics, itself. All or nearly all races of mankind, have had a 
deep concern about right and wrong and such ethical problems but here the 
universality seems to end, for it has been said with some degree of truth 

that if all the deeds were put in one huge pile and we removed them one by 

one as we found them forbidden in any one code of ethics they would all be 

removed, finally; if, however, we restored each one as we found it approved 

in any code whatever, we would end by having the entire pile restored. Thus 
it would seem that ethics is of universal concern but the contents and details 
show no such universal agreement. 

It is also interesting to note that Kant, who had so much to say, 
and so profoundly, on the subject of Cause and Effect, has his relationships 
in the inverse order from that of the theologians. Whereas the theologians 
made our ethical sense the effect and God the cause, Kant has made the existence 
of God rest upon the foundation of our moral will. He evidently was too staunch 
a believer in the inherent dignity of man to believe in unreasoned submission to 
Authority from outside, no matter what the proposed authority might be. So in 
the Essay on Religion we find him saying that since religion must be based, not 
on the logic of theoretical reason, but on the practical reason of the moral 
sense, it follows that any Bible or revelation must be judged by its value for 
morality, and cannot itself be the judge of a moral code. Churches and dogmas 
have value only in so far as they assist the moral development of the race. 

No wonder the theologians were not enthusiastic about a philosophy 
that saved their God at such a pricel 

But a belief in God is usually carried to the point where reason 
rebels. It is taken either as the basis for the belief tha,t ethics is a finished 
book and that no one should presume to question or propose any advancement or 


addition, or else it is taken as the foundation for the opinion that certain men 



, 



' 


W' v 


; ■ i , • 







•Uv t.fi; : k £ I 


■ J - J' ' ■ j 


: O.Li.' 'U, ' i 


vi’ 





i 



xx I ".oia *urc 






' 


y 




l • ... 4 - ; ; J,; fr;> o-i ilfA 


f'.i rr i: 


ft c 


■ ■■ * ( ■ 


. ■ • , - ■ • < 1 ■ ■ 


v 


■ 


• ; ( J 


i • 


o, rX ]HXX v 


: 







: 


,J ! ? ■ V ' ■ ‘ J'i j'.fC'v' /. a.-:. I O^T'a 


*■:i' =f i j ■ ' u ■ t A • . ’■ :i: .. ; *.■; >1 ■ 




104 . 


are the medium through which God speaks, and all their judgments have the 
full weight of supernatural authority. 

The first is of the nature of the written constitution in politic 
cal theory that is supposed to set the unchangeable pattern for all time to 
come. Yet those countries which have tried this method have found it 
necessary to amend the constitution from time to time in the light of changing 
circumstances. There is much to he said for the British system that scorns 
a written constitution and prefers to proceed by precedent and tradition 
combined with a certain degree of on-the-spot improvising, which some call 
"muddling through 11 . The second is of the nature of the Superman of Nietsche 
transferred from the political to the ethical field. 

Probably beca/use of these tendencies, Bergson, who revolted against 
the materialistic mechanism of Spencer, gives us a picture of God as finite, 
limited by matter, not omniscient, but groping gradually towards knowledge 
and more light. H God thus defined, has nothing of the ready-made; He is 
unceasing life, action, freedom. Creation so conceived, is not a mystery; 
we experience it in ourselves when we act freely.” 1 

We see here, quite clearly, the influence of the evolution theory, 
however, it does bestow on man a freedom from the notion of a final and finished 
authority, and makes him a junior partner as it were in the search for truth 
and light. 

This is a digression from the discussion of Stevenson and at this 
inconclusive stage I will let the matter rest with a reiteration of the follow¬ 
ing caution. Those who believe in the existence of God, which itself is a 
highly emotive word, should exert extreme caution lest they try to supply from 
their own minds and natures too many details of the Will of God, and thus 

consciously or unconsciously, invoke the supernatural authority of God for 

their own aspirations, desires, and beliefs. 

1 

Creative Evolution Page 248. __ 




( 


x 


(To 1 t .' iioi 


I o ■ : t': t f : .1f '' i f: J' o r i oft 


J f 


■ 




f j; Ij 


>i ' ! > ■) 


' :n - •::> - • I 


■ 


! • 


..... , i 




/ort ; ■ 


.vidvon 


o:i' TJ 



Vf OC’-j 




V: . or 


' fj f 


* 




t.ft •. siv 


orfO j ft 


a of: 


mX' :•.* ; • 


. 


■ 


.!> (> f, 1 , "’O .' ;*.■ 


COO ' 0C'j - O' 


J,( . i: . |. fv f r 




105 . 


Although the mention of God. is not made explicitly in 'Ethics 
and Language' it would seem to he in keeping with the emotive theory, 
for of all the emotive words in our language God would seem to he the most 
highly charged, for most people at least. Because, also, the Will of God 
in this or that situation is vague (in fact so vague that many say it is 
hut the projection of the individual's beliefs) it becomes a ready weapon, 
nay even more, it becomes a constant temptation for persuasive definitions. 
Thus we seldom, if ever, find an instance where a nation waged war, no matter 
what the cause, that God was not on their side; in fact he is usually the 
first conscript. 

It is little wonder that such abuses of the emotive power of the 
name of God, should drive many sincere thinkers to attempt to eradicate the 
belief altogether. And it is very likely that those who so abuse it, through 
ignorance, in the long run, do more disservice to their cause than do the 
critics and sceptics. Yet as Stevenson said of emotive meaning in general, 
"The use of emotive meaning is not always to be deplored, its bad effect 
lies in its abuse" . Probably nowhere have the abuses been more prevalent or 
of such serious consequences, as in the attempts whether sincere or insincere, 
to interpret the Will of God. This should be a constant warning to those who 
sincerely believe in God, not only against others who would exploit their 
beliefs but also against the ever present temptation within themselves to 
make God in their own image. 

The belief in God in ethics or theology is somewhat comparable to 
the atomic bomb in science, both can be used to comfort mankind, one in a 
spiritual, the other in a material way, but both are of immense power in 
their respective fields and can so easily become instruments of oppression 




i' : ; > i t : . ■ ■ . 

' 

... - , T. ' ’ ' ’ •• • ' 1 ' ’ . ' 

;; ■ . i ' . , j ‘ ' V < . w ' ' ■■ ■ ) ' • u ’ ' - w J 

1 

... • 1 • > i. J « - ■ -j •’ -r •' • r - ■ '< 1 : 


r v ft 


( 







. 


• 


1 1 : ■ 




! [ ■Ti-Wr- ■. i. 


; 




















, 


• 


.1 . 1 X " 

• J " • 

' 


c : J o . • * i 



: 























• 




i 







i. V 

’ l 


■ : 1 ’ . • •‘ .' 


r 



* 

~rS 






i • ; v - J r 

• 

• ■ J ■ . i.* " 










• *' 



• 

i 



■ - v , 1 ' 

j 


■ 




j 1 o 


■ ■ : ■ i ' ; ■ ■■ ' ■ 11 




’ ! 


j c! ;■.?] , :■ v • ■■■ k ,'rv J..r. Jw.i 

, . J r -u, ,;i * in W 

■ ; 

<* •' • u J' ... ;* r-d rffM .-a ejr.ul' ; : 

jxctjcrr-rr.- t o.-'y i?j6 \ 

■ O.i •• ■■ • •• • 

* 

, ■ .* ■- • : ■ 1 : ; lI - 1 ■ 

J ]_ , I : : 







■■■ : • t 




3 : ' 

■ 

.■ , V 

o1 


: 


; t : X I rtBUl C5 '■ ol .1.00 




.• ; , ' • 


io6. 


and destruction. Even those who deny the existence of God and consequently 
his power, cannot deny the power of the belief in God, even though they can 
see it only as an instrument of oppression. Thus we find many of the be¬ 
lievers in God advocating' abolition of the atomic bomb, and we find many 
materialists advocating abolition of the belief in God, and because each 
man can encompass only a part of the truth, they cannot always see that 
their reasons are much the same. 

This power of the belief in God exists; nor can it be abolished 
by fiat. Those who deplore it, and not without reason, are inclined to 
use it in the same manner as Stevenson says some men use emotive meaning. 

It will be recalled that Stevenson says that many people find emotive 
meaning a nuisance and hindrance to clear definition and so use it as the 
waste-basket for all linguistic ills and lay at its door all the errors and 
faults of language. Many thinkers, conscious of the difficulties and 
abuses of the belief in God, and the obstacles which it presents to clear 
logic, are inclined to use it, too, as the limbo to which they consign all 
the inconsistencies and lack of reason and logic on the part of society. 

But the point is that though some may deplore it and speak against 
it, and ridicule it, yet they cannot abolish it. Only a small percentage 
of mankind are philosophers and even they do not agree on the existence of 
God, and the philosopher who would ignore the belief in God is writing 
an esoteric doctrine for that minority who think as he does. One feels 
Ayer’s impatience with emotive meaning and his open scorn of metaphysics, 
and the reader may agree with his point of view; but to assume that the 
attack means annihilation of these things, and that he can now proceed to 
ignore them, is much the same as the biased point of view of those scientists 


. 

, 

y i> » • 

' 


h-i./i'i.i:.!'• ,ci ii;x nrn &sy nl 'if XI>r‘ -Id 

() u . ■ :n.i v . , ' 

T 




. ... . .. , ■ 





. . : V 

‘ 



i. - j •, 

i. : v o 

\ ... • 1 ' 






! 


, 

i:.v : -0 . 

■ 



i 





1 

. ! . , - . 

. 



- 


; ■ .-v v < ■ . '■ . ; ■ ’"I ■ : ... 


- -i. v . , . ' •• ; .. i • ; .• ' . * . < • i '■ ' r;r f . -1 

-i 1 J ' . < ' J. ' ■ .1 ■ < J. i ■*. *ioV 0 ' -' •: 

■ at ■ ; v J ■- .1 r . . f Lu . ■ UiS i yj : ■ . ■■ r [ ' : I' 

i. • • ; V ' ■ : •• . • ? , a i ’ .■i • "o r-ru^r- 

: if ' .\i i : j , ; X , .. ;j , ; ; .1 U > . , •,'> V , - 'l .•'■ ■ •) ' U' '• O J 

4 ; U ■ ■ ; 1 

■ ■■ • J . by • • ■ ' 1 - t ax', nl oi j bi . it 

; .I.. Vi.": . . ■ i ' ' ' X 1 < - '' V'' ,. ’Atf ‘ l - v « i. 


. - ■ ■ i. V ifi 

' > j ' i "inn ■ • Iflv • • ■ . < 

. ! • ' • •: ; •• -n, ■ nizlwi nr: vac- w 

1 ‘ 

-. : " J 

r ■ ‘ t ‘ ’ • 

; M • . • 




10?. 


who would ignore those circumstances and conditions of an experiment which 
he cannot control and which he finds to be a nuisance in his work. The 
Age of Reason, so long the focal aim of many, is still but a dream, and its 
realization is not imminent nor likely in the forseeable future. Thus 
philosophy, if it would see life as it is, must take cognizance of emotive 
meaning and belief in God and the power of persuasion and influence which 
they still have in the everyday thinking of the man in the ordinary walks 
of life, Ayer, with all his impatience bordering on scorn, recognized the 
fact that knowledge of emotive meaning does not bestow immunity. 

The power is there, and, as Stevenson points out so discerningly, 
if men of good will do not make use of it, then it becomes that much more 
effective weapon in the hands of the unscrupulous. To point out and enlighten 
men 1 s minds on the power to influence which it is, and then to ignore it, is 
to point out the strategic value of some position and then to withdraw and 
abandon it to the enemy. 

The Rennaissance and Reformation were a revival of the spirit of 
man and a rebellion against the authoritative oppression of men's minds 
which was the outstanding feature of the dark ages. This revolt, as is so 
true of all revolts, carried through to the other extreme and culminated 
in the Age of Enlightenment which proclaimed the dawn of the new Age of 
Reason, 

But man's spirit began to feel that it had had a surfeit of 
scepticism and doubt and whereas he had freed himself from a master who 
enslaved one side of his nature he had accepted another who was equally 
repressive to the other side. This counter revolution found its champion 
in Kant who attempted to restore man's faith in God and Idealism, but both 

were modified and affected by the penetrating, if one-sided, thought of the 


Age of Enlightenment 








' 












i.oI '•*, , ' 1 ' 


: r.'s 




X J:;■ -i'j. J: i I: 














v> 


;io ddN.u! .o;> 

. . •, .. .. • ■ 

j -, • •• -j j. . ■ i ■ : « v '• , * 




t w •' r 




, - ; . : • ■ ■■ . ■■ 

j-■; ■' j fir.*; t ^l i *.om ■ - - • •* 




r I 


': • ‘ ' T L : ni j J 0 J ’ E ‘ < 




J-..'■ ■ •> r?.* 


, 


f l V. 




o r 


■ 


[•' [• 




-Dei 


p 




' 0 ■ ‘ • ■ 


;•!.) j ■ :• \; • ; i ' ' J'( ■ f ilfii : 


* 











■ 


/ !' i.'J 


: ■ ! 1 ' •» •’ - ' 


I bn 




1 


.. 






‘ 1 ’ 




108. 


Darwin and Spencer, however, renewed the attack and again man's 
spirit was threatened with engulfment hy another tidal wave of scepticism 
and intellectualism. But again man's spirit rebelled and found a champion 
in Bergson and his vitalism. Bergson's popularity, if even only temporary, 
bears witness to the fact that humanity is not ready to relinquish all of 
life to the cold hand of the intellectualist. 

Earlier I made reference to the Perennial conflict in education 
between the child centred schools and the discipline type, and mentioned 
how the pendulum tends to swing’ from one side to the other, indicating that 
each have considerable truth but each is but a partial view of reality. A 
consideration of trends in philosophy shows a very similar situation and 
for very much the same reasons. 

When Kant advised the theologians to abandon the argument from 
design in nature, he showed his depth of insight by, at the same time, 
urging those scientists who had neglected it, to begin using it, as it was 
very revealing. So we might give the same sort of advice to philosophers. 

Let the intellectualist consider more seriously the emotions and feelings, 
the spirit and ideals of man, in order that life might not be deprived of 
all warmth and glow; and let the idealist give more consideration to cold 
reason, in order that life might have some of the stability and down-to- 
earth reality that only cool reason can give. 

To borrow from Hegel one might say that philosophy has seen the 
thesis and also the antithesis but what is needed is the synthesis. In 
fact Stevenson may or may not have had Hegel in mind when he said that ethics 
is "Becoming". 


T 

' ■: v - ■ ■■ " ; : ;:>v " ... ... -i : \P' ■/> ■ . ' v 

• ■ 1 . . 

1 

i ; •; ■ 

, 

' 

,i.i. J 1 i. • iJ r/ i-?. ■ .H. .. t 

■■■":] u •,-• .. -v .i : • i, .> ; • ' i■ : . - - • •• i; ■ 

, ■ ■ • ■ • 

•;/. ;*■ ■ j , " -j.r.i. :: '-,,.1 *. f- 1 J. • ■ 'X- ■: • j . '. X •• > 

, . 

... _ ■ . ■ • , 

'• : • . ; ; ‘ '■ ■ X, . ; ; ' : , • a -J j. x i - • 

. 

f . . ; j • ... - • of : ' .1 r ; ’ > •• *«* 

*. .. ; v j; I1 ; v ■ r<r •, x.v 

: ! • f ' ' ■ 

. 

* 

, {« i - i I ■ . : ■ 

• > ; - ; . • u . t ■ ■ . 

V >' : • ' ' '• 1 1 ; 7 J ■ ‘ ' 

' 


109 


I do not suppose that Stevenson has written the last word on 
ethics and in fact there are some minor points with which I do not entirely 
agree. For instance he suggests that intellect is a disposition to action, 
yet he later, in discussing persuasion, points out that it is often necessary 
to supply the urge to act, which often withers in those who reason too much. 

This latter position is more in keeping with the notion of the "cold and 
palsied thought” which I believe is nearer to the truth. I believe that, if 
intellect is a disposition to action, the warmth and fire of feeling and 
emotion and will, is more often than not, the necessary spark to set the 
action going. 

This, however, is a minor point and as Stevenson himself said, the 
proposal was only tentative, and in no way necessary to his main theme. Since 
criticism of such minor points is of the nature of mere cavil I will no farther 
detract from my general agreement with more instances of disagreement on minor 
issues. 

His insistence on the need to recognize the part that attitudes and 
aspirations play in ethical judgments, and also the need to consider the 
power that the emotive meaning of ethical terms have to influence others, 
whether we wish it to be so or not, would seem to be necessary to uncover the 
blind spot which the thorough going intellectualists seem to have. His insis¬ 
tence, too, on the need for rational support for our judgments and the warning 
that the approval will probably be short lived if based only on persuasion to 
the exclusion of rational reasons would seem to be necessary to those intuition- 
ists who seem fearful of opening their ethics to the light and sobering influence 
of reason. His further insistence that ethics is a function of the whole persona¬ 
lity would seem to give to ethics that importance it deserves, for no doubt man 




, ■ ' ■ v . • '• 

. ■ .. , Jo; • <v .■*. J‘; •: u 

■ . • - : ' i ■ 1 : ■ 

Vi.. r ■)" v v,; ‘ o fji)' J rfvi'I - 


i 1 i '■■■! ' M J i"> V- 





j ’ i> » i , ! r a " tu > i; j-' -Cff-' 

, 


• j r 

' > ■ ?„n i:r 


. 






■' *K. . , • i 


■ i , •• "J ' ;• JJ’ M. i fell I- 


, • 

. 


■ j' : ; ■ ■ / ■ ; . . /, . - 1 ;. t':. ' 'U ' l? ‘ '• 1 

: , f •• • .'-J „ v ‘ UX , ■ /• ^ ' J : 

■ 


v ;> <i | 


•: H , 


<v ; ; ■ r 


: •. r ; s.; - - r '‘ ' 




r > 




■ 


• j- ' - ■■■■• . v h- j 

t 


' 

!1' ' !' I • "" ’ j ^ ! 


110. 


will need to use all of his faculties to their fullest if our ethics is to 
keep pace with the advancement in other fields. 

The story is told of a young man who was impatient of the Author¬ 
ity of an omnipotent and omniscient God. In an attempt to voice his disap¬ 
proval and lack of agreement, he said to his Minister, "Why I could make a 
tetter world myself 1 '. The Minister, however, happened to te a man of some 
breadth of outlook and so he replied "Go to it, that is what you are here 
for." 

So we must not expend all of our energies in a critical analysis 
or in disputes concerning the foundation of ethics tut must see to it that, 
despite the necessity of analytical study, at least some of our energies 
are available for getting on with the jot. 


- 

- 

■ 

. ; • ! . 

r 


* 

■ • ir rovr 

. 

.. , j 1 ; : ' ■■ ■ '■ • i t , ■ ' ■ ' 

• r • , ' . “ * •- j J J 

; , •’ : r .. 0■ ‘ 1 . w 

,\ o\ '• ■ o ' >\* « 


' 

. ' ' I . •• i • : - -• , r ■’ 

' •• • 

”•; o' 

• 01 > ' ■■ ■ * ■ 

J i.r ‘ • O (i S o : ' ' 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


C # L* Stevenson: 

Ethics and Language 

A. J♦ Ayer: 

Language, Truth and Logic 

Kant: 

The Fundamental Principles of 
the Metaphysic of Ethics 

Kant: 

Critique of Pure Reason 

Kant: 

Critique of Practical Reason 

L. T. Hothouses 

The Rational Good 

Rashdall: 

Theory of Good and Evil 

Bergsons 

Creative Evolution 

Aikin: 

Philosophy of Hume 

Rogers: 

History of Philosophy 

Carnaps 

Meaning and Necessity, a Study 
in Semantics and Modal Logic 

Russells 

An Inquiry into Meaning and 
Truth 





















* 


i' 

„ • „ 















* * 
































B29764 




