uiifi m 

wN' : u 


, •A'i ri { f 


UwfcJaKJS, V 'V • ' 


w? r, U 'V. •.*.*,• '' .*/> 


mm m$ & $ • < ; 


















For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


©X UlMt!£ 

aMWHaais 








Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/functionsoftemplOOjohn 




THE FUNCTIONS OF THE TEMPLE 


A Dissertation 

submitted to the B.D. Committee of the 
Senate of the University of Alberta 
in candidacy for the degree of 
Bachelor of Divinity 

by 

JOHN THOMAS WILIS, B.A. 


University of Alberta 
April 1952 






. 

















THE FUNCTIONS OF THE TEMPLE 


tor 

JOHN THOMAS WILIS, 6.A. 


St. Stephen*s College 
University of Alberta 


April 1952 





DEDICATION 


To my wife Lois, whose constant 
encouragement and inspiration 
have made possible all of my 
humble achievements; and to 
my daughter Susan, who symbol¬ 
izes the ever present joy in my 


chosen vocation, 





ACKNOWIEDGMENTS 


Acknowledgment is gratefully made to 
Rev. Dr. L. E. Toombs for the invalu¬ 
able assistance he has given both in 
the composition of this thesis and in 
all of my Old Testament studies; and 
to my friend and fellow student* Vern 
Wishart for help rendered in fruitful 


discussions 




viii 


PREFACE 

The functions of the Temple have not been set forth in any great 
detail by recognized Biblical scholars. As a result, the almost ex¬ 
clusive sources, used in this thesis, are texts of Old Testament 
Scripture. The authorized and revised versions, as well as the Hebrew 
text, have been used. The quotations made have been taken mainly from 
the authorized version. In such cases as the others axe employed, they 
will be referred to as RV and MT, respectively. 

The Hebrew text used is R. Kittle*s Biblica Hebraica . Leipzig, 
1906; 3rd edition (giving Ben Asher*s text edited by P. Kahle) edited 
by A. Alt and 0. Eissfeldt. Stuttgart, 1929-1937. 

The chronology followed is that of W.F. Albright (The Biblical 


Period) 




ix 


INTRODUCTION 

Ezekiel saw a wheel a rolling. 

Way up in the middle of the air. 

A wheel within a wheel a rolling, 

Way up in the middle of the air. 

And the big wheel ran by faith 
And the little wheel ran by the 
grace of God. 

This song is a favorite of campers, old and young. You can hear 
it shouted by noisy youngsters from the mess hall. You can thrill to 
its harmony from a chorus gathered around a glowing camp fire. 

This exegesis of Ezekiel 1 s vision symbolizes God's control of 
the universe. The larger wheel can turn only when the smaller, inner 
wheel, is in motion. The hub turns the rim, Israelites sought the 
grace of God in the Temple at Jerusalem. From the time of Abraham, 
their belief, their faith in one God, was always on the circumference 
of their lives, individually and collectively. They linked themselves 
with God in particular ways. The spokes ran from the rim to the hub 
as sacred objects, sacrifice and offering, shrines, the priesthood, 
the Law and the Temple ritual. All of their religious practices, 
vestigial and active, are brought together in the Temple building 
and its worship. The functions of the Temple reveal a development, 
from earliest times, in the strivings of the Children of Israel to 
worship God more perfectly. The development commences with a non 
moral conception of the holiness of God. It culminates in the moral 
holiness of clean hands and a pure heart. This is regarded as essen- 


7 7 


: ' r v ; ' ... i 7 

: 

* . 


„ . . 7" , 7 . ‘ :■ ' •7," 7 \ 7 7 7 "7 . : 7 ‘ ' ’ 

■■ :■ ■; f! C i (v.7 7 . rK.r; ■ ;=■:" ", 7 7 ; j'T .7 ■: 

' 

] '. 1 

t ' 7 7 .7 . ' ‘ .. ’ '7 "7 

. 7 . 7' ; t 

„ 



'A • 7; 



, " ' ;;i! ■ : . ; 17 

' 






* . 


;■ .7* '. '» >: 


t 


•7 7 To 




7 7 7 

. 

- 77 . ■: 



' 


. 


t : 



% ' ' 


r. 





. 










-• *7 











. , 

5 


7 ' ’ .. 7;,, 7. , 7 - • 

, ' ' ' ' ' ■ . 7 : 7 . 






X 


tial in approaching God. It is also the characteristic idea of worship 
in the Old Testament. 

The Temple, then, became the hub, the central point of worship. 
Here the glory of the Lord was sought. From here, it was hoped, the 
grace of God would pour forth. The divine power would generate dedi¬ 
cated lives into great sources of righteousness and service. At the 
Temple, the altar of the universe, men might approach God, seek the 
very means of forgiveness and renewed power for their lives. 



xi 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PREFACE. viii 

INTRODUCTION. ix 

CHAPTER PAGE 

I THE TEMPLE AS THE CENTER OF DIVINE WORSHIP. 1 

1. The Position Of Sanctuaries : Early ideas; Divine 
direction; Signs of God*s activity; The sanctuary 

at Shiloh; One God, therefore, on© sanctuary. 1 

2. Zion Is The Only Center Of True Worship : The 
choice of Zion; The site of the Temple; The abode 
of Yahweh; The title 9 Most High 1 ; The foundation 


of national hope; A manifestation of security. 6 

3. The Selection Of Jerusalem : Early references; The 
capture of Jerusalem; Divine choice; A sanctuary 

for the Ark of the Covenant; The renewal of worship. . 9 

4. The Universal Significance Of The Temple s Yahweh, 


the God of the Israelites and sojourners. 12 

II THE TEMPLE AS AN INDICATION OF SUBLIME WORSHIP. 15 


!• Reasons Why David Could Hot Build The Temple ; David 


is personally unfit; Israel could not have one 
sanctuary until it had received rest from its ene¬ 
mies; The worship of Yahweh had not completely 

emerged from its primitive simplicity... 15 

2. Decorative Symbols Used In The Temple s The signi¬ 
ficance of pillars; Cherubim; Palm trees.. 18 


3* The True Commandment Of The Exodus s Laws relating 
to sacrifice; Sacrifice to God and the fulfilment 
of vows; God 1 s voice returns with His glory; 
Sacrifice is not of primary importance to Yahweh; 
Obedience is urged; Obedience is better than sacri¬ 
fice. .... 


21 






















' 




■ 


* 

, 

' • 

. . 

. 


. . * 

- 
























xii 


III SYMBOLS OF GOD’S PROTECTING PRESENCE . 25 

1. The Glory And The Name : Illustrations of God’s glory; 
Physical accompaniments of glory; Glory identified 
with the presence of God; God’s name as a manifesta¬ 
tion of His character; Solomons purpose in building 

the Temple; Prayer towards the Temple in God’s name. . . 25 

2. The Temple Stream And The Ark Of The Covenant : The 

sanctification of water; The Pool of Siloam; The 
Temple stream; A description of the Ark; Its his¬ 
tory; Its significance.. 27 

3. The Temple Is No Guarantee Of Security : Jeremiah*s 

warnings; The departure and return of the glory.35 

IV THE TEMPLE AS THE THRESHING FLOOR OF GOD ........ . 37 

1. Threshing As An Agricultural Metaphor : Threshing 
signifies complete destruction; The judgment of 

God; The help of God. 37 

2. The Fulfilment Of God*s Promise : The significance 

of the selection; The implications of God*s choice. . . 40 

V THE TEMPLE AS TEE ALTAR OF THE UNIVERSE.42 

1. God The Creator ? Primitive Semitic conceptions of 
the universe; Creation illustrated; The sovereignty 
of God over creation; God, the Greator and Sus- 
tainer of the universe; The greatness of God and 

the glory of His city. ..42 

2. The Holy Center : Israel’s dwelling place; Heaven 
as a temple; Preparations for the Temple and 

worship; The building plans of the Temple. ....... 46 

3. The Priesthood ; In pre-exilic t5.mes; In post- 

exilic times. 49 

4* Sacrifice And Offering : Categories of offering; 

A sign of God’s acceptance; True sacrifice and 

offering. 52 

5* The Significance Of Altars : The importance of the 
altar; The ritual of sacrifice; The ’horns of the 
altar*; The consecration of the altar; The position 
of the altars in the Temple, . ..57 

BIBLIOGRAPHY. 63 








































—\ .. .V . ■- . . , 


’ 










% ' 




: 




1 

























CHAPTER I 


THE TEMPLE AS THE CENTER OF DIVINE WORSHIP 

1. The Fosition Of Sanctuaries 

From primitive times, in Semitic lands, sanctuaries were used 
to mark holy places. A holy character was seen as belonging to such 
things as springs, rocks, trees and heights. These were thought to be 
the favorite haunts of deities. To such places were attached an altar, 
a sacred stone pillar, a sacred tree or pole and some symbol of deity. 
The Hebrews, when they settled in the Promised Land, came to think of 
lahweh as being in or near such holy places. Mary of these had been 
seats of worship for Canaan!te deities. Holy places were now re¬ 
garded as sites where Yahweh had specially manifested Himself (Gen. 28j 
Ilf) or recorded^- His name (Ex. 20s 24). It appears to have been a 
custom of the ancient Semites to look upon hilltops as especially 
suitable locations for worship. Thus, it was quite natural for the 
Israelites to adopt the sanctuaries in the high places of the Canaan- 
ites. They still retained the sacred objects, such as sacred pillars 
or stones (Gen. 28: 18). However, at the beginning of their settlement 
in Canaan, these numerous sanctuaries, for the most part, were devoted 
to the worship of Yahweh. 

Each sanctuary had an altar so that appropriate sacrifices could 
be offered to Yahweh (I Sam. 9s 12). This denotes the close associa¬ 
tion that they had with the worship of their God. The idea developed 
that certain of these sanctuaries were established by Yahweh, Himself 


Heb. n cause My name to be remembered”. 





•y 






„ 










' ' 1 ‘ 






r ) 


r, 


■■ J. j 






> 


. i ; 


X ?, .r: 


.'. ’.f o,: < .m'i 






fl: ■ i \ ' : ‘ 

v. r> f Cr'l-: 




lev 


' 


1 


• r 


' 




+ 


M 


• • \ ^ 


o : 




■ . < 




































(Ex. 15: 17). The dedication of Bethel by Jacob shows that a holy place 
was actually the spot where divine direction was received (Gen. 28: lOff). 
When Jacob awoke from his inspiring dream, he "took the stone that he 
had for his pillow, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil upon the 
top of it. n Jacob anointed this pillar to be "God*s house" (H V) ^ 

It can be seen that some sanctuaries were regarded as symbols of 
Yahweh*s activity. In Judges 6: 24 the name given to the altar is 
"Jehovah - shalom." This means Yahweh is peace (MT). This is an allu¬ 
sion to the words of Yahweh contained in verse 23, "Peace be unto thee." 
This passage relates the account of Gideon*s brilliant victory over the 
Midianites. Gideon was called by Yahweh to lead his people to freedom 
from the control of the conquering Midianites. Gideon asked for a sign. 
He prepared sacrifices and laid them upon a rock. These were consumed 
by fire when an angel of the Lord touched the rock. Gideon perceived 
this to be the activity of Yahweh, Himself, and constructed an altar 
where this manifestation had appeared. Thus Gideon hallowed the place 
where he had received assurance of support in carrying out Yahweh*s 
instructions. The story of his success is a well known one. After he 
had gained victory over the Midianites, Gideon could fully realize the 
significance of the words spoken by the God of Israel. 

The sanctuary at Shiloh (I Sam. 1:3), the chief shrine of Israel 
in the last days of the Judges, illustrates the sacredness that was 
attached to ancient holy places. The location of this shrine is expli¬ 
citly given (Judg. 21:19) as being "on the north side of Bethel, on the 
east side of the highway that goeth up from Bethel to Shechem, and on 


2 Heb. "Beth-el". 








- 3 - 


the south of Lebonah." It has been identified with the modern Seilun. 

We learn, from both the above passages in I Samuel and Judges that a 
yearly feast was held at Shiloh. Elkanah, the husband of Hannah, went 
there to worship and to offer sacrifices unto Yahweh. The tribe of 
Benjamin went to the festival at Shiloh to secure wives for themselves. 
Dancing seems to have been a customary activity at this annual festi¬ 
val, for the Benjamites were told to catch wives for themselves from the 
daughters of Shiloh, as they danced. 

From the sanctuary at Shiloh, we know that a priesthood was 
associated with these shrines. Hannah, true to her vow (I Sam. lsll), 
took Samuel, her first-born son, to this holy place. Here she dedi¬ 
cated him to the service of Yahweh under Eli, the high priest. Eli was 
an old man and seems to have held Ms priestly position for a long 
time. There are no accounts of Ms investiture into the priesthood 
nor of his early life. 

The importance of Shiloh at this time may be seen from the fact 
that it housed the Ark of the Covenant. Ihen Joshua moved Ms head¬ 
quarters from Gilgal to Shiloh (Josh. 18:Iff.), he brought the Taber¬ 
nacle and the Ark with him^. In the time of Eli and Samuel, the 
Tabernacle was replaced by a permanent building. In I Samuel Is9 it is 
called a temple. We have no information regarding the size of this 
n hous© of the Lord. 0 The Ark was considered to be a sign of Yahf/eMs 
presence. Resting in the sanctuary at Shiloh, it would heighten the 
sacredness of this holy place. It is sufficient to not© here that the 
Ark was taken into battle against the Philistines. The enemy was vic- 

torious and captured Israel 1 s sacred Ark. It is also probable, at this 

3 The full significance of the Ark will be discussed in Chapter III, 
Section 2. 




,' ■ 

I 

. •• , j 

•. f f ' ' : . MV" . 

•: : ■ ■' 

* , r, 

*> ' ■ ’■> <■;.<./: . 

, 

.. • , ' '• . -■ . • • ' , 'I •' 

. . * 

■ ■ 1 ' . ■’ ' 

, 

■ ' 

. ■ . . ; * :• /■ 

t . . . : ‘ !■ : . •' 

, 

„ 

, 

. 

' . * ' !■ . i' - -t. . I : fe, 






- 4 - 


time, that the sanctuary at Shiloh was destroyed ty the Philistines. 

The religion of Israel became a covenant religion at Mount Sinai. 
Moses made a national theism by welding together the earlier religious 
ideas of the nomadic Hebrews. Yahweh was to be the God of the Israel¬ 
ites and they were to be His people. The Covenant was the seal of the 
proposition. But when the Children of Israel settled in Canaan they 
forgot that this was a royal covenant. They made it an arbitrary 
agreement, taking licence when they should have given obedience. In 
Canaan they adopted a cult religion similar to Baal worship. It did 
not take long for the most of them to conform to the pagan worship of 
the Baals. Instead of raising the cult religion to the standards of the 
covenant, they succumbed to its superstitions, materialism and idolatry. 

It was the prophet Amos who shattered this conception of religion as 
cult religion. This fearless eighth century prophet made the religion 
of Israel supremely ethical. 

Amos® keen insight of the ethical conception of religion remained 
a theory for him. He had no political power to invoke reform. But not 
long after he emerged from the wilderness of Tekoa, reforms did take 
place. Steps toward centralizing the worship were made. In this action 
lay the hope that Israel®s religion would become ethical in content and 
practice. In II Kings 18sIff, we read that King Hezekiah of Judah 
(c. 715-6B7) ’’removed the high places and broke down the sacred pillars 
and cut down the sacred poles 1 * (RV). This king was interested in streng¬ 
thening and reforming the nation. He not only succeeded in purifying 
the forms of worship, but he made Jerusalem the national religious center. 
During his reign idolatrous practices were made impossible. However, it 


; ‘ : • . ' t 

' * 

. ■>*-'> ’ • 


• ' 


: 




, 






. * . ' 

. ' ■ ' ■ .. 

ivd ncr i 'to°£no;> 'io J"“ >"«:s ocU‘ m'o*1 :.:t. :>•/ J-on 

' 










V C" • 


• ■ ■ 



' 

- 


• 




■■ 






, 

‘ 1 ’ 

. 

*: i r . • *. T . \ • '■ : ■" ‘ ■ 

: . 

















- 5 - 


was not until the reign of King Josiah (c. 640-609) that all shrines out¬ 
side of the Holy City were abolished. While the Temple walls were being 
repaired, some workmen found a copy of the Law, as contained in the Book 
of Deuteronomy. Josiah recognized this book as the ideal national con¬ 
stitution of Israel and his reforms were based on it. He centralized all 
the worship in the land in the Temple at Jerusalem. Josiah*s premature 
death in a battle against the Egyptians, brought an end to his reforms. 

But the ideal of the prophets had been given national recognition. The 
moral code of Deuteronomy had set forth the ethical conceptions of the 
great prophets. Thus josiah had given his religious and cultic reforms 
a prophetic basis. The Temple, the sanctuary of the priest, received 
prophetic guidance. The one God of Israel was no royally proclaimed. 

The establishment of one sanctuary confirmed the belief In one God. 

The ever narrowing circle of worshipping Yahweh, finally was 
drawn into the focal point. The Children of Israel were a God-fearing 
people. It is true that their belief in one God sometimes wandered to the 
worship of pagan deities, but the true servants of Yahweh remained loyal. 
These faithful few, such as Abraham, Moses, the devoted prophets, the 
Kings David, Hezekiah and Josiah, drew in the circle. The pagan prac¬ 
tices were abolished. The shrines, which had become places of desecra¬ 
tion, were removed. The day when the rebuilt Temple became the altar 
of the Temple universal, was not far off. 




;.‘ii 




- : , n;; ■ : - ' > ' ' ■' ■ •;' \ 

■ '■ , 

I 

, ■'. : : r ''. ' ; : t :■>. •' ■■ • 

. 

• ^ \n, : j.£' xel f U> rJ 

, ' ” 

■ - . .' 5 

' 


■o o'j: 




•: ! i 




)• O 


. 


. 

„ 


W 


, 

• . X'C'. ; l r : 

■; t -' '• •' ‘ ■■■ ’ ' ;■ - \’. • r 

- ■ .. ■. • ' . '■ ' Vf l' >: ' ■ • 

: ' ' ■ : r . . ’ ' „ j ' 

■ : • v. 


. : , .. " " ' 


* * ■ '■' ! > ^ : ‘7 :• <'.'1 

. ; ' :• 

« . 





- 6 - 


2. Zion Is The Only Center Of True Worship 

"Moreover he refused the tabernacle of Joseph^, and chose not the 
tribe of Ephraim: But chose the tribe of Judah, the mount Zion which he 
loved" (Ps. 78:67f). These verses contain an account of the choice of Zion. 
Here and elsewhere (Ps. 87:If; Is. 14:32), it is shown that this was con¬ 
sidered to be a divine selection. Yahweh had chosen Zion as the place 
where His sanctuary should be built. The tribe of Ephraim had formerly 
established Yahweh J s shrine at Shiloh. If this had not been actually des¬ 
troyed by the Philistines, at least it was no longer the religious center 
of the nation. The tribe of Judah had remained true to the house of David 
and therefore was considered to be chosen by Yahweh for a special purpose. 
Jerusalem lay within the kingdom of Judah and had a special association 
with Zion. Zion is identified as a mountain here. It is also referred to 
as Jerusalem itself. It seems then, that Zion was the site of the Holy 
City, including the mountainous region in which it was situated. Modern 
tradition locates Mount Zion as the south west hill of the range around 
Jerusalem. It is on this site that the Temple and citadel were built. 
However, Zion f s significance was that its site was believed to have been 
consecrated by Yahweh (Ps. 2:6; 43:3; 48:1). 

In II Chronicles 3:1 we read that "Solomon began to build the house 
of the Lord at Jerusalem in mount Moriah". Moriah is described as the place 
where Abraham prepared Isaac for sacrifice (Gen. 22:2). This region had a 
specially sacred tradition. In the early writings of Scripture, Zion is 
the name given to the nation f s religious center. Moriah was the name given 

^"Joseph" is frequently used to denote the combined tribes of Ephraim and 

Manasseh or the Northern Kingdom of Judah as a whole (Gen. 49:22ff; Deut. 
33:13ffj Josh. 16:1,4; I Kings 11:28). 





. 

_ 

... 

' 


, . 1 ' ' 



•) 

, r 


• 

: 



..i" : 

. 

' « 



i 








f 



>,v 






« 

'■ 


J 

r< ; 

■MY 






1 

' 

0 ' 



r x 




f; ’ ; > 



■ ' .a ,v. \ 

vs" • 

'tn 

■ 

' 

;T 



■ 






. 

* 

.t;' 


, 


1 

' 



. 



Offj 


' 2 



IS . 


i 



* 








'V' 





■■ 'I 'S ::. 


0 

■ 

c 





- c 


f 

. u 


; lilt 

’ 

: 





.V. 

*-.;d c 





. 

) 


' 











j 




• • ;•, 



■ - 









• 



■ 


Y 

. * ■■ 








j- 


t) 

- 

















• 

: :• 









. 


• 

nV.■;: - 

• 

> " 


' 





< 











i 










.' 

















■: i ■ 






'■ : 





, 










• 















„ 

kv. • 





- 7 - 

later to show a possible association with Abraham. The Books of Chronicles 
are known to be late writings and they support this speculation. What is 
significant is that Zion was selected to be the site of the Temple. 

In the days of Moses, Mount Sinai had been thought of as the dwelling 
place of lahweh. Now Zion is His special abode (Ps. 50:2; Is. 2:2f; 24:23). 
It became recognized as such from the time that the Ark of the Covenant was 
moved to the Temple at Jerusalem^. It was from Zion that lahweh would hence¬ 
forth judge His people. Psalm 50 presents a solemn vision of judgment. In 
earlier days Yahweh came forth from Mount Sinai, in the midst of storm and 
lightning, to promulgate the law. Here He is represented as appearing from 
Zion, surrounded by these symbols of His majesty, to continue the enforce¬ 
ment of His commands. The name which God is given represents certain aspects 
of His divine nature. Elohim is His name as the God of nature and creation. 
Yahweh is used to signify that He is the God of the covenant and of grace. 
"The mighty God, even Yahweh" (MT) came to dwell in Zion. He came to enforce 
His Law. More important, however, is the assurance that here He may be 
found. 

Yahweh is given the title 'Most High* several times in the Psalter 
(Ps. 7:17; 9:11; 18:13). In Psalm 7, Yahweh is given this name because it 
characterizes His self revelation as the supreme governor of the world. In 
this Psalm it is shown that Yahweh executes judgment unceasingly on the 
wicked. The conclusion is an ascription of praise to Him for His manifesta¬ 
tion of His righteousness. Although this title is not used by the prophets, 
it does appear in the Book of Deuteronomy (32:8). Her© in the Song of Efoses 
it alludes to Yahweh f s irreproachable impartiality in partitioning the earth 

5 A full account of the restoration of the Ark appears on Pages 33-34* 




• 

\j. , . 






■ 

l t 

. 



1 

■. 


x ; 





. 

' 

‘ 

, ■ " . 

, ' 

br.: :i- v. . '/• c ; ■. Vi- :•*■■■ cd* t 

' 1 . 


. I 








* 



. •: ■ , v ' ■- ■ \ '1 

» ■ • ' rv‘> •' ' '/ .. r v . £ 4': ;*p. 

. . 4 . ' , . ... 

. 




i ' ! ' ' . 


1 




J j . j : 



- 8 - 


among the nations. The Most High God will dwell in Zion, executing judgment 
as conceived by the great prophets. 

Isaiah of Jerusalem prophecied an impending doom in Chapter 28 of his 
book. The full might of Assyria threatened to engulf all of the nations. 
Meanwhile the royal court of Judah spent its time in drunken revelry. As a 
statesman, Isaiah warned the officials of their folly. As a prophet, he 
sounds the only note of hope. **Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a 
stone, a sure foundation 1 * (v.16). Yahweh has established His Temple in Zion. 
Isaiah considered the Temple to be inviolate. It*s existence was the assur¬ 
ance of divine help. Zion, Yahweh*s chosen site, was the very foundation 
of the national hope. 

Mountains in general, as the most solid part of the earth, were con¬ 
sidered by the Israelites to be the symbol of all that was immovable and 
unchangeable (Ps« 93:1$ Is. 54:10)* In both of these references, these 
characteristics of Yahweh are noted. In Psalm 93 the mountains symbolise 
Yahweh*s majesty and power. In the passage from Isaiah, they symbolize both 
Yahweh*s irrevocable judgment and His mercy. Mountains were the most as¬ 
suring symbol of security to the Israelites. In Psalm 125 divine trust is 
said to be nurtured by Mount Zion, **they that trust in Yahweh shall be as 
Mount Zion, which cannot be removed** (v.l MT). Zion, then, is a manifesta¬ 
tion of the trust that the Israelites place in their God. 

Until serious study is made of the choice of Zion, its full signifi¬ 
cance cannot be realized. It can be seen that in this high place the Is¬ 
raelites experienced many divine manifestations. Zion embodies many of the 
elements contained in true worship. The prophet and psalmist proclaim Zion 
to be a place which has been divinely chosen. When the Ark of the Covenant 
came to rest in Jerusalem, Zion was recognized as the abode of Yahweh. 




Cd.*:9 



■ 

•V.n.t • 



- 9 - 


Mount Sinai had been abandoned by lahweh and Zion now became the place of 
His judgment. Now that Yahweh dwelt in Zion it became the foundation of 
national hope. Zion was the nation*s symbol of security that was placed 
in Yahweh. 


3. The Selection Of Jerusalem 

There is no information in the Old Testament or historical books con¬ 
cerning the origin of the city of Jerusalem. It is recorded as ’’Urusalim” 
in the Tell-el-Amarna tablets (1400 B.C.). In this letter, the king ap¬ 
peals to Pharaoh Amenhotep IV for help against certain invaders known as the 
Habiri. The following account is contained in the Book of Ezekiel, ’’Thus 
saith the Lord God unto Jerusalem; Thy birth and thy nativity is of the land 
of Canaan; they father was an Amorite, and thy mother a Hittite” (1613). 
Jerusalem, it is known, was a royal city of the Canaanites. A reference in 
Judges 19:10ff, reveals that it was held by the Canaanitie tribe of the 
Jebusites. They called the city Jebus. When David captured this city 
(II Sam. 5:6ff), it was already known as Jerusalem. Jeremiah gives the 
meaning of the name, but its origin is not indicated. Jeremiah 33:16b reads, 
”and this is the name wherewith she shall be called. The Lord our righteous¬ 
ness,” Jerusalem was of national importance from earliest times. This 
connotation of its name suited its favored destiny. 

The account of the capture of Jerusalem appears in II Samuel 5:6-10 
and I Chronicles 11:4-9, The forces of David had little difficulty in over¬ 
coming the Jebusites. After its capture, Jerusalem was officially known as 
the ’’City of David.” The seizure of Jerusalem and the employment of it as 
the nation’s capital, gives an illustration of David’s political genius. 

David was first recognized as king of southern Israel. Later the northern 



' 

* 

' . . ' i ' 

* 

, 

"U- . ' B .:' o £ r ■ 1 %'S x;lcx.x/xH o$ a f U::eq 

. * 

. ' ' , \ . . . ‘ 

. . . ■ t : 

. 

. ' ' d . ■ 

♦ ■ .■ ■ : : 

, • 

. 

• i ’ • 

, 






- 10 - 


tribes invited him to become monarch of all Israel, Political instability 
would have continued to plague David, as it did Saul, had he relied upon the 
uncertain support of the tribes, David’s solution was to choose this city, 
which was outside of the Israelite tribal system, to be his capital. Jeru¬ 
salem had never before been the property of Israel. Its strategic position 
is seen from its location on the very borders of the re-united halves of his 
kingdom. Thus David could establish his court according to his own design. 
He was not forced to solicit tribal support through complimentaxy positions. 
David’s wisdom as a soldier is shown in his selection of Jerusalem. Nestled 
in Zion, the city would be attacked on its weakest side, from the south, 
David had strong fortifications constructed to defend this approach. So, 
for practical military and political purposes, Jerusalem became the nation’s 
center. 

From the pages of Scripture it can b© seen that Jerusalem was also 
regarded as the heart of Israel because it was chosen by lahweh. The Book 
of Deuteronony, which codifies the prophetic ideals, indicates this. The 
people are urged, in obedience to lahweh’s statutes, to destroy all of the 
rural sanctuaries (Deut, 12:Iff). The only one that is to remain is the one 
that Yahweh chooses. The location will be the one He has selected above acy 
habitation of all the tribes. This of course is Jerusalem. The Psalmist 
proclaimed Jerusalem as being divinely chosen (Fs. 11452). Solomon, in his 
prayer of dedication (I Kings 8s44# 4$)» certifies this as a generally 
accepted belief. David showed gifted insight in his strategical selection 
of Jerusalem as his capital. But the Israelites regarded its special choice 
as a divinely ordained act of Yahweh, It had become the national center of 
worship. It was the Holy City. 


' 

i 




■ 1 

' I , ■ • •: ; : 

. 

■ 

- r T *!. v t»t., -f«-. •? ■ r - * (-• * • ,]• .t < 




V' -r. ; V.yj 


r 




, ■: ■: i r ;r . ' . 






ic w . cr 


■■ 










* 






■ 


* . 


' ■ Ji w.LY Jr&d& 




' 










- 11 


When David*s armies had completely broken the power of the Philistines, 
it was possible for Israel to regain possession of the Ark of the Covenant* 

The Ark was transferred from Kiriath-jearim to the City of David (II Sam. 6:Iff 
I Chron. 15:Iff). The Tabernacle, in which it was now housed, was the tent, 
used in the time of Moses. The possession of this ancient palladium of the 
tribes of Israel was of great religious significance. It gained pre-eminence 
for the sanctuary at Jerusalem over all other sanctuaries in the land. As 
has been noted, in due time, the Deuteronomic reforms of Josiah made it the 
exclusive center of worship. After David had restored the Ark, his central 
government was securely established. The next fifteen years of his reign 
were marked by peace and prosperity. It is interesting to note that there 
was prosperity wherever the Ark rested. When it was being transported to 
Jerusalem, David left it in the house of Obed-adorn, the Gittite, for three 
months (II Sam. 6:11). While it was there M the Lord blessed Obed-edom, and 
all his household." This attribute of the Ark is proclaimed in later days by 
Zechariah (l:l6f). David was assuring the success of his reign by acknow¬ 
ledging the power which was invested in this symbol of the divine presence. 

As soon as the Ark was brought to rest in Jerusalem, David had offer¬ 
ings prepared for its reception (II Sam. 6:17; I Chron. 16:If). The con¬ 
struction of the altar is not specifically described in these passages. The 
definite mention of it does not occur until later in the Book of I Chronicles 
(16:40). However, our account does tell us that sacrifices were offered. 

This was the first step in establishing a right relationship with Yahweh. 

This procedure is borne out in later times. When the Jewish refugees returned 
from their exile in Babylon, they were anxious to restore the Temple. Before 
they commenced work on their cherished sanctuary, they established this 







•• •' ’' 

w ' 

,o 

. " £ . 

• 


■ 







* ___ ' 



. . . 

jj 

‘ 








■ 


* 

, 









.:;r. - 




, 

; h 









' t 






\ 


• • 


' 











< 



' 

i 







■ ' ■ 





■ - r ■ ■■ 




. 


• 


' 



7 

, 



jl- 



'a-' ' 



. 


* 






: ■ 


'■ a- • 






, 



t 

• 









* 


* 










' 







• 


, 














' 



•. - * 




i'i • : ' 

• 












* 





* 




• 


: ' r 










• 


' 









• ■ ?•: '0 















i 


, . 
















• 






'..-Vv/O; 







* 


t 



' 









- . 






12 


proper relationship with their God, In order to renew worship at Jerusalem, 
they constructed an altar and presented offerings to Yahweh (Ezra 3 j1-6). 

It was of utmost importance to make supplication to Yahweh and to seek His 
divine aid. 

The primary reason for selecting Jerusalem as the nation*s capital 
was a matter of political expediency. But as the place of asylum for the 
Ark of the Covenant, it became confirmed as the national religious center. 
Jerusalem was Yahweh*s chosen Holy City. 


4. The Universal Significance Of The Temple 

The Book of Leviticus, while a late compilation, contains mazy ancient 
lai^s. The Children of Israel integrated these laws with their religious 
practices. These show that Yahweh was not considered to be worshipped ex¬ 
clusively by the Israelites. Provisions were made for the proselytes or aliens 
who dwelt in Israel. It is true that they were expected to come within the 
jurisdiction of Hebrew law, but special recognition was given to them. If 
they offered a burnt offering or made any sacrifice at the doorway of the tent 
of meeting, they would receive Yahweh*s blessing (Lev. 17:8f). Yahweh was 
the sole object of worship for both the Israelite and the sojourner. In 
these early times Yahweh was held to be supreme above all other gods. The 
beginnings of the universal conception of God are seen in the extension of 
His power over these proselytes. When the Israelites settled in Canaan, 

Yahweh became the arbitrator of all justice. Yet, it was not until the time 
of the great prophets that He was proclaimed as the judge of all mankind. 

Solomon*s Prayer of Dedication (I Kings 8s22-53) develops the idea 
of the universal significance of the Temple. Before this is shown, the 





* 




. . 


•••• t : 


, 





* 




, 



. 









' ' ■ ' ‘ 


■ 

. 1 

, 

: . . ' . . *:c ; 




1 ; 








4 


\ ' ’• / ... ' V: C.; ■') 

. 




- 13 - 


composition of this prayer must be discussed. The eighth chapter of I Kings 
contains three orations of Solomons his address to the people, verses 15-21; 
his Prayer of Dedication, 22-535 an(i the Benediction, 54-61. These passages 
reveal numerous coincidences in style with the Book of Deuteronony and the 
Deuteronomic parts of the Book of Joshua. All these writings are the work 
of the Deuteronomic school, which was formed after the reform of Josiah in 
621. These additions in I Kings comprise an interpretation of a historical 
situation in the form of speeches which were supposed to have been delivered 
by the leading personage of the story. This was a.common practice of Deuter¬ 
onomic historians. The compiler of I and II Kings gives his own view of the 
supreme significance of the building of Solomon*s Temple. It has thus been 
established by Biblical scholars that Solomon did not actually deliver any 
of these speeches. A further explanation is revealed in the religious in¬ 
tention of these writers. They had little interest in political affairs. 

The important reigns of Omri and Jeroboam II are dismissed with a few meagre 
notices. Events which have an ecclesiastical character are described at 
great length. Always the standard adhered to is the Book of Deuteronomy. 

The writer*s purpose is to show how the ideas which are inculcated in Deuter¬ 
onomy. The writer*s purpose is to show how the ideas which are inculcated 
in Deuteronony have been those which molded the destinies of the nation 
throughout its past history. Two of these ideas have been presented as the 
insistence of maintaining purity of worship and the restriction of sacri¬ 
ficial worship to the central sanctuary at Jerusalem. Another ideal is to 
uphold the right of Yahweh to demand the whole-hearted allegiance and wor¬ 
ship of His chosen people Israel (I Kings 2:2-4). With these ideas in mind 
the writer composes a prayer of dedication for Solomon that would uphold 


the Deuteronomic ideal 


Y? ;-n ho nw? *x :*riOJii vp Y •$ 

. 















, 

■ 

. ■ 

. 


' 

. 


. 

* 


, 

, 

. 

• : 

1 1 

. 

, 

- 1 -- 

, - : 

‘ 

. 



- 14 - 


From Solomon*s prayer it is intended that the Temple should be re¬ 
garded as **a house of prayer for all people'* (cf. Is. 56:7). A petition 
first is made to Yahweh to listen to the prayers of His people, whether they 
be in the Temple or offer their prayers toward it (v.30). Next, the non- 
Israelite, the stranger, is assured that if he prays towards the Temple, 

Yahweh will listen (v.4l)* Yahweh was considered to be the God of all 
nations by the prophets. When the stranger stretches out his arms in sup¬ 
plication, all the peoples of the earth will come to know Yahweh*s name (v.43). 

Yahweh's house was little more than a shrine to the infamous Solomon. 
This ambitious monarch denied the supremacy of Israel*s God when he provided 
shrines for the pagan gods of his foreign wives. His expedient marriages 
guarded his agreements with other nations. But the Temple was established 
in Jerusalem. Isaiah of Babylon proclaimed its importance in keeping with 
the prophetic ideal, "for mine house shall be called an house of prayer for 
all people" (Is. 56:7b). The Beuteronomic writers intended to show that 
from the time that the Temple was dedicated, Yahweh's presence, symbolized 
by the Ark, did actually make it a house of prayer for all people. Thus 
the Children of Israel could turn toward it in prayer when they were in exile 
in Babylon. Thus all men could echo the Psalmist's prayer "from the end of 
the earth will I cry unto thee" (Ps. 61:2). 
















. 




!■ ' 






- 15 - 


CHAPTER H 

THE TEMPLE AS AN INDICATION OF SUBLIME WORSHIP 

1. Reasons Why David Could Not Build The Temple 

In the Book of I Chronicles, we read that David was personally unfit 
to build the Temple (22:8; 28:2). In many cases, the events which occur 
in the books of the Chronicler are a restatement of their occurrence in the 
historic books of I and II Kings^. It is only in I Chronicles that this 
first reason for David’s inability to build the Temple is found. The writer 
of this book makes a special case of David’s position. Here David’s kingdom 
is glorified. Its wealth and power are exaggerated beyond the reach of even 
David’s own imagination. This is done in keeping with the Chronicler’s 
purpose of writing the first apology of Judaism. He sets down a polemic 
against the claims of the Samaritans, who possessed the Law of Moses and had 
a rival temple at Mount Gerizim. It is also written against the pretensions 
of the Gentiles of Europe and Asia. The Chronicler set out to prove that 
the religion of Jerusalem was the only true one. Along with this he wants 
to show that the Temple was the religious center of mankind. He traces the 
sacred institutions of Judaism back to Moses and Aaron, or, when that was 
impossible, to David. Thus the Golden Era in Israel’s history is glorified. 
It is shown how David organized the work of the sacred functionaries and 
prepared for the building of the Temple. David’s renowned accomplishments 
are recorded almost without blemish. In spite of this, the Chronicler re¬ 
cords David’s unworthiness for being able to undertake the actual construe- 
6 


e.g., Solomon’s Prayer of Dedication, I Kings 8:22-53; II Chron. 6:12-42 













. 


' , ‘ .. : ' 7 




l 




' ■ : 
















I 







.i 






■. 


: 1 '■ ,:o i $ f 























! 




- 16 - 


tion of the Temple. w But the word of the Lord came to me, saying. Thou hast 
shed blood abundantly, and hast made great wars; thou shalt not build an 
house unto my name, because thou hast shed much blood upon the earth in my 
sight* 1 (22:8). This reason seems unjustified in view of the fact that the 
Philistines had to be defeated in order to secure Israel*s freedom. Never¬ 
theless, the Chronicler considers this monarch, who had carried out such 
extensive warfare, to be unfit to establish Yahweh*s sacred sanctuary. 

The reason given for David’s prevention of building the Temple in 
I Kings 5s3> is that he was hindered by incessant wars. It is known that 
David extended the boundaries of the kingdom of Israel farther than they 
had ever been. They were widened as far as central Syria in the northwest 
and the Euphrates Valley in the northeast. He won brilliant victories over 
the Edomites, Moabites, Ammonites, Arameans and Philistines. Also within 
Israel proper, David had to show great skill and diplomacy in retaining order 
among the tribes. In the time of Saul, their support was not reliable. 

David did not want his kingdom to be weakened 6y internal strife. The 
vigilance which David was forced to keep was lessened in the last years of 
his reign. However, Israel was not to have one sanctuary until it had re¬ 
ceived complete rest from its enemies. This is also the reason given in the 
Deuteronomic code (Deut. 12:9f)* The Hebrew historians felt justified in 
reserving this appointed time for the reign of Solomon. 

The third reason given, in forbidding David to build the Temple, is 
that the worship of Yahweh had not completely emerged from its earlier no¬ 
madic ideal (II Sam. 7). This chapter intends to show the divine guarantee 
of the permanence of David’s dynasty. It also reveals how the prophet 
Nathan advised David against constructing a permanent house for Yahweh*s 


. 


- 

' 



. ‘I ■ ' i ! Q f 



, 




* , - 

. 1 



: f c ■> V V • ' VI l 

i \a‘:: j 

< 


* 

. 

1 




■ • ; 'V ' 

1 


« 


' 

' , : . V. V 


on i 

jz : Vw 

n' t/V. 0'iL. 




... V' 


f • ' ' If ' ' ■ 

T 

) 

• . ’ . ... ; ' : •■ . ■ '■ 

j an *.r: V :.V n/. j oas V ! ’ 

j v :a.v: v m:V at j a.V:. r.: . 'v. ' 1.. v o/:... Ctn.ev 

, 

, ■ l ■ . 

. 

\ t v I' ' '■ 

1 ■ ') 

, ; ■); ' . 5 - 3 •' ; . \ V .j ’ V IV 


. n 




. ! ■ ' 






17 


presence. This fearless servant is divinely informed that Israel*s God still 
prefers to have a tent for His dwelling place. The Ark of the Covenant had 
usually been kept in a tent since the days of Moses. This temporary resi¬ 
dence was a constant reminder that Yahweh could not be confined to any perman¬ 
ent location. Although Yahweh had chosen Zion, the Israelites still required 
a period of continuous peace before they could give their devoted attention 
to the worship of Yahweh. So until their God chose the place where His name 
should dwell (Deut. 12:11), the preceding period, dating from the Exodus, 
was considered to be a transitionary one. This is borne out in Solomon*s 
address to the people (I Kings 8:15f), which precedes his prayer of dedica¬ 
tion. 

On the surface, the reasons for preventing David from building the 
Temple are far from satisfactory. David is held in the highest esteem, tt my 
servant David, who kept my commandments, and who followed me with his whole 
heart* 1 (I Kings 14s8). This is an estimate given by one of the writers of 
the Deuteronomic school. The Psalmists proclaim the gracious mercy of 
Yahweh for the blessings bestowed upon David (Ps. 18:50; 78:70; 89:3 > 20). 

It seems evident that the Israelite historians found it most difficult to 
explain David*s failure to build. Israel*s national hero and religious 
saviou£ would have been their choice as the architect of the house of God. 

Yet the reasons given display a characteristic Hebrew genius. These set 
forth the high moral and religious requirements necessary for sublime wor¬ 
ship. Moral integrity is stressed by the prophetic reformers. Consecrated 
members of the priesthood insisted that the ceremonial rites be performed 
punctiliously. These moral and ritualistic requirements were closely 




■ 


■ ' 




• *’i- '■ J ' V r' <. j : 


■ 

■ 

, 


■ ■ •/ , ; •• ' ' ■ ■• •' ■' '■ 

* 

v v ' : •• • • ' • ' T ' 

. 

t . ' ' U . . ' : . V ' - ' .* , ' 

' 

' 

* : r • 


. 

' 

■ 









■ 






















' ■ 


18 


allied with the political and national conditions. It was desirable that 
there be a lasting period of peace. Added to this was a necessary altera¬ 
tion in the minds of the worshippers. The Israelites had traditionally 
held the nomadic ideal of Yahweh*s mobility. He had gone before them in 
time of war and settlement. The Ark had been housed in a tent. A transi¬ 
tion was needed to change this ideal so that Yahweh would be naturally 
thought of as dwelling in a fixed abode in Sion. 


2. Decorative Symbols Used In The Temple 

It was a combination of the prophetic and priestly ideals that were 
symbolized in the construction of the Temple. The evolution of these ideals 
is displayed figuratively in the designs wrought on the pillars, doors and 
walls of the Temple. The “inner court of the house of the Lord” (I Kings 
7:12) was marked off by a low fence of three rows of hewn stones and a row 
of cedar beams. Standing at the head of the platform steps and flanking 
the porch entrance were two pillars of brass. The one on the right was 
named Jachin and that on the left was called Boaz (I Kings 7:21). It is 
not known whether these names were inscribed in some way on the pillars. 

They may have been key words in some kind of mottoes, but their actual 
meaning remains a mystery. Ezekiel also includes these two pillars in his 
plans for the Temple (40:49). 

The use of pillars in sanctuaries evolved from stone worship. Primi¬ 
tive Semitic people believed that the whole world of earth, water, air and 
sky was animated. Every part or feature of the world was thought to be the 
abode of life in one form or another. Thus rocks, from which echoes and 







, 

• . : 
9 , V 


, 

' 


. ■ ‘ ’ . 
















. 

' 

■ .. ; •. ' ■■■■* . ' ' ■ : '■ 1 ■' ' . . 

O.L j 

* 

. 

tfca 

. 

* : 

■ 





» 





- 19 - 


other nysterious sounds were heard, from which living water sprang or within 
whose recesses it was stored, were thought to be animated fcy a diety. Once 
rocks and stones were regarded as sacred objects, they became factors in 
subsequent religious tradition. So the stones and pillars which were used 
in the Temple were regarded to be sacred objects. They were used as symbols 
of Yahweh’s presence. 

The twin pillars, Jachin and Boaz, were made of brass or a copper alloy. 
It is likely that each pillar consisted of cylindrical cast copper plates 
which had been slipped over a built-up cedar post^, This would be in ac¬ 
cordance with such methods that are known to be within the capacity of 
skilled workmen in the time of Solomon. The chapiters, or upper part of the 
columns, consisted of a bowl member, a leaf member and the pomegranates. 

The bowl member may have been a vessel in which incense was burned. What¬ 
ever significance the pomegranates and leaves had is now not known. 

Cherubim were represented in the carved woodwork of the doors and walls 

of the Temple (I Kings 6s29, 32, 35). Although no precise shape is assigned 

to cherubim, they are described as composite creatures. They have the wings 

of birds and the bodies of terrestrial animals. They symbolize the manifold 

forces of nature, combining the strength of the earth with the swiftness of 

the wind. They are described alike in prophetic vision and in sacred art as 

attending upon Tahweh and assisting to enhance the glory of His manifested 

presence^. These were the only living creatures that were portrayed in the 

Tabernacle and the Temple. This, apparently, was done without any violence 

^ It is quite possible that these pillars allude to tree worship. In this 
case the cedar post would represent the tree and the cylindrical plates 
the bark. 

cf. Gen. 3:24; II Sam. 22:11; Ps. 18:10; 80:1; Is. 37:16. 


8 





' t 








« 


! 












- ‘ • ‘ ' 


‘ ' > 






' ' ■ 


. 

■ : ; . ■ ' . V ‘ , ■ . 0' : 

•: v : v •• . v • :i' 10 L~ ■: ->' ? ."T- 

, 

t- * 

- 

:. '• 'o : 

■ 

















- 20 - 


to the second commandment (Ex. 20:3). Cherubim, then, were regarded only as 
ministers of the Most High. They occupied a place in Yahweh 1 s court to sig¬ 
nify His regal state and to carry out His will. 

The doors of the oracle or the Holy of Holies, as it came to be known, 
were made of olive wood. Upon these were carved designs of cherubim, pa3.m 
trees and open flowers (I Kings 6:32). It is thought that the palm tree 
represented the sacred tree which marked a sanctuary. Trees, in general, 
have a sacred tradition similar to that of pillars. In early Semitic times, 
trees which grew, put forth leaves, yielded fruit from the sap within them 
and the moisture at their roots, were thought to be abodes of a divinity. 

These Temple decorations symbolize the growing and developing power 
of Yahweh. The pillars, as symbols of majesty and strength, represent the 
living but static presence of Yahweh. The palm trees represent Yahweh*s sus¬ 
tenance, ever replenishing and renewing man’s spiritual needs. Again, the 
cherubim, as indications of sublime worship, signify the active presence of 
Yahweh. The active presence is realized in the ministerings of the Temple 
priests. Their lives are dedicated to the task of bringing Yahweh*s people 
into a receptive relationship with the divine presence. 




, 

. ' / v ■ ' '■ ? 

. •: : i i * effct a 0 ' v 

. , -[ ' : ‘ . •• 

■ . ; ' . - ■ ) •; :i 

. ,>; l : •<: ■ : .. ' ! . ; \v-'-y ■ 


. 

J .. ■' . 1 ' .. 

' *. . : ' . ' : » 
t : • : . ' .... , • ' •»!"' 

„ . . '. • ' 

: ■ . • ;‘'r \ ' ;'" . 

0 

1 ■ »• ‘ ' 





- 21 


3. The True Commandment Of The Exodus 

It has been indicated that it was desired to have the Temple estab¬ 
lished according to the prophetic and priestly ideals. The Temple designs 
used on the walls, pillars and doors symbolize the manifestation of Xahweh 
in all His might, majesty and glory. The ritual of T/orship used in the 
Temple carried the aspirations of perfection still further. The Temple had 
to be worthy in dedication, structure and worship. 

Laws relating to sacrifice may be found in the priestly book of 
Leviticus. Sacrifice was regarded as a divinely appointed institution (1:2). 
In general, sacrifice is an offering made to Xahweh with the intention of 
expressing, securing or promoting friendly or normal relations with Him. 

It is based on the fundamental assumption that the worshipper and lahweh can 
enter into personal communion. It was hoped that by sacrifice this relation¬ 
ship would become closer and more intimate. The catalogue of priestly laws 
found in Leviticus gives the correct procedures to be taken. They stress 
the necessity of conforming to lahweh 9 s will, but also provide special sacri¬ 
fices for repentant sinners and those who sin through ignorance (4t27f). 
Sacrifice had a very prominent place in the Temple worship. It must be 
realized, however, that its ritual had been reformed as advocated by the 
prophets (Deut. 12:6f). The Temple was the only place where sacrifices were 
to be offered unto Xahweh. The ritual was under the strict supervision of 
the priesthood. 

Psalm 50 deals with true sacrifice and worship. It draws attention 
to the vital need of associating morals with the Temple ritual. The sacri¬ 
fice of animals is not condemned nor even slighted. It is the conduct of 









' 








•_ u ; . _• . . ■, _ 

• '■ ‘ : -r<J. 












« ’ ? 

: ‘ • 1 ' ' " ‘ ' 


r . . 


■ 


t •' 


' 

' 

. 

. '. : ■. : • • 

■ 












! 








• : ■ ■ > • ■ 




, 












,, 






■ 





22 - 


some sacrifices which are condemned as being unworthy of presentati-on to 
Yahweh. As such they were unworthy of the spiritual worship which ought to 
characterize the true Israel, The Psalmist displays a fervor and power, 
characteristic of a prophet of Yahweh, He insists that the moral and 
spiritual significance of worship must be in accordance with the character 
of Israel*s holy God, This involves the absolute necessity of ordering the 
life and conduct of the worshippers in keeping with the high ideals. The 
objects offered for sacrifice were to be the best in the possession of the 
worshipper. All vows made to Yahweh were to be fulfilled. 

It is significant to notice that not only was the appearance of Yah¬ 
weh thought to dwell in the Temple but also His voice. This information is 
gained from the Book of Ezekiel (43s1-9)• In Chapters 4i and 42 the build¬ 
ing is described. Everything is then In readiness for the consecration of the 
Temple. Ezekiel describes how he had seen Yahweh abandon His sanctuary^ 

(10:19; 11:23). How he envisions the return of the God of Israel to dwell 
in the Temple (v.1-5). However, he not only sees the divine Gloiy, he also 
hears the divine voice. Yahweh announces that once more the Temple has 
become His dwelling place. The voice prescribes special conditions. The 
holiness of the divine name must never again be defiled. The people are 
to be instructed to keep Yahweh*s commands. The presence of Yahweh*s voice 
will be a constant reminder of the obedience which He demands. Sublime 
worship insists that the Children of Israel conform to Yahweh*s will, re¬ 
quiring obedience and not mere sacrifice. 

^ The departure and return of the Glory will be described fully on Pages 36-37. 



... .. ' - ■ . ‘ 

. 

■ 

■ 

. • 

' 

, 

_ 

. •• 

■ 

. 

- 

* 

* 

« . 

. • • • • .'••••• - * •. 

. ,-d • 

i , 1 








* 










■ 



23 - 


It can be shown that sacrifice is not of primary importance to Yahweh. 
Saul learned this, much to his sorrow. This first king of the Israelites 
waged a successful war against the Amalekites. The prophet Samuel had warned 
Saul that this nation was to be put under the ban (I Sam. 15:3). Accordingly 
all the inhabitants and domestic animals were supposed to have been destroyed 
completely. Saul saved the best of the sheep and oxen, claiming that these 
would be sacrificed to Yahweh (15:21). Samuel*s reply indicates the subordinate 
significance that was attributed to sacrifice. “Hath the Lord as great de¬ 
light in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the 
Lord? 11 (v.22). Saul*s punishment fdr disregarding Yahweh*s command was his 
rejection as king of Israel. 

The Children of Israel had been urged to obey the commandments of Yah¬ 
weh from early times. Their God had inflicted many plagues upon the Egyp¬ 
tians, when the Pharoh refused to allow them to leave his realm in a peace¬ 
able manner (Ex. 8:8, 24; 9:23; 10:13). When the Israelites had escaped from 
Egypt, Yahweh provided water to quench their parching thirst (15:25). At the 
same time Moses assures them that Yahweh will not suffer them to endure any 
plagues, such as the Egyptians had experienced. In addition, he insisted that 
the Israelites must heed the voice of Yahweh and obey His commands (15:26). 
Yahweh promised to give protection and sustenance to His people but in return 
He demanded a righteous conduct on their part. These were the terms of His 
royal covenant mad© at Mount Sinai. 

The great prophets of Israel were concerned about the abuses of sac¬ 
rifice. In many cases the worship of Yahweh became an external display. 

The condition of obedience was ignored. Moreover, sacrifices were offered 








' 





' 







' 



; -) 


' ! 


? ' ' ' ' ' 


















t 







, 


t 


■ 




‘ 


' 




" 


). 







' 






- 24 - 


to pagan gods when the Israelites were settled in Canaan (Amos 2:8). Their 
idolatry even led them to offer human sacrifices (Jer. 7:31). Jeremiah 
emphasizes Yahweh*s demands for obedience. He states his case in vehement 
fashion, pronouncing Yahweh*s displeasure, “For I spake not unto your fathers, 
nor commanded them in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, 
concerning burnt offerings or sacrifices: But this thing commanded I them, 
saying, Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people:" 
(7:22, 23). Hosea voices his opposition in a softer, but nevertheless em¬ 
phatic tone. He states that Yahweh really wants love from His people and not 
sacrifice. He desires divine knowledge more than burnt offerings (Hos. 6:6). 
Micah makes a classic disclosure concerning true religion," and what doth 
the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk 
humbly with thy God?" (6s8) 10 . 

Sacrifice was an important accessory of the religion of Israel. Chap¬ 
ter 12 of the Book of Deuteronomy upholds its institution and usage. Here 
the ritual has been reformed of its pagan practices, including the abolition 
of human sacrifice. It is the attitude towards sacrifice that must be ele¬ 
vated. This must be in harmony with Micah 1 s proclamation. Sacrifice, as an 
integral part of sublime worship, must be an act of humble service in res¬ 
ponse to the commands of Yahweh. 


Micah*s plight is more clearly seen in the following selection from the 
preceding passage; "Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my- 
self before the high God? shall I come before him with burnt offerings, 

.....? .shall I give my firstborn for my transgression.? He 

has shewed thee, 0 man, what is good;** (v.6-8a). 












e 








- f > ' 





j{‘ 


; '"i 




1 




. i 












i 











- 25 - 


CHAPTER III 

SYMBOLS OF GOD*S PROTECTING PRESENCE 

1. The Glory And The Name 

The Psalms provide the most illuminating illustrations of Yahweh*s 
glory. In Psalm 19 the glory of Yahweh is His manifested excellence, "The 
heavens declare the glory of God” (v.l). The glory as external splendor 
is seen elsewhere, in the description of a storm (29s3) and in the ocean 
tempests (93:4). On other occasions the glory is Yahweh*s demonstrated 
power. Psalm 66 is a hymn of thanksgiving for divine deliverance. Yahweh 
had released the Israelites from the hands of their enemies. He has re¬ 
vealed His divine pov/er. In Psalm 96 Yahweh 1 s glory is associated ?/ith His 
power and also with His authority over all of the nations. 

The glory of Yahweh has physical accompaniments. In the Book of 
Ezekiel these have definite shape and color, but can only be seen by the pro¬ 
phet. In his inaugural vision, Ezekiel sees the mysterious throne car 
(1:1-19). Above the creatures and the chariot Ezekiel sees something else, 
**And above the firmament that was over their heads was the likeness of a 
throne, as the appearance of a sapphire stone:*' (1:26). Ezekiel cannot 
describe this part of his vision in detail. He can make out only appear¬ 
ances . 

The glory of Yahweh was thought to dwell upon Mount Sinai. Yahweh 
called to Moses from the midst of a cloud which shrouded His presence. On 
this occasion those present experienced the glory, 81 And the sight of the 
glory of the Lord was like devouring fire" (Ex. 24:17). The glory also 
manifested itself in the Tent of Meeting, where the Ark of the Covenant was 









■ 

••• 



* 


. 







: ' t 




1 

. 

• 


. 




. : 





1 . 

» ■ ' ' •. : ; ’ 

« 

' ‘ ’ . ' '' . 

• ■ •. V. S. .■ .! ' • ^ ••' 

■ ’ ’ » • ; ■ ' . ... 

♦ 

, 

’ 

, ' . • . j"; •: ■ 1 loi'i 

. " 

, ' . ■ ■ . • . . • ’ : r 1 



- 26 - 


housed (Ex. 40:34f). 

The glory is identified with the presence of Yahweh. This is demon¬ 
strated to Moses while the Israelites were still in the vicinity of Mount 
Sinai. Moses asks Yahweh to show him His glory (Ex. 33:18). The writer 
describes Yahweh 1 s fulfilment of this request. He has His goodness pass 
before His faithful servant. Neither Moses nor any human can see Yahweh. 
Rather, the activity of Yahweh, in all its perfect righteousness, is re¬ 
vealed to Moses. 

The Psalmist calls upon Yahweh to save him ty His name (54:1). Here 
Yahweh's name stands for His whole manifested character. The Psalmist con¬ 
fidently rests his plea on the divine nature and divine strength as revealed 
in history. Yahweh's name is the sum of His revealed attributes of majesty, 
power and salvation. 

Solomon's stated purpose for building the Temple is to provide "an 
house for the name of the Lord” (II Chron. 2:1; I Kings 5:5). That the 
Deuteronomie writers supported this association of Yahweh's name is seen in 
Solomon's Prayer of Dedication (I Kings 8s29). This association is also 
upheld in an older passage (Ex. 20s24) and in the Book of Deuteronomy it¬ 
self (12s5, 11; 14:23f; 16:2, 6, 11; 26:2). Also from Solomon's dedicatory 
prayer, it is seen that prayer can be made towards the Temple in God's name 
(I Kings 8:35). This is possible because the divine sanctuary is called by 
God's name (v. 43 > 48). Ezekiel carries this idea even further to include 
Jerusalem itself, "and the name of the city ... shall be. The Lord is 
there.” (48:35). 

By this treatment of the glory and the name it is intended to show 
how the Temple is conceived as being Yahweh's dwelling place. The Israelites 





27 


did not think that Yahweh, Himself, could be confined to an earthly abode. 
However, they felt that He had particularly revealed His divine manifesta¬ 
tions in Zion. Thus, what they could hope for was that His glory or divine 
presence and His name would dwell in His chosen sanctuary. Yahweh*s resident 
glory and name were indications of His protecting presence. 


2. The Temple Stream And The Ark Of The Covenant 

In the arid country of Palestine, water is indeed a precious thing. 
Water has been sanctified from earliest times. Twice in the Book of Isaiah, 
the presence of Yahweh is compared to a river. In Chapter 8, Yahweh*s power 
is likened unto s, the waters of Shiloah that go softly” (v.6). This symbol¬ 
izes Yahweh*s abiding presence, constantly sustaining His people. In Chapter 
33> Yahweh*s presence is described; ”the glorious Lord will be unto us a place 
of broad rivers and streams” (v.21). Here Yahweh*s majesty is proclaimed. 

The Psalmist adds to the fundamental idea contained in these passages from 
Isaiah. **There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the city of 
God” (46:4)* Yahweh*s presence is the joy and refreshment of His people, 
as well as their defense. 

Whenever Jerusalem was besieged the supply of water was of primary 
importance. The City of David occupied the southeast corner of Jerusalem, 
as it had expanded in the time of the Homan conquests. Hear the east wall, 
in the valley of the Kidron River, is an intermittent spring. This was known 
as Gihon, which in Hebrew means ”gusher tt (MT). This spring is referred to 
in I Kings 1:33 and II Chronicles 33s 14« In later t5„mes it was called the 
Virgin*s Fountain. It is interesting to learn that this spring was the site 






- 28 - 


of Solomon*s coronation (I Kings l:33f). It must have boon a place with a 
special sacred tradition. A rock hewn conduit connected Gihon with the Pool 
of Siloam or Shiloah, which was located just outside the south wall of David*s 
City (II Chron. 32:30). During the reign of Hezekiah (c.715-687), in antici¬ 
pation of an attack from the Assyrians, the channel on the surface of the 
ground was stopped up. The water of Gihon was diverted by means of a sub¬ 
terranean conduit from the Old or Lower Pool to the New or Upper Pool. This 
new reservoir was constructed within the fortifications of the city (II Kings 
18:17; Is. 36:2). Thus, the defenders of the city were assured of an inex¬ 
haustible supply of water. 

Ezekiel, in his theoretical plans for the ideal Temple, describes a 
stream of water that flows from the Temple (47:1-12). The course of this 
stream is in a south-easterly direction towards the Dead Sea. Less than a 
mile and a half from the city the river becomes so wide that it cannot be forded. 
These waters had magical powers for they transformed the Dead Sea into a lake 
swarming with fish and surrounded by fruit-bearing trees. The leaves of 
these trees are said to have special healing properties. Moreover, the Dead 
Sea does not lose its salt-producing qualities. This miraculous Temple stream 
is purely a figment of Ezekiel*s imagination. It is only by speculation that 
it can receive the slightest possible support. West of the Temple hill is a 
pool called Hammam-esh-3hif. This suggests that a stream may have originally 
flowed within the Temple enclosure, thus draining off the blood from the altar. 

The Israelites were very conscious of the life-giving properties of 
water. Indeed, it symbolizes Yahweh*s divine providence. The sparkling fresh¬ 
ness of the Pool of Siloam was not only a sign of Yahweh*s ever-abiding 











. 




' 
















> 












- 29 - 


presence but also of the vitality that He imparted to the lives of devoted 
worshippers. This was no stagnant pool that Ezekiel envisioned. His 
stream, with its restorative properties, symbolizes the miraculous power 
of Yahweh in restoring physical and spiritual health to the individual 
and renewing political control in the nation. In the thought of Ezekiel, 
all this beneficent activity of Yahweh was channelled out from the Temple. 

The Ark of the Covenant had a continual association with the re¬ 
ligion of Israel. Through many generations It was bound up indispensably 
with the political life of the nation. The Ark, as described in the Priest¬ 
ly Code, was an oblong box of acacia wood, two and one-half cubits long 
and one and one-half cubits wide and deep*^. It was overlaid with gold 
and had a rim or molding around the top. There were golden rings at each 
corner, through which staves were passed when it was being carried. Cover¬ 
ing its lid was a solid gold plate called the Mercy Seat. Two golden 
cherubim were placed at each end of this (Ex. 25:10-22). 

Some of the names given to the Ark are significant. It was called 
the M ark of the covenant of the Lord” (Deut. 10:8) and the 11 ark of the 
testimony** (Ex. 25:22), because it contained the two tablets of stone. 

On these were engraved the words constituting the basis of the Mosaic cove¬ 
nant between Yahweh and His people. When Solomon placed the Ark in the 
Temple, it is claimed that **there was nothing in the ark save the two 
tables of stone, which Moses put there at Horeb** (I Kings 8:9). It is not 
known why the writer says that the Ark contained nothing more. Perhaps 
there was a prevailing impression that it held something else. This state¬ 
ment would deny such rumors. 

^ The cubit was generally taken to be the length of a man*s forearm, or 
approximately 45.8 cm. 




- p - 













* 

. 







: K 


c 







- . 












I 







30 - 


The Ark of the Covenant was unknown to the Israelites before they 
settled in Canaan. The Old Testament contains no direct information con¬ 
cerning its origin. The Ark, as has been shown, first made its appearance 
at Mount Sinai, after Moses had secured the tablets containing the sacred 
Law. It was built to be the receptacle for these tablets. The arrange¬ 
ment of the cherubim seems to indicate that they were intended to form a 
throne (Ex. 25s20). Further evidence is gained from vers© 22, 31 1 will 
commune with thee from above the mercy seat, from between the two cheru- 
bims which are upon the ark of the testimony. 13 David calls the Ark 31 the 
footstool of our God 11 (I Chron. 28:2). The Ark would never become an image 
of worship in itself. It is of necessity a vacant throne, for no man could 
ever see lahweh face to face. But as a throne it is a symbol of His sover¬ 
eignty. 

The Israelites did use sacred chests, called ephods, in their worship 
of lahweh. In I Samuel there are several instances when the ephod is used. 
It seems to be employed chiefly in connection with divination, especially 
for ascertaining the will of lahweh by means of sacred lot (14:18; 23:6,8; 
30:7). Gideon made an ephod for his people, although it is not described 
in detail (Judg. 8:27). This became an object of worship and therefore 
was an abomination to lahweh. Since Exodus is a much later writing than 
the Book of Judges, it may be that the idea of the Ark came from the prac¬ 
tice of using the ephod chest. Perhaps it was intended that the Ark should 
supersede the ephod. The Ark was symbolic of the divine presence. As such 
it never would have become the object of idolatrous worship. Since the Ark 
contained the articles of Yahweh’s covenant, divination was no longer 
necessary. lahweh*s commandments made known His will. 




*1 











' y t:‘ 










IC?5> 
















, 



















- 31 - 


The Ark of the Covenant was housed in the Tabernacle Tent (Ex. 40:21) 
at Mount Sinai. The tribe of Levi was commissioned to guard and transport 
the Ark (Num. 3s31). When the Israelites departed from Sinai, they carried 
the Ark, the Tent and all of its contents with them (Num. 10:33)* The Ark 
travelled in the vanguard, indicating that Yahweh was leading His people 
safely through the wilderness. When the Children of Israel reached Canaan, 
Joshua had become their leader. The Levites, bearing the Ark, were the first 
ones to approach the Jordan River (Josh. 3s6). Joshua received divine in¬ 
structions that the Levites were to stand in the midst of the river (3:8), 
while the rest of the people crossed over. The scriptural account tells us 
that the water was at a high level in this time of the harvest. When the 
priests entered the river, the waters were held back so that the Israelites 
crossed over on dry ground (3:15-17). Joshua made his first camp at Gilgal 
and placed the Ark there (4:19). The Ark played a part in the sensational 
destruction of the walls of Jericho, when Joshua besieged that city. The 
priests carried the Ark around the city once each day for six days and 
seven times on the seventh day. On this last day, the walls collapsed at 
the sound of the trumpets and the shouting of the people (6:2-20). Joshua 
brought the Ark to rest at Shiloh, after this victory and set up the Taber¬ 
nacle there (18:1). The Israelites were no?/ well established in Canaan, 
although they had not yet conquered all of the land. 

After Samuel had become a prophet of Yahweh, the Israelites were 
threatened by the Philistines. Samuel roused his people to fight their 
enemy and had the Ark accompany them into battle (I Sam. 4:1-4)* The 
Israelites believed that the presence of the Ark would assure them of 
victory. However, they were defeated and the Philistines captured the 




- 32 


Ark. The new owners found that it was disastrous for them to keep the Ark 
in any of their cities. Its presence cast the spell of death on many Phil¬ 
istines. It was placed in the country side, where it remained for seven 
months (5:3-6:1). The Philistines constructed a special cart for the Ark 
and took it to the district of Bethshemesh (6:12). They placed trespass 
offerings of gold and jewels on the cart. These were given with the hope 
of appeasing Yahweh for the afflictions suffered when the Ark had rested 
in a city. The Ark did not tarry here. When the Bethshemites examined 
the inside of the Ark, many of their tribe were killed (6:19). The Ark 
finally came to rest at Kirjath-jearim and remained there as long as it was 
in the possession of the Philistines (7:1). 

David finally recaptured the Ark from the Philistines when he had 
defeated this powerful enemy. He went to Kirjath-jearim, to the house of 
Abinadab, who had kept the Ark for twenty years (I Sam. 7:2). A new cart 
was built and the sons of Abinadab, Uzzah and Ahio, drove the oxen which 
pulled it. On the way to Jerusalem, a curious thing happened. Uzzah put 
his hand on the Ark to steady it and was immediately struck dead (II Sam. 
6:2-6; I Chron. 13:6-10). David, in fear of the mysterious power of the 
Ark, left it at the home of Obededom, the Gittite (II Sam. 6:10; I Chron. 
13:13). It remained here for three months. Finally, the Ark was placed in 
the City of David. During David f s reign it remained in the Tabernacle Tent 
(II Sam. 6:17). 

Before Solomon dedicated the Temple, he had the Ark placed in its 
special chamber in Yahweh*s house (I Kings 8:lff; II Chron. 5:2ff). This 
chamber lay at the far end of the Temple and was called the Most Holy Place 
(I Kings 8:6). After Solomon*s reign the history of the Ark mainly remains 


' ' 










' : f) :J 


’ ; •. 


v: 


O'.,'" %'t 


r 






; >.... vv 'v' 




r)( ■ 




r - : <• 

, 


)'■ j. 1 




’•••'. i •; '• V.o •. *: ' 


■ ? , ; . ;• •> 





- 33 - 


a mystery. There is no mention of it between the reigns of Solomon and 
Josiah, a span of some three hundred years. Josiah is reported to have 
restored the Ark to the Temple (II Chron. 35s3)• It is not known what hap¬ 
pened to the Ark prior to this, nor after this solitary mention following 
Solomon*s reign. 

The prophet Jeremiah has cause to refer to the final removal of the 
Ark. This prophet of doom says that Tahweh will show His displeasure of 
His people*s sinful ways in a punitive manner. **The Ark of the covenant 
of the Lord; neither shall it come to mind; neither shall they remember it; 
neither shall they visit it;** (Jer. 3sl6). Jeremiah*s prophecy was ful¬ 
filled in that neither in Ezekiel*s plans nor in Zerubbabel*s construction 
of the second Temple, is the Ark mentioned. 

This rather lengthy outline of the history of the Ark of the Coven¬ 
ant is necessary in order to appreciate its full significance. In the time 
of Moses, the Ark symbolized Yahweh*s sovereignty. But Yahweh was a ruler 
and leader whose divine presence hovered over His people. The Ark, sym¬ 
bolizing His protective presence is carried before the people in their 
march upon Canaan. When the Israelites disobeyed Yahweh*s commandments, 
their sacred Ark was taken from them. It was not restored until David, 
Yahweh*s anointed servant, had subdued the enemies of Israel. Underlying 
these manifestations of Yahweh*s sovereignty are two features which show 
the evolutionary trend in the religion of Israel. First, the Ark retained 
some of the ancient thought of divination. In the days of the great patri¬ 
archs or judges, the tribe of Benjamin was rejected by the remaining tribes 
of Israel. When the Israelites were defeated in battle by the Benjamites, 
they went to the house of Yahweh, at Shiloh, to inquire of Him whether or 






- 34 - 


not they should fight the Benjamites again (Judg. 20;27f). This practice 
is characteristic of divination as it was used in earlier times, to seek 
Yahweh's will. However, it will be remembered that Samuel did not employ 
this method when the Israelites set forth to fight the Philistines. Sec¬ 
ondly, the Ark seemed to possess a mysterious power within itself. Uzzah 
was struck dead when he touched the Ark. David would not remove this sacred 
chest until he felt assured that Yahweh's wrath had subsided. At the end 
of three months he saw that Obededom had enjoyed an amazing prosperity 
because of the Ark's presence in his house (II Sam. 6sll). Then David had 
it brought to his city. The conception of a diety residing in a sacred 
object seems to have lingered on. Whether or not the incident concerning 
Uzzah is accepted as fact is not important. It is worth noting the sacro¬ 
sanct character that was attributed to the Ark. The holiness of the Ark 
was considered to be contagious. As such, it was a source of danger and 
even of death to ordinary and unsanctified persons. A person, object or 
place had to be sanctified for sacred use. The presence of the Ark con¬ 
tributed a special sense of sacredness to the Temple. It heightened the 
reverence in the worship of Yahweh. 


. 






■ 

, 



t 








' 










* 






„ 


. 

■ 

, ' 


• ' . 


, . : ' : . 


- 




: ). - ■' ■ ■ . • - v 

■ 




. 









- 






- 35 - 


3. The Temple Is No Guarantee Of Security 

The prophet Jeremiah did not agree with his predecessor Isaiah, of 
Jerusalem, that the Temple was inviolate. He warned the people of Israel*.s 
northern kingdom of Judah that if they did not change their ways, Jerusalem 
and the Temple would be destroyed. Jeremiah believed that Judah was suffer¬ 
ing at the hands of the Babylonians because they had disobeyed God*s will. 
The people believed that their possession of the Temple, Yahweh*s dwelling 
place, was a guarantee of their ultimate security. Jeremiah vehemently 
denies such a notion, claiming all speeches about it to be lies (Jer. 7:4)* 
His words clearly present his courageous prophecies which he maintained 
even though the Babylonians were storming the gates of Jerusalem. “And now, 
because ye have done all these works, saith the Lord, ..... but ye heard 
not; ..... Therefore will I do unto this house, which is called by my name, 

wherein ye trust, .and unto the place which I gave to you and to your 

fathers, as I have done to Shiloh 11 (7:13# 14)* Yahweh could not be con¬ 
fined to His earthly dwelling place. His protecting presence remained only 
so long as His people obeyed His will. Jeremiah*s prophecy did come true. 
Jerusalem and the Temple were completely destroyed. 

Ezekiel was exiled into Babylon along with many other of his country¬ 
men. In a vision he saw how the glory of lahweh left Jerusalem (ll:22ff). 
Before Yahweh*s holy sanctuary could be demolished. His divine presence had 
to depart from Zion. This visionary prophet held the general conception 
that Yahweh did manifest Himself in His chosen city. Yahweh ! s punishment 
includes the withdrawal of His protecting presence. This same idealist 
visualizes the return of Yahweh 1 s glory when the Temple has been recon¬ 
structed (43:1-4)* The return of the glory is manifested by thunder and 






■ 

■ 

• • V' " "i • ' ' ' 

* 

! ' ■ 

' . J s' 

• ■ .7 \ 

• . . . ■ r J" , . . . . . . ' 

•, • > ■; .• -X s »7. x ,7\7 ■ . -V- ‘ e* 

. 

* 

• ' ■ ’ 

■ 

■ . 

■ . 

. • 

’ ' 





lightning, symbolizing Yahweh*s majestic power that illumines the life of 
mankind. Although Ezekiel f s plans are entirely theoretical, Yahweh ! s 
presence did return to Jerusalem, Darius, the Assyrian king, who per¬ 
mitted the Israelites to return to Jerusalem, sanctioned the rebuilding 
of the Temple (Ezra 6:7)* Under the direction of Zerubbabel, the Temple 
was rebuilt. It was dedicated with sacrificial offerings. The people 
knew that indeed it was their God who had thus made them joyful (6:22). 
Yahweh’s protecting presence had enabled them to reconstruct His sanctuary, 
in spite of opposit5.on from neighboring nations. His presence continued 
to dwell with them when the fortifications of the city were later restored 
under the prophet Neheraiah. 


1 

- • . • 

■ ■ ■ ■ 

, » ■; . • ’ 

1 1 •! 

, 







- 37 - 


CHAPTER IV 

THE TEMPLE AS THE THRESHING FLOOR OF GOD 

1* Threshing As An Agricultural Metaphor 

Harvest time in Palestine comes in the dry season. The grain can 
be threshed in the open air. The threshing floor was usually a permanent 
spot located on a mountain or hill, where the winds could be most readily 
utilized. The threshing was done by cattle treading knee deep over the 
sheaves of grain or by having a heavy sled or a roller drawn over the 
sheaves. The sled was probably made like those in use in this ancient 
land today which consist of two planks joined together. On the underside 
were set stones or knives or rollers. 

The act of threshing was used to give a vivid illustration of the 
annihilation of a nation by an enemy. In such instances, the sled of 
destruction had completely crushed lives and property. This metaphor is 
used to describe Syria’s oppression of Israel during the reign of Joahaz 
(c.815-801). ’’For the king of Syria had destroyed them, and made them like 
the dust by threshing” (II Kings 13:7). The prophet Amos announces that 
Yahweh’s wrath will consume the Syrians “because they have threshed Gil¬ 
ead^ with threshing instruments of iron:” (Amos 1:3)* 

Jeremiah uses this metaphor in prophecying Yahweh’s severe judgment 
against Babylon. "The daughter-^ of Babylon is like a threshing floor, it 
is time to thresh her” (51:33). From the verses preceding this it can be 
seen that Yahweh intends to punish the Syrians for attacking His people. 

To" ~ "" ~ — 

Gilead here is the district east of the Jordan River and south of the 

Sea of Galilee. 

13 

The people are the grain and the city is the threshing floor. 
















. 




, 




" 

, 

, 

■ 

, ' . , " •' • ; r:- 

. isuri 

. ■.^ v. 1 


* 




. 


■ 


: ■ J ' . 










* 


















- 38 - 


Complete destruction will result when Babylon is made a "burnt mountain" 
(v.25). This will be done "because it is the vengeance of the Lord, the 
vengeance of his temple" (v.ll). The prophet Micah foretells the conditions 
which will exist in the last days. Yahweh will redeem Israel from the hands 
of her enemies. He commands His people to "arise and thresh, 0 daughter 
of Zion" (4:13). Yahweh will again establish His sovereignty over Zion. 
Peace will be established again. Those nations which refuse Yahweh 1 s judg¬ 
ment will be threshed to destruction. 

Isaiah of Jerusalem employs the complete sequence of sowing and 
harvesting to illustrate Yahweh 1 s devoted service to Israel (28:24-29). 

He shows how the ploughman begins by preparing the soil and finally the 
harvest is gathered and threshed. He explains that these operations fol¬ 
low one another in natural order. Also, when the seed is sown, the hus¬ 
bandman has the harvest in mind. The inhabitants of Jerusalem have been 
filled with despair at the ill fortunes which had befallen Judah at the 
hands of her enemies. Isaiah wants to emphasize that Yahweh®s methods of 
judgment are exercised systematically. He sets out to illustrate his con¬ 
viction. The delicate spices are not threshed with a sled but with a staff. 
Also, although the corn needs a roller, it is not crushed to dust. Yahweh*s 
judgment is not executed arbitrarily but proportionate to the extent of 
violation. The parable concludes, "the Lord of hosts is wonderful in 
counsel, and excellent in working" (v.29). Isaiah stresses the wisdom 
that Yahweh displays in offering sustenance and salvation to His people. 

Isaiah of Babylon assures the exiles of Jerusalem that they are still 
Yahweh*s people (41:8). Yahweh promises His help, "yea, I will help thee$ 
yea I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness" (v.10). 



, . . ■ 1 f* 

00 ■ ■ ■ 

, 

* 

4 


. . . ■ ' > l l n 





' " ' - 

1 ' ;• • , ' ; ; •: . 5 ‘ 


. 

o ” . : - [ ■ . 

Si 

. .. ■ 

' 


.. : ■ U 


. 

' <■,■ , " , . ; : .■ , '■ ■ ■ : : C; : ;, ' 


■ 





, 


■ - . ■ h 

' 

• 

, ' ' . • 



> 

t ! '• 

> • ‘. • . ’’ V ’ V 

, .. . ' N 

4 

■ ') , ■;: v> 










- 39 - 


Yahweh promises to restore Israel, to make her a new power, "Behold, I 
will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument having teeth: thou shalt 
thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shalt make the hills as chaff" 
(v.15). All things are possible with Yahweh*s assistance. 

The threshing metaphor provides several graphic illustrations of 
Yahweh*s divine nature. It is the prophet who uses it to signify complete 
destruction. Captured cities had been literally threshed to dust and even 
ploughed under. Recent archaeological excavations have revealed that this 
is what happened to Shiloh, probably in the time of Samuel when the Phil¬ 
istines attacked it. It is not Yahweh*s nature to bring about wanton 
destruction. However, the prophets 1 pleadings for a return to obedience 
to Yahweh*s will had gone unheeded for many years. As a result, they use 
the most vindictive illustration to describe the wrath of their God. He 
will not be mocked. The prophets, then, remind the people of an important 
function of the Temple. It houses the Ark of the Covenant which is the 
guardian of the sacred tablets. These tables contain the Law of the cove¬ 
nant and are a constant reminder of Yahweh*s judgment. Again, the thresh¬ 
ing metaphor has a kindlier message to convey. The sequence of planting 
and harvesting portrays Yahweh*s methodical wisdom. The help given to His 
people is not sporadic. Just as His justice is not at all arbitrary, so 
does He lead His people to a spiritual harvest. In their worship of 
Yahweh, in His holy Temple, the people will be led to a fuller understand¬ 
ing of His saving grace. They must prepare their lives through obedience 
and service to their God. Thus righteousness and firm convictions will be 
implanted. Yahweh will nurture their beliefs. There will be a rich harvest 
of the soul for each one who has planted with a view to fulfilling Yah¬ 


weh *s will, 








n ■ . ,-j; X! 




■ 




. . 

: : ' . 


! 


. 
















, 










, 


i V: > V.. • 1 ' :: ■■ <> >'3f : ' 

I 


. ' •, ; ; f.l 




■ ■ 


o . . . 1 ' . '. ' 

I ■ ■ 1 

, ’ ■ > 




. . 























2. The Fulfilment Of God ! s Promise 


In the last section of II Samuel, there is a document which may be 
described as the charter of the most famous of the world*s holy places 
(24:10-25). This concerns David*s selection of an altar site at Jerusalem, 
This has been of importance not only to Judaism and Christianity, but Islam 
as well. Over the same spot today, stands the Dome of the Rock, one of 
the most sacred Mohammedan shrines. 

David had taken a census of his kingdom (24:1-9). For some reason 
this is recorded as being displeasing to Yahweh. It may be that at this 
time it was considered a sin to know a secret which only the Creator should 
know. In any event, David repented of his sin. The prophet Gad announces 
that his king may select one of three alternate punishments (v.13). David 
chooses the one of least duration, a three days* pestilence in the land. 
Seventy thousand men throughout the kingdom perished. Finally, the hand 
of the destroying angel was stayed while it was at the threshing floor of 
Araunah, the Jebusite (v.16). At Yahweh*s command David purchased this 
threshing floor. On this site he constructed an altar in Yahweh*s name. 

The spot where the angel’s hand was stayed was consecrated for all future 
ages. 

The account of the census and the selection of the altar site oc¬ 
curs also in I Chronicles, Ghapter 21. In this book, though, the altar 
receives its full import. ,! Then David said. This is the house of the Lord, 
and this is the altar of the burnt offering for Israel** (22:1). It was 
intended that this altar should be the one used by Solomon when he built 
the holy Temple. 



I 


' 


1 

* 

1 


, ' '' " * ' 





* - 

■ 

4 

' 


, 

4 



. 



• 




•. . : : ; :■ . : •’ ' '• ' ■' ' " . ■'< : . " :■ ■ ■ ' '-.0 


* 

, 

4 ■ . 

» ■ •; ■ -i. ’ : !<■ 1 \ • ’ " 

, 

• ; . V ■ ■ , ; '■ ■ m&rl 


' 


■ 

■ 


. - ■ \ ’v 

, 


' 

, 








- 41 - 


It was shown earlier that Jerusalem, Zion, was specially chosen by 
Yahweh. This was to be the place where His name should dwell (Deut. 12:5). 
There is no indication, from Scriptural records, that there had ever been 
a sanctuary at Jerusalem before David*s time. Such places as Shiloh and 
Bethel had been shrines from earliest ages. They were used as sanctuaries 
by the Canaan!tes for their pagan gods. Yet there is a special significance 
in David*s choice of a threshing floor as the location of Iahweh*s altar. 
Since threshing floors were established on hills or mountains or on some 
elevated spot, they naturally acquired the sacred respect attributed to 
high places. More than this, in Jacob*s time a threshing floor was named 
as a sacred spot. Ihen Joseph died, Jacob and a great company with him 
went **to the threshing floor of A tad, which is beyond Jordan, and there 
they mourned with a great and very sore lamentations and he made a mourn¬ 
ing for his father seven days 11 (Gen. 50:10), 

Araunah*s threshing floor became a most suitable site for Iahweh*s 
sanctuary. It commanded majestic respect from its elevated position. It 
solemnized Yahweh*s execution of judgment when His people disobeyed His 
will. It commemorated Iahweh*s display of mercy when the destruction of 
the pestilence was ended. In David’s act of insisting to pay for the 
threshing floor (II Sam. 24:24), the rightful act of offering was inaugu¬ 
rated in this holy place. A rightful relationship with Yahweh was thereby 
established. Yahweh*s dwelling place could then become the threshing floor 
for dedicated lives bearing rich fruits of faithful service and obedience 


to their God 










. 








■ 


- 

f - . ' • ■} . ' . . 


, 








* 

' ■ ■ 

■ . "V: ' 








* 






t ; • . i • ■ 
















t • 

' 

. 






■ 


. ' 








- 42 - 


CHAPTER V 

THE TEMPLE AS THE ALTAR OF THE UNIVERSE 

1. God The Creator 

In this concluding chapter, the hub of the spiritual wheel is reached* 
Systematically the functions have been gathered. One by one the ideals, 
symbols and metaphors have been accumulated. We now converge upon that spot 
in the Temple where direct communion with Yahweb was thought to be estab¬ 
lished. In a wider sense the Temple itself will be seen as the altar of 
the universe. 

The Hebrew conception of the universe, in its general outlines, was 
the one held ty primitive Semitic peoples. Before a description is given, 
it must be understood that there is no single connected passage in the Old 
Testament which describes the cosmos as a consistent whole, or even brings 
together all of the fundamental conceptions. The earth is the center of the 
universe. It seems to be a circular disk (Is. 40*22), which rests upon 
unseen foundations (Job 38:6; Zee. 12:1). The firmament or sky, like a 
thin, solid dome^, restrains the waters above it (Gen. 1:6), except when 
its windows are opened to let down rain (Gen. 7:11). The firmament also 
rests upon mysterious foundations (II Sam. 22:8; Job 26:11). In it are 
fastened the luminaries, sun, moon and stars (Gen. 1:14-17), which move in 
their fixed courses. Sometimes a plurality of heavens is spoken of (Beut. 
10:14; Ps. 148:4)* la the highest of which Yahweh dwells (Deut, 26:15; 

II Chron. 6:21; Amos 9:6). Within the mass of the earth is the dark abode 
of the departed, called Sheol (Hum. 16:33$ Ps. 15:11$ Is. 38:18). Beneath 
14 


cf. Job 22:14, n vauit tt ; Prov. 8:27, "compass**; Ps. 104:9, abounds 11 









:: , 0 '.; 




. * 

/ i-io ■ ’ v ' >n 

. ■. ' ! ' ' . ' . 

„ , : '•:••• r ■ .! : l .! : 

■ 

. ": '■ ■ ;: •> :h-'. '. ’ ■ ■' ■ m ' j ' -■ ni 

. 

; ■ . :• ■ ' . «\ v ■ • ' t m ,o 

. 

; 

1 ' ' ; ■ ' *• 

( 

■ 




J , )■ 


. 

„ 

' * ■ t 

' 


; 

, , < ' 

.. 

. . . 

, » 
, ? '• 


•• . ■ , : 








- 43 - 


the earth is the great deep (Is. 51:10), whose storehouses and fountains 
(Gen. 7:11) feed the seas which are around the edges of the dry land. 

It can be seen, from the above references, that some of the cos¬ 
mological conceptions come from poetry. Others are written in highly 
figurative prophecy or apocalypse. Actually the Old Testament does not 
describe the universe according to plan and elevation. The writers pos¬ 
sessed no scientific instruments, but present their poetic imagery from 
observation and imagination. Indeed, the whole question of the original 
creation and present structure of the universe is frequently stated to be 
beyond the comprehension of human reason-^. 

Chapter 38 of the Book of Job describes the act of creation as the 
construction of a building. "Where wast thou when I laid the foundations 

of the earth?.Who hath laid the measures thereof, .or who hath 

stretched the line upon it? Whereupon are the foundations thereof fast¬ 
ened? or who laid the cornerstone thereof?" (v.4-6). Isaiah of Babylon 
stated that Yahweh had formed the earth to be a dwelling place (45:18). 
Since the entire universe, including all animate and inanimate objects were 
created by Yahweh, all were manifestations of His activity. As such, Yah- 
weh’s sustaining presence can be said to dwell throughout the entire 
universe. Thus, in keeping with the particular concept of the Temple as 
the abode of His divine presence, the universe, too, can be thought of 
as a temple, in its widest sense. Also, Yahweh had given mankind dominion 
over other living creatures (Gen. Is28). Human beings then, were to be 
the priests of the temple universal, ministering to all of Yahweh’s 
creatures. 

15 


Jer. 31:37; Is. 40; Job 26:14; 36:29; 37:l6f, 





Vi • 'I;. 

: ' _ : » 

< ' 

’ 

: ■ 41 <C 4 o .i". . 

' : ' .. • ' ' 


. 

. 

• ..... t ,*•:#* •' 

- .L > ' ‘. ■.,■■■'■ V ' ' ; ■:.' 

’ ■ ": •' ■ 

, . • ■ . . ’ ■/ . 




, * ■" 

■ 1,7 ' \ <J " { ' * 

, 




< ■ 


. 


, 

, . . : : : ■/. 

./ : j. :> 

. . 

- 

. ^ • '• , ■ ' 

, 

' e'if :jWi 








1 







- 44 - 


The Psalmist envisions the presence of Yahweh as permeating the entire 
universe. He asks that he **may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days 
of (his) life” (Ps.27:4). Yahweh*s glory is manifested in the beauty of 
nature. Yahweh*s assurance of security will protect him always. When he 
wishes to praise his God with joyous sacrifice, then he will go to Yahweh*s 
tabernacle in Zion to present his offerings. 

The sovereignty of Yahweh over creation is described in graphic terms 
by the psalmists. The theme of Psalm 97 is Yahweh*s appearance in majesty 
and judgment, which is a source of terror to the wicked and a solace to 
the righteous. In the opening verses (1-6), Yahweh*s manifestation as the 
King, the divine ruler, is shown. He comes forth in the midst of many 
signs to assert His royal prerogatives. n His lightnings enlightened the 
world: the earth saw and trembled. The hills melted like wax, at the pre¬ 
sence of the Lord** (v.4-5). The manifold display of mighty power, as seen 
in a gigantic storm, is taken as an illustration of Yahweh*s power. The 
wicked are exhorted to take heed of Yahweh*s display of might for right¬ 
eousness and judgment are the habitation of his throne** (v.2). Yahweh*s 
sovereignty is again displayed in a storm in Psalm 77:16-19. The God Who 
judges the conduct of men is in complete control of all of these exhibitions 
of terrifying power. Indeed, He Is sovereign of all that He has created. 

In Psalm 104, Yahweh is praised as both the Creator and Sustainer 
of the universe. In this Psalm, the creation of the universe is described 
in terms of an architectural metaphor. The earth is compared with a tent, 
its covering being the firmament. **Who stretchest out the heavens like a 
curtain*’ (v, 2 )-^ a The figure is carried further in the next verse. ’’Who 

16 of. Is. 40:22. 




1 


■ 


0 












- 45 - 


layest the beams of his chambers in the waters*” The Psalmist envisions 
heaven, Yahweh*s abode and earth, man’s dwelling place, each as being a 
chamber, supported by huge beams* These pillars are not thought actually 
to hold up the dome of the firmament. They stand, in a general way, for 
Yahweh*s means of supporting the world. The Hebrew cosmology, as has been 
shown, was very primitive. The skies, they thought, did require some means 
of support, which was beyond their comprehension. Yahweh*s act of creation 
was thus all the more stupendous and mysterious to them. 

The Psalmist goes on to praise Yahweh for the manner in which He 
created the earth (v.14). Yahweh made the soil so that it would produce 
grass for cattle and food and herbs for mankind. Consequently, Yahweh 
prepared for the sustenance of all forms of life. 

In Psalm 48 , Yahweh*s greatness is lauded. Psalm 46 shows the oc¬ 
casion for such praise. Israel had been miraculously saved from the be¬ 
sieging enemy. A destructive plague had forced the attacking Assyrians to 
withdraw. The maintenance of the nation’s security is attributed to Yah- 
weh’s Intervention. His powers of destruction are compared to that of a 
lashing storm which shatters the strongest vessels (Ps. 48:7). No power 
on earth can withstand Yahweh’s might in his relentless pursuance of the 
establishment of righteousness. 

The Psalmist has selected a special place where Yahweh is to be 
praised. It is ”in the city of our God, in the mountain of his holiness’ 5 
(48:1). The inhabitants of Jerusalem have seen Yahweh assail their enemies 
with His destructive power. He had saved His holy city. Zion had been 
glorified. It had become n the joy of the whole earth” (v.2). 


' '* ■; 


? 


? 


t 6 











- 46 - 


The Israelites did believe that Yahweh moved in mysterious ways. 

They never ceased to wonder at the incredibility of creation. Great as 
Yahweh was in creation, His magnitude exceeds all bounds in the mercy He 
shows to all of His created beings. For Yahweh supports not only the 
starry firmament. He sustains all animal and vegetable life. Imminent 
though Yahweh is in His universal sovereignty. He is the intimate guardian 
of Israelis security. Yahweh will guide His people for all ages, demonstra¬ 
ting His greatness in His desire for righteousness on the part of all na¬ 
tions. Where can Yahweh be most appropriately praised? In the life center 
of His earthly chamber, men may sing His praises. In worship and praise 
men conceive the magnanimity of Yahweh’s loving kindness. This is most 
fully realized in Zion’s Temple, at the altar of holiness. 


2. The Holy Center 

Yahweh’s greatness is acclaimed in the Song of Moses (Ex. 15). Yah¬ 
weh had displayed His might by His spectacular rescue of the Israelites 
from the clutches of the Egyptians. However, not only has Yahweh saved 
His people. He has chosen a haven for them, a dwelling place of security. 
”Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheri¬ 
tance, in the place, 0 lord, which they hands have established” (v.17). 

This special display of Yahweh’s power in deliverance is common ground for 
both prophetic and priestly writers. The priestly school saw this selection 
as the divine ideal. It is significant to discover that the Prophet Jere¬ 
miah retains Yahweh*s original choice of Israel’s dwelling place when he 
foretells the restoration of the nation (Jer. 31:31-40). What is more, the 




) 






. 


HI 






1 












- 47 - 


boundaries are set out in a minute way* The walls of the holy city will be 
measured (v.39). Also in Zion there will be found the corner stone of Yah¬ 
weh* s earthly chamber. This will be the guarantee of security, a sure 
foundation (Is. 28:16). The corner stone is that large stone, in the lowest 
layer of stones, which binds two rows at right angles. It is Yahweh*s sanc¬ 
tuary that binds the people with their God. Righteousness and mercy will 
be His portion. Obedience and service will be the obligation of the people. 
These will be united in Zion, Israel*s dwelling place. 

While a careful selection was made for Israel*s dwelling place, it 
was still confined to time and space. Temporal man has the Temple in Zion 
where he seeks His God. But Yahweh dwells in heaven, His temple and His 
throne. His holiness and sovereignty emanate from this upper chamber. Those 
who trust in Yahweh look upward and envision their God sitting upon His 
throne. All this is proclaimed by the Psalmist (Ps. 11:4)* That Yahweh 
dwells in His heavenly temple, maintaining His constant vigil for righteous¬ 
ness, is the belief of the prophet Micah (1:2). Yahweh always witnesses the 
behavior of all people. 

The building of Solomon*s Temple was undertaken with utmost skill and 
extravagance of materials (I Kings 5). Negotiations were made with Hiram, 
the king of Tyre. Solomon informed this monarch that he was under divine 
instruction. Yahweh had told David that his son should build the house for 
the divine name (v.5). Hiram respected the God of the Israelites in his 
amiable relationship with David and then Solomon (v.8). He was prepared 
to carry out Solomon*s wishes* 

Israel possessed no suitable timber for the construction of the 
Temple. Cedar and fir trees were secured by Hiram*s men from Lebanon. 




- 48 - 


There is soft lime stone in the hills of Palestine which is easily quarried. 
It hardens on exposure to the air. The skilled craftsmen of Tyre assisted 
the Israelites in shaping the timbers and the stone. The manual labor was 
done by thousands of Israelites, Solomon spared neither cost nor man power 
in the construction of his elaborate Temple. The writers of I Kings indicate 
all this. However, they make but brief reference to the forced labor to 
which Solomon resorted. He was an oriental despot who gave vent to lavish¬ 
ness not only on Yahweh*s house, but more so on his own palace (7:1-12), 

A detailed description of the Temple buildings is given in I Kings, 
Chapter 6. The architectural completeness indicates that these plans were 
probably recorded by a contemporary of Solomon, The description of Ezekiel*s 
temple, which, though only an ideal, is based largely on the plans for the 
first Temple. 

The dimensions of the Temple are given in cubits. Since a cubit may 
be roughly estimated as twenty inches, the inner dimensions of the building 
would be approximately 100 feet by 33 1/3 by 50 (v.2). The interior con¬ 
sisted of two compartments, the Holy Place and the Holy of Holies. These 
were constructed in such a way as to direct attention to the most sacred 
chamber. There was a series of stairs which led up to the porch. The ves¬ 
tibule opened into the Holy Place. From this entrance one*s gaze would be 
directed by the rectangular length of this compartment to rest on the doorway 
of the Holy of Holies. This chamber was a symmetrical cube, twenty cubits 
in dimension. It was reached by a stairway. Thus, one would look ever up¬ 
ward towards this sacrosanct room. 

In keeping with the divine selection of Israel*s dwelling place, the 
Temple was carefully constructed to contain Yahweh’s glory. The finest mate- 







- 49 - 


rials were secured. The most skilled craftsmen were employed. Architect¬ 
ural perfection was used to obtain a heavenward attitude. Yahweh*s holy 
center contained all the external inducements for a righteous approach to 
His throne of grace. 


3. The Priesthood 

Primitive Semitic people used the means of sacrifice to satisfy the 
physical needs of some particular god. The God of Israel had no deficiencies 
and so sacrifice had to fulfil the needs of the worshipper. As a result, 
cult regulations were established. These were used to consider the gracious 
gifts that Yahweh was continually bestowing on His people. Also, the Is¬ 
raelites realized that all that they could do for Yahweh was to honor Him* 
Someone was needed to conduct sacrifices. In nomadic times any Hebrew male 
could perform these duties. Usually it was the head of a family or a clan 
who did this. 

The tribe of levi was preferred for the duties of the priesthood. 

Levi was the great grandfather of Moses and Aaron (Ex. 7:16-20). The 
Levites, along with Aaron, received a special blessing for their loyalty to 
Yahweh. This event took place after Moses had made his first descent from 
Mount Sinai with the tablets of stone (Sx. 32:Iff). The people, fearful 
lest he should not return, had erected a golden calf to be their idol of 
worship. Moses was enraged. He sought help to avenge this idolatrous 
rebellion. The sons of Levi supported him with armed might and killed many 
of the insurgents. Their loyalty was rewarded (v.26-29). The Levites 
became the custodians of the Ark of the Covenant from the time that Joshua 



, 


' 

■ . f 

. 





* 



. 

s 

, 

' 

« 

' 

• ,i t 

’ 

Y "t- /5 

t 

* 

■' 


, 

* 

: f t ' • • 

' 

, . . r 1 2\ . > : ; 

: 

aoo'. ' ■ . 

< t • ■ ' ■ 





J . 


, . ' ■■•■•... 




* 


■ 

■ • .tf .• 








- 50 - 


led the Israelites into the Promised Land* Although the Levites had received 
this special recognition, any male Israelite could still conduct sacrifices. 

During the period of the settlement, it was the custom to have a 
priest in charge of a sanctuary. Thus Eli and his sons were engaged with 
the active management of the shrine at Shiloh (I Sam. 1 j 3. 9). David had 
two chief priests in Jerusalem, Zadok and Abiathar (II Sam. 8:17), who were 
custodians of the Ark (15:24). Yet, David exercised a priestly prerogative 
when the Ark was brought to Jerusalem (II Sam. 6:13-16). He offered a sac¬ 
rifice of thanksgiving. Then he donned the priestly vestment and danced 
ecstatically before the procession. The theocratic character of the Israel¬ 
ite monarchy is further revealed. Jehoash severely chastised the priests 
for failing to provide for the necessary repairs of the Temple (II Kings 12: 
7-16). Thus we see. In effect, that the king was the head of the priest¬ 
hood. 

Money was collected by means of tithes and free will offerings. The 
priests were the Temple treasurers and were required to delegate part of the 
funds for these repairs. 

Zadok became the high priest during Solomon*s reign (I Kings 2:35). 

The priesthood now became a hereditary institution, descending from this 
priest*s family. The Levites still continued to administer the country 
shrines until the time of Josiah. This monarch abolished all these rural 
sanctuaries. At the same time it had been decreed that all Levites should 
be priests and all priests Levites (Deut. 18:1). Py these joint actions 
Josiah put the Levites out of a job. The problem of unemployed priests was 
not solved before the exile. 






f 









" 




v- • 


* 

' 

! »/ . ' 

' 

- 

. 

. 

■. 


„ 




- 51 - 


In post exilic times the Levites were too numerous to function as 
priests. They were excluded from the ordained priesthood. Ezekiel outlines 
their subservient duties. "They shall be ministers in my sanctuary, having 
charge at the gates of the house, and ministering to the houses they shall 
slay the burnt offering and the sacrifice for the people, and they shall 
stand before them to minister unto them* 1 (44:11)* The functions assigned to 
the priests, the sons of Zadok, are also set forth (44:15-31)* They alone 
were permitted to enter the Temple and minister at the altar. They were 
required to teach the people the difference between the clean and the un¬ 
clean. They were to be the judges of the people and they themselves were to 
obey all the commands of Yahweh. 

Joshua was the head of the body of priests who returned with the first 
exiles. He is accorded a very high place by the prophets Haggai (l:l,12f) 
and Zechariah (3:If)* As the representative of his people Joshua also re¬ 
ceived the announcement of the coming of the Messiah (Zee. 3:1-8). Zerub- 
babel was appointed governor of the returning exiles by Darius, the Persian 
king (Hag. 1:1). However, Joshua shared with him the exercise of authority 
over a restored Jerusalem. 

The priesthood grew out of man*s desire to glorify God. In their 
nomadic days the Israelites had a tightly knit tribal society which ex¬ 
cluded all strangers. Then any male member could offer sacrifices of thanks¬ 
giving and praise. When the Israelites settled in Canaan there was a real 
danger of the infiltration of pagan practices. Thus the regulations of the 
cult were more rigidly enforced. Officials were needed to administer the 
activities of Yahweh*s sanctuaries. The kings of Israel maintained final 
control of the sanctuaries and the Temple. However, in post exilic times 


. 


' 




■ 














* 











\ 




«■' 



■ 




l-'', 1 

• 









, 





. 















. 


•. .. t; , 


9 

... 

. 










' 

. 

. 


. 


t ■ ' 


j . ,' 

■ 



- 52 


the survival of Judaism depended upon a zealous preservation of the religi¬ 
ous cult* The importance of the chief priest rose to that of recognized 
civil authority. The Temple had become the center of religious and politi¬ 
cal control. 


4. Sacrifice And Offerin g 

In Chapter II the full connotation of sacrifice and offering was given. 
Now the categories of offering will be listed. It is important to know the 
significance of the several types of offering. From them we shall learn why 
the Israelites felt it necessary to worship Yahweh at one sacred altar. 

The burnt offering-^ was the most general of all sacrifices. It was 
the oldest form of sacrifice and was more generally practiced fcy Semitic 
peoples than other forms. The sacrificial victim was usually a male animal 
taken from a herd or flock. Sometimes birds were used. As a rule* the 
burnt offering accompanied the morning and evening worship of the people. 

It characterized occasions of great importance. Adoration is the signifi¬ 
cance of this continual type of offering. It is expressive of a normal or 
ideal relationship to Yahweh. 

The sin offering^ was propitiatory in its character. The victim 
varied according to the person or persons on whose behalf it was offered: 

(a) for a ruler, the victim was a male goat; (b) for an ordinary person it 
was a female goat, a ewe lamb, a turtle dove or a young pigeon, or even a 
meal offering; (c) for a priest or Levite at the time of installation 
(Hum. 8:8) and (d) for the whole congregation, it was a bullock or a male 

18 


17 


Lev. 8:6f; Ex. 29:38-42; Num. 28:3f 


Lev. 4:Iff; 8:14; Num. 15:24, 








, 












- 53 - 


goat, (e) On the Day of Atonement-^ a bullock was offered for the high 
priest and two male goats for the people. The design of the sin offering 
was the covering or removal of minor sins 20 and repented sins. 

The guilt or trespass offering (Lev. 5; 7:1-10) was like the sin 
offering in its general meaning and nature. It had a more specific use for 
an unwitting transgression of the ordinances of Yahweh in respect of holy 
things or of the rights of property (Lev. 6:Iff). The sacrifice consisted 
of the offering of a ram, supplemented by the addition of a fine or pecuni¬ 
ary compensation, in case of damage done to one’s neighbor. The amount of 
reparation was computed according to the loss in value sustained by the 
injured party, plus one-fifth for the priest. 

The peace offering (Lev. 3; 7:Ilf) expressed general friendly re¬ 
lations with Yahweh. It was not merely the restoration of a disrupted peace, 
however. There were three varieties of this lype: (a) the thank offering; 

(b) the vow offering; (c) the free will offering. In all of these, Yahweh 
is recognized as the bestower of blessing. In the first, the blessing is 
a thing of the past and the sacrifice signifies its acceptance. In the 
second, the blessing is looked upon as still in the future. It is greatly 
, desired by the worshipper who makes his offering as an expression of loyalty 
and a condition for the bestowment of the blessing. In the third, the 
function of the offering was auxiliary to the prayer rather than a condition 
for the reception of the blessing. Victims for the peace offering could be 
either male or female from a herd or flock, but had to be without blemish. 

The terms ”wave offering” (Lev. 7s30) and ’’heave offering” (v.14) 

^ Lev. 16:16, 24, 29; Ex. 30:10—a yearly festival when atonement was 
made for the sins of all the people. Ezek. 45s 18—here it is stated 
that it should be observed twice a year. 

20 

Sins of ignorance, Lev. 4> Num. 15. 








, 

' 




' 

’ * 


4 V 



4 






. 




t ' ' . ' ' ' 













- 

■4 

' 

♦ 






* 




' 


, 














. m 


* 












t 








- 54 - 


were applied to the portion of the sacrificial victim that the priests 
received* The former denotes a pecular ceremony consisting in holding the 
right shoulder of the victim horizontally and moving it forward towards the 
altar. This signified that this portion belonged to Yahweh but was given 
back to the priests by Him. The latter signifies the moving of the breast 
of the animal upward and then downward in token of presenting it to Yahweh 
as His and receiving it again as a gift from Him. 

The ‘‘meal offering 11 (Lev. 2) and tt shewbread n (Lev. 24:5f; Ex. 25:30) 
were the main vegetable offerings. The meal offering consisted of unbaked 
fine flour, baked cakes or loaves or parched ears of corn. This offering 
usually accompanied a peace or burnt offering, neither of which was com¬ 
plete without it (Hum. 15; 28; 29). Sometimes it was presented as a com¬ 
plete offering due to the poverty of the worshipper. Also, a special 
variety was the oblation prescribed for cases in which a husband, suspi¬ 
cious of his wife*s fidelity, brought her to the priest with n the tenth 
part of an ephah of barley meal. K A handful of this was then burned upon 
the altar, while, through an elaborate ritual, including the use of holy 
water, the wife was given an opportunity of swearing to her innocence and 
presumably proving it (Num. 5s14-31)* 

The showbread consisted of twelve loaves of unleavened bread. These 
were placed upon a table in the Holy Place. They remained here for a whole 
week so that they could be sanctified and purified. Thus the showbread 
signified that Yahweh was the source and origin of the nourishment that 
sustains and strengthens the worshipper. 

During the reign of Ahab, the prophet Elijah vindicated the divinity 
of Yahweh in a dramatic fashion (I Kings 18:20-40). On this occasion he 





- 55 - 


stands alone against four hundred and fifty prophets of Baal, Each side 
prepares a bullock for sacrifice, but neither sets fire to the wood under¬ 
neath the victim. After the pagan prophets have failed to call forth their 
god, Elijah calls on Yahweh. “Then the fire of the Lord fell, and consumed 
the burnt sacrifice* 1 (v.38). The spectators were shown that Yahweh was their 
God. Also, we see here a sign of Yahweh*s acceptance^. He who had offered 
sacrifice was himself dedicated to obedience and service towards Yahweh. 

It was generally believed that offerings sacrificed to Yahweh were 
accepted as a pledge of the worshipper*s faithfulness. Abel offered **the 
firstlings of his flock** (Gen. 4*4) to Yahweh ft and the Lord had respect 
unto Abel and to his offering.** Cain was **a tiller of the ground* 1 (v.2). 

He offered fruit from his crop to Yahweh, but it was not accepted (v.5)• 

The reason why Cain*s offering was rejected was due to some defect in his 
character. He was not worthy of personal respect. 

Amos presents a prophetic vie?/ of sacrifice (5s21-27). Here he goes 
through the entire ritual of sacrifice, including all types of offering and 
even music. Amos denounces the idolatrous usage of these forms of worship. 

He points out that true sacrifice is not possible without justice and right¬ 
eousness. All worshippers must make moral preparations in their own lives 
before they can have true sacrifice. Since the Israelites had disregarded 
the righteous attitude towards sacrifices, Amos would do away with them all. 

The burnt offering was the most significant means of expiation. Its 
main use was for the glorification of Yahweh. Other types varied in 
importance from the removal of minor sins to the atonement for all iniquities 
committed ty the people. The peace offerings were used to invoke Yahweh*s 


21 


cf. Lev. 9s24; Judg. 6s21. 



ni 












* 

r ■ : ' 








' 






. . 

% 

• ’ 

■ 






i t 








- 

* 


t : 












, 



blessings or to express gratitude for His beneficence. The showbread 
offering recognized Yahweh ! s sustenance of His people. The sacrificial 
ritual provided all the mechanics for approaching Yahweh with praise and 
petitions. However, the profuseness of regulations seems to make the 
ritual unwieldy. It is not difficult to understand why Amos is so critical 
of the abuses. The rigid adherence to technicalities had buried the sacred 
purposes. Yet provision had been made for the most sacred consideration of 
sacrifices. It was decreed that the Day of Atonement should be followed 
by "a sabbath of rest” (Lev. 16:31). This yearly festival for making propi¬ 
tiation of the sins of all the nation was thus to be consecrated by every 
individual. Sacrifice to be true sacrifice had to be an act of service and 
of consecration in response to the command of Yahweh. 

It is interesting to note that the meal offering was a means of trial. 
The Temple had legal significance for the people, in this respect. How 
much better it would have been if all worshippers had possessed a conscious 
sense of divine judgment as they stood before the Temple. Then the dramatic 
sense of Yahweh*s approval of sacrifice would have had a personal meaning. 
Before His altar they would have been purged by His searing spirit and their 
lives would have been rekindled to righteous conduct and service. 




* 

1 . 

■ 


■ 

. 


- 

, 

■ 

, 












■i,. v:. 


' 

' 

■ 




- 57 - 


5. The Significance Of Altars 

Since the sacrificial ritual is such an essential part of worship in 
the religion of Israel, altars came to be of utmost importance. Even these 
sacred objects went through an evolutionary development. Originally, sacri¬ 
fices were set upon the ground before the divinity or upon some object in 
which it was believed to dwell. Then there emerged the concept of the 
sacrifice as a meal, which was either exclusively for the divinity or shared 
with the worshippers. With the development of the idol concept, natural 
objects, such as poles and stones, were placed before the idol where the 
diety was thought to be present. Sometimes a thin substance was spread on 
the ground to remove the idol from direct human contact. When the first 
shrines were built they were small in size. As a result, the altar was 
placed outside. When shrines were enlarged, the altar was moved inside 
and placed before the idol. With the development of art, the altars varied 
in form and were ornamented. 

While this process aptly illustrates the evolution of altars, the 
Israelites provided their own sacred connotations. It was characteristic of 
the Hebrew genius to adopt pagan practices and give them special meanings 
worthy of attribution to Yahweh. The way in which a sacred stone came to 
be regarded as an altar is seen in an event that occurred during Saul*s 
reign (I Sam. 14:31-35). The Israelites were drawn up to fight the Philis¬ 
tines, when the enemy broke camp and fled (v.16-23). Saul received news 
that many of the people were slaying animals that had been captured and 
were eating them without a proper sacrificial disposal of the blood. He 
had a large stone placed before him, to which the people were ordered to 







- 58 - 


bring their animals for slaughter. This rock was both a sacred stone, set 

up in commemoration of Yahwehte deliverance of His people and also an altar. 

The main idea regarding the sacred stone was that it indicated the nearby 
22 

presence of deity . With regard to the altar, it was the place of sacri¬ 
fice, since every slaughter was considered to be a sacrifice. This was due 
to the fact that blood was shed. These two ideas were brought together 
in the Old Testament in places wherever Yahweh manifested His presence 
(cf. Ex. 20:24j Deut. 12:5)* 

The importance of the altar is seen when the exiled Israelites re¬ 
turned to Jerusalem. Before they had begun to rebuild the Temple, they 
erected an altar (Ezra 3:1-6). It was necessary to regulate their daily 
activities by establishing the sacrificial ritual. 

The ritual of sacrifice is set forth in minute detail in Chapter I 
of the Book of Leviticus. Here instructions are given to the priests, 

Aaron 1 s sons (Lev. 8:10). The burnt offering involved first the laying on 
of the hands of the offerer. Next the victim was slaughtered at the door 
of the sanctuary, to the north of the altar. Then came the flaying and 
cutting of the body. The entrails and legs were washed. Finally there 
was the sprinkling of blood and the burning of the whole victim on the alter. 
The laying on of hands was commonly used to signify the self identification 
of the person that performed the act with the one on whom the hands were 
laid. In the offering up of sacrifices, the worshipper indicated his wil¬ 
lingness to be considered one with the victim by placing his hand on its 
head. The northern regions were the most unknown and full of mystery in 
the thoughts of all Semitic people. This may explain the explicit instruction 


22 





, 


1 

" . ;; t v . ' '• ■■ . ■ 




• . 

, ; ' 




, . 


; If':' ; v. V • 


4 


' " ’' •' ‘ ■ 




, 


■ 


' 

, 

, 




* 








■: ■ ' 


















< 



■ 





, 







- 59 - 


for the slaughtering of the victim to the north of the altar. The killing 
of the victim is generally held to be the primary sacrificial act. There 
is no evidence in the Scriptures to show that it was at first, or during 
the Old Testament period, regarded as anything more than a means of secur¬ 
ing the blood. The general notion was that the life principle either is 
the blood itself or has its residence in the blood (Lev. 17;ll). As was 
shown in the reference to Saul, blood was not to be made an article of food 
(cf. Lev. 7:26). Recognition of the presence of deity was made by sprink¬ 
ling blood on the altar. This could also be done with oil. This was done 
in token of the offering of the life of the victim and of the atonement or 
expiation of sin thereby (Lev. 3:2$ 16:14). The act of burning was probably 
the very way in which the connection of the sacrificed animal with Yahweh 
was symbolized. With the complete destruction of the sacrifice, accom¬ 
panied by the ascending smoke, it was a sign that the offering had gone to 
Yahweh. 

The horns of the altar were regarded as necessary adornments at the 
time of building the first Temple (I Kings 12:28). The oldest altars, 
simply built of unhevm stone, did not seem to possess these horns (cf. Ex. 
20:25). Although it was customary for the elaborate altars to have horns, 
their original significance is not known. The pointed shape of horns made 
them the emblem of a peak. As such they would be symbolic of the reverence 
attributed to high places. Horns were also considered to be emblems of 
power, since animals used them as weapons (I Kings 22:11). Also, animals 
raised their horns as a sign of victory and strength (cf. Fs. 75:10). It 
is known that the horns were regarded to be a very sacred part of an altar. 
The ritual of the burnt offering contains this instruction, ,f And thou shalt 





- 














■ • ■ 'imo 




•> - .■ 


> 















t 




.... _ 















! 


, t 






' 










- 60 - 


take of the blood of the bullock, and put it upon the horns of the altar 1 ' 
(Ex* 29:12), Somehow these parts of the altar became recognized as a 
place of asylum, Adonijah, one of David's sons, sought to gain enough 
support so as to be able to succeed his father. But David had promised 
to appoint Solomon as his successor. When Solomon received official recog¬ 
nition, Adonijah, in fear, "went and caught hold on the horns of the altar" 
(I Kings 1:50). Thus they symbolized Tahweh's protecting presence and 
indicated a development of the conception of the Temple as an assurance of 
national security. 

Ezekiel describes the consecration of the altar in his character¬ 
istically meticulous fashion (43:18-27). The altar is dedicated by apply¬ 
ing the blood of the sin offering. By this means the inherent "sinfulness" 
of material things is expiated and removed^. The rite is to last for seven 

V 

days. Thus the hallowing of the altar begins with the rite of purification. 
It was believed that sin could affect even material things. As a result, 
these iniquities had to be removed before any object or person could be 
dedicated to lahweh. The blood, which is regarded as containing the prin¬ 
ciple of life, is sprinkled on the prominent parts of the altar in order to 
communicate holiness. At the same time, the application was intended to 
purify and purge the altar from this inherent sinfulness. The purpose of 
the rite in Ezekiel is to remove contamination from that which is already 
holy.. Thus, a two-fold intention may be said to determine the act, the 
imparting of holiness and the removal of sin. Although this act is not 
included in the account of the dedication of Solomon's Temple, it can be 

The altar needs atonement as having been previously profane. It is now 
made holy , that is, placed in the category of things which have a special 
relation to the diety. The sin has nothing to do with moral misdeeds. 








- 61 - 


seen that it is applicable for the consecration of the Temple itself. 

Solomon*s Temple contained one altar and the table for the showbread. 
The altar of incense was not known until post exilic times 2 ^. In the second 
Temple it and the table were placed just outside the Holy of Holies. 1/Then 
the Ark of the Covenant was housed in the Tent, it is reported that a veil 
separated it from the altar of incense (Ex. 30:6). The specific location 
of the showbread table must be assumed from a scriptural reference. 11 And 
thou shalt set upon the table shewbread before me alway J * (Ex. 25:30). Since 
the Holy of Holies can contain nothing except the Ark, the table for the 
showbread would be placed just outside this chamber. The altar of burnt 
offering was located in the Holy Place. It is described both in II Chron¬ 
icles 4:1 and in Ezekiel 43:13-17. Ezekiel*s altar was made of four square 
stones, set one upon another, decreasing in extent and increasing in thick¬ 
ness. The altar was ascended by a flight of steps on its east side. 

The great altar would convey all the significance involved in sacri¬ 
ficial offerings. The showbread, as has been stated, signified Xahweh*s 
ceaseless sustenance. The significance of the burning of incense was that 
of prayer, rising ever upward. The importance of approaching the great 
altar from the east is realized from the general concept regarding this 
quarter. Hebrews, as well as other Orientals, considered the east to be 
the determining point of the compass. This was probably due to the fact 
that it was the place of the sunrising. How appropriate it was to go up 
to Yahweh to seek the light of His countenance in a devoted attitude to 
worship! 

The altar of incense was not mentioned by Ezekiel. It appears in late 
Priestly writings. The antiquity of the showbread table is known from 
its mention in I Sam. 21:4ff. 





- 62 - 


The sacrificial ritual was the means that the Israelites used to 
seek communion with their God. They sought every means to remove the 
barriers of sin, which might keep them from drawing near to His divine 
presence. They were guided in their ceremonies by the meticulous priests. 
They were cautioned in their conduct by the zealous prophets. With utmost 
care they embodied their knowledge of God in the construction of the 
Temple and in the location of their altars. Thus, they sought to represent 
in Zion what Yahweh had created in His universe. Their Creator had fash¬ 
ioned a chamber . They, too, erected one. Their Sovereign Lord demanded 
obedience to His divine laws. Their response was to design the Temple as 
the altar of the universe. The house of Yahweh symbolized true sacrifice. 
In content and use it was their act of service in response to the command 


of their God 


. 


* 




• ' ; ■: ;f " : • J • . / ? 


■ 


- 

, 

« 










, 






■ 

















BIBLIOGRAPHY 


- 63 


Albright, W. F., The Biblical Period ; Pittsburgh; 1950. Reprinted from 
The Jews ; Their History, Culture and Religion, edited by 
Louis Finkelstein. New York; Harper and Brothers, 1949. 

Cooke, G. A., The Book of Ez e kiel . I.C.C., Edinburgh: T. and T. Clark, 
1936. 

Davies, T. W., Psalms . Volume II; The Century Bible, Edinburgh: T.C. 
and E.C. Jack, ND. 

Davison, M. A., Psalms . Volume I; The Century Bible, Edinburgh: T.C. 
and E.C. Jack, ND. 

Garber, P. L., The Biblical Archaeologist . XIV, 1 (February, 1951), 

pp. 2 - 24 . 

Jacobus, M. W., editor, A Standard Bible Dictionary ; New York: Funk and 
Wagnallis, 1909. 

Kennedy, A.R.S., I and II Samuel ; The Century Bible, Edinburgh: T.C. and 
E.C. Jack, ND, 

Lofthouse, W. F., Ezekiel ; The Century Bible, Edinburgh: T.C. and E.C. 
Jack, ND. 

Pfeiffer, R. H., The Introduction to the Old Testament ; New York: Harper 
and Brothers Publishers, 1948. 

Robinson, H. W., The Religious Ideas of the Old Testament ; New York: 
Charles Scribner 1 s Sons, 1913. 

Rowley, H. H., The Re-Discovery of the Old Testament ; London: James 
Clarke and Co. Ltd., 1945. 

Skinner, J., I and II Kings ; The Century Bible, Edinburgh: T.C. and 
E.C. Jack, ND. 

















Q 







































B29766 



