Av\cL^cjscl. 

G?CCSca\ J o^w : 


University of Alberta Libra 1 



0 1620 3448190 1 



vW 




B29737 







Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/geeson1900 















THE DEVELOPMENT' 13® THE RELATIONS 


BETWEEN GOVERNMENTS AND THE LABOR MOVEMENT 
DURING THE WAR* 


J ohn R 






The Development in the Relations 


between Governments and the Labor Movement 
during the War, 


Being a thesis in the department oft Sociology on 
the Divinity Course leading to the degree of 
Bachelor of Divinity.. 


By John R. Geeson.B. A 
Alberta College, 



\ 








Preface. 


When the writer first undertook to prepare this essay, 
he had the hope of obtaining access to the official rec¬ 
ords of the Canadian and Imperial Governments. This 
being denied, the scope of the essay has changed consid¬ 
erably. Great difficulty has been occasioned by the 
delay of the official departments in forwarding the 
materials asked for, some organizations have failed to 
this date in providing them. The result being that the 
governments referred to,are only the'two mentioned above 
together with‘the United States of America. Thus this 
little effort is seriously curtailed both in subject- 
matter and in comprehensiveness. It will be noted also 
that Canada has not received her due share of attention, 
and it is because the writer did not have sufficient 
data to give her a more adequate treatment. 

No one seems to have entered this field as yet, hence 
the writer has had no other sources beyond the official 
publications of the United States Department of Labor, 
together with a few documents from the Department of 
Labor of the Canadian Government and the Ministry of 
Labor of the British Government. A few magazine articles 
have been of help. It will be seen that in so short a 
time as could be devoted to this task, it was not poss¬ 
ible to do more than touch upon such facts as has come 
under personal observation. It, however, has been a 
great pleasure and an education to study such an import¬ 
ant phase of social life as the place of labor in the 
fabric of national life. Whatever the quality of the 
paper may be, this at least can be said, that its prep¬ 
aration has been a real education in matters that were 
dimly understood. 





With reference to Canada and the United States, while 
the Federal Governments have a large share of the oversight 
of the industrial life, yet the hulk of the legislation 
originates in the provinces and states. Matters such as 
the hours of labor, the minimum wage, compensation, insur¬ 
ance, and the welfare of the worker are constantly dealt 
with in the legislatures. This complicates the study of 
this question so much that no attempt has been made‘s include 
the work of the legislatures in this study. When it is 
mentioned that labor legislation was enacted in forty-one 
states in 1915, and many of the states took up more than 
one issue as e, g, California which enacted on seven issues, 
it will be readily understood that it is almost a super¬ 
human task to correlate all this legislative work for the 
space of four years. At the beginning of 1914 the United 
States Department of Labor published the labor laws of 
that country in two large volumes of over 2,400 pages and 
in two years the legislatures added no less than five 
hundred new labor laws. Added to thas maze of legislative 
work are the judicial decisions and the administrative 
orders of the departments. It is better, therefore, to 
deal with the larger issues involving the Federal Govern¬ 
ments ,, for by so doing we secure a more general treatment 
of this subject. However, it is not possible to disregard 
entirely the work of the state and provincial legislatures. 





: ' •’ ■ . 

• ‘ ■ -:•■■■. -v:-, 

• ■ 

, : . . . ' - . . ' ' ■■■ . ' 
• ' ’ « - - i: - v: ■ 


' 








* 


■ 

' 

■' . : . r ■ •. ■ :• .• 




, 




■ 

f C 



1 


The labor movement is entirely modern and may be 
said to have its rise when the propertyless man was 
granted the suffrage. Wage-earners came to realise a 
greater sense of power and began to battle with much 
more hope for their rights. They agitated for the 
secret ballot, the reduction of the hours of labor, 
free schools, the abolition of imprisonment for debt. 
These being secured, the labor movement gained great 
impetus. Better education and the secret ballot 
raised the intellectual life of the worker, and,in a 
measure,freed him from the political control of his 
employer. With this larger opportunity and larger 
outlook came the desire for a greater enjoyment of 
the comforts of life. Combinations sprang up followed 
by protracted struggles for the right of labor to 
combine into trade-unions for the purpose of securing 
better conditions. Employers, on the whole, having 
little sympathy for the worker by virtue of 3tfteirIcl^ss 
training, regarded these combinations with bitterness 
and formed combinations to resist what they regarded 
as a menace. Legislation was asked for and judicial 
decisions sought to make the trade-union movement an 
unlawful conspiracy. Great strikes occurred, but no 
real settlement has been reached as both parties have 
continued down to the present time to view each other 
with mutual distrust. 

At first the law was entirely favourable to the 
employers. Despite the .advantage and the superior 
wealth of the employers, the class struggle has gene 
on for the last fifty years. While the laboring classes 
have succeeded in forcing many issues to better their 



position, yet the employing classes still possess unusual 
privileges. However, there has come a somewhat better 
understanding of the worker. Many have risen from the 
working classes and occupy high positions in society, 
being members of legislatures, practising at the bar, 
and prominent civil servants. These have contributed to 
this age of legislation for the benefit of the worker. 

Many of the most oppressive laws that prevented the trade- 
unionists from ameliorating their hard lot were either 
amended or abolished. Instead of labor being regarded 
as employer ^ r property to be disposed of without a 
thought for the worker, it is now accepted as the property 
of the worker who has the right to bargain for the best 
return that labor can bring him. He is perfectly within 
his rights to refuse to work as much as the employer is 
to discharge him. A contract which is regarded as unfair 
can be broken by the laborer refusing to carry out the 
conditions, the employer can get no redress if it be 
proved to be unfair. For this reason, the labor contract 
is a thing of the past in the great majority of industries. 

The right of the workers to bargain collectively through 
the media of the trade-unions has been vigorously combatted 
by'the employers. However, they have not succeeded and 
many of them have been forced to accept this principle 
which will become universal. It has been claimed that 
labor has no more right to bargain collectively for higher 
wages than have manufacturers to combine for the purpose 
of raising the prices of commodities. But labor cannot 
be regarded as a commodity like a wheel-barrow- it is not 
a thing, it is life. Labor cannot be separated from the 
laborer. The labor contract is a bargain, not only for 
wages, but also for hours of labor* speed and fatigue 
enters in to the bargain, not to mention safety and health, 
accident and disease involving even life itself. This 




rz . . - 

. 




. 









: - ^ ' • ' . . ; 
















. 








■ 









view places the trade-union in an entirely different 
situation from that of a manufacturers’ combine* 

Labor, as a whole, has never contested the right of 
manufacturers to combine as an employers* association, 
though they oppose vigorously manufacturers* associations 
formed with a view of manipulating the prices of commod¬ 
ities. In the labor struggles of the past, the odds 
were usual ly with the employers in that they could 
always invoke the boycott law as well as the law of con¬ 
spiracy* These laws in some countries have been modified 
so as not to apply to trade-unions, but in the United 
States of America they ere still a factor to be reckoned 
with up to the outbreak of the war. , More of this will 
come up for consideration latgr^on. In addition to these 
legal disadvantages, labor has A and is still under an 
economical disadvantage. The employer is usually a 
corporation -a combination of capital- while the laborer 
has no resources to fall back upon but his union. He 
cannot bargain with the employer alone as he is at the 
disadvantage of having to make his living by labor. To 
afford him no powder to bargain collectively is to place 
him at the mercy of the ‘‘boss". This situation is intol¬ 
erable, and has given rise to strikes for the recognition 
of unions by the employers. Striking, picketting, and 
boycotting are the only weapons that labor can use to 
enforce its demands, and the only loss it causes to the 
employer is a temporary loss of trade, consequently a 
loss of property. On the other hand, the employer can 
close his shops to enforce? his demands on labor and 
the loss to labor is an economic loss that involves his 
livelihood. Equal legislation would recognise trade- 
unions as well as employers* associations for the pur¬ 
pose of reachin g a wage-bargain, or an agreement as 
to the con ditions under which a laborer shall work. 


3 


view places trade-unions in entirely 


4 


The conditions that now obtain are, that where the 
employer is strong and the workers not organized, that 
"open" shop prevails. This is a misnomer as it is a 
shop that is closed to trade-unionists, and the men 
employed there are engaged on a contract they are com¬ 
pelled to accept. On the other hand, where trade-unionism 
has won recognition, the 11 closed” shop prevails: this 
is a shop closed to non-union men t though men are free 
to join the union concerned- and there the workers by 
collective bargaining obtain a wage and shop conditions 
they are willing to accept. But there is injustice on 
both sides in this condition of things. There is this 
to be said for the unions, that they have been driven 
to ths attitude in self defence. The remedy for this 
is the recognition of the unions and their encourage¬ 
ment sc as to secure representative workers who can 
meet representative employers and make their bargains. 

This is the stage that nearly all industrial countries 
had^arrived; at on the outbreak of the war. 

One other fact may be noted, namely the great difference 
in the industrial status of the three countries under 
consideration. Canada cannot be termed a manufacturing 
country. Even though she lias immense mineral and forestry 
resources together with an extensive transportation system 
yet she is essentially an agrarian country. Agriculture 
is an industry, of course, but the situation of the 
Canadian farmer is such that he can hardly be classed 
as an ordinary worker. Only in so far ad there are many 
facrm laborers, who have nothing to depend on but their 
wages, can the agricultural worker be classed with the 
”hands” in a factory or workshop. Owing to the fact that 
the farm laborer has not organized, the term labor as used 
in the phrase ”the labor movement” is not xxxixsxxsxxf 
MsxKira usually regarded as inclusive of his class. 








5 


The United States, while largely an agricultural country, 
manufactures on a very extensive scale. Her industrial 
population is a large proportion of her people, hut 
industrially, she is a young country. She has developed 
enormously, yet she cannot he regarded as an industrial 
country like Great Britain. Great Britain is almost 
entirely industrial; the larger part of her population 
is engaged in manufacture. She is one of the oldest 
manufacturing nations in the world and her development 
naturally is more complete. Here we find trade-unionism 
strongly entrenched and advanced legislation to protest 
the interests of the worker. While labor is well organized 
in both countries of this continent, yet it cannot he 
said that their organization is as complete as in Britain. 
This naturally modifies the relations of the governments 
with the labor movement. Having stated these facts, the 
way is clear for a more detailed discussion of the subject. 




. 

. 

. 

. . ' 










6 


Great Britain* 

Before the outbreak of the war, the labor movement ■ 
in Great Britain had reached a very high stage of dev¬ 
elopment. An immense army of workers had organized both 
industrially and politically. The membership of the 
various unions affiliated with the national organization, 
the Trades Union Congress, was over two and a half millions 
and the membership of the Labor Party was over two millions 
The voting strength of the party and the rapidity of its 
growth had been of tremendous value to the working people 
as it had enabled the government to establish legislation 
for the protection of the interests of labor. Trade- 
unionism had been recognised by the large industrial 
corporations for a long period of years, and there had 
developed such customs and practices that regulated the 
conditions of employment in almost every conceivable way. 
The trade-unions were extremely jealous of their privileges 
no unskilled nor semiskilled workers weee admitted to m 
membership, nor could they do work that properly belonged 
to the skilled tradesman* 

The rules and. practices which had developed were made 
in the interests of the work-people. They provided:- 

1. against unemployment, 

2. against reduction of wages or standard of living, 

3. for protection against capricious or overbearing 
employers, 

4. for facilities to secure progressive improvements 
in wages and conditions of work. 

These customs embraced such questions as the length of a 
work-day, standard rates of pay whether by time or by 
piece including rates for overtime, night-work and Sunday- 
work, the number and length of holidays, and mealtimes, 



















i ; . ' 


... ’ , -r'. : 



• C - • . 















. . .• .. CL ■ / . 

, - V . ‘ X ' 

1\ ' " ; L 0 £ 

c 

- 















< 









7 


the exact class of employees to he employed on a partic T 
ular joh, process or machine. By a quiet understanding 
among the workingmen,there was also a limitation in the 
amount of work done in a work-day which was usually the 
average output of the average man. This amount: of out¬ 
put was regarded as a fair day’s work. All these and mx 
many other features, such as the number of apprentices 
or unskilled workmen to be employed in proportion to 
the number of tradesmen, had grown and had become firmly 
standardized. 

As a political force, the Labor Party had its rise 
in the well-known Taff-Uale decision in 1902, which held 
that the funds of trade-unions were liable in damages 
for destruction of property during‘a. strike. The com¬ 
pany’s railroad plant suffered considerable damage by 
the violence of the strikers, and in addition there were 
the losses incurred through the company’s inability to 
do business. Legal action for damages against' the rail¬ 
wayman ’s union was instituted which ended in the highest 
court awarding damages to the railway owners against the 
union. Trade-unionism was in jeopardy, ahd Labor’s answer 
was the formation of a political party insisting dm leg¬ 
islation to nullify the consequences of that verdict. I 
the general election which followed in 1905-6, this part 
suddenly threw twenty-nine labor members into parliament. 
This amazed the old fashioned politicians who saw the 
new party successfully secure the "Trades Disputes Act” 
of 1906. This act not only protected union funds from 
attack in the courts, but legalised strikes, boycotts, and/ 
picketting, provided that it was peacefully conducted. 
Thus were put into the hands of the wage-earner, such 


£ >> 

















8 


weapons as they could use to combat the employer in the 
securing of a living wage and decent conditions of employ¬ 
ment* 

In 190? the compensation law was passed securing to 
any employee financial aid for accidents incurred during 
employment, provided that they result in disablement 
for at least one week* It also provides compensation 
to families in case of death resulting from an accident. 
Two years later was passed the “Trade Boards Act 11 , which 
secured a minimum wage in “sweated” industries and pro¬ 
vided for the % extension of this act to other'industries 
at the discretion of the Board of Trade. The Parlia¬ 
mentary Committee that recommended this act made the 
following declaration of principle as a basis for this 
legislation;- 

“Upon the question of the general policy of Parliament 
fixing or providing for the fixing of a minimum rate 
of payment for work ,,, your committee are of the 
opinion that it is quite as legitimate to establish 
by legislation a minimum standard of remuneration as 
it is to establish a standard of sanitation, ventil¬ 
ation and hours of work. If it be said that there 
may be industries which cannot be carried on if such 
a standard of payment be enforced, it may be replied 
that ..... it would be better that any trade which 
could not exist if such a minimum of decent and humane 
conditions were insisted upon should cease. Parlia¬ 
ment, with the full approval of the nation, has prac¬ 
tically sc decided again and again”. 

The trade boards set up by this act were composed of emp¬ 
loyers and workers together with others appointed by the 
Board of Trade, and they had power to fix minimum piece 
and time wages which would be obligatory throughout the 













9 


trade. This is a very important piece of legislation, 
and has done untold good to the working classes. It has 
also contributed to the formation of unions; the wage- 
earners had to he Brought together to appoint their 
representativ es on the trade hoard and it was hut a 
short step to form a union to establish a definite line 
of policy to he followed. This act, aimed at sweating ? 
has been extended to other industries where wages were 
very low with beneficent results. 

The “Old Age Pension Law** of 1908 is undoubtedly one 
of the finest examples of social legislation in Great 
Britain, and contributes enormously to the well-being 
of the aged wage-earners who can toil no more. It is 
the most genuinely universal of all British forms of 
social insurance, the cost of which is borne entirely 
by the government. It is the state’s recognition of 
the national service of the worker. 

In 1909, another judicial decision was rendered by 
the House of Lords, the highest court in Britain, 
declaring it to be illegal that the funds of the trade- 
unions should b e used for political purposes. The 
reply of labor was to send forty-two representatives 
to Parliament in the election of 1910, and in 1913 the 
“Trade-Union Act" was passed setting aside this legal 
decision. Thus labor was taught in Britain to be a 
political power if it was to secure redress. In this 
period, labor was made much more powerful by the inc¬ 
lusion of its representatives in the cabinet, thus 
having an actual voice in the government of the country. 

Another great step toward the establishment of the 
minimum wage for all industries was taken in 1911, when 


1C 


the ’'Goal Mines Act'* was passed. The ’’Trade Boards Act” 
which secured minimum wages for the ’’sweated” workers 
did n ot apply to industries where the workers we r re well 
organized, and where the wages approximated the trade- 
union standard. The coal operators refused to grant to 
the miners an increased wage, and a great strike took 
place which threatened to assume national proportions. 

The government was forced to intervene which resulted 
in the passing of the act mentioned above. This legis¬ 
lation provides for the establishment of district boards 
with the power to fix minimum wages for the district. 

Thus the question of minimum wages became a conspicuous 
issue and the government announced that it was going to 
take into consideration the imposition of a minimum wage 
upon the agricultural industry. On the eve of the war, 
it looked as if the government would recognise that it; 
was the duty of the state to see that no industry was 
conducted on a wage basis, which is below the accepted 
limit of health and efficiency. 

The ’’Insurance Act” of 1911 was an epoch-making 
enactment of great value to the wage-earner. It was 
divided into two sections 

a. Health Insurance which was compulsory on all 
manual workers between the ages of sixteen and seventy, 
irrespective of sex, and all other employees receiving 
a salary less than a stipulated amount. This insurance 
embraces medical care, sanitarium benefit, and the free 
use of certain therapeutic appliances. The premium is 
secured by a flat rate being levied on employer, employee 
and state. 

b. Unemployment Insurance whish was twofold:- 

i. Provision was made for the payments of contri¬ 
butions by all employers and work-people in the trades 
specified in the act, which covered practically all 
industry except the textile, leather, rubber and chemical 
trades, and for the payment of benefit to the workers 
when unemployed. This part of the scheme is compulsory. 


















11 


2. Provision is made for the encouragement of vol¬ 
untary insurance against unemployment hy means of money 
grants from state funds to associations of persons in 
all trades and occupations, which pay out-of-work benefits. 
The compulsory section of the scheme provides that both 
the employer and employes equally contribute a weekly 
amount, to which the state adds a share, the proceeds go 
to establish the fund out of which the insurance is paid. 

In 19C9, a national system of labor exchanges had been 
established and the work of this was utilised to prevent 
fraud in the working of this section of the'*Insurance Act'*. 
The names of all ben eficiaries were at once posted in__^ ox . 
the government labor exchanges, and work was secured^ht 
the earliest possible moment. Where there is an evident 
desire to enjoy a vacation, the insurance benefit is 
suspended; thus wage-earners are protected and the fund 
also. There are many ingenious features of this act which 
are an incentive to the employer to keep his employee 
occupied and v ice-versa. 

In addition to the above legislation, there has been a 
great deal done in establishing the conditions under w 
which the wage-earner was employed, and in curtailing the 
hours of work for women and children. Even as early as 
1833 there was legislation protecting the child-worker 
and this early precedent has been followed up to 1914. 

Judge Brandeis of the Supreme Court of the United States 
said in 1914, '‘The British law of 1844 was the first 
statute in any country limiting the hours of adult women 
employed in textile mills. It provided for a‘period of 
rest at night between 8:30 p,m, to 5:3C a.m., and restric¬ 
ted work to twelve hours in one day. By successive 
enactments between 184? and 1907 further restrictions had 
been introduced 11 



12 


Enough has been said to indicate the position of 
labor at the outbreak of the War. Wage-earners were 
strongly organized; enjoying the possession of many 
privileges; recognised in the establishment of various 
regulations and customs of work; protected in unemploy¬ 
ment, accident,disease, old-age, working conditions, 
hours of labor, and a fair wage; but above all, protected 
by a parliamentary party which was able to enforce its 
demands. The worker was happily situated'; hi3 party 
was working in coalition with the government, having 
representation even in the cabinet. Thus labor had the 
unique privilege in aiding the government to fulfil its 
functions, but what is more to the point, in protecting 
by legislation all and every safeguard that trade- 
unions had won in their long struggle for a fair share 
in the product of the work of their hands. 

The outbreak of the war resulted in a remarkable 
transformation of the labor aituation. The government 
appealed for fecruits for the army, and the wage-earners 
by the thousands flocked to the colors. So great was the 
eagerness to enlist that the forces of labor were very 
seriously depleted and consequently, industry was well- 
nigh paralized. We have the statement of J. Hi. Thomas, 

M. P., secretary of the national Union of Railwaymen, 
to the American Federation of Labor in June ^217, that 
four million men were taken out of industry by voluntary 
enlistment. This withdrawal of the workers, together 
with the pressing need of munitions of war forced a sit¬ 
uation that was a serious menace to the nation. The 
enlistment of skilled workers, who could be utilised 
in the production of wa It equipment, 

was stopped, and many men were actually returned from 
the army to work in the workshops. Thus the government 





13 


was brought to realise the immense importance of the 
worker to the nation. This depletion of workers and the 
ever-pres sing demand of the army for guns, shells, rifles 
and other necessities forced the government to insist on 
production and still more production. The nation was in 
peril, the army was impaired as a fighting force because 
of the shortage of vital necessities. The workers realised 
the situation and the trade-unions declared a truce with 
the employers and all trouble came to an end. For several 
months, the workmen worked hard and long; they willingly 
submitted to M speeding up 1 *, and "put in” excessive overtime. 

JSTo form of compulsion was necessary; the men patriotically 
did their bit despite the palpable fatigue that was 
beginning to show and which afterwards reduced greatly 
the quality of their work and output. 

All went well till the workers began to see that the 
go vernment was not getting the benefit of their excess¬ 
ive toil. The co st of living went up by leaps and 
bounds; the employers ' patriotism did not lead them to 
refuse to take excessive profits nor did it lead them 
to share them with the men.whose efforts made them. 

The workers began to complain and to threaten industrial 
war. Nothing was done in the matter that was satisfactory 
to the men and strikes began to occur. The ship-builders 
of the Clyde, whose work had increased threefold in value 
judging by the enormously increased value of ships, were 
the first to strike for higher wages; then followed other 
strikes al 1 ov er the country. The employers refused to 
meet the men’s terms and charged them with being unpatriotic, 
hoping to influence public opinion against them. The 
government, anxious for the successful prosecution of the 
war, stepped in to adjust matters and, finally, where the 




















14 


dispute could not be amicably settled, took over the firms 
one after the other that were doing war work. Finally,a 
large number of them were operated under government control. 
By these means the government was able to secure maximum 
production, and the trade-unions were asked to co-operate 
in facilitating this desirable end. The government became 
the great employer of labor and wielded an all-powerful 
influence upon all other employers by forcing them to 
recognise government oversight, Ygiricus measures were 
adopted to effect the purposes of the government and resulted 
in a complete revolution of industry. So greatly was the 
position of labor enhanced, and so greatly did labor 
sacrifice that attitude of the government was very friendly. 

In all the revolutionary measures that the government 
undertook, labor had a share for it must be remembered 
that labor was represented in the government. More than 
this, labor was recognised on every committee that had 
any xsMxtxgxjBX. relationship with labor questions, and, 
when,later, the war cabinet was formed, labor was given 
a place through a representative. Owing to the protracted 
and perilous nature of the war, it was decided to unite 
the nation in the tremendous issues involved by a coalition 
of all political parties; out of all proportion to their 
parliamentary strength, three labor members joined the 
government at the invitation of the premier and the labor 
Party in Annual Conference approved of their action. Upon 
the downfall of the Asquith Government, the continued 
participation of labor in the new coalition which followed 
was approved, and no less than seven labor members joined 
the government. On the inner council of five, one labor 
member was given a seat, and the other members who joined 
became:- Minister of Pensions, Min ister of Labor -a newly 





























































15 


created department at this time, Under-Secretary for the 
Home Office, Under-Secretary of the Board of Trade, Assistant 
Director of National Service, and Government Whip, Thus 
three were actively engaged in governmental functions 
having direct influence in departmental action, the others 
had considerable influence, if not direct, in departmental 
action. This proportion has been maintained though there 
have been some changes in personnel and of departments. 

These, forming a strong labor interest within the govern¬ 
ment, have influenced practically every activity of the 
government in its dealings with and for labor. 

Among the numerous committees appointed by the govern- . 
ment was the Committee on War Output. This was composed 
entirely of labor men, seven in number. Its duty was to 
deal with complaints arising out of the carrying out of 
the provisions of the Munitions of War Act. It did most 
of its work through local committees and succeeded in 
maintaining a standard of production %£ which the act was 
framedjto secure. In addition to labor being fully repres¬ 
ented in the government and on various committees, whenever 
a situation arose which affected the workingmen, the 
ministers concerned called the officers of the trade- 
unions in consultation and required their help in reaching 
solutions. Th qsm. labor leaders had conferences, not only 
with the premier, but with several of the ministers from 
time to time. For the first time in history, probably, 
there was the unusual occurrence of a minister leaving 
his office and proceeding to the office of a trade-union 
leader for consultation. This happened not once,but many 
times, and it is an eloquent testimony to the changed 
relations between government and labor. The reason for 






16 


this apparent deference paid to labor is that frequently 
the government wanted a suspension of some trade-union 
regulation; and realising that a resort to compulsion 
would only irritate the workers, it always laid before 
the unions the situation and pointed out the remedy, and 
asked for co-operation. To the credit of labor let it be 
said that never once did it fail the government in making 
what sacrifices w^ere necessary even though it involved 
the surrender some right or privilege that had been won 
by generations of effort. This was recognised by the 
government, and has led to a far better understanding of 
the labor movement. 

The outstanding incident in all these negotiations 
between the government and the labor organizations was 
the meeting which took place in the Bffice of the Treasury 
in March 1915. The representatives of all the trade- 
unions that were connected, no matter how remotely, with 
the production of the munitions of war, met the members 
of the government who pointed out the gravity of the 
situation and the need of drastic action to increase 
the output of munitions factories. These labor leaders 
agreed to make a number of recommendations which were 
embodied in a document known as the “Treasury Agreement' 1 . 
One. of the most important clauses was : - 
"That during the wa$, a relaxation of existing trade 
practices is imperative, and it is recommended that 
each union take into favourable consideration such 
changes in working conditions as may be necessary with 
a view of accelerating the output of war munitions and 
equipment". 

Other recommendations were;- 

1. The dilution of industries, hitherto exclusively 
employing men, by the introduction of women. 

2. To train both women and unskilled men for semi-skilled 
work also for parts of processes hitherto confined to 





17 


skilled men only. 

3. The restriction of the right of the workman to leave 
work or to go on strike. 

4. To submit all grievances to the proper authority for 
redress. 

These recommendations were made by the trade-union leaders 
on the condition that a record of all the departures from 
trade-union standards be kept, and that the government 
require all employers engaged on munitions of war to give 
an undertaking with regard to the resumption of these 
standards after the war. Where female and semi-skilled 
labor had been allowed for the duration of the war, 
skilled labor only should be employed when the war came to 
an end; the priority of employment should be given to all 
workmen who had joined the colors or who were at that date 
in the firm’s employment. It was also pointed out that 
the rates paid to the substituted worker should be the 
same rates as would && normally be., paid for the class of 
work done, and that employers should not get monetary ben¬ 
efit from the relaxation of trade-union rules; i.e., their 
profits should be limited, the surplus accruing to the stat 
The terms of this agreement were incorporated in the 
•'Munitions of War kct u of 1915, and all munition factories 
were given the right to regard all restrictive rules and 
customs as in suspense provided that they observed the 
terms of the act. This had a tremendous influence upon 
subsequent events in the labor world. It brought into 
employment in the engineering and ironworking trades over 
one million women, and utilised apprentices and semi¬ 
skilled labor to a vastly increased extent. One or two 
skilled mechanics were directed to help and instruct a 
number of less skilled workers; jobs were broken up so as 
to bring the work within the capacity of semi-skilled 
workers; newjm achinery, especially automatic, was intro¬ 
duced involving ne^rocesses; a new and scientific method 







18 


of shop management appeared whish ira.de for greatly increased 
efficiency and output. All these changes are momentous 9 and, 
now th at the war is over, can all the old standards he set 
up? Many of these changes must, in the nature of things, he 
permanent. The new methods involved hy the use of new mach¬ 
inery must remain, for it would he too great an economic 
loss to scrap them for the sake of returning to less effic¬ 
ient standards to keep the agreement. But that is the 
government’s pledge; the employers agreed to the propos¬ 
ition. Seeing that a complete restoration of the old stan¬ 
dards will not he possible, there must he as close an approx¬ 
imation to them as is possible. When the employers and the 
employed meet to settle the industrial conditions, the trade- 
unions will have a powerful ally on their' side namely the 
government, which pledged itself to restore the old conditions 
and which possesses a full record of all departures from the 
established trade-union conditions. Thus the re-est^blish- 
ment of industry will he along lines satisfactory to labor 
under the patronage of the government. It ma£ he that these 
new relations between the government and organized^will~he ^- c 
the means of creating new and improved conditions from the 
pre-war h as is, especially in the matter of the-length of 
the working aa£. 

Having dealt with the political relations of the govern¬ 
ment with labor, we will go further into the changes that 
the government imposed on, and were accepted hy labor. At 
the outbreak of the war, there was no single department which 
was charged with the sole duty of dealing with industrial 
problems. The Board of Trade dealt with unemployment, the 
distribution of labor and conciliation in labor disputes. 

The Home Office was responsible for administering the Fact¬ 
ory Act, The Local Government Board looked after the relief 
of industrial distress which could not be met by the work of 
the Board of Thade. All these had nothing to do with the 
contracting departments, which were to be found in other 






19 


"boards or ministries. There was great difficulty to secure 
the fullest co-ordination and the committee on munitions of 
war did what it could to foregather with the various depart¬ 
ments with a view of having a single controlling authority. 
The work of this committee finally resulted in a Ministry 
of Munitions, which was set up in June 9th 1915. This office 
took upon itself to a large extent the work and functions 
of a labor ministry. The first purpose of this ministry 
was to secure munitions, hut so difficult was it to separate 
the work from the w.orker that nit was'forced to deal with 
labor issues as a secondary purpose. In order to create 
a satisfactory organization for obtaining munitions, it 
was ne-cessary to organize labor for that purpose. This 
process of organizing labor was the great factor which has 
brought about the revolution of the labor world. Old estab¬ 
lished principles had to be disregarded, and requirements, 
that cut right across all the customs and usages built up 
by trade-unionism, were framed and accepted. This ministry 
undertook the work of the management and the distribution 
of labor, and enlisted the resources of the Board of Trade 
for this purpose. It also undertook the administration of 
the new compulsory powers conferred by the Munitions of 
War Act of 1915. 

Later, in September, 1916, the Trades Union Congress 
made a demand for -the appointment of a Minister of Labor 
under whose direction would be co-ordinated all the labor 
matters in which the government is concerned. The advent 
of the Lloyd George ministry made this possible, and a new 
ministry of«labor was created to take over much of the 
work of the Board of Trade and the Home Office. The 
minister appointed was a Trade-Unionist. However, most 
of the facts that come up for discussion in this paper will 
be confined to the work of the ministry of munitions as the 
labor ministry did not absorb the great labor department 
which had been set up by the ministry of munitions, 








































20 


Very early in the war, the problem of the proper dist¬ 
ribution of labo r arose produced by the enlistment of men 
in the army. Some engineering establishments, largely 
drained of men, were afterwards found to be vitally import¬ 
ant in their products, and were entirely inadequate to 
the demands put upon them. To overcome this handicap, the 
employers sought to obtain labor to fill the vacated places 
in their plants. Consequently, owing to the inducements 
offered by the employers, a great deal of indiscriminate 
migration took place, which greatly aggravated the trouble. 

To rectify this, a system of voluntary war-work was attempted 
which aimed to secure- volunteers that were to be placed where 
needed most in order to overcome the consequences of the 
early removals. This system was not a success. An 0rder 
in Council was issued on April 29th 1915 which attempted to 
prevent the free movement of labor. The three main features 
were; — 

1. Employers of the engineering, shipbuilding or ordnance 
trades were prohibited from securing labor except through 
the national labor exchanges. 

2. The practice aimed at was enticement. 

3. The employer, not the workman was made liable to penalty. 
Thus the free right of the employer to engage workers where 

he can find them was denied, and this reacted upon labor. In 
order to still more effectively curb the shifting of labor, 
the Munitions of War Act was passed. 

This act did not apply to the employer only, who sought 
to entice labor, but also to the worker. It denied to him 
the freedom to move. A system of leaving certificates was 
created, and no employer could engage a workman without a 
leaving certificate from his previous employer, unless he 
had been without work for six weeks. This was a serious 
blow to the worker and the employer was not slow to take 
advantage of it. Abuses became manifest such as:- 

1. The dismissal of a worker without giving him a leaving 
certificate, which resulted in a loss of employment for 







.. 



























, ( 



t 





. 
















. 

.. 







e 













' 




























. 













, 



























. 















. 





* 












. 




. 






* 








. 

t . 

- .. O-B.. - c ■ : 

, 

... 
. ' .. v -~ 

c : . : :.:: SXfcA" i '' 

* 

c 


. 21 


six weeks. 

2. The refusal of a certificate to a workman leaving as a 
consequence of unfair dealing on the part of an emjjloyer. 

The remedy for this was provided for by the resort to the 
munitions tribunal, but it was a proceeding very distasteful 
to the worker., 

3. The endorsation on certificates of statements reflecting 
upon the workman, thereby making it difficult for him to get 
employment. 

These abuses gave rise to much unrest and twice the act was 
amended which, among other things, removed the difficulty 
noted in section one above; failure to give a certificate 
upon dismissal was penalized by compensation to the worker. 
Regulations are also provided for in the method of appeal 
to the munitions tribunal mentioned in section two above, 
and permitting a workman to "leave his employment on account 
of conduct on the part of the employer....which would just¬ 
ify the immediate termination by the workman of his contract 
of service' 1 . T he third section was met by a regulation 
from the department. Other objections were met in the same 
way so that the restrictions became less oppressive to the 
worker than at first. Under the provision of the amendment 
of 1917, the leaving certificate was abolished, and any 
worker was free to leave his employment on munitions work 
for other similar work, if he gave his employer a week’s 
notice, or such longer notice as is provided for in his 
contract of service. 

Another phase of the relation of the government with labor 
was the control of the workers so as to obtain the maximum 
output. The direction of control was toward compulsion 
which ev entually was attained by the passing of the Munitions 
of War Act, and also by the use of the compulsory military 
service act, the powers of which have been used indirectly 










' 






for industrial compulsion. This control raises three con* 
siderations:- 

1. The maintenance of work without cessation, involving 
the right to strike or to leave work without reasonable 
excuse. 

2* The c ontinuance of work without loss of time or energy, 
which gave rise to restrictions on bad time-keeping, shop 
discipline, and the adjustment of hours of labor to prevent 
fatigue. 

3. The acceleration of work to attain the highest possible 
production results, which meant the break-down of trade- 
union shop customs and practices. 

The first consideration raises the whole matter of indus¬ 
trial warfare. The workmen had to stay at their jobs; they 
were required to forego the right to enforce their demands 
by means of the walk-out. This was virtually a suspension 
of the Trades Disputes Act,. The .wage-earners were made un¬ 
easy by the fact that, coupled with the increased restrictions 
placed upon them, the employers were making large profits. 

The coming into force of the first Munitions of War Act of 
1915 was marked by a serious strike in the South Wales coal¬ 
fields. This strike was settled by concession and not by 
the use of compulsion as empowered by the act, which states, 
“An employer shall not declare,,,,a lock-out, and a person 
employed shall not take part in a strike.... unless the 
difference has been reported to the Board of Trade for a 
settlement 11 . The decision of the Board of Trade was “binding 
both on employers and employed and could be made retrospec- 
tive“. In 1916, an amendment of the act provided for special 
arbitration tribunals, wdiich were to deal .with disputes, the 
decisions of which were binding on both parties. No statute 
will prevent strikes even though it makes them illegal, yet 
this act did succeed in that few strikes of magnitude 
occurred. The Defence of the Realm Act made it a crime to 




incite munition workers to strike; this too had a very 
salutary effect, especially as one conviction was secured 
against a labor leader who was sash enough to ignore the 
law. 

Shop discipline was a sore -point with many workmen, 
yet it had to be rigidly enforced to prevent any slackening 
in the work. The ordinary methods of dealing with the lack 
of discipline were no longer open to the employer, namely, 
the right to dismiss for offences and the resort to the 
Employers and Workmen f s Act. He could not dismiss, because 
of the great labor shortage, also because dismissals might 
lead to difficulties with workmen generally; and the remedy 
in the act mentioned above was of very little value. At 
such a point the state had to step in, and the Munitions of 
War Act provided that factory rules should be framed gov¬ 
erning the discipline of the factory, a breach of the rules 
to be punishable before a special domestic court set up by 
the act. Prosecutions for offences under these rules 
before this court could not be made or defended either by 
counsel or solicitor representing either party. Pines and 
imprisonment could be imposed by sentence of the court. 

Where the penalty exceeded $100.00, or its equivalent in 
imprisonment, appeal could be made to the regular court of 
the Quarter Sessions. In the amendment of 1916, the right 
of appeal was transferred to a special appeal tribunal, 
which was a judge of the high court; the powers of imprison¬ 
ment were rescinded, and of fining limited. In many cases, 
under the encouragement of the ministry of munitions, shop 
committees were created and these tended to create a better 
spirit between employers and employed. These committees 
7/ere composed of workers and management. They considered 
such matters as dilution, piece-wages, the grade of work 
or processes, and other matters vital to labor. These com¬ 
mittees have worked so satisfactorily, that they formed the 
subject of a report from the Committee on Reconstruction. 



I ■' 









ou-v 






24 


But this did not touch the heart of the trouble. It 
was necessary to go deeper and attack the ultimate source, 
which was the fatigue of the worker produced by abnormally 
long hours and arduous labor. Long hours with regard to 
and young persons were limited by Factory Acts, but in the 
pr essure of war conditions, they were, with the consent 
of the administration, often ignored. Some women and men 
worked from one hundred to one hundred and twenty hours 
per week of seven days, giving up holidays for month after 
month. The greatest hardship was endured by men as there 
were never any statutory provisions dealing with the hours 
of adult males. It was urgently necessary that the govern¬ 
ment deal with the question of hours. The government 
responding to the demand reduced the hours of labor, and, 
very soon after, there was a great improvement in shop dis¬ 
cipline and time-keeping. As time went on, the government 
found itself called upon to deal more and more stringently 
with such matters as‘Sunday work and excessive overtime in . 
order to increase production. The question of fatigue was 
never more earnestly studied than during the war. The 
Health of Munition Workers Committee was appointed in Sep¬ 
tember 1915 and issued reports recommending certain changes 
from time to time, till April 1918 when it ceased to do its 
work. 

These recommendations have been generally accepted and 
widely adopted. They have had a far-reaching influence 
upon industrial conditions generally, not only in Great 
Britain, but also in other countries. There is no need to 
.go into the matter fully, but to note one or two features. 

The care that the government has exercised over the health 
of the worker, under the stress of abnormal conditions, 
has produced remarkable results in efficiency and production. 
Definite conclusions were arrived at as to what steps 
should be taken to maintain and promote the health of indus¬ 
trial workers. They include the prevention of excessive 
fatigue, sanitary conditions of work, care of the health, 































i'^j' - 








ho 


and welfare supervision outside the factory. 

The break-down of trade-union shop customs produced by 
"speeding up H and dilution caused much difficulty. The 
government anticipated this and secured the Treasury Agree¬ 
ment. Trade-unionism had built up a most elaborate system 
of restrictions regulating output and defining the status 
of a worker; these matters have already been referred to*. 

It is necessary only to point out that over a million 
women directly replaced men in the trades connected with 
the -production of munitions of war. This has resulted in 
a complete transformation of the industrial life of Great 
Britain. Even though the agreement between the government 
and the labor leaders provided for equal pay for equal 
work irrespective of sex, the women were not so well paid 
as they should have been. They organized and, with the 
aid of the Amalgamated Society of Engineers, secured higher 
wages. The ministry of munitions under the powers of the 
Munitions of War Act finally required equal pay for equal 
work irrespective of sex after a due period of probation. 

The history of the gradual control of wages went through 
three stages. The first stage lasted till the passing of 
the first Munitions of War Act. During this period, wages 
were left to the ordinary play of competition and industrial 
arrangement. It was open to any employer to alter to alter 
the basis of wages in order to attract additional labor, or 
of encouraging the men he already had at work. The compet¬ 
ition for labor became severe, and all sorts of wage anom¬ 
alies appeared. Some contractors paid rates out of all 
proportion to what was paid previously. Some districts had 
wage conditions more favourable to semi-skilled workers 
than other districts had to skilled. The next stage arose 


*See pages 6, 7: 16. 17 









. •• • • 














' 

, 

' 











26 


when the gov arnment assumed power by the act mentioned 
above, and vetoed any variation in wages either up or down 
so far as munition work was concerned. Compulsory arbit¬ 
ration was instituted at the same time in order to modify 
the irregularities which had already arisen by attempting 
to devise uniform advances throughout the country. The 
central arbitrating committee on production found itself 
confronting the difficult task to provide a reasonable 
basis of remun eration. In practice, it first af all 
confined itself to removing the anomalies by cutting down 
the high points then, when a fair level had been reached, 
to ensure a more equitable advance whenever it became nec¬ 
essary. But the adoption of the act added certain compli¬ 
cations as it required that no piece-rate should be cut. 

This had an unexpected result. Piece-rates had been hur¬ 
riedly fixed throughout the country in the belief that 
certain processes were skilled. The introduction of auto¬ 
matic machinery, the use of semi-skilled workers, and 
other causes had shown such.classification to be mistaken. 
Thus rates were fixed for processes that semi-skilled, and 
even unskilled, workmen could do giving rise to the peculiar 
fact that these often got higher wages than the skilled men 
in the same shop. Another difficulty was that volunteer 
war workers were moved from one place to another and they 
received their old rate r if it were higher than that of the 
district, on their new job. This resulted in men of the 
same category working side by side where one was getting 
more for his work than the other. 

The last stage started with the second Munitions of 
War Act(lS16). This act gave the government power to take 
the initiative with regard to wages. It provided that the 
government might make orders regulating the wages of wgmen, 
to whom the restrictions on leaving employment applied, 



' • 

.. • t .. .... c ■ : ' 

■ ' ■ ! c cic' '-r aWOi.U ; 1 

_ 

- 

; , • , . 'h :.•> ;■ ; c • :i. i°:'. 

< 

. 

: ■ ‘ j -Oi 


e 







and of certain classes of unskilled men replacing skilled 
men. So far as women’s wages are concerned, the government 
had the advantage of starting with a clean sheet for they 
have never enjoyed high wages nor were they so fully organ¬ 
ized. Their rates were fixed in' the orders of the depart¬ 
ment, and all the arbitrators had to do was to decide which 
was or was not women’s work, Sarly in 1917, the 

policy of the department with regard to women’s, wages was 
extended to men so that rates became much more uniform and 
satisfactory to the men. The Wages (Temporary Regulation) 

Act, which came into force in November 1918, set the min¬ 
imum rates of wages for all classes of workers for a period 
of six months. The act empowered the Minister of Labor 
to appoint an interim court of arbitration, consisting of 
representative employers and employees, and of independent 
persons from whom the chairman of the court is selected. 

The duty of this court is to settle differences arising 
out of the prescribed rate of wages by determining the class 
to which the worker belongs, and what rate should be sub¬ 
stituted for the prescribed rate. The clauses of the 
Munition of War Acts, 1915 to 1917 dealing with the settle¬ 
ment of labor differences were repealed by this act, and 
th e court set up by this act replaces that set up in tbs 
acts referred to. 

In all the changes having a bearing on labor that took 
place during the war, it would not do to overlook some of 
the modifications of previous acts, These were for the 
period of the war only. The scope of the compulsory section 
of the Insurance Act, the Unemployment Act, and the Workmen’s 
Compensation Act was extended to include all classes of 
workers on war work. The latter is so amended that employers 
have a twenty-five per cent, increased liability for weekly 
compensation to pay to workers suffering from total disability 
as a result of an accident which arose out of his employment. 















































# 

.... 

. 

. 

. 


28 


Everything possible was done to give the workmen the fullest 
protection and adequate compensation even though they were 
engaged in the most hazardous occupations. One of the out¬ 
standing indications of the care the government took to make 
the war conditions sit as lightly as possible upon them was 
the Bent Act, Large bodies of men had been shifted from 
one part of the country to another * and the new-comers were 
constantly subjected to higher rates than should obtain. 

What was more serious was that many tenants were required 
to move in order to make room for more profitable tenants. 
This gave rise to a very serious situation, and it was met 
by the passing of the Rent Act. This act prohibited the 
ejection of a tenant who was either the wife of a soldier, 
or a civilian following his or her ordinary occupation. 

It also made illegal the increase of the rental above what 
was regarded as normal. This did not solve the housing 
problem of the munition workers, so the government appro¬ 
priated large sums of money and built model dwellings for 
them and their families. Where such a worker lived away 
from home, he was allowed travelling expenses, and a free 
pass on the railways every two weeks if the distance were 
not too great, and oftener if the distance was short. In 
addition to that, he was granted a subsistence allowance 
supplementimg his wages till a home was provided for him 
and his family. 

The Welfare Department of the ministry of munitions 
accomplished a great deal for the munition w-orkers. Reg¬ 
ular Inspection of the factories was conducted with a view 
to securing the minimum requirements of working conditions. 
Every inducement was offered to establish the best possible 
conditions so as to maintain the health of the workers. 

Under this department, the Health Committee did its work. 

The following quotation from the final report of April 1918 

indicates the general attitude of this committee 

"While there can be no doubt that since the appointment of 









29 


“the committee in September 1915, the issue of their mem¬ 
oranda, the action of the central departments concerned, 
and the trend of opinion amongst employers, workers and 
the public generally have combined to secure very substan¬ 
tial improvement in the conditions of employment, it 
would be a very grave•mistake to assume that all is now 
well, or that further care and attention are not still 
essential if a serious break-down of industry is to be 
avoided. Further, while the committee have of necessity 
been primarily concerned about the health and physical 
efficiency of the munition worker under the abnormal con¬ 
ditions created by the war, they are strongly of the 
opinion that the principles underlying right action at 
the present time are permanent and not merely transitory 
in importance, and should be accepted also as fundamental 
to all schemes for industrial health and betterment after 
the war. Though the problems concerned with the well¬ 
being of the worker are not new......the ’committee has 

been greatly embarrassed by the limited extent to which 
in the past scientific investigation has been made into 
the various problems affecting industrial efficiency. 
Research is greatl y needed into the relation of occu¬ 
pation to fatigue, invalidity and mortality”. 

From this statement three facts stand out regarding the 
well-being and health of the worker. First, that previous 
to the war, no very great attention was paid to it beyond 
making the barest sanitary provisions and providing sick 
benefit. Second, that in the interests of greater effic¬ 
iency and production, the care of the worker assumed far 
greater importance leading to a much more scientific study 
of the worker's physical needs. Sample menus were drawn 
up, an outcome of the study of his dietary needs; shop 
conditions were studied, to afford him better surroundings; 
housing conditions were taken into consideration to pro¬ 
cure for him a better condition of health and comfort. 



, 

' 

, 












30 


Third, that now the need of care for the worker as well as 
the machine has become a public question, never again will 
there be permitted a return to the old conditions under 
which the wage-earner worked. More than likely, the govern T 
xnent will make a further advance along the lines of the re¬ 
commendations of this report. 

Industrial unrest in the latter part of 1916 resulted in 
the appointment of a commission of enquiry which found that 
the workers were thinking of what the future would mean to 
them when the war was over. On closer examination of the 
industrial conditions, the commission came to the conclusion 
that it would be advisable to formulate plans for the work 
of, reconstruction. This resulted in the establishment of a 
ministry of reconstruction under which various committees 
have been at work. The committee concerned in the question 
of labor is known as the Committee on delations between 
Employers and -Employed under the chairmanship of the Right 
Hon. J, H. Whitley, M. P. The committee was composed of 
foremost employers, labor leaders, and industrial experts 
and their work has resulted, in a plan of industrial relations 
that has already found wide acceptance. The Interim Report 
has been adopted by the War Cabinet as a policy which it 
hopes to carry into effect in the field of industrial recon¬ 
struction. It is not intended to introduce state interference 
into industry; the formation of these councils as recommended 
is a voluntary matter, but the government feels that all well 
organized industries should comply with the recommendations 
of the report with as little delay as possible. To secure 
this, the en ergies of the ministry of labor are directed, 
and aid is freely offered to any industry seeking to estab¬ 
lish such organization as is recommended. 

It would be well to note at this point the Trade Boards 
Act of 1918, which is the result of the work of the Committee 













' 




31 


of ‘Reconstruotion. The particular occasion for this act 
is the prospective readjustment of labor at the close of 
the war, which seems likely to accentuate the problem of 
inadequate wages for unskilled and unorganized workers, 
especially women. Many women will have to return to their 
former occupations as dress-making etc. and in seeking 
employment in the old lines will meet with competition 
which will likely depress wages. Many unskilled workers 
will have to relinguish their places to skilled workers. 

It was to meet these conditions that this amending act 
was passed. The original law has been noted above*. 

The new act permits the Minister of Labor, to apply its 
provisions to any trade in which it appears to him that 
no adequate machinery exists for the effective regulation 
of wages, so that having regard to the rates prevailing 
in the trade, it seems expedient that the law should be 
made to apply. It also provides that rates fixed by a 
trade board may be made to apply to the trade as a whole, 
or to any special process in the trade, or to any special 
district, or to any class of workers. It is possible 
under the act to fix rates for successive periods, or 
during specified periods. This flexibility makes it poss¬ 
ible to meet every contingency as the rates may be either 
time- wages or piece-wages. Other sections of the act 
require that the worker present on his employer’s premises 
for the purpose of receiving work shall he .deemed as emp¬ 
loyed and entitled to wages unless the employer prove that 
the worker was present without employer’s consent. This 
act is one of the first provisions of the permanent law 
looking toward readjustment and is a very great advance 
upon the old one, which was limited both in scope and 
power. 


*See page 8 and 9 














32 


The ministry of munitions took a great step toward re¬ 
construction by giving the workers an increased measure 
of control over the conditions of their working life. 

The workshop committees, referred to above*, have become 
a very important factor in labor circles. The employers 
regarded them as an interference with his management, 
but, after a few weeks of operation, found that they gave 
beneficial results. Recently, the Federation of British 
Industries -an employers association of nine thousand 
firms with a total capital of $10,000,000,000- recommended 
a plan much like the findings of the Committee on Recon¬ 
struction. They also suggested that' the government 
recognise and give official standing to an organization, 
representative of employers and workpeople, and that it 
should sympathetically assist such organization to reach 
settlement and agreement, but not to coerce, and that 
each trade be free to build up its own organization. 

What a remarkable advance] The scheme recommended by 
the Whitley Reports is;- 

The organization of each industry into a 

1. National Joint Standing Industrial Council, 

2.. District Councils,and 

3.. Works Committees. 

This scheme, adopted by the government, accepted by the 
Federation of British Industries, and the Trades and 
Labor Congress, will revolutionise industry. Already 
several of the well organized trades have proceeded to 
create their respective councils and committees. There 
are great hopes for the scheme once it is in working 
order. The splendid' feature of the scheme is that it 
calls for the organization of all the trades, and brings 
xx the unorganized workers into organization* This is a 
recognition of trade-unions by the nation] A tremedous 


*See page 23 









































33 


advance upon the old conditions. 

The temptation is very great to deal rather fully with 
this scheme, hut only a very short account can he given. 
Where the trade is fully organized, it is intended that 
the shop committee shall deal with ail local differences 
arising out of the operations of the plant concerned, it 
matters not whether it he wages, hours of labor, working 
conditions, the method of payment of wages, or the class¬ 
ification of a particular job; wherever there is a dispute, 
it is first of ail to he taken for settlement to the Works 
Committee. This means that the dispute has a chance of 
being settled before it reaches large proportions, or 
before great feeling is aroused. Failing settlement by 
the Works Committee, the dispute is taken to the District 
Council, which is composed of employers and workers of 
several plants of the same trade in a district. There 
again there is a chance of settling a dispute before it 
reaches national proportions. If agreement cannot be 
reached, it comes to the National Council. If the decision 
of the council is not favourable to the workers, they 
may elect to strike; or vice-versa the employers may 
declare a lock-out. The important feature of this scheme 
is that it delays drastic action until cooler judgment 
has a chance to work; and further, it brings the ..workers 
and employers face to face to bargain for terms. 'This 
gives each a better opportunity to understand the other 
and this is a great advantage to both. The most outstanding 
feature is that the government proposes to use the National 
Council as a permanent Advisory Committee for that partic¬ 
ular industry. The Minister of Labor stated in a circular 
letter to all organizations of labor and employers on 
October 20th 1917, that "the Councils will be recognised 
as the official standing consultative committees to the 
Government on all future questions affecting the industries 






... 

... i . 

. i; . ' • , 

. 



■■ . 

. 

. - . ■ > • ■ ' - . • 


, 


. 



' r - : •" ' ■ - . ■ 

. 

I 














34 


which they represent, and that they will he the normal 
channel through which the opinion and experience of an 
industry will he sought on all questions in which the 
industry is concerned*! It is clear that the principle 
of self government in industry is attained hy this 
scheme. The only matter that will lie within the gov¬ 
ernments control will he the regulation of factories, 
and the employment of children. It may he argued that 
this appearance of self-government will he in reality 
the government•of the worker hy the employer. But if 
it is remembered that the "Trades Disputes Act" is still 
in force, it will he readily seen that very powerful 
weapons are in the hands of labor by which it can take 
care of itself. 

Until the organization of the less developed trades 
takes place, these will be under the operations of the 
Trade Boards Act of 1918?, Here the government proposes 
to watch over the interests of the workingmen until 
such time as these industries become sufficiently organ¬ 
ized to form their committees and councils. The aid of 
the ministry of labor being offered for that purpose. 

The difference between a Trade Board and an Industrial 
Council is that the former, while it is composed of 
employers and workers,-has three others who are not 
connected with the industry concerned; the latter is 
composed only of employers and workers. Again, the 
Trade hoard is a statutory body established by the Mini-r 
ster of Labor and is maintained out of public money; 
while the Council is voluntary and self-sustaining. 

The powers of the former are restricted hy the provisions 
of the Trade Boards Act, while the latter within very 
wide limits is able to determine its own functions, mach¬ 
inery and methods of working. 


*See pages 3C and 31 





. 

.... * ; . 








■ 


, . 


£ 


' 


. 

.J .. 

. 

. 

, ■ 








35 


The position of labor since the outbreak of the war 
has been greatly improved. Though there has been consid¬ 
erable departure from established customs, it saas all 
.done by amicable arrangement, as we have seen, between 
the trade-unions and the government. That the government 
should recognise the unions in this way marks a very 
great advance in the relations of the government with 
labor and is of great promise for the future. The worker 
is a citizen with rights and privileges; no longer can 
he be treated as a cog in the wheel of industry. Kis 
labor is not a commodity, but a part of himself; there¬ 
fore his interests as a hmman being must be considered. 

Thus his health and well-being is a national interest, 
and, during the war, so carefully was this studied that 
the factory and housing question was settled along the 
lines that gave him greater comfort. These advances 
undoubtedly will be maintained, making far better the 
lot of the worker. These relations once established 
are not likely, to be broken. Labor will always have the 
recognition of the government. Another feature that will 
make labor a recognised force of no mean power is the 
growing influence of the Labor Party. Labor is now asso¬ 
ciated with the government as also are employers and others, 
this fact alone brings the government into close relations 
with the 1 abor movement. 







36 


United States of America. 

The war,while it had a great influence upon American 
industry, dod not really come into direct contact with 
the nation until President Wilson reported to Congress 
that a state of war existed between the United States 
and Germany. This was after the war had been raging 
for two and a half years. During this period, the man¬ 
ufacturing resources of the country had been taxed to 
the uttermost in supplying munitions to the Allies. 

But it made no change worth mentioning in the relations 
of the government with labor. But on the declaration 
of war in April 1917, there were great changes. Even 
a little before this date, anticipating the final rup¬ 
ture as diplomatic relations had been severed, there 
was proceeding an industrial preparation fur war. It 
has been stated already that the labor organizations 
of the United States had not reached that high attain¬ 
ment that* characterized British Labor. The membership 
in the American Federation of Labor was actually less 
than that of the British Trades-Union Congress up to 
this time, and further, owing to the attitude of the 
executive, the Federation has never sought to become a 
political party like the British Labor Party. The pro¬ 
portion of union to non-union workers is much less there 
than in Britain, neither is unionism so well entrenched 
so that the shop rules and practices had not reached so 
high a development. “Speeding up“ or scientific shop 
management had secured an earlier hold in the workshops 
with the result that the conditions of work favoured the 
employer rather than the worker. Most of the labor x 
struggles were for recognition of unions as a basis for 
negotiation between employers and employed. Collective 









. 


1 



. - 


« 


. . V 



€ 












. 


< 

» 

- c 



. 



. 




* 






. 







. 






» 

- :j r r .' 



< 






6 1 v, • loS.' - ' 

. 
















. 



...... ; . j ' 





- . . :■ i:e \ .7 










, 







. 



; ; \ i 3 r. C ■ 










. 









' 

. 


„ . 

. 







z 
















37 


bargaining was not regarded with favour by the employers 
and the result was that there were whole industries 
where the workers were unorganized. The steel workers 
of Pennsylvania had to work twelve hours per day, i. e. 
two shifts per day in continuous operation plants, and 
their'remuneration was not really adequate for the work 
they did. The large corporations almost without excep¬ 
tion had unorganized men working in their plants. 

The Department of.Labor was organized in March 4th 1913 
and a labor-unionist, Mr J. B. Wilson, was appointed 
Secretary of Labor to the administration. This depart¬ 
ment, to use the words of Secretary Wilson, “was created 
in the interests of the wage-earners of the United States; 
its aim is to foster, promote, develop the welfare of the 
wage-earners of the country, to improve their working 
conditions and to advance their opportunities for profit¬ 
able employment. These wage-earners consist of all, 
whether assoc iated together in labor-unions or unorgan¬ 
ized. Irinas.-much as so many of the workers are associated, 
the Department of Labor must invite the confidence and 
encourage the co-operation of responsible labor organiza¬ 
tions if it is to subserve its prescribed purpose". The 
three principal divisions of work are:- 

1. Mediation and Conciliation in labor disputes. 

2. Legal advice on claims arising out of compensation 
acts, labor contracts,etc., 

3. The Collection of labor statistics -this was organ¬ 
ized in 1885* comprising hours of labor, relations of 
labor and capital, w^ages or earnings, means of promoting 
welfare. 

4. Distribution of labor, a service which was added later 
The great turning point in the labor movement in the 

United States is the Federal Supreme Court decision in 


















38 


the Holden Case in 1898. Labor had repeatedly secured 
favourable legislation only to see the laws declared un¬ 
constitutional by the courts, because they were regarded 
as class legislation. On this occasion however, it took 
a stand favourable to labor and by the wording of the 
decision handed down established a percedent t for further 
favourable legislation. The court declared that both 
employer and employee should enjoy equal protection of 
the laws and stated that “the proprietors lay down the 
rules and the operatives are practically constrained to 
obey them;.... the latter are often induced by the fear 
of discharge to conform to regulations.... detrimental 
to their health and strength* 4 . On that ground it justi¬ 
fied the interference of the state to rectify the ineq¬ 
uality. From this time there has been progress in labor 
legislation in the various states, greatly improving the 
lot of the worker. Collective bargaining, however, was 
hampered by restrictions on the right of the worker to 
strike. Many states forbad picketting, boycotting and 
other'means which labor used to secure collective barg¬ 
ains with employers. The great blow delivered agaxndt 
labor was the decision in the Danbury Hatters Case, 
which arose out of the provisions of the Sherman Anti- • 
Trust Act. The union involved was penalised for damages 
arising out of a boycott in a sum of money far greater 
than it could pay. The Clayton Act, amending the Sherman 
Act, was passed in 1914 which provided against all future 
decisions like the one just referred to, by legalising 
strikes, peaceful picketting, boycotting for trade-union 
purposes, and the granting of financial aid to strikers 
on the part of labor organizations. But this act did 
not apply to state courts, and only a few states had 
legislation that approached the Clayton Act. 





39 


Still it could be said that the workingman’s right to 
strike was restricted, and the employer’s right to dis¬ 
charge was unrestricted. Many states have since enacted 
statutes prohibiting employers to coerce workmen into 
surrendering their right to belong to labor-unions, thr¬ 
ough threatening them with discharge unless they comply 
with the demand, and yet these, as late as 1915 have been 
declared by the Federal Supreme Court, as unconstitutional. 
This means that an employer can maintain a shop closed to 
all union men. The verdict of the Federal Supreme Court 
in the Hitchman Case had the result of anti-union employers 
adopting the identical wording of the Hitchman Co. contract, 
and compelling their employees to sign it. Thus they put 
themselves un der the protection of the Supreme Court to 
prevent the unionization of their employees. The clause 
of the contract leading to this issue was that employees 
should not join any labor-union while in the employ of 
the company. These circumstances have led to labor-union- 
ism in the United States being somewhat weakened in abil¬ 
ity to secure favourable bargains in wages, hours of labor, 
and other matters vital to labor. Despite these diffic¬ 
ulties, however, labor has secured many advantages, and, 
through organisation has succeeded in driving better bar¬ 
gains with employers. 

There have been many very serious disputes, involving 
loss of life and property, simply because employers would 
not yield in the recognition of a labor-union. Yet with¬ 
out organization on both sides there can be only a one¬ 
sided bargain, and it is to the interest of the public 
that labor should be free to bargain collectively in order 
to get fair play*. The United States Industrial Relations 
Commission, which made its final report in 1915, has made 
it clear that there was need to give labor greater power. 









4C 


Disputes show that very often labor was not advantageously 
placed to combat an unreasonable employer. In April 1914, 
in relation to the Colorado Strike, Mr J. D. Bockfeller Jr. 
declared before the above commission that he would rather 
lose his millions invested in the Colorado coalmines than 
recognise the labor 7 timion of his workers. In,the face of 
this remark he acknowledged that he did not know what wages 
the miners earned, what rent they paid for the company’s 
houses, what profit the company made out of its stores. 

He admitted that he had never visited Colorado for ten 
years, and consequently was not personally acquainted with 
the miners’ working conditions. With that attitude on 
the part of ma,ny employers, labor has had to force its 
recognition. Even on this commission, the employer’s 
section, after hearing all the evidence gathered from all 
over the country, remained partisan and reported that 
disputes should be enquired into by the government only 
when both sides invite' it. It also protested sympathetic 
strikes, contract breaking, closed shops, restriction of 
output -under union rules. The other members strongly 
endorsed collective bargainin g and favoured the adoption 
of the British Trades Disputes Act, st ating that one of 
the principle causes of industrial unrest was the denial 
of the right and opportunity to form effective labor 
organizations. 

In the matter of hours of labor, thdjr,inimum wage, un- 
employm ent, and factory conditions, there is great var¬ 
iation throughout the states. The great xgajority of the 
seven million workers in the work-shops of the United 
States in 1914 worked sixty hours per week in contrast 
with the trade-union standard of fifty-two in Britain: 
five per cent, of them worked where the prevailing hours 
















41 


were between sixty and seventy-two hours per week, many 
thousands work on a larger time-scale than that. Added 
to this is the situation that many continuous operation 
plants operate on the seven day week plan and require 
their employees to ’put in’ a twelve hour day. Mr. W. 

B. Dickson, vice-president at one time of the United 
States Steel Corporation said"In my judgment, a large 
proportion of the steel workers, who from early manhood 
work twelve hours a day, are old men at forty". .Legis¬ 
lation in hours of work has been enacted in all the 
states, but only in relation to women and children. 

But with regard to night work for women and children, 
America has been backward in contrast to Great Britain. 
In Massachusetts, the law forbids night work in factori© 
and mills only between the hours of six p. m. and six 
a. m. -the strictest law in the United States; but there 
are many states where night work is unregulated for 
women and poorly regulated for children. 

The minimum wage legislation of the United States 
goes back to 1910 and by 1916, eleven states had passed 
a minimum wags law. In the case of Oregon, this has 
been contested through all the courts to the federal 
Supreme Court which upheld its constitutionality. 

Public employment bureaus under Federal administration 
was not very far advanced at the outbreak of the war; 
this service was largely left to the individual states 
and municipalities. Factory regulation for the safety 
and health of the worker, and'social insurance has 
been provided for.in all the states. In some states 
however, there has been very little done in the matter 
of social insuranc e beyond compensation for accidents 
incurred while being employed. Here again the North 
has been far more progressive than the South. 









42 


America having entered into the world war, the labor 
legislation enacted by the various states and the Congress 
bears the impress of the event. The need of health prot¬ 
ection, adequate remuneration, reasonable compensation in 
case of accident or industrial disease, the settlement of 
labor difficulties and the like all received careful att¬ 
ention. European experience was noted, representatives 
from labor overseas were received in order to explain the 
various measures adopted in Europe and the nature of their 
success. Profitting by all this, the United States Czovern- 
ment took precautions to safeguard the country from the 
early mistakes of the Allies across the Atlantic. At once 
the government sought to establish closer relations with 
labor, and the president of the American Eederation of 
Labor, Mr. S. Gcmpers, was appointed on the Commission for 
National Defence. The Report of this great labor organ¬ 
ization for 1117 contains the following statement;- 
"It is with great gratification we report specific devel¬ 
opments showing that the American Labor Movement has 
secured the best agreements with the government that has 
been secured in any other warring countries. The agree¬ 
ments and the relations between the workers and the 
American Government established a new period in the Indus¬ 
trial world -a period in which the government has sanct¬ 
ioned standards based upon principles of human welfare, 
and has substituted these standards for the old system 
under which profits were paramount*.’ 

One of the earliest announcements of the government 
cont ained this statement: "There have been established 
by legislation, by mutual agreement between employers 
and employees, or by custom certain standards constituting 
a day’s work. These vary from seven hours to twelve hours 
in continuous operation plants. The various states and 
municipalities have established specific standards of 











43 


safety and sanitation, and have provided inspection ser¬ 
vice to enforce the regulations. They have also estab¬ 
lished maximum hours of work for women and minimum age 
limits for children employed in gainful occupations. 

These are to be retained except where national necessity 
demands a change. As the standard of living is variable 
no arbitrary change in wages should be attempted either 
by strikes or lockouts until the established agencies as 
the Mediation Board has been given opportunity of adjusting 
differences**. ' Yet with this attitude on the part of the 
government, there were influences at work seeking to take 
some advantage of the unusual conditions. Thus four states 
in Mew England authorized, under certain circumstances, the 
setting aside of labor laws during the period of the war. 
There was some relaxation in other states owing to the 
need of increased production, but it did not result in any 
hardship on labor due to the activity of the federal boards 
and committees. The Council of National Defence, acting 
upon the recommendation of the committee on labor, urged 
the state legislatures as well as administraticn agencies 
rt to maintain rigorously the existing safeguards as to health 
and the welfare of the workers? it also asked the state 
legislatures to ’’delegate to their respective governors 
power to suspend or modify the restrictions of their labor 
laws 11 when requested by the council. President Wilson 
stated at a conference of the representatives of labor and 
capital and British labor delegates:- 14 1 have been very 
much alarmed at... the apparent inclination of the legis¬ 
latures of one or two of our states to set aside, even 
temporarily, the laws which have safeguarded the standards 
of labor and life. I think nothing would be more deplor¬ 
able than that....1 shall exercise my influence... to see 
that that does not happen"?. And on the same day, the 





44 


Association of Manufacturers passed a resolution asking: 
that the president be given authority"to suspend for the 
period of the war all restrictive legislation at both 
gov eminent and private plants... .which seriously threatens 
to cripple the capacity of national industry to perform its 
indispensible functions for national defence". 

The situation was peculiar; the government saw that to 
interfere too seriously with labor would be to defeat the 
aim of greater production; while the operators and employers 
demanded such interference in the interests of greater 
-production* The former recognised that coercion would mean 
failure as it would be brought into conflict with labor; 
again there was not the excessive need together with ex¬ 
cessive shortage of man labor to warrant such radical 
measures. The latter, while meaning well, evidently failed 
to recognise that compulsion could not be applied without 
the consent of the worker* Compulsion as it was applied 
in Britain was first of all submitted to and agreed to by 
labor* This movement to modify the labor standards was 
soon defeated, as the opposition of organized labor to¬ 
gether with other social organizations, backed by the facts 
of European experience, was both vigorous and powerful. 

The amazing feature of this move is that most of the attempt 
was directed against the child and women labor laws of the 
states and the federal Child Labor Law, which became effec¬ 
tive in Sept. 1st. 1917. Later, the manufacturers succeed¬ 
ed in getting the latter declared unconstitutional. It is 
a relief to find that some of the state legislatures as 
Wisconsin adopted such resulitions as:"Laws safeguarding 
the rights of laborers must not be set aside even tempor¬ 
arily because of the war"; and that two govenors in the 
first two months of the^vetoed bills passed by legisla¬ 
tures, one of which was'to suspend a child labor law. 

This situation-created a great deal of labor unrest and 


/ 



















45 


agitation on the part of the manufacturers only succeeded 
in making lab or very suspicious. The various unions were 
repeatedly passing resolutions protesting any change, 
affirming their loyalty and their willingness to do all 
in their power to aid production. The action of the Coun¬ 
cil of National Defence was time 13^ when it created the 
Labor Adjustment Commission representative of the various 
groups of employers and employees. All disputes in plants 
working on government contracts had to be referred to it, 
after all the other established means of mediation had 
failed to effect a settlement. The decision of this com¬ 
mission was final and binding on both parties. Thus the 
right to strike or to declare a lock-out was denied. This 
weakened the power of labor; but later, labor was given 
much help by a new administrative body, the National War 
Labor- Board. 

With a friendly administration in power in Washington, 
the organized labor movement undoubtedly has greater influ¬ 
ence than ever it had before. Mr. Gompers* position on 
the Council of National Defence was a recognition of the 
place of labor in national life, and the great influence 
he wielded^bore frui#. For the first two or three months 
of the war, the organized labor movement was not represented 
on any of the effective committees.surrounding the Council ' 
of Nati onal Defence. Mr. Gompers advocated labor*s direct 

representation co-equal with all other interests upon all 
committees engaged with war work. He claimed that^the 
employee as well as the employer should have opportunity 
to determine national economic policies and to control 
labor standards involved in the handling of war contracts. 
This advocacy succeeded. The Coal Production Committee 
included the United Mine Workers * representatives on their 
ctDnmiit.tee and others followed suit. Mr. Gompers formed 
his Labor Qmmittee from the organized trades and from 
representative employers. From this committee has come 





, i v 

X;.j «‘5 £ "i »; ; ,» ... 



* ♦ 

. • ■ 




't C lit: 

t, J 


(I'lQl 

- 

c: i d 

: 






46 


much advanced legislation. The Advisory Commission, the 
War Industries Board, the Shipping Board, the Wage Adjust¬ 
ment Board all have on them representatives of labor. 

Labor, getting so much recognition on the administrative 
bodies, became a great power. The understanding between 
government and labor was very amicable. When a president 
of the United States journeys several hundred miles from 
Washington to Buffalo to address a labor-union convention, 
it serves to indicate the change of relationship between 
government and labor. Late in 1917, a journalist entered 
the .Department of Labor building in Washington. In the 
hall was a delega tion of Chicago packers, in the waiting 
room a delegation of the employees from the packing houses 
together with the executive of the Chicago Federation of 
Labor. Secretary Wilson invited both into his office and 
these two parties faced each other for the first time in 
fourteen years. The result of that conference was the 
appointment of a judge to be arbitrator, and he upheld 
most of the contentions of the men. The journalist then 
went to the American Federation of Labor building and 
arrived in time to overhear Mr. Gompers explain to two 
prominent capitalists that he could not see them as he 
had barely time to make his appointment with Secretary 
McAdoo. He found that another labor official was appearing 
before a committee of congress; and a third was just 
leaving for a conference with a government official. 

Perhaps the greatest labor triumph was the final capit¬ 
ulation of the Steel Corporations in the latter part of 
1918. For over twenty-five years the workers have had 
no voice in determining their conditions, and the standard 
day was twelve hours. It was decided to organize the 
steel workers -this fact together with the known government 
policy led to the corporations adopting the standard day 
of eight hours. These incidents are an eloquent testimony 


. 

-- 

. 


. ; 

•.; i v ..w & . a ... "• 

\ 

. 

‘ - .. 

* 

■ 








■ 















47 


to the new power of labor, and the place it has secured for 
itself in the administration of the government. 

The most important move of the administration was the 
appointment of the War Labor Conference Committee. This 
was composed of five labor men and five employers; these 
two groups each chose a public citizen, the former chose 
Mr. Walsh and the latter Mr. Taft. After a period of 
enquiry, this committee made its report, coming to a un¬ 
animous conclusion on the following points 

That there be created for the period of the war a nation¬ 
al War Labor Board of the same number, and to be selected 
in the same manner, and by the same agencies as the com¬ 
mission making this recommendation. The^ functions and 
powers of the National Board shall be as follows:- 

a. To bring about a settlement by mediation and concil¬ 
iation, of every controversy arising between employers and 
workers in the field of production necessary for the effec¬ 
tive conduct of the war. 

b. To do the same thing in similar controversies in other 
fields of national activity*, -to deal with delays and obstruc¬ 
tions which may, in the opinion of the National Board,affect 
detrimentally such production. 

c. To provide such machinery, by direct appointment or 
otherwise, for - the selection of committees on boards to sit 
in various parts of the country where controversies arise, 
to secure settlement by local mediation and conciliation. 

d. To summon the parties to the controversy for hearing 
and- action by the National Board, in case of failure to 
secure settlement by mediation and conciliation. 

“Principles and Policies to govern relations between 
workers and employers in war industries for the duration 
of the war. 

a. There should be no strikes or lockouts during the war. 








48 


b. The right of workers to organize in trade-unions and 
to bargain collectively through chosen representatives i3 
recognized and affirmed. This right shall not be denied,, 
abridged, or interfered with by employers in any manner 
whatsoever. The right of employers to organize in assoc¬ 
iations or groups and to bargain collectively through 
chosen representives is recognized and affirmed. This 
right shall not be denied, abridged,.or interfered with 

by the workers in any manner whatsoever. Employers should 
not discharge workers for membership in trade-unions, nor 
for legitimate trade-union activities. The workers, in 
the exersise of their right to organize, should not use 
coercive measures of any kind to induce persons to join 
their organizations nor to induce employers to bargain or 
deal therewith.- 

c. In establishments where the union shop exists the 
same shall continue, and the union standards as to wages, 
hours of labor, and other conditions of employment shall 
be maintained. In establishments where union and non¬ 
union men and women now work together and the employer 
meets only with employees or representatives engaged in 
said establishments, the continuance of such conditions 
shall not be deemed a grievance. This declaration, how¬ 
ever, is not intended in any manner to deny the right or 
discourage the practice of the formation of labor unions 
or the joining of the same by the workers in said estab¬ 
lishments, as guaranteed in the preceding section, nor to 
prevent the War Labor Board from urging or any umpire from 
granting, under the machinery herein provided, improvement 
of their situation in the matter of wages, hours of labor, 
or other conditions as shall be found desirable from time 
to time. Established safeguards and regulations for the 
protection of the health and safety of workers shall not 
be relaxed. 

d. If it shall become necessary to emgloy women on work 
ordinarily performed by men, they must Ue^equal pay for 
equal work and must not be allotted tasks disproportionate 



49 


to their strength. 

e. The basic eight-hour day is recognized as applying 
in all cases in which existing law requires it. In all 
other cases the question of hours of labor shall be 
settled with due regard to governmental necessities and 
the welfare, health, and proper comfort of the workers* 

f. In fixing wages, hours, and conditions of labor, 
regard should always be had to the labor standards, wage 
scales, and other conditions prevailing in the localities 
affected. 

gv. 1, The right of all workers, including common labor¬ 
ers, to a living wage is hereby declared.. 

•2. In fixing wages, minimum rates of pay shall be es¬ 
tablished which will insure the subsistence of the worker 
and his family in health and reasonable comfort? 

This report was adopted and this committee was appointed 
as the National War Labor Board to carry out its recommend¬ 
ations and to act when all other means of settlement had 
failed. The policy of the Federal government and of this 
board has resulted in a phenomenal advance of the labor 
movement. The recognition of the right of the workers to 
organize and to bargain collectively has resulted in the 
increase of membership of the organized labor-unions of 
over one million in little more than a year. Where unions 
had been impossible for years, they sprang up almost over¬ 
night. Labor has never been in a more advantageous position 
in its history than it is at present in the United States. 

In carrying out its policy, the board has made many decisions 
resulting in the establishment of far better conditions 
for the working man. The following is a sample of the 
work done by the board:- 

1. The labor contract.. Two firms, Smith and lessen Co. 
and.the General Electrical Co. of Pittsfield were ordered 
to eliminate individual employment contracts and to make 
no more in the future*- The principle of collective bar¬ 
gaining must be recognized. The former firm refused and 
the answer of the government- was to commandeerthe plant* 

2*. Minimum wages. - At W'aynesboro, wages were as low 


















50 


as 21 cents per hour, the hoard fixed the rate for sonar on 
labor at 4C cents, 

3. The eight-hour day. This was awarded to industries 
in Buffalo, New York, and East Cambridge. 

4. Strikes. Workers in the Remington Arms Co.and other 
firms went out on strike in defiance of the board's 
decision . The pressure of the government forced the men 
back at once and also the firms to reinstate them. 

In addition to the above mentioned board, the functions 
of which were judicial, was the War Labor Policies Board, 
an administrative body. It was found that there was need 
to coordinate all the war-work of the government depart¬ 
ments under a unified labor administration,, which should 
look after all matters affecting labor such as wages, 
hours of wcr 1 - , standardization of working conditions and 
kindred things. This board dealt only with plants under 
direct government control, but-what is important was that 
it endorsed the policies and principles of the National 
War .Labor Board. Thus the government as an employer of 
labor accepted this revolutionary standard by which labor 
enters a new era. 

Other important services created by the government, 
which have a direct bearing on labor are:- The Employ¬ 
ment Service which was an enlargement of the division of 
employment of the Department of labor. Offices were planted 
throughout the country and their work coordinated with all 
municipal and state offices to create a nation-wide system, 
much on the lines of the system: of Great Britain. It is 
a service that is bound to become pennanment because of its 
manifest advantage both to the public and to the worker. It 
brought many men to important jobs and performed a useful 
service by tabulating reports from all the offices regarding 





51 


the prospective ratio of demand to supply k 0 r monthly 
periods* Thus a barometer was constructed by means of 
which labor fluctuations were noted and, by careful ad¬ 
ministration, the maximum labor power of the country was 
fully utilised, greatly to the advantage of labor. The 
Working: Conditions Service, and the Investigation and 
Inspection Service had to do with the inspection of all 
industrial establishments and to see that proper standards 
o^ wages,* hours, hygiene, safety, working conditions are 
established and maintained. The state regulations and 
codes were collected to guide the officers in their work. 

But it was designed to go further than enforce these exist- 
ing standards— these were to be studied and proper standards 
to be determined and then maintained* A number of other 
services)have a direct bearing upon labor but these need not 
be mentioned. But these all reveal the fact that the 
government intended to protect labor to the full limit in 
health, safety, wages and reasonable leisure. Here, as in 
Great Britain, it may be said that never was labor so care¬ 
fully studied and protected so as to ensure maximum pro¬ 
duction; and here too it was found that the increase in 
wages, the reduction of excessive hours of labor, and better 
sanitary conditions, brought fruit in increased production 
which more than repaid the extra outlay involved. 

American labor has then made considerable advance, owing 
to the protection afforded it by the Government. Without 
being in a pos ition of wielding great political power 
like t he British Labor Party, it succeeded in gaining a 
place on the adv isory committees and obtaining a share 
in the control of industry. It was represented on the 
boards and committees dealing with disputes arising outof 
labor conditions, and wage increase; and had a voice in the 
allocation of war contracts. Hever has labor enjoyed so 













5 £ 


close an understanding with the government, and never has 
it been so benefitted as in the period of the war. Perman¬ 
ent progress has been made in all matters affecting labor 
and this has resulted in greater contentment and comfort 
of the laboring masses. 


It is a matter of personal regret that the new book of 
Mr. Gompers entitled "The American Labor Movement and the 
War” has not been available. It was published after this 
was completed 


' 

. 

. ' - . 










. 







53 


Canada. 

It has already been noted that Canada is not an industrial 
country like the United States, consequently, we do not 
find labor very well organized, nor that there has been 
very much activity in labor legislation. The labor movement 
is practically a branch of that of the United States. There 
are very few ; strictly national self-sustaining labor organ¬ 
izations. The industrial field of the country is almost 
entirely covered by the international craft unions and the 
unions connected with the American Federation of Labor. 

Thus nearly all the labor-unions of Canada are branches 
of organized labor across the border. These unions elect 
their delegates to the Trades and Labor Congress of Canada, 
which is thus composed of labor men of this country, who 
largely, are menbers of American labor-unions. In addition 
to this nation al organization, there is a similar organ¬ 
ization for each province, and each large industrial centre. 
The duty of the national and provincial bodies is to create 
public opinion for necessary beneficial labor legislation 
and to prevent pernicious labor legislation being placed 
upon the statute book. Owing to the fact that the Canadian 
organization is closely allied with the American Federation 
of Labor, the labor movement before the war had not become 
a political organization like the British Labor Party. 

The pol itical activities have been confined almost entirely 
to the lobby and the interview of government ministers. 

The total trade-union membership has never been more than 
175,000 (1913) so that the work has not been easy for the 
union officials. There is much apathy on the part of many 
workers to organize, due largely to the lack of numbers to 
form very aggressive unions. 

There have been plenty of labor disputes, some of which 
have caused a great deal of suffering and hardship, but the 










54 


means adopted to conciliate the workers have not been of 
the best. Previous to the war, labor legislation lagged 
behind the legislation of the industrial countries. 
Australia, a country much the same as Canada in national 
development, has a very strong Labor Party and very advan¬ 
ced labor legislation. Legislation would be more advanced 
here were the labor organizations more powerful. There 
has been a fair amount of provincial legislation giving a 
moderate degree of protection to the worker; but there 
has been no close association between the representatives 
of labor and the governments. Among several acts under 
which labor has been controlled or benefitted is the 
Industrial Disputes Investigation Act which came into 
operation in ISO?.. It had as its purpose the compulsory 
investigation of all disagreements between capital and 
labor affecting public utilities. Ho strikes or lock-outs 
could be declared until the machinery of the act was put 
into operation to effect a settlement. The Trades and 
Labor Congress has gone on record as opposed to the measure 
because it has not been administered effectively. On many 
occasions, the minister of labor has refused to appoint a 
board upon the application of a local union. As a compul¬ 
sory measure the act has failed absolutely. Since March 
ISO? to 1916 there has been approximately eighty-four 
strikes, yet in only eight cases did the government prose¬ 
cute. The act is a failure as a compulsory measure. It 
has had better success as a conciliation measure as many 
disputes have been settled by the means the act provides. 

It has also been fairly successful in delaying hasty action 
both.on the part of workers and of employers. 

The Conciliation and Labor Act simply provided means by 
which a district board of conciliation or arbitration coukx 
b e appointed for the settlement of trade disputes of that 
district. The duty of the boards was to provide conditiors 




■ ' 






55 • 


favourable to a settlement and to encourage the parties 
to come together and to effect a settlement themselves. 

This act, together with the one mentioned above seems to 
constitute the only means of securing amicable understanding 
between employer and worker. Judging from the industrial 
status of the country, these have not been as effective 
as they ought to be. The' government by the Trade-Union 
Act has protected labor from the operation of the combine 
laws so that a weapon has been put into the hands of the 
workers whereby they were in a position to enforce collect¬ 
ive bars^ning. In 1909 the department of labor was set 
up to have charge of the administration of)the above acts, 
and to collect and publish labor statistics. The govern¬ 
ment also required that all government work and all work 
aided by public funds shauld be undertaken only under the 
“Fair Wages Resolution" which required a schedule of wages 
to be inserted in their contracts. This is all the leg¬ 
islation of the federal house that has any bearing on our 
subject; but there is a great* deal of provincial legislation 
which provided for sanitary and safe working conditiond, 
compensation in case of accidents, the safe-guarding of the 
wages of workers, hours of employment of women and children, 
inspection and regulation of factories and mines, fair wages 
on public works and railways, health of workers, holidays 
and rest days. These have been of very great benefit to 
labor, even though in some instances they were not very 
advanced. 

At the outbreak of the war, Canadian labor was in the 
'position of being able to adopt aggressive measures to 
secure more favourable conditions , but thesesconditions 
were not so favourable as in more highly organized countries 
As for any relations with the government, there were none. 
The only way in which labor could secure the ear of the 
government was to wait \ipon the premier in deputation and 







56 


ask for certain legislation which rarely was granted. After 
the outbreak of the war, there had been no close co-operaticn 
with the government, but since the conference on war problems 
held in Ottawa early in 1917 between the members of the 
government and the officers of the International Unions and 
the Trades and Labor Congress, there lias been much improve¬ 
ment which will be noted later, ho drastic action was nec¬ 
essary for - regulating or controlling industry because there 
was a disposition on the part of the majority of employers 
and the employed to recognize the abnormal times of the war 
period, "there was a very great deal of unemployment and 
it was with gratitude that labor men saw the British Govern¬ 
ment placed war contracts in this country. But trouble soon 
started as there was a disposition on the part of some empl¬ 
oyers to make money at the expense of the workers. There 
were many cases of men being underpaid. The labor organiz¬ 
ation could find no one responsible to effect a change until 
appealing through British Labor to the Ministry of Munition, 
a fair wage clause was inserted in the war contracts. 

Disputes 'were reported to the Imperial Board of Munitions 
and by means of inspectors, or the Board of Conciliation, 
they were adjusted. The labor leaders were able to safe¬ 
guard wages and rates with fair satisfaction, but so much 
had to be done by agitation before this could be effected. 
This was entirely due to the lack of co-operation between 
the government and labor. 

During th e war period, the provinces have been specially 
active in the enactment of laws of a somewhat drastic nature. 
Ontario, British Columbia, Manitoba, Nova Scotia, New Brun¬ 
swick, Saskatchewan, and the Yukon Territory all passed 
advanced workmen’s compensation acts; four provinces set up 
bureaus of labor, four dealt with housing accomodations for 
workmen, while factory inspection and regulation, child and 
women labor, fair wages were dealt with in the majority of 



f 

- 

' 

■ 

- 

* 

8 

. 


i 












57 


the provinces. In the matter of workmen*s compensation, 
Canada has taken her place among countries that have advan¬ 
ced legislation along this line. The Alberta Factory Act is 
unique in that it contains a section fixing a minimum wage, 
and another fixing the hours of labor. The setting up of 
the bureaus of labor in some of the provinces augurs well 
for the closer relations of labor with the governments. 

C-oming to Dominion legislation, there has been little done 
beyond enlarging the scope of the Industrial Disputes Invest¬ 
igation Act to include industries connected with war work, 
and wider powers of investigation. One significant amend¬ 
ment, however, is that an employee shall not cease to be 
such for a lock-out or strike, or by dismissal if an app¬ 
lication for a board is made within thirty days after dis¬ 
missal. This amendment goes far to secure to the worker 
the right to return to his job, after a dispute has been 
settled. This is no small consideration to the worker. 

Two Orders In Council have been issued, one to compel every 
male person between sixteen and sixty residing in Canada to 
be regularly engaged in some useful occupation; the other is 
a pronouncement that reflects the influence of the principles 
of the War Labor Board of the United States. Some of its 
provisions are:.- 

1. Uo strikes nor lock-outs during the war, 

2. All employees should have the right to organize in 
trade-unions, and through chosen representatives should be 
permitted to negotiate with employers. 

3. Employers should not discharge or refuse to employ 
members of trade-unions. 

4. Workers should use no coercion in gaining membersof 
unions. 

5. Shop standards, whether union or nonunion should be 
continued, but should hot prevent employees from organizing 
if they wish. 












I 






58 


6. Wages should be commensurate with the standard of 
living, and to secure reasonable comfort and provision for 
old age. Minimuni rates of pay should be established. 

7. Women should be allowed equal pay with men for equal 
work, and have tasks suitable to their strength. 

This order also provided for a Board of Appeal in the event 
of failure to reach agreement under the provision of the 
Industrial Disputes Investigation Act. This board was to 
onsist of two representatives appointed by the executive 
council of the Trades and Labor Congress, two appointed by 
the executive of the Canadian Manufacturers’ Association 
and a chairman nominated by the above four, in case of 
disagreement, the minister of labor may nominate the chair¬ 
man. Thus finally, labor acquired equal voice with employers 
in the settlement of disputes, and secured full recognition 
of the right to bargain collectively, and to organize. 

In 1917, the Trades and Labor Congress decided to follow 
the British precedent and organize a Labor Party upon such 
a basis that all social workers could unite to promote 
legislation in the best interests of the workers of the 
nation. Already two provinces had organized and arranged 
to enter the next provincial elections with candidates'. 

In the Dominion election of December of the same year, over 
thirty candidates were nominated by labor men in various 
parts of the dominion. Two only were elected, but a start 
has been made and soon labor will be a factor to reckonjwith 
as a parliamentary force. Since this, there has been 
political activity among labor circles in almost every 
prov ince with a view of establishing a strong party organ¬ 
ization for representation in the legislatures. It is 
significant that with this activity there has been a phen¬ 
omenal growth of labor-unionism during the past two years. 

In 1917 the growth was about fourteen per cent, and in 
1918 the growth was nearly twenty-five per cent., reaching 
the remarkable total of 204,630 members. 






* 

. 

- 

- 






: '■ 

, 

. 








. 



































. 
















.The Conference on War Problems was held in Ottawa between 
the members of the government and fifty representatives^ 
organized labor. There were many meetings and important 
matters vital to labor were discussed. As a result, many 
of the demands of labor were acceeded to. The following 
statement of the labor representatives is significant:- 
‘•The Government of this country having realised that no 
measures can be successful without the co-operation of 
the workers, and also that to obtain that expression of 
true co-operation it must recognize the organizations 
of the wo rkers as the only tangible means of expression. 

The methods of conference of all other allied countries 
in dealing direct with organized labor representatives 
may have some bearing on their changed attitude.... Their 
attitude is now one of co-operation with the organized 
labor movement and...it is hoped that such co-operation 
will expand to its fullest degree'*. The government 
offered labor representation by asking to appoint a labor 
man as undersecretary of labor; this offer was refused 
as the labor organization wished to remain free. Labor, 
however, p ressed its claims to be represented upon the 
advisory committees which have to do with the prosecution 
of the war, or with reconstruction after the.war in which 
labor was affec ted. The government also agreed to go into 
the matter of establishing employment bureaus and encouraging 
provincial and municipal enterprises along this line. Later 
an act was passed giving effect to this agreement. Bureaus 
were to be established throughout the country either by 
municipalities, provinces or by the federal government, 
and these were to be linked tfrith the office at Ottawa 
which was to be the national clearing house. All private 
employment agencies were abolished. The government also 
called upon the Trades Congress to nominate its represent- 




- 

- 

. 











. 


r- ' .. • 


■ 

. 


- 

■ 

- 


- 

. 
















60 


atives for many advisory committees, included among which 
were;- The Canada Registration Board, Advisor to the Fuel 
Controller, The Canada War Trade Board, The Soldier’s Civil 
Re-Establishment Commission, The Dominion Executive of the 
Victory Loans, The Committee on War Saving Stamps. Finally,? 
when Premier Borden left for England to attend the' Peace 
Conference in November, he took with him an advisory comm¬ 
ission includin g P. M. Draper a labor man to advise with 
him on labor questions. Two names have been suggested 
to assist the minister of labor relative to the policies 
of the federal control of employment bureaus. This active 
assistance of labor in an advisory capacity to the govern¬ 
ment has resulted in a great change in the relations of 
the government with labor. Belated though this, co-oper¬ 
ation has been, it cannot but be productive of great good. 

It has meant a great deal to labor that the government 
finally sought its co-operation. The advanced legislation 
and the Order in Council recognising the right of labor to 
organize has placed labor in a splended position; and 
promises well for the future. 




, 

* 

' 

- 

. • 

. 

. 


- 


. ; . 




‘ 







































