
University of Alberta Library 


0 1620 3069240 2 


For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton. Alberta 


Lowther, G.K. 

Geology and Petrology of the Echo 
Bay Region, Great Bear Lake, North 
west Terrirories. 1933. 
























GtX UBaw 
nmntsmm 

SIBWIIMIS 
















333 

5 











UNIVERSITY OE ALBERTA 


GRADUATE SCHOOL 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have 
read, and recommend to the Committee on Graduate 
Studies for acceptance, a dissertation on ” Geology 
and Petrology of the Echo Bay Region, Great Bear Lake, 
North West Territories w , submitted by George Kenneth 
Lowther, B.Sc.(M.E.), in partial fulfilment of the 
requirements for the degree of Master of Science. 











GEOLOGY ALL PETROLOGY OF THE ECHO BAY REGION, 


GREAT BEAR LAKE, 

NORTH WEST TERRITORIES. 

by 

George Kenneth Lowther, B.Sc.(M.E.) 
Department of Geology 
University of Alherta 


A THESIS 

Submitted to the University of Alberta 
in partial fulfilment of the requirements 
for the degree of Master of Science. 


Edmonton,Alberta 


April, 1933 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/geologypetrologyOOIowt 


TABLE OP CONTENTS 


Introduction . ................ . 1 

General Statement and Acknowledgements ...... 1 

Location and Means of Access .. 2 

Previous Work ...... 4 

General Character of the Region .. 8 

Physical Features . 8 

Climate . 10 

General Geology and Petrology ... 13 

General Statement and Table of Formations ... 13 

Sedimentary and Volcanic Complex 15 

Distribution and General Character ....... 15 

Igneous Rocks of the Basement Complex .... 16 

Sedimentary Rocks of the Basement Complex 18 

Description of Rock Specimens .. 19 

Granite and Other Acid Plutonic Rocks .. 39 

Distribution and General Character ..••••• 39 

Red Granite .. 39 

Grey Porphyritic Granite ................. 40 

Granodiorite, Syenite etc. ................ 41 

Description of Rock Specimens ••.»••••••*• 4?, 

Diabase Dikes and Sills and large Quartz Veins 53 
Distribution and General Character ....... 53 

Quartz Diabase .. 54 

Olivine Diabase .. 55 

Description of Rock Specimens 56 

Quaternary Geology .. *.. 63 

Structural Geology 64 

Economic Geology .. 66 

Location and General Character of the Deposits 66 

Mineralogy of the Deposits .. ••••••••• 67 

Origin of the Deposits .. 68 

Summary of the Main Petrological Features ...... 69 

List of works to which reference is made . 72 


















































. 


' 

' 

■ 

. 

























ILLUSTRATIONS 


Plate 1. Routes to Great Bear Lake and Norman... 3 

2. Photographs showing rugged topography 

at Great Bear Lake .. 9 

3. Geological map of Echo Bay .....12 

4. Microphotographs of Feldspar Porphyry 35 

5. Microphotographs of Feldspar Porphyry 36 

6. Microphotographs of Feldspar Porphyry 37 

7. Microphotographs of Volcanic Tuff .. 38 

8. A. Microphotogranh of Granodiorite .. 60 

B. Microphotograph of Quartz Diabase 60 

9. A. Microphotograph of Olivine Diabase 61 
B. Microphotograph of Quartz Diabase 61 

10. Microphotographs of Olivine Diabase... 62 







1 


GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY OE THE ECHO BAY REGION, 
GREAT BEAR LAKE, 

NORTH WEST TERRITORIES. 


INTRODUCTION 

General Statement and Acknowledgements . 

In the summer of 1930 pitchblende and silver 
were discovered on the eastern shore of Great Bear 
lake. This aroused widespread public interest in the 
area and resulted in several papers being published. 
Most of these have been concerned primarily with the 
economic geology and the mineralogy of the deposits. 
This paper deals more especially with the petrology. 

The writer spent the summer of 1932 examining 
and studying the rocks in the vicinity of Echo bay 
and Contact lake under the direction of Dr.D.F.Kidd 
of the Geological Survey. During this time a number 
of specimens were collected for microscopic examination 
the following winter. Additional specimens were kindly 
furnished by Mr.G.E.Moody and Mr.B.E.Souch of the 
Contact Lake Mining Company. Specimens belonging to 
the Department of Geology of the University of Alberta 
were also placed at the writerfe disposal. 

In the actual preparation of the thesis the 
writer is greatly indebted to Dr.R.L.Rutherford. for 
his assistance in the microscopical determinations and 







GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


2 


to Dr.J.A.Allan,Dr. P.S.7/arren and to Dr.R.L.Rutherford 
for their helpful suggestions as to the arrangement of 
the material. 

Location and Means of Access 

Great Bear lake lies on the Arctic Circle about 
half way between the MacKenzie river and Coronation 
gulf. With an area of approximately 12000 square miles 
it is the fourth largest body of water on the American 
Continent. It is drained by the Great Bear river which 
flows from the south west corner of the lake into the 
MacKenzie river at Port Norman,a distance of about 90 
miles. Echo bay, which has so far been the centre of 
mining activities,lies about 30 miles south of the 
”Circle” on the east shore of the lake. 

The principal routes into Great Bear lake are 
shown on the accompanying map (Pg.3). Access into the 
country can be made either by air or by water. The main 
water route commences at Waterways, the end of ” steel”. 
It leads down the Athabasca, Slave and MacKenzie rivers 
to Fort Norman, thence up the Bear river to Great Bear 
lake and across the lake to Echo bay. The total distance 
from Waterways is about 13^0 miles. Only two portages 
are necessary, one of 16 miles between Port Pitzgerald 
and Port Smith on the Slave river,and one of 3 miles on 







PLATE I 


3 



NORTHWEST TERRITORIES 
Scale of Miles 


SO 


100 


200 


_ Main aircraft route Railway 

_ Summer steamer route P. Trading post 

. Boat, scow,or canoe route M. Mining recording office 

. Portage W. Wireless or telegraph 

Department pfMines, Canada, 1932. 152 APP™'^ distance in miles between points 


Publication No. 230\ 
































GEOLOGY ATO PETROLOGY AT ECHO RAY 


4 


the Rear river. Several alternative water routes are 
shown on the map (Pg.3) hut as these involve numerous 
portages they are seldom used. Water transportation is 
confined to a period of a little over two months every 
summer, as the ice does not leave Great Bear lake until 
the middle of July and commences to form again sometime 
in September. 

The air route, like the water route, follows 
the Athabasca and Slave rivers to Great Slave lake. 

From here it crosses the lake to Fort Rae and then 
follows a chain of rivers and lakes to the eastern 
shore of Great Rear lake. The distance from the air - 
base at Fort McMurray to Echo bay by this route is a 
little over 800 miles. It can usually be made in less 
than 9 hours flying time. 

Aircraft on floats can only operate at Great 
Bear lake from the end of June till early in September. 
On the other hand, aircraft on skiis can only be used 
at Waterways from December until early in April. This 
means that aerial transportation from McMurray to 
Great Bear lake is impossible from early in September 
till December. 

Previous Work 


In 1901 the first geological work was done in 







GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


5 


the region, although considerable exploratory work 
had been done before this. Dr.J.Mackintosh Bell (l) 
of the Canadian Geological Survey spent the winter of 
1900 and 1901 at Fort Resolution on Great Slave lake. 
The next summer, assisted by Dr.C.Camsell he made a 
topographical and geological reconnaissance down the 
MacKenzie river to Fort Norman, thence up the Bear 
river to Great Bear lake, around the north and east 
shores of the lake to .the Camsell river and thence by 
a series of lakes and rivers back to Fort Resolution, 
by way of Fort Rae. In his report he speaks of the 
abundant copper and iron mineralization on McTavish 
bay and notes the frequent occurrence of cobalt bloom 
and copper green on its shores. 

During the field season Bell collected a large 
number of rock specimens. Dr.A.E.Barlow, also of the 
Geological Survey made a petrographical examination of 
these and his description of these rocks is included 
as an appendix to Dr.Bell’s report, 

Notwithstanding this report, few prospectors 
were attracted to the district owing to its remote¬ 
ness. In 1921 however, an experienced prospector,C,E. 
Sloan staked, but did not record, a copper deposit on 
Hunter bay. Later, in 1929, with increased prospecting 
activity due to the development of aerial transport- 





GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


6 


ation, this deposit was restaked and came into the 
hands of Dominion Explorers. The greater interest 
shown in the north at this time was evidenced hy the 
appearance of two articles on the Great Bear lake - 
Coppermine river district hy J.P.lTorrie (13) and G.G. 
Duncan (5). It was not until May of 1930 however that 
the discovery which drew the attention of the outside 
world was made. This was the discovery hy Gilbert 
Labine of pitchblende and silver just north of Echo 
bay, on what has since been called Labine point. The 
first description of this deposit was published that 
fall by C.W.Knight (12)* 

The importance of this discovery led the Dominion 
Government to undertake considerable work in the area 
in 1931. It was photographed by the Royal Canadian Air 
Force for mapping purposes and a geographical control 
for these photographs was established by topographical 
survey under the direction of Mr.R.C.McDonald• 

Geological field work was carried on for a period of 
two months by a party headed by Dr.D.F.Kidd, and H.S. 
Spence of the Mines Branch spent three weeks in August 
examining the pitchblende deposits. During 1931 several 
new discoveries were made, the most important being the 
discovery of silver on claims held by the Eldorado 
Company on Dowdell point, the discovery of silver and 






GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


7 


pitchblende on claims held by the Consolidated Mining 
and Smelting Company adjoining the original Eldorado 
claims and on claims held by the Northern Aerial 
Minerals Explorations Company (N.A.M.E.) on the north 
shore of Contact lake. 

The 1932 season witnessed still greater activ¬ 
ity in the field. Several new discoveries were reported, 
the most interesting being the discovery of pitchblende 
and silver in a diabase dike at the north end of 
Contact lake. Silver was also discovered some 30 miles 
south east of Echo bay in the Camsell river district. 

In addition gold was found to occur in small quantities 
in some of the veins. Geological field work was again 
carried on by Dr.D.F.Kidd. 

Since the first description of the Eldorado 
deposit by C.Knight (12) numerous papers have been 
published on the region. The general geology and general 
character of the deposits have been dealt with by 
Cameron (2,3,4) Reid (14) and Kidd (7 , 8 , 10 , 11) 
and the minerology of the deposits in articles by 
Spence (16, 17 ,. 18 , 19, 20) , Kidd (9) , 

Palache and Berman (15). 


Thomson (21) 








GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


8 


GENERAL CHARACTER OF THE REGION 
Physical Features . 

The Precambrian shield in general is a country 
of low relief, the hills and ridges seldom rising more 
than from one to two hundred feet above the level of 
the adjoining lakes. The eastern shore of Great Bear 
lake forms a direct contrast to this. Here the topo¬ 
graphy is very rugged and almost semi-mountainous. 
Precipitous cliffs, fringed with long steep talus slopes 
are abundant. Hills frequently rise abruptly from the 
water's edge to elevations six or seven hundred feet 
above the level of the lake, while inland a short 
distance elevations of eleven hundred feet are quite 
common. 

The country as a whole has the appearance of 
a deeply dissected plateau with a gentle gradient to 
the north. The highest hills occur in the vicinity of 
Richardson island in the south east corner of the lake, 
where a maximum elevation of 1750 feet above sea level 
or 1350 feet above the lake has been noted (10). These 
gradually slope off towards the north until at Labine 
point the highest hills seldom rise more than 1000 
feet above the lake. Still further north, around 
Hunter bay the hills rarely rise above 700 feet. 







£... ; ; .:v;'A;' 






yrfq&* f '* f .y i +<y$ ' “.nt $rf;v*o 

yjseT V'"; • >: :•-TI- 1 * 9 -P.:- / ". i / ^jr'lorr q.*y$ %;fj y-r • , 




xl^jjoa gnisfool s^jbX $d&$£ioQ J.o sTOfia dfioW .a 


• Xajss 




EXPIANAT I ON OF PLATE 2 

Photographs showing the rugged topography 
at Great Bear lake. 

A. Spence McDonough air base at Lindsley hay. 

B. North shore of Contact lake looking south 


east 



9 


PLATE 2 




B 







GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY-AT ECHO BAY 


10 


The shoreline is very irregular and is frequent¬ 
ly penetrated by long fiord-like inlets which in some 
cases extend inland for a distance of twenty miles. 

The whole area is dotted with innumerable lakes, which 
are frequently rock rimmed and have no visible outlets, 
although the larger ones are frequently connected by 
small intermittent streams which flow only for a short 
period during the spring of the year. 

Climate. 

Due to its location on the Arctic circle the 
seasonal variations at Great Bear lake are very marked. 
The long dark winters are characterized by continuous 
cold especially during January, February and March 
when temperatures as low as 78 degrees below zero have 
been recorded (15)* The snowfall is rather light 
reaching a depth of about three feet, but its dry 
powdery character makes travel extremely difficult. 

On the other hand the summers, although short 
are particularly delightful. On account of its northern 
latitude, continuous daylight prevails throughout the 
greater part of■May, June and July, and for a period 
of slightly over two months cool, sunshiny weather 
is experienced. 

The smaller lakes and rivers open early in June 
and remain open until about the middle of September. 






GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


11 


Great Bear lake itself however is not suitable for 
navigation till sometime during the later part of 
July. 





12 



PLATE 3 


GEOLOGICAL MAP 

ECH O BAY A REA 

GREAT BEAR LAKE N.W. T. 

SCALE ' I I N. - 2 Ml. 

LEGEN D 


Flak-ly i ncj dike 
G ran i he 
Gra nod torihe c^c- 
| | — Older Sediment's 

* Volca n i c s- 
(^) - Mineral Occurrences 


C 7 


Specimen Mys 

Locations 




Dowd el 1 
















GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


13 


GENERAL GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY 

GENERAL STATEMENT AND TABLE OF FORMATIONS 
The consolidated rocks of the region are all believed 
to be of Precambrian age. The oldest consist of a 
group of metamorphosed sediments and volcanics, 
frequently spoken of as the basement complex. These 
have been intruded by large masses of granite and 
other acid Plutonic rocks. Later than the granites 
is a group of younger, only slightly disturbed sand¬ 
stones and conglomerates. Diabase dikes and sills 
and large quartz veins cut all the aforementioned 
rocks. 

The younger sandstones and conglomerates have 
only been found to occur in the extreme north west 
portion of the region around Hornby bay and in the 
extreme south west portion, south and west of 
Richardson island. The writer did not have an oppor¬ 
tunity to examine these rocks in the field and as 
they do not occur in the Echo bay area, with which 
this report is primarily concerned, they will not be 
discussed further. 

The geological succession in the area around 
Echo bay is as follows: 









GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


14 


TABLE OR FORMATIONS 

QUATERNARY 

Gravel, silt, glacial drift 

_ 

Unconformity 


1 

Diabase dikes and sills and large 
quartz veins. 


Intrusive contact 

1 

.... . . ... | 

FRECAMBRIAN 

Granite and other acid plutonic 
rocks. 

. 


Intrusive contact 

. . ... .. .j 


Sedimentary and volcanic complex ! 

1 


A detailed petrographical description of several 
representative specimens is given after the more 
general description of each formation, so that the 
reader may obtain a better idea of the actual rock 
types. The exact location of the individual specimens 
is shown on the geological map (page 1?). 
















GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


15 


SEDIMENTARY AND VOLCANIC COMPLEX 

Distribution and General Character 

The oldest rocks have been placed into one large 
group, "known as the basement complex. They completely 
surround Echo bay and extend northward in a comp¬ 
aratively narrow band along the lake, for a distance 
of over 50 miles without any major interruptions. They 
are also reported to occur some 30 miles to the south 
and east of Echo bay in the Camsell river district (11). 

No attempt has been made to subdivide these 
rocks except in the immediate vicinity of Echo bay. 

Here Cameron (4) has divided them into two groups. The 
younger is largely sedimentary in origin and consists 
chiefly of a thick massive bed of red ferruginous 
cobble conglomerate, underlain and overlain by red 
tuffs. These beds outcrop on. the main land in the 
eastern and northeastern part of Echo bay. The western 
portion of the Echo bay area, which includes Labine 
and Dowdell points is underlain by the older group. 

It consists of a large series of interbedded sediments 
and volcanics, the sediments becoming more prevalent 
towards the bottom. 

Kidd (11) has also subdivided these rocks. His 
divisions correspond with those of Cameron except that 






GEOLOGY ATO PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


16 


he has divided the older stout) into two parts the 
upper of which consists predominantly of flows with 
some interbedded sediments and the lower, predominantly 
sediments with some interbedded flows. 

Igneous Rocks of the Basement Complex 

The igneous portion of the basement complex 
consists of a series of volcanic flows ranging in 
composition from an andesite to a trachyte. Por the 
most part they are massive, fine-grained red to black 
rocks , containing numerous phenocrysts of feldspar up 
to 3 or 4 mm. in length and slightly lighter in color 
than the groundmass. Plow banding, amygdules and frag¬ 
mental flow tops are quite common. 

Everywhere these rocks have been more or less 
metamdrphosed, but except in the vicinity of the 
intrusive batholiths their original textures and 
structures are remarkably well preserved. They appear 
to have suffered more through the action of hydro- 
thermal agencies than through any process of dynamic 
metamorphism. Although they are frequently sheared and. 
shattered it is only occasionally that they exhibit 
any tendency to develop a schistose or gneissic char¬ 
acter. On the other hand,solutions and gases have 
penetrated their pores, depositing new minerals and 
changing original into secondary minerals. This is 






17 


GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 

especially so in the vicinity of the larger intrusions 
where the metamorphism has often been so intense as to 
completely destroy the original character of the rocks. 
In many cases however the solutions and gases causing 
the metamorphism appear to have been derived from the 
flows themselves, numerous vesicles and amygdules 
testify as to the quantities of the emanated gases. 

The microscopic study of these rocks frequently 
reveals more information with regard to the chemical 
changes which have taken place in the different minerals 
than it does to the original composition of the rocks. 

In the more altered specimens, only the outlines of the 
original minerals remain. In all cases the feldspars are 
more or less altered to mixtures of carbonate, epidote, 
zoisite, sericite and chlorite,while the original ferro- 
magnesiums are nearly always completely changed to 
mixtures of chlorite and magnetite. In the vicinity of 
batholithic intrusions large quantities of epidote, 
magnetite and pynte are commonly added to the original 
constituents of the rock, and in a few cases tourmaline 
is quite abundant. 

These rocks exhibit so many variations both in 
texture and composition that rather than attempt a 
further general description here, the reader is referred 
to the petrographical descriptions of the individual 
















































■ 










GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


18 


specimens. 

Sedimentary Rocks of the Basement Complex 

The sedimentary, rocks of the "basement complex 
were not examined in any detail. They include a wide 
variety of rock types, the following* he in? the more 
common: agglomerates and tuffs, argillites, cherts, 
sandstones, quartzites, conglomerates, impure lime¬ 
stone and lean iron formation. Most of these occur 
interhedded with flows throughout the whole series, 
hut conglomerates and tuffs are especially abundant 
in the upper portions and argillites in the lower 
portions. In places these latter become quite silicious 
and take on the appearance of cherts. 

Tuffs and agglomerates, as would be expected 
from the acid character of the flows,are quite common. 
They vary considerably in grain, the individual frag¬ 
ments ranging in size up to a foot or more in diameter. 
The one specimen examined under the microscope was 
remarkably fresh, the feldspar and quartz fragments 
showing little alteration and the groundmass still 
retaining its original glassy character. 




























. 






















GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO- BAY 


19 


Description of R oc k Specimens (Basement Complex) 


Specimen number 
Name 

Occurrence 


C-l 

Feldspar Porphyry 

Volcanic flow on mainland one 

mile S.E. of Mystery island. 


Macroscopic 

The hand specimen shows a dark colored porphy- 
ritic rock with reddish brown feldspar phenocrysts, 
averaging R to 4 mm. in length, enclosed in a black 
aphanitic groundmass. Vesicles filled with quartz and 
carbonate are quite common and vary widely in size. 


Microscopic 

In thin section the minerals observed are 
plagioclase feldspar (Ab 65 An 35), magnetite, 
chlorite, epidote, zoisite, calcite and apatite. The 
texture is porphyritic. 

The groundmass is holocrystalline but is so fine¬ 
grained as to be mostly indeterminable. It contains 
numerous microlites of feldspar and is thickly dusted 
throughout with small grains of magnetite. 

The phenocrysts consist wholly of plagioclase 
feldspars which vary in outline from euhedral to sub- 
hedral. They frequently show albite twinning and 
measurements on these twinning lamellae in sections 
perpendicular to X show them to be andesine of a 








GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO HAY 


20 


composition Ab 55 An 35. Z on 010 in these sections is 
about 75 decrees. 

Practically all the phenocrysts show evidence of 
corrosion around their borders. The majority while still 
retaining their crystal outline show a bleached zone 
of varying width around their margins. A few have 
remarkably irregular boundaries and are corroded through¬ 
out . 

The rock has suffered considerable alteration, 
the phenocrvstic feldspars in some cases being changed 
entirelv to chlorite, which in this slide shows a part¬ 
icularly fine abnormal blue interference color. In 
other cases epidote, zoisite and carbonate have result¬ 
ed. The alteration to a large extent has probably been 
due to the gases given off by the flow itself. Numerous 
a,mygdules occur throughout the slide, the larger ones 
having a small central filling of carbonate surrounded 
by quartz. A ring of chlorite usually envelopes the 
wh. ole amyg d u 1 e . 


Specimen number C-2, 2A, 2B. 

Name HeIdspar Porphvry 

Occurrence Volcanic flow 1000 feet S.W. 

of the north end of Campbell 
lake. 






GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


21 


Macroscopic 

A dark colored porphyritic rock containing long 
lath-shaped phenocrysts of red feldspar up to 5 mm. in 
length in a dense "black groundmass. Embedded in the 
groundmass are numerous rounded, somewhat irregular 
masses of silica and carbonate taken to be amygdules. 

Microscopic 

The rock consists essentially of large plagio- 
clase phenocrysts (Ab An 32) enclosed in a crypto¬ 
crystalline groundmass. The latter contains numerous 
granules of magnetite and microlites of feldspar. 

The feldspar phenocrysts are, for the most 
part, long and lath-shaped averaging about 4 mm. in 
length by about 1.^ mm. in width. Some however are 
almost square in outline. A few have rounded edges, 
probably due to resorption. Practically all show albite 
twinning and in a few cases carlsbad twinning is also 
present. Extinction angles, measured in sections per¬ 
pendicular to the negative bisectrix determine the 
composition to be in the neighborhood of Ab 68 An 32. 

Z on 010 in these sections is about 77 degrees and on 
001 is about 14 degrees. The feldspars have undergone 
considerable alteration, chiefly to eridote and zoisite 
although some calcite frequently results. 







GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


22 


Probably the most interesting feature of these 
slides are the amvgdules. Most of the fillings exhibit 
a marked concentric arrangement. The central portion 
consists largely of calcite, which is surrounded in 
turn by thin enveloping layers of chlorite, hornblende 
and biotite, zoisite and a somewhat wider layer of fine¬ 
grained silica. In a few cases the amygdules do not 
show this well-marked concentric structure and the 
fillings consist largely of quartz with some zoisite, 
calcite, hornblende and biotite, and fine-grained 
silica irregularly spaced throughout. The whole is 
usually enveloped by a ring of chlorite. In a very few 
cases the amygdaloidal fillings consist almost entirely 
of hornblende and biotite. 

Specimen number C-3 

Name Feldspar Porphyry 

Occurrence Volcanic flow between Bay 66 

and Contact lake. 


Macroscopic 

A greyish black porphyritic rock containing 
white lusterless feldspar phenocrysts in a dull grey¬ 
ish black groundmass. 


• Microscopic 

Under the microscone the following minerals 
were recognized: plagioclase feldspar, magnetite, 
chlorite, epidote, zoisite, calcite, sericite and 










GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


23 


leucoxene. The texture is porphyritic. 

The phenocrysts consist principally of plagio- 
clase. They vary in outline from euhedral to subhedral 
and range in size up to 4 mm. by 2mm. No idea of their 
composition could be obtained owing to the alteration 
which obscures practically all the albite twinning. 

This alteration has resulted largely in the development 
of sericite although epidote and zoisite are also quite 
abundant. In a few cases the phenocrysts have been com¬ 
pletely changed to epidote and chlorite. 

Other irregular areas of chlorite* epidote and 
magnetite are all that remain of some original ferro- 
magnesium phenocrysts. 

The groundmass is largely crypto-crystalline 
and presents the same clouded appearance as the pheno¬ 
crysts* It is thickly speckled throughout with fine- 
grains of magnetite and a few microlites of feldspar 
are visible. Some secondary calcite and a white luster¬ 
less opaque mineral probably leucoxene occur rather 
commonly throughout the groundmass. 


Specimen number 
Name 

Occurence 


C-4 

Heldspar Porphyry 
Volcanic flow 500 feet S.W. 
of the west shore of ^ay 66 


Macroscopic 9 M i eras e r fri'c 


A purplish black rock very similar in appearance 









GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


24 


to C-3. It consists essentially of highly altered 
feldspar phenocrysts in a confused groundmass, probably 
largely feldspar. The groundmass is thickly speckled 
throughout with fine grains of magnetite. 

Zoisite, epidote and sericite are all common 
alteration products of the phenocrvstic feldspars. A 
tendency is shown for the alteration to be more intense 
towards the centres of the crystals. This is no doubt 
due to zoning, the more basic interior portions of the 
crystals being more easily attacked than the outer more 
acid portions. 

Circular aggregates of quartz grains occur 
throughout the slide. They appear to be secondary and 
in all probability are amygdaloidal fillings. 

Specimen number C-5 

Name Eeldgrar Porphyry 

Occurrence Volcanic flow between Bow 

lake and the S.W. arm of 

Echo bay. 

Macroscopic 

A dark massive rock containing phenocrysts of 
reddish colored feldspar up to 3 mm. in length in a 
very fine-grained groundmass. The phenocrysts often 
exhibit rounded edges. 


Microscopic 

Microscopical examination reveals the following 










GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


25 


minerals: plagiociase feldspar (Ab 60 An 40), quartz, 
biotite, magnetite, apatite, eridote, zoisite and 
chlorite. The texture is porphyritic. The rock presents 
a very confused appearance due to alteration. The 
groundmass is a very fine-grained crystalline aggregate 
of magnetite, green biotite and chlorite with what 
appears to be quartz and feldspar. 

The phenocrysts consist entirely of plagioclase 
feldspars which in many cases are almost completely 
altered to mixtures of zoisite, epidote, chlorite and 
and kaolinite. They show marked evidence of corrosion 
in their rounded borders and frequent embayments. Their 
composition was determined as Ab 60 An 40 by measure¬ 
ment of extinction angles in sections perpendicular 
to Z. X on 001 in these sections gives angles from 12 
to 16 degrees. 

Stringers and circular aggregates of fine-grained 

quartz are quite common. The individual grains average 

the 

about 0.1 mm. while aggregates frequently exceed 2 mm. 
in diameter. The boundaries of these areas are often 
very conspicuous, due to a segregation of fine particles 
of magnetite in the groundmass at their borders. When 
these areas come in contact with the feldspar pheno- 
crvsts their boundaries frequently become verv in¬ 
definite and the quartz appears to have replaced the 





GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


26 


feldspar to a considerable extent. Biotite, chlorite 
and magnetite, of a similar character to that found 
in the groundmass occur in these aggregates as well as 
numerous crystals of apatite. 

It is thought that these areas represent cavity 
fillings by later silicious solutions. At any rate they 
are much later than the main portion of the slide. The 
biotite, chlorite and part of the magnetite in the 
groundmass may also have resulted from the infiltration 
of these same solutions. 


Specimen number 
Name 

Occurrence 


C-6 

Feldspar Porphyry 
Volcanic flow N.E. end of 
Copper lake. 


Macroscopic 

A dense purplish black rock which weathers to a 
distinctly reddish color. A few cleavage laths of 
feldspar, slightly lighter in color than the ground- 
mass are visible. Pyrite occurs sparingly disseminated 
throughout the rock. 


Microsc opic 

Microscopic examination shows the rock to consist 
essentially of long lath-like phenocrysts of plagioclase 
(Ab 70 An 30) in a fine-grained holocrystalline ground- 
mass containing numerous grains of magnetite and micro- 









GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


2 7 

lites of feldspar. Large crystals of magnetite, biotite, 
pvrite and tourmaline are quite abundant as accessories. 
Chlorite and serpentine occur .as alteration products. 

The feldspar phenocrysts vary considerably in 
size, but average from 1 to 3 mm. in length and from 
.2 to.6 mm. in width.They are arranged in a sub-parallel 
manner and are sometimes twisted and contorted. As the 
extinction is not undulatory it is probable that both 
structures are due to movement during solidification 
while the magma was still in a viscous state. The borders 
of the phenocrysts are very irregular and ragged due to 
corrosion and their surface often presents a clouded 
appearance due to alteration. Measurements of Z on 010 
in sections perpendicular to X show the composition of 
the phenocrysts to be about Ab 70 An 30. 

A fine-grained greenish aggregate, probably 
serpentine occurs quite abundantly filling cavities 
and occupying small cracks. Intimately associated with 
it and frequently enclosed by it are crystals of 
magnetite, pyrite, tourmaline, biotite and chlorite. 

The tourmaline especially is quite abundant and shows 
a deep bluish brown rleochrism. All these minerals have 
been introduced, or at least have resulted from the 
introduction of foreign material probably derived from 
the adjacent granite. 







GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


28 


Specimen number C-7, 7 A 

Name Feldspar Porphyry 

Occurrence Volcanic flow about one mile 

S.W. of Bay 66. 


Macroscopic 

A dark greenish black porphyritic rock in which 
numerous laths of feldspar slightly lighter in color 
than the .vroundmass are visible. 


Microscopic 

The rock consists essentially of large feldspar 
phenocrysts enclosed in a groundmass of feldspar and 
epidote. 

The phenocrysts vary considerably in size and 
quite commonly exceed 6 mm. in length by mm. in 
width. In general they have been so decomposed that the 
twinning lamellae are only occasionally visible. The 
alteration is especially intense towards the centres 
of the phenocrysts, a phenomenon which can be explained 
by zoning, the more basic inner portions of the crystals 
being less resistant to alteration than the outer compar¬ 
atively acid portions. The composition of the phenocryst- 
ic feldspars could only be determined in a very general 
way. They show marked undulatory extinction, so that 
even when the twinning lamellae are visible the extinc¬ 
tion angles are very difficult to measure. In the zone 
perpendicular to 010 however, extinction angles up to 








GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


29 


11 degrees were measured and the sign was determined 
as negative. This makes the feldspar at least as basic 
as Ab 70 An 30. 

The groundmass consists almost entirely of 
equidimensional gfanular plagioclase in which the in¬ 
dividual grains average about 0.2 mm. in diameter. 
Undulatory extinction frequently gives these grains the 
appearance of quartz, but when examined under high 
magnification very fine albite twinning striae are often 
visible, and no grains were found which would give a 
uniaxial figure. Epidote occurs abundantly as small 
particles at the grain boundaries of the feldspar, and 
in addition occurs in large patches and stringers 
throughout the slide. A few grains of magnetite occur 
in the groundmass. 


Specimen number C-8 

Name Feldspar Porphyry 

Occurrence Volcanic flow about 2500 feet 

S.W. of Bay 66. 


Macroscopic 

The rock is of a somewhat heterogeneous character 
varying in color from an orange red to a purplish brown. 
Close examination shows numerous lath-like crystals of 
feldspar verv nearly the same color as the groundmass. 

A dull greenish mineral, probably epidote is quite 


abundant 









GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO RAY 


30 


Microscopi c 

Under the microscope the rock presents a very 
confused appearance due to the alteration of its 
constituents. The original feldspar phenocrysts are 
very irregular in outline, and are practically complet¬ 
ely changed to epidote, chlorite, kaolinite and red iron 
oxide. A few remnants remain in which the albite twinn¬ 
ing lamellae are still visible. The groundmass presents 
the same highly altered appearance as the phenocrysts, 
so that the latter are only visible under crossed nicols 

Stringers and large irregular patches of epidote 
chlorite and zoisite are very abundant. The epidote 
frequently exhibits a marked spherulitic tendency and 
shows the black cross characteristic of such structures. 
Some tourmaline and heulandite (?) are also present. 


Specimen number 
Name 

Occurrence 


C-9 

Feldspar Porphyry 
Volcanic flow between Bay66 
and Contact lake. 


Macroscopic 

A dark aphanitic rock containing a few small 
lusterless phenocrysts of reddish colored feldspar. 
Pyrite occurs sparingly disseminated throughout the 
hand specimen. 








GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


31 


Microscopic 

In thin section the rock is seen to consist of 
feldspar, magnetite, sericite, calcite, epidote, 
chlorite, pyrite and heulandite (?). The texture is 
porphyritic. 

The phenocrysts and the groundmass are composed 
largely of feldspar, which in places is somewhat alter¬ 
ed to calcite, epidote and chlorite. The boundaries 
between the individual crystals are very indefinite, 
and it is frequently impossible to distinguish the 
original phenocrysts from the groundmass. 

Magnetite occurs occasionally in small narrow 
veinlets, but more frequently it has penetrated the 
pores of the feldspars and appears as fine srecks 
throughout the entire rock. 

Numerous vesicles up to 2 mm. in diameter are 
quite common. These are filled with a zeolite which ex¬ 
hibits the optical properties of heulandite, except 
that it lacks the cleavage. A few small circular grains 
of pyrite surrounded by chlorite are also present. 


Specimen number 
Name 

Occurrence 


C-10 

Metamorphic Rock 

North shore of Contact lake 

near granite contact. 







GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


32 


Macroscopic 

The hand specimen shows a fine-grained mottled, 
red and black rock through which pyrite is quite 
abundantly disseminated. The black areas consist chief¬ 
ly of magnetite and occur in large irregular patches up 
to 1 inch across, as well as in fine stringers and vein- 
lets. The reddish material is too fine-grained to 
determine microscopically. 

Microscopic 

Microscopic examination shows the rock to have 
suffered intense metamorrhism. It consists largely of 
a confused interlocking groundmass of -feldspar and 
quartz, throughout which are large areas of magnetite, 
lesser amounts of pyrite and considerable bluish green 
amphibole. Galcite, chlorite, epidote, zoisite and red 
iron oxide are the common alteration products. 

The magnetite is definitely secondary. It has 
been injected along numerous fractures in the rock and 
has replaced the original constituents over large 
areas. It frequently shows polysynthetic twinning 
which produces a sort of pseudo-cleavage. The larger 
areas of magnetite are generally surrounded by a 
narrow rim of zoisite and epidote. A light bluish 
green slightly pleochroic hornblende is also quite 
commonly associated with the magnetite. It gives 







GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


33 


extinction angles up to 20 degrees and is frequently 
considerably altered to chlorite. Secondary calcite, 
and red iron oxide occur quite abundantly in the 
groundmass. 


Specimen number 
Name 

Occurrence 


C-ll 

Tuff 

Pyroclastic bed underlying 
conglomerate on the east 
shore of Echo bay. 


Macroscopic 

The hand specimen shows numerous angular to sub- 
angular fragments of milky quartz, feldspar and a red 
chertish looking material cemented in a dense reddish 
brown matrix, numerous small quartz eyes are visible. 

Microscoric 

In thin section the rock is seen to consist of 
angular to subangular fragments of quartz, plagioclase 
and fine-grained crystalline aggregates in a glassy 
groundmass heavily stained with ferric oxide, and 
consisting originally of volcanic ash. Secondary calcite 
and chlorite occur as alteration products. 

The fragments vary markedly in size ranging up 
to 4 mm. in diameter, although they average .5 mm. 

About 60 percent of them are composed of quartz, 30 
percent of feldspar, and 10 percent of crystalline 


















GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


34 


aggregates too fine-grained to determine. The ^eldsnar 
fragments are quite fresh and frequently show albite 
twinning. Measurements of extinction angles in sections 
perpendicular to the two bisectrices show them to have 
a composition about Ab 60 An 40. Sections perpendicular 
to Z give angles from 12 to 15 degrees for X on 001, 
while sections perpendicular to. X give angles from 69 
to 73 degrees for Z on 010. 








y*iyjrfc['io c i < ijB<f8-tX'6 r ‘!. lo rfq;djSiip to i.e • £ 
jb rid iw 9 l jjb§yaSr k ^nxwons (I - 0 .osqs) 
t sd-X0lB0 bo goilli'i iB'i.tnso Il-ema 
yd LsdnuoTius t sd*iBijp yd bebHuoiiua 
iCojBld 9 dT .ed-iiolrfo "to ^hxtc woixsn b 
a (d-rf^xl y'lBfixbdO) . 9 d id'srx^Bm ax 

■ 

YTVffcrio*!.. J.o *g£ir sododqoiox .FT 

"IBCf 8 M 9 % ■ bsbo '1‘lti 9 7$r? I WO 0 ( I -a • 9 3d 3 ) 

~dua od ■•-' Bribedy9 deddo dnB;dsveoor -rfq 
’ -rfoj89ld ridf xr/ siavToonsriq r.BCi.pJb C 3~ I^dbafl 
, ; :-; 1 0 O X n ■ X 8 "• O ‘I C' • « a 4 V 3 ip *16 d. b 9 
■ 

, 



EXPLANATION OP PLATE 4 


A. Microphotograph of Peldspar Porphyry 
(spec. C-l) showing amygdule with a 
small central filling of calcite, 
surrounded by quartz, surrounded by 
a narrow ring of chlorite. The black 
is magnetite. (Ordinary light). 


B. Microphotograph of Peldspar Porphyry 
(spec. C-l) showing corroded feldspar 
phenocryst and other euhedral to sub- 
hedral feldspar phenocrysts with bleach¬ 
ed borders. (Crossed nicols). 



35 


PLATE 4 



2 MM. 


A 



B 









y.TVjiq '• bLl s •_ 'Icy icyi ^6 Xo • , o to! b . A 

d’xoljBo bn.s sfwip &nd.Vo os ' ( -r . osgo 
91^ aslubsymus sj i oI,bo 9 rfT . e 9 l.ubyvmj 3 
n 10 r« ? 9 cf i t 0 1 rlo' To a x t v;cf b 9 b nu01 t u s 
(0b! cf) fiiaxos e 3$ i j 0 i: o r .bna 9 brxslcf 
.(driyil; jsoxIxs bsnivST^-enxT bn& 


yiyrfq to c l tAo abl e ? « 0 • jfiqq^ryocf c&fqo to 1 0 . E 

TJsqsMs't ■br-XaTToo yrriocoo ( S~b . osq i) 

< si qIs c v 0 t y I x. I■ r. 9 aqay■:oonsriq 
t 9Xx.tc .cor baa sbiisIdaTo ;i r::;r xoollxi 
*£3 i T i A bor:i..c-0.0 i-1 yo bs:bnooTTU 3 




EXPIAT'TAT I O'M OP PLATE 5 


A. Microphotograph of EeIdspar Porphyry 
(spec. C-2) showing quartz and calcits 
amygdules. The calcite amygdules are 
surrounded by rings of chlorite, horn- 
blende and biotite, zoisite (black) 
and fine-grained silica (light). 


B. Microphotograph of EeIdspar Porphyry 
(spec. C-2) showing corroded feldspar 
phenocrysts and a large vesicle, 
filled with hornblende and biotite, 
surrounded by fine-grained silica. 



36. 


PLATE 5 




B 









Y i Y. rfcf i o *t sr* ~ hr-, % ; ' 'oxtyo ^ r ' oioi ; . A 

l9llI^:x‘f/-nr r -> : " -r « osgs / 

8X 3 Y*I 90 Cl9 TJS&cbh.L ,9. •/ VO i I IB 

rttiw JtesxerTo yfytl'W ^ShtMuois jb ni 
; sailsrrruoT ~*xT .eelirrun^ 

erri'ineg'ie& - f B 


YTViiq'ioA xeg&fclM' 1 . lo rb. B^rocforfqoyoiM .X 
ylrteiii 9 y y b X’ y Fixy o X o. (q**3 » o sq s ) 
b rii eXc V7 0cr;scic. yBabble x bs'isXI-.s 

bnB yyA-IA: -'A 

'' :,'. . { ■i'l&p) 3 X 0 hiq 9 





EXPIAEATI OE OF PIATE 6 


A. Microphotograph of Feldspar Porphyry 
(spec. C-6) showing sub-parallel 
arrangement of feldspar phenocrysts 
in a fjrouridmass thickly charged with 
magnetite granules. Tr-- Tourmaline: 
Sr= Serpentine. 


B. Microphotograph of Feldspar Porphyry 
(spec. C-7) showing large highly 
altered feldspar phenocrysts in a 
groundmass of feldspar (light) and 
epidote (dark). 



37 


PLATE 6 



0_„ 2 MM. 

A 



Q 2 MM. 


B 













'iTIrT oinloIoV Jo is it] 

io sJ-nsmsBil’ s^iworEs (Il-O .osgs) 
bsrciBis-snil: has ssjsIoo jUsIg ? s£%eup 
y;as.sl§ & nx s^xlljsff v^io 

• a&smbnuom 


;■ :' ■ ■•'*- ^ •' ' 

. ;>/. ®.o 2 IV be-2. -rvcj ',':• ••' ■ .. . - 





s* . Mi 




EXPLANATION OP PLATE 7 


Microphotograph of Volcanic Tuff 
(spec. C-li) showing fragments of 
quartz, plagioclase and fine-grained 
crystalline aggregates in a glassy 
groundmass. 


A. Ordinary light. 

B. Crossed nicols. 



30 


PLATE 7 



0_______ 2 MM. 

A 



B 





GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


39 


GRANITE AND OTHER ACID PLUTONIC ROCKS 

Distribution and General Character 

Intruding the older sediments and volcanics are 
large masses of granite and other related intrusive 
rocks. One large body lies immediately south of Echo 
bav and Dowdell point and extends southwards for a 
distance of over twentv miles, to the southern end of 
Richardson island, and east nearly to the base of 
Conjurer bay. Another large mass lies east of Lindsley 
bay and Echo bay, while still a third outcrops on 
islands along the coast from Echo bay to Hunter bay. 
All these granites may or may not be of the same age. 

Near the border, the granite frequently grades 
into syenite, granodiorite, or diorite, and these 
phases often occur as small isolated stocks cutting 
through the old complex near the granite contacts. 

Red Granite 

The large batholithic mass lying south of Echo 
bay is remarkably uniform in character. It consists 
almost entirely of medium to coarse-grained reddish 
colored rock composed essentially of feldspar, quartz 
and biotite. In places the feldspars become quite large 
(often exceeding an inch in crossection) and give the 
rock a porphyritic appearance. 














GEOLOGY ANT) PETROLOGY AT ECHO HAY 


40 


Microscopic examination shows the predominant 
feldspar to he orthoclase, although acid plagioclase 
is sometimes present. Quartz is abundant, often making 
up 50 percent of the slide. It occurs both as allotrio- 
morphic crystals and as micropegmatitic intergrowths 
with the orthoclase. The principal ferromagnesium is 
bictite, although hornblende is sometimes present in 
minor amounts. The feldspars occasionally show consider¬ 
able alteration to sericite and kaolinite, and the 
biotite to chlorite. 

Grey Porphyritic Granite 

Pikes of a grey porphyritic granite occasionally 
break through the more common red granite. These were 
apparently intruded shortly after the main mass solid¬ 
ified and before it cooled. Although the contact between 
the two is always quite definite, neither shows chilled 
margins against the other. In this granite, large 
striated feldspar phenocrysts, up to l-g- inches in 
length occur in a coarse groundmass of quartz,feldspar 
and mica. 

Under the microscope both acid plagioclase and 
orthoclase are found to be present. The phenocrysts 
consist entirely of plagioclase, while the groundmass 
contains both orthoclase and plagioclase . The most 
abundant constituent of the groundmass however, is 







GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECRO RAY 


41 


quartz. "Riotite is again the most important ferro- 
magnesium, although some hornblende is usually present. 

Granodiorite,_Syenite etc. 

Towards the borders of the main batholithic mass 
the granite frequently becomes somewhat darker in 
color due to the percentage of the ferromagnesiums 
increasing,and the amount of quartz decreasing. 

Examined microscopically these phases commonly 
have the composition of a granodiorite. They show an 
excess of plagioclase over orthoclase, and the ferro¬ 
magnesiums make up as much as 60 percent of the slides. 
Quartz has generally decreased until it composes some¬ 
what under 5 percent. On the whole these phases have 
suffered much more alteration than the main granite 
mass-.The feldspars are commonly altered to kaolinite, 
sericite, epidote and carbonate, while the ferro- 
magnesium constituents are often completely changed 
to aggregates of chlorite and fine-grained magnetite. 
The minor intrusions near the granite contacts are 
very similar in appearance to the border uhases of 
the granite. If anything, they show a little less 
quartz and the plagioclase is a little more basic. 
Occasionally they are quite fresh, but they generally 
show considerable more alteration than the main mass 
of the granite. 









GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


42 


The other granite batholiths were not examined in as 
great detail as the one just described, but for the 
most part they are very similar in appearance* Like it 
they are composed of red, coarse to medium-grained 
granite, which often becomes slightly more basic 
towards the margins. The grey porphyritic granite,was 
not observed in these intrusions, although it may 
quite possibly be present. 


Description of Rock Specimens (Granite and other acid 


plutonic rocks) 


Specimen number 
Name 

Occurrence 


G-l, 1A, IB, 

Red Granite. 


Large granite batholith on 
Dowdell point, about 1000 
feet south of the contact. 


Macroscopic 

A coarse-grained reddish colored rock consisting 
chiefly of red feldspar, quartz and biotite. A few dull 
greenish areas, probably epidote, occur throughout the 
rock. 

Microscopic 

Examination of the thin sections shows the follow¬ 
ing minerals to be present: orthoclase, quartz, biotite, 
apatite, magnetite, sericite, kaolinite, chlorite and 
epidote. The texture is granitic. 






















GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


43 


About 60 percent of the rock is composed of 
orthoclase, which appears to be of two ages. The older 
has undergone advanced alteration to sericite, whereas 
the younger is still comparatively fresh being only 
slightly clouded by kaolinite. 

Quartz, although the next most abundant mineral 
is very subordinate in amount to the orthoclase. It 
occurs both in the form of allotriomorphic crystals 
and as micrographic intergrowths with the orthoclase. 

The femic constituents consist almost entirely 
of a dark green, highly pleochroic mica, which in place 
is altered to chlorite around its borders. 

Areas of chlorite and calcite, snrinkled through 
out with fine specks of magnetite occur. These appear 
to have resulted from the decomposition of feldspar and 
mica, as these latter are sometimes observed rather 
intimately mixed and altering to calcite and chlorite 
at their respective borders. 

All the calcite in the slide has not resulted 
from the decomposition of feldspar. In places it has 
been introduced and occurs as small veinlets cutting 
through the other constituents of the rock. 







GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


44 


Specimen number G-2, 2A. 

Name Grey Porphyritic Granite 

Occurrence Dike cutting large granite 

batholith about 10 miles due 
south of Dowdell point. 

Macroscopic 

A coarse-grained porphyritic rock containing 
large white tabular crystals of feldspar, frequently 
well over an inch in length, in a groundmass of quartz, 
feldspar and mica. The groundmass itself is quite coarse¬ 
grained, the individual constituents often exceeding a 
quarter of an inch in crossection. 

Microscopic 

Microscopic examination shows the rock to consist 
largely of feldspar, quartz and biotite. The accessories 
include hornblende, apatite, titanite and magnetite. 
Sericite, kaolinite, calcite and chlorite occur as 
alteration products. 

The feldspathic components include both plag- 
ioclase and orthoclase, the plagioclase being slightly 
in excess as it composes the large phenocrysts as well 
as appearing in the groundmass. Measurement of extinction 
angles in sections perpendicular to X show the composit¬ 
ion to be about Ab 75 An 25. Z on 010 in these sections 
varies between 80 and 85 degrees. As far as can be 
determined there is little difference in composition 









GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


45 


"between the phenocrystic plagioclase and those in the 
sroundmass. Both the plagioclase and the orthoclase 
are considerably clouded by decomposition products, 
kaolinite and sericite being developed to the largest 
extent although calcite and chlorite also occur. The 
alteration, in the case of the plagioclase is much more 
intense towards the centres of the crystals, probably 
a result of zoning. 

Quartz, after feldspar is the next most abundant 
mineral in the slide. It occurs in the usual manner 
forming coarse irregular aggregates, which are allotrio- 
morphic towards the other constituents of the slide. 

Femic minerals make up about 10 percent of the 
rock. Biotite is the most abundant, but a bluish green 
pleochroic hornblende also occurs. Magnetite, titanite 
and epidote are quite common as accessories throughout 
these areas. 


Specimen number G-3 

Name Altered Granodiorite 

Occurrence Border phase of granite 

batholith near the south east 
end of Contact Lake. 


Macroscopic 

A dark colored, coarse-grained, granitic rock 
made up of dark ferromagnesiums and red feldspars, the 







GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


46 


ferromagnesiums being slightly in excess. Quartz is 
scattered sparingly throughout the hand specimen. 

Microscopic 

Under the microscope the following minerals 
were recognized: plagioclase feldspar, quartz, chlorite, 
magnetite, sericite, zoisite, red iron oxide, apatite 
and zircon. The texture is hypidiomorphic. 

Feldspar, originally the most abundant mineral 
in the rock is now almost entirely altered to sericite 
and zoisite and is heavily coated with red iron oxide. 
Occasionally remnants remain on which the albite 
twinning striae are still visible. 

Quartz occurs in small amounts filling the inter¬ 
spaces between the other minerals and by its freshness 
shows up in marked contrast to the much decomposed 
feldspars. It shows undulatory extinction. 

The original ferromagnesiums have been completely 
altered to chlorite and magnetite and no clue as to 
their original character remains.Areas of fine-grained 
relatively fresh granular feldspar, interspersed with 
chlorite appear to be considerably later than the main 
portion of the rock. Apatite and zircon occur rather 
sparingly as accessories. 










GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


47 


Specimen number G-4 

Name Altered Granodiorite 

Occurrence South east end of Contact lake 

in border phase of granite 
batholith. 

Macroscopic 

A medium to coarse-grained, reddish black rock, 
consisting of red feldspar and black ferromagnesium 
material in about equal amounts. A small amount of 
quartz is visible in the hand specimen. 

Microscopic 

The rock is very similar to G-3, and like it 
consists essentially of plagioclase feldspar, chlorite 
and quartz. The feldspars have undergone advanced 
alteration to sericite, epidote and zoisite so that the 
albite twinning lamellae are only occasionally visible. 
Primary quartz occurs in allotriomorphic crystals and 
makes up somewhat less than 5 percent of the rock. 

The femic constituents have been almost com¬ 
pletely changed to chlorite, magnetite and leucoxene, 
although a few stringers of original biotite still 
remain. Apatite occurs rather sparingly as an access¬ 


ory 






























. 




















, 

' 

. 



- 


























GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


48 


Specimen number G-5 , 5A. 

Name Granodiorite (altered) 

Occurrence Small granitic stock on 

Dowdell point. 

Macroscopic 


The hand specimen shows a dark colored, medium¬ 
grained, highly altered rock. Black ferromagnesiums 
compose about 50 percent of the rock and the remainder 
consists of dull reddish to greenish material, probably 
largely feldspar. 


Microscopic 

Examination under the microscope shows the rock 
to bonsist of feldspar, quartz, hornblende, biotite, 
magnetite, sericite, zoisite, chlorite and ferric oxide 
The texture is granitic. 

The feldspathic components make up at least 30 
percent of the rock and include both orthoclase and 
plagioclase. Both have undergone advanced alteration 
to sericite , chlorite, zoisite and occasionally to 
epidote. In spite of this the albite twinning lamellae 
are occasionally visible in the plagioclase. Measure¬ 
ment of extinction angles in the zone perpendicular to 
010 show them to be at least as basic as Ab 60 An 40. 
They probably have a. considerable range however, as 
most of the crystals show evidence of zoning in that 








GEOLOGY AM PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


49 


the alteration is more pronounced towards their centres. 

Quartz stands out in marked contrast to the 
feldspars due to its fresh, unaltered appearance. Never¬ 
theless it is only present in minor amounts and makes 
up less than 5 percent of the slides. 

The femic minerals constitute well over 40 
percent of the slides. A pale yellowish green hornblende, 
showing rather weak pleochrism is by far the most 
common. Biotite and chlorite occur however and 
frequently result as alteration products from the 
amphibole. Magnetite and apatite occur in small 
quantities throughout the ferromagnesium areas. Calcite 
is present in small veinlets traversing the other 
constituents of the slides. 


Specimen number 
Name 

Occurrence 


G-6 

Granodiorite 

Small stock adjoining large 
granite batholith on the 
north shore of Contact lake 


Macroscopic 

A fairly dark, medium-grained rock consisting of 
light colored feldspars and dark ferromagnesium material 
in about equal amounts. The feldspars vary in color 
from pale red to greenish white. 


Microscopic 








GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


50 


Under the microscope the minerals seen are 
orthoclase, plagioclase, quartz, preen amphibole, 
biotite, chlorite, epidote, kaolinite, calcite, 
magnetite, apatite and zircon. The texture is granitic. 

The feldspathic components make up at least 60 
percent of the slide and include plagioclase and ortho¬ 
clase in about equal amounts. The plagioclase is very 
difficult to determine owing to its marked undulatory 
extinction. Two distinct species are present however. 
One shows broad indefinite twinning while the other 
shows very fine, well defined albite twinning frequent¬ 
ly combined with carlsbad twinning. The first was 
determined as Ab 70 An 30 by measuring extinction 
angles in sections perpendicular to X. The margins of 
the second frequently lack twinning and show a 
different extinction from the interior. This is 
probably a result of the soda-lime feldspar being 
replaced by potash feldspar. Both plagioclase 
feldspars show considerable alteration to sericite 
and calcite. The potassium feldspar is comparatively 
fresh. 

Interstitial quartz occurs in minor amounts 
and quite frequently has corroded the surrounding 
minerals. In addition it sometimes occurs as micro- 
graphic intergrowths with the orthoclase. All told 






GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


51 


however,it makes up less than 5 percent of the slide. 

A small amount of biotite is present, but for 
the most part the original ferromagnesiums have been 
completely altered to chlorite, epidote and secondary 
magnetite. Primary magnetite, apatite and zircon occur 
quite commonly as accessories, while later calcite and 
quartz fill small fractures traversing the rock. 


Specimen number 
Name 

Occurrence 


G-7 

Syenite. 

Small intrusion between Bay66 
and Contact lake. 


Macroscopic 

The hand specimen shows a pink colored rock 
consisting chiefly of feldspar. Epidote is abundant as 
large patches and sub-parallel veins averaging a quarter 
of an inch in width. 


Microscopic 

In thin section the rock is seen to consist of 
plagioclase feldspar, epidote, zoisite, chlorite, 
calcite and garnet. The texture is granitic. 

Two feldspars are present in about equal amounts. 
One is very fresh and shows narrow well defined albite 
twinning lamellae. Measurement of extinction angles in 
sections perpendicular to X show it to have a 
composition Ab 75 An 25. Z on 001 in these sections 









GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


52 


is about 10 degrees and on 010 is about 82 degrees. 

The other feldspar is not so well twinned and shows 
marked undulatory extinction. It was determined to 
have a composition Ab 55 An 45. Sections perpendicular 
to Z give 18 degrees for X on 001. 

Numerous large patches and well defined veins 
containing epidote, zoisite, chlorite and calcite 
occur throughout the slide but have not altered the 
surrounding rock to any extent. Garnets are quite 
common in these veins. 






GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


53 


DIABASE DIKES AND SILLS AND IARGE QUARTZ VEINS 

Distribution and General Character 

Diabase dikes and sills and M giant" quartz veins 
cut all the other rocks o^ the region including the 
younger sandstones and conglomerates which occur in the 
vicinity of Hornby bay and south west of Richardson 
island. 

The "giant” quartz veins, while not as numerous 
as the dikes are nevertheless of frequent occurrence. 
They range up to five hundred feet in width and one, 
in the vicinity of Hunter bay has been traced for a 
distance of over seven miles (10). Another very 
conspicuous one extends for a short distance along the 
shore of Jabine point, nlunges into the lake and re¬ 
appears again to form a number of small islands along 
the coast. 

In reality these are not simple quartz veins, 
but consist rather of a complex network of smaller 
quartz veins varying in width from a fraction of an 
inch up to several feet, and frequently enclosing 
large masses of country rock, especially near their 
borders. Many of the individual veins show banding 
and occasionally vugs are present containing large 
crystals of quartz having comb structure. The veins 







GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


54 


are generally barren of any metallic mineralization, 
although in Dianes they contain specular hematite and 
at Hunter bay one o^ the veins contains chalcoryrite, 
bornite and chalcocite. 

Xj 

The diabase dikes and sills are very numerous 
and are of all sizes varying in width from a few 
inches up to two hundred feet. They have been observed 
cutting all the rocks of the region except the "giant" 
quartz veins, with reference to which their age is not 
known. The largest of these bodies is a nearly flat- 
lying dike which occurs throughout the greater part of 
the area and outcrops frequently between Contact lake 
and Hunter bay. It averages about one hundred and 
twenty feet in thickness. 

The writer’s collection of these rocks is in¬ 
complete but an examination of the specimens on hand 
shows that lithologically there are at least two 
diabases present. One is a rather fresh appearing 
quartz diabase and the other a much decomposed olivine 
diabase. The quartz diabase is considerably more 
abundant than the olivine diabase and makes up the 
large flat-lying dike. 


Q.uartz Diabase 

Macroscopically the quartz diabase is a fresh 







55 


GEOLOGY AYD PETROLOGY AT ECFO 

appearing, rather fine-grained, greenish grey to green¬ 
ish black rock in which the ophitic texture can frequent¬ 
ly be recognized in the hand specimen. It weathers to 
a typical reddish brown color and in the larger outcrops 
usually exhibits good columnar jointing. 

The microscopic examination of these rocks shows 
them to consist of laths of labradorite the interstices 
between which are filled with colorless augite and 
varying amounts of primary quartz. The quartz is 
frequently intergrown with feldsnar to form a micro- 
pegmatitic intergrowth. Skeleton crystals of magnetite 
are quite numerous and unusually well developed. 

Epidote, zoisite, hornblende, chlorite and sericite 
are present to some extent as alteration products 
although the rock is usually quite fresh. 

Olivine Diabase 

In the hand specimen the olivine diabase is 
very similar to the quartz diabase except that it 
lacks the fresh appearance so characteristic of the 
latter. 

Examined under the microscoue the original 
ferromagnesiums in all cases are almost completely 
altered to dull green areas of chlorite and serpentine. 

A few remnants of colorless augite occasionally remain 







GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


56 


However and give some clue as to the original character 
of the ferromagnesiums.The feldspars are remarkably well 
preserved although they too show considerable alter¬ 
ation to sericite, chlorite, epidote and calcite. 


Description of Ro c k Specimens (Diabase dikes and sills) 


Specimen number D-l, 1A. 

Hame Quartz Diabase 

Occurrence Large diabase dike on Labine 

point. 


Macroscopic 

A fine-grained, fresh appearing, greenish black 
rock in which numerous small feldspar laths are visible. 


Microscopic 

The examination of the thin section shows this 
rock to consist of augite, labradorite, quartz, 
magnetite, green hornblende, biotite, chlorite, 
zoisite, epidote and calcite. The texture is onhitic. 

The femic constituents make ud at least 60 
percent of the slide. By far the most abundant is a 
colorless pyroxene, determined as augite. It occurs in 
allotriomorphic crystals up to 3 mm. in crossection 
and is frequently twinned. It is generally quite fresh 
but occasionally shows considerable alteration to 
zoisite and green hornblende which in turn alters to 












GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


57 


biotite. Some slightly larger areas of green hornblende 
may be primary. Another ferromagnesium mineral is now 
completely altered to chlorite. The original cleavage 
is still apparent but no traces of the mineral itself 
remain. 

The plagioclase is distinctly subordinate in 
amount to the augite.lt occurs in the form of long, 
relatively narrow rods nearly always showing albite 
twinning. In sections at right angles to the twinning 
lamellae extinction angles up to 36 degrees were 
measured showing that the feldspar is at least as 
basic as Ab 60 An 40. Sericite and epidote are common 
alteration products resulting from the decomposition 
of the feldspar. 

Quartz occurs throughout the slide, almost as 
abundantly as the feldspar and is frequentlv intergrown 
with it. This intergrowth appears to have been the 
last portion of the rock to solidify as it always fills 
the interstices between the other minerals. In places 
it takes on a marked radial arrangement and under 
crossed nicols shows the black cross characteristic of 
such spherulitic structures. 

Large skeleton crystals of magnetite are quite 
common throughout the slide 






















































' 






. 











' 



, 

























GEOI-OGV AND PETROLOGY AT ECFQ RAY 


Specimen number 
Name 

Occurrence 


D-2,2A- 

Olivine Diabase 
Diabase dike cutting granite 
between Contact lake and 
Bow lake. 


Macroscopic 

A dark greenish black rock, weathering to a 
reddish brown color. Numerous dark colored laths of 
feldspar are visible throughout the hand specimen. 

Microscopic 

Examined under the microscope the rock is seen 
to consist of plagioclase feldspar, serpentine, 
chlorite, augite, olivine, magnetite, quartz, pyrite, 
sericite and calcite. The texture is ophitic. 

About 70 percent of the slide is composed of 
plagioclase feldspar. It occurs most commonly as long 
slender euhedral crystals (up to 2 mm. in length) 
frequently showing albite twinning. The maximum 
extinction, in sections normal to 010 is 25 degrees 
showing it to be labradorite of a composition Ab 55 
An 45. Another feldspar, less common than that just 
described occurs as tabular crystals commonly showing 
no twinning but when twinning is present it is much 
broader than that observed in the labradorite. This 
was determined as Ab 75 An 25 by measuring extinction 
angles in sections perpendicular to the positive 









■ 
























. 






, 

























GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


59 


Bisectrix. Both feldspars show undulatory extinction. 

Irregular areas of light green serpentine fill 
the interstices between the feldspars and frequently 
completely surround them. It is practically non- 
pleochroic, shows no cleavage and in most cases gives 
no indication as to its origin. Occasionally however 
a few remnants of olivine and colorless pyroxene 
remain. 

Quartz occurs throughout the slide in a few 
small rounded grains which appear in all cases to be 
secondary. It shows no tendency to form micropegmatitic 
intergrowths with the feldspar as is so common in the 
quartz diabase. 

Magnetite and pyrite occur quite commonly as 
accessories, the former frequently being present as 
skeleton crystals. Some of the finer grains however 
are undoubtedly secondary and along with the 
serpentine have resulted from the breakdown of the 
ferromagneslums• Sericite, chlorite, epidote and 
calcite are present in minor amounts as alteration 
products from the feldspar. 










sd" £ to i beg. r ■ • " n • £ ? o rfq o t o l' . A 

ol •lomo xiT^oI.Le •;■..■ { - - ■ • o c 'a 3 ) 

n 9 9 W j 9 cf 6. 9 0 •£ Cf.3 T 9 o H 1 £ u £ C11 I S '! T •••'. ! 0 








EXPLANATION OP PLATE 8 


A. Microphotograph of Granodiorite 

(spec. G-6) showing allotriomorphic 
quartz filling interspaces "between 
the plagioclase feldspars. 

(crossed nicols) 


B. Microphotograph of quartz diabase 
(spec. D-l) showing micropegmatitic 
intergrowth of quartz and feldspar, 
twinned augite and feldspar laths, 
(crossed nicols) 



60 




PLATE 8 


MM. 


0 


B 


l MM 








PLA TE 9 











9 a jb <f jb i d 9 &t , v' i I Q • 010 i' 1 . A 

erfd'jsl TBg'aJbl9l srrgworfa ( P-C .osqa) 

* jfojsld . sni.tnsa'iss ycf ftsbnr.fotrrtra 







-tiXPTANATI ON 0 ? PLAT E 9 


A. Microphotograph of Olivine Diabase 
(spec. D-2 ) showing feldspar laths 
surrounded by serpentine. Black - 
magnetite. 


B. Microphotograph of Quartz Diabase 

showing skeleton crystals of magnetite. 



61 




PLATE 9 


I MM. 


B 














9ejBd\siG sniviLO Jo rfqBTSod’orfqo'ioiM 
9.sXq 9*i Qni^fig qiaa %n x w o if a (£- G «■• o s g a ) 
* . 9n9XQ*XYq 339l^el03 ^ni 

. 9d"id-9n^£iTT 


.A 


93bcT£|G 9jV rri,V V;. erfqo'ioV. V 

[ r art r v i V xrpfcV&K-. i "'-r . r>9<T3 ) 


,c r ;/>r . 09q3 ) 




^ni*X9d-|^ 










EXPLANATION OF PLATE 10 


A. Microphotograph of Olivine Diabase 

(spec. D-2j showing serpentine replac¬ 
ing colorless pyroxene. Black = 
magnetite. 


B. Microphotograph of Olivine Diabase 
(spec. D-°) showing olivine altering 
to serpentine. 



62 


PLATE 10 



o 


I MM. 


B 






GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO HAY 


63 


QUATERNARY GEOLOGY 

During Pleistocene times the region was glaciated by 
the continental ice sheet, which in this area moved 
almost due east. Glacial striae are very abundant 
and especially well preserved on the hill tops. 
Boulder clay and other morainal material is 
relatively scarce however and only occurs in the 
valleys between the hills. 

Old gravel beaches are quite common and have 
been observed as much as five hundred feet above the 
present lake level. 






GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


64 


STRUCTURAL GEOLOGY 

The general lack of Horizon markers in the district 
makes structural determinations difficult. In general 
however the earlier rocks of the complex have suffer¬ 
ed much more deformation than the later ones. On the 
western portion of Lahine point and on Dowdell point 
the beds are nearly vertical, striking approximately 
north and south and dipping from seventy to ninety 
degrees east. Further east the dips gradually decrease 
until in the upper portion of the complex, dips over 
thirty degrees are uncommon. The fact that dips in 
the flat-lying diabase vary for the most part from 
zero to twenty degrees suggests that most of the 
folding took place before the intrusion of this dike. 

Probably the most conspicuous feature of the 
whole region is the large amount of fracturing which 
the rocks have undergone. The more pronounced 
fractures run in an easterly to north easterly 
direction but there are numerous transverse breaks 
running very nearly at right angles to these. The 
rocks in these zones are usually very highly 
shattered, so that erosion frequently develops long 
linear depressions which can be traced for several 
miles. The lake basins, river valleys and. the longer 













GEOLOGY AKD PETROLOGY AT ECHO PAY 


65 


"bays of Great Bear lake frequently parallel these 
breaks suggesting that they too are structurally 
controlled. 

One major fault is known to occur in the area. 
It extends from the east arm of Echo bay past Cameron 
bay to Lindsley bay in a north easterly direction, 
paralleling the main fracture system. Reid (14) 
states that the eastern side of this fault has been 
downthrown at least one thousand feet. It is -probable 
that many other faults roughly paralleling the major 
structural directions of the region are present. 








GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


66 


ECONOMIC GEOLOGY 

Location and General Character of the Deposits 

Up to the present time five important mineral 
occurrences are known in the Echo "bay region. Two of 
these are located on Labine point on claims held 
respectively by the Eldorado Gold Mining Company and 
the Consolidated Mining and Smelting Company. Two are 
located near Contact lake, one on the north shore 
owned by the Bear Exploration and Radium Company, and 
one between Contact lake and Bow lake owned by the 
North West Radium Minerals Limited. The fifth occurrence 
is owned by the Eldorado Company and is situated on 
Dowdell point. Native silver and pitchblende have been 
found on all these properties except on Dowdell point 
where silver only has been found. 

The mineralization occurs in shear zones which 
roughly parallel the two main structural directions 
of the region. On Labine and Dowdell points these 
shear zones cut through sediments and volcanics of 
the old complex. North of Contact lake they occur in 
a small granodiorite stock which adjoins the large 
granite batholith lying to the south. Between Bow 
lake and Contact lake the veins are found in a highly 
altered olivine diabase dike which cuts through granite. 














GEOLOGY AND METROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


67 


The limited amount of development work done 
seems to indicate that the nature of the country rock 
has had a profound influence on the character of the 
veins. The older sediments and volcanics have been much 
broken and shattered by the shearing movements. In 
consequence the veins in these rocks are comparatively 
wide and the values penetrate considerable distances 
into the wall rocks. On the other hand the granodiorites 
have not been shattered to the same extent so that the 
veins are relatively narrow and well-defined and the 
values are almost wholly confined to the veins. 
Practically no work ha,s been done on the deposits in 
the diabase. On the surface however they appear to 
resemble the veins found in the granodiorite rather 
than those in the older sediments and volcanics. 

Mineralogy of the Denosits 

The mineralogy of the deposits is extremely 
complex. In addition to silver and pitchblende the 
following minerals have been reported: (listed roughly 
according to their abundance) chalcopyrite, 
chalcocite, bornite, tetrahedrite, pyrite, arseno- 
pyrite, galena, niccolite, chloanthite, smaltite, 
cobaltite, skutterudite, rammelsbergite, safflorite, 
baumhauerite, native bismuth, argentite, pyrargyrite, 






GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


63 


tennantite, sphalerite, pyrrhotite, magnetite, hematite, 
limonite, manganite, psilomelane, cobalt bloom, azurite, 
malachite, annabergite, uranophane, native copper, 
native gold and lead. 

It is impossible at present to give the exact 
order of deposition of the above minerals. All 
investigators are agreed however that pitchblende is 
one of the earliest minerals and that the silver 
mineralization is much later. 

Origin of the Deposits 

Until July of 1932 it was generally assumed that 
the mineralization was derived from the granite. All 
occurrences up to that time had been found in fractured 
zones near granite contacts. Kidd while believing the 
main mineralization, including the pitchblende, to be 
associated with the granite suggested that the silver 
mineralization might possibly be connected with the 
diabase dikes. The discovery in July of 1932 of both 
pitchblende and silver in a diabase dike cutting 
granite however, shows that in this case at least the 
mineralization is later than the large granite batholith 
lying south of Echo bay. Before any definite conclusions 
can be drawn concerning the origin of the ores it will 
be necessary to establish more accurately the relative 
ages of the different intrusive bodies. 



























' 







. 




- 


. 





















GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


69 


STTMMARY PE MAIN PETROLOGICAL T?EATITRFS 

The consolidated rocks in the Echo bay area are all of 
Precambrian age and fall into three divisions: 

Diabase dikes and sills 

Granite and other acid plutonic rocks 

Sedimentary and volcanic complex. 

The igneous rocks of the complex are all of 
volcanic origin. They include a wide variety of acid 
to intermediate flows, exhibiting varying degrees of 
metamorphiSm. For the most part they have suffered 
chemical rather than mechanical alteration so that 
their original textures and structures are remarkably 
well preserved. Macroscopically they are massive, 
fine-grained red to black rocks containing numerous 
phenocrysts of feldspar, generally lighter in color 
than the groundmass. They frequently show flow band¬ 
ing., fragmental flow tops and numerous vesicles and 
amygdules. Pillow structure, however is entirely 
lacking. Under the microscope the feldspar pheno¬ 
crysts in most cases are seen to be extensively 
altered to sericite, epidote, zoisite, carbonate and 
chlorite and frequently only the outlines of the 
original minerals remain. The groundmass is generally 
too fine-grained to wholly determine but usually 













' 

■ 

. 

. 









GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


70 


contains numerous feldspar microlites and fine grains 
of magnetite. 

The sedimentary portion of the complex consists 
largely of argillites, conglomerates, tuffs and 
agglomerates. These ocour interbedded throughout the 
whole formation, but argillites are especially abundant 
near the base and conglomerates near the top. 

The rocks of the basement complex have been 
intruded by large masses of granite and smaller masses 
of syenite and granodiorite. The relative ages of these 
intrusions are not known. The large batholiths are 
remarkably uniform in character and consist chiefly 
of a coarse to medium-grained, fresh appearing,reddish 
colored rock composed essentially of orthoclase, quartz, 
and biotite, with minor amounts of plagioclase, 
hornblende, apatite, zircon and magnetite. The rock 
frequently becomes more basic towards the margins of 
the batholiths and with a decrease in quartz and an 
increase in plagioclase and ferromagnesiums it takes 
on the composition of a granodiorite or syenite. The 
rocks in the minor intrusions are very similar to 
those found in the border phases of the larger 
batholiths. The central portions of the granite 
intrusives are usually quite fresh but the border 
phases and minor intrusions frequently show consider- 






GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


71 


able alteration, the feldspars to kaolinite, sericite, 
epidote and carbonate and the biotite to chlorite. 

All the aforementioned rocks are cut by numer¬ 
ous diabase dikes and sills. Lithologically there are 
at least two different diabases present. One is a 
fresh appearing quartz diabase which consists essential¬ 
ly of long laths of labradorite, the interspaces 
between which are filled with colorless augite, 
magnetite, and a micropegmatitic intergrowth of quartz 
and feldspar. The other is a highly altered olivine 
diabase in which the original ferromagneslums are 
almost completely changed to aggregates of serpentine 
and chlorite. A few remnants of olivine and colorless 
pyroxene occasionally remain. The relative age of these 
two diabases is not known, although both of them are 
younger than the granite. 








GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


72 


LIST OP WORKS TO WHICH REFERENCE IS MADE 

1. Bell,J.M.: Report of the Topography and Geology 

of Great Bear Lake,Geol.Surv.,Canada,Ann.Rept., 
vol.XII,Pt,C,lyOl. 

2. Cameron,A.E•: Geology at Echo Bay,Great Bear Lake, 

N.W.T.,Northern Miner,March 4,1932 . 

3. Cameron,A.E.: Geology of Echo Bay,Great Bear Lake, 

N.W.T. Presented to the Science Association of 
the University of Alberta,March 17,1932. 

4. Cameron,A.E.: Mineral Development and Mining 

Possibilities,Great Bear Lake,N.W.T. 
Unpublished Lecture,Nov.1932. 

5. Duncan,G.G.: Exploration in the Coppermine River 

Area,N.W.T.,Bull.Can.Inst. Min. Met., March 1931 
pp. 363-382.,Trans.Can.Inst.Min.Met.,1931,pp. 
124-143. 

6. Ellsworth,H.V.: Rare Element Minerals of Canada, 

Geol.Surv.,Canada,Ec.Geol.Series No.2,1932. 

7. Kidd,D.P.s The Great Bear Lake - Coppermine River 

District,Can.Min.Jour•,Jan.1932,pp.5-12. 

8. Kidd,D.F.s Great Bear Lake - Coppermine River Area, 

Bull.Can.Inst.Min. Met.,Sept.1932,pp.512-526. 

9. Kidd,D.F.: A Pitchblende - Silver Deposit,Great 

Bear Lake,Canada,Economic Geology,vol.27,No.2, 
March-April,1932,pp.145-159. 

10. Kidd,D.F.: Great Bear Lake - Coppermine River Area, 

MacKenzie District,N.W.T.,Geol.Surv.,Canada, 
Summ.Rept.,1931,pt.C,pp.47-69. 

11. Kidd,D.F•: Great Bear Lake Developments,1932. 

Presented at Annual Western Meeting,Can.Inst. 
Min. Met.,Dec.1932. 

12. Knight,C.W.: Pitchblende at Great Bear Lake,Can. 

Min.Jour.,Oct.10,1930,pp.962-976. 

13. Norrie,J.P.: Prospecting and Exploration in the 

Great Bear Lake - Coppermine River Area,Bull. 
Can. Inst .Min.Met., March 1.931, pp.349-362 . 







GEOLOGY AND PETROLOGY AT ECHO BAY 


73 


14. Reid,J.A.: The Minerals of Great Bear Lake, Can. 

Min.Jour.,February 1932,pp.61-68. 

15. Palache,C. and Berman,H.: Oxidation Products of 

Pitchblende from Great Bear Take,American 
Mineralogist,vol.XVIII,January 1933. 

16. Spence,H.S.: Radium-Bearing Minerals from Great 

Bear Lake,Mines Branch,Memorandum Series No.48, 
March 1931. 

17. Spence,H.S.: Occurrences of Pitchblende and Silver 

Ores at Great Bear Lake,N.W.T.,Mines Branch, 
Memorandum Series No.51,Oct.1931. 

18. Spence,H.S.: Radium and Silver at Great Bear Lake, 

Min.Met.,March 1932,pp.147-151. 

19. Spence,H.S.: The Pitchblende and Silver Discoveries 

at Great Bear Lake,N.W.T.,Mines Branch, 
Investigation of Mineral Resources and the 
Mining Industry,Iy31,pp.55-92. 

20. Spence,H.S.s Character of the Pitchblende Ore from 

Great Bear Lake,N.W.T.,Can.Min.Jour.,Dec.1932. 

21. Thompson,E.: Mineralogy of the Eldorado Mine,Great 

Bear lake,N.W.T.,University of Toronto Studies 
Geology,Series No.32,1932. 







u 













B29741 


