For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 

A PRELIMINARY STUDY OF TICK AND HOST 

IN RELATION TO 


WESTERN CANADIAN TICK-BORNE DISEASES 



JOHN DOUGLAS GREGSON 









©X MBBIS 

abwimimis 

aiwosaiinsi* 








Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/gregson1936 




A PRELIMINARY STUDY OF TICK MD HOST 


m RELATION . XQ ..JESIKBN . Q M M 1, Jl tS S ASSS ■ 


by 


John Douglas Gregson> B.A. (British Columbia) 


A Thesis Submitted in Candidacy for the Degree 


of 


Master of Science. 


The University of Alberta 
April 1936. 







UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have read 
and recommend to the Committee on Graduate Studies for acceptance 
a thesis entitled, "A Preliminary Study of Tick and Host in 

H 

Relation to Western Canadian Tick-borne Diseases, submitted by 
John Douglas Gregson, B. A*, in complete fulfilment of the 
requirements for the degree of Master of Science. 







^ \ 


£.1 


(9 . 





























■ 
















■ 





TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

INTRODUCTION .. .. .. .. .. 1 

The Tick in Relation to Disease 1 

Nature of Studies Followed in This Thesis 1 

Extent of Studies 3 

Sources of Material for Study 3 

PART I 

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF WESTERN CANADIAN TICK- 

BORNE DISEASE .. .. .. .. .• 4 

1. Outline of the Ecology of the Ticks Studied in 

This Thesis 5 

2. General Description of Mouth Parts and Alimentary 

Tract of the Tick (Dermacentor andersoni Stiles) 9 

3. Histology of Stomach and Process of Digestion 22 

4. The Microscopic Picture of Normal Tick Excreta 29 

5. The Tick in Relation to Disease 32 

6. The Status of Tick-borne Disease in Canada 33 

7. A Discussion of the Less Knorai Microorganisms 

Invading Tick Tissues 35 

8. Observations to Determine the Extent of Invasion 

into Tick Tissues by Microorganisms 40 

PART II 

STUDIES ON THE RATE OF TICK FEEDING IN RELATION TO DISEASE 53 
• General Discussion of Tick Paralysis 53 


1 








Page 

2. Study of Host end Tick Tissues in Relation to 

Varying Feeding Rates of Individual Ticks 56 

3. Study of Host and Tick in Relation to Seasonal 

Variations in Rate of Tick Feeding 63 


APPENDIX 

TECHNIQUE FOR THE STUDY OF TICK FLORA 

1. Methods Employed for Infestation Studies 

2. Technique for Cross Anatomical Studies 

3. Histological Technique for Tick Sectioning 

4. Bacteriological Technique for Study of Tick-borne 

Microorganisms 

5. Artificial Media for the Culturing of Tick-borne 

Microorganisms 

6. Elementary Technique for In Vitro and In Vivo Studies 


of Tick Tissue 


73 

73 

75 

75 

78 

80 

84 


SUMMARY 

REFERENCES 

PLATES 


87 

89 

91 


* * * 




LIST OF TEXT FIGURES 

Page 

TEXT FIGURE 1 

Alimentary Tract of Dermacentor andersoni tick 18 

TEXT FIGURE 2 

Dorsal View of Capitulum of Dermacentor andersoni 19 
TEXT FIGURE 3 

Ventral View of Capitulum of Dermacentor andersoni 19 
TEXT FIGURE 4 

Salivary Gland of Unengorged Adult Dermacentor 

andersoni tick 20 

TEXT FIGURE 5 

Salivary Gland of Replete Adult Dermacentor 

andersoni tick 20 

TEXT FIGURE 6 

Section Through Salivary Gland of Unengorged 

Adult Dermacentor andersoni Tick 21 

TEXT FIGURE 7 

Section Through Salivary Gland of Replete Adult 

Dermacentor andersoni Tick 21 

TEXT FIGURE 8 

Section Through Gut of Dermacentor andersoni in 

Various Stages of Engorgement 28 

TEXT FIGURE 9 Tick Group G. 61 

TEXT FIGURE 10 Tick Group C. 61 

TEXT FIGURE 11 

Comparison of Host Tissue Below Slow and Fast 

Feeding Ticks 62 




LIST OF PLATES 


Page 


PLATS I 

Figure 1, 

Invading Bacteria in Moose Tick 92 

Figure 2. 

Intracellular Pigmented Bodies in 

Dermacentor andersoni 92 

PLATE II 



Figures 1 and 2. Intracellular Yeast-like 



Bodies 94 

PLATS III 

Figure 1* 

Histology of Engorging Tick Gut 96 

Figure 2. 

Intracellular Globules in Engorging 

Tick Gut 96 

PLATS IV 

Figure 1. 

Histology of Replete Tick Gut 98 

Figure 2. 

Disintegrating Epithelial Nuclei 

in Tick Gut 98 

PLATE V 



Figures 1 and 2. Disintegrating Tick Gut 100 


PLATS VI 

Figure 1, 

Smear of Gut Inclusions 102 

Figure 2, 

Mitochondria 102 

PLATE VII 



Figures 1 and 2. Smear of Intracellular 

Globules on Agar 104 





ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


I express my gratitude to both Professor Win. Rowan 
and Dr. Winifred Hughes of the Department of Zoology for their 
unfailing interest in my studies and for the kindly help and 
advice which they have given to me at all times. 

My thanks are also extended to Professor H. Strickland, 
Professor G. Hunter, Dr. R.M. Shaw, Dr. S. Keeping, and Dr. J.W. 
McGregor of the Departments of Entomology, Biochemistry, Bacteri¬ 
ology, Dermatology, and Pathology, all of whom have given me valuable 
assistance when my studies have invaded their fields of learning. 

I express my sincere appreciation to Mr. R. Lister for 
his patient care of experimental animals and willing help in pre¬ 
paring reagents and slides. 

For the generous supplies of material and data or refer¬ 
ences pertaining to such, I am obliged to members of the Dominion 
Entomological Branch at Kamloops, B.C. 

The expenses for various reagents and equipment were 
largely defrayed by an adequate grant from the Carnegie Corporation 


Research Fund 



INTRODUCTION. 


The Tick in Relation to Disease; 

The tick has long been a menace to animal life, acting as 
a carrier of dangerous diseases, but it is only with the recent ad¬ 
vance of civilization into existing tick areas, that this menace has 
been recognized as a problem of vital economic importance. Not only 
have severe losses of live-stock occured in all parts of the world, 
such losses having involved several hundred animals in certain areas, 
but human life is itself threatened. Mention need only be made of 
the deadly Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever in this respect, the death 
rate of which may be as high as 90 % of those affected. 

Western Canada, one of whose primary industries is stock 
raising, is faced with a series of tick problems which threaten this 
phase of the country’s resources. In spite of this, studies of the 
tick in relation to disease are practically untouched in this area. 

The investigation of this relationship presents some of the most inter¬ 
esting biological problems to the student, and promises greater security 
from disease to the animal life of the country. 

Nature of Studies followed in this Thesis; 

The writer, although realizing the many problems presented 
by tick-borne diseases in Canada, has, in this present thesis endea- 




ns 











' 














. 
















' 













































2 


voured only to prepare a way for their future study. The elementary 
work that has been followed has been divided into two phases, each of 
which has been little studied hitherto, and of which a thorough know¬ 
ledge is necessary before it is advisable to proceed to the more advanced 
lines of investigation. 

The first of these phases deals entirely with the tick as 
a vector of animal diseases. A preliminary description of the internal 
anatomy of the tick is followed by histological and cultural studies 
of pathogenic and non-infectious organisms, particular attention being 
paid to symbionts. A large amount of data on the technique of tick- 
flora studies has been collected from other workers, and with the 
writer's comments, has been listed at the end of this paper. 

The second phase is devoted to observations and experiments 
in connection with the feeding rates of ticks - a factor that plays 
an important part in the production of tick paralysis. The obscurity 
of this problem, and the lack of any previous work on it, has neces¬ 
sarily made these studies of a very general nature. The writer, how¬ 
ever, considers them well justified, even if they serve only to expose 
clues that will provide a basis for further investigation. All in¬ 
festation experiments are hampered by the difficulty of caging ticks 
safely on animals, and satisfactory results are gained only at the 
expense of a great deal of time and attention. This fact seriously 
limits the number of animals under observation. Since hosts and 
ticks probably show a great physiological and anatomical variation, 
it is obvious tha,t the conclusions drawn from the ensuing experiments 












can only be of an indicative nature 


Extent of Studies: 

Little mention has been made of tick-borne diseases that 
are not found in Canada, and references to studies that have been made 
in other countries are cited only when their nature has a direct bear¬ 
ing upon the type of work dealt with herein. 

The taxonomy of ticks, their life histories, and ecology 
are all subjects with direct bearing on disease studies. Mention 
of these however, has, for the greater part, been omitted, as they con¬ 
stitute entirely separate lines of study, reference to which may be 
obtained from various entomological libraries and research stations. 

Sources of Material for Study: 

The ticks used for the following investigation were of a 
large collection of various stages of Dermacentor albipictus and D, 
andersoni, together with occasional specimens of Haemaphysalis leoorus 
palu strife and Ixodes ricinus . The majority of these specimens were 
gathered by the writer at Kamloops, B.C#, during the Christmas of 1935* 
Through the kindness of the Dominion Entomological Branch at Kamloops, 
samples of ticks were frequently received from different parts of the 
province# These were of particular interest for disease study and 
the writer is most grateful for the cooperation that has been shown 
while he was away from his duties at that laboratory. 






























' 







, 











■ 
















„ , 


















■ 

























Part I. 


- 4 - 


AN INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF 
WESTERN CANADIAN TICK"BORNE DISEASES. 

The order Acarina is divided into t?/o groups, the mites 
and the ticks. The latter are subdivided into the families Arga- 
sidae (Soft ticks), and Ixodidae (Hand ticks). Both of the two 
genera of the Argasidae 8re represented in British Columbia. The 
Ixodidae , a larger family, is comprised of some eight genera, three 
of which are native to Canada. These genera, Dermacentor Koch, 
Haemaphysalis Koch, and Ixodes Latreille, include fifteen of the 
eighteen known species of Canadian ticks. 

The ticks studied in this thesis are confined entirely to 
the Ixodidae of Western Canada. This group of parasites has been 
extensively investigated during recent years at the Dominion Entomo¬ 
logical Laboratory, Kamloops, B.C. In spite of these efforts, how¬ 
ever, a knowledge of the taxonomy and life histories of the rarer 
species is still incomplete, end therefore the following introduction 
to the ticks will be limited to the most important species. These 
will be discussed briefly in order of economic standing, their life 
cycles being given to acquaint the reader with their host relationship. 






























• 















* 





































' 























1. Outline of the Ecology of the Ticks 

Studied in this Thesis . 

Dermacentor andersoni Stiles. This tick is common through¬ 
out the dry belts of British Columbia end Alberta, extending north as 
far as Quesnel, and is most prevalent in the Okanagoui and Kootenay 
districts. In the United States it is recognized as an extremely 
dangerous pest, being the vector of Rocky Mountain spotted fever. 

This disease has, fortunately, only appeared in Canada once or twice, 
although its presence has been indicated in Kamloops ticks. In Canada 
this tick is responsible for deaths among animals and humans by para¬ 
lysis. It is also capable of transmitting tularaemia. 

D. andersoni , in all of its stages, feeds upon the blood of 
various warm blooded animals, both domestic and vdld. Its hosts in¬ 
clude dogs, cattle, horses, sheep, deer, mountain goats, squirrels, 
rabbits, weasels, mice, groundhogs, and grouse. It also readily en¬ 
gorges upon men. 

Mating of the adult ticks takes place on the host while they 
are engorging. When replete, the female drops to the ground and in 
about two weeks egg laying commences. During the following ten days 
or so, as many as eight thousand eggs may be deposited, after which 
the tick shrivels and dies. 

Under favourable conditions, the eggs develop in a month 
into larval, or "seed' 1 ticks, which have only three pairs of legs. 

This stage usually appears about midsummer. Its acquisition of a 
host depends upon the chance passing of a rodent, commonly a groundhog. 







6 


Attachment having been accomplished, the larva commences to feed. At 
the end of five or six days it becomes replete, drops off, and after 
a dormant period of two to eight weeks, moults into the eight-legged 
nymph. 

The nymph repeats the process, again awaiting a suitable host, 
which may be a rodent or bird in this instar. It engorges, drops to 
the ground when replete, and then undergoes a quiescent period of vary¬ 
ing duration, to emerge from its nymphal case, a fully formed adult. 

The host for this final stage is a larger animal, such as 
a dog, deer, cow, or man. Attachment takes place a few hours after 
the chance arrival of the tick upon the animal, and engorging lasts, 
under optimum conditions, about seven days. 

During this period the female tick increases tremendously 
in size and may reach a length of half an inch. The male does not 
enlarge to any appreciable extent. Mating occurs, and the life cycle 
starts anew. 

It is thus seen that the interval elapsing between the larval 
and adult form may be very long, dependent upon the fortune of the 
various stages to meet with a host. The shortest time in which a 
life cycle can be completed is one year. Adult ticks have been kept 
for three years without a host, and even after this period, have fed 
normally and oviposited. Although the first two instars appear to 
feed rea-dily at any time of the year, providing the weather conditions 
are suitable, the adults exhibit a strange inability to engorge after 
spring has passed. 

















. 










Dermacentor albipictus Packard 


This tick is very similar 


to the preceding species in general appearance. Its distribution 
is somewhat wider. Besides inhabiting the dry belt, the species, or 
variations of the species, are found in the foot-hills as far north 
as Grande Prairie, Alberta, and along the coast of British Columbia. 

It is of considerable economic importance to ranchers as large numbers 
of horses are often lost by heavy infestations. As a vector of at 
least one disease of moose, it undoubtedly plays an important part in 
large game epidemics throughout the Northern States end Canada. 

Its life cycle differs from that of D. endersoni in that all 
the three instars axe passed on one host. Contrary to the usual season 
of tick activity, this parasite feeds during the winter, dropping from 
its host early in spring. 

Haemaphysalis leporus palustrairs Packard, known as the rabbit 
tick, has a very wide distribution. It is a common parasite of wild 
rabbits in British Columbia and Alberta, and on account of its ability 
to transmit tularaemia, is thought to be responsible for the periodic 
epidemics among these animals. 

The genus is an important one from a disease aspect, being 
responsible, in other parts of the world, for the spreading of piro- 
plasms, 8nd rickettsia bodies, and possibly for a fatal case of human 
paralysis in Australia. 

The life cycle is passed over three hosts in which may be 


included rabbits and grouse 






Ixodes ricinus californicus (Banks)* Known in British 


Columbia as the Coast tick* This species has in recent years been 
the cause of considerable attention about the residential outskirts 
of Victoria and Vancouver, as it is a common parasite of humans, dogs, 
and deer* Although not yet known to be the vector of any diseases, 
as is the European variety, this tick is capable of producing serious 
slow healing ulcers at the site of attachment. 

The early life cycle was first observed by Dr* Jellison (15). 
Further studies of its hosts have been made by the writer (12) and 
other members of the Dominion Entomological Station at Kamloops. 

The larvae and nymphs commonly infest the Coast lizard 
( Gerrhonotus multicarinatus Blainville). From this reptile they 
pass to mammalian or avian hosts. Their period of adult activity 
appears to last through the year, but is at its height during the 
early warm spring days. 

The life histories of these four ticks, alone, illustrate 
the importance of these parasites to animal life in general. Their 
assortment of hosts, together with their wide distribution and con¬ 
tinuity of activity, makes them extremely powerful agents for the 
dissemination of disease among human, domestic, and wild life. 














' 










2. General Description of Mouth Parts 
and Alimentary Tract of the Tick 

(Dermacentor andersoni Stiles). 

A primary requisite for a study of tick-borne diseases is 
a thorough knowledge of the alimentary tract of the tick, together 
with an understanding of the digestive changes that occur within it. 

To this end, the following description has been compiled by the writer. 

The alimentary tract (Fig. 1) may be divided into distinct 
regions consisting of the buccal cavity, the salivary glands and ducts, 
pharynx, oesophagus, stomach and caecal appendages, rectal tube, rectal 
sac, Malpighian tubes, anal canal and anus. The anatomy of these 
regions will be considered in their proper sequence. 

The mouth parts, being the structures which are mechanically 
responsible for the access to blood will be discussed first. These 
structures are collectively referred to as the capitulum. 

The Capitulum: 

This chitinous structure ( Figs. 2 and 3), known as the "false 
head", is composed of the basis capituli, the hypostome, the chelicerae, 
and the palps, the last structures constituting the first two pairs 
of body appendages. 

The basis capituli is a dense basal part of the capitulum. 

It articulates with the anterior part of the cephalothorax, of which 
it forms a part. The integument at the point of articulation is thin 
and permits a certain degree of extension or depression of the capitulum. 
Dorsal and lateral movements, however, are prevented by two backwardly 
















■ 

■ 




'.'j .c. 


■ < 

, 




- 








a c 


. . ..i 





■■ : :• ;i . ' 

: 

, 

■■ " 

. 

. 










- 10 


projecting ridges on the latero-dorsal margin of the basis capituli, 
the cornuae, and two dorsal projections from the cephalothorax on 
each side of the capitulum, the scapulae. The base of the basis 
capituli communicates directly with the body cavity by the capitular 
foramen through which extends the pharynx, salivary ducts, and basal 

y 

portions of the chelicerae. 

The hypostorae is a prolongation of the median and ventral 
lobes, incompletely separated by a vertical suture which dorsally forms 
a deep longitudinal groove, the hypostomal gutter. Posteriorly this 
gutter connects with the buccal cavity; anteriorly it merges into the 
flattened dorsal surface of the hypostome. The distal extremity of 
the hypostome, called the corona, is broad and blunt, and is beset 
with an irregular mass of small teeth. Behind the corona these den¬ 
ticles are replaced by definite rows of strong recurved teeth that 
extend towards the base of the hypostome. 

The chelicerae are enveloped by two cheliceral sheaths that 
lie above the hypostome. These sheaths fuse at the base, and there 
are continuous with the dorsal surface of the basis capituli. Distally 
they are armed on the upper and lateral surfaces by fine chilinous 
denticles. The chelicerae are long and hollow, and are attached to 
the sheaths near the distal end by a loose flexible membrane, thus 
allowing a retraction or protraction of the appendages. At the posterior 
end they are dilated to receive the attachment of extensor and reflexor 
muscles. At the anterior extremity each chelicera articulates with 
a pair of dentate processes known as the digits. In each pair the 















































































' 








* 




- 
























- 11 - 


longer inner digit is bidentate, “while the shorter external one bears 
three teeth. The digits are moved by muscles which extend within the 
bases of the chelicerae. According to Zebrowski (36), these digits 
contain relatively large ducts which open to the exterior by pores, 
the use of these ducts being unknown. The chelicerae and hypostome 
together constitute the piercing organs of the tick. 

The palps are paired appendages that lie closely to each side 
of the hypostome and chelicerae. Each palp consists of four segments. 
The proximal articulates with the anterior margin of the basis capituli 
and is distally fused with the second segment. The fourth or terminal 
segment is inserted in a cavity on the antero-ventral portion of the 
third segment, and may be withdrawn or extruded at will. It is the 
smallest and bears at its tip a tuft of supposedly tactile hairs. Both 
palps possess sparse irregularly placed hairs on the dorsal and ventral 
surfaces. Nine long hollow spines extend in a median anterior direc¬ 
tion from the inner ventral margins of the first and second segments 
of each side. The purpose of these spines is not clear. It may be 
noted that while the tick is feeding, the palps are forced out in a 
lateral direction, thus permitting the piercing organs to be thrust to 
their full extent into the tissue. Such a position of the palps would, 
tend to force the mentioned spines into the tissue, and from this fact, 
they may serve to excrete some substance into the skin of the host. 

The Buccal Cavity: 

This food channel is bounded dorsally by the cheliceral sheaths 


and ventrally by the hypostomal gutter. Posteriorly it becomes a 






- 12 - 


closed tube , surrounded entirely by the fusion of the cheliceral 
sheaths -with the edges of the hypostome. From here it extends back 
a short distance, ending in a sac which is termed the buccal cavity. 

A salivary duct enters at each postero-lateral corner of this sac. 

The Salivary Glands and Ducts (Figs. 4 and 5): 

The large salivary glands lie on each side of the buccal 
cavity, extending from the capitular foramen back to the stigmal plates. 
Throughout this region they are in close contact with the caecal lobes 
of the stomach, portions of the Malpighian tubes, and a ramifying mass 
of tracheal tubes. Each gland is composed of a number of lobes of 
loosely connected alveoli, which are of two kinds (Fig. 6). By far 
the greater number of alveoli are of the first type (Figs. 6, 4). Each 
of these alveoli is made up of some fifteen large nucleated cells grouped 
about a central lumen or collecting chamber, and are bordered at their 
bases by a thin basement membrane which forms the boundary of the struc¬ 
ture. 

Of these cells there are two types:- 

The first type is situated at the opening of the alveolus, 
and in cross section usually appears as a pair of large cells, one on 
each side of the duct. The nuclei are small and central, and stain 
black with haemotoxylin-eosin, red with Mallory’s and blue with methylene 
blue-eosin. The cell contents which are coarsely granular, stain red 
with these stains. 

The other type of cell makes up the greater part of the glob¬ 
ular alveolus. Their nuclei are larger, stain a lighter blue with 


any of the stains mentioned above, and, as a rule, are more distally 






' 

























































- 



- 13 - 


placed. The cell cytoplasm is less granular and stains only a blue 
or purple. 

Of counts taken through a hundred random alveolar sections 
in the gland of one tick, 36 % of the cells were of the granular form. 
(This complies closely with several reconstructed alveoli in which it 
was usually found that 5 eosin staining cells surrounded the opening 
of the lumen, and that these were surmounted by a ring of 5 and a distal 
roof of 5 of the second type of cell.) 

The lumen of the alveolus opens into a short efferent duct 
which in turn joins a lobular duct (Fig. 6, 3). Each lobular duct 
then empties directly into the central salivary duct. Although this 
main duct is usually single, the writer upon several occasions has 
noticed a bifurcation within the gland to form two large glandular 
lobes. In either case, the main duct extends throughout the whole 
length of the gland. Anteriorly each duct leaves the gland, continues 
forward for a short distance, and then turns inwards to open into the 
buccal cavity. 

The second type of alveolus (Fig. 6, 1) is slightly larger 
than the first, and is found adjacent to the central salivary duct 
(Fig. 6, 2). These alveoli are most numerous in the anterior half 
of the gland, often extending in front of the other gland cells. They 
usually appear on the dorsal and median sides of the duct, but in some 
cases have been noticed to surround it entirely. The secretory cells 
of these structures are very resistant to all stains, and the individual 
cells are distinguishable only by their large poorly staining nuclei. 











■ 






* 

Hr% 

' 








V K 


. 

' 


















* 
















■ 




. > ' V 


« 











, 










- 14 - 


The lunina open directly into the main duct by short vessels. 

The Salivary Gland During Active Secretion: 

As the tick commences to engorge, the salivary gland under¬ 
goes a morphological and physiological change. The entire gland of 
a replete female tick is over twice the size of that of an unfed adult. 
This change in size is due to enlargement of the individual alveoli, 
which in turn is due to an increase of cell and even nuclear matter. 
Measurements give the secreting alveolus a diameter of 120 microns, 
against that of 40 microns for the dormant stage. In many of these 
alveoli, the two types of cells show a uniform swelling. In others 
the granular cells remain enlarged but the distal methylene blue 
staining cells exhibit a marked degeneration and flatten into a thin 
layer. Cross sections of the latter type have a characteristic signet 
ring appearance (Fig. 7, 4). The secretion is finely granular and 
stains with eosin. 

The medial non-staining alveoli show little change. The 
secretion is non staining. 

The Pharynx: (Fig. 1) 

This is a fusiform tube opening anteriorly into the floor of 
the buccal cavity and extending posteriorly through the capitular fora¬ 
men to join with the oesophagus. The entire tube is highly muscular 
and is supplied with a system of chitinous plates which, with a series 
of radial constrictor and dilator muscles, forms a powerful pumping organ. 

The Oesophagus: (Fig. 1) 

The oesophagus is a short delicate tube connecting the pharynx 
































■ 


- 


• 



- 












. 
















■ 













' 













- 15 - 


to the stomach. From the pharynx, it runs posteriorly vdth a ventral 

inclination for a short distance, then turns upwards to pass through 
the brain. It emerges from the posterior border of the latter, and 
after a short upward course, enters the ventral median surface of the 
mid intestine or stomach. At the point of entrance there appears a 
valvular structure, the proventricular fold, which undoubtedly serves 
to prevent a regurgitation of blood from the stomach. 

The Stomach: (Fig. 1) 

The mid-intestine, with its caecal appendages, forms the 
greater part of the digestive tract. Indeed, when engorged, these 
tubes occupy practically the entire body cavity. The mid-intestine 
is, itself, a relatively short stout tube, extending anteriorly to the 
brain, end posteriorly to a point about midway between the brain and 
anal aperture. At its anterior and posterior extremities it branches 
to form a number of blind sacs, the diverticula or caecae. These 
extensions of the gut a.re of irregular diameter, are usually very long, 
and are all capable of great dilation. Anteriorly there are two antero¬ 
lateral diverticula, each of which continues out at right angles to the 
mid-gut for a short distance, then gives rise to a short branch which 
runs forward to the margin of the capitular foramen. Immediately beyond 
this branch is a second offshoot. This extends out to the edge of the 
body cavity, follows it forwards, and terminates close to the end of 
the first branch. The main trunk of the antero-lateral caecum now 
passes back in a postero-lateral direction. Neaj' the outer margin of 


the third coxa it sends off a third branch which turns back on itself 








, 















*10 










- 













• 

' 

* 




. 














































- 16 - 


and follows the ventral surface of the salivary gland up to the anterior 
margin of the second coxa, A fourth branch arises a short distance 
behind the third and extends along the inner margin of the salivary gland, 
to which it is closely applied. The remaining portion of the divertic¬ 
ulum continues posteriorly till close to the stigmal plate, dips ven- 
trally, and then passes forwards on the floor of the body cavity. It 
ends near the posterior extremities of the chelicerae, median to and 
in the same plane as the tips of branches one, four, and two. The 
postero-lateral diverticula are four in number and present a less com¬ 
plicated system than the anterior appendages. Each of these four caeca 
extends posteriorly and laterally until close to the margin of the body 
cavity, then dips ventrally and retraces its course towards the rectal 
sac near which it terminates blindly. 

The Rectal Tubes (Fig. 1) 

The waste food from the mid-intestine passes into a rectal 
sac by a short slender rectal tube. This passage commences as a funnel 
shaped tube, draining the median ventrel portion of the mid-intestine. 

It extends in a caudo-ventral direction to the rectal sac. The assump¬ 
tion that the rectal tube, in most ticks, is a functionless cord that 
does not permit the passage of faecal matter is clearly untenable in 
this case. While engorging, Dermacentor andersoni passes a very large 
amount of excreta, consisting of products of blood, which can be seen 
in the sectioned rectal sac where it closely resembles the contents 
of the diverticula. 


The Rectal Sacs (Fig. 1) 







17 


The rectal sac lies slightly behind and ventral to the poster¬ 
ior end of the mid-gut. It is a swollen H-shaped structure, with the 
two posterior extensions larger and more divergent than the anterior 
lobes. At the antero-ventral surface are three openings, a median one 
for the entrance of the rectal tube, and two lateral ones for the Mal¬ 
pighian tubules. The anal canal opens from the post ero-ventral, surface 
of the rectal sac, immediately anterior to the bifurcation of the 
posterior lobes. 

Anal Canal: (Fig. 1) 

This is a short, thin walled tube, passing directly from the 
rectaj. sac to the anus. The latter is a single aperture, located on 
the ventral integument of the tick in a median line and slightly poster¬ 
ior to the stigmal plates. 

Malpighian Tubes: 

These excretory tubules are two in number and arise blindly 
near the posterior extremity of each chelicera. Each tube continues 
backwards in a long tortuous course beside the salivary gland to the 
stigmal plate region, there turning up and forward to the base of the 
antero-lateral diverticulum of the mid-intestine. Turning back again, 
it extends to the posterior region of the body cavity, where its course 
is again altered to a ventral and forward direction reaching the bases 
of the posterior diverticula where it finally doubles back and enters 
the rectal sac. Each tube is unbranched, and varies considerably in 
diameter according to the engorged state of the tick. The secretion 
of these organs is a chalky white material and so gives the structures 
a characteristic whitish colour. 




- 18 - 


m 1 




ALIMENTARY TRACT of D. ANDERSON! 


. Cap'll ujurr 



•Sca.pu.la 


Salivary SV-til 

OeSophagM-S 

Brain 


Flnte.ro- lateral 
diverticulum 

Mid cjut 


Ma.lphigi.an tubule 
Rectal tu.be 


Beet.o.l sat ■ 


. . RmaJ canal 
- flnu& 


Poster©-lalera-l 
diverticula 




Figure 1 















- 19 



Figure 2. 

Dorsal view of Capitulum of Dennacentor andersoni . 


r 


L 

Figure 3. 



Ventral view of Capitulum of Dermacentor andersoni 

















20 - 



Figure 4. 

Salivary gland of an unengorged adult 
Dermacentor andersoni tick (x 12). 



Figure 5. 

Salivary gland of a replete 
adult Dermacentor andersoni tick (x 12). 











21 



Figure 6. 


Section through the salivary gland of an unengorged 
adult Dermacentor andersoni tick (x 250). 



Figure 7. 

Section through the salivary gland of a replete 
adult Dermacentor andersoni tick (x250). 








■TV 



22 - 


3. The Histology of the Stomach and 
Process of Digestion * 

It was found during early studies that smears of the intestinal 
contents and excreta of ticks presented a variety of confusing micro¬ 
scopic bodies. These particles bear such a resemblance to bacteria 
and protozoa that an acquaintance with their nature is essential for 
detailed symbiotic and parasitic observations of tick-borne microorganisms. 
Accordingly, an extensive study of the assimilative processes within 
the tick-gut was made by the writer. 

These studies, for convenience, are divided into four phases; 
the pre-absorptive, absorptive, post-absorptive, and disintegration 
stages (Figure 8). It must be remembered, however, that the process 
of assimilation is a continuous one, and in a cross section of an en¬ 
gorging female tick, at least two of the phases are usually present. 

Pre-absorptive Stage: 

This is the condition of the gut wall of the unfed adult tick, 
and so presents a picture of its normal histology. 

The outer wall of the intestine and diverticula is composed 
of a very thin network of muscle fibres. Their presence is indicated 
by occasional spindle-shaped nuclei about the periphery of the gut. 
Mallory's triple stain, Giemsa's, and methylene blue all bring out these 
fibres in a dark blue colouration. 

Within the layer of muscular fibres is a lining of irregularly 
shaped epithelial cells, all resting on a delicate basement membrane. 
These cells of the inactive gut are columnar in general appearance, but 
vary considerably in size and form and are somewhat compressed. They 







23 


usually present two stages of progression. The majority are fairly 
short and cuboidal in shape. Their nuclei are round and may be basal 
or central in position. The non-staining cytoplasm of all these cells 
is evenly filled with numerous black, round granules, (l) The cells 
of the second type (2) are believed to be similar to those of the first, 
but in a more advanced condition. They are fewer in number, and are 
wedged by a narrow stalk between the other cells, the enlarged free ends 
projecting far out into the lumen of the gut. In these, the granules 
are of a pale sienna colour - indicative perhaps of some physiological 
change from their former state. The nuclei are noticeably larger and 
more distal. 

Absorptive Stage: 

This sbage is present in the gut from the first day of feeding 
until the tick is semi-replete. The parasite, during this time, is 
actively feeding from its host, and the digestive tract is markedly di¬ 
lated with blood. A strong peristalsis is present in the mid-intestine 
and diverticula, the course of which is usually from the terminus to 
the origin. By this movement, the blood is carried towards the mid¬ 
gut along the periphery of the caecae, and is sucked out distally through 
a central channel. 

Cross sections of portions of diverticula and mid-gut when 
semi-engorged with fresh haemolysed blood, present a picture of active 
assimilation. The enclosed fluid within the lumina appears uniform 
in appearance, is unpigmented, and stains a deep red with Mallory’s triple 
stain (3). Bordering the lumen, and resting on the basement membrane, 
is an irregular layer of small cuboidal cells. The cell walls of these 




- 24 - 


are indistinct; the cytoplasm and their small nuclei stain blue with 
Giemsa's stain or methylene blue. Projecting from between these cells, 
or appearing to form an inner layer upon them, are large assimilative 
cells. Whether they are also secretory in nature is not yet known. 

These cells, formed originally from the primary epithelial cells (des¬ 
cribed in the preceding phase) are now tremendously enlarged. The cyto¬ 
plasm of the basal region appears flocculent and stains blue with Giemsa's 
In some cells the cytoplasm includes a dense mass of brown granules which 
may entirely mask any other cell structures (4). This pigment is amilar 
in size and structure to that described in the large central cells of 
phase I. When present, it appears most dense in the neck of the cell, 
thinning out at the distal periphery. It was noted that only sections 
of certain caecae showed these pigmented cells. Other caecae, though 
similar in appearance morphologically, and even forming the bi-lateral 
counterpart, contained assimilative cells that were entirely devoid of 
pigmented granules. In all other respects, the two forms of cells 
appeared to be identical in nature and function. It is believed by 
the writer that these granules represent some stage of a symbiont organism 
They will be fully discussed from this aspect in a later portion of this 
paper. The distally placed nuclei of the cells are large and contain 
distinct chromatin granules and nucleoli. They stain a deep blue with 
methylene blue, Giemsa's and Mallory's - the nucleoli appearing red with 
the latter stain - and a purple colour with haemotoxylin-eosin. When 
stained with Mallory's triple stain, these cells are distinctly seen to 
be filled with many bright red spherical bodies (5). These droplets 


are thought to be either globules of the surrounding blood fluid, which 


■ • . - : 


/ ; . ‘ -i •• « 

*£ 

* 

. 




' 


■ 



• 

. 

■„ . 

1 


* ■ 

. 


. . 

' 

' 

- 




, 






iv. . • ‘ 




■ 


■ 

. 

. 

, 

■ 

.. : ■ ; ' 1 : ■:/' ? ' - 

’ 










- 25 - 


in some manner has been engulfed by the cells, or else to be some form 
of symbiotic life* As assimilation continues, they increase in size 
and finally occupy the whole of the intracellular space* 

Post-absorptive Stage: 

At this stage the tick is replete and leaves its host. The 
epithelial cells have taken up all the blood that they are able, and 
continued feeding is no longer of advantage to the tick. 

The first stages of degeneration are seen in the elements 
lining the edge of the gut. Here cell structure has become indistinct 
and the protoplasm and nuclei are seen only as deeply staining masses 
between and at the bases of the assimilating cells. The latter now 
consist of a cell membrane, filled completely by the large, clear, fat- 
like globules which stain in a manner similar to that of the surrounding 
fluid (7). Cytoplasm and granular particles, alike, have been compressed 
to a minimum area between these intracellular drops of fluid. The 
nucleus alone remains as an undisturbed element of the former cell struc¬ 
ture, and retains its affinity for basic stains. As absorption nears 
completion, these swollen cells project more and more into the lumen 
of the intestine, many of them becoming detached to form large spherical 
masses (Text Figure 8, and Plate IV, Fig. l)> The ultimate fate of 
these cells is complete disintegration. This is preceded by a breaking 
up of the nucleus into numerous round fragments. Giemsa's stain portrays 
this process clearly in certain ticks, and particles of the blue nuclear 
material may be clearly seen within the clear gloTbules by which it has 
been ungulfed (Plate IV, Fig. 2). As many as six fragments have been 


seen in one droplet. A final breaking of the cell membrane occurs and 


■ 





A 7.v ' LtV 








" i ■ i; ' ; '' c- xo :$/■ :■ ; ,■ 

; 

' 

. 



26 


the contents diffuse end become lost in the surrounding fluid (9). 

The blood within the gut, at this stage, has become a thick,dark red, 
viscid fluid. Microscopically it appears to be full of fine dark 
granules, varying in size from 1.5 to 2.2 microns (10). These parti¬ 
cles which have been extruded from the cell bodies during assimilation, 
due to similarity in structure, are believed to be related in some way 
to the previously mentioned yeast-like granules. They are evenly distri¬ 
buted throughout the fluid, except in a narrow region directly surrounding 
the cells, where the clear fluid forms a distinct halo-like area (Plate IV, 
Fig. 1). The writer suggests that this "halo" is caused by some chemo- 
tactic repulsion. Sections of the intestine gave negative results at 
all stages of engorgement when submitted to Perle's test for haemosideron. 

Physiologically, the digested blood appears to be in two layers 
at this stage. A heavy staining area surrounds the cells and fills 
the outer margin of the lumen. Towards the centre is a distinct undu¬ 
lating boundary, within which is a uniform lighter staining area. 

Degenerative periods 

If the tick is not killed until several weeks after leaving 
its host, then one of two slightly different pictures will be seen from 
sections of the gut. In any case there will be a complete disintegration 
of the epithelial layer of cells, resulting in the subsequent freeing 
of numbers of the enclosed globules and granules. The globules are 
now seen as large round bodies that stain red, and sometimes blue, with 
Mallory’s (Plate V, Fig. 2). The edges are usually distinct and the 
contents of a granular nature. The yeast-like granules (15) are seen 
as small oval bodies, either brown or colourless, the latter state 








27 


























4 

- - ' iv ’ . ' t 












. 

. 
















' 

- ' 

. 







Key to Figure 8 . 


Pre-absorptive stage (eosin-haematoxylin stain) 

1. Gut epithelial cell containing pigmented granules. 

2. Large gut epithelial cell containing brown granules. 


Absorptive stage (Mallory's triple stain) 

3. Haemolysed blood within lumen of gut. 

4. Gut epithelial cell containing masses of brown, yeast-like 

granules. 

5. Gut epithelial cell inclosing numerous round globules. 

6. Cell cytoplasm being compressed by round globules. 


Post-absorptive stage (Giemsa's stein) 

7. Gut cell containing a large mass of closely packed globules. 

8. Floating epithelial body containing nuclear fragments. 

9. Disintegrating epithelial body. 

10. Blood fluid and granules within lumen of gut. 


Disintegration stage ( Mallory's triple stain) 

11. Malphigian concretion from excretory tubule. 

12. Phagocyte from body fluid. 

13. Nucleus from disintegrated epithelial cell. 

14. Symbiont-like globules from epithelial cells. 

15. Yeast-like granules from epithelial cells. 

16. Possible fragment of disintegrated nucleus. 



28 



Figure 8 










29 


probably having been brought about by a bleaching action through 
oxidative reactions. 

If the tick is removed before becoming replete, there may 
also be seen a few nuclei within the lumen of the gut (13). These 
bodies apparently retain their shape for several weeks after leaving 
the cells, still possessing the single or paired nucleoli so readily 
seen with Mallory's stain. 

From observations of the nuclei in the replete gut (page 25) 
it is supposed that all of these cell elements rapidly break down into 
small masses of nuclear material end are subsequently absorbed by the 
intestinal fluids. Thus, sections of ticks that have dropped from 
the host of their own accord would not be expected to contain any nuclear 
bodies within the intestine. This has not yet been verified. 

A further disintegration of the tick tissue may permit excre¬ 
tory particles to flow into the gut, thus adding numerous Malpighian 
concretions (11), possible tick-blood phagocytes (12) to intestinal 
inclusions. 

4. The Microscopic Picture of 
Normal Tick Excreta : 

Rapidly feeding female adults of Dermacenter sndersoni produce 
a very large amount of excreta - approximately half a cc. per tick. 

This digestive excretion accompanies feeding throughout the engorging 

%' 

period, end ceases as soon as the replete tick drops from its host. It 
is extruded from the anus as small droplets at intervals of about three 
minutes. Each viscid black drop dries almost immediately into a shiny 







30 - 


smooth pellet, which remains adhering to the anal aperture till it is 
pushed away by the succeeding excrement. If undisturbed for several 
days, the excreta of the engorging tick is seen in the form of long 
masses of shiny round globules. It is very brittle and readily breaks 
into black crystalline particles of varying sizes which readily dissolve 
in water. It emits a strong acrid odour which is apparent even during 
the first day that the tick is feeding. 

After leaving the host, the tick may continue to excrete one 
or more small pellets of whit© matter, identified as guanine.* This 
Malphigian excrement is also liberated as the tick engorges, but is then 
masked by the copious digestive waste. 

Smears of tick excreta, examined microscopically, show the 
presence of the following non-staining bodies: 

1. Granules of pigment. These appear as uniform round or 
slightly elongated bodies, about 2 microns in diameter. Their 
colour is of a greenish brown. These bodies appear in similar 
form in smears made from the gut-content and represent the ex¬ 
truded yeast-like granules that are mentioned in the preceding 
studies. 

2. Irregularly shaped transparent colourless particles, vary¬ 
ing in size from! to 5 microns. Mention of these is made in 
the following paragraph. 

3. Large pale green opalescent globular bodies, from 5 to 15 
microns in diameter. These particles are fairly uniformly 


* Through the kindness of Professor G. Hunter 


























' ' 

, 

■ 

' 








' 


■ 


' 








, 

■ 














* 








I 

. . 

















31 


distributed throughout the excreta, and represent the greater 
product of the Malphigian tubules. Examination of the white 
Malphigian excrement shows an abundance of these bodies, to¬ 
gether with a few smaller glassy amorphous particles which are 
probably of the same material. 

Cross sections through the active Malphigian tubules of ticks 
show the lumina to be closely packed with these spherical particles, al¬ 
though when seen under these conditions they nearly all have a lamellate! 
onion-like appearance (Plate V, Fig. 1). 

The main body of the tick excreta is a reddish brown semi-trans¬ 
parent amorphous material. It is readily soluble in water, giving a 
similar coloured solution, but is insoluble in absolute alcohol. Finely 
crushed particles of excreta appear microscopically as brown flakes and 
are seen to contain all of the elements mentioned above. Water soluble 
particles, which would disappear in a smear, were not noticed in these 
flakes, but it is probable that such are present since water smears of 
Malphigian excreta, when evaporated, left a distinct pattern of crystals. 

Perle's iron ferricyanide test was negative when applied to 
all smears of tick excreta. 
















32 


The Tick in Relation to Disease: 


The importance of ticks as disseminators of disease cannot 
be better exemplified than by a summary of the recognized tick-borne 
diseases from various parts of the world. In no other arthropod group 
is there such a variety of organisms transmitted by a single family 
of parasites, and next to the mosquito the tick is probably the most 
dangerous disease carrier known to man. 


The more important tick-borne diseases: 

Piroplasms (transmitted exclusively by ticks). 

(1) Texas fever , a haemoglobinuric fever of cattle, occuring 
in North and South America, Africa and Australia. 

Caused by Babesia bigemina , transmitted by Boophilus 
annul at us . 

(2) European Cattle fever . Caused by Babesia bovis , and 
is transmitted by Ixodes ricinus . 

(3) Malignant Jaundice of Dogs . Present in Europe, Africa, 
Asia, and Central America. Produced by the piroplasm 
Babesia canis . 

(4) East Coast Fever of Cattle . An African and Indian disease 
following the bite of Bhipicephalus ticks carrying 
Theileria parva organisms. 

(5) Haemoglobinuric anaemia of Sheep from infection by Babesia 
bovis. 

(6) Biliary fever » caused by the piroplasm Nuttalia equi , 
transmitted in Southern Europe and America, Africa, and 
Asia, by the tick Rhipicephalus evertsi . 


Bacillus diseases. 

(7) Tularaemia . A European and American disease of about 5$ 
human fatality. Transmitted largely by Dermacentor andersoni . 

(8) Oroya fever » a Peruvian disease claiming many human deaths. 
Caused by the cocco-bacillus Bartonella bacilliformus, 


























33 


and transmitted by Dermacentor andersoni . 

(9) United States Moose Disease . A paralysis producing 

disease of game animals. Organism, Klebsiella paralytica; 
vector, Dermacentor albipictus . 


Rickettsia diseases, 

(10) Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever . A severe human disease 
limited to the mountainous regions of United States, 
Produced by infection by Dermacentroxenus rickettsi through 
the agency of Dermacentor andersoni and Haemaphysalis 
leporus palustris . 

(11) Heart-water ? a febrile disease affecting sheep, goats, 
and cattle in South Africa, Due to a filterable virus 
in association with Rickettsia rurainantium . Vector, 
Amblyomma hebraeum . 


Spirochaete diseases, 

(12) Relapsing fever , of man and animals. Common in Europe, 
India and Africa. Vector, usually one of the Omithodorus 
ticks. 

(13) Fowl Spirochaetosis . A cosmopolitan disease transmitted 
by Argas persicus. 


Virus or Toxin diseases. 

(14) Tick Paralysis . Various forms of paralysis distributed 
over America, Australia and Africa. 


6. The Status of Tick-borne Diseases in Canada . 

The tick-produced diseases of this country at this date present 
a series of problems that have barely been touched. A knowledge of 
their etiology is scant and confused and even of the more studied ones 
is still too scant for a clear understanding of their nature. Because 
of this lack of data, and since a direct study of any of these diseases 






























4V < 







, ' 


















..'.C 


' 














’ 








: 









f'v VC ■ 


' 

: 

■ 



■:r re |)| , ( rr; f$^4p§| 












- 34 - 


is out of the field of this thesis the following summary is restricted 
to a brief outline of each type. 


1. Tick paralysis . An acute ascending motor paralysis produced 
by the engorging females of Dermacentor andersoni . Occurs in 
children, sheep, dogs, and cattle. The paralysis appears about 
six days after the tick has commenced engorging, and passes rapidly 
from the hind quarters to the thorax and respiration centres. 

Death usually follows unless the tick is removed, in which case 
there is a correspondingly rapid recovery. Cause likely due 

to a toxin, organism, or virus. (Personal studies.) 

(a) A swelling of glands of host noticed on several occasions 
when Dermacentor andersoni first engorges on humans. May 
be a mild form of tick paralysis. Unstudied. (Personal 
observations.) 

(Similar diseases occuring elsewhere which may be affiliated 
are: 

Australian tick paralysis, produced in lambs, dogs, and 
children by Ixodes ricinus and Ixodes holocyclus . Apparently 
due to a potent salivary toxin which is exhibited in all 
ticks. Glands of 2^ ticks fatal per mouse. (Ross, (27)). 

South African tick paralysis of sheep. Caused by Ixodes 
pilosus . Paralysis and prolonged weakness for several 
months. (S. van Rensburg, South Africa Department of Agri¬ 
culture, Reprint $18, 1928.) 

A paralysis of Californian cattle, caused by Dermacentor 
Occidentalis infected with Bacterium tularense. Little 
studied. (U.S. Pub. HealtiTRepT1^7l471p2i PP 1299- 
1300, 1929.) 

2. Tularaemia . Transmitted by ticks, blood-sucking flies, and lice. 

A long lasting disease affecting man, rats, squirrels, rabbits, 
etc. Tularaemia complex in nature is still very little understood. 
(Parker and Spencer, (24)). 

3. Tick Poverty . An ascending weakness of horses caused by heavy 
infestation by Dermacentor albipictus . Disease unstudied. 

(Personal observations.) 

4. Persistent sores (with one probable case of paralysis) following 
the bite of the Coast tick, Ixodes ricinus Califomicus . 

(Personal observations.) 



















35 


5. Canadian Moose Disease . Unstudied. May be a new disease, or 
of the Illinois or Minnesota varieties mentioned below. (Per¬ 
sonal studies. Annual Rept. 1935 Dom. Ent. Lab. Kamloops.) 

(Similar diseases occuring elsewhere which may be 
affiliated are: 

Illinois Moose disease. Probably caused by an organism, 
Klebsiella paralytica , the vector of which is Dermacentor 
albipictus . Paralysis and weakness. 

(Wallace, Cahn and Thomas, (3).) 

Minnesota moose disease. Emaciation and weakening of moose 
without paralysis. All bacteriological, necropsy, para¬ 
sitological and pathological findings negative. 

(Fenstermacher and Jellison, (8).) ) 

6. Rocky Mountain spotted fever . Has been shown to exist in British 
Columbia rabbit tick in a form of very low virulence. Human 
cases from Alberta and United States-British Columbia borderline. 
(Parker, (25).) 


7. A Discussion of the Less Known Micro¬ 

organisms Invading Tick Tissues . 

An outline of the most important tick-borne diseases has already 
been given. Many of these have been successfully linked up with a 
causative organism and have had their etiology fairly well established. 
Since it is the writer's intention to prepare a field for the studying 
of the lesser known diseases, no further mention will be made of these 
recognized organisms. A full account of their nature may be found in 
any bacteriology textbook. 

The value and need of a detailed study of tick content flora, 
whether pathogenic or otherwise, is adequately expressed in the following 
extract: (C-laser, R.W. (11).) 

"The bacteria-like so-called intracellular 'symbionts* or 
'rickettsiae' found in some arthropods have been proven to be transmitted 
and to be associated with the production of fatal disease in man and 









. 






, 






'■ ! c 







. . 

' 

. 

. ■ 


36 


domestic animals. To the presumably pathogenic forms belong those 
associated with exanthemic fever, trench fever, Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever, and heartwater. Dengue fever and some other arthropod-trans¬ 
mitted diseases, such as the Japanese flood fever, are also suspected 
to be associated with the 'rickettsiae'. One 'rickettsiae* (R. melo- 
phagi) is transmitted by its vector (M. ovinus) to sheep in which it 
apparently survives as a harmless parasite. The majority, however, 
are at present not transmitted to animals, but usually exist within 
certain specialized cells of the invertebrates and are passed from 
one generation to the other through their eggs. 

Very little is known about either the pathogenic or the non- 
pathogenic intracellular parasites under discussion because it has 
been so far impossible to adapt most of them to artificial media. 

Some claim that the parasites are bacteria, others that they should 
be placed among the so-called 'rickettsiae', a group erbcted by da 
Rocha-Lima in 1916, for certain small microorganisms found in the 
human body louse infected with the virus of typhus fever. A third 
class of investigators has concluded that the intracellular inclusions 
are not microorganisms at all, but products of cellular metabolism. 

Some of the structures observed might represent bacteria; others a 
totally new type of microorganism; and lastly, still others might, 
conceivably, represent products of cellular metabolism. 

Many arthropods apparently harbour more than one species of 
'symbiont'. in some cases a form pathogenic to vertebrates exists 
together with a non-pathogenic form. Frequently the t¥/o forms re¬ 
semble one another so closely, morphologically, that cultures become 
imperative in order to differentiate them, as Noguchi showed in 1926. 

The cultural possibility also opens up a number of interesting biolo¬ 
gical problems among which the much discussed question of symbiosis 
has prominence." 

Thus it is only through a systematic and cultural study of 
all the microbic flora of the parasitic arthropods that definite conclu¬ 
sions as to the nature of the pathogenic group can be obtained. Such 
studies tend to increase the knowledge of the insect-invading organisms 
as a whole, and also serve to separate specifically the various groups 
of economic interest. 

The following are the forms of life which have been observed 
within the ticks and are but partially understood: 


1 


The Rickettsiae 

















37 


The rickettsia organisms have been studied very extensively 
during the last decade; but there is yet little clarity as to the nature 
of these microorganisms. Hertig and V/albach (13) define them as being 
Gram negative, intracellular, minute, coccoid or diplo.coccoid organisms, 
o.3 - 0.5 microns, staining readily with Giemsa, but poorly with other 
aniline stains, without well defined contour, and difficult to cultivate 
in vitro. Cowdry (4) suggests that the criterion for distinguishing 
the rickettsiae from other insect organisms is their minute size. 

Nicholson (21) observes differences between rickettsiae bodies 
and mitochondria in that the former do not establish any definite re¬ 
lation with the nucleus or other cellular compnnents. Dibacillary 
forms are most abundant in the early stages of infection, later becoming 
bacillary. He states that after fixation in Regaud's fluid, it is 
possible to colour the rickettsiae and the mitochondria successively 
in the same cells and thus demonstrate their independence. The micro¬ 
organisms are first brought out by staining by Giemsa*s method. The 
tissues are then decolourized and stained vdth aniline fuschin and methyl 
green (Bensley's method, Mallory and Wright’s Pathological Technique, 

7th Ed.). Products of phagocytosis or nuclear degeneration in the 
same cells may be further demonstrated by decolourizing again end staining 
with iron haematoxylin. 

It was found that the rickettsiae may be stained by both the 
iron haematoxylin and the aniline fuschin and methyl green technique, 
the two methods which are primarily intended for mitochondria, and that 
when appropriately mordanted, the mitochondria may sometimes be coloured 
by Giemsa*s. In both cases, however, the colour reactions were so 














38 


atypical that they could not be taken to indicate the existence of a 
close degree of similarity. 

The following are references to some of the recognized forms 
of rickettsiae; in most cases their systematic position is still very 
indefinite: 

Cowdry (5) observed rickettsia organisms in a variety of Hexa¬ 
pods, among which were included the Araneida, Atsarina, Thysanura, Hemip- 
tera, Neuroptera, Diptera, Siphonoptera, and Hymenoptera. It thus 
appears from these observations that blood is not a definite requisite 
for the presence of rickettsiae, though they undoubtedly abound more 
in the blood feeding arthropods. 

Kuczynski (18) has obtained cultures of R. prowazeki and 
Sikora (30) of R. pediculi . 

Wolback and Schlesinger (35) obtained virulent cultures of 
R. prowazeki and Dermacentroxenus rickettsi from tissues of Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever infected animals. 

In 1925 Cowdry (7) observed a Gram -, intracellular, pleomor¬ 
phic, coccus-like microorganisms in the tissues of goats, sheep, and 
cattle that were suffering from heartwater. The organism resembled 
the rickettsia group, and though uncultured at the time was designated 
as R. ruminantium . 

Kligler and Aschner (17) succeeded in isolating and culturing 
an organism from blood sucking pupipara that closely corresponds to 
Moeller's (1923) description of R. melophagi . 

Noguchi (22) showed that "from the tissues of a spotted fever 


infected tick, non-pathogenic microorganisms closely resembling D.rickettsi 










. 






39 - 


may be cultivated on special media". Although resembling the spotted 
fever forms, they bore no delation to infectivity and showed no simi¬ 
larity immunologically. The most frequently isolated species were 
Bacillus rickettsiformis , B . pseudoxerosis , and B . equidistans. All 
exhibited pleomorphism. 

2. Bacteria . 

Wallace, Cahn, and Thomas (33) have isolated an organism, 
Klebsiella paralytica , which is supposed to be the causative organism 
of Moose Disease. The strain has been cultured from ticks ( Dermacentor 
albipictus)and has been re-inoculated into guinea pigs with resulting 
symptoms resembling those of the diseased moose. The bacterium is 
a capsulated, rod-coccoid organism, producing a sediment in broth, and 
Beta haemolysis on blood agar. It is a vigorous fementor, gives a 
rapid mucoid growth on agar, and produces a powerful toxin. 

Dr. Fenstermacher (9), in his studies on moose disease in 
Minnesota, states that, contrary to reports by Cahn and his associates, 
paralysis has never been noted as a symptom in the moose he has observed, 
and he was unable to isolate any pathogenic organism from ticks from 
diseased moose by bacterial examination. 

During the summer of 1935 (An. Rept. Dom. Ent. Lab. Kamloops) 
the writer isolated a motile, non-capsulated, Gram -, bacterium from 
Dermacentor albipictus ticks taken from a British Columbia moose. It 
fermented lactose and grew on common media in white shiny round colonies. 
Rabbits inoculated with this organism died after 4 to 16 days, exhibiting 
white lesions on the surface of the liver. Partial paralysis prior 
to death was noted in two instances. Whether this organism is responsible 

































- 

















' 

?)C- i ■; 

. ... 

0 . - 
































, 










, 

- 





- 40 


for the disease of Canadian moose is not yet known* 

It is possible that there may be several types of the 
disease, that it may be inter-related with tick-paralysis, or, as 
Fenstermacher states, that an axtirely new and hitherto undiscovered 
pathogen is the cause of the disease among moose and that the conditions 
studied are brought about through several forces cooperating to reduce 
the vitality of moose and producing the symptoms observed (8). 

3. Other Organisms that hav6 been seen in Ticks * 

Through personal correspondence, the writer has been informed 
that the Rocky Mountain spotted fever laboratory, Hamilton, U.S.A., 
have observed several species of staphylococci, and recently a spiral¬ 
like organism with a single long flagellum, but in very few cases 
have any of these organisms been successfully cultured. 

8. Observations to Determine the Extent 

of Invasion into Tick Tissues by 

Microorganisms : 

Technique for microscopic examination of ticks for microorganisms: 
The following outline of technical procedure is further exempli¬ 
fied at the end of this thesis. Reference, where necessary, will be 
made to the corresponding page numbers. 

Sectioning: This method proved to be both convenient and satis¬ 
factory for the demonstration of microorganisms within tick tissues. 

The ticks are partly opened, then embedded according to the procedure 
described on page 77. Sections for bacteriological studies were made 
at 4 microns and stained by Giemsa's and Brown and Brenn's methods(Page 78). 







41 - 


Smears: Smears of tick contents wer& made on clean slides 

and spread out with a drop of saline solution. They were studied 
under dark stage and direct illumination conditions. Dried smears 
were fixed for a minute in 95/£ alcohol and then stained for bacteria 
by Giemsa's and Gram's stains; for spores by Moeller's spore stain; and 
for spirochetes and Gram negative organisms by Tunnicliff's stain (page 79). 

A Discussion of Plant-like Bodies Normally Appearing within 
the Tick (Dermacentor andersoni): 

A histological study of the tick for microorganisms reveals 
the presence of various cell components and digestive products, many 
of which can easily be mistaken for forms of flora. It is essential 
that a clear picture of these bodies is gained before passing on to 
the bacterial studies. To this end a brief description of the appear¬ 
ance and staining properties of each form is given. 

Extracellular bodies: These are seen chiefly as digestive 

wastes, and have been discussed under the section pertaining to assimi¬ 
lative processes of the tick (page 26). They may be tabulated as 
follows: 

(1) Malpighian concretions (Plate V, Fig. 1). Large round lamel¬ 
la! ed bodies, approximately 10 microns in size, transparent 

or slightly green, non-staining, and insoluble in water, alco¬ 
hol and ether. Normally within the Malpighian tubules, but 
scattered widely in disintegrating ticks. 

(2) Fragments of the above, exhibiting the same properties. 

Intracellular bodies: Any of these may appear outside the cell 

if disintegration has commenced. Of these bodies, three of the following 
























' 






' 




' 


■ 






; 


■ 








1 •' ••• 1 - ■' 

, 








, 




-i 




r.;.' .r 0?:* 


' 


* 

* 

, 

■' • „• . , ; : ; t '/-.•ie 'tfl %n f . ' - 







. 



- 42 - 


forms have not yet been satisfactorily defined. They will be considered 
under the next section. 

(1) Pigmented bodies. 

(2) Yeast-like granules. 

(3) Intracellular globules. 

(4) Nuclei. These are recognized by the single or paired 
nucleoli which stain red with Mallory*s triple stain. 

(5) Mitochondria. (Plate VI, Fig. 2) A great deal of work has 
been done in an attempt to define the nature of mitochondria. 
Many advances have been made suggesting that they are of symbi¬ 
otic nature. Other investigators deny this theory, stating 
that they are not capable of independent growth apart from 

the cells. For the morphologist it will suffice to give 
the differences that they exhibit from bacteria, as shown ty 
Cowdry (4). 

(a) They are in general much less resistant than bacteria. 

They are invariably destroyed by fixatives such as 95$ 
alcohol, Bouin's fluid, or acetic acid. Fixation by 
Regaud*s is necessary for perfect preservation. 

(b) They show a particular resistance to common histological 
stains, with the exception of iron haematoxylin. Giemaa's 
stain, which is best adapted for the demonstration of 
bacteria, colours mitochondria little, if at all. 

(c) While some bacteria exhibit a high degree of pleo- 
morphism, it may be said that the mitochondria have 
been shown to possess a degree of modifiability far 
greater than that possessed by any known organisms. 

(d) Mitochondria never appear in the intestinal lumen or 
apart from cells, as bacteria generally do. 


Morphological Characteristics of Organisms Seen in Ticks: 

The failure to observe a larger number of invading organisms 






- 43 - 


in tick tissues must not be taken as an indication that the Western 
Canadian species of Ixodidae are relatively free from infection* The 
bacterial studies have merely been curtailed by the wide departure 
that has been made from the intended plans. As a result, the actual 
number of specimens examined histologically for bacteria is very small, 
including not more than fifty individuals, these being comprised of 
only a very few species largely from one district. 

The author, however, feels confident that this extra time 
has been well spent, and trusts that the previous and following obser¬ 
vations of the histology of the tick will fully portray the need for 
these preparatory investigations. 

Bacteria observed in ticks : 

A large number of sections were made from adult Dermacentor 
albipictus ticks that had been collected from a moose at Hulatt, 
B.C., in the spring of 1935 * Since these specimens had been 
fixed and preserved in alcohol, smears were not made. All of 
the sections showed the presence of vast numbers of Gram positive 
coccoid bacteria (Plate I, Fig. l). These organisms were seen 
best when Brown and Brenn's stain was used, staining a dark purple 
against the yellow tissues. Thev showed fsirlv well with Giemsa's, 
but were harder to differentiate from the surrounding tissue 
elements with this stain, all of the structures appearing in various 
shades of blue. 

The organisms were scattered throughout the degenerating 


* See inoculation experiments with moose ticks, page 39. 


















' 
















■l 














. 



■ i 





r. : 







■ ; 


, 



. 






- 44 - 


tissues, but were most dense along the peritoneal lining of the 
body cavity. None were observed within the lumen of the gut. 

Morphologically the bacteria were all of similar size, beine 
about .6 microns in diameter. About fifty percent were paired, 
the remainder single. No spores or capsules were noted. 

To date no further observations of bacteria have been made. 


(April, 1936) 



- 45 


Cell inclusions of doubtful origin: 

During the description of assimilative processes within the 
tick gut (page 23), mention was made of three different intracellular 
bodies that were observed in the digestive tracts of all adult ticks 
that were studied. Lack of material and time has prohibited the author 
from gaining a complete understanding of the nature of these inclusions. 
Their qualities indeed are still so abstruse that it is with hesitation 
that they have been discussed among the organisms. They have, however , 
shown several characteristics that are suggestive of life, and they 
also bear a certain similarity to some of the recently studied insect 
symbionts. Until they are cultured, it is unlikely that they will be 
proven to be true organisms; in the meantime they will be openly con¬ 
sidered as either symbionts or inanimate products of cell metabolism. 

(1) Pigmented bodies: (Plate I, Fig. 2) These inclusions were 
observed in all normal cells of the gut epithelium. They appear 
in unstained sections as numerous minute, round, single, bluish- 
black particles, distributed throughout the protoplasm, though 
usually in larger numbers tov/ards the base of the cell. They 
are constant in size, approximately .2 microns in diameter. 

Owing to their pigmented nature, it is impossible to determine 
their staining qualities. They are not decolorized by any of 
the fixatives used and are not bleached by either ether or acetone. 
The origin and fate of these coccoid-like particles has not been 
studied. Since they have not been observed during the later 
assimilative changes, it is possible that they may develop into 
one of the following bodies. 




• .■ 


I 








46 


(2) Yeast-like bodies; (Plate II, Figs, 1 & 2; Plate VI, Fig.l) 
These particles never appeared in the gut cells until assimilation 
of blood had commenced. During this absorptive stage, the cells 
of certain diverticula were crowded with these bodies while in 
other portions of the intestine they were entirely absent. Evan 
in the cross section of a single tube there appeared the same un¬ 
evenness of distribution. When they were present, they were 
usually so numerous as to obscure all other cell structures. The 
newly formed particles are very small, rarely exceeding .4 microns, 
are round in outline, 8 nd possess a characteristic sienna brown 
colour. They remain visible after passing through the usual fixa¬ 
tive fluids, but are decolorized by acetone and ether. They show 
an affinity for gentian violet and Giemsa dyes, but are not coloured 
by safranin, aqueous fuschin, or eosin. 

As the tick nears repletion, these particles increase in size 
to 2 microns. They are then readily visible with the oil immer¬ 
sion lens, under which they are seen to be oval in shape. There 
is an indication of a thick cell wall but no sign of a nucleus. 
Iodine produces no change in the appearance. No change in size 
or numbers has occurred by culturing these bodies on agar, though 
in smears from this medium there is sometimes a suggestion of 
budding. 

(3) Intracellular globules: (Plates III & VII 5 Plate VI, Fig.l) 



these bodies that appear in all the epithelial cells of the gut 
as soon as the lumen becomes filled with blood. At first they 









: 

• -'i'.' 0$ ■/*£ JX" 

I .:tv; ■y:^:'tcr\ vL-'.?n 
...' . ; 

. 

- 

f ■ fim. 

. 


; -■ < : - 


■ is 



















- 47 - 


are seen as very small droplets, varying in diameter from 1 to 5 
microns, and lying scattered in the protoplasm towards the distal 
portion of the cell. As assimilation continues they increase in 
size, until finally, when the tick is replete, they appear as large 
closely packed globules up to 15 microns in diameter. They stain 
bright red with aqueous fuschin, blue with Giemsa, are Gram positive, 
and are coloured brown by iodine. 

All of the early forms, and the majority of the final stages, 
are spherical in shape. A few are oval or of irregular outline. The 
contents of the bodies are finely granular and homogenous. None of 
the mentioned stains brings out any indication of a nucleus, although 
when iron haematoxylin is used there is, in some, a series of concentric 
areas of different gradation of colour. 

Because of their similarity to droplets of blood when stained 
by fuschin, these globules were first thought to be particles of partly 
assimilated fluid) this assumption, however, was modified when numbers 
of the globules were isolated in a smear on agar. Their similarity 
to organisms then became apparent, and they were definitely seen to 
be enclosed by a thin membrane. Attempts to culture these bodies on 
blood and tick excrement agar have so far proven unsuccessful. Certain 
of the globules, nevertheless, show an astounding similarity to cells 
in the process of dividing. One body in this state was studied for 
a week while on agar in a hanging drop, but it failed to undergo any 
change (see Plate VII). 


Discussions The failure, at this date, to culture success- 
















s ' : 



- 48 


fully any of these intracellular bodies has necessarily left their taxo¬ 
nomic position in a very obscure state. Their natures, however, are 
considered to be sufficiently suggestive of life to permit a comparison 
to be made with certain of the insect symbionts. 

The first mentioned pigment bodies may be excluded from the 
mitochondria by their characteristic resistance to acetic acid and the 
more harsh fixatives. Neither mitochondria nor bacteria are normally 
pigmented, a fact that further denies them a place among the micrococci. 
Their resemblance to excretory granules has been considered, but here 
again their pigmented nature excludes them from these bodies. There 
appear to be only two places left for them. Either they are waste 
products from previous cell metabolism - and this seems hardly likely, 
since they give no tests for blood pigments and are of uniform shape 
and size - or they present some undescribed phase of a spore forming 
organism. The latter theory seems the more probable, particularly 
since they are replaced by the following symbiont-like cell inclusions. 

Of the three bodies under question, the yeast-like granules 
present the greatest similarity to living symbiotic units. They are 
similar in size and shape to members of the yeast group, exhibit apparent 
changes in growth, possess a thick cell wall, are very resistant to 
stains, and are occasionally suggestive of budding. Their sudden 
appearance in only certain of the intestinal cells of semi-replete 
ticks is suggestive of growth. If they were waste particles of haemato- 
genous origin, they would most likely have appeared in all cells of 
similar size and position, whether in individual gut sections or in 
bilateral counterparts. Yeast plants are very commonly found as 















:'v; ‘ 

















, * 




. 







• u 








■ 








■ 


■ 


. 



















- 49 - 


symbionts in sap-sucking insects, but according to Buchner (2) there 
have so far been no records of such symbionts having been seen in any 
blood-sucking insects. 

The intracellular globules, whether living bodies, or inani¬ 
mate vacuoles of matter, are elements of extreme interest. They have 
already been shorn to play an important part in the assimilative pro¬ 
cesses, being directly responsible for the greater part of the morpho¬ 
logical changes that occur in the epithelial cells as the tick passes 
towards a stage of repletion. The exact nature of their benefit to 
the tick, however, is not known, and at present is as little understood 
as the identity of the bodies themselves. 

Bases for assuming them to be merely globules of engulfed 
protein matter are plentiful; they appear in all epithelial cells as 
small droplets as soon as the cells are in contact with haemolysed 
blood; they enlarge, as the time for assimilation increases; they ex¬ 
hibit the same staining reactions as does blood, and even react to 
the Benzidene test; and they have never been seen in any form of division 
while in the cell membrane nor yielded any indication of a nucleus. 

On the other hand, they exhibit equ£ ly outstanding qualities that 
are suggestive of life. They grow from small spheres to larger ones, 

(f 

and since having only blood fluids to assimilate, naturally give a 
positive Benzidene test for haemoglobin. They possess a resistant 
membrane about them, will not disintegrate in water, alcohol or fat 
solvents, and will maintain oval or irregular shapes for many days. 

They present a general granular appearance and even a concentric 
structure when treated with special stains; occasionally they stain 







1 














50 - 


blue with Mallory’s, instead of red, as if showing signs of age 
(Plate V, Fig. 2). Full sized globules in replete ticks, when 
stained with Giemsa's, frequently are seen to have engulfed one or 
more blue-staining granules, believed to be fragments of epithelial 
cell nuclei (Plate IV, Fig. 2). They apparently possess an affinity 
for this material, yet on no occasion have they been seen to take 
in the surrounding yeast-like bodies. 

Whether these cells have been seen in a process of division 
is not certain. Such a state would definitely prove them to be 
organisms. Forms have been seen in which there is a budding or 
cleavage effect, including a distinct membrane between the two adjacent 
bodies. This appearance could be brought about by either two inani¬ 
mate globules coining together, the adjacent membranes refusing to 
break, or by an animate body forming a cell wall preparatory to dividing 
From the microscopic picture the latter seems the more probable. 

Before departing from the morphological picture of these 
globules, mention must be made of one other element of the tick’s 
anatomy. In both replete and unfed adults there have been noticed 
groups of oval cells, 4 microns in size, that invariably stain an even 
red with Mallory’s. These objects appear to infest the sheath of 
the coelomic muscle fibres, clustering along them like parasites (Plate 
V, Fig. 1). Although it is probable that they are a form of phago¬ 
cyte - these cells in insects often attaching themselves to free sur¬ 
faces of tissues - it is not impossible that they may bear some relation 
ship to the globular masses under discussion. 

If the intracellular globules are organisms, they are un- 



51 - 


doubtedly some form of a symbiont. Their type of cell obviously 
does not fall under the headings of any of the recognized forms of 
microorganisms, such as the bacteria, protozoa, or yeasts. Never¬ 
theless, the possibility of there being such an organism in existence 
is not remote, and if present, would resemble very closely the recently 
studied symbionts of aphis. 

Before proceeding further, it will be necessary to digress 
briefly to the studies of Buchner (2) and Paillot (23). 

In most Homoptera there is, in the abdomen, a mass of cell 
tissue - the pseudovitellus or mycetome. According to Buchner (Arch. 
Protistenk. 1912) this organ contains great numbers of symbiotic micro¬ 
organisms which are harboured in cells known as mycetocytes. The 
association is claimed to result in a mutual satisfaction, the plants 
living at the expense of the host, and at the same time relieving it 
of excess waste products or food materials. 

Paillot, in dealing with the mycetomes of aphis, describes 
the symbionts as being elements of rounded form, the general aspect 
of which varies hardly from one species to another. These bodies, he 
states, have been temporarily placed with the yeasts. The basis for 
such a position, however, is quite unsound, since the existence of a 
differentiated nucleus cannot be demonstrated, and they have nothing 
in common with the characteristic budding of the yeasts. The symbionts 
multiply entirely by fission, as in the ordinary micrococci. 

Wien coloured by iron haematoxylin, the organisms present 
themselves as rounded masses of fairly homogenous structure, the central 
part appearing more coloured than the peripheral region. There was 










; > i v 1 . 





' 

r ' • 

.. . --.VC ' :::: ; : ;i;i; • ■ ; ■ • V ' - 

' * 

« 

: ■ ; • _ .. . : -ry,;:;.r ' . . ' V ’ ' ^ ^ ^ !’ 




; 



52 - 


nothing that reminded one of the form and structure of a nucleus. 

He further adds that sometimes with smears coloured by Giemsa, 
there appeared chroraatophile or basophile granules dispersed through 
the mass of the cell, or sometimes the central mass of the symbiont 
was coloured purple while the perimeter remained a pale blue. These 
organisms often reached a size of six microns. 

The classification of these symbiotic globules in the aphis 
awaits a thorough knowledge of their nature and is dependent on a 
greater understanding of other symbiotic microorganisms of insects. 

These cells of Paillot’s thus resemble the tick globules by 
possessing only the indication of a nucleus, and by being of similar 
size and shape. In each case have basophile granules been noted under 
certain conditions when stained with Giemsa*s fluid. 

Whether the similarities of these bodies from widely differing 
arthropods is any indication of their both being organisms remains to 
be seen. Buchner (2) states that to date none of the Ixodoidea have 
been known to possess mycetomes. In any case, were the epithelial 
cells of the tick acting in the form of mycetocytes, the gut of the 
creature could hardly be termed as a mycetome. Further studies will 
undoubtedly shed more light on the nature of the intracellular globules 
of the tick, and whatever the fate of their placing, they will invari¬ 
ably be of considerable interest in pathological and physiological 
studies of the tick in relation to disease. 




53 


Part II. 


STUDIES ON THE RATS OF TICK FEEDING 

IN RELATION TO DISEASE 


1. General Di scussion of Tick Paralysis * 

The ensuing studies have been made in an attempt to throw 
more light on the problem of tick paralysis. This disease is produced 
by a variety of ticks and its occurrence appears to be ¥/orld-wide. 

Its mysterious and often fat si nature? and the elusiveness of a causa¬ 
tive factor have enticed numerous workers to spend more than a passing 
thought in connection with its etiology? but although several conflicting 
theories have been advanced, no definite conclusions can. yet be drawn 
that satisfactorily explain its cause or causes. 

The disease is prevalent in Southern Alberta and British 
Columbia, and throughout the North-western Rocky Mountain United States, 

In these localities it is caused by the female Spotted Fever tick, 
Dermacentor andersoni . In British Columbia, tick paralysis has attracted 
considerable attention, particularly among the large cattle ranches. 

Eight human deaths from the disease in this province were reported 
recently by Dr, Menzies of the British Columbia Health Service, and 
every year there are minor cases among dhildren. Sheep, dogs, and 
cattle are particularly susceptible to the tick, recent paralysis out¬ 
breaks in individual cattle ranches having involved, on two occasions, 
a hundred and two hundred animals with a respective mortality of sixty 
and thirteen percent. 
























■, . 






' 




* 


.. 

■ 


54 - 


Tick paralysis is prevalent in Australia and South Africa, 
proving a 'veritable menace' to sheep fanners in many parts* The 
causative ticks in these countries are species of Ixodes. 

Etiology: Tick paralysis may be produced in an animal by 

single tick. The symptoms appear only when the tick has been engorging 
for about seven days and is nearing repletion. The onset is sudden 
and is characterized by unsteady gait, and an acute ascending motor 
paralysis of the flaccid type. Pulse and breathing are rapid, there 
is slight glandular disturbance, and pain is absent. Death usually 
occurs in twenty-four to sixty hours from paralysis of the thoracic 
organs. If the causative tick is removed during paralysis, there is 
a rapid and complete recovery of the patient, normality usually being 
attained in four to twenty-four hours depending upon the seriousness 
of the disease. Exceptions to these observations are instanced in the 
case of a British Columbia man whose recovery required a period of over 
three months, and in certain South African sheep which remain in a 
weakened condition for many weeks. There is considerable controversy 
as to whether an animal can be immunized against the disease. The 
writer has noted many instances where it has been impossible to induce 
paralysis even in young lambs with as many as a. dozen rapidly feeding 
ticks. 

The facts of rapid recovery, negative necropsy findings, and 
negative inoculation tests point to the theory that a tick-secreted 
toxin is responsible for the paralytic symptoms. This supposition 
is strengthened by experiments that have been performed in Australia, 
in which it was found that an injection of crushed salivary glands 




- 55 - 


from two and a half ticks proved to be a M.L.D. for the mouse. Opposing 
this theory are the facts that the latter result has not been obtained 
in British Columbia by glands from as many as seven ticks, dissected 
in vivo or while frozen, and injected intravenously, subcutaneously, 
and intraspinally, into mice, dogs end sheep* that many ticks may feed 
upon an animal with no ill effect on the part of the host - or one 
tick may cause a fatal paralysis; and that a bacterial disease, similar 
in symptoms to paralysis, is produced in the moose by a closely allied 
tick • 

Such is the present state of data on tick paralysis. It 
must be borne in mind, however, that owing to the wide distribution 
of this disease it is quite possible that the variations appearing in 
different countries, and even in same provinces or states, are due to 
more than one type of disease. If this is true, then much of the con¬ 
fusing and conflicting data may be accounted for. 

Variations in the Rate of Feeding of 
Adult Ticks and Relation of Such to 
Paralysis; 

Tick paralysis is generally thought to be due to a rapid 
injection of a salivary toxin by the tick into its host. This condition 
would logically accompany any rapid feeding on the part of the tick. 
Paralysis in British Columbia is produced only by fast feeding ticks 
that drop at the end of seven to eight days. 

Attacking the problem from this end, the writer has endeavoured 
to discover the conditions that are conducive to rapid feeding of the 


tick 




















' 
















. 














:■ ■ ■ : . • ‘ ^ 

. 




- 













56 


It must first be noted that variations in the rate of tick 
feeding may be divided into two groups; an individual variation, present 
among certain ticks, and a general seasonal variation in which all 
ticks are affected. In the first case, a series of ticks of common 
origin, feeding under apparently identical conditions, will often 
show a variation in feeding period from seven to eighteen days. In 
the second, it is noted that all ticks will feed readily in the spring 
months over an average period of about nine days, but towards the fall 
and during the winter months, although apparently willing to engorge, 
they exhibit a striking inability to do so* 

It remains to be seen if there is any relationship between 
these two types of feeding phenomena. 

2. Study of Host and Tick Tissues 
in Relation to Varying Feeding 

Rates of Individual Ticks . 

On June 11th, 1S35, a four month old lamb was infested with 
twenty-eight pairs of adult Dermacentor andersoni ticks. These ticks 
were placed in groups of eight over the following areas of grease free 
and closely clipped wool and were covered by gauze infesting cages. 

A. Directly behind the base of left ear. 

B. Over left shoulder. 

C. To right of spine in lumbar region. 

D. To left of spine in pelvic region. 

E. On right flank. 

F. On right side of belly. 

G. On scrotum. 

By June 17th, th6 following engorging female ticks were in 
the indicated stages of repletion. (Ticks that had failed to attach 
during the first day were dessicated by the sun.) 














' 

- 

' 

■ 




















, 

■ ..... . . ..... . . ' '■ : 

’ 



. 

. 


, 























57 


A. 1 tick -g— replete* 

B. 3 ticks jr replete; 1 -§• replete. 

C* 3 " ; 1 dropped rep 

it , 

9 


D. 3 

E. 3 

F. 3 

G. 3 


f- 


replete. 


n 


f replete; 1 replete. 

■§■ " ; 1 dropped replete. 


These ticks were all of the same stock - a series of adults 
that were collected two months previously by dragging in a single area 
near Kamloops. They all commenced feeding on the same host at the 
same date and were consequently under common weather conditions. Each 
infested piece of skin was approximately 1 square inch in area, thus 
allowing the ticks of each group as little variation in skin structure 
as possible. Yet in spite of these conditions, similar for each tick, 
there appeared a great difference in their feeding rates, as shown 
above (Figures 9 and 10). 

Immediately after repletion of two of the ticks (groups C. & 

G.), the host was chloroformed. Pieces of skin -J- inch deep and ■§• inch 
square were incised around each tick, and, with the latter still attached, 
were placed in Bouin's. To effect a rapid penetration of the fixative, 
the dorsal integument of each tick was removed. The entire operation 

was completed as rapidly as possible, after which the animal was killed. 
Except for the two replete ticks that had previously detached themselves, 
not one of the parasites released its hold during the whole of the some¬ 
what drastic procedure. 

All specimens were left in Bouin*s for eighteen hours; removed 
to fifty percent alcohol for one half hour; to sixty-five percent for 
six hours, and stored indefinitely in seventy-five percent. 















' 


- 

, 










* 

■ 

. 






- 




. 


■ - 








- 58 - 


Comparison of Host Tissues Below Fast and 
Slow Feeding Ticks (Figure 10): 

A series of sections was made from the previously mentioned 
tissues. (For technique, see page 77). Where possible, these 
sections were taken through the site of attachment of the tick. Efforts 
to preserve the mouth parts within the tissue were unsuccessful, due 
to their chitinous nature, but the depth of penetration could clearly 
be seen on certain slides, and was marked by a surrounding scab of 
dried blood. Very little mechanical disturbance appeared to result 
from the tick's feeding, the mouth parts rarely penetrating beyond 
the epidermal layer. Opposed to this fact is the common impression 
that the tick buries itself in the tissues of its host. This, of 
course, is no more true than the supposition that the tick must be 
'unscrewed' to be removed from the skin, though it is probable that 
the mere twisting may serve to loosen the mouth parts. 

(a) The Host Tissue Below Fast Feeding Ticks. 

Sections dealt with here were made from the skin below two 
ticks that were replete at the end of seven days ( groups C and G ), 
and from tissue below a two-thirds replete tick (group E). All three 
series, being pathologically similar, will be described collectively. 

The site of attachment of the parasite is surrounded by an 
area of dried haemolysed blood. Beneath this scab, in two or the 
three series, a small pocket of pus was present, representing probably 
a secondary infection. The whole of the dermis presented a picture 
of an acute inflammation. The blood vessels and capillaries were 


tremendously dilated, and in two tissues, had ruptured to form haemorr- 



59 - 


hagic areas of haemolysed blood, .An edema was present throughout 
the tissue, filling lymph spaces with a thick transudate. Surround¬ 
ing every blood vessel, and extending into the corium towards the tick, 
there appeared a vast collection of leucocytes. These foci consisted 
mainly of polymorphonuclears and fibroblasts, but contained a large 
percentage of eosinophiles, lymphocytes, and histocytes. In no instance 
could red blood cells be discovered, other than within certain of the 
unruptured capillaries. It is believed by the writer that this whole 
area must be saturated with haemolysed blood, but no positive test for 
haemoglobin (Benzidene reaction) could be obtained outside of the hae¬ 
morrhage to substantiate this probability. 

(b) The Host Tissue Below Slow Feeding Ticks. 

These three tissues were taken from areas within inch from 
the above mentioned ones. In each case, the tick had only reached 
a semi-replete stage at the time the tissue was fixed. Histological 
examinations of sections through these areas showed that little change 
had taken place as a result of the tick. Edema and inflammatory pro¬ 
cesses were practically absent, and the capillaries were only very 
slightly dilated. 

Discussion: 

It has already been shown thal an irregular rate of feeding 
may occur among a common stock of ticks while feeding under identical 
external conditions and on the same host. This variation was find, 
thought to be due to the fact that certain of the ticks had tapped a 
blood vessel, and so gained an extra supply of nutritive fluid. This 























































- 60 - 


theory fitted very well with the fact that rapidly feeding ticks 
usually cause paralysis - any toxic secretion would be readily dis¬ 
seminated by such a position. 

Studies from the previous experiment contribute the follow¬ 
ing data: Rapidly feeding ticks produce an acute inflammation in 

the underlying dermal tissues. Intense leucocytosis occurs around 
the blood vessels. The capillaries are very dilated, and a haemolytic 
area of haemolysed blood is usually present. Slow feeding ticks pro¬ 
duce little or no change within the tissue. Capillary counts in both 

cases were similar. 

These facts lead to an assumption that the inability for 
certain ticks to engorge rapidly during their feeding season is not 
through an insufficiency of tissue blood. It seems, rather, that the 
slow feeding ticks lack the power to produce sufficient disturbances 

within the tissue to cause a liberation of blood from the vessels . 

Since the mechanical disturbance is very slight, and since the tick 
does not penetrate deeply enough to obtain blood from the capillary 
bed, it is entirely dependant upon the production of an edema and hae¬ 
morrhage for its access to the blood fluid. It probably produces 
these injuries by the elaboration of a powerful toxin, the evidence 
of which is suggested by the pathology of the tissues below the fast 
feeding ticks. 










61 



•J- replete 
replete 


Figure 9. 


Tick group G. showing irregular feeding. 
(See page 57.) 



Figure 10. 

Tick group C. showing irregular feeding. 
(See page 57.) 














- 62 - 



COMPARISON cf HOST TISSUE BELOW 

FAST-FEEDING TICKS and SLOW-FEEDING TICKS 





Figure 11 








- 63 


3. A Study of Host and Tick in 

Relation to Seasonal Variations 

in the Rate of Tick Feeding* 

In the following series of experiments, mention is made of 
several investigations that were carried out during the summer of 1935* 
These were made by the writer while studying other phases of tick problems 
at the Dominion Entomological Laboratory, Kamloops, He is particularly 
indebted to the Dominion Entomological Department for the privilege of 
modifying certain infestation experiments to meet his requirements and 
for access to the results, the latter which have enabled him to establish 
the conclusions discussed herein. These summer studies have proven 
valuable in providing a basis for the ensuing winter experiments, and 
have also served to lend data for comparison with winter observations. 

To these ends they are quoted in detail together with the more recent 
studies. 

Studies on the Effect of Age upon 
the Feeding of Dermacentor andersoni : 

The peak of adult Dermacentor andersoni activity, during 
the year of 1935, was seen to occur in May. Throughout th© whole 
of this month large numbers of these ticks were gathered from tick 
areas in the vicinity of Kamloops, B.G. All of these specimens taken 
from the field showed normal activity and, v/hen pla.ced on animals, 
engorged over an average period of eight days. Conditions were ideal 
for their feeding. 

On the twenty-second of the same month a series of twelve 
pairs of Dermacentor andersoni adults were placed on a year old ram. 

These had all emerged from their nymphs! state during February, 1935. 














64 - 


Being of known age, an attempt was made to see if the irregular feeding 
of individual ticks (mentioned in the proceeding pages and noted often 
during general tick infestation experiments) was due to a difference 
in the ages of the ticks, or to some condition in the host. Since it 
is known that adult ticks may wait several years for a host, it is quite 
within reason to expect that the older ticks would show a weakened ability 
to engorge and thus take a longer period to feed. 

On May twenty eighth, instead of being two-thirds replete, as 
expected under the optimum conditions, these ticks were still unengcyged . 

They were still active, and had attached since the date of infestation, 
so indicating some unfavourable condition was present in either the tick 
or the host. 

In continuance with the above infestation experiment, cross 
infestations were made to ascertain whether the inability for the ticks 
to engorge was due to conditions in the tick, or in the host. The 
following material was used; 

(A) 1 year old ram, upon which ticks ’C* refused to feed during 
the period from May 22 to May 28. (See above experiment.) 

(B) 1 year old ewe, upon which all ticks 'D* will feed readily. 

(C) Flat adult D. andersoni ticks, the life history of which is 
as follows: Eggs laid in early June 1934; eggs hatched in late 
June; larvae kept over damp sand and fed between September 

and November; flat nymphs fed at end of December; adults emerged 
in February 1935. 

(D) Flat adult D« andersoni ticks collected in the middle of May 
1935 at Rayleigh Bluff, Kamloops. Individual life histories 
unknown. 

The following infestations were made on May 30th: 








65 


6 pairs of ticks *0’ were placed on sheep 'A', 

II H »* I Q I II II I' 'I 9 

-^2 ’• •• I* *j)* i* " »• •• *j\_* j 

■^2 •• '* •• »p • i« n I* ii «B * 

All infestations were made under capsule cages placed over grease 
free and closely clipped wool. At the end of one week the following 
observations were recorded: 

Nineteen of the twenty-four female ticks *D' were in various 
stages of engorgement on both sheep 'A* and *B'. In no case had any 
of the eighteen female ticks of group 'C' shown any signs of engorgement. 
The majority of these latter ticks were still alive and active, about 
twenty-five percent had attached but still were apparently unable to 
engorge, and a similar number had dried up from exposure. 

Conclusions: This experiment illustrated, with remarkable 
clearness, that the ticks of 'C* stock were unable to engorge while in 
their condition at the time of infesting. Their inability to do so 
was shown to be entirely due to a condition in themselves, and not to 
one present in the hosts *A* and 'B*. 

Studies on the Effect of Light on 
the Feeding of Dermacentor andersoni 
Ticks: 

During the winter of 1934-35, experimental studies pertaining 
to the feeding habits of Dermacentor andersoni Y/ere mad6 at the University 
of Alberta. A small number of ticks v&ich had refused to feed on 
rabbits during the fall were induced to do so when the host was ’modified* 
by previous gradually increased illumination. Details of this experi¬ 
ment appeared in ’Nature* ^3417, Vol. 135, under the title "Winter Feeding 
of the Tick D. andersoni Styles", Professor Win. Rowan and J.D. Gregson. 









' 




: l ' 


' 




■ 




■ 5 ... ■ ; i ■ 


















' t ' 




: 


' ; 




.i • ' J ■ l 






: ; - 






■ 










- 66 - 


The object of the above experiment, as of the following, was 
to attempt to show whether the inability of the tick to engorge during 
the fall and winter months lay in some unfavourable condition in the 
host, or in the tick, this condition being produced possibly by the 
shortening fall days. 

The following animals were accordingly placed under observation: 

(A) 1 sheep. This was left outside in the open during the entire 
experiment, and was consequently subjected to increasing days of 
light until June 21st. 

(B) 2 sheep (ram and ewe, each 1 year old) were subjected to shortening 

days by enclosing them during the night in an absolutely light 

proof shed. At the beginning of the experiment their day was 

from 5 a.m. to 7.30 p.m. On each successive day they were released 
from their shed five minutes later in the morning and shut up five 
minutes earlier in the evening . 

(C) A series of eighty pairs of ticks collected by dragging at Rayleigh, 

Kamloops, during early May, 1935, were placed in a shaded pyrex 
cylinder over damp earth immediately outside of the sheep shed door. 
These ticks received increasing days of light until June 21st. 

(D) A series of sixty pairs of ticks of the above stock were placed 

in a pyrex cylinder over damp earth immediately inside the sheep 
shed. These ticks consequently received the same decrease of light 
as the sheep, the door of the shea being left open during the day. 

The experiment commenced on May 9th. The sheep were infested 

on June 16th. The controlled animals at this date were receiving eight 

and a half hours of light each day, namely from 8 a.m. to 4.30 p.m. The 

shortening of days was continued to the end of the experiment on June 24th. 

Sheep B. (Ram) Eight pairs of ticks *C' were placed under each 
of two cages along the back. 

Sheep B. (Ewe) Eight pairs of ticks *C' were placed under each 

of three cages, one above the shoulder and two over the hips. 

Sheep A. Eight pairs of ticks 'C* were placed under each of two 
cages, one over the left shoulder and one at the centre of 
the back. 

Eight pairs of ticks *D' were placed under each of three 
cages, these being placed over the right shoulder, right hip, 
and centre of back. 










■ 

, ' 









’ 













































































: 










, 











67 


The following periods of feeding were noted for the female 
ticks that attached on June 16th: 


Sheep A. Tick group 'C' 


2 dropped in 6 days 


4 

4 

5 


II ll rj ll 

II II g II 

ii ii g ii 


Average engorging 
period for 15 ticks 
was 7.8 days. 


Tick group 'D* 2 dropped in 7 days 

2 " "8 " Average period of 

3 " "9 " engorging for 13 

6 " " 12 " ticks was 9.9 days. 

(2 remained unengorged) 


Sheep B. 
(ram) 


Tick group *C* 


4 dropped in 6 days 

4 « '*8 '* 

TJ II "9 11 


Average engorging 
period for 15 ticks 
was 7.9 days. 


Sheep B. Tick group *C’ 1 dropped in 6 days 

(ewe) 1 " "7 " Average engorging 

7 " "8 « period for 10 ticks 

1 " ’* 10 " was 7.9 days. 

The results of this experiment have suggested that although 
light may have some effect on the physiological state of the host, such 
a change in its condition does not appear to affect the rate of feeding 
of the tick. This assumption, it will be noted, contradicts the points 
suggested in the previous experiments, but the latter observations were 
cajrried out under slightly different conditions and with different hosts, 
and do not necessarily refute the former suggestion that the winter 
feeding of ticks is dependent on the condition of the host. 

It would seem, from the average of time taken for the light 
controlled and uncontrolled ticks to engorge under similar host and 
weather conditions, that the feeding rates of ticks are impaired by 
the previous treatment of decreasing light days. Unfortunately, due 
to the high rate of mortality of ticks between infestation and attaching 
periods, the number of females under observation was very small. The 




























* 

■ ' . l v 














. 

















- 68 - 


results of this portion of the experiment, however, have been of 
sufficient interest to warrant repetition and further experiments 
with regard to the effect of light on ticks. 

During the fall of 1935 a further experiment was conducted 
to determine whether light had any effect upon the rate of tick feeding. 
Since the supply of live ticks at this time was limited, and the infesting 
of rabbits, even when taking the utmost precaution, involves the risk 
of losing the parasites, the writer, in this experiment, used himself 
as the host. 

Five adult female Dermacentor andersoni ticks v/ere used, all 
being specimens that were collected at Kamloops in May, 1935. These 
ticks were marked and subjected to the following conditions. Their 
individual behaviour is recorded in the same table. (See page 69.) 

Histological Examination of Ticks: All the ticks were 

sectioned and stained with eosin-haematoxylin and Mallory's stains. 
Examination of the stained sections gave similar and normal pictures 
for all ticks. In the intestines of each specimen was seen a certain 
amount of blood (most in tick jf 1) . The gut epithelial tissues were 
all commencing the absorptive stage. Black pigment bodies were abundant 
in all the cells, and numerous small round globules were present, but 
in no cases were there present any of the brown yeast-like granules. 

The fact that at the areas of attachment an intense itching 
was produced further suggests that a powerful toxin is injected into 
the host tissues during the feeding of the tick. The lack of blood 
from below the four specimens that showed no signs of engorging streng¬ 
thens the theory that ticks will feed fast only when there is sufficient 
free blood surrounding their mouth parts. 





69 


1935. Tick fflt- . . .. .tfJL — 

Nov .3 Irradiated continually for one week under 
a 60 W. quartz Mazda CX lamp. The ticks 
were enclosed in a petri dish covered by 
a damp cloth thus permitting penetration 
of ultra-violet rays. The source of li^it 
was one foot from the ticks, a distance 
giving an irradiation approx, equivalent 
to sunlight. (Pers. corres. Gen. Elec.) 


if 3, ■ . ..a,- I*-'.' 

No irradiation. These 
ticks were left in the 
dark, but were under simi¬ 
lar humidity and tempera¬ 
ture conditions. 


10th Placed on right arm under 

Placed 

Placed 

Placed 

Placed 

capsule. 

on 

on 

on 

on 


left 

left 

left 

right 


arm. 

arm. 

arm. 

arm. 


(All ticks were active when placed on the skin and 
within six hours each had definitely attached itself 
and was ready to engorge.) 


11th Released its hold during the Had all attached near Firmly 

night, and was found firmly the same site on arm. attached. 

attached to the chest in the 

morning. 

(All ticks very active reacting immediately to wafts 
of breath. No excreta observed. Slight inflammation 
and intense itching of skin surrounding ticks.)* 


12th All ticks still at same sites. Excreta practically 

negligible. Edematous boil-like elevations filled 
with clear serum appeared in the skin surrounding the 
ticks. 

13th. Portion of chest and tick sub- 
a.m. mitted to mercury arc rays for 
two mins. (The tick at this 
date still showed no signs of 
engorging.) 


13th. Tick began to engorge very 
p.m. rapidly. Much excreta, with 
its characteristic odor. 
Edematous raised area of skin 
2 cm. in diameter at site of 
attachment. Inflam, region 
surrounding wound for a dis¬ 
tance of two inches. 


All other ticks showed no signs 
of engorgement, although they 
occasionally liberated small parti¬ 
cles of black excrement. Inflam¬ 
matory areas one inch in diameter. 
Intense itching. 


All ticks were removed and placed in Bouin*s for micro¬ 
scopical examination. Wounds in the skin healed slowly, 
and itched as long as four weeks after. 

Bleeding followed removal No blood was evident upon removal, 

of mouth parts. 




























70 


The interesting results of the previous experiment end the 
later arrival of more ticks of the same stock led the writer to conduct 
one more experiment along the same lines. A rabbit was used for the 
host this time> and instead of the apparently ineffective irradiation 
of ticks by quartz lamps, the mercury arc method was employed. 

The observations commenced on January 8th, when two flat 
female ticks were placed under gauze capsules on each side of the rabbit 
(see technique page 73). 

The ticks, as usual, attached to their host shortly after 
being placed on the skin. They were observed carefully for five days, 
during which time they exhibited practically no tendency to engorge. 

(Under spring conditions they would have been two-thirds replete by 
this time.) 

On January 13th the infesting capsule was temporarily removed 
from the right side of the rabbit and the ticks and surrounding skin 
were exposed to a mercury arc light for ten minutes. This procedure 
was repeated for three days, a similar dose of ultra violet being given 
each time. At the end of the third day it was found that all the 
ticks had commenced to engorge. Furthermore, the two ticks that had 
been irradiated were noticeably larger than those that had received 
no treatment. The average size of the ticks from each of the two groups 
was respectively three eighths and one fourth of the replete ste.ge at 
this time. 

Unfortunately at this date the rabbit succeeded in tearing 
off the cages and eating all the ticks but one. This remaining specimen, 
one which had never been irradiated, was observed for a week. At the 

































- 


, 












- 

■ 



' 






ih'fc - ' 


' 




- 

■ 









, 






- 71 - 


end of that time it was still only about two thirds replete. 

Discussion; In the above observations it is indicated that 
irradiation of ticks by quartz (Mazda CX) lamps has little or no effect 
upon the metabolism of the tick in relation to its feeding. An increase 
in the engorging rate, however, was noticed on two occasions when 
feeding ticks and adjacent host tissues were submitted to mercury arc 
treatment. 

Assuming from the previously mentioned experiments (pages 65-68) 
that light produced no noticeable physiological change in the tick or 
host in relation to tick feeding rate, and considering the theory that 
slow feeding ticks are merely suffering from a lack of accessible tissue 
blood (page 60), it is suggested that the ultra violet treatment of host 
and tick is effective chiefly through a local pathological condition 
that is produced in the host. This condition, seen as a hyperaemia, 
would naturally tend to bring more blood to the subcutaneous tissues 
surrounding the tick, thus creating a factor conducive to increased 
assimilation processes. 

The tick feeding studies have to date led to the suggestion 
that the varying rates of tick engorgement are directly due to the 
varying abilities of ticks to produce a hyperaemia within the host 
tissues surrounding the site of attachment. This condition is believed 
to be brought about by some powerful salivary irritant that is injected 
into the wound. 

The reason for the seasonal and individual variations in the 
potency of this toxin is still unknown. It was at this point in these 


studies that the various intracellular symbiont-like bodies were noticed 




72 - 


in the digestive epithelium of the tick. It is possible that light 
and other external physical conditions may play a part in the metabolism 
of these symbionts, they in turn affecting the physiology of the tick. 
The possibility of such intricate relationships has led the writer to 
temporarily discontinue the above experiments until more is known about 
the normal tick content flora. 





73 


APPENDIX 

TECHNIQUE FOR THE STUDY OF TICK FLORA 

The microscopic studies of tick tissues and their flora are 
beset with innumeraole difficulties, a fact that has been realized by 
all who have carried out investigations along this line. The following 
methods used in attacking tick problems have been found to be most satis¬ 
factory by the writer. 

1. Methods Employed for 
Infestation Studies : 

The writer will make no mention here of large scale infestation 
procedures, such as are recognized in experimental laboratories where 
numerous ticks are reared for life history and parasite studies. The 
following methods only apply to feeding and host reaction studies of 
individual or small groups of ticks where daily observations are required. 
All experiments of this nature are rendered doubly difficult by the 
fact that the student has an animal continually opposing his efforts. 

The mere attachment of a tick container to a rabbit v/ill usually cause 
the animal to scratch and bite the object until it is torn off. Cages 
placed on the backs of sheep are readily rubbed off, or squashed if 
placed on their heads. The best infesting cages that the writer has 
tried require at least daily attention. 

Sheep are undoubtedly the most suitable animals for the feeding 
of Dermacentor andersoni adults. Besides being one of their normal 
hosts, they provide remarkable facilities for the attachment of infesting 
cages. The latter are in the form of dome shaped capsules, and are 
easily made from squares of brass gauze. 














- 









































, 

' 















74 


The mesh of this screen should he sufficiently close to keep 
the ticks enclosed, and the wire must be stout enough to give the cage 
rigidity. The bottom of the capsule is trimmed evenly and covered 
with adhesive tape to prevent injury to the host's skin. It is important, 
whenever adhesives are used, that precautions are taken to ensure that 
there are no sticky portions vdthin reach of the ticks. 

The infesting area on the host is clipped and washed free 
from grease. The cage is then attached by hitching six lengths of 
stout linen thread to opposite tufts of the surrounding wool, and passing 
them through meshes near the apex of the container. If the opposite 
threads are tied in bows, then the cage may readily be removed for in¬ 
spection of ticks. The writer has found this an exceedingly satisfactory 
method, providing the threads are renewed whenever they begin to rot 
or wear. 

Ihen the experiment demands a number of hosts, sheep are 
obviously out of the question. Rabbits have been resorted to in these 
instances, but have proved to be far from satisfactory. The gauze 
capsule method was found to be the most efficient for infestations. 

Each container was fastened by fine cross wires to a stout wire ring 
of larger diameter than that of the capsule, this ring being held to 
the animal by a broad band of adhesive tape that entirely encircled 
the body. 

Personal infestations were employed when there was too great 
a risk in losing the ticks. In these instances the ticks were enclosed 
in a cork ring that was held on the arm by a cloth bandage. In such 
experiments, of course, the possibilities of infection must be considered. 





























- 


. 











75 - 


2. Technique for Gross 
Anatomical Studies : 

Gross dissections are best carried out under physiological 
saline solution. The tick is held in position by first spreading 
it out on a sheet of adhesive tape, embedding the legs into the ad¬ 
hesive by drawing a hot needle over them. The tape is pinned or melted 
onto a wax bed and the whole tray filled with saline. The chitinous 
integument of the tick is circumcised with the point of a razor scalpel, 
and with little difficulty can be detached from the underlying mass of 
viscera. 

Fully engorged female ticks are so distended with blood that 
an accidental rupturing of the diverticula will cause the contents to 
flow out and obscure the field. This danger may be avoided by immersing 
the specimen momentarily in boiling water before placing if on the dis¬ 
secting tray (due to coagulation of gut contents). 

Anatomical studies of the capitulum and other chitinous 
portions are revealed by careful clearing in 3% NaJOH solution and sub¬ 
sequent mounting in Canada balsam or Euparel. 

3 • Histological Technique for 
Tick Sectioning^ 

(1) Killing of specimens. 

Ticks are extremely resistant to poisonous fumes and liquids. 
Adult specimens often crawl about after having been half an hour under 
95% alcohol and mercuric chloride. Temporary immersion in hot 70%> 
alcohol will kill and distend larvae and nymphs, and this method is 
generally used when making whole mounts. For histological studies, 











- 



























i 




- ■ 










76 


direct killing in the fixative is advised. To ensure an even and rapid 
penetration of the fixing fluid, part of the integument must be removed. 
This is done most conveniently by the method previously described. For 
bacteriological studies, a slice off each side of the tick is sufficient 
to effect penetration. 

(2) Fixing. 

Various fixatives have been used, all with fairly satisfactory 

Among these may be mentioned: 

Bichromate of potash 2% 

Sulphate of soda 1 % 

Mercuric bichloride 5$ Dissolved in 100 cc. water. 

Acetic Acid (added after) 

Picric acid sat. aqueous sol. 75 parts, 

Formol 25 " , 

Acetic acid 5 " 

Glacial acetic acid 1 part, 

Absolute alcohol 3 parts. 

Cowdry recommends Regaud's fixative as being particularly good 
for preservation of mitochondria and bacteria. The solution consists 
of 4 parts 3% potassium bichromate and 1 part of commercial formalin. 

The solution must be used immediately after being made and should b© 
changed several times for one or two days. The tissues are washed in 
running water for 24 hours and then changed to alcohol. The high con¬ 
centration of formalin in this fixative aids penetration between the 
plates of chitin, and the bichromate acts as a mordant for Giemsa's stain. 

(3) Infiltrating. 

The fixed tissues, haveing been washed in water or alcohol, 
were passed successively through the following solutions of ethyl and 
N-butyl alcohols: 


results. 

Zenker's 

Bouin * s 

Carnoy* s 











77 


18 cc. 50$ ethyl and 2 cc. N-butyl, 

16 cc. 60$ " " 4 cc. " , 

13 cc. 75$ " " 7 cc. " , 

9 cc. 90$ " " 11 cc. " , 

5 cc. absolute " " 15 cc. " 

They were allowed to remain in each of the five grades for 
six hours. These solutions were followed by two changes of pure 
butyl alcohol, each of 6 to 10 hours duration. The butyl alcohol 
has the advantage of not hardening the chitin as much as xylol does. 

Cedar oil was used with fair results, but the longer period 
taken for replacement by paraffin tends to harden the tissues to an 
unnecessary extent. 

(4) Embedding and Sectioning. 

The butyl alcohol was replaced by a low melting point paraffin 
(48-52 degrees), five one hour changes being sufficient to complete the 
removal of alcohol. A temperature of 10 C. was found to be most suitable 
for the cutting of sections 5 to 10 microns in thickness. The ribbons 
were flattened over egg albumen in the usual procedure. 

(5) Staining. 

Sections of engorged female ticks contain a large amount of blood, 
and because of this show a great tendency to curl off the slide if they 
are 15 microns or over in thickness. Loss of such sections during stain¬ 
ing may be prevented by passing the slice from absolute into a thin solu¬ 
tion of celloidin. In the ascending series of alcohols, the absolute 
is substituted by a carbolxylol solution (25$ phenol). 

Apart from this deviation, which was followed only in the case 
of thick sections, the normal staining routine was used. 

A variety of stains were tried for histological studies. 



















. 














. 













. 





' 








. 

















78 


Haemotoxvlin-eosin was found to be the most satisfactory for general 
purposes. (Delafield’s) 

Mallory^ triple stain was particularly useful for studying assimilative 
changes within the epithelial cells# the intracellular droplets appear¬ 
ing a bright red, in contrast to the blue cell elements. 

Giemsa's stain was of value in studying nuclear changes. 

Heidenhain's Iron Haematoxylin was used in several instances to bring 
out mitochondria and nuclear structures. 

Methylene blue-eosin gave a clear picture of connective tissue elements. 

4. Bacteriological Technique for the 
Study of Tick-borne Microorganisms : 

Morphological Examination for Microorganisms. 

(1) Staining. 

All sections that were examined for bacteria and other tick 
invading microorganisms were cut at 4 microns and stained one or both 
of the following stains. In either case, the paraffin sections were 
passed through xylol and brought down to distilled water in the usual 
manner. 

Giemsa. Tissues were stained half an hour, washed with 
distilled water, and passed immediately through 95/£ alcohol to absolute. 

The following method was found to be very satisfactory for 
the demonstrating of bacteria in tick tissues: 

Brown and Breen*s Differential Method for Bacteria in Sections . 

1. Stain in freshly filtered alum-haematoxylin (Harris) 4 min. 

2. Wash in acid alcohol (3/£ HC1 in 95/£ ale.) until pink. 

• Wash in ammonia water (1 cc. NH4OH in 100 cc. water) till blue. 


3 


























, 




- 




. 










■ 








4 








- 




' 












. 



















79 


4. Wash in water. 

5. In a small vial mix 5 drops of 5 J aqueous sol. sodium bicarbonate 
with 0.75 cc. of 1% aqueous sol. of gentian violet. Pour mixture 
on slide for 2 minutes. 

6 . Wash quickly with water. 

7. Cover with Lugol's iodine sol. for 1 minute. 

8 . Wash with water. Blot. 

9. Decolourize in one part ether plus 3 parts acetone. 

10. Blot. 

11. Stain with basic fuschin (0.005 gm. in 100 cc. water) for 5 minutes. 
(A sat. sol. of fuschin was found to be more satisfactory.) 

12. Wash in water, blot, but do not allow section to dry. 

13. Pass through acetone. 

14. Decolourize carefully in a sol. of 0.1 gm. picric acid in 100 cc. 
acetone. 

15. Pass through acetone, equal parts of acetone and xylol, and xylol. 

16. Mount in balsam. 


Smears of tick gut contents were fixed for a minute in 95^ 
alcohol and stained for bacteria by Gram's stain. 


The following modification of Tunnicliff's stain was used 
to demonstrate the presence of spirochetes; 

1. Cover smear with carbol crystal violet for 30 seconds. (Sat. ale. 
sol. crystal violet, 10 cc.j 5/£ aq. phenol sol. 90 cc.) 

2. Wash with water. 

3. Cover with Lugol's iodine sol. for 30 seconds. 

4. Y/ash with water. 

5. Cover with safrsnin, 30 seconds. 


6 


Wash with water 














80 - 


Moeller's Method for Spores . 

A method by which bacterial spores are stained red in contrast 
to the blue staining bodies. 

(1) Wash fixed smear in chloroform for two minutes. 

(2) Wash in water. 

(3) Cover with 5 j chromic acid for two minutes. 

(4) Wash in water, and steam in carbolfuschin solution for three 
to five minutes. 

(5) Decolorize in 5 J sulphuric acid for 5 to 10 minutes. 

(6) Wash in water, and stain in aqueous methylene blue for one 
minut e. 

(2) Dark Field Illumination. 

Examination of fresh smears in saline by dark field illumina- 
tion is of value, since by this method possible forms of microorganisms 
may be seen that would otherwise be destroyed beyond recognition by 
drying and fixing. 

5• Artificial Media for the Culturing 
of Tick Invading Microorganisms . 

The preparation of media suitable for the growth of highly 
adapted forms of microorganisms has long been a problem to the bacteri¬ 
ologist . 

Here, in the form of various tick invading bacteria and possible 
intracellular symbionts, the student is presented with organisms possess¬ 
ing extremely delicate cultural rea.ctions. To date, many of the micro¬ 
organisms seen within tick tissues remain uncultured on artificial media. 
Others have been grown only after years of searching for a suitable medium. 












. 


. 














81 


The writer lists here media that might normally be used in 
attempting to isolate strains of tick invading organisms. Ihereas 
ordinary bacteriological media are usually adjusted to a pH between 7 
and 7.6, the writer advises the experimenting of media with pH's as 
low as 6, since it was observed from the reactions of six engorged 


nymphal ticks that the pH of the body contents was between 6 and 6.2. 

Meat Extract Broth . (Zinsser - 37) 

To 1 litre of distilled water add: 

Difco Meat extract 5 grams; 

Peptone 10 " ; 

NaCl. 5 " , 

Mix, dissolve, cool, and adjust pH. 

Boil for 30 minutes, re-adjust, filter, and tube. 


Plain Agar . (Zinsser Bact.) 


Agar 20 
Meat extract 3 
Peptone 20 
Sodium chloride 5 
Distilled water 1000 


Boil till agar is dissolved, 
adjust pH, filter and tube. 


grains; 

u . 
i 

« 

n # 

> 

cc. 

add water to restore volume, 


Cooked Meat Medium . (Prac. Bac. Mackie & McCart.) 

For cultivation of anaerobes. 

Mince 500 gr. fresh heart, place in 500 cc. boiling N/20 
caustic soda, simmer for 20 minutes. Neutralization of lactic acid 
occurs, leaving pH about 7.5. Drain liquid and partially dry meat. 
Place 5 cc. of meat in each tube and add 1% infusion broth (of adjusted 
pH) to cover meat by 1 cc. Boil in bath for half an hour to drive 
off oxygen. Surface may be covered with -J- inch sterile paraffin. 


Hottinger Broth . (Per kindness of Dr. Naismith, Kamloops.) 

Take about 750 gr. of meat; free it from facia, cut into finger 
length pieces and boil in 1500 cc. distilled water. After 15 minutes 
take out meat and put through grinder. Cool the water to 37 C. and 
add sodimm carbonate, 3 grams. Put 550 grams of the meat into a two 
litre flask, add the water and fill the remaining space with distiUed 
water. Add pancreatin 3 gr., chloroform 10 cc., and toluene 10 cc. 
Incubate or leave at room temperature for one to two weeks, shaking 
two or three times daily. Acidify with HC1. (Brom. thymol blue indi¬ 
cator). Decant the liquid through cheese cloth and add rinsings from 
the meat. Bottle till ready for use. Dilute to one third for culture 
broth and autoclave to drive off chloroform. 









82 - 


( Glaser , (11).) 

10 cc. of standard nutrient agar is poured into petri dishes 
into which previously 3 cc. of sterile defibrinated horse blood and 
2 cc. of 10$ sterile dextrose solution has been added. The final pH 
should be adjusted to a range from 7 to 7.4. Test for sterility. 

Spot loops of material over plate. 

Peptone-gelatine-blood medium . (Kligner and Aschner, (17).) 

Stock solution consists of 10 grams of peptone, 10 grams of 
gelatine and 100 cc. of water. One cc. of this solution is diluted 
in 10 cc. Locke solution. Adjust pH, autoclave, and divide into neutral 
clean test tubes, 2 cc. per tube. 

A day or two before use, 0.25 cc. of defibrinated sheep blood 
is added to each tube. 

The writer also used the above medium with a solution of tick 
excreta, one gram of dry excrement dissolved in 50 cc. water. This 
medium appeared to favour the growth of organisms, but it was found to 
be extremely difficult to free the excreta thoroughly from contaminating 
organisms. Double filtration through Berkefeld filters was only efficient 
when the medium was made up in agar plates so that the contaminating 
organisms could be isolated. 

Noguchi (22), in his Rocky Mountain spotted fever studies, 
mentions the following special media: 

Leptospira medium . 

0.9$ saline solution 800 cc. 

Fresh rabbit serum 100 cc. 

2.0$ nutrient agar, pH 7.2 100 cc. 

Rabbit haemoglobin (made by 
taking 1 part of defib. 
blood with 3 parts of dis¬ 
tilled water) 10 to 20 cc. 

Now and McNeal . 

Mix equal parts of melted nutrient agar and defibrinated 
rabbit’s blood. When the agar has cooled to about 50°C, an equal 
quantity of rabbit's blood is added, mixed, and allowed to cool. 

Noguchi . 

To 9 parts Hiss serum water containing various carbohydrates 
in series is added 1 part of 2$ nutrient agar. N/lO HG1 is added to 
give a pH ranging from 4.5 to 7.4. 


















. ) 





. 











- 83 


6 . Methods for the Artificial Cultivation 

of Tick Invading Microorganisms . 

Freeing Tissue from Contaminants: 

One of the first difficulties to present itself in cultural 
studies of tissue invading microorganisms is that of freeing the tissues 
of contaminating bacteria. This naturally must be accomplished effici¬ 
ently, and yet too drastic methods must not be employed or the invading 
organisms themselves will be destroyed. 

In the course of the preceding studies a variety of methods 
for sterilizing the outsides of tissues were tested. Some of these 
were formulated by the author, others were procedures that had been used 
by previous workers. The following was found to be the most satisfactory. 

Glaser’s Method for freeing contaminants from 

roach tissues. (Glaser, (11).) 

"The roach is etherized until immobile. It is then submerged 
for 15 to 20 minutes in a solution consisting of equal parts of 95$ 
alcohol and l/lOOO mercuric chloride, after which the insect is washed 
in 70$ alcohol. The extremities are amputated at their bases with 
sterile scissors and the insect is fastened with sterile pins ventral 
side up in a tray of paraffin recently melted and hardened. Prior to 
using the paraffin, the tray is flooded with 70$ alcohol for a few minutes. 
After pinning, the ventral side of the abdomen is again washed off with 
70$ alcohol, and by means of a fine pipette alcohol is forced in between 
the external abdominal segments. The abdomen is lastly singed with a 
red hot spatula, and the ventral chitin removed with sterile instruments. 
The desired tissues are removed, macerated in sterile saline, and trans¬ 
ferred to appropriate media.” 

(Kligner and Aschner (17) state that by dipping the tick into 
5$ tincture of iodine for 5 to 10 seconds, and then placing it in 95$ 
alcohol for the same time, contaminating bacteria are sufficiently des¬ 
troyed to permit aseptic dissections of gut and other inner tissues. 

The writer, in no instance, found this method to be satisfactory.) 

The following methods have been used to sterilize the outsides 
of fly eggs for medicinal purposes. Since the eggs are not destroyed 
for hatching purposes, it follows that these procedures should be highly 
































. 















, 






















. ■ $ | 



I 

, 

1 

































- 84 - 


satisfactory for cultural studies of egg inhabiting organisms. For 
such studies, the treated eggs should be tested for remaining contamin¬ 
ants by incubating in broth for three days. They are then transferred 
to a suitable medium and crushed with the aid of a sterile rod. 

Fine, A. and Alexander, H. Jour, of Bone and Joint Surg., 1934, 16, 572. 
Separate clumps of eggs in .85% NaCI vdth aid of cotton tipped rod. 
Wash in 10% formalin for 8 minutes. 

Rinse in sterile saline. 

Baer, W.S. Jour, of Bone and Joint Surg., 1931, 13, 438. 

Wash eggs for 30 minutes in 1 part l/lOOO HgCl2 

1 part 50/£ alcohol 
-§- 1% HC1. 

Rinse in sterile saline. 

McLellan, N.W. Can. Med. Ass. Jour., 1932, 27, 256. 

Wash eggs for one hour in 50 parts l/lOOO HgCl2 

50 parts 50%> alcohol 
£ part HC1 (C.P.) 

Rinse in sterile saline. (Few spores killed.) 

Child and Roberts, N.Y. State of J. Medicine, 1931, 31, 937. 

Wash in sodium hypochlorite to remove albuminous coating, and steri¬ 
lize by continuous washing with 4% formaldehyde for 3 minutes. (No 
spores killed.) 


7 • Elementary Technique for In Vitro and In Vivo 

Studies of Tick Tissue . 

It has been the desire of the writer on several occasions 
to induce ticks to feed from an artificially constructed tissue. This 
would essentially consist of a piece of skin placed over a container filled 
With a suitable medium. The chief difficulty in such an experiment is 
in keeping the enclosed medium sterile, for whatever would be of best 
nutrient value to the tick, would also be a medium for bacteria, and it 
is practically impossible to avoid contamination when the tick penetrates 
the enclosing skin. 

Such studies would undoubtedly throw much light on the nature 
of tick feeding, their preference for certain hosts, and their relation 
























. 








■ 


. 




. 



















...... : ' '■ •• •=• i 


- 


. - 



























- 85 - 


to host diseases, and should even open up a new field for the study 
of tick repellents. That such an experiment is probably not impossible 

is suggested by the fact that the author has on several occasions 
been able to induce ticks to attach and feed from a bath of warm blood 
covered by skin from a rabbit’s ear. In each case infection occurred 
before the 'parasite' had been able to engorge to any appreciable extent. 

One further experiment was performed in which portions of 
the gut of an unfed adult tick were incised under aseptic conditions and 
were placed in hanging drops of serum, haemolysed, and defibrinated blood. 
After being cultured for three days at a temperature of 30°C. they were 
fixed and sectioned. 

Microscopic examinations showed the digestive epithelium to 
be still preserved, though no apparent assimilative changes had taken 
place. It is probable that assimilation of blood by the gut cells 
is stimulated by other factors then the mere presence of blood - possibly 
distension or digestive enzymes play a part in the process. 

It is hoped that further experiments in this line will be 
planned in which sterile extracts of the body fluid will be added to 
the blood medium. To this end, the following methods of Frew (10) 
are quoted. 

Method of Obtaining Bacteria-free Tissues: 

"Sterile tissues may be obtained from larvae reared in the 
ordinary way by the tedious but quite effective method of repeated 
washing of the fragment of tissue in sterile physiological saline. 

Twelve changes of saline have been found effective. It is left for 
about two minutes in each change with constant agitation with a needle. 
Sterile needles are used for each transference to a fresh washing. 

After the final washing it was either put up in culture whole, or cut 
into fragments depending on the type of growth required; well over 
90 % of such cultures were free from bacterial infection." 






86 


It is noted by Frew that the above method is only successful 
for portions of ganglia, muscle and fat bodies. Fragments of gut and 
salivary glands invariably showed bacterial infection after several days. 
Method of Obtaining Bacteria-free Body Fluid: 

"It is an easy matter to obtain sterile body fluid by filtration 
through a Berkfeldt candle, but it has proved an extremely difficult 
matter, and one not successfully overcome, to ensure that the fluid 
so filtered is unchanged in any way except in being freed from bacterial 
contamination. 

"After autoclaving, the Berkfeldt candle must be dried, and it 
is essential that the drying should be done at a low temperature (30°C.) 
as otherwise it has a very marked effect on the pH of the filtrate. The 
nozzle of the candle projects into a small waxed glass tube, which is 
introduced with aseptic precautions into the container after the whole 
assembled filter has been dried at the temperature mentioned above. 
Paraffin oil is now poured into the reservoir and sucked through the 
candle, gradueLly filling the small glass tube. The candle itself must 
be kept completely covered with oil and the suction is continued until 
air bubbles, at first numerous, practically cease to emerge from the 
nozzle of the candle. The fluid to be filtered is then pipetted into 
the reservoir below the oil which covers the candle. On passing through 
the candle the fluid is delivered below the surface of the oil in the 
small glass tube, to the bottom of which it sinks. In this way the body 
fluid is collected, filtered, and stored without once coming in contact 
with the air. In the absence of this special paraffin oil filtration 
there is quite enough air in the candle to cause pronounced oxidative 
changes in the fluid. The use of the oil has the further and minor 
advantage, in dealing with small quantities of fluid, that almost the 
very last traces of the fluid can be forced through the filter." 







87 


SUMMARY 


This preliminary' - study of the tick and host in relation to 
western Canadian tick-borne diseases has been divided into two parts. 

The first deals with the tick as a reservoir of microorganisms, patho¬ 
genic or otherwise. 

A brief discussion of the systematic position of the ticks 
studied and the life histories of the most important Canadian species 
introduces the topic. 

After a morphological description of the alimentary tract 
of the tick Dermacentor andersoni Stiles, the histology of the stomach 
and process of digestion is fully described. The assimilative changes 
of the gut are divided into four phases: the preabsorptive, being the 
condition of the gut before entry of blood; the absorptive, during 
which time the epithelial cells are actively assimilating blood; the 
post-absorptive, when the epithelial cells become distended and break 
loose from the gut lining; and the degenerative period, involving a 
gradual disintegration of the gut elements. 

The tick-borne diseases of the world are tabulated and followed 
by a summary of the status of tick-borne diseases in Canada. As an 
introduction to the study of the latter, the writer briefly reviews 
the studies that have to date been made with regard to the less known 
micro-organisms, these including the rickettsia bodies and certain forms 
of bacteria, A preparatory study of the tick as a reservoir for micro¬ 
organisms brings to light several symbiont-like bodies that possibly 
play a very important part in the life history of the tick. 









88 


Part II includes a series of studies of the physiology of 
tick and host in relation to varying rates of tick feeding* In con¬ 
nection with this, the problem and etiology of tick paralysis are dis¬ 
cussed. Studies of host tissues below fast and slow feeding ticks, 
the effect of light on host and tick, and observations from the feeding 
of ticks on the writer all lead to the suggestion that the varying 
rates of tick feeding are directly due to the varying abilities of 
ticks to produce a hyperaemia and haemorrhage within the host tissues 
surrounding the site of attachment. This condition is believed to be 
brought on by some powerful salivary irritant that is injected into the 
wound. The reason for the seasonal and individual variations in the 
potency of this toxin is unknown, but may possibly be indirectly due to 
the effect of external physical conditions on certain intracellular 
symbionts of ticks. 

The thesis is concluded by a discussion of technique in attack¬ 
ing problems pertaining to the study of tick-borne diseases. 



REFERENCES 


Boyd. Textbook of Pathology - Inflammation. 

Buchner, P. Tier und Pflanze in Symbiose. 2nd Edition. 1930. 

Cahn, Wal. and Thom. A New Disease of Moose, III. Science, 

76:385. 1932. 

Cowdry, E.V., and Olitsky, P.K. Differences between Mitochondria 
and Bacteria. Jour. Ex. Med., Vol. 36, 1922. 

Cowdry, E.V. The Distribution of Rickettsia in the Tissues of 
Insects and Arachnids. Jour. Ex. Med., Vol. 37, 1923. 

Cowdry, E.V. A Group of Microorganisms Transmitted Hereditarily 
in Ticks and Apparently Unassociated with Disease. 

Jour. Ex. Med., Vol. 41, 1925. 

Cowdry, E.V. Studies on the Etiology of Heartwater. Jour. Ex. Med. 
Vol. 42, 1925. 

Fenstermacher, R. and Jellison, W.L. Diseases Affecting Moose. 

Univ. of Minnesota Bui. 294, 1933. 

Fenstermacher, R. Further Studies on a Moose Disease in Minnesota. 

U. of Min. Agric. Ex. St. Bui., No. 308, 1934. 

Frew, J.G.H. A Technique for the Cultivation of Insect Tissues. 

Brit. Jour, of Ex. Biol., Vol. 6, 1929. 

Glaser, R.W. On the Isolation, Cultivation and Classification of 
the So-called Intracellular "Symbiont" or "Rickettsia" of 
Periplaneta americ a. Jour. Ex. Med., Vol. 51, 1930. 

Gregson, J.D. The Bionomics of the Keeled Lizard, Gerrhonotus 

multicarinatus (Blainville) in British Columbia. U. of B.C. 1934 

Hertig and Walbach. Jour. Med. Research, 44, 1924. 

A . E>* 

limns, P.P. An Introduction to Entomology - Phagocytes. 

Jellison, W.L. Parasitism of Lizards by Ixodes ricinus califomicus 
(Banks). Unpublished contribution from the Rocky Mountain 
Spotted Fever Lab. of U.S. Pub. Health Service, Hamilton, Mont. 

Kligler, I.J. and Aschner, M. 1931. Cultivation of Rickettsia- 
like Microorganisms from Certain Blood-sucking Pupipsxa. 

Jour, of Bac. 22, 103-117. 

Kligler, I.J. and Aschner, M. 1931. Berlin Tieraeztl. Wachenschr. 
30, 197. 









s 








90 


18. Kuczynski, M.A. Med. Klin., XVI, 1920. 

19. Lee. The Microtomist's Vade-mecum. 

20. Matheson, R. Medical Entomology. 

21. Nicholson, F.M. A Cytological Study of the Nature of Rickettsia 

in Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever. Jour. Ex. Med., Vol. 36, '23. 

22. Noguchi, H. Cultivation of Rickettsia-like Microorganisms from 

the Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever Tick, Dermacentor andersoni . 

Jour. Ex. Med. Vol. 43, 1926. 

23. Paillot, A. L'Infection Chez les Insectes. 1933. 

24. Parker, R.R. and Spencer, R.R. Hereditary Transmission of Tularaemia 

Infection by the Wood Tick, Dermacentor andersoni Styles. 

U.S. Public Health Rept., 41, 1926. 

25. Parker, R.R. Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever. Montana State Board 

of Entomology, 7th Biennial Rept. 1929. 

26. Patton, W.S. and Evans, A.M., Insects, Ticks, Mites and Venomous 

Animals of Medical and Veterinary Importance, Part I, Medical, 
1929; Part II, Public Health, 1931. 

27. Patton, W.S. and Cragg, F.W. A Textbook of Medical Entomology. 

28. Ross, I.C., An Experimental Study of Tick Paralysis in Australia. 

Parasitology, 18, 1926. 

29. Rowan, Wm. and Gregson, J.D. Winter Feeding of the Tick Dermacentor 

anderso ni, Styles. Nature, Vol. 135, No. 3417, 1935. 

30. Sikora, H. Arch. Schiffs-w. Tropen-Hyg. XXV, 1921. 

31. Thomas, L.J. and Cahn, A.R. A New Disease in Moose, I. Jour. 

Parasitology 18;1932. 

32. True, G.H. Studies of the Anatomy of the Pajaroello Tick, Qmi- 

thodorus coriaceus Koch. Univ. Cal. Pub. in Ent., Vol. 6, 

No. 3, 1932. 

33. Wallace, G.I., Thom, and Cahn. A New Disease of Moose, II. Proc. 

Soc. for Ex. Biol, and Med. 29:1932. 

34. Wigglesworth, V.B. Insect Physiology. 

35. Wolbach, S.B. & Schlesinger, M.J. J. Med. Res. XLIV, 1923-24. 

36. Zebrowski, G. A Preliminary Report on the Morphology of the American 

Dog Tick. Trans. Amer. Ent. Soc. LI. No. 881, 1926. 

37. Zinseer & Bayne-Jones. Textbook of Bacteriology. 7th. Ed. 1934. 









1 










. 







PLATE I 


Figure 1. I 

Gram + cocci as seen in the tissue of 
a Dermacentor albioictus tick stained by 
Brown and Brenn's method. 

x 1700. 


Figure 2. 


Pigmented bodies in gut epithelial cells 
of Dermacentor andersoni t as seen in un¬ 
stained tissues. 


x 1750 




92 


PLATE I. 



Figure 1. 



Figure 2 


















PLATE II 


Figure 1. 

Portions of diverticula of an engorging 
Dermacentor andersoni tick showing certain 
cells filled with yeast-like granules. 

x 150. 


Figure 2. 

One cell of the above showing the dense 
mass of pigmented granules. 


x 1050 



94 - 


PLATE II. 



Figure 2 









V 








PLATE III. 


Figure 1. 


Cross section of a diverticulum of an engorging 
adult Denaacentor andersoni tick showing pro¬ 
liferation and expansion of epithelial cells, 

x 170. 


Figure 2. 


Portion of above section showing the fuschin 
staining intracellular globules. 


x 500 



96 


PLATE III. 



Figure 1. 



Figure 2 








PLATS IV 


Figure 1. 

Portion of diverticulum (and integument) of a replete 
adult Dermacentor andersoni tick stained with Giemsa's 
stain. This picture shows several ’floating’ epithelial 
cells, one with the nucleus still intact, two others 
with only nuclear fragments. Note the pigmented 
particles in the gut fluid and the halo-like area 
surrounding the epithelial cells. 

x 160. 


Figure 2. 

Epithelial cells of above section filled with large 
clear globules. Two whole nuclei are shown in cells 
at the bottom. In a neighboring cell the nucleus 
has disintegrated and is being engulfed by the globules. 


x 500 



98 


PLATE IV. 



Figure 1. 



Figure 2 

















PLATE V. 


Figure 1. 

Portion of body contents of a disintegrating 
Dermacentor albipictus tick stained by Mallory's. 
At one side are seen members of Malphigian 
concretions. In neighboring tissues and within 
the muscle sheath are numerous symbiont-like 
bodies which stain red with fuschin. 

x 375. 


Figure 2. 

.Another portion of the above section showing 
red and blue staining symbiont-like bodies within 
the gut membrane. These globules are believed 
to be the same as those shown in Plates III and 
IV. Note the complete absence of epithelial cells. 
The clouds of clear particles are likely decolorized 
yeast-like granules (Plate II). 


x 375 



100 - 


PLATE V. 



Figure 1. 



Figure 2. 
















PLATE VI 


Figure 1. 

A smear from the gut of a replete Dermacentor 
albipictus nymph, stained with Mallory's, 

Note the oval non-staining yeast-like particles 
and the large blue and red intracellular 
globules. 

x 1050. 


Figure 2. 

Portion of the egg of a tick stained by iron 
haematoxylin to show the mitochondria. 


x 1050 




102 


PLATE VT. 



Figure 1. 



Figure 2 





C 










PLATE VII 


Figures 1 and 2. 

Photomicrograph of a culture of tick gut 
content on agar. Note the pigmented 
yeast-like bodies and the appearance of 
division in the large clear globule. 




104 


PLATE VII. 



Figure 1. 



Figure 2 














































