
0 1620 3448152 1 

nco j 



























< 









































BOLLINGER 
pH 8.5 

MILL RUN F3-1548 

















































0X UBBK 
iiwvissttaiis 

awmimis 





THE 

GROWTH 

OF 

CORN AND 

SUNFLOWERS 

IN 

RELATION 

TO 

CLIMATIC 

CONDITIONS. 


BY W.F. HAMA. 


A THESIS 

SUBMITTED TO THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE REQUIRE¬ 
MENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF 

MASTER OF SCIENCE IN AGRICULTURE 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/hanna1923 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Page 

Introduction • 1 

Review 3 

Growth Measurements 3 

Internal Factors 3 

External Factors 8 

Problem 14 

Experimental 15 

Outline 15 

Seeding 15 

Growth Measurements 16 

Relative Growth 18 

Harvesting and Yields 19 

Temperatures 20 

Temperatures Indices 21 

Relative Humidity 24 

Temperature x Relative Humidity 24 

Precipitation 25 

Sunshine 25 

Maximum Solar Radiation 26 

Discussion 27 

Climate 27 

Growth 50 

Yields 34 

Dates of Seeding 37 

Growth and Climate 37 

Summary 45 


Literature Cited 


48 






THE GROWTH OE CORN A HD SUNFLOWERS IN RELATION 
TO CLIMATIC CONDITIONS 01 

by W.F. Hanna. 

INTRODUCTION 

The importance of environmental conditions in determining 
the nature of plant growth has long been recognised. The process of 
natural selection which is continually going on is but an expression 
of the effectiveness of these conditions to react upon plant life. 

In many cases the distribution of various types of vegetation is 
clearly due to the different climatic factors which have been at 
work. For example, the distribution of genera and species within 
that broad belt of coniferous forest which stretches across Canada, 
while in some cases influenced by competition, variations in soil 
type, and differences in altitude, is very often directly related to 
such climatic conditions as precipitation, wind velocity, temperature, 
atmospheric humidity and sunlight. But these results have been 
brought about by the constant application of such elements over 
long periods of time. Of the fluctuations which occur in the growth 
rate of an individual plant from day to day and from hour to hour, 
due to the accelerating or retarding influence of climatic changes, but 
little is known. The ordinary records of climate, useful though 
they may be in some respects, are of limited value in interpreting 
plant growth unless coupled with data for corresponding physiological 
activities in the form of growth measurements. A knowledge, therefore, 
of the manner in which the growth of economic plants is affected by 
fluctuations in climate should be of considerable practical value. 

The relation of corn and sunflower plants to the climatic envir- 

onment of this particular district is of singular interest, espec- 

m Report of an investigation carried out in the Department of Die Id 

Husbandry, University of Alberta, under the direction of Brofessor 

Newton. 














































































-£- 

ially in connection with the optimum dates of seeding these crops. 

If seeded too early in t he season the young corn plants are liable 
to he killed by frost when only a few inches above the ground. This 
not only results in the extra cost of a second seeding, but in most 
years makes the resulting crop so late that it is unable to attain 
that stage of maturity necessary for the production of the best 
quality silage. There is good reason to believe that sunflowers 
can withstand lower temperatures than corn without being killed, 
but the optimum date of seeding this crop has never been accurate¬ 
ly determined for this district. Vihile the sunflower plants may 
not actually be frozen by temperatures in the neighborhood of 
0°C, it does not necessarily follow that, such low temperatures 
do not have a retarding influence on their subsequent growth. 

A .study of the geographical distribution of any plant gives 

a rough indication of the relation which it bears to its environment. 

In this respect, the clearly marked distribution of corn, Zea mays , 

suggests at once that quite high temperatures during the growing 

season is one of the conditions necessary for its successful culture. 

The sunflower. He lianthu. s annu.us , has no such distinct zone of' 

culture. Although considered by most authorities as being a native 

of the Great Plains Begion from Nebraska to Mexico, it has now quite 

a scattered distribution as an agricultural crop. In 1615 Champlain® 

observed it being cultivated by the Hurons in Canada. About the 

middle of the sixteenth century the plant was introduced into Spain 

from America. It is now grown extensively throughout Forth America, 

Bussia and Hungary, and to a limited extent in China, Australia, New 

Zealand, couth Africa, Egypt and India. V/hile the location of its 

si Gilmore. Uses of Plants by the Indians of the Missouri liver 
Begion, 1919. 
















































































-3- 

original habitat suggests that the plant thrives best in regions 
of high temperature, its present distribution shows that it can be 
grown successfully under a great variety of conditions. 

BEVIEW 

Growth Measurements 

The manner in which growth measurements are carried out is of 
considerable importance. • If stem elongation over a relatively short 
period of time is taken as a measure of growth, it will, in most 
cases, be found that the maximum amount of growth takes place in 
the absence of light. In this case growth is but a measure of the 
rate at which materials already elaborated by the plant are trans¬ 
located and rearranged. Prescott (£5), working on the growth of 
maize in Egypt, found that the growth rate, measured by increase in 
height, exhibited two maxima during the twenty-four hours, one a 
short time after sunrise and the other in the late afternoon about 
sunset. The total growth however, during the twelve night hours 
from 8 p.m. to 8 a.m. was generally found to be greater than that 
during the remaining twelve hours of daytime. If, on the other 
hand, increase in dry 'weight, is taken as a measure of growth, or 
even stem-elongation over a period of several days, the former must 
give an accurate, and the latter an approximate measure of the 
plants ability to produce new materials, from the compounds present 
in air and soil. 

Internal Factors 

Before considering the probable influence of external factors 
such as climate upon the rate of growth, a clear conception is 
necessary regarding the part played by certain tendencies resident 
within the plant- itself - the internal factors. Lying dormant 







































































































- 4 - 


within the seed are certain genetic tendencies, which when expressed 
later during the life of the growing plant, tend to produce 
under any given set of external conditions, a certain definite 
form of growth. It is only reasonable to believe then, that 
the role of external conditions is merely that of accelerating or 
retarding the manner in which the internal factors tend to 
express themselves. F.F. Blackman (2) in pointing out the 
power which protoplasm possesses of renewing and increasing 
itself, has compared the growth of an organism to the process 
of autocatalysis. In the multiplication of bacteria,this author 
points out, the increase in number, which is a fair measure 
of the increase in their total mass, assumes for a time the 
form of a strictly logarithmic curve. In the higher plants, how¬ 
ever, the extreme degree of differentiation and specialization 
in tissue prevents any such regular increase in mass. Beed and 
Holland.(26) however, found that the rate of stem elongation in 
Helianthus , as determined by weekly measuremenus, followed strict¬ 
ly the course of an autocatalytic reaction as expressed by the 
formula 



where A represents the final mass of the plant, x the size of 
the plant at any timeJp,t,the time at which the mass of the plant 
is half the final mass, and K a constant. The close similarity 
between the observed and calculated values in this wor is indeed 
striking, and led the authors to conclude that the growth rate is 
governed by constant internal factors ratner than by external 
factors. Peed (27) has applied the same formula to the growth of 
pear shoots ( Byrus communis ) and young walnut trees ( Jugla ns nigra 

and Juglans regia) with good results. The formula was also found 



























































to be applicable to data on maize collected b Ereusler, the 
calculated values tearing a similarity with these observed whether 
me.'n height, mean green height, or mean dry weight was taken as 
a measure of growth. Finally, Feed (27) employed the formula 
successfully in connection with certain data published by Eckles 
and Swett (11) on the growth of heifers. But, as pointed out 
by West, Briggs and Kidd (28) the above formula involves the 
assumption that the falling off in growth per unit of dry weight 
is due to the disappearance of a catalyst. In the absence of 
evidence to support this view they contend that this decrease in 
the growth rate is possibly due to an increasing dif'ferenciation 
into productive and non-productive tissue. Working recently 
with Helianthus (17), they have shown that the respiration index 
of the merist emat ic tissue as well as that of the whole plant fa life 
off with age. The curve for respiration, moreover, follows 
closely the falling growth rate curve. This suggested, that the 
decrease in growth towards the end of the life cycle is not 
wholly due to an increase in water conducting and mechanical 
tissue. 

The "compound interest law” of growth has been put forward by 
V.H. Blackman (3,4) as expressed by the formula 

H = w 0 t *■* 

when :WI is the dry weight of the plant at the end of time t, W 
the initial seedling or need weight, _r, the rate of interest, and 
e, the base of the natural logarithms. The value of r has been 
termed by Blackman as the "efficiency index" of dry weight 
production, representing the efficiency of the plant as a producer 
of new material. According to this formula the increase in dry 
weight takes place exponentially and all of the new material 
added by the plant is equally effective in producing new growth. 


















































































































- 6 - 


For the data originally examined by Bladkman fairly constant 
values of r were found during the active growing period of the 
plant. But Kidd, V/est and Briggs (16) have applied this formula 
in examining the growth ratesof several plants, and find that 
not only does the efficiency index fluctuate from week to week, 
hut that it tends generally to deerease in value from a period 
quite early in the growing season. An examination of the data 
presented by Brenchley (6) for the growth of peas also shows that 
the value of r undergoes quite violent fluctuations. 

Briggs, Kidd and West (7,8) in carrying out an analysis of 
data collected by Kreusler on the growth of maize, calculated the 
growth rate by means of the following formula 

ft 

/oc w, 

where and Wg are the dry weights of the plants at beginning 
and end of the week, respectively. This is essentially a simple 
interest method of calculating growth rate. It gives the rate 
of increase in dry weight for the period, as a percent of the 
dry weight at the beginning of the period. Fisher (12) has 
criticized the use of this formula and pointed out that in some 
cases it introduced errors up to one hundred percent. He main¬ 
tained that 31ackman T s compound interest formula expresses corr¬ 
ectly the growth rate of the plant. Should it be necessary to 
express growth as taking place on the linear basis, he believed that 
the growth rate should be calculated as a percent of the mean value 
for the period according to the formula 

/d - Z(Wz-W,) 

(yv, + yY^) 


/oo 











































































- 7 - 


Both the simple and the compound interest formulae are based on 
the assumption that the new material produced by the plant is 
employed as capital in a certain definite manner, in the former 
case at stated intervals, and in the latter continuously. In 
neither instance does the method of calculation give more than 
an approximation. 

The relative growth rate curve for maize presented, by 
Briggs, Kidd and best (7,8) from Kreusler's data, shows that for 
the two or three weeks following germination the growth rate is 
either very small or negative in quantity. Following this 
period, there is a rapid increase in the growth rate until it 
reaches a maximum, when it falls again to a very low value at the 
end of the season. In the falling part of the curve, however, 
are two subsidiary maxima which are found, in general, to be 
coincident with the appearance of male and female flowers, an 
event probably preceded by increased respiration which resulted 
in the minima immediately preceding the subsidiary maxima. When 
the curve for leaf area, ie., the ratio of leaf area to dry weight, 
is plotted for the same date it is found to follow closely the 
form, of the growth rate curve. This similarity in the form of 
the two curves, suggested to the authors that the increase in dry 
weight per unit of leaf area, was approximately constant through¬ 
out the life cycle of the plant. In.order to test this supposition 
the "unit leaf rate", ie ., the increase in dry weight per square 
centimeter of leaf surface, was calculated for the same period. 

On the assumption that leaf area is a measure of the active growing 
tissue, the capital, so to speak, which the plant employs, the 
unit leaf rate curve should have been a straight line parallel to 
the time axis. But the authors point out that the assimilation 




































































- 8 - 


oj young seedling leaves is relatively small per unit of 
surface; also the dry weight per unit of leaf area falls at first 
and then rises to a maximum at the end of the life cycle. These 
two tendencies coupled with the fact that respiration per unit 
of dry weight decreases with age, would have the effect of 
making the unit leaf rate curve assume a concave form relative 
to the time axis. The curve obtained follows this general form 
in the early period of growth, hut subsequently fluctuates 
violently and fails to show any particular tendency. This, the 
authors have shom r n to be due in all -probability to errors in 
sampling. 

.'<hile this work leaves the problem of plant growth formulas 
still unsolved, it marks a distinct advance by unraveling some 
of the many internal factors responsible for plant growth. 

Syternal Factors 

Of the climatic conditions influencing growth, precipitation, 
atmospheric humidity, temperature and light are probably the most 
important. In most of the investigations carried out on this 
subject, the conditions in regard to moisture have been kept in 
excess either by irrigation or by growing the plants in water 
culture, so that little information is available regarding,,effect 
of precipitation at different period^in the life cycle of the 
plant. An examination of the charts prepared by Prescott (25) 
on the growth of maize in Egypt shows the immediate response 
which the plant makes to irrigation during the period of rapid 
growth, when soil moisture has become a limiting factor. The 
work of Briggs and Shantz (10) emphasized the great variations 
which different groups of plants exhibit in respect to water 
requirement. They have reported the results obtained by Wollny 
at- Kunich, who found the water requirements of corn and sunflowers 


















































































- 9 - 


to be 23S and 490 respectively. 

Atmospheric humidity or more properly, the evaporating power 
of the air, is one of the factors chiefly responsible for water 
loss by the plant through transpiration. fjut With a constant 
amount of water vapour in the air, the degree of saturation 
must vary inversely with temperature. The important thing to 
consider therefore, is the vapour tension deficit of the atmos¬ 
phere for the particular temperature considered. Livingston 
and Shreve (19) give a thorough review of this topic and suggest 
certain methods of employing data on evaporation for the study of 
plant growth and distribution. McLean (20) in studying the growth 
of soybean cultures 5 as a measure of the growth producing power 
of the climate of Maryland, found that the ratio of evaporation 
to rainfall became quite often a limiting factor for growth. 

This was especially noticeable towards the end of the growth 
period, when high temperatures prevailed. The general methods 
employed by McLean have been adopted by Johnston (15) in a study 
of the growth of buckwheat, P agopyrum esoulenturn , under green- 
hou se c on ditions. He f ound 1 1 hat the high e vap ora ti on rates of 
late summer occurring with high temperature and transpiration 
values, were responsible for low rates of increase in dry weight 
and in leaf area. 

Besides furnishing energy for the phot o s yn t he tic activity 
of the plant, light is undoubtedly one of the most important ex¬ 
ternal factors influencing transpiration, 'ihile only about 0.5 
percent f- of the radiant energy falling upon the leaf is utilized 
in the process of carbon assimilation, Pal ladin (24) states that 
27.5 percent is used up in transpiration .A close correlation between 
assimilation and light of high intensity is therefore scarcely to 
be expected.Brenchley(6) 


































• 











































































- 10 - 


exp€ rir. enting with the growth of pea plants under greenhouse con¬ 
ditions , found good correlation "between "bright sunshine and the 
rate of increase in dry weight calculated by Blackman T s (3) 
compound interest formula, provided the food supply was adequate. 
Briggs, Kidd and West (8) found the closest correlation "between 
unit leaf rate (increase in dry weight per unit of leaf area per 
week) and light, when intensities up to one fifth full sunlight 
were considered as limiting. The correlation with total hours of 
sur hine was insignificant. The value for real assimilation was 
calculated from the unit leaf rate, after adding the loss due to 
respiration, and deducting the gain due to salt uptake. When the 
value obtained was compared with light intensity, there seemed to 
be little correlation, no matter now light was measured. This led 
the authors to suppose that under natural conditions, light 
limits the growth rate not b- its direct action upon photosynthesis 
but indirectly? through its effect upon stomatsl openings. Becent 
experiments by Garner and Allard (13) have shown that the relative 
length of night and day is of great importance in determining the 
amount of vegetative growth and the time of reproduction. This 
brings up the question of the dates of seeding of different crocs 
in order to obtain maximum yields of fodder or seed. 

Temperature has the effect of accelerating most chemical re¬ 
actions. The acceleration in reaction velocity, moreover, is log¬ 
arithmic in nature. This phenomenon has been summed up in the 
rule known as the Yan T t Hoff principle, which, in brief, states that 
for every? rise of 10°C the reaction velocity is approximately 
doubled. This principle has been found to hole true in the case 
of many vital reactions. F.B. Blackman (1) discusses this prin¬ 
ciple in relation to assimilation and respiration, and points out 













r- 




























































































-li¬ 


the necessity of considering also the time factor. Esjjs cially is 
this true in the case of assimilation, as the initial rate falls 
off rapidly at high temperatures. It has generally been supposed 
that a certain optimum temperature exists for the process of growth 
in a : giv'en organism. But Blackman (1) shows the futility, of 
considering a single limiting factor such as temperature unless 
in relation to other possible limiting factors. Probably the most 
careful work on the problem of temperature and growth has been 
carried out by Lehenbauer (18) in his study of the growth of 
maize seedings. In general, he found that the amount of growth 
increase per unit of time at a given temperature was influenced 
by the duration of the exposure to that temperature. With an 
exposure period of twelve hours the optimum temperature was found 
to be 52°C. One noticeable feature of these measurements is that 
for most of the temperatures up to and including 31°G. the 
growth rate per period of time increases quite regularly from 
hour to hour. This suggests that had the increase for each period 
been expressed as relative growth rate, a more constant series 
of values would have been obtained. McLean ( 20 ), Hildebrandt (14), 
Prescott (25) and Briggs, Kidd and West (8), all found a high 
correlation existing between temperature and growth under field 
conditions. Brenchiey ( 6) and Johnston'(15) obtained similar 
results when investigating greenhouse conditions. The failure of 
F.eed and Holland (26) to establish any intimate relation between 
temperature and the rate of stem elongation in Helianthu s may 
have been due to the fact that in California where temperatures 
would naturally be uniformly high, other factors might have been 
limiting growth. The relation of temperature accumulations 
expressed as degree days, to time of blossoming in the apple and 
peach, has been studied by Bradford (5). He found that the 



































































.* 













' 

























- 12 - 


agreement in temperature accumulations to "blossoming from year to 
year at any one place, varies with the length of the time for 
which they are measured, indicating that ordinary•temperatures 
are not always effective, or that temperature is not always a 
limiting factor. Mo'sier (22), in his study of the climate of 
Illinois, has used degree hours to express temperature accumulations 
for the frost free periods, considering 49°F. as the point of 
unit growth rate for corn. Although lower yields occurred during 
the years of high temperature, he found that high temperatures could 
he correlated with low rainfall. In a recent work Livingston and 
Shreve (19) have made use of various temperature indices in an 
attempt to correlate different vegetational regions in the united 
States with environmental conditions. Summations of temperature 
for numerous stations, according to the different indices, were 
obtained, by employing the information accumulated in meteorological 
literature. In some cases the temperature indices ^ere employed 
in conn ection with similar data on evaporation and precipitation, 
thus giving a series of combined indices. The whole country was then 
divided into zones according to the magnitude of the various summ¬ 
ations obtained. V'hile this work was essentially a study of plant 
distribution as related to climatic conditions, the methods employed 
promise to be of considerable value in connection with any general 
study of climatic conditions and the rate of plant growth. 

In general, while each individual plant has its particular 
form of growth as influenced by various groups of internal factors, 
it is only reasonable to expect distinct fluctuations in the growth 
rate curve from day to day, brought about by changes in climatic 
environment. I.Ioreover, the magnitude of the effect produced by 
climatic changes will depend to a considerable extent upon the 
stage of development reached by the plant. That is, the effect of 


















































































































-13 


any single climatic factor such as temperature, is influenced in 
its action upon the plant by its relation to other climatic 
factors, and to the internal condition of the plant. 

































/y- 


PROBLEM 

The primary purpose of this work is to ascertain if possible 
the optimum dates of seeding corn and sunflowers. In view of 
the intimate relation existing between climatic conditions and 
the growth of a plant at any particular stage of its develop¬ 
ment, it becomes of interest to measure, if possible, the effect 
of the climate in promoting plant growth. The final yield is in 
most cases the only matter considered in dates of seeding exper¬ 
iments. But such data are of value only if collected for a con¬ 
siderable number of years. They are also of value only inthe 
particular district in which the work is carried out. In the 
present study, records for growth-rate, climatic conditions, 
and yields have all been kept. It is hoped by careful mathemat¬ 
ical analysis of the data thus accumulated to derive fundamental 

* 

information as to the growth adaptations of these crops, which 
may throw light on their suitability to various parts of the 
c ountry. 


























































- 15 - 


EXP EBIMEETAL 

Outline 

The general method employed was that of seeding standard 
varieties of the sunflower He lian thus a minus and corn Zes /fa ys , 
at a number of dates, beginning quite early in the spring and 
continuing until about the first week in June. Growth measurement 
of a certain number of plants in each plot were taken at regular 
intervals. At the same time accurate meteorological records were 
kept, end careful observations were made after all spring and 
fall frosts. The varieties employed in the experiment were 
Mammoth Russian sunflower and forth Western Dent corn. Both of 
these varieties are regarded as standard and are employed exten¬ 
sively in the experimental work of this station. The work was 
carried out during two years, 1920 and 1921. The land used for 
the 1920 experiments sloped slightly to the south and west. 

In 1919 this land was seeded to spring rye. In 1921 the exper¬ 
iment was carried out on land which produced a heavy crop of sun¬ 
flowers in 1920. The slope of this land was’ from north to south. 

See ding 

In 1920, five plots of corn and five of sunflowers were 
seeded, the plots of corn and sunflowers alternating with each 
other. The numbers of the plots and dates of seeding are given 
in Table 1. Plots 1, 2,9,and 10 were seeded on the same date, 

May 14th, so as to act as checks in calculating the final yields. 
There were, therefore, four dates of seeding, at intervals of 
roughly ten days, from May 14th to June 10th. Each plot consist¬ 
ed of five rows, 50 links long and 5 feet apart. The rows were 
seeded east and west. A small hand seeder was employed for drill¬ 
ing in the seed, it being set so as to droj one seed about every 











- 







































































































- 16 - 


inch . Later, when the plants were about 6 inches high, they 
were thinned so as to leave 8 inches between plants. 

In 1921 five plots of corn and six plots of sunflowers were 
seeded, one plot of sunflowers being seeded on May 3, to try the 
effect of a very early seeding. The numbers of the plots and 
dates of seeding are given in Table 2. In this year the plots of 
corn and sunflower did not alternate with each other as in 1920, 
but were planted in adjacent strips of land. This change in 
method of plantin was made to eliminate, if possible, the factor 
of unequal competition between adjacent plots of corn and sun¬ 
flowers. Plots 1, 5, 6 and. 10 were seeded on the same date. May 
10th, and were used as checks. This gave four dates of corn and 
five of sunflowers, arranged at ten day intervals. Each plot con¬ 
sisted of 4 rows, 130 links long, rows being 3 feet apart. Rows 
were seeded north and south. The methods of seeding and 
thinning out were the same as those used in 1920. In the early 
morning of May 28th the temperature dropped to 24°F. killing 'the 
corn plants of plots 1 and 5. These plots were reseeded May 30th. 


1 r ov tfe Me asur emen t a . ■ 

Increase in dry "eight is generally taken as a measure of plant 
gr owth. This me thod is** oniy a "gff cu^W^e^yfor^ el'c^i 1 "sample ,oce dure 
which necessitates the seeding of quite a large area. Since, the 
labor involved is also considerable, it was not found possible to 
follow such a method in this experiment. It was therefore decided 
to measure the rate of increase in height of the plants. This 
method has been followed by numerous investigators, including Reed 
and Holland (26), working with sunflowers and Prescott (25) working 
with corn. 

In 1920 ten normal plants were selected, in each plot, the use 
of border plants, or any having an accidental advantage in regard to 










































* 




































































- 17 - 


spacing, "being avoided. A small wooden stake about, the size of a. 
pencil was driven into the ground about six inches from £aeh plant 
so as to have the top of the stake level with, the surface of the 
ground. The ten selected plants in each plot were then given 
numbers from one to ter;, and records were kept throughout the 
season of their heights at different dates. The sunflower plants 
were measured from the top of the stake to the apex of the stern. 

In measuring the corn plants the height from the top of the stake 
to the highest leaf tip was taken, the measurements thus repres¬ 
enting a combination of internode elongation of the plant itself, 
and of leaf growth. Measurements were taken for three dap periods 
and were carried out as nearly as possible immediately after noon 
each day. Measurements were begun June 5, but frost on the morning 
of June 13 badly injured the leaves of the corn plants, so measure¬ 
ments were discontinued until June £3. From this date they were 
continued at three day intervals until Sept. 9, with the exception 
of one period of six days, from Aug. £S to 31st. In plot 8 measure 
ments were kept of only nine plants, as one plant was found to be 
a dwarf and was discarded. Table 3 gives the mean heights (cm.) of 
the selected plants in each plot at the different dates. The mean 
actual growth in height (cm.) of these plants for the three day 
periorfefrom June £3 to Sept. 9, is presented in Table 5. 

In 19£1 the general method outlined for 19£0 was followed, but 
two changes must be noted. First, measurements were Carried out 
for two days, instead of for three day periods. Second, the corn 
plants were measured from the top of the stake to the tip of the 
longest leaf, when the leaves had been stretcher out to their full 
extent. In this way a more constant measure of growth was obtained 
than was possible in 19£0, when the leaves tended to droop and 
appear shorter on very hot days. Measurements were begun June £Oth 

























































































- 18 - 


and we re continued until Se ] t. 9. In e few instances measure¬ 
ments could tie taken only al ter four day periods. lie mean heights 
(cm.; of the selected plants in each plot at the different dates 
ere presented on Table 4. The mean actual growth in height of the 
plants (cm.) for the different periods is given ir Table 6. 

Relative Growth 

for the purpose of calculating the relative growth rates of 
corn and sunflowers in 1920, the heights of plants in plots 1, 

3, and 9 of corn, and plots 2, 4, and 10 of sunflowers have been 
averaged for the different dates. These three plots in each 
group were considered, to be at about the same stage of develop¬ 
ment. This gives two series of values, one representing the mean 
neight (cm.) of thirty corn plants at different dates, while the 
other gives the same information for thirty sunflower plants. 

These averages are given in the last two columns of Table 3, while 
the corresponding growth increases are presented in the last two 
columns of Table 5. In 1921 plots 1, 2 and 3 of corn and plots 
6, 7 and 10 of sunflowers have been treated in the same way. 

The mean height (cm.) of the two groups of plants at different 
dates are given in the last two columns of Table 4, while the 
corresponding growth increases ere given in the last two columns 
of Table 6. blot 5, although seeded on the same date as plot 1, 
was considerably shaded by the adjoining plot of sunflowers, and 
was therefore not used in making up this average. 

The relative grow/th rate for these averages has been calcul¬ 
ated for the two years from lackman T s (3) formula 



or employing the common system of logarithms, and expressing 


the result as a percent 



/CO 


t x 0-4-3&3 































































































































































- 19 - 


where H. # is the height of the plant at the beginning of the 
period, Hg its height at the end of the period, and t, the length 
of the growth period - in 1920, 3 days and in 1921, 2 days. Cal¬ 
culated in this way E. is the percent increase in height per day, 
per unit of height, for the whole period. The results for the 
two years are given in Table 7. 

Harvesting arid Yields 

In 1920 the corn was injured to some extent by frost on Aug. 

31, but as some growth was still taking place it was not cut until 
belt. 20, when corn and sunflowers were harvested, both having been 
damaged by the low temperature of 28°F on Sept. 19th. The two 
outer rows of the plots were discarded, the yield for each plot 
being taken from the three central rows only. Thus, the plots 
as harvested each consisted of three rows, 50 links long. The 
green weight of fodder was obtained by weighing the plants as soon 
as they were cut. At the same time a representative sample was 
taken from each plot and the percent dry matter determined. Corr¬ 
ected yields per acre were calculated by the method outlined by 
ilewton (23). The actual yields of the plots, together with the 
percent dr? matter , and corrected yields in dry matter are given 
in Table 1. 

In 1921 the corn was frozen on Sept.2, and was cut the follow¬ 
ing day. The sunflowers were not touched by this frost, but were 
injured by a frost on Sept. 10th. They were cut or Sept. 15th. 

In the case of plots 5, 6, 9 and 10 yields were taken from two 
rows, 100 links long. This was necessary as there was a noticeable 
competition between the four neighboring rows of corn and sunflowers 
in plots 5 and 6, and between the early and late see dings of sun¬ 
flowers in the case of plots 9 and 10. The actual yields of these 














































































- 20 - 

plots given in Table 2 have been multiplied by two, in order to 
make them comparable with the yields of the other plots which 
consisted oi four rows, 100 links long, the percent dry matter 
anr corrected yields calculated as in 1920, are given in Table 2. 

Temperature s 

Temperature data for the two years were obtained from a 
self recording atmospheric thermograph situated close to the plots. 
The thermograph records were checked with daily reading#of maximum 
and minimum thermometers. S _ 'nce the growth measurements were made 
from noon to noon for the different periods, it becomes necessary 
to calculate the temperature values for similar periods, lor this 
purpose the mean bi-hourly temperatures (Fahrenheit) from noon of 
one day until noon of the following day have been taken from the 
thermograph records. Table 20 (Appendix) gives the mean bi-hourly 
temperatures from noon June 23rd until noon Sept. 9th, 1920. 

Table 21 gives the corresponding data for 1921 from noon, June 20th 
until noon, Sept * 9th. From these values the mean temperatures 
(Fahrenheit) for the twenty-four hour periods from noon of one 
day until noon of the following- day have been calculated. These 
temperatures have been translated to the corresponding centigrade 
readings and are presented in Table 8 for the two years. In this 
way a series of values have been obtained which are based upon 
not only the magnitude of the temperature, but upon its duration 
as well. In other words,they represent a series of weighted averages. 
These readings should be of infinitely greater use in interpreting 
plant growth than any average based upon maxima and minima readings 
for the day. " ?» 

































































































- 21 - 


The mean temperatures (centigrade) tor the three and two-day 
periods of growth, during 1920 and 1921 respectively, have been 
calculated from the mean temperatures for the twenty-four hour 
periods. The means for these periods ot growth in 1920 are given 
in Table 12, those for 1921 in Table 12. 

Temperature Indices 

The problem of how best tfo express temperature in the inter¬ 
pretation of growth processes has been thoroughly discussed by Liv¬ 
ingston and Shreve (19). They have employed, a number of tempe.r- 
sture indices in their zonation studies of the various types of 
vegetation in the United States. It has been decided to express 
the temperature data collected for this work; in the form of some 
of the indices given by these authors. The five following temper¬ 
ature efficiency indices have therefore beer calculated as de¬ 
scribed, for eadh of the periods of growth in 1920 and 1921, and 
are presented in Tables 10 and 11 respectively. The indices em¬ 
ployed by Livingston and Shreve (19) were in the Fahrenheit scale. 
In the present work the centigrade basis has been used. 

Exponential indices have been obtained from Fahrenheit readings, 
but as will be seen, the numerical value of these indices is in¬ 
dependent of the scale used. 

(1) Lirect Temperature Efficiency Indices. 

This method assumes that above 0°0 the rate of plant growth is 
directly proportional to temperature. The indices for each growth 
period have been obtained by summing the mean twenty-four hour 
temperatures (centigrade) for each t"o or three day period. 

(2) Remainder Temperature Efficiency Indices. (Growth at 4.5° 
centigrade as unity). 

These indices are really a modification of the direct 
































































- 22 - 


temperature indices, the difference being that the zero point of 
growth is moved from 0°G to up to 2.5°C f while at 4.5°G the rate 
of growth is assumed to be equal to unity. In calculating these 
indices, 5.5° has been subtracted from each mean twenty-four hour 
temperature (centigrade) and the remainders have been summed for 
the periods of growth. 

(5) remainder Temperature Efficiency Indices: (Growth at 10° cent¬ 
igrade as unity). 

These indices are similar to those preceding except that 
10°w has been chosen as the point at which unit growth takes place, 

(4) Exponential Temperature Efficiency Indices: 

The calculation of these indices is based on the assump¬ 
tion that at 40°E plant growth takes place at unit rate, and that 
for each increase of 18°F above this point, the rate of growth is 
doubled, according to the Yan't Hoff-Arrhenius principle. The re¬ 
lation between temperature and the corresponding index of temper¬ 
ature efficiency is expressed by the equation 

ir — &G 

I-& -tr- 

where t is the mean twenty-four hour temperature (Fahrenheit) and 
1^ the corresponding efficiency index for plant ;rowth. These 
indices have been calculated, by Livingston and Livingston for all 
temperatures between 41°F and. 100°F and. are reproduced by Livingston 
and Shreve (19). The efficiency index for each mean twenty-four 
hour temperature (Fahrenheit) has been read, from this table and the 
values obtained, are presentee, in Table 8 for the two years. The 

indices for each period of growth were then summed. 

) 

(5) Physiological Temperature Efficiency Indices: 

Lehenhauers(18) data for the growth rates ofmaize seed¬ 
lings at various temperatures when exposed for twelve hour periods, 









* 






























































FIGURE A 


Physiological Temperature Efficiency Indices based on Lehenberuer*s 
twelve-hour exposures with Maize Seedlings. 


























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































% 










- 23 - 


ha s been used by Living ton in preparing these indices, plotting 
growth rates as ordinates and temperatures as abscissae, a curve was 
obtained giving indices ranging from zero at 2°C through a maximum 

n 0 

of 122.3 at 32 C to zero again at 48 C. These indices have been 
reproduced by Livingston and bhreve (19) in their work , and 
from them the curve given in Figure A has been prepared. In this 
way it was possible to read directly from the curve the index 
corresponding to each mean twenty-four hour temperature. These 
values are given in Table 8 for the two years. The indices for each 
period of growth'Were then summed. 

Degree Hours: 

This method of expressing temperature accumulations has been 

$ 

employed by hosier (22) in his study of the climate of Illinois. 

He considered that the zero point of growth for*corn was 49°(Fahren¬ 
heit), and calculated the degree hours for different periods by 
multiplying the number of hours during which the temperature is 
above 49°F by the number of degrees the average temperature is above 
that point. ( Merriam (21) chose 6°G (43°F), as the lower limit 
for physiological activity in plants and reproductive activity 
in animals. Livingston and Shreve- (19) have made quite general 
use of 40°F as the point of unit rate of growth in plants. Degree 
hours have been calculated from 40°F in this study, although 
it is realized that the position of the point of unit growth rate 
may not be exactly the same for both of the plants under consid¬ 
eration. The bi-hourly temperatures given in Tables 20 and 21 
(Appendix) have been used in calculating the degree hours for each 
twenty four hour period for the two years, as presented in Table 8, 
From these values the degree hours for each period of growth have 
been obtained, as shown in Tables /O and IP for the years 1920 and 
1921 respectively. 



































a 








































- 24 - 


Finally, the values for each of the six temperature indices 
considered above have been summed from June 25 in 1920 and June 
20 in 1921, to the end of each period of growth.i Tables 14 and 
15, therefore, give the summation of each of these indices to 
different dates, for the two years. 

Relative Humidity 

Records for relative humidity were not- kept at the experimental 
plots but were obtained from the Monthly Record of Meteorological 
Observations issued by the Meteorological Service of Canada. The 
readings given for Edmonton were recorded about two miles from the 
experimental plots, and while probably not the same as those 
obtaining about the plants, will serve as a measure of the fluc¬ 
tuations from day to day. The hourly relative humidity for each 
day of July and August, 1920, and June, July, August and September 
of 1921, are given in these records. Relative humidity for June 
and September of 1920 were not given. The mean daily relative 
humidity, calculated from the hourly readings, and given in the 
records mentioned above, are reproduced in Table 9. The mean 
relative humidity for each period of growth was obtained, by aver¬ 
aging all of the hourly readings for the corresponding periods. 

These means are given in Table 12 for 1920 and. in Table 13 for 
1921. 

Temperature x Relative Humidity 

With low atmospheric relative humidity, the water strain may 
become so great during the hotter part of the day that plants are 
unable to make use of the high growth possibilities of the exist¬ 
ing temperatures. Growth under the&conditions necessarily takes 
place at a slow rate, as the plant cells are unable to maintain their 
turgldity. Prescott (25f, working on the growth of maize in Egypt, 



































































- 25 - 


found that the grovth rate fell distinctly during the hours of 
great heat, due to the low atmospheric relative humidity. A high 
temperature combined with high relative humidity, should give con¬ 
ditions most favorable for rapid growth. The value 

/o 

has been employed in this study in an attempt to express a com¬ 
bination of temperature and relative humidity favourable to plant 
growth, here, T is the mean temperature (centigrade) for the pehod 
of growth, and E the mean relative humidity for the corresponding 

period.The large products which resulted have been reduced by dividing 

by 10 in each case,The resulting values have been presented for 1920 
in Table 12;those for 1921 sxe given in Table X3. 

Precipitation 

In 1921 the rain gauge recording daily precipitation was sit¬ 
uated close to the plots. In 1920 records were kept in another field 
about one Quarter of a mile distant. The daily precipitation in 
inches from June 23 to September 9 in 1920, and from June 20 to 
Sept. 9 in 1921, is given in Table 9, 

Sunshine 

The duration of sunshine for each hour of daylight from June 20 
until September 9 of both years was obtained from the Dominion 
Government Meteorological Station in Edmonton. The readings were 
taken by means of a Campbell Stokes Sunshine Becorder. This in¬ 
formation has been reproduced in Tables 22 and 23 (Appendix). The 
hours of sunfhine for each day of the two years from June 20 to 
September 9 are given in Table 9. The total hours of sunshine for 
each growth period, as given in Tables 12 and 13 for the years 1920 
and 1921 respectively, were obtained from Tabler 22 and.23 (Appendix). 
The mean daily hours of sunshine for the growth periods for the two 
years are given in Tables 12 and 13. 





































































































- 26 - 


Maximum Solar Radiat ion 

The maximum solar radiation (Fahrenheit) for each day, 
obtained from a black bulb in vacuo , is given in Table 9, for 
the period from July 4 to September 8, 1921. These records were 
supplied by the Dominion Government Meteorological Station at 
Edmonton. Records for 1920 and for the remainder of 1921 were not 
available.. Since the readings for 1921 are maximum readings for 
each dap, they cannot be accurately translated into corresponding 
means for the two day periods of growth. But, since the maximum 
reading would probably occur for' most days about or shortly after 
noon, it has been decided to treat the maximum for each day as 
being that for the twenty-four hour period which begins at noon 
of that day. For example, the mean daily maximum solar radiation 
for the growth period noon July 4 to noon July 6, has been found by 
averaging the readings for July 4 and July 5. The means calculated 
in this way are given in Table IS. 




- 



























































. 
















FT GUFF 1 

Mean Daily Temperat' re (Fahrenheit), Mean Daily Belat ve 
Humidity, and Daily H irre of Sunshine for 1920 and 1921» 




























































DISCUSSION 


Climate 

In figure 1, the daily temperature, daily relative humidity and 
daily hours of' sunshine lor the growing seasonsof 1920 and 1921 are 
shown for the purpose of comparing the climatic changes during the two 
years. The temperatures are those given in columns 2 and 7 of Table 
8. The me:-n daily relative humidity, and total daily hours of sun¬ 
shine are taken from Table 9. An examination of the data presented 
in this figure shows, first of all, that the three elements consid¬ 
ered undergo quite violent fluctuations from day to day. The tem¬ 
peratures rise until the highest values are attained about the middle 
of July, then fall off gradually towards the end of the summer. The 
temperatures for 1920 are generally higher than those for 1921 and 
seem to rise and fall less frequently. From June 25 to Sept. 9 of 
1920 there were 40,292 degree hours. From June 20 to Sept. 9 of 
1921, a slightly longer period, there were only 35,502 degree hours. 

Unlike temperature, the relative humidity for the two years 
rises gradually as the season advances. The curve for 1920 is gener¬ 
ally higher than that for 1921, and until the end of July is more 
uniform and contains fewer sudden drops. 

The curve for daily hours of sunshine follows fairly closely 
the temperature curve. The 1920 readings, moreover, are for a great 
part of the time considerably higher than those for 1921. Table * 16 
gives the total hours of sunshine for the months of June, July and 
August of the tv r o years brings out this differences more clearly. 

Table 16 - Total hours of sunfhine for June, July and August 


of 1920 and 1921. 


























































































- 28 - 


Month 


1920 


1921 


June 


257.7 


301.0 


July 


376.5 


311.1 


Align st 


276.6 


252.9 


Total 


910.8 


865.0 


It will he readily seen that the clifferences in July and August 
are responsible for the higher total during 1920. 

The precipitation for the two seasons has been purposely 
omitte from figure 1, as the growing plants draw not only upon 
the rainfall which they receive during the summer months, but 
from the supply stored up in the soil as well. The total pre¬ 
cipitation from the end of the growing season of the previous 
year should be a fair measure of the moisture which is available 
to the growing plant when it begins growth. This information 
is presented in Table 17, together with the rainfall for the 
months of July and August. 














TABLE17 

x recip 

itation from 

-29- 

Sept . 1, 1919 to Aug. 31, 

1921. 

Year 

Month 

Bain 

Snow 

Total 

1919 

Sept. 

1.38 

0.2 

1.40 

1919 

Oct. 

0.47 

18.1 

2.28 

1919 

Bov. 

0.04 

18.5 

1.89 

1919 

De c. 

— 

8.2 

0.82 

1920 

Jan. 

. 0.03 

19.9 

2.02 

1920 

Eeh. 

0.01 

2.9 

0.30 

1920 

March 

— 

12.6 

1.26 

1920 

Apr. 

0.45 

3.9 

0.84 

1920 

May 

2.00 

4.3 

2.43 

1920 

June 

4.49 

— 

4.49 


T otal 

8.87 

88.6 

17.73 

1920 

July 

2.23 

---- 

2 .23 

1920 

Aug. 

1.12 

--- - 

1.12 


Total 

12.22 

88.6 

21.08 


1920 

Sept. 

1.31 


1.31 

1920 

Oct. 

0.62 

1.6 

0.78 

1920 

Bov. 

0.01 

1.7 

0.18 

1920 

Lee. 

---- 

2.5 

0.25 

1921 

Jan. 


7.9 

0.79 

1921 

Feb. 


13.6 

1.36 

1921 

March 

0.07 

15.8 

1.65 

1921 

Apr. 

0.08 

2.5. 

0.33 

1921 

May 

1.03 

2.4 

1.27 

1921 

June 

3.08 

----- 

3.08 


Total 

6.20 

48.0 

11.00 

1921 

July 

3.13 

--- 

3.13 

1921 

Aug. 

1.52 


1.52 


Total 

10.85 

48.0 

15.65 


























- 30 - 


While the precipitation for July and August of 1921 was greater 
than for the same period <bf 1920, it will he readily seen that 
1920 was characterised by a heavy precipitation in June, which 
brings the total for June, July and August slightly higher than 
for the same three months in 1921. In addition to this the pre¬ 
cipitation for Sept. 1, 1919 to the end of May 1920 is consider¬ 
ably higher than that for the same period during 1920 and 1921. This 
difference was largely due to the heavy fall of snow in the winter 
of 1919-1920. 

In brief, then, the summer of 1920 was-marked by high temper¬ 
atures during the three growing months, combined with favorable 
soil moisture conditions. In 1921 temperatures were considerably 
lower, while the amount of moisture stored in the soil at the 
beginning of June must have been much less than at the same time 
in 1920. 


Orowth 

An examination of Tables land 2 shows that the time from 
seeding to appearance of the plants above ground, decreases with 

each date of seeding. In 1920, in the case of the first seeding 

v 

of corn, eighteen days elapsed between the time of seeding and 
the appearance of the plants, while sunflowers seeded the same 
date require' only eleven days. At the last seeding these times 
are reduced to eight days and seven days respectively. In 1921 
the results are much the same. This shortening in the length of 
time for germination is probably due to the higher soil temperatures 
which obtain as the season advances. No soil thermograph records 
were kept in the spring of 1920, but the readings for 1921 show 
that the soil temperature increased from 53° F. on May 14 to 65° 

F on June 9. The soil temperatures at this time, therefore, have 












































PLATE I 



Effect of frost injury on the growth of sunflowers. 

Left to right; two branching plants, two plants with leaves 
curled, normal plant. 




















-Si¬ 


an important hearing upon the dates of seeding these two crops. 

In 1921, corn and sunflowers seeded on May 30, twenty days after 
the first seeding on May 10, were only fourteen days later than 
the first seeding in appearing above the ground. This is equivalent 
to a gain in time of nearly a week. 

o 

In 1920 the temperature dropped to 29 F, on the morning of 
June IS, doing considerable injury to the first and second seedings 
of corn. These plants recovered., however, and a second seeding 
was not necessary. The sunflowers were not noticably injured by 
this frost. Corn seeded on May 51 escaped this frost as it did 
not appear above the ground until June 14. 

In 1921 the first seeding of corn was killed by frost on May 
28, when the thermometer registered 24°F. It was necessary to 
reseed these plots. In this year, then, the earliest seeding of 
corn, which escaped frost injury, was that of Kay 20. The sun¬ 
flowers while not killed by the frost seemed tc have suffered injury. 
The leaves of some were later seen to curl slightly, and a number 
of the plants assumed a branching form, possibly due to injury of 
the growing point.. In Plata 1 four of these plants are shown 
beside one uninjured plant. It is well known that in most of the 
common varieties of sunflower, plants can be found which show this 
branching habit. Strains have been selected which breed true 
for this factor. But of the many forms which appeared after this 
frost, probably only a few were due to any hereditary differences 
in the plant#, This is brought out by the following count of the 
abnormal plants in different plots taken on June 25rd, 19 1. 


Plot 6 76 
Plot 7 17 
Plot 10 79 
Plot 11 98 












. 
























FIG-ITRB 2 

Mean Height fcm. ) of Corn and Sunflower Plants at Different 
Dates in 1920, 





































. 














Since plants of plot 7 did not appear above the around until 
June 1, they could not have been affected bp this frost. Plot 11 
which was seeded on flay 3, was injured most of all. 

It therefore appears that a temperature of 23°!’. in 1920 did 
considerable injury to the corn, but apparently had no effect upon 
the sunflowers. In 1921 a temperature of 24°E, completely killed 
the corn plants and slightly injured the sunflowers. 

Thus far it has been shown that the earliest seeding of 
corn to escape frost injury in 1920, was that of May 31, which 
appeared above the ground on June 14. In 1921 the seeding of 
May 20, which appeared June 4, was the earliest- safe date. But 
in some years it is possible that corn seeded at either of these 
dates might be frozen. Data collected for a number of years must- 
be made use of in studying this part of the problem. Decords of 
the late frosts at Edmonton kept for the years 1894 to 1917 in¬ 
clusive, have been referred to in this connection. According to 
these records corn above the ground on June 4 would have been 
frozen in six years out of the twenty-four years considered, while 
corn seeded so as to he above the ground not before June 14, 
would have been frozen only in three years out of twenty-four. 

In other words, the seeding of corn at the end of' May would 
greatly reduce the danger from late spring frosts. 

The mean heights of the ten plants in each plot at different- 

dates in 1920, are shown in figure 2. The most noticeable thing 

in this figure is the much greater height attained by the sunflowers 

to 

This may have been/a slight extent due to the method used in meas¬ 
uring the corn in 1920. In the case of the sunflowers the best 
growth as measured by height, was made by plot- 10, which t|as seeded 
on May 14. The other plot of sunflowers, seeded on. this date, did 































f 




























Pisur? z 

Meen Height (cm.) of Corn and Lonflower Plants et 
Eetes ir. 1921. 


Different 




























- 33 - 


not make such good growth, prob-bly because it - as situated at 
the sorth end of the block, on lower ground. Plot 8, the last 
seeding.made the poorest growth of all. Pone of the plots of sun¬ 
flowers had reached maturity at the end of the season, as all 
were still growing rapidly when the last measurement was taken. 

Of the plots of corn shown in figure 2, the best growth was 
made by the seeding of Lay 31, while the poorest growth was made 
by plot 7, seeded only ten days later. It therefore appears that 
a difference of ten days in the date of seeding at this time, 
has, in the case of both corn and sunflowers, an important in- * 
f'luence upon the ultimate height which the plants attain. The 
most mature plots of corn as .judged by these growth curves, were 
those seeded Lay 14 and Lay 21. Plots 5 and 7, seeded May 31, 
and June 10 respectively, were still growing when the last meas¬ 
urements were taken. 

The same fluctuations in the growth rate from day to day can 
be noticed in all of the plots, showing that environmental con¬ 
ditions have affected all of the plants of both corn and sun¬ 
flowers in much the same way. Plot 10 which made the most rapid 
growth has apparently been influenced by these changing conditions 
less than any other plot. Most of the growth has been made by 
all of the plots during the month of July and the first half of 
August. Between August 15 and 18 the growth was suddenly 
checked, and from that point onwards, proceeds at a much slower 
rate . 

The mean heights of the ten plants in each plot, at different 
dates in 1921 are shown in figure 3. It will be remembered that 
in this year a new method of measuring the corn plants was adopted 
But the final heights recorded for the plants in 1921 were not 
greatly affected by the method of measurement, as in both years 
the last height measurements were taken to the tip of the starn- 














































































- 34 - 


enate inflorescence which remained quite erect and generally 
exceeded the leaves in length. 

An examination of the curves presented in f'igure 3, shows that 
the growth made 'by the sunflowers in 1921 was much less than during 
the season of 1920. Corn on the other hand seems to have.made 
letter growth. The early see dings of sunflowers have attained the 
greatest height, while as in 1920 the late seeding of June 9 has 
made a very poor showing. The corn of plot 2, seeded on May 20, 
has made very rapid growth. Plot 3, seeded on May 30, has also 
reached a good height. Some of the plants of plot 5 were shaded 
by the adjoining plot of sunflowers, and for that reason the mean 
height of this plot has been reduced. Phile the corn ha d nearly 
c/eased growth at the last measurements, the sunflowers, as in 
1920, show no sign of any retardation in the growth rate. 

A study of the growth curves presented for the two years 
shows that the early seeding of sunflowers seems to be advisable, 
while corn seeded from May 20 to May 11 gave the best results. 
Earlier maturing varieties of both corn and sunflowers are necess¬ 
ary if the plants are to complete their life cycles during the 
growing season at their disposal. While the sunflowers made much 
better growth in 1920 than 1921, conditions for the growth of corn 
seem to have been better in the latter year. 

Yields 

The corrected yields in tons of dry matter per acre are given 

in Tables 1 and 2, together with the per cent dry matter for each 

plot as'determined by drying in an electric oven at 100°C. The 

dry matter content of the corn remained roughly the same for the 

two years, the highest value being 18.4% for plot 5 in 192 0 ,and 
the lowest 13.9 % for plot 4 in 1921.The 

very high dry matter content of plot 5 in 1920 and plot 3 in 1921, 
was very probably due to the fact that both of these plots were 










































































growing ver; rapidly when injured by the fall frosts. Injury 
to the leaves in such a case would be very severe, with the result 
that they would quickly lose their moisture content. In 1920 it 
was noticed that the'frost of Aug. 51 caused more damage to plot 5 
than to any other plot of corn. The high dry matter content of 
17.9 fo for plot 9 in 1920 is unquestionable, due to the favorable 
state of maturity of this plot, which was situated on the warm 
dry land at the north end of the block. 

The dry matter content of the sunflowers is appreciably lower 
than that of the corn in 1920, while in 1921 their relations in 
this respect are reversed. The favorable dry matter content of 
the sunflowers in 1921 seems to have been associated with poor 
growth and low yield. 

It has been already stated that the method outlined by 

0 

.Newton (25) was used in calculating corrected yields. In 1920 the 
block of ground used for the experiment sloped gently from plot 
10 to plot 1. The slope, however, was uniform throughout, as will 
be seen from an examination of the actual yields in green weight 
for that year. In the 1921 experiment, the only slope was north 
and south, the direction in which the plots were seeded. The use 
of this method of calculating corrected yields is therefore just¬ 
ifiable . 

The yields of sunflowers in 1920, given in Table 1, are 
about double those for corn during the same year, notwithstanding 
the lower dry matter content of the sunflowers. The highest 
yield of sunflowers was given by the early seedings, and the 
yields tend to fall as the dates of seeding become later. The 
best corn yield was produced by the May 51 seeding, although the 
seedings of May 14 also gave quite good yields. The poorest yield 
of corn was given by the late seeding of June 10. 





























































- 36 - 


In 1921 the yields of sunflowers have fallen off greatly, 
while the corn yields are considerably higher than in i920. Plot 
11, the very early seeding of sunflowers, has given the highest 
yield of the block, but with this exception, the sunflower yields 
are slightly below those of the corn. The highest yield of corn 
is again given by the plot seeded at the end of May, while the 
lowest yield is given by the late seeding of June 9. Plots 1 
and 5 of corn which were reseeded on May 30, have given slightly 
lower yields than plot 3, while theoretically, all should have 
the same percent dry matter and yield. This may be due to the 
fact that a few? planus in plots 1 and 5 which were frozen off, 
came up again before the new plants, were thinned out. It is 
also possibly due to the experimental error of the work. In any 
case, the conclusions which may be drawn from this work are not 
seriously affected by this difference. bince the frost of May 28, 
1921 caused some injury to the sunflowers which were above the 
ground at that time, it is only reasonable to believe that the 
yield of these plots would be reduced accordingly. In examin¬ 
ation of the yields given in Table 2, however, shows that plots 
7, 8 and 9, which were not subjected to this frost, have also given 
much lower yields than the corresponding dates of seeding in 
1920. The low sunflower yields for 1921 must have been due to some 
other cause than frost injury. The probable cause for this re¬ 
duction in yield will be considered later. 

Prom the discussion of frost observations, growth measure¬ 
ments, and final yields in the foregoing pages, some decision may 
now be arrived at regarding the optimum dates of seeding these 


crops. 




> 





Dates of Seeding 

Data collected for two years show that corn seeded about May 31 
germinates and starts growth quickly, makes rapid growth, and 
attains a good height, as shown by the growth measurements, and at 
the same time has given the best yield of dry matter per acre# 
According to the records of late frosts kept at Edmonton, corn 
appearing above the ground June 14, might be expected to receive 
frost injury one year in every eight. Nothing would be gained by 
delaying the seeding of corn much beyond May 31 for two reasons. 
First, the yields from the June 9 and June 10 seedings have been 
low in both years. Second, of the three spring frosts which 
ocourred after June 14, two came on June 24. At this time, corn 
seeded 6ven after June 10 would be subject to frost. Therefore, 
the danger from frost would be only very slightly reduced by 
seeding after May 3i. It appears, then, that the optimum date of 
seeding corn for this district is about May 31. 

In both years the early seedings of sunflowers have given the 
most rapid growth and the best yields. In 1921 the May 3 seeding 
gave the highest yield of the block, notwithstanding the fact that 
some of the plants had been injured by frost. The data at hand, 
therefore, ^show that the seeding of sunflowers as early as May 
3 is profitable. 

The need for earlier maturing varieties of both corn and sun¬ 
flowers is emphasized by this study. The ability of the sun-flowers 
to withstand light spring and fall frosts gives them a slightly 
longer growing season than the corn, but men with this advantage 
the variety of sunflower employed in this work failed to reach 
that stage of maturity necessary for the production of good quality 
silage. 

growth and Climate 

The relative growth taken from Table 7, and actual growth. 









































































PI3U1I 4 


Actual and relative Growth of Corn and Sunflower Plants for 
three-day periods i« 1**0, together with Mean Temperature foentl- 
-rnfte \ Pvici itrtlon finches), "ean -rlatlve Humid Its: the 
0 ?w e ' ’and Mean Daily Hours of * Sunshine for corresponding petiod®. 

*7o~ 
































FT X Tr i? £ 

Actual snc* 7'elative Growth of Corn ana twat lower Plants for 

two-diij periods in 19£1, together wItfc Mean Temperature (ccnt!*rede) 

Precif 1 tatior (inches), Mean T -elr.t;3Te Humidity; the product 

TB ^ -Jean Bailor Hours of Sunshine, and Mean Kaarimuw tolar ;,adiatio$ 

lU (Fahrenheit) 

















































38 


taken from the last two columns of Tables 5 and 6, for the years 
1920 and 1921, together with the corresponding climatic data, 
is presented in figures 4 and 5. It will be seen by referring 
to Tables 5 and 6 that once in 1920,and six tirres in 192® the 
growth measurements were taken after longer than the regular 
periods. For the purpose of avoiding any confusion in the present¬ 
ation of the actual growth in these charts, the growth for these 
periods has been reduced to a mean for the two on three day period, 
according as the year is 1921 or 1920. For example, the growth 
given in the tables for a six day period in 1920 or a four day 
period in 1921, has been divided by two and the resulting values 
have been plotted in the two figures. The relative growth rate 
calculated by Blackman’s (3) formula is independent of the length 
of the period of growth. Precipitation taken from Table 9 is pres¬ 
ented in inches for the days on which it fell. All of the other 
climatic data have been presented as means for the periods of 
growth, as taken from Tables 12 and 12. 

In 1920 the relative growth rate is quite high at the be¬ 
ginning of the season, but falls considerably towards the latter 
part of July, while at the end of the season it takes the form of 
a straight line almost parallel to the time axis. In 1921 the 
curve has much the same form. The fluctuations from day to day in 
both years follow those of the actual growth rate curve, but from 
about the end of July the relative growth rate seems to be un¬ 
affected by enrironmental factors. The growth in height, then, of 
corn and sunflowers, seems to ha ve no strict relationship to 
the height which the plants have already attained, but falls in an 
irregular manner from the beginning to the end of the season. 

The actual growth rate for the two years fluctuates from day to 

day with the environmental conditions. In 1920 the actual growth 











. 

























Height cm 



PIUTC 6 

direct T mjeretire Kffioienoy Indioe© (oetit i^rade) end the 
in Heig-ht of Corn end Stmt lowers In 19E0 end 19£1* 


3-rowth 


































Height.cm- 



FIGEJBE 7 


Bemainder Temperature efficiency Indices (4.5°D = 1) and the 
Growth in Height of Corn and Sunflowers in 1920 and 1921. 











teo 







MO 


no 


;:oo 


160 


/eo 


l #0 


/to 


/oo 


60 


eo 


y/o 


to 



Remainder Indices (/o“c=i) 



FISUBE 8 


Bemainder Temperature Efficiency Indices (10 C - 1) 
Growth in Height of Corn and Sunflowers in 1920 and 


and the 
1921. 




























EI3UPE 9 

Exponential Temper ture Efficiency Indices and the Srowth 
Height of Corn and Sunflowers in 1920 and 1921. 


in 













Height 




fisupe 10 

Physiological Temperature Efficiency Indices and the Growth 
in Height of Corn and Sunflowers in 1920 and 1921. 











Height c 



FIGXJEE 11 

, o 

Degree Hours (Fahrenheit) above 40 F. and the Growth in 
Height of Corn and Sunflowers in 1920 and 192X a 





















39 


rate of corn is considerably lower than that of the Sunflowers. 
This is probably due to the method used in measuring the corn, 
as towards the middle of August, when the tassel of the corn 
plant was being measured, the growth of the corn is about 
equal to that of the sunflowers. In 1921 the actual growth rate 
of the corn is quite often higher than that of the sunflowers. 
This is especially noticeable at high temperatures, suggesting 
that at high temperatures the corn makes more favorable growth 
than the sunflowers. The time during which the most rapid, growth 
was made extended from about July 11 to Aug. 19 in both years. 
This period coincides with a time of quite high temperatures. 

The sudden drop in temperature about August 19 in both years 
is accompanied by a sudden drop in the growth rate after which 
neither of the plants make very rapid growth. The corn almost 
ceases growth at this point, while the sunflowers continue to 
make considerable growth, but at a much reduced rate. 

In some cases precipitation has accelerated the growth 
rate even where the temperature remained the same or has fallen. 
The best growth has been made where precipitation was followed by 
increasing temperatures. There seems to be little relation 
between growth and relative humidity. The product TB does 

TO 

not seem to have as close a relation to growth as does the tem¬ 
perature curve. The hours of sunshine,and solar radiation nat¬ 
urally show quite a close correlation with each other, and with 
the temperature curve. 

Since the relation between temperature and growth seems to 
be so intimate, it is of interest to consider the coefficientsof 
correlation for a few of these plots. The coefficients of 
of correlation with the direct indices of Tables 10 and 11, have 
been calculated for each date of seeding of corn and sunflowers 
































* 


' 40 ' 


for the two years. The 

TABLE 18 

Correlation Coefficients 

method of Ayres has 

for Direct Indioes 

been used. 

and Growth 

Corn 

r 

1920 

Sunflowers 

r 

Plot 1 

• 3613 .1173 

Plot 2 

.5184 ± .0987 

Plot 3 

• 3389 .1194 

Plot 4 

.4184 ~ .1113 

Plot 5 

.3479 ± .1186 

Plot 6 

.4729± .1047 

Plot 7 

.4793 — .1108 

Plot 8 

.2864 ± .1320 

- 

— 

- 

— 

Corn 

r 

1921 

Sunflowers 

r 

Plot 2 

.4564 i .09 59 

Plot 6 

.6496 .0689 

Plot 3 

.4000 - .1017 

Plot 7 

.4854 i .0911 

Plot 4 

.4814 i .0963 

Plot 8 

.5427 ? .° 869 

— 

— 

Plot 9 

.4778 ? .0951 

-- 

--- 

Plot 11 

.6655 ± .0664 


Prom the correlation coefficients given in Table 18, it will 
he seen that the relation between the rate of growth of corn 
in 1920, and changes in temperature as measured by direct indices, 
is very obscure. With the exception of the value for plot 7, 
these correlations lack any particular significance, especially 
when considered in relation to their probable errors. In 1921 
the correlations for corn are slightly higher, but this may be 
due to the fact that a different method of measuring was used. 

The early seedings of sunflowers in both 1920 and 1921 show the 
existence of a relationship between growth and temperature as 
measured by direct indices. This correlation becomes quite dis¬ 
tinct in the cast of plot 11, seeded May 3, 1921. It will also 
be noticed that in 1921 the values given for sunflowers are 
generally higher than those for 1920. This difference may to a 











































41 


certain extent reflect the lower temperatures which prevailed 
in 1921, as expressed by degree hours. In other words, tem¬ 
perature in 1921,had slightly limited growth. 

From the growth rate and temperature curves of figures 4 and 
5, it is obvious that there exists quite a close relationship 
between fluctuations in the growth rate and changes In temperature. 
The direct temperature indices seem to bring this out in the 
case of the sunflowers, especially for the early plots in 1921. 

The growth of corn, however, seems to bear a different relation¬ 
ship to temperature, as the correlation of its growth with 
direct temperature indices, is slight in both years. 

In figures 6 to 11 the mean heights of the thirty plants 
given in columns 11 and 12 of Table 3, for 1920, and columns 
12 and 13 of Table 4 for 1921, have been plotted as ordinates. 

The various summations of temperature efficiency indices as given 
in Tables 14 and 15, are plotted as abscissae. If the heights 
reached by the plants on the various dates had'been in any way 
proportional to the temperature accumulations for the corres¬ 
ponding periods of growth, a definite form of curve might have 
been expected, depending upon the nature of the relationship. 

The curves obtained from the various indices are all very similar 
in form, and suggest that the Klationship between growth and 
temperature as measured by any of these methods, is a linear one. 
In all cases, the fall in the slope of the curve at the beginn¬ 
ing and end of the season, shows that temperatures at those 
times have been less effective in promoting growth in height. 

In order to m/easure, if possible, the accuracy with which 
the various temperature indices express the relationship between 
temperature and growth, a few correlation coefficients have been 
calculated. Plot 2 (1921) of corn and plot 11 (1921) of sun- 






t 








42 - 


flowers, have teen chosen,as they both showed some evidence of co> 
relation with the direct indices and were also the two earliest, 
seedings for the year. The coefficients given in Table 19 are 
those between the growth of the plants in these plots, and the 
five temperature indices, degree hours, total hours of sun- 
shine, the p/roduot Jq and mean relative humidity. The tem¬ 
perature indices and degree hours used are those given in Table 

TR 

11# The total hours of sunshine, Jq and mean relative humidity, 
will be found in Table IS* 

TABLE 19 - Correlation Coefficients for Plots 2 and 11 (1921) 
and Temperature Indices, Degree Hours, Total hours 
of Sunshine 1®, and mean Relative Humidity, 

Tb 



Plot 

Corn 

2 

r 

Plot 11 
Sunflowers 

r 

Direct Indices 

•4564 

± 

.0959 

.6655 

± . 

0664 

Remainder Indices (4.5°C) 

• 5292 

± 

.0872 

*6469 

± . 

0693 

Remainder ” (10°G) 

.6407 

± 

.0714 

.2571 


1113 

Exponential Indices 

.4582 

tb 

.0957 

.6387 

£ . 

0706 

Physiological Indices 

.5798 


.0804 

.0355 

tb 

1190 

Degree Hours 

.5580 

tb 

.0861 

.6207 

± 

0733 

Hours Sunshine 

.4322 

i 

.0985 

.4100 

t 

099 2 

TR 

I V 

.6606 

& 

.0683 

.3991 

X 

■» 

1002 

Relative Humidity 

-.0910 

tb 

,1201 

-.0600 

ir 

~ 4 

,1188 


The best correlation between the growth of sunflowers and 

temperature is obtained when direct temperature indices are 

o 

employed. With the remainder indices above 10 C and also 

with the physiological indices, there is no correlation whatever. 

The relation with hours of sunshine and the product TR is very 

TU 

slight, while the value for relative humidity is a minus quantity* 












. 

. 





















. 







































-43 


The correlation between the growth of corn and temper- 

o 

ature is considerably better with the remainder indices of 4,5 
C, than with direct indices. It is still higher with remainder 
indices of 10°C, while the best correlation with the growth of 
corn has been obtained with the products TR The correlation 

TG. 

between the growth of cnrn and physiological indices is com¬ 
paratively good when compared with the corresponding figure for 
sunflowers. Since the physiological indices were actually 
derived from Lehenbauer’s (18) data on maize seedlings* it is 
not surprising to find that the corn plants in their growth 
show a much closer relationship to these indices than do sun¬ 
flowers. It, therefore, appears that physiological temperature 
efficiency indices for expressing plant growth can be of little 
value unless derived from observations on each particular plant 
under consideration* 

Although too much reliance cannot be placed upon the corr¬ 
elations in the above table, there seems to be considerable 
evidence to support the view that while sunflowers make good 
growth at medium or quite low temperatures, corn responds most 
closely to high temperatures, and is particularly influenced by 
favorable conditions of temperature and relative humidity. 

Prom a study of the climatic data growth measurements and 
yields for the two years, certain conclusions may be drawn re¬ 
garding the climatic adaptations of these two crops. The out¬ 
standing difference in the climate for the two seasons, was the 
low precipitation from SeptJ., 1920 to the end of June 1921, as 
compared with the same period during the previous year. This 
difference in precipitation for the two years was associated with 
a reduction in the yield of sunflowers for 1921. The corn on 

the other hand suffered no such reduction in yield. Sunflowers 



. 
















-44- 

have germinated and started growth more rapidly than corn, when 
seeded at the early dates. They have not been seriously injured 
by late spring and early fall frosts, and for that reason have a 
considerably longer growing season. Corn has been very suscept¬ 
ible to frost injury and gives evidence of good growth at high 
temperatures. Sunflowers, therefore, should be well suited to 
those parts of the country where precipitation is ample, but where 
there is a short growing season with low temperatures in spring and 
fall, and danger of frost injury. Corn should give good results 
where the season is longer, temperatures higher, and where soil 
moisture is not sufficient for the successful culture of sunflowers. 






- M - 


' 






, 









45 


SUMMARY 

1* During 1920 and 1921 a study has been made of the growth of 
corn. Sea Mays , and Sunflowers, He lienthu s annuus , seeded at 
different dates, in relation to their climatic environment* 

The varieties used were Northwestern Dent corn and Mammoth 
Russian sunflowers. 

2® Early seedings of sunflowers were found to germinate and appear 
above ground sooner than the early seedings of corn, while the 
late seedings of both plants required much the same time for 
this purpose. Both were retarded by the lower soil temperatures 
obtaining early in the season, but the corn to a greater degree 
than the sunflowers. 

3. A temperature of 29°P. in the spring of 1920 injured the corn 
but did not affect the sunflowers. In 1921 a temperature of 
24°P. killed the corn and slightly injured the sunflowers. 

4. Because of resistance to late spring and early fall frosts, 
sunflowers have a longer growing season than corn. 

5. Corn seeded at the end of May begins growth quickly, will in 
most years escape injury from late spring frosts, and gives a 
good yield of dry matter. Seeded at this date its time of aotivs 
growth capacity synchronises with that part of the season most 
favorable for vegetative growth. 

6.The seeding of sunflowers early in May seems advisable if the 
best yields of dry matter are to be obtained. 

7. In 1920 the com had a higher dry matter content than the Sun¬ 
flowers. In 1921 this order was reversed but the high dry matter 
of the sunflowers was associated with slow growth and low yield. 


8. The growth in height of corn and sunflowers fluctuates greatly 












- - 














* 











































from day to day. The per cent relative growth is not constant 
hut falls in an irregular manner from the beginning to the end 
of the season. 

9. An effort has been made to correlate the growth of corn 

and sunflowers, with five temperature efficiency indices used 
by Livingston and Shreve, as well as with degree hours, total 
hours of sunshine, the product TR , and mean relative humidity* 

T5 

10; The growth of both corn and sunflowers has shown closer 

correlation with temperature than with any other single climatic 

factor. Corn gave the best correlation with temperature when 

remainder indices derived from temperatures above 10°C were 

employed. Sunflowers gave the best correlation with temper- 

o 

atures above 0 This indicates a greater capacity in sun- 

flowers than corn for growth at low temperatures. 

ll.Physiological temperature indices derived from Lehenbauer's 
observations on the growth of roaiz6, have shown no relation to 
the growth of sunflowers, but have given a distinct correlation 
with the growth of corn. 

12. The sudden drop in temperature about Aug. 19th in both 

a 

years was accompanied by,distinct check in the growth rate of 
corn and sunflowers. The sunflowers continued to grow steadily 
at the low temperatures which followed this date, but the 
growth made by the corn was very slight. 

13. Lack of sufficient soil moisture in 1921 was undoubtedly re¬ 
sponsible for the low yields of sunflowers in that year. Corn 
showed no reduction in yield due to this cause. 







. 









. 




. 




« 

. 





. 





14 


- 47 - 

• Com promieee to give better yields of fodder than 
sunflower® in the southern ureas of the province where 
the growing sector, is oomj nra lively long, temj era to res 
ire high, and .oil moisture is limited* tiwtf lowers should 
hr well els 1 ted to the northern Beet lone where mol. store iss 
more abundant, temperature® at the beginning end end of 
the growing sea -on ere low, end where there is dang- r 
from spring and fall frosts* 

16. The need for earlier maturing varieties of both corn 
and ennflovere it emphasised hi this study. 


i 










48 


LITERATURE CITED 


(1) BLACKMAN, FF. Optima and Limiting Factors. Ann. Eot., 

Vol. 19, p. 281, 1905. 

(2) BLACKMAN, FF. The Metabolism•of the Plant considerec 1 as a 

Catalytic Reaction. Science, vol. 28, p. 628, 1908. 

(5) BLACKMAN, V.H. The Compound Interest Law and Plant Growth. 
Ann. of Bot., Vol. 35, p. 3 53, 1919. 


(4) BLACKMAN, V.H. The Significance of the Efficiency Index of 

Plant Growth. New Phyt., vol. 19, no, 3 end'd, p. 97, 1920 


f5) BRADFORD, F.C. The Relation of Temperature to Blossoming in 
the Apple and leach. University of Missouri Agric. Exp. 
Sta., Research Bull. 53, 1922. 

(6) BRENCHLEY, W.E. On the Relations between Growth and the Environ 

mental Conditions of Temperature and Bright Sunshine. 

Ann. Appl. Biol., vol. 6, no. 4, p. 211, 1920. 

(7) BRIGGS, G.E., KIDD, F., and WEST, G. A Quantitative Analysis 

of Plant Growth. Part 1, Ann. Appl. Biol., vol. 7, r>. 103, 
1920. 


(8) BRIGGS, G.E., KIDD, F., and 
of Plant Growth. Part 
2 and 3, p. 202, 1920. 


WEST, C. A Quantitative Analysis 
2, Ann. Appl. Biol., vol. 7, no. 


(9) BRIGGS, G.E., KIDD, F., and. WEST, C., Methods in the Quantit¬ 
ative Analysis of Plant Growth - a Reply to Criticism. 

Ann. Appl. Biol., vol. 7, no. 4, p. 403, 1921. 

(10) BRIGGS, L.J. and SEANTZ, H.L. The Rater Requirement of Plants. 

U.S. Dept, of Agric., Bureau of Plant Industry, Bull. 284, 
and 285, 1915. R 


(11) ECKLES, C.H., and SWETT, W.W. Some Factors Influencing the 

Growth of Dairy Heifers. university of Lli^ssouri, Agric. 
Exp. Sta., Research Bull. 31, 1918. 


(12) FISHERJ R.A. Some Remarks on the methods formulated in a 
Recent Article on "The Quantitative Analysis of Plant 

Growth". Ann. Appl. Biol., vol. 7, no. 4, p. 367, 1921. 

$ ■ > 

(15) GARNER, W.W. and ALLARD, H.A. Effect of the Relative Length of 
Day and Night and Other Factors of Environment on Growth 
and Reproduction in Plants. Jour. Agric. Res. vol. 18, 
no, 11, 1920. 

(14) EILDEBRANDT, F .II., A Physiological Study of the Climatic 
Conditions of Maryland as Measured by Plant Growth. 
Physiol. Res., Vol. 2, no. 8, p, 341-405, 1921. 



















































. 













♦ 





















49 


(15) JOHNSTON, E.S., The Seasonal March of the Climatic 

Conditions of a Creenhor.se as Belated to Plant Growth. 
University of Maryland, Agric . Ex] . bta., Bull. No. 

245, 1921. 

(16) KIDD, E„ WEST, C. , and BBIGGS, G.E. What is the Signif¬ 

icance of the Efficiency Index of Plant Growth? New 
Phyt., vol. 19, no. 5 and 4, p. 88, 1920. 

(17) MIDI), E., WEST, C., and BBIGGS, G.E. A quantitative Analysis 

of the Growth of Helianthus annuus. Part 1, xroc. 

Boyal Society, vol. 92, p. 368, 1921. 

(18) LEBENBAUEB, P.A. The Growth of Maize Seedlings in Delation 

to Temperature. Physiol. lies., vol. 1, no. 5, p. 247- 
288, 1914. 

(19) LIVINGSTON, B.E. , and SHBBVE, E. The Distribution of Veg¬ 

etation in the united States as Belated to Climatic 
Conditions, 1921. 

(20) Me LEAN, E.T., A Preliminary Study of Climatic Conditions 

in Maryland as Delated to Plant Growth. Physiol. Ees., 
vol. 2, no, 4, p, 129-208, 1917. 

(21) MEEDIAM, C.H. Life Zones and Crop Zones of the United 

States. U.S. Dept, of Agric., Div. of Biological 
Survey, Bull. 10, 1898. 

(22) MQSTEB, J.G., Climate of Illinois* University of Illinois, 

Agric. Exp. Sta., Bull. 208, 1918. 

(23) NEWTON, B. Note on Belative and Corrected Yields. Scientific 

Agriculture, vol. 3, no. 3, p. 122, 1922. 

(24) PALADIN,V.I. Plant Physiology. 'fans, o Livingston, B.E., 

1917. 

(25) PBESCOTT, J.A. Some Observations on the Growth of Maize in 

Egypt. Sultanic Agric. Soc., Bull. 7, 1921. 

(26) BEED, H.S., and HOLLAND, B.H., The Growth Bate of an Annual 

Plant Helianthus. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sc. U.S.A., vol. 5, 
p. 135, 1919. 

(27) BEED, H.S. The Nature of the Growth Late. Journ. Gen, 

Physiol., vol. 2, no. 5, 1920. 

(28) WEST, 0., 1RIGGS_G.E. , and ZIDB, E. Methods and 

Significant Delations in the Quantitative 
Analysis of Plant Growth. New Phyt., vol. 19, no. 7 and 
8, p. 200, 1920. 












































































. 















TABLE I - PLAN OF-SEEDING, OBSERVATIONS ALL Y ' ~LDB BOB 1920 


Date of 
heeding 

Elot 

.Crop i 

i 

r>» 

CO 

fc-J 

r=3 

14 

1 

Corn 

May 

14 

2 

Sunflower 

Ma y 

21 

5 

C orn 

May 

21 

4 

Sunf lowe r 

May 

31 

5 

Corn 

May 

31 

6 

Sunflower 

June 

10 

7 

Corn 

June 

10 

8 

Sunflower 

May 

14 

9 

Corn 

May 

14 

10 

Sunflowe r 


Date Da#s Date 

appear- from Har- 

ance of seeding vest- 

plants to appear- ed. 
above ance of 
ground plants 


June 

1 

18 

Sep 

.20 

May 

25 

11 

it 

ii 

June 

7 

17 

h 

i? 

June 

4 

14 

11 

IT 

June 

14 

14 

TT 

11 

Junfe 

10 

10 

IT 

11 

June 

18 

8 

II 

It 

June 

17 

7 

11 

IT 

June 

1 

18 

IT 

IT 

May 

25 

11 

It 

11 


Actual 
yield 
>er plot 
lbs. 
green 
wt. ) 

Per- Corr- 
cent ected 
dry yield 

matter per ac. 
(Tons of 
dry r® tter 

134.6 

15.8 

1.95 

350.7 

14.2 

4.33 

139.7 

14.9 

1.69 

368.2 

14.8 

4.33 

154.6 

18.4 

2.08 

405.4 

14.1 

4.19 

144.8 

15.8 

1.53 

38 7.5 

14.3 

3.77 

177.8 

17.9 

1.95 

451.5 

15.1 

4.33 








































































• 





















































TABLE 2 - PLAN OF SEEDING, OBSERVATIONS AND YIELDS POE 1921 


Date of 
Seeding 

Plot 

Crop 

Date 
appear¬ 
ance of 
plants 
above 
ground 

days 
from 
seeding 
to appear 
ance of 
plants 

Date Actual Per- 
Har- yield cent 
vest- per dry 

ed plot matter 
(Lbs. 
green 

Correct¬ 
ed yield 
per acre 
(Tons of 
dry 

matte r) 








wt . ) 



May 10* 

1 

Corn 

May 25 

15 

Sep 

.3 

707.5 

15.3 

2.95 

May 20 

2 

IT 

June 4 

15 

IT 

3 

699.5 

15.8 

3.02 

May 30 

3 

tt 

June 8 

9 

TT 

3 

726.0 

16.4 

3.27 

June 9 

4 

TT 

June 17 

8 

TT 

3 

693.5 

13.9 

2.67 

May 10® 

5 

IT 

May 25 

15 

TT- 

3 

654.0 

16.2 

2.95 

May 10 

6 

Sunf lov/e r 

Ida $ 23 

13 

IT 

15 

549.0 

20.3 

2.94 

May £0 

7 

U 

June .1 

12 

TT 

15 

399.0 

22.9 

2.46 

May 30 

8 

ii 

June 8 

9 

TT 

15 

502.0 

21.6 

2.98 

June 9 

9 

IT 

June 17 

8 

TT 

15 

424.0 

20.4 

2.43 

May 10 

10 

TT 

May 23 

13 

it 

15 

484.0 

21.1 

2.94 

May 3 

11 

*» 

May 18 

15 

IT 

15 

588.0 

21.7 

3.75 

si Corn of plots 1 and 

5 killed 

by frost 

on 

morning of 

May 28, 


and seeded again May 30. Plants of second seeding appeared 
above ground June 8. 












3 


TABLE 3 - 

Date 

HEAD HEIOHT OF 

rLAUTS 

(cm.) AT DIFFERED! LATE 

Plot 1 

Hot 3 

flot £ 

llot 

7 llot « 

Plot 



Corn 

Corn 

Com 

Corn 

Corn 

Sunfl 

June 

5 

3.9 




4.6 

1.7 

It 

8 

5.2 




5.9 

2.2 

It 

11 

6,4 




6.5 

3.0 

It 

12 


4.7 





It 

14 






3.6 

n 

15 







it 

17 







it 

20 







it 

23 

7.5 

6.6 

7.3 


7.3 

5.9 

it 

26 

8.8 

7.9 

8.4 


8.1 

6.6 

it 

29 

9.3 

9.0 

9.1 


9.2 

9.2 

July 

2 

10.0 

11.0 

11.3 

10.9 

13.9 

12.4 

It 

5 

12.0 

12.0 

14.1 

12.3 

17.2 

15.9 

Tt 

8 

14.5 

14.3 

15.1 

13.9 

19.7 

21.3 

It 

11 

21.0 

19.4 

19.8 

19.7 

29.5 

34.9 

Tf 

14 

23.8 

22.3 

23.4 

22.3 

36.4 

42.0 

It 

17 

31.9 

29.2 

29.3 

30.1 

48.1 

57.9 

It 

20 

40.4 

37.3 

38.1 

37.5 

58.0 

70.3 

It 

23 

53.6 

46.8 

48.7 

48.2 

69.8 

91.1 

It 

26 

bj.i 

51.6 

54.5 

51.5 

75.6 

99.5 

It 

29 

67.1 

62.0 

67.6 

59.5 

88.3 

117.0 

Aug. 

1 

79.9 

69.7 

79.9 

68.4 

105.7 

131.2 


4 

89.8 

77.9 

90.8 

73.4 

115.5 

140.3 


7 

105.5 

92.5 

102.2 

78.4 

127.4 

150.8 


10 

123.2 

110.4 

117*3 

87.7 

141.7 

170.9 


13 

131.6 

121.3 

125.6 

93.3 

147.0 

182.9 


16 

150.8 

137.2 

143,2 

103.6 

155.5 

200.1 


19 

153.0 

138.6 

144,8 

105.8 

166.2 

204.7 


22 

156.6 

141.2 

149.3 

113.5 

156.8 

216.0 


25 

162.1 

142.6 

154.2 

117.0 

156.9 

221.4 


31 

165.8 

147.0 

164.7 

123.4 

156.9 

235.2 

Sept. 3 

166.9 

148.9 

169.5 

129.4 

156.9 

243.3 


6 

167.4 

149.9 

175.9 

134.9 

157.0 

251.7 


9 

167.7 

150.1 

179.0 

136.7 

157.0 

257.9 



1 


Plot 

4 x lot 

6 x lot 

Ave .of 
plots 

8 Plot 10 1.3 & 9 

Ave.of 
plots 

P A r. n J in 

*uu- due- Sun- sun- Corn-- 

flowers flowers flovers flowers 

Sun¬ 

fl owe rs 




1.9 






£.9 






3.6 



2.5 









4.6 



2.8 






5.2 

3.6 


8.4 

7.1 

6.6 

5.9 

4.0 


10.5 

8.3 

7.7 

9.4 

5.6 


15.2 

9.2 

11.3 

15.4 

8.5 

7.0 

23.5 

11.6 

17.1 

19.6 

11.9 

9.0 

33.6 

13.7 

23.0 

24 .0 

17.4 

13.7 

42.2 

16.2 

29.2 

32.5 

27.8 

29.2 

59.9 

23.3 

42.4 

37.2 

32.7 

36.4 

70.3 

27.5 

49.8 

50.0 

46.5 

46.1 

86.7 

36.4 

64.9 

61.4 

60.7 

53.1 

105.2 

45.2 

79.0 

80.1 

80.0 

65.1 

121.2 

56.7 

97.5 

85.0 

88.0 

70.0 

132.3 

61.5 

105.6 

105.2 

107.6 

87.0 

151.2 

72.4 

124.5 

121.9 

124.6 

102.2 

163.8 

85.1 

139.0 

129.7 

134.7 

113.9 

173.6 

94.4 , 

14 7.9 

144.9 

151.2 

127.6 

189.0 

108.5 

161.6 

159.4 

167.8 

141.6 

203.1 

125.1 

177.8 

172.7 

180.2 

155.9 

215.2 

133.3 

190.3 

190.5 

200.3 

173.8 

233.5 

14 7.8 

208.0 

196.2 

205.1 

178.8 

238.5 

149.3 

213.1 

207.3 

215.4 

190.3 

247.7 

151.5 

223.7 

215.4 

221.4 

197.8 

254.9 

153.9 

230.6 

229.5 

236.9 

213.3 

267.6 

156.6 

244.1 

239.6 

245.0 

223.7 

273.0 

157.6 

252.0 

249.6 

254.9 ' 

233.2 


158.1 


257.0 

262.1 

241.7 

£85.1 

158.3 

266.7 





















• • 
















4 


list 6 


July 


Aug 


Sept. 


B 4 

- lEAfl 

HEIMT O ' 

i-LAI TE 

(cm.) AT - 


- ‘1 P-il-L, , 

1921. 











Plot 

1 Plot 2 

r lot 

3 : lot 4 

riot 

5 riot 6 

r lot 

7 


r lot 8 

Plot 9 

plot 10 

Plot. 11 

Ave . of plots 

1, 2 and 5. 

Ave. oi 
6 7 

plots 

: l 11 A in 


G orn 

« orn 

Horn 

Corn 

Corn 

Suh- 

Sun- 



bun- 

bun- 

bun- 

Si n- 

0 orn 

Sun! lovers 







f lo’ve rs 

f love rs 


flow e rs 

flowers 

flowers 

flowe rs 




20 

16.8 

22.6 

14.2 

— 

— 

9.7 

6.1 



— 

— 

10.6 

10.7 

17.6 

8.8 


22 

2 

18.9 

26.2 

19.0 

— 

17.4 

12.4 

7.6 



— 

— 

13.0 

15.2 

21.4 

11.0 


24 

22.2 

30.9 

22.2 

14.7 

20.5 

16.1 

9.9 



6.3 

3.4 

16.6 

17.2 

25.1 

14.2 


26 

25.8 

36.6 

26.3 

19.0 

23.8 

20.4 

12.9 



8.4 

4.1 

20.6 

21.5 

29.6 

18.0 


28 

29.5 

42.7 

30.2 

21.9 

26.9 

25.7 

16.6 



10.4 

4.8 

24.7 

26.2 

34.1 

22.3 


SO 

34.0 

49.1 

35.3 

26.1 

31.4 

32.5 

21.4 

M 


15.3 

5.7 

30.4 

32.0 

59.5 

28.1 


4 

40.2 

57.3 

41.5 

28.9 

37.0 

42.5 

28.9 



18.7 

7.6 

58.6 

44.5 

46.3 

56.7 


6 

43.1 

60.8 

44.4 

31.0 

39.8 

46.2 

32.1 



21.2 

8.7 

42.3 

46.5 

49.4 

40.2 


8 

48.9 

67.3 

50.7 

34.5 

45.2 

54.6 

39.8 



26.9 

11.4 

50.2 

55.4 

55.6 

48.2 


10 

52.2 

70.4 

54.4 

37.4 

49.0 

59.7 

45.0 



31.4 

13 .6 

55.6 

61.6 

59.0 

63 .4 


12 

67.5 

77.1 

60.4 

42.8 

55.3 

67.5 

52.1 



57.1 

17.1 

65.9 

69.2 

65.0 

61.8 


14 

66.9 

84.6 

68.3 

49.5 

63.0 

77.3 

62.7 



46.0 

22.2 

77.9 

79.2 

72.9 

72.6 


16 

74.6 

94.6 

78.5 

59.5 

71.6 

87.7 

74.3 



57.3 

30.1 

87.0 

88.4 

82.6 

83.0 


18 

80.0 

101.0 

83.8 

65.0 

76.9 

97.0 

83.0 



65.9 

36.9 

95.3 

94.9 

88.3 

91.8 


20 

90.6 

112.1 

94.1 

75.2 

85.1 

106.2 

94.0 



77.5 

46.4 

104.1 

104.4 

98.9 

101.4 


22 

96.8 

118.6 

100.7 

82.2 

91.2 

112.1 

100.5 


86.8 

55.3 

109.4 

109.1 

105.4 

107.3 


26 

113.3 

134.9 

115.8 

99.8 

105.4 

121.5 

111.1 



99.9 

67.8 

117.8 

117.6 

121.5 

116.8 


28 

118.9 

140.2 

121.8 

107.2 

110.7 

125.4 

115.0 


! 

105.1 

72.5 

121.6 

121.3 

127.0 

120.7 


30 

126.7 

148.1 

129.4 

116.3 

117.2 

131.9 

120.8 



111.6 

78.8 

126.6 

126.4 

134.7 

126.4 


. 1 

138.2 

159.4 

141.0 

127.9 

127.6 

140.7 

129.4 



121.7 

87.8 

154.4 

134.1 

146.2 

134.8 


3 

146.5 

168.5 

150.8 

137.6 

134.9 

148.3 

136.6 



129.2 

95.0 

141.5 

141.5 

155.3 

142 .1 


5 

151.4 

172.5 

155.3 

142.7 

139.1 

152.8 

140.3 



133.4 

98.4 

145.3 

145.3 

159.7 

146.1 


9 

161.6 

182.4 

165.8 

154.7 

147.0 

162.7 

149.3 



145.0 

108.1 

154.4 

154.5 

169.9 

155.5 


11 

167.4 

188.3 

171.8 

161.2 

152.2 

169.0 

155.6 



149.6 

114.4 

160.8 

161.0 

175.8 

161.8 


13 

174.4 

194.8 

179.1 

167.8 

158.6 

174.5 

161.5 



156.0 

119.9 

166.7 

167.1 

182.8 

167.6 


16 

182.3 

202.8 

188.4 

176.4 

163.7 

180.4 

0.67 . 2 



160.6 

123.5 

171.9 

173.0 

191.2 

173.2 


17 

188.4 

207.3 

193.1 

181.1 

166.1 

184.8 

171.9 



164.4 

127.0 

177.0 

178.6 

196.3 

177.9 


19 

192.6 

212.2 

198.0 

185.8 

171.0 

190.3 

176.7 



169.4 

131.4 

182.3 

184.1 

200.9 

183.1 


23 

198.3 

217.8 

204.0 

192.9 

176.2 

197.9 

184.1 



176.4 

13 7.3 

190.7 

193.6 

206.7 

190.9 


25 

200.2 

219.4 

205.9 

195.0 

178.0 

200.9 

187.0 



179.5 

159.8 

194.4 

197.4 

208.5 

194.1 


27 

201.3 

220.5 

206.6 

197.5 

179.4 

203.4 

189.3 



182.1 

142.0 

197.3 

200.8 

209.4 

196.7 


1 

204.5 

221.8 

207.4 

200.8 

182.8 

211.7 

198.8 



190.1 

14-9.0 

208.0 

212.8 

211.2 

206.2 


9 

— 

__ 

_ 

— 

— 

226.2 

207 .4 



200.1 

156.5 

216.4 

225.9 


216.7 
















































5 


TABLE 6 - MEAN ACTUAL 

GROWTH 

0? PLANTS (cm.) 

FOR PERIODS. 1920 

Data 

Blot 1 

Plot 3 

Plot 6 

Plot 7 

Plot 9 

Plot 2 

Corn 

Corn 

Com 

Corn 

Com 

Sunflowers 

June 23-26 

1.3 

1.3 

1.1 

— 

0.8 

0.7 

June 26-29 

0.6 

1.1 

0.7 

— 

1.1 

2.6 

n 29-July 

2 0.7 

2.0 

2.2 

— 

4.7 

3.2 

July 2-6 

2.0 

1.0 

2.8 

1.4 

3.3 

3.6 

July 6-8 

2.6 

2.3 

1.0 

1.6 

2.6 

5.4 

July 8-11 

6.6 

6.1 

4.7 

6.8 

9.8 

13.6 

July 11-14 

2.8 

2.9 

3.6 

2.6 

6.9 

7.1 

July 14-17 

8.1 

6.9 

6.9 

7.8 

11.7 

15.9 

July 17-20 

8.6 

8.1 

8.8 

7.4 

9.9 

12.4 

July 20-23 

13.2 

9.6 

10.6 

10.7 

11.8 

20.8 

July 23-86 

3.8 

4.8 

6.8 

3.3 

5.8 

8.4 

July 26-29 

9.7 

10.4 

13.1 

8.0 

12.7 

17.5 

July 20-Aug.l 

12.8 

7.7 

12.3 

8.9 

17.4 

14.2 

Aug.1-4 

9.9 

8.2 

10.9 

6.0 

9.8 

9.1 

Aug. 4-7 

16.7 

14.6 

11.4 

6.0 

11.9 

10.5 

Aug. 7-10 

17.7 

17.9 

16.1 

9.3 

14.3 

20.1 

Aug. 10-13 

8.4 

10.9 

8.3 

6.6 

5.3 

12.0 

Aug. 13-16 

19.2 

16.9 

17.6 

10.3 

8.6 

17.2 

Aug. 16-19 

2.2 

1.4 

1.6 

2.2 

0.7 

4.6 

Aug. 19-22 

3.6 

2.6 

4.6 

7.7 

0.6 

11.3 

Aug. 22-26 

6.6 

1.4 

4.9 

3.6 

0.1 

5.4 

Aug. 26-31 

3.7 

4.4 

10.6 

6.4 

ooo 

13.8 

Aug.31-Sep.3 

1.1 

1.9 

4.8 

6.0 

0.0 

8.1 

Sept. 3-6 

0.6 

1.0 

6.4 

5.6 

0.1 

8.4 

Sept. 6-9 

0.3 

0.2 

3.1 

1.8 

0.0 

6.2 





Plot 4 

Plot 6 

Plot 8 

Plot 10 

Ave. of plots 
1, 5 t 9. 

Ave. of plots 
2, 4 and 10. 

Sun¬ 

flowers 

Sun* 

flowers 

Sun¬ 

flowers 

Sun¬ 

flowers 

Corn 

Sunflowers 

0.7 

0.4 

— 

2.1 

1.2 

1.2 

3.5 

1.6 

— 

4.7 

0.9 

3.6 

6.0 

2.9 

— 

8.3 

2.4 

5.8 

4.2 

3.4 

2.0 

10.1 

2.1 

5.9 

4.4 

5.5 

4.7 

8.6 

2.5 

6.2 

8.5 

10.4 

16.6 

1*.7 

7.1 

13.2 

4.7 

4.9 

7.2 

10.4 

4.2 

7.4 

12.8 

13.8 

9.7 

16.4 

8.9 

15.1 

11.4 

14.2 

7.0 

18.6 

8.8 

14.1 

18.7 

19.3 

12.0 

16.0 

11.5 

18.5 

4.9 

8.0 

4.9 

11.1 

4.8 

8.1 

20.2 

19.6 

17.0 

18.9 

10.9 

18.9 

16.7 

17.0 

16.2 

12.6 

12.7 

14.5 

7.8 

10.1 

11.7 

9.8 

9.3 

,8.9 

16.2 

16.5 

13.7 

15.4 

14.1 

13.7 

14.5 

16.6 

14.0 

14.1 

16.6 

16.2 

13.3 

12.4 

14.3 

12.1 

8.2 

12.5 

17.8 

20.1 

17.9 

18.3 

14.5 

17.7 

6.7 

4.8 

5.0 

5.0 

1.5 

5.1 

11.1 

10.3 

11.5 

9.2 

2.2 

10.6 

8.1 

6.0 

7.5 

7.2 

2.4 

6.9 

14.1 

16.6 

15.5 

12.7 

2.7 

13.5 

10.1 

8.1 

10.4 

5.4 

1.0 

7.9 

10.0 

9.9 

9.5 

— 

0.5 

— 

7.4 

7.2 

8.6 

12,1 

0.2 

14.7 









































. 


. 




. 




. 

. 

; 

* 



























6 


TABLE 6 . MEAN 

ACTUAL GROWTH 

OP PLANT-j (cm. )F0R PERIODS. 

1921 

Date 

Plot 1 

Plot 2 

Plot 3 

Plot 4 

Plot 5 

Plot 6 


Corn 

Corn 

Corn 

Corn 

Corn 

Sunf lowers 

June 20-22 

3.1 

3.6 

4.8 

— 

— 

2.7 

22-24 

3.3 

4.7 

3.2 

— 

3.1 

3.7 

24-26 

3.6 

5.7 

4.1 

4.3 

3.3 

4.3 

26-28 

3.7 

6.1 

3.9 

2.9 

3.1 

5.3 

28-30 

4.5 

6.4 

5.1 

4.2 

4.5 

6.8 

30-July 4 

6.2 

8.2 

6.2 

2.8 

5.6 

10.0 

July 4-6 

2.9 

3.5 

2.9 

2.1 

2.8 

3.7 

6-8 

5.8 

6.5 

6.3 

3.5 

5.4 

8.4 

8-10) 

3.3 

3.1 

3.7 

2.9 

3.8 

5.1 

10-12 

5.3 

6.7 

6.0 

5.4 

6. 3 

7.8 

12-14 

8.4 

7.4 

7.9 

6.7 

7.7 

9.8 

14-16 

8.7 

10.1 

10.2 

10.0 

8.6 

10,4 

16-18 

5.4 

6.4 

5.3 

5.5 

5.3 

9.3 

18-20 

10.6 

11.1 

10.3 

10.2 

8.2 

9.2 

20-22 

6.2 

6.5 

6.6 

7.0 

6.1 

5.9 

22-26 

16.5 

16.3 

15.1 

17.6 

14.2 

9.4 

26-28 

5.6 

5.3 

6.0 

7.4 

5.3 

3.9 

28-30 

7.8 

7.9 

7.6 

9.1 

6.5 

6.5 

•fv 

30-Aug.1 

11.5 

11.3 

11.6 

11.6 

10.4 

8.8 

Aug. 1-3 

8.3 

9.1 

9.8 

9.7 

7.3 

7.6 

3-5 

4.9 

4.0 

4.5 

5.1 

4.2 

4.5 

5-9 

10.2 

9.9 

10.5 

12.0 

7.9 

9.9 

9.11 

5.8 

5.9 

6.0 

6.5 

5.2 

6.3 

11-13 

7.0 

6.5 

7.3 

6 .6 

6.4 

5.5 

13-15 

7.9 

8.0 

9.3 

8.6 

5.1 

5.9 

15-17 

6.1 

4.5 

4.7 

4.7 

2.4 

4.4 

17-19 

4.2 

4.9 

4.9 

4.7 

4.9 

5.5 

19-23 

5.7 

5.6 

6.0 

7.1 

5.2 

7.6 

23-25 

1.9 

1.6 

1.9 

2,1 

1.8 

3.0 

25-27 

1.1 

1.1 

0.7 

2.5 

1.4 

2.5 

27-Sept.1 3.2 

1.3 

0.8 

3.3 

3.4 

8.3 

Sept. 1-9 


— 

— 

— 

— 

14,5 


3 


; lot- 7 

Plot 8 

.lot 9 

Blot 10 

Plot 11 

Ave.of plots 
1-2-3 

Ave.of plots 

6-7-10 


oun- 

Cun- 

Sun- 

Sun- 

Corn 

Sunflowers 

. lower j 

flowers 

flowers 

flowers 

flowers 



'it 5 

— 

— 

2.4 

2.5 

3.9 

2.2 

2.3 

-- 

— 

3.6 

4.0 

3.7 

3.2 

3.0 

2.1 

0.7 

4.2 

4.3 

4.5 

3.8 

3.7 

2.0 

0.7 

3.9 

4 .7 

4.5 

4.3 

4.8 

2.9 

0.9 

5.7 








5.3 

6.4 

5.8 

7.5 

5.4 

1.9 

8.2 

12. r > 

6.8 

8.6 

3.2 

2.5 

1.1 

3.7 

2.0 

3.1 

3.5 

7.7 

5.7 

2.7 

7,9 

8.9 

6.2 

8.0 

5.2 

4.5 

2.2 

5.4 

6.2 

3.4 

5.2 

7.1 

5.7 

3.5 

10.3 

7.6 

6.0 

8.4 

10.6 

8.9 

5.1 

12.0 

10.0 

7.9 

10.8 

11.6 

11,3 

7.9 

9.1 

9.2 

9.7 

10.4 

8.7 

8.6 

6.3 

8.3 

6,5 

5.7 

8.8 

11.0 

11.6 

9.5 

8.8 

9.5 : 

10.6 

9.6 

6.5 

9.3 

8.9 

5,3 

4.7 

6.5 

5.9 

10.6 

13.1 

12.5 

8.4 

8.5 

15.9 

9.5 

3.9 

5.2 

4.7 

3.8 

3.7 

5.7 

3.9 

5.8 

6. 5 

6.3 

5.0 

5.1 

7.7 

5.7 

8.6 

10.1 

9.0 

7.8 

7.7 | 

11.5 

8.4 

7.2 

7.5 

7.2 

6.9 

7.4 

9.1 

7.3 

3.7 

4.8 

3.4 

4.0 

3.8 

4.4 

4.0 

o 

• 

■ wp 

9.6 

9.7 

9.1 

9.2 

10.2 

9.4 

6.3 

6.6 

6.3 

6.4 

6.5 

5.9 

6.3 

5.9 

6.4 

5.5 

5.9 

6.1 

7.0 

5.8 

5.7 

4.6 

3.6 

5.2 

5.9 

8.4 

5.6 

4.7 

3.8 

3.5 

5.1 

5.6 

5.1 

4.7 

4.8 

5.0 

4.4 

5.3 

5.5 

4.6 

/ 4*2 

7.4 

7.0 

5.9 

8.4 

9.5 

5.8 

7.8 

2.9 

3.1 

2.5 

3.7 

3.8 

1.8 

3.2 

2.3 

2.6 

2.2 

2.9 

3,4 

0.9 

2.6 

9.5 

8.0 

7.0 

10.7 

12.0 

1.8 

9,5 

8.6 

10.0 

7.3 

8.4 

11.1 

— - 

10.5 






































7 

Table 7 - IE AM RELATIVE GROWTH OF PLANT3(percent per day) 

1920-1921 



1920 



1921 


Data 

"Ave , P16ta 

1-3-9 

Gorn 

A\rs .'JPlirts 

2-4-10 

Sunflowers 

Date 

Av e • 2?1613 

1-2-3 

Corn 

A vs. Plota 

6-7-10 

Sunflowers 

June 23-26 

5,2 

M 

5.6 

June 20-22 

10.1 

11.2 

26-29 

3.4 

12.8 

22-24 

8.0 

12.8 

June 29 


< 

24-26 

8.2 

11.9 

July 2 

7.7 

13 r 8 

26-28 

7.1 

10.7 

July 2-5 

5.5 

9.9 

28-30 

7.3 

11.6 

5-8 

5.6 

8.0 

June 30 



8-11 

12.1 

12.4 

July 4 

4.® 

6.7 

11-14 

5*5 

5.4 

July 4-6 

3.2 

4,5 

14-17 

9.3 

8.8 

6-8 

5.9 

9.1 

17-20 

7.2 

6.6 

8-10 

3.0 

5.1 

29-23 

7.6 

7.0 

10-12 

4.8 

7,3 

23-26 

2.7 

2.7 

12-14 

5.7 

8,0 

26-29 

5.4 

5.5 

14V-16 

6.3 

6.7 

July 29 

. , .. 


16-18 

3.3 

5.0 

Aug. 1 

5.4 

3.7 

18-20 

5.7 

5.0 

Aug. 1-4 

3.5 

2.1 

20-22 

3.2 

2. 8 

4-7 

4.6 

2,9 

22-26 

3.5 

2.1 

7-10 

4.7 

3.2 

26-28 

2.3 

1.6 

10-13 

2.1 

2,3 

28-30 

2,9 

2.3 

13-16 

3.4 

3.0, 

July 30 



16-19 

0.3 

0,8 

Aug. 1 

4.1 

3.2 

19^ i2 

0.5 

1,6 

Aug. 1-3 

3.0 

2,6 

22-25 

0.5 

1.0 

3-5 

1.4 

1.4 

. 25-31 

0.3 

1,0 

5-9 

1.5 

1.6 

Aug. 31 



9-11 

1.7 

2.0 

Sept. £ 

0.2 

1.1 

11-13 

2.0 

1.8 

Sept, 3-6 

0.1 

0.9 

13-15 “ 

2.2 

1.6 

6-9 

0.04 

0,9 

15-17 

1.3 

1.3 




17-19 

1.1 

1.4 




19-23 

0.7 

1.0 




23-25 

0.4 

0,8 




25-27 

0 ,2 

0,7 




Aug, 27 






Sept, 1 

0 .2 

0.9 


Sept, 1-9 


0,6 





w . 















r 








* 



































» * 














r^MPERATUBEo.SXPOBENTIAL AND PHYSIOLOGICAL TEMPL iturk 
EBIICIENCY INDICES AND DEGREE HOURS EOR TWENTY-FOUR HOUF. PERIODS* 

1920-1921 * ’ 


Ute 

June 


June 

July 

July 


1920 



Degrees 

_ 

Degrees 

_ 

Exponential 

Indices 

Physiological 

Indices 

Degr ee 
Hour 8 

20-21 

— — — 








-- 

“ —- 

- - - 

21-22 


— _ 

_ 







-- 

— - - 

22*23 

— 

— 

— 



23-24 

wu • O 

11.9 

1.7 

9 

324 

24-25 







52.9 

11.6 

1.6 

9 

310 

25-26 







54.0 

12.2 

1.7 

10 

336 

26-27 







61.6 

16.4 

2.3 

23 

513 

27-28 







62.2 

16.8 

2.3 

25 

534 

28-29 







64.2 

17.9 

2.5 

31 

580 

29-30 







6y. 1 

20.6 

3.1 

51 

698 

30 






1 

66.7 

19.3 

2.8 

40 

642 

1-2 

67.2 

19.6 







2»8 

43 

6 52 

2-3 

63.4 

17.4 

2.4 







28 

562 

3-4 

58.3 

14.6 

2.0 

17 

4 40 

4-5 

60.8 

16.0 

2.2 

22 

500 

5-6 

57.9 

14.4 

2.0 

16 

430 

6-7 

64.9 

18.3 

2.6 

34 

593 

7-8 

68.2 

20.1 

2.9 

46 

678 

8-9 

70.9 

21.6 

3.3 

60 

7 42 

9-10 

66.8 

19.3 

2.8 

40 

644 

10-11 

67.1 

19.5 

2.8 

42 

6 50 

11-12 

62.2 

16.8 

2.3 

25 

532 

12-13 

61.5 

16.4 

2.3 

23 

516 

13-14 

65.6 

18.7 

2.7 

36 

614 

14-15 

67.8 

19.9 

2.9 

45 

6 68 

15-16 

74.3 

23.5 

3.7 

75 

824 

16-17 

74.7 

23.7 

3,8 

77 

8 32 

17-18 

72.3 

22.4 

3.4 

66 

776 

18-19 

71.7 

22.1 

3.4 

64 

7 62 

19-20 

73^3 

22.9 

3.6 

70 

800 

20-21 

75.0 

23.9 

3.8 

78 

840 





1921 


Degrees 

F. 

Degrees 

c. 

Exponential 

Indices 

Physiological 

Indices 

64.3 

17.9 

2.5 

31 

63.5 

62.8 

20/3 

3.1 

48 

17.1 

2.4 

26 

64.3 

17.9 

2.5 

31 

67.7 

19.3 

2.9 

44 

59.7 

15.4 

2.2 

19 

67.0 

19.4 

2.8 

41 

61.8 

16.6 

2.3 

24 

60.7 

15.9 

2.2 

21 

62.6 

17.0 

2.4 

26 

58.8 

14.9 

2.1 

17 

55.4 

13.0 

1.8 

12 

54.7 

12.6 

1.8 

1.1 

57.6 

14.2 

2.0 

15 

53.7 

12.1 

1.7 

10 

50.9 

10.5 

1.5 

7 

53.1 

11.7 

1.6 

9 

63.0 

17.2 

2.4 

27 

57.6 

14.2 

2.0 

15 

56.2 

13.4 

1.9 

13 

55.5 

13.1 

1.9 

12 

55.2 

12.9 

1.8 

12 

60.3 

15.7 

2.2 

20 

62.9 

17.2 

2.4 

27 

69.0 

20.6 

3.1 

51 

63.3 

17.4 

2.4 

28 

54.2 

12.3 

1.7 

10 

59.2 

15.1 

2.1 

18 

68.2 

20.1 

2.9 

46 

71.5 

21.9 

3.4 

62 

63.4 

17.4 

2.4 

28 


Degree 

Hours 

584 

684 

548 

584 

666 

472 

648 

524 

496 

542 

452 

370 

352 

422 

330 

262 

314 

552 

422 

390 

372 

366 

488 

550 

696 

560 

344 

460 

678 

756 

562 








































9 


1920 


Date 

Degrees 

F. 

Degrees 

_ 

Exponential 

Indices 

Hiysiological 

Indices 

Degrei 
Hour 3 

July 21-22 

72.5 

22.5 

3.6 

67 

780 

22-23 

61.6 

16.4 

2.3 

23 

518 

23-24 

68.1 

20.1 

2.9 

46 

674 

24-25 

60.3 

15.7 

2.2 

20 

488 

25-26 

61.2 

16.2 

2.2 

22 

510 

26-27 

56.9 

13.8 

2.2 

14 

406 

27-28 

62.8 

17.1 

2.4 

26 

548 

28-29 

67.2 

19.6 

2.8 

43 

654 

29-30 

69.2 

20.7 

3.1 

52 

700 

July 30-31 

69.2 

20.7 

3.1 

52 

702 

July 31 





i ' f.j 

Aug. 1 

67.4 

19.7 

2.8 

44 

658 

Aug. 1-2 

65.1 

18.4 

2.6 

34 

602 

2-3 

64.0 

17.8 

2.5 

30 

57 6 

3-4 

52.0 

11.1 

1.6 

8 

288 

4-5 

57,7 

14.3 

2.0 

16 

424 

5-6 

66.0 

18.9 

2.7 

38 

624 

6-7 

69.7 

20.9 

3.2 

54 

712 

7-8 

68.6 

20.3 

3.1 

48 

636 

8-9 

62.6 

17.0 

2.4 

26 

542 

9-10 

56.0 

13.3 

1.9 

13 

384 

10-11 

50.7 

10.4 

1.5 

7 

256 

11-12 

62.2 

16.6 

2.3 

25 

532 

12-13 

68.0 

20.0 

2.9 

46 

672 

13-14- 

67.3 

19.6 

2.8 

43 

656 

14-15 

60.7 

15.9 

2.2 

21 

498 

15-16 

57.9 

14.4 

2.0 

15 

430 

16-17 

61.8 

16.6 

2.3 

24 

524 

17-18 

44.7 

7.1 

1.2 

3 

114 

18-19 

43.9 

6.6 

1.2 

2 

110 

19-20 

52.8 

11.6 

1.6 

9 

316 

20-21 

60.9 

16.1 

2.2 

22 

502 

21-22 

63.5 

17.5 

2.5 

23 

564 




1921 


Degrees 

Degrees 

Exponential 

Physiolc 

;ical Degree 

F. 

C. 

Indices 

Indi< 

:s Hours 

64.3 

17.8 

2.5 

30 

584 

62.8 

17.1 

2.4 

26 

548 

59.2 

15.1 

2.1 

18 

460 

62.5 

16.9 

2.4 

26 

540 

62.6 

17.0 

2.4 

26 

542 

65.7 

18.7 

2.7 

36 ' 

616 

64.8 

18.2 

2.6 

33 | 

596 

57.6 

14.2 

2.0 

15 1 

422 

57.2 

14.0 

1.9 

15 ' 

412 

61.3 

16.3 

2'. 2 

23 1 

512 

60.0 

15.6 

2.2 

20 

4 80 

63.6 

17.6 

2.5 

29 

566 

55.6 

13.1 

1.9 

12 1 

374 

51.0 

10.6 

1.5 

8 

264 

52.2 

11.2 

1.6 

8 

294 

50.0 

10.0 

1.5 

6 

240 

60.7 

15.9 

2.2 

21 

496 

61.8 

16.6 

2.3 

24 

524 

56.4 

13.6 

1.9 

14 

394 

56.7 

13.7 

1.9 

14 

402 

55.1 

12.8 

1.8 

12 

36 2 

57.1 

13.9 

1.9 

15 1 

410 

61.3 

16.3 

2.2 

23 

512 


18.3 

2,6 

34 

600 

65.0 





67.a 

19.5 

2.8 

42 , 

650 

59.6 

15.3 

2.2 

19 \ 

470 

61.2 

16.2 

2.2 

22 : 

510 

54.0 

12.2 

1.7 

10 | 

336 

50.3 

10.2 

1.5 

7 

248 

54.7 

12.6 

1.8 

11 1 

354 

60.5 

15.8 

2.2 

21 

492 

53.2 

11.8 

1.6 

9 

316 

















































10 


Bate 

Degr e e e 

F. 

Degrees 

_ 

Exponential 

Indices 

■Physiological 

Indie ps 

Degree 

Aug. 22-23 

66.7 

19.3 

2.8 

40 

642 

23-24 

53.0 

11.7 

1.6 

9 

322 

24-25 

59.6 

15.3 

2.2 

19 

470 

25-26 

51.3 

10.7 

1.5 

8 

270 

26-27 

50.2 

10.1 

1.5 

6 

244 

27-28 

57.2 

14.0 

1.9 

15 

412 

28-29 

52.2 

11.2 

1.6 

a 

294 

29-30 

51.2 

10.7 

1.5 

8 

278 

30-31 

51.5 

ip.a 

1.6 

18 

304 

Aug. 31 

.. . 





Sept. 1 

54;. 8 

12.7 

1.8 

11 

358 

Sept. 1-2 

57.0 

13.9 

1.9 

15 

408 

2-3 

59.1 

15.1 

2.1 

18 

458 

3-4 

56*2 

13.4 

1.9 

13 

388 

4-5 

59*9 

15.5 

2.2 

20 

478 

5-6 

53*2 

11.8 

1.6 

9 

313 

6-7 

49*2 

9.6 

1.4 

6 

252 

7-8 

53*2 

11.8 

1.6 

9 

336 

8-9 

56.4 

13.6 

1.9 

14 

403 



t 1921 


Degrees 

L. ?t . 

Degrees 

_ 

Exponential 

Indices 

Physiological 

Indices 

Degree 

Hours 

56.1 

13.4 

1.9 

13 

386 

56.8 

13.8 

1.9 

14 

404 

51.8 

11.0 

1.6 

8 

288 

53.2 

11.8 

1.6 

9 

330 

53.7 

12.1. 

1.7 

10 

338 

55.9 

13.3 

1.9 

13 

382 

54.7 

12.6 

1.8 

11 

354 

53.1 

11.7 

1.6 

9 

336 

49.2 

9.6 

1.4 

6 

242 

51.3 

10.7 

1.5 

a 

272 

45.6 

7.6 

1.3 

3 

206 

49.7 

9.8 

1.5 

6 

244 

48.3 

9.1 

1.4 

5 

250 

52.9 

11.6 

1.6 

9 

310 

51.0 

10.6 

1.5 

8 

278 

57.1 

13.9 

1.9 

15 

410 

51.6 

10.9 

1.6 

8 

278 

38.3 

3.5 

0.0 

0.5 

22 








































11 


TABLE 9. MEAN DAILY RELATIVE HUMIDITY,TOTAL DAILY HOURS OF SUNSHINE, 
AND DAILY PRECIPITATION (inches)FOR 1920 AND 1921,AND BALL# 
MAXIMUM SOLAR RADIATION (F) F0Rjl921. 


Date 


1920 



1921 



Relative 

Hours 

Sunshine 

Precipi- 
tation 

Relative 

Humidity 

H our s 
Sunshine 

Precipi¬ 

tation 

Solar 
Radi a 

June 20 

---- 

12.2 

— 

58 

15.4 



21 


14.4 

--- 

54 

12.5 

--- 


22 


7.9 

- - 

61 

11.6 


- - - 

23 


11.3 

- -- 

70 

7.6 

0.13 

...» 

24 


4.9 


51 

13.7 

--- 

- -- 

25 


8.2 

to 

o 

» 

o 

69 

3.6 

0.03 

— - 

26 

--- 

10.4 

--- 

51 

13.2 

0.02 


27 

—- 

13.8 

--- 

59 

10.7 


- - - 

28 


11.6 


58 

10.7 

0.10 

-- - 

29 

--- 

13.3 

--- 

57 

10. 5 

—- 

--- 

50 

--- 

13.0 

--- 

87 

2.0 

0.72 


July 1 

55 

15.4 


68 

5.4 

0.38 


2 

62 

10,8 

0.30 

83 

0.0 

— « 

— - 

3 

63 

15.2 

— - 

76 

6.2 

0.65 


4 

62 

11.9 

--- 

78 

7.4 

--- 

123 

5 

85 

3.6 

0.36 

85 

4.6 

0.27 

108 

6 

68 

14,4 

0.01 

64 

13.2 

0.31 

12 3 

7 

64 

12.9 

--- 

63 

9.0 

0.11 

129 

8 

64 

15.1 


64 

7.9 


125 

9 

66 

11.9 


55 

12.4 


124 

10 

67 

14.9 

—- 

69 

10,6 


129 

11 

81 

5.3 

—— 

67 

11.9 

— - 

130 

12 

64 

13,7 

-* -» 

67 

13,3 


133 

13 

65 

14.5 

— - 

61 

14,7 

--- 

13 2 

14 

62 

15.3 

—- 

58 

12,3 

--- 

132 

15 

65 

14.8 


56 

10.1 


132 

16 

54 

14.7 


75 

5.1 

— 

98 

17 

66 

11.0 

—- 

86 

4.5 


127 

18 

68 

13.0 


73 

14.4 

0.33 

134 

19 

65 

10.3 


64 

12,3 


136 

20 

68 

12.8 

--- 

64 

13,4 

0.03 

137 

21 

72 

7.7 


57 

15. 3 

0.06 

128 




















12 

2 


1920 1921 


Date 

Relative 

Humiditv 

Hours 

Sunshine 

Precipi¬ 

tation 

Relative 

Humidity 

Hours 

Sunshine 

Precipi- 
tation 

Solar 

Radiation 

July 22 

82 

2.1 

0.57 

58 

14.3 

--- 

132 

23 

67 

13.9 

— 

52 

15.1 

--- 

132 

24 

73 

12.3 


66 

12.1 


131 

25 

72 

14.1 

0.68 

72 

9.3 


119 

26 

79 

4.8 

0.31 

67 

13.8 


139 

27 

70 

15.1 

--- 

64 

13.1 


134 

26 

69 

15.0 

— - 

80 

3.2 


124 

29 

77 

14.6 


76 

6.6 

0.85 

125 

30 

70 

12.9 

--- 

71 

13.5 

0.02 

129 

31 

7* 

12.5 

-=•— 

80 

6.1 

0.12 

129 

Aug. 1 

74 

13.3 

0.20 

82 

7.3 

0.25 

122 

2 

75 

9.7 

0.18 

74 

10.6 


132 

3 

84 

10.8 

0.14 

71 

5.0 

0,12 

111 

4 

81 

6.5 

0.16 

75 

6.3 

—- 

120 

5 

62 

15.0 

--- 

85 

5.7 

— -*«• 

108 

6 

63 

14.8 

— 

66 

13.3 

0.10 

127 

7 

68 

13.1 

--- 

74 

12.0 


130 

8 

71 

11.1 


89 

0.0 

0.27 

99 

9 

81 

2.7 

0.15 

83 

6.0 

0.12 

122 

10 

80 

6.5 

— 

76 

8.4 

0.35 

118 

11 

71 

12.8 

- - 

75 

6.8 


135 

12 

64 

13.1 

--- 

76 

12.0 


129 

13 

69 

11.9 

--- 

65 

13.7 

--- 

127 

14 

64 

14.9 

— - 

70 

1-3.9 

--- 

131 

15 

74 

7.7 

— - 

39 

8.6 

--- 

129 

16 

75 

12.2 

--- 

66 

12.9 

— - 

128 

17 

89 

0.5 

--- 

86 

0.5 

0.20 

127 

ia 

94 

0,0 

0.29 

85 

3.5 

0.01 

10 5 

19 

71 

7.5 

— 

79 

6. 5 

0.01 

119 

20 

72 

10.4 

— -- 

68 

11.8 


128 

21 

63 

12.8 

- -- 

88 

0,5 

0.05 

97 



















13 


_ 5 _ 


1920 1921 


Date 


Relative 

Humidity 

Hours 

Sunshine 

Precipi¬ 

tation 

Relative 

Humidity 

Hours 

Sunshine 

Precipi¬ 

tation 

Solar 

Radiat 

Aug. 

22 

70 

13*3 

-- 

66 

13.0 

0.02 

120 


23 

78 

4.7 


76 

10.3 

0.02 

124 


24 

75 

9.7 

-•* 

79 

5.3 

-- 

119 


25 

88 

0.1 

— 

64 

13.2 

-- 

125 


26 

83 

3.3 

— 

62 

13.2 

— 

125 


27 

84 

6.0 


58 

10,2 

-- 

127 


28 

77 

2.2 


68 

2,5 

— 

98 


29 

68 

11.5 

-- 

67 

8,5 

— 

124 


30 

72 

6*0 

— 

74 

6.1 

-•» _> 

126 


31 

71 

12.5 


84 

4.8 

-- 

119 

Sept. 

1 

-- 

11.7 


84 

4.7 

0.04 

102 


2 


7.2 

- ■ 

70 

9.6 

0.02 

124 


3 

— 

8.8 


68 

10.1 

— 

122 


4 

— 

11.0 

--- 

59 

7.9 

— 

127 


5 

— 

4.3 


58 

11.6 

-- 

126 


6 


3.3 

0.00 5 

65 

7.1 


131 


7 

— 

11.3 

-- 

74 

6,0 


126 


8 

— 

11.7 

~ 

78 

0.2 

0.36 

85 


9 

— 

9.8 

-=* 

SO 

0.0 


























T ABLE 10. SUMMATION OP TEMPERATURE EFFICIENCY INDICES AND 


DBBREE 

HOURS POE PERIODS OP GROWTH. 1920. 


Direct 

Date Indices 

Remainder 

Indices 

Remainder 

Indices 

Exponential 

Indices 

PhysiolOi 

Indices. 



(4.6°c ) 

UOfo) 



June 23-26 

36.7 

26.2 

8.7 

6.0 

28 

26-29 

61.1 

40.6 

24.1 

7.1 

79 

June 29 

Jnly 2 

69.6 

49.0 

32.5 

8.7 

134 

July 2-6 

48.0 

37.6 

21.0 

6.6 

67 

6-8 

62.8 

42.3 

26.8 

7.6 

96 

8-11 

60.4 

49.9 

33.4 

8.9 

142 

11-14 

61.9 

41.4 

24.9 

7.3 

84 

14-17 

67.1 

56.6 

40.1 

10.4 

197 

17-20 

67.4 

56.9 

40.4 

10.4 

200 

20-23 

62.8 

62.3 

36.8 

9.7 

168 

23-26 

62.0 

41.6 

26.0 

7.3 

88 

26-29 

60.6 

40.0 

23.6 

7.4 

83 

29- 

Aug. 1 

61.r 

60.6 

34.1 

9.0 

148 

Aug. 1-4 

47.3 

36.8 

20.3 

6.7 

72 

4-7 

64.1 

43.6 

27.1 

7.9 

108 

7-10 

60.6 

40.1 

23.6 

7.4 

87 

10-13 

47.2 

36.7 

20.2 

6.7 

78 

13-16 

49.9 

39.4 

22.9 

7.0 

80 

16-19 

30.3 

19.8 

3.3 

4.7 

29 

19-22 

46.2 

34.7 

18.2 

6.3 

59 

22-26 

46.3 

36.8 

19.3 

6.6 

68 

26-31 

67.6 

46.3 

13.6 

9.6 

53 

31- 

Sept. 3 

41.7 

31.2 

14.7 

5.8 

44 

Sept. 3-6 

40.7 

30.2 

13.7 

5.7 

42 

6-9 

36.0 

24.6 

8.0 

4.9 

29 






TABLE 10. 

BUKMATION OF TEMPERATURE EPPICIENCY INDICES AND 
DEGREE HOURS FOR PERIODS OP GROWTH, 1920. 

Degree 

Hours. 


970 


1632 

* 

1992 


1602 


1706 


2036 


1662 


2324 


2338 


2138 


1672 


1608 


2060 


1466 


1760 


1612 


1460 


1584 


748 


1382 


1434 


1802 
















. 






















. 





. 




















. 

















. 

. 














. 

























. 







. 






. 










. 
















































15 


TABLE 11. SUMMATION OP TEMPERATURE EFFICIENCY INDICES AND DEGREE HOURS 
FOR PERIODS OF GROWTH. 1921. 


Date 

Direct 

Indices 

Remainder 
Indices - 

Remainder 

Indices 

(10°C) 

Exponential 

Indices 

Physiological 

Indices 

Degree 

Hours 

June 20-22 

38/2 

31.2 

20.2 

5.6 

79 

1268 

22-24 

35.0 

28.0 

17.0 

4.9 

57 

1132 

24-26 

35.2 

28.2 

17,2 

5.1 

63 

1138 

26-28 

36.0 

29.0 

18.0 

5.1 

65 

1172 

28-30 

32.9 

25.9 

14.9 

4.6 

47 

1038 

J une 30 

July 4 

54.7 

40,7 

18.7 

7.7 

55 

1596 

July 4-6 

22.6 

15.6 

4.6 

3.2 

17 

59 2 

6-8 

28,9 

21.9 

10,9 

4.0 

36 

866 

8-10 

27.6 

20.6 

9,6 

3.9 

28 

812 

10-12 

26.0 

19.0 

8.0 

3.7 

24 

738 

12-14 

32.9 

25.9 

14.9 

4,6 

47 

1038 

14-16 

38.0 

31.0 

20.0 

5.5 

T9 

12 56 

16-18 

27.4 

20.4 

9,4 

3.8 

28 

804 

18-20 

42.0 

35.0 

24.0 

6,3 

108 

1434 

20-22 

35,2 

28.2 

17,2 

4.9 

58 

1146 

22-26 

66.1 

52.1 

30.1 

9,3 

96 

2090 

26-28 

36.9 

29.9 

18.9 

5.3 

69 

1212 

28j30 

28.2 

21,2 

10,2 

3.9 

30 

834 

J uly 30 

Aug. 1 

31.9 

24.9 

13.9 

4.4 

43 

992 

Aug. 1-3 

30.7 

23.7 

12.7 

4.4 

41 

940 

3-5 

21.8 

14,8 

3,8 

3.1 

16 

558 

5-9 

56,1 

42.1 

18.1 

7.9 

65 

1654 

9-11 

26.5 

19,5 

8,5 

3.7 

26 

764 

11-13 

30.2 

23.2 

12,2 

4.1 

38 

922 

13-15 

37.8 

30.8 

19,8 

5,4 

76 

12 50 

15-17 

31.5 

24.5 

13,5 

4.4 

41 

980 

17-19 

22,4 

15.4 

4.4 

3.2 

17 

584 

19-23 

53.6 

39.6 

17,6 

7.5 

54 

1548 

23-25 

24.8 

17,8 

6.8 

3.5 

22 

692 

25-27 

23.9 

16.9 

5.9 

3. 3 

19 

663 

Aug, 27 

S ept. 1 

57.9 

40.4 

12.9 

8.2 

47 

1586 

Sept. 1-9 

77,0 

49.0 

5,0 

10,5 

54.5 

1998 







































. . 






... 






. 


.E 




. 






- 





























16 


TABLE 12 . MEAN TEMPERATURE (Centigrade) .MEAN RELATIVE HUMIDITY, 
TR. TOTAL HOURS OF SUNSHINE .AND ME AIT DAILY HOURS OF 

10 

SUNSHINE.FOR PERIODS OF GROWTH.1920. 


Date 

Mean Temp. 
(Centigrade) 

Mean 

Relative 

Humidity 

TR 

10 

Total 

Hour* a 
Sunshine 

Mean Dai! 

Hours 

Sunshine 

J une 23-26 

12 

-- 

— 

25.3 

8.4 

26-29 

17 

-- 

— 

36.8 

12.3 

June 29 






J uly 2 

20 

-- 

— 

38.2 

12.7 

July 2-5 

16 

64 

102 

35. 3 

11.9 

5-8 

18 

72 

130 

36.0 

12 # 0 

8-11 

20 

67 

134 

38.1 

12.7 

11-14 

17 

68 

116 

38.0 

12.7 

14-17 

22 

64 

141 

44.1 

14.7 

17-20 

22 

67 

147 

34.4 

11.5 

20-23 

21 

74 

155 

21.9 

7.3 

23-26 

17 

70 

119 

37.4 

12.5 

26-29 

17 

73 

124 

38.7 

12.9 

July 29 






Aug. 1 

20 

72 

144 

33.4 

12.8 

Aug, 1-4 

16 

78 

125 

29.9 

10.0 

4-7 

18 

67 

121 

41.8 

13.9 

7-10 

17 

74 

126 

24.7 

8.2 

10-13 

16 

70 

112 

33.9 

11.3 

13-16 

17 

70 

119 

34.§ 

11.4 

16-19 

10 

86 

86 

9.8 

3.3 

19-22 

15 

68 

102 

33.7 

11.2 

22-25 

15 

.77 

116 

22.0 

7.3 

25-31 

11 

78 

86 

36.4 

6.1 

Atg* 31 






Sept. 3 

14 

-- 


29.3 

9,8 

• 3-6 

14 


-- 

21.0 

7.0 

6-9 

12 

— 


30.7 

10.2 





















« 





I 










. p 


. L 
























.6 




























17 


TABLE 13. MEAN TEMPERATURE (Centigrade) .MEAN RELATIVE HUMIDITY,TR, 
TOTAL HOUR3 OE SUNSHINE.MEAN DAILY HOUR3 OE 10 

3UN3HINE .AND MEAN MAXIMUM SOLAR RADIATION (Fahrenheit) 
FOR PERIODS OE GROWTH IN 1921. 


Date 

Mean Temp. 
(Centigrade) 

Mean Belat. 
Humidity 

TR 

10 

Total 

Hours 

Sunshine 

Mean Daily 

Hours 

Sunshine 

Mean Max. 
Solar Rad. 
(Fahrenheit) 

June 20-22 

19 

56 

106 

26.7 

13.4 

-- 

22-24 

18 

67 

121 

19.0 

9.5 

— 

24-26 

18 

65 

117 

18.7 

9.4 

-- 

26-28 

18 

55 

99 

22.6 

11.3 

-- 

23-30 

16 

63 

101 

15.5 

7.8 

-- 

June 30 

July 4 

14 

77 

108 

15.5 

3.9 

-- 

July 4-6 

11 

77 

85 

16.6 

8.3 

116 

6-8 

14 

64 

90 

21.1 

10.6 

126 

8-10 

14 

61 

85 

21.7 

10.9 

125 

10-12 

13 

71 

92 

22.4 

11.2 

130 

12-14 

16 

62 

99 

28.1 

14.1 

133 

14-16 

19 

58 

110 

20.8 

10.4 

132 


1 4 

83 

116 

10.8 

5.4 

113 

16-18 

18-20 

21 

64 

134 

27.2 

13.6 

135 

20-22 

18 

61 

110 

28.1 

14.1 

133 

22-26 

17 

64 

109 

50*3 

12.6 

129 

26-28 

18 

65 

117 

23.8 

11.9 

137 

28-30 

14 

78 

119 

12.8 

6.4 

125 

July 30 

Aug. 1 

16 

78 

125 

14.2 

7.1 

129 

Aug. 1-3 

15 

74 

111 

18,9 

9.5 

127 

3-5 

11 

77 

85 

11.9 

6.0 

116 

5-9 

14 

78 

109 

33.0 

8.3 

116 

9-11 

13 

77 

100 

13.9 

7,0 

120 

11-13 

15 

74 

111 

21.9 

11.0 

132 

13-15 

19 

70 

133 

2:5.5 

12.8 

129 

15-17 

16 

74 

118 

18.1 

9 .1 

129 

17-19 

11 

86 

95 

4.0 

2.0 

116 

19-23 

13 

75 

98 

35.6 

8.9 

116 

23-25 

12 

76 

91 

17.2 

8.6 

122 

25-27 

12 

61 

73 

25 

»5 12.8 

125 

Aug.27 

Sept» 1 

12 

73 

88 

27.6 

5.5 

119 

Sept. 1-9 

10 

68 

68 

56.9 

7.1 

118 


















TABLE 14, SUMMATIONS OF TEMPERATURE EFFICIENCY INDICES AND DEGREE HOURS 
FROM JUNE 23 TO THE END OF EACH THREE-DAY PERIOD OF GROWTH 
IN 1920. 


J uly 


1 

Direct 

Indices 

Remainder 

Indices 

(4.5°C.) 

Remainder 

Indices 

(10°C.) 

Exponential 

Indices 

Physiological 

Indices 

D egr e e 
Hours 

26 

35.:, 7 

25.2 

8.7 

5.0 

28 

970 

29 

86.8 

65.8 

32.8 

12.1 

107 

2602 

2 

146.3 

114.3 

65.3 

20.8 

241 

4594 

5 

194.3 

152.3 

86.3 

27.4 

308 

6096 

8 

247.1 

194.6 

112.1 

34.9 

404 

78 02 

11 

307.5 

244.5 

145.5 

43.8 

546 

9 838 

14 

359.4 

285.9 

170.4 

51.1 

630 

11500 

17 

426.5 

342.5 

210,5 

61.5 

827 

13824 

20 

' 493.9 

399.4 

250.9 

71.9 

1027 

16162 

23 

556.7 

451.7 

286.7 

81.6 

1195 

18300 

26 

608.7 

493.2 

311.7 

88.9 

1283 

19972 

29 

659.2 

433.2 

335.2 

96.3 

1366 

21580 

1 

720,3 

583.8 

369.3 

105.3 

1514 

23640 

4 

767.6 

620.6 

389.6 

112.0 

1586 

25106 

7 

821.7 

664.2 

416.7 

119.9 

1694 

26866 

10 

872.3 

704.3 

440.3 

127.3 

1781 

28478 

13 

919.5 

741,0 

460,5 

134.0 

1859 

29938 

16 

969.4 

780.4 

483.4 

141.0 

1939 

31522 

19 

999.7 

800.2 

486.7 

145.7 

1968 

32270 

22 

1044.9 

834.9 

504.9 

152,0 

2027 

33652 

25 

1091.2 

870.7 

524,2 

158,6 

2095 

3 5086 

31 

1153.7 

917.2 

537.7 

168,2 

2148 

36888 

. 3 

200,4 

948.4 

552.4 

174,0 

2192 

38112 

6 

1241.1 

978.6 

566.1 

179.7 

2234 

39296 

9 

1276.1 

1003.1 

574,1 

184.6 

2263 

40292 

























TABLE 15. SUMMATIONS 01’ TEMPERATURE EEEICIENCY INDICES AND DEGREE 
HOURS PROM JUNE 20 TO THE END OE EACH TWO-DAY PERIOD QB 1 
GROWTH (E2J 1921. 


Periods 

Ending- 

Direct 

Indices 

Remainder 

Indices 

(4.5°C) 

Remainder 

Indices 

( io ° c .) 

Exponential 

Indices 

Physiological 

Indices 

Degree 

Hours 

J une 22 

38*2 

31.2 

20.2 

5.6 

79 

1268 

24 

73.2 

59.2 

37.2 

10.5 

136 

2400 

26 

108.4 

87.4 

54.4 

15.6 

199 

3538 

8 

144.4 

116.4 

72.4 

20.7 

264 

4710 

50 

177.3 

142.3 

87.3 

25.3 

311 

5748 

Junity 4 

232.0 

183.0 

106.© 

33.0 

366 

7 344 

6 

254.6 

198.6 

110.6 

36.2 

383 

7936 

. 8 

283.5 

220.5 

121.5 

40.2 

419 

8802 

10 

3U.1 

241.1 

131.1 

44.1 

447 

8614 

12 

337.1 

260.1 

139.1 

47.8 

471 

10352 

14 

370.0 

286.0 

154.0 

52.4 

518 

11390 

16 

408.0 

317.0 

174.0 

57.9 

597 

12646 

18 

435,4 

337.4 

183.4 

61.7 

625 

13450 

' 20 

477.4 

372.4 

207.4 

68.0 

733 

14884 

22 

512.6 

400.6 

224.6 

72.9 

791 

16030 

26 

578.7 

452.7 

254.7 

82.2 

887 

18120 

28 

615.6 

482.6 

273.6 

87.5 

956 

19332 

30 

643.8 

503.8 

283.8 

91.4 

986 

20166 

Aug. 3 

675.7 

528.7 

297.7 

95.8 

1029 

21158 

3 

706.4 

552.4 

310.4 

100.2 

1070 

22098 

5 

728.2 

567.2 

314.2 

103.3 

1086 

22656 

9 

784.3 

609.3 

332.3 

111.2 

1151 

2 4310 

11 

810.8 

628.8 

340.8 

114.9 

1177 

25074 

13 

841.0 

652.0 

353.0 

119.0 

1215 

25996 

15 

878,8 

682.8 

372.8 

124.4 

1291 

27246 

17 

910.3 

707.3 

386.3 

128.8 

1332 

28226 

19 

932.7 

722.7 

390.7 

132.0 

1349 

28810 

23 

986.3 

762.3 

408.3 

139.5 

1403 

3 0358 

25 

1011.1 

780.1 

415.1 

143.0 

1425 

31050 

27 

1035.0 

797.0 

421.0 

146.3 

1444 

31718 

Sept. 1 

1092.9 

837.4 

433.9 

154.5 

1491 

33304 

9 

1169,9 

886.4 

438.9 

165.3 

1545.5 

3 5 302 



















APPENDIX 


TABLE 20 - Mean Bi-hourly Temperatures (°F) for 24 Hour Periods, 
from Noon June 23 until Noon Sept. 9, 1920. 


Date 


12-2 

2-4 4 

-6 6 

-8 

8-10 

June 

23-24 

59 

62 

64 

65 

54 

June 

24-25 

58 

62 

63 

62 

54 

June 

25-26 

68 

60 

56 

53 

49 

June 

26-27 

70 

71 

72 

69 

63 

June 

27-28 

73 

75 

72 

73 

66 

June 

28-29 

74 

76 

74 

71 

65 

June 

29-39 

80 

80 

80 

79 

73 

June 

30-July 1 

75 

78 

80 

80 

72 

July 

1-2 

74 

78 

79 

79 

70 

June 

2-3 

77 

77 

79 

76 

72 

July 

3-4 

62 

65 

67 

67 

64 

July 

4-5 

70 

73 

73 

72 

62 

July 

5-6 

61 

62 

64 

56 

54 

July 

6-7 

71 

74 

76 

76 

68 

July 

7-8 

80 

82 

81 

74 

71 

July 

8-9 

81 

82 

81 

78 

73 

July 

9-10 

82 

83 

82 

74 

64 

July 

10-11 

78 

81 

82 

78 

72 

July 11-12 

67 

67 

68 

67 

63 

July 

12-13 

72 

73 

72 

70 

64 

Jyiy 

13-14 

77 

79 

79 

78 

71 

July 

14-15 

79 

81 

80 

77 

70 

July 

15-16 

84 

88 

89 

85 

75 

July 

16-17 

88 

92 

92 

91 

81 

July 

17-18 

92 

95 

93 

70 

67 

July 

18-19 

83 

83 

80 

82 

74 

July 19-20 

87 

90 

89 

83 

74 

July 

20-21 

86 

88 

90 

84 

75 

July 

21-22 

88 

89 

84 

80 

76 

July 

22-23 

69 

71 

68 

65 

61 

July 

23-24 

74 

79 

82 

77 

70 


10-12 

12-2 

2-4 

4-6 

6-8 

8-10 

10- 

46 

44 

47 

47 

50 

50 

54 

48 

48 

45 

42 

47 

52 

54 

48 

47 

48 

49 

54 

61 

65 

58 

•2 

49 

47 

56 

64 

68 

56 

48 

45 

45 

56 

66 

72 

57 

52 

49 

46 

56 

72 

78 

65 

60 

58 

56 

58 

68 

72 

61 

54 

49 

48 

64 

69 

71 

60 

56 

56 

56 

58 

66 

74 

62 

56 

51 

47 

51 

55 

58 

54 

48 

44 

43 

55 

64 

67 

58 

54 

50 

49 

52 

58 

59 

50 

49 

50 

56 

60 

64 

69 

60 

54 

50 

49 

57 

68 

76 

64 

58 

54 

50 

58 

70 

77 

66 

62 

59 

57 

62 

72 

78 

59 

56 

54 

50 

58 

67 

73 

63 

58 

55 

55 

58 

61 

64 

59 

55 

53 

53 

58 

67 

69 

55 

50 

46 

44 

54 

65 

73 

58 

53 

50 

48 

54 

66 

74 

62 

58 

55 

52 

56 

67 

77 

67 

66 

62 

57 

64 

73 

82 

68 

61 

57 

53 

59 

70 

84 

63 

61 

59 

57 

61 

72 

78 

66 

61 

56 

54 

63 

77 

82 

67 

64 

57 

53 

63 

73 

80 

69 

64 

63 

61 

64 

75 

81 

72 

65 

64 

63 

63 

61 

65 

59 

56 

53 

49 

54 

64 

70 

61 

58 

57 

56 

61 

68 

74 





























































i 
























































































- 













































































( 











































































V 


Date 


12-2 

2-4 

4-6 

6-8 

8-10 

10-12 

12-2 

2-4 

4-6 

6-8 

8-10 

10- 

July 

24-25 

78 

80 

76 

66 

54 

54 

52 

49 

48 

50 

56 

61 

July 

25-26 

67 

71 

73 

68 

60 

55 

55 

54 

54 

55 

58 

65 

July 

26-27 

73 

74 

68 

58 

52 

50 

48 

47 

46 

48 

56 

63 

July 

27-28 

67 

70 

72 

72 

66 

57 

52 

50 

49 

58 

66 

75 

July 

28-29 

79 

81 

80 

80 

70 

58 

54 

51 

49 

57 

68 

80 

July 

29-30 

85 

83 

78 

72 

66 

63 

61 

60 

57 

61 

66 

78 

July 

30-31 

80 

79 

79 

77 

70 

65 

63 

62 

58 

59 

66 

73 

July 

31-Aug.1 

77 

82 

81 

74 

69 

65 

63 

58 

56 

57 

62 

65 

Aug. 

1-2 

70 

77 

83 

83 

70 

57 

52 

48 

47 

54 

68 

72 

Aug. 

2-3 

80 

85 

84 

74 

63 

56 

53 

50 

49 

50 

58 

66 

Aug. 

3-4 

58 

54 

57 

58 

53 

50 

50 

49 

47 

50 

49 

49 

Au g. 

4-5 

53 

60 

67 

71 

60 

52 

48 

48 

46 

52 

63 

72 

Aug. 

5-6 

75 

79 

81 

81 

66 

56 

52 

49 

48 

57 

70 

78 

Aug. 

6-7 

83 

87 

88 

66 

74 

60 

56 

52 

50 

56 

66 

78 

Aug. 

7-8 

85 

85 

82 

80 

68 

62 

56 

53 

51 

56 

70 

75 

Aug. 

8-9 

79 

78 

74 

68 

64 

58 

55 

54 

54 

54 

55 

58 

Aug. 

9-10 

61 

64 

64 

62 

55 

51 

51 

51 

48 

48 

56 

61 

Aug. 

10-11 

64 

64 

60 

57 

50 

45 

4o 

J&0 

4o 

42 

45 

61 

Aug. 

11-12 

68 

73 

76 

72 

60 

54 

51 

49 

49 

54 

65 

75 

Aug. 

12-13 

80 

83 

85 

84 

66 

60 

55 

53 

52 

55 

67 

76 

Aug. 

13-14 

83 

86 

84 

79 

68 

62 

56 

52 

52 

56 

62 

68 

Aug. 

14-15 

75 

78 

77 

68 

56 

52 

49 

49 

50 

52 

58 

65 

Aug. 

15-16 

67 

70 

69 

64 

56 

53 

50 

49 

47 

49 

58 

63 

Aug. 

16-17 

68 

73 

73 

68 

62 

61 

59 

58 

57 

56 

54 

53 

Aug. 

17-18 

51 

52 

50 

46 

42 

41 

40 

40 

42 

43 

45 

45 

Aug. 

18-19 

44 

44 

44 

44 

42 

38 

37 

38 

39 

49 

52 

56 

Aug. 

19-20 

60 

64 

67 

62 

51 

47 

43 

39 

37 

46 

56 

62 

Aug. 

20-21 

70 

75 

76 

72 

56 

50 

48 

47 

47 

50 

64 

76 

Aug. 

21-22 

80 

82: 

81 

80 

60 

54 

51 

48 

46 

47 

60 

73 

Aug. 

22-23 

80 

8S> 

82 

78 

70 

63 

56 

54 

50 

52 

65 

68 

Aug. 

23-24 

67 

62 

59 

69 

54 

48 

42 

38 

37 

41 

57 

62 

Aug. 

24-25 

69 

72 

73 

68 

60 

56 

54 

52 

52 

51 

54 

54 


















































































































































































































































- 



























• 























































































































Date 


3 

12-2 2-4 4-6 6-8 8- 


Au g. 

25-26 

55 

56 

55 

52 

Aug. 

26-27 

53 

58 

61 

60 

Aug. 

27-28 

63 

70 

70 

66 

Au g. 

28-29 

64 

60 

56 

55 

Aug. 

29-30 

65 

68 

65 

58 

Aug. 

30-31 

62 

65 

66 

65 

Aug.; 

31-Sept .1 

68 

71 

71 

69 

Sept 

. 1-2 

64 

66 

64 

58 

Sept 

. 2-3 

68 

74 

74 

68 

Sept 

. 3-4 

62 

68 

72 

68 

Sept 

. 4-5 

75 

77 

78 

70 

Sept 

. 5-6 

61 

62 

64 

57 

Sept 

. 6-7 

60 

62 

65 

61 

Sept 

. 7-8 

68 

70 

72 

65 

Sept 

. 8-9 

73 

77 

77 

69 


>-12 

12-2 

2-4 

4-6 

6-8 

8-10 

O 

1 

51 

49 

49 

48 

49 

50 

50 

47 

46 

44 

43 

44 

46 

48 

56 

52 

46 

43 

43 

53 

64 

50 

47 

45 

42 

43 

54 

60 

44 

42 

39 

57 

40 

50 

57 

48 

42 

38 

34 

34 

49 

60 

46 

43 

41 

40 

39 

53 

61 

54 

54 

49 

52 

53 

54 

62 

54 

52 

51 

46 

47 

56 

61 

50 

44 

43 

41 

45 

58 

68 

52 

52 

52 

42 

49 

56 

58 

51 

49 

47 

46 

46 

50 

54 

41 

38 

36 

34 

37 

48 

62 

44 

41 

39 

36 

36 

54 

66 

48 

48 

42 

36 

57 

53 

64 


10 

51 

52 

60 

51 

60 

55 

56 

54 

58 

55 

58 

52 

47 

48 

53 










. 


















. 












. 













• 













t 













. 



























. 








































. 






















APPENDIX 


TABLE 21 - Mean Bi-hourly Temperatures (°F.) for 24 hour Periods 
from Noon June 20 until Sept. 9, 1921. 


Date 


12-2 

2-4 

4-6 

6-8 

8-10- 

10-12 

12-2 

2-4 

4-6 

6-8 

8-10 

10- 

June 

20-21 

73 

77 

79 

77 

70 

53 

51 

50 

50 

54 

63 

75 

June 

21-22 

78 

83 

82 

78 

70 

64 

61 

58 

56 

58 

64 

70 

June 

22-25 

73 

78 

78 

72 

59 

58 

56 

53 

51 

54 

59 

63 

June 

23-24 

70 

74 

74 

72 

66 

61 

60 

55 

54 

55 

63 

68 

•June 

24-25 

74 

78 

80 

75 

68 

65 

62 

61 

60 

58 

64 

68 

June 

25-26 

72 

75 

64 

65 

60 

52 

46 

44 

43 

57 

66 

72 

June 

26-27 

76 

80 

80 

74 

70 

64 

60 

54 

49 

57 

68 

72 

June 

27-28 

76 

79 

76 

69 

60 

5 1 

53 

48 

46 

54 

60 

64 

•'une 

28-29 

70 

76 

76 

70 

63 

54 

51 

48 

48 

52 

57 

63 

June 

29-30 

68 

74 

76 

70 

66 

60 

58 

56 

55 

55 

56 

57 

June 

30-July 

1 62 

68 

70 

67 

62 

57 

55 

54 

53 

52 

53 

53 

July 

1-2 

56 

61 

65 

65 

60 

52 

53 

52 

52 

51 

49 

49 

July 

2-3 

52 

57 

61 

58 

56 

53 

50 

49 

51 

54 

56 

59 

July 

3-4 

62 

64 

66 

64 

60 

54 

52 

50 

46 

49 

60 

64 

July 4-5 

67 

71 

64 

57 

55 

49 

45 

44 

43 

46 

51 

53 

July 

5-6 

57 

59 

57 

55 

53 

48 

43 

44 

44 

45 

50 

56 

July 

6-7 

60 

63 

60 

55 

53 

50 

46 

44 

43 

47 

54 

62 

July 

7-8 

68 

72 

74 

70 

64 

60 

58 

54 

53 

56 

62 

65 

July 

8-9 

68 

70 

71 

66 

56 

50 

48 

47 

49 

52 

56 

58 

July 

9-10 

63 

66 

69 

65 

55 

52 

48 

44 

44 

50 

57 

62 

July 

10-11 

66 

70 

63 

60 


SO 

48 

44 

41 

47 

59 

64 

July 

11-12 

68 

71 

68 

60 

54 

47 

43 

39 

40 

47 

60 

65 

July 

12-13 

70 

73 

74 

74 

60 

53 

49 

46 

45 

50 

60 

70 

July 

13-14 

74 

77 

77 

72 

61 

58 

51 

47 

45 

56 

64 

73 

July 

14-15 

77 

80 

80 

74 

67 

64 

64 

62 

56 

62 

68 

74 

July 15-16 

78 

81 

76 

71 

60 

57 

54 

52 

51 

54 

60 

66 

July 

16-17 

68 

63 

58 

57 

53 

49 

50 

49 

49 

50 

52 

53 

July 

17-18 

57 

65 

69 

68 

61 

56 

50 

47 

48 

56 

64 

69 

July 

18-19 

75 

78 

80 

75 

67 

61 

60 

60 

60 

62 

68 

73 

July 

19-20 

78 

83 

85 

82 

72 

68 

66 

64 

59 

60 

67 

74 

July 

20-21 

83 

87 

82 

64 

59 

56 

55 

53 

50 

51 

57 

64 

July 

21-22 

69 

74 

78 

82 

76 

57 

53 

52 

49 

51 

61 

70 

July 

22-23 

73 

78 

76 

72 

64 

57 

55 

53 

51 

52 

59 

64 

July 

23-24 

70 

73 

75 

75 

64 

48 

44 

41 

40 

50 

63 

67 

July 

24-25 

66 

70 

71 

69 

63 

60 

58 

53 

50 

56 

64 

70 






















- 




































































































































































































































































































K 

























































































































Date 


12-2 

2-4 

4-6 

6-8 

o 

i—i 

i 

CO 

10-12 

12-2 

2-4 

4-6 

6-8 

8-1C 

) 10 

July 

25-26 

72 

71 

77 

74 

65 

59 

53 

50 

46 

50 

63 

71 

July 

26-27 

75 

78 

81 

80 

70 

60 

55 

51 

50 

54 

64 

70 

July 

27-28 

75 

8# 

80 

78 

69 

58 

53 

51 

54 

56 

58 

65 

July 

28-29 

67 

70 

66 

57 

55 

54 

53 

52 

52 

52 

54 

59 

July 

29-30 

62 

65 

68 

69 

65 

65 

50 

46 

44 

46 

54 

62 

July 30-31 

70 

72 

75 

77 

66 

56 

52 

50 

50 

51 

55 

62 

July 31-Aug.l 

69 

73 

70 

67 

62 

57 

53 

51 

50 

51 

56 

61 

Aug. 

1-2 

68 

72 

73 

70 

60 

58 

57 

56 

56 

57 

65 

71 

Aug. 

2-3 

73 

77 

70 

52 

51 

49 

48 

47 

48 

49 

50 

53 

Aug. 

3-4 

55 

62 

64 

59 

50 

43 

42 

41 

42 

45 

50 

59 

Aug. 

4-5 

64 

61 

60 

54 

50 

49 

48 

48 

46 

48 

49 

50 

Aug. 

5-6 

51 

52 

58 

58 

50 

47 

42 

41 

40 

44 

54 

63 

Aug. 

6-7 

68 

72 

76 

74 

60 

52 

49 

49 

48 

51 

61 

68 

Aug. 

7-8 

70 

73 

77 

65 

57 

55 

55 

55 

55 

55 

62 

63 

Aug. 

8-9 

62 

51 

59 

59 

57 

54 

55 

52 

49 

54 

59 

66 

Aug. 

9-10 

72 

73 

70 

61 

54 

52 

49 

47 

46 

49 

53 

55 

Aug. 

10-11 

58 

61 

62 

62 

52 

46 

47 

49 

49 

53 

58 

64 

Aug. 

11-12 

67 

67 

65 

62 

58 

53 

48 

47 

43 

50 

60 

65 

Aug. 

12-3)3 

68 

71 

73 

70 

58 

51 

50 

48 

44 

58 

70 

75 

Aug. 

13-14 

79 

83 

82 

76 

64 

58 

54 

50 

45 

51 

65 

73 

Aug. 

14-15 

79 

82 

82 

78 

68 

62 

57 

52 

48 

57 

68 

72 

Aug. 

15-16 

74 

76 

70 

66 

60 

56 

52 

49 

43 

46 

57 

66 

Aug. 

16-17 

70 

73 

73 

70 

62 

59 

57 

55 

54 

54 

52 

56 

Aug. 

17-18 

58 

62 

60 

57 

54 

52 

51 

50 

49 

50 

52 

53 

Aug. 

18-19 

57 

59 

58 

55 

49 

48 

47 

45 

42 

41 

49 

54 

Aug. 

19-20 

60 

64 

65 

62 

52 

50 

47 

42 

42 

50 

58 

65 

Aug. 

20-21 

70 

76 

78 

70 

60 

55 

56 

53 

51 

50 

51 

56 

Aug. 

21-22 

58 

64 

62 

56 

53 

51 

48 

45 

45 

44 

53 

59 

Aug. 

22-23 

64 

68 

69 

68 

56 

48 

47 

48 

47 

47 

52 

59 

Aug. 

23-24 

66 

71 

71 

64 

57 

53 

53 

50 

48 

47 

50 

52 

Aug. 

24-25 

56 

* 63 

65 

63 

54 

47 

46 

42 

38 

40 

50 

58 

Aug. 

25-26 

64 

69 

70 

66 

53 

43 

38 

38 

38 

39 

56 

64 

Au g. 

26-27 

69 

71 

70 

62 

48 

42 

39 

38 

38 

45 

56 

66 

Aug. 

27-28 

71 

74 

70 

64 

51 

48 

46 

45 

45 

46 

52 

59 

Aug. 

28-29 

63 

66 

67 

61 

51 

47 

45 

45 

45 

47 

58 

62 




































































































































































































































= - 

R 


. 

. 


. 

. 

* 

. 


z 

. 

f 

. 




. 

. 

. 

. 













Date 


12-2 2-4 4-6 6-8 8-10 10-12 12-8 2-4 4-6 6-8 8-10 10-12 


Aug, 29-50 

69 

75 

72 

65 

Aug. 50-51 

70 

72 

65 

55 

Aug.51-Sept.1 

55 

60 

67 

60 

Sept.1-2 

50 

59 

61 

57 

Sept.2-3 

65 

70 

64 

53 

Sept.3-4 

62 

67 

67 

60 

S«pt.4-5 

61 

68 

68 

56 

Sept•5-6 

64 

65 

67 

60 

Sept.6-7 

71 

71 

67 

62 

Sept.7-8 

66 

68 

64 

57 

Sept.8-9 

43 

44 

43 

41 


44 

39 

36 

34 

43 

52 

60 

41 

37 

37 

36 

40 

46 

48 

47 

45 

44 

45 

45 

49 

49 

36 

33 

31 

29 

35 

50 

60 

44 

41 

40 

39 

39 

37 

56 

38 

33 

32 

33 

39 

47 

57 

46 

44 

43 

41 

42 

56 

60 

40 

39 

37 

37 

40 

52 

66 

55 

53 

47 

44 

47 

53 

61 

51 

49 

46 

43 

40 

41 

41 

39 

37 

35 

33 

31 

34 

40 


60 

44 

52 

46 

49 

45 

50 

45 

54 

55 

40 
















- ’ 

* 




























. 













. 












* 














-I. 












- . 

- • 













- . * i 













- . . 













» - . 













- • 













- . 

















APPENDII 


TABLE 22 - Duration of Sunshine for Each Hour of the Day from 
June 20 to Sept . 9 . 1920 . 

-SffHfc, 1S20--- 


Day of 
month 4 


10 


Hours Ending 
11 Hoop 1 2 


20 

0.5 

1.0 

0.6 

0.4 

0.9 

0.9 

1.0 

0.8 

0.7 

0.8 


0.9 

0.8 

0.5 

0.6 

0.9 

0.7 0.2 

12.2 

16.9 

21 

m.o 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1 . 0 . 

1.0 

1.0 


1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.4 


14.4 

16.9 

22 

0.1 

0.0 

0.3 

0.6 

1.0 

0.9 

4 

0.6 

0.1 

0.0 

o . o . 


0.0 

0.8 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 

0.6 

7.9 

16.9 

23 

0.6 

0.0 

0.8 

0.8 

1.0 

0.9 

0.8 

0.5 

0.3 

0.8 


0.8 

0.6 

0.9 

0.9 

1.0 

0.6 

11.3 

16.9 

24 










0.4 

" •-] ■ 

0.4 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 

1.0 

0.2 

4.9 

16.8 

26 

0.6 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 

0.9 

0.3 

0.5 - 

0.8 

0.5 


0.7 

0.1 





8.2 

16.8 

26 


0.8 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.7 

0.7 

0.8 


0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.4 

0.7 

0.1 

10.4 

16.0 

27 

1.0 

0.7 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 


0.8 

0.8 

1.0 

1.0 

0.5 


13.8 

16.8 

28 

0.1 1.0 

0.8 

0.9 

0^9 

0.8 

0.7 

0.8 

1.0 

1.0 

0.6 

I 

0.6 

0.2 

0.6 

1.0 

0.6 


11.6 

16.8 

29 

0.8 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.7 

0.8 . 

1 

0.9 

1.0 

0.8 

6.5 

0.5 

0.3 

13.3 

16.8 

30 

0.2 

0.1 

0.7 

0.9 

D«9 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

-. 

1.0 

1.0 

0^7 

1.0 

1.0 

0.4 

13.0 

16.8 


Total 0.1 


JULY , 1920 

1 0.1 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1 . 0 ' 1.0 

2 0.4 1.0 0.9 1.0 1.0 1 . 0 . 1.0 




1.0 1.0 

1.0 £.0 


1.0 1.0 

1.0 0.9 


1.0 0.3 

0.6 


S 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 

0.9 i.o 

0.9 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.5 

15.2 

4 


0.9 

1.0 

0.7 

0.7 

0.8 

0.9 

0.9 

1.0 

1.0 0.9 

0.7 

0.8 

0.5 

0.8 

0.3 

11.9 

6 

0.1 

0.0 

0.5 

0.6 

0.0 



0.2 

0.2 

0.4 " " 

0.5 

0.2 


0.6 

0.3 

3.6 

6 

0.6 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.6 

• 

o 

■■ 

I- 1 

• 

o 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 

0.3 

14.4 

7 

0.7 

0.9 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.8 

0.6 

i-0 1.0 

1.0 

0.5 

o.l 

1.0 

0.5 

12.9 

8 

0.3 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.6 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1 *° V 1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.6 

15.1 

9 

0.7 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

!.0 l.o 

0.7 

0.3 


0.1 

0.1 

11.9 

10 

0.4 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1,0 1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.5 

14.9 

11 

0.6 

1.0 

0.8 



0.1 


0.1 

0.2 

0.1 


0.7 

0.8 

0.8 

0.1 

5.3 

12 


0.7 

0.9 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1-0 

1.0 

0.8 

o 

• 

O 

• 

CD 

0.9 

0.6 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

13.7 

13 

6.7 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.7 

0 • 9 1.0 

0.9 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.3 

14.5 

14 

1.0 

1.0 

1.6 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

i.6 i . o 1 '- 

100 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.3 

15.3 

16 

0.5 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

i* 0 1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.3 

14.8 

16 

0.5 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

• 1.0 ' 1.0 

1.0 

1 . 0 . 

1.0 

1.0 

0.2 

14.7 


Total 

Hours 


Total 
possible 
Hrs . Lat , 


15.4 

10.8 


T ft 


n % l r > t o 1.0 1.0 


1.0 


1.0 


1.0 1.0 


1.0 


an ty 


11.0 


















































































TABLE 22 

- continued 

August , 1920 





1 


Day of 
Month 

4 6 6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

Hour 8 
11 

Ending 

Boon 

1 

2 

5 

4 

6 

6 

7 8 

Total 

9 Hours 

16 
















19 

0.7 

1.0 

0.8 

0.5 



0.2 

0.4 

0.8 

1.0 

0.9 

0.1 

1.0 

0.5 

7.6 

20 



0.5 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.6 

0.6 

1.0 

1.0 

0.7 

10.4 

21 

0.2 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.6 

12.8 

22 

0.8 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.6 

13.5 

28 

0.6 

0.4 

0.2 

0.5 

0.5 

0.5 

0.5 


0.1 



0.5 

1.0 

0.8 

4.7 

24 

0.4 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 

0.7 

0.8 

0.8 

0.9 

1.0 

0.4 

0.8 

0.8 

0.2 


9.7 

26 



0.1 


’ 










0.1 

26 










0.6 

0.9 

0.4 

0.8 

0.6 

5.3 

27 






0.6 

0.9 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.8 

0.7 



6.0 

28 


- 


0.4 

0.8 

0.8 

0.1 

0.1 







2.2 

29 


0.1 

0.9 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.5 

11.6 

50 




0.4 

0.8 

1.0 

0.7 

0.2 

0.5 

0.5 


0.8 

1.0 

0.5 

6.0 

21 

0.2 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.5 

12.6 

Total 

2.9 14.0 

10.0 

19.1 

20.2 

20.6 

20.8 

20.9 

20.1 

21.2 

20.0 

20.5 

£ 0.5 

20.6 

14.1 12.2 

276.6 



SEPTBI ' BEB . 1920 











1 


0.7 

0.4 

i.o 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

06 

11.7 

2 





0.1 

0.9 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.2 


7.2 

2 


0.2 

0.5 

0.6 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.7 



8.8 

4 


0.2 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

o.e 


11.0 

6 


0.1 

1.0 

1.0 

0.6 

0.1 

0.4 » 

■ i 

0.5 

0.0 

0.0 

0.6 

0.2 



4.3 

6 







0.5 

0.1 


0.4 

1.0 

1.0 

0.5 


3.3 

7 


0.4 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 


11.3 

6 


0.8 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 


11.7 

9 


0.4 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.8 

1.0 

0.6 



9.8 


Total 



















































TABLE 23 

- Dnratlon 
June 20 

APPEHBIX 

of Sunshine for 
to Sept . 9 , 1921 . 

JURE , 1920 

Each Hour of 

the Day 

from 










Day of 
Month 

4 5 

6 

7 8 

9 

Hours Ending 

10 11 Noon 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

Total 

9 Hours 

20 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.5 

15.4 

21 

1.0 

1.0 

0.4 0.3 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.8 



12.5 

22 


0.8 

1.0 1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 

1.0 

1.0 

0.8 

0.1 



11.6 

23 






0.8 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.7 

0.1 


7.6 

24 

0.3 

0.6 

0.7 1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 

0.9 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.3 

13.7 

25 



0.8 0.2 

0.1 




0.7 



0.6 

0.2 


0.8 

0.3 j 

3.6 

26 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.2 



13.2 

27 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 1.0 

0.7 

0.8 

0.7 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 

0.6 





10.7 

28 

1.0 

1.0 

0.8 1.0 

0.2 

0.7 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.5 

1.0 

1.0 

0.4 

0.1 



10.7 

29 



0.7 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.8 



10.5 

30 




* 



0.2 

0.2 

0.5 

0.3 

0.8 




r • 

2.0 

31 

















Total 



• * - 




» . 


' * 



::.: 
























JULY , 1920 














1 









0.1 

0.8 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.5 

5.4 

2 











0 






3 




0.2 

0.5 

0.7 

0 . 4 . ' 

0.4 

0.2 

0.7 

0.7 

1.0 

0.6 

0.6 

0.2 

6.2 

4 

0.4 

0.3 

0.2 0.2 

0.1 


0.7 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.2 


0.2 

0.8 

0.3 

7.4 

5 



0.8 0.3 




0.1 

0.2 

f 

0.7 

0.4 

0.5 

1.0 

0.6 


4.6 

6 

0.5 

1.0 

1.0 1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.3 


0.9 

1.0 

0.5 

13.2 

7 

0.3 


0.8 0.3 

0.7 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.7 

0.9 

0.3 




9.0 

8 

0.1 

0.9 

1.0 1.0 

1.0 

0.4 

1.0 

0.4 

0.6 

0.4 

0.4 

0.4 


0.5 



7.9 

9 


0.2 

0.2 0.8 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.2 

12 .4 

10 

0.6 

1.0 

1.0 1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 

0.1 





10.6 

11 

0.8 

1.0 

1.0 1.0 

1.0 

0.7 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 

1.0 

0.7 

0.5 

0.6 

0.7 



11.9 

12 

0.5 

1.0 

1.0 1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 

0.4 

1.0 

0.8 

0.3 

0.4 

13.3 

13 

0.8 

1.0 

1.0 1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 


14.7 

14 

0.6 

1.0 

1.0 1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.2 

005 



12.3 

16 

0.5 

1.0 

1.0 1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.6 






10.1 






























JULY . 1920 


TABLE 23 - continued 


Day of Honrs endin ? 

month _ 4 _ 6 _ 6 _ 7 _ 8 _ 9 _ 10 ~ n 


Hoon 1 


2 3 4 6 6 


7 


8 


Total 
9 Honrs 


16 

0.3 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.5 

0.2 

0.1 









5.1 

17 









0.1 

0.8 

0.5 

0.5 

0.2 

1.0 

1.0 

0.4 ' 

4.5 

18 

0.2 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 

1.0 

0.3 

14.4 

19 


0.6 

0.1 

0.9 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 

0.6 

0.2 

12.3 

20 

0.7 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 

0.9 

0.9 



13.4 

21 

0.8 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.8 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.7 

15.3 

22 

0.6 

0.8 

0.7 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 

0.3 

14.3 

23 

0.8 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.6 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.3 

16.1 

24 


0.8 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 

0.5 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.3 


12.1 

26 

0.3 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.8 

1.0 


0.5 




0.7 

1.0 

1.0 

0.8 

0.2 

1 

9.3 

26 


0.8 

0.8 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.3 

13.8 

27 


0.3 

0.4 

0.4 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

13.1 

28 

0.1 

0.1 

0.1 

0.3 

0.5 

0.9 

0.5 

0.2 

0.1 

0.3 

0.1 






3.2 

29 





0.3 

0.9 

0.9 

0.5 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.2 

0.7 




6.6 

30 


0.7 

0.8 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.8 

0.9 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.3 

13.5 

31 




0.3 

0.9 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 



0.7 


0.1 

0.8 

0.2 

0.1 

6.1 

Total 

8.9 

18.6 

19.9 

21.5 

23.5 

23.9 

23.9 

22.5 

22.2 

22.4 

23.7 

19.0 

18.5 

20.6 

16.0 

6.2 

311 . 1 




AUGUST 

. 1920 














1 



0.1 


_ , . 



0.4 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.3 

7.8 

2 


0.6 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.8 

1.0 

1.0 

0.8 

0.7 

0.5 

0.2 



10.6 

3 







0.6 

0.1 


0.5 

0.5 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.3 


5.0 

4 



0.2 

0.1 

0.1 

0.2 

0.3 

0.8 

0.9 

0.7 

0.5 

0.8 

0.8 

0.7 

0.1 

0.1 

6.3 

5 


1.0 

0.2 








0.4 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 

0.9 

0.3 

5.7 

6 


0.3 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.8 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.2 

13.3 

7 

8 

9 

0.4 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.8 

0.8 

0.8 

0.2 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.4 

0.6 


12.0 




0.6 

0.6 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.2 

0.3 

0.3 





6.0 

10 





0.1 

0.1 

0.5 

0.6 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.1 

8.4 

11 




0.8 

0.2 

0.8 

0.9 

1.0 

0.9 

, 0.7 

0.5 

0.3 

0.2 

0.6 



6.8 

12 


0.6 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.8 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.8 

0.1 

1.0 

1.0 

0.7 


12.0 

13 


0.8 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 


13.7 

14 


1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

; 1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 


13.9 


i 
































TABLE 23 - 

L 

continued 

AU 3 UST . 

1920 



4 


Day of 
Month 4 

6 6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

Hours 
11 . 

Ending 

Eoon 

1 

16 

0.3 

0.5 

0.4 

0.9 

0.9 

0.7 

1.0 

0.6 

16 

0.7 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

17 

0.1 

0.1 


0.1 





18 







0.1 

0.6 

19 




0.2 


0.1 

0.1 

0.6 

20 

0.6 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

21 









22 

0.6 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

23 

0.1 

0.3 

0.7 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

24 


0.1 

0.1 



0.1 


0.3 

26 

0.7 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

26 

0.8 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

27 


0.8 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

28 







0.1 


29 


0.3 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.5 

0.7 

30 

0.2 

0.2 





0.3 

0.7 

31 








0.5 

Total 

0.4 9.3 

13.8 

15.7 

16.2 

16.8 

17.8 

18.6 

21.0 



SEPTEMBEB . 1920 




1 


0.1 


0.1 


0.1 


. J 

2 

0.1 

0.4 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

3 


0.3 

0.7 

0.5 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

4 




0.2 

0.6 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

6 

0.4 

1.0 

0.2 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

6 


0.4 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

7 




0.2 

0.1 

0.8 

0.7 

1.0 


8 . 0.2 

9 


Total 


s 

3 

4 

6 

6 

7 

8 

9 

Total 

Hours 

0.9 

1.0 

0.7 

0.1 

0.3 

0.3 



8.6 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.2 



12.9 




0.2 



1 


0.5 

0.5 


0.3 

0.4 

0.8 

0.8 



3.6 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.5 



6.6 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

Q .2 




11.8 


0.3 


0.2 





.6 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.5 



13.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.7 

0.3 

0.2 



10.3 

0.7 

1.0 

1.0 

0.7 

0.9 

0.4 



5.3 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.5 



13.2 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.4 



13.2 

0.7 

0.6 

0.6 

0.7 

0.8 




10.2 


0.7 

0.7 

0.4 

0.6 




2.5 

0.6 

0.9 

0.8 

0.4 

0.1 

0.2 

] 


8.5 

0.4 

0.8 

0.9 

1.0 

1.0 

0.6 



6.1 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.3 




4.8 

21,7 

23,1 

23.2 

22.3 

20.0 

12.0 

1*0 

352 ,J 

0.2 

1.0 

1.0 

0.8 

0.9 

0.5 

1 


4.7 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.1 





9.6 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.6 




10.1 

1.0 

• 1.0 

1.0 

0.6 

0.5 




7.9 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.9 

1.0 

0.1 



11.6 









7.1 

0.7 

0.1 








1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.2 





6.0 


_ 


0.2 







































• • 























■ 

■ : , 

' 

■. - *M 

, - - v ■ : . " 

-■■■■■-' ■■ ' ; . . •■ ■ ...... 1 ' ■ 


f* 


: ' h ' ■ > •••• t 


... 

• ».-.■■ ■ : - • ,. -.: ■' - 
• • :;/v v ■ - 4 : 

f.. ■’ ' 

? .>• : M .‘fro.vS-i'J.R a ■ / 

-.-■■■ ■. -■■ *f'.G v .- 




- 

. . . ■■ ’ . ' 




-PM 


- v•' -Tn-v*. ■,: -**?*•*; •:•■• -■ . ...-=•■ 

V . / 'i- £ ‘- -v’ e t J " v ^ ’ ’ . ’ 

i-v .. ’ : • - . ' • 

- ’ 




v . .C - -. . -. ' .*• < ■*•’• A.- . •, t ,■■ 

■' Vv-" ■*«. .<* ^ 

-■ '*-v 

1 -"■ -v ;" s _ 

' ' i § gl » 


■h. 


i "v>/-:•■■ ■■■ 

• • 


' - •' 

v--,-^ 

* - *■: ■ v ; "' ■ ’V^aSC^-;' 


■ 

* -JBPUfRI 

■ 

■ 

: 

...... - - 

*- 50 ^' • ■ w -- ..' ' - • * ;... . v ^;. . - . 




•., v mg .. 

.. 


/ 


s r * ' . 


i 








v* 








.-y' —5-‘/ 

. «y. ' • 










: r > 

- - 

' \ : r ; ? - - ": * yt , ■-# > 


'*'* v - ■ 




■ 




a /•' ' : 'i ••;. ,; >4v v';i 

■ 

; . ->v • 'x-V; ■/ \ ■ ' ' ■■■_■ 

■v ' I ■'■''■ : ; 'F ; • ■ 

s * > a ^ > 

e > .' • . 1 - ’ . . - •• : . 

, 




. .. .. Jiflu.-.-.-, 

!x A .*».<*•'.'••-.**':• /*' v ‘ ^ " 

■ ' 

-y- 




^ 5 . 


f'.'S'fe 


. 

, v ,, . iS , r 

t ■'< > ' ^if ts *.. ^ ■'j ^ ' 

“ ■ iv::; 

■ 1 : - 1 ! 1 : • 

- ■ 

1 - . ‘ - . 




-t, S. . 


i&k&l-y.!■-■'* ■:■■'■ 

>_ ] i :*■ 

. ' ■ ' ■ - ' 

, 

a vv-.:; : v v ;•■ 

> . " V,' •?•■ V n. ' ■ 

- 

, ’ V --> 

- 

■ 


- : - ~ .. ■ ; 
‘:f a^.W-^' 


V 




'.rS* 






,>y . : 

'.'.'.''V'V - , i'.. --:•- .. ; . 

-■-r. 










f 






