













©X MBM* 

wsbshpjs 

MMWMSIS 

















UNIVERSITY OP ALBERTA 
LILEARY 


Regulations RegarRing Taos os 


tations 


Typescript copies of thoses and dissertations for Easter's 
octor's legrees )o it d in th Unive: sity of Alberta 


Library, as the Official Copy of the vacuity of Graduate Studies, 
.v be 3 on ulted in the 1 eference I 3 a ing Room only. 


A second copy is on deposit In the Department under whose 
supei visi th work was done. Some epartments are willing to 
loan their copy to libraries, through the interlibrary loan 
service of the University of .alberta Library. 


These theses and dissertations are to be used only with due 
regard to priority rights of the author. mitten permission of 
the author and of the Department must be obtained through the 
University of Alberta Library when extended passages are used. 

hen permission has been granted, credit must appear in the 
pub1is he d work. 

This thesis or dissertation has been used In accordance 
with the above regulations by the persons listed below. The 
borrowing library Is obligated to secure the signature of each 

user. 



InoiW U 'tfr ItV-tlaH 





























THE UNIVERSITY OE ALBERTA 


A HISTORY OE THE COCHRANE AREA 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OE GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL EULEILMENT OE THE REQUIREMENTS EOR THE DEGREE 


OE MASTER OE ARTS 


FACULTY OE ARTS AND SCIENCE 
DEPARTMENT OE HISTORY 


by 

DONALD EDWARD BROWN 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA, 
APRIL 7 , 1951 . 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/historyofcochranOOdona 


\he.s\S» 

\^s\ 

* 1 



University of Alberta 


Faculty of Arts and Science 
Department of History 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have 
read and recommend to the School of Graduate Studies 
for acceptance, a thesis entitled “A History of the 
Cochrane Area** submitted by Donald Edward Brown, B.Ed., 
in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the 
degree of Master of Arts. 







































. 






table of contents 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I A GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE AREA. 1 

II INDIANS AND THE ADVENT OF THE WHITE MAN. 8 

III THE COCHRANE RANCHE. 18 

IV THE TOWN OF MITFORD . 37 

V RURAL SETTLEMENT - TO 1900 . 39 

VT THE HISTORY OF THE VILLAGE 

OF COCHRANE - TO 1914 . 77 

VII GLENBOS .101 

VIII RURAL DEVELOPMENT SINCE 1900 . 112 

IX COCHRANE SINCE 1914 . 133 

X CHURCHES, SCHOOLS, SPORTS, 

AND SOCIAL ACTIVITIES . 147 

XI CONCLUSION. l6l 

APPENDIX 

A . 166 

B . 168 

G . 173 

D . l80 

B . 181 

F . 184 

BIBLIOGRAPHY. 186 

iii 





































ABSTRACT 


"A History of the Cochrane Area" is concerned with 
the history of the settlement and development of the region 
adjacent to, and including, the village of Cochrane, 
Alberta, to 19.5 0. An account is given of the settlers 
to 1900 by name, and the establishment of the Morleyville 
Mission and the founding of the former hamlet of Mitford 
are examined in detail. The history of the village of 
Cochrane is included, with maps of the village and the 
rural area tributary to it at various stages of develop¬ 
ment. The social and economic development of the region 
is examined and an account of the former hamlet of Glenbow 


is included 


. ■ . 

. v ... : J . • -... 6 ... : ' '.. 0 ... i '. 

• j ■ ..... .. ^ . . ■ . -■ . ...... 

: 

.. Y • • . . ,. c • - ; 

.... ,-Yv I' ■ • X i :• ...' X-Ju :1 y. .ft ., ,/. 






CHAPTER I 


A GENERAL DESCRIPTION OP THE AREA 

The area discussed in the early parts of this thesis 
and shown on the accompanying map (1) is situated within the 
(1) Appendix A, map (1) 

foothill belt of Alberta between 114°l8 f and 114°32 r west 
longitude. It includes all of townships 23 and 26, ranges 
4, 3 and 6, west of the 3th Meridian; township 27, ranges 4 
and 3; township 26, range 6; that part of township 27 , range 
6, south of the Reserve (#142B); and those parts of township 

24, ranges 2 and 3 and township 23, range 2, north of the 

Elbow river. The Stoney Indian Reserve projects slightly 
into the western extremity of this area south of the Row 
river. 

This extensive region had a unity of its own during 

the early l880 f s. All the land east of a line north and 

south through the centre of townships 23 and 26 , range 3, 
was held in leasehold by the Cochrane Ranch Company, whose 
headquarters were a mile west of the present town of Coch¬ 
rane. The land west of the Cochrane ranch, within the boun¬ 
daries of the area indicated above, was sparsely settled by 
pioneer ranchers. The southern half of township 26, range 
6, contained the Morleyville settlement which was the first 
nucleus of white settlement for the whole area. In time, 
as will be shown, the region lost its earlier unity. Set¬ 
tlers in the eastern section made Calgary their business 





* 


centre. Those west of the Ghost river remained loyal to 
Morley and the rest of the area developed into a thriving 
community with the town of Cochrane as its centre. 

The Bocky Mountains dominate the western horizon of 
this region. The mountain foothills extend eastward to a 
line drawn north and south from the Wildcat Hills to just 
west of Jumping Pound creek. (2) The Wildcat Hills reach 
(2) Appendix A, map (5) 

an elevation of 5,000 feet in some places. 

The Bow river traverses the whole area. It is one 
of the major streams that rise in the mountains and flow 
eastward through the front ranges of the Hoeky Mountains 
and then across the foothills. It has eroded a broad valley 
across the area and this valley is the most prominent topo¬ 
graphical feature. To the east of the mountain foothills, 
the prairie foothills are intersected by broad, generally 
deep, valleys that run inward towards the Bow valley. (5) 

t5) The whole area lies within the foothills, but a dis¬ 
tinction is made between the mountain foothills and 
those smaller hills lying between them and the prairie. 
These smaller, less rugged, hills are sometimes re¬ 
ferred to as "prairie foothills* 1 .* 

Many of these drainage ways do not now contain streams. 

The main tributary of the Bow river in this area is 
the Ghost river. It is a clear, rapid torrent that rises 
in the outer ranges of the Bocky Mountains and flows east 
and then south-east to meet the Bow. In preglacial times 






« 

' 



. 

. 












« 





3 


the Ghost river was the outlet of the Bow river from Banff, 
by way of Lake Minnewanka. The Ghost river enters the Bow 
eleven miles west of Cochrane. The Ghost dam of the Calgary 
Power Company is situated on the Bow river immediately east 
of the confluence of the Ghost and the Bow. The tremendous 
reservoir of water created by this dam is known as the Ghost 
lake. 

Pive small streams join the Bow river from the north 
between the Ghost river and Cochrane. They are Spencer 
ereek, Beaupre creek, Coal creek, Horse creek and Big Hill 
creek. The Jumping Pound creek drains the area south of the 
Bow river and meets it two miles west of Cochrane. 

There are no large natural lakes in the area. There 
are two small ones, Cochrane lake and Glenbow lake, and nu¬ 
merous sloughs. The volume of surface-water has decreased 
greatly in the last-few decades for there are many dry ba¬ 
sins that previously acted as reservoirs. 

In the area around the Ghost river, the country is 
characterized by high ridges, partly timbered, running in a 
north westerly direction, separated by low, generally swampy 
valleys. There are several small creeks that flow into 
Spencer ereek. 

The area north of Cochrane, between Big Hill ereek 
and Grand valley, is gently rolling and composed of fairly 
high ridges with long gentle slopes. It is nearly all fit 








vji 






. : . 





















4 


for cultivation and is good arable land. Coal creek flows 
down Grand valley - in fact, many maps refer to the creek 
as Grand Talley creek. 


The Big Hill lies directly behind the town of Coch¬ 
rane. It is a high rounded mass, largely of hard sandstone, 
rising 550 feet above the river. Its southern and western 
sides are covered with a thick growth of poplar. The area 
on top of the hill is gently rolling in topography and ex¬ 
tends eastward to the "Nose” a few miles west of Calgary. 

Much of it is pasture land, with scattered clumps of trees 
and extensive stands of willow brush. 

South of the Bow river the area is rolling in topo¬ 
graphy with low ridges and fairly wide valleys. The topo¬ 
graphy is more choppy near the river. The soil is heavy 
textured and black. The mountain foothills mark the western 
extremity of cultivable land. 

In most of the Cochrane area there is a frost hazard 
and, as a result, coarse grain is grown extensively on culti¬ 
vated lands. About 551 » of the land is tilled. The remainder 
is hay and pasture land. Excellent crops of native hay are 
common. 

The area has a rainfall of 18 inches or more per 
year on the average. Moisture is not as great a limiting 
factor as in districts to the east and north of Calgary. 

Soil drifting is not a serious problem since much of the 





3 


original fibre remains, as yet, in the soil. The area is 
generally rich in plant food and the necessity of growing 
coarse grains lessens the danger of one crop cultivation 
depleting the soil chemicals. Water erosion in cultivated 
sections has not been serious yet, but the favorable loca¬ 
tion with relation to market facilities tends to result in 
an ever more intensive type of farming and the utilization 
of marginal and sloping land. Judicious crop rotation sat¬ 
isfactorily controls the perennial and other weeds. This 
practice characterizes much of the mixed farming region in 
Alberta and weeds are not a serious problem to the success¬ 
ful farmer. There are extensive sections where the land is 
rough. A heavy native grass of high nutritive value is 
produced and, where the topography permits, extensive hay¬ 
ing is done. 

The Cochrane area lies within the northern Chinook 
belt. These periodic winds are warm and of low humidity. 
During the winter they have a moderating effect on the tem¬ 
perature. During the summer, in a prolonged dry spell, 
they have a destructive influence on growing crops. The 
prevailing winds are, however, from the north-west. The 
area receives an average of 2,300 hours of bright sunshine 
per year out of a possible total of 4,430 hours. Edmonton 
receives about 100 hours less, on the average. Over a 21 
year period, from 1916 to 1926, the area had an average of 







6 


100 frost free days per year. The first fall frost general¬ 
ly occurs in the second week in September, but the low lying 
districts, many of which contain cultivated land, receive 
frost much earlier. 

The region is noted for its unique appearance. In 
the prairie and mountain foothills to the north there are 
extensive stands of timber that tend to shroud the contour 
of the land. In the south, the prairie foothills are quite 
narrow and also extensively wooded. In the Cochrane dis¬ 
trict, the prairie foothills occupy a broad belt of 35 miles, 
rising steadily in height until they meet the mountain foot¬ 
hills. Great reaches of the higher area are free of trees. 
The hilltops offer an unobstructed view of a magnificent 
landscape of ever rising hills gradually fading into a blue 
haze at the base of the snow capped Rockies. One spot in 
particular is worth mention. A mile east of the town of 
Cochrane, the Big Hill projects sharply outwards towards 
the Bow river on the south. Jfrom the western edge of this 
ridge the view of the broad Bow valley, the great depth of 
foothills and the towering mountains is superb. 

Seventy-eight years ago, on a similar hill with a 
commanding view of this beautiful countryside, the McDougalls 
established the first white settlement. They came to bring 
Christianity to the Indians of the area. Ranchers followed 
them and then came farmers. It is with the lives of these 



7 


people and the community that they created that this history 
is concerned. 



CHAPTER II 


INDIANS AND THE ADVENT OF THE WHITE MAN 

David Thompson appears to have been the first white 

man to cross this area. In his tt Journey to Bow River and 

o 

Rocky Mountains in November l8$0 n , he tells of a trip south 
from Rocky Mountain House. With five members in the party, 
he proceeded a little east of south until he struck the Bow 
river on November 21, at or near the present site of Galgary. 
He then proceeded to the Highwood river and visited two Pike- 
now camps. On November he began the return trip, procee¬ 
ding northwest, and on the 28 th he camped at a spring close 
to the Bow river at a point a little above the mouth of the 
Ghost river. He went up to the present Gap, traversing the 
present Morley reservation. This trip appears to be related 
to the establishment of Bow Fort. Goues says that the fort 
was begun in l 802 . (1) 

(, 1) Goues, E., t! The Manuscript Journals of Alexander 

Henry and of David Thompson 1 *, Harper, N.Y.-lS??* 704. 

The Pikenow Indians referred to are the Piegan, a 

part of the Blackfoot Gonfederacy. This gives some idea of 

the Indians then inhabiting the area. Thompson®s trip was 

the first white penetration of this area, unless the French 

actually built Fort Jonquiere on or near the present site of 

Galgary, which seems unlikely. (2) Fort Jonquiere was built 

(2) Ibid., 484. 











■ 

- 

« 

■■ t ■ ' ■ • ' ■ . ' v r. 


* 

- 



9 


in 1752. 

The Old Bow Fort (Piegan Post) at the junction of 
the Bow river and Bow Fort creek appears to have been built 
in 1835, not 1802, by the Hudson’s Bay Company. (3) It was 

(3) MacLeod, J.E.A. , "Old Bow Fort”, Canadian Historical 

Review, Volume XII, #1, University of Toronto Press - 
1931. 407f. 

abandonned in 1834 because the Piegan proved too hostile 
and the area was not rich enough in beaver. 

The Stoney Indians were latecomers to the area. 

They arrived about 1845. (4) It is suggested that the Moun- 

(4) Dawson, G.M., "Report B", Geological Survey of Canada, 

Annual Report, Volume 1 - 1885 . 12 and 13• 

tain Cree preceded them by a few years, probably driving out 

the Piegan and possibly some elements of the Kootenay tribe. 

The Stoney attach definite names to very few of the features 

in the area. Many of the names are Cree or their equivalent 

in Stoney.(4) 

"The Stoney Indians are a branch of the great Dakota 
or Siouan Confederacy. They are Assiniboines, of which Sto- 
ney is the English translation. The derivation of the name 
is said to come from the fact that the Assiniboines cooked 
their food on heated stones, and from this custom they re¬ 
ceived this name, which was translated by the white people 
into the Stone People, and finally into Stoney Indians". (5) 

(5) MacLean, J., "Canadian Savage Folk", Briggs, Toronto- 

1896 . 19 . 












■ 


■ 










10 


The Athabascan Assiniboine had separated from the 
main body of Assiniboine and settled the Athabasca region a 
decade or two before the end of the eighteenth century. Du¬ 
ring the 1640 T s many of the Athabasca Assiniboine were forced 
to move southward because of a scarcity of game. The group 
that settled in the valley of the Bow became known as the 
Mountain Stoney. 

!, The Stoneys are of medium height, well formed, of 
pleasing countenance and especially active in their move¬ 
ments. it is not too much to say that they are the most 
energetic of all the tribes of the North-West. They are 
excellent horsemen and had the reputation of being great 
horse thieves. They were famous as scouts and were used 
in that capacity during the Riel Rebellion of 1885* Many 
were used during the survey of the G. P. R.” (6) 

(6) Ibid., 24. 

Dr. Hector passed through the western extremities of 
the area in 1858. He mentions camping for the night at the 
foot of Dream Hill. (7) This would be one of the more sou- 

(7) "The Journals, Reports and Observations relative to the 
Exploration by Captain Palliser", G.E. Eyre and W. 
Spottiswoode, London - 1865* 98. 

therly Wildcat Hills for he speaks of reaching the Ghost 

river early the following morning. He describes travelling 

down over a succession of rolling hills to the Bow river. 

Sections of shale and sandstone interspersed with seams of 







. 

-vV. “• V- , 

' 

- 

- 

* 


. . 5 - 

■ 

* 

, 


‘ 

E 





. 













11 


coal occurred along the banks of the river* This would be 
somewhere around the mouth of Coal creek. From the camp at 
Dream Hill, the party looked out across a level plain that 
seemed to sweep up to the base of the mountains. The nert 
morning Dr. Hector found that the level plain was the valley 
of the Deadman, or Ghost river. (7) Peter Erasmus, who ac¬ 
companied Dr. Hector, says the Indians knew the river as "the 
river of ghosts”. "They believed that they saw a ghost visi¬ 
ting the many Indian graves along the river, picking up the 
skulls of warriors killed by the Crees". (8) Palliser’s 

(8) Howay, F.W., "Builders of the West", Ryerson Press, 
Toronto - 1?2?. 120. 

report had a considerable influence on the decision to build 

the railroad to the north of the arid stretches. Had this 

plan been followed, the development of the Cochrane area 

would have been retarded many years. 

An event of great importance took place in 1873, 

when Reverend George and Reverend John McDougall came into 

the area west of the junction of the Bow and Ghost rivers 

and established a mission at Morleyville. (?) In November 

(?) McDougall, J., "On Western Trails in the Early Seven¬ 
ties", Briggs, Toronto - 1?11. 21. 

Morleyville was named in honour of the Rev. Morley 
Punshon, the great Methodist pulpit orator. 

they built a fort on a high hill north of the Bow river 

about three miles from the present McDougall church. (10) 

(10) Ibid., 102 and 103. 

















12 


The walls were eight feet high and there was only one small 
opening to the outside. Living quarters, sheds and a small 
yard were contained within the walls. In this structure, 
the families of the Rev. John and his brother David lived 
in comparative safety from the marauding Blackfeet during 
the long period that the brothers were absent. (11) 

(11) Interview - Mrs. A.v. Mathieson, Calgary, January 19.51. 

In 187.5 a small community sprang up on the flats 
north of the Bow river. A church, a day school, a mission 
house, a store and various stables were built. (12) Most of 

(12) Appendix B, diagram (l) - shows the disposition of the 
buildings in the early settlement. 

the buildings were log structures covered with whip-sawn 
lumber. Only the church remains today. It is somewhat in¬ 
differently fenced off from the surrounding pastureland and 
is a rather dilapidated looking hulk. A fine stone cairn 
commemorating the services of the pioneering McDougall family 
stands out in front of it beside the trans-Canada highway. 

Two services were held in the church on Sundays - 

one in the morning for the Indians and one in the afternoon 

for the little white community. An organ, the first in the 

far west, provided the music. (13) The day school offered 

(,13) This organ was made in England for the Anglican Bishop 
of Rupert’s Land. It was purchased by the Rev. George 
McDougall in 1071 and transported with much difficulty 
across the plains to the Sunday school in Edmonton. It 
was subsequently taken to the new mission at Morley. 
McLean, J., “McDougall of Alberta 11 , Ryerson Press, 
Toronto - 1927. 118. 



















■ ' ■ ! .... I'-jV 

. 

, 











13 


a rudimentary education for the children living in the neigh¬ 
bourhood. An orphanage was built in 1878 to provide living 
quarters, meals and education for those Indian children whose 
parents lived in the more remote areas or were dead. David 
McDougall operated the store, bringing his supplies from Fort 
Benton or from Fort Garry via Edmonton. 

Frank Sibbald’s reminiscences of the life of his 
father, Andrew Sibbald, offer an interesting picture of the 
difficulties experienced by the early settlers. In the spring 
of 1873 , the latter was offered a position as teacher in a 
school about to be established by the Rev. George McDougall 
among the Blood Indians. He accepted and left Stroud, Ontario 
on June 10 with his wife, his sons Howard (9) and Frank ( 6 ) 
and daughter Elsie (3)* He met David McDougall, the trader, 
at Fort Garry, secured a cart, an ox, a horse and a wagon, 
loaded the family possessions (including a sewing machine) 
and headed towards Edmonton. The ox developed sore feet and 
was traded for a partly broken steer at Fort Ellice. The 
steer proved to be very partially broken and, after upset¬ 
ting the cart several times, was sold and David McDougall 
carried the bibb aid freight thereafter. (14) The journey 

(14) McOowan, D., “Hill-Top Tales", McMillan Company, 

Toronto - 1348. 124f. 

took 104 days. (13) The family prepared to spend the winter 
(13) Interview - Mr. C.E. Sibbald, Cochrane, January 1951* 

















t 




















i " - 













14 


in Morley. Unfortunately the Rev. George McDougall lost his 
life in a blizzard that winter and plans for the mission 
among the Blood Indians were delayed several years, but Mr. 
Sibbald remained and taught school in Morley. (16) In 1879 
(16; McGowan, D., loc. cit. 

Mr. Bibbald left the school and under his guidance a small 
sawmill was established by the McDougalls which supplied the 
first lumber for the buildings in Galgary. (17; Mr. Sibbald 

(17) MacLean, J., op. cit. 86. 

farmed for many years and then spent his late years in 
Banff. He died in 1934 at the age of one hundred and one 
and is buried in the little mission cemetery at Morley. His 
tombstone bears the inscription, w Jirst School Teacher in 
the West - 1873”. (18) 

(18) Appendix B, note (1), further history of the Sibbalds. 

The people mentioned above were the pioneers of 
this area. Most of them came to offer their services to the 
Indians and they established the first small nucleus for the 
larger settlement that followed. "The Morley mission was 
sustained by a splendid band of native Christians, true in 
their faith, loyal to the Government, honest in their deal¬ 
ings with the white race, and friendly toward all". (19) 

(19) MacLean, J., op. cit., 87 . 

The task of maintaining peace among Blackfoot and Stoney and 
keeping order in the new settlement was greatly facilitiated 
by the establishment of the Mounted Police Post in Galgary 




















15 


in 1875 and the signing of Treaty in 1877* 

In his extensive travels in Eastern Canada, the Rev. 
John McDougall continually extolled the merits of this new 
land into which he had helped lead the way. (20) In the 


(20) Appendix B, note ( 2 ), further history of the McDougalls. 
1880 f s many followed in his footsteps. The extensive Coch¬ 
rane Ranch was established twenty-five miles east of Morley 
and many smaller ranches sprang up between these two places. 
The railway was pushed through the region and it gave the 
final impetus to settlement on a large scale. 

The construction of the first Canadian railway to 
the Pacific through the Bow valley and the Kicking Horse 
Pass was an event of major importance to the Cochrane dis¬ 
trict. Large scale settlement was not possible until the 
railway penetrated this region. Throughout the l870 f s it 
seemed a foregone conclusion that the railway would be 
built through the Yellowhead Pass some two hundred miles 
north of the Bow valley. (21) After the project was handed 

(21) Roe, F.G., “An Unsolved Problem of Canadian History** 

The Canadian Historical Association Report - 1?36* 60. 

over to the syndicate, the route through the Bow valley and 

Pass was decided on. (22) Several reasons for this change 


t22) The syndicate was composed of J.J. Hill, Lord Mount 

Stephen, Lord Stratheona and others. It was formed in 
1878 and bought the St. Paul and Pacific Railway. Most 
of these associates were instrumental in building the 
C.P.R. In 1883, J.J. Hill sold his interests in the C. 
P.R. and retired from the directorate. 

Morgan, H.J., “Canadian Men and Women of the Time**, 
Briggs, Toronto - 1898. 463. 















16 


were advanced at the time. Mr. F. G. Hoe gives a number of 
these, such as the representations of wealthy cattle compa¬ 
nies in the south, the fear that another company would build 
between the northern line and the International Boundary if 
the C• P. R. built through the Yellowhead Pass, the fact 
that the Kicking Horse route was shorter, and the ability 
of J. Macoun in championing the southern line at the syndi¬ 
cate’s meeting in St* Paul in l88l. (25) Macoun makes an 
(25) Hoe, F.G., op. cit., 68, 6?, 70. 

interesting statement with respect to this meeting. He had 
told Mr. J. J. Hill of his experiences on the prairie and 
the easy route to be found to the mountains. “Years after 
this, Mr. Fleming told me that for good or for evil, I had 
sent the road into the Bow River Pass**. (24) Roe believes 

(24) Macoun, J., H Autobiography* 1 , Field Naturalists’ Club, 
Ottawa - 1922. 185. 

that none of these reasons for the change in plans is sat¬ 
isfactory. (25) He suggests that the railway was built 

(25) Hoe, F.G., op. cit. 70. 

through the Bow Pass because the northern sections were 
already largely inhabited and the railway was not favoura¬ 
ble toward the idea of increasing the value of other people’s 
townsite properties. They preferred to own and develop their 
own. (26) It is evident that the matter is still “An Unsolved 

(26) Ibid., 75. 










r 


: 













17 


Problem in Canadian History"• 

The coming of the railroad resulted in a new orien¬ 
tation. Mitford and Cochrane were established and the first 
of a series of disruptions in the earlier unity of the area 
occurred. As these new towns grew up, the centre of gravity 
shifted to them. Morley could no longer be regarded as an 
integral part of the Cochrane district. (27) However, af- 
(27) Appendix A, map (2). 

ter the establishment of Morley and before the construction 
of the railway, extensive settlement had taken place. One 
of the most interesting features of this early settlement 
was the establishment of the Cochrane ranch, the history of 
which will now be examined. 







CHAPIER III 


THE COCHRANE RANCH 

In 1872, in an effort to encourage the settlement 

and development of western lands, the Dominion Government 

passed the first land act providing for the granting to 

settlers of the land adjacent to their farms for grazing 

purposes. This act was broadened in 1876 to allow for the 

granting of leases to anyone. Tracts of land, generally 

not in excess of one hundred thousand acres, could be 

leased by individuals or companies at the rate of one cent 

per acre per year. In order to assist the leasers in 

stocking their land, the Government removed the duty on 

cattle imported from the United States. (1) By l88o op- 

(1) R. W. Murchie, "Agricultural Progress on the Prairie 
Frontier", Volume V of Canadian Frontiers of Settle¬ 
ment, MacMillan Co., Toronto - 1936. 34. 

tions had been taken on several huge tracts in southern 

Alberta but it was not until l88l that the first large 

herds of cattle were brought in to stock them. 

In the early history of ranching in southern Alber¬ 
ta the strongly organized and heavily capitalized ranching 
companies greatly overshadowed the individually owned ran¬ 
ches. Generally, English or Eastern Canadian capitalists 
formed a ranching company, subscribed the capital invest¬ 
ment, took up an extensive lease, purchased a large herd of 
cattle in the United States to stock the lease and launched 







. 







■ ■ ..... - . 

. . ■ . . . . . , ; 






19 


a large scale ranching enterprise in a short time. Indivi¬ 
dual ranchers, on the other hand, were often hampered by a 
lack of capital and were forced to expand much more slowly. 
The great ranching companies gave the industry a tremendous 
impetus at its very outset and had very soon established an 
economically sound foundation for the future development of 
ranching in southern Alberta. 

The u Cochrane Ranche Company (limited) ,, , whose 
holdings lay in the area under consideration, was the first 
of these great ranching companies. The Company was incor¬ 
porated by the Dominion Government on May 14, l88l, although 
it had been formed some time earlier. (2) Senator M. H. 

(,2) "Statutes of Canada 11 , Volume 1, 1882. cxxv. 

Cochrane was President and his son, W. if. Cochrane, was 
manager. The company also included Hugh MacKay, merchant, 
William Lawrence, manufacturer, William Cassils, Gentleman, 
William Hwing, seedsman, and Charles Cassils, manufacturer, 
all of the city of Montreal. It was capitalized at five 
hundred thousand dollars. Major James Walker, a former 
North West Mounted Police inspector, was appointed local 
manager and Dr. D. M. McEachren was made resident general 
manager. (2) The Company f s lease consisted of those parts 

(3) Dr. MciSachren had a very interesting career. He es¬ 
tablished the Montreal Veterinarian College in 1866 
and was principal and professor of Veterinarian medi¬ 
cine and surgery for many years. It was the first 
institution of this kind in Canada. In l8?0 he was 








20 


appointed dean of the new faculty of veterinarian 
Science at McGill. He was chief inspector of livestock 
in Canada from 187 b until his retirement in 1902. He 
was responsible for the very successful cattle quaran¬ 
tine system used in Canada. The importance of this 
achievement cannot be overestimated - particularly in 
a rapidly developing country like Canada in the last 
century, when great numbers of cattle were being im¬ 
ported to stock new ranches. Dr. McEachren was mana¬ 
ger and vice-president of the Walrond Hanche Company 
for many years. 

Morgan, "Canadian Men and Women of the Time 11 , Briggs, 
Toronto-1912. 763. 

His connection with the Cochrane Hanche company was 
more tenuous. It may be assumed that he was appointed 
regional manager because of his qualifications as an 
authority on livestock although there is no evidence 
that he had had any practical experience in raising 
cattle on the range. It must be added that, although 
his influence on the Cochrane Hanche was not advanta¬ 
geous, the walrond ranch was very successful. 


of township 24 and 25, range 3, north of the Elbow river; 
townships 25 and 26 , range 4; and the east half of town¬ 
ships 25 and 26, range 5, all west of the 5th meridian. It 
was subsequently found that the lease contained over one 
hundred and nine thousand acres. (4) The ranch headquarters 


(4) Letter, MM/TEL 142709-3, dated November 28, 1950, De¬ 
partment of Resources and Development, Ottawa, G. E. B. 
Sinclair, Chief, Lands Division. 

Although in excess of the maximum acreage allowed, no 
adjustment was made. Strangely enough a further lease, 
to be discussed later, was granted the Company. 


were established one mile west of the present town of 
Cochrane. 


Senator M. H. Cochrane, its founder, was the driving 
personality behind the Cochrane Hanche Company. Mathew 
Henry Cochrane was born at Hillhurst Farm, Compton, Quebec, 










... •, 




« 





21 


in 1823. He took an early interest in farming, but at the 
age of eighteen, he went to Boston and established a leather 
business. In 18,54 he returned to Canada and, in partnership 
with Cassils and Company of Montreal, opened a boot and shoe 
factory. By 18?8 this business had a gross yearly income of 
half a million dollars. 

It was however as a successful breeder of improved 
grades of cattle that he was best known. In this respect 
his reputation v/as world wide. In 1864 h© purchased Hill- 
hurst Farm from his father and three years later obtained 
the services of Simon Beattie, an outstanding judge of cat¬ 
tle, as farm manager and adviser. With the help of Simon 
Beattie, Mr. Cochrane set out to secure the best Shorthorn 
cattle that could be bought. In 1867 he purchased two out¬ 
standing animals in Britain - the famous cow "Rcsedal©", 
who had no peer in the English show rings, and ’’Baron Booth 
of Lancaster”, a bull calf. "Rosedale" attained a greater 
celebrity than has ever been achieved by any cow on this 
continent. She was the sensation of every show. "Baron 
Booth" subsequently passed into the hands of a cattle 
breeder in Illinois and his record as a show animal and a 
sire brought about a revolution in the Shorthorn industry 
of the United States mid-west. 

In 1868, Mr. Cochrane imported the first of the 
famous "Bates" cattle into Canada. There were eleven head, 



. 


* . 

- . ■. ... . , . . . . 


, ' 

I 

* 

- 

~ 



* 




* 






' 


. 







22 

and one of them, "Duchess 97th", cost a thousand guineas, 
the highest price that had ever been paid for a cow. 

"Duchess 97th" was later sold to a New York breeder for a 
record seventeen thousand nine hundred dollars. From then 
on Mr. Cochrane carried on a campaign of importing the 
best English Shorthorns and selling them on this continent. 
There seems to have been no shrewder dealer in Shorthorns 
during the history of this breed of cattle. 

In 1882 Senator Cochrane abandoned the breeding of 
Shorthorns for a time and went into Aberdeen-Angus and 
Hereford cattle, importing some of the finest specimens of 
these breeds then available. He also imported choice lots 
of Southdown, Cotswold, Leicester and Lincoln sheep. A 
number of excellent Suffolk horses and Berkshire pigs were 
also brought to Canada. 

Senator Cochrane’s contribution to the improvement 
of Canadian, and United States, livestock cannot be over¬ 
estimated. He had the courage, and the money, to buy the 
best animals. He was a pioneer in this field and his pur¬ 
chases made available to this continent’s livestock 
breeders the finest breeding stock of the period. 

He was called to the Senate in October 1872 . Be¬ 
sides his interests in livestock, the boot and shoe 
factory and the Cochrane ranch, he was a vice president of 
the Eastern Townships Bank, a governor of the Sherbrooke 

















23 


Protestant Hospital, a trustee of Bishop*s College, Lennox- 
ville, and a member of the Council of Agriculture in Quebec, 
Senator Cochrane died in 1303* (3) 

(5) Morgan, R.J., "Canadian Men and ttfomen of the Time", 
Briggs, ‘foronto - 1838* 

Marshall, D., "Shorthorn Cattle in Canada", Dominion 
Shorthorn Breeder’s Association - 1332* 113f. 

In the spring of 1881, plans were made to purchase 
the first herd of cattle for the Cochrane Ranche* Major 
Walker was sent to Montana, where he obtained six thousand 
eight hundred head at an average price of eighteen dollars 
per head with the understanding that the Montana ranchers 
from whom they were bought would deliver them to the boun¬ 
dary* (6) The I. G* Baker Company contracted to drive the 

(6) F. White’s, "General Notes" - a small memorandum book 
in which general notes and copies of Cochrane ranch 
contracts were recorded. Mr. White records that 6.199 
head of cattle were purchased, at a cost of $124,7oQ*0J?. 
Mr. White also kept a diary, which is being used as a 
source for much of this chapter. The diary and the 
"General Notes" are in the possession of Mr. A. R. 
McTavish, j?08 - 3th Ave., W., Calgary. 

cattle from the boundary to the Cochrane ranch for two dol¬ 
lars and fifty cents per head. 

Prank Strong, foreman for the Baker Company, was in 
charge of the drive and was assisted by thirty cowboys with 
three hundred head of horses. In order to make as rapid a 
trip as possible, Strong divided the herd in two. The "dry" 
herd, consisting of steers, was sent ahead and was driven at 
the rate of fifteen or more miles per day. The second group 







V-v 




■ 



rj-fo 


fa ■ 


t 








Q 











24 


made up of cows and calves, was moved more slowly although 
it often covered fourteen miles in a day, Kelly says that 


"this drive has remained the criterion for hard driving, 
and no such great numbers of cattle have since been moved 
so rapidly by trail", {T) A number of wagons came along 

(7) Kelly, L.V., "The Rangemen", Briggs, Toronto - 1913. 

147* 

behind the herds to pick up the calves that had fallen 
from exhaustion, hundreds of cattle were left to perish 
along the way. 

The herds were pushed across the Bow river near the 
site of the present Mewata Park in Calgary and turned over 
to Major Walker and his men. Several of the Baker cowboys 
remained to work for Major Walker and quite a number of the 
saddle bourses were sold to the Cochrane Ranche Company. 

The Baker Company had contracted to brand the cattle before 
turning them over to Major Walker but had been unable to do 
so because of the speed with which the drive was carried 
out. As a result, the cattle were accepted after a hair 
brand and a proper branding was to be given at the home 
ranch. It was late in the fall when the herd arrived how¬ 
ever, and branding was postponed until the following spring. 

Winter came on before the cattle had a chance to 
recover from the hard drive and, although it was not an un¬ 
usually cold winter, many died. (8) The drive and the effect 

(8) Appendix C, note (1) - Cochrane ranch losses. 












■ 







■ . 

. 














. 

. 






25 


of the winter on the herd provided valuable information to 
the cattlemen of the west on the relative endurance of the 
various breeds of cattle. Black Polled Angus cattle proved 
most sturdy, Herefords rated second and Shorthorns were the 
least hardy. 

In the spring of 1882 the hair brand that had been 
put on the cattle the previous fall disappeared with their 
winter coats. The Company directors ordered Major Walker to 
round up every unbranded animal on the Cochrane range and 
brand it with the Cochrane 11 C H . Several settlers in the 
area assisted for a time but, when they found that their own 
unbranded animals that were on the Cochrane range were to be 
included in the round-up, they quit in a body. The settlers 
were incensed at the prospect of losing their own cattle 
and, in order to avoid financial ruin, they set to work 
searching for scattered groups of cattle that had been missed 
in coulees and ravines during the general round-up. Any that 
were found were taken home and branded with the settler*s own 
brand. Quite a number of cattle ended up with the wrong brand 
and It is not unlikely that the settlers came out with some¬ 
what augmented herds. 

Major Walker had been hampered in his management of the 
ranch on several occasions by the necessity of obeying orders 
from the company*s office in the east or from Dr. HcSachren, 
who was his immediate superior and also manager of the Walrond 



26 


ranch further south. These orders were often ill advised, 
since they were not based on sound ranching experience nor 
in accord with the conditions existing on the ranch itself 
at the time. During a trip to Montana in the summer of 1882, 
Major Walker was forced to follow a course of action that he 
found entirely against his better judgement and as a result, 
he tendered his resignation. 

Major Walker had arranged for the purchase of four 
thousand three hundred head of cattle from the Poindexter 
and Orr ranch in Montana. (9) The deal was temporarily sus- 

(9) F. white’s Diary (F.W.D. hereafter), October 21, 1882. 
pended when Dr. McSachren arranged for the purchase of the 
new herd by the I. G-. Baker Company. This Company was plan¬ 
ning to stock an Alberta ranch for itself and Dr. McSachren 
felt that the Cochrane herd could be more profitably pur¬ 
chased in conjunction with the Baker herd. The arrangements 
were tentative and opposed by Major Walker. The Baker Com¬ 
pany finally abandoned the idea and Major Walker returned to 
the Poindexter and Orr ranch to find that the price of cattle 
had risen in his absence. The herd cost twenty-five thousand 
dollars more than it would have if the deal had been completed 
earlier and valuable time had been lost. (10) Major Walker 

(10) Appendix c, note (2), for a copy of the contract between 
Poindexter and Orr and Major Walker. 

was so incensed that he sent in his resignation, to take 

effect when a successor could be found. 








. 









. 

* 






. 


. 












* 

. 








27 


Poindexter and Orr undertook to deliver the new herd 
to the Cochrane ranch at a cost of two dollars and seventy- 
five cents per head. Deliveries were to begin July 1, but 
several delays occurred and the herd did not arrive until 
October. Poindexter was in charge of the drive and found it 
necessary to move rapidly to avoid being caught by an early 
snowstorm. The plan failed. At Pish Creek, near the present 
Midnap ore, the weary herd ran into a bitter snowstorm and 
could proceed no further. Poindexter wanted to hold the 
animals there for a month until they had recovered from the 
long drive and the snow cleared, but Major Walker, acting on 
orders from the east, insisted that delivery be carried out 
as soon as possible. Poindexter obtained a number of hardy 
steers from nearby settlers and sent them ahead to break a 
trail through the snowdrifts. The exhausted Cochrane herd 
was forced along behind them. The cattle were turned over 
to Major Walker on October 20. (11) 

Poindexter was an experienced rancher but had been 
forced to move the herd too fast owing to the delay in pur¬ 
chasing it and was later forced to continue the drive after 
the snow fall because of the orders from the Cochrane Ranche 
Company^ directors, however, the Company had begun to 
learn a lesson. In a contract with the 1. G. Baker Company 
signed on September 5, 1882, the Cochrane Ranch Company 
agreed to pay forty dollars per head for some four hundred 






. •• ' ' - 

. 

« 

- 

■ 

. ' 


< ' . V 






. . •. : ' 

. 










. 

. 




♦ 

. 










. 


. 








. 




28 


and fifty to five hundred and fifty head of three year old 
steers, at the same time sepcifying that the herd was t o be 
delivered to the Cochrane ranch and the drive was not to 
occupy less than three weeks. (12) 

(12) Appendix C, note (3), for & copy of this contract. 

On September 7, 1882, Frank White, a former rail¬ 
road man and bookkeeper, arrived at the Cochrane ranch to 
assume the duties of treasurer. On October 7, Mr. W. D. 
Kerfoot, a Virginian and an experienced rancher, arrived to 
take charge of the livestock and replace Major Walker. (13?) 

(13) Appendix C, note (4), for a copy of the contract be¬ 
tween W. D. Kerfoot and the Cochrane Ranche Company. 

Major Walker subsequently established a very successful 

lumber business in Calgary. 

The winter of 1882-83 was a disastrous one for the 
Cochrane ranch. The storm mentioned above lasted until 
October 13 and was followed by a slight thaw that softened 
the snow. This thaw was followed by a severe cold spell and 
a hard crust formed on the aaow. The cattle found it im¬ 
possible to reach the grass .and drifted continually. The 
directors in the east were advised of the condition of the 
range and the lack of feed but insisted that the stock be 
held on the Cochrane lease. Camps of cowboys were estab¬ 
lished at the mouth of the Fish creek, at Calgary and along 
Nose creek to hold the herd. The whole winter was spent in 
holding the starving herd on the home range. This blundering 











% 


■ 






• ' . iC: V 








2 ? 


policy was followed in spite of the fact that there was ex¬ 
cellent winter range at Blackfoot Crossing and the Little 
Bow where only a small amount of snow fell throughout the 
winter. 

The winter of 1881-82 had been rather mild and the 
Cochrane herd had come through it without serious losses. 

As a result, no preparation had been made for the following 
winter. No hay had been put up and no one seems to have 
considered the possibility of a hard winter and the disas¬ 
trous effect that such a winter would have on the cattle. 

The inability of the local manager to follow his own ini¬ 
tiative compounded the disaster. The extent of the losses 
of Cochrane cattle was not fully appreciated until June, 
1883 , when the snow finally disappeared. 

Kelly, describing the Cochrane losses, says, "Dead 
bodies were heaped in every coulee, thousands of head hav¬ 
ing perished. Some of the long ravines were so filled with 
carcasses that a man could go from the top to the bottom, 
throughout its entire length, and never have to step off a 
dead body. Indians made a very good wage for some time, 
skinning the animals for twenty-five cents each. Out of the 
twelve thousand head that had been purchased and placed on 
the Cochrane range, there remained now but a scant four 
thousand, counting natural increase." (14) Other ranches in 
(14) Kelly, op. cit., 133. 
















/J'J ;; J 























& . 


• t 


, 






. 








30 


southern Alberta suffered but a fraction of the losses of 
the Cochrane ranch chiefly because of a more practical poli¬ 
cy of letting the cattle drift to areas where they could 
graze. 

In 1882 the Cochrane Ranch Company started a butcher 
shop in Calgary as a retail outlet for their beef. A camp 
was established at Nose Creek to hold the cattle for this 
shop and also to supply the beef required to fill the North 
West Mounted Police contract. About twenty steers a month 
were sold from this camp. Another camp at the Sarcee res¬ 
erve supplied the twenty-five head per month required to 
feed the Indians there. There were two other camps as well, 
one at Blackfoot Crossing, which supplied one hundred and 
thirty head per month to the Blackfoot Indians, and a second 
one at Morleyville, where twenty head of cattle were required 
each month for the Stoney. (lj>) 


(15) A. R. McTavish’s notes and comments on Prank White’s 
Diary, Canadian Cattlemen, Tol. ?, No.l, June 1^46. 8. 
See also Appendix 0, below note (5), copy of contract 
between Cochrane Ranche Company and the N«W.M.P., and 
note (6), remarks on the contracts with the Dominion 
Government for the Indian Reserves. 


In the spring of 1883 , the directors of the Cochrane 
Ranche Company decided that the winters in the area west of 
Calgary were too rigorous and a new lease was taken up in 
the Waterton Lakes area, southwest of Macleod. This new 
ranch was made up of land taken over from the ’’Rocky Moun¬ 
tain Cattle Company” and the ’’Eastern Township Ranch Company”, 

































t 
























31 


who appear not to have stocked their ranches. It consisted 
of one hundred and six thousand five hundred acres. (16) 

(16) Letter, BMM/IH, previously quoted. (4) 

The lease west of Calgary was retained and, in fact was ex¬ 
tended by the addition of that part of townships 23 and 24 
north of the Elbow river, and the south half of township 25, 
range 2. (16) By May arrangements had been completed for 
the transfer of the remaining cattle to the new range. Mr. 
White and a new local manager named Ca Sous were in charge 
of the move and of the new ranch. Mr. Kerfoot remained as 
manager of the ranch west of Calgary. 

Mr. White remained with the Company until December, 
1884, when he returned to the Cochrane area and established 
a sheep ranch of his own. (17) The Cochrane Ranche Company 

(17) F. W. D., December 15, 1884. 

was more successful on the new range and, largely because 
of the success of Senator Cochrane In procuring fine breed¬ 
ing stock, it built up one of the finest herds of beef cat¬ 
tle in southern Alberta. This land was subsequently pur¬ 
chased outright by the Company and was held until 1506 when 
it was sold to the Mormon Church for six million dollars in 
the largest land deal In Alberta to that time. 

The Cochrane Ranche Company pastured horses on 
the lease west of Calgary through the remainder of 1883* In 
June there were four hundred and ninety head of horses on 









u 
















32 


this range* (18) Most of these horses had been purchased 
(18) F. White's, ''General Notes". 

from the Montana ranchers that had sold the Company cattle. 
In the course of the next few years the number was increased 
to nearly one thousand head through local purchases and im¬ 
portations. In this respect, it is interesting to notice 
that Senator Cochrane is credited with importing the first 
thoroughbred stallion into the present province of Alberta. 
(,1?) In 1883 plans were made to import a flock of sheep to 

(.19) J. Grant-MacEwen, "Horse History in the West", Canadi¬ 
an Cattlemen, Vol* 7, No. 4, March, 1943. 134. 

further utilize the range. 

In February, 1884, the original shareholders of the 

Cochrane Banche Company formed a new Company known as the 

"British American Ranche Company (limited)". (20) The for- 

(20) Appendix C, note (7), for a copy of the Charter of the 
"British American Banche Company". 

mer Company retained the leases around Waterton lakes and 

sold the leases and improvements west of Calgary to the new 

Company for the sum of fifty-five thousand dollars* (21) 

(21) F. W. D., February 19, 1884. 

This was a subterfuge to avoid losing one or the other of 
the leases should the Dominion Government decide to enforce 
the legislation that limited companies or individuals to 
one hundred thousand acrease of leasehold. 

In July, 1884, Senator Cochrane came to the west, 














* 

' 








- 


















33 


and, accompanied by Mr. Kerfoot and some hired men, purchased 
eight thousand head of sheep in Montana. Mr. Kerfoot drove 
the flock to the home range, and arrived in a blinding Sep¬ 
tember snowstorm. Two hundred head of pedigreed Shropshire 
Down rams, imported from England, were also driven in. (22) 
(22) Kelly, op. cit., 169. 

Mr. A. E. Cross was hired as bookkeeper and veterinarian 
surgeon about this time. 

The sheep did well the follov/ing winter. Some hay 
had been put up, but it was not required. The spring was a 
different matter however. A prairie fire, starting near the 
mouth of Beaupre creek, swept down over a portion of the 
flock and destroyed a thousand head. Misfortune struck a- 
gain a short time later. The flock on the northern portion 
of the lease was held at night in a large corral near Coch¬ 
rane lake. The night of April 2nd was stormy and a driving 
snowstorm developed after dark. The swirling snow drifted 
inside the corral until, by morning, the corral was full. 

The sheep walked out over the top and wandered down wind 
until they reached the lake three miles away. Hundreds were 
drowned before the herder arrived. Three hundred dead sheep 
were pulled out of the lake after the remainder were driven 
back from the water. (25) A further loss was experienced 
(25) Ibid., 178. 

when several hundred ewes died during lambing. 






. • 









34 


Mr. Kerfoot managed the ranch for another year. He 
seems not to have been happy, however, for he had the usual 
cattleman 1 s antipathy for sheep. The increasing importance 
of the horse breeding enterprise offered some compensation 
but the continued practice of the Company directors of ig¬ 
noring advice and then holding the local manager responsible 
for their misguided policy resulted in Mr. Kerfoot’s resig¬ 
nation in I 887 . He had signed a five year contract with the 
British American Hanche Company, however, and the Company 
withheld his salary. A lawsuit followed and was not finally 
ended until April, 1888. Mr. Kerfoot won the case. He went 
into the ranching business on his own in 1887 and will be 
heard of again in a subsequent chapter. ( 24) 

(24) Interview, Mr. A. D. Kerfoot, a son, Cochrane, 

January, 1951. 

M. B. H. Cochrane, a son of Senator Cochrane, took 
over the manager’s position when Mr. Kerfoot left. The 
price of wool and mutton declined more each year and the 
Company decided to discontinue the sheep ranch. In 1887 a 
new set of buildings had been built on the south side of 
the Bow river slightly to the east of the present Glenbow 
station. The horse breeding enterprise was concentrated at 
this new headquarters and the sheep were kept on the north 
side of the Bow at the old ranch site. 

On August 29, 1888, the Calgary Herald carried an 
advertisement advising its readers of the proposed sale of 









.% ' 


. 

















35 


seven thousand head of sheep and forty-one thousand acres of 
leasehold by the British American Hanche Company. The com¬ 
pany had decided to concentrate on horse breeding. A new 
Company, known as the "Bow River Horse Hanch Company” was 
formed and received the British American Hanche Company 
leases south of the Bow river and east of Jumping Pound 
Creek, as well as the band of horses. The land north of 
the river and the sheep were sold in October. Prank White 
had established his sheep ranch by this time on the land 
south of the river and west of Jumping Pound creek that had 
previously been held by the Company. Most of the lease 
north of the river was taken over by new settlers, but the 
purchasers of the sheep are not recorded. 

Mr. G. E. Goddard was bookkeeper on the new Bow River 

Horse Ranch for a time and then became manager. In l8?4 in 

partnership with Messrs. E. H. Warner and W. P. Warner, he 

purchased the lease and the stock from the Company. (25) 

(25) Letter, EMM/IH 142705-3, dated January 31, U51, 
Department of Resources and Development, C. K. Le 
Capelain, Acting Chief, Lands Division. 

This marked the end of Senator Cochrane’s interests in the 

area under consideration. 

The present day town of Cochrane was named by the 
Canadian Pacific Railway in honour of Senator Cochrane. 
Cochrane lake was named in honour of 1. F. Cochrane, a son 
of Senator Cochrane, who had been employed at the Cochrane 












' 












36 


Ranch in 1883* F. Cochrane later became manager of the 
ranch near Waterton lakes and the success of this ranch was 
largely due to his ability as a stockman. 

The original Cochrane ranch house still stands. It 
is situated one hundred yards west of the present Cochrane 
Creamery, about one mile west of the town. It is a log 
structure and, at one time, had a sod roof. It is still in¬ 
habited. The old barn has fallen into disrepair. These two 
buildings are the only tangible remains of this huge pioneer 
ranch. 

The Cochrane ranch and the British American ranch 
retarded the early development of the town of Cochrane. The 
site had been granted to the Canadian Pacific Railway in 
1885 but few people settled there because the ranch lay all 
around it and there was no nearby rural population. In fact, 
in the l880 f s it seemed possible that there never would be 
much of a town there. A few miles to the west, the little 
town of Hit ford had sprung up and was endangering the 
istence of Cochrane. The rivalry of these two towns and the 
subsequent decline of Mitford were important developments in 
the early history of the Cochrane area. 



CHAPTER IV 


THE TOWN OF MITFORD 

The history of the short life of the town of Mitford 
is particularly interesting because of the way in which it 
is inextricably linked with the activities of the family 
that founded it. T. B. H. Cochrane, son of Admiral Sir 
Thomas Cochrane of England, and his wife Lady Adela Coch¬ 
rane, daughter of the Earl of Stadbroke, were the founders 
of Mitford. The Cochranes were a remittance family who had 
come to Canada in 1883 and acquired a ranch consisting of 
sane fifty-five thousand acres of leasehold centred on t own- 
ship 13, range 4, southwest of High River. In 188? this 
lease was exchanged for one around township 17, range 6, 
west of the 4th Meridian. (1) Neither of the leases ap- 

(1) Letter, EMM/IH 14270? - 3, dated November 28, 1?30 and 
quoted in Chapter III. This second ranch, which con¬ 
sisted of fifty-one thousand acres, would be near the 
junction of the Little Bow and Belly rivers. 

pears to have been stocked. In 1886 the Cochranes decided 
to enter the lumber business and constructed a sawmill on 
the subsequent site of the town of Mitford. 

Prior to the arrival of the Cochrane family, ef¬ 
forts had been made to develop the coal beds in the area. 

In 1885 a Mr. Chaffey of Galgaiy purchased the "Big Hill 
location” and formed the 11 Bow River Mining Company.” (2) 

(2) Calgary Herald, January 2?, 1883. The "Big Hill loca- 













38 


tion" was the name given to a particularly promising 
coal site on the south side of the Bow river opposite 
the mouth of Coal creek. 

A coal seam was struck a few feet below the surface. Mr. 
Chaffey became associated with a Mr. Merrill in 1886 and 
then dropped out of the Company a short time later. The 
mine was not a success. Late in 1886 it was flooded and, 
in January 1887, Merrill removed the machinery and aban¬ 
doned the mine. (3) The location was then sold to Mr. J. 

(3) W. D., January 21, 1887. 

W. Vaughan. 

Larly in 1886, Tom Cochrane completed his sawmill. 
It was located three miles west of the present town of 
Cochrane, on the north side of the Bow river a short dis¬ 
tance from the point where the Canadian Pacific Railway 
crosses to the south bank. The mill was capable of turn¬ 
ing out thirty thousand board feet of lumber per day. It 
was proposed to run a narrow gauge railway from the mill to 
the timber stands in Grand Valley. Tom Cochrane was asso¬ 
ciated with Hugh Graham, Francis White and Archibald 
McVittie of the ?, Calgary Lumber Company 11 and contracted to 
supply them with lumber. 

The sawmill went into operation that summer. (4) 

(4) F. w. D., July 29, 1886. Mr. White records that he 
procured lumber from the mill on this date. 

The logs were hauled from Grand valley by teamsters until 

the next year. In the meantime a small steam locomotive 





















. 

















was purchased ani work began on the track. A steel track 
was laid northward up Horse creek valley for one mile and 
then westward to Grand valley. The track was then extended 
nine miles up Grand valley, where a turnabout for the engine 
was built. The remainder of the track was made of wooden 
rails and extended northward to the Dogpound creek. Small 
horse-drawn cars were used to haul the logs along the 
wooden railway to the turnabout. (3 j 


(3) Calgary Herald, June 30, 1807* -1 short article men¬ 

tioning the trial run of the steam engine and Tom 
Cochrane*s intention to have the railway completed in 
July. 

The steam engine was a small single-drive-wheel type. 
The pistons were mounted vertically and the boiler was 
surmounted by an extremely high smokestack. The engine 
was affectionately known as “Betsy 11 , and the railway 
track as “Betsy 1 s track". 

See Appendix A, map (3), for the route of “Betsy's 
track". 


There were several small stands of fir on the west 
side of Grand valley about five miles north of the Bow 
river. However, the ties required for the steel track and 
the ties and rails required for the wooden track very near¬ 
ly used them up. Further north, on the Dogpound, the timber 
was wholly spruce and pine. The result was that the best 
timber was used in constructing the enterprise and there was 
little fir left for lumber. 

The timber limits lay in townships 27 , 28 and 29, 
range 3, and part of townships 28 and 27 , range 6. (6) The 





* 

...... . 

... * 

■ 

, 

■. ■ v ' .1 rj ..-,/V ... ./ ...' .1 t" : CIV.^v 

* 

■ t : ... .. J-. . ,. , 

. - . V - ... ■ . . 

* 

. 

, 

... 



. 









, 



/ til ]| 

. 










40 


(,6) Letter, EMM/IH 14270? - 3, dated November 28, 1?30, 
previously quoted. 

logs were hauled down the wooden track by local settlers 
who worked at a daily wage. The men were poorly supervised 
and the enterprise as a whole was poorly organized. The 
cars were continually jumping off the track and, since the 
men were paid regardless of the amount of work done, no one 
helped the teamster whose car became derailed. The result 
was that hours were spent in idleness waiting for the track 
to be cleared. "Betsy” would be kept waiting at the turna¬ 
bout and the mill would be idle. Then too, "Betsy” showed 
an alarming tendency to jump the rails and often required 
several hours of work before being ready for operation a- 
gain. The grade from Mitford up the Horse creek valley was 
quite steep and the engine often ran away when returning to 
the sawmill with a load of logs. 

In 1887 the Cochrane’s house was finished. Lady 
Cochrane appears to have moved to Mitford about July of that 
year. (7) J. W. Vaughan was trying without much success to 

(7) F. W. D., July 1?, 1887 * First mention of Lady Cochrane, 
operate the coal mine. The shaft had been pumped out and 
some coal removed. (8) It was in this year too that the 

(8) Calgary Herald, June 24, 1887 . Report that a miner 
named Judd had been crushed to death in the workings. 

town received its name. It was named in honour of Mrs. 

Percy Mitford, a sister of the first Earl of Egerton. Mrs. 








- 









41 


Mitford was a great friend of Lady Cochrane’s and appears to 
have had a financial interest in some of the Cochrane enter¬ 
prises. It was not until 188? that a post office was estab¬ 
lished there. 

The site that Tom Cochrane chose for the little town 
he was about to build Isa striking example of his imprac¬ 
tical! ty. It was at the confluence of the Bow river and 
Horse creek, on a low bench some two hundred yards wide and 
one-half mile long# The steep hill to the north of the 
river and the town site abutted on the river at the west 
end of the bench and made entrance from the north or west 
very difficult. Horse creek valley was narrow, and it re¬ 
quired considerable labor to build the grade for “Betsy’s 
track”. On the east, the Canadian Pacific Railway occupied 
the only good approach to the town, and it too was on a 
sharp incline. At Mitford the railway and the river came 
together on a long angle and as a result, the flat between 
the river and the railway was very narrow. It was on this 
narrow flat that Tom Cochrane later built the store, the 
hotel and the saloon. The only ford across the river was 
rather treacherous and, of course, teams could not be taken 
across the railway bridge. On the south side of the river 
the hills rose sharply and there were no satisfactory build¬ 
ing sites. There is a certain picturesque beauty about the 
location but as a site for a town, particularly a town that 


■ 

. 


. 


■ 

■ :' .. ' . J v 

. 

. 

• 

- 

. 






. . ■ . ■ 

.. .• 

. 



s 



. . - 


■ . • . ' 








* 




j 


■ 




. 

- 

: ' 

• 







* 

















' 




« 






• 



. 


< 







. 










42 


it was hoped would expand, it was quite impossible. 

Late in 1887 , Mr. Vaughan abandoned the mine. He 
began to prospect the north side of the river around the 
mouth of Goal creek and soon found a promising seam just 
east of the creek about three-quarters of a mile above its 
mouth. A shaft was sunk but Mr. Vaughan was immediately 
faced with the problem of transporting the coal from the 
mine to the railway. The sawmill track passed up Grand 
valley a short distance north of the mine and seemed the 
obvious solution. In June 1888, Tom Cochrane and lie. Al¬ 
gernon St. Maur, who with Mrs. St. Maur was visiting the 
Cochranes at that time, purchased a two-thirds interest in 
the mine and constructed a spur from the mine to the saw¬ 
mill track. (5) 

(5) F.W. D., June 15, 1888. Mr. White refers to Mr. St. 
Maur as Lord St. Maur but the title is not listed in 
Sir John Bernard Burke’s “Peerage* 1 . 

Several buildings were put up in 1888. The Coch¬ 
ranes built a store, a livery stable and a hotel. (10) The 

(10) F. W. D., September 25 . First mention of the hotel. 
October 18. First mention of the store. 

Interview, C. Pedeprat, January 1551, Cochrane. The 
livery stable and the second group of bunkhouses were 
built the same year as the hotel. 

number of bunkhouses was very materially increased to pro¬ 
vide accommodation for the men in the mine. There were 
some private homes besides that of the Cochranes but the 








































43 


names of their owners are not recorded. Dr. Hayden, the 
first doctor in the area, opened a small drug store and of¬ 
fice that summer. (11) A man named Dejournel operated the 


(11) F. W. D., October 12, 1888. First mention of Dr. Hay¬ 
den. Interview, 0. Pedeprat - Mr. Pedeprat says that 
Dr. Hayden ran a small drug store and medical practice 
in Mitford for three years. Accidents in the mine and 
sawmill were numerous. Betsy, in particular, kept him 
busy, for she was always jumping the track and mangling 
the engineer or brakeman. 


store and hotel for T. Cochrane. 

Mrs. Algernon St. Maur, wife of Mr. St. Maur men¬ 
tioned above, kept a detailed diaiy of her experiences while 
visiting in the North West Territories and that portion 
which deals with the visit at Mitford is the best source of 
information on this pioneer town. (12) A number of excerpts 

(12) Mrs. Algernon St. Maur, “Impressions of a Tenderfoot 1 *, 
John Murray, London - 1890. 

that throw some light on the activities of the Cochranes and 
their neighbours and the nature of the country in which they 
lived are presented here, with comments where necessary. 

“May 31st - We have a beautiful view of the Rocky 
Mountains here, and on a fine morning it is difficult to 
believe they are sixty miles distant; we are surrounded by 
fine undulating prairie. The cattle are fat and sleek, 
thcugh they have had nothing but what they could find on 
the “range" all winter. The great drawback here is the 
frost at night; even in summer there is often enough to in¬ 
jure the potatoes and wheat. 











• 






44 

"Adela and I amused ourselves planting the garden; 
we sowed cabbages, lettuces, cauliflowers, carrots, beets 
and beans. 

"The soil is surprisingly rich; one digs nearly a 
yard deep, and still it is the same good brown loam every¬ 
where. 

"The sawmill and the house are close to the 0. P. R.; 
at the former fifty men are at work. Their wages are from 
#20 to "30 a month, and they are boarded as well. A private 
railway brings the logs down from the forest, they are sawn 
up here and put in the cars for market. 

"N-, Tom G—-—and Algernon have been busy 

this morning making a garden fence. They are also building 
a new hen-house; the latter requires to be well put together, 
to keep out the cold in winter, and has double walls, with 
saw-dust filled up between. Dug-out hen-houses with turf 
roofs also make warm shelter; only a few have stoves, and 
often the claws of the poor birds get frost bitten. The cat 
here has had her ears frozen off; fortunately they both are 
gone just at the same place, and give her the appearance of 
having her ears cropped." 

(.Torn G-was Tom Goehrane and Algernon was her husband, 

Mr. St. Maur. N-remains unknown, although it is possi¬ 

ble that he was the Earl of Nor bury who lived for a time 
with the Cochranes.) 





































4S 


"June 1st - Mr. Kerfoot, a neighbour, and one of the 
best riders and drivers in the North-West, drove Adela T s 
ponies in the buckboard. They have been on the prairies for 
six months; when "taken up" they often require re-breaking; 
one of them lay down twice, bucked, and made a great fuss. 
Mr. Kerfoot drove them patiently and well. The harness and 
buckboard, both of American make, were perfectly adapted to 
the rough roads and prairie work. These carriages, owing 
to the wide axle, are almost impossible to upset, and one 
can drive them where no English carriage could go. The har¬ 
ness enables the horses to go quite independently of each 
other; the pole-pieces, instead of being, as in England, 
fast to the head of the pole, are here attached to a short 
bar called the yoke, which works loosely on the end of It, 
and also gives the horses a straight pull in holding back. 

"We all started on the private railway to see the 
timber limits, which are fifteen miles distant. A truck 
was arranged for us to sit on in front of the engine, the 
latter pushing us along. The men in charge drove too fast, 
and when we had gone about three miles, we felt several 
great jolts, the truck had left the rails and upset; most 
fortunately for us, one of the wheels got wedged in the sand, 
and the brakeman, having put on the brakes, stopped the en¬ 
gine. For a few moments there was an awful feeling of sus¬ 
pense; we all expected the engine would come crashing down 







46 


on the top of us; happily, however, this did not occur, else 
we might all have been killed* On regaining our feet, we 
found the only person badly injured was the brakeman; he, 
poor fellow, lay under the ermine with three bad wounds in 
his head, and his ear almost severed from the scalp. With 
difficulty he was extricated from his perilous position, 

and while the G-s and Algernon remained with him, N- 

and I went for assistance.".. 

(Mrs. St. Maur speaks of running back to Mitford for the 
doctor.) 

"The doctor came quickly, a wagon followed, the 
poor fellow was soon in his little bed at the saw-mill, and, 
wonderful to relate, though so terribly injured, and with a 
badly fractured skull, he recovered. It is always much in 
favour of these men during illness that they have lived a 
hardy out-of-door life." 

"June 2nd - Drove to the British American Go’s sheep- 
ranche. The manager was away, but his housekeeper gave us 

luncheon; afterwards we went fishing." 

(S. B. H. Cochrane would be the manager at that time. Mrs. 
St. Maur gives a detailed account of the fishing party.) 

"June 3rd - The doctor who comes to see the man who 
was hurt in the engine, has travelled much, and was for a 
long time in the Hudson Bay Go’s service.. ..." 







c 


' 


V 





47 


(This would be Dr. Hayden. There follows a long passage on 
Esquimaux dogs, of which the doctor had a team while at 
Moose factory. Mrs. St. Maur speaks of seeing a fine pair 
of these dogs in Calgary. The owner had been offered £100 
for them but had refused to sell them.) 

"June 4th - 10 degrees of frost last night. 

"Algernon went for a ride with Mr. Kerfoot, and in 
the afternoon we all rode over to his horse-ranche. The 
horses are most clever in avoiding the gopher holes, and if 
given their heads they can go at any pace over them without 
making a mistake.. 

"At the ranche we saw more than a hundred horses. 
The corrals are wonderfully well arranged, three opening 
into each other. When the band of horses has been driven 
into the first, which is the largest, the horses required 
for branding or breaking are separated from the rest, and, 
the gate being opened, are turned into the second corral. 
The entrance into the third corral is by a very high strong 
gate, so arranged as to swing round against the side of 
this corral, with just space for a horse to stand between. 

A single horse is now let through this gate, which is swung 
around, holding him against the side of the third corral, 
so that he is helpless and cannot fight or hurt himself 
being branded or bridled..... 

(Mr. Kerfoot T s ranch was on the west side of Grand valley 


















I 












t 


„ ..... u 




. 

.* ' • ‘ ■' ■■■■■.* ■ r ■■ wiy U 'iui 

... 










48 


about six miles northwest of Mitford. Mrs. St. Maur notes 
that there was 10 degrees of frost the preceding night. It 
must be remembered that Mitford was on a bench a very few 
feet higher than the river. Low lying areas throughout the 
district are subject to these late frosts - as well as early 
frosts in the fall.) 

"June 6th - On the other side of the Bow river is a 
canon knovn as ‘the jumping pound*, over the edge of which 
the hunters used to drive the buffalo, and in this canon 
their bones still lie in places two or three feet deep; 
they are now being taken away and used for manure." 

(The jumping pound is a precipitous bank several hundred 
yards long and over one hundred feet high on the west side 
of Jumping Pound creek about one mile from the mouth of the 
creek. This, of course, is the origin of the name of the 
creek.) 

"A band of Blackfoot Indians passed to-day; the 
chief ‘Three Plumes* rode up to the house to show his per¬ 
mit, which is given by the Indian agent to enable them to 
leave their reservations for a stated time; this band had 
been on a visit to the Stony ^sic.) Indians. We have since 
heard that the guests on leaving stole thirty ponies. M 

"June 14th - Until this morning we have not seen the 
Bockies for nearly a week. 

"Innumerable wild flowers grown on the prairie; last 




49 


month there were anemones of all colours, and in a few weeks 
there will be masses of dog-rose and wild honeysuckle; it is 
a kind provision of nature that this wild rose is so hardy, 
it stands even the extreme cold of winter and grows from the 
root each year. The doctor, who is a botanist, sent a col¬ 
lection of wild flowers which he had made on the prairie to 
Kew Gardens, to be classified.... 

“We went to see the coal-mine which was discovered 
three years ago; the first traces of coal being seen at the 
mouth of a badger*s hole. Adela and I only went in as far 
as the end of the first gallery, where we met a man and 
horse bringing up a truck of coal to the mouth; the others 
all departed along a similar gallery, each carrying a Davy 
lamp; as yet there is little danger of gas, the workings 
being quite near the surface.” 

"June l8th - Adela r s sitting hens require a lot of 
running after; half wild, and fleet as hares, they appear 
to have a strange dislike to returning to their nest, so 
we have to get some of the men to help us to run them down. 

"Two ranchers came to luncheon to-day - true types, 

I should think, of ^western men*. I hear that their father 
in England is a rich man, but he seems to do but little for 
his sons. They work hard, even washing all their own 
clothes and cooking, and it is not therefore to be wondered 
at that they look rough. 



■ 









.50 


"The usual dress out here is a blue flannel shirt, 
with no collar, but a coloured handkerchief tied loosely 
round the neck, a buckskin shirt, a pair of leather *shaps* 
with fringes down the seams, worn over trousers, boots, 
and a broad brimmed felt hat, with a leather band round it, 
which is generally stamped with patterns and ornamented in 
sane way. 

" T Shap f is an abbreviation of the Mexican word 
f chaparajos f , and are long leather leggings. A lariat 
coiled at the horn of the Mexican saddle, a plaited leather 
bridle with a severe Spanish bit, and a pair of smart spurs, 
often silver-mounted, complete the cowboy’s outfit........ H 

"June 21st - To-day we visited the forest or timber 
limits, starting early. The ride was quite delightful, as 
we cantered up and down these limitless plains of grass, 
with the mountains stretching away into the dim distsince as 
far as the eye could reach, and extending in Canada alone 

for 800 miles..Tares of many shades, pea-vine, wild 

camomile, cyclamens, bugle-flowers, and many other wild 
flowers, we saw as we rode along; also myrtles, gooseberries, 
and dog-roses. Occasionally a few prairie hen rose in front 
of us, and flew away, wondering doubtless at having being 
(sic.) disturbed. 

"As we came in view of the log-house where some of 
the lumbermen live, we saw the forest beneath us;.We 





. 








( 




* 





51 


rode four miles further, over somewhat marshy ground, then 
after descending a rather precipitous path, we found our¬ 
selves at a place which goes by the name of Dog Pound Creek; 
the horses were all picketed out, the harness and saddles 
having been removed." 

(The party attempted to fish without success and then visi¬ 
ted a nearby ranch.) 

"Madame d T Artigue and her husband and sister (French 
people from the Basque Provinces) are in charge of this 
ranche for some one who lives in Calgary. It was quite a 
pleasure to see their beautifully managed poultry-yards. 
There were hundreds of chickens of all ages and sizes, rows 
of boxes for the sitting hens with one hen in each, all ar¬ 
ranged the same and in the practical manner peculiar to 
French people. There is an excellent market for poultry 
in the North-West; they told me that for a capon they got 
#1.75 cents in Calgary........" 

(C. Pedeprat, previously mentioned in a footnote, was a 
nephew of Mr. d'Artigue. Mr. d'Artigue was a member of 
the original M. I. M. P. He left the service in l88o and 
returned to France a short time later. He brought back two 
nephews, John and Charlie Pedeprat, with him and settled on 
the Dog Pound in 1884. John d*Artigue was a bachelor, and 
the Madame d'Artigue mentioned is a sister-in-law. A 
brother of John d 8 Artigue, with his wife and her sister, 





: ' 






52 


came to Canada about 1884 also, and they are the family men¬ 
tioned by Mrs. St. Maur. This family did not remain long). 

(13) 

(.13; Interview, C. Pedeprat, Cochrane. January 1?31. 

"Sunday, June 24th - In the evening we had a ser¬ 
vice from a travelling minister - about half the man came; 
the hymns selected by him were not at all cheerful nor 
bright, and his sermon was not suitable in any way to the 
requirements of his listeners, which one regretted.” 

"June 23th - ..Rather a tragic termination 

to our visit was caused by another accident on the railway. 
In the evening we heard the mill-whistle blowing violently, 
and found that the engine, returning with four trucks of 
lumber, had been thrown off the rails; the engineer got 
jammed between the engine and the logs, and had his leg 
broken in two places; but such is the toughness of these 
men that when being carried down we heard him joking with 
the others about not yet needing to be carried feet first, 
though he must have been suffering great pain. n 

The mine and sawmill were kept in operation through¬ 
out 1889 . The coal seam was only two feet thick and it was 
difficult to get the coal out. The seam "pinched off” at 
frequent intervals and was often found again several feet 
above or below the workings. This meant that the shaft had 
to be re-dug a considerable distance up towards the surface 










i " 





L 




33 


in order to level the slope enough to permit the laying of 
a track to the new portion of the seam. Then too, there 
was a tremendous amount of stone and earth to remove at the 
face of the working in order to follow the narrow seam of 
coal. (14) The coal was poor in quality and could not be 

(14) Interview, J. Cooper, January 1951, Calgary. Mr. 

Cooper worked for the Cochranes from 1888 to 18^2. He 
worked in the mine at first and later ran the brick 
yard about to be mentioned. 

sold at a high enough price to ensure a profit. 4 The saw¬ 
mill was becoming a liability as well. Both were abandoned 
in the spring of 1890. 

In 18^0 Dejournel left Mitford and was succeeded by 
R. Smith in the hotel and A. Martin In the store. A saloon 
was built early in this year, but does not appear to have 
been operated very long. (15) Mr. Smith had worked in the 

(15) F. W. D., February 18, l8$?Q. First mention of the 
saloon. 

sawmill for three years before he started to run the hotel. 
His daughter Yiolet, now Mrs. Farley of Cranberry, B. 0., 
was born at Mitford in 188? and appears to have been the 
first white child born there. (16) Mr. J. McNeil lived In 

(16) Interview, Mrs. J. Cooper, January 1931, Calgary. 
Mitford around 1890 as well. He was a miner but does not 
appear to have worked for the Cochranes but rather to have 
been in the mines at Canmore and returning home on the week¬ 
ends. His daughter, Sadie, later became Mrs. L. Y. Kelly. 
Mr. Kelly is the author of "The Rangemen". 




















M 


There were two rather important developments in 1891. 
Lady Cochrane procured the services of Miss Isabel Monilaws, 
of Bruce County, Ontario, as school teacher. A school was 
opened in the old saloon, the first school between Calgary 
and Morleyville. There were usually about ten children each 
year. Miss Monilaws remained until 1895, when she married 
Mr. J. Cooper, who was then running a small ranch some ten 
miles northwest of Mitford. (1?) 

(19) Interview, Mrs. J. Cooper. In 1894 the following 
children were at school in Mitford; Harry, Leslie, 

Walter and Yera Towers, whose father was a section 
man at Radnor and later a rancher south of Mitford, 

Harry Jones and George Skinner, sons of ranchers some 
twenty miles north, Birdie Radcliffe, whose father 
ran a creamery at Big Hill springs, and Mary, Everet 
and Joseph McNeil of J. McNeil's family. 

The second development of interest was the estab¬ 
lishment of a brick yard at Mitford. The Cochranes had lost 
money on the coal mine and the sawmill and believed that a 
brick yard would help to recoup their losses. The clay was 
hauled down from the flat a mile or two north of Mitford 
with the locomotive. The yard consisted of three kilns, of 
a primitive type, and a number of drying sheds. Mr. Cooper 
ran the yard. The bricks were poor in quality and expen¬ 
sive to make. This enterprise lasted two summers. 

Dr. Hayden left in 1891 and a Mr. Cowley ran the 
drug store after that. Mr. Cowley later established the 
drug store of that name in Calgary. Joe Howard built a 
black suit h shop a half mile east of Mitford on the north 




r 




e 


























side of the C. P. R. line. Tom Cochrane built a bridge 
across the Bow river during the summer. It was located 
one hundred yards east of the railway bridge and consis¬ 
ted of two spans abutting in the middle of the river on a 
small island. It was a toll bridge for a short time, the 
fees being five cents for an individual to walk across and 
ten cents for a team and wagon. (18) 

(18) Interview, Mrs. Cooper. 

About 18?2 the Cochranes opened a coal mine at Can- 
more. This venture proved unsuccessful and was abandoned 
in l89j?, although the man who purchased it from them ran it 
very successfully - and it is operated to this day. (19) 

(19) Interview, C. Pedeprat. The mine is owned by the 
”Canmore Coal Company” at the present time. A Mr. 
McNeil purchased it from Tom Cochrane and later formed 
the Company. The mine employs about three hundred men 
and produces over one thousand tons of coal per day. 
The face is under the mountain group known as ”The 
Three Sisters”. The coal is excellent steam coal and 
the C. ?. R. is the largest customer. 

In the fall of 1892, an Anglican church was built 

on the hill northeast of the town. (20) Lady Cochrane in- 

(20) Appendix D, plan of the town of Mitford. 

terested friends in England in the project and contributed 
to its construction herself. Many of the furnishings in 
the church were presented by Lady Cochrane. A. W. F. 
Cooper, later Archdeacon Cooper, was the first incumbent 
and the first ceremony was the baptism of James W. Jones, 
a brother of Harry Jones mentioned above, in October 1892. 






















o' 


' 


- 











" 

: . 

■ 

. . 

■ 










56 


The first recorded service was held on January 1, 1855. The 
names of W. F. Webb, S. C. C. Smith, C. W. Nain, F. W. Good- 
man and F. Perrin appear in the church record as officiating 
clergymen in the course of the next five years. (21) 

(21) All Saints Anglican church Records, Cochrane. 

The brick yard was the last business venture of the 
Cochrane family in this area. It was abandoned in 1855. 
"Betsy" was sold to a lumber mill near Golden, B. C. The 
track was taken up and the industrial life of Mitford came 
to an end. The Canadian Pacific Railway, which had been 
loathe to stop in Mitford at any time, finally cancelled 
regular stops there that summer. As previously mentioned, 
there was a considerable incline down towards the town from 
the east. Trains proceeding east and stopping at Mitford 
were forced to back up half-a-mile in order to make the 
grade out of town. Westbound trains came to a halt with 
the engine on the bridge and there was danger of a fire. 

The local children soon discovered that a small amount of 
grease applied to the track created consternation among the 
train crew, particularly on the westbound train, which slid 
right through the town before it could be stopped. (22) 

(22) Interview, Messrs. H. Jones and G. Skinner, January 
1551, Cochrane. As schoolboys in Mitford, Mr. Jones 
and Mr. Skinner participated in these pranks. They 
also report that they used to lie between the rails 
when the train approached and let it pass over them, 
a practice that caused a satisfactory amount of ter¬ 
ror in the breasts of the local citizens and the 
train crews. 







■ • 






















. .. . ■ . . .... 






37 


The next three years saw the final abandonment of 
Mitford. A, Martin and J. Howard both moved to Cochrane 
and established businesses there. Tom Cochrane ran against 
Frank Oliver in the elections for the House of Commons in 
1896 and was defeated. (23) Shortly afterwards, the Coch- 
(23) Sessional Papers fZQ, Volume XXXI - 1897. 303. 


ranes returned to England. Tom Cochrane’s sister was a 
lady-in-waiting to Princess Beatrice of Battenburg, who was 
governor of the Isle of Wight. She managed to procure an 
appointment for her brother as Deputy Governor. (24) 


(24) Interview, Miss M. Pinkham, 0. B. E., January 1931, 
Calgary. Miss Pinkham visited the Cochranes on the 
Isle of Wight in the early 1900 T s and says that they 
were living in considerable elegance in a very beau¬ 
tiful old castle. 

No one seems to know just why the Cochrane family came 
to Canada. Miss Pinkham suggests that they came out 
to retrench. Another, and more interesting suggestion, 
is that Lady Cochrane in some manner incurred the dis¬ 
pleasure of Queen Victoria and found it expedient to 
leave England for a time. 


The town appears to have been deserted by 1898 . 

Some of the buildings were moved to Cochrane and one or two 
to nearby farms. The rest were burned by transients in the 
course of the next few years. Lady Cochrane's house was 
burned in 1903. The AngLiean church was moved to Cochrane 
in April, 1899 , an event that caused considerable indigna¬ 
tion among those in England who had helped to finance it. 
They did not believe that a town could die. The church 
cemetery, a few remnants of foundations, and a suggestion 











38 


of a grade on the west bank of Horse creek, are all that 
remain to mark the old site of the town of Mitford. 

The unfavorable site of the town of Mitford was 
one of the most important factors leading to its failure 
to became the centre of the growing rural district. The 
fact that the Canadian Pacific Railway owned no property 
there, and found it a difficult place for its trains to 
stop, combined with the consistent failures of the Coch¬ 
rane enterprises, further discouraged its development. 
Tom and Lady Cochrane, the only people with a vested in¬ 
terest in the town, administered the coup de grace when 
they departed. The steadily expanding rural community 
quite naturally turned to the town of Cochrane as its 
local commercial centre. 






, 


. 

■ : ; 


















- 








CHAPTER V 


RURAL SETTLEMENT TO 1900 


The settlement and development of the rural area was 
slow, though steady, in the last quarter of the century* The 
first settlement of any kind was of course that of Morieyvilie 
previously mentioned. The McDougalls brought the first live¬ 
stock into the region in 1873 and added more in the following 
years, (l) 


(l) Rev. J. McDougall, op. cit., 90. McDougall mentions the 
stock brought from Edmonton but does not give the number. 
On page 146 he refers to the livestock purchased the fol¬ 
lowing year in Montana. 

Kelly, op. cit., Ill, states that fifty head of cattle 
and horses were brought to Morleyville by the McDougalls 
in 1871. He is wrong about the year but may be right 
with respect to the number of animals. The McDougalls 
did not establish Morleyville until 1873# See Chapter I 
above. 


A Mr. Spencer appears to have been the first settler 
in the area to the east of the Ghost river. He came to Mor¬ 
leyville in 1874 and established himself along the creek that 
now bears his name sometime in the fall of that year. Mr. 
Spencer was an Easterner who had travelled to the Pacific via 
the United States. He worked in the mines in British Columbia 
for a time and had then gone to Edmonton through the Yellow- 
head Pass. In Edmonton he met Rev. George McDougall who 
recommended the area around Morleyville as a place in which 
to settle. Following this advice, Mr. Spencer joined a party 
travelling to Fort Benton early in 1874. He suffered severely 




c 


V < ■ . 



' 


- 



6o 


from the cold and was finally abandoned by the rest of the 
party in an Indian camp near Calgary when he became incapa¬ 
citated by snowblindness. A kind Blackfoot undertook to 
deliver him to Morleyville. (2) 

(2) Rev. J. McDougall, op. cit., 132 and 132. 

Mr. Spencer went to Montana with the Me Doug alls in 
the summer of 1874 and purchased twenty-five head of Texan 
steers. (2) He does not appear to have remained at Spencer 
creek many years. Before he left, he attempted to build a 
sawmill run by water power and the remains of the expertly 
hewn water wheel still lie beside the creek a few miles 
north of the Banff highway. (3J 

(3) Interview, C. Pedeprat, Cochrane, January 1931. 

The number of livestock in the area increased 
greatly in the late fall of l8?4 when Mr. Shaw arrived at 
Morleyville with five hundred head of cattle. He had driven 
them through the Kootenay pass from British Columbia and in¬ 
tended to reach Edmonton before winter. When he arrived at 
Morleyville, Rev. John McDougall persuaded him to winter 
there. Mr. Shaw found the pasture so satisfactory that he 
remained until the early fall of 1876 and, after selling 
some of the stock to Rev. J. McDougall, he then went on to 
Edmonton. (4) 

(4) Kelly, op. cit., 113 and 117* 

In 1876 a frenchman named Louis Beaupre arrived 










- 




















, ■ 















, 

* 














6 l 


with his half-breed wife and settled near the lake that now 
bears his name. (5) Mr. Beaupre remained until 1885, when 
C5) Ibid., lib. 

he sold his farm and improvements to Frank White for one 
thousand dollars. Mr. White also bought his cattle paying 
thirty-five dollars a head for them, but the number of cat¬ 
tle is not recorded. (6) 

(6) F. W. D., May 29, 1885 . 

There does not appear to have been any further set¬ 
tlement in the l870 T s. Kelly records that there were four¬ 
teen settlers in the area west of Calgary in 1879, but those 
not already accounted for may have been in the area east of 
the one under consideration. (7) 

(7) Kelly, op. cit., 156. 

About 1880 John d f Artigue settled on Spencer creek 
a short distance north of the Bow river. In 1883 he moved 
north to Dogpound creek. Mr. d’Artigue was a member of the 
original Mounted Police force of 1874. He returned to 
France in 1884 and brought his two nephews, John and Charles 
Pedeprat, and his brother and his brother’s wife back to 
Canada with him. The Mdme d’Artigue mentioned in Mrs. St. 
Maur’s diary of 1888 was this sister-in-law of John d’Artigue. 
The d’Artigue brother and his wife moved out of the area 
shortly after 1888 . ( 8 ) 

( 8 ; Interview, C. Pedeprat, Cochrane, January 1951. Mr. 

Pedeprat was only eleven years old when he came to Canada. 




















62 


In l88l A. P. Patrick, a Dominion Government sur¬ 
veyor, took out a lease of five thousand acres along the 
Ghost river about four miles north of the Bow river. He 
called his ranch the Mount Royal and it was the first large 
privately owned ranch in the area. Mr. Patrick went east 
and purchased two hundred and eight head of good stock from 
around Galt and Guelph. The cattle were shipped to Winnipeg 
and then trailed overland to the ranch. The drive from 
Winnipeg took six months. (?) 

(9) Kelly, op. cit., 144. 

Angus McDonald arrived in the area the same year. 

He was a native of Invernesshire, Scotland and came to Canada 
with a Mr. McDonnell. They travelled across the American 
mid-west and then up the Missouri river by boat. It was on 
this boat trip that Mr. McDonald saw his first and only buf¬ 
falo. At Port Benton teams and wagons were purchased and the 
two men drove north to Morleyville. McDonnell took out a 
lease in the area to the east of Morleyville a short time 
after he arrived. Mr. McDonald spent some time looking the 
country over and found a spot south of the Mount Royal ranch 
that reminded him of his old home in Scotland. He bought a 
half section of this land in 1882 and called it the Glen- 
finnan ranch in honour of his wife f s birthplace. (10) 

(10) Interview, Mrs. Joanne Phipps, Cochrane, January 1921* 
Mrs. Phipps is a daughter of A. McDonald. 









' < 







: 










. 








:■ 






i 












63 


In 1883 A. P. Patrick took a Mr. Behan into partner¬ 
ship with him on the Mount Royal ranch. In September, Prank 
Ricks arrived from Oregon with two hundred and fifty head of 
horses for the ranch. They had been purchased from D. E. 
Gilman and Company in Oregon. Prank Ricks started north 
with the herd in May and came through the Crow r s Nest Pass 
and then along the foothills. The drive ended in September. 
Prank remained to work for the Mount Royal and became a well 
known figure in the area. He was one of the outstanding 
riders of southern Alberta. (11) 

(11) Kelly, op. cit., 170. 

In June 1883 , Sandy McDonnell, a well-known half- 
breed of the area, shot a buffalo bull along the Horse creek, 
shortly afterwards, he shot another in the Grand valley. 

These are the last two buffalo in the area of which there 
is any record. (12) 

(12) R. Broderick, ”The Great Buffalo Migration”, Canadian 
Cattlemen, December 1939. 313. 

W. Bell Irving established the first ranch in Grand 
valley sometime in 1883 . His brother was one of the survey¬ 
ors on the C. P. R. and appears to have recommended the area 
to W. Bell Irving. The Bell Irving ancestral home was in 
Dumfrieshire, Scotland. Mr. Bell Irving built his ranch 
headquarters on the western side of the valley just beyond 
the western boundary of the Cochrane Ranche Company r s lease. 



















































64 


Mr. Kerfoot married one of the Bell Irving daughters and 
then went into partnership with his father-in-law after 
he left the Cochrane Ranche. (13) 

(13) Interview, A. D. Kerfoot, Cochrane, January 1931• 

The number of livestock in the area declined 
sharply in 1883 with the removal of the Cochrane herds to 
the new lease in southern Alberta. It was not until after 
the turn of the century that the cattle population exceeded 
that of late 1882 . The winter of 1882 - 83 that was so dis¬ 
astrous to the Cochrane herd did not particularly affect the 
other ranchers In the area. It is quite possible that the 
more rugged nature of the land where these small ranchers 
were located may account for this. The deep ravines of the 
Wildcat Hills would provide excellent shelter and the high 
hilltops would be blown bare enough to allow the cattle to 
pasture. 

Early in 1884, Murdock McPherson settled on the 
north bank of the Bow about two miles east of Spencer creek. 
Mr. McPherson's father had been a factor in the Hudson's Bay 
Company but Murdock wanted to be a farmer. There were three 
children in the family - Billy, who later became an engineer 
on the C. P. R.; Joseph, later a cowhand on the Bow River 
Horse Ranch; and Maggie, who later married A. P. Patrick. (13) 
(13) Interview, Miss Mary Morrison, Calgary, January 1931* 

Alexander Gillies, a brother-in-law of Angus McDonald, 






* 

- 






« 


» 

- 

' 







. 


, 

; 








V . ; .i : 








65 


arrived the same year and took up a homestead to the south 
of the Glenfinnan Ranch. (16) Frank White secured the 

(16) Interview, Miss Annie Gillies, Cochrane, January 19.51. 
McDonnell lease west of the Ghost river in September, and 
severed his connection with the Cochrane Ranche Company in 
December. He began to lay plans for a sheep ranch, (l?) 

(17) F. W. D., September 25 and December 22, 1884. 

George Creighton established his first ranch in the 
area in 1884. It was located north of Beaupre lake, and 
was followed a short time later by another northwest along 
the Ghost river. The ranches were both quite extensive al¬ 
though most of the land was leased in the early years. Mr. 
Creighton was a horse rancher. E. Boney Thompson, another 
of the outstanding riders of southern Alberta, worked for 
him. ( 18 ) 

(18) Interview, Miss A. Gillies. Creighton’s ranch near 
Beaupre lake was close to the Gillies homestead. 

In May 1885 , J. Robertson purchased an interest in 
the proposed sheep ranch of Mr. White. Mr. Robertson in¬ 
vested two thousand dollars. Mr. Hardisty of the Hudson’s 
Bay Company invested five thousand dollars as well. (19) 

(19) F. W. D., May 23 and June 11, 1885• 

Mr. Hardisty was an Edmonton man - F. W. D. June 8, 
1885. 

Late in July, Mr. White went to Montana and obtained some 
twenty-five hundred sheep from a Mr. Graden, a sheep rancher 
near Fort Benton. Sixty-eight bucks were obtained from 0. 






























66 


G. Cooper, north of Port Benton. The move got under way on 
August 3 and took six weeks. Fourteen sheep perished on 
the trail. (20) 

(20) F. W. D., August September 26 and Memo section, l88j?. 

The McDougall family severely contested Mr. White’s 
lease. The Dominion Government appears to have promised the 
land to the Rev. George McDougall for an orphanage. After 
his death, the Rev. John McDougall had the land fenced and 
placed the matter in the hands of the Methodist Conference. 

No one took steps to get title to the land. When McDonnell 
obtained the lease. Rev. John McDougall lodged a protest, 
but since McDonnell appeared to have no interest in stocking 
or improving the lease, the matter was dropped. The situa¬ 
tion was more serious in 1884 however, for Mr. White had 
every intention of using the land. McDougall had apparently 
been promised that the land would not be leased again and 
was quite indignant at the H official injustice 11 . (21) Mr. 

(21) F. W. D., memoranda, in diary of 1886. Records of the 
conversations, some of which were quite heated, between 
Mr. white and Rev. J. McDougall in connection with the 
land. 

White promised to limit his improvements as much as possible 
if he was promised new leases elsewhere and compensation for 
moving. As a result, Mr. White received extensive leases on 
the south side of the Bow river, west of Jumping Pound creek. 
He moved to the new ranch in July 1886, and this became the 
famous "Merino Ranch". (22) 






















6 ? 


(22) F. ¥V. D. , July 24, 1586. 

In 1883 R. Wainwright settled along Spencer creek 

on the land previously occupied by John d'Artigue. Mr. 

Wainwright died a few years later and the land passed into 

the hands of a man named Lewis. (23) 

(23; Interview, 0. Pedeprat, Cochrane, January 1931* 

Lewis was called "Professor” Lewis. It is not known 
how he acquired the title. 

James Quigley, a section foreman on the C. P. R., 
took up the first homestead adjoining the town site of 
Cochrane the same year. He must have received permission 
from the British American Ranche Company since this was still 
part of its lease at that time. However, several homestea¬ 
ders established themselves on the lease during the next few 
years, particularly on that part of it that lay west of 
Jumping Pound creek. Major J. Butler arrived about the same 
time and took up a homestead at the junction of the Bow river 
and Jumping Pound creek. He was a former British army offi¬ 
cer, who had served for many years in India. He returned to 
Ireland in 19 02 but his son Robert remained on the farm, (24) 
(24) Interview, Miss A. Gillies, Cochrane, January 1931- 
Mr. E. D. McKay settled near the Butlers. He remained there 
for five years working for Mr. White most of the time. In 
1890 he moved to Grand valley and took up a homestead there. 
(24) 

In 1886 A. P. Patrick and Mr. Behan sold the Mount 

















68 


Royal Ranch to W. C. Wells and Nelson Brown. Mr# Wells 
owned a sawmill at Palliser, B. C., and did not spend much 
time at the ranch. Mr* Patrick had been concentrating on 
horse raising but Wells and Brown decided to change to cat¬ 
tle. Some five hundred head were added to the cattle herd 
that summer. Most of them were brought from British Colum¬ 
bia. The following winter was extremely cold and quite a 
number of the new cattle perished. 

The same year, R. W. Cowan established himself 
north of the township line on Big Hill creek. Mr. Cowan 
and Walter Jones had ranched together in Manitoba earlier 
and came to the Cochrane area together. Mr. Cowan pur¬ 
chased nearly four thousand acres of land and stocked it 
with cattle from Manitoba. These cattle were shipped in 
trainload lots and were the first large movement of stock 
into the area since the Cochrane herds had been brought in. 
Mr. Jones remained with Cowan a few years and then managed 
the horse ranch of Ed. Bottrel near the present town of 
Bottrel. (25) 

(25 ) Interviews, Mr. W. Hutchinson, who now owns the Cowan 
ranch, and Mr. H. Jones, son of W. Jones, Cochrane, 
January 1951* 

Mr. Thomas Ellis settled along the Jumping Pound 
in the summer of 1886. He had come from Lenark county, 
Ontario, in the hope of finding a better living for his 
family than the hundred acre farm in Ontario offered. He 
had four sons, Robert, Thomas, Oliver and John, and one 




























- 








6 ? 


daughter, bar a. The father and the four sons each took up 
a quarter section homestead with the usual quarter section 
pre-empted alongside. They went into sheep raising, pur¬ 
chasing most of the animals from the British .American 
Ranche. ( 26 ) 

(26) Interview, Mrs. bara Edge, daughter of T. Ellis, 
Cochrane, January 1931 * 

3P. H. Towers was employed as trackman on the C. P. 

R. at the Radnor section house, a few miles west of Mitford, 
in 1886. Mr. Towers had come to Calgary with the railroad 
in 1883 and had worked at Langdon, a few miles east of 
Calgary. He raised stock as a sideline at Radnor and built 
up a small herd. When he left the C. P. R. some years 
later to take up a homestead on the Jumping Pound he owned 
about two hundred head of cattle. ( 27 ) 

( 27 ) Interview, W. Towers, Cochrane, January 1931* 

In 1886 Angus McDonald brought his family out from 
Scotland. Mrs. McDonald and the children were passengers 
on one of the first C. P. R. trains to make the transcon¬ 
tinental run. Mr. McDonald had been slowly building up a 
herd, and owned about twenty-five head of cattle by this 
time. There were three sons in the family, Angus S., Donald 
Peter and Alexander J., and three daughters, Jessie, now Mrs. 
Perry of Edmonton; Margaret, who later married J. Robertson; 
and Joanne, later Mrs. J. A. Phipps. Angus J. later home¬ 
steaded on the Beaverdagi creek some fifteen miles north of 

















70 


Cochrane, D. P. McDonald went to work for the Mount Royal 
Ranch where Prank Sibbald, a son of Andrew Sibbald of Mor- 
leyville, was foreman at that time. In 1890 D. P. succeeded 
him as foreman and began to buy out Wells and Brown. By 
1^01, D. P. owned the ranch. Alexander was foreman on the 
Cowan ranch from 1896 to 1901 and then moved to Calgary. (28 ) 

(28) Interview, Mrs. J. Phipps, Cochrane, January 1951. 

In 1887 W. H. Edge took up a homestead five miles 
south of Cochrane. The Edge family had crossed the United 
States to San Prancisco and then travelled by boat to Van¬ 
couver, in 1876. W. Edge, one of the sons, came on alone to 
Alberta hoping to establish a ranch for himself. In 1894 he 
married Sara Pllis. He obtained ten head of milch cows 
about this time and shipped butter to Calgary for a few 
years. Butter then sold for twenty cents a pound, to be 
taken in trade. (2?) 

(29) Interview, Mrs. W. H. Hdge, Cochrane, January 1951. 

¥. D. Kerfoot resigned as manager of the British 
American Ranche Company in 1887 and went into partnership 
with W. Bell Irving. They leased several thousand acres of 
land east of Grand valley and north of Cochrane lake and 
stocked it. Pour years later the Government suddenly can¬ 
celled their lease and it was necessary to sell the stock, 
unfortunately the market was weak at the time and the part¬ 
ners took a very heavy loss.. Paeh managed to save more than 

















. 








71 


a section of land and a few head of livestock. They went 
into remounts after this. (30) 

(30) Interview, A. D. Kerfoot , Cochrane, January 1931. 

The Bow Kiver Horse Ranch was raising horses for the 
English market at this time. Only Englishmen were employed 
to break and handle the horses. Thirty or forty were shipped 
in 1887 and found a good market. (31) 

(31) Kelly, op. cit., 214. 

0. Perrenoud settled on the Horse creek in 1887 or 
1838. Mr. Perrenoud was the son of a jeweller in Besancon, 
Prance, who came to Canada because he wanted to raise horses. 
He was a student at the Winterbotham ranch near Pincher creek 
for a time. It was a common practice in the l880 T s to spend 
some time on an established ranch in order to learn the busi¬ 
ness. Mr. Perrenoud, like many others, paid six hundred dol¬ 
lars for the course - which appears to have consisted of 
doing all the dirty work on the ranch. After graduation, he 
purchased twenty-five head of horses from Critchley, near 
Calgary, and established his horse ranch. (32) 

(32) Interview, Mrs. C. Perrenoud, Cochrane, January 1931* 

John Phipps settled near C. Perrenoud early in 
1888. He had been working for Bir Lister-Kaye on his ranch 
near Blackfoot Crossing for some four years or more. Mr. 
Phipps took out a quarter section homestead and the usual 
quarter section pre-emption. There were six children in 








■ 

. 

* 

* 

. 










* 

■'' ■■ ■; ’a ; 

. . 


























- • ■ c: * . .. 










72 


the Phipps family, two of whom were born after 1888. Mrs. 

C. Perrenoud was a Phipps. Evelyn Phipps married J. Rayden, 
a later settler on the Horse creek. Victoria married 
Stewart Walker, a homesteader on Beaverdam creek. George 
Phipps married Joanne McDonald. (33) 

(33) Interview, Mrs. Joanne Phipps. 

The Copithorne brothers, John and Richard, settled 
on the Jumping Pound and went into partnership on a mixed 
farm. A mixed farm in those days was one where a few cat¬ 
tle and horses, pigs, sheep and chickens were raised. John 
had come to Canada from county Cork in 1883 and had worked 
around Winnipeg for a time. During the rebellion he volun¬ 
teered for the army and was sent to live among the Gree 
Indians and watch their movements. In 1886 he came as farm 
instructor to the Sarcee Indians. Dick came to Calgary in 
1887 and worked on the Mission bridge in Calgary until he 
had enough money to buy a team. The two brothers then took 
up homesteads beside each other. John married a Miss Susan 
Tolle, who had just then come to Calgary. The Copithornes 
traded in Calgary the first few years, mainly in butter and 
eggs. In 1898 the brothers went into the beef raising busi¬ 
ness. (34) 

(34) Interview, C. Copithorne, Cochrane, January 1931. 

In 1889 J. Curran settled at the junction of Coal 
creek and the Bow river. D. C. Morrison took up a homestead 






. 










73 


two and one-half miles north of him. Mr. Morrison was from 
the Hebrides and had arrived in the west in 1886. He had 
worked for three years on the large ranches of Sir Lister- 
Kaye and W. K. Hull east of Calgary before he came to the 
Cochrane area. C. Anson homesteaded beside Mr. Morrison 
but left in 1891 and Mr. Morrison bought his land. (33) 

(33) Interview, Miss M. Morrison, Cochrane 1931* 

The Le Seurs settled three-quarters of a mile up 
Spencer creek in 1890. This family was from the Isle of 
Guernsey and had been in the coffee business in Brazil. 

They left around 1900. (36) 

(36) Ibid. 

Mr. D. M. Radcliffe established the first creamery 
in southern Alberta that year. It was on Big Hill creek 
about six miles from Cochrane. Mr. Radeliffe had his own 
herd of milch cows to provide him with the raw materials 
and produced the butter in a small water-driver creamery. 

It was sold in both Cochrane and Calgary. (37) 

(37) Interview, Mrs. J. Cooper, Calgary, January 1931. 

In the early l890*s Lesson and Scott, who operated 
the Agency store at Morleyville, established the ‘‘SL 1 * ranch 
east of the reservation and south of the Bow river. Frank 
Hicks managed it for them and also ran a small place of his 
own nearby. ( 38 ) 

(38) Interview, L. Towers, Cochrane, January 1931. 

























74 


G. E. Goddard was managing the Bow River Horse ranch 
by this time. In l8?4, in partnership with the Warrens, he 
bought It. The long struggle with squatters, particularly 
just west of Calgary, ended that year, for Mr. Goddard al¬ 
lowed them to take up homesteads on the lease. 09 ) In l8?7 
09 ) Kelly, op. eit., 280. 

there were twelve hundred head of horses on the ranch in¬ 
cluding some famous thoroughbreds of that time. 

By 1?00 there were a number of new settlers in the 
area around Cochrane. Near J. Phipps, on Horse creek, the 
Johnsons and Mallottes had taken up homesteads. The Elliots 
had settled south of Phipps and the Bassetts were south again 
of Elliots. 

In the area between Horse creek and Coal creek, the 
Bostons, F. Bloomfield and Joe Jump had taken up homesteads. 
Joe Jump lived In a stone dugout and worked for the neigh¬ 
bours. Fred Bloomfield was a curious individual. He was a 
recluse and spent his time writing a bible that was to con¬ 
tain the true elements of all the religions of history. One 
of his most interesting tenets was that 11 no woman ever went 
to heaven”. 

On the west side of Grand valley, a few miles above 
the Bow river, the McEachems, the Coopers and the Perrys 
had settled. A. Baptie had taken up a homestead northeast 
of Kerfoots. (40) 






. 



75 


(.40) Interview, Miss Mary Morrison, Calgary, January 1951. 

The winter of 1898 , that was so difficult for ran¬ 
chers further south, did little damage to the ranchers and 
homesteaders around Cochrane. The number of livestock in 
the area was increasing rapidly and the quality was being 
maintained through the importation of purebred bulls. Low 
wool prices were discouraging the sheep raisers and Frank 
White in particular was cutting down his flocks. Wolves 
were always a menace to the livestock, but they were parti¬ 
cularly bad in Grand valley In 1898 . Horse prices rose 
sharply due to the Boer war and gave the horse ranchers a 
much needed period of prosperity. Two thousand head of 
beef cattle were shipped out of the area in 1899, indica¬ 
ting a brisk demand for local livestock. (41) 

(41) Annual Report of Department of Agriculture, North 
West Territories. 1899* 

In 1900 the Cochrane area was still rather sparsely 
settled. Great stretches had no settlers at all, this being 
particularly true of the burnt ground area northeast of 
Cochrane. Homesteaders tended to cluster in the valleys of 
the small creeks. There were only a few ranches of any con¬ 
sequence although some large ranches were later to develop 
on foundations that were laid at this time. Generally 
speaking the settlers had made their local purchases at 
Mitford during the time that town was in its heyday. After 












e 
















■ 














. 





. 


■ 









76 


it was abandoned, they turned to Cochrane. The foundations 
of this bustling little community centre were firmly estab¬ 
lished by 1900. The tremendous influx of settlers in the 
early years of the new century resulted in a corresponding 
expansion of Cochrane and the town had reached a position 
of considerable importance in a prosperous rural area by 
1914 . 



CHAPTER VI 


THE HISTORY OP THE VILLAGE OF COCHRANE - TO 1914 

Cochrane came into being with the building of the 
Canadian Pacific Railway. The town site was granted to 
the C. P. R. in the early l88o f s and turned over to its 
subsidiary, the North west Land Company, to parcel out in 
lots. The side has a mixture of advantages and disadvan¬ 
tages that have become manifest at different times in the 
history of the village. The most striking advantage, and 
one that does not change, is the beauty of the location. 

The village lies at the foot of Big Hill, which rises 
sharply to a height of six hundred feet immediately be¬ 
hind it. The Bow valley stretching cut to the south is 
some three miles wide at this point and the river bed 
lies along the southern edge of the valley. To the east 
of the town, the Big Hill, which normally runs east and 
west parallel to the river, has a sharp projection to the 
south that marks the eastern boundary of this wide valley. 
Cochrane lies in the angle made by these two hills. To 
the west, the valley tends to narrow until it is little 
wider than the river bed at the junction of the Ghost and 
Bow river eleven miles away. The view of the foothills 
and the Rockies from the town Is superb. 

A second and more practical advantage Is Cochrane T s 





- 

: 

; 

j- ■ i. O ' — : •. ‘ v„. U 

* 

. 


... . 




78 


situation in the heart of a prosperous mixed farming area. 
In the early years of its history, this advantage was not 
apparent. The town was located within the boundaries of 
the British American Ranche and rural settlement took 
place some distance away. The ranch gave up the lease on 
the north side of the Bow river in the late l880 f s but the 
town of Mitford had been established in the meantime. 

When Mitford was abandoned in the 18^0 T s, Cochrane became 
the centre of the rural area and began to grow. 

In the early years of the present century, the 
village showed promise of developing an industrial self- 
sufficiency that would make it less dependent on the farm 
population. However, the first World War, changing tech¬ 
niques in building, and a certain conservatism in the in¬ 
habitants doomed the local industries. It is only in very 
recent years that Cochrane has again achieved any measure 
of independence from the rural area. The first World War 
had an extremely detrimental effect on the town; the second 
World War has renewed the earlier promise and vigor. This 
chapter is concerned with the earliest period of develop¬ 
ment. 

The first building in Cochrane was the c. P* R. 
station. It was a frame building some thirty feet long, 
sixteen feet wide and seven feet high, situated on the 
south side of the tracks a short distance west of the 
present grain elevator. It served as an office, a freight 


: 








- 








































. 













19 


shed and living quarters for the telegraph operator* A sec¬ 
tion hcuse was built soon afterward* The first private home 
appears to have been constructed early in 1886 by J. Bruce, 
section foreman on the track west of town, (l) In those 

(1) F. W. D., July 27, 1886. 

days, track maintenance depended on two crews working out 
of Cochrane - one to the east and one to the west. J. Quig¬ 
ley was foreman on the line east and he established himself 
on a homestead immediately east of the town site. 

A small store was built some time In 1886. It is a 
matter of much controversy as to who operated this enter- 
prise. Frank White speaks of the purchases he made at the 
Frenchman’s store in 1886, 1887 and 1888 . This would be 
Joe Limoge’s store, although many believe that J. Johnson 
owned the first one in Cochrane. However Johnson is not 
mentioned by Frank White until 1888, and then in connection 
with the post office. (2) It seems probable that Limoge ran 

(2) F. ¥. D., June 21, 1888 and April 27, l88?. 

the store for two years at least and then sold to Johnson. 
Limoge later went to High River and operated the High River 
Trading Company for many years. The location of his store 
in Cochrane cannot be ascertained. 

W. B. Elliot came to Cochrane in the summer of 1886 
with his wife and two daughters. He built a small hotel on 
the present site of Webb and Milligan’s garage early in 












8o 


1887. (5) In 1892 , John Pedeprat enlarged it. The lower 
(5) Interview, C. Pedeprat, Cochrane, January 1951. 
floor was extended and a second storey added. The inside 
was then plastered and it was quite a pleasant place in which 
to stop. In 1895 Mrs. Elliot died and Mr. Elliot decided to 
get out of the hotel business. He rented the old headquar¬ 
ters of the British American Ranche and started a small farm. 
Mrs. Elliot was buried on the hill behind the ranch buildings. 
The hotel was placed in the charge of John Doyle. It burned 
down in 1896 , a few hours before a big dance was to have been 
held in it. The next year, Mr. Elliot's daughter Agnes died 
and was buried beside her mother. Mr. Elliot took up a home¬ 
stead on the Horse creek a short time later. In l 8?8 the 
hotel site was sold to the Murphy brothers. (4) 

(4) Interviews, C. Pedeprat and Miss A. Gillies, Cochrane, 
January 1951* 

Johnson's store was located in a “lean-to" on the 
side of his house. The house still stands. (5) Late in 1898 

(5) Appendix E, map (1), Cochrane in 1898 . 

a new store was built a block west of the house. It was a 
fair sized building and may be regarded as the first general 
store in Cochrane. It contained hardware and dry goods sec¬ 
tions, a grocery department and a meat market. (6) 

(6) Interview, C. Pedeprat. 

Alex Martin, formerly of Mitford, built a small 
store on the northeast corner of the same block. It was a 












f. 















81 


combination store and living quarters. Mr. Martin sold out 
to C. W. Fisher in 1?01. (7) He then went to Calgary and 

(7) Interview, A. Chapman, Cochrane, January 1931 * 
established the well known Martin Sporting Goods Store on 
7th Avenue west. 

In 18^0 an attempt was made to mine coal In Cochrane. 
It was necessary to sink a vertical shaft some eighty feet 
to the coal seam. Very little coal was taken out of the hole 
and it caved in a few years later. The circumstances regar¬ 
ding the cave-in were regarded with suspicion at the time. 

It was generally believed that a whiskey runner, upon being 
warned in Cochrane that the police were awaiting him in 
Calgary, threw a few barrels of whiskey out of the freight 
car in which he was transporting them and then rolled them 
into the mine shaft. The barrels wrecked the casing as they 
fell and caused the cave-in. ( 8 ) 

(8) Interview, G. Pedeprat. 

In 18^8 Jim and Joe Murphy built a new hotel on the 
site of the earlier one owned by Elliot. The new building 
was a frame structure about the same size as its predeces¬ 
sor. It came to be called the "Murphy House 11 and was a 
famous landmark in Cochrane. (8) 

The Murphy brothers were old-timers in the west. 

They had come from Wellington county, Ontario, in 1582 and 
operated a shoe store in Calgary for a few years. They then 












held the contract for carrying the mail from Calgary to 
MacLeod for a time. When the railway was being built be¬ 
tween those two points, the brothers did contract work for 
the C. P. R. They moved to Cochrane in 1898 . Jim Murphy 
was killed in 190j> or 1906 on the road a short distance 
southwest of the British American Ranche buildings. The 
’•horseless carriage" in which he was a passenger failed to 
make the corner and he was crushed when the vehicle turned 
over. The curve was known as "deadman’s ccrner" after that. 
(?) 

(.9) Interview, iviiss Mary Morrison, Calgary, January 19.51. 

A Mr. Little began work on a brick yard one mile 
west of town late in the l89Q T s. He died in 1900 and his 
widow married Peter Collins a year or two later. Mr. Collins 
owned a brick yard in Calgary at the time, but sold it and 
moved to Cochrane. (10) 

(10) Interviews, Mr. A. Chapman and Miss M. Morrison. 

A small schoolhouse was built just before 1900 
through the efforts of J. Quigley, J. Hewitt and the Bruce 
family. (11) Mr. George Bevan was an early teacher in this 

(11) Calgary Herald, Saturday, July 8, 1930. 
school, although he may not have been the first. (12) 

(12) Interview, C. Pedeprat. 

The Roman Catholic church was built in 1893* The 
Anglican church was moved to Cochrane from Mitford in 1899 



















8? 


and a Presbyterian church was established in 1900. More 
will be said about these churches in Chapter X. 

C. W. Fisher arrived from London, Ontario, in 1910. 

He purchased the Martin and the Johnson stores and the Merino 
ranch that year. A short time later, he established an im¬ 
plement business in the town. In 1904, the Johnson store 
was extended and brick veneered. The Martin store was turned 
into a Liberal clubhouse and headquarters. Mr. Fisher was 
elected to the first government of Alberta and was appointed 
speaker, a position he held until his death in 1919. (15) 

(15) Interviews, Mr. I. Andison, Mr. E. Andison, Cochrane, 
January 1951. 

R. Smith, the former manager of the hotel in Mitford, 
died in 1902 and his widow purchased the Sharp house. Mrs. 
Sharp was a sister of W. Jones of the Bobtrel ranch and had 
lived in Cochrane since the l890 T s. Mrs. Smith turned the 
house into a maternity hospital and a Dr. Toronto operated 
it for a time. He was the first doctor to reside in Coch¬ 
rane. (14) 

(14) Interview, H. Jones, Cochrane, January 1951. 

Until 1905 Cochrane was an unorganized hamlet. In 
that year It was erected a village, since then it has never 
had a large enough population to become a town. 

In 1905 Mr* A. Chapman came to Cochrane to open a 
branch store for Dave White of Banff. Mr. Chapman had come 
to Calgary in 1899 and had worked on C. P. R. construction. 










84 


He was made foreman of the Calgary yards in 1900 but left 
this position to go into business with Mr. White. In 1904, 
Dave White sold his interest in the Cochrane store to J. 
Howard, the former blacksmith at Mitford and Mr. Chapman 
followed suit in 190>. He then went into the construction 
business with his brother, H. Chapman. Howard ran the 
store for-a year and then sold it to Dave White and his 
new partner Mr. Bain. In 1908, White and Bain sold the 
store to J. A. Campbell. (1J?) 

(lj?) Interview, Mr. A. Chapman. 

Mr. A. Andison arrived in Cochrane In 19 04 . In the 
course of the next few years other members of the Andison 
family followed. H. Andison, clerk of the Legislature, is 
a brother. Ernie Andison had been an apprentice butcher in 
England, and he took ever the butcher shop in the Usher 
block. In 1907 he sold his interest in the shop to the 
Towers brothers, sons of f. H. Towers, the rancher on the 
Jumping Pound. Mr. Andison continued to work in the shop 
until 191b’. In 1909 E. C. Johnson, an American, established 
a second butcher shop, in the Howard block. (16) 

(16) Interview, Mr. E. Andison. 

Mr. E. C. Johnson was a rather interesting individual. 
He is reputed to have been the hero of Owen ¥ister f s "The 
Virginian 11 , published in 1902. (17) The novel is laid in the 

(17) Interview, Mr. A. Chapman. 

vast regions of the American mid-west. The author asserts 












' 


c . . 










85 


the utility of the rude frontier code that prevailed in re¬ 
gions before regular law and order was established. The 
hero, a Wyoming cowpuncher, forces his idea of justice on a 
turbulent community, and prevents a lawless gang from taking 
control of local affairs. 

The extensive settlement that was taking place in 
the surrounding rural area in the early 1900 T s started a 
small boom in Cochrane around 1905• A second hotel was 
built by a Mr. Alexander. It was called the Cochrane hotel, 
and still stands. The Murphys built a livery stable behind 
the Murphy House and the McRwen family established a Massey 
Harris implement business. Dr. Ritchie came to Cochrane but 
did not practice. He was soon followed by Dr. A. W. Park 
who did open a practice. ( 18 ) 

(18) Ibid. 

The expansion continued in 1906. A. Chapman was 
elected mayor. A brick schoolhouse was built a half block 
behind the earlier school. A council chamber was built. 

Pete Collins donated to the town the land for two cemeteries - 
one for the Catholics and one for the Protestants. They are 
located on top of the Big Hill north of Cochrane. An Orange 
Hall was built about this time and J. Howard established a 
dairy to supply the town with milk. The census of that year 
indicates that the population was one hundred and fifty 
eight. (19) 









86 


(,19,) Interviews, Mr. A. Chapman and Miss M, M 0 rrison. 
bee Appendix E, map (2J, Cochrane in 1906. 

The town T s finances took a serious blow in 1907- A 
smallpox epidemic broke out and it was necessary to estab¬ 
lish a quarantine camp down near the river. Tents with lum¬ 
ber floors were set up to house the patients, cuards were 
hired to prevent well meaning relatives from visiting the 
sick. The disease was mild in form and only affected adults, 
borne twenty to twenty-five persons were stricken and it took 
the town two years to pay off the money borrowed to run the 
camp. (,20) 

(20) Interview, Mr. A. chapman. 

In 1908 the Chapman brothers built a store for J. 
Howard. Next door to it a man named Bomgartner built a 
pool room and restaurant. The Shelley Quarry Company of 
Calgary opened up the first stone quarry in the Big Hill 
creek valley behind the town. A short time later, a man 
named Tesky, working for doe Murphy and using sandstone from 
the quarry, began to build an imposing house. This rela¬ 
tively huge building is located in the north-east corner of 
town right at the foot of the hill. (21) 

(21) Interviews, Messrs. A. Chapman and A. Raby and Miss 
A. Gillies. 

A small corporation, composed of C. W. Fisher, his 
half-brother, T. Fisher, J. Quigley, F. Sibbald and W. 
Hutchinson, bought the whole of the town site south of the 









< 













87 


railway tracks. It included some one hundred and thirty 
acres of land, but there were no buildings on it. (22) There 

(22) Interview, Mr. W. Hutchinson, Cochrane, January 1931. 
was a great deal of speculation at this time in connection 
with a railway that was to be built from Entwistle, west of 
Edmonton, to Pincher Creek, and it was believed that the di¬ 
visional point might be situated in Cochrane. A charter for 
the railway was granted a few years later and, in 1913, the 
C. N. R. surveyed the proposed route. It was to cross the 
C. P. R. just west of Cochrane. In November 1912, the lit- 
tichen Investment Company offered the little corporation 
fifty thousand dollars for the land but was refused. (23) 

(23) Cochrane Advocate, November 14, 1912, and April 24, 

1913• The Cochrane Advocate began publication in 
March 1909 - see below. In subsequent footnotes it 
will be referred to as M C.A. W 

The railway bubble burst just before the war and the local 
corporation could not sell the land. It was turned over to 
the town for taxes many years later. 

In March, 1909, the Cochrane Advocate began publi¬ 
cation. J. Mewhort was the first editor and owner. In Oc¬ 
tober, C. N. Austin, a homesteader in Jumping Pound, sold 
his farm and bought the Advocate. A. Stickland purchased 
it from Austin in 1911 and he sold it to W. A. McKenzie in 
1913. (24) The Cochrane Advocate was in no way an outstan- 

(24) G.A., March 11, 190?; October 9, 1909; October 26, 

1911; and May 19, 1913. 































88 


ding small town paper. In the course of its career of six¬ 
teen years it had fourteen editors. Nearly all of them 
owned the paper and nearly all of them went bankrupt. Un¬ 
til 1^14 the Advocate consisted of eight pages, six of which 
were "boiler-plate w prepared and set up in print by outside 
concerns. The editor set up two pages of local news and ad¬ 
vertisements. The local news occupied two or three columns 
and took the form of a series of short paragraphs each deal¬ 
ing with a separate topic. On occasion an editorial on a 
local matter was included. The remainder of the front page 
was devoted to the advertisements of the local merchants. 

The back page was filled with notices of animals astray, 
livestock for sale and general advertisements from the lo¬ 
cal ranchers and farmers. The paper was printed weekly, 
on Thursdays, and was sold by subscription at one dollar 
a year. The circulation is not recorded. 

In 1909 Cochrane had a population of three hun¬ 
dred and fifty and a land assessment of two hundred thou¬ 
sand dollars. There were sixty-five children attending 
the school. Two brick plants were operation and two more 
were planned. The stone quarry was getting ready to go 
into full operation and a sawmill was planned. (2J?) 

(25) C. A., April 15, 1909. 

In 1910 the Union Bank opened a branch office in 
Cochrane. (26; It was situated in the southeast corner of 






89 


(^26) Interview, Mr. A. Allen, manager of the Royal Bank, 
Cochrane. 


the Fisher building. At this time the building also con¬ 
tained the office of the Advocate, the Tower brothers 1 meat 
market, Fisher's General Store, a hardware, the post office, 
Dr. Park's office, and, on the second floor, the living 
quarters of T. Fisher and the Masonic Hall. (27J 
(27) Interview, Mr. A. Chapman. 


In the issue of Thursday, November 24, 1?10, the 

Advocate printed the following town directory :-- 

U .YU1 ago. ft£-toshxsaa - Kq x v $>.S £ ,. X31 Q - 

Representative in Dominion Parliament - M. S. McCarthy. 

Representative in Provincial Parliament - Hon. C.W. Fisher, 

'Village Council - George Mortimer - Chairman, 

A. Chapman, R. Hewitt, 

Robert Butler - Village Constable, 

I. E. Laird - Sec/treas. 

All Saints Anglican Church - Rev. R. D. Harrison, B. A. 

St. Marys R. C. Church - Rev. Father Hermes, Ph. D. 

St. Andrews Presbyterian Church - Rev. J. A. Claxton, B-A., 

Cochrane and District Board of Trade - B.D. 

J. G. Tweed, J.P. - Pres., 

A. Chapman - Sec/treas. 

Cochrane and District Agricultural Society - 
J. Cook - Pres., 

J. E. Laird - Sec. 

Cochrane Social and Athletic Club - 
J. E. Laird - Chairman, 

E. H. P. Cook - Sec/treas. 

King Solomon Lodge AF and AM #41 - 
John L. Evans - I. M., 

John D. Curren - Sec. 

Medical Man - A. W. Park, M.D. - Fisher block. 

Nursing Home - Mrs. T. Davies. 

Hotels - Murphy House - opp C. P. R. 

Cochrane Hotel - west end. 



















General Merchants - Fisher and Simpson, 

J. A. Campbell, 
stringer and Pfeifer. 
Butchers - W. F. Towers, 

E. C. Johnson. 

Hardware - C. W. Fisher. 

Lumber Sales - T. Quigley, 

A. J. Murphy 

Livery Stables - Tempany and Atkinson, 
Quigley Bros. 

Brick Manufacturers - Quigley Brick Co., 

Peter Collins, 
Gabriel Bruel. 

Stone Quarries - Duncan Shelley." 


A hospital was opened in the T. Davies home in 1910. 
Dr. Park was the house physician and five rooms were set 
aside for patients. The Davies family lived in quarters 
behind the hospital section. It closed in 1914. (28) 


(28) Interview, Mr. E. Davies, Cochrane, January 19J? 1. 


In 1911 Joe Murphy sold the Murphy House to Wm. 

Dean. Mr. Dean rechristened it the Alberta Hotel but it 
was so well known by its earlier name that the new one was 
not accepted. The motor car age had definitely arrived in 
Cochrane and the Advocate of May 4, 1911, carried the re¬ 
port that "Chapman Brothers are about to build a Motor Car 
Garage for Messrs T. Quigley and T.. Fisher on the lot be¬ 
tween S. J. Peyto T s house and Pope Avenue. The building 
will accommodate four cars, besides giving storage room for 
supplies of gasoline and other necessaries. It should be a 
great convenience to visitors from Calgary and other outside 
points as well as to our own car owners." 






1 


» ♦ ■ ’ '. 

. 

- 






' 

. 

' ■ ' ' - . ; . 

\ 

. . 

. 

. ■ . 

• , . , ■ .. I 

■ 

l 







91 


In May, 1911, the ’’Cochrane Creamery Association” 
was formed. It was locally owned by the holders of thirty 
shares of one hundred and fifty dollars each. The building 
was finished in 1912 and was situated near the present Tex¬ 
aco Service Station. A Mr. Pilon was the first butter maker. 
Thirteen thousand nine hundred and fifty pounds of butter 
were manufactured in 1912 and were sold for an average price 
of twenty-seven cents per pound. (29) The creamery was only 

(29) Interview, Mr. S. J. Reed, present butter-maker, 
kept open in the summer months during the early years that 
it was in operation. 

In 1909 R. A. Webster, who had recently arrived in 
Cochrane, purchased the implement business of C. W. Fisher. 

He also established a flour and feed business in 1911. (30) 

(30) Interview, W. Andison. 

The Dominion elections of 1911, resulting in the 
defeat of the Liberals, had repercussions in Cochrane in 
1912. The post office, previously run by T. Fisher, was 
moved from the Fisher block to the Howard block and Mr. 
Chapman became postmaster, a position he held until 1949. 
Politics was a very important element in the life of the 
townpeople before the first World War. Mr. Chapman was a 
strong supporter of C. 1. Fisher during the early 1900 r s 
but he changed his political affiliation and formed the 
first Conservative party in the Cochrane district around 



















. ■ ( 







1910. The post office was a patronage position in those 
days and naturally fell to Mr. Chapman when the Conserva¬ 
tives won the election. (31) 

(31) Interview, Mr. A. chapman. 

In February 191-5, 0. Pitter opened up a bakery shop 
in the Cochrane hotel. (32) In August Mrs. Campbell Koberts 

(32) C. A., February 20, 1913* 

opened a new and up-to-date hospital in the east end of 
town. (33) The hospital remained open until the end of the 

(33) 0. A., August 7, 1913. 

war but it was not a profitable venture. 

In October, 1914, a bill authorizing the town to 
raise fifty thousand dollars for the purpose of installing 
a water system was proposed in the Alberta Legislature. The 
new system had been surveyed and it was thought that the 
water would be obtained from Big Hill creek some two miles 
north of Cochrane or else from local wells. The improvement 
promised to make the local taxes considerably higher and C. 
W. Usher, since he owned quite a lot of property in the 
town, opposed the bill and managed to have it killed. (34) 

(34) Interviews, Messrs A. Chapman and W. Andison. 

The industrial expansion of Cochrane, based as it 
was on the brick yards, the coal mines, the stone quarries 
and the sawmill, had ended by 1914. The brick yards were 
the most promising development of the period before the war. 



























93 


Underlying the valley in which the town is located is a 
silty, laminated, hard clay of a strongly calcareous charac¬ 
ter that requires little sand when used in brick making. 

The Cochranes of Mitford had taken advantage of this natural 
resource in 1891 but had failed to make a success of their 
brick yard. As previously mentioned, Little had begun the 
establishment of a brick yard before his death. Peter 
Collins carried on this work. 

Collins built his first kiln in 1902. It had a 
capacity of one hundred thousand bricks. The early brick- 
maker was a horse driven affair. Additional kilns and dry¬ 
ing sheds were added in the next few years and, in 1906, 
when a steam driven brick-maker was installed, there were 
four kilns and over thirty drying sheds. A spur was built 
from the C. P. R. In 19 07 the plant was turning out twenty- 
five thousand bricks per day. The yard was only operated 
during the summer months and most of the help came from the 
homesteads near the town. Many homesteaders depended on 
the Collins yard for the summer employment that kept them 
eating through the winter. ( 35 ) 

( 35 ) Interview, Mr. A. Raby, Cochrane, January 1931* 

Mr. Raby was one of these homesteaders. 

S. Perrenoud and J. Boudreau established the “French 
Brick Yard" in 1904. Gabriel Bruel bought them out a short 
time later. This yard employed the “primitive* 1 kiln system 
of firing the bricks. There were no permanent kilns, but 


















, 

. . 

















■ 

. 




, 


. 




- 



: . . 

* 


; - 

- 

■* 

, 

. 

* 

. . . 

. 

, 

. 

. 






94 


rather the kilns were built with the green bricks as they 
were made. After the bricks had been fired the kilns were 
torn down and the bricks composing them were sold. Exten¬ 
sive new brick making machinery was installed in 1?11 and 
the yard then had a capacity of twenty-two thousand bricks 
per day. All the employees were Frenchmen. (36) 

(36) Interview, C. Pedeprat. 

T. Quigley established a brick yard in 1910. It had 
no regular kilns either although some excellent brick-making 
machinery was installed. Quarters and a cookhouse were 
built. The fourth yard was opened in 1?11 by Joe Murphy and 
a Mr. Loder. Mr. C. Burnham bought them out shortly after¬ 
wards and the concern came to be known as n The Cochrane 
Brick Company 11 . Both of these firms went bankrupt before the 
war. (37) 

(37) Ibid. 

The depression of 1?13 was the first serious blow to 
the brick business in Cochrane. Quigley and Burnham closed 
up and the other yards were forced to cut production. About 
this time yards for the manufacture of pressed brick at 
Brickburn, near Calgary, and at Redcliffe began to offer 
serious competition to the kiln-brick yards. This resulted 
in a further curtailment of production in Cochrane. The 
French Yard operated on a small margin and managed to remain 
solvent. Collins attempted to raise money to purchase the 















T S' 













95 


machinery necessary for the manufacture of pressed, brick. 

He was determined to retain complete control of the yard 
however, and no one was prepared to invest money on those 
terms. Collins carried on until the war on a small scale. 
(38) The war was the final blow to the brick industry in 

(38) Interviews, A. Chapman and C. Pedeprat. 

Cochrane. In August 1914 , Gabriel Bruel and most of his 
employees were called back to Prance to rejoin their regi¬ 
ments. (39) The yard was closed, never to reopen. The 

(39) C.A., August 20, 1914. 

See Appendix E, map (3), for location of the brick 
yards. 

Collins yard closed soon afterwards, but it was reopened 
for a time after the war ended. 

The coal mines attracted a certain amount of atten¬ 
tion at different times before the war. They were located 
on or near the site of the earlier Vaughan mine, on t he 
south side of the river, west of Mitford. The miners gene¬ 
rally lived in bunkhouses near the mines but Cochrane was 
the source of supplies and the mine offices were situated 
there. 

The first mine was opened in 1908 by “The Western 
Canada Cement and Coal Company* 1 of Exshaw. It was near the 
early Vaughan mine and the Company hoped that it would sup¬ 
ply the coal required in the cement plant at Exshaw. The 
slope flooded the next year and the mine was abandoned. (40) 






'I r»o i> 









(40) Interview, Mr. A. Chapman. 

Mine number 169 has an interesting history. It lay 
abandoned from 1887, when Mr. Vau^ian gave it up, until 1911 
when it was taken over by th "Calgaiy Coal Syndicate". 

This syndicate was controlled by English capitalists and 
the head office was in the Temple Chambers, London. The 
mine was christened "Valerie Mine". The old slope was 
pumped out and extended some three hundred feet. A contract 
was let for the construction of a plant and tipple capable 
of handling five hundred tons per day. (41) The syndicate 

(41) Annual Report of the Department of Public Works, 
Alberta, 1911. 

sold the mine to "Mitford (Calgary) Colliery Limited" in 
1912. R. B. Bennett was President of this company. The 
main slope was extended to twelve hundred and eighty feet 
in the course of the next year. A plant and tipple were 
begun and several fine buildings for the miners were con¬ 
structed. A second slope was begun and was sunk a distance 
of two hundred and forty feet. The main slope was pushed 
down to sixteen hundred and eighty feet before the min6 was 
abandoned in 1913* (42) 

(42) Annual Reports of the Department of Public Works, 

1912, 1913, 1914 and 1913. 

Mine number 303 was located up the hill to the 

south of the other two openings. Dr. Ritchie owned the 












m > 


< 







97 


land and the ”Bonnie Brae Coal and Quarries, Limited” of 
Calgary entered into an agreement with him to open the mine, 
in 1911* (43) A level four hundred feet long was driven on 

(43) Interview, Mr. A. Chapman. 

the strike of the seam. The contract for construction of a 
plant and tipple was let but they were never built. The 
coal seam varied in thickness from four feet six inches to 
five feet six inches. (44) The mine was abandoned in 1912. 

(44) Annual Reports of the Department of Public Works, 

1911, 1912. 

In May 191.5, the machinery was removed and in August Dr. 
Ritchie sued the company for thirty-three thousand dollars 
arrears In rent. The Company was bankrupt however, and most 
of the stockholders had lost their money. (43) 

(43) c. A., May 20 and August 12, 1913. 

Various attempts have been made since to operate a 
mine in this area but all have failed. The coal is poor in 
quality and the seams are too thin. No figures are availa¬ 
ble on the amount of coal removed during the periods when 
the mines were operated but it appears that no company was 
able to show a profit. The mines have been completely 
abandoned for twenty-five years. 

A previously mentioned the first quarry was opened 
at Cochrane in 1908. sandstones are exposed at many points 
along the northwest side of the valley of Big Hill creek. 
Duncan shelly of the ”Shelley Quarry Company” of Calgary 






























98 


tested a number of these outcroppings in the main valley and 
in adjoining coulees. The offices and cutting plant of the 
Company were located in Calgary, but local men were employed 
to take out the stone. In the summers of 1?11, 1^12 and 
1912 three quarries were in operation employing as many as 
two hundred men* (46) The workings were about one and a 

(46) C. A., April 17, 1913, quotes this number. 

half miles north of Cochrane and at a considerable eleva¬ 
tion above the creek. Desirable stone was only found in 
the upper zone and the blue hardhead, useless as a build¬ 
ing stone because of its hardness, was encountered at very 
moderate depths. This factor, coupled with the conside¬ 
rable overburden that occurs in any quarry located in the 
side of a steep bank, limited the size of the workings. 
Development was therefore restricted to numerous small 
openings along the escarpment. Transportation c£ the stone 
from the quarries to the railway was another problem, es¬ 
pecially when the workings were all located high on the 
hillside. (47) 

(47) Interview, Mr. A. Raby 

The stone is from the Paskapoo formation of Sand¬ 
stone of the kocene System and was formed when marine con¬ 
ditions ceased and great fresh water lakes occupied wide 
areas of the western plains. With the exception of the 
mottled limestone from Tyndall, Manitoba, this formation 








99 


yields the most important building stone found in the prai¬ 
rie provinces. The stone is buff in type, but there are 
variations in grain and color, (48) A number of buildings 

(48) Parks, W. A., "Report on the Building and Ornamental 
Stones of Canada", Government Printing Bureau, Ottawa, 
1916 . 232 . 

in Calgary axe made of this sandstone. In 1915, for exam¬ 
ple, the Examining Customs Warehouse, the General Electric 
Office and Warehouse, the Canada Foundry Office and Ware¬ 
house, and several elegant residences were constructed of 
stone from these quarries. Operations ended early in 1914, 
due to a lack of orders, and the war closed them completely. 
(4?) They have been reopened at different times since and 

(49) Interview, Mr. A. Chapman. 

will be mentioned again in a later chapter. 

The Quigley sawmill went into operation around 
1910. In the next two years, lumber mills were established 
on the old Cochrane timber limits on Dogpound creek, on the 
Mount Royal ranch and on Behan creek. The logs ?*ere sawn 
near the scene of cutting and the lumber was hauled to 
Cochrane. It was nearly all sold locally, A huge steam 
tractor hauling several wagons at a time v/as used in trans¬ 
porting the logs and the lumber. Like the Quigley brick¬ 
yard, this enterprise ended in bankruptcy in the depression 
of 1913. (30) 









100 


(50) Interview, Mr. H. Jones. Mr. Jones ran the steam 
tractor for some time. 

The war ended any industrial activity in Cochrane 
that had not already collapsed during the depression. The 
population of the town fell rapidly, partly through enlist¬ 
ments, hut also through the movement of families to areas 
that offered employment. In 1911 the population had been 
three hundred and ninety-five and had increased steadily 
in the next two years. It had fallen to two hundred and 
eighty-four by 1916 and continued to fall for the next ten 
years. (51) 

(51) Bureau of btatisties, "Facts and Figures on Alberta", 
King's Printer, Edmonton, 1950. 30. 

The first stage of the development of the town 
ended in 1914. For the next twenty-five years, Cochrane f s 
survival depended wholly on the agricultural community of 
which it was the centre. The importance of the rural area 
in this respect is graphically illustrated when the fate 
of the neighbouring town of Glenbow is considered. When 
its local industries collapsed, there was nothing left to 
support the town. Glenbow has vanished. 











CHAPTER VII 


GLEHBOW 

Glenbow, as Its name suggests, is located in a glen 
on the Bow river. It is four miles east of Cochrane. The 
little valley lies in a wide u U n in the river and is blocked 
ofr from the north by Big Hill, which lies across the top of 
the "IP 1 . The Canadian Pacific Railway occupies the only 
practical roadway in and out of the glen. The semicircular 
valley floor, which lies seventy feet above the river, is 
about one and a half miles long and one half mile wide. It 
is a beautiful spot, but it is almost inaccessible except 
by train. 

The history of the hamlet that was established in 
this little valley is similar in certain respects to that 
of Ivlitford. Both towns were the creations of a particular 
family and were built on more or less inaccessible sites. 
Both depended for survival on the wealth of their founders 
and the success of the industries established in them. In 
each case the industries were short-lived. Glenbow and 
Mitford were one-family towns and they were abandoned by 
their populations shortly after they were deserted by their 
founders. 

There are, however, other ways in which their his¬ 
tories are different. Mitford served as the nucleus of the 
early rural development of an extensive district. Glenbow 




f ■' - 


, .. . 

nl 

.. i 

: 










■ • : . .l : . ' < x 

. 

. 

- 

- . ; .. .. . 

* 

• 

.. : ■ ‘. • y ■ ■ ' .to f'v 

■ ' ; ■ ■■■ • ; .yp.,u 

' . ■ 

« • 

- j. ... . ' 





102 


had no connection with a rural area. It was important only 
to those who lived in the little valley or nearby on the 
hillside. A very few families established themselves in 
Mitford, but Glenbow at one time contained forty or fifty. 
Several of the beautiful homes built around Glenbow still 
stand; nothing more than a few ruined foundations mark the 
old site of Mitford. 

The first twenty years of the history of Glenbow 
are of little importance. In the late l88o f s, the G. P. R. 
constructed a section haise there and employed two or three 
men to watch for rock slides in the deep cuts along the 
neighbouring right-of-way. Homesteaders were not interes¬ 
ted in the district because of the difficult nature of the 
terrain. The area was otherwise ignored except for the 
occasional passenger on the trains who might have noticed 
this pleasant little valley. (1) 

(1) Interview, Mr. T. Wearmouth, Cochrane, January 19J?1. 

Mr. Wearmouth was the main source of information on 
Glenbow. He worked there from 1907 to 1909 and then 
homesteaded nearby. 

It was the geological formation of this particular 
area that first focused attention on it. Along the rail¬ 
way, thin layers of sandstone and shales are to be seen. 

The same formation appears on the hillside to the north and 
is topped by heavy layers of sandstone. In 190,5, a Mr. 

Moore bought the land in the valley and on the hillside with 




■ : . . ' ; ; 




. 

. . ,. 



. 

* 

: 

* 

* ' 

: 

* 


: . 



.. ' :I2 , ’ ' ■ 





103 


the intention of establishing a quarry there. In the next 
two years several test openings were made and a small amount 
of stone was taken out. In 1907 Mr. Moore turned the quarry 
over to a Mr. Hayden of the "British Columbia Construction 
Company'*. The stone was to be shipped to British Columbia 
but the project soon fell through when the Company found 
sources of supply closer to that.market. 

In 1908 Mr. C. de la Vergne became interested in 
the prospects Glenbow offered and purchased Mr. Moore f s hold¬ 
ings. The period of extensive development then began. (2) 

(2) Ibid. 

Mr. de la Vergne came to Alberta late in 1907. He 
was the son of the president and founder of the **de la Vergne 
Refrigerator company" of Hew York. It is suggested that the 
family business did not interest him and, after the death of 
his father, he came west in the hope of finding a more sat¬ 
isfactory enterprise in which to invest his considerable 
fortune. (3) 

(3) Interview, Mr. S. Scott, Cochrane, January 1931. Mr. 
scott lives in the house formerly owned by de la Vergne. 

In 1908 Mr. de la Vergne had the townsite surveyed 
and constructed a store and post office. Mr. L. McDonald, 
a recent immigrant from the Mar it i me s, operated them for de 
la Vergne. The Chapman brothers of Cochrane were given the 
contract to construct a suitable home for the de la Vergne 




















104 


family. A number of lots were sold to the men moving in to 
work in the quarry and small homes were built for them. A 
great deal of money was invested in machinery for the quarry 
and facilities were provided for turning out finished 
stone. (4) 

(4) Interviews, Messrs. A. Chapman and T. Wearmouth. 

John Clarke came to Glenbow in 1?08 and built a 
dairy farm about three-quarters of a mile west of the store. 
He bought a herd of pure-bred Holstein cows and shipped milk 
to Calgary. Mr. Clarke was also a wealthy American, from 
New York. His father is reputed to have owned a controlling 
interest in Madison Square Gardens. 

(5) Interview, Mr. T. Wearmouth. 

The Chapman brothers finished the de la Vergne 
house in 1?09. It was a frame building and no expense was 
spared in making it one of the finest in the area. Barns 
and other out-buildings were constructed and Mr. de la 
Vergne stocked his holdings with cattle and thoroughbred 
horses. A school was built on the towns it e as well as 
several houses for the workers and their families. (6) 

(6) Interview, Mr. A. Chapman. Mr. Scott reports that the 
de la Vergne house cost twenty-five thousand dollars 
to build. 

The Parliament Buildings in Edmonton were under 
construction at this time and the steelwork and granite 
base had been finished. The contract for the sandstone 






















105 


for the min portion of the building was let to the “Quinlan 
and Carter Quarry Company”. This Company took over the ope¬ 
ration or the (ilenbow quarry and began to take out and finish 
the stone for the new building. John Quinlan was a Montreal 
man with considerable experience in sandstone quarrying and 
Me. W* Carter was an Ldmonton man. (7) A great deal of new 

(7) “Construction of the Parliament Buildings'* - a brochure 
in the Library of the Alberta Legislature. 

equipment was installed including diamond cutting saws and 

gang saws for finishing the stone and derricks for moving 

the large blocks out of the quarry. 

The problem of getting the stone from the quarry to 
the railroad tracks was always a serious one, since the 
quarry was situated a half mile up the steep hillside. 

Hayden had constructed a double track up the hill and used 
a long cable to lower a car on one track while a second one 
was pulled up the other track. The system worked by gravity, 
since the car going down was always loaded with stone and the 
other was empty. A wheel that could be braked located above 
the quarry, controlled the descent of the load of stone. 

The strain on this wheel was terrific and everyone feared 
that it would one day fail. 

Mr. Quinlan decided to install a proper winch and 
drum mechanism. As a result, a machine of this nature 
weighing several tons was brought to Glenbow and, after a 









106 


prodigious amount of labour, was installed on the steep 
hillside above the quarry. Several tons of rock were piled 
in front of it to prevent it being pulled down the hill by 
the load of sandstone. One detail overlooked in the instal¬ 
lation became strikingly apparent when the trial runs were 
made. The drum was mounted on long timbers and rotated on 
a horizontal axis. As the first car was lowered, the cable 
paid out frcm the bottom side of the drum and all went well. 
When the second car was being lowered ho?«rever, the cable 
came off the top of the drum and, since no one had thought 
to pile stones on the timbers behind the drum, the whole 
mechanism somersaulted forward over the retaining pile of 
rock and fell into the quarry. The carload of stone ran 
wild and snapped the heavy winch out of the quarry and 
pulled it at express train speed through the sheds below 
that housed the machinery for finishing the sandstone. The 
cable finally broke and the car spilled off its load and 
vaulted the G. P. R. tracks. Winch and car, both badly 
wrecked, still lie where they came to rest. The earlier 
system for lowering the stone was reinstalled and functioned 
without mishap for the remainder of the time that the quarry 
was in operation. (8) 

(8) Interview, Mr. T. Wearmouth. Mr. Wearmouth was opera¬ 
ting the winch at the time and narrowly escaped serious 
injury. 






107 


In 1^10 and 1?11 a considerable amount of stone was 
removed. Besides the Parliament Buildings, Glenbow sand¬ 
stone may also be seen in Athabaska Hall at the University 
of Alberta, as well as a number of buildings in Calgary. 

The stone is not of a high quality. There is a diversity 
of colouring and blue cores may be seen in some stones. 

This blue hardhead induces horizontal cracking. Blue hard¬ 
head was encountered at moderate depths in the workings and 
restricted the size of the q.uarry. It Is now regarded as 
worked out. (?) 

(?) Parks, W. A., "Report on the Building and Ornamental 
Stones of Canada", Government Printing Bureau, Ottawa, 
1?16• 228 and 232. 

There were a number of developments in 1?10. Mr. 
McDonald left the store and was succeeded by Mr. C. Edwards. 
In the electioneering of 1?0?, Hon. C. W. Fisher promised 
that efforts would be made to have a bridge put across the 
Bow river at Glenbow. On the strength of this promise and 
in the hope of being able to tap the expanding grain grow¬ 
ing district south of the river, Mr. de la Vergne built a 
ten thousand dollar elevator on the townsite in 1?10. C. 

S. Benell, of Brandon, was the contractor. The bridge 
never materialized, and the elevator, with a capacity of 
thirty thousand bushels, never held more than a few hun¬ 
dred. (10.) 

(10) Interview, T. Weamouth. 

C. A., May 1?, 1910. 











108 


In 1912 the quarry was nearly worked out. The men 
went on strike in May demanding higher pay and some guaran¬ 
tee of future employment. Mr. de la Vergne decided to es¬ 
tablish a brick yard as there was still a fair market for 
kiln bricks and this new enterprise would provide employ¬ 
ment for the men. The Parliament Buildings had been com¬ 
pleted and new orders were hard to get. Quinlan and Garter 
discontinued operating the quarry. 

The new brick yard was situated one hundred yards 
east of the store. (11) Some excellent equipment was in- 

(11) See Appendix F, Map (1), Glen bow 1914. 

stalled but the method of firing the bricks was primitive, 
like that used by the French Brick Yard in Cochrane. A 
number of families left Glenbow but there were still plenty 
of men to operate the yard. In 1913 and early 1914, a pro¬ 
duction of fifty thousand bricks per day was maintained. 

The enterprise survived the depression of 1913 only because 
de la Vergne operated it at a loss. It was abandoned a 
short time before the war began. (12) 

(12) Interviews, Messrs. T. Wearnouth and A. Raby 

In 1912 and 1913 a unique and interesting settle¬ 
ment took place at Glenbow. Three wealthy Americans from 
New York built themselves beautiful homes near the town. 
They were R. Stevenson, Dr. H. Morris and T. Drake. Drake 
was married to de la Vergne 1 s sister. It is reasonable to 










presume that the others were friends of de la Vergne who 
were persuaded by him to come and settle there. (13) 

(13) Ibid. 


109 


The houses built by Dr. Morris and Mr. Drake were 
frame buildings and each contained over thirty rooms. Mr. 
Stevenson*s house was built of sandstone with a second 
storey of frame construction. It cost over thirty-five 
thousand dollars and contained forty rooms. (14) Exten- 
(14) Interview, Mr. S. Scott. 


sive barns were built around the houses and each owner 
imported a number of thoroughbred horses. A racetrack and 
a small polo field was laid out south of the railroad. 
Glenbow became noted for its elegant social life and sport¬ 
ing elite. Polo was played extensively. (13) 


(13) Interviews, Messrs. A. Raby and T. Wearmouth. A 

picture of Mr. de la Vergne in one of the polo teams 
in Calgary may be seen in the "Canadian Cattlemen**, 
Vol. XII, No. 1, June 1?49. His name is spelled 
**de la Verne** in the caption. 


Mr. Stevenson was not in good health and he found 
it expedient to return to New York to be near the speci¬ 
alized medical care that his condition demanded. His house 
was not completed when he left. It was sold to a Mrs. van 
der Hoff, also of New York, who finished it and lived in it 
until 1313 or I?l6. (16) 


(16) There is some uncertainty about the spelling of this 
lady T s name. Mr. wearmouth believed that "it was 
spelled like it sounded". No one else would venture 
an opinion. There is also some uncertainty about the 





























110 


initials of Drake, Morris and Stevenson. It was im¬ 
possible to find anyone who had moved in their social 
circle and knew them intimately. 

Dr. Morris found himself in grave financial diffi¬ 
culties by the time his home was completed and he left in 
1^14 to return to New York. The Drakes and Mrs. van der 
Hoff left during the war. The houses remained deserted for 
many years. In the 1930 T s, R. C. Burns, K.G., of Calgary, 
purchased the Morris buildings and maintains a summer home 
there. In 1930, the Stevenson, or van der Hoff, house was 
sold for seven hundred and fifty dollars. It was torn down 
for the material it contained and nothing remains now but 
the stone walls. (17) 

(17,) interviews, Messrs, s. Scott and f. Wearmouth. There 
was an elaborate hot water heating system in this 
house. Mr. scott reports that the Calgary man who 
purchased the house and tore it d cmn got over seven 
hundred and fifty dollars for the furnace itself. 

In 1913 the elevator burned to the ground. (l8) 

(18) C. A., November 18, 1913. 

The town itself was deserted except for the C• P. R. sec¬ 
tion men. In 1913 Mr. de la Yergne sold his stock and 
moved to Calgary. He had lost most of his money by this 
time and went into the business of selling cars in an ef¬ 
fort to recoup his fortune. The land at Glehbow was rented 
for farming purposes. The car sales did not prosper and Mr. 
de la Yergne returned to the United States. E. L. Harvie, 
K.C., Calgary, bought the Glehbow holdings in 1936. Mr. de 














Ill 


la Yergne died in Seattle in the early 1940 f s. (1?) 

(1?) Interview, Mr. S. Scott. Mr. Scott has managed the 
property of L. Harvie at Glenbow since 1936. 

In 1923 Mr. Clarke also returned to the United 
States. (20) Mr. C. Copit home now owns his land. 

(20) Interview, Mr. T. Weamouth. 

In the years since the first World War, all the 
buildings on the townsite except the store, the post office 
and those maintained by the C. P. R. have either been 
burned down or torn down. The store and the post office 
are now used by Mr. Scott as granaries. 

The history of Glenbow is rather unique in some 
respects. The considerable population that the town once 
boasted is gone and has only left three beautiful old homes 
and a hole in the hillside as evidences that people once 
lived there. The settlers in the Cochrane district were 
hardly aware of Glenbow when it was in full bloom, and most 
of than do not now remember that it ever existed. 






























CHAPTER VIII 


RURAL DEVELOPMENT SINCE 1900 

The new century began rather auspiciously for the 
Cochrane district. The whole area was devoted to the rais¬ 
ing of livestock, cattle were selling for fifty dollars 
each and there was a brisk demand. The British Oovernment 
had recently curtailed its beef purchases in Argentina 
owing to disease among the cattle there and the Canadian 
stock-growing community was enjoying a boom. Over thir¬ 
teen hundred head of beef were shipped from Cochrane in 
1?00 and again in 19 01. The Boer War kept the horse mar¬ 
ket healthy. Cl) The sheep industry was a much less 

Cl) Annual Report of the Department of Agrieulture, 

North West Territories, 1900 C53 and 58 ) and 1901, 

87. 

profitable one, but the only sheep rancher of any conse¬ 
quence, Prank white, sold out in 1901. 

Mr. White had found it impossible to raise sheep 
profitably. The Merino ranch lost money steadily in the 
1890 T s and Mr. White disposed of his stock in 1900 and 
1901. He then sold the ranch to C. ¥. Fisher, who impor¬ 
ted a herd of Shorthorn cattle with which to stock it. (2) 
C2) Interview, Mr. L. Towers, Cochrane, January 1951. 

John and Richard Copit home went into beef cattle 
in 1898 . They steadily built up a fine herd of Herefords, 








































' ■ 








* .. 

* 

- 

. 

' 

, 


. 




















115 


although they found it difficult to obtain good sires in 
those days. sam Copithorne came from Ireland in 19 04 and 
settled beside his brothers on the Jumping Pound. (3) 

(5) Interview, Mr. C. copithorne, Cochrane, January 1951- 
In 1904 a Mr. McNaughton bought the land owned by 
the Cochranes, at Mitford, and stocked it with a trainload 
of cattle from eastern Canada. The cattle were not used 
to the climate, however, and most of them perished the fol¬ 
lowing winter. Therefore Mr. McNaughton decided to discon¬ 
tinue ranching. (,4J 

C49 Interview, Mr. H. Jones, cochrane, January 1951 

The early years of 1900 saw a steadily increasing 
flow of homesteaders to the rural area around Cochrane. 

This influx reached its maximum in 1905 and 1906. Many of 
the ranchers already established found their leases either 
being diminished by the Government or cut up by squatters. 
All the good land was taken up by 1910. Like many other 
rural areas in Alberta, the Cochrane district gained as 
large a population as it could comfortably support, and the 
number of landowners has not since been as large. Many of 
the homesteaders could not make a success of it and they 
sold out to their neighbours and moved away. Today there 
are few holdings as snail as the half section with which a 
homesteader was expected to make a living. 

The new settlement resulted in a reorientation of 



























114 


the Cochrane area. Homesteaders and squatters had steadily- 
alienated the eastern portions of the Bow River Horse Ranch 
since the l890 f s, and they turned to Calgary as their com¬ 
mercial centre. The eastern boundary of the ranch thus 
moved steadily westwards, and the thriving farming community 
of Springbank grew up between the Bow and Elbow rivers. The 
ranch headquarters was closer to Cochrane than to Calgary 
however, and Mr. G. E. Goddard continued to deal in Coch¬ 
rane. (5) 

(5) Appendix A, map (5), the Cochrane district around 1906. 

Mr. Kerfoot and Mr. Bell Irving, who had been rais¬ 
ing high quality remounts on their ranch in Grand Talley, 
dissolved their partnership in 1905 and Mr. Bell Irving sold 
out to J. Meiklejon, who had settled near him ,in the late 
1890*s. Mr. Meiklejon specialized in a heavier class of 
horses and on the prize lists of the stallion shows in 
Calgary in the early 1900*s, his name invariably appeared. 

He was a member of the “Territorial Cattle Breeders* Asso¬ 
ciation" as well as the “Territorial Horse Breeders 1 Asso¬ 
ciation." (6) 

(6) Report of the Department of Agriculture, North West 

Territories, 1905* 54. 

Interview, Mr. A. D. Kerfoot, Cochrane, January 1951* 

Mr. 0. Critchley, in partnership with H. A. Rhodes, 
bought out Mr. Meiklejon in 1906. Most of the heavy horses 
were sold soon afterwards and the partners concentrated on 











113 


light horses. Both were keen polo enthusiasts and figured 
prominently in the early polo teams around Cochrane and 
Calgary. Mr. critchley also owned land in the Nose creek 
district northwest of Calgary. He had settled in that area 
some fifteen or twenty years earlier. Mr. Rhodes was a 
recent immigrant from England. (7) 

(7) Interview, Miss M. Morrison, Calgary, January 1951• 

In 1906 R. Cowan, wishing to return to England, 
sold his large ranch northeast of Cochrane to Mr. W. 
Hutchinson. The Cowan ranch consisted of four thousand 
acres at that time and Mr. Hutchinson has extended it 
steadily and now owns ten thousand acres. The ranch head¬ 
quarters is situated in the valley of Big Hill creek about 
eight miles northeast of Cochrane. Mr. Hutchinson raises 
Shorthorn cattle. (8) 

(8) Interview, Mr. W. Hutchinson, Cochrane, January 1931. 

The dreadful winter of 1906-07 hardly affected 
the stock around Cochrane. The snow was less heavy and 
the hay more plentiful than elsewhere in the ranching 
area of southern Alberta. Many ranchers in other regions 
were ruined that winter. (9) 

(9) Ibid. 

The Glendale district, northeast of Cochrane, on 
top of the Big Hill, was the last portion of the areato 
be settled. There were no settlers there in 1903. In 















116 


1883 an extremely thick stand of willow bush that covered 
the whole district, was destroyed by fire. The fire pene¬ 
trated to the roots and continued to burn underground for 
several years. The area was known as "The Burnt Ground" 
until 1?10. (10) In 1908 and 1909, J. Willis, A. Norris, 


(l0) Mr. R. Dixon, better known as Rattlesnake Pete, of 
Calgary, reports that the area was burned off the 
year before he came to work at the Cochrane Ranche. 
That was 1884. Mr. White, in an entry in his diary 
on September 26, 1883, records that he had heard 
that there was an extensive fire northeast of the 
Cochrane Ranche headquarters. He was on the ranch 
near Waterton Lakes at the time. 


w. Bancroft, T. Wear mouth, a Mr. Dougall, and R. and J. 
Standring settled on “The Burnt Ground". The land was 
covered with a tall stand of grass at that time, and lit¬ 
tle bush had taken root again. The soil was full of hum¬ 
mocks and was extremely hard to break. A number of the 
settlers had families and they formed the "Glendale" 
school district in 1910. Strangely enough the bachelors 
of the district were much in favor of the school, for 
they wanted a place in which dances and socials could be 
held. (11) 

(11) Interview, Mr. T. Wearmouth, Cochrane, January 1951. 

No one appears to kno?/ why the district came to be 
called Glendale. 

In 1908 Dr. Ritchie purchased the Butler homestead, 
at the mouth of Jumping Pound creek, and on this land he 
grew the first wheat to be successfully ripened in the 
Cochrane district. It was shipped from Cochrane in the 















« 


. 


. 




. . * . .. 

' 

. 

. 














. 

- 




• ■ 




















117 


fall of 1908 and was the first carload of wheat ever sent 
from a point west of Calgary* (12) 

(12) c. A., April 15, l^O?• 

interview, Mr. A. chapman, Cochrane, January 1951. 

Mr. Kerfoot was accidently killed at the Spring 
Stock show in Calgary in 1910. He was riding a spirited 
horse in the livestock parade in front of the grandstand 
and, when the band began to play, the horse darted side¬ 
ways and fell over the neck of a Jersey cow. Mr. Kerfoot 
was crushed beneath it. At the time of his death, Mr. 
Kerfoot owned five sections of land in G-rand valley, about 
five hundred head of horses and the same number of cattle, 
some of his horses were well known. ‘’Tartan”, ’’Dixieland” 
and ’’Smokey’ 1 were raised by him. ’’Partan” and “Dixieland” 
won a great number of prizes in light horse shows in the 
United States. “Smokey” did not bee erne well known until 
after he was purchased by D. P. McDonald of the Mount Koyal 
ranch. (13) 

(13) Interview, Mr. A. D. Kerfoot. 

In 1910 “The Cochrane and District Agricultural 
Society” was formed with J. Cook, a local farmer, as presi¬ 
dent. This society held its first exhibition in the fall 
of that year. There was a great deal of enthusiasm in the 
early years. In 1911 prizes to the value of two thousand 
dollars were offered. (14) The first annual seed fair was 












' 



' 










113 


(14) Report of the Department of Agriculture, Alberta, 

1911. 189. 

held in 1913 and this was the first sign that an important 
grain growing industry had been established. The society 
survived the first World War but interest waned each year 
and it was discontinued in 1923 * (13) 

(13) Int erview, Mr. A. Chap man. 

The homesteaders were the first landowners in the 
Cochrane district to turn their attention to grain growing. 
Various ranchers had broken small acreages before this 
time, but had had little success. J. Hewitt is believed 
to have been the first to ripen barley and oats successful¬ 
ly. That was in 1907. Dr. Ritchie proved that wheat could 
be ripened there in 1908 . As a result, grain growing gained 
in importance each year until, in 1913, as noted above, there 
were enough farmers to support a seed fair. The fair gave 
the industry new impetus. The Provincial'Government sent 
judges to examine the grain and lecture to the farmers on 
approved techniques. About this time a movement developed 
to produce grain fit for seed and prevent the export of 
large sums of money from the district for seed grain. The 
farmers were only partially successful in this respect. 

Oats and barley of a sufficiently high quality to be used 
for seed are often grown, but this is not the case with 
wheat, in fact, wheat farming has never been very success- 






. 

. 

. . ' V • 




■ 

■ 

. 


- 


•* 

. 

. 


- 

* 







, 
















11 ? 


ful, since the gracing season is too short in the Cochrane 
district. (16) 

(16) Interviews, Messrs. A. Chapman, T. Weymouth and 
L. Towers. 

In 1911 Mr. Goddard decided that the day of large 
scale horse ranches had ended and he began to sell portions 
of the Bow River Horse Ranch. In April, H. 1‘lint of 
Cardiff, Wales, the president of the "Channel Ranche Com¬ 
pany", purchased thirty-two hundred acres immediately east 
of Jumping Pound creek. Two thousand acres on the eastern 
extremity of the ranch were bought by a Mr. Kennerley, who 
established a ranch of his own on it. Mr. Goddard was pre¬ 
pared to sell the remainder of the Bow River Horse Ranche 
too, but failed to find a buyer at that time. (17) 

(17) C. A., April 20 and August 24, 1911. 

In 1912 the Canadian Pacific Railway purchased a 
half section of land on the hillside east of Cochrane and 
established an experimental farm on it. J. Cook was ap¬ 
pointed director and a fine set of buildings was construc¬ 
ted. A number of purebred hogs and Ayreshire cows were 
imported and a study of the problems of mixed farming in 
the foothills was begun and carried out with great success 
in the course of the next six years. Mr. Cook was parti¬ 
cularly successful in producing varieties of vegetables 
that were suitable for this area. He took most of the 







. 

. 

. 

. 

C 

, 

. 

. 

■■. 

. 

' J.i , ; ;c ■ f L.o 


' 

, - 








120 


prizes offered for vegetables at the fairs during the period 
that the experimental farm was in operation. (18) 

(18) Interview, Mr. 0. Copit home. 

About 1908 0. W. ii'isher sold the Merino ranch to 
Mr. A. McPherson. Mr. McPherson went out of cattle raising 
in 1910 and began to breed horses. In 1912 he sold the ranch 
to Countess Bubna for thirty six thousand dollars. E. L. 
McBride was appointed manager of the ranch and the Countess 
imported a number of valuable English bhire horses. They 
were considered the best quality heavy horses ever brought 
into Alberta to that time. (1^) 

^19) C. A., November 14, 1?12, and May 8, 1913 . 

Countess Bubna was an interesting individual, she 
came originally from London, England, and was a daughter 
of the Duchess of Sutherland. bhe married an Austrian 
Count in 1911. bhe came to Canada and bought the ranch to 
satisfy an early ambition. It was hoped that Count Bubna 
would be able to join her but the international situation 
deteriorated to such an extent that he was not allowed to 
enter Canada. The countess was a well known figure around 
Cochrane, she generally spent the winters in the United 
states and the summers on her ranch, bhe was short in 
stature, with a paralytic condition that caused her to 
carry her head cocked sideways over her right shoulder, 
she operated the ranch until 1922 and then traded it to 









121 


Mr. M. McLennan for a small ranch near Kelowna, British 
Columbia, bhe remained there a very short time and then 
went to live in JSgypt, in order to be nearer her husband. 
She devoted herself to writing a play, but died before it 
was completed. (20) 

(2) Interview, Mrs. A. McKay, Cochrane, January 1951. Mr. 
and Mrs. McKay worked on the Merino ranch for a number 
of years, and were close personal friends of Countess 
Bubna. Mrs. McKay speaks very highly of her and found 
her a lady of great personal charm, which more than 
offset her unfortunate appearance. 

Mr. George Creighton was still operating two large 
horse ranches west of Cochrane in 1914. Mr. Creighton was 
a very obstinate man, as many of the buyers of remounts 
could testify. He never sold a horse unless he got his 
price. On one occasion, after a protracted argument with 
the buyers, which they lost, he donated a carload of his 
finest horses to the Government. In 1914 Dave Me Doug all, 
a local rancher and a son of trader David MeDoug all, in¬ 
stituted proceedings against Mr. Creighton over the owner¬ 
ship of a horse. Paddy Nolan, the famous Calgary lawyer, 
was retained by Mr. Creighton, who vowed that he would 
spend ten thousand dollars, if necessary, to prove that Mr. 
McDougall was wrong. The case attracted wide attention. 

One of the more hilarious aspects concerned the evidence - 
two dead horses. Borne one had shot the mare and colt that 
were involved and had taken the precaution of cutting out 
the brands. The animals were dragged to Cochrane to be 








122 


presented as evidence, Mr. Nolan threatened to have every¬ 
one involved thrown in jail if the carcasses were taken onto 
the town site. As a result, the jury was forced to go out¬ 
side the town limits to view the evidence. The jury returned 
a verdict of not guilty but the strain of the trial resulted 
in the death of Mr. Creighton in March 191.5. (21) 


(21) Interview, Miss M. Morrison. Several people expressed 
the opinion that Kendall’s "The Luck of the Mounted", 
Gundy, Toronto, 1920, was based on the Creighton- 
McDougall feud. The story is undoubtedly about the 
Cochrane area ard some of the characters seem familiar. 
The murders are figments of Kendall’s imagination. In 
the^story "Cow Run" is Cochrane, "Davidburg" is Morley, 
and'Morley McDavid" is the old trader Dave McDougall. 

T. Creighton, a brother, ran the ranches for two 
years after George died. He then sold them to P. and J. 
Bowlen for seventy-seven thousand dollars, including the 
stock. There were nine hundred and ninety head of horses 
on the land at the time of the sale. (22) 

(22) Interview, Miss M. Morrison. 

In 1?15 another of the early settlers died. He was 
Prank Ricks, who had come into the area in 1883 driving a 
large band of horses from Oregon to the Mount Royal ranch. 

He established a ranch of his own southwest of the Merino 
ranch in the l890’s. Mr. Ricks took his own life, but no 
one is certain why he did this. Some believe that he was 
a fugitive from justice and was being blackmailed by some¬ 
one In the district. These people believe that he was a 
cousin of the notorious James brothers. Others say that 











123 


he had always said that he would die with his hoots on. He 
was beginning to fail in health and may have decided that 
suicide was the only way of avoiding his declining years in 
poor health. His son, who is blind, lives in the Institute 
for the Blind in Calgary. The fine old ranch headquarters 
has been deserted since 1913* (23) 

(23) Interviews, Messrs. L. Towers, S. Cope and G. Copi- 
thorne, and Miss M. Morrison. Mr. Towers reports 
that an Indian would not ride by the Ricks 1 building 
after dark if he was offered one hundred dollars and 
a good saddle horse. The Indians believe that Frank 
Ricks still rides around his old ranch each night. 

In 1?14, "Smokey", a fine fifteen hand horse raised 

by the Kerfoots, began to make a name for himself. Some 

years previously, the Kerfoots had sold him to D. P. 

McDonald, not realizing his potentialities as a jumper. D. 

P. trained him and, at the Edmonton horse show in 1^14, he 

jumped seven feet. He was defeated, however, by a horse 

from the Si ft on stables, but he later went on to win many 

prizes. Notwithstanding this defeat, Mr. McDonald’s horses 

won thirty-two ribbons at the show in Edmonton. (24) 

(24) G. A., April 23, 1?14. 

tt Smokey u was seventeen years old at the time, a great age 
for a horse. He broke his leg taking a jump at the Calgary 
show several years later and had to be destroyed. 

The sale of remounts was very brisk in 1?14 and 
1?13. French, Canadian and English buyers found the horses 
offered in the Cochrane district acceptable and large num- 














. 

. 

' 










- •:/ .■ 


■ 


i 


• il 1:0 








124 


bers were purchased. The average price was one hundred and 
fifty dollars. The business slackened off after l^lj?, 
partly because of the Dominion Government 1 s restrictions on 
foreign buyers. (2j?) 

(25) Interview, Mr. A. D. Kerfoot. 

In 1?16 the farming and ranching population of the 
Cochrane district was beginning to realize that dairying 
would be the salvation of the area. The horse business had 
begun to fall off and the day of extensive cattle ranching 
was over. Markets were available for milk in Calgary and 
the Cochrane creamery was prepared to remain open all the 
year around if it received enough cream. Many of the home¬ 
steaders who had survived the early years were seeking ad¬ 
ditional sources of income and dairying was the logical 
solution. This new industry made great strides in the late 
* teens. (.26; 

^26; interviews, Messrs. T. Wearmouth and C. Copit home. 

The most serious consequence of the first World war 
was the man power shortage that it caused. Over two hun¬ 
dred and fifty men from Cochrane and district enlisted in 
the services. As the war progressed more and more of these 
men left the farms and ranches and those that were left be¬ 
hind had to restrict the herds and acreage being tilled in 
order to be able to handle it themselves. Many of the men 
lost their lives and many others did not return to the land 













125 


after the war. As in numerous other areas in Alberta, the 
Cochrane district after the war contained a population that 
was predominately made up of older people. This is still 
the case today, but to a lesser degree. The big difference 
has been the improvement in techniques and machinery for 
farming and dairying that occurred between the wars. This 
enabled smaller numbers of farmers to maintain a high 
level of production after the second World War began even 
though manpower was in short supply. ( 27 ) 

(27) C. A., November 9, 1?22, quotes 2j>8 as the number of 
men who enlisted from the Cochrane district in the 
first World War. 

In 1918 Mr. J. M. Copithorne bought the C. P. R. 
experimental farm. Mr. C. Copithorne took it over in 1920 
and added the Quigley homestead to it a short time later. 
Mr. C. copithorne officiated as brand inspector at Cochrane 
from 1922 to 1929* He now operates an extensive dairy 
farm. ( 28 ) 

(28) Interview, Mr. C. Copithorne. 

The late T teens and early 1920 T s witnessed the 
latest reorientation of the Cochrane area. (29) More and 

(29) Appendix A, map (4). 

more farmers were acquiring cars and with them were able 
to travel conveniently to the more populous commercial 
centre of Calgary. The residents of districts a few miles 
nearer Cochrane than Calgary began to go regularly to the 













126 


latter to do business. As cars improved, larger numbers 
followed. Today, when almost everyone owns a car, the 
whole rural population transacts a certain amount of its 
business in the city. The automobile has greatly retarded 
the development of the village of Cochrane. 

The market for horses went to pieces completely in 
the early 1920's and two of the large horse ranchers sold 
out. H. A. Rhodes had lost his life in the war and his 
brothers came to Canada to take over his interest in the 
ranch in Grand valley. They bought out Mr. Critehley T s 
interest and he moved out of the district. (30) Mr. God- 

(30) Interview, Miss M. Morrison. 

dard had sold the remainder of the Bow River Horse Ranch 
to a Prince Dabro in 1916. The Prince had been unable to 
meet the payments and Mr. Goddard repossessed it. In 
1924 he finally sold it to two brothers, Barons Joseph 
and Andre Csavossy. 

They are Hungarian noblemen. Their father's es¬ 
tates lay in three different countries after the peace 
treaties divided up central Rurope. The sons managed to 
sell those portions that remained in Hungary, and they 
left the country. They farmed and ranched the Bow River 
property for a time and then went into scientific pig pro¬ 
duction. It has been an extremely successful venture. (31) 

(31) Interview, Baron Andre Csavossy, Cochrane, January 

1951. 

















- 

* 

















* 

* 

T 

. 







* 

- 

























. 

































127 


In 1921 i£. "Boney" Thompson, who along with Frank 
Kicks had been one of the outstanding "bronc" riders of the 
west, succumbed to injuries received while riding a bucking 
horse. The whole community turned out to attend his funeral 
which was conducted in true "cowboy" fashion, nis horse, 
saddled and with his riding boots reversed in the stirrups, 
was led behind his hearse. The ceremony is regarded by many 
as unique in western uanada. { 32 ) 

{ 32 ) U. A., August 4, 1^21. 

In 1?21 the first Cochrane School Fair was held. 

This has become an annual event and is the only institution 
of its kind that still survives in this area. Sach fall 
the school children compete for prizes in classes that 
range all the way from livestock to home cooking. It is 
safe to say that, for the district as a whole, this is the 
one day to which the children most enthusiastically look 
forward. In the early 1920 T s, the annual Agricultural 
Fair was held about the same time, but it was discontinued 
in 1925. 

In 1922 Mr. M. McLennan bought the Merino ranch 
from Countess Bubna and placed his son Malcolm in charge 
of it. Malcolm was accidently killed three years later 
while attempting to rope a horse in the Cochrane stock- 
yards. He caught the animal by a hind leg, it kicked 
viciously, and spun the rope around Malcolm 1 s neck. He 









128 


was jerked off his horse and strangled before help arrived. 
Soon after this tragic happening, to. McLennan sold the 
ranch to Mr. K. Coppock. (32) 

(32) Interview, Mr. C. Gopithorne. 

In the late 1930 f s Mr. Coppock in turn sold the 
ranch to the Dominion Government and, with the J. Potts 1 
ranch to the west of it, which the government had recently 
bought, this land was incorporated into the Stoney reser¬ 
vation. The Indians operate a large ranch there at the 
present time. (24) 

(34) Interview, Mr. A. Chapman. 

The dairy industry expanded steadily in the 1920 f s. 
The smaller farmers shipped cream to the Cochrane creamery 
and those who went in more extensively for milch cows 
shipped to the large dairies in Calgary. Jiach year the 
rural area became more healthily diversified in its farm¬ 
ing activities. Pew of the large ranches devoted exclu¬ 
sively to the raising of beef remined by 1930. Horse 
ranches were a thing of the past. 

The depression of the 1930 T s made itself felt at 
a very early stage but it was less disastrous than in many 
farming regions in Alberta that were less diversified. 

Most of the farmers managed to remain reasonably solvent, 
largely because they could subsist with little else than 
that which they produced themselves. The dairy industry 

















. ■ 














. . 


















* 









* 

- ■ ■ - 

• - . . : .! , ,, 

* 

. 








12? 


suffered greatly of course, but there was always a market 
of some sort for milk to assure a small income. Grain and 
livestock were a much less reliable source of revenue. 

In 1926 the area south of the Bow river was devas¬ 
tated by a prairie fire. It began on the night of November 
18, in the eastern fringes of the forest reserve around 
Kananaskis, and spread eastward at an incredible speed in 
front of a fifty mile-an-hour wind. A tremendous area, 
reaching almost to Calgary, was burned off. A heavy down¬ 
pour the night of November V) brought it to an end. The 
Calgary Herald established the Bow Valley Fire Fund and 
collected over four thousand dollars in cash and exten¬ 
sive donations of equipment. A great number of people volun¬ 
teered their services in rebuilding homes and barns and the 
livestock that was saved was provided with free pasture for 
the winter by farmers as far away as Innisfail. The Alberta 
Government provided a great deal of feed and equipment. The 
loss is estimated at two hundred thousand dollars and over 
one hundred thousand acres of land were affected. No lives 
were lost, although the children at the Brushy Hidge school 
were in danger for a time. Many of the farmers and ranchers 
had no prairie fire clause in their insurance policies and 
received no recompense. The assistance of a sympathetic 
community was largely responsible for the early reestablish¬ 
ment of those who had been wiped out. (3j>) 


. 












■ 




' ' 




,r . , 

.. 

' 


- 

* 

« 

* 


*. , .-7 


■ 






- 


















130 


(33) Calgary Herald, November 19 to December 3, 1336. 

A number of the original settlers passed away in 
the 1920 f s and 30's. A. Gillies died in 1922; A. McDonald 
in 1927; G. Perrenoud in 1929; J. Phipps and R. Copithorne 
in 1933; J. Copithorne and F. H. Towers in 1936, and D. P. 
McDonald and !♦ H. Edge in 1940. Mrs. Perrenoud and her 
son George still operate the original ranch. Members of 
the Copithorne families own a large part of the land south 
of the Bow river. L. Towers has extended his father's 
holdings and now operates a large mixed farm along the 
Jumping Pound. Miss Helen McDonald, a daughter of D. P., 
runs the Mount Royal ranch and the Edge boys have several 
large ranches around their father's original one. The 
Gillies 1 , A. McDonald's and Phipps' land has passed into 
other hands. 

The second World War did not have such a detri¬ 
mental effect on the Cochrane rural area as the first one 
had. Fewer men of military age enlisted and, although 
there was a manpower shortage, the farmers were able to 
maintain and even extend production through the use of 
modern machinery. Extensive areas were broken, much of 
which was marginal land. The use of caterpillars and huge 
brushbreakers and the favorable location with respect to 
markets continue to result in this practice of bringing 
under the plow land that is not well suited to cultivation. 






. 








































, 




- 


' 


















131 


A number of veterans have been established on farms 
since the war ended. They have found it difficult to stock 
their holdings because of the high price of livestock and 
many of them have turned to cultivation. It is unfortunate 
that this has been necessary, for the Cochrane district is 
much better suited to the raising of cattle. 

During the 19 40*s the old established farms and 
ranches enjoyed a decade of unprecedented prosperity. Cat¬ 
tle prices rose steadily and the production of coarse 
grains became more and more profitable. Dairying, in par¬ 
ticular, was a remunerative occupation. Most of the dairy 
farmers had land enough to produce their own feed and thus 
reduce their overhead costs. It is safe to estimate that 
the average dairy farmer in the Cochrane area had a gross 
income of twenty-five dollars a day. In the Glendale dis¬ 
trict, there are some whose monthly milk cheque is over 
one thousand dollars. 

In recent years the whole region has been electri¬ 
fied. Good gravel and dirt roads intersect the country in 
every direction and the trans-Canada highway runs through 
the centre of it from east to west. Many of the farmers* 
homes have all the conveniences of city homes, and none of 
them are more than an hour from Calgary or two hours from 
Banff by car. It is not surprising that, with these ad¬ 
vantages, the prosperity of their undertakings and the 








132 


remarkable natural beauty of the region, the farmers and 
ranchers of the Cochrane district are convinced that they 
live in one of the finest spots in Canada. 





CHAPTER IX 


COCHRANE SINCE 1914. 

The history of the village of Cochrane since 1914 
is not as interesting as that of its earlier years. The 
depression that proeeded the first World War, and the war 
itself, brought the local industries to an end. The ear¬ 
lier vigor of the bustling and expanding village gave way 
to apathy and stagnation and it came to depend wholly on 
the rural area for survival. Its prosperity was directly 
proportional to the prosperity of the farmers and ranchers 
around it. It is only in very recent years that Cochrane 
has regained some of its earlier independence. 

In 1?14 the residents of Cochrane organized several 
committees to raise funds in support of nation-wide cam¬ 
paigns. By January, 1915 , over eight thousand dollars were 
subscribed to the Patriotic, the Belgian and the Red Cross 
Funds. An overseas tobacco fund was started and loyally 
supported throughout the war. In August, 191.5, the villa¬ 
gers decided to donate money for a machine gun. At a meet¬ 
ing called to elect a committee, the inhabitants oversub¬ 
scribed the new fund before they had finished electing the 
members to control it. (l) 

(1) C. A., January 29 and August 12, 1915* 

In March, 1919, the village was finally connected 
to the Calgary Power Company’s lines. Two years before, 









134 


in an effort to economize, a boiler and generator were 
installed and T. Quigley was hired to run the little plant. 
The power line from the Ghost dam had been built past Coch¬ 
rane in 1^12, but the village council had felt that the 
Company’s rates were too high. The local power plant did 
not work satisfactorily, however, partly because the 
villagers persisted in using toasters as heaters, and the 
franchise was given to Calgary Power. The matter of the 
improvised electric heaters cleared up very soon after 
electric metres were installed in the villagers’ homes. (2) 

(2) 0. A., March 11, 1915. 

In June, 1915, George Pitter, who had been running 
a bowling alley without much success, renovated the build¬ 
ing and turned it into a hall for dances and socials. The 
community was not yet ready to support a privately owned 
hall however, and he sold it to the curling club. The 
curling rink has been located in it since that time. (3) 

(3) C. A., June 17, 1915. 

Interview, Mr. W, Andison, Cochrane, January 1951* 

In 1915 the Howard block was purchased by F. W. 
Maggs, with the financial support of the Canadian Credit 
Mens* Association. He then bought out the grocery busi¬ 
ness of J. A. Campbell that was housed in the block and 
conducted the store himself until 1938. (4) 

(4) Interview, Mr. A. Chapman, Cochrane, January 1951. 


























135 


In l^lb the Chapman brothers constructed a meat 
market for Mr. H. Andison on Main Street. Mr. Andison still 
operates his butcher shop there, (j?) 
t5) Interview, Mr. A. Andison, Cochrane, January 1951- 

The villagers were opposed to prohibition but the 
"drys" elsewhere in Alberta prevailed and the sale of liquor 
was prohibited. As a result, the Cochrane hotel went out of 
business. Mr. R. A. Webster, who had recently sold his flour 
and feed store, purchased the hotel building and opened the 
"Peoples Cash Store" in it. A short time later, the United 
Farmers of Alberta Cooperative Association bought the stock 
and good will but kept Mr. Webster as manager. The business 
went bankrupt in 1918 and Mr. Webster repossessed it. (6) 

( 6 ) Interview, Mr. W. Andison. 

The Cochrane creamery was moved from the west end 
of the village to the bank of Big Hill creek in 1918. 

Drainage and water supply had been a serious problem after 
the creamery went into year-around production. The new 
site was ideal, and the creamery, now owned by Mrs. J. 
Loughery, is still operated there. The original buildings 
of the Cochrane Ranch are located a short distance behind 
it. (7) 

^ 7 ) Interview, Mr. S. J. Reed, Cochrane, January 1951* 

In 1918 the Chapman brothers built a large garage on 
Main street. They operated this business until 1935, when 










j . 





















136 


they sold out to Mr. M. Baptle. (8) 

(8) Interview, Mr. A. Chapman. 

In May, 191?, the Hon. C. W. Fisher died while at¬ 
tending a session of the Alberta Legislature. He had 
represented Cochrane in the House since l?0j> and had been 
speaker throughout that time. Mr. Fisher came to Cochrane 
in 1901, a comparatively wealthy man, and purchased a great 
deal of property in the village, as well as the Merino 
ranch. The Fisher block, that housed most of his enter - 
prises, was a landmark. His general store was the largest 
in the village and was a great boon to the agricultural com¬ 
munity, and many of the homesteaders received financial sup¬ 
port and credit from Mr. Fisher. At the time of his death 
he owned quarter sections of land scattered all over the 
Cochrane district that had been turned over to him for 
grocery bills by homesteaders who had gone bankrupt. Land 
was of little value in 1919, and. his widow suffered finan¬ 
cial embarrassment because of her former husband’s commen¬ 
dable but unpractical attitude towards those who owed him 
money. 

T. Fisher, his half brother and a beneficiary, took 
over the general store in partnership with W. Andison. Mr. 
Andison, a brother of E. Andison, had been an employee in 
the store since 1907. In 1924, Mr. Fisher sold his interest 








137 


to R. A. Webster and the stock was moved into the Cochrane 
hotel. (?) 

(?) Interview, Mr. W. Andison. 

In the by-election that followed the death of the 
Hon. C. W. Fisher, Mr. A. Moore was elected. He was a local 
farmer and a member of the United Farmers of Alberta. He 
was the first supporter of this organization to become a 
member of the Legislative Assembly. The village did not 
support him but the rural area voted heavily for him. (10) 

(10) Interview, Mr. W. Andison and Mr. A. Chapman. 

In 1?1? Dr. J. Waite set up a practice in Cochrane. 
Dr. Ritchie had been killed in an automobile accident on 
the Cochrane hill in 1?1?. Dr. Park had joined the medical 
corps in 1?14 and did not return to Cochrane after discharge. 
His young assistant, Dr. W. S. baunders remained for a time 
during the war, but left before Dr. Waite arrived. Dr. 

Waite established a regular drug store in the village. 

Drugs and medicines had previously been sold by the general 
store. (11) 

(11) Interview, Mr. A. Chapman. 

The Cochrane Board of Trade was reorganized after 
the war. Several previous attempts had been made to main¬ 
tain such a board but all had failed, as did this one. It 
is only in very recent years that it has been revived, and 
it appears to be more healthy this time. (12) 






















158 


(12) Interview, Mr* V/, Andison. 

Cochrane was still predominately "wet” in the pro¬ 
hibition referendum of 1920, but the vote was light. In 
1925 the vote on clause "D" to end prohibition had one hun¬ 
dred and seventy-seven supporters, while clause "A", to con¬ 
tinue it, had only fifty-five. A majority of Albertans also 
agreed with the inhabitants of Cochrane and the sale of 
liquor became l©gal. (13) 

(13) C. A., October 23, 1920, and November 3, 1923* 

The end of prohibition resulted in several changes 
in Cochrane. Mr. Webster decided to reopen the hotel and 
the businesses housed there were forced to move. J. Bailey, 
who had operated a small bakery there for a time, gave up 
his business. This was the last bakery in Cochrane, that 
of C. Pit ter having gone bankrupt in 1913* In June, 1924, 
the hotel beer parlor was opened for the first time in 
eight years. In March, 1923, the grocery store was moved 
back to the Fisher block and the hotel was completely re¬ 
novated. Mr. Webster sold his interest in the store to 
Mr. W. Andison, who has operated it since that time. Soon 
afterwards, Mr. Webster sold bhe hotel to J. W. Dickenson, 
who rechristened it the "Russell Hotel", the name it 
carries today. 

Miss Webster had opened a small confectionery be- 












13 ? 


side the hotel in the late T teens. In 1924, she sold it to 
J. Allan .and Allan’s confectionery gradually became an in¬ 
stitution in the village. (14) 

(14) Interview, Mr. W. Andison. 

In the early 1920 f s Cochrane was beginning to feel 
the benefit of its location on the main east-west highway. 
The growing tourist trade was given fresh impetus by the 
construction of the Banff-Windermere highway in 1923* In 
1?24 the road from Banff to Calgary was extensively im¬ 
proved and in May of that year over three hundred cars were 
registered at the Park gates each weekend. Several district 
roads were built about this time and, in 1925, a new bridge 
was completed across the Bov; river south of Cochrane. (15) 

(15) C. A., August 25, 1925, May 23 and 29 , 1924, and 
August 13, 1925. 

R. Butler built the "Tourists’ Rest", near the 
former site of the Cochrane creamery, in 1925. The building 
contained a dance floor and a dining room. Tourists were 
not yet numerous enough to support such a business however, 
and Mr. Butler sold the building to Mr. R. Hogarth, who 
used it as a residence for many years. Ml*. Butler went 
to Peace River. (16) 

(16) Interview, Mr. W. Andison. 

In 1925 the local farmers gave their support to 
plans for an elevator. They purchased over eight thousand 
dollars worth of shares in the United Crain Growers’ AS so- 











140 


ciation and the building was constructed in 1926 . 

The Collins brick yard operated sporadically during 
the summers from 1921 to 1925. At times as many as twenty- 
five men were anployed. The last big contract was for the 
C. P. R. hotel at Lake Louise, which was begun in 1925. It 
is largely constructed of Cochrane brick. The yard has been 
closed since that contract was filled, ( 17 ) 

(17) C, A., January 22, 192.5. 

Interview, Mr. A. Chapman. 

The Royal Bank of Canada took over the branch of the 
Union Bank in Cochrane in 1925* (18) 

(18) Interview, Mr. A. ALlen, Cochrane, January 19.51. 

The Cochrane Advocate ceased publication on September 
8 , 1927. The paper had had ten editor-owners in the period 
from 191.5 to 1927. They were H. Whitfield, from September 
15 to November 15, 1915; P. C. Atkinson, to January 1, 1916; 
A. Taylor, to January 20, 1916; A. C. Hathway, to November 7, 
1918; R. J. Hawkey, to August 21, 1919; H. B. Willis, to May 
20, 1920; 0. S. Love, to October 14, 1920; C. C. Stuart from 
March 17, 1921 to February 9, 1922; H. C. Farthing, to Octo¬ 
ber 8 , 1925; and finally, A. Gissing, from June 16 to Sep¬ 
tember 8 , 1927. The paper was not published from October 
14, 1920, to March 17, 1921, nor from October 8 , 1925, to 
June 16, 1927. All the editor-owners found it a poor busi¬ 
ness venture although only H. B. Willis and H. C. Farthing 
ever tried seriously to put the paper back on its feet. 










141 


When A. Gissing, a brother of the artist, R. Gissing r gave 
it up, no one else was prepared to continue with it. 

In 1^28 the Murphy House, or Alberta hotel, burned 
to the ground. It was the best known landmark in Cochrane 
to that time. Mr. W. Dean had found it difficult to remain 
solvent during the years of prohibition, but after repeal 
of the law in 1922, his business boomed. The Murphy House 
boasted a long hardwood bar with the characteristic brass 
foot-rail and was popular with tourists and residents 
alike. (20) 

(20) Interview, Mr. A. Chapman. 

An Elks' Lodge was organized in the village in 
1928. Funds were collected from the local people and a 
very fine hall was built. The new society tended to be a 
catch-all of members, many of whom were a disgrace to it. 

It fell into disrepute, it was disbanded, and the hall re¬ 
mained in the hands of those who had contributed to its 
construction. Mrs. J. Bailey had a considerable amount of 
money invested and she and her daughter, Mrs. Allan, looked 
after the building for many years. In 1947 the village 
bought it for five thousand dollars and now maintains it 
as a public meeting place. (21) 

(21) Interviews, Messrs. A. Chapman and A. Raby. 

In September, 1929, a second spectacular fire des¬ 
troyed the Fisher block. The fire started late in the 









142 


evening in some new electrical wiring in the hardware 
section. The local fire department was unable to deal with 
it, although it managed to prevent the fire spreading to 
nearby buildings. Mr* W* Andison bought the land from R. 

A. Webster and constructed a new block. It is somewhat 
smaller than the former block but contains W. Andison’s 
general store, the Royal Bank of Ban ad a and the post 
office, which was moved back to this location from the 
Howard block in 1930 . (22) 

(22) Interview, Mr. W. Andison. 

George Hope, who had been the local blacksmith 
for many years, sold his business to Mr. D. Murray in 
1?29* Mr. Murray has remained there ever since. In 1946, 
his son, David Murray, established a hardware store on the 
lot behind the blacksmith shop. ( 23 ) 

(23) Interview, Mr. D. Murray Sr., Cochrane, January 1931• 

In 1929 the village had a land assessment of 
forty-one thousand four hundred dollars and an improvement 
assessment of ninety-three thousand dollars. The population 
was estimated at two hundred and eighty-five. (24) These 

(24) Reports of the Department of Municipal Affairs, 1930. 
figures are rather more impressive when compared with those 
of 1909; two hundred thousand dollars for land assessment, 
twenty thousand for buildings and three hundred and fifty 
for population. (23) The tremendous decrease in land as- 











143 


(23) G. A., April 13, 190?. 

sessment was due to two factors. The earlier enthusiasm 
for the prospects of the village had not been born out by 
events and the land had fallen greatly in value in twenty 
years. The earlier land owners, 7/ho had made no improve¬ 
ments, had long since let their property be taken over for 
taxes. The village itself owned a large part of the town- 
site in 1929 and this reduced the land assessment. However 
the buildings in the village had been greatly improved in 
the course of twenty years. 

In 1930 the Texas Company of Canada established a 
service station in Cochrane. Evelyn Nelson was the first 
operator, then came btan bkov and, in 1934, Graham Broatch, 
who still operates it. In 1939, Mr. Broatch built a number 
of cabins near the service station and has found them a 
most remunerative investment. (26) 

(26; Interview, Mr. G. Broatch, Cochrane, January 1931. 

The Quigley garage was moved from the east end of 
town to Mountain Avenue in the late 1920 T s. Mr. C. E. 
bibbaid, a son of Andrew Sibbald, had married Elizabeth 
Quigley and gone into partnership with T. Quigley. The 
garage failed during the depression and 7/as sold to C. 
Colgan. Mr. Colgan operated it until 1938, when he built 
a new and more modern building on the former site of the 
Murphy House. The other building was sold to C. \T. Lind 










144 


and now contains a barber shop and pool room. 

In 1934 a Mr. Polsky opened a small but modern 
flour mill in Uochrane. His product was of excellent 
quality but rather dark in color and did not sell well. 

He left in 1936 and the building has since been used as 
a granary. 

Dr. Waite died in 1934 and was succeeded by Dr. H. 
Rivers. His thriving drug business was taken over by Mr. 

H. A. Hart, foimerly of Gadsby, Alberta. Mr. Hart still 
runs it. Dr. Rivers left before the second World War and 
Cochrane has not since had a resident doctor. (27) 

(27) Interview, Mr. H. A. Hart, Cochrane, January 1931. 

Mr. B. Klassen established a hardware store in 
the village in 1933. He had previously owned the ‘‘Buil¬ 
ders 1 Hardware*’ in Didsbury. He has a thriving business 
and has recently renovated and modernized his premises. (28) 

(28) Interview, Mr. B. Klassen, Cochrane, January 1931. 

The depression had a very detrimental effect on 
Cochrane. The village was entirely dependent on the rural 
community and the farmers and ranchers had very little 
money to spend. Many of the villagers were unable to pay 
their taxes and lost their property. In 1939 the land 
assessment had fallen to eighteen thousand five hundred 
dollars, less than half the figure for 1929. The assess¬ 
ment on improvements fell over ten thousand dollars, an 









145 


indication that same of the residents had lost their homes 
as well as their lots. (29) 

(29) Reports of the Department of Municipal Affairs, 1940. 

The second World War had none of the ruinous con¬ 
sequences of the first one. The agricultural community 
began to enjoy a boom and this influenced the prosperity 
of the village. The population climbed steadily and by 
1946 exceeded four hundred. Extensive oil exploration in 
the Jumping Pound area and the discovery of large reserves 
of natural gas gave new impetus to this expansion. 

The influx of oil workers did not result from any 
recent discoveries of oil. In 1914 there were no less 
than ten oil companies drilling in the Jumping Pound 
area. (50) Natural gas had been leaking out of fissures 

(30) C. A., July 2, 1914. 

in the ground in that district since earliest times but 
had attracted little attention until 1914. Some idea of 
the availability of the gas pockets may be gained when the 
experience of the Purity Gas Company in 1914 is considered. 
This Company drilled to a depth of eight hundred and ninety- 
three feet and discovered three large gas deposits in that 
distance. (31) Throughout 1914, 1915 and 1916, various 

(31) C. A., November 1, 1914. 

small companies drilled wells. Some of them went to a 
depth of three thousand feet but, although great quantities 











146 


of gas were discovered, there was little crude oil. In 
1927, the Imperial Oil Company drilled a well to five 
thousand two hundred feet and still did not find oil. (22) 
(22) C. A., July 21, 1927. 

Since the second World War, the Shell Oil Company has 
drilled two wells to a depth of ten thousand feet but has 
been unable to find oil in commercial quantities. This 
Company has turned its attention to the natural gas in the 
district and is constructing a large scrubbing plant to 
purify the gas for export. It contains large amounts of 
sulphur compounds and it is only in recent years that 
practicable methods for purifying it have made the develop¬ 
ment of this natural resource profitable. The two wells 
are expected to yield thirty million cubic feet of gas 
daily. A pipeline to Calgary was completed in December, 

195 0, and work then began on a line to Exshaw and Banff. 

In 1949 the assessment on improvements had 
tripled that of 192?. New homes were being constructed 
all over the village. Several of the local businesses 
have been extended and the villagers are enjoying a grea¬ 
ter prosperity than ever before. The new scrubbing plant 
and the small industries that it is attracting promise to 
maintain this prosperity. Cochrane has a promising future. 




. 



CHAPTER X 


CHURCHES, SCHOOLS, SPORTS, AHD SOCIAL ACTIVITIES 

Methodist and Roman Catholic missionaries occupied 
an important place in the ranks of the pioneers in the Bow 
valley west of Calgary, Something has been said in an 
earlier chapter of the activities of Rev. George and Rev. 
John McDougall and the mission that they established at 
Morleyville in 1873. Missionaries had travelled through 
the region on a number or occasions prior to that however. 
The Rev. Robert Terrill Rundle journeyed up the Bow valley 
to the present site of Banff in the early 1840 T s. The Rev. 
Father Pierre Jean DeSmet came into this area by way of the 
present Whiteman 1 s Pass and spent some time among the Stoney 
Indians in 184% Rev. George McDougall had visited the 
Stoney near the present Morley as early as 1871, and on that 
occasion resolved to establish a mission among them. Two 
years later he carried out this resolution and built the 
first church in this region. 

The first Catholic mission in southern Alberta was 
located on the Elbcw river, nine miles south of the present 
village of Cochrane. In 1873 Rev. Fathers Fourmond and 
Scollen came from St. ALbert and took up residence in a log 
cabin on the north bank of the river. The parishioners 
were Blackfeet, Metis, and a few trappers and traders. 








' 




> . .. . 








. 

W ... 

- 

. 











, 






- 

■ 







' 


J 


, 





. 

■ 

• 





; .. . , 

. 

* 

. Ji i 

■ . I 


■ 


. i 


■ 0 








148 


Father Fourmond returned to St. Albert the next spring, 
while Father scollen visited the camps of the buffalo 
hunters that summer. He returned in the fall and was 
joined by F'ather Bonald. In the fall of 1875, it was 
decided to move the mission to the vicinity of the new 
N. W. M. P. post at Calgary. Today the site of the mis¬ 
sion on the Elbow river is marked by a cairn erected in 
1559 . 

Several of the pioneer ranchers in the Cochrane 
area were Catholics from the highlands of Scotland. Mr. 
Angus McDonald, Mr. A. Gillies, Mr. D. Morrison and Mr. D. 
McEachren formed a small parish. They were visited by 
missionaries from the Oblate residence in Calgary. Mass 
was said in private homes. In l8?4 there were eighty 
Catholics settled in and around Cochrane and the Council 
of Oblates approved'plans for the erection of a church. 

In September Father Comire and Brother Patrick Bowes be¬ 
gan work on it. In November the building was finished 
and the local Catholics had raised enough money to clear 
it of debt. It was blessed on November 24, l8?4, and was 
named "St. Mary’s Church”. 

Father Comire remained for two years and was fol¬ 
lowed by Father Fouquet, who stayed until 1899* Father 
Seltman took charge then and, in 1901, built the small 
rectory beside the church. He was succeeded by Father 





14 ? 


Hermes in 1?07, who remained until 1?21 and was perhaps the 
best known and best loved churchman ever to reside in the 
Cochrane district. 

Diocesan priests took over the parish from 1?21 to 
1?40. A priest visited in Cochrane and said mass two Sun¬ 
days in each month. In 1?40 the parish was returned to the 
Oblate Fathers and Father Lessard took residence in the 
village. The Franciscan Order was given the parish in 1?4? 
and purchased the houses originally owned by J. Murphy and 
C. W. Fisher. These buildings are now used as a retreat 
for tho Fathers. (1) 

(l) Records of "St. Mary’s Church”, Cochrane. 

Interview, Miss M. Morrison, Calgary, January l?j>l. 

The second church to be established in the village 
was that of the Anglicans. It will be remembered that this 
building was constructed in l8?2 at Mitford through the ef¬ 
forts and contributions of Lady ndela Cochrane and her 
friends in England. In l8?? it was moved to Cochrane. 

In the early l?00 T s, a succession of clergymen were 
in charge of this church. Few of them resided in the vil¬ 
lage. They were also responsible for Exshaw, Bottrel and 
Springbank. Unfortunately the number of Anglicans has 
always been small and the church has not had enough sup¬ 
porters to merit a regular clergyman for many years. Ser¬ 
vices are held about every fourth Sunday. (2) 














150 


(2) Records of "All baints, Cochrane." 

"All Saints, Cochrane" is a remarkably picturesque 
building although it is not always maintained in the best 
of condition. The exterior has been in need of paint for 
many years. Many of the furnishings are antique and very 
beautiful. The altar cloth has been exquisitely woven by 
hand and the pews are a striking example of the ability of 
the early pioneers in constructing furniture. 

The third church in Cochrane was that of the Presby¬ 
terians. It was built in 1900 by a Mr. Downey under the 
supervision of Rev. Mr. Simpson. A large manse was con¬ 
structed beside it in 1904. As the population expanded in 
the early 1900 T s, the old church was found to be too small 

and was moved back on the lot to make room for a new one. 

The present "St. Andrew’s" church was completed in 1910 
and is much the largest church in Coehrane. In 1909 it 
was estimated that it would cost ten thousand dollars to 
build but so extensive were the local contributions of 
labor and material that the cost of construction was re¬ 
duced to three thousand five hundred dollars. In 1925 it 
became "St. Andrew’s United Church". 

The following have been incumbents in this church - 
Rev. Mr. Simpson, Rev. J. A. Claxton, Rev. A. W. Whiteman, 

Rev. W. I‘. Burns, Rev. J*. C. Herdman, Rev. W. A. Greer, 





. 


( 









J f. 




. 












151 


Rev. W. McRae, Rev. W. Brooker, Rev. P. Halstead, Rev. D. 
McKeen Reid, Rev. A. R. Aldridge, Rev. R. Srskine Pow, Rev. 
W. Little, Rev. C. W. McKay, and Rev. J. R. Brown. Gene¬ 
rally the clergyman has resided in the manse and taken an 
active part in community affairs. At different times the 
district of springbank has also been the incumbent f s res¬ 
ponsibility. (5) 

(,5) Records of "St. Andrew* s United church”, Cochrane. 

Interview, Mr. A. Chapman, Cochrane, January 1951. 

The United Church has the largest congregation of 
any in Cochrane, although the parishioners of St. Mary T s 
support their church more strongly. The various religious 
denominations in this area have an enviable record of 
tolerance and good will. There are few communities that 
can boast, as Cochrane can, that their Orange hall has 
been used by the Roman Catholics for church socials. 

The first school in the Cochrane area was that 
established by the McDougalls at Morleyville in l8?4. In 
1891 Lady Adela Cochrane hired a teacher and opened a school 
in the former saloon at Mitford. Shortly before 1900, a 
small school was opened in Cochrane, and in 1906 a large 
brick building was constructed for this purpose. This 
latter structure forms part of the present school, although 
several additions have been made since 1906. 

The influx of settlers in the early 1900*s neces¬ 
sitated the construction of a number of rural schools. 















e 




. 

"ft , ", i" 













153 


Glenbow school was built in 1^09, Glendale and Brushy Ridge 
in 1^10. Grand Valley school was also constructed about 
this time and a few years later schools were built in the 
Cochrane Lake, Weedon and Inglis districts. In 1?24 one 
was constructed near Beaupre lake. These schools were 
generally snail one room buildings with accommodation for 
about twenty-five pupils. The teacher boarded in the home 
of a nearby farmer. Most of the children rode to school, 
some for a considerable distance, and a barn was a standard 
accessory at each school. The quality of the education the 
children received tended to be directly proportional to the 
ambition and capability of the teacher. The Provincial 
Government provided for periodic inspections by qualified 
men, and made an attempt to maintain a reasonable standard 
of education. In view of the difficulties that had to be 
overcome - the weather, the distance to school, arrears in 
taxes, poorly paid teachers, often obstructive trustees, 
and the proclivity of local bachelors to marry the lady 
teachers - the rural schools were remarkably satisfactory. 

■ Since the second World War, the Weedon, Cochrane 
Lake and Grand Valley schools have been combined. The 
children are transported to Cochrane in buses. The vil¬ 
lage school has been extended from three to six rooms and 
the Inglish school house, closed owing to a paucity of 
pupils, has been moved in as an annex. The whole area is 




. 

t 

■ 

.. VJ 



. 

• • 


, 

. 

f 

v- - 

. 

•• V 

. ■ : 

' 


. . .V . 

■ 

-■ • 

.... .. ... 

. 

... . c 

. . ... iO ' ■ ■ 

' • .. ' • 0. • .: 

■ ‘ • 

' 

I * •' 






153 


included in the Calgary school division. 

In the realm of social and sporting activities, 
perhaps the most notable one participated in by the resi¬ 
dents of the Cochrane area was that of horse racing. In 
the early days this district was famous for its racehorses 
and polo ponies. Enthusiasm for sports of this nature was 
often closely related to the current price of horses. 

The first race was held in l8?l on a small graded 
track a half mile east of Mitford. The local ranchers 
organized a small association and took up a collection for 
prizes. The first meet was so successful that it was deci-* 
ded to hold one annually. Each year the competition became 
more keen, and although Mr. Kerfoot won every race In l8?3, 
the competitors made certain that this did not happen again. 

In the early years of this sport, the association 
sponsored an "owners up 11 event that soon became the most 
popular race of the meet. Each owner bent all his efforts 
to winning this race, not only because of the personal 
triumph that victory brought, but also because of the ad¬ 
ded prestige he gained for the horses he had for sale. 

When Lady Adela Cochrane was at Mitford, the an¬ 
nual races were an especially important social event. 

Many of her friends came to Mitford and were entertained 
in an elegant manner. A large and gaily colored tent was 
erected at the track and her guests found it a pleasant 




0 




L ) 






154 


shelter from the hot sun while they consumed sandwiches and 
strong punch between the races. 

Fach year more and more racing enthusiasts took the 
opportunity of spending the day away from Calgary. An el¬ 
liptical track was laid out and work was begun on a small 
grandstand in 1894. In the early 1900's, a special train 
was run from Ualgary on the day of the meet. In 1910 the 
association was reorganized and the land on which the track 
was located was purchased. At that time, Oochrane had the 
reputation of having the finest mile turf track in western 
Canada. 

The depression that preceded the first World War 
had a detrimental effect on the races of 1912 and 1915* 

The association suffered financial embarrassment and was 
completely ruined when on October 4, 1915, the grandstand 
burned to the ground. (4) A new one could not be financed 
(4) C. A., October 9, 1913• 

and the races attracted little attention for the next ten 
years. 

Horse racing in the Cochrane area took a new lease 
on life in 1925. B. F. Rhodes had come to Grand Valley 
after the war to take over the ranching interests of his 
brother, H. A. Rhodes, who had lost his life in the war. 

He was an enthusiastic horseman and a wealthy man. He took 
over the racing grounds to prevent them being lost for 







■ t ;• $§!■;■ ; 








o' 




































155 


taxes. A fine new grandstand was built in 1924. 

The biggest race meet in the history of the district 
was held on June 24 and 23, 1925. A special train ran from 
Calgary each day and hundreds were in attendance. This meet 
lacked some of the earlier enthusiasm that had characterized 
those held when the ranchers owned all the horses. Racing 
was largely commercialized by this time and although it was 
a great success from the financial point of view, the old 
timers could not help but regret the loss of the element of 
racing for the sake of the sport. 

The races became less popular after the depression 

began. The last meet was held in the fall of 1931 and on 

the occasion a young apprentice jockey named Johnny Longden 

booted home most of the winners. The land was then sold and 

the grandstand torn down for lumber. A field of grain now 

grows on the foimer race track each summer. (3) 

(3) Interviews, Messrs. A. Kerfoot, A. Chapman and L. 

Towers. Where not otherwise specified, these men 
have been the source of the infonnation concerning 
the race track. 

Polo was also a very popular sport in the Cochrane 
area in the early days. It appears to have been introduced 
to Alberta ranchers in the late lSSO’s or early l890 f s and 
was first played in the district around Pincher Creek. 

The first club at Cochrane was not organized until 1909. 

Mr. W. Hutchinson and Mr. A. McPherson were appointed 




■ 


i ; ■: 






4 

■ 

4 





' 

. 

- 











156 


captains, grounds were secured and a vigorous program of 
practices was set up. Mr. W# D. Kerfoot was an enthusi¬ 
astic member until he lost his life at the Spring Stock 
Show in Calgary in 1910. His sons also were greatly in¬ 
terested and many of the early teams were predominantly 
Kerfoot. (6) 

(6) Interview, Messrs. A. Kerfoot and W. Hutchinson. 

Polo was the favorite game of the ranching commu¬ 
nity in southern Alberta before the first World War. 

Alberta players gained a considerable reputation and in 
1912 were Invited to compete in the United States. A team 
composed of players from Cochrane, Cowley, High River and 
North Fork went to Spokane and defeated the best teams of 
the western United States. (7) Alberta teams competed far 

(7) "Canadian Cattlemen", June 1949, Vol. XII, No. 2. 22. 

the championship of western Canada in Cochrane in 1913. The 
Fish creek team won on that occasion. In September the 
Cochrane team won the Osier trophy in a tournament in Win¬ 
nipeg. (8) The war brought the sport to an end and it has 

(8) C. A., July 24 and Sept. 23, 1913* 
not since been revived. 

Cochrane has not participated in any other sports 
of note. Baseball, hockey and curling have been popular 
diversions for many years. The first curling rink was 
built in the early 1900 T s and one has been maintained ever 



















127 


since. The skating rink was built in 1910 and keen but un¬ 
spectacular hockey is played every year. Local leagues are 
formed for both hockey amd baseball and the teams from 
Cochrane win a fair share of the titles. 

Cochrane has always been a popular recruiting 
ground for fraternal organizations. An Orange Lodge was 
organized about 1902 and a fine Orange hall was built in 
1902. The Order was very strong for fifteen years or more 
but was discontinued in 1922. The hall was turned over to 
the Provincial Order, who sold it to the local I.O.O.F. in 
1922 for one hundred and fifty hollars. (9) 

(9) Interview, Mr. A. chapman. 

In June, 1909, King Solomon Lodge ^41 of the Masonic 
Order was instituted. The members occupied the second floor 
of the Jfisher block until that building was destroyed by 
fire in 1929. In recent years, the I.O.O.P. has appealed 
more to the younger men and membership in the Masons has 
declined. The Eastern Star, an associated organization, 
has a considerable following among the ladies of the vil¬ 
lage. This group meets in the original school building, 
which was moved to a location one block west of the present 
school many years ago. (10) 

(10) Interview, Mrs. S. J. Reed, Cochrane, January 1921- 

Three other organizations have a considerable mem¬ 
bership in the district. The Canadian Legion was fomed 









' '< I 


. ;:i 





■ f gj 


i 












158 


after the first World War and procured the former Q,uigley 
brick yard cook house as a meeting place. This body was 
greatly augmented by veterans from the second World War. 
The I.O.O.F. instituted a lodge in the l?30 f s and bought 
the Orange hall as a meeting place. This organization has 
been particularly successful among the young men^and has a 
commendable record of participation in community affairs. 
(11) The i£Lk f s Lodge, now defunct, has already been men- 
(11) Interview, Mr. A* Chapman, 
tioned in Chapter IX. 

Of other social activities, dancing has been the 
most popular. The early dances were held in private homes 
or in haylofts. The settlers travelled miles to attend. 
After the Orange hall and the rural schools were built the 
dances took place in them. The purely local nature of the 
dances has changed in the last ten or fifteen years. It 
became the smart thing to attend country dances and nume¬ 
rous people drove out from Calgary. The earlier spirit 
gave way to spirits to some extent, a circumstance for 
which the local people are not entirely without responsi¬ 
bility. 

The Cochrane area has been particularly unrespon¬ 
sive to a number of social and sporting activities. The 
bowling alley built by Addie Moses In 1?12 soon went out 
of business. A “Cheerio” club organized for the purpose 
















'Jf. 













. 










. j 














159 


of holding small socials and dances was extremely short lived. 
A golf club was organized in 1925 and barely lasted one sea¬ 
son. Young Peoples clubs have been established on innumera¬ 
ble occasions but have generally expired before the first 
play was produced. 

The annual "Christmas Concerts’ 1 are an interesting, 
and sometimes amusing, institution. The various schools 
prepare an evening of entertainment to be given shortly be¬ 
fore the Christmas holidays begin, short plays, instrumental 
and vocal numbers, and recitations are presented to a jammed 
house. A ’’Box Social” or dance held sometime before the con¬ 
cert usually nets enough to provide santa with a present for 
each child in the district. The evening is much looked for¬ 
ward to by both young and old. 

A local ’’Light Horse Association” was formed after 
the second World War. There are few good saddle horses left 
in the district and membership Is therefore limited. A gym¬ 
khana is held each summer at the Mount Royal ran'ch and 
features some excellent amateur racing and jumping. The 
riders all participate in the annual Stampede Parade. 

Political clubs have flourished at different times. 

The Hon. C. W. Pisher organized the first one about 1905 and 
provided a meeting place in the village equipped with a bil¬ 
liard table and a bar. The U. P. A. was strongly supported 
by the rural people for a time and numerous dances and pic- 












c 





















nics were sponsored. Both organizations vanished in 1935 
and do not show any signs'of reviving. 

The Womens 1 Institute has occupied an important 
place in the lives of farm women. Many commendable ser¬ 
vices have been performed by this body. It is occasionally 
shaken from top to bottom by a controversy among the members. 

The Cochrane area has not been characterized by 
strong community activities, particularly since the first 
World war. The advent of the automobile and the proximity 
of Calgary and Banff have provided the residents with means 
of amusement and relaxation outside the district. Local 
picnics are now all but unknown, but many families drive 
to Banff for a Sunday outing. It is no problem to attend 
an evening movie in Calgary, a fact that has nearly ruined 
a number of individuals who tried to make a success of 
movies in the village. In spite of these shortcomings, it 
would be hard to convince the average resident of the Coch¬ 
rane area that he does not live in the friendliest community 


in Alberta 



CHAPTER XI 


CONCLUSION 

The history of the Cochrane area, although in many 
respects similar to that of most other sections of Alberta, 
displays some characteristics that are unusual* Insofar as 
the Morleyville settlement was a part of this district for 
a time, the region around Cochrane has been distinguished 
from others in southern Alberta by the fact that the first 
nucleus of settlement was a mission among the Indians. 

Then too, Cochrane was the site of the first of the great 
company cattle ranches that were to have such an important 
influence on the development of the southern half of the 
province. 

The construction of the transcontinental railway 
through the district around Cochrane offers an interesting 
insight into the influences that the railroad had on a 
community primarily devoted to ranching. The railway es¬ 
tablished a better connection with the markets for live¬ 
stock and it made the region easily accessible to new 
settlers. It resulted in a new orientation of the area 
from east to west and disrupted the earlier line of com¬ 
munication southward into the United btates along the 
Macleod - Port Benton Trail. New hamlets grew up along 
the right-of-way and the former unity of the region, based 
as it was upon the settlement at Morleyville, was lost. 


. 

. 

. ... . • . .. .. ,i£) 

;.. : ,.. j , j, ..' ;r.;> 

. 

' ■ 

. 

< 

* ■ • 

: e-i- ■ : J ' : J. : 

>■ . 




* 

. > ■ • ; ... ' i ' ■ ■ . 

V': ; . . V' 








. 

- 

• 

. . . 






162 


Mitford and Cochrane became the nuclei about which rural 
development occurred and the district around MorleyviJ.le 
became a separate entity. 

The histories of Mitford and Glenbow are interest¬ 
ing, not only because of the notable personages that par¬ 
ticipated in them, but also because they reveal something 
of the indomitable spirit of individual enterprise which 
made the economic foundation of Alberta more secure by 
making it more diversified. It is true, of course, that 
the industries in Mitford and Glenbow, and in Cochrane 
for that matter, were not ultimately successful, but they 
brought in new settlers and new wealth to help in develop¬ 
ing the area and, what is more important, their failure 
showed the local people that it was only possible to 
broaden their economy by varying their agricultural acti- 
vit ies. 

This early process of trial and error in the search 
for a more stable economic foundation resulted in the es¬ 
tablishment of a grain growing industry and then a dairying 
industry. These new enterprises expanded steadily and, in 
conjunction with the earlier ranching activities, placed 
the Cochrane area in a secure financial position before the 
depression of the 1920's. Like other farming and ranching 
districts in Alberta this region felt the depression at an 
early stage, but unlike many it survived it without serious 







163 


consequences, largely because it had a sufficiently diversi¬ 
fied agricultural economy. 

The history of the Cochrane area also presents a 
rather interesting example of the influence of geographical 
position on the development of a local society. To begin 
with, there were the hardy pioneers, travelling with teams 
of horses or oxen into a comparatively isolated section of 
the province and laying the foundations of a tightly knit 
community. The railway followed and established a much 
closer link with the rest of Canada east and west. It 
brought new settlers with the result that the social struc¬ 
ture of the area was modified. The early community feeling 
was partially broken down by the influx of great numbers of 
homesteaders, who were regarded as somewhat inferior soci¬ 
ally because they were unpropertied newcomers and because 
they did not usually become ranchers. As the earlier con¬ 
cept of ranchers being more aristocratic than farmers be¬ 
gan to wane, partly because the farmers proved that their 
enterprise could be just as profitable as ranching, the 
automobile jmde its appearance and further disunited the 
community. The farmers and ranchers were given greater 
mobility, with the result that they could travel outside 
the district to participate in social activities and did 
not therefore develop a strong feeling of local unity. 




vi vv i1C 


v , J :. ■ .. . 











■. ■ • 

. 

-. i . . 



. 

■ 

...... ; . 1 ...., . . :: : .. • "X 

... 

* 

~ •; e.tl . 

- ' . . • 

. 

-L vV;.'C.J 






,,■" , £ . . .. ; S. . •' , ... . .. . 




* 

. 













164 

In conclusion, it may be maintained that the history 
of the Uochrane area is interesting in itself because It is 
the story of the people who created, in a beautiful section 
of Alberta, one of the prosperous agricultural communities 
that are the foundations of this province. 



APPENDICES 







Tbo t y 


APPei^o tx. 


A. - maps 



















































































f\?P£NO\K f\ 


167 



SUNDRE 


WESTWARI 


[armattan, 


MINARET 


DIDSBURY( 


ELKTON 


GARFIELD 


CARSTAIR? 


CREMONA 


WATER VALLEY 


DOGPOUND 


MADDEN 


NiER 


KATHYR 


KEITH-'* 


;haw 


^AR° 


DNAPORE 


DALE 


iVILLE 


SAND* 


TURNEI 


VALLE' 


HARTELI 


HIGH RIVER 


ROYALTIES 


LONGVIEW 


AZURI 


CAYLE 


[HEAD 




N 


J 





Nd 

fl 


(V^flP ts) 























































































































































































































































































































































APPENDIX B 


168 



Diagram (1) 

WoRieV o mufc /*ajp it-s 

This diagram shews the disposition of the buildings 
in the early Morleyville mission. The church is the only 
building still standing and Its location Is shown in Appen¬ 
dix A, map (2). These buildings were further north of the 
river in 1872, but the Ghost dam has caused the water to 
back up to such an extent that the church is now only one 
hundred yards from the water. 

"The Old Houses" is the name that was given to the 
original fort when the Me Doug a 11 family took up their quar¬ 
ters in the new buildings in 1872* 

After the railway was built, the post office was on 
the south side of the river and somewhat to the west. It 








































169 


was called Millward for seme years, in honour of Rev. George 
Millward McDougall. Indian settlement centred around this 
new post office and in time some of the buildings from the 
original settlement were moved over there. The Orphanage, 
for example, was moved in 1904. The old store was operated 
intermittently until 1932 when it burned. An agency store 
had been established in the Indian settlement in the late 
1890 f s. The newer settlement finally took over the name 
Morley. 

(l; Mr. Andrew bibbald had no left hand. He wore a hook, 
and those who remember him remark on his outstanding 
ability to use tools, especially the axe, in spite of 
this handicap. A son, Ularence A. bibbald, was born 
after the family came to Morley. Mrs. bibbald died of 
typhoid fever in 1882 and is buried at Morley. bibbald 
creek, a small tributary of Jumping Pound creek, is 
named after Prank sibbald, who ranched in that neigh¬ 
bourhood for many years. 

(2) J. MacLean in “McDougall of Alberta", 113, has an ex¬ 
cellent account of the circumstances surrounding the 
death of the Rev. George McDougall. In January 1876 , 
he was hunting with Rev. John and others. While re¬ 
turning to the camp to prepare supper for the rest of 
the party, the Rev. George lost his way. A severe 








i . . . ’ . 


■ 












;< 


















- ,/■" 


■j 


. 

>1 



t 





170 


blizzard developed that night and he was not found for 
thirteen days. The spot where he was found has not been 
established with certainty, but it is about fifteen 
miles northwest of Calgary. Rev. George McDougall was 
fifty-four years old when he died. He is buried in the 
Morley cemetery. 

Mrs. Elizabeth Chantler McDougall, his wife, died in 
1?02 at the age of eighty-five and is buried beside him. 
She was born in England in l8l8 and came to Alberta with 
the Rev. George McDougall in 1862. Three daughters died 
of smallpox during the epidemic at Pakan (Victoria). 
George, a son, died of tuberculosis on the trail to Fort 
Benton about 1878. 

Mrs. (Senator) R. Hardisty, Mrs. L. Y/ood and Mrs. 
Harrison Young were daughters of the Rev. George Mc¬ 
Dougall. Mrs. Young's husband was a Hudson's Bay Com¬ 
pany official. In October 1877 Mrs. Young was visiting 
Morleyvilie. Realizing that the birth of her expected 
baby was imminent, she persuaded her brothers David and 
Rev. John to take her to Calgary where medical aid would 
be available. A severe blizzard caught the party on the 
banks of the Ghost river and they were forced to make 
camp. The baby was bom in this camp. This child was 
Birdie Young who, in 1899, married Dr. Philippe Roy, a 
young doctor. In 1911 Dr. Roy was appointed Canadian 







r 


- 


. 


' .. 


. 




. . . f .0.< 













- 


i. : X' 


.. s' 














171 


Commissioner to France and in 1928 was made Canadian 
Minister to France, 

Madame Roy appears to have been the first white 
child bom in the Cochrane district. 

The Rev, John McDougall was married twice. His first 
wife, whom he married in 1864, was Abagail Steinhauer. 
Her father, the Rev. H* B. Steinhauer, was the mission¬ 
ary at White Fish lake. There were three daughters by 
this marriage, Flora, Ruth and Augusta. Mrs. McDougall 
died at Victoria, N. W. T., in 1870. 

Flora married Mr. Magnus Begg, an Indian agent to the 
Blackfeet. Mrs. Begg passed away in 1950. Ruth married 
Mr. Captain Wheeler and now lives in Winnipeg. 

Augusta Victoria Mathieson, who has supplied much of 
this information on the McDougalls, was bom at White 
Fish lake in 1870. She came with her father and step¬ 
mother to the early mission at Morleyville. The family 
lived in the fort for two years and then moved into the 
new settlement beside the river. In 1878 she was sent 
east to school. Her sister Ruth went with her and 
Flora had gone a year or two earlier. A year was spent 
in a school in Cobourg and then four years in a young 
ladies school in Oshawa. They returned to Morley in 
1884. The greater part of the next twenty years was 
spent in teaching and nursing around the Morley mission. 





.. 




.... , 

. . .' 

. . : - v 

>i ■ . 




. . 


. 

. .,. d v, ..,::i iii\ 






. t 

j ,.;[ "I 

. 








172 


She married in 1914 and she and her husband went farming 
in the Carstairs district. In 1947 Mr. and Mrs. 

Mathieson moved into Calgary, where they now live. There 
are two daughters, Mrs. Agnes Raynes and Mrs. Robert 
Simpson, both in Calgary. 

The Rev. John McDougall f s second wife was Elizabeth 
Boyd of Grey county, Ontario. They were married in 1872- 
There were six children, George Millward, John Boyd, 
Lilian Elizabeth, Morley Samuel, David Livingstone and 
Douglas Judson. George and John were ranchers around 
Morley and both are now dead. Lilian married John 
Graham, an old-timer in the area. Mr. Graham Is now 
dead and Mrs. Graham lives in Calgary. Morley was a 
C. P. R. conductor and is now retired in Calgary. 

David is a C. P. R. conductor and Douglas is an elec¬ 
trician in the Calgary Eire Department. 

The Rev. John McDougall died in January 1917 and is 
buried in Calgary. 

David McDougall (trader Dave) had a family of four 
daughters and one son. They are Mrs. Georgina Eliza¬ 
beth Luxton of Banff, Mrs. Jane Ellen Graham of Calgary, 
Mrs. May (Senator) Ross of Calgary, David Hardisty 
McDougall, a rancher at Cochrane and Mrs. Anne Condie 
Carling of Calgary. 





ftppe/ooix C. 


~ rh6 RftK>CH£ CorrtPAtJ? 


»*> i-r h 
34L.0 lAJ 
u> H It ^ 



THC MAT^Riflt 
FHow f=R/»AJ/< 


173 


(1) Cochrane ranch losses - winter of l88l-82. x-^npir y.h 

M terrcra 1 Nu tiro 1 r t . It is difficult to arrive at an accurate 
figure but the losses through the winter appear to ap¬ 
proach two thousand head. F. White records that the 
stock on November 30, l88l, numbered six thousand seven 
hundred and ninety-nine head. This figure does not in¬ 
clude the calves, which were apparently not counted in 
the purchase price. It is hard to estimate how many 
calves there would be in the herd, but it is recorded 
that there were some fourteen head of yearlings in the 
spring of 1882. Hundreds were lost on the trip north, 
but it is safe to assume that there must have been very 
considerably more than fourteen hundred head of calves 
when the drive started. Therefore, I think it is safe 
to assume that eight thousand head of cattle at least 
(counting calves) were on the Cochrane range in November 
of 1881. F. White records that there were seven thou¬ 
sand two hundred and fifty four head in April 1882. 

This includes fourteen hundred head of calves bom that 
spring. If the assumptions are granted, it follows 
that sane two thousand three hundred head of cattle 
perished that winter. There is no indication that the 
directors of the Company thought that this was an un¬ 
expected loss. 

(2) Copy of the contract between Poindexter and Orr and 
Major Walker. 













174 

11 It is agreed this 16th day of May A.D. 1882 be¬ 
tween Messrs. Poindexter and Orr of the first part and 
James Walker of the second part as follows; 

The parties of the first part agree to sell to 
James walker of the second part all their herd of cat¬ 
tle except lj>0 dairy cows and about 60 thorough bred 
cows and heifers which have never been with the herd 
at the rate of #2J?. 00 per head. Diseased, big jaw and 
lame cattle excepted, branded thus - XX on right hip, 
double dew lap, and one slit in right ear and two slits 
in left ear. All unbranded yearlings and calves over 
eight months at time of delivery to be counted, the 
balance of the calves to be given free with the herd 
and not counted. Delivery of the cattle to commence 
1st July next and continue until all are delivered. 

The parties of the first part agree to provide 
suitable corrals with branding shutes and will corral 
the cattle and assist the said part of the second part 
to brand the cattle. The cattle as soon as branded to 
become the property of James Walker. 

And said James Walker agrees to purchase the said 
cattle at the rate aforesaid. $J?000 to be paid by 
draft on I. G. Baker and Go. through debris, Perris 
and White, the receipt of which is hereby acknowledged. 
The balance to be paid in New York exchange on due 






175 


delivery of aforesaid cattle. 

Signed - Poindexter, Orr, James Walker.” 
There was a verbal agreement to the effect that James 
Walker would buy as many of the saddle horses as pos¬ 
sible. 1‘n another note, P. White records that fifty- 
five head were purchased at sixty dollars per head. 

13) Copy of the contract between I. G. Baker Company and 
the Cochrane Kane he Company, September 5, 1882. 

”B and Co agree to deliver to the C. R. Co from 
45 0 to 550 steers, at their Ranche at Bow River, N. 

W. T. - 

The steers to be started on the drive from here not 
later than the 1st week of October and in order to se¬ 
cure as far as possible their arriving in good condi¬ 
tion the drive must not occupy less than three weeks 
from the time they are fairly started on the drive. 

No steers must be under three years old. 

The price to be forty dollars per head, delivered 
on the C. R. C Ranch at Bow River, N. W. T. 

The C. R. Co are to pay I. G. B. and Co the sum 
of two thousand dollars ($2000) to cover all expenses 
of driving the said steers provided the number is not 
less than four hundred and fifty (450). 

The C. R. Co further agree to purchase such horses 







J, ' 

, 

. : . - ■ X 

- 








... . « 






. 








& 

■ 

. 








* 

. 

* 







. 




176 


as are used in driving the above cattle, at what they 
may have cost I. G. B. and Go., provided they are sound 
and in as good condition as when purchased by them. 

The number not to exceed ten (10) horses.' 1 

(4) Copy ol* contract between mi. D. Kerfoot and the Cochrane 
Ranche Company. 

"Fort Benton M. T. 

August 10/82. 

I, W. D. Kerfoot of Oka M* T. hereby enter into an 
agreement with Jas. A. Cochrane representing the Coch¬ 
rane Ranche Co of Bow River, N. W. T. Canada, to enter 
into the service of the said Company under the direc¬ 
tion of the resident general manager, to take charge 
of the cattle or other stock of the said company and 
otherwise to carry out the instructions of the Manager, 
in consideration of the sum of $2000 payable half year¬ 
ly with customary lodging and board for one year com¬ 
mencing Sept. 15/82 or at so much earlier a date as it 
is possible for me to close my present business. 

Signed - W. D. Kerfoot." 

(5) Copy of contract between Cochrane Ranche Company and 
N. W. M. P. - the full contract is not recorded. 

» 64.000 lbs of Beef at per lb . 


Beef to be delivered on foot, animal by animal as 









177 


required, to be slaughtered by the police. The head, 
feet and hide to be returned to Messrs I. G. Baker and 
Co, the Dep T t of the Interior paying for the four quar¬ 
ters only. 

The necks of the animals slaughtered for beef shall 
be cut off at the fourth vertebrae joint, and the heart 
trimmed down. The shanks of fore-quarters shall be cut 
off from three to four inches above the knee joint and 
of the hind-quarters from six to eight inches above the 
gambrel or back joint. 

Should it be necessary for the requirements of the 
police to take over cattle on foot 11 in herd" the price 
to be paid for the live weight of such cattle to be one 
half the price for the delivery of meat at dead weight. 

The Honourable the Minister of the Interior reserves 
the right to increase or diminish the quantities of any 
of the articles without any increase in the price pro¬ 
vided notice thereof in writing be given before 1st 
June/82. 


One year from 1st July 1882.” 

Mr. White mentions that the tenders go in about February 


or March. 















178 


(6) Remarks on the contracts with the Dominion Government 
for t he Indian Reserves. 


'Blackfoot Crossing 

- 7,500 

lbs (monthly ) 

9h<t 

Morleyville 

- 1,875 

lbs 

9 if 

Sarcee 

- 1,875 

lbs 



To be delivered in quarters net on the block, not 
less than one animal at a time and to be of good 
qual ity. 

The hides and offal of all Beef killed on Reserves 
to be the property of the gov’t. 

Additional quantities, if required, to be supplied 
at same rates. 

One year from 1st July 1882 

(7) PUBLIC Notice is hereby given that, under "The 
Canada Joint Stock Companies Act, 1877,'* letters 
patent have been issued under the Great Seal of the 
Dominion of Canada, bearing date the fifth day of 
February, 1884, incorporating the Hon. Matthew Henry 
Cochrane, of Compton, in the Province of Quebec, 
Senator; Hugh Mackay, merchant, William V. rawrence, 
manufacturer, William Cassils, Gentleman, William 
Cassils, Gentleman, in trust, William Ewing, seeds¬ 
man, and Charles Cassils, manufacturer, all of the 
City of Montreal, in the Province of Quebec, in the 
Dominion of Canada, for the purposes of the breeding 








\ •. •’ i .. 


. .• j - c 








. 





. 








. 









: ■ ' t ■ ' • v 

, 

: . J . , 






















17? 


and rearing of horses, males, sheep, cattle, and swine 
in the North Yv'est Territories of Canada, of dealing 
and trading in them or any of them throughout the 
Dominion of Canada, and of shipping the same to foreign 
countries, and of acquiring and holding the property 
required therefor, -- by the name of "The British 
American Ranche Company (limited)", with a total 
capital stock of two hundred thousand dollars, divi¬ 
ded into two thousand shares of one hundred dollars. 

Dated at the office of the Secretary of State of 
Canada, this fifteenth day of February 1884. 

J. A. Chapleau, 

Secretary of State. 

Canada Gazette - 1884 - Jan. - June, page 125?. 


. 






. 

. 




. 




ft. PPSUC I K 
MRP O) 


D 


180 














































(Vs ft p CO 

































182 


/)pp£AOp|* <f. 
MflPtz) 

3U 



Cockrr fOfe WOt 



































183 


f\ PPe/oD i x C m 

MAP (3; 



h 

«. 


in 

? 

0 

F 

c 

o 

o 

J, 


2 

CC 


a 

c£ 

C 

y- 


Or 

& 

w 

c 

0 

& 


C»cnRAf5fc 













































f\ P Pe k> p i * 


F. 

184 



Tfa:r -R».3. ^ flP c.) 

GrLfcOBOuO >^»4- 
















































BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Books and Texts 


Broderick, R., "The Great Buffalo Migration", Canadian 
Cattlemen, December, ±939. 

Coues, E., "The Manuscript Journals of Alexander Henry 
and of David Thompson", Harper, N. Y., ±891. 

Grant-McEwen, J., "Horse History in the West", Canadian 
Cattlemen, Yol. 7, No* 41, March, 1943• 

Howay, J? . II., "Builders of the West," Ryerson Press, 
Toronto, 1929. 

Kelly, L. V., "The Rangemen", Briggs, Toronto, 1913. 

Kendall, S., "The Luck of the Mounted", Gundy, Toronto, 

1920 . 

MacLean, J., "Canadian Savage Folk", Briggs, Toronto, 

1596. 

MacLeod, J. E. A., "Old Bow Fort", Canadian Historical 
Review, Yol. XII, No. 1, University of Toronto 
Press, 1931. 

Macoun, J., "Autobiography", Field Naturalists T Club, 
Ottawa, 1922. 

Marshall, D., "Shorthorn Cattle in Canada", Dominion 
Shorthorn Breeders * Association, 1932. 

McCowan, D., "Hill-Top Talks", McMillan Company, Toronto, 
1945. 

McDougall, J., "On Western Trails in the Early Seventies", 
Briggs, Toronto, 1911. 

McLean, J., "McDougall of Alberta", Ryerson Press, Toronto 
1927. 

McTavish, A. R., notes and comments on Frank White's Diary 
Canadian Cattlemen, Vol. 9, No. 1, June 1946. 

Morgan, H. J., "Canadian Men and Wfomen of the Times", 
Briggs, Toronto, 1598. 




. 




/ 

















187 


Morgan, H. J., "Canadian Men and Women of the Times", Briggs, 
Toronto, 1912.. 

Murchie, R. W., "Agricultural Progress on the Prairie 
Frontier", Volume V of Canadian Frontiers of 
Settlement, MacMillan Co., Toronto, 1936. 

"The Journals, Heports and Observations relative to the 
Exploration by Captain Palliser", G. E. Eyre 
and W. Spottiswoode, London, l8b3. 

Parks, W. A., "Report on the Building and Ornamental Stones 
of Canada", government Printing Bureau, Ottawa, 
l?lb. 

Roe, F. G., "An Unsolved Problem of Canadian History", 
Canadian Historical Association Report, 193&* 

Mrs. Algernon St. Manr, "Impressions of a Tenderfoot", 

John Murray, London, 1890. 


Newspapers and Periodicals 


Calgary Herald - January 29 r 1883- 
June 24, 1887. 

June 30, 1887. 

August 29, 1888. 

November 19 to December 5, 1936. 
July 8, 1930. 

Cochrane Advocate - March 11, 1909 to June 16, 192']. 

Canadian, Cattlemen - December 1939 * 

March 1943. 

June 1946. 

June 1949. 


governmental Records and Reports 
Statutes of Canada, Yol. 1, 1882. 

Annual Report of the Geological survey of Canada, Volume 1, 
Report B, 1883. 




. 

. 








. . 




























sessional Papers jf20, Volume XXXI - 1391 • 

Annual Reports of the Department of Agriculture, .North 
West Territories, 1899, 1900, 1903. 

Report of the Department of Agriculture, Alberta, 1911. 

Report of the Department of Municipal Affairs, Alberta, 
193 0, 1940. 

Annual Reports of the Department of Public Works, 1911, 
1912, 1913, 1914 and 1913. 

"Construction of the Parliament Buildings 11 - a brochure 
in the Library of the Alberta Legislature. 

Bureau of Statistics, "Pacts and Pfgures on Alberta 11 , 
King’s Printer, Ldmonton, 1930. 


Church Records 

All saints AngLican church Records, Cochrane, 
st. Andrew’s United Church Records, Cochrane. 
St. Mary’s Church Records, Cochrane. 


Miscellaneous 


White, P., ’’Diary” and “General Notes”. A series of 
eleven books in the possession of Mr. A. R. 
McTavish, 308 - 3th Ave., W., Calgary, which 
are the personal diary and the records kept 
by Mr. White from i860 to 1889. 

Letters - PMM/IH 142709-3, dated November 28, 1930, 

Department of Resources and Development, Ottawa, 

G. D. B. Sinclair, chief, Lands Division. 

- EMM/IH 142709-3, dated January 31, 1931, Depart¬ 
ment of Resources and Development, C. K. Le 
Capelain, Acting Chief, Lands Division. 





- 

« 

, 

. 




- 













- 


. 



• • 







. 

: -• . 

* 








■*, 



w 







S:' 




1 





SPECIAL COLLECTIONS 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA LIBRARY 


REQUEST FOR DUPLICATION 


I wish a photocopy of the thesis by 


(author) 


entitled A g/ ZAi l 


The copy is for the sole purpose of private scholarly or scientific study 
and research. I will not reproduce s sell or distribute the copy I request, 
and I will not copy any substantial part of it in my own work without per¬ 
mission of the copyright owner. I understand that the Library performs 
the service of copying at my request, and I assume all copyright responsi¬ 
bility for the item requested. 


Date _ Name and address _ Pages copied _ Signature _ 

__ - A? /3 a. p*? n ,-x ~~~ 

Odjt. ~ll 7C, //2/9 - 99 AtrC .pp , £>./■< >3cl 


F. 236 


September 1975 
























UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTS 
LIBRARY 

Special Collections 

Regulations Regarding Xeroxing of Theses and Dissertat i o ns 

Typescript copies of theses and dissertations for Master’s and Doctor's ^ 
degrees deposited in the University of Alberta Library, as the official copy 

of the Faculty of Graduate Studies, may be consulted in the Special Collections" 

Reading Room. 

A second copy is generally on deposit in the Department under whose 
supervision the work was done. Some Departments are willing to loan their 
copy. 

V $v' 

These theses and dissertations are to be used only with due regard to the 
rights of the author. Written permission of the author must be obtained 
through the University of Alberta Library when extended passages are copied. 
Therefore, xeroxing by users is limited to a maximum of twenty pages, and user's 

are asked to record and sign for the pages xeroxed. 


Date 


Signature 


Pages copied 


/ jp. t 






/ 


'SS.-7. 




I':" 




-F 


& 


>V 

_ 


March 






















B29761 






















