University of Alberta Libra 


0 1620 3369996 6 


For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 








©X UBEIS 
IWWlWtK 















Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/historyofalbertaOOmacn 


A HISTORY 


OP 

THE ALBERTA TEACHERS 1 ASSOCIATION 


”Magistri Neque Servi" 


by 

Kathleen Marsh MacNab, B # A« 


A thesis 

submitted in partial fulfillment 
of the requirements for the 
Degree of Master of Arts 
in the Department of History 


The University of Alberta 
May, I9I+9. 















-2- 


TABLE OP CONTENTS 


Chapter Page 


I 

The Pounding of the Alberta 

Teachers 1 Alliance 

k 

II 

The Growth of Membership 

21 

III 

The Attainment of Recognition 

32 

IV 

The Struggle for Financial Security 

k 3 


The Form of Contract 

hh 


Salary Schedules 

58 


Legal Protection 

67 


Pensions 

70 

V 

Improved Professional Training 

82 

VI 

Professional Activities 

91 

VII 

The Advancement and Safeguarding of 
Education in Alberta 

109 

VIII 

Constitutional Evolution 

120 

IX 

The Canadian Teachers* Federation 
and Other Organizations 

13k 

X 

Conclusion 

1I4.0 


j 
































. 






. 






' 

' 















FOREWORD 


Since most of the information in the following 
pages was taken from the A.T.A. Magazine, the writer 
is endebted to Mr* Eric C. Ansley, M*A., General 
Secretary-Treasurer, and the Executive Council of the 
A*T*A* for their kindness in allowing her to make 
extensive use of their files of the Magazine. She 
wishes to acknowledge also, the courtesy of Mr. Ronald 
;Gould, General-Secretary of the National Union of 
|Teachers in England, and Mr. Irvin S. Kuenzli, Sec¬ 
retary of the American Federation of Teachers, in 
isending her information on their organizations. 

The v/riter is deeply endebted to Dr. George E. 
iMisener, first President of the A.T.A., for the 
|details of the founding of the Alliance, and to the 
|late Dr. J. W. Barnett, first General Secretary- 
|Treasurer of the A.T.A., for his interest and encourage- 
jment in the planning of this thesis. It is to be 
I regretted that he did not live to write, as he had 
iplanned, a history of his organization which would 
jhave been filled with interesting and colourful 
■details which this work of necessity lacks. She 
acknowledges, too, the interest and advice of Dr. 

M. E. Lazerte, Dean of the Faculty of Education, 
University of Alberta and at one time President of 
the A.T.A., and Mr. Raymond E. Shaul, M.A., also a 
former President of the Association. She is deeply 
'grateful to Mr. M. H. Long, M.A., Professor of History, 
University of Alberta, for his encouragement and very 
helpful advice in the preparation and revision of 
this thesis. 













. 









-k- 


Chapter I 

THE POUNDING OP THE ALBERTA TEACHERS* ALLIANCE 


Organization of the teachers of Alberta was, 
in the words of the late Dr. J. W. Barnett, "the 
product of rebellion”, rebellion against conditions 
which had developed during the First World War. 
Education in Alberta was, in some respects, at a very 
| low ebb. The teachers, disgusted with the seeming 
hopelessness of their position, existing at what was 
merely a subsistence level and knowing no security in 
their positions, were leaving the profession in large 

i 

| numbers. The educational authorities, for their part, 

| were exhausting every possible means of keeping the 
classrooms open. It was fortunate that among the 
teachers of Alberta there were some who were convinced 
] of the value of their service and who were willing to 

i 

j brave resentment and disapproval and to devote them- 
| selves to the difficult task of forming an organiza¬ 
tion of teachers outside the control of governmental 
officials. They hoped, by this means, to raise the 
teaching profession to the position it rightfully 
deserves and to induce many to remain within the 










' 










, 






* 






; ; 


: 

■ 


, 


» 








- 








'■ 

“ 



' 













. 

. 

, ■ ' : 

. 




’ 




! ' ■ 











profession. To some the idea of a professional 
organization of teachers was not new for they had been 
members of the National Union of Teachers in England 
or were at least familiar with its success. They had 
watched with interest, also, the activities of the 
recently formed American Federation of Teachers. 

At that time the American Federation was still 

. 

j in its infancy. Early in the twentieth century groups 

I 

j of teachers in various parts of the country had become 

i 

! Locals of the American Federation of Labour. For 
this, since there were no state laws, in most cases, 

I to guarantee them security of tenure, they had become 

1 victims of official hostility and many had been black- 

! 

j listed and driven from the profession. The idea of 
| federating these Locals for greater protection seems 
j to have originated in Chicago where, in 1915, there 
| were three A. F. of L. Locals of teachers. With the 
| encouragement of similar groups in some of the larger 

eastern cities the Chicago Locals, in the face of an 

i 

| attempt by the Chicago Board of Education to have 
! teachers’ unions outlawed, proceeded to take the lead 
in the formation of the American Federation of Teachers. 

The first convention of the American Federation 









* 






* 


V 

. 









- 





' 








• 


. 



, 





. 














* 





• 


. 

• 







t 








■ Ki ti 



. ■ 

: 










-6- 


! 




I 


met in Chicago in April, 1916. At that meeting a 
constitution was drawn up and adopted and the objec¬ 
tives of the movement were set forth. A charter was 
immediately sought from the American Federation of 
Labour and was granted in May, 1916. Two years later 
the President was made a full-time officer and organizer 
while in the following year, the Secretary-Treasurer 
was made a full-time permanent official. Through 
the first decade of its history the Federation followed 
a very stormy course as a result of official opposition 
to the principle of the affiliation of teachers 1 
organizations with labour and because of disagreement 
among the Locals as to the proper course to pursue and 
even as to the value of a nation-wide organization. 

Nevertheless, from 1916 to 1921 the Federation 
showed remarkable growth. At the time of its forma¬ 
tion there were eight charter Locals with a membership 
of about 2800 and by 1920 this had increased to one 
hundred and forty Locals with a membership of about 
twelve thousand. During the same period, however, a 
number of larger Locals, including the original Chicago 
group, had broken away, mainly because of the continued 






I 










. 








. 












. 


l - 



























- 




- 



, 








i i • 










. 




■ 







- 









- 7 - 

opposition by the Boards of Education. There followed 
a period of decline and disintegration, from 1921 to 
1927, when at the lowest point only twenty per cent of 
the charters remained operative. The depression years 
which followed brought a renewed interest in the 
Federation and its membership increased gradually 
| until, in 193^» there was a membership of over ^00 

i 

in seventy-five Locals. Although its numbers and 
prestige have continued to grow, the Federation has 
never succeeded in winning the support of all the 
teachers 1 organizations and it has thus been handi¬ 
capped in its struggle to secure what has been called 
a "New Deal” for teachers.^ 

The National Union of Teachers in England, on 
the other hand, had been organized as early as I87O 
and had long been well established. Originally its 
membership had been restricted to elementary teachers 
only but after 1889 it included those of all groups. 

By 1917 its membership was well over one hundred 

1 . Robinson, Aileen W., ”A Critical Evaluation of the 

American Federation of Teachers" (Chicago, 193 il)« 

Sticker, Freeland G. , "Early History of the American 
Federation of Teachers." (Manuscript obtained 
from A. F. of T.) 









' 










E r. ' ■-< C f S 


* 




- 






















4 























-8- 


thousand, organized in Local Branches and larger 
County Associations. There were also a number of other 
special organizations in public and secondary schools 
such as the Incorporated Associations of Head Masters 
and of Head Mistresses and similar groups for assist¬ 
ants. The National Union was, however, the largest 
and strongest and was gradually drawing members from 
the others. It had made some real progress through 
the establishment of a retirement scheme in the Teachers 1 

1 Provident Society and through the Teachers 1 Benevolent 

| and Orphan Fund. It also offered legal advice and 
protection to its members and exercised considerable 

I 

| influence In the administration of elementary education, 

| the training of teachers and the establishment of 

$ 

; professional standards. It had even taken an active 

I 

1 interest in politics, in some cases supporting and 

l 

| electing its own candidates for membership in Parlia¬ 
ment • 

A vigorous campaign in 1913-14 had resulted in 
improvements in at least fifty per cent of the salary 

i 

scales then in existence and a similar campaign con¬ 
ducted in 1919 through the National Union 1 s members 
in Parliament brought a grant for improvements in 






- - 






* 














, 





• 




- 


' 

' 



* 



■ 

. 

r Ir -*■•*»*<*■■■ 


' 







' 







■ 


















- 9 - 


teachers salaries of over <£ 5 , 000 , 000 . Representatives 
of the N. U. T. have acted on the permanent Burnham 
Committee on Teachers 1 Salaries set up by the govern¬ 
ment in 1919 anc ^ throughout the following years they 
have done much to sustain salaries at a reasonable 
I level* The growing strength of the National Union 
is shown by the fact that in 191|6 its membership was 
lb7,000, approximately seventy-five per cent of the 
! teachers of England.^ 

j This progressive teachers 1 organization in 

j Britain seems to have served as the model for the 

i Alberta Teachers 1 Alliance both in its constitution 

I 

I and in the formation of its policies* Although the 

I 

j Alberta association adopted some of the terminology 
! of the American Federation in the establishment of 


| Locals and later Sub-Locals, and was for a time forced 

! 

I 


1 ® Encyclopedia and Dictionary of Education. Edited by 
Foster Watson, London, Sir Isaac Pitman Sons, 
1921 , Vol• III, p. II56* 

Cyclopedia of Education. Edited by Paul Monroe, 

New York, McMillan and Company, 1915, Vol. IV, 

p. 58^. 

The Year Book of Education, 1952 , London, Evans and 
Company, 1932 , p. 279, 

Action and Achievement, 1 945-46. p. 4. Publication 
of N.U.T. (London, 1947) 

Teachers 1 Unions in England, France and the United 
States. Irvin R. Kuenzld. Pamphlet published 
by American Federation of Teachers (Chicago). 











- 10 - 


to use organizers in the extension of its membership, 
it steered its course away from any affiliation with 
organized labour, toward the goal of a purely profes-» 
sional association recognized by the government* 

There were in Alberta at the time of the 
founding of the Alliance a number of organizations of 
| teachers, existing chiefly for social and educational 
j purposes but assuming no official capacity to act for 
| the teachers in general. They were found, for the 
most part, in the cities but in the rural areas, where 
there was the greatest need for organization, the in¬ 
dividual teachers were left to their own devices. 

Their only means of contact was in the Fall Conventions 
or Institutes, organized under the Department of Educa- 
| tion by the School Inspectors for the purpose of 

j 

| instruction or discussion. They afforded no opportunity 

I 

j to the teachers to act as a body on their own behalf. 

The only general organization was the Alberta Educational 
Association, under the control of the Minister of 
Education, whose membership was not restricted to 
teachers. Although it took an active interest in 
their welfare and problems it had no power to act for 
their protection. None of these bodies was of the 














. 


















.. 




■ • 

. 









. 


. 






















, 



























- 11 - 


nature envisioned by the promoters of the Alliance but 
they afforded the opportunity to take the first steps 
toward its formation* 

The first attempt to form a province-wide 
teachers’ organization was made at the Convention of 
| the Alberta Educational Association held in Edmonton 
| in 1916. Mr. George Gorman, Inspector of Schools, 

I 

| Calgary, in a resolution adopted by the Association, 

| was named to act as President and to take the prelim- 
! inary steps in the formation of a teachers’ organiza- 
i tion.^ Nothing came of this first move and accordingly 

i 

I in the Convention held in the First Baptist Church in 

I 

! Calgary, during Easter Week of the following year, Mr* 

| 

j George Misener, at a very stormy session and in the 

| 

j face of bitter opposition, succeeded in gaining the 
j floor and brought forward a motion which was adopted 

i 

by the meeting and which started the Alliance once more 
| on its way.^ In a motion adopted by the Association 
! Mr. Misener, who was Principal of H. A. Gray Junior 
High School in Edmonton, and Mr. C. S. Leppard, 


1 * Dr. George Misener, Conversations with the writer. 











- 12 - 


Principal of Ramsay School in Calgary, were named 
President and Vice-President of the new organization. 
These two were given authority to choose a Secretary- 
Treasurer and instructed to take such steps as were 
necessary to organize the teachers of the Province. 

A small grant was made by the Alberta Educational 
Association to defray preliminary costs and the 
j drafting of a suitable constitution was left to the 
two officers.^ They in turn chose Mr. J. W. Barnett 
| of Strathcona High School, Edmonton, as Secretary- 

J 

j Treasurer and future years were to prove the wisdom 

j 

2 

of their choice. Faced with the problem of persuad¬ 
ing the various teachers 1 2 organizations to join the 
new association and running the risk of official 
! resentment, Mr. Misener turned all his energy and ability 
to what he regarded as a trust and it was chiefly 
I through his efforts that the Alberta Teachers* Alliance 
came into being. 

The First Annual General Meeting of the Alliance 
j was held in the First Presbyterian Church in Edmonton, 


1. A. T. A. Magazine, Vol® I, Jan., 1921. p.l6. 

2. Dr. George Misener, Conversation with the writer 









i 


. ... : 


























' 


* 

■ 

* 

. 

* 






- 13 - 

April 2 , 19lB. So well had the executive officers 
laid their plans that it too]£ only two short sessions 
to dispose of all the important business* Various 
amendments to the proposed constitution were adopted 
and a resolution to take immediate steps to seek in¬ 
corporation was carried. Plans were made also to send 
a delegation to the Government to press for the pub- 
j lication of a directory of teachers and schools in 
the Province, the authorization of•a form of contract 

j to give security of tenure to the teachers, and the 

! 

| establishment of a satisfactory scheme for teachers 1 
pensions. Arrangements were made for the drafting of 
a Code of Honour or Professional Etiquette to be 
1 presented at the next Annual Meeting.^” At this session 
also, Mr. Misener was re-elected President and Mr. 

T. E. A. Stanley, Principal of South Calgary High 
School, Calgary, was chosen Vice-President. Following 
the instructions of the meeting, the association was 
registered and incorporated on June 2I4, 1918, and a 
request was immediately made for a corporation seal 


1 . An interesting sidelight on this meeting is that the 
membership fee for 1917-18 was fixed at only thirty- 
five cents. Although this fee was increased the 
following year to from $5.00 to $10.00, depending 
upon the salary of the member, it has remained rela¬ 
tively low. At the present time the fee ranges fro in 
$8.14.0 to $15.60 per year. 











. 

* 


* 

, 

. 

' 

. 
















• ' 

t 




. 

- 

. 














-u+- 

1,2 

bearing the words "Alberta Teachers 1 * 3 Alliance". 

The Second Annual General Meeting of the A.T.A. 
was held in the Public Library, Calgary on April 19 , 
1919 * The Alberta Educational Association did not meet 
that year but an appeal from the Executive of the 
| Alliance brought together representatives of all the 
I existing Locals and the Annual General Meeting was able 
to proceed without involvement in the sessions of the 
Educational Association. This independent procedure 
has been regarded by many as marking the establishment 

k 

of the A.T.A. in fact as well as in name. 

At this Second Annual Meeting dissatisfaction 
was voiced over the inadequate representation on the 
Executive Council of some of the rural areas. Accord- 
| ingly a committee was appointed to make arrangements 
for a fairer distribution of representation. Another 


1 . Minutes of the First Annual Meeting (hereinafter 

designated as A.G.M.) of the Alberta Teachers* 
Alliance, April, 1918. 

2 ® Dr. George Misener, conversation with the writer. 

3. It became customary to speak of the Alliance as the 
A.T.A. and this abbreviated form will be used in the 
following pages. 

)4. Dr. George Misener, conversation with the writer. 



















. 












. 

' 






. ,• . 
























y 


5 ^ 






* ■ 




* 

« 








- 15 - 


committee was named to report later in the session on 
a suggested provincial salary schedule. When this 
report was presented, however, it was felt to be unsatis¬ 
factory and it was decided to instruct the Executive to 
appoint another committee to meet in the following July 
and prepare a suitable schedule for submission to the 
Locals through the Executive. 

Although a spirit of moderation was apparent in 
all the discussions, it was also evident that the Alliance 
j had already adopted some definite policies which, as 
it will be seen, were to be pursued with determination 
through the ensuing years. Thus, a resolution was 

1 

| adopted calling upon the Locals to request from their 
| various School Boards, permission to send representatives 
| to their meetings who would have the right to take part 

i 

I in discussions but not to vote. This was the first 
i demand for representation, a demand which was to be 
repeated persistently throughout the following years 0 
Since no satisfactory reply had been received from the 
Government to the request for an improved form of con¬ 
tract plans were made for the preparation of a model 
form to be presented to the Locals for their approval. 

Thus began the struggle for security of tenure. It was 














. 



•c • ' • 

' 




■ 

* 







, 

„ 





- 











‘ 




■" " « ■ v, . : . • ' ” 








i 














-16- 


also at this meeting that preliminary steps were taken 
toward the formation of a federation of all the teachers* 
organizations in Canada, steps which were to result 
ultimately in the establishment of the Canadian Teachers* 
Federation. When, at this meeting of the Alliance, Mr. 
Misener withdrew from the Executive Council in order to 
pursue post graduate studies in education, he could feel 
that he had performed the task entrusted to him two years 

i 

I before and that through his vigour and his enthusiasm 
| the Alberta Teachers* Alliance was set squarely on its 
| way . * 1 


Another interesting trend of policy was seen in 

I this Second Annual General Meeting. At one of its 

! sessions Mr. A. Farmilo, an organizer for the American 

| 

| Federation of Labour, addressed the delegates and in- 

f 

! vited the Alliance to affiliate with the A. F. of L., 

i 

promising them the support of his organization in any 
further problems. Although there was some support 

j ______ 

1 . Mr. Misener had registered with the first class in 
the University of Alberta, graduating in Arts in 1912 
and in Theology in I9I3. He attended Camrose Normal 
School in 1915 * He was awarded his M.A. by the Univer¬ 
sity of Alberta in 1922 and from then until 1927 did 
post graduate study toward his B.Paed. and D.Paed. in 
the University of Toronto. 








' 

- 





















■ 














, 





. 


‘ 

■ . 

. 

• • 











-17- 


for affiliation among the delegates and a resolution 
was introduced proposing a referendum on the matter, it 
was so amended that its purpose was lost* Instead the 
General-Secretary was instructed to prepare a report on 
the question of affiliation with labour but as no fur¬ 
ther steps were taken the issue was effectively shelved, 

| This was in keeping with the future policy of the A.T.A. 
for although it has maintained cordial relations with 
organized labour It has avoided affiliation and has pur- 
| sued a course toward a purely professional association 

i 

unbound by any ties with labour or any political party. 

The first constitution of the Alliance, as it 

J grew out of the resolutions and discussions of these 

i 

| earliest meetings, envisaged a membership that would 
| ultimately include all the teachers of the Province. 

Thus anyone who had been actually teaching in the Province 
during the twelve months preceding affiliation, in any 
educational institution supported by Dominion, Provincial 
or Municipal taxation, was made eligible for membership. 

To this there was one exception, "permit" teachers were 

p 

barred from joining. Members were to be organized in 


1 . Minutes of the Second A.G.M. of the Alberta Teachers* 
Alliance, April, 1919 * 

2 • By "permit" teachers was meant those who were given 
special permission by the Department of Education to 
teach In spe cified schools but who had no training 
as teachers other than a Grade XI or Grade XII High 
School standing. 










' . . ■ ■ w.- 








; 




. • • v; •: ‘ 






■ 

















■ 


































. 

t 

. 








-18- 


Local Alliances, any six teachers being permitted to 
form such a Local with the consent of the Executive 
Council. Every Local was to have an Executive Committee 
made up of a President, Vice-President and Secretary- 
Treasurer, elected annually. The list of officers was 
to be reported to the Executive Council of the Alliance. 
This body, the administrative organ of the Alliance, was 
to consist of nine members: the President, Vice-Presi- 

! dent, the General Secretary-Treasurer, the immediate 

| Past-President, and five District Representatives. The 
General Secretary-Treasurer was to be appointed by the 
Executive Council but all the other members were to be 
elected by the Annual General Meeting. The policies of 

I 

| the Alliance were to be dealt with by the Annual General 

| Meeting which was to be held during the annual conven- 

I 

| tion of the Alberta Educational Association. The delegates 

i 

I to the meeting were to be members in good standing 
selected by the Local Alliances on the basis of numbers. 
Thus a Local of ten or less could send one delegate, 

j one of from eleven to twenty-five members could choose 
two delegates and Locals of over twenty-five could elect 
one additional delegate for every twenty-five or fraction 

i 












* 


. 












. 

■ 




. 






























. 






-19- 


thereof. Probably because of the nature of the organ¬ 
ization with its scattered membership, more than usual 
power was placed with the Executive Council which 
according to the Regulations was to conduct the business 
of the Alliance and could exercise any power not 
specifically vested in the Annual General Meeting* 
Amendments to the constitution, proposed by the Local 
Alliances to the Executive Council, could be made after 

| approval by a vote of a two-thirds majority of the mem- 

1 

bers and confirmation by the Annual General Meeting* 

The first constitution outlined the purposes of 
the Alberta Teachers 1 Alliance as being: 

(a) To advance and safeguard the cause of education 

I in the Province of Alberta. 

(b) To raise the status of the teaching profession 

j in the Province of Alberta. 

(c) To unite the members of the society in an assoc¬ 
iation for their mutual improvement, protection 
and general welfare. 

(d) To bring about united action on any matter of 
common interest to the teachers in the educational 

|l. The Alberta Teachers’ Alliance Constitution. A.T.A. 

Magazine, Vol. I, Sept.-Oct. 1920, p.15. 

















. 

' 


' 

■ 






■ 






t 

“ 

: 







a 







-20- 


institutions of the Province of Alberta which 
are supported by Dominion, Provincial or Muni¬ 
cipal taxation* 

(e) To co-operate with teachers* organizations in 
the other Provinces of the Dominion having the 
same or like aims and objects.^ 

The intention of this study is to trace the activities 
of the A.T*A. in the achievement of these purposes and 
to follow its development through the course of some 
thirty years into one of the most progressive and 
successful teachers* organizations in Canada* 


i 


1* The Alberta Teachers* Alliance Constitution. A.T.A* 
Magazine, Vol* I, Sept*-Oct., 1920 , p*!5* 














-21- 


Chapter II 

THE GROWTH IN MEMBERSHIP 


The faith of the small group who founded the 
Alliance was soon justified by its rapid growth in 
membership* At the Annual General Meeting held In 



| able to announce that the membership already represented 
sixty-five per cent of the teachers of the Province* 

It included almost all the teachers in the cities and 

i 

| larger towns but it had been found difficult to gain the 

I 

i interest and support of the teachers in the rural areas* 

I 

| In securing this the problem was chiefly one of organiza- 
| tion for it was sometimes almost impossible to get into 

j 

| contact with teachers in outlying areas and to induce 
them to organize with others in similar circumstances. 

The large fall conventions had made it possible to meet 
a number of these prospective members but further con¬ 
tacts were necessary to secure and retain their support. 
The change carried out by the Department of Education 
from large conventions to smaller district institutes, 
as they were called, rendered the task of organization 









» 


- ■ 





. . '.v ' ■ 


. ■ . ■ ■ ■ •• v 






























-22- 


1 

still more difficult* 


In view of these problems the Executive, in the 

autumn of 1919 # had decided to employ an organizer whose 

duty it would be to visit teachers’ meetings whenever 

and wherever possible and bring them within the organiza- 
2 

tion. The difficulty of financing such an office had 
been met by the support of the teachers in Edmonton and 
Calgary who were only too willing to sign notes needed 


I to borrow the money from a bank* Mr. J. W. Barnett, 

i 

| who, as already noted, had been acting as Secretary- 
Treasurer since 191?# was also appointed Provincial 
| Organizer at an initial salary of $1250.00 a year. At 


! 

i 




the Annual General Meeting of 1920, a resolution was 

adopted providing for the employment of a full time 

General-Secretary and Mr. Barnett was appointed perma- 

3,Il 

nently to office on July 1 of the same year. His 
salary for the combined offices amounted to a little 
over $2500.00 a year.^ He was now able to devote his 


jl. Report of the General-Secretary to the A.G.M., A.T.A. 
Magazine, Vol. II, May, 1922, p.i|0. 

2. Handbook of the Alberta Teachers’ Association, 19^l-7# P«H« 

3 * Report of the Annual General Meeting, April, 1920, 

A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. I, June, 1920, p.25* 

I 4 .. Handbook of the Alberta Teachers’ Association, I 9 I+ 7 # p*ll< 
5* Financial Statement, Year Ending Easter 1921. A.T.A. 
Magazine, Vol. I, April-May 1921, p.2,0. 























- 23 - 

entire time to organization and the general affairs of 
the Alliance. The wisdom of this choice was soon appar¬ 
ent and indeed much of the success of the A.T.A. can be 
attributed to his devotion and perseverance. 

Through the enthusiasm of a number of members in 
the larger centres, it was found possible to have 
representatives of the A.T.A. present at almost every 
Fall Convention even though these were often held simul¬ 
taneously. As a result the General-Secretary was able 
to announce, each year, a large growth in membership, 
in spite of difficult post-war financial times and the 
necessity of higher fees to meet increasing costs. The 
policy had also been adopted of enrolling Normal School 
| students as provisional members at a very low fee and in 
j most cases they remained loyal to the Alliance when they 

j 1 

| obtained their full status as teachers. 

At the Annual General Meeting in April, 1922, a 
resolution was passed which provided for the setting up 
of a committee to investigate ways and means of "initiat¬ 
ing and propagating a vigorous membership campaign". 


1. Report of the President, A.G.M., Easter, 1920. 

A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. I, June, 1920, p.13. 











- 


* 
















-2k- 


This committee was to report before the close of the 
session and the A.G.M., as it had come to be called, 

was to consider its suggestions and take appropriate 

1 






action* The discussion on the resolution brought 
references to “vicious propaganda” directed against the 
teachers* organization* Mr* Barnett had made pointed 
reference to it in his report to the preceding A*G.M* 

The A*T*A* he said had been subjected to very serious 
and at times vicious attacks by the press and from the 
public platform. He referred to attacks in the larger 
newspapers, with the exception of the Calgary Albertan, 
and especially to a speech made by the Minister of Educa¬ 
tion, the Honourable George P. Smith, before a joint 

2 3 

meeting of the Inspectors and Normal School instructors* 
Three outstanding members, T. E. A. Stanley, H. C* Newland 
and J. W. Barnett, had been selected for especially 
bitter attack being described as a “handful of radicals” 
who were "knowingly misleading" the teachers of the 
Province* As these attacks had been repeated in many 
of the newspapers of the Province and had served to deter 


1* Report of the Proceedings of the A.G*M*, April, 1922, 
A.T*A. Magazine, Vol* II, May, 1922, p. 13 . 

2* Report of the General-Secretary, April, 1922, 

A.T.A* Magazine, Vol. II, March, 1§22, p.19* 

j 5* Policy of the Executive, A.T.A* Magazine, Vol* I, 
February, 1921, p . 25 I 4 .. 








- 25 - 


some of the younger teachers from joining the Alliance 
it was felt that some decisive steps must be taken to 
bring before the teachers and the public the true nature 
of the A.T.A. It was partly for this reason then that 
the above mentioned membership committee was formed and 
brought forward its report to the A.G.M. then in session. 
It presented three major proposals: 

1 * That a competition in securing new members be 
organized among the Locals. 

2. That the Executive b© empowered to encourage the 
organization of Provisional Locals with as low 

a membership as three and that these Locals be 
represented at the A.G.M. on the basis of one 
delegate for at least six members, if necessary 
representing two Locals. 

3 . That the Executive divide the Province into dis¬ 
tricts for the purpose of more thorough organiza¬ 
tion and endeavour to secure suitable teachers 
who would be willing to devote a portion of their 
time to securing new members on a commission 

basis• 

With a view to carrying out these proposals, the Executive 

1. Report of the Membership Committee of the A.G-.M., 

A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. II, May, 1922, p.l. 



























i ' 






- 26 - 

took steps to get into touch with persons who would be 
prepared to act as organizers. Secretaries of the Locals 
were requested to place the matter before their various 
groups for the purpose of suggesting to the General- 
Secretary the names of persons suitable and willing to 
carry on this work* At the next Executive Meeting of 

| December, 1922, the General-Secretary was able to report 

| another substantial increase of over five hundred members ^ 
The report of the General-Secretary, however, at 

i 

| the following A.G.M., March, 1923, indicated that al- 

I though these less formal methods were getting some 

| 2 
results they were not sufficient* Accordingly, a reso¬ 
lution was adopted which empowered the Executive to 
employ an organizer or organizers at certain suitable 

3 

times during the year* Two years later the Executive 
adopted the policy of keeping organizers in the field 

i on a commission basis and although the costs appear to 
have been high the results seem to have justified this 
policy* The President announced at the Annual General 
Meeting of 1926 that all records in membership growth 

1* A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. Ill, January, 1923* P*5* 

12. Report of the General-Secretary, A.G.M., March, 1923, 
A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. Ill, April, 1923, p.13. 

3. Report of the A.G.M., March, 1923* A.T.A. Magazine, 

Vol. Ill, April, 1923, p.18'. 













. 
















* 


-- 

i 




. 


, , , 

* 

* 

































-27- 

had been broken, 1 This growth continued until in 1930, 
in spite of very poor economic conditions among the rural 
teachers, as a result of the beginning of the great 
depression, the total membership exceeded three thousand. 
This made the A.T.A., with the exception of the Federa¬ 
tion of Women Teachers of Ontario, the strongest organiza- 

2 

tion of teachers in Canada, 

At the Annual General Meeting of 1931+ a resolution 
| was adopted unanimously which, in its ultimate results, 

| may be regarded as one of the most important resolutions 
! ever adopted by that body, A plebiscite of all the 
| teachers of the Province was to be taken as to whether 
I or not they favoured legislation to give the A.T.A, full 
professional status with compulsory membership of all 
| £he teachers employed in public schools in the Province,5 
j When the matter was submitted to the teachers the 
• result was so overwhelmingly in favour of the proposal 
j that it seemed almost useless to have expended the money 
| and effort in carrying out the plebiscite. Accordingly 

1* A.T.A, Magazine, Vol. VI, April, 1926, p*9» 

2, A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. V, May, 1930, p*5* 

J. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XV, October, I 93 JU - 9 p*l# 







« 


. 





.... 



' 





















-28- 


in January, 1935, a delegation from the Alliance, led by 
President E. J. Thorlakson, presented the proposal to 
the Government and with it a draft form of the bill to 
establish statutory membership* Premier Brownlee*s 
only cause of hesitation seemed to be the possibility of 
the extra cost to the Government in administering the 
act* The delegates assured him that the A.T.A. would be 
prepared to assume any extra cost entailed* With this 

! understanding an Act known as ”The Teaching Profession 
Act 11 was introduced in the session of the Legislature 
of the same year*^ The Act embodied all the proposals 
made by the Alliance, but the compulsory membership 
clause met with very serious opposition especially from 
members of the Legislature who belonged to other pro¬ 
fessional groups. Of these only three who were members 
of the legal profession, supported the main principle 
of the bill* An amendment which deleted the compulsory 
membership clause was passed by a very narrow majority 
of three and the Teaching Profession Act, thus amended, 
became law.^ The Alliance, which under the act became 
"The Alberta Teachers* Association’ 1 , was bitterly dis- 

1* A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XV, February, 1935, P*6<> 

2* A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XV, May, 1935, P*3* 














V 




. 





-29- 


appointed with the fate of the compulsory membership 
clause, but felt that at least one important gain had 
been made, for the Alberta Teachers* Association had 
received full statutory recognition as a professional 
body. 

With the victory of the Social Credit party in 

the provincial elections of 1955 > which brought many 

teachers into the Legislature and placed one of them, 

the late William Aberhart, at the head of the government, 

the tide seemed to turn in favour of the A.T.A. In the 

first session of the new Legislative Assembly, in the 

Spring of 195 ^* the Teaching Profession Act was amended 

to make membership in the Association compulsory. The 

amended clause now read as follows: 

"All persons carrying on the profession of teach¬ 
ing in any institution of the Province of Alberta, 
supported by provincial or municipal taxation, 
which maintains a department for giving instruc¬ 
tion in the courses of study for elementary, 
secondary or technical schools, under the juris¬ 
diction of the Department of Education of the 
Province of Alberta, shall as a condition of their 
employment be members of the Association."^ 

Some further amendments were later made to clarify the 


1. The Teaching Profession Act and Amendments thereto. 
A.T.A. Handbook, 19^-7* P«15» 








-30- 


position of Normal School instructors and members of 
the Faculty of Education in the Association and to bring 
members of the Roman Catholic religious orders, teaching 
in the schools of Alberta, into individual membership* 

The Teaching Profession Act, so amended, remains still 
the constitutional basis of the Alberta Teachers* Assoc¬ 
iation and through its enactment the A.T.A. became the 
second professional teaching group in the British 
I Commonwealth to obtain statutory membership*^ 

One other important feature of the Act must be 
1 noted* Along with requiring compulsory membership, 

| it also gave to the Association the power to discipline 
| its members and provided for a committee to exercise 
| this function* By-laws relating to discipline, also, 

| could be made by the Association, subject to the approval 

! of the Lieutenant-Governor in Council, and through these 

1 

| By-laws the Association could ensure truly professional 

conduct on the part of its members. Provision was also 

made for appeals against the decisions of the Discipline 
P 

| Committee• Here, at long last, was the fulfillment of 

—-———— - --——— -— 

1. Alberta Teachers 1 Association Handbook, 19)4.7, p*l5* 

2. Teaching Profession Act and Amendments. A.T.A. Hand¬ 

book, I9J4.7, p.l8. 









r 

• ■ * 






















. ■ ; 











' 


- 





- 

' 


- 


















* 








* 







-31- 


one of the chief aims of the original Alliance, an 
association of one hundred per cent statutory membership 
with power to discipline its own members* All the money 
and effort which had hitherto been spent in winning new 
members could now be turned to other important purposes, 
to the achievement of a true profession not only in name 
but also in fact and to the advancement of the cause of 
| education in Alberta* 
















/ 










































■ 






















-32- 


Chapter III 

THE ATTAINMENT OF RECOGNITION 


One of the earliest and most persistent problems 
of the Alliance was the refusal of official bodies to 
give to the Alliance recognition as the organization 
representing the great body of the teachers of Alberta* 

JUntil such, recognition was forthcoming it was felt that 
j the Alliance had fallen short of one of its chief pur- 

j poses 9 that of affording the teaching profession its 

i 

proper economic and social status* On the part of 
School Boards the obstacle was chiefly their refusal to 
j recognize the Alliance as the official agent of all the 
! teachers who came within the organization* This attitude 
| on the part of the Boards was founded largely upon fear, 

! fear of the consequence of meeting in discussions rep- 

1 

| resentatives of the Alliance who would be much more 
I formidable in debate than the individual teacher, and 
fear of the possibility of coming into conflict with 
the whole strength of the teachers’ organization. On 
| the other hand, the problem of recognition by the De¬ 
partment of Education was more serious, for the Alliance 
felt that recognition by that body involved at least 

















■ 


, 


fc. ' ". ... : ; • ’ v ■;; r • 

. 

‘ 



* 
























-53- 


two very important things, recognition of the Alliance 
as the rightful agent of the individual teacher in all 
disputes, and recognition of the Alliance as a profes¬ 
sional organization with a right to representation on 
all bodies dealing with matters of education in the 
Province. 

The School Boards of the cities and larger towns, 
being composed mainly of professional and business men, 
did not entertain the same distrust as did the rural 
Boards of the Alliance as the bargaining agent for the 

\ 

teachers and very soon recognized the convenience to 
themselves of dealing with the organization rather than 
the individual teacher, especially in matters of salary 
schedules. Accordingly many Boards asked that all matters 
relating to salary be laid before them by representatives 

j of the Alliance. In 1920, the Edmonton School Board 
went a step further and requested that representatives 
of the Public School and High School Locals attend all 
meetings of the Board and of its School Management 
Committee. In the same year the Annual General Meeting 
of the Alliance passed a resolution requesting School 
Boards to admit representatives of the Alliance as non¬ 
voting members of their body. When the question was 












. 















. 









« 

. 

' 

* 
















raised as to the legality of having teachers serve on 

the Board which hired them, the difficulty was avoided 

by having the Edmonton School Board give a standing 

invitation to the Alliance to send representatives*^ 

The School Board of 1921 rescinded this motion of the 

former Board on the ground that it was not within the 

2 

power of the Board* This action and the refusal of 
the Board to enter into collective bargaining on a new 
salary schedule with the Edmonton High School Teachers’ 

i 

] Alliance led to a strike of the Edmonton High School 
j teachers* 

In all, seventy-four members of the Edmonton 

| 

| High School Teachers’ Local Alliance were on strike for 
the two weeks from Monday, April 18, to Monday, April 28. 
During the first week public opinion seems to have been 
against the strike, influenced, no doubt, by the hostile 
attitude adopted by the Edmonton Bulletin and the fear 
of the effect of the disruption upon the success of the 
j High School students in the approaching final examinations* 
I The Edmonton Journal, on the other hand, assumed a more 

n ——— ■ 1 ■ - — ■ "I" 1 " ” 1 - * 11 ■ — — —» ■■ 

jl* Newland, H. C* , "Teacher Representation and the Model 
Agreement." A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. I, June, 

1920 , p. 17 * 

2. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. I, March, 1921, p. 5 . 









- 35 - 


conciliatory view and succeeded in swinging public 
opinion gradually toward sympathy with the teachers. 

In response to a petition of ratepayers. Mayor Duggan 
arranged for a mass meeting on the second Tuesday at 
which the views of the teachers and of the School Board 
were placed before the public. A resolution was adopted 
at the meeting requesting the teachers and the School 
Board to ”get together” and try to reach an agreement. 

Meanwhile also, a joint committee of the Trades and 

j 

| Labour Council and the Edmonton Board of Trade had 
I asked representatives of the Alliance and of the School 
I Board to meet them and clarify the points at issue. 

As a result negotiations were begun to end the strike. 
The outcome was the establishment of a Conference 
Committee of the Board to meet representatives of the 
Alliance to discuss matters which the teachers wished 
placed before the Board, and the agreement that repre¬ 
sentatives of the Alliance, in their capacity as 
citizens, should attend all meetings of the Board or 
the Management Committee and should receive copies of 
the agenda and informal notice of the meetings. The 
salary dispute was left to the Conference Committee. 







■ 








, 






* 




■ 







































• - 





















- 36 - 

Here was a measure of recognition in one important 
1 

school district. 

In a Manifesto presented to the Minister of 
Education in September, 1921, the Alliance again 
requested, among other things, that the School Ordi¬ 
nance be so amended as to make attendance of teachers 1 

representatives at School Board meetings legal, but 

2 

for the time being nothing was done. 

Unfortunately, relationships between the Depart¬ 
ment of Education and the Alliance had been unsatis¬ 
factory from the beginning. The Minister of Education, 
the Honourable George P. Smith, viewed with suspicion 
the actions of the teachers in forming an organization 
of exclusively teacher membership and was very loathe 
to recognize it as an official organization. It was 
I unfortunate too that the Alberta Trustees* Association, 
formed about the same time as the Alliance, took for 
the most part the same attitude as the Department of 
| Education. The result was that in many of the early 

I —. . . .. — .— — - - ——— 

j 1. A.T.A. Magazine, r, The Edmonton Strike." April-May, 
1921, p. 3 . 

| 2. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. II, Oct., 1921, p*3« 


























































* 









- 37 - 

disputes between the School Boards and the teachers, 
the question of the right of the Alliance to act for 
its members was a major issue. One of the most out¬ 
standing of these cases was the dispute with the 
Blairmore School Board which centred around the right 

I of teachers to collective bargaining through their Local 

1 

| of the Alliance. Although judgment in the original 
| court and also in the appeal court went against the 

I teachers, in one important respect the ultimate result 

j 

j favored the Alliance for it proved to School Boards and 

I 

other interested groups the solidarity of the teachers 9 
organization. School Boards found themselves forced 
to recognize the Alliance as an effective organization 
i in protecting its individual members. In this connec- 

j tion, too, the publication of the so-called "Black 

6 

j List”, in the A.T.A. Magazine as a warning to members 

i 

} of the Alliance, proved an effective method of dealing 
with School Boards who treated teachers uni 1 airly• 

Much of the controversy, to be dealt with later, 
which centred upon a satisfactory form of a contract, 
arose from the demand of the Alliance that in matters 


1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. VI, July, I 925 PP* I3”15 f 
also October, 1925 , p*l5* 










- 38 - 


of dispute between teachers and School Boards, the 
teachers should have the right to be represented at 
any meeting by an "agent", obviously a member of the 
Alliance. Actually the demand was never fully satisfied 
as long as the law provided for individual contracts 
between teachers and School Boards. It is true that in 

I 

some cases, representatives of the Alliance succeeded 
in gaining permission from the School Boards to appear 
before them on behalf of individual teachers but the 
trustees were, for the most part, unwilling to have this 
right written into the contract form. The result was 
| that many minor cases were taken before the courts which 
might have been settled by discussion in School Board 
meetings. In these court cases the Alliance was able to 
| act for the teacher but the method proved costly to 
| both Alliance and School Boards. The Alliance continued 
to press for the right to act as agent for the teacher 
until in 1937 with the passing of the Teacher Tenure 
Act, to be dealt with later, the need for such a right 
disappeared* 

Recognition of the Alliance by the Department of 
Education in other matters was achieved only gradually. 







- 










' r. 


* 




* 


' 












■ 


. 



















































- 39 - 


From the outset the organization had claimed the right 
to representation on any committee dealing with matters 
of education. At first this demand was ignored but with 
the change of government after the election of 1921 and 
the consequent appointment of a new Minister of Education, 
the Honourable Perren Baker, some change in policy was 
seen. Representatives of the Alliance were invited to 
attend meetings of the committee for the revision of 
| the High School Curriculum and to place before them the 
! opinions of the membership at large on that important 
matter,^ In 1923, following a meeting of the Executive 
of the Alliance with the Minister of Education, further 
recognition was obtained. It was agreed that a repre¬ 
sentative, nominated by the Alliance, would be appointed 

by the Minister as a member of the High School and 

2 

University Matriculation Examinations Board* This 
policy was continued until, in 1939 * there were repre¬ 
sentatives of the Alliance on the following important 
committees of the Department of Education: the High 
School and University Matriculation Examinations Board, 

The Committee on Examinations, the Radio Committee, the 
Committee on Certification, the Revision Committee, and 

I* A.T.A, Magazine, Vol, II, October, 1921 , p*7* 

2. Ibid, Vol, III, February, 1923 , p*9® 


































. 

. 

, 

. 










- 1 * 0 - 


1 

the Committee on Re-Draft of School Grants* The 

Certification Committee was set up in 1959 but without 

statutory recognition* It consisted of representatives 

of the University, the Department of Education and the 

Alliance. In I 9 I+I 4 .* Uy the same Orders-in-Council which 

provided for the Faculty of Education in the University 

of Alberta to assume full responsibility for teacher 

training, this Certification Committee became the Board 

of Teacher Education and Certification* This Board was 

to consist of five representatives of the University, 

five of the Department of Education, and three of the 

Z 

Alberta Teachers’ Association. 

Recognition of the Alliance by the University 
of Alberta, as the official organization of the teachers, 
was regarded as a most important step toward the attain¬ 
ment of its rightful position in matters of education, 
j When in 1928 plans were being made for the establishment 
i of the School of Education as a training school for 
teachers within the Faculty of Arts and Science, the 
Alliance was invited to send two representatives to sit 
with the Senate Committee on Education.5 Dr. M. E. 
Lazerte, a member of the A.T.A., who had done valuable 

1. A*T*A* Magazine, Vol. XIX, May, 1959* P*5® 

2 . A.T.A. Handbook, I 9 I 4 . 7 , pp. 13,llj.» 

3 . A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. IX, Dec., 1928 , p.l 6 . 









-kl- 

work with the Alliance Bureau of Research, was named 
Supervisor of the School of Education* It was during 
his term of office as President of the A.T.A*, that the 
Executive of the A*T*A. approached the President of the 
University with a view to having a representative of 
the A.T*A. appointed to the Senate of the University 
and also to the Liaison Committee of the School of 
Education, a joint committee of the University and the 
Department of Education whose purpose was to assure com¬ 
plete co-operation and harmony in the matter of teacher 
training.'*’ At the following Convocation in May, 1957> 
Dr. W. A. Kerr, President of the University, announced 
that the Senate had approved by an unanimous vote, the 
affiliation of the Alberta Teachers’ Association with 
| the University and had agreed that the organization be 
| represented on the University Senate. As a result. 

Dr. Geo. D. Misener, who had been first president of the 

Alliance, was appointed as A.T.A. representative on the 

2 

Senate, for a period of three years. 

In a brief presented to the University Survey 
Committee in December, I 9 I 4 -I* the A.T.A. placed before 
the committee a recommendation that there be established 

U A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XVI, May, 1936 , p*2ij. # 

2. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XVII, June, 1957* P*l* 







- 




. 

• • 





















■ 
















... 








, 

• - 

. . . 










, 




5 t 




* 







a Faculty of Education for training High School teachers 
and a suggestion of the type of instruction which such 
a Faculty should offer* The brief also repeated the 
request that there be a representative of the Association 
on the Liaison Committee of the University and the 
Department of Education.^ The establishment of a 
Faculty of Education had been advocated by the A.T.A. 
for many years as a part of its programme for improved 
professional training and it was therefore with great 
I satisfaction that the A.T.A* greeted the establishment, 

| in May, 19I4.2, of a full-fledged Faculty of Education 
j with Dr. M. E. Lazerte, Past-President of the A.T.A., 
as the first Dean of the Faculty. It was felt that 
this was a recognition of the teaching profession as 
being on a par with the legal and other learned pro¬ 
fessions, an ambition which teachers had long enter¬ 
tained. 


1* A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XXII, Dec., l^l, p.7® 
2. Ibid., Vol. XXII, May, p.l6. 











40 - 


Chapter IV 

THE STRUGGLE FOR FINANCIAL SECURITY 


In speaking to a meeting of the Alberta Educa¬ 
tional Association early in 1920, President T. E. A. 
Stanley declared that the first specific task of the 

Alliance was to win for teachers ”their proper social 

„ 1 

and economic position"• Obviously this would not be 

1 

j fccomplished until the organization could gain for its 
I members a higher degree of financial security through 
I continuous contracts, more adequate salaries and satis- 
| factory pensions# The earliest efforts of the A.T.A. 
j were therefore devoted strenuously to these ends, to 

I 

I such an extent in fact that its opponents pointed to 
j these as the only real aims of the organization# Although 
- considerable stress was laid on the question of higher 
minimum salaries, the first consideration was to gain 
j a form of contract which would guarantee to the teacher 
| a reasonable degree of security# It is impossible to 
separate this question entirely from that of recognition 
; of the Alliance for all its demands put forward at various 
! times involved that of the right of the teacher to be 

I___ 

1# A.T.A. Magazine, Vol# I, June, 1920, p#lJo 

I 








* 

■ 

. 

' 

* 

t 

* 

. 

' 

* 





represented in all disputes with a School Board by an 
agent, presumably a member of his association* 


The£orm of Contract 
















When the organization was first formed the posi- 
tion of the teacher under the existing form of contract 
was, to say the least, precarious, subject to the whims 
of small School Boards and to the attacks of petty local 
gossip and jealousies* At the Annual General Meeting of 
Easter, 1918, a resolution was passed empowering the 
Executive to prepare a model form of agreement and to ask 
the Department of Education to make certain changes in 
the School Ordinance which would provide for greater 
security of tenure for the teacher* Although the Presi¬ 
dent and the General-Secretary acted upon these instruc¬ 
tions, they were not able to obtain anything definite 
from the officials of the Department* Accordingly, at 
the Annual General Meeting of the following year, the 
Executive was instructed to have its solicitors prepare 
a model form of agreement which was to be submitted to 
the Locals for their approval. Acting upon these instruc¬ 
tions the Executive prepared and distributed 

1. Newland, H.C* Chairman of the Law Committee, Report to 
the A.G.M*, April, 1920* A.T.A* Magazine, Vol* I, 

June, 1920, pp* I7-I9. 











■ 45 - 

to the Locals a model form of contract, which did not 
violate, according to legal advice, any of the provisions 
of the School Ordinance or of the Regulations of the 
Department of Education* Some of these agreements were 
signed between School Boards and teachers. The Depart¬ 
ment of Education, however, refused to accept this form 
i 
s 

j and issued instructions to the School Boards to the 

■ 

! 

| effect that the only legal form of contract was that 

i 

j approved by the Minister. This action on the part of 

! the Government was regarded by the A.T.A. as highly 

| 

unfair and they continued to press for further discus- 
| sions with the Department. Following another interview 

; with the Honourable George P. Smith, Minister of Educa- 

; 

! tion, officials of the A.T.A. were allowed to put their 
case before the Executive Council. At this meeting they 

received definite promises that a new form of contract 

I 

j would be prepared which would include at least three of 
! the demands put forward by the teachers, namely, the self- 
j renewing feature of the form already proposed by the 
I A.T.A., provision for a salary schedule and a security 
| clause. When, however, the new form did appear the 
j Alliance was disappointed to find that it had not been 
! granted the security clause for which it had asked. In 



- 


' 

. 


* 

» 

... 

* 

♦ . . 

- 

■ 

* 

■ 

- 








- 46 - 

this new form provision was made for an enquiry before 

dismissal but no recognition was given to the principle 

that the teacher should be permitted to be represented 

at such a meeting by an agent. In other words, the 

Department of Education was not yet willing to recognize 

the A.T.A. as the official organization and bargaining 

agent of the teachers. Nevertheless the latter felt 

1 

I that they had gained some valuable ground. 

The Alliance continued to press for further 

! 

amendment to the official form of contract and the amend¬ 
ment which it had proposed was widely publicized. Locals 
were urged to insist upon the inclusion of Clause V in 
every contract, that is the clause proposed by the 
Alliance which gave to the teacher the right to be repre- 

j 

I sented by an agent at any meeting of a School Board where 
reasons for dismissal were to be discussed and which pro- 
vided further for adequate notice of such a meeting. 

The controversy which followed brought forth a very 
strong denunciation of the policies and leaders of the 
| Alliance by the then Minister of Education, the Honour- 
| able G. P. Smith. These accusations were made both in the 

______ 

| 1. Newland, H. C., Chairman of the Law Committee, Report 

to the A. G # M., April, 1920, A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. I, 
June, 1920, pp. 17-19* 







- 

■ , . 




. 

I 

- 

. ■ 




■ 



' . 








' 








1 . 

. 


. 




. 








[ 


- 14 - 7 - 

press and before Conventions of the United Farmers of 
Alberta and of the Alberta School Trustees* Association# 

It was rather surprising, therefore, that at the meeting 
of the latter group, the Minister of Education put for¬ 
ward a proposal for a conciliation meeting on the question 
of contracts, to which both the Alliance and the School 
Trustees* Association were asked to send delegates#^ 

This conference took place in March of the same 
year, 1921, but very little was accomplished# Agreement 
! was reached on two minor points, that the period of notice 
I of a meeting regarding dismissal should be extended from 
five to ten days and that the Department of Education 
should be requested to amend the School Ordinance to 
| make the payment of salaries on a monthly basis obligatory, 

| but the major points at issue, those of recognition and 

s 2 
of the meeting to precede dismissal were left unsettled# 

S At the U.F#A. Convention of that year. President H# C# 

j Newland laid the teachers* case before that body and had 

| the satisfaction of having the teachers * tenure clause 

i endorsed# 

Hopes for any definite improvement in the situation 

____ _ 

jl# A#T#A# Magazine, Vol# I, February, 1921, p#5# 

2# A#T#A# Magazine, Vol# I, May, 1921, p#27# 














- 

■■ 

, 

« 

















r. 




. 

. 

. « • 

* 











- 1 * 8 - 


were dashed by the passing of several amendments to the 
School Ordinance in 1922. Of these, three were of special 
interest to the teachers, two dealing with the contract 
form and the third establishing a Board of Conciliation# 
Section I 5 I of the School Ordinance had read in part as 
; follows: 

"The contract entered into shall be in the form 
prescribed by the Minister and such form may b© 
altered or amended as may be mutually agreed upon 
by the contracting parties providing such altera¬ 
tions or amendments are not inconsistent with any 
of the provisions of the Ordinance or the regula¬ 
tions of the Department." 

This clause had given the Alliance at least a small 
Smargin to work upon. It had been possible in some cases 
| to persuade School Boards to include in the contracts a 
! clause permitting an agent to act for the teacher at a 
: meeting for dismissal. Such a clause did not violate any 

I 

of the provisions of the School Ordinance or the regula- 
I tions of the Department. This advantage was now removed 

! by the amendment which read: 

1 

"The contract entered into shall be in the form 
prescribed by the Minister and such form may be 
altered or amended as may be mutually agreed upon 
by the contracting parties provided always that 
such alterations or amendments shall be subject 
to the approval of the Minister." 

| Since the Minister of Education was opposed to the changes 

desired by the Alliance it was highly improbable that he 






. 







1 


: 





■ 








. 


1 ' 

' J ■ : ■ i . ’ 




• 










* 

j ■ ■ 



X 

- 

■ 

. :/ i>v ivlf; 





- 49 - 


would approve their inclusion in any contract. Further¬ 
more, Section 95 °£ the Ordinance was amended to insure 
strict compliance with the prescribed form of contract. 
Clause 17 of this section had read in part: 

M ,,.,*the contract wherefor shall be in writing 
and may be in the form prescribed by the Minister,” 

| The use of the word ”may” had left some freedom in 

j drawing up a contract but this was now impossible for 

I the amendment read: 

the contract shall be in writing and shall 
conform to the provisions of section 151 of this 
Ordinance,” 

j The use of the word ”shall” made it quite evident that 
! there was to be no variation from the departmental form 
I of contract. The losses sustained by the Alliance 

i through these amendments were not offset by the slight 

I 

! 

advantage they had gained through the fact that the 
School Boards could not alter the form of contract to 

j 1 

j the detriment of the teachers. 

The Boards of Conciliation provided for in the 

I 

| amendments to the Ordinance were also unsatisfactory to 
| the Alliance, The School Ordinance had formerly made 
! provision for the Minister of Education ”to appoint one 
j or more persons to inquire and report upon any appeal. 


1, A.T.A, Magazine, Vol, II, June, 1921, p,5. 









■ . 

■ 






. * . * * 

1 






„ . , * • 






.. 

‘ 

, 

, 
























- 50 - 




[ 




j 


f 


complaint or dispute arising from the decision of any 
board or inspector or other school official”. It also 
provided that when such a report had been made the 
Minister should make any order upon the matter as seemed 
to him proper. The instigation of such an enquiry was 
stated to be one of the duties of the Minister. By the 
amendment, however, it became merely a discretionary 
power. A Board of Conciliation was to be appointed when, 
in the opinion of the Minister, it seemed necessary and 
when the point in dispute was a matter pertaining to 
the carrying out of the terms of a contract. Each Board 
was to consist of a representative of the teachers, a 
representative of the trustees and a chairman who was to 
be neither a teacher nor a trustee. There was no time 
limit set for the appointment of such a board and no 
provision to make its decision effective. Although dis¬ 
appointed with this arrangement, the Alliance was prepared 
to give it a fair trial and to assume that the Minister 
of Education was making a sincere attempt to co-operate 
with the teachers 

During the following summer a request was received 


1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. II, June, 1921, p .5 








- 51 - 


from the Minister of Education for a further conference 
between representatives of the Alliance and of the 
Trustees* Association on the form of contract. The new 

form had proved unsatisfactory to both groups. Repre- 

' 

j sentatives of the two organizations met but no progress 
| was made.^ 

In December, 1922, a decision handed down by 

! 

! Justice Chas. A. Stuart, of the Appelate Division of the 

j Supreme Court of Alberta, revealed the precarious position 

| of the teacher under existing methods of hiring. In the 

| case of Johnson versus McEwan School Board, the decision 

j 

j of the Appeal Court made it clear that no agreement 

[ existed until a contract had been duly executed and 

I 

| signed. A mere letter of acceptance was not binding upon 

p 

| either party. This proof of the weakness of the 
teachers* position spurred the A.T.A. to greater efforts. 

I 

After a discussion with the new Minister of 

I 

| Education, the Honourable Perren Baker, in January, 1923, 

1 the Executive of the A.T.A. felt that their position was 
! improving and that the Minister was ready to concede much 
| of what they were asking. His offer at that conference 


1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. II, August, 1922, p.3* 

2. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. Ill, June, 1923, pp. I2-I5. 










* 











* 

. 

• „ 

- 

■ 


* 


















- 



* 










» 


t 






- - * 







52 - 


was that a new form of contract should be Issued which 
would provide for a hearing to precede dismissal and 
that due notice of such a meeting should be given. The 
Boards of Conciliation, provided for in the 1921 amend¬ 
ments to the Ordinance, should be replaced by direct 
appeals to the Minister of Education. The teachers* 
delegates accepted these proposals but when they were 

presented to the Trustees* Association that body opposed 

1 

■ the appeal £0 the Minister* When the new form of 

, 

| contract, which became known as the 1923 Form, was finally 
| printed and circulated, it was found that the views of 
the Trustees* Association had prevailed. Clause Six of 

I the new form of contract provided for a hearing to pre- 

| 

cede dismissal but of this hearing the teacher was to 
| receive only two days’ notice. This would make it im- 

j 

j possible in most cases for the teacher to get any advice 

I 

j from the Alliance. There was, moreover, no provision for 

j 

the teacher to have a representative at the meeting. In 
the words of an editorial in the A.T.A. Magazine at the 
time, 

"It will be seen from the foregoing that the action 
of the Department is probably the most serious 

| 1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol• III, Feb., I923, pp. 8,9. 






' 




.■ O.C 



■ - 





























* 

i 







« 

t 




- 

* 










;' ’' 1 - . : . : 


■ 


>. 

' 


} ■ 








« 




' 






* 

1 





a 





* 














■ ■ > ■ ■ ,> j\ 







. 






, 













t 


- 

» 

. 



















* 

- 





iC 











, 






53 - 


thing that has taken place with regard to 
contracts since the question was first mooted by 
the Alliance. It means a great deal to the 
individual teacher and very much to the Alliance, 
inasmuch as it will place a great obstacle in the 
way of the Alliance functioning effectively in 
defending its members in time of greatest diffi¬ 
culty.” 

In spite of continued pressure upon the Department of 
Education this form of contract remained until 1926.^ 

In the spring of that year the Executive of the 

I A.T.A. was able to announce some substantial progress. 

i 

I The Government had amended Clause VI of the contract, 

! the tenure clause, to provide for five days* notice of 

I 

the meeting on dismissal at which time the teacher was 
to be permitted to hear and discuss with the School Board 

its reasons for wishing to terminate the contract. At 

I 

the same time the Executive also announced that the 
Government planned to set up an effective Board of 
Reference to replace the Boards of Conciliation provided 

! 

j for some six years previously. It was to consist of 

j three members, one representing the Trustees* Association, 

; one the A.T.A., and a third neutral member. The former 

I 

' Boards could merely pass rulings on the interpretation 
of the contracts but this new Board was to have power 


1 . A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. Vl, July, 1923, p. 2 . 

0 ? 








• 















' 


. 


. 




, 














. 

■ 


. 

•• ‘ , • ’ V .' . 

t 

. ■ 

4 t \ Z ."i t,jf d'Ci: uo . r ■ : : , ‘ . ;v. voi ■ 

. 

* . . . 


- 
































- 54 - 


to pass judgement on the decisions of School Boards in 
what were claimed to be cases of unjust dismissal* Al¬ 
though the Board of Reference was not given power to 
enforce its findings and no provision was made to prevent 
School Boards from engaging another teacher while the 

case was before the Board of Reference, the Alliance 

1 

j felt that much had been gained* 

■ 

In 1950 the procedure was once more changed* The 
! Minister of Education informed a committee of the Alliance 

I 

| Executive that according to his new plan a School Board 
i would be given power to terminate an agreement at any 

r 

| time upon thirty days* notice with the provision that the 

j 

| School Inspector should act as arbitrator in cases where 

| the proposed termination was contemplated during the 

| academic year® The Alliance voiced vigorous opposition 

| to the proposal in the form of a manifesto to the 
i 2 

| Minister* Nevertheless it was embodied in the so-called 
Baker Bill which provided for a complete revision of the 
administration of education in the Province* The Baker 
Bill met with such serious opposition in the Legislature, 
j however, that the Government did not allow it to reach 


1 * A.T*A* Magazine, Vol* VI, March, 1926, p*$ 2 ; also 
April, 1926, p.l?* 

2 * Manifesto to the Minister of Education, A.T.A. Maga¬ 
zine, Vol* X, March, 1930 , p* 21 . 







. 

„ 

■ ' 

> 

■ 

' 

« 

. 

■ t l 










x 


■ ■ 

' 

! 




« 


■ 


■". - ; ■ •' . . 

’ 



. 




' xiii ' . •: ;.r 




. 


... 

* 

* 

■ * 






- 55 - 


the third reading but the following year, in the closing 
hours of the session, amendments to Section 197 of the 
School Act were passed embodying the provisions of the 
Baker Bill applying to teachers® contracts 

. 

As had been forseen by the Executive of the A.T.A., 
the new arrangements proved unsatisfactory to both 

1 

teachers and trustees alike. The Minister of Education 
had argued that the new contract would put an end to 
| expensive litigation over termination of contracts but 

I such was not the case. There was great confusion as to 

1 

whether the new rulings applied to contracts already in 

existence and in one notable instance, f, The Acme Case,” 

the dispute as to whether or not the amendments to 

| Section 197 of the School Act applied to contracts 

entered into before the passing of the amendments, reached 

the Supreme Court of Canada. The case was decided in 

favor of the Alliance claim that in such contracts the 

2 

new amendments did not apply* 

The general dissatisfaction brought another con- 
| ferenc® between representative of the Alliance and of 
! the Trustees® Association. It seemed as though agreement 

1. History of Teachers® Contracts, A.T.A. Magazine, Vol* 

XI, June, 1931, p*lij-* 

2. A*T.A. Magazine, Vol. XII, January, 1932, p*l* 










- 56 - 


was finally to be reached for the committee succeeded 
in drawing up a form of contract which they believed 
would be acceptable to both bodies* The Government 
accepted the proposals and had them embodied in further 
amendments to the School Act in the session of 1932 but 
these were not proclaimed pending the acceptance of the 
j ‘proposals by the two groups concerned* When the amend- 
| ments were presented to the next convention of the 
j Trustees* Association, that body refused to accept them 

| and the legislation was therefore not proclaimed*^ 

! 

| However, following a further conference between repre- 
| sentatives of the Department of Education, the A*T*A* and 
| the Trustees* Association, a new amendment to the School 

S Act was introduced which gave to the Board of Reference 

! 

| power to disallow the action of School Boards in cases 

| of wrongful dismissal* After intensive agitation on the 

I 

part of the trustees this was again amended to take from 

the Board of Reference power to act upon notice of dis- 

2 

missal issued during the month of June* 

As in many other instances, a real solution for 
this problem of the Alliance came with the change of 


1* A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XII, April, 1932, p*l6 f 
2* Ibid., Vol* XVI, September, 1935, P*3* 










- 57 - 


government in 1935• The Teacher Tenure Act of April, 
1957, made radical changes in the existing methods of 
engaging teachers, changes which were in keeping with 
recommendations which had been made by the A.T.A. for 
some time* The formal term contract was abolished and 
replaced by a continuous contract based upon letters 
of acceptance by the School Board and the teacher* No¬ 
tice to terminate the agreement must be given by the 
School Board before June 20th of any year and by the 
teacher before July 20* These notices could be effective 
only at the end of the school year unless either party 
had received the consent of the Minister of Education.^ 

I An amendment to the School Act in the same year is signi¬ 
ficant* To the Board of Reference, which was now to 
consist of one person, appointed by the Minister of 

j Education, was restored the power to disallow notices of 

2 

f termination of agreements at any time during the year 0 

j Although recently there has been some agitation on the 

s 

i part of the Trustees’ Association to have the proceed- 
J. ings of the Board of Reference made less formal, for the 
| most part there has been general satisfaction over the 
working of the Teacher Tenure Act* 

1* A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XVII, April, 1937, p.27 # 
i 2* A.T.A. Handbook, I9I17, p*13* 

















. 

• - 














' 


* 


■ 




* 

■ 

■ 


■ 






, 

t 

■ 

















■ 





- 58 - 


Salary Schedules 

While efforts were thus being made to establish 
a satisfactory form of agreement, attempts were also 
under way to obtain better salaries through the setting 
of a higher minimum and a province-wide salary schedule* 
This was a necessary part of any programme the purpose 
of which was the placing of teachers in their proper 
social and economic position* Although it was difficult 
to do much in this matter while the organization did 
not control all the teachers of the province the early 
efforts of the Alliance were not without success* 

At first the organization was concerned chiefly 
with the problem of securing fair treatment for the 
teachers in the payment of salaries then in existence 
and especially with evasions of the la?/ in the matter 
of payment for a full year’s work* Much of the work of 
the General-Secretary and his staff arose from disputes 
over the interpretation of the law regarding payment 
of salaries* Although some disputes were carried to 
the courts, many were settled without recourse to law 
when it was realized that the teacher was being supported 
by a strong organization* 














. 

- 

. 

■ 

' 


















r 












. 




* 




59 - 


1 




| 

j 




In March, 191?, the Government passed legislation 
which established a minimum salary for teachers of 
$8L|.0*Q0 a year*^ The Alliance was not satisfied with 
this as a reasonable basis for teachers 1 salaries* They 
met strong opposition from the Trustees* Association 
who, through almost every convention of their organiza¬ 
tion, presented to the government demands to reduce the 
minimum or to eliminate it entirely* On the other hand 
the A.T.A. worked for a much higher minimum, not through 
legislation but through pressure brought to bear upon 
School Boards by the teachers themselves in signing 
contracts* In President Stanley*s address, already men¬ 
tioned, before the Alberta Educational Association in 
1920, he clearly stated the two specific aims of the 
Alliance in the matter of teachers* salaries: first, 
the acceptance by the teachers and the trustees of a 
$1200*00 minimum and, second, the establishment of a 

satisfactory salary schedule which would give ample 

2 

recognition to training and experience* By continued 
agitation and propaganda the Alliance was for a time 
remarkably successful in raising the level of salaries 

1* A.T.A. Magazine, Vol* I, June, 1920, p*23* 

2* Ibid., p.lj. 



















. . t 






l 

, 






* 

. 


. 


* * * 












— ■ 




* 







-6o- 


paid. Tables show that from I 9 I 5 to 1921 the level of 

salaries for all teachers in Alberta rose on the average 

t 

from f792*72 to $1,288*^9# Much of the increase came 

in the years 1919 anci 1920 when the effectiveness of 

1 

the Alliance was beginning to be felt# This did not 
mean, however, that all teachers were being paid on 
the basis of the #1200#00 minimum for many, especially 

| in the rural districts, were far below that level# The 

! 

I A.T#A# therefore continued to press for higher salaries# 

I 

| The Annual General Meeting, April, 1923 , once more 

s 

| urged all its members to refuse salaries of less than 

! 11 , 200 . 00 . 

1 

In January, 1920, the Alliance had issued a 

I proposed salary schedule which its members were urged 

! to try to attain. It adopted the #1,200.00 minimum 

with satisfactory increases for experience, training 

2 

| and heavier responsibilities. In September of 1927 , 

I 

! in face of steadily increasing pressure to lower 
| teachers 1 salaries, the Alliance adopted a new schedule 

| based on a lower minimum of $1,100.00# This was sub- 

I 

{ mitted to an electoral vote, that is a vote of the mem- 

| _______________ 

j 1# A.T.A. Magazine, VqI# III, Oct., 1922, p#10. 

I 2# A.T.A. Magazine, Vol# I, Dec., 1920, p#5# 












-61- 


bers through the Locals, and received almost unanimous 

support* It was compiled as a basis for negotiation 

between teachers and trustees and no attempt was made 

1 

to gain legislation on the matter* 

Many factors were working against the Alliance 
at this time in the matter of attaining higher levels 
of salaries or in even maintaining those already 
| reached* The very low prices for agricultural products, 

| in this period of depression, made the burden of taxation 
j heavy in rural districts. To many, the cost of main- 
! taining the schools seemed the easiest place in which to 
! exercise economy* At the same time the overcrowding 
| of the profession helped School Boards to bargain with 

j teachers for lower salaries. Added to this was the 

| 

| readiness with which the Minister of Education used the 

j 

i power granted to him under the School Act, to permit 

1 

1 School Boards to pay less than the statutory minimum. 

| It is to the credit of the Alliance that salaries in 

| Alberta were maintained at as high a level as did prevail. 

| 

| As with many other problems, the turn in the tide came 

\ 

I with the passing of the Teaching Profession Act and its 

1 

| amendments. Compulsory membership made it possible to 

1-- ----------— — 

il. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. VII, Sept., 19^7» P*H» 

I 





* 

' 

■. • 




V A,' 


’ 


. 

: ■ . 


- 








■ 







. 


. 


■ 

; 

- 



-62- 


put a stop to underbidding for positions and to present 
a stronger front against further cuts in teachers* 
salaries. 

When the new school bill passed the Legislature 
in the Spring of 1935, establishing the large Divisions 
as administrative units in education, it was hoped by 
some that there would be an improvement in the matter 

| of salaries for teachers. In its immediate result, 

S 

I however, this was not the case, for the new Divisional 

! Boards found themselves burdened with the deb$s of their 

i 

| predecessors and it was difficult in many cases to main- 

! 

! tain the salaries already being paid. Yet the effect 

\ of the large Divisions ultimately favored the teachers 

: 

for it tended to bring the salaries of all teachers to 
an even level and did away with petty bickering with 
small School Boards. Negotiation of salary schedules 

1 

| with the larger Divisional Boards proved much more 

I 

! satisfactory. 

The position of the A.T.A. was strengthened 

I 

| greatly by the passing in 1937 by the Alberta Legisla- 

| 

| ture of an act known as "The Freedom of Trade Union 
Association Act.” In its essence it established the 
right of groups of employees to bargain collectively 






. 

■ ' t ■ . 

. 

I 


. , ■ . ■ 

* 












■ 


. 






* 

- 

a 



















-65- 


with their employers* The following year this act, 
among others, was repealed and replaced by "The Indus¬ 
trial Conciliation and Arbitration Act," which included 
the provisions of the former act and outlined the steps 

to be taken in any dispute between employees and 
2 

employers* Legal opinion at the time placed the teachers 
j under the application of the Act but any doubt in this 

| matter was settled by an amendment passed in 19 ^ 4-1 which 

I 

! specified teachers and School Boards as coming under 

1 3 

| the Act* One effect of this legislation was to put an 
j end to any Individual bargaining between teacher and 
j board for the individual contract was abolished. At the 






same time it gave to the Salary Negotiating Committees 
of the A.T.A* a fixed procedure in bargaining for better 

h 

salary schedules with School Boards. r 

In I 9 I 4.2 the matter of salary schedules was clari¬ 
fied by an amendment to the School Act which made it 
obligatory for School Boards to negotiate schedules with 


I 1* A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XVII, June, 1937# P#2* 

| 2. Ibid., Vol. XVIII, June, 1938 , p.2. 

U. IBid., Vol. XXI, June, I 9 I 4 JL, p. 5 . 
j 4 * All legislation in this regard has since been incor¬ 
porated in the Alberta Labour Act* 







' 






- 64 - 


their staffs, which schedules were to include a minimum 
salary and regular increases or increments to a maximum 
salary* The schedules might also include allowances 
for special duties and qualifications and for past 
experience*"^ 

The rising cost of living during the war years 
I brought increased pressure from the A.T.A. for higher 
j salaries for teachers. A resolution of the Annual 

j General Meeting of 19l|-2 established a minimum of #1,000*00 

j p 

| to be sought by all Salary Negotiating Committees*~ 

| A corresponding decision of the Alberta Trustees' Associa- 

I 

6 ion to refuse to depart from the $81j.0*Q0 minimum resulted 
in disputes between School Boards and Locals going before 
. Arbitration Boards. These disputes brought out one 
| weakness in the procedure of arbitration, namely, that 
j there was no provision in the Industrial Conciliation 
j and Arbitration Act for compulsory acceptance of the 
! award of the Arbitration Board* While the Executive of 
j the A.T.A. adopted the policy of recommending to its 
! 

| ~— 1 —-.. —--— -~~ 

: 1* A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XXII, May, 19 J+ 2 , p.22* 

2* A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XXII, May, 194.2, p*28* 













-65- 


Locals that they accept an award of such a board, 
whether favorable or not, the Trustees’ Association did 
not follow suit and deadlocks, occurred# Sometimes the 
disputes were settled by further negotiation but in 
two notable cases, those of Mundare in I 9 I +2 and Vegre- 
| ville in 1914-3* the persistent refusal of the School 
| Boards to accept the awards led to strikes# The Mundare 
{ dispute was of short duration as the School Board 
I accepted the award of the Arbitration Board without 
| qualification# Settlement was reached through a confer- 

; ence between the School Board and the Executive of the 
1 

j A#T#A# The Vegrevllle strike was in part the result 
| of a policy of the Executive of the A.T.A. This had 
! zoned the Province into three divisions according to 
| "ability to pay” and in each of these a test case was 
carried through to arbitration# It was hoped that the 

I 

settlements reached would serve as bases for salary 
schedules in all Divisions in similar circumstances. 

The Board of the Vegreville Division, which had been 
chosen for one of the test cases, refused to accept 
the decision and the strike followed# The dispute was 

| - —————-———-—_——, , - -■——— 

: 1* A#T.A# Magazine, Vol# XXII, May, 19lf2, p#7* 








. 

- 

■ ' ' - J 

« 

, 

. 

* ' ' 

» 

' 

. 

«, * * 

« • * 

. 

, 

* 

* * " • ' * • 









-66- 

final ly settled by further negotiation involving com¬ 
promise on both sides 

Although there was a marked improvement in 
salaries as a result of this pressure from the A.T.A., 
the increase still failed to keep pace with the rising 
cost of living. The failure of the Federal Government 
to make the cost of living bonus apply to teachers’ 

salaries and the f, Fr©ezing Order” of the same Government 

i 

which prevented qualified teachers seeking other employ¬ 
ment, combined with comparatively low salaries to dis¬ 
courage young people from entering the profession during 

! 

the war years. The result was that the post-war years 

j brought a critical shortage of teachers. Awakening 

| public opinion as expressed through the Alberta Educa- 
2 . 

| tional Council, and pressure from the A.T.A. and the 

I 

j Alberta School Trustees 1 Association persuaded the 

I 

Alberta Government to make a substantial increase in 
the 19^7 estimates for grants paid to public schools of 


•A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XXIII, Feb., 19 ) 4 . 3 , p.l?. 

•This council which is mentioned again in a later chapter 
is composed of representatives of the A.T.A., the 
| Trustees’ Association, Home and School Association^, the 
I.O.D.E. and other groups interested in education. It 
was formed in I 9 I 4.6 and is a purely voluntary organiza¬ 
tion which is attempting by every possible means to 
rouse public interest in education* 









. 

X 

. 

. 




- 6 ?- 

the Province* As a result there has been a marked 
upward trend in the salaries paid to Alberta teachers.^ 


Legal Protection 


On© important duty assumed by the A.T.A. from 
the outset was to afford legal protection to its indi- 
| vidual members. For the most part this protection was 
| required in disputes with School Boards over interpreta- 
! tion of contracts, instances of unfair dismissal, and 
| payment of salaries and it was therefore another 

! important objective in the struggle for financial secur- 

| 

; ity. This protection was given in various ways, some- 

i 

I times through information and advice published in the 
; A.T.A. Magazine, sometimes through consultation with 
! and help from the General-Secretary and the Executive 
1 Council and often through the services of a competent 

j 

legal adviser who took the teachers’ case to the 
courts. 


At the first Annual General Meeting in 1918 the 

i --- ■■ —- — ————— — '■ 11 1 1 11 ,n " . - 

! 1 . According to the School Act the present minimum 

salary for teachers in Alberta is # 1 , 000.00 a year 
but this minimum is now largely ignored by the 
Negotiating Committees of the A.T.A. Locals. The 
average salary being paid in Alberta is now approx¬ 
imately $ 2 , 500.00 a year. 







. 


- - . 

. 


. 







- 68 - 


Executive was instructed by resolution to choose a 

competent legal adviser to the AllianceIt was decided 

to seek the services of a promising young lawyer who 

would be willing to make a special study of school law* 

The choice of the Executive fell upon Mr* George Van 

Allen, LL.B., who had himself had experience in teaching 

in Alberta and was therefore sympathetic with the cause 

| of the teachers* Experience from that time until his 

| untimely death in 1937 proved the wisdom of the choice 

| made by the Executive. As solicitor for the A*T.A. 

Mr. Van Allen was very successful in piloting many cases 

through the Courts, even to the Supreme Court of Canada. 

Through his efforts there was established a cod© of 

| case law in matters of Education in Alberta which proved 

2 

; invaluable to the Alliance. Upon Mr. Van Alleys 
| death in 1957* Mr. C. W* Clement, B.A., LL.B., was 
j appointed to take his place and he in turn was replaced 
by Mr. Louis Hyndman, K.C., the present solicitor for 
the A.T.A. For a number of years it was customary to 
appoint from each new Executive, a Law Committee whose 
| function was to decide with M r# Van Allen the course to 

1. Minutes of the First Annual General Meeting of the 
A.T.A., April, 1918 . 

i 2. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XVII, Aug., 1937* p.2. 







, 



- 69 * 


be taken as each new difficulty arose. Later this 
prabtic© was changed and the Executive as a whole 
acted as the Law Committee. 

Very often it was possible to reach an amicable 
agreement with a School Board through a letter from the 
Executive or through the personal intervention of the 
General-Secretary, J. W. Barnett, or even by a letter 
from the solicitor threatening legal action. In many 
cases, however, recourse had to be made to the courts. 

As has been mentioned before most of these cases had 
to do with unfair dismissals and with the interpretation 
of the law governing contracts but there were others, 
charges of slander and even of assault. In most cases 

! judgement in the lower courts was in favour of the 

( 

teachers and appeals to the Appelate Division sustained 

I the claims of the Alliance., It became customary too, 

| 

[ with the succeeding amendments to the School Act to 
instigate test cases which served as precedents in the 
interpretation of each new amendment. For this reason 

| two important cases, the so-called "Acme Case” and the 

| "Athabasca Case", were carried to the Supreme Court of 
Canada and in each instance the claims of the Alliance 
were upheld. Both dealt with the interpretation of the 








« . 

■ J < 1 :\ L ■ 

• ■ - v.‘ - i "■■■ •. .v' . '■ ' .U c;.: ■ 

3 • i - ■ j V/ .[>? i’iO^voo i.:/..] r *{ ; r- V • .j V ; ; .;c 

. 

’ ■ 

. 

( 

. ' ' . ■ ■ , 

. 

_ 

■ 

' 

„ 







-70- 

existing contract clauses of the School Act. The 
passing of the Teacher Tenure Act and the establishment 
of an effective Board of Reference has done much to 
obviate the necessity of this litigation. 

The value of this legal procedure can be readily 
seen* It helped the individual teacher in cases of 
unjust treatment by School Boards or by others in the 
district, it acted as a deterrent upon those who might 

otherwise have taken advantage of the teacher if left 

s 

| unprotected, it helped to force upon School Boards and 
| upon the public the recognition of the A.T.A. as the 
! official organization of the teachers of the Province 
[ and it helped to clarify School Law. 

Pensions 

i . 

Prom the outset the Alliance advocated the 
establishment of a suitable pension scheme as an important 


1 1. Early editions of the A.T.A. Magazine recount some 
appalling examples of mistreatment of teachers in 
some rural districts. For example, in one case, 
an Irate male parent accompanied by two women entered 
the school during school hours and in a dispute with 
the lady teacher, knocked her down and kicked her. 

In another case the teacher*s desk and books were 
smeared with filth. Although these are extreme ex*- 
amples, assault was not unusual and slander and 
threatening letters were quite common. 










. 

• • ;.h - .■ / :/ . 

* 








• • . ' ? 

. 

. . . 

’ 













' 


■ 


. 








* • • 

■ 

. 

* 

t •; 



















-71 


part of any plan to attain financial security* Before 
the formation of the Alliance the matter had been one 
of the interests of the Alberta Educational Association* 
Various committees had been appointed from time to time 
to deal with the question and had collected information 
on the schemes adopted in other parts of Canada and of 
the Empire. A report of one of these committees, pub¬ 
lished for the Easter Convention of the Association 
in 1917 9 outlined the fundamental principles which had 
j been accepted in all pension schemes. Three of these 
were accepted by the Alliance as essential to any scheme 
they might adopt: 

1* The principle of compulsory contribution* 

2. The need for a sound actuarial basis* 

5 * The assurance of at least some return of 

contributions in the event of withdrawal 

j 

from the profession. 

When the Alberta Teachers* Alliance was formed it was 
felt that the matter of pensions could be dealt with 
more satisfactorily by that organization since it would 
provide facilities for presenting the question to the 
teachers in smaller groups and at any time throughout 
the year* Accordingly, at the Easter Convention of the 









' ■ ' ■ 

. ■ ■ l . - 

■ 

y : i . .V * •.; 'Jr pJPoOOLP P6PPP O P Ci’.J !.‘C> 

» ' 


. ■ ' ' ■ ‘ *•< 1 





- 

. 

‘ 



Of, ;/ •: <• ; ■ j. ' J J.. - 

■ 

£>cc; < ■ ■ 

■ 


; Jr ob : i . orr J 

* 

„ 

. 

• ' ' f • : 

” ' , ■ ' . ■ ' ' 

, ' . , . . . ' • ' . i : ! .* . :.r.oJ- ' 

, 


-72- 


Alberta Educational Association in 1918 , a resolution 
was adopted to hand over the question of pensions to 
the Alliance# 

Earlier schemes for pensions had contained both 
insurance and annuity clauses but the Minister of Educa¬ 
tion, the Honourable J. R* Boyle, made it clear at this 
1918 convention that the Government was definitely 
opposed to any insurance provisions* Consequently it 
i was found necessary to draw up a new plan* The Execu- 
| tive of the A*T*A., therefore, recommended that a 
Pensions Committee be appointed to prepare new proposals* 

| 

| The committee was duly appointed and drew up a new plan, 

S omitting the insurance clauses, which was presented in 
1 1919 to tiie new Minister of Education, the Honourable 
| George P* Smith, but he felt unable to act upon it at 
: the time since he had just been appointed* 

Each succeeding Annual General Meeting passed 
‘ resolutions instructing the Executive to press for a 
j suitable pension scheme and each year the Executive 
brought the question before the Government but with no 

I 

| result* When a superannuation scheme for the Alberta 
Civil Servants was under consideration an attempt was 
made by the Alliance to have teachers included in the 












■ . * C J ’ 




* ■ . 

r 

■ 

- 

. 

i 1.0-' 

, 

. q .. : 

. 






- 75 - 


plan* The Minister of Public Works, the Honourable 
Alec Ross, who was responsible for the Civil Servants 1 
plan, promised to give this matter his consideration 
but the pension plan was established without including 
the teachers*^” 

By I925 the School Boards of some of the larger 

! centres had come to see the necessity for some such 

| 

j schemes for their own staffs* In that year the Calgary 
| School Board requested the Calgary Local of the A.T*A. 

| to draw up a suitable scheme for their consideration* 

The Pensions Committee appointed by the Calgary Local 
together with W* W. Scott, the President of the A*T*A*, 

! and J. W* Barnett, General-Secretary, were constituted 
; a Pensions Committee for the A*T*A. to prepare another 
i scheme which would be Province-wide* The new scheme 

| differed somewhat from the proposals of some five years 

■ 

before. It was presented to various School Boards 
throughout the Province and for the most part received 
their approval and their promise to act with the A.T*A* 
in placing the plan before the Government. Yet another 
committee known as the Provincial Pensions Committee was 

1 . "Pensions for Alberta Teachers"* Editorial, A*T*A* 
Magazine, Vol. V, Jan*, 1925, p. 11 ff. 











- 71 *.- 

formed in March, 1925 * made up of representatives of 
various interested groups and including the Chairmen of 
the Edmonton and Calgary School BoardsMr. P. S. 
Selwood, Chairman of the Calgary School Board, acted 
as chairman of this committee. This group met the 
Minister of Education and presented to him the broad 
outline of the proposals. Arrangements were then made 
for the Pensions Committee to present their plan to 
the Provincial Executive Council. At the same time the 
plan won the approval of the Alberta Trustees 1 Associa- 
| tion, then in convention, and a representative of that 
! group joined the Pensions Committee. The delegation 
| appeared before the Cabinet, as had been arranged, and 
j seemed to meet with some success "for the Civil Service 
! Commissioner was appointed to work with the A.T.A. in 
j making a survey of the Alberta teachers for the purpose 
j of gaining information upon which to draft a satisfactory 
! pension plan.^ 

In April, 1925, the Pensions Committee was 
| summoned to meet with the Minister of Education, then 

| the Honourable Perren Baker, for a round table discussion 

\ 

i 1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. V, March, 1925, pp. 18,19. 
j 2 . Ibid, Vol. VI, June, 1925, p.15. 





. 

■ \ ' . ' . . 

* 

* 

. ^ ■ : 

* 

*; <:■ee^ j Imr-oO ^.ol 

' '■ ' i? >'i ' . : - v 3 v 3 /..V 'ey 0. *.' " '■ .■ ' ' ; 3.;. > :j.iC , •' ; :.= ■ j 


. . • . • : ■ ■ t .„. 

, • ‘ 

. . . ■ ■ 

■ . . 

' 




? 

■ ' ■ ■ . • : ." ■, vi ■ i . • .; j , 




* 


J.. : , 


t 











- 75 - 


on the matter of pensions. Two other Minister^, the 
Honourable R. G. Reid and the Honourable Alec Ross, 
were named to act with the Minister of Education and go 
more thoroughly into the details of the scheme. Dis¬ 
cussions were carried on through several meetings and 
arrangements were once more made to conduct a compre¬ 
hensive survey of the teachers of the Province in regard 
j to age, salary and years of experience. Yet in spite 

I of such hopeful signs very little progress was made 

! 

because of the reluctance of the Government to embark 
upon any new expenditures. The Pensions Committee 
continued to bring pressure upon the Government to 
proceed with the scheme but to no avail 

In January, 1928, a strong delegation, again 
j representing various interested groups such as School 
! Boards, the Parent-Teachers 1 Association, the U.P.A. 
and other similar organizations, once more met the 
Provincial Cabinet to try to get some action on the 
plan. The Government was interested and sympathetic 
but felt that at this time nothing definite could be 
promised as it had in mind a complete revision of the 


1 . A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. VI, June, I925, p.15 







t 

J- . .V;/. . r-r •; ^ 

■ 

■ ■ ' ■ : ■ 

. 

.■' ! *\.'v. ; o-ie ’ J 

■ 

* 

' C C ... - v ■ ' V \ ( ' . ■; ":i -o-q.! ? • ' •I / ■ .* 1 . . • : - 

. * 

. - . 

. • . 

* 

’ 

' 







- 76 - 


whole educational system for Alberta and until this was 

accomplished it would seem unwise to undertake any new 

plans, 1 2 3 A similar meeting in May, 1928, brought forth 

much the same answer although a gleam of hope was found 

in Premier Brownlee*s instructions to the Honourable 

Perren Baker to make a thorough investigation of the 

matter and to report to the Government within the next 
p 

few weeks. Nothing of any real value developed from 
j this chiefly because of the Government’s preoccupation 

with the Baker Bill, a measure designed to effect a 

x 

sweeping revision of the educational system. 

In the session of the Legislature in 1929 * the 
| matter of a pension plan for teachers was again dis¬ 
cussed in connection with a resolution introduced by 
| Hector Lang, M,L,A, for Medicine Hat, This resolution 

i authorized the Minister of Education to make provision 

1 

in individual cases for teachers suffering from break¬ 
down or old age® It was the result of a request made 
j to the Premier by delegates from the Pensions Committee 
of the A,T,A, Debate on the resolution brought forth 

1, A.T.A, Magazine, Vol, VIII, Feb., 1928, p, 23 » 

2 , Ibid®, June, 1928 , p.llj., 

3, See Chapter IV, ’’Salary Schedules.” 








• ■ Xj ■ ' • 

. • . . . . ■ • 

J 

i < 

- . . . ■ - . : 

j.-. • ■ c.< !■} c :-.!' ■; •' '* .** : • - * 

■ ‘ 

Wo’-'.ir 

» 

: • 

* 

: ; \ • v-' • ':r . ■ . \\ 

■ 

• ' 

, 

. 

0 - « 





- 77 - 


very strong support from all parts of the House, for 
some plan to provide satisfactory pensions for all 
teachers.^ It seemed as though the Government would 
at last be forced to act. 

In April of the 1950 session of the Provincial 
Legislature Mr* Hector Lang introduced the resolution 
"That the matter of superannuation of the teachers of 
the province be immediately referred to a committee of 
the House with a view to surveying the whole field and 
| drafting a scheme for consideration during the I93I 
session of the Legislature". Although the resolution 
received strong support it was opposed by the Minister 
of Education, the Honourable Perren Baker, and by Premier 
Brownlee and was consequently defeated. There was 
I however, some encouragement in the fact that the Govern- 
\ ment was sufficiently interested to? order an invest!- 

I 

gation of various schemes in existence in other parts 
2 

of Canada. 

The so-called depression years saw little progress 
| made in the matter of pensions although the A.T.A. con- 

I ___ 

; 1 . A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. IX, April, 1929, p* 13 * 

| 2 . A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. X, April, 1930 , p .13 ff* 


s 






" - 


• ' 

::•' ■ : ' r ■'• I .... I ' - ; 

. 

: 1 - 1. f 1 nl ■ 

* 

. 

■ 

D 

' 

- 

I 








' >':. t, ■; ■ •/ :• 





: : • i 


e 


. . , 

» 








- 78 - 


tinued to press for some action and members of the 
Legislature, through their questions, kept the matter 
before the House. At that time Alberta alone, of all 
the provinces of Canada, had no pension scheme for 
teachers. One article on the question in the A.T.A. 
Magazine spoke of Alberta as ,f an island in the British 
Empire". Upon the request of the Edmonton Public School 
Board the Alliance submitted to them a scheme for 
| teachers* pensions and in return asked their support 

I 

| in urging the matter upon the Provincial Legislature* 

! The Department of Education had suggested that Edmonton 
should inaugurate a scheme which might become the first 

! unit in a province-wide plan.^ 

! 

In 1933 , the A.T.A. Executive, discouraged in 

• its attempts to get the Provincial Government to 

? establish a pension fund to which the Government would 

contribute an amount equal to that paid in by the teachers, 

asked that enabling legislation be passed to permit the 

establishment of a fund to which the teachers alone con- 
2 

tributed* They asked only that the Government main- 

| tain the machinery for administering the fund. This 

( 

! 1 . A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XII, Nov., I93I, p* 21 * 

2 . A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XIII, March, 1933 * P«8* 

























: 








' 




• ^ 












- 79 - 


request went the way of all others and nothing was done. 
During 1^3k little action was taken for it was felt that 
the salaries of most teachers had fallen so low that 
they could not afford to contribute to a pension fund* 

In 1935 9 however, following a resolution to the effect 
in the Annual General Meeting, the question was again 
brought to the attention of the Government. 

In November, 1937* interest in pensions was once 
more awakened by a questionnaire issued to teachers 
through the A.T.A. Magazine with the purpose of secur¬ 
ing the opinion of the members of the Association on 
certain principles involved in a pension plan. The 
information obtained was to be used in drawing up a 
: retirement plan to be once more presented to the Govern- 

| ment. The bill for the establishment of a Retirement 

j 

I Fund for teachers was drafted by a committee, with Mr. 

H. C. Clark of the Eastwood High School, Edmonton as 
Chairman, and was submitted to the Annual General Meet- 
| ing in April, 1938, where it received the approval of 
| that body.-** When this bill known as "The Teachers 1 
Retirement Fund Act" was submitted to the Legislature 
in the Spring of 1939, it passed with no serious opposi- 


1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XVIII, June, 1938, p.l 












j C 




* 




' 


,::\- 




• ' 


■ o nc 






.r j. 









- 80 - 


tion from any part of the House* It made no specific 
arrangements for the amount of pensions to be paid but 
provided for a Board of Administrators to be respons¬ 
ible for the fund. The Board was to be made up of two 
j representatives of the Legislature nominated by the 
! Lieutenant-Governor in Council and two representatives 
| of the Alberta Teachers* Association, nominated by the 
| Executive. The fund was to be established through com- 
pulsory contributions by the teachers, deducted at the 
source, a contribution by the Government through deduc- 

| tions from the grant payable to School Boards of an 

* 

| amount equal to that contributed by the teachers and a 
| contribution by the School Boards of an amount equal 
to one-half of one percent of the salaries paid by the 

Boards to the teachers. The Board of Administrators 

j 

| was given the power to fix the amount of the pensions 
| to be paid. 1 

While this was a good start toward adequate 
pensions there were many weaknesses in the plan. Since 
| each contributor paid an amount equal to 3 per cent of 
I his salary and each beneficiary received the same amount 

of pension there was no balance between the amount 

i 

---- _ - ——————--— 

| 1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XIX, April, 1939, P* 1 ****• 





• • • 

io •- i- • . ... r..c . V." 

■ 


.V./ 1 , / C, 

J: O • C 

■ ... ' 

. 


, 


. 




[ • .. • • re- f •.;; 

w ; j ■ ' ■ 

1 ’ .. Cf * 

« ' ■ 

J .. 

■ , •- ' . 

.: . f . i : : . \ • ■ ■..., -. i> ; ; ‘Jo 

» 

. 

• 3 ' ' 

. J.'iJ 6 J . r . 

. ■ 



' 




■ 





♦ 


• C: 




. 




■ 












-81- 


contributed and the amount receivable from the fund* 
Furthermore, even with the most careful administration 
it was found impossible to pay pensions which would 
provide an adequate living allowance. Although the 
amount of the pension grew it had reached by I9I+7 only 
j $14-80.00 a year. The inadequacy of this amount was 
j regarded as one of the reasons for the critical shortage 
of teachers in the post-war years. Through pressure 
brought by the Alberta Trustees 1 Association, the Al¬ 
berta Teachers 1 Association and the Alberta Educational 
Council, and through the desire of the Government to 
j attract more of the promising students into the profes¬ 
sion, the estimates of the Legislature in the Spring 

J of I9I4.8 provided for a much larger contribution to the 

S 

| Teachers* Retirement Fund. The Speech from the Throne 
! in the present session, 191+9* forecast legislation to 
implement a new retirement plan for teachers. It is 
understood that the new plan will resemble that provided 
for the Civil Servants of the Province. It involves 
higher payments from the teachers but much more adequate 

pensions.-^ Alberta now bids fair to have one of the best 
pension plans for teachers in Canada. 

1 * It is understood that the pensions paid will equal 
approximately 51%* of the average salary of the five 
consecutive years of highest salaries received by the 
teachers. They now contribute 1 $ of their salaries. 









* 



J 


o4 €/■ £&&< qj-z.1 , 



. 




* 


- 

* 

. V ■ ••• ..... 

- ■ • 



. . * ■ . • ' 5 c ■ 


. 

. 

... 

. 

, 

■ 

X 16? 

V 

•• ' • ■ ;■ , y. 

< 

'■ ■ ■ ■ 




■ ■ & . 


. 

• . j£ < 

» 

■■"v• - . I.f.v.K; ■ 


. .. ■ 


* 







a 

' 








-82- 


Chapter V 

IMPROVED PROFESSIONAL TRAINING 


The first constitution of the A.T.A. laid down 
as one of the major objectives of the organization the 
improvement of the professional status of teachers in 
the Province. It was recognized that this could be 
achieved in four ways, higher professional training, 

1 

| increased financial returns and security of tenure and 
; greater responsibility in matters of education. As 
| one step toward the first of these goals the Alliance 
| advocated from the outset the elimination of the Third 
| Class Certificate and the Permit in qualifications for 
| teachers. It was to the granting of Permits that the 
| Alliance took the greatest exception. Recognizing the 
! fact that these were issued to meet the current shortage 
I in teachers, the Alliance maintained that this was a 

I wrong approach to a pressing problem. The demand for 

i 

more teachers could be met if the financial and profes- 
|sional position of the teachers was improved. 

In an address before the Alberta School Trustees® 

I Association in 1921 , President Newland of the Alliance 

| 





- - 

■ . 

r i, ... 

' ' V ; • : *. ik , r. :V. 

■ . ' ' . '' •, = • . V.. v... 1 o* 7 J' 

« 

. ' ‘ ■ /. ■ •: ". . 1 . * -■*- •' ■ ■' ’ - ■ 

■ V ■ , . 

■ 

o, ; ; j .. : k - ■ - C- -k- 

• ' O: , - ' • - '■ 

' 

* 

* 

. 1 . . . ' , 

- 

. 

. 

:V.- ' • U - Hr. f 

t . 











-83- 


emphasized as one of the important objectives of his 
organization the elimination of the Permit and of the 
Third Class Certificate."^ Prom that time forward con¬ 
tinued representations were made to the Department of 
| Education urging it to discontinue the practice of 
| issuing such certificates with the resultant lowering 
! of the status of the teaching profession as a whole. 

In a Manifesto presented in 1921 by President Newland 
| and General-Secretary Barnett on behalf of the Alliance, 

! to the Minister of Education, the Honourable Perren 

! 2 
Baker,.this was one of the important demands. Again 

in January, 1922, in a letter addressed to the Deputy 

i 

I Minister of Education, John T. Ross, Mr. Barnett pro¬ 
tested against the practice of some School Boards of 

\ 

j engaging "Permit” teachers when fully qualified teachers 

i 

| were available.? As a result of a similar protest of 
| the delegates to the Annual General Meeting in 1922, a 

j deputation from the Executive met officials of the 

* 

Department of Education and received an assurance of 

i the Departments sympathetic attitude on this as well 

» 

i as a number of other issues.^ Subsequently there was a 

| 1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. I, April, May, 1921, p.l?. 

| 2. Ibid., Vol. II, Oct., 1921, p.3. 

; J. Ibid., January, 1922, p.3. 

! 4. Ibid., Vol. Ill, Feb., 1923, p.8. 







cr.6 h'ZZl i.v .'-r 


■. i'l • • 1 -"',1 



...... . 

13 ■ 

• . i . ■ J -j o* r 

. 


' ■ ; V 


„ 





■ 

, < 



. t ' 

- • . . , - . • 

T : . Jv .i,n 


;lo r ,XoonoS "it , ^'1,;::.;',,; ■-!...: ;j ?u;. *”•■:;>./< ..'•J':' ;? 

- 





"iSJlfS ‘10 


. . r , ■ - ■: - X 

* . 

■.X ' ' : U; ■ ; V O ■ 

* • * 

. - » 

« t» « 

* ■ * ? 

* « * 

. 

- 




-84- 


decided decrease in the number of permits issued - by 
I92I}- it had dropped to six - but these were replaced 
by "letters of authority*’ issued to persons who had 
failed to pass the Normal School requirements or were 
| otherwise unqualified* 1 The Alliance then turned its 

| attention to these* 

| 

In July, 1921-j-, the Executive of the Alliance once 

I more met Mr* Baker, the Minister of Education, to place 

| before him resolutions passed at the recent Annual 

| General Meeting* Among other things they received his 

| promise that he would no longer permit the admission 

] of "conditioned” students to the Normal Schools but 

| there was no improvement in the matter of letters of 
2 

, authority* As a consequence a second "Manifesto”, 
j presented to the Minister by the Executive of the Alli¬ 
ance, protested once more against the issuance of letters 
of authority to students who had failed in the practical 
work in the Normal Schools and of Third Glass Certifi- 
j cates to those who had failed in other subjects* The 
| Department of Education did for a time cut down on the 
| issuance of certificates to underqualified teachers but 

1. A*T*A. Magazine, Vol* V, Feb*, 1925* 

2* A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. V, August, I92J+, p*ll* 

3* A.T.A* Magazine, Vol. V, May, I925, p*l5* 






. ‘io V. 


r ' ■ 

-- 

■ 

• . - •. . .. . ■ ' •• . .. : 

, 




. t' 

. 

* 

. *. . : d 1 ■ r ' . . ’ ■ . 

; 

' 

- 




. 




. ■ : 




* 

■ 






. • 
. 





- 8 5 - 






on the other hand gave permission to teach to many 
from outside the Province, while many qualified Alberta 
teachers were not employed, and made no attempt to limit 
the number of students entering the Normal Schools. 

The conviction grew that the satisfactory solution of 
the problem would come only when the A.T.A. exereised 
some control over the issuance of certificates. 

In the Spring of 1928 the A.T.A. put forward a 
request to the Department of Education for the establish¬ 
ment of an Advisory Council in Education, which would 
give to the Alliance some control over the issuance of 
certificates and over the qualifications and training 
of teachers through A.T.A. representation on the Council.^ 
This same request was embodied in a "Manifesto" presen¬ 
ted to the Department of Education in July, 1929, by a 
committee of the Executive of the A.T.A. with President 

A. J. W. Powell, of Josephsburg School, Port Saskatchewan 
2 

as Chairman. Apparently no action was taken for the 
same demand was made in a resolution of the Annual 
General Meeting in the following Spring .5 When the 
resolution was presented to the Government, the Alliance 


1 * A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. VIII, May, 1928, p.l 6 . 

2 . Ibid., Vol. X, Sept., 1929, p.?. 

3. Ibid., June, 193 °* 








j 







- 86 - 


was put off with a statement in a letter from Premier 
J. E. Brownlee that the matter could not be considered 
until the revision of the School Act was once more 
before the Legislature *^* 

Luring the depression years the chief concern 
; of the Alliance was the struggle against the lowering 

| of teachers’ salaries and the attempts of School Boards 

S 

* 

| to evade the provisions of the School Act in regard to 
i the statutory minimum of salaries, but in 1935 the 
| matter of certification was once more revived* In that 
; year a Brief presented to the Government by a committee 

I 

j of the Alliance under the leadership of ^resident E. K. 

i 

Thorlakson of Central Collegiate, Calgary, repeated 
| the request for an Advisory Council. The Brief also 
| urged that Grade XII standing be made the prerequisite 

j 

| for entrance to Normal School and that the training 

j course for teachers be extended to two years* The 

J delegation received an encouraging hearing and a promise 

| from Premier Brownlee that the matters submitted would 

? 

| receive the careful consideration of his government* 

1 * A.T*A. Magazine, Vol. XI, January, I95I, p. 17 * 
j 2 * A.T.A. Magazine, Vol* XV, May, 1955 > P* 4 « 







I • :j 

X 

\ - . 

.. 0 < , ■ C '■ -J : . - , : : ■ ‘ , ' ' . ? , l ' ; ■ ,/ ' .< 

: ' ■ ' , *0 • 

* 

* 

. 

■ 

,• . - 

■ 

* 

' 

! - • - ' ■ • ■. .... ■' 

, . * 

. . , 






. • ■ 





- 87 - 


The victory of the Social Credit party in the 
elections of 1955 brought a favourable change of policy 
in this as in other matters of education. Almost 
immediately Premier Aberhart, who assumed the position 
of Minister of Education, began a curtailment of the 
number of students entering Normal Schools and a tight¬ 
ening of the requirements for entrance to those schools. 
Prom that time the complaints against poorly qualified 
teachers and against the flooding of the profession 
gradually disappeared. Following the introduction of 
a revised course of studies which included optional 
subjects for which teachers required special certificates, 
many in the profession found it necessary to take fur¬ 
ther training. At the same time the amendments to the 
School Act in 19^2, which established salary schedules 
throughout the Province, made allowance for increased 
payments for additional training. This served as an 
incentive to many teachers to seek better qualifica¬ 
tions • 

Since 19lj.2, when the Faculty of Education was 
established at the University of Alberta, there has been 
a marked improvement in the standard of professional train¬ 
ing both sought for and required. Almost from the out- 







- 88 - 


set the A.T.A. had advocated a two-year training 
course for teachers* It was felt that this would not 
only raise the status of the profession but would act 
as a deterrent to those who wished to use teaching 
merely as a stepping-stone to some other occupation* 
Stability was necessary if the profession was to receive 
full recognition. In 19i|-6 a two year training course 
| for permanent certificates in teaching was announced 

I by the Faculty of Education and received the approval 

I 

| of the Association. Although the programme was modi- 
| fied to meet the urgent demand for teachers after the 
! war, the principle of longer training for teachers was 
definitely established. 

In 19^0, the President of the University, Dr. 

j 

| W. A. R* Kerr, submitted to the Board of Governors, 

I with the endorsation of the Senate, a proposal to raise 

1 

the status of the School of Education to that of a 
College of Education, in keeping with the precedent 
set in other Canadian and American Universities. When 
this proposal was endorsed by the Board of Governors 
| the A.T.A* felt that another step had been taken toward 
full professional training and status. The College of 










• • - i ' ^ ; h 




. vr 




» . , 

: 

. 0 > ■: & ’ 


■ 

o ■ 

' 

* 

• * • > .r 

t . 

* 

t • . 


- - 

' 

t" • ■ 


~ o S; i $ a ct r ** :i c l .cm 

. 

• -ttn. <;<. r f l is 

. 








- 89 - 


Education was restricted to the issuance of certificates 
for secondary schools* When in 194-2 the College was 
raised to the status of a full-fledged Faculty it was 
considered that at last the profession was recognized 
as on a par with the other learned professions. The 
first Dean of the new Faculty was Dr. M. E* Lazerte who, 
as President of the A.T.A. and Principal of the College 
of Education, had done a great deal to raise the stan- 
! dards of the profession in the fields of both training 
I and professional consciousness*^ 

In 1944 it was announced that the Faculty of 
Education was to take over full responsibility for 
teacher training in Alberta, with courses so arranged 
as to lead to the degree of Bachelor of Education. An 
j Advisory Board on Teacher Education and Certification 
I was set up in 194-5 to help in the work of the Faculty. 
The Board was to be made up of five representatives of 
the University, five of the Department of Education 
and three of the A.T.A., and a quorum of the Board to 
transact business must include at least one representa- 
I tive of the Association. Here at long last was the 


1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XXII, May, 194- 1 2 # P*l6 

2. A.T.A. Handbook, 194?* P«13* 








- 


„ 


; . ■ : l\s$i * ; - . - 

■ 

. ■ ■ 

. 

. . - 

. 

* 

pd$ 3 : ' 

• : . ; 

7c no.la \,o u:ur o& Vu-;i o-t 

7 v'i •.-.■•/• : ; ;VO .h- ■ ■ , ' : •' ?■■■;■' •/:. 

. ' 

» . 4 

' . • ' 

4 

< , < * • • * 

* 4 < . .... 




- 90 - 


fulfillment of another aim of the A.T.A., that the 
teachers of the Province be adequately represented on 
any Board which directs teacher training and certifi- 
cationo 




j 














- 91 - 


Chapter VI 

PROFESSIONAL ACTIVITIES 


; 










Although economic considerations occupied the 
greater part of the interest of the Association through 
its earlier years, another major item of its programme 
was not neglected, namely, the furtherance of education 
in the Province, It was felt that if the teacher was 
to attain hi^s rightful position in society as a member 
of a recognized profession he must be in touch with 
all movements in educational matters, must be familiar 
with all means of improving educational methods and 
facilities and be in a position to speak with authority 
on all questions pertaining to education* It was with 
this in mind that one of the earliest actions of the 
Alliance was to set up a Research Committee whose pur¬ 
pose was to investigate the problems of importance in 
education both in technique and administration and to 
place these matters before the members. 

At the Annual General Meeting in 1920 a resolution 
was passed empowering the Executive to set up such a 
committee to be known as the Bureau of Research and it 










- 


1 

- 





• 





■ ■ ■ • ■ • 

* 




• j 




. 


. 

■ ■ ' . .. . . • . . 

. 



. 

. 

' 

■ . X* 



- 

'tmi p.aoJid q $:jp IX 

. 




' 

Xi 

— 


■ 

•: " ''.XV wx 

ill 


■ > C ' ■- • ■«• ■ 






' - ’ ' : S ■ 

-:i' ax; dd od nt> 

: 1 


■ ■ • . .•} 



-92- 

was accordingly established.^ Two standing committees, 

composed of both teachers and non-teachers, were 

appointed by the Bureau to make a study of two major 

problems, the High School Curriculum and Taxation for 

School Purposes, and the General-Secretary was empowered 

to appoint a suitable convener in each Local to help in 

2 

gathering material. 

In July, I 927 , a further impetus was given to 

I 

interest in educational problems by the formation of 
the Educational Publicity Committee. Its purpose was 
to develop educational propaganda throughout the Province 
and it was hoped that this would help to rouse both the 
| teachers and the public to a real interest in problems 

3 

of the profession. One of the first steps taken by 
this committee was the organization in 1928 of the 
Alberta School Week. One week of each year was to be 
set aside for the purpose of rousing public interest 

k 

in education through all possible channels. The co¬ 
operation of the Press, the Church and Parent Teachers 1 2 3 4 

1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. I, June, 1920, p. 7 . 

2. Ibid., Vol. II, Dec., 1920, p. 3 . 

3 . Ibid., Vol. VIII, Sept., 1927 , p. 9 . 

4. Ibid., Vol. IX., Nov., 1928, P.2J4.. 








- 93 - 


Associations was obtained and the Publicity Committee 
was well satisfied with the results* As a consequence, 
the convention of the Canadian Teachers’ Federation 
in 1934 decided to undertake a Dominion-wide Education 
Week to which plan the A.T.A. readily agreed.^ 

In 1928, also, nev\r interest was awakened in the 
work of the Bureau of Research by the appearance of 
Regular reports in the A.T.A. Magazine of the findings 
j of the members of the committee* The A.T.A. was fortun- 
1 ate to have among its members several who had done 
advanced work in educational research. The list of the 
members of the Bureau for that year speaks for itself: 
Wilfred Wees, M.A., B.Educ., Chairman! L. G. Bennett; 

| C* B* Willis, M.A., D.Paed.; D* L. Shortcliffe, M.A.; 

H. C. Newland, M.A., LL*B*, B. Educ•; M* E. Lazerte, 

! M.A., M*Educ., Ph*D*; and members of the Provincial 

p 

Executive* Dr. Lazerte, at that time Assistant Profes¬ 
sor of Psychology and Education at the University of 
Alberta, had already contributed a series of articles 
| to the A.T.A. Magazine on Elementary School Problems 
\ and now undertook a diagnostic steudy of problems encoun- 


1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol* XV, Nov., I93I4., p.32. 

2. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. VIII, June, 1928, p*l? 










- 94 - 


tered by students in Algebra 1 . Dr. Willis took charge 
of a study of Standardized Tests and Measurements 
suitable for use in Alberta Schools, while Mr. Short- 
liffe began a study of ways and means by which children 
could be given vocational advice. This was to be a 
forerunner of a vigorous campaign for Vocational Guid¬ 
ance in the schools of Alberta. These special studies 
were followed yearly by similar investigations into 
other questions and furnished a valuable source of in¬ 
formation on special educational problems. 

In 1929 the Bureau pf Research and the Publicity 
Committee were combined under the chairmanship of Mr. 

G. 0. Hicks, M.A., Principal of Victoria High School, 

| Edmonton."** It was felt that since the latter committee 
I depended on the former for most of its material the 
combined committee would prove more effective. Now 
known as the Educational Research Committee it continued 
its work, making regular monthly reports to the Alliance 
through the A.T.A. Magazine. Though much of its study 
was centred on special courses in the curriculum, it 
branched out into the consideration of many other sub- 


1 . A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. X, May, I 93 O, p*9 







« 

» - 

■ 

• - 






Xo< 




■ . 




■ *■■■-■ X . • ' •: t v ' .5.1;. 


* 

- ' ‘■ ■ . ■ - ■ . 

.. , 

. 

■ 

t • 

* 

• ; ■ • ■' J . ;' ■ 










- 95 - 


jects of educational interest. Its personnel was still 
not restricted to Alliance members and consequently 
its reports covered a very wide field. Among its most 
frequent contributors were Dr, M. E, Lazerte, who for 
a number of years edited the report in the Magazine, 

Dr, C, Sansom, Dr, H, E. Smith and Dr, G, E. Misener, 
but most of the outstanding teachers of the Province 
from time to time shared in the work of the Committee, 
Dr, C, Sansom was chosen by the Executive to become 

chairman of a special committee to prepare the brief on 

I 

| Education in Alberta presented to the Rowell-Sirois 
! Commission,^ 

I 

Another similar venture of the Alliance was the 
\ establishment of the Bureau of Education whose purposes 
j were the offering of opportunities to teachers to raise 
| their status by completing courses by correspondence 
j through the Bureau and the publication of Teachers* 
Helps and Manuals in the various prescribed courses of 
the Elementary and High Schools, A resolution of the 
Annual General Meeting of 1925 empowered the Executive 
to proceed with the establishment of the Bureau for 
| which plans had already been prepared, A large group 

! 1, A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XVIII, Jan,, 1938, p,l|o 
| 2, A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. Ill, April, 1923, p,l8. 







' 

* 




« 








. 


* 








- 




' 

■ 


. • . J Oit ; 


- 








. 




















- 96 - 


of well-qualified teachers were engaged to conduct the 
correspondence courses and another similar group pre¬ 
pared the Teachers’ Manuals and Helps. Mr. H. C. New- 
land, M.A., LL.B., Editor of the Magazine and former 

I 

President of the Alliance, was named Manager of the Bureau 
and Mr. J. W. Barnett, General-Secretary of the A.T.A., 
was made Secretary-Treasurer. Since legally the Alliance 
| could not operate such a Bureau through its Executive, 
it was necessary to place it under the Alberta Teachers’ 

I Alliance Publishing Company. It was therefore conducted 
j as a separate undertaking but its policies were controlled 
S by the Alliance. 

Although the Bureau of Education continued for 
a number of years to supply a much-felt need of the 
teachers and students in the Province, difficulties 
! arose from time to time. These were chiefly of a 
i financial nature. The Annual General Meeting of I92I4. 
instructed the Executive to consolidate the offices and 
staff of the Magazine and the Bureau of Education. The 
i officials in charge were no longer to be members of the 
; Executive but the control of all the finances was to be 
! in the hands of the Finance Committee of the Alliance.^ 

j 1 . A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. IV, May, I92I4., p.15* 












- 97 - 


The following year a resolution of the Annual General 

Meeting gave the management of both the Magazine and the 

Bureau to the General Secretary-Treasurer.^ The Bureau 

of Education was proving too costly to the Alliance as 

it was found difficult to canvass teachers for either 

sales or collections* Therefore in 1928 the Bureau of 

Education was disposed of to the Western Canada Bureau 

of Education, which became known as the Western Canada 
! 2 

| Institute* The Alliance for a time retained some 

] 

! shares in the company but these were later sold* 

Another similar phase of the activities of the 
A.T*A*, which proved especially valuable to the younger 
teachers was the publication through the Teachers’ 

| Helps Department of the A.T.A. Magazine of detailed 
monthly outlines of the work to be covered in the various 
grades of the Elementary Schools* Previously various 
I special articles had appeared in the Magazine, written 
j by successful teachers and supervisors, on individual 
subjects but in February, I927 under the direction of 
Mr* Samuel J* Dymond, of Calgary, these articles were 
combined with carefully organized material for use by 
less experienced teachersWhen in 195& the course of 


1. A*T.A. Magazine, Vol* V, May, 1925, p.ll* 

2. Ibid., Vol• VIII, July-August, 1928, p.l6 
3* Ibid., Vol. VII, Feb., I927, p.^2* 










. • • . • I • ... . 

. 


, 













- 98 - 


studies was radically changed and the enterprise method 
of teaching was introduced into the Alberta Schools^ 
the need for these detailed outlines disappeared but 
they were followed by helpful explanations and directions 
for the conduct of the new courses* 

For a number of years after the formation of the 

i 

I Alliance, members had felt the need for some form of 
! guidance in the schools which would help the student in 
; choosing the type of occupation toward which he should 

I direct his studies. Finally in 1928 through the Bureau 

| 

j of Research, Mr. D. L. Shortliffe, M.A., undertook a 
! study of ways and means by which students could be given 
j vocational guidance. As a result of this a resolution 
| was passed at the Annual General Meeting of 1928 suggest- 

5 ing that the Government introduce Vocational Training 

| 

1 Schools in the Province to furnish education for the 

I 

: students of a less academic turn of mind. A delegation 
| from the Alliance which waited upon Premier Brownlee 
j to present this suggestion among others, received the 

2 

! promise that the matter would be given consideration. 

In the same year a report by Mr. G. 0. Hicks, M.A., 

1 . A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XVI, May, IQ36, 0.6. 

2 . Ibid., Vol.IX, May,, 1929, p.l 4 . 







- 






' 

. 






, 



j‘ . •! ’ 


4 


... - 

. ' 


. 

4 

. 


* 



' 


■ ;; cr 


- • - * 


• * t , 

* - t , 

.... 

* - » * ® 






-99- 

A.T.A. representative on the Curriculum Revision 

Committee,, held out hope that a course in Vocational 

Guidance might soon be introduced."*' However, the matter 

seems to have rested there for some time. 

In the Pall of 193&? however, the Executive of 

the Alliance began plans for a monograph on Vocational 
2 

Guidance. A committee was appointed to proceed with 
the work and to appoint sub-chairmen to study each of 
| several vocations and to collect and evaluate all avail- 

i 

able information. When the material had been submitted 
to the central committee it was to be compiled In a 
form interesting to students and parents alike. The 
monograph was published in April, 193$ > under the title 

j 

! of "Choosing Your Life Work". The final compilation 
| had been the work of Mr. Fred Tyler, B.Sc. It was 

j 

i published in text-book form to be used in connection 

1 

\ with a course in Vocations and Guidance established in 
the High School Curriculum. 

The Summer of 1939 marked a further step in the 
development of the professional activities of the A.T.A. 

1 

1 ------—-“- — ————— --—’ 

1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. X, Sept., 1929? P*3* 

2. Ibid., Vol. XVII, Oct., 1936, p.2. 

3. Ibid., Vol. XVIII, April, 1938? p.15* Also A oocMOA /, 

I 



















^ . * * * 







- 100 - 


At that time the Executive sponsored a Summer School, 
course for the training of Study Group leaders in "The 

Psychology and Supervision of Reading", supplying all 

1 3 

the books and tests required in the course* ; Of a 
somewhat similar nature was the inauguration in I9I4.3 of 
a series of Survey Tests, to be extended through five 
years, in the attainments of Grade X students* The 
purpose of the tests was to determine the standard of 
I preparation of students for the High School programme. 

I 

I 

| The results of the tests and commentaries upon them by 
| Dr. C. Sansom have been published annually in the A.T.A. 
I Magazine. When this study has been completed it will 

5 

I 

| form a good basis for criticism of the attainments in 

| p 

j the Elementary and Intermediate Schools. 

The Teaching Profession Act of 1935 stipulated 

I that the Alberta Teachers f Association was to assume 

| as one of its responsibilities the establishment of a 

! 

I suitable library of reference books which would be 

| valuable to members of the profession. The same act 

1 

| also implied the duty of the Association to establish 
| itself as a truly professional body. The fact that 

1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XX, April, 19)4.0, p.ll. 

2 . Ibid., Vol. XXIV, Oct., I9I4.3, p.l'p. 

3. x 











- 101 - 


there was no longer any need for the Association to 
spend large sums in organization work to gain members 
left more money available for professional undertakings. 
It was for these reasons that the Annual General Meeting 
in 1938 directed the Executive to set up four trust 
funds, one for the library, one for scholarships, 
another for research and a general trust fund. Annual 

I payments from the general fund were to be made, $5,000 

! 

to the general fund and $1,000 to each of the others. 

| Special committees were to be appointed to administer 
! the funds and the Executive was empowered to make such 
| payments as were required by the committees. A Trust 
1 Fund Board has since been established which has control 
j of the administration of all the trust funds. 

j 

With the money thus provided the A.T.A. now 
| maintains a circulating library for the use of all its 
I members. The library contains nearly one thousand books 
j on all phases of education and on questions of current 
| public interest. At present the books are kept in 
i the office of the Association but plans for a new A.T.A. 

I _________ 

| 1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XVIII, June, 1938, p.21. 
j 2. A.T.A. Handbook, I9I4.7, pp. 122-126. 









- 102 - 


headquarters include provision for a suitable library 
and reading room. Each edition of the A.T.A. Magazine 
carries lists of the most recent additions to the library 
and reviews of outstanding books. 

Until recently little was done in the matter of 
scholarships partly because of differences of opinion as 
to the type of scholarship to be offered but chiefly 
because of the preoccupation of the Association with 
problems resulting from the war and participation in 
i the activities of various other groups such as the 
| Committee on Community Service and the Committee on 
| Democracy. It was not until 19^7 that any steps were 
! taken. Then President W. C. Melsness announced that a 
decision had been reached to set up a scholarship to 
be known as ’’The John Walker Barnett Scholarship”. It 
i was to be an annual award of $500 to a student complet¬ 
ing the second year in the Faculty of Education, on the 
basis of academic standing, qualities of leadership and 
interest in professional mattersIt was to serve as 
| a permanent memorial of the late Dr. J. W. Barnett and 

I 

j as a recognition of his services to the Association and 
| 1 . A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XXVII, April, I 9 I 4 . 7 , p.10. ~~ 

I 











- ll ■ ■ ■ - 


' 

' ■ ;'t.C t'L- 

- 

... ‘ • ^ . • 

. 

. 

* 

• .. .. • ♦ 

■ 


::/o ---O ;v:.-I v-M :..t 

. ! 

;1j . ■ ■ 

n 

: V: ■ . v ; ,oL' i >c : .... : ‘ ’ ;oJ 

■ 

. 

I ' ' * V' C‘ 

: .. •• ... J 








• • , 










- 103 - 


to education in general. It was planned that as soon 
as the income from the Scholarship Trust Fund is 
sufficient further scholarships will be established. 

With the membership of the A.T.A. scattered 
throughout the Province it was almost inevitable that 
most of its professional activities should be carried 
on through committees of the Executive but two other 
j agencies especially served to keep the members in touch 
I with the work of the Association and to allow them to 
| share in its activities. These were the Fall and Easter 
| Conventions and the A.T.A. Magazine. The Fall Conven- 

| tions developed from the earlier conventions or insti- 

I 

1 tutes, arranged by the Inspectors of the Department of 
j Education in each of the various inspectorates. Their 
j purpose was at first simply to provide an opportunity 
| for the Inspectors to meet the teachers as a group and 
to discuss with them various aspects of their work. 

These conventions were provided for in the School Act 
and were carried on in school time. As the A.T.A. grew 
stronger arrangements were made with the Department of 
Education to allow a portion of the time to be devoted 
| to discussion of A.T.A. problems. Since the passing of 
| the Teaching Profession Act and the establishment of the 




' 

. - / . . . . ■ - 1 ■ ■ • 

, . . 

• . . • ; r « c 

. 

. 

■ 

0 

■ 

. . . 

0 . . . 

■ • 




- 104 - 


large divisions of administration the Fall Conventions 
have been used for the Annual Meetings of the Locals 
of the A.T.A. The programmes for the meetings are drawn 
up by the Executives of the various Conventions in co¬ 
operation with the Superintendents of the Divisions and 

the High School Inspectors* The Conventions last for 

j 

i two days and the programmes provide ample time for dis- 
| cussion of A.T*A. matters and current educational 
| problems* 

The Easter Convention, on the other hand, is 
the survival of the Annual Convention of the Alberta 
| Educational Association, an organization sponsored 

j 

| originally by the Department of Education. Its meetings 
were held during Easter Week and although composed 
chiefly of teachers they represented any groups or in¬ 
dividuals interested in education* It was customary in 

i 

the early years of the Alliance to hold the Annual 
General Meeting at the same time and to fit its sessions 
into the programme of the Educational Association 
wherever time permitted. After the amalgamation of the 
! two groups in the Alberta Educational Federation the 
| arrangements for the conventions were given over to 
| the Alliance and its Annual General Meeting was allotted 








- 105 - 


suitable time,"** Professionally these Easter Conventions 
have proved very valuable. To them have been brought 

outstanding educationists from both Canada and the United 

-\ 

States to give leadership in the broader aspects of 
education. Recent developments in education in Alberta 
and the recognition of the A.T.A. as the professional 
organization of all the teachers have made it necessary 
to allot more and more of the time of the Easter Con- 

! 

] vention to Association matters. 




Perhaps the strongest single agency in promoting 
| professionalism among the teachers of Alberta has been 

I the A.T.A. Magazine, the official organ of the Associa- 

j 

! tion. Its publication was provided for at the first 

2 

I Annual General Meeting in 1918 and the first issue of 


| the magazine appeared in June, 1920 , with Mr. H. C. New- 
! land, then President of the Alliance as Editor. The 
first editorial stated that the policy of the A.T.A. 
Magazine would be controlled at all times by the Exec¬ 
utive and that its first purpose would be to further 
I the aims and objects for which the Alliance existed and 


1 . A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XIII, Oct., 1932, P«l?> 

also May, 1933, p.6. 

2 . A.T.A. Handbook, 194.7, P*H« 







-106- 


above all to endeavour to raise the status of the 

1 

teaching profession in the Province. Almost immed¬ 
iately the publication was criticized by the Minister 
of Education, the Honourable George P. Smith for its 
policies in openly expressing opinions and criticism 
on educational matters and on the operation of the 
Department of Education. Bold statements by the Past 
President, T. E. A, Stanley, and by the President and 
Editor, H. C. Newland, made it obvious that the policies 

p 

| of the A.T.A. Magazine would not change. Each 
| succeeding monthly issue placed before the membership 
| the details of controversies between the Alliance on the 
one hand and the Department of Education, the Alberta 
School Trustees * 1 2 Association or individual School Boards 
on the other. Admittedly a propaganda agency, much of 
the space, especially in earlier issues, was given over 
to such matters.'' 

At the same time the Magazine has served a 
multiplicity of other valuable purposes. Almost every 

I 

| question of current educational interest has been dis- 
! cussed at some time in its pages. Articles by teachers, 

s ....... 

1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. I, June, 1920, p.J. 

2, Ibid., April-May, 1921, p.17. 












-107- 


both within and outside the organization, and by promin¬ 
ent educationists in various fields have been published. 
Reports of various committees of the Executive such as 
the Bureau of Research have reached the members through 
its columns, the valuable work of the Teachers 1 Helps 
Department has already been noted. The Magazine became 
the means by which communications of general interest 
reached the Locals and Sub-Locals. Since the passing 

| of the Teaching Profession Act also, it has oublished 

! 

| regularly the Official Bulletin of the Department of 
j Education with notices to the teachers from that source. 

j 

j At the same time teachers in outlying districts have 

[ 

| been kept in touch with what was being done in other 

i places, through the publication of reports from the 

| 

various Locals and Sub-Locals• Though from time to 
time, at the Annual General Meeting, the subject matter 
of the Magazine has been criticized and recommendations 
made for improvements, the value of the Magazine has 
never been questioned. 

I 

In 1925, as has already been mentioned, in 

! accordance with resolutions passed at the Annual General 

| 

Meeting, the management of the Magazine along with the 
Bureau of Education was placed in the hands of the 

General-Secretary-Treasurer and Mr. J. W. Barnett was 















-108- 


name d Managing-Editor. He retained that post until 
his retirement in 1914-6 when he was succeeded by Mr. 
Eric C. Ansley, the newly chosen General Secretary- 
Treasurer. For the most part the Magazine has been 
more than self-supporting, the only exception being 
during the depression years when advertising fell to 
j a minimum. At the outset subscription to the Magazine 
| was voluntary but since 1956 it has been the practice 

j 

| to include the subscription with the membership fees. 






1 . A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XXVI, May, 19^6, p.? 







. 


■ ■■ 


■ 




■ - 

* 

";'i >'j. j ' l' ■ 1 . " ' « ' ;■ :j ■ . ' -v •. w 

' , . • 




■ 























-109- 


Chapter VII 

THE ADVANCEMENT AND SAFEGUARDING 
OF EDUCATION IN ALBERTA 


It is significant that the first clause in the 
statement of policy embodied in the original constitu¬ 
tion of the Alliance was M to advance and safeguard the 
j cause of education in Alberta 11 . This purpose lay behind 
; most of the activities of the A.T.A* even in its 
I earliest years* If education was to advance in Alberta, 
first and foremost there must be a body of well-qualified 

teachers, alive to the educational problems and theories 

s 

| of the day, happy in their work and satisfied to devote 
themselves permanently and whole-heartedly to their 

! 

| chosen profession* Secondly there must be established 
| in the schools of Alberta a curriculum which would 
! meet the demands of life in a modern democracy, socially, 
vocationally, and politically. Lastly, it was essential 
that there should be in Alberta a system of administra- 

I tion which would give, as nearly as possible under 

| 

!existing circumstances, equality of opportunity to all 

| 

students, both rural and urban, and would distribute 
the cost of education as equitably as possible* 



















. 







t 













t 









t 


. 






• i’ ;-.L 









■ 










- 110 - 


In earlier chapters we have dealt with activities 
and achievements of the A.T.A. in meeting the first of 
these demands which In many ways were to help in the 
attainment of the other two* 

Prom the outset the A.T.A. claimed that the 
teachers as a body were best qualified to determine the 
nature of the subject matter of the curriculum laid 
down for the schools and also the standards that should 
i be required of the students. In this they met with 

I 

| rather less opposition than usual from the Minister of 
I Education, the Honourable George P® Smith. In the 
I Manifesto presented to the Government in the Fall of 
| 1921, the Alliance expressed the desire to co-operate 
| with the Department of Education in revising the High 
i School curriculum by sending representatives to the 
\ committee currently working on the revision, and at the 
I same time it expressed the opinion that in the matter 
| of the Public School curriculum the Alliance had not 
j been given sufficient opportunity to bring forward the 
views of its members on suitable changes.^ The reply 

! 1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. II, Oct., 1921, p. 3 . 










- 111 - 


to this manifesto was embodied in a letter from Mr* 

G. P* McNally, at that time Supervisor of Schools, in 
which the invitation of the Minister of Education was 
extended to the members of the Alliance to participate 
in the study of the curriculum and to place its views 
before the Curriculum Committee.^ The Alliance then, 

| through its own committee, began a systematic compila- 
I tion of the views of its members in the matter. Through 
| the General-Secretary the teachers of the Province were 

| circularized and a questionnaire was sent out to stimu- 

i 

i 

j late discussion and help organize the various views* 

| In December, 1921, the Provincial Curriculum Committee 
| of the Alliance met with the Executive to compile all 
i the information thus gathered. This was placed before 

j the Revision Committee by a representative of the 

| 

1 Alliance who had been invited by the Minister of Educa- 

2 

! tion to attend its sessions. Before the next Annual 

! 

| General Meeting, moreover, the Department of Education 
j released for consideration by the teachers the proposed 
I revised curriculum for the Elementary Schools. Un- 
| fortunately this was not done early enough to stimulate 
! any worthwhile discussion when the teachers met. 


1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. II, Oct., 1921, p .7 

2. Ibid., Dec., 1921, p. 23 . 
























- 








v 









- 112 - 


In December, 1922, through the A.T.A. Magazine, 
the Alliance began the issue of a series of question¬ 
naires on the new course of studies for Public Schools 
through which they hoped to get the views of teachers 
in general. Again the results were compiled and used 
by the A.T.A. representative on the Curriculum Committee.^ 

| In June, 1926, through the Curriculum Committee of the 
* Alliance, still another questionnaire was issued, this 
time to the High School teachers, asking for proposals 
for further changes in the High School curriculum. The 
resulting report was presented to the Honourable Perren 
Baker, Minister of Education, by delegates of the 
Executive who met the Minister in July. At that meet¬ 
ing the Alliance was invited to send representatives to 

p 

j the Legislative Committee on Educational Problems. 

1 

During the Summer of 1929 the new High School 
j curriculum came up for review and again at the request 

| of the Alliance a representative of that body was 

j 

! included on the Curriculum Committee. This represent- 
| ative was also given permission to call in specialists 

1 ----- 

1 . A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. Ill, Dec., 1922, pp. 8-9. 

2. Ibid., Vol. VII, Sept., 1926, p.29. 






. _ 


• • - . p 

s ‘ :H: sor.^iflA or O 

' - ■ ■ :* OJ k!m,K ' - • i:rm : jr • . 

. 

I, f: 1 






. 









- 113 - 


to review the various subjects before the committee. 

They voiced the opinion of the teachers as a whole ob¬ 
tained through a further series of questionnaires. The 
Alliance representative on the committee, Mr. G. 0. 

Hicks, M.A., in making a report to the membership on 
the results of this method, expressed the view that it 
had proved very satisfactoryIn the Fall of 1933 » 
when the High School curriculum was once more under 
review, the Minister of Education requested the Executive 

| 

| of the Alliance to appoint outstanding teachers from 
j various parts of the Province to give advice in their 
| special subjects to be used in the Handbook on High 
j School Courses soon to be issued. The Alliance now had 

I 

j reason to feel that the right of teachers to take a 
j leading part in shaping the curriculum had been fully 

j recognized. 

1 

In the matter of administration two main features 
met with the disapproval of the Alliance. One was the 
dependence of education upon local taxation and the 
other was the restricted school district which placed 
too much power in the hands of the small local School 
Boards. The first of these, it was felt, worked a 

1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. X, Sept., 1929* PP* 1-3* 

2. Ibid., Vol. XIV, April, I 93 I 4 ., p. 7 . 










hardship not only upon the taxpayers but also upon the 
children in the poorer districts where taxation could 
not produce sufficient revenue to give them the same 
opportunities enjoyed by children in wealthier districts• 
At the time the Alliance maintained that no real 
equality of opportunity, for rural students at least, 
could be attained until the unit of administration was 
enlarged. This would make possible the establishment 
| of schools with teachers specializing in certain sub- 
| jects and more especially, the provision of rural High. 

j Schools to meet the needs of the older students. In 

i 

| both these fields, however, the activities of the 

j 

j Alliance were limited for the most part to propaganda 
j since it could claim no real authority to interfere in 
! matters of administration. 

From the standpoint of finance two main policies 
I for improvement were advocated by the Alliance. At 
j the outset they suggested the imposition of a blanket 
! tax for education on all assessable property through- 
I out the Province. This would distribute the cost of 
| education more equitably and lift some of the burden 
I from the poorer and more sparsely populated areas. 

| Under the existing circumstances some teachers were 





I - ■ ■ ' ■ ■ : 

. . ■ ; » 

- 

.-/■ . ; ! ■> i-1. • - •; ' ' ; -0:YL; J , C. 

.• 1 ■ ■' 

. 

. 

■ . 

. . . 

. 

» 

. 

.1. : . . X ' ■ , 

. 

■ 

■ 

. 



-1X5- 


being forced to assume indirectly an unjust share of 
the cost of education through the acceptance of low 
salaries and the students were suffering through the 
inability of the poorer districts to keep their schools 
supplied with well-qualified and experienced teachers. 

| Through the columns of the A.T.A. Magazine and through 

I other publications the Alliance urged the efficacy of 

I 

! the blanket tax as a solution of the problem but with 

I 1 

! little success. Some support was gained from the 
i Alberta Trustees 1 Association, but the idea of the tax 

! was never popular and the Government probably doubted 

| 2 
its expediency from the standpoint of politics. For 

a time the Alliance turned its attention to the 

I 

| establishment of the larger unit of administration and 
j then approached the problem of finance from another 
l angle, increased government grants to School -Districts. 

To the Alliance must go the credit of being 
the first organization in Alberta to advocate the 

| establishment of larger units of administration in 

I 

z 

education.^ In early issues of the Magazine articles 
| were published proposing this as one of the first steps 



A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. II, October, 1921, p.^ 6 * 
Ibid., Vol. VI, December. 1925 , p.22. 

Ibid.; Vol. II, March, 1§22, p.lj. 







-116- 




i 

s 




toward satisfactory administration. Careful study 

was made of larger units as they existed elsewhere 

and the possibility of adopting them in Alberta.' 1 ' As 

has been noted before, this plan was advocated as one 

means of gaining a more equitable distribution of 

costs, a fairer level of salaries for teachers and 

above all, a broader and more uniform education for 

the students in the rural schools. When, therefore, 

the Honourable Perren Baker introduced his so-called 

Baker Bill into the Legislature in 1929 , providing for 

the re-organization of existing School Districts into 

larger School Divisions, the principle of the bill 

received the hearty support of the Alliance. Certain 

clauses of the bill in regard to supervision and the 

size of the new divisions were questioned but the general 

principle received almost unanimous support from the 

2 

members of the A.T.A. Even after the bill was dropped 
for the time in the Legislature, because of the opposi¬ 
tion it evoked, the Alliance continued to press for the 
general principle it contained. It advocated however 

T. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. VII, Nov., 1926, p. I- 3 . 

2. Ibid., Vol. IX, June, 1929* P*9$ also Vol. X, 

Sept., 1929# P*9* 



( 










-117- 


a somewhat smaller unit than that proposed by the 
Minister and the retention by the Divisional Boards 
of a larger measure of authority. Since the matter 
had raised so much opposition in the Legislature the 
A.T.A. suggested the establishment of a committee of 
teachers, trustees and members of the Legislature to 
make a complete survey of the situation before the 
| next session.*** Reform based upon the report of such 
| a committee would, it was hoped, prevent educational 
policy becoming a political issue. The idea of re- 
| organization, however, was dropped for the time being 

| by the Minister of Education. It was not until the 

l 

I advent of the Social Credit Government in Alberta that 
| the plan was revived and put into force by the late 

: Premier William Aberhart. The new arrangements were 

| 

| more in keeping with those advocated by the Alliance 
and have been generally accepted as a marked improve¬ 
ment*^ 

For a number of years the Alliance has worked 
| with other organizations to rouse the interest of the 
| Federal Government in educational problems. In the 
| report prepared for presentation to the Rowell-Sirois 

I___________________ 

|1. A.T.&. Magazine, Vol. IX, June, 1929 , P*9> also 

Vol. X, Sept., I 929 , p. 9 . 

12 • Ibid., Vol. XV, May, 1936 , p.2. 





» 

, , * 

"* 

' 

* 


« 

' 






: i. ' ’ 

■ 

■ 


* , 




* 

' 

■ 





-118- 


Commission the weaknesses of the present arrangements 

were pointed out and federal aid for education was 

offered as a solution* The report of the commission, 

2 

however, did not adopt the suggestion. Some Federal 
grants have been made for technical and vocational 
training but the Federal government has steadfastly 
refused to assume any responsibility in financing 
general education. During the recent war the A.T.A. 
co-operated with the Canadian Teachers 1 2 3 * Federation in 
once more pressing for Federal aid but as yet they have 
attained no success. 5 

Since 19I4.6 the Alliance has joined the Alberta 
School Trustees* Association and other groups to bring 
pressure upon the Provincial Government to make larger 
grants to education as one means of overcoming the 
difficulties in that field following the Second World 
War. Representatives of these groups in the Alberta 
Educational Council have conducted an extensive cam¬ 
paign through the press and radio, to arouse public 

1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XVIII, April, 1938* p.l?* 

2. Ibid., Vol. XXI, Sept., 19io, p.8. 

3. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XXIII, Sept., 19^4-2, p*l|, 

also Dec., I9I4.2, p.9. 









-119- 

1 

interest and concern. Partly as a result of this the 

Provincial Government has made substantial increases 

2 

in educational grants. In a less tangible way the 
Alberta Educational Council has also been successful 
for it has been a means of drawing together the two 
large organizations of trustees and teachers to work 
! for the improvement of education in Alberta. 


1. A.T.A. Magazine, VOL. XXVII, Feb., I9I4.7, p*7. 

2. Ibid., Vol. XXVII, April, I9I+7, p.lj.. 

















-120- 


Chapter VIII 

CONSTITUTIONAL EVOLUTION 

The original Constitution of the A.T.A. was 
drawn up with a view to a large and scattered member¬ 
ship. As was noted in Chapter I the governing body 
of the Alliance was the Annual General Meeting of the 
delegates from the Locals. This body, in theory at 
I least, chose the Executive Council, the administrative 

| organ of the Alliance. It became customary, however, 

i 

| almost from the outset to have the officers elected 
f by ballots mailed to the members and returned to the 
i Secretary-Treasurer. The result of this balloting was 
! simply confirmed by the Annual General Meeting through 
the President instructing somermember to cast a general 
ballot. As a result of an electoral vote in 1926 the 
| Executive amended the Constitution to make the election 

i 

| of officers by a general vote final without further 

p 

| reference to the Annual General Meeting. 

; 

Originally there were five geographical areas 

1 

represented by members on the Executive; Northern 


1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. I, Sept.-Oct., 1920 , p.15 

2 . Ibid., Vol. VI, April, 1926, p.9. 















- 121 - 

Alberta, South-eastern Alberta, South-western Alberta, 
Edmonton and Calgary. Later as the Alliance grew and 
the number of schools in the central and northern 
parts of Alberta increased there was need for a larger 
number of District Representatives. In the By-laws 
adopted by the Annual General Meeting in 1956, follow¬ 
ing the passing of the Teaching Profession Act, the 
number of District Representatives was enlarged by the 
creation of three new districts; North-eastern, North- 

! 

I western, and Central Alberta. Central Alberta has 

j since been divided and there are now eight District 

1 

| Representatives on the Executive Council. 

One step of major importance to the Alliance 
was the decision at the third Annual General Meeting 
in April, 1920, to appoint a Secretary-Treasurer to 
devote his full time to secretarial and organization 
work* While the matter of the appointment was left 

j to the Executive their obvious choice was Mr. J. W. 

| Barnett who had been Secretary-Treasurer from the out- 

i 

i set and whose experience previously with the National 

; Union of Teachers in England had been invaluable in 

j _ ___ 

[ 1. A.T.A. Handbook, 19h7 > P*6, also p*5^4-• 

i 2. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. I, June, 1920, p.25. 













-122- 


the organization of the Alliance. Mr. Barnett was 
persuaded to give up his position in Strathcona High 
School, Edmonton, and to devote his full time to the 
work of the Alliance. In the years immediately follow¬ 
ing, although Mr. Barnett was Business Manager of the 
A.T.A. Magazine, Mr. H. C. Newland was Editor. The 
latter was also named Manager of the Bureau of Educa¬ 
tion while Mr. Barnett again acted as Secretary-Treasurer 
of the Bureau. This arrangement was found to be too 
complicated and as a result a resolution of the Annual 
General Meeting in 192l|. called for the re-organization 
of the Administrative work of the Alliance in one 




I 

i 

i 


general office and under one General Secretary-Treasurer* 
To this position Mr. Barnett was now appointed. Pre¬ 
viously the Secretary-Treasurer had voted as a member 
of the Executive Council. It was now considered to 
the best interests of the Alliance to separate the 


- policy-making power from that of the execution of the 
policy. For this reason a resolution of the same 
! Annual General Meeting ruled that the General Secretary- 

| Treasurer should not have power to vote on matters before 

*1 

I the Executive Council. 

] 1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. IV, May, 1921]., pp. 15, l6. 












- 123 - 


In the same year accommodation was procured in 
the Imperial Bank Building in Edmonton and while the 
space occupied has been expanded the office still 
remains in that building. At the Annual General 
Meeting in 19^4-7* initial steps were taken toward the 
erection of suitable headquarters for the A.T.A. -A 

■ 

j resolution of that year provided for the establishment 
i of a Building Fund to which $20,000 was to be transferred 

jfrom the General Fund and $3,000 was to be added 

1 

| annually until it reached $30,000. A suitable site 
for the headquarters has been purchased and at a recent 
jmeeting of the Executive Council plans were made to 
j proceed with the erection of the building. 

As the membership of the Alliance grew and the 
! number of Locals increased, it was felt that these 
j groups were too small to serve the best interest of 
the organization. The Local often consisted merely of 
| the staff of one town school with a few teachers from 

I 

j nearby rural districts . It was to meet this situation 

i 

j. that the Executive in 1932 began to encourage the 

| formation of District Associations representing a number 

| of adjacent Locals in districts including about forty 

p 

or fifty schools. Associations of this kind had already 

j - — _________—------ 

Fl. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XXVIII, Jan., I 9 I 4 . 8 , p. 35 . 

j 2. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XIV, Nov.. 1933„ p.l 6 ; also 

April, 1934-, P«9* 








■ - -■ ■ ‘ » 




j 





„ 

- 

i ’ i 1 : Li- ■ 

- ' ■' 








, 






. 

- 













been formed in the Smoky Lake and Czar districts. It 
was not intended that the District Associations should 
supplant the Locals as the administrative units of 
the Alliance but it was felt that they would serve two 
other important purposes. They would give teachers 
the opportunity of meeting a large number of their 
fellows for social and educational pursuits and they 
would also make it possible for members of the Executive 
to meet the teachers personally and lay before them 
matters of immediate importance. It was found also 
j that they were a valuable means of obtaining the views 
\ of the whole membership on any current issue. The 
{ Executive of each District Association consisted of a 
j President, a Vice-President, and a Secretary-Treasurer, 

| together with representatives of the Locals on the 
! basis of one representative for every ten teachers* 

This formation of larger units within the 
j Alliance facilitated the work of re-organization which 
| followed the establishment by the Provincial Government 
| of the large Divisions in administration. It seemed 
j logical that the units of the Alliance should be aligned 
with the administrative divisions. Consequently as 
new Divisions were formed steps were taken to re-organize 





‘ ‘V a . M. 

, - , ■ •' ’ • . . 

i . . ■ 1 l.i' 

* 

■ ; x : : 

’:o V: --.O ii-ifu-O ^ r I Y,C,: 

* 

- . j -f. . ■ 


■ 

- 






: 

- 

, 




von : 





- 125 - 


the Association on the same basis. In each Division 
there was now to be a Local which represented all the 
teachers in that section in dealings with the Divi¬ 
sional Board. The former Locals became Sub-Locals with 
their individual Executives. The Executive of the 
Local was to be made up of the usual officers. President 
Vice-President and Secretary-Treasurer, along with 
Councillors representing each of the supporting Sub- 
• Locals. Charters were issued to the Locals when their 
! constitutions and by-laws had been approved by the 
j Executive Council of the Association, while certificates 
| were issued to the Sub-Locals on the advice of the 
1 Executive of the Locals. Here was an organization 
which prevented any over-lapping in dealing with the 
| Divisional Board, and which made it possible for all 
| the members to be kept informed upon important Associa- 
j tion matters. In order to assure unity of policy in 

I 

■ dealing with the Government one of the By-Laws regarding 

i 

S discipline under authority of the Teaching Profession 
i Act of 1935 forbade the Locals or any other groups of 
I teachers to approach the Government on questions deal- 
! ing with educational policy or affecting the interests 
| of the teachers as a whole, without the knowledge and 



















-126- 


approval of the Executive Council of the Association. 

Further provision was also made in the general By- 

Laws of the A.T.A. for the appointment of an adjustment 

committee to settle disputes between Locals in centres 

1 

where more than one Local had been formed. 

The passing of the Teaching Profession Act 
necessitated very little change in the Constitution 
of the A.T.A. The existing Constitution and By-Laws 

I 

| were embodied in the new Act, the compilation of which 

| was largely the work of Mr. Barnett. The only major 

| change was in the name of the organization. "The 

I Alberta Teachers* Alliance, Incorporated," became "The 

2 

j Alberta Teachers* Association". The Executive Coun- 
| cil of the Alliance became by an electoral vote the 
j acting Executive Council of the Association and the 
! organization proceeded on its course in unbroken con- 
| tinuity. 

As the Association grew in numbers and responsi- 

I 

[ bility, the work of the Executive Council increased 


1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XVI, May, 1936, pp. IO-I5. 

Ibid., Vol. XVIII, Jan. 1938, p.l. 

2. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XV, May, I935, p.5. 












-127- 


accordingly and it became necessary to delegate some 
of this work to various committees of the Executive 
sometimes drawing upon the other members of the Associ¬ 
ation. The President and General Secretary-Treasurer 
were therefore made, ex-officio, members of every 
committee. The new By-Laws also placed restrictions 
on eligibility for membership on the Executive Council. 

j 

I Only those who had been members in good standing of 
I the Association or of another recognized teachers* 

! association for at least four years were eligible to 
| hold office in the Association while the President 
! must have served previously as a member of the Executive 

I Council. According to the By-Laws also, no change could 

, 

! be made to those in existence without the approval 

of a two-thirds majority of the whole membership in 

1 

I an electoral vote. 

| 

The passing of the Teaching Profession Act 
I brought a large expansion in the membership of the 
| Association and correspondingly increased the number 
i of delegates to the Annual General Meeting. At the 

i 

| same time there was a considerable degree of dissatis¬ 
faction with the fact that so much of the business of 


j 1. A.T.A. Handbook, 19^4-7# PP* 1+7-60. 










-128- 


the Annual Meeting was of necessity carried on by 
committees who submitted reports to the general meet¬ 
ing* Another difficulty was found in the fact that it 
was almost impossible to call together a representative 
body of the Association at any time in the year other 
than at the Annual General Meeting, no matter how urgent 
the questions to be discussed might be. It was felt 
I that while the electoral vote gave the members an 
! opportunity to pass judgement on a major proposal, 

| nevertheless it did not give adequate opportunity to 
discuss such a question* It was with these points in 
mind that the Executive Council in 19M+ submitted to 
the Pall Conventions of the Locals a proposal for a 
! major change in the constitution.^' This would re- 
I place delegates to the Annual General Meeting who acted 

I 

\ only for the period of its sessions and under advice 
jfrom the Locals and then reported back to their respec- 
| tive groups, by Councillors chosen by the Locals in 

1 the Fall Conventions who would hold office for the 

I 

I 

| entire year* The Councillors were to be given wide 

i 

\ discretionary powers and could act without direction 


1 . A.T.A. Magazine, Vol* XXV, Oct., I9I4I]-, p.10 














. 

. ■ ’ r ' 

* 

' 

. , , ■ U - - 

„ 

• { i V . ' . 1 ■: i II ■ 

■ ; -■ # . ■ • ■■ 

.) ,i . ■ .. ■' - i ■ 

. 

, . ■ . ' . . . ' 

* 

. 

* 

. 

•Li 

■ 


’ 


■ 








-129- 


from the Locals. They would serve as links between 
the Executive Council and the Locals and would be in 
a position to keep their groups more fully informed 
of the activities of the Association. These Councillors 
would now compose the Annual General Meeting, the member¬ 
ship of which would be greatly reduced by the adoption 

i 

| of the following system of representation. Locals 
| with a membership of less than one hundred would choose 
| one Councillor, of less than two hundred two Councillors, 

| of less than three hundred three Councillors and of 

| 

! over three hundred four Councillors. Since they 
would be permanent representatives of their Locals, 
the Councillors would take from the District Represen- 

| 

tatives, who made up the Executive Council, the almost 

I 

| impossible task of keeping in touch with the membership 
in their large geographic districts. At the December 
| Executive Council meeting the General Secretary-Treasurer 
j reported that the electoral ballot on the matter had 

i 

! indicated that eighty per cent of the members favoured 

p 

j the change. Accordingly a committee of the Executive 
i was appointed to draw up the proposed amendment to the 

1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. XXV, Oct., I9U1, P«10. 

2. Ibid., Jan., l%-5* p.21. 










-130- 

By-Laws to be confirmed at the next Annual General 
MeetingThis ratification was duly given and the 
new method of representation is proving much more satis- 

p 

factory than the old. 

Other necessary additions to the By-Laws which 
grew out of the Teaching Profession Act were those 
governing discipline. The Act gave to the Association 
power to discipline its members for breaches of the 
| professional code. To do this the Association was 

7 

I authorized to establish a Discipline Committee? and 
I provision was made for appeals against its decisions,^ 

| As this power of discipline was great, even to the 

! 

1 point of recommending the cancellation of a teachers* 
certificate, it was necessary that the utmost care 
should be taken to make the whole matter of unprofes- 

| sional conduct very clear and to outline the procedure 

1 

in all cases before the Discipline Committee, The 
By-Laws re Discipline adopted by the Annual General 
Meeting, 193&, duly established the Discipline Committee 

' 1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol, XXV, April, 191+5, p.25* 

|2, For the earlier system of election which involved 
a much more numerous body of delegates see p.l8, 

J, A,T.A, Handbook, 19^7# P*l8, 

4 , Ibid,, p,20• 







- 

* 

. 

. . 

- 

• j • . i 




; J t 


J Cil : 


i no J;; 

J • J;-:; 


■ 




t 






-131- 


for which statutory provision had been made and the 
following statement of unprofessional conduct was 
adopted:^ 

u .every member shall be deemed guilty of 

unbecoming or improper conduct who - 

(a) wilfully takes, because of animosity or for 
personal advantage any steps to secure the 
dismissal of another teacher; 

(b) wilfully circulates false reports derogatory 
to any fellow teacher, or to any other 
person associated with education in the 
Province of Alberta; 

(c) maliciously, carelessly, irresponsibly or 
otherwise not in fulfilment of official 
duties, criticizes the work of a fellow 
teacher in such a way as to undermine the 
confidence of the public and pupils; 

(d) publishes or circulates any false or mis- 
chiqfbus statements or enters into any 
collusive arrangement meant to circumvent 

or nullify any of the Acts of the Legislature 
pertaining to teachers or schools or the 
regulations of the Department of Education; 

(e) where he is one of a local group, bargains 
on his own behalf on questions affecting 
each and all members of the group; 

(f) is addicted to the excessive use of intoxica¬ 
ting liquors or the excessive or habitual 
use of opiates or narcotics, as defined in 
the Opium and Narcotic Drug Act, (Chapter 
II4I1, R.S.C. 1927) 9 and amendments thereto; 

(g) has been convicted of an offence under the 
Criminal Code of Canada.” 

' ___ 

1. A.T.A. Handbook, I9I4.7, PP* 62, 63. 












-132- 


Some difficulties have arisen from time to time 
over the interpretation of the Constitution. The 
chief of these have been the question of the precise 
relationship between the General Secretary-Treasurer 
and the Executive Council and the question of the 
"responsibility 11 of the Executive Council to the Annual 
General Meeting. In neither case has the relationship 
been entirely clarified but at the same time, the 
unanimity of purpose of all concerned has prevented 
either from becoming a major issue* 

In the case of the General Secretary-Treasurer, 
it has been necessary to place most of the responsi¬ 
bility for the administration of the affairs of the 
4ssociation in his hands. Although the Executive meets 
at intervals throughout the year to make decisions on 
major questions, the General Secretary must assume 
more power than is usually delegated to such an officer* 
The exact delineation of this authority is difficult 
to determine and the resultant uncertainty has led at 
times to some difference of opinion* 

A somewhat similar situation arises in the 
relationship between the Executive Council and the 
Annual General Meeting. Since the members of the 







“133- 


Executive are elected by the whole body of the Associ¬ 
ation and not by the Councillors at the Annual General 
Meeting, it has been contended that the Executive 
Council is not responsible to the representative body 
but to the membership at large, For this reason 
therefore, the decisions of the Annual General Meeting 
! must be regarded as merely directives to the Executive 

I 

j and it is not compelled to act upon them, Hov/ever, 

* since there is almost complete unanimity of purpose 
. between the two groups this technicality has seldom 
I caused serious friction* 










-134- 


Chapter IX 

THE CANADIAN TEACHERS 1 FEDERATION 
AND OTHER ORGANIZATIONS 


As part of its original policy the A*T*A. has 

worked consistently toward the closest co-operation 

j 

between the various provincial teachers* organizations* 

| 

i Although some of the problems facing the various groups 
have differed from province to province, in many 
| matters such as financial security, security of tenure, 

| and recognition, the issues have been the same* It has 

| 

been part of the policy of the A*T*A* to keep in touch 

| with developments in the various provinces, especially 

! 

in the West, and to advise its members through the pages 
of the A.T*A* Magazine of any difficulties facing sister 
organizations in order that they should not be party to 

j any attempt to undemine the stand taken by the teachers 

| 

| of other provinces* The most notable examples of this 

were in connection with the Brandon and New Westminster 

1 

disputes in the early 1920*s. In both cases the A.T*A. 
Magazine published the details of the quarrels and 

! 1* A.T*A* Magazine, Vol* I, March, 1921, p. 155 also 

Vol* II, May, 1922, p*9* 







: 





- 155 - 

warned its members against accepting positions under 
either Board of Trustees. On the other hand the 
Alliance received similar support from the other pro¬ 
vincial organizations in some of its most serious 

difficulties notably in the Edmonton and Blairmore 

1 

incidents* Besides offering moral support the various 
j provincial organizations through the Canadian Teachers* 
Federation helped to meet the serious financial diffi¬ 
culties involved in these disputes* 

In 1950 when economic conditions in education 
| were at their worst the Alliance sent delegates to a 
| meeting of representatives of the three Prairie Provin- 
I ces in Saskatoon* The purpose of the conference was 
| to draft some plan for solving the pressing financial 
j problems.^ Again in 1938 representatives attended a 

2 

| similar meeting to discuss problems of adult education*^ 
Recently, in 19 ^ 7 > another joint meeting was called 
in Edmonton to reach agreement on a suitable salary 
schedule to be sought by the teachers* organizations 
of the Western Provinces*^ - 

1* A.T.A. Magazine, Vol* VI, April, 1926, p. 7 * 

2 * Ibid., Vol* XI, May, I93I, p.k. 

3* Ibid., Vol. XVIII, April, 1938, p. 12 . 

4 * Ibid., Vol. XXVIII, Jan. 1948, p.29. 










r 


IV, 












- 136 - 




Although such conferences have been valuable 
in facing what might be called sectional problems 
the greatest co-operation has been achieved through 
the Canadian Teachers* Federation* This body grew 
j out of a proposed federation of the teachers* organiza- 
| tions of the four Western Provinces* In October, 1919, 
a meeting of representatives of the four Provinces 
was held in Winnipeg to discuss the possibility of 
; such a federation, and plans were made there for a 

; similar conference in Calgary the following year to 

1 

outline the details of the organization. To this 
meeting, which took place during July, came represen¬ 
tatives also of the Ontario Women Teachers* Association 
and the Ontario Male Teachers* Association with full 
power to act for their organization if such a federation 

I 

| were formed. They were therefore welcomed as delegates 

j to the conference and the work of planning the federa- 

| tion proceeded. The Canadian Teachers* Federation, 

as the new association was named, was so constituted 

as to permit the inclusion of all the teachers* organ- 

2 

izations of Canada if they should so wish. Resolutions 

1. A.T.A. Magazine, Vol. I, June, 1920, p.l^. 

| 2. Ibid., August, 1921, p*3* 
















- 137 - 


embodying uniform policies on questions common to all 

the Provinces were adopted and plans were made for 

regular annual meetings in various cities throughout 

Canada. By 1927 the Canadian Teachers* Federation 

1 

included all the Provinces of Canada. 

In the Summer of I93O the Alberta Alliance 
j played host to the Canadian Teachers* Federation in a 

I 

| convention the sessions of which were held successively 
in Calgary, Edmonton and Jasper. At this last meeting 
Mr. J. W. Barnett who had been a regular representative 
of the A.T.A. at the conventions was named President, 
a fitting tribute to his work for teachers* organizations 
in Canada. Dr. H. C. Hewland, President of the Alliance 
1 during 1920-21, had been chosen President of the 
| Canadian Teachers* Federation in 1923* In 1938 Dr. 

| M. E. Lazerte, then President of the Alliance, received 
j a similar honor and again in I9I4.2, Mr. Raymond E. 

Shaul, who had also served as President of the A.T.A., 

| was elected to the same position. 

Members of the A.T.A. have also taken important 
parts in the work of various committees of the Canadian 

\ 

— -————-—————— — —— ——— - 

1. A.T.A. Handbook, 19k-7 9 P*I3* 








-138- 


Teachers 1 Federation. In 1928 a committee of the 
Alliance presented a report to the Annual Conference 
on educational costs. At the I93O and I932 Conferences 
Mr. M. P. Watts, M.A., now of the Department of Educa¬ 
tion but then a member of the Alliance, submitted 
reports of the Examination Enquiry Committee of which 
he had acted as Chairman. It was the Alberta delega¬ 
tion which in 1928 had first suggested that the 
Federation should approach the National Research Council 
for a grant to be made to research in Educational 
j Psychology. It was not surprising then that in 195!+ 

Mr• Barnett should b© named to a committee in charge 
of a Bureau of Research established by the Federation. 
Alberta continued to urge Federal interest in educa- 
! tional research and in 1957 Dazerte was made 

chairman of a committee pressing for the establishment 

i 

! of a Dominion Research Council for Social Sciences. 

I When during 1959 the Canadian Council for Educational 
Research was finally set up. Dr. Lazerte, as represen- 
| tative of the Canadian Teachers* Federation, was made 
| Chairman of that important body. 

During 1939 a comprehensive report on salaries. 











-fo si - •>: i : . •" C; i i 1 C X {-.(1 • •< 




V 






-139- 


salary schedules and negotiations was compiled by 
Mr* A. J. H. Powell, M.A*, of the Alberta Association 
for presentation at the Conference of that year* Mr. 
Powell subsequently was named Director of a publicity 
campaign to secure higher standards of living for 
Canadian teachers and to educate the public as to the 
justice of their claims for Federal aid in education* 

At the I9I+5 Conference when Federal aid had become 
a major interest of the Canadian Teachers* Federation, 
Alberta presented a brief on Educational Finance pre¬ 
pared by Dr* K. Argue of the Faculty of Education in 
the University of Alberta. The Canadian Teachers* 
Federation continues to play an Important part in 
moulding public opinion on education and is yet further 
evidence of the foresight of the early leaders of the 
A.T.A. who were to no small degree responsible for 
the founding of the national organ!zation 


1 * All the information on the activities of the 

Canadian Teachers* Federation is from Annual 
Reports of the C.T.F. in the A.T.A. Magazine 













* - . 

* 

■ 


V.! ; ,>i/' -AMjr. l.L-l.ol 

. 

' 

' 

C.< v C • r.: {>[.. s 

‘ ■ • r n .. :.. ■ 

* . . 

. 


’ ", ... . 

i-c •• 1 



. 

• ■ ■ = - ' 

» 

. 

.... ei' j 

. ‘ 





' ‘ . ■ • - 


I 

v 


• 

fo 5 : . • 


■ 

• 

, 

- - 






-llj.0- 


Chapter X 
CONCLUSION 


In a little over thirty years the Alberta 
Teachers 1 Association has advanced very far along the 
| road towards the attainment of those goals to which 
| it directed its course when it was first organized. 

| First and foremost it has established itself as a 
truly professional body, recognized by the Government 
| and School Boards alike as the official organization 
of the teachers of Alberta, empowered to act on their 
behalf and to voice their views in educational matters. 
It was the first teachers* group in the British 

! 

Commonwealth of Nations to achieve disciplinary powers 
over its membership and the second professional teach¬ 
ing group to obtain statutory membership .^* It has 

I 

gone far towards winning for teachers their proper 

I 

economic status, with much higher salary schedules, 
security of tenure and what is recognized as one of 
I the best pension schemes for teachers in Canada. It 
includes in its membership almost all the teachers 

j 

| 1 . A.T.A. Handbook, I9I4.7* 








■ 

? • 

. 

- 

, 

■ » 

■ r <; . •>*. v ■' • • • ■ ■ j>.;f ■ ; ■' ;;a.B 

* 

: ' v ; B ; r \ , / >. ,! •: : • ;/ • .;: ' j; ;,■>«; 

■ -■ ; 1 ' ; ■ ' ■ . • 

■ : ■ T .‘ ■ ’ •' 

' ■ ' . ( ■ 

* 

* 

- 

* 

- •• -• . i .. ■ :. 



-llA- 


engaged in schools in Alberta, both public and private, 1 
and has taken a leading part in the activities of 
! the Canadian Teachers 1 Federation. It has, moreover, 
succeeded to a marked degree in winning the confidence 
of both the educational officials and the public in 
| general, through its moderation and its insistence 
upon professional conduct on the part of its members. 

It has given to the teachers a feeling of security 
j and confidence and has awakened in them a professional 
I consciousness and a broader interest in educational 
j problems. An analysis of some of the reasons for its 
i success may be interesting. 

j 

One of the greatest single factors contributing 
to its success has been the consistency of its objec¬ 
tives and policies. Although minor problems have at 
| times thrust themselves forward and although there 
jhave been some differences of opinion over the methods 
' to be adopted, the members of the Association have 
never lost sight of their real objectives. With the 
j utmost determination they have worked toward their 


|1. According to the Teaching Profession Act all 

teachers in public and separate schools must be 
members of the A.T.A. Membership of others is 
optional. 






. 

N ' 

t ' - . 

'• ■ ' - l ■ • 

r.1 :• ‘ : o .G,j- ; c !.:* ' eri'u rrJ'OO aC 

, 

. 

' 

. • j i • 

. ■ • ■ ■ . - ■ 


. 

* 

» 

. . 

■ 

. 

* 




■ 



. 









-ll+2- 


r 

J goal. Failure at any one point seems to have spurred 
them on to renewed efforts and at no time have they 
"failed to see the forest for the trees”. 

At some stages the Association has been favoured 
j by the turn of events as was the case in the advent 
| of the Social Credit Government to power, led by a 
former member of the Association, and including among 

I 

j the legislators a number of teachers who were able 
to present the case of the profession advantageously 
to their fellow members. At the same time there has 
been a gradual assimilation by the Department of 
Education of former members of the A.T.A. who have 
! viewed the position taken by the organization with 
| understanding, and have helped to break down the hos- 
tility with which the Departmental officials first 

viewed the Alliance. At the present time almost all 

J 

| the officials of the Department of Education, includ- 

j 

| ing the Minister and Deputy Minister, have been members 

j 

\ at some time of the Teachers 1 Association. 

i 

Combining with these two factors and to no 
I small extent rendering them effective, has been the 
faithful work of many of its members. The A.T.A. still 
numbers in its membership some who were with the 





. 

. ' - ' . \o '■ ... : \,V. • .*=■ V 

- 

. 

■>! 3 1 :;\ r Z ( .. 

• . 

* 

■ 

■ . « * 

- . 

* 

. - ... 

. 

. 

• ■ 

... 





-143- 


organization at its inception, who have helped to 
give it that consistency of policy and purpose which 
has meant so much to its success and who have worked 
loyally and selflessly for their fellow teachers* 

It is difficult to overestimate how much of 
its success the A.T.A. owes to the devotion of the late 
Dr. J. W. Barnett who was the first General Secretary- 
, Treasurer and served in that capacity from 1917 to 
his retirement in I9I4.6• When he came to Alberta in 
1911 he had already had valuable experience with 

j teachers* organizations in England. Prom I9O9 to 

l 

; I9H he had been President of the Surbiton and District 
Branch of the National Union of Teachers and he brought 
v/ith him to Alberta a conviction of both the value of 
and the need for such organizations among teachers 
everywhere. It was therefore the great good fortune 
of the Alliance that in 1920 , when the need was felt 
I for a permanent and full-lime General Secretary-Treasurer, 
| that Mr* Barnett agreed to devote himself to the work* 

; With unrelenting determination he strove to achieve 
those purposes for which the Alliance was formed* 

* 

| With exceptional organizing skill and the ability to 
! see past the smaller questions to the real issues at 





. 




■?:& £ I,arc I 


* * » 


i. ;r x i cu -: ‘ 




. . • . IX . 

■ 

■ ■ ' • 

. 

" 

- 


’ 








-1W- 


stake, he succeeded in guiding the young organization 
through very difficult times and had the satisfaction 
of seeing it become one of the most successful associ¬ 
ations of teachers in Canada. Recalcitrant School 
Boards learned to fear him, teachers everywhere learned 
to trust him and, although he made some enemies, as 
one with his energy and determination was bound to do, 

i 

everyone learned to respect him as one of the leading 
authorities on educational problems and on school 
law. After thirty years of service with the A.T.A., 

I for he remained with the organization after his retire- 

| 

ment from office in an advisory capacity, he must have 
looked back upon what could be regarded as his life ! s 
work with the satisfaction of knowing that his was a 
task well done. The teachers of Alberta had become, 

I in the words of their motto, "Magistri Neque Servi", 
Masters and not Slaves. 














■ ' 

■ 










. 




















* 















- ' / ■ 






, 




■ : 






' ■. 1 





• 









. 



' 




. 



t * 

. , 

■ 



% 



• , . 











, 







; 







' 

- 'x- r .1" 



: 





■ 

' t.> 4; 

* 

■ 



■ 



* 

• 

% 





• 1 







* 


::UA 








BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Primary References 

A.T.A. Magazine, Volumes I - XXVIII. 

Official Organ of the Alberta Teachers 1 
Association. 

Alberta Teachers* Association Handbook, 19i}-7. 


Other References 


Encyclopedia and Dictionary of Education. 

Edited by Foster Watson (London, Sir Isaac 
Pitman, Sons, 1921 , ) Vol. III. 

Cyclopedia of Education, 

Edited by Paul Munroe, (He?/ York, McMillan 
Company, 1913), Vol. IV. 

The Year Book of Education, 1932 , (London, Evans, 
Company, 1932). 

Robinson, Aileen W., ”A Critical Evaluation of the 

American Federation of Teachers”, (Chicago, I93I4J 

Sticker, Freeland, G. ”Early History of the American 
Federation of Teachers”. (Manuscript) 

Action and Achievement, I9I4.5-I4-6. Published by National 
Union of Teachers, (London, 19 U 7 ») 

Kuenzli, Irvin R., "Teachers* Unions in England, 

France and the United States.” Pamphlet pub¬ 
lished by American Federation of Teachers, 
(Chicago)• 











































-114.6- 

Appendix 

PRESIDENTS OP THE ALBERTA TEACHERS* ASSOCIATION 


Dr. 

George D. Misener, 

Edmonton 

1917-1919 

Mr. 

T. E. A. Stanley, 

Calgary 

1919-1920 

Dr. 

H. C. Newland, 

Edmonton 

1920-1922 

Mr. 

Chas. E. Peaseley, 

Medicine Hat 

1922-1923 

Mr. 

J. E. Somerville, 

Edmonton 

1923-1924 

Mr. 

W. W. Scott, 

Calgary 

1924-1925 

Mr. 

Fred Parker, 

Calgary 

1925-1926 

Mr. 

A. Waite, 

Edmonton 

1926-1927 

Mr. 

H. Sweet, 

Lethbridge 

1927-1928 

Mr. 

H. D. Ainlay, 

Edmonton 

1928-1929 

Mr. 

A. J. H. Powell, 

Port Saskatchewan 

1929-1930 

Mr. 

R. D. Webb, 

Calgary 

1950-1951 

Mr. 

C. 0 . Hicks, 

Edmonton 

1951-1932 











! 












147' 


Mr. 

M. 

W. Brock, 

Calgary 

1932-1933 

Mr. 

G . 

A. Clayton, 

Edmonton 

1933-1934 

Mr. 

E. 

J. Thorlakson, 

Calgary 

1934-1935 

Mr. 

G. 

G. Harman, 

Edmonton 

1935-1936 

Mr. 

E. 

G. Ansley, 

Medicine Hat 

1936-1937 

Dr. 

M. 

E. Lazerte, 

Edmonton 

1937-1959 

Mr. 

R. 

E. Shaul, 

Edmonton 

1939-1941 

Mr. 

Jas. A. Smith, 

Kitscoty 

1941-1943 

Dr. 

C. 

Sansom, 

Calgary 

1943-1945 

Mr. 

H. 

C. Melsness, 

Grande Prairie 

1945-1947 

Dr. 

H. 

E. Smith, 

Edmonton 

1947-1948 

Mr. 

E. 

T. Wiggins, 

Didsbury 

1948-1949 


















- 11.8 


THE TEACHING PROFESSION ACT, 

19 3 5 

AND AMENDMENTS THERETO 


1, This Act may be cited as The Teaching 
Profession Act , 

la. In this Act, unless the context otherwise 
! requires 


(a) Association” shall mean the Alberta 
Teachers 1 Association; 

(b) “Member” shall mean a member in good 
standing of the Association; 

(c) “Executive Council” shall mean the 
Executive Council of the Association; 

(d) “Minister” shall mean the Minister of 
Education of the Province of Alberta; 

(e) "Department” shall mean the Department of 
Education of the Province of Alberta. 

(f) ”Teacher” shall mean a person holding a 
valid certificate of the Minister; 


(g) “Secretary" shall mean Secretary, Secre¬ 
tary-Treasurer or the General Secretary- 
Treasurer of the Association. 

2. (X) There is hereby established and constituted 

| under the name of: "The Alberta Teachers 1 Association" 

! a body corporate and politic. 


I 



















■ 








■ 



. 

■ I. r . • •' ''' ' " 

r 

• • . on 

. 

' ■ " ‘ ' ' ■- 

* 















(2) The Association may take any measure 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or 
of any Act or Regulation of the Province of Alberta, 
which it deems necessary in order to give effect to 
any policy adopted by it with respect to any question 
or matter, directly or indirectly affecting the 
teaching profession. 


3 . The objects of the Association shall be: 

(a) To advance and promote the cause of 

education in the Province of Alberta; 

(b) To raise the status of the teaching 

profession - 

(1) by initiating and promoting research 
in methods of arousing interest in 
presentation of teaching the various 
subjects of the curriculum; 

(2) by establishing research libraries 
and circulating libraries of books, 
treatises and papers designed to 
assist the teacher in the classroom; 


(c) To promote and advance the interests of 
teachers and to secure conditions which 
will make possible the best professional 
service; 

(d) To arouse and increase public interest 

in educational affairs; 

■ 

(e) To cooperate with other teachers’ organ¬ 
izations in the provinces of the Dominion 
of Canada and throughout the world, 
having the same or like aims and objects. 


Ij,. (1) All persons carrying on the profession 
] of teaching in any institution of the Province of 
| Alberta, supported by provincial or municipal taxation, 
which maintains a department for giving instruction in 


I 












-150- 


the courses of study prescribed for elementary, 
secondary, or technical schools under the jurisdiction 
of the Department of Education of the Province of 
Alberta shall, as a condition of their employment or 
continued employment, be members of the Association: 

Provided that when a teacher enters upon any 
contract of engagement with the Board of Trustees of 
any School District in the Province of Alberta, he 
shall give notice forthwith in writing to the Secretary 
of the Association of the date of his proposed employ¬ 
ment and the remuneration agreed upon, and in such 
case the Board of Trustees may employ the teacher 
unless and until the Association notifies him in writ¬ 
ing that the teacher is not a member* 

(2) The following persons shall be eligible 
for membership in the Association: teachers in any 
Normal School or School Education; members of the 
Faculty of the University of Alberta; teachers in any 
Provincial School of Technology; teachers in any School 
of Agriculture; teachers in any other educational 
institution of the Province* 

( 5 ) Unemployed teachers who hold a valid 
certificate of the Minister shall also be eligible 
for membership* 

(Ip) A member who is not the holder of a valid, 
permanent certificate of the Minister and who has had 
less than two years 1 experience in teaching shall be 
known as an Associate Member with the same rights, 
privileges and benefits, and subject to the same limit¬ 
ations and restrictions as other members; 

Provided, however, that an Associate Member shall 
not be eligible for election as a member of the 
Executive Council nor for election or appointment as 
a member of any committee or board of the Association 
dealing with discipline, training or certification of 
teachers, or with courses of study for schools operat¬ 
ing under the jurisdiction of the Department* 

5. The Association shall consist of a federation 
of Local Associations and members at large* 










' a 






- 151 - 


6* (1) The Association in general meeting may 

pass by-laws not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act or of any Act or Regulation of the Province 
of Alberta respecting - 




i 


(a) the election of the Executive Council 
and officers of the Association; 

(b) the formation, government, management 
and dissolution of Local Associations; 

(c) the management of its property and affairs 
and its own internal organization and 
administration; 

(d) the maintenance of the Association and 
the fixing and collecting of annual and 
other fees; 

(e) the time, place and conduct of the annual 
and other meetings of the Association; 

(f) discipline, including the suspension and 
expulsion of members; 


(g) all such other matters as may be deemed 
necessary or convenient for the manage¬ 
ment of the Association and the promotion 
of its welfare or the conduct of its 
business• 

(2) The Association may also amend, alter or 
j repeal any by-laws* 


(5) No such by-laws or amendments or repeal 
j thereto, relating to discipline, shall be valid or 
| take effect until approved by the Lieutenant-Covernor- 
! in-Council* 

(I4,) Any witness failing to attend before the 
: Discipline Committee, constituted persuant to the 
By-Laws of the Association Relating to Discipline, 

| in obedience to a notice requiring him to attend and 
I give evidence before such Committee, or failing to 


» 





-152- 


produce any books, papers or other documents or in 
any way to comply with such notice, or refusing to 
be sworn or to answer any question allowed by such 
Committee, shall be liable to attachment upon applica¬ 
tion by notice of motion to a Judge of the Supreme 
Court and may be punished as for contempt of court; 
and where such witness is the member of the Associa¬ 
tion whose conduct is being investigated, such failure 
or refusal shall be deemed unprofessional conduct 
within the meaning of the By-laws of the Association 
Relating to Discipline* 


7* (1) The Association shall be governed by 

| an Annual General Meeting to be held during Easter 
; week of each year, or at such other times as may be 
i deemed expedient by the Executive Council. 

(2) The Annual General Meeting shall be com- 
1 posed of the officers, the Executive Council and the 
delegates from Local Associations, as provided by the 
| by-laws. 


8. The business of the Association shall be 
j transacted and carried on by the Executive Council, 
to be elected or appointed as provided in the by¬ 
laws. The Executive Council shall be composed of the 
officers of the Association and at least eight others 
to be elected by districts. 


9* The fees of members of the Association shall 
j be those fixed from time to time by the by-laws. 


10* (1) The trustees of any school district in 

j the Province of Alberta are hereby empowered and shall 
retain from the salary of each and every teacher the 
amount of membership dues fixed and prescribed by the 
j Association, and all moneys so retained shall be 
deemed to be a payment on account of such salary and 
shall be deemed to be a payment on account of member¬ 
ship dues by the teacher from whom such sum has been 
retained* 











c s. i ■ t 


VO ■■ 

A ' J • 







; cd : 1 

ij > 

- 

c T/O^.OC^ 






- 153 - 


(2) The Department of Education of the 
Province of Alberta is hereby empowered and shall 
retain at the end of each school term, from the grants 
payable to each and every school district under The 
School Grants Act (R.S.A. 1922, Chap. 53 ) in aid of 
schools organized and conducted under the provisions 
of The School Act , an amount equal to the amount so 
required and retained by such school district from 
the salary of the teacher, and to receive and pay over 
to the Association the moneys so retained on account 
of membership dues of the teacher from whom the said 
sums were originally retained, and all moneys so re¬ 
tained and paid over shall be deemed to have been paid 
over to and received by the school district on account 
| of the aforesaid grants; 

1 

Provided, however, that any school district, with 
! the consent of the Minister, obtained on request in 
| writing of the Secretary, may pay the fees of members 
i employed by them direct to the Association. 

11 . Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to inter- 

| fere with the rights of Separate Schools as provided 

! in The School Act. 

.. . .■ " - r - ———■ 


TEACHING PROFESSION APPEAL BOARD 


11a. (1) There shall be constituted a board to 

I be known as the Teaching Profession Appeal Board con- 
| sisting of three members, one of whom shall be 
| appointed by the Executive Council and two by the 
j Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council• 

(2) It shall be the duty of the Teaching 
Profession Appeal Board, and it shall have power, - 

(a) to appoint a chairman and secretary; 

(b) To serve as a board of appeal in case 
of suspension or expulsion or other 



















’ ‘ O-' 





( 


.v ‘,:o 









, - ■ 








- 154 .- 


disciplining of members of the Association, 
or to investigate on the order of the 
Minister cases involving suspension or 
cancellation of teachers* certificates* 

lib* In the event of any teacher being suspended 
or expelled from membership in the Association, or 
otherwise disciplined by the Executive Council, such 
| teacher shall be entitled to appeal to the Teaching 
I Profession Appeal Board, and in case the said Board 
| confirms such decision of the Executive Council, the 
i Association may advise the Minister to suspend or 
| cancel the certificate of such teacher* 

12* Every person guilty of violating any pro- 
| vision of this Act, or any of the by-laws made there- 
| under, shall be liable to a fine of not more than 
; Twenty-five Dollars ($25*00) recoverable with costs 
j under the provisions of the law respecting summary 
| convictions. 






i 

i 













[ ' . 

■ 

i ' ‘ 

' 




•. ■ . : : •' 


nh-ttsj 






ADDENDA 


1* At a meeting of the Executive of the A.T.A. in 
1937 Dr. Lazerte proposed that a careful study be made 
of vocational opportunities in Canada and that the 
Executive make available a sum of money to render such 
a study possible. Accordingly the Executive provided 
a grant-in-aid of |600 to a student in the School of 
Education to proceed with the study. Mr. Fred Tyler, 
B. Sc., a graduate of the School of Education, was 
chosen for the work and “Choosing Your Life Work 11 
was a result of this study. 


2 0 In I9I1-O the A.T.A. sponsored a second Summer 

Course in Psychology and Supervision of Arithmetic, 
supplying the books and tests required. The Associa¬ 
tion paid the fees and railway fares of representatives 
of the Locals taking the course. Although the 
University would not allow credit for the course, so 
great was the interest it aroused that in January of 
the following year all of the one hundred books per¬ 
taining to the subject were in circulation and there 
were more than fifty reservations for them. During 
the following years also, there was considerable 
activity and study in the Locals on the whole subject 
of testing and supervision. 








■ 


A 














B29756 




















