


(3x MBBIS 

WIBSllMIS 

WMMSM1S 








SYNOPSIS 


This study seeks to investigate the 
development of Red Deer and its tributary areas 
from 1884 to 1954. In particular it attempts to 
show that growth has been slow but substantial, 
and that the Eastern Canadian influence has been 
very great in the community.The first section 
deals with the geographical background,and gives 
an account of the first period of settlement 
which extended from 1884 to 1891. In the second 
division the economic development is examined. 
Basically Red Deer's prosperity results from its 
favorable location as a distributing centre 
and from the fertile agricultural area which 
lies on all sides of the city. The last two parts 
of the thesis are an examination of civic and 
social and cultural development. The findings show 
that in ail aspects of community life Red Deer 
has been conservative but not reactionary, and 
that in a small way it has helped to exert a 
steadying influence in provincial affairs. 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 





https://archive.org/details/investigationintOOdawe 


PURPOSES AND LIMITATIONS 
OF THIS STUDY 

Because Red Deer is the largest community 
between Calgary and Edmonton, the history of its 
development is an important part of any account 
of the settlement of Western Canada. Although many 
of the early records have been lost or destroyed, 
and many of the pioneers have passed from the scene, 
there is still in existence sufficient information 
to make possible an accurate account of the 
first seventy years of Red Deer and district. The 
purpose of this study has been to record some of 
the material which is still available,and to try to 
show the relation between events in Red Deer and 
the general development of the West. 




THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


AN INVESTIGATION INTO THE DEVELOPMENT 

OF 

THE RED DEER COMMUNITY 
IN 

RELATION TO THE 
DEVELOPMENT OF WESTERN CANADA 

A DISSERTATION SUBMITTED 
TO THE COMMITTEE ON GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE DEGREE OF 
MASTER OF ARTS 

FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 


BY 

ROBERT WELLINGTON DAWE 
September, 1954 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I. ORIGINS AND EARLY DEVELOPMENT 1 

II. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF RED DEER 

AND ITS TRIBUTARY AREA 47 

III. CIVIC AND POLITICAL DEVELOPMENT 121 

IV. SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT 157 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 209 

APPENDIX 


REPORT OF SIX YEARS 1 EXPERIENCE 
OF A FARMER IN THE RED DEER 
DISTRICT 

THE FIRST RED DEER SCHOOL 

PUBLIC GATHERING TO HONOR MR. 
JOSEPH WELSH 

CENTRAL ALBERTA OLD TIMERS' 
ASSOCIATION 

POLITICAL BACKGROUND OF THE NORTH¬ 
WEST TERRITORIES AND ALBERTA 


-III- 







ILLUSTRATIONS 

PRECEDING 

PAGE 

MAP OF RED DEER I 

RED DEER IN 1893 1 

RED DEER IN 1953 1 

CAIRN AT THE OLD CROSSING 17 

THE OLD CROSSING 17 

FORT NORMANDEAU 44 

RED DEER AND SURROUNDING COMMUNITIES 47 

THE SPRINGBSTT BLACKSMITH SHOP 50 

THE LEONARD GAETZ HOME 53 

THE MCLEOD HOME 53 

THE ISAAC GAETZ MEMORIAL 53 

THE WESTERN GENERAL IN 1910 79 

RED DEER IN 1895 102 

RED DEER IN 1913 117 

RED DEER IN 1920 117 

THE FIRST MAYOR AND COUNCIL, 1901 127 

BASEBALL IN 1911 139 

RED DEER FROM THE AIR 146 

PROMINENT CITIZENS 146 

THE CENTRAL SCHOOL IN 1911 AND 1953 157 

THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 190 

THE ANGLICAN CHURCH 190 

THE UNITED CHURCH 190 

THE MEMORIAL TABLET 204 

ONTARIO IN ALBERTA 208 


IV- 





ILLUSTRATIONS 



PRECEDING 


PAGE 

NEW CONSTRUCTION 

208 

MAP 

208 


-V- 
































































































RED DEER,1893 

(Looking east along Ross Street) 


(Photograph obtained, from Mrs. T.A.G-aetz) 











55 th St 











CHAPTER I 

ORIGINS AND EARLY DEVELOPMENT 

In September,1953 delegates of the Canadian 
Chamber of Commerce visited Red Deer. Their assessment 
of the town*s importance in Alberta affairs is given in 
a newspaper report. "Red Deer is about the half-way mark 
in the two hundred miles separating Calgary and Edmonton, 
Alberta*s biggest cities.The choice farmlands of Central 
Alberta and oil and gas discoveries have created 
a need for another hub between Calgary and Edmonton 
and Red Deer apparently is it. 

“Its population now is approaching ten thousand, 
three times what it was at the end of the war. 

"Red Deer is blessed in its location.Downtown its wide, 
busy streets are typically western , but its location on 
the Red Deer River, with its broad,rising banks and 
woods gives the residential area the appearance of parklands. 

"If Red Deer has a rival as the hub of Central 

1 

Alberta it is probably Ponoka to the north. " 

Red Deer is not only blessed in its location,as 
the report says,but owes its very existence to its 
position,which is ninety-three miles from Calgary and 
ninety-eight from Edmonton.The present city occupies parts 


1. The Calgary Albertan .September 26,1953 


-1- 






- 2 - 


of sections 8,9,15,16,17,20,21,township 38,range 27, 

meridian. 

west of the fourth^ As yet there is very little building 

east of 40th Avenue, which is the road allowance 

between sections 15 and 16. However,informed opinion 

2 

is that the city will grow to the east and south. 

The fifth survey meridian, which is 114 degrees 
west longitude,just touches the eastern outskirts of 
Calgary,and passes through Burnt Lake,which is eight 
miles west of Red Deer.If a straight line is drawn from 
Calgary to Edmonton,Red Deer lies about four miles 
west of the point at which this line crosses the Red Deer 
River.This fact may have some bearing on recent proposals 
to re-route Number Two Highway,although the primary 
purpose of any diversion would be to avoid the traffic of 
a growing centre. 

Many lakes lie close to ^ed Deer.Among these is the 
popular summer resort of Sylvan Lake , with a permanent 
population of more than a thousand people,and between five 
and ten thousand during July and August.This resort is 
fifteen miles west of Red Deer on Number Eleven Highway 
which runs to Rocky Mountain House.Gull Lake, a much 
larger body of water than Sylvan Lake,is twenty-five miles 
to the north-west of Red Deer,and Pine Lake,which is said 
to resemble Windermere in the English Lake Country,is 
thirty miles to the south-east of the city.Smaller bodies 
of water are Jackfish Lake and Blackfalds Lake,both about 
six miles to the north, and the two G-aetz Lakes which are 


2.Dennis Cole ( Town Planner) 





















■ 






. 






■ 


. 

















































- 3 - 


in the Wildlife Park on the eastern outskirts of the city. 

3 

The altitude of down-town Red Deer is 2,819 feet,while 

the surrounding hills on which part of the city is built 

have an elevation of approximately 3,000 feet.This 

difference in elevation has a bearing upon the Weather 

Bureau*s official temperature readings , which usually 

give a Red Deer temperature four or five degrees lower 

than at Edmonton.However,Red Deer readings are for the 

valley,and readings taken on the hills correspond closely 

to those reported for Edmonton.With regard to temperatures 

it should be mentioned that during the first period of 

settlement in the 1890's the Red Deer district acquired a 

bad name for frost,even oats failing to mature on 

frequent occasions.Discouraged by these setbacks many of 

the first settlers left the region and established themselves 
4 

elsewhere. The mean temperature now is given as thirty-six 

degrees.On the average rain falls on eighty days in the year, 

although frequently the showers bring very little moisture , 

as is shown by the fact that the mean annual precipitation is 

5 

only twenty inches. Hail occurs occasionally in the area, 
but severe storms have not struck the city itself for 
many years. 

From the standpoint of geology the underlying rocks 
in the Red Deer area belong to the Paskapoo formation of 
the early Tertiary Age.These rocks are shales and sandstones 


3. Geodetic Survey of Canada, Red Deer Bench Mark 

4. W.P.Code ( Pioneer),-oral statement 

5. Government of Alberta; Economic Survey of the 

City_ of Red Deer ,April.1949.p.1 — 











































. 








* 




. 



























































- 4 - 

with some quartzite.In the region of the East Bridge, 

which is seven miles straight east of town,the impressions 

of leaves and "branches are clearly defined in the strata. 

A small deposit of volcanic ash is found near the bridge 

but although this material is exactly the same as "Dutch 

Cleanser" it is too small a deposit to have any commercial 

significance.Oil exploration has been carried out 

extensively in the East Bridge area,and production has been 

obtained at a number of wells. 

In the Red Deer district the ancient glaciers left 

definite evidence of their work."The Divide",a long,high 

ridge about six miles east of the city,is a glacial 

6 

moraine.East and north of the city the river has cut its way 

through this ridge.A small stream has cut a deep gorge 

a short distance from the river channel itself.Between 

these two canyons is a high,narrow ridge of land about one- 

half mile long and in places only thirty feet wide.This 

feature,known as "The Hogsback",has long been a landmark 

in the area,and John McDougall has mentioned it in one of 

7 

his books. 

The black soil of the area has a depth of at least 

a foot and is very fertile.This soil has three times 

as much nitrogen and organic matter as is found in the 

8 

brown or gray wooded soils of the province.On two occasions, 
in 1947 and 1948,J.S.Alsopp won the world wheat championship 


6. R.L.Whitney ( Geology Instructor);oral statement 

8,Government of Alberta; Economic Survey of the 
City of Red Deer ,p.1 

7. John McDougall;Saddle,Sled and Snowshoe 

William Briggs,Toronto,1910,p.72 * 



















9 

with grain grown on a farm close to Red Deer. 

Deposits of coal are found in the area,especially along 

the river.For many years coal has been brought in by wagon 

or truck from Ardley,In the depression years of the 1930's 

a number of small mines were operated along the river, 

sometimes by only one or two men,who sold the coal to 

10 

truckers for as little as one dollar per ton. To-day farmers 
buy local coal from the Johnston and the Lynesse Mines,but 
there is no longer a market for solid fuel in the city 
itself because in 194? the North-West Utilities brought in 
gas from the Viking field.At present Red Deer is the 
southern terminus of the company's pipe line. 

The natural vegetation consists of grasslands, 
interspersed with clumps of poplar and willow.Marge spruce, 
sometimes with a diameter of three feet at the base,grow 
along the rivers and on most steep north slopes.In early time 
that is,before 1900,many areas which are now densely wooded 
were clear of trees.The change has resulted from the building 
of roads which act as checks to the spreading of fires. 

In pioneer times forest and prairie fires were very 

common. The Hospital Hill,now well covered with a grove of 

11 

poplars,was open land in the early days of the settlement. 

Another example was given by a farmer near Pine Lake who 

said that forty years ago his father cut hay from a part of 

12 

the farm now overgrown with trees and underbrush. On the 

9. Edmonton Journal,November 10,1953,P.73 

10. E.A.Wood (Reporter);oral statement 

11. G-eorge Best (Pioneer);oral statement 

12. John Hodgkinson;oral statement 

















■ 6 - 


north slope of Michener Hill fire-blackened stumps 

are testimony of ancient fires , although this 

part of the district has not been burned over within 

the memory of the oldest settler. 

The name Red Deer comes from the river which 

traverses the town.Because a large number of deer were 

found along its banks,this river was known to the Grees 

13,14 

as the Waskasoo Seepee or Red Deer River. The creek which 

flows through the town still bears the Indian name, as does 

Waskasoo Avenue,one of the chief thoroughfares of the town. 

The Indians had a legend which accounted for the beautiful 

valley where the creek and river join.They said it was 

a resting place of Napia,the deity who created all 

beautiful things in this Western land . Because he was going 

to sleep there Napia took great pains to create the 

clear lakes, the tree-claeE. hills and the winding streams 

15 

which still mark the Red Deer country. 

The Red Deer River has a length of 385 miles in its 

winding course from the mountains to the point at which it 

16 

joins the South Saskatchewan. The iower part of the river, 
near Drumheller,cuts through the Bad Lands, and it is 
there that the great beds of dinosaur bones are found. 

Here sixty million years ago roamed the duck-billed 
dinosaurs,the tricerotops and the chasamosaurus. Wo one. 


13. Annie L. Gaetz; The Park Country ,Wrigley Printing 

Company, Vancouver ,1948 , p.99 

14. James G.MacGregor; Blankets and Beads . Institute 

of Applied Art , Edmonton , 1939 , p.18 

15. Edgar Woods;oral statement 

16. J ames G. MacGregor; op . cit. ,p.l6 






















. ' 



: 




. 














. . ‘ 

. 

' 







































- 









- 7 - 


however,has found any fossils of importance in the 
Red Deer district itself. 

The Blindman,an important tributary,joins the Red Deer 

a few miles downstream from the city.This river received 

its name from an incident in very early times.A party of 

Gree hunters suffered so severely from snow blindness that 

they had to camp beside the stream until their eyes were 

healed. The Indians gave the river the name ’’Blindman” 

because of this happening. On the first survey map of the 

17 

region the stream is named ’’Blindman*s River”. 

Morton places the Red Beer district well within the 

18 

range claimed by the Blood Indians. To the north of the 

river lay the area dominated by the Hudson’s Bay Company, 

and to the south of the stream was the region in which the 

whiskey runners and other free traders from the United States 

19 

carried on their operations. ”North of the Red Deer the 
Hudson’s Bay Company and some free traders controlled the 
trade and commerce of the whole land. South of the Red Deer, 
and within recent years,Americans,or Long Knives,as they were 
called,had established some trading posts and wolfers* 
headquarters,and,as rumor had it,at these southern posts 
made-on-the-spot whiskey was the chief article of trade. 

North of the Red Deer river the pacific and humane policy 
of the Hudson’s Bay Company made a wonderful difference 

17. Annie L. Gaetz;op. cit.,p.64 

18. Arthur S. Morton; A History of the Canadian West . 

Thomas Nelson and Sons,Toronto (No date),p.258 

19. E.A.Corbett; Blackfoot Trails .McMillan Company of 

Canada,Toronto,1934,p.4 












- 8 - 


20 

in conditions." 

John McDougall ! s books have several references to the 

Red Deer region.On one occasion he speaks of travelling 

south on the r, Blackfoot Trail 11 and crossing the Red D eer 

21 

at the location of the present city.On this trip John and his 

father visited the Hogsback in the canyon region.The grandeur 

of the scenery greatly impressed the two men as they gazed 

down from the steep banks which towered six or seven hundred 

feet above the river.While hunting ducks in the area John 

dropped his gun,which fired on impact,the charge of shot 

wounding the elder McDougall. The two men spent some time 

in the vicinity of the mouth of the Blindman while the 

father recovered.During this interval they prospected for 

gold."We found quite $ quantity of colors,but as this was 

dangerous country,it being the theatre of constant tribal 

war,a small party would not be safe to work here very long; 

22 

so it will be some time before this gold is washed out." 

As a point of interest,no one has ever obtained any 
quantity of gold from the Red Deer. In the years of the 
depression a number of unemployed men made an attempt to earn 
a few dollars by washing for gold.Like John McDougall they 
found colors,but not enough of the precious metal to enable 
them to earn more than fifty cents per day each. 

The original site of the Red Deer settlement was 
about three miles upstream from the present city. At this 
point there is a ford which can be used safely at nearly 

2-L.John McDougall; Saddle , Sled and Snowshoe,p.68 
22.John McDougall :ibid ..n.72 

20.John McDougall; Western Trails in the fearly 

Seventies .William Briggs,Toronto,1911,p. 10 















- 9 - 


all times.Here the Indians crossed the river on their 
journeys north and south,or west to Rocky Mountain 
House.For generations this old trail had been in use, 
running from Southern Alberta to Lone Pine,a solitary 
tree about three miles east of present-day Olds. The 
Cree name for this well-known Lone Pine was Minnie-hay- 
gwak-pask-wasksut.From Lone Pine the trail ran north to 
The Spruces,a grove of trees just north of Innisfail. 

23 

From this point it continued on to the Red Deer Crossing. 

An intersecting trail ran from Buffalo Lake to about the 

point at which Number Two Highway now crosses the Blindman, 

24 

and then west to Rocky Mountain House. The first survey maps 

refer to the Calgary Trail as the "Bow River Trail",but north 

of the Red Deer the route is described as the “Edmonton 
25 

Trail". 

Although the country along the Red Deer was frequented 
by tribes who were generally at war with each other,there 
seems to have been no battles fought in the immediate 
vicinity of the town.According to old stories,however,one 
fight did occur at Pine Lake about thirty miles to the 
south-east.There in about 1812 a Cree camp was surprised 
and its inhabitants massacred by t&e Blackfeet.Only one 
Cree escaped the slaughter,a man who had been out of the 
camp when the attack came.On his return he found the 


23. Annie L, Gaetz;op.cit.,p.4 

24. Annie L. G-aetz; ibid. , p. 69 

25. Department of the Interior,Survey Maps,1883 -1884 
















■ 











i 
























■ 












































- 10 - 


dead and mutilated bodies of his relatives and friends. 
Determined on revenge,he stalked the Blackfoot war party, 
killing six of them before they managed to slay him.After 
this incident the Indians avoided the lake,which they 
said was haunted by the spirits of the murdered Gree 
tribesmen, and which was known for many years as Ghost 
Pine Lake. 

Mr. Hugh Bower,whose farm touches the highway just 

south of town,has made a hobby of collecting Indian 

relics,especially arrow points and scrapers.He has several 

boxes of these objects,all collected within a short 

distance of Red Deer,and most from his own farm.From the places 

in which he found these flints the region along Waskasoo 

Creek must have been a favorite camping ground in early 
26 
times. 

The Indians sometimes disposed of their dead by 

placing them on platforms built in the trees.Although 

this custom had been abandoned by the time the white 

settlement began , the platforms were still to be found . 

The bodies themselves were gone. Just after the Gaetz 

family came to the district, a severe small-pox epidemic 

swept through the Indian camps, and many people died of the 

disease.The graves of some of these small-pox victims 

are on the Opie farm north-east of the Red L e er Grossing, 

27 

and some are on the Convent Hill near Number Two Highway. 


26. Hugh Bower;oral statement 

27. Annie L. Gaetz;0£.cit.,p .89 
























































































































* 


' 














- 11 - 


A map of the areas inhabited by the Canadian 

aborigines shows Red Deer well within the range of the 

28 

Blood band of the Blackfoot Confederacy. The custom of 
burial scaffolds,mentioned by Mrs. G-aetz,was a characteristic 
of this tribe.In 1858 the Blood band was estimated at 
250 tents,or about 2,000 people,but by the time of the 

29 

settlement in 1884 their numbers had fallen considerably. 

In addition to the Bloods the area seems to have been 

visited frequently by the Crees and by the Stoneys, 

with whom Mr. Raymond Gaetz traded frequently at Red Deer 
30 

Crossing. 

By Mr. G-aetz®s time most of the Indians were outwardly 
Christian,but they continued to pay some respect to their 
old deities.Sven to-day the Indians hold an annual 
Sun Dance at Rocky Mountain House, showing that the 
traditions of a race die hard.In and around Red Deer itself 
the Indians have almost all disappeared. A few are found 
mingled in with the general population. They have no 
peculiarities of dress to distinguish them from the 
whites,but because they lack training they tend to fall 
into the lower paid manual labor jobs. 

Some years ago the writer observed an old Indian 
sitting on the hillside just west of the Training School. 

It was nearly sunset,and the old man was gazing steadily 
at the town in the valley,and at the sun just touching the 


28. Dominion Government,Department of Mines; 

Map 270A,Aborigines of Canada,1932 

29. Diamond Jenness; Indians of Canada .King’s Printer, 

Ottawa,1932,p.324 

30. Raymond Gaetz; Trading with the Stoneys (Essay)1934 
























































' 

































. 














































- 12 - 


mountains in the west.The alien was strong in the land of 
his fathers;the scene symbolized the decline of his race. 

The first white man to visit the Red Deer region, 
so far as is known,was Anthony Henday.In 1754 this 
Englishman was sent out by Governor Isham of York Factory 
on Hudson Bay in an attempt to encourage the Western 
Indians to trade with the Company’s forts on the bay.On 
December 23,1754 Henday on his return from the vicinity of 
present-day Rocky Mountain House crossed a branch of the 
Waskasoo River,probably the 31indman,and continued 
southward to a high knoll,from which on the next day he 
bade farewell to the Rockies.”l had a fine view of Arsinie 

Watchie at a far distance,it being the last sight I ever 

31 

shall have of it this year.” From his route it appears 

likely that the elevation from which he had the fine view 

of the Rockies was Antler Hill,east of Innisfail.As the 

distance from the Blindman to Antler Hill is about twenty- 

five miles,Henday probably used the Red Deer Crossing 

on December 23 or 24,1754. 

With the establishment of Rocky Mountain House 

by the North West Company in 1799 at the confluence of the 

32 

Saskatchewan and Clearwater Rivers, the old Indian trail 
to the north gained importance in the life of the region. 
The crossing of the Red Deer,therefore,became more and more 
of a landmark.Red Deer still is a junction point for 
north and south traffic with that going west to Rocky 
Mountain House,sixty miles distant. 

31. Arthur S.Morton;op. cit ., p.248 

32. Arthur S.Morton; ibid ., p.463 















































































































-13 


The first building at Red Deer Grossing was a 

small cabin which had been built ,according to local 

tradition, by Addison McPherson, who used it as 

a temporary headquarters when he was hunting and trading 

with the Indians in Central Alberta. When Dr. Leonard 

Gaetz came to the area in 1884 this building was still 

standing, and served as temporary accommodation for 

33 

settlers' families. 

In 18?8 Angus McPhee, Dominion Land Surveyor, visited 

the Red Deer area and was greatly impressed by the 

agricultural possibilities of the district. Five years 

later he made an official survey of the region, making it 

possible for homesteaders to register their lands by legal 
34 

description. In 1881 before the survey was made, John T. 

Moore of Ontario visited the district as an agent for the 

Saskatchewan Land and Homestead Company, a group of Eastern 

business men who proposed to buy Western land and sell it 

to settlers. Mr. Moore bought for the company at a price of 

two dollars an acre the odd-numbered sections in a tract 

thirty miles long and eight miles wide. Rad Deer city lies 

almost exactly in the centre of the land purchased by 
35 

Mr. Moore, In accordance with government policy of that day 
the even-numbered sections were left open for homesteaders, 
unless reserved for some special purpose. By way of contrast 
with the price paid by Mr. Moore the same land to-day 
sells for a price of about seventy-five dollars an acre, 

33 , Annie" L. G-aetz;”op. ~"cit. , p. 46 

34, Government of Alberta; Economic Survey of 

the City of Red Deer, p.l 


35. Red Deer Advocate .Jubilee Edition,July 18,1934 






















' 





















- 14 - 


and even in depression years unimproved land near the 

town brought a price of over thirty dollars an acre. 

The survey maps of 1883 describe the land as M first class, 

covered with poplar and willow”.These township maps 

also show numerous large marsh areas,but with the opening 

of the country most of these low-lying places were drained. 

In 1882,just the year before the survey,the first 

agricultural settlers,Daniel Dobler and his wife,came to 

the valley of the Red Deer.They spent only a few months 

on the land they selected before they returned to 

Ontario,making the trip across the plains by ox team.They 

came back to the district in 1885, and remained until the 

36 

1890*s when they sold out and returned to Ontario. The next 

settlers were four young single men,Bob McClelland,Bill 

Kemp,and two cousins,G-eorge and Jim Beatty,who reached the 

37 

Red Deer Crossing on September 29,1882. It must have been 
a very early winter for there were over two feet of 
snow on the ground.These men chose sites for their 
homesteads and then went on to other occupations.The 
Beatty cousins joined a survey party which was working 
north of Edmonton,while the other two men found employment 
freighting for the I.G. Baker concern.About a year later 
all four men returned to Red Deer Grossing to establish 
settlers * rights on the land they had chosen. 

Mr. James Youmans,a long-time resident of Red Deer, 
was in IS 83 a missionary stationed at Whitefish Lake.In 


36. Red Deer Advocate ,July 18,1934 

37. Raymond G-aetz; The Early Settlement of Red Deer (Essay) 



















. — - — 






. 




, 




. 





V 




■ 








:.J ■ 'I 
















- ... . 





. 








. 




. 












) 


















- 15 - 


the summer of that year he travelled from Edmonton to 

Calgary by Red River cart,and in all that Journey south 

he saw no white habitation other than that of Mr. E.B. 

Glass, a missionary at Bear's Hill,ten miles south of Wetaskiwin, 

On the return trip,however,when he came to Red Deer Grossing 

he saw a log barn under construction.The building was about 

one-half mile south of the fording place on the land 

chosen by McClelland.In that same year George Beatty 

established himself about two miles south of the Red Deer 

Crossing on land which is still known as the Beatty Flats. 

In the winter of I 883 (George and William Byers arrived in 

the district,and in January,1884 Sage Bannerman, 

38 

who later operated a ferry,came to the Crossing. There were, 
therefore,several other settlers in the vicinity when Dr. 

Leonard Gaetz brought his family to the site of the present 
city in the spring of 1884. 

The Canadian Pacific Railway reached Calgary in 
August,I 883 ,and soon afterwards two partners,Leeson and 
Scott by name,established a horse-drawn stage to take 
mail and passengers to Edmonton.Leeson and Scott were 
experienced stage-coach operators,having established a 
successful business of this kind at Prince Albert.Although 
they managed the Calgary-Edmonton service themselves, 
they hiired others to do the actual driving.Even at the best 
of times travel was slow,and the stage which left Calgary 
on Monday did not reach Edmonton until Friday,but the 
settlers were pleased that they could expect a regular 


38. Red Deer Advocate ,July 18,1934 















■ 











































. 













































. 





















mail service from Calgary once every two weeks.Because 
people from a very wide area received their mail at 
the Crossing,many settlers living at places far distant 
from the present city were often described as residents of 
Red Deer.The stage operated until the coming of the 
railway in 1891. 

In the summer of 1885>after the Second Riel Rebellion, 
travel was greatly facilitated when the government 
established a ferry at the crossing of the Red Deer.Sage 
Bannerman operated the ferry until the coming of the 
railway in March,1891.After that date any travellers 
who came along the old route had to ford the river. 
Construction was started on a traffic bridge,which was 
completed two years later. 

With the establishment of the stage service from 

Calgary to Edmonton,G-. C.King, a Calgary merchant, erected 

a small log building in December 1883 at the Crossing. 

Mr. King did not plan to operate the Red Deer business 

himself,but hoped to be able to hire someone to manage it 

for him.However,he found absentee proprietorship 

impracticable under the transportation conditions 

existing in the early days,and after a few months he sold 

the business to Dr. Leonard G-aetz.This building, which 

served as a combined store and post office,was the first 

permanent trading post between Calgary and Edmonton, 

and its establishment was the beginning of Red Deer as 

40 

a distributing centre. The location of the building is 


39*Raymond G-aetz; The Great Adventure .an essay (1934) 
























. 




























1 




. 






... . w J 




. . 




























































CAIRN AT SITE OF OLD TRADING POST 
Trading Post was built in 1&33. 

This was the beginning of Red Deer as 
a distributing centre* 







THE OLD CROSSING ( LOOKING NORTH ) 

Used by the Indians long before the 
white man came to the West. 

First white man to cross - Anthony Henday, 

December, 1754o 

Red Deer started here. 

The Old Crossing was abandoned when the 
railway crossed the river at the Leonard 
Gaetz Homestead. 






- 17 - 


marked by a cairn which the Old Timers’ Association 
40 

erected in 1951.The plaque bears the following 
inscription:"This marks the site of the first trading 
post between Calgary and Edmonton,and the Old Red ^eer 
Crossing.Erected by the Old Timers’ Association in 
memory of those who pioneered the Red Deer District. 

Yr.'51. M 

The first buildings which the settlers erected were 
mainly of logs,although rough-sawn lumber became available 
after 1884 when a small,portable sawmill was imported 
and placed in operation.The typical log house in the 
region was constructed from spruce or poplar.A skilled 
axman was able to dovetail the corners of the house, 
but an average builder normally used a simple,notched 
type of corner.In the very early times the logs were used in 
the round state,but later it became customary to smooth 
both the inside and the outside surfaces with an adze.The 
pioneer often used moss or clay for chinking,but if he could 
get it he preferred to use a lime mortar,At Sylvan Lake the 
writer examined one small house which had been built by 
a Frenchman named Gerrard.The chinking in that building 
had been done by means of strips of folded newspapers 
held in place by small sticks nailed along the crevices 
between the logs.The date on the newspapers was 1900. 

The floor was generally of packed earth which was 

41 

covered by cowhides or deerskins. A simple roof was 
constructed by making one wall higher than the other 


40.See Appendix 

41.Mrs.William Cassels;oral statement 











and placing long poles across the top. If the settler 
wanted a building of greater than average width he used 
a ridge pole and built an A-shaped roof. He then co¬ 
vered the poles with a layer of hay. Long strips of sod, 
grassy side down, were placed directly on the hay. Then 
the builder placed a second layer of sod grassy side up. 
This last layer he overlapped in the manner of shingles. 

The settler considered himself lucky if a rain occurred 
soon after he finished the job, because the moisture 
caused the sods to grow together, making the whole mass 
almost impervious to rain. A properly constructed sod 
roof was very good insulation against the heat of summer 
and the cold of winter. Its disadvantage was that a 
prolonged spell of wet weather generally caused it to 
leak. 

In 1&&4? in anticipation of the needs of settlers 
for lumber two halfbreeds, Mackenzie and Wishart by name, 
began to operate a small portable sawmill on the river 

42 

flats about three miles downstream from the present city. 
One may still recognize the old mill site which is on 
the present Northey farm. Trees of considerable size 
grow up the steep bank, but one may easily discern the 
trail even after seventy years. 

In IB84 Thomas Lennie and his wife built a stopping 
house at Red Deer Crossing, just across from the combined 
store and post office established by Mr. King. Mrs. Lennie 


42. Byron Northey; oral statement 



. 

. 

. -i :.;C O' •. 

■. V:. ’ ■/ . : 

. 

• ' 

« 


. 'V ' > 

. 

4 . . 

. 

‘ , •: . * 

. 

2 ' 


. 


. 

. 





- 19 - 


was a native of the Red River country, the daughter of 
a free trader and an Indian woman. W she helped Ray 
Gaetz a very great deal when, at the age of eighteen, 
he took over the management of the little store which 
Dr. Leonard Gaetz, as mentioned previously, had bought 
from Mr. King in August 1B&4. Mrs. Lennie, who had 
experienced the uncertainties and fears of the Red River 
Rebellion, prevailed upon her English husband to leave 
Canada for the United States when word reached Red Deer 
Crossing in the spring of l£35 of the Second Riel Rebellion. 

Because stopping houses played an important part 
in early Alberta life, an account of their rough but 
welcome accommodation may be of interest.^ The one at 
Red Deer Crossing was apparently typical, and of consider¬ 
able importance. There were others at Lone Pine, (near 
Olds) and five miles south of Penhold. The proprietor 
provided a number of rough wooden bunks which were 
fastened to the walls. These bunks were filled with hay 
for a mattress but the proprietor provided no bedding. 
Firstcomers reserved this superior accommodation for 
themselves by placing their blanket rolls in the bunks. 
Usually there were only about six bunks, which meant that 
late-comers had to content themselves with a place on 
the floor on which they could spread their bedding. 


43. Raymond L. Gaetz; The Great Adventure 


44. Annie L. Gaetz; Edmonton Journal , March l£, 1953 














. 




. 












. 

. 


















t 

. 


. 



. 




. 

i. 

. 1 













. 



- 20 - 


Women travellers could secure privacy by hanging a 
blanket in front of one of the bunks. Many travellers 
had tents of their ovm which they pitched near the 
buildings for protection and company. The proprietor 
charged fifty cents for a night 1 s accommodation, which 
included one meal. Because most of the stopping-house 
owners were bachelors the bill of fare was simple and 
rough. A coarse, fatty bacon, which had green streaks 
through it, giving it the name of "rattlesnake bacon", 
bannocks, beans, tea and coffee were all that were usually 
served to the traveller. 

The first settlers within the present city limits 
arrived in 1S&4 when the Reverend Leonard Gaetz and his 
family came to the district. Their coming has been well 
described by the eldest son, Ray, who was eighteen at 
the time of their coming, and had just finished high 
school. A keen observer, he had the academic training 
necessary to record his experiences. The Gaetz family 
had a long tradition of pioneering in Canada. In 1751 
the founder of the family in the New World c rossed from 
Hanover to Nova Scotia, settling at Lunenburg. In the 
midnineteenth century a great grandson of the original 
immigrant moved to Upper Canada, where, in 1&&3 his son, 
Dr. Leonard Gaetz, was the pastor of a Methodist church 
in London .^ The nervous strain of his work was too 


45. R. L. Gaetz; The Great Adventure 














- 21 - 


great for Dr. Gaetz, and in the summer of 1&$3 his 
physician warned him that he must for a time at least 
give up active public life. 

In the Ontario of that day a spirit of restlessness 
was in the sir. Most of the good farming land of the 
province had already been settled. The young men, es¬ 
pecially from the rural communities, found an outlet for 
their energies in the United States and inthe Canadian 
West. Dr. Gaetz, although not a young man, decided to 
investigate the possibilities of obtaining suitable land 
in the North-West Territories, through which the Canadian 
Pacific Railway was building. Accordingly in September 
1$$3 he travelled to the end of steel, which at that time 
was somewhere between Moose Jaw and Medicine Hat. There 
he had the good f ortune to meet Chief Factor Richard 
Hardisty of the Hudson’s Bay Company, who, with traditional 
Western hospitality persuaded Dr. Gaetz to accompany him 
from the end of steel to Calgary and thence north to 
Edmonton. The visitor was willing and even anxious to 
make this trip because he had received very favorable 
reports of the country from John T. Moore who had visited 
the region as an agent for the Saskatchewan Land and 
Homestead Company. The intermingling of prairie and 
woodland in the vicinity of Red Deer Crossing appealed 

greatly to Dr. Gaetz, and he gave it the name which it 

46 

still bears, "The Parklands". He determined that some¬ 
where in the region he would make his home. 


46 . Raymond L. Gaetz; ojp. cit . 


















* 


. 








. 

i 


' 


. 










■ 

t 

. 

. 

. o 

. 

« 



- 22 - 


Dr. Gaetz returned to his family in London, and 
on April 1, they loaded their stock and goods for 

the long trip to the West* Because there was no line 
around the north shore of Lake Superior the journey had 
to be made through Minnesota and Dakota* They made good 
time, and on April £ reached Calgary, at that time ”a 
little frame station in a little village, whose houses 
were constructed chiefly of boards and tar-paper. But 
the glorious Alberta sun was bright with all its ac¬ 
customed power in a wonderfully radiant sky, and seemed 
to beckon the newcomers to a great heritage in a mighty 
land.”47 

The three older boys (there were ten children) Ray, 
Halley, and Clarence, left for the Red Deer River with 
their outfit. Some half-breed freighters with whom they 
travelled promised to look after them. Horses drew all 
of the Gaetz wagons except one, which was drawn by an ox 
team, and these beasts gave their driver, Halley, endless 
trouble and delay. Fortunately the weather continued 
bright and sunny, and by the afternoon of the seventh 
day they reached Red Deer Crossing. When they were only 
a short distance from their destination they looked back 
and saw a cloud of dust over the trail. "Shortly, out 
of this dust emerged the Reverend John McDougall, who 
had got it into his head to bring father up from Calgary, 


47. Raymond Gaetz; op. cit 










-23- 


and a little hundred mile jaunt for the Reverend John 

id 

was as nothing 2 !f ^ The Reverend John took the father 
and the three boys to the Beatty shack, whose occupants 
made them all most welcome. They fed the animals and 
gave the visitors a meal of ducks and prairie chicken. 

Next morning when they set out in a democrat to find a 
suitable homesite they gradually explored their way down 
along the river to t he region where Waskasoo Creek joined 
the Red Deer. Raymond Gaetz said later, "I really think 
what decided father on the location was the sight of the 
river with its beautiful trees along the banks and of the 
well-wooded hills which made such a charming background. 

Near the river, about where the traffic bridge is 
to-day, some trapper or squatter had built a ten by twelve 
shack, but he had abandoned it. The Gaetz boys moved as 
many of their possessions as possible into this shelter. 
Next morning they started to construct a home of their 
own. The boys set to work getting out logs, while the 
father went to George Beatty to secure advice on how to 
build. Beatty at once offered to look after the whole 
affair. n The next morning who should we see coming across 
the flat but four men of sacred memory—George and James 
Beatty, Bill Kemp and Bob McClelland. To make a long 


4$*Raymond L. Gaetz; op cit . 
49. Raymond L. Gaetz; op. cit . 






















! . 

* 

* 

. 


. 









-24- 

story short they laughed at the logs we had been getting 

out, went down the river about a mile, took out some fine 

spruce, hewed them, and put up the house in an unbelievably 
50 

short time.*’ The lumber for the roof and interior 
finish was secured from the recently started sawmill of 
Mackenzie and Wishart. ^ The workmanship may have been 
rough, but the newly milled spruce gave the air in the 
first home in Red Deer an unforgettably pleasant tang* 

An incident in the construction of the Gaetz home 
typifies the Western attitude of the day, "One afternoon 
when all the work was done, father called these heroes 
about him (I really must repeat their names again, George 
and Jim Beatty, Bill Kemp and Bob McClelland) and said 
to them, now men, how much do I owe you for your work, 
and then I heard one of them swear fiercely for the first 
and only time before father; they were indignant because 
father asked them to accept pay for their work,"52 


50. Raymond L. Gaetz; op. clt . 

51. Lumber produced by small Western mills of 
the ISSO*s was almost always sold in the 
rough. To allow for planing boards were 
usually slightly over the stated width and 
thickness. As a result even when dressed 
an inch board, for example, was the full 
inch in thickness. The nails used in 1&£5 
were square in section, tapering to a point, 
something like a modern horseshoe nail, 

52. Raymond L Gaetz; op. cit . 














■ t 0 

t 

♦. 

. 

■ 

. t . '. ■’> - " .... •• 

" t 

. 

. 

- 

. 


. 

* - 

, 






- 25 - 


When the men had completed the house Dr* Gaetz and 
Clarence started off with two wagons for Calgary. On 
their return they brought with them Mrs. Gaetz and the 
rest of the children. The first family had settled in 
Red Deer. 

During the first summer Dr. Gaetz and his sons ac¬ 
complished a great deal of work such as breaking land, 
building corrals and shelter for the stock, and erecting 
fences. The oxen proved especially valuable for the 
chore of breaking. The family had brought large supplies 
of non-perishable foods, flour, beans, rice, and sugar 
with them, but the country itself provided a good deal* 

No closed season existed and wild birds and animals were 
a source of fresh meat. Duck eggs could be found around 
the sloughs. Gardens did well on the breaking. 

At the end of August Mr. G. C. King, who owned a 
store in Calgary, and who, as we have seen, had established 
a trading post on the Red Deer in 1S&3, came to visit the 
Gaetz family, whom he had met previously. Mr. King wished 
to dispose of his store at the Crossing as it was too far 
from Calgary for him to manage. He persuaded Dr. Gaetz 
to purchase the business, paying for it as the stock was 
sold. The eldest son, Ray, as already mentioned, took 




. 




. 

- v; . ,* 










. 




: d> ■ 


. 

. 

. : . ' , • . ■ c 

. • 




















. 


. 




. 


. 

. : . 

























- 26 - 

charge of the post* f, At that moment I was the only white 

trader between Calgary and Edmonton, an honor I assumed 

with great timidity, for I knew nothing whatever about 

trade, naturally, having just come out of high school. 

However, everyone of us had to do his bit, and this 

53 

seemed to be mine.” ^ 

A few days after Ray had taken charge a half-breed 

brought in three small skins. The youthful trader had no 

idea of what they were worth, but wanted to disguise his 

ignorance. He boldly offered twenty-five cents per skin. 

The half-breed accepted so quickly that Ray realized that 

something was wrong. He hurried across the trail to the 

stopping house where Mrs. Lennie told him that he should 

have paid five cents per skin for the furs, which were 

muskrat. Ray, realizing that the Indians would be almost 

his only customers during the winter, arranged with Mrs. 

Lennie to assist him in his trading deals. She also taught 

him the Cree language, and by spring he had mastered the 

native tongue sufficiently well to graduate into the Indian 

54 

trading class* 

Incidentally, shortly before Mr. Gaetz f s death the 
writer asked him what furs he had obtained from the Indians. 
Mr. Gaetz enumerated the common ones, mink, beaver, muskrat, 
wolf, lynx, fisher, coyote, and then hesitated for some 


53. Raymond L. Gaetz; op. cit. 

54. Raymond L. Gaetz; op . cit . 





„ . 

















. 

, 

.. I , .. ‘1 -v . ■ " v 

* 

. ■ . ;: ? r . ; • ' , ' '..-r ?v. ; j. 

* 

... 

■ ;; •„ . : ■; 7,'r.:. v v-'“ 

. 










. 






. 

• ' ' . •' . ' ‘ . . .... . .J 







-27- 


time, saying, "There was another one, I remember the 
Indian name for it perfectly, but I cannot think of the 
English term." The name actually was the wolverine but 
the incident shows how much his trade had been with the 
Indians because after the lapse of half a century the 
Indian term was recalled. 

Frequently the Indians would come on a cold, still 
night in winter when the temperature was ten degrees below 
zero, or even colder. Sounds would carry enormous distances 
but generally the silence was so complete that it was 
almost oppressive. The Stoneys had developed the habit 
of establishing a camp for their women and children some 
distance from the post while the men and older boys came 
on alone to do the trading. When Ray heard the crunching 
of snow under the feet of horses he knew that his customers 
would soon be with him,. Therefore, he hurriedly filled 
the stove to capacity with wood, placed on a huge kettle 
filled with water, and laid out a large supply of tobacco. 
The members of the Indian band unsaddled their horses and 
set the packs of fur against the walls of the post. The 
headman waited until all his party were ready, and then 
he led them, twenty or so in number, into the store. 
Etiquette demanded that all shake hands ceremoniously, 
and that each person, even down to boys of ten or twelve, 
be given a plug of tobacco. After these formalities had 



















* 

' 

. 

* 

« ■ 


I 




. O 


















■ 

t‘ • ‘ ' . ■ t 

; ‘ . 

' 





been complied with the natives sat down on the floor, as 
close as they dared to the stove, which by now was red hot* 
"While they were silently filling their pipes (we 
felt that they were really too chilled to speak) we were 
exceedingly active, for our duty was to serve supper to 
them, which we did with a hearty good will, for although 
red men, strangely clad, were they not Jiumans and our 
brothers, and had they not had a bitterly cold day f s 
journey without a bite to eat all through the day? Great 
slices of bacon cut from such sides as we don’t see now¬ 
adays, were put in the heavy iron frying pans, and presently 
the store dimmed with the gathering clouds from the sizzling 
pans* Our nostrils were regaled with a most delicious 
smell from the cooking sowbelly, and other smells emanating 
from about the stove that were not quite so pleasing*"55 

Sacks were spread on the floor to serve as tablecloths 
and on them were placed the dishes, huge quantities of 
hard-tack biscuit, tins of thick treacle, and occasionally 
even butter. When the latter was available it was generally 
very strong and u self-reliant. M After the tea had been 
thoroughly boiled, the Stoney word for "eat", phonetically 
"ho-mun-dink-touch", was pronounced, but not with the 
results one might expect. 


55* R. L. Gaetz; op . cit 








-29- 


"These half-starved men did not rush at the food, as 
some of their white brothers might have done, but with a 
good deal of dignity gathered around the food and partook 
of a real meal. "^6 

After they had eaten the Indians clustered about the 
stove and smoked. Ray cleared away the dishes and sacks 
before he joined the natives. 

"The next half-hour would be spent in gossip. Jacob 

Rain would tell about losing a horse. John Brown Bear 

would tell about having a daughter, telling it in a way 

that suggested to us that he would have been much prouder 

had it been a boy, but perhaps we misinterpreted his 
57 

grunts." 

After he and his followers had met the demands of 
etiquette, the leader would voice the question all wanted 
to hear, "Is fur good?" By this he wanted to know the 
price. The trader always gave a non-committal reply to 
this traditional query. The headman then sent one of the 
boys to bring in one of the packs of furs. The leader 
unbound the package and spilled the furs about on the floor. 
After he had done this task he always turned back to the 
stove in pretended indifference. Ray, although nearly 


5.6 1 R. L. Gaetz; op. cit 
57. ibid . 
















. 

, 




. 








. 








... 









' 

<■- 

. 


. 










. 






















-30- 


blinded by the smoke and suffocated by the heat and fumes, 
had to match this indifference with his own, lighting his 
pipe and leisurely strolling over to the furs to sort and 
value them. When he had decided on the price he could 
afford to offer he would inform the headman of the amount 
in pounds sterling because the Hudson’s Bay Company had 
taught the Indians the English money system. The actual 
value placed on a pack might amount to a considerable sum, 
often as much as fifty pounds. The common furs traded 
at the Red Deer store were beaver, bear, fisher, marten, 
mink, lynx, an occasional wolverine, skunk, wolf and coyote. 

After the trader had made his offer, an animated 
discussion, in which even the youngest took part, occurred 
among the Indians. When they had satisfied themselves 
that the trader would pay no more they accepted his offer. 
The settling of the prices for this first lot seemed to 
content them for the evening, because from then on they 
accepted his valuations without question. 

Having put the contents of the first pack out of the 
way Ray asked the owner what he wanted to buy with the 
money which he now had to his credit. rf The question seemed 
to come to him as a complete surprise; he just hadn’t 











•• 















* 



„ 




. 




. 


. 






. 


. 




. 








, 


































-31- 


thought of that, so he might turn to his ten-year-old son 
who had accompanied him, and ask the lad what they would 
have. And what do you suppose was the first thing on 
the order? Five dollars 1 worth of ribbon I and then perhaps 
another five dollars 1 worth— then colored prints, shawls 
and other fabrics, I soon found that it was well to 
suggest to them after they had spent half their amount 
that they should get some grub, ammunition and other 
necessities, to which they generally agreed as they had 
apparently forgotten such trifles. It was strange— in 
fact an interesting study in primitive man*s psychology, 
that while these necessaries were forgotten, no sooner 
had his sum been exhausted and no more balance due him 
on his fur, than his subjective mind rose to the surface 
of his consciousness, and reminded him that he needed 
food and ammunition above all things, and that the trader 
could hardly refuse him these vital necessities on credit, ft 
A night of this kind proved long and tiring because 
it might be three o T clock in the morning before Ray had 
finished all that he had to do. During this long process 
under no condition was a door or window to be opened. 

Relief from the heat, smoke and odors only came when Ray 
retired to a little room which he had partitioned off at 
the back of the store. 





-32- 


ff I would throw open my window, no matter if it was 
sixty below—the cooler the better, for my poor head was 
nearly splitting. Then to the sound of the frost ripping 
the ice in the nearby river, the cracking of the logs in 
the walls of the store, and the cry of a coyote in the 
woods down the river, I would drop asleep. Where would 
my Indian friends be when I retired from the scene? In 
the store of course, and no place else. I traded with 
them from the fall of 1$$4 until the spring of 1&91, 
during which period they made about five visits each winter, 
and in all that time I never knew them to take so much as 
a match off the counter ! TT 

During the remainder of the night the Indians repaired 
their gear. In the early morning they tapped lightly on 
the door of his little room as a sign for him to get up 
and prepare breakfast for them. He tried leaving out food, 
but regardless of this they would never prepare their own 
meals. When they had everything ready for departure they 
would all c ome back inside the store and shake hands in 
a very formal manner. The visit was a combination of a 
commercial transaction and a social occasion. 

"Did I like these fellows? Certainly I did. I got 
to know them, know their families, their hopes and their 
ambitions, and some of the trivial details of their lives, 













. 








I- , 


.. 

. 

. 








I 








* 












. 






. 








. 










■ 











-33- 


and to know them as I did in those days was to like them, 
and I would feel a bit lonely as I saw them go off in the 
half light of those early mornings, and a bit sorry for 
them too, for I realized that I represented just the 
trickling of a great tide of white immigration that would 
ultimately swamp them, and rob them of a heritage that 
their children could never enter into*” 5& 

Soon after their arrival the Gaetz parents began to urge 
that a school be provided for the seven young children of 
the district, five from their own family and two McClelland 
children. Bob McClelland had married his brother’s widow, 
and now kept a stopping house at Red Deer Crossing* In 
1$S6 the agitation bore fruit, and led to the establishment 
of the first school between Calgary and Edmonton. It was 
known as tT The Red Deer Central Protestant Public School 
District Number 104 of the North West Territories.” 59 
Because matters of land title were often a trial to Western 
settlers in the l$$G T s, a simple method of overcoming 
the difficulty was found by building the school on an unused 
road allowance. This location, half way between the Gaetz 
homestead and the Red Deer Crossing, took into account 


5$. R. L. Gaetz; Trading with the Stoneys 
59 • Government of Alberta; Economic Survey of 


the City of Red Deer p.2 
























. 










I 

* 














. . ( 








. 












, ' 







-34- 


the distribution of population. The building, which was 
of logs, stood on about the present site of the Cronquist 
house. George Wilbert Smith, who later married the 
eldest daughter of the Gaetz family, was the first teacher } 
with Dr. Leonard Gaetz as chairman of the Board. 

The 1886 building, which was erected by voluntary labor, 
was certainly not pretentious. One of the students who 
attended the Crossing School, as it was called, in 1890 
left an account of her impressions of it. Tf The unpainted 
door, placed exactly in the middle of the front of the 
building, led into a dimly lighted oblong room, guiltless 
of paint, whitewash, polish or decoration. On either side 
were small, not too clean windows. Walls, ceiling and 
floor boasted the natural wood finish, fashionable in the 
West at that period. The space immediately in front of 
the door was occupied by a large, rusty box stove, whose 
pipes ran the length of the room, ascending to the roof 
at the far end. The chimney was, as usual, a tin stove 
pipe. For the teacher there was a small desk and a kitchen 
chair. To the right of the room as one entered were ranged 
about six homemade double desks, most uncomfortable.” ^1 
The Red Deer school was typical of those in Western Canada 
in 1836. 


60. Mina Cole: The First Red Deer School 

61. Mina Cole: Essay ; Red Deer*s First School 

TmTss Cole att endecT in 13951 















- 35 - 


After the coming of Dr. Gaetz to the district in 1S&4 
there was no great influx of settlers. Sage Bannerman 
arrived at the Crossing in January, 1&$4, and the Reverend 
Isaac Gaetz came in 1B&5 and built the second house in what 
is now Red Deer City. John Halgren and John J. Gaetz came 
in 1&£5 and took up land. Mr. Gaetz f s land is now 
part of the Provincial Training School premises, and Mr. 
Halgren 1 s is four miles east on the ”Coal Trail” to the 
mines on the Red Deer River. Travellers between Calgary 
and Edmonton always made the Crossing their stopping place, 
and Indians from a wide area came to trade there, but 
Dr. Gaetz, who was keenly interested in the prosperity of 
the place in which he had made his home felt that the 
government should be urged to establish a railway. From 
the standpoint of a general western development his work 
in this regard played no small part in the decision to 
build a line between Calgary and Edmonton. In l£&6 he 
journeyed to Ottawa where he showed Sir John Carling, the 
Minister of Agriculture, samples of grain which he had 
grown on his farm. Oats, which weighed 53 pounds to the 
bushel, completely out-classed some Scotch oats which 
Dr. Saunders, director of experimental farms, had brought 
over as a standard for Canada. ^3 


62. Red Deer Advocate ; Jubilee Edition, July IS, 1934 

63. Red Deer Advocate ; Jubilee Edition, July 1^,1934 


























- 




■ 






# 

* 




# 








■ 



. 









* 






„ 

' 

. 

. 

. 

■ 

. 













-36- 


When James Ross, William (afterwards Sir William) 
MacKenzie, and Daniel (later Sir Daniel) Mann came before 
parliament to secure aid in money and land for their 
proposed line through the heart of Alberta, they called 
Dr. Gaetz east to testify as to the value of the land. 

After hearing him a parliamentary committee decided that 
the land was potentially valuable for settlement, and 
that MacKenzie and Mann should be given assistance to 
enable them to build the Calgary-Edmonton line without 
further delay. ^4 

The Department of Agriculture published and distributed 
Dr. Gaetz T s evidence in the form of a thirty-five page 
booklet entitled tf Six Years T Experience of a Farmer in 
the Red Deer District n . The pamphlet bears the date Feb. 

26, l£90, and no doubt was influential in dispelling the 
opinion that land in Northern Alberta, as it was then called, 
was worthless. Dr. Gaetz described weather and crop 
conditions at some length. He stated that he had been 
warned not to go to Alberta because it never rained there.65 
However, when he reached the location he had chosen, he 
wondered if the rain would ever stop, because it rained at 


64. Red Deer Advocate; Jubilee Edition, 

JuIy“T§7 I m - 


65. Leonard Gaetz; Six Years T Experience as a 
Farmer in the Red Deer District. " 


















































, 




. 






. 




. 




. 












. 



-37- 


short intervals from early June to August 17* Streams 
and sloughs were full to overflowing. Crops and gardens 
planted on that year f s breaking did exceptionally well* 

The following winter, that of 1&&4-&4, the time of the 
Rebellion, was very mild with little snow. He had seeded 
land in March, and a heavy snowfall gave abundant moisture 
for germination. The next winter was very severe, with 
snow lying on the ground until April. Although the summer 
of 1&86 was drier than the preceding one, crops did well. 

The next two years were good growing years, although a 
severe frost on July 11, 1&£7 caught the barley when it 
was just heading out. The winter of 1&&3-39 was the mild¬ 
est he had ever experienced, with no snow. This resulted 
in a lack of spring moisture, and the seed did not germinate. 

Rains finally did come that year at the first of July, 
but they were too late to produce good crops. The next 
winter 1&&9-90, Dr. Gaetz considered to be the coldest 
he had experienced in Alberta. He was confident, though, 
that the heavy snow would produce good crop conditions 
in the spring. 

Dr. Gaetz f s efforts, along with other factors, pro¬ 
duced results, and in 1&90 the first sod was turned on 
the Calgary-Edmonton Railway. Leonard Gaetz attended 





* 

* 


, 


- 

,-■■■■ • f ■'1 

. 





■ 
















i 






, 

' 

. 

i S) . - r 








i >11 








. 
























-33- 


the opening ceremonies, and indeed was one of the chief 
speakers* ^6 •pfre contractors pushed the grading forward 
rapidly, and by winter the work had reached the Red Deer 
River, where, during the cold months, men built a bridge* 

By June, 1391, steel had reached to Red Deer and the 
construction trains carried some freight and passengers 
as well as the loads of building materials. 

It seemed certain that a townsite would be established 
at the point at which the railway crossed the Red Deer. 

In true Western fashion the inhabitants of the tiny 
hamlet at the Old Crossing dreamed of fortunes from the 
sale of building lots. The engineers had surveyed three 
possible routes, one at the ancient crossing, one at the 
Leonard Gaetz farm, and one downstream at the site of the 
Northey farms of to-day. The settlers were sure that the 
Old Crossing would be chosen, because it already had a 
nucleus of settlement, but the contractors permitted a 
"leak" of information that they actually favored the down¬ 
stream route. A meeting was held with MacKenzie, Ross 
and Mann at Dr. Gaetz T s house. Dr. Gaetz, his son, Halley, 
and his brother Isaac, offered the builders six hundred 
acres of land to cross at their holdings. This grant 

induced the contractors to put the station and the bridge 

67 

in their present location. 


66. R. L. Gaetz; The Great Adventure 

67. Red Deer Advocate ; July 13, 1934 







* 


, , ; ■ : ' I - • • < 



























. 

. 






. 

’ 







- 


. 


. 






-39- 


In 1953 the only building at the Red Deer Crossing, 
the "Old Crossing" as it came to be called after the coming 
of the railway in 1&91, is a restoration of Fort Normandeau. 
This old log building played a part in the Riel Rebellion 
of 1384-&5, and, although no shots were ever fired at an 
enemy from it, it helped to maintain peace in the trouble¬ 
some days of the Rebellion. Its very location indicated 
the fundamental importance of Red Deer in western develop¬ 
ment. It was and is in the centre of the developed part 
of Alberta, and the Red Deer River is a natural dividing 
line between the north and the south. 

The basic causes of the rebellion were apparent to 
the early settlers before any actual outbreak occurred. 

The half-breeds foresaw the inevitable end of the life 
which they understood and the establishment of a new order 
which they did not understand if the trickles of white 
settlement became a flood. Economic distress added to 
their discontent. The feeling of unrest spread from the 
half-breeds to the tribes. 

The settlers began to notice a change in the Indian 
attitude some months before violence occurred. In 1&$3 
relations in the Red Deer region had been very good, the 
Indians helping the settlers to find strayed animals, and 
the settlers providing the natives with meals on frequent 



















t - 


- : • t >• ^ ; 


. 






■■■VC 

* 

: 


. 


. f 


. 




. • 






* 




. 














-40- 


occasions, but by April 1&&5 a large number of Indians 
had camped on the north bank of the river, opposite the 
tiny trading post, and their attitude had become distinctly 
menacing. Some of the more belligerent ones openly 
boasted that they would kill the settlers and appropriate 
their possessions. && The more intelligent, though, 
realized that they could not win a war in which their only 
source of arms and ammunition would be their white enemies# 
An example of the change in attitude occurred on 
the afternoon of April 11, 1#$5 when Mrs. Gaetz was 
terrified by the sight of a dozen horsemen, all decked 
in war paint, all chanting the war cry, and all shooting 
off their muzzle-loaders, approaching her farm home. 

The men of her family were all away engaged in breaking 
land. The Indians walked into the house without knocking 
and demanded food in a belligerent manner. Fortunately 
a large pot of beans was already cooking on the stove, 
and Mrs. Gaetz was able to serve the natives a meal of 
beans, bread, meat and tea. Etiquette and custom among 
the Indians demanded that they leave their weapons away 
from the table when eating, but on this occasion they 
kept them right at hand. However they made no attempt 
to molest Mrs. Gaetz and voiced no threats. After they 
had eaten they rode off quietly. ^9 


6$. Annie L. Gaetz; The Park Country 9 p# 20 
69. R. L. Gaetz; oral statement 








. 






0 





















. 








* 












* 

* 












J r . > . . ‘ . . • ■ • . 











-41- 


Late that day a rider from the north, his horse 
nearly dead from exhaustion, came to the trading post 
where the young Ray was alone. He was a government 
courier going south to Calgary. His duty was to warn any 
settlers that they should proceed to the southern town 
without delay. A few days previously the white settlers 
in the Red Deer region had discussed the matter of leaving 
Red Deer Crossing, but had decided to wait until the 
situation became clear. The courier’s news and advice 
decided the matter f or them and by noon of April $th the 
Gaets family, Emily Parry, George and Hatty Galloway, 

John Stewart, George Beatty and Bob McClelland, the total 
white population remaining in Central Alberta at that time, 
met at Red Deer Crossing to begin the trip south. They 
decided to leave in full daylight rather than to try to 
sneak away under cover of darkness. Their bold front was 
successful. Although a number of Indians gathered to 
watch the departure, no attempt was made to attack the 
whites. As the party travelled south to Calgary they 
passed through a land from which all settlers had fled. 
Elaborate precautions were maintained to guard against 
surprise. The only hostile act they encountered was one 
night when SDme half-breeds fired rifle shots in an un¬ 
successful attempt to stampede the horses. Although the 




. 
















. 

' 




• . • 


u 















■ 

' 

. 


- 
















-42- 


trip to Calgary normally took five days, the refugees did 
not spare their animals, and completed their journey in 
three days. By way of contrast even a slow train goes 
from Red Deer to Calgary in three hours, and automobile 
drivers cover the distance in about two hours. Emily 
Parry, later Mrs. T. A. Gaetz, was fifteen in 1835 when 
she made the trip to Calgary. She died in November 1953. 
The improvements in transportation in Alberta which she 
saw in her lifetime are almost beyond belief. In 1$&5 
the population of the valley where she lived consisted of 
one family. In 1953 there were ten thousand people in 
the same area. 

Although the men from Red Deer Crossing stayed at 
Calgary for only three days, the women and children 
remained there for several weeks. Before they returned 
to the Red Deer River the men obtained a supply of govern¬ 
ment ammunition to use to protect themselves if they should 
be attacked. After the rebellion the Gaetz boys tried 
these cartridges, and found them worthless. During the 
absence of the settlers from Red Deer Crossing half-breed 
scouts broke into the trading post to secure supplies 
for which the federal government afterwards paid Dr. Gaetz. 
Except for this trifling incident no property loss 
occurred in the wide area centring on the Red Deer Crossing. 






















... 

. 


. 

■ 









. 


. 


, 

, 



. 






















-43- 


On April 25th the First Division of the Alberta Field 
Force, with a train of one hundred and fifty-six wagons, 
reached the Red Deer and forded the river without incident, 
although the stream was rising rapidly.Three days 
later the Second Division of the force, somewhat handi¬ 
capped by a nine-pounder gun of which they were inordinately 
proud, could not make the crossing of the wide, swift¬ 
flowing and treacherous stream, as they described it. 

They hastily built a raft from logs which they f ound on 
the spot, and two men swam to the north bank, taking with 
them a long rope made by tieing picket lines together. 

By means of this raft the men crossed the stream. On the 
last trip the gun was the main part of the load. The 
rope broke and the raft drifted about three miles before 
it grounded on the north shore. In 1940, in a gravel 
pit which would be about five miles downstream from the 
Old Grossing workers found a four-pound cannon ball several 
feet from the surface. At first people accepted the 
theory that this was a shot lost in 1&&5* However, this 
explanation is not likely, because the shot is the wrong 
size and there is no record of the 18#5 forces having 
any cannon other than their nine pounder. Military men 


70. Annie L. Gaetz; The Park Country ,p.2? 














■ 

V-- 

' 

. 

t • 


. 






. 






. 

t 

. 


. 












RESTORATION OF FORT NORMANDEAU 
Originally constructed in June, 1885. 
The building had two storeys and was 
protected by a moat and palisade. 













-44- 


have pointed out that in 1835 the artillery did not use 
solid shot. It is probably a relic of a still earlier 
era when fur traders mounted small brass cannon on some 
of their forts as at Rocky Mountain House. 

The Mounted Police decided that the Red Deer Crossing 
was an excellent place to attempt to capture any possible 
fugitives who might seek to escape from Northern Alberta 
to the United States. Therefore, twelve members of the 
Mounted Police and twenty soldiers of the 65th Regiment 
from Montreal were stationed at Red Deer Crossing where 
the soldiers under the command of Lieutenant Normandeau 
built a fort. This building, which was named Fort 
Normandeau in honor of the young commanding officer, 
served to overawe any possible troublemakers in Central 
Alberta. The authorities also stationed at the fort twelve 
Mounted Police who were to conduct extensive patrols through¬ 
out Central Alberta.^ 

By the end of June the soldiers had finished building 
the fort, which stood about a quarter mile south and a 


71. Annie L. Gaetz; op. cit . p.29 

French names predominate in the muster roll 
of the soldiers at the fort: Lieutenant 
Normandeau, Sergeant C.Duchesny, Sergeant A. 
Demers, Sergeant A. Rideau, Corporal Jas. Gingre, 
Corporal J. Rivet, Corporal A. Levesque, Private 
E. Leclerc,Private A. Leblanc, Private N. Lamarcbe 
Private C. Wilson, Private D. Francour, Private 
N. Simard, Private A. Rousseau, Private N. 

Desmarteau, Private J. Vigor, Private J. Traynor, 
Private M. Corrigan, Private N. Gervais. 








-45- 


quarter mile east of the actual fording place. In size 
the sod-roofed structure was twenty-eight feet by twenty- 
four feet, two storeys in height. The soldiers built an 
eight foot palisade around the fort, and also dug a 
moat eight feet deep aid ten feet wide about the place. 

The ditch was kept filled with water from the river. 

Because of its position and strength the fort was con¬ 
sidered by many to be potentially as important as Edmonton. 
It was, however, never tested in action. Shortly after 
they had completed the construction of the fort the 
soldiers left for Edmonton, but the police detachment 
remained at Fort Normandeau. In 1399 the fort building 
was moved to the Cornett homestead in the Waskasoo district, 
south of Red Deer. The palisade was destroyed by a prairie 
fire, and the moat was filled in by silt from the river. 

The Old Timers, in 1934, held a rally in honor of 
the fiftieth anniversary of the settlement. At that time 
the association decided to establish a permanent meeting 
place for the future. The Canadian Pacific Railway sold 
the group three acres of land at the site of the old Red 
Deer Crossing, and the Municipality of Pine Lake donated 
a similar amount. Tom Gaetz organized a group to move 
the remains of the old fort, by then badly dilapidated, 




' 

• • . . 






- t 








. 


r 






, - 




i 







f " V "• 

. 

0 



• 







. 





. ' ‘ - 





r 

. 

-• . . . 


, 




. 









-46- 

to the Old Timers 1 property.^ 2 The task was done, and the 

old building restored as much as possible to its original 

appearance* In 1934 the Old Timers had the ancient Indian 

trail leading down to the Crossing made useable again. 

They placed the old fort very close to where the trail 

crosses the river. This trail, incidentally, is the 

oldest one still in use in Alberta. 

The late James Dawson, who came to Red Deer in 1$&9 

with the Mounted Police, had been in that service at the 

time of the Rebellion. His comment on life at Fort 

Normandeau is worthy of repetition. n We had a very quiet 

time of it—mostly little duties around the barracks, such 

as grooming the horses and keeping the equipment in order, 

just waiting for something to turn up. This was a law- 

abiding community because there was a good class of 

people here.” ^ The Police actually remained at Red Deer 

Crossing for six years, until, with the coming of the 

railway, they shifted their station to the new hamlet in 

October l£91. For the fall term of 1$92 the Crossing School 

took up quarters in the Burch store in the new settlement. 

Previously, the entire civilian population of the crossing, 

74 

all eighteen of them, had moved to the new townsite. 


72. Annie L. Gaetz; op. cit . p.l60 

73. James Dawson; Oral statement 

74. R. L. Gaetz; Early Red Deer 






. 


' 





















. 


. 









, 










. 


.. 





















. 





COAL FIELDS tributary io RED DEER 
TIMBER LIMITS RED DEER 


RED DEER AND SURROUNDING- COMMUNITIES 


Board of Trade Map 1913 

























Chapter II 


Economic Development of Red Deer 
and its Tributary Area 

Red Deer is a very prosperous community.In 1953 

purchases in the city’s retail stores amounted to 

$13,200,000,which was an increase of 20.4 per cent 

over sales for 1952. In Alberta as a whole the 

increase in the same period was only 7#4 per cent. 

In 1953 2,600 Red Deer families had a net disposable 

income after taxes of $10,036,000 for an average of 

$3,3?9, a substantial increase over the average of 

$3,695 in the preceding year.With retail sales 

much larger than local income Red Deer must be the 

1 

centre of a large trading area.The tributary districts 

are one of the best mixed-farming regions of Western 

Canada,oroducing large amounts of wheat and coarse 

2 

grains,sheep,hogs and dairy products.To the west 
of Red Deer lie the lumber'towns of Rocky 
Mountain House and Caroline,while to the east of the 
city are the ranching areas of Pine Lake. Coal is 
mined at Nordegg in the mountains and at Ardley on 


1. Sales Management Survey ,New York,1953 

"(Reported irP ReSTbeer Advocate ,August 4,1954) 

2.Sales at Sims’ Auction Market,1953: 

32,600 hogs;3,305 cattle;662 sheep. 

The condensery operated by the Central 
Alberta Dairy Pool processes about thirty million 
pounds of milk in a year. 





















* 













■ 

I 1 






















' 





- 48 - 

the banks of the Red Deer River.With regard to the 
province as a whole Red Deer*s position midway 
between Calgary and Edmonton has made it a distributing 
centre of importance. 

Red Deer*s economy has developed with that of 
the province.In the first two decades of its existence, 
1891 to 1911 ,the town grew rapidly,reflecting the 
great influx of settlers to the West.Then from the 
beginning of the First Great War until the beginning 
of the Second there was a period of consolidation, 
which resulted in a slowing down of the rate of 
growth in the town itself,although the rural area 
continued to develop fairly rapidly.Statistics tell 
the story. 



1901 

1911 

1921 

1931 

Red Deer 

323 

2,lTF~ 

2,328 

2,344 

Alberta 

73,000 

374,000 

583,000 

732,000 

Red Deer as 

0.44 

0.56 


0.32 


Per Cent 
of Total 



1936 

1941 

1946 

1951 

Red Deer 

2,389 

2,924 

A, 042 

7,575 

Alberta 

750,000 

796,000 

803,000 

939,000 

Red Deeras 

0.32 

~U7TT 

0.50 

0.81 ' 


Per Cent 3 

of Total 

In 1953 Red Deer had an estimated population 
4 

of 10 , 000 ,which was one per cent of the population 
of Alberta. 

3 .The Canada Year Book , Federal Census 
A. Annual Report,City of Red Deer,1953 



















C ' 


. 


:!• 








C 


f : 
























An examination of the figures given in the 
table shows that the greatest increase,both in 
actual numbers and in relation to Alberta generally, 
has been since the Second Great War.The cause of 
this increase has been the realization by many firms 
of the advantages which Red Deer offers as a shopping 
centre and distributing point.Some of the newly 
established business concerns are the Chrysler Corporation, 
with a large warehouse just south of town,the Union 
Tractor plant,the Cadbury Chocolate Company’s 
warehouse,the T.Eaton retail store,the F.W.Woolworth 
store and the Simpson-Sears mail-order office.In the 
period before 1914 many Red Deer business men hoped 
that industries would establish themselves in the town. 
To-day,with fifty thousand people in the immediate 
trading area,most business people feel that Red Deer 
has a prosperous future as a market town,but not as 
a manufacturing centre. 

The oldest continuous business enterprise in 

Red Deer is the Springbett Blacksmith Shop,which 

William Springbett established in 1890 in the old log 

shack of Addison McPherson at Red Deer Crossing. In 

May,1891 Mr. Springbett moved to the new townsite 

on the railway,establishing his business in a building 

which occupied the present-day site of the Imperial 
5 

Bank. For fifty years Mr. Springbett served the needs 


5. Annie L. Gaetz; om cit . r to. 100 




















. 













' 











■ 




■ 







■ 

. 










. 

. 












-50 - 


of a widespread community in Central Alberta.After 
the Second 3-re at War a new residential area of the 
city,Springbett Drive,was named after this sturdy 
pioneer. In later years his son carried on the trade. 

The first retail store within the city limits 

of Red Deer was a small ten by twelve log shack 

which an itinerant trader named Stevenson built in 

the summer of 1890 at the corner of Ross Street and 

G-aetz Avenue to serve the needs of the construction 

workers on the Calgary-Edmonton Railway.After the 

completion of the bridge across the Red Deer in the 

spring of 1891 he abandoned the shack and moved 

6 

elsewhere.Mention has already been made of the 
trading post at Red Deer Crossing. 

In 1891 Raymond G-aetz opened a store in the 
new settlement,his premises occupying the site of 
the present-day Central Block.When that block was 
built the old store was moved just north of it 
to face G-aetz Avenue. In 1928 it was again moved, 
this time to the rear of the Corona G-arage,where it 
was soon afterwards destroyed by fire.In the same 
year that Mr. G-aetz built his store John Burch 
came from Eastern C ana <i a and started a similar 
business on the north-east corner of G-aetz Avenue 
and Ross Street.The west part of the Horsley Drug 

6 .Raymond G-aetz; Early Red D eer ( The Red Deer 
Advocate . July 18, 1934) 























. 













- 




. 



1 



























- 















THE SPRINGrBETT BLACKSMITH SHOP 
1891 - 1953 

Built as the McBride Hardware 
Store on the corner of Ross Street 
and G-aetz Avenue. 

Moved to 48 Street to make way 
for the Royal Bank building 
One of the first three commercial 
buildings in Red Deer. 




















Store of to-day is actually the building which 

Burch built in 1891.Above the store was an extra room 

which in 1892 became the first school in the City 

of Red Deer.A third business place also opened in 

1891 when Frank McBride,a young man from Ontario, 

built a hardware store just south of John Burch's 

premises.When the Royal Bank was constructed the 

old McBride building was moved to 48th Street, 

where it served as the Springbett Blacksmith Shop 

7 

until it was demolished in 1954.The blacksmith shop 
and the two general stores constituted Red Deer's 
business section when the railway began to operate 
a regular train service in 1891. 

A study of the photograph of the McBride 
building is of interest because this structure was 
typical of 1890 to 1911 construction in many Western 
towns.The width of the single-storey building,which 
had living quarters at the back,was only twenty-five 
feet.The false front,which gave a slight illusion 
of a second storey, seemed a laughable sham to 
many Eastern visitors,but in actuality it was the 
symbol of a dream.The flimsy,frame structure was 
all the owner could afford,but the false front was 


7. Photograph (1953 ) on preceding page 










« 






■ 













f 




























* 

t 

V 

' 




. , 





-52- 


a visible outline of what he hoped to have some day. 

From the architectural point of view it was ridiculous, 
but it was really intended to be a brave defiance of 
the future.Unfortunately for many of the pioneers 
the dream died in the bitter years. 

In 1891 Red Deer was only a flag stop on the 
Calgary-Edmonton railway.The service consisted of 
one train per week,and even this was often more than 
an hour late.A box-car was placed beside the track 
to serve as a shelter for the occasional traveller 
who wanted to board the train at Red Deer.Then in 1893 
the Canadian Pacific Railway Company built a station 
near the place where the freight sheds are to-day. 

After the completion of the station Philip Pidgeon, 
who took an active part in the Board of Trade and in 
municipal affairs,became the resident agent of the 

8 

company.In 1910 the company built the present station. 

In the spring of 1891 there were only three 

dwelling houses within the present city limits.The oldest 

of these had been built in 1886 by Isaac Gaetz,a 
brother of Dr. Leonard Gaetz. Isaac Gaetz homesteaded 

and pre-empted the north half of section seventeen, 

placing his buildings on a little knoll beside 
9 

Waskasoo Creek.In the 1920®s the original logs were 


8 . Annie L. Gaetz;op. cit . t p.117 

9. Mina Cole (Pioneer of 1890);Report ,October 28,1953 

























. 









' • .. 






•> .. 'f 

■ 



. 


















. 























. 













THE LEONARD GAETZ HOME 
Built in l£90. 

Located at the original home site. 
First house in Red Deer to be built of 


sawn lumber 














House on Corner 4$ th St, and 49 th Ave. 
Originally the home of Mrs. Emma McLeod 
One of the first three houses in Red Deer. 
Original dwelling has been added to. 









The Isaac Gaetz Memorial 
One of the first memorials 
in the cemetery. 

Isaac Gaetz was a brother 


of Dr. Leonard Gaetz 












-5> 


covered with siding,giving the building the appearance 

of an ordinary frame structure.When plumbing was 

installed a real problem arose because of the solid 
10 

walls. Similar difficulties have arisen in modernizing 
other pioneer buildings,which frequently give no 
indication of their original log construction except 
for an unusual thickness of the outer walls.The second 
house in Red Deer was built in 1890 by Dr. Leonard 
Gaetz,who used lumber from a small portable mill 
which he operated to make use of the abundant timber 
of the area. This house,which still stands at the 
southern approach to the traffic bridge on about the 
site of the original homestead buildings,was the 

first house between Calgary and Edmonton to be built 

11 

entirely of sawn lumber,Red Deer*s third house,which 
still stands at the corner of 48th Street and 49th 
Avenue,was built in 1890 by Mrs. Emma McLeod,a sister 
of George Smith who was the first teacher in Central 
Alberta. 

In 1891 the townsite was surveyed,with the 

main east and west thoroughfare,Ross Street,one 

12 

hundred feet in width. Unfortunately the surveyors 
made Gaetz Avenue,which is now part of Number Two 


10. Elmer Mathews (owner);oral statement 

11. Annie L. Gaetz;bp. cit .,p.4l 

12. Government of Alberta; Economic Survey of 

the City of Red Deer ,p.3 



















■ • 


































, 





























. 


■ 








. 




' 





. 





. 











-54- 


Highway, the standard one chain in width,which has 
proved far too narrow for the volume of traffic which 
uses this street.Fortunately they did follow a 
symmetrical plan of straight streets and avenues 
intersecting at right angles,and they avoided any 
narrow,winding streets like those which came into 
existence in some Western towns.In 1891 many people 
felt that the width of Ross Street was nothing but a 
waste of good land. 

The railway brought no great influx of people 

to the hamlet,which by the end of 1891 had a population 
13 

of only fifty.A man named Carey came from Ontario and 

built the Alberta Hotel about where the Buffalo 
14 

Hotel stands now. In a small shack near this hotel 
John Grant,who was a well-known resident for over 
thirty years,opened the first barber shop in Red Deer. 
4»ater Mr. Grant put up a brick building on the corner 
of Ross Street and 49th Avenue where he operated a 
taxidermist business.The fine buffalo head which 
hangs in the City Council chambers is an example of 
Mr. Grant’s careful work.The animal,one of the last 
of the great herds,was killed on the banks of the 
Red Deer River near the Saskatchewan border in 
August,1887.In 1940 Mr. Grant’s building was moved 


13. Government of Alberta; ibid ..p.4 

14. Photograph of Red Deer,1893 




















, 




























I 






- 










- 



. 














' 









-55- 


east of its original location,and became the Mounted 
Police barracks.In 1952 the ground floor was modified 
to become the Public Library. 

In the same year that Mr. Grant opened his 
barber shop,1891,Henry Reinholt,who had homesteaded 
near Burnt Lake,began to quarry stone on the south 
bank of the river near the Gronquist house of to-day. 
He obtained a good quality grey sandstone,which was 
soft at first but hardened rapidly on exposure to 
the air.Builders used the stone extensively for 
foundations,and even for whole buildings.The Anglican 
Church is one of the best examples of its use on a 
large scale,Mr. Reinholt found there was a large 
demand for the stone locally,and he also shipped 
carloads of the material to other places.By the time 
of the First Great War,however,stone was seldom used 
in building and the quarry ceased to operate. 

In June, 1891,George G-reene,a young lawyer who 

like so many other Red Deer pioneers had come from 

Ontario,settled in the town,where he built the 

15 

first business block. His building,which was 
constructed of the local stone,still stands on the 
south-west corner of Ross Street and G-aetz Avenue. 


15. The Red Deer Advocate .Jubilee Edition,1934 














- • 









... 




« i 










. 








' 






. . 





. 


* 
















> 

. 









-56- 


Originally Mr. Greene used it for his own law offices 
and for a private bank which he established to serve 
the needs of the growing community until the Merchants 
Bank of Canada bought him out in 1902,Mr. G-reene, 
who was Red Deer*s first lawyer , in 1902 took W.E. 
Payne into a partnership which lasted until Mr. 

G-reene became a judge at Medicine Hat in 1915. The 

legal firm then became Payne and Graham,and is now 

16 

Graham and Stewart. 

In 1883 Red Deer became the postal address 
of the settlers in a very wide area when G.C. King 
built his trading post at the Grossing.There was a 
slot in the door for the mailing of letters,and 

17 

the mail was brought in by means of a Red River cart. 
After the railway reached Calgary the mail was brought 
north once every two weeks by stage coach.From the fall 
of 1884 until the completion of the Calgary-Edmonton 
railway line in 1891 Raymond Gaetz operated the 
post office at Red Deer Grossing.His brother,H.H. 

Gaetz succeeded him when the settlement moved to its 
present location.The new post office was in the H.H. 
Gaetz drug store,which stood on the west side of 
Gaetz Avenue,just north of Ross Street.Within a 


16. P.E.Graham;oral statement 

17. The Red Deer Advocate ,Must 15,1951 
















t 


' 

<• 




. 
























. . , 



























- 57 - 


short time Mr. Gaetz moved the drug store and post 

office to the building which is now the Morris 

store on the south side of Ross Street,a few doors 

east of the railway station. In 1902, when the G-aetz 

Cornett block on the corner of Gaetz Avenue and Mann 

Street was built,the post office was established in 

the south half of that building,while the north half 

18 

became the drug store. This arrangement lasted until 
1911 when Harry Wallace succeeded H. H.Gaetz as 
postmaster.The post office then was moved to the 
News building on the corner of 48th Street and Gaetz 
Avenue,where it shared quarters with the Red Deer News, 
one of the two local weeklies.For the convenience of 
the public boxes with combination locks were installed 
in the lobby,and these could be rented for a small 
annual fee.Even at that date the volume of mail 
was so small that it could be wheeled to the railway 
station in a hand cart.After eight years of service 
Mr. Wallace resigned,Thomas Edis succeeding him 
as postmaster.Until 194? the Dominion government 
let a contract for the Red Deer post office,with the 
result that the employees were not civil servants 
but employees of Mr. Edis,who was always successful 
in obtaining the contract. 


18.Roy Cornett;oral statement 
























. 






. 


























. 

■ 











. 









-58- 


By 1922 the need for a Dominion Lands Office in 
Red Deer was over,and the post office was moved to 
the former lands office buildins,which occupied the 
site of the present Federal Building.For many years 
a large,crumbling excavation had existed just east of 
the Lands Office,and this had been the beginning of 
what was to be a fine new post office,offered as 
election bait in 1911.The building,however,was never 
constructed,and the excavation served merely as 
an excellent dwelling site for cliff swallows and 
a wonderful place for small boys to play soldier.In 
1922 the Dominion government had the hole filled. 

Although the facilities in the renovated Lands 
Office were an improvement on the News Block,they 
soon became grossly inadequate,especially at Christmas, 
when bags of mail often had to be piled outside the 
building.Congestion in the lobby was bad until a 
house-to-house delivery service was started in November, 
1949.In 1950 the government let contracts for the 
construction of a fine Federal Building to house the 
Post Office,the Customs Office,the Unemployment 
Insurance Office and the Mounted Police Office.As if 
to make up for past neglect,the authorities spared 
no expense,erecting a fine structure of the most 











' 




































* ( 

. 














- 




->■ - 




■ 

■ 

















- 59 - 


modern design.In this building,which is the seventh 

Red ^eer post off ice, Mr. George Horn is postmaster, 

with a staff of thirty employees.The economic progress 

of seventy years is symbolized in the transformation 

of the post office from a log shack to an air-conditioned 

19 

building of steel and tile. 

After the hamlet of Red Deer had been in existence 

for one year,William Piper,a settler from Ontario, 

started a brickyard,which was the town*s first 

manufacturing industry.His plant turned out a good 

quality product,although the Red ^eer brick rather 

lacked color.Settlers in need of cash were often able 

to find employment in the brickyard,which by 1914 

could produce up to fifty thousand bricks per day,and 

20 

employed about sixty men. Because so many buildings 
were constructed of brick,Red Deer and district came 
to resemble many regions in the older parts of Ontario. 
The Red Deer plant,however,with wood and coal for 
fuel,could not compete successfully with the gas-fired 
yards at Medicine Hat.At the end of the First Great 
War the Piper brickyard closed. "Piper’s Mountain”, 
a high,steep hill in south Red Deer serves to recall 
this early industry. 

In 1892 the Mission Board of the Methodist Church 


19. The Red Deer Advocate ,August 15,1951 

20. Annie L. G-aetz; op. cit ., p. 116 


















. 












< 





































- 







. 


■ 









- 60 - 


began construction of a large Indian Industrial 

School on the north hank of the river,just across 

from the original site of Red Deer, The main building 

was very substantially constructed of stone from the 

21 

Reinholt quarry.Barns and houses were also built. 

The school,which had four hundred acres of land,provided 
accommodation for one hundred and fifty Indian children. 
The eight members of the staff were appointed by the 
Mission Board,but were paid by the government of 
Canada.Miss Mary Linton,later Mrs. Raymond Gaetz,came 
to the school as governess for the children of the first 
principal,the Reverend Thomas Nelson. 

The purpose of the school was to try to ease 
the period of transition for the Indians by giving the 
children enough training to enable them to take a 
part in the new era that was rapidly coming.The boys 
received training in farm work,blacksmithing and 
carpentry,as well as rudimentary academic schooling, 
while the girls had courses in domestic science.lt 
is doubtful,however,that the pupils were able to 
practise many of the things which they learned in 
the school when they returned to their people. The 
Industrial School ceased to function at the beginning 


21.Government of Alberta;op. cit ., p.4 
































« 


















. 
















































- 61 - 


of the First G-reat w ar. 

For some years no use could he found for the 
buildings. Then in 1919 the Soldier Settlement Board 
bought the school from the Methodist Church for the 
purpose of developing a training farm for prospective 
soldier settlers.lt was used for this work for only 
one year,and then remained closed until 1922 when 
fourteen Hebridean families were brought to the 
Red Peer district through the efforts of Father 
Macdonald,the parish priest.The old school became 
a reception centre and training farm for these Scottish 
settlers.No more Hebrideans were brought to the area 
and after the first group had left the school 
the farm land was sold to private individuals.To-day 
the great stone walls of the main building still stand, 
but the roof is gone and the interior is a complete 
wreck.The barns and houses which once stood about 
the main school have ail been torn down or moved away. 
Visitors to the district often ask about the great 
grey hulk of the building,which stands over half 
a mile from the nearest public road.Like the little 
log fort which stands just opposite it on the other 
bank of the river,it is to-day a symbol of a nearly 
forgotten era. 

The project of training Hebridean immigrants in 
























- 













. 













































. 
















- 62 - 


Alberta farming methods was similar to an earlier 
undertaking of the Reverend Dr. Fry,headmaster of a 
boys’ school in England.Some of his former pupils 

who had emigrated to Canada wrote to him about 

themselves 

their difficulties in adjusting/\to Canadian farming 

practices.Therefore,in 1903 he established in the 

Springvale district about five miles east of Red Deer 

a school which he called Berkhamstead Farm for the 

purpose of teaching British boys the methods used in 

farming in the West.A competent,experienced farmer 

was placed in charge,but the school did not prove 

popular,mainly because the young immigrants preferred 

to secure their practical experience by working 

for some farmer for wages.In 1909 Mr. J.E. Eversole 

took control of the Berkhamstead place,which he 

operated from then on as a straight farming venture. 

Two men who took training at Berkhamstead Farm later 

became prominent in Canadian military affairs.They are 

Major G-eneral Pearkes, V. C., D. S. 0 and Bar, and Major 

22 

G-eneral Lionel Page,D. S. 0. and Bar, 

A still earlier venture in group migration 
occurred in 1888 when a party of fifty Icelanders 
left Pembina County in North Dakota in search of 
better land in Canada.They decided to settle along 


22. Annie L. G-aetz ;op. cit . . p. 61 









. 




















. 


■ 








































. 



. 













- 63 - 


the Medicine River,about fifteen miles west of Penhold. 

One of the leading men of the settlement was S.G-. 

Stephanson,the famous Icelandic poet,who took an 

active part in community welfare by helping to organize 

a school district,to establish a post office, and to 

secure roads and bridges.In 1950 a cairn was dedicated 

to the memory of this poet-farmer. 

These pioneers experienced real hardship with 

the nearest railway ninety miles away at Calgary,and 

sixteen miles away even after the Calgary-Edmonton line 

was built.Their land was fertile,and they worked hard. 

They were believers in co-operatives.In 1898 Mr. 

J.Benedictson started a small store and cheese factory, 

which a co-operative association of thirty-five farmers 

bought out in the following year.The Dominion government 

was operating creameries at the time,and in 1899 they 

sent Daniel Morkeberg,a -^anejto the Icelandic 

settlement of Markerville to take charge of a creamery 

there.Dairying has been one of the most important 

industries of the district ever since.Many of the 

original settlers or their sons and daughters are 

still in the district,which is the best possible proof 

23 

that the original selection of land was good. 


23.First Markerville Settlers:S.J.Bjornson; 

0. Olafson;B. Olafson;S.Jonasson;S.Arnson;B.^onson; 
J. Hunford;B. J.Bardal;G-. Dalman;G-. Thorlakson; 

J. G-udmunson; J. Bjorns on; E. Helgason; J.Einarson 



■ 

. 

' 














. 







. 

' 




' 


. 








































. 





























-64- 


The village of Penhold,about eight miles south 
of Red Deer,is the centre of a very prosperous 
agricultural region.When the Calgary-Edmonton railway 
was built Penhold was known only as the "Seventh 
Siding". G-eorge Fleming,upon whose homestead the 
village was built,wanted to have it named Essexville 
in honor of the Ontario county from which he had come, 
but his suggestion was not approved.The name "Penhold" 
supposedly came from a railway official who jabbed 
a pen into a piece of paper and said,"Let it be 
called Penhold." 

The settlement of the district came just about 
the same time as the settlement of Red Deer.Mr.and 
Mrs. John Stewart of London,Ontario,the first settlers, 
came to the West because they had heard the glowing 
accounts which Dr. G-aetz gave of the Red Deer country. 
The Stewarts actually settled on their homestead and 
pre-emption,six miles south of Red Deer Crossing, 
only a few weeks after the G-aetz family had taken up 
their lands.The same four men who had assisted Dr. 

Gaetz to build his house also constructed a log 
dwelling for the Stewarts.This spirit of helpfulness 
was an important factor in influencing settlers to 
stay on even when conditions became very discouraging. 

For twenty years the Stewarts remained on their 



























■ 






- 











. 









. 









. 



















- 65 - 


homestead, but after the death of John. Stewart his 
sons moved to the village of Penhold where they 
went into business.They also opened a branch in 
Red Deer,and the Stewart Lumber Company has become a 
very important enterprise in that town. 

Because it was closer to Calgary the Penhold 

district before 1890 attracted more settlers than did 

the Red Deer region.Experienced farmers,many of whom 

came from Ontario,soon had a fair amount of land 

under cultivation,even though the sowing had to be done 

by hand,the grain cut by a scythe,and the threshing 

done by a flail or by horse-tread.One of the early 

settlers was Alfred Speakman,a lay minister of the 

Methodist Church,who settled in the Horn Hill district 

east of Penhold.An educated man,Mr. Speakman,who from 

the first was very interested in the farmers 1 movement, 

drafted the constitution for the first United Farmers * 

Association of Alberta.He also served as president of 

the association.His son Alfred,who was a member of the 

Progressive party and the United Farmers of Alberta, 

represented the Red Deer constituency at Ottawa from 
24 

1924 until 1935. 

In 1940 the economy of Penhold benefitted from 
the establishment of an Air Force station just north¬ 
west of the village.At first this unit was Number 2A 


24.See Chapter III 
















, 





* 




. 










. 




, 

' 





. 







* 

, 










. 


























- 66 - 


Manning Depot,R.G.A.F.,but in August,1941 it became 
Number Thirty-Six Service Flying Training School.In 
July,1953,after having been closed for eight years, 

Penhold was reactivated as a training station under 
the new expansion program for Canadian defence in ^ 

conjunction with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. 
Although certain businesses have gained considerably 
through providing for the needs of the Air Force personnel, 
the real basis of Penhold*s prosperity is still the 
fertile agricultural region which lies around the 
village. 

About seven miles north of Red Deer lies the 
village of Blackfaids.The Blindman valley,with an 
abundance of feed and shelter for cattle,first attracted 
settlers to the region.Before the early ranchers arrived 
there was a stopping house near where the old Number 
Two Highway crosses the Blindman.From this point trails 
branched off to Rocky Mountain House to the west and to 
Buffalo Lake to the east. 

The first white man to settle in the district 
was A. D. G-regson,who in 1889 chose an attractive 
homestead near the junction of the Blindman with 
the Red Deer.Mr. Gregson,who was soon joined by his 


25,The Central Alberta Air News,August,1953 

















’ 






. 


- 

























• ■ 




' 




- 





- 67 - 


brother Percy, chose the spot as much for its 
advantages as a hunting and fishing region as for 
its farming possibilities.He built a house of split 
field stone,and dug it into the side of a hill in an 
attempt to insulate it against the severe Alberta 
winters.Because of this unusual construction the 
house,which is still in use,attracts considerable 
attention. 

Another early settler of the district was Walter 
Waghorn,who kept the first post office in his ranch 
house near the river,later moving the office to a 
small building on the site of the present village. 

The post office was first called Waghorn,but in 1892 
it was changed to correspond in name with the 
Biackfalds siding.The settlers of the region soon 
demanded a school,and in 1893 Blindman School,which 
was Number 255 of the North-West Territories,was 
opened.The late Senator Talbot of Lacombe was at one 
time the teacher of this school. 

In the rainy years which began in 1897 the rolling 
surface of the Biackfalds country kept it from 
becoming the waste of mud and water which covered much 
of the rest of Central Alberta.As a result there 
was a great influx of settlers to the district,including 
many young Englishmen who liked the idea of ranching 









- 68 - 


rather than farming.3y 1900 all the available land 

was occupied and a demand arose for better trading 

facilities.A village was planned for the siding. 

John McKay opened the first general store,while 

William Spurel built an hotel.Other business men 

came to Blackfalds which soon had three lumber yards, 

three livery barns,several general stores,a number 

of implement dealers, and a few professional 

men. Blackfalds actually had a dentist before there 

2 6 

was one in Red Deer.By 1914 Red Deer had grown large 
enough to attract much of the farm trade away from 
Blackfalds,and this tendency of people to do their 
shopping in a larger centre has become more marked 
with the improved highways of the present day. 

G-rain growing and mixed farming have replaced 
ranching in the Blackfalds district,although there 
are still many fine herds of cattle in the area. 

Sheep raising has become common,and dairying has 
increased greatly,most of the milk being shipped to 
the Condensery in Red D eer# 

The nearest town west of Red ^eer i s Sylvan 
Lake,a well known summer resort.Until 1903 this 
lake was called Snake Lake because so many garter 


26.Dr. J.B.Long (Dentist);oral statement 








- 69 - 


snakes were found along its shores.Because the land 
around the lake was heavily timbered and rather 
inaccessible,settlement did not begin until 1899 
when Alexander Loiselle and his son,Louis,came from 
Michigan.They had brought a sawmill with them and 
decided to settle at Snake Lake because so much 
timber was available there.The father chose a 
homestead within the limits of the present town, 
while the son selected land west and north at Third 
Point.They placed their mill near the outlet of the 
creek which joins Sylvan Lake to Burnt Lake.This 
stream,which is practically dry now,in those days 
carried sufficient water to enable them to float 
rafts of logs between the lakes.By 1902 other settlers 
had come to the district and Alexander Loiselle 
built an hotel to accommodate people coming to the 
region.He also started a store.Much of his business 
was with freighters who followed a trail which just 
skirted the south end of Sylvan Lake.As the whole 
region as far west as Rocky Mountain House was supplied 
by this route,the volume of traffic was considerable. 

In 1903 Sylvan Lake became a post office,with 
Alexander Loiselle as postmaster. 

The development of a summer resort began as 
early as 1901 when two families from Red Deer 













I 



. 






















. 


, 

' 

. 

■ 


















camped at the lake.In 1904 three summer cottages 
were built,the first of nearly one thousand 
summer places that are there now.The farm population 
of the area grew slowly because railway facilities 
were lacking until the Alberta Central Railway 
was built from Red Deer to Rocky Mountain House 
in the years from 1910 to 1914.Many of the people 
who came to the region were from Finland and the 
other Baltic provinces of Russia.These settlers 
often obtained some cash to meet their living 
expenses by working in the lumber camps of 
the Rocky Mountain House country during the 
winter,while during the rest of the year they did 
the heavy work of clearing and breaking their 
fields. 

Because the surrounding district developed 
slowly,for many years the village of Sylvan Lake 
showed little growth in population,which as late as 1923 
comprised only I 85 permanent residents.The 
depression years,oddly enough,had the effect of 
increasing the tourist trade in the village, 
mainly because large numbers of people felt that they 
could spend a holiday there at less cost than in 
more pretentious resorts.By 1934 the permanent 



















































. . 


« 

■ 











' 


■ 




- 71 - 


population had increased to seven hundred,with 
about four thousand people living at the resort 
during July and August.Hotels,rooming houses,dance 
halls and other places of amusement were built. 
Business declined during the Second G-reat War,but 
after that conflict was over the agricultural 
community around the lake began to enjoy considerable 
prosperity.New land,cleared by large brush-cutting 
machines,produced heavy crops of grain.The resident 
population of the town of Sylvan Lake is about 
twelve hundred at the present time (1954-). 

East of Red Deer lies Pine Lake,which is the 
centre of a district in which ranching has been 
the most important industry.The soil is sandy and the 
surface is rough and broken,with many sloughs. 

An elderly woman aptly described the region by 
saying that it was f, as hilly as a pan of buns". The 
advantages of shelter,abundant water and plenty of 
slough grass for hay have made the region excellent 
ranching territory.The natural beauty of the district 
appealed to English settlers in particular.Of these 
people Robert Page,who started a cattle ranch in 
1892,was the first.Within a year Mr.and Mrs. M.J. 
Herbert and Mr. and Mrs. H.F.Lawrence also secured 
land at Pine Lake,while B.P.Alford opened a small 







- 72 - 


27 

store near the north end of the lake. In the succeeding 
years there was a slow,steady growth as other 
settlers,mainly from England,came to the district. 

In 1910 a survey was made for a railway from Red Deer 
to Moose Jaw,and for a time it seemed that Mr. 

Alford’s little store might be the beginning of a 
town,but the line was never constructed,and no 
village developed at Pine Lake.In 1946 the provincial 
government built a gravel highway from Penhold to 
Lousana,and thi s improved road has caused a considerable 
increase in the tourist business done by a number 
of small resorts along the shores of the lake.There 
is,however,no public beach or park.In spite of the 
increase in the tourist trade and the oil development 
which has occurred in recent years,the prosperity 
of the Pine Lake community is basically founded on 
cattle ranching. 

A brief account of the Lawrence family may be 
given as an example of the experiences of settlers 
in the region.In 1893 Henry Frank Lawrence,a man 
of considerable education who contributed occasionally 
to the Toronto Saturday Night . chose a homestead on 
the shores of the lake.An artist of some ability,he 
found subjects for his paintings in the rugged country 


27,The Red Deer Advocate ,July 18,1934 



















' 



. 








. 




% 








' 


. 








, 





. 












■ 







< ' 






Ol , 





r, , ; .. ^ . 

' 




■ 




' 


. 






■ 

... 


: 
















- 73 - 


about his home.Although ^r.^^Lawrence had some 

difficulty in adjusting/lto his new environment,his 

sons,horn and raised in the West,became successful 

farmers and ranchers.Although their holdings were 

scattered through a wide area,they worked them as 

a unit.They made excellent use of the natural 

resources of the country,for example,sawing the 

scrub poplar of the region into four-by-four 

timbers which they used for corrals and barns at a 

time when other ranchers were spending large sums 

28 

for commercial lumber. Their material progress 
was not spectacular,but it was steady,and by 1950 
their joint holdings of land and cattle were worth 
a large amount of money.As time went on some of the 
sons and grandsons left the district to engage in 
business or the professions,in a sense completing 
the cycle which began with an English immigrant sixty 
years earlier. 

If Pine Lake is taken as an example of a 
ranching area,Balmoral on the eastern outskirts of 
Red beer may be considered as a typical mixed- 
farming community.The first two settlers were the 
half-breeds,McKenzie and Wishart,who operated a 
sawmill on what is now the Northey property. 


28 .Edgar Wood;oral statement 










- 74 - 


Wishart also squatted on a piece of unsurveyed land 

which is to-day the Provincial Training School 

farm. In 1885 John G-aetz and his mother, the first 

white settlers in Balmoral,bought out the Wishart 

claim to the land which John G-aetz occupied for the 
29 

next fifty years. By 1891 three other men,Robert 

McDuffy,William Jenkins and Charles Cruikshank, 

had started to clear and break land in the district. 

In 1894 the Balmoral School District,Number 292, 

was organized,the name being chosen by Mrs* C.M. 

G-aetz in honor of a family who had just come from 

Scotland.A brick schoolhouse,without any basement, 

was built,but for two years there were no students 
30 

to use it. When the school did open,Miss Mina Cole was 
the teacher.In 1911 the original building was 
replaced by a well-constructed brick structure with 
a proper foundation and a full-sized basement.For some 
years this building was considered to be the finest 
rural school in the Red ^eer Inspectorate.The 
economic changes in the district were reflected in 
the school enrolment.At first there were few pupils 
because the families were chiefly young couples. 


29. Mrs. J.J.Gaetz;oral statement 

30. H.J.Mott,Secretary Balmoral S.D.;oral statement 









t 





' 

. 





























. 

. 




































- 75 - 


They cleared their land and prospered,and by the 
1920*s the registers showed enrolments of forty, 
with some families having three or four children in 
the school,which only went as high as the eighth 
grade.Very few pupils went on to high school.Most 
of the boys and girls either worked on the home 
farm or found employment with a neighbor .By the 
1930 ! s the school enrolment began to decline as the 
introduction of power machinery resulted in larger 
farms of a section or more.By 1953 there were so 
few children in the district that the school was 
closed.Sight or nine pupils come from Balmoral to 
Red Beer by bus. 

The soil of the district is a deep,black loam, 
producing up to forty bushels of wheat to the acre 
in an average year.Originally this land was covered 
with a heavy growth of poplar and willow,which in 
pioneer times had to be cleared by hand.The growth 
was often so dense that one acre would yield twenty 
cords of firewood,with only the aspen poplar being 
used.Because so much labor was involved,five acres 
represented a good year*s work by a homesteader in 
clearing and breaking land.It was no accident that 
Mr. Frank Van Slyke of Balmoral invented a good 
breaking plough;the need for such an implement was 
very great.Once it was broken the land was excellent 


















. 

■ 




















' 

. 

■ 





- 76 - 


for mixed farming,as the following letter,written in 
1912,testifies. 

"I came to this district from Garleton,Ontario 
twelve years ago,and have since farmed two hundred 
and forty acres three miles from Red Deer. 

U I have carried on mixed farming and have kept 
a few cattle and have gone in more for hogs the last 
few years.I have fed hogs on oats and barley and 
have made one dollar a bushel for my barley by 
feeding it.There has been big money in hogs. 

”1 have grown wheat,and it is a successful 
crop as a rule.The smallest yield I have had from 
it is thirty bushels per acre,and I have grown as 
high as sixty bushels to the acre....My oats have 
averaged at least sixty bushels to the acre every 
year,and-I have taken one hundred bushels of oats to 
the acre. 

“I have never missed a crop since I have been 

here - twelve years.I like the climate very much. 

We sometimes have it very cold in winter,but we have 

31 

very few bad storms at any time of the year. H 

To-day in Balmoral there is a greater tendency 
to engage in grain farming than there was in 1912. 
Dairying has become important,but many farmers have 
not kept sufficient pasture for extensive herds.Borne 


31. Samuel McConnell,June,1912 







i 






, 

























- 77 - 


fields have heen under cultivation for sixty 
years and there are signs that the fertility has 
been depleted.Substantial brick houses,many built 
fifty years ago,are still in use.In brief,Balmoral 
is a good example of a mature farming community in 
Central Alberta. 

In selecting land in any of the districts 

around Red Deer an early settler was well advised to 

pay attention to the kinds of trees growing on 

it.Large willows indicated a deep black soil,poplars 

a thinner layer of black dirt,or even a straight 

clay soil,and spruce or pine that the land was not 

32 

very good for farming. An inexperienced person 
attempted to cut the tough willow shrubs above the 
ground,and as a result made very slow progress 
and received many stinging cuts from the tough, 
limber shoots.A better technique was to cut the 
willow clumps just below the surface of the ground, 
where the branches came together and the root offered 
firm resistance to the axe.Even under the best 
conditions it was hard,back-breaking work,and few 
people had the vitality displayed by one Swedish 
immigrant,who at the end of a twelve or fourteen 
hour day could still joke about the slogan which had 
brought him to Alberta:"Gome to America and grow rich.'" 


32.Jacob Labb (pioneer);oral statement 






















■ 

„ 

- 
















- 
















- 78 - 


The poplars varied in size from small ones 

which could easily he uprooted by a single team 

to large trees which left stumps that required 

the use of blasting powder.After the settler had 

cut the brush and trees he had to pile the material 

into huge heaps for burning,which was hot and 

dirty work because the ends had to be thrown into 

each fire after the bulk of each pile had burned. 

Frequently the pioneer "corded” the white poplar 

by cutting it into four-foot lengths,and then 

splitting and piling it. This wood was generally 

sold by the rick,which was a measure of thirty-two 

square feet on the face of the pile.A rick of four-foot 

wood was one hundred and twenty-eight cubic feet, 

while a rick of stove-length,sixteen inch blocks 

34 

was only one-third as much. Newcomers to the region 
were often puzzled by the term which was almost 
always used in preference to "cord” when speaking of 
firewood.In 1912 an English syndicate sent a man 
to Red Deer to investigate the possibility of 
a pulp mill which would use the great quantities 
of logs which the settlers were burning to get them 
out of the way.His report was that the supply was too 


34.H.J.Mott ( early settler);oral statement 

















RED DEER IN 1910 


Western G-eneral Electric Light Company'8 
Powerhouse in the Foreground 

(Note the cordwood used for fuel) 












- 79 - 


uncertain to justify a large investment , and, 

therefore,the project was never attempted.One steady 

market for firewood was the Western General Electric 

Company which for many years used great quantities 

35 

of cordwood in their power-generating plant. Householders 
often "bought pole wood for about two dollars a load. 

The customer then had the logs cut into stove lengths 
by one of the numerous power-saw outfits which toured 
the towns and rural districts.The clear,ringing 
sound made by these saws could be heard in almost 
any Alberta town on a winter®s day 

After the trees and brush had been burned the 
land was broken by a heavy plow drawn by four,six, 
or even eight horses.Before 1900 oxen were frequently 
used, and after 1920 tractors replaced horses on 
most breaking jobs.The settlers next task was to 
gather the roots into large piles along the edges of 
the field."Backsetting",that is,turning the sod over 
again,exposed many more roots.The grub-hoe,a heavy 
iron tool like a combination pick and axe,was a useful 
implement in getting out the roots.The Van Slyke 
breaking plow,invented in 1910,was manufactured for 
two years in a small factory in Red Deer.Mr. Van Slyke 
then sold the patent to the Maple Leaf Milling Company, 


35.See Board of Trade Photograph , 191° 


































- 




. 















“ 

. 













1 





















' 




























< 


. t 

' , 







- 80 - 


who closed the Red Deer factory,hut continued to 

36 

manufacture the plow elsewhere for a few years. 

By the end of the First Great War it had been 

superseded by newer models. 

By the time of the Second Great War most 

breaking in the Red Deer area was done by large 

outfits at a contract rate per acre.The clearing of 

land is now done so easily that conservationists 

are seriously worried about the future."By the time 

another generation of farmers have done their work 

I am afraid that there will be little of the native 

growth left to shelter the fields and to provide 

nesting places for the birds.Then the country will 
37 

suffer" Many people agree with this view which was 
expressed by a lady who has lived in Central Alberta 
since 1890. 

The first settlers had only flails and scythes 

with which to harvest their crops until 1891 when 

the coming of the railway made implements of a better 

kind available.Mowing machines and reapers became 

common,and in 1893 John Stewart and Elias Code 

purchased steam-powered threshing machines.However it 

was not until 1898 that any large quantity of grain 

38 

was shipped from Red Deer. 

36. R. A.Van Slykejoral statement 

37. Mina Cole;Address to Teachers® Convention 

38. Annie L. G-aetz; op. cit .. p. 160 












. 



















, 


. 













■ 

, . . . ' 









- 81 - 


In the 1890*s a few primitive trails radiated 

from Red Deer,hut travel,especially in summer,was 

very difficult.As late as 1898 Mr. Ed Whiteside,a 

pioneer of the region south-east of Stettler,built 

a scow to float a load of groceries down the Red Deer 

River rather than to attempt to haul them by wagon 

39 

over the terrible roads. It is true that 1898 was 

an exceptionally wet year in Central Alberta,but even 

in normal years it took him five days to drive a few 

cattle to market in Red Deer over a route which he 

may now cover in only a few hours by truck. 

In I893 travel between Calgary and Edmonton 

was helped a great deal by the opening of a traffic 

4-0 

bridge across the river at Red Deer. Unfortunately 
heavy floods so damaged this structure in the spring 
of 1899 that it could no longer be used,and permission 
had to be obtained from the Canadian Pacific Railway 
Company to cover the deck of their bridge with planks 
in order that it might be available for public use. 
Construction of a new steel bridge of two spans was 
completed early in 1901,but this bridge was swept 
away ty ice that same spring . One of the spans was 
salvaged and is still in use across the Blindman River 
on the old Edmonton trail.From 1901 until 1903,when a 


39. The Stettler Independent ;December.1953 

40. Government of Alberta;op. cit .,p.2 









. 




















































-82- 


new bridge was completed,travellers had to cross the 
river at the old Red Deer Crossing,at a ford near 
the bridge,or at McKenzie Crossing,three miles 
downstream from the town.After two people had 
been drowned in fording the stream the government 
installed a ferry at the McKenzie place.The bridge 
built in 1903 proved to be much more substantial 
than the two earlier ones and it lasted until 
1947 when the provincial government replaced it 
by a much wider structure to accommodate the large 
volume of traffic using Number Two Highway.Because 
this bridge serves the province as a whole,Red Deer 
City Council has felt for some time that the province 
should accept responsibility for maintaining the 
approaches to it.In 1954 the provincial highways 
minister accepted their argument and stated that the 
government will give assistance to the city in 
improving and maintaining all of G-aetz Avenue as part 
of the highway. 

In early years the expedient of the 11 corduroy” 
road was cfoen used in Central Alberta.This was made 
by laying a foundation of logs and brush across the 
trail.Earth was sometimes placed on top of the brush, 
but often the weight of the traffic pushed the logs 
into the soft ground.As the road settled more earth 


t 










. 

























- 































- 

















































• 














; 



























-83- 


and more brush were added*Even as late as 1925 
a car in wet weather would often cut down to the 
old corduroy on the Sylvan Lake road.The first high 
grade on this Number Eleven Highway was made by 
power machinery in 1928*In the 1930 f s it was gradually 
widened and improved,and in 1953 a paved surface was 
put on it.An old timer stated that in 1911 he made 
a trip from his homestead near Alhambra to Red Deer. 
He travelled in an ox-drawn wagon,and the roads were 
so poor that Sylvan Lake was in sight for three days. 
He now makes the journey in about thirty minutes. 

During the winters the heavy snows of Central 

Alberta closed the roads to all automobile traffic. 

In 1916 the Board of Trade considered the possibility 

of having sleigh runners set the same width apart 

as the wheels of a car in order that automobiles 

could drive along the hard-packed strips of snow 

formed by the passage of the sleighs.The scheme was 

42 

an ingenious one,but nothing came of it. During the 
1940*s the municipal authorities began a program of 
raising grades in order to keep the roads clear of 
snow.They have also purchased plows to keep the 
roads open during the winter.Twelve years ago 
almost every farmer in the district kept some kind of 


41. John Kerr;oral statement 

42. Red Deer Board of Trade; Minute Book 










. 














. 


















































* 










. 























. 

. 









-84- 


horse-drawn equipment for use in winter,but in 
1954 nearly all the rural families depend on using 
cars or trucks during the whole year.This has 
had a decided effect on the economy of the region. 
Farmers from a very wide area come to Red Deer to 
shop during the winter instead of going to their 
smaller local centres as they did when transportation 
means were slower.Because more things go wrong with 
cars when they are operated in severe weather,garages 
now have their busiest season in the winter.By 
contrast in 1925 one garage owner did not have the 
main doors of his building open for nearly four 

43 

months. 

As in the rest of the province,title to much 
of the land in the Red Deer area was originally 
acquired from the Crown under homestead rights.All 
surveyed,even-numbered sections,which had not been 
otherwise disposed of,were available for homestead 
entry.Any person who was the sole head of a family, 
or any male who was at leash eighteen,could secure 
possession of a quarter section on payment of a fee 
of ten dollars.By proving exclusive use for three 
years,by residence for at least six months in each 
year,and by cultivation of an amount laid down in 
the regulations,the homesteader secured title to 


43.G-eorge Ely;oral statement 





















































, 



















, 

























- 







' 


< ■ 









-85- 


his land.By living on the place for twelve months, 

and by cultivating at least thirty acres,the settler 

could secure his title more quickly.He might also 

purchase an adjoining quarter-section,known as his 

pre-emption,at three dollars an acre,one-fourth 
44 

payable in cash. The government of the Territories 

appointed land guides to assist prospective settlers 

in securing suitable homesteads and in securing the 

proper legal description of the parcel chosen.Robert 

McClelland,one of the first settlers at Red Deer 

Crossing,was a land guide for this area. 

Early settlers,especially those with families, 

almost always wanted to know if there was a doctor 

in the district.Before 1892 when Dr. J.H. Hicks 

came to the hamlet, Red Deer,although the service 

45 

centre for a wide area,had no physician. Six years 
later Dr.H.J.Denovan opened a practice in the 
town,remaining for five years and then selling his 
business to Dr. Richard Parsons,a young man who 
wanted to establish himself in a Western community. 

For the next forty-one years Dr. Parsons gave devoted 
service to the residents of Central Alberta.To-day his 
sons carry on the practice under the name of the 
Parsons Clinic. The development of this medical pracice 


44. Homestead Regulations - Summarized by 

by Sir John Bourinot ;How Canada Is Governed. 
Copp Clark Company,Toronto,1918,p. 303 

45. Red Deer Advocate ;July 18,1934 



















* ■ 






















f 






- 


' - ■ 










. 














. 









— <* 





-86- 


is unique in that it has remained under the control 
of one family for over half a century,but in other 
ways its development has been typical of Western 
Canada.At first the doctor had to travel by horse and 
buggy over primitive bush trails in order to bring 
aid to his patients,When an ambulance was needed the 
seats in a democrat were replaced by a cot.Sometimes 
his operating theatre was the kitchen table of a 
farmhouse,with only a candle or a feeble oil lamp 
to give him light.He was on call twenty-four hours a 
day,and often had to take his fee in wood,meat or 
dairy products.In the modern clinic the doctors 
keep the office hours of any other business man, 
they have a large,well-equipped hospital for their 
patients,and even emergency cases are generally 
brought to them by ambulance. 

Other doctors who played a part in the life of 
early Red ^eer were John Collison and his partner 
Charles Saunders.In 1904 these young men began to 
practise in the town,establishing their offices in 
a dwelling house which still stands directly south 
of the post office,although business firms now have 
built all around this old residence.Dr. Collison, 
a former teacher who had turned to the study of 
medicine,had just completed his course at Me Grill 















- 









— 







. 



















. 












? ■ 




* 















_ 

' 






-87- 


University, while Dr. Saunders had just returned to 
Canada after serving in the South African War.Until 
they sold out their practice in 1927 these two men 
served faithfully the people of an area extending 
from Pine Lake on the east to Rocky Mountain House 
on the west. 

Two men,noted more for their interest in public 

affairs than for their practice of medicine,were 

Dr. C. C.G-rant,who came to Red Deer in 1900, and Dr. 

46 

Michael Clark, the noted parliamentarian. Dr. G-rant 
did serve the needs of many patients in the seventeen 
years he remained in Central Alberta,hut his main 
interest lay in expressing the very definite views 
which he held on all public questions.The files of the 
local newspapers contain numerous letters from him, 
and even after he had left Red Deer he continued to 
publish in strong language his ideas on many topics. 

In 1954 there are fourteen physicians in Red Deer, 
eight of them in the Parsons Clinic,and five in the 
Associate Clinic which was formed by Dr. Bunn who 
bought out the Collison and Saunders practice.Dr. David 
G-rant,who is not related to the earlier man of the 
same name,maintains an independent practice.The 
almost fanatical trust which the pioneers had in 
their family doctor has now been replaced by a much 


46. See Chapter III. 













. 







' 


« 






f 



. 

. 









































































-88- 


more impersonal relationship in the clinics.This 
change is not peculiar to Red £>eer,but is typical 
of the developing West, 

The business men of the 1890*s were very 
anxious to have a newspaper in their little 
community.They felt that this was almost an essential 
service,and that it would greatly enhance the 
economic status of their settlement.Therefore in 
1894 the Saskatchewan Land and Homestead Company 
started the Red Deer Review ,whose primary purpose 
was to advertise the lands which the company had for 
sale,The paper was actually published in Eastern 
Canada,and distributed locally by the Board of Trade. 
In 1901 two men from Ontario, 0. and Gr. Fleming, 
began publication of a paper,but their work did not 
satisfy the business men,who criticized it with 

47 

much severity. In 1904 the Flemings sold ihe Echo , 
as they called their paper,to a group of local men, 
who then began to publish a weekly which they called 
The Alberta Advocate .John Cowell,who later became 
Clerk of the Alberta Legislative Assembly,was 
editor and part owner.Edward Michener,a real estate 
man,and John T. Moore,head of the Western General 


47.The Red Deer Board of Trade, Minute Book 






























































. 

























. 

' 


















-89- 


Electric Light Company,also had shares in the 
48 

paper. Then in 1906 Francis Galbraith,who had 
come to the West because his wife was threatened 
with tuberculosis,purchased the newspaper,which 
he named The Red Deer Advocate . The Advocate of 
1906 , a patent-inside paper,had a circulation of 
about six hundred.The patent-inside meant that the 
bulk of the paper,which consisted of syndicated 
material and advertisements,had been printed 
elsewhere.The local men printed only the outside 
of the front and back pages.This method was widely 
used in Alberta in early times and is still used 
in some small towns.Even as it was publication was 
very uncertain.Mr. Galbraith describes it:“The 
paper was supposed to be issued on Friday morning, 
but in the past more than half the copies came out 
on Monday.” 

Mr. Galbraith*s first editorial laid down the 
policy which he followed for more than a o A uarter of 
a century.“In taking over The Advocate the new 
proprietor trusts that the relationships between 
himself and the readers of the paper may be long 
and pleasant.He will aim,so far as in him lies, 
to promote the peace,welfare and prosperity of the 


48.F.W.Galbraith; Fifty Years of Newspaper Work, 
Advocate Press,Red Deer,March,1934 


























. 







I 












■ 







. 

. 








































* 







-90- 


people of the district and town of Red Deer.If he 
has any special convictions as to the relationships 
of the members of the community,they are that the 
progress of this district and town can only be 
secured by united effort and mutual confidence,and 
that no one should get return for which he does not 

49 

give value. 11 when Francis Galbraith died in 1934 
most people felt that he himself had lived up well 
to the ideals which he had expressed in the first 
issue of his paper.His son Phillip succeeded him 
as editor. In the early years the Advocate often 
labored under economic difficulties,but in 1928 when 
the T.Eaton Company,the first large retail concern 
to establish itself in Red Deer,bought out the 
W.E.Lord Department Store advertising revenues 

increased greatly.Today,with a circulation of about 

50 

six thousand, The Red Deer Advocate is one of the 
largest and most prosperous papers in Western Canada. 
Mr. Galbraith’s comment on the business conditions 
prevailing in 1906 are of interest.”1 found in a 
few weeks after I started that the earnings were not 
sufficient to meet the expenses,if I was to have 
anything for my family,so I proposed that an advance 
of fifty per cent be made on the regular advertising 


49. F.W.Galbraith;o£.cit.,p.19 

50. Circulation,December,1953, 6,365 



































- 









































-91- 


rates. In those days of stimulation and speculation, 
of brilliant prospects and free movement,fifty per 
cent was looked on hardly more seriously than 
ten per cent to-day;even five or six ministers and 
lay preachers were in the real estate line.I had 
hardly got the accounts out in May,1907 at the higher 
rates than the real estate boom collapsed.However, 
the advertisers stood by me loyally,and we worried 
through until the next boom came in 1909." To 
give an example of the real estate values of 1906 
and later years,Mr. Galbraith just after he took 
over the paper purchased the lot on which the 
Advocate building stands for $1,150.In 1934 he 
estimated that the lot had a value of $1,200,but 
in 1953 the price of the land alone was about 
$12,000. 

Another paper,the Red Deer News,started to 
publish in 1904 with G-eorge Love,an experienced 
newspaper man,as owner and editor.In 1906 it was 
bought by John Carswell,a former Oshawa journalist 
who had been farming in the Horn Hill district. 

In 1922 H. 0. Scott, a veteran of the First G-reat War, 
became owner and editor.In the rather quiet years 
in which he published the News Mr. Scott was often 











. 
















. 


1 









f 












-92- 


hard pressed to obtain material for his paper. 

One method he employed was to write letters to 
himself,signing a fictitious name,and then comment 
editorially on the letters.He persuaded his friends 
to write letters to the editor on a variety of 
topics,and he also employed a local lady to contribute 
a ’’Women’s Column”. He had another column on what 
the babies were doing.Parents in the town and district 
liked to read in the News that their infant had 
taken his first step,said his first word,or 
performed some other noteworthy achievement.In 
spite of these expedients the News was not financially 
profitable,with the result that it was merged with 
the Advocate in 1926.Mr. Scott then served as a 
police magistrate for a time,and later moved from 
Red Deer. 

From the days of the first settlement dairying 

has played an important part in the economy of 

Central Alberta.In 1896 the first creamery between 

Calgary and Edmonton was established in Red Deer 

at about the present-day location of the Texaco 

51 

oil tanks in the south part of the town. It was a 
co-operative enterprise with Samuel Flack as 
buttermaker and manager.Although the building was 
of logs,the machinery was the best obtainable. Dairying 


51. Annie L. G-aetz; op. cit .,p. 123 











- 93 - 


was not sufficiently well developed and the 
creamery became bankrupt within a short time, 

Andrew Trimble bought the machinery and made use 
of it on his own farm in the Clearview district 
just south-east of town.He built up a dairy herd of 
his own,and with some patronage from his neighbors, 
obtained sufficient cream to make his enterprise 
moderately successful.One of the hazards in his 
business was the difficulty of transporting the 
butter to the railway in Red Deer. The wagons 
had to make the journey over very poor roads,and 
had to ford Waskasoo Creek, not the o x uiet little 
brook of the present,but a rough,turbulent stream 
which carried a large volume of water.On one 
occasion a wagon loaded with one-pound prints upset 
in the creek.The swift current carried the butter 
downstream,where town residents were able to use 
long poles to fish out a good supply for themselves. 

In 1901 another co-operative creamery was 
opened in the town itself.The location was 
near the river,just west of the traffic bridge. 

Mr. Flack again had charge of the enterprise,which 
operated for eleven years before it became bankrupt. 

In 1910 the Laurentian Milk Company,financed 
largely by local capital,opened a factory to can milk 





























' 








■ 
























, 
































' • 
















- 94 - 


by a process which the sponsors claimed would 

result in a product indistinguishable in taste from 
52 

fresh milk. The establishment of this new factory 

touched off a great wave of optimism in Central 

Alberta.People thought that the sale of whole 

milk to the factory would bring the farmers a 

steady cash income greater than they could hope 

to receive from the sale of cream alone.A publicity 

release of 1912 describes the product in glowing 

terms. ,, The company is establishing a large plant 

for the pasteurization and sterilization of milk. 

The milk after being treated is put in sealed 

bottles,and will keep good for any length of time. 

Part of the process consists of breaking up the 

solider part of the fluid,and so making it all one 

substance.When milk has been treated in this way 

the cream does not rise to the top,but remains an 

53 

undivided portion of the milk . u At first the 
company was very successful in marketing its product, 
but by the time of the First Great War it was in 
financial difficulties.Customers found some of the 
milk to be spoiled when the bottles were opened.The 
failure of the Laurentian Milk Company was part of 


52. The Red Deer Advocate ,July 18,1934 

53. Board of Trade; Publicity Folder .1912 











. 


. 



■ 











. 

. 















, 












- 95 - 


the general collapse of the "boom in Red Deer in 1914. 

Dairying remained one of the basic industries of 
the district.The weekly cream cheque was an important 
item in the budget of most farm families.Even in those 
years in which frost or hail ruined the grain crops, 
the settler usually could manage to salvage enough 
feed to carry his dairy cattle through the winter. 

Old timers expressed the situation both forcibly 
and crudelyPull teats or pull out.’” 

The importance of the dairy industry was 
acknowledged in a unique way in October,1912,when the 
Board of Trade tendered a banquet to Rosalind of Old 
Basing,a Jersey cow who had won the British Empire 
championship for milk production.Her owner,C.A.Julian 
Sharman,attended as Rosalind’s proxy,and expressed 
the thanks of the famous animal for the honor done 
her.In three years Rosalind had produced 37,847 
pounds of milk,yielding 2,504 pounds of butter fat. 

Her owner estimated the value of this milk and 
cream,together with the three heifer calves,at $3,008. 
Mr. Sharman,who had trained as an architect in Britain, 
settled in the Red Deer district in 1901,where he 
sought with considerable success to show that intensive 
farming on a quarter section of land could be made 


























. 






. 

' 

































































- 96 - 


to yield a better living than could be obtained from 

54 

farming a section carelessly. 

In November,1936 the Central Alberta Dairy 

Pool opened a condensery in Red Deer.This factory, 

which is still Red Deer’s largest industry,affects 

the economic well-being of a large section of 

Alberta.Nine hundred farmers from an area which 

extends about fifty miles in all directions from 

Red Deer ship milk to it.The Condensery has expanded 

its operations steadily over the years until in 1953 

it processed about thirty million pounds of milk. 

In an average year the output amounts to 300,000 

cases of condensed milk,valued at nearly three million 

dollars.The product is marketed under the brand names 

55 

"Cherub" and*klpha". 

The first man to ship cattle from Red Deer 
was G-. W. Smith,who in 1891 established the first butcher 
shop in the town.At different times the farmers 
sought unsuccessfully to have a packing plant established 
in Red Deer. The production of cattle has increased 
steadily through the years,with over eight thousand 
being sold at the Sims Auction Market in 1953. 

Hogs are even more important than are beef cattle 


54. C.A.Julian Sharman;letter,June 6,1911 

55. Ellis Johnson (Manager);oral statement 


























' 













■ 

























. 

















- 97 - 


to the economy of the region,with more than thirty- 
three thousand being marketed in Red Deer in 1953. 

A manufacturing industry which flourished in 

Red Deer in the early days was the Great West 

Lumber Company*s sawmill.In 19o5 this concern bought 

a mill which had been established by G.H.Bawtinheimer. 

The company secured logs from the upper stretches 

of the river,floating this timber down to Red Deer. 

By 1912 the enterprise employed as many as four 

hundred men in the woods and at the mill,and produced 

56 

over six million board feet of lumber. The payroll 
was of great importance in the economy of both the 
town and district.By 1916 ,however, the timber limits 
were nearly exhausted and markets were restricted. 

The mill was closed and the machinery sold.In 1953 
the country west of Red beer,especially in the 
vicinity of Rocky Mountain House,was an important 
timber producer,but since 1916 there has been 
no lumbering carried on at Red Deer itself. 

By 1900 there was a great demand for 
homesteads in the Red Deer district.This influx of 
settlers was a manifestation of a much larger 
movement.The Canadian government hoped that the 
building of the Canadian Pacific Railroad would 
result in a great wave of immigration to the West, 
but this did not occur for some time. H The blunt 


56.Red Deer Board of Trade; Information Folder ,1913 





- 

: ' •• • ,t 

1 

„ . • ;U '. 

/ :>■ 

t . " ..-,i, ;.: 

. 

.7 • 


















• )fj 




, ■ • , .1 ; 




•: ;■■■■: w..' iJ . . 



, i 6 .r•; : 







- 98 - 


truth was the Canadian West had to wait until the 

American West was filled up;this did not occur 

until the 1890°s.As soon as the last good 

boundary state,North Dakota,had been settled, 

the condition had arisen for a diversion of the 

stream to Canada.The settlement of the Canadian 

West is an example of the general westward 

57 

movement of the continent. 11 In this wave of 

immigration the majority of people coming to the 

Red Deer area were from Ontario,the British Isles 

and the United States.The influx caused the 

government in 1900 to open a Dominion Lands Office 

in Red Deer.Jerry Jessop was in charge of this 

office which was in a frame building on Ross 

Street,about where the Park Hotel now stands.In 

May,1905 352 people filed on homesteads at Red Deer, 

which was the largest total for any office in Canada 

for that month. The number of entries for April,1906 

was 674,although this figure was not the highest 
58 

in the Dominion. Homestead activity continued 
until the collapse of the boom in 1914.After the 
land in the immediate vicinity of Red Deer had been 
all taken,the settlers turned to the country to 
the west,especially around Eckville and Rocky 


57. A.R.M.Lower;From Colony to Nation,Longmans, 

Green and Company,Toronto,1947,p.420 

58. Red Deer Advocate,May,1906 
































































* :j 














, ■ 


























- 99 - 


Mountain House,When construction "began on the 
Alberta Central Railway,which was actually the 
Canadian Pacific under another name,the movement of 
homesteaders into the western part of Central 
Alberta was greatly accelerated,In 1910 Sir Wilfred 
Laurier drove the first spike for this railway,which 
opened for traffic in 1914.Planned as a major road 
from Moose Jaw to the Pacific,this line held great 
possibilities for Central Alberta,but unfortunately 
it never built west of Rocky Mountain House or 
east of Red Deer.Mr. Galbraith,who in 1913 was 
sent by the &ed Deer city council to interview 
President Shaughnessy of the Canadian Pacific, 
reported on the matter: M I do not think that there 
can be much doubt that the C.P.R. contemplated 
another line west through the Rockies in view of the 
standard of construction of the Alberta Central, 
and in view of the investment made in lots in Red 
Deer in the years 1910-1913 by C.P.R. folks.Dr. 

Grant,one of our stormy petrels for many years, 
declared that there was not a pass through the 
mountains west of Red Deer to allow the building of 
a railway.And whether the engineers found this to be 
the case,or whether the directors could not raise 
money for construction,or whether they concluded that 













.. 












. 




















. . 








' 










- 100 - 


the commercial outlook for this central district 

did not warrant construction,or whether Calgary 

interests blocked the way,as Senator Michener said, 

the project was dropped.President Shaughnessy*s answer 

was non-commital to our Question about the extension 
59 

of the line." At any rate the line did open up 
for development a sixty-miles-long belt of territory. 

In 1904 John T. Moore and his son ,William, 
obtained from the town council a twenty-five year 
franchise for an electric light and power company 
which they organized under the name of the Western 
General.Their company began service in the same 
year,and soon proved so profitable that on various 
occasions the city tried to buy back the franchise. 

In 1926,when the franchise had only another three 
years to run,the council and Mr. W.J.Moore finally 
were able to agree on a price which amounted to 
little more than the actual physical value of the 
plant.Mayor Edgar Johns played an important part in 
negotiating the transfer,which gave the city control 
of a very profitable utility.Under municipal control 
rates have been cut to about one third of what they 
once were,while at the same time the profits have been 
equal to the amount that could be raised by ten mills 
on the tax rate.In the 1930*s the council did not have 


59.Francis Galbraith;op. cit .,p.24 







. 

. 








■ 















































- 



























101 


to impose any levy for municipal purposes because 

the utility profits provided revenue for all needs 

other than schools and hospital.The city,which 

scrapped the old steam-driven generating plant, 

buys energy at wholesale rates from the Calgary 

Power Company.The estimated profits for 1954 are 

60 

one hundred and ten thousand dollars. Although Red 
Deer was by no means the first in the field of 
public ownership of utilities,its experience has 
served to show that a small Western community 
can operate efficiently an electric light and 
power service. 


60.The City of Red Deer;estimated budget,1954 










, 










. 

























• 




























RED DEER,1895 

(Looking west on Ross Street) 


(Photograph obtained from Mrs. T.A.G-aetz) 















The Red Deer Board of Trade 


In 1894,just three years after the tiny 
settlement on the railway began,the business men 
formed the Board of Trade.In the ensuing sixty years 
this body has played an important part in the 
development of the town and district.In April,1953, 
to the regret of some people,the name was changed 
to the Chamber of Commerce and Agriculture. The 
original minute book for the period from 1894 to 
1909 shows what the business men of one small Alberta 
community thought and did. The book gives a picture 
not only of Red Deer but of many other Western 
communities in their early days. 

The first five years may be described as the 
period of hope.The population was less than two 
hundred,a few frame stores fronted on a muddy street, 
the rural roads were morasses over which the public 
had the right to travel,if it could,the uncleared 
bush lay close on all sides to the hamlet,but the 
country was young and the business men were young. 
Optimism was strong.The second five years were the 
period of moderate accomplishment.Schools were built, 
roads were constructed,settlers were encouraged. 


- 102 - 







































• :j Jji,. ■ 




. 
































. 






' . 









- 103 - 


The new province of Alberta was in the making.The 
third five-year period was the starting of the 
boom.The future seemed secure. The two thousand 
people of the town would soon be twenty thousand,and 
the brush covered quarter section on the outskirts 
would soon be an industrial suburb,while the 
citizen who was worth one hundred thousand 
dollars in unsold lots would soon be a millionaire. 
The year 1910 came and went,and all was well.The 
fourth five-year period saw the climax and swift 
collapse of the boom.The speculator let his lots 
go to the town for unpaid taxes,while the incipient 
millionaire closed the mansion which he could no 
longer afford to heat. In the choice industrial sites 
and high-class residential areas little wooden survey 
stakes marked the lot corners until the pasturing 
cattle knocked these pegs over.The fifth period from 
1915 to 1920 was one in which the people turned 
all their thoughts and energies to the great struggle 
in Europe.At home there was rigid economy in 
municipal and business affairs and the acceptance 
of small-town status.lt was not a defeatist attitude, 
but more an acceptance of fact.The quarter of a 
century following 1920 saw little change.Then in 
the decade beginning with 1945 growth began again,and 
before long the post-war boom was well under way. 

































* 











































































- 104 - 


New enterprises were started,but a note of caution, 
lacking in the first boom,was always present. 

Examining the minute book in detail,one finds 
that the first entry is in formal language. 

"Minutes of a meeting held in the office of 
the Red Deer Review this day,March 17,1894,at 
eight p.m. 

Present 

John Burch,Ray L.Gaetz,R. C.Brumpton,Geo.W. 
G-reene, G-eo. W. Smith, R.M. Pardoe; P. Pidgeon, J. S. Hicks M. D., 
D.H.Murphy,Wm.Piper,R.D.Jackson and F.E.Wilkins. 

"A motion was passed that D.H.Murphy be 
Chairman and G-eo.W. G-reene be Secretary. 

"The Chairman explained the object of the meeting, 
namely,the formation of a Board of Trade. 

"The following gentlemen were appointed to draft 
a constitution and a set of by-laws for the 
association,and to meet again on the 23rd inst. 

Jno. Burch, D. H.Murphy, G-eo. W. G-reene. 

Geo.W.Greene 
Secretary Pro Tem." 

The meeting was duly held on the 23rd,and the 
constitution was adopted.Raymond Gaetz became the 
first President,with Geo.W.Greene as Secretary- 
Treasurer. 










- 105 - 


An amusing entry dealt with immigration."The 
following gentlemen were appointed a committee 
to meet all trains for the next two weeks:D.H. 

Murphy; Jno Burch;G-eo.W.G-reene. ”As there were only 
two trains a week,and as the entire population of 
the village made a habit of closing down business 
and meeting all trains anyway,the formality of the 
resolution seems scarcely necessary. 

The constitution adopted at this same meeting 
was clear and definite.’’The object of this association 
shall be the improvement of the town of Hed Deer and 
district,commercially and municipally;the promotion 
of the district in its agricultural and natural 
resources,and in such other ways as may be beneficial 
to the district.Any male person of the age of 
twenty-one,of good moral character,may become a 
member on payment of a fee of two dollars a year. 

A ballot is to be taken on all prospective members, 
and if less than three black balls shall be found, 
the application shall be accepted.“Additional 
features of the constitution were that any three 
members might call an emergency meeting,that the 
constitution might be amended by a two-thirds vote 
of the membership at any regularly called meeting, 
and that the Secretary-Treasurer was to receive 
some remuneration for his work. 




■*1 




















. . 
































. 




































- 106 - 


In April,1894 the Board of Trade undertook its 
first important task in the field of municipal affairs. 
Steps were taken to bring Red Deer under the 
Unincorporated Towns Ordinance,and a committee of 
the Board defined the proposed boundaries for the 
town.Later in the year the Board secured the 
appointment of Robert McClelland as a land guide 
for the district.Although the population of the 
village was less than one hundred,the Board decided 
to advertise in Toronto for a man to start a 
newspaper in Red Deer.Then as now road conditions 
were a major interest of the business men of Central 
Alberta,and the Board of Trade had the whole-hearted 
support of all the people of the area in an attempt 
to have the government of the Territories do something 
to improve conditions.A letter was sent to the 
Commissioner of Public Works at Regina pointing out 
that in the preceding year the hamlet of Red Deer by 
self taxation had raised the sum of four hundred 
dollars for roads and streets,and that it was 
not unreasonable to expect the government of the 
North-West Territories to make a grant of at least 
one hundred dollars,”in order that the roads may be 
made at least passable.” 

Governments must have moved slowly then, for 




























■ 









- 


































■ 

















- 



















- 107 - 


five years later the chairman of the Roads Committee 

reported that nothing had been done about opening 

some of the much-wanted roads.A representative of 

the government stated that the Territorial Assembly 

had made provision for the expenditure of five 

hundred dollars on the roads leading out of Red Deer. 

With perhaps intentional humor,the Board of Trade 

responded with a resolution pointing out to the 

government that the roads leading in to Red ^eer 

were nearly impassable.The members also sent a 

letter to the Commissioner of Public Works informing 

him that something should be done immediately about 

the bridge which had been swept away by the recent 

floods. 11 All means of crossing the river are now 

shut off,causing much hardship to the settlers,as 

well as much inconvenience to travellers,merchants 
61 

and others. "This question of public works in the 
Red Deer district was merely a manifestation of 
a much greater problem.Because the Dominion of 
Canada kept control of their natural resources, 
the North-West Territories had very meager funds. 

The members of the Board of Trade knew of the problem, 
and began to investigate the costs of a ferry,because 
they felt the government might be financially unable 


61.The Red Deer Board of Trade; minute Book ,1899 










































f 












. 





































- 108 - 


to replace the "bridge,at least for some years. 

Because the expected rush of settlers to the 
district had not materialized,the Board decided in 
1899 that something should he done to encourage 
immigration to Central Alberta.They appointed a 
committee to prepare a pamphlet setting forth the 
advantages of the region.When the material had been 
collected it was printed by the Methodist Book and 
Publishing House,Toronto.The Ontario origin and the 
Methodist faith of the founding families of the 
settlement led them to urge that business should 
be done with Toronto business houses whenever possible. 
If they wanted a teacher,an editor,an architect or 
any other professional person,the advertisements 
were invariably published in the Ontario capital. 

In 1900 a demand arose that Red Deer should 
attempt to become a judicial centre for its district. 
G-eorge W. Greene and Raymond G-aetz were appointed 
a committee to draft a petition asking that a 
court house be built.Their efforts were successful, 
and in August the Secretary was instructed to write 
the Minister of Public Works,Ottawa,expressing 
the satisfaction of the people of the area with the 
news that estimates had been passed for a court 
house at Red Deer. 






















. 







« 















































- 109 - 


In 1900 the Board of Trade undertook its 

second bis task in the field of municipal affairs 

when it undertook to have Red Deer incorporated 

as a town.The members of the Board did all the 

necessary preliminary work, and on June 20,1901 

62 

the new town was formally incorporated. 

In April,1901 the Board suggested an ingenious 
solution to the bridge problem.After considerable 
discussion the officials of the Canadian Pacific 
Railway granted permission to the people of 
Red Deer to make a plank road on the railway 
bridge,provided that a watchman was appointed to 
keep the public off the bridge at train time. 

The Board of Trade offered the position of watchman 
to Mr. J. Dgherwood at a salary of forty-five dollars 
a month,which it was hoped the Department of Public 
Works at Regina would pay.The substitute bridge 
served the needs of the people well,and it is strange 
that it was not more widely copied in the West.Later, 
however,the railway company strongly opposed any 
trespassing on their property. 

In July,1901 the Board requested the Ottawa 
government to stock Pine Lake and Sylvan Lake with 
"useful fish".On several occasions fish were released 
in Sylvan Lake,and in 1954 a representative of the 


62.Dealt with more fully in Chapter III. 






















‘ 



















- 






. 

« • 






















- 110 - 


Alberta Fish and G-ame Branch conducted surveys in 
the Pine Lake district with the object of stocking 
some of the small lakes with trout. 

In 1903 President H. H. G-aetz spoke on fhe Material 

Prosperity of the Town .His remarks indicate a 

growing spirit of optimism."He alluded to a few of 

the industries,namely the brickyards of Piper and 

Go., and the Red •‘-'eer Brick Co., capable of turning 

out three million a year each,the Red beer Lumber 

Company of Mr. Bawtinheimer,and the large increase 

in the lumber trade,the creamery with an unparalleled 

advance in output and the large business built up 

on its own merits.None of these industries had 

received any encouragement from the town.He mentioned 

the telephone system,and the prospect of having 

electric lights in the near future. He also said that 

while the town had prospered,the farmers also had 

in a measure been prosperous.Allusion was made to the 

advisability of inviting manufacturing industries, 

a flour mill,and electric trams or a railway to 

63 

the vast coal fields to the east.” Half a century 
later the brickyards and the lumber trade are no 
more,although a cement block company is flourishing. 
The creameries have closed,but a large condensery 


63 .The Red Deer Board of Trade; Minute Book .Dec. .1903 

























- 






' ■ 


- 


. 














- 

. 











































- 111 - 


has replaced them.The mines at Nordegg are having 
difficult times because the railways are using oil 
rather than coal.The line to the east has never 
materialized.The town,however,has flourished, 
not as a manufacturing centre but as a distributing 
point.The population is now about twenty times as 
great as when President G-aetz spoke. 

In 1904 the Board investigated the possibility 
of establishing a farmers * market in Red Deer 
where producers could sell directly to consumers. 

The scheme, which also interested the citizens of 
many other towns,was never tried in Red Deer,although 
it was frequently discussed. 

In the same year Captain Cottingham,the 
Dominion Land Agent,suggested that the Board of 
Trade urge the Dominion government to reserve a 
large tract of land along the river for a public 
park,In the area of his proposed park there is 
a very deep gorge which is much like the Grand 
Canyon,but,of course,on a smaller scale.Although 
the members gave some support to his scheme,they 
did not press for it,and no action was taken by 
the Dominion.Soon the land was taken by homesteaders 
and the opportunity of making it into a park was 
gone. 


In 1905 the major interest of the Board of Trade 













- 






, 

. 


' 




- 













































. 

























- 112 - 


was the creation of the new province.Because of 
its central location some members felt that Red 
Deer might be chosen as the site of the provincial 
capital.Edward Michener offered a free site for 
the government buildings on the East Hill,about 
where Dr.Parsons now has his home.The members of 
the Board of Trade felt that the economic benefits 
which would result from securing the capital 
would be considerable,and they spared no effort or 
expense in urging Red Deer's advantages .In April, 
1906 they persuaded Premier Rutherford and the 
members of the Assembly to visit the town.The 
guests inspected the proposed site,made many 
complimentary speeches about Red Deer,and selected 
Edmonton,when the time came,as the capital. 

Through 1905 and succeeding years the Board 
did all it could to attract industries to the town, 
but many of their prospective capitalists asked for 
many concessions before they would establish their 
industries in Red ^eer.For example,one man promised 
to start a flour mill if he were given a free site, 
exemption from taxes for ten years,and a cash 
bonus of five thousand dollars.Later another man 
offered to establish a pork-packing plant.The 
Board of Trade agreed with the promoter when he 






















‘ 

- 

1 


































- 






















. 


























-In¬ 


stated that the industry would "benefit the 
community,but rapidly lost interest when they 
learned that he was not prepared to invest any of 
ills own money.Proposals of this kind were typical 
of the attempts made by promoters to interest 
the citizens of Western towns in their schemes. 
Invariably the argument was advanced that if Red 
Deer did not accept the offer,some neighboring 
town would secure the industry. 

In 1905 stringent measures were adopted 

to force deliquent members to pay their fees. n The 

President shall cause to be read in open meeting 

the names of any members six months in arrears.Any 

absent member shall then be notified by mail or 

personal service.If this fails to bring results, 

the Secretary shall notify the member by registered 

letter to appear at the next meeting and show cause 

why he should not be expelled.Any member in arrears 

may not vote or speak on any question other than 

his own deliquency.He may not hold any office in 

64 

this association. M The final penalty seems an 
anti-climax. 

In 1906 a man from Chicago inquired about 
starting a brewery,but nothing came of his proposal. 
In 1954 a brewery did open.Another long-delayed 


64.The Red Deer Board of Trade; Minute Book,Nov.,1905 















. 













































. 


















. 





















- 114 - 


project was Mayor Edward Michener ! s suggestion in 
1906 that they should bore for gas.In 1953 and 
1954 fifteen producing oil wells were drilled 
about eight miles east of Red Deer. 

In 1907 the Secretary sent to the President 
of the Grand Trunk Pacific Railway a letter v/hich 
reveals the thoughts and hopes of the business men 
of Central Alberta forty-seven years ago. n The Board 
of Trade of Red Deer have authorized me to open 
up correspondence with your company with a view to 
securing connection with your line through Central 
Alberta by way of Red Deer. 

“Red Deer,as you are no doubt aware,is situated 
about one hundred miles from either Calgary or 
Edmonton.It is just half-way between the two and 
is the centre of a spendid agricultural district 
known as Central Alberta. 

“As a town it has many natural resources in 
addition to its central location to make it become 
an important place in the future.We have large 
deposits of coal both east and west,large timber 
interests,two extensive brickyards,as well as 
building stone. 

11 We notice by the map that a straight line 
running from Saskatoon to the Yellowhead Pass would 






























3 “ 

























' 







■ 







- 115 - 


just about pass through Red Deer,and it would give 

your company a much shorter route for through 

traffic than the present line by way of Edmonton. 

We would be pleased to hear from your company as 

to whether we may hope for railway connection with 

65 

the G-rand Trunk in the near future. M 

In 1907 Raymond G-aetz showed considerable 
foresight in a speech which he made to the Board. 

In the first place he urged the establishment of 
agricultural colleges throughout the province.In the 
second place he called attention to the need for 
protecting and enlarging the forests.In the third place 
he recommended the appointment of a commission to 
investigate the insurance business in Alberta.His 
last point was that co-operative coal mining should 
be undertaken under the auspices of the government. 

Later in the year the Board of Trade prepared 
a petition requesting that the Dominion government 
make Red Deer a port of entry.The customs authorities 
realized that an office in Red Deer would serve a 
large territory and granted the request.At first the 
amount of revenue collected was very small,but it 
increased gradually.In 1938 receipts were only 
$44,000,but in 1953 they were $343,000,definite evidence 
of the growth of commercial and industrial activity 


65 .M.A.Munroe,Secretary for 1907 ;letter 





















. 




































■ 































. 




■ 












* • - 






. 



-116 


66 

in the city and district. 

Although they were successful in securing 
the customs office,the members failed completely 
in obtaining an adjustment of freight rates,which 
they felt placed a great handicap on Red Deer. 

The problem was first discussed in 1907,and was 
a topic for debate at many meetings in the later 
years,but no solution satisfactory to the railway 
company and the people of the district was ever 
proposed.In the larger field high transportation 
costs have always been an obstacle to Alberta f s 
economy. 

There is only one typewritten entry in the 
original minute book,which ends with the meeting of 
January,1909. This is a resolution on civic affairs, 
moved by R.B.Welliver,who was prominent in the 
business life of the community for many years. 

The resolution called the attention of the town 
council to the condition of the streets,a matter which 
the Board of Trade frequently brought before the 
civic government. H Whereas Ross Street,one of the 
main business streets,and the first street that 
meets the eye of the transient public,is in a 
disgraceful condition,be it resolved that the 


66.R.W.E.Tetley,Collector of Customs; 

Newspaper Report,1953 












* 

' 
























Board of Trad© Photograph 
















EN T STORE 


BOARD OF TRADE PUBLICITY ,1913 

(This photograph appears to be an alteration 
of the one shov/ing Red Deer in 1913. ) 














- 117 - 

Town Council be requested to have Ross Street 

properly drained.The condition of our main street 

reflects in no small way the personnel of our 

67 

municipal government.” 

Throughout the prosperous period from 1909 
to 1914 the Board of Trade sought to attract 
industries to the area. The Board appointed a 
publicity director,who in 1913 prepared and 
distributed a large advertising pamphlet,which 
predicted among other things a population of 
twenty-five thousand for the town by 1920.A 
photographer in some way prepared a picture which 
showed street cars and large buildings as well as 
the familiar landmarks.Aithough this altered 
photograph was entitled Red Deer,1923,many people 
felt that it was of doubtful honesty.The pamphlet did, 
however,give valuable information about the 
agricultural possibilities of the Red Deer district. 

In 1945 another folder was issued,but it was much 
Smaller,and was limited to factual statements and 
actual pictures. 

In 1934 the Board of Trade was instrumental in 
arranging a Jubilee Celebration in honor of the 
fiftieth anniversary of the founding of Red Deer. 
Numerous interviews with old timers were published 
in the Advocate *s special edition.As a direct result 


67.The Red Deer Board of Trade; Minute Book, J an.12,1909 








- 118 - 


of this jubilee celebration the Central Alberta 
Old Timers’ Association came into being,and is 
still an active and thriving organization. 

In 1947 the Board of Trade was responsible for 
the publication of a city directory which gives 
the name,occupation and address of all the 
inhabitants of Red beer.This booklet has proved of 
great value to the citizens of the town and to 
visitors who wish to find someone living in the 
city.The system of house and street numbering, 
which made the directory possible,came about as a 
result of pressure from the Board on the City 
Council.In the original townsite survey the streets 
were all given names,but in later years this was 
modified,and some streets were numbered , but no 
house numbering was done,which meant that visitors 
had to be directed to an address by giving them a 
general description of the building.The system 
adopted in 1946 is similar to the one used in 
Edmonton.Ross Street and daetz Avenue,the two main 
throroughfares,are Fiftieth Street and Fiftieth Avenue. 

In concluding an account of Red Deer’s economic 
development a recent article in the Financial Post 
presents a business man’s appraisal of the city. 



















. 


I 













■ 

* 


















- 





































- 119 - 


"Red Deer 


Postwar 


To-day 

11,200 


Population 


4,042 


Retail Sales 


Production 


#1,679,690 #2,803,288 

14,247,000 #16,950,000 


Householders 


1,199 


2,105 


"Red Deer claims to be the fastest growing 
city in Alberta.Spending for construction is one 
yardstick.Building permits last year,valued at 
$>3, 885 ,250,were very nearly double the 1952 figure. 

"Five new firms settled in the city during the 
year,Chrysler Corporation established a warehouse 
for the supply of spare parts to the whole of Alberta. 
This plant employs forty people.Smith-Connors,makers 
of drill bits for hard-rock diamond drilling and 
the oil industry built a plant employing fifteen 
persons.The Red Deer Brewery,which is just beginning 
production,cost $ 1 , 500 , 000 ,and has a staff of fifty 
employees.Fry-Cadbury has built a central warehouse 
to supply the entire province,and employs fifteen 
workers.Western Supplies has built another warehouse 
for the supply of pipe and other plumbing fixtures. 
With a large labor supply Red Deer officials feel 
that they can look forward to an increase in the 
number of new firms,especially since the city is in 








- 120 - 


68 

an advantageous area for warehousing and distributing.” 

In the two hundred miles of prosperous 
country between Calgary and Edmonton there has to 
be some other centre of importance.Because it is 
on the one stream capable of supplying enough 
water for a large community,and because it is almost 
exactly half way between the two big cities,Red 
beer seems destined to become this centre.In this 
fact lies the key to Red Deer's economic history. 


68.The Financial Post,Toronto,April 24,1954,p.48 









CHAPTER III 


CIVIC DEVELOPMENT 
A. Municipal Government 

The first local government in Red Deer was 

established May 31, 1894 when the government of the 

North-West Territories declared that Red Deer was 

1 

an unincorporated town. This status allowed only 
a very small measure of self government because it 
did not give authority for the citizens of the town 
to elect a council.A public meeting was held on June 
14, at which Mr. R.M. Pardoe was appointed overseer 
for the year, and the tax rate was fixed at two mills. 
Apparently things went well in the village during the 
next year for no more public meetings were held 
until June, 1895, when the citizens again assembled 
with R.C. Brumpton, local merchant, as chairman, and 
Gr.W. Greene, local lawyer and banker, as secretary. 

The mill rate was left at the two mills set in the 
previous year, and Mr. Pardoe was requested to continue 
as overseer. The meeting directed the overseer to 
purchase two dozen wooden pails and three ladders 
for fire protection in the hamlet. 


1. The Red Deer Advocate ; Red Deer*s 

Municipal Development (article) July 11, 

1934 


- 121 - 

















. 


















. 








. 


. 















-12 2 - 


Under the Unincorporated Towns Ordinance an area 
might nominate an overseer, whose appointment had to be 
confirmed by the Territorial Government at Regina* The 
unincorporated town had defined boundaries within which 
a property tax might be levied. A meeting of ratepayers 
had to be held at least once a year, and the overseer 
reported to this meeting, which also appointed an auditor 
to check on the spending of the public funds. It serves as 
an example of the way in which the Territorial Government 
in the Canadian West kept a much closer check on local 
affairs than did the state and territorial governments in 
the western part of the United States* 

In the annual meeting for 1396 William Springbett, 
blacksmith, was nominated as overseer in succession to 
R* M. Pardoe. The meeting decided that a wooden sidewalk 
should be built from the Queen*s Hotel to the Alberta 
Hotel, that is, a very short distance east of the railway 
station. As far as the records show, this was the first 
public work undertaken in Red Deer. Raymond Gaetz, merchant, 
was selected as auditor for the year. 

The next recorded meeting was held in April, 1397* 
when a financial statement was presented to the ratepayers. 

















, 

. 




. 

. 


. 




• ■ 






. 

* 





-123- 

Receipts ..$126.76 

Balance from previous 

year. .. 3*93 

Total......$130.69 

Expenditures .. 90*36 

Balance ..$40.33 


By way of contrast, the 1954 estimated revenue of the 
City of Red Deer is as follows: 

Revenue 

a. Tax Levy ....$492,000 

b. Other taxes 5#,OCX) 

c. Grants §4,000 

d. Utility Profits 

110,000 

Total .$744,000 

One happy feature of the 1&97 report was that 
about one-third of the revenue raised during the year 
had not been spent, which resulted in a resolution that 
no taxes be levied in 1897* Another resolution stated 
that f, the overseer be paid ten dollars for spending what 
is on hand, and what he can collect. w The situation 
then was much better than to-day when all the city 
authorities may safely predict is constantly rising 
taxes. 

In 1$9$ by Ordinance 27 Red Deer was classified 
as a village, which gave the inhabitants the right to 












'jftizven 




-124- 


elect an overseer without reference to the Territorial 
Government. 2 Under the ordinance government was 
direct. There was no council, and the overseer carried 
out policies laid down in ratepayers 1 meetings. At the 
annual meeting held in March, 1&98 a levy of two mills 
was authorized for general revenue, the money from poll 
taxes, dog taxes and peddlars 1 licences being assigned to 
the overseer as his salary. Fifteen per cent of the 
property tax was to be set aside as a contingent fund 
before the balance was spent on street improvements. 

The village ordinance was very rigid, and the meeting 
sent a request to Regina that an amendment be granted 
which would allow residents to let their cattle run 
loose within the village limits, and that the overseer 
be permitted to arrange for the planting of shade trees 
at public expense. The second part of the request 
indicates very clearly how little authority the overseer 
actually had in matters of finance. 

Public funds were not large, and citizens were often 
expected to donate their services to the village, A 
proposal to pay Mr. A. B. Nash the sum of five dollars for 
auditing the accounts, which only amounted to #152, 
provoked a stormy debate at the annual meeting of 


2. J. ¥. Judge: Speech on Red Deer’s 

Municipal Growth; Red Deer 
Advocate, 1953 





, 


. 

* 

1 

„ 

. . 

' :V,: ' ‘ ' Vi ■ ■ V? > ' -V IV, ' 

! 

• ■ 


, 

. 

. 

... 





- 125 - 


ratepayers held in the spring of 1900. The majority 
felt that a citizen should not expect pay for a task of 
this kind, and defeated the proposal. One reason that 
the amount of money handled by the overseer was so small 
was that the school board appointed their own assessor 
who collected the school tax directly from the taxpayers. 
The custom of sending a requisition to the municipal 
authorities for the amount needed to operate the schools 
developed later.^ 

The year 1900 saw the beginning of a period of 
fairly rapid growth and there was a need for increased 
revenue. A two mill rate had sufficed in 1$99, but in 
1900 the rate had jumped sharply to seven. The rate¬ 
payers 1 meeting which had agreed to the higher levy also 
appointed a licence inspector and passed a resolution 
prohibiting cattle and horses running at large within the 
village between the hours of nine in the evening and six 
in the morning. The pioneers objected to having their 
sleep broken by nocturnal raids on their gardens by the 
neighbors 1 stock. 

In 1901 Mr. A. B. Nash was selected as overseer. He 
was the last person to hold that office because the 


3. Red Deer Public School District 104, 
Minute book. 





t 


.... . ,/v ■. ; 


















. 

. 

f . 

' ‘ ■ ' • ■ ' 1 T ;;; ? .;X' 

' 

X 

» 

■ 






-126- 


people of the village now felt that they needed more 
autonomy in civic matters than they had under the village 
ordinance, and therefore, they should seek to have Red Deer 
incorporated as a town. A committee investigated the 
matter. Their report to a public meeting showed that 
incorporation would bring increased autonomy and increased 
expense. The meeting voted by a large majority, though 
not unanimously, to apply to Regina for a change in status. 
A proclamation by Lieutenant-Governor Forget established 
the new town of Red Deer on June 20,1901, and appointed 
George Greene, lawyer, as returning officer for the civic 
elections, which resulted in these choices: 

Mayor - Mr. R. L. Gaetz 
Council - D. S. Long 
W. A. Moore 
H. Sharpies 
W. Springbett 
R. C. Brumpton 
F. E. Wilkins 

The council then appointed George Green as the first 
solicitor for the town, with L. C. Fulmer as the first 
Secretary-Treasurer.^ The estimates for the year showed 


4. Photograph of First Council -opposite 

page 127 









. 






r 


.. 



» 





- 













LOWER PICTURES 

I. Mr. R.L. G-aetz in later life 
Mayor 1901 - 1903 

IX. Dr. Leonard G-aetz 

The founder of Red Deer 

Mr. A.T. Stephenson 

Commissioner 1908 - 1934 


III. 

























-127- 


that the committee had not been wrong in forecasting 
increased expenditures* The council planned to spend 
f2591.00 or nearly three times the amount spent in the 
preceding year. The first banking business, a loan against 
uncollected taxes, was done with Mr. Greene’s private 
bank. The regular statutory meeting was set for the 
first Wednesday in each month, but this was changed 
frequently in the following years. A surveyor, Major 
Laurie, was engaged to mark out the street lines, and a 
poundkeeper, Joseph Smith, was appointed to prevent 
animals from running at large within the town. An inci¬ 
dent which was regarded very seriously at the time 
although it caused considerable amusement in retrospect, 
was the matter of a dead horse. Either as a practical 
joke or as a protest against the relentless advance of 
civilization some pioneer deposited the body of a long- 
dead animal at the east end of Ross Street, the main 
thoroughfare. The council made a determined effort to 
discover the culprit, but had no success. Certain other 
settlers were slow to conform to the new conditions, and 
in 1902 William Posthill, a prominent merchant, protested 
vigorously about people who persisted in dumping loads of 
barnyard manure in the depression which was close to his 








- 

. 


. 


' . 


. 


, 













QC 


. 


: -i ' 


» 

, 
















’ 














-12 a- 


house on Ross Street* The aldermen promised to take 
action against the practice of dumping rubbish indiscrim¬ 
inately throughout the townsite, and appointed Dr. Denovan 
as the first Medical Officer of Health* Though the 1901 
census gave Red Deer’s population as 323, there were no 
sewers, and no water supplies other than shallow wells 
which were easily polluted. A housewife who wanted milk 
simply set a pitcher on the porch steps and the milkman, 
who carried in his wagon a large can of unpasteurized 
milk, a funnel and a quart can, measured the required 
amount into the pitcher.^ Farmers might offer the produce 
of their own farms for sale in the town without any inspec¬ 
tion, and it was not until as late as 1930 that a person 
offering meat for sale had to produce for inspection the 
head, liver and lungs of the animal in order that it 
might be checked for disease. However, with the appointment 
of Dr. Denovan the council began a policy of seeking to 
improve public health conditions. The aldermen stated that 
they would support the medical officer in all reasonable 
steps to protect the community against epidemics, impure 
food, improper disposal of wastes, and any other practices 
which might menace the general health of the inhabitants. 


5. Annie L. Gaetz; op . cit.,p.l26 



■ : 

, 

. 

' 

» 

.... . :: 
, t • 7 ■/■'.. " , . j,r ■ .■ c: 

* 





a 



, 


• 



• 



, 





■ 






. 







-129- 


In 1902 the town council made strong representations 
to the Territorial Government with regard to roads. They 
urged that a system of main thoroughfares, which they 
named colonization roads, be established by the territories, 
and that from these main arteries the local authorities 
could establish branch roads. The scheme was a good one, 
but because the natural resources were under federal 
control, the territories had very restricted revenues, and 
any major highway development was too expensive for them 
to undertake, so nothing came of the council’s request. 

By 1903 the major issue in the municipal field was 
the provision of utilities in the expanding town. John 
T. Moore, who had been prominent in the Saskatchewan 
Land and Homestead Company, organized the Western General 
Electric Light Company, obtaining for this concern a 
twenty-five year franchise and the right to use the streets 
and lanes without charge in erecting a distribution system. 
The town undertook to install street lights and to pay 
the company for the power used by them at a fixed rate 
per light per year. Mr. Moore also received a franchise 
for the Western Telephone Company, which was to be exempt 
from municipal taxes. The council engaged John Galt, a 
qualified engineer, to estimate the cost of installing 


. 

* 

. 

: 


. 

- 

- 














* 


. 




, 


-13 0- 


waterworks and sewers. They agreed to purchase the 
electrical energy to drive the water pumps from the 
Western General. 6 Later the citizens criticized the 
1903 council severely for granting such generous terms, 
but in 1903 the success of the enterprise was doubtful. 

For example, it was not until 1906 that Frank Michener 
installed the first commercial power motor connected to 
the company 1 s lines.^ After prolonged negotiations the 
City of Red Deer in 1926 took over the generating plant 
and distributing system, operating the utility as a very 
profitable municipal enterprise. In the same year that 
they considered the question of electric light and a 
waterworks system (1903) the members of the town council 
decided to give a pledge of financial support to the 
Memorial Hospital, which had been built by private sub¬ 
scription as a memorial to three young men of the district 
who had been killed in the South African War. The council 
estimated that it needed eight thousand dollars for 
municipal purposes in 1903, and this sum could be raised 

d 

by a mill rate of eighteen. 

In 1904 the ideas of the council were ahead of the 


6. The Red Deer Advocate , July IS, 1934 

7. F. W. Galbraith; Fifty Years of Newspaper Work, 

P. 20 

S. City of Red Deer, municipal records 












-131- 


ideas of the ordinary citizens. A gasoline fire engine 
and one thousand feet of hose were obtained for demonstra¬ 
tion purposes, but the bylaw to purchase this was defeated 
by a vote of the ratepayers, who did not think such 
equipment necessary. In October the burgesses did give 
approval to the waterworks plan by a vote of fifty-nine 
to nine, and work started on that utility in the fall. 
However, though the vote indicated overwhelming support 
for the undertaking, Mayor Michener in 1905 came in for 
severe criticism by some people who felt that he and the 
council were embarking on too pretentious a program of 
public works, including streets, sidewalks and the water 
system. Incidentally, it was not until 1906 that a start 
was made on providing public sewers. The pipes that were 
installed were very small, and in times of heavy rain 
flooding of basements occurred. No storm sewers were 
laid, although the need became apparent as early as 1913* 
Even in 1954 this utility is lacking, and it must be 
provided before proper streets can be constructed in 
many parts of the city* 

In 1905 dissension arose within the council over 
the matter of paying for the new utilities. Some of the 
members wanted to pay at least part of the cost out of 
current revenue, but the majority favored the issuing of 










-132- 


debentures for the total cost. The majority view was 
certainly the popular one in Western Canada in 1905, 
for practically all municipal authorities favored borrow¬ 
ing for public works, overlooking the fact that interest 
charges nearly doubled the cost of many undertakings. 

The borrowing also was a symptom of the lack of capital 
in the West. By way of contrast, in the period after 1920 
Red Deer adopted a pay-as-you-go policy with excellent 
results, clearing off all debt, and receiving maximum 
value for its tax money because nothing had to go for 
interest. Unfortunately, by 1953 the boom after the 
Second Great War had resulted in heavy borrowings, which 
built up the funded debt to f800,000 with interest to 
maturity calculated at |>183,000. 

In 1906 an instance of municipal red tape aroused 
much resentment. A man by the name of John Matson was 
refused admission to the hospital because he had no order 
for hospitalization. A coroner T s jury condemned the 
action very strongly. ?f We cannot but express our strong 
disapproval of the officials of the hospital who refused 
admission to a dying man because an order was not first 
obtained."9 


9. The Red Deer Advocate , April 1906 














* 

. 













f 










* 










. 






















' 


-133- 


In 1906 the council had a civic census taken. The 

population according to this count numbered 1,710. By 

way of contrast the civic census of 1954 gave a total 

of 10,7^9 which was an increase of 1625 over the figure 

for 1953* The increase in the one year almost equalled 

, 10 

the town’s population in 1906. 

In 1906 the council received protests that gambling 
was being carried on within the town limits. A bylaw 
which strictly prohibited slot machines or other gambling 
devices was passed, but proved difficult to enforce. The 
Agricultural Society’s annual fair always included a 
midway on which gambling booths were an important feature. 
Other local organizations often sponsored carnivals at 
which games of chance formed the main entertainment. In 
all of these cases the local authorities made no attempt 
to prosecute the operators of the gambling devices. In 
1952 Police Magistrate James Smith at the annual meeting 
of ratepayers denounced in strong terms the lax way in 
which the anti-gambling ordinance was enforced in Red Deer* 
In 1906 municipal affairs were flourishing in Red 
Deer, and the ratepayers approved bylaws which provided 
$20,000 for waterworks, $4,000 for street improvements 
and $5,000 for the erection of a fireball. Interest 


10. Ernest Newman, City Clerk, April 30, 1954 












-134- 


among the citizens was not great for only fbrty out 
of a qualified two hundred and thirteen took the trouble 
to vote. The provision of a fireball, though, did indicate 
considerable development from the days when fire pro¬ 
tection equipment consisted of a few wooden ladders and 
pails. The new fire hall also indicated the hope of 

future growth., for it bore the inscription "Firehall 
Number One". There is not a "Fireball Number Two" even 
half a century later. 

Red Deer was one of the Western towns which adopted 
the commission form of government. Two commissioners, one 
of whom was always the mayor, were given extensive 
powers, subject to review by the elected council. The 
new form of administration proved very successful. Much 
credit for the success of the experiment should go to 
the late A. T. Stephenson who held the position of Secretary- 
Treasurer and Commissioner for the town and city from 
190& to 1935. Mr. R. S. Gillespie held the position from 
1935 to 1953, doing a very fine job of administration 
during that time. Mr. J. A. Beveridge became commissioner 
in 1953. 

Although relations between the town council and the 
school board were generally harmonious, in 1907 the 
council received a snub on the occasion of the opening 




-’Ino 

. . : 

■ 

* 

C‘X 





- 


* . J. f : 





' 5 i 





• 


, .1 





- 







« 

. 

. 

. 










































-135- 


ceremonies at the new school. Because in 1906 the council 
had not invited the trustees to a banquet given the 
members of the Legislative Assembly, the school board 
refused to have the mayor and aldermen take any part 
in the opening of the school, and did not even invite 
them to atteiid the function. 

In 1907 the town council and the Western General 
Electric Light Company went to arbitration over a dispute 
about rates. The decision favored the company, which was 
allowed to increase its rates from twenty-five to thirty- 
five dollars for a business telephone, and ten dollars to 
twenty-three dollars for a domestic telephone. The 
rate for electricity was set at twenty cents per kilowatt 
hour, while the charge for street lights was increased from 
seventy-five dollars to one hundred dollars per year. As 
wages were much lower than those paid in 1954, these 
utility rates seem very high, especially for electricity. 
However few homes had any appliances, other than lights 
and the total power consumption was small. 

Throughout 190& and 1909 business conditions were 
good. Tax collections, an excellent indication of general 
economic conditions within the community, amounted to 
nearly ninety per cent of the levy each year. The 1913 
















































































































- 136 - 


assessment showed a very great increase, but this was 
mainly the result of inflated values placed on unimproved 
lots. However, the owners stopped paying taxes on these 
lots when they could not sell them at a profit and as a 
result of tax seizures, by 1920 the city held title to 
almost all vacant land within the city limits. 

In April 1909 Mr. A. G. Ayres became assistant to 
A. T. Stephenson in the town office. He held that position 
and also that of city clerk for nearly forty years. Red 
Deer has been fortunate in having conscientious men of 
ability such as Mr. Ayres, Mr. Gillespie and Mr. Stephenson 
who gave many years of outstanding service to the munici¬ 
pality. Mr. Stephenson in particular was recognized 
outside Red Deer as an authority on municipal finance, 
and in 1940 was honored by a life membership in the Union 
of Alberta Municipalities. 11 Another public-spirited 
citizen was Mr. H. H. Gaetz, who in 1909 donated to the 
town a tract of land along the south bank of the river. 

This land became Gaetz Park, to-day one of the beauty 
spots of the town. Mr. Gaetz in 1915 became Professor 
of Pharmacy at the University of Alberta. 


11. Annie L. Gaetz; op. cit.,p.l29 





.. ' . V 




-137- 


In 1909 the council made an unsuccessful attempt to 
acquire the electric light plant. The company and the 
municipality could not agree on the value of the unexpired 
portion of the franchise. 

The lack of planning in the growth of many Western 
towns was exemplified in a court case in February, 1910 
when Philip Pidgeon began legal proceedings to unseat 
Francis Galbraith from the town council. The basis of the 
action lay in the fact that the properties along Waskasoo 
Avenue were divided by the boundary of the town. As a 
result Mr. Galbraith's house was in the rural municipality 
of Pine Lake, but his outbuildings were in Red Deer. 

Mr. Pidgeon argued that Galbraith, therefore, was not a 
resident of the town. Judge Scott awarded the decision 
to Galbraith, but ordered that each party should bear his 
own costs. The judgment established the precedent that 
in cases where part of a property lay within a municipality 
the owner might claim to be a resident of that unit, 
provided, of course, that he did not claim to be a resident 
of the other municipality also. Fortunately no house 
was divided by the boundary or the case might have been 
much more complicated. 

In April 1910 the first mention of automobiles 
appeared in the council's minutes. The aldermen decreed 




. 

' 










. 

. 

. 

Z 

* 

* 




. 

. 








-138- 


that no car should exceed a speed of ten miles an hour 
within the limits of the town. Horses, though, were still 
the chief means of transportation, and signs warned drivers 
that fines would be levied on anyone who rode or drove 
across the river bridge at a speed greater than a walk. 

Only the venturesome made long trips by automobile, and a 
person who drove his car to Calgary or Edmonton was well 
advised to carry an axe, a shovel, and a block and tackle. 

On August 11, 1910 Sir Wilfred Laurier visited Red 
Deer. The council shared with the local Liberal Association 
the costs of twelve hundred dollars which were incurred 
in arranging a reception for him. It was not until August 
1953 that another prime minister spent any time in Red Deer, 
but in the case of the last visit the city council made 
no grant towards defraying the expenses of Mr. St. Laurent. 

In 1911 an adjacent municipality was organized when 
the people living north of the river obtained incorpo¬ 
ration of their district as the Village of North Red Deer. 

It retained its separate identity until it amalgamated 
with Red Deer in 1947. Because this area had no water 
or sewer lines, the provision of utilities in North Red 
Deer has been a major undertaking for the city. The 
basic problem is one which confronts many Alberta cities. 


. 

■ 

* 


. . 

. 











■ 










' 








. 










/BO 

. ' 

. 

* 








OPENING- OF THE 1911 BASEBALL SEASON 

Mayor Welliver about to deliver the first ball 
(Photograph by courtesy of W.J.Botteril) 





-139- 


People build outside the city limits because taxes are 
lower there and building restrictions are very minor. 

After the region has been built up it seeks union with 
the adjacent city in order to obtain the necessary public 
utilities, but the city is reluctant to take it over 
because the taxes obtained from the area are far less 
than the expenses incurred there. The Red Deer Town 
Planning Commission proposes to meet the problem by 
establishing a minimum of four acres for small holdings. 

If a landowner wishes to subdivide he must pre-pay the 
costs of streets, sidewalks, water mains and sewers, in 
all a charge of about six hundred dollars on a fifty-foot 
lot. 

Tiie census of 1911 showed a population of only 
slightly more than two thousand people,^ but the municipal 
authorities confidently expected that this would soon 
increase by five or ten times. The commissioners made 
a report to the council on traffic conditions. Tf The 
congestion of traffic on Ross Street has increased 
rapidly, and we must anticipate that it will go on 
increasing, and that in time street cars will be running 
on our streets. ” The congestion came after the Second 
Great War, not on Ross Street but on Gaetz Avenue, which 
forms part of Number Two Highway. 


12. 211S 




















■ 




,.*■ ; . - ■ 




f 






















, 






















. 

























- 140 - 


In June 1911 the town c ouncil and local citizens 
raised sufficient money to honor the boy scout troop. 

A bandit by the name of Kelly shot down the chief of 
police who tried to arrest him as he was holding up 
two citizens. The bandit escaped. While hundreds of 
adults searched the countryside Scoutmaster A. R. Gibson 
had the boys check the vacant lots within the town itself 
and they found the wanted man. The funds provided by the 
council were used to send Patrol Leaders Donald Ghadsey 
and Phillip Galbraith to the King T s Rally in England of 
scouts from all over the world. 

In 1913 Reel Deer obtained a city charter, becoming 
the fifth city in Alberta both in order of incorporation 
and in population. Francis Galbraith had the honor of 
becoming the first Mayor of the City.^3 


13. The following men have held the office 
of Mayor: 


1901 - 1903 

1904 

1905 - 1906 
1907 - 1903 

1909 

1910 

1911 - 1912 

1913 

1914 

1913 - 1916 
1917 - 191S 
1919 - 1920 
1921 - 1924 

(Continued 


R. L. Gaetz 

G. A. Love 

E. Michener 

H. H. Gaetz 

W. G. Botteril 

S. E. McKee 

R. B. Welliver 

F. W. Galbraith 

S. N. Carscallen 
J. A. Carswell 

G. W. Smith 
W. E. Lord 
John Collison 
on next page) 









. 

. ■ 

. 









































' 



















-141- 


In the same year, 1913, economic conditions throughout 
Western Canada were poor and Red Deer suffered severely. 

In August the city could only secure a bid of eighty-three 
for six per cent debentures, and by December the city 
was unable to pay the school board its demands because 
the banks had refused to extend further credit. Unemploy¬ 
ment became a problem which the municipal authorities 
bravely tried to solve by embarking on a program of 
public works, but financial difficulties soon brought 
this construction to a halt.^ 

The year 1914 was the beginning of a period in 
which the watchword in municipal affairs was simply ?T economy J? . 


13. (Continued from page 140) 


1925 - 1927 
192£ - 1930 
1931 - 1932 
1933 - 1936 
1937 - 1943 

1944 - 1947 

1945 - 1949 
1950 - 1951 
1952 - 1953 
1954 

Commissioners: 


E. G. Johns 
H. J. Snell 

F. W. Turnbull 
W. P. Code 

E. S. Hogg 
H. W. Halladay 
C. R. Bunn 
J. W. Bettenson 
Paul Crawford 
H. W. Halladay 


190$ - 1935 A. T. Stephenson 

1935 - 1953 R. S. Gillespie 

1953 J. A. Beveridge 

First City Council: S. N. Carscallen; 

J. A. Carswell; W. E. Lord; G. W. Smith 

G. H. Murrin; W. J. Botteril 
(Murrin resigned and was replaced by 
W. Piper) 


> 


14. Francis Galbraith; op . cit.,p.24 









-142- 


As the population began to decline speculators just 
refused to pay taxes on the hundreds of lots which they 
had hoped to sell at a profit. The assessment dropped and 
the mill rate rose.-^ 


Year 

Assessment 

Mill Rate 

City Debt 

1910 

11 , 460,000 

22 

$ 177,000 

1914 

$ 4 , 229,000 

16 

$ 440,000 

1918 

$ 2 , 621,000 

25 

$ 421,000 

1922 

# 1 , 649,000 

65 

$ 405,000 

1934 

$ 1 , 362,000 

41 

#125,000 

1952 

$ 6 , 051,000 

42.5 

$715,000 


During the period of John Collison f s mayoralty 
the council, largely on the urgings of the commissioners, 
adopted the policies which led to a slow, steady improvement. 
Borrowings were replaced by a pay-as-you-go policy and 
public works were cut to a minimum. In his report for 
1922 Commissioner Stephenson stated, "The expenditures for 
this year have been kept down as low as possible, and we 
have been trying to save every dollar possible. "By the 
early 1930 f s Red Deer T s financial position was excellent. 

The depression actually placed little strain on the munici¬ 
pal government. Some attempt was made to care for the 
unemployed by public works such as a new water reservoir 


15. City of Red Deer; Annual Reports 








, 


















- 








. 
















-143“ 


and grading and gravelling the streets, but assistance 
mostly took the form of straight relief payments. Red 
Deer f s virtually debt-free condition attracted widespread 
Interest, and municipal officials from many places visited 
the town to try to learn the secret of its financial 
success. The answer to their question lay in efficient 
officials and an avoiding of any undertakings which 
could not be paid out of current revenue. The profits 
on the electric light and power system, which had been 
bought from the Western General in 1926, made it unnec¬ 
essary in many years to strike any mill rate for municipal 
purposes, but only for schools and hospital. 

A policy which was widely copied in Central Alberta 
was adopted in Red Deer with regard to the sale of city- 
owned lots. After 1936 a moderate amount of building 
began. The city sold lots only to individuals who 
guaranteed to erect substantial improvements within one 
year. Speculation became impossible because title was 
not transferred until the new building had passed inspec¬ 
tion by city officials. The price charged for the land 
was nominal because the main object was to get more 
property on the tax roll. 

In 1947 Red Deer entered a second boom period, which 
placed a severe strain on municipal finances. Although 
millions of dollars of new property has been added to the 








-144- 


assessment roll, the demand for public works has forced 
the council into very heavy borrowings. For the average 
citizen taxes have more than doubled, while at the same time 
services have become poorer and poorer. Streets that were 
gravelled and well maintained in the 1930 T s are now quagmires 
in wet weather and thick with choking dust after a day 
without rain. Many citizens sigh for the efficiency and 
economy of the past. From the larger standpoint an important 
question is being tested in Red Deer municipal government: 

Can a city which is largely residential find the tax 
revenues to provide a satisfactory level of public services? 

The financial picture for the city of Red Deer in 
March 1954 is shown in the following statistics:*^ 


#3,300,000 

#492,000, including 


1954 Assessment 

Tax levy 


#247,000 for schools and #34,000 for hospital. 
Other taxes, such as special assessments, raise 
the total revenue to be obtained locally to 
# 550,000 

Provincial grant s #34,000 

Estimated profit on sale of electric power 
#110,000 (or about twelve mills on the assessment) 
1954 mill rate 56 mills 


16. The Red Deer Advocate , March 17, 1954 











-145- 


The post-war tax rates have been as follows: 

1946—44 mills; 1949—45 mills; 1950—55 mills; 1951— 

52 mills; 1952—42.5 mills; I 953 -- 5 S mills. In 1954 
higher assessments were imposed on all properties. Taxes 
on most residential properties are about double what they 
were at the end of the Second Great War. 

With relation to Central Alberta generally Red Deer*s 
municipal history has shown that the commission form of 
government can be made to function well in a small community. 
It has shown also that a community may recover from practi¬ 
cally bankrupt conditions provided there is an almost 
static population, but even the most careful management 
cannot prevent a load of municipal debt in a period of 
rapid expansion of population. Citizens who have gone 
to neighboring communities to settle have carried from 
Red Deer a tradition of intelligent interest in civic 
affairs. Municipal councils often serve as a training 
ground for men who later play a prominent part in pro¬ 
vincial or federal affairs, but with the exception of 
Edward Michener who served as mayor and later became a 
senator, no member of the Red Deer council went on to 
play a part of prominence on the wider stage. 




centre is Gaetz Avenue 





















i * 





PROMINENT CITIZENS 

I.F.W. Galbraith 

First Mayor of the City of Red Deer, 1913 

II.R.8. Gillespie 

Commissioner 1934 - 1953 

III. E.S. Hogg 

Mayor 1937 - 1943 

IV. John Collison 

Mayor 1921 - 1924 

V. James Bower 

First President of the U.F.A. , 1909 

VI. Mrs. J.A. McCreight 

First woman member of the School Board , 1926 














- 146 - 


B. Red Deer’s Political History- 

Red Deer’s political party history has been rather 
an unorthodox one. John T. Moore, Edward Michener, and 
Dr. Michael Clark are three names that serve to recall 
interesting issues and campaigns. Even before the creation 
of the Province of Alberta in September, 1905 Mr. Moore 
offered himself as a non-party candidate who would seek 
to obtain the provincial capital for Red Deer.-*- He 
argued that in nearly all the American states the capitals 
were not the large commercial centres, and, though Edmonton 
was the centre of the new province geographically, Red 
Deer was the centre of the more settled part. Their 
national organization urged the Liberals in and around Red 
Deer to throw their support to the organized Liberal campaign 
which was planned for the Alberta provincial elections 
rather than to work for an independent. Because he could 
not hope for victory unless he had the support of one of the 
major parties, Mr. Moore swung to the Liberal side, winning 
the nomination as the candidate for that party. However, 
one group professed to have no faith in Mr. Moore’s 
conversion, and nominated A. D. McKenzie of Penhold as 
a second Liberal candidate. The provincial Liberal 
convention in Calgary evaded the issue by excluding both 


1. Red Deer Advocate, June 1905 







-147- 


the Moore and McKenzie delegations from all proceedings. 
Therefore in the November elections both men claimed to 
be the Liberal candidate for Red Deer. Although the editor 
of the Advocate wrote that Dr. Gaetz was tf making a grave 
mistake by allowing himself to be drawn into the troubled sea 
of politics", Dr. Gaetz accepted the Conservative nomination, 
and campaigned vigorously for that party. Even families 
divided on the issue, some of Dr. Gaetz f s own sons, for 
example, supporting him while others worked strongly for 

o 

Mr. Moore. The majority of the voters in the constituency 
thought that Mr. Moore was the better man to advance Red 
Deer f s economic interests in the Legislature, and he won by 
a small majority. The total vote, which was not large, 
showed the following results: Moore 532; Gaetz 4$&; McKenzie 
&0. The Liberals won the election with successful candidates 
in almost every constituency in the province. In its first 
provincial election Red Deer by a narrow margin had voted 
with the majority party, although the town itself actually 
gave a majority for the Conservatives. 

In the election of 1909 the Rutherford government 
swept the province, winning thirty-four out of forty-one 
seats. Red Deer, however, was on the losing side this time 
electing Edward Michener as an Independent over John T. 

Moore. Michener 1 s majority was 163*^ Although he had been 


2. W. J. Botteril; oral statement 

3. The Red Deer Advocate , March 1909 








-148- 


elect ed as an Independent, Michener, who had Conservative 
leanings, became the leader of the latter party in the 
Legislative Assembly. Mr. R. B. Welliver became the Liberal 
candidate in the elections of April, 1913* He conducted 
a vigorous campaign against Michener, who managed to win, 
this time as an avowed Conservative, by the narrow margin 
of 31 votes. As an example of how strictly party lines 
were drawn in 1913 > Mr. Botteril, the Conservative leader 
in the constituency, stated that on the day before the 
election he had been able to predict the results in each 
poll within a matter of a few votes. Within the town 
itself the Conservative majority was larger proportionately 
than it was in the constituency at large. Both candidates 
had promised to promote legislation to prohibit the sale 
of liquor in the open bar as each felt that this pledge 
would gain him the support of the influential Moral Reform 
League. However, party allegiance rather than any specific 
issue determined the election. Because so many settlers in 
the Red Deer district had come from Ontario where the 
Conservative tradition was strong, that party had an ad¬ 
vantage. Regardless of the causes, Red Deer again had 
voted for a minority party. 

In the 1916 elections Michener and Welliver were the 
candidates. Feeling ran so high that even the school 
children chanted slogans in support of the man their 









. 



, 


t 










' 


. 

. 

: , 

! 




















■ 






* 







































-149- 


parents favored. When all the votes except those from one 
small poll in the Rocky Mountain House region had been 
tallied, Welliver led by a small margin. Because the vote 
from the small poll was much larger than had been expected, 
and because this vote went almost solidly for Michener, 
the Conservatives won this election by a very slight majority^ 
In 1917 Mr. Michener received an appointment to the 
Senate as a reward for his efforts for the Conservative 
party in Alberta. The Liberal party in the Red Deer 
constituency was divided between those who approved of 
Dr. Clark's supporting the Borden government, and those who 
strongly opposed his action. In the by-election which 
was made necessary by Michener f s resignation those Liberals 
who thought that Clark was in the right decided that a 
Unionist candidate should enter the provincial field. At 
a joint convention Francis Galbraith, a former Liberal, 
received the nomination as a Unionist candidate. tf Unionist tT 
was an unfortunate term because the members of this new 
party certainly were not united. The Michener wing of the 
Conservative party favored F. W. Kenny. Other and more 


4. Francis Galbraith; op . cit ., p26 




- 150 - 


inf luential people also displayed opposition to Galbraith. 
"The Liberal government at Edmonton did not take kindly to 
this Unionist game in provincial affairs, and as the U. F. A. 
seemed also to be growing in strength and interest in 
politics, they determined to hit hard and put an end by 
decisive action in the Red Deer by-election to those anti¬ 
party and independent movements. I went to Edmonton and 
assured Premier Stewart of my good faith towards the 
government as a non-party representative, but they wanted 
a straight supporter.The cabinet spared no effort in 
supporting John J. Gaetz, a pioneer farmer, with the result 
that the Unionists were so thoroughly beaten that Galbraith 
lost his deposit. The decisive victory at Red Deer, 
however, had no lasting effect on the fortunes of the 
provincial Liberal party, which was swept out of office by 
the U. F. A. in 1921. Red Deer on this occasion was with 
the majority, returning G. ¥. Smith of the U. F. A. in 
preference to Mr. Gaetz. The farmer victory indicated that 
common economic interests were cutting across the old party 
affiliations. 

Red Deer continued to support the U. F. A. government 
until the death of Mr. Smith in 1931* Because economic 
conditions were almost desperate there was a strong protest 
vote in the by-election. Feeling against the government 
was so strong in Red Deer, which had previously been 


5. Francis Galbraith; op . cit ., p.27 








' 

. 

















. 








■ 






. 

. 

- 












. 




. 

■ 

. 




. 


, 





















regarded as a safe U. F. A. seat, that even Raymond Gaetz, 
one of the most respected men in the community, was unable 
to hold the riding for the farmers 1 party, and W. E. Payne, 
a strong Conservative, won the by-election. Disunity in 
the U. F. A. ranks also helped to bring about the defeat, 
which was a forecast of things to come. In the 1935 
general election the new Social Credit party won the Red 
Deer seat by an overwhelming majority, although in the town 
itself the contest was not as one-sided as it was at many 
rural polls where the Social Credit majority was often as 
great as fifty to one. 

A small incident which occurred at a rural meeting 
may serve to explain the mood of those depression days. 

Mr. Speakman, the Federal member, was attacking the Social 
Credit theories with considerable effect. A farmer stood 
up and stopped him, saying, IT Mr. Speakman, please don T t go 
on. My position is desperate, and if you destroy my hope 
in Social Credit, I can see nothing ahead of me but suicide 
Another farmer gave his reasons for voting as he did in 
these words: ”1 know I don f t understand Aberhart T s theories 
but I’ve listened to his preaching for a long time, and I 
think that he’s a godly man whom I can trust. I have 
faith in him.” In the Red Deer area the original Social 
Credit victory of A. J. Hooke resulted from an odd mixture 


6. E. A. Wood (Reporter); oral statement 














. 









; ■ ■ 


■ 






' 




















. 








- • ' - - . ■ 

. 

. 














' 











. 

, 



















- 152 - 


of almost equal parts of economic despair, fundamentalist 
religion, and efficient organization of every part of the 
constituency. 

By 1940 dissatisfaction with the Social Credit 
administration had become strong in the Red Deer riding. 

The opposition groups combined their efforts in support 
of Alfred Speakman who ran as an Independent. He won 
over the Social Credit candidate, George McCullough. Mr. 
Hooke did not stand in Red Deer, but instead was elected 
in Rocky Mountain House. Unlike Moore and Michener, who 
soon dropped their designation of Tf Independent”, Mr.Speakman, 
who died in office in 1943, remained aloof from any of the 
older parties, and because he had been a federal member 
for fourteen years, was an effective critic of the adminis¬ 
tration. In the by-election made necessary by his death 
the Independents failed to maintain their unity, and David 
Ure regained the riding for Social Credit. Ure f s victory 
was partly the result of a new development: Many people 
now regarded Social Credit not as a radical but rather as 
an ultra-Conservative party, and even in 1943 the Conservative 
tradition was strong in Red Deer. Ure easily retained the 
seat in 1944 and succeeding general elections. At the 
time of his death in 1953 he held the position of Minister 
of Agriculture. 


. 

* 








. 





























. 





. ■; 
























, 








, $ 


































-153- 


In the by-election held in the spring of 1954 Ked 
Deer, as in the days of Edward Michener, became one of the 
few Alberta constituencies to return a Conservative to 
the provincial house, Cameron Kirby, a local lawyer, 
defeated Donald Prescott, Social Credit. There have been 
almost as many explanations of the surprising upset as 
there are people in the constituency, but the basic causes 
seemed to be a return to the traditional Conservatism of 
the area, and an element of protest against the provincial 
administration. The single transferable ballot helped in 
this element of protest because Prescott actually had a 
slight majority of the first choices, but was defeated by 
the second choice votes of the C, C. F. Mr, Kirby has 
been suggested as the provincial Progressive-Conservative 
leader, and should he attain this position, Red Deer ! s 
position in provincial politics will be almost exactly the 
same as it was in the period from 1909 to 1917. 

In the federal field no account of Red Deer should 
omit the name of a man who is even yet widely remembered 
in Canada, Dr. Michael Clark. As late as 1953 Prime 
Minister St. Laurent stated that until he actually had 
visited the city Red Deer represented to him only the home 
of Dr, Michael Clark. Actually Dr. Clark never did live 
in Red Deer itself but was a resident of the Eagle Hill 





-154- 


district a short distance west of Olds. His son still 
lives there. However, Dr. Clark, whose skill in oratory 
and ability in debate became known on the national scene, 
gave Red Deer some of the best publicity it ever received. 

Dr. Clark, who was a medical man by training, had 
been a member of the British House of Commons, but in 
Canada he had started farming as a career, and had no 
intention of standing for parliament. In the small com¬ 
munity of Central Alberta his outstanding abilities soon 
attracted attention, and in 190$ he was nominated as the 
Liberal candidate in the Red Deer constituency. George 
F. Root, a prominent cattleman, stood for the Conservatives. 
The Liberal slogan, n Yote for Laurier, Clark and railway 
development", proved effective in the straight party contest 
which followed, although the contest was close. Clark had 
a majority of 242 votes.? He at once began to attract 
attention in the Canadian parliament. In the election of 
1911 he easily gained re-election, this time having a 
majority of 2,500 votes over the Conservative candidate. 

In the town of Red Deer the strong Conservative group 
made the contest much closer than in the rest of the 
constituency. In the First Great War Dr. Clark supported 
the Union Government, and in 1917 he was successful at the 


7. Red Deer Advocate , October 190$ 








-155- 


polls although many old-line Liberals did not approve of 
his change. He failed to secure the Red Deer nomination 
of the Liberal party in 1921, and stood, instead for a 
Saskatchewan constituency, where he was defeated. He 
died shortly afterwards. 

Brilliant in debate, a master of the language and 
having a very rich, full voice, Dr. Clark had one weakness, 
a fondness for alcohol, which had caused him to leave 
England, and probably was the reason Why he did not attain 
cabinet rank in this country. However, it will be many 
years before tT Red Michael of Red Deer tf is forgotten. 

¥. F. Puffer of Lacombe received the Liberal nomination 
in 1921, but the election was won by the U. F. A. candidate, 
Alfred Speakman, who had been prominent in the farmer 
movement in Central Alberta for a long time. Speakman 
consistently voted with the Progressive or fl Ginger ?f group 
at Ottawa although he always regarded himself as primarily 
a U. F. A. man. The new economic alignment cut across the 
old party lines and many people who had formerly voted 
either Liberal or Conservative came to feel that their 
interests were best served by keeping Mr. Speakman as their 
representative. He was not seriously challenged until the 
Social Credit sweep of 1935, when he met complete disaster 






-156- 


at the hands of Eric Poole, the Social Credit candidate. 

In 1940 F. D. Shaw, a former teacher, gained the Social 
Credit nomination. He has represented the Red Deer 
constituency ever since. Red Deer since 1921 has supported 
minority groups at Ottawa, although it has voted with the 
rest of the province. We tend to keep the same man as 
our representative, Clark for thirteen years, Speakman 
for fourteen, and Shaw for at least fourteen. This reluc¬ 
tance to change stems from a deep-rooted conservatism in 
the area. It is another manifestation of the strong 
Ontario influence which has prevailed in the region from 
the days of the first settlement. 


















THE STAFF AND STUDENTS OF THE RED DEER 
PUBLIC SCHOOL 

1911 


(The second photograph of this building 
shows it In 1953) 












THE CENTRAL ELEMENTARY SCHOOL 

The oldest school building in use in 

Red Deer, 

Formally opened on October 10 , 1907. 
Cost:#35,000.00 

Eight classrooms and an Assembly Hall. 








■j '1 or-.:.; .t-rtf J-'f'jlp'r'' :1 ■ ?<:. 

J. ■' ■’: ■ < V : i \ 



CHAPTER IV 


SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT 
THE SCHOOLS 

"As the matter of education is one of vital importance 
to persons who contemplate removing with their families 
into a new country, we have deemed it advisable to give 
a synopsis of the school law of the North-West Territories. 
It will readily appear that both the Dominion and 
Territorial Governments are fully alive to the importance 
of the subject by furnishing every possible facility 
for the organization of schools even in very sparsely 
settled localities,and granting exceptionally liberal 

1 

aid to the local boards entrusted with their management." 
This statement shows the attitude of the authorities 
towards schools, and in Ontario,from which so many of 
the Red Deer settlers came, respect for education was 
very strong. In October,1886 they established the first 
school between Calgary and Edmonton. Because the development 
of the school system reflects to a great degree 
the progress of the general community, the changes 
and improvements in the schools indicate the growth 
of Central Alberta from a pioneer stage to a mature 
state. 

The first teacher was George W. Smith, a 
young man from Nova Scotia. He had seven pupils, 


1. Appendix to Six Years * Experience as a 

Farmer in the Red Deer District , Queen*s 
Printer, Ottawa, 1^90 


- 157 - 
















- 158 - 


five from the G-aetz family and two from the 
McClelland home at Red Deer Crossing.In all 
Alberta only the schools at Calgary,Edmonton, 
Medicine Hat and Lethbridge were formed earlier 
than the Red Deer Central Protestant Public School 

2 

District Number 104 of the North-West Territories. 

Because the G-aetz family alone had ten children of 

school age,that is,between the ages of five and 
3 

twenty,the district easily met the requirements 
as to the minimum number of children who had to be 
resident in an area not greater than five miles by 
four miles before a district could be legally 
formed.Financing was not a major problem for the 
first school board,which consisted of Dr. G-aetz, 
William Kemp and the teacher, G-.W. Smith, because the 
grants were to be equal to seventy-five per cent of 
the salary paid a first-class teacher,seventy per 
cent for a second-class teacher,and sixty-five per 
cent for a teacher with a third-class certificate. 
As there were few expenses other than the teacher's 
salary,the burden on the local ratepayers was not 
heavy. 

This first school building in the vast area of 
Central Alberta was a log structure built by the 


2. G-overnment of Alberta;op. cit . ,p.2 

3. North-West Territories School Ordinance, 

Section 90 




- 159 - 


settlers themselves at no charge for labor.Almost 

all the furniture in it was home-made,while the 

teaching equipment provided consisted of a few old 

maps and a box of chalk.For books the pupils had 

only the varied assortment which the settlers had 

brought with them.The children studied the traditional 

reading,writing and arithmetic,plus geography, 

4 

history and grammar for the older pupils. In 
presenting the material and in deciding promotions 
the teacher followed as closely as possible the 
Ontario program of studies. 

G-rants were paid to this Grossing School, as 
it was commonly called,although for the first 
seven years organization on the local level was 
very informal.The written records have been 
lost,and the first minute book begins with an entry 
for January, 1893>headed 11 The First Meeting of the 
Red Deer Central Protestant Public School District", 
but the trustees acknowledged the earlier organization 
by assuring Miss Margaret Duncan that her salary for 
the preceding year would be paid as soon as government 
grants were received and arrears of taxes were 
collected.Although the amount of her salary for 
1892 is not stated,the Board offered her $4^0,payable 
quarterly,for 1893*This custom of paying the teacher 
quarterly was widely followed in the West because 

4.Mina P. Cole; The First Red Deer School 

(Essay, 1953) 













- 160 - 


5 

the government grants were paid on that basis. 

In the original log building the older pupils 
did the caretaking,but after 1891 when the school 
moved to the hamlet on the railway the trustees 
engaged James &aetz as janitor at a salary of one 
dollar and fifty cents per month.His duties were 
enumerated briefly but effectively:"Sweep out 
the schoolroom every day after school hours,dust 

6 

the room in the morning,and build fires when necessary." 

In 1893 four people received salaries from 
the school district.They were the teacher,the janitor, 
the assessor,who received fifteen dollars,and the 
secretary-treasurer,who received thirty dollars. 

The secretary-treasurer seems to have been well 
paid for comparatively light duties,and the assessor 
underpaid for his work in levying and collecting the 
taxes. 

In July,1893 the secretary entered in the 
minutes some statistics which help to give a picture 
of school affairs in a small Western village sixty 
years ago.In the term from April to June school was 
open for sixty-two days.Although twenty-two pupils 
were on the register,the average daily attendance 
was only 12.27,or less than sixty per cent.In 
Standard Five,which was the highest grade taught. 


5.North-West Territories School Ordinance 


6.Red Deer Public School Pistrict; .minute Book, 

April,1893 





- 161 - 


there were three pupils,all members of the G-aetz 
family.In that year the summer holidays were only 
the first two weeks of August. 

In that same summer the trustees decided that 
they should avoid any suggestion that the school 
was denominational in nature.They,therefore,petitioned 
that the corporate name of the district be changed 
to omit the word ”ProtestantTheir request was 
granted. 

Tenders submitted for the erection of a two-room 
brick school give an indication of building costs 
in 1893.The lowest bid was $1,650,or |825 per room. 

By way of contrast costs in 1954 amount to twenty 
thousand dollars per room for even the plainest 
construction.In 1893 the trustees were more farsighted 
than later school authorities for they built 
two rooms,although they actually needed only one 
to care for the school population of the village. 

Whenever they needed any professional people 
the citizens of Red Deer always thought first of 
Ontario.Accordingly,in November the Board placed 
the following advertisement in the Toronto Globe : 

"Male teacher,married,for Red Deer Public School 


District for 1894.Give qualifications,age,experience 





- 162 - 


and references.Salary not to exceed $60 per 

month. G-eorge W.G-reene,Secretary,Red Deer,Alta." 

The advertisement brought results,and Mr.Charles 

Eggletone was appointed teacher,"provided he brings 
7 

his family here." The custom of advertising in 
Eastern papers for teachers was not confined to 
Red Deer,but was practised by the majority of 
Alberta school districts for many years.lt was a 
symptom of the chronic teacher shortage which has 
prevailed throughout the province’s history except 
for a decade beginning in 1930.In the early years 
many male teachers who came to the West soon left 
teaching to take out homesteads or to engage in 
business,while the young women either returned to 
the liast,or married shortly after their arrival in 
the community. In addition to Ontario,Nova Scotia 
was an important source of teachers.In 1954 school 
boards have gone even farther afield and have 
sought teachers in Britain. 

In the 1890’s the annual school meetings 
were held at ten o’clock in the morning because 
the merchants and other business people had 
practically no customers in the forenoons.The Red 
Deer annual meeting for 1894 was typical of these 
gatherings.Reports showed that fifteen girls and 


7.Red Deer School Board;Minute Book,December, 

1893 






- 163 - 


ten "boys attended the school during the preceding 
year,with an average attendance of seventeen. 

Receipts from all sources amounted to $1,400.The 
taxation rate was 2.75 mills on an assessment of 
$167 9 000.Reasonably prosperous conditions had 
prevailed with the result that arrears of taxes 
amounted to only $ 21 . 15 .The school furniture must 
have been very simple for it was given a 
valuation of only $ 21 . 15 .Although classes were being 
held in a room above the Burch store,the trustees 
assured the ratepayers that a two-room school 
would soon be built. 

In carrying out their building program the 
Board purchased from Dr. G-aetz a site which 
measured 275 feet by 250 feet.For this land,which 
was the first part of the Central School grounds to 
be acquired,the trustees paid the small amount of 
$250.Because land titles in the North-West Territories 
were often uncertain,the Crossing school had been 
built on an unused road allowance.Incidentally, 
even to-day the School Board owns the Central 
School property under six different titles,and as 
some of these transfers are rather vaguely worded, 
confusion has sometimes arisen over boundaries 
between school property and city property. 



- 164 - 


The Board decided to build this first school 
within the city limits of brick from the Piper 
brickyard.For architects they turned,as was to 
be expected,to Ontario,and for a fee of thirty 
dollars hired a Brockville firm to prepare the 
plans.The Trustees decided that they should be 
very strict with the contractor,deducting from 
his price five dollars for every day over the 
time limit.If the delay exceeded two weeks the 
deduction was to be at the rate of ten dollars 
per day for the entire period over the promised 
date.Plumbing and heating were simple.A well was 
dug at a cost of twenty-two dollars,and ten cords 
of wood were bought at three dollars a cord,which 
seems a very high price for fuel in a wooded 
district.By September the school was ready,and 
the people were apparently well satisfied with 
the Board’s efforts for the annual meeting 
passed a resolution congratulating the Trustees on 
their admirable selection of a school site.No 
comment was made on the fact that the mover of the 
resolution was the man who had sold the land to 
the district. 

Although it contained only two rooms,the new 
building was two storeys in height because a high, 
narrow building was considered easy to heat.The 





. 

. 

■ 





' 


, r • 


: 






' ,1 ■ m • 


. 





















- 165 - 


improvements in heating methods and in insulating 
materials are strikingly shown by the changes in 
school architecture.In 1954 three schools were 
completed in the city of Red Deer.All of these 
are of one-floor construction and have very large 
window areas,but even in very cold weather these 
buildings can be kept comfortably warm.In the 
first brick school,which was demolished in 1928, 
classes sometimes had to be dismissed because of 
the cold. 

In the 1894 school the upper room was not needed 
for classroom purposes.The Board,therefore,attempted 
to rent it for other uses at the following scale of 
fees: 

Court sessions - five dollars per day 
Concerts and plays -five dollars per night 
Church concerts and charitable entertainments - 

three dollars,cash 

Public meetings - five dollars per day,or 

three dollars per half day 
Private societies (privileged to meet fifteen 

times a year) -thirty dollars 
School interests suffered when the upper room was 
used for court purposes because the teacher was 
instructed that he should dismiss school whenever 






- 166 - 


witnesses were put out of court.The witnesses might 
then wait in the lower room. 

Hard times prevailed in the West in l896,and 

these conditions were reflected in the attempt of 

the Board to reduce the teacher's salary from 

six hundred and fifty dollars which he had received 

in the preceding year.In this first salary dispute 

in the Red Deer schools the teacher was successful. 

The Trustees first informed Mr. Eggletone that if 

he did not accept their terms he was "at liberty to 

better himself as he saw fit,and the Board could do 

8 

the same". The Board made an attempt to secure a 
second-class teacher,but without success,and finally 
had to re-engage Mr. Eggleton at his former rate of 
salary.Times really were difficult for the settlers, 
one man agreeing to supply the school with wood 
for seventy cents per cord.Previously the Board had 
paid three dollars a cord for fuel. 

By 1899 immigration to Central Alberta was 
increasing,necessitating the opening of the second 
room in the school.It had taken thirteen years for 
the Red Deer settlement to increase to a size that 
required a two-room school;growth had certainly not 
been rapid.Miss Hettie Keast of Innisfail became the 
first principal in the Red Deer school system,with 


8. Minute Book ,January 4,1896 







- 167 - 


Miss Edna Stewart of Penhold as her assistant.Miss 
Stewart had obtained her education in the West, 
being one of the students who had attended the 
old log school at Red Deer Crossing. 

The problem of non-resident pupils first came 
before the Board in 1899.Settlers wanted to have 
their children live in the village and attend school 
there until schools were established in the rural 
districts where the parents were developing home¬ 
steads. The Trustees set the reasonable fee of fifty 
cents per family per month for non-residents.As the 
years went by the number of outsiders attending the 
local schools gradually increased.By 1954 about 
five hundred non-resident pupils attended the 
Composite High School,paying fees of one hundred and 
fifty dollars per year each. Dormitory accommodation 
for about four hundred students is provided on the 
school grounds,and many children find private 
boarding places. 

Salaries for 1901 give some indication of the 
income level in a small town at the beginning of 
the century. The principal received six hundred and 
sixty dollars,and his assistant four hundred and 
eighty.The secretary's salary was relatively high, 
being one hundred dollars per year.The janitor 



- 168 - 


received six dollars per month .In spite of the 

low salaries the Board had several applications 

for teaching positions.Mr.A.T.Stephenson,for many 

years City Commissioner,came to Red Deer in 1902 

as the school principal.He had a staff of two other 

teachers,the growth of the town necessitating an 

addition to the original building.The Trustees even 

felt that the time had come to consider opening a 

9 

"Department of High School". The Central Alberta 
community had passed beyond the first pioneering 
stage in which the struggle for existence made it 
impossible for families to provide more than 
elementary schooling for their children. The estimates 
indicate a considerable increase in the money 
available for educational purposes.Expenditures for 
1903 were $5,200,or about two and one-half times 
what they had been in 1902. 

In 1904 W.J.McLean was hired as principal for a 
salary of eight hundred dollars a year.He had three 
assistant teachers who were paid six hundred dollars 
per year. The enrolment, which was one hundred and 
seventy,showed a considerable increase over the 
preceding year,but the average attendance of 
seventy per cent was poor by modern standards.Mr.Melean, 


9 .Minute Book , March,1903 













- 169 - 


who remained in charge of the Red Deer schools 
until 1910,is widely remembered in Central Alberta 
for his work in encouraging sports among the school 
children.He became an inspector of schools for the 
Department of Education,and in that capacity did 
much to promote the organization of track and field 
events.In 1954- the City Council suggested to the 
Trustees that the school athletic field might 
be named Mclean Field in his honor. 

In 1904 the Board decided to launch a campaign 

to Improve cleanliness in the buildings and among the 

children.The caretaker received strict orders to 

keep all parts of the room scrupulously clean or 

deductions would be made from his salary.A resolution 

was sent to the principal: H The teachers are instructed 

to examine into the cleanliness of the children in 

their rooms,and any pupils found to be in an unclean 

state are to be requested to remain at home until 

10 

fit to come to school.” 

In August,1905 the secretary made the following 
entry in the minutes:"Friday,the first day of 
September being the inauguration day of the province 
of Alberta,is declared by this Board to be a public 
holiday in the school,and the teachers are requested 


10. Minute Book,April,1904 












. 










; ' V: ;; ■ 

c 




. 








■ 




- ■ 





■ 





















- 170 - 


to bring to the attention of the pupils the 
importance of that day." In the half century since 
that entry was made education in the province has 
changed greatly.In Red Deer,for example,there are 
one hundred classrooms instead of four.Practically 
all urban students and many rural students attend 
high school.The program which in 1905 offered only 
academic courses now provides for the student 
who is not academically inclined.He may in Red 
Deer study Woodworking,Automotives,Metal Work, 
Electricity,Agriculture,Typewriting,Bookkeeping, 
Shorthand,Fabrics and Dressmaking and Foods and 
Nutrition.Probably the greatest change in the half 
century is in the attitude of the children.In 1905 
many children,especially among the boys,attended only 
because they were forced.Now the average pupil likes 
to attend school. 

By 1906 the population of the district had 
increased to such an extent that a much larger 
school was needed.The Board,therefore,decided to 
provide an eight-room school at a cost of thirty- 
five thousand dollars,repayable in thirty annual 
instalments.Until this building was ready accommodation 
was secured in the Opera House,as the theatre was 
called in Red Deer,as in almost all other Western 



- 171 - 


towns of 1906. The Red Deer building was in such 

poor condition that the Trustees soon declared that they 

refused to continue to rent it because of its 

11 

unsound and dangerous state. Fortunately the new 
school was ready for occupancy by the fall,with the 
formal opening taking place on October 10,1907. r ^he 
prominent people who were invited to the ceremonies 
were Honorable A.C.Rutherford,Premier and Minister 
of Education,D.S.McKenzie,his Deputy,Honorable W.H. 
Cushing,Minister of Public Works,Honorable C.W. 

Cross,Attorney General,and School Inspector Boyce. 

The building was considered to be very satisfactory, 
and both Olds and Hardisty asked to copy the plans. 

From a modern standpoint it had certain faults and 
even dangers.lt was three stories in height,with 
four classrooms on each of the first two floors and 
an assembly hall on the third floor.Because small 
boys might clamber up them,the fire escapes ended 
about seven or eight feet from the ground.Fortunately 
no fires ever occurred or a terrible disaster might 
have been the result.The building was of very 
substantial construction with a foundation of the 
local stone and very heavy brick walls.Renovated 
and made safer,it is still in use. 

In 1909 an epidemic of small pox swept through 


11. Minute Book,February,19o7 









g, 


\ 















- 172 - 


Central Alberta.The Trustees insisted that all 
children attending the school be vaccinated at the 
expense of the Board.If a parent refused to have 
his child given this protection,the pupil was 
excluded from the school.Since 1933 periodic 
examinations of all children in the Central Alberta 
area have been made by the Full-Time Health Unit. 
Immunization against certain diseases is part of the 
program,but the children are given the vaccination 
and inoculation only on the written consent of the 
parent.During the influenza epidemic of 1918 the 
city Board again instituted a compulsory inoculation 
program,but the serum did not prove to be at all 
effective,and the schools had to be closed. 

From time to time the problem of religious 

instruction in the public schools has arisen in Red 

Deer,as it has in many other Alberta communities. 

In 1909 the Red Deer Board adopted a policy which 

has been followed since that time.When a local minister 

requested permission to carry on religious instruction 

in the classes,the Board passed the following 

resolution: 11 This Board is not in favor of devoting 

any portion of the school day to religious instruction 

12 

in a public school. 11 Although the Trustees received 


12. Minute Book , January,1909 







- 173 - 


considerable criticism for their stand at the 
time,the majority of ratepayers then and now 
support them in their attitude. 

In 1909 the Board hired A.R, G-ihson as an 
assistant for W.J.McLean. Salaries for the year ranged 
from eleven hundred dollars for the principal to 
six hundred dollars for the lowest paid assistant 
teacher.Mr. Gribs on, who had a distinguished career as 
an officer in the First G-reat War,"became a school 
inspector soon after his return from overseas.He 
retired from the position of superintendent in the 
Lament division in 1952. 

The rapid growth in the population continued, 
and the new school itself soon became inadequate for 
the needs of the town.The old school of 1894 had not 
been used for classes after 1907 because it lacked 
wiring,plumbing and satisfactory heating.The Trustees 
decided that the demand for classrooms was so great 
that they should attempt to renovate the old four- 
room structure.Cement buttresses were erected to 
keep the building from falling down,and it served as 
a high school until 1928,when it was torn down and 
replaced by an eight-room structure. 

In 1910 the idea of centralization began to 
develop and it was suggested that Waskasoo,Clearview, 
Balmoral and Crossroads,all rural districts,might 







- 174 - 


amalgamate with the town. In the Red Deer area, 
however,the idea of the small,autonomous district 
had been brought from Ontario by tjie first settlers 
and consolidation had little appeal.In 1953 another 
attempt was made at centralization as a means of 
overcoming the teacher shortage,but it met with 
strong opposition.The conservative tradition of the 
area makes the people slow in approving changes 
in educational administration. 

During 1911 and 1912 the boom gathered strength, 
forcing the Board to build small schools in the 
north and south parts of the town.Coupled with this 
expansion program was a novel proposal which might 
have had far-reaching effects in Alberta towns.Along 
with the by-law to borrow money for the South School 
the Board grouped a proposal to raise funds to build 
a teachers* residence on the school grounds.Rural 
schools often provided small buildings called teacherages 
for their teachers,but urban districts had not done 
so,at least not on the scale planned by Red Deer. 

The by-law passed,but apparently the need for a 
teachers 1 apartment house was not as great as had been 
thought for the Board quietly dropped the idea. 

In 1912 there was a desire to give specialized 
instruction in certain subjects,and the Board hired 








- 175 - 


Mrs. John Quigg,not a teacher but a musician of 
considerable ability,to give special lessons in music 
through the schools.This was the first instance of 
special instruction being given in the Red Deer schools 
in a cultural subject.Succeeding Boards carried on the 
policy until the Department of Education in 1942 
insisted that the Trustees employ only people who 
had Alberta teachers’ certificates.By that date,however, 
the ruling did not cause difficulty because many 
qualified teachers in the province were also specialists 
in music. 

By 1913 teachers’ salaries had risen considerably 
over the amounts paid in former years.The principal 
received nineteen hundred dollars and the highest paid 
assistant twelve hundred.The other teachers received 
varying amounts,but none less than nine hundred dollars. 
However,by June evidence of the collapse of the boom 
showed in school affairs when the Trustees asked the 
City Council to pay them weekly as collected the 
school’s share of the taxes.If the Council failed to 
grant this request,the Board would apply to the courts 
for a receiver.With the hope of preventing drastic 
reductions in their wages the teachers offered to 
take a reduction of five per cent in their salaries 
for 1914,More severe cuts were actually made,and by 



- 176 - 


1915 the principal's salary was down to fifteen 
hundred dollars.Throughout the war years the prevailing 
note was economy in all school matters,with the result 
that in 1917 educational costs were six thousand 
dollars less than they had been in 1913. 

A brief entry in the fall of 1918 helps to 

recall the terrible outbreak of influenza which swept 

through Western Canada as well as many other parts 

of the world."Owing to the epidemic influenza,all 

schools under the jurisdiction of this Board will be 

13 

closed until further notice," Many people in Central 
Alberta died of the disease,and the schools were not 
able to open until the end of January,1919.The teachers 
won commendation from the Board by volunteering to 
help care for victims of the disease,which often swept 
through whole families,leaving no one to keep fires 
in the house or to care for the bedridden.In a vain 
attempt to check the spread of the germs both children 
and adults were compelled to wear cheesecloth pads 
over the mouth and nostrils when on the street or in 
any public place. 

A desire to introduce technical training developed 
just after the First Great War,but the problem of 
finance defeated the project.The scheme suggested was 


13. Minute Book ,October 20,1918 










- 177 - 


one which was adopted in many parts of Alberta in 
later years,that is,technical teachers would 
travel between Red Deer and Lacombe,offering 
instruction in Lacombe two days a week and in Red Deer 
three days per week.When it was estimated that a 
building in which manual training and domestic 
science could be taught would cost Red Deer about 
thirty thousand dollars,the Trustees dropped the 
project.lt was not until 1937 that Instruction in 
these subjects was actually offered.In 194? with the 
opening of the Composite High School Red Deer 
became a centre for technical training at the high- 
school level, 

,f The more things change,the more they are the 
same.” Any one who has had more than casual contact 
with the school system has heard many complaints 
about the deterioration in the conduct of the students. 
In 1922 Principal Locke complained that pupils were 
attending dances and loitering around the rink or the 
streets until very late hours.The Trustees met the 
problem with a resolution: n We deplore the fact that 
some of the school children are allowed to attend 
dances until the small hours of the morning,which 
unfits them for doing proper work in school to the 

detriment of the whole school.It is unfair to the 
school and to the teachers.When school is being carried 









- 178 - 


on at such a cost to many ratepayers,the parents should 
do their part to assist. ,, The effect of the resolution 
on the young people of 1922 is not on record. 

In 1922 Joseph Welsh was engaged at a salary of 
fifteen hundred dollars to teach Grade VIII and to act 
as principal of the public school.Mr. Welsh retired 
in June,1954.Eight hundred people attended the 
ceremonies in honor of his thirty-one years of service. 

A unique feature was a roll call of class representatives 
for each year from 1923 to 1954.In some cases father 
and son or mother and daughter were in the group.No 
more striking way of showing the influence which one 

man has had on the development of the community could 

14 

possibly have been devised. 

Building costs in the year Mr. Welsh came on the 
staff compared with building costs in the year he 
retired are a good example of the inflation which has 
come in that time.In 1923 architects estimated that 
an eight-room,one-storey structure,with an assemoly 
hall and two additional rooms in the basement,would 
cost fifty-eight thousand dollars,while a ten-room, 
two storey school,with an assembly hall and two extra 
science laboratories,would cost seventy-eight 
thousand dollars.Similar buildings in 1954 were 
estimated at a minimum of three hundred thousand dollars. 


14. See appendix for program 










- 179 - 


Unfort unate ly the Trustees in 1923 did not take 
advantage of the low construction costs to obtain 
needed extra accommodation or to replace obsolete 
buildings.Much of the resistance to expansion came from 
a well organized economy group who succeeded in 
defeating Mr. R. L, G-aetz,who as chairman had favored 
improving school facilities as much as possible. 

Mr. G-aetz had been intimately associated with the 
Red Deer schools from the formation of the district in 
1886 until his retirement from the Board in 1924.As 
a very young man he helped to build the log school 
at Red Deer Crossing,and actually did most of the 
School Board work for his father who was nominally 
chairman of the Board.Raymond himself became chairman 
in .1893.A strong supporter of the teachers,and a 
vigorous opponent of those who in his own words "drove 
to School Board meetings in the most expensive cars, 
and then scrutinized with the greatest care every penny 
spent on education 1 ’, he was typical of many men who have 
given generously of their time and effort to prove 
that democratic control of Alberta schools is to the 
advantage of the community. Mr. G-aetz had a quiet 
humor which often served to expose sham,as shown in 
the following true anecdote.A man who was very anxious 
to obtain the position of principal of the schools 






- 180 - 


decided to make a personal appeal to Mr. G-aetz. a e 
visited him and outlined his qualifications.Mr. G-aetz 
stated that they would be pleased to consider his 
application at the School Board meeting that evening, 
and suggested that the man appear before the 3oard. 

During the afternoon the prospective principal visited 
the Leonard G-aetz Memorial Methodist Church,and promptly 
rushed back to Mr. C-aetz. "Sir, I forgot to tell you 
that I have been a strong Methodist all my life. 0 To 
this Mr. G-aetz quietly replied, "Thank you for telling 
me.However,if your other qualifications are as good 
as you say they are,I am sure that the other members 
of the Board and I will not hold it against you." 

During the first four years after Mr. G-aetz's 
retirement the Board sought by one means or another 
to find accommodation for the increasing school 
population without having to spend money on building. 
Classes grew larger and larger until the High School 
Inspector stated that the overcrowding was making the 
Red Deer school one of the poorest in the province.In 
a community which had prided itself on maintaining 
high educational standards this report proved sufficient 
to start the Trustees planning a new school,which was 
opened in 1928 with Ralph Whitney as principal. The 
enrolment for that year was 675,with 174 in high school. 










■ 






. 






- 181 - 


Teachers ' salaries just before the depression 
were not high,but were sufficient to permit the 
teachers to have a reasonably good standard of living 
in a small community.The principal of the high school 
received two thousand five hundred dollars,while the 
principal of the public school received one thousand 
dollars less. High school assistant teachers had 
salaries of from sixteen to eighteen hundred dollars, 
and public school teachers were paid from one thousand 
to twelve hundred.The Board had no trouble in filling 
vacancies,indicating that the salaries they offered 
were comparable with those paid elsewhere.Other 
salaried positions in Red Deer at the time were as 
followsjpostal clerks,sixty to seventy dollars a 
month;warehousemen,seventy dollars a month; 
stenographers,fifty to sixty dollars a month;clerks 
in stores,sixty to one hundred dollars a month; 
provincial government road engineer,two hundred dollars 
a monthjbank juniors,forty dollars a month. 

During the early 1930’s the depression affected 
the schools in many ways.Because jobs were hard to 
obtain,the high school enrolment actually rose,although 
this was offset by a fall in the public school classes. 
The total enrolment for 1937 showed an increase of only 
one student over the 1928 figures,but the high school 



- 182 - 


had increased from 174 to 251.In 1937 more rural 

people wanted secondary education for their children, 

and non-resident pupils numbered sixty-four compared 

with fifteen in 1928.Another result of the depression 

was the severe cutting of salaries,although they did 

not fall in Red Deer as much as they did in many 

other Alberta communities.High school teachers were 

engaged for twelve hundred dollars and public school 

teachers for nine hundred.Even at the lower salaries 

the number of applicants was much greater than it 

had been in pre-depression years.For one vacancy on 

the public school staff the Board received sixty- 

eight applications from experienced teachers,some 

of whom stated that they were willing to accept any 

15 

salary which the Trustees cared to set. In the rural 
districts salaries were often cut even when there was 
no need of reducing them,as in the case of one district 
which offered its teacher six hundred dollars, 
although it had in the bank sufficient money to pay 
the legal minimum of eight hundred and forty dollars 
without levying any taxes.In other districts the rate 
of salary in the contract made little difference 
because the teacher received only the government 
grant.In the Red Deer area,as elsewhere in the province 
these conditions had certain lasting results.In the 


15. Minute Book,June,1934 







- 183 - 


first place many young people decided not to take 
teacher training at the conclusion of their high 
school,and in the second place many trained teachers 
made up their minds to leave the profession at the 
earliest opportunity.The origins of the teacher 
shortage of the 1950*s are found in the 1930's.In the 
third place the depression gave point to the Honorable 
Perrin Baker’s argument of 1928 that the larger 
school unit was a necessity.Therefore,when the Aberhart 
government imposed the school divisions,the opposition 
in the Red Deer area,which had condemned the Baker 
plan,was not strong.In January,1939 the Red Deer 
School Division Number 35,an amalgamation of sixty 
rural school districts,was established.The city district, 
Red Deer Number 104,is not in the Division. 

In the fall of 1940 Red Deer became one of the 
first of the smaller centres to establish a Junior High 
School as a distinct unit within the school system. 

Prior to that date the division in Red Deer had been 
eight grades in public school and four grades in 
high school.Under the new scheme of things grades one 
to six became the elementary school,grades seven to 
nine the intermediate or junior high school,and grades 
ten to twelve the high school.The change had been 
authorized throughout the province in 1936,but it 
could not be established in Red Deer until a new building 




- 184 - 


was available. 

The Second G-reat War had two effects on the 
Red Deer schools.In the first place enrolment rose 
steadily,reaching one thousand and sixty by 1945. 

In the second place the Board was forced to abandon 
a rule against the employment of married women as 
teachers,In 1954 in both the City and Divisional 
schools married women form a considerable portion of 
the teaching staff.The same tendency is apparent 
throughout the province. 

From the standpoint of Alberta generally one of 
the most significant changes which Red Deer has 
made has been the establishment of the Composite 
High School, which was started in 194? in buildings 
which the Red Deer Division purchased from the 
Department of National Defence.The term '’Composite” 
is very fitting because the students come from all 
parts of the province,with the majority from Red Deer 
city,Red Deer rural and the Rocky Mountain House 
School Division.The program offered is very extensive. 
A student may select a straight academic program 
leading to university entrance,or he may avail 
himself of a very wide range of technical and 
commercial subjects. 

In 1949 the school decided to introduce a 
semester system under which a student would study 





- 185 - 


two or three subjects intensively for three and 
one-third months,write his examinations at the end 
of that time,and then register for another group 
of subjects.The scheme proved to be very popular and 
successful,especially with students who required 
only one or two subjects to secure their high school 
diplomas.So great a demand was made on the school 
facilities that a rule had to be adopted that students 
from the four larger cities could not be accepted 
unless there were special circumstances pertaining 
to their requirements.The second part of the experiment 
was that the costs of the school were defrayed on a 
fee basis.A payment of fifty dollars a semester 
had to be made either by the student*s parents or by 
the district from which he came.Red Deer city decided 
to pay fees for all its high school students rather 
than to operate a school of its own.The fees vary 
from year to year as costs change,but there has 
been a persistent rise from 1949 to 1954. The 
fees now are fifty-eight dollars a semester. 

The Red Deer success brought requests from 
other centres for permission to adopt a similar plan. 
The Department of Education,however,has decided that 
it will grant other places permission to introduce a 
two-term plan,but not a three-term one as in Red Deer. 
The reason for this decision seems to be mainly the 



- 186 - 


difficulty of setting and marking departmental 
papers three times a year.Mount Royal College and 
Alberta College studied the Red Deer system and 
introduced a two-term plan in 1953.Should a semester 
system he widely adopted in Alberta,the credit for 
the change belongs to the Red Deer Composite School, 
and especially to R,L.Whitney,Red Deer principal 
from 1926 to 1950,who pressed for its introduction. 
Credit should also go to Doctor Lindsay Thurber, 
former superintendent of schools,after whom the new 
school building has been named. Mr. D.C.Dandell, 
the present principal,was appointed to that position 
in 1950. 

In addition to the public schools there is the 
Red Deer Separate School District Number 47.The school 
for this unit has been operated for many years by 
St.Joseph 1 s Convent,which was established by the 
Sisters of Wisdom,a French order,in 1908,the same 
year that the separate school district was formed.In 
1954 the Separate School Board began the construction 
of a school adjacent to the Composite High School.The 
Convent has accommodation for twenty boys and fifty- 
five girls as boarders,and in the past many Protestant 
families in Central Alberta sent children there 
because there were no other dormitory facilities 
available.The Sisters offer instruction in the work 




- 187 - 


of grades one to twelve. 

The Sisters of Wisdom selected Red Deer as the 
site for their convent "because of the central 
location.Relations between the Roman Catholic and 
Protestant people of the community were very good 
in 1908,and Dr. Parsons,for example,donated his 
professional services to care for any illnesses among 
the pupils.In the early 1930*s there was a brief 
period of tension when an attempt was made to form 
a Iiu Klux Kian in Red Deer. On one occasion some of the 
more excitable members of this group planted a 
fiery cross in front of the convent,but the people 
of the community condemned actions of this kind strongly. 
Since that time there have been no unpleasant incidents. 
The separate and public schools work together in 
harmony. 

The Canadian Nazarene College began operations 
in 1930.In addition to theological courses it offers 
instruction in academic and commercial subjects from 
grade nine to grade twelve.The enrolment of 165 is 
drawn from almost all Western Canada. The college has 
boarding facilities for about eighty students. This 
school is not tax supported but depends on contributions 
from the Nazarene Church and fees paid by the students. 


16.Government of Alberta;op. cit .,p.12 











- 188 - 


The Presbyterians also made an attempt to 

operate in Red Deer a school that would serve the 

needs of their membership in the province.In 1912 they 

built a Presbyterian Ladies 1 College on a ten-acre 

site which Henry Jamison,an early settler,donated to 

them.Their building,which is of very substantial 

brick construction,cost |75,000,mostly raised by 

subscription in the town and district.The college, 

however,failed to attract sufficient students to 

warrant keeping it open, and in 1916 the building was 

sold to the province.lt became the nucleus for the 

Provincial Training School for mentally defective 
17 

children. 

In the seventy years of their history the schools 
in and around Red Deer have reflected the conservative 
tendencies of the people of the area.In Alberta the 
curriculum is imposed on the schools by the Department 
of Education,which permits a minimum of deviation 
from the prescribed courses.The people of an area may 
only make their wishes known in educational matters 
by the rather indirect method of political action.To 
the extent that they have local control the people 
of Red Deer have favored formal methods of instruction, 
and have regarded with some suspicion such innovations 
as the enterprise and guidance.Although conservative 


17.Annie L. G-aetz;po cit. ,p. 142 









- 189 - 


they are not reactionary,and in the semester system 
they have experimented with a method which may affect 
the province as a whole.The change,which concerns 
itself with methods rather than with the contents 
or philosophy of the program of studies,is certainly 
not a radical one. it is,therefore,in keeping with the 
other aspects of Red Deer’s development. 













5 

f 

1 

/ 

) 

I' 

) 




THE KNOX PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 

1898 - 1954 























THE ANGLICAN CHURCH 
1899 - 

A good example of the use of local 
building stone 















LEONARD GAETZ UNITED CHURCH 
Opened in April, 1910 as the 
Leonard Gaetz Methodist Church, 






THE CHURCHES 


The Ontario influence in the Red Deer district 
was a guarantee that the Methodist Church would play 
an important part in the religious life of the 
community. Other than Dr. G-aetz,the first resident 
minister of any denomination was Mr. William Vrooman, 
a student missionary of the Methodist Church,who in 
the spring of 1886 established himself in the old 
McPherson cabin.His field was an extensive one,covering 
all the central part of the present province of Alberta. 

He had no church in which to hold services,but conducted 
them in the school or in the homes of the settlers. 

His services were attended by people of all denominations, 

and were a welcome break in their isolated,monotonous 

18 

lives.In the summer of 188? another student missionary, 
James Buchanan of the Presbyterian Church,began to 
hold services at the Crossing.Beginning in 1888 
Bishop Pinkham of the Anglican Church visited Red Deer 
periodically to perform marriages or conduct baptisms. 

In the same year Roman Catholic priests started coming 
to the Crossing to serve adherents of their faith. 

With the coming of the railway and the consequent 
increase in the number of settlers,consideration was 
given to the matter of a church building. The Methodists 
in 1891 established the first church in Red Deer, 


18. Annie L. G-aetz; op. cit . , p. 37 


-190- 




-191- 


building it on what is now 51 Street.lt still 
stands,although greatly altered,and is to-day the 
Code mill.Although nominally a Methodist Church, 
in the early years it was used by other groups also. 
For example,in 1895 the Presbyterians held the 
morning service,the Methodists the evening worship, 
and there was a Union Sunday School in the afternoon. 

By 1909 the growth in population had been great 

enough to warrant the building of a new and larger 

Methodist Church.This was opened for services in 
19 

April,1910. For many years this building,which had 
the largest seating capacity of any church in the 
central part of the province,served as an assembly 
hall for public meetings,concerts and other 
entertainments.In honor of the founder of the city 
the church was named the Leonard G-aetz Memorial 
Methodist (United) Church. 

Originally the Red Deer cemetery belonged to the 
Methodist Church. In 1893 John Gaetz donated a portion 
of his land to the church for that purpose.Although 
nominally under the control of the Methodist group, 
the cemetery was used for burials of people of all 
faiths,and in 190? the church transferred the title 
to the municpality of Red Deer.After the town 


19.The Red Deer Advocate ,April,1910 








-192- 


acquired possession one portion of the land was 
set aside for Roman Catholic burials,hut that has 
been the only attempt to have any part reserved for 
a particular denomination. 

In 1925 the Methodists in Red Deer voted in favor 
of church union,and their building became the 
Leonard G-aetz Memorial United Church.The Presbyterians, 
influenced strongly by the Reverend Walter Brown, 
an outstanding opponent of church union,decided to 
continue as a separate congregation.In the Red Deer 
United Church to-day the former Methodist group 
is by far the largest. 

The Presbyterians have always been an important 
group in Central Alberta.In l898,when the village 
population was only about one hundred and twenty-five 
in all,the Presbyterians built the north part of the 
present-day Knox Church,adding to the building later. 
The old church,which has been a landmark for many 
years,stands in a commercial section of the town, 
and in 1953 was sold to make the land available for 
business buildings.The Presbyterians have started 
construction of a new church near the United Church. 

¥.P.Code,a member of a pioneer family,was present 
at the ceremonies in 1893 when sod was broken for the 
original church,and was present in 1954 when the new 












-193- 


20 

project started. 

In a community in which the majority of the 
people are of British descent the Anglican Church 
has many adherents.In 1899 Canon Hinchcliffe began 
construction of a church building,drawing the plans 
himself and even doing a good deal of the actual 
work of building.Local sandstone was used,giving the 
church a decidedly Old-World appearance.On one 
occasion in the 1920 ! s a picture of this church was 
used as an illustration of a mediaeval building. 

A fourth Protestant group,the Baptists,built 
their church in 1905.They had previously held 
their services in a room above one of the stores. 

The Roman Catholics did not have a church in 
Red Deer until 1905, when they built a small one 
in the south part of the town.In 1908 St. Joseph's 
Convent increased the importance of Red Deer for 
people of the Roman Catholic faith,but they remained 
a small minority in the town and district.In 1934- 
a larger church was built on the former H. R.G-aetz 
property on 55 Street. 

The changes in the racial groups have been 
well illustrated in church affairs after the Second 
Great War.Immigration from the Netherlands has 
led to the building of a Dutch Reformed Church at 


20. The Red Deer Advocate ,April, 1954- 














- 194 - 




Red Deer and another at Rocky Mountain House. 

Lutherans from the Baltic states have established 
a small church,and the Latter Day Saints are acquiring 
land for a building.The Church of the Nazarene, 
which in 1920 was a very small congregation,has 
become one of the largest of the Protestant groups 
in the district.The Pentecostal Tabernacle,the 
Missionary Alliance Tabernacle and the church of 
the Plymouth Brethren are other examples of the 
diversity now found in the Red Deer area.Many of 
the adherents of these churches are people who have 
been converted to those beliefs after coming to 
Western Canada,but the influence of immigrants from 
the United States has been another important influence. 
The Ontario and British traditions have weakened 
with the passing of the years. 









THE PUBLIC LIBRARY 


A quick assessment of the cultural development 
in an area may he made by visiting the Public Library, 
if one is available.The accession lists,circulation 
lists and addresses and occupations of the subscribers 
reveal much about the people of the community.Consideration 
should be given to the method by which the library 
was established;was it a gift,or did it come from 
the efforts of the people themselves? One should 
find out if the library is supported by self-imposed 
local taxation,or if it depends upon grants and gifts. 

For forty years the Red Deer Public Library, 
which was the third to be established in the province, 
has played an important part in the life of the 
people of Central Alberta.The Legislative Assembly 
passed a Public Libraries Act in 1907,and at once 
W.J.McLean,principal of the school,and J.F.Boyce, 
school inspector,began to urge their fellow citizens 
to take advantage of this statute.Interested people 
formed a committee which collected information on 
the formation of libraries and enlisted the support 
of local organizations,including the Board of Trade, 
which promised the committee that the Board of Trade 
office in the City Hall might be used for library 


- 195 ” 



- 196 - 


quarters. By the closing days of 1913 plans were 
sufficiently definite to enable the committee to 
ask for a pledge of financial support from the City 
Council.The next step was to secure signatures of 
ratepayers on a petition.Not only did the committee 
easily secure a large number of signatures,but 
they also obtained pledges of four hundred dollars 
in support of the project.The City Council then 
drafted a by-law which the electors approved by a 
large majority.In the spring of 1914 the Red Deer 
Public Library opened its doors,with J.F. Boyce, 
who had done so much work in promoting the project, 
as chairman of the board and H. H.G-aetz as secretary. 

The members of the board are not elected but are 
appointed by the City Council. 

At first the library limited its circulation 
to the Red D e er School District,but after the supply 
became larger books could be borrowed by anyone 
living in Central Alberta.Sylvan Lake residents,for 
example,made good use of the Red Deer Library.In 
1952 a regional library was established in Lacombe, 
and this has decreased the demands made on the Red Deer 
institution. 

In 1954 the library has about twelve thousand 
volumes,well balanced between fiction and reference 


. 


. 


















* 




, 

. - 

- 



















* 

• 

, 

















. 


. 















- 197 - 


mate rial. About one hundred and fifty dollars per 
month can be spent on new books.Although the 
province makes a small grant,most of the revenue 
comes from taxes levied in the City of Red Deer. 

The first minute book begins with the hope that the 
Public Library would be “a centre from which will 
radiate an elevating influence,not only in the city, 
but in the surrounding district. n In the forty years 
which have elapsed since that entry was made the 
Red Deer Public Library has fulfilled the hopes of 
its founders. 









THE ALBERTA NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY 


About 1901 Dr. Henry G-eorge of Innisfail began 

to collect material for an Alberta Natural History 

Museum which he established as a sideline to his 

small medical practice.Naturalists throughout Alberta 

heard of his venture and often visited the little 

museum.The interest of others was great enough to 

persuade Dr. G-eorge to organize a small group of 

nature lovers like himself.This little organization 

took the title ”The Alberta Natural History Society”. 

Their object was to promote conservation and to 

provide a club in which those interested in all kinds 

of nature study could exchange notes.From Innisfail 

the movement spread to Red Deer,where a branch of the 

society was formed in 1906,with Canon Hinchcliffe as 

the first president, and Dr. G-eorge, who moved to Red 

Deer in 1907,as the prime mover.After Dr. G-eorge 

left Innisfail the group there ceased to meet and 

Red Deer became the headquarters of the society.Branches 

21 

were organized in Calgary,Edmonton and Lethbridge. 

The Honorable G-. H.V.Bulyea, first Lieutenant- 
G-overnor of Alberta, became a member, as did Frank 
Oliver of Edmonton.The provincial government thought 
well enough of the scheme to make an annual grant of 
one hundred dollars to the Alberta Natural History 

21.The Alberta Natural History Society; 

Minute Book 


-198- 












, 








»'' . . •*: j 

■ 




. 






3 




* 










. 


■ •< 


. . . 






























- 














-199- 


Society, which was a source of information about 
such things as farm pests.The society used the grant 
to pay the costs of publishing scientific booklets. 

In March,1916 they published a complete descriptive 
catalogue the Qdanta or Dragonflies of Alberta .by 
F.C. Whitehouse,a local bank manager,who was an: 
entomologist of considerable ability.In 1919 the 
society published a large and valuable Check List of 
Moths arid Butterflies of Alberta .by Kenneth Bowman. 
The following year the society published an Annotated 
List of the Beetles of Alberta ,by F.C. Carr.The three 
publications are still in demand among entomologists 
in Canada and the United States. 

In addition to its publishing ventures the 
society persuaded the provincial government in 1922 
to declare a 230-acre tract near Red ^eer to be the 
G-aetz Lake Bird Sanctuary. In 1952 this became the 
G-aetz Lake Provincial Wildlife Park,with the society 
as custodian.The club meets several times a year 
and does much to promote a study and interest in 
nature in Central Alberta.The group is larger than 
either the Calgary or Edmonton societies,with which 
it is no longer affiliated.Kerry Wood,naturalist and 
writer,is an active member who has done much to 
















, 

' * 

















- 

. 

. 

♦ 











-200- 


promote the work of the Alberta Natural History 
Society.lt may be of interest to know that Mrs. 
G-eorge, who made hundreds of paintings of Alberta 
wild flowers,was the designer of the Alberta coat of 
arms. 






THE WARS 


Because the British and Ontario elements are 
in a majority in the community,Red Deer and district 
have contributed heavily to the war efforts of the 
Empire and Commonwealth.Three memorials honor 
those who served in different conflicts. 

A number of young men of the district served in 
the South African War,and three,Charles Cruikshank, 
Angus Jenkins and Archibald McNichol,were killed. 

In 1902 Lord Strathcona offered to donate one thousand 
dollars to the town to erect a memorial to the 

22 

three who had been members of the Strathcona Horse. 

The people felt that a hospital should be built,as 
there was none between Calgary and Edmonton.They 
added fifteen hundred dollars which they had previously 
collected to Lord Strathcona's donation.Local 
organizations contributed generously to the building 
and furnishing of the hospital,which opened in 1904 
with thirteen beds.It was the first hospital between 
Calgary and Edmonton.The facilities were not adequate 
for the demands made on them,and the hospital was 
enlarged in 1912,1940 and 1954.Because of financial 
difficulties it had to be taken over by the city in 
1923,becoming the Red Deer Municipal Hospital. The 


22. The Red Deer Advocate ; The Memorial 
Hosjcital, July, 1934 


-201- 






















? 


; 








, 

, 










■ 







■ 


" 

' 


* 











-202- 


city introduced a scheme under which any resident 

who paid the sum of six dollars per year was 

entitled to hospitalization at a charge of one 

dollar per day.This plan proved so satisfactory that 

the hospital district was gradually extended to 

cover a very wide area around the city. 

In World War I eight hundred men from Red Deer 

and district served in the Canadian forces,twenty-two 

others with the armies of France,and eleven with the 

British forces.Of those who served one hundred died 
23 

In action. Red Deer’s response to the call for men 

was immediate.The militia unit,"A" Squadron,Central 

Alberta Horse,which actually had been started at 

pine Lake about two years before the outbreak of 

24 

war,offered to enlist as a unit. This offer was not 
accepted,but on August 25 seventy-five men of the 
squadron left for the big camp at Valcartier,Quebec, 
where they were attached to other units.On November 
14 sixty-four volunteers joined the 31st Battalion. 
During the winter of 1914-1915 the Canadian Mounted 
Rifles secured one hundred and fifty recruits from 
the town and district.In the course of the war many 
men joined the 63rd Battalion,the 66th,the 89th, 
and especially the 187th,which was regarded as 
Central Alberta*s own battalion.Casualties were heavy 

23. H.J.Snell,Secretary 1922 Memorial Committee; 

oral statement 

24. Lieutenant Colonel Lister;oral statement 









-203- 


from 1916 to the end of the war. In one week in the 
spring of 191? five Red Deer men were killed and 
many others were wounded. 

After the war was over the majority of the 
men who had enlisted from the town and district 
returned to their former homes.A few had difficulty 
in re-adjusting to civilian life and drifted away 
again.The Soldier Settlement scheme in some cases 
placed untrained men on overpriced land,hut in 
general those who remained in the area succeeded in 
re-establishing themselves in agriculture or business. 

In 1922 a war memorial ,which took the form of a 
statue of a soldier in full battle kit,was erected 
just north of the post office. The cenotaph and 
statue attracted considerable attention in Canada as 
an example of what a small town could do in erecting 
an artistic war memorial.Lord Byng of Vimy unveiled 
the memorial on November 15,1922. 

The First G-reat War had little lasting effect 
on the development of the town and district.There 
was no large immigration and the population remained 
predominantly Anglo-Saxon in racial origin. Over-expansion 
of agriculture did occur during the war years,but 
because clearing and breaking the land was a slow 
process,this expansion was not as pronounced as on 
the prairies. 


























































. 




- 






• • 









INSCRIPTION ON THE TABLET IN THE MEMORIAL CENTRE 

" IN PROUD AND GRATEFUL REMEBRANCE OF ALL THOSE 
FROM RED DEER AND DISTRICT WHO SERVED IN THE WAR 

1939 - 1945 

THESE GAVE THEIR LIVES: 


Beaton, W. 

Mayberry, R.M. 

Bohn,J.D. 

McCullough, D.L.C 

Brothers, W.M. 

McDougall, H.G. 

Carscadden, C.H. 

McFadden, H.D. 

Carrol,B. 

McGregor, D.P. 

Cooper, E. 

McWhithey, W* 

Currie, R.E. 

Mohring, J. 

Dunham, W.M.G. 

Murray, W.L. 

Ellenwood, R.W. 

Nelson, V.E. 

Farrow, W.B. 

Nichols, S.W. 

Forrester, R.R. 

Oldford, L. 

Galvan, C. 

Opie, A.E* 

Gordon, J.A.G. 

Perlick, W.G. 

Groom, A.P. 

Roland, R.M. 

Hadley, C. 

Scott, W.G. 

Hall, A.L. 

Sinclair, V. 

Hopfe, K. 

Stephenson, E.B. 

Jenner, J.L. 

Stringer, L.G. 

Johnson, R.O. 

Trussler, D.M. 

Kellington, E.J. 

Van Slyke, A.R. 

Kirkpatrick, J.G. 

WhIlians, G.D. 

Kirkwood, D. 

White, E.R® 

Langton, G.R.O. 

Whyte, Jo 

LaRoque, G. 


Long, H.B. 


MacArthur, D.A. 



THEY WERE A WALL UNTO US BOTH BY NIGHT AND DAY. 


1 Sara. 25:19 11 








t 









' 










Tablet, Memorial Centre 















- 204 - 


On the outbreak of the Second Great War there 
was not the same sense of urgency as there had been 
in 1914.Almost evryone in the Red Deer district 
felt that Canada should make a maximum effort to the 
common cause,but the ties with Britain were not as 
close;most of the young men were Alberta born.liobile 
recruiting units visited the region from time to 
time,and in 1940 the A-20 Army Camp began to train 
men from all parts of Canada.After the war was over 
some of these men settled in Central Alberta.Some 
Royal Air Force personnel who had trained at Penhold 
established homes in and around Red Deer.Of those 
who were residents of the district in 1939 about 
twelve hundred enlisted in some branch of the active 
forces ,and most of these returned to their homes 
here after they received their discharges. 

The majority of people desired a war memorial 
which would have some practical use,and suggestions 
were made for an elaborate civic centre,which,however, 
proved to be beyond the financial resources of the 
memorial committee.As a substitute for the more 
pretentious undertaking a former drill hall in the 
A-20 camp was altered to form an auditorium and 
gymnasium.The auditorium,which has a seating capacity 





- 205 - 


of eight hundred and fifty,is one of the finest in 
the province.Because it is available outstanding 
artists occasionally visit Central Alberta.For 
example,the Winnipeg Ballet gave two fine performances 
to large audiences. 

The Second G-reat War has had important effects 
on the town and district.From the economic standpoint 
the building of the army camp and Penhold airport 
began a period of prosperity which has resulted in a 
large increase in population in Red Deer.Because many 
of the newcomers are of other races,the predominance 
of people of British and Scandinavian origin has 

25 

decreased,although they are still in a large majority. 

The war also counteracted the parochialism which had 
started to develop among the native born.Because of 
their war experiences hundreds of men realize that 
events in Europe or Asia may have a profound effect 
on their lives and the lives of their children in 
this quiet part of Alberta.Veterans’ benefits made possible 
higher education and technical training for many men 
and women who otherwise could not have attended 
universities or technical schools. 

25.A list of the Old Timers' Association 
members is given in the appendix* British and 
Scandinavian names predominate. 
























( 






















- 













. 

. 





















IN THE LIFE OF A MAN 


At the graduation ceremonies of the Composite 
High School in 1953 the guest speaker began his 
address by stating that in the audience was an elderly 
man who as a boy had lived in Red Deer when the entire 
area of the present city was unbroken bushiand.Young 
people might well consider the toil and sacrifices of 
the pioneers who within the life span of a man had 
developed a community of eleven thousand people in 
a valley which had been nothing but wilderness when 
James Gaetz was a boy. It was not a miracle but hard, 
persistent work by the people of Central Alberta 
which had brought about economic and cultural 
development sufficient to enable two hundred boys 
and girls to graduate from high school in one year. 

The purpose of this thesis has been to examine some 
aspects of that growth. 

In the opinion of the writer the whole Western Canadian 
community grew directly from those improvements in; 
transportation which enabled farmers on the prairies 
to pay carriage charges on grain and still meet the 
competition of European-grown wheat.In effect they 
exported the fertility of the Western soil.The development 
began south of the border,and by 1900 little free 
land was left in the American West.Then the homesteaders 


- 206 - 










* 






♦ 
























- 










































. 

. 










• 

• 













-207 - 


turned to Manitoba and the North-West Territories, 
bringing about the development which had been expected 
fifteen years earlier with the completion of the 
Canadian Pacific Railway.As Alberta developed the 
growth of an important market town at some point 
between Calgary and Edmonton became inevitable.Red 
Deer,which was almost exactly midway between the two 
larger cities and on the main river between the 
Bow and the Saskatchewan,became that centre. 

The community which developed was a solid, 
conservative town,reflecting the Ontario origin of 
so many of its founders.The surrounding district was 
fertile,but it required a great deal of work to 
clear and break the land,resulting in a slower 
expansion than in the open lands of the prairies. 

Mixed farming rather than grain growing or ranching 
guaranteed in most years a small,steady income. 

As the years went by the social and economic forces 
which have affected the world in the twentieth 
century slowed or accelerated the growth of Central 
Alberta,and at the same time the conservative nature 
of the people in the region exercised some steadying 
influence in provincial affairs.In the seventy years 
of its history no startling developments have 


, 






















. 

. 

. 

* 

e 








■ 

. 

: 








ONTARIO IN ALBERTA 
An early house on 56 Street 

The Ontario influence has been very important 
in Red Deer. 





















NSW CONSTRUCTION 
A bungalow built in 1952. 

Red Deer f s population has increased by 
three hundred per cent in the last ten years. 



























C o /k vv\ b i a. 















- 208 - 


occurred in the community;they would not be in 
accord with the nature and traditions of the 
people.G-radually the town has become a small 
city capable of providing more and more services 
for the people of the wide and potentially rich 
area about it.Loyal to the British connection, 
law-abiding and thrifty, Red Deer's similarity 
to an Ontario community such as Guelph is very 
striking. 








BIBLIOGRAPHY 


The Alberta Natural History Society;Minute Book 

City of Red Deer; Annual Reports 

Bourinot, Sir John; How Canada Is Governed , 

Copp Clark Company/Toronto, 1918 

The Calgary Albertan , Special Edition, July 26, 

1952 

The Central Alberta Air News , August, 1953 

Cole, Mina; Red Deer ! s First School ( Essay 

published in Red Deer Advocate,1953 ) 

Corbett, E.A. ; Blackfoot Trails , McMillan Company 
of Canada, Toronto, 1934 

Department of the Interior; Survey Maps , 1883 - 

1884 

Dominion Government,Department of Mines; 

Map 27QA (Aborigines of Canada ) 1932 

The Edmonton Journal , November 10, 1953 

The Financial Post , Toronto, April 24, 1954 

Gaetz, Annie L.; The Park Country , Wrigley Printing 
Company, Vancouver, 1948 

Jaetz, Leonard; Report of Six Years 1 Experience 
of a farmer in the Red Deer 
District , Queen*s Printer, Ottawa, 

1890 

Gaetz, Raymond; Trading with the Stoneys ; 

The Great Adventure ( Essays 
published in the Jubilee Edition of 
the Red Deer Advocate, July, 1934 ) 

Galbraith, Francis; Fifty Years of Newspaper Work , 
The Advocate Press, Hed Deer,March, 

1934 

Jenness, Diamond; Indians of Canada , King*s Printer, 
Ottawa,1932 


- 209 - 

























































« 


* . . L . 

■ 

. 









- 210 - 


Lower, A.E, ; From Colony to Nation, Longmans,Green 
and Company, Torontp, 1947 

MacGregor, James G. ; Blankets and Beads , Institute 
of Applied Art, Edmonton, 1934 

McDougall, John; Saddle, Sled and Snowshoe ; 

William Briggs, Toronto, 1910 

McDougall, John; Western Trails in the Early 

Seventies , William Briggs, Toronto, 

1911 

Morton, Arthur; A History of the Canadian West ; 

Thomas Nelson and Sons, Toronto, 

No date 

The Red Deer Advocate , 1906 to 1954 , especially 
the Jubilee Edition, 1934 

The Red Deer Board of Trade; Minute Book , 1893 -1954 

The Red Deer Board of Trade; Publicity Folder , 1913 

The Red Deer Public School District 104; Minute 

Books , 1891 -1954 

The Stettler Independent , December, 1953 

Government of the Province of Alberta; Economic 
Survey of the City of Red beer , 

April, 1949 


























































- 211 “ 


SOURCES OF ORAL INFORMATION 

George Best, Merchant 
¥.J.Botteril, Real Estate Agent 
Hugh Bower, Farmer 

Mrs. William Cassels, Early Settler 

W.P. Code, Farmer and Miller 

Dennis Cole, Town Planner 

Roy Cornett, Druggist 

Mrs. J.J. G-aetz 

P. E. Graham, Lawyer 

John Hodgkinson, Farmer 

Ellis Johnson, Condensery Manager 

Jacob Labh, Farmer 

Lieutenant Colonel Lister 

J.B. Long, Dentist 

Samuel McConnell, Farmer 

Elmer Mathews 

H.J. Mott, School Secretary 
Ernest Newman, City Clerk 
Byron Northey , Farmer 
C.A.Julian Sharman , Farmer 

H.J. Snell, Secretary 1922 Memorial Committee 
R.W.E. Tetley , Collector of Customs 
R.A.’Van Slyke , Farmer 
R.L. Whitney, Teacher 
E.A. Wood, Writer 




ALBERTA, N.W.T 


Report Of Six Years 1 Experience Of A Farmer 


in the 

RED DEER DISTRICT 


by 


REV. LEO. GAETZ 


Published by the Department of Agriculture of 
the Government of Canada 


OTTAWA: 


Printed by Brown Chamberlin, Printer to the 
Queens Most Excellent Majesty 


1890 

































* 


' 


* '' ? ' • : 

. 0.. . .L: ; 1 ■ 1 





















RED DEER 


DISTRICT OF NORTHERN ALBERTA 


Committee Room 50, 

House Of Commons! 

Ottawa, 26th February, 1$90. 


The Select Standing Committee on Agriculture 
and Colonization met this day in the Committee 
Room. Mr. Peter White, Renfrew, Chairman, pre¬ 
sided. 


The Chairman - Hon. Fir. Carling has sug¬ 
gested to me that the Rev. Leonard Gaetz, who 
has lived in the Red Deer River district of 
the North-West Territories, might be able to 
give the Committee some information with res¬ 
pect to that country. 

Hon, hr. Carling - The Rev. Leonard Gaetz, 
who is well known in western Canada, and whom, 
on account of poor health, was obliged some 
years ago to leave the ministry, settled in 
Alberta, about 100 miles north of Calgary, in 
the vicinity of the Red Deer River, and has 
become a farmer and is cultivating a large 
quantity of land. He brought down with him 
yesterday from there samples of grain that were 
grown in that section, and. I thought the com¬ 
mittee would be very much interested in having 
a description of that country, and seeing the 
samples of grain that were grown there. 








■. A ' 


< 


t 





c 
























INTRODUCTORY REMARKS. 


The following is a report of the information 
furnished to the Committee on Colonization and 
Agriculture by the Rev* Leo* Gaetz, giving his 
personal experiences of six year’s residence 
as a farmer in the Red Deer district of Northern 
Alberta* Mr* Gaetz, owing to ill-health, was 
obliged to resign his ministry in the Methodist 
Church, and in consequence he took up his 
residence in the locality stated. 

The record of an experience of six years’ 
farming as a settler in Northern Alberta by a 
man who had no experience of this mode of life 
presents new information which is of great 
interest, and which was furnished by Mr. Gaetz 
to the Committee with frankness. 

The facts stated are proof of the pleas¬ 
antness of the climate and the general conditions 
of living in that, at present, little known 
portion of the North-West, and they convey a 
more favourable impression of the farming 
resources of Northern Alberta than have been 
believed by many to exist. 


DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, 

OTTAWA, 7th March, 1690 












< 












Rev. Leonard Caetz - I have the honour and 
privilege of appearing before you, as the hon. 
Minister of Agriculture stated, through a kind 
suggestion of his own. I may say here that I 
once had the privilege of preaching, not at but 
to the Hon. Mr. Carling in the city of London, 
and he was a kindly friend then, and I believe, 
continues to be, and from his intelligent de¬ 
votion to his Department he has won the hearts, 

I think, of all the farmers from the wave-washed 
shores of the Atlantic to the eastern slope of 
the Rocky Mountains, which I have the honour to 
represent here to-day. I show T ed the Minister of 
Agriculture some samples which are here before 
you, and he thought it might be well if these 
were presented to the Committee: as it is no 
reflection upon the intelligence, even of this 
honourable body, to say that few have the 
slightest conception of the extent, the product 
and the capabilities of these western Territorie 
I felt then and feel still an embarrassment; 
because although I cannot say 1 am entirely un¬ 
accustomed to public speaking, I am quite unac¬ 
customed to speaking under such auspices, and I 
am very much afraid that in my ardour I may 
violate all the rules of Parliamentary dis¬ 
cussion and branch off into an exhortation or 
sermon, and be called to order. 1 hope, how¬ 
ever, you will regard any of my errors as errors 
of the head rather than the heart. I am a 
thorough Canadian from the sole of my feet to 
the crown of my head. I am am enthusiastic 
farmer. I claim to be a co-worker with you, if 
not on the floor of Parliament, yet in the 
fertile fields of the western priarie. I am 
a co-worker with you in everything that leads 
to the success and development of this ancient 
and honourable industry. I speak more par¬ 
ticularly today of the Province of Alberta, 
because I know it better than K know Assiniboia 
and North Saskatchewan; but I may say here, that 
it must not be considered an infringement on the 
prerogative of the representative of Alberta, my 
friend Mr. Davis, for he is perfectly willing 







3 ' 





« 

. 













that I should be his Aaron in speaking of that 
promised land. I have no doubt also that my 
friend from Regina, Mr. Davin, and Mr. Macdowall 
from Saskatchewan, will present information with 
respect to their particular districts. 

The District of Alberta has an area of over 
100,000 square miles. It is, therefore, twice 
as large as Manitoba, about four times as large 
as New Brunswick, five times as large as Nova 
Scotia, and forty times as large as Prince Edward 
Island. It stretches from the 49th parallel of 
latitude—the American boundary—up for over 
450 miles north to the Territory of Athabasca. 

It extends from the filth degree of longitude on 
the east to the Province of British Columbia on 
the west, being somewhat of wedge shape, 
about 120 miles at the south end and somewhere 
about 300 miles at north; or, say, a mean of 
200 miles in width. This country may really be 
divided into three parts, and each of these" 
parts has a special and distinctive capability 
of its own. 

Here is, first, that western portion of 
Alberta which takes in the eastern slope of the 
Rocky Mountains and out through the foot-hills 
to the prairie proper, in which division the 
hand of Providence has treasured immense mineral 
wealth, and forests of timber, and everlasting 
reservoirs of water. Now, it does not require 
any great prophetic genius to foretell the com¬ 
mercial possibilities that are to be found in 
such a district. As yet we are only playing at 
mining; but I firmly believe, Mr. Chairman and 
gentlemen, that our children will see Denvers 
and Butte cities and Bentons north of the 49th 
parallel. 

I see no reason why any sane man can question 
that. The possibilities are there, and while 
capital is seeking for investment, and labour is 
clamouring for employment, and enterprise is every¬ 
where commanding that the stones be made bread, 

I believe it is not impossible that we shall see 


„ 








these things north of the 49th parallel. I 
know that in that country a great deal is being 
done, but very little compared with what we have 
reason to expect. This arises from the fact 
that the mineral resources and resources of 
timber have been discovered by individuals who 
have not as yet the capital to open and develop 
them, and when the hour arrives and capital is 
found to invest in enterprises in that western 
portion of Alberta, it will be a great source 
of strength and commercial advantage to the 
whole country. 

Then, Sir, I hasten to say that the remainder 
of Alberta, making more than two-thirds of the 
district, may be divided into what we call 
Southern Alberta and Northern Alberta. 

Southern Alberta, which extends from the 
boundary line north about 200 miles, to a point 
about 40 miles north of Calgary, and from the 
edge of the foot-hills out to the boundary line 
of Assiniboia, is one of the greatest stock 
countries of the continent of America. This is 
not a new statement. It is a well-known and 
admitted fact by the American ranchmenthat 
Southern Alberta is a far better stock range 
than can be found today in either Wyoming 
Territory, Nevada, Washington Territory or 
Oregon, for the depth of snowfall in winter is 
less and the grass is better. Many American 
rqnchmen are endeavouring to find some way in 
which they can bring, especially duty free, 
their stock over into the district of Southern 
Alberta, in order to graze them there. Now, while 
I speak of this section as being distinctively 
appropriate as a stock-raising country, it is 
only just to say that in many parts of Southern 
Alberta I have seen crops of the ordinary kinds 
of grain—wheat, oats and barley—very excellent, 
both as regards quality and yield. 



c 













- 











From High Elver, Sheep Greek, Pine Cree, 

Fish Creek and the valleys of the Elbow and Bow, 

I have seen at agricultural shows some very fine 
samples of grain. So she is particularly 
favoured in having one industry which she can 
control in a remarkable manner, and yet capable 
of growing the grains of commerce. 

I consider this a great source of wealth, 
as I am sure you all do, and we have the en¬ 
couragement that on such large areas men are 
able to raise hundreds of thousands of stock 
at comparatively little cost and comparatively 
little risk, although 1 must admit that in certain 
seasons, when the snowfall is exceptional and a 
crust on the snow, there is some loss of cattle. 

I think it is only fair to say that some will be 
lost this year. 

But should it reach even 25 per cent, which 
has never yet been reached, aside from the un¬ 
pleasant thought of the suffering of the animals, 
it is an inconsiderable loss after all, when you 
take into consideration the ease and cheapness 
with which the cattle can be produced. 

I sometimes think that if an Eastern man 
can afford to sell a three-year old steer for 
$30, as I hear they have done, a Western ranch¬ 
man ought to' be able to give the steer and a 
bonus to the man who takes him to the amount of 
$10; because I think it is pretty well understood 
that you cannot grow steers to three years of 
age under $ 40 , or $45 per head. Taking Southern 
Alberta, then, it has rich resources in its 
capabilities of cattle-producing, and also to a 
considerable extent in grain-growing. 

To come more particularly to Northern 
Alberta, that great fertile valley stretching 
from about forty miles north of Calgary on for 
two hundred^miles and more past the Red Deer 
River, the Battle River, North Saskatchewan and 
Sturgeon River, we have a somewhat different 
country, with capabilities peculiar to itself, 
and, in my humble judgment, the garden of Alberta, 









, 

. 










. 

' . j U;i; 


■ 










■ 




, ? • 1 ... 

' 




■ - ■ i : 




. 





a country pre-eminently suited to mixed farming. 

It has some peculiar features in this respect, 
that is is a well-wooded and a well-watered 
country. It is true that there is not wood 
everywhere where a farmer would wish to find it, 
but it is true that it answers the description 
of a park-like country with sufficient timber 
for necessary purposes in the greater portion. 

It is a country where a settler going with little 
means does not need to expend his capital al¬ 
together to provide shelter for himself and his 
stock, but where, if he has not timber on his 
own land he can get a permit from the Govern¬ 
ment and get 1,800 lineal feet of building 
timber, 400 roof poles, 2,000 fence rails and 
30 cords of dry wood for 50 cents, and put up 
his buildings. He can husband his resources 
to expend in fitting himself out with stock and 
implements to carry on his work. That is 
certainly a very important item. So far as 
water is concerned, I am glad to think that the 
indications are that there will be no need to 
mention irrigation, at least in Northern Alberta, 
for a great many years to come. We have those 
magnificent water courses—mountain streams and 
also creek and springs. Even at a very high 
rolling point on the prairie there is flowing 
out of the sides of the hills and in the coulees 
springs of water that remain open the year round. 

I have never known a solitary instance in 
that section of the country where a man had to 
dig from more than 15 to 30 feet to have at 
hand a well of the purest and best water. I 
speak favourably of Northern Alberta also, because 
we can grow cattle there I think at one-third 
of the cost that they can be produced for in any 
of the Eastern Provinces. It is true, we think 
it best at any time and often find it necessary 
to house our cattle, because the snowfall is 
deeper in Northern Alberta. I do not hesitate 
to say that in my humble judgment the time is 
fast coming when the best interests of the 
country, the greatest commercial prosperity of 
the country, will be best served by holding cattle 





i ' s. 








'/ , 









/ ■ ’ ' ■■■■• ; ■ l ' Io\,. 








I ' ■ • : • - o f ■; 


. 

. 

■ 

. 

t *■ Q'j 






in such numbers as can be housed, as therefore 
the loss will be only such accidental losses as 
may occur to any farmer. It does not take any 
very great skill to raise cattle, which at twenty- 
eight or thirty months old will dress without an" 
ounce of grain 650 and 700 pounds of beef, or a 
three year old that will dress $00 to $50 pounds. 

I am speaking of what I have seen, and am testi¬ 
fying to what I know by personal experience. Then, 
Sir, it does not take a very great deal of skill 
in farming. Even a novice like myself in average 
years can grow crops of grain--oats from 50 to 
75 bushels to the acre, and weighing 46 to 50 
pounds to the bushel; barley from 45 to 55 bushels 
to the acre and weighing from 54 to 57 pounds to 
the bushel; wheat from 35 to 40 bushels to the 
acre and weighing from 62 to 64 pounds per bushel; 
black barley 35 to 40 bushels to the acre, weighing 
!60 to 6$ pounds to the bushel. We have grown 400 
I bushels of potatoes and 700 bushels of turnips to 
•the acre. I may say 1 have seen greater things 
than these, but 1 am not taking what is phenomenal 
(under very exceptional and favourable circumstances, 
(but what I believe the average farmer with average 
(care and application can realize five years out of 
|six in Northern Alberta. 

But I may say here, I have known yields of 
I$3 bushels to the acre of Welcome oats, and I 
have seen 90 bushels grown at Red Deer. A man 
at Fort Saskatchewan raised 115 bushels to the 
acre, and gave sworn testimony to that effect. 

1 am perfectly aware that men from that country 
are suspected ob being able to tell big stories® 

The Chairman- -C.orresponding with the size of 
(the country. 

Mr. Gaptz —Yes; precisely, but I have taken 
|the pains to bring my bondsmen with me in the 
!shape of grain samples, and 1 will leave practical 
farmers to say whether the collaterals are worthy 
of being accepted or not. 1 am bringing samples 
!produced from my own farm, by one who has no 
exceptional skill in farming. Some are samples of 






. 

. 

i > i 

.. 

. 

, 

' 

« 

* 

. 

. . • 

> 

. 

: 

: : 

. 


a 

' . . . . : 

’ 

■ •' 




the crop of 1$£9 and some of the crop of 18 v $&. Mow 
when we have a country that will produce such grain 
as these and that number of bushels to the acre, 

I can safely leave it to the Committee to say 
‘whether there must not be something favourable in 
the soil and climate where such products may be 
reaped• 

Just to give you an illustration of the fer¬ 
tility of the soil, and the influence of the long, 
bright days in the North-West Territories—I have 
seen wheat and oat straw that grew to the height 
of and 6 feet, and yet well headed and filled 
with plump grain. Mr. L.A. Hamilton, Land Com¬ 
missioner for Canadian pacific Railway, who is now 
in the city of Ottawa, will attest to the fact 
that I sent in the fall of 1$£$ to the C.P.R. car 
wheat 6 feet 2 inches in the straw, with large 
heads, averaging 4i to 5 inches in length. I 
am not going to say to this honorable body that 
in the North-West Territories, in Alberta, it is 
a perfect paradise; that there are no drawbacks 
or no disadvantages. I will not impose upon the 
intelligence of the Committee by saying that there 
is nothing that the farmer has to contend with, 
no difficulties, no anxieties in the matter of 
crop-producing; but I shall be very glad indeed if 
any gentleman here will tell me where on the face 
of God T s earth there are not some difficulties and 
some disadvantages to be contended with in faming. 
I have to say this in all truth and dandour; I 
have closely examined into the matter, and I do 
not know a spot on earth, either south or north of 
the 49th parallel, where I would rather take my 
chances in the industry of mixed farming that I 
would in Northern Alberta. 1 just want to say, 
in order to disarm any possible hostile criticism, 
that I have no town property to sell, I have no 
land you can buy, I have no disposition to be re¬ 
warded . I want to be in the best part of the 
country, for my own sake and for my family T s sake* 

I have come here, gentlemen, not as the agent of 
any Government, or any man, or of any corporation; 

I am at your own command, telling you of a section 
of our great country as I find it. I have been 
















e 




o.ii ov;p : ii , 






there six years, long enough to have formed a 
judgment as to it character and capabilities and, 
therefore I feel that I have a right to speak 
with some assurance. My motives for going were 
various, but the chief reasons -were, sickness, 
poverty and a desire to keep my family around me. 
It was not a dislike for the beautiful Provinces 
of the east. I am dead in love with Canada any 
i way—I include all the Provinces—even Quebec/ 

! which seems to have been handled somewhat roughly 
of late. But I had not the capital to invest in 
ji purchasing a farm in these beautiful Provinces, 
jl never could have hoped to secure land in the 
least, to enable me to keep my large family of 
ijboys around me, seeing that I was very near coming 
11within the range of Mr. Mercier f s fecundity bonus, 
ill think there are thousands in Ontario and the 
other Provinces just in the same situation. I 
say that if a man is well situated in the eastern 
I Provinces, and if he is doing well, I see no 
reason why he should nove; but men who are mort¬ 
gaged heavily or renting farms, and are likely to 
leave the heritage of mortgage and want to their 
^children, I believe it is their duty to go out to 
I the North-West and take up land which will enable 
|them to maintain that family, and do more for them 
in five years than he could do under the same cir¬ 
cumstances in fifteen or twenty years in the east- 
[!ern Provinces. I may be asked if there is any 
valuable land still to be had there? if there is 
(much of that land you speak of? Why, gentlemen, 

I might almost say it is all available; there is 
only in the fertile valley of the lied ’Deer, that I 
have described to you, a few hundred of occupied 
j,homesteads; that is only a drop in the bucket, as 
compared with the capabilities of these vast 
;stretches of fertile land—land very much better 
than some of the land I am farming. I am on the 
bottom lands by the riverside, which are thinner 
I land poorer, thd wall require feeding with manure 
ia little oftener. But most of these products are 
from these bottom lands. There are millions of 
acres of deep soils in the various sections of the 
Red Deer country that are now entirely unoccupied. 











• vo' v : 


0,0 


t ' { 0 

. 

* 

. 

■ 






C ■ 




r 


■ V 




That is saying nothing of the fertile valley of 
the Battle River, the Saskatchewan and the Edmon¬ 
ton and Fort Saskatcewan districts, and of the 
Sturgeon River district, stretching up for 130 
miles north, a country of wonderful probabilities; 

It seems to me in my zeal I am in danger of 
overstepping the bounds of privileges; but bear 
with me when I say the indications suggest the 
necessity of a vigorous immigration policy for 
the North-West country--a very vigorous immigration 
policy indeed. With the strong competition of 
the Argentine Republic, Brazil and Mexico, Australia 
and the United States, and a great many other 
countries, is it reasonable to expect that people 
are going to flock into Canada, without even the 
facts of the case being set before them? I think 
it is quite out of the question for us to reasonably 
expect this. I therefore hope that there will be 
efforts put forth by this honourable body that 
will encourage the filling up of that country; for, 
let me say, it is to your interest as well as ours. 

You send us a thousand men, and in a few years we 
will send you back # 50,000 for commodities that it^ 
is impossible for us to provide for ourselves—conWp 
modifies which you will control, and in which we 
will not be likely to come into very serious corn- 
pet ion with you. 

Our markets will soon be in the other direction. 
China and Japan have become tired of eating rice 
and want flour; and why should they take it from 
Washington Territory, Nevada, California--that is, 
from those portions which grow wrheat—when it can 
be grown out in those western Provinces of Assiniboia, 
Saskatchewan and Alberta. Our coal will not come 
into competition with eastern coal, for they are 
clamouring for it for the furnaces along the mountains 
of Nevada and Washington Territory, where they have 
to go to the enormous expense of cutting timber away 
far up in the hills, and shunt it down to the 
valleys below for their furnaces. They are 
clamouring for our coal. Our beef, I hope, will 
soon go to England by the Hudson Bay route, and 
save long tra.vel. In this way we shall keep out 
1 of your road, and will be a help to you in the east. 






use both brain and muscle, or else be left behind 
in the struggle for bread. I feel that the 
Experimental Farm, while an institution that must 
benefit the eastern Provinces, is particularly 
necessary to us. We have no agricultural literature 
We have not the experiments of others to guide us— 
not even their blunders to shun. We are feeling 
our way; everything is tentative. In good faith 
we tried the met ods that were appropriate in 
jthe east, but often failed. In this matter, 
therefore, I say that the Experimental Farm, 
jUnder its wise and devoted directors, will be of 
■great value. Not the least in importance are 
‘the contemplated experiments with natural grasses 
of the country, for the time will come when settle¬ 
ment will limit our ranges, and in order to feed 
jour flocks and herds, when the wild ranges are 
'limited, it will be necessary to fall back upon 
cultivation of native grasses, in themselves most 
jnutritious, and which can be cultivated with success 
[With this assistance I have no fears with reference 
|to the future. I do not fear the competition of 
the United States when our country becomes known, 
si have no idea that the best portion of this country 
slies south of the 49th parallel. I have no con¬ 
fidence in the idea that the Americans have the 
best of it. The centuries will tell that the best 
portion of it lies to the north-west of the great 
slakes. I think when the resources of that vast 
[region are better known Canadians will flock back 
(from the United States. In my community tfao-thirds 
of the settlers are men who were once in the United 
!|States--Canadians who went to the United States 
and tried it, and have come back again. In my own 
Province of Nova Scotia, that strong, vigorous 
[[people are growing men and women so fast that they 
Ihave no places to put them in, and God has provided 
the prairies of the west. Would the peo le of 
jCanada rather have them go to the United States? 

I If they do, I will tell them that six of our 
latest settler got tired of going from Nova Scotia 
to the United ^tates, and have found their way 
[over this transcontinental route and are doing well. 
Some bachelors there have been able to make, in 
one summer, $400 worth of butter, and raise a band 
of calves besides, such as you could not produce 
in this country if }rou tried. I say that is a 






■ t' 

* 

. 

. 

- 

* 


* 

? 

. 

. 

« 

. 

. 

. 

. 

♦ 

.... 

. 

. • j f on : :Vi •. | 

■ on evrd 

» 

r 

. 

. ' 

, 




country that has hope and promise in it, and I 
therefore trust you will be able to develop some 
plan that will settle up that country. Nov/, I 
thank you very kindly indeed, honourable gentlemen, 
for ohe patient hearing you have given me. I have 
felt, time and again, that I am trespassing; but 
mv.heart is full. My purposes and motives are 
unimpeachable before heaven. I believe in the 
country where I have gone to make my home. I 
'believe the Providence of God never made country 
so perfect as it is to be a failure. I believe 
!there is a home there for millions of the earth, 
and I hope these facts will be calmly looked, into 
'and I believe the results will be favourable. I 
shall be glad to answer any questions that may be 
asked, being conscious that I have not nearly gone 
!over the ground. 

By Mr. Trow:-- 

Q« Have they exported any very large amount of 
grain from that Territory? A. No sir. The home 
1 market as yet requires it. 

Qo I would also ask you why you produce samples 
of the crop of 1$£$? Surely there was sufficient 
in that great country in 1BS9 to fill those little 
I bags without taking the produce of lSBB? A. It 
jis well understood that in every new country there 
jis a local market, and that local market is the 
very best we have. We have no reason in the world 
• for sending our products away and getting 50 
! cents a bushel, when we can get 6$ cents right at 
our door. There is in every new country this local 
market, which as long as it lasts, is the very 
| best. Up to the present time, we have always had 
| ways of disposing of all we could raise. I sold 
1 1,500 bushels of oats to one man--a stage contracto 
! at 6£ cents per bushel. There is a vast freight 
traffic that goes from the Canadian Pacific Railway 
station at Calgary all through the northern country 
| away up to White Fish Lake and Saddle Lake, and 
the Indian reserves north. These teams have to be 
fed, and require all the grain that we have already 

raised here, With reference to my brining the 
seed of 1$88, I have nothing to conceal. I do 














c 






< 





































. 










* 











not hesitate to say, and I assume that the questioner 
jknows, that 1$$9 was our hardest year. It was the 
most difficult year, because of a drought that 
we had never before experienced. Why was that the 
case? Because the winter before was no winter at 
all—just a continual spring. There was no snow 
on the ground; there was no frost. Our Aprils 
and Mays are invariably dry, and the seed last 
year was placed in the ground when it was so dry 
that it did not germinate. Rain held off until 
about the first week in July, and consequently 
we did not realize either the quantity or quality 
of grain we had in other years. This year, I am 
iglad to say, we have an old-fashioned Canadian 
winter, with plenty of snow and plenty of cold. 

I believe the prospects were never better. 

Q. On what dates do you commence seeding? A. About 
the latter part of March or the first of April. 

[Some of our largest seeders, the Beaty Bros., for 
jinstance, have their grain mostly sown by the Bth 
of April. I have known it to be the latter part 
of April before it was sown. In the year l££6 or 
cannot just tell which—the snow lay on 
until the latter part of March, and seeding did 
inot begin until the 10th of April. 

IQ. Are you subject to any summer frost? A. The 
’only one we had was on the 11th of July, 1B&7, 
when the barley was just heading out. Frost in 
those localities, as many of you know, goes in 
|veins or streaks, something like a hail storm, 

Sand quite often you will find that while the grain 
Ion one half-section has been injured, that on 
the neighbouring half-section has not been touched 

I at all. The frost was local. We have this to 
ifear. It is one of the draw-backs that may come; 

II cannot guarantee that it will not. It is one 
of those occurrences, however, that may come to 
.almost any country, and when it destroys the tobacco 
icrop of Virginia, as it did last year, it will.be 
very likely to strike out and reach the crops in 
northern parts of Canada. 








i 




? 



* 

' t ■ 








■ L 


c c 

* 

■ ? t ■ : ' 

■ 

■ 

I f ■ ' ■ •. ' 

. 

• ■ r J !.) : B 

- 

{ " . 

. 

. 




Q* Where do you derive your information in reference 
to the percentage of loss in the ranchg districts 
this season, because the season is only partially 
past? Twenty-five per cent is very large. I 
understand you to say pep 25 per cent would be the 
loss? A. I hope I was not so understood. I said: 
"Sven should it reach 25 per cent, which it never 
had yet.” In the winter of 13&7 it reached 7 or 
IS per cent. I am sure there will be some loss 
this winter. I was only making the point that 
; should it reach that percentage ( 25 )'the ease 
;with which the cattle'could be produced would not 
'make it, after all, to a large ranchman, a very 
serious loss. 

Q. What distance are you removed from the railway 
company’s reserve? A. Eighty-eight miles from 
Calgary, my nearest railway point. 

By Mr. Armstrong:-- 

Q. Perhaps Mr. Gaetz would give us some idea about 
the general rainfall in the summer in that country. 
Is it pretty plentiful and pretty evenly distributed, 
as a general thing? Of course, we know this last 
year was dry all over the North-West? A. I am 
very glad also to be able to answer that question, 
because, of course, in that country, having imbibed 
from every source the idea that it never rained, 
the Canadian Pacific Railway employees and the 
American land agents were telling me, when I was 
going into the country, that it never rained there, 
and 1 would be dried out, and be sick and tired 
of it before very long. In the face of this, I 
thought I had done a rash act in coming to a 
country where it never rained. But before the 
20th of August I wondered whether it every stopped. 

It rained from about the $th of June, at short 
intervals, on through June and July, and up to the 
7th August, so that the brooks were booming and 
the sloughs were full, and we could not get into 
the meadows with our mowers, and had to go out 
on the high priarie to cut our hay. The year l££6 
was a delightful year, because the rain just seemed 
to come when it was needed. It was well dis¬ 
tributed, and all we needed. It w T as not so great 








■ 

. 



. 

* 

. 

. 


8 

. 

. 

* 

« 

' 

; ’ 

. 

' 

: : t < 

' . , ' : , . "i 

f .•. 

. ; <. 

o ■ j 

jo ;:>h Ovv .11 




ks in 1884 and 1835, but it was sufficient for all 
purposes. In 1887 there was also abundance of 
rain. From 1884 to 1889 the rainfall was sufficient 
for all purposes of agriculture. Last year, 1889, 
was the only season that we had any suspicion of 
the possibility of a failure of moisture. 

By Mr. Trow:- 

iQ. How many months do you house your cattle and 
[horses? A. A great manyof them we do not house 
at all. Our young stock or yearlings simply go 
in the shed in the night, and around the straw 
istack in the day. Our breeding cows we house. 

My young horses were out this winter until the last 
week in January, though one of the coldest winters 
isince I have been in the country. They were in 
iperfectly good condition, and healthy. Horses 
iaccustomed to it will get into one of these big 
sloughs and will stay there week after week, live 
'well and come home fat. Speaking of last winter, 
our young horses did not come home at all. We 
never fed them a pound of hay, but I do not want 
to see the recurrence of a winter like that again. 

I think a snowfall and cold are better than these 
mild winters. 

Q. This has been the experience of the farmers 
even in Ontario, the experience of the new settlers 
when the country was comparatively a bleak wilder - 
ness; the cattle lived on brouse. It has also 
been the experience of Manitoba. When the country 
becomes thickly settled, do you expect to raise 
natural grasses there? Has the experiment been 
tried? A. I have never been under the necessity 
of trying the experiment. I am experimenting now 
with a variety of grasses under cultivation, in¬ 
cluding, timothy, Alsasas clover, Blue-top, and 
Kentucky blue grass. 1 have tried these; so far, 

I have had no success with clover. Last year I 
put down an acre of timothy and had an excellent 
yield—a ton to the acre, even dry as it was; . I 
w ill say further, that the piece which had been 
sown two years was very short, and did not come 
up to my expectation at all, and was not cut. 








, 


c 















It would have cut, probably, half a ton, but I 
thought it was better to let what there v/as go to 
seed; consequently, I am unable to decide as to 
the others, but I see no reason why timothy should 
not succeed. As to the native grasses Mr. McKay, 
who has been experimenting at the Experimental 
Farm at Indian Head, will give us some encourage¬ 
ment, I hope, on these points. 

Q. Would not the Experimental Farm be much better 
in your settlement than at Indian Head? A. Cer¬ 
tainly I would like that very much. The Depart- 
iment did not look at it that way, and yet generous 
and unselfish a mortal as I am, I think, all things 
!considered, it is better where it is; because it 
is working for a wooded and park-like country in 
Northern Alberta as well as for the Province of 
Assiniboia, where there is a great dearth of wood, 
and consequently I believe the results will be far 
better and more satisfactory to have it located 
where it is, because if thejr succeed with any ex¬ 
periment at Indian Head 1 have no doubt it will be 
a great success in Northern Alberta. 

By Mr. Sproule:- 

Q. What is the mean depth of your snow in winter? 

:A. Well, it is very varied. I have known it to 
be 5 or 6 inches deep in the winters of 1$$6 and 
,l£$7; in the winter of 18*$7-£& it was 23 and 24 
inches deep, but to strike an average, I would say 
I somewhere betwreen 16 and 1$ inches, taking a period 
of ten years. 

By Mr. Trow:- 

Q. Has any coal been developed in your section? 

A. Well, I may just say to my honourable friend 
that the whole county is underlaid with coal. 

There is none yet being mined. I am within 
twenty miles of the great coal banks in Range^24, 
Tw$jnship 3$, west of the Fourth Principal Meridian, 
where, by my own measurement, there are 60 feet 
of coal from the top down to the water’s edge, and 
running under the water’s edge I don’t know how 

£iS-taIS8i l r ll§a t iX e ^i^ll 1 ig! d r§mg| r !n t ^ an a 










c 















block of half a ton or so at a time and taking it 
home. That is all the development as yet. 

By Mr. Armstrong:- 

Q. I suppose you have been about a good deal in 
Northern Alberta? A. Yes. 

Q. £own nearly as far as Edmonton? A. I have been 
thirty miles north of Edmonton. 

Q. The question I want to ask you is this: have 
you formed any general idea about the extent of 
land yet to go on for immediate settlement? You 
understand that in our country, in Ontario, even 
| around London, where they have the best land, there 
are large tracts of magnificent land now that in 
early days were not fit to go on to settle. It 
required time and capital. About what do you 
think is the proportion of land that a settler 
can go in on and commence ploughing and cropping 
1 at once? A. There is so much of it that it would 
i be impossible for me to say. I have simpl^y to 
state this-—if a man were to tumble out of a 
balloon at random he could hardly fall on a 
quarter-section of land in that country where there 
would not be enough fertile, tillable land for a 
man of small capital to go to work upon and farm. 
That is my honest conviction; that is—unless he 
fell into a lake, and provided his health was 
not impaired by the fall. Good land is so abundant 
it is really easier to tell what is not there than 
what is there. There are immense tracts; of course 
there are bluffs of small timber here and there, 
but these are a convenience. Taking the land 
generally, I think this land today, in its virgin 
state, without a ploughshare having touched it, 
would be worth #100 to the acre near some eastern 
city or town. It is so fertile and so easily broken 
up that a man can start and plough for a quarter 
of a mile, and if he get a favourable position 
he can plough a mile. 

Qu. I suppose these bluffs will be good land, too, 
after the timber is taken off? A. The very best. 




















By Mr. Davin:- 


i 

Q. Wherever there are bluffs, there is splendid land 

also? 

By Mr. Armstrong:- 

Q. The bluffs you speak of are not rocky, worthless 
land at all. It is good land, and will be good 
land, the same as the surrounding prairie when 
the timber is taken off? A. I think it is the 
very best of land, but now it costs too much to 
clear while as yet there is such an abundance of 
land. In my garden, for example, I have that 
Ikind of land—and that which had been burned over 
once, covered with rose bushes. There is not a 
rock in it; you cannot get a rock to shie at a 
gopher for miles in a stretch. I Relieve it to 
be the richest land, from experience, where these 
timber bluffs had been. 

By Mr. Watson:- 

Q. You have had considerable experience there in 
regard to rainfall. Don’t you think it would be 
a good thing to protect a lo$t of this timber? I 
suppose it has a certain effect on the atmosphere? 

A. I have no doubt it would be an important thing 
to protect what timber we have. Take sections of 
the country, say forty miles north of Calgary, 
there is a distance of from fifteen to twenty 
miles where there are only scattered bluffs. It 
is not only important to protect what there is, 
but to grow more. The Government ought to give 
great encouragement in the supplying of trees to 
plant. It is a matter of no difficulty at all 
to grow any of these trees. I have taken spruce 
up and removed them, and taking simple, ordinary 
care of them, I have lost but 2 per cent of those 
I have planted. Poplars are more vigorous still. 

Q. Is the timber being injured very much by fires? 

A. A great deal, I am sorry to say. 















- 

s ’ 

, 

* ■ • ■ 


* 







Q. What means could be taken to protect them? 

A. It is very difficult indeed to say what means 
could be taken. I am not a born legislator, but 
I sometimes think it would be desirable that 
there should be an officer appointed in various 
districts—-a sort of fire warden—-whose duty it 
should be, not his privilege, whenever a fire 
anywhere, to go out and command his neighbours 
to go and assist in putting out that fire, and 
having authority to fine those who refused. As 
it is, if we see a fire and know it is going to 
pass our own place without doing serious harm to 
use, in our own selfish way we often go to sleep 
and let it burn. I have felt intensely on this 
subject. I know there has been enough timber 
destroyed in my district to meet the requirements 
of a large agricultural community for the next 
fifteen or twenty years. If there was a fire 
warden to go and warn men when a fire started, 
even fifteen or twenty miles away, this damage 
might be averted. At the inception of a fire it 
is a very small thing, but afterward it is a very 
difficult thing to control or stop it. 

Q. Would a system of brakes do? A. We all do 
that. The man who is a "russler” will generally 
put his fields in such a shape as to protect his 
place; but for the unsettled portion of the country, 
those vast stretches of the country which are 
nobody’s special interest, it would be simply im¬ 
possible to meet the difficulty with fire-brakes. 

Q. Nobody except the Government. Would it not 
be well in the interest of that country and its 
future for an expenditure to be made in making 
fire-brakes every six, or eight or ten miles? 

A. That would mean making these fire-brakes every 
year, because the growth of vegetation is so 
rich. I have seen a piece of ground turned up 
and not cropped, and by next season there would 
be a growth of 3 or 4 feet of rank grass. That 
grass dies in the autumn and leaves you as help¬ 
less as you were beqfre. 































By Mr* Armstrong:- 


Q* What are the principal varieties of timber 
you have in your country? A. We have chiefly 
spruce and poplar. In addition to those, we 
have tamarac, a little birch and a small wood 
called Sascatoon, of very little commercial value, 
but of great value to the farmer. It is a very 
tough wood, and makes an excellent whiffletree, 
or anything of that sort. It is equal to the 
rock elm in Ontario. 

Q. Does the spruce grow to any considerable size? 

A. I have had some spruce taken out this winter 
for milling purposes that will go 2£ inches ac¬ 
ross the stump. That is a large size. If I 
were to strike an average, I would say 12 to 15 
inches would be an average all round. 

By Mr. Kirk:- 

Q. Is spruce a desirable wood for fencing? A. Not 
for fencing, if just cut down and immediately put 
in without any preparation; but spruce that has 
the bark shaved off and put into a hot willow 
fire and singed or dipped in lime water is almost 
as desirable as tamarac, but, of course, not so 
desirable as cedar. 

Q. How does it compare with Nova Scotia spruce? 

A. I think it is the very same; I see no difference 
Some people will take this dead spruce that they 
find fire-killed, and small pieces no bigger than 
your arm, and string wire upon it. They take no 
paiBS to keep it from corroding, and such treat¬ 
ment gives the impression that spruce is no good. 

I think that if pains are taken that spruce makes 
a very excellent post, not equal to tamarac or 
cedar, of course, but still a very desirable post, 
in places where other varieties cannot be had. 

By Mr. Trow:- 

Q. Has the Government made a proper system of. 
survey of the townships out there? A. Yes, sir. 








* 


- 

. 

t 







4 

/r i •.... 

. 

• V 


4 

. 

. 


* 

\ . ', V ■. J 

• ' 

( v ... . :C • ' . / ;:r ,. vx;\ .• jinn 

■ 

' . V i 

* 

. 







The country is all blocked out in townships, 
and a considerable portion of it sub-divided into 
sections. In the Red Deer River district there 
are ten townships divided into sections, but the 
whole country is not sub-divided. It is laid out 
in townships so that a man \Afho understands town¬ 
ship surveys can pretty nearly locate himself. 

Q. Why should he be put to that unnecessary trouble? 
A. We sincerely hope that will not remain the 
case very long. I think that whenever immigration 
begins to swarm in there that will be remedied. 

I beg to suggest, although the Government may not 
thank me for "pointers,” that it would be well to 
get ahead of the immigration, so that men might 
have their choice and know what they have chosen. 

By Mr. Sproule:- 

Q. How are you off for mills? A. We have no grist 
mills there yet. No man has had enough capital to 
start one, and it is one of the things I propose 
to enquire about, and see if a portable grist mill 
can be had. There was a saw mill put in by the 
| Mackenzie 1 s some years ago, and lasf fall I was 
rash enough to put in a portable saw mill, with 
edger, matcher and planer, and a thirty horse¬ 
power John A. Bell engine. We think now of 
getting a grist mill to run by this engine during 
that portion of the year it will not be used by 
the saw mill, as we have not enough demand cutting 
the whole year. The day we are able to convert 
our wheat into flour will greatly lessen the cost 
of living, for it costs $1 to $1.35 per hundred 
to freight our flour from Calgary. The Red Deer 
River, with a fall of 14 feet per mile, is one of 
the grandest of water powers that nature has ever 
provided, with good banks, and every facility for 
the establishment of mills. As yet, however, it 
is very much cheaper, in a small way, for men to 
employ steam power rather than water. 


By Mr. Innes:- 
















Vegetables do splendidly. We have had no manner 
of failure in regard to vegetables in any year 
but last year. The drought last year decidedly 
affected u^s it did Manitoba and the North-West 
generally. I suppose I may astonish some of you 
when I say I have grown potatoes at the rate of 
720 bushels to the aere. That is a phenomenal 
yield, but not that we gave them any special 
attention; we can grow from 300 to 400'bushels of 
potatoes per acre, without any extra attention, 
skill or manure. We can also grow carrots, cab¬ 
bages and cauliflower. I have frequently seen 
cauliflower at Calgary Fair that were a yard in 
circumference. You may have seen them larger, 
but I am glad to get them that large. In ref¬ 
erence to small fruits, I may just say, that this 
is another matter that has to be experimented upon 
for us, rather than we for ourselves. I have been 
for four or five years doing this work, and not 
without some results. I have grown red currants, 
black currants and strawberries with considerable 
success, but not what would satisfy me or the taste 
of any ordinary farmer. I find we made a blunder. 

, I have no idea that it is our cold winters that 
kill our fruits. I think it is the hot, dry winds 
of April and May. The sap comes up early; un- 
: less they are mulched then the bark gets loose 
I because the sap seems to dry it up. I am waiting 
1 for information on this matter, but in the mean¬ 
time I am trying a heavy mulch around the roots 
ithis year, so as to keep the sap back, as you do 
j with your grape vines. If we can keep the sap 
back I believe we will make a success of small 
fruits. It is done in many parts of the country 
and some have excellent success. I have not yet 
got what I hope to obtain. 

By Mr. Trow:- 

Q. Have you Chinook winds? A. We are not so 
subject to them as they are in Southern Alberta, 
but since I left home, as a mere freak of nature, 
they have had one of the strongest Chinooks there 
that they have had in any part of the country.^ 

The snow went off very quickly, and the whole band 










of cattle started off to seek their own fare 
and succeeded so well that when they came back 
they would not touch food. But as a general 
thing we are not so liable to warm winds as they 
are further south. 

By Mr* Armstrong:- 

Q. Have you any mid small fruits that can be 
used? A. I only planted some last year, and cannot 
say. The growth this year was remarkable, and 
I begin to feel this is a matter in which we can 
attain some success. There is all kind of wild 
fruit there, such as currants, gooseberries, etc. 

Q. Can you gather them for use? A. Yes; any 
quantity for our own use. There is another berry 
called the Saskatoon, very much like the blue¬ 
berry of the eastern Provinces. In 1$$6 a man 
could go out and gather barrels of them. 

By Mr. Watson:- 

Q. What was the largest crop of grain grown there, 
and what is the amount of area under settlement? 

A. The area of settlement would be over a length 
of seven or eight miles along the Bdmonton trail, 
by three or four miles east and west of the trail, 
but it is a scattered settlement. There is no 
closely-packed settlement anywhere. As to the 
largest crop—do you mean that I have had? 

Q. I mean the total crops? A. There is no bureau 
of agriculture to gather statistics, and I really 
cannot, on the spur of the moment, give any in¬ 
formation. In the season of 1$$£ I had about 
three thousand bushels of grain in all, of wheat 
oats, barley and some peas. The Beatties had 
some 2,000 bushels. I suppose 10,000 or 15,000 
bushels were grown in the little neighbourhood 
there althgether* 

By Mr. Cochrane:- 

Q. Do peas grow well there? A. 1 have grown 35 




















. 

. 

< . c ... 

. 







ibushels to the acre, and weighing 66 pounds to 
the bushel, of the Golden Vine variety. 

By Mr. Trow:- 

Q. Do you find the wild pea there? A. We have 
abundance of the pea vine, also vetch, all 
through that district. 

Q. It is regarded as a strong indication that 
the land is fertile, is it not? A. We have 
abundance of it. There is one variety that grows 
low and tangled in the grass, while there is 
.another that grows on the willows and poplars, 
climbling them 6 or 6 feet. 

By Mr. Watson:- 

|Q. How is your wheat marketed, if you have no 
market? A. I dispose of it to newcomers. We 
keep some for seed, and we fatten pigs on it, anri 
it pays to fatten pigs on wheat, when you get 
40 bushels to the acre and 64 pounds to the 
bushel, and 10 cents a pound for pork. 

By Mr. Fisher:- 

|Q. How many people are there in that settlement? 

A. I suppose there are about a hundred occupying 
homesteads. They would average, including bachelors, 
from 150 to 200 in that settlement. I wish to say 
that this is some distance from the Mormon Settlement. 
There is nothing that would give me more pleasure 
than to have Government send about 1,000 men 
and 2,000 women. This would be the grandest thing 
that every happened to that country. I say when 
a man goes out to that country or to any country 
he should take his wife with him. If he has not 
a wife he should get one. Many persons insure 
'their ybn failure by going out for a year or two 
to get things fixed up and send back for their 
wives and families. A woman who cannot do as 
much as a man and a-half in fixing up is not much 
of a woman. I am worth a little, but my wife is 
worth ten times as much as I am. If you want a 








- 

« 






downright enthusiast in reference to the country, 
if you have money to spend for immigration pur¬ 
poses she will do the work. When she went out 
to the North-West Territories, six years ago, 
the doctors were anxious in reference to her 
change of living. She had never been well in the 
Lower Provinces for many years. Now she is a 
robust, strong woman. I know also Mrs. Nelson, 
wife of the Rev. Mr. Nelson, who has also regained 
health. I am only mentioning these facts to show 
that the climate cannot be so rigorous and so fatal 
as some people would like you to believe. That 
is not the case. I do not want to dispargge this 
[country, but taking even the low reading of the 
thermometer for the last few days in the North- 
West, I will take the climate indicated in pre¬ 
ference to what we have had here for the last two 
or three days. I have not had a cold or a sore 
throat for the last two on three years till I 
came to Ottawa. I t would be foolish for me to 
say that it is not cold in the North-West. You 
do feel the cold there, but at the same time you 
don’t feel the cold to the extent that you might 
Imagine from the reading of the thermometer. We 
have not lost a solitary day all winter in con¬ 
sequence of cold. My sons have gone three and 
ifour miles to work in the coldest days we have 
had, and children play out of doors, in the bracing 
atmosphere, unless the temperature is very low 
indeed. 

By Mr. Innes:- 

Q. What is the average range of the thermometer 
in winter? A. I can hardly tell just offhand, 
but this winter, I believe, the mean temperature 
in Northern Alberta measures down somewhere a 
few degrees below zero. It has been very steady 
cold weather, about the coldest I have known since 
I have been in the country. In the summer months 
the mean temperature derived from meteorological 
statistics at Battleford and Toronto, taken three 
years ago-—I have no fcecent data--for the months 
of June, July and August, was 61° in Toronto, 
and 60° in Battleford. 












t 









t 




By Fir. Bain(Wentworth):- 

Q. How are you summer nights? Under what conditions 
do you get your summer frost—is it after a rain, 
or how? A. It is usually after a rain, when the 
wind is to the north-east. 

Q. Do your rains come from the north-east? 

A. From the north-east generally. 

Q. Is that where you have your summer rains from? 

A. Well, we are very apt to have our summer rains 
from the north-east—more apt to be from that 
quarter than any other. 

!Q. It is very apt to settle down cold? A. It 
is very apt to settle down cold in the early part 
of June^ especially in the full of the moon in 
June. If we have rain then there is a little 
; danger it might settle down into frost, though 
very slight. 

Q. When the wind is in the north-east? A. Yes; 
'however, in reality we have never been seriously 
affected. 

By Mr. Carling:- 

Q. You have experimented with different kinds of 
wheat, I think, in that section of the country? 

You have tried the Red Fife, and you have tried 
the Ladoga wheat? I would like to ask you 
whether you have found the Ladoga wheat to ripen „ 
earlier than the other different kinds of wheat 
that you have tried, and what is the result of 
your experiment? I might say to the gentlemen 
present that the sample of Fir. GaetzJs wheat here 
'present on the table is the Ladoga wheat grown in 
the Red Deer district, and I have a sample here 
of the Ladoga wheat grown in the Peace River 
district, 350 miles north-west of Edmonton, which 
weighs 64 pounds to the bushel. This is quite 
clear that that northern district, as far as to 
the Peace River, is very able to grow a good 
quality of wheat. I pass it around to gentlemen 
'who would like to see it? A. I have tried three 












varieties of wheat—one variety called the Defiance, 
another the Fife, and third Ladoga. My experience 
is that the Ladoga will ripen about a week or ten 
days earlier than the Defiance. Up to the present, 
it is the earliest-maturing variety that we have 
had, and the general feeling among the farmers is 
that this is the wheat for the North-West. If 
there is any little prejudice as to the colour 
of the flour, I think this will be overcome. If 
the farmer is able to take his own grain to the 
mill he will be glad to take the flour, even with 
a high colour. 

By Mr. Armstrong:- 

I 

!Q. Would it rate as a hard wheat? A. I believe 
! it would* I am not prepared to say; but the 
1 Experimental Farm bulletin represents it as a 
;hard wheat, with a larger proportion of glutin 
in it than the Hed Fife, and the amount of glutin 
in it constitutes its strength. 

By Mr. Carling:- 

Q. How does it do as to the yield per acre? 

Is A. It is the best, in my opinion by five or six 
bushels* 


(Signed) 


Leo. Gaetz 































f- 


<s> 


PUBLIC 

GATHERING 


TO HONOUR 

Mr. Joseph Welsh 

Principal of the Red Deer Junior High School 
and Superintendent of City Schools 

On His Retirement After Thirty-one Years of Service 
in the Red Deer Schools 

Memorial Centre 

RED DEER, ALBERTA 


Friday, June 4th, 1954 


4 


8:30 P.M. 



Class 

1923- 24 

1924- 25 

1925- 26 

1926- 27 

1927- 28 

1928- 29 

1929- 30 

1930- 31 

1931- 32 

1932- 33 

1933- 34 

1934- 35 

1935- 36 

1936- 37 

1937- 38 

1938- 39 

1939- 40 

1940- 41 

1941- 42 

1942- 43 

1943- 44 

1944- 45 

1945- 46 

1946- 47 

1947- 48 

1948- 49 

1949- 50 

1950- 51 

1951- 52 

1952- 53 

1953- 54 


Representatives 1924-54 

George Cox 
George Horn 

Frances Kangiesser (Mrs. Geo. Cox) 
Tom Cornett 

Isabel Cruickshank (Mrs. Walter Code) 

George McLevin 

Sheila Hanna (Mrs. Neil Jarvin) 

Bob MacGregor 
Harry Halladay 

Florence Holmes (Mrs. Paul Brown) 
Edna Crawford (Mrs. Pat Smith) 

Mel Crawford 
Bill Moore 
Ronald Scott 
Harold Crawford 

Doris Tetley (Mrs. G. B. Hanford) 
Gwen Scragg (Mrs. Stan Tetley) 

Leah Brodersen 
Stanley Tetley 
Elmer Crawford 
Jeanne Barrett 
Harold Asmundson 
Chlo-Ellen Cox 
Lloyd Crawford 
Beryl Lundberg 
Ted Bower 
Donald Woitte 
Bob Cox 
Barry Code 
Hugh Horn 
Barbara Anne Cornett 


PROGRAMME 


CHAIRMAN: Mr. G. H. Dawe 


0 CANADA 

OPENING REMARKS _Mr. G. H. Dawe 

“MR. WELSH TEACHES HIS CLASS ” _ Mr. Welsh 

and Representatives of the Years 1924-54 

PIANO SOLO _ Miss Deirdre Foster 


ADDRESS _ Mayor H. W. Halladay 

INTRODUCTION of the Minister of Education 

Mr. R. V. McCullough 
Supt., Red Deer School Division No. 35 


ADDRESS _ Hon. A. O. Aalborg 

Minister of Education 

PRESENTATIONS: 

RED DEER SCHOOL BOARD _Mr. G. M. England 

Chairman Red Deer School Board 

STAFF _Miss Isabel C. Murray 

FORMER STUDENTS _Mr. C. H. Humber 

REPLY _ Mr. J. Welsh 


GOD SAVE THE QUEEN 

Accompanist: Miss Deirdre Foster 


RECEPTION IN MEMORIAL CENTRE GYMNASIUM 












CENTRAL ALBERTA PIONEERS 1 & OLD TIMERS' ASSOCIATION 


Red Deer 


Alberta 


Membership Past & Present 1934 - 1951 


, B.P. 

W.J. 

ong, T.G. 

H. 

K H.T. 

til, Mrs. A. 
ijson, J. 
i >on, Pirs. 0» 

', Mrs. M.S. 

;, C.R. 

[fee, M. 
s/rth, H.E. 
I>rth, Firs. 

»n, Ken 

l, Winnie, 

| fong, John 

tong, Mrs. 
ton, W• E. 

m, Mrs. 


, Mrs. 
son, J.E. 

(: son, Fred 
i D.W. 

;i, Geoff. 

1, Mrs. 

|j>, S.B. 

;o, Mrs. 
oald, R.D. 
son, Mrs. Fred 
W.G. 

A. 


Ison, 

Firs. 

Son, 

lavid 

If. C. 


4rs • 


i ison, 

A. 

ison, 

J. 

rong, 

Hobt 

tong, 

Wm. 

’ tong, 

E. 

rong, 

Firs. 


d, AIL. 
i. O.M. 

son, H. 
son, Mrs. 

, Albert E. 


tford, R. 
ford, Mrs. 
, James 

G. 

, L.E. 

I 


Botterill, W.J. 

Ball, G.W. 

Broughton, W.J. 
Bradbury, George 
Bradbury, Mrs. Flary 
Bradbury, Fred 
Bower, Hugh 
Blades, R.H. 
Botterill, Mrs. W.J, 
Botterill, Miss P. 
Bickley, John 
Burnett, Norman 
Burnett, Mrs. 
Bradbury, E.B. 
Bannerman, Barbara 
Blakeley, Mrs. B. 
Bower, A.D. 

Bann errnan, J.A. 
Bannerman, Firs. 
Beckley, Wm. 
Beckley, Firs. 
Botterill, Norman 
Brown, Firs. L.E. 
Ball, Firs. G.W. 

B j orkland, Mrs. E.W 
Bjorkiand, Vic. 
Bearchell, Firs.-* 4 . 


Ole 


Brackeney, J.R. 
Bradbury, Mrs. E.B 
Beckley, Mrs. K. 
Berreth, George 
Blair, D.W. 
Bjorsan, Mrs Esse 
Bjorsan, Firs. 
Bascombe, J* 

Bascombe, Firs. 
Benol N.L. 

Bower, Norman 
Bremner, Henry 
Black, Mrs. E.L. 
Barwick, J.A. 

Blue, 0. 


Bunn, Firs. C.R 


1 > *** ° • - 

Bower, Mrs. Hugh 

Braithwaite, C.R 
m — t 


Draiunwaiue 5 

Bickley, L. 
Brown, J.H. 

Bower, A.D. 
Bower, Mrs. C 
Bailey, R.J. 
Bailey, Mrs. 
Bickford, A.T. 
Bickford, Firs. 
Bruce, Chas. 
Bickley, Pat. 
Black. R.T. 
Beckley, Jack 
Beeklev. F. 


Beckley, Firs 
Brown, Tom. 
Brooks, Mrs. V« 
Black, M.E. 
Bugler, ..alter 
Bugler, Firs. 
Brown, A.J. 
Barbee, G.K. 
Barbee, E.F. 
Barbee, R. 
Blakeley, S. 
Blakeley, Mr 
Barrett. R.E 


Brown, Firs. 

Barrett, Firs. 

Bowen, Firs. P. 

Busby, Firs. R 

Bennett, B.W. 

Black, Mrs. R 

Blair, Allan K. 

Beatty, W.E. 

Blair, Anna K. 

Beatty, Firs. 

Blair, Helen 

Buttin, J.W. 

Brett, A. 

Buttin, Mrs. 

Bower, Chas. 

Baines, T. 

Bunn, Dr. C.R. 

Baines, Firs. 

Beiich, FUR. 

Bennett, F.G. 


j^aiiey, a 
Bailey, M 


Baxter, E 


Baxter, *•. 
Broughtor 
Balinhard 

•o_ H-T, 


Bower, F 


u ri x j * - 

Bury, A. 
Bury, Fir 
Browning 
Brockman 
Brierley 
Bremner, 
Bettinso 
Bettinso 





e 









user, Sam 
:er, Mrs. 
er, Dorothy 
ierson, E.C. 
ierson, Mrs. Irene 
Lr, Gordon 
<m 9 Mrs. J. 

9r, Wm. 

arm an, Mrs. J. 
lam, Mrs. M. 
pr, J. H. 
br, Mrs. 
lies, Wm. 
jpinheimer, H.E. 
ton, T. 
keley, B. 
lfee, Paul 
fee, Harry 
| ham, G. H. 
lam, Mrs. 
feke, C.S. 
rce, Mrs. 
ley, R.E. 
prell, H.F. 
pkney, J.R. 

[fct, A. 
liner, Henry 




C.H. 

sels, W.A. 
inquist, E.P. 
aett, R.G. 
nquist, D.P. 
Hckshanks, James 
scallen S.N. 
tingham, Miss F. 
Ijy. A.H. 
y, Mrs. 
ip bell, Tom 
nett, Mrs. R.G. 
rke, Mrs• Hugh 
sels, Mrs. Elsie 
jer, James 
er, Mrs. 
swell, J.A. 
usen, Dan 
iusen, Jonas G. 
swell, Cecil 
(swell, Mrs. J. 
istian, J.W. 
hbertson, J. 

‘ D. 
dwell, D.B. 
ssley, H. 
ck, Chas. 

‘scallen, Mrs. F.J, 
•scallen, Margaret 

, A.H. 


Cottle, F.L. 

Currie, Beatrice 
Connell, Allen 
Cookson, Wm. 

Cookson, Mrs. 

Cole, Plrs. J.K. 

Card, Mrs. M. 

Churches, Geo. 
Carscadden Mrs. J.M. 
Carscadden, Gladys 
Collier, Mrs. W. 
Comstock, Mrs. W.H. 
Comstock, Margaret 
Comstock, Clyde 
Christian, George Jnr. 
Cravath, Mrs. E. 

Cyr, Mrs. C.H. 

Cline, H.L. 

Comet, James 
Comet, Mrs. 

Coghili, A. 
Christianson, T. 
Christianson, J.P. 
Christianson, Mrs. 
Christianson, Miss T. 
Comfort, J.H. 

Craig, James 
Craig, Mrs. 

Carscallen, F.J. 

Cline, Mrs. H. 
Creelman, Mrs. Rex 
Caswell, E.C. 

Caswell, Mrs. 

Crossley, Harold 
Crossley, Mrs. 

Cooper, 3.C. 

Curr, Sandy 
Carr, Mrs. 

Comer, H.W. 

Comer, Mrs. 

Carritt, Fred 
Carritt, Mrs. 

Craig, Mrs. James 
Cram, Mrs. E. 

Cochrane, John W. 
Chamberlin, A.J.H. 
Chamberlin, Mrs. 
Cornett, George 
Crawford, Paul 
Crawford, Mrs. 

Cook, Mrs. Pearl 
Cuddy, Tom. 

Creelman, M.M. 

Craig, Mrs. May 
Code, $ •P. 

Code, Mrs. 

Calvert, C.W. 

Calvert Mrs. 


Choate, J.A. 

Choate, Mrs. 

Case, Mrs. F. 

Connors, F.B. 

Connors, Mrs. 
Christian, Mrs. J.W. 
Cavanaugh, J.P. 
Chambers, J. 

Cony, J.P. 

Cuddy, Mrs. Eva 
Coulthwaite, T.H. 
Clarke, Pat. 

Collicutt, Frank 
Collicutt, Mrs. 

Curr, Mrs. N.M. 
Christiansen, A.J. 
Clarke, Hugh 
Cole, Mina P. 

Connor, C.H. 

Creasy, Mrs. Ed. 
Cowlthorp, H.L. 

Connor, C.H. 

Cuddy, J.S. 

Caton, G.L. 

Caton, Mrs. 

Case, Mrs. M.P. 

Card, M. 

Colling, G. 

Carswell, James 
Cuddy, Mrs. Eva 

Day, E.B. 

Dennis, Mrs. Minnie 
Dale, J.J. 

Dawson, J.J. 

Darrough, Wm. 

Douglas, W.J. 

Douglas, Mrs. Annie M. 
Domoney, Fred 
Duncan, George 
Dickinson, J.W. 

Dale, Mrs. J.J. 

Doyle, Mrs. 

Domeney, L.W. 

Eomoney, Mrs. H.L.M. 
Domoney, Mrs. Fred 
Ditzler, C.N. 

DomoBBy, Mrs. Myrtle 
Dowler, F.A. 

Dowler, Mrs. 

Delaney, Fred 
Dixon, J.G. 

Ditzler, L.W. 

Ditzler, Mrs. 

Benmafck, ..A. 

Denmark, Firs. 

Drever, J. 

Drever, Mrs. 













[ 

'ett, Mrs, 
ir, R.H. 
('sole, J.E. 
■(•sole, Mrs. 
ritt, George 

, W TD 


ir, W, 


• 

Mrs. Ha 
(>tt, J.E. 
i^nwood, H.C 
snwood, W.R 
Land, Geo. 
ar, Mrs. 
Iltig, Mrs. C. 
ar, W.H. 
ar, Mrs. 
ritt, Mrs. 
is, Harrv 
ell, A.J v . 
jell, Mrs. 



Farquaharson, C. 
Farr, Mrs. M. 
Fletcher, E.C. 
Fleming, G.E. 
Fead, A. 

Frid, G.S. 

Frid, Mrs. 

Fisk, R.W. 

Foster, J.D. 
Fletcher, E.C. 
Farnell, W.S. 

Farrar, J. 

Flack. G.L. 
Fisher, Art 
Farnell, E.B. 
Farnell, Mrs. 
Forth, Tom 
Feya, A.A. 

Forbes, Bob 
Fisk, Firs. R.W. 
Fisher, W.J. 
Fitch, C.H. 

Fry, J. 

Fry, Mrs. 

Firby, Mrs. ¥. 
Foster, J.D. 
Fleming, Stephen 
Fleming, Mrs. 
Findlay, Moe 
Findlay, Mrs. Joe 
Freeman, S.E. 
Fitch, B. 

Fitch, Mrs. 
Farley, Frank 
Farren, J. 

Farr, J.S. 


Gaetz, T.A. 
Gaetz, Mrs. 
Gaetz, M.M. 
Gaetz, Mrs. 
Gaetz, Flo 
Gaetz, R.L. 
Gaetz, Mrs. 
Griffin, Ralph 
Gummow, Del 
Gummow, Mrs. 
Grimson, G.S. 
Grimson, Samuel 
Gehrke, S.E. 
Gehrke, Mrs. 
Gehrke, August 
Gehrke, Alex 
Gehrke, John 
Gudmundson, T.H. 
Gaetz, F.W. 
Gaetz, J.B* 


Gibson, H.B # 

Grant, Mrs. J.A. 
Gaetz, Simon 
Gehrke, E. 

Graham, P.^. 

Gaetz, Annie L. 
Graham, Mrs. James 
Graham, James 
Gaetz, Mrs. T.E. 
Gilbert, G.M. 

Green, George 
Gilbert, Mrs. D.M. 
Gilchrist, Mrs. A. 
Greig, Ernest 
Green, F.T. 
Galbraith, F.P. 
Gaetz, Percy 
Green, James 
Giffen, H.R. 

Gano,JH. 

Goodey, A.J. 
Goodacre, Art 
Goodacre, Mrs. 

Gaetz, Mrs. Percy 
Goodridge, E.G. 
Gilchrist, Hugh 
Grimson, Mrs. G.S. 
Green, Mrs. J.E. 
Gillis, Webb 
Breer, Jack F. 
Grieve, Hugh 
Grieve, Mrs. 

Glasson, E. 

Gordon, M.E. 
Gilchrist, Mrs. Hugh 
Grant, Dr. D.R. 
Gordon, Mrs. M.E. 
Grant, Mrs. D.R. 
Goodacre, Harry 
Goodacre, Mrs. 

Gummow Wm. 

Gray, Ira 
Gish R.B. 

Gish, Mrs. 

Gehrke, Mrs. Alex 
Greenwood, Mr. 
Greenwood, Mrs. 
Griffiths, W.C. 
Griffiths, Mrs. M. 
George, Ernest, S. 
Goings, J.J. 
Grierson, F. 













>y )0d, A. 

Heikla, John 

Healy, Mrs. L. 

l .ng, Walter 

Heikla, Mrs. 

Hazlett, Wm. Jnr 

p nan, H.B. 

Hedemark, P1B. 

Harper, W.R. 

u in, J.M. 

Harrison, C.A. 


ben, Walter 

Huget, H. 


[v >, Tom 

Huget, Mrs. 

Ives, Mrs. Ella 

sy, A. 

Hoppus, Mrs. V. 

Isaacson, A.F. 

5r, Weo. J. 

Howarth, Mrs. W. 


Em, D.G. 

Hopfe, Mrs. E.M. 


E)| 

Haliburton, Mrs. D.A. 

Jones. R.E. 

iL Mrs. Alma 

Hallgren, Miss C. 

Jamison, Harvey 

r>n, William 

Hazlett, Mrs. W.J. 

Jarvis, Firs. W.M 

3n, Ben 

Hammond, Eva 

Johns, Mrs. E.G. 

ling, E.T. 

' Hayden, J.W r . 

Johnson, P.W. 

icinson, H.M. 

Hodgkinson, Mrs. S. 

Johnson, Firs. 

stt, James 

Henderson, J. 

Johnson, F.K. 

| ptt, W. J. 

Hulgaard, Mrs. 

Johnson, Firs. 

. son, T. 

Henderson, Mrs. H.T. 

Johnson, W.S. 

-bon, Mrs. Jane 

Humphrey, J. 

Jardine, P.A. 

.son, Mrs. T. 

Humphrey, Mrs. 

Jacobson, J.C. 

bn, Cecil 

Hodson, J.C. 

Johnstone, Ellis 

iij'nark, Bernard 

Huget, Chas. 

Jarvis, James 

, Thos. 

Hives, T. 

Jarvis, Mrs. 

bon, Mrs. Guy 

Hart, Fred 

Johnson, JjE. 

:bs, Norman 

Hutton, S.D. 

Johnson, J.O. 

, W r alter H. 

Hay, G. 

Johnson, Mrs. 

nark• O.A. 

Hamilton, Mrs. M.A. 

Jorgenson, 3.S. 

gr en, A.E. 

Hartley, W.H. 

Jamieson, Dave 

pn, Mrs. Ben 

Hartley, Mrs. 

Johnson, Elmer 

cjjnark, Mrs. O.A. 

Hart, Mrs. Fred 

Johnson, Mrs. 

i bark. J. 

Hives, Sydney 

Johnson, Chas. 

i ter t, J. B. 

Horn, Mrs. D.G. 

Johnson, Firs. 

, Mrs. E.S. 

Hazlett, Firs. James 

Janssen, Wm. 

en, Ella 

Hives, Mrs. Edmund 

Janssen, Firs. 

j, Dave 

Henderson, Archie 

Jamieson, H.H. 

, Henry 

Hall, John 

Jamieson, Firs. 

|Jrth, Wm. 

Hart, Geo. 

Johns, T.R. 

tlman, John 

Horne, Geo. 

Jarvis, P1B. 

, Mrs. Henry 

Hodgson, E. 

Jones, Firs. R.E. 

s, Mrs. b r. 

Hepworth, R.L. 

Mamieson, W.G. 

jins, A. 

Hepworth, Mrs. 

Jarvis, Firs. Jam< 

:ins, Mrs• 

Haste, Harold 

Johnson, Joe 

(is, Walter F. 

Haste, Mrs. 

Johnson, J. 

herson, Mrs. Jas. 

Hillman, Mrs. John 

Jaffrey, James 

Jon, Mrs. Cecil 

Henderson, Mrs. Jas. 

Jaffrey, Mrs. 

2 it ad, E. 

Humber, Mrs. Henry 

Johnston, L.M. 

, C.A. 

Hanna, Mrs. W.H. 

Johnston, Mrs. 

L Mrs. 

Hough, Melvin 

Jahraus, Mrs. Wm 

o 

o 

psr 

cn 

. 

Hoggh, Mrs. M. 

Junte, Firs. Carl 

tt, Robt. 

Humber, Rod 

Johnson, H.R. 

tt, Mrs. 

Hurd, Waino 

Johnson, Mrs. 

Iiert, A. 

Hurs, C. 

Johnson, Firs. E.l 

i»ert, Firs. 

Huget, W. 


lert, R.B. 

Houston, A. 


jiert, Mrs. 

Hooker, Stan 


1st ad, A.B. 

Hammer, George 


., Mrs. E.G. 

Hayhoe, Milton 


[L, Walter 

Hayhoe, Mrs. 














t 


t 






Stuart, 

, >dy, A.M. 
ijep, Euastace 
W. J. 
se, B.F. 

, Mrs. P.E. 
sep, L. 
ings, Wesley 
ing, Mrs. 
sr, Mrs. Robert 
set, Mrs. E. 
pew, C.E. 
pew, Mrs. 

L Theo. 


, F.W. 

, Mrs. 

, J • C • 

W.J.C. 

drs. J.C. 

, Mrs. Wm. 

, William 

F.O. 

Mrs. C.E. 

, Thos. 

> Mrs. 

"ed 

La, N.J. 

La, Mrs. 
George 
John R. 
drs. 

■Irs. George 


m, Benson 

,m, Mrs. 

*ence, 

V.H. 

., J.B 

• 

rig, F 

.P. 

fig, P 

.F. 

fence, 

Chri 

il, R.A 

• 

lard, ; 

P.H. 

1, Geo 

. A. 

L Mrs 

. A.H 

l, Niels. 

master 

, R.V 

1, W.E 

• 

1, Firs 

• 

vhead, 

Jack 

:head, 

Robt 

^ance, 

Mrs. 


pon, Wm. 

| S . J . 
llrance, J.G. 
jjS, R.i.. 
jp, Mrs. 

pence, Mrs. V.H. 


Logan, Maitland 
Lanterman, A. 
Lanterman, Mrs. 
Lawrence, Jack 
Lawrence, Mrs. 
Latam, Mrs. Benson 
Learned, B.C. 

Long, Dr. Benson 
Long, Mrs. 

Longer, Carl 
Longer, Mrs. 

Lobb, Carl 
Lund, Mrs. Geo. A. 
Lanterman, W. 

Long, Howard 
Lorentson, I. 
Little, W.E. 

Lyons, Mrs. W. 
Lister, E.A. 

Lund, Mrs. E.A. 
Locke, 3.A. 

Locke, Mrs. J.M# 
Lemon, M.P. 

Lemon, Mrs. 

Lawton, Mrs. W.H. 
Larritt, Dave 
Lowe, Peter H. 
Larritt, Mrs. Dave 
Leithead, Mrs. J. 
Ladwig, Mrs• Fred 
Logghborough, J. 
Leavitt, B.G. 

Lee, Thos. 

Lee, Mrs. 

Little, A.R. 
Lincoln, A. 
Lawrence, R* Nigel 


Mitchell, A.B. 
Mitchell, Mrs. 

Moon, Geo. 

Moore, R.R. 

Markle, C.G. 

Matins ell, H.B. 
Munro, Alex 
Morrison, Dave 
Munro, A.S. 

Meeres, Horace 
Meeres, Mrs. 

Munro, Mrs. S.E. 
Martin, Tom 
Martin, Donald 
Martin, Mrs. Mattie 
Magee, H.M. 

Martin, Angus 
Mott, H.J. 

Martin, John 


Mohring, Wm. 

Meeres, Mrs. M.J. 
Munro, Mrs. W.J. 
Matheson, Norman 
Munroe, Jas. 
Morrison, Mrs. VMM. 
Miller, John 3. 
Martin, Thos 
Morrison, Mrs. Dave 
Martin, Mrs. Angus 
Milien, Alex 
Milien, Mrs. 

Millen, Thos 
Millen, Mrs. 

Millen, E.S. 

Millen, Mrs. 

Martin, John 
Martin, Mrs. 
Manning, M.J. 
Manning, Mrs. 
Morton, John 
Maga, B. 

Michener, N. 
Michener, Mrs. 
Morrisroe, Mrs. Ed. 
Martin, Stuart 
Miller, J. 

Martin, Mrs. 

Martin, Mrs. 
Morrisroe, Ed. 
Morrisroe, Mary 
Miller, Mrs. W.J. 
Morrical, Mrs. P. A . 
Morrow, Mrs. W.A. 
Moxley, Clarence L. 
Michener, W.S. 
Matthews, Elmer 
Matthews, Mrs. 
Meeres, Ray 
Meeres, Mrs. 

Moore, Mrs. Oswald 
Moore, Fred J. 
Markle, C.G. 
Markwich, 3.R. 
Markwick, Mrs. A.R. 
Murray, F.T. 

Martin, J.A. 

Martin, Ken 
Martin, Mrs. 

Moore, Fred B. 
{jjoore, Mrs. 

Melton, W.R. 

Morton, Mrs. John 
Munce, Mrs. Agnes 
Maveety, Mrs.^ B.W• 
Mannix, Mrs. E.J. 
Morrison, Geo. 
Milne, Alex 










I 





In* Mrs. 

t. , Mrs. Donald 
on, Geo. 

, Win. 

Lewis 
Henry 
.th, Jack 
.ther, Mrs. 

Levi 
\ Mrs. 

! ■ r* 

|lsj F.c. 

J. 
r , Mrs. 

Leld, 3. 

3 , Willie 
Leld, Mrs. S.L. 
ler, Mrs. E. 
jir, John 
anel, Geo. H. 
fie, A.D. 
ige, Mrs. F.A. 
rlight, Dr. J.A. 
fcart, Geo. Mrs. 
n, W.J. 

non, Mrs. Edith 
d py, Paul 
ajJLum, Mrs. Bertha 
ipy, Mrs. Annie 
start, Geo. 
e, E.C. 
he, Allan 
hon, W.L. 
jnon, Mrs. D.W. 

|e, Neil 
jen, J. 
en, Mrs. 
n, Mrs. W.J. 
ne, Alex 
iald, Noman 
|naid, R. 

nald, Mrs. Norman 
.n, Chas. 
jn, Mrs. 

*ee, John 
Lre, J.R. 
de, Charles 
.de, Mrs. 
ill, David 
.11, Mrs'. 

-ister, E. 

Lister, Mrs. 
(.ister, J.W. 
Lister, Mrs. 
rmid, C. 
rrnid, Mrs. 
pnon, Locke 
nnon, Firs, 
hnon, Mrs. W# 


McIntosh, Julius 
McDougall, H.R. 
McConnell, Ed. 
McKinnon, Edith 
McCullock, F.D. 
McCullock, Mrs. 
McCann, Estella 
McFarlane, Mrs. Fred 
McCann. T.A. 

McKinnon, Catherine 
MacKinnon, N.C. 

McCann, Firs. John 
McBride, E. 

McBride, Mrs. E. 
McBlane, Mrs. 

McBlane, Mrs. 

McCook, Nan 
McNeill, Margaret 
McFadden, Hester 
MacLeod, Mrs. M. 
McKinnon, Port 
McPhee, C.M. 

McPhee, J.A. 

McPhee, Mrs. 

McBlain, Mrs. Alec 
McKinnon, Mrs. Port. 
McDonald, J.M. 
McIntosh, Mrs. Julius 
McBlain, A.W. 

MbBlain, Mrs. 
McKinnon, J.L. 
McKinnon, Mrs. 
McGorrnan, A.B. 

Me Gorman, Mrs. 
MacDonald, J. 

McLevin, Hugh 
McLevin, Mrs. 

McFaul, R.E. 

McFaul, Mrs. 

McKenzie, E.B. 
McKenzie, Mrs. 
McLellan, Mrs. A. 
MacKay, Hugh 
McPhee, Mrs. Chas. 
McKay, Mrs. H.D. 
MacKay, Don 
McKee, F.W. 

McKee, Firs. 

McFarlane, Wm. 
McFarlane, Firs. Wm. 
PIcFarlane, Don 
FIcEobbie, Jas. 
McRobbie, Firs. 
McDougall, Hugh 
McDougall, Firs. 
FIcPhee, Niel,Junr. 
PIcTavish, Firs. H. 
McKay, Firs. Don 
Mackenzie, R.F1. 


McNutt, J. 
McEachern, E. 
FIcCabe, H. 

McAfee, J. 

McAfee, Dan 
McEaehern, J. 
McDonald, Firs. H.R. 
McKay, W.C. 
PIcKinnon, J.D. 
McDonald, Firs. A.L. 
McDonald, Hector 
PlcDonald, Alma 


Nyman, John 
Nelson, H. 

Northey, Firs. C.L. 
Northey, Firs. Walter 
Norby, Oscar 
Norby, Firs. 

Nelson, H. 

Nelson, Firs. 

Nelson, Gus. 

Nelson, Mrs. 

Niblock, Wm. 

Niblock, Firs. 

Neal, James 
Nielsen, O.M. 
Nilsson, Gus. 

Nolan, W.E. 

Nolan, Firs. 

Nichols, S.S. 
Nichols, Mrs. 
Nielson, Walter 
Nicholson, George 
Northey, W.H. 
Northey, Firs. 

Nash, Percy 


Oldford, J.C. 

Opie, E.T. 

Qrine, Geo. 

Olsen, Andrew 
Olson, L.S. 

Ogden, J.E. 

Ogden, Firs. 

Olsen, Hans 
Oxtoby, Geo. 
O’Connor, Ed. 

Orme, Firs. Geo. 
Qlrnstead, S. 
Osmond, S.C. 

Opie, Firs. E.T. 
Oldford, Mrs. J.C. 
Oldford, Terence. 









t 



c 


c 








t 


*ry 


nald 


Mr s• J • C 


Parsons, Dr. W.B. 
Parsons, Mrs. 

Pixley, Ted 
Prendergast, J.C. 
Pennington, J.H« 
Pollock, Ray 
Pollock, Mrs. 

Packer, H. Senr. 
Pierce, Charles 
Pierce, Mrs. 

Payne, Gordon 
Pierce, Mrs. Roger 
Pye, Elijah 
Parker, C.P. 
Pewtress, Mrs. J.J. 
Pomerleau, Ted. 

Pardue, Bay 
Pardue, Mrs. 
Pomerleau, Mrs. Ted. 
Payne, Mrs. Gordon 
Preeper, H.A. 

Parry, Albert 
Parry, Mrs. 

Parker, C.R. 

Parker, Mrs. 

Piper, F.E. 
Patterson, F.G. 
Patterson, Mrs. 
Powell, A. 

Potter, J.H. 

Peel, Thos. ¥. 

Peel, Mrs. 

Parker, Mrs. D.C. 


Quant z, E.A• 


Reay, W.J. 

Hitson, Wilson 
Hit son, Mrs. Hanna 
Raymer, B. 

Reeves, James 
Rodd, Richard 
Richards, J.J. 
Robbins, V.B. 
Robbins, Mrs. 
Rosse, Joe 
Reidy, Mike 
Robinson, W.A. 
Rode, R. 

Rode, Pits. 

Raymer, Mrs. B. 
Reay, Chris 
Reay]. Mrs. 

Russell, P. 
Russell, Mrs. 


Ritson, Nelson 
Ritson, Mrs. 

Rogers, S.H. 
Richards, J.L. 
Richards, Mrs. 
Richards, Mrs. J.J. 
Ruby, E.M. 

Ruby, Mrs. 

Rice, Mrs. James 
Reddern, Mrs. 

Rabidou, WaIter 
Rabidou, Mrs. 
Reierson, E.L. 
Richards, John 
Richards, Mrs 
Reed, Melvin 
Roberts, F.G. 
Roberts, Mrs. 
Richards, E. 
Richards, Mrs. 
Hollis, R.J. 
Rideout, L.D. 

Reay, Mrs. W.J. 
Rutherford, Ed. 
Rutherford, Mrs. 
Richards, Mrs. J.L. 
Rideout, Mrs. L.D, 
Rutherford, A. 
Rutherford, Mrs. 


Speight, J.Arthur 
Smith, Walter A. 
Smith, Mrs. G.W. 

Shaw, J.O. 

Shaw, Sid 
Stephenson, W.J. 
Stephenson, A.T. 
Stephenson, Mrs. 
Springbett, Wm. 
Springbett, Mrs. 

S t ewart, Norraan 
Smith, Donald 
Stevens, R.S. 
Stickland, W.G. 

Sigurdson, 0. 

Smith, Bert 

Smith, Mrs. Elizabeth 

Stone, C.H. 

Skene, Jack 
Skene, Mrs. 
Springbett, J.C. 
Smith, Chas. 

Snell, Chas. H. 

Sandercock, W.J. 
Sandercock, Mrs. 
Stewart, Dora 







5 


t 


« 






5 


Z 


: 




i 


z 





' t 


t w 






' 




, ? 


c 



z 



...rt, Mrs. Ester 3 
;aljlter, John 
rili, Percy W. 

:r, A.S. 
iai|, R.J. 

S tg, W.J.F. 
tg, John 
tg, Mrs. 
i, Walter R. 
i, Pits. 

E irt, Mrs. Norman 
.air, David 
ienson, Doug 
., H • J • 

"s, Geo. 

?s, Mrs. 

"berg, H. 

"berg, Mrs. 

^r, Fred 
3 r, Mrs. 

(i, Rodney 
fi, Mrs. 
sr, D. 
sr, Mrs. 

^ Mrs. 
jirdson, Mrs. 0. 
rdson, S.K. 
Hudson, Mrs. 

John 
Mrs. 

!ibj Gilbert 
lb, Geo. 

Ids, J. 

r neman, Mrs. C. 
enenett, A. 
eienett, John 
ei'enett, Mrs. 

€ henson, Joe 
e henson, Mrs. 

■ henson, W.W. 
Eihenson, Mrs. 
ijrlay, H.J. 
ti|rlay, Mrs. 
in son, Mrs. 
jart, J. 

. y, J.L. 
y, Mrs. 
celey, E. 

, Mrs. Sid 
nsberg, Gus. 
nsberg, Mrs. 
Ilair, A.T. 
flair, Mrs. 

,h, M.L. Mrs. 

|h, Bruce 
h, Mrs. M.J. 
imsberg, Mrs. 


J.S 


H. 


Shorrock, J.W. 

Smith, J.C. 

Skocdopole, John 
Snider, Mrs. Minnie 
Schrnidt, W.N. 

Smith, Mrs. P.E. 

Solic, Wm. 

Spenceley, Herbert 
Spenceley, Mrs. 

Snell, Mrs. C.H. 
Stephenson, Mrs. W.J. 
Sorenson, Gordon 
Sorenson, Mrs. 

Smith, Mrs. Percy W. 
Smith, W.H. 

Smith, Mrs. 

Smith, James 
Smith, Harry C. 

Smith, Mrs. Florence E 
Storey, Fred W. 

Storey, Mrs. 

Stringer, W.H. 

Stanway, Thos. S. 
Stanway, Mrs. 

Sharman, Holland 
Sharman, Mrs. 

Sveinson, J.S. 

Smith, John 
Smith, Sidney 
Schmidt, Mrs. W.H. 
Soderberg, E.P. 

Shantz, B.A. 

Smith, R. 

Schunerrian, Mrs. A. 
Swanson, Mrs. Alice 
Snider, Roy 
Sundahl, 1. 

Storey, Carol 
Supina, W.J. 

Supina, Mrs. 

Smith, R.J. 

Spoor, Fred 
Shantz, Tete 
Smith, Mrs. A.E. 
Soderberg, Mrs. E.P. 
Stone, Mrs. Florence 
Staniforth, A. 
Staniforth, Mrs. 
Stewart, W.F. 

Smith, S.S. 

Swainson, S. 

Sundahl, Mrs. I. 

Smith, Mrs. R.J. 

St ew T art, Mrs. W .F. 
Swainson, Mrs. S. 
Sveinson, Paul 
Sveinson, Mrs. Paul 
Scott, Mrs. Wesley 


Smith, Harry C. 
Stephenson, E.E. 
Stephenson, Mrs. 
Sankey, Myra 
Shorrock, James W. 


Turnbull, Fred 
Trimble, W.H. 

Towers, Tom 
Thompson, Mrs. Ina 
Thompson, G.H. 
Tutenberg, H.J. 
Tallman, Frank 
Tallman, Mirs. 
Trimble, Roy C. 
Telning, Larry 
Taylor, Mrs. Cliff 
Thompson, Mrs. 
Turner, John 
Turner, Mrs. 

Talson, Henry 
Talson, Mrs. 

Thompson, G.W. 
Thomson, Mrs. 
Thompson, Chas. 
Trimble, Mrs. H.W. 
Towers, Fred 
Tetley, L.H. 

Truant, R.V. 

Thorn, O.W. 

Thorn, Mrs. 

Thorne, Mrs. G. 
Teague, Mrs. T. 
Taylor, Mrs. R.C. 
Tester, F.W. 
Thompson, Mrs. H.R. 
Taylor, John 
Taylor, Mrs. 
Trussler, M. 
Trussler, Mrs. M. 
Thompson, Jack 
Thatcher, Donald 
Thatcher, Mrs. 
Teasdale, J. 

Taylor, A.G. 

Taylor, Mrs. 

Tetley, Rex W.E. 
Tetley, Mrs. 

Taylor, W.J. 

Teague, T. 

Towers, R. 

Towers, Mrs. 
Thompson, Mrs. Jack 
Teasdale, Mrs. J. 
Thomas, J.H. 

Truant, Mrs. R.V. 
Thompson, Jim 








' 



c 

X 



i 



t 


X 





c )son, 

C.A. 

c oson, 

H.H.J 

c :>son, 

Mrs. 

- *y, w 

.H. 

r Dull, 

Mrs. 

.3 end, 

J. 

send, 

Mrs • 


i rwood, Mrs. Mary 
Chas. 

Mrs. 

dart, D.D. 
hart, Mrs* 
hart, D.S. 

, A.L* 

lient, E.S. 

!ers, Stanley 
lvke, E.A. 
lyke, Mrs* 
j Osear 
ey, J.E. 
ers, W.S. 

> ers, Mrs* 

:ent, E.F. 
ihrin, C*E. 

■ hrin, Mrs. 

»|ers, Firs. Stanley 
,ent, Fred 


torn, Mrs* Lizzie 
[ins, John 
e, E.M. 
j.e, W • J. 

[ht, James 
aver, R.B. 

;er, L.B. 

:, Wm. 

son, Mrs. S. 

:e, Jack 
;e, Mrs. 

3on, Samuel F* 
son, Steve 
5ht, Joseph 
*ht, Mrs* 

:e, Chris 
be, Mrs. 
ke, Miss, 
son, W.J. 
be, Mrs. R.M. 
liver, K.M* 
bon, Russell 
mot, E. 
ght, J.E. 

I Is, Walter 
lifbe, Mrs. Jack 


Wright, John 
Wright, Mrs. 

Wells, Mrs. Walter 
Wilson, Mrs. Steve 
Wells, W.M. 

Wood, Aubrey 
Wood, Mrs. 

Wells, E.R. 

Wells, Mrs. 

Wilson, T.E. 

Wilson, Mrs. 

Wallace, Gretchen L. 
Welliver, R.B. 
Welliver, Mrs. 

Weber, L.A. 

Weber, Mrs. 

Waddy, Mrs. Richard 
Whaley, W.E. 

Whaley, Mrs. 

Watson, F. 

Wright, Rev. J.W. 
Wanless, Alice P. 
Whittemore, Ada 
Wright, Mrs. J.W. 
Wood, James A. 

Woof, E.F. 

Wilson, A.E. 

Wilson, Mrs. 

Wright, David 
Wilson, Wm. 

White, Tom 
White, Mrs. 

Wilson, Ward 
Wilson,Mrs. 

Wood, Mrs. James A. 
Whiteside, R.B. 
Walker, Tom 
Willie, W. 

Wilson, Ted 
Winter, Wm. 

Wood, E.A. 

Wallin, E. 

Wiggins, K. 

Wiggins, Mrs. 

Withers, Harry 
Whittle, Mrs. N. 
Wingate, Mrs. Richard 
Wong, Wing 
Wong, Wing, Mrs. 
Warren, Chas. 

White, T.A. 

White, Mrs. S.A. 
Warren, Mrs. M. 
Wallin, G.S. 

Willson, E.J. 

Willson, Mrs. 

Woitte, O.A. 

Woitte, Mrs. 

Wright, Agnes 


Warren, Mrs. Chas. 
Wallin, Mrs. E. 
^estcott, Jas. W. 
Wilde, Mrs. ...J. 
Jills, ...... 

Warren, Mrs. C. 
Wilson, J.E. 

White, Dr. C.A. 










< i V" 










t 







c 






Appendix 

POLITICAL BACKGROUND OF THE NORTH-WEST TERRITORIES 

AND ALBERTA 

In 1375 the parliament of Canada passed the North- 
West Territories Act which called for a council consisting 
of five members appointed by the Governor-in-Council and 
other members to be elected by the people in communities 
with a white population of one thousand people within an 
area of one thousand square miles. This system continued 
until 1333 when the appointing of members was abolished 
in favor of an elected assembly whose members served for 
a three-year term. 

The North-West Territories Act, although passed in 
1375, was not proclaimed until October 7, 1376. The first 
Lieutenant-Governor was the Honorable David Laird, who 
established his capital at Livingstone (Swan River) until 
government buildings were completed at Battleford. At 
the first session of the Council at Swan River in March, 

1377 twelve bills were passed and sent to Ottawa for con¬ 
firmation. The bills dealt with protection of the buffalo, 
roads, infectious diseases, prevention of forest and prairie 
fires, the administration of justice, and masters and 


servants 




, 

■ 

. 

. 

* 








. 




. 


» 














- 2 - 


In addition to Lieutenant-Governor Laird the members 
of the Council were Matthew Ryan and Lieutenant-Colonel 
Hugh Richardson, who were stipendiary magistrates. Lieutenant 
Colonel James Macleod, Commissioner of the North West 
Mounted Police, was also a member. A. E. Forget , appointed 
Lieutenant-Governor in 1S9#, was the Clerk of the Council. 

By the time the second session opened in 1#7# the Council 
had received wider powers, enabling it to deal with prisons, 
property and civil rights, marriage, and the formation of 
municipalities having powers of local taxation. This 
session repealed the ordinance for the protection of the 
buffalo, and from then on there was no hope that the great 
herds could be saved. Pascal Breland was appointed as 
an additional member of the Council. The fear of possible 
trouble with Indian tribes led the authorities at this 
period to begin the organization of voluntary militia. 
Companies were formed at Battleford, St. Laurent and Prince 
Albert. 

The first elected member of the Council was Lawrence 
Clark, chief factor of the Hudson’s Bay Company at Fort 
Carlton, who was returned for the electoral district of 
Lome. He attended the session of the Council at Battle- 
ford in 1&&L. By 1&$3, when Honorable Edgar Dewdney 



. 

: / . 

, . - ;v '■ v' : 

. 






- 

. 

«- r 

■ 

' 














-3- 


replaced David Laird as Lieutenant-Governor, there were 
six elected members of the Council: Captain D. H. McDowell 
for Lome; John C. Hamilton for Broadview; T. W. Jackson 
for Qu T Appelle; William White for Regina; James H. Ross 
for Moose Jaw, 

In l£&4 the Council passed an Administration of Justice 
ordinance which divided the North-West Territories into 
the judicial districts of Assiniboia, Alberta and Sask¬ 
atchewan. These in turn were subdivided into Regina, 
Medicine Hat, Calgary, Macleod, Edmonton, Battleford, 

Prince Albert Districts. There were three stipendiary 
magistrates, one at Battleford, one at Macleod and one 
at Regina,sixty-three justices of the peace, and thirty- 
four notaries in the North-West Territories. This session 
(1S&4) saw the development of opposition to the Lieutenant- 
Governor’s control of expenditures. A party led by Frank 
Oliver of Edmonton and J. H. Ross of Moose Jaw demanded that 
the Council have practically the same powers that the 
Legislative Assemblies possessed in the provinces. The 
Second Riel Rebellion interrupted this struggle. However, 
in the fall of 13$5 an elaborate memorial was prepared and 
presented to the Ottawa government asking for better terms 
for the Territories. The federal government dealt liberally 









. 

. 

. 

. * 

. 

L 


* 

- , ..o; ... 

* 

. 

. 

. 





-4- 


with the requests. The Habeas Corpus Act was extended 
to the Territories, a supreme court with appellate 
jurisdiction was established, two senators were to be 
appointed, four members of the House of Commons, two for 
Assiniboia and one each for Saskatchewan and Alberta, were 
to be elected, and the powers of the Council were extended. 
In the elections of ld87 the Territories elected the fol¬ 
lowing federal representatives; D. W. Davis for Alberta; 

D. W. McDowall for Saskatchewan; W. D. Perley for Assiniboia 
West. 

The last session of the North-West Council was held 
in 1&$7. The elected members were appointed a committee 
to prepare a memorial respecting the future constitution 
of the North-West Territories. Lieutenant-Governor 
Dewdney disapproved of the memorial, and wrote to the 
federal authorities about it; "During the sitting of the 
Council a memorial was adopted recommending a purely rep¬ 
resentative form of government to take the place of our 
present Council. I feel that it is my duty to inform 
you that my information, from several scattered centres 
of population, does not indicate that such is the general 
feeling of the people. A strong fear is expressed that a 
purely representative form of government will lead to 




-in¬ 


direct taxation and thus impose upon settlers burdens 
which they are at present unable to bear." However, by 
amendments to the North-West Territories Act in 1&#$ the 
Dominion parliament created a legislative assembly of 
twenty-two members for the Territories, with three legal 
experts who might take part in all debates but not vote 
in the assembly. The assembly 1 s term was not to exceed 
three years. 

Honorable Edgar Dewdney was succeeded by Honorable 
Joseph Royal as Lieutenant-Governor. When the first 
legislative assembly convened at Regina in lggg, W. C. 

Wilson, Edmonton, was chosen speaker. The advisory council 
consisted of F. W. Haultain, Macleod; D. F. Jelly, North 
Regina; William Sutherland, also Regina; and Hillyard 
Mitchell, Batoche. Strained relations ensued between the 
Lieutenant-Governor and the Assembly over the powers and 
responsibilities of the advisory council, with the result 
that the first advisory council resigned, and a new one 
consisting of Messrs. Brett, Betts, Jelly, and Richardson 
took its place, but failed to win the confidence of the 
Assembly, and tendered its resignation, which the Lieutenant- 
Governor refused to accept. The Assembly then refused to 
consider supply for 1&S9-90 until the expenditures for the 


* 

... . 

. 




* 

. 

. 

. 


. 


* 

, 







- 6 - 


preceding year had been accounted for. As a result the 
Lieutenant-Governor was forced to accept the resignations. 
He attempted unsuccessfully to form a new council with 
Mr. Tweed of Medicine Hat as the leader. Mr. Tweed refused 
to serve unless the claims of the Assembly were granted. 
After the elected body prorogued, the Lieutenant-Governor 
was forced to appoint a council regardless of whether or 
not they possessed the confidence of the elected represent¬ 
atives. After the second Assembly had been elected in 1&91 
a delegation went to Ottawa where they succeeded in having 
certain changes made in the Act. The Lieutenant-Governor 
was given power to dissolve the Assembly at any time and to 
1 call an election. The Assembly, to which enlarged powers 
were granted, was to sit separately from the Lieutenant- 
Governor. The framework of responsible government was 
being established slowly but surely. 

The third Legislative Assembly convened in the fall 
of 1$95. Again a memorial was prepared which demanded 
greater powers for the Territorial Government, but not 
provincial status, although Dr. Brett of Banff for the first 
time raised the issue of making Alberta a separate province. 
The demands of the memorial were accepted in Ottawa, and 
at the opening of the session In 1&99 Lieutenant-Governor 
M. C. Cameron declared that the changes meant a completely 




. 

. 

» 

. 


. 

' 

i . 

* 

' 

. • 

■ 

> 

* 





-7- 


responsible system of government. An executive council 
with members responsible for specific departments was then 
created. From then on the main issue was the creation of 
a new province or provinces. The Territorial Government 
drew up a bill of rights which demanded all the powers 
enjoyed by the older provinces. Considerable discussion 
and negotiation occurred between the Federal Government 
and the Territorial Government on the issues involved. One 
issue was the problem of one or two provinces. Although 
one capital had served for the whole North-West Territories, 
the conflicting claims of various towns for status as a 
capital was one factor in the decision to create Alberta 
and Saskatchewan. Incidentally, in the Territorial Assembly 
party lines had not been drawn to any extent because many 
of the prominent men of the group felt that such a division 
would not be in the interests of good government. It was 
only after the Autonomy Acts of 1905 that the public men 
of the new provinces formed the distinct parties, which 
were, perhaps, a necessity for successful cabinet government. 

The Alberta Act came into force on September 1. 

Honorable G. H. V. Bulyea had been appointed Lieutenant- 
Governor in August, and Honorable A. C. Rutherford of 
Strathcona was called upon to form a government on September 
1. His cabinet, which was Liberal, consisted of the following 
men: President of the Council, Provincial Treasurer and 






» ■ 

' 

- 






















. 

. 

* 





. 



-a- 


Minister of Education, Honorable A. C. Rutherford, Strathcona 
Attorney-General, Honorable C. W. Cross, Edmonton; Minister 
of Public Works, Honorable W. H. Cushing, Calgary: Pro¬ 
vincial Secretary and Minister of Agriculture, Honorable 
W. T. Finlay. In the general election which was held in 
November, 1905, the principal issues were the rights of 
minorities to establish separate schools and the ownership 
of public lands. The party lines were along the Liberal 
and Conservative patterns. At the first meeting of the 
legislature in March, 1906 Honorable C. W. Fisher of Cochrane 
became Speaker, and J. R. Crowell of Red Deer became the 
first clerk of the assembly. The chief question in the 
first session was the location of the capital. Edmonton, 
Strathcona, Red Deer, Banff and Calgary advanced claims 
for it, but a vote of sixteen to eight settled the matter 
in favor of Edmonton. 

For five years the provincial scene was not troubled 
by any serious dispute. Then in 1910 the Liberal party 
split in a furious quarrel over the guaranteeing by the 
province of the bonds of the Alberta and Great Waterways 
Railway. Honorable A. J. Sifton, chief justice of Alberta 
formed a government when Mr. Rutherford resigned. It was 
in this same year that Edward Michener of Red Deer became 


. ■ ■; ■ o. 

; , k c- 

: 






* , 




$ 




. i 

, 

. 

e 

< 

. 


* 

. 

•- . 





-9- 


the leader of the Conservatives and, therefore, leader of 
the opposition. In the general election of 1913 thirty- 
eight Liberals and eighteen Conservatives were elected. 

The financial statement given by the premier in September 
of the year is of interest for purposes of comparison. 

The total outstanding indebtedness was $15,741,931. The 
authorized amount of the railway bond guarantee was $63,631,300 
with $30,124,700 actually outstanding. The assets of the 
province were estimated at $110,373,000. 

The next general election was held in 1917. Because 
several of the members were serving overseas with the 
Canadian forces, a special act was passed by the Legislative 
Assembly declaring that these men were members of the 
new house without having to stand for election. The soldiers 
and nursing sisters of the province were represented by two 
members-at-large, Captain Robert Pearson, and Nursing Sister 
Roberta McAdams. Miss McAdams, and Mrs. L. C. McKinney of 
Claresholm, representing the Non-Partisan League, were the 
first women ever elected to a Canadian or British legislative 
assembly. The election had returned thirty-three Liberals, 
nineteen Conservatives and two Non-Partisans. Honorable 
Charles Stewart became premier in succession to Mr. Sifton. 

In 1919 the United Farmers of Alberta entered politics, 
easily winning the by-election in the Cochrane constituency 




. 

i 

, 

. 

* 

. 

* 

, 

■ 

, * 









- 10 - 


over the Liberal organization. Between the years 1913 
and 1921 the membership of the Farmers Party increased 
from 13,000 to 33,000. In 1921 a political platform was 
adopted and the resolution made to contest every constituency 
in Alberta at the next provincial election. In July, 1921 
the U. F. A. won thirty-nine seats, the Liberals fourteen, 
Labor four, Independents three, Conservatives 1. The swing 
away from the old-line parties, a feature of Alberta politics 
ever since, had started. Economic interests were beginning 
to become the great factor in party affiliations. The 
uncertainties regarding markets and prices for their products 
in the period following the assured market and prices for 
all they could grow were forcing the farmers to unite. 

Herbert Greenfield, a prominent member of the United Farmers 
of Alberta executive became the premier. In 1925 he was 
succeeded by J. E. Brownlee, the former attorney-general. 

The United Farmers held office until the economic storm of 
the depression forced them out of office in favor of the 
Aberhart Social Credit movement. 


. 

. 

. ... 

. 

. 

. 

. 

* 

. 

. 

. 

■ 

. 

. 






































