

(3x UBBIS 

®weissi»ais 

mBwaiMis 



University of Alberta 
Printing Department 















Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/investigationofaOOcoff 





THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


[<\6 ( f ) 

4 ? 


AN INVESTIGATION OF THE AMOUNT OF KNOWLEDGE 
CONCERNING THE SCHOOLS AND THE SCHOOL 
SYSTEM POSSESSED BY THE PUBLIC 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF EDUCATION 


DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION 


by 

ERIC RUSSELL COFFIN 

EDMONTON, ALBERTA 
June, 1959 


















ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


The writer wishes to acknowledge the helpful 
suggestions and advice given by his advisor* Dr. H. T. 
Sparby, and by the other members of his committee, 

Dr. G. L. Mowat, Dr. A. W. Reeves and Dr. D. B. Black. 

Appreciation is also expressed to the members of the 
Horae and School Association who acted as interviewers and 
to the staff of the Department of Municipal Affairs who 
did the machine tabulation of the results. 

The writer acknowledges his indebtedness to the 
W. K. Kellogg Foundation whose financial assistance made 
this study possible. 



ABSTRACT 


During Education Week, March 1 - 7 , 1959, a survey 
was undertaken to determine the extent of knowledge about 
the school system possessed by citizens of Edmonton. A 
representative sample of the public was interviewed in their 
homes by members of the Home and School Association. 
Ninety-eight per cent of the questionnaires were returned, 
of which eighty-seven per cent were usable. 

The scores on the test of tf knowledge-about-the-schools n 
ranged from zero to seventy-one per cent with an average of 
thirty-eight per cent. 

The survey found that regular contact with the schools 
through attendance at Home and School meetings and other 
school functions caused an appreciable improvement in know¬ 
ledge of education. No statistical difference was found 
between the levels of knowledge about the schools possessed 
by public, separate or private school patrons. Educational 
background and occupations of the respondents proved to have 
a very significant relationship to school knowledge. The 
university graduate and the professional worker scored 
significantly higher on the test. However, the income cate¬ 
gories showed the lowest scores at the two extremes with the 
respondents in the ff over $l6,000 tT bracket scoring only 
slightly higher than those in the lowest income group. The 



e 
















































. c : 





■ 
































V 


middle income categories scored significantly higher than 
all others* Similarily the middle age range of ff the forties” 
scored higher than all other age groups* 

Nearly half of the adults interviewed believed that 
they had received the bulk of their information concerning 
the schools from the newspapers. The majority of adults 
expressed a desire to participate in study groups on edu- 
cation and to receive more newsletters from the schools. 

Three-quarters of the public were unable to estimate 
the cost of a school building. Two-thirds of the adults 
had no idea of the Province’s share of city school costs* 

A smaller number still, knew the share of city taxes 
received by the school system. 

Nearly ninety per cent of the public did not seem to 
understand the objectives of the High School. Sixty per 
cent believed that the High Schools are concerned solely 
with the ”3 R f s” or with specific vocational training. 

Seventy per cent of the public are not aware of the methods 
advocated for teaching reading in our schools. Twenty per 
cent believe that ’’phonetics” is the sole method employed. 

The survey showed conclusively that the public is 
ill-informed with respect to school matters. 





TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I. AN INTRODUCTION .. 1 

Background of the Problem and Need 

for the Study.... 1 

Historical Development. 1 

Education in the Modern World ........ 4 

The School Viewpoint. ............ 5 

The Problem ...» . 7 

Statement of the Problem. 7 

Specific Nature of the Problem. ....... 7 

Limitation of the Survey. $ 

Definition of Terms . ... 9 

Hypotheses .. 10 

A Preview .. 12 

II. RELATED STUDIES. 15 

Psychology of Acquiring Information ...... 15 

The Public Vs Lack of Knowledge.. 16 

Knowledge Desired by the Public .. Id 

Sub-Publics .. 19 

Communications. ................ 21 

Summary ............ . 23 

III. THE QUESTIONNAIRE.... . 27 

Rationale for Question Choice . . 27 

Revisions of the Questionnaire . 31 



































„ . 






■ 

. ..• . ... 











vii 

CHAPTER PAGE 

Format and Data Section ..... . 34 

IV. THE EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN FOR SAMPLING 

AND INTERVIEWING.37 

Sampling Design. 37 

Size ..37 

Tracts. 39 

Sample Selection ..... . . . 40 

Interview Personnel ..43 

Recruitment and Organization . 43 

Briefing Session ..... . , 45 

Time of the Survey ..46 

V. GENERAL ANALYSIS OF THE RESULTS OF 

THE PUBLIC INFORMATION SURVEY. 49 

The Sample .. 49 

Number of Returns.49 

Comparison of the Sample with the 

Universe .. 50 

Reliability of the Instrument ......... 53 

General Results of the Questionnaire . 54 

Communications. 57 

Summary. 59 

VI. A DETAILED ANALYSIS OF THE RESULTS 

OF THE EDUCATION SURVEY.6l 

Comparison of Scores with Data Categories. ... 6l 

















































viii 


CHAPTER PAGE 

Occupations. ..6l 

Income. 63 

Age. 64 

Marital Status . ..... 66 

Sex. ..67 

Type of School Attended.6? 

Children . ..6? 

Parents . ...... 68 

Education Completed . 69 

School Age of Children. 70 

Resident Factor...71 

Length of Residence in Edmonton ..71 

Place of Prior Residence .. 72 

School Contacts . 73 

Analysis of Question Response . 74 

VII. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS ..... . 77 

Major Findings of the Survey.77 

Limitations of the Study.$3 

Implications of the Study. $4 

BIBLIOGRAPHY ............. . 88 

APPENDICES .. 93 

APPENDIX A. The Questionnaire.94 

APPENDIX B. Map of Census Tracts. ..96 

















































LIST OF TABLES 


TABLE PAGE 

I. Sampling Data.42 

II. Structure of Geographic Organization ...... 44 

III. Responses Classified. 49 

IV. Comparison of the Sample with the 

Population. 51-2 

V. Comparison of the Sample with the Pilot 

Study. 53 

VI. Scores Obtained on the Public Information 

Survey. ... . .......... 55 

VII. Percentage of Question Response . .... 75 

VIII. Order of Achievement within Areas.76 


















LIST OF FIGURES 


FIGURE PAGE 

1. Scores on the Public Information Survey . 56 

2. The Channels through which Respondents 

Received the Bulk of their Knowledge 

of the Schools. 57 

3. The Channels of Communication Most Preferred 

by the Public ................. 59 

4. Mean Scores Achieved by Occupational Groups ... 62 

5. Mean Scores Achieved by Income Groups. 63 

6. Mean Scores Achieved by Age Groups. ....... 65 

7. Mean Scores Achieved by Marital-Status Groups . . 66 

8 . Mean Scores Achieved by Sex Groups ....... 67 

9. Mean Scores Achieved by Type-of-School 

Groups (Children). 68 

10. Mean Scores Achieved by Type-of-School 

Groups (Parents) . ....... 68 

11. Mean Scores Achieved by Education-Completed 

Groups ...... . .... 69 

12. Mean Scores Achieved by Child-Placement Groups 70 

13. Mean Scores Achieved by Length-of-Residence 

Groups. 71 

14. Mean Scores Achieved by Place-of-Residence 

Groups. 72 














* 

. 








xi 


FIGURE PAGE 

15. Mean Scores Achieved by School-Contact 

Groups (Average of Past and Present). ...... 73 









CHAPTER I 


AN INTRODUCTION 

How much do citizens know about their school system? 

Do men know more about education than women? Is age a 
factor which affects the level of knowledge concerning the 
schools? Does membership in a particular occupational group 
or a certain income bracket tend to predict superior know-, 
ledge in the area of education? Do parents of separate 
school children know more about their child’s schooling than 
do public school parents? How do citizens attain their 
educational knowledge? In which aspect of education is 
public knowledge the most extensive? In which the least? 

These are the kinds of questions with which this study is 
concerned. 

I. BACKGROUND OF THE PROBLEM AND NEED FOR THE STUDY 
Historical Development 

The active seeking of public support for schools, 
based on adequate understanding of the educational system 
and community involvement in educational planning, is a 
relatively recent phenomenon in Canada. Time was when teachers 
and administrators felt that school business was the exclu¬ 
sive prerogative of the profession and that the public 
should ”mind its own business”. This did not create undue 







' } 

■ O' I 




; :o';:r: v .. . 

, 

. 



■ 




' 

. 








' 








■2 


■ 










■ 










i "i.; t 




. 


■ 












■ ' 






. 









2 


problems in the school-community relationships because the 
public reciprocated this attitude. Both parent and teacher 
perceived the school in this traditional role. 

Such attitudes are gradually being replaced by a 
growing awareness of the need for a broader basis of edu¬ 
cational planning. McClusky and Hamlin point up the necessi¬ 
ty and the recency of this feeling. 

The education of adults about education is in some 
respects the central problem of education. If the edu¬ 
cation of children and youth and adults is important 
in a democratic society such as ours* the instruction 
of adults about this education is even more important, 
since adults provide the financial support and create 
the cultural climate which makes any kind of education 
possible. This point is so elementary that it seems 
fantastic that it should have escaped the attention of 
such large sections of the pedagogical fraternity. But 
recent attacks on current pedagogy and the growing 
necessity for increasing financial assistance compel 
the educator to encourage public enlightenment about 
the facts of education. Already this movement is 
sufficiently visible to justify the review of the 
emerging data in this field. 

Today the public seems to be more vitally concerned 
with the philosophy, the work and the product of the schools 
than at any other time in human history. This Intense 
interest in and concern for the educational system has 
evolved for several reasons. Three major wars within the 
span of an individuals lifetime, a depression of great 
magnitude, the rapid development and application of scienti¬ 
fic technology, the rise to power of countries seemingly bent 
on world domination, have created a more than average 






anxiety in the public mind. 

The impact of social change is not new to mankind, 
although such evolution is increasing in intensity and in 
magnitude and tends to create a world-wide involvement. 
Because radical social changes are not new, it is possible 
to trace historically the rise and fall of public interest 
in education paralleling dramatically the ebb and flow of 
crises in the lives of nations. 

Another reason for the increased public interest in 
education is the gradual rise in the level of schooling 
attained by adults. Each generation stays longer in school 
and thus feels more certain of its understanding of the 
school system and more confident of its ability to condone 
or condemn. 

It is a perennial trend of civilized people every¬ 
where to look to the schools for answers to their problems. 
Are there too many accidents involving teen-age drivers? 

The schools could correct this by Driver Education Courses. 
Are morals too lax among our modern generation? Let the 
schools incorporate more religion Into their curriculums. 
Are young people physically soft? Double the time spent on 
Physical Education. And so it goes through the gamut of 
human endeavorI The public has a sublime faith in what the 
schools can do. 

Yet in times of extreme uncertainty, the public goes 




%:> ' : ' ’ " 




, . . ■ V : • 

. 


. 

' 







































. 

. 

' 














beyond seeing the schools as a universal solution to all its 
problems. Citizens also use the school as a scapegoat for 
the cause of all their ills. Is there an increase in 
juvenile delinquency? The schools are too lax in their 
discipline. TT Why can’t Johnny read?” The schools are using 
the wrong methods. 

This is the paradox! The public simultaneously has 
too much and too little faith in its schools. 


Education in the Modern World 

Education is the largest single enterprise in the 
nation, whether in terms of importance, money spent or 
number of persons directly involved. This enterprise is 
owned by the people and they are the final authority with 
respect to its policies and its expenditures. 

Clint Pace, Director of the White House Conference on 
Education, stressed the role of the public in education. 

In a democracy where public education requires public 
support, it must first have public understanding. This 
understanding comes about, as it does with most things 
in a democracy, when people become so concerned with their 
common problems that they are willing to talk over their 
solutions and air their own points of view. 

The most important issue now facing education is not 
school goals, or organization, or buildings, teachers, 
or money—important as each obviously is. It Is the 
creation and maintenance of a strong public interest in 
schools. Given this, the other needs will be met. But 
they cannot be met sufficiently or in time if the people 
who own the educational system are unaware of and 
apathetic to its needs and its future. 2 







* 

. 


„ . 

■ 

- 

' 

„ i • . ■ ’ ■ ■ : 


' ' - ■ . • • ' 

- ’ ■ ' ' . 

* 


, ' 

( 

. 

C 

. 

' 

• ' ' ' ■; 
* ., • 

■ • • 





5 


When it is considered that twenty-five per cent of 
Canada 1 s population are directly connected with education 
either as pupils or paid personnel, it becomes obvious why 
the public has very definite opinions about the educational 
system. There is a growing tendency to accept the phil- 
sophy that the wise parent will be as informed, as alert and 
as vigilant about the schools his children attend as he is 
about any other phase of their welfare. If he is not, he is 
not a wise parent. 

But parents are not alone in their growing interest 
in the school’s business. Industry needs skilled workers— 
seemingly more than the schools are providing. Business 
men, whether they have children in school or not, are con¬ 
cerned with the productivity and the products of the edu¬ 
cational system. Every adult, parent or not, pays taxes. 
When a third of every tax dollar goes for education, the 
taxpayer looks searchingly at the manner in which his money 
is spent. 

The School Viewpoint 

But school systems have not been hapless victims of 
an engulfing tide of public opinion. There is a growing 
conviction on the part of educators that schools can profit 
from public participation. This is partially based on the 
premises that policies enjoy longer tenure when understood 
and supported by the public; that curriculum changes are 









6 


primarily changes in social emphasis and thus any modifica¬ 
tions in the school program will ultimately affect the com¬ 
munity; and that those who are affected by a policy should 
share in shaping it.3 

Seeking public opinion about the schools* engaging 
interested individuals and organizations in planning* and 
continually trying to sense the public response to present 
and future policies has become the gumma rerum of local and 
provincial governments. 

But how fallacious to suppose that opinions by mere 
weight of numbers will create wise choices in the educational 
system. Griffith argues that intelligent lay people* once 
they acquire an appropriate background of knowledge . can 
make wise decisions.^ Knowledge alone does not create valid 
opinions. let opinions without appropriate knowledge can 
have little or no validity. 

The public expects educational administrators to give 
the leadership in the acquisition of such knowledge. A 
fundamental precept of leadership or teaching is that the 
present quality and quantity of knowledge are known before 
an attempt should be made to teach further. Edmonson places 
this precept as the basic issue of public relations. 

n What does the public already know about schools and 
what does the public want to know? rT There are few 
educators who make a systematic study to find out what 
the people in their community already know about schools. 
















' ■ 








. 




* 

■ 







, 



■ 















. , 



. 




* 


















■ H 























7 


Without such information, however, it is obviously 
difficult to plan an appropriate program of information. 
No expert teacher would proceed with a program of class¬ 
room instruction without taking account of the knowledge 
and skills already possessed by the members of the class, 
but many school officials organize programs for instruct¬ 
ing the public without much consideration of the know¬ 
ledge the public already has. . . . 


... In all probability, school officials are 
wasting a considerable amount of time and effort through 
repeating information that most patrons already have, 
and at the same time are neglecting to give information 
that the public wants to receive. We need more systema¬ 
tic studies of what the public knows and what the public 
wants to know about schools.5 

Such studies have occurred in the United States 
(Chapter II, pp. 15-20). To the writer’s knowledge, this 
study is the first of its kind to be undertaken in Canada. 

II. THE PROBLEM 

Statement of the Problem 

The problem may be stated in the form of a question. 
How much does the general public know about the schools and 
the school system? 

Specific Nature of the Problem 

Specifically the study is seeking answers to these 
questions. 

1. How much does the public know about its schools and 
its school system? This should yield a generalized con¬ 
clusion; e.g., the public is well informed, the public has 































' 











: 


vi 










'£ ‘ i ■ ' 

































6 


an average amount of information or citizens have very 
little information. The criteria used will be the percentage 
of correct responses received on a test of school knowledge. 

2. What distinctions are evident among various sub¬ 
publics? What differential is found between members of 
various occupational groups? Does income have a bearing on 
school facts known? Is age a factor in educational know¬ 
ledge? Does marital status make an appreciable difference 
in school knowledge? What effects on amount of school know¬ 
ledge are attributable to the variables of sex, type of 
school attended by the child or by the parent, the education 
completed, the number and age of children, the length of 
residence in the test locale, the place of previous residence, 
or the frequency and degree of contacts with the schools? 

3. In which areas of education is there the most know¬ 
ledge; in which the least? 

4. What is the order of importance attached to the 
various channels of communication? Through what media did 
the public get its information? Through what media would 
people like to get their knowledge of the schools? 

Limitation of the Survey 

To define the limits of the locale for the survey, 
the writer gave consideration to the elements of time, 
financial resources and available personnel. When these 








9 


factors were matched with the possible scope of the sample, 
a decision was reached to confine the survey to a repres¬ 
entative sample of the adult population of the city of 
Edmonton. 

Definition of Terms 

Boundaries of Edmonton —the confines of Edmonton city 
proper as defined by an official city map printed by the 
City Engineer’s Department (195$). The limits do not 
include Jasper Place, Beverley and similar surrounding 
areas which are not directly under the jurisdiction of 
the Edmonton City Council and the Edmonton Public and 
Separate School Boards. 

Adult —any man or woman who is twenty or more years of 
age. 

Universe —all adults living within the boundaries of 
Edmonton city proper. This may be referred to as ”the 
public” or TT the general public” or ”the population”. 
Tract —a homogeneous area of the city as delineated by 
the Dominion Bureau of Statistics in the 1956 Census. 6 
(Appendix B) 

Separate School —for Edmonton, these are tax-supported 
schools established, under law, by a Catholic minority 
group and attended by children whose parents profess the 
Roman Catholic or Greek Catholic faiths. 














* 

' ■ 

. 

V, 

* 













10 


Public School —for Edmonton, these are tax-supported 
schools established, under law, by the majority group 
and attended by children whose parents do not profess 
the Roman Catholic or Greek Catholic faiths. 

Private School —for Edmonton, these are non-tax-supported 
schools attended by children whose parents do not wish 
to accept the services of either the Public or Separate 
Schools. For most of the categories examined, the parents 
of Private School children are included with Public 
School patrons as the former continue to pay Public 
School taxes. 


III. HYPOTHESES 

In general terms this study is attempting to delineate 
a statistically significant difference among various cate¬ 
gories of citizens with respect to their knowledge about 
the school system. The specific hypotheses which follow 
were conceived through the writer’s experience, born in the 
travail of a winter’s study and nurtured by the relatively 
meagre research which has been done on this particular topic. 

1. Large segments of the public are not well informed 
on educational matters. On the basis of the pilot study, it 
is hypothesized that the mean score of the sample will be 
approximately forty per cent of a possible twenty-eight 
correct responses. 














- 




















<■ 















' 1-- r‘ . ' ' S O • \ . .'1 , 










■■ 








5 , 

1 

' 

• 0 















11 


2. There are significant relationships between know¬ 
ledge of the school system and these variables: occupation, 
income, age, marital status, sex, type of school attended by 
children and by parents, education completed, age and number 
of children, length of residence in Edmonton, place of 
residence before living in Edmonton and degree and consis¬ 
tency of contact with the school situation. 

(a) The most informed group of citizens are those of the 
middle-class as defined by an income category of 
$5,000 to $3,000. 

(b) Married persons have a greater knowledge of the school 
system than have single persons. 

(c) Mothers of school children have superior knowledge of 
the school than have fathers in the same category. 

(d) Separate School supporters have greater knowledge of 
their school system than have Public School patrons. 

(e) The greater the education level of the testee, the 
greater the knowledge about education. 

(f) Parents with children in school have superior knowledge 
of the school system to all other adults. 

(g) Parents of Elementary School children tend to score 
higher on the achievement test than do parents of High 
School children. 

(h) Adults who make it a practice to visit the schools 
regularly and contact the teachers frequently have 






• ■ 






f 



i : 







12 

superior knowledge to irregular attenders. 

3. The child is the best channel of communication 
between the school and the home. School bulletins are next 
in importance. 


IV. A PREVIEW 

There have been a number of studies to assess public 
knowledge concerning education. These, generally, have been 
corollaries to studies of public opinion of Education. 

These along with other pertinent research are examined in 
Chapter II. 

The construction of the questionnaire Is explained 
in Chapter III. The design of the experiment receives 
further examination in Chapter IV, in which the sampling 
design, the organization of personnel and the timetabling of 
preparation are outlined. 

Chapter V gives a general analysis of the data re¬ 
ceived. The sample and the universe are compared to test 
the validity of the former. The questionnaire is gauged for 
reliability. A more detailed analysis of the data follows 
in Chapter VI. The relationships between the various 
categories in each variable and the test scores are analysed. 
Lists give the rank order of the responses to individual 
questions and the responses within areas of educational 



{■> ' : " 




, • . - 


1 •< , ‘ • 

•« 













. ,k 


■ 





o. ' :M 


















. 

w 



! 




' 







knowledge. The concluding chapter synthesizes the major 
findings and presents conclusions and implications. 




FOOTNOTES--CHAPTER I 


■^Howard Y. McClusky and Herbert M. Hamlin, "Adult 
Education About Education", Review of Educational Research , 
Vol. 23, No. 3, 1953, Chapter VI, p.26l. 

2 Clint Pace, "Winning Public Assistance for the 
Public Schools", School Executive , Vol. 75, 1955-6, (July, 
1956), p. 19. 

^B. Othanel Smith, et al., Fundamentals of Curriculum 
Development , New York: World Book Company, 1957, p. 452. 

^Daniel E. Griffiths, Human Relations in School 
Administration , New York: Appleton-Oentury-Crofts, 1956, 
p. 452. 

^J. B. Edmonson, et al ., The Administration of the 
Modern Secondary School , New York; The MacMillan Company, 
1948, p. 477. 

^Census of Canada, 1956, Population , Characteristics 
by Census Tracts , Calgary-Edmonton, Bulletin 4-13, Ottawa, 
1957, p. 3. 
























t 



c 




c 







c 


t 


t 









CHAPTER II 


RELATED STUDIES 

The research into public knowledge concerning the 
schools and the school system is comparatively recent. What 
is available may be classified as predominantly post World 
War II in origin. The United States has experienced a trend 
to informed public participation in educational planning 
which is not yet evident in Canada. Research in the field 
of public knowledge concerning the school system is, there¬ 
fore, almost exclusively American in origin. 

From the wealth of literature pertaining to the role 
of the public in school affairs, research under these sub¬ 
titles was gleaned as pertinent to a better understanding 
of the present study: (1) Psychology of Acquiring Information, 
(2) The Public 1 s Lack of Knowledge, (3) Knowledge Desired 
by the Public, (4) Sub-Publics, (5) Communication. 

I. PSYCHOLOGY OF ACQUIRING INFORMATION 

The increasing use of surveys in business and education 
to determine public opinion of various products or issues 
points to the basic question of the relative validity of 
people’s opinions. As Parten suggests: 

Increasing use has been made of the "knowledge” 
test to determine whether or not people understand 














' f 








16 


enough about the topic being surveyed to hold an 
intelligent opinion.1 

But knowledge per se does not guarantee an intelli¬ 
gent opinion. As Roethlisberger discovered in his study of 
personnel in industry, people are motivated more by feeling 
and sentiment than by matters of fact and logic.^ Attitudes 
must supplement information for the optimum growth of public 
knowledge about the schools. These are the findings of 
Charters as he stresses T? that facts are never enough”. He 
illustrates this statement with four basic tenets of social 
and psychological forces which research has shorn to control 
communication of knowledge. (1) Information rarely reaches 
all persons for whom it is intended. (2) People tend to 
expose themselves to information about things in which they 
are already interested. (3) People tend to accept only that 
information which confirms the attitudes they already hold. 
(4) When exposed to information which contradicts their 
attitudes, people tend to reinterpret or ignore the informa¬ 
tion rather than change their attitudes.3 


II. THE PUBLIC’S LACK OF KNOWLEDGE 


As opinion polls show a consistent pattern of public 

approval of the schools, knowledge surveys as consistently 

reveal public apathy and ignorance of the educational system. 

Most pupils, parents, and other citizens tend to 
take for granted the established ways of doing things in 






r 


























1 

















. '■/ 




17 


the schools of their localities. Because these 
established ways seem "natural" to them, they seldom 
ask how any practice in the school has come to be as it 
is or why it persists. . . . 


. . . We do not generally perceive alternatives to our 
established ways of doing and thinking about things so 
long as we and those we know are generally satisfied with 
the results.^- 

Bolmeier^ and McCluskey^ found that a fundamental 
barrier to the development of good schools was the misinforma¬ 
tion possessed by adults. In the Michigan Studies on public 
relations, Haak decided that "despite the generally favorable 
opinion of schools, large segments of the general public are 
not well informed regarding public education".^ Barnhill 
found a similar lack of understanding about schools on the 
part of citizens. His study was concerned with rural and 
consolidated school populations. In a study by Rossi, nearly 
two-thirds of the citizens of a large American city were 
classified as inactive because of their apathy to the schools.*^ 
Sweitzer concluded from a similar study that a large minority 
of the people could become well informed if they were given 
the opportunity and the motivation. 10 He found a remaining 
fifty per cent who were difficult to reach with information 
because they were not interested. 

An Alberta thesis by Worth surveyed editorial comment 
on education in local newspapers.H He found that although 
three per cent of editorials were concerned with education, 




















t 















t 








the great bulk of the writing dealt with finances, problems 
of higher education and efficiency in the curriculum. Al¬ 
though the comment in the main was favorable, much of the 
criticism aimed at the curriculum and educational finance 
was sharply critical and showed a basic lack of understand¬ 
ing between editors and educators. 

III. KNOWLEDGE DESIRED BY THE PUBLIC 

Charter’s tenets of learning make it imperative that 
the public’s desire for school knowledge be at least deter¬ 
mined, if not awakened. This was realized by Langdon and 
Stout when they prepared to write a handbook for teachers 
explaining in detail how the schools may help the parents 
understand the work of the school.^- 2 They conducted a study 
of £65 families to determine what parents wished to know 
about the schools. The respondees indicated clearly that 
they wished detailed information about what is being taught 
and how it is being taught. Repeatedly there were desires 
expressed for opportunities to have closer ties with the 
schools. 

Informed participation in school administration is 
apparently a novel idea to great numbers of parents, judging 
from responses to a question asked by Van Winkle in a recent 
study. 13 The question was ’’Should parents have a say in 
deciding what subjects the schools will teach?” In reply, 


' 

' 








- '■ 
















' 





19 


45.3 per cent said "yes"; 22.5 per cent said "no"; and 31.7 
per cent were uncertain about the answer. In other words, 
well over half of the public was not sure that parents have 
any business helping their own schools decide what to teach. 

In another question, these parents were asked to 
indicate whether they had ever been asked to serve on a 
committee in their schools. Here 42.7 per cent said they had 
been asked "several times"; 11.7 per cent said "once"; and 
45.6 per cent said "never". 

Van Winkle concludes from his research that practices 
vary widely among school systems, with extensive participa¬ 
tion found in some and almost no participation in others. 

In general, participation was limited to helping obtain funds 
for school purposes. The investigator recommends that 
administrators become better acquainted with the methods and 
possibilities for increased citizen participation because, 
as he concludes, "In failing to do so, they not only overlook 
a key means of informing the people about their schools, but 
also fail to establish an important means of ’feedback* from 
the community". 


IV. SUB-PUBLICS 

In determining the level of public interest and know¬ 
ledge of education, many researchers have learned that there 
is no such variable as "the public". There are many publics. 


' 









20 


The various publics have a wide range of opinions, interests 
and backgrounds of information. Each sub-public must be 
understood, accepted and treated in a different manner. 

Research by Rossi separates an active public of 15 
per cent, a moderately active public of 24 per cent and an 
inactive public of 6l per cent.14 He also discovered that 
the active public tended to be recruited heavily from the 
upper levels of the class system and to have more-than- 
average education. Shipton developed a Criticism Index by 
which he placed the diverse sub-publics into supportive, 
neutral and critical groups.15 He learned that criticism 
was consistently associated with (1) the two extremes of 
education: a lower-than-average education and graduate 

school training, (2) no present contact with the public 
schools, (3) manual occupation, (4) age, (5) lack of contact 
with personnel of the school system, (6) first generation 
citizenship. 

The importance of finding the present level of under¬ 
standing in the community is argued by Pierce.16 He believes 
that: "With this information he (the principal) can use the 

knowledge of certain groups to educate others". Pierce^ 
implies that the program of improving public knowledge "will 
function through a group or groups already present in the 
community or set up for that purpose". 

Wilson detected five major informal power clusters in 










■ 



















, ( 








■ 




ft>: 





■ 










i 












; i 


;• , • ? 






‘ 





■ ; ■ • . 








21 


a rural community .^ The members of the power structure were 
separated from the general public by a wide margin of social, 
economic, educational and interest factors. Since the power 
groups tended to have a strong influence on the educational 
system, the participation of the citizens at large was at a 
minimum. 

In a power structure study in a New England city, 
Gleaser learned that informal leaders tended to be associated 
with high income, professional vocation, age of more than 
fifty years, long time residence in the community and exten¬ 
sive influence in local organizations and business. He 
noted that certain categories were never chosen as members of 
a power structure: clergy, elected municipal officials 
and women. ° 


V. COMMUNICATIONS 

Basic to the study of school knowledge possessed by 
the community, is research into the channels of communication 
between the school and the community. Modern research into 
school-community relationships points consistently to the 
necessity for a ’two-way 1 as opposed to a ’one-way’ communi¬ 
cation between the schools and the public”.19 

In a study of forty-two school systems in Ohio, Van 
Winkle decided that a two-way flow of communication was most 
difficult to obtain without public involvement in educational 











• 'V- ■ ./ • : •: • ■ 1 ' V' — ,;': ‘ *' ; . •F'o:., .i *.■ '•' ' 

' • [; I Xc : ; 

;■ ■' ,r I 4'1 i‘ 'lb ! • » >•’ ‘i v: '->Li ' r " ■ C 




. 

• ' 




. 












. •. i'J \ : 






' 



- 


. 

' ' l f . : • 


. - - ! . . • : 








f 


■ . 




22 


20 

planning. u He also discovered that more highly educated 
parents are generally more easily reached with information 
and are more likely to participate in school affairs. 

According to this research, the best channel of communication 
between the school and the community was the pupil. 

Newspaper publicity was examined by Grout.^ In a 
study designed to appraise the effectiveness of the news¬ 
papers in interpreting education to the public, he demonstrated 
a positive gain in public knowledge after controlled pub¬ 
licity. Haak T s Michigan Communications Studies revealed that 
the use of mass media such as brochures, newspapers, radio 
and television must be supplemented by more personal contacts 
between the home and the school.^ His study showed that 
some means would have to be maintained for the public to 
communicate its needs and opinions to school personnel. 

Sweitzer concluded from his study that the fifty per cent of 
the public who were apathetic and uninformed could be reached 
with information by TT sensational and bizarre charges rf . 2 3 

Dennis and Chisholm conducted an investigation by 
interviews, with citizens and lay and educational leaders.^ 
They sought to determine the importance of public relations 
in school district reorganization. The three most commonly 
used channels of communication were oral: conversations 
between persons, discussion groups and speeches. In rating 
the effectiveness of the various methods, the interviewed 








. ' 




: 












! ' 

' 


' 

* 

, 

. 

. .. 1 ' ■ ■' ) '■■■ 

' l„ : 


i 












■ 










' ' ' ", ) - ’ .'I 
















23 


leaders gave the highest ratings to discussion groups, con¬ 
versation, public hearings, newspaper articles, door-to- 
door canvasses and speeches. Printed information was con¬ 
sidered of limited value. 

VI. SUMMARY 

The research into public knowledge about education 
supports a number of major tenets which have emerged as 
almost fundamental laws of effective school-community 
relations. 

1. Opinions are not necessarily based on facts, nor 
attitudes on logic. While opinions of the school system 
tend to be favorable they may be favorable with or without 
knowledge and, in some cases without justification. 

2. The acquisition of knowledge by the public proceeds 
best by actual involvement directed toward definite and 
mutually acceptable educational objectives. 

2 >. Human relations must be the heart of public relations. 

4. There must be a continuous, planned development toward 
a complementarity of knowledge. 

(a) The school personnel must know their community—the 
power structure, the traditions, the opinions, the socio¬ 
economic, occupational and educational backgrounds. 

(b) The community must know about the school and the school 
system—what the school is trying to do and how well it is 


I "T. ' •:<: 


... 






U 










doing it. 


The present thesis is focused on 4(b)--the level of 


public knowledge. 




FOOTNOTES—CHAPTER II 


^Mildred Parten, Surveys , Polls and Samples , New York: 
Harper and Brothers, 1950, p.493. 

2 F. J. Roethlisberger, "Efficiency and Co-operative 
Behaviour", Notes and Reports, CEA Short Course in Educational 
Leadership, May, 195$. 

W. W. Charters, Jr., "In a Public Relations Program, 
Facts Are Never Enough.", The Nation* s Schools , 53 (February, 
1954), p. 56. 

William 0. Stanley, et al., Social Foundations of 
Education , New York: Dryden Press Inc., 195$, pp. 1, 2. 

^Howard Y. McClusky and Herbert M. Hamlin, "Adult 
Education About Education", Review of Educational Research, 
Vol. 23, No. 3, 1953, Chapter VI, p. 261. 

6 Ibid . 

?Leo A. Haak, "The General Public and the Public 
Schools", Administrator 1 s Notebook, Vol. IV, No. $, (April, 
1956). 

$ 

Roald F. Campbell and Russell T. Gregg, Administrative 
Behaviour in Education , New York: Harper and Brothers, 1957, 

p. 240. 

%bid ., pp. 240-1. 

■^Robert E. Sweitzer, "¥hat They Don ? t Know Can Hurt 
You", Administrator’s Notebook, Vol. II, No. 3, (November, 
1953). 

■^falter H. Worth, "An Analysis of the Editorial 
Treatment of Education in the Alberta Press", Unpublished 
Master’s Thesis, University of Alberta, Edmonton, 1952. 

•^Grace Langdon and Irving W. Stout, Helping Parent 1 s 
Understand Their Child 1 s School , Englewood Cliffs, N.J.; 
Prentice Hall, 1957, pp. i-lv. 

■^Harold Van Winkle, "Good Schools Tell Their Story", 
Administrator 1 s Notebook , Vol. V, No. 4, (December, 1956). 

































■ 




■hi; 




- 





•? ■' i 




. 


■ 




li 







FOOTNOTES— CHAPTER II (Concluded) 


26 


-^Campbell, ojd. cit. , pp. 236 , 240. 

1 5Ibid., p. 237. 

-^David M. Dennis and Leslie L. Chisholm, TT Public 
Relations and School District Reorganization”, Administrator T s 
Notebook , Vol. II, No. 5, (January, 1954). 

-^Campbell, op . cit ., p. 241. 

lS Ibid., p. 242. 

l^McClusky, loc . cit. 

2 ^Van Winkle, loc . cit . 

Stuart Grout, ^Interpreting Education Through the 
Local Newspaper”, Administrator 1 g Notebook , Vol. V, No. 2, 
(October, 1956). 

22 Haak, loc . cit . 

2 3sweitzer, loc . cit . 

24i)ennis, loc . cit . 













* 




















CHAPTER III 


THE QUESTIONNAIRE 

An achievement test of school knowledge was admini¬ 
stered to a scientifically selected sample of the adult 
population of Edmonton, The purpose of this chapter is to 
provide a rationale for the choice of question material, to 
interpret the development of revisions and to explain the 
format and the organization of the data section. A sample 
of the questionnaire appears in Appendix A. 

I. RATIONALE FOR QUESTION CHOICE 

To determine the most important areas in which the 
public should have an adequate knowledge to share in edu¬ 
cational planning two successive criteria were used as a 
basis for choosing the test questions: 

1. From the sources listed in the Bibliography and from 
the writer 1 s experience, there was compiled a list of thirty- 
five broad areas of school knowledge in which it was considered 
necessary for the public to have an adequate understanding. 

The thirty-five areas chosen were judged to be sufficiently 
comprehensive to cover all phases of educational knowledge. 

2. The members of the graduate class in Educational 
Administration were asked to select from the above list 
approximately twenty areas in which they felt that public 


' 

f ' 

x fei 













23 


knowledge was most essential.* "Approximately twenty" was 
arbitrarily selected to create a forced choice situation in 
which the number to be chosen fell close to but below the 
anticipated number of questions for the proposed question- 
naire. 

The frequency of choice by the administrative group 
gave the following rank order of areas in which knowledge of 
the school system was most needed by the public: 

1. Powers and responsibilities of school boards 

2. Curriculum 

3. Programming, grouping, streaming, etc. 

4. School taxes 

5. Ex-curricular activities 

6. Philosophy and objectives of education 

7. Pupil reporting 

3. Teacher training 

9. Appointment of officials 

10. Pupil placement: organization of the school into 
grades and divisions 

11. Powers and responsibilities of the superintendent 


*The sixteen respondents, prior to their temporary 
leave of absence, had been practising inspectors, superinten¬ 
dents, principals, department heads and teachers in nine 
Canadian provinces. 






■ 
















































, . 3c . 

« 









29 


12. Testing 

13. School costs (including provincial governments 
share) 

14. Salaries of Teachers 

15. School Board Regulations 

16. Guidance 

17. Special Education: e.g. handicapped children 

IS. Health Services 

19. School Buildings 

20. Powers and responsibilities of the Department of 
Education 

In choosing the actual questions and wording of the 
questions to test these sub-areas of school knowledge, 
several criteria of suitability were used in addition to the 
professional opinions and documentation already mentioned: 

1. Availability of the information to the public. In 
this regard, the choice was guided by Worth’s thesis^, the 
195& Annual Report of the Alberta Department of Education 2 , 
the 195^ Annual Report of the Edmonton Public School Board^, 
and the writer’s experience with newspaper coverage and agen¬ 
das of Home and School meetings. 

2. Suitability of the questions to the areas of know¬ 
ledge to be tested. The choice was guided by the writer’s 
personal judgement and by opinions of graduate classmates. 

3. Adaptability to an exclusive and clearly defined 









■ 





•v: 








' 



30 


choice in a multiple-choice type of question. 

4. Adaptability to a multiple-choice type of question 
due to the existence of an adequate number of feasible wrong 
answers. 

5. Relative difficulty of wording necessary to convey 
the import of the question to the respondents. 

Questions were drawn primarily from the following 
publications of the Department of Education and of the 
Edmonton School Boards. 

A. Annual Reports^", Courses of Studies^ and Curriculum 

Guides^ of Alberta’s Department of Education. 

7 A 

B. Annual Reports , Policy Handbooks 0 of Edmonton Public 
School Board and correspondence with Edmonton Public^ 
and Separate School Boards 10 . 

Each of the twenty sub-areas of school knowledge was 
represented by at least one question. The five highest 
ranking areas (see p. 2$) were granted two questions each. 

The twenty-five questions originally planned for the question¬ 
naire resulted. Twenty-five questions were considered a 
reasonable compromise between an adequate test and the 
limitations of public acceptance. (In a subsequent revision 
the total number of questions increased to twenty-eight.) 

As the sub-areas selected are not mutually exclusive, the 
questions stemming from one area frequently have implications 
in several other areas. For example a question designed to 








. 






- 

. 

. 


, 

- 

* 




* 

- 

. I 














* 





31 

test public knowledge concerning the powers of the Department 
or the Superintendent, might also help to reveal the know¬ 
ledge, or lack of it, concerning such items as programming, 
reporting, pupil placement, testing, guidance, etc. This 
overlapping and interlocking of test items tends to strengthen 
the testing instrument as four or five questions in one area 
promise a more reliable judgement of the knowledge possessed 
in that area. With two exceptions the first ten areas 
selected have four or more test questions relating to each. 

The areas supported by one question only, are in the four¬ 
teenth rank position or lower. 

Thus the questions were based on the twenty areas of 
public knowledge about the schools selected by practising 
administrators. The questions were screened by the five 
criteria of suitability. The questions were prepared from 
the most recent official documents and the correct answers 
were checked for accuracy with officials of the School Boards. 
The questionnaire, in both content and format, developed 
through five distinct revisions. 

II. REVISIONS OF THE QUESTIONNAIRE 

The original questionnaire was amended in separate 
consultations with fellow graduate students, professors of 
the Faculty of Education and from correspondence with each 
of the Public and Separate School Boards in Edmonton. This 




i 















, f 


• ' t[ • . ' ' ■ ' : • 

A'V '■ . ; ' ■ .f - ; j ; 




! 










i 






■ ‘ 1 / 1 V 

> ■ ■ ■■ ■ ' • 











f r 






first revision resulted in a change of format: a more cumber¬ 
some style of multiple choice was modified to the present 
type, A number of questions considered inadequate were 
replaced by more appropriate test items. The correspondence 
from the Public and Separate School Boards gave the most 
recent answers to many of the selected questions and thus 
strengthened the selection of the foils. 

This first revision was examined minutely by the class 
of graduate students during a session in Educational Research. 
The format and wording were subjected to detailed modifi¬ 
cation. This sharpening of the instruction and question 
wording improved the effectiveness of the testing instrument. 

This second revision, in mimeographed form, was 
administered to the members of the City Council of the Home 
and School Association at their January 5, 1959 meeting. 

The statistical results of this pilot study gave an estimate 
of the reliability of the test. Test-Retest and Two- 
Comparable-Forms-of-the-Same-Test proved impractical methods 
of testing reliability in this case. Therefore, the Split- 
Half Reliability Coefficient was determined. This coefficient 
corrected by the Spearman-Brown Prophecy Formula, gave a 
correlation coefficient of .76. This is significant at the 
one per cent level of confidence. The mean obtained by the 
respondents in this pilot study (n=3&) was 11.5 or 46 per 
cent. The Standard Deviation was 4.&6. These results will 





. ■ ( 


• v i 













i 

























33 


be compared with the results derived from the total sample.* 

The experiences of this pilot study led to further 
revisions in the questionnaire. As a result of evident 
misunderstandings by respondents, a number of the questions 
were reworded. In addition the foils in some questions were 
found to be inadequate and were thereupon improved. For 
example, the dates in the question on the Grade One starting 
age and the subject names in the question on compulsory sub¬ 
jects in High School showed need for clarification. (It 
was on a suggestion from a member of this group that Edu¬ 
cation Week was approved for the survey.) 

This third revised copy was further strengthened at a 
Seminar comprised of the Faculty of the Educational Admini¬ 
stration Division and the Masters Degree candidates. As a 
result of this critical analysis of the question content, 
further validation and documentation were carried out. This 
additional documentation resulted in the deletion of four 
questions and the addition of seven. This evaluation resulted 
in the addition of questions on Special Services such as 
Health, Guidance and. Ex-Curricular Activities. It also 
resulted in a question testing the public knowledge of edu- 


*Twenty-one of the questions used in the pilot study 
were still present in the final draft of the questionnaire. 







T 


- 















34 

cational objectives. As a result of this revision the number 
of questions rose to twenty-eight. 

This final draft was further examined by two Faculty 
advisers who suggested several refinements in wording. It 
was then approved for final editing and printing. 

IV. FORMAT AND DATA SECTION 

A multiple-choice type of question was chosen as 
being preferable to an open-end, completion type as the 
former ensured a more uniform interpretation and a greater 
facility of marking. The multiple-choice type of question 
was also considered preferable to the true-false kind because 
of the sharp dichotomy of distinction created by the latter. 

The twenty-eight questions used in the printed form 
were accepted as being as large a sample as could feasibly be 
administered, although a larger number of test questions is 
usually recommended for reliable test results. The double 
column and the small type give some psychological illusion of 
brevity.^ Questions Twenty-Nine and Thirty solicit opinions 
concerning the channels of communication between the school 
and the home. 

The data portion of the questionnaire appears at the 
end to avoid a distraction between the opening explanation 
and the body of the test. The data items, thirty-one to forty- 
two, serve to categorize the variables listed in the hypo- 











. 






t 




' 


: 




. J 







theses. In order to preserve the anonymity of the respondents 
no names or identifying marks appeared on the questionnaire. 
The completed questionnaires were coded for card-punching 
purposes only. In order to ensure this anonymity, and thus 
promote more complete and more accurate responses to the 
questions of a personal nature the respondents sealed their 
completed questionnaire in an envelope before handing it to 
the interviewer. 



FOOTNOTES—CHAPTER III 


^Walter H. Worth, ”An Analysis of the Editorial 
Treatment of Education in the Alberta Press TT , Unpublished 
Master’s Thesis, University of Alberta, Edmonton, 1952. 

^Department of Education, Government of Alberta, 

Annual Report , 1957, Edmonton, Queen’s Printer, 195$. 

^Edmonton Public School Board, Annual Report . 1957. 

^Department of Education, op . cit . 

^Department of Education, Government of Alberta, 
Foundations of Education , Bulletin 1: An Introduction to 
the Program of Studies for the Elementary and Secondary 
Schools, 1949. 

^Department of Education, Government of Alberta, 
Curriculum Guide for Alberta Secondary Schools , 1950; and 
Senior High School Guide for English Language and Literature, 
1957. 

^Edmonton Public School Board, 02 . cit . 

^Edmonton Public School Board, Policy Handbook, 

195$-59. 

^Personal Correspondence of the Author with Mr. M. J. V, 
Downey, Director of Personnel and Research, Edmonton Public 
School Board, December 4, 195$. 

^Personal Correspondence of the Author with Mr. A.A. 
O’Brien, Superintendent, Edmonton Separate School Board, 

January 20, 1959. 

Hj. Francis Rummel, An Introduction to Research 
Procedures in Education, New York: Harper and Brothers, 195$. 









































t 








4 






. 

. 






* 

















CHAPTER IV 


THE EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN FOR SAMPLING AND INTERVIEWING 

The preliminaries of this research involved the 
selection of a scientific sample of the adult population of 
Edmonton, the enlisting and training of a force of inter¬ 
viewing personnel and the preparation for personal interviews 
in the respondents homes to occur during Education Week. 

These basic developments are traced in this chapter. 

I. SAMPLING DESIGN 


Size 

A sample of five hundred adults was considered adequate 
to represent the population of Edmonton. This constitutes 
a .25 per cent sample. When this sample was judged by the 
criteria outlined by Parten, it satisfied the general factors 
which affect the choice of the sample size.^ 

1. Homogeneity of population, which requires fewer cases 
for reliability than heterogeneity, was promoted in this 
sample by stratification utilizing the homogeneity of census 
tracts. 

2. The sub-categorization planned In tabulation and 
analysis did not envision a large number of sub-groups and, 
therefore, the total sample did not need to be as great as if 
a multitude of categories were to be examined. 








c 







c 


c 























3. The problems of interview, collection and tabulation, 
limited funds and time affected the size of the sample which 
could be secured. It was estimated that approximately one 
hundred volunteer interviewers could be enrolled. On the 
principle that any one volunteer should not be asked to 
contact more than six homes, a maximum potential of six 
hundred interviews was foreseen. Allowing for refusals and 
wastage, a net return of five hundred questionnaires was 
estimated. 

4. A controlled sample, realized by using a proportionate 
sub-sample from each tract, requires fewer cases than a city¬ 
wide random sample. However, a built-in sampling error will 
occur in this case due to a disproportionate increase of 
population within tracts since the most recent federal 
census (1956). 

The sample size was also validated by the following 
formula: 

n - (<5”z) ^ 
s (—) 

where n„ is the size of the required sample, o” is the 
preliminary estimate of the standard deviation of the universe 
(as obtained from the pilot study), z is the standard error 
corresponding to the accepted probability (Ps,99) and T is 
the permissable error or tolerance (arbitrarily chosen as / 
or -1). Substituting in the above formula, n s = 156. 

This means that a random sample of 156 cases should 












39 


give an estimate of the mean on the test of knowledge with 
an assurance of 99 per cent that such a mean is within the 
permissable error range of plus or minus one mark or 3*5 
per cent. This precision is predicated on the complete 
accuracy of the hypothetical sample. In practice, it is 
anticipated that the sampling errors which do occur, will be 
partially balanced by the larger sample of approximately five 
hundred cases. 

Tracts 

A large scale map of the city of Edmonton was sub¬ 
divided into census tracts. (Appendix B) 

"Census Tracts are designed with a view to approximate 
uniformity in size and population and such that each 
includes an area which is fairly homogeneous with respect 
to economic status and living conditions." (2, p.3) 

Stratification was considered essential to the sampling 
for several reasons: 

1. to ensure greater representativeness. 

2. to improve homogeneity which would ensure greater 
precision with fewer cases. 

3. to structure interviewers’ choices and thus help to 
eliminate bias. 

4. to promote concentration which would reduce the 
travelling time needed for interviewing. 

The census tracts were chosen as the preferable means 
of geographic stratification because they provided greater 









■ 




' 



40 

homogeneity than either city sub-divisions or a superimposed 
uniform grid. Also, city sub-divisions showed too great a 
range in size; and all sections of the city are not included 
in sub-divisions. Stratification on other than a geographical 
basis was not considered feasible because of the nature and 
distribution of the interviewing personnel and because of 
the lack of adequate lists of the potential universe. 

Sample Selection 

Within each of the thirty-four tracts, the blocks 
were numbered consecutively. The total number of blocks 
ranged from 40 in Tract Four to 293 in Tract Two. (Table 1, 
Column 2) Blocks occupied solely by schools, hospitals or 
other non-residential buildings were distinguished on the 
map so that they would not be drawn in the sampling. 

Using the most recent census figures available for 
these tracts,^ the percentage population in each tract was 
determined. The same percentage of the sample was drawn 
from each tract. (Table 1, Column 3) For example, the 
population of Tract One was 6,553 or 2,9 per cent of the total 
population of 226,002. Thus the size of sample required from 
Tract One was 2.9 per cent of the gross sample (600) or 
approximately eighteen cases. In a similar manner the number 
of individual cases needed in each of the other tracts was 
calculated, (Table 1, Column 4) 













i ' 















The sub-total sample in each tract was divided by six, 
which was the number of interviews arbitrarily chosen for 
each volunteer interviewer. The resulting quotient, rounded 
off, gave the number of blocks (and thus interviewers needed) 
in each tract. (Table 1, Column 5) This clustering of six 
interviews in each block limited the commuting by ensuring 
that one interviewer could locate his six interviews within 
the confines of one block. 

After the number of blocks needed in each tract had 
been determined, the numbers of the blocks to be used were 
selected by the use of a table of random numbers. The 
numerical designation of blocks is shown in Table 1, Column 
6. The resulting potential of interviews was ninety-seven 
times six for a total of 5$2 individuals. 

These blocks thus selected were marked on the master 
map. Where blocks chosen proved to be vacant, the nearest 
residential block was substituted. A small replica of each 
block with boundaries designated was prepared for the use of 
each interviewer. Each interviewer was instructed to start 
at any corner of his block and contact every third house 
until his six calls were completed. Interviewers were 
instructed to control the sampling to the extent of seeking 
equal representation from men and women but not to restrict 
representation in any other variable except as controlled by 
definition. 




. 

. 











1 

Tra< 

No, 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

31 


42 


TABLE I 
SAMPLING DATA 


2 

No. of 
Blocks 

3 

Popula¬ 
tion in 
Hundreds 

4 

Sample 

Needed 

5 

Blocks 

Needed 


Blocks 

6 

Chosen 

291 

65 

18 

3 

181 

81 

200 


293 

46 

14 

2 

181 

200 



116 

96 

25 

4 

82 

18 

55 

43 

40 

32 

10 

2 

19 

33 



56 

55 

15 

2 

43 

18 



120 

69 

19 

3 

43 

82 

22 


133 

70 

19 

3 

43 

18 

6 

18 

94 

100 

26 

4 

59 

43 

51 

65 

68 

18 

3 

43 

18 

50 


54 

66 

18 

3 

43 

18 

50 


59 

56 

16 

3 

43 

18 

50 


59 

48 

14 

2 

43 

18 



90 

91 

24 

4 

59 

43 

50 

51 

101 

79 

21 

3 

43 

81 

18 


so 

111 

29 

4 

37 

51 

55 

39 

66 

49 

14 

2 

43 


50 


115 

79 

21 

4 

43 

81 

17 

1 

69 

60 

17 

3 

43 

18 

51 


98 

109 

28 

5 

59 

43 

50 

51 

70 . 

71 

19 

3 

43 

18 

50 


145 

37 

11 

2 

51 

16 



50 

53 

15 

2 

43 

18 



45 

34 

10 

1 


33 



59 

62 

17 

2 

43 

18 

22 


89 

83 

22 

4 

59 

43 

50 

51 

72 

93 

24 

4 

43 

18 

50 

37 

176 

45 

13 

2 

67 

137 



65 

39 

11 

2 

44 

18 



56 

78 

21 

3 


18 

50 

25 

50 

45 

13 

2 

43 

18 



59 

64 

17 

3 

42 

18 

50 

81 

106 

81 

21 

3 

43 

18 


98 

60 

17 

3 

59 

43 

50 


70 

47 

13 

2 

43 

18 













43 

The comparison of the sample received with the census 
of the universe will be considered in Chapter V. 

II. INTERVIEW PERSONNEL 

To gain better co-operation of respondents, to attain 
a greater proportion of returns and to achieve a truer cross- 
section of the public, it was considered necessary to conduct 
personal interviews in respondents’ homes. To mail question¬ 
naires of this type and of this length was considered to have 
too high a possibility of non-returns. Group administration 
was not chosen because such a purposive sampling would tend 
to have a high index of bias. 

Recruitment and Organization 

The decision for personal interviews necessitated the 
recruiting of a company of interviewers. Because of the 
financial limitations involved, the basic interest motiva¬ 
tion and the already functioning organization, the Home and 
School Association was approached to provide the volunteers 
needed. First, through a meeting with the executive of the 
Edmonton Home and School Council, and then, as a result of 
outlining the project to the Council itself, unanimous 
approval for the support of the survey was secured. Repres¬ 
entatives of seventy-seven locals were contacted and asked 
to enlist at least two volunteers from their membership. 








I! 










Forty-three Home and School locals responded with a comple¬ 
ment of ninety-two interviewers and nine leaders. 

The metropolitan area of Edmonton was divided into 
five directoral areas, each incorporating a number of tracts 
and delineated by tract boundaries. (Appendix B) The number, 
location and size of these areas were dictated by the number, 
residence and personality of the volunteer leaders enrolled 
in the initial phases of the organization. One of the 
volunteer leaders resident in each area was designated as an 
Area Director and for organizational purposes the area was 
coded using the initial letter of the Director’s surname. 

The contact organization was constituted in this manner: 


TABLE II 

STRUCTURE OF GEOGRAPHIC ORGANIZATION 


Area 

Tracts 

Director 

Assist¬ 

ants 

No* of 
Inter¬ 
viewers 

No. of 
Blocks 

No. of 

H.&S. 

Locals 

C 

2 ,5,6,7, 
10,11,12, 
15,16,20 

Coffin 

1 

17 

27 

8 

E 

21,22,23, 

28,29,30 

Eliason 


7 

12 

3 

H 

13,14,17, 

18,19 

Halkier 

1 

10 

19 

5 

K 

24,25,26, 

27,31,32, 

33,34 

Kales 

1 

24 

23 

13 

R 

1,3,4,8,9 

Ryley 

1 

h 

2k 

92 

16 

n 

lit 

43 









. 














c 








45 


Briefing Session 

A briefing session held at the University^ Education 
Building on the evening of February 25, 1959 was attended by 
ninety-four of the 101 volunteers. The group received their 
necessary information and materials. Each interviewer 
received a kit containing: 

6 blank questionnaires 

6 envelopes in which questionnaires were to be sealed 
on completion 

1 identification ribbon 

1 letter of credentials from the Faculty of Education 
office 

1 instruction sheet 

1 map card with a diagram of the block to be interviewed. 

An instruction sheet gave detailed information for 
selection of the respondents and for the administration of 
the instrument. Instructions were given for procedure if the 
block was not residential, if tenants were absent, or if 
selected respondents refused to answer. Suggestions were 
outlined for introductions and for explanations of the 
instrument to the respondent. During the briefing session, 
the volunteer interviewers were given an overview of the 
purposes of the survey as well as an outline of the organi¬ 
zation and how the preparations had developed. This informa¬ 
tion was considered essential to assist in the establishment 
of rapport with the potential respondent. 

The interviewers chose their own blocks. Because of 
the numerical inbalance between the volunteers and the 










































<■ 


. 






























k6 


selected blocks in each tract, certain interviewers volun¬ 
tarily chose blocks outside of their own residential area. 

The necessary small percentage volunteered to be responsible 
for two blocks. 

Time of the Survey 

The personal interviewing took place during Education 
Week, March 1-7, 1959. This week was chosen because it was 
felt that the increase in educational interest and publicity 
which normally prevails during Education Week would supple¬ 
ment the publicity planned for this survey. This expectation 
was borne out by the resulting news releases. The fostering 
of public interest and acquaintance with the study was 
considered of primary importance in the establishment of 
interviewer-respondent co-operation. The resulting public 
response seemed to support this contention. 

No definite date or time during the week was set for 
the interviewing. The possibility of earlier respondents 
passing information to those approached later was considered 
but this factor was deemed of neglible importance. In 
contrast, the nature of the interviewing personnel made some 
flexibility imperative. 

Respondents had the opportunity to seal their 
completed questionnaires in the envelopes provided. The 
great majority availed themselves of this opportunity. This 














c 







was thought necessary to encourage the adult concerned to 
answer questions of personal data and to answer them more 
sincerely. 

The completed questionnaires, after editing and coding, 
were machine scored and tabulated. The results are analysed 
in the remaining three chapters. 




FOOTNOTES—CHAPTER IV 


^Mildred Parten, Surveys , Polls and Samples , New York 
Harper and Brothers, 1950, pp. 294-301. 

^Census of Canada, 1956, Population, Characteristics 
by Census Tracts, Calgary-Edmonton, Bulletin 4-13, Ottawa, 
1957, pp. £-15. 























CHAPTER V 


GENERAL ANALYSIS OF THE RESULTS OF THE 
PUBLIC INFORMATION SURVEY 


The data of the research are examined in general out¬ 
line in this chapter and in greater detail in Chapter VI, 


I. THE SAMPLE 

Number of Returns 

The assumption expressed earlier (Chapter IV, p, 3$), 
that it would be necessary to plan for approximately six 
hundred interviews to net five hundred completed returns, 
was substantiated in the sample received. Five hundred and 
eighty-two questionnaires were distributed to interviewers. 
Five hundred and seventy-five questionnaires were returned 
of which five hundred and five were completed. The composi¬ 
tion of the returns indicates the index of response. 


TABLE III 

RESPONSES CLASSIFIED 


Classification 

Frequency 

Per Cent 

Completed 

505 

87.0 

Refused: 



Language Difficulties 

16 

2.7 

Not Interested 

6 

1.0 

No Reason Given 

42 

7.3 

Returned Incomplete—no 

reason stated 6 

1.0 

Lost 

Z 

1.0 

Total 

582 

100 



















' 












■ 




T 












■ 




















50 


Ninety-eight per cent of the test papers reached the 
public and were returned for analysis. Eighty-seven per cent 
of those approached completed the questionnaires. 

Comparison of the Sample with the Universe 

The statistics of the 505 completed returns were com¬ 
pared with the comparable parameters of the population of 
Edmonton. This data was compiled principally from the annual 
census of the city of Edmonton for the years 1956-5& inclusive 
and the national decennial census of 1956. These were the 
most recent figures available to the writer at the time of 
the comparison. 

These statistics generally exhibit a marked similarity 
between the sample secured and the universe represented. 

This similarity, however, should be considered as only a 
very general indication of representativeness. The level of 
confidence for the difference in per cents is not statisti¬ 
cally measurable in all cases because the parameters differ 
from the statistics in categorization and date. In calculating 
the statistical data for the population cell entries, it was 
necessary to interpolate and recategorize for all variables 
except those of "type of school", "marital status" and "sex". 

It is in these variables that the significant differences 
can be measured. The probabilities range from for "sex" 
to 1.6 for "type of school". These are not significant at the 





















51 


TABLE IV 

COMPARISON OF THE SAMPLE WITH THE UNIVERSE* 
(All Cell Entries Are Percentages) 


A. Type of School 

Public 

Separate 

B, Occupation 

Sample 

Si.2 
1S.S 

Sample 

Population 
Dominion School 
Census, Census, 

1951 195S 

78.1 78.3. 

21.9 21.7 f 

Population 

1951 Dominion Census 

Professional 

16 

8 

Managerial 

5 

7 

Clerical 

10 

12 

Salesman 

4 

6 

Craftsman 

10' 

15 

Housewife 

42 

39 

Service Worker 

4 

9 

Labourer 

5 

4 

Not Stated 

4 



Population 

C, Income Sample 1957 City Census 


Up to $3,000 

17 

12.2 

$3,000 to $5,000 

41 

49 

$5,000 to IS,000 

24 

26 

$8,000 to $12,000 

7 

9 

$12,000 to $16,000 

2 

3 

Over $16,000 

.5 

.8 

Not Stated 

8.5 



*A11 but one set of figures for the population are 
taken from "General and Administrative Statistics of the 
City", Edmonton, 1958. 

^From correspondence with the Edmonton Public School 
Board, December 4, 1958. 
























































{ 


c 







52 


TABLE 

IV (continued 




Population 

Age 

Sample 

1956 Dominion Census 

20 to 29 years 

21 

29 

30 to 39 years 

34 

25 

AO to 49 years 

25 

19 

50 to 59 years 

6 

12 

60 to 69 years 

6 

9 

70 years and over 

3 

6 

Not stated 

3 

Population 

Marital Status 

Sample 

1956 Dominion Census 

Single 

10 

15 

Married 

37 

35 

Not Stated 

3 

Population 

Sex 

Sample 

1953 Citv Census 

Male 

44 

50 

Female 

53 

50 

Not Stated 

3 

Population 

Education Completed 

Sample 

1951 Dominion Census 

To Grade 6 

3 

9 

Grade 7 to 12 

$2 

79 

University 

12 

12 

Not Stated 

3.5 

Population 

Children 

Sample 

1956 City Census 

None 

10 

30 

PreSchool 

25 

2 $ 

Elementary 

34 

26 

Secondary 

16 

a 

Through 

11 

a 

Not Stated 

4 



































































53 

accepted level of confidence. This means that these differ¬ 
ences could occur by mere fluctuation of sampling. This 
comparison serves to further strengthen the confidence in 
the representativeness of the sample. 

A further validation of the adequacy of the sample is 
provided by a comparison of the mean and the standard deviation 
of the sample with the similar measures of the pilot study. 


TABLE V 

COMPARISON OF THE SAMPLE WITH THE PILOT STUDY 


Statistic 

Pilot 

Study 

Sample 

Test 

Significance 

Number of_Cases (n) 

38 

505 


Average (x) 

11.5 

10.6 

t=l.l N.S., pi.05 

Standard Deviation (o) 

4® § 

4.2 

F=1.3 N.S., p=.05 


Neither the means nor the standard deviations show a 
significant difference at the five per cent level of 
confidence. 


II. RELIABILITY OF THE INSTRUMENT 

As already explained in Chapter III (p. 32), the Split- 
Half Test of Reliability seemed the most practical test for 
examining the reliability of the test questions. A relia¬ 
bility of .79 resulted from a comparison of the scores of the 












' 




:> 

















: - ... 



• r 














54 


odd-numbered questions with the scores of the even-numbered 
questions. A high reliability for the scores obtained may be 
assumed from this correlation. 

III. GENERAL RESULTS OF THE QUESTIONNAIRE 

The results of the test questions on knowledge about 
the schools are tabulated in Table VI and portrayed graphi¬ 
cally in Figure 1. The range of raw scores was from zero to 
twenty or a range of 71.4 per cent. Both public and separate 
school respondents achieved the same range of scores. For 
the total sample the mean and median were 10.56 and 10.76 
respectively. Skewness, dispersion and kurtosis were assumed, 
by inspection, to be sufficiently normal that the distri¬ 
bution could be considered as a normal one for all 
calculations.* 

The achieved mean of 37.7 per cent shows a significant 
similarity to the hypothesized mean of 40 per cent. This 
result supports the first hypothesis that the general public 
is not well informed regarding education. 

The hypothesis that Separate School supporters have 
greater knowledge of their school system than have Public 
School supporters is not upheld. Nor is the hypothesis 
rejected. The difference between the two means, although it 
favours the Public School respondents, is not statistically 


*No correction in the scores was made for guessing. 





f 








• > . 


ii 


y-i\ 1 f 


1 • 

















t 








r 






. 










. 







. 

if . ' ' ' i ' ■ . 










55 

significant. That is, the difference between the Public 
School mean of 10.70 and the Separate School mean of 9.97 
could have occurred by chance fluctuations in sampling. 

TABLE VI 

SCORES OBTAINED ON THE PUBLIC INFORMATION SURVEY 


Scores 

Raw Per Cent 


Frequency 

Not 

Total Public Separate Stated 


0 

0 


7 

5 

2 


1 

3.6 


5 

4 

1 


2 

7.1 


6 

4 

1 

1 

3 

10.7 


10 

6 

4 


4 

H.3 


19 

16 

3 


5 

17.9 


18 

16 

2 


6 

21.4 


25 

21 

3 

1 

7 

25.0 


25 

17 

6 


6 

23.6 


35 

26 

6 

1 

9 

32.1 


42 

35 

7 


10 

35.7 


46 

36 

10 


11 

39.3 


55 

42 

13 


12 

42.8 


46 

36 

10 


13 

46.4 


40 

33 

7 


14 

50.0 ' 


38 

33 

5 


15 

53.5 


30 

27 

3 


16 

57.2 


16 

15 

1 


17 

60.8 


22 

18 

4 


id 

64.3 


12 

10 

2 


19 

67.8 


3 

3 

0 


20 

71.4 




1 

— 



Totals 

505 

407 

95 

3 



Mean 

10.56 

10.70 

9.97 














. 

„ ' J T r " ■ - l i 1 " ;' • ■ ' r ? ■ - . ' ' :: 


H . Im HUH 






' 














56 



squapuodsey jo jequin^ 


RAW SCORES ACHIEVED ON PUBLIC 
INFORMATION SURVEY 








57 


IV. COMUNI CATIONS 

Questionnaire items twenty-nine and thirty determined 
the channels of communication through which the public 
received their knowledge of education. Twenty-nine was 
normative and thirty was descriptive. In the opinions of the 
457 respondents who answered Question Thirty, the rank order 
of importance of the channels of communication is depicted 
in Figure 2. 



Per Cent of Respondents 


FIGURE 2 

THE CHANNELS THROUGH WHICH RESPONDENTS RECEIVED 
‘ THE BULK OF THEIR KNOWLEDGE OF THE SCHOOLS 















Forty-five per cent of the people believe that they 
get most of their information about schools from the news¬ 
papers. Home and School Meetings were chosen second in 
importance as a channel of communication. However, this 
channel achieved only half the popularity of opinion that was 
expressed for newspapers. Tt Talking with teachers", "listening 
to your children" and "reading bulletins and papers from the 
schools" were granted almost equal status. The hypothesis 
that the child is the best channel of communication between 
the school and the home is rejected. 

The level of knowledge possessed by the group who 
placed "talking with teachers" as the most important channel 
of communication, was superior to all other groups of respon¬ 
dents. The superiority of knowledge of the group was highly 
significant when compared to the group who felt that "school 
newsletters" were the best means of communication. Also a 
significantly lower knowledge than the "talking-with-teacher" 
group was scored by the group who said that they received the 
most of their knowledge "through their children". 

When adults were asked to choose the channels of 
communication which they would prefer, 470 indicated their 
wishes as graphed in Figure 3. 

Participation at a local level through "meeting with 
teachers and parents in study groups" was chosen as the most 
desirable method of improving knowledge in school matters. 








59 

A desire for "more newsletters from the schools" was expressed 


by twenty-three per cent of the respondents. Sixteen per 
cent wished to get their school knowledge by "studying about 
it on their own" and ten per cent indicated an interest in 
"working on education committees". 



Per Cent of Respondents 
FIGURE 3 

THE CHANNELS OF COMMUNICATION 
MOST PREFERRED BY THE PUBLIC 


V. SUMMARY 


From a potential of 5$2 interviews 505 were returned 
completed and 70 incompleted. The sample proved to have 
valid representativeness. The questionnaire showed signifi- 






















■% ■ l ' 




i . L • u- 





























■ 










' ‘ 















. ... 

\r 







60 

cant reliability when compared with the results of the pilot 
study and when correlated using the Split-Half Reliability 
Test. 

The hypothesis concerning the "failing” scores on the 
test was supported. However, Public and Separate School 
patrons proved to have equal knowledge of their schools. 
Adults thought that newspapers and Home and School Meetings 
gave them the bulk of their school knowledge. Three-quarters 
of these interviewed expressed a desire for more local parti¬ 
cipation through the media of parent and teacher study groups 
and school newsletters. 











CHAPTER VI 


A DETAILED ANALYSIS OF THE RESULTS 
OF THE EDUCATION SURVEY 

This chapter proposes to examine in detail the relation¬ 
ships exposed between the various data and the achieved scores. 
It will culminate in an analysis of the individual question 
responses. 

I. COMPARISON OF SCORES WITH DATA CATEGORIES 

The data portion of the questionnaire was contained in 
items thirty-one to forty-two. Personal data of the respon¬ 
dents was structured into categories through which score 
relationships could be tested for significant differences. 
Analysis of variance with a five per cent level of confidence 
was used throughout to test significance. 

Occupations 

Eight broad categories of occupation were listed. 

These were based on Canadian and American census classifi¬ 
cations with certain modifications. For example, the category 
of tt farmers n was omitted as not being essential in an urban 
survey; the category of n housewives n was added. 

The rank order of difference in mean score is graphed 
in Figure 4. This difference for the group is highly signi¬ 
ficant . 









' 






t 

- '' f 








' 


• ■ 


' 


... . • - - j ■ : ‘ ) 

, 

. 

. ■ ; 





62 


The mean scores provide a range from 12.63 or forty- 
five per cent for the respondents in professional occupa¬ 
tions to a mean score of 7.72 or twenty-eight per cent for 
laborers. Professional workers, clerical workers (42 per 
cent) and managers (41 per cent) achieved a mean score greater 
than the mean of the total public. Housewives (37 per cent), 
craftsmen (36 per cent), sales workers (35 per cent), service 
workers (30 per cent) and laborers are progressively lower in 
mean score than the general average. 


£ 

o 

•H 

■p 

ctf 

a* 

3 

o 

o 

o 


Professional, Technical, etc 


Clerical 


Managers, Officials, Proprietors 


Housewives 


Craftsmen, Foremen 


Sales Workers 


Service Workers 


Laborers 


5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 

Mean Scores in Per Cent 


FIGURE 4 


MEAN SCORES ACHIEVED BY OCCUPATIONAL GROUPS 


















; 


■: 


C 




* : c : C , •: ■' ■ ■ ! ■. 

r ;• 

. , 

. 

. ' ' • 













63 


It is evident that there is a general relationship 
between occupational status and Tr knowledge-of-schools TT 
status. However, the significant differences are between the 
extreme groups of the categorization rather than between any 
two consecutive groups in the order of achievement. 

Income 

Six categories of income were chosen by 462 respon¬ 
dents. The achievement expressed in mean scores is ranked 
in Figure 5. 



Mean Scores in Per Cent 


FIGURE 5 

MEAN SCORES ACHIEVED BY INCOME GROUPS 


















y.l 



















64 


Respondents in the $£,000 to $12,000 income bracket 
show a highly significant superiority to all other categories. 
The $12,000 to $16,000 bracket (44 per cent), the $5,000 to 
$£,000 bracket (43 per cent) and the Over $16,000 group 
(42 per cent) are clustered with no significant difference 
between the three. These first four categories are above the 
general mean score. Slightly below the general average but 
not significantly different from it is the mean for the 
$3,000 to $5,000 income range (37.6 per cent). Highly signi¬ 
ficant is the low mean score (30 per cent) for the lowest 
income category. 

While income does exhibit a general relationship to 
knowledge about the schools, it is not the progressive, 
straight-line relationship exhibited by occupations. The 
hypothesis that the $5,000 to $£,000 income group is the most 
informed is not substantiated as this group is statistically 
lower than the $£,000 to $12,000 bracket. However, this 
$5,000 to $£,000 income group is slightly superior to the 
?T over $l6,000 fT group and is statistically superior to the 
lowest income groups. 

Age 

A decennial categorization was used for the variable 
of age. No definite hypothesis concerning age was made. It 
was hypothesized, however, that parents of elementary school 







t 


k 


c 




. , ■" .< 


! . ■. i. 


I 


■ 












:* : O 






c 







-V ■ 


c 






65 

children would show a statistically significant advantage in 
knowledge. Such a category would be comprised mainly of 
adults from thirty to forty years of age. This age group 
plus the higher decade of forty to fifty years of age shows 
a statistically higher achievement in the test of knowledge 
concerning the schools. This is shown in Figure 6. 



Mean Scores in Per Cent 
FIGURE 6 

MEAN SCORES ACHIEVED BY AGE GROUPS 


The pattern of mean scores for age categories is 
distinguished by three pairs of statistically equivalent 
means. Adults in the fl thirties Tf and tT forties TI are equally 





















. 



66 


more informed than the next pair of the "twenties" and the 
"fifties". Also the combined group of thirty to fifty years 
achieved a score above the general mean. The "twenties" 
and "fifties" are in turn above the mean of the sixty years 
and over categories. All four of the latter categories 
tested below the general mean. 

Marital Status 

It was hypothesized that married persons had greater 
knowledge of the school system than had single persons. The 
findings as shown in Figure 7 disprove this hypothesis. 


CO CO 
-P 2 
•H -P 
U CO 
CO -P 

S cn 


5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 

Mean Scores in Per Cent 


FIGURE 7 

MEAN SCORES ACHIEVED BY MARITAL STATUS GROUPS 


The slightly greater achievement of the single group 
is not statistically significant. Neither average is 
significantly different from the general mean. 


Single 


Married 


























67 


Sex 

The hypothesis is rejected that mothers of school age 
children have superior knowledge about the schools compared 
with fathers in the same category. Figure & pictures no 
statistical difference in the score achievement of men and 
women. 



Mean Scores in Per Cent 
FIGURE 6 

MEAN SCORES ACHIEVED BY SEX GROUPS 


Type of School Attended 

Data was secured on the type of school the respondent 
had chosen or would choose for his children and on the type 
of school he had attended. 

Children . A greater knowledge of the schools hypo¬ 
thesized for parents of separate school attenders is not 
upheld. Figure 9 demonstrates no statistical difference for 
type of school attended by children. 





















. 

■ 

































■ 




•r. 












o :ic 

■ 

. r ■ ’ . • 



■ 

- 

.f , ■ ■ • f '■>: . ' ;!o 

: .. , < it - : ■ I 


.•. 

■ - ■. '■ -i 

. :/ . ' : 
















63 



FIGURE 9 

MEAN SCORES ACHIEVED BY TYPE-OF-SCHOOL GROUPS (CHILDREN) 


Parents , The type of school attended by parents also 
makes no significant difference in achievement on this 
questionnaire.* The scores achieved by parents of different 
school background are seen in Figure 10. 

"d 

0 

T5 



FIGURE 10 

MEAN SCORES ACHIEVED BY TYPE-OF-SCHOOL GROUPS (PARENTS) 


*The number of cases in each cell for private school 
respondents is not sufficiently large to warrant comparisons. 
















































' • : • 
















. 






69 


Education Completed 

The education completed by the respondents shows a 
highly significant relationship to the achievement scores. 

The "Business College or Trade School after High 
School" group shows no significant difference to the "Grade 
12" group. Otherwise there is a difference between each 
category which cannot be explained by chance alone.* 

The hypothesis, that the greater the education level 
of the testee the greater the knowledge about education, is 
supported. The high degree of correlation between Education- 
Completed and Knowledge-of-Schools is revealed in Figure 11. 



Mean Scores in Per Cent 


FIGURE 11 


MEAN SCORES ACHIEVED BY EDUCATION-COMPLETED GROUPS 































' \ ') 


j q : ’ ■ *■ 


; 






)•;> c ; 


. 

a . ■ ■ . . 

noie-jj f.u.! ’ ■ • ' ■ 

. • r ' ■ ■■■•’ * ■■ 




■ 






■ 




V, . "■ " ■ ■ ^ ;I 

; . <■/: , S 5-' ■; 




. 




70 


School Age of Children 

The hypothesis that parents have greater knowledge 
than non-parents is supported with reservations. These 
categories appear in Figure 12. Parents of pre-school 
children achieve equal marks with parents of school children. 
But parents of children who are through school exhibit no 
greater knowledge than adults without children. Both the 
latter groups are below the general average. 


o 

o 

£1 

o 

CO 

G 

•H 


•H 

o 


Secondary School 


Elementary 


Pre-school 


No Children 


Children through School 


■I 

■ 

m 


5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 

Mean Scores in Per Cent 

FIGURE 12 

MEAN SCORES ACHIEVED BY CHILD PLACEMENT GROUPS 


*The number of cases for the ?? post graduate Tt group 
and the "elementary" group cells are inadequate for complete- 
statistical confidence. 

















: ?. \sv\ 

* 


• ■ i 


: 


■, ; ' ■ ‘ ■■ ‘I 



. 


V 
































‘ 
















Co o ■ 




72 


Place of Prior Residence . Respondents who lived in 
the United States prior to residence in Edmonton show a 
greater knowledge of school matters than other respondents. 
Previous residence in other provinces accounts for no signi¬ 
ficant differences in educational knowledge. Prior residence 
in Canada causes slightly superior knowledge over former 
residence in other English-speaking countries and highly 
significant achievement above former residence in non-English 
speaking countries. 


<D 

O 


£ 


<D 


T3 


•H 

CQ 

<1) 

U 


5h 

O 

Pn 


United States 


Alberta 


Eastern Canada 


Western Canada 


Other English-speaking Countries 


Othe r 


5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 

Mean Score in Per Cent 


FIGURE 14 

MEAN SCORES ACHIEVED BY PLACE OF RESIDENCE GROUPS 



































71 


The hypothesis that parents of elementary school 
children would receive a higher mean score than parents of 
secondary school children is refuted. 

Resident Factor 

The residence of the respondents was considered from 
two aspects—the length of time that the respondent had 
lived in Edmonton and the place of residence prior to 
moving to Edmonton. Length-of-residence results are 
depicted in Figure 13 and place-of-residence results in 
Figure 14. 

Length of Residence in Edmonton . Respondents who had 
lived seven years or longer in Edmonton achieved signifi¬ 
cantly higher scores than residents of shorter duration. 



Mean Scores in Per Cent 


FIGURE 13 

MEAN SCORES ACHIEVED BY LENGTH OF RESIDENCE GROUPS 





















* f 


.. 






•i 

. . 








, 








'. 4 . 









73 


School Contacts 

Contact with the school through regular attendance 
at Home and School Meetings and meeting with teachers 
increases knowledge of the schools significantly. 


Official in Home and School 
Regularily Attend Home and School 
Attend most School Functions 
Meet Child’s Teacher 
Discuss Child’s Progress with Teacher 
Talk over Work with Children 
Occasionally Attend Home and School 
Rarely Attend Home and School 
Member of School Board* 

5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 

Mean Scores in Per Cent 

FIGURE 15 

MEAN SCORES ACHIEVED BY SCHOOL-CONTACT GROUPS 
(AVERAGE OF PAST AND PRESENT) 


*The number of cases in this category is too small 
for statistical reliability 


CO 

-p 

o 

•p 

C 

o 

o 


o 

o 

& 

o 

CO 
















































Ik 


II. ANALYSIS OF QUESTION RESPONSE 

Each question was considered from the viewpoint of 
percentage of correct response, wrong answers and "don’t 
know". The rank order of results based on percentage 
attainment of the correct response is shown in Table VII. 

The percentage of knowledge ranged from eighty per 
cent for the content of Social Studies to two per cent for 
objectives of the Guidance program. Seventeen of the items 
received lower than fifty per cent of correct response. 

Eleven items received fifty per cent or better of correct 
response. Cost factors and objectives appear most frequently 
at the lower end of the rank order. Conclusions which may 
be drawn from this breakdown are enumerated in Chapter VII. 

A clearer picture of the areas in which the public 
has information of the schools is shown by grouping appro¬ 
priate questions into their broad areas of application. 

These are ranked in order of achievement in Table VIII.* 

The percentage of correctness in certain broad areas 
exhibited a range of 6S.$ per cent to 30.0 per cent. How 
Officials Receive their Positions, Pupil Placement and the 
Powers arri Responsibilities of School Boards were areas in 


*0nly those areas in which three or more test 
questions pertained were chosen. Only papers with one or 
more correct responses in each sub-area were considered. 






TABLE VII 


75 


PERCENTAGE OF QUESTION RESPONSE 


No. 

Test Question 

Area of Knowledge 

Right 

Responses 

> Wrong 

Don’t 

Know 

15 

Content of Social Studies 

80 

10 

10 

3 

Government which has control of 
education 

79 

14 

7 

20 

High School program for University 

74 

10 

16 

9 

Who hires the teachers? 

73 

19 

8 

id 

Grades which have Departmental 

Exams 

72 

18 

10 

i 

How are School Board Members 
chosen? 

69 

18 

13 

24 

Which children receive Health 
Services? 

64 

23 

13 

23 

Who pays for educating deaf 
children? 

63 

22 

15 

22 

Which grades are called the 

Junior High? 

62 

27 

11 

4 

Who chooses the subjects of the 
curriculum? 

53 

31 

16 

19 

Compulsory subjects in High School 

50 

40 

10 

2 

Who chooses the city superintendent? 

42 

41 

17 

2d 

Objectives of ex-curricular 
activities 

41 

23 

36 

11 

Teachers ’ salaries 

37 

40 

23 

12 

Cut-off date for Grade I beginners 

36 

53 

11 

10 

Responsibility for teacher 
certification 

34 

53 

13 

13 

Methods for teaching reading 

30 

57 

13 

14 

Number of days in a school year 

30 

44 

56 

17 

Student report marks 

26 

52 

22 

25 

University training for teachers 

24 

41 

35 

16 

Percentage who achieve Grade 9 
standard 

19 

51 

30 

5 

Education’s share of the city taxes 

13 

30 

57 

26 

Objectives of High School Education 

12 

54 

34 

21 

Understanding of ’’credit” in High 
School 

8 

42 

50 

8 

Cost of 12 years of school for one 
child 

8 

36 

56 

6 

Province’s share of school costs 

7 

28 

65 

7 

School Building costs 

6 

42 

52 

27 

Objectives of Guidance program 

2 

68 

30 















76 


which public knowledge of the school system was the 
greatest. Objectives of Education, Costs of Education and 
Pupil Reporting proved to be the areas of least information. 
Matters of Curriculum, Teach Training, Department of Edu¬ 
cation and Programming, Grouping, Streaming occupied a 
central position in the ranking of school knowledge. 


TABLE VIII 

ORDER OF ACHIEVEMENT WITHIN AREAS 


Rank 

Area of Knowledge 

Percentage 

1 

How Officials Receive Their Positions 

68.8 

2 

Pupil Placement 

66.3 

3 

Boards, Powers and Responsibilities 

65.5 

4 

Curriculum 

60.5 

5 

Teacher Training 

53.5 

6 

Department of Education 

55.2 

7 

Programming, Grouping, Streaming 

54.4 

6 

Special Education 

49.3 

9 

Objectives of Education 

47.4 

10 

Costs 

39.4 

11 

Taxes 

33.1 

12 

Pupil Reporting 

30.0 







' 





t 


- 







CHAPTER VII 


CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS 

This final chapter is a synthesis following the 
detailed analysis of the preceding chapters. It highlights 
the major findings of the study and draws conclusions. 
Limitations of the experiment are portrayed to imply 
suggestions for future studies. 

I. MAJOR FINDINGS OF THE SURVEY 

The public response to this questionnaire was 
superior to the returns in the majority of questionnaire 
studies.^ These returns were shown to have a better-than- 
chance representativeness to the population. This should be 
treated with caution, however, as vital statistics in an era 
of rapid social mobility become out-dated very quickly. 

Many of the population parameters were true only at the time 
of the decennial census of 1956, 

From the standpoint of normal achievement in a test¬ 
ing situation, the scores obtained indicate a high index of 
failure on the part of the respondents. The number of cases 
in most categories was sufficient to warrant a statistical 
confidence. The relatively low basis of attainment should 
not affect the appraisal of relationships between scores and 
categories. It is assumed that a range of marks would 















, 






e 




exhibit a similarly normal distribution regardless of its 
placement on a percentage scale. 

The following hypotheses were supported by the 
research findings: 

1. The public generally are ill-informed on school 
matters. 

2. Regular contacts with the school tend to increase 
the knowledge of education. 

3. The level of school knowledge depends on the level 
of education of the respondent. 

4. Parents of school children have superior school 
knowledge to non-parents and parents of children who are 
through school. However, the school knowledge possessed by 
parents of pre-school children is also better than that of 
the two latter groups. 

The other hypotheses were proved to be false or 
partially false. 

1. The middle-class income group as defined by the 
$5,000 to $$,000 income bracket do not represent the best 
knowledge-of-schools-group. The above average income group 
of $$,000 to $12,000 proved to be significantly higher than 
all other respondents. 

2. Married people do not have better knowledge of the 
schools than single people. No significant difference was 
found. 








* 

. 










79 


3. Women do not have greater knowledge of the schools 
than men. The findings prove them equal in mean scores. 

4. Patrons of the separate schools showed statis¬ 
tically equal knowledge to public school adherents. 

5. Parents of elementary school children scored no 
statistical difference in educational knowledge. 

6. The children and school bulletins are not the best 
source of school information, but parents would prefer more 
newsletters from the schools. Newspapers were credited 
with being the best source of school information. 

A composite picture emerges from the research, of the 
person who would tend to score the highest and the one who 
would usually score the lowest on a test of knowledge. 

Whether the person is male or female, married or single and 
partial to the public or separate school system is immaterial. 
The variables which give predominance appear to be applic¬ 
able in any area of knowledge. The paragon of knowledge 
would be a professional, technical or kindred worker, with 
a post-graduate degree, earning an annual income of $$,000 
to $12,000. This person would be forty to forty-nine years 
of age, with children of pre-school or school age. The ideal 
person would have lived over seven years in Edmonton and have 
had prior residence in the United States. The ideal would 
be an officer in the Home and School Association or a 
regular attender at Home and School meetings. 


, 

■ • ■. . ' 










so 


In contrast the research portrays a model of the 
least knowledgeable individual. Again it is of no conse¬ 
quence whether the individual is man or woman, single or 
married, public or separate school supporter. The variables 
which place a subject in the lowest category of educational 
knowledge are, in the main, those factors which are associ¬ 
ated with lack of knowledge, per se . The low score recipient 
would be a laborer earning less than $3,000 a year with a 
Grade Six education or less. The person would be over 
sixty years of age with no family or with children who had 
finished school. The person would have lived less than 
seven years in Edmonton and have had former residence in a 
non-English speaking country. Non-attendance at Home and 
School meetings would be characteristic of this low score 
individual. 

Probably of more vital concern to educators are the 
areas in which weaknesses occur. With due respect for the 
limitations of the test items which reveal these weaknesses, 
the major areas of misinformation or lack of information are 
probed. These percentages quoted are a total of tT wrong 
answers rt , Tt don f t know TT , and rt not stated fr for each item 
mentioned. 

Ninety-eight per cent of the respondents did not 
know the objectives of guidance in the Junior High School. 
Sixty-seven per cent felt that the chief role of guidance 




, 




. 

. 


n ■ >. 




















was to help students choose their own subjects in Junior 
High School. Thirty-one per cent felt that guidance should 
help Junior High pupils choose a specific vocation. 

Ninety-four per cent were ignorant of the cost of 
school buildings. Fifty-two per cent checked "don T t know". 

A quarter of the public thought that school buildings were 
half or less of their true cost. 

Only seven per cent knew the extent to which the 
Provincial Government shares in educational costs. Sixty- 
five per cent admitted that they could not answer. Of the 
remainder, the majority believed that the Province paid a 
higher share of school costs than is actually the case. 

Fifty-six per cent of the public has no idea of the 
total cost of putting a child through twelve years of school. 
Thirty per cent estimated the cost higher than it is. 

Ninety-two per cent do not understand the use of the 
word "credit" in High School. Eighty-eight per cent do not 
know the objectives of the High School. Of this latter 
group sixty per cent believe that the High Schools are 
concerned solely with the "3 R f s" and/or specific vocational 
preparation. 

Fifteen per cent of Public School and eight per cent 
of Separate School supporters know the share of city taxes 
received by their school systems. A quarter of the Public 
School people believe they receive a smaller portion and a 


. 













$2 


third of the Separate School respondents believe they get a 
larger portion than is the actual share. Sixty per cent of 
each group admitted that they did not know. 

Eighty-one per cent of the public is not aware of the 
percentage of students who achieve Grade Nine graduation. 
Nearly half the public believes the attrition rate is higher 
than it actually is. 

Seventy per cent of the people are not aware of 
methods advocated for teaching reading in our schools. 

Twenty per cent believe that "phonetics" is the sole method 
employed. 

Seventy-six per cent are unaware of the university 
requirements for teachers of Grade Twelve subjects. Sixty- 
six per cent do not realize that the Provincial Government 
are invested with exclusive authority for certificating 
teachers. Nearly a third of the public believes that 
teachers are paid a lower salary than actually prevails. A 
third believes that the Provincial Department of Education 
chooses the city superintendent. Thirteen per cent are of 
the opinion that the same Department hires the city teachers. 
On the other hand, twenty-two per cent believe that the 
local School Board is permitted to select the subjects that 
will be taught in the city schools. Twenty-five per cent 
of the public believes that the school year is up to a month 
longer than it really is. 




S3 


Are these shortcomings in knowledge serious or is 
this as it should be? 

II. LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY 

Because of limitations in the testing device, 
administration of the questionnaire, certain intrinsic 
sampling errors were accepted as unavoidable. In addition 
restrictions in time, research skills and funds created 
limitations in the study. 

1. The instrument does not have sufficient questions. 
It was felt that it would be impossible to administer such 
an instrument with any more than the forty-two items 
contained in the present questionnaire. 

2. The questionnaire may well be refined in quality as 
well as quantity. Both quantity and quality are experi¬ 
mental variables which control response. Particularly when 
comparisons are drawn between knowledge within areas, the 
questions arise: are the questions of equal weight, of 
equal precision, of equal validity? Does the wording imply 
the same meaning to all respondents? 

3. Was the sample as representative as might have been 
drawn? How will the proportions of populations in various 
categories compare with the picture which the current city 
census will reveal? 

4. Was the interviewing done uniformly? Was bias 


' 




















introduced by choice of respondent, by varying methods of 
administering the interview? 

These are the sources of error which may occur in any 
survey--the instrument, the sample, the personnel—in each 
lie potential sampling errors. It is the considered opinion 
of the writer that these errors have been minimized as much 
as possible in this survey, 

5. The refusals constituting eleven to thirteen per 
cent of the survey cannot be ignored in a final analysis of 
the returns. When plotted on the city map, these refusals 
showed no distinct pattern of concentration. This could be 
interpreted as a uniform distribution of refusal and if so 
would have little effect on the sample. However, it could 
create a sampling error if it represented a cluster of such 
groups as single or older persons. 

III. IMPLICATIONS OF THE STUDY 

The findings of the research indicate a low level of 
public knowledge concerning education. Why? Is the public 
not expected to know these facts? Is the public not 
interested? Have the people had insufficient opportunity to 
learn this information? 

The broad implications of this research are threefold. 
1. What is the philosophy of the Department of Edu¬ 
cation, of School Boards and of school personnel? Is the 




. 















4 










. 

























































* 








. 


S5 

public to be informed on educational matters? Is an informed 
public an educational asset? Can the educational system be 
improved by informed public participation? These questions 
must be answered first. 

2. If the public are to be informed, on what matters 
are they to receive information? Shall educators choose the 
facts to be disseminated? Shall the public have an oppor¬ 
tunity to voice their desires for knowledge concerning the 
schools? Are the public to be informed only in certain areas 
and forbidden to pry in others; or will it be "cafeteria” 
style? These questions emanate from the philosophy and in a 
sense are part of it. 

3. When a decision is reached on the nature and 
quantity of the information, then the mechanics of communi¬ 
cation become of concern. Who will inform the public? When 
and how often will information be distributed? By what 
means will people be informed? How may the effectiveness 

of the informing process be measured? Gan it be demonstrated 
than an improvement has occurred in the educational product 
because of the increased public knowledge of education? 

The implications of this study point to a need for 
improved media and methods of disseminating school informa¬ 
tion to the public. The study implies that an increased use 
should be made of the presently interested and informed 
nucleus in each community. 



& 










36 


Further studies should be done to extend the under¬ 
standings in this area. 

1. The level of public knowledge about education 
should be tested in a rural setting. The results can be 
compared with the urban findings. The effects of urbaniza¬ 
tion and consolidation might have some bearing on public 
involvement in its school relations. 

2. Research should endeavor to discover the best channels 
of communication between the school and the home. The 
critical examination of present methods of imparting informa¬ 
tion should lead to improvement and extension. 

3. It might prove profitable to correlate the opinions 
expressed on the recent T.P.E. Opinionnaire with the 
knowledge exhibited by persons in the same categories. 2 
The data portions of the T.P.E. Opinionnaire and this study 
are very similar. 

4* Forty per cent of the public believed that it 
received the bulk of its information from the newspapers. 
Research might analyse the information given by the press 
over a period of time. 

5. An investigation should be made into the philoso¬ 
phy of Departmental officials, School Board members and 
school leaders with respect to the optimum level of knowledge 
of the school system to be possessed by the public. 













' 








: 

. 


... ■ . ■ 






c 


= * . 


. 

‘ 

' 

. 

. 




. 







FOOTNOTES—CHAPTER VII 


•kj. Francis Rummel, An Introduction to Research 
Procedures in Education , New York: Harper and Brothers, 
19 ^ 

^The T.P.E. Opinionnaire, An Instrument for Obtaining 
Opinions Regarding the Task of Public Education, Midwest 
Administration Center, University of Chicago, 195&-9. 











BIBLIOGRAPHY 







SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 


A. BOOKS 


Campbell, Roald F. and Russell T. Gregg, Administrative 

Behaviour in Education. New York: Harper and Brothers. 
1957. 

Edmonson, J. B. , Joseph Toemer and Francis L. Bacon, The 

Administration of the Modern Secondary School . New York: 

The MacMillan Company, 1948. 

Edwards, Allen L., Statistical Methods for the Behavioural 
Sciences . New York; Rinehart and Company, Inc., 1953. 

Griffiths, Daniel E # , Human Relations in School Administration . 
New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1956 

Hand, Harold C., What People Think About Their Schools . 

New York: World Book Company, 194$. 

Langdon, Grace and Irving S. Stout, Helping Parents Under ¬ 
stand Their ChiId f s School , Englewood-Cliffs, N. J.: 
Prentice-Hall, 1957. 

Parten, Mildred, Surveys . Polls and Samples . New York: 

Harper and Brothers, 1950. 

Reeder, Ward G., The Fundamentals of Public School Admini¬ 
stration . New York: MacMillan Company, 1951. 

Rummel, J. Francis, An Introduction to Research Procedures 
in Education . New York; Harper and Brothers, 1958. 

Smith, B. Othanel, et al., Fundamentals of Currlculum 
Development . New York: World Book Company, 1957. 

Stanley, William 0., et al., Social Foundations of Education . 
New York: Dryden Press, Inc., 195S. 

Storen, Helen F., Laymen Help Plan the Curriculum . Association 
for Supervision and Curriculum Development, N.E.A., 
Washington 6, D.C., 1946. 



















































4 


' 


l ■ - 





90 


B. GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS 


1. Dominion Government 

Census of Canada, 1956, Population , Characteristics by 

Census Tracts, Calgary-Edmonton, Bulletin 4-13, Ottawa, 
1957. 

2 . Government of Alberta 

Department of Education, Annual Report , 1957, Queen*s 
Printer, Edmonton, 1953. 

_, Curriculum Guide for Alberta Secondary Schools, 

1950. 

_, Currlculurn Guide ( Senior High School ) for English, 

English Language and English Literature, 1957. 

_, Foundations of Education . Bulletin 1, An Introduction 

to the Program of Studies for the Elementary and 
Secondary Schools, 1949. 

__, Promotion Policies Report , 1957. 


2 * Government of the City of Edmonton 

Edmonton Public School Board, Annual Report « 1957. 

, Policy Handbook . 1953-9. 

, Starting to School , A Message for Parents, (n.d.). 

The City of Edmonton, Personnel Department, General and 

Administrative Statistics of the City . J. G. Suski (ed.), 
Edmonton, 1953. 


C. PERIODICALS 


Charters, W. W., Jr., 
Are Never Enough”, 
1954), p. 56, 


TT In a Public Relations Program, Facts 
The Nation*s Schools , 53 (February, 


























































91 


Dennis, David M. and Leslie L. Chisholm, TT Public Relations 
and School District Reorganization 11 , Administrator’ s 
Notebook . Vol. II, No. 5, (January, 1954). 

Grout, Stuart W. , "Interpreting Education Through the Local 
Newspaper" Administrator 1 s Notebook . Vol. V, No. 2, 
(October, 1956). 

Haak, Leo A., "The General Public and the Public Schools", 

A dm1nis tra t o r’ s Notebook . Vol. IV, No. 8 , (April, 1956). 

McCluskey, Howard Y. and Herbert M. Hamlin, "Adult Education 
About Education", Review of Educational Research, 

Vol. 23, No. 3, 1953, p. 251. 

Pace, Clint, "Winning Public Assistance for the Public 

Schools", School Executive , Vol. 75, 1955-6, (July, 1956), 
P. 19. 

Parents and the Schools . National Society for the Study of 
Education, National Elementary Principal, Thirty-Sixth 
Yearbook, Vol. 37, No. 1, (September, 1957). 

Sweitzer, Robert E., "What They Don’t Know Can Hurt You", 
Admlnistrator’ s Notebook , Vol. II, No, 3, (November, 

19537: 

Van Winkle, Harold, "Good Schools Tell Their Story", 

Administrator’s Notebook. Vol. IV, No. 4, (December, 

I95FT.. 


D. MISCELLANEOUS 


Letter to the Author from Mr. M.J.V, Downey, Director of 
Personnel and Research, Edmonton Public School Board, 
December 4, 195$* 

Letter to the Author from Mr. A.A. O’Brien, Superintendent, 
Edmonton Separate School Board, January 20, 1959. 

Roethlisberger, F. J., "Efficiency and Co-operative Behaviour", 
Notes and Reports, CEA Short Course in Educational 
Leadership, May, 195$. 

T.P.E. Opinionnaire, An Instrument for Obtaining Opinions. 
Regarding the Task of Public Education, Midwest Admini¬ 
stration Center, University of Chicago, 195$-9« 

























It 



c 


c 


c 


c 





t ■ c 





s 




t 



It 





< 








t 


< 





c 




c 





Worth, Walter H., Tf An Analysis of the Editorial Treatment of 
Education in the Alberta Press TT , Unpublished Master’s 
Thesis, University of Alberta, Edmonton, 1952* 





APPENDICES 



APPENDIX A 

PUBLIC INFORMATION SURVEY 


WHAT THE AVERAGE CITIZEN KNOWS ABOUT EDUCATION 


Many people have definite ideas about our school system. This is a very healthy condition in a democratic country. In order to 
find out what the average citizen knows about education, we are taking a representative sample of the citizens of Edmonton and 
asking them to help by answering some questions on Education. You have been chosen as one of the sample but your name will 
not be revealed in any way. 

PLEASE CIRCLE THE NUMBER(S) OF WHAT YOU BELIEVE TO BE THE RIGHT ANSWER(S) TO EACH QUESTION (OR 
CIRCLE THE NUMBER OF "DON'T KNOW") 

Please CIRCLE the number which shows whether you are answering for:- 

1. Public Schools 
2„ Separate Schools 


1. HOW ARE MEMBERS OF EDMONTON SCHOOL 
BOARDS CHOSEN? 

1. appointed by City Council 

2. elected to City Council and chosen from 
the Council 

3. elected by popular vote 

4. appointed by the Department of Education 

5. don't know 


2. WHO CHOOSES THE SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC 
(OR SEPARATE) SCHOOLS IN EDMONTON? 

1. Department of Education 

2. City Council 

3. School Boards 

4. electors 

5. don't know 


3. WHICH GOVERNMENT HAS OVER-ALL CONTROL 
OF EDUCATION IN THE PROVINCES? 

1. Federal 3, Municipal 

2. Provincial 4. Don't know 


4. IF A SUBJECT SUCH AS HEALTH AND PERSONAL 
DEVELOPMENT WERE TO BE DROPPED FROM THE 
CURRICULUM, WHO WOULD MAKE SUCH A 
DECISION? 

1. Federal Government 

2. Provincial Government 

3. Teachers 

4. City Council 

5. School Board 

6. Don't know 


7. WHAT IS THE AVERAGE COST PER CLASSROOM OF 
BUILDING A PUBLIC (OR SEPARATE) ELEMENTARY 


SCHOOL IN EDMONTON? 

1. $10,000-14,999 

4. 

$25,000-29,999 

2. 

$15,000-19,999 

$20,000-24,999 

5. 

$30,000-35,000 

3. 

6. 

Don't know 


8. WHAT IS THE TOTAL COST TO THE EDMONTON 
TAXPAYERS FOR 12 YEARS OF PUBLIC (OR 
SEPARATE) SCHOOLING FOR ONE CHILD 

1. $2,000-2,999 4. $5,000-5,999 

2. $3,000-3,999 5. $6,000-7,000 

3. $4,000-4,999 6. More than this 

7. Don't know 


9. WHO HIRES THE TEACHERS FOR PUBLIC (OR 
SEPARATE) SCHOOLS IN EDMONTON? 

1. School Board through the Superintendent 

2. Alberta Teachers' Association 

3. City Council 

4. Department of Education through the Chief 
Superintendent 

5. Don't know 


10. WHO IS RESPONSIBLE FOR CERTIFICATING 
TEACHERS IN ALBERTA? 

1. Alberta Teachers'Association 

2. School Boards 

3. Municipal Governments 

4. Provincial Government 

5. University of Alberta 

6. Don't know 


5. EDMONTON'S MILL RATE IS 58. HOW MUCH DOES 
THE PUBLIC (OR SEPARATE) SCHOOL BOARD 
RECEIVE AS ITS SHARE? 


11. WHAT IS THE AVERAGE YEARLY SALARY FOR 
PUBLIC (OR SEPARATE) SCHOOL TEACHERS IN 
EDMONTON? 


1. 10-19 mills 

2. 20-29 mills 

3. 30-39 mills 


4. 40-49 mills 

5. 50-59 mills 

6. Don't know 


1. $3,000-3,999 

2. $4,000-4,999 

3. $5,000-5,999 


4. $6,000-6,999 

5. $7,000-8,000 

6. Don't know 


6. WHAT SHARE OF THE PUBLIC (OR SEPARATE) 
SCHOOL COSTS IN EDMONTON IS PAID BY THE 
PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT? 


12. A CHILD IN EDMONTON MUST BE SIX YEARS OLD 
BY WHAT DATE BEFORE HE MAY "TRY OUT" FOR 
GRADE I? 


1 . 

none 

6. 

50-59% 




2. 

10-19% 

7. 

60-69% 

1 . 

September 1 

5. December 31 

3. 

20-29% 

8. 

more than 

2. 

September 30 

6. January 31 

4. 

30-39% 


this 

3. 

October 31 

7, February 28 

5. 

40-49% 

9. 

don't know 

4. 

November 30 

8. Don't know 




- 2 - 


13. EDUCATORS BELIEVE THAT THE BEST WAY TO 
TEACH READING IS TO USE: 

1. phonetics 

2. word method 

3. sentence method 

4. story method 

5. combination of methods 

6. don’t know 


14. THE ALBERTA SCHOOL ACT RECOMMENDS THAT 
THE NUMBER OF DAYS IN WHICH A SCHOOL 
SHOULD OPERATE DURING ONE SCHOOL YEAR IS: 

1. 200 4. 230 

2. 210 5. less than these 

3. 220 6. more than these 

7. don't know 


15. IN WHICH SUBJECT WOULD YOU FIND A GREAT 
DEAL OF GEOGRAPHY? 

1. Sociology 4. Geometry 

2. Social Studies 5. Mathematics 

3. Psychology 6. Don't know 


16 c WHAT PERCENT OF ALL CHILDREN WHO START 
GRADE I EST ALBERTA, GRADUATE FROM GRADE 
9? 


1 . 

40-49% 

4. 

70-80% 

2. 

50-59% 

5. 

less than this 

3. 

60-69% 

6. 

more than this 


7. don't know 


17. BY DEPARTMENTAL REGULATIONS, A MARK OF 
"B" (IN HIGH SCHOOL) INCLUDES ALL MARKS 
BETWEEN: 


1 . 

40-64% 

4. 

50-69% 

2. 

45-64% 

5. 

55-69% 

3. 

50-64% 

6. 

don't know 


18. IN WHICH GRADES DO STUDENTS WRITE EXAMINA¬ 
TIONS SET BY THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION? 
(Circle more than one number of necessary) 


1 . 

four 

6. nine 

2. 

five 

7. ten 

3. 

six 

8. eleven 

4. 

seven 

9. twelve 

5. 

eight 

10. don't know 


19. WHAT SUBJECT MUST EVERY STUDENT TAKE 
IN EVERY GRADE IN HIGH SCHOOL? (Circle 
more than one number if necessary) 

1. English (Literature and Language) 

2 0 Mathematics 

3. Science 

4. Social Studies 

5. Health and Personal Development 

6. French 

7. Art 

8. Music 

9. Don't know 


20. IF A CHILD WISHES TO GO TO UNIVERSITY 
WHICH PROGRAM OF COURSES SHOULD HE 
TAKE IN HIGH SCHOOL? 

1. Matriculation 4. Commercial 

2. General 5. None of these 

3. Vocational 6. Don't know 


21. ONE HUNDRED CREDITS ARE NEEDED TO RE¬ 
CEIVE AN ALBERTA HIGH SCHOOL DIPLOMA. 
ONE CREDIT CORRESPONDS TO: 

1. one subject of instruction 

2. one class period per day 

3. one class period per week 

4. 3-5 class periods per week 

5. don't know 


22. WHICH GRADES IN ALBERTA ARE REFERRED TO 
AS THE JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL? (Circle more 
than one number if necessary) 


1. 

six 

5. 

ten 

2. 

seven 

6. 

eleven 

3. 

eight 

7. 

twelve 

4. 

nine 

8. 

don't know 


23. WHO BEARS THE COST OF EDUCATING ALBERTA'S 
DEAF CHILDREN? 

1. School Boards 

2. Charitable Organizations 

3. Provincial Government 

4. Federal Government 

5. Don't know 


24. HEALTH SERVICES ARE PROVIDED IN THE PUBLIC 
(OR SEPARATE) SCHOOLS OF EDMONTON FOR: 

1. needy pupils only 

2. Elementary pupils only 

3. Elementary and Junior High pupils only 

4. all pupils 

5. don't know 


25. ACCORDING TO THE REGULATIONS OF THE 
ALBERTA DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION GOVER¬ 
NING TEACHER CERTIFICATION, THE MINIMUM 
NUMBER OF YEARS OF UNIVERSITY TRAINING 
REQUIRED FOR TEACHING GRADE 12 IS: 


1 . 

one 

4. 

four 

2. 

two 

5. 

five 

3. 

three 

6. 

don't know 


26. WHICH ONE OF THESE ITEMS IS STATED BY THE 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION TO BE AMONG 
THE OBJECTIVES OF SECONDARY EDUCATION IN 
ALBERTA? 

1„ Growth toward competence in Citizenship 

2. Development of a Basis of Fundamental 
Skills and Knowledge 

3. Preparation of all students for University 
entrance 

4. Preparation of all students for definite jobs 
on graduation 

5. Don't know 



- 3 - 


95 


27. WHICH ONE OF THESE ITEMS IS STATED BY THE 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION TO BE AMONG THE 
OBJECTIVES OF THE GUIDANCE PROGRAM IN 
ALBERTA'S JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL? 

1. To help students choose the major subjects 
they will take in Junior High School 

2. To help students choose a vocation 

3. To help teachers in planning individualized 
instruction 

4. To help students plan the ex-curricular 
activities of the school 

5. Don't know 


28. WHICH ONE OF THE FOLLOWING ITEMS IS STATED 
BY THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION TO BE 
AMONG THE OBJECTIVES OF EX - CURRICULAR 
ACTIVITIES IN ALBERTA HIGH SCHOOLS? 

1. To provide training in democratic practices 

2. To give each student a hobby 

3. To train students in the use of musical 
instruments 

4. To encourage each student to become 
skilled in at least one sport 

5. Don't know 


29. IF YOU WISHED TO KNOW MORE ABOUT OUR 
SCHOOL SYSTEM, HOW WOULD YOU LIKE TO 
GET THAT KNOWLEDGE? (Circle only one) 

1. Studying about it on your own 

2. Working on education committees 

3. Meeting with teachers and parents in 
study groups 

4. More newsletters from the schools 

5. Other (please specify) 


30. HOW DID YOU GET MOST OF YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
ABOUT OUR SCHOOL SYSTEM? (Circle only one) 

1. Reading bulletins and papers from the 
schools 

2. Attending Home & School meetings and 
other meetings at the school 

3. Listening to your children 

4. Reading the newspapers 

5. Talking with teachers 

6. As a teacher 

7. Other (please specify) 


In order to form some definite conclusions from this survey, we need some information about the person who answered. Please 
circle the numbers of the right answers for you. Since we do not have your name, the information can never be associated with 
you. Your anonymity is fully protected. 


31. YOUR OCCUPATION 


35. YOUR SEX 


1. Professional, technical and kindred 
workers 

2. Managers, officials and proprietors 

3. Clerical and kindred workers 

4. Sales workers 

5. Craftsmen, foremen and kindred workers 

6. Housewives 

7. Service workers 

8. Laborers 


32. FAMILY INCOME 


1. Male 

2. Female 


36. TYPE OF SCHOOL YOUR CHILDREN ATTEND (OR 
WOULD ATTEND IF YOU HAD CHILDREN IN 
SCHOOL) 

1. Public 

2. Separate 

3. Private 


1. below $3,000 

2. $3,000-4,999 

3. $5,000-7,999 

4. $8,000-11,999 

5. $12,000-16,000 

6. over$16,000 


37. TYPE OF SCHOOL YOU ATTENDED 

1. Public 

2. Separate 
3o Private 

4. Other 


33. YOUR AGE 




38. EDUCATION YOU COMPLETED 

1. 20 - 29 

4. 50 - 59 



2. 30 - 39 

5. 60 - 69 

1, 

Grade six or less 

3. 40 - 49 

6. 70 and over 

2. 

Grade 7, 8 or 9 



3. 

Grade 10 or 11 



4. 

Grade 12 

MARITAL STATUS 


5. 

Business College or Trade School after 
High School 

1. Single 


6. 

University Degree 

2. Married 


7. 

Post Graduate Degree 








-4 - 


39. YOUR CHILDREN (Circle more than one number 
if necessary) 

1. None 

2. Below school age 

3. In elementary school 

4. In secondary school 

5. Through school 


40. YOUR LENGTH OF RESIDENCE IN EDMONTON 


1. Less than one year 

2. 1-6 years 

3. 7-12 years 

4. More than 12 years 


41. YOUR PLACE OF RESIDENCE BEFORE LIVING 
IN EDMONTON 


42. PLEASE CHECK (V^) ANY OF THE FOLLOWING 
STATEMENTS WHICH TELL ABOUT YOUR PRESENT 
OR PAST CONTACTS WITH THE SCHOOL: 

Present Past 


Member of school board 

Elected officer in a Home & 
School Association 

Attended meetings of a Home 
& School Association s 

usua lly__ 

occasionally_ 

rarely_ 

Attend most school affairs 
which involve my child 

Make it a practice to meet 
my child's teacher 


1. In Alberta 

2. In the other three Western Provinces 

3. In Eastern Canada 

4. In United States 

5. In another English-speaking country 

6. Other 


Visit school occasionally and 
talk with teacher about my 
child's progress 

Talk with each of my children 
about his (her) activities and 
progress at school 


THANK YOU SINCERELY FOR YOUR HELP 


PLEASE FOLD AND SEAL THIS PAPER IN THE ENVELOPE 























APPENDIX B 



INDEX MAP OF CENSUS TRACTS OF THE 
METROPOLITAN AREA—EDMONTON 























































