

For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 

CAT. NO. 1935 LOWE-MARTIN CO. LIMITED 


(3x MBBIS 

nmnsrans 

HHKMISIlSK 












Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/jacquesmaritainmOOcoll 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


JACQUES MARITAIN s MAN AND EDUCATOR 

A DISSERTATION SUBMITTED 
TO THE COMMITTEE ON GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE DEGREE OF 
MASTER OF EDUCATION 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


BY 

EDWARD BLAKE COLL 
CALGARY, ALBERTA 


OCTOBER, 1955 





ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


The writer wishes to express his appreciation for the en¬ 
couragement and assistance received during the preparation of this 
work. The helpful' advice and pertinent observations on the develop¬ 
ment of the thesis by Dr. B.E. Walker, Dean H.E. Smith and Dr, J.M. 
Gilles are gratefully acknowledged. The writer also expresses his 
gratitude to Miss M. Kane for her assistance in editing and typing 
the thesis. 


iii 





TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I. EARLY YEARS AND EDUCATION. 1 

II. PHILOSOPHY OF MARITAIN. 12 

III. MARITAIN l S PHILOSOPHY OF EDUCATION... 39 

IV. THE DYNAMICS OF EDUCATION... 51 

V. VARIOUS STAGES OF EDUCATION..... 73 

VI. PROBLEMS OF PRESENT-DAY EDUCATION..... 9k 

VII. CONCLUSION....... 110 


IV 













. 

. .. . . I '■ .i.-'J':-. - .1 




... T * 

.. . -. 















SYNOPSIS 


This thesis falls into three parts, Maritain's life and search for truth, 
the finding of that truth to his own satisfaction, and the spreading of that 
truth to others seeking it. 

In his early life the desire for truth was so strong as to make life 
without its discovery seem meaningless. The search for it, the resolution to 
die unless it could be found and the first glimmerings of the possibility of its 
attainment mark the first part of his life. 

The fulfilment of the first promise of success in his search, the dis¬ 
covery of Thomistic philosophy, the dedication of his life to the study of this 
philosophy and the following of its conclusions to their ultimate end mark the 
second part of his life. 

The third division of his life embraces his desire to spread his find¬ 
ings in philosophy among men. This leads him to an examination of the basic 
principles of education. He examines the aims of education in the light of 
his philosophical principles, the various schools of educational thought which 
differ from his and the means by which errors in these schools may be corrected. 
The true nature of education, the means by which this education is to be impar¬ 
ted to the learner, and the role of the teacher in the educative process are 
considered at length. 

The organization of the curriculum, the emphasis to be placed on certain- 
subjects and the intellectual development which will result from the application 
of his basic philosophical principles are outlined in full. 

The goal of present-day education in its application to the society of 
tommorrow occupies the attention of Maritain to a large degree. The whole life 
of Maritain can be considered as a search for truth and a desire to spread that 
truth to those who are also seeking it. 


v 








- 










- 


























1 


CHAPTER 1 

EARLY YEARS AND EDUCATION 


Some time ago, in an article prepared for the publication Saturday 
Night . Doctor Scarlett, the Chancellor of the University of Alberta, wrote: 

Surely the soul of every sensitive man and woman has been seared by 
the contemporary revolt against culture, the colossal inhumanity which 
makes a mockery of all high ideals, the betrayal of the decencies of life, 
the program against all creative minds, the inquisition that dwarfs those 
of the past* As witness of this new barbarism there stretch gigantic ceme¬ 
teries under the moon full of the victims of this awful pestilence* 

Confronted with these things it is the business of education to con¬ 
cern itself with something more than matters of buildings and salaries 
and the H three R^”. It must oppose the Enemy with the principles and 
works of great faith. All true education looks toward the eternities* 

It must deepen the currents of our great heritage which at the moment are 
running through beds that are pitifully shallow..*. It must concern it¬ 
self with the good life which has to do first of all, not with institutions, 
but with the human being itself.... Above all the university in its dual 
task of teaching and research must be true to its age-old duty of assert¬ 
ing the symbols of truth and beauty, for only in that way will the great 
split between knowledge and morality be 1 healed and the de-civilizing in¬ 
fluence abroad In the world be checked. 

The thought expressed by Doctor Scarlett that there is need of closing the 

gap between knowledge and morality, and that it is the duty of education to 

perform this work has been the subject of much deliberation during the early 

part of this century. 

Among those who have devoted time and effort to the discovery of the 
needs of the modern world in this respect, and there have been many, none has 
devoted more unselfish efforts nor brought greater depth of thought and insight 


^E.P. Scarlett, tt A Chancellor Pleads for the Humanities”, Saturday 
Night . CLVIII (December 20, 1952), p. 9* 































■ 


< 







• • ' ' o: : 



. 








■ 0 

* 

. 










.... 

' 





' 


.... 




_ 



r 





. 







































2 


to the task than has Jacques Maritain. 

Born in Paris on November 13, 1382, Maritain was the descendant of a 
family noted for its intellectuality as well as for its fearlessness in the 
cause of what it considered to be the right. One of the outstanding members 
of this family was Jules Favre, of whom Mme. Maritain writes: 

Jules Favre, a militant democrat, played a very formative role at the 
beginning of the Third Republic. Under the reign of Napoleon Third, he 
was in the French Parliament, among the very small number of Opposition 
deputies. He succeeded Victor Cousin in the French Academy; he was an 
orator of preeminent excellence and an advocate of lost causes, a great 
patriot on whose shoulders fell the sad mission of defending the interests 
of France before the conqueror of 1870. He was sufficiently eloquent and 
persuasive to convince Bismarck that the German army entering Paris aJTter 
the siege should at least not enter the Place de la Concorde, and that it 
should not occupy the city for longer than two days.- 

The love of liberty, the preoccupation with the future of mankind, and 
the disregard for the opinions of others in the face of his own convictions 
which mark the career of Maritain were seen in Mme. Maritain*s description of 
the character of his mother, 

...as I came better to know Jacques* mother, I could admire in her a 
religious loyalty to the passionate ideal which animated the republican 
opposition under the Empire, an indomitable spirit of liberty, a fervent 
hope for the spiritual future of mankind, a boldness in her defiance of 
the world*s opinion and a granite firmness - all of which never changed 
with the passage of time, but which a youthfulness renewed by the ardour 
of great age informed with sweetness.^ 

It was from such sources as these that Maritain gained his love for 
humanity and his sense of dedication to the welfare of mankind. From his father 
he inherited" a spirit of leisurely study, of whom Mme. Maritain says, n He loved 
Burgundy, the rather slow, scholarly and comfortable life one led there, and he 
was astounded at his son*s being a philosopher.”^ 


iRaissa Maritain, ¥e Have Been Friends Together , trans. Julie Kernan 
(New York: Longmans, Green and Co.7l945*57 P* 49. 

2 Ibid , p. 49. 

3 Ibid. p . 50. 


























3 


Maritain*s early education was received at the Lycee Henri IV. There 
he formed a friendship with Ernest Psichari, the grandson of Ernest Renan, a 
friendship which endured until the death of Psichari in battle in August, 1914> 
and which contributed greatly to the spiritual development of both young men. 

From his earliest years as a student, Maritain was obsessed by a desire 
to find the answer to the riddle of life. This he sought at first in philosophy, 
only to discover that the answer was not there. 

Even when he was only sixteen and was taking a course in philosophy 
at the Lycee Henri IV under M. Dereux... young Jacques would hurl himself 
in despair on the rug in his room, because to all his questions - there 
was no answer. 

From the Lycee Henri IV, Mari tain entered the Sorbonne. There he met 
his future wife, Raissa Oumansoff, to whom we are indebted, for the intimate 
sketches of Maritain, and for the account of their struggle toward the answer 
to the problem, the meaning of life. 

I was leaving M. Matruchot*s plant physiology class one day in a rather 
downcast frame of mind, when I saw coming toward me a young man with a 
gentle face, a heavy shock of blond hair, a light beard and a slightly 
stoop-shouldered carriage. He introduced himself and said he was form¬ 
ing a committee of students to start a movement of protest among French 
writers and university people against the ill-treatment to which Russian 
Socialist students had been subj ect in their own country.... Such was my 
first meeting with Jacques Maritain. 

In this young girl Maritain had met a kindred spirit, one who was athirst 
with the desire to know the underlying principles of things, and to be assured 
that the discoveries of physical science did not exhaust man*s ability to know 
reality. 


That Mme. Maritain had the same problem as Maritain himself concerning 
the existence of truth is apparent from her words; Jacques Maritain had the 
same concerns as I, the same questions tormented him, the same desire for truth 


1 Ibld. p. 67 
2 Ibid. p. 40 












t 





























I 













4* 


wholly moved him. M ^ 

The desire to know something of the reality which lay outside the 
scope of the physical sciences had led Maritain to take courses in phil¬ 
osophy at the Lycee and again at the Sorbonne. In each school he was dis¬ 
appointed in the results of his courses, failing to find in them the answers 
to the questions he considered most important. His future wife was his com¬ 
panion in this search for truth, and since she attended the same courses 
as did Mari tain, her testimony in the matter expresses the experience and 
opinion of Maritain. She wrote of this period: 

The philosophers of the Faculte' des Lettres whose courses we took 
were personally men of great merit; their learning was broad and deep, 
and they were keenly alive to the demands of scientific research. 

But they bent their energies, as to their main task, to the endless 
analysis of the detail of historical matters, reducing almost to this 
alone that study of wisdom which their name and their philosophical 
profession imposed upon them as a duty. Their whole learning was in 
the direction of historical erudition, or toward the mathematical 
sciences. In none of them did we find rooted a positive theory of 
knowledge; the conclusions which they believe they could formulate pro¬ 
visionally, under the influence of the rationalistic and idealistic 
tradition to which they still clung, fell into dust under the influence 
of a positivism and an empiricism which were at once dogmatic and in¬ 
effectual. 

It is true that the teachers of the courses were technically phil¬ 
osophers, but in philosophy itself they had lost all hope. They were more 
concerned with the history of philosophy than with the findings of philos¬ 
ophy, and, in consequence, made history a queen among the sciences, an heir¬ 
ess to all the rights of repudiated metaphysics. Of this tendency among the 
philosophers, and of its result on the students, Mme. Maritain has this to 
say: 


Through some curious de facto contradictions, they sought to verify 
everything by processes of material learning and of positive verifica¬ 
tion, and yet they despaired of truth, whose very name was unlovely to 


3 -Ibid, p. 67, 
^Ibid. p. 67 

















5 


them and could be used only between the quotation marks of a dis¬ 
illusioned smile. The tragedy to which they were victims was this; 
that a high degree of intellectual detachment, a profound honesty of 
spirit in them became twisted into a distrust of the simplicity of 
loftier truths, which they considered to be naive simplifications 
arising from the image-making functions of language. All in all, the 
only practical lesson to be had from their conscientious and disinter¬ 
ested instruction was a lesson in integral relativism, intellectual 
skepticism, and - if one was logical - in moral nihilism. So young 
men finished their philosophical studies as knowledgeable and intel¬ 
ligent youths who had no confidence in ideas except as instruments 
of rhetoric, and who were completely unprepared for the combats of 
the mind and the conflicts of the world. 1 2 

To intellectual persons such as they were, anxiously seeking the 
meaning of reality and disappointed in the answers they obtained from the 
philosophy of their day, this feeling of frustration was intolerable. It 
was in this state of mind that they entered a favorite place of meditation, 
the Jardin des Plantes. Mine. Mari tain describes the scene: 

Before leaving the Jardin des Plantes we reached a solemn decision 
which brought us some peace; to look sternly in the face, even to the 
ultimate consequence - insofar as it would be in our power - the facts 
of that unhappy and cruel universe, wherein the sole light was the phil¬ 
osophy of skepticism and relativism. 

We would accept no concealment, no cajolery from persons of conse¬ 
quence, asleep in their false security. The epicureanism they proposed 
was a snare, just as was sad stoicism; and estheticism - that was mere 
amusement. Neither did we wish, because the Sorbonne had spoken, to 
consider that the last word had been said. The French university world 
was then so hermetically sealed within itself that by the very thinking 
of this simple thought we showed some little merit. 

Thus we decided for some time longer to have confidence in the un¬ 
known; we would extend credit to existence, look upon it as an experiment 
to be made, in the hope that to our ardent plea, the meaning of life would 
reveal itself, that new values would stand forth so clearly that they 
would enlist our total allegiance, and deliver us from the nightmare of 
a sinister and useless world. 

But if the experiment should not be successful, the solution would 
be suicide; suicide before the years had accumulated their dust, before 
our youthful strength was spent. We wanted to die by a free act if it 
were impossible to live according to the truth.^ 

It was through their friendship with the writer Charles Peguy that 
some hope came to the disillusioned Maritains. He took them to hear the lec- 


1 Ibid. p. 68. 

2 Ibid. p. 77. 











. 































6 


tures of the brilliant philosopher Henri Bergson. Bergson was then lecturing 

at the College de France, an institution which was viewed with some misgivings 

by the faculty of the Sorbonne. Mine. Maritain writes of this attitude, saying; 

... a mountain of prejudice and of distrust existed between these two 
institutions particularly so on the part of the Sorbonne philosophers 
with respect to Bergson's teaching.^ 

It was while listening to Bergson that the Maritains first understood 
that they might yet come to know something of the nature and existence of truth. 

Someone I know well wrote much later that ."man is an animal who feeds 
upon transcendentals". In different terms Bergson assured us that such 
food was within our reach, that we are capable of truly knowing reality, 
that through intuition we may attain to the absolute; and we interpreted 
this as saying that we could truly, absolutely know what is.^ 

The particular value of this contact with Bergson to the Maritains 
was not so much his philosophical system, which they could not accept as an¬ 
swering all their questions; it was rather the realization that a thinker of 
the highest calibre acknowledged the possibility of the existence of the ab¬ 
solute, and the possession by man of some faculty or power by which he could 
come in contact with this reality. 

Indeed, Maritain was later to break with Bergson on the question of 
the nature of this power and its proper function. To the Mari tains, however, 
the mere acknowledgement of such a faculty opened the doors to unlimited spec¬ 
ulations and hopes. They felt that there might be an answer to the riddle of 
life, and considered it a strict duty to seek to know the reality of things 
with all their ability. 

While yet filled with enthusiasm for the new-found truth, the Mari tains 
made another contact which was to have a profound influence on their lives. 

Leon Bloy, a writer with whose work they became acquainted by reading a review 

•’- Ibid, p. 79. 

2 Ibid. p. 83. 














•• . ■■ 






- 


-V; • 


' 










v ' C--: 

• : • < ' '• • •' - 




-■ -a 


■ 









7 


of Bloy's writings written by Maurice Materlinck, became their friend. Through 
this review, and their interest in his works, the Maritains made his acquain¬ 
tance. Their contact with this man placed them, for the first time, in an at¬ 
mosphere in which they met the Catholic culture and faith exemplified in the 
life of a good man. It was in the agonized writings of this man, Bloy, that 
they first were placed in contact with a possible solution of their search for 
truth. 


Ignorant as we were both of Judaism and Christianity, we could not, 
when we first read these pages, have understood all of Leon Bloy's com¬ 
plex symbolism. But its beauty was obvious. And these lamentations of 
a heart made disconsolate by injustice, these aspirations toward the 
glory of truth - were they not to some degree present in us, sufficiently 
so for us to recognize them in the heart of the sorrowful old writer?^- 

It was again the passionate seeking after truth that led them toward 
a belief in God as the -ultimate truth. It was not an easy step to take, with 
their education and the traditions of the time. It was no easy thing for them 
to accept the God Who was so far from the ideals of their associates and their 
former professors. They felt that it was possible that they would find the 
same empty betrayal in this that they had experienced so many times before. 
However, it would have been against their nature to fail to make every effort 
to find the truth they had so ardently sought in so many other ways. 

I would like to note, however, that Jacques later told me that every¬ 
thing had changed for him when thinking that it was fair to put to a test 
by an act of the soul the promises of the unknown God, he started praying 
in the following way. ”My God, if You exist, and if You are the truth, 
make me know it”, and one day decided to kneel down and recite the Lord's 
Prayer for the first time.2 

The doubts and hesitations of this period were a sore trial to the 
Maritains. Hot the least of their distress came from the thought that their 
contemplated step would separate them from the people and the world they knew. 


J -Ibid. p. 135. 
2 Ibid. p. 144, 










3 . 


It meant the acceptance of separation - for how long a time? - from 
our parents and the comrades of our youth whose lack of understanding we 
thought would be total (and indeed it was in many cases),.. 

Finally, we already felt like 11 the filth of the world” when we thought 
of the disapproval of those we loved. Jacques remained despite everything 
so persuaded by the errors of the “philosophers”, that he thought that in 
becoming a Catholic he would have utterly to forswear the intellectual 
life. 1 

These thoughts were a severe trial to both Jacques Maritain and to 
his wife. Maritain had always shown a deep affection for all his friends, 
and a touching response to suffering of any sort. To think that his deliber¬ 
ate act was to bring sorrow and shame, for so he considered the probable re¬ 
action to his conversion, to his many friends and especially to his own people, 
was, for him, a supreme suffering. 

Not the least of his mental agony came from the thought that his life 
of study and intellectual curiosity would be at an end. 

We still thought that to become Christian meant to abandon philosophy 
forever. Well, we were ready - but it was not easy - to abandon philosophy 
for the truth. The truth we had so greatly desired had caught us in a 
trap. ”If it has pleased God to hide His truth in a dunghill”, said Jac¬ 
ques, “that is where we shall go to find it. M ^ 

On June 11, 1906, the Maritains were baptized. In August of the same 
year they went to Germany to study the state of biological science in that 
country. They held themselves aloof from the other students at Heidelberg, 
During these days they became better acquainted with the new state into which 
they had entered. It was a time of readjustment, a time which they spent in 
exploration of every avenue opened by their new proximity to the truth. In 
the investigation of these new avenues, far from the feared sterility in mat¬ 
ters philosophical, they found new and wider horizons for their intellectual 
curiosity. Mine. Maritain writes of those days: 

I see in Jacques' diary that a bare month after our arrival in Heidel¬ 
berg, we, who had believed that we should have to forswear philosophy, 
began already to see the possibility of a “restitution of the Reason, of 


1 Ibid. p. 175- 










9 . 


which metaphysics is the essential and highest operation,..• We must 
now know what we want”, Jacques wrote, ”and it is to philosophize truly.” 1 

The reaction of the families of the Maritains which they had foreseen 
was not long in being realized to the full. Their conversion had been repor¬ 
ted by the ubiquitous ’’friend”, and Maritain hastened to Paris from Heidelberg 
to explain away some of the misunderstanding and hurt which their parents felt. 
Though Madame Maritain's parents were amenable to the explanations offered, 
Jacques* mother remained for a long time unable to see the wisdom or the neces¬ 
sity for such a step on the part of her son. 

Maritain was not long in coming in contact with some of the results of 
his conversion. In 1907, having returned from Germany after finishing his bio¬ 
logical studies, he was ready to accept the chair in philosophy at one of the 
French state lycees. This was his by right of his agregation. However, the 
spirit of the times, one of strong anti-clericalism, made him fear that he would 
not be absolutely free to teach according to his convictions as a Christian and 
a philosopher. As a result, he gave up his career as a teacher in the state 
universities. 

To provide the bare necessities of life, Maritain was obliged to asso¬ 
ciate himself with the publishing firm of Maison Hachette. There he spent some 
years preparing lexicons and dictionaries and, at the same time, enjoying a 
liberty of mind in regard to the philosophical problems which confronted him. 

A slow ripening process was thus made possible, during which the prin¬ 
cipal outlines of a philosophy of being and of spirit took shape before 
his eyes, and also the conviction that truth attained in any degree what¬ 
ever of reality should be the friend and companion of the truth in any other 
degree of being.^ 

Along with this testimony of his wife, Maritain himself writes, as she 
quotes in her book, Adventures in Grace: 


1 Ibid . p. 175. 

^Ibid , p, 202. 








' 








' ■ 

. 

. 




- 






. ■ 










\ 




- 

t" 




? ' - ' . ‘ r ' 

. 
























. 



. 













10 


My philosophical reflections leaned upon the indestructable truth of 
objects presented by faith in order to restore the natural order of the 
intelligence to being, and to recognize the ontological bearing of the 
work of reason. Thenceforth, in affirming to myself, without chicanery 
or diminution, the authentic value of reality of our human instruments of 
knowledge, I was already a Thomist without knowing it. When, several months 
later, I was to come to the Summa Theologica, I would erect no obstacle to 
its luminous flood.^ 

From 1909 to 1913 Maritain spent his time working for the firm of Maison 
Hachette preparing a Dictionary of Practical Life, while his private studies were 
devoted to Aristotle and St. Thomas Aquinas as well as to the reading of contem¬ 
porary scholastic authors. In 1909 he published the results of his biological 
studies in Germany, thus acquitting himself of the obligation incurred as the re¬ 
cipient of the Michonis fellowship. In 1910 he wrote his first philosophical 
study, La Science Moderne et la Raison . In it he criticized the tragic state to 
which reason had come. It is the first essay in the volume, Antimoderne . which 
was collected and published in 1923. In 1911 Maritain wrote a long article for 
the Revue de Philosophie, entitled L 1 Evolutionnisme Bergsonien . This article 
outlined the criticisms which the Ba^gsonian system called for from the viewpoint 
of Thomistic philosophy. 

In 1912 Maritain began the first year of his philosophy courses at the 
college Stanislas, meeting opposition from the other members of the faculty be¬ 
cause of his determination to present Thomistic philosophy. The fire with which 
he presented his teachings was looked upon as the fervor of a beginner in a new 
and interesting system. The members of the faculty who feared repercussions from 
the intellectual world were reassured by the thought that this phase would pass 
as the new professor became more mature. 

Maritain himself wrote several years later that it did not pass, on the 
contrary, it had become with time more tenacious and more determined, although it 
lost the useless harshness of youth and inexperience. 

iRaissa Maritain, Adventures in Grace , trans. Julie Kernan (New York: 
Longmans, Green and Go., 1944)? P* 4* 
































. 






' 







11 


. • .precisement cette ’’ardeur des neophytes’ 1 qui passera, mon ami, qui pas- 
sera, lui disait un jour le venerable directeur d*un etablisement d*edu¬ 
cation ecclesiastique - eh non. 1 Elle n'a pas passed elle est devenue, au 
contraire, avec le temps, plus tenace, et plus determined, tout en perdant,^ 
il l*espere du moins, l*inutile aprete de la jeunesse et de 1 *inexperience. 

In these courses Maritain inspired the hearers with a love of learning 
and a desire to find the solution to the problems which had filled his own stu¬ 
dent days with so much heart-searching and anxiety. He bent all his energyto 
setting forth the subjects on the programme and the problems of contemporary 
philosophy in the light of the principles of St. Thomas, and in so doing, he 
set the pattern for the great work of his life, the interpretation of contempo¬ 
rary problems in the light of these doctrines. 

For him, the teachings of St. Thomas were the exposition of the truth 
which he had sought for so long. For him, there were no questions bothering 
the minds and the intellects of the present generation which did not have their 
solution in the doctrines formulated so long ago. There was no field of intel¬ 
lectual investigation which did not have relationship with the truth which is 
one, and, therefore, it was true that the harmonizing of truth into unity was a 
work which could and should be done. 

In 1930 Maritain became connected with the Institute of Medieval Studies 
in Toronto, Canada. During the Second World War he was visiting professor at 
Columbia University in New York, and also at Princeton University. After the 
war ended he returned to France and received the appointment of Ambassador to 
the Vatican, in which position he served from 1945 until 194^. He then occupied 
the chair of Philosophy at Princeton University from which position he retired 
recently. He still continues to publish essays and articles in the familiar 
trend of relating present day topics to the teaching of Thomistic philosophy. 


^■Jacques Maritain, Antimoderne , Editions de La Revue des Jeunes, (Paris: 
Dewclee et Cie.), p. 14. 













. . * 






. 






. - ■ 


, 


- 


. ‘."‘c 














' : • 




_ • . r r. . . 

' 




. .n 








— . . . '-0 .• I 












. 








12 


CHAPTER II 

PHILOSOPHY OF MARI TAIN 

All his life Maritain had sought the meaning of life and the certainty 
of the existence of reality and truth* While attending the lectures of Berg¬ 
son, he realized the existence of a power in the human mind capable of attain¬ 
ing knowledge of this reality and truth. To him, it seemed clear that this 
truth was within the domain of the philosopher, and that those who bore the 
name of philosopher had the obligation of knowing this truth and of transmitt¬ 
ing it to those who sought it. 

Though he was much taken with Bergson's philosophy in the beginning, 
he could not find in it a clear-cut explanation of the nature of reality, at 
least one which would satisfy him. Nor could he be satisfied with the method 
Bergson used, one which failed to state clearly that his system was the abso¬ 
lute truth. On both these points he broke with Bergson, though later he ad¬ 
mitted that he had missed the purpose of Bergson's failure to speak with all 
authority. 

Bergson's philosophy held that experience was reality, and reality ex¬ 
perience. To know reality it is necessary to consult experience. Experience 
is what we experience it to be, thus it is subjective in its interpretation. 
This Maritain found hard to accept, since he was seeking a reality which was 
absolute and not the result of subjective interpretation. To Bergson, the 
experiences which man undergoes are all interpreted in the light of practical 
problems, and in this Bergson's philosophy is pragmatic. Bergson held that 
our contact with experience is remembered, somewhat in the nature of the Freud- 








13 


ian unconscious, being recalled and connected with immediate experience for 
the purpose of solving present problems. All knowledge of experience, to 
Bergson, is useful, Maritain would have liked to think that there is a know¬ 
ledge of the absolute truth which is not immediately useful, but to be known 
for itself. 

To Bergson, the intelligence of man falsifies the experiences in their 
essential nature by adapting them to the useful, and to know man in himself, 
the intelligible interpretation would have to be corrected so that these use¬ 
ful features would be ignored. Maxi tain thought that man had a power by which 
he could know truth directly, or at least, without making the adjustments ne¬ 
cessary in the Bergsonian system, Bergson did not deny the possibility of 
man knowing truth, but for this he posited intuition, necessary since man, 
through his intelligence, was interpreting reality in a particular way and 
for a particular purpose, Maritain thought this a debasement of the power 
of the intellect. To explain the existence of matter, Bergson posited the 
elan vital, an active principle which was struggling against a resistance 
which it itself creates. This doctrine of the elan vital raised questions 
on a metaphysical level which Maritain did not consider properly answered by 
Bergson*s philosophy. 

From this philosophy of Bergson, Maritain had hoped to be led to the 
clear knowledge of reality, the essence of things. This hope was not realized. 
He writes: 

In the days when I, in company with the little group associated with 
Charles Peguy and George Sorel, enthusiastically followed Bergson*s lec¬ 
tures at the College de France, what we looked for was the revelation of 
a new metaphysics, and it was that which the lecturer himself seemed to 
promise us. 

This was not the case, in reality. Bergson did not give us that meta¬ 
physics; he never intended to do so. And for many among us that was & 
very vivid disappointment; it seemed to us that a promise on which we had 









<! 




'A. 


v-/: 


\ 







t 








14 . 


relied had not been kept.^ 

Maritain admits later that the object of Bergson was not to give his stu¬ 
dents a ready-made metaphysics, but rather to arouse in them a realization of the 
need of metaphysics, leaving the road open for them to formulate their own, or to 
discover a system which would satisfy their newly-felt need. He writes of this: 

And nothing is perhaps more moving than that species of detachment with 
which he freely let that desire, once aroused, travel its own road, in the 
minds of everyone, and lead some to the metaphysics which was not his meta¬ 
physics, which was even directly opposed to his metaphysics, until there 
should be, on deeper terms, relating not so much to philosophic conceptual¬ 
ization as to the spiritual directives of philosophy, new meetings of the 


Maritain was one of those who could not follow the lead of the master in 
the formulating of metaphysics. To him the metaphysics of Bergson was irrational. 
He writes of this: 

Faced with the contradictions and the fluctuations of abstract knowledge, 
experience alone (as though it itself were not inevitably indicated in ab¬ 
stract knowledge) - experience alone in his eyes had any philosophic value. 
Hence if experience - an experience more profound than the experience of the 
laboratory sciences - seems to admit me to the presence of a creative time 
and a c hange which is substance and a duration which is a kind of cure act 
in becoming , well then, let logic and the principle of identity and all the 
rational requirements of the intelligence perish as they must. 

It was in the writings of St. Thomas Aquinas that Maritain found the 
system of metaphysics he considered to be the true one. Bergson had done x^hat 
he had set out to do. He had led Maritain to a metaphysics which satisfied him 
as the explanation of the nature of reality, and from that time on Maritain 
considered that his duty was not only to accept this system as his own, but 
also to spread its teachings to others. Speaking of himself in the third per- 


J. Maritain, Ransoming the Time , trans. Lorin Binsse (Hew York: Charles 
Scribner*s Sons, 1946), p. 53. 

2 Ibid. p. 53. 

• ^Ibid. p. 66. 





















\ 












15 


son in the work Antimoderne . he makes use of the phrase ”vae mihi, si non thomis - 
izavero n , ’’unfortunate am I, if I do not preach Thomism”. This was to be his vo¬ 


cation. 


Mais lorsqu’il ecrivit cet article sur La Science Moderns et la Raison, 
il avait retrouve, grace a l’Ange de l’Ecole, dont l’amplissime doctrine 
avait acheve de guerir du bergsonisme, et venait de lui manifester sa vo¬ 
cation intellectuelle (vae mihi, si non thomistizavero.*) comme un nouveau 
printemps philosophique - a la verite' il n’etait pas encore tres avance en 
age - et une nouvelle ardeur de pensee:^ 


This, then, was to be his vocation, the interpretation of the problems of 
the modern world in the light of the truths found in St, Thomas. That he had 
found these truths, and that he believed that they were the long-sought absolutes, 
we can judge from the manner in which he speaks of Thomistic philosophy: 

Quant a la pensee de saint Thomas, de laquelle on s’efforce de s’in- 
spirer dans le present livre, elle n’est pas la pensee d’un siecle ni d’une 
secte - ceux qui ne voient en elle que 1*accident historique et les par¬ 
ti cularites du hie et nunc montrent par la qu’ils la considerent avec les 
sens plus qu’avec I’intellect. Elle est, en realite, une pensee univer- 
selle et perdurable, - elaboree d’abord par la raison naturelle de 1’human- 
ite* - devenue apres cela sagesse superieure et consciente d’elle-meme dans 
1’’intelligence de l’Eglise - puis liee et formee en doctrine, d^finie, 
formulee un jour par un hoxnme, au temps fixe, par le docteur elu, parce 
que, d’une part, toute sagesse rationnelle doit pouvoir etre formee en 
doctrine d’autant plus fermement jointe et membree, qu*elle est plus large, 
et parce que, d*autre part, il est conforme & noire condition humaine que 
nous soyons instruit dans la science par un maitre humain; mais cette 
doctrine a ete’ formulee par saint Thomas d*Aquin non pas comme sienne, 
tout au contraire comme independante de lui-meme, et commune: comme le 
bien commun dont Thomas n*etait que le fidele econome, comme la sagesse 
commune dont il n’etait que 1’agent de transmission - sagesse qui, desor- 
mais formee, pourra, sans fin, croitre et se developper, et s’assimiler 
toute verite*, vetera novis augere: car etant spirituelle elle n’est pas 
soumise a la necessite du vieillissement et de la morte,... Par son uni- 
versalite meme, elle deborde infiniment, dans le passe comme dans I’avenir, 

1 ’e'troitesse du moment present; elle ne s’oppose pas aux systemes modernes 
comme le passe 9 " a 1’actuellement donne r , mais comme eviternel au momentane. 
Antimoderne contre les erreurs du temps present, elle est ultramoderne pour 
toutes les verites enveloppees dans le temps a venir. 


^Jacques Maritain, Antimoderne, p. 13. 


. ^Ibid, p. 15 4 








n 




* 






\ 












i 
















16 


This, then, was the guide and the deposit of truth for which Maritain 
had searched in vain in the modern philosophies of the Sorbonne and the lead¬ 
ing exponents of philosophical theory of his day. 

Maritain was perfectly well aware that he would be called upon to de¬ 
fend his choice of an authority such as St. Thomas to the many friends who 
were deeply interested in the search for truth. His intellectual colleagues, 
as well as his philosophical opponents, all would desire, would even demand, 
that he show them the wisdom of his choice. No better defender of scholastic 
teaching could have been found, and he advanced to the task with vigor and 
precision. To his friends he wrote in the preface to his H Saint Thomas ”; 

Thomism claims to make use of reason to distinguish truth from false¬ 
hood; it does not want to destroy but to purify modern speculation and 
to integrate all truth that has been discovered since the time of St. 
Thomas. It is an essentially synthetic and assimilative philosophy, the 
only philosophy which, as a matter of fact, attempts throughout the ages 
and the continents a work of continuity and universality. It is also 
the only philosophy which, while rising to the knowledge of the supra- 
sensible, first requires from experience an unqualified adhesion to sen¬ 
sible reality. The task which lies before It is to disengage from the 
enormous contribution which the experimental sciences have accumulated 
in the past four centuries, a genuine philosophy of nature - as, In quite 
another sphere, to integrate the artistic treasure of modern times in a 
philosophy of art and beauty which shall be truly universal and at the 
same time comprehend the efforts being made at the present moment.-*- 

This was the manner in which Mari tain explained his project to those 
who were seeking information as to his future career. In this passage he 
outlined the guiding principle of his work to come. He was to interpret mo¬ 
dern questions in the light of the principles which had been laid down in the 
works of St. Thomas. 

There were those in the intellectual world who did not miss the op¬ 
portunity to speak out against this apparent regression. To them, Maritain 
had something to say: 


^Jacques Maritain, St. Thomas Aquinas , trans. J.F. Scanlan (London: 
Sheed & Ward, 1948), p. X. “ 



























17 


\ 


What offends x them, (critics of the Thomistic revival,) excites their 
wrath, gives them'scandal, is that anyone should think that he, Thomas 
Aquinas, still subsists, that he dominates history, that his light, be¬ 
cause it is spiritual, and his philosophy, because it is true, still con¬ 
tinue with their essential grandeur and essential efficacy, to-day as in 
the time of St. Louis. 

Immersing every reality, even of a spiritual nature, in the flux of 
time, considering the value of the very substance of wisdom as essentially 
determined by time and history, they think that to acknowledge any im¬ 
mutability whatsoever, imposing itself unaided upon their minds, is to 
arrest the progress of time, to immoblize history, to claim to solidify 
the very flux of succession; they do not perceive that the immutability 
of what wisdom has once acquired is not in time, but above it, and far 
from arresting the progress of history, rather accelerates its course and 
the progress of knowledge. Their philosophy under its dapper appearance 
is poverty itself, destitute of intellectuality, fundamental materialism. 
What I assert against it is that truth does not disintegrate, that there 
are stabilities not of inertia but of spirituality and life, intemporal 
values; eternal acquisitions; that time is in the eternal like a gold 
piece in the clutch of the hand; and that mind is above time.^ 

Thus Mari tain met the objection that time had moved on and that the 
principles which solved the questions of the thirteenth century were no longer 
the solutions to the problems of the twentieth. His love for truth, his ac¬ 
ceptance of it wherever it was found, was the motive force in his seeking it 
and finding it in the writings of St. Thomas Aquinas. 

He was too sensible to consider that the problems of the thirteenth 
century were the same as those of the present day. He did not consider that 
the works of St. Thomas contained answers to the questions which were of im- 
mediate concern to the people with whom he associated in the world of the 
present, but he considered that the basic truths were to be found in these 
writings, and the application of these truths was the business of the philoso¬ 
pher, the modern Thomist. 


La renaissance thomiste a done pour condition une fidelite rigoureuse, 
non seulement aux principes generaux et tres generaux (il y a des personnes 
qui s’imaginent qu'on est thomiste si on croit que Dieu existe, et qu ’ll 
a cree le ciel et la terre), mais aux moindres principes philosophiques 
de saint Thomas - je ne parle pas des elements materiels et cadues de la 
.syntliese thomiste, par exemple de tout le materiel scientifique dans lequel 
les Anciens enrobaient leurs principes metaphysiques, et qui a besoin 


1 Ibid. p. XIII. 










. 




- . ;• 

, 

■ 




. 


< 




- 




* 

' \ to It ' 

' 






■ 

_ .“"G :• 

* 










■ •.. ,~i" 






• ■ 








13 . 


d*etre entierement revouvele - je parle des principes formels de saint 
Thomas, dont le plus insignifiant en apparence a sa place necessaire 
dans une doctrine qui est organique et vivante, et qui embrasse tons 
les aspects du reel. 

J'ai besoin de dire qu'il ne s'agit pas la non plus d*un attachement 
servile a saint Thomas et a Aristote, et d*une maniere de philosopher qui 
consisterait a repeter leurs formules d*une facon mecanique. II s*agit 
d*une fidelity spirituelle et filiale, qui fait chercher dans leurs 
principes activement medites, groupes, coordonnes, le moyen de d/couvrir; 
d* M inventer M la solution des problemes nouveaux qui peuvent se poser de 
nos jours, et cela grace a un effort original de l'esprit. Car c*est im- 
plicitement et virtuellement, ce n"est pas explicitement que ces principes 
contiennent la reponse a tout nouveau problems philosophique, ou plutot 
aux nouvelles determinations et aux nouveaux modes que les eternels prob¬ 
lemes philosophiques peuvent recevoir de nos jours. Mais precisement a 
cause de cela le moindre de ces principes a une valeur infinie. 

There can be no doubt as to the belief of Maritain that Thomistic phil¬ 
osophy contained the doctrines of truth. He considered that if the world was 
founded on truth, or the reality of being, there must have been a radical change 
in the thinking of men since the time that these truths were the common heri¬ 
tage of humanity. 

Were these truths, once rediscovered, to remain the treasure of the 
searcher who was fortunate enough to come upon them as he had, after long and 
diligent labor? Was the world at large to be deprived of the results of his 
research, and was he to retire to an ”ivory tower”, there alone to rejoice in 
the possession of truth? 

He answered these questions in his pronouncement of the objectives of 
the Thomistic revival. He had stated, ”vae mi hi, si non thomistizavero. 1 ” and, 
for him, Thomism was the basis on which the thinking and direction of human 
affairs should and must be carried out. 

I even think that the time has come for it to spread into every kind of 
profane speculative activity, to quit the confines of school, seminary 
or college and to assume throughout the whole world of culture the role 
appropriate to a wisdom of the natural order: its place is among its 
sister sciences and it must exchange ideas with politics a,nd ethnology, 


1 


Jacques Maritain, Antimoderne . p. 133. 











* 



' 

■ 

. 







































19 . 


history and poetry; bred in the open air, in the free discussions of per- 
ipateticism, its desire is, while holding aloof from the active business 
of mankind.', to take an interest in everything that concerns human life; 
it is essential for it to keep in contact with sensible experience; to 
maintain its own vitality it needs a great expanse in which to breathe and 
unceasing exchanges. 

If, as Maritain claims, the modern system of thought and philosophy is 
wrong, if it is based on false assumptions, there must have been some place at 
which these false assumptions were first introduced into modern thinking. 
Speaking of the philosophy of Maritain, Doctor Phelan says: 

The root-cause of the trouble, he declares, is a suicidal decision of 
philosophers to disown completely the proper function of the intelligence 
and to place as the first condition of all knowledge an initial sin against 
the light. 2 

This ”sin against the light” was the work of Descartes, from whose theo¬ 
ries flow the modern errors in regard to the proper function of the intellect. 

The dream of Descartes was to free the mind from its dependence upon 
things, to confer upon human reason an intuitive mode of knowing like that of 
the pure spirits and to relieve it of the burden of discursive thought by de¬ 
positing ideas innate within its very essence. 

The sin of Descartes was the sin of angelism. He turned Knowledge and 
Thought into a hopeless perplexity, an abyss of unrest, because he conceived 
human Thought after the type of angelic Thought. To sum it up in three 
words: What he saw in man*s thought was Independence of Things : that is 
what he put into it, what he revealed to it about itself 

In another passage Maritain describes more fully the process by which 
the human mind reaches the state which he deplores in modern thinking, a con¬ 
sequence of the Cartesian theory. 



^Jacques Maritain, 


2 


Gerald B. Phelan, 

1—1 

d 

3 

Jacques Maritain, 

p. 54. 



St. Thomas Aquinas , p. 82. 

Jacques Maritain . (New York: Sheed & Ward, 1937), 
Three Reformers (London: Sheed & Ward, 1950), 












r. 



' 






















































20 . 


The mind imagines that it is giving proof of its own native strength 
by denying and rejecting as science first theology and then metaphysics; 
by abandoning any attempt to know the primary cause and immaterial real¬ 
ities; by cultivating a more or less refined doubt which is an outrage 
both to the perception of the senses and the principles of reason, that 
is to say, the very things on which all our knowledge depends. Such a 
presumptious collapse of human knowledge may be described in one word: 
agnosticism. 

The mind at the same time refuses to recognize the rights of primary 
truth and repudiates the supernatural order, considering it impossible - 
and such a denial is a blow at all the interior life of grace, that may 
be described, in a word as naturalism. 

The mind allows itself to be deceived by the mirage of a mythical con¬ 
ception of human nature, which attributes to that nature conditions pecul¬ 
iar to pure spirit, assumes that nature to be in each of us as perfect and 
complete as the angelic nature in the angel and therefore claims for us, 
as being in justice our due, along the complete domination over nature, 
the superior autonomy, the full self-sufficiency... appropriate to pure 
forms. 

That may be described as individualism, giving the word its full meta¬ 
physical meaning, although angelism would be a more proper description. 

It might be well at this point to consider what Maritain means in call¬ 
ing the sin of Descartes the sin of angelism. Maritain himself explains it in 
outlining the teaching of St. Thomas concerning the angelic spirits and their 
mode of knowing. 

According to St. Thomas*s teaching, the human intellect is the last 
of the spirits, and the most remote from the perfection of the divine 
Intelligence* As the zoophyte bridges the gap between two kingdoms, so 
the rational animal is a transitional form between the corporeal world 
and the spiritual world. Above it, crowded like sea sand, rise in count¬ 
less multitude the pure spirits in their hierarchies. These are thinking 
substances in the true sense of the word, pure subsistent forms, who 
certainly receive existence and are not existence, as God is, but they 
do not inform matter and are free from the vicissitudes of time, movement, 
generation and corruption, of all the divisions of space, all the weaknes¬ 
ses of individuation by materia signata; and each concentrates in himself 
more metaphysical stuff than the whole human race together. Each by it¬ 
self is a specific type, and exhausts the perfection of its essence, and 
therefore they are borne, from the moment of their creation, to the com¬ 
plete fullness of their natural possibilities, incorrupt by definition, 
they raise over our heads a canopy of immensity, an abundance of stabil¬ 
ity and strength which, in comparison with us, is infinite. Transparent 
each to his own glance; each with full preception of his own substance 
by that substance, and at a single leap naturally knowing God also - by 
analogy, no doubt, but in what a mirror of splendor: their intellect, 


1 Jacques Maritain, St. Thomas Aquinas , p. 93. 












21 


always in act with regard to its intelligible objects, does not derive 
its ideas from things, as does ours, but has them direct from God, Who 
infuses them into it when He creates it. And by these innate ideas, 
which are in it as a derivation from the divine Ideas, their intellect 
knows created things in the creative light itself, rule and measure of 
all that is. Infallible, then, and even impeccable in the natural or¬ 
der, considered apart from the supernatural end: autonomous and self- 
sufficing, so far as a creature can be self-sufficing: the life of the 
angels is an endless outflow of thought, knowledge, and will, without 
weariness or sleep. Piercing, in the perfect clearness of their intui¬ 
tions, not, of course, the secrets of hearts nor the unfolding of future 
contingencies, but all essences and all laws, the whole substance of this 
universe: knowing the power and actions of fire, water, air, the stars, 
the heavens, all other bodies, as distinctly as we know the different 
occupations of our workmen, they are finally, without hands or machines, 
as masters and possessors of nature, and can play upon nature as on a 
guitar by modifying the movement of the atoms at their will. In all 
this we are speaking of the attributes of the angelic nature considered 
in itself, and, apart from its elevation to the supernatural order, as 
it subsists in fallen and faithful spirits alike. That is the modjl on 
which a son of Tourraine set out one day to reform the human mind. 

For Maritain, Descartes had set in motion a chain-reaction with de¬ 
plorable results. He had denied the Thomistic doctrine that all knowledge 
comes through the senses, and that the senses, for man, are the contacts 
with reality, the truth of which is in being. 

Thus it is that Maritain can speak of the angelism of Descartes, 
and it is from this doctrine that Maritain sees many of the great evils of 
the present day spreading outward from their source as the ripples spread 
from a stone thrown into still water. 

Still other results of this doctrine are closer in the immediate 
understanding of the average man. Though perhaps less damaging in their 
fundamental injuries to the human spirit, they are more easily apparent to 
the investigation of the modern onlooker. 

It remains - and this is what concerns us - that the Cartesian 
ideas come from God, like angelic ideas, not from objects. Thus the 
human soul'is not only subsistent as the ancients taught, causing the 
body to exist with its own existence; it has, without the body, re¬ 
ceived direct from God all the operative perfection which can befit it. 


Jacques Maritain, 


Three Reformers . 


p. 55. 









V* • ' 

























22 . 


There is the destruction of the very reason of its union with the body, 
or rather, there is its inversion. For if the body and the senses are 
not necessary means of the acquisition of its ideas for that soul, and 
consequently the instrument by which it rises to its own perfection, 
which is the life of the intelligence and the contemplation of truth, 
then, as the body must be for the soul and not the soul for the body, 
the body and senses can be there for nothing but to provide the soul - 
which needs only itself and God in order to think - with means for the 
practical subjugation of the earth and all material nature, and this 
reduces the soul*s good to the domination of the physical universe. 

Maritain considers the disregard of the spiritual to be one of the 
great evils of the present day. This disregard he sees as a result of the 
Cartesian theory that the soul uses the body only for the domination of the 
physical universe. 

Another result of the theories of Descartes is the complete separ¬ 
ation of the mind and the intellect from contact with reality. The mind, 
which knows only innate ideas, is in contact with nothing but itself, its 
criterion of truth is within it, not depending on any conformation of the 
idea with the reality existing outside the mind. This is idealism, plac¬ 
ing the whole burden of judging truth and reality on the subjective consi¬ 
derations of the mind, and no^ since it is impossible, on the comparison with 
truth in reality. 

With this theory of representational ideas the claims of Cartesian 
reason to independence of external objects reach their highest point; 
thought breaks with Being. It forms a sealed world which is no longer 
in contact with anything but itself; its ideas, now opaque effigies in¬ 
terposed between it and external objects, are still for Descartes a 
sort of lining of the real world. But as Hamelin says, the lining was 
to consume the cloth. Here again Kant finishes Descartes* work. If 
the intelligence when it thinks, reaches immediately only its own 
thought, or its representations, the thing hidden behind these repre¬ 
sentations remains for ever unknowable.^ 

To Maritain this is contrary to the order of reality. Man was crea¬ 
ted with certain powers by which he was able to reach and know reality. 

This knowledge was to serve him as a stepping-stone to the ultimate Truth, 

God, for Whom he was created. It was to this end that the philosophy of St. 


3 -1 bid , p. 63 
2lbid. p. 7S 











: 


■ 





































23 . 


Thomas was directed, examining and explaining the instruments with which man 
is equipped to reach this end, and outlining the method by which the end was 
to be attained. 

This philosophy, old in the sense that it had been the common belief 
of the ages before theories such as that of Descartes gained ground, seems 
to Maritain to have lost nothing because of its age. He says: 

The old philosophy knew the nobility of the intelligence and the 
sublime nature of thought. It knew that in its purity, and freed from 
every condition alien to its formal notion, it is only fully realized 
in the infinitely holy God, It knew that if human intelligence is the 
last of the intelligences, it yet partakes of the life and liberty which 
belongs to the spirit; that if it depends on the object to which it is 
proportioned, it is to gush out in spontaneous action and become all 
things; that if it depends on the being which makes it fruitful, it is 
to conquer Being itself and rest only in it. You pay dear for rejecting 
these truths .^ 

That Maritain saw the Cartesian theory of knowledge as the cause of 
many of the ills of the world today is clear from his summing up of the ef¬ 
fects of these doctrines. This, to him, was no abstract criticism of the 
theories of one dead and gone. It was not a speculative consideration of a 
dead system, but a warning of the errors that had been introduced into the 
world by Descartes, however unknowingly, and which are of vital interest to 
the men of good-xm.il in the world of the present. 

We must not forget the importance of the stake. We must not forget 
that Descartes finally reversed the order of human cognition and made 
Metaphysica an introduction to Mechanics, Medicine, and Ethics, from 
which we shall henceforth gather the invigorating fruits of learning. 

In the higher order of Cognition, the Cartesian reformation gave the ir¬ 
retrievable stability of the things of the spirit to the moral attitude 
of turning towards perishable goods. See what the great name of Science 
has since become. It is today hardly applied to anything but the know¬ 
ledge of matter, and science, par excellence , is regarded by most modern 
thinkers as belonging to a museum. In the modern world, reason turns its 
back on eternal things and is ordered to the creature. It rates the mathe¬ 
matics of phenomena above theology, science above wisdom. Ti*om the moun¬ 
tain of its excellence it has descried all the kingdoms of the material 


J -Ibid, p. SO 










, ' ' ' . ' > J 


- 








• ■ -C 


. 


■' 

■ 


. v: / 




















■ 















24 


universe and the glory of time, and it goes down to possess them.^* 

Mari tain had been enraptured from his early youth with the beauty of 
truth. For him, following the teachings of St, Thomas, creation, the universe, 
is theocentric. This, to him, is a fact from which man cannot escape by deny¬ 
ing it or by ignoring it. He had sought the essence of things as they are, 
not as man would have them to be, and his search had led him to the edge of 
suicide. Now that he was perfectly satisfied as to the true order of the uni¬ 
verse and the proper end of man, it was important that man should know and ac¬ 
cept the reality of this truth. 

However men might have claimed to be uninterested in the metaphysical 
truths which govern the nature of being and of good, it is apparent from the 
history of mankind that these truths, or the theories held concerning these 
truths, had a tremendous effect on the actions of mankind. Their patterns of 
thought as well as their beliefs were governed and controlled by the current 
thinking done in this regard. It was imperative, then, that the thought of 
mankind be corrected and directed toward the truth of these matters. It was 
necessary that these great truths should be considered, not as speculative 
knowledge, but as practical knowledge applied to human life. 

It is the business of the theologian to consider the nature of God 
and all that can be known about Him. It is the work of the philosopher to 
make use of the instruments given to man, the intellect and the reason, to 
know what we can of God, especially in the field of the relationship of God 
to man and man to God. 

Maritain's chief work is in the field of human relations, both with 
man's fellowman, and man's relationship with God. He considers that many of 
the difficulties of the present day stem from the lack of right understanding 
of the nature of man, and in consequence, man's relations with his fellowman. 


Ubid. p. 82 

















. .... ■ • ■ .. ■ < ■ 

■ 

' 


n " o 










25 


Maritain made a deep study of the nature of man so as to outline clearly the 
distinction between the person and the individual. 

What does Christian philosophy tell us? It tells us that the person 
is ”a complete individual substance, intellectual in nature and master 
of its own actions”, sui juris, autonomous, in the authentic sense of the 
word. And so the word person is reserved for substances which possess 
that divine thing, the spirit, and are in consequence, each by itself, a 
world above the whole bodily order, a spiritual and moral world, which, 
strictly speaking, is not a part of the universe, and whose secret is hid¬ 
den even from the natural perception of the angels. The word person is 
reserved for substances which, choosing their end, are capable of themr- 
selves deciding on the means, and of introducing series of new events into 
the universe by their liberty; for substances which can say after their 
kind, fiat, and it is so. And what makes their dignity, what makes their 
personality, is just exactly the subsistence of the spiritual and immortal 
soul and its supreme independence in regard to all fleeting imagery and 
all the machinery of sensible phenomena. And St. Thomas teaches that the 
word person signifies the noblest and highest in all nature: ”persona sig- 
nificat id quod est perfectissiraum in tota natura”. 

The word individual, on the contrary, is common to man and beast, to 
plant, microbe, and atom. And, whilst personality rests on the subsis¬ 
tence of the human soul, (a subsistence independent of the body and com¬ 
municated to the body which is sustained in being by the very subsistence 
of the soul), Thomist philosophy tells us that individuality as such is 
based on the peculiar needs of matter, the principle of individuation be¬ 
cause it is the principle of division, because it requires to occupy a 
position and have quantity, by which that which is here will differ from 
what is there. So that in so far as we are individuals we are only a 
fragment of matter, a part of this universe, distinct, no doubt, but a 
part, a point of that immense network of forces and influences, physical 
and cosmic, vegetative and animal, ethnic, atavistic, hereditary, econo¬ 
mic and historic, to whose laws we are subject. As individuals, we are 
subject to the stars. As persons, we rule them. 

This is the fundamental nature of man, the reason for his worth and 
dignity, the reason why his fellow men, the State, and all other agencies must 
consider the worth and dignity inherent in him when dealing with him, when 
legislating for him, and when so controlling the environment that he may be 
led to his final end, union with God. 

There is in him a richer and nobler existence; he has spiritual ex¬ 
istence through knowledge and love. He is thus, in some way, a whole, 
not merely a part; he is a universe unto himself, a microcosm in which 
the great universe in its entirety can be encompassed through knowledge. 


1 Ibid. p. 19. 







t 











4 




' 


t 









X 










X 







. 


X 








26 


And through love he can give himself freely to beings who are to him, 
as it were, other selves; and for this relationship no equivalent can 
be found in the physical world. 

If we seek the prime root of all this, we are led to the acknowledge¬ 
ment of the full philosophical reality of that concept of the soul, so 
variegated in its connotations, which Aristotle described as the first 
principle of life in any organism and viewed as endowed with supramaterial 
intellect in man, and which Christianity revealed as the dwelling place 
of God and as made for eternal life. In the flesh and bones of man there 
exists a soul which is a spirit and which has a greater value than the 
whole physical universe. Dependent though he may be upon the slightest 
accidents of matter, the human person exists by virtue of the existence 
of his soul, which dominates time and death. It is the. spirit which is 
the root of personality. The notion of personality thus involves that 
of wholeness and independence. To say that a man is a person is to say 
that in the depth of his being he is more a whole than a part and more 
independent than servile. It is this mystery of our nature which religious 
thought designates when it says that the person is the image of God. A 
person possesses absolute dignity because he is in direct relationship 
with the realm of being, truth, goodness, and beauty, and with God, and 
it is only with these that he can arrive at his complete fulfillment. 

His spiritual fatherland consists of the entire order of things which 
have absolute value, and which reflect, in some manner, a divine Absolute 
superior to the world and which have a power of attraction toward this 
Absolute. 

It is from this fundamental truth of human nature, the special pro¬ 
perties of personality, that Man*s relationship with his fellowman is born. 

Speaking of personality, Maritain says M it tends by its very nature to social 

2 

life and to communion.” 

According to Maritain, the human personality has need of others for 
its material, intellectual and moral life. This fundamental need of the human 
person is the basis and reason for society. 

This is true not only because of the needs and the'indigence of human 
nature, by reason of which each one of us has need of others for his ma¬ 
terial, intellectual and moral life, but also because of the radical genero¬ 
sity inscribed within the very being of the person, because of that openness 


Jacques Maritain, Education at the Crossroads (New Haven: Yale Uni¬ 
versity Press, 1943)? p. 

2 

Jacques Maritain, The Rights of Man and Natural Law , trans. Doris C. 
Anson (New York: Charles Scribner*s Sons, 1943)? p. 5. 























27 . 


to the communication of intelligence and love which is the nature of the 
spirit, and which demands an entrance into relationship with other persons. 
To state it rigorously, the person cannot be alone. 

But society, to Maritain, is more than a collection of the human per¬ 
sons who form it, and it has a good which is distinct from that of the indivi¬ 
dual persons who make it up. 

Society is a whole whose parts are themselves wholes, and it is an 
organism composed of liberties, not just vegetative cells. It has its 
own good and its own work which are distinct from the good and the work 
of the individuals which constitute it. But this good and this work are 
and must be essentially human, and consequently become perverted if they 
do not contribute to the development of human persons.^ 

The common good of society is something distinct from the individual 
good of the persons who make it up; nor is it to be sought at the expense 
of the good of the persons who are the constituents of society. 

It is the good human life of the multitude, of a multitude of per¬ 
sons, the good life of totalities at once carnal and spiritual, and 
principally spiritual, although they more often happen to live by the 
flesh than by the spirit. The common good of society is their commun¬ 
ion in the good life; it is therefore common to the whole and to the 
parts, which are in themselves wholes, since the very notion of person 
means totality; it is common to the whole and to the parts, over which 
it flows back and which must all benefit from it. Under pain of being 
itself denatured, it implies and demands the recognition of the funda¬ 
mental rights of the person (and the rights of the family, in which per¬ 
sons are enmeshed in a more primitive way of communal living than in 
political society.) It involves, as its chief value, the highest pos¬ 
sible attainment (that is, the highest compatible with the good of the 
whole) of persons to their lives as persons, and to their freedom of 
expansion of autonomy - and to the gifts of goodness which in their 
turn flow from it. 

The object of society is to lead its members to the development of 
the highest potentialities of each individual member. This demands that 
certain individuals in the society should be intrusted with the duty of see- 


1 Ibid. p. 5. 


2Ibid, p. 7 


























' 


t ' . ' * ■ ' ' 


: •• . C 

















28 


ing that this end is reached. This obligation demands the exercise of autho¬ 
rity, It is the common good which is the basis for this authority. The de¬ 
cisions which they make must be guided by this end, the common good, and the 
obedience which is shown to their laws must be rendered by the other members 
of the society as a means of attaining the common good. This obedience is 
not that of slaves, rather that of free men, Maritain says of this: 

Such an authority, aimed at the good of the whole, applies to free 
men, in utter contrast to the dominion wielded by a master over human 
beings for the particular good of this master himself, 1 

Since society is a whole made up of persons, and since the good of 
society is the good of the persons making it up, the spiritual destiny of 
the persons requires that the good of society be orientated to a spiritual 
good. Thus the common good must have to do with intrinsic morality. This 
implies, not merely a set of advantages and conveniences, but essentially 
integrity of life, justice and moral righteousness being essential to the 
common good, 

Maritain sums up his ideas of the ideal society by saying that it 
must be theist or Christian. Not that he would require every member of the 
society to be a Christian or to believe in God, but that society in general 
recognize that God, Who is the principle and end of the human person, is the 
prime source of society and authority among men. This recognition involves 
the acknowledgement that the liberty and fraternity released by the Gospel, 
the virtues of justice and friendship, the practical respect for the human 
person, and the responsibility of those who exercise authority and of those 
who obey it make up the internal energy which civilization needs for its 
fulfillment. 

1 Ibid i p. 10. 



















. 




5 . 

















. T~. 








































29 . 


Those who do not accept the teachings of the Christian gospel, or even 
believe in the existence of God, can accept the practical application of the 
Christian virtues in society. In this way they share in the direction of so¬ 
ciety to the common good. In this conception, civil society is linked with 
religion. Maritain writes of this idea: 

In this conception civil society is organically linked to religion 
and turns consciously towards the source of this being by invoking di¬ 
vine assistance and the divine name as its members know it. Independ¬ 
ent in its own temporal sphere, it has above it the kingdom of things 
that are not Caesar*s and must cooperate with religion, not by any kind 
of theocracy or clericalism, nor by exercising any sort of pressure in 
religious matters, but by respecting and facilitating, on the basis of 
the rights and liberties of each of us, the spiritual activity of the 
Church and of the diverse religious families which are grouped within 
the temporal community. 1 

Maritain, after outlining the nature of the society which he feels 
is the proper one to carry out the destiny of mankind, proceeds to the ques¬ 
tion of the working of this society. What, he asks, are the historical re¬ 
cords of the various societies as to the fulfilling of their task? 

What is the work for whose achievement men gather together to set 
up a political society? This work does not relate merely to some par¬ 
ticular department of human activity, as is the case, for instance, 
with the work undertaken by a society of biologists, namely, the pro¬ 
gress of the biological sciences. Mo, the political task relates to 
the human life itself of the social whole; and each individual, as 
we have seen, is in his entirety enmeshed in this common work, although 
he is not enmeshed by reason of himself as a whole and by reason of all 
that is in him, and although he transcends it from other points of view. 

It would be distorting the nature of political society to assign to it 
as object a task of a grade inferior to human life itself and to the 
activities of internal improvement which are proper to it. I noted a 
moment ago that in the bourgeois-individualist conception, there is, 
properly speaking, no common task; the function of the State is only 
to insure the material convenience of scattered individuals, each ab¬ 
sorbed in his own well-being and in enriching himself. In the communist- 
totalitarian conception, the essential and primordial task of the social 
whole, or rather the trend in which ’’communion 11 inevitably asserts it¬ 
self, is the political domination of other men. In these three concep¬ 
tions - of which the third is certainly the worst - political society 


^ Ibid. p. 22. 












„ 











' 

« ' • • ■ 
■ ■ ' ‘ t 

tnV m -V ■ v ‘ :• . * -4 

■ 


» 







■ 

- 

• • V 








30 . 


is distorted and the human person sacrificed. In the bourgeois-indivi¬ 
dualist conception, which confused the true dignity of an abstract In¬ 
dividual, supposedly sufficient unto himself, the human person was left 
alone and unarmed; particularly were the persons of those without pos¬ 
sessions left alone and unarmed before the possessors who exploited 
them. In the communist conception and in the racist conception the 
dignity of the person is disregarded, and the human person is sacrificed 
to the titanism of industry, which is the god of the economic community, 
or to the demon of race and blood, which is the god of the racial com¬ 
munity. And for none of these does there exist a properly political 
task.l 

For Maritain, then, there is a political society which will be built 
on fixed principles, and will contain the following essential structure: 

The common good flowing back over individuals; political authority 
leading free men towards this common good; intrinsic morality of the 
common good and of political life. Personalist, communal, and pluralist 
inspiration of the social organization; organic link between civil 
society and religion, without religious compulsion of clericalism, 
in other words, a truly, decoratively, Christian society. Law and 
justice, civic friendship and the equality it implies, as essential 
principles of the structure, life and pace of society. A common task 
inspired by the ideal of liberty and fraternity, tending, as its ultimate 
goal, towards the establishment of a brotherly city wherein the human 
being will be freed from servitude and misery. 

Maritain would not have us think that by simply admitting the prin¬ 
ciples on which the society should be founded, all the problems which con¬ 
front men in the modern world would immediately disappear. He is too close 
to reality to consider that he has outlined a system in which none of the 
strife and struggle of human life would exist. He sees clearly the tension 
in daily life of the modern man and sees a philosophical basis for its exis¬ 
tence. 

I should like to point out once again that if a sound political 
conception depends above all on concentrating on the human person, it 
must at the same time bear in mind the fact that this person is an 
animal gifted with reason, and that the part of animality in such a 
set-up is immense. The roll of the instincts, of the feelings, of 
the irrational is even greater in social and political than in individual 
life. It follows, therefore, that a work of education, taming the ir¬ 
rational to reason, and developing the moral virtues, must constantly 


L Ibid. p. 41. 


2 Ibld. p. 54. 






- 

' 




















- 


' 













31 . 


be pursued within the political body; it follows that this latter must 
be in a state of tension and defense against perpetual internal and ex¬ 
ternal threats of disintegration and destruction; it follows that author¬ 
ity, aside from its essential function which is to lead free men towards 
the common good, must exercise subsidiary functions, not only of penal 
sanction for those who violate the laws of the commonwealth, but also of 
moral direction and training for those who still behave like minors; and 
it follows that many evils, as well as more or less impure collective 
feelings and group instincts, must be tolerated - which you cannot attempt 
to abolish by external pressure and by law without provoking even greater 
evils•1 

That this animality in man cannot be taken as the rule of his life, 
and that the personality of man, the spiritual and material union which makes 
up man, has its allegiance first to the spiritual, comes from the very nature 
of man and is the basis of his rights as a person. 

I am taking it for granted that you admit that there is a human nature, 
and that this human nature is the same for all men. I am taking it for 
granted that you also admit that man is a being gifted with intelligence, 
and who, as such, acts with an understanding of what he is doing, and there¬ 
fore, with the power to determine for himself the ends which he pursues. 

On the other hand, possessed of a nature, being constituted in a given, 
determinate fashion, man obviously possesses ends which correspond to his 
natural constitution and which are the same for all.... But since man is 
endowed with intelligence and determines his own ends, it is up to him to 
put himself in tune with the ends necessarily demanded by his nature. 

This means that there is, by very virtue of human nature, an order or a 
disposition which human reason can discover and according to which the hu¬ 
man will must act in order to attune itself to the necessary ends of the 
human being. The unwritten law, or natural law is nothing more than that. 

The existence of the natural law and the moral conscience within us, 
which is the knowledge of this law, do not merely prescribe things to be done 
and not to be done, they also recognize rights, rights which are linked with 
the very nature of man. 

The human person possesses rights because of the very fact that it is 
a person, a whole, master of itself and of its acts, and which consequently 
is not merely a means to an end, but an end, an end which must be treated 
as such. The dignity of the person? The expression means nothing if it 


1 Ibid . p. 55. 


2 . 





32 . 


does not signify that by virtue of natural law, the human person has the 
right to be respected, is the subject of rights, possesses rights. There 
are things which are owed to man because of the very fact that he is a 
man. The notion of right and the notion of moral obligation are correla¬ 
tive. They are both founded on the freedom proper to spiritual agents. 

If man is morally bound to the things which are necessary to the fulfill¬ 
ment of his destiny, obviously, then, he has the right to the things neces¬ 
sary for this purpose. 

For Maritain, the basic rights of the human person are such as to be 
beyond the power of the State, and must be respected by the civil authority. 

The fact that the human person naturally transcends the State, to the 
extent that the former enfolds a destiny superior to time, may be verified 
in many other ways. 

The universe of truths - of science, of wisdom, and of poetry - towards 
which the intelligence tends by itself, belongs, by nature, to a plane 
higher than the political community. The power of the State and of social 
interests cannot impose itself upon this universe. 

It is clear that, for Maritain, the human person is the centre of inter¬ 
est in the state and in the world of everyday life. To violate these rights is 
a crime against the nature of things, whether it be done in the name of the 
State or on any other pretext. 

To sum up, the fundamental rights, like the right to existence and life; 
the right to personal freedom or to conduct one*s own life as master of 
oneself and of one*s acts, responsible for them before God and the law of 
the community; the right to the pursuit of the perfection of moral and 
rational human life; the right to the pursuit of eternal good (without 
this pursuit there is no true pursuit of happiness); the right to keep 
one*s body whole; the right of private ownership of material goods, which 
is a safeguard of the liberties of the individual; the right to marry ac¬ 
cording to one*s choice and to raise a family which will be assured of the 
liberties due it; the right of association, the respect for human dignity 
in each individual, whether or not he represents an economic value for so¬ 
ciety - all these rights are rooted in the vocation of the person (a spirit¬ 
ual and free agent) to the order of absolute values and to a destiny su¬ 
perior to time. 

It is from these rights of the person that the freedom of the person is 
derived. These rights are the basis for the declaration of President Roosevelt, 


1 Ibid. p. 65. 



3 Ibid, p. 79. 























33 


commonly known as the Four Freedoms. Mari tain quotes these freedoms in a foot¬ 
note. 


(1) Freedom of speech and expression everywhere in the world. 

(2) Freedom of every person to worship God in his own way everywhere in 
the world. 

(3) Freedom from want which, translated into world terms, means economic 
understanding which will secure to every nation a healthy peace-time life 
for its inhabitants everywhere in the world. 

(4) Freedom from fear which, translated into world terms, means a world¬ 
wide reduction of armaments to such a point and in such a thorough fashion 
that no nation will be in a position to commit an act of physical aggression 
against any neighbor anywhere. 

It is proper that Mari tain should have dealt with the question of free¬ 
dom and its nature, since he has dealt at length with the basis of freedom, 
the nature of the person. Since, to him, the person is a being endowed with 
intellect and will, it is necessary to understand the meaning of the term ,, will H . 
The freedom of man is understood to lie in the exercise of his will. 

All the varied senses of the word Freedom which have importance for 
mankind presuppose this primordial freedom, this fact that our Will in 
its inner fortress is free not only from all external constraint but also 
from any kind of inherent necessity that would determine it ad unum.^ 

It is the teaching of St. Thomas, whom Maritain follows, that freedom 
of choice is something proper to a certain nature, a rational or intellectual 
nature. To be free is a quality proper to every intellectual being. Maritain 
describes the manner in which this freedom is of necessity a characteristic of 
an intellectual being. 

Every appetite (or, in modern terminology, every faculty that mani¬ 
fests tendency or inclination) is a power by which the subject directs 
himself towards Being in concrete shape in order either to incorporate 
it in his own self or to incorporate himself in it. It is this attractive 
or directive function of Being in relation to appetite that gives rise to 


1 Ibid, p. 72. 

2 

Jacques Maritain, Freedom in the Modern World , trans. R. O'Sullivan 
(London: Sheed & Ward, 1935), p* 5. 










34 . 


the notion of ontological Good or Good-in-general and that likewise explains 
why every appetite is dependent upon knowledge,•.. It is by our will that 
we direct ourselves towards things that are good as known to us by our in¬ 
tellect, towards things, that is to say, that are known to us in their 
character as good. The intellect which abstracts and recognizes the ob¬ 
jective form of Being abstracts and recognizes also the objective form of 
Goodness - a thing which is beyond the power of purely sensitive faculties. 
In every creature endowed \d.th intellect there ought therefore to be found 
a power of loving and desiring essentially distinct from the sensitive ap¬ 
petite and tending to the Good as such, to the Good in the universal and 
transcendental character in which it comprehends each several good. This 
power we call the rational appetite or will. 

The will of man is founded in the very nature of man. Since it seeks 
something it desires by virtue of what it itself is, it is a sort of nature in 
itself. The will tends of necessity to something of which all it knows is that 
it satisfies all desires. 

What then? If the will is necessarily directed to a good that has no 
limit, it follows that any good which is not a good without limit cannot 
bind the will by its necessity. It is because the will has by nature a 
capacity for the infinite and because it tends by nature and necessarily 
to an infinite Good which shall fulfil 'its aspirations that the will is free 
in face of every particular and partial good, of every good that we can 
take and measure and that is insufficient to exhaust the infinite capacity 
of the will to love. If then we decide to will such and such a good, we 
have none the less the power not to will it. In other words, our will has 9 
power to endow the thing it wills with the attraction that thing exercises."* 

The freedom of the will depends on its indifference to finite things, 
on things that are less than the infinite good and infinite Being which is the 
end of the will. The intellect is aware that the sum of goods is not the Good, 
since it has a concept of the Good. It is this knowing of the Good which marks 
the control of the intellect over the choice of the will, and it is necessary 
to understand the nature of the intellect and its action upon the will. 

St. Thomas does not conceive Free Will as a sort of divinity of the 
noumenal order that lives within us and that nothing can effect. He 
knows that our free will is immersed in a world of affectivity, of in¬ 
stinct, of passion, of sensitive and spiritual desire. Our will is so¬ 
licited on every side; it is weak; it loves and desires all sorts of 


^Ibid. p. 6. 
2 Ibid, p. 7. 
































35 


M goods M in its own despite. But when our intellect intervenes to deliber¬ 
ate our action it awakens the infinite capacity for love of which we have 
been speaking; to will and to love this or that good to the point at which 
it determines my act, the act of my human personality, this is proper to 
the free action of my will, for it depends on a practical judgment of my 
intellect which my will alone is able to control. My intellect may indeed 
adjudge in a speculative way that such an action should be done; but that 
does not make me do it. This needs a practical decision, a practical judg¬ 
ment of the intellect. And when the mind deliberates it sees that every 
limited good in so far as it is limited is in one view good, and in another 
not good; that it is at once acceptable and yet not acceptable; to me 
who aspire by nature to the Infinite Good. Out of the depths of the will 
itself must come the efficacy that the particular “good” which solicits it 
needs in order that it may be adjudged unconditionally good for me.-^ 

To Maritain, following St. Thomas, the act of free will becomes a re¬ 
sult of the united action of the intellect and will, an interaction which is 
necessary in bringing about the free choice of good which is less than the in¬ 
finite Good itself, which is the efficacious object of the will. Thus, free¬ 
dom of the will is the inalienable property of every intellectual or spiritual 
nature and the possession of free will presupposes such a nature, the nature 
of intellect and of will. Freedom of the will is the right of a person. 

Thus we see that, to Maritain, the right of freedom, a fundamental 
right of democratic living, is founded on the very nature of man, and proper 
to him because he is a person endowed with intellect and will. 

It is on this foundation that Maritain builds his philosophy concern¬ 
ing the things which interest the modern man. It is on this basis, the per¬ 
sonality of man, that he demands the democratic freedoms which must permeate 
the world. 

While we have given a short resume of some of the fundamental doctrines 
of his teachings, it would be wrong to consider that we have considered his 
writings in detail, either as to depth of thought or scope of interest. Etienne 
Gilson has written of him: 


1 Ibid . p. S. 



. 


















. 

, 








. 










. 






. 








» 

1 












- 

. 


. 

. 

► 

. 







Nul metaphysicien n'aura jamais trouve", dans la familiarite* de 1* 
eternel, le secret d'une familiarite plus parfaite dans son commerce 
intime avec les soucis qubtidiens de son temps. Pas une question posee 
ou que ce soit dans le monde, pourvu seulement qu'elle trahisse 1* 
inquietude sincere de la verite^ que Jacques Mari tain ne l'entende et 
ne lui donne reponse. Pas un appel de ceux qui ont faim et soif de 
justice auquel sa voix ne se soit jointe, que ce fut celle de Cesar 
ou celle de Christ. Litterature, art, science, ethique, politique 
nationale ou internationale, on ne voit aucun domaine de la vie et de 
la pensee de son temps qu*il ait personnellement habited explore" et 
reconnu jusqu*a l*extreme liraite de ses frontieres, lieux naturels 
d*une pensee attentive a ”distinguer pour unir". Parmi tant de phil- 
osophes “modernes" extreme pointe d*avant-garde d*une armee de hardis 
penseurs tout occupes a repeter ce qu*ils ont lu dans des livres vrai- 
ment ’’modernes 11 , notre ,, anti-moderne ,, ne permet pas qu*il se fasse rien 
de grand et d*authentique, qu* aucun probleme vital pour l'homme ne se 
pose, qu*aucun drarne humain ne se noue en aucun point de la planete, 
sans que la Sagesse ne s'y porte avec lui pour rendre temoignage a la 
verite. 1 

Maritain has x^itten on many subjects, subjects which are of great 
interest and worth to the modern age. He has laid down principles which, if 
followed, he feels sure will result in a better and happier world. He claims 
to be a philosopher, one of those whose duty it is to map the course which is 
to be followed by the men of action. 

It is of particular interest to us that he has written a treatise on 
the question of education. The principles which have been stressed in the 
outline noted here of his philosophy, especially that of the person and the 
dignity of man, are applied by Maritain to the question of Education. It is 
to be noted that many of the ideals and ideas of the so-called moderns in 
education have the full agreement and approval of Maritain. Not only does he 
approve of much in modern education, he, as is his wont in all matters of which 
he treats, finds solid philosophical principles on which to rest his agreement. 

It would be untrue to say that Maritain agrees completely with all the 
systems of modern educational, philosophy. It is true to say that when he dis- 


^Bibliotheque de la Revue Thomiste, Jacques Maritain . Son oeuvre 
philosophique (Paris: Desclee de Brouwer, editeurs, 1949), P* 3. 







, 

. 

. 





' 


























37 . 


agrees, he states the principles on which he disagrees, showing that these 
systems do not fulfil his requirements for solid basic principles on which to 
build the future of our schools and the well-being of our state through edu¬ 
cation. 

Maritain does not claim to have established a new philosophical sys¬ 
tem. He accepts the teachings of St. Thomas Aquinas as the true explanation 
of the nature of reality and of the powers of man to contact and know that 
reality. 

As he himself writes, he has failed to find in the philosophy of Berg¬ 
son the complete answer to the questions which bothered him concerning the 
nature of reality and man's ability to know it. Bergson had no intention, as 
Maritain admits, of forcing his metaphysics on his students as the ultimate 
truth. He x/anted simply to convince them of the need of metaphysics to counter¬ 
act the materialism of his day. 

Maritain accepted the system of St. Thomas completely, in spite of the 
criticisms of Thomistic philosophy which had begun even during the life-time 
of its founder. This would argue for Maritain*s complete intellectual convic¬ 
tion of the truth of the system. The criticisms of the system were well known 
to Maritain, but failed to convince him of their validity. He was forced, how¬ 
ever, to take notice and to attempt to explain the abandonment of the system 
in the ages after its foundation. 

The changing interests of mankind during the Renaissance, the attacks 
made on the findings of St. Thomas in the light of the interest in the physical 
sciences and the growth of the experimental method of gaining knowledge, all 
had their place in causing a change of interest on the part of men. 

It was the culmination of all these trends that Maritain found expres¬ 
sed in the work of Descartes. The n angelism u of Descartes deprived the human 





38 


intellect of its proper role in the attaining of truth, and the effects of this 
doctrine, coupled with the preoccupation in material sciences, resulted in the 
skepticism so prevalent in Maritain's time. 

To reestablish the Thomistic principles of the nature of man, Maritain 
studied the ideas of individual and person as outlined in St. Thomas. These 
ideas became basic in his treatment of modern problems of politics and govern¬ 
ment. The examples of the governments in Europe in the early part of the pre¬ 
sent century, and the theories on which they were founded, seemed to him to 
illustrate the doctrine which he was attempting to teach, namely, that denial 
of the true nature of man led to excesses and crimes against the natural rights 
of man. 

The acceptance of the Thomistic doctrine of the proper end of man, and 
the obligation of man to seek and attain that end, seemed to be the answer to 
the materialistic atheism which x</as gaining control of much of the world * S'pop¬ 
ulation,. and this he taught in all his writings. 

The application of Thomistic principles to the questions of the fields 
of authority of Church and State; the scholastic theory of art; the princi¬ 
ples governing the brotherhood of man and racial tolerance; all these questions 
were dealt with from a Thomistic point of view, and the solutions of the prob¬ 
lems outlined. 

The principle of the rights and dignity of the person were shown to be 
the basis for democracy and the freedoms which are considered to be an integral 
part of that system of government. The obligations placed on those who accept 
these principles in the realm of education, and an explanation of the nature 
and principles of education made up a notable part of his writings. 








. 


' 































. 






. 


. t 






• ■ 


• ■ 

, 






i 

■ 











c ' 













39 , 


CHAPTER III 

MARI TAIN* S PHILOSOPHY OF EDUCATION 

AIMS OF EDUCATION 

Philosophy deals with certain problems which are vital to the life 
of man. It is not a vague groping after solutions, but rather an ordered 
and systematic search for truth. 

Actually, philosophy is a rigorous, disciplined, guarded analysis of 
some of the most difficult problems which man has ever faced, not just 
anyone*s point of view. It requires the best thought of which man is 
capable. Philosophers are men of great intelligence and remarkable in¬ 
sight who have been able to see the significance of the discrete events 
in human experience and, to use Plato’s term, take a synoptic view of 
them. 

Since the beginning of philosophy, such questions as the purpose of 
the existence of life, the difference between right and wrong, the possibil¬ 
ity of an intelligent purpose of life, what happens after life is over, can 
any answer be found to these questions and the possibility of having valid 
knowledge all have been the object of the philosophers* inquiry. 

It is clear that the answers to these questions have not always been 
the same. It is clear, too, that, stemming from the answers given to these 
questions the courses of action and the direction to goals will be widely di¬ 
vergent, In the matter of education, the purposes for which it is given, and 
the results which are hoped for from it, will be intimately linked with the 
answers to the questions which are considered by philosophers. 

■^•Stella Van Petten Henderson, Introduction to the Philosophy of Edu¬ 
cation (Chicago! The University of Chicago Press, 1947;, p. 4* 










40 , 


Philosophers differ in their answers to these questions.... So 
eminent a philosopher as John Dewey thinks that it is foolish to at¬ 
tempt to discover answers to most of these questions and that philoso— 
phers should turn their attention to solving social problems. 1 

But all philosophers have attempted and continue to attempt to answer 
these and similar questions. 

But all philosophers who have exercised a lasting influence upon 
contemporaneous and subsequent philosophic thought have invariably 
striven to work out a reasoned, self-critical, ultimate certainty as 
to the primary cause and the ultimate end of all existence.^ 

Since the questions of the ends of education and the means by which 
these ends can be reached are vital to the life of man, it would seem proper 
to philosophy to examine education as to its basic tenets and its aims and 
purposes. The philosopher is interested in education, and builds his theories 
of education on the basis of the principles which he believes to be the basis 


for the existence of man. 


Philosophy, then, can be considered as a critical search for the rules 
of general conduct of life. These rules are determined in the light of 
the evaluation of values in which men are guided by a critically built 
general outlook upon life and its ends - a kind of clearing house for the 
evaluation of values•^ 


It is apparent, then, that the values which are placed on the various 
purposes of life and the end of life itself would be of great importance in 
forming educational thought as to the nature of direction which should be given 
to the youth of the day. It would seem, too, that as the ends vary in the 
thoughtful consideration of the philosophers of education, the aims and pur¬ 
poses of education would also vary. It is from this variation in the evalua¬ 
tion of the ends and purposes of life that spring the many philosophies of 
education, and the many schools of thought concerning the aims and end. 


1 Ibid . p. 4* 

^Michael Demiashkevich, An Introduction to the Philosophy of Education 
(New York; American Book Company, 1935), p. 35• 

3lbid. p„ 27. 














' 










. 

















" 1 





. 










, 




' 



















41 . 


While it is possible to distinguish so many varied schools of educa¬ 
tional thought, it is also clear that the defenders of each school find no 
room for the ideas of those who oppose them and that to each his own system 
seems, and must seem, the one and only solution to the problem. 

In order that a man may be a reformer, a leader of men, he must know, 
or at least be convinced that he knows, the way to a better state of 
things toward which he wants to lead others. He must not only believe 
passionately that his goal and his way to it are right, but he must be 
able also to spreaj a contagious belief that his is the only right and 
good goal and way. 

Maritain, showing this certainty which is common to all philosophers, 
speaks with authority on the matter of education. He is one to whom the end 
and the purpose of life is clear. He accepts the Thomistic teaching without 
any hesitation, and on the foundation that man is created for the eternal end, 
known to man, he builds his theory of education. 


Education is an art, and an especially difficult one. Yet it belongs 
by its nature to the sphere of ethics and practical wisdom. Education is 
an ethical art (or rather a practical wisdom in which a determinate art 
is embodied). Now every art is a dynamic trend toward an object to be 
achieved, which is the aim of this art. There is no art without ends, 
art*s very vitality is the energy with which it tends toward its end, 
without stopping at any intermediary step.^ 


To Maritain, following the teaching of St. Thomas, the end of the art 
of education is fixed. It exists outside man, and is proper to man by his 


very nature. The end of man is the Absolute, and to this Absolute all his 
activities must tend. 


It is on this question of the end of education and the end of man that 
Maritain differs from many of the modern philosophers of education. The trend 
of modern thought in this matter can be seen from the writings of John Dewey: 


^Ibid. p. 35. 

^Jacques Maritain, Education at the Crossroads, p. 2. 














42 . 


Theories about the proper end of our activities - educational and 
moral theories — often violate this principle. They assume ends lying 
outside our activities; ends foreign to the concrete makeup of the situ¬ 
ation; ends which issue from some outside source. Then the problem is 
to bring our activities to bear upon the realization of these externally 
supplied ends. They are something for which we ought to act. In any 
case, such tt aims M limit intelligence; they are not the expression of 
mind in foresight, observation, and choice of the better among alterna¬ 
tive possibilities. They limit intelligence because, given readymade, 
they must be imposed by some authority external to intelligence, leav¬ 
ing to the latter nothing but a mechanical, choice of means,^- 

Dewey says that the aim set up must be an outgrowth of existing con¬ 
ditions; that the end cannot be something external to the experience to which 
the individual is exposed. The criteria of ends and aims is the intelligent 
activity of the individual. This is a denial of the existence of absolute 
goals or aims apart from the individual himself. 

The aim as it first emerges is a mere tentative sketch. The act of 
striving to realize it tests its worth. If it suffices to direct activity 
successfully, nothing more is required, since its whole function is to 
set a mark in advance; and at times a mere hint may suffice. But usually 
- at least in complicated situations - acting upon it brings to light con¬ 
ditions which had been overlooked. This calls for revision of the original 
aim; it has to be added to and subtracted from. An aim must, then, be 
flexible; it must be capable of alteration to meet circumstances. An end 
established externally to the process of action is always rigid. Being 
inserted or imposed from without, it is not supposed to have a working 
relationship to the concrete conditions of the situation. What happens 
in the course of action neither confirms, refutes, nor alters it. Such 
an end can only be insisted upon..,. The value of a legitimate aim, on 
the contrary, lies in the fact that we can use it to change conditions. 

It Is a method for dealing with conditions so as to effect desirable al¬ 
terations in them. 

It would seem that those who are of the same mind as Dewey in the mat¬ 
ter of values and ends or aims would consider that the value of an aim comes 
from the attitude of the one who sets up the aim rather than from the Intrinsic 
value. 


After reviewing the past philosophic schools which held that there is 


-*-John Dewey, Democracy and Education . An Introduction to the Philoso¬ 
phy of Education (New York; The Macmillan Company, 1922), p. 121. 


2 Ibid , p. 122. 








... . - , * 

■ 

■ 












, 

■ 


. 











' 









43 . 


an external reality which gives value to the sensible reality around us, Lewis 
says; 


But what is common to them all is something we cannot neglect. It 
is the doctrine of objective value, the belief that certain attitudes 
are really true, and others really false, to the kind of thing the uni¬ 
verse is and the kind of things we are. 

Another author who is considered to speak with authority from the scien¬ 
tific point of view, Lecomte du Nouy, says; 

Human evolution, therefore, still depends on the fruits of intelli¬ 
gence but no longer on its development which seems to be attained, long 
ago, such a high level, in certain individuals, that it cannot be said 
to have increased since that time. It depends above all on the progress 
of morality, that is to say, on its extension to the great majority of men, 
for the fundamental moral ideas are absolute and cannot be perfected. 

Catholic philosophers of education hold as essential the acceptance of 
basic fundamental principles, absolute in value, and in truth, on which the 
nature of man and his destiny are based and which are to be the guiding light 

o 

of his development during his lifetime. 

The Catholic viewpoint is that educational policies and programs 
should be guided by sound philosophy, so that pupils will be trained 
to respond intelligently to social changes and social needs. In other 
words, there should be a consistent but flexible educational program; 
consistent in that it adheres strictly to unchanging fundamental prin¬ 
ciples by which alone the true nature of man, society, and democracy 
can be known and rightly interpreted; and flexible in that it makes 
provision for adjustment to accidental and environmental social changes.-^ 

It is to this school, that which accepts the existence of positive, 
absolute values independent of sensible phenomena, that Maritain belongs. To 
him, the basis of any educational philosophy must be the acceptance of these 
values as really existing, and the recognition of the fact that man has been 
created within a framework of these values, with a definite destiny to be 
worked out in his life, in relation to these absolutes. 


^-C.S. Lewis, The Abolition of Man (New York; The Macmillan Company, 

1947), p. 12. 

^Lecomte de Nouy, Hainan Destiny (new York; Longman?, Green and Co., 

1947), p. 141. 

^John D. Redden and Francis A, Ryan, A Catholic Philosophy of Educa¬ 
tion (Milwaukee; The Bruce Publishing Company, 1942), p. 579. 







t ? 






















44 


To say that man is a person is to say that in the depth of his being 
he is more a whole than a part and more independent than servile. It is 
this mystery of our nature which religious thought designates when it 
says that the person is the image of God. A person possesses absolute 
dignity because he is in direct relationship with the realm of being, 
truth, goodness, and beauty, and with God, and it is only with these that 
he can arrive at his complete fulfillment. His spiritual fatherland con¬ 
sists of the entire order of things which have absolute value, and which 
reflect, in some manner, a Divine Absolute superior to this world and which 
have a power of attraction toward this Absolute. 

For Maritain, then, the education of man must take into consideration 
the purpose of man*s existence on earth. It is not enough to train man for 
this earthly life since this is not the only obligation placed on man. He has 
duties and obligations toward the absolute which exists outside of him, and 
his energy mast be directed toward the fulfilling of the end ordained for him 
by his Creator, 

Thus the fact remains that the complete and integral idea of man which 
is prerequisite of education can only be a philosophical and religious 
idea of man. I say philosophical, because this idea pertains to the na¬ 
ture or essence of man; I say religious, because of the existential sta¬ 
tus of this human nature in relation to God and the special gifts and 
trials and vocation involved. 

Maritain considers that the most important element in education is that 
which has reference to the spiritual values, the absolutes which are the ulti¬ 
mate goal of human life. To him, this is the end and purpose of education. 

We may now define in a more precise manner the aim of education. It is 
to guide man in the evolving dynamism through which he shapes himself as a 
human person - armed with knowledge, strength of judgment, and moral virtues 
- while at the same time conveying to him the spiritual heritage of the: na¬ 
tion and the civilization in which he is involved, and preserving in this 
way the century-old achievements of generations. The utilitarian aspect of 
education - which enables the youth to get a job and make a living - must 
surely not be disregarded, for the children of man are not made for aristo¬ 
cratic leisure. Eut this practical aim is best provided by the general 


•^Jacques Maritain, Education at the Crossroads, p. 8 
^I bid. p. 6. 










45 . 


human capacities developed. And the ulterior specialized training which 
may be required must never imperil the essential aim of education. 

Maritain teaches that, since the more important, though not the exclu¬ 
sive part of man, is the personality as distinguished from the individual, it 
is in the development of this higher part of man that education should be prim¬ 
arily concerned. It is in the development of these potentialities that man 
gains the highest development of his essential being. 

The chief aspirations of a person are aspirations to freedom - I do not 
mean that freedom which is free will and which is a gift of nature in each 
of us, I mean that freedom which is spontaneity, expansion, or autonomy, 
and which we have to gain through constant effort and struggle. And what 
is the more profound and essential form of such a desire? It is the desire 
for inner and spiritual freedom. In this sense Greek philosophy, especially 
Aristotle, spoke of the independence which is granted to men by intellect 
and wisdom as the perfection of the human being. And the Gospel was to lift 
up human perfection to a higher level - a truly divine one - by stating that 
it consists of the perfection of love, and, as St. Paul put it, of the free¬ 
dom of those who are moved by the divine Spirit. In any case, it is by the 
activities that the philosophers call n immanent” - because they perfect 
the very subject which exerts them, and are within it the supreme activi¬ 
ties of internal achievement and superabundance - that the full freedom 
of independence is won. Thus the prime goal of education is the conquest 
of internal and spiritual freedom to be achieved by the individual person, 
or, in other words, his liberation through knowledge and wisdom, good will, 
and love,^ 

Maritain would stress the fact that the freedom of which he speaks is 
not a mere freeing of potentialities without any object to be grasped. Since 
man, to Maritain, is composed of material and spiritual entities, the struggle 
to attain, and the very attaining of the spiritual end of man, is the crowning 
glory of his existence. In this he differs from the views of Dewey: 

But we must remember that the object is only a mark or sign by which 
the mind specifies the activity one desires to carry out. Strictly speak¬ 
ing, not the target but hitting the target is the end in view; one takes 
aim by means of the target, but also by the sight of the gun. The differ¬ 
ent objects which are thought of are means of directing the activity.... 


^I bid. p. 10. 
2 Ibid. p. 11. 










a 


* 

' " » 

. 

■* • 











46 . 


The doing with the thing, not the thing in isolation, is his end. The object 
is but a phase of the active end - continuing the activity successfully. 

In this thought of Dewey, the importance is laid on the activity, with 
the end as an incentive to the action. In the thought of Maritain, on the con¬ 
trary, the end is all-important. 

At this point we must observe that the freedom of which we are speaking 
is not a mere unfolding of potentialities without any object to be grasped, 
or a mere movement for the sake of movement, without aim or objective to be 
attained. It is sheer nonsense to offer such a movement to man as constitu¬ 
ting his crowning glory. A movement without aim is just running around in 
circles and getting nowhere. The aim, here on earth, will always be grasped 
in a partial and imperfect manner, and in this sense, indeed, the movement is 
to be pursued without end. Yet the aim will somehow be grasped, even though 
partially. Moreover the spiritual activities of the human being are inten¬ 
tional activities, they tend by nature toward an object, an objective aim, 
which will measure and rule them, not materially and by means of bondage, but 
spiritually and by means of liberty, for the object of knowledge or of love 
is internalized by the activity itself of the intelligence and the will, and 
becomes within them the very fire of their perfect spontaneity. 2 

St. Thomas Aquinas states as a principle that the operation of a being 

Q 

follows its nature: ’’Modus operand! uniuscujusque rei sequatur modum ipsius. 

Maritain, with St. Thomas, holds that the essence of man is the soul. 
Since it is the nature of man to be spiritual, to have a soul, then, in the light 


of the above principle, it is the nature of man to act according to his nature, 
the spiritual entity which makes him a man. 

Maritain, with St. Thomas, holds also that the highest power of man is 
his intellect, a power of the soul by which man can know truth. St. Thomas says: 
’’Respondeo dicendum quod sicut bonum nominat id in quod tendit appetitus, ita 
verum nominat id in quod tendit intellectus. 


^■John Dewey, Democracy and Education, p. 123* 

2 Jacques Maritain, Education at the Crossroads^ p. 11. 

3 St. Tomae Aquinatis, Summa Theologica, pars prima, (Taurini: Libraria 
Marietti, MCMXXXVII),~ p, 583. ” 

4 Ibid. p . 119. 

















■■ 








' 

, 

* 

. V < ■ 

t 


. 








' 

• . . . ? 




t ■ 








. 




. 




. c 















47 


Not only does St, Thomas hold that the intellect has as its object 
truth, but also that the intellect is the highest of all the powers of man, 
’'Inter alias autem potentias intellectus altior est, et voluntati propinquior,”^ 

Maritain, considering the above principles, states that it is the at¬ 
tainment of truth which will actualize the greatest potentialities of man. It 
is in this attainment of truth that man will find freedom which is his heritage. 
It is in this search for and acquisition of truth that the true education lies. 

Truth - which does not depend on us but on what is - truth is not a 
set of ready-made formulas to be passively recorded, so as to have the 
mind closed and enclosed by them. Truth is an infinite realm - as in— 
finite as being - whose wholeness transcends infinitely our powers of 
perception, and each fragment of which must be grasped through vital and 
purified internal activity. This conquest of being, this progressive at¬ 
tainment of new truths, or the progressive realization of the ever-renewed 
significance of truths already attained, opens and enlarges our mind and 
life, and really situates them in freedom and autonomy. And speaking of 
will and love rather than knowledge, no one is freer, or more independent, 
than the one who gives himself for a cause or a real being worthy of the 
gift. 2 

Though Maritain states the view which is held by many in this regard, 
it would not be true to say that such a view is without its critics. 

It demands a belief in a Supreme Creator, an Absolute Truth, and a 
power in man by which he can attain to this truth. Such is not the belief of 
many who are considered as spokesmen of modern thought. 

We moderns are rightly hostile to a supposed Platonism, which repre¬ 
sents reason and understanding and thought as otherworldly influences, 
descending, as it were, from heaven upon the human scene, bringing to 
bear upon men*s lives a control essentially alien and superior to human 
nature itself. We know now that whatever reason may be, it is human. 

It is made by man. It arises out of customary human activity.^ 

Those things which Maritain held as absolutely true; those principles 


llbid. pars Secunda Secundae p. 465. 

^Jacques Maritain, Education at the Crossroads, p. 12. 

3Alexander Miklejohn, E ducation Between Two Worlds (New York: Harper 
& Brothers, 1942), p* 111. 

















. /‘r ' 

.. 


, 

, 

• > 
















43 


/ 

on which he based his whole theory of education; the existence of God, the 
dependence of man upon that Supreme Creator, and the nature of man, created 
in the image and likeness of that God; these things, so fundamental for Mari- 
tain, so necessary in the shaping of the world as he sees it; these things 
are not accepted as absolutely true by the modern writers on philosophy and 
education. 

For men who believed in God, the universe was an expression of thoughts 
and purposes because of which the world had been made, for the sake of which 
it was carried on. But the Darwinian nontheological theory gives to intel¬ 
ligence no such cosmic status. Thinking is, so far as we know, man-made. 

No other thing, living or nonliving, shares in the conscious attempt to 
know, to appreciate, to control. The cosmos as a whole, out of which human 
life emerges, gives no evidence of being, or wishing to be, intelligent. 

The human spirit is alone in an otherwise nonhuman, nonspiritual universe. 
"Whatever it has, or may ever have, of sensitiveness, of wisdom, of genero¬ 
sity, of freedom, of justice, it has made, it will make, for itself. 1 

It is apparent, then, that the school of thought represented by Mari- 
tain is divided from the so-called ,f modern school 11 on fundamental questions 
such as the existence of God, and the spirituality and even the existence of 
the soul of man* Sidney Hook, in criticising Hutchins on his theory of educa¬ 
tion, says; 

Monsignor Sheen and M. Maritain are more frank with us than their 
epigoni at Chicago and elsewhere. But all of them owe us a proof that 
the immortal soul, as defined by them, exists. So far not a shred of 
valid experimental evidence has been adduced to warrent belief in its 
existence. In fact, the achievements of genuine knowledge about human 
nature in biology, psychology, and history have been largely won by a 
bitter struggle against obstacles set in the path of scientific inquiry 
by believers in a supernatural soul. 

To Maritain, the existence of God and of the human soul is true. There 
can be no doubt about these facts. He takes them as the basic facts of reality, 


^Ibid. p. 199. 

^Sidney Hook, Education for Modern Man (New York: The Dial Press, 1946), 


p. 21. 










t , ' . /' 


\ 










.. 't 









49 


and it is on these facts that his understanding of reality and the nature of man 
rests. The modern philosopher of education does not accept these as facts. He 
sees the belief in God in the traditional sense as the recognition of the quali¬ 
ties of humanity in general by man in particular. 

The truth is, then, that human prophets have perceived in human nature 
itself the beauty of holiness, the strength of humility, the magnificence 
of wisdom. And these qualities seemed to them so great, so significant in 
their authority over the beliefs and the conduct of men that, without know¬ 
ing what they were doing, they created the myth of divine origins and divine 
sanctions. That myth is now? fading away. 1 

This view immediately demands a new interpretation of education in its 
ends and purposes. It places the emphasis of life on man and the life here be¬ 
low, rather than on the life of the spirit which is to be interpreted in the light 
of the existence of God and of man*s dependence on Him and on His will. These 
things are of the very nature of man, according to Maritain. 

To Maritain the nature of a thing is unchanging, and thus the nature of 
man is the same today as it was at all times. This view of man*s nature is not 
accepted by all writers. Hook says: 

The nature of man is always relevant; but just as relevant is our decis¬ 
ion as to what we want to make of it, and what we want men to become. At 
this point no metaphysical deduction, whether proceeding from materialistic 
or spiritualistic premises concerning the nature of "reality”, can guide us.^ 

Here we see an essential difference in fundamental ideals between Maritain 
and the modern Darwinian philosophers. While admitting that there are certain ac¬ 
cidental changes and differences in men of different ages, Maritain insists that 
the fundamental nature of man remains always the same. This view influences his 
theories of education. 

Of course the job of education is not to shape the Platonist man-in-himself, 
but to shape a particular child belonging to a given nation, a given social en¬ 
vironment, a given historical age. Yet before being a child of the twentieth 
century, an American-born of European-born child, a gifted or a retarded child, 


^A. Meiklejohn, Education between Two Worlds, p. 202. 
2 

S. Hook, Education for Modern Man , p. 19. 







' 

< r.cS.hi 


o 


' 


. o " 






« < j ■ . . . 

■ : t .■ 




. ( . . 


, 


c ' " «'■' • 

; * • /' ' ' ■ ' ' ' f 

t ■ r : v ' ' 

■ .o 






•' C'j, 


* 


' 


f r 


t 'r ■ C 


. 


i • ■ ! 




' 




c 






‘ 


. f 




<■ ~~ 


' 

■ 

5 


._ ? 

r • r ' _ , 





50 . 


this child is a child of man. 


1 


Maritain needs to explain what he means by man, if his above definition 
of the job of education is to have meaning. As to this, he says; 

In answer to our question, then, ”What is man?" we may give the Greek, 
Jewish, and Christian idea of man: man is an animal endowed with reason, 
whose supreme dignity is in the intellect; and man as a free individual in 
personal relation with God, whose supreme righteousness consists in volun¬ 
tarily obeying the law of God; and man as a sinful and wounded creature 
called to divine life and to the freedom of grace, whose supreme perfection 
consists of love. 

It follows from the fundamental doctrines of Maritain that there is a 


Lawgiver, distinct from the will of the group. Who has given a moral standard 
and an absolute truth to man, and which man is by his very nature, bound to fol¬ 
low and learn. 

Some modern educational philosophers reject the existence of a code of 
morals absolute in its nature, and immutable with regard to what they consider 
as the changing nature of man. They feel that moral conduct and sanctions are 
to be known and evolved from the conduct of the group rather than from the trans¬ 


mitted revelation of a Supreme Lawgiver. Rugg says of this view: 

We can now state the moral-ethical problem for our society in our times. 
It is nothing less than building in our people an understanding and an ac¬ 
ceptance of the moral resources and the obstacles in the nature of man and 
of society, and the facts of the power world and of creating new ethical 
principles and a corresponding working body of rules of conduct that will be 
appropriate to our times and our stage of cultural development.3 

Maritain differs from these views. Because he differs from them he forms 


a concept of the aim of education different from that of some of the modern phil¬ 


osophers of education. 


fJ. Maritain, TEducation at the Crossroads, p. 1. 

2 Ibid . p. 7. 

■^Harold Rugg, Foundations for American Education (New York: World Book 
Company, 1947), p. 511. 












51 


CHAPTER IV. 

THE DYNAMICS OF EDUCATION 


Mari tain, having determined his theory of the ends of education drawn 
from his ideas of the end of man, proceeds to consider the dynamics of educa¬ 
tion. He divides these into, first, the inner vitality of the student*s mind 
and the activity of the teacher; second, the basic dispositions to be fostered 
in the pupil; third, the fundamental norms of the teacher. 

In beginning his reflections on this part of his theory of education, 
Maritain examines the various explanations of how we know. He begins first 
with that of Plato. 

In order to discuss the dynamic factors in education, we must naturally 
reckon first with the Platonic conceptions that all learning is in the 
learner, not in the teacher,^- 

In explanation of the Platonic theory, Fuller says, in his history of 
philosophy: 

At this point, however, we are confronted with the difficulty. After 
all, here and now, the mind is in the body, and is dependent upon the 
senses, it would seem, for its contact with external reality. But the 
senses never acquaint us with the universal and absolute. They present 
the mind only with particular, concrete data. We do not perceive red¬ 
ness, or mankind in general, or the law of gravitation. We perceive this 
or that individual man, this or that particular red or falling apple. 

How then can. the mind ever come by general ideas and universal truths at 
all? It cannot get them, from the senses, and yet, apparently, there is 
no other source save the senses for any experience whatsoever. 

This difficulty Plato meets with his famous doctrine of Reminiscence 
or Recollection. In the Phaedrus, ... we are told that before birth the 
soul, living in heaven with the gods, saw the Ideas face to face. Fallen 
from heaven and born in the body, she retains a faint recollection of the 
Forms she has seen, and is reminded of them by their sensible embodiments 


■kr. Maritain, Education at the Grossroads. p. 29 









52 


with which the senses acquaint her* It is by virtue of being thus “remin¬ 
ded” that the soul is able to find similarity in sensible objects, to 
single out in them features they have in common, and to classify them ac¬ 
cording to their "type”, and to give them group names.... Generally speak¬ 
ing, then, the growth of knowledge is simply clearer and clearer recollec¬ 
tion of the Form of which the particular object “reminds” us. And the at¬ 
tainment of certainty is like exclaiming to a person whose face is vaguely 
familiar, but whose name we have forgotten, ”Ah, now I remember perfectly 
who you are,”^- 

Maritain says of this theory of knowledge: 

The student, in this way, does not acquire knowledge from the teacher, 
who has no real causal influence and who is at best only an occasional 
agent: the teacher only awakens the attention of the student to those 
things which he already knows, so that to learn is nothing else than to 

remember.^ 

¥ith the coming of Christianity and especially with the harmonizing of 
the Aristotelian philosophy with the doctrines of the Christian religion by 
Thomas Aquinas, the accepted explanation of the nature of man was that of the 
existence of a spiritual soul through which the intellectual functions and the 
act of knowing was carried on. 

It was with the work of Darwin and the scientific method so popular 
in the last century that the attention of men was turned to some other explan¬ 
ation of the nature of man and the operation of intelligence. It was clear 
that, if the existence of a spiritual soul was denied, then some other method 
of knowing and reasoning must be postulated, a method different from that of 
the religious explanation of the past. It was here that the work of modern 
psychologists was called upon to explain the nature of the intellectual oper¬ 
ation, and the method of reasoning according to the evidence of their scien¬ 
tific investigations. 


■^B.A.G. Fuller, A History of Philosophy (New York: 
Company, 1938), p. 99. 



Maritain, Education at the Crossroads , p. 29. 


Henry Holt and 














53 . 


Theories were advanced to explain the former belief in a spiritual 
entity called the soul, and by the explanation of the rise of the theory, it 

was believed that the theory itself was discredited. The tracing of the de¬ 

velopment of such theories is dealt with by Bode, who says: 

The discussion of mind-substance would not be complete, however, with¬ 
out recognition of the fact that to very many persons the belief in a mind- 
substance is determined primarily, not by argument or even by habits of 

thinking, but rather by the emotional reactions which have to do with the 

belief in a life after death. If immortality is accepted as a fact, then 
the theory of a substantive mind becomes a convenient way of explaining 
this fact. 

1/hen this theory of the spiritual soul is rejected, it becomes neces¬ 
sary to explain the nature of the acquisition of knowledge, and the process 
of reasoning. This next step sometimes goes under the name of Behaviorism. 

Of it Bode says: 

¥ith the reduction of sensations, perceptions, and images to activi¬ 
ties or processes the behaviorist succeeds in reducing all the terms of 
his explanation to a simple common denominator. Everything that we call 
experience consists of physical reactions. It is not necessary at any 
point to have recourse to a different kind of reality called ,, mind ,! or 
•’consciousness” • Such terms as foresight, purpose, motive, desire, have 
no proper place in a psychological vocabulary. They are literary, not 
scientific terms. ¥e can explain everything that a human does in the 
same terms with which we explain the operations of a machine. 

Another theory, embodying in itself a refutation of the old dualistic 
idea of the soul and body, with the action of the soul being responsible for 
the operation of intelligence and the process of reasoning, is advanced by 
Dewey, who says: 

Another dualism is that of activity and passivity in knowing. Purely 
empirical and physical things are often supposed to be known by receiving 
impressions. Physical things somehow stamp themselves upon the mind or 
convey themselves into consciousness by means of the sense organs. Rational 
knowledge and knowledge of spiritual things is supposed, on the contrary, 
to spring from activity initiated within the mind, an activity carried on 


-43.H. Bode, How ¥e Learn (Boston: D.G. Heath and Company, 1940), p. 122. 
2 Ibid, p. 174- 







V. 


■ 











54 . 


better if it is kept remote from all sullying touch of the senses and 
external objects.-*- 


Dewey continues to outline the reasons which lead him to consider such 


a dualism to be untenable. He says: 

We shall be content to summarize the forces which tend to make the un- 
tenability of this conception obvious and to replace it by the idea of 
continuity, (i) The advance of physiology and the psychology associated 
with it have shown the connection of mental activity with that of the 
nervous system. Too often recognition of connection has stopped short 
at this point; the older dualism of soul and body has been replaced by 
that of the brain and the rest of the body. But in fact the nervous 
system is only a specialized mechanism for keeping all bodily activities 
working together. Instead of being isolated from them, as an organ of 
knowing from organs of motor response, it is the organ by which they inter¬ 
act responsibly with one another. The brain is essentially an organ for 
effecting the reciprocal adjustment to each other of the stimuli received 
from the environment and responses directed upon it.... (ii) The develop¬ 
ment of biology clinches this lesson, with its discovery of evolution.... 
The effect upon the theory of knowing is to displace the notion that it 
is the activity of a mere onlooker or spectator of the world, the notion 
which goes with the idea of knowing something complete in itself. For 
the doctrine of organic development means that the living creature is a 
part of the world, sharing its vicissitudes and fortunes, and making it¬ 
self secure in its precarious dependence only as it intellectually identi¬ 
fies itself with the things about it, and, forcasting the future consequ¬ 
ences of what is going on, shapes its own activities accordingly. If the 
living, experiencing being is an intimate participant in the activities 
of the world to which it belongs, then knowledge is a mode of participa¬ 
tion, valuable in the degree in which it is effective.... (iii) The de¬ 
velopment of the experimental method as the method of getting knowledge 
and of making sure it is knowledge, and not mere opinion - the method of 
both discovery and proof - is the remaining great force in bringing about 
a transformation in the theory of knowledge. The experimental method has 
two sides, (i) On one hand, it means that we have no right to call any¬ 
thing knowledge except where our activity has actually produced certain 
physical changes in things, which agree and confirm the conception enter¬ 
tained. Short of such specific changes, our beliefs are only hypotheses, 
theories, suggestions, guesses, and are to be entertained tentatively and 
to be utilized as indications of experiments to be tried, (ii) On the 
other hand, the experimental method of thinking signifies that thinking 
is of avail; that it is of avail in just the degree in which the antici¬ 
pation of future consequences is made on the basis of thorough observation 
of present conditions.••• The experimental method is new as a scientific 
resource — as a systematized means of making knowledge, though as old as 
life as a practical device.... It will doubtless take a long time to se¬ 
cure the perception that it holds equally as to the forming and testing 
of ideas in social and moral matters. Men still want the crutch of dogma, 
of beliefs fixed by authority, to relieve them of the trouble of thinking 


-*-J. Dewey, Democracy and Education , p. 390. 






„ 

■ 

■ 






. 

' 

. 

. 

c 

< ; ^ ' 

r • 

•' t . 

■ \ . 'C. j 

- " 

, 









. 

- 









55 . 


and the responsibility of directing their activity by thought.... In time 
the theory of knowing must be derived from the practice whicn is most suc¬ 
cessful in making knowledge; and then that theory will be employed to im¬ 
prove the methods which are less successful .^ 

None of these views were unknown to Maritain, himself trained in the 
scientific tradition. In spite of this, adhering firmly to the philosophy of 
St. Thomas and the scholastic doctrine of the duality of the human nature, he 
built Ms theory of education and the manner of knowing on St. Thomas* explan¬ 
ation of the functions of the powers of the intellect in knowing the reality 
of things. It might be well at this point to outline the scholastic explan¬ 
ation of the theory of knowledge. 

According to St. Thomas, the soul is endowed with two powers of appre¬ 
hension, the sensitive, of lower order, and the intellectual, of higher order. 
The sensible apprehends what are called sensible species from the objects around 
it. 


There is another genus in the powers of the soul which regards a more 
universal object, namely, every sensible body, and not only the body to 
which the soul is united. And there is yet another genus in the powers 
of the soul which regards a still more universal object - namely, not only 
the sensible body, but universally all being. Therefore it is evident 
that the latter two genera of the soul * s poxvers have an operation in re¬ 
gard not merely to that w r hich is united to them, but also to something 
extrinsic. Now, since whatever operates must in some way be united to 
the object in relation to which it operates, it follows of necessity that 
this something extrinsic, which is the object of the soul*s operation, 
must be related to the soul in a twofold manner. First, inasmuch as this 
something extrinsic has a natural aptitude to be united to the soul, and 
to be by its likeness in the soul. In this way there are two kinds of 
powers, namely, the sensitive, in regard to the less common object, the 
sensible body; and the intellectual, in regard to the most common object, 
universal being.2 

It is the work of the senses to abstract sensible species from the ob¬ 
jects in which these forms are found, and this St. Thomas speaks of when he says 


1 Ibid . p. 391. 

2 Anton C. Pegis, Basic Writings of Saint Thomas Aquinas (New York: 
Random House, 1945), p. 734. 














< :> 4 














56 . 


Therefore, through the sensitive soul an animal must not only receive 
the species of sensible things, when it is actually affected by them, but 
it must also retain and preserve them.... But for the retention and pre¬ 
servation of these forms, the phantasy or imagination is appointed, being 
as it were a storehouse of forms received through the senses.... Now we 
must observe that as to sensible forms there is no difference between men 
and other animals. 

The species thus retained are called "phantasms." This sensible species 
which is retained in the memory is not a universal, but a particular. It is 
not "tree", but "this tree", not "man", but "this man". To be received by the 
intellect as a universal, it must first be in the senses as a particular. 

The next step in the process of knowing is for the sensible species to 
furnish the material from which the intellect can draw the universal form, the 
intelligible species. To do this, two powers of the intellect are called into 
play, the passive intellect which is the aspect of the intellect which learns, 
and in so doing, brings about the realization of its nature, and acquisition 
of truth. The forms which will fill it do not exist outside of the soul as 
intelligibles, for they are embedded in matter. To become intelligible, they 
must be abstracted from the sensible species, and presented to the passive 
intellect as intelligibles. This is done by the power known as the active in¬ 
tellect. 


For the intellect, as we have shown above, has an operation extending 
to universal being. We may therefore see whether an intellect is in act 
of potentiality by observing first of all the nature of the relation of 
the intellect to universal being. For we find an intellect whose relation 
to universal being is that of the act of all being; and such is the divine 
intellect, which is the essence of God, in which, originally and virtually, 
all being pre-exists as in its first cause. Therefore the divine intellect 
is not in potentiality, but is pure act. But no created intellect can be 
an act in relation to the whole universal being; for then it would needs 
be an infinite being. Therefore no created intellect, by reason of its 
very being, is the act of all things intelligible; but it is compared to 
these intelligible things as a potentiality to act.... But the human in¬ 
tellect, which is the lowest in the order of intellects and most remote 
from the perfection of the divine intellect, is in potentiality with regard 


^Ibid. p. 742. 

















t 
















* 























57 . 


to things intelligible, and is at first like a clean tablet on which nothing 
is written as the Philosopher says. This is made clear from the fact that 
at first we are only in potentiality towards understanding, and afterwards 
we are made to understand actually. And so it is evident that with us to 
understand is in. a way to be passive.... And consequently the intellect is 
a passive power. 

The existence and the work of the active intellect is explained in the fol¬ 
lowing passage from St. Thomas: 

But since Aristotle did not allow that the forms of natural things exist 
apart from matter, and since forms existing in matter are not actually in¬ 
telligible, it follows that the natures or forms of the sensible things which 
we understand are not actually intelligible. Now nothing is reduced from po¬ 
tentiality to act except by something in act; as the senses are made actual 
by what is actually sensible. 'We must therefore assign on the part of the 
intellect some power to make things actually intelligible, by the abstract¬ 
ion of the species from material conditions. And such is the necessity of 
positing an agent intellect. 

This process of abstracting the sensible forms by the sensitive soul, the 
storing of the phantasms, the abstraction from them of the intelligible universals, 
finally, the judgment of the intellect as to the conformity of the abstracted in¬ 
telligible forms with reality, this is the method of knowing first postulated by 
Aristotle, and then developed and formulated by St. Thomas. It is on this basis 
that Maritain built his theory of knowledge and the dynamics of education. It is 
from this belief that he criticises the pragmatic theory of the moderns in educa¬ 
tional philosophy. He says: 

It is an unfortunate mistake to define human thought as an organ of re¬ 
sponse to the actual stimuli and situations of the environment, that is to 
say, to define it in terms of animal knowledge and reaction, for such a de¬ 
finition exactly covers the way of ”thinking” proper only to animals without 
reason. On. the contrary, it is because every human idea, to have a meaning, 
must attain in some measure (be it even in the symbols of a mathematical 
interpretation of phenomena), what things are or consist of unto themselves; 
it is because human thought is an instrument or rather a vital energy of 
knowledge or spiritual intuition (I don’t mean ’’knowledge about”, I mean 
’’knowledge into”); it is because thinking begins, not only with difficul¬ 
ties but with insights, and ends up in insights which are made true by ra¬ 
tional proving or experimental verifying, not by pragmatic sanction, that 
human thought is able to illumine experience, to realize desires which are 
human because they are rooted in the prime desire for unlimited good, and 


1 Ibid. p. 747. 














58 . 


to dominate, control, and refashion the world. At the beginning of human 
action, insofar as it is human, there is truth, grasped or believed to be 
grasped for the sake of truth. Without trust in truth, there is no human 
effectiveness. 

In considering the theory of knowledge to which Mari tain subscribes, 
it might seem, since the intellect of the learner is equipped to consider 
the things of the material world, and from them to abstract the forms which 
make them what they are, and, by the innate power of the intellect to arrive 
at judgments as to their truth or falsity, that there is no place for the 
teacher in the acquisition of knowledge on the part of the learner. He says: 

Ready-made knowledge does not, as Plato believed, exist in human souls, 
but the vital and active principle of knowledge does exist in each of us. 
The inner seeing power of intelligence, which naturally and from the very 
start perceives through sense-experience the primary notions on which all 
knowledge depends, is thereby able to proceed from what it already knows 
to what it does not yet know.... This inner vital principle the teacher 
must respect above all; his art consists in imitating the ways of the in¬ 
tellectual nature in its own operations. Thus the teacher has to offer to 
the mind either examples from experience or particular statements which the 
pupil is able to judge by virtue of what he already knows and from which he 
will go on to discover broader horizons. The teacher has further to com¬ 
fort the mind of the pupil by putting before his eyes the logical connec¬ 
tions between ideas which the analytical or deductive power of the pupil*s 
mind is perhaps not strong enough to establish by itself. 

All this boils down to the fact that the mind*s natural activity on 
the part of the learner and the intellectual guidance on the part of the 
teacher are both dynamic factors in education, but that the principal agent 
in education, the primary dynamic factor or propelling force, is the in¬ 
ternal vital principle in the one to be educated; the educator or teacher 
is only the secondary - though a genuinely effective - dynamic factor and 
a ministerial agent.^ 

This stress placed on the primacy of the learner in the process of 
learning is in keeping with the teachings of the philosophers of the pragma¬ 
tic school in the philosophy of education. Dewey says: 

The specific elements of an individual*s method or way of attack upon 
a problem are found ultimately in his native tendencies and his acquired 
habits and interests. The method of one will vary from that of another 


-*-J. Maritain, Education at the Crossroads , p. 12. 
2 Ibid , p. 30. 








. 




r r ■ 

■ 

? "' * 

. 

, . . . 

, 

. 






' 




* 

. 





























59 . 


(and properly vary) as his original instinctive capacities vary, as his 
past experiences and his preferences vary. Those who have already studied 
these matters are in possession of information which will help teachers 
in understanding the responses different pupils make, and help them in 
guiding these responses to greater efficiency. 

Maritain is most willing to give credit to the moderns for those things 
which he considers admirable in their system. Of the reawakened interest in 
the child as the most important feature of the learning process, he says: 

The actual merit of modern conceptions in education since Pestalozzi, 
Rousseau, and Kant, has been the rediscovery of the fundamental truth that 
the principal agent and dynamic factor is not the art of the teacher but 
the inner principle of activity, the inner dynamism of nature and of the 
mind. 2 


He insists, however, that the philosophy behind the modern theories can¬ 
not be justified in his eyes, and is something which he considers should be cor¬ 
rected, lest it nullify the good features of the new system. He says: 


If there were time we could insist, in this connection, that the search 
for new methods and inspiration, as emphasized by progressive education, 
and what is called in Europe the ’’active school”, should be valued, develop¬ 
ed, and expanded - on condition that progressive education gives up its out- 
of-date rationalistic prejudices and utopian philosophy of life and does not 
forget that the teacher, too, is a real cause and agent - though only co¬ 
operating with nature - a real giver whose own dynamism, moral authority, 
and positive guidance are indispensable. If this complementary aspect is 
forgotten, the finest endeavors which arise from the mere cult of the free¬ 
dom of the child will be washed away in the sands.- 1 


Maritain is most emphatic on the point of the primary role of the stu¬ 
dent in the educative process. However, he places great emphasis on the work 
which must be done by the teacher, though it is not the most important work in 
the process. He does consider it to be essential when properly understood and 
carried out. He says: 

The freedom of the child is not the spontaneity of animal nature, mov¬ 
ing right from the start along the fixed determinate paths of instinct (at 


kl. Dewey, Democracy and Education, p. 203. 

2 

J. Maritain, E ducation at the Crossroa ds, p. 32. 


3 









60 . 


least we usually think of animal instinct in this form, which is really 
too simplified, for animal instinct has a first period of progressive 
fixation). The freedom of the child is the spontaneity of a human and 
rational nature, and this largely undetermined spontaneity has its inner 
principle of final determination only in reason, which is not yet develop¬ 
ed in the child. 

The plastic and suggestible freedom of the child is harmed and led 
astray if it is not helped and guided. An education which consisted in 
making the child responsible for acquiring information about that of 
which he is ignorant, an education which only contemplated a blossoming 
forth of the child*s instincts, and which rendered the teacher a tract¬ 
able and useless attendant, is but a bankruptcy of education and of the 
responsibility of adults toward the youth. The right of the child to be 
educated requires that the educator shall have moral authority over him, 
and this authority is nothing else than the duty of the adult to the free¬ 
dom of youth. 

This help and guidance of which Maritain speaks is not the rigid dis¬ 
cipline once accepted as the proper climate for the school. It must be remem¬ 
bered that, to Maritain, the principal agent in the educative process is the 
seeking intellect of the learner, guided and directed by the teacher, but not 
dominated in such a way as to take the initiative from the learner and make 
him simply a vehicle for the educational paths of the teacher*s thought. 

Not only Maritain holds this view, but also other Catholic writers of 
authority in the educational field. Redden and Ryan sayj 

There is a type of discipline, however, that is outmoded, and that 
never was in agreement with sound pedagogical practice. Such discipline 
cannot be too strongly condemned. In that form of discipline, the child 
is trained to absolute obedience without reserve. A lock-step procedure 
is employed, designed to !, break the will 11 , make the individual do those 
things he dislikes, and force his submission. This kind of discipline, 
which is mere servitude, presents no opportunity for the development of 
freedom, independence, initiative, or resourcefulness. It is against this 
extreme form of discipline that educators and pupils alike justly rebel. 
Such a discipline, however, should not be confused with right and true 
discipline, wherein sympathetic but reasonably firm teachers take positive 
steps to acquaint the individual with the purposes of rules that must be 
obeyed, by showing him that such observance will^assist in the development 
of good moral habits that have permanent values.' 


hbid. p. 33. 

2 John D. Redden and Francis A. ityan, A Catholi c Philosophy of Education. 


P. 506. 












6l 


Maritain himself leaves no doubt as to his stand on the question of 
guidance as opposed to harsh discipline. He says: 


Education by the rod is positively bad education. If from a love of 
paradox I were to say something on its behalf, I should only observe that 
it has been able, actually, to produce some strong personalities, because 
it is difficult to kill the internal principle of spontaneity in living 
beings, and because this principle occasionally developes more powerfully 
when it reacts and sometimes revolts against constraint, fear, and punish¬ 
ment than when everything is made easy, lenient, and psychotechnically 
compliant to it. 

He continues in the same passage to consider the possible effect of 
completely undisciplined education. He says: 


Strangely enough, we may wonder whether an education which yields it¬ 
self entirely to the sovereignty of the child, and which suppresses any 
obstacle to be overcome, does not result in making students both indiffer¬ 
ent and too docile, too passively permeable to anything the teacher is 
saying. However that may be, it is still true that birch and taws are 
bad educational measures, and that any education which considers the teachr- 
er as the principal agent perverts the very nature of the educational task. 


Another philosopher of education, Henderson, says of discipline: 

Children must learn self-control, self-discipline, intelligent self- 
direction, in the interests of all. This is never learned without disci¬ 
pline from without, but it must be a discipline aimed at making itself un¬ 
necessary.^ 

Maritain sums up his views on education insofar as he has dealt with 
them in the following manner: 

We have had a view of the being who is to be formed into a true human 
person, perfecting himself by knowledge and by love, and capable of giv¬ 
ing himself; and we have seen that to achieve rationality and freedom 
this being must have knowledge taught and discipline, and these require 
the office of the teacher.^ 


Maritain considers next the question of the dispositions which must be 


■^J. Maritain, Education at the Crossroads , p. 32. 

2 

Ibid, p. 32. 

■^S.V.P. Henderson, Introduction to the Philosophy of Education, p. 258. 
^J. Maritain, Education at the Crossroads , p. 36. 

















62 


fostered in the child, the primary agent in the work of education. He says: 

If the nature and spirit of the child are the principal agent in edu¬ 
cation, then, obviously, the fundamental dispositions to be fostered in 
this principal agent are the very basis of the task of education. They 
are rooted in nature but they may be warped, and they need to be carefully 
cultivated. 

He proceeds to consider these dispositions, the first of which he con¬ 
siders to be the love of truth. He considers that the student should be led 
to know the truth of things, and this is the work of the intellect. Once known, 
the truth becomes attractive to the will of the person, and this attraction is 
what is called love. This knowledge depends on the demonstration of the guide 
or teacher, since, in many things, it is not immediately apparent. In this 
view he follows the teaching of St. Thomas, who says: 

Now there are some Intelligible things which have no necessary connec¬ 
tion with first principles: e.g. contingent propositions, the denial of 
which does not involve a denial of first principles. And to such the in¬ 
tellect does not assent of necessity. But there are some propositions 
which have a necessary connection with first principles, namely, demonst¬ 
rable conclusions, a denial of which Involves a denial of first principles. 
And to these the intellect assents of necessity, when once it is aware (by 
demonstration) of the necessary connection of these conclusions with the 
principles; but it does not assent of necessity until through the demon¬ 
stration it recognizes the necessity of such a connection. 

This love of truth Marl tain considers to be the primary tendency of 
any intellectual creature, since his intellect is ordained to the knowledge of 
the truth. It is a disposition to be fostered since the child Is not able by 
his own efforts always to distinguish the truth of things, but must be helped 
to this by the guidance of the teacher. 

Along with this love of truth must go the love of justice and heroic 
deeds, as well as the love of the good. Maritain is a transcendentalist, and 
as such, requires the fostering of the love of the good, the concept of which 


1 Ibid. p. 36. 

2 

A.G. Pegis, Basic Writings of Saint Thomas Aquinas, p. 779* 






*' 



. 


, 


1 . ; 

■ 

' 

„ ■ < ' ' ■' i ■' . : ■ 

: ; r * 

' 

. , 

, 

t *• . ' . ' ■ ' o ' - 

■ ’ <*' 


• ' ' ’ ' .< 

* 








63 . 


is interchangeable with that of the true* 

Maritain would have the instructor foster in the child the feeling of 
happiness in the very fact of his existence* By this he means a facing of 
reality as regards the conditions of his life* This is to be fostered by love 
and confidence on the part of the child, and genuine interest and love on the 
part of the teacher. He says; 

I would describe this disposition as the attitude of a being who exists 
gladly, is unashamed of existing, stands upright in existence, and for whom 
to be and to accept the natural limitations of existence are matters of 
equally simple assent. 1 

It could be spoken of as freedom from fear, the fear of the responsi¬ 
bilities of human living, and is recognized in modern psychology as one of the 
traits to be fostered in the mental health of children, as a protection against 
the feeling of insecurity so harmful to the proper development of the child. 
Maritain says of this feeling of security: 

And it is so deeply and elementarily vital that the wounds it happens 
to undergo in many children, often very early, from family life and social 
life - spoken of today as an inferiority complex with its manifold morbid 
’’compensations” - are exp eci ally grievous and difficult to cure. ’’Fear 
and trembling”, undoubtedly, are part of the great experiences of the human 
soul, when it has become mature and enters the mysterious avenues of the 
spirit, but they are bad beginnings in education. 

Maritain next considers the formation of the habits of work. By this 
he means the proper attitude to work to be done, not simply as activity, since 
the outward appearance of busyness, or the lack of it, is not always a criterion 
of productive industry. It is not this lack of laziness of which he speaks, 
but something else. He says of this disposition: 

I am speaking of something deeper and more human, a respect for the 
job to be done, a feeling of faithfulness, and responsibility regarding 
it.... I am convinced that when this fundamental disposition, which is 


1 J. Maritain, Education at the Crossroads, p. 37. 
Ibid, p. 38. 













64 


the first natural move toward self-discipline, this probity in regard to 
work is marred, an essential basis of human morality is lacking. 

Modern educators realize this very well. One of the basic character¬ 
istics that they try to inculcate in the students of today is the sense of re¬ 
sponsibility to the work to be done. However, some give different reasons for 
this sense of responsibility than Maritain does. Witness the writings of Dewey: 

What makes it (the work of a carpenter) continuous, consecutive, or 
concentrated is that each earlier act prepares the way for later acts, while 
these take account of or reckon with the results already attained - the 
basis of all responsibility. 

Dewey here places the basis of responsibility on the activity done, the 
chain-reaction produced by the doing of things, while Maritain would place it 
in the nature of the person, a quality which is demanded by the spiritual de¬ 
sire for the perfection of the individual. 

Henderson treats of this desire for work well done when she says: 

Even if a man did not need to work for a living, he would need to work 
in order to live. A playboy knows nothing about life*s realities and life*s 
possibilities. One cannot become a strong man or woman without a struggle, 
without the joy which comes from succeeding in carrying out one 1 s purposes, 
without the lessons we can learn from failure. It is only through struggle ~ 
and effort that man develops his highest talents, his finest potentialities. 

Those who are critical of modern trends in education are also explicit 
on the point of the inner realization of the value of worth-while work. They 
claim to detect a lack of this appreciation in the modern educational systems. 
Iddings Bell says: 

Man exists to do creatively, in the most craftsmanlike manner possible, 
all things that must be done; great things like government, or mothering, 
or the healing of minds and bodies; small things like making beds, or hoe¬ 
ing corn, or driving a truck; things in the public eye like making speeches, 
or unleashing atomic energy, or making peace; obscure things like selling 
groceries, or running a bus, or teaching school. He finds inner peace who 
works at whatever is in front of him, not for the pay he gets or for what he 


1 Ibid. p. 33. 

p 

J. Dewey, Democracy and Education, p. 392. 

^S.V.P. Henderson, Introduction to the Phjlo,.aQ 5 fe-Qf-E ducati^^ p. 32. 












. 


f' 










, 

4 I 




























65 . 


can buy with that pay, not for applause or gratitude, but for sheer joy 
in creativity. There are a vast number of tasks to be performed in this 
world, most of them not romantic. They may be done in one of two ways: 
just to get them over with as quickly and as painlessly as possible, in 
which case they become a monotonous burden hard to bear; or each as 
beautifully and thoroughly as possible, in which case life is good to 
the taste. 

Our fathers knew the joy that lies in craftsmanship. They did not 
advocate it; they took it for granted. We have forgotten it. overlooked 
it. Craftsmanship is no longer practiced, taught or praised. 

The same idea is expressed by a more recent writer, a Canadian, who 


says: 


The sensible and fair thing is surely to let children know by experi¬ 
ence in school that life may be difficult and disagreeable as well as de¬ 
lightful and simple; that theirs is a world for workers, and that work 
demands their best effort; and to help them to acquire in school such 
firm habits and such clear principles as will enable them, whether they 
gain or lose the world, to do their duty in it \d.th diligence and with 
intelligence. Nothing could be less practical or progressive than the 
current fashion of keeping those who should be achieving the age of dis¬ 
cretion in ignorant, if contented immaturity,'' 

Maritain notes another disposition to be fostered, namely, that of co¬ 
operation. In this modern educators would find him in agreement with their 
views on the matter. He considers this tendency to be as natural as the ten¬ 
dency to social and political life. 

Having dealt first with the importance, of the learner in the educative 
process, Maritain now turns to the dispositions necessary in the ministerial 
agent, the teacher. 

Though Maritain stresses the essential, role of the intellect of the 
learner in the acquisition of knowledge, he considers the role of the teacher 
of equal importance. Though the pupil could acquire knowledge by the exercise 


^Bernard Iddings Bell, Crisis in Education (New York: McGraw-Hill 
Book Company, 1949), p. 22. 

2 Hilda Neatby, So Little for the Mind (Toronto: Clarke, Irwin & Com¬ 
pany, Limited, 1953), p. 18. 











66 


of his intelligence without guidance on the part of the teacher, it would be so 
difficult to do so, and so possible to err without some authority in learning, 
that the role of the teacher is of great importance* Maritain proceeds to out¬ 
line rules for the teacher* The first rule of which he speaks is to foster 
those dispositions which enable the principal agent to grow in the life of the 
mind* In this matter he has written "it is clear, in this connection, that the 
task of the teacher is above all one of liberation*" 1 To understand this state¬ 
ment, it is necessary to consider Maritain*s ideas on the true freeing of per¬ 
sonality* He writes: 

The same man in his entirety is an individual and a person: he is a 
person by reason of the spiritual subsistence of his soul, and he is an 
individual by reason of that principle of nonspecific diversity which is 
matter, and which makes the components of a same species different from 
each other. My individuality and my personality, thus defined, are two 
aspects of my whole substantial being, to which correspond two different 
poles of attraction for my inner and moral development. I may develop 
along the lines of personality, that is, toward the mastery of independ¬ 
ence of my spiritual self* Or I may develop along the lines of individual¬ 
ity, that is, toward the letting loose of the tendencies which are present 
in me by virtue of matter and heredity. 

Such being the case, certain educators confuse personality with indi¬ 
viduality, and mistake the display of sheer individuality for the develop¬ 
ment of personality. Personality means interior!ty to oneself; the in¬ 
ternal selfhood grows in proportion as the life of reason and freedom do¬ 
minates over the life of instinct and sensual desire - which implies seLf- 
sacrifice, striving toward self-perfection and love. But individuality, 
in the strict Aristotelian sense in which I am using the word, individu¬ 
ality means the material ego, the displaying of which consists in giving 
a free hand to the irrational trends of this ego. Thus, while becoming 
the center of everything, the ego is in reality scattered among cheap de¬ 
sires or overwhelming passions, and finally submitted to the determinism 
of matter.^ 

It is in this way that Maritain considers the work of the teacher one 
of liberation. The liberation of the personality as opposed to the development 
or liberation of the individuality. In practice, the application of this prin¬ 
ciple calls for the development or liberation of those energies in the learner 


J. Maritain, Education at the Crossroads* p. 39* 


2 

Ibid* p* 34-* 


















67 . 


which will lead to the liberation of the personality. This is to be done es¬ 
sentially by the encouragement of the desirable traits. Maritain says: 

To liberate the good energies is the best way of repressing the bad 
ones, though repression is also needed, but only as a secondary means, 
as dealing particularly with that part of animal training in human edu¬ 
cation of which I spoke in my first chapter, and even so it is useful only 

on condition that the repression of the bad tendencies will always be bound 

up with enlightenment and encouragement. Encouragement is a§ fundamentally 
necessary as humiliation is harmful. A mere prohibition of evil-doing is 
less efficacious than illumination about good that this evil-doing will 
spoil. The real art is to make the child heedful of his own resources and 
potentialities for the beauty of well-doing. 

This attitude is in keeping with the recommendations of the modern psy¬ 
chologists of education. They hold that punishment, when it must be applied, 
should be constructive, aimed at emphasizing the good rather than stressing the 
evil. Sorenson says: 

The teacher who praises a child for his work does so in order to stimu¬ 
late him; even more, when she reproves him, she does so to check undesir¬ 

able behavior or to spur him to greater achievement. 

In this connection, it may be pointed out that one of the distinguish¬ 
ing features of very good and very bad teachers is the nature of the re¬ 
sponses that they make to the efforts of their pupils. The superior teachers 
nod approval, speak encouragingly, and in general react positively. The 
poor ones, on the other hand, are inclined to be negative in their reactions, 
depreciating their pupils 1 efforts, scolding them, and finding fault with 
their work. 

Another writer on the subject of adolescent psychology treats of the 
same subject by saying: 

Many adolescents develop one or more of three fears, all associated 
with school work: fear of teachers, fear of examinations, and fear of re¬ 
citing. None of these is necessary, all of them are destructive to either 
progress in school of personal development, and all of them are learned 
from experiences in school,^ 


1 Ibid. p. 39. 

^Herbert,Sorenson, Psychology in Education (New York: McGraw-Hill 
Company, Inc., 1940), p. 308, 

^Luella Cole, Psychology of Adolescence (New York: Rinehart & Company, 
Inc., 1952), p. 135. 













68 . 


Another authority on the subject, Judd, says of this question of punish¬ 
ment or repression of evil attitudes: 

The relation of punishment to the development of patterns of behavior is 
of vital concern because, when punishment disturbs a child, the consequences 
are often serious. Many a school failure is to be traced to incompatibility 
between a pupil and a teacher which had its origin in punishment that seemed 
to the child to be unjust or tmnecessary. 

It is not, however, merely the unfortunate consequences of punishment 
that make this form of treatment of children questionable. The purpose of 
all social treatment should be positive. If punishment merely checks action, 
it contributes little to the development of the individual who is punished. 

If useful conduct can be substituted, for undesirable conduct, a higher result 
will be attained. Punishment should always be followed, therefore, by induce¬ 
ment to behavior which is wholesome and constructive. 

It seems justifiable, in this case, to consider punishment as any action 
which expresses disapproval, of the actions of the child, not necessarily in the 
narrow sense of corporal punishment. It is in this sense that Maritain would 
have us accept his teaching, that the positive release of good actions will, in 
the majority of cases, be of more lasting benefit than the punitive suppression 
of those considered harmful. Henderson expresses the same idea in other words: 

A teacher*s attitude toward his pupils* misbehavior should be like that 
of the physician toward his patient. Not shock, not indignation, not irrita¬ 
tion, not disgust, but a determination to understand, to heal, to help. How 
to do this is the study of a lifetime. The greatest reward that a teacher 
can hope for is to see boys and girls improving a little and growing some¬ 
what in self-discipline, in thoughtfulness for others, in unselfishness, in 
intelligence, and in strength/'" 

Here, again, the remarks made about misbehavior can be interpreted as ap¬ 
plying to wrong attitudes to truth and learning. Again, the approach is a posi¬ 
tive one. 

As another primary rule for teachers, Maritain would have the teacher 
center attention on the inner depths of personality, or, in other x^ords, to lay 
stress on inwardness and the internalization of the educational influence. He 


1 Charles H. Judd, Educational Psychology (Cambridge: Houghton Mifflin 
Company, 1939), p. 544. 


2 S.V.P. Henderson, I ntroduction to the Philosophy of Education, p. 374. 

















69 . 


would have the teacher instill in the student a deep appreciation of the true 
field of education, the development of the intellectual power of thought. Un¬ 
less the student sees and feels the vital connection between the knowledge he 
has and the knowledge toward which he is approaching, then, to Maritain, the 
work of real education is not being done. 

The pressure on the surface level of the mind of ready-made formulas 
of knowledge, as elaborated from the socialized intellectual life of adults, 
and only made cheaper and more rudimentary for the use of children, and 
the pressure on the surface level of the will, either of compulsory disci¬ 
pline or of extraneous incentives motivated by self-interest and competition, 
have left the internal world of the child*s soul either dormant or bewildered 
and rebellious. 

The teacher must recognize this inner life of the pupil, must strive to 
direct the student*s mind to a recognition of it, and must do everything in his 
power to see that it is fostered and encouraged. From this recognition flows 
the respect that the teacher must have for the efforts of the student to reach 
truth, must see that nothing in his approach to the student *s beginning aware¬ 
ness of this inner power blights or inhibits it. It is for this reason that the 
use of sarcasm on the part of the teacher toward the intellectual efforts of the 
child is so rightly condemned by all right-thinking educators. In the same way, 
any tendency on the part of the teacher to pass from one point of knowledge to 
another until the first is thoroughly understood by the student is poor technique 
in the educational field. Maritain says; 

Parenthetically, it is with reference to this preconscious spiritual 
dynamism of human personality that keeping personal contact with the pupil 
is of such great import, not only as a better technique for making study 
more attractive and stimulating, but above all to give to that mysterious 
identity of the child * s soul, which is unknown to himself, and which no 
techniques can reach, the comforting assurance of being in some way recog-^ 
nized by a human personal gaze, inexpressible either in concepts or words. 

Again, on the same subject, he says: 


Mari tain. Education at the Crossroads, p. 40. 


2 Ibid, p. 41. 




















70 


With regard to the development of the human mind, neither the richest 
material facilities, nor the richest equipment in methods, information, 
and erudition are the main point. The great thing is the awakening of the 
inner resources and creativity. The cult of technical means considered as 
improving the mind and producing science by their own virtue must give way 
to respect for the spirit and dawning intellect of man. Education thus 
calls for an intellectual sympathy and intuition on the part of the teacher, 
concern for the questions and difficulties with which the mind of youth may 
be entangled without being able to give expression to them, a readiness to 
be at hand with the lessons of logic and reasoning that invite to action 
the unexercised reason of the youth. No tricks can do that, no set of tech¬ 
niques, but only personal attention to the inner blossoming of the rational 
nature and then confronting that budding reason with a system of rational 
knowledge. 


Maritain states that the most important thing in the life of reason is 
the intellectual insight or intuition. This, he says, cannot be developed by 


direct training, yet there is a way in which the teacher can do a great deal to 
foster it. Concerning this, he writes: 

Yet if the teacher keeps in view above all the inner center of vitality 
at work in the preconscious depths of the life of the intelligence, he may 
center the acquisition of knowledge and solid formation of the mind on the 
freeing of the child’s and the youth’s intuitive power. By what means? 

By moving forward along the paths of spontaneous interest and natural cario¬ 
sity, by grounding the exercise of memory in intelligence, and primarily by 
giving courage, by listening a great deal, and by causing the youth to trust 
and give expression to those spontaneous poetic or noetic impulses of his 
own which seem to him fragile and bizarre, because they are not assured by 
any social sanction - and in fact any awkward gesture of rebuff or untimely 
advice on the part of the teacher can crush guch timid sproutings and push 
them back into the shell of the unconscious." 


On the same point, Brubacher says; 

Education is a social process, a process of sharing between the various 
members of the group. This being the case, nothing could be more absurd 
than to exclude from the group the person who has the most to contribute, 
the teacher. But it is equally absurd to think that the teacher is the 
only one who has anything to share. Freedom, thus, is not something for 
children but not for the teacher, for the immature but not for the mature. 

On the contrary, children can only grow in freedom if the teacher is free 
to advise how the capacities of individuals can be brought to richer fruition. 


1 Ibid . p. 43. 











f 








. 

' 










-- ■' , 

. 

- 
















71 . 


Such a function he must perform, however, not as a dictator, but as a 
counselor.^ 

Far from claiming that the matter of education is solely one of intel¬ 
lectual intuition, Maritain stresses the use of material things as a technique 
of good teaching. Realia should be used so that the student can receive the 
sense impressions from which the intelligible phantasms can be drawn. He says: 

I should like, moreover, to suggest that, in order to set free creative 
and perceptive intuition, the path through which it is naturally awakened, 
the path of sense-perception and sense-experience and imagination, should 
be respected and followed as far as possible by the teacher.^ 

The influence of the teacher in this awakening of the spiritual intui¬ 
tion of the student depends on the attitude of the teacher. Maritain says of 
this: 


Finally, the very mood of the teaching is here of crucial import. If 
the teacher himself is concerned with discerning and seeing, with getting 
vision, rather than with collecting facts and opinions, and if he handles 
his burden of knowledge so as to see through it into the reality of things, 
then in the mind of the student the power of intuition will be awakened 
and strengthened unawares, by the very intuitivity traversing such teaching .' 

Maritain would also stress the value of certain subject-matter as the 
most valuable in the development of intellectual power. In this he is of the 
group who are called the traditionalists. He considers a liberal education as 
the best, not only as an education, but also as a preparation for whatever vo¬ 
cation the student is to follow in later years. He writes: 

The knowledge which is ”of most worth” - I don*t mean which has the 
most practical value, I mean which makes the mind penetrate into those 
things which are richest in truth and intelligibility - such knowledge 
affords by itself the best mental training, for it is by grasping the 
object and having itself seized and vitalized by truth that the human mind 


■^John S, Brubacher, Modern Philosophies of Education (New York: McGraw- 
Hill Book Company, 1939), p. 302. 

^J. Maritain, Education at the Crossroads, p. 44. 

3 Ibid. p . 45. 
























72 


gains both its strength and its freedom. It is not by the gymnastics of 
its faculties, it is by truth that it is set free, when truth is really 
known, that is, vitally assimilated by the insatiable activity which is 
rooted in the depths of self 

The whole teaching of Maritain on the proper method of teaching may 
be found in his summing up of the fundamental rules for the teacher. In it 
he shows that he is heartily in accord with the teachings of the modern phil¬ 
osophers on education in this matter. He says: 

To summarize: What is learned should never be passively or mechanic¬ 
ally received, as dead information which weighs down and dulls the mind. 

It must rather be actively transformed by understanding into the very life 
of the mind, and thus strengthen the latter, as wood thrown into fire and 
transformed into flame makes the fire stronger. But a big mass of damp 
wood thrown into the fire only puts it out. Reason which receives know¬ 
ledge in a servile manner does not really know and is only depressed by a 
knowledge which is not its own but that of others. On the contrary, rea¬ 
son which receives knowledge by assimilating it vitally, that is, in a 
free and liberating manner, really knows, and is exalted in its very ac¬ 
tivity by this knowledge which henceforth is its own. Then it is that 
reason really masters the things learned. 







73 . 


CHAPTER V 

VARIOUS STAGES OF EDUCATION 


In this section of his work on education, Maritain treats of the prin¬ 
cipal stages of education. These he considers to be three: 

As to the principal stages in education, let us note that there 
are three great periods in education. I should like to designate them 
as the rudiments (or elementary education,) the humanities (comprising 
both secondary and college education), and advanced studies (compris¬ 
ing graduate schools and higher specialized learning.) And these periods 
correspond not only to three natural chronological periods in the growth 
of the youth but also to three naturally distinct and qualitatively de¬ 
terminate spheres of psychological development, and, accordingly, of know¬ 
ledge.^- 

Maritain, along with many other educators, asserts that the child is 
not a small adult. While this is true of the physical aspect of the child, 


it is equally true, and of much greater significance, of the psychological 


structure of the child. Of this he says: 

In the realm of physical training, of psychophysical conditioning, 
of animal and experimental psychology, contemporary education has under¬ 
stood more and more perfectly that the child of man is not just a dimin¬ 
utive man. 


On this point John B. Morgan says: 

Although the theory that the child is merely an adult in miniature 
has not been as vigorously defended as some other theories, it has been 
explicit in much educational practice. It is a natural outgrowth from 
an exaggerated emphasis upon the importance of adult life and a lack of 
regard for the significance of childhood. Most childish acts are useless 


\r. Maritain, Education at the Crossroads , p. 38 . 
2lbid. p. 59. 



















. 




f 




, 



_ ' 

. 

_ 

. , 




: • -■ 




' 








. 






' 


. 












. 

' 

. 










74 . 


and absurd, according to this theory, and children should be ’’seen, and 
not heard.” Play is valuable only as it prepares children for adult 
life. Adult motives are read into the random or unthinking acts of the 
child. 

N 

Modern psychology has changed the focus of interest. The adult is 
now considered as the grown-up child instead of the child’s being regar¬ 
ded as the miniature adult. 

Similarly, Judd writes s 

The educational processes carried on by the school must fit them¬ 
selves to the growth processes which take place in the bodily organs..,. 

An infant has a nervous system, but, ... the nervous system must mature 
before it can perform the functions which the school aims to cultivate.... 
There is a succession of changes during the school period. A child must 
learn to use oral language and interpret the meanings of words before he 
can be taught to read. He must be able to count before he can be taught 
to add. All the higher stages of education depend on the acquisition by 
the individual of the fundamental, or rudimentary, ideas and skills taught 
in the early grades,^ 

Sorenson, on the same theme, has this to say: 

The period when the annual increments of mental growth are greatest 
merely from growing older are the preschool and elementary-school periods 
of life. During high-school years, growth through maturation is much 
slower^ and it may be considered as reaching its limit during college 
years. 

Maritain appears to go beyond the position taken above in asserting 
that there is a special knowledge proper to children, a knowledge which differs 
from that proper to other stages in the development of man. 

The knowledge to be given to youth is not the same knowledge as that 
of adults, it is an intrinsically and basically different knowledge, which 
is not knowledge in the state of science, such as that possessed by the 
mind of an adult, but the specific knowledge fitted to quicken and perfect 
the original world of thought of the child and the adolescent. Consequently 
I should like to emphasize that at each stage the knowledge must be of a 
sort fitted to the learners and conceived as reaching its perfection with¬ 
in their universe of thought during a distinct period of their development, 


Ijohn B. Morgan, Ch ild Psychology (New York: Farrar & Rinehart, Inc, 1942), 

p. 9. 

' ^Charles H. Judd, Educational Psychology, p. 462. 

•%. Sorenson, Psychology in Education , p. 272. 















75 . 


instead of laying the foundations of a single sphere of knowledge which 
would grow in a continuous and uniform way until it became the science 
of the adult, where alone it would attain perfection. 

Maritain becomes more explicit when he writes: 

The universe of a child is the universe of imagination - of an im¬ 
agination which evolves little by little into reason. The knowledge 
which has to be given to the child is knowledge in a state of story, an 
imaginative grasp of the things and values of the world. 

In this view Maritain is in accord with Aristotle*s theory of know¬ 
ledge. This theory holds that the mind of a child is a 11 tabula rasa” at 
birth. All ideas which later come to it are introduced through the senses. 

The first years of a child’s life are spent in the acquisition of sense images 
with no great attempt to coordinate these images with reality. The faculty 
which is most active at this time of life is the imagination. Morgan writes, 
•’Imagination is a subjective recombination of the materials of experience in 
a manner which may or may not conform to facts, ”3 and Kelly states, ’’Imagin¬ 
ation is the mental power of forming representations of material objects which 
are not actually present to the senses.”^ Because the world of imagination 
is the child’s mental world, it is difficult for him to distinguish the imag¬ 
inary from the real, Kelly writes: 

The young child has difficulty in distinguishing between imagination 
and reality. He peoples his world xd,th all sorts of things, and the in¬ 
animate objects around him are furnished with life; the doll to a little 
girl is a real baby, the toy soldier to a boy is a real soldier. The 
small child lives in a world of play, folklore, fairy tales, and nursery 


*kr. Maritain, Education at the Crossroads , p, 59. 

2 Ibid , p, 60. 

Morgan, Child Psychology , p. 267. 

%. Kelly, Educational Psychology (New York: The Bruce Publishing Co., 
1941), p. 79. 















76 . 


rimes. Children in play imagine themselves other than they are; they 
transform themselves into parent, teacher, salesman, shopkeeper, etc., 
and fulfill, all the functions of neighbors and citizens with dignity and 
solemnity.*** 

It is this quality of imaginative thinking proper to the child that 
Maritain would make the basis of elementary education. He realizes the dif¬ 
ficulty which the child may have in distinguishing the imaginary from the real. 
In this he is not alone among educators. Judd writes: 

If imagination is merely an unrestrained activity, it is of little 
value except for the recreation which it provides the individual. When 
imagination is unrestrained, it is called "fancy. 11 In fancy one builds 
castles in the air, but one does not expect to live in them. Excessive 
imagination of the purely fanciful type is to be discouraged in children.-■ 

Maritain warns against unrestrained imagination in the child in these 


words: 


The child*s mentality may be compared in some ways with that of pri¬ 
mitive man, and this mentality tends by itself toward magic, and what¬ 
ever effort the teacher may make, his teaching always runs the risk of 
being caught and engulfed in a magic ocean. In his task of civilizing 
the child*s mind, therefore, he must progressively tame the imagination 
to the rule of reason, whilst ever remembering that the proportionally 
tremendous work of the child*s intellect, endeavoring to grasp the ex¬ 
ternal world, ig accomplished under the vital and perfectly normal rule 


of imagination. 


a 


Maritain sees the cultivation of the imaginative force in the child 
as the foundation of developing reason. In the course of the child * s develop¬ 
ment and learning, the reason will appear through the workings of imagination. 
As the child develops there will be a mingling of imagination and reason and 
in this there may be a danger for the child unless proper guidance is given. 

On the other hand the vitality and intuitiveness of the spirit are 
quick in the young child and sometimes pierce the world oi his imagina¬ 
tive thought with the purest and most surprising flashes, as if his spirit, 


lW. Kelly, Educational Psychology , p. 85. 
2 C.H. Judd, Educational Psychology , p. 336. 


Maritain, Education at the Crossroads , p. 60. 


























77 . 


being not yet both strengthened and organized by the exercise of reason, 
enjoyed a kind of bounding, temperamental, and lucid freedom. At the same 
time, however, the immature workings of instinct and the violence of nature 
make him capable of intense resentment, wickedness, and manifold perversion. 
This vitality of the spirit should be relied upon as an invaluable factor 
in the first stages of education. Even from a purely naturalistic point of 
view it is a pity to see the child*s mysterious expectant gravity and his 
resources as regards spiritual life neglected or trampled upon by his elders, 
either from some positivist bias or because they think it their duty, when 
they deal with children, to make themselves childish. 1 

Redden and Ryan also consider the control of the imagination of great 
importance in the teaching of children. They state, in their Catholic Philosophy 
of Education : 

Training of the imagination must be subject at all times to those 
principles which are derived from a correct interpretation of the true 
nature of the individual. Such principles both direct the proper expres¬ 
sion to be given to the imagination, and, at the same time, emphasize the 
need for careful guidance and supervision, to prevent distorted develop¬ 
ment and undue exaggeration of this power. It is only by the application 
of such principles that the imagination can function in ways which are 
wholesome, ennobling, and which tend to further its right development in 
the total work of intelligent education. 

To Mari tain the state of wonder and imagination which are natural to 
the child should be the basis for the beginnings of education. It is through 
these states that the exercise of reason is developed* By the cultivation of 
these activities the interest and pleasure in learning are fostered and the 
future intellectual development of the child made natural and enjoyable. 

The period of childhood gradually merges into that of adolescence. 

The dominant role of the imagination slowly gives way to that of reason. In 
the former stage, the interests of the child are centered, on the physical 
phenomena of the things which surround him. The dawning power of reason begins 
to posit questions which, until this time, have not been in evidence. 

Psychologists sre agreed that the problems which arise at this time 


lj. Maritain, Education at the Crossroads , p. 61. 


2 J, Redden and F. Ryan, A Catholic Philoso phy of.Ed ucation , p. 235. 

















78 . 


are not limited to the intellectual field, but rather are a compilation 
of problems in many fields, physical, moral, emotional and intellectual. 
Judd writes: 

Changes in interests and in methods of reacting to the world oc¬ 
cur as phases of the general transition from childhood to a later 
stage of development. When childhood is left behind, the individual 
looks forward and interests himself in the responsibilities of adult 
life. This forward look is in sharp contrast with the circumscribed 
selfishness of the earlier period of life, when the mental horizon 
is narrow and bodily strength is limited. The attitudes of adoles¬ 
cents, like their physical structures, are symptoms of the general 
process of maturing. 

Cole says: 

Near the beginning of the adolescent period the boy or girl 
achieves sexual maturity and, in some specific capacities, intel¬ 
lectual maturity as well. By the end of adolescence, physical 
growth is complete and intellectual growth nearly so. Only 
severe deprivation can prevent an organism from coming into its 
bodily and mental maturity. The real problems of adolescence 
center therefore about emotional, social, moral and economic 
problems. Solution of these is necessary if the individual is to 
emerge from the childish attitudes and reactions with which he con¬ 
fronts life at puberty and become an accepted member of adult 

society.^ 

Maritain tends to concentrate on intellectual development at this 
period in the life of the child. 

The universe of the adolescent is a transition state on the way 
to the universe of man. Judgment and intellectual strength are de¬ 
veloping but are not yet really acquired. Such a mobile and anxious 
universe evolves under the rule of the natural impulses and tenden¬ 
cies of intelligence - an intelligence which is not yet matured and 
strengthened by those inner living energies, the sciences, arts and 
wisdom, but which is sharp and fresh, eager to pass judgment on 
everything, both trustful and exacting, and which craves intuitive 
sight.^ 


■^C.H. Judd, Educational Psychology , p. 461. 

2 

L. Cole, Psychology of Adolescence, , p. 5. 

3j. Maritain, Education at the Crossroads , p. 61. 


















79 . 


Since for Maritain the proper end of education is always intellectual, 
he considers that the emphasis in adolescent education should and must be 
centered on the acquisition of truth. 

The knowledge which has to develop in the adolescent is knowledge ap¬ 
pealing to the natural powers and gifts of the mind, knowledge as tending 
toward all things by the natural instinct of intelligence. The mental at¬ 
mosphere for adolescence should be one of truth to be embraced. Truth is 
the inspiring force needed in the education of the youth - truth rather 
than erudition and self-consciousness - all-pervading truth rather than 
the objectively isolated truth at which each of the diverse sciences aims, 1 2 

For Maritain, then, this is a fundamental principle, one that colors all 
his thinking, concerning the education of the adolescent. It has been less ex¬ 
clusively emphasized by others in the educational field. The necessity for 
other kinds of training than intellectual has been stressed. 

Butts, in his work, A Cultural History of Education , says: 

In the middle 1930's the critical social situation in the United States 
and in the world made it clear to the "frontier” group of progressive edu¬ 
cators that the aims and curriculum of schools and colleges should consider 
more fully the needs of society and should be based upon a rounded concep¬ 
tion of the desirable social system that should be achieved in the United 
States. Prominent spokesmen among progressive educators urged that the tra¬ 
ditional aims of education should be reinterpreted in the light of the newer 
conceptions of an experimentalist view of human nature and an industrial 
view of democratic society.2 

Lodge, in his work. Philosophy of Education , contrasts the various 
schools of modern philosophical thought in this regard, and says: 

What effect does the adoption of philosophical principle have upon the 
subject matter of education? Realists then, almost always, do insist upon 
its importance, and upon the importance of selecting the "right” subjects. 
The authority of the realist philosopher Herbart is invoked on behalf of 
the view that the mind is what it studies. When we apprehend, the content 
apprehended Is just taken in - i.e. taken into the nervous system via sen¬ 
sation, and established there by association - without alteration, except 


1 Ibid . p. 62. 

2 R. Freeman Butts, A Cultural History of Education (New York: McGraw- 
Hill Book Company, Inc., 1947) p. 643. 















80 . 


insofar as interaction with other contents, similarly established or in 
process of being apprehended, brings about alteration. 

The same writer, setting out the ideas of those he would call the 
Idealists, says of their theories: 

Other idealists, such as Plotinus, summed up the view of antiquity by 
pointing to the ’’three pathways” of love, art and the pursuit of know¬ 
ledge: that is to say, to the three ideals of creating beauty and good¬ 
ness in human life, and creating beautiful objects in the environment of 
human life, and creating sciences with the ideal of truth as their aim, 
inculcating truthfulness as the dominant human virtue. All their ’’path¬ 
ways” were regarded as leading to the same goal: the philosophical and 
mystical insight into the ultimate recesses of a reality envisaged as 
spiritual, as a perfect Self, transcending in its absolute perfection the 
resources of the merely empirical, everyday self of human beings, but cap¬ 
able of endowing the earnest seeker with some of its own transcendental 
significance. 

This view would seem to be in keeping with Maritain's attitude regard¬ 
ing the general purpose of adolescent education. The same writer, Lodge, ex¬ 
plains the views of another school, the pragmatists, when he writes: 

The pragmatist, with his belief that problems, unlike misfortunes, "fend 
to come singly, one after another, has no special use for the systematic 
’’subjects” in which the realist believes. He does not wish a student to 
be turned into a Latinist, or an analytical chemist, or a medieval historian, 
knowing everything of one subject and nothing about everything else. Books 
intended to be used for reference purposes may well be put together system¬ 
atically; but when it comes to the growing members of the community, he 
would prefer them to be taught how to use reference books - viz., when 
wanted, and for purposes of reference - rather than to be turned into walk¬ 
ing books of reference. Subject matter for the pragmatist is accordingly 
an excuse for training a student in suitable techniques, techniques for 
the direction and control of events.^ 

Maritain considers the adolescent as one in whom the power of intellect 
is awaking and reaching toward the truth of things. It is the work of education 
to place that truth before the seeking youth, using every means to satisfy the 
cravings which Maritain believes to be strong within the young. Of this seeking 
for truth Maritain writes: 


' Rupert C.-Lodge, Philosophy of Education (New York: Harper & Brothers, 
revised edition, 1947), p. 203. 

2 Ibid. p. 209. 

3 Ibid , p. 212. 











81 . 


Here we are confronted with a natural and instinctive impulse toward 
some all-embracing truth, which must be shaped little by little to 
critical reflection, but which I should like to compare primarily to the 
trend of the first thinkers of ancient Greece toward an undifferentiated 
world of science, wisdom, and poetry. Common sense and the spontaneous 
pervasiveness of natural insight and reasoning constitute the dynamic 
unity of the adolescent*s universe of thought, before wisdom may achieve 
in man a stabler unity.^ 

To Maritain, the sum total of knowledge is able to be united and simpli¬ 
fied into one truth which becomes more and more apparent as the wisdom of the 
learner approaches perfection. This belief he holds in common with the Idealists, 
of whose philosophy on this point Lodge writes: 

All pathways of self-development, faithfully pursued, call to the in¬ 
ner nisus, and tend to culminate in a progressive series of idealist in¬ 
sights into the nature of reality as ultimately spiritual. Thus the physi¬ 
cist may start by believing that what he is investigating is the nature of 
”objective” reality, and that he is leaving the self entirely out of the 
picture. But the personal equation is not thus naively to be dismissed. 

After a while, when he becomes immersed in the deeper reaches of his sub¬ 
ject, if he asks himself, What am I really studying?, he begins to realize 
that he is living in a world of definitions and consequences, that he is 
investigating the logical consequences involved in the questions he is pos¬ 
ing, that he is setting himself problems, and that his answers are the re¬ 
sponses of his self to the questions his self has raised. It is then that 
he realizes that physics passes over, without a definite break, into meta¬ 
physics or philosophy proper, and that his mind has apparently never left 
the realm of mind, but that nature” is simply the mind*s ”other”, its 
social counterpart, ig which the relation of creator and creation seems, in 
the end, to coincide. ' 

This love and desire for the truth and for the meaning of reality is 
proper to the adolescent, and must be kept in mind by educators who are entrus¬ 
ted with the planning of curriculum for the adolescent. Maritain says: 

Just as imagination was the mental heaven of childhood, so now ascend¬ 
ing reason with its freshness, boldness, and first sparkling ambitions, is 
the mental heaven of adolescence; it is with reasoning that adolescence 
happens to be intoxicated. Here is a natural impulse to be turned to ac¬ 
count by education, both by stimulating and by disciplining reason."' 


Maritain, Education at the Crossroads, p. 62. 

2 

R.C. Lodge, Philosophy of Education, p. 210. 


"J. Maritain, Education at the Crossroads , p. 62. 

















82 . 


Maritain would not place the emphasis on the subject matter but rather 
on the way in which it is taught. Since the adolescent is intrigued with the 
underlying meaning of the things he studies, this can be used as a directive as 
to the method of instruction. The intellectual curiosity of the student should 
be aroused so as to help him acquire the meaning of the truth and beauty con¬ 
tained in the science or art itself. 

It is less a question of sharing in the very activity of the scientist 
or the poet than of nourishing oneself intellectually on the results of 
their achievement. Still less is it a question of developing one*s own 
mental skill and taste in the fashion of the dilettante by gaining a super¬ 
ficial outlook on scientific or artistic procedures or the ways and means, 
the grammar, logic, methodology thereof. 1 

This is in keeping with the modern criticism of the so-called "formal 
discipline” of the past. Rather than stress the mechanical memorization of 
facts and events, the teacher has the task of stirring up the pupil to make 
critical use of his intelligence so as to reach conclusions for himself, thus 
making the acquired knowledge vital and meaningful. Maritain continues: 

The objective of education is to see to it that the youth grasps this 
truth or beauty by the natural power and gifts of his mind and the natural 
intuitive energy of his reason backed up by his whole sensuous, imaginative, 
and emotional dynamism. In doing that a liberal education will cause his 
natural intelligence to follow in the footsteps of those intellectual vir¬ 
tues which are the eminent merit of the real scientist or artist. The 
practical conditions for all that is to strive to penetrate as deeply as 
possible into the great achievements of the human mind rather than to tend 
toward material erudition and atomized memorization.2 

It is the truth of the particular subject matter or science which is 
the objective of the youth*s learning rather than complete mastery of the sub¬ 
ject matter at this stage of education. This should be kept in mind by the 


teachers. 


















S3. 


Maritain continues on the same subject: 

So I should say that the youth is to learn and know music in order to 
understand the meaning of music rather than in order to become a composer. 

He must learn and know physics in order to understand the meaning of physics 
rather than to become a physicist ,^ 

At the adolescent level it would be considered best to have a wide cover¬ 
ing of the field of education. Maritain says: 

In a social order fitted to the common dignity of man, college educa¬ 
tion should be given to all, so as to complete the preparation of the youth 
before he enters the state of manhood. 

Maritain would term college education as that given to the youth from 
the age of sixteen to nineteen. This would correspond to the high school level 
in our existing educational framework. He would defer specialization until a 
later stage in the educational process. 

To introduce specialization at this sphere is to do violence to the 
world of youth. As a matter of fact, a young man will choose his specialty 
for himself and progress all the more rapidly and perfectly in vocational, 
scientific, or technical training in proportion as his education has been 
liberal and universal. Youth has a right to education in the liberal arts, 
in order to be prepared for human work and for human leisure. But such edu¬ 
cation is killed by premature specialization. 

This view does not receive complete approval from those who defend the 
modern view of education. While Maritain holds the position that education 
has as its end the total development of the powers of man, with emphasis on 
the intellectual powers, such men as Judd feel that education is a preparation 
for the special manner in which man will spend his life working in society. 

Judd says on this subject: 

One mistake which has often been made in the dispute between the repre¬ 
sentatives of the new technical courses and the representatives of the tra¬ 
ditional courses is that of assuming that traditional courses are different 


^Ibid. p. 63, 
"Ibid , p. 64. 

3 

Ibid , p. 64* 




































■ 












.. 




































Lc . 'lo&sl 


















34 . 


from technical courses which merely cultivate imitation and that these tra¬ 
ditional courses always cultivate high types of intellectual ability. Not 
only have defenders of the traditional courses claimed that these courses 
are superior to all other means of training the mind, but they have insisted 
that all pupils ought to take the traditional courses if they are to be put 
in,possession of the best that the race has produced in the course of its 
evolution. 1 

Judd continues with the opinion that the so-called liberal courses were 
originally of the vocational type developed to satisfy the culture of ancient 
times. Cole, speaking of the trend in curriculum-making toward vocational train¬ 
ing in secondary schools, explains this trend by saying: 

As soon as high schools began to grow rapidly and to enroll students of 
widely varying interests, it became evident that what many pupils needed was 
vocational education. There have been enthusiasts who wanted to turn prac¬ 
tically all higher education into vocational training,^ 

Certain writers make the point that there is and must be a place in edu¬ 
cation for both liberal and vocational education. Bernard Iddings Bell is one 
of these. 

Much of the current argument between liberal educators and vocational 
educators seems artificial. Obviously everyone should both earn a living 
and live it once it has been earned: this is true whether his labor be in 
the field of thought or in more prosaic employments. The true aim of edu¬ 
cation must consist in teaching both how to do a reputable job and also how 
to be a human being and enjoy life. Whether in the secondary schools or in 
the colleges to which so many of their graduates go these days or in still 
later fields of mature activity, liberal education, which has to do with 
being, and vocational training, which has to do with doing, are properly 
not only inseparable but interdependent. One’s vision of meaning is colored 
by the effectiveness of one’s creative activity. Conversely, one’s labors 
have meaning only to the extent that one comes to perceive their place in 
cosmic processes or, at least, their relationship to the ends that are es¬ 
sentially human. It is wicked to go in for the sort of liberal education 
which produces incompetent dreamers. It is equally wicked to rely on un¬ 
interpreted vocational training to turn out men and women of understanding 
and wisdom. 3 


^L. Cole, Psychology of Adolescence , p. 575. 
^B.I. Bell, Crisis in Education, p. 49. 








The need for liberal education in the democratic world is stated strongly 


by a committee of university professors in a publication entitled General Edu¬ 
cation in School and College * This report says: 

A liberally-educated man demands freedom. ,f We call those studies liberal”, 
wrote a Rennaissance educator, ”which are \^orthy of a free man”... and we might 
add today, of a free society. Education designed to free individual human be¬ 
ings from the limitations of ignorance, prejudice, and provincialism makes 
sense only in a free society; we mean one based on the belief that individual 
persons are ends in themselves, that men are responsible beings, equal in 
rights, and that government exists only to foster their freedom. When total¬ 
itarian dictatorship triumphs in the modern world, truly “liberal” education 
is the first object of attack, since it is one of the most obvious bulwarks 
against the brutalization and atomization of the individual. To put the mat¬ 
ter another way, a democratic society can never develop if the individuals 
composing it are merely specialists with no significant knowledge or beliefs 
held in common. The only way to organize a society of pure experts who have 
little or nothing in common with each other is through a dictatorship. On 
the other hand, the ideal democratic society, if there were one, would see 
to it that its specialists were liberally-educated men. Liberal education 
and the democratic ideal are related to each other in a thousand ways. It 
is not too much to say that they stand and fall together.-^- 

The.need of liberal education in the present educational process is stressed 
by many. It is clearly understood that technical and vocational education have a 
most important place in the present environment. Maritain holds that specializ¬ 
ation should come after the fundamentals of liberal education have been received.. 
Others hold the same view* Dr. Malcolm Wallace writes: 


Now it is difficult to convert an acquaintance with the humanities into 
higher earning power. They are not “goods” to increase our technical or pro¬ 
fessional efficiency; like good health, they are their own justification. 
They do not make better engineers or doctors or plumbers; they merely make 
better and happier men who go about their business of living more intelli¬ 
gently. It would not be necessary to labor the point were it not for the 
general assumption that education is an instrument. Even the speaking or 
writing of good English has been commended on the ground that .professional 
or business efficiency is increased thereby. We find it difficult to believe 
in tastes or interests or skills merely because they make us nappier, more 
satisfied, more conscious of living abundantly. The heresy, of course, 
is based, on the assumption that our human satisfaction depends on 


- 1 Gp. -n^ra1 Education in School and College , A Committee Report of the Facul¬ 
ties of Andover, Exeter, Lawrenceville, Harvard, Princeton, and Yale. (Cam¬ 
bridge: Harvard University Press, 1952), p. 20. 














* 




„ 

- 


- 


. 





• 

' 




11 










5 . 



— 

. • 



• c ’ ■ 







/ 


<' 


„ 




. 




. • 

' 




' 




' 

. 








t 










c 





„ •' 


' 





















, 














■ 
















86. 


the possession of power, of wealth, not as instruments but as ultimates.^ 

The same theme is dealt with by Sir Richard Livingstone, who says: 

We live in a world where our power gives us the chance of doing unlimi¬ 
ted harm; and we need an education which teaches us not merely how to use 
that power but how to use it well. To build up in every man and woman a 
solid core of spiritual life, which will resist the attrition of everyday 
existence in our mechanized world - that is the most difficult and import¬ 
ant task of school and university. Barbarian tribes destroyed the Roman 
Empire. There are no such tribes to destroy modern civilization from out¬ 
side. The barbarians are ourselves. The real modern problem is to human¬ 
ize man, to show him the spiritual ideals without which neither happiness 
nor success are genuine or permanent, to produce beings who will know not 
merely how to split atoms but how to use their powers for good. Such know¬ 
ledge is not to be had from the social or physical sciences. 

This leads us to the question of how these views are to be put into 
operation. The device by which this is done is the curriculum, and on this 
Maritain has very definite views. He would have a different division of the 
school life from that which is prevalent in the western world at the present 
time. He outlines his division in a footnote in his book, Education at the 
C rossroads , where he says: 

The general plan which I have in mind and which forms the background 
of my present considerations divides the main educational periods as 
follows: 1. The rudiments (or elementary education): 7 years, divi¬ 
ded into 4 years of initial elementary education (age six to nine) and 
3 years of complementary elementary education (age: ten to twelve). 

11. The humanities: 7 years, divided into 3 years of secondary educat¬ 
ion of high school (age: thirteen to fifteen) and 4 years of college 
education (age: sixteen to nineteen). 111. Advanced studies, compris¬ 
ing the university and higher specialized learning. 

The curriculum for the years of secondary education would differ from 
that now accepted in the western schools. Since Maritain is in the classical 


^Malcolm W. Wallace, The Humanities . Royal Commission Studies. A Selection 
of Essays prepared for the Royal Commission on National Development in theArts, 
Letters, and Sciences. (Ottawa: Edmond Cloutier, 1951)* p. 105. 

2 

Sir Richard Livingstone, Some Tasks for Education (London: Oxford Uni¬ 
versity Press, 1946) p. 14. 

o 

Maritain, Education at- the Crossroads, footnote, p. 67. 




















































tradition, he concentrates on that branch of study during these all-important 
years. He sets out the particulars of his curriculum as follows: 

Supposing that the period of the humanities were to last seven years, 
so that secondary education, which forms the transition between the period 
of rudiments and the college, and whose importance is therefore crucial, 
would comprise three years (from thirteen to fifteen), we might order these 
three years as follows: 

The year of Languages, comprising: first, foreign languages, studied 
in connection with the national language; second, comparative grammar 
and the art of expression; third, national history, geography, and natural 
history (especially elementary astronomy and geology). The year of Grammar, 
comprising: first, grammar, especially comparative grammar and philology; 
second, foreign languages and the art of expression; third, national his¬ 
tory, geography, natural history (especially botany). 

The year of History and Expression, comprising: first, national his¬ 
tory, history of civilization, the art of expression; second, foreign 
languages; third, comparative grammar and philology, geography, natural 
history (especially zoology). 1 - 

One of the most striking features of the secondary school curriculum 
outlined by Mari tain is the total lack of mathematics in the preparatory years. 
Though he places this science in the following years of undergraduate study, it 
seems odd that the elementary grounding in this science should be left to the 
later stages of the educational course. Indeed, the delay in starting this 
study seems to ignore one of his basic principles, since mathematics has an ap¬ 
peal to the very qualities which he cites as proper to the age of youth, wonder 
and the search for truth. On this subject, the committee report known as General 
Education in School and College , has this to say: 

Mathematics is the rigorous application of notions that are vaguely ap¬ 
parent even to the nonmathematical; its wonder lies in its demonstration 
of the extraordinary power which comes from thinking closely and connectedly. 
It is not remarkable that an apple drops with growing speed.from tree to 
ground, but what Newton did to this idea is one of the heroic advances of 
the human mind. The means by which he did it are not easily understood; 
the power of abstract thinking is matched by its difficulties. This is 
true for all the basic ideas of mathematics, yet it is just these basic 
ideas that are of the greatest value to the student. 


• k[bid . p. 66. 

^General Education in School and College, p. 53® 





















• 




















' - <t 








■ ' I 


























































, 

' 

f - 

. 




■ 



































. 




38. 


Maritain feels that the preliminary training of the first section of 
the secondary education will prepare the student for the second part, the uni¬ 
verse of the liberal arts. This would comprise four years, divided into the 
following sections; 

The year of Mathematics and Poetry, comprising first mathematics and 
literature and poetry; second logic; third, foreign languages, and the 
history of civilization. 

The year of Natural Sciences and Fine Arts, comprising; first, physics 
and natural science; second, fine arts, mathematics, literature and poetry; 
third, history of the sciences. 

The year of Philosophy comprising: first, philosophy, that is to say, 
metaphysics and philosophy of nature, theory of knowledge, psychology; 
second, physics and natural science; third, mathematics, literature and 
poetry, fine arts. 

The year of Ethical and Political Philosophy, comprising: first, 
ethics, political and social philosophy; second, physics and natural 
science; third, mathematics, literature and poetry, fine arts, history 
of civilization and history of the sciences.~ 

Maritain would have the sciences taught during this period as an intel¬ 
lectual exercise rather than as a source of practical application. He says on 
this point: 

... physics and natural science must be considered as one of the chief 
branches of liberal arts. They are mainly concerned with the mathematical 
reading of natural phenomena, and insure in this way the domination of the 
human spirit over the world of matter, not in terms of ontological causes 
but rather in terms of number and measurement..,. Physics and natural 
science, if they are taught not only for the sake of practical applications 
but essentially for the sake of knowledge, with reference to the specific 
epistemological approach they involve and in close connection with the 
history of the sciences and the history of civilization, provide man with 
a vision, of the universe and an understanding of scientific truth and a 
sense of the sacred, exacting, unbending objectivity of the humblest truth, 
which play an essential part in the liberation of the mind and in liberal 
education. Physics should be taught and revered as a liberal art of the 
first rank, like poetry, and probably more important than even mathematics. 2 


Maritain, Education at the Crossroad s, p. 67. 
2 Ibid. p. 69, 







, 






.. ■ :* ■ 


, 






■ ... 

: c • '/ ... ■ . 




. 






























■ 




















39. 


Maritain does not stress the classical languages in his outline. He 
deliberately omits them, placing them in the class of specialized studies, to 
be undertaken only for some definite purpose. He explains this attitude by 
saying: 


Our curriculum, besides, does not mention either Latin or Greek; in 
my opinion, they would represent chiefly a waste of time for the many des¬ 
tined to forget them; Latin, Greek, and Hebrew (or at least one of these 
three root-languages of our civilization) should be learned later on - 
much more rapidly and fruitfully - by graduate students in languages, lite¬ 
rature, history or philosophy. 1 

During the study of the humanities the student will gain a useful know¬ 
ledge of the inner mechanisms of language, one practical result to be achieved 
by the study of the classics. Foreign language study offers a means of mastery 
over the national language, while the study of great books gives the best learn¬ 
ing in literature. The study of these great books should be from the original 
texts since it is from these texts that the deep thought of the author is ob¬ 
tained, Commenting on this method of studying classical, literature, Maritain 
says: 

One cannot emphasize too much the educational role of great books. 

Yet this role does not only consist in sharpening the intellectual, power 
of the youth; they are not only like a large bone with which a puppy 
struggles so that his teeth may grow sharper. To bring the metaphor to 
completion, it should be added that this large bone is a marrow-bone, and 
that not only do the puppy*s teeth have to grow sharper, but his living 
substance also has to feed itself on the valuable marrow. It is doubtless 
not a question for the young student of ^mastering 1 * the great books, but 
of discovering and being quickened and delighted by the truth and beauty 
they convey - and, if they convey errors too, of discerning and judging 
the latter, however awkward and imperfect this process may be at first. 

The intellect *s teeth are not really sharpened if they are not able to 
separate the true from the false. That is why the great books should not 
be too many in number, and their reading should be accompanied by enlight¬ 
enment about their historical context and by courses on the subject matter,2 


3 -Ibid . p. 69. 
^I bid , p. 70. 







, 

*■' 

. 







. 

, 

... r. ; "/ " v ., ! j ,oJ: ':' r orSfl Wjfi& 

* 








. 

. 




„ 

< 










90. 


Maritain states definitely that education which omits the study of 

philosophy lacks the crowning glory of the finished edifice. He would make 

this study a necessary part of the educational process. He says: 

... education deals ultimately with the great achievements of the human 
mind; and without knowing philosophy and the achievements of the great 
thinkers it is utterly impossible for us to understand anything of the 
development of mankind, civilization, culture, and science.' 

He sees the difficulty of teaching and studying philosophy since modern 
philosophers hold divergent views on the basic principles which are the starting 
points of the various systems. This difficulty can be overcome, according to 


Maritain, when the stress is laid on the basic truth which underlies each sys¬ 


tem and when consideration is taken of the fact that the purpose of philosophical 
courses is to cause the student to think, rather than to accept the system of the 
teacher without critical analysis of the system. Maritain says on this point: 


The solution of this problem may take two forms. First, there is a 
common, though unformulated, heritage of philosophical wisdom which passes 
through any real teaching of philosophy, whatever may be the system of the 
teacher. Reading Plato is ever a blessing, even if you disagree with the 
tenets of Platonism. Second, teachers in philosophy are not teaching to be 
believed but in order to awaken reason; and the students in philosophy owe 
it to their teacher to free themselves from him.^ 


Maritain also considers philosophy without theology to be incomplete. 
According to him, the western culture in which our educational frame is set needs 


an understanding of theological problems to be properly understood. 

Thus the considerations I have laid down regarding philosophy are still 
truer of theology, Nobody can do without theology, at least a concealed 
and unconscious theology, and the best way of avoiding the inconveniences 
of an insinuated theology is to deal with theology that is consciously aware 
of itself. And liberal education cannot complete its task without knowledge 
of the specific realm and the concerns of theological wisdom.-' 


1 Ibid . p. 72. 
2 Ibid , p. .72. 
'Ibid. p. 74. 










. 




. 

, 

, 

, 






* 









. 






























a 














91 


As with philosophy, the question of teaching courses in a subject having 
so many different views of fundamental doctrine poses a problem. Maritain, who 
advises the giving of such courses in the last year of the study of humanities, 
lays down certain guiding principles; 

The practical aspect of this question is of no difficulty for denomi¬ 
national colleges. With regard to nondenominational colleges, the practi¬ 
cal solution would depend on the recognition of the pluralist principle in 
such matters. Theological teaching would be given, according to the diver¬ 
sity of creeds, by professors belonging to the main religious denominations, 
each one addressing the students of his own denomination. And of course, 
those students who nurture a bias against theology would be released from 
attending these courses and allowed to remain incomplete in wisdom at their 
own pleasure*^ 

In the process of education, Maritain considers the perfection of learn¬ 
ing to take place in the university. Here the training and intellectual develop¬ 
ment, undertaken and pursued in the years of youthful study, would reach its 
highest state. For Maritain, the aim of a university is as follows; 

If, according to the European habit, we reserve the name university for 
higher learning in advanced and graduate studies, we might say that the aim 
of the university is to achieve the formation and equipment of the youth in 
regard to the strength and maturity of judgment and the intellectual virtues," 

The scope of the university in modern times should be broad enough to 
satisfy the demands of modern democratic civilization. Differing from the orig¬ 
inal idea of the university as modern life differs from that of the Middle Ages, 
departments and divisions of its teaching would embrace all the arts and sciences 
making up the body of knowledge of the modern day. Maritain writes on this point; 

And in our age, when such teaching does not deal, as in the Middle Ages, 
with the formation of an intellectual leadership essentially consisting of 
clerics, nor, as in the following centuries, with the formation of the po¬ 
tential members of the ruling classes, but deals, according to a more demo¬ 
cratic pattern, with the formation of a much larger and more diversified 
mass of outstanding citizens of all ranks in the nation, it is suitable that 


1 


Ibid. p. 75 















. 

. 

. : . ;■ 

, 


. • ' ' • • 














* 


' 

' 










. 




' 


_ 





92. 


actually all the arts and sciences, even those which concern the manage¬ 
ment of common life and the application of the human mind to matters of 
practical utility, should be embraced by the typical modern university. 1 2 3 

Maritain would divide the teaching of the university into three orders, 

graded from the study of the useful arts and applied sciences to the realm of 

speculative sciences and fine arts. The first of these orders would be: 

... concerned with the realm of useful arts and applied sciences in the 
broadest sense of these words, and with advanced studies in technical 
training, engineering, administrative sciences, arts and crafts, agricul- 
ture, mining, applied chemistry, statistics, commerce, finance, and so on. 

The second would be concerned with the realm of those practical sciences 
which relate to man himself and to human life. Such sciences would include 
medicine and its allied subjects on the one hand, and on the other such fields 
as law, politics, education and so on. 

The third order would be concerned with the speculative sciences and 
fine arts, a knowledge which liberates the mind by truth or beauty. Of this 
order, Maritain writes: 

At this point we find the immense chorus of the free workings of the 
spirit, mathematics, physics, chemistry, astronomy, geology, biology, 
anthropology, psychology, pre-history, archeology, history, ancient and 
modern literature and languages, philology, music, fine arts and so on. 

That is the very core of the life of the university and the very treasure 
of the civilized heritage.-^ 

For the perfection of the highest education Maritain would have a fourth 
order, of which he writes: 

And this third order is to culminate in a fourth one, which is the 
highest animating center in the architecture of teaching, and which deals 
with those sciences that are also wisdom because they are universal by 
virtue of their very object and of their very essence: the philosophy of 


llbid . p. 76. 

2 Ibid , p. 77. 

3 Ibid . p. 78. 







.. 

.. . 

, . . . • f ■ • . V.i • • :■' • ix ' , «? ‘ ‘ : 

‘ t 

■ ' ' 
... •:> : 

. .■/. . 

, . . < . , '. ' «' *. ■ ' . ' -• ■ 

- . . 


















93. 


nature, metaphysics, and the theory of knowledge, ethical philosophy, 
social and political philosophy, the philosophy of culture and of his¬ 
tory, theology and the history of religions. 

Maritain feels that the function of the university would not be per¬ 
fectly carried out if there were not an opportunity for the study of teachings 
and findings of theology. Even for those students who do not accept the teach¬ 
ings of theology as true, he feels that there is great benefit in coming in 
contact with them since from these teachings they will receive breadth of 
vision and acquaintance with the roots of our culture and civilization. Mari¬ 
tain feels that, in the universities which are nondenominational, the various 
schools of theology should be represented impartially, open to all the students 
and having as their purpose, not the formation of clerics, but the enlighten¬ 
ment of laymen in the problems and findings of these creeds. 






1 Ibid. p. 78. 















. 


■ , 

































94. 


CHAPTER VI 

PROBLEMS OF PRESENT-DAY EDUCATION 


Maritain sees the recent world struggle of the nations as the end of 
an era of individualism in thought, industry and statesmanship. This stressing 
of the individual in industry by the "laissez faire” policy, in thought by the 
angelism of Descartes, and in statesmanship by the exaggeration of nationalism, 
reached its climax in the two world struggles through which the nations have 
passed in the last two generations. 

Maritain feels that man must reconsider the effect of this individual¬ 
ity on mankind, and reshape his thought to avoid a repetition of the evils which 
have come from it. He writes of this; 


If mankind overcomes the terrible threats of slavery and dehumaniza¬ 
tion which it faces today, it will thirst for a new humanism, and be eager 
to rediscover the integrity of man, and to avoid the cleavages from which 
the preceding age suffered so much. 


Maritain is not alone among those who write on education in seeing dan¬ 


gers in the future as well as certain lacks in the past. R.M. Saunders, writing 
in the publication, Education for Tomorrow , says; 


Our ancestors had their roots. They knew what they believed. They 
were in touch, intimate touch with the sources of spiritual capital. Too 
many of us are rootless. We have lost touch with the spiritual sources of 
our way of life. We do not know what we believe. We drift in a sea of 
chaos. Thoughtful people wonder how many tests such as we have undergone, 
we can survive. To them our victory is not a triumph barely won, but a 
catastrophe barely averted.^ 


^Ibid. p. SB. 

2 

Richard M. Saunders, Education for Tomorrow , a Series of Lectures organized 
by the committee representing the Teaching Staff of the University of Toronto 
(Toronto; The University Press, 1946), p. X. 
















95 . 


This new humanism of which Maritain speaks will demand a new education, 
or, at least, a new outlook on education, so as to bring about in society an at¬ 
titude of mind which will make this new humanism known and desirable. 

Bourgeois individualism is done for. What will assume full importance 
for the man of tomorrow are the vital connections of man with society, that 
is, not only the social environment but also common work and common good.^ 

Maritain sees two possible replacements for the individualism of the 
bourgeois era, either totalitarianism or regimentation of the beehive typ% or a 
civilization founded on time humanism. He writes: 

The problem is to replace the individualism of the bourgeois era not 
by totalitarianism or the sheer collectivism of the beehive but by a per- 
sonalistic and communal civilization, grounded on human rights and satisfy¬ 
ing the social aspirations and the needs of man.~ 

Maritain writes of education as a process which must look to the future, 
must anticipate the needs of the future and prepare men for these needs by train¬ 
ing them to fulfil these needs before they become of immediate necessity. The 
time lag between the felt need of the culture and the preparation for that felt 
need should be as short as possible. This lag is overcome by the advance think¬ 
ing of those in control of education. The work of the educator of today is to 
lay the foundation for the needs of tomorrow by re-directing the thought of 
man to the new humanism of which Maritain has made mention. 

Education must remove the rift between the social claim and the individ¬ 
ual claim within man himself. It must therefore develop both the sense of 
freedom and the sense of responsibility, human rights and human obligations, 
the courage to take risks and exert authority for the general welfare and 
the respect for the humanity of each individual person.-" 

In thus outlining the work of education, Maritain again asserts his be¬ 
lief that man is first a person, possessing an intelligence and will and thus hav¬ 
ing the right to the possession of truth and good; and second, man is a member of 
society the good of which is common to all its members. 

ij, Maritain, Education at the Crossroads , p. 39. 

2 Ibid . p. 39. 

3Ibid , p. 39. 



















96 . 


This concept of the role of persons in society is a basic one with 
Maritain who is deeply concerned with the nature and role of the person in 
human life and equally concerned with the role of the person in society. He 
writes, "To state it rigorously, the person cannot be alone. It wants to tell 
what it knows, and it wants to tell what it is - to whom, if not to other 
people?”! He speaks of Rousseau's statement that the breath of man is deadly 
to man, and Seneca's remark that every time that he has been among men he has 
returned a diminished man, and says of these views: 

All that is true - and yet by a fundamental paradox we cannot be men 
without going among men, we cannot make life and activity burgeon within 
us without breathing in common with our fellow-men. Thus society is born, 
as something required by nature, and (because this nature is human nature) 
as something accomplished through a work of reason and will, and freely 
consented to. Man is a political animal, which means that the human person 
craves political life, communal life, not only with regard to the family 
community, but with regard to the civil community. And the commonwealth, 
in so far as it deserves the name, is a society of human persons.^ 

It is from this natural condition of man, the possession of intelli¬ 
gence and will, that the freedom which is essential for the full life of man 
comes, and with it the search for and attraction to the good, taking man out 
of himself and expressing the love for others which is the basis for the recog¬ 
nition of the dignity of his fellow-men. 

The question of leisure in the post-war world is one which commands at¬ 
tention on the part of Maritain. In the modern world shorter working hours, 
labor-saving devices and lessened demands on the energy of the people have left 
both time and energy at the disposal of the people. Maritain thinks that a 
liberal education is of use in making provision for the enjoyable spending of 
this time and energy. He writes: 




lj. Maritain, The Rights of Man arid Natural Law , p. 6. 
2 Ibid . p. 6. 




























1 












97 . 


The problem of human leisure, which mechanical and social progress 
had made important before the war, is bound to become a particularly 
crucial problem in the world of tomorrow. Physical and mental relaxa¬ 
tion, plays, movies, games, are good and necessary. Only that leisure 
however is suitable to what is most human in man, and is of greater worth 
than \Jork itself, which consists of an expansion of our inner activities 
in enjoying the fruits of knowledge and beauty. Liberal education enables 
man to do so. Here we see one of the reasons why liberal education should 
be extended to all. 

This problem of leisure has attracted the attention of others interes¬ 
ted in the work of education in the post-war world. It is considered as a major 
problem by Herbert Read, who, in his book. Education for Peace , says: 

But when, as nowadays, we speak of the problem of leisure, we are not 
thinking of securing time or opportunity to do something: we have time 
on our hands, and the problem is how to fill it. Leisure no longer sig¬ 
nifies a space with some difficulty secured against the pressure of events: 
rather it signifies a pervasive emptiness for which we must invent occupa¬ 
tions. Leisure is a vacuum, a desperate state of vacancy - a vacancy of 
mind and body. It has been handed over to the sociologists and the psych¬ 
ologists: to such specialists it is more than a problem - it is a disease. 

Read’s judgment on the nature of leisure in the present world may be 
considered a harsh one, but the recognition of the problem places some onus on 
the educators to find a solution for it, and Maritain would have it consist in 
so enriching the intellectual powers of the mind as to be a source of pleasure 
in the pursuit of intellectual recreation. This seems to be the idea of the 
Report of the Harvard Committee when dealing with the value in general of liberal 
education. 

The adult who rereads his great authors realizes how much he had missed 
of their meaning when he read them in school or college. Now^his reading 
is more rewarding because his range of experience is greater.'' 


1 J. Maritain, Education at the Crossroads, p. 89. 

^Herbert Read, Education for Peace (Hew York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 
1949), p. 44. 

^General Education in a Free Society . Report of the Harvard Committee. 
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1945), p. 70. 

















. 



























93 . 


This quotation would seem to indicate something of the same idea as 
found in Maritain, that liberal education would give food for profitable in¬ 
tellectual exercise during leisure time. 

Maritain feels that the education of tomorrow must stress the social 
obligations of each member of society. Effort must be made to inculcate in 
the youth of the time a realization of the debt each one owes society as we}l 
as an understanding of the responsibilities arising from membership in society. 


Maritain writes thus: 

The education of tomorrow must provide the common man with the means 
for his personal fulfillment, not only with regard to his labor but also 
with regard to his social and political activities in the civil common¬ 
wealth, and to the activities of his leisure hours. 

Maritain has been discussing the general trend of the education of to¬ 
morrow. He now discusses individual tasks which are incumbent on that educa¬ 
tion. He sees education extended into fields hitherto not considered proper 
to it. This extension must be carried on with due caution and regard for cer¬ 
tain inherent dangers. He writes: 

Education has its own essence and its own aims. This essence and 
these essential aims, which deal with the formation of man and the inner 
liberation of the human person, must be preserved, whatever the super¬ 
imposed burdens may be. It is not a question of refusing the latter. 

But if they were taken up in the wrong way, so as to warp the essential 
human values of education; or if the school, conceived according to some 
totalitarian pattern as an organ of the political state, were to replace 
the free and normal agencies provided by nature and God for the upbringing 
of man, then the common good, for the sake of which the super added burdens 
must be assumed, would not be ensured, but betrayed,"' 

Maritain advocates a state authority under which schools would be granted 
academic freedom, supervised by the state within the structure of the school as¬ 
sociations sanctioned by law. Any state interference with the organization or 


J. Maritain, ' Education at the Crossroads , p. 90 . 


2 Ibid. p. 91. 


























99 . 


the curriculum of these schools would be based on the free association agree¬ 
ments concluded between the state and representatives of the autonomous unions 
of the schools. He writes of this: 

Here we face again the importance of the pluralist principle, which 
grants to the manifold groups arising from free association the greatest 
autonomy, and bases the state*s superior authority on the recognition of 
the rights of these groups. As concerns the educational system, the plural¬ 
ist principle implies basically academic freedom. Not only does it stress 
the right to found schools, which is open to everyone qualified and comply¬ 
ing with the laws of the state. It also demands that diverse teaching 
institutions be free to join with each other in several unions or organ¬ 
izations which would be prevented by law from encroaching upon the basic 
liberties of their members, but could establish general regulations valid 
inside each union. It is by the agreements concluded between these unions 
(including the -unions of schools and colleges supported by the state) that 
any justifiable intervention of the state in educational matters might take 
place. 

Maritain*s concern for the freedom of the schools from state interfer¬ 


ence arises from the domination of education in Europe by the political parties 
in the dictator states. On this side of the Atlantic ocean, the question con¬ 
cerns the financial aid given to schools by the central government. James B. 
Conant has expressed some basic ideas on this subject as they apply in the 
United States. In his book, E ducation in a Divided World, he writes: 

Let us start with the elementary and secondary schools. These insti¬ 
tutions are firmly rooted historically in the local community. In spite 
of a considerable diversity in the development of universal education in 
the different states, I think it safe to say that the doctrine of local 
control of the school is one of the beliefs ingrained in the American 
mind. * 2 

Conant goes on to say, however, that this desire to have the schools 
controlled locally is not the true state of educational policy. He continues: 

The constitutional unit on matters of education, however, is not the 
town or city, but the state.-'’ 


~Ibid a p. 92. 

2 James B.‘ Conant, Education in a Divided World (Cambridge: Harvard Uni¬ 
versity Press, 1943)? P* 133. 

3Ibid , p. 194. 













Though the root of the question in this instance is finance, both Conant 
and Maritain see a danger of interference by the state in matters of curriculum 
and organization of the schools. The danger would be modified and the role of 
the state in education would be supervised by parents* associations which would 
counteract any attempt on the part of the state to assume control beyond its 
rights. Maritain writes on this point: 

An important role should be granted to the parents* associations, which 
would make their desires heard by the educational body and whose claims 
could counterbalance the demands of the state. 

Since every department of the social order would have its share in the 
work of education, Maritain has a place for those organizations which represent 
the working class. He says: 

The role of labor unions and other great economic or cultural organi¬ 
zations which might possibly become the founders and trustees of a number 
of privately endowed teaching institutions, should also be taken into con¬ 
sideration. 

Thus Maritain sees the education of tomorrow to be a social function of 
the state, the liberating of the free spirit of man in all walks of life, and 
a joint undertaking of all those who make up the political society of free men. 

One of the causes of the disruption of modern life appears to Maritain 
to be the decay of morality in the modern world. This decay, he considers, must 
be combatted by the education of tomorrow. One of the special tasks of the 
school is to assure proper order and discipline, not only in the school itself, 
but also in the social community for the good of which the educative process is 
being carried on. He writes of this: 

The task of moral re-education is really a matter of public emergency. 
Every serious observer recognizes the fact that children have not only to 
be trained in proper conduct, law observance, and politeness, but that this 
very training remains deficient and precarious if there is no geniune inter- 

lj. Maritain, E ducation at the Crossroads , p. 93. 







101. 


nal formation. That the teachers in public schools may not face unruliness 
and.violence,.moral authority must be recognized; and there must be a 
serious teaching of moral principles, I mean as grounded on truth rather 
than as suitable to social convenience. - 

The teaching of such moral principles presents a difficult task in 
countries where religious freedom allows a choice of dogma. Maritain claims 
that, in the teaching of morality, the modern educator is faced with the large 
number of parents who are opposed to any religious teaching for their children. 
This opposition must be taken into consideration since the parents as a group 
have great influence in the shaping of curriculum. This same reluctance to 
commit the school to a pre-determined dogma is expressed by Conant, who says: 

A wide diversity of beliefs and the tolerance of this diversity have 
constituted the bedrock of our national unity. They must continue to be 
the foundation for the peaceful growth of this republic. 

On the other hand, the school owes a debt of moral training to the so¬ 
ciety which it serves, one which must be paid in one form or another. It is 
but one of the many agencies in the moral training of the citizens, but an im¬ 
portant one. In the work, General Education in a Free Society, we read, H Clearly 
we have a right to expect the school to be engaged directly in moral education.’^ 
The youth of Canada expressed their opinion on the need of moral training in 
the schools. In a work called Youth Sneaks Its Mind , we read: 

They also expressed a need for greater command of good English, for 
moral guidance and religious training, for a philosophy of life and charac¬ 
ter development, training for leadership and help in learning 11 how to take 
hold of a proposal and carry it through,”^ 


J -Ibid . p. 93. 

p 

J.B. Conant, Education in a Divided World , p. 96. 

3 

General Education in a Free Society, p. 72. 

^Blcdwen Davies, Youth Speaks Its Mind (Toronto: The Ryerson Press, 194^), 
p. 105. 



















102 . 


Maritain speaks of the necessity of reviving the moral power of reason. 
There appears to be a great decline in ethical reasoning though this decline is 
more apparent at the present time in the ideas than in the actions of the people. 
This may result from lack of direction on the part of the teachers in the schools 
who themselves are the products of an education which has failed to direct their 
reason in the proper ethical channels. He writes of this: 

To such a disease of human intelligence and conscience, special remedies 
should be given, not only through a badly needed revival of religious faith . 
but also through a revival of the moral power of reason. Accordingly, if 
teachers may be found whose reason is healthier than that of their students, 
special teaching should be provided, in schools and colleges, for the princi¬ 
ples of natural morality,^ 

The exercise of natural morality feels more at home in the field of tem¬ 
poral activities which include such things as political, civic and social moral¬ 
ity. These temporal activities should be stressed in the school so as to incul¬ 
cate in the students the ethical approach to these sciences. 

The need for moral teaching in the modern world has been expressed by 
Sir Josiah Stamp in his book, We Live and Learn, where he writes: 

It is not to be wondered that young people are perplexed when the adult 
world is so divided in its opinions. Having lost tradition and authority 
as an adequate basis for our judgment of right and wrong, gnd conscience 
having no education, we have found no adequate substitute. 

The same writer, considering the need of religious education in the 
schools vital to the life of the nation, speaks of the duty of the schools in 
this regard in this way: 

The responsibility for the religious outlook in education is thus thrown 
on the educationist and the teacher to a unique degree. He cannot, in this^ 
particular, say that the business man can get what he wants by asking for it. 


1 J. Maritain, E ducation at the Crossroads , p. 94. 

r\ 

Sir Josiah Stamp, We Live and Learn (London: Macmillan and Co., Limited. 
1938), p. 183. 












■ 









. 

. 




* 






. 

- 




, 


' .' ■ ’ ' • ' : - ■ 

' . 






- 








r 


- 

' 
























103 . 


IJhen we proceed from business to the State or to those who directly con¬ 
trol social policy, the incidence of the responsibility is still unchanged. 
The educationist cannot divest himself of it by saying that he is there as 
a mere servant to supply according to other people*s specifications and 
that he has no rights or responsibilities of his own. 

Catholic authorities on education take a firm stand on the question of 
religious education in the schools. They assert that religious education is ne¬ 
cessary for the individual in his personal life as well as in his social life as 
a member of the community. On the question of the role of the school in preserv¬ 
ing the freedoms of deomcracy, Redden and Ryan states 

The question may well be asked, therefore, ”¥hat kind of world is needed 
in order that these freedoms may function effectively?”.... That kind of 
world ought to include, among other things, the recognition of individual 
freedom as a gift of God; respect for the inalienable rights of the in¬ 
dividual; knowledge of man*s brotherhood and spiritual equality; and the 
acceptance of absolute, universal, moral principles governing all aspects 
of life. Education, then, should seek to inculcate in the individual the 
foregoing fundamental truths if it is to effect desirable changes in the 
individual and, consequently, in the social order. 

There are many who do not agree that religious education lies within the 
scope of the school. Ernest Green, in his work, Edu cation for a New Society , 
writes? 


Now the Free Churches and the Anglican Church have reached a general 
agreement on the basis of religious teaching; and, though some Anglicans 
still clamour for denominational instruction, others - more enlightened, 
it may be suggested - are prepared to accept the position long since taken 
up by their new allies, and leave all sectarian teaching to the Church and 
the Sunday School.'' 

Because of this feeling on the part of many authorities against dogmatic 
religious instruction in the schools, Maritain feels that the schools of to— 


1 rbid . p. 92. 

John D. Redden and Francis A. Ryan, Freedom through Education (Milwaukee: 
The Bruce Publishing Company, 1944), p. 187. 


^Ernest Green, Education for a New Society (London: G. Routledge & Sons 

Ltd., 1943), p. 135. ‘ 



























104 . 


morrow must concentrate on the teaching of natural morality in the fields of 
political life and civilization. He writes: 

So the teaching of natural morality will naturally tend to lay stress 
on.what may be called the ethics of political life and of civilization. 
Which is all to the good (for here it enjoys its maximum strength and 
practical truth) provided that it resist the temptation of neglecting or 
disparaging personal morality, which is the root of all morality. Above 
all it. should resist the temptation of warping and' perverting all its work 
by making itself a tool of the state to shape youth according to the col¬ 
lective pattern supposedly needed by the pride, greed, or myths of the 
earthly community. 

Maritain asserts that the knowledge of the principles of morality is 
not enough to insure moral action by the individual. The vital faculty in¬ 
volved in action is not the intellect but the will, and so it is necessary to 
inculcate in the subject rectitude of will which results in a movement away 
from self and towards the good that it perceives in the moral act. He writes 
in this regard: 

Now since we are dealing with morality and moral teaching, we must 
not overlook the practical truth which is of the greatest moment in this 
regard: as to the actual uprightness of the will and human conduct, 
knowledge and sound teaching are necessary but are surely not enough. 

In order for us rightly to judge what to do in a particular case, our 
reason itself depends on the uprightness of our will, and on the decisive 
movement of our very freedom. ^ 

The place of the will in the act of moral freedom is expressed by Mari¬ 
tain more fully in his work, Freedom in the Modern World , where he writes: 

St. Thomas does not conceive Free Will as a sort of divinity of the 
noumenal order that lives within us and that nothing can affect. He 
knows that our free will is immersed in a world of affectivity, of in¬ 
stinct,. of passion, of sensitive and spiritual desire. Our will is 
solicited on every side; it is weak; it loves and desires all sorts 
of ^goods’* in its own despite. But when our intellect intervenes to de¬ 
liberate our action it awakens the infinite capacity for love of which 
we have been speaking; to will and to love this or that good to the point 
at which it determines my act, the act of my human personality, this is 


1 


J. 


Maritain, Education at the Crossroads , p. 95. 


2 Ibid. p. 95. 


















105 . 


proper to the free action of my will, for it depends on a practical judg¬ 
ment of my intellect which my will alone is able to control. 

The education of the will away from egoism and towards an outer good is 
given first in the security and love of the family, where the child first experi¬ 
ences parental and brotherly love. Later, this education is continued in the 
school where he learns to give of what he has for the benefit of his fellows. 

And it is in the nature of things that the vitality and virtue of love 
develop first in the family. Not only the examples of the parents, and 
the rules of conduct which they inculcate, and the religious habits and 
inspirations which they further, and the memories of their own lineage 
which they convey, in short the educational work which they directly per¬ 
form, but also, in a more general way, the common experiences and common 
trials, endeavors, sufferings, and hopes, and the daily labor of family 
life, and the daily love which grows up in the midst of cuffs and kisses, 
constitute the normal fabric where the feelings and the will of the child 
are naturally shaped. * 2 

The importance of the home as a basic educational unit is stressed by 
others in the field of education. Educational psychologists are concerned with 
such questions as the influence of members of the family on each other, the size 
of families, and the proper climate within the family group. Cole says: 

The child who is fortunate enough to grow up in a ”complete” family 
circle has the best possible chance of feeling secure and of developing 
a normal personality. If any member of the family is missing, the home 
environment is in some degree defective, and the child may suffer in con¬ 
sequence." 

The educational function of the home is stressed by Iddings Bell, who 


writes: 


ij. Maritain, Freedom in the Modern World. Trans. Richard 0*Sullivan, 
(London: Sheed & Ward, 1935)* p. 8. 

2 J. Maritain, Education at the Crossroads , p. 96. 

•'L. Cole, Psychology of Adolescence, p. 300. 














106 . 


Manners, morals, religion have always been taught by parents in the 
home; to teach them otherwise is to teach them awkwardly and badly. Be¬ 
cause. they are the indispensable disciplines which make for character, 
in which human beings must become and remain reasonably adept, and because 
such is the.function of the home, parents cannot abdicate the authority 
and.responsibility to teach them except at the cost of contributing to 
social disruption. 

Maritain stresses the importance of home education as a foundation for 
the good habits of later life. He writes: 

Over and above all, family love and brotherly love create in the heart 
of the child that hidden recess of tenderness and repose the memory of 
which man so badly needs, and in which, perhaps after years of bitterness, 
he will immerse^himself anew each time a natural trend to goodness and peace 
awakens in him. 


Maritain now considers the question of the needs of the state and the 
political commonwealth in the new world which follows the War. Here he finds 
another superadded task for education. From the freedom, rights, and autonomy 
which will come to the educational body and to the individual, will come respon¬ 
sibilities and moral obligations as their correlatives. These duties and re¬ 


sponsibilities will in no way detract from the freedom of the political body 
or the individual. Maritain states this clearly when he writes: 

In a human commonwealth, freedom and authority are as necessary for one 
another, by virtue of the nature of things, as their occasional conflicts 
are inevitable in actual fact. Political authority, that right to direct 
and to be obeyed for the sake of the general welfare* political authority 
is not opposed to human freedom, but required by it. 

He has made his thinking on this subject clear in another of his works. T he Rights 

of Man and Natural Law , when he says: 


A second characteristic relates to authority in society. The common 
good is the foundation of authority; for indeed leading a community of 
human persons towards their common good, towards the good of the whole as 
such, requires that certain individuals be charged with this guidance, and 


“B.I. Bell, Crisis in Education, p. $4. 

2 

J. Maritain, Education at the Crossroads, p. 97, 
3 Ibid . p. 98. 

















. 


' 

. 








» 




. 

. 

' 




' 


» 


■ 

. 


































107 . 


that the directions which they determine, the decisions which they make 
to this end, be followed or obeyed by the other members of the community. 

The free acceptance of authority in the democratic state is closely con¬ 
nected with education in the state. The ultimate goal of all the actions of the 
state is the common good. Education has the same end, the common good. Maritain 
says of the role of education in the free commonwealth: 

The educational body, to the very extent that it is free and autonomous, 
is bound in conscience to the common good. To the very extent that it is 
entrusted with an all-important function in the common good, it is bound in 
conscience to feel responsible toward the entire community, and to take into 
consideration the requirements of the general welfare. 

This interest in the common good and the role that education plays in bringing 

this good to reality, is also expressed by E. Green, who says: 

... the new society will have to face fundamental problems just as the old 
one had to face them, with the difference - that while today social initiative 
and action depends upon a small minority of the people who have had the good 
fortune to be equipped for the task - or who have struggled against all odds 
to equip themselves, equality of educational opportunity and a conception of 
the values in the content of education suited to a new society, x^ill produce 
men and women educated for the responsibility and capable of living the way 
of life which makes democracy a reality. 


Maritain points out that there is a responsibility on the political autho¬ 
rity to see to it that education is unhampered in the carrying out of the task 


of promoting the common good.. He writes of this: 

Political authority, in the broad sense in which I use the word, has 
not only to protect the freedom of teaching but also to guide it toward 
the good of the whole,.as far as a matter essential to the very life of 
the whole is involved, 


The danger .exists that the state may make use of education to promote its particu¬ 
lar political doctrine, overlooking or ignoring the basic aim of education and the 


~J. Maritain, The Rights of Man and Natural Law , p. 9. 

p 

j. Maritain, Education at the Crossroads , p. 98. 
Green, Education for a New Society , p. 143. 

^J. Maritain, Education at the Crossroads , p. 99. 








~ 

. 

' 

. 

. • 

' 

. 

. 

. ■■ '• ■ 

- 







103 . 


proper function of political authority. Maritain warns against this in the words: 

Indeed, the time of anarchical freedom, which is but a false freedom 
is gone. The crucial point is to pass on to an age, not of servitude, but 
of real and organic freedom. As concerns education, this is not the mo¬ 
ment to accept any philosophy which would warp its true essence, but 
rather to affirm and maintain this essence more than ever. I am afraid 
the new insistence on authority, therefore, if it departs from the unchange¬ 
able lines of the education of man, may perhaps deviate toward rather des- 
potical educational philosophies. 

The possibility of the political power making use of education to further its 
aims in the political field does not seem to Maritain to be too far-fetched. 


He speaks of certain writers x^ho look to education to produce a type of person 
apparently approved by the political tenets of the time. Maritain feels that 
this is outside the scope of education. He says: 

The state would summon education to make up for all that is lacking in 
the surrounding order in the matter of common political inspiration, stable 
customs, moral unity and unanimity, it would urge education to perform an 
immediate political task and, in order to compensate for all the deficiencies 
in civil society, to turn out in a hurry the type fitted to the immediate 
needs of the political power. Accordingly education would become a func¬ 
tion directly and uniquely dependent on the management of the state, and 
the educational body an organ of state machinery. As a result of the ex¬ 
traneous and unnatural burden imposed upon education, and of the subsequent 
annexation of the educational tasks by the state, both the essence and free¬ 
dom of education would be ruined. 

Maritain feels that the natural force of education, allowed to function 
without interference from the state, will achieve the ends of a democratic state. 


He forsees a new dynamic freedom in the education of the future which, by its 
very nature will counteract the forces opposed to the ideals of democracy. 

The freedom enjoyed by education, therefore, will not be a quiet and 
easy-going, peacefully expanding freedom, but a tense and fighting one. 

Yet while changing its mood and taking on a new and more stringent style, 
it can and must remain freedom. We may be sure that the educational system 
will not need any obstrusive pressure of the state in order to help the 
effort of the body politic toward moral unity .' 


1 Ibid . p. 99. 































. , 

. 


. 


» 


. 














■ 




. 


, 

■ '• c ' . ' • 


.1 




. 

. 

, 











. 

















■ * 




109 


Maritain pointg out that the democratic states are aware of their past 
failure to inculcate the fundamental principles of democracy in their citizens. 
This failure, he claims, has been apparent in the teachings of the schools, 
where no great effort has been made to state clearly and attractively the foun¬ 
dations of the democratic ideal. In the future, a clear and exact enunciation 
of these principles, impressing them on the minds and wills of the pupils, will 
be the true method of overcoming the false teachings of those who advocate the 
overthrow of democracy. He says: 

Democracies are aware today of their long carelessness in failing to 
defend and stress their own principles, their own intellectual and moral 
roots, in their own schools. They do not need to borrow totalitarian methods 
in order to remedy this lack. The great thing is that the democratic state 
itself have its own philosophy of life and society, and have faith in it. 

Maritain foresees great changes in the education of tomorrow. In spite 
of the weaknesses of the past and with the experience gained from these weak¬ 
nesses, he feels that correction will not be impossible. It is his opinion 
that the new education will be of immeasurable value to the democratic world. 

Of this, he says: 

All the new conditions I have mentioned may be satisfied without alter¬ 
ing the essence of education. At any rate this very essence must remain 
intact. For the sake of the new civilization we are fighting for, it is 
more than ever necessary that education be the education of man, and edu¬ 
cation for freedom, the formation of free men, for a free commonwealth. 

It is in education that freedom has its deepest human recess, where the 
reserves of freedom are kept alive. 4. 


llbid . p. 102. 
^Ibid . p. 102. 









* 


# 































- 


« 

« 




* 






, 


■ 

. 

. 










no. 


CHAPTER VII 

CONCLUSION 

The life of Jacques Maritain may be summed up as a continuous search 
for truth and for the meaning of reality. This search has been carried on 
for his own personal satisfaction and also that he might communicate the know¬ 
ledge of the truth to others who are seeking it. 

The refusal to be content with the explanations of reality accepted by 
his contemporaries might be taken as a sign of weakness and flight from the 
hard facts of life, but in the life of Maritain this idealism was a sign of 
moral strength, demanding personal and professional sacrifices in the attain¬ 
ment of the goal. 

Maritain was intimately connected with those who, in his country, were 
dissatisfied with the findings of the age of reason, so brilliantly initiated 
by his countrymen, Voltaire, Rousseau and Diderot. Men such as Beaudelaire, 
Psichari and Bloy had tried in various ways to find satisfaction of spirit in 
the material things of the world. Their failure to find this satisfaction 
spurred Maritain to seek in other directions. 

It cannot be alleged that Maritain was out of touch with the hard 
reality of thought common to the scientifically minded men of his day, since 
he himself was trained as a scientist. It was the very failure of science to 
answer his questions on reality that forced him to seek the answers in the 
realm of philosophy, a rare approach for one steeped in the tenets of modern 
science. His scientific training, along with his deep desire to know what 










■ 
















111 . 


lay behind the observable phenomena of the laboratory, made hiw subject his 
findings in the realm of truth to the light of logical criticism. Once he 
accepted his findings, he was determined to follow them to their conclusion 
without counting the cost. 

His meeting with Raissa Oumansoff, his future wife, was a milestone 
in the search for truth, since she, too, had the same desire to know the real¬ 
ity which underlay the scientific materials with which she worked. Her fail¬ 
ure to find this reality seemed a confirmation of his, and the conclusion they 
came to, that life without an adequate explanation was unbearable, led them to 
consider self-inflicted death preferable to life without meaning. 

The contact, through friends, with the philosopher Henri Bergson, was 
the first ray of light to fall on this unhappy pair, the first promise that 
their search was not in vain. Even the faint prospect of attaining a knowledge 
of the absolute lightened their despair and set them on the path to the final 
solution of their difficulties. 

It must be admitted that their solution does not commend itself to all 
persons of intelligence and good-will. For them, however, it was adequate and 
satisfying. It was, moreover, clearly not an emotional experience, but one of 
reason and logic. 

For Maritain, the absolute led directly to God. In keeping with his 
character, he was ready to accept the hardships and trials which he knew would 
result from the pursuit of such an ideal. He foresaw misunderstandings with 
his colleagues in the academic world, with his relatives and those of his wife. 
These misunderstandings came quickly and were a source of deep sorrow to him 
and to his wife. After several years of unimportant positions as hack-writer 
and as teacher in small schools, his work in philosophy began to be recognized 
and his career from that time on was brilliant and successful. 




' 




, 






. 

-> - .*• 










■ 






■ 




■ 

, . - 

















112 . 


Soon he began to find flaws in the teachings of Bergson and turned 
the more sharply to those of St. Thomas. In these teachings, he found the 
answers not only to his own personal problems but to those of many seekers 
similarly perplexed. 

Now a fresh challenge faced him, that of spreading the philosophy of 
St. Thomas, not as a historical curiosity, but as a working philosophy for 
modern life. To do this, he had to show the reason for the loss of favor of 
this philosophy in the past. In reviewing the history of philosophical thought 
from the period of the Scholastics to the modern times, he considered that Des¬ 
cartes formally stated the doctrine which has had great influence on modern 
thought. This was the theory that man knows by innate ideas which do not 
come from immediate contact with existing reality outside the mind. This rele¬ 
gated the intellect to a role of introversion, to a consideration of ideas al¬ 
ready existing within the mind of man and not, as St. Thomas teaches, to a 
role of extroversion, a consideration of the external truth of things. This 
explanation of the role of the intellect produced what Maritain calls the 
,, angelism H of Descartes, leading men to neglect the truth of reality as not 
pertinent to the question of epistemology, and later as no longer valid in the 
consideration of reality. According to Maritain, this misdirection of thought 
led to the dismissal of absolute truth from consideration and later from very 
existence. For him, this was the explanation of his professors* inability to 
answer his questions about the nature of reality. He considered it a duty to 
rectify this erroneous attitude and to apply Thomistic principles to the prob¬ 
lems of modern life. 

Maritain maintains that the direct consequence of this angelism is the 
denial, or, at least, the neglect of the spiritual. This, to him, is a perver¬ 
sion of the true nature of being which can be corrected only by a proper under- 






113 . 


standing of the true nature of man. He showed, according to Thomistic princi¬ 
ples, that man is spiritual as well as material. The spiritual part of man*s 
being is the more important, especially in the attainment of truth, since it 
is through the operation of this spiritual part that contact is made with the 
reality of sensible things. The truths gathered from the nature of the sens¬ 
ible objects around man lead him to a knowledge of the absolute truth which is 
known as God. 

This ability to know individual truths and to be led to the knowledge of 
the absolute truth seems to Maritain to be the reason for the dignity of man 
and the solid basis for the respect which is owed him by his fellow men. For 
this same reason, the rights guaranteed man by a democratic state have their 
origin in the very nature of man, a spiritual nature destined to the knowledge 
of the absolute truth. Mari tain considered this a lesson from Thomism which 
would be of value to the modern world since it would give a philosophical ex¬ 
planation of democratic ways of life. 

Maritain was led from his study of the nature of man to a considera¬ 
tion of the problems of education since they dealt with formation of man ac¬ 

cording to a definite ideal of \Hiat man should be. 

Because Maritain accepts the Thomistic view of the end of life, he 
speaks with authority on this question. He considers the end of life to be 
closely connected with the nature of man and his personality. The spiritual 
nature of man is the key to the direction which must be given the education 
of man. The real purpose of man*s existence is union with the - ultimate truth, 
attained by a knowledge of the intermediate truths which exist in reality. 

This final end of man is the goal of education, which prepares him for it. 

If one. accepts Maritain*s first principles, his theory of education 

seems logical, preparing man step by step for the final knowledge of the ul- 












- 







. 






‘ 




' 




■ 


- 


•* 




. 






. 




- 












, 

. 




' 












114 . 


timate truth. Maritain is firmly convinced of the validity of the Thomistic 
doctrine, as are those who accept these principles. There are others in the 
field of educational philosophy who do not agree with him. Dewey, for example, 
would consider the very activity of man an end in itself, sufficient to justify 
and motivate man to act, without reference to a union with ultimate truth. This 
view seems to place the criterion of man's actions within himself, while Mari¬ 
tain would have it outside the individual. Dewey would stress the sensitive 
in man while Maritain would stress the role of the spiritual. This view leads 
Maritain to emphasize the personality of man which rests on the spiritual rather 
than the individuality which rests on the material. The development of the 
spiritual element of man will produce one who is aware of the destiny of man¬ 
kind, and will develop the instrument by which this destiny can be achieved. 

Maritain proceeds to consider the dynamics of education as producing 
the desired effect. He follows the Thomistic school in the explanation of the 
nature of knowledge, showing that the active intellect of the child is the im¬ 
portant instrument in acquiring knowledge. It is this power of the intellect 
which is in contact with the reality of the object, though this contact is 
made through the senses. Thus the whole man is engaged in the process of learn¬ 
ing, while the role of the teacher is one of encouragement and direction. This 
theory of learning is in harmony with that of the modern educational psycholo¬ 
gists who stress the need of arousing the interest of the student so that he 
himself may carry out the task of learning. Maritain points out the need of 
the teacher in this process to create an atmosphere in which the learner can 
best operate, and speaks of the freedom of the learner as directed by discipline 
imposed by the teacher for the good of the learner. 

Certain dispositions are to be fostered in the pupil, according to Mari¬ 
tain. These are love of truth, love of justice and love of the good. Along 







* 



























115 . 


with these dispositions, Maritain would have the teacher inculcate a feeling 
of happiness and an acceptance of the student*s condition in life. A necessary- 
task for the teacher is to develop in the child a habit of work, not necessarily 
for the particular piece of work but rather a sense of responsibility for the 
task undertaken and the need of carrying it through to a successful conclu¬ 
sion. In this he differs from Dewey who sees the responsibility arising from 
the very doing of the activity, while Maritain sees it existing in the nature 
of the person, arising from the spiritual desire for the perfection of the in¬ 
dividual. This quality is stressed by many writers on educational subjects, 
though explained by them in different ways, some deploring the present-day at¬ 
titude to work, others placing the cause of such an attitude in the modern 
home-life, the demands of society or the failing of the old-fashioned virtues. 

Maritain also sees the necessity of fostering a feeling of co-opera¬ 
tion among the students. This attitude meets the approval of modern authori¬ 
ties on education. While the more important agent in the process of learning 
is the pupil, Maritain does not underrate the place of the teacher in learning. 
He considers certain dispositions which must be used by the teacher as a guide 

to good work. It is necessary that the teacher keep in mind the liberation 

of the spiritual powers of the learner. In each individual spirit and matter, 

as it were, vie for the ascendancy over the individual. If the spirit is to 

be the master, and Maritain considers this to be the proper order of nature, 
then there must be discipline and control of the material or animal nature of 
man. The discipline of the material will free the spiritual. The work of the 
teacher is to guide this liberation. It is for this reason that Maritain is in 
favor of discipline, which must always be used for the good of the pupil. It 
must never be harsh or cruel, but rather positive and helpful. 

The positive nature of the inducement to good work is one of the dis- 



' . 










116 . 


positions to be developed by the good teacher. This stands in accord with the 
findings of educational psychologists of the present time. Praise and reward 
for good actions are the best methods of motivation. Along with these quali¬ 
ties in the teacher, Maritain stresses the need of developing the power of* 
original thought in the pupil. In this he agrees with the authorities in modern 
educational thought. He advises the teacher to make sure that the pupil thinks 
through the problems confronting him, and holds that, unless the pupil does 
this, the knowledge he gains will be of little use. 

Finally, the teacher is advised to foster and respect that intellectual 
intuition, that direct approach to truth which is found at certain times in the 
reasoning of all young people and which is the outward sign of the inner power 
of the intellect. Maritain considers the liberal arts as the best means of pro¬ 
moting intellectual development and a liberal education as the proper one for 
the development of good intellectual habits. 

When Maritain has examined the dynamics of education, the operation of 
the learning process, and the necessary dispositions of the teacher, he proceeds 
to a consideration of the ability of the pupil to receive instruction. He sees 
three distinct stages in the development of the student - childhood, adolescence, 
and maturity. Each stage has its personality characteristics and each demands a 
different emphasis on the part of the instructor. The child lives in the realm 
of imagination and needs instruction which is based on imagery and wonder. Other 
authorities agree in this, seeing the child as different from the adult, and ad¬ 
vocating instruction which takes this difference into consideration. 

Maritain contends that, even at the lowest level, the educative process 
is to be directed to the acquisition of truth, though the means taken must be 
those which will be effective at the child’s intellectual level. All the approv¬ 
ed means of modern education are to be used, visual education, interest-arousing 





117 . 


presentation, and controlled direction under the supervision of skillful teach¬ 
ers. 

He criticizes modern educational thinking as over-stressing the physical 
elements in the child-education processes while ignoring or underestimating the 
spiritual development of the learner. Though he stresses the importance of the 
imagination, Maritain also sees a possible danger in over-stressing it without 
adequate controls, since the child lives so deeply in the realm of imagination 
that the dividing line between reality and imagination is not always clear to 
him, and the teacher must take precautions that such a distinction be made ap¬ 
parent to the child. 

In the adolescent stage, the imagination ceases to be the primary element 
in the learning process and the adolescent becomes aware of and enamoured of truth. 
It is the business of the educator to see that this awakening delight in truth be 
encouraged, lest the searching intellect of the youth lose its enthusiasm and be¬ 
come weary of seeking truth among the -uninteresting mass of dully-taught material. 
Some modern educators see education as a preparation for the daily work in which 
the youth will later engage. They would have the school prepare him for the 
work of life by teaching him the technicalities of industry rather than the fun¬ 
damental activities of the intellect. Maritain stresses the delight and desire 
the adolescent feels in the acquisition of truth, rather than the perfection of 
the technicalities of the subject-matter which he studies. Maritain claims the 
emphasis should be on the wide field of the truth of the subject rather than on 
the detailed mastery of the science being learned. 

While placing the emphasis on liberal rather than technical education, 
Maritain sees a very necessary place for the latter in the education of youth. He 
does claim a priority for the intellectual development over the mechanical train¬ 
ing of the pupil. To carry out his theories as to the emphasis in education, he 












•- 




. 




, 'I 

. 






■ 






- .... 






* 










. 

, 

. 

1 

« 






would have the liberal arts stressed throughout, beginning in the lower years of 
the school and advancing to the higher levels of education. He would have phil¬ 
osophy and theology taught by all universities, though not made compulsory for 
all students, and not limited to any fixed system or school of thought. 

Maritain sees the present condition of society as a direct result of 
the philosophy against which he has dedicated his life. Refusal to seek truth, 
denial of absolute standards and forgetfulness of the spirituality of man have 
produced the conditions which are regretted by the thinking men of the present. 
These conditions he sees as possible of correction through education. A real¬ 
ization of the worth of the individual, the democratic ideal, can come only 
through education for truth. It is only through correctness of thinking on 
the part of the individual that correctness of thinking in society will have a 
sound basis. It is only by instilling the true principles of moral thought 
that society can be regenerated and led to the freedom and value of democratic 
living. 

The goods of democratic living are for all men, and it is the role of 
education to place them within the reach of all citizens. To Maritain, this 
means a liberal education since it is the best development of the intellectual 
powers of man. Thus it is the duty of the state authority to see that the rights 
and freedom of education are granted and preserved within the state. 

Danger to educational freedom may arise if the state attempts to use 
its educational system to inculcate political ideas and shape its citizens in 
a political mould rather than to develop them intellectually. Maritain warns 
of this danger and points to the unhappy history of those European states which 
so debased education in the past. The best and surest means of advancing true 
democratic thinking and living is to allow the schools to carry on their work 
of intellectual training in the way in which they are best fitted to do so, with 






119 . 


state aid if necessary, but never with state interference in their proper work. 

The training of the young citizens is the work of many agencies, of 
which the school is but one. All these agencies must be inspired with a desire 
to shape the young in the good ideals of life, showing by example the end to 
which they would guide the learner. Education is the formal presentation of the 
way of life which is most suitable for the realization of the personal worth and 
value of the individual. It is by right education that the errors of the past 
will be corrected and the promises of the future realized. It is for this end 
that Maritain outlines his theories of education. To this he has dedicated his 
life and his work. He writes that men of today may be spared the lorg and pain¬ 
ful search that was necessary for him to find that which he sought. 






















1 


■ 





' 











120 . 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Aquinatis, S. Tomae. Summa Theologica . 7 vols. Taurini: Libraria Marietta., 
MCMXXXVII. 

Bell, Bernard Iddings. Crisis in Education . New York: Whittlesey House. 
McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., 1949. 

Bibliotheque de la Revue Thomiste. J acques Maritain. Son Oeuvre Phtlosonhinue. 
Paris: Desclee de Brouwer, editeurs, 1949. 

Bode, Boyd Henry. How We Learn . Boston: D.C. Heath and Company, 1940. 

Brubacher, John S. Mo dern Philosophies of Education . New York: McGraw-Hill 
Book Company, Inc., 1939. 

Butts, R. Freeman. A Cultural History of Education . New York: McGraw-Hill 
Book Company, Inc., 1947. 

Cole, Luella. Psychology of Adolescence . New York: Rinehart.& Company, Inc., 
1952. 


Conant, James Bryant. Education in a Divided World . Cambridge: Harvard Uni¬ 
versity Press, 1943. 

Davies, Blodwen. Youth Speaks Its Mind . Toronto: The Ryerson Press, 1943. 

Demiashkevich, Michael. A n Introduction to the Philosophy of Education. New 
York: American Book. Company, 1935. 

Dewey, John. Democracy and Education. An Introduction to the Philosophy of 
Education . New York: The Macmillan Company, 1922. 

du Nouy, Lecomte. Human Destiny . New York: Longmans, Green and Co., 1947. 

Education for Tomorrow . A Series of Lectures organized by the Committee repre¬ 
senting the Teaching Staff of the University of Toronto. Edited by 
Richard M. Saunders. Toronto: The University Press, 1946. 

Fuller, B.A.G. A Hi st ory of Philosophy . New York: Henry Holt and Company, 

1933. 

G eneral Education in a Free Society . Report of the Harvard Committee. Cam¬ 
bridge: Harvard University Press, 1945. 

General Education in School and College . A Committee Report by members of the 
Faculties of Andover, Exeter, Lawrenceville, Harvard, Princeton, and 
Yale. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1952. 

Green, Ernest. Education for a New Society . London: G. Routledge & Sons, Ltd,, 

1943. 

































121 . 


Henderson, Stella Van Petten. Introduction to t he Philosophy of Ednn.ntinn. 
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1947. 

Hook, Sidney. Education for Modern Man . New York: The Dial Press, 1946. 

Judd, Charles H. Educational Psychology . Cambridge: The Riverside Press. 
Houghton Mifflin Company, 1939. 

Kelly, William A. Educ ational Psychology . Revised Edition. New York: The 
Bruce Publishing Co., 1941. 

Lewis, C.S. The Abolition of Man , or Reflections on Education with special 
reference to the teaching of English in the upper forms of schools. 

New York: The Macmillan Company, 1947. 

Livingstone, Sir Richard. Some Tasks f or Education . London: Oxford Univer¬ 
sity Press, 1946. 

Lodge, Rupert C. Ph ilosophy of Education . New York: Harper & Brothers, 1947. 

Maritain, Jacques. Antimoderne . Editions de la Revue des Jeunes. Paris: 
Desclee et Cie., 1222. 

_-_« Education at the Crossroads . New Haven: Yale University Press, 

1943. 


___ . Freedom in the Modern World . Translated by Richard 0*Sullivan. 

London: Sheed & Ward, 1935. ' 

. St. Thomas Aquinas . Translated by J.F. Scanlan. London: Sheed 
& Ward, 1931. - 

. St. Thomas Aquinas . Translated by J.F. Scanlan. London: Sheed 
8c Ward, 1943. 

__. Three Reformers . London: Sheed & Ward, 1950. 

. The Rights of Man and Natural Law . Translated by Doris C. Anson. 

New York: Charles Scribner f s Sons, 1943. 

. Ransoming the Time . Translated by Lorin Binsse. New York: Charles 
Scribner^ Sons, 1941. 

Maritain, Raissa. Adventures in Grace . Translated by Julie Kernan. New York: 
Longmans, Green and Co., 1944. 

. We Have Been Friends Together . Translated by Julie Kernan. New 
York: Longmans, Green and Co., 1940. 

Meiklejohn, Alexander. Education Between Two Worlds . New York: Harper & 
Brothers, 1942. 

Morgan, John J.B. C hild Psychology . New York: Farrar 8c Rinehart, Inc., 1942. 










































122 . 


Neatby, Hilda. So ..Little For The Mind. Toronto: Clarke, Irwin & Company, 
Limited, 1953. 

Pegis, Anton C. Basic Writings of Saint Thomas Aquinas. 2 vols. New York: 
Random House, 1945. 

Phelan, Gerald B. Jacques Maritain. New York: Sheed & Ward, 1937. 

Read, Herbert. Education for Peace. New York: Charles Scribner*s Sons, 1949. 

Redden, John D. and Ryan, Francis A. A Catholic Philosophy of Education . Mil¬ 
waukee: The Bruce Publishing Company, 1942. 

___. Freedom through Education . Milwaukee: The Bruce Publishing Company, 

1944. 

Rugg, Harold. Foundations for American Education . New York: World Book 
Company, 1947. 

Saturday Night . CLVIII, December 20, 1952. Montreal: Consolidated Press Ltd. 

Sorenson, Herbert. Psychology in Education. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Com¬ 
pany, Inc., 1940. 

Stamp, Sir Josiah. We Live and Learn . Addresses on Education. London: 
Macmillan and Co., Limited, 1933. 

Wallace, Malcolm W. T he Humanities. Royal Commission Studies. A Selection 
of Essays prepared for the Royal Commission on National Development 
in the Arts, Letters, and Sciences. Ottawa: Edmond Cloutier, Printer 
to the King*s Most Excellent Majesty, 1951. 























