
Adamfi, James 

The psychology of impressionism. 


For Reference 






NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 





































/ 



1 



UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 


The undersigned hereby certify that 
they have read and recommend to the Faculty 
Council for acceptance a dissertation on 
"The Psychology of Impressionism" submitted 
by James Adam, B.A*, in partial fulfilment 
of the requirements for the degree of M.A. 


Edmonton, 
April, 1915, 




















THE PSYCHOLOGY OP IMPRESSIONISM 


by 

James Adam. 


University of Alberta 






Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/james1915 


1 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF IMPRESSIONISM . 

The modern expansion of art-forms and the 
inauguration of psychological research have given a 
new direction to aesthetic theories. In conformity 
with the scientific trend of our age beauty is thought 
of in some such phrase as "characteristic expressive¬ 
ness for sense-perception" or "the harmonious function¬ 
ing of the organism," rather than as Hegel’s "shining 
of the idea through matter" or Schelling’s "perception 
of the infinite in the finite." A well-known 
psychologist, realizing that aesthetic canons are bound 
up with problems of physiology and psychology looks 
forward to the time when the work of art will be pro¬ 
duced according to scientific prescription. There is 
no more striking instance of this relation than Impress¬ 
ionistic painting in its application of the results of 
Helmholtz, Chevreul and Fechner. It was a kind of 
protest, in the light of these researches, against 
the accepted psychology of art. This paper proposes 
to examine how far recent psychological investigation 
has Justified the grounds of that protest. 

The term Impressionism has, apart from its 
popular signification as a synonym for technical 
incompetence, two distinct meanings. First, it is 









■ 


' ■? 


: o 






' 


. 


7 


yi, 








2 


used in a general sense of that kind of painting which 
is opposed to making a picture a catalogue of objects, 
and which paints things "in the order of attention." 

This has been called Subjective or Emotional Impression¬ 
ism. In this sense, not only Velasquez, Robust! and 
Rubens, but Watteau, Claude Gellec , Turner, Constable 
and Carot were the precursors of a movement which 
embraced such oppositions of individual expression as 
Whistler and Degas, Manet and Brangwyn, Horne1 and 
Liebermann. 

The term is used, however, in a more specific 
way to express the technical methods of those Erench 
artists who sought to get rid of academic rules, of 
the literary "tone" of art, and to make painting the 
"visual language of the imagination." It is known as 
Objective or Scientific Impressionism; sometimes in 
the more appropriate term Chromatism. These Chromatists, 
led by Claude Monet, threw all the weight on the aes¬ 
thetic value of colour. Subject, which is mainly a 
question of form (and therefore of line) they ignored, 
because the attainment of correct form is scarcely 

ever compatible with that purity of colour sought by 

% 

them. They rejected the idea that a picture should 
be (in Whistler's phrase) "a method of bringing about 
a literary climax." One may ignore or generalize 


. 





f 




















forms of nature only: subject and line must control 
all figure painting. On that account pictures by 
Monet, Sisley, Pissarro, Cezanne, and Emile Claus 
are chiefly of landscape, where the aesthetic charm 
of pure colour could he best attained. Their tech¬ 
nical methods of dissociated tones, the study of 
values, the effects of complementary colours are 
thus described (G. Moore, Modern Painting , p. 87): 
"Browns and blacks disappeared from the palettes of 
those who did not wish to be considered presque du 
Louvre. Venetian reds, siennas and ochres were in 
process of abandonment and the palette came to be 
composed very much in the following fashion: violet, 
Y/hite, blue, white, green, white, red, white, yellow, 
white, orange, white,- the three primary colours and 
the three secondary colours with white placed between 
each so as to keep everything as distinct as possible 
and avoid in the mixing all soiling of the tones." 

So, also, a French critic (Arreat: Psychologie du 
peintre , 1892): "Les tachistes . eux, couvrent leur 
toile de larges gouttes vertes, jaunes, bleues, 
lilace / es, etc.; ils accouplent les rayons du prisme 
sur un fond neutre, et laissent a nos yeux la charge 
de recomposer a distance le ton voulu." The movement 


became more scientific under the Beo-Impressionists 
















£ 



4 


it 

and the Synchronists (see J. Meier-Graefe, Modern 
Art Vol. I. p. 311), hut the underlying psychological 
bases were alike, and these have been excellently 
summarised by Mauclair in the following statement: 

"In nature no colour exists by itself. The colouring 

of objects is a pure illusion.the mystery 

of matter escapes us; we do not know the exact moment 
when reality separates itself from unreality. All we 
know is that our vision has formed the habit of dis¬ 
cerning in the universe two notions: form and colour: 
but these two notions are inseparable. Only artifi¬ 
cially can we distinguish between outline and colour: 
in Nature the distinction does not exist." 

In such a statement the aesthetic sentiment 
rests almost wholly on physiological grounds, a 
particular case of Fechner's "aesthetics from below." 

It recognises only the direct factor mentioned in 
"Vorschule der Aesthetik;" it does not recognise the 
indirect non-sensuous factor, "that large and important 
part of aesthetic effect which arises from association, 
suggestion, or the play of the imagination" (Sully). 

Now, in the direct factor there are two components 
(1) the sensuous or material (E) the formal or relation¬ 
al, and we have seen that the Chromatists disregarded 

# Cubism, be it noted, is in direct antithesis to 
Impressionism: see the book on this subject by Gleize 
and Metzinger. 



















- 

' , . . . , . 


: ' 

, 















- 




: 




* 












1 




« 




1 • 







: 






- 





» 



, 


« 

( 








5 


the second of these. How far were they justified in 
restricting the aesthetic sentiment to the sensuous 
or material element, rejecting not only the relational 
elements "but also the factors "from above?" Is there 
an aesthetic gain in exploiting the value of colour 
at the expense of line and mass? This leads to a more 
fundamental consideration, viz. the relative aesthetic 
value of line and colour. It is therefore to the 
psychology of the primary states of consciousness that 
we turn - to sensation and feeling as far as these 
relate to form and colour - for an explanation of 
this manifestation of the art-impulse. 

Our first consideration is as to the relative 
pleasurableness of form and colour as simple and 
separate manifestations. In his discussion of the 
qualities of bodies Locke distinguishes ("Human 
Understanding" Bk II. ch £) between primary and 
secondary qualities. In the former, bulk, figure, 
situation, motion or rest are inherent qualities 
"whether we perceive them or no:" in the latter, 
bodies may have sensible qualities by which they 
have the power of producing impressions in us. To 
the first order belongs form, to the second colour. 
Proceeding on this basis, Ruskin ("Modern Painters" 
Vol. I. Part II.Sec.1, Chap.5) - as might have been 
expected of one who defines art as "that which gives 






- 


* 






. 

, . 




. 


• • 









6 


the greatest number of the greatest ideas" - asserts 
that "colour even as a source of pleasure is feeble 
compared with form." Ruskin is, of course, thinking 
of line and mass in landscape painting which gives 
"the greatest ideas", i.e. of the indirect factor in 
aesthetics; and modern book-illustration and photo¬ 
graphic reproduction shew that this agrees in the main 
with ordinary experience. Further, it has been observ¬ 
ed by Loewe "Rendering of Nature in Greek Art" (p.29) 
"that the greater number of memory-images are undeter¬ 
mined by colour." But is this the case on the level 
of the sensations as experimental psychology has 
examined them? We know that the whole retinal field 
is able to receive the stimuli of form while only a 

ti 

restricted area may be stimulated by colour (Eulpe). 

The comparative frequency of colour-blindness is 
evidence of the relative instability and probably 
later development of the colour-sense (Grant Allen), 
which is further attested by the presence of rods with¬ 
out cones in lower visual organisms. Even before there 
is any vision, we have a muscular and tactual apparatus 
for perceiving space arrangements (Stratton, Exper . 
Psych , and Culture p. 250). To this must be added the 
fact that what we call "local colouf f is an adventitious 
quality. "There is no colour peculiar to any object, 
but only more or less rapid vibration of light upon 

















; 








* 
















' 

■ 

. 






... . 


* 







7 


its surface" (Mauclair). Colour is essentially, then, 
of the nature of a luxury, probably the aesthetic 
climax of a biological evolution (as Grant Allen 
asserts ) whereby the utilitarian taste at first devel¬ 
oped in man's frugivorous ancestors lias survived in 
somewhat disinterested forms. 

Let us first consider the effect of single lines 
or colours, before dealing with harmonies arising from 
their combination. ' Before doing so, it is necessary 
to determine the relation of sensation to feeling. 

When the organs of sense are stimulated, a double 
process is started, on the one hand a cognitive 
process leading to perception, on the other, an- affect¬ 
ive process leading to feeling. As to whether these 
processes are independent and simultaneous there is 
much controversy among psychologists. Are feelings 
the attributes of sensations, or functions of sensa¬ 
tions, or the product of an independent conscious 
process? The extremes of these views are represented 
in the Herbartian (intellectualist) school and in the 
James-Lange / (physiological) school. The latest repre¬ 
sentative of the Herbartians considers feeling as "the 
consciousness of the fusion or inhibition of the 
presentations" (Volkmann Lehrbuch der Bsychologie ). 

They are not primary or independent states, but rather 











e 




< ■ ' 

« 

't ; i : . f 

. 






, 

• . - 














8 


the "consciousness of the process of ideation itself." 
This intellectualistic basis of feeling, if it could be 
substantiated, would be a serious argument against the 
Impressionists method, for it would indicate an initial 
bias which the perceptive process had acquired, and so 
would make more difficult the task of placing the 
psychology of Impressionism on aesthetic grounds. Wundt, 
however, (Phys. Psych. I.534,3rd Ed.) in developing his 
tridimensional theory of feeling has made an effective 
criticism of the Herbartian position. Perhaps recent 
psychology has gone to the other extreme. When Fechner, 
criticising lotze, pointed out that "the psychically 
unitary and simple are resultants of a physical manifold" 
he stated the crucial problem on v/hieh the recent 
physiological theories are based. These theories 
connect all states of feeling with biological conditions, 
and consider them as the direct and immediate express¬ 
ions of the physical organism that have their roots 
in the needs and instincts (and therefore are connected 
with the movements) of the individual. But James, 
propounding this "psychology without a soul", whilst 
he insists that "each of us knows sensations and feel¬ 
ings only as introspectively distinguishable but 
inseparable, parts of the stream of his own conscious¬ 
ness, and that nothing in our experience justifies us 








* 

, 



, 


[ 






. 


. 

. t 

- 

t 

- 
























a 


in believing that such mind-dust exists or can 
exist," is forced to admit that although "the soul 
presents nothing, herself creates nothing, is at the 
mercy of the material forces for all possibilities, 
still, amongst these possibilities she selects and 
by reinforcing one and checking others, she figures 
not as an *epiphenomenon’, but as something from 
which the play gets moral support." This selective 
function in the production of sensations and feeling 
is evidently not to be explained on physiological 
grounds: it is an antecedent condition to the "possibili¬ 
ties arising from material forces." Rejecting then 
these intellectualistic and physiological theories, 
there remains the alternative towards which recent 
experimental psychology seems to tend, viz. that 
"affection must be given an elemental rank in con¬ 
sciousness as a process coordinate with sensation" 
(Titchener, Reeling and Attention , Lectures IV and 
VII). From the fact that feeling is never present 
without sensation, some psychologists such as Sully 
prefer to modify this statement by considering feeling 
the subjective quality or "tone" of sensation, though 
it may be noted here that this feeling-tone differs from 
sensation in that it is not a localized agreeableness, 
as e.g. in the sensation of yellow. In order that it 






c 

' 


1 

. 


- 

e 


- 


f 


* 








i • . .. 






10 


may not be an indifferent sensation the whole 
organism is adjusted to this stimulus, for pleasur¬ 
able or disagreeable feeling qualifies the whole of 
consciousness and does not attach itself exclusively 
to any sensation or other distinguishable element of 
the stream of consciousness. (McDougall, Body and 
Mind p. 312)• 

As a rule all the simple sense-feelings exhibit 
the "tone” of being agreeable or disagreeable. 
Sensibility to pleasure and pain may thus be said to 
be the essential element in our affective states 
(see Titchener, Kulpe, Marshall in loco ) though 
Wundt has enumerated three pairs of qualities. Only 
the first Wundtian pair, however (i.e. pleasure-pain) 
can have reference to the sense-feelings concomitant 
with visual sensations; and of these only the hedonic 
aspect of feeling may be considered, for lines and 
colours can hardly be positively painful. At most, 
the range would be from positive to neutral in the 
field of pleasure. For single lines and colours, at 
any rate, it is doubtful if the feeling ever becomes 
unpleasant, as is shewn by the well-known diagrams 
(see Ladd, Ziehen, Titchener) illustrating Weber 1 s 
law of the relation of stimuli to sensations and to the 
pleasure-pain qualities of feeling. 











e 


« 

. 




« , 

. 




- , 

- 

' ■ 

e 

r 


- 

1 






■ 



11 


As an illustration of this relation consider the 
sensation (say) of a yellow colour on a piece of 
cardboard• Light-waves , which reach the eye at the 
rate of 500 billions per second in order to produce 
the sensation of yellow, stimulate the nerve cells in 
that part of the retinal field round the yellow spot, 
where on account of the greater number of cones the 
susceptibility to colour vibrations is greater. At 
the same time that these vibrations from the yellow 
card reach the eye other vibrations reach it. The 
neural activities set up in the peripheral organ are 
various, and before sensation is possible some instinct 
ive choice has to be made of that series of vibrations 
most in harmony (we must presume) with the functioning 
of the organism. The brain, it is true, "receives all 
those nervous impulses that result in consciousness, 
but parts acted on by external physical agents (like 
the retina) and the parts transmitting the nervous 
impulse (like the optic nerve) are in a sense as much 
concerned in the production of conscious states as the 
brain itself” (McKendrick and Snodgrass, Physiol, of 
the Senses, p. £88). Efen at this stage an involuntary 
attention has been engaged in the choice of the series 
which (in this case) was to become the sensation of 
yellow. Such a choice, even at this early stage, in- 








e 

. 

y " 




. 

. . 

’ 

, ' f 




. ■ ' . , . 







12 


voIves the recognition of a primal psychic activity, 
under the control of which the eye moves in the direction 
of this chosen series. In this way a certain quality 
has been given to the stimulations by this consciousness 
"which is not confined to the recesses of the nerve-cells 
in the cortex of the cerebral hemispheres, but active 
also through the whole organism in the production 
of conscious states." The motor aspect of affection 
enters thus into even the initial stage of the process. 
The series of rhymthic vibrations thus selected for 
attention by the movement of the eye is in the position 
of the "most favoured nation." The repeated stimula¬ 
tions, as the result of this attention, gain in 
intensity, are propagated more harmoniously to the 
sensory cortex, and we become conscious of a sensation, 
which in a further stage becomes the perception of 
yellow. It has been argued that our sense of agree¬ 
ableness is explained by the kinaesthetic sensations 
aroused by these movements and accommodations of the 
eye, that these and the nervous changes and photo¬ 
chemical reactions which were the physiological 
phenomena of colour-vision warranted us in judging 
that pleasure and pain are determined by the efficiency 
or inefficiency of the visual organs, pleasure being 
dependent upon the use of surplus stored force. 











' 


• e 


- 




- , ' . 

r » • 

- 

' 




- 

, 







13 

Ladd has shewn that such physiological explana¬ 


tions, while accepted as accompanying motor correlatives 
of the affective state considered as pleasure-pain 
do not form a complete explanation. And even if we 
could reduce to simple terms of functional enhance¬ 
ment or arrest the complicated physiological con¬ 
comitants of agreeahleness, still the "meaning" of 
this enhancement or arrest must be referred to a 
psychic activity for "the sensory content of the 
consciousness of an object has for its physical 
correlate a number of discrete processes in the brain 
which in no sense constitute a unitary whole." 

(MeDougall op.cit.p. 311). Even bearing in mind the 
conclusions of Fere (Sensation and Movement, p.34) 
and Lehmann that every stimulus calls forth a 
modification of the activities of the body which 
modification, according to the intensity and the 
duration of the stimulus, takes the character ; either 
of enhancement or of arrest; and that in general, 
moderate stimulation promotes harmonious functioning 
and thus begets the feeling of pleasure in us % we do 
not thereby infer that this dilatation and increase 
of innervation constitute the pleasure, but rather 
that when consciousness by attending to the stimulus 
has given it a "meaning" of agreeableness, this 
function is enhanced and promoted. The lack of such 












r 



- 




















* 

♦ . . 

* , 

. 


, 

* 




. 

* 


14 


a "meaning” accounts for the fact that the other 
series of simultaneous vibrations from the luminiferous 
ether do not reach the stage of sensation, and give 
no agreeable tone because they are disregarded. The 
"vast mass of optic effects are practically indifferent" 
(Marshall, Pain, Pleasure and Aesth. p.292). To this 
enhancement or inhibition of function is primarily 
due the art-impulse. Modern psychology has placed 
greater importance on the fact which lies at the root 
of all imitation-theories and play-theories of art, viz. 
that every affective state can be interpreted in terms of 
activity and that pleasure (Hirn, Origins of Art p.35) 
"acute or massive appears as the result of a stimulus 
which owing to a happy proportion between its intensity 
and the functional capacity of the organ has modified the 
bodily functions in such a way as to produce manifesta¬ 
tions of energy." It is only by reference to the 
instinctive impulse to such imitative movements that 
we can explain the development of art-forms and the 
enjoyment of art. In the primary constituents of the 
sensation of yellow e.g. there is probably little more 
than response to stimuli (as Jastrow asserts) just as in 
a single tone from (say) a tuning-fork; pure tones are 
not those which music employs; and "even down in the 
simple sensations of sound as well as of colour the 



f ■ 

• J • f ' 

f 

- 






. 

, , •. f 

- . 


■: . ,‘\ ; ■ ■ 

- 

* 

♦ . 




' 










15 


pleasure is due in part to the presence of something in 
contrast to mere sensation - is due to the conjunction 
of sensation with the order and form in which the 
materials of such sensations are arranged." There is 
a spatial element even in the sensation of color. This 
was shewn very clearly in the excellent experiments 
made by G. Bullough with colored triangles. Not 
only weight (i.e. dark colors under light) determined 
the preference, but aLso area and length of time of ex¬ 
posure. (Of. Exp. by Clark, Goodall and Washburn on 
"effect of area etc"). Such a "sensation-mass" of 
uncertain localization as that from the cardboard 
though apparently perceived by the motionless eye is 
accompanied by a vast number of photo-chemical changes 
in the retinal field; and it is probable that the 
mere focussing of attention upon any colour-mass 
necessary to bring it into consciousness at all is 
accompanied by sensations and memory-images of sensations 
which belong to the tactual and muscular sense (Ladd, 
Descr. Psych, p.145). From such considerations TUchener 
(Attention and Feeling p.106) concludes that isolated 
patches of colour and isolated tones are usually 
indifferent; while Exner and other investigators admit 
that the influence of contrast both as to tint and 
intensity overrides all calculations as to agreeableness 






, 


* 














-- 

- 


- 






, ' 








16 


of single colours. The immediate agreeableness of 
colour in suitable circumstances is, however, generally 
admitted, and in most cases assumed. It is not so 
easy to admit this concomitant affection in the case 
of line-sensations. For with line we get beyond the 
elements of response to stimuli. The motor element 
and motor innervation become prominent. It is frequently 
assented that even if straight lines are indifferent, 
the eye finds pleasure in curves. This has been 
attributed to the ease of muscular activity of the 
various parts of the eye. But in recent experiments 
(Stratton: Exper. Psych, and Culture pp.238-40) the move¬ 
ments of the eye have been shewn to be very irregular 
and by no means suggestive of ease. The sensation of 
line is not merely "the demand of the eye" but also the 
"somatic resonance." This may only produce energetic 
and not necessarily harmonious functioning. It was 
the search for the aesthetic quality which underlay 
Hogarth's analysis of the serpentine line "leading the 
eye a kind of chase," as it underlies the recent 
theory of the sculptor Hildebrand - the theory of the 
"Fernbild" or distant view of form arising "from the 
demands of the eye." Even the simple sensation of line 
is a complex form of mental activity, which does not 
exhibit the immediate agreeableness of feeling, which 



, 

, 


* 

■ 

• 

, 

. 

•• 

■ 

■ 








17 


we find in colour. It seems justifiable to conclude 
therefore that so far as single lines and simple 
colours are concerned line has not so great affective 
potentialities as colour; that is to say, it is less 
aesthetic in character. 

So far, only the psychology of the earliest 
stages of feeling has been examined. We have seen that 
all sensory stimuli must be referred to some primal 
psychic activity which makes a choice as to which 
series of stimuli is conducive to the welfare of the 
organism; that this choice determines our attention to 
the stimulus; that the pleasure which accompanies 
sensation cannot, even in the primary stage, be satis- 
factorily accounted for by physiological considerations 
only; that such pleasure arises from the rhythmic 
nature of the stimulus which produces an affective 
state concomitant with sensation; that attention is the 
psychic effort to enhance the harmonious functioning 
of such a stimulus the motor counterpart of which 
is seen in such organic modifications as increased 
respiration, quicker pulse-beat, nervous reaction. By 
applying these conclusions to the relative effects of line 
and colour, it was found that colour was more 
immediate in its effect and therefore 1 a priori 1 better 
suited to develope an affective state; that the 
kinaesthetic factors of the sensation of line gave it 





- 







; 

» 

, 




. . 



. 









■ ' 











• 




18 


a bias to the cognitive process, and that, since colour 
and line were inseparable elements (at least so far 
as colour was concerned) the tendency was for the 
aesthetic quality to be suppressed. On this lower 
ground, then, the Impressionist, on account of the 
effort to give his work a purely aesthetic significance 
divested of literary association was justified in pre¬ 
ferring colour to the disregard (as far as possible) 
of the line-element. 

The shading of such an embryonic process into the 
so-palled aesthetic feelings makes psychological 
disintegration more difficult. But, however doubtful 
may be the aesthetic value of simple lines and colours, 
it is at least certain that space arrangements and colour- 
groups have acknowledged pleasure-giving factors. The 
difficulties of explaining whence this pleasure arises 
lie in the interplay of representative factors which are 
involved in the development of percepts from sensations. 
Kulpe, indeed, has the interesting suggestion that 
the aesthetic feelings arise from our judgments about 
this interplay of elements. The selective character 
of primary attention in the sensory process has 
already given hints of such a function of an instinctive 
nature. Interest is such an instinctive judgmeht. But 
this is different from the intellectualistic function 









* 

* 


' 




' 


. 




■ 








































19 . 


of judgment referred to by Kulpe. And indeed the 
problem for the Impressionists was how far art could 
resist the intrusion of such judgments. Sensations, 
then, as they develope to perception are modified in 
greater or less degree, by their affective tone. The 
effects of feeling on visual perception (Ladd, Descr. 
Psych.p. 365) are direct and indirect, the one a matter of 
the fusion of suggested images with the relatively meagre 
sensuous factors; the other through the relation which 
interest bears to attention. It is the influence of 
this feeling-tone so closely intertwined with attention, 
which is to determine whether the ideating process will 
result in an aesthetic state or whether the emotion will 
be stressed. "When emotions are at their maximum" 
writes Pillsburyf "Attention" p. 193)"earlier experience 
is not at work in the control of thought and action, but 
some stimulus, owing to its instinctive appeal, has become 
dominant in unusual degree. When all of the conditions 
of attention are active in normal strength, emotion is 
suppressed." If we ask why emotion is suppressed in 
one instance and the instinctive appeal is dominant 
in another, we return to the conflicting theories to 
which we referred in connection with the simple feelings, 
and the answer is again given: the nexus of sensations 
and of organic and motor reactions is innate: the 
instinctive impulse for enhancement of function prompts 











, 

• ■' . 

* 

? - •« 

■ 

.. 

■ . 

. 

* « 

«. . 

, ' 




20 


the individual to attain to the repetition of these 
stimuli which have been found harmonious. The prompt¬ 
ings to this attainment are known as the art-impulse. 

Such promptings, however, disturb the perceptual 
process, which can only result in clear percepts when 
the disturbing pleasure-pain element is near the 
indifference-point. Bergson has shewn how large a 
part is played by this feeling tone of sensation in 
disturbing the perceptual process, especially as regards 
remembering and reproducing sensations. On this account 
perception has been called sensation with a "meaning", and 
it is to be remembered that we are better able, as 
Schulze, Bullough, Scripture and others have shewn, 
to give this "meaning" to line than to colour. The 
Impressionists, who sought a direct sensuous appeal, 
were, therefore, so far, justified in their preference. 

In describing the affective state of agreeableness 
which was a concomitant of the sensation from the 
yellow cardboard we noted that this state though it 
arose from the stimulation of the peripheral organ did 
not come into consciousness unless the whole organism 
accepted it. This "somatic resonance" to feeling 
determines all impulse and leads to conscious striving 
for revival of what has been thus selected as advanta¬ 
geous to the organism. Where therefore such a sensation 






. 










■; 

V ' f . 

- 

. 

I 

, 








, 

. 

‘ • f 

















' 










21 


is objectified by consciousness becoming a percept, 
the agreeable element becomes enhanced by associations 
of former experiences. If the agreeableness is 
sufficiently strong, the intellective process will be 
arrested and the affective process enhanced. The 
art-impulse has its material in these recollected 
emotions. (cf. Wordsworth*s definition of poetry: 
"emotion recollected in tranquillity"). The effect e.g. 
in the perception of yellow would be that with this 
colour would be associated not such perceptions as 
gold, sulphide of arsenic, the Chinese, jealousy, but 
rather oranges, autumn, sunset, daffodils; in this 
latter group the feeling-element would be enhanced. On 
account of the opposing character of such memory-images 
Ribot has given two divisions of imagination - the 
practical and the aesthetic. But such a division seems 
hardly necessary. Since art is the development of 
activities prompted by instinctive impulse, the art- 
forms which at first were the social results of such 
activities became separated from their direct relation 
to concrete utilities. They acquired an autotelic 
character to a great extent, but art "never ceases to 
inform, never ceases to please, never ceases to 
stimulate, never loses something of a magical efficacy." 
(Hirn, Origins of Art , p.301). Eatenough weight is 






. 






t c 


. 











«. ' ' 

, 

t 

" 











22 


attached to this aspect of the art-impulse by the 
play-theories of Schiller (probably due to Home), 

Spencer and Groos, and to a less extent by the imita¬ 
tion theories. In its autotelic character the art- 
impulse has, it is true, something in common with play 
and on account of its relation to motor reactions of the 
organism it has been explained in the physiological way 
in which Herbert Spencer has explained the play-impulse 
(Princ. of Psych. Vol.II pp.629,630). But they are not 
identical as Groos (following Schiller: see Hirn, op. 
cit.p.26) has argued. The permanence of the art-product, 
its teleological import, is a fundamental distinction. 

The imitation theory, also, though as old as Aristotle 
(Physica II, 2, Poeties ch.l) has acquired recent 
physiological emphasis. The Lange'-James theory of 
emotion insists on the priority of the motor manifesta¬ 
tions of feeling which are at the basis of the imitation 
idea. An agreeable feeling is produced by a certain 
(moderate) stimulus of the sense-organ, and the enhance¬ 
ment of this function is gained by repeating the 
movement (Fe're': Sensation et Movement). All imitation- 
explanation of the art-impulse depends on this fact. 

Even an undefined feeling of vigour can acquire 
distinctness only by expressing itself in some mode of 
physical or mental activity. And this motor element. 









' 










. ' , 

, 

c « 

» 

- -J t • 

1 < 




- 

- 






- 








• ! 


■ • • 

; . .. ■" "■ 














■ 






22 


which provokes imitation, (Sourian: "La Suggestion dans 
1* Art") plays an important part in the revival of 
feeling for "it is impossible to revive a feeling 
without reviving its organic conditions." (Ribot: Psych, 
of the Emotions pp. 127-9). The fundamental distinction, 
however, is in the fact that "the aim of play is 
attained when the surplus of vigour is discharged or 
the instinct has had its momentary exercise. But the 
function of art is not confined to the act of production; 
in every manifestation of art, properly so called, 
something is made and something survives." (Hirn, op.cit. 
p.29). From this impulse to make permanent the 
revivability of feelings has arisen the art forms, each 
a psychological deduction of some individual who had a 
pleasurable experience of which he sought to reproduce 
the grounds, by a mimic creation, either for himself 
or others. It is in such a way e.g. that by means of 
landscape painting men who are required to live in 
cities have gratified their "feeling for nature." 
Wordsworth has beautifully expressed this in his "Lines 
on Revisiting the Banks of the Wye, 1798." 

"Oft in lonely rooms. 

And mid the din of to?/ns and cities, 

I have owed to them sensations sweet. 

Felt in the blood and felt along the heart, 




, 

- 

' 

* 

. 

* 

* 

■ 

* . ; . 

* 

< 

, 

f 

t •• • • 











24 


And passing even into my purer mind 
With tranquil restoration." 

It is in the city that men's imaginations are exercised 
to revive feelings of pleasure from nature. When men 
lived close to nature their contemplation always took 
practical shape. Schiller remarks that "the Greeks 
artistic as they were and blessed with so genial a 
climate have some accuracy in the description of a 

landscape, but only as they might describe a weapon, a 

■ 

shield or a garment. Nature appears to have interested 
their understanding rather than their feelings." The 
aesthetic contemplation of nature succeeded those 
practical attractions, and the "dehumanised" conception 
has led to an exaggerated idea of the disinterestedness 
of art. Still, the fact that all art is at bottom 
imitative, (however ideally as Taine suggests) indicates 
that it has always some element of interest in it. In 
such an art-form as Impressionism we see the effort at 
complete emancipation from any utilitarian motives, the 
delight in the sensuous pleasure for its own sake, as 
that is more nearly approximated in "pure" music. While, 
therefore, it is true that the aesthetic pleasure comes 
from the complex influences of association and 
imagination on perception, the ideational basis of 
perception is never quite submerged; so that it is 














, A 












* 




, 








: ’ •> F, : ' 




' ' , 

r • 

, 

y.. , f • yf t.' / f ^ 







25 


only ideally that we speak of the "conscious happiness 
in which one is absorbed and as it were immersed in the 
sense-object." (Galkins, Introduction to Psych). This 
absorption in the sense-object called by Guyau "irradia¬ 
tion" is possible in music, but more difficult in 
pictorial art for a reason Y/hich may now be given in 
some detail. We return then to the relations of line- 
arrangement and colour harmony. 

We have seen that eye-movements and accommodations 
are directly related to our perceptions of space 
whether we assume Berkeley*s tactual theory or grant 
that space may be perceived independently and 
similarly by touch and sight. Closely connected with 
this motor aspect is the Lippsian principle of "inner 
activity"; a tendency to "feel into" a line an "inner 
activity" created by the imagination. "Graceful lines" 
writes Stratton (Exp. Psych, and Culture t p. 240) "are 
by experience often found to be the expression of 

movements that are under perfect control.so that 

the lines which please us are those which suggest, 
though perhaps very dimly, a life that is master of 
the situation. Such life we sympathize with and what 
we sympathize with we imitate. We often feel ourselves 
vaguely participating in the movement suggested by 
pleasing curves.” 


An extreme example of this ./empathy 






., • ■ ' ♦ 






. 

. 

■ 

. 










it. 














' . . 


• . » 

« 

. 



26 


is given by Lee and Thompson (Art."Beauty and Ugliness", 
Gontemp. Review, 1897), the concluding sentence of 
which is: "A complete and equally distributed set of 
bodily adjustments has accompanied the ocular sight 
of the jar; this totality of movements and harmony of 
movements in ourselves answers to the intellectual fact 
of finding that the jar is a harmonious whole. " This 
"intellectual fact" in which association takes so great 
a part, may be found still more evident in combinations 
of lines and relative shapes of masses. Recent exper¬ 
iments in balance and symmetry shew that a certain 
mathematical ratio though not invariable as in musical 
tones, accompanies those forms which are found to be 
most agreeable. Fechner's "golden section" rectangle 
is well-known in this respect, though a recent applica¬ 
tion of it seems to have escaped the investigators. In 
his"Science and Practice of Drawing" (p. 289, App.) 

H. Speed has given examples from well-known pictures 
of the apparently fortuitous agreement of this ratio 
with experimental results. The ratio is called "the 
proportion"(1:1*6........as in Fechner). Its remark¬ 
able consistency of appearance in such pictures as 
"Las Meninas", "Bacchus and Ariadne", "Love and Death" 
(Watts), and "The Birth of Venus" (Botticelli) shews 
how fundamental is this inscrutable balance of parts. 













' t , . 

I : 

. (■■■'. 

. 

i. ■ , ' • - i 

* 

: ~ ' 

■ 

. 

< : ‘ v ' " : ' ‘ . f \ .... ' 

t 




27 


We have another instance of how great a part the motor 
elements of sensation play in the psychology of form 
in the rule stated by P.G. Hamerton (Notes on Aesthetics, 
1689) that in a picture any issue or suggested opening 
should always he rather to the right and that any large 
mass blocking the composition of the picture should 
be to the spectator’s left. He referred to researches 
by M. Delauny which shewed that the habit of people was 
to move to the right, due to the usual predominance 
of the left side of the brain. So, too, D. S. MacColi 
in a fine passage ("A Year of Post-Impressionism" XIX 
Century, Neb. 1912): "In the lines of abstract ornament 
you will often get a more striking impression of con¬ 
flict or repose than from the most document-supported 
picture of battle or sleep; and it is this element, 
the music of space and form, that really plays to the 
imagination behind the images that represent person or 
thing. A division of the paper will do more to 
enthrone a figure or dignify a landscape than the dress 
of kings or the presence of palaces, and the drift or 
swing of a composition across the canvas be more 
eloquent of its motive than the particular attitude and 
occupation of its constituent persons." We are forced 
to conclude then that though a certain agreeableness 
of feeling is aroused by simple space arrangements 
which compel the organism to "a rhythmical mode of 









. 






















.1: 0 x: . 

* » 

x ' 

■ ■ a 

•n 







' 











28 


being", yet when the imitative instincts and the 
suggestions of memory-images arouse the imagination to 
expression the value of the original affective character 
is almost lost in the resultant aesthetic emotion. So 
that though in the primary stage the value of color 
as an aesthetic component is greater than line, 
ultimately it does not retain its importance. In the 
psychology of any art-form the potent influences of 
suggestion and memory in the reproductive process must 
be acknowledged. Lotze ("Microcosmus, Bk III Chap.V) 
has this statement: "We derive aesthetic satisfaction 
only from a plurality which may be apprehended as a 
clearly discerned unity;” yet this unity of the manifold 
which an impressionistic picture presents is only the 
"vague gentle pleasure gained from immediate impressions 
of the color sense" an "attenuated hypnosis." Besides 
this vague pleasure, however, which really implies the 
shifting of a focus in consciousness over a wide 
pleasure field - such as we see in a picture of Corot's, 
or in a Whistler "Nocturne", or in a landscape by Monet - 
there must be, as in Rembrandt, a more decided centre 
of interest flitting more or less lightly over this 
vague field. This important factor of attention or 
centre of interest it is important to recognise, in spite 
of the fact that the intellectualistic theo ries 
emphasised it to the suppression of the aesthetic element 









. 

* 

: 

. jo e 

r: 

- 

f 

, 








29 


which is fundamental. The Impressionist by refusing to 
stimulate attention to form - and indeed frequently by 
expressing it so badly as to deprive us of the satis¬ 
faction of expectancy (Bergman, quoted by Marshall) - 
shifted the centres of interest entirely to colour. 

It has been said (Stratton, op.cit.p.260) that a "display 
of colour itself, apart from any inherent imitative 
meaning in its arrangement, is capable of producing 
noble effects", and sunset effects are adduced as evidence 
of this. But the pleasure arising from sunset effects, 
if the foregoing arguments are valid, is as far re¬ 
moved from a mere display of colour without any 
inherent imitative meaning as can well be imagined. The 
parallel case to music which has no inherent imitative 
meaning would be the Persian carpet, and even of this 
it is true that "the really good carpets are themselves 
a kind of picture, dependent for the sting of their 
beauty on the remote 'subject' that went to their 
design." (MacGoil op.cit.). Of the Post-Impressionist 
Serusier wrote "one thing must be noted, i.e. the 

absence of subject.The purpose, even the 

concept of the object represented, disappears before 
the charm of his coloured forms." How, if we refer 
again to music, this never happens even in the most 
Straussian of tone-poems. We cannot think of harmony 
without melody, though we may have melody alone. We 







“■ 

" 

* 

• - - , 

f 

* 

r 

* 


1 - -' 

. ~ . .. • * 

3 * 

... . , , 

t 

« 

, 

■ 

i 


, • 

y'i \ •. ; 

V 3 



30 


cannot have color alone, and line, without color, has 
(as we have seen) mainly intellectual qualities com¬ 
pared with schemes of colour. The Impressionist wished 
to make his picture a form of colour orchestration, 
but colour harmony and contrast is a single impression, 
the effects are simultaneous,and so are lacking in that 
emotional quality of expectancy which is a character¬ 
istic of music, a quality which has presented great 
promises to such recent experimenters in color-music 
as tfavre, Schooling and Rimington; where an attempt 
has been made (in the direction which carries the theory 
of Impressionism to its logical extreme ) to approximate 
this condition with respect to colour. In describing 
a recent instrument (Rimington, Color Music p. 72) for 
the production of such color-music, the inventor records 
his experiments on the introduction of form and comes 
to the conclusion that if used at all, it should be 
indefinite and merely decorative. It was this decorative 

(rather than imitative)character on which the 

/ 

impressionists insisted. Of Cezanne it is said (Maurice 
Denis: Art.Burlington Mag.Feb. and Mar.1910): He imitates 
objects without any exactitude and without an accessory 
interest of sentiment or of thought. When he imagines 
a sketch he assembles colours and forms without any 
literary preoccupation: his aim is nearer to that of a 
carpet-weaver than of a Delacroix, transforming into 








e 

- 

, 

. 








. 




. 










, 








. 




31 


colour-harmony but with dramatic or lyric intention 
a scene from the Bible or Shakespere. Tf In a similar 
strain writes Van Gogh in a letter: Au lieu de chercher 
a rendre exactement ce que jai devant les yeux, je me 
sers de la couleur plus abitrairement pour m*exprimer 
fortement. Laissons cela en tant que theorie, mais 
je vais te donner un exeraple de ce que je veux dire: 
je voudrai faire le portrait dun ami artiste que reve 
des grands reves, qui travaille comme le rossignol chante, 
parce que cest ainsi la nature. Ge homme sera blond. 

&c.(Meier-Graefe, 1,809). How far, then, can a scheme 
of colour-combinations - Van Gogh’s view of Arles or 
Monet’s "Haystacks” series, for example - be justified 
on this isolated ground? Can the pleasurable im¬ 
pression be constant in revival? Is the variety of 
stimulus from colour-harmony of itself sufficient to 
be permanently pleasurable? It has been shewn (see 
Valentine and Washburn) that the agreeableness of a 
colour is affected not only by brightness, hue and 
saturation but also by space, duration of stimulus 
and subjective conditions. The great part of the 
effects of colour-contrast depend on such relations. 

On the optical grounds of such contrasts the 
Impressionists based their programme. They saysr that 
color when mixed on the palette and modified on the 
canvas to express shape lost its brightness. They 











. 

« 

, 

- 


f .'i. ' . 


. 0 c 
•.V 

' 


32. 

sacrificed shape therefore to gain brilliancy so the 
colour came to have decorative rather tnan imitative 
significance. Knowing that all our perceptions involve 
judgments, they trusted to obtain perspective 
by values, i.e. the suggestion of distance by degrees 
of light or dark intensity. For this reason 
their shadows are equally full of colour but colour 
of a different quality. It is colour with profuse 
patches of blue in it, because the complementary of 
blue is the warm yellowish tone of full sunlight, which 
was the theme of most of their pictures. The sensuous 
pleasure arising from such combinations apparently depends 
to a great extent on the vividness of the impression. 

It has been claimed as one of the triumphs 
of Impressionism that for "strength and brilliancy 
of general tone and for decorative effect they have 
few, if any, equals;" and that "Monet and his follow¬ 
ers raised the color scale many degrees in brightness." 

The psychologist, setting aside as a question for 
aesthetics the value of this method to the technique 
of painting, is able here to point out that vividness 
of impression, though a well-recognised means of 
producing aesthetic results in cruder forms as in 
barbaric art and in popular decoration, is a dangerous 
ground for permanency of pleasurable revival (Marshall 
op.cit.334), and "that the avoidance of continuity of 








« 

- 

„ 

: 

« 


' 

« 





vivid presentation of any one set of contents is a 


33 


necessity if pain is to be avoided." It would seem 
indeed that the Impressionists by defying academic 
ideas and aiming at character, as Flaubert, the 
Groncourts, and Zola did in the novel, were guilty 
of a psychological confusion. It is true that the 
predominance during the 19th century of music and 
landscape-painting (with its attendant emphasis on 
colour) had made the scope of aesthetics much wider 
and the difficulty of giving an inclusive signification 
to the term much greater. But the art-impulse and its 
psychological basis still remained; and in spite of the 
evolution of materials and technique, the idea of 
beauty underlies all its activities. The Impression¬ 
ists denied the place of non-aesthetic elements in 
art, and relied on truth of colour, not as beauty but 
as character. Yet character is a determination of 
judgment, which is itself a non-aesthetic element. 

Truth of colouring, as Miss Puffer convincingly points 
out, is not synonymous with beauty of colouring. So 
that if we seek to neglect attention in attaining to 
sensuous absorption, we miss that sentiment of harmony, 
that "faith in the reality of the unreal" which the 
imagination creates for us. It makes more evident how 
clearly the ideating function of attention controls 
every stage of the transformation from the simple 




4 

' 

V- ’ 

■ 

■ 

. 






« 

v t 

. 


v 


. 


' ' 










34 


feelings to the aesthetic sentiment. This ideating 
element always tends to the suppression of feeling by 
the introduction of non-aesthetic elements. The 
struggle has been brilliantly analysed in Nietzsche's 
Birth of Tragedy and only by the vigorous partisanship 
of modern experimental psychology has the fundamental 
function of emotion as the basis of the art-impulse 
been maintained. This struggle is all the greater 
because the business of art has to do - not with the 
feeling itself - but with the mainly intellectual 
reproduction of feeling - "emotion recollected in 
tranquillity." With it are fused therefore many non- 
aesthetic elements, such as information, propitiation, 
stimulation to work, magical efficacy (Him op.cit.301), 
and this mysterious fusion is the eternal problem of 
beauty. As emotion has its basis in physical response 
to external stimuli, so the expression of emotion has 
its basis in the materials that condition every art-form. 
The artist must recognise as Walter Pater says "his 
responsibility to the materials of his art." 

Impressionism came from a sense of this responsibility. 
Manet, in the catalogue of his exhibition (1867) said: 

"It is the effect of sincerity to give a painter's 
works a character that makes them resemble a protest 
whereas the painter has only thought of rendering his 














1 




: IT f>r 

























• 

































• 








* 





. 





e 






8 • 























£> 5 . 


impressions. ,T V/hen the children in the last act of 
"The Blue Bird" tell their wonderful adventures of 
the seen-unseen to their parents, their mother at once 
says to her husband: "They’re ill. Fetch a doctor." And 
that is the popular verdict on Impressionism, the verdict 
which cannot comprehend the true artist's thought of 
his material, of its beauties, of its limitations, of 
its propriety to the task of self-expression. As R.A.M. 
Stevenson reminds us in the last chapter of his 
fascinating book on Velasquez, "Leon Pelouse, the French 
landscape-painter used to say that the gift of the 
naturalist lay in the power of recreating the eye of 
the child." In that saying lies the value of 
Impressionism to the art of our time. 








