A SURVEY OF THE HISTORY OF THE FRANKS 


by 

ISOBEL LILLIAN JANETTE JOHNSON, B.A 

i For Reference \ y 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 






@X HIBBI* 

MBawfusis 








UNIVERSITY OF 1LLFRTA 
LIb?'i ARY 


Regulations in a T he ses and FIs s or _ta t i ons 

1 ; ©script copies ol the ses a i c i; s : tati fox Ivlas ter f s 
and doctor’s degrees deposited in the University of Alberta 
Library, as the Official Copy of the faculty of Graduate Studies, 
b ;on i 11 : d isi t he .■ f r ence . sac In .1 oom cnly . 

A second copy is on deposit in the Department under whose 
supervision the work was done. Some departments are willing to 
loan their copy to libraries, through the interlibrary loan 
service of the University of alberta Library. 

These theses and dissertations are to be used only with due 
regard to priority rights of the author. .ritten permission of 
the author and of the Department must be obtained through the 
University of Alberta Library when extended passages are used, 
fhen permission has been granted, credit must appear In the 
pub1is he d w ork. 

This thesis or dissertation has been used in accordance 
with the above regulations by the persons listed below . The 
borrowing library is obligated to secure the signature of each 

user. 


Please .sign below: 


Date 


Signature 


Ins titution 

























































k 








Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/johnson1952 



THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


A SURVEY OF THE HISTORY OF THE FRANKS 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF ARTS 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 
DEPARTMENT OF MODERN LANGUAGES 


by 

ISOBEL LILLIAN JANETTE JOHNSON, B.A. 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA, 
APRIL, 1952. 

























X should like to egress my gratitude to 
Dr® F* Owen who encouraged me to undertake 
the study of Frankish hi story, and who has 
so helpfully directed this thesis® 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Chapter I: The Origin of the Franks •Page 1 

Chapter II: The Franks to the Death or Clovis..... n 6 

Chapter III: The Merovingians... • • • n 26 

Chapter IV: The Carolingians. n 6b 
Bibliography....... n 91 












MAPS 


Frankish and Other Tribes 

in the Third Century A.D.••••••••••••••-Page 5 

Gaul, showing the principal 

places mentioned in Chapter II. n 25 


Western Europe at the end 

of the: Merovingian Period ... n 63 

The Carolingian Empire*.. n 90 


ILLUiSTHAT 10NS AND TABLES 
Germanic Weapons.... Page 2b 


Genealogical Table 

of the Merovingians » ..* • * • * n 62 

Genealogical Table 

of the Carolingians.. . ..... rf 89 





















1 


I 

THE ORIGIN OF THE FRANKS 

The Franks belonged to the western branch of the Germanic 

peoples and were, according to Much, a confederacy comprising the 

Chamavi, Chattvarii, Amsivarii, Usipii, Tenchteri, Tubantes, 

Bruchteri, Chatti, Salians and Ripvarii.^ To these tribes, Schmidt 

2 

adds the Chasvarii. According to Gibbon, the formation of this 

confederacy took place: about 240' A.D.^ However, the collective 

name of "Franks" did not make its first appearance until around 

258. Opinion differs as to the meaning of the term "Frank.” The 

theory that it means "free" has been widely accepted. Meanings 

such as "defiant" (trotzig), "bold" (kuhn), "ferocious", denoting 

national characteristics, are also suggested. 

Der Name Franken ist die zusamenfas^ende Beze^chnung 
einer AnzahJ, in der Rheingegend ansassiger, langst 
bekannter Volkerschaften and b^deutet^vielleicht "die 
Freien" Oder "die Trotzigen, Kuhnen."? 

O.G. Frankun, Franchon, Vrancun; Germ. Franken; O.E. 
Froncan; O.N. Frakkar; Lat. Franci (Theoclius, cit. by 
Vopiscus, third century A.D.); M. Lat. grancones;... 
Secondary name: Germ. Franzosen, Franzmanner; ESigl. 
Frenchmen; M. Lat. Franciseani; Fr. Fran^ais; Ital. 
Franceschi, Frances!;... Place names: O.H.G. Franconofurt: 
M. Lat. Villare Francorum, Fr. Villers-Franqueun; 
Francorcamps, etc. The adjective frank means ’ferocious,’ 
according to the: traditional interpretation. (Isidore, 
Etyrn. ix, 2 I6l; Ermold Nigellus, I, 344; cp. O.N. frakkr 
’brisk’). The old etymology Is preferable to the 
divergent guesses of modern philologists. The derivation 
from an alleged old adjective meaning ’free’ should be 
avoided; this signification is secondary, arising from 
the position of the ruling Franks among the subjected 
Romans. 0 

Grimm connects the name of the confederacy with a weapon commonly 
used by the Germanic peoples — a short-bladed iron spear known as 

1. Much: Deutsche; Stammeskunde, p. 90. 

2. Schmidt: Geschichte der germanischen Fruhzeit, p. 274. 

3* Gibbon: The Decline and Fall of the Rom^n Empire, vol, I, p. 307* 

4. Schmidt: Geschichte der germanischen Fruhzeit, p. 274. 

5. -Ibifl . p- 3.7 4 

6. Schutte: Our Forefathers the Gothonic Nations, vol. 2, p. 158. 




e 








t 




' 











i 









„ 

I m 

' 



2 


the "framea." 

Es ist eine and ere ableitung v^rgeschlagen worden: aus 
goth, hramjan figere stamme frankisches adchramire und 
(nach wechsel zwischen CH und PH s. 3^9) adframire^ die 
mishandelte framea, das ags• diminutivum franca (fur 
frameca), daher der name Franken.-* 1 

The original home of the Germanic peoples was, according to 

Schmidt, the area around the Baltic Sea: the southern part of 

Sweden, Denmark, Schleswig-Holstein and northern Germany, between 

the lower Weser and the Oder. 2 Hirt^ is; in complete agreement with 

Schmidt on this point. Upon examining the available linguistic 

evidence, Schutte; accepts as correct the many legends which claim 

a Scandinavian origin for the Germanic peoples. 

What the stories tell us is this: the Gothonic nations^ 
remember nothing of their origin except that, on the 
whole, they have expanded southwards from the north. They 
call their original home Seadinauja, which the Chron. 
Gothanum translates; ’Northland.’ At the present day this 
answers to Scania, but it seems as if the name originally 
embraced all Denmark or at least included the Danish 
islands, Ptolemy’s ’Lesser Scandic islands. 1 5 

At the end of Period I of the Bronze Age (i.e. 1500 B.C. 

according to Montelius, 1750 according to Kbssinna),the migration 

of the Germanic peoples from their original home began.^ These 

people divided into separate groups. Early in the Iron Age, there 

appeared three main groups: the western, northern and eastern 

branches of the Germanic peoples.^ To the western branch belonged 

the tribes which later formed the Frankish confederacy. According 

1. Grimm: Geschichte der deuts.chen Sprache. p. 359 . 

2. Schmidt: Geschichte der germanischen Fruhzeit, p. 6. 

3. Hirt: Die Indogermanen, vol. 1, p. 172. 

4. "Gothonic nations* 1 ' is a term of Schutte*s own invention, and as 
used by him, is synonomous with "Germanic peoples.** 

5 . Schutte: Our Forefathers the Gothonic Nations, vol. 1, p. l44. 
6.,Schmidt: Geschichte der germanischen Fruhzeit, p. 21. 

7. Schmidt: Geschichte der germanischen Fruhzeit, p. 28. 







' 














t 








J 1 ' 








I 
































t 






3 


to Schutte, the land around the south-eastern corner of the 
Zuider Zee was the original home of several of the Frankish tribes z 
the Salians, Chamavi, Chattvarii and Tubantes. These tribes were 
bordered on the east by the Chasvarii and Amsivarii.^ These tribes 
expanded from their original home until, at the first appearance 
of the term "Franks"' about 258 A.D., the Chamavi occupied the area 
between the lower Lippe and the Saale, the Salians were in Salland, 
the Chattvarii on the middle and upper Ruhr, the Bruchteri and 
Tenchteri between the Ruhr and the Sieg, the Amsivarii on the upper 

p 

Wupper, and the Usipii and Tubantes between the Sieg and the Lahn. 

Schmidt places the starting-point or nucleus of the Frankish 
confederacy on the lower Rhine among the Bruchteri and Tenchteri, 
on the ground that these tribes had always been among the most 
bitter enemies of Rome.^ Schtttte, however, takes issue with this 
argument, agreeing instead with Procopius, who considers the 
Rhenish marshes the original home of the Franks.^ Xet another 
viewpoint is offered by Sergeant, who states that "...near the 
springs of the two Salas, in and around the Thuringerwald, was the 
very cradle-land of the people called Franks." 0 

Sergeant also mentions the legendary Trojan origin of the 
Franks. He states that the work known as "Fredegarius" which is in 
part based on Gregory of Tours, is especially responsible for this 

1. Schutte: Cur Forefathers the: Gothonic Nations, vol. 2, p. 171. 

2. Schmidt; Geschichte der germanischen Fruhzeit, p. 274, See map 

at end of Chapter I of thesis. rr 

3. Schmidt; Geschichte der germanischen Fruhzeit, p. 275. 

5*. Byzantine historian born at Caesarea, Palestine about 490 A.D# 

5* Schutte; Our Forefathers the Gothonic Nations, vol. 2, p. 173* 

6. Sergeant; The Franks — The Story of the Nations, p* 45. See map 
at end of Chapter I of thesis. 














- 





4 


legend. Gregory says of the Franks: 

It is a common tradition that this people issued from 
Pannonia.. 

2 

The legend itself, which is based upon a passage from Virgil, 

concerns the migration to Pannonia of a Trojan named Antenor.3 

Hence, the alleged relationship of the Franks to the Trojans. 

The Frankish confederacy was at first a very loosely-knit 

organization, its members capable, of concerted action only in 

warfare. Of the Franks, Schmidt remarks: 

Der Frankenname, neben dem die Einzelnamen noch voile 
Geltung behalten, ist vorerst das einzige sichtbare Band* 
das jf sie umschliesgt. Nur langsam gewinnen diese ft 
vorubergehenden Bundnlsse an D^uerhaftigkeit und Starke,, 
tun schlieszlich erst in dem frankischen Gesgmtreiche si eh 
zu einer politischen Einheit zu verdichten. 


1. Gregory of Tours: History of the Franks, II, 8 (9). 

2. Aeneid: i. 246. 

3* Sergeant: The Franks, p» 17. f 

4. Schmidt: Geschichte der germanischen Fruhzeit, p. 274. 





























, 


' 

























































* 

, . , . ■- ' . 

* 




Third Century fl. D. 











II 


6 


THE FRANKS TO THE DEATH OF CLOVIS 
The Roman conquest of Gaul was completed by Julius Caesar in 
50 B.C., eight years after his arrival there as proconsul. Having 
conquered Gaul, the Romans were now obliged to defend her against 
the thrusts of the Germanic tribes who inhabited the right bank of 
the Rhine* To this end, Roman legions were, stationed along the 
entire length of the Rhine, which had early been recognized as the 
barrier separating the Germanic tribes from Gaul. 

During the first centuries of the Christian era, the Germanic 
tribes were in a constant state of flux. Funck-Brentano states that 
they were a nomadic people,, and therefore required vast tracts of 

o 

land in order to live. Hence, as their population increased, they 

were forced to seek new territory. As one tribe expanded, it would 

very often overrun the territory occupied by another, which would, 

in turn, ba forced to move on in order to escape destruction. This 

Germanic expansion is summed up by Funck-Brentano, who states: 

...each of these numerous German^thrusts into the 
territory of Gaul or other parts of the Roman Empire, was 
provoked by a similar thrust by another German people into 
the territory of those who were forced to emigrate. It 
was like a swarm of bees coming to occupy the hive of a 
feebler swam, which was thus obliged, under pain of 

1. Duruy, Victors HIstoire de France, vol. 1, p. 6*f. 

2. Funck-Brentano, Frantz: The Earliest Times, p. 1?5* The 
statement that the Germanic tribes were nomadic is based on the 
histories of Caesar and Tacitus, who knew them in time of war. 

In peacetime, they were largely an agricultural people. 

3. "German," as used here, signifies "Germanic." This erroneous use 
of the term " German’ 1 2 3 is almost universal among English-speaking 
authors and translators. Correct usage limits it to reference to 
the inhabitants or institutions of modern Germany. This problem 
of terminology is peculiar to the English language. In German, 
the terns "die Germanen" and "die; Deutschen" are used to refer 
to the Germanic peoples and to the Inhabitants of modern Germany 
respectively. In French, the Germanic peoples are referred to as 
"les Germains" and the inhabitants of modern Germany as "les 
Allemands." 







c 





. 


" 

1 c' 


£ 












7 


extinction,, to seek a new home elsewhere. The people who 
had been driven out thrust themselves upon their 
neighbors, who in their turn thrust themselves upon a 
third party, who thrust themselves upon Gaul. 1 2 3 

In these Germanic tribes, the Romans found fonridabLe adversaries* 

Although they lacked the skill and discipline of the Roman 

legionaries, the Germanic peoples were by no means lacking in valon 

According to Tacitus, as, they were not plentifully supplied with iro^ 

their defensive armour usually consisted only of a shield* Their most 

commonly-used weapon was the "framea," their iron-headed spear which 

Tacitus describes them as using both at dose quarters and at a distance. 

Ne ferrum quidem superest, si cut ex genere telorum 
colligitur. rari gladiis aut maioribus lanceis utuntur: 
hastas vel ipsorum vocabulo frameas gerunt angusto et 
brevi ferro, sed ita acri et ad usum habili, ut eodem 
telo, prout ratio poscit, vel comminus vel eminus pugnent< 
et eques quidem scuto frameaque contentus est, pedites et 
missilia spargunt, pluraque sinmli, atque in inmensum 
vibrant, nudi aut sagulo leves.3 

It seems certain, however,, that the leaders carried iron swords, since 

k 

they are fairly common in Germanic graves. Tacitus describes the 
Germanic peoples as being tall of stature, with fierce blue eyes 
and reddish or auburn hair.^ Although his description is of the 
Germanic peoples of the first century A.D., it can be taken as a fairly 
accurate description of those who later became known as the Franks, 
since there was little, if any, intermarriage with other peoples. 

The policy adopted by Julius Caesar in regard to the Germanic 

peoples was defensive, and wisely so, as pointed out by Sergeant. 

...the Germans, in addition to being a multitude of 
swarming nations, were also in a condition of constant 
flux...His (Caesar*s) course in Gaul was comparatively 

1. Funck-Brentano: The Earliest Times, p. 175* 

2. It must be remembered that Tacitus wrote in the first century 
A.D. Iron later became more plentiful. 

3. Tacitus: Germania, 6. 

See illustration at end of Chapter II of thesis. 

5 * The Latin "rutilus" may be rendered by "red,” "gold-red, ,r 
11 golden," "yellow", "auburn." 















. 


■ 






■ " e 


•0 




c 





? - 


■ r 










<? 13 








% > ■ 




, 


' 






! 




- 

O o 

* \ 





8 


smooth sailing, hut if he had invaded Germany 1 he would 
have been caught in a vortex of overwhelming currentso 
In Gaul he had a fixed mark, whereas in Germany the 
target would have been incessantly in motion*"- 

Caesar’s policy prevailed more or less; during the first two 

centuries A.D. Members of various Germanic tribes did succeed in 

crossing the Rhine from time to time*. The Romans would either force 

them back across the Rhine, or, at times, allowing them to remain, 

in fact, even inviting them across the river, would colonize them 

and enrol them in the Roman legions.As time went on, the armies 

of Rome contained more and more of this foreign element. To this 

fact is partially attributed the disintegration of the Roman Sup irk 

The Frankish confederacy made its first appearance in history 

about 25S A.D. This same year, the Roman emperor, Gallienus, left 

the Rhine for the Danube; frontier, leaving his son, Valeri anus, at 

Cologne in the; care of the tribune, Silvanus. A party of Franks, 

unnoticed by the Roman guards, succeeded in crossing to the; left 

bank of the Rhine. However, these invaders were repelled by 

Postumus, the general charged with the defense of the Rhine 

boundary.^ In repulsing these Franks, Postumus captured much booty, 

which he proceeded to divide among his soldiers. Silvanus, however, 

laid claim to this booty for the prince. A conflict resulted, and 

6 

Postumus was proclaimed emperor by his soldiers * 0 The following 

year, 259, a large number of Franks made their way through Gaul and 

into Spain, where they captured and destroyed Tarragona. After 

1. This term Is misleading. It is; very loosely used by most English- 
speaking writers; to designate both modern Germany and the lands 
occupied by the ancient Germanic tribes. See footnote 3, p. 6 . 

2* Sergeant: The Franks, p*. 24. 

3. -Ibid. , p. 38 . 

4. Ibid. , p. 49. 

5. Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stfimme, vol. 2, p. 437* 

6 . Ibid. , p. 437. According to Sergeant ( op. cit ., p. 60), Postumus 
killed both the emperor’s son and the latter’s guard!an.Postumus 
was one of the ’’Thirty Tyrants” who, in Gallienus’ reign, 
assumed authority in various parts of the Roman Empire. 








. 










t ■ 
















- 

: 










C * . 




, n : 


7 







9 


wandering about in Spain for twelve years, they seized a number of 
Spanish ships and made their way to Africa, where they disappeared^ 
After the invasions of 2?9, further attacks by the Franks were 
warded off by Postumus, who made use of Frankish auxiliaries, 

probably composed partly of prisoners of war and partly of 
2 

mer cenar 1 es • 

The next major Germanic invasions of Gaul took place around 

275*^ Germanic tribes crossed the Rhine at numerous points, and in 

the words of Funck-Brentano, n spread themselves right and left in 

devastating hordes." 1 2 * 4 * 6 7 ** Schmidt states that the Alemanni constituted 

the greatest danger at this time. Accordingly, the emperor Probus 

personally led his troops against the Alemanni in 277, leaving to 

his generals the struggle against the Franks. By 278, these 

Germanic invaders had been driven from Gaul. Those of the Franks 

who had been taken prisoner were sent by Probus to Thrace as 

colonists.^ However, they did not remain there for long, but around 

280, seizing a number of ships, made their way back to their 

homeland. Duruy describes their escape: 

Mais, fatigues bientot de. cet exil, ils se saisirent 
de quelques barques, passerent les deiroits, franchirent 
la Medi ter ranee., en pillant tour \ tour les cStes d t Asie, 
de Gr^ce et dlAfrique, jusqu f aux colonnes d f Hercule, puis 
toumant l r Espagne et la Gaule, vinrent center a leurs 
compatriot es des bords du Rhin la faiblesse du grand 9 
empire qu r ils avaient impunement traversS de part en parti 

1. Guizot: History of France from the Earliest Times to 1848. vol.l, 
p. 10^. That the Franks were able to invade Gaul in such large 
numbers is attributed by Sergeant (The Franks, p. 60) to the fact 
that Postumus, having killed the: young prince and his guardian, 
was now too busy defending himself against Aureolus, a general 
sent by Gallienus, to properly attend to the defense of the 
Rhine frontier. 

2. Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamrne, vol., 2, p. 438. 

3:. Funck—Brentano: The Earliest Times, p. loO. 

4. Ibid. . p> 180. 

?. Schmidt: op. cit. ? p. 440. 

6. Schutte: Our Forefathers, vol. 2, p. 174. 

7. Duruy: Histoire de France, vol.l, p. 84. 








« 1 ' ': " ' 
* 







, ' 

", ! 




1 


' 


1 

’ 




f - 














10 


Around 286, Salian Franks, along with Saxons, were carrying 
out piratic raids in the English Channel and on the northern coast 
of France. Many of the pirate ships were captured by Carausius, who 
had been charged with combatting this disorder.^ Carausius 
strengthened his troops; by the addition of a Germanic element which 
included Franks. Then, going to Britain, he had himself proclaimed 

p 

emperor. The Saxons at this time were advancing westward. Their 

advance caused a migration of Salian Franks. 

Die Salier mussen damals infolge des Vordringens der 
Sachsen, ihre Heimat, das Sajland an der Yssel, 
aufgegeben und si ch weiter sudlich in der Yeiuwe am Ufer 
des Alten Rheines niedergelassen haben, ^elcher Strom 
ihnen einen leichten Zugang zum Meere eroffnete.3 

In 288, from their new location on the Rhine, the Salians attempted 

to penetrate 1 the land of the Batavi, but were driven back by 

Emperor Constantins I. At the same time, other Frankish branches 

crossed the Rhine at Cologne, and after pushing far into Gaul, 

returned home with considerable booty. However, these Franks were 

punished by the emperor Maxlmian, who personally led his troops 

against them and defeated them in their own territory. 11 * The 

territory of the Batavi was invaded by Franks (Ghamavi) and 

Frisians about 295. Constantins repelled this Invasion, taking 

numerous prisoners, whom he settled as colonists in the districts 

ot Amiens, Beauvais, Troyes and Langres. ^ 

Immediately after his accession in 306, the emperor 

Constantine the Great, the son of Constantins, was obliged to fight 

against the Franks, who had forced their way into Gaul. These 

Frankish invaders were Bruchteri and possibly Amsivarii and 

1. Schmidt: Geschichfe der deutschen Stffinme, vol. 2, p. M+0. 

2* Ibid. , p* 4*fi. 

3. Ibid .. p„ 39. 

V.. Ibid. , p. M+l. 

Ibid. , p. ¥f2. 







f* . . 

* 




- 






* 



. 
















« 

' 



a ■ - 



c 



n 


, 


' 














■ 



- 



■ 



% 






* 


- 






11 


Tubantes.^ The victorious Constantine took the Frankish princes 
As carious and Merogaisus prisoner and had them thrown to the wild 
animals in the arena . 2 Constantine determined to end the ever¬ 
present threat of invasion by completely crushing the power of the 
would-be invaders. Therefore, in the summer of 310 5 he led an 
offensive across the Rhine into the land of the Bruchteri. The 
campaign, which was carried out with great cruelty, ended in a 
Roman victory. 

Der Krieg ward mit der grosz ten Grausamkeit gefuhrt; die 
Ansiedelungen der Germanen wurden verwustet, zahlreiche 
Menschen hinges chlachtet, and ere als Gefangene 
fortgeschleppt und in die Arena geschickt.? 

Early in 313, the Franks living further down the Rhine (Schmidt^ 

thinks they probably were the Chamavi) entered Roman territory* 

Constantine gained a decisive victory over them.? With the victory 

£ 

of Constantine r s son, Crispus, over the Salians in 320 , the 
struggle of Rome against the Franks was over for a period of some 
twenty years. 

The peace which Constantine had established along the Rhine 
boundary lasted until 3^+1, when the Franks again invaded Gaul. 
However, their invasion was quickly repelled by Constans, one of 
the emperors of the Western Empire.? There was again peace along 
the Rhine until 3 50, when Gaul was invaded by Frankish and 

o 

Alemannic forces. This invasion was facilitated by the fact that 
the Rhine boundary was at the time only poorly protected, 

Magnentius having departed with most of his troops to battle against, 

1. Schmidt: Geschiehte der deutschen Stlmme, vol. 2 , p. bb2. 

2 . Ibid . . p. Vh-3 . 

3.. Ibid .. p. ¥f 3 . 
b. Ibid ., p. bb3. 

?• Probably in the vicinity of Trier, since the victory was 
celebrated there. (Schmidt: op. cit. p. bb3 ). 

6 .. Schmidt: op., cit . p. 443. 

7. Ibid .. p. 264. 

8 . Schutre: Our Forefathers, vol. 2, p* 174. 








, 




« - 

e 
















* 













« 






’ 






. 








■ 








' 

■ 

, , 






n 

* 








12 


Emperor Constantius II in Pannonia. 1 By December 355 when Julian, 
a nephew of Constantine the Great, arrived in Gaul to take up his 
duties as Caesar, the Franks had captured Castra Herculis, Qualbur^ 

p 

Castra Vetera, Neuss, Bonn, Andernach and Cologne. By the autumn 

of 356, Julian had retaken Cologne by means of negotiation with 

Frankish princes, who are not identified.^ Julian f s sojourn in Gaul 

saw several military campaigns against the Franks. In December 357* 

he went to the lower Rhine, where a force of 600 Franks had 

penetrated far into Belgium. Their retreat cut off by the Romans, 

these Franks moved into two abandoned Roman citadels on the Meuse, 

at Maastricht, where the Roman forces besieged them for fifty-three 

days. Exhausted food supplies finally forced them to surrender. 

Julian sent these Frankish prisoners to the emperor Constantius, 

who enrolled them in his army.^* Julian spent the rest of the winter 

£x 

in Paris, or Lutetia, as it was then called.^ Early in the summer 
of 358* he was again obliged to put down disturbances which had 
broken out on the lower Rhine. Due to the pressure exerted by the 
westward-advancing Saxons, the Chamavi attempted to cross the Rhine. 
Forced back, they then sailed down the Rhine and conquered the 
Batavian Island, driving out Salians who were already settled there* 
The latter fled to Toxandria^ and sent envoys to Julian with the 
request that they be allowed to settle in the district. Julian 
permitted these Salian fugitives to settle in Toxandria as subjects 

1. Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamme, vol. 2, p. 264. 
Magnentius had usurped the power of Cons tans in 350, after the 
assassination of the latter. According to Sergeant (The Franks, 
p. 70), Magnentius was a Frank in the service of Rome. 

2. Schmidt: op. cit .. p. 445. 

3. Ibid., p. 445. 

4. Ibid ., p. 445. 

5. Sergeant: on. cit .. p. 73. 

6 . District in Belgian Limburg. This place name survives in that of 
the village of Tes sender loo (Schtitte: Our Forefathers, vol. 2, 

P. 174). 









t 







■ 









c 
















r . • >■; - :■ J 










- 




* 









- 




* 








13 


of Rome, after having forced them to surrender to hinu^ He then 

proceeded to conquer the Chamavi who had driven the Salians from 

the Batavian Island. Under the terms of peace, the Chamavi were 

obliged to cease hostilities, supply troops to the Roman army, and 

2 

to return to their homeland* By 359, Julian had recaptured Castra 

Herculis, Qualburg, Castra Vetera, Neuss, Bonn, and Andernach.^ In 

the summer of 360, he undertook a campaign against the Chattvarii, 

who were raiding the land on the left bank of the Rhine. Crossing 

the Rhine at Castra Vetera, he moved his forces up the Lippe and 

then southward into the homeland of the- Chattvarii, taking them 

completely by surprise and quickly conquering them. The Romans took 

many prisoners, whom they settled in the district around Langres.^ 

Until Julianas death in 363, peace reigned along the Rhine. 

When this peace was disturbed on the lower Rhine early in the reign 

of Emperor Valentinian I (364), the westward advance of the Saxons 

was again to blame. Due to the pressure of the latter, the Chamavi 

again invaded the Batavian Island. At this: time, Frankish and 

Saxon pirates were also raiding the coasts of Britain. In 369, the 

Roman general, Theodosius,- succeeded in putting an end to these 

6 

raids and in forcing the Chamavi out of the Batavian Island. In 
37° , the Saxons penetrated into the land held by the Salians whom 
Julian had permitted to settle in Toxandria. However, these Saxon 
invaders were annihilated by troops under the command of the Roman 
g eneral, Severus»? 

A Frankish king, Mallobaudes, shared in the command of a Roman 

1. Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamme, vol. 2, t>. 446. 

2. Ibid., p. 447. 

3. I bid, , p. 447. 

4. Ibid. , p. 447. 

5. Father of the later emperor of the same name. 

6-. Schmidt: or. cit ., p. 448. 

7. Ibid. . p. 448. 














' 


















■ 














, 




i * 




ft 





14 

army in a battle against an Alemannic force at Argentaria in 378 . 1 
In 38 O, Mallobaudes was attacked by the Alemannic prince, Macrianus, 
an ally of Rome. The Alemanni were defeated and Macrianus killed. 
Consequently, the Franks took possession of the Alemannic territory 

p 

to the north of the Main. 

What Schutte^ refers to as a Roman civil war, was the signal 

for a fresh outbreak of Germanic raids and invasions in 388 . Since 

383 , Magnus Maximus had ruled in Gaul as emperor. By means of his 

powerful and much—feared troops, he had held the people along the 

Rhine frontier firmly in check. However, in 388 , he left for Italy, 

4 

to lead his forces against the emperor, Valentinian II. Taking 
immediate advantage of Maximus! absence,, Saxon pirates again raided 
the Gallic coasts, and Frankish forces, under the: leadership of 
Gennobaudes, Markomer and Sunno, invaded Gaul, devastating in 

tj 

particular the district around Cologne.'' According to Schmidt, 

Gennobaudes was a Frankish king, and Markomer and Sunno, princes. 

As these invaders were returning home,, some of them decided to 

remain on the left bank of the Rhine; to pillage further. Those who 

remained were dispersed without difficulty by a Roman force, 

6 

probably near Aachen. In the winter of 392-393 1 Arbogast, a Roman 

general of Frankish birth, crossed the Rhine at Cologne and Invaded 

the land of the Bruchteri and the Chamavi. On his suggestion, the 

emperor Bugenius ' 7 made treaties with the Franks on the Rhine 

frontier in 393* According to the terms of these treaties, the 

Franks were to supply troops to Bugenius* army.^ In 396, Stilicho, 

l.Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamme, vol. 2, p. 449. 
2.Schtttte: Our Forefathers, vol. 2 , p. 174. 

3 .Ibid. . p. 175. 

4.Schmidt: 00 . cit ., p. 449. 

5. Ibid .. p.“'449. 

6 . Ibid., p. 450. 

7. Bugenius was raised to the position of emperor by Arbogast. 

s. mm* ’p? % } • 









cr- ; • 

t'. 

- 










t - • • 
















- 


c' • 


. c 1 ' 






? 

. 

o O , « - ■ 


c 




- 


:* 

* 1 

- , • 


. * 



1 ? 

a Roman general, who was a Vandal by birth, renewed the treaties 
made by Eugenius. 1 There were no further hostilities between the 
Franks and Romans until after the first decade of the fifth 

p 

century. 

By the fifth century, the Christianisation of Gaul had been 

largely completed. Christianity in Gaul took the Orthodox form. 

The Germanic tribes, however, with the exception of the Goths and 

Burgundians, who had been converted to the Arian form of 

Christianity,^ were still pagan, belonging to the cult of the 

k 

Scandinavian god, Odin. 

Up to the fifth century, Gaul had been subjected to frequent 

Germanic invasions, most of which had been successfully repelled 

by the Roman Legions. At times, Franks and other Germanic, elements 

had been permitted to settle west of the Rhine as subjects or 

allies of the Roman Empire. Towards the end of 4-06, however, 

commenced the inundation and permanent settlement of Gaul by vast 

hordes of Germanic peoples - Vandals, Alans and Suebi. ^ This influx 

of people, which was accompanied by much devastation, was a mass 

migration, not merely a raid by Germanic warriors for the purpose 

of taking booty. Of these fifth-century invasions, Malet remarks: 

Les invasions violent©®, cell© des Huns exceptee, ne 
furent pas des expeditions militaires ayant pour objet 
la destruction dlun ermemi, le butin et la conqu^te. Ce 
furent des migrations: de peuples, des d©managements de 
nations entieres, hommes, femmes, enfants, troupeaux, 
quittant % suns esprit de retour la premiere patrie et 
partant a la recherche diune patrie nouvelle. 

The Franks did not take part in the invasions of 406, but 

1. Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen StSmme, vol* 2, p. 451 o 

2. Schutte: Our Forefathers, vol. 2, p. 175. 

3o Funck-Brentano: The Earliest Times, p. 201. 

4-. Malet: Histoire de France, vol. 1, p. 23 . 

5. Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 68. 

6. Malet: op. cit ., p. 25. 







¥ 







16 

rather, tried to prevent them, feeling themselves threatened by 
the devastating hordes hurling themselves upon Gaul* Although they 
did not succeed in keeping the invaders out of Gaul, the Franks did 
manage to inflict heavy losses on the Vandals. 1 Gregory places the 
number of Vandals killed at 20,000, and goes on to state that the 
entire Vandal force might have been annihilated, had the Alans not 

p 

come to their aid in time. The Rhine being frozen, the invaders 
were able.' to cross it on foot.3 Spreading destruction as they went, 

K 

they passed through Gaul and crossed the Pyrenees into Spain. 

In *+13, the Burgundians, under their king, Gondicaire, 
established themselves in the area from Lake Constance to the 
confluence of the Rhine and Moselle. A few of them remained on the 
right bank of the Rhine. The Alemanni spread out into the territory 
now known as Alsace, into the valley of the Doubs, into Switzerland, 
and further north, into the Moselle Valley.^ By 419, the Visigoths 
were established in Aquitaine and in the greater part of Spain.* 7 
About 413, those Franks who were later to be known as 
Ripuarians, captured Treves (Trier). They then expanded their 
territory until it reached the Meuse and the Sambre. They also 
spread southward.^ In the north, the Salian Franks occupied BelgiuS. 
Dispargum, in Belgian Limburg, was the residence of one of their 
kings, Chlodio. In 428, the Roman general, Aetius, repulsed the 
Ripuarian Franks from the left bank of the Rhine. 10 Meanwhile, the 

1 . Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 69. 

2. Gregory of Tours: II 8 (9). 

3. Sergeant: The Franks, p. 78. 

4. Duruy: Histoire de France, vol. 1, p. 86* 

?• Ibid ., p. 86. 

6 . Lavisse: op. cit . p. 72 . 

7. Duruy: op. cit . p. 86. 

8 . Lavisse. op. cit . p. 72. 

9. Ibid.. p. 73 • 

10. Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamme, vol. 2, p.454. 










- 


c 











17 


Salian Franks, under Chlodio, had pushed as far as the Somme® 

However, a severe defeat was inflicted on them, probably around *+36, 

by Aetius, at Hesdin-le-Vi eux, on the banks, of the Canche. We are 

told that at the time of this defeat, the Franks were celebrating 

a marriage. They were so engrossed in their merrymaking that Aetius 

and his forces were able to take them completely by surprise.™ The 

Roman general permitted the Franks to keep their newly-conquered 

territory on condition that they swear fealty to the Roman Empire 

2 

and provide it with soldiers. 

The Huns, the most barbaric of all the barbarians, invaded 

Gaul in 451, under the leadership of their king, Attila, crossing 

the Rhine between Worms and Bingen.^ They are thought to have been 

Tartars, who had swarmed into Eastern Europe from Asia probably a 

4 

century previously. The hordes under Attila r $ command consisted 
not only of' Hons, but also of other peoples who had Joined him as 
he traversed Europe - among them, Ostrogoths, Gepidae, and Alemannio 
To these allies of the. Huns was added a section of the Ripuartan 
Franks. Shortly before 451, the king of the Ripuar&ans had died, 
leaving two sons, both of whom were straggling for possession of 
the throne. The elder allied himself with Attila, in order to 
obtain the latter f s assistance. The younger concluded a treaty of 
mutual assistance with Aetius. Thu% the Ripuarians fought both for 
and against the Bunnish invaders. The Salian Franks, part of the 

1. Funck-Brentano: The Earliest Times, p. 212. There is considerate 
difference of opinion among historians regarding the date of 
this event. Schmidt (Gesehichte der deutschen Stamme, vol. 2, p. 
454) places it around 428. Duray (His to ire de France, vol. 1, p. 
87 ) gives the date as 448. Lavisse (Histoire de France, vol. 2, 
p. 75) states that the event took place between 431 and 451* 
These differences serve to illustrate the fact that the history 
of the Franks up to the time of Clovis is, at times,reiyindefinite. 

2 . Funck-Brentano, op. cit . p. 212. 

3. Lavisse: op. cat , p. 76. 

4. Sergeant: The Franks, p. 91* 

5* Schmidt: Op. cit ., p. 455* 










18 


Ripuarian Franks, the Visigoths and most of the Burgundians joined 
forces with Aetius against Attila. The latter was defeated in a 

"I 

battle which took place between Troyes and Chalons-sur-Marne. 

Attila was never again able to attack Gaul* 

The date of the death of the Salian king, Chlodio, is 
2 

uncertain* Schmidt places it around 460* This seems improbable, 

however, as Merovech, ^ Chlodio f s successor, is mentioned as having 

led the Salian Franks under the command of Aetius during the battle 

against the Huns in 451* According to Funck-Br entano, Merovech 

4 

himself died in 457. it is from his; name that the succeeding line 

of Frankish kings got their dynastic name of "Merovingian. rt 

Merovech was succeeded a,s king of the Sail an Franks of the 

cr 

Tournai district by his son, Chi Id eric.. The; latter, however, was 
exiled by his people the first year after his accession, because of 
his dissolute way of life. The Franks at Tournai then set up as 
king, Aegidius, who had succeeded Aetius as Roman governor of Gaul. 
Aegidius died in 464, leaving a son, Syagrius. The latter did not 
succeed his father as governor of Gaul, but only as governor of the 
city of Soissons*^ 7 

According to legend, Childeric had, before going into exile, 
divided a gold coin with a trusted friend, who was to send him his 

o 

half of the; coin when the people again wanted him as king* 

Childeric took refuge in Thuringia, at the castle of King Basinus. 

1. Funk-Brentano: The Earliest Times, 

2. Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamme, vol* 2, p. 465* 

3. It is not definitely known whether or not Merovech was Chlodio f s 
son* 

4* Funck-Brentano: on* ait *. p. 222. 

5* Ibid .. p. 222. 

6. Gregory of Tours: IT 11 (12). 

7. Funck-Brentano: op. cit . p. 224. The word "city" as used here, 
refers not only to the town itself, but also to the territory of 
which it was the capital. 

8. Gregory of Tours: II 11 (12). 







1 

' 








19 


After eight years had passed, so the Legend continues, he received 

the half of the coin he had left with his friend, and thus knew 

that his people at Toumai wanted him to return. Shortly after 

Child eric f s return to his kingdom, he was joined by Basina, wife of 

King Basinas. Childeric and Basina were married, and a son, Clovis, 

was born. 1 Childeric died in 48l and was buried at Tournai. His 

tomb was discovered in 1653* It contained a number of his personal 

2 

possessions - weapons, jewels, gold coins, etc. 

Clovis (also called "Chlodowech’ 1 ) was sixteen years cf age when 

he succeeded Childeric as king of the Franks of Tournai in 481. It 

should be noted, however, that the monarchy was not hereditary, but 

elective. 3 The Franks, as most of the Germanic peoples, chose their 

kings from one particular family. In the case of the Salian Franks 

4 

of Tournai, the family was that of Merovech. ‘ At the time of Clovis 1 
accession to the throne, there were four Frankish kings in Gaul: 
Siegbert, who ruled over the Ripuarians? Ragnacar, king of Cambrai; 
Cararic, who ruled the area between Tournai and the Somme? and 
Clovis himself, who ruled at Tournai, on the upper Scheldt, over a 
territory partly corresponding to Hainau.lt»- 

The first territory conquered by Clovis was that of Soissons, 
the only part of Gaul still under Roman government* It was ruled by 
Syagrius, and extended from the Burgundian kingdom in a north- 
westerly direction to the English Channel, between the Seine and the 
Somme* 0 Clovis, with Ragnacar, king of Cambrai, marched against 
Syagrius in 486, and defeating him near the city of Soissons, 

1. Lavisse: Histoire- de France, vol* 2, p, 954 

2. Ibid . , p. 96. 

3. Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamme, vol. 2, p. 473* 

4. Duruy: Histoire de France, vol. 1, p. 97* 

?. Sergeant: The Franks, p. 101. 

6. Ibid . . p. 101. 




T 











: n - f) 



























20 


annexed the territory which he had ruled• The Franks; took 
considerable booty, much of it from the churches. As the spoils 
were about to be divided among the warriors, the famous incident 
of the vase took place. The- bishop of one of the churches had 
asked Clovis to restore to the church a certain very beautiful vase 
which had been removed from it. The king promised to do this, 
provided that the vase was part of his share of the booty. Clovis 
asked his warriors to allow him the vase over and above his 
rightful share. All. agreed but one, who struck the vase with his 
battle-axe, saying that Clovis should have his share of the booty 
and no more. For the time being, Clovis swallowed the affront, but 
a year later, in reviewing his troops, he went up to the soldier 
who had insulted him, and snatching his weapons from him, threw 
them upon the ground, saying that they were not in fit condition 
for use. As the man bent over to pick them up, Clovis buried his 
own axe in his skull, reminding him of the vase at So is sons. 

Gregory remarks that by this act, Clovis, put great fear into the 
hearts of his men. 1 Soon after this, Paris fell to Clovis. 2 

Around ^93, Clovis married the princess Clotilda, niece of the 
Burgundian king, Gondebaud.^ Clotilda, although belonging to a 
family of Arlans, was herself an Orthodox Christian. Her uncle, 
Gondebaud, had murdered her parents, and would have killed her and 
her sister also, if they had not been rescued by friends. Sergeant^ 
remarks that the fact that Clotilda was an Orthodox Christian is 
easily accounted for, if the friends who rescued her were themselves 
Orthodox. Clotilda was determined to convert the pagan Clovis to 

1. Gregory of Tours: II 18 (27), 

2. Sergeant: The Franks, p. 105. 

3. Lavisses Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 98. 

4. Sergeant: op. clt. , p. 113 . 








* 



*, % > 

I 










































21 


( 


Christianity. At first, he refused to be converted. As Gregory 
relates, Clotilda had her first son, Ingomer, baptized at Tournai. 
The child, however, died a few days later, and Clovis argued that 
the pagan gods of his ancestors were angered at his son’s baptism. 
About 496, their second son, Chlodomer, was born. He too was 
baptized, and soon became ill. Clovis again began to storm against 
Christianity, and although his child recovered, he remained 
unconvinced of the power of God. Soon afterwards, he led his troops 
against the. Alemanni. The; battle having taken a critical turn, 
Clovis, according to Gregory, began to pray, saying that if God 
would but grant him the victory, he would become a Christian. 
Immediately, the Alemanni turned and fled. Thus, now firmly 
convinced of the power of the God of the Christians, Clovis 
permitted himself and 3000 of his troops to be baptized by Hemigius, 
bishop of Heims . 1 However, it is highly probable that Clovis, in 
embracing Christianity, was motivated by political rather than 
religious considerations* The fact that he; became an Orthodox 
Christian secured for the Pranks the invaluable support of the 
Homan church. Consequently, the Catholic Franks and not the Arian 
Goths prevailed as the chief power in Western Europe. Clovis’ 
victory over the Alemanni put an end to the invasions of Gaul from 

0 

the east for several centuries. 

Clovis offered terms of alliance to the cities of Armorica in 
^97* These terms were accepted, and the cities recognized the rule 
of the Franks.^ In JO7, Clovis led his forces against the Visigoths, 
whose territory extended from the Loire to Gibraltar* Gondebaud, 
king of Burgundy, was his ally in this campaign. In the battle which 

1. Gregory of Tours: II 22 (31). 

2 . Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2 , p. 99. 

3. Sergeant: The Franks, p. 132 . 






I ' .1 - 

: 

' $ ' " ■ k ' "■ 

: 


% 






















■ 






l 














22 


i 


took place at Poitiers, Alarfc II, the Visigoth!c king, was killed 

and his forces routed• Clovis himself narrowly escaped death* 

Theodoric, Clovis 1 eldest son, the child of a pagan wife, conquered 

Auvergne. Clovis captured Toulouse and conquered Aquitaine.-*- In 

recognition of his victory over the Visigoths, Clovis received the 

title of Consul from the Roman emperor, Anastasius. In 509 ? the 

Ostrogothic king, Theodoric, sent to south-eastern Gaul an army 

which succeeded in raising the siege of Aries, which was being 

attacked by Franks and Burgundians, and in retaking Narbonne, which 

2 

Clovis 1 ally, the Burgundian king, Gondebaud, had seized. 

Clovis now turned his attention to the consolidation of all 
the Franks into a single kingdom. As this could not be accomplished 
while other Frankish kings lived, he decided to do away with them, 
and take over the territory which they ruled. His first victim was 
the Ripuarian king, Siegbert. Clovis suggested to the latter r s son, 
Cloderic, that he would inherit his father r s wealth and become king 
of the Ripuarians. Upon hearing this, Cloderic resolved to have his 
father assassinated. He soon accomplished this, and Informing Clovis 
of Siegbert f s. death, offered him part of the late king 1 s treasure. 
Clovis sent messengers to Cloderic, and while the latter was 
bending over one of the treasure chests, one of the messengers 
murdered him with an axe. Clovis 1 scheme to set Cloderic against his 
father had succeeded. Next, Clovis captured Cararie, ruler of the 
territory between Toumai and the Somme, and his son. Both of these 
were put to death. Now, the only remaining Frankish king besides 
Clovis, was Ragnacar, king of Cambrai. Clovis marched against the 
latter, and capturing him, killed him with his own hand*^ Thus, 

1 . Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2. p. 103 * 

2 . Ibid ., p. 104. 

3 . Gregory of Tours; II 31 (42). 















1 






c 




















' 















23 

having disposed of all the other Frankish kings, Clovis was now 
sole ruler of the Franks. He died at Paris in ?11, and was buried 
in the Chmrch of the Holy Apostles.His widow, Clotilda, survived 
him by many years. 


1. Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2 ? p. 106 









2b 


&e?\ r*\ n vie. W^ftPorv^s 

















































14 lov* 





26 


III 

THE MEROVINGIANS 

As we have seen in the preceeding chapter, Clovis had, by 
disposing of the other Frankish kings, consolidated all the Franks 
into one kingdom, of which he was the sole ruler. However, under 
his successors of the Merovingian dynasty, it was only at rare 
intervals that all the Franks were united under one king. 

Upon the death of Clovis in 511, his kingdom was divided among 
his four sons - Theodoric, Chlodomer, Childebert and dotair.^ 
According to Lavisse, Theodoric, the eldest of the four brothers, 
received the eastern portion of his father’s realm, which included 
the cities of Reims, Cologne, Zulpich, Treves, Metz, Verdun and 
ChSlons-sur-Marneo In addition, he was given Auvergne and some of 

p 

the neighboring cities - among them, le Puy,Limoges and Cahors* 
Chlodomer f s share included Orleans and the neighboring cities of 
Auxerre, Sens, Chartres, Angers, Tours, and further south, Bourges 
and Poitiers in Aquitaine. Childebert ruled over Paris, over the 
territory extending as far as the Somme and the English Channel, 
and also over Brittany. ^ Clotair f s realm included Soissons, Laon, 
Noyon, Cambrai, Tournai and the territory extending as far as the 
Meuse.^ Theodoric*s capital was Reims, Chlodomer*s was Orleans, 
Childebert*s was Paris, and Clotair f s was Soissons. It is generally 
agreed that the four brothers purposely selected as their capitals 
cities that were located close together, as they realized the need 

1. The Frankish monarchy was now hereditaryand not elective. "La 
royaute £tait her^ditaire^ les fils succedaient au plre, chacun 
ayant un droit egal \ 1heritage; ils se partageaient la 
monarchic, suivant leurs convenances personnelles. Les filles, 
parce qu’elles n f auraient pu commander les armies, etaient 
exclues de la succession, comme de la possession de la terre." 
(Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 171.). 

2. Lavisse: op. cit. p. 117* 

3. foid. p. 118. 

b. Funck-Brentano: The Earliest Times, p. 2^9. 









« $ 



o . W > - - 








27 


for concerted action in matters of foreign policy. Of the four sons 
of Clovis, Lavisse says: 

Sans doute les frSres ont trop souvent agi au gre de leurs 
caprices et se sont parfois fait la guerre; mais ils 
gardaient le sentiment qu f ils devaient s f entr f aider et 
accomplir une tache commune: achever la conquete de la 
Gaule, repousser les incursions v porter leurs armes chez 
les voisins. Aussi se sont-ils etablis aussi pres que 
possible les uns des autres.-*- 

About 51a band of warriors, under the leadership of 

their king, Hygelac (Chochilaichus), raided the Gallic coast near 
the mouth o£ the Rhine. The Danes loaded their ships with prisoners 
and booty and put out to sea. Hygelac, however, who had remained on 
shore, intending to follow later, was killed by Theodorlc f s son, 
Theodebert, who had arrived with a considerable force in order to 
combat the invasion., In the naval engagement which followed, 
Theodebert defeated the Bases and recovered the prisoners and booty 

0 

they had taken. 

Around 520, Theodorlc was obliged to put down a revolt which 
had broken out in Auvergne, under the leadership of the Roman, 
Areadius, whom Gregory identifies as a man of senatorial family In 

it 

the city of ClermontAreadius, upon hearing that Theodorlc was 

on his way to Auvergne, fled to Bourges. However, according to 

Schmidt, It was only by means of a lengthy military campaign that 

h 

Theodorlc was able to crush the revolt of the Arvernians. 

1. Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 118. n 

2. Ibid. , p. 129. Schmidt (Geschichte der deutschen Stamme, vol. 2, 
iH>oo) gives the date of this event as 528. This raid is 
referred to In the Beowulf epic. 

3* Gregory of Tours: III, 9* O.M. Dalton, the translator and editor 
of Gregory r s fr History of the Franks,” states that the senatorial 
family mentioned by Gregory was that of Sidonius Apollinarus, a 
Latin poet born at Lyon in 430. Areadius was Apollinarus 1 2 * 4 
grandson. 

4. Schmidt: on. cit. p. 499• 








. 

, - ■. « 

















IS 

, V , ■ ■ " ■ ' 

* 

, 













28 

In 523, Chlodomer, Childebert and Clotair invaded Burgundy. 1 
Gregory 2 tells ns that their mother, Clotilda, incited them to this 
attach on Burgundy in order to avenge the death of her parents who 
had been murdered by her uncle, Gondebaud, father of the reigning 
Burgundian kings, Sigismond and Godomar* The victorious Franks 
captured Sigismond, along with his wife and children. The Burgundian 
king and his family were then taken to the village of Saint-Peravy- 
la-Colombe, near Orleans, where they were put to death by being 
thrown into a well,. "When the Franks left Burgundy, they considered 
it conquered. However, Godomar, Sigismond*© brother, managed to 
organize further resistance, and the conquest of Burgundy had to be 
started afresh, 3 Theodor!c had not taken part in the first exp©ditto 
to Burgundy* Having married Suavegotta, daughter of Sigismond, in 
515) he was on friendly terms with the latter. However, the eldest 
son of Clovis Joined his three brothers in their next attack on 
Burgundy, for, as Lavisse^ points out, Sigismond being dead, there 
was now nothing to prevent Theodoric*© claiming a share of his 
father-in-law*© kingdom. This second Burgundian expedition resulted 
in the death of Chlodomer in June 52%, in a battle which took place 
at Vezeronce. 0 The Burgundian king, Godomar, retook all of the 
northern part of his realm, and according to Lavisse, recognized 
the rule of the Ostrogothic king, Theodoric, ^ over the southern 
part, of which several cities - Avignon, Cavaillon, C'arpentras, 
Orange and Vais-on — had already been captured by the latter*s 

1. Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p, 122, 

2. Gregory of Tours: III, 6. 

3. Lavisse: on, cit ,. p. 123. n 

%• Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamme, vol, 2, p. %99* 

5. Lavisse: on, cit, , p. 123 . 

6. Vezeronce is in the Department of Isere. 

7* The Ostrogothic Theodoric is not to be confused with Theodoric, 
the eldest son of Clovis. The Frankish Theodoric is referred to 
by many historians as "Thierry." 













. :: 
















1 

- 

? 




















t 






■ * 


t 














* 




■ 






■ 


























29 


general, Tulun. 1 

Chlodomer left three sons among whom, in the normal course of 
events, according to Frankish law, 2 3 4 5 6 his kingdom would have been 
equally divided. However, the two elder sons, aged ten and seven 
years,^were murdered by their uncles, Childebert and Clotair, who, 
along with Theodoric, divided Chlodomer f s kingdom* Childebert took 
Orleans and Chartres, Clotair took Tours and Poitiers, and Theodoric 
took Sens and Auxerre. Chlodomerts third son, Clodovald, was 
rescued. He entered the Church and was later canonised. 9 Clotair 
married Guntheuka, the widow of Chlodomer.^ 

Around 529* Theodoric invaded Thuringia, but was forded to 
withdraw his troops. However, his second Thuringian expedition, 
which took place in 531) received the support of his brother, 
Clotair, and also of Saxon forces./ 7 8 Most of Thuringia fell to the 
Franks, who, as was their custom, took much booty. Among the 
prisoners was the princess, Radegonde, the niece of the Thuringian 
king, Hermanefried. Radegonde, who was very beautiful, was the 
cause of strained relations between Theodoric and Clotair, both of 
whom wanted to marry her. Finally, Clotair married the Thuringian 
princess. However, when he ordered the death of one of her brothers, 
Radegonde left him and went to Poitiers, where she founded the 

p 

convent of Sainte-Croix. In the autumn of 531) Theodoric and 

1. Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 123. 

2. See footnote 1, p. 26. 

3. Michelet: Histoire de France, vol. 1, p. 225. 

4. Lavisse: op. cit . a p. 119* 

5. Clodovald was sheltered in a small village near Paris, which now 
bears the abbreviated form of his name ~ St. Cloud. (Funck- 

. Brentano: The Earliest Times, p. 252). 

6. Schmidt:t Gesehichte der deutschen Stamme, vol. 2, p. 500. 

7* Ibid., p. 500. Under the terms of alliance between the Franks 
and Saxons, the former received a tribute from the latter. 
(Lavisse: op. cit .. p. 129). 

8. Lavisse: op. cit .. p. 129. 









t 





t * ■ 

« X. • ' L * <; 

: 

- 




t 





















30 


Clotair left Thuringia, which they had not subjugated completely, 
the Thuringian king, Hermanefried, still holding a remote part of 
his kingdom. 1 2 3 4 * 6 

Theodoric was now obliged to once more turn his attention to 

Auvergne, which Childebert, having heard rumors of his elder 

brother’s death, was preparing to seize. In fact, Childebert had 

already entered Clermont, the capital of Auvergne, with his troops. 

However, upon learning that Theodoric was still living, and was, 

moreover, on his way to Auvergne, Chlldebert immediately withdrew 

his troops, as Schmidt points out, ,f um einen kriegerischen 

Zusammenstosz mit dem gefurchteten Bruder zu vermeiden,” and 

2 

undertook a campaign against the Visigoths. It Is generally agreed 
that one of the objects of Childebert f s attack on the Visigoths was 
to avenge his sister, Clotilda,^ who was married to the Visigothic 
king, Amalaric. The latter, who was an Arlan, had treated Clotilda, 
an Orthodox Christian, with extreme cruelty. Childebert invaded 
Septimania in October 531? and defeated -Amalaric at Narbonne. The 
latter fled by ship to Barcelona, where, according to Schmidt, he 
was killed by a Frank named Besso, who was In his service. 
Childebert, laden with booty, returned home, taking with him his 
sister, Clotilda. However, the latter died en route, and was buried 

h c; 

In Paris. Septimania was still held by the Visigoths.'' 

The following year, 532, Childebert and Clotair again invaded 

Burgundy. Theodoric did not take part in this expedition, although 

£ 

invited by his brothers to do so. Lavisse gives as reason for 

1. Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamme, vol. 2, p. 501. 

2. Ibid. . p. 501. 

3. Not to be confused with her mother, Clovis’ widow, who is 
generally referred to as ”3t. Clotilda.” 

4. Schmidts on. cit. . p. 502. 

5* Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, n. 12*f. 

6. Ibid. , p. 123. 



















. 


, 









. 

* 










„ 


* 




‘I 




















31 


Theodoric^ absence the fact that he was busy putting down the 
revolt in Auvergne* According to Schmidt,"*" Theodoric was engaged in 
defeating Munderic, a pretender to his throne, who had gathered 
together a number of followers in Champagne. In Burgundy, Childebo^t 
and Clotair captured Autun and put the Burgundian king, Godomar, to 
flight. 2 

In 533) while Theodoric was completing the subjugation of 

Thuringia, his son, Theodebert, led troops against the Visigoths in 

Septimania, conquering Bezieres, Dio and Cabrieres. Theodebert even 

succeeded in crossing the Rhone and occupying Arles, in Provence, 

which territory was under Ostrogothic rule. However, upon hearing 

that his father, Theodoric, was seriously ill, Theodebert 

immediately started out for home, abandoning most of his conquests. 

Theodoric died in the summer of 53V* “ Childebert and Clotair 

attempted to seize their brother r s kingdom, which rightfully 

belonged to his son, Theodebert. The latter, however, by dint of 

presenting the aristocracy (die Groszen) of his realm with gifts, 

won their support, and thus foiled the attempt of his uncles to 

cheat him out of his inheritance. i 

Hicht ohne auf erhebliciie Schwierigkeiten zu stoszen, 
trat Theudebert die Nachfolge an. Seine Oheime suchten 
ihm den Thron streitig zu machen und nur dadyrch, dasz er 
die Groszen seines Reiches durch Geschenkg fur sich 
gewann, gelang es ihm, sich zu behaupten. *' 

In 53V, Childebert, Clotair and Theodebert shared the Burgundian 

kingdom, which had at last been definitively conquered. Theodebert 

obtained the northern portion - the cities of Langres, Bes:an$on, ? 

Avenches, Windisch, Sion, Autun, Chalon-sur-Sa8ne, Vienne and 

Viviers; Childebert, the centre - Mtcon, Geneve and Lyon; Clotair, 

1. Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamme, vol. 2, p. 503 . 

2 . Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 123 . 

3. Schmidt: or. cit .. p. 56k. 

¥* Ibid* . p. 505, 











T 














. 






- 





















- 


, 

- : 










' 


t , 


' 






■j ' ; ' 




32 

the south - Grenoble., Die and the neighboring cities. 1 

Having conquered Burgundy, the Franks now desired to extend 

p 

their dominion to the shores of the Mediterranean. As Lavisse 
points out, they were aided in this desire by circumstances in 
Constantinople and in Italy. Justinian, the Roman emperor at 
Constantinople, dreamed of restoiring the ancient Roman Empire. An 
event in Italy, which country was under Ostrogothic rule, gave him 
an excuse for sending an army there. The Ostrogothic king, Theodoric 
the Great, had died in 526 and was succeeded by his grandson, 
Athalaric. However, the latter being a child, his mother, Amalasun1ii% 
daughter of Theodoric, governed In his stead, as regent. 1 Amalasunth^ 
who ^governed Italy with marked favor to her Roman subjects, ,rf 
incurred the .intense dislike of the Ostrogothic nobles. The death 
of her son, Athalaric, induced her to share her sovereignty over the 
Ostrogoths with her cousin, Theodahad, who, in April 535 ? had her 
imprisoned, and soon afterwards murdered. Upon the assassination of 
the pro-Roman Amalasuntha, Justinian declared war on Theodahad. ^ 

The Roman emperor promised the Franks a large sum of money in return 
for their alliance. The Ostrogothic king, Theodahad^ also sought an 
alliance with the Franks, promising to turn over to them Provence, 
as well as the sovereignty over the Alemanni settled in Rhaetia. 
Theodahad died in December 536, before he could conclude his 
negotiations with the Franks. The latter were offered these same 
terms by Theodahad f s successor, Wltigis, and accepted them. The 
Frankish kings divided Provence. Aix, Digne and Gland eve went to 
Theodebert; Arles and Marseilles: to Childebert; and Orange, 

1. Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 123. 

2. Ibid., p, 12^. 

3. Bury: A History of the Later Roman Empire, vol. 1, p» 3S3* 

4. Ibid ., p. 384. 

5- Ibid. . p. 389. 










I 






.» - 

- 










, 





t, 
























c ■; 





- 




- 









* ■ 










< • 



< 


<;:•■' : ■ ; 



* 








. 


- 










r ' 5 ' 


. 









, 


- 

’ 



* 









• 

<t -» <1 r\ 

0 n 

0 








33 


Carpentras and Gap to Clotair.'*' However, when it became evident 
that Justinian f s army, under the command of Belisarius, would 
triumph over the Ostrogoths in Italy, the Franks promised their 
alliance to the Roman emperor. This alternating alliance with 
Ostrogoth and Roman is typical of Frankish treachery and double¬ 
dealing. 

Die Frankenkonige verfolgten nur ihre eigenen Interessen; 
durch abwechsej^nde Unterstutzung beider Parteien gedachten 
sie diese allmahlich zu schwachen und sich dann selbst 
ohne: grosze Opfer in rf den Besitz Italiens zu setzen. Die 
Seele ; dieser doppelzungigen Politik \\rar Theudebert, der 
im^weiteren Verlaufe seine Oheime ganz in den Hintergrund 
drangte. 1 - 

Theodebert invaded Italy in 539. The Ostrogoths, believing the 
Franks to be their allies, allowed them to cross the Po unhindered* 
The Franks then attacked the unsuspecting Goths;. Those who escaped 
massacre fled towards Ravenna. 3 From their camp near that city, the 
Romans saw the Ostrogothic fugitives and thought that they had been 
defeated by Belisarius. Advancing to meet the Franks, whom they too 
considered as their allies, the Romans met the same fate as the 
Ostrogoths,^ 1 * However, disease among his troops, along with lack of 

! 

provisions, soon forced Theodebert to withdraw his forces from 
Italy . 0 

When the Ostrogoth, Witigis, was besieged in Ravenna by 
Belisarius, the Frankish kings promised to aid him in his struggle 
against the Romans in return for part of Italy. This proposition 
was rejected by the Ostrogothic king, who was taken to Constantinople 

1. Lavisses Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 124. 

2. Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamme, vol. 2, p. 5Q7* 

3* Ibid, , p. 507. 

4. Funck-Brentano: The Earliest Times, p. 256. 

5* Schmidt: on. cit .. p. 508, 











;J lilt! 




























, 

t 






- 












, 


‘ 








- 












3*+ 

as a prisoner in 5 1 *0» 1 Theodebert took advantage of the struggle 
between the Ostrogoths and the Homans to establish his forces in 
the north Italian provinces of Liguria, Emilia and Venetia. Totila, 
who had succeeded Witigis, accepted the proposition rejected by the 
latter. Theodebert remained in control of Northern Italy until his 
death in 5*+8* 2 

Meanwhile, in 5^+1 > Childebert and Clotair made their 
unsuccessful expedition into Visigothic Spain. Crossing the Pyrenees^ 
they captured Pamplona and advanced to Saragossa, which they 
besieged in vain for forty-nine days. Then they devastated the 
province of Tarracona on both sides of the Ebro River. Laden with 
booty, they set out for home, only to find the passes through the 
Pyrenees blocked by a Visigothic army.. According to Schmidt, the: 
Franks would have been completely annihilated, had they not 
succeeded in bribing the Visigothic commander, who granted them a 
day and a night to carry out their retreat. As it turned out, only 
the Frankish rearguard was lost .3 

When Theodebert died in he was succeeded by his son, 

Theodebald, who was then fourteen years of age. l} * Buhler^ describes 
the latter as tf ein entarteter, unkriegerischer, kranklicher Knabe." 
The Roman emperor, Justinian, demanded that the Franks leave Italy 
and aid the Romans in their struggle against the Goths, as 
Theodebert had promised to do years before.'" Justinian f s demand 
went unheeded, the Franks remaining in Northern Italy. In 552, a 
Roman army under the command of Narses arrived in Italy. The 
entrance of this force into Italy, along the coast of Venetia, was 

1. Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 125. 

2. Ibid., p. 126. 

3. Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamme, vol. 2, p. 510. 

*+. Funck-Brentano: The Earliest Times, p. 2 57• 

5. Biihler: Das erste Reich der Deutschen, p. 57* 

6 , Schmidt: on. cit ., p. 513• 






4 




, 















* 































• 















• 




















. 




















- 




’ 






? ^ 










4 




„ 

* 

. 


35 

successfully accomplished, despite opposition from Frankish and 

Gbthie troops,.- The Ostrogoth!c king, Totila, was killed, and his 

successor, Teias, begged Theodebald for assistance. The latter 

2 

refused to give this aid, and Teias was killed in 553* The same 

year, Theodebald allowed Leutharis and Bucelin, two Alemanni who 

were at his court, to lead an army into Italy, They both advanced 

into the southern part of the peninsula and were conquered in 554-. 

The whole of Italy fell to the Romans, and the Franks were obliged 

i 4* 

to withdraw beyond the Alps. 0 Theodebald died in 555. 

'Since Theodebald had left no heir, Clotair seized his kingdom. 
According to Lavisse, Childebert was ill at the time, and therefore 
unable to claim a share of Theodebald f s realm.^ In 555? Clotair was 
obliged to march against the Saxons and Thuringians, who were 
rising against the Franks, Lavisse tells, us that the Saxons tr se 
rebellerent et entrainerent dans leur defection les Thuringiens,"^ 
Clotair laid Thuringia waste and fought a large-scale, battle 
against the" Saxons. The next year, 556, he led a new expedition 
against the Saxons, At the approach of the Franks, the Saxons 
offered terms of peace which Clotair was inclined to accept. 
However, his warriors forced him to reject these terms and give 
battle. The Frankish forces suffered a severe defeat. Under the; 
peace terms, the Saxons continued to pay the Franks an annual 
tribute of 500 cows,' 7 

When Clotair annexed Theodebald f s kingdom in 555? he entrusted 

1. Bury: A History of the Later Roman Empire, vol. 1, p. 4*12. 

2 . Ibid .. p. 4-13. 

3. Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p, 126. 

4*. Ibid ., p. 120. 

5. Ibid .. p. 120. 

6 . Ibid ., p. 129. 

7. Ibid ., p. 129. 














• 3 ' 


. 


. 

, 

C $ 









■ 

? 7 •> 




- 

% 




. 













' 

. 




36 

one of his sons, Chraranus, with the governing of Auvergne. However, 
in ^56, when his father was occupied with the Saxons, Chramnus tried 
to have himself proclaimed king, with the aid of certain Aquitanians 
who dreamed of setting up an autonomous state. Chramnus formed an 
alliance with Childebert and was recognized as king by the cities 
of Poitiers and Limoges. 1 Clotair, however, after forcing Chramnus 
to surrender, pardoned him. After the death of Childebert in 558, 
Chramnus revolted again. In 560, he took refuge in Brittany, with a 
Breton count named Conober. Clotair pursued Chramnus to Brittany 
and, seizing him, had him enclosed with his wife and children In a 

p 

hut, to which he then set fire. Since the death of Childebert in 
558, Clotair had been the sole ruler of the Franks. This was the 
first time since the death of Clovis in 511 that all the Franks 
were united under one king. Clotair died in 561. 

The realm of Clotair I was divided among his four sons: 
Caribert, Gontran, Siegbert and Chilperic. Caribert received Western 
Gaul from the Bresle to the Pyrenees, with Paris, Rouen, Tours, 
Poitiers, Limoges, Bordeaux and Toulouse. The capital of his 
kingdom was Paris. Gontran r s capital was Orleans, and his kingdom 
consisted of the province of Berry and the valleys of the Saone and 
Rhone. Siegbert, whose capital was Reims, had the territory watered 
by the Meuse and the Rhine, with dominion over the Germanic tribes 
as far as the Elbe; he also received Auvergne and part of Provence. 
Chilperic had Soissons for his capital, and the cities of the north¬ 
west: Amiens, Arras, Cambrai, Therouanne, Tournai and Boulogne.^ 
Gregory^ tells us that before the realm of Clotair I was 

1. Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 120. 

2. Ibid,, p. 120. 

3. Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamme, vol. 2, p. 518. 

4. Lavisse:? on. cit .. p. 133» 

5. Gregory of Tours: IV, 15 (22). 




1 ? ■ 

. 

V 

* ' ° : 1 ■" Y-' ■ 

7 


- 
















, 

t s 


* ' .•*: ' t ’ r ' 

? ’ 


Q 


e 

• 

















* 


.. 
















■ :r * 




























■ 























r> 






* 





37 


divided among his sons, Chilperic seized the treasure in the royal 
villa of Berny, 1 and then occupied the royal residence of Childebert 
in Paris. His brothers, however, forced him to give up his ill- 
gotten gains and take only his rightful share of his father's 
possessions * In 562, when Siegbert led his troops against the Avars, 
who had hurled themselves upon Thuringia, Chilperic took advantage 
of his brother's absence to take possession of Heims. Siegbert, 
returning victorious from his battle with the Avars, drove Chilpeiac 
from his kingdom and, moreover, seized the letter's capital of 
Soissons, which he kept.- In 566, Siegbert was again obliged to 
combat the Avars. This time, he was defeated and taken prisoner. By 
means of gifts, he won over his adversaries and even concluded a 
treaty of friendship with their chief. 1 *’ Caribert died in 567, and 
his territory was divided among his brothers. Chilperic was given 
the northern and southern portions; of Caribert's realms Brittany, 
with the cities of Rouen, Evreux: and Angers, and in the south, 
Bordeaux, Cahors, Limoges and the districts of Bearn and Bigorre. 
Siegbert obtained the cities of Tours and Poitiers, and Gontran, 
those of Saintes, Angoulime and Perigueux. The brothers couldn't 
reach an agreement on the possession of Paris, so they decided that 
it should be governed by all three, and that none of them could 
enter it without the permifeion of the other two." 

It was in the same year, 567 ? that Brunhilda and Fredegonda, 

those two women who were destined to wield so much influence in 

Frankish affairs, first came upon the scene. The marriage of 

!• In the canton of Vi c-sur—Aisne, arrondissement of Soissons. 

2. The Avars were, according to Sergeant (The Franks, p. X80), 
descendants of the Huns who had ravaged Europe under Attila. 

3* Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, n. 133 . 

K Ibid ., p. 153. 

5. Ibid., p. 133. 





; 

' !. ; : r ‘ ;■ IL 




t 







38 


Slegbert to Brunhilda, the daughter of the Spanish Visigothic king, 

Athanagild, brought the Frankish king much honor, for the Visigothic 

court at Toledo was considered among the Franks as being extremely 

brilliant. 1 2 3 * 5 Siegbert’s marriage was all the more brilliant when 

compared to those of his brothers, who had married common servants. 

Chilperic had married Audovera, whom he later repudiated in favor 

of her servant, Fredegonda. Jealous of his brother’s brilliant 

marriage, Chilperic asked Athanagild for the hand of his elder 

daughter, Galeswintha. The: Visigothic king readily gave his consent, 

and Chilperic, marrying Galeswintha, sent Fredegonda away 
2 

temporarily. One morning, Galeswintha was found strangled in her 

bed. According to Gregory, J her murder had been ordered by Chilperic. 

h. 

Gregory’s translator, O.M. Dalton, is of the opinion that the 
crime was instigated by Fredegonda. A few days after the death of 
Galeswintha, Chilperic married Fredegonda. ^ 

The period in which the sons and grandsons of Clotair I ruled 
Gaul was largely a period of civil war. It is well, therefore, to 
follow the course of these internal struggles before turning to the 
relations of the Franks with foreign powers. Lavisse points out 
that the origin of these civil wars was neither the hatred between 
Brunhilda and Fredegonda, nor the opposition of the predominantly- 
Roman population of Western Gaul (Neustria) and the Germanic 
population of the eastern portion (Austrasia), as is claimed by 
many historians, but rather, the ambition of the Frankish kings 
themselves. 

Une passion unique occupe 1’ame de: ces princes: ils 
veulent augmenter leur part de royaume aux dlpens. du 

1 . Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 133• 

2. Ibid ., p. 134. 

3. Gregory of Tours: IV, 21, (28). 

H-. 0.1!• Dalton: footnote, p. 112, Introduction to Gregory’s "History 

5. Lavisse: on. cit .. p. 134. of the Franks."" 













. ' ' 1 

' 


l ' 
















' ? 


* 


1 





































39 


voisin. II y avait, d f ailleurs, dans chaque royaume, des 
elements de guerre civile, Dans chacun, les grands 
demandent an roi honneurs et richesses,et, s f il refuse, 
sont pr£ts ci le trahir. Un roi qui veut faire la guerre 
a son voisin trouve imm^diatement des complices parmi ces 
m^contents.- 

After the: death of Galeswintha, civil war almost broke out 
between Chilperic and Siegbert, the latter wanting to avenge the 
murder of his sister-in-law. However, hostilities were avoided by 
the mediation of Gontran. It was decided that Chilperic would merely 
cede to his brother, Siegbert, those territories which he had 
settled upon Gales win tha at the time of their marriage, viz, 
Bordeaux, Cahors, Limoges and the districts of Bearn and Bigorre,? 

In 573 ? civil war did break out between Chilperic and Siegbert, The 
former sent his son, Theodebert, to seize Siegbert f s possessions in 
Aquitaine. Siegbert called in troops from his territories east of 
the Rhine, and succeeded in defeating Theodebert. The latter was 
killed in Aquitaine*^ In defiance of the agreement by which none of 
the three brothers could enter Paris without the consent of the 
other two, Siegbert took his wife, Brunhilda, and their children to 
that city, where he left them while he pursued Chilperic to Tournai.i 
The: latter was deserted by the nobles of his realm, who proclaimed 
Siegbert as their king. ' However, immediately after Siegbert f s 
proclamation as king (575)* he was assassinated by two youths who 
stabbed him with poisoned daggers. Fredegonda was responsible for 
this murder. Chilperic r s forces once more rallied around his 
standard• 9 i 

Siegbert was succeeded by his five-year-old son, Childebert, 

1. Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 136. 

2. Ibid .. p. 13^. 

3. Sergeant; The Franks, p. 182, 
bm Lavisse; on, cit ., p. 136. 

5. Sergeant; op, cit ., p. 182. 









„ • 

' f : : ■ 

, 










„ 




* .. ' 




« - 

■ 

















1 








“ 


. 





















■ ' ' ' 

, 












* 






a 

















v 



4 










































ko 


who, at the time of his father's death, was in Paris with his 

mother, Brunhilda, and his sisters. Childebert was rescued by a 

noble named Gondovald, who took him to Metz, and there had him 

acknowledged as king. Brunhilda and her daughters were taken 

prisoner by Chilperic. 1 Brunhilda f s escape was contrived by 

2 

Chilperic's son, Merovech, who had secretly married her. The 

unfortunate Merovech, however, fell into the hands of Chilperic, 

who, at the instigation of Fredegonda, had him put to death. 

Brunhilda returned to Austrasia. 

Upon Childebert f s accession to the throne, there came into 

being two distinct factions in Austrasia* The majority of the 

nobles sought to take advantage of Childebert f s minority in order 

1 + 

to increase their power and usurp the royal prerogatives. The 

opposing faction, which Lavisse refers to as the "royalist party," 

consisted of a few nobles faithful to the king* Lupus, duke of 

Champagne, and Gogo, Childebert's guardian,^ were included in the 

latter group. The nobles seeking to usurp the king's power allied 

themselves with Chilperic, while the royalist faction was allied 

6 

with Gontran, king of Burgundy* 

In 577) an alliance took place between Childebert and Gontran. 
The latter, being childless, declared Childebert his heir.^ However, 
at the death of Childebert's guardian, Gogo, in 581, the young king 
was persuaded by the nobles to ally himself with Chilperic. The 
latter, whose sons were dead, adopted Childebert, promising to make 

1. Lavisse: Histoire de France., vol. 2, p. 136 * 

2. Merovech was the second son of Chilperic and Audovera (Sergeant: 

3. Lavisse: op* cit* . p. l40. * The Franks, p. 183 *; 

4. Ibid ., p. 139. 

5. O.M. Dalton (p. 384, Introduction to Gregory's "History of the 
Franks") explains that a boy succeeding to the throne as a minor 
was given a guardian. 

6 . Lavisse: op. cit .. p. 140. 

7. Gregory of Tours: V 9 11,(17). 















1 


c 



c 



t 


T 




q * 


' 








- 


7 '• 














5 











« 


f 




bl 

i p 

him his heir* Chilperic’s policy at this time, as Daltorr points 

out, was to crush Gontran with the assistance of Austrasian forces 

and then to annex Austrasia itself. Thus, Chilperic would be the 

sole ruler of the Franks. However, the alliance between Chilperic 

and the Austrasians was soon ended. Part of the Austrasian army, 

infuriated at Chilperic r s invasion of Austrasian cities (which are 

not identified), refused to tolerate the Neustrian alliance any 

longer. According to Lavisse, Brunhilda instigated this move by 

which Childebert was "d^livre du joug de l’aristocratie." In 5^3* 

the alliance which had previously existed between Childebert and 

cr 

Gontran was re-established. 

6 

Chilperic was assassinated at Chelles, near Paris, in pen-. 
Whether or not Fredegonda instigated the murder of her husband is 
a controversial question. Sergeant' claims that the murder of 
Chilperic was the inevitable sequel to those of his and Audovera f s 
sons, and that by committing these crimes, Fredegonda made a clear 

o 

path to the throne for her own son, Clotairo Lavisse doesn*t take 
a definite stand on the matter, but gives the impression that he 
considers Fredegonda innocent of this particular crime, pointing 
out that with the death of Chilperic, she lost her protector and 
support. 

Upon the: death of Chilperic, Fredegonda and her six-month-old 
son, Clotair II, took refuge in the Church of Uotre Dame in Paris. 
Learning that Childebert had already made his way as far as Meaux, 

1. Gregory of Tours; VI, 3* 

2. O.M. Dalton; p. 121, Introduction to Gregory's "History of the 

3* Ibid ,, p. 121, Franks." 

b. Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. l4l. 

?. Ih 11 ., p. Ibl, 

6 . Funck-Brentano: The Earliest Times, p. 2 66 . 

7. Sergeant: The Franks, p. 183 . 

8 . Lavisse: o~p« cit », p. 1*+1, 




T 




? 


I 






xr.' 




r f 




5 ! 





: 



n 










' 




Fredegonda sent messengers to Gontran, asking the latter to 
Journey to Paris to act as guardian to the infant Clotair. 1 Gontran 
agreed to her request, for, as Dalton points out, he saw the 
prospect not only of increased prestige, but also of material 
advantage in taking over the governing of his nephew's kingdom. 
Relations between Childebert and his uncle became strained when the 
former demanded that Gontran surrender Fredegonda to him, and the 
Burgundian king refused to do this. Gontran had Clotair proclaimed 
king of Neustria.-' 

Lj. 

However, the revolt of the pretender, Gondovald, obliged 

Gontran to turn to Childebert again. Gondovald, the illegitimate 

son of Clotair I, had lived in virtual exile in Constantinople from 

565 to 582, when the Australian nobles persuaded him to return to 

Gaul, considering him a potential weapon in their anti-monarch!cal 

c 

intrigues . J Upon the reconciliation of Childebert and Gontran in 
58 3 , Gondovald withdrew to an island in the Mediterranean, However, 
the death of Chilperic, along with the estrangement of Gontran and 
Childebert, decided GoMovald to return to Gaul. Therefore, he 
joined Gontran f s former general, Mummolus, at Avignon, where the 
latter, who was out of favor with the Burgundian king, had taken 
refuge. There they were joined by the anti-monarchist nobles. Soon 
the southern part of Gaul was in'a state of revolt. The pretender 
was proclaimed king at Brive—la-Gaillarde, in the department of 
Correze. Gondovald seized Angouleme, Perigueux, Toulouse and 
Bordeaux. Gontran, fearing that Childebert might ally himself with 
Gondovald, renewed his alliance of 583 with his nephew, for the 

1. Lavisse. Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 1^2. 

2. Daltons p. 123, Introduction to Gregory*s "History of the Franks." 

3. Lavis s e s on. clt ., p » 2h2 . 

4. Hot the Gondovald who rescued Childebert II from Paris in 575* 

5. Daltons on. clt .. p. 12^-, 




' 7 


70 . 













43 


third time adopting him and declaring him his sole heir* 1 GondovaUs 
followers deserted him one by one. In 585, the pretender was forced 
to take refuge in Saint Bertrand-de-Comminges, which was soon 
besieged by the forces of Gontran and Childebert. Gondovald was 
handed over to the besieging forces by Mummolus, and was put to 

o 

death. 

At this time (585), Childebert f s guardian, Wandelin, died and 
was not replaced, since the young king had now attained his 
majority. Lavisse points out, however, that Childebert was only 
the nominal ruler of Austrasia, his mother, Brunhilda, exercising 
the real power of government. With the support of Gontran, Brunhilda 
commenced a ferocious struggle against the aristocracy, and 
succeeded in having many nobles assassinated. The Austrasian nobles 
Ranching, Ursion and Berthefried, concluding an alliance with the 
nobles of Clotair f s realm, planned to murder Childebert and rule in, 
the name of his two young sons, Theodebert and Theodoric. Their 
plot was discovered by Gontran, who revealed it to Childebert. The 
latter invited Ranching to Metz, where he treated him in a friendly 
manner. However, as Ranching was about to take his departure, the 
king had his servants murder him. Ursion and Berthefried, who were 
en route to Metz with an army, learned that their plot had been 
discovered, and took refuge in a fortress on the Woevre Plateau in 
Lorraine.^ 

While Childebert f s army was preparing to go in pursuit of 
Ursion and Berthefried, who were later captured and piit to death, 
the Austrasian king signed a pact with Gontran on November 28th 587, 

1. Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 143. 

2. Gregory of Tours: VII, 3:8. 

3. Lavisse: or. cit .. p. 144. 

4. Ibid. . p. 144. 




r 








' 


' 


T 







• 

? ■* 






in the city of Andelot in the department of Haute-Marne. The two 
kings swore eternal friendship, agreed on fixed boundaries for 
their realms, and also agreed that the one of them who died first, 
provided he didn f t leave a son, would have as his heir the survivor. 
Childebert promised to turn over to Gontran those of the latter f s 
leudes^ who had taken refuge in Austrasia, and the Burgundian king 

p 

promised to do likewise with Childebert f s leudes . When Gontran 
died on April 28th 593, Childebert, under the terms of the treaty 
signed at Andelot in 5$7, inherited the territory of the Burgundian 
king. In 596, Childebert himself died, leaving two sons, aged 
eleven and nine years.^ 

Childebert f s realm was divided between his two sons, the elder, 

Theodebert, receiving Austrasia, and the younger, Theodoric, 

receiving Burgundy, as well as Alsace, Champagne and territory 

in the region which later became known as Lorraine. Brunhilda ruled 

4 

in the name of the two young kings. Before the death of his mother, 

Fredegonda, in 597, Clotair managed to seize Paris and neighboring 

cities and win a battle at Laffaux^ against Theodebert and Theodcricw 

7 1 

However, the two sons of Childebert defeated Clotair at Dormeille 
in 600. Consequently, the latter f s realm shrank to the territory of 

g 

the -three cities of Rouen, Beauvais and Aniens. Because of the 
increasing antagonism of the Austrasian nobles, Brunhilda was 
obliged to take refuge in Burgundy. In 605,, she urged Theodoric, 

1. These ”leudes” were really courtiers. Lavisse (Histoire de France, 
vol. 2, p. 1^5) defines them as ”Xes fondtionnaires du roi, les i 
grands personnages qui vivent d f ordinaire k la cour, ceux qui se 
sont unis au roi par la recommandation.” 

2. Lavisse: op. cit .. p. 1^5« i 

3* Ibid : p. l46. 

4. Ibid., p. 146. 

5. Between Soissons and Laon. 

6. Lavisse;: on. cit. . p. lV7» 

7• Department of Seine—et-Marne. 

8. Dalton: p. 1^3, Introduction to Gregory f s ^History of the Franks r . r 











; « * 1 - 




king of Burgundy, to make war on Austrasia, not on his elder 
brother, Theodebert, but, according to Lavisse, 1 on the aristocracy 
under whose control Theodebert ruled# However, war did not break 
out between Austrasia and Burgundy until 610. After having declared 
war on his brother, Theodoric captured the city of Toul. The 
Austrasian king arrived on the scene with his forces and a battle 
was fought outside the city# Defeated, Theodebert fled to Cologne. 
He suffered another defeat in 612, in a battle at Tolbiac, and 
shortly afterwards was captured and taken to Chalon-sur-Saone, 

p 

where Theodoric had. him executed# Thus, the kingdoms of Austrasia 

and Burgundy were united under Theodoric. The latter died in 613, 

leaving four sons. Instead of having the kingdom divided among the 

four, Brunhild a broke with tradition and had only the eldest son, 

Siegbert, proclaimed king. She intended to rule in his name, but 

fate, in the form of the Austrasian nobles, intervened# The latter, 

headed by Arnulf, bishop of Metz, and Pepin de Landen, who were the 

ancestors of the Carolingians, called on Clotair to take over 

Austrasia and Burgundy* The leustrian king reached Andernach 

without meeting any resistance* Brunhilda, however, did succeed in 

raising an army against him, and forced him to fall back to the 

Aisne, Suddenly, the Burgundian nobles abandoned the queen, who, 

closely pursued by Clotair, sought refuge in Burgundy. Brunhilda 

was captured and taken before the Neustrian king, who had her put 

3 

to death, as well as two of her great-grandsons -(613) 

Although in the period from 561 to 613 civil wars largely 

replaced wars of conquest, It is, nevertheless, necessary to 

consider the relationship of the Franks with other peoples. During 

1. Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 1*4-7* 

2* Ibid ,. p. lV7. 

3* Ibid *, p. 148. 




















• ... 











this period, the Franks derived little glory from their military 
campaigns. 

Brittany formed part of the territory which Chilperic received 
upon the death of his brother, Caribert, in 567. It had not, 
however, been brought completely into subjection by the Franks. In 
578, Chilperic led troops against the Bretons, who, under their 
chieftain, Waroch,, had seized the city of Vannes and refused to 
give it up. Although Waroch inflicted a severe defeat on Chilperic, 
he came to terms with the latter, agreeing to pay him tribute. The 
following year, 579 y Waroch began his raids over again, extending 
them as far as Rennes and Nantes. Neither Gontran nor Childebert, 
under whose domination Brittany successively came, was able to deal 
with these disorders any more successfully than did Chilperic. 
However, at the end of the sixth century, Vannes was once more in 
the hands of the Franks. 1 

The Frankish expeditions against the Basques, who inhabited 
the south-western corner of Gaul, had little more success than those 
against the Bretons.. The Basques, too, were given to carrying out 
raids, some of which extended as far as Bordeaux. In 581, Chilperic 
sent an army under the command of Duke Bladast against the Basques. 
The greater part of the Frankish force was annihilated. In 587, an 
army sent by Gontran and commanded by Duke Austrovald also met 
defeat at the hands of the Basques. As a result of the campaign of 
Theodebert and Theodoric in 602, the Basques became tributaries of 
the Franks. 2 

After their settlement in Northern Italy in 568, the Lombards 

frequently invaded Dauphine and Provence. Their invasions, however, 

l.Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 150. 

2. Ibid. . p. 150. 















«■ 




■ 




' 












: ' 'I 






























* 


*+7 


were repelled by Gontran r s forces without much difficulty.^ In 58*f, 

Childebert led a Frankish force into Italy at the appeal of Maurice, 

Roman emperor at Constantinople, who paid him a considerable sum of 

money to drive the Lombards from the Italian Peninsula. The Franks 

devastated the Po Valley. However, upon receipt of a sum of money 

2 

from the Lombards, they withdrew from Italy. Childebert returned 

o 

to Italy in 585, 588 and again in 590. These invasions were, in 

the words of Hodgkin, "'ravaging and plundering expeditions, 

effectual doubtless for the devastation of the country, but 

powerless for Its conquest."^ 

In 585, Gontran sent two armies against the Visigoths in 

Septimania. One force succeeded in capturing Carcassonne, but the 

other was defeated at NImes. The Visigothic prince, Reccared, 

forced the withdrawal of both these armies. Gontran f s forces 

invaded Septimania again in 589, once more seizing Carcassonne. 

Septimania, however, remained in the hands of the Visigoths.^ 

Lavisse seems justified in tracing Merovingian decadence to 

the half-century from 561 to 613• Of conditions in this period he 

remarks: 1 

Les guerres civiles brisent X'unite du royaume et le 
partagent d^finitivement en quatre parties ennemies: 
Austrasie,, Neustrie, Bourgogne et Aquitaine. Elies sont, 
avec la dissolution des moeurs et les crimes, la cause 
veritable; de la dicadence des Merovingiens. c 

Upon the death of Brunhilda in 6X3, Clotair II became sole king 

of the Franks. The: power of the Frankish aristocracy was, however, 

continually increasing. Although Clotair was at this time the sole ! 

X. Hodgkin: Italy and her Invaders, vol. 7, p. 15* 

2. Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol, 2, p. 151. i 

3* Ibid; , p. 152. 

*f. Hodgkin: on. cit .. p. 15* 

5. Lavisse: on. cit ., p. 152. 

6. Ibid .. p. 153• 






- 

. 

« 


\ 






■' . , 

I 


■ 


* 

? 

v . ’ '• . 

, 

. 






o 









«» B ? * 








Frankish monarch, he was far from being the ruler of a united 
kingdom. Actually, he ruled over three separate kingdoms - 
Austrasia, Neustria and Burgundy. In each of these territories , 
Clotair was obliged to appoint a mayor of the palace. This official 
was the chief of the king’s household, and thus, next to the king 
himself, the most important person in the kingdom. Landry was 
appointed to this office in Neustria, Radon in Austrasia, and 
Warnacaire in Burgundy, The king was obliged to make the latter’s 
position permanent. 1 

Clotair’s position as sole Frankish king lasted approximately 
a decade. Austrasia demanded a separate ruler, the nobles of that 
district realizing that they would have greater opportunity to 
obtain wealth and high rank if they had a king in their own 
territory. In 623, Clotair sent his son, Dagobert, to rule over the 
area between the Ardennes^ and the Fauci 11 es.^ However, both 
Dagobert and the: Austrasians being dissatisfied with this 
arrangement, Clotair was obliged, in 626, to extend his son’s 
sovereignty over the whole of Austrasia, with the exception of 
Aquitaine and Provence, both of which had formerly been annexed to 
that kingdom.^ In Austrasia, Pepin de Landen, the mayor of the 
palace, and Arnulf, bishop of Metz, who was advisor to the king, 
governed in the name of Dagobert. As has been mentioned previously, 
Pepin and Arnulf were the ancestors of the Carolingians. Arnulf’s 
son, Ansegisel, married Pepin’s daughter, Begga. The Carolingians 
were their descendants. In 627 when Arnulf entered the monastery 
founded by his friend, Romaric, he was replaced as advisor to the 

1. Funck-Brentano: The Earliest Times, p. 269* 

2. A wooded plateau situated in the department of the same name' and 
extending into Belgium. 

3. Hills which connect the Yosges Mts. and the Langres Plateau. 
l !-. Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 156. 











: *• ' ' 

- r, 

, •. -: J. ■' $ ■ < ■ ' ’ ' ' 

t 


















7 ?■ 
* 


„ 





% 







*+9 


king by Cunibert, bishop of Cologne 

Early in Clotair’s reign as sole Frankish monarch, revolt 
broke out in Burgundy. The king summoned a group of the rebellious 
nobles to his villa in Alsace, where he had them put to death. He 

p 

had others killed at his villa near Sens. The king realized, 
however, that he would be obliged to make some concessions to the 
Burgundians in order to preserve his authority in their territory. 

In 627, Wamacaire, the Burgundian mayor of the palace, died, and 
the nobles declared that they no longer wanted such an official, 
since they preferred to deal directly with the king. The latter 
agreed to this state of affairs. The nobles did not want a mayor of 
the palace because his presence, in their territory would serve as 
a chech on their independence. Already the nobles had their own 
armed bands. When Clot air II died in October 629, each of the three 
states - Austrasia, Neustria and Burgundy, was beginning to be 
divided into seigniorial domains. J 

Clotair II left two sons, between whom, according to Frankish 
custom, his realm should have been divided. However, the elder son, 
Dagobert, did not share the succession with his younger brother. In j 
629 and 63 O, Dagobert made a tour of Austrasia and Burgundy, 
stopping at the principal towns to hear the complaints of the 
people and to render justice to rich and poor alike-.^ In this way, 
he hoped to re-establish the unity of his realm. Following this 
tour, he took up residence in Paris." 

Aquitaine had never cheerfully endured the domination of the j 
Franks. The desire of this district to have a separate government 

X. Lavisset Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 157. 

2. Ibid .. p. 157 . 

3 . Lavisse: on. cit. , p. 158. 

V. Guizot: The History of France, vol. 1, p. l4l. 

5* Lavisse: op. cit .. p. 158. 





Q 


f 















Xr -V.'oJc 

-j:} ;t ‘j.C'X 1 

? 

















50 


was so strong that Dagobert decided to place it under the 
administration of his younger brother, Caribert, who established 
his residence at Toulouse. By the time of his death about 633 9 
Caribert had defeated the Basques, thus extending his dominion as 
far as the Pyrenees. He left one son, Chilperic, whose death took 
place soon after his oiAm.lt is suspected that Dagobert was 
responsible for his nephew f s death. Once more Dagobert was the sole 
ruler of the Franks.^ 

Dagobert, as well as being fond of luxury, was all-powerful in 

the realm of the Franks. Therefore, the bishops and nobles were 

powerless to prevent his taking back from the churches and from 

members of the aristocracy wealth which had been given to them from 

the treasury. The king also confiscated bequests to the Church by 

private individuals. The: wealth thus seized enriched the treasury 

2 

and added to the luxury of the court. 

It was in 632 that the famous battle between Dagobert f s army 
and the forces of Samo took plave. According to Lavisse, Samo was 
a Frankish merchant who, at the end of the sixth century, went to 
trade with the Slavs. In return for his assistance in their struggle 
against the Avars, these Slavs made him their king. Samo founded a 
kingdom which had its centre in Bohemia and extended from the Eavel 
Biver^ to the Styrian Alps. He offered his alliance to Dagobert, 
who, through his ambassador, sent him: an insulting reply. As a 
result, the ambassador was imprisoned by Samo. Dagobert sent an 
army against the latter, and a battle took place on the banks of the 
Egra.^ Dagobert r s forces were defeated. In the end, Samo was obliged 

c 

to make peace. However, he kept his kingdom until his death in 658. 

1. Funck-Brentano: The Earliest Times, p. 271. 

2. Lavisses Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 159- 

3. A river in Germany (Mecklenburg and Prussia). 

4-. A river in Bohemia. 

5. Lavisse: on. cit. . p. I6l. 







£ 








■1 











-• o ' 1 ";■: :. rr . r ". 


Oi '$ H ( - 



3 

■ : ‘o ' i' ‘ f .:V. . 

: 



* 

§V 

t 





* 

• 



■ ■' ' \ '■■■- 

. 


■ c ' 







c, 

• 

f 








o 




51 

In 63 7 ? Dagobert sent an expedition against the Basques,who 

had revolted, and succeeded in bringing them into subjection* He 

also managed to exact from the Breton chieftains a promise of 

obedience to Frankish rule. 1 According to Lavisse, Dagobert 

replaced one Spanish Visigoth!c king with another, neither of whan 1 
2 

is identified. 

The Austrasians, irritated at Dagobert*s moving the capital to 
Paris, demanded a king of their own. Therefore, in 63 *+, Dagobert 
proclaimed his son, Siegbert, king of Austrasia. This territory was 
governed in the name of the young king by Cunibert, bishop of 
Cologne, and by Ansegisel, son of Arnulf, who had become mayor of 
the palace in Austrasia. The Neustrians, who feared that they might 
one day come under the domination of the Austrasians, laid claim to 
Dagobert r s younger son, Clovis, as king. Dagobert, therefore, 
arranged that at his death, Siegbert would continue to rule over 
Austrasia, as well as Aquitaine and Provence, and Clovis would rule 
over Neustria and Burgundy. The nobles of the entire realm swore to 
observe this arrangement. Dagobert died on January 19th 639 , and 
was buried in the abbey of Saint-Denis.^ 

The death of Dagobert marked the end of the period of 
Merovingian strength, and ushered in that of decline which, in 
little more than a century, terminated in a change of dynasty. After. 
Dagobert, reigned the"iois faineants" T - "sluggard kings"', or "do- 
nothing kings." These kings were mere puppets, the mayor of the 
palace wielding the real power in the kingdom. This state of affairs 
is well summed up by both Funck-Brentano and Buhler. The former 
writes: 

1. Funck-Brentano: The Earliest Times, p. 273• 

2. Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 160. 

3* Ibid .« p. 162. 





1 ■ 

? *■■■•- - 
„ ' . : 

' c 

■ 

■ ' 

- ; | ■ H : 1 ' 

■ 

- 




- 



- 

- 



. 

, 

. 



0 ■. - 









' 

* 





52 


Up to and during the reign of Dagobert the kings deposed 
mayors who had ceased to please them, replacing them by- 
others whom they preferred. But after Dagobert it was the 
mayors who deposed the kings. 1 

That the kings were merely figureheads is expressed by Buhlers 

Die Merowinger waren jetzt nur noch dem Namen nach Konige, 
die eigentliche Reichsleitung lag in der Hand der Groszen, 
insbesondere der Hausmeier. 

After the death of Dagobert I in 639, Ega continued in his 
capacity as mayor of the palace in Neustria, of which Dagobert f s 
son, Clovis II, was now king. Pepin de Landen returned from exile 
and replaced his son-in-law, Ansegisel, as mayor of the palace in 
Austrasia, Siegbert f s realm. In Burgundy, this position was taken 
over by Flaochat. The Burgundians had no king of their own, but 
along with the Neustrians, were under the rule of ClovisErkinoald 
succeeded Ega in Neustria. Pepin de Landen died in 640 and was 
succeeded by a noble named Otho. After the assassination of the 
latter, Grimoald, son of Pepin, became mayor of the palace in 
Austrasia.' 

Lavisse^ points out that the duties of the mayor of the palace 
were contradictory. This official was the chief noble in the realm 
and therefore was obliged to maintain the privileges of the nobles. 
However, as representative of the king, he was also obliged to 
preserve the royal prerogatives. Some mayors, such as Erkinoald, 
favored the nobles, while others, such as Otho, were loyal to the 
king. The nobles didn f t hesitate to show their resentment to a mayor 
who supported the king, as can be seen in the case of Otho. In 6Vl, 
when the Thuringians revolted against the Franks and proclaimed 
their independence, the Australian nobles, out of hatred for Otho, 

1. Fimck-Brentano: The Earliest Times, p. 278. 

2. Buhler: Das erste Reich der Deutschen, p. 62. 

3. By the disposition which Dagobert had made of his realm. 

Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. l6*f. 

5* Ibid .. p. l6*+. 


































■ 


* 




























:■ ; \ >:! i 





53 

refused to march against that rebellious people. Thus, Frankish 

dominion over Thuringia was ended. Otho was assassinated by the 

Alemannic duke, Leutharis, with whom the Austrasian nobles seem to 

have plotted the crime. The Franks lost their sovereignty over the 

Alemanni as well as over the Thuringians.*^ 

Neither the king nor the nobles received the support of’ Ctho r s = 

successor, Grimoald. Upon the death of Siegbert in 656, Grimoald 

sent the latter f s son, Dagobert, to a monastery in Ireland, and 

placed his own son, Childebert, on the throne. However, the time 

was not yet ripe: for a change of dynasty. Grimoald was overthrown 

by the Austrasian nobles and turned over to the Neustrian king, 

2 

Clovis II, who had him put to death* 

Clovis himself' died in 657 and was succeeded by his son, 

Clotair III. Bathilda, Clotair*s mother, acted as regent for her 
young son. At this time, Ebroin was the Neustrian mayor of the 
palace. Austrasia and Burgundy had neither king nor mayor. However, 
in answer to Austrasia f s demands, Ebroin gave that territory 
ChiIderic II, brother of Clotair III, as king, and Wulfoald as 
mayor of the palace. Ebroin desired to maintain the unity of 
Neustria and Burgundy, but encountered much resistance from the 
Burgundian nobles under the leadership of St. Leger, bishop of 
Autun. As is pointed out by Lavisse, Ebroin had a formidable 
adversary in this Burgundian bishop. J 

When Clotair III died in 673, he was. succeeded by his brother, 
Theodorie III, The latter had been placed on the throne by Ebroin, 
who had not consulted the Burgundians. Consequently, the latter 
revolted. This revolt was organized by St. Leger. Ebroin was 

1. Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. X6V. 

2. Hodgkin: Italy and her Invaders, vol. 7 ? P« 39• 

3. Lavisse: or. clt .. p. 165. 








\ 


* '■ ■ « 




















; 


1 







„ 

- 

r '■ . ' 


: 

: ' 




» 


■ 

* 


. 




« • 


, ■ 










. 

■ , 

. ■■ " • 


, ’’ 

, 




9 + 


defeated and obliged to take refuge in the monastery of Luxeuil. 

Theodoric III was sent to the monastery of Saint-Denis. The bishop 

of Autun thus became the most important person in the realm. Howerar, 

the Austrasian king, Childeric II, and Wulfoald, his mayor of the 

palace, rose against St. Leger who, in his turn, was forced to take 

refuge at Luxeuil. Upon the assassination of Childeric, both Ebroin : 

and the bishop of Autun left their monastic retreat at Luxeuil.” 

However, the struggle between them was soon resumed. Ebroin 

2 

proclaimed as king an alleged son of Clbtair III* and marching 
against St. Leger f s forces, which were under the command of the 
Burgundian mayor of the palace, defeated them. Ebroin then abandoned 
his king of uncertain origin and proclaimed Theodoric III king of 
Feustria and Burgundy. He himself took over the Office of mayor of 
the palace in both these territories. Ebroin f s army besieged St. 
Leger in Autun and forced him to surrender. The bishop was put to 
death in 678 .^ 

The Austrasian king, Childeric II, was assassinated in 673. 

The following year, Dagobert II, who had been sent to Ireland by 

Grimoald In 656, was brought back to Gaul and placed on the 

Austrasian throne. #+ At Dagobert *s death in 678 , it seemed inevitable 

that Feustrian rule would be extended over Austrasia. To prevent 

this, the Austrasian nobles sent an army against Feustria. This 

force was under the command of Pepin d , Heristal and a certain 

Martin, who was related to Pepin. However, the Austrasian army 

suffered a severe defeat near Laon.Pepin managed to escape, but 

Martin was forced to take refuge in Laon, where he was besieged by 

Ebroin f s forces. Upon surrendering, he was put to death. Austrasia 

1. Lavisse: Bistoire de France, vol.2, p. 166. 

2'. Duruy: Histoire de France, vol. 1. p. 160. 

3 . Lavisse; op. cit .. p. 160 . 

H-. Hodgkin: Italy and her Invaders, vol. 7, p* te. 







; 












i 






i 













































came under Neustrian rule* It was just three years later, In 68l, 
that Ebroin was assassinated.” 

Waratto, who replaced Ebroin as Neustrian mayor of the palace, 
concluded a peace treaty with Pepin, the Austrasian mayor# The 
latter recognized Tlieodoric III as king. Waratto, however, was 
overthrown by his son, Gislemar, who was soon at war with Austrasia c 
Pepin f s forces were defeated by the Neustrians in a battle at Namur 
in 683. Gislemar died soon afterwards, and his father, Waratto, 
again became mayor of the palace, in Neustria* As long as the latter 
lived, relations between Neustria and Austrasia were friendly# Upon 
his death in 686, however, the Neustrian nobles divided into two 
factions - those who proclaimed as mayor of the palace a noble 
named Berthar, who supported the policy of Ebroin and Gislemar, and 
those who favored Pepin d f Heristal. In 687 , Pepin marched against 

p 

Neustria and meeting Berthar f s army at Ter try, won a decisive 
victory over it.~ 

Although Pepin was now in full control of Gaul, he recognized 

the king, Theodoric III, who was the nominal ruler of all the Franks, 

In 691, Clovis III became king, in 695*Childebert III, and in 711* 

Dagobert III. These kings were permitted no share whatever in the 
k 

government. Pepin had two sons, Drogo and Grimoald. To the elder, 
Drogo, he gave the duchy of Champagne, and arranged for him to 
succeed to the position of Austrasian mayor of the palace. He made 
Grimoald mayor of the palace in Neustria. His sons, however, did 
not survive him, Drogo dying in 708 and Grimoald falling victim to 
a pagan assassin in 71^• Grimoald left a young son, Theodebald, whcm 
Pepin appointed mayor of the palace in Neustria. Drogo f s two sons, 

1. Hodgkin: Italy and her Invaders, vol. 7* P» ^+3* 

2. Department of Somme. 

3. Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p# 167 . 

H-# Funck-Brentano: The Earliest Times, p. 302. 


" 












C •• 
























C 1 














, „ ■ ■ ' ' ' v 






* 















56 

Arnulf and Hugo, were to succeed their grandfather in Austrasia. 1 

Pepin succeeded in re-establishing Frankish sovereignty over 
the Germanic peoples east of the Rhine, who, after the death of 
Dagobert I, had proclaimed their independence. Starting in 689, he 
sent expeditions against the Frisians, who inhabited the territory 

p 

between the Ems and the Meuse. Finally, he won a decisive victory 
over their chief, Ratbod, at Durestede, near Utrecht. Pepin f s son, 
Grimoald, married one of Ratbod f s daughters. For the last twenty 
years of Pepin f s life, there was peace between the Franks and the 
Frisians. 0 

Pepin d*Heristal died in 7i*+and was succeeded by his grandsons: 
Theodebald, Arnulf and Hugo. These successors to the position of 
mayor of the palace in Neustria and Austrasia were children, hence 
their grandmother, Plectruda, the widow of Pepin, governed in their 

K 

name. Pepin, however, had another son, Charles Mart el, whose birth was 
illegitimate. The latter was approximately twenty-six years of age 
when his father died. Realizing that Charles constituted a threat 
to her power, Plectruda had him imprisoned immediately after his 
father r s death.^ 

In 715? civil war broke out between Heustria and Austrasia. The 
Neustrlans replaced, the Austrasian child, Theodebald, who was their 
mayor of the palace, ; with Ragenfred, a Neustrian, and declared war 
on Theodebald and Plectruda. In a battle which took place near 
Compiegne, the Austrasians were defeated by the Ueustrianso The 
Heustrian king, Chilperic II, who had succeeded Dagobert III on the 
death of the latter In 715,. and Ragenfred, his mayor of the palace, 

1. Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 168. 

2. Ibid. . p. 168. 

3. Hodgkin: Italy and her Invaders, vol. 7, p* 

V. Lavisse: on. cit. . p. 257* 

5. Ibid ., p.‘ 25^ 








■1 <s 

o M 




t 


$ « 


7 



« ‘ ■ c 







? 


x 


$ 






r r r 




: 












57 


allied themselves with the Frisian, Ratbod. The Neustrians advanced 
to the Meuse, then to Cologne, where they besieged Plectruda. Upon 
receiving from the latter a considerable portion of the treasure 
accumulated by Pepin, they returned to Neustria. 1 In 716, Pepin’s 
son, Charles, escaped from prison and managed to gather around him 
his father ’s leudes. Attacking the Frisians, who had sailed up the 
Rhine, he was defeated by Ratbod. 2 However, he inflicted a defeat 
on the Neustrians at Abl^ve, near Malmldy, and recovered his 
father’s, treasure, which they had obtained in Cologne. The following 
year, 717* Charles won a decisive victory over the Neustrian forces 
at Yincy, near Cambrai. He conquered Paris and, returning to Cologne, 
received from Plectruda the remainder of his father’s treasure. 
Charles’ position as mayor of the palace in Austrasia was now 
acknowledg ed• J 

Aquitaine had become virtually independent and was ruled by 
its duke, Eudo. The latter was allied with Neustria, to which he 
gave powerful support. In 719 9 the combined forces of Neustria and 
Aquitaine were routed by Charles near Soissons. Eudo fled to 
Aquitaine. Charles was now ruler of Neustria as well as Austrasia. 
The Australian king, Clotair IY, having died, Charles recognized 
the nominal sovereignty of the Neustrian, Chi Ip eric II. Upon his 
disappearance the following year, the latter was succeeded by 
Theodoric IY. 

In 711, the Saracens began their invasion of Europe. Crossing 
the Straits of Gibraltar, they entered Spain, overthrowing the 
monarchy of the Yisigoths. They entered Gaul in 716, and four years 
later, in 720, conquered the old Gothic territory of Septimania. 

1 . Hodgkin; Italy and her Invaders, vol. 7 ? p. 50. 

2 . Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 258. 

3. Hodgkin; or. cit .. p. 51- 
H-. Lavisse; ou. cit .. p. 258. 









58 

This same year, they besieged Toulouse, but were repelled by Eudo. 
however, by 725? the Saracens had advanced as far as Autun in 
Burgundy." 1 * The war between Eudo and Charles continued, the latter 
invading Aquitaine twice in 731* To defend himself against Charles, 
Eudo became the ally of a Saracen chief named Munuza, to whom he 
gave, his daughter, Lampegia, in marriage. Munuza, who apparently was 
attempting to establish an independent state in Spain, was overthrown 
in 732 by Abd el-Rhaman, the Saracen governor of Spain. The latter 
then invaded Aquitaine. The Saracen force, which had devastated the 
territory it had traversed, reached Bordeaux. Eudo attempted to save 
the city, but suffered a crushing defeat at the hands of the Moslem 
invaders. He was obliged to ask his former enemy, Charles Martel, 
for assistance. Meanwhile, reaching Poitiers, the Saracens burned 
the church of St. Hilary, which was situated outside the city walls. 
The city itself resisted the invaders who, instead of besieging it, 
headed for Tours. Marching against the Moslems, Charles encountered 
them at Cenon, near Poitiers. The Battle of Poitiers took place on 
October 17th, 732. There was great loss of life on both sides. At 
nightfall, the fighting ceased. At daybreak, the Franks prepared to 
attack the Moslem camp, but found that during the night the invaders 
had fled. 2 The victory of Charles at Poitiers saved Gaul from Moslem 
domination. 

1 

Upon the death of Eudo in 735? his son, Hunald, succeeded him 
as independent ruler of Aquitaine. Charles demanded an oath of 
loyalty from Hunald. Upon the refusal of the latter to comply with 
this demand, Charles invaded Aquitaine and re-established Frankish 
dominion over Southern Gaul.3 

The Moslems were still in control of Septimania, and in 737> 

1. Hodgkin: Italy and her Invaders, vol. 7? p« 52. 

1 2. Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 260. 

3. Ibid ., p. 261. 



t 

4 

'• 9 

0 I 

„ ' 

4 

































, 





















59 


seized Avignon and Arles in Provence* This same year, Charles 
recaptured Avignon, and crossing the Rhone, defeated the Saracens 
in a battle near Narbonne. He did not succeed in taking Narbonne, 

A 

but did capture Nimes and Agde. The next year, 73°, all of Provence 
was recaptured by the Franks. Septimania, however, remained in the 
hands of the Moslems. 1 

The puppet king, Theodoric IV, died in 737 and was not replaced 
during the lifetime of Charles Martel. In 7*+l, Pope Gregory III 
sent an embassy to Charles, asking for his assistance against the 
Lombards in Italy. Charles refused this request, since, as Funck- 
Brentano^points out, he did not know the strength of the Lombards, 
and he was afraid of another Saracen offensive. Charles Martel died 
in October, 741. ^ 

A few months before his death, Charles divided the territory 
under his control among his three sons - Carioman, Pepin the Short, 
and Grifo. Carioman was given Austrasia, Thuringia and the Alemannic 
territory. Pepin received Burgundy, Neustria and Provence. Grifo, 
who was illegitimate, did not at first receive a share in his 
father r s territory. However, the protests of his mother, Swanahild, 7 
finally obtained for him a portion of each of the three kingdoms of 

Ll. 

Austrasia, Neustria and Burgundy. 

Soon after the death of Charles, a quarrel broke out between 
Grifo and his two brothers, in addition to revolts in Aquitaine, 
Bavaria and the Alemannie territory. Marching against Grifo, 

Carioman and Pepin captured and Imprisoned him. In 742, they marched 
against Aquitaine, causing much devastation and returning home with 

1 . Hodgkin: Italy and her Invaders, vol. 7, p. 58. 

2. Funck-Brentano: The Earliest Times, p. 305* 

3 , Hodgkin: or. cit .. p. 59* 

4, Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 266. 









* 

4 

? • . ' ' .4 

* 








4 


0 








O 


' 

' « ‘ ’ 














; 


4 


/ 

. 








• 





9 
















4 ' ' ' -0 " 

4 


4 

T t 

o 4 " ■ o 








? * 






60 

considerable booty. Alemania, too, was devastated and brought into 

subjection. The Bavarian forces were defeated on the banks of the 

Lech," and in 7*+*+j surrendered to the Franks. Meanwhile, the 

Aquitanian duke, Hunald, invaded Neustria, burning the city of 

Chartres. After conquering the Germanic peoples east of the Rhine, 

Pepin and Carloman marched against Hunald. The latter, who was able 

to offer no resistance, entered upon a monastic life and was 

2 

succeeded by his son, Waifar, in 

Carloman and Pepin also turned their attention to combatting 
the state of disorder which then existed among the Frankish clergy. 
The evils to be found among this clergy were many and varied. 
Bishoprics were bought by noblesr who spent their time hunting, or 
in the. army, and who were always ready to increase their domains by 
force. These "bishops" also frequently looted monasteries and 
convents. In the monasteries themselves, the monks would often 
revolt against their abbots. Ecclesiastical councils were held more 
and more rarely. Charles Martel was in a large measure responsible 
for these disorders, since he had had no scruples about using 
ecclesiastical appointments to reward his followers for their 
services. Under the reform carried out by Pepin and Carloman, a 
council was held each year; every priest had to give an accounting 
of his actions to his bishop twice a year; and members of the clergy 
were forbidden to bear arms, to hunt, or to go to war.'-' 

In 7*+7 ? Carloman confided his territory and his children to 
Pepin, and then left for Rome, where he, entered holy orders. He 
founded a monastery at Monte Soracte, in Etruria, but since he 
attracted many visitors, he soon left it and entered the monastery 

1. A river in Bavaria. 

2 . Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 267. 

3. Ibid ., p. 268. 




. ■ , • ■ • , ■ . y.' 

" 



















■, 1 




, 

■* : 

. 

- 

( ii v: • 






' 

$ 



, ■ 

♦ * 


, 















61 


at Monte Cassino. 1 2 3 

Thus, Pepin the Short became the sole ruler of the Franks. 
There had been a Frankish king since 7*+3j when Pepin and Carloman 
had placed Childeric III on the throne. However, this last of the 
Merovingian rulers was, as his predecessors for the past century, a 

p 

mere cipher. Nevertheless, as Lavisse points out, these kings were 
respected by the Franks. Therefore, powerful as Pepin was, he was 
afraid to usurp the title of king without the sanction of the Church. 
To obtain this sanction, he sent Pope Zacharias an embassy composed 
of Fulrad, the abbot of Saint-Denis, and Burchard, bishop of 
Wurzbourg. These clerics were to consult with the pope on the 
subject of kings whose rule was only nominal. The pope, fully aware 
of the services which Pepin could render to the Church, replied that 
he who actually wielded the power of government should have the 
title of king. 

As soon as Pepin received the pope's reply on the subject of 
faineant rulers, he had himself elected to the position of king of 
the Franks by an assembly which he convoked at Soissons in November, 
751•^ Thus began the rule of the Carolingian dynasty. Childeric III, 
the last of the Merovingians, and his son, Theodoric, were sent to 
the: monasteries of Saint-Bertin and Saint-Wandrille respectively. 


1. Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 270 

2. Ibid. , p. 271. 

3. Ibid ., p. 272. 






: 

'■ % 






, 











: 

7 

. 

„ '■ 






' 


























, , - , 

” ' ° ? S 




62 


Genealogical Table of the Merovingians 
(Hodgkin: Italy and her Invaders, vol* VII) 


Austrasia 


Clovis I (481-511) 


Theodoric I 
(511-34) 


Theodebert I 
(534-48) 


Theodebald 

(548-55) 


Chlodomer 

(511-24) 


Childebert I 
(511-58) 


Caribert I 

( 561 - 67 ) 


Neustria 
Chilperic I 

(561-84) 
m. Fredegonda 


Burgimdy 

Gontran 

(561-93) 


Clotair II (584-628) 


Dagobert I 

(622-38) 


Aquitaine 
Caribert II 
(628-31) 


Theodebert II 
(596-612) 


Clotair I 
( 511 - 61 ) 


Austrasia 
Siegbert I 

(561-75) 

m. Brunhilda 


Childebert II 
(575-96) 


Theodoric II 
(596-613) 


Clotakr III 
(656-70) 


Neustria 


Clovis II 

(638-56) 


ChiIderic II 
(660-73) 


Chi Ip eric II 
( 715 - 20 ) 


Childeric III (743-51) 
Denosed 


Jlovls III 
(691-95) 


Austrasia 


"iegbert II 
(632-56) 


Dagobert II (674-78) 


Theodoric III 
(673-91) 


Childebert ill 
(695.-711) 


Dagobert III 
(711-15) 


Hotair IV 
(717-19) 


Theodoric IV (720-37) 





















63 



WESTERN EUROPE ftT THE END OF THE 
HE Ro VlNfrlftM PERiCIP 

F RRHKISH TERR|T0R)T - 










IV 


6b 


THE CAROLINGIANS 

Upon his election as king of the Franks in 751, Pepin the 

Short became in name what he and his predecessors for the. past 

century had been in actual fact* Pepin 1 s election was confirmed in 

752 when he and his wife were crowned at Soissons. by St* Boniface, 

archbishop of Cologne* The coronation was repeated two years later, 

in July 75*+, by Pope Stephen II at Saint-Denis*" In crowning Pepin, 

his wife and children, the pope forbade the Franks, on pain of 

excommunication, to select a king from any other than the 

Carolingian family* The pope also conferred upon Pepin and his two 

sons the title of Homan Patrician* The patrician was originally the 

Homan emperor f s delegate in the territory in which he was established 

The patriciate: had, however, become a purely honorary dignity, and 

2 

moreover, as Funck-Brentano points out, one which the pope had no 
authority to confer* 

The pontiff 1 had not undertaken the journey from Home to Saint- 

Denis merely for the purpose of bestowing dignities upon the 

Frankish king, but rather, to obtain the latter r s assistance against 

the Lombards, who had seized the exarchate of Ravenna and the 

Pentapolis J and were threatening Home* Pepin promised the pope to • 

do :all in his power to liberate the territory seized by the LombardSi 

His projected campaign against the Lombards meeting with considerable 

opposition from the Frankish nobles, Pepin tried to avoid an 

1. Funck-Brentano: The Earliest Times, p* 317• 

2* Ibid *„ p* 317* 

3 * The exarchate of Ravenna and the Pentapolis consisted of that 
territory along the Adriatic coast of Italy which still owed 
allegiance to the Homan emperor at Constantinople* Included were 
the cities of Ravenna, Rimini, Pesaro, Faro, Cesena, Sinigaglia, 
Jesi, Forli, Urbino, Cagli, Gubbio,and Harni* (Lavisse: Histoire 
de France, vol. 2, p. 2 75)* 



























. 












. 


'• r r • - ' 

















6 ? 


Italian expedition by sending a delegation to the Lombard king, 
Astolf, asking him not to march against Rome. The Lombard's reply 
being unfavorable, the Frankish army set out for Italy in 75^, 
probably in August, The Lombard forces were defeated at Susa, 1 ' and 
the Franks advanced as far as Pavia, devastating the surrounding 
area. Astolf was constrained to sign a peace treaty whereby he 
promised to surrender the exarchate of Ravenna and the Pentapolis, 
and to refrain from attacking Rome, He even promised to pay the 
Frankish king an annual tribute. By one of the clauses of the treaty, 
the territory surrendered by the Lombards was to be handed over to 

p 

the pope.^ However, Astolf did not keep his promises. He refused to 
give up any territory, and in January 756, again besieged Rome, The 
pope wrote several letters to Pepin, asking for assistance which 
the Frankish nobles were unwilling to give. Finally, the. Franks 
agreed to a second Italian expedition. Once more Frankish forces 
advanced as far as Pavia, and once more Astolf asked for peace, 
renewing the promises he had made in 75^+* This time, the terms of 
the treaty were carried out. The receipt of the promised territory 
by the pope instituted the; Church States in Italy. ^ 

Having successfully completed the Italian campaign, Pepin now 
turned his attention to areas which had long been trouble spots. In 
75B> he led his forces against the Saxons, who were finally brought 
into subjection and agreed to pay the Franks an annual tribute of 
three hundred horses,'' 1 * In 759, a Frankish force besieged Narbonne, 
in the old Gothic territory of Septimania. The inhabitants of 
Ifarbonne were promised that they would be permitted to keep their 
own separate laws if they surrendered their city to Pepin’s forces. 

1. In Piedmont. 

2. Lavisse; Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 275* 

5. Ibid,, p. 276, 

h -9 Hodgkin; Italy and her Invaders, vol. 7? p« 270. 



1 













. ! rv 


c 








3 







n 


T- 



> ; 



<o, 










$ 


r * 


X 

>;■/ 


' 

■ 







t 


66 

Rising against the Saracens who controlled the city, the Gothic 
population handed it over to the Franks.. Thus was ended the Moslem 
domination over Southern Gaul,' 1 ' 

In 760 began Pepin f s war against Aquitaine, which was to last 

p 

for eight years. According to Hodgkin, the pretext for beginning 
the war was the refusal of the Aquitanian duke, Waifar, to restore 
to a number of churches under Pepin f s special protection the 
property which belonged to them in Aquitaine. Marching against 
Aquitaine in 760, the Frankish king devastated the province of Berxy. 
The following year, Waifar invaded Burgundy. Pepin seized Clermont, 
and in the spring, Bourges. Waifar had the cities of Poitiers, 
Limoges, Saintes, Perigueux, and Angouleme demolished in order to 
prevent the Frankish forces from making use of them. The Aquitanian 
forces attacked Septimar.ia and the provinces of Lyonnais and 
Touraine. Limousine and the neighboring districts were laid waste 
by the Franks. In 763 j the latter advanced as far as Is.soudun, J 

s \ if ■ 

reached the Vezere and possibly Cahors. The: Aquitanian forces were 

5 

defeated, and Waifar barely managed to escape. It was at this time 

that Pepin *s- nephew, Tassilo, Duke, of Bavaria, renounced his 

allegiance to the. Franks, and with his forces returned to Bavaria. 

Waifar took advantage: of Tassilo r s defection to demand restitution 

of those cities seized by the Franks. Pepin refused this demand, 

but, for a period of two years, discontinued hostilities against 

Aquitaine. The war was resumed in 766, and in March 767, Aquitaine 

was taken by the Franks, who attacked from Septimanla. Pepin left 

Aquitaine to return in August with his wife and children, who took 

l.Kodgkin: Italy and her Invaders, vol. 7> p* 270. 

2 .Ibid., p. 271._ 

3 .Department of Indre. 

b.k river with its source in the mountains of Limousine.. 

5*Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 277« 



'• '• '■ f 


1 









\ 




r 


■ i 4 ■; 

. , r r. f><i 

V/.- ’;.0 ;C 


. 


* 




- 


■ rv 




■ 






n 

l : 


4 . / : 1 — 












. 






* 





67 


up residence in Bourges. The Frankish king then set out in pursuit 
of Waifar, who had taken refuge in Southern Aquitaine. However, at 
the approach of winter, Pepin returned to Bourges, and his army 
went into winter quarters in Burgundy. The pursuit of Waifar began 
again in February 768. Finally, the Aquitanian duke was killed and 
his family captured.^ 

Pepin was ill when he left Aquitaine. Realizing upon his 
arrival at Saint-Denis that he had not much longer to live, the 
Frankish king summoned his nobles, that he might divide his realm 
between his two sons, Charles, who later became known as Chariemagn^ 
or Charles the Great, and Carloman, in their presence and with 
their consent* Charlemagne was to receive Austrasia, that part of 
Neustria to the north of the Oise, and Aquitaine, except for the 
province of Bourges. Pepin designated as Caloman's. territory 
Burgundy, Provence, Septimania, Alsace, Alemania, Thuringia, Hesse, 
Heustria. south of the Oise, and that portion of Aquitaine which had 
not been assigned to Charlemagne. Pepin died in September 768, and 

p 

was buried in the abbey of Saint-Denis. 

Pepin's realm was divided among his two sons, Charlemagne, and 
Carloman, as he had arranged before his death. That the two brothers 
were incapable of concerted action was clearly demonstrated in the 
case of the revolt which broke out in Aquitaine in 769* A certain 
Hunald^ attempted to set himself up as king of Aquitaine. 

Charlemagne asked for his, brother 's support in putting down the. 
Aquitanian revolt,, but was refused this assistance. Since the 

1. Lavisse: Histoire ae France, vol. 2, p. 278. 

2. Ibid., p. 278. 

3. According to Funck-Brentano (The Earliest Times, p. 32?), this^ 
was Duke Kunald, Waifar r s father, who had entered a monastery in 
7^5. Lavisse ( on. cit .« p. 28l) states, however, that this^Hunald 
was not the duke by the same name, as the latter had died in Rome 
in 756. 






* 

a ' t ' 

*' ' ' ' 10 ' ‘' ' 
. <* 











- 


* 




































: < > 

* 






‘:« ■' > 







V C 

* 



- 

! 


1 ' ft - 









;;.v 


68 

revolt did not affect his own portion of Aquitaine, Carloman took 

no interest whatever in crushing it, Charlemagne marched against 

Hunald. The latter took refuge with Lupus, Duke of Gascony, who, 

however, handed him over to Charlemagne upon being ordered by the 

latter to do so. The revolt crushed, Charlemagne returned home.' 1 ' 

Carloman favored the Lombards, while Charlemagne supported the 

pope. Their mother, Bertha, tried to bring about a reconciliation 

between the two. Her plan was to have Charlemagne marry Desiree 

(Desiderata), the daughter of the Lombard king, Didier (Desiderius). 

The marriage took place in 770, Charlemagne repudiating Himiltrude, 

2 

whom he had previously married. However, the marriage of 

Charlemagne and Desiree was not of long duration, the Lombard 

princess being repudiated in 771 * J Carloman died in December 771, 

and his leudes. passing over his sons, proclaimed his brother, 

k 

Charlemagne, as their king.' Thus, the latter became the sole ruler 
of the Franks, 

In 773, Charlemagne, undertook his first campaign against the 
Lombards. It was the ambition of the Lombard king, Didier, to set 
up in Italy a kingdom similar to that of the Franks in Gaul. 
Therefore, after the death of Pepin, he attacked central Italy, 
seizing the cities which the Frankish king had given to Pope 
Stephen II. Charlemagne, receiving an appeal from Pope Hadrian I 
for assistance against the Lombards, twice sent embassies to Didier, 
asking him to surrender the church lands he had seized* The Lombard 
king refused to do this:* so Charlemagne set out with his troops for 
Italy. The Frankish king once more tried to negotiate the surrender 

!• Lavisse: Histoire de France, voi. 2, n. 28l. 

2. Ibid ., p. 281. 

3, Hodgkin: Charles the Great, p. 89. 

*f. Sergeant: The Franks, p. 219*. 






fi 








■ ' '■ ■ . t - 












■_ 



» 





* 





n . 

£ 
















n 



4 


r 






















* 


69 

of the church territory by the Lombards, and again failed in his 

attempt. However, Didier f s army, panic-stricken at the approach 

of the Franks, fled. The Lombard king took refuge in Pavia, where 

”1 2 

he was besieged by the Frankish forces." According to Hodgkin, the 
siege of Pavia began about the end of September 773 and lasted for 
ten months. Leaving the major portion of his army at Pavia, 
Charlemagne proceeded to Verona, the other centre of Lombard 
resistance. It was at Verona that Carloman f s widow, Gerberga, and 
children had taken refuge. The garrison of the city, under the 
command of Didier f s son, Ad el chis, offered only slight resistance 
to the besieging Franks. The city soon surrendered. Adelchis 
escaped to Constantinople. Ho more was heard of Gerberga and her 
children. Hodgkin takes the stand that their lives were spared by 
Charlemagne, since, if they had been put to death, that fact would 
have been recorded. 0 

Charlemagne returned to his forces besieging Pavia, and from 
there directed the capture of the cities on the left bank of the 
Po. In the spring of 77*+ ? the Frankish king left for Rome, reaching 
that city on Easter Saturday. The following Wednesday, Charlemagne 
confirmed the donation of territory made by his father, Pepin, to 
Pope Stephen II and his successors, and drew up a new donation more 
extensive than that of Pepin. Hodgkin points out that this 
alleged donation, which would have made the pope sovereign of two 
thirds of Italy, never became an accomplished fact. 

Charlemagne returned to his position before the city of Pavia. 
The city surrendered to the besieging Frankish forces in June 77^. 

1. Lavisses HIstoire de France, vol. 2, p. 282. 

2. Hodgkins Charles the Great, p. 9*+# 

3. Ibid . a P . 95. 

h* Lavisses op. clt, 5 p. 283. 

5. Hodgkins Italy and her Invaders, vol. 7> P* 379. 





7 


' 


c • T 

« ' 

' ■ . 

t 1 

4 „ 

« 

. 










■ 


. 

• , 

' ’• ' ■' * ' . V ■ '■ 

' n 

' 

, ' ' I. ' 

' 








;• * 




. 




- 













70 


The Lombard king, Didier, who was taken prisoner, ended his days in 

a monastery. Charlemagne seized the royal treasure and took the 

title of king of the Franks and Lombards." The Lombards, however, 

had not been brought completely under subjection. Arachis, son-in- 

law of Didier, and Duke of Benevento, remained independent. The 

Frankish army having departed, Hildebrand, Duke of Spoleto, plotted 

with Hrodgaud and Reginald. Dukes of Friuli and Chiusi, to seize 

Rome and re-establish the Lombard kingdom in Italy. Once more the 

pope appealed to Charlemagne for assistance* The latter arrived in 

Italy early in 776. Crushing the Lombard rebellion, he returned to 

his kingdom. However, the: Duke of Benevento, Arachis, assumed the 

title of prince and had himself crowned. The Frankish king returned 

to Italy in 777 and Arachis surrendered to him. Upon the death of 

Arachis, his son, Grimoald, was permitted by Charlemagne to succeed 

his father as Duke of Benevento. Grimoald became a tributary of the 
2 

Frankish king. 

In 787 , Charlemagne: led an expedition against Bavaria. Ever 
since the Bavarian duke, Tassilo, had deserted Pepin in 76 3 during 
the; latter f s Aquitanian campaign, Bavaria, although nominally under 
Frankish rule, had been virtually an independent state. A 
reconciliation of Tassilo and Charlemagne had been brought about by 
Sturm!, the abbot of Fulda, probably around 76 9.^ Tassilo, however, 
assumed the title of king. Charlemagne could see Bavaria gradually 
slipping from his grasp. Therefore, in 7^3,, Charlemagne and. Pope 
Hadrian sent a joint embassy to Tassilo to warn the latter against 
taking any action contrary to his oath of fealty to the Frankish 
king. The Bavarian journeyed to Worms, where, in the king r s presence, 

1. Lavisse:HIstoire de France, vol. 2, p. 283 . 

2. Ibid .? p* 284. 

3 . -Hodgkin: Italy and her Invaders, vol. 8 , p. 99. 






4 








* ' ’ 




c 









\ ' 

- . ’ ’ " ■ c 

, c ? ' 

/. * ’ 

■ 

, » 1 



71 


he re-affirmed his fealty* Charlemagne, however, doubted Tassilo f s 
loyalty and in 787* sent another embassy to the Bavarian to remind 
him of his oath of allegiance and to summon him to his presence* 
Upon Tassilo’s refusal to obey this summons, Charlemagne marched 
against him* The Bavarian duke, realizing that many of his own 
nobles would side with the Franks, surrendered his duchy to the 
latter. Charlemagne immediately restored Tassilo to his position 
of ruler of Bavaria, under Frankish suzerainty* The Bavarian duke 
again swore fealty to Charlemagne, who thereupon returned to his 
palace at Ingelheim on the Rhine.” However, the Frankish ruler soon 
suspected Tassilo of disloyalty, which was later confirmed (the 
Bavarian had conspired with the Avars against the Franks), and in 
June 788, summoned him to trial at Ingelheim* There, a general 
assembly consisting of representatives of all Charlemagne’s subjects 
had been convoked. This assembly found Tassilo guilty of the charges 
of treason brought against him and condemned him to death. 
Charlemagne did not carry out this sentence, but instead, banished 

p 

Tassilo to a monastery. Thus, Frankish sovereignty over Bavaria 
was secured. 

One of the most noteworthy events of Charlemagne’s reign was 
his war against the Saxons, which began in 772 and lasted over 
thirty years. The Saxon confederacy consisted of four tribes - the 
Westphalians, Angarians, Eastphalians and Nordalbingians, The 
territory bounded by the Elbe on the east and extending nearly as 
far as the Rhine on the west, corresponding to modern Hannover, 

Brunswick, Oldenburg and Westphalia, was divided almost equally 

/ 

among the first three tribes, the Westphalians and Eastphalians 

1. Hodgkin: Italy and her Invaders, vol. 8, p. 103® Ingelheim is 
near Mainz.. 

2. Ibid. . p. IQ?. 





- 






% • • 










? 







1 


<1* 


























Q . 

c *•' ' ” 

1 

’ 

* :• • '• ; 


. | 










• 


- 






* 




„ : 










; ~ 










? 4 . ' ' • ■ ■ ^ • - . ' ■ • ' '■ 



72 

occupying the western and eastern portions respectively, and the 

Angarians the central portion. The Nordalbingians occupied the area 

beyond the Elbe, corresponding approximately to the modern duchy 

of Holstein.'** The Saxons were pagans. 

At an assembly of the Franks held at Worms in July 772, 

Charlemagne decided to attack the Saxons. Entering Angarian 

territory, his army captured the fortress of Eresburg. Proceeding 

northward, the Frankish force came upon a sacred grove, in the 

midst of which stood an extremely large tree trunk. This was the 

idol known as the n Irminsul,” which was worshiped by the Saxons of 

the surrounding district. Round about stood shelters containing 

gold and silver. The Franks destroyed the idol and the shelters 

and carried away the treasure. Charlemagne then advanced as far as 

the Weser, where he had an interview with one of the Angarian 

chiefs, from whom he received hostages in token of submission. The 

Saxons took advantage of Charlemagne 1 s Italian campaign in 774 to 

devastate Hesse, sacking the monastery of Fritzlar, which had been 

founded by St. Boniface. In September of the same year, the Frankish 

king sent against the Saxons four separate forces which returned to 

2 

Gaul laden with booty. 

Charlemagne spent the winter of 774-? in his palace at Quierzy, 

on the Oise, and there decided to wage war against the Saxons until 

they were either conquered and converted to Christianity, or 
3 

annihilated. In August 775 5 he led his forces across the Rhine, 
attacking all of the Saxon tribes except the Nordalbingians. The 
Angarian^ who were concentrated at Bruni|?erg on the left bank of 
the Weser, were dispersed by the Franks. The Westphalians and 

1. Hodgkins Charles the Great, p, 104, 

2. Lavisses Histoire de France, vol. 2, p, 286, 

3. Hodgkin! cit 0 , p, 109. 



-t 

* 












, 

■ 

„ ■ ’ ■" • - ' '• 

, ■ : ' . - .. 

■ ' - : 

♦ 

. 




? ’ * 

t 

■ i 




■ 








* 

; 

' ■' ■ ■ j'■ ' 

- 


73 


Angarians surrendered. Charlemagne was on his way back to Gaul when 
he learned that the rearguard of his army had been surprised by the 
Saxons at Lubeck and largely massacred. He attacked the Westphalian^ 
killing many, taking booty and demanding hostages. The next year, 
776, while Charlemagne was in Italy, there was an uprising in the 
northern portion of Westphalia and Angaria. However, upon the 
arrival of the Frankish king, the rebels surrendered, promising to' 
adopt the Christian religion. Thus, the first of the mass baptisms 
of Saxons took place. 

In 777 ? Charlemagne held an assembly at Paderborn, which was 
attended by all the Frankish nobles and also by nearly all the 
chiefs of the Saxon tribes. This assembly saw the baptism of a 
large number of Saxons. However, Widukind, a Westphalian chief, who 
was to play a prominent part in Saxon resistance to the Franks, was 

p 

not present. Of Widukind*s resistance, Lavisse writes: 

Au cours de la lutte qu*il va conduire, sa presence n r est 
eertaine dans aucune bataille, mais son influence se fait 
sentir partout 5 il est sans cesse en marche a travers le 
pays, provoquant la revolts-. Mais il ne reus sit pas a 
^veiller chez ses compatriotes le sentiment national. 
Jamais les Saxons ne se reuni^ent dans un soul^vement 
gln^ral contre 1 r envahi ss.eur • 

In 778 , the Saxons, hearing that Charlemagne had led his forces into 
•Spain, rose under the leadership of Widukind and advanced as far as 
the Rhine. They did not cross the river, but devastated the right 
bank from Deutz to Coblentz;. Hearing of this invasion of Frankish 
territory, Charlemagne sent a squadron against the Invaders. The 
Frankish troops caught up with the Saxons at the Eder River, and 

Ll 

inflicted upon them heavy casualties. In the spring of 779, 

1* Lavisses Histoire de France, vol* 2, p. 287 . 

2. Hodgkins Charles the Great, p. 111. 

3. Lavisses on. cit .. p. 2 87 . 

4-. Hodgkins on. cit .. p. 112. 




' 









c 


a 









. ? 7 " 

7 ' " ' 

c > . t • ■ rr.f ■■ \ . ' ' ■ -t 





0 * * ; 

* 

° 


3 f" ■ 1 

* 

• • 

♦ 








7 ^ 


Charlemagne penetrated far into Saxon territory. The following year, 
the Franks advanced to the Elbe, and the inhabitants of the eastern 
portion of Eastphalia and part of the Nordalbingians were baptized. 
There were no hostilities between the Franks and Saxons in 7^1. In 
July 782,. Charlemagne held an assembly at the sources of the Lippe, 
and the Saxons attended in great number. The Frankish king believed 
that the subjugation of the Saxons had at last been completed. 
However, he was soon to realize that this was far from being the 
case. This same year, back in Gaul, he learned that a Slavonic 
tribe, the Sorabi, which was established between the Elbe and the 
Saale, had invaded the neighboring portions of Saxon and Thuringian 
territory. The Frankish king conceived the plan of sending against 
these invaders an army composed not only of Frankish soldiers, but 
also of Saxons. This, force was under the command of three Frankish 
courtiers - Adalgisus, Geilo and Worad. Entering Saxon territory 
and learning that a Saxon force, at the instigation of Widukind, 
was preparing to invade Gaul, the three Frankish generals abandoned 
their expedition against the Sorabi and instead., led their troops 
against the rebel Saxon force. According to Hodgkin,™ the Saxon 
element of the Frankish army had deserted. The Franks attacked the 

p 

Saxon camp on Mount Suntal, near Minden, and were all but 
annihilated.3 Upon hearing of the Saxon rising and the defeat of his 
three, generals, Charlemagne led a large force against the Saxons. 
Crushing their resistance;, he summoned before him all the Saxon 
chiefs: and demanded to know who had instigated the revolt. All the 
chiefs named Widukind, who, however, had fled to Denmark. Since 
Charlemagne couldn f t wreak his vengeance on Widukind, he decided 

1. Hodgkins Charles the Great, p*. 11^. 

2. Westphalian city on the Weser. 

3 . Hodgkins s on. clt .« p. 11 5* 





Q - 

« 




, 

• '■ ■ . 

; 

, 












, 

■■ 






? • , H 1 ’ - 

1 




.... t n.t 


7? 

that the latter f s accomplices must suffer. Therefore, 4500 men who 
had played a prominent part in the revolt were handed over to the 
Frankish king who had them all beheaded at Verden, on the banks of 
the Aller. 1 2 3 4 5 6 

After his massacre of the Saxon rebels at Verden in 782, 
Charlemagne promulgated an edict providing the death penalty for 
those Saxons who were disloyal, to the king; entered a church by 
force, and set fire to it or robbed it; killed a bishop or priest; 
continued to practise the rites of paganism; refused baptism; or 
failed to observe Church fasts. The edict obliged the Saxons to 
have their children baptized within their first year of life, and 

p 

forbade them to assemble unless summoned by authority of the king. 

In the spring of 783? immediately after the funeral of his. 

wife, Hildegard, whom he: had married after his repudiation of 

Desiree, Charlemagne led a strong force against the Saxons, winning 

decisive victories over them in battles at Detmold and Osnabruck, 

and spreading devastation from the Weser to the Elbe. Upon his 

return to Gaul, he married Fastrada, the daughter of the Frankish 

count, Radolf.3' The following year, 784, Charlemagne f s son, Charles, 

won a cavalry battle against the Saxons on the banks of the Lippe. 

The Frankish king spent the winter of 784-5 in Saxon territory, 

much of which he laid wasted It was towards the end of 785 that 

Widukind surrendered to Charlemagne and was baptized at Attigny.' 

The Saxon was well received by the Frankish monarch , who acted as 

/• 

his godfather and also presented him with rich gifts. 0 For the next 

1. Hodgkin : Charles the Great, p© 116. 

2. Laviss.es Histoire de France, vol© 2, p. 289. 

3. Hodgkins or), cit .« p. 116, 

4. Ibid. , p. 117• 

5. Department of Ardennes, 

6. Lavisse: or>. clt. . p. 289. 





C 



































































a 




o 




. 

- 






76 

seven years, there was peace between the Franks and Saxons. The 

latter were represented in Charlemagne r s armies and in assemblies 

held by the Frankish monarch. However, their subjugation was not 

yet complete. In 793> when Charlemagne was preparing for a campaign 

against the Avars, he learned that the troops which Count Theadoric, 

a relation of his,, was bringing him, had been annihilated while 

crossing the Weser. The Saxon rebels had also directed their fury 

against churches and clergymen. Thus, hostilities once more broke 

out. Until 799 9 Charlemagne’s armies traversed Saxon territory, 

leaving destruction in their wake# From each of these expeditions, 

the Frankish king returned home with large numbers of Saxons, whom 

he would settle in Gaul. In 80^, ten thousand Saxons were 

I 

transported to Gaul from Wigmodia and Nordalbingia, and their lands 
given to the Abodrites, a. Slavonic people who had been faithful 

p 

allies of Charlemagne. At last, the conversion of the Saxons to 
Christianity was completed, and the long struggle between them and 
the Franks ended. 

Other wars, besides that of the Saxons, filled Chalemagne’s 
reign. In the spring of 778? he led his troops against the Saracen’s 
in Spain. The Franks captured Pamplona, Huesca and Glrone, but were 
unable to take Saragossa. Charlemagne returned to Pamplona, the 
walls of which he destroyed to prevent the city from rebelling 
against him,and then began his northward journey into Gaul. It was 
on August 15th 778 that the rearguard of Charlemagne’s army was 
ambushed and annihilated by the Basques in the narrow pass at 
Roncevalles, in the Pyrenees. It is this battle that Is celebrated 
In the ’’Chanson de Roland.” The Saracens then took the offensive. 

1. The territory between Bremen and Hamburg. 

2. Lavisse? HIstoire de France, vol* 2, p. 290. 




T 



* 


4 

g 

• ^ 

' 

f. 

. 

* 


T 

, 







* 

' 


' » 


' 

• 

§ ' 

’ 






• 


1 

• 


; 1 

r ■ :■> $ . r' ; , 




- ‘ ? 

' 

. 

. 

. . . 

.. 

’ ■ 

- , 






77 


In October 783, Abd el-Rhaman, the caliph of Cordova, died and was 
succeeded by his son, Hescham, who resolved to conquer Septimania. 

In 793, He-s chain's geheral, Abd el-Mel.ec, invaded Gaul, burning the 
outlying parts of Narbonne. The Saracens then headed for Carcassonne, 
The Duke of Toulouse tried to stop them, but was defeated in a 
battle on the banks of the Orbieu, a tributary of the Aude. The 
Moslems returned to Spain with numerous captives and much booty**** 

In 796, Frankish troops; ravaged Saracen territory. They besieged 
Huesca, but unsuccessfully. Barcelona was besieged in 301, and 
finally forced to surrender to the Franks. Between 809 and 8ll, 
three attempts were made to capture Tortosa, at the mouth of the 

p 

Ebro River. The third attempt succeeded. According to Hodgkin, 
these Frankish conquests were retained during Chariemagne T s lifetime. 

The Avars, who inhabited Pannonia, J constituted a continual 
threat to the eastern frontier of Charlemagne’s realm. In 788, they 
sent two armies against the Franks, one to Bavaria and the other to 

k 

Friuli. However, both these forces were defeated. ‘ In 791, 
Charlemagne led his first expedition against the Avars. This was the 
only occasion on which the Frankish king personally led his troops 
against this people* Saxon and Frisian troops, under the command of 
Count Theodoric, followed the left bank of the Danube, and the 
Frankish forces, commanded by Charlemagne- himself, the right bank. 

On September 8th, the combined force crossed the Pannonian frontier. 
The; Franks spread devastation as, far as the confluence of the Raab 
and the Danube, but met no opposition from the Avars. They were 
forced to turn back, however, when most of their horses were stricken 
with an epidemic and died. Charlemagne’s son, Pepin, king of Italy, 

1. Lavisse. Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 294-. 

2. Hodgkins Charles the Great, p. Ijl*. 

3. Modern Hungary. 

*+• Hodgkins on*cat *. p. 156. 



c 

r • . • 























c 









c 



















- 






' =* 






5 




? ? ■ 

. ^ 1 


■ 


, ' * ' ' h 1 . ■ \ !*; ■ n . 

V. 1 ' ■ ,■ j ■ ’■ : A • 











78 

invaded Pannonia from the south and ravaged part of the country. 


In 795, the Duke of Friuli forced his way into the Avar capital, 
which was a rather remarkable encampment consisting of a series of 
walls in the form of concentric circles. In this city, the Franks 
found a vast treasure hoard, which was sent to Charlemagne at 
Aachen. According to Lavisse, the Frankish king gave part of this 
treasure to the pope and divided the rest among his courtiers<»~ The 
following year, Pepin returned to the Avar capital, where a 
considerable part of the treasure still remained. Pepin took this 

p 

booty to his father at Aachen. The Avars revolted again in 799, 
after it was thought that they had been conquered. However, they 
were constrained by Slavonic pressure to ask the protection of 
Charlemagne. In 809, they recognized his sovereignty.- 

The Frankish king found ' that when ' he 'had conquered- the Saxons, he 
had to protect them against the Slavs, who were continually at war 
with them. In 805, a force under the command of Charlemagne r s 
eldest son, Charles, ravaged the territory of the Czechs in 
Bohemia, and the following year, that of the Sorabi, along the 

Ir 

Saale and the Elbe. ! 

It was against the Danes that Charlemagne fought his last war. 
In June 810, he learned that a fleet of 200 Danish ships had 
devastated the coasts and islands of Frisia, and that troops had 
disembarked and forced the Frisians to give- them large sums of 
money. There was a rumor that the* Danish king, Gottfried, was 
planning the conquest of the territory to the south of his realm. 
Therefore, Charlemagne stationed troops at the confluence of the 
Aller and the Weser. Having arrived there, however, he learned that 

1. Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 296. 

2. Hodgkin: Charles the Great, p. 1.62. 

3. Lavisse: on. cit .. p. 296. 
l !-. Ibid. , p 0 297® 






). 







r? 


. 

§ 

n ' 

* ^ - * 

• * ! " • 








* 

c 

' ' c 








„ • •■ 


' ’ *7 >: * * ■ 



79 

Gottfried had just been assassinated. The new Danish king, Hemming, 
concluded a peace treaty with the Franks.“ 

Charlemagne realized the need of his realm for naval protection 
against piratical raids. In 800, he toured the seacoasts of his 
kingdom and had garrisons installed at coastal points. His son, 
Louis, king of Aquitaine, had ships constructed to protect the 
mouths of the: Rhone and Garonne 0 In October 8ll, Charlemagne 
reviewed his fleet, which was assembled at Gent and Boulogne. The 
Frankish king provided for the defense of the land frontiers of his 
realm by the creation of "marches,” each of which was simply a 
group of counties under the authority of a chief charged with its 
defense. 1 2 3 

It was on Christmas day in the year 800 that the title of 
Roman emperor was conferred upon Charlemagne. The conferring of this 
new dignity was brought about largely by events in Constantinople 
and Rome* In the former city, the emperor, Constantine VI, had been 
deposed and his throne taken over by his mother, Irene. Lavisse J 
points out that the throne, occupied by a woman, could be considered 
vacant. In Rome, Pope Leo III, whose election to the papacy had 
been widely opposed, was attacked in the street in April 799 and 
severely wounded. According to Hodgkin, this incident definitely 
decided the pope in favor of bestowing the imperial dignity on 
Charlemagne. 

After that fatal day, his reluctance, if he had any, to 
see*one man In the Italian peninsula holding an 
Indisputably higher position than his own, was changed 
into eager acquiescence in the scheme. He was willing, nay 
anxious, to see the purple robe encircling the stalwart 

1. Lavisse: Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 297« 

2. Ibid .. p. 298 9 

3. Lavisse: on. cit .. p. 302. Lavisse statesrrthat Constantine, who 
was ordered blinded by Irene, died soon afterwards. According to 
Hodgkin (Charles the Great ? p. 179), Constantine lived for more 
than twenty years after this mutilation. 















- 

„ 


. 




Q ? - 


„ 












- 




?' : ' ‘ 










■ 






r 













• 
















i 



. ■ 

c 




* 





v : 












$ 



■ 





' •; >' >■ ■ 

r 




* 









t 





<■ 




* 

. 

































_ 


: r '-0 ' ■ ; - r r ? • 

<, :■ 

% 


: ' ’ ' 

** -S T v 

' • - :■ . . ■» • •' 

* 

- r , 




80 


limbs of the Frankish conqueror, if only he himself 
might take shelter under that robe from the dagger of 
the assassin. 

The injured pontiff took refuge with Charlemagne at Paderborn. The 
Frankish monarch provided the pope with an escort to Rome, whither 
he himself journeyed late in 800. At Christmas mass in the basilica 
of St. Peter, Charlemagne was praying before the altar when the 
pope placed the imperial crown on his head, proclaiming him emperor 
of the Romans. According to Lavisse,- this action had been decided 
upon previously, and Charlemagne had been consulted. He did not, 
however, know that his coronation was going to take place at that 
particular time. 

Also on December 25th, 800, Pope Leo crowned Charlemagne 1 s 

eldest son, Charles. Pepin and LoMs had been'crowned kings of 

Italy and Aquitaine respectively, by Pope Hadrian in 781. Hodgkin^ 

suggests that Charles was probably crowned king of the Franks, that 

title being left open by his father f s promotion to a higher dignity. 

Charlemagne was predeceased by two of his sons, Pepin dying in 810 

and Charles in Sll. In September 813, Charlemagne convoked a general 

assembly of the Franks at Aachen, and with their consent, transmitted 

to his remaining son, Louis, the title of Irnperor, crowning him in 

the church on Sunday, September 11th. Charlemagne died on January 

28th, 8 lb-, and was buried in the church at Aachen.^* 

Upon learning of the death of his father, Louis, who was in 

Aquitaine, immediately set out for Aachen, where he arrived on 

February 27th, Sib*. He was then thirty-six years of age. ^ The new 

emperor was well named Louis the Pious by his; contemporaries® Of the 

1, Hodgkins Charles the Great, p. 201. 

2® Lavisses Histoire de France, vol* 2, ; p. 303• 

3. Hodgkins Italy and her Invaders, vol® 8, p. 196. 
b-. Lavisse.s on® clt », p. 330. 

5. Ibid. , p. 359. 



.. : 




: V 














0 


I 






■ t 







81 


character of Louis, Funck-Brentano writes: 

He remained for hours prostrate on the stones of the 
churches muttering prayers and weeping• It had been his 
desire to become a monk like his gredt T uncle, Carloman, 
but Charlemagne had prevented him* Nevertheless Carloman 
always remained his ideal. And he was not mistaken with 
regard to his true vocation. For he was made for the 
peaceful life of an obedient monk^rather than for the 
government of a tumultuous state." 

Although he had been crowned emperor by his father, Chari anagie, 

Louis had himself crowned again at Reims by Pope Stephen V in 

October 816. The following year, a general assembly was held at 

Aachen, and it was decided to divide the Frankish empire into 

kingdoms. Louis divided his empire among his three sons - Lothair, 

Pepin and Louis. Pepin received Aquitaine and Gascony, the march of 

Toulouse, the county of Carcassonne in Septimania and those of 

Autun, Avalon and Nevers in Burgundy. Louis received Bavaria, and 

the territory of the Carinthians, Bohemians, Avars and Slavs to the 

east of Bavaria. However, Lothair, the eldest, was to be his father! 

' i 

heir and the sole emperor, and during his father f s lifetime, his 

"associate emperor." His two brothers were to be under his 

domination, forbidden to have any dealings with foreign nations, or 

even to marry without his consent. This act was approved by the pope^ 

2 

and all the inhabitants of the empire swore to respect it. 

Bernard, king of Italy and nephew of the emperor, rebelled 
against the latter f s authority, and with his supporters, Invaded 
Gaul. Louis led troops against Bernard, capturing him at Chalons— 
sur-Saone in December 817* Bernard was blinded and died a few days 
later. ^ 

Brittany had always been a trouble spot and now felt strong 

enough to refuse obedience to the emperor, even setting up a Breton 

1.Funck-Brentano: The Earliest Times, p. 38l. 

2»Lavisse: HIstoire de France, vol. 2, p. 36 O® 

3.Funck-Brentano, : on. cit *. p. 386 . 












; ■ : tv 







n • 


c 


\ 










C 


, 











82 

named Morman as their king. However, this revolt was crushed in 
818, and Morman killed. Again in 82b, Louis was obliged to put 
down an uprising in Brittany. Almost all the Breton chiefs were 
present at the general assembly held in Aachen in 825, and Brittany 
remained quiet until the end of Louis* reign. 1 There were risings 
among the Avars and Slavs, but these, too, were successfully put 

p 

down. Deciding to attempt to convert the Danes to Christianity, 
Louis sent the archbishop of Reims to the territory near the mouth 
of the Elbe. This attempt to spread Christianity had some success, 
as a Danish prince, Harald, arrived at the palace of Ingelheim with 
his wife, his son, and bOO of his followers, to be baptized in May 
826. 3 

His wife, Hirmingarde, having died in 8l8, Louis the Pious 
married Judith, daughter of Count Welf of Bavaria, the following 
year* In 823 there was born to the emperor and empress a son, the 
future Charles the Bald. To give this infant son a share of his 
empire, Louis would have to break the constitution of 817 . He 
obtained Lothair *s consent to do this:. However, his eldest son, at 
the instigation of the counts Hugue and Matfrid, reversed his 
decision. Nevertheless, at Worms in 829, Louis the Pious gave to 
his young son, Charles, Alemania, Alsace, Rhaetia, and part of 

the 

Burgundy, along with A title of duke. Lothair was sent to Italy. The 
sons of the emperor were much annoyed by this gift of territory to 
young Charles. Judith was considered the cause of all the evil. 
Pepin and Lothair met in May 830 at Compi&gne. Judith was obliged 
to enter a convent. However, by promising Pepin and Louis that he 
would increase their kingdoms , the emperor won their support 

1. Lavisse: Histoire d& France, vol.2, p. 361 . 

2. Duruys Histoire de France, vol. 1, p. 202. 

3® Lavisse; on. cit .. p. 362. 



c 


* .. 











■ ^ 










c 














c *' • : • 

. f 





. • • 

: 

■ N . , 

- 



83 


against Lothair. The assembly held at Nimegue in October 830 
authorized the return of Judith from her convent. In February 831 , 
a new division of the empire was made at Aachen. Italy remained in 
Lothair r s possession, and the rest of the realm was divided into 
three parts - Pepin had Aquitaine, the territory between the Loire 
and the Seine, and beyond the latter river, the territory limited 
by the counties of Chalons-sur-Marne, Meaux, Amiens and Ponthion. 
Louis received Bavaria, Thuringia, Saxony, Frisia and Austrasiaj 
his territory was limited on the west by the counties of Vermandois, 
Artois, and Boulonais. Charles received Alemania, Burgundy,except 
for the part given to Pepin, Provence, Septimania, and the districts 
of Woevre, Vouziers and Mezieres, the counties of Heims, Laon, 
Moselle and Treves. This partition of the empire caused new quarrels,, 
Pepin and Louis demanded a share in the governing of the empire* 
Pepin refused to obey the emperor, who wanted to send him back to 
Aquitaine. Louis was opposed to the allotment of Alemania to Charles 
Louis the Pious went to Augsburg and forced Louis to lay down'his 
arms. Then he had Pepin Imprisoned at Treves and gave Aquitaine to 
Charles. Pepin, however., escaped, and his brothers rallied around 
him, Lothair arriving from Italy and Louis from Bavaria. 

The emperor determined to resist his sons. Thus, on June 2 Vth, 
833 , the two armies met in Alsace. An attempt was made at 
negotiation, but was not successful. A few at a time, the forces of 
Louis the Pious deserted their master and went over to his sons. By 
June 30 th, the emperor was abandoned by all but a few followers. 

The plain in Alsace where this drama was enacted was henceforth , 
known as the ” Field of LIes n ( Tf Champ du Men song 05 !t ,r Lugenf eld ,r ). In 
October of the same year, the unfortunate emperor was deposed and 
lo Lavissei Histoire de France, vol. 2 , p. 383® 




















q • e ■ c 



















I 

. 


8b 

forced to enter a monastery. Judith was exiled at Tortona in Italy, 
and Charles was placed in the monastery of Prum. There took place 
a new partition of the realm, which gave Louis Alemania and Alsace. 
The government of the entire empire was in the hands of Lothair. 
However, the coalition formed against Louis the Pious soon began to 
totter. Public sentiment was strongly opposed to the dishonorable 
treatment of the father by his children. Also, Pepin and Louis, 
jealous of Lothair f s authority,, were conspiring against him. Both 
Louis and Pepin were working for the re-establishment of their 
father on the throne. By February 83%, they had an army ready to 
march. Louis the Pious was freed on February 28th at Saint-Denis. 
Lothair withdrew. In August of the same year, Lothair surrendered 
to his father, swearing loyalty to him. The former then went to 
Italy. In February 835, Louis the Pious was formally re-established 
on his throne.*** 

The emperor, who was dominated more and more by his wife, 

Judith, now had only one thought - to assure the succession of his 

youngest son, Charles, to his share of the realm. Towards the end 

of 837, he gave Charles Frisia, the: territory between the Meuse and 

the Seine, and several counties in Burgundy. In September 838, he 

had him crowned king at Quierzy-sur-Oise, and added to his share of 

the realm the whole of Western Gaul between the Seine and Loire. The 

previous June, in the assembly at Nimegue, the emperor had taken 

from Louis Saxony, Thuringia, Austrasia and Alemania. 2 He had 

intended to charge Pepin with the protection of young Charles. 

However, Pepin having died in December 838, he turned to Lothair, 

who for the past'three years had been in Italy. The latter was 

1. Lavisses Histoire de France, vol. 2, p. 36?. 

2* Ibid .. p. 3660 



































-T 










' 


I : ? ■ 

„ 



I 





















offered half the realm if he would act as the guardian of Charles, 
Lothair accepted and arrived at Worms on May 30th, 839. A few days 
later, the Caroling!an empire was divided into two sections, the 
eastern portion, Austrasia, going to Lothair, who would also have 
the title of emperor, and the western portion, Neustria and 
Aquitaine, going to Charles*^ 

Aquitaine, however, refusing to accept this last partition, 
had proclaimed as king Pepin II, son of their king,Pepin, who had 
recently died. The emperor set out for Aquitaine to constrain that 
territory to obedience, but arriving in Poitiers, he learned that 
Louis was trying to reconquer the territories recently taken from 
him. Thus, Louis the Pious was obliged to lead his forces against 
his son. The latter was forced to withdraw to Bavaria* On the way 
home, the emperor fell ill, and died in the neighborhood of 

p 

Ingelheim on June 20th,. 840* Louis the Pious was buried at Metz* 

Lothair, refusing to fulfill the conditions of the agreement 

he had entered into at Worms, claimed for himself the territory 

which had been his under the constitution of 817. Thus, Charles and 

Louis formed an alliance against Lothair, and all three brothers 

prepared for war, Lothair 7 s partisans consisted of the majority of 

the Franks, and those A^uitanians who supported Pepin II* Alemaimi, 

Saxons, Thuringians and eastern Franks rallied around Louis, and 

the Burgundians and the remainder of the Aquitanians around Charles* 

The two younger brothers spent the winter of 840-41 in assembling 

their troops* In the middle of June 84-1, they were in the. district 

of Chalon-sur-Saone, and Lothair was in Auxerre. They sent the 

latter three successive embassies to attempt to negotiate a peace* 

1* Funck—B'rentanos The Earliest Times, p* 394* 

2, Laviss.es Histoire de France, vol* 2, p. 366* 

3* Ibid * * p. 367* 













. - J: ' 














% 


z rr • rrv.: 




























; J\t r i 

. 


- 




' ,I;' ■ - " .» ,,,* .. —• 

, : ~ “ 















86 

Lothair, however, asked for time to consider the matter, and thus 
gave his Aquitanian forces time to arrive on the scene. When the 
latter joined him on June 24th, he offered battle. This engagement 
took place at Fontenoy-en~Pmisaye, south-west of Auxerre. Lot-hair y s 
forces were routed by the arrival of Charles T ally, Count Warin, 
with the Burgundians. This battle, however, was not decisive. His 
two brothers having separated, Lothair tried to conquer them one 
after the other. In August, he prevented Louis from crossing the 
Rhine at Mainz. Then he turned his attention to Charles, who was 
established at Saint-Denis. However, the. latter was too strongly 
entrenched to be moved from this position. Lothair then proceeded 
toward Aachen, arriving there early in February 842. 

Charles and Louis resolved to bind themselves to each other by 

an oath. Thus, on February l4th, 842, in the plain of Strasbourg, 

they swore the celebrated oaths which bear this name. Louis, being 

the elder, swore first, in the Romanic language, in order to be 

understood by Charles r arm yi 

Pro Deo amur et pro Christian poblo et nostro eommun 
salvament, d f ist di en avant, In quant Deus savir et 
podir me dunat, si salvarai eo cist meon fradre Karlo, et 
in adhiudha et cadhuna cosa, si cum om per dreit son 
frat-ra salvar dist, in o quid il mi altrezi fazet; et 
ab Ludher nul plaid numquam prindrai qui, meon vol, cist 
meon fradre Karle in damno sit. 

For the love of God and the salvation of the people of 
Christendom and of ourselves, from this day forward, so 
long as God shall give me knowledge and power, yea indeed, 
I will support this my brother Charles with my help in 
all things, as one should by right support one f s brother, 
and that he may do the same by me, and from Lothar I shall 
accept no plea which, hy^onnivance, shall be to the 
disadvantage of this my brother Charles. 

Charles repeated the same oath, in German, for the benefit of Louis f 

army, which was mainly German-speaking. Then each of the two armies 

swore the following oath in their respective languages: 




1 







C ’ 













Si Lodhuwigs sagrament, que son fradre Karlo jurat, 
conservat, et Karlus, meos sendra, de suo part lo suon 
fraint, si io returnar non IMnt pois, ne io ne neuls cui 
eo returnar int pois, in nulla aiudha contra Lodhuwj&g nun 
li ier. 

If Louis keeps the oath he has sworn to his brother 
Charles but if Charles, my master, for his part, breaks 
his, and I cannot deter him from so doing, neither to him 
nor to any whom. I cannot deter shall I be of any help 
against Louis, 

Coon afterwards, Charles and Louis received ambassadors from 

Lothair, extending peace terms* These were accepted, and on June 

15th, 8%2, on an island In the Saone, near Mlteon, the three 

brothers signed an agreement to suspend hostilities* The definitive 

partition of the empire was set forth in the Treaty of Verdun, 

which was concluded in August 843* By this treaty, Lothair received 

the Frankish territory in Italy, and a strip of territory about 1?0 

miles wide, extending from the North Sea to the Alps and the 

Mediterranean* Louis received the Frankish territory situated to 

the east of the Rhine, with the. districts of Spiers, Worms and 

Mainz on the left bank* The remaining territory, in Western Gaul, 

was given to CharlesLothair kept the title of emperor, but no 

longer had any authority over his brothers, who had become his 
2 

equals* This treaty began the separation of the modern French and 
German nations. 

The Oaths of Strasbourg are quite as Important from the 

literary point of view as they are from the historical, since they 

constitute the first document in the French language that has come 

down to us. Louis swore his oath in "Romanic* - the ninth century 

form of the Latin language in the western part of the Frankish 

empire. The Frankish invaders Introduced into Cadi a Getmanic 

X. Funek-Brentano: The Earliest Times, p* *4-00. 

2 * Lavisses HIstoire de France, vol® 2 ,‘p* 370* 





88 


tongue, wMch has left an indelible stamp on the modern French 
language• 


The Frankish invaders supplied French with a number of 
terms, many of which survive* These relate to (1) 
military life, e.g. guerre (werra), garde (warda), ruet 
(wahta). eneron (sporon),, (sp eot), gant (wantu, cf. 

Vfontnn 'shrouds 1 ), heaume (helm). robe trauba), lieraut 
(*heri-wald). gonfalon (*gund-fano), 0.Fr. eschiere 
(*skara)$ (2) political life, e.g. fief (feudum)„ gage 
(vadium, from wad .1 a ), 'jurisdiction 1 , 0. Fr. pledge 

'pledge' ('•‘pliga), and dignitaries such as baron T 
saci-baro in the Salic Law), s^hechal (*sini-skalk), 
marechal t^marh—skalk), echanson (* skank.1 o). chambellan 
v^l'amarllng); (3) daily life, e.g. banc (bank). fauteul1 
(faldastol), loge (laubja)., canif (cf. Du. kni;ifT ? r?^’ 
(raustjan). danser (danson)$ (V) agriculture, e.g. gerbe . 
Hale (hagaj, houe (*houwa), lioux C^huls), h£tre (*ha±str); 
(5) miscellaneous qualities, etc. e.g. hate (haifsta). 
orgueil (urgoli), honte (haunitha). The h- o f haut is due 
to a blend of altus and hoh and the of gater to one 
between vastare and * wastian . Cf adjectives, the 
commonest are riche (rik.ia). frais (frisk), gal (gahi), 
and the colours blanc (blank), brun, bleu tblaw-O, fauve 
(falw-), gris (gris). The verbs include gagner 
(* waiCfeinjan), enargner C*sparanjan), choisir (* kausjan)» 
In addition there are in North Eastern France many place 
names in -anges . -enges (Frankish -ingas , cf. the 
Burgundian -ingos . which gives -ans . -ens on the Swiss 
border). 


p. W3. 


1* Priebsch and Collinson: The German Language, 























































e 





TT 




89 


Genealogical Table of the Carolingians 


Pepin de Landen, 

M.P. of Austrasia ( d. 640 ) 
(canonised) 


Grimoald, 
M.P. Austrasia 
642-56 


Childebert 
d. 656 


dau. Begga m. Ansegisel, 
son of Arnulf, Bp. of Metz 


Pepin d r Heristal, 

M.P." Austrasia & Neustria 
679-714 


Hertruda 

(canonised) 


Drogo, Duke Grimoald, 

of Champagne M.P. Neustria 

d. 708 d. 71’+ 


Charles Martel, 
M.P. Austrasia 
717-41 


Childebrand 


Carloman 
(a monk) 


Pepin the Short, 
M.P. 741 

King of the Franks 
751-68 


Grifo 


Charlemagne, 
King 768 
Emperor 800-814 


Louis the Pious, 
Emperor 8l4-40 


Carloman 


dau. Bertha 
m. Count of Angers 


(?) Roland, Duke 
of Brittany 


Lothair. 
Emperor o40-55 


Pepin, King 
of Aquitaine 

817-38 


Louis the German, 
King of Bavaria 
817-76 


Charles the Bald, 
King of 
Neustria 838 
Emperor 875-7 





























■ 









90 








91 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Buhler, Johannes: Das erste Reich der Deutschen, Leipzig. 

Bury, J.B.: A History of the Later Roman Empire, vol. 1, London 

and New York, 1889. 

Dnrny, Victor: Histoire de France, vol. 1, Paris 1898. 

Funck-Brentano, Frantz: The Earliest Times - The National History 

of France. Translation by E.F. Bnckley, 
London, 1927. 

Gibbon, Edward: The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, vol. 1, 

New York, 1900. 

Gregory of Tours: The History of the Franks. Translation by O.M. 

Dalton, Oxford, 1927. 

Grimm, Jacob: Ges.chichte der deutschen Sprache, Leipzig, 1853. 

Guizot, M: The History of France from the Earliest Times to 184-8, 
vol. 1, Translation by Robert Black, New York. 

Hirt, Hermann: Die Indogermanen, vol. 1, Strassburg, 1905. 

Hodgkin, Thomas: Charles the Great, London, 1908. 

Italy and her Invaders, vols. 7&8, Oxford, 1899. 

Lavisse, Ernest! Histoire de France depuis les Origines Jusqu T a la 
Revolution, vol. 2, part 1, Paris, 1903. 

Malet, Albert: Histoire de France jusqu/a la Revolution, vol. 1, 

Paris, 1919. 

Michelet, Jules: Histoire de France, vol. 1, Paris, 1870. 

Much, Rudolf: Deutsche Stammeskunde, Berlin and Leipzig, 1920. 

Priebseh, R. and Collinson, WoE.: The German Language, London, 194^. 

Schmidt, Ludwig: Geschielite der deutschen Stamme, vol. 2, Berlin, 

„ 1911. 

Geschichte der germanischen Fruhzeit, Cologne, 193 

Schutte, Gudmund: Our Forefathers the Gothonic Nations, vols. 1 & 2, 

Translation by Jean Young, Cambridge, 1929. 

Sergeant, Lewis: The Franks. - The Story of the Nations, London, 1898. 

Tacitus, Cornelius: Germania, Translated by Maurice Hutton, London, 

1932. 







$ 






? 


1 


Q 




« 



















B29764 






