For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


LABORATORY EXPERIMENTS ON, THE CONTROL 

■t*. L / * f » ’A', (/i ;• cult -t \ *U' • •’ v -.<• ,’Y • 

j'v,. y.,,s.fr4^,'AT/'. Hi/■ . ‘-V- )/- v V A: j iL , •• ; \ iV"-5 

OF THE 

ftfeVnlPw- flw ■ R-f '^rav/l U»i »/*« ■ ' • tiv fr*' ■ ' <1 , > >, •. 

wMi^APEWORM TRIAENOPHORUS CRASSuS 




r'f \ 


BY 

M-L- LIBIN 


WwmMM 


' ■ y 


' 'Wf 

it* 


|BH 





pHns 

jff* 

P jb «v B j ny 





Si*4 1 



• : (s. ” . 


^k} tjfjgpL § v 





wfcV'V 













@X UBBIS 

mwiRsroais 

aiBBTOKSlS 














Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/laboratoryexperiOOmort 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


LABORATORY EXPERIMENTS ON THE CONTROL 
OF THE 

TAPEWORM, TRIAENOPHQRUS CRASSUS . 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF SCIENCE 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 

by 

Morton Lionel Libin 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 
April, 1951. 





University of Alberta 


TV\e.«=b>v% 

\ 36 | 


Faculty of Arts and Science 


Department of Zoology 


The undersigned hereby certify 
that they have read and recommend to the 
School of Graduate Studies for acceptance, 
a thesis entitled, Laboratory Experiments 
on the Control of the Tapeworm Triaenophorus 
Cra ss us, submitted by Morton Lionel Libin, 
B.Sc., in partial fulfilment of the require¬ 
ments for the degree of Master of Science. 


PROFESSOR 


PROFESSOR 


PROFESSOR 















•: ' • ' ■ t ’ 

. '• \ 


■ : 




■V : /. 




■ 









, 







ABSTRACT 


The plerocercoids of Triaenophorus crassus found 
encysted in the flesh of fishes of the genus Leucichthy s 
and of the whitefish Coregonus clupeaformis cause these 
fishes in many Canadian lakes to be unmarketable. 

This study is a search for methods of breaking 
the life cycle of this cestode by attacking the free living 
stage of the parasite, using both chemicals and electricity. 
In order to extend the period of experimentation on the eggs 
and coracidia, pituitary injections were made on the final 
host Esox lucius, the pike. The theory underlying these 
injections is as follows: both the pike and tapeworm re¬ 
lease their sexual products during the same period each 
spring; therefore sexual development of the pike and cestode 
follow a similar annual cycle of development and regression. 
It was hoped that by advancing the sexual maturity of the 
fish with pituitary injections, the tapewormswould become 
sexually mature, release their eggs and thus permit further 
chemical and electrical experiments to be conducted. 

Dinotro-o-Cyclohexylphenol, Dicyclohexylamine 
salt, commercially known as Dow K-604 was the only chemical 
that proved to be effective at a concentration that would 
justify its use on a large scale. Electricity was effective 
at voltages varying between 2 and 55 and held for a period 
of five seconds. The pituitary injections caused a marked 
advancement in the development of the tapeworms, buit no 
viable eggs were obtained. 









'fU: 












,5v€l ; M 














TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

INTRODUCTION. 1 

PART 1 - ON THE CONTROL OF EGGS AND CORACIDIA OF 

TRIAENOPHORUS CRASSUS .10 

Chemical Attack.10 

Chemicals Tested in 1949.12 

Chemicals Tested in 1950.l4 

Information on Dow-K604...15 

Cost of Using Dow~K 604 in Lakes.16 

Gold Fish Experiments.17 

Invasive Power of Chemically Treated 
Coracidia..17 

Electrical Experiments.20 

SUMMARY OF PART 1.24 

PART 11 - OBSERVATIONS ON THE EFFECT OF PITUITARY 

SUSPENSIONS AND EXTRACTS ON TRIAENOPHORUS 

CRASSUS AND ITS HOST, SSOX LUCIUS .26 

INTRODUCTION... .....26 

EQUIPMENT, MATERIALS AND SPECIMENS. 28 

Tank and Aerator.28 

Pituitary glands.30 

Pike. 31 

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE.32 

MICROSCOPIC STRUCTURE OF PIKE GONADS.34 

DEVELOPMENT OF GENITALIA IN TRIAENOPHORUS CRASSUS .37 































EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION. 

Experiment One. 

Experiment Two. 

Experiment Three. 

Experiment Four. 

Experiment Five. 

Experiment Six. 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS OFPART 11 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS. 

REFERENCES. 

APPENDIX. 


Page 

. .40 

..41 

..41 

..44 

..46 

..50 

..53 

..56 


60 

63 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


FIGURE 1 

Electrical Apparatus Used in Coracidial 


Control Experiments.....22 

FIGURES 2 and 3 

Views of the Filter, Tank and Aerator....29 

FIGURES 4, 5) 6, and 7. 

Genitalia Development in T^ Crassus . ....39 

FIGURE 8 


Photomicrograph of the Testis from Fish 
Number 1.,..45 


FIGURE 9 


Photomicrograph of the Testis from Fish 
Number 7.45 


49 


FIGURE 10 


Photomicrograph of the Testis from Fish 
Number 19. 



























FIGURE 11 


Page 


Photomicrograph of the Testis from Fish 
Number 24.49 










INTRODUCTION 


From an economic point of view the cestode Triaen¬ 
ophorus crassus is the most important tapeworm in Canada. 

The plerocercoids of this parasite appear as conspicuous 
yellow cysts, chiefly between the muscle segments in the 
fishes of the family Coregonidae. The whitefish ( Coregonus ), 
and the ciscoes ( Leucichthys ) are particularly affected. 

The cysts often occur in large numbers and vary greatly 
both in size and shape. Although harmless to humans they 
are objectionable from an aesthetic point of view. A sub¬ 
stantial percentage of the whitefish production and almost 
all of the tullibee production is prohibited entry to the 
United States. During the period from March, 1945 to March, 
1946 a total of 402,472 pounds of whitefish from Alberta, 
Manitoba and Saskatchewan was rejected at the U.S. border. 
There are many commercially valuable lakes remaining un¬ 
fished today due to heavy infestations of the whitefish 
in them. 

Life History of Triaenophorus Crassus 

Before any control methods can be inaugerated, it is 
essential to understand the life history. Miller (1943A, 
1943B, 1945C, 1945D, 1946) has thoroughly investigated the 
life cycle of Triaenophorus crassus and cleared up many 
previously disputed points. The life history is as follows: 
In Alberta the adult tapeworm lives only in the intestine of 
















f 









1 > 


■ 









-2- 


the pike, Esox lucius . The scolex is firmly imbedded in 
the gut wall Just below the pyloric sphincter. The adult 
tapeworm gradually matures during the winter months and 
reaches full sexual maturity in the early spring. The 
tapeworm sheds its eggs during the pike spawning period, 
which varies slightly from year to year, occurring usually 
at the end of April and early part of May. Once the eggs 
are released the worm dies and passes out of the gut into 
the water. 

The eggs, being slightly denser than water, slowly 
sink to the bottom. When first released they are white 
but after about 45 minutes change to a brown color. Each 
ripe egg contains an onchosphere, bearing six hooks. Move¬ 
ments of the onchospheres can be clearly detected about 
two days prior to hatching as the egg is transparent. 

These movements gradually become more violent and finally 
result in the knocking open of the operculum at the small 
end of the egg. The embryo, once escaped from the egg, 
is termed a coracidium. The coracidia at first are the 
same size as the egg, but one hour after hatching enlarge 
to twice the size, due to the swelling of the ciliated 
jelly-like layer surrounding them. The coracidia lead a 
free swimming existence, swimming aimlessly about by means 
of their cilia for 24 to 48 hours. If the next host is not 
available within 48 hours, the coracidia die. 

The first intermediate host is the copepod, Cyclops 
bicuspidatus which swallows the coracidia. Miller (1943B) 












-3- 


has observed anywhere from 1 to 32 parasites in a single 
Cyclops . When the coracidia are swallowed, they crawl out 
of their ciliated envelope, and by means of their hooks dig 
their way through the stomach wall. Once they are in the 
body cavity of the Cyclops they are referred to as procer¬ 
coids. Within four days the procercoids double in size, and 
by the eighth day reach mature size, roughly six times that 
of the coracidia. The procercoid is considered mature when 
the cercomere (caudal appendage bearing the hooks) is pinched 
off. Once the cercomere is established the procercoid either 
grows very slowly or stops growing altogether, and can go on 
living for thirty days with no apparent change in appearance. 

The second intermediate hosts are the coregonine fishes, 
i.e. tullibee, whitefish, and Rocky Mountain whitefish. 

Miller (19^, 19*+5) has shoxm that the tullibee is probably 
the natural host and that the whitefishes are incidental 
hosts. When an infected copepod is swallowed by the second 
intermediate host, the procercoid is liberated by the dig¬ 
estive juices. It is thought that the procercoid then 
proceeds to penetrate a pyloric caecum by means of its fron¬ 
tal gland, after which the cercomere drops off. It then 
crosses the body cavity and enters the flesh. Once in the 
flesh it acquires the characteristics of the plerocercoid, 
and becomes enclosed in a cyst formed by the connective 
tissue of the host. This penetration and encystment takes 
place during July, requiring generally one month or more. 

The cysts live three to four years and then die, the 






- r ; 








' 













greatest infestations being noted in tullibee, three to six 
years old. The plerocercoids resemble the adult worm closely, 
differing only by the lack of sex organs. 

The completion of the life cycle from plerocercoid 
to the adult is accomplished by a pike swallowing an in¬ 
fested tullibee or other second intermediate host. The 
cyst is digested away within a few hours, releasing the 
plerocercoid, which by the end of three days is quite firmly 
attached to the gut wall. New infestations are picked up 
by the pike, starting in the late summer. 

Possible Methods of Control 

On examining the life history of T^ crassus the most 
logical approach to a method of control is some way of 
breaking the life cycle. There are four possibilities: 

1. Elimination of the first intermediate host, Cyclops 
bicuspidatus . 

2. Elimination or reduction of the second intermediate 
hosts, the coregonine fishes. 

3. Extermination or reduction of the definitive host, 
Esox lucius . 

4. Control of the coracidia. 

Control of the First Intermediate Host . 

Owing to the cosmopolitan nature of Cyclops bicus ¬ 


pidatus , this line of attack seems highly improbable 






















lO SiC'jJ' .1 


r r -■ 












./ v 








■ 



- 5 - 


Miller (19^+) has found this species of copepod in all of 
the numerous Alberta lakes that he has investigated. It is 
also known to occur across Canada and Europe. Even if a 
successful "clean-up" were possible, it would be impossible 
to prevent the rapid re-entry of this copepod into the bodies 
of water treated. 

Control of the Second Intermediate Host . 

The removal of tullibee, the second natural intermed¬ 
iate host, would serve as a method of breaking the life 
cycle. By allowing year around fishing with no limits, 
tullibee numbers could be reduced sufficiently to result 
in a reduction of the plerocercoids in whitefish. The Al¬ 
berta Government has adopted this policy at Lesser Slave 
Lake. Miller (19^8) has shown that during the period 19^4 
to 19^7 the number of Triaenophorus cysts in whitefish at 
Lesser Slave Lake decreased from 26? per 100 fish to 26 
per 100 fish. This method of cyst reduction is applicable 
where there is a demand for tullibee, i.e. mink feed, thus 
maintaining fishing pressure. It would be preferable to 
find some other control method if at all possible, as tul¬ 
libee, an excellent smoking fish, would find a ready market 
if free of cysts. 









S3 


: 






















» 


- 6 - 


Control of the Definitive Host 

Overfishing, poisoning, electrocution, and the use of 
dams are some of the methods that could be used to reduce 
the jackfish population. The Central Station of the Fish¬ 
eries Research Board is attacking the pike-whitefish para¬ 
site problem in Manitoba from this angle. Netting has been 
tried and is successful in the removal of larger pike, but 
many of the smaller ones escape and continue to restock the 
lakes. Fish tox, a rotenone poison has been used in Mani¬ 
toba and also by Miller (1948, 1950) in Alberta, The re¬ 
sults of poisoning pike do not justify the expense, and 
could hardly be extended to large, commercially fished lakes, 

Coracidia Control . 

The coracidia generally occur for a brief period, in 
shallow water near the shore. It is hoped that by means 
of chemical or electrical treatment of the water at appro¬ 
priate times, the coracidia will be killed. This phase of 
control has been the object of this work and will later 
be dealt with in detail. 

Previous Chemical Research on Egg and 

Coracidia Control 

The earliest research on coracidia control was carried 
out by Miller (1944), who discovered that by increasing the 









on' 







- 7 - 


acidity of cultures to a pH of 5.0, the coracidia are killed. 

An attempt was made in May, 19*+5 at Baptiste Lake, 

Alberta to kill the coracidia by lowering the pH to 5.0 
(Miller and Watkins 19*+6). Twenty tons of commercial sul¬ 
phuric acid were introduced into the pike spawning areas, 
over a period of ten days. This should have been sufficient 
acid to reduce the pH to 5.0. The experiment proved to be 
a failure, as the pH was reduced only for a short period of 
time. The presence of carbonates in the bottom mud probably 
neutralized the acid within a few hours. 

Miller and Huston (unpublished) next carried out a 
number of laboratory experiments, testing the effect of var¬ 
ious chemicals on the eggs and coracidia. A large series of 
chemicals was tested and recorded. The following is a brief 
summary of their findings; 

Certain chemicals were effective in killing the coracidia 
these ares 

Gentian Violet at 1,000 p.p.m., but not at lower concen¬ 
trations. 

Malachite Green at 10 p.p.m. 

Auramine at 2 p.p.m. 

Phenol shows variable results, though it appears effective 
at 1 p.p.m. 

Betanaphthol at 100 p.p.m. 

Hexyl resorcinol at 5 p.p.m. 

Lysol at 0.1 p.p.m. 

Borax at 1,000 p.p.m. 












' 





-e- 


Alum at 1,000 p.p.m. 

Rotenone is very effective but is a potent fish poison. 

Zinc Carbonate at maximum solubility. 

Bismuth Carbonate at maximum solubility. 

Lead Carbonate at maximum solubility. 

Calcium Propionate at 100 p.p.m. 

Merthiolate at 1 p.p.m. 

Copper Sulphate at 1 p.p.m. 

Phenyl Mercuric Chloride at 10 p.p.m. 

Zephiran Chloride at 10 p.p.m. 

Formalin at ICO p.p.m. 

Benzyl Benzoate at maximum solubility. 

Carbon Tetrachloride at 800 p.p.m. 

Kerosine is effective but impractical. 

A number of chemicals showed reactions that were classed 
as doubtful, and require retesting; these are: methenamine, 
salol, quinoline and barium carbonate. 

A large number of chemicals had very little effect on 
the coracidia; these are: cresol, resorcinol, pyrocatecliol, 
mulcide, hexachlorethane, phenothiazine, sodium iodide, 
aerosol, d.d.t., sodium benzoate, magnesium sulphate, pot¬ 
assium permanganate, potassium dichromate, lauryl pyridinium 
chloride, ethyl mercuric phosphate, chloramine, and picric 
acid. 

It was found that the eggs were more resistant than 
the coracidia and only a few of the previously mentioned chem¬ 
icals had any effect on hatching. The chemicals that prevented 







I 








hatching to a certain degree are: 

Gentian Violet at 1,000 p.p.m. prevents hatching. 

Auramine at 5 p.p.m. is effective. 

Hexyl resorcinol has some effect at 5 p.p.m. 

Lysol at 100 p.p.m. prevents hatching. 

Formalin at 100 p.p.m. is effective. 

Carbon Tetrachloride is effective at 800 p.p.m. 

Of the numerous chemicals tested lysol appears to be 
the most promising and is also the cheapest. (In the spring 
of 19*+9 I thoroughly retested lysol and found it to be ef¬ 
fective in killing coracidia at 5 p.p.m. At such a high 
concentration, the cost of treating a lake would be too 
large to be practical). 

In this study the work of Miller and Huston (unpublished) 
on testing chemicals for their effect on eggs and coracidia 
has been continued. The effect of electricity has also 
been given preliminary exploration. A difficulty in this 
work has been that the period when eggs are obtainable is 
limited to a few weeks in the spring. It would be desirable 
to find some way of obtaining eggs over a longer period 
of the year. Accordingly, some experiments have been carried 
out to test the response of the worms to pituitary injections 
of the definitive host, the pike. The coracidial work is 
presented here as Part 1 and the pituitary work as Part 11. 





. 

■ 






- 10 - 


PART 1 

ON THE CONTROL OF EGGS AND CORACIDIA OF 
TRIAENOPHORUS CRASSUS 


The purpose of this laboratory work was to find some 
method that will prevent hatching of the eggs, or kill the 
coracidia of crassus . The method must be such that it 
would be economically possible to treat large infested 
bodies of water. Both chemicals and electricity were used 
for experimentation. 


Chemical Attack 

With the work of Miller and Huston serving as a guide, 
a number of chemicals were chosen to be tested. I had no 
idea what type of chemical would be most effective, so a 
variety of disinfectants, insecticides and generally cheap 
chemicals were chosen. The ideal chemical would be one 
cheap enough to use on a large scale, effective at low con¬ 
centrations, non toxic to fish and other waiter-dwelling or 
using animals, sufficiently water soluble to reach the ef¬ 
fective concentration and not neutralized, destroyed or pre¬ 
cipitated under natural conditions. 


Procedure 


Towards the end of April worms were removed from the 























" : \U C 


' 




» . 















cn*’0- 


i C;J . 









- 11 - 


intestines of jackfish, identified and placed in petri dishes 
filled with water• If the eggs are sufficiently developed 
they are released when the worms contact the water. In some 
cases when the eggs are not extruded spontaneously, the worms 
may be induced to release them by pulling the worm between 
the thumb and finger. Worms were obtained by having pike 
intestines sent in from Fishery Officers and by making trips 
to the lakes; the best results being obtained by the latter 
means. Once the eggs were collected they were kept in 50 
c.c. bottles at refrigerator temperatures. 

The various chemicals to be tested were made up in 
distilled water to serve as concentrates. With the appear¬ 
ance of coracidia in the egg cultures, experimental cul¬ 
tures having a volume of 50 c.c. were made up in petri 
dishes. Sufficient amounts of concentrated chemical and 
distilled water were added to petri dishes to produce the 
required experimental strength. This was followed by the 
addition of 10 c.c. of egg culture. Each chemical tested 
was mixed in three different concentrations, generally 100, 

10 and 2 p.p.m. There were also two controls run for each 
chemical, consisting of 10 c.c. of egg culture plus ho c.c. 
distilled water. All cultures were kept at refrigerator 
temperatures of about 7 to 8 degrees Centigrade. 

Each day the experimental cultures were aerated by 
means of an eye-dropper and one drop of culture removed to 
be examined under the microscope. The readings were carried 
out for 6 to 7 days for each culture and were made to 




* 

* * ■ 

' 

' 



- 12 - 


determine the ratio of hatched to unhatched eggs and of 
live to dead coracidia. The eggs being transparent enabled 
easy diagnosis of the hatched and unhatched condition; as 
the latter are seen to contain the embryo while the former 
are empty. Motility served as the method of determining 
live from dead coracidia. 

Chemicals Tested in 19^9 

During the spring of 19^9 ten chemicals were tested 
with egg cultures. Several other chemicals were available 
for testing but the egg supply failed. The records of these 
experiments may be found in the appendix, tables Vll to XVI. 
The following are the chemicals at the concentrations tested: 

L-F disinfectant #17H - 14 at 100, 10 and 2 p.p.m. 

Even at 100 p.p.m. this disinfectant proved impotent as it 
did not affect hatching of the eggs and scarcely reduced 
the percentage of live coracidia. 

Sodium ethylene bis-dithiocarbonate at 100, 10 and 2 
p.p.m. This chemical at 10 p.p.m. appears to be quite ef¬ 
fective in killing the coracidia and in preventing hatching 
of the eggs. 

Ccl4 triton x at 100, 10 and 2 p.p.m. The viability of 
the coracidia was reduced considerably at 10 p.p.m. while 
at this same concentration no effect on hatching was observed 

Y-77 at 20, 10 and 2 p.p.m. While there was no apparent 
effect on the eggs at 20 p.p.m; all the coracidia were killed 
at 10 p.p.m. the coracidia were reduced by approximately 
60 per cent. 



, 














. 








- 13 - 


Lysol at 10, 5 and 2 p.p.m. Close to 100 per cent of 
the coracidia were killed at 10 and 5 p.p.m; there was little 
effect on hatching. 

Copper Sulfate at 100, 10 and 2 p.p.m. This chemical 
was 100 per cent effective in killing the coracidia and 
completely inhibited hatching at 100 p.p.m. At 10 p.p.m. 
it was ineffective. 

Toxaphene at 8, 5 and 2 p.p.m. There were no noticeable 
effects on either the eggs or the coracidia at all three 
concentrations. 

Mulcide B at 100, 10 and 2 p.p.m. The coracidia were 
effectively reduced, though hatching was not inhibited at 
100 p.p.m. 

Sodium Caprylate at 100, 10 and 2 p.p.m. This chemical 
did not prevent hatching, but did substantially reduce the 
coracidia at 100 p.p.m. 

Dowklor at 100, 10 and 2 p.p.m. At 100 p.p.m. the 
coracidia were nearly completely killed off; while hatching 
was not affected. 

The following three chemicals out of the ten tested 
were considered to possess a desirable degree of potency: 
Sodium ethylene bis-dithiocarbonate, eel 1 * triton x and lysol. 
But the cost of using any of these three to treat an in¬ 
fested lake would be too great to be practical, so other 
chemicals were chosen to be tested in 1950 . 













- 14 - 


Chemicals Tested In 1950 

The eggs commenced hatching about two weeks later than 
those of the previous year, the first coracidia being ob¬ 
tained May 11, 1950* Several field trips were made and a 
large supply of eggs obtained. I had anticipated running 
a large series of experiments, but due to bacterial and 
protozoal invasions, only twenty per cent of the egg cul¬ 
tures were suitable for experimental purposes. Plans were 
made to continue the chemical experiments well into July, 
using two different species of Triaenophorus eggs that 
normally hatch later than those of T*, crassus . The first 
of these, Triaenophorus nodulosus, spends its adult life in 
the intestine of the pike, releasing its eggs during the 
latter part of May to the middle of June. This is approxim¬ 
ately one month later than T^ crassus (Miller, 19*+3A). The 
second species of Triaenophorus, T. stizostedionis , occurs as 
the adult in the intestine of the pike-perch, Stizostedion 
vitreum. This species of Triaenophorus spawns during the 
first part of June (Miller 19^?D). A trip was made to 
Lesser Slave Lake early in June to collect eggs of either 
T. nodulosus or T_s. stizostedionis . Over one hundred fish 
were examined and no adult worms were found attached. There 
were signs of previous infestations and a few worms were 
found passing out of the intestine. It appears that where 
T. crassus was late in spawning, both T_._ nodulosus and T. 
stizostidionis were earlier than usual. 



















b ;, f 















- 15 - 


Owing to the shortage of satisfactory egg supplies only 
a few chemicals were tested. These ares 

Antimony Tartrate at 100, 10 and 2 p.p.m. There was no 
great visible effect to either the coracidia or the hatching 
of the eggs. 

Chloromycetin at 10, 5 and 1 p.p.m. This antibiotic was 
impotent. 

Two per cent Tyrothricin at 200, 100 and 20 p.p.m. There 
was no observable effect to either the eggs or the coracidia® 

Toxaphene at 100, 10 and 2 p.p.m. This insecticide 
proved quite effective in killing the coracidia at 100 p.p.m., 
but had no effect on hatching of the eggs. At 10 p.p.m. it 
reduced the numbers of live coracidia by roughly 65 per cent. 

Dow K-604 at 20,10,2.5,2,1,0.5>0.35*0.25, and 0.05 p.p.m. 
The results from this chemical look very promising, at 0.35 
p.p.m. it was 100 per cent effective in killing coracidia, 
while at 0.5 p.p.m. as well as killing all of the coracidia 
it reduced hatching by about 35 per cent. Further statist¬ 
ical details may be obtained by referring to the tables in 
the appendix. 

Information on Dow K-604 

Dow K-604 is a highly toxic, yellow compound, composed 
of Dinitro-o-Cyclohexylphenol Dicyclohex^mine salt, and is 
manufactured by the Dow Chemical Company at Midland Michigan 
U.S.A. It is very insoluble at 1000 p.p.m., but at 25 


i 



J,"u 









- 16 - 


p.p.m* goes nearly completely into solution. A more sol¬ 
uble form is available commercially for spraying plant 
mites and is termed Dow DN-111. Dow DN-111 contains 20 per 
cent K-604; the remainder being made up of an inert sol¬ 
uble powder. James W. Ingalls Jr. (letter on file) has fed 
Dow DN-111 at 100 p.p.m. to mice and guinea pigs as their 
only water source for one month with no apparent ill effects 
to the animals. It appears that this chemical is perfectly 
safe to mammals at a much higher concentration than that 
necessary to kill the coracidia, and inhibit hatching. 

Cost of Using Dow K-604 in Lakes » 

The following are prices quoted June 30, 1950 by the 
Dow Chemical Company: 

Dow R-604 - $1.00 per pound, plus duty and exchange. 

Dow DN-111 - $0.52 per pound packed in 3f pound bags 
(12 per case), freight allowed on orders of 100 pounds net 
or more. Dow K-604 can be supplied only from Midland Mich¬ 
igan, while DN-111 is available at Sarnia, Ontario; or Mich¬ 
igan. The Dow Company strongly advises the use of DN-111 
which can be easily compounded. 

On the basis of these prices, it would be possible to 
have a concentration of 0 o 35 p.p.m. Dinitro-o-Cyclohexyl- 
phenol Dicyclohexylamine at $0.95 per acre foot using Dow 
K-604, and $2.48 using DN-111. 

In order to treat Square Lake having a total area of 

























< 


















- 17 - 


2.5 square miles and requiring treatment of 2,000 acre feet, 
it would cost $1,900.00 using Dow K-604 and $4,960.00 using 
DN-111 to give a concentration of 0.35 p.p.m. K-604. 

Gold Fish Experiments 

To determine the effect of Dow K-604 on fish, three 
gold fish were placed in a bowl containing the chemical at 
the desired concentration. A control was also run, consist¬ 
ing of three gold fish in tap water. 

At 0.35 p.p.m. Dow K-604 seemed to cause a loss of 
colour in the gold fish, but aside from this they appeared 
quite normal. At the end of two days, the experimental gold 
fish were placed in 0.5 p.p.m. K-604. They appeared to be 
quite normal for the first few hours, but by morning all 
three fish were dead. The next day one of the controls was 
placed in 0.4 p.p.m. K-604 and after 24 hours appeared to 
have a loss of colour, sluggish behavior and the development 
of a white filamentous coating over the eyes. After 72 hours 
this fish died. The two remaining controls were still al¬ 
ive after two months had passed. It appears that K604 is 
quite toxic to fish at concentrations over 0.35 P*P«nu 

Invasive Power of Chemically Treated Coracidia 

During the spring of 1949 chemically treated coracidia 
were fed to Cyclops bicuspidatus , the first intermediate host. 
The purpose of this experiment was to determine if the chem¬ 
ical, while not killing the coracidia, may weaken them to 


i 









) l 





:*.! 1 


• ' : ■ 


.. i > 


: ,rr r Lq 

. 














■ 18 - 


such an extent that they were unable to infest the host. 

Procedure 

Cultures of eggs in distilled water were examined 
daily to determine the numbers and viability of the cora- 
cidia. Those cultures containing active coracidia were then 
mixed with the chemical to be tested to produce a concen¬ 
tration of 2 p.p.m. of the chemical. A few c.c. of this 
culture were placed in a Syracuse watch glass and a number of 
Cyclops bicuspidatus then added. At the same time a control 
was run containing coracidia and Cyclops but no chemical. 

The following day a number of Cyclops were removed by means 
of an eye-dropper and examined under the microscope to deter¬ 
mine if they had been invaded by coracidia. 

Results 

In the controls an average of 65 per cent of the Cyclops 
contained one or more coracidia; the experimentals were 
about 60 per cent infested with coracidia. The chemicals 
tested and the results obtained are shown in Table 1. 









. . . . . - ' 




- 19 - 


Table 1 

THE EFFECT OF CHEMICALS ON THE INVASIVE POWER OF CORACIDIA 

OF T. CRASSUS 


DATE 

CONTROLS 




NO. OF CYC¬ 
LOPS EXAMINED 

NO. OF CYC¬ 
LOPS INFESTED 

PERCENT OF 

CYCLOPS INFESTED 

28-5-50 5 

2 


40 


30-5-50 6 

2 


33.3 


31-5-50 . ... 12 

.9 . 


75 


1-6-50 7 

5 


71.4 


1-6-50 20 

15 


75 


9-6-50 12 

.9 . 


75 


DATE 

EXPERTMENTALS 




CHEMICAL TESTED 

AT 2 p.p.m. 

NO. OF CYCLOPS 
EXAMINED. 

NO. OF CYC¬ 
LOPS INFESTED 

Per cent 

INFESTED 

28-5-50 Lysol 

3 

2 


66.7 

30-5-50 L-F Disinfectant 17 

9 


52.9 

31-5-50 Y-77 

12 

8 


66.7 

1-6-50 Ccl4 Triton X 

6 

5 


83.3 

1-6-50 Copper Sulfate 

9 

0 


0 

9-6-50 Mulcide-B 

2 

z 


.77.3 


It is quite clear that, with the exception of copper 
sulphate, all of the chemicals, are ineffective. Copper sul¬ 
phate is effective in killing the coracidia at 100 p.p.m. 
(Table Xll appendix) and in weakening them at 2 p.p.m. to 
such an extent that they are unable to infest the first 


i 




























- 20 - 


intermediate host. Copper sulphate has the disadvantage of 
being precipitated by the carbonates in the lake water, and 
thus rapidly becoming unavailable. 

Electrical Experiments on the Eggs and Coracidia of 

T. Crassus 

Many investigators have noticed the lethal effect of 
alternating current on insect larvae and fish (Smith, G.F.M. 
and P.F. Elson, 19*+9)* It was thought that an A.C. appar¬ 
atus similar to the type designed for fish population sur¬ 
veys could be used in the pike spawning areas in an attempt 
to kill the coracidia of T^ crassus . To build the necessary 
apparatus would require considerable expense, so prelimin¬ 
ary experiments were run in a specially designed and constructed 
laboratory set-up. 

Apparatus 

The apparatus (fig. 1) was designed by Professor Harle, 
to whom we are grateful, and built in the University Machine 
Shop. The ciarrent is taken from an A.C. wall outlet and the 
voltage regulated by means of a variac. The voltages ob¬ 
tained varied from a minimum of two, to a maximum of one 
hundred and twenty. The specially designed cell is construct¬ 
ed from lucite; it is inches long by 5 inches wide and 
made in easily removable sections to facilitate cleaning. 

The two electrodes are of 1/16 inch stainless steel measuring 










i 














C :ST 












.. 


















- 21 - 


x inches and are situated 3"| inches apart. The elec¬ 
trodes are scavenged by water passing through built-in tubes 
The centre of the cell is occupied by a small chamber 
| x 1 x | inches in size and separated from the cell proper 
by vegetable parchment diaphragms. The cell 1 s design en¬ 
ables the voltage gradient between the two electrodes to 
be readily calculated. 

Experimental Procedure 

Cultures of eggs and active coracidia were chosen and 
the percentages of live to dead coracidia and hatched to un¬ 
hatched eggs determined. Then by means of an eye-dropper 
2 c.c. of culture were placed in the centre chamber of the 
cell. The voltage was then set by means of a calibrated 
variac and the current turned on for the desired period of 
time. Following electrocution the 2 c.c. of culture were 
withdrawn from the centre chamber and examined to determine 
percentages, as was done prior to the experiment. The exper 
imental culture along with a control was then stored in a 
refrigerator for two or more days after which another series 
of counts was made. The centre chamber was washed out with 
distilled water following each experiment. 

Results 

A number of experiments were run, the shortest time 
used was five seconds with voltages of 2,5,10,15,20,25,26, 




V 



. 


. 




, 

. . 




' \ r ■ ■ . J ; v ... •;:/ 

♦ 









- 22 - 


! 


if 


d> 6 

A 




1 

1 

VM 


V 



Figure 1 

ELECTRICAL APPARATUS USED IN CORACIDIAL CONTROL 

EXPERIMENTS. 

Scale - inch is equal to 1 inch. 


KEY 

A - Ammeter 

B - Chamber for holding eggs and coracidia 

C - Opening to electrode chamber 

D - Water inlet pipe 

E - Water outlet pipe 

F - Rubber gasket 

G - Alignment bar 

H - Post connected to electrode 

I - Vegetable parchment diaphragm 

V - Variac 

VM- Voltmeter 
























































- 23 - 


and 55« At fifteen seconds duration voltages of 45,50,52, 

54, 55 and 110 were used, while at 20 seconds 2 , 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 , 
25,30,35,40,45,50,55 and 110 were used. Voltages of 110 and 
120 were tried for a period of thirty seconds. Records of 
the experiment may be found in Table XXIV appendix. 

Those voltages used for a five second duration were 
successful in killing the coracidia nearly one hundred per 
cent, but due to the original cultures not being too active 
this set of results should not be relied upon. At 15 seconds 
the voltages used showed no great effect on either the eggs 
or the coracidia, while at twenty seconds the percentage of 
dead coracidia was increased by about twenty-five per cent 
at voltages between two and forty. The current at 110 and 
120 volts held for thirty seconds proved ineffective. Im¬ 
mediately following electrocution, in the majority of cases 
the coracidia appeared extremely active as though under 
stimulation. Also in those cultures infested with protozoa, 
the protozoa appeared quite normal after electrocution. In 
most cases, there were slight increases in the percentages 
of hatched eggs and live coracidia when read on the second 
day following experimentation. 








) 


‘ 

* 

'ifm 

. 


! 


















- 24 - 


SUMMARY OF PART 1 

The most desirable way to control the cestode Triaen- 
ophorus crassus would be some method of killing the free 
living stage of the tapeworm. Both chemical and electrical 
attacks were made on the eggs and coracidia. The purpose 
was to prevent hatching of the eggs and to kill the cora¬ 
cidia, or weaken them to such an extent that they would be 
unable to infest their first host Cyclops bicuspidatus . 

A total of fifteen chemicals was tested with favor¬ 
able results being obtained in the following: sodium eth¬ 
ylene bis-dithiocarbonate, Ccl4 triton x, lysol and Dow E-604 
(Dinitro-o-Cyclohexylphenol Dicyclohexjamine salt). By 
balancing potency against cost, Dow K-604 is the only chem¬ 
ical tested that would be economically feasible to use on 
a large scale. At 0.35 p.p.m. it is one hundred per cent ef¬ 
fective in killing the coracidia. It is very unlikely that 
a more potent chemical could be found, but it would be de¬ 
sirable to find a chemical as potent and considerably cheaper. 
The final test of K-604 would be to run an experiment on a 
small infested lake. 

Seven chemicals were tested to see if they could weaken 
the coracidia to such an extent that they would be unable to 
infest the first intermediate host. Copper sulphate was the 
only effective chemical and it completely prevented infest¬ 
ation at 2 p.p.m. The main disadvantage of copper sulphate 
is that it is precipitated by the carbonates in the lake. 




























- 25 - 


The effect of electricity on the eggs and coracidia 
was tested by means of a specially built laboratory set up. 
Voltages ranging from 2 to 120 were tested for varying per¬ 
iods of time. Those voltages varying from 2 to 55 and held 
for a period of five seconds were one hundred per cent ef¬ 
fective in killing the coracidia. The voltages used for 
longer periods of time had no great effect. On the basis of 
this experiment it appears that electricity could be used to 
control the coracidia. Owing to the poor condition of the 
cultures tested it would be desirable to run further series 
of electrical experiments with more active cultures, to ver¬ 
ify and expand this work. 










' 













. 




■) 










- 26 - 


PART 2 


OBSERVATIONS ON THE EFFECT OF PITUITARY SUSPENSIONS AND 
EXTRACTS ON TRIAENOPHORUS CRASS US AND ITS HOST, ESQX LUCIUS 


INTRODUCTION 


Experimentation on the free living stage of Triaenoph - 
orus crassus is limited to a few weeks of each year, the 
period being determined by the availability of the tapeworm 
eggs. The object of this work was to obtain egg supplies 
over various seasons of the year and thus enable a year around 
attack on the coracidia. 

Both QM crassus and Its host, the pike, Esox lucius, 
release their sexual products at approximately the same date. 
There is no set time for spawning; it fluctuates by a week 
or two from year to year, occurring shortly after the ice 
breaks, either in the latter part of April or early May. The 
fluctuations in spawning dates of the pike may be due to the 
seasonal rise in temperature of the water. This was pointed 
out by Turner (1919) fide Craig-Bennett (1931). This co¬ 
inciding of spawning times is not a mere chance occur*ence, 
but has been observed over several years and indicates that 
there must be some controlling force. It seems reasonable 
to hypothesize that the host exerts a controlling effect 













I 
















- 27 - 


over the cestodes, causing them to reach full maturity during 
the pike spawning period. This controlling force or mech¬ 
anism could be the pituitary gland, whose secretions are 
the chief regulatory influences operating on the gonads. If 
this were the case, we would expect the ripening of the cest- 
ode to coincide with the advancement of oogenesis and sperm¬ 
atogenesis in the pike. This is precisely what occurs, 

Moore (1942) reports that spermatogenesis, whether of 
the seasonal or continuous variety, appears to depend upon 
pituitary activity. In those animals having a strictly 
seasonal period of spermatogenetic activity, gonadotropic 
treatments will stimulate the testicle to activity and 
spermatozoa will appear at unusual periods. There have been 
several attempts to induce premature ripening of the gonads 
with the aid of pituitary glands. Craig-Bennett (1931) in¬ 
jected extract of the anterior lobe of the pituitary into 
Gasterosteus aculeatus, causing redevelopment of the sec¬ 
ondary sexual characters in five cases out of eight. Hasler, 
Meyer, and Field (1939) obtained both mature eggs and sperm 
fromlainbow trout six to seven weeks in advance of the 
onset of the normal spawning period. This was accomplished 
by means of intraperitoneal injections of fresh and acetone- 
dried pituitary glands of the carp. Pregnant mare serum 
and the follicle stimulating fraction prepared from sheep 
pituitary failed to induce spawning prematurely in trout. 

The above mentioned three authors (1940) also treated cap¬ 
tive muskellunge with pituitary hormones of the carp and 












- 28 - 


induced spawning three to six days following injection. 

The eggs were fertilized and a normal hatch occurred. There 
was no spawning among the controls. 

On the basis of the previousl«jmentioned hypothesis and 
the success obtained by other workers in advancing spawning 
times, the following research program was carried out. Pike 
were kept in captivity and injected with various dosages of 
pituitary suspensions and extracts. It was hoped that this 
would advance spermatogenesis and oogenesis in the fish and at 
the same time cause the tapeworms to reach full adult maturity. 


EQUIPMENT, MATERIALS AND SPECIMENS 

Preliminary to experimentation it was necessary to 
procure and prepare various specimens, materials and equip¬ 
ment . 

Tank and Aerato r 

In order to house the pike over fairly lengthy periods 
of time, a special tank and aerator were secured (figures 2 
and 3). The tank consisted of a small concrete pond meas¬ 
uring 98 by 75 inches, with a depth of five inches for the 
first thirty inches of its width and then gradually increas¬ 
ing to a maximum depth of eighteen inches. This tank was 
originally designed for the storage of frogs and turtles and 
did not prove to be favorable for keeping a dozen or more 









- 










' 


; ?y:A 




■ 

« 


.. 

•1 


~ 

“ 

- 






'29 


Figure 2 

TOP VIEW OF FILTER 





Figure 3 


VIEW OF TANK, AERATOR AND FILTER 










- 30 - 


medium-sized pike in captivity at one time. 

It was necessary to fill the tank with lake and river 
water, as pike will not survive in Edmonton* s chlorinated 
water. To provide the necessary oxygen content and to keep 
the water relatively clean a filter and spray were installed. 

The filter consisted of a metal box measuring 49 by 36 inches 
and having an overall depth of 25.5 inches. Lining the bottom 
was a three inch layer of gravel made up of stones measuring 
one half inch or over in diameter. Above this lay six inches 
of gravel made up of stones less than one half inch in diameter. 
The filter was mounted above the tank (fig. 3) and a pipe con¬ 
taining several small holes carried the filtered water in 
the form of a spray into the tank. A 1.15 horsepower A.C. 
motor pumped the water from the tank into the filter. 

Pituitary Glands 

The entire pfi^itary glands from six hundred pike were 
removed and stored in sma.ll vials of acetone in the re¬ 
frigerator. Forty-seven frog pituitaries were also extracted 
and stored in a similar manner. In a few cases pituitaries 
were obtained from freshly killed pike and utilized immed¬ 
iately. 

Preparation of Pituitary Suspensions 

About one hour prior to injection the desired number 
of whole pituitary glands was chosen and the acetone filtered 





- 31 - 


off. The pituitaries were allowed to dry and then ground 
to a fine powder using a mortar and pestle. The final step 
was the addition of ten c.c. of distilled water whereupon 
the suspension was ready to be used. 

Preparation of Pituitary Extracts 

Pituitary extracts proved to be more suitable than sus¬ 
pensions, as the latter had a tendancy to clog the hypodermic 
needle and thus interfere with injection. Preparation of 
the extract consisted of filtering off the acetone, drying 
and grinding the pituitaries in the same manner as for the 
suspensions. Next, three c.c. of distilled water were added 
and the mixture further ground and the particles allowed to 
settle. The extract was then decanted and two more c.c. of 
distilled water added and the grinding, settling and obcanting 
repeated. The second portion of extract was combined with the 
first and then used for injection. 

Pike 

The pike were secured during the fall and winter months 
from Baptiste Lake, Alberta. During the period November 4, 
1949 to January 28 , 1950 , four trips were made to the lake 
and a total of 53 pike were brought to the tank. From Sept¬ 
ember 26 to October 31» 1950 , three trips resulted in 32 
pike being procured in good shape for experimental purposes. 
The fish were captured with gill nets and experience proved 





































- 32 - 


that fish obtained from nets set and run every hour or two, 
were more healthy and had a greater survival rate than those 
fish procured in overnight sets. A trammel net was set in 
October, 1950, but no fish were caught. The fish were trans¬ 
ported to Edmonton in a truck equipped with a tank specially 
built for this purpose. 


EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE 

The experimental procedure consisted of injecting sus¬ 
pensions or extracts of whole pituitary glands into marked 
pike. Two or three days following injection certain experim¬ 
ental and control fish were killed and examined to determine 
the condition of their gonads and tapeworms. The worms and 
gonads were then fixed and prepared for histological study. 

Injection and Marking of the Pike 

Two people were required for this operation, one to 
catch and hold the fish and the other to inject and mark it. 

The injections were all intraperitoneal, being made on the 
left ventro-lateral surface just anterior to the pelvic girdle, 
so as to avoid damage to any of the underlying organs. It 
was a matter of sheer guess work regarding dosages used, 
both large and small doses of pituitaries were given, with 
the more favorable results being obtained with small doses 
repeated at two or three day intervals. Various fin combin- 



w 










■ 
















- 

■ , 








. 



- 33 - 


ations were clipped to facilitate future identification 
and the fish were then returned to the tank. The dosages 
used and fins cut were then recorded, the whole operation 
taking less than two minutes. 

Examination of the Pike 

Examinations were conducted twice daily and any dead 
fish removed for detailed stud 3 ^. The pike were watched 
closely for colour changes, evidence of spawning, and worm 
ejection. A few days following injection certain experi¬ 
mental and control fish were killed and examined to deter¬ 
mine the condition of their gonads and tapeworms. Ripe 
males were readily identified, as any slight pressure ex¬ 
erted on their abdomens resulted in the exudation of milt. 
Very little could be told from the appearance of the ov¬ 
aries in the females. The worms were removed, identified 
and placed in water to see if they could be induced to 
shed eggs. Portions of the gonads were fixed in Bouin’s 
solution, while the worms were fixed either in ten per 
cent formalin or in A.F.A., a special cestode fixative 
of the following composition: 

46 per cent distilled water 
24 per cent ethyl alcohol 
15 per cent commercial formalin 
10 per cent glycerine 
5 per cent glacial acetic acid. 

Sections of the gonads were made and stained either with 


iron haematoxylin, Delafield’s haematoxylin or Mallory’s 




- 34 - 


triple stain, the best results being obtained with iron 
haematoxylin. Both sections and whole mounts were made of 
the tapeworms and stained with iron haematoxylin stain. 
Detailed microscopic examinations were made of all slides 
and the results tabulated. 


MICROSCOPIC STRUCTURE OF PIKE GONADS 

The microscopic examinations of the gonads were made 
with two objects in view, to determine the effect of the 
injections and to correlate the condition of the gonads 
with the stages of tapeworm development. 

Testis Structure 

The basis of testis structure is connective tissue which 
forms the thin covering of the testis and fills the inter¬ 
tubular spaces. There is no muscular tissue in the testis 
and the discharge of spermatozoa is brought about chiefly 
by the elastic contraction of the connective tissue (Craig- 
Bennett 1931). The germ cells are contained within num¬ 
erous tubules which reach their maximum size when filled 
with spermatozoa. The tubules contain no permanent germ¬ 
inal epithelium and are therefore not strictly comparable 
'to mammalian seminiferous tubules. 

The germ cells of the testis undergo spermatogenesis, 



* 


' 

* 









- 35 - 


the stage of least development being shortly after spawning 
and that of maximum development sometime during April. In 
the numerous slides examined the testes appeared fully devel¬ 
oped as early as February. Craig-Bennett (1931) reports that 
functional spermatozoa may be present in the testes of Gast- 
erosteus aculeatus one to two months prior to the breeding 
season. 

The first stage of germ cell development is division of 
the spermatogonia. Not one of the testes examined showed this 
stage exclusively. Following this the spermatogonia are trans¬ 
formed into primary spermatocytes contained in thin walled 
cysts; these are the largest cells observed in the testis. 

The primary spermatocytes undergo the first maturation div¬ 
ision resulting in the formation of secondary spermatocytes 
which are considerably smaller than the primary spermato¬ 
cytes. The second maturation division results in spermatids 
and these metamorphose into spermatozoa. 

A ripe testis contains tubules packed with spermatozoa 
and very few spermatocytes are detectable (fig. 8). In a 
less developed testis, even though the tubules may be full of 
spermatozoa, cysts of spermatocytes are plentiful and easily 
observed (fig. 9). 

Coinciding with the maturation of the sex cells is the 
development of the interstitium. The interstitial, connective 
and vascular tissues of the testis undergo an annual devel¬ 
opment and regression. The interstitium increases in volume 
as spermatogenesis nears completion. The interstitial cells 




















■ 














^ ~ • ■ 

. • ■ 1 • : • 






- 36 - 


are large nucleated cells with a granular cytoplasm and gen¬ 
erally reach their maximum development just prior to the 
breeding season (figs. 8 and 10). Bouin and Ancel (1903 
fide Craig-Bennett 1931) hypothesized that the interstitial 
tissue of the testis is the source of the hormone which caus¬ 
es the development of secondary sexual characteristics of the 
male, in mammals and probably other vertebrates. Bennett 
(193D concluded that the interstitial tissue of Gasterosteus 
is an endocrine gland. 


Ovary Structure 

The cavity of the ovary is divided by a number of trans¬ 
verse lamellae originating from the dorsal wall. The growing 
oocytes are embedded in these lamellae, surrounded by a fine 
follicular epithelium. The ovary undergoes an annual cycle of 
development. Oogonial division occurs shortly after spawning 
and maturation divisions occur over the year resulting in 
mature ova at the breeding season. The interstitium of the 
ovary is always thin and there are no interstitial cells. 

In this study several ovaries were sectioned and stained. 
No details could be observed of the various stages of oogenes¬ 
is and as a result detailed histological examinations were 
confined to the testes. 


1 















* 

■ 


























- 37 - 


development OF GENITALIA IN TRIAENOPHORUS CRASSUS 

In order to correlate the development of the c est- 
ode genitalia with the pituitary injections in the pike, it 
is essential to have an understanding of these organs and of 
their sequence of development. Each mature proglottis con¬ 
tains a functional set of both male and female sex organs. 

The genital pores are marginal and alternate irregularly. 

Every set of male genitalia consists of the following: num¬ 
erous testes, vasa efferentia, vas deferens, vesicula seminalis, 
cirrus and cirrus sac. Situated among the male organs are the 
following female sex organs: a bilobed ovary, vitellaria, 
vitelline ducts, yolk resevoir, oviduct, shell gland, uterine 
sac, uterus and vagina. 

Normally the anlagen of the genitalia appear in November; 
the first eggs appear in the uteri in January (Miller 19*+3). 

The uteri are distended with eggs early in February, but the 
eggs do not contain recognizable onchospheres until March and 
April. These various stages are readily differentiated with 
the aid of a microscope and a ripe worm may be easily rec¬ 
ognized with the naked eye. 

The various sex organs exhibit a stereotyped pattern of 
development. When first differentiated the genitalia appear 
as solid structures; they later acquire lumina and become 
functional organs. The following pattern of development was 
observed in a large series of whole mounts. The first struc¬ 
ture to appear is the shell gland and following this is the 


i 























"V 






• . 

' 






t' '■ 1 












■ 








































- 38 - 


KEY TO FIGURES 4,?,6 and 7 

c - cirrus sac 
e - egg 

m - marginal pore 
o - ovary 
s - shell gland 
u - uterus 
us - uterus sac 
v - vagina 


Magnifications indicated in figures 4,5,6 and 7 
are those for the original drawing. 

Magnifications produced by photographic reduction 


are X 50 


- 39 - 



FIG.6. X80. FIG.7. X80. 


DEVELOPMENT OF GENITALIA 



















- 40 - 


cirrus sac (fig. 4). Both the above mentioned structures 
were seen in worms taken during October. The next stage of 
development is shown in figure 5, where, in addition to a 
distinct shell gland and solid cirrus sac, the uterine sac is 
present as a solid structure and the ovary and uterus are be¬ 
ginning to form. The development of functional sex organs 
follows this and may be seen in figure 6 which is a camera 
lucida sketch from a worm taken January 28, 1950. The sex 
organs are seen to be well differentiated. The uterine sac 
is distended with eggs without onchospheres and the uterus is 
greatly enlarged. The ovary and ovid^uft are distinct as is 
the cirrus sac. The shell gland is not observable, as it 
probably collapsed after serving its function. Figure 7 de¬ 
picts a proglottis in the post spawning condition, showing 
well developed sex organs and the uterine sac collapsed as a 
result of releasing the eggs. 

By a comparison of the gonads of experimental and con¬ 
trol tapeworms, any effects due to the pituitary injections 
may be readily seen. 


EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION 


Seven trips were made to Baptiste Lake, with the 
.pike from each trip serving as separate experimental lots. 
Before actual experimentation commenced, the fish were allowed 
to adapt themselves to tank conditions for two days. The 


i 


;; t 





N 







- 41 - 


first two experiments provided the necessary experience and 
technique in housing and handling of the fish and following 
these more satisfactory results were obtained. 

Experiment One 

On November 5, 1949 twenty large pike were placed in 
the tank, which had been previously filled with lake and city 
water. At this time the filter box contained no gravel and 
functioned only as an aerator. All of the fish were found 
dead on the morning of November 8. There are several explan¬ 
ations that could account for this sudden and complete kil¬ 
ling, such as overcrowding, city water being added, new fit¬ 
tings on the pump and filter may have given off lead; or the 
accumulation and decomposition of partially digested tullibee, 
regurgitated by the pike, may have poisoned the water. An¬ 
other factor that may have played an important role in the 
sudden fish mortality was their poor physical condition which 
resulted from their being caught in overnight sets and dama¬ 
ging themselves by attempting to escape. One might conclude 
that the fish died due to the cumulative effect of all these 
factors. 


Experiment Two 

Prior to obtaining the fish the filter xvas filled with 
gravel and the tank with river water. Ten healthy medium 
sized pike were added to the tank on November 11, 1949. In 
an attempt to determine the effect of city water, six healthy 








- 42 - 


pike were placed in a second tank filled with tap water. 

The tank of city water had a constant supply of lap water en¬ 
tering and thus kept the water relatively clean and oxygen¬ 
ated, Within four hours three of the fish in the city water 
were dead and by morning the remaining three had died. The 
ten fish in lake and river water were all active, therefore 
indicating that chemically treated water from the city is lethal 
to pike. Three pike were found chad on the evening of Novem¬ 
ber 13. The remaining seven fish served as experimentals and 
controls being numbered, marked and injected with suspensions 
of pituitary as indicated in table 11. 

Table 11 


RECORDS OF INJECTED AND CONTROL FISH FOR EXPERIMENT TWO 


FISH 

NO. 

SEX 

FIN CUT : 

INJECTION 

DATE 

NO. OF PITUITARIES 
INJECTED 

DATE OF 
DEATH 

1 

i 

R. Pect. 

14-11-49 

9 

19 - 11-49 

2 

* 

R. Pelvic 

14-11-49 

9 

18 - 11-49 

3 

t 

L. Pect. 

14-11-49 

13 

18 - 11-49 

4 

t 

L. Pelvic 

15-11-49 

30 

15-11-49 

5 

$ 

R. Pelvic 

15-11-49 

48 

19-11-49 

6 

% 

— 


— 

15-11-49 

7 

t 

— 


-- 

19-11-49 



The first 

observable 

effect due to the 

pituitary 


Injections was the marked loss of colour in all of the exper¬ 
imental fish. Their normally dark green backs had faded to a 
very pale shade of yellow green. 


1 















\ 




r. /• ' ( 





- 43 - 


Condition of the Pike and Their Parasites at Time of Death 

The pike appeared to be perfectly normal aside from the 
loss of colour exhibited by the injected fish. Three out of 
the four injected male pike were brought into a breeding con¬ 
dition as shown by the active sperm obtained. Fish number 
four was the experimental male failing to reach the ripe con¬ 
dition, this being due to its death shortly following inject¬ 
ion and before enough time had elapsed for the pituitaries to 
cause any noticeable changes. Fish number seven served as 
the male control and was not ripe. In both the injected fe¬ 
male and the control the ovaries were in similar unripe 
condition. 

The tapeworms were firmly attached in all of the fish and 
when placed in water failed to release their eggs. 

Histological Examination of the Pike Gonads 

Fish numbers, one, three, five and seven were chosen 
for detailed study of the testes. The testes of the first 
three of these were ripe and all showed a similar state of 
development. They all had tubules crammed with spermatozoa 
and only one or two tubules contained stages of spermatog¬ 
enesis. The intertubular spaces were filled with well de¬ 
veloped connective tissue, interstitial cells and small 
amounts of spermatozoa frorn broken tubules. Figure 8 shows 
these details as they appeared in fish number one. 

The control testis (fig. 9) differed considerably from 




















■ : 

■ ' 






■ 







- 44 - 


the experimental. The tubules were filled with sperm¬ 
atozoa but there was also an abundance of thin walled cysts 
filled with the various stages of spermatogenesis. The 
connective tissue was not too well developed and intersti¬ 
tial cells were scarce. 

Histological Examination of the Tapeworms 

Cross sections were made of worms removed from fish 
one, three, five and seven and whole mounts of those Itom 
fish one and seven. The cross sections were of no value 
as no correlation could be made between the condition of 
the sex organs of the various worms. The whole mounts re¬ 
vealed various differences in degree of development of the 
genitalia; these were compared to the camera lucida draw¬ 
ings (figures 4,5,6,7). Both the worms from the experim¬ 
ental and control fish were in a similar state of develop¬ 
ment, a stage lying between that shown in figures 4 and 5. 

Experiment Three 

Thirteen pike were added to the tank on November 19? 
19^9• The next day found five fish dead from which the 
pituitary bodies were dissected and an extract made. Fol¬ 
lowing the death of one more fish on November 21, seven 
were left for experimentation with pituitary extracts. 

The experimental data may be found in table 111. 





- 45 - 



Figure 8 

PHOTOMICROGRAPH OF THE TESTIS FROM FISH #1 



Figure 9 

PHOTOMICROGRAPH OF THE TESTIS FROM FISH #7 


i 









- 46 - 


TABLE 111 

RECORD OF EXPERIMENTAL AND CONTROL FISH FOR EXPERIMENT THREE 


FISH 

NO. 

SEX 

FIN CUT 

INJECTION 

DATE 

NO. OF PITUIT- 
ARIES INJECTED 

DATE OF 
DEATH 

a 

i 

R. Pect. 

21-11-49 

8 

(Fresh) 

21-11-49 

9 

% 

L. Pect. 

21-11-49 

17 

(Frog) 

21-11-49 

10 

t 

L. Pelvic 

21-11-49 

5 


21-11-49 

11 

% 

L. Pelvic 

21-11-49 

5 


21-11-49 

12 

% 

R. Pelvic 

24-11-49 

5 


24-11-49 

13 

t 

— 

— 

— 


21-11-49 

14 


— 

— 

— 


21-11-49 


Examination 

The experimental fish died shortly after injection and 
on examination showed no further sexual advancement than 
the controls. The worms in both the experimental and con¬ 
trols were all firmly imbedded and failed to release their 
eggs when placed in water. The forementioned results were 
to be expected as not enough time had elapsed for the in¬ 
jections to take any noticeable effect. For this reason 
no histological examination was conducted. 

Experiment Four 

After three days of fishing on Baptiste Lake, ten fish 
were obtained for this experiment. The fish all appeared 
to be in a healthy condition, probably because the nets 
were run every two or three hours and thus excess damage 
to the fish was avoided. The fish were placed in the tank 
on January 30, 1950 and treated as indicated in table IV. 























. 













- 47 - 


TABLE IV 

RECORD OF EXPERIMENTAL AND CONTROL FISH FOR EXPERIMENT FOUR 


FISH 

NO. 

SEX 

FINS CUT 

DOSAGES 

30-1-50 3 

IN 

-2- 

WHOLE PITIUITARIES DATE OF 
-50 7-2-50 13-2-50 DEATH 

15 1 

l 

R. 

Pect. 

2 

2 

— 

13-2-50 

16 

t 

R. 

Pelvic 

3 

3 

3 

8 - 2-50 

17 

$ 

L. 

Pect. 

4 

4 


6 - 2-50 

18 

% 

L. 

Pelvic 

5 

— 

- -- 

9-2-50 

19 

i 

Both Pect. 

10 

— 

- - 

11 - 2-50 

20 

l 

R. 

Pelvic 

— 

— 

3 

16-2-50 

21 

t 


— 

— 

— 


6 - 2-50 

22 

£ 


-- 


— 

-- 

9-2-50 

23 

l 


-- 

— 

-- 

— 

11-2-50 

24 

$ 


-- 

— 


-- 

16-2-50 


This lot of fish was exceptionally vigorous, jumping 
and thrashing the water continuously. The injected pike 
appeared to lose their dark color and considerable contrast 
could be observed between experimentals and controls. Seven 
days following the first injections a number of loose worms 
in the spent condition were found in the water. Several eggs 
slightly smaller than normal were obtained from these worms 
and were found to contain well formed embryos. The eggs 
were stored in the refrigerator but hatching did not occur. 


Condition of the Pike and Their Parasites 

At Time of Death 

Apart from a loss of colour in the experimental fish 
the pike all appeared perfectly normal, When stripped every 
injected male fish released milt containing active sperms, 
while among the male controls milt was unobtainable in all 


i 
















- 48 - 


cases but one. Thus, one control was possibly in a mature 
condition; the high temperature of the tank water probably 
provided the necessary stimulus for maturation. The gonads 
of the female experimental and control pike were in a similar 
condition and stripping did not cause the eggs to be released. 

Fish numbers 16,17 and 19 which were experimental males 
showed signs of heavy infestations, but only a few scolices 
were found imbedded near the pyloric sphincter region and a 
number of loose worm fragments were located in the ileum. 

This same situation was found in fish number eighteen, a 
female experimental. The worm fragments found in the ileum 
released eggs containing well formed onchospheres. Both 
female experimentals 15 and 20 had worms loosely attached as 
well as some passing down the intestine; all worms were in 
the spent condition. 

Among the controls, fish numbers 22 and 24, female 
and male respectively, showed no signs of previous infest¬ 
ation. Both number 21, a ripe male and number 23, a female, 
had many Triaenophorus crassus firmly attached, which on 
contact with water released eggs that contained no embryos. 

Histological Examination of the Pike Testes 

The testes of experimental fish 17 and 19 and controls 
21 and 24 were examined. The two experimental fish were in 
approximately the same stage of sexual development (fig. 10), 
both having well developed interstitium and interstitial 
cells. The tubules were large and many were empty, having 






i 






' I 


j.i .. V/ 




. 




- 49 - 



Figure 10 

PHOTOMICROGRAPH OF THE TESTIS FROM FISH #19 



Figure 11 

PHOTOMICROGRAPH OF THE TESTIS FROM FISH #24 







-50- 

previously released their spermatozoa. Occasional groups 
of spermatocytes were observed. The two control fish were 
at similar stages of development (fig. 11). Both had tub¬ 
ules packed with spermatozoa, but very little tubule break¬ 
down could be detected. The interstitium was well developed 
and cysts containing spermatocytes were easily seen. 

Histological Examination of the Tapeworms 

Whole mounts were made of the Triaenophorus found in 
fish numbers 17, 18 and 19. The cestodes from numbers 17 
and 19 were immature; as they were taken from the ileum they 
are probably anterior fragments of ripe worms that had passed 
out. They were developed to a stage corresponding to that 
shown in figure 5* In experimental fish 18 the tapeworms 
were also loose but none had passed out from the alimentary 
canal. These were all in a spent condition similar to that 
shown in figure 7. 

Worms from fish 21 were chosen to serve as controls, 
they were found to be developed to the state shown in figures 
6 and 7; all were well developed and a few appeared spent. 

Experiment Five 

On October 21, 1950 sixteen pike were obtained in good 
condition by setting and running the nets every two hours. 
When placed in the tank they were fairly active, but like 
the fish in all previous experiments they regurgitated a 









:ui 


!; /CM ;■" 



... . 


. 





. 

. 

. 






- 51 - 


number of partially digested tullibee and refused to eat 
any food offered them. The first extract injections were 
made October 23, 1950, the details of which may be found 
in table V. 


TABLE V 

RECORD OF EXPERIMENTAL AND CONTROL FISH FOR EXPERIMENT FIVE 


FISH 

NO. 

SEX 

FINS CUT 

INJECTION 

DATE 

HO. OF WHOLE 
PITU1TARIES 

DATE OF 

DEATH 

W 

* 

L. Pect. 

23 - 10-50 

2 

27 - 10-50 

26 

* 

Both Pect. 

23 - 10-50 

3 

25 - 10-50 

2 7 

% 

R. Pelvic 

23 - 10-50 

4 

27 - 10-50 

28 

t 

L. Pelvic 

24-10-50 

1 

27 - 10-50 

29 

* 

Both Pelv. 

24-10-50 

2 

27 - 10-50 

30 

i 

L. Pelvic 






L. Pect. 

24-10-50 

5 

25 - 10-50 

31 

t 

-- 

-- 


25 - 10-50 

32-36 

$ 

— 

— 

-- 

27 - 10-50 

37-33 . 

* 

— 

-- 

— 

27 - 10-50 


This experiment did not prove too successful, as all 
of the pike but one were dead by October 27. A number of 
the dead fish were found firmly wedged between the over¬ 
flow pipe and side of the tank, apparently having been 
caught here and died in their attempts to free themselves. 


Condition of the Pike and Their 

Parasites at Time of Death 

Of the six injected fish only number 28 proved to be 
a male, this fish had received the extract of one whole 
pituitary gland. The injected male was not ripe and appeared 
no different than the numerous male controls examined. The 












' 








- 52 - 


five female experimental appeared to be in the same stage 
of immaturity as the controls. 

In both the control and experimental fish the cestodes 
were firmly attached and failed to release their eggs when 
submerged in water. In the smaller pike the worms were 
found to be Triaenophorus nodulosus, while those in the 
larger fish were T^ crassus . 

The fish appeared to be perfectly normal and while 
there was a certain amount of colour loss in the experimen- 
tals it was not nearly as marked as in earlier experiments. 

Histological Examination of the Testes 

The testes from fish 28 showed tubules filled with 
spermatozoa and a poorly developed interstitium. Stages of 
spermatogenesis were present but very hard to detect. 
Sections from control testes revealed a similar condition. 

Histological Examination of the Tapeworms 

The cestodes used in this examination had been prev¬ 
iously fixed in A.F.A. cestode fixative and proved far 
easier to handle, stain and mount than those of the previous 
experiments fixed in formalin. Worms from fish 26 and 30 
were chosen as typical experimentals. The sex organs of 
these worms were distinct but had not acquired lumina. Both 
were in similar stages of development, identical to that 
shown in figure 5> which was drawn from a worm secured from 
fish thirty. 








■;r 







■ ' 






Worms from fish 31 and 32 served as controls and were 
all in a similar stage of development, not quite as advanced 
as that shown by the experimentals. The ovaries were not 
seen and the cirrus sacs not complete; the stage of develop¬ 
ment was somewhat between that shown in figures 4 and 5* 


Experiment Six 

Seven pike were injected with extracts of pituitary 
glands, while eight served as controls. Details of the 
injections may be found in table VI which follows. 


TABLE VI 


RECORD OF EXPERIMENTAL AND CONTROL FISH FOR EXPERIMENT SIX 


FISH 

NO. 

SEX FIN CUT 

NO. OF 

WHOLE PITUITARIES 
INJECTED 


DATE OF 
DEATH 

2-11-50 7-11-50 8- 

-11-50 15-11-50 

39 

* L. Pect. 

2 

2 

-- 

-- 

13-11-50 

Vo 

t R. Pect. 

3 

3 

— 

— 

9-11-50 

41 

t R. Pelv. 

4 

4 

-- 

— 

13-11-50 

42 

t Both 







Pelvics 

— 

-- 

5 

— 

20-11-50 

43 

£ Both 







Pectorals 

— 


10 

— 

20 - 11-50 

44 

% L. Pelv. 

— 

— 

-- 

i 

20-11-50 

45 

1 R. Pelv. 


— 

-- 

i 

20-11-50 

46 

*- 

— 

— 

— 

— 

13-11-50 

47 

t —— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

15-11-50 

48 & 49 

't - 

— 

— 


.— 

20-11-50 

50 & 51 

% 

— 

-- 

— 

— 

20-11-50 

52 

l - 


— 

— 

— 

21-11-50 

53 

t - 

-- 

-- 


-- 

21-11-50 


Condition of the Pike and Their Parasites 

At time of Death 


The fish all appeared normal and very little colour 













- 54 - 


change was observed. 

Three out of the four injected males exuded milt upon 
stripping. The immature male was fish 42 and had received 
one injection of five pituitaries twelve days prior to his 
death. Not one of the male controls was in a ripe condition. 
There was no visible difference between the ovaries of the 
female experimentals and controls. 

The condition of the cestodes varied; worms were found 
loose in the ileum or trailing from the vent in fish numbers 
39 5 40 and 4l, while those in fish 42, 43, 44 and 45 were 
all firmly attached. The loose worms when placed in water 
released eggs that did not contain embryos, while the at¬ 
tached worms could not be induced to shed their eggs. This 
would indicate that smaller and more frequent injections are 
more effective than large single ones, as only those fish re¬ 
ceiving two small injections contained worms that released 
eggs in water. 

In all of the controls the worms were found to be firmly 
anchored. A few worms were also found loose in the tank. 

Histological Examination of the Testes 

Experimental fish 39* 4l and 42 were chosen for de¬ 
tailed microscopic examination. Both 39 and 4l were ripe 
fish with gonads in about the same condition. The tubules 
were jammed with spermatozoa and many tubules showed the 
walls breaking and sperm being released. The interstitium 
was thick and interstitial cells plentiful, while stages of 




I 







- 55 - 


spermatogenesis were not common. The testis from fish 42 
did not exrete milt; on microscopic examination it appeared 
quite similar to testes of 39 and 4l, except that there was 
a lack of tubule wall breakdown and more tubules showing 
spermatogenesis. 

The control testes resembled the testis of fish 42, in 
that they appeared ripe, but no breakage in the tubule walls 
could be detected and cysts of spermatocytes were abundant. 

Histological Examination of the Tapeworms 

Tapeworms were examined from experimental fish 39? 40 
and 4l. Worms from fish 39 were mature with collapsed uteri, 
indicating egg release and in general appeared similar to fig¬ 
ure 7. The worms from fish 40 were not nearly as well de¬ 
veloped as those from 39* This may be due to the worms from 
fish 40 being loose in the ileum and therefore remnants of 
ripe worms that had previously passed into the tank. The 
genitalia of the worm fragments were in the process of ac¬ 
quiring lumina and therefore somewhat between the stages 
depicted in figures 5 and 6. Fish 4l had worms developed 
similar to that of figure 6, that is all of the sex organs 
developed and the uteri filled with eggs. 

Those worms found in the tank were in a spent condition, 
with the uteri collapsed in the majority of proglottides 
much like that in figure 7. 

Cestodes from fish 46, 48 and 50 served as controls. 

In all of the controls the genitalia of the tapeworms showed 


i 

















., • *:t. o" 










- 56 - 


a significant difference from those of the experimental; 
they were not as far advanced. The cirrus sac and uteri were 
beginning to acquire lumina and the ovaries, just forming, 
were in a developmental stage between figures 5 and 6. 

This difference observed in the tapeworms in experiment 
six is sufficient to prove that the factors responsible for 
gonadal development in the pike also control the development 
of the parasite Triaenophorus crassus . 


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS OFPART 11 

v 

1. This study was conducted primarily for the purpose 
of obtaining Triaenophorus eggs over various seasons of the 
year. It was thought that pituitary injections into the 
host, Ssox lucius, would result in maturation of their tape¬ 
worms and thus enable eggs to be procured when desired. If 
this were the case, chemical experiments on the control of 
the eggs and coracidia could be conducted over greater per¬ 
iods of time each year. 

2. Although viable cestode eggs were not obtained, a 
large amount of interesting data were recorded regarding the 
effects of pituitary on the pike, Esox lucius , and its par¬ 
asite Triaenophorus crassus . 

3. A high rate of mortality among the pike interfered 
with the early experiments. This may possibly be attributed 
to the method of capture; those fish caught in nets set over¬ 
night had a much lo\v r er survival rate than those taken in 


short sets 











» 

, ■ : 

* 

' 

■ 


: . . O l . ' uj ■& ; ■, .. ‘ .7 .....s. 










i 

- : 

, 

.. : • . •. ’: • : ■ tw . ' ' 

■ 

. 

* 

7 ■ : ■ : • •. ' 

■ 










. 




* 

. 

* 





- 57 - 


4. Pike are unable to survive in Edmonton* s city water 
for periods longer than 24 hours. As a result water for the 
tank was taken from the lake and river. 

5. Extracts of pituitary are more suitable for injection 
than are suspensions. 

6. Small doses of pituitary extract at two or three 
day intervals are more effective than large single doses. 

7. Loss of colour is the first noticeable change caused 
by pituitary injections. 

8. The injections resulted in the male sex organs of 
the pike maturing to the extent that viable spermatozoa were 
obtained as early as four days following injection. 

9. No advancement could be detected in injected female 

pike. 

10. Histologically a ripe testis differs from an im¬ 
mature one, by the abundance of interstitial tissue and cells, 
tubules full of spermatozoa and a reduction in all stages 

of spermatogenesis. 

11. The injections into the pike resulted in their 
tapeworms developing to a more mature condition than those 
found in control fish. Some worms were advanced to the 
stage where they released their undeveloped eggs upon con¬ 
tact with water. 

12. The nearer the dates of injection to the natural 
spawning period, the easier it is to advance both the sex 
organs of the fish and those of their parasite T_. crassus . 


1 







'j; ' ■ ■ .... 

t 

- 

. 0 



1 

. 


. 
































- 

« 




■ 7 , '.V 

. 

- 


. - ' 




. 















- 58 - 


13. The higher temperature of the tank water as compared 
to that in the lake probably advances spermatogenesis to 

a certain extent. 

14. There is a definite relationship between maturation 
of the pike gonads and the parasite T_. crassus . The con¬ 
trolling factors are the hormones secreted by the pituitary 
gland of the host Esox lucius . 

15. Viable eggs and coracidia were not obtained, al¬ 
though this condition was nearly attained when certain exper¬ 
imental worms released eggs which contained well formed on- 
chospheres. A possible explanation as to why ripe eggs were 
not shed is that the dosages of pituitaries were too large 
and the time intervals between injections too brief. This 
resulted in the worms receiving large amounts of hormonal 
stimulus which either simulated or forced them to release 
themselves from the intestinal wall before their eggs had 
time to mature. 

16. More desirable results would probably be obtained 
if the pike could be kept alive over longer periods of time 
and the number of whole pituitaries reduced and injected 

at lengthy intervals. 


1 





* 

. 

* 

■ 

, 

■ ■ 

i 


. 



• 



. 





• 







- liXEi '■ 


■ 


. 



• 

i 






. 



f 

’ 

• 







■ £ • 

■ 


-.■> . ■-}' ' 




. 

















- 59 - 


acknowledgments 


I wish to express my gratitude to both the Fisheries 
Research Board of Canada and the Fisheries Branch of the 
Government of the Province of Alberta, whose interest and 
financial support has made this study possible. 

I am deeply indebted to Dr. R.B. Miller of the Depart¬ 
ment of Zoology for his constant interest, advice and patient 
reading of this paper. 

My thanks are also extended to Dr. M.J. Huston of the 
Department of Pharmacy for his guidance and provision of 
materials, apparatus and laboratory space required to con¬ 
duct the chemical experiments; to Professor J.A. Harle of 
the Department of Electrical Engineering for designing the 
cell used in the electrical experiments; to Messrs. H.B. 
Watkins, W.H. MacDonald, L. Silver, C. Scott and M. Heron 
of the Fisheries Branch, for their help in obtaining fish; 
to my wife for her aid in typing the manuscript, and to 
Mr. R. Lister for his willing help and advice in the prep¬ 
aration of the slides used in the microscopic studies. 




;• 







' 


( ' 







- 60 - 


REFERENCES 

Craig-Bennett, A. 1931. The reproductive cycle of the 

three-spined stickleback, Gasterosteus 
aculeatus, Linn. Royal Soc. London, 

Phil. Trans., B, 219: 197-279. 

Hasler, Arthur D., Roland K. Meyer and Howard M. Field. 

1939* Spawning induced prematurely in 
trout with the aid of pituitary glands of 
the carp. Endocrinology, Vol. 25: 978- 
983. 

Hasler, Arthur D., Roland K. Meyer and Howard M. Field. 

1940. The use of hormones for the con¬ 
servation of muskellunge, Esox masquin - 
ongy iramaculatus Garrard. Copea: 43-46. 

Miller, R.B. 1943 (A). Studies on cestodes of the genus 

Triaenophorus from fish of Lesser Slave 
Lake, Alberta. 1. Introduction and the 
life of Triaenophorus crassus Forel and 
T. nodulosus (Pallas) in the definitive 
host Esox lucius . Can. J. Research, D. 21 
160-170. 

Miller, R.B. 1943 (B) Ibid. 11. The eggs, coracidia, and 

life in the first intermediate host of 
Triaenophorus crassus Forel and 2 Ll 
ulosus (Pallas). Can. J. Research, D, 21: 
284-291. 


i 












































- 61 - 


Miller, H.B. 19*+*+. Suggestions for experiments in the 

control of the pike-whitefish tapeworm, 
Triaenophorus crassus . Dept. Lands' and 
Mines, Fisheries Branch, Alta. 

Miller, R.B. 1945 (C). Studies on cestodes of the genus 

Triaenophorus from fish of Lesser Slave 
Lake, Alberta. IV. The Life of Triaen ¬ 
ophorus crassus Forel in the second in¬ 
termediate host. Can. J. Research, D, 

23: 105-115. 

Miller, R.B. 1945 (D) Ibid. V. Description and life history 

of Triaenophorus stizostedionis . Can. J. 
Research, D, 23: 117-127. 

Miller, R.B. and H.B. Watkins. 1946. An experiment in the 

control of the Cestode Triaenophorus 
crassus Forel. Can. J. Research, D,24s 
175-179. 

Miller, R.B. 1946. The life history of the pike-whitefish 

tapeworm. Dept. Lands and Mines, Fish¬ 
eries Branch, Alta. 

Miller, R.B. 1948. Problems in the control of whitefish 

parasites. Unpublished. 

Miller, R.B. and M.J. Huston. 1948. Effect of certain chem¬ 
icals on the eggs and coracidia of 
Triaenophorus crassus . Unpublished. 

Miller, R.B. 1948. Reduction of Triaenophorus infestations 

in whitefish by depletion of the cisco 


1 

















- 62 - 


population. Can. J. Research, D, 26: 
67-72. 

Miller, R.B. 1950. The Square Lake Experiment: An attempt 

to control Triaenophorus crassus by pcos- 
ining pike. Can. Fish Culturist, No. 7. 

Moore, Carl. 1942. The physiology of the testis and appli¬ 
cation of male sex hormone. The Journal 
of Urology, Vol. 47, No. 1: 31-44. 

Smith, G.F.M. and P.F. Elson. 1949. Direct current elec¬ 
trical fishing apparatus. Atlantic 
Biological Station, Fisheries Research 
Board of Canada. Mimeographed. 

We isel, George F. 1943. A histological study of the testes 

of the sockeye salmon, Oncorhynchus 
nerka. The Journal of Morphology, 

Vol. 73, Wo. 2s 207-229. 


1 










0 












■ 63 - 


APPENDIX 

TABLES Vll - XXIV 




-64- 


TABLE Vll 


COUNTS FROM CONTROL AND EXPERIMENTAL CULTURES USED TO TEST 


LF DISINFECTANT #17H-l4 


DATE 

HATCHED 

EGGS 

UNHATCHED EGGS 

DEAD 

CORACIDIA 

LIVE 

CORACIDIA 

NO. 

f 

NO. 

-. % 

NO. 

,..l 

NO. 

-j- 




CONTROL 

1A 





3-5-49 

190 

44 

24l 

56 

30 

45 

36 

55 

4-5-49 

135 

22 

475 

78 

15 

18 

68 

82 

5-5-49 

130 

25 

387 

75 

17 

35 

3 , 2 

65 

6-5-49 

83 

28 

216 

72 

37 

61 

24 

39 

7-5-49 

93 

25 

273 

75 

62 

74 

22 

26 

9-5-49 

130 

26 

375 

74 

24 

4l 

34 

59 

10-5-^9 

.63 

25 

186 

75 

26 

58... 

19 

42 




CONTROL 

IB 





3-5-49 

172 

20 

709 

80 

32 

27 

89 

73 

4-5-49 

102 

26 

296 

74 

33 

46 

38 

54 

5-5_49 

87 

27 

234 

73 

24 

3 , 8 

39 

62 

6 - 5-49 

75 

22 

265 

78 

28 

64 

16 

36 

7-5-49 

75 

28 

198 

72 

4l 

84 

8 

16 

9-5-49 

82 

31 

182 

69 

30 

73 

11 

27 

10-5-49 

144 

28 

367 

72 

37 . 

68 

17 

32 

CULTURE #1 - 

100 

P.P.M. LF DISINFECTANT #17H-14 


3-5-49 

182 

24 

588 

76 

^fO 

95 

2 

5" 

4 - 5-49 

134 

26 

385 

74 

33 

61 

21 

39 

5 - 5-49 

162 

21 

597 

79 

17 

51 

16 

49 

6-5-49 

75 

23 

252 

77 

20 

87 

3 

13 

7-5-49 

68 

25 

20 7 

75 

22 

92 

2 

8 

9-5-49 

115 

23 

384 

77 

62 

89 

8 

11 

10-5-49 

88 

24 

286 

76 

61 

28 

1 

2 

CULTURE #1 - 

10 

P.P.M. LF 

DISINFECTANT #17H-14 


3-5-49 

247 

23 

820 

77 

98 

¥2 

137 

^8 

4-5-49 

150 

28 

379 

72 

33 

42 

46 

58 

5 - 5-49 

141 

28 

367 

72 

50 

60 

33 

40 

6-5-49 

84 

29 

207 

71 

34 

79 

9 

21 

7-5-49 

90 

25 

273 

75 

51 

88 

7 

12 

9-5-49 

134 

31 

294 

69 

85 

83 

17 

17 

10-5-49 

126 

26 

356 

74 

68 

22 

6 

8 

CULTURE #1 - 

2 

P.P.M. LF 

DISINFE 

ICTANT #17H-14 


3-5-49 

~T52 

23 

501 

77 

19 

36 

33 

64 

4-5_49 

110 

32 

229 

68 

78 

4o 

119 

60 

5-5-49 

103 

22 

373 

78 

55 

66 

28 

34 

6 - 5-49 

76 

25 

229 

75 

34 

42 

47 

58 

7-5-49 

103 

27 

272 

73 

46 

90 

5 

10 

9-5-49 

150 

28 

388 

72 

55 

83 

11 

17 

10-5-49 

15.5 

-JLi 

-322 

-£Z 

Z4 

2i 

4 

— 1— 


i 




























- 65 - 


table Vlll 


COUNTS FROM CONTROL AND EXPERIMENTAL CULTURES USED TO TEST 


SODIUM ETHYLENE BI3-DITHI0CARB0NATE 


DATE 

HATCHED EGGS 

UNHATCHED EGGS 

DEAD 

CORACIDIA 

LIVE 

CORACIDIA 

NO. 

w 

z? 

NO. 

$ 

NO. 

% 

NO. 

; % 

CONTROL #2A 

5 - 5-49 

^9 

15 

382 


28 ^ 

67 

14 

33 

6-5-49 

25 

21 

94 

79 

11 

46 

13 

54 

7-5-4 9 

80 

38 

132 

62 

13 

27 

35 

73 

9-5-49 

92 

45 

111 

55 

34 

45 

42 

55 

10-5-49 

251 

57 

187 

43 

86 

53 

75 

47 

11-5-49 

254 

61 

165 

39 

95 

53 

83 

47 

12-5-49 

180 

60 

120 

40 

83 

77 

25 

23 

13-5-49 . 

226 

68 

108 

32 

132 

88 

18 

12 

CONTROL#2B 

5^49 

61 

22 

214 

75- 

32 

6F 

15 

32 

6 - 5-49 

18 

19 

75 

81 

22 

63 

13 

37 

7 - 5-49 

55 

36 

98 

64 

9 

29 

22 

71 

9 - 5-49 

77 

42 

105 

58 

29 

48 

31 

52 

10 - 5-49 

198 

54 

170 

46 

56 

56 

44 

44 

11 - 5-49 

83 

59 

59 

41 

53 

64 

30 

36 

12 - 5-49 

71 

59 

49 

41 

61 

86 

10 

14 

13 - 5-49 

199 

68 

92 

32 

153 

92 

14 

8 



CULTURE #2 100 

P.P.M. 






SODIUM ETHYLENE BIS- 

-DITHIOCARBONATE 



5 - 5-49 

40 

13 

272 

87 

28^ 

100 

0 

0 

6 - 5-49 

23 

10 

217 

90 

34 

90 

4 

10 

7 - 5-49 

22 

11 

175 

89 

26 

90 

3 

10 

9 - 5-49 

21 

11 

171 

89 

24 

100 

0 

0 

10 - 5-49 

54 

13 

379 

87 

26 

81 

6 

19 

11 - 5-49 

38 

14 

239 

86 

53 

100 

0 

0 

12-5-49 

17 

8 

211 

92 

54 

100 

0 

0 

13-5-49 

18 

10 

161 

90. 

44 

100 

0 

0 



CULTURE #2 10 

P.P.M. 






SODIUM ETHYLENE BIS- 

-DITHIOCARBONATE 



5-5-49 

147 

27 

392 

73 

94 

95 

5* 

5 

6 - 5-49 

36 

20 

143 

80 

24 

67 

12 

33 

7 - 5-49 

13 

8 

160 

92 

25 

89 

3 

11 

9 - 5-49 

39 

12 

296 

88 

47 

94 

3 

6 

10 - 5-49 

52 

16 

2 77 

84 

59 

94 

4 

6 

11 - 5-49 

47 

15 

267 

85 

38 

95 

2 

5 

12 - 5-49 

31 

17 

147 

83 

20 

100 

0 

0 

13-5-49 

76 

15 

435 

... 85 . 

71 

100 

0 

0 



CULTURE #2 2 

P.P.M. 






SODIUM ETHYLENE BIS- 

-DITHIOCARBONATE 




5-2-49 

76 

20 

312 

86 

29 

74 

10 

26 

6-5-49 

32 

28 

82 

72 

15 

58 

11 

42 

7 - 5-49 

33 

27 

90 

73 

9 

4l 

13 

59 

9-5-49 

71 

37 

123 

63 

33 

44- 

42 

56 

10-5-49 

120 

46 

139 

54 

72 

67 

36 

33 

11-5-49 

107 

56 

83 

44 

80 

69 

36 

31 

12-5-49 

91 

63 

54 

37 

58 

73 

22 

27 

13-5-49 

99 

66 

50 

34 

46 

79 

12 

21 
































- 66 - 


TABLE IX 


COUNTS FROM CONTROL AND EXPERIMENTAL CULTURES USED TO TEST 


TRITON X 


DATE 

HATCHED 

EGGS 

UNHATCHED 

EGGS 

DEAD 

CORACIDIA 

LIVE 

CORACIDIA 

NO. 

JT~ 

NO. 

% 

NO. 

_S_ . 

NO. 


CONTROL 3A 

7-5-50 

13 

-5 

235 

9 5 

1 

25^ 

3 

75 

9-5-50 

25 

8 

298 

92 

9 

69 

4 

31 

10-5-50 

16 

5 

281 

95 

27 

8 7 

4 

13 

n-5-50 

15 

6 

243 

94 

14 

87 

2 

13 

12 - 5-50 

18 

6 

296 

94 

24 

92 

2 

8 

13-5-50 

16 

5 

299 

95 

74 

97 

2 

3 

14-5-50 

20 

10 

181 

90 

86 

98 

2 

2 

16-5-50 

20 

2 

. 311 

-21 

I 69 

99 A 

1 

0.6 


CONTROL 3B 


7-5^5 0 

18 

— 3 - 

“344“ 

9f 

6 

T 7 

3 

33 

9-5-50 

15 

5 

288 

95 

6 

40 

9 

60 

10-5-50 

42 

7 

573 

93 

36 

84 

7 

16 

11-5-50 

29 

7 

370 

93 

24 

89 

3 

11 

12-5-50 

27 

6 

406 

94 

29 

83 

6 

17 

13-5-50 

14 

5 

273 

95 

76 

96 

3 

4 

14-5-50 

10 

5 

201 

95 

81 

98 

2 

2 

16-5-50 

17 

6 

261 

24 

139 . 

99.3 . 

1 

0.7 


CULTURE #3 - 

100 P.P.M. 

CCL4-TRITON 

X 



7-5-50 

17 

ST 

""283 

94 

7 

70 

3 

30 

9-5-50 

15 

4 

326 

96 

4 

67 

2 

33 

10-5-50 

29 

7 

397 

93 

23 

92 

2 

8 

11-5-50 

24 

6 

398 

94 

29 

100 

0 

0 

12-5-50 

35 

8 

433 

92 

51 

100 

0 

0 

13-5-50 

22 

10 

204 

90 

50 

100 

0 

0 

14 - 5-50 

7 

8 

82 

92 

18 

100 

0 

0 

16-5-50 

9 

7 

130 

93 

59 

100 

0 

0 


CULTURE #3 - 

10 P.P.M. 

CCL4-TRIT0N 

X 



7-5^5 0 “ 

1 

2 

4o 

98 

1 

50 

1 

To 

9-5-50 

2 

4 

43 

96 

5 

83 

1 

17 

10-5-50 

3 

7 

42 

93 

9 

100 

0 

0 

11-5-50 

6 

7 

85 

93 

18 

90 

2 

10 

12-5-50 

9 

10 

84 

9p 

21 

95 

1 

5 

13-5-50 

1 

6 

15 

94 

13 

100 

0 

0 

14 - 5-50 

2 

14 

12 

86 

31 

100 

0 

0 

16-5-50 

3 

9 

30 

91 

64 

100 

0 

0 


CULTURE #3 - 

2 P.P.M. 

CCL4-TRIT0N 

X 



7-5-50 

12 

3 

377 

97 

3 

7f~ 

1 

T~ 

9-5-50 

9 

8 

100 

92 

7 

58 

5 

42 

IO- 5-50 

4l 

6 

610 

94 

23 

72 

9 

28 

11-5-50 

17 

6 

280 

94 

29 

93 

2 

7 

12-5-50 

11 

3 

341 

97 

23 

88 

3 

12 

13-5-50 

13 

6 

217 

94 

45 

100 

0 

0 

14 - 5-50 

24 

9 

254 

91 

51 

100 

0 

0 

16-5-50 

22 

Z 

290 

—23.— 

143 

99 

2 

1 



































4 









- 67 - 


table X 


COUNTS FROM CONTROL AND EXPERIMENTAL CULTURES USED TO TEST 


Iz2Z 


DATE 

HATCHED 

EGGS 

UNHATCHED 

EGGS 

DEAD 

CORACIDIA 

LIVE 

CORACIDIA 

NO. 

or 

NO. 


NO. 


NO. 


CONTROL 4A 

10-5-49 

183 

39 

^286 

61 

81 

48^ 

88 

52 

11-5-49 

224 

44 

286 

56 

106 

53 

94 

47 

12-5-49 

117 

36 

205 

64 

73 

68 

35 

32 

13-5-49 

70 

42 

98 

58 

4l 

67 

20 

33 

14-5-49 

88 

4o 

132 

60 

86 

90 

10 

10 

16-5-49 

162 

58 

117 

42 

108 

86 

17 

14 

17-5-49 

l4o 

54 . 

118 

46 

161 

86 

26 

14 

CONTROL H-B 

IO-5-49 

212 


260' 

55 

^0 

67 

^0 

33 

11-5-49 

203 

46 

236 

54 

77 

60 

51 

40 

12-5-49 

251 

45 

309 

55 

109 

60 

72 

4o 

13-5-49 

108 

42 

147 

58 

63 

78 

18 

22 

14-5-49 

86 

4o 

129 

60 

67 

84 

13 

16 

I6-5-49 

94 

53 

83 

47 

76 

89 

9 

11 

17-5-49 

308 

56 

246 

44 

252 

24 

15 

6 


CULTURE #4 

Ph 

a. 

0 

1 

m. y- 

-77 




10-5-49 

200 

^5- 

242 

55 

220 

100 

0 

0 

11-5-49 

198 

45 

246 

55 

258 

100 

0 

0 

12-5-49 

192 

49 

198 

51 

198 

100 

0 

0 

13-5-49 

156 

50 

155 

50 

174 

100 

0 

0 

14-5-49 

125 

47 

l4l 

53 

201 

100 

0 

0 

16-5- l i9 

284 

52 

263 

48 

344 

100 

0 

0 

17-5-49 

208 

54 

178 

46 

4l0 

100 

0 

0 


CULTURE #4 

- 10 P.P. 

M. Y- 

-77 . 




10-5-49 

180 

47 

203 

ft 

134 

82 

29 


11-5-49 

231 

51 

221 

49 

157 

94 

11 

6 

12-5-49 

142 

43 

191 

57 

120 

95 

7 

5 

13-5-49 

150 

49 

153 

51 

142 

94 

9 

6 

14-5-49 

113 

52 

103 

48 

80 

94 

5 

6 

16-5-49 

124 

55 

100 

45 

121 

97 

4 

3 

17-5-49 

135 

49 

139 

51 

173 

-2Z— 


-3— 


CULTURE #4 

- 2 P.P. 

M. Y- 

■77 u . 




10-5-49 

”157 

-49 

193 

51 

86 

76 

27 

24 

11-5-49 

156 

49 

162 

51 

55 

60 

36 

40 

12-5-49 

238 

45 

295 

55 

128 

96 

5 

4 

13-5-49 

117 

40 

173 

60 

78 

82 

17 

18 

14-5-49 

103 

46 

123 

54 

64 

79 

17 

21 

16-5-49 

151 

56 

118 

44 

99 

88 

13 

12 

17-5-49 

. .261— 

63_ 

—iS 


165 

92 

14 

8 


i 
































\ 4 





- 68 - 


TABLE XI 


COUNTS FROM CONTROL AND EXPERIMENTAL CULTURES USED TO TEST 


LYSOL 


DATE 

HATCHED 

EGGS 

UNHATCHED 

DEAD 

EGGS CORACIDIA 

LIVE 

CORACIDIA 

NO. 

' A 

NO. 


NO. 

* 

NO. 

$5 

CONTROL #5A 

H5-M-9 

313 

29 

756 

71 

100 

49 

103 

51 

12-5-49 

216 

29 

538 

71 

88 

40 

134 

60 

13-5-49 

146 

29 

352 

71 

94 

50 

94 

50 

14-5-49 

101 

35 

184 

65 

52 

48 

56 

52 

16-5-49 

213 

4o 

324 

60 

129 

70 

56 

30 

17-5-49 

388 

4o 

583 

60 

236 

70 

103 

30 

19-5-49 

320 

52 

300 

48 

155 

85 

28 

15 

CONTROL #5B 

11-5-49 

146 

29 

355 

71 

61 

45 

75 

55 

12-5-49 

301 

29 

745 

71 

166 

50 

I67 

50 

13-5-49 

245 

32 

528 

68 

99 

50 

100 

50 

14-5-49 

187 

39 

290 

61 

97 

65 

51 

35 

16-5-49 

267 

41 

334 

59 

192 

71 

77 

29 

17-5-49 

512 

45 

618 

55 

344 

76 

106 

24 

19-5-49 

464 

50 

472 

50 

303 

. 78 

85 

22 


CULTURE #5 

- 10 P.P. 

,M. 

LYSOL 




11-5-49 

97 

27 

' 267 ' 

73 

91 

100 

0 

0 

12-5-49 

96 

19 

409 

81 

136 

98 

3 

2 

13-5-49 

241 

24 

748 

76 

354 

99 

3 

1 

14-5-49 

122 

20 

474 

80 

210 

99 

1 

1 

16-5-49 

249 

25 

744 

75 

268 

100 

0 

0 

17-5-49 

20 5 

27 

545 

73 

318 

100 

0 

0 

19-5-49 

182 

30 

417 

70 

243 

100 

0 

0 


CULTURE #5 

- 5 P.P. 

M. 

LYSOL 




11-5-49 

247 

27 

668 

73 

242 " 

84 


16 

12-5-49 

253 

29 

610 

71 

274 

93 

21 

7 

13-5-49 

154 

31 

349 

69 

193 

98 

5 

2 

14-5-49 

121 

25 

362 

75 

137 

99.3 

1 

.7 

16-5-49 

224 

36 

390 

64 

302 

99.7 

1 

.3 

17-5-49 

173 

37 

300 

63 

258 

100 

0 

0 

19-5-49 

331 

38 

537 

62 

3.26 

100 

0 

0 


CULTURE #5 

- 2 P.P. 

M. 

LYSOL 




11-£-49 

163 

30 

380 

70 

67 


63 

49 

12-5-49 

191 

30 

456 

70 

84 

53 

74 

47 

13-5-49 

167 

30 

333 

70 

109 

63 

64 

37 

14-5-49 

167 

33 

332 

67 

99 

72 

39 

28 

16-5-49 

182 

35 

339 

65 

146 

91 

15 

9 

17-5-49 

346 

40 

511 

60 

316 

97 

8 

3 

19-5-49 

...Jig 

JtZ 

327.. 

£3 

262 

22 

Z 



i 























- 69 - 


table Xll 

COUNTS FROM CONTROL AND EXPERIMENTAL CULTURES USED TO TEST 


COPPER SULFATE 


DATE 

HATCHED 

EGGS 

UNHATCHED 

EGGS 

DEAD 

CORACIDIA 

LIVE 

CORACIDIA 

NO. 

$ 

NO. 


NO. 

% 

NO. 


CONTROL #6A 

16-5-49 

92 

15 

523 

85 


62 

2F 

38 

17-5-49 

129 

20 

529 

80 

81 

76 

26 

24- 

19-5-49 

175 

24 

555 

76 

155 

88 

22 

12 

20-5-^9 

117 

23 

397 

77 

150 

97 

5 

3 

21-5-49 

215 

31 

477 

69 

203 

94 

13 

6 

25-5-49 

476 

52 

445 

48 

387 

90 

44 

10 

26-5-49 

615 

Jk 

516 

46 


. 89 . 

^5 

11 


CONTROL j%B 


16-5449 

72 

16 

383 


39 

W 

22 

36 

17-5-49 

162 

18 

734 

82 

154 

78 

44- 

22 

19-5-49 

168 

24 

525 

76 

152 

96 

6 

V 

20-5-49 

144 

26 

410 

74 

114 

98 

2 

2 

21-5-49 

180 

31 

392 

69 

162 

91 

15 

9 

25-5-49 

183 

47 

204 

53 

153 

88 

21 

12 

26-5-49 

286 

56 

228 

44 

226 

90 . 

26 

10 

CULTURE 

#6 - 

100 P.P.M. 

COPPER SULFATE 



16-5-49 

74 

12 

~J3l~ 

80 

W 

100 

0 

0 

17-5-49 

89 

14 

554 

86 

302 

99.3 

2 

0.7 

19-5-49 

91 

15 

495 

85 

189 

99.5 

1 

o.5 

20-5-49 

92 

12 

654 

88 

364 

100 

0 

0 

21-5-49 

122 

11 

960 

89 

505 

100 

0 

0 

25-5-49 

61 

1? 

341 

85 

176 

100 

0 

0 

26-5-49 

119 

14 

.733 . 

86 

325 

100 

0 

0 

CULTURE #6 - 

10 P.P.M. 

COPPER SULFATE 



16-5-49 

84 

14 

~J09~ 

86 

3o 

64 

21 

36 

17-5-49 

90 

16 

479 

84 

28 

55 

23 

45 

19-5-49 

163 

23 

553 

77 

114 

69 

51 

31 

20-5-49 

214 

28 

558 

72 

293 

84 

57 

16 

21-5-49 

242 

29 

601 

71 

291 

87 

42 

13 

25-5-49 

278 

42 

382 

58 

288 

94 

19 

6 

26-5-49 

485 

45 

591 

55 

561 

98 

10 

2 

CULTURE #6 - 

2 P.P.M. 

COPPER SULFATE 



16-5-49 

104 

T8 


^2 

64 

68 

3° 

32 

17-5-49 

133 

16 

719 

84 

189 

79 

49 

21 

19-5-49 

52 

25 

159 

75 

138 

91 

13 

9 

20-5-49 

197 

27 

541 

73 

217 

92 

19 

8 

21-5-49 

221 

30 

526 

70 

248 

98 

5 

2 

25-5-49 

315 

40 

465 

60 

475 

98 

11 

2 

26-5-49 

344 

42 

474 

_ 

. .2,9-8 

98 

8 

2 





























■ •ff 








- 70 - 


TABLE Xlll 


COUNTS FROM CONTROL AND EXPERIMENTAL CULTURES USED TO TEST 


TOXAPHEHE 


DATE 

HATCHED 

EGGS 

UNHATCHED EGGS 

DEAD 

CORACIDIA 

LIVE 

CORACIDIA 

NO. 

T~ 

NO. 


NO. 

* 

NO. 

JT ~ 

CONTROL #7A 

20-5-49 


11 

474 

89 

71 

91 

7 

9 

21-5-49 

58 

11 

452 

89 

64 

85 

11 

15 

25-5-49 

128 

39 

198 

61 

119 

73 

44 

27 

26-5-49 

210 

39 

324 

61 

195 

81 

45 

19 

27-5-49 

175 

46 

201 

54 

268 

85 

46 

15 

28-5-49 

239 

58 

174 

42 

262 

83 

53 

17 

29-5-49 

272 

68 

129 

^2 

4o6 

86 

65 

14 


CONTROL #7B 


20-5-49 

36 

10 

318 

90 

30 

91 

3 

9 

21-5-49 

35 

12 

248 

88 

31 

86 

5 

14 

25-5-49 

94 

43 

124 

57 

67 

78 

19 

22 

26-5-49 

130 

49 

137 

51 

78 

74 

27 

26 

27-5-49 

238 

54 

201 

46 

224 

81 

53 

19 

28-5-49 

191 

61 

120 

39 

191 

84 

35 

16 

29-5-49 

257 

67 

127 

33 

236 

89 

30 

11 

CULTURE #7 

- 8 P. 

,P.M.- TOXAPHENS 25 % WETTABLE 



20-5-49 

35 

7 

478 

93 

69 

90 

8 

10 

21-5-49 

55 

12 

417 

88 

64 

89 

8 

11 

25-5-49 

142 

36 

255 

64 

168 

91 

16 

9 

26-5-49 

163 

38 

264 

62 

199 

93 

16 

7 

27-5-49 

186 

43 

249 

57 

254 

88 

34 

12 

28-5-49 

334 

53 

292 

47 

323 

93 

25 

7 

29-5-49 

190 

58 

138 

42 

276 

21 

28 

-.,9,.- 

CULTURE #7 

" 5 P. 

■P.M.- TOXAPHENE 

25 % WETTABLE 



20-5-49 

28 

8 

321 

92 

65 

93 

5 

7 

21-5-49 

31 

12 

238 

88 

36 

95 

2 

5 

25-5-49 

113 

29 

272 

71 

93 

71 

39 

29 

26-5-49 

114 

36 

202 

64 

109 

76 

34 

24 

27-5-49 

120 

41 

170 

59 

145 

82 

32 

18 

28-5-49 

87 

47 

99 

53 

157 

84 

29 

16 

29-5-49 

184 

49 

191 

21 

133 

—2.6 

.Jfl— 

24 

CULTURE #7 

- 2 P. 

P.M. TOXAPHENE 25% WETTABIE 



20-5-49 

59 

9 

602 

91 

77 

94 

5 

~F~ 

21-5-49 

43 

10 

402 

90 

58 

92 

5 

8 

25-5-49 

96 

33 

196 

67 

123 

80 

31 

20 

26-5-49 

155 

35 

285 

65 

135 

88 

19 

12 

27-5-49 

223 

57 

169 

43 

219 

82 

49 

18 

28-5-49 

211 

44 

271 

56 

427 

92 

36 

8 

29-5-49 

247 

, , 55. - 

206 

JtL 

249 

79 

..-62— 

21 
























- 71 - 


TABLE XIV 


COUNTS FROM CONTROL AND EXPERIMENTAL CULTURES USED TO TEST 

__ MULCIDE B _ 

DEAD LIVE 


DATE 

HATCHED 

EGGS 

UNHATCHED 

EGGS 

CORACIDIA 

CORACIDIA 


NO. 

T~ 

NO. 

T 

NO. 


NO. 

% 

CONTROL #8A 

20-5-49 

18 

10 

157 

90 


94 

3 

6 

25-5-1(9 

139 

46 

160 

54 

24l 

93 

17 

7 

26-5-H9 

167 

47 

188 

53 

307 

94 

20 

6 

27-5-49 

132 

47 

147 

53 

336 

93 

24 

7 

28-5-49 

238 

56 

187 

44 

617 

94 

bO 

6 

29-5-49 

180 

60 

119 

40 

427 

92 

37 

8 

30-5-49 

110 

70 

>+8 

30 

127 

90 

14 

10 

CONTROL #8B 

20-5-M9 

29 

13 

19 b 

87 

63 

95 

3 

5 

25-5-49 

127 

37 

217 

63 

230 

91 

23 

9 

26-5-49 

150 

45 

183 

55 

278 

89 

34 

11 

27-5-49 

84 

45 

104 

55 

341 

95 

16 

5 

28-5-49 

153 

62 

95 

38 

393 

93 

30 

7 

29-5-49 

195 

70 

85 

30 

335 

94 

23 

6 

30-5-49 

120 

78 

44 

27 

.J34 

-25 

12 

5 


CULTURE #8 - 

100 P.P.M. 

MULCIDE B 




20-5-49 

33 

9 

355 

91 

61 

100 

0 

0 

25-5-49 

no 

30 

254 

70 

167 

100 

0 

0 

26-5-49 

193 

37 

322 

63 

265 

99.3 

2 

0.7 

27-5-49 

166 

47 

185 

53 

296 

99 

3 

1 

28-5-49 

161 

45 

198 

55 

242 

98 

2 

2 

29-5-49 

146 

54 

125 

46 

229 

99 

3 

1 

80-5-49 

154 

59 

109 

4l 

227 

100 

0 

0 


CULTURE #8 - 

10 P.P.M. 

MULCIDE B 




20-5-I(9" 


12 

"26$r 

88 

93 

98 

2 

2 

25-5-49 

89 

30 

211 

70 

138 

98 

3 

2 

26-5-49 

122 

41 

179 

59 

177 

93 

13 

7 

27-5-49 

200 

49 

205 

51 

256 

97 

9 

3 

28-5-49 

77 

42 

106 

58 

150 

94 

? 

6 

29-5-49 

98 

56 

78 

44 

190 

93 

14 

7 

80-5-49 

129 

68 

75 

3? ... 

216 

22 

20 

8 


CULTURE #8 - 

2 P.P.M. 

MULCIDE B 




20-5-49 ~ 

24 

11 

203 

^9 

5T 

92 


Tj 

25-5-49 

149 

35 

274 

65 

147 

85 

26 

15 

26-5-49 

102 

36 

184 

64 

223 

89 

27 

11 

27-5-49 

148 

41 

211 

59 

276 

93 

22 

7 

28-5-49 

56 

50 

57 

50 

167 

92 

l5 

8 

29-5-49 

134 

59 

95 

41 

423 

96 

18 

4 

30-5=4.2- 

130 

64 

7-g 

.36 

284 

24 

12 

6 



























- 72 - 


TABLE XV 

COUNTS FROM CONTROL AND EXPERIMENTAL CULTURES USED TO TEST 


SODIUM CAPRYLATE 


DATE 

HATCHED 

EGGS 

UNHATCHED 

EGGS 

DEAD 

CORACIDIA 

LIVE 

CORACIDIA 

NO. 


NO. 


NO. 

ir 

NO. 

% 

CONTROL #9A 

26-5-49 

73 

15 

415 


39o 

99 

6 

1 

27-5-^9 

37 

20 

148 

80 

207 

99 

2 

1 

28-5-49 

75 

21 

283 

79 

315 

98 

5 

2 

29-5-49 

33 

20 

131 

80 

114 

96 

5 

4 

30-5-49 

93 

30 

217 

70 

292 

97 

10 

3 

31-5-49 

71 

26 

202 

74 


95 

12 

5 

1-6-49 

Z2 

31 

179 

69 

234 

26 

9 

4 


CONTROL #9B 


26-5-49 

53 

12 

379 

88 

28l 

98 

7 

2 

27-5-49 

52 

16 

271 

84 

259 

98 

4 

2 

28-5-49 

49 

18 

229 

82 

236 

99.6 

1 

0.4 

29-5-49 

61 

25 

181 

75 

227 

97 

6 

3 

30-5-49 

58 

21 

216 

79 

199 

96 

9 

4 

31-5-49 

58 

25 

175 

75 

131 

96 

6 

4 

1-6-49 

72 

33 

145 

67 

124 

26 

5 

4 


CULTURE #9 - 

100 P.P.M. 

SODIUM CAPRYLATE 



26-5-49 

50 

15 

285 ~ 

85 

25T 

100 

0 

0 

27-5-49 

62 

14 

379 

86 

739 

99.9 

1 

0.1 

28-5-49 

46 

17 

232 

83 

469 

100 

0 

0 

29-5-49 

37 

18 

174 

82 

362 

100 

0 

0 

30-5-49 

37 

22 

133 

78 

202 

100 

0 

0 

31-5-49 

75 

24 

237 

76 

298 

99 

4 

1 

1-6-49 

96 

26 

270 

74 . 

322 

98. 

6 

2 


CULTURE 

- 

10 P.P.M. 

SODIUM 

CAPRYLATE 



26-5-49 

—% 

TT 

352 

&6 

342 

99 

i 

1 

27-5-49 

57 

15 

327 

85 

375 

98 

6 

2 

28-5-49 

49 

14 

302 

86 

356 

99 

2 

1 

29-5-49 

32 

18 

150 

82 

196 

98 

4 

2 

30-5-49 

38 

17 

191 

83 

252 

97 

7 

3 

31-5-49 

39 

32 

83 

68 

102 

97 

3 

3 

1-6-49 

in 

35 

209 

65 

291 

25 

16 

_ 


CULTURE #9 - 

2 P.P.M. 

SODIUM 

CAPRYLATE 



26-5-49 

70 

17 

330 

~B3~ 

274 

99 

4 

1 

27-5-49 

54 

15 

302 

85 

270 

99.6 

1 

0.4 

28-5-49 

69 

19 

287 

81 

260 

98 

6 

2 

29-5-49 

44 

23 

149 

77 

130 

99 

2 

1 

30-5-49 

85 

27 

226 

73 

213 

95 

12 

5 

31-5-49 

52 

27 

144 

73 

143 

99 

2 

l 

1-6-49 

15— 

28 

145 

72 

107 

21 

6 

5 























__ 










- 73 - 


table XVI 


COUNTS FROM CONTROL AND EXPERIMENTAL CULTURES USED TO TEST 

_ DOWKLOR _ 

DEAD LIVE 


DATE 

HATCHED 

EGGS 

UNHATCHED 

EGGS 

CORACIDIA 

CORACIDIA 


NO. 


NO. 

~3 

NO. 


NO. 

% 

CONTROL #1QA 

1-6-49 

40 

10 

342 

90 

BiJ 

97 

3 

3 

2-6-49 

28 

10 

24l 

90 

78 

91 

8 

9 

3-6-49 

29 

19 

125 

81 

46 

92 

4 

8 

7-6-49 

54 

21 

208 

79 

85 

83 

18 

17 

8-6-49 

86 

20 

345 

80 

123 

84 

24 

16 

9-6-49 

182 

29 

439 

71 

153 

82 

33 

18 

10-6-49 

96. 

35 

176 

62 

119 

Jtl 

18 

12 


CONTROL #jQB 


1-6-119 

51 

5 

735 

94 

123 

99 

1 

i 

2-6-49 

30 

7 

430 

93 

91 

95 

5 

5 

3-6-49 

59 

13 

402 

87 

146 

94 

10 

6 

7-6-49 

157 

35 

291 

65 

124 

81 

30 

19 

8-6-49 

161 

39 

250 

61 

118 

81 

28 

19 

9-6-49 

166 

46 

191 

54 

106 

84 

20 

16 

10-6-49 

203 

54_ 

175 

46 

121 

88 

16 

12 


CULTURE #10 

- 100 P, 

.P.M. 

DOWKLOR 



1-6-49 

35 

7 

445 

93 

141 

100 

0 

0 

2-6-49 

28 

7 

348 

93 

148 

99.3 

1 

0.7 

3-6-49 

72 

13 

484 

87 

282 

100 

0 

0 

7-6-49 

86 

24 

273 

76 

155 

100 

0 

0 

8-6-49 

67 

26 

191 

74 

169 

100 

0 

0 

9-6-49 

112 

30 

267 

70 

200 

100 

0 

0 

10-6-49 

88 

29 

213 

71 

205.99.5 

1 

. 0 * 5 .. 


CULTURE #10 

- iot; 

;kht 

EOftKLOR 



T^+9 

26 

6 

3S1 

94 

92 

96 

4 

4 

2-6-49 

33 

8 

358 

92 

111 

96 

5 

4 

3-6-49 

100 

12 

727 

88 

259 

96 

12 

4 

7-6-49 

98 

29 

235 

71 

61 

75 

20 

25 

8-6-49 

133 

35 

248 

65 

123 

85 

21 

15 

9-6-49 

145 

41 

207 

59 

71 

82 

16 

18 

10-6-49 

. 125 - 

47 

224 

?3 

100 

83 

21 

17 


CULTURE #10 

2 P, 

,P.M. 

DOWTCLOR 



1^5-49“ 

35 

9 

"355" 

91 

111 

98 

2 

2 

2-6-49 

46 

10 

404 

90 

126 

98 

2 

2 

3-6-49 

48 

10 

412 

90 

113 

96 

5 

4 

7-6-49 

98 

29 

245 

71 

118 

97 , 

3 

3 

8-6-49 

145 

39 

231 

61 

159 

99.4 

l 

0.6 

9-6-49 

194 

40 

289 

60 

235 

97 

6 

3 

10-6-49 

191 

44 

242 


J51 

^8 

5 . 

2 






































- 74 - 

table XVII 


COUNTS FROM CONTROL AND EXPERIMENTAL CULTURES USED TO TEST 


ANTIMONY TARTRATE 






X L 1X1 x XJ 

- 

DEAD 

LIVE 

DATE 

HATCHED EGGS 

UNHATCHED EGGS 

CORACIDIA 

CORACIDIA 


NO, 

% . 

NO. 

r 

NO. 


NO. 

v 




CONTROL 

11A 





12-5-50 

3 

if .lT 

69 

9T^~ 

“ 

0 

3 

100 

13-5-50 

13 

13.7 

82 

86.3 

1 

33.3 

2 

66.7 

15-5-50 

11 

16.7 

55 

83.3 

1 

20 

4 

80 

16-5-50 

11 

16.4 

56 

83.6 

0 

0 

2 

100 

17-5-50 

14 

14.1 

85 

85.9 

1 

20 

4 

80 

18-5-50 

35 

28 

90 

72.0 

5 

33.3 

10 

66.7 

19-5-50 

52 

36.4 

91 

63.6 

9 

64 . 3 

5 

3 5.1 

22-5-50 

77 

53 

67 

47 

9 

47.4 

10 

52.6 




CONTROL 

11B 





12-5-50 

7 

7."86' 

B T 

92.1 

1 

2*5 

3 

7T 

13-5-50 

5 

8.8 

52 

91.2 

0 

0 

1 

100 

15-5-50 

12 

7.5 

148 

92.5 

0 

0 

1 

ICO 

16-5-50 

21 

12.7 

144 

87.3 

0 

0 

2 

100 

17-5-50 

4 

8.9 

4l 

91.1 

1 

25 

3 

75 

18-5-50 

18 

18.0 

82 

82.0 

3 

37.5 

5 

62.5 

19-5-50 

44 

24.7 

134 

75.3 

4 

5o 

4 

50 

22-5-50 

45 

39.8 

68 

60.2 

12 

52.2 

11 

47.8 

CULTURE 

#11 - 100 

P.P.M. 

ANTIMONY 

TARTRATE 



12-5-50 

11 

6.96 

~T47~ 

93 

5 

83.3 

l 

16.6 

13-5-50 

9 

13.2 

59 

86.8 

0 

0 

4 

100 

15-5-50 

21 

11.2 

166 

88.8 

13 

77 

4 

23.5 

16-5-50 

4 

5.7 

66 

94.3 

4 

66.7 

2 

33.3 

17-5-50 

24 

16.8 

119 

83.2 

9 

100 

0 

0 

18-5-50 

25 

14.2 

151 

85.8 

8 

61.5 

5 

38.5 

19-5-50 

31 

17.1 

1?0 

82.9 

12 

92.3 

1 

7.7 

22-5-50 

33.. 

41.8 

46 

58.2 

8 

100 

0 

0 

CULTURE #11 - 10 

P.P.M. 

ANTIMONY 

TARTRATE 



12-5-50 

if 

9.75 

37 

90.2 

3 

75 

1 

25" 

13-5-50 

15 

11.3 

ns 

88.7 

4 

57.1 

3 

42.9 

15-5-50 

16 

16.1 

83 

83.9 

1 

25 

3 

75 

16-5-50 

5 

7.3 

63 

92.7 

1 

50 

1 

50 

17-5-50 

9 

7.3 

113 

92.7 

2 

25 

6 

75 

18-5-50 

15 

15.8 

80 

84.2 

1 

25 

3 

75 

19-5-50 

21 

21.2 

78 

78.8 

4 

44.5 

5 

55.5 

22-5-50 

23 

31.1 

51 

68.9 

2L 

77,8 . 

2 

22.2 

CULTURE 

#11 - 2 

P.P.M. 

ANTIMONY 

TARTRATE 



12-5-50 

4 

5.5 

~w 

~w~ 

1 

50 

1 

W 

13-5-50 

3 

4.1 

70 

95.9 

3 

75 

1 

25 

15-5-50 

6 

6.5 

87 

94 

3 

50 

3 

50 

16-5-50 

9 

11.3 

72 

88.7 

2 

100 

0 

0 

17-5-50 

15 

12.9 

102 

87.1 

0 

0 

2 

100 

18-5-50 

9 

12.7 

62 

87.3 

0 

0 

3 

100 

19-5-50 

18 

15.0 

102 

85.0 

0 

0 

8 

100 

22-5-50 

18 

—3i^o 

35 

66.0 

1 

14,X 

6 

85.7 



































- 75 - 


table XVlll 


COUNTS FROM CONTROL AND EXPERIMENTAL CULTURES USED TO TEST 


CHLOROMYCETIN 


DATE 

HATCHED 

EGGS 

UNHATCHED 

EGGS 

DEAD 

CORACIDIA 

LIVE 

CORACIDIA 

NO. 

% 

NO. 

T~ 

NO. 

. ^ 

NO. 


CONTROL 13A 

29-5-50 

So 

30.8 

90 

69.2 

11 

50 

11 

50 

30-5-50 

27 

36.9 

46 

63.1 

3 

25 

9 

75 

31-5-50 

13 

38.2 

21 

61.8 

2 

4o 

3 

60 

1-6-50 

55 

50.4 

54 

49.6 

13 

56.5 

10 

43.5 

2-6-50 

35 

62.5 

21 

37.5 

5 

45.4 

6 

54.6 

3-6-50 

60 

70.6 

25 

29.4 

10 

71.4 

4 

28.6 

.5-6-50 

23 

60.8 

60 

.39.2 

14 

70 

6 

30 

CONTROL 13 B 

29-5-50 

33 

18.4 

146 

81.6 

2 

16.7 

10 

83.3 

30-5-50 

43 

23.9 

137 

76.1 

14 

44 

11 

56 

31-5-50 

46 

48.9 

48 

51.1 

14 

40 

21 

60 

1-6-50 

55 

51.9 

51 

48.1 

13 

61.9 

8 

38.1 

2-6-50 

84 

65.6 

44 

34.4 

20 

54 

17 

46 

3-6-50 

26 

39.4 

40 

60.6 

15 

65.2 

8 

34.8 

5-6-50 

107 

59.8 

72 

40.2 

26 

86.7 

4 

23.3 


CULTURE #13 - 

10 P.P.M. 

CHLOROMYCETIN 



29-5-50 

18^ 

17.5 

~w~ 

^27T 

15 

75 

5 

25 t 

30-5-50 

84 

37.8 

138 

62.2 

18 

48.6 

19 

51.4 

31-5-50 

90 

41.5 

127 

58.5 

12 

4o 

18 

60 

1-6-50 

74 

43.5 

96 

56.5 

10 

40 

15 

60 

2-6-50 

99 

49.1 

103 

50.9 

15 

68.2 

7 

31.8 

3-6-50 

71 

44.6 

88 

55.4 

14 

66.7 

7 

33.3 

5-6-50 

85 

58.6 

60 

41.4 

10 

62.5 

6 

J7 t.5.. 


CULTURE #13 - 

5 P.P.M. 

CHLOROMYCETIN 



29-5-50 

51 

25.6 

l48 

74.4 

16 

^.5^ 

17 

~1TT~ 

30-5-50 

38 

42.2 

52 

57.8 

6 

42.8 

8 

57.2 

31-5-50 

44 

50 

44 

50 

7 

36.9 

12 

63.1 

1-6-50 

77 

48.1 

83 

51.9 

16 

40 

24 

60 

2-6-50 

33 

45.8 

39 

54.2 

10 

45.5 

12 

54.5 

3-6-50 

94 

57.7 

69 

42.3 

7 

41.2 

10 

58.8 

5-6-50 

196 

65.3 

104 

34V7 

24 

72.7 

9 

27.3 


CULTURE #13 - 

1 P.P.M. 

CHLOROMYCETIN 



29-5-50 

75 

28.6 

■"187 

71.4 

9 

37.5 

1* 

62.5 

30-5-50 

34 

52.3 

31 

47.7 

7 

41.2 

10 

58.8 

31-5-50 

32 

38.5 

51 

61.5 

6 

37.5 

10 

62.5 

1-6-50 

42 

43.7 

54 

56.3 

7 

38.9 

11 

61.1 

2-6-50 

49 

50.5 

48 

49.5 

21 

65.6 

11 

34.4 

3-6-50 

59 

52.2 

54 

47.8 

13 

56.5 

10 

43.5 

5-6-50 

23 

.HZti— 

25 

52.JL- 

8 

80 

2 

20 

























- 76 - 


table XIX 


COUNTS FROM CONTROL AND EXPERIMENTAL CULTURES USED TO TEST 


DOW K-604 


DATE 

HATCHED 

EGGS 

UN HATCHED 

EGGS 

DEAD 

CORACIDIA 

LIVE 

CORACIDIA 

NO. 

1° 

NO. 

~T7~ 

NO. 

% 

NO. 

I n 

CONTROL 12A 

20-5-50 

27 

9.9 

246 

90.1 

r - 

63.3 

1 

16.7 

22-5-50 

37 

15.1 

208 

84.9 

3 

16.7 

15 

83.3 

23-5-50 

83 

33.2 

167 

66.8 

6 

20.7 

23 

79.3 

25-5-50 

35 

41.7 

49 

58.3 

4 

16.7 

20 

83.3 

27-5-50 

120 

44.4 

150 

55.6 

5 

22.7 

17 

77.3 

29-5-50 

44 

62.8 

26 

37.2 

1 

14.3 

6 

85.7 

30-5-50 

89 

66.9 

44 

33.1 

3 

18.8 

13 

81.2 

CONTROL 12B 

20-5-50 

15 

10.5 

128 

8945 


36T*T 

7 

63.6 

22-5-50 

30 

26.8 

82 

73.2 

1 

9.1 

10 

90.9 

23-5-50 

70 

31.4 

153 

68.6 

10 

31.2 

22 

68.8 

25-5-50 

102 

49.5 

104 

50.5 

11 

30.6 

25 

69.4 

27-5-50 

162 

60.0 

108 

40.0 

8 

36.4 

14 

63.6 

29-5-50 

33 

55 

27 

45 

1 

16.7 

5 

83.3 

30-5-50 

44 

56.4 

3.4 

43,6 

1 

50 

1 

50 


CULTURE #12 - 

20 P.P.M. 

DOW K-604 




20-5-50 

18^ 

8.7 

■ 188 

91.3 

10 

100 

0 

0 

22-5-50 

14 

11.5 

108 

88.5 

11 

100 

0 

0 

23-5-50 

21 

9.7 

196 

90.3 

8 

100 

0 

0 

25-5-50 

20 

11.9 

157 

88.7 

13 

100 

0 

0 

27-5-50 

18 

13.1 

119 

86.9 

6 

100 

0 

0 

29-5-50 

12 

12.8 

82 

87.2 

5 

100 

0 

0 

30-5-50 

15 

15.8 

80 

84.2 

8 

100 

0 

0 


CULTURE #12 - 

10 P.P.M. 

DOW 

K-604 




2o-5-5o 

11 

4.7 

"224 

"95T3 - 

~T~ 

100 

0 

0 

22-5-50 

21 

10.6 

178 

89.4 

12 

100 

0 

0 

23-5-50 

15 

15.8 

80 

84.2 

4 

100 

0 

0 

25-5-50 

20 

19.8 

81 

80.2 

19 

100 

0 

0 

27-5-50 

18 

15.9 

76 

84.1 

5 

100 

0 

0 

29-5-50 

13 

13.8 

81 

86.2 

9 

100 

0 

0 

30-5-50 

30 

15.2 

168 

84.8 

8 

100 

0 

0 


CULTURE #12 - 

2.5 P.P.M. 

DOW 

K-6o4 




20-5-50 

13 

3.7 

3'3'6"' 

96.3 

7 

~77TB“~ 

2 

22.2 

22-5-50 

23 

13.3 

150 

86.7 

13 

92.9 

1 

7.1 

23-5-50 

4o 

11.2 

317 

88.8 

28 

100 

0 

0 

25-5-50 

19 

12.0 

l4o 

88.0 

3 

100 

0 

0 

27-5-50 

37 

10.0 

332 

90.0 

8 

100 

0 

0 

29-5-50 

12 

10.5 

102 

89-5 

6 

100 

0 

0 

30-5-jP- 

10 

23.8 

32 

76.2 

12 

100 

0 

0 


I 

































- 77 - 


TABLE XX 


COUNTS FROM CONTROL AND EXPERIMENTAL CULTURES USED TO TEST 


DOW K-604 


DATE 

HATCHED 

EGGS 

UN HATCHED 

EGGS 

DEAD 

CORACIDIA 

LIVE 

CORACIDIA 

NO. 


NO. 

-Jo 

NO. 


NO. 


CONTROL l4A 

29 - 5-50 

23 

35.9 

41 

64.1 

14 

73.6 


2E7S 

30 - 5-50 

30 

43.4 

39 

56.5 

10 

58.8 

7 

41.2 

31 - 5-50 

43 

48.3 

46 

51.7 

22 

75.9 

7 

24.1 

1 - 6-50 

99 

49.1 

103 

50.9 

15 

50 

15 

50 

2 - 6-50 

96 

64 

54 

36 

17 

58.6 

12 

41.4 

3 - 6-50 

64 

60.4 

42 

39.6 

8 

57.1 

6 

42.9 

5 - 6-50 

57 

71.2 

23 

28.8 

8 

66.7 

4 

33.3 

6-6-50 

29 

61.7 

18 

38,3 

2 

50 

2 

50 

CONTROL l4B 

29-5-50 

10 

27.1 

27 

72.9 

13 

92.8 

1 

7.2 

30-5-50 

34 

53.1 

30 

46.9 

12 

70.6 

5 

29.4 

31-5-50 

51 

50 

51 

50 

16 

66.7 

8 

33.3 

1-6-50 

40 

56.3 

31 

43.7 

3 

30 

7 

70 

2-6-50 

39 

54.9 

32 

45.1 

6 

50 

6 

50 

3-6-50 

180 

65.2 

96 

34.8 

10 

50 

10 

50 

5-6-50 

128 

73.1 

47 

26.9 

13 

65 

7 

35 

6-6-50 

238 

73.7 _ 

85 . 

26.3 

8 


4 



CULTURE #11+ 

- 2 P.P.I 

4. DOW 





29-^0 

24 

22.2 

' 54 

77.8 

30 

100 

0 

0 

30-5-50 

18 

37.5 

30 

62.5 

18 

100 

0 

0 

31-5-50 

20 

29.4 

48 

70.6 

8 

100 

0 

0 

1-6-50 

29 

33.3 

58 

66.7 

7 

100 

0 

0 

2-6-50 

18 

33.3 

36 

66.7 

7 

100 

0 

0 

3-6-50 

20 

45.5 

24 

54.5 

3 

100 

0 

0 

5-6-50 

64 

33 

130 

67 

9 

100 

0 

0 

6-6-50 

9 

39.1 

14 

60.9 

3 

100 

0 

0 


CULTURE #14 

- 1 P.P.M. DOW K-604 



29-2-20 

22 

29.3 

53 

7 0.7 

11 

100 

0 

0 

30-5-50 

8 

23.5 

26 

76.5 

13 

100 

0 

0 

31-5-50 

26 

43.3 

34 

56.7 

9 

100 

0 

0 

1-6-50 

41 

38.7 

65 

61.3 

12 

100 

0 

0 

2-6-50 

11 

32.3 

23 

6 7.7 

4 

100 

0 

0 

3-6-50 

34 

48.6 

36 

51.4 

4 

100 

0 

0 

5-6-50 

30 

49.2 

31 

50.8 

5 

100 

0 

0 

6-6-50 

29 

41.4 

41 

58.6 

3 

100 

0 

0 


CULTURE #14 

' r o7TT.P, 

,M. DOW K-604 



29-5-20 

21 

36.9 

36 

63.1 

8 

100 

d 

0 

30-5-50 

53 

51.9 

49 

48.1 

20 

96.9 

3-very3.1 

31-5-20 

43 

43 

57 

57 

14 

100 

0 weako 

1-6-50 

26 

36.1 

46 

63.9 

7 

100 

0 

0 

2-6-50 

53 

46.5 

61 

53.5 

7 

100 

0 

0 

3-6-50 

19 

28.8 

47 

71.2 

6 

100 

0 

0 

5-6-50 

90 

42.5 

122 

57.5 

5 

100 

0 

0 

6-6-50 

36 

43.4 

JtZ_. 

56.5 

5 

100 

0 

0 


Examination of cultures on the §9-5-50 was carried out 10 minutes 


after mixing. 






























TABLE XXI 


COUNTS FROM CONTROL AND EXPERIMENTAL CULTURES USED TO TEST 


DOW K-604 


DATE 

HATCHED EGGS 

UNHATCHED EGGS 

DEAD 

CORACIDIA 

LIVE 

CORACIDIA 


NO. 

“3“ 

NO. 

. . 

NO. 

. 3-. 

NO. 


CONTROL 16A 

28-6-50 

154 

68.1 

72 

31.9 

3 

30 

7 

70 

29 - 6-50 

400 

67.8 

190 

32.2 

13 

56.5 10 

43.5 

30 - 6-50 

132 

76.7 

40 

23.3 

8 

61.5 

5 

38.5 

. 3-7-50 


-- NO 

LIVE CORACIDIA -- 





CONTROL 16B 

28-6-50 

123 

65.8 


33.2 

2 

25 

6 

75 

29-6-50 

118 

77.6 

34 

22.4 

3 

20 

12 

80 

30-6-50 

84 

78.5 

23 

21.5 

1 

16.7 

5 

83.3 

3-7-50 


— NO 

LIVE CORACIDIA — 






CULTURE #16 

■ 0.35 p.p. 

,M. DOW 

K-604 



28 - 6-50 

109 

66.5 

55 

33 . j 


100 

0 

0 

29-6-50 

130 

67.3 

63 

32.7 

4 

100 

0 

0 

30-6-50 

87 

64.9 

47 

35.1 

2 

100 

0 

0 



_ ivrn 

T Tin? PADAPT-HTA 















CULTURE #16 

0.25“P.F\ 

,M. DOW 

K-604 



28 - 6-50 

100 

71.9 

39 

28.1 

1 

25 

3 

75 

29 - 6-50 

159 

68.2 

74 

21.8 

6 

75 

2 

25 

30 - 6-50 

54 

72 

21 

28 

3 

100 

0 

0 

3-7-50 


-- NO 

LIVE CORACIDIA — 






CULTURE #16 

0'.'o5 P.P.M. DOW K- 60 W 



28-6-50 

53 

68.8 

24 

31.2 

0 

0 

5 

100 

29-6-50 

88 

78.6 

24 

21.4 

3 

37.5 

5 

62.5 

30-6-50 

134 

68.4 

62 

31.6 

7 

58.3 

5 

41.7 

3-7-?o , 


-- NO 

LIVE CORACIDIA — 









































- 79 - 


table XXII 


COUNTS FROM CONTROL AND EXPERIMENTAL CULTURES USED TO TEST 


2# TYROTHRICIN 


DATE 

HATCHED EGGS 

UNHATCHSD EGGS 

DEAD 

CORACIDIA 

LIVE 

CORACIDIA 

NO. 

% 

NO. 

. J. . 

NO. 

* 

NO. 

r 

CONTROL 15A 

30-5-50 

7 

28 

18 

72 

3 

75 

1 

25 

31-5-50 

34 

35.4 

62 

64.6 

6 

54.5 

5 

45.5 

1-6-50 

17 

41.5 

24 

58.5 

6 

66.7 

3 

33.3 

2-6-50 

17 

36.2 

30 

63.8 

2 

40 

3 

60 

3-6-50 

15 

24.2 

47 

75.8 

5 

55.5 

4 

44.5 

5-6-50 

15 

50 

15 

50 

7 

77.8 

2 

22.2 

6-6-50 

16 

4l 

23 

59 

5 

83.3 

1 

16.7 

C0NTR0L15B 

30-5-50 

24 

32.4 

50 

67.6 

10 

83.3 

2 

16.7 

31-5-50 

26 

35.1 

48 

64.9 

9 

56.2 

7 

43.8 

1-6-50 

27 

40.3 

4o 

59.7 

5 

55.5 

4 

44.5 

2-6-50 

15 

25.9 

43 

74.1 

2 

4o 

3 

60 

3-6-50 

35 

36.8 

60 

63.2 

8 

66.7 

4 

33.3 

5-6-50 

24 

64.9 

13 

35.1 

0 

0 

3 

100 

6-6-50 

22 

40.7 

32 

59,.3 

6 

75 

2 

. 25 


CULTURE #15(2% TYROTHRICIN)-200 P.P.M 



3o-5-5o 

10 

3475 

19 

65.5 

6 

75 

2 

“2T" 

31-5-50 

21 

45.6 

25 

54.4 

9 

81.8 

2 

18.2 

1-6-50 

18 

26.1 

51 

73.9 

3 

75 

1 

25 

2-6-50 

29 

42.6 

39 

57.4 

5 

62.5 

3 

37.5 

3-6-50 

26 

32.9 

53 

67.1 

4 

66.7 

2 

33.3 

5-6-50 

28 

52.8 

25 

47.2 

4 

50 

4 

50 

6-6-50 

22 

45.8 

26 

54.2 

6 

21 

2 

25 


CULTURE #15-100 P.P.M. (2$ TYROTHRICIN! 


30-5-50 

12 

34.3 

23 

&T.7 

12 

100 

0 

0 

31-5-50 

17 

27.9 

44 

72.1 

6 

100 

0 

0 

1-6-50 

6 

33.3 

12 

66.7 

3 

7? 

1 

25 

2-6-50 

21 

34.4 

40 

65.6 

6 

66.7 

3 

33-3 

3-6-50 

12 

25 

36 

75 

3 

60 

2 

40 

5-6-50 

45 

50 

45 

50 

8 

80 

2 

20 

6-6-50 

4 

26.7 , 

11 

73.3 


71.4 

2 

28.6 



CULTURE #15- 

- 20 

P.P.M. (2% TYROTHRICIN) 


30-5-50 

11 

29.7 

26 

70.3 

6^ 

66.7 

3 

33.3 

31-5-50 

10 

37.1 

17 

62.9 

4 

66.7 

2 

33.3 

1-6-50 

10 

35.7 

18 

64.3 

9 

81.8 

2 

18.2 

2-6-50 

24 

38.1 

39 

61.9 

4 

66.7 

2 

33.3 

3-6-50 

19 

27 

51 

73 , 

5 

83.3 

1 

16.7 

5-6-50 

49 

47.6 

54 

52.4 

14 

70 

6 

30 

6-6-50 

28 

52.8 

21— 

47.2 

2 

25 

6 

-JZ2 


I 























-80- 


TABLE 2X111 


COUNTS FROM CONTROL AND EXPERIMENTAL CULTURES USED TO TEST 

TOXAPHENE 


DATE 

HATCHED 

EGGS 

UNHATCHED EGGS 

DEAD 

CORACIDIA 

LIVE 

CORACIDIA 

NO. 

"IT" 

NO. 

% 

NO, 

■ % 

NO. 


CONTROL 17A 

29-6-50 

51 

35.9 

91 

64.1 

2 

16.7 

10 

83.3 

30 - 6-50 

201 

63.6 

115 

36.4 

15 

33.3 

30 

66.7 

4 - 7-50 

112 

88.2 

15 

11.8 

4 

36.4 

7 

63.6 

5-7-50 

88 

83 

18 

17 

2 

40 

.3 

60 



CONTROL 

17B 





29-6-50 

“2<r~ 

59.1 

lb 

40.9 

6 

37.5 

10 

62.5 

30 - 6-50 

68 

67.3 

33 

32.7 

2 

10 

18 

90 

4-7-50 

103 

84.4 

19 

15.6 

2 

22.2 

7 

77.8 

5-7-50 

153 

81.8 

34 

18.2 

3 

37.5 

5 

62.5 

6-7-50 

96 

88.9 

12 

11.1 

6 

. 75 

2 

2? 


CULTURE #17 

100 P.P 

.M. TOXAPHENE 



29-6-50" 

49 

T474 


^7^ 

21 

75 

7 

25 

30-6-50 

57 

68.7 

26 

31.3 

13 

92.8 

1 

7.2 

4-7-50 

35 

83.3 

7 

16.7 

2 

100 

0 

0 

5-7-50 

118 

80.8 

28 

19.2 

6 

100 

0 

0 

6-7-50 

98 

89.1 

12 

10.9 

8 

100 

0 

0 


CULTURE #17 

10 P.P 

.M. TOXAPHENE 



29-6-50 

42 

52.5 

38 



72.3 

3 

27.2 

30-6-50 

96 

66.7 

48 

33.3 

19 

82.6 

4 

17.4 

4-7-50 

87 

92.5 

7 

7.5 

5 

83.3 

1 

16.7 

5-7-50 

107 

88.4 

14 

11.6 

5 

100 

0 

0 

6-7-50 

110 

85.9 

18 

14.1 

. 5 . 

100 

0 

0 


CULTURE #17 

2 P.P 

.M. TOXAPHENE 



29 - 6-50 

90 

48.9 

94 

51.1 

7 

50 

7 

To~ 

30-6-50 

90 v 

68.7 

4l 

31.3 

11 

26.8 

30 

73.2 

4-7-50 

117 

87.3 

17 

12.7 

7 

58.3 

5 

41.7 

5-7-50 

66 

94.3 

4 

5.7 

6 

100 

0 

0 

6-7-50 

_ 

88.6 

17 

11.4 

8 

100 

0 

0 


B§§ 















I 





























■81- 


TABLE 


COUNTS FROM CONTROL AND EXPERIMENTAL CULTURES 


DATE 

EXPERI¬ 

MENT NO 

TIME 
.IN SEC 

VOLTS 

• 

DEAD 

COR. 

% 

DEAD 

LIVE 

COR. 

% 

LIVE 

HATCHED 

EGGS 

Jo 

HATCHED 

UNHA' 

EGGS 

30 - 5-50 

1 

5 

2 

3 

100 

0 

0 

11 

l 6 ~~ 

~19 

30 - 5-50 

2 

5 

5 

14 

100 

0 

0 

24 

10 

210 

30 - 5-50 

3 

5 

10 

3 

100 

0 

0 

18 

12 

137 

30 - 5-50 

4 

5 

15 

4 

100 

0 

0 

27 

18 

120 

30 - 5-50 

R 

5 

20 

19 

95 

1 

5 

48 

22 

167 

30 - 5-50 

6 

5 

25 

4 

100 

0 

0 

15 

8 

172 

30-5-50 

7 

5 

26 

5 

100 

0 

0 

49 

26 

137 

30-5-50 

C.#l 

- 

— 

5 

71 

2 

29 

20 

29 

70 

30-5-50 

C.#2 

- 

— 

8 

73 

3 

27 

40 

11 

321 

30-5-50 

C.#3 

- 

-- 

5 

71 

2 

29 

10 

16 

, 51 

30-5-50 

8 

5 

55 

27 

63 

16 

37 

115 

19 

497 

1-6-50 

9 

15 

4? 

9 

82 

2 

18 

27 

17 

134 

1 - 6-50 

10 

15 

50 

4 

80 

1 

20 

15 

19 

65 

1-6-50 

11 

15 

52 

10 

91 

1 

9 

41 

19 

179 

1-6-50 

12 

15 

54 

8 

100 

0 

0 

43 

18 

201 

1-6-50 

13 

15 

55 

13 

100 

0 

0 

33 

20 

129 

1-6-50 

C.#4 



7 

78 

2 

22 

14 

19 

58 

1-6-50 

c.#5 

— 

— 

9 

90 

1 

10 

42 

18 

197 

5-6-50 

14 

20 

2 

21 

87 

3 

13 

48 

42 

65 

5-6-50 

15 

20 

5 

12 

92 

1 

8 

37 

47 

4l 

5-6-50 

16 

20 

10 

6 

75 

2 

25 

28 

3 1 !- 

54 

5-6-50 

17 

20 

15 

10 

91 

1 

9 

47 

59 

32 

5-6-50 

18 

20 

20 

12 

80 

3 

20 

41 

41 

59 

5-6-50 

19 

20 

25 

24 

83 

5 

17 

81 

37 

135 

5-6-50 

20 

20 

30 

19 

79 

5 

21 

48 

44 

61 

5-6-50 

21 

20 

35 

21 

78 

6 

22 

58 

36 

102 

5-6-50 

22 

20 

40 

12 

86 

2 

14 

36 

41 

52 

5-6-50 

23 

20 

45 

9 

69 

4 

31 

23 

38 

38 

5-6-50 

24 

20 

50 

14 

64 

8 

36 

88 

45 

104 

5-6-50 

25 

20 

55 

35 

69 

16 

31 

104 

44 

133 

5 - 6-50 

c.#6 



12 

52 

11 

48 

37 

34 

71 

5 - 6-50 

C.#7 

_ 

-- 

20 

83 

4 

17 

39 

36 

69 

9 - 6-50 

26 

15 

110 

6 

86 

1 

14 

38 

72 

15 

9 - 6-50 

2 7 

20 

110 

9 

64 

5 

36 

75 

65 

40 

9 - 6-50 

28 

30 

110 

6 

75 

2 

25 

62 

66 

32 

9 - 6-50 

29 

30 

120 

1 

33 

2 

67 

10 

71 

4 

9 - 6-50 

C.#8 



6 

75 

2 

25 

50 

64 

28 

9 - 6-50 

C.#9 

—— 

— — 

3 

60 

2 

40 

40 

63 

23 





KEY 







Cor. - Coracidia. 
C. - Control. 





-82- 


XXIV 


USED TO TEST THE EFFECT OF ELECTRICITY 


% UN- DATE 

HATCHED REREAD 

DEAD % LIVE 

COR. DEAD COR. 

—% 

7° 

LIVE 

HATCHED 

EGGS 

5? 

HATCHED 

UNHATCHED 

EGGS 

UNHA 

54 

2-6-50 

3 

^0 

2 

To 

ir 

17 ■ 

73 

”83 

90 

2-6-50 

4 

50 

4 

50 

13 

12 

91 

88 

88 

2-6-50 

3 

43 

4 

57 

15 

18 

68 

82 

82 

2-6-50 

6 

46 

7 

54 

22 

18 

98 

82 

78 

2 - 6-50 

11 

55 

9 

45 

68 

26 

199 

74 

92 

2-6-50 

5 

62 

3 

38 

26 

22 

91 

78 

7b 

2-6-50 

11 

79 

3 

21 

61 

5o 

60 

50 

71 

2-6-50 

9 

60 

6 

40 

46 

29 

115 

71 

89 

2-6-50 

6 

40 

9 

60 

28 

25 

85 

75 

84 

2-6-50 

10 

77 

3 

23 

70 

60 

46 

40 

81 

2-6-50 

33 

92 

3 

8 

140 

33 

281 

67 

83 

3-6-50 

8 

61 

5 

39 

44 

29 

107 

71 

81 

3-6-50 

11 

92 

1 

8 

21 

28 

55 

72 

81 

3-6-50 

1+ 

57 

3 

43 

16 

48 

33 

52 

82 

3-6-50 

3 

75 

1 

25 

15 

30 

35 

70 

80 

3-6-50 

12 

86 

2 

14 

24 

23 

79 

77 

81 

3-6-50 

14 

70 

6 

30 

50 

25 

147 

75 

82 

3-6-50 

9 

90 

1 

10 

42 

18 

197 

82 

48 

8-6-50 

13 

72 

5 

28 

42 

61 

27 

39 

53 

8 - 6-50 

23 

66 

12 

34 

91 

59 

63 

4l 

66 

8-6-50 

5 

83 

1 

17 

34 

62 

21 

, 38 

4l 

8 - 6-50 

10 

71 

4 

29 

44 

57 

33 

43 

59 

8-6-50 

26 

87 

4 

13 

69 

55 

56 

45 

63 

8-6-50 

8 

73 

3 

27 

45 

65 

24 

35 

56 

8 - 6-50 

11 

52 

10 

48 

33 

58 

24 

42 

64 

8 - 6-50 

7 

58 

5 

42 

60 

74 

21 

26 

59 

8-6-50 

11 

48 

12 

52 

116 

66 

59 

34 

62 

8-6-50 

4 

40 

6 

60 

46 

57 

35 

43 

55 

8-6-50 

20 

71 

8 

29 

83 

61 

52 

3.9 

56 

8 - 6-50 

5 

36 

9 

64 

36 

56 

28 

44 

66 

8-6-50 

13 

48 

14 

52 

60 

61 

38 

39 

64 

28 

35 

34 

29 

36 

37 

8-6-50 

6 

60 

4 

40 

33 

62 

20 

38 














































B29761 








