LEG A! STATUS 


OP T 


0AKA JUAN PUBLIC SCHOOL 


For Reference- 

NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


By 

Peter Frank Bergen 





0X 1IBB1* 
MMBSWam 



University of Alberta 
Printing Department 














Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/legalstatusofcanOObarg 



THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


THE LEGAL STATUS OF THE CANADIAN PUBLIC SCHOOL PUPIL 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY 


DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL. ADMINISTRATION 

by 

PETER FRANK BARGEN 

EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


April 2, 1959 




























































ABSTRACT 


The increasing complexity of educational administration in a 
dynamic and industrial society brings with it a corresponding necessity 
for the administrator to understand the legal aspects of the educational 
enterprise. This study examines the legal status of the Canadian public 
school pupil, and is based mainly on statutory and common law and their 
judicial interpretation. 

Public education may receive its structure from statutory law 
but it receives its operational pattern, in large part, from judicial 
interpretations and common law principles. Consequently, the conclusions 
are based on the findings of the Courts in litigations involving the 
public school pupil and attempt (1) to clarify and define the legal 
status of the pupil, especially in regard to his rights and responsi¬ 
bilities; (2) to bring together the Court decisions affecting this 
status, and to state in the language of the layman the general principles 
on which the Courts have relied in arriving at their decisions; and (3) 
to evolve a list of suggestions and recommendations to guide the ad¬ 
ministrator in setting up more efficient legal safeguards in dealing 
with pupils in the public schools. 

The analysis of constitutional and statutory provisions with 
their judicial interpretations, and the common law principles when 
applicable, yield the following general conclusions: 

1. Both statutory and common law are essential in defining the 
legal status of the pupil. Statutory law is predominant in defining 
(1) the right of a child to an education; (2) admission and attendance 
at school; and (3) the curricula. Common law assumes major importance 






































, 















































in defining (l) pupil control in school; and (2) the degree of care owed 
by school personnel to the pupil. It is only in the light of both these 
branches of the law that the legal status of the pupil becomes meaningful, 

2. Provincial governments have no "natural” responsibility for the 
education of children, but Courts hold that legislatures, by passing 
educational laws, create for themselves an inescapable "statutory” 
responsibility in this respect. 

3. Separate schools in Canada are not independent entities but are an 
integral part of the public school system within which they operate; they 
are public schools of a special kind. Pupil rights and responsibilities 
in such schools are the same as in the public schools. 

4. Private schools have no statutory existence but are "tolerated" by 
provincial governments. If these schools desire accreditation they must 
meet the standards required of public schools. Private school personnel 
are legally responsible to the same degree as public school personnel 
for the education and care of their children. 

5. In regard to a child*s rights and responsibilities society has 
erected not only a framework of legal mandates and restrictions, but also 
a legal philosophy which imbues this framework with life and purpose. 

Only with the help of this legal philosophy can the social end of 
education be understood and achieved. 

6. The Courts will uphold the rights of the child, but will also 
demand of him the fulfilment of those responsibilities which he owes to 
his school and its personnel. 

7. A knowledge of school law will not only help the administrator 
in avoiding costly litigation, but w ill enable him to provide improved 


iv 































■ 


' 


. 









educational services in his community. To achieve this broader objective 
it is essential, that an administrator know (l) the legal framework within 
which public schools operate and are controlled; (2) the legal principles 
arising out of judicial opinion; and (3) the application of these 
principles to the welfare of school and community. 


v 




ACKNCfWLEDGMENTS 


The author wishes to express his sincere gratitude to the 
various individuals who have been of invaluable help in the writing 
of this dissertation. My sincerest thanks go to Dr. H.T. Sparby, who 
painstakingly laboured through the original manuscript and whose 
criticisms and suggestions did so much to contribute to any merits 
this study may possess. To Mr. W.F. Bowker, Dean of the Faculty of 
Law, the author owes much of the legal literacy which he now possesses. 
Thanks are due as well to Dr. A.W. Reeves, Chairman of the Division of 
Educational Administration, Dr. H.T. Coutts, Dean of the Faculty of 
Education, and Dr. W.H. Swift, Deputy Minister of Education, Province 
of Alberta, whose encouragement and help have made the writing of 
this dissertation a challenge and a pleasure. To all a special 
indebtedness is gratefully acknowledged. 


vi 





TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER 

I. INTRODUCTION . 

Statement of the Problem . 

Delimitation of the Study . 

Related Studies . 

Sources of Data . . 

Definition of Terms ... . 

Statute law . 

Common law . . . 

Equity . . 

Case law .... . 

Positive law ... . 

Natural law . 

Precedents... 

Mandamus ................. 

Injunction . 

General Procedure . ....... 

Initial Assumption.. 

II. LEGAL JURISDICTIONS IN CANADIAN EDUCATION . . . 

I. THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK OF PUBLIC SCHOOL CONTROL 

Federal Authority . 

Provincial Authority ........... 

Local Authority . . .... 

The Role of the Courts . 

Independence of the Courts ...... 


PAGE 

1 

2 

3 

5 

6 
7 
7 

7 

8 
8 
9 
9 
9 
9 
9 

10 

n 

12 

13 

14 

17 

18 
20 
20 



















































CHAPTER 


PAGE 


Function of the Courts. 21 

Interpretation by the Courts.. 22 

Legal Principles as Precedents. 24 

II. THE LEGAL STATUS' OF SEPARATE SCHOOLS. 25 

Statutory Recognition of Separate Schools . . . 26 

Clarification of Terms . 26 

Separate School Issues and Their Implications 

for the Legal Status of the Pupil *. 28 

Determination of a Denominational Right. 29 

Are the Denominational Rights those of Parent 

or Child?. 31 

A Parents Choice as to Schools.. . . . . 33 

Central Control of the Administrative Functions 

of a Separate School Board.. . . 38 

The Independence of Separate Schools . 43 

Definition of Protestant and Roman Catholic .... 48 

Summary . 50 

III. THE LEGAL STATUS OF OTHER MINORITIES. 51 

The Jewish Problem in Quebec ........ ..... 51 

Separate Schools for Negroes in Ontario •••••••• 57 

III. COMPULSORY ATTENDANCE LAWS AND THE RIGHT TO AN EDUCATION . . 63 

I. COMPULSORY SCHOOL ATTENDANCE .. 64 

Exemptions to Compulsory Attendance. 65 

Instruction Outside of Public School . 65 

Mental or Physical Unfitness . •••••••••• 66 


viii 

























































CHAPTER 


PAGE 


Distance from School. 67 

Satisfaction of Minimum Educational Requirements . 68 

Work Permits . 69 

Other Exemptions. 70 

Compulsory School Attendance Laws and the Courts . . 71 

Federal v. Provincial Laws in Education. 72 

Compulsory Attendance Laws and Private Schools . . 73 

Compulsory Education and Religious Freedom .... 77 

Prosecution Under Compulsory Attendance Laws ... 80 

Summary and Conclusions. 82 

II. THE RIGHT TO AN EDUCATION. 84 

The Right to Accommodation . .. 86 

The Right to Equal Opportunity ........... • 90 

The Right to the Provisions of the Statutes . . . . • 91 

The Right to an Education .. 93 

The Right to Attend a Particular District School . . 100 

Conclusions . 102 

IV. LEGAL STATUS IN REGARD TO ADMISSION AND ATTENDANCE.104 

The Age of Admission to School ,••••.••»..»• 105 

The Wilkinson case ..108 

Kindergarten . 108 

Residence Requirements ....... . ..... 110 

Definition of "Residence” and "Domicile" . • 110 

Children Not Living with Their Parents ....... 114 

The Payment of Rates .. 117 

ix 








































CHAPTER PAGE 

Non-Resident Ratepayers . 119 

Children in Foster Homes.120 

Children in Charitable Institutions . 123 

Summary and Conclusions...124 

Tuition Charges.125 

Legal Interpretation of Ambiguous Statute.126 

Statutory Law is Decisive if it is Unambiguous ... 129 

The Importance of Proper Procedure ••••••••• 130 

Summary and Conclusions.131 

Vaccination Requirements ...... . •••• 132 

The Yarwood Case..... 132 

The Clowes Case.133 

Comparison of Cases. 137 

Pupil Transportation .. 138 

The Powers of a Local Board .. 140 

Mandatory Provisions...141 

Discretionary Provisions .••.•••••••.•• 143 

Distance .. 144 

Discrimination in Transportation ..149 

Summary and Conclusions.150 

V. THE LEGAL, STATUS IN REGARD TO INSTRUCTION.151 

I. RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION IN THE PUBLIC SCHOOL.152 

The Time when Religious Instruction may be Offered . . . 154 

The Place of Instruction.158 

Religious Garb.157 


x 

























































CHAPTER PAGE 

Textbook for Religious Instruction.158 

Compulsory Religious Instruction ( Chabot Case) . 159 

Facts in the Case. 160 

The Issues Involved.162 

The Reasoning of the Court .. 162 

Findings ..... . 167 

Significance of Findings . 168 

Conclusions. 170 

Summary. 171 

II. THE LANGUAGE OF INSTRUCTION.172 

The French Language Used Contrary to the Provisions 

of the Act. 174 

The Boutin Case .. 174 

The Mcdonald Case .. 176 

Language and the Guarantees of Section 93 of the 

B.N.A. Act (The Mackell Case).177 

Facts in the Case .. 177 

The Issues Involved . ......... 179 

The Findings of the Court. 179 

Conclusions. 183 

III. PATRIOTIC EXERCISES.184 

The Donald Case .. •••• 185 

The Ruman Case .. 186 

Comparison of Cases and Conclusions ..189 



































































CHAPTER 


PAGE 


VI LEGAL STATUS IN REGARD TO CONTROL.191 

I. SCOPE OF AUTHORITY OF SCHOOL PERSONNEL.192 

General Authority ..... . 192 

Authority out of School Hours and 

off School Grounds.19^ 

Conclusion .. 196 

II. SUSPENSION AND EXPULSION ...... . 198 

Disobedience and Misconduct . ..... 199 

Damaging School Property . ..... 202 

Truancy . ........ 204 

Mental Retardation ..... . ..... 205 

Refusal by a Teacher to Suspend a Pupil ...... 207 

Summary and Conclusions.208 

III. CORPORAL PUNISHMENT. 209 

The Authority of Statute ..211 

The Authority of Precedent 212 

Reasonable Punishment (Cases).217 

Excessive Punishment (Cases) ....•••••»»• 220 

Liability of School Boards for the 

Disciplinary Acts of Teachers.222 

Summary.223 

VII LEGAL STATUS IN REGARD TO THE TORT OF NEGLIGENCE .... 225 

I. TORT LAW. 225 

Definition of ’’Tort'*. 225 

Fundamental Grounds for Tort Liability. 226 

xii 


























































CHAPTER 


PAGE 


II. THE TORT OF NEGLIGENCE. 227 

Definition of Negligence . . . . . . 227 

Cause of Action for Negligence.. . * 229 

Some Terminology of Negligence. 229 

Legal Duty. 229 

Standard of Conduct . . . . .. 230 

The Reasonable Man. 230 

Types of Negligence. 231 

Ordinary Negligence . 232 

Slight Negligence ..... . 232 

Gross Negligence. 232 

Wilful and Wanton Negligence. 233 

Negligence Liability of School Authorities , . 233 

III. CANADIAN CASES. 235 

General Accidents on School Grounds 

and During School Hours. 236 

Unsuccessful Actions ...... . 236 

Successful Actions ...... . 240 

Accidents on School Grounds but Out 

of School Hours 245 

Accidents Off School Grounds.. 247 

Accidents in Laboratories and Industrial Shops 248 

Accidents During Physical Education Classes . 249 

Unsuccessful Actions . ...... 249 

Successful Actions ...••••••••• 252 

Accidents in Regard to Excursions ..... 253 


xiii 










































CHAPTER PAGE 

Accidents in Regard to School Patrols ...... 254 

Accidents in Regard to Transportation . 255 

Unsuccessful Actions . 256 

Successful Actions .• . 258 

Accidents Due to Independent Contractors .... 260 

Unsuccessful Action ..... . 260 

Successful Action...260 

IV. CONCLUSIONS.26l 

VIII CONCLUSIONS...265 

I. SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS . .265 

II. AREAS OF SPECIAL SIGNIFICANCE . .268 

The Relative Place of Different Branches 

of the Law .. 268 

The Responsibility for Educating the Child .... 269 

Separate Schools. 270 

Private Schools 270 

III. IMPLICATIONS.271 

IV. FURTHER RESEARCH ..273 

V. RECOMMENDATIONS .. 273 

BIBLIOGRAPHY. 2 77 

GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY... 278 

CASE BIBLIOGRAPHY. 284 

APPENDIX. 296 

A. Extract from the Manitoba Act, 1870 .. 297 

xiv 








































CHAPTER 


PAGE 


B. Extract from the Order in Council Admitting 

British Columbia into the Union, 1871 «•••••••• 298 

C. Extract from the Saskatchewan Act, 1905 and 

the Alberta Act, 1905 .299 

D. Extract from an Act to Approve the Terms of Union 

of Newfoundland with Canada, 19^9.300 


xv 














2 

clarify many legal issues. As one Court has said: 

... No matter how much care is taken, it is impossible in any 
Act of Parliament intended to regulate the conduct of men in the 
transactions of life to provide for all possible cases. Experience 
shows that the best framed Acts of Parliament are imperfect.^ 

For this reason it is imperative that the legal principles govern¬ 
ing Court decisions also be understood by the administrator. It is even 
more important that he knows how to apply these principles to the edu¬ 
cational situation. Statute law tells him which laws are to be applied; 
common law principles tell him how this application is to be made. 

Statement of the Problem 

The interests of the child are of paramount consideration in the 
educational system of a democratic country. Public schools find their 
very reason for existence in public concern for the child. It is of 
fundamental importance, therefore, that the legal rights and responsi¬ 
bilities of this chief player in the educational drama be fully under¬ 
stood. In this study it is proposed to examine and analyze statutory and 
case law in order to identify the principles which define the legal status 
of the pupil in the public school systems of the Canadian provinces. In 
particular, an attempt will be made to: (1) clarify and define the legal 
status of the Canadian public school pupil, especially in regard to his 
rights and responsibilities; (2) bring together the Court decisions 
affecting this status, and state in the language of the layman the 
general principles which the Courts have relied on in arriving at their 

2 Askew v. Manning et al., (1876), 38 U.C.Q.E. 3^5» at p. 37^* 























- 


























, 











CHAPTER I 


INTRODUCTION 

Today the school administrator must be many things to many people. 
His role is much more complex than it used to be and he is compelled to 
play many parts. "He must be a curriculum expert, an administrative 
genius, an office manager, a personnel director, a publicity agent, a 
maintenance chief, a master teacher, a diplomat, at times a judge, and 
now, with the wealth of new laws must also be a legal expert. 

The last mentioned role in the above quotation, that of legal 
expert, appears to add an inescapable dimension to the task of the school 
administrator today. There is little doubt that the school administrator 
will be more capable and tactful if he possesses a knowledge of school 
law. 

To be fully effective, however, such knowledge must not be 
confined merely to a familiarity with the provisions of statutory law; 
it must also extend to a knowledge and understanding of the judicial 
principles underlying Court decisions. Public education may receive its 
structure from statutory law, but it receives its operational pattern, 
in large part, from the legal principles laid down, by the Courts. 

The legality of many acts of school administrators can properly 
be evaluated only in the light of both statutory law and common law 
principles. The former alone is not sufficiently encompassing to 

^•G. F. Hopkins, "What are the Important Legal Aspects of School 
Administration," National Association of Secondary - School Principals , 
Bulletin, Vol. 40, No. 219, April 1956, p. 165. 























3 

decisions; (3) evolve a list of suggestions and recommendations to guide 
the administrator in setting up more efficient legal safeguards in dealing 
with pupils in the public schools. 

Delimitation of the Study 

Although this study attempts to give a national picture of the 
legal status of the Canadian public school pupil, it does not claim to 
be a legal treatise and should not so be considered. Nor does it claim 
to be a complete legal guide containing all laws affecting all the aspects 
of a pupil’s status. Rather it is an attempt to identify, examine, and 
report upon certain general principles which can be deduced from the 
judicial interpretation of statutory law. If statutory detail is 
desired it may be found by reference to the School Acts and the regulations 
of the Departments of Education. 

Statutory law is basic to an understanding of a pupil’s status 
in school. However, since this study is concerned mainly with those 
aspects of a pupil’s status which have been brought before the Courts for 
clarification, not all statutes pertaining to pupils will be examined 
here. Matters such as age of admission to school, qualifications for 
attendance, and exemptions to school attendance, form the framework 
within which the legal rights and responsibilities of a pupil are defined, 
and the statutes governing these matters are included in this study. On 
the other hand, statutes governing minor aspects of a pupil’s legal 
status are included only if they have reached the Courts for interpre¬ 
tation. In other words, not all statutory provisions are considered 


but attention is given to all available reported cases. 
































■ 














4 

In Newfoundland, where no Court cases dealing with any aspect of 
this study have been found, only the pertinent provisions of the statutes 
are considered. Yet the common law principles that have been applied in 
other provinces would, of necessity, also apply in Newfoundland, regard¬ 
less of the fact that no cases have been reported there. 

The concern in this study is with two main sources of authority 
affecting the legal status of the Canadian public school pupil. These 
are: 

1. The statutory authority as expressed in the B.N.A. Act and 
the statutes of provincial legislatures. 

2. The legal status of the pupil as interpreted by provincial 
and federal Courts. 

The major emphasis is on the latter source. 

In this study separate schools are considered as part of the public 
school system, and it is proposed to deal with the legal controversies 
arising out of the constitutional setting of these schools only as far as 
the purposes of the study require. That is to say, the peculiar place of 
separate schools within provincial school systems is considered only to 
the extent that it contributes to clarifying and defining the legal status 
of the pupil. The Separate School problem is directly related to the 
rights of religious minorities and their privileges of establishing 
schools of their own; and it is dealt with in this light. In so far as 
separate schools are concerned, therefore, this study deals ©nly with the 
implications which they have for the legal rights and responsibilities of 
the Canadian school pupil. 


♦ 

- - . 








































. 









Related Studies 


Only two studies have been found that deal with school law on 

4 

the Canadian scene. The first study was made by G. J. Ross in 1948, 
and the second by R. L. Lamb in 1957*^ The study by Ross covers all 
aspects of public education in Canada and is, consequently, a broad 
general coverage of case law in regard to Canadian public schools. 

The study by Lamb has developed only one aspect of the field 
covered by Ross, and presents a "reasonable picture" of the pattern of 
negligence actions against school boards and teachers. It deals in 
detail with what is contained in Chapter VII of the present study and 
has influenced both the organization of and approach to that chapter. 

Both of the above studies have been of considerable help to the 
present writer. The conclusions reached by Lamb and Ross have been 
invaluable in orienting this writer to his task, and have served, as 
well, as a basis for a further consideration of some major issues. In 
the present study this is particularly true of Chapter VII, which is 
largely based on the conclusions reached by Lamb. Both studies have 
suggested approaches and have served as valuable aids in locating the 
legal cases pertinent to this work. Neither study, however, has dealt 
with the educational scene in Quebec and Newfoundland. 

^G. J. Ross, The Courts and the Canadian Public Schools , Ph.D. 
Dissertation, University of Chicago, 1948. 

■5r.L. Lamb, The Legal Liability of School Boards and Teachers 
for Accidents in the Schools . M. Ed. Thesis, University of Toronto, 
1957. 




















1 






































. 




. 


















































































Sources of Data 


6 


As has been said, this study is concerned with statutory and 
case law. Consequently there were two primary sources of data: 

1. The laws and by-laws of governments. These include: (a) the 
British North America Act, 1867» and its amendments, (b) the Acts or 
Orders-in-Council admitting individual provinces to the federation, 

(c) the School Acts of the various provinces, and (d) the regulations 
of the Departments of Education. 

2. The law reports of the Dominion and the provinces. Since case law in 
Canada is law by precedent, its roots reach down into British and American 
soil. Cases from these two countries are referred to, however, only if 
they shed light on pertinent legal principles operative in the common 

law of Canada. 

Some secondary sources were also available, but these dealt 
largely with the American scene. They were valuable mainly in suggesting 
approaches to problems, and were only rarely applicable directly to 
Canadian education. 

One of the major problems faced by this writer was locating the 
legal cases pertinent to his study. However, the following legal publi¬ 
cations proved to be very helpful. 

1. Canadian Bhcyclopedia Digest . 

2. The Canadian Abridgement . 

3. Canadian Annual Digest . 

4. The Canadian Bar Review . 

5. The McGill Law Journal . 

In addition, references to Canadian, British and American cases pertinent 
to a particular issue were found in the law reports which served as 
invaluable aids in making the search complete. The indebtedness of the 
























































writer to the studies of Ross and Lamb has already been indicated. 


7 


Definition of Terms 

No terms in this study have been given any unusual connotation 
and are used, therefore, in the generally accepted way. If any special 
meaning is given to a concept, it is clarified where it occurs in the body 
of the text. Nevertheless, it may be advisable, as an aid to the general 
reader, to clarify certain legal concepts and terminology which may not 
be too familiar to a person not versed in law. The concepts below are 
defined in general terms only, and the definitions make no claim to 
complete precision. The sources relied upon for these definitions are 
the following: 

1. J. Bouvier, Bouviei^s Law Dictionary , Rawle's Revision, 1897* 

2. H. C. Black, Black*s Law Dictionary , 3rd Ed., 1933. 

Statute law . These are laws established by an act of the legis¬ 
lative power. They are the written will of the legislature, solemnly 
expressed according to the forms necessary to constitute them the law 
of the state. All statutory laws are written laws. 

Common law . As distinguished from statute law, the common law 
comprises the body of those principles and rules of action, relating to 
government and security of persons and property, which derive their 
authority solely from usages and customs of immemorial antiquity, or 
from the judgments and decrees of the Courts. The common law is, 
particularly, the ancient unwritten law of England. The common law is 
of fixed and immutable authority, and must be applied to controversies 
rigorously and in its entirety, and cannot be modified to suit the 













■ 








! 































































8 

peculiarities of a specific case, nor colored by any judicial discretion. 
Common law rests, confessedly, upon custom or decision, as distinguished 
from any claim to ethical superiority. 

Equity . This is a branch of remedial justice by and through 
which relief is afforded to suitors in the Courts of Equity. In the 
broad sense in which this term is sometimes used, it signifies natural 
justice. In a more limited application, it denotes equal justice between 
contending parties. In the past the rigidity and formality of the English 
common law often involved a denial of justice, and disappointed suitors 
referred their petitions to the King for relief and asked him to do what 
equity required. In time a separate body of principles known as the 
doctrines of equity arose, and a separate Court of Chancery to apply them. 
This gave rise to a duality of Courts, but in Britain and Canada today 
this duality has disappeared. Nevertheless, the rules of common law and 
the doctrines of equity still remain distinct and separate. "In effect, 
equity has become a part of the common law system, enriching it with a 
special procedure for certain kinds of cases, a wider range of remedies, 
and a modified application of certain of the strict rules of the common 
law. 


Case law. This is the body of law created by judicial decisions, 
as distinguished from law derived from statutory and other sources. 

^R. M. Dawson, The Government of Canada , Toronto, University 
of Toronto Press, 1956, pp. 454-455• 









, 

v -■ 


























. 




















- 

















































9 

Positive law. This is law actually ordained or established 
under human sanction and the will of society. It may be written or 
unwritten. Positive law is to be distinguished from natural law, which 
comprises those considerations of justice, right and universal expediency 
that are based on the voice of reason or of revelation. 

Natural law. That law which God, the sovereign of the universe, 
has prescribed to all men, not by any formal promulgation, but by the 
internal dictate of reason alone. It is governed by a just consideration 
of the agreeableness or disagreeableness of human actions to the nature 
of man; and it comprehends all duties which we owe either to the Supreme 
Being, to ourselves, or to our neighbors. 

Precedents. A precedent is a legal act or instrument which is 
deemed worthy to serve as a rule or model for subsequent cases. 

Mandamus. A mandamus is a remedial writ at common law. It is 
an extraordinary remedy directed against a public office in cases where 
the usual and ordinary modes of proceedings are powerless to afford remedies 
to the parties aggrieved, and when, without its aid, there would be a 
failure of justice. It confers no new authority, and the party to be 
coerced must have the power to perform the act required. Mandamus is 
remedial, tending to compel action and redress past grievances, but 
cannot be used as a preventive remedy to take the place of an injunction. 

Injunction. The writ of injunction may be regarded as the 


correlation of the writ of mandamus, the one enjoining the performance 















































































10 

of an unlawful act, the other requiring the performance of a lawful or 
neglected act. An injunction is a prohibitory writ, issued by the 
authority and generally under the seal of a Court of Equity, to restrain 
a party from performing an act which is deemed to be inequitable so far 
as regards the rights of some other party. 

General Procedure 

In the interests of clarity and comprehension, Chapter II of this 
study deals first with the statutory framework within which the status of 
the public school pupil, finds its meaning. Then in Chapter III two 
general but basic concepts regarding the legal status of a pupil are 
considered. This is done in order to add the common law dimension to 
the statutory framework considered in the previous chapter. In Chapters 
17, V, VT, and VII the particular aspects of pupil status within a school 
system are considered from both the statutory and common law points of 
view. The last chapter attempts to evaluate the conclusions reached, 
and set forth some implications of this study for school personnel. 

The following outline of chapter headings indicates the procedure 
that has been followed: 

1. Introduction 

2. Jurisdictions in Canadian Education 

3. Compulsory Attendance Laws and the Right to an Education 

4. Legal Status in Regard to Admission and Attendance 
Legal Status in Regard to Instruction 


5 . 






6 


Legal Status in Regard to Control 

Legal Status in Regard to the Tort of Negligence 

Conclusions and Implications 


11 


7. 

8 . 


Initial Assumption 

One major initial assumption has been made: A study and analysis 
of Statutory and Case law regarding the legal status of the public school 
pupil in Canada will reveal that status clearly, and allow one to deduce 
the common law principles which make that status effective. 





CHAPTER II 


LEGAL JURISDICTION IN CANADIAN EDUCATION 

In a democracy the various aspects of education are generally 
allocated to different levels of government. In the case of federated 
democracies these allocations are written into federal constitutions, the 
Acts or Orders-in-Council establishing the different states or provinces, 
the statutes of the state or provincial legislatures, and the rules and 
regulations of the local boards of education. Because of their importance 
in determining the legality of legislation it is necessary that these 
allocations be clearly comprehended by all persons concerned with educa¬ 
tional matters. It is proposed in this chapter to examine the legal 
framework of public education in Canada and to distinguish the areas of 
jurisdiction allocated to the three levels of government - federal, 
provincial, and local - and to examine the role of the Courts within this 
legal framework. This will be done under the heading: The Legal Frame¬ 
work of Public School Control. 

On the Canadian scene the legal framework of school control is 
complicated by provisions for denominational schools. It seems that no 
area of jurisdiction has engendered so much controversy as the one dealing 
with the place and control of denominational schools within the framework 
of Canadian education, especially at the point of articulation between the 
jurisdictions of the federal and provincial governments. It is proposed 
here to examine and define the rights and privileges in regard to 
denominational schools as they have been set down by statute and defined 
by the Courts. Such clarification is necessary for an understanding and 















. 

< 

. 

- 
















- 







































- 









13 

appreciation of the task of the Courts in finding the least thorny path 
through the wilderness of legal mandates and restrictions. This will be 
done under the heading: The Legal Status of the Separate Schools. 

The final section of this chapter will examine and define the 
legal status of certain minority groups that have sought, or have been 
allotted, a special place within the school systems of some of the 
provinces. This problem will be considered under the heading: The Legal 
Status of Other Minorities. 

The considerations in this chapter are of a general nature, in 
the sense that it is not proposed to deal with the historical development 
of these problems except in so far as it is necessary to clarify present 
conditions. Major emphasis will be placed upon the present status of the 
separate schools and separate school pupils within the legal educational 
framework. 


I. THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK OF PUBLIC SCHOOL CONTROL 

Ideally in a democracy the people themselves, either directly or 
indirectly through their representatives, decide the nature, extent, and 
allocation of the public school control that is to be exercised by the 
different levels of government. Such control is also influenced by the 
historical development, experience, and environmental setting of the 
society concerned. Although the Canadian educational systems have drawn 
liberally upon British tradition and American experiences, they have, in 
no small measure, been determined by the particular geographic, ethnic, 
and political circumstances of the Canadian environment. The result has 
been that the provincial educational systems have developed patterns 
























- 






« 









peculiarly their own 


14 


When the American Republic was formed the principle of duality in 
government was accepted and acted upon. Canadians, on the other hand, 
determined to learn a lesson from the disunity evidenced by the American 
Civil War, adopted the principle of unity as a dominating consideration 
in the formation of the new nation. Within the American governmental 
framework education, not being mentioned in the Federal Constitution, 
automatically falls under the complete control of the state legislature 
since the residue of powers was vested in the states. In Canada the 
control of education has been specifically given to the provinces by the 
British North America Act, 1 867 , but is subject to certain limitations 
and control by the federal government. Ironically enough, history seems 
to indicate that in the United States the possibilities of federal control 
of education are greater than in Canada. Increased federal participation 
in public school control is forced by social and economic trends in both 
countries, and the Supreme Courts are being compelled to decide far-reaching 
public education policy. 

Federal Authority 

It is not intended or necessary for our purpose to trace the events, 
controversies and compromises, that led to the passing of the B.N.A. Act 
in I 867 . It is sufficient to state that the B.N.A. Act, as the written 
part of the Canadian Constitution, gives to the provinces the complete 
control of education, subject to the constitutional guarantees of the Act 
of 1867. In view of the fundamental importance of section 93 of the B.N.A. 
Act, school authorities should be intimately familiar with its provisions. 


























v i 




* 




, 


















. 




















t 


. 




















- 







15 


The section reads as follows: 

93: In and for each Province the Legislature may exclusively 

make Laws in relation to Education, subject and according 
to the following provisions:- 

1. Nothing in any such law shall prejudicially affect 
any Right or Privilege with respect to Denominational 
Schools which any Glass of Persons have by Law in the 
Province at the Union: 

2. All the Powers and Privileges, and Duties at the Union 
by Law conferred and imposed in Upper Canada on the 
Separate Schools and School Trustees of the Queen*s 
Roman Catholic Subjects shall be and the same are 
hereby extended to the Dissentient Schools of the 
Queen's Protestant and Roman Catholic Subjects in 
Quebec: 

3. Where in any Province a System of Separate or Dis¬ 
sentient Schools exists by Law at the Union or is 
established by the Legislature of the Province, an 
Appeal shall lie to the Governor General in Council 
from any Act or Decision of any Provincial Authority 
affecting any Right or Privilege of the Protestant 
or Roman Catholic Minority of the Queen's Subjects 
in relation to Education: 

4. In case any such Provincial Law as from Time to Time 
seems to the Governor General in Council requisite 
for the due Execution of the Provisions of this 
Section is not made, or In case any Decision of the 
Governor General in Council on any Appeal under this 
Section is not duly executed by the proper Provincial 
Authority in that Behalf, then and in every such case, 
and as far only as the Circumstances of each Case re¬ 
quire , the Parliament of Canada may make remedial 
Laws for the due Execution of the Provisions of this 
Section and of any Decision of the Governor General 

in Council under this section. 

In all ten provinces the rights to sectarian education are protected 
either by the above provisions, or by provisions very similar to them. 


1 

Appendix 


For the provisions of the various Provincial Acts see 
pp. 296-300. 
















•• V 





- 




16 


Section 93» therefore, places the control of education into the 
hands of the Provincial Legislature, except in so far as the protection 
of denominational rights and privileges mentioned in the section are 
concerned. This protection is guaranteed by a rather unique feature of 
the Canadian federated system. The Federal Government has the consti¬ 
tutional authority to disallow any provincial legislation which is, in 
its judgment, detrimental to the interests of Canada as a whole, or if 
the provincial legislation is contrary to any provisions of the B.N.A. 

Act. Even though legislation in education is within the legal competence 
of the provincial legislatures, the Federal Government can disallow any 
provincial Act that would prejudicially affect the guaranteed rights and 
privileges in regard to denominational schools. It may be noted, however, 
that interference by the Governor-General-in-Council and the Dominion 
Parliament in educational matters has been rare, the last instance being 
the dispute over separate schools in Manitoba during the turn of the 

century. Since that time the Courts rather than the Federal Parliament, 

2 

have been relied upon to resolve any disputes in educational matters. 

Although education in Canada is not under the direct control of 
the Federal Government, the Dominion Parliament is concerned with certain 


^he provisions for an appeal to the Govern©r-General-in-Council 
and for the intervention of the Federal Parliament were not made applicable 
to Newfoundland. Since intervention of these two bodies in provincial 
matters has, in practice, become more or less obsolete in the other 
provinces as well, it is considered that the Courts are the most effective 
guardians of the rights and privileges granted under section 93 of the 
B.N.A. Act. 







■ 
















■ 

■ 

- 












. 




























































. 




17 


special kinds of education that contribute directly to national purposes.^ 
Advantage has been taken of implied powers to appropriate funds for 
general educational purposes, but any direct federal aid to provincial 
education is today still viewed with suspicion, and the extent of federal 
participation in education today is a vital but controversial problem. 

Provincial Authority 

In accord with the general grant of power given to the provinces 
in educational matters by section 93 of the B.N.A. Act, provincial legis¬ 
latures have determined educational structure in the provinces. 

E^ecially have they determined the types of schools to be established, the 
means of support, the types of curricula, the manner of control, and the 
qualifications and duties of the teachers. Such control is generally 
exercised through a central authority which is, in all cases, a depart¬ 
ment of the provincial government. Provincial governments, in turn, have 
delegated certain powers to local authorities. 

In each of the provinces of Canada the provincial pattern of edu¬ 
cation is written into the statutes of the province and the rules and 
regulations of the Department of Education. There are, of course, many 
similarities among the patterns established by the various provinces; 


■^The Federal Government does control and operate schools on 
Indian reservations and on federally owned land. In some cases the 
schools situated in national parks have also become a part of the 
educational system of the province in which the park is situated, at 
least as far as curriculum and inspection is concerned. Schools in 
national defence areas also follow the provincial pattern. Education 
in the North-West Territories is a Federal concern. These aspects of 
education, however, do not fall within the scope of this study. 





































18 


yet there are enough variations to make hazardous the application of all 
but the most general statements as to structure and type. Since the 
statutes vary from province to province the work of interpretation carried 
on by the courts becomes somewhat complex, and the legal principles govern¬ 
ing education in some areas are not necessarily applicable to other areas. 
Where, however, the legal principles arise out of the Common Law rather 
than out of Statute Law, application to all areas are valid. This statement 
also holds true when the spirit of section 93 is applied to an educational 
issue, in whatever province of Canada the issue may arise. 

It is worth noting here that the protective provisions of section 
93 do not purport to stereotype the educational system of any province as 
it existed at the time of the Union. On the contraiy, it expressly 
authorizes the provincial legislatures to make laws in regard to education, 
subject only to the provisions of the section. To exercise that power 
effectively the legislatures have been accorded a large measure of freedom 
to meet new circumstances and needs as they arise. As was stated by 
Chief Justice Meredith, "It was never meant that ... schools should be 
left forever in the educational wilderness of the enactments in force in 
1867. 

Local Authority 

Provincial supremacy over education brings with it the power to 
delegate authority to local communities. Belief in the democratic 

^ Ottawa Separate School Trustees vs . City of O ttawa , 24 D.L.R. 

497, at pp. 501 - 2 . 





































.. 








, 
























19 


principle would demand that some measure of local autonony is essential 
to an efficient school system. Consequently local school boards have 
been set up in all the provinces. The powers and duties of these boards, 
as defined in the various provincial Acts , are relatively uniform through 
the provinces. The delegation of authority, however, should not be 
construed as a surrender on the part of a province of its authority over 
school matters. On the contrary, the supreme authority of a province is 
evidenced by the fact that its legislature prescribes the scope of local 
control. The delegated authority is not acquired by the choice of the 
local community; it is obligatory rather than permissive, and when the 
province deems it expedient, that authority may be rescinded. 

In the provinces of Canada (with the exception of Quebec and 
Newfoundland) early legislation in Upper Canada has generally served as 
a pattern to establish the nature and scope of local responsibilities 
in education. This pattern has established that local boards are really 
"administrative agents for effecting provincial control of education."^ 
Ultimate decisions in regard to school control, however, lie within the 
perogatives of the provincial legislatures. Legislatures may organize 
municipal institutions and determine their structure; they may increase, 
decrease, or eliminate entirely, local responsibilities. School boards 
are agencies of the province, and within the framework of delegated 
authority act as local legislatures in educational matters. 

^T. C. Byrne, "Design and Structure in Canadian Education," 

The Alberta Journal of Educational Research , III, No. 1, March 1957» 
p. 31. 











20 

Policies formulated by such boards have the force of law and 
constitute part of the legal framework within which the schools operate. 
Unless there is evidence of bad faith, the Courts will not interfere with 
the discretionary powers granted to local boards. Generally speaking the 
court may set aside a board decision when (l) the board has exceeded its 
powers; (2) irregularity of procedure has caused serious harm; (3) the 
board has been mistaken, though action was taken in good faith; (4) the 
board has acted unjustly or prejudicially and in bad faith.^ In this 
respect the Courts have ruled: 

The discretionary and quasi-judicial powers vested in a School 
Board in matters relating to the schools under its control are so 
limited that the business of the Board must be regularly conducted 
within its jurisdiction in the bona fide discharge of its duties 
and in harmony with the laws of the province and the regulations 
of the Department, A School Board in matters relating to the 
schools under its control and involving discretion or judgment is 
bound to exercise such functions so that the whole question must 
be presented to the Board, should be weighed and considered by the 
Board and must be determined upon by the Board, nor has the Board 
the power to delegate duties or functions of this character to 
another instead of exercising its own judgment and discretion 
throughout.? 


The Role of the Courts 

Independence of the Courts . Federal systems of government, such 
as we have in Canada, are unique in that they inevitably result in a 
constant clash of powers between the different levels of jurisdiction. 


u Laviolette v. 
(1956) Rev., Leg. 215. 


Commissaires d 1 Ecoles de St . Jean 1 1 Evangeliste , 


?Mackell v. Ottawa Separate School Trustees , 18 D.L.R. 456. 

































. r, . 





. ' ■ : f'. t .‘:i i: ‘ f 

- 

■ 

t 




c 





- 


* 








There is, therefore, a persistent demand for the services of an impartial 
arbiter to decide on questions of jurisdiction.^ This function can be 
performed more acceptably by the Courts than by any other agency of 
government because of the institution of judicial "independence." Judges 
are made independent of most of the restraints checks and balances, and 
punishments which govern other public officials. As Dawson says: 

The judge is placed in a position where he has nothing to lose 
by doing what is right and little to gain by doing what is wrong; 
and there is therefore every reason to hope that his best efforts 
will be devoted to the conscientious performance of his duty.° 

Function of the Courts. The function of the judiciary is 
primarily the settlement of disputes brought before the Courts for that 
purpose. The judge must interpret the laws, whether they are statutory 
laws (written) or common laws (unwritten) , and he must give them clarity 
and precise meaning. The judge 

... stands as guardian to see that the rule of law is maintained; 
to ensure that no one will be punished except for a breach of the 
law, and to nullify the acts of any government or government 
official which are not legally authorized....The judiciary therefore 
performs political and constitutional functions of the greatest 
consequence by applying legal criteria to the actions of 
government 

In Canada the powers of the Courts may be called into play at 
three points: (l) When a wrong has been committed. This is the normal 
and most common cause of Court actions. (2) In equity, when the Court is 
convinced that the commission of a legal wrong is contemplated. This 

®R. M. Dawson, 0£. Cit ., p. 155• 










22 

means intervention prior to the actual commission of a wrong. (3) When 
the Courts are asked to decide questions specially formulated to ascertain 
the opinion of the Courts before legislation comes into effect. In Canada 
many questions concerning the interpretation of the B.N.A. Act have come 
before the Courts in this manner. The judicial interpretation of contem¬ 
plated legislation has obvious advantages in that administrative machinery 
need not be set up before there is an assurance that such machinery will 
not be eliminated on grounds of illegality. 


Interpretation by the Courts. The judicial review of legislative 
powers at various levels of government has been attacked on the grounds 
that it allows the Courts to alter legislation and read into it anything 
they wish. To a degree this danger does exist, but the Courts are fully 
cognizant of this temptation and on frequent occasions have consciously 
avoided this danger. On one occasion Judge Garroitf, of the Ontario 
Supreme Court, said: 

With questions of policy, we have nothing to do, nor do we 
sit to determine cases based only upon natural justice.... 

This is a Court of law; and a right asserted and claimed before 
us, as before any other of our Courts of law, must shew for its 
supporting foundation something in the substantive law of the 
Province, or the claim must fail.^ 

On another occasion the Court added: 

Whether these things were necessary or unnecessary, gracious or 
ungracious, is a matter that does not in any way affect the legal 
question involved in these actions; if they were lawful, the 
plaintiff's appeal should not be to those who expound the law, 
but to those who make it, or to those who elect the makers in 
regard to any grievance they may feel they have,-*-2 


^ Mackell v. Ottawa Separate School Trustee s, (1915)» 24 D.L.R. 
475, at p. 488. 

•^ Ottawa Separate School Trustees v. City of Ottawa , 24 D.L.R. 
497. at p. 502 . 















































23 

It is true that the Courts can, on occasion, shift the 
"constitutional centre of gravity" by throwing their weight to one side 
or other of an argument. Whether this will be done depends largely on 
the clarity, or lack of clarity, of the statutes under consideration. 

If statutory provisions are stated clearly and precisely such danger is 
cut to a minimum, or is even non-existent. 

Courts may modify, they cannot replace. They can revise 
earlier interpretations, as new arguments, new points of view 
are presented; they can shift the dividing line in marginal 
cases; but there are barriers they cannot pass, definite assign¬ 
ments of power they cannot reallocate. They can give a 
broadening construction of existing powers, granted to another, 
or modify the provisions of the B.N.A. Act regarding the 

of the executive and legislative branches of the 


In the same vein the Privy Council said that the duty of the 

Court "is to interpret, not to enact. The question is, not what may 

14 

be supposed to have been intended, but what has been said." This is 
a good rule to follow if the statutes are unambiguous, precise, and 
just; but in the interests of justice the Courts must, on occasion, 
consider the intention of the legislation. In spite of the above 
generalization, the Privy Council itself made the following statement: 

Their Lordships do not think it right to apply to Canada of 
today the decisions and the reasons therefor which commend 
themselves, probably rightly, to those who had to apply the 
law in different circumstances, in different centuries, to 
countries in different stages of development. The British 


•ganization 

inn t 


dominion.' 


3 0 . D. Skelton, Evidence before the Special Committee on the 
British North America Act; see its report 1935 P* 28 quoted in Dawson, 
op . cit. , pp. 156-157. 

^Brophy v. Attorney - General for Manitoba (1895) A.C. 202, at 

pp. 215-6. 













24 

North America Act planted in Canada a living tree capable of 
growth and expansion within its natural limits.1-5 

Their Lordships do not conceive it to be the duty of this 
Board - it is certainly not their desire - to cut down the 
provisions of the Act by a narrow and technical construction, 
but rather to give it a large and liberal interpretation so 
that the Dominion to a great extent, but within certain fixed 
limits, may be mistress in her own house, as the provinces 
to a great extent, but^within certain fixed limits, are 
mistresses in theirs. 

At the points of articulation between the different levels of 
jurisdiction lies a legal no-man*s land that only the Courts are competent 
to enter. If entry is made, the decisions of the Court must be made in 
the light of all the wisdom of which fallible men are capable. 

Legal principles as precedents . Judicial interpretation is a slow 
and gradual process of change. In education, as in other areas of 
national life, a judicial interpretation of a law is the origin of a 
legal principle. This principle serves as a precedent for subsequent 
Courts, until it is overruled. The greater the number of legal decisions 
that are decided on the basis of this principle, the more firmly is the 
principle established. It is logical, therefore, that the accumulation 
of Court decisions on educational matters should serve as a set of legal 

17 

principles to guide school personnel in the performance of their duties. ' 
Precedent, however, cannot be relied upon in all circumstances, for it is 

^ Edwards v. Attorney-General for Canada, (1930) A.C. 124 at 
p. 134. Quoted in Dawson, op . cit . , p. 159 • 

l 6 Ibid ., pp. 159-60. 

Bolraeier, op . cit . , p. 212. 






. 

1 






. 







25 


usually based on statute law, and such law varies among different 
jurisdictions. Decisions rendered in one province may not be applicable 
in another province. Then again, the influence of social and political 
changes on judicial interpretation can alter principles previously 
established. 

It is of fundamental importance that statutes be clearly written 
in conformity with constitutional provisions. If this caution is properly 
observed by those in whom the authority is placed the Courts are not 
likely to interfere in the administrative affairs of any educational 
system. 


II. THE LEGAL STATUS OF SEPARATE SCHOOLS 

Documentary evidence seems to indicate that few problems in 

Canadian education have caused so much heated controversy as the separate 

school situation. It is not proposed, or necessary for our purpose, to 

review the entire separate school issue in Canada, especially the early 

controversies dealing with the basic constitutional problems involved, 

1 ft 

for much has already been written on this phase of the question. The 
early legal cases on this problem arose primarily out of the formation of 
new provinces, or attempts by established provinces to revise their school 
Acts. Cur concern here, however, is with those areas of the controversy 
that have helped to define the legal status of separate schools in the 
different provinces, because this status has important implications for 
the legal rights and responsibilities of the school child in regard to 


l^For the history and cases see particularly G.M.Weir, The 
Separate School Question in Canada , Toronto, The ftyerson Press 193^; 
J.C. Miller, op. cit. , pp. 93-229; Report of the Royal Commission on 
Education in Ontario , Toronto, Published by Baptist Johnston, Printer 
to the King's Most Excellent Majesty, 1950, pp. 392-539» 803-89^. 
































. 













































< 

, 






. 












attendance and instruction. 


26 


It is first necessary to know the pattern of separate school 
provisions in the different provinces and to define clearly certain 
basic terms. This will be done under the heading: Statutory Recognition 
of Separate Schools. This will be followed by an examination of the legal 
cases dealing with such status, under the heading: Separate School Issues 
and Their Implications for the Legal Status of the Pupil. In addition, 
brief consideration must be given to certain other minority groups who 
do not fall neatly into the Roman Catholic - Protestant classification. 

This will be done in the section entitled: Legal Status of Other Minorities. 

Statutory Recognition of Separate Schools 

Clarification of terms. The term "separate school" is often not 
clearly defined or understood in general usage. Legally, separate schools 
are public schools of a special kind. They are legally provided for by 
provincial statute as part of the public school system, and are managed 
by a legally recognized class of persons belonging to a particular 
religious minority. In Canada this minority is generally Roman Catholic, 
although if the majority of inhabitants in any area are Catholic, a 
Protestant separate school may be established there. All separate schools, 
however, are and remain an integral part of the public school system and 
are subject to control by the same central authorities. Separate schools 
in this sense exist only in Ontario, Saskatchewan and Alberta. 

One cannot in strict accuracy say that separate schools, as defined 
above, exist in Quebec. In this province, due to the dual nature of the 
educational system, schools may be"denominational" and/or "dissentient," 
but not separate in the above sense of the term. In the dual system of 















































































































27 


Quebec the schools are controlled, even centrally, by either Roman 

Catholic or Protestant authorities. For this reason all schools may be 

classed as denominational, for all are operated by either one or other 

religious denomination recognized by law. A "dissentient M school 

resembles a separate school in the sense that it is a school that has 

been established and is managed by a religious minority, but it differs 

from a separate school in the sense that it is not administered by the 

19 

same central authority that administers the school of the majority. 

In Newfoundland there are actually four school systems, but in 

contrast to Quebec, they all operate under one central authority. Each 

system has a Superintendent of Schools who operates the system of his 

20 

particular denomination. Therefore, the schools in Newfoundland are 
"denominational" but not "separate" in the sense in which such schools 
exist in Ontario, Saskatchewan and Alberta. In the provinces of British 
Columbia, Manitoba, New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Nova Scotia, 
the only schools that legally exist are public schools. In some of these 
provinces, however, informal privileges may be extended to Roman 
Catholics by virtue of special "gentlemen's agreements" by which their 
children are educated in specially designated public schools staffed by 
teachers of the Roman Catholic faith. Such schools, however, enjoy no 
special legal status. 


19 

These distinctions are further clarified when the problems 
of other minorities are considered later in this chapter. 

20 Roman Catholic, Anglican, United Church, and Salvation Army. 







28 

With such provincial variations, it is small wonder that the 

Courts have been called upon to clarify and interpret the problems 

arising out of the right of religious minorities in education. It is 

interesting to observe that in those provinces where no separate or 

dissentient schools are legally recognized, little difficulty seems to 

arise once the basic constitutional issues have been nesolved. In 

provinces where separate schools legally exist litigation is more 

frequent. The cases on record have occurred in three provinces: 

21 

Ontario, Quebec, and Saskatchewan. Since separate schools find their 
legal origin in the provisions of the B.N.A. Act, 1867, it is well to 
examine the nature of the provisions of section 93 a little more closely. 

Separate School Issues and Their Implications for the Legal Status of 

the School Pupil 

This section concerns itself with the nature of the "denominational" 
rights and privileges granted by the B.N.A. Act, 186?, and as defined by 
the Courts. The following questions are considered: 

(1) What is the character of a "denominational" right? (Determination of 
a denominational right). 

(2) Are the denominational rights those of parent or child? 

(3) Do parents have a free choice as to which schools (separate or 
public) they may send their children and for which schools they will be 
taxed? (A parent *s choice as to schools) 

^-This discussion, of course, omits consideration of basic 
constitutional issues which were resolved in the latter part of the 
19th century, e.g., the Manitoba school question, for these are beyond 
the scope of this study. 










29 


(4) Can the provincial legislature suspend or withdraw the powers 

of the local administrative body in charge of a separate school? (Central 
control of the administrative function of a separate school board). 

(5) Do separate schools form part of the public school system, or are 
they completely independent in regard to curriculum offerings? (The 
independence of separate schools). 

(6) In relation to the guaranteed rights and privileges, who is a 
Catholic and who a Protestant? (Definition of Roman Catholic and 
Protestant). 

All of these questions have important implications for the legal 
status of the school child in Canada. The answers help to define the 
child*s rights and responsibilities and help to determine the nature of 
the education to which the child is exposed. It is self-evident that the 
questions stated also involve the problems of religion and language in 
the schools. It is proposed here to deal with these aspects only in so 
far as necessary to clarify the separate school status, and leave the 
more detailed consideration of religion and language to Chapter 7. 

The determination of a "denominational** right . In section 93 (l) 
of the B.N.A. Act, it is stated that no provincial law "shall preju¬ 
dicially affect any Right or Privilege with respect to Denom i national 
22 

Schools which any Class of Persons have by Law in the Province at the 
Union." One of the questions the Courts have had to answer was: What 
factor, or factors, determine whether a school is "denominational" or 
not? In various litigation, claims were made that the denominational 

22 


'Underlining mine. 





































- 

















. 













• 

























' 










30 

character of a school is determined not only by religion but by race and 

language as well. A case that was particularly concerned with this 

23 

question occurred in Ontario. 

In the Mackell case one of the contentions of the Separate School 
Board was that the free use of the French language in separate schools was 
a "denominational" right protected by section 93 (l) of the B.N.A. Act, 
and therefore could not be abrogated by the provincial legislature or by 
the Department of Education. The Court pointed out that the first enact¬ 
ment regarding separate schools in Ontario was made in 1841, after Upper 

oh, 

and Lower Canada had been united. In 1843 the Act of 1841 was repealed 
and for the first time introduced the religious element as a reason for 
establishing separate schools.^ The Separate Schools Act of 1863» besides 
providing for the establishment and maintenance of Roman Catholic separate 
schools, also provided for similar schools for coloured people and 
Protestants. The principle applied to all cases was that these separate 
schools were to be brought into existence by the voluntary action of 
respective classes, Protestants, Roman Catholics, and coloured people. 
Except in the case of schools for coloured people, there is not to be 
found in the legislation prior to Qonfederation any recognition of the 

^ 3 pttawa Separate School Trias tees v. Mackell , (191?) A.C. 62; 32 
D.L.R. 1; affirming 24 D.L.R. 475; 34 D.L.R* 335* Hereinafter referred to 
as the Mackell case. 

24 4 and 5 Viet. ch. 18, sec. 11. 

25 7 Viet. ch. 29, sec. 56 . 









31 


right to separate schools based upon linguistic or racial differences. 

26 

Only religious differences are found specifically mentioned. In the words 
of Justice Garrow: 

... the "right of privilege" protected by law is not one con¬ 
cerning language, but to have what the general community has not, 
namely, religious instruction imparted in such schools 4 ^ 7 

The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council concurred in this opinion when 

it stated in the words of Viscount Haldane, Lord Chancellor: 

... the class of persons to whom the right or privilege is 
reserved must, in their Lordships' opinion, be a class of persons 
determined according to religious belief, and not according to 
race or language. ° 

As the final authority the Privy Council has established that "denominational" 
rights are determined by religion only, and consequently only Roman Catholic 
children, regardless of race or language, have the right to attend Roman 
Catholic separate schools. 

Are the "denominational"rights those of the parent or the child ? 

The Mackell case raises an interesting question. In case the parent, 

and ratepayer, is of one religious denomination and the children are of 

another, to which school shall the child be sent? A case in Quebec partially 

29 

answers this question. 


26 24 D.L.R. 475 at p. 486. 

27 Ibid ., p. 491. 

28 32 D.L.R. 1, at p. 4. 

29 

Shannon v. Les Syndics D'Bcoles Dissidents de St. Romould , (1930) 
S.C.R. 599; 4 D.L.R. 190. 

























32 

Whitefield Shannon, the respondent in the appeal, was a resident 
of the municipality of St. Romould, and in educational matters subject to 
the control of either the school commissioners (Roman Catholic) or of the 
school trustees (Protestant). The great majority of the people in the 
community were Roman Catholics. There also existed a dissentient Protestant 
school corporation, and it was this school body that Shannon sued to have 
his children educated in their school. The respondent professed to be a 
Protestant, but he was married to a Roman Catholic, and had several 
children, three of whom were of school age. In 192? the defendant board 
refused to accept these children into their school on the grounds that the 
children were being brought up as Roman Catholics and were to be considered 
as such for school purposes. Because the children professed a religion 
different from that of the father, the father was not entitled to be con¬ 
sidered a dissident, and the board had struck his name from the dissentient 
roll and advised him to pay his taxes to the school commissioners. The 
respondent sought a writ of mandamus against the appellants to force them 
to receive his children in their school. 

The Supreme Court before which the appeal was made, affirmed the 
judgment of the Court of King's Bench, granting the respondent a writ of 
mandamus and ordering the appellants to receive the respondent's children 
in their school. In the words of the Court: 

The trustees of a dissentient school cannot deny the right of 
a dissentient ratepayer to have his children educated ... at the 
dissentient school for the support of which he is taxed, notwith¬ 
standing the fact that the religious faith of the children is 
different from that professed by the parent.30 


3 °lbid .. p. 599. 











































’ 












. 








A question that is not answered by the Court is whether the children 
would have been allowed to attend the Catholic school if they had 
been accepted there and the parent had not objected. 

A parent’s choice as to schools . The Courts have established that 
"denominational" rights are based on religion, and that it is the religion 
of the parent that is the decisive factor in this matter. A question that 
naturally arises out of these decisions is: Do the parents have a free 
choice as to which school, separate or puhLic, their children may attend, 
and for which they shall be taxed? In other words, can a Roman Catholic 
be a public school supporter even if there is a Roman Catholic separate 
school in his district? On the other hand, can a Protestant be a Separate 
school supporter if such separate school is a Catholic school? Three 

31 

Canadian cases deal with this question." The first case occurred in 
Ontario and the other two in Saskatchewan. 

In the Renaud case in Ontario the parents were both Roman Catholic 
and both owned land in the school section in which they resided. The father 
declared that his land should be assessed for public school purposes while 
the mother declared her land be assessed for separate school purposes. They 
both agreed that their children should attend the separate school of their 
district and notified the authorities accordingly. On the assessment list 

31 

Renaud v. Board of Trustees of Roman Catholic Separate School 
for School Section 11 in the Township of Tilbury North , (193*0 O.W.N. 218, 
(1933) 3 D.L.R. 172, (1933) O.R. 565; McCarthy v. City of Regina and the 
Regina Board of P.S, Trustees , (Bartz Case) 1917* 32 D.L.R. 7*H» (1918) 

A.C. 911; McCarthy v. City of Regina and the Regina Boar d of P.S. Trustees 
(Neida Case) 1917» 32 D.L.R. 755- 































34 


the mother was described as the parent. However, in entering the 
assessment, the assessor made an error in designating the residence of the 
mother with the result that the children's names did not appear on the 
annual enumeration roll for their district as was required by law. The 
separate school board of the district refused to admit the children to its 
school and the parents sought a mandamus to compel it to do so. 

The lower Court refused to grant the mandamus and said: 

It is not the ownership of property in the section by the parent 
or guardian of a child - it is not the assessment of such property 
and the entiy of the owner as a Separate School supporter - it is not 
the religion of the parent, guardian or child, that imposes upon the 
trustees the duty of providing for it adequate accommodation and 
legally qualified teachers - it is solely, the name of the child on 
the annual enumeration that poses the duty, quoad that child. 3 % 

The case was appealed to the High Court of Justice, which reversed the 

decision. Justice Kerwin stated: 

It is admitted that Mrs. R.'s residence is in the same school 
section and that she is actually a supporter of the school under the 
control of the respondent Board. That being so, the error made by 
the assessor in stating the residence in the school section cannot 
deprive the applicant of any rights that she may have. The two 
parents of the children live together and both are Roman Catholics. 
There is nothing to prevent one parent, under these circumstances, 
being assessed as a public school supporter with respect to one 
parcel of land, and the other parent as a Roman Catholic Separate 
School supporter with respect to a different parcel of land. The 
assessor has adopted the wishes of both parents in naming the mother 
as the parent in the enumeration, and what the assessor did was 
correct .™ 

The decision of the lower Court was reversed and the mandamus granted. 

It is difficult to understand why the lower Court would charge an 


32 (1933), 3 D.L.R. 172 , at p. 177. 
33(1934), o.W.N. 218. 












































35 


error, made by the assessor, against the parents. Nevertheless, in the 

final decision certain legal principles governing the rights of parents 

and children are clearly evident, (l) In Ontario a ratepayer, regardless 

of religious affiliation, may state to which school system his taxes shall 

go. (2) If both parents own land they need not be assessed for purposes 

of the same school system. They have a free choice. (3) In case each is 

assessed for a different system, the children shall attend the system 

supported by the person who is legally declared as parent. (4) An error 

made by others cannot be used to deprive a parent or a child of the right 

to an education. In this case an error had been made by the assessor and the 

childrens' names did not appear on the annual enumeration roll of the 

district. Yet the children had the right to attend the Catholic school. 

This, however, was the exception and in general it still holds true that, 

barring errors of this kind, a separate school board is obligated to accept 

and instruct a child only when its name appears on the annual enumeration 

roll of the district. Whether a child's name will appear there depends upon 

the free choice of the parents of the child. Barring error, the ruling of 

34 

the lower Court is absolutely correct. 

In Saskatchewan the Courts faced a similar problem but arrived at 
a different answer.33 This case is divided into two sections: the Bartz 
case dealing with Roman Catholics, and the Neida case dealing with Protes¬ 
tants. Bartz was a Roman Catholic who wished to be assessed for public 


3 ^supra , p. 34. 

^^ McCarthy case, ©£. cit . 






























. 


























































36 

school purposes even though there was a separate school in his district. 

The public school board accepted his taxes and action was brought against 
it by McCarthy, who claimed that Bartz had no choice but to support the 
separate schools. 

The board's argument was based on two contentions: (l) That after 
the establishment of a separate school it was only those who had actually 
voted in favour thereof that were liable to the rates to support such 
schools. That as to all other Roman Catholic ratepayers it was a matter of 
"conscience" whether they would support separate schools or not. (2) That 
the Dominion Parliament had no power to impose the restrictions in sec. 17 
of the Saskatchewan Act as to separate schools. 

The decision of the Court on both these questions is best given in 
the words of Justice Newlands: 

Can it, then, be argued that such a district is established only 
by those voting in favour of it? There being no individual right to 
form such a district, how can it be said that the individuals voting 
for the formation of the district are the ones who established it? 

The minority voting are bound by those in the majority, if they 
decide not to form such a district, and are they not equally bound 
where the majority vote is in favour of forming the district? Other¬ 
wise what is the object of taking a vote? Surely it is to decide 
whether the religious minority as a class will establish a separate 
school district, and surely when that vote is favourable, that the 
whole class is bound, as it would be bound if the vote was 
unf avou rabl 

The principle arising out of this decision seems to be that where 


^Section 17 ± s a re-enactment of sec. 93 of the B.N.A. Act with 
certain modifications. These modifications, based on ordinances of the 
North-Vfest Territories passed prior to the Saskatchewan Act became a part 
of this Act. See Appendix, page299 and also 32 D.L.R. p. 7^5* 

352 D.L.R. 741 , at p. 749. 




37 

the minority ratepayers in a district have established a separate school 
in Saskatchewan, all the ratepayers of the same religious denomination 
in the district are bound to contribute to the support of such school. A 
ratepayer of the same religion cannot choose to be a supporter of another 
school. 


In regard to the second contention the Court declared the Dominion 
Parliament had every power to make changes in the application of the B.N.A. 
Act to new provinces. Prior to 1870 there was no law or regulation or 
ordinance with respect to education in force in the area now comprised by 
Saskatchewan. Therefore the system of education as set up by the 
Saskatchewan Act in regard to separate schools and their rights, are 
governed by that Act, and not by sec. 93 of the B.N.A. Act. Justice 
Newlands concluded: 

The second ground of the appeal, that the Dominion Parliament had 
no right to impose upon this province the restrictions contained in 
sec. 17 of the Saskatchewan Act, is based upon the argument that the 
B.N.A. Act as a whole must apply to the new province; that it can 
neither be taken from or added to by the Dominion Parliament.38 

... How an exemption from taxation? when there was no law imposing 
taxation, can be said to be a right or privilege with respect to 
denominational schools which a class of persons had by law , passes 

my comprehension.39 

Section 17 of the Saskatchewan Act, and any provincial legislation passed 
in conformity with that section is intra vires . 

In the sister case (Neida case) the decision conformed to the above 


38 Ibid., p. 750. 
39 Ibid ., p. 755. 


















































. 






































38 

rulings. Nick Neida admitted that he was a Protestant but wanted to be 


assessed for separate school purposes. The Court ruled: 

Not being of the religious faith of the minority which has 
established the separate school he cannot exercise the right 
granted only to such minority, and cannot escape the obligation 
of being assessed for the support of the public school. 

In regard to the parent*s choice of schools as between separate 
and public, the Courts hold: (l) In Ontario a Roman Catholic parent may 
elect the school system to which his taxes go. His children will then 
attend the system to which such taxes are paid. ( 2 ) In Saskatchewan, if 
a separate school exists in a district, the ratepayer has no choice but 
to support the school operated by members of his religious denomination. 


Central Control of the Administrative Functions of a Separate School Board . 

Among the vital questions the Courts have had to answer in regard 
to education in Canada is the following: Can the provincial legislature 
suspend or abrogate the administrative body of a separate school? A 

/• 42 

case in point occurred in Ontario in 1916. 


^32 D.L.R. 755. at p, 756. 

4l 

The difference between Ontario and Saskatchewan can also be 
explained by reference to the provisions for separate schools in the 
School Acts of the two provinces. In Ontario the freedom of choice is 
given to Roman Catholics by section 62 of The Separate Schools Act , 
R.S.O. 1950, ch. 356. In Saskatchewan section 39 of The School Act, 
R.S.S. 1953* ch, 169 > provides in general terms that "the ratepayers 
establishing the school (separate) shall be liable only to assessments 
of such rates as they impose upon themselves in respect thereof." The 
Courts have held that this gives the individual no choice in the matter. 

^ Ottawa Separate School Trustees v. City of Ottawa : Ottawa 
Separate School Trustees v. Quebec Bank , (1917) A.C. ? 6 , 32 D.L.R. 10., 

30 D.L.R. 770, (1916) 24 D.L.R. 497- 
























39 


The board of the Ottawa separate schools insisted that the 
French language should be used as the language of instruction in schools 
under its management. The Department of Education, however, refused to 
permit such a practice. As a result the board failed to open the schools 
under its charge at the time appointed by law, and failed to provide 
qualified teachers for the said schools. Under an Order-in-Council of 
July 25, 1915, the appellant board was abolished and an appointed 
commission was set up to manage the affairs of the separate schools in 
Ottawa. This step was taken under the authority of sec. (3) of 5 Geo. 

V. ch. 45 (1915), which was an Act passed by the Provincial Legislature. 
Section (3) provided as follows: 

If, in the opinion of the Minister of Education, the said 
Board fails to comply with a.ny of the provisions of this Act, 
he shall have power with the approval of the Lieutenant-Governor 
in Council - (a) to appoint a commission of not less than three 
or more than seven persons. 

(b) To vest in and confer upon any commission so appointed all 
or any of the powers possessed by the Board under statute or 
otherwise, including the right to deal with and administer the 
rights, properties, and assets of the Board, and all such other 
powers as he may think proper and expedient to carry out the 
object and intent of this act. 

(c) To suspend or withdraw all or any part of the rights, powers, 
and privileges of the Board, and whenever he may think desirable 

to restore the whole or any part of the same, and revest the same 
with the Board. 

(d) To make such use or disposition of any legislative grant 
that would be payable to the said Board on the warrant of any 
inspector for the use of the said schools, or any of them, as 
the Minister may in writing direct. ^ 

The question raised in the appeal was whether this section was within the 

competency of the provincial legislature. The appellants contended that 


4 332 D.L.R. 10, at p. 11 









40 

the section prejudically affected certain rights and privileges with 
respect to denominational schools reserved under the provisions of sec, 

93 (1) of the B.N.A. Act, I 867 . 

The Supreme Court of Canada ruled that the section under dispute 

was within the competence of the legislature and did not prejudically 

affect any right or privilege with respect to denominational schools 

44 

guaranteed by the B.N.A. Act. The appellants then took the case to 

45 

the Privy Council, whose decision is of particular interest and importance. 

The case of the respondent commission was that the appellant board 
did not come within the category of "a class of persons," and that therefore 
no guaranteed right or privilege had been prejudicially affected by the 
legislature in question. The respondents argued further that the rights 
and privileges under consideration were those of all the adherents of the 
Roman Catholic schools in the province and that since the board repre¬ 
sented only a minority of a large class it could not properly be desig¬ 
nated "a class of persons." The Privy Council held, however, that the 
right of electing managers for their schools is conferred upon supporters 
of separate schools. Since the appellant board was duly elected for the 
management of Roman Catholic separate schools within the city of Ottawa, 
by the Roman Catholics within the area, such a board represented the 
interests of the Catholics within the city, and enjoyed the rights 

^32 D.L.R., 10, at. p. 11 
4 532 D.L.R. 10, (1917) A.C. 76 








conferred upon it by such supporters. The Court said: 


4l 


Apart, therefore, from any words of limitation or any 
implication to be drawn from the context, the appellant Board 
represents a section of the class of persons who are within 
the protection of provision (1). Their Lordships can find 
neither limiting- words nor anything in the context which would 
imply that they are excluded from the benefit of the provision. 


46 


The rights and privileges guaranteed by sec. 93 (l) of the B.N.A. 


Act were then applicable to the appellant board. The next question was: 


Did the powers granted in the impeached legislation prejudicially affect 
these rights and privileges? The powers conferred on the Minister by 
sec. (3) of the provincial legislation were expressed in very wide terms. 
The legislation provided that all the powers of the board might be 
withdrawn for an indefinite time, and subject only to restoration by the 
discretion of the Minister. The appointed commission was a nominated body, 
in the selection of which the ratepaying supporters of the separate schools 


had no voice. The Court ruled: 


There is no question that the impeached section of the Act of 
1915 does authorize the Minister of Education to suspend or 
withdraw legal rights and privileges with respect to denomi¬ 
national schools.? 


The Court stressed that this was not merely an interference with 
a right or privilege, but an entire withdrawal of all rights for an 
indefinite period of time. Furthermore, the question was not whether such 
power would be used with wisdom and moderation, but rather, 

... it is the creation of the power and not its exercise that 
is subject to objection, and the objection would not be removed 


46 32 D.L.R. 10, at p. 13- 
47 

r Ibia. , p. 12. 































42 


even though the powers conferred were never exercised at all. To 
give authority to withdraw a right or privilege under these 
conditions necessarily operates to the prejudice of the class 
of person affected by the withdrawal. ... It was argued that no 
evidence on behalf of the appellant board had been called to prove 
that the withdrawal of their rights, powers, and privileges, 
operated to their prejudice. In the opinion of their Lordships 
no such evidence was necessary.^ 

Their Lordships declared that the Act of 1915* as framed, was ultra 
vires , and the province was compelled to reinstate the board. 

The decision made it clear that the provincial authorities could 
not withdraw the powers of a separate school board. Could separate 
schools then break away from the central control established by the 
province, and operate independently of the public school system? What 
was the alternative? The Court was concerned with this difficulty and 
said: 


It may be pointed out, however, that the decision in this appeal 
in no way affects the principle of compulsory free primary education 
in the province established under the School Law of 1850, and that 
if the appellant board and their supporters fail to observe the 
duties incident to the rights and privileges created in their favour, 
the result is that the children of Roman Catholic parents are under 
obligation to attend the common schools, and thus lose the privileges 
intended to be reserved in their favour under provision (l) of sec, 

93 of the B.N.A. Act, I 867 . 9 

In this respect members of the appellant board were in the same 
position as other boards or bodies of trustees entrusted with the 
performance of public duties, and were liable to process if they refused 
to carry out their statutory obligations. Nevertheless in this case, 








the appellant board after resuming control of the separate schools, 
continued to refuse to follow the regulation regarding the language of 
instruction that had given rise to the litigation. Not until 1927 were 
new arrangements made and the controversy settled; but until that time 
no provincial grants were paid to these separate schools and the schools 
were operated as private institutions at the sole expense of their 
supporters. 

The Independence of Separate Schools. The question of the place 
of the separate schools within the public school system was answered in 
the above case only by implication. It was not until 1927 that new 
litigation considered this question directly.^ Although a number of 
issues were involved in this latter case, the matter of concern here is 
whether the separate schools could teach whatever they liked without 
control or restraint on the part of the central authority. Tied to this 
issue was the question of provincial grants and the right of Roman 
Catholics to establish their own high schools and collegiate institutes. 
The major question affecting the legal status of the pupil is whether 
separate schools are a part of the system of public school education 
or not. 

-*®J. C. Miller, op . cit ., p. 191-192; See also, Report of the 
Royal Commission on Education in Ontario , op . cit ., pp. 408-412. 

•53- Tiny Separate School Trustees y. The King (1928) 3 D.L.R# 733 
affirming (1927) 4 D.L.R. 857, S.C.R. 637» affirming on equal division 
(1927) 1 D.L.R. 913, 60 O.L.R. 15, affirming 59 O.L.R. 96. 
















44 

The appellants in the Tiny case contended that the Department of 
Education could not make regulations for the control of the courses of 
study to be taught in the separate schools. They argued that such 
regulations were prohibitory and in derogation of the rights given to 
separate schools at Confederation. They claimed the right to select the 
courses of study for their schools. 

The Department may only make regulations as to what text¬ 
books shall be used and as to the hours of study. The Department 
cannot, by regulation, prevent the coming into existence of a new 
school; it can only regulate existing schools; its regulations, 
even then, must not derogate from the rights which the separate 
schools have possessed since Confederation. 

The respondent argued that the privileges of the separate schools under 
sec. 93 of the 3.N.A. Act meant that such schools were free from inter¬ 
ference in their denominational aspect, and that there had not been an 
interference of this nature either by regulation or by legislation. Even 
at Confederation the separate schools had been subject to the Council of 
Public Instruction (now the Department of Education) as regards regulation 
of grading, subjects taught, and textbooks. The respondent further claimed 
that even before Confederation the separate schools did not possess such 
wide and independent powers as were claimed now. 

The appellants’ claims were founded upon the provisions of the 

53 

Separate Schools Act of 1863 > the so called "Charter of denominational 
rights" in Ontario, and on the provisions of the Upper Canada Common 


^ 2 60 O.L.R. 15, at p. 16. 
^Can. 2 6 Viet, cap. 5. 






45 


54 

Schools Act of 1859» both of the late Province of Canada, and in 
force at the Union. Section 7 of the 1863 Act reads: 

7. The trustees of separate schools forming a body corporate 
under this act, shall have the power to impose, levy and collect 
school rates or subscriptions, on and from persons sending children 
to, or subscribing towards the support of such schools, and shall 
have all the powers in respect to separate schools, that the trustees 
of common schools have and possess under the provisions of the Act 
relating to common schools. 55 

The suppliants pointed to this section as giving them powers of which 
they had since been unlawfully deprived. 

The Court reviewed in detail the various provisions of the Acts 
of 1859 and 1863 and held that the contention of the suppliants ran 
counter to the whole spirit of the legislation. Judge Hodgins commented: 

I cannot imagine a more chaotic system of education than would 
result if the claims made by the suppliants before us were given 
effect to... This would mean that, side by side with a system 
scientifically organized, classified, and regulated, there would 
exist a wholly uncontrolled system, managed by urban and rural 
trustees according to their individual notions and yet entitled 
to share in every public grant whether specific or general, and 
to use it at their own will, regardless of what designation the 
Legislature had given it. I do not think that separate school 
legislation existing in 1867 can possibly be stretched so far 
as that.5c 

Apparently the Court was convinced that past legislation had endeavoured to 
harmonize the laws governing common and separate schools and also that it 
had at the same time followed a definite policy of establishing a general 
system of education covering the entire province. All children, regard¬ 
less of creed, were to be assured of at least a rudimentary education. The 


54c.s.U.C. cap. 64. 

5560 O.L.R. 15, at p. 38. 
56 Ibid., p. 35. 
























- 























































46 


education to be offered was to be determined by the Council of Public 
Instruction which was appointed by the Legislature, while the ordinary 
management of business affairs of the school was placed in the hands of 
its trustees. As Justice Grant said: 

It seems to me to be clearly intended that, while enjoying 
such rights and privileges, the separate schools were to be 
maintained in the same manner, with the same standards, and 
under the same system, subject always to the control of the 
Legislature, as were other common schools...Always the Legis¬ 
lature is supreme and shall determine the "education" to be 
furnished.37 


The Court held that the language of sec. 93 showed clearly that 
Parliament had distinguished between rights respecting the "schools" on 
the one hand, and rights respecting the "education" to be imparted in the 


schools on the other. Basically, section 93 provides that provincial 
Legislatures may make laws in relation to education. Provision (l) of 
section 93 protects rights or privileges with respect to denominational 
schools only, and not with respect to education . Justice Grant continued: 


The choice of words seems to me to be quite significant ... 
The denomination may carry on the schools, but the Province 
controls the education.-^ 


The rights or privileges respecting " denominational schools " 
were, in general terms, to have their schools managed by their 
own trustees, with their children being taught together by (duly 
qualified) teachers of their own faith (always using only 
authorized textbooks and being subject to the central regulating 
power), end to have denominational teaching. The schools would be 
denominational in their teaching and management, their atmosphere 
and environment; the education would be what the Legislature, or 
the central authority by it appointed, might from time to time 
determine.^ 


57 Ibid ., p. 40. 
58 Ibld ., p. 4l. 











This opinion, then, holds that although a province is forbidden from 
interfering with the "denominational" aspects of a school, it does have 
the authority to control its "educational" features. This is indeed an 
amazingly fine distinction. Justice Hodgins summarized the opinion of 
the Court when he said: 

My view, in short, as to the position of the separate schools, 
is that they are a part of a system of common school education, 
doing under denominational auspices , the work of common schools, 
that they have always had that character and position... the 
definition and limits of which is for the Legislature of Ontario 
to declare from time to time. 

The judicial ruling that arises out of this litigation is that 
separate school trustees never had, even prior to confederation, ultimate 
control over the education to be given in their schools. This control 
was vested instead in the legislature, which had been given control over 
all the schools in the province, and therefore separate school trustees 
were not entitled under section 93 (l) of the B.N.A. Act, 1867. to 
exercise final control over education in their schools. The Privy Council 
in its decision on this case upheld the above reasoning. The separate 
schools always have been, and remain, an integral part of the public 
school system and are subject to the same central controls. Whatever 
the province makes the common schools it also makes the separate schools, 
and the latter are different only in their denominational aspects, being 


either Protestant or Roman Catholic. 





48 

Definition of "Protestant” and "Roman Catholic ," There is no 
difficulty in holding that Roman Catholics form a distinct denomination 
and are therefore recognizable as a "class of persons" for educational 
purposes. Roman Catholics have an inherent unity in that they all 
recognize the authority of the Pope. In respect to Protestantism a 
similar unity is far from clear because of the multiple loyalties 
governing the religious life of its adherents. Can Protestants be regarded 
as a "class of persons" for the purposes of education? Who is a Protestant? 
A recent case in Quebec gave a legal definition. 

In the Perron case the plaintiff had been a Roman Catholic but 
abjured that faith and became instead an adherent of Jehovah*s Witnesses. 

He thereupon removed his children from the Roman Catholic school of the 
district and sent them to the Protestant school. The school commissioners 
of the Protestant school, however, refused to admit them. The plaintiff 
then sought a mandamus to compel the Protestant board to admit them to 
their school. The respondent board contended that the children did not 
qualify as Protestants since Jehovah’s Witnesses, even while claiming 
themselves Christian, nevertheless oppose all other Christian religions. 

The plaintiff claimed that the Catholic and Christian religions are the 
only ones recognized by the Quebec Education Act, and as a Christian he 
was entitled to such recognition for school purposes. 

In its decision the Court pointed out that the religious denomi¬ 
nations referred to in the B.N.A. Act, 1867» are solely those of Catholics 

^ Perron v. School Trustees of Rouyn , (1956) 1 D.L.R, 4l4; 

Que., Q.B. 841. 









49 

and Protestants, and that both these denominations are considered to be 
a "class of persons" within the meaning of the Act. In a previous case, 
Viscount Cave, L.C., had expressed the opinion of the Court in this way: 

The Protestant community, although divided for some purposes 
into different denominations, is itself a denomination and capable 
of being regarded as a "class of persons" within the meaning of 
sec. 93 of the Act, of 1867 • 

Therefore, if a person should renounce the Catholic religion but 
continued to call himself a disciple of Christ, he would have to be 
considered a Protestant and his status for school purposes would be 
clear. The Court said: 

Christians who repudiate the authority of the Pope...are... to 
be considered as adherents of the Protestant faith for the purposes 
of the Act. 6 ? 

Held , further, it is not a proper defence for the trustees to 
say that plaintiff did not qualify as a Protestant. Since they 
knew he had abjured Catholicism., they should have considered that 
he had a right to demand admission for his children to the 
Protestant school of his town, and it was not within the trustee’s 
sphere to determine whether plaintiff was a member of Jehovah’s 
Witnesses or whether the latter was a religion. 6 4 

The plaintiff was entitled to a mandamus to compel the defendants to 

admit his children to their school. 


Hirsh v. Protestant Board of School Commissioners, (1928), 

1 D.L.R. 1041, at p. 1050. 

®1956 1 D.L.R. 4l4, at p. 415. It is interesting to note that 
this definition would classify Greek Catholics as Protestants. 

6i *lbid. 











Summary 


50 


The principles formulated by the Courts in respect to the legal 
status of separate schools in provinces where separate schools exist by 
law, can be summarized as follows: 

(1) The denominational rights and privileges are determined by religion 
and not by race or language. 

(2) In case the religion of a parent ratepayer differs from that of 
his children, it is the religion of the parent that is decisive in 
determining the school to which the children shall go. 

(3) In regard to a ratepayer’s choice of schools, as between separate 
and public, there is a difference between Ontario and the West: 

(a) In Ontario a Roman Catholic may choose which system he shall 
support. 

(b) In Saskatchewan and Alberta, a ratepayer must support the 
separate school operated by members of his own religious denomi¬ 
nation (either Roman Catholic or Protestant), if such a school 
exists in his district. 

(4) The provincial legislature has no authority to suspend or withdraw 
the administrative powers of a separate school board, since such action 
would affect the rights and privileges guaranteed by law at the Union (186?). 

(5) The separate school system is an integral part of the public 
school system and is subject to the same central controls in regard to its 
"educational" aspects. It is independent in its "denominational” aspects 
only. 

(6) For the purposes of education, all Christians who repudiate the 

































































































. 



















authority of the Pope, are considered to be Protestants 


51 


III. THE LEGAL STATUS OF OTHER MINORITIES 

The B.N.A. Act and subsequent judicial opinion have held that the 
"class of persons" to whom certain "rights and privileges" are guaranteed 
fall into two major groups: The Roman Catholics and the Protestants. 

What, then, is the position of children who are non-christian and who do 
not fall neatly into one of these recognized classes? This question has 
caused little difficulty in most provinces, but has arisen in more serious 
form in Quebec and Ontario. In Quebec the place of the Jewish child in 
the educational system has caused some concern, while in Ontario, special 
treatment of Negro children has been provided for by statute. Although 
the problem of Jews and Negroes has been confined to the two provinces 
mentioned, the legal principles formulated by Court decisions in respect 
to these two classes of people, have important implications that must be 
understood if the legal status of these children within their provincial 
educational systems is to be meaningful. In the consideration of these 
problems it is advisable to alter the approach somewhat and give special 
consideration to historical development as well as to legal case study. 

The Jewish Problem in Quebec 

In Quebec the crux of the Jewish problem was clarified by the 
Courts in the Hirsch case.^ Apart from a few minor distinctions the 

^ Hirsch v. Protestant Board of School Commissioners of Montreal , 
(1926) 2 D.L.R. 8, (1926) S.C.R. 246, (1928) A.C. 200. 




























■ 











































































































52 

Privy Council supported the arguments and decisions of the Supreme Court 
of Canada^ and it is the latter decision that will form the basis of the 
discussion here. 

The Supreme Court of Canada considered an appeal from a decision 
of the Court of King*s Bench, appeal side, province of Quebec, to which 
had been referred a series of questions relating to the educational system 
in the island of Montreal. The Quebec Legislature in 1903^ had passed 
an "Act to amend the law concerning education with respect to persons 
professing the Jewish religion.” The immediate occasion for this legis¬ 
lation had been the refusal of the Protestant Board of School Commissioners 
of the city of Montreal to recognize the right claimed by Jewish persons 
to have their children received and educated in the schools operated by 
the respondent commissioners, but to which schools the Jewish people had 
theretofore sent their children almost exclusively, 0 Due to the decision 
in the Pinsler case, the Act of 1903 had provided, in section 6: 

After the coming into force of this Act, children professing 
the Jewish faith shall have the same right to be educated in the 
public schools of the province as Protestant children, and shall 
be treated in the same manner as Protestants for all school 
purposes.®^ 

Did this section mean that Jews had the same right to schools of their 

66(1926) S.C.R. 246. 

6 ?3 saw. VII, c. 16. 

68pinsler v. Protestant Board of School Commissioners , 23 S.C.R. 

365. 

69 


(1926) S.C.R. 246, at p. 260. 











53 

own as did the Protestants, or did it merely imply that Jewish children 
were to attend the Protestant schools in Quebec? The Hirsch case answered 
these questions. The Court said that in the circumstances of the case, 
the Legislature had intended to grant the Jewish children the right to 
attend Protestant schools. The Legislature, however, would also be 
competent to provide for: 

the establishment of separate schools for persons who are 
neither Roman Catholics nor Protestants, if so framed as not 
to affect prejudicially any right or privilege with regard 
to education enjoyed by either Roman Catholics or Protestants 
at Confederation.' 70 

The Jewish question was particularly complicated because the 

educational system of the island of Montreal differed in some respects 

from that operating in the other areas of Quebec. It is necessary, 

therefore, to understand the difference. The rights and privileges in 

regard to denominational schools enjoyed by citizens of the Province of 

Quebec at Confederation are to be found in the legislation consolidated 

in chaps. 15 and 1 6 of the Consolidated Statutes of Lower Canada , 1861, 

According to the Court, chapter 15 of the above legislation, 

gave to every child between the ages of five and sixteen years 
resident in any school district an equal right to attend the 
school thereof (s. 66); and in each of the cities of Montreal 
and Quebec, such children from any part of the city might 
attend any school established by, or under the control of the 
Commissioners (s. 129). The statute, therefore, conferred on 
every child resident in any school district in the province 
the right to education in some public school established under 
its provisions in such district...this was not a right enjoyed by 
a class of persons with respect to denominational schools; it 
pertained to the individual as a citizen. Accordingly it did 
not fall within the protection of s. 93 (l)'* 5 * 


70 lbid ., p. 247-48. 

71 (1926) S.C.R. 246, at pp. 253-54. 










54 

Chapter 15 of the same statute made distinct provisions, quite 
different in their scope and character, for the cities of Montreal and 
Quebec on the one hand, and for other municipalities of the province on 
the other. In the words of the Court: 

The signal difference presently material is that the provisions 
for "dissentient schools" (which were likewise "common schools" for 
many purposes of the statute (s. 138) but were in other respects 
clearly distinguished from them) applied only to rural municipalities. 
These schools were governed by Board of "Trustees." All the schools 
of the cities of Montreal and Quebec were "common schools" under 
Boards of "Commissioners," each of these cities being considered 
one municipality not divided into school districts (s. 129). It 
being thus "otherwise provided"; the provisions with regard to 
dissentient schools did not apply to them. (s. 128). Under the 
Act of 1861 there were no "dissentient schools" either in Montreal 
or in Quebec, although ... the schools in these cities were 
"denominational schools." This Situation has continued down to 
the present day.72 

Another feature of the Act of 1861 was that for school purposes 
it divided the population into two great classes, Roman Catholics and 
Protestants. The term "Roman Catholic" admits of no doubt, but the 
Court said that the term "Protestant" is "not synonymous with non- 
Catholic, in that it excludes all persons who do not profess to be 
Christians," and really includes only those who accept the principles 
and doctrines of the Reformation of the l6th century. 

From an examination of the above statutes the Court held that 
the separate school situation in the Province of Quebec was as follows: 

(l) In rural municipalities the schools of the majority were common 


72 Ibid .. pp. 254-255. 
73 Ibid .. p. 255 . 






55 


schools and possessed no "denominational" rights. The schools of the 
minority were dissentient schools and enjoyed the "denominational" rights 
and privileges guaranteed by the B.N.A. Act. 

(2) In the cities of Montreal and Quebec there were two different 
school corporations, one for Roman Catholics and one for Protestants, 
each having exclusive control and management of the schools of the 
denomination it represented. Therefore, all schools in these cities were 
"denominational" schools, but "public schools" as well. Since no 
"dissentient" schools existed, the protective provisions of sec. 93 of 
the B.N.A. Act did not apply. 

If these distinctions are applied to the Jewish problem, it 
follows that the imposition of non-Christian children upon "dissentient" 
schools could not be allowed since it would prejudicially affect the 
rights and privileges guaranteed by the Act of 186?. In rural munici¬ 
palities this would prevent Jewish children from attending any dissentient 
school. In this respect the Court said, "There, the common schools of 
the majority alone were open as a right to Jewish children, at all events 

after 1867, owing to the privilege of exclusion conferred on the 

74 

dissentient schools by s. 93 (2) of the B.N.A. Act." In the cities of 
Montreal and Quebec, however, all the schools, though "denominational," 
are also common. Do Jewish children therefore have a right to attend 
any of them? The Court, answered, "Yes"; and since no other schools are 
in existence in these cities, the Protestant and Roman Catholic 

7 4 Ibid ., p. 262. 







commissions must share the responsibility for educating them. 


56 


But as was noted, under the Act of 1903 Jewish children were to 
be treated as Protestants. Was such an Act unconstitutional? The Court 
answered: 

No, except inso far as it would confer the right of attendance 
at dissentient schools upon persons of a religious faith different 
from that of the dissentient minority. 

This answer implies that in rural municipalities where dissentient 

minorities exist Jewish children cannot attend dissentient schools; but 

in the cities of Montreal and Quebec, where no dissentient minorities 

exist, Jewish children have the right to attend the Protestant schools. 

The Montreal Protestant Board of School Commissioners was 
dissatisfied with this ruling and made an appeal to the Privy Council 
which upheld the Supreme Court decision on this point. The result was 
that by law^ a Jewish School Commission for the island of Montreal was 
appointed, and an agreement was made with the Protestant Board of School 
Commissioners by which the Jewish population would pay its taxes to the 
support of the Protestant schools, and those schools would receive the 
Jewish children. This agreement would be automatically renewed for 
periods of fifteen years unless notice was given by either party two 
years in advance. The agreement was renewed in 19^5 and is still in 
force. Whether the Jewish problem has been solved satisfactorily for 
all time remains for history to declare. 

75 Ibid., p. 269. 

^Statutes of Quebec, 20 Geo. V. Ch. 6l, 1930* 

















































. 




















































Separate Schools for Negroes in Ontario 


57 


It does not seem to be a matter of common knowledge that for the 
past century provisions for separate schools for negroes have been on the 
statute books in Ontario. The reasons for these provisions are not 
difficult to appreciate when one remembers that the counties of Kent and 
Essex in Ontario became the refuge of numerous run-away slaves during the 
first half of the 19 th century. The education of the negro children 
became a particular problem when the reception of these children into the 
common schools of the province was far from cordial on the part of their 
white schoolfellows and the local school authorities. As a consequence, 
the Legislature, in the Common Schools Act of 1850, granted to the colored 
people the right to establish their own separate schools.^ With slight 
modification, this legislation has remained law until the present day. 

A review of the statutes leads one to the conclusion that 
separate schools for colored people were authorized out of deference to 
the prejudices of the white population, rather than any great concern 
for the rights of racial minorities. There seemed to be an apprehension 
that negro children, many of whom had just escaped from slavery, n may be, 
in respect to morals and habits, unfortunately worse trained than white 
children are in general, and that their children might suffer from the 
effects of bad example. Even though brought into existence by the same 
legislation and the same clauses that established separate schools for 

77i2 Viet. ch. 83, secs. 69 , ?0, and 71. 

^Th Re Dennis Hill v. The School Trustees of Camden and Zone, 
(1854) 11 U.C.Q.B. 573 at p. 573. 











58 


Roman Catholics and Protestants, the actual practices in regard to 

negro separate schools differed from those with respect to other 

separate schools in some material respects. These differences are the 

aspects of the problem that concern us here. 

79 

In one early case a negro father sought a mandamus to have the 

school trustees admit his son to the public school of the area. The 

trustees stated that since 1846 a school had been set apart for colored 

people and that the school to which admission was sought was overcrowded 

and had no room for any additional children. It must be noted that no 

separate school had legally been established for colored people, the Act 

authorizing such schools being passed after the setting apart of the 

school above mentioned. The Court held, that on the ground only of want 

of accommodation the writ was refused. But because admission had been 

refused not on that ground but on account of the boy's color, the trustees 

were ordered to pay the costs of the application. 

In an earlier case an attempt was made to exclude a negro boy from 

go 

the public school even though a separate school did not exist in the area. 
The Court rules: 

The legislature does seem to have meant, though reluctantly, 
to give way so far to any prejudices that may exist in the minds 
of white inhabitants, as to allow of the establishment of separate 
schools for the colored people, if thought expedient, but not so 
far as to consent to shut them out from the only public schools 

^In Re Hutchinson and the Board or School Trustees of St . 
Catherines, (1871), 31 U.C.Q.B. 274. 

^ Washington v. The Trustees of School Number 14, in the 
Township of Charlotteville , (1854 11 U.C.Q.B. 569. 






































' 
































' 
























59 


that do exist, by leaving it discretionary in the school trustees 
to deny admission to them arbitrarily, when they have no other 
school to go to. ^ 

The mandamus was granted. 

The above decisions reflect the justice and impartiality with 
which the Courts approached the negro problem. Nevertheless, discrimi¬ 
nation against Negroes was evident in other aspects of the practical 
application of the legislation regarding Negro separate schools. The 

choice of schools is not open to Negroes once a Negro separate school 

82 

has been established. In the Dennis Hill case a Negro father sought a 
mandamus to have his children accepted in the common school of a district 
even though a separate Negro school had been legally established in the 
area. The Court ruled: 

After the establishment of any such separate school in a 
division, we do not think a choice was intended by the 
Legislature to be left to the colored people within that 
division to send their children nevertheless to the general 
common school, because that would defeat ghat we take to 
have been the intention of the provision. 

Another point of discrimination was made evident in the Dennis 
Hill case. In regard to the white population, it was left to the religious 
minority by vote, to decide whether they wanted their own separate school 
or not. Again the Negro population had no such choice. The Court said: 

The municipal council of any township might in their discretion 

8l Ibid., p. 573. 

82 ln Re Dennis Hill v. The School Trustees of Camden and Zone 
(1854) 11, U.C.Q.B. 573. 






























. 














' 

. 





























































60 


establish separate schools for the colored population, and 
this too, it is material to remark without being moved to do 
so, as in the case of separate schools for Roman Catholics 
and Protestants by an application from the class of persons, 
whose children were to be taught in such separate schools. ^ 

It is evident from these opinions that the Negro population had not only , 

no voice in establishing a Negro separate school, but also no choice but 

to send their children to such a school once it had been established. 

An interesting situation occurred when a separate school, that 

had been established, ceased to exist because the Negro population was 

too poverty stricken to maintain it, although the school had never been 

legally dissolved.®-* Under these circumstances, did the children of 

George Stewart, a Negro, have the right to attend the common school of 

the district? The Court ruled: 


It is in our opinion impossible to hold that if a separate 
school is once established, the class for whose use it was once 
brought into existence cannot, when it is no longer maintained, 
claim the privileges conferred by the Common Schools Act. The 
creation of a separate school suspends but does not annul those 
privileges, an 
rights revive. 

In this case, a mandamus was granted to compel the admittance of the Negro 
children to the common school of the district. In this case it is 
satisfying to note that under certain circumstances , justice takes 
precedent over racial prejudice. 


.when the separate school ceases to exist the 


84 


Ibid. 


85 


In Re George Stewart and the Trustees of School Section #8 of 


the Township of Sandwich East in the County of Essex (1864) 23 U.C.Q.B. 634 















61 


It is interesting to note that today no separate schools for 
colored people exist in fact in Ontario. The last of such schools ceased 
to exist in 1891 when the colored separate school at Chatham was dissolved 
and the pupils transferred to the public school.®? As a summary of the 
negro problem the Ontario Royal Commission rather warmly stated: 

A great and laudable change has taken place, particularly during 
the past quarter-century, in the general public attitude in this 
province toward colored people. The children of colored citizens 
are accorded the same educational advantages that are available to 
other children in public schools. In fact, white children nox^r play 
and work happily with colored children; and the latter enter into 
school games, play on teams, are members of school orchestras, 
generally making satisfactory progress in their studies, and are 
frequently the most popular pupils in the school.° 

Since no separate schools for colored people are in existence the 

statutory provisions for their establishment, and the legal principles 

for their operation find no practical application today. Why then have 

provisions for the establishment of colored schools on the statutes? The 

colored people have no rights or privileges preserved for them by the 

89 

B.N.A. Act, for the Mackell case* 7 has established that such rights are 
determined by religious belief, and not by race or language. Consequently 
it is within the power of the Ontario Legislature to repeal the provisions 
in respect to Negro separate schools. It is well to remember that at 
present the seed of racial discrimination is only dormant and lies imbedded 
in fertile soil. It can be contended that separate schools for Roman 
Catholics and Protestants are a reflection of justice and respect for 


8 ?Report of the Royal Commission on Education in Ontario , Toronto, 
Published by Baptist Johnston, Printer to the King’s Most Excellent 
Majesty, 1950, p. 535- 


88 Ibid. 
89 Supra, 
















human values. But the history of separate schools for colored people 
tends to convince the observer that provision for such schools have 
not been a reflection of human justice, but of racial prejudice and 
discrimination. 





CHAPTER III 


COMPULSORY ATTENDANCE LAWS AND THE RIGHT TO AN EDUCATION 

The history of education in Canada shows that- when schools were 
first established the attendance of pupils was voluntary and subject to 
various fees. The following years saw the acceptance of the principle 
of ’’free schools" supported by rates imposed upon all property owners in 
the district. With the coming of free schools came the concept of 
"compulsory education," a concept that is based on a variety of beliefs 
some of which are not readily compatible. On the ideal side the claim 
was made that the child had a natural right to an education, coupled with 
the absolute duty to allox* himself to be educated as completely as his 
native capacity will allow. This view holds that education is for the 
good of the child and for his personal benefit and welfare, A more 
mundane view, however, holds that the state has a paramount interest in 
the education of its citizens, to which consideration the claims of the 
parents and their right to control their children must yield.' 1 ' This view 
holds that education must be compelled for the ultimate benefit of the 
state. The emphasis placed on one or other of these views vacillated 
considerably from time to time, depending upon the concept of society 
dominant at any given time. Whatever view one holds, compulsory school 
attendance laws as products of "a gradual evolution in social concepts 


1 C. K. Woltz, 
Contemporary FrobQ ems , 

Winter 1955» p. 21. 


"Compulsory .Attendance at School," Law and 
School or Law, Duke University, VoTT^UTTtfo. 


1 . 






















































- 



























1 


3 














- - 

- ...ul ■ , - 

, ■ . - e • . i 













64 

following upon changing economic and social conditions" seem to be 
here to stay.^ 

Compulsory school attendance laws are on the books of all the 
provinces of Canada. In some cases the legality of these laws has been 
challenged in the Courts , not so often on the basis of the laws themselves 
as upon the basis of the implication of these laws for the liberty of the 
individual. What implications do these laws have for the freedom of the 
individual? Are they compatible with the "right” to an education? What 
is the nature of such a "right"? Is it a natural right or a statutory 
right that can be classed as a civil privilege? These are some of the 
questions the Courts have had to answer in connection with compulsory 
education in Canada t and which we will consider under two main headings 
in this chapter: 

I. Compulsory School Attendance. 

II. The Right to an Education. 

The discussion will be largely restricted to those aspects of the laws 
that have been before the Courts. The statutory provisions will be 
considered only in so far as they help to make this discussion meaningful. 

I. COMPULSORY- SCHOOL ATTENDANCE 

The mandatory provisions of the attendance laws are qualified 
by "ifs" and "buts", and "excepts" and "unlesses", to such an extent 
that it would be simpler to say what such laws do not require than 







65 


what they compel. The fact that exemptions to compulsory school 
attendance exist by law in all the provinces would seem to indicate that 
there is neither an absolute compulsion nor an absolute right in the 
matter of education in Canada. Before considering the judicial 
attitudes to the provisions of compulsory attendance laws, it is well 
first to look at the nature of the exemptions provided by law. In 
this way the exceptions to the rule, though often differing from 
province to province, can be classified into general types which apply 
almost universally and permit a more systematic treatment. What then 
are the major exemptions? 

Exemptions to Compulsory Bducatlcn 

Instruction outside of public school . All the provinces have 
provisions by which a child, for various reasons, may receive an edu¬ 
cation outside of the publicly established schools. The law in 
British Columbia is typical of the provisions in other provinces as 
well. A parent will not be penalized for failure to send his child to 
school provided that 

... a child is being educated by some other means 
satisfactory to the Justice or tribunal before whom the 
prosecution takes place.^ 

The term "some other means" generally refers to being educated by 
attendance at an approved private school, or being educated at home by 
the parents, a tutor, or by means of correspondence courses. Such 
instruction, however, must be of a nature, depth and extensiveness, to 

3These observations have been drawn from the School Acts of 
the various provinces. 

^Public Schools Act , S.B.C. 1958, ch. 42, sec. 121 (2) (a). 



































































66 

compare favourably with the instruction that would be received if the 
child attended the public school of the district. In all cases an 
interesting point of law is: Whose decision is final in determining whether 
instruction outside of the public school is satisfactoiy or not? 

The Courts have refused to go beyond the strict letter of the 
law in answering the above question. Judicial opinion has interpreted 
the law but has refused to go beyond it to determine why outside in¬ 
struction has been approved or disapproved."^ In British Columbia and 
Newfoundland the decision of the Justice or tribunal before whom the 
prosecution takes place is final. In Alberta, Saskatchewan, and 
Manitoba, approval is dependent upon a certificate of the inspector or 
superintendent whose decision is binding. In Ontario the final 
decision is left to the Minister of Education, while in the remaining 
provinces no official or body has been designated as the final authority, 
although it is implied that the inspectors have such powers. 

Mental or physical unfitness. It is a safe generalization to 
say that in all the provinces the children who are incapacitated by 
mental or physical defects may be exempted from compulsory school 
attendance. While certain provincial statutes refer specifically to 
mental and physical infirmities , in most provinces exemptions are 


^Infra p. 73 . 

^Prince Edward Island and Nova Scotia. 








67 


provided for by a more general statement such as "sickness or other 
unavoidable cause."^ In all cases such defects must be confirmed by a 
duly qualified physician. In three provinces mentally defective children 
may lawfully be excluded from school subject to the final decision of a 
physician (Manitoba), or the Minister of Public Health (Saskatchewan), 
or to the Chief Superintendent of Schools (Alberta). The education of 
the mentally and physically handicapped children is usually assumed by 
the province, even if they are not accepted into the public schools. 
Although much more can be done for these unfortunates, various provinces 
have established special schools for the instruction of handicapped 
children, or have made arrangements with other provinces to have their 
children accepted into special schools already established there. 

Distance from school . All the provinces excuse from attendance 
children of stated ages who live more than a specified distance from 
a public school, and for whom no means of transportation is provided. 

The provisions of the Ontario statutes, although differing from other 
provinces in the specified ages and distances, is rather typical of 
the nature of this exemption. In Ontario a child is exempt from public 
school attendance if he lives: 

(1) over one mile from school and is not yet seven years of age; 

(2) over two miles and he is not yet ten years of age; 

o 

(3) over three miles if he is over ten years of age. 

^ The Schools Administration Act , S.O. 195^* ch.86,sec.6 (2)(b). 




























• 






- 


































































All the other provinces make similar provisions 


68 


Satisfaction of minimum education requirements . An interesting 
exception to compulsoiy school attendance is the provision in some of 
the provinces for children to leave school before reaching school-rleaving 
age, provided they complete the work of a specified grade or level. In 
Alberta a child is exempt from further attendance at school if he has 
passed the grade 9 examinations or has attained equivalent standing. In 
Saskatchewan the school leaving level is grade 8, while in Ontario it 
is secondary school graduation. In Quebec a child may be exempted upon 
the completion of the elementary or primary elementary school course or 
its equivalent. In British Columbia a child may leave school if he has 
reached a standard of education equal or higher than the standard to be 
attained in any school within three miles, if no conveyance is provided 
to take him to a higher school. In the remaining provinces the school¬ 
leaving age governs the number of years of education to which the child 
shall be exposed. 

It seems however that not all attendance laws are designed to 
require attendance at school up to a certain age. Rather it is intended 
that the child shall be exposed to instruction for a specific number of 
years. If the precocious child can run the course quickly he is free to 
leave school, at least in some of the provinces. On the other hand the 
dull child will be kept at the task and then dismissed when he comes of 
age, regardless of how much or how little he has learned. 











. 
















- 






s 


- 


















69 

Work permits. In all the provinces it is illegal, during school 

hours, to employ children of school age unless an employment certificate 

has been issued by the appropriate authority. Within certain limits the 

employment of school children is allowed, if the circumstances warrant, 

q 

in all but two provinces. The provisions in Newfoundland are typical 
of the pattern followed in the other provinces. In Newfoundland a child 
may be exempt from school attendance if, 

...the services of the child are required for urgent or 
necessary duties for the maintenance of himself or of some 
person dependent upon him and a certificate has been issued 
by a stipendiary magistrate, or any other person named for 
that purpose by the Minister, ...a certificate covering a 
period of more than two months in any school year shall not 
be issued in respect of any child under the age of twelve 
years, without prior approval in writing of the Minister. 

Such certificate shall not be issued without making sufficient inquiry 

as to the merits of the request. This pattern is followed in most of 

the other provinces, although the details in regard to age and length 

of the period of exemption differ somewhat. 

Even though the precise conditions on which certificates are 
issued vary, the following things are generally required before issuance: 
(a) satisfactory proof of age, (b) school record, and possible proof of 
completion of a certain level of work, (c) an employer’s written statement 
that the work is available and a description of its nature, (d) proof of 
economic necessity. When these requirements have been satisfactorily 


^Manitoba and British Columbia. 

^ School Attendance Act , R.S.N. 1952, ch. 105, sec. 7(d). 
















■ 


































■ 


























70 


met the child may be employed for periods of time specified by the 
statutes. Employment provisions for school children are designed to meet 
the basic needs of the families concerned. In the words of the Inter¬ 
national Labour Office: "Where children are compelled to work in order 
to support themselves or their family, economic necessities appear to be 
stronger than any regulation for keeping them out of employment and in 
school. 

Other exemptions . In several of the provinces exemptions other 
than the ones mentioned above are provided for by statute. In Ontario a 
child may be absent from school on any holy day of his religious denomi¬ 
nation. In Frince Edward Island poverty is regarded as a sufficient 
reason for nonattendance at school. In five provinces insufficient 
accommodation is considered a reason for absence from school. This 
last provision seems rather dichotomous to the statutory right of 

13 

children to an education, a right that a child can legally insist upon. " 
Since no cases have dealt with this particular aspect of the exemptions, 
it is rather difficult to know what the attitude of the Courts would be, 
should such a case appear before them. It seems reasonable to assume, 

^ Studies on Compulsory Education , No. 5» Child Labour in 
Relation to Compulsory Education 22 , U.N.E.S.C.O. 1951* Quoted in 
C.K. Woltz , op. cit . , p. 18. 

-^Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta, Nova Scotia and Newfoundland. 

This question of "right" is discussed later in this chapter. 

















71 

however, that should accommodation be lacking, and should the parents be 
willing to keep their children at home, then the above provisions would 
cover such an exemption. However, if the parents demanded accommodation 
for their children the board would have no alternative but to supply it. 

In this light the exemption because of lack of accommodation is a parental 
privilege but does not excuse the board for failure to provide facilities 
for those children who demand it. 

Compulsory School Attendance Laws and the Courts . 

The right of the provinces to enact compulsory school attendance 
laws has been directly challenged in a number of cases. These challenges 
have taken three approaches: 

1. That federal laws in regard to education take precedence over 
provincial legislation in the same field. (Federal v. provincial laws 
in education) 

2. That compulsory attendance laws cannot compel attendance at a 
public school. (Compulsory attendance laws and private schools) 

3. That the compulsory attendance laws violate the principle of 

x6 

religious freedom. (Compulsory education and religious freedom). 

Let us consider each of these cases and the resulting decisions of 
the Courts. 


l 4 R. v. Hildebrand, (1919) 3 W.W.R. 286. 

1 ^ R. v, Ulmer . (1923) 1 W.W.R. 1, 19 Alta. L.R. 12, 1 D.L.R.304. 

l6 p ereP oikln et ux v. Superintendent of Child 'Welfare , (1958) 

23 W.W.R. 592. 











72 


Federal v, provincial laws in education. This issue arose in 
the Hildebrand case in Manitoba in 1919* Hildebrand was a Mennonite 
who had come to Canada under the provisions of an Order-in-Council 
passed on August 13. 1873. Section 10 of this Order-in-Council stated: 

10. The fullest privilege of exercising their religious 
principles is by law afforded to the Mennonites, without any 
kind of molestation or restriction whatever, and the same 
privilege extends to the education of their children in 
schools. ■ 

Hildebrand refused to heed the compulsory attendance laws of the province 
and claimed that such laws were ultra vires of the provincial government 
by virtue of the Order-in-Council of 1873. After an examination of the 
facts and the legislation involved, the Court held that any agreement 
made between the Dominion Government and the Mennonites in Manitoba were 
not binding as far as educational matters were concerned. Section 22 of 
the Manitoba Act , gives exclusive jurisdiction in this field to the 
provincial legislature. Sven a Mennonite can be penalized under the 
School Attendance Act if he fails to send his children of school age to 
school. The Court held further that the special provisions as to edu¬ 
cation in the settlement agreement cannot be held to interfere with the 
compulsory school attendance laws of the province, and could not bind 
the province of Manitoba as to its jurisdiction in educational matters. 
The decision makes it quite clear that the Federal Government cannot 
encroach upon the area of jurisdiction allowed to the provinces by the 


(1919) 3 W.W.R. 286, at p. 287. 
































■ 

■ 


■ 



























































■ 



:i; 



■ :.I 
































■ > 



















73 


federation agreement. It also confirmed the power of the provincial 
legislature to enact compulsory education laws that are binding on all 
citizens in the province. In this case it was the educational aspects 
of the 1873 Order-in-Council that were declared ultra vires , and the 
rights and powers of the provincial legislature were held inviolate. 

Compulsory attendance laws and private schools. In the Ulmer 

case in Alberta, 1923, the compulsory education laws were challenged 
18 

on different grounds. The children of Ulmer were attending a private 
school organized and established by German Lutherans and maintained by 
them. However, the school had not received a certificate of approval 
from the inspector of schools stating that the instruction offered was 
approved by the central authorities. In this action Ulmer was charged 
with violating the compulsory school attendance laws in not sending his 
children to the public school of his district. In defence the following 
three arguments were put forward: 

1. The provisions of section 93 of the B.N.A. Act were really 
general in their application and so applied to any minority that had 

freedom of education prior to 1867* 

2. The inspector of schools had no authority to deny a certificate 
of approval to the Lutheran private school. 

3. The Alberta School Attendance Act violated the protective 
provisions of section 93 of the B.N.A. Act, as well as the protective 

*^®R. v, Ulmer (1923) » o£. cit . 






















































. • 







- 




. . . 





















?4 


19 

provisions of section 17 of the Alberta Act . 

The Court decisions on each of these contentions were clear and 
to the point. In regard to the first argument the Justices Stuart and 
Clarke stated that the limiting or protective provisions of section 93 
were not intended to be general in their application to all minorities 
nor to all provinces that might join the Canadian Confederation in the 
future, but only to those minorities specifically contemplated by the 
framers of the constitution, and to those provinces which were being 
united at that particular date, i.e., 1867. Furthermore, it would seem 
impossible, except by mere vague analogy, to apply the protective 
provisions to new provinces erected under the authority of the B.N.A . 

Act, 1871. Even though section 17 of the Alberta Act is a modification 
of these protective provisions, the Parliament of Canada had every right 
so to modify. The Court said. 

The "right” or "privilege" means a legal right or privilege, i.e., 
one established by law and granted specially to a distinctly specified 
"class of persons" who have been set apart from the rest of the 
community by the law which has conferred the right or privilege 
upon them. ( (1923) 1 W.W.R. 1, at p. 7). 

In regard to the second argument, that the inspector of schools 
had no authority to withhold a certificate of approval from the private 
school involved, the Court held that: 

...where an inspector refused to grant such certificate, the 
magistrate was justified in convicting the parents for a violation 
of the Act, and he cannot go beyond the absence of the certificate 
to ascertain why the inspector had refused it, 0 


l^See Appendix p. 299 • 

20 (1923) 1 W.W.R. 1, at p. 1. 












75 


Consequently the school may be declared closed and the parents of the 
children who continued to attend the school became liable to a penalty 
under section 5(a) of The School Attendance Act, ^ 

The third argument is closely related to the first. Did The 
Alberta School Attendance Act violate the protective provisions of 
section 93 of the B.N.A. Act ? The Court held that it is within the 
powers of the provincial legislature to pass the Act in question. This 
Act also gave to the Department of Education absolute and arbitrary 
control of all private schools that were attended by pupils of compulsory 
school age. The said Act does not violate any of the guarantees contained 
in section 93 of the B.N.A. Act or of section 17 of the Alberta Act. In 
the latter section it is only the right or privilege 

...with respect to separate schools which was protected and 
preserved. The right or privilege was the privilege of the minority 
in a district, whether Protestant or Roman Catholic, to establish 
by law a separate school, to levy rates and assessments upon 
themselves for the maintenance thereof, and to be subject to 
ordinary governmental control and inspection. A legally established 
system was in contemplation by which the minority were relieved from 
taxation to support a public school and empowered legally to levy 
rates upon themselves to support a separate school. As the class 
persons to which the defendant belonged had never been doing this 
and did not want to do it, The School Attendance Act violated no 
right or privilege with regard to separate schools ever enjoyed by 
that class within the meaning of sec. 17 of The Alberta Act and was 
therefore entirely valid and binding upon them and upon him. 22 

In summary the following legal principles can be deduced from 
the decision in the Ulmer case: 


21 R.S.A. 1910, ch. 8; amended 1916, ch. 9. 
22 


(1923) 1 W.W.R. 1, at p. 5. 















1 


76 

In matters of education provincial legislation is supreme if it 


does not violate the protective provisions of section 93 of the B.N.A. 
Act. 

2. The Dominion Parliament has every power to modify the application 
of section 93 to any province that may be admitted to' the Union. 

3. Compulsory attendance laws enacted by provincial legislatures 
are intra vires . 

4. Provincial governments have absolute and arbitrary control of 
the private schools in the province. Private institutions exist by 
virtue of privilege but possess no legal rights. 

5. The Courts will not question the discretion of the provincial 
authorities in their control of private schools, nor go behind the 
scenes to ascertain the reason for refusal of recognition. 

6. The provisions for evaluating the efficiency of instruction 

outside of public schools are governed sole3„y by the statutes in force 

23 

in a particular province. 

The following words of the Court serve as a summary of this 


case: 


The provisions of the School Attendance Act requiring all 
children within certain ages to attend their district school 
(with some exceptions) are intra vires. Children who are regularly 
attending some other school, such as one established by members 
of some religious faith, provided it is not entitled to the rights 
of a separate school (as set up by the ordinances of C.O.A. , 1901 * 
cc 29 * 30, and preserved by the Alberta Act, 1905 » (Can.), c.3» 
s. 17,) can be compelled to attend the district school under the 
provisions of the Act. A parent is not liable to a penalty for 
not having his child attend a district school if an inspector 


2 3see Supra p. 74 . 

























































. 




. 








77 

gives a certificate in writing that the child is receiving sufficient 
instruction elsewhere. Held , where an inspector refused to grant 
such certificate, the magistrate was justified in convicting the 
parent for a violation of the Act, and he could not go beyond the 
absence of the certificate to ascertain why the inspector had 
refused it.^ 

Compulsory education and religious freedom. A third challenge 

to compulsory education laws claimed that such laws militated against 

the religious freedom enjoyed by all people in Canada, and occurred in 

25 

British Columbia in 1958. The appellant was a Doukhobour whose child 
had been taken from home and placed in the custody of the Superintendent 
of Child Welfare because the father refused to send the child to the 
district public school. This action was undertaken by authority of 
section 7 (in) of the Protection of Children Act , which provides that a 
child "who is habitually truant from school and is liable to grow up 
without proper education" may be detained by the Superintendent of Child 
Welfare and brought before a juvenile judge. Section 8 of the same Act 
permits the juvenile judge to make an order for the custody of such a 
child. 26 

The appellant objected, on religious grounds * to sending his 
child to the public school. He claimed that the schools interpreted 
histoiy so as to glorify, justify, and tolerate the intentional taking 
of human and animal life; that they exposed the children to materialistic 
influences and ideals, and separated secular matters from spiritual 


24 (1923) 1 D.L.R. 304, at p. 304. 

^ Pe repolk in et ux v. Superintendent of Child Welfare , (1958) 
23 W.W.R. 592. 














78 


matters in education. The following contentions were made by the 
appellant: 

1. Section 157 (l) of the Public School Act .^which required all 
children of school age to attend the public school, was ultra vires 
because it infringed the religious freedom of the Doukhobours who have 
a religious scruple against their children receiving the instruction 
offered in the public schools. 

2. That section 157 (3) of the Public School Act , which exempts 
from attendance a child being educated by some other means satisfactory 
to the justice or tribunal before whom the prosecution takes place, 

is also void for the reason that such provision permits the justice 
or tribunal to decide what other means of education is satisfactory, 
and takes such a decision out of the hands of the parents. As it 
stands, this provision, it was claimed, renders nugatory the appellant*s 
right of religious freedom and the right to determine what instruction 
the children should receive. 

3. Since section 7W of the Protection of Children Act also infringes 
upon the religious rights of the individual parent, such section is 
therefore null and void. 

It is clear that this action challenged the laws that made 
compulsory the school attendance of certain children. The validity of 
these provisions basically depends upon the legislative jurisdiction 
of the provinces over education; that is, whether these provisions 
were within the grant of power conferred upon the provinces by the 


2 ?R.S.B.C., oh. 29?. 












79 


B.N.A. Act, 1867 . The Court also had to decide whether compulsory 
education laws did in fact infringe upon the right to religious freedom 
in this country, as all three contentions of the appellant were founded 
upon the basic premise that his religious freedom had been violated. It 
is to be noted that, even though religion played a part in the Hildebrand 
and Ulmer cases, the concept of religious freedom was not basic to the 
issues in those cases but was confined more to the statutory incompati¬ 
bility with educational freedom. In the Perepolkin case religious 
freedom was the central point of all arguments. 

After a careful examination of all issues the Court found 
against the appellant for the following reasons: 

1. The general powers of the province to legislate on education 
under section 93 must be taken to be unqualified and unlimited. Since 
the appellant did not fall under the protective provisions of that 
section, he possessed no right or privilege that would limit the 
authority of the province in educational matters. Therefore, the 
compulsory education laws are within the legislative powers of the 
province, and are effective to compel the attendance of the appellant’s 
children at a public school. 

2. In view of the above ruling, the province has every authority to 
set up offices or agencies that can absolutely decide what kind of 
education satisfies the laws of the province. 

3. Since section 7(m) of the Protection of Children Act deals with 
educational matters, it is valid legislation. 

4. The Courts have not yet clearly ruled on who holds legislative 











, * 















„ 


. 




■ 


< 





t 
























80 


power in regard to freedom of religion, or if any authority possesses 
such powers in Canada. At present religious freedom in Canada seems to 

oo 

be based more on "natural” rather than "positive" law. In the case 
under consideration the Court did rule on the immediate problem when 
it said: 

...Although the seeking of exact lines between religion, ethics 
and a code of manners is perhaps perilous, the contention that 
when some sect decides to proclaim some group of tenets forms part 
of its religion those tenets thereby necessarily take on a 
religious colour must be absolutely rejected. ■° 

The Court held that even assuming that the provinces cannot pass legis¬ 
lation in regard to religion, section 93 of the B.N.A. Act makes it 
clear that the mere fact that bona fide legislation on education may 
indirectly affect religion in some aspects, does not affect the validity 
of such legislation. For that reason the claim of religious freedom 
cannot be upheld as a valid reason to circumvent legally established 
compulsory education laws. 

Prosecution under compulsory attendance laws . The three cases 
considered above involve some rather basic constitutional issues in 
Canadian education. One case is on record where the parent had no 
reason to justify keeping his child out of school. It does, however, 
have some interesting implications for prosecution under the compulsory 
attendance laws in Alberta.^ 

po 

°For a fuller discussion of this problem see the Chabot case, 
Infra , pp. 159 - 172. 

29 (1958) 23 W.W.R. 592, at p. 593. 

30 a. V. Erion ■ (1943) 1 W.W.R. 800, 80 C.G.C. 131. 













The parent was prosecuted under section 9(l) of the School 


81 


Attendance Act ,^ which reads as follows: 

Any parent, guardian or other person having charge or control of 
any child who has attained the age of seven years and has not 
attained the full age of fifteen years who within five days after 
having been notified as provided* in the preceding section neglects 
or refuses to cause such child to attend school and continue in 
regular attendance thereat, unless such child be excused from 
attendance as provided by this Act, shall be subject to a 
penalty... 

In its information the prosecution failed to show that: (l) the child 
was seven years of age, or that (2) the child was not over fifteen years 
of age, or that (3) the prosecuted party was in charge of the child, or 
that (4) notice according to the Act had been given. The Court commented 

...An information which charges a parent with unlawfully neglect¬ 
ing or refusing tc cause his child to attend school...is void because 
of omission of necessary averments, namely, that the child had 
attained the age of 7 years but had not attained the age of 15 
years, that the accused had the charge or control of such child, 
and had been duly notified pursuant to s. 8 of the Act. An 
information which discloses no offence cannot be amended on appeal 
...and a conviction based thereon must be quashed. 

It is no offence, therefore, to neglect to cause a child to attend school 

except under the conditions laid down in the Act. In any prosecution 

under school law the prosecuting party must have the facts and must state 

them clearly. This decision emphasizes one of our basic legal principles 

a person is innocent until proven gui3-ty. 


31 R.S.A. 1922, oh. 55. 

32 80 C.C.C. 131, at p. 131. 








82 


Summary and conclusions. The legal principles and facts that 
arise out of the Court decisions on the cases involving the compulsory- 
school attendance laws may be summarized as follows: 

1. Within the framework of section 93 of the B.N.A. Act , the complete 
control of education has been granted to the legislatures of the provinces. 

2. The protective provisions of section 93 apply only to the rights 

33 

of Catholic and Protestant minorities. This provision cannot be 
interpreted as giving such rights to any other group or denomination or 
sect. 

3. Compulsory attendance laws are within the competence of the 
provincial legislatures to pass. 

4. Private schools are under the absolute and arbitrary control of 
provincial legislatures. Such schools enjoy only such rights and 
privileges as the province, in its discretion, may see fit to give them. 

5. The right to freedom of religion cannot be used as an argument 
to evade compliance with compulsory education laws in a province. 

6. In offences under the education laws, as under all other laws, 
a person is innocent until proven guilty. 

In retrospect it can be said that compulsory school attendance 
laws are generally stated in simple terms but express a most important 
underlying social concept: that the education of the individual citizen 
is in the best interests of the whole state. As Chief Justice Meredith 


3^As a class of 


persons. 








































































expressed it: 


83 


•..Public education is not for the mere benefit of parent 
or child; the paramount purpose, the dominant intention...is the 
public interests of the province, the making of true subjects 
of all its children - loyal and efficient subjects and citizens, 
the best assets of any state. 

For such purpose, public schools and compulsory education 
are essential, and so public schools were established long ago, 
and have been, and are, maintained; and compulsory laws are in 
force.- 34 

One may agree or disagree with the honorable judge in what he said and 
how he said it, but it is a valid conclusion to hold that he did express 
the general legal attitude as to the purposes of education. 

Compulsory school attendance legislation, however, depends for 
its effectiveness upon the general public acceptance of these laws, for 
they must operate in a climate of opinion which dictates voluntary 
compliance. As the separate school issue so vividly illustrates, legal 
force without acceptance of the law by the people concerned can 
degenerate into bitter conflict and futility. 

We speak of compulsory education. But in fact we have voluntary 
education. The compulsory attendance laws operate and are designed 
to operate only on a very insignificant minority. If because of 
changing public opinion education should cease to be voluntary 
on the part of most, I doubt very much that it could actually be 
made compulsory, whatever provision the law should make. 

Compulsion has its place in a free society but it becomes operative only 

by the consent of the majority. 


3 3 4 (1916) 24 D.L.R. 497, at p. 500. 

"^C.K. Woltz, 02- clt ,. p. 22. 








n. THE RIGHT TO AN EDUCATION 


84 


It must be unquestionably accepted that public school education 
in Canada is compulsory. All children between certain ages are compelled 
to attend public schools or receive an education that is equivalent to 
that available in such schools, and penalties are provided for failure 
to comply with the necessary laws established by the provinces in this 
respect. The onus of performance here rests upon the child, or the 
parent or guardian. On the other hand, compulsory education makes it 
incumbent upon the educational authorities to provide facilities 
necessary to give meaning to such compulsion. The children in Canada 
are not only compelled to go to school, but under statute, they have a 
right to do so. The onus here is upon the appropriate educational 
authorities to provide whatever is necessary to make that education 
possible. The words of an American Court in this respect are also 
applicable to Canada: 

...The statutory obligation to cause children to attend school 
involves an obligation to put them into condition to attend 
and cannot be escaped by neglect to qualify them for attendance .^ 

Compulsory education and the right to an education, therefore, 
are the two sides of our educational coin. Compulsion throws the burden 
of effort on the child and parent. Right , less obviously, throws the 

3 ^Commonwealth v. Green , 168 N.E. 10l(Mass. 1929). Quoted in 
National Education Association, "The Legal Status of the Public School 
Pupil," Research Bulletin , vol. XXVI, No. 1, Feb. 1948, p. 6. 






































85 

burden of performance on the educational authorities. The relationship 
between these two aspects of education involves mutual responsibilities, 
and at the same time vests in both sides the authority necessary for the 
attainment of the educational objectives of the state. 

To most Canadians it is obvious that compulsory education laws 
are valid and binding. Less obvious, however, is the concept of the 
right to an education. Is this a statutory or a natural right? What 
is the nature of this right and what are the implications for the child, 
the parent, and the school authorities? What responsibilities are 
involved and where do they lie? In Canada a number of Court decisions 
have attempted to answer these questions. For the sake of clarity and 
comprehension the following discussion is divided into five headings on 
the basis of the cases that are on record. These headings and cases are 
as follows: 

1. The Right to Accommodation. Cases: 

(a) Tremblay v„ Valentin , (1887), 12 S.C.R. 546. (Quebec). 

(b) Henchel v. Board of Medicine Hat School Division No. 4 , 

(1950), 2 W.W.R. 369. (Alberta). 

(c) Ex Parte Gallagher , (1892), 31 N.B.R. 472. (New Brunswick). 

(d) Re West Missouri Continuation School , ( 1912 ), 1 D.L.R. 252 , 

4 D.L.R. 847. (Ontario). 

2. The Right to Equal Opportunity. Case: 

Riding v. Elmhurst 5.D. No. 2, (1927), 2 W.W.R. 159, 21 Sask. 

L.R. 471, 3 D.L.R. 173; Reversing (1926) 3 W.W.R. 729. 
(Saskatchewan). 











3. Right to the Provision of the Statutes, Case: 


86 


Wilkinson v. Thomas , (1928), 2 W.W.R. 700 , (Saskatchewan). 

4. The Right to an Education. Case: 

McLeod v. Board of School Trustees of School District No. 20 

( Salmon Arm ), (1952), 2 D.L.R. 562, 4 W.W.R, 385. (B.C.). 

5. The Right, to Attend a Particular District School . Cases: 

(a) . Dunn v. The Board of Education of the Town of Windsor , 

(1883). 6 O.R. 125. (Ontario). 

(b) Patrick v. Trustees of Yorkton School District No. 159 , 

(1914), 6 W.W.R. 1107, 28 W.L.R. 495. (Saskatchewan). 

In the discussion of these cases only the McLeod case will be 
dealt with in any detail. The legal principles formulated in the first 
six cases serve as precedents in this case and find therein rather 
interesting and practical application. 

The Right to Accommodation 

37 

In the Tremblay ^' case in Quebec the controversy revolved around 
the question of providing sufficient accommodation for all school age 
children in the district. On an appeal to him by the school commissioners, 
the superintendent of the area had ordered that a large school district in 
the municipality should be divided into two districts with a school house 
in each, in order to provide facilities for children who lived too far 
removed from the existing school. The commissioners appeared to accept 
the decision and unanimously passed a resolution to make the ordered 

37 


(1887), 12 S.C.R. 546. 




















87 

division. A short time later a petition from the inhabitants of the 
area, opposing the division, was presented to the commissioners. 

Thereupon the commissioners reversed their previous resolution and refused 
to comply with the division order on the plea that because the majority of 
interested parties were opposed, compliance was an impossibility. 

The decision of the Court was rendered in no uncertain terms: 

...Their (the Commissioners') whole argument consists in opposing 
their rebellious act as a justification for their rebellion to the 
constituted authority in the matter. We have not here to enquire 
whether the division should take place or not. The superintendent 
has pronounced on that, and his decision is final, says the statute. 
And the contention, that because a majority, or the totality of 
the inhabitants of these divisions, or of the whole parish, or, 
even if it were the whole of the Province itself, have asked the 
commissioners not to obey the superintendent's orders, they were, 
ipso facto , authorized to do so, seems...utterly untenable. The 
statute tells them "you shall obey"; these petitioners said to them 
"don't obey", and to the petitioners' wishes, (say the respondents), 
we submitted in preference to the law's precepts; and that is our 
defence...I have no hesitation to say that such a defence cannot 
prevail. 

That is not...how should be received the orders of a high officer 
of the State, whom,...the law has declared should be the sole arbiter 
of these dissensions amongst the school ratepayers. His decrees must 
be respected and obeyed as those of a court of justice should be, 
and the refusal or negligence to do so is nothing else but an act 
of rebellion to law and authority.38 

In spite of the many words, the central issue in this case was 
whether the performance of a statutory duty could be evaded on the plea 
that such duty was impossible of performance. The 6ourt made it quite 
clear that (l) school officials cannot be heard to say in defence that 
they found it impossible to comply with an Act of the legislature, and 
(2) such officials cannot evade the statutory duty to provide the 


38 Ibid ., pp. 561-562. 








88 


children in their area with the educational facilities to which they 
are entitled by law. 

39 

In the Henchel case in Alberta, action was brought against a 
divisional board for failure to provide school accommodation to certain 
children in the district. In its decision the Court said: 

The duty to provide adequate school accommodation for the purposes 
of the district which is imposed on school districts by s. 126 (f) 
of the Act is an absolute one; and even if it were not so expressly 
stated in the Act it would have to be implied since children have 
the right to be educated and that is the only reason for the 
existence of school districts and divisions. And by s. 274 (l) of 
the Act the duties imposed by the Act on school districts are 
imposed upon every divisional board...Since, although this 
obligation was imposed by the Act no mode of enforcing the 
performance by the board was prescribed, the common law can 
be resorted to for the appropriate remedy. 0 

The mandamus and damages asked for by the parents were granted. 

The decision in this case emphasized: 

1. The statutory law imposes upon the board of trustees an absolute 
duty to provide adequate school accommodation for the purposes of the 
district. 

2. If the statutes provide no mode of enforcing the performance of 
a prescribed duty, the common law may be resorted to for the appropriate 
remedy. The statutory right of children to an education cannot be 
denied. 


In New Brunswick the Courts held that lack of sufficient funds 
cannot be an excuse for the board to neglect to perform a required duty. 


39(1950), 2 W.W.R. 369. 


40 


Ibid. 









89 


In the G allarher case^ the board failed to provide sufficient school 
accommodation in the district and pleaded that it had not requisitioned 
enough funds to provide such facilities. In its decision the Court took 
no cognizance of the frailties of men and ruled: 

...Boards must provide sufficient accommodation and requisition 
from Town Council an amount sufficient to do so. Sven if they 
have not assessed sufficient, they are not relieved from the 
responsibility of providing school accommodation. 2 

Under such conditions the applicants were entitled to have the rule for 

a mandamus made absolute. 

Nor can a municipal council invade the authority of a school 
board by refusing to grant them, the monies requisitioned for. In an 
Ontario case^ a school board had requisitioned $7000 to establish a 
school and $1000 to maintain it. The municipal council approved this 
requisition and then refused to act on it because certain elements 


within the community opposed the establishment of the school. The 
Court ruled: 

...The Court will prevent the invasion by a municipal council 
of the legislative authorit^r assigned to a school board..•(even if 
ratepayers disapprove of the action of the board). ‘When application 
of a school board for funds...has once been approved by the 
municipal council to whom it is made, then it must be complied with 
and this duty cannot be evaded by a subsequent disapproval or by 
repealing the by-law that has been passed in compliance with that 
duty. ^ 


41 (1892), 31 N.B.R. 472. 

42 Ibid ., p. 473. 

4 ^ Re West Missouri Continuation School ,(1912) 1 D,L.R. 252, 
4 D.L.R. 847. 

44 (1912) 1 D.L.R. 252 , at p. 252. 











90 


This decision made it unquestionable that in Ontario a school board is 

supreme within the limits of its own jurisdiction, and a municipal council 

has no authority to render nugatory the action of such a board in the 

4*5 

exercise of a power given to it by statute. J In this case the requi¬ 
sitioned money had to be paid to the board so that the statutory 
obligation to provide educational facilities for all children in the area 
could be carried out. 


The Right to Equal Opportunity 

46 

In the Riding case in Saskatchewan, the above legal opinions 
were extended to include a finer point of law. Not only must the boards 
provide adequate school accommodation, but in doing so there should be 
no discrimination against any children in the community. The trustees 
of a school district had made arrangements to have the children of 
their area educated in a neighbouring school district. Arrangements 
were made whereby the children were conveyed to the neighbouring 
school, transportation was provided for all children except the 
children of one family who were relatively isolated. The parents 
sought a mandamus to compel the trustees to provide transportation, 
or payment in lieu thereof. In its decision the Court said: 

Where the trustees of a school district make arrangements for 
the education of children of that district in another district, 
and make arrangements for their conveyance to school, they are 
bound to include all children of their district, and are liable 
for the cost of conveying to school children for whom they 
have made no j arrangements,^? 


45 (1912) 4 D.L.R. 847, at p. 847. 

46 (1927) 3 D.L.R. 173. 

4 ?Ibid. 










- 



, 














. 


















‘ 

- 




























91 


It was pointed out that conveyance had not been mandatory, but the 
Board undertook, by resolution, to convey the children and therefore 
must convey all children and not only a part. The Court said, "Having 
passed a resolution to do that, the defendants were not entitled in 

48 

carrying it out to discriminate against the children of the plaintiff. 

The Court was emphatic in pointing out that the duty to provide 
accommodation included provision of adequate facilities, proper instruction, 
and the means by which such accommodations could be made available to the 
children. The legal principles governing the decision in this case 
leave no doubt that (l) no discrimination is permissible in the education 
of the children, and (2) that it is the duty of trustees to put all 
children into condition to attend school in order that advantage can be 
taken of the accommodation and facilities that are provided. What is 
provided for some must be provided for all. 

The Right to the Provisions of the Statutes 

Any rights or privileges granted to the child by statute may not 

be taken from him by the actions of the board of trustees. This principle 

49 

was clearly laid down by a Court in Saskatchewan in the Wilkinson case / 

The Saskatchewan statutes provided that children between the ages of 
five and twenty-one in rural areas, and six and twenty-one in town 
districts, imperatively had the right to attend school and receive 
instruction.-5° The School Act also provided that town district boards 

^Ibid., p. 177. 

^ Wilkinson v. Thomas , (1928) , 2 W.W.R. 7°0. 

50 The School Act , R.S.S. 1920, ch. 110, sec. 202(2). 













































. 


























92 


had the power to determine the number, grade, territorial boundaries 
and descriptions of schools to be opened and maintained, as well as the 
time of year that pupils could be admitted to grade 1.^ This section 
specifically mentioned "town districts" and no mention was made that 
such powers were also granted to rural districts. 

The defendants in this case, who were trustees of the Tuxford 

School District (a rural district), passed a resolution "that we take 

52 

in beginners after midsummer holidays" only. Dorothy Wilkinson was 
aged five and applied for admission to school before "midsummer 
holidays" and her application was refused. The parents thereupon sought 
a mandamus to compel the board to accept her. In its ruling the Court 
held that since the trustees were responsible for a rural district, 
the powers granted in section 110, subsection 27, of the School Act 
were not conferred upon them. Dorothy Wilkinson, being of the age 
specified in the Act, had the right to attend school on the day of her 
fifth birthday. The resolution of the board violated the right of the 
child to receive an education at a time when she was, by law, entitled 
to it. The Court said: 

...The right is the right of the child itself to receive proper 
instruction, and it is not a matter left in the discretion of the 
parent or in the school board. 

51 Ibld., sec. 110 ( 27 ). 

52 (1928), 2 W.W.E. 700, at p. 701. 

53jbid., p , 702 . 







93 

The following legal principles seem to govern the decision 
in this case: 

1. Within the framework of the statutory provisions every child has 
the right to receive instruction in the public schools at the time 
specified by the Act. 

2. The trustees of school districts are absolutely bound to provide 
school accommodation and facilities to all children entitled by law 

to attend school. 

The provisions of the statutory law are binding and decisive in this 
matter. An interesting implication of this decision seems to be that 
the "right” of a child to an education is governed by statutory 
provisions. This would belie any contention that the right of a child 
to an education is a "natural" right. 

The Right to an Education 

54 

Because the McLeod case^ in British Columbia is based upon the 
precedents established in the litigation just considered, coupled with 
the fact that it is relatively recent, it will be well to consider this 
case more systematically and in more detail. Here, as in the previous 
cases, the basic issue was: Can the children of school age be legally 
deprived of their right to an education? 

^^ McLeod v. Board of School Trustees of School District No. 20 
(Salmon Arm), (1952), 2 D.L.R. .562, 4 W.W.R. 385. 
















94 

Facts in the case . The governing body of the School Corporation 
of School District No. 20 was formed of representatives from three areas: 
the City of Salmon Arm, the Municipal District of Salmon Arm, and a 
surrounding unorganized rural area. The funds for educational purposes 
came from these three areas. The School Act provided that in the event 
of a conflict regarding the annual school expenditure estimates, the 
question should be referred to a Board of Arbitration, the decision of 
which should be binding on all parties concerned. Such a conflict did 
take place, and arbitration occurred on May 12, the aw a rd of which 
reduced the expenditures by $80,000 (from $328,000 to $248,000). The 
school board met this award by threatening to close the schools unless a 
further contribution was made by all areas in the school district. The 
Municipal District of Salmon Arm did make an agreement with the board. 

The City of Salmon Arm agreed to contribute an additional sum, but such 
money was to be applied to the education of the city school children 
only. The school board refused to accept this proviso, and in addition 
stated that the amount contributed was not sufficient. No agreement was 
reached, and in the fall the board closed the city schools and thereby 
deprived one third^ of the children in the school district of an edu¬ 
cation. On an application for mandamus the school board contended that 
compliance with such an order was impossible due to the lack of funds. 

The lower Court found for the board but the appeal decision reversed 
this finding. 


-^This involved 510 out of 1,528 children. 






The issues in the case. This case decided three important 


95 


issues; 

1. Is the plea of "impossibility" valid to relieve the board of 
its statutory duty? 

2. If not, is mandamus the proper remedy? 

3. Where does the responsibility for the education of the children 
primarily lie. Does it lie with the (a) ratepayers or (b) the board or 
(c) the province? 

The findings of the Court . Issue 1 . The Trial Court had discharged 
the rule that the Court ought not to order the performance of an 
impossibility. The Superior Court reversed this decision and held that 
the trial judge had exercised his discretion on an improper principle 
in refusing the writ. 

...Where there is refusal by a public body to obey a statutory 
duty the discretion ought, in the absence of inhibiting circum¬ 
stances or other adequate remedy, to be exercised in favour of 
granting the writ. The discretion of the trial judge is not . 
arbitrary and must be exercised within defined limitations.'^ 

The Court was not satisfied that the plea of impossibility was valid 

under the circumstances. In fact the school board had defied the law 

in two ways: (a) it refused to accept the arbitration award as final 

and binding on it, and (b) it deprived one third of the children in 

its district of their statutory right to an education. 

In its plea of "impossibility" the board did not state that it 

could not, since May 12, have reduced its expenditures to the figure 

set by the Arbitration Board. Even though the Board admitted that there 

had been a way of reducing expenditures by at least $11,000, no bona 


56 (1952), 2 D.L.R. 562, at p. 564. 











fide effort had been made to do so. The Court quoted Lord Denham, 
C.J.s 


96 


...Persons who undertake a public office, are bound to execute 
its duties. It is an unfortunate circumstance, if they have spent 
their funds in some other way; and they have not shown in what way.-^ 

In the first place the Court felt that since the school board had never 

made a bona fide effort to reduce expenditures in compliance with the 

arbitration award, it was obvious that the board had obdurately pursued 

its own course on the assumption that the aw a rd had been wrong. In the 

second place, it was not within the competence of the board to say that 

the statutes were impossible to be complied with. The statutes made the 

findings of the Arbitration Board final and conclusive, and it was the 

imperative duty of the school board to act accordingly. The intentions 

of the School Act were clear in that school boards must keep their 

expenditures within the limits of the funds that the statute allows them 

and at the same time give schooling to a3.1 the children in their area. 

Boards must cut their expenditures to available income. 

The opinion of the Court was summarized as follows: 

It is a well known principle that people cannot set up their 
own default or neglect in answer to a charge of evasion of a 
plain statutory duty.^ 

We think it is the duty of the Trustees to provide sufficient 
accommodation for all children...between the ages named in the 
Act, and not having done so, the applicant is entitled to have the 
rule made absolute.^9 


57 Reg v. Trustees of Luton Rds ,, 10 L.J.Q.B. 264, quoted in 
Ibid., p. 568. 

53(1952) 2 D.L.R. 562, at p. 570. 

Ihid ., p. 569. 










97 


The decision, in no uncertain terms, stated that the reason for the 
above ruling was that public education laws find their reason for 
existence in the right of children to receive an education. 


Issue 2. In regard to the granting of the mandamus the Court 


fo3lowed the reasoning of the Henchel case, and stated that if there is 
no statutory provision for enforcing a statutory duty, the common law 


may be resorted to for the appropriate remedy. In this case the 


failure to obey a statute resulted from a deliberate course of conduct, 
for the lack of funds had. been occasioned by a course of action in defiance 
of a statute. In addition the return to the mandamus did not aver that 
the school board could not have reduced its expenditures to comply with 
the law. 

The Court said: 

Mandamus is of a highly remedial nature and one to be facilitated 
in order to secure the efficient administration of justice rather 
than hedged about by refinements which detract from that end. It 
gives effect to, if not actually springing from the clause in 
Magna Carta which undertakes "nulli negabimus, aut differemus 
rectum vel justiciam." ...If it is not upheld here the children 

Mansfield’s words) "put out of the 



Mandamus is the appropriate remedy where there is no other way to 
enforce obedience to the law when in justice and good government there 
ought to be a remedy. The very circumstance, that the children in this 
case were without remedy, requires no further reason for granting the 
mandamus^ 


^ Supra p. 

6 l (l952)2 D.L.R. 562, at p. 571. 
































. 























































98 

Issue 3 . The main fact in this case was that children had been 


deprived of their statutory right to an education. Where does the 
responsibility to provide this education really lie? Could the rate¬ 
payers have taken a different action? Could the school board have 
found another way to assure that the education of the children was 
not interrupted? What was the responsibility of the province in 
this matter? These questions were answered by the Court. 

0 Halloran, J.A. , stated that the ratepayers had some responsi¬ 
bility to provide money for education, but the greatest responsibility 
must be assumed by the province since the province is the authority 
that (l) compels the attendance of children at school, (2) directs the 
subjects to be taught and the examinations to be written, and (3) assumes 
some two-thirds of the costs of education as such, and one-half the cost 
of school buildings. The judge continued: 

...It is the Province which is directly and primarily responsible 
as the agency which enacted the legislation. In coming to a decision 
I am compelled to regard the interests of the children as paramount. 
That is inherent in the Public Schools Act ; and all its provisions,., 
even if some of them seem to conflict must be read in that light... 

The Court emphasized that once it was clear that the major responsibility 

for the education of the children fell upon the province, the school 

board ought to have realized this and ought to have acted in the interests 

of the children by assuring that the province assumed this responsibility. 

How could this have been done? 


63 

64 


Ibid . , p. 566. 


Ibid. 
















































- 





























- 







99 


The members of the school board really had only one course of 
action - they should have resigned, and the province would have been 
compelled to resume the responsibility through an official trustee. 

In the words of the Court: 

In my opinion people in public office ought to resign if they 
find no way to carry out their statutory duties. They subject 
themselves to censure, invite public approbrium and legal action, 
if in such circumstances they remain in public office and attempt 
to evade or pervert the statute by which their legal conduct is 
confined.* 

The duties and responsibilities of the local educational authorities 
(school boards) are delegated, and, therefore, can be shifted back to 
the original authority if such local, bodies find that they cannot 
act within legal limits in the fulfillment of their functions. The 
Court stressed this principle when it stated: 

The taxpayers of the district itself have acted according to 
law and ought not to be penalized. The Province ought to assist in 
what is becoming not only a Gilbertian situation, but one in which 
the taxpayers of the Province may easily become aroused concerning 
the manner in which their money is spent. The School Board have 
not perceived the obvious, and have failed in consequence to act 
in a manner that would assure the Province shouldered the major 
responsibility it has assumed in the Public School Act . 1 ° 

Since the interests of the children are "the paramount consideration" 

in the Public School Act , the appeal was allowed and the mandamus 

granted. 


Significance of the findings. 


It is to be noted that many of 


the legal principles formulated in the previous 


decisions served as 


^•5 Ibid . , p. 567. 
66 


'Ibid . , p. 572. 


















' 






















- 













. 











■ 





• 



























100 

precedents for this case. The principles which received special 
emphasis in the McLeod case were: 

1. The plea of "impossibility" cannot be entertained as a defence 
when a school board fails to perform a statutory function. 

2. People cannot set up their own default or neglect in answer to 
a charge of evasion of a plain statutory duty. 

3* If a school board cannot perform its statutory obligations it has 

only one course of acceptable action - resignation. 

4. The province, as the agency which enacts legislation and controls 
education, has the prime responsibility in the education of the children., 

5. If the statutes provide no remedy for an illegal action, a mandamus 
will lie. 

6. In the Public School Act the interests of the children are the 
paramount consideration, and any action must be governed by this fact. 

7. A child’s statutory right to an education is absolute. 

In its summary the Court said that it would consider it to be a dangerous 
precedent if it would relieve the school board, no matter on what grounds, 
from its imperative statutory duty to provide children with an education 
according to law. 

The Right to Attend a particular District School 

The child, however, does not have the right to choose the school 
of the district which he may attend. If more than one school exists in 
a district, the school authorities have the discretionary power to assign 
pupils to a particular school in their district. In Canada two cases 
have been litigated and the decisions support this conclusion. 

In an early Ontario case a Court laid down the principle that 









































101 


the board had the right to designate the school within the district 
that a child was to attend .^ Applications for transfer from one school 
to another must be made in accordance with the statutory provisions 
governing such a transfer. In the Town of Windsor there were two schools, 
one of them for coloured children, although it was not a legally 
established separate school. Without making any application a coloured 
child arrived at the other school, but was refused admission. Action 
was brought by the parents against the board. The board contended that 
there was not sufficient accommodation in the school to which admittance 
was sought, and evidence supported this fact. The Court ruled: 

A mandamus to compel the admission of a child to a public school 
will not be granted where it is shewn that there is not accommo¬ 
dation for her, for this is a valid answer to such an application* 
especially where it appears, as here, that there is sufficient 
accommodation in another public school in the same toxm; nor where 
it is shewn that the application for admission was not made in the 
regular and proper way... 

In Saskatchewan, in 191**> the Court upheld this reasoning even 
69 

more emphatically. The board operated a district in which there were 
two schools, and it notified all parents that children from one part 
of the district should attend one school and the children from the 
other part, the other school. By this ruling the children of the 
plaintiff were compelled to attend the farther school. The parents 
sought a mandamus to compel the trustees to admit their children to the 
nearer school. The Court said: 

Dunn v. The Board of Education of the Town of Windsor , 

(1883) 6 O.R. 125. 

/La 

Ibid ., p. 125. 

^ Patrick v. Trustees of Yorkton School District Mo . 159 . 

(1914) 6 W.W.R. 1107. 28 W.L.R. 495. 























































- 












- 




































The Legislature having imposed upon the trustees the duty of 102 
providing the accommodation furnished by the second school, and 
having vested in them the management of the schools in their 
district...must, in my opinion, be held to have impliedly given 
them the power to make all regulations necessary or advisable, 
not only for the management of the school room, but for 
determining the portion of the district that could be most 
suitably served by each of the schools - or the children who 
shall attend each, and so long as the trustees act bona fide and 
to the best of their judgment for the purpose of securing the 
better conduct or more efficient management of the school under 
their charge, their discretion in these respects cannot be 
interfered with... Prima facie every resident of a school 
district has the right to send his children to the school of 
that district...This, however, does not give him the right, 
where there is more than one school in the district, of 
determining to which particular school they shall go.' 

This decision followed the precedent set by the Dunn case and needs no 

further comment. It is clear that a school board has discretionary 

powers in determining the particular school in the district that 

children shall attend. 


Conclusions 

Compulsion and right in education are governed by statute, since 
no educational right or duty has been directly recognized by common law. 
Under common law alone there is no compulsion to enforce education, and 
also no natural right to an education. In Canada the provinces have 
realized that the safety and welfare of the nation depend upon an 
enlightened citizenry, and by legislative enactment have established 
statutory rights and duties in regard to education. Hence constitutional 
and statutory provisions circumscribe the rights and responsibilities of 
child and parent, as well as of the local school authorities. 


7 °(19l4) 28 W.L.R. 495, at p. 498. 




















- 


























































' 








. 













. 








■ 









103 


An analysis of the Court decisions on these matters leads one 
to the conclusion that education is not so much a right or privilege 
as it is a duty imposed upon the child for the public good. Decisions 
have clearly indicated that the child has no inherent or absolute 
right to an education except in so far as such right is precisely 
granted and defined by the statutes, and even then the exemptions to 
compulsory attendance seem to indicate that the child must first 
qualify for such a right in order to enjoy it. 

The words of an American Court are also applicable to Canada. 
When speaking of school attendance the Court said: 

This is a privilege or advantage, rather than a right, in the 
strict technical sense of the term. This privilege is granted, and 
is enjoyed, upon such terms, and under such reasonable conditions 
and restrictions as the law-makirg power, within constitutional 
limits, may see fit to impose.,. 

It appears that the right to an education is a civil right and is not 
abso3,ute or unqualified. To take advantage of such a right a pupil 
must meet the requirements imposed upon him by the statutory law. 

Some of these major requirements are the concern of the next chapter. 


^ Biss el v. Davison , 65 Conn. 183» 190? 32 Atl. 348, 349 (L894). 
Quoted in L.O. Garber, "The Legal Requirements for Admission to Public 
•Schools," Law and Contemporary Problems , School of Law, Duke University, 
Vol. 20, No. 1, Winter 1955, p. 24. 











CHAPTER IV 


LEGAL STATUS IN REGARD TO ADMISSION AND ATTENDANCE 

In all Canadian provinces children of school age have a legal 
right to attend public school. This right, however, is not unrestricted; 
and even the existence of compulsory school laws is not in itself 
sufficient to ensure that all children who wish to do so may attend 
school free of charge. The legislature, and in some cases school boards, 
may and indeed have, set up standards which must be met before children 
are admitted to school. Such standards are generally concerned with age, 
residence, tuition, and health. 

In considering the question of admission requirements and standards, 
it should be noted that the statutory provisions pertaining to these 
matters are decisive. It is only when the meaning of the statutes is not 
clear, or when some pertinent aspect of admission and attendance is not 
covered by statutory enactments, that resort is had to the decisional law 
of the Courts. In this chapter provincial laws governing admission to 
school will be examined; and an attempt will be mad© to discover from the 
Court decisions those legal principles which have a bearing upon these 
laws. 

In most cases responsibility for meeting requirements rests 
with the parent or the child. In at least one respect, however, the 
burden is upon the school board. This is in the matter of transportation. 
Here it is incumbent upon the board to make it possible for pupils to take 
advantage of the accommodation and facilities which must by law be 

































' 









■ 

- 








105 


provided for them. In this chapter, therefore, the problem of trans¬ 
portation will also be considered. 

The Age of Admission to School 

All provinces have restricted free public school education to 
children between specified ages. It must be remembered, however, that 
the statutory provisions in this respect are not to be interpreted as a 
limitation upon the power of the legislatures to provide school 
facilities for individuals outside these specified age limits. The 
statutory provisions must be carried out; but a legislature may go 
beyond legal mandate if it sees fit to do so, and, for example, provide 
children with a kindergarten education or establish schools for adults. 
Furthermore, in cases where authority is delegated to school boards, 
the boards themselves may require standards in addition to those set by 
statute; but such standards may not, of course, be contrary to provincial 
laws or to regulations of the Department of Education. 

All provinces prescribe the age at which children shall be 
admitted to school and state the number of years that a child must 
remain in school. The following table indicates ages at which free 
schooling is provided by law in the various provinces. 






106 


FREE SCHOOL AGE LIMITS AS SET BY PROVINCIAL STATUTES 


Province 

(Data taken from provincial 
Minimum age Maximum age 

for entrance for free 
to grade I attendance 

School Acts) 
Number of 
years of free 
schooling 

Compulsory 

attendance 

ages 

Newfoundland 

5 

15 

10 

7-15 

Nova Scotia 

5 

21 

16 

7-14 rural 
6-16 urban 

Prince Ed. Is. 

6 

Not stated 

Not stated 

7-15 

New Brunswick 

6 

20 

14 

6-15 

Quebec 

6 

16 

10 

6-14 

Ontario 

5 

21 

16 

6-16 

Manitoba 

6 

21 

15 

6-14 or 16 

Saskatchewan 

6 

21 

15 

7-15 

A3.be rta 

6 

21 

15 

7-15 

British Columbia 

6 

19 

13 

7-15 


Most commonly, children above six years of age and below twenty- 
one are entitled to free schooling, although major exceptions to this 
pattern can be noted, as in Quebec where the upper limit is sixteen years. 
Although the maximum age for free attendance is not stated for Prince 
Edward Island, there is provision for free education to children over 

























107 

the age of fifteen, if accommodation is available; the upper limit for 
the number of years of free schooling, however, is not stated. Another 
exception to the general pattern occurs in New Brunswick where the 
maximum age for free education is extended to over the age of twenty, if 
accommodation is available. In all cases, and as a general principle, 
tuition fees may be charged for children outside these age limits, or 
the children may be excluded. 

From the preceding table it will be noted that there are 
discrepancies between rural and urban requirements In some provinces. 

In the rural and village areas of Nova Scotia ratepayers may vote at 
the annual meeting to alter the age limits from the stated 7 to 14, by 
substituting 6 for 7» and 15 or 1 6 for 14. In Manitoba the compulsory 
school years are 6 to 14; but if a person is not employed, the school 
board may require attendance to age 16. In Saskatchewan the minimum 
age for entrance into grade one is set at six years, but in rural and 
village districts children who are 5 years of age may be admitted by 
resolution of the board. In addition, Saskatchewan boards have the 

power to determine at what times pupils may be admitted to grade one."^ 

2 

A similar provision exists in Alberta. 

In studying the compulsory attendance laws of the ten provinces, 
one is impressed with their over-all similarity; yet there are numerous 

1 The School Act, R.S.S., 1953, eh. 169, Sec. 113 (38). This 
provision is, no doubt, the consequence of the Wilkinson v, Thomas case 
discussed Supra p. 91 • 


2 The School Act, R.S.A., 1955. ch. 297, sec. 177(d). 










differences of detail. One is also convinced that conditions of 


108 


admission to school are governed by statute. There is apparently no 
"natural" age for school attendance. Because of the overriding authority 
of the statutes in this respect, and perhaps because of the clarity and 
precision with which the age for admission to school is stated, there 
has been a dearth of litigation dealing with this subject. Only one case 
is on record. 

3 

The Wilkinson Case . This case was mentioned previously in the 
discussion of the right of a child to an education. Actually the basic 
question raised in the case involved the age of admission to school. The 
direct issue was: when may a child enter the first grade if he attains 
the minimum age for school attendance after the opening of the school 
year? It was noted during the hearing that only urban districts had the 
authority to determine at what time of year beginners may enter school. 
Such authority had not been given to the rural and village areas, so the 
children there had a statutory right to be admitted whenever they reached 
the minimum school age. The law in Saskatchewan has been amended on this 
point, and it is unlikely that similar litigation will come before the 
Courts again. When the statutes are clear and precise there is generally 
no need for legal action, nor will there be a real danger *of any liti¬ 
gation if school personnel and school boards act within the limits of the 
statutory law. 

Kindergarten . In Canada kindergarten classes have not yet been 


-^ Wilkinson y. Thomas , Supra p. 91. 



















































. 
















































109 

fully accepted as a necessary part of the public .school system. Only in 
New Brunswick has mandatory legislation regarding kindergarten classes 
been passed. Section 63 (l6) of the School Act in that province reads: 

The board of school trustees shall provide privileges free of 
charge for all children from four to six years of age inclusive, 
in a kindergarten department, who are residents of cities and towns, 
and when authorized by the school meeting, for all children from 
four to six years of age, inclusive, resident in the district. Such 
additional expenditure shall be at the option of the school board 
and shall be levied and collected along with and in the same 
manner as all other school taxes within such district.... 

It will be noted that the establishment of kindergarten classes is 

mandatory in cities and towns, while it remains discretionary in rural 

districts. 

In five other provinces the establishment of kindergarten classes 

4 

is discretionary to the local authorities. In British Columbia and 
Manitoba no additional fees may be charged for such classes; while in 
the other three provinces a fee varying from one to two dollars per 
month may be levied. In the provinces of Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, 

Prince Edward Island, and Quebec, the statutes are silent on the matter 
of kindergarten instruction. There is little doubt, however, that even 
though free school age limits have been set in all provinces, provincial 
legislatures may, if they so wish, provide free school attendance outside 
these limits. That is to say, statutory provisions do not imply a legis¬ 
lative prohibition to extending those limits either up or down. 

^Ontario, Manitoba, Saskatchewan, British Columbia and 

Alberta. 





. 










. 

































110 

Residence Requirements 

Schools are maintained primarily for pupils resident in the 
district in which the school is located, and such pupils must be admitted 
to school free of charge. This is, however, not the case with non¬ 
resident pupils. Generally local boards have the option of accepting non¬ 
residents upon the payment of prescribed fees. If accommodation is not 
available, non-residents may be refused admittance entirely. The 
distinction between resident and non-resident pupils is often not clear, 
and the Courts have been frequently asked to rule on this issue. In some 
cases Courts have had to define the term "residence", as distinguished 
from "domicile." Other cases have involved the rights of children 
living apart from their parents. In a few instances the rights of 
children living in foster homes and in charitable institutions have 
been the issues. These matters become especially complicated, for they 
are governed by statutory provisions which vary from province to province. 
Consequently broad generalization can be drawn only at the risk of 
accuracy in detail. As will be seen, however, it is possible to draw 
some legal generalizations after the specific questions mentioned 
earlier in this paragraph have been considered. 

Definition of "residence* 1 and "domicile. " Generally the Courts 
have held that the residence of an unemancipated minor of school age is 
that of the parent or guardian and cannot be considered otherwise except 
under unusual circumstances. A major difficulty here, however, is to 
determine what is meant by "residence" as used in the statutes. Some 
Courts have held that "residence" and "domicile" are synonymous terms; 





































< 

• 





















. 

• 




















































' 









Ill 

while other Courts have held that they are distinct. The trend, however, 
seems to be to take a more liberal view by holding that "residence” for 
school purposes does not mean "domicile" in the narrow sense of "residence" 
for the purposes of taxation. 

The case of Ex Parte Miller^ in New Brunswick has been a leading 
case in defining the term residence. A man, who worked a farm in 
district #10, moved his family to district #8 and took up residence there, 
although he spent part of his time on the farm. He had notified the 
trustees of the district into which he had moved, that he had changed his 
residence and asked them to assess him for school purposes. The trustees, 
however, refused to make the assessment and would not allow his children 
to attend the local school. They claimed that the father’s residence was 
not a bona fide one, and contended that the father had moved to district 
#8 simply to give his children school privileges. They argued further 
that "residence" as used in the School Act meant "domicile," and the 
father’s "domicile" remained in district #10 even though his "residence" 
had changed. 

The Court, in reviewing the purposes of school law as it related 
to the issue, stated that the Act had been passed to provide an education 
for all children within certain ages. Such education was to be provided 
at public' expense by means of taxation. The mere fact that the father 
owned a farm on which he formerly resided and to which he went every 
week, made no difference to the rights of the children to receive an 
education. The residence of the father was in the district to which he 

5 (1897) 3^ N.B.R. 318. 









, 

























■ 


































112 

had moved, but even if the father's residence had remained in district 
#10, the right of the children to be educated in their place of residence 
was not affected. Van Wart, J., said: 

The residence necessary to give the right to attend school is the 
residence of the child. True, that for many and perhaps most 
purposes the residence of the father determines that of the child 
(a minor), A man can have but one domicile, but may have more than 
one place of residence, and may change it from time to time at 
his will, 

"Residence" means where one actually resides, and may be changed 
every month, or even oftener....While not necessary for determining 
this case, I think, however, that the actual residence of the child 
gives the right to attend school, and that the child may have a 
residence sufficient to entitle it to school privileges independent 
of the residence of the parent,^ 

The Court also ruled on the question of assessment as it was 

o 

involved in this case. Section 24 of the Common Schools Act° provided 
that: 


...every male person (except a clergyman) between the age of 
twenty-one years and sixty years, have resided in the district for 
the period of one month next before the making out of district 
assessment, shall be assessed and shall pay the sum of one dollar 
as a poll tax. 

Accordingly, actual residence for one month made the party liable to 
district assessment for school purposes. Again, section ?4 of the same 
Act provided that any person assessed for school rates in two or more 
districts, had the right to send his children to the school of any 
district in which he was assessed. The right to school attendance in 
New Brunswick, therefore, can apparently be determined by either the 


6 Ibid .. p. 3X9-320. 

7 Ibid . , p. 321. 

8 C.S.N.B. 1877. ch. 65, sec. 24. 




























. 




- 
























































5 » 











* 








113 


residence of the child or by payment of school rates by the parent. 

The plaintiff had asked to be assessed, and had the right to be 
assessed in district #8. The refusal of the trustees to accede to his 
request could not affect the right of his children to attend the school 
in that district. The Court also held that it could'not question the 
reason the plaintiff had for moving from one district to another. The 
Court said: 

...1 fail to find anything in the Act to prevent children from 
attending school as a right, or that any satisfactory reason can 
be assigned why they should not. In my view of the law, the 
question of the bona fide of the residence has nothing to do with 
the case. Actual residence determines the right, and that 
residence is the residence of the child.° 

The mandamus asked for by the plaintiff was granted. 

Four principles governing the decision in this case deserve 

emphasis: 

1. The residence necessary to give the right to attend school is 
the residence of the child. 

2. The payment of school rates by a parent, apart from any residence 
in the district, may qualify his children for school attendance there. 

3. The Courts do not question the bona fide of the residence that is 
established. 

4. "Residence" and "domicile" must be held to be distinct terms, and 
the right of the child to attend school depends upon the term used in the 
statutes. 

It must be remembered that these principles were applied to a particular 


9(1897) 3^ N.B.R. 318, at p. 321 






















- 

























114 


area at a particular time; and that they can be changed by statutory 
enactment at the will of a legislature. The question of what is meant 
by "residence” and "domicile" is touched upon in numerous other cases 
which are still to be considered, but under different headings. 

Children not living with their parents. Thirty years after the 

Miller case another litigation in New Brunswick involved the question of 

residence, b.it this time concerned a child living with an uncle. In 

Ex Parte Murray Lambert a boy went to live with his uncle in Moncton. 

At first he was admitted to school but later was told that he would have 

to pay tuition fees. Action was brought to obtain a mandamus compelling 

the school board to admit the boy free of charge. 

The Court based its decision on the precedent of Bx Parte Miller . 

Justice Grimmer said: "The residence necessary to give the right to 

attend school is the residence of the child."“^The rule for mandamus 

was made absolute. The influence of precedent in this case was clearly 

revealed when Justice Sir J.D. Hazen said, "I concur with the judgment 

of my brother Grimmer, but only with a great deal of hesitation, and 

12 

only because I feel bound by the case of Ex parte Miller ...." 

In Quebec the rights of children living apart from, their parents 
are not the same as those in the cases just considered. In a recent 

10 Ex Parte Murray Lambert , (1930) 1 M.P.R. 12, 

1X Ibid ., p. 19. 

-^ Tbid . , p. 15* 































- 

























































115 

13 

Quebec case, the plaintiff had formerly lived with several members of 
his family, and four other children, in parish A. The four children were 
not related to him, but their mother was an invalid and the children 
were, as he alleged, "sous sa garde." Later the plaintiff moved a small 
house onto a part of his land that was in parish B, and moved into it 
with his wife and the four other children. The school commissioners of 
parish B refused to accept the children into their school, although it 
was two miles closer to the plaintiff’s farm than that of parish A. The 
plaintiff sought a mandamus . 

The liability of the commissioners under section 69 of the 
14 

Education Act was to receive the children "domiciled" in the munici¬ 
pality. The Court, then, had to clarify two issues: (l) What was the 
domicile of the plaintiff? (2) What was the domicile of the children? 

In regard to the first issue the Court pointed out that under article 80 
of the Quebec Civil Code, a change of domicile must be established, show¬ 
ing the taking up of actual residence in a new place, coupled with, the 
intention of making it one's principal place of habitation. The change 
must be both animo and facto, and the burden is on one who asserts a 
change of domicile to establish it. In the case under consideration, 
the plaintiff had failed to establish his change of domicile; therefore, 
his domicile continued to be in parish A. 

■^ Poissant v . Commissaires D’Ecoles De St . J acques Le Mineur , 
(1956) Que. S.C. 123. 

l4 R.S.Q., 1941, ch. 59, sec. 69 . 


















116 

The central issue in this case, however, was the "domicile" of 
the children. Under article 83 of the Quebec Civil Code the domicile 
of the children must be that of their parents or parent, or their tutor 
if he is related to them by blood. But the plaintiff in this case was 
not the children's tutor but merely as he described himself, their 
"gardien." The Court claimed that there was nothing in the Education 
Act that excluded the operation of the Civil Code or affected the question 
of the children's domicile. Under the circumstances, therefore, these 
children could not be considered to have a domicile with a person to whose 
"garde" they had been informally entrusted. The action in this case 
failed. 

The Poissant case related above confirmed two legal decisions 

previously held by the Quebec Courts. One of these was that where a 

child is living with an uncle who is resident in a municipality, while 

his father and mother are domiciled elsewhere, the school in that 

municipality is not obliged to receive him.^ The reason given for this 

decision was that the domicile of an unemancipated minor is determined 

1 ^ 

by the domicile of his parents. In a similar case in 1951» the Quebec 
Courts were faced with the question of whether a school board was 
compelled to admit children whose father had died, and who were not 
living with their mother but with a "tutor" who was not related to them. 

"‘^ Pelletier y. Commissaires D' Ecoles de Rock Forest, (19^*5) * 

Que. S.C. , 140. 

■^Compare with decision in Ex Parte Murray Lambert , Supra , where 
the facts were almost identical but the decision was reverse. 










































































. 

' f 






















117 

The decision in this case was the same; unemancipated minors have the 

same domicile as their parents or surviving parent, and do not take the 

17 

domicile of a tutor not related to them by blood* ' 

It is to be noted that in Quebec the Education Act is subject to 
the general provisions of the Quebec Civil Code. It is this fact that 
accounts for the differences in the Quebec and New Brunswick judgments. 

In New Brunswick, precedent and the concept of "residence" governed the 
decision in the Miller and Lambert cases; in Quebec, it was the Civil 
Code and the term "domicile" which directed the decisions. It seems that 
the operation of the Civil Code in Quebec allows the Courts much less 
flexibility in their decisions than they enjoy in those provinces where 
precedent plays a major role. 


3 3 

The payment cf rates . In a Manitoba case"" a school board 
contended that the residence of a parent was not enough to qualify his 
children for attendance at school; in addition to being a resident the 
parent must also be paying a school tax at least equal to the average 
tax paid by other ratepayers in the district. In this case the plaintiff 
resided in the district but paid less than average taxes. Consequently 
the trustees insisted on payment of a fee before the children would be 
allowed to attend school. In this case the trustees must have been 
either ignorant of the law or misinformed. The decision of the Court 


-7 ]gLliott v. rrotestant School of St. The res e , (1951) , Que.S.C.,p .395* 

"^ Inkster v. M initonka School District , (1912) 2 W.W.R. 1105» 

22 W.L.R. 57, 22 Man. R. 487, 6 D.L.R. 57- 





































118 

was based solely on the statutory provisions as set forth in the Public 
19 

Schools Act, In the words of Mathers, C.J.K.B.; 

...By the plain reading of the section 2(m) as re-enacted and 
amended, all pupils are to be regarded as non-resident, with the 
exception of two classes: first, those whose parents, or one of them, 
or whose legal guardian has his permanent and principal place of 
residence in the district; and secondly, those who, or whose parents 
or legal guardians, pay or are liable to pay the average school tax, 
whether they reside in or out of the district. Those who come within 
either exception are not to be classed as non-residents. The 
plaintiff’s children come within the first exception and therefore 
the trustees have no right to insist on payment of a fee as a 
condition of their being allowed to attend the school. 

It is difficult to understand how the trustees could have made 
such an error when the law was stated so precisely. As a result their 
ignorance or poor judgment proved to be costly. The Court’s decision 
made it clear that when both parents and their children reside permanently 
within the limits of a school district, the children cannot be considered 
non-residents for school purposes. 

From the consideration of cases thus far concerning residence 
for school purposes, it appears safe to draw the following general 
conclusion: Being a resident ratepayer meets admission requirements 
in all provinces. In Quebec, because of the Civil Code, the deciding 
factor is the "domicile" of the parent; to be merely a ratepayer without 
being domiciled in a district does not qualify a ratepayer’s children 
for free school attendance. On the other hand, in New Brunswick and 


^R.S.M. 1902, ch. 143, sec. 2 (m). 
20 


22 W.L.R. 57, at p. 58. 



















- - 

























Manitoba it appears that a ratepayer's children are entitled to school 
privileges in a district even if residence is elsewhere. 


119 

Non-resident ratepayer. In British Columbia, however, the school 
privileges of a non-resident ratepayer's children are different from what 
they are in Manitoba and New Brunswick. In the Patterson case 21 the 
central issue was: Is a pupil's right to attend school free of charge 
dependent upon residence and/or the payment of rates? The appellant in 
the case was a resident of Oak Bay Municipality and a ratepayer in the 
City of Victoria. When he sent his children to Victoria to attend high 
school, they were refused admission unless they paid the non-resident 
fees. Application for a mandamus was made on the ground that the plaintiff 
was a ratepayer in Victoria and his children should therefore be admitted 
as though they were residents. 

In its decision the Court relied wholly on the explicit state¬ 
ments in the statutory law of the province. Justice Murphy said: 

...there is no provision of the Public Schools Act called to, 
my attention which confers on a ratepayer the right to have his 
children attend the schools of the municipality to which such 
rates are paid independent of residence therein....The right to 
attend the British Columbia Public Schools is in no way connected 
with the payment of rates. 

It is interesting to note that since the above mentioned case was 
heard the statutory provisions have been changed in British Columbia. 
Section 158 (c) of the present Act states that children of non-resident 
ratepayers may attend a district school free of charge if the amount 

^- Patterson et al v. Victoria School Trustees, (1917) 1 W.W.R. 

526, 24 B.C.R. 365. 

22 (1917) 1 W.W.R. 526, at p. 528. 






























■ 

. 












































































. 





























■ 

' , 







. , - 


« 







120 

of taxes paid in that district is at least $75.00. Most other provinces 
now have similar provisions except that the words "to an amount equal 
to the average tax" are sometimes used instead of stating a specific 
amount. Again it is evident that the situation at any one place at 
any one time will depend upon the written law in force at that particular 
moment. No firm generalization can really be drawn, therefore, except to 
say that the provisions of the statutes are decisive. 

Children in foster homes . Another question related to residence 

requirements that has come before the Courts is whether foster parents 

can be considered "parents" or legal "guardians" for school purposes. 2 -^ 

In Ontario action was brought by Spiers, a farmer, who boarded and looked 

after three boys from Dr. Bamardo’s Homes, for a writ of mandamus to 

compel a school board to admit one of his charges to their school. Dr. 

Barnardo’s Homes was a charitable institution looking after boys who 

were orphans, or whose parents for some reason were unable to keep them. 

The institution placed the boys in private homes and paid small sums to 

the families for keeping them. The question before the Court was whether 

24 

Spiers was a guardian within the meaning of the Public Schools Act . 

Under the same Act the trustees were bound to furnish accommodation for 

2 %all v. St is ted , (1897) 24 O.A.R. 476, affirming 28 O.R. 127. 

24 


R.S.O. 1891, ch. 55, sec. 40 (3). 































. 





























121 

two-thirds of those children whose parents or guardians were residents 
25 

in the district. During the year 1895 the plaintiff’s foster son had 
attended the school, but in 1896 he was refused admission. Evidence 
showed that there were fourteen or fifteen other boys resident in the 
township under similar "boarding-out” undertakings, who were also refused 
admission to school. There were forty-six children of actual residents 
in the area, and the school house had accommodation for thirty-two only. 

The contention of the defendant board was that it had done all 
the law required in providing school accommodation, having regard to the 
number of children whose parents or guardians were residents of the school 
section. It was claimed that the children resident in the section under 
"boarding-out" arrangements, were not by law computed with or added to 
children whose parents or guardians were resident in the section. 

In its decision the Court held that because Spiers was being 
paid to take care of the child, he was to be considered the child *s 
"custodian" but not his "guardian" as defined by the Act. Furthermore, 
since the trustees had provided accommodation for the required two-thirds 
of those children whom they were bound to take into account, they could 
not be compelled to provide more. A mandamus to admit the "boarding-out" 
children was therefore refused because there appeared to be no accommodation 
in the school. In the words of the Court: 


^This rather unusual provision was based on the assumption that 
at the time (l89l) no more than two-thirds of the school age children 
would attend school at one time. (1897) 24 O.A.R. 476, at p. 478. 















< 




























• 



























' 

. 


■ 





122 


...The custodian of a child under a "boarding-out agreement" 
to clothe, maintain, and educate him, is not his guardian...and the 
trustees of the school section within which the custodian resides 
need not provide school accommodation for the child. 0 

The most significant aspect of the ruling in this case was that 
a "custodian" is not a "guardian." The distinction apparently turns on 
the nature of the relationship that exists between the adult and the child. 
As L.O. Garber has so clearly stated: 

...in this type of case an involuntary relationship existed 
between the child and the guardian. It (the Court) also characterized 
this as a business relationship...assumed by the guardian for the 
purpose of making a living. As a result, it (the Court) reasoned 
that such homes, to which children were committed, were only 
temporary places for the detention of children. ' 

In Quebec the situation concerning children in foster homes seems 

28 

somewhat different from that in Ontario. In a Quebec case the Court 
considered the question: What are the obligations of a local school when 
children are placed with families pursuant to the Act for the Protection 
of Children Against Tuberculosis ? The Court ruled that local school 
authorities were obliged to receive such children, and that the Attorney- 
General of the province could obtain a writ of mandamus compelling the 
school commissioners to admit the children to school. This decision 
was upheld in 1956 when a mandamus was granted to compel a local school 
commission to accept children who had been placed in private homes under 


26 Ibid ., p. 476, 

2 ?L. 0 .Garber, "Legal Requirements for Admission to Public Schools," 
Law and Contemporary Problems , Vol. 20, No. 1, Winter 1955* p. 42. 

^Procureur General de Quebec v. Commissaires d 1 Ecoles de 
Marabel , (1944) Que. S.C. 299. 















































- 





























- - 









. . . 
















29 12 3 

the provisions of the stated Act. The decision clearly required school 


commissioners to admit non-resident pupils to their schools if such 
pupils fell under the Child Protection Tuberculosis Act.' ^ It is worth 
noting here that the principle established by the above decision is also 
operative in British Columbia where section 157 (2) of the Public Schools 
Act provides that a child, placed in a private home with the approval of 
the Director of Welfare, shall be considered a resident of that district 
for school purposes. 

Children in charitable institutions . It is rather remarkable that 
only in one province do the statutes clarify the educational position of 
children in orphanages and houses of refuge. In Ontario the Public 
Schools Act section 90 (?) reads: 

A person of school age maintained in. a county house of refuge or 
a children*s shelter shall be deemed to be a non-resident, and the 
County council shall pay to the board of the school attended by such 
person such monthly fees as may be agreed upon, or at least the 
average cost per pupil of the maintenance of the school. 

The statutes of the other provinces are silent on this matter. 

It may be helpful at this point to state briefly what the 
American legal attitude has been on this question. In that country the 
Courts have consistently allowed free public school attendance in local 
schools for children committed to children’s homes. In this connection 

^ Societe D 1 Adoption et De Protection De L*Infance v. Commissaires 
D 1 Ecoles Du Bas De St . Janvier , (1956)> Que. S.C. 94. 

30 


R.S.Q. 1941, ch. 191. 



































- 











































































. . 







one Court said: 


124 


...That the Home is the place of their dwelling indefinitely 
is self-evident. They have no other place, at least for the present, 
where the care and support demanded by law can be bestowed. The fact 
that someone may adopt a child or that his parents may be able again 
to undertake their duties does not render the children mere 
sojourners. It is at the Home where they live in fact and receive 
what more fortunate minors are given at their parent's homes. A 
residence within the district is sufficiently established, and the 
Home's children must be admitted to the district school on the 
same basis as other children in the district.31 

In view of the important role played by American precedent in Canadian 

cases, it appears to be a reasonable implication that where provincial 

statutes are silent on the matter of school attendance of children 

resident in an orphanage, such children would be entitled to attend 

school in the district in which the institution is located. 


Summary and conclusions. Because of variations in provincial 
statutes concerning the meaning of "residence" and "domicile", it is not 
possible to make a generalization that would validly cover the situation 
in all ten provinces. Residence qualifications depend upon the wording 
of a particular statute, and this wording varies from province to province. 
In some instances the "residence" of a child alone may establish his right 
to free school attendance. In some cases a parent may send his children 
to school in a district where he is a "non-resident ratepayer." In other 
cases the payment of rates alone does not qualify children for free school 


-^ School Township No . 76 v. Nicholson , 288 N.W. 123 (Iowa ,1939)* 
Quoted in N.E.A.» "The Legal Status of the Public-School Pupil," Research 
Bulletin , N.S.A., Vol. XXVI, No. 1, 1948, p. 8. 
































































































' 






. 


... • - • - 


















125 


attendance. In Quebec the "domicile" of the parent governs the 
educational rights of the child. If a generalization is possible, it 
would be to the effect that the children of a "resident ratepayer" have 
the right to attend a district school free of charge, except in Quebec 
where the "domicile" of the parent is decisive. 

In the case of foster children and children in charitable 
institutions, the right of such children to attend a district school 
free of charge depends upon the statutory provisions governing the 
situation. In the absence of such provisions it would seem that Courts 
favour the right of the children to attend school. Basically the only 
valid generalization that can be drawn is that the right of the child 
to free school attendance is governed by the particular statutory law 
in force at that time. The statutes are decisive, and no natural law 
right apparently exists in this respect. 

Tuition Charges 

Attendance at school is not normally free to non-resident 
children and, generally speaking, tuition fees must be paid by such 
children if they wish to attend school outside their home districts. 

This fee is paid by either of two parties: (l) by the school district 
if it makes arrangements to have the children of its area educated in a 
neighbouring district (2) by the parent if he arranges for his children 
to attend school outside of the resident district instead of at the 
school which is available to them free. In either case it is not 
incumbent upon the receiving district to admit non-resident pupils, for 
each district has the power to refuse admission particularly if accommo¬ 
dation is not available. In some cases the power to admit non-resident 








' 
















« 




























126 

children resides with some prescribed authority such as the superintendent 
of schools. In all provinces the rate of tuition fees are prescribed by 
law, either as a definite figure for respective grades, or in less 
specific terms requiring that such fees are not to exceed the net 
average cost for each pupil enrolled in the school district. 

Legal interpretation of ambiguous statute . The payment of tuition 

fees is governed by statute. Generally speaking, statutory law is rather 

specific and unambiguous in this regard, and once it has been established 

whether a child is resident or non-resident, the specific provisions of 

the law are uniformly applied. However, the law has not always been 

clear, with the result that the Courts have been asked to give clarifi- 

32 

cation. One such case occurred in British Columbia in 1918. 

In this case some pupils, resident in the defendant municipal 
district of Oak Bay, attended the high school in the plaintiff city 
municipality of Victoria. The question in dispute was the right of the 
plaintiff (City of Victoria) to receive a contribution from the 

33 

defendant (Oak Bay) under section 15 of the Public Schools Act ." The 

section under consideration read as follows: 

In case where the attendance at any public school in a 
municipal school district is made up partly of pupils residing 
in another district municipality, the municipal corporation of 
the municipality from whence such non-resident pupils attend 
shall contribute to the support of the school a per capita grant 

-^ Corporation of the City of Victoria v. District of Oak Bay , 

(1918) 1 W.W.R. 158. 

33r.s.B.C. 1906, ch, 206. 
































































































• 










: 


















■ 










127 

for each of such non-resident pupils based upon the proportion which 
the cost of each pupil in attendance bears to the total cost of 
maintaining the school: such per capita grant to be paid annually 
to the municipal corporation of the municipality in which the school 
is situated. 

The defendant (Oak Bay) denied all liability on the contention 
that section 15 of the Act obliged it to pay only to another "district" 
municipality. The argument was that on the true construction of the 
section it was only when pupils in a district municipality attended the 
schools of another district municipality that the municipality of 
residence must contribute its share of the cost. Since the plaintiff 
was not a d istrict municipality but a city municipality no liability 
existed under the law. 

In this case the Court was faced with two alternatives: 

1. To accept the literal interpretation of the statute and thus 
perpetrate an injustice. 

2. To interpret the section in the light of the purposes of education 
in such a way that justice was done to all. This latter course, howe-ver, 
would border on an act of legislation. 

The decision of the Court is best given in the words of Justice 
Macdonald: 

Now an analysis of the section leads to several alternative 
constructions: first, that the contribution is to be made only 
as between district municipalities. This construction 
would eliminate altogether contribution to the school funds of 
city municipalities by district municipalities, or by other city 
municipalities, and would be at variance with the literal reading 
of the section. To arrive at this construction we would have to 
read municipal school district in the second line as "District 
municipality school district" because of the word "another." 

Secondly; If the word "another" be eliminated, the district 
municipalities alone would be required to contribute whether its 
pupils attended school in a district or in a city municipality, 




























































. 





















- 


- 

' 

. 









128 

and city municipalities would have the benefit of the section 
but not its burden. 

Thirdly; If the word ’’district" be eliminated, the section 
would be equitable, and bear evenly on all parties of the province 
except in the uncorporated parts which would escape contribution on 
any construction of the section. 

I think, therefore, having regard to the whole Act, and the 
intention which I think must be imputed to the Legislature to compel 
municipalities to contribute inter se where children of one are 
educated in the schools of the other, and the impossibility of 
giving it a literal construction, the third interpretation of 
the section, which leads to no injustice or absurdity, must be 
adopted. - 

The Court then ruled that under section 15 of the Act a city munici¬ 
pality may claim a contribution from a district municipality for the 
expense of educating children who reside in the district municipality 
but attend the schools of the city municipality. 

Regardless of the fact that this is a relatively old decision 
and that the laws have since been changed, two important implications 
can serve us today. The first is the importance of making statutory 
law as precise and. definitive as possible. The onus here is on the 
legislature. The second implication is that the literal interpretation 
of a statute may not necessarily be the legal interpretation if literally 
the law would lead to an injustice or absurdity. In a literal sense the 
Oak Bay contention was perfectly correct. The Court, however, said: "In 
constructing the section the scheme of the Act must be understood and 
borne in mind; it is that education in the province shall be universal, 


34 (1918)1 W.W.R. 158, at pp. 159-160 
















. 

. 

. 







129 

and that its costs should be equitably distributed...."-^" Where the law 
is ambiguous and its literal interpretation would perpetrate an injustice 
the Courts will, if at all possible, render an interpretation on the 
basis of the fundamental purposes of the law in order to assure justice 
to all concerned. This will be done even if such interpretation borders 
on an act of legislation. 


Statutory law is decisive if it is unambiguous. It is a matter 
of surprise that parties sometimes seek rights and privileges that are 
clearly contrary to statutory provisions. Such a case occurred in Ontario 
in 1935.*^ Prior to 1915 the City of Galt was part of the County of 
Waterloo. Galt had a Collegiate Institute, which the pupils of the county 
attended. The county, by formal agreement, paid the full costs for their 
students. In 1915 Galt separated from the county and the old arrangements 
with the county continued by informal agreement until 1932. In the 
meantime, however, certain sections of the High Schools Act of Ontario 
relating to the costs of educating non-resident pupils were revised (1927). 
In 1933 the County of Waterloo took the position that according to law 
it should pay only 80$ of the cost of educating county pupils in the 
schools of the City of Galt, and based this contention on section 37 (l) 
of the High Schools Act .' ^ The City of Galt brought an action to recover 

35 Ibid., p. 159. 

'^Galt Board of Bducation v. Waterloo. (1935) O.W.N. 396. 


37 R.S.O. 1927. ch. 326. 












, 
















. 






■ 






















































130 


not only 80$ but the full cost of educating the county pupils. 

The Court had little difficulty with this case, for the law was 
clear and to the point. Section 37(l) of the Act read: 

Where the board of a city or a separated town has notified the 
county clerk that the high school is open to county pupils on the 
same terms as high schools in the municipality not separated from 
the county are open to such pupils, the county shall, on or before 
the 15th day of December in each year, pay a sum equal to eighty 
per centum of the cost of education of county pupils at such high 
schools. 

It is quite evident that an action to recover 100$ of expenditure in 
the face of statutory provisions to the contrary, must fail, and the 
Court ruled that the City of Galt was only entitled to receive 80$ of 
the cost. It is remarkable that a school board would expect the 
statutory law to be set aside to have its illegal claims validated. This 
case makes it unquestionable that in matters of tuition charges, the 
statutory law is decisive. 

The importance of proper procedure. Even though the law may be 

clear and precise, the rights and privileges granted by it may be 

enjoyed only if procedures laid down by the law are strictly complied 

38 

with. A case in point occurred in New Brunswick in 1928.' The school 
in Kingsclear offered no vocational courses and a pupil from that district, 
wishing to take a vocational course, applied to the board to have her 
tuition paid in a vocational school in Fredericton. The Kingsclear board 
had the power, by law, either to approve or disapprove this request; 
and, in the case of a disapproval, there was no appeal. If approved, the 

-^ School Trustees of Fredericton v. School Trustees of Kingsclear , 
(1928) 4 D.L.R. 13, 54 N.B.R. 177. 











131 

application was sent to the vocational school (Fredericton) where it was 
also subject to acceptance or rejection. If rejected here, however, the 
pupil could appeal to the Provincial Vocational Board, whose decision in 
the matter would be final. 

In the case under consideration the application was refused by 
the local (Kingsclear) board; but in spite of this, the applicant applied 
directly to the school in Fredericton, and was accepted. The Fredericton 
board now sought to recover from the Kingsclear board the required tuition 
fees. Was the Kingsclear board liable, in the circumstances, to pay 
such fees? The Court ruled as follows: 

Where an applicant for vocational training in another school 
district is made to a local school board, there being no vocational 
school in the local district, and the local board refuses to forward 
it, and the applicant then successfully applies to the vocational 
board appointed under the Vocational Education Act, 1923, (N.B.), 
c. 27, there is no authority under the Act for compelling the local 
board to pay the cost of the applicant's vocational tuition. Such~ p 
board is only liable if successful application is made through it. ' 

The action failed and the Fredericton board was faced with the necessity 

of having to collect the fees from the applicant herself. This decision 

leaves little doubt that the legal procedures necessary to acquire an 

educational right must be strictly followed. 


Summary and conclusions . The decisions in cases dealing with 
tuition charges for non-resident pupil's seem to warrant the following 
conclusions. 

1. Tuition fees and the conditions under which they must be paid, 
are prescribed by statute. 


39 


(1928) 4 D.L.R. 13, at p. 13. 





. 































' 









■ 

. 

. 


































* , .. 





















132 


2. Where the statutes are ambiguous, Courts interpret the law 
in accord with the basic purposes of education (and in the light of 
equity). No absurdity is allowed to stand. 

3. Statutes are decisive, not only in regard to the nature of the 
right that is granted, but also in regard to the procedure which must be 
followed to acquire the right. 

4. In all provinces, non-resident children may be legally required 
to pay tuition fees in the districts where they attend school. 

Vaccination Requirements 

All provinces have statutory provisions governing the health of 
public school pupils. Generally speaking, local school boards have the 
power to exclude from school pupils who are suffering from a contagious 
disease. Over the years little difficulty has been experienced in the 
enforcement of health regulations in school, for the regulations are 
usually reasonable. In only two cases have such regulations been 
challenged in the Courts, and in both instances it was the validity of 
laws requiring pupil vaccination, as a condition of admission to school, 
that was questioned. One case occurred in Ontario and the other in 
Alberta; and although the decisions were contradictory, they were not 
necessarily incompatible. 

40 

The Yarwood case. The Ontario case was tried in 1922. There 
was an epidemic of small-pox in a town and the board of education refused 
to allow children to attend school unless they had been successfully 
vaccinated. This power to exclude unvaccinated children had been granted 

^ Yarwood v. Smith Falls Board of Education , (1922) 23 O.W.N. 33. 











133 

by legislative enactment. The plaintiff objected to having his children 
vaccinated and brought an action for damages against the board for exclud¬ 
ing his children from school. Pertinent to this case was the fact that 
this exclusion had been carried out in contravention of the statutory 

k-j 

provisions governing the procedure by which this was to be done. 

In its decision , the Court stated that a parent has a prima facie 
right to have his children admitted to public school; and that although 
statutes provide that children who have not been vaccinated may be 
lawfully excluded from school, the provisions for exclusion must be 
complied with and rigidly followed. Here, the procedures outlined in the 
statutes had not been followed, and the plaintiff was entitled at least 
to nominal damages. 

The most significant principles established by this case, therefore, 
are that (l) statutes empowering school boards to require vaccination are 
valid; (2) statutory proceedings governing the exclusion of unvaccinated 
children must be followed, and (3) as in other cases nominal damages only 
are likely to be awarded if defendants have acted in good faith. 

The Clowes case. A more comp],ex case occurred in Alberta in 
42 

1915. The Alberta Board of Health had passed a regulation under 
authority of the Public Health Act, that no child was to be admitted to 

^3The O.W.N. notation is a digest of the case and does not state 
precisely which provisions were not complied, with. In the absence of the 
complete Court record it is not possible to give clarification on this 
point. 

^ Clowes v. Edmonton School Board and McKnight , (1915)» 9 W.W.R. 

372, 32 W.L.R. 733, 9 Alta. L.R. 106, 25 D.L.R. 449. 













134 

school until he presented evidence of successful vaccination. An action 
was brought by the plaintiff , a ratepayer of the City of Edmonton, seeking 
a mandamus to compel the defendants to admit his son even if the boy had 
not been vaccinated. The board based its defence on regulation 68, which 
read as follows: 

On and after the first day of January, 1912, no pupil shall be 
admitted to any school unless and until he produces evidence of 
successful vaccination.... ^ 

There was also a proviso for relief in case of hardships in rural districts. 
The issue was: Is regulation 68 ultra vires ? 

In considering the decision in this case it is well to review the 
opinions of the three judges. Justice Harvey said: 

The real difficulty that presents itself to me regarding this 
regulation, however, is that I find no way of reconciling it with 
the provisions of the Truancy Act. That Act provides that every 
child of school age, with certain specified exemptions, shall 
attend school - the regulation in terms provides that the child 
shall not attend school, unless on certain conditions - conditions 
not imposed by the Truancy Act. 

The Provincial Board of Health is not given power to repeal 
or otherwise render ineffective any statutory provisions, and I 
am unable to see that if this regulation is enforced it might not 
have that effect.^ 

The opinion goes on to state that the health regulation prohibited 
something which statute law ordered to be done, and that such prohibition, 
therefore, was beyond the power of anyone to enact except the legislature 
itself. 


^(1915) 25 D.L.R. 449, at p. 452 . 
^ hbid . , p. 449. 











































































■ ' 
















































. . . 

















135 


The Justice pointed out that in the United States the Supreme 
Court of Minnesota had upheld a ruling to exclude unvaccinated children 
but only when a smallpox epidemic existed in the community. The Court 
in that case stated: 

It is very true that the statutes of our State provide that 
admission to public schools shall be free to all persons of a 
defined age and residence, and that any parent having control of 
any child of school age is expressly required to send such child 
to school....But all these statutory provisions must be construed 
in connection with, and subordinate to, the statutes on the subject 
of the preservation of the public health and the prevention of the 
spread of contagious diseases. The welfare of the many is superior 
to that of the few, and, as the regulations compelling vaccination 
are intended and enforced solely for the public good, the rights 
conferred thereby are primary and superior to the rights of any 
pupil to attend public school. ^ 

Justice Harvey stated that he agreed with this reasoning, but felt that 
no emergency such as that described in the judgment existed in Edmonton. 

He therefore declared regulation 68 to be ultra vires . 

Justice Stuart, in his opinion, carried the analysis of the case 
a bit farther. He stated: 

The first enquiry which arises in my mind is, whether regulation 
68 can properly be called a regulation as to "the vaccination of 
all children in the province," or whether it should not rather be 
looked upon as a regulation as to what pupils shall or shall not 
attend school. There is not a word in regulation 68 which 
positively requires all children in the province...to be vaccinated... 
because the penalty may be escaped by simply failing to present 
the child at school, and the avoidance of any rejection for non¬ 
vaccination . ^ 

In other words, the regulation did not impose a duty of vaccination. 
Instead, the Board of Health had made an order as to who should be 


^ State v. Zimmerman , 58 L.R.A. 78, quoted in Ibid., p. 450. 
46 

Ibid ., pp. 452-453. 

















■ 

. 




































- 












. 

■ 

. 




136 

allowed to attend school. The Justice stated: "... that (order) is in 
my opinion, a regulation as to attendance at school, not a regulation 
providing for vaccination. Justice Stuart censured the legislature 
for not facing the issue squarely by passing direct legislation, instead 
of relying on a by-law of a department of government. 

The argument of Justice Beck examined the whole issue of passing 
legislation by means of by-laws. His first point was that the power of 
governmental agencies to pass by-laws was an absolute necessity. Within 
the limits of section 92 of the B.N.A. Act, provincial legislatures could 
delegate to municipal institutions or other bodies of their own creation, 
authority to make by-laws and regulations regarding subjects specified 
in the enactment. He said that the power to pass by-laws "is ancilliary 
to legislation, and without it an attempt to provide for varying details 

48 

and machinery to carry them out may become oppressive or absolutely fail" 

He also pointed out, however, that there is a prescriptive framework 
within which such by-laws must be passed in order to be valid. In Reg 
v. Hodge ,^ it is stated: 

In England the subjects upon which by-laws may be made were not 
usually specified in the King's charter, and it became an established 
doctrine of the Courts that every corporation had the implied or 
incidental right to pass by-laws; but this power was accompanied 
with these limitations, namely, that every by-law must be reasonable 
and not inconsistent with the charter of the corporation, nor with 
any statute of parliament , nor with the general principles of the 


4 ? Ibid . , p. 4-53. 
48 Ibid ., p. 456. 


**9? a.R. (Ont.) 246. 













































* , 


, 





























- 

















' 















- 

















137 

common law of the land, particularly those having relation to 
the liberty of the subject or the rights of private property. 

It was clearly evident that the regulation made by the Provincial 
Board of Health, not a representative body, was in the nature of a by-law 
and not an Act of the legislature. Consequently, if the regulation proved 
to be inconsistent with statutory enactments, it became ineffective and 
void. In the Clowes case the Alberta School Act prescribed a statutory 
duty, under statutory penalty, requiring a parent to send his child to 
school. The regulation (by-law) of the Department of Health, at the same 
time, prevented the parent from exercising this duty. Justice Beck con¬ 
cluded : 

My opinion, therefore, is that regulation 68 in any sense 
in which it may be taken is ultra vires of the Provincial Board 
of Health...and is inconsistent with the School Act and the 
Truancy Act....Mandamus granted without cost. 3° 

By unanimous opinion of the three justices, therefore, the school 
board was protected from paying the cost of the action because it had 
acted in good faith, under a regulation for which it was not responsible. 
The Court said: "The School Board should not, however,... be required to 
pay the costs of the action since they simply acted in good faith upon a 
regulation which had not before been questioned."^ 

Comparison of cases . In comparing the Cicwes case with the 
Yarwood case, it becomes evident that although the decisions are 

50 (1915) 25 D.L.R. 949, at p. 459. 

51 Ibid ., p. 451. 




































, 








































. 





138 

contradictory, they are not incompatible. In Ontario, the vaccination 
provision was an Act of the legislature while in Alberta it was a by-law 
of a department of government. Even in the Clowes case there is nothing 
to imply that legislation regarding the compulsory vaccination of school 
children could not be passed by the proper authority. In fact, Justice 
Harvey stated, "I have nc doubt that a regulation might be passed requir¬ 
ing every child before reaching school age and before attending school 

CO 

to be vaccinated."^ Such regulation, however, would have to be passed 
by the legislature, and it is "beyond the power of anybody except the 

53 

legislature itself." ' As a matter of fact, three provinces, New 
Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and Prince Edward Island, have compulsory 
vaccination laws on their statutes; and even though these particular 
provisions have not been challenged in the Courts, there is every reason 
to believe that if they were, they would be upheld. 

Pupil Transportation 

Since many children live a great distance from school, the 
availability of transportation facilities is an important part of the 
question of school attendance. In the hey-day of the little red school- 
house , transportation created few problems, for it was taken for granted 
that parents were responsible to see that their children got to school. 
With the coming of the larger school unit the picture has changed, for 


52 Ibld., p. 449. 
53 Ibid. 











' 









- 

















t 






. 













139 


the distances children must travel to school have increased markedly. 

All but two provinces (Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland) now have 

statutory provisions empowering local authorities to provide conveyance 

for children living farther than certain specified distances from school. 

The legality of this grant of power to school boards has not been 

challenged in Canada, although in the United States the authority to spend 

public money for this purpose has been questioned. 

Transportation laws, however, have their own peculiar problems. 

There has been a conflict, for example, in the interpretation of transpor- 

54 

tation provisions in Ontario.' In Saskatchewan a school board 

questioned the mandatory nature of its duties in regard to the transpor- 

55 

tation of school children. The question of whether such provisions 

56 

are mandatory or discretionary came before the Courts in Quebec. In 
Manitoba and Quebec the question of the distance for which transportation 
must be provided was litigated .^ The question of discrimination in the 
operation of transportation provisions came before the Courts in 
Saskatchewan.-^ Let us consider each of these problems and their 

5 4^1 U rray and Brighton v. United Count!es of Northumberland and 
Durham , (1941) S.C.R. 204, 2 D.L.R. 273; reversing (1940) 2 D.L.R. 28; 
reversing (1939) 4 D.L.R. 738. 

-55 Perreault v. Kinistino School Unit, (1956-57) 20 W.W.R. 145, 
affirming' (1956) 21 W.W.R. 17, 19 W.W.R. 667. 

5 ' ^Lacroix v. La Commission d 1 5coles de la Pointe Claire , (1918) 

53 Que. S.C. 88. 

57r. v. Green , (1913) 23 W.L.R. 264, 10 D.L.R. Ill; Rex vel 
Kowalski v. Oak Bluff S.D. , (1937) 3 W.W.R. 352, 45 Man R. 409, 3 D.L.R. 
500, 4 D.L.R. 368; Patrick v. Protestant School Com*rs of Melbourne 
Township , (1945) Que. S.C. 239. 

^ Hiding v. Elmhurst S.D. (No. 2), (1927) 2 W.W.R. 159, 

21 Sask. L.R. 471, 3 D.L.R. 173, reversing (1926) 3 W.W.R. 729. 




























. 

- 

. -. ■ 






- 



- ' - 










implications for the legal rights of the child. 


140 


The powers of a local board .In Ontario the Murray and Brighton 
townships had established, and for several years, maintained a continuation 
school at Wooler, in the Township of Murray. Among the pupils attending 
the continuation school were a number of pupils from the counties of 
Northumberland and Durham, the cost of whose education these counties were 
required by statute to pay. Initially no transportation was provided for 
any pupils. In 1937» however, the townships decided to provide transpor¬ 
tation to and from school for the pupils in attendance, including the 
county pupils, and claimed a proportion of the expense for such service 
as an item in the cost submitted to the counties. The two counties wholly 
disclaimed liability for this item and contended that the townships had 
no power to transport county pupils and such costs could not therefore 
be a proper item to include in the cost of education to be paid by the 
counties. They also claimed that the powers of the appellant board were 
confined to the boundaries of its school section. A Trial Court found 
for the appellants, but the Superior Court reversed that decision and 
found for the respondents. The case was then taken before the Appeal 
Court, whose decision is considered here. 

The issue involved in this case was the proper interpretation 
of the powers of a local school board as granted by the Public Schools 
Act^° and the Continuation Schools Act.^ 1 The Appeal Court reversed the 


^ Murray and Brighton case, Supra. . 
6 o r.s.o. 1937, o. 357. 

6i 


R.S.O. 1937, c. 359. 











l4l 

Superior Court decision and found for the appellants when it said,"... 
a continuation school board may provide for the transportation of county 
pupils to its continuation school, and in virtue of s. 95 (2) charge the 
cost thereof to the county council under s. 8 (l) of the Continuation 

6 ? 

Schools Act as part of the cost of county pupils." ~ ' Again the principles 
of justice and equity were followed in the interpretation of statutes that 
were far from clear. 


Mandatory Provisions. In the perrault case in Saskatchewan a 
school unit board refused to make any provisions for the transportation 
of the plaintiff’s children to school, even though section 51(9) of the 

64 

Larger School Units Act imposed upon it a mandatory duty to do so. The 
plaintiff then enrolled his children in a private school in Prince Albert 
and brought action against the board to recover the cost of doing so. The 
board had no defence, and in its decision the Court stated: 

The larger school units were designed to insure an education 
to all children within the district apart entirely from the financial 
standing of the parent or however remote the child might be from a 
school. Accordingly provision is made for providing conveyance or 
making an allowance therefor. Where necessity arises there is an 
absolute duty on the school board to provide for or assist in the 
conveyance of children to school and where conveyance is not reason¬ 
ably possible, to provide accessible facilities or pay for the 
services elsewhere; this is not a matter of discretion. Apart from 
the moral and legal aspects it is a service the parent or guardian 
is entitled to in return for the taxes he must pay. 


62 (l94l) 2 D.L.R. 273, at p. 2?3. 

63 

Perrault v. Kinistino , Supra . 

64 


'R.S.S. 1953, ch. 170, 















. 







































































- 
















142 


Where plaintiff father had been, and would be, obliged, 
because of the defendants' failure to provide said service, to send 
his children to school outside of the district, held , he was entitled 
to damages and also to a declaration that he was entitled to have 
his children educated outside of the district at the expense of the 
defendant so long as the present conditions prevailed. 5 

The Court felt that there had been a breach by the defendant school 

board of its obligation to provide educational facilities for children 

legally entitled to the same. 

The only question on which there was some doubt was the measure 

of damages to be aw a rded to the plaintiff. Should it be the amount 

actually spent in sending the children to another school? If so, the 

board would also have had to pay the cost if the children had been sent 

to a more remote town or city* The Court ruled that the actual amount 

spent was not a just measure, and that the plaintiff could recover only 

66 

an amount that is "reasonable having regard to all the circumstances." 

The decision of the Court established that the obligation of a 
school board to provide transportation for school children was absolute, 
if the statutes made it mandatory. Such a statutory obligation must be 
carried out in one of the following ways: 

1. By providing school facilities in the local district so that no 
transportation was necessary, 

2. By conveying the children to a removed school or to another 
district. 

3* By paying for transportation and/or school services elsewhere. 

6 5(1956) 21 W.W.R. 17, at p. 17. 

^ Ibid . , p. 34. 












, 














■ 














. 











































. 











143 

The statutory duty to put the children into condition to attend school 
cannot legally be evaded by a school board. 

Discretionary provisions« The mandatory or discretionary nature 

of the provisions for pupil transportation depend upon the intent and 

wording of the pertinent statute. Where conveyance of pupils is a 

discretionary power vested in the school board by law, not even the Courts 

can interfere with a decision of the board concerning this matter. In the 

67 

Quebec case of Lacroix v. La Commission d t Bcoles de la Pointe Claire, ' 

a parent brought action against a local board to compel it to convey his 

children to and from school. The regulation under dispute was article 

2608 of the Revised Statutes of Quebec, which read as follows: 

If, in any school year, the average number of children attending 
the school of a district, is less than ten children of school age, 
the school board may close such school, and, if necessary, may have 
the children conveyed free of charge to one or more schools of their 
municipality. 

In this case the school had not been closed, but the parent made 
his claim because of the distance he lived from the school. In its 
decision the Court said: "It appears... that art. 2608 was discretionary 
and not imperative....It cannot be contended that they (the plaintiffs) 
were deprived of any right in not gratuitiously transporting them, nor 

68 

that the commissioners acted harshly or unjustly in the circumstances." 

The Court emphasized that the powers of the Court do not extend to matters 

(1918) 53 Que. S.C. 88. 

68 Ibid ., p. 92. 








144 


which are discretionary. Since the Act stated that the commissioners 
"may" convey the children "if necessary," such a duty was optional and 
not mandatory. The action failed. 

Distance. Most statutes providing for the transportation of 

school children specify the distances that children may or must be 

conveyed. Three cases have come before the Courts regarding the 

question of computing distance. If a certain distance is specified, does 

it mean that the children who qualify for conveyance must be picked up 

at their yard? This question is particularly pertinent when the law is 

silent on how the distance is to be determined. Litigation in Quebec 
. . 69 

is a case m point. 

In 19^5» article 92 of the Education Act in Quebec stated that 

no district was to exceed five miles in length or breadth unless the 

school commissioners and trustees provided means for conveying the 
70 

children to school. In this case three districts had been united 
into one with the result that the plaintiff lived six miles from the 
nearest school. It was a clear statutory duty therefore for the 
commissioners to provide conveyance for his children. The district made 
arrangements to pick up the plaintiff’s children a little more than a 
mile from their home, but an action was brought to compel the board to 
pick them up at the farm gate. In its decision the Court ruled; 

^ Patrick v . Melbourne , (1945) Que. S.C. 239. 

7 °Ibid. 
























. 














- 




. - 








. 




' 
























‘ 






' 

■ 

















. 









145 


.•• unless it is so provided by a contract, the driver of the 
vehicle is not required to call at the home of pupils living on 
cross-roads or at a distance from the highway, but proper provision 
shall be made in order that they may meet the vehicle at some 
appointed time and place each morning. If it appears that a property 
owner and ratepayer lives on a cross-road and that the school 
commissioners have offered to pick up his children at a designated 
point which is a little over a mile from his domicile, the — 
commissioners have fulfilled the obligation imposed upon them. 

The mandamus asked for was refused. In the absence of laws to the 

contrary it appears to be discretionary to the board to determine what 

"reasonable" distance the children have to walk, even if transportation 

is mandatory. 

A similar case occurred in Manitoba in 193The Public Schools 
73 

Act provided that "the trustees of such districts must make and carry 
out suitable arrangements for conveying to and from school once each day 
each way all pupils who would have farther than one mile to walk in order 

to reach school..." In this case, although the bus route ran to within a 

little more than one quarter of a mile from the appellant's home, the 
appellant wanted it to come to the gate of his farm and asked for a 

mandamus to compel the trustees to see that it did. Since the statutes 

did not deal with the distance from the home where children were to be 
picked up, it was left to the Court to establish the rule. 

The appellant contended that the respondent board had failed to 
provide suitable means of transportation for his children and, alternatively, 


^Ibid. 

^ Rex vel Kowalski v. Oak Bluff S.D. , Supra . 

73r.s.m. 1930, ch. 34, sec. 48 (l) . 



















... 



































. 



































- 



146 

that the children lacked suitable clothing to walk the required quarter 
mile. The need for additional clothing was admitted by the trustees, who 
offered to supply what they thought necessary; but the appellant, in 
rejecting their offer, requisitioned five times as much clothing as the 
amount offered. On this point the Court felt that the applicant was not 
acting in good faith. The Court said: 

If this applicant succeeds, it will have a tendency to encourage 
children, not only to insist on being clothed to go to school, to 
be carried to and from school, to be supplied with free books and 
teaching, but might lead them to expect wages for the time spent 
in school. 


The Court felt that a little hardship was a necessary part of 
education in Canada. Therefore, the provisions requiring the conveyance 
of children to school "should be broadly and liberally construed in the 
interest of public education...without pampering children into weaklings 
in a country where courage, hardihood and robustness are required. "^-5 
Education should be concerned not only with the three R's, but also with 
the "development of character, strength, ability, and spirit." The 
Court continued: 

It is not the intention of the statutes to provide transportation 
from the very door of the pupil's home: merely because children 
have to walk 90 rods to reach a school bus is no ground for 
requiring school trustees...to provide additional transportation 
facilities so that they may be picked up directly in front of 
their homes.77 


74 (1937) 3 D.L.R. 300, at p. 504. 
75 jbid . , p • 500. 

^(193?) 45 Man. R. 409, at p. 417. 
77 (1937) 3 D.L.R. 500, at p. 500. 




























































































147 

The Court added that "the trustees...are not bound to provide 
transportation beyond what is reasonably adequate. Reasonable adequacy 

OQ 

is a question of fact that will vary with the circumstances ' As a 
result of the Court's reasoning the application for mandamus was dismissed. 

The decision in this case was based on the criterion of 
"reasonableness," and it is important to note that this criterion depends 
upon the facts in the case, and that no absolute rule in this matter can 
be formulated. It can also be observed that even when conveyance is 
mandatory, the children may still be required to walk a certain distance 
to reach a bus route. Most provinces have removed all doubt in the matter 
by stating in their statutes the maximum distances from home that children 
shall be picked up. 

One other case involving the question of distance has been 
reported in Canada. In Manitoba the Court faced the question of whether 
the children of the plaintiff lived within the distance specified in the 

79 

statute. An application by John '//ells for a mandamus was directed to 
the trustees of the school district of Teulon. The law stated that con¬ 
veyance must be provided for children living a mile or more from school. 
However, the points between which the distance was to be computed was not 
stated. The children of the plaintiff had been conveyed to school until 
the 22nd day of April, 1912, and on that day were refused conveyance by 
the driver, Archibald Campbell. The defendant board contended that it 

78 Ibid ., p. 505. 


79r. v. Green . (1913), 23 W.W.R. 264, 10 D.L.R. 111. 
























148 


had surveyed the distance from opposite the plaintiff's home to the 
gate of the school and found it to be two feet short of a mile. The 
distances from the plaintiff's home to the road, and from the road to the 
school had not been considered. The Court was faced with two questions: 
(l) Had the distance been properly computed, and (2) had the trustees 
acted in good faith? 

Evidence showed that William C. McKinnol, one of the trustees, 
was the unsuccessful candidate for office of reeve of Rockwood at an 
election held in April, 1912. Wells, the applicant, had supported one 
John Poison, the successful candidate. It was after the election that 
the applicant's children were refused transportation facilities. In 
its decision the Court took cognizance of these underlying currents. 

These defendants contend that Wells is two feet short of one 
mile from the school and because of this shortage of two feet they 
refuse to concede to his children the privilege extended by the 
Act. I cannot conceive men of reason actuated by any motive other 
than resentment and bad humour stooping to such smallness. But as 
a matter of fact the children of Wells have to walk more than a 
mile from their home to get to school; the contention of the 
defendants is that a measurement of the distance from the school 
to the van route opposite the Wells home, the distance between the 
house and the road should not be counted, nor yet the distance from 
the school gate into the school building. Those distances omitted 
make the two feet short of the mile, but I cannot understand why 
those distances should be omitted....How are the children going to 
get from their house to the van route? Surely that distance must be 
taken into account. 

I grant the order for a mandamus with costs against the 
defendants personally and not against the school district. 


80 (1913) 10 D.L.R. Ill, at p. 112. 





























- 



































. 




































. 





































149 


The following principles may be deduced from this decision: 

1* In computing the distance children live from school the distance 

from the house to the road, and the road to the school, must be taken into 
account, unless the statutes specify otherwise. 

2. When trustees act in bad faith, the Courts are inclined to order 

that the costs of the action be paid by the trustees personally. 

Apparently action taken in good faith protects public servants to some 
extent, at least, from the legal consequences of bad decisions. 

On 

Discrimination in Transportation . In a Saskatchewan case 0_L a 
Court held that no discrimination may be made among children, or classes 
of children, in the operation of transportation laws, whether these laws 
are mandatory or discretionary. In 1922 the board closed its school and 
made arrangements to convey the pupils to the school in an adjoining 
district. All the pupils were conveyed with the exception of the 
plaintiff's children who lived in a remote area. The question was: 

Were the defendants under absolute obligation to provide transportation 
facilities for the plaintiff's children when the provision of conveyance 
generally was only a discretionary duty of the board? The Court ruled: 

Conveyance was not mandatory - but the board undertook to convey 
the children and therefore must convey all children and not only a 
part. Having passed a resolution to do that, the defendants were not 
entitled to discriminate against the children of the plaintiff . 2 

^• Riding v. Elmhurst S.D. ( No. 2 ) , (1927) 2 W.W.R. 159» 21 
Sask. L.R. 471, 3 D.L.R. 173» reversing (1926) 3 W.W.R. 729 . 

82 (1927) 3 D.L.R. 173. at p. 177. 
























































■ 


- 










Summary and Conclusions 


150 


From the cases involving transportation the following 
conclusions may be drawn: 

1. Transportation laws are within the powers of provincial 
legislatures to enact. 

2. Mandatory provisions to provide transportation facilities for 
children who qualify, are absolute. 

3. If statutes do not state the distance from home at which children 
shall be picked up, the principle of "reasonableness" under the circum¬ 
stances will apply. 

4. A school board that decides to provide transportation for school 
children in its district must provide it for all children who legally 
qualify. 

5. Statutory provisions are decisive factors in litigation involving 
transportation. 

Much of the litigation on pupil transportation is caused by 
inadequacy and ambiguity of statutory provisions relating to this matter. 
In Canada, pupil transportation is a costly, and in many respects, a 
hazardous public enterprise. In view of this, provincial legislatures 
would be well advised to examine their particular transportation laws 
with a view to determining how they might be improved. A study of cases 
such as those reviewed above should indicate points at which existing laws 
may be vague or unsatisfactory. Much litigation could be avoided if the 
statutory provisions were clearly and precisely stated. 








CHAPTER V 


LEGAL STATUS IN REGARD TO INSTRUCTION 

If the interests of the state are served by free compulsory 
education, it naturally follows that the state should also be concerned 
with the nature of the education to which the children are exposed. In 
Canada the authority of provincial legislatures to control the curriculum 
of the public schools has not seriously been questioned since the days of 
Edgerton Ryerson, for with the provincial control of education came the 
right to prescribe the courses of study for the schools. In Canada this 
provincial right is now generally taken for granted. 

As a general principle, therefore, it can be stated that in the 
provinces of Canada the nature and type of instruction offered in the 
public schools is prescribed and controlled by the central authority. 

Only in Newfoundland is this control less direct. Section 6 (i) of the 
School Attendance Act' *' states that local boards have the authority, 
"subject to the approval of the proper Superintendent of Education, to 
prescribe courses of studies and textbooks for the schools under its 
management." This authority, as noted, is subject to the approval of the 
appropriate Superintendent of Education, with the result that even here 
the courses of study are, in actual practice, relatively uniform. Because 
of the public acceptance of central control of education in Canada, few 
legal cases have been concerned with instruction in school, with the 

^■R.S.N. 1952, ch. 105 . 

















. 


















. 








■ 




' • 




« 





















152 

exception of the separate school controversies which have already been 
noted. 

In the field of instruction there have, however, been three areas 
of controversy which have resulted in litigation. These three areas are: 

(1) Religious instruction in the school. 

(2) The language of instruction. 

(3) Patriotic exercises. 

Special consideration will be given to these three areas. 

I. RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION IN THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS 

When public education systems were first set up, religious 

instruction in the schools was left to the discretion of the trustees in 

the local community, and central authorities generally abstained from 

2 

prescribing religious exercises and activities. Today religious 
exercises and related activities may only be carried on within the bounds 
of the permissive legislation passed by the legislatures of the provinces. 
In the denominational systems of Quebec and Newfoundland the authorities 
of each recognized denominational system are free to regulate religion 
in the schools. The public schools of the other provinces are definitely 
restricted in the scope and nature of the religious instruction that may 
be offered in the schools. In all cases, however, no child in any 
Canadian school can be legally compelled to receive religious instruction 

2 C.E. Phillips, The Development of Education in Canada, Toronto: 
W.J. Gage and Company Limited, 1957* p. 327. 






















- 




















■ 






















, 












.. 




















• • 






153 


or participate in religious exercises to which the parent or guardian 
may object. 


Regarding religious exercises, statutory law in British Columbia 
is typical of that existing in the other provinces: 

167. All public schools shall be opened by the reading, without 
explanation or comment, of a passage of Scripture to be selected from 
readings prescribed or approved by the Council of Public Instruction. 
The reading of the passage of Scripture shall be followed by the 
recitation of the Lord's Prayer, but otherwise the schools shall be 
conducted on strictly secular and non-sectarian principles. The 
highest morality shall be inculcated, but no religious dogma or creed 
shall be taught. 


15.01 Where the parent or guardian of any pupil attending a 
public school sends a written notice to the teacher of the pupil 
stating that for conscientious reasons he does not wish the pupil 
to attend the ceremony of reading prescribed selections from the 
Bible and reciting the Lord's Prayer at the opening of school, the 
teacher shall excuse the pupil from attendance at such ceremony 
and in his discretion may assign the pupil some other useful employ¬ 
ment at school during that period, but the pupil so employed shall 
not be deprived of any other benefits of the school by reason of his 
non-attendance at the ceremony. 

In British Columbia these provisions are mandatory, but in most 
other provinces they are discretionary to the local school boards. 

The wisdom of the Courts has been taxed to the extreme in determining 
which aspects of school life reflect religious influences to which valid 


objection may be taken. Such an attempt, it was seen, was made in the 
Perepolkin case but the Court was more precise on what was not inter¬ 
ference than what was. As will be seen, the Courts have clarified certain 
aspects of this problem; but generally speaking the question of what 
constitutes "religion” of a denominational character and what general 
Christian morality has not yet been satisfactorily clarified. 


^Public Schools Act , S.E.C. , Ch. 42, 1958, Section 167 . 
^Rules of the Council of Public Instruction , division 15.01. 





















* 




























: 









■ 


i 














■ 






15 ** 

The problems relating to religious instruction in schools that 
have come before the Courts in Canada can be classified as follows: 

(1) The time when religious instruction may be offered. 

(2) The place of instruction. 

(3) Religious garb. 

(4) Textbook for religious instruction. 

(5) Compulsory religious instruction. 

To these problems we now turn our attention. 

The Time When Religious Instruction May be Offered . 

A distinction must first be made between religious "exercises” 
and religious "instruction.” The first term refers to opening the school 
day with Scripture reading and prayer, while the latter term refers to 
actual religious teaching of a denominational character. The province 
of British Columbia does not allow any religious instruction in its 
public schools, although opening exercises are mandatory. In all the 
other provinces religious instruction will depend upon the mandate given 
by the statute and the wishes of the parents in a district, except in the 
Catholic schools of Quebec, where religious instruction is an integral 
part of the curriculum. Generally speaking the last half hour of the 
day may be devoted to religious instruction for those children whose 
parents wish it, the length of the period and the time of day being 
governed by statutory provisions. These provisions were challenged in 
Ontario in 1911.^ 


•^ Shaver v. Cambridge and Russell Union School Section , (1911) 13 
O.W.R. 501, 2 O.W.N. 686. 










. 







































- 












. 


- 



























155 

In the Shaver case the board of trustees had passed a resolution 


that the school should be closed each day at three-thirty o*clock to 
allow teachers to give Catholic religious instruction to the pupils whose 
parents desired them to be instructed in this faith. The teacher, on the 
authority of the Roman Catholic parish priest, carried out this duty. An 
action was brought for an injunction restraining this practice, and for a 
declaration that the resolution passed by the board was invalid. The 
Court dismissed the action on the following grounds: 

1. The trustees had the power under The Education Department Act , 

1901 (Ont,), c. 38, s. 4, to change the hours of opening or closing the 
school, so long as the hours of study were not less than five per day. 

In the present case there still remained five and one-half hours for study. 

2. The law provided that religious instruction could be given after 

school hours if the parents so desired, on condition that such instruction 
be given by a priest or minister of the denomination, or by a person 
authorized by him. The teacher in this case had been authorized by a 
clergyman of the Roman Catholic Church and thus had authority to give 
such instruction. 

The Court pointed out that the privileges of religious instruction 
were open not only to Catholics but to other denominations as well. 

Justice Teetzel said: 

...there is nothing to prevent applications by the clergy of other 
denominations being made for the privilege, and under regulation 100 
it would be the duty of the Board of Trustees in such case to decide 
on what day of the week the schoolhouse shall be at the disposal of 
the clergyman of each denomination after school hours, and if appli¬ 
cation is made, the Board would be compelled to pass the necessary 




■ 

. 

. 
























. 

























. 







■ 




. 


. 

, 



enabling resolution and to amend the present resolution accordingly. 

A rather significant implication of this decision in Ontario is that if 
the privilege to offer religious instruction exists, it is not confined 
to the ranks of one denomination. All religious denominations have the 
same rights under law and, if requested, the available time must be 
equitably divided among the interested parties. It is also clear that 
these rights and privileges exist only within the framework of the 
statutory law. In religious instruction what is not specifically 
authorized by law cannot be claimed as a right or privilege. 

The Place of Instruction 

7 

An interesting case occurred in Nova Scotia in 1929. In the 
County of Richmond the dwindling Protestant population made it pro¬ 
gressively more difficult to provide public school facilities in the area. 
The board of trustees entered into an arrangement with the Convent of 
"Our Lady of the Assumption" whereby a few upper grade pupils could attend 
the Convent school. The board made a contribution towards meeting the 
salaries for the teachers at that school, on the condition that the 
pupils involved would receive no denominational teaching. Albert Thurgood 
thereupon took his daughter out of school, sent her to a public school 
in Sydney, and brought an action for damages against the school trustees 
for failure to supply appropriate school privileges. 

6 18 0. W. R. 501, at p. 505. 

^Ehurgood v. Vigneau , (1929) 4 D.L.R. 857. 








. 


I 













■ 




. 
















■ 

















•"< . 











« . . . - 


• • ■ 






157 


In its decision the Court held that the trustees had supplied 
school privileges in compliance with the spirit and letter of the 
Education Act, and had not paid out illegally any of the money collected 
for school purposes. There was no evidence that religious denominational 
teaching had occurred. It is to be regretted that this decision was not 
appealed, for there seem to be some aspects of this case which the Court 
appears to have overlooked. Although not necessarily a precedent, the 
decision of this Court stands in the absence of any similar litigation. 


Religious Garb 

A Court in New Brunswick in 1896 faced the question: Is the 
wearing of a religious garb to be considered as religious denominational 

Q 

teaching? This case occurred in a district where Roman Catholic Sisters 
were employed as public school teachers. The ruling of the Court was 
as follows: 

It is in no sense illegal to employ Sisters of Charity as teachers 
in the public schools. If they comply with the requirements of the 
law they are as much entitled to employment as any one else.... 

To hold that the ordinary garb worn by a Sister of Charity, while 
engaged in teaching a public school, converts the school into a 
sectarian school, is in effect either to exclude her from being a 
teacher altogether, or else to deprive her of the right while 
teaching of wearing her usual dress.... I can concede great 
possibilities to the system of teaching by object lessons, but to 
ask me to hold that the sectarian doctrines and tenets of the 
Roman Catholic Church are being inculcated in the minds of 
Protestant school children simply by looking upon the garb of 
the sister who is teaching them, is asking much more than my 
belief in the system will warrant.9 


^ Rogers v. Bathhurst School Trustees , (1896) 1 N.B. Eq. 266. 
9 Ibid ., p. 267. 














- 

- 

■ 






























- 

r 





- 





















158 

Again this is the only reported case of its kind in Canada. It 
is rather interesting to note that the province of Saskatchewan is the 
only one that mentions religious garb in its School Act. Section 254 (l) 
of this Act reads: 

No emblem of any religious faith, denomination, order, sect, 
society or association, shall be displayed in or on any public school 
premises during school hours, nor shall any person teach or be 
permitted to teach in any public school while wearing the garb of 
any religious faith, denomination, order, sect, society or 
association. 

There is little doubt that statutory provisions forbidding the wearing of 
religious garb are intra vires . But where there is no statutory prohi¬ 
bition, this decision would seem to indicate that religious garb may be 
worn by teachers of public schools. 

Textbook for Religious Instruction 

A municipal board of education in Ontario received a gift by will 
to provide a book, containing a synopsis of the life of Christ, the Ten 
Commandments, the first Psalm and the Lord’s Prayer, for use in the public 
schools. In an action that followed, the Court faced the question: Is 
the acceptance of this gift compatible with the legal restrictions placed 
on the board relating to religious instruction in the schools? The 

10 

decision again was rendered solely in the light of statutoiy provisions. 
The Department of Education Act ,^ provided that (l) the Lord’s 


l^Re Anderson , (1943) 4 D.L.R. 268, O.W.N. 303 and 698 
i:l R.S.O. 1937, c. 356, sec. 4. 










. 





. 

















< 


- 


















. 







. 

. 


- 

























. - - 


. 



. 


























159 


Prayer was to be repeated each day when school opened, (2) that a 
sanctioned portion of Scripture be systematically read daily, (3) that the 
Ten Commandments were to be repeated as part of the religious exercises. 

It will be observed that with the exception of one item, namely, the 
synopsis of the life of Christ, all of the contents of the book are 
mentioned, or contained in what is mentioned, in the above regulations. 

The Court said: 

...the scripture readings sanctioned by the regulations do 
include the full narrative of the life of Christ.... I can see 
nothing in the statutory provisions or in the regulations...which 
renders the Board of Education incompetent to carry out the bequest; 
or, to put the matter in another way, which would render the carry¬ 
ing out of the bequest obnoxious to their prescribed powers and 
duties. Freedom from compulsory religious instruction still will 
exist for those pupils whose parents or guardians may object to 
their joining in any religious exercises. Nothing is imposed on 
them. The book will still be for the “use” of the pupils... 
within the spirit and intent of the regulations.^ 

It is noteworthy that this decision was based on the provisions of the 

statutory law and the fact that the book would not include matter that 

was not already used in the schools. Had the bequest required materials 

not sanctioned by law there is no doubt that it would then have been 

declared invalid. (The fact that this decision was later reversed under 

the Law of Wills, really has no bearing on the educational aspects of 
13 

the problem. ) 


Compulsory Religious Education (The Chabot case) 

The above cases deal only with peripheral aspects of a much more 


12 (1943) 4 D.L.R. 268, at p. 273. 
13 See (1943) O.W.N. 698 . 

















































■ 


































. 




- . . 























-, 1,160 

fundamental problem which came before the Court in Quebec in 1957. 

In the Chabot case the Court concerned itself with the relationship of 
religious freedom to compulsory education. What protection, if any, is 
afforded by our Constitution to freedom of religion? The Chabot case 
not only settled an important point in the school law of Quebec but also 
made some novel suggestions as to the place of natural law in our consti¬ 
tutional system. Because of its importance this case will be dealt with 
more systematically and in more detail under the following headings: 
facts in the case, the issues involved, the reasoning of the Court, 
findings and conclusions. 

Facts in the case . The appellant was a Jehovah 1 s Witness whose 
children had attended a public school in the municipality of Lamorandiere. 
The district was predominantly Catholic in population and the school was 
run as a Catholic school, following the courses of studies prescribed by 
the Roman Catholic Committee of the Quebec Council of Public Instruction. 

By the regulations of this Committee all pupils were obliged to take the 
religious instruction offered in the school as a part of the curriculum. 
Pupils must pass examinations not only in the secular subjects but in 
the religious subjects as well. 

In the absence of a Protestant dissentient school the appellant 
had no choice but to send his children to the public school of the district, 
He informed the school authorities, however, that he did not wish his 
children to participate in the religious exercises and devotions. For a 


14 N 

Chabot v. Les Commissaires D * Ecoles De Lamorandiere , (1957) 
Que. QB. 707 (C.A.). 





















































































■ 












. 


l6l 

time his wishes were complied with, until the respondents determined that 
all children, including the children of the appellant, were to follow the 
entire course of study including the religious instruction. The result 
was that the appellant refused to allow his children to comply with these 
regulations; so the children were expelled from the school, on the ground 
that excusing them from religious instruction was contrary to law and a 
cause of disorder in the class. The father then brought action seeking 
a mandamus to compel the school commissioners to re-admit his children 
to the secular courses only. He also asked the Court to declare unconsti¬ 
tutional any provisions of the Education Act (R.S.Q., 19^1, c. 59.) or 
regulations made thereunder which denied this right. The attomey- 
General of Quebec intervened to uphold the validity of the Act. 

The Superior Court refused the mandamus on the grounds that the 
commissioners were not demanding more than the law required, and that the 
refusal on part of the children to follow the course of study constituted 
insubordination which justified dismissal. In the appeal to the Quebec 
Court of Queen's Bench, Appeal Side, a special bench of seven judges 
reversed the judgment, with one judge dissenting, and ordered that the 
children be re-instated in school and exempted from all religious in¬ 
struction. 

The reasons which the Court gave for this judgment raised some 
very interesting questions, and touched upon such grave issues as freedom 
of conscience, the right of the parent to control the education of his 
child, and the authority of the provincial legislature to impose a 
particular religious course of study in a public school on all pupils 










' 















■ 










































« 




























regardless of their faith 


162 


15 

The issues involved . There were four main questions to be answered 
in order to decide the issues raised in this case: 

1. Was the defendants' school (a school under the control of the 
commissioners, in a school municipality where the majority of ratepayers 
were Roman Catholic) one which only Roman Catholic children had the right 
to attend, or had children of a different religious belief, domiciled in 
the municipality, also the right to attend? 

2. If children of a different religious belief had the right to 
attend this school, were they obliged to participate in the Roman Catholic 
religious exercises and training included in the curriculum? 

3. Were the provisions of the Education Act regarding religious 
education ultra vires ? 

4. Were the regulations of the Roman Catholic Committee regarding 
religious education invalid or ultra vires ? 

The reasoning of the Court : The first question to be answered 

was: Did the Chabot children have the right to attend the district school? 

The position taken by the school commissioners was indicated in 

para. 29 of their plea, which read: 

Subsidiairement, les defendeurs plaident qu'ils ne peuvent etre 
astreints a reaevoir les infants non catholiques a leur ecole 7 de 
Lamorandiere. 


-*--5For two interesting discussions of the Chabot case see F.R.Scott, 
"Case and Comment," The Canadian Bar Review , Vol. XXXVI, No. 2, May 1958, 
pp. 248-254, and D. Johnston and M.B. Gameroff, "Case and Comment," The 
McGill Law Journal , Vol.4, No. 2, Spring 1958, pp. 268-289. 

16 


(1957) Que. Q.B. 707, at p. 732. 














































































• 








. . 

. 

. . . .« 







*' 

. . , , 

. . . 



163 

But the schools under the control of the commissioners were the 
only schools in the municipality. There was no Protestant dissentient 
school to which Chabot could send his children. Section 69 of the Edu¬ 
cation Act provided as follows: 

Each school municipality in the Province shall contain one or 
more public schools, under the control of school commissioners or 
trustees who shall be obliged to admit to the grades provided in 
such schools every child domiciled in the municipality, from the 
beginning of the school year following the day on which he attains 
the age of six years until the end of the school year in which he 
attains the age of sixteen years. 

The school in question was therefore a public school; and since the 

children of Chabot were domiciled in the municipality and were within the 

required age group, they not only had the right to attend but were obliged 

to do so. The Court based this ruling on the precedent of Hirsch v . 

Protestant Board of School Commissioners of Montreal. 1 2nd said, M ... 

that a school in a rural area under the control of commissioners is open 

18 

to all pupils regardless of their religious belief." 

The second question was whether the pupils of another religious 
belief who attended such a school were obliged to participate in the 
Roman Catholic religious exercises and training which constituted part 
of the curriculum. In the conclusion of his declaration Chabot prays: 

That it be declared that the children of the petitioner are not 
legally obligated to participate in Roman Catholic religious exercises 
and training as a condition to receiving education at the school of 
the defendants. ^ 


1 ?(1928) A.C. 200. 

18 (1957) Que. Q.E. 707. at p. 735 













. 











. 

. -, . 




. 
















164 

The Court pointed out that freedom of worship is a right which 

is recognized and protected in Canada. Even though there are differences 

of opinion as to the nature of that right, whether it is a civil right or 

a political or public right, its existence has been admitted and upheld 
20 

by the Courts. The Court said that freedom of worship included the 
right of a parent to have his children follow the religious training of 
the parent*s choice, and also the right of not being forced to have his 
children subjected to religious training of another faith. In this case 
such a subjection was taking place and was therefore a violation of the 
right of freedom of worship. The Court said, "...no particular regulation 
will be enforceable if its application results in the denial of any of the 
fundamental rights of man. 

The third question was whether the provisions of the Education Act 
relating to religious education were ultra vires . Section 221 of the Edu¬ 
cation Act provided: 

It shall be the duty of the school boards (i.e. commissioners or 
trustees):... 

3. To take the measures necessary to have the course of study 
authorized by the Roman Catholic or Protestant Committee, as the 
case may be, followed in each school. 

The Court pointed out that this provision is capable of two 
interpretations. First, it could mean that the commissioners were duty- 
bound to see that the curriculum authorized by the Roman Catholic Committee, 


20 Religious freedom received particular attention in another Quebec 
case involving Jehovah’s Witnesses and the right to distribute religious 
literature. See Saumur v. City of Quebec , (1953) 2 S.C.R. 299* Two other 
cases dealing with religious freedom are Birks v. City of Montreal , (1955) 
S.C.R. 799» and Chaput v. Romain , (1955) S.C.R. 834. 

21 

Chabot case, op_. cit. , p. 723* 

















■ 

. 


















4 









. 

. . 
























. 















. 












' 

< . ■ 

• - ; 











165 

including the religious training, was followed by all the pupils in the 

school. (Jewish pupils, however, were granted a specific exemption by 

section 588.) On the other hand the provision could be taken to mean that 

it was the duty of the commissioners to see that the curriculum was 

followed, insofar as religious exercises arxi instruction were concerned, 

by Roman Catholic pupils only. Mr. Justice Owen said: 

When interpreting the Education Act the Act should be read as 
a whole. If this is done it seems clear to me that the Act intended 
that the Committee involved (Roman Catholic and Protestant) should 
have the power to control the religious training of the pupils of 
its religious belief, Roman Catholic or Protestant as the case may 
be, but not the power to require that pupils professing a different 
religious faith follow the same religious training as the majority. 22 

The fact that section 221, par. 4 provided that the rector or 

priest had the right to choose the books relating to religion for the 

use of the pupils of his religious belief, and that section 588 

provided that Jewish children were exempt from religious exercises and 

instruction to which they objected, would seem to support Justice Owen‘s 

contention. But these sections could not be made the basis of any 

23 

convincing argument, for their terms were not free from ambiguity. 

In any case, the Court warned that the Act should not be 

interpreted as giving the Roman Catholic Committee any greater powers in 

regard to religious education in the schools than it gave to the Protestant 

committees. "The true purpose and object of the Education Act is to deal 

24 

with education and not to supress religious freedom." Justice Owen 


22 Ibid ., p. 738. 

2 ^D. Johnstone and M.B. Gameroff , op . cit ., p. 275. 
24 Ibid.. p. 739. 









. 




< 
























. 














concluded: 


166 


In my opinion, the Education Act when properly construed does not 
infringe the provisions of the British North America Act nor violate 
the right of freedom of religion and is intra vires . 

The other judges agreed with this opinion. 

The last question is whether the provisions of the Roman Catholic 
Committee relating to religious education were ultra vires . The Education 
Act provided that the Roman Catholic and Protestant Committees might make 
regulations for their respective schools. The Protestant Committee had 
passed Regulation 9 which read: 

Religious instruction shall be given in all public schools as 
laid down in the Course of Study and Handbook for Teachers. No 
pupil in any public school, however, shall be required to read or 
study from any religious book or to join in any exercise of devotion 
or religion when it is objected to in writing by his or her parent 
or guardian. 

The regulations of the Roman Catholic Committee, however, contained 
no such exemption. After providing for the program of studies, which, of 
course, included the religious instruction and devotions, Regulation 73 
of the Roman Catholic Committee enacted that each teacher was obliged, 
by par. 5: 

De faire executer fidelement le programme d'etudes approuve et 
de classer les eleves de maniere que chacun puisse faire des progres 
satisfaisants; 

by par. 6: 

D’exiger qu’un eleve sache bien tout ce qui doit s'enseigner dans sa 
propre classe avant de le faire passer dans une classe superieure; 








- 






■ I 

















. 
















• • 










. 





















and by par. 12: 


167 


D*enseigner toutes les matieres du programme d*etudes autorise. 

Paragraph 3 of Regulation 75 required every pupil to: 

Suivre le cours d*etudes autorise et se conformer aux reglements 
de l’ecole. 

In the absence of any provisions to exempt pupils of other faiths from 
religious instruction the regulations were mandatory in all schools 
operated by the Roman Catholic Committee and were therefore applicable to 
all pupils attending such schools. Also, the regulations were not ambiguous. 
In clear and unambiguous terms the regulations stated that all children 
in the schools subject to such regulations, must follow the complete 
program of studies including religious instruction and devotions. 

Nevertheless, the majority opinion of the Court on this question 

was: 


Under the provisions of the Education Act the Roman Catholic 
Committee has the power to prescribe compulsory religious training 
in accordance with the precepts of the Roman Catholic faith only 
with respect to Roman Catholic pupils.... The regulations of the 
Roman Catholic Committee contain no dispensation in connection with 
religious training for non-Roman Catholic pupils, who have the right 
(and also the obligation when there are no schools under the control 
of trustees) to attend schools under the control of commissioners in 
municipalities where the majority of the ratepayers are Roman Catholics. 
Therefore, the Roman Catholic Committee in making these regulations 
exceeded the powers given to that Qommittee under the Education Act. ' 


Findings. A summary of the findings of the Court can now be given. 
On the basis of the four questions to be answered, the findings were as 


27 Ibid ., p. 741 











' 



































. 

































follows: 


168 


!• The plaintiff, Chabot, had the right to send his children to the 

defendants school, because it was the only school in the district. 

2. The Chabot children were not obliged to participate in any Roman 
Catholic religious exercises and instruction while attending the said 
school. 

3. The Education Act when properly construed did not infringe the 
rights of religious freedom, and was not ultra vires of the Provincial 
Legislature. 

4. The regulations of the Roman Catholic Committee imposing religious 

instruction upon all children in the school were invalid and beyond the 

authority granted to the Roman Catholic Committee by the Education Act. 

28 

Such regulations violated the natural right of religious freedom. 

Significance of findings. From a literal reading of the law 
involved in this case it could be concluded that the defendant board had 
the authority to expel the children who did not conform to the religious 
requirements of the school. In fact this argument was used by Rinfret, J., 
in his dissent. The interpretation of the other judges, however, starting 
from the larger principle of freedom of conscience, was more creative in 
its approach and more far reaching in its implications. 

That the majority opinion was based upon the principles of natural 
law is indicated in the words of Casey, J., when he said: t! *..no particular 
regulation will be enforceable if its application results in the denial 
of any of the fundamental rights of man. 

2 8 Ibid .. p. 741-743. 

2 9 lbid ., p. 723. 


It is highly significant 















- 




















- 










, 




. 







169 


that the decision in this case was given on the basis of natural law 
rather than positive law, for five of the seven judges rested their 
decisions upon man's natural right to religious freedom. 

The strongest expression of the role of natural law was given by- 
Justice Casey, who said: 

On this point there can be no doubt for if these rights find their 
source in positive law, they can be taken away. But if, as they do, 
they find their existence in the very nature of man, then they 
cannot be taken away and they must prevail should they conflict 
with the provisions of positive law. 3° 

3*1 

Pratte, J. , quoted Sir Richard Malins in Agar-Sllis v. Lascelles^ where 
he said: 


The authority of the father to guide and govern the education 
of his child is a very sacred thing, bestowed by the Almighty, and 
to be sustained to the uttermost by human law. It is not^to be 
abrogated or abridged, without the most coercive reason. 

Hyde, J. brought these general principles to bear directly on the Chabot 

case when he said: 

The power given to the Roman Catholic Committee to determine the 
course of studies in the schools under its jurisdiction cannot be 
construed to override this basic principle of natural law. It 
would require very specific provisions in the Act to that effect 
to justify any such interpretation and then, of course, the 
constitutionality of such provisions would be a matter for 
consideration.33 


3 ° Ibid .. p. 722. 

31 (lS78-79). L.R. 10 Ch.D. 49, at p. 58. 
32 (1957) Que. Q.B. 7°7. at p. 716. 
3 3 Ibid .. p. 725. 



















. 




- 




« 


- 



























■ 


- 

. 




. 
















170 

It was on the basis of natural law, therefore, that the Court was 
able to decide that section 221 (3) of the Education Act did not intend to 
abrogate religious liberties, even though the positive law could be inter¬ 
preted to do so. A most significant implication of this principle for the 
educator is: 

Whenever the language of the Legislature admits of two 
constructions and, if construed in one way, would lead to obvious 
injustice, then the Court should give to the statute the meaning 
which is the more consistent with the liberty of the individual.^ 

Furthermore, the significance of the principle is not confined to the 

Chabot case; for without the concept of natural law the whole question 

of individual liberty in Canada is left on a somewhat insecure foundation. 

As F. R. Scott said: 

For unless Casey J. is correct, and provincial autonomy is bound 
by natural law as well as by the statutory restrictions of the 
British North America Act - a proposition the implications of which 
are indeed startling- the legislature of Quebec...might amend the 
Education Act tomorrow so as to take away the freedom of conscience 
and the parental authority over education the Court of Appeal has 
proclaimed.^ 


Conclusions . A point that is not too clear is whether the freedom 
of parents to control the religious instruction of their children falls 
within the field of education or religion. It may be found that the 
"natural right" of the parent over the religious education of a child 
belongs to the subject of religion. If it does, then it falls under 
federal rather than provincial jurisdiction. In the absence of a Bill 


Johnston and M.B. Gameroff, op. cit., p. 281. 
35 f. R. Scott, op>. cit ., p. 253. 











■ 








, 











■ 


* 






















- ■ - 


. 

















■ 

























- 






171 

of Rights religious freedom may be beyond the powers of Parliament 

entirely, and subject only to the natural law. 

If one compares the decision in the Chabot case with that in the 

Perepolkin case, it is significant to understand a subtle distinction 

between the two cases. There is a distinction, evidently legal, between 

a child being compelled to go to school when his parents object to schooling 

on religious grounds, and his being compelled to receive religious 

instruction of a particular nature when he gets to school. Compulsory 

attendance at school can be considered a power incidental to jurisdiction 

in education; while compulsory attendance at religious exercises in school 

36 

might be considered properly to fall within the field of religion. It 
is evident that the applications of section 93 of the B.N.A. Act to 
situations involving freedom of conscience need further clarification, 
for the Court in the Chabot case arrived at an effect,but did not clearly 
ascertain the cause. 

Summary . In an analysis of the Court decisions involving religious 
instruction and exercises in the public schools of Canada, the following 
legal principles find general application: 

1. The provisions of provincial statutes are decisive in governing 
the following aspects of religious instruction: 

a. The time of day when instruction may be given. 

b. The length of the period allowed for religious instruction. 

c. The extent and nature of religious exercises. 

2. All religious denominations may take advantage of existing legal 


36 Ibid ., p. 254. 



























































































































. 















172 


provisions to offer religious instruction to children of their faith 
in the public schools. 

3. The wearing of religious garb is not unconstitutional unless it 
is specifically forbidden by statute. 

4. School boards may receive a bequest by will to publish a religious 
book for use in the public schools, provided that the content of such book 
does not contain material not sanctioned by statute. 

5. In no public school can a child be legally compelled to receive 
religious instruction to which his parents object. 

6. A child*s refusal to take religious instruction, or to participate 
in religious exercises, does not deprive such child of arjy other benefits 
of the school by reason of such refusal. 

7. The right of the parents to control the religious education of 
the child is a matter of freedom of conscience, based on natural law, 
and cannot be abrogated or abridged by provisions of the positive law. 

8. Whenever the language of a statute permits of two constructions 
and, if construed in one way, would lead to obvious injustice, then the 
Court will give to the statute the meaning which is the more consistent 
with the religious liberty of the individual. 

II. THE LANGUAGE OF INSTRUCTION 

Section 133 of the B.N.A. Act defines the scope within which the 
French language is constitutionally recognized in Canada. This section 
specified that French may be used in the records and Journals of the 
Canadian Parliament and the Quebec legislature and in any Quebec Court 
or Court of Canada established under the Act. The statutes of Canada 








. 












- 

» 

' 













f I 

' 





























- . _ 



■ 

• 






. 




















173 


and Quebec are to be printed in both English and French. By these 

terms the Franch language has a constitutional protection in Quebec that 

37 

it does not have in any other province. While, therefore, English and 
French have equal official status in Quebec, this situation does not obtain 
in the other nine provinces. 

In the majority of provinces a de facto recognition is given to the 
English language as the language of instruction in schools, even though 
the statutes contain no provisions to this effect. In four provinces 
(Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba and Ontario) provisions governing the 
use of foreign language in school are written into the School Acts. 

The provisions in Manitoba are typical of those in the other three of 
these provinces: 

(1) Subject to subsection (2), English shall be used as the 
language of instruction in all public schools. 

(2) When authorized by the board of trustees of a district 
a language other than English may be used in any school in the 
district: 

(a) during a period authorized herein for religious teaching; 

(b) during a period authorized in the program of studies for 
teaching of a language other than English; and 

(c) before and after school hours prescribed in the regulations 
and applicable to that school. 

With minor modifications, therefore, provincial statutes outside of Quebec 
recognize only the English language as the official language of instruction 
in the public schools. Where the provincial statute is silent on this 
matter, a de facto situation exists that seems to be as binding as the law 


3?This protection was also given in the original Manitoba Act, 
but was repealed by the province in 1890. See R.M. Dawson, ojo. cit . , p.90. 

^ 8 The Public Schools Act , S.M. 1952 (1st Sess.), c.50,sec.240. 




















- 


■ 




































































. , 


. - 

. , 














174 

itself. Where, then, do difficulties occur in regard to the language of 
instruction? 

In Canada three cases are recorded that involve disputes over the 
use of French in the schools. These cases fall into two definite 
categories: (a) the French language used contrary to the provisions of the 
Act, and (b) the French language as a "right and privilege" guaranteed by 
the provisions of section 93 of the B.N.A. Act. The latter issue involves 
the question of "denominational" rights, with which we have already dealt, 
and also touches upon the contention that the free use of language is a 
"natural" right that no legislation can abrogate. Let us now consider 
these issues in turn. 

The French Language Used Contrary to the Provisions of the Act . 

39 

The Boutin case . This litigation occurred in Saskatchewan. 

Evidence disclosed that a school was being conducted entirely in French. 

The trustees were aw a re of this and deliberately and consistently ignored 

40 

section 178 of the School Act which provided that English should be 
used as the sole language of instruction in all schools except as otherwise 
provided in the Act. Section 110, subsection 4, of the same Act provided 
that it was the duty of the trustees to see that school was conducted in 
accordance with the provisions of the Act. A charge was brought against 
the school trustees for knowingly permitting the use of the French language 

Boutin v. Mackie , (1922) 2 W.W.R. 1197• 

^R.S.S. 1920, ch. 110. 




















' 





, 














. 












« 


























175 

as the language of instruction. However, this charge was not laid 
under section 110, but under section 2l6 (2) which read: 

Any person required by this Act or by the regulations made there¬ 
under to furnish information or make a statement in writing to the 
Department or to perform any act or duty, who refuses or neglects 
to furnish such information or make such return or statement or 
perform such act or duty shall be guilty of an offence and liable 
to a penalty not exceeding $ 50 . 

The action failed because the charge was laid under a wrong section of 
the Act. The Court said that the charge 

...cannot be laid under sec. 216(2) of the Act. The words therein, 
"to perform any act or duty," must be interpreted with regard to 
the context, and the maxim "noscuntur a sociis," (cognate to the 
other expressions of the paragraph) and are limited in their 
application to any act or duty in relation to the department of 
which the Act or regulations positively enjoin the performance, and 
cannot be extended to every omission of trustees to carry out in 
their entirety the various provisions of sec. 110 (one of which is 
that they are to see that the school is conducted in accordance with 
the provisions of the Act. 

It is to be noted that the action failed solely because the charge 
was laid under a wrong section of the Act. The Court pointed out that the 
remedy for this situation lay elsewhere. (1) Section 124 of the Act provided 
that any five ratepayers could upon petition to a Judge procure the removal 
of any trustee guilty of any neglect of duty. (2) Section 8 of the Act 
empowered the Minister of Education to order an inquiry held and even to 
oust the elected trustees and replace them by an official trustee. The 
Court admitted: 

Here there has been a flagrant violation of the Ag£ - but 
conviction cannot be upheld on the basis of the plea. 


1,1 (1922) 2 W.W.R. 1197. at p. 1197. 
42 Ibid., p. 1200. 





. 1 t«t., I • l-J • ..‘i 










i > '•: 














































































The McDonald ease. 


This case occurred in Ontario. The 


176 


43 


Lancaster school trustees had hired a teacher for their school. This was 
done against the advice and protests of the school inspector and the 
Department of Education. The teacher did not possess the necessary- 
qualifications to teach in English and her qualifications to teach in 
French had not been validated by the Minister, or by the Department. The 
teacher was able to teach in French only, and the trustees allowed her to 
conduct the school in that language. An action was brought by a ratepayer 
to restrain the trustees from continuing to employ the teacher, and from 
having the school conducted in French. 

Since the statutes required that schools be conducted in the 
English language, unless an inspectors approval was obtained to do 
otherwise; and since in this instance the trustees had not obtained the 
inspector's approval, the Court ruled: 

The conduct of the defendants, in disregarding and defying the 
rulings and remonstrances of the Department and its officers, can 
be described only as recalcitrant and recusant. If they are, as 
they claim and as they seem to be, ignorant men, they ought to 
have sought competent legal advice; and, having failed to do so, 
they cannot claim to have acted in good faith. ^ 

There was a judgment for the plaintiff against the defendants, and for 

the recovery of nominal damages and full costs against the trustees 

personally. Again it was evident that the statutory provisions were 


^ McDonald v. Lancaster Separate School Trustees , (1915) 24 D.L.R. 
868, 34 O.L.R. 346, affirming 31 O.L.R. 360. 

^31 O.L.R. 360, at p. 364. 



















, 








■ 










. 




■ 






, 

. 

- 

■ 




- 


- 





decisive. 


177 


A significant implication of this decision was that the trustees 

were charged personally and not as a corporation. This was done because 

the Court felt that the trustees had not acted in good faith. With 

reference to the question of costs, "the good faith or want of good faith 

45 

of the trustees has much to do." The significance of this last statement 
for all actions of a board of trustees is self evident. 

Language and the Guarantees of Section 93 of the B.N.A, Act 

The two cases just considered dealt solely with the fact that 

the French language had been used contrary to statutory law. The issues 

in these instances, therefore, did not go beyond the provisions of the 

law, nor did they question the basic premises upon which those laws were 

based. The really basic question still remained to be answered: Have 

the provinces the right to require that schools be conducted in the 

English language only? This question was before the Courts in the 
46 

Mackell case. When the case was brought before the Privy Council the 
reasoning and decisions of the Canadian Courts were upheld. 

The facts in the case. Legal action was brought against the 
Ottawa separate school trustees when they refused to implement clause 3(l) 

45 Ibid ., p. 363. 

^^One aspect of this case has already been considered in connection 
with denominational rights. Mackell y. Ottawa Separate School Trustees , 
(1917) A.C. 62; 32 D.L.E.l; affirming 24 D.L.R. 475 with annotation 
492; 34 O.L.R. 335. 











, 








. 

' 













f 




. 










' ■' 




. 



178 

of Regulation 17 which appeared as a "Circular of Instruction for the 

47 

School Year, September to June 1912-13." Clause 3 (l) of Regulation 17, 
as revised in 1913» reads as follows: 

3. Subject, in the case of each school, to the direction and 
approval of the Chief Inspector, the following modifications shall 
also be made in the course of study of the Public and Separate 
Schools: 

The Use of French for Instruction and Communication 

(l) Where necessary in the case of French-speaking pupils, French 
may be used as the language of instruction and communication; but such 
use of French shall not be continued beyond Form I, excepting that, on 
the approval of the Chief Inspector, it may also be used as the 
language of instruction and communication in the case of pupils beyond 
Form I who are unable to speak and understand the English language. 

The defendant board was charged with committing the following 
violations: 

1. The use of French as the language of communication and instruction 
beyond Form I, and as a subject of study for more than an hour a day 
without the consent of the Chief Inspector. 

2. The employment of unqualified teachers who were hired to teach 
only in the French language. 

3. Obstructing the inspectors in the discharge of their duties and 
thus preventing the inspection of the schools. 

4. Wilful failure to keep the schools open during the time prescribed 
by law, and in fact closing them and keeping them closed at and after 

the commencement of the school year 191^-1915. 

5. Wilfully omitting properly to equip and carry on the schools by 
the employment of qualified teachers, and, on the contrary, dismissing 
from the schools twenty or more satisfactory, competent, and qualified 
teachers. These dismissals were made personally by the chairman of 

47 For complete provisions see Report of the Royal Commission on 
Education in Ontario 1950 , op . cit., pp. 421-425. 















. 

' 




. 











, 




• 







. 
















- 

- 

. 











. 














■ 










the board. 


179 


6. Defiant refusal to conduct the schools according to law or submit 

to the Regulations, and so forfeiting or suspending payment of their 
share of the Government grant; and, by publication of their resolutions 
and declarations fomenting discontent among the school supporters and 
encouraging the insubordination of the pupils. 

Out of these six violations only four issues dealt with below were ruled 
on by the Court. 

It will be noticed that even though these charges arise directly 
out of the conflict over the use of the French language in the schools, 
some of them are subordinate to the central issue. After dealing briefly 
with the subordinate issues, main consideration will be given to the 
language problem. 

The issues involved. The issues, as the Courts saw them, were the 
following: 

1. Did the chairman personally have the power to dismiss the teachers? 

2. Is language a ’’right or privilege” guaranteed by the protective 
provisions of section 93 of the B.N.A. Act, 1867? 

3. Is language a ’’right by custom” which the legislature is powerless 
to impair or destroy? 

4. Is the French language a right that is guaranteed by treaty e.g. 
the Quebec Act, 1774? 

The findings of the Court . In regard to the first issue the 
Court was clear and direct when it said: 

































* 














* 


















180 

...the Chairman of the Board had no power to discharge teachers 
as he purported to do, and...these teachers are not legally discharged. 
...the resolutions under which the Chairman purported to act conferred 
upon him no right to dismiss or engage Jjeachers. This is a function 
of the Board, and cannot be delegated.**® 

The second issue with regard to language as a "right or privilege" 

guaranteed by the B.N.A. Act has already been dealt with when the nature 

49 

of a denominational right was considered. As was noted then the Court 
said that "the 'right or privilege' protected by law is not one concern¬ 
ing language."^ 0 The fact that in early days languages other than English 
had been used in the schools was no basis upon which to claim a right or 
privilege by law. The Court said: 


We were, it is true, referred to some rather hazy instances in 
the early days when a more extensive use of the French language 
may perhaps have been customary in schools in French settlements, 
just as German was used in German settlements at about the same time. 
These instances, however, fall very far short of proving or establish- 
ing "a right or privilege which any class or persons have by law" 
in respect of these languages as against the general use of English. 
They were evidently in every case mere temporary tolerations. 

This decision holds that the compulsory use of the English language in 

the schools does not infringe upon any constitutional rights which the 

supporters of separate schools have under the B.N.A. Act. 

In the third issue the freedom of language was sought on the 

52 

grounds that it was a right based on custom and usage. The defendants 
sought to find such a right or privilege in the clause which the 2nd and 
3rd Charters of Henry III added to Magna Carta. The pertinent clause in 


** 8lbid .. pp. 480-481. 
^ Suora . Chapter II. 
5 ° Ibid .. p. 491. 
51 Ibid .. p. 491-492. 
5 2 Ibid . . pp. 493-496. 







- - 














- - . 





. 




. 

•: ; 




, 
















. - , i • 



























r 
















- - - 







181 

Magna Carta runs: 

No freeman shall be arrested or detained in prison, or disseised 
of his freehold, or outlawed, or banished, or in ary way molested; 
and we shall not set forth against him, nor send against him unless 
by lawful judgment of his peers and by the law of the land.53 

To this clause the two Charters of Henry III added after the words 

"disseised of his freehold," the words "or of his liberties or free 

54 

customs." The implication here seems to be that a free custom to teach 
French in their separate schools was a right or privilege existing by 
virtue of the above Charters. 

The Court admitted that if the words "liberties and free customs" 
meant that such rights belong to a man of his free birthright , the contention 
might possibly hold good. The Court contended, however, that "free 
customs are liberties enjoyed by custom and usage, which in its legal sense 
signifies a law not written but established by long use, and the consent 
of the ancestry. In such a case the antiquity of a custom should be 
of such a nature that the memory of man could not show the contrary. 

In its decision the Court held that it was unable to appreciate or support 
the contention that the right to use the French language in the separate 
schools of Ontario was a natural right which the legislature is powerless 

56 

to impair or destroy. 


^Quoted in Ibid . , p. 495. 


















. 

















* 






























. 


I 
































- 
















182 


The fourth issue involved the freedom of language as a civil 

right possessed by the French-speaking people by virtue of the Quebec Act, 

1774. Section VIII of the Quebec Act provided that the religious Orders 

and Communities in Quebec could continue to '’hold and enjoy their property 

and possessions, together with all customs and usages.relative thereto, 

57 

and all other civil rights ," The Court felt it was going a long way to 

contend that the right to use the French language in separate schools was 

a civil right granted by an Act that was passed before separate schools 

existed. In this case the Courts did not protect the right in question, 

and Justice Meredith expressed the opinion of the Court when he said: 

I am unable to find anything which supports the contention of 
the learned counsel for the appellants that the right to use the 
French language in the Separate Schools of the Province was 
guaranteed by a treaty or otherwise to the French-speaking 
people... 

The decision of the Court went against the defendant board. It is 

interesting to note that the board was not convicted of bad faith. Justice 

Lennox felt that there was some excuse for men desiring to maintain a 

language that is dear to them, but there was no excuse for the weapons 

and methods that were used in this case. It was a ’’wholly unwarranted 

59 

action at what amounted to ‘a declaration of war'.” The decision, 


therefore, was not against the defendants personally because no evidence 













































. 













183 


was shown that they did not act "honestly, conscientiously, and in 
good faith;...One cannot help but suspect that this latter part of 
the ruling was significantly determined by the emotionally charged nature 
of the whole issue. 

Conclusion . In general, the decision of the Courts could be 
stated in the following way: The Ontario legislature has the power 
under section 93 of the B.N.A. Act to regulate the manner of conducting 
schools in the province, to determine the qualifications of teachers, and 
to regulate the use of the French language in the schools be they public 
or separate; and a regulation of the Department of Education dealing with 
these matters does not conflict with those rights and privileges with 
respect to denominational schools which any class of persons had at the 
passing of the Act. Nor can these rights and privileges be sought on 
the grounds of "right by custom," or on the basis of a "guarantee by 
treaty." The plenary power of the legislature, within the ambit of its 
legislative authority is unlimited as to what it should ordain regarding 
the use of the French language in the schools. 

Although the Courts clarified the legal issues in this controversy, 
Regulation 17 "went on its tempestuous way" without solving the educational 
problem involved. The Ottawa separate schools continued their opposition 
by refusing to comply with the regulation. As a result the government 
embarked on a more lenient policy even though new regulations were not 



















- 



i . 4 .j 


. 








. 

1 















. 




. 






- 







184 


issued until 1944. As the Minister of education reported in 1928: 

The universal desire on part of French-speaking parents to have 
their children acquire English, the sympathetic support of the 
Departmental plans by school boards, the energetic co-operative 
effort on the part of the teachers, inspectors, and training school 
staffs are factors in the situation that promise well for the future. 

It seems evident that provincial authorities hope that patient but 

persistent pressure applied over a period of time will accomplish what 

legal mandates could not accomplish, and that school practices will 

eventually conform to legal requirements. One cannot help but wonder, 

in the light of the emotional and religious ramifications of this problem 

if such may not be a vain hope. 

III. PATRIOTIC EXERCISES 

62 

In Canada two flag salute cases are on record - one in Ontario 
and one in Alberta. J In the United States such cases have long evoked 
much constitutional heart-searching in the Courts. In the American 
setting, however, the issues are cast in a constitutional framework that 
includes guarantees of freedom of speech and worship. In Canada there 
are no constitutional guarantees of civil liberties and such liberties 
are based, rather, upon principles of the common law. It will be noted, 
also, that the cases in Canada relied upon American precedent for their 


1 Report of the Minister of Education , Ontario , 1928 , £.x. Quoted 
in Report of the Royal Commission on Education in Ontario , p. 415. For a 
more complete discussion of the historical development of this contro¬ 
versy see Ibid ., pp. 408-425. 

^ Donald v. Hamilton Board of Education, (1945) 3 D.L.R. 424, 

O.R. 518, O.W.N. 526. Reversing (19 W 4 D.L.R, 227, O.R. 475. O.W.N.559. 

^ Rinnan v. Board of Trustees of Lethbridge School District , (1944) 
1 D.L.R. 360, (1943) 3 W.W.R. 340. 



























, i 












■ 










. 


























, 






- 

. 

’ - 

. 






. 




.! . 

- - - ..... 




" 











135 

settlement. The Canadian cases will be examined individually and then 
. 64 

compared. 

The Donald case. 

Two pupils who were members of a family of Jehovah's Witnesses, 

were expelled from school because they refused to sing the national anthem 

and salute the flag in the opening exercises of the school. The Ontario 

statutes contained no provision for exempting pupils from participating 

65 

in patriotic exercises, but both the Public Schools Act and the High 
School Regulations^ ^ did contain provisions for exempting children from 
taking part in religious exercises objected to by their parents or 
guardians. On the basis of these provisions the plaintiff brought an 
action against the board of education of Hamilton. In the Trial Court 
the basis of this plea was briefly considered and dismissed on the grounds 
that the flag salute was a patriotic exercise and not covered by the 
provisions for religious exemption. The action was then taken to the 
Appeal Court, the decision of which is of interest and concern to us 
here. 

The Court first ascertained that the only reason the pupils were 
expelled was their failure to join in the patriotic exercises of the 

^See "Case and Comment," The Canadian Bar Review , Vol. 22, 

Nov. 1944, pp. 840-842, for a review of these cases. 

65 R.S.O. 1937. Oh. 357. sec. 7(1). 

66 12 (1) (a) 

















. . 
























. 












. 










186 


school. The expulsion had not been made on bad faith on the part of 
the board, but even an act of good faith could be illegal. The Court 
felt that regulations exempting children from participating in objection¬ 
able religious exercises could also by implication be extended to cover 
the present situation. The Court ruled as follows: 

In view of s. 7(l) of the Public Schools Act...and High School 
Regulation 12 (l)(a), which exempt school children from any 
obligation to take part in religious exercises objected to by 
their parents or guardians, public school or high school pupils 
who, on religious grounds, refuse to sing "God Save the King," a 
required school exercise under the Regulations made applicable 
to the Public Schools Act and the High Schools Act...by the 
Department of Education Act,... and who, on the same grounds, 
also refuse to join in a "flag salute," a school exercise 
prescribed by teachers in virtue of their obligation under the 
respective Acts and Regulations to teach patriotism by order, 
command and illustration, may not be suspended or expelled from 
the school. Suspension or expulsion in such circumstances is 
illegal and although there is no mala fides, damages may be 
recovered. The fact that exemption in favour of "religious 
exercises" is not defined (either by inclusion or exclusion) 
does not warrant a Court in saying that the exercises here in 
question have no religious significance, since this might result 
in denying the religious freedom which the statutory exemption is 
designed to secure. 

This decision held that "patriotic exercises" may have a religious 

significance and consequently fall within the provisions for religious 

exemptions. In this ruling the Court relied heavily upon two American 

68 

cases both of which held that the compulsory "flag salute" requirement 
contravened the constitutional guarantees of freedom of speech and 
worship. 


The Ruman Case. 

In a "flag salute" case in Alberta the decision of the Court 


67 (1945) 3 D.L.R. 424, at p. 424. 

^ West Virginia Board of Education v. Barnette , 319 U.S. 624; 
and New York v. Sandstrom . 2?9 N.Y. 523. 









































. 


. . - 




































- 



























■ , > . . ..... 


- 












187 

differed from the decision rendered in the Donald case. In Lethbridge 

the children of a member of Jehovah's Witnesses were expelled from school 

for refusing to salute the flag, and the expulsion was upheld by the 

Court. The decision in this case rested upon the statutory provisions 

governing patriotic exercises in effect at that time. The relevant 

69 

sections of the School Act provided for the following: 

(1) Section 2(k) defined the term "patriotic exercises" and included 
the "flag salute" as being part of them. 

(2) Under the general heading of "The Powers and Duties of Boards of 
Trustees," section 127(s) granted the power "To require such patriotic 
exercises to be conducted at such times and places and in such manner 
as the board may from time to time direct." 

(3) Section 155 (1) read: "In any school patriotic exercises shall be 
conducted at such times and places and in such manner as the Board may 
from time to time direct." 

(4) Section 155 (2) suggested one manner of conducting the exercises, 
which might be followed if the board so desired. The suggestion was that 
all students come to attention and that the actual salute be given by 
one person only, e.g., the principal, teacher, or a senior student. 

In view of the powers granted to the board by the above provisions 

the trustees passed the following resolution: 

That this board requires all pupils in our school to salute 
the flag, sing our national anthems and participate in all school 


69 R.5.A. , 19^2, ch. 175- 







188 


patriotic exercises when required to do so by the principal, and 
any pupil refusing to do this be summarily expelled from the 
school. 

The manner of saluting the flag required that all pupils stand at 

attention and give the salute. The children of the plaintiff were 

ordered by their parents not to give the salute and were consequently 

expelled by virtue of the above resolution. It is to be noted that the 

children were not guilty of any other offence. 

The Court pointed out that nowhere in the Act was there an 

imperative direction to a board to require that patriotic exercises be 

performed. Whether or not such exercises were required was discretionary 

but, if the board decided to require such performance, it had the power 

71 

to direct the time, place and manner of performance. The issue in this 

case turned largely upon the construction of the verb '’may' 1 where it 

occurs in section 155 (2) of the Act. The Court accepted the meaning 

72 

as defined in the Alberta Interpretation Act which says that "may" 

73 

shall be construed as permissive and "shall” as imperative. If the 
verb "may" is construed as permissive, then the subsection amounts only 
to a suggestion as to the manner in which the exercises could be performed, 
and the board was still free to alter this in any way. This had been done 
in the case under consideration. 


7°(1944) 1 D.L.R. 360, at p. 361. 
^ Xbid ., p. 364. 

72 R.S.A., 1942, ch. 1. 

73(!9/j4) 1 D.L.R. 360, at p. 364. 










. 








. 







5 













































. 


. . . 







In the light of the above provisions the Court upheld the 


189 


action of the board in expelling the children, and concluded: 

Defendant school board was held to have acted within its powers 
under the sections of the Act enumerated...in dismissing plaintiff's 
children from the school because of their refusal to salute the flag, 
such salute being the patriotic exercise which was directed by the 
board to be performed in that school, and the performance of which 
in the manner in question the board was held to have the power to 
prescribe.‘^ 

Comparison of Cases and Conclusions 

It is interesting to note why the decision in the Donald case 
differed from the decision in the Human case, even though the facts in 
the cases were practically identical. The discrepancy resulted from a 
difference in the provisions of the statutes. In Ontario the statute 
provided for the exemption of children from participation in religious 
exercises to which they objected. As was noted, the Donald case was 
decided in the light of this exemption, when it was extended by the 
Court to include patriotic exercises. In the Ruman case, however, the 
Court was not confronted with any provision for statutory exemption from 
religious exercises by the counsel for the appellant. It appears that 
the failure to do so was indeed a weakness in the appellant's argument. 
Had an appeal to "religious” exemption been made, the decision could well 
have been different. 

The decision in the Human case did, however, indicate clearly 
that a provincial legislature has the authority to direct or authorize 
a school board to require the students in its schools to salute the flag 












. 




















. 




- 




■ 

































190 

as part of school exercises. That the legislatures are not inclined to 
abuse such power is indicated in an amendment made to the Alberta School 


75 

Act following the Ruman case. This amendment introduces an exernptive 
clause in favour of "any pupil whose parent or guardian presents to the 
principal of the school a written statement setting forth that he or she 
is a member of a religious organization whose tenets forbid or are 
opposed to its members individually saluting the flag." Such pupils are 
required only "to come to attention and to remain silently and at 
attention" during the salute. The absence of "flag salute" cases in the 
other provinces would seem to indicate that satisfactory provisions for 
patriotic exercises and appropriate exemptions are in force, either by 
law or in practice. 


?5r.S.A. , 1944, ch. 46, sec. 9 






CHAPTER VI 


LEGAL STATUS IN REGARD TO CONTROL 

Children attending public schools are required to obey the school 
laws of the province and the rules and regulations of the local school 
boards. Teachers are required to see that discipline in school is main¬ 
tained and that the laws and regulations are enforced. Traditionally, 
pupils have been disciplined by means of corporal punishment, suspension, 
and expulsion, depending upon the seriousness of their misconduct. These 
means of discipline have been generally accepted by society, on the 
assumption that pupil control is possible only when effective means of 
enforcing discipline are available. Occasionally, however, parents will 
challenge the manner of punishment or question the validity of the punish¬ 
ment itself. It is then that the Courts may be called upon for their 
judgment. 

In general it would seem that the over all legal framework within 
which the schools control their pupils is based on the principle that edu¬ 
cation is a privilege afforded by the state to the individual. For the 
sake of this privilege the individual must sacrifice a measure of personal 
freedom in order to insure that the educational system achieves its 
maximum usefulness and effectiveness. 

In examining the problems of pupil control by the school the 
following matters will be considered under separate headings: 

1. The Scope of Authority of School Personnel. 

2. Suspension and Expulsion. 

3. Corporal Punishment. 
























. 

. 









, 








































. 

V 

. 






: 












' 

- 
















192 

Although the authority to use these forms of punishment lies partly in 
statutory law, upon study it soon becomes evident that its major authority 
is found in the common law. 


I. THE SCOPE OF AUTHORITY OF SCHOOL PERSONNEL 


General Authority 

All provincial School Acts grant to schools the power to control 
the conduct of pupils. This power is based on the concept known as in 
loco parentis . Basically this concept involves a delegation of parental 
authority to teachers and includes both the power to suspend or expel 
from school and the authority to administer reasonable corporal punishment. 
In Corpus Juris^ the following statement is made: 

As a general rule a school teacher, to a limited extent at least, 
stands in loco parentis to the pupils under his charge and may exercise 
such powers of control, restraint, and correction over them as may be 
reasonably necessaiy to enable him properly to perform his duties as 
teacher and accomplish the purposes of education subject to such 
limitations and prohibitions as may be defined by legislative enact¬ 
ments.... If nothing unreasonable is demanded, he has the right to 
direct how and when each pupil shall attend to his appropriate duties 
and the manner in which a pupil shall demean himself. 

In Britain Lord Hewart stated this same rule more specifically 
when he said: 


...Any parent who sends a child to school is presumed to give to 
the teacher authority to make reasonable regulations and to administer 
to the child reasonable corporal punishment for the breach of those 
regulations. * 2 


^- Control of Pupils and Discipline , 56 C.J. #1088 (1932). Also 
quoted in M.R. Sumption, "The Control of Pupil Conduct by the School," 
law and Contemporary Problems , Vol. 20, No. 1, Winter 1955* p. 80. 

2 R. v. Newport ( Salop ) Justices , (1929) 2 K.B. 4l6, at p. 428. 















































, 














; r 






. 

— 

- 

















■ • 








- - 








■ 




193 


The editor of the 11th edition of Salmond says that Prosser gives 
even a sounder reason for the rule than Lord Hewart. Prosser states 
the rule as follows: 

A parent or one who stands in the place of a parent f may use 
reasonable force, including corporal punishment, for discipline 
and control, A school teacher has the same authority. It is 
sometimes said that the parent, by sending his child to school, 
has delegated his discipline to the teacher; but since many children 
go to public schools under compulsion of law, and the child may 
well be punished over the objection of the parent, a sounder reason 
is the necessity for maintaining order in and about the school.^ 

It is evident that the power of the school to control the conduct 

of pupils is based on both the above grounds. Society acknowledges the 

obligation of the state to provide and assure education for all citizens. 

In order to discharge this obligation the school, as an agency of the 

state, must have control of the pupils or its efforts would be decidely 

less effective. Because the school is an agency of the state, the power 

to control the behavior of pupils is, therefore, part and parcel of the 

4 

power of the state to control the acts of individuals. The power of the 
school in this respect is limited only by the restraints which the law 
and the Courts place upon it. In line with this reasoning, the Courts 
do not question the legal right of school personnel to exercise reason¬ 
able control and discipline. But the Courts will question the "reason¬ 
ableness n of any control exercised, and it is in this regard that most 
of the litigation occurs. 


■^Quoted in Murdock v. Richards et al ., (195^)» 1 D.L.R. 766, 
at p. 769. 




.R. Sumption, 


op . cit. , p. 80. 





- 















t , 





. 

. 

. 




















. 






■ 








. 










- 















' 




194 

Authority Out of School Hours and Off School Grounds 

The control of pupils exercised by the school is not limited to 
school hours or school premises. The Courts are inclined, instead, to 
make interpretations which give broad discretionary powers to school 
personnel, particularly where the intent is to insure a wholesome atmos¬ 
phere that is conducive to learning. As stated by M.R. Sumption, two 
general principles are followed by the Courts in their interpretation 
of the reasonableness of an action: 

...The first is that any act of a pupil detrimental to the 
orderly discipline or well-being of the school, regardless of 
where committed, is of legitimate concern to the school. The 
second is that the school has prohibitory and punitive power 
over the acts of pupils which interfere with their school work - 
or with other pupils, or reflect on the reputation of the school."* 

The first principle mentioned is reasonable because the school is an 

integral part of the community, and the influence for good which it 

exerts in a community "is in no small measure dependent on good public 

relations and good morale among pupils and teachers.On the other 

hand, such positive conditions are dependent in many cases upon the 

conduct of pupils outside of school hours and off school grounds. The 

second principle referred to by Sumption really supplements the first, 

but the power referred to here is prohibitory in that it is legally 

sanctioned to prevent conduct that may interfere with the efficient 

operation of the school. 

The power to control pupil conduct outside of school hours and 

^ Ibid ., p. 85. 

6 Ibid. 




















































- 
















c 




■ 













' 

. 



















195 

off school grounds is based on precedent drawn from Great Britain. The 

n 

leading case in this matter is Cleary v. Booth /which first established 
the rule. In that case Justice Collins said: 

It is a clear law that a father has the right to inflict reason¬ 
able personal chastisement on his son. It is equally law, and it 
is in accordance with very ancient practice, that he may delegate 
this right to the schoolmaster. Such a right has always commended 
itself to the common sense of mankind.... As a matter of common 
sense, how far is this power delegated by the parent to the school¬ 
master? Is it limited to the time during which the boy is within 
the four walls of the school, or does it extend in any sense beyond 
that limit? In my opinion the purpose with which the parental 
authority is delegated to the schoolmaster, who is entrusted with 
the bringing up and discipline of the child, must to some extent 
include an authority over the child while he is outside the four 
walls.... Very grave consequences would result if it were held that 
the parent’s authority was exclusive up to the door of the school, 
and that then, and only then, the master’s authority commenced; 
it would be a most anomalous result to hold that in such a case 
as the present the boy who had been assaulted (on the way to school) 
had no remedy by complaint to his master, who could punish the 
assailant by a thrashing, but must go before the magistrate to 
enforce a remedy between them as citizens.... In such a case as 
the present it is obvious that the desired impression is best brought 
about by a summary and immediate punishment. In my opinion parents 
do contemplate such an exercise of authority by the schoolmaster. I 
should be sorry if I felt myself driven to come to the opposite 
conclusion, and am glad to be able to say that the principle shews 
that the authority delegated to the schoolmaster is not limited to 
the four walls of the school. It is always a question of fact 
whether the act done was outside the delegated authority; but in 
the present case I am satisfied, on the fact, that it was obviously 
within it. 

American precedent has also played an important part in 
Canadian cases. The broad outlines of the legal framework within which 
schools control the conduct of pupils outside of the school was indicated 
in two American cases. The breadth and depth of this framework were 
implied when an Iowa Court ruled as follows: 


^Cleary v. Booth , (1893)» 1 Q.B. 465* 




























' 








■ 

* 




























■ 













. 

- 



















■ 









196 


Any rule of the school, not subversive to the rights of the 
children or parents, or in conflict with humanity and the precepts 
of divine law, which tends to advance the object of the law in 
established public schools, must be considered reasonable and 
proper* If the effects of acts done out of school-houses reach 
within the schoolroom during school hours and are detrimental 
to good order and the best interest of pupils, it is evident that 
such acts may be forbidden.® 

There are, however, limits to the authority of school boards 
and teachers in this matter. These limits were indicated by an American 
Court when it said: 

School boards and boards of education have important duties 
to discharge, and we have no disposition..*to circumscribe their 
powers in too narrow a compass. The statute clothes them with 
power to make all needful rules for the government of the school 
established by them, or by the teacher with their consent...yet 
it cannot fairly be claimed that the boards are uncontrolled in 
the exercise of their discretion and judgment upon the subject. 

The rules and regulations must be reasonable and proper, or, in 
the language of the statute, "needful , u for the government, good 
order, and efficiency of the schools - such as will best advance 
the pupils in their studies, tend to their education and mental 
improvement, and promote their interest and welfare. But the 
rules and regulations must relate to these objects. The boards 
are not at liberty to adopt rules relating to other subjects 
according to their humor,...9 


Conclusion 

The above British and American decisions define the common law 
framework within which the Canadian Courts have operated in interpreting 
and ruling on cases dealing with pupil conduct. It is evident that 
in the whole area of pupil control, both British and American precedents 
have played a major part. 


^Burdick v. Babcock , 31 Iowa 562, 565 (1871). Quoted in 
M.R. Sumpton, ojd. cit ., p. 88. 

^ State ex rel . Powe v. Board of Education , 63 Wis. 234, 237* 
23 N.W. 102, 103-104 (1885) Quoted in M.R. Sumption, Ibid . 

















. 

- 

- 


















■ 

. 






. 


■ 

. 





' 




197 

The question of the "reasonableness” of any disciplinary action 

taken by the school is basically a question of common law rather than of 

statute, for the statutory law is limited in the extent to which it can 

prescribe a specific punishment for a specific misdemeanour. One Canadian 

Court stated this principle as follows: 

.•.The law has not undertaken to prescribe stated punishments for 
particular offences, but has contented itself with the general grant 
of power of moderate correction, and has confined the graduation of 
punishment within the limits of this grant to the discretion of the 
teacher. 10 

In all legal cases involving the discipline and control of pupils, 
Courts must ask themselves three basic questions: 

1. Was the teacher acting within the scope of his legal authority? 
This question involves the statutory authority of the teacher as well 
as his authority in loco parentis . 

2. Was there cause for punishment? In answering this question the 
Courts have indicated their reluctance to set aside a teacher's judgment. 

3. Was the punishment reasonable under the circumstances? This 
question generally constitutes the heart of any litigation and must be 
answered on the basis of precedent and common law. 

The first of the above questions is a question of law; the last 
two are questions of fact. The question of law, once validated, cannot 
be further doubted. The questions of fact are different in each case and, 
therefore, become the prime concern of the Courts in any litigation. 


10 R. v. Metcalfe . (1927), 3 W.W.R. 194, at p. 198 




































■ 












II. SUSPENSION AND EXPULSION 


198 


The punishments of suspension and expulsion generally represent 
last resorts in attempts to control pupils. Suspension implies that the 
student is temporarily barred from the school, while expulsion signifies 
a moire permanent action. Suspension means that final judgment is held 
in abeyance until some authority takes official action either to 
reinstate the pupil or make the suspension permanent. Suspension is 
generally within the powers of the professional school staff while 
expulsion is a prerogative of the school board. These disciplinary 
measures are resorted to only under dire circumstances, for they are, 
in the last analysis, a confession of failure that can well besmirch 
the credit of a school. 

In every province of Canada power to suspend or expel pupils has 
been given by law to the local school authorities or the teachers of the 
schools. In all cases, however, the suspension or expulsion, must be 
approved or actually carried out by the school board. The provisions 
in Ontario are typical of those in force in the other provinces: 

108: It shall be the duty of every teacher, (i) to suspend any 
pupil guilty of persistent truancy, or persistent opposition to 
authority, habitual neglect of duty, the use of profane or improper 
language, or conduct injurious to the moral tone of the school, and 
to notify the parent or guardian of the pupil and the board of the 
suspension, but the parent or guardian of any pupil suspended may 
appeal against the action of the teacher to the board which shall 
have the power to remove, confirm or modify the suspension. 1 

In Canada the legal right of a board to suspend or expel a pupil is, 

therefore, firmly established; but the reasonableness of such action is 

lx The Public Schools Act, R.S.O., 1950, oh. 316, sec.108 (i). 











































































1 

. 

' 










. 






■ 









sometimes challenged. 


199 


In Canada the recorded legal cases on suspension and expulsion 
fall into definite categories based upon the reasons for such punishment. 
These categories are: 

1* Suspension for disobedience and misconduct. 

2. Suspension for damaging school property. 

3. Suspension for truancy. 

4. Expulsion for mental retardation. 

5. A teacher*s refusal to suspend on orders from the school board. 
Each of these reasons will now be considered. 

Disobedience and Misconduct^ 

This case occurred in Ontario in 1886. On the 3rd of December, 
1884, a boy, thirteen years of age, was dismissed by his teacher for 
disobedience and for speaking impudently to the teacher when he was 
questioned about his misconduct. The matter was brought before the 
trustees, and on the following January 6th they held a meeting and 
passed a resolution that the boy could return to school on an expression 
of regret for his misbehavior. After the receipt of a solicitor’s letter 
on behalf of the father, the trustees, on February 10th held another 
meeting and passed a resolution that the boy could return to school 
after one day's suspension. On the 11th of February another meeting 
of the board was held and a resolution was passed reinstating the 

^In Re the Minister of Education and McIntyre y. The Public 
School Trustees of Section Eight in the Township of Blanchard , et al ., 
(1886), 11 ).R. 439. Hereinafter noted as the McIntyre Case. 


























































• • 



















■ 










. 






200 


resolution of January 6th. The father was not notified nor was he 
present at the meetings of January 6th and February 11th; but he was 
notified and was present at the meeting of February 10th. The boy 
returned to school, but relying on the resolution of February 10th, made 
no apology. He remained in school for several days and was not interfered 
with by the teacher who, however, would give him no instruction. 

In an action in the Division Court, instituted by the father 
against the teacher and the trustees for alleged wrongful dismissal, the 
judge dismissed the action against the teacher but held the trustees 
liable. The trustees appealed to the Court of Common Pleas which 
rendered the decision given below. 

The case was ruled on by four judges, one of whom dissented 
from the majority opinion. In his dissent Justice Smith for the follow¬ 
ing reasons held the trustees liable: 

...The duty of the teacher was only to have suspended the child 
and reported the matter to the trustees....Here there was an 
expulsion. The office of trustee is merely ministerial and not 
judicial, and they are liable for the wrong sustained by the 
plaintiff through their misfeasance. But even if their duties 
are judicial there was malice shown. Under the statute the action 
is maintainable. 

This dissenting opinion, however, was not upheld by the other 
three judges. The majority opinion held that the boy had in fact been 
"refractory" and that the board had acted within its authority in 
suspending the boy under the conditions noted above. Justice Shepley 


x 3 lbid ., p. 442. 





. 




- 

. 

■ 


















- 



... 







































said: 


201 


...The matter was brought before the trustees, and they very 
properly decided that the boy should apologize to the teacher. This 
did not constitute an expulsion, but merely a suspension....This is 
a matter in which the trustees are clothed with judicial functions, 
and their action cannot be questioned; at all events malice must 
be shewn. 

The majority of the Court felt, however, that the proceedings 
of the board had been somewhat irregular, but even so this irregularity 
did not constitute malice. Justice Cameron said: 

I am also of the opinion that this appeal must be allowed. The 
action of the trustees in modifying their judgment in the absence 
and without malice to the parties interested was an irregular 
proceeding; but it is quite manifest from the evidence before the 
Court they were actuated only by a desire to do their duty properly, 
and the slip made was one that men in their position, unaware of 
the requirements of the law, might readily make. The condition 
requiring the boy to apologize to the teacher was a reasonable 
one... ^ 


The Court was also convinced that it was not an act of the 
trustees, but that of the teacher that caused the boy 1 s removal from 
school. In addition, in not instructing the boy when he returned to 
school the teacher was acting on her own initiative and not on direction 
from the board. The Court held that it was not the duty of the trustees 
to compel the teacher to offer instruction to a pupil whom the teacher 
had suspended for just cause. 

In arriving at its decision the Court also expressed its opinion 
on the attitude taken by the father. Justice Cameron commented as 


l 4 Ibid ., p. 441. 
• ^Ibid , , p. 442. 


follows: 
























. 
















- 
















. 

































. 















202 


The father, in my opinion, acted most unreasonably in the 
course that he took* If capable of understanding what was in his 
boy's interest he ought to have insisted upon his making the 
apology. There is no humiliation in doing right, and in 
acknowledging an error there can be none. The error itself is 
the cause for feeling humiliated, not the acknowledgment which 
if frankly and sincerely made goes far to atone for the fault. 
Courts, however, have to deal with the legal rights of parties, 
not with their tastes; and if the plaintiff made out that a 
legal right to which he was entitled had been invaded, he would 
not be denied the legal redress pertaining to the wrongs^no 
matter how objectionable he may have conducted himself. 

Since no legal right of the plaintiff had been invaded, the Court 

allowed the appeal. 

The following conclusions may be drawn from the decision in 
this case: 

1. Teacher and trustees have the right to suspend from school any 
pupil who is disobedient and misconducts himself. 

2. It is legal for the trustees to impose a reasonable condition 
upon the child before he will be readmitted to school. 

3. A suspension cannot be viewed as an expulsion even if the child 
refuses to carry out the condition for readmittance. 

4. A reasonable suspension will be upheld by the Courts unless it 
is definitely shown that the teacher or trustees have acted with malice. 
Malice cannot be implied, it must be proven. 

Damaging School Property ^? 

The decision in another case in Ontario was governed by the 
same principles as laid down in the McIntyre case. A pupil cut the top 
of his desk and was suspended by the schoolmaster who stated that the 


l 6 Ibid ., pp. 442-1*43. 

1 '”ln Re McCallum and Board of Public School Trustees of Section 
6, Township of Brant , 1889)» 17 O.R* 451. 


















. 

- 

' 

t 




- 























































. 















' 




203 


pupil would not be readmitted until he had replaced the top with his 
own hands. The boy remained suspended for almost fifteen months, but 
in the meantime attended another public school that was three miles 
farther from his home. During this time appeals were made by the father 
to the three trustees, seeking to have the boy readmitted to the school 
without fulfilling the condition set by the teacher. In each case the 
action of the teacher was upheld by the trustees. An application was 
then made for a mandamus to compel the teacher to take the boy back into 
school. 

It was the opinion of the Court that the action of the teacher 

18 

and trustees had been unwise; but that since disciplinary action was 
a discretion of the proper school authorities, the Court could not 
interfere with it, unless such action was clearly illegal. Rose, J., 
said: 

...I am told that in Re Yu ill , an unreported case, the Chief 
Justice of Queen's Bench Division, on the 27th of April, 1888, 
held that an application for mandamus would not lie to correct 
a supposed error of teacher or trustee in a matter of discipline, 
and that such an application was practically an appeal from the 
decision of the teacher and trustees.^ 

The Court emphasized that it could not substitute its own discretion 

for that of the officers to whom the decision had been left by law. 

The application for mandamus was refused. 

The principles governing the McIntyre case, therefore, also 


18 Ibid .. p. 452. 
19 lbid .■ p. 453. 












. 


' 



, 

































r ' * * 

■ 





































































204 


governed the decision in this case. One can generalize perhaps, by- 
saying that the Courts are reluctant to interfere with decisions made by 
school personnel involving disciplinary problems. This is so not because 
of the nature of the problems, but rather because decisions determining 
disciplinary action are by law discretionary to the teacher and the board. 

Truancy 20 

In an Alberta case the right of the teacher to suspend a pupil 

for truancy was decided by the Court. Simply stated, the facts were 

that two boys remained away from school because they found certain school 

work uninteresting and did not like the manner in which the teacher 

21 

conducted school. The teacher suspended the boys. The School Act in 
section 202(n) gave the teacher the authority to suspend pupils for 
"wilful opposition to authority," but no mention was made of "truancy" 
as a reason for suspension. On the other hand, section 137 (u) gave to 
the board the power to suspend for "truancy." The suspension had been 
made by the teacher, and the plaintiffs contended that he had exceeded 
his authority, since the power to suspend for truancy resided only in 
the board. In the Trial Court a judgment was given in favour of the 
plaintiffs and against the teacher. The case was appealed by the teacher 
and came before the Supreme Court, Appellate Division. 

The Supreme Court said that the contentions of the plaintiff 
could not be sustained, and said that "truancy" also constituted 

20 

Finlayson et al.v. Powell et al.; Tucker et al, v. Powell et al ., 
(1926) 1 W.W.R. 939, 22 Alta. L.R. 171, 2 D.L.R. 333. “ 

21 


R.S.A., 1922, ch. 51. 






















. 



























« 

' 








- 
































. 

























"wilful opposition to authority." The Court held: 


205 


A pupil who remains away from school...is guilty of "wilful 
opposition to authority" within the meaning of ...the School Act... 
and it is not only the teacher’s right but his duty to suspend him; 
even if the view (which the Court did not concur with) be correct 
that such conduct is "truancy" within the meaning of sec. 137(u) 
of said Act. 

The Court felt that no rule of construction would support the view that 
"truancy" was not "wilful opposition to authority." The offence of 

23 

"truancy" was "specifically mentioned for extra caution in one case," 
but there was no reason why it should be read out of the expression in 
section 202(n) where it speaks of "wilful opposition to authority." The 
Court stated: 

Whether these boys were guilty of truancy is not the important 
fact but whether they were guilty of "wilful opposition to authority" 
and it is clear that they were. ^ 

The appeal was upheld. 

The specific legal principle that arises in this case is that 
truancy is one form of wilful opposition to authority; and that if the 
latter provides sufficient grounds for a teacher to suspend a pupil, a 
pupil can also be suspended for truancy. 

25 

Mental Retardation 

An interesting case relating to expulsion occurred in Quebec in 


22 1 W.W.R. 939. at p. 939. 

23 Ibid ., p. 9^1. 

24 Tbid., p. 941. 

2 ^Commissaires D'Ecoles De St . Mathieu De Dixville v. Bouchard . 
(1949), Que. K.B. 30. (1950), S.C.R. 479. 





































































- 
















20 6 


19^9. Two children had been dismissed from school because of their 

inability "to follow" the courses of study, and because of their continued 

unruliness and insubordination. The school board, in notifying the 

parents of the dismissal, stated that it was for "incapacite a suivre 

26 

les cours." This reason was given "in order to spare the parents* 

27 

feelings." The parents contended that the children were of normal 
mentality and the reason for expulsion was, therefore, illegal. They 
sought a mandamus to have the children readmitted to the school. 

In its decision the Court considered both aspects of the case: 
the mental ability of the children, and their acts of insubordination. 

The Court said: 

If it be true, as alleged in respondent’s answer to contestation, 
although the proof of records is to the contrary, that "Les enfants 
sont dans un etat mental absolument normal...", then the failure to 
apply themselves to their studies under instruction of their teacher 
is a flagrant and deliberate act of insubordination which will justify 
their dismissal from school....If, on the other hand, their conduct 
is due to defective mental equipment, the act is still insubordinate 
though it is to be regarded as involuntarily (sic.). That it was 
habitual, within the connotation of the section referred to, is 
clearly established in evidence.^ 

No play upon words... will justify the conduct of these boys. 
Insubordinate they were; whether from deliberate intent or by 
reason of mental deficiency is of little moment, and I cannot see 
that in justice to the other pupils in their class and to their 
distraught teacher that the Board should be compelled to reinstate 
such pupils... ' 


26 Ibid . 

2 ? Ibid . 

^ Ibid ., p. 43 
29 Ibid. 


















- 








' t • 









- 


. 

. 



■ 

























■ 












* 

■ 






, 

- 






20? 


It should also be pointed out that the Court did not base its 
reasons for the decision only on the evidence of insubordination. As 
in the cases mentioned earlier the Court was reluctant to interfere with 
the discretionary powers of the school authorities; and in this regard, 
the Court said: 

In conformity to general rules already stated, mandamus will lie 
to compel the performance of the ministerial duty of admitting to 
school duly qualified pupils unlawfully excluded, or of reinstating 
them in case of illegal expulsion; but the writ will not lie where 
expulsion or refusal of admission was made in exercise of discretionary 
powers vested in the school authorities and not arbitrarily. Even 
when the writ might otherwise issue, it will be denied where the 
right to admission is not clearly established, where the probable 
result of the reinstatement of the pupil would be to break down the 
authority of the teacher, where the facts do not show expulsion, or 
where performance of the act commanded by the writ would be impossible. 

Whether or not a child possesses the qualifications entitling him 
to admission to school is a matter within the discretion of the proper 
authorities and mandamus does not lie to review their discretion in 
the absence of any showing that it was abused. 

In this case the expulsion of the children from school was upheld. 

31 

Refusal by a Teacher to Suspend a Pupil 

A rather unusual case concerning pupil suspension occurred in 
Saskatchewan. A teacher was ordered by the school board to suspend a 
pupil. However, the teacher had nothing against the child and had 
received no valid complaints about her. Fearing, therefore, that the 
father might take some action against him, the teacher refused the order 
of the school board and told the trustees to put the child out themselves.^ 2 


^°Ibid # ,p. 40. 

^ Leclerc v. Perigood School District (No. 2) , (1925) 2 W.W.R. 
312, 19 Sask. L.R. 435, 3 D.L.R. 578. 

32it should be noted that this case was the culmination of a 
rather lengthy and bitter struggle between the teacher and the board. 
The facts of this struggle are irrelevant here, however, and have 
nothing to do with the issue under consideration. 















- 


- 


« 






t 





















. 


208 

The Court was faced with a clear issue: Can a school board 
compel a teacher to expel a pupil against a teacher 1 s better judgment? 
The Court held that the action of the teacher was justified. Mackay, 
J.A* f said: "...he could not suspend the child under s. 198 (12) of the 
Act, as he had no complaint against the child, and if the defendant knew 
of some valid reason why the child should be suspended or expelled from 
the school, it was the duty of the defendant itself to suspend or expel 
the child under s. 110 (31) of the Act."^ The fact that the board had 
not acted in its own powers seemed to indicate that it was actuated by 
bad faith and desired to cause trouble for the teacher. 

The legal principle established by this case is as follows: 

If a teacher knows of no reason why a pupil should be suspended or 
expelled, and has received no complaint against the pupil, he is 
justified in refusing to obey an order of the school board to suspend 
such a pupil. 

Summary and Conclusions 

From an analysis of the cases involving suspension and expulsion 
the following principles can be deduced: 

1. Teachers and school boards have the power to suspend or expel 
a pupil for just and reasonable cause. 

2. A valid reason for suspension or expulsion is any offence that 
interferes with the efficient operation and purposes of the school. 

3. Some indication that he desires to reform may be required of a 
pupil as a condition of his readmittance to school. 

33 


2 W.W.R. 312, at p. 312 








: 








- 


. 


















- 

: 



















. 
































209 

4. Malice must be proven, not only implied, before a Court will 
use it as grounds for interfering with a reasonable decision of a 
teacher or board in matters of suspension or expulsion. 

5. The Courts are reluctant to interfere with the manner in which 
school authorities use their discretionary powers, unless such powers 
are abused. 

6. A teacher cannot be compelled by a board of trustees to suspend 
or expel a pupil unless the teacher himself has a reasonable complaint 
against the pupil. 

The arguments of the Courts allow one to imply that suspension 
and expulsion are not to be exercised arbitrarily, wantonly or capriciously, 
nor is it enough merely to act honestly. A teacher who suspends a pupil 
must be certain that he has acted reasonably having regard to all the 
facts. If a Court is satisfied that a child has been suspended for 
adequate reasons, no legal action against the schoolmaster or school 
board will be successful. 

III. CORPORAL PUNISHMENT 

There are two views commonly held on the subject of corporal 
punishment: one, that beating is a brutal and brutalizing punishment 
which ought under no circumstances be inflicted; the other, that 
corporal punishment is a necessary process in the establishment of 
good character. As one Justice has stated, the latter view is usually 
indicated by the judge or magistrate when he remarks "that he was beaten 
at school, the implication, of course, being that the beating made him 




, 

■ 

























■ 





- 























< 










- 













































. 




' 


* 









the fine fellow he is 


,34 


Regardless of what view one holds, the 


210 


questions that Courts have to ask in any case involving corporal punish¬ 
ment are these: Was the teacher acting within the scope of the authority 
delegated to him? Was there occasion for punishment? Was the punishment 
reasonable under the circumstances? 

As is indicated by the above questions, corporal punishment 
involves two questions - one of law and one of fact. The question of 
law simply asks: "Has the teacher the right?" The question of fact 
asks: "Has the teacher inflicted unnecessary punishment on the child, or 
has he gone farther than a wise, firm and judicious parent would go?" 

The question of law is concerned with the provision of statutes and the 
authority of precedent. The question of fact may differ with every case. 

It is, therefore, proposed to examine the legal framework set 
up by statute and precedent in Canada and then consider the reported 
cases and their decisions. The precedents considered are those that 
have actually been quoted by the Courts in ruling on Canadian cases. 

For the sake of clarity the following outline will be followed: 

1. The Authority of Statute. 

2. The Authority of Precedent. 

3. Reasonable Punishment (Cases). 

4. Excessive Punishment (Cases). 

5 * Liability of School Boards for the act of teachers. 

6. Summary. 

34 


Solicitor 1 s Joumal , 75: June 27, 1933» p. 4l6 
















- 



















. 






: 










- 






















The Authority of Statute 


211 


In Canada the provincial statutes are silent on the question of 
corporal punishment. This silence is understandable in the light of the 
provisions of section 63 of the Canadian Criminal Code,-^5 which reads: 

It is lawful for every parent or person in place of a parent, 
schoolmaster or master, to use force by way of correction towards 
any child, pupil or apprentice under his care, providing such 
force is reasonable under the circumstances. 

It follows, then, that the use of force as a means of punishment falls 

within the jurisdiction of the Federal Government; and it is therefore 

beyond the jurisdiction of Provincial legislation to forbid the use of 

reasonable force in disciplining a pupil. In addition, the term 

"reasonable under the circumstances" cannot be limited or extended by 

provincial legislatures since they have no authority to modify a federal 

statute. Provincial legislation dealing with such matters, whatever its 

provisions* would be questionable in view of the above mentioned general 

powers granted by federal authority. Consequently the right to administer 

reasonable corporal punishment is established by federal law, and any 

excessive punishment of this kind is a criminal offence to be dealt with 

under the provisions of the Canadian Criminal Code . 

That the Courts uphold the right of teachers to inflict corporal 
punishment on pupils is unquestioned. In 1951 Justice McDougall, of the 
Quebec Court of King*s Bench, said: 

That schoolmasters and parents have a right to use force in 
order to discipline their pupils and children is undeniable (Code 
s. 63). What would under the law generally be an assault is 
permitted in the case of school children provided that the offence 


^R.S.C. 1927, ch. 36. This is section 43 of the present Code . 





' 

r 

‘ 

, 
























- 


. 

t 










. 

. 

- 











’ 

* - - - 








212 


committed by the child merits punishment and that the punishment 
inflicted is reasonable and appropriate to the offence. That the 
punishment naturally may cause pain hardly needs to be stated; 
otherwise its whole purpose would be lost.-'® 

So far as the question of law is concerned, there is no 
difficulty whatever. Section 63 itself is based on British law. 
Blackstone, the eminent commentator on the law of England, as far back 
as 1765, summarized the law of England on this point as follows: 

(The parent) may lawfully correct his child, being under age, 
in a reasonable manner; for this is for the benefit of his edu¬ 
cation....He may also delegate part of his parental authority, 
during his life, to the tutor or school master of his child; 
who is then in loco parentis , and has such a portion of the power 
of the parent committed to his charge, viz. that of restraint 
and correction, as mav be necessary to answer the purposes for 
which he is employed.- 5 ' 


The Authority of Precedent 

Since the statute does not define what is meant by "reasonable" 
force, Courts have had to rely on precedent to decide this question. 
Fortunately there is a remarkable consensus of opinion on the matter in 
British and American decisions, and Canadian Courts have drawn liberally 
upon it. It may be well, then, to review briefly the British and 
American precedents that have attempted to draw a line of demarcation 
between "reasonable" and "excessive" punishment. 

Punishment cannot be said to be unreasonable by the mere fact 
that the parent is not aware of school regulations the breach of which 


^ Campeau v. The King , (Que. C.A.) 103 C.C.C. 355* a t p. 360. 

Blackstone^ Commentaries 452 and 453. Quoted in Rex v. 
Metcalfe , (192?) 3 D.L.R. 194, at p. 196. 







































. 




























































. 





- 














213 


may call for punishment. This principle was stated in the leading 
English case of Mansell v. Griffin .^ 8 Walton, J. , in delivering the 
judgment said: 

...There may be domestic regulations at the school of which the 
parent may know nothing which may be changed at any time, without 
any permission asked or any notice to the parent,, which regulate 
when, where, and by whom corporal punishment is to be inflicted. 

It does not seem to me that such regulations of which the parent 
knows nothing qualify or limit the ordinary authority as to the 
administering of corporal punishment which a parent must be supposed 
to give to the school authorities when he sends the child to school. 

The authority to inflict corporal punishment upon their pupils is 
discretionary to the teachers, and the Courts will not hold a teacher 
criminally responsible unless the punishment be such as to occasion 
permanent injury to the child, or is inflicted merely to gratify an 
evil passion. Canadian Courts have drawn upon a leading case in the 
United States for this precedent. In the judgment passed in State v. 
Pendergrass the decision in part reads as follows: 

It is not easy to state with precision the powers which the law 
grants to school masters with respect to the correction of their 
pupils. It is analogous to that which belongs to parents, and the 
authority of the teacher is regarded as a delegation of parental 
authority.... and he (the teacher) is armed with the power to 
administer moderate correction, when he shall believe it to be 
just and necessary...• The line which separates moderate correction 
from immoderate punishment can only be ascertained by reference to 
general principles. The welfare of the child is the main purpose 
for which pain is permitted to be inflicted. Any punishment, 
therefore, which may seriously endanger life, limbs, or health, or 
shall disfigure the child, or cause any other permanent injury, 
may be pronounced in itself immoderate, as not only being 
unnecessary for, but inconsistent with the purpose for which 
correction is authorized. But any correction, however severe, which 
produces temporary pain and no permanent ill, cannot be so 


38 


(1908) 1 K.B. 160. Quoted in Rex v. Metcalfe , op . cit., 


p. 197. 
















- 




- 


























■ 
















.... 


. 

< 










- 

. 






. 














214 


pronounced, since it may have been necessary for the reformation 
of the child, and does not injuriously affect his future welfare.-^ 

It is evident from the above decision that a teacher, in exercising 

his power to administer corporal punishment, must not make such power a 

pretext for cruelty and oppression. Whether chastisement is moderate or 

excessive must necessarily depend upon the age, sex, condition, and 

disposition of the scholar, with all the attending and surrounding circum- 
40 

stances in the case. In addition, "the cause must be sufficient, the 
instrument suitable; and the manner and extent of correction, the part of 
the person to which it is applied, and the temper in which it is inflicted, 
should be distinguished with the kindness, prudence, and propriety which 

4l 

becomes the station." If the punishment be administered for the 

gratification of passion or rage, or if it is immoderate and excessive 

in its nature or degree, or if it be protracted beyond the child's power 

of endurance, or with an instrument unfitted for the purpose and 

calculated to produce danger to life or limb,-"in all such cases the 

42 

punishment is excessive and the violence is unlawful." 

Another precedent established by an American Court is that 
punishment of a pupil must be administered only when the misconduct 


39 state y. Pendergrass , 2 Dev. & B., (N. Car.) 365, 31 Am. Dec. 
4l6. Quoted in Rex v. Metcalfe , op . cit., p. 198. 

^ Dowlen v. State , 114 Tex. App. 6l. Quoted in Rex v. Metcalfe , 
Ibid ., p. 198. 

^ Cooper v. Me Junk in , 4 Ind. , 240. Quoted in Rex v. Metcalfe , 
Ibid ., p. 197* 

^ 2 R. y. Hopley , 2 F & F, 202, 6. Quoted in Regina v. Robinson , 
(1899), 7 C.cTc. 52, at p. 56 . 
























. 
















■ 










■ 

. 


' 








1 








































. 







- 


. 


■ 



- 


. , . 











. 

■ 







215 

leading to the punishment occurred during a pupil-teacher relationship. 


A teacher punishing a pupil for misconduct during a semi-professional 
baseball game in which both were players, for example, would find 
himself liable to prosecution. The teacher-pupil relationship is an 

Li'* 

essential condition for proper and reasonable punishment. J 

A further legal principle established by precedent holds that 
"Where the alleged assault is by a parent on his child, or teacher on 
his pupil, or the like,....it is probably the better doctrine, that if 
the relationship appears, the chastisement will be presumed to be 

/j 7|. 

reasonable, and for sufficient cause until the contrary is shewn." 

Another American case expressed the same principle when it was said: 

If the punishment is clearly excessive, then the master should 
be held liable for such excess, though he acted from good motives 
in inflicting the punishment, and, in his own judgment, considered 
it necessary and not excessive, but, if there is any reasonable 
doubt whether the punishment was excessive, the master should have 
the benefit of the doubt. ^ 

The law presumes, therefore, an absence of criminal intent to injure; 
and only the use of unnecessary and unreasonable force will render a 
teacher liable. In other words, the teacher is considered to be 
innocent until proven guilty. 

In summary, precedent relating to corporal punishment has 
established the following principles: 

^%.R. Sumption, op. cit . , p. 89. 

^Anderson y. State , 3 (Term.) 455 and 45?, in Rex v. Metcalfe , 
op . cit ., p. 197. 

Zander v. Seaver , 32 Vt. 114, 76 Am. Dec. 156. Quoted in Rex 
v. Metcalfe , Ibid ., p. 198. 












= 









« 




.« 

































. 


c 













- 


' 






. 





















216 

1 * The authority for inflicting punishment upon their pupils is 

discretionary to the teachers. 

2. Corporal punishment may be administered only in the teacher-pupil 
relationship. 

3. When corporal punishment is administered the Courts will presume 

that the teacher acted without criminal intent to injure, and the 
chastisement will be considered reasonable and for sufficient cause 
until the contrary is shewn. 

4. Punishment is considered reasonable when: 

a. It is for the purpose of correction and without malice. 

b. There is sufficient cause for punishment. 

c. It is not cruel nor excessive and leaves no permanent mark 
or injury. 

d. It is suited to the age and sex of the pupil. 

e. It is not protracted beyond the child's power of endurance. 

f. If the instrument used for punishment is suitable. 

g. It does not endanger life, limbs, or health, or disfigure 
the child. 

h. If it is administered to an appropriate part of the pupil's 
anatomy. 

Let us now briefly consider the Canadian cases to determine whether 
they have anything to add to the above principles. The cases naturally 
fall into two categories: (l) cases where the punishment is reasonable, 
and (2) cases where the punishment is excessive. 






* 




■ 

. 






- 


































, 


- 








■ 


- 




















■ 


























Reasonable Punishment 


217 


In a number of cases the Courts have had to decide whether 

temporary marks or discoloration of the skin are sufficient reasons 

for holding that the punishment administered by the teacher was 

46 

excessive. In R« v. Metcalfe , the teacher used a strap, and because 

the girl refused to hold out her hand, the punishment was administered 

"on that part of her anatony which seems to have been especially designed 

47 

by nature for the receipt of corporal punishment." The Court held that 

punishment so inflicted which caused temporary pain and discoloration of 

the flesh for a few days was not excessive. The same principle had been 

48 

laid down in the case of Regina v. Robinson , and was again followed in 

49 50 

R. v. Corkum , in 1937. In the case of R. v. Gaul , even though marked 

discoloration was in evidence, the punishment was considered reasonable 

because there was no indication that the punishment had been administered 

with malice or that any permanent injury had been done. 

In the Hilton case^ the judge expressed the accepted judicial 

attitude on this question when he said: 

^(.1927) 3 W.W.R. 194, 49c. C.C. 261. 

4? Ibid .. p. 194. 

46 (1899), 7 C.G.C. 52). 

49 (1937), 1 D.L.R. 79 . 67 C.C.G. 114. 

50 (1903) 36 N.S.R. 504. 

51 (1927) 3 D.L.R. 194 , at p. 199. 












218 

It seems to me therefore that under these authorities I am in 
this appeal bound to find that taking into consideration the doctrine 
laid down in the case of State v, Pendergrass as explained by the 
case of Rex v, Gaul that the force used...was reasonable under the 
circumstances. I have consulted many authorities and so far as my 
reading extends the only case in which the schoolmaster or mistress 
has been found guilty of an assault is where the act was done with 
a dangerous weapon, improper for correction, and likely (the age 
and strength of the pupil being duly considered) to kill or maim, 
such as an iron bar, etc., or where the pupil is kicked to the 
ground or otherwise illtreated, or where the chastisement is 
flagrantly excessive, or the master has been actuated with malice 
or illwill towards the pupil, but I have found no case which goes 
nearly that length that the respondent on this appeal is asking me 
to do, namely, to hold that because a punishment inflicted by the 
schoolmistress caused temporary pain and discoloration of the flesh 
for a few days, that no pain or inconvenience was experienced so far 
as the evidence shows outside the first two days, I should hold that 
the punishment inflicted was excessive or was not reasonable under 
the circumstances. 

In this case the schoolmistress could not be convicted under The Code 
for an assault. Discoloration of the flesh is not in itself proof that 
the punishment has not been reasonable. 

Two other Canadian cases have established that punishment is 

reasonable even when the teacher forcibly pulls a resisting child out 

of his desk or inflicts a punishment in a far from orthodox manner. In 

52 

the case of Murdock v. Richards et al ., a pupil resisted punishment 
and the teacher pulled her from her seat, and propelled her along the 
aisle. Because of her resistence, the pupil accidentally fell and struck 
her head against a desk or the floor, but no serious injury resulted. 

Once out of the room the pupil was strapped several times on each hand. 
The Court held that under the circumstances, and because the pupil had 


52 (195^). 1 D.L.R. 766 
















, 






, m 4 



. 













' 









. 























i 

■ 








r 























- 


- 













c 







































- 












« - 

< 








- 

- . . 










219 

resisted, the force used was reasonable. The force used had been 
necessary because the pupil had resisted the teacher, and such resistence 
had caused the pupil accidentally to strike her head. 

A similar ruling was made in the case of The King v. Zinck ^. A 
fourteen year old boy, of strong physique, refused to be punished by the 
schoolmistress for habitual insubordination and misconduct. When he was 
asked to hold out his hand he laughed at the teacher and went home. The 
next day he was kept after school and the teacher again attempted to 
punish him. The boy laughed and went into the cloak room where the 
teacher tripped him and sat on him, and with a ruler hit him on the 
shoulders and back of the hands, causing bruises and welts. In Court 
the boy admitted that he had not been hurt in the least and laughed at 
his mother for making much of nothing. Was the force used by Miss Zinck, 
the teacher, reasonable? The judge said, M I certainly think it was very 
reasonable and would be so under less trying circumstances. 

These cases suggest that force which is considered reasonable 
in one case may not be so considered in another. Had the circumstances 
in the Zinck case been such that the same force had been used on an 
unresisting pupil, the force might well have been declared excessive. 

It is also worth pointing out that in all the above cases, except that 
of Murdock v. Richards et al ., the stated decisions were reversals of 
convictions given in Magistrates’ Courts. 

53 (1910) 18 C.C.C. 456. 

54 Ibid., p. 458. 



























. 

' 





















. 






Excessive Punishment 


220 


In several Canadian cases the Courts have ruled that the punishment 
was excessive, and found the teacher liable. In the case of Andrew v, 
Hopkins ^ the teacher strapped a girl for misbehavour. The punishment 
was administered without malice, with a proper instrument, and on the 
palms of the hands. In Court the pupil and parents claimed, however, 
that the child had also been struck across the arms and had received a 
severe blow on one breast, which left the girl with a chronic condition 
of mastitis* The .judgment of the Court was as follows: 

I have no doubt the marks on the child*s arms and breast were 
caused by the teacher*s strap and I am disposed to believe the 
teacher that she did not intentionally strike the child on the 
arms or breast, but I do think, by the exercise of reasonable care, 
such as taking hold of the child's wrist, the blows could have 
been confined to the palm of the hand as they should be. I think 
there was negligence on the part of the teacher for which she must 
be held responsible .^ 

It is important to note that this decision indicates that it is not 
always necessary to prove the teacher was unreasonable in administering 
punishment. If the teacher is careless in the manner of punishment he 
may by that fact alone be held responsible. 

The above stated principle was upheld in a later case, Campeau 

57 

v. The King , where McDougall, J., said: 

...If in the course of the punishment the pupil should suffer 
bruises or contusions it does not necessarily follow that the punish¬ 
ment is unreasonable. However, if the teacher is careless in the -g 
manner of punishment he may by that fact alone be held responsible. 


55 (1932) 3 D.L.R. 459, 5 M.P.R. 7. 
56 rbid., p. 461. 


57 (1951) 103 C.C.C. 355. 
5®Xbid,, p. 360. 




















. 

. 














- 


. 

' 

. 


































. 

- 

... - 



*• 






221 

In this case the teacher had punished two boys by striking the back of 
their hands four or five times on the edge of the teacher's desk. Bruises 
and minor wounds had been caused, but no permanent injury had been 
inflicted. 

The Court felt that the wounds in themselves were not sufficient 
cause to hold that the punishment was unreasonable. Justice Bissonnette, 
dissenting from the majority opinion, said: 

As I understand the doctrine and jurisprudence in such matters, 
what must guide the judge, more than that, the rule that appears to 
me to be imposed upon him, is not to determine whether the pupil 
has suffered any wound whatever, but to deduce from the evidence 
whether or not there was excess of force. Accordingly, it is 
incumbent upon the Crown (not simply to prove) that a superficial 
wound resulted, but also (to establish) that the teacher used 
excessive force, either in the method employed or by an impulsive, 
angry, unjust act, or otherwise.^ 

The other two judges in the case agreed that "the mere fact that the 
children disciplined suffered contusions and bruises is not in itself 
proof of exercise of undue force"; but in this case the question of 
"risk" had to be considered as well. 

The Court felt that a teacher who strikes a child on any part 
of the body where permanent damage may be caused must take the con¬ 
sequences. Justice McDougall stated: 

...There will be no disagreement that if a teacher strikes a 
pupil on the head by way of discipline his act is completely 
unjustified; the reason being that there is danger of doing 
permanent harm by striking a delicate part of the body..,. For the 
same reason to hit the child on the spine with a hard object such 
as a ruler, would in my opinion be unjustified no matter what his 
offence. Also, though to a lesser degree, to discipline a 9-year 


•^ Ibid ., p. 356. 



































- 























< 

; 

- 

, 

















. 


. - . - ■ 

' t 

4 i •• ' * • : | 1 ■ ■ - 






222 

old child and one of 6 years by banging their knuckles on the corner 
of a desk is dangerous and may be unjustified. The covering over 
the bones on the back of the hands is very thin and the risk of 
permanent injury is correspondingly great.... 0 

The teacher was convicted of common assault. 

The legal principle that seems to be established by this case 
may be stated as follows: A teacher is liable to conviction for common 
assault if he punishes a pupil by striking him on parts of the body 
where there is risk of permanent injury. This principle is somewhat 
different from the American precedent established with the case of 
State v. Pendergrass . which held that permanent injury must be actual 
before a conviction will be made: This difference in Canadian and 
American viewpoints can be explained, perhaps, by the fact that even 
though punishment does not cause permanent injury, this fact in itself 
is no assurance that the punishment was "reasonable M as mentioned in 
section 63 of the Canadian Criminal Code . Negligence and undue risk 
apparently make an otherwise reasonable punishment, unreasonable. 

Liability of School Boards for the Disciplinary Acts of Teachers 

In school disciplinary problems action is generally taken against 
the offending teacher. The Courts indicate, however, that due to the 
master-servant relationship that exists between the teacher and his board, 
the board may be held liable as well. In the Nova Scotia case of Murdock 
v. Richard et al . the Court said, "If the teacher, Doris C. Richards, 

6o Ibid., p. 359. 

6l (195^) 1 D.L.R. 766. 







































* 





























- 



223 


is liable, the Board of School Commissioners is liable as well. 

In a Quebec case, too» the Montreal Catholic School Commission was held 
responsible for damages caused by an unjustifiable assault upon, and 
maltreatment of, a pupil by one of the teachers. J Even though in most 
cases it is the teacher who is sued, the school board.is jointly liable 
with the teacher for any disciplinary action taken in its schools. 

Summary 

The various principles which have been derived from decisions 
rendered in disciplinary cases, and which have been summarized in earlier 
parts of this chapter, will not be repeated here. In general, however, 
it might be said that teachers imposing corporal punishment should be 
careful in all cases to remain strictly within the rules of the common 
law that have been so clearly and forcibly laid down in the cases referred 
to. Even though the teacher has the right to inflict corporal punishment, 
such punishment should not be administered maliciously, wilfully, 
capriciously, or too severely. A proper instrument of punishment must be 
used, and it must be applied to that part of the body where there is little 
risk of permanent injury. 

In the words of one Court: 

...Each case must be decided according to the facts submitted, and 
it must always be borne in mind that it is a question of fact for 
determination, whether in the case at bar the punishment has or has 

62 Ibid. 


S.C. 442 


^ Duchesne v. Montreal Catholic School Commissioners , 6l Que 















. 























t i 




















C 




- 










* 














■ 



224 


not been excessive. Herein the difficulty lies, and the teacher 
who acts firmly, but kindly and mercifully, and inflicts punishment 
in moderation will, in most instances, and should in all, escape an 
investigation of his conduct in the courts. ^ 


^Regina v. Robinson , (1899) 7 C.G.C. 52* at p. 58 






CHAPTER VII 


LEGAL STATUS IN REGARD TO THE TORT OF NEGLIGENCE 

I. TORT LAW 

This chapter is not concerned with the whole of tort law. A 
complete consideration of this subject, even if it were feasible, would 
be outside the scope of this study. It will be necessary, however, to 
give a general definition of torts because the law of negligence, with 
which we are here concerned, forms an important part of the law of torts. 

No body of law is more elusive and complex than tort law. Its 
vague and undefined nature is emphasized by the fact that only during 
the last three decades has any attempt been made, even by legal experts 
themselves, to define and systematize this body of law. In 1853 Joel 
Bishop proposed to write a textbook on torts but publishers declared 
that there was no place for a work on the subject. They said that such 
a book would not sell even a dozen copies. Since then, however, tort 
law has grown rapidly, and today the publications on torts are too 
numerous to mention.^ - 

Definition of "Tort " 

Prosser has stated that a really satisfactory definition of a 
tort has yet to be found. 2 Since the derivation of the word itself is 
from the Latin ’’tortus," meaning twisted, a tort might be described as 


Ir.A. Turner, The Principles of School Law With Applications to 
Alabama 1 s Public School System , Ed.D. Dissertation, Alabama Polytechnic 
Institute, 1955* p. 3*+8» 

2 W.L. Prosser, Handbook of the Law of Torts , 2nd ed., St. Paul, 
Minn., West Publishing Co., 1955* P* 1* 












. 


c 

< 

c 

. 

.€ 


. 


» 











- 





































- 












e 











■ 

. 




. . 

. . , 1 




C 












. 










226 

an act that is crooked or twisted. Another definition would be that it 
is an unlawful violation of a private legal right, not created by contract, 
which gives rise to a common law action for damages. At best, however, 
such definitions are really too broad and too vague to be sufficiently 
definitive. 

Prosser defines a tort as follows: 

"Tort" is a term applied to a miscellaneous and more or less 
unconnected group of civil wrongs, other than breach of contract, 
for which a court of law will afford a remedy in the form of an 
action for damages. The law of torts is concerned with the compen¬ 
sation of losses suffered by private individuals in their legally 
protected interests, through conduct of others which is regarded 
as socially unreasonable.^ 

From this definition one may make the following conclusions as 
to what a tort is not. For instance: 

1. A tort is not a crime. 

2. A tort is not a breach of contract. 

The fact that a tort is not a crime does not exclude the possibility that 
the same wrong may be both criminal and tortious. However, the term 
"tort” can be applied to a wrong only in its civil aspects. 

Fundamental Grounds for Tort Liability 

For the sake of convenience Prosser divides the fundamental 
grounds for tort liability into three parts, because every case in which 
such liability has been imposed has rested upon one of three, and only 


3lbid. 






- 




















. 

. 




























* 





































227 


three, grounds for imposing it. These grounds are:^ 

1. The intent of the defendant to interfere with the plaintiff*s 
interests. 

2. Negligence. 

3. Strict liability, "without fault," where the'defendant is 
held liable in the absence of any intent which the law finds 
wrongful, or any negligence, very often for reasons of policy. 

In every case where tort liability has been imposed, such liability has 
rested upon one of the three above grounds. No other grounds exist for 
imposing tort liability. 

It would be of value to all school administrators and teachers 
to understand fully each of these three fundamental grounds for tort 
liability. For the purposes of this study, however, only the tort of 
negligence will be dealt with, because it forms the basis of liability 
for the legal actions against school personnel to be considered in 
this chapter. 


II. THE TORT OF NEGLIGENCE 

Definition of Negligence 

Negligence may be defined as "the omission to do something which 
a reasonable man, guided by those ordinary considerations which ordinarily 
regulate human affairs, would do, or the doing of something which a 
reasonable and prudent man would not do.""* That is to say, negligence 

4 Ibid ., p. 24. 

^Black * s Law Dictionary. 









228 


is the failure to conform to the standard of behaviour imposed by 
society and required by the law* It should be mentioned that negligence 
is not synonymous with M incompetency", since a competent person may be 
negligent. 

From the above definition it is evident that negligence consists 
of either, acts of commission or acts of omission, which result in 
injury to others. In earlier times the burden of proving that an act of 
negligence had not been committed rested upon the defendant. The progress 
of the law, however, has been away from such a position and today the 
consensus of authoritative opinion is that the burden of proof for 
negligence rests generally upon the plaintiff, except where strict 
liability is imposed.^ 

There is a class of case, however, in which the mere happening 
of the accident is in itself evidence of negligence, and in such a case 
the Court may hold the defendant liable without further proof of 
negligence. This doctrine is known as res ipsa loquitur . Some au¬ 
thorities say that where this doctrine applies the burden of proof is 
shifted to the defendant to disprove negligence. The better opinion, 
however, is that res ipsa loquitor does not necessarily have such a 

strong effect, but merely gives the Court a basis on which it may , but 

7 

not must find negligence. 

^See R.A. Turner, op. cit ., p. 425. 

?For a full discussion of the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur 
see W.L.Prosser, op. cit ., pp. 197-217. 






















. 


' 












- 

* 










, 



















« 


















1 














* 




















Cause of Action for Negligence 


229 


It should be noted that merely the occurrence of an accident 

which results in injury to a pupil during the hours when he is under 

the jurisdiction of the school♦ places no legal responsibility on school 

personnel. The law seldom permits a recovery where there has been no 

fault. In order for a cause of action to lie for negligence the follow- 

8 

ing elements must be present. 

1. There must exist a legal duty for a person to maintain a standard 

of conduct for the protection of others against hazardous risks. 

2. There must exist a failure on the part of the same person to 

conform to the standard required. 

3* There must exist an injury to another person or persons as a 

result of the failure of the first person to maintain the proper 
standard of conduct. 

4. There must exist a causal connection between the failure of the 
first person to maintain an acceptable standard of conduct and 
the resulting injury sustained by the other party. 

The basic importance of these elements in determining negligence 
makes it necessary that an educator have some understanding of the 
principles of law involved in the terms “legal duty,” “standard of 
conduct," and "reasonable man." 

Some Terminology of Negligence^ 

Legal duty. A legal duty is an obligation recognized by law to 

8 Ibid ., p. 426. 

9Definitions based on W.L. Prosser, op. cit ., pp. 116-190. 


















« 










230 

conform to or maintain a specific standard of conduct for the protection 
of others against unreasonable risk of harm. 


Standard of conduct. Legally a "standard of conduct" is based 
upon the conduct that the law imposes upon or demands of an individual 
in the circumstances in which he finds himself. A person is, under 
every circumstance, required to exercise the care that is commensurate 
with the risk; or, in other words, he must do what a reasonable man 
would do. 


The reasonable man. Although the "reasonable man" is a fictitious 
creation of the law and the Courts, his figure overshadows the tort of 
negligence. He represents a community ideal of proper and reasonable 
behaviour. He is a prudent man and a man of ordinary sense. A noted 
legal authority, A.P. Herbert, has described the reasonable man as 
follows: 


He is an ideal, a standard, the embodiment of all those qualities 
which we demand of the good citizen....He is one who invariably looks 
where he is going, and is careful to examine the immediate foreground 
before he executes a leap or a bound; who neither stargazes nor is 
lost in meditation when approaching trap doors or the margin of a 
dock;... who never mounts a moving omnibus and does not alight from 
any car while the train is in motion...and will inform himself of 
the history and habits of a dog before administering a caress;... 
who never drives his ball until those in front of him have 
definitely vacated the putting-green which is his own objective; 
who never from one year’s end to another makes an excessive demand 
upon his wife, his neighbors, his servants, his ox, or his ass;... 
who never swears, gambles or loses his temper; who uses nothing 
except in moderation, and even while he flogs his child is meditating 
only on the golden mean....In all the mass of authorities which 
bears upon this branch of the law there is no single mention of a 
reasonable woman.^ 


10 


Quoted in ibid ., p. 125 







































































' 




.... 






. . 






. 

■ 






231 


Turner summarizes the characteristics of this artificial and 
unreal character as follows: 11 

1. The reasonable man will vary his conduct in keeping with the 
circumstances. 

2. The reasonable man will be made to be identical with the actor 
in the matter of physical characteristics. The man who is blind, 
lame or deaf is not required to do the impossible by conforming 
to physical standards. 

3. The reasonable man is accorded no allowance for lack of intelli¬ 
gence short of insanity. For a defendant to do the best he knows 
is not enough. 

4. The reasonable man is considered to be an adult. Children, 
therefore, are not required to meet the same standard of conduct 
as that of the reasonable man. 

5. The reasonable man will be accorded special abilities and skills 
and will be held responsible for them when the circumstances so 
warrant. In other words, the law will take knowledge of the fact 
that some people are of superior knowledge, skill, and intelligence. 

6. The reasonable man is required to maintain a higher degree of 
standard conduct when he has had time to reflect on his course 
of action than when he must act in an emergency. 

7. The reasonable man, under many circumstances, will be charged 
with the duty of anticipating and guarding against the conduct 
of others. For instance, where children are in the vicinity, 
greater caution and anticipation are required than if they were 
adults. 

In principle the law holds that an actor may not depart from this formula 
of doing what is required of the reasonable man. 


Types of Negligence 

As a general rule Courts have held that the amount of care 
exercised must be in proportion to the apparent risk. This simply 


11 


R.A. Turner, ojd. cit . , pp. 431-432. 


































. 






. 




























































. 


. . 









232 

means that as dangers and hazards increase so also must the care 
exercised by the actor. This principle gives rise to the idea that 
there are degrees of negligence. 

Prosser points out that the weight of authority rejects the 

idea of degrees of negligence and considers that any failure to use the 

1 2 

care required under the circumstances is merely ordinary negligence. 
However, in some jurisdictions the common law, and in others specific 
statutes, recognize the idea, and Prosser himself distinguishes ordinary 
negligence from slight negligence, gross negligence, and wilful and 
wanton negligence. 

Ordinary negligence . Ordinary negligence is simply the failure 
to use ordinary care in a situation. The actor may not depart from the 
usual formula of doing what is required of the reasonable man. Ordinary 
negligence will give the injured party the right to be put in the same 
position that he was in before his injury; or, if this is not possible, 
it will give him the right to be compensated accordingly. 

Slight negligence . Slight negligence is failure to use great 
care, and results in liability only where such care is required. It 
is not the same as slight want of ordinary care; but, rather, the 
want of that degree of care which is necessary under the circumstances. 

Gross negligence . Gross negligence is failure to use slight 
care, or the care that even a careless person would use. It is a 


■^W.L. Prosser, ojd. cit. , p. 147. 
































- 







- 


































drastic departure from a proper standard of conduct or care. 


233 


Wilful and wanton negligence . Wilful and wanton negligence is 
negligence that borders on intent. It consists of intentional conduct 
of an unreasonable character in disregard of a known risk involving 
great possibility of harm. 

In the Canadian legal cases to be considered later, the charge 
of ordinary negligence is the most common. In certain instances, however, 
it appears that the Courts will hold educational personnel responsible 
for slight negligence. The charges of gross negligence or wilful and 
wanton negligence do not appear in any of the cases that follow. 

In any suit for negligence which has caused injury to a school 
pupil, one defense, or at least a partial defense for the defendant, may 
be to claim contributory negligence on part of the plaintiff. Contribu¬ 
tory negligence is conduct on part of the plaintiff which falls below 
the standard to which he should conform for his own protection, and 
which, therefore, is a contributing factor to the injury sustained. 

In the United States, with some few exceptions, contributory negligence 
bars recovery against the defendant. In Canada, however, contributory 
negligence is no grounds for dismissal of a suit, but results in the 
damages being reduced in proportion to the plaintiff's fault. 

13 

Negligence Liability of School Authorities 

It is a matter of common sense that an individual is responsible 

^Discussion of this section is based on the conclusions 
reached by R.L. Lamb, ojd. cit . 











' 


, 

- 























- 









. 











- 








. 



. . 





234 


for his own torts. To the educator this simply means that every 
teacher, administrator, and school board member, is liable for his 
personal acts of negligence. The individual teacher, however, has some 
protection in that he may sue the board to recover damages granted 
against him for an accident to which the negligence of the board has 
contributed. 

In Canada school boards, as corporations, have no immunity in 

14 

common law from tort action; they can, therefore, be sued. On the 

other hand, trustees are not individually liable for damages for 
negligent acts of the board unless a statute particularly provides for 
such individual liability. Trustees become individually liable, however, 
if it can be shown that the board acted in bad faith or was actuated by 
malice or ill-will. 

It has been repeatedly held by Canadian Courts that school 
boards are responsible in damages for the tort of their servants acting 
within the scope of their authority. In such cases, and under certain 
circumstances, the Courts may allow the board to recover such damages 
from the negligent servant. 

Cases have also arisen in which the negligent act was that of 
an independent contractor hired by the board. In such cases, except 
under unusual circumstances, such as "collateral M negligencethe 

^This principle differs from the situation in the United States 
where school boards enjoy "governmental immunity," unless specifically 
deprived of this privilege by statute. 

■^To be dealt with later in this chapter. 








- 




. 
















, 












. 


. 



















, 























■ 

















235 

Courts have held that the school board is liable as well as the contractor. 
The general rule in this regard was stated in a Canadian case as follows: 

Where a person employs another to do work which does, or in the 
natural course of things will, involve or result in a duty on the 
employer either towards the community or towards a third party, the 
employer cannot escape the responsibility for the performance of 
that duty by employing someone else to perform it, however competent 
such person may be, even though such person is an independent . 
contractor and has agreed to assume the whole responsibility. 

It should be added that while school boards are held accountable 
to a high standard of conduct in the discharge of their duties, they do 
have certain statutory protection; for example there is usually some 
enactment, either in the School Act, or a special Public Authorities 
Protection Act, which limits the time of their liability. In most 
instances an action taken against a school board or teacher must be 
brought within a specified number of months of the negligence complained 
of.” 


The attention of the reader is now directed to a consideration 
of Canadian legal cases involving negligence actions against school 
personnel. 


III. CANADIAN CASES 


The Canadian cases dealing with negligence actions on behalf of 
pupils against teachers and school boards are summarized below. In the 
light of the studies of Lamb and Ross it is not considered necessary in 


^From Halisbury's Law of England , quoted in Cochrane v. Con¬ 
solidated School District of Elgin , (1934) 2 W.W.R. 409, at p. 4ll. 

1 ^G. J. Ross, pjq. cit. , p. 115. 
























t 

' 

« 
























































■ 

; - - , .. • * 






' 




this study to deal in detail with these cases, for the details have been 


given, particularly in the work of Lamb. Rather, the intention here is 
to classify the cases according to the place and time in which the 
accidents occurred, and to indicate why some actions were successful 
while others failed. In this way the basic considerations of the Court 
become meaningful and helpful to the teacher and administrator. The 
categories to be considered are the following: 

1. General Accidents on School Grounds and During School Hours. 

2. Accidents on School Grounds but Out of School Hours. 

3* Accidents Off School Grounds. 

4. Accidents in Laboratories ard Industrial Shops. 

5. Accidents During Physical Education Classes. 

6. Accidents in Regard to Excursions. 

7. Accidents in Regard to School Patrols. 

8. Accidents in Regard to Transportation. 

9. Accidents Due to Independent Contractors. 

In dealing with each of the above categories* consideration is first 
given to unsuccessful, and then to successful actions. 

General Accidents on School Grounds and During School Hours 

Unsuccessful actions . No legal action against teachers or school 
boards is likely to be upheld by a Court unless it can be shown that 
their action, or lack of action, was at least partly responsible for the 
injury to the plaintiff. That is to say, a causal relationship must be 
shown to exist between the behavior of the defendant and the sustained 
injury before a conviction will lie. In an Ontario case, a child 






t 






- 
















* 















































. 

















- 

. 














< 




- 



















237 

developed a chill and subsequently became a cripple because of it. In an 

action against the school board the plaintiff claimed that the chill had 

been contracted because the girl had to walk through flooded grounds to 

reach the outside toilet. The Court held, however, that no causal 

relationship could be established between the injury and the condition 

i ft 

of the school grounds and the action was, therefore, dismissed. 

In another case in Ontario a Court held that a board of education 

is not responsible for the loss of or damage to children's clothing, 

where it is shown that school authorities have exercised reasonable care 

19 

in providing for proper cloak rooms. The Court felt that theft and loss 
could not be eliminated even with the most stringent regulations governing 
these matters. 

In a Saskatchewan case a boarding pupil was injured when he came 

into contact with a faulty light fixture as he was climbing down from 

20 

the upper bunk of a double-decker bed. The Court held, however, that 
the room facilities were safe in themselves and did not constitute 
unreasonable hazards. The fact that the pupil injured was nearly 
eighteen years of age also lessened the board's liability in the matter. 

The Court said,"...the duty of supervision diminishes as the child grows 
older and in this case the student was a young man nearly 18 years of age." 

3-^ Wiggins v. Colchester South Pacific School , (1922) 23 O.W.N. 157. 

^ Stevenson v. Toronto Board of Education , (1919) 49 D.L.R. 673» 

46 O.L.R. 146, (1919) C.C.C. 19. 

^ Scrimgeour v. Board of Management of Canadian District of 
American Lutheran Church , (1947) 1 D.L.R. 677. 1 W.W.R. 120; reversing 
(1946) 3 W.W.R. 707. 

21 (1947) 1 D.L.R. 677, at p. 677. 



























. 






c 

















' 

, 











- . 



' 




■ 







— 



238 

In another case in Saskatchewan a nine year old girl was injured 

when she fell after missing the rung of a horizontal ladder on which she 
22 

had been playing. Again the Court ruled that there was no causal 

relationship between the facilities provided and the injury. The ladder 

had been in use for years and no injury had occurred there before. The 

Court remarked, "...evidence did not justify the conclusion that the 

absence of mats under the ladders caused the injury, it being just as 

23 

probable that it would have occurred had they been there." 

Courts have also held that accidents which arise out of the normal 
risks and hazards to which all children are exposed cannot always be 
prevented by even the most conscientious supervision. In cases where 
injuries occur because "children are children," neither the teacher nor 
the board can be held liable. The following three cases illustrate this 
principle. 

In a Nova Scotia school an eight year old boy was struck by a 

24 

stone thrown by another pupil during recess. No teacher was present 
at the time of the accident and the officially designated supervisor 
was occupied with another group of boys who were "acting up." In its 
judgment, the Court held that no amount of warning or supervision could 
prevent some boys from throwing rocks; and that even if the supervisor 
had been present the accident would still probably have occurred. 

^ Boivin v. Glenavon School District , (1937) 2 W.W.R. 170. 

2 3 Ibid . 

^ Adams v. Bd. of School Com 1 rs for Halifax , (1951) > 2 D.L.R. 

816, 27 M.P.R. 232. 



















■ 







, 














- 






















■ 








' 




















239 

In addition, the Court stated: 

There was no duty of continuous supervision over the pupils in 
the school yard. A basis for the Board's liability could be found 
only in the negligence of the principal when the system of super¬ 
vision provided by him had been sufficient over many years and was 
that in use in other schools. Nor was the assigned teacher 
negligent since it could not be said that she must be in the play¬ 
ground every minute of the recess regardless of anything else. In 
any event, there was no evidence that her presence would have 
prevented the accident. Held, further, the "careful parent" 
standard was not helpful in this case. It could not be said a 
"careful parent" would refuse to let his boy play in the yard unless 
there was a teacher there every minute. 

The action against the teacher and the board was dismissed. 

Again in Nova Scotia, a pupil was injured when he lost the sight 

25 

of one eye after having been struck by an acorn thrown by a companion. 

In this instance, the Court stated that supervision had been adequate 
and that there was no proof of negligence on part of the teacher or the 
board. The Court felt that young children are naturally reckless and 
the teacher should not be penalized for weaknesses inherent in a child's 
nature. The case was dismissed. 

26 

The third case occurred in Quebec. An eleven year old girl was 
injured when another pupil ran into her in the course of playing a game. 
Supervision in this case was judged to have been adequate and there was 
no indication that the teacher had been negligent. The Court said, "It 
was clearly impossible for instructors, in supervising such play, to 
prevent such accidents as had here occurred ." 27 The action was dismissed. 


2 5 pyer v. Halifax School Com' rs , (1956), 2 D.L.R. 39^. 

2 ^Goyett e v. Commissaires D'Ecoles De Pointe Aux Trembles , 
(1957), Que. S.C. 276 . 

2 ?Ibid. 











. 








- 





. 












. 

■ 










. 












- 















.... 

. 

- 











240 

It appears from a consideration of the above cases that a causal 
relationship must be shown to exist between the action of the defendant 
and the injury sustained by a plaintiff before liability for negligence 
will attach. The law also appears to be realistic about children's 
natural propensities; and some matters are taken to be so self evident 
that no proof of them by evidence is required in a Court of law. One of 
these is that children are reckless, and that it is therefore unfair to 
hold education authorities liable for mishaps which every sensible parent 
must accept as possibilities if children are to take part in the normal 
activities of youth. 

Successful actions . The above discussion, however, does not imply 

that teachers and school boards are absolved from their legal duty to 

observe reasonable care in dealing with and supervising pupil activities. 

Actions against school authorities have been successful where it has been 

proven that playground equipment was unsafe, that supervision was not 

adequate, or that teachers were negligent in performing their duties. 

School facilities, including playground equipment, must not 

constitute unreasonable hazards to the pupils in school. An action in 

this regard was successful in Ontario after a pupil had been injured 

28 

when he stepped into an unguarded hole in the schoolroom floor. In 

Qiebec a board was held liable when a pupil was injured when he fell 

29 

from some steps which were not guarded by bannisters. 

28 Shaw v. Board of Education of the City of St. Thomas , (1911), 

19 O.W.R. 846, 2 O.W.N. 146?. 

^Sweet v. Drummondville School Trustees, (1947), Que. S.C. 444. 





























. 








' 

. 




- 






- 





- 


















< 















' 









, 













241 

In Alberta a six year old boy was injured when he fell from a 

teeter-totter which was in a state of disrepair. In this case the 

equipment was considered to be an unreasonable hazard and the Court 

said, ,r Where a board of school trustees provides an apparatus for school 

children to play with, they are bound to provide a thing reasonably fit 

for the purpose and are liable for injuries caused to a child because of 

31 

the unsafe condition of the thing supplied." 

In a recent Ontario case a school board was sued for allowing the 

32 

use of swings which were unsafe. An eleven year old boy was using a 
swing installed on sloping ground. Other children upset the swing and 
the boy suffered a serious injury which left him partially paralyzed and 
mentally impaired for life. A supervisor was present, so lack of super¬ 
vision could not be claimed. It was pointed out, however, that the swing 
had been upset on previous occasions and, therefore, was in fact an 
unreasonable hazard. On this occasion the Court ruled as follows: 

School children are not merely permitted, or invited, to come 
to school, but are required to do so, and, as members of the public, 
if they are injured by neglect of a statutory duty with regard to 
a place where they are expected to play, they are entitled to make 
those upon whom the statute has imposed the duty responsible for 
injuries sustained by them through breach of such duty. A school 
board of trustees is required by statute to provide adequate accommo¬ 
dation for children and adequate accommodation includes the school 
for the purpose of teaching, and the schoolyard or playground for 
the purpose of exercise and recreation. The duty of the board of 
trustees is to see that the premises provided for the accommodation 
of the school children are as safe as reasonable care and skill can 
make them. School children should not be exposed to unnecessary 
danger in the school, or while playing in the schoolyard.33 


3Q schultz v. Grosswald School Trustees , (1930) 1 W.W.R. 579* 

3 D.L.R. 600. 

31 Ibid . 

32 Lamarche et al . v. Board of Trustees of the Roman Catholic 
Separate Schools for the Village of L 1 Original , (1956), 33 O.W.N. 686. 

33 Ibid. 

















































T 




t 




- 




- 



























< 






- 








242 

This action was successful, and the board had to pay over thirty thousand 
dollars damages. 

Actions against school authorities will also be successful if it 
can be proven that supervision of pupils has been inadequate and therefore 
a cause of injury. Adequate supervision implies more specific care than 
is owed to an invitee, for pupils are compelled to attend school. In this 
respect one Court said: 

In view of the duty of supervision of their pupils which the 
law imposes upon school authorities more specific care of the pupils 
while on the premises during school hours is demanded of them than 
that which is ordinarily required of an occupier of premises in 
respect of invitees. Supervision involves some general protection 
of the pupils against damages that are known or that should be 
apprehended,-^ 

In Quebec a thirteen year old boy was injured during school hours 

35 

when a dynamite cartridge, with which he was playing, exploded. It was 

held by the Court that the teacher had been negligent in carrying out her 
supervisory duties and she was, therefore, liable. At the same time the 
Court held: 


...that the Commission must be held liable for the failure of 
their employee, through her lack of supervision and of taking 
precautions to prevent her pupils continuing to play with dynamite 
cartridges, to act as "le bon pere de famille.”36 


In a recent case in Alberta it was found that a six year old girl 


had been injured when she fell from a swing during a recess period 


37 


^McStravick v. Ottawa , (1929), 4 D.L.R. 492, 64 O.L.R. 275; 
affirming 3 D.L.R. 317. 63 O.L.R. 626. 

•^ Bisson v. Commissaires d 1 Scole de St . George de Windsor , 
(1950), Q.K.B. 775. 


3?Brost Tilley School District , (1955) 15 W.W.R. 24l. 






































. 


■ 









































' , . 




. 








. - , 



t • - 








243 

Evidence disclosed that the school concerned had no systematic arrange¬ 
ments for the supervision of pupils during recesses, and as a result the 
principal and the school board were found liable. The teacher who had 
been in charge of the playground when the accident occurred, however, 
was found not liable. In this rather interesting decision the Court 
said: 


The board and the principal failed to exercise the degree of 
care the law required of them to safeguard the small pupils in the 
use of the swings and what happened to the youthful plaintiff 
resulted therefrom. It was quite foreseeable that this accident or 
some such accident would happen sooner or later. The child’s teacher 
was not liable; although she was in charge of the playground during 
recess, she had not been instructed to supervise the use of the 
swings or placed under a responsibility to direct the pupils with 
regard to their use; the duty to provide for proper supervision 
rested on the principal and the board.-'® 

In all cases involving supervision the Courts have held that the 
standard of care required of school authorities is that of a reasonably 
careful parent towards his own children. This standard is of a higher 
degree than that required of an invitor towards an invitee because the 
children are compelled to go to school and are not merely invited to do 
so. The fact that children must go to school, therefore, places an 
extra burden of care upon those authorities who operate and control 
the school. 

Even though it may be proven that teachers have provided adequate 
supervision of pupils, an action may still be successful if other forms 
of negligence can be proven. In Quebec a boarding pupil was injured while 
wrestling with another boy.^ The person in charge of the infirmary to 


38 Ibid . 

■^ Gagnon v. Freres des Ecoles Chretiennes . 76 Que. S.C. 38. 































. 

t 




■ 






' 
















i 
























244 


which the pupil was taken failed to call in the school doctor even 
though the pain and inflammation caused by the injury persisted for two 
months. In an action brought by the parents against the school 
authorities the Court ruled that the latter were responsible in damages 
because they had failed to provide proper and reasonable care for the 
child after the injury. 

I 

A rather unusual case involving negligence occurred in Ontario. 

A boy had attempted to light a gasoline stove to prepare hot soup for 

the teacher and was severely burned. The action against the board and 

teacher was brought well after the six month period allowed by section 

4l 

103 of the Public Authorities Protection Act , and the defendants sought 
protection under its provisions. Evidence, however, disclosed that the 
soup had been intended for the teacher and the Court held that because 
of this fact the accident had occurred outside of the official pupil- 
teacher relationship. Consequently, the protective section did not 
apply to this situation and the defendants were not protected by it. 

The teacher was found negligent and liable to damages. In its turn the 
Board was liable through the teacher because it knew of and permitted 
the serving of hot lunches in the school. 

By way of summary, it may be pointed out that when considering 

^° Gray et al . v. McGonegal and Trustees of Leeds, and Lansdowne 
Front Township School Area, (1950) 4 D.L.R* 395* O.R* 512, O.W.N. 475» 
(1952) 2 D.L.R. 161, 2 S.C.R. 274; affirming (1949) 4 D.L.R. 344, 

O.R. 749, O.W.N. 127. 

4l 


R.S.O. 1937, sec. 103 

















































































































- 









. 










' 



























245 

accidents occurring on the school grounds and during school hours, school 
authorities must recognize the rights of the child who is under legal 
compulsion to attend school. The child is more than an "invitee 1 ', he is 
a "compulsee," and the care taken for his welfare must, therefore, be 
correspondingly greater than that of an invitor towards an invitee. 
Teachers and/or school boards will be held liable for pupil accidents 
if their actions have a causal relationship to the injury, if school 
facilities constitute an unreasonable hazard, if supervision has been 
inadequate, or if they have acted negligently in the performance of 
their duties. 

Accidents on School Grounds but Out of School Hours 

In Canada, only three reported cases fall into the category of 

accidents occurring on school grounds but out of school hours, and all 

three actions were unsuccessful. In Ontario an accident was suffered 

42 

by a toboggan rider while sliding on land owned by the school board. 

During the trial the plaintiff failed to show that the toboggan slide 

was dangerous in itself. The Court recognized that the accident had 

occurred at 8.45 a.m. and that the teachers had no responsibility of 

supervision at that time. The action was dismissed. 

43 

A similar case occurred in Saskatchewan. Before school opened 
in the morning a pupil climbed to the roof of a small shed and injured 
himself as he jumped down into a snowbank. The judge stated that the 

coffield v. P.S. Board of North York , (1942) O.W.N. 458. 

^Koch v. Stone Farm S.D., (1940) 2 D.L.R. 602, 1 W.W.R. 44l. 











. 





























- 






















- 












, 


- 













- 















246 

injury was due solely to the plaintiff's wilful misconduct. Besides, 
neither the teacher nor the trustees had any obligation of supervision 
before pupils reported to school in the morning. In its ruling the Court 
held: 


No claim for damages will be against a board of trustees...in 
cases of mere non-feasance except where it is established that they 
negligently failed to perform a duty to the plaintiff which the Act 
imposes on them. Thus since the Act does not empower the trustees 
to provide for supervision of pupils playing in the school grounds 
(outside of school hours), a pupil injured while so playing has no 
cause of action against the trustees b^reason of the teacher's 
failure to supervise him while at play. 4 ™ 

The third case also occurred in Saskatchewan.^ An eight year 
old boy was injured by the cross-bar of a jumping stand when the bar flew 
from the stand and struck him in the eye. The accident occurred after 
school hours when pupils were practicing with the stand. The original 
trial held that the equipment was dangerous; but this decision was 
reversed by the Appeal Court. The Appeal Court held that the crossbar 
was not dangerous in itself and that the plaintiff had no right to be 
at school after school hours. The Court said: 

It is not negligence on the part of a school board to use a 
bamboo cross-pole for practicing high jumping, although one end of 
the pole is splintered or jagged, if the pole is not dangerous for 
the purpose for which it is used, and it is not liable for injuries 
caused to a pupil by being hit with the end of the pole while 
watching other pupils practicing jumping after school hours. 

It appears that no liability attaches to teachers or boards for 
injuries sustained by pupils on school grounds but out of school hours. 


^ Edmondson v. Moose Jaw School Trustees, (1920) 3 W.W.R. 979, 
13 Sask. L.R. 516, 55 D.L.R. 563. 

46 


(1920) 3 W.W.R. 979, at p. 979. 















. 

- 











* 

- 







- 






















. 























■ 













247 

During school hours the pupil is at least an invitee, but after school 


hours his legal status seems to change to that of a licensee, with a 
consequent reduction in the degree of care owed him by the board. 

Although no case has been reported in this respect, it would be interest¬ 
ing to discover the legal attitude to an injury caused by faulty playground 
equipment but occurring after school hours. What would be the status of 
the pupil in such a case? 

It is also to be noted that a board is generally not held liable 
for a non-feasance of a discretionary duty, e.g. the supervision of 
pupils outside of school hours. On the other hand, if the board under¬ 
takes to supervise pupils outside of school hours it immediately lays 
itself open to charges of misfeasance in the event that such supervision 
is not properly carried out. Once a discretionary duty is undertaken, 
the charge of misfeasance can be escaped only if the duty is properly 
performed. 

Accidents Off School Grounds 

In three reported cases involving accidents which occurred off 

school grounds Canadian Courts have held that school authorities have 

no liability. In British Columbia a pupil was injured when a decayed 

tree from an adjoining property fell on him while he was standing on a 

47 

highway just outside the school grounds. In the action that followed 
the school board was held not liable. The case against the property 
owner was also dismissed because the tree was growing naturally on the 
land. 

^ Patterson v. N. Vancouver School Trustees , (1929) 2 W.W.R* 181, 

41 B.C.R. 123, 3 D.L.R. 33- 



















■ 


- 













. 

■ 











. 
















2 48 


Nor is a board liable in case a pupil is struck by a bicycle 

48 

just outside the school grounds. In such a case, also in British 
Columbia, the Court held that school authorities are under no obligation 
to supervise the area surrounding the school premises, and therefore a 
child injured immediately outside the school premises has no cause for 
action against the board. 

4 9 

The third case also occurred in British Columbia. A fourteen 
year old boy, while playing catch with another pupil, walked backwards 
out of the school entrance and into the street. He was struck by an 
automobile and injured. In the original trial both the driver and the 
school board were held liable. On an appeal to the Supreme Court of 
the province the action against the driver was upheld, but the board 
was found not liable "because land outside of school property was 
beyond the board's jurisdiction. 

It appears from the above cases that school authorities will 
not be held liable for accidents to pupils which occur outside the 
school premises because the pupils are then considered to be outside the 
jurisdiction of the school. 

Accidents in Laboratories and Industrial Shops 

Only three cases in this category have been reported in Canada 
and all were unsuccessful actions. In general, Courts have held that 
"A school board which conducts a technical school for instruction in the 

liQ i 

“Pearson v. Vancouver Board of School Trustees , (1941) 3 W.W.R. 
8?4, 58 B.C.R. 157- 

^ Ritchie v. Gale and Vancouver Board of School Trustees . (1934) 
3 W.W.R. 703 , 49 B.C.R. 251 . (1935) 1 D.L.R. 362. 

50 


(1935) 1 D.L.R. 362. 























. 














- 










249 


manual arts...is not liable in damages for injuries to a student... 

if the equipment supplied was reasonably safe and suitable for the work 

for which it was being used."^ 1 Especially will this be the case when 

supervision is adequate, or when the injury is due to the negligence of 
52 

the pupil himself. 

In British Columbia a pupil was injured when the teacher ordered 
the class to clean up certain equipment which had been used during a 

53 

chemical experiment. The teacher left the room and in his absence an 

explosion occurred which caused a pupil to lose an eye. Section 81 of 

54 

the Statute of Limitations required that legal action had to be taken 
within three months of the accident. This particular action was taken 
eight years after the accident occurred, and the Court therefore ruled 
that action was barred by section 81 of the above mentioned statute. If 
the action had been taken within the prescribed period, one cannot help 
but feel that it might have been successful on the grounds of inadequate 
supervision by the teacher. 

Accidents During Physical Education Classes 

Unsuccessful actions . The Courts recognize that "accidents will 
happen" even during properly conducted physical education activities. In 

^ Smiles v. Edmonton School District , (1918) 43 D.L.R. 171, 

3 W.W.R. 673, 14 Alta. L.R. 351; reversing 41 D.L.R. 400. 

^^ Ramsden v. Hamilton Board of Education , (1942) 1 D.L.R. 770* 

-^ Duncan v. Ladysmith School Trustees , (1931) 1 D.L.R. 176, 

43 B.C.R. 156 , ( 1930 ) 3 W.W.R. 175. 

54 R.S.B.C., 1924, ch, 226, sec. 81. 































, 


- 






- 








- 














. 



























* 







‘ * - • - 

- • • 









British Columbia a boy was injured during a game of grass hockey*-^ while 
the teacher responsible for supervision was absent attending a staff 
meeting. The Court held that the mere absence of the supervisor was not 
necessarily negligence unless it could be shown that supervision would 
have prevented the injury. In this case the injury had been due to the 
normal hazards of the game, and the action was dismissed. 

Nor are school authorities liable for injuries to a pupil when 

the pupil voluntarily participates in a wrestling match conducted under 

proper supervision.^ The same non-liability attaches to injuries 

sustained by pupils while voluntarily participating in prescribed 

physical education activities, providing such activities are properly 
57 

supervised. In this Ontario case the Court held: 

A Board of Education will not be liable for damages sustained 
by a pupil in one of its schools while participating of his own 
free will in a gymnastic exercise (pyramid building), without proof 
of negligence on part of the Board or its employees contributing to 
the accident. It is not negligence to permit a pupil to take part 
in an exercise in which there is an element of danger if he has 
been progressively trained and coached to avoid such danger and 
the exercise is one reasonably suitable to his age and condition, 
physical and mental. 

Lack of supervision by the teacher himself will not in itself 
constitute grounds for successful action. In Ontario a fourteen year 

59 

old boy was injured in gynasium work. The instructor had been absent, 


~^ Gard v. School Trustees of Duncan , (1946) 2 D.L.R. 441, 

1 W.W.R. 305, B.C.R. 323. 

^Hall y. Thompson et al, (1925) 4 D.L.R. 139» O.W.N. 4?8. 

•^ Murray v. Board of Education of Belleville , (1943) 1 D.L.R. 
494, O.W.N. 44. 

58(1943) o.W.N. 44 . 

^ Butterworth et al. v. Collegiate I nstitute Board of Ottawa , 
(1940) 3 D.L.R. 466, O.W.N. 332. 








































- 




. 







. 





• 









- 












. 

























... ... 




■ 

' 


■ 

„ 












■ 

' 














251 

but the class had been placed in charge of two senior boys. The Court 
felt that there might have been some negligence in supervision, but that 
it could not be established that such negligence was the cause of the 
accident. Besides, the Court felt that fourteen year olds must exercise 
reasonable and intelligent care in their own safety. . The case was 
dismissed. 

Also in Ontario, a boy was injured during an athletic meet but 
failed to report the injury or seek aid. Five years after the accident 
the boy brought an action for damages against the board, on the grounds 
that the board was not authorized to hold athletic meets.^ The board was 
protected from the action in this instance by the provisions of the 
Public Authorities Protection Act^ which required that action must be 
brought within six months after the injury. In regard to the authority 
of the board to conduct athletic meets the Court said: 

The act of conducting the games was plainly virtute officii .... 

It is the duty of the Board of Education to maintain schools for 
the education of children. Education includes exercise of the body 
as well as of the mind....If a Board is of the opinion that in the 
interests of the children games should be arranged, it would be 
the duty of the Board to arrange such games. 

The action was dismissed. 

The above cases appear to establish the rule that lack of super¬ 
vision in itself is not sufficient grounds to support a charge of 
negligence against teachers and boards. Rather, it must be shown that 

^ Levine v. Toronto Board of Education , (1933) O.W.N. 152,O.W.N.238. 

6l R.S.O. 1927, ch. 120, sec. ll(l). 

62 


(1933) O.W.N. 238. 




























































- 

, ., , 






■ 
























. 



• 



. . . 














252 

such lack of supervision was the cause of the injury, before an action 
will be successful. 

Successful actions . In only two reported cases regarding accidents 
during regular physical education activities have the actions for damages 
been successful. In an Ontario case a fourteen year old boy fell on 
rubble littered ground and broke his leg. The Court felt that there 
was a direct causal relationship between the unsafe condition of the 
school grounds and the sustained injury, and held, therefore, that the 
board was liable for damages. It held further that a reasonable person 
could have anticipated that some such accident would occur where stones 
and brickbats covered the ground. 

The second case occurred in British Columbia.^ A school board 
had decided that all district schools should participate in special field 
day exercises and that the arrangements for the exercises were the 
responsibility of the individual principals. Principal Thomas arranged 
a shooting contest and asked the boys to bring rifles. One boy brought 
a 22 calibre rifle which was inspected by Thomas, During practice the 
gun backfired and the boy lost an eye. In the action that followed, 
the board claimed in its defence, that Thomas had acted beyond the scop© 
of his authority, that the contest had been voluntary and permitted by 
the parents, and that the board itself had had no authority to institute 

^Pook v. Ernest town School Trustees , (1944) 4 D.L.R. 268, 

O.R. 465, O.W.N. 543. 

^ Walton v. Vancouver Board of S chool Trustees and Thomas , 

(1924) 2 D.L.R. 387, 34 B.C.R. 38, ~2 W.W.R. 49. 






































« 





































































. r . . 

- 

- ... . ... 


such games and was, therefore, not responsible for the accident. 

In its decision the Court held the board liable but dismissed 
the charges against Thomas. The Court held (l) that the trustees had 
not provided for a proper system of supervision, and (2) that similar 
contests had been held for years and were, therefore, a de facto 
recognition of the power of the board to hold such games. The charges 
against Thomas were dismissed because the Court felt that he may have 
been unskilful rather than negligent. Thus the onus was on the board 
to provide skilful persons to supervise such activities. Furthermore, 
since the trustees had authorized and permitted the contest to be held, 
the duty to supervise them properly must be held to rest upon them. 

Accidents in Regard to Excursions 

In Canada only one case has been reported regarding an accident 
which occurred during a planned excursion taken by school pupils.^ In 
this case the excursion had been planned and carried out by the teachers 
without knowledge or permission of the school board. About sixty-six 
children had been loaded into a truck, and during the trip the sides of 
the truck had given way and many pupils had been thrown out and injured. 
The plaintiffs in this case sued the school board but not the teachers. 
Because the action of the teachers in arranging the excursion had been 
outside the scope of their official duties, the board was not held 

^ Beauparlant et al v. Board of Trustees of Separate Scho ol 
Section No. 1 of Appleby et al , (1955) D.L.R. 558, O.W.N. 286. 














2 54 

responsible and the action was defeated. The Court stated: 

A school board is liable in law for an accident due to the teacherls 
negligence if it is a matter which may reasonably be regarded as 
falling within the scope of his employment. The teachers in organ¬ 
izing a trip for the pupils and in allowing the children their 
freedom from their regular studies, were held to have exceeded their 
authority and were held not to have been acting within the scope of 
their authority, express or implied. 1 * * 4 ° 

If the above suit had been brought against the teachers instead of against 

the board the result could well have been different. 

It is also unlikely that parental permission for the trip would 
have protected the teachers from liability. Although no case on this 
latter point has come before the Courts in Canada, an American Court 
has held that permission for a visit or excursion given by the parent 
to the school authorities does not relieve the teacher in charge from 
liability.^ 7 

Accidents in Regard to School Patrols 

In Canada only one case concerning an accident involving school 

traffic patrols has been reported, and in that case the school board 

was not sued. The accident occurred in Manitoba when Joan Byres, six 

years old, ran out of a group of children supervised by a patrol boy 

and was struck by a passing truck. In the action against the truck 

68 

driver the Court held: 


66 (1955) 4 D.L.R. 558. 

^ Benson v. Baltimore Traction 60 . , 26 Atl. 973 (Md. 1893); Roe 
v. St. Louis Independent Packing Co., 21? 3.W. 335 (Mo. 1920); mentioned 
in N.E.A. "The Legal Status of the Public School Pupil," Research 
Bulletin , Vol. XXVI, No. 1, Februaiy 1948, p. 33. 

^ Byres v. Gillis and Warren Limited , and Chi vers , (194*0) , 

4 D.L.R, 747, 3 W.W.R. 390. 




















































255 

Where young children are exposed to risk of injury a greater 
than ordinary caution must be exercised. So, held, a truck driver 
was negligent in seeking to pass in front of a large group of 
school children who had been stopped by their boy leader in mid- 
street while a car passed, and he was liable in damages for 
injuries suffered by a 6 year old girl who ran out from the 
group and collided with the truck. A child of such tender years 
cannot be guilty of contributory negligence. 

From one point of view it is to be regretted that the position 
of the school board and the patrol boy were not clarified in this case. 
One cannot help but wonder how the ruling regarding accidents to children 
off school grounds applies to the school patrol situation. In this 
respect the mandatory or discretionary nature of school patrols would 
be material. If such patrols are mandatory then the school authorities 
would appear to be liable for negligent action in this regard. If they 
are discretionary, however, then liability would seem to attach only in 
case of misfeasance but not in the case of non-feasance. For example, 
no liability would attach if the board did not undertake to provide 
traffic patrols; however, if the duty is undertaken the board becomes 
liable for accidents due to improper conduct of such patrols. 


Accidents in Regard to Transportation 

The doctrine of negligence applies to school bus drivers and to 
school boards in the transportation of children to and from school, 
because the safety of the children being transported is their responsi¬ 
bility. Even in instances where the board has undertaken a discretionary 
duty to convey children to school it becomes liable for misfeasance if 
such duty is not properly carried out. In all cases the doctrine of 
negligence applies. 





Unsuccessful actions . In not many instances have actions 


256 


growing out of transportation accidents been unsuccessful* for there 
appears to be a high correlation between the negligence of the driver 
and/or the school board and the accident rate. Nevertheless, as in 
other cases involving accidents, it must be proved that negligence was 
a cause of the accident. 

In 3ritish Columbia a child was found lying injured on the road 

69 

after leaving the school bus. In the action that followed, the Court 
held that the cause of the injury could not be shown since no one had 
witnessed the accident. The action against the board and the driver, 
therefore, was dismissed. 

An interesting case involving a transportation accident occurred 
70 

recently in Manitoba . ( The Association for Retarded Children in 
Winnipeg made arrangements with Moore’s Taxi Company to transport 
certain children to and from a school operated by the Association. 
Included in these arrangements was a clear understanding of the general 
and specific responsibilities assumed by the taxi company. On the day 
of the accident a taxi had picked up a group of children, including 
John Finbow who was eight years old but had a mental age of only three 
and one-half years. One of the teachers was accompanying the group to 
act as supervisor in the car. When the driver stopped opposite John’s 
home he allowed him to get out on the left side of the car, after which 

^ Lovell v. Budd and Lake Cowichan School Pistrict , (1956) 

5 D.L.R. (2nd) 324. 

^°Finbow v. Domino , (1957-53) 23 W.W.R. 9?« 




















’ 




t 

































. 




































. 






, 












257 

the driver got back into the taxi while John was permitted to cross the 


street by himself. The boy was struck by a truck of the Union Fuel 
Company and so severely injured that one leg had to be amputated just 
below the knee. An action for damages was brought by the parents against 
both of the companies concerned and also against the Association for 
Retarded Children. 

In its decision the Court found both the drivers and their 
companies negligent, but held the Association not liable. The Court 
said: 


Held, that the association was not negligent; it had discharged 
its obligation in the matter of transportation when it selected a 
licensed and competent taxi company for that purpose, arranged for 
and had an adult accompany the children and took such steps as an 
employer reasonably could to see that the taxi company was duly and 
properly informed of its general and special responsibilities. Nor 
could the association be held liable in tort. In relation to it—. 
the taxi company stood in position of an independent contractor .' 

The Court also held that the child could not be guilty of 

contributory negligence even though he was chronologically eight years 

of age. Not only chronological age but also mental age had to be 

considered here, and the Court in this case followed the rule laid down 

72 

by Justice Kerwin in McEllistrum v. Etches : 

It should now be laid down where the age is not such as to 
make a discussion of contributory negligence absurd, it is a question 
for the jury in each case whether the infant exercised the care to 
be expected from a child of like age, intelligence and experience. 


^Ibid ., p. 97 . 

^ %'lcSllistrum v. Etches , (1956) S.C.R. 787» at p. 793. 






. 















■■ 



















258 

Generally it has been held by the Courts that a school district 
is liable for the negligence of independent contractors hired by the 
board. In the Finbow case, however, the school authority was not held 
liable. This seeming contradiction can be explained on the basis of 
11 collateral negligence” for which the employer is not held responsible. 

On this point Prosser says: 

The employer is not liable because the negligence is ’’collateral” 
to the risk created - which is to say, that the performance of the 
work contracted for in the normal manner contemplated by the contract 
would involve no recognizable risk of such harm to the plaintiff, 
and it is the abnormal departure from usual methods by the contractor’s 
servants which has created the danger....The distinction is thus one 
between risks inherent in the normal performance of the work and 
those which arise from abnormal and unusual misconduct of the workmen; 
and it is the latter only which are to be regarded as "collateral”, 
and for which the employer will not be held responsible,^ 


Successful actions. In all successful actions involving trans¬ 
portation accidents the school boards have been held liable for the 
negligence of the van drivers, whether the drivers were direct servants 
of the board or independent contractors. 

In Manitoba a school van overturned because the driver had been 
negligent in his duty. ^ A pupil was severely injured and the parents 
brought an action for damages against the school board. In its decision 
the Court held: 

Where a school district assumed responsibility for conveying 
children to school and hired a driver for that purpose, it is liable 


73 

W.L. Prosser, Handbook of the law of Torts , St. Paul, Minn., 
West Publishing Co., 1955* p. 362. 

^Cochrane v. Elgin Consolidate d School Pis trict , (1934) 2 W.W.R. 
409 , 42 M.R. 257; affirming (1934) 2 W.W.R. 154. 










































































. 






























* 




. 










259 


for injuries sustained by a pupil when the school van overturned 
due to the driver's negligence; whether in position of hired man 
or independent contractor he is the agent and servant of the school 
district for whose negligence the district is liable. 

In a Saskatchewan case the Court followed the same principle in 
coming to its decision. As in the Manitoba case, the van had been 
upset because of the driver's negligence and the board was held liable. 

The Court ruled: 

Where injuries were sustained by a pupil through the overturning 
of a horse drawn van, used as a conveyance to and from school, and 
the accident was due to the negligence of the driver, held, the school 
board was liable, as they had employed him. The contention that, 
under the Act, the only duty imposed upon the defendant school 
district was to pay the expenses of the conveyance, and that the 
driver was an independent contractor, could not be maintained. In 
any case, the board could not escape its liability by employing an 
independent contractor.'' 

In Alberta a pupil was severely injured when the school van in 

78 

which she was a passenger, collided with a truck at a crossroad. The 
Court found both drivers negligent and liable to damages. At the same 
time the school board was liable for the negligence of the bus driver. 

In this case, however, the Court ruled that the school board was entitled 
to recover its share of the damages from the bus driver if it so desired. 

It is evident from the consideration of transportation accidents 


^( 1934 ) 2 W.W.R. 409. 

7^ Tyler v. Ardath School District. , (1935) 1 W.W.R. 337* 

2 D.L.R. 814. 

77(1935) 4 D.L.R. 8l4. 

7 8 Sleeman and Sleeman v. Foothills School Division #38 , (1946) 
1 W.W.R. 145. 













260 

that if the cause of the accident can be ascertained, the injured child 
has the right to recover damages from one or all of the negligent 
parties. Not only is the school bus driver liable for his own 
negligence, but the board, as his employer, is also liable. In some 
cases, however, the board is entitled to recover from'the driver in 
respect to damages it is required to pay. 

Accidents Due to Independent Contractors 

The position of school authorities in regard to the torts of 
independent contractors has already been mentioned. Two reported cases 
involving building contractors have come before the Courts in Canada. 

In these cases one action was unsuccessful and one successful. 

Unsuccesful action . In British Columbia a building contractor 

79 

left some equipment in a safe position on the school premises. The 
equipment was moved to a dangerous position by third parties and a pupil 
was injured by it. The Court held that the equipment involved was not 
dangerous in itself and had been properly cared for in storage. The 
contractor could not reasonably anticipate that the equipment would be 
moved by others, and was found not liable and, therefore, the board also 
was not liable. 

Successful action. In Saskatchewan a building contractor had 
erected a system of pulleys to raise construction material to the roof 

^Vick v. Morin and Thompson , (1915) 7 W.W.R. 1053 ♦ 30 W.L.R. 
412, 21 B.C.R. 8, 22 D.L.R. 29. 















. 








































































- 


































261 


level of a school. During recess boys played on this arrangement, 
and a timber supporting the pulleys gave way and fell, striking and 
injuring one of the pupils. An action for damages was brought by the 
parents of the child against the contractor and the board. 

The original trial awarded damages against both defendants and 
in an appeal this decision was upheld. The Appeal Court felt that the 
liability of the contractor was self evident. In regard to the liability 
of the board the Court held as follows: 

In this action the school board had at all times the responsibility 
of supervision and could not delegate the responsibility to a 
contractor whether independent or not. ^ 

Thus the school board was also found liable because the Court held that 

the duty to supervise school children could not be delegated to an 

independent contractor. 


IV. CONCLUSIONS 

Turner has described tort law as a process of social engineering 
which attempts to achieve a balance between the rights and needs of 

Op 

people in a complex society. This definition would imply that tort 
law is dynamic in character, keeping pace with changing social conditions 
and new social policies. Tort law, therefore, is not static, but rather 
in a state of "becoming". 

On the other hand, each legal case in torts presents a series 
of facts which are unique in itself. The application of these facts to 

^ Ellis et al . v. Board of Trustees for Moose Jaw Public School 
District and Blondin Roofing Products, (19^*6) 2 D.L.R. 697, 2 W.W.R. 19. 

81 (1946) 2 D.L.R. 69?. 

®^R.A. Turner, op. eit ., p. 474. 


































































■ 





















. 









262 


the law of torts inevitably results in varying judgments even in 
apparently similar situations. Therefore, in view of the changing nature 
of tort law and the unique facts of each case, it would appear to be 
presumptuous to draw up any hard and fast legal principles applicable to 
all tort cases. 

However, the Courts themselves are guided by certain fundamental 
considerations, and it is possible to state conditionally some of the 
more basic principles underlying the operation of tort law in a 
particular society. 

A study of the decisions in regard to the tort of negligence on 
part of public school authorities would seem to justify the following 
principles as being applicable to the Canadian educational scene. 

1. Negligence on the part of school authorities is the failure to 
perform a legal duty imposed upon them by statute or common law. 

2. School boards and teachers in Canada have no immunity from tort 
liability. 

3. Contributory negligence on the part of the plaintiff is no longer 
a complete defense, but results only in the sharing of the 
damages between the plaintiff and the defendant in proportion 

to their fault. 

4. The public school child has the right to receive from the board 
and the teachers the same degree of care that a "careful parent" 
would give his children. 

5. The degree of care owed to school children by school authorities 
is of a higher degree than that required of an invitor towards 
an invitee. The child is, in fact, a "compulsee." 

















. 

I 

































263 

6. The law requires that the school authorities take reasonable 
steps to keep buildings and equipment (including playground 
equipment) in good repair. Boards are liable in damages for 
injuries resulting from defective school equipment and 
facilities. 

7. School boards are generally responsible for the tortious acts 
of their servants, including independent contractors. 

8. School boards and teachers are generally not responsible for 
injuries to pupils occurring off the school grounds or out of 
school hours, unless the pupil is still under the official 
jurisdiction of the school. 

9. School boards cannot delegate their responsibility for pupil 
supervision to anyone. They may delegate the duty of supervision 
but cannot delegate the responsibility. 

10. School boards and teachers are not liable for non-feasance of a 
discretionary duty, but are liable for misfeasance once the duty 
is undertaken but not properly carried out. 

In conclusion it may be said that the educator is required to 
take n fatherly n care of the pupils in his school. This rule, however, 
does not extend to a constant and unremitting supervision, nor does it 
mean that a school teacher is expected to guard against contingencies 
which he cannot reasonably foresee. Generally he will be free from legal 
reproach if he keeps to approved and recognized methods of organizing 
school activities. The legal correspondent of Times Educational Supole - 


ment adds: 



















































« 

















• 






■ 























■ 




264 

Few other rules can usefully be laid down, for the facts of 
each case differ, and it is on their own facts that cases are 
decided. It is tempting, no doubt, to look for trends in the 
judicial treatment of claims of this sort. But the variety of 
the facts in each case is apt to make such a search misleading. 
Probably the most that can confidently be said is that at 
present it is no easier, and possibly more difficult than 
formerly, to establish a case of this type of negligence 
against a schoolmaster or his employee. * 


83py a Legal Correspondent, "The Child and the Law," from 
Time s Educational Supplement, reproduced in The Alberta School Trustee , 
Vol. 35 t No. 11, December 1955» pp. 17-20, at p. 20. 












CHAPTER VIII 


CONCLUSION 

I. SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS 

The analysis of constitutional and statutory provisions with 
their judicial interpretations, and the common law principles when 
applicable, can be summarized to give a general national picture of 
the legal status of the Canadian public school pupil. The reader 
should be cautioned, however, that the following general conclusions 
should not by themselves be used as definitive guides to the situation 
in any one province, for in many instances the whole is not merely a 
sum of the parts. 

1. The statutoiy responsibility for educating children in Canada 
rests upon the provincial legislatures. 

2. In all provinces qualified children have a statutory right to 
attend public schools. 

3. In Quebec children of all religious denominations have the right 
to attend the school of the majority in the district. If a dissentient 
school exists in the area, only children of the dissentient minority 
have the right to attend such a school. 

4. In districts where separate schools exist the right of parents 
or ratepayers to support a public or separate school depends upon the 
provisions of the statutory law applicable to the province. 

5. In so far as they affect his education, the denominational, 
rights of a child are determined by the religion of his parents and 



































♦ 




















- 

. 










f 


. 





























* 






266 

not by their race or language. 

6. The "educational” aspects of separate schools are under the 
control of a central provincial authority. Such authority however, 
cannot, in any way, legally interfere with the "denominational” aspects 
of such schools. 

7* Private schools are under the complete and arbitrary control 
of the provincial legislatures. 

8. Freedom of religion as it applies to public school education 
appears in Quebec to be based upon natural law and cannot be taken away by 
any provisions of the positive law. 

9. Admission to public schools is not an absolute right of the child. 
Rather, it is a duty and a privilege granted by statutory law. 

10. Legislatures may set up conditions restricting admission to 
public schools. Among the most commonly established restrictions are 
age, residence, and health. 

11. Provincial laws prescribe the age between which children may 
attend public schools free of charge, provided they meet other 
qualifications. Generally the age limits are six and twenty-one. 

12. Provincial legislatures prescribe compulsory school ages. Most 
commonly the age limits are seven and sixteen. 

13. School boards have the power to determine which public school 
within their district a pupil shall attend. 

14. Exemptions from compulsory school attendance laws are provided 
by all provinces. 

15. It is mandatory or discretionary according to provincial laws 
for school boards to furnish transportation for school children. 






















{ . 


. 
















. 

* 








, 




* 
















- 


- 




- 






. 




























' 




16. When transportation is discretionary parents cannot compel the 
school board to transport their children; nor is a district required to 


furnish door-to-door transportation even under mandatory laws. 

17. Sectarian education in public schools is prohibited in most 
provinces; but Bible reading is not legally considered to be sectarian 
instruction. 

18. To require a flag salute of all public school pupils is within 
the competency of the provincial legislatures. In most provinces, 
however, the law provides for special exemption from such an exercise 
on religious grounds. 

19. Pupils in attendance at public schools must submit themselves 
to the reasonable rules and regulations of the school board and to 
the control of the teachers. The principle of loco parentis shields 
and defends a school administrator or teacher in the performance of 
his duties. 

20. In all provinces a teacher may legally administer corporal 
punishment if it is justified and not excessive or malicious. 

21. School boards have the power to suspend or expel pupils from 
school for violation of the rules and regulations of the school, 
provided that such rules and regulations are reasonable. 

22. In all provinces school boards as corporations are liable in 
damages for pupil injuries caused by board negligence. 

23. In all provinces a teacher is liable for pupil injuries if it 
can be proved that the injury was caused by the teacher’s negligence. 

24. School boards are generally liable in damages for the negligence 
of their teachers and employees, even if such employees are independent 


contractors 










II. AREAS OF SPECIAL SIGNIFICANCE 


268 


From the brief summary of conclusions presented in part one 
of this chapter, four special topics have been selected for further 
comment• 

The Relative Place of Different Branches of the Law 

The legal status of the Canadian public school pupil is defined 
primarily by statutory and common law. It is difficult to estimate the 
relative influence of each of these branches of law in defining this 
status, but there are certain indications that one branch tends to assume 
more importance than the other in certain specific aspects of education. 
For example, the right of a child to an education finds its origin in 
statute law alone; for the common law recognizes no such right. Statute 
law also governs admission and attendance at school, as well as the 
nature of the instruction to which the child is exposed. On the other 
hand, in regard to pupil control and to the child's right to proper care 
while at school, the common law plays the more important part because it 
defines the degree of care owed by the teacher to the pupil. 

Such a distinction, however, cannot be carried too far without 
doing violence to a valid concept of a pupil's legal status, in much 
the same, way as an unwarranted separation of environment and heredity 
would do violence to a valid concept of human personality. A knowledge 
of both statutory and common law is essential to a proper understanding 
of the legal status of the public school pupil; for it is in the light 
of both these branches of law that such a status becomes meaningful. 






. 


. 





























- 














The Responsibility for Educating the Child 


269 


From the perspective of natural law it may be argued that the 
prime responsibility for the education of children rests upon the 
parents; the Courts have recognized this principle. In some of the 
cases dealt with in this study, however, the legal attitude seems to 
be that in Canada the prime responsibility for the education of 
children rests upon the provincial governments. To a degree these two 
points of view can be reconciled. 

In Canada the British North America Act, 1867, in permissive 
terms allocates education to the jurisdiction of the provincial 
governments. Therefore, a provincial legislature is free to establish 
a system of education or it may refrain from assuming such a power 
entirely. However, once the power to provide education becomes active 
through the actual creation of an educational system, the province 
automatically creates a responsibility to carry out properly the 
duties arising out of the use of such power. In other words, once the 
duty is undertaken the legislature may be said to become liable for 
misfeasance if such a duty is not performed in accordance with the 
creating statute. 

The legal view seems to imply that provincial responsibilities 
in education are created by the legislatures themselves when they create 
school systems and pass compulsory school attendance legislation to 
make the systems effective. Thus, the legislatures may not have a 
"natural” responsibility for the education of children, but the Courts 
hold that a provincial government creates for itself a "statutory" 
responsibility by passing educational laws. 










. 





. 


< 















' 

























' 





Separate Schools 


270 


Separate schools in Canada are legally recognized denominational 
schools supported by public taxation, but forming a part of the public 
school system. Separate schools may be viewed as public schools of a 
special kind. 

The fact that instruction in separate schools is to a degree 
different from that offered in the other public schools has a signifi¬ 
cant bearing upon the nature of the education to which a child is 
exposed. Thus, the religious denomination of a child’s parents will, 
under certain circumstances, determine the type of education the child 
will receive. 

A significant finding of this study is that separate schools 
are not independent entities but form a part of the public school 
system. One Court summed up the situation when it said: 

In consequence of the religious desires or duties of some 
classes of the community, separation in schooling is permitted and 
special separate school provisions were made for the great class 
of residents of the province described in the legislation upon 
the subject as Roman Catholics. But such separation in no wise 
affects the public purposes of the schools, or makes the one, 
any more than the other, the less a public school in the sense and 
for the purpose I have mentioned. The trustees of all are, alike, 
public officers, having the like duties and powers, and subject to 
the like pains and penalties for misconduct in office, and the 
schools are all subject to control of provincial educational 
authorities; and are all alike entitled to share equally in^the 
provincial grants of money made for public school purposes. 


Private Schools 


In Canada attendance at an approved private school may exempt 


^ Ottawa Separate School Trustees v. City of Ottawa , (1916) , 
24 D.L.R. 497, at p. 500. 























, 




















' 










« 










- 














. 








; 

- 

' : 


























■ 











271 

children from attendance at public schools. Howe-ver, private schools 
have no legal existence but are "tolerated" by provincial governments, 
generally in deference to the desires of certain classes of persons, 
most commonly religious minorities. Such schools are generally supported 
by the private efforts of churches or individuals and do not enjoy the 
privilege of support by public taxation. When private schools receive 
provincial accreditation they are allowed relative freedom in regard to 
instruction, but must not fall below the standard required by provincial 
authorities, who may legally withdraw accreditation at their pleasure. 

A number of cases in this study reveal that private school 
personnel are legally responsible to the same degree as public school 
personnel for the education and care of the children in their school. 

III. IMPLICATIONS 

A number of basic implications for the educator arise out of 
this study. 

1. The legal status of the public school pupil is not as simple 
as it sometimes appears. The complex nature of this status is 
examplified by the fact that the Courts in their decisions have had to 
rely not only on statutory and common law dating back to Magna Carta , 
but have also drawn upon the natural law in defining the scope and 
nature of certain pupil rights. A competent knowledge of statutory, 
common, and,to a degree, natural law is, therefore, necessary to 
understand the legal status of the pupil. 

2. This study emphasizes that Society and the State, as well as the 
parents, have an interest in the education of the child♦ Too often 



- 






. 









. 










. 











































■* 

















t 





























272 


administrators and teachers fail to recognize and appreciate the 
attempts of Society to cultivate a child’s potential in the interests 
of good citizenship. The general legal attitude is that the education 
of the child is necessary for the welfare of the State as well as for 
the benefit of the individual, 

3. This study also indicates that unless educators become more 
aware of the legal and social dimensions of the rights and responsi¬ 
bilities of the public school pupil, they will lack the understanding 
and skill necessary to extract the maximum benefit from established 
educational systems. It appears that in regard to a school child’s 
rights and responsibilities society has erected not only a lifeless 
framework of legal mandates and restrictions, but also a legal philoso¬ 
phy which imbues this framework with life and purpose. Only with the 
help of this legal philosophy can the social end of education be more 
completely understood and achieved. 

4, The perspective with which the responsibilities of the educator 
towards the child is to be viewed is also indicated in this study. 

It may not be too much to say that educators, at times, have a false 
concept of the rights of the child, and allow such rights to "run 
rampant” in that they become the only concern in a situation. It 
must be remembered that teachers have rights as well, especially in 
regard to the control and care of school children. The Courts strive 
for impartiality in protecting educators from any unjust accusations 
and suits brought against them. In other words, the Courts will uphold, 
not only the rights of the child, but will also demand of him the 
fulfillment of his responsibilities owed to the school and its personnel. 





* 
































< 



































, 







■ 

. 















’ 

- 






273 

Thus, a proper perspective on part of the educator demands of him a 
high degree of legal literacy. 

17. FURTHER RESEARCH 

Many parts of this study have revealed a need for further 
research. The need seems greatest in three major areas concerning the 
legal aspects of education in Canada. 

1. The legal status of public school boards in Canada. 

2. The legal status of public school teachers in Canada. 

3. The scope and nature of sectarian education within the public 
school systems in Canada. This study could include a detailed exami¬ 
nation of the position of separate and private schools in the Canadian 
provinces. 

All the areas mentioned above are relatively untouched by the 
pen of the researcher, even though ample source material for such 
studies is available. The findings of such studies would give complete¬ 
ness to an educators knowledge of the legal status of Canadian public 
school systems. 


V. RECOMMENDATIONS 

It cannot be denied that the interest of school administrators 
in school law appears to be on the incline. Such interest is under¬ 
standable in the light of increasing responsibilities imposed upon 
school personnel by a dynamic and industrial society. It is important, 
but not enough, to know the details of a particular School Act; of 

























. 











. ' 

- 





















. 




























* 






* 












I 









greater importance is the use of such knowledge, not only in avoiding 
trouble, but in the improvement of educational services offered in a 
community. In order to achieve this broader objective it is essential 
that an educator know (l) the legal framework of public school control, 
(2) the legal principles arising out of judicial opinion, and (3) the 
application of these legal principles to the educational situation for 
the welfare of school and community. 

The findings of this study suggest that the following recommen¬ 
dations deserve serious consideration. 

1. The educator should have a thorough knowledge of school law, 
particularly that of his own province. This law provides the framework 
within which legal problems must find their solution. 

2. It is important that an educator be legally literate. Not only 
must he know the School Act but he must also be conversant with legal 
terminology and concepts. Legal literacy includes an understanding 

of the underlying legal philosophy that gives life to the statutory 
framework. Such knowledge would be of great help in dealing with 
problems on which statutes are silent or ambiguous. 

3. The educator should keep abreast of legal happenings, for new 
light is constantly being shed on problems that have not yet been 
clarified. In addition, the law is dynamic and to a degree keeps 
pace with social progress; hence the educator must keep in step with 
current legal thought if the educational system in which he is working 
is to achieve its full purpose. 

4. This study reveals that a meticulous conformity to legal 
requirements on part of all school personnel would prevent much 












, 


























* 





















. 










- 
















. 

























275 


unnecessary litigation. Many cases have come before the Courts only 
because some individual or agency was in ignorance of statutory law, 
or else consciously failed to conform to clear and specific legal 
requirements. 

5. A number of cases dealt with in this study indicate that school 
boards could avoid costly litigation if they would obtain competent 
legal advice. School boards should have expert legal counsel available 
at all times. 

6. School boards and teachers have had to pay costly damages because 
they failed to have clearly laid out rules and regulations in their 
schools. Even though such rules and regulations are not part of school 
law, they do facilitate order in the school and bear witness to the 
conscientious and good-will efforts of school personnel. 

7* Lack of a systematic plan of pupil supervision has been grounds 
on which some litigation has been lost by school authorities. Boards 
should be certain that an approved and systematic plan of pupil 
supervision is carried out in all its schools. 

8. Faulty and dangerous school facilities and playground equipment 
are invariably valid grounds for successful actions against school 
boards. School boards, therefore, should maintain a system which 
provides for regular inspection of schools, property and equipment. 

9. Schools should adopt and enforce definite regulations in regard 
to field trips and excursions. In this respect evidence of proper 
concern for pupil safety does much to protect school boards and 
teachers from charges of negligence. 

10. Not all accidents can be prevented. Therefore, school boards 





- 

„ 

. 








t 






' 














- 





, 
























276 

should provide for all necessary and reasonable insurance. 

11# Action in ’’good faith" can do much to protect the educator from 
the legal consequences of unwise decisions. Action in "bad faith" 
seldom escapes the censure of the Courts and usually makes the school 
trustees individually liable for the costs of an action. It is, 
therefore, legally necessary that school administrators and teachers 
carry out their duties in "good faith." 

It cannot be denied that the application of these recommendations 
would make school personnel and boards less vulnerable to legal action; 
at the same time the community would be assured of a more efficiently 
operated educational system. In his study of legal principles and their 
application to practical situations, S.C. Bolmeier expressed a timely 
caution when he said: 

Perhaps the most important consideration in the application 
of a legal principle is the probable effect on the school and 
community. The fact that an act is legal is no assurance that it 
is necessary or desirable. It may be performed in strict accord 
with a permissive law and sanctioned by judicial opinion, but, if 
it results in community resentment and dissatisfaction, it might be 
better if it had not been performed at all. 

Legal principles are best applied when school conduct is 
in accord with the laws, but also in a manner whjcb. will be for 
the welfare of the pupil, school, and community. 


2 E.C. Bolmeier, "What Should the Principal Know About School Law?" 
The Bulletin of the National Association of Secondary-School Principals , 
Vol. 39, No. 210, April. 1955* p. 137* 









' 




. 




- 









' 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 


For the convenience of the reader and to facilitate general 
reference, it has been found advisable to divide the bibliography into 
two sections: General Bibliography and Case Bibliography. In the 
Case Bibliography all cases have been listed under the main topical 
sections in which they appear in this study. The cases are preceded 
by a key to the abbreviations used to identify the various law reports. 







GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 












A. BOOKS 


279 


Dawson, R.M* The Government of Canada , Toronto: University of Toronto 
Press, 1956. 

Edwards, N. The Courts and the Public Schools * Chicago: The University 
of Chicago Press, 1955. 

Hamilton, R.R. and Mort, P.R. The Law and Public Education , Chicago: 

The Foundation Press, Inc., 1941* 

Lindgard, C. C. Territorial Government in Canada, The Autonomy Question 
in the Old North-West Territories . Toronto: University of Toronto 
Press, 1946. 

Miller, J. C. National Government and Education in Federated Democracies : 
Dominion of Canada . Philadelphia, The Science Press Printing Co., 
1940. 

Ontario, Department of Education. Report of the Royal Commission on 
Education in Ontario . Toronto: Published by Baptist Johnston, 
Frinter to the King*s Most Excellent Majesty, 1950. 

Phillips, C. E. The Development of Education in Canada . Toronto: W.J* 
Gage and Company Limited, 1957. 

Prosser, W.L. Handbook of the law of Torts . Second edition. St. Paul, 
Minn*, West Publishing Co., 1955. 

Remmlein, M.E. School Law * Toronto: McGraw-Hill Book Company Inc., 1950. 

_, The Law of Public School Administration * Toronto: McGraw-Hill 

Book Company, Inc., 1953. 

Sandiford, P. Comparative Education: Studies of the Educational Systerns 
of Six Modern Nations . London and Toronto: J.M.Dent and Sons Ltd., 
1918. 

Weir, G.M. The Separate School Question in Canada . Toronto: The Ryerson 
Press, 1934* 









































B. BULLETINS AND PERIODICALS 


280 


Bolmeier, E.C. "Teacher and School Law," Elementary School Journal . 55 
(December, 1954), 209-218. 

_, "What Should the Principal Know About School Law?" The Bulletin 

of the National Association of Secondary-School Principles . 39 

(April, 1955), 135-137. 

_, and Hopkins F. "What are the Important Legal Aspects of School 

Administration?" The Bulletin of the National Association of 
Secondary-School Principles . 40 (April, 1956), 162-167. 

Byrne, T.C. "Design and Structure in Canadian Education," The Alberta 
Journal of Educational Research . Ill (March, 1957)* 28-43. 

Garber, L.O. and Bolemeir, E.C. School District Liability . (Pamphlet) 
Washington D.C; American Association of School Administrators, 

1953. 

Kramer, R. (ed.). "School Pupils and the Law," Law and Contemporary 

Problems . School of Law, Duke University, Vol.20, No.l, Winter 1955. 

Leipold, J.E. "Digest of School Law," School Executive . 73 (August, 1954), 
43-47. 

___, "Tested Cases on Teachers and the Law," School Executive . 75 

(Hay, 1956), 80-81. 

_, "You Can Stay Out of the Courts," American School Board 

Journal . 129 (November, 1954), 41. 

_, "You Either Have the Right or You Don f t," Clearing House . 28 

(October, 1953), 69-77. 

Legal Correspondent of Times Educational Supplement, "The Child and the 
Law," The Alberta School Trustee . 35 (December, 1955), 17-20. 

McCann, L.E. "Legal Aspects of School Supervision," American School 
Board Journal . 132 (June, 1956), 45-46. 

Mill er, H.A. "Legislation on Education," School Executive . 75 (January, 
1956), 51-52. 

National Education Association, "The Legal Status of the Public-School 
Pupil," Research Bulletin . XXVI (February, 1948). 

_, "The Legal Status of the Public-School Teacher," Research 

Bulletin . XXV (April, 1947). 




















































281 


National Education Association, "The State and Sectarian Education," 
Research Bulletin , XXXIV (December, 1956). 

Punke, H.H. "Care, Injury, and Tort Liability in Pupil Transportation," 
American School Board Journal , 131 (October, 1955) 35-36, 

November, 1955) 33-35» (December, 1955) 39-40,(February, 1956) 
40-42. 

Roach, S.F. "Good Faith Aspects of Board Actions," American School 
Board Journal . 127 (November, 1953) 42-43. 

_, "Legal Concepts Concerning Religious Influences in Public 

Education as Defined by State Courts of Last Resort," Teacher^ 
College Record . 55 (November, 1953) 61-69. 















C. THESES AND DISSERTATIONS 


282 


Dedrick, D.W. The Common Law Status of Teachers 1 Contracts of 

Employment, 1929-1954 . Microfilmed Ed. D. Dissertation, University 
of Pittsburg, 1955. 

Lamb, R. L. The Legal Liability of School Boards and Teachers for 
Accidents in the Schools . Unpublished M. Ed. Thesis, University of 
Toronto, 1957* 

McClure, O.D. Legal Rights, Privileges. and Responsibilities of Pupils 
in the Public Schools of Illinois . Microfilmed Ed. D. Dissertation, 
Washington University, 1955* 

Moore, J.B. Legal Principles and Issues Involved in the Consolidation 
of School Systems . Microfilmed Ed. D. Dissertation, University of 
Pittsburgh, 1955* 

Ross, G.J. The Courts and the Canadian Public Schools . Microfilmed 
Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Chicago, 19^8. 

Stroup, S.S. The Comparative Status of School District Liability for 
Torts in Selected States as Evidenced by Reported Court Decisions 

and Statutory Enactments . Microfilmed Ph. D. Dissertation, 

University of Pittsburgh, 1956, 

Thompson, J.C. Legal Aspects of Federal Aid to Sectarian Schools . 

Microfilmed Ph. D. Dissertation, George Peabody College for Teachers, 
1955. 

Turner, R.A. Principles of School Law with Applications to Alabama's 
Public School System . Microfilmed Ed. D. Dissertation, Alabama 
Polytechnic Institute, 1955* 




































D. GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS 


Alberta Government, Statutes . 1905-58. 

British Columbia Government, Statutes . 1871-1958. 

Canadian Government, Statutes , 1841-1958. 

Great Britain, Statutes . 30 Victoria, Chapter 3. 1867. 

Great Britain, Statutes . 34-35 Victoria, Chapter 28, 1871. 
Manitoba Government, Statutes, 1870-1958. 

Newfoundland Government, Statutes, 1949-1958. 

New Brunswick Government, Statutes , 1867-1958. 

North West Territories, Ordinances . Chapters 29 and 30, 1901. 
Nova Scotia Government, Statutes , 1867-1958. 

Ontario Government, Statutes , 1867-1958. 

Prince Edward Island Government, Statutes , 1873-1958. 

Quebec Government, Statutes . 1867-1958. 


Saskatchewan Government, Statutes, 1905-1958 
















* 

t 

: 



















CASE BIBLIOGRAPHY 








LAW REPORTS 


285 


Abbreviation 

A. C. _ 

Alta. L.R. - 

B. C.R. - 

c.c.c. - 

D. L.R, -- 

E. L.R. - 

Man. R. - 

M. P.R. - 

N. B.R. --- 

N.L.R. --- 

N. S.R. - 

O. A.R. ---—-- 

O.L.R. --—■ 

O.R. —---- 

O.W.N. -—- 

O.W.R. - 

Que. S.C. --—-—- 

Que. K.B. - 

Que. Q.B. —--—- 

Sask. L.R. - 

S.C.R. - 

Terr. L.R. - 


Report 

Canadian Reports, Appeal Cases 
Alberta Law Reports 
British Columbia Reports 
Canadian Criminal Cases 
Dominion Law Reports 
Eastern Law Reports 
Manitoba Reports 
Maritimes Provinces Reports 
New Brunswick Reports 
Newfoundland Law Reports 
Nova Scotia Reports 
Ontario Appeal Reports 
Ontario Law Reports 
Ontario Reports 
Ontario Weekly Notes 
Ontario Weekly Reports 
Quebec Superior Court Reports 
Quebec King’s Bench Reports 
Quebec Queen’s Bench Reports 
Saskatchewan Law Reports 
Canada Supreme Court Reports 
Territories Law Reports 
Upper Canada Common Pleas 


U.C.C.P 

























































Abbreviation 


Report 


U.C.Q.B. 
W.L.R. - 
W.W.R. - 


Upper Canada Queen*s Bench 
Western Law Reporter 
Western Weekly Reports 












A. JURISDICTION IN EDUCATION 
(Chapter II) 


287 


Brophy v. Attorney-General for Manitoba . (1895) A.C. 202. 

Edwards v. Attorney-General for Canada . (1930) A.C. 124. 

Hirsch v. Protestant Board of School Commissioners . (1928) A.C. 200, 

~ 1 D~.L.R. 1041, (1926) 2 D.L.R. 8, S.C.R. 246. - 

In Re Dermis Hill v. The School Trustees of Camden and Zone .(1854) 

11 U.C.Q.B. 573. 

In Re George Stewart and the Trustees of School Section #8 of the Township 

of Sandwich East in the County of Essex . (1864) 23 U.C.Q.B. 634. 

In Re Hutchinson and the Board of School Trustees of St. Catherine . (1871) 
31 U.C.Q.B. 274 

Mackell v. Ottawa Separate School Trustees . 18 D.L.R. 456, (1915) 24 D.L.R. 
475, 32 D.L.R. 1, 34 O.L.R. 335, (1917) A.C. 62. 

McCarthy v. City of Regina and the Regina Board of Public School Trustees . 

(Bartz Case). (1917) 32 D.L.R. 741, (1918) A.C. 911. 

McCarthy v. City of Regina and the Regina Board of Public School Trustees . 

(Neida Case). (1917) 32 D.L.R. 755. 

Ottawa Separate School Trustees v. City of Ottawa . 24 D.L.R. 497. 

Perron v. School Trustees of Rouyn . (1958) 1 D.L.R. 4l4, Que.Q.B. 841. 
Pinsler v. Protestant Board of School Commissioners . 23 S.C.R. 385. 

Renaud v. Board of Trustees of Roman Catholic Separate School for School 

Section 13. in the Township of Tilbury North. (1934) O.W.N. 218, (1933) 

3 D.L.R. 172, O.R. 5^5. 

Shannon v. Les Syndics D T Ecoles Dissidents de St. Romould , (1930) S.C.R. 
599, 4 D.L.R. 190. 

Tiny Separate School Trustees v. The King . (1928) 3 D.L.R. 753; affirming 
(1927) 4 D.L.R. 857, S.C.R. 637; affirming on equal division (1927) 

1 D.L.R. 913, 80 O.L.R. 15; affirming 59 O.L.R. 98. 

Washington v. The Trustees of School Number 14 in the Township of 

Charlotteville. (1854) 11 U.C.Q.B. 589* 































288 


B. COMPULSORY ATTENDANCE LAWS AND THE RIGHT TO AN EDUCATION 

(Chapter III) 

Dunn v, Board of Education of the Town of Windsor . (1883) 6 O.R. 123. 

Ex Parte Gallagher . (1892) 31 N.B.R. 472. 

Henchel v. Board of Medicine Hat School Division No. 4 . (1950) 

2 W.W.R. 369. 

McLeod v, Board of School Trustees of School District No. 20 (Salmon 

Arm). (1952) 2 D.L.R. 562. 4 W.W.R. 385. 

Patrick v. Trustees of Yorkton School District No. 159 . (1914) 6 W.W.R. 
1107, 28 W.L.R. 495. 

Pereoolkin et ux v. Superintendent of Child Welfare . (1958) 23 W.W.R. 592. 
R. v. Erion . (1943) 1 W.W.R. 800, 80 C.C.C. 131. 

R. v. Hildebrand . (1919) 3 W.W.R. 286. 

R. v. Ulmer . (1923) 1 W.W.R. 1, 19 Alta. L.R. 12, 1 D.L.R. 304. 

Re West Njssouri Continuation School . (1912) 1 D.L.R. 252, 4 D.L.R. 847. 

Riding v. Elmhurst S.D. No. 2 . (1927) 2 W.W.R. 159, 21 Sask. L.R. 471, 

3 D.L.R. 173; reversing (1926) 3 W.W.R. 729, 

Tremblay v. Valentin . (1887) 12 S.C.R. 546. 

Wilkinson v. Thomas . (1928) 2 W.W.R. 700. 




















289 


C. LEGAL STATUS IN REGARD TO ADMISSION AND ATTENDANCE 
(Chapter IV) 


Clowes v. Edmonton School Board and McKnight . (1915) 9 W.W.R. 372, 

32 W.L.R. 733. 9 Alta. L.R. 106, 25 D.L.R. W). 

Corporation of the City of Victoria v. District of Oak Bay . (1918) 

1 W.W.R. 158. 

Elliot v. Protestant School of St. Therese . (1951) Que. S.C. 395* 

Ex Parte Murray Lambert . (1930) 1 M.P.R. 12. 

Ex Parte Miller . (1897) 3^ N.B.R. 318. 

Galt Board of Education v. Waterloo . (1935) O.W.N. 396. 

Hall v. Stisted . (1897) 24 O.A.R. 476; affirming 28 O.R. 127. 

Inskter v. Minitonka School District . (1912) 2 W.W.R. 1105, 22 W.L.R. 

57, 22 Man. R. 487, 6 D.L.R. 57. 

Lacroix v. La Commission d f Bcoles de la Pointe Claire . (1918) 53 
Que.S.C. 88. 

Murray and Brighton v. United Counties of Northumberland and Durham . 

(1941) S.C.R. 204, 2 D.L.R. 273; reversing (1940) 2 D.L.R. 28; 
reversing (1939) 4 D.L.R. 738. 

Fatriek v. Protestant School Commissioners of Melbourne Township . 

(1945) Que. S.C. 239. 

Patterson et al. v. Victoria School Trustees . (1917) 1 W.W.R. 526, 

24 B.C.R. 365. 

Pelletier v. Commissaires D^coles de Rock Forest , (1945) Que. S.C. 140. 

Perreault v. Kinistino School Unit . (1956-57) 20 W.W.R. 145; affirming 
(1956) 21 W.W.R. 17, 19 W.W.R. 667. 

Poissant v. Commissaires D^coles De St. Jacques Le Mineur , (1956) 

Que. S.C. 123. 

Procureur Genera l de Quebec v. Commissaires d'Ecoles de Marabel , (1944) 
Que. S.C. 299.~ 

R. v. Green . (1913) 23 W.L.R. 264, 10 D.L.R. 111. 























































290 


Rex vel Kowalski v. Oak Bluff S.D. . (1937) 3 W.W.R. 352, 45 Man. L.R. 
409, 3 D.L.R. 500, 4 D.L.R. 368 

Riding v. Elmhurst S.D. No. 2 . (1927) 2 W.W.R. 159, 21 Sask. L.R. 471, 

3 D.L.R. 173; reversing (1926) 3 W.W.R. 729. 

School Trustees of Fredericton v. School Trustees of Kingsclear , (1928) 

4 D.L.R. 13, 54 N.B.R. 177^ 

Societe DAdoption et De Protection De L’Infance v. Gommissaires 

D'Ecoles Du Bas De St. Janvier . (1956) Que. S.C. 94. 

Wilkinson v. Thomas . (1928) 2 W.W.R. 700. 

Yarwood v. Smith Falls Board of Education . (1922) 23 O.W.N. 38. 












D. LEGAL STATUS IN REGARD TO INSTRUCTION 
(Chapter V) 


291 


Boutin v. Mackie . (1922) 2 W.W.R. 1197. 

Chabot v. Les Commissaires D^coles De Lamorandiere . (1957) Que. Q.B. 

707 (C.A.). ~ 

Donald v, Hamilton Board of Education . (1945) 3 D.L.R. 424, O.R. 518, 
O.W.N. 526; reversing (I9*l4) 4 D.L.R. 227, O.R. 475, O.W.N. 559. 

Hackell v, Ottawa Separate School Trustees . (1917) A.C. 62, 32 D.L.R. 1; 
affirming 24 D.L.R. 475, with annotation 492, 34 O.L.R. 335. 

McDonald v. Lancaster Separate School Trustees .(1915) 24 D.L.R. 868, 

34 O.L.R. 346; affirming 31 O.L.R. 360. 

Re Anderson . (1943) 4 D.L.R. 268, O.W.N. 303 and 698 . 

Rogers v, Bathurst School Trustees . (1896) 1 N.B. Eq. 266. 

Ruman v, Board of Trustees of Lethbridge School District . (1944) 

1 D.L.R. 360, (1943) 3 W.W.R. 340. 

Shaver v. Cambridge and Russell Union School Section . (1911) 18 O.W.R. 
501, 2 O.W.N. 686. 

Thurgood v. Vigneau . (1929) 4 D.L.R. 857. 





















E. LEGAL STATUS IN REGARD TO CONTROL 
(Chapter VI) 

Andrew v, Hopkins , (1932) 3 D.L.R. 459, 5 M.P.R. 7. 

Campeau v. The King . 103 C.C.C. 355. 

Commissaires D^coles De St. Kathieu De Dixville v, Blanchard . (1949) 
Que. K.B. 30, (1950) S.C.R. 479. 

Duchesene v. Montreal Catholic School Commissioners . 6l Que. S.C. 442. 

Finlavson et al. v. Powell et al.; Tucker et al. v. Powell et al. . 

(1926) 1 W.W.R. 939, 22 Alta. L.R. 171, 2 D.L.R. 383. 

In Re HcCallum and the Board of Public School Trustees of Section 6 . 

Township of Brant . (1889) 17 O.R. 451. 

In Re the Minister of Education and McIntyre v. The Public School 

Trustees of Section Eight in the Township of Blanchard et al. . 

(1886) 11 O.R. 439. 

The King v. Zinck . (1910) 18 C.C.C. 456. 

Lecleric v. Perigood School District . (1925) 2 W.W.R. 312, Sask. L.R. 
435, 3 D.L.R. 578. 

Murdock v. Richards et al. . (1954) 1 D.L.R. 766. 

R. v. Corkum . (1937) 1 D.L.R. 79, 67 C.C.C. 114. 

R. v. Gaul . (1903) 36 N.S.R. 504. 

R. v. Metcalfe . (1927) 3 W.W.R. 194 . 

Regina v. Robinson . (1899) 7 C.C.C. 52* 





























F. LEGAL STATUS IN REGARD TO THE TORT OF NEGLIGENCE 
(Chapter VII) 


293 


Adams v. Board of School Commissioners for Halifax , (1951) 2 D.L.R. 8l6, 

27 M.P.R. 232. 

Beauoarlant et al. v. Eoard of Trustees of Separate School Section Mo. 1 

of Appleby et al. . (1955) 4 D.L.R. 558, O.W.N. 286. 

Bisson v. Commissaires d'Ecoles de St. George de Windsor , (1950) Q.K.B.775. 

Boivin v. Glenavon School District . (1937) 2 W.W.R. 170, 

Brost v. Tilley School District . (1955) 15 W.W.R. 241. 

Butterworth et al. v. Collegiate Institute Board of Ottawa . (1940) 3 
D.L.R. 466, O.W.N. 332. 

Cochrane v. Elgin Consolidated School District . (1934) 2 W.W.R. 409, 42 
Man. R. 257; affirming (1934) 2 W.W.R. 154. 

Duncan v. Ladysmith School Trustees . (1931) 1 D.L.R. 176, 43 B.C.R. 156, 
(1930) 3 W.W.R. 175 . 

Dyer v. Halifax School Commissioners . (1956) 2 D.L.R. 394. 

Edmondson v. Moose Jaw School Trustees . (1920) 3 W.W.R. 979, 13 Sask. L.R. 
516, 55 D.L.R. 563. 

Ellis et al. v. Board of Trustees for Moose Jaw Public School District 

and Blondin Roofing Froducts . (1946) 2 D.L.R. 697, 2 W.W.R. 19. 

Eyres v. Gillis and Warren Limited and Chivers . (1940) 4 D.L.R. 747, 

3 W.W.R. 390. 

Finbow v. Domino . (1957-58) 23 W.W.R. 97* 

Gagnon v. Freres des Ecoles Chretiennes . 76 Que. S.C. 38. 

Gard y. School Trustees of Duncan . (1946) 2 D.L.R. 441, 1 W.W.R. 305, 

B.C.R. 323. 

Govette v. Commissaires D’Ecoles De Pointe Aux Trembles . (1957) Que.S.C. 276 . 

Gray et al. v. KcGonegal and Trustees of Leeds and Lansdowne Front Township 

School Area . (1952) 2 D.L.R. l6l, 2 S.C.R. 274, (1950) 4 D.L.R. 395, O.R. 
512, O.W.N. 475; affirming (1949 ) 4 D.L.R. 344, O.R. 749, O.W.N. 127 

Hall v. Thompson et al. . (1952) 4 D.L.R. 139, O.W.N. 478. 























. 







294 

Koch v. Stone Farm S.D. . (1940) 2 D.L.R. 602, 1 W.W.R. 441. 

Lamarche et al. v. Board of Trustees of the Roman Catholic Separate 

Schools for the Village of L 1 Original . (1956) 33 O.W.N. 686 . 

Levine v. Toronto Board of Education . (1933) O.W.N. 152, O.W.N. 238. 

Lovell v. Budd and Lake Cowichan School District . (1956) 5 D.L.R. 324. 
HcEHistrum v. Etches . (1956) S.C.R. 787. 

McStravick v. Ottawa . (1929) 4 D.L.R. 492, 64 O.L.R. 275; affirming 3 
D.L.R. 317, 63 O.L.R. 626. 

Murray v. Board of Education of Belleville .(1943) 1 D.L.R. 494, O.W.N. 44. 

Patterson v. North Vancouver School Trustees . (1929) 2 W.W.R. 181, 41 
B.C.R. 123, 3 D.L.R. 33- 

Pearson v. Vancouver Board of School Trustees . (1941) 3 W.W.R. 874, 58 
B.C.R. 157. 

Pook v. Ernesttown School Trustees and Thomas . (1924) 2 D.L.R. 387> 34 
B.C.R. 38, 2 W.W.R. 49. 

Ramsden v. Hamilton Board of Education . (1942) 1 D.L.R. 770. 

Ritchie v. Gale and Vancouver Board of School Trustees . (1935) 1 D.L.R. 

362 , (1934) 3 W.W.R. 703, 49 B.C.R. 251 . 

Schultz v. Grosswald School Trustees . (1930) 1 W.W.R. 579 , 3 D.L.R. 600. 

Scoffield v. Public School Board of North York . (1942) O.W.N. 458 

Scrimgeour v. Board of Management of Canadian District of American Lutheran 

Church .(1947) 1 D.L.R. 677, 1 W.W.R. 120; reversing (1946) 3 W.W.R. 707. 

Shaw v. Board of Education of the City of St. Thomas . (1911) 19 O.W.R. 846, 
20 O.W.N. 1467. 

Sleeman and Sleeman v. Foothills School Division r/38 . (1946) 1 W.W.R. 145. 

Smiles v. Edmonton School District . (1918) 43 D.L.R. 171, 3 W.W.R. 673, 

14 Alta. L.R. 351; reversing 41 D.L.R. 400. 

Stevenson v. Toronto Board of Education . (1919) 49 D.L.R. 673, 46 O.L.R. 
146, C.C.C. 19. 

Sweet v. Drummondville School Trustees . (1947) Que. S.C. 444. 


Tvler v. Ardath School District . (1935) 1 W.W.R. 337, 2 D.L.R. 814. 



























Vick v. Morin and Thompson . (1915) 7 W.W.R. 1053, 30 W.L.R. 412, 21 
B.C.R. 8, 22 D.L.R. 29. 

V. r iggins v. Colchester South Pacific School . (1922) 23 O.W.N. 157. 











APPENDIX 






APPENDIX A . 


297 


EXTRACT FROM THE MANITOBA ACT, 1870 


In and for the Province, the said Legislature may exclusively make 
Laws in relation to Education, subject and according to the 
following provisions 

(1) Nothing in any such Law shall prejudically affect any right 
or privilege with respect to Denominational Schools which any 
class of persons have by Law or practice in the Province at the 
Union: 

(2) An appeal shall lie to the Governor General in Council from 
any Act or decision of the Legislature of the Province, or of any 
Provincial Authority, affecting any right or privilege of the 
Protestant or Roman Catholic minority of the Queen’s subjects in 
relation to Education: 

(3) In case any such Provincial Law, as from time to time seems 
to the Governor General in Council requisite for the due execution 
of the provisions of this section, is not made, or in case any 
decision of the Governor General in Council or any appeal under 
this section is not duly executed by the proper Provincial Authority 
in that behalf, then and in every such case, and as far only as the 
circumstances of each case require, the Parliament of Canada may 
make remedial Laws for the due execution of the provisions of this 
section, and of any decision of the Governor General in Council 
under this section. 








APPENDIX B 


298 


EXTRACT FROM THE 
ORDER IN COUNCIL 

ADMITTING BRITISH COLUMBIA INTO THE UNION, 1871 
Terms of Union 


Section 10: "The provisions of the B.N.A. Act, 1867 1 shall (-) 

be applicable to British Columbia in the same way and to the like 
extent as they apply to the other Provinces of the Dominion, and as 
if the Colony of British Columbia had been one of the Provinces 
originally united by the said Act," 


Order in Council Admitting Prince Edward Island into the Union, 1873, 
ratified terms of union containing a section similar to the one quoted 
above for British Columbia. 







APPENDIX C 


299 


EXTRACT FROM 

THE SASKATCHEWAN ACT, 1905 
and 

THE ALBERTA ACT, 1905 


Section 17 (Identical in both acts) 

Section 93 of the British North America Act, 1867, shall apply to 
the said province, with the substitution for paragraph (l) of the said 
Section 93, of the following paragraph:- 

1. Nothing in any such law shall prejudically affect any right or 
privilege with respect to separate schools which any class of 
persons have at the date of the passing of this Act, under the 
terms of chapters 29 and 30 of the Ordinances of the Northwest 
Territbries, passed in the year 1901, or with respect to relig¬ 
ious instruction in any public or separate school as provided 
for in the said ordinances. 

2. In the appropriation by the Legislature or distribution by the 
Government of the province of any moneys for the support of 
schools organized and carried on in accordance with the said 
Chapter 29 or any act passed in amendment thereof, or in sub¬ 
stitution therefor, there shall be no discrimination against 
schools of any class described in the said Chapter 29. 

3* 'Where the expression "by law" is employed in paragraph 3 of 
the said Section 93* it shall be held to mean the law as set 
out in the said Chapters 29 and 30, and where the expression 
11 at the Union" is employed in the said paragraph 3, it shall 
be held to mean the date at which the Act comes into force. 








APPENDIX D 


300 


EXTRACT FROM 

AN ACT TO APPROVE THE TERMS OF UNION 
OF NEWFOUNDLAND WITH CANADA, 1949. 


Terms of union were agreed upon in 1948. 

17. In lieu of section ninety-three of the British North America Act, 
1867, the following term shall apply in respect of the Province 
of Newfoundland: 

In and for the province of Newfoundland the Legislature shall have 
exclusive authority to make laws in relation to education, but the 
Legislature will not have authority to make laws prejudicially 
affecting any right or privilege with respect to denominational 
schools, common (amalgamated) schools, or denominational colleges, 
that any class or classes of persons have by law in Newfoundland 
at the date of Union, and out of public funds of the Province 
of Newfoundland, provided for education. 

(a) all such schools shall receive their share of such funds in 
accordance with scales determined on a non-discriminatory basis 
from time to time by the Legislature for all schools then being 
conducted under authority of the Legislature; and 

(b) all such colleges shall receive their share of any grant 
from time to time voted for all colleges then being conducted 
under authority of the Legislature, such grant being distributed 
on a non-discriminatory basis. 






. 

- 




_ 

. 














































