LITERARY CRITICISM UST THE EDTKTRURGH 
AKD QUARTERLY REVIEWS 1802 - 1830 


PETER M. ROBERTS 











m : v ' i n < xi dp r 

LIBRARY 


Regulations R.umrhmg Tnos - s and "-iss ertati ons 

Ty >e script copies >i these s a. di ss ertati on; for Mas ter * s 

and Doctor f s degrees deposited in the University of Alberta 
Library, as the Official Copy of the faculty of Graduate Studies, 
.n b - >n i It id. in fch h 1 - nee lea: ing Room only . 

A second copy is on deposit in the Department under whose 
supervision the work was done. Some Departments are willing to 
loan their copy to libraries, through the interlibrary loan 
service of the University of alberta Library. 

These theses and dissertations are to be used only 'with due 
regar( to priority rights of the author. written permission of 
the author and of the Department must be obtained through the 
University of Alberta Library when extended passages are used, 
when permission has been granted, credit must appear in the 
pub1is he d work. 

This thesis or dissertation has been used in accordance 
with the above regulations by the persons listed below. The 
borrowing library is obligated to secure the signature of each 

user . 


Please sign below; 


Date 


Signature 


Ins titution 


























































Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 




https://archive.org/details/literarycriticisOOpete 



THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


LITERARY CRITICISE IN THE LDTIRURGH AND IRI^R.L? REVISE 

1802 - 1830 


IN 


A 

SUBMITTED TO TE 
PARTIAL FUIFILMENT 

rvr? 

uu 


DISSERTATION 

i SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
OF TIE REQUIREB/IEcITS FOR THE 
MASTER OF ARTS 



FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 
DEPARTMENT OF ENGLISH 


by 


FTER MCLAREN ROBERT 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA, 

AUGUST 1, 1951 






Th^SM S 
I 9S1 
# 60 


University of Alberta 

Faculty of Arts and Science 
Department of English 

j 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have 
read and recommend to the School of Graduate Studies for 
acceptance, a thesis entitled literary Criticism in '•Lc 
E-din-' ■ r ;-h Quarterly Reviews, 1SQ.2 - 1830 , submitted 
by Peter McLaren Roberts, B. Ed,, in partial fulfilment 
of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts, 



August 1, 


PROFESSOR. 










abstract 


Between 1802 and 1S30, the Edinburgh Review and the 
Quarterly Review noticed many of the important romantic 
iters. Generally speaking, the 711 1 nji , of which the 
editors and contributors were Whigs, and which was sup¬ 
ported by the official opposition party, gave unfavorable 
notice to such politically reactionary writers as Word¬ 
sworth, Coleridge and Southey, but was more generous to 
liberal writers like Hunt, Haalitt, and Shelley. The 
Quarterly . on the other hand, which was estal and 

written by Tories, and supported by the Tory administration, 
praised the work of the H Lake tt poets, but found little good - 
in that of the second generation of romantics. Although the 
obvious evidence indicates political prejudice in the lit¬ 
erary reviewing of both publications, there is good reason 
to believe that such prejudice is confined to one or two 
articles, and that most of the reviewers attempted to judge 
works impartially according to their own literary standards. 































c 








- , V 












„ 






5 




< 0 - ' 




















Table of Contents 


i . v, 

Page 

Chapter I ..... . Introduction ............. 1 

Chapter II ..... ' ordsw ortlp Coleridge, Southey. . . . IS 

Chapter III ..... Byron ................ 65 

Chapter IV ..... Scott ................ 85 

Chapter ~ r ..... Kazlitt, Hunt, Shelley, Keats .... 97 

Chapter VI 


Conclusion 


113 









Chapter I 


INTRODUCTION 


The purpose of this dissertation is to show what opinion the 
idinburgh Review and the Quarterly Review held of some important 
authors who were writing between 1802 and 1830, A further purpose is 
to attempt an explanation of some fundamental differences in the 
opinions of the two reviews, and to decide the extent to which their 
conflicting politics influenced their literary criticism. Before one 
can understand the significance of individual articles, one must know 
the circumstances of the founding of the reviews, and what political 
connections they had. 

There is no want of descriptions of the founding of the Edinburgh . 
The classic on© is Sydney Smith ? s own, in the preface to his collected 
works? 


Among the first persons with whom I became acquainted were 
Lord Jeffrey, Lord Murray (late Lord Advocate for Scotland), and 
Lord. Brougham! all of them maintaining opinions upon political 
subjects a little too liberal for the dynasty of Bundas, then 
exercising supreme power over the northern division of the island. 

One day we happened to meet in the eighth or ninth story or 
flat in Buecleufih Place, the elevated residence of the then Mr. 
Jeffrey. I proposed that we should set up a Review; this was 
acceded to with acclamation, I was appointed Editor, and re¬ 
mained long enough in Edinburgh to edit the first number of the 
Edinburgh Review . The motto I proposed for the Review was, 

“Tenui inusam meditamur avena . 11 

“We cultivate literature upon a little oatmeal." 

But this was too near the truth to be admitted, and so we' took 
out present grave motto from Publius Syrus , of whom none of us 














































« 







' 











. 


















- p - 


had, I am sure, ever read a single line; and so began what has 
since turned out to be a very important and able journal, When 
I left Edinburgh, it fell into the stronger hands of Lord Jeffrey 
and Lord Brougham, and reached the highest point of popularity and 
success. I contributed from England many articles, which I have 
been foolish enough to collect, and publish with some other tracts 
written by me. ^ 

Brougham ^ quotes a slightly different version of Smith ! s account 
(one of the differences being Brougham*s definite statement that he, 
Jeffrey, and Smith were the only persons present) and asserts that 
"nothing can be more imaginary than nearly the whole of the above 
account." The grounds for Brougham*s complaint are more fancied than 
real, however, and seem to be chiefly Smith*s description of the house, 
which had only three stories, and Smith’s claim that he had been 
appointed editor, which, writes Brougham, he never was, for "there was 
not a man among us less fitted for such a position." Brougham then 
gives his own account of the "stormy night in March, 1802 [wh@n]Sydney 
Smith first announced to me his idea of establishing a critical 
periodical or review of works of literature and science." The account 
is not appreciably different from Smith’s. In two places Brougham, in 
spite of his objection to Smith f s claim, refers to Smith as performing 
editorial duties in the first number, ^ Brougham’s account reveals 
that Jeffrey was the most dubious participant in the review. His 
"inconceivable timidity" (a curious phrase to apply to the author of 
the review of The White So® ) "not only retarded the publication of 
the first number , * 3 but he kept prophesying failure in the most dis» 
heartening way." ' Jeffrey’s recollections of the establishment of 

















































* 


















; < * 


. 

* 




I 






- 


1 

' 

' 














- 3 - 


the review are less certain, perhaps because they were not set down 
until half a century after the event. ^ He recalls meetings at his 
house in Buccleuch Place, attended by Smith, Horner, Brown, Murray, 
and others, but he makes no mention of the particular evening on which 
Smith made his proposal to Jeffrey and Brougham. He recalls the entire 
group examining mss. "in a dingy room of Willison's printing office, 
in Craig*s Close," but there is nothing in his statement about Smith 
as an editor. Jeffrey claims for himself the honor of having "the 
office pressed upon me." 1 

The effect of the first number was electrical. In a letter to 
John Jeffrey, June 26, 1802 (before the publication of the first 
number) Jeffrey reports: "I have completely abandoned the idea of 
taking any permanent share in it, and shall probably desert after ful- 
filling my engagements . . ° The first.number had no sooner appeared 

than Jeffrey accepted the post of editor, at a stipend of £300. He 
was, says Brougham, "utterly dumbfounded" the reception given to 

the first number. 

The politics of the Edinburgh were, during the first thirty years 
of its existence, definitely Whig and anti-government. Apart from the 
clear marks of liberalism in reviews like that on Bon Ccvallog 7 or on 
The Orders in Council 10 there is external evidence to show that the 
journal had a missionary zeal for reform. Brougham writes that 
"there arose some doubts upon the orthodoxy of the opinions in religion. 






















o 












' 

' 




' 








’ .1 ' - "s'.' ■ ■■ :• ' v,» ' ■ W- $, > ’ «" ' 


. . , 















* 


















. J 




















- 4 - 


and objections to the undeniable bias against the existing policy and 
ministerial arrangements." ^ Brougham states also that the influence 
of the review was used to promote "sound and liberal opinions upon all 
questions in church and state," and to subject "the frame of our 
government" to "decorous and temperate comment or discussion." 

For Brougham, the "great importance of the review" was the contribution 
it made "to the improvement of some, and the removal of others" of a 
list of "evils" such as protection, a bad system of parliamentary 
representation in Scotland, the restrictions placed upon Roman Catho- 

q o 

lies, the slave-trade, and the savage methods of criminal punishment. ‘ J 
Cockburn writes that "its [the Edinburgh 1 political opinions made 
it be received by one party with demonstrations of its iniquity, with 
confident prophecies of the improbability of so scandalous a publication 
lasting, much pretended derision, and boundless abuse of its audacious 
authors. He calls it "a pillar of fire" which everyone in Scotland, 
"where the constitutional wilderness was the darkest" watched with 
great intensity. ^ The same author remarks that the little group 
who were responsible for the first few numbers of the revie?/ "formed 
a distinct and marked sect, distinguished by their reputation, their 
whiggism, and their strong mutual coherence ... By the old Tories 
. . . they were disdained| and by the young ones . . » they were viewed 
with genuine horror." 

Lockhart, who wrote for Blackwood ? s and succeeded Gifford as 
editor of the Quarterly , writes in his Peter *g Letters to bis Kinsfolk ^ 













, 






















. 

% 



, 


* . 












' 










% 





v»S !■ - 












" 1 ■■Ot • 









% 









, 












, 








% 



% 






* 





... * « ' 

. 

■ 1 

1 



- 5 - 


that there are ’'mean views” of general policy* illustrated and ex¬ 
emplified in the Edinburgh Review , In spite of these views, however, 
Lockhart contends that there are still people "who see things with the 
eyes . . . of enlightened patriots," and whc show "loyalty and 
attachment to the more formal and external parts of the English 
constitution," The letter after this last contains a sharp attack 
upon the Edinburgh Whigs, whose rise and importance he attributes 
largely to the Edinburgh Review ," The Edinburgh , he writes, 

"never did anything to entitle it to much respect, either from English 
scholars, or English Patriots, or English Christians." 

One is tempted to adduce as additional evidence of political 

alignment the review’s association with a republican like Hazlitt, its 

harsh criticism of "turncoat" whigs like Wordsworth, Southey, and 

Coleridge, and its sympathy with revolutionaries like Shelley, but it 

21 

will be shown later that this evidence may not be valid. 

The history of the establishment of the Quarterly Review is best 
told in Scott’s letters, and in Lockhart’s Life of Scott. The first 
sign of real dissatisfaction on the part of Scott with Ed Inburgh 
politics appears in a letter to Southey, December 15, 1807, ^ "I 
dislike extremely the late strain of politics which they have adopted 
, . he writes, and pronounces firmly against the Edinburgh’s 
agitation for Roman Catholic emancipation on the grounds that Romans 
and their clergy are necessarily involved with foreign powers, A 
development of the feeling is apparent in a letter to Lady Abercorn, 


June 9* 1808, where Scott reveals that he has ceased writing for the 












* 4 - 

, 




' ? 

' 

1 

« * * 

ri’ • r ' ■ 





- 6 - 


Edinburgh since “their politics became so warm/’ J and for that 
reason will be unable to ask a favor of Jeffrey. At this stage 
there has been no mention of a review. 

During the summer of 1808, Scott f s relations with his publisher. 
Constable, who was also publisher of the Edinburgh , became strained, 
and finally completely ruptured in January, 1809. Murray, the 
young London publisher, hearing of this quarrel, and of the fact that 
Scott had in hand “another Scotch poem and a Scotch novel,“ hastened 
northward with a scheme which he had long in mind for a rival review. 
His arrival in Ashestiel, where Scott was, in October, 1808, coincided 

with the appearance in the Edinburgh of an article by Brougham, Don 

27 

Cevallos and the Spanish Usurpation . and followed not long after the 

review of Marmion . ~ c Scott was much offended by the Marmion review,'^ 

Murray, when he read the Marmion article, said to Lockhart that 

“Walter Scott has feelings both as a gentleman and a Tory, which these 

people must now have wounded.^ Lockhart quotes a letter from a 

correspondent of his, Mr. R. Cad©11, describing Scott’s reaction to 

31 

the Don Cevallos article. “When the twenty-sixth number appeared, 

Mr. Scott wrote to Constable in these terms8 *The Edinburgh Review 

had become such as to render it impossible for me to continue a con- 
32 

tributor to it v now, it is such as I can no longer continue to 
receive or read it. fn ^ 

Such was Scott r s frame of mind when Murray arrived in Scotland 
in October, 1808. The results of his visit are described by Scott in 







































- 7 - 


a highly significant letter to Ellis, November 2, 1808. ^ This letter 

is worth reproducing entire, because it provides information not only 

about the founding of the Quarterly , but also about the contemporary 

political situation, and about the connections which Scott expected 

the review to have with the government. 

Dear Ellis, - We had, equally to our joy and surprise, a flying 
visit from Heber about three weeks ago. He staid but threes days, 
but, between old stories and new, we made them very merry in 
their passage. During his stay, John Murray, the bookseller in 
Fleet Street, who has more real knowledge of what concerns his 
business than any of his brethren » at least, than any of them 
that I know - came to canvass a most important plan, of which I 
am now, in Mern privaeie,” to give you the outline. I had most 
strongly recommended to our Lord Advocate (the Right Eon. J. G. 
Colquboun) to think of some counter measures against the Edinburgh 
Review, which, politically speaking, is doing incalculable 
damage. I do not mean this in a party wayi the present ministry 
are not all that I could with them, for (Canning excepted) I 
doubt there is among them too much self-seeking . . » But their 
political principles are sound English principles, and, compared 
to the greedy and inefficient horde which preceded them, they are 
angels of light and purity. It is obvious, however, that they 
want defenders, both in and out of doors. Fitt f s 
“Love and fear glued many friends to him| 

And now he t s fallen, those tough co-mixtures m©lt. J? 

Were this only to effect a change of hands I should expect it with 
more indifferences but I fear a change of principles is designed. 
The Edinburgh Review tells you coolly, H We forsee a speedy 
revolution in this country as well as Mr. Cobbettj” and, tc say 
the truth, by degrading the person of the Sovereign, exalting the 
power of the French armies and the wisdom of their counsels, 
holding forth that peace (which they allow can only be purchased 
by the humiliating, prostration of our honour) is indispensable 
to the very existence of our country, I think that for these two 
years past they have done their utmost to hasten the accomplish¬ 
ment of their own prophecy. Of this work 9000 copies are printed 
quarterly, and no genteel family can pretend to be without it, 
because, independent of its politics, it gives the only valuable 
literary criticism which can be met with. Consider, of the 
numbers who read this work, how many are there likely to separate 








II 






' t - 


■ t : 




■; ~ - i 

, 

• 

^ ,! ' ■ ;: 4 -i -V ^ 

i ' 

; 


- 


f « ' t 

1 : 

c T 


V 



. 


% '••• 

„ 

■ 






the literature from the politics? - how many youths are there 
upon whose minds the flashy and bold character of the work is 
likely to make an indelible impression? - and think what the 
consequence is likely to be. 

Now I think there is balm in Gilead for all this, and 
that the cure lies in instituting such a review in London as 
should be conducted totally independent of bookselling influence, 
on a plan as liberal as that of the Edinburgh , its literature as 
well supported, and its principles English and constitutional. 
Accordingly, I have been given to understand that Mr. Hill/km 
Gifford is willing to become the conductor of such a work, and 
I have written to him, at the Lord Advocate *5 desire, a very 
voluminous letter on the subject. Now, should this plan succeed, 
you must hang your birding-pieee on its hook, take down your 
old Anti-Jacobin armour, and ^remember your swashing blow . n It 
is not that I think this projected Review ought to be exclu¬ 
sively or principally politicalj this would, in my opinion, 
absolutely counteract its purpose, which I think should be to 
offer to those who lev© their eounti-y, and to those whom we would 
wish to love it, a periodical work of criticism conducted with 
equal talent, but upon sounder principles. Is not this possible? 
In point of learning, you Englishmen have ten times our scholar¬ 
ship! and, as for talent and genius, M Are not Abana and Fharpar, 
rivers of Damascus, better than any of the rivers in Israel?® 5 
Have we not yourself and your cousin, the Roses, Malthus, 

Matthias, Gifford, Heber, arid his brother? Gan I not procure 
you a score of blue-caps who would write for us than for the 
Edinburgh Review if they got as much as pay by it? 55 A good plot, 
good friends/ 55 

Heber*s fear was lest we should fail in procuring regular 
steady contributors! but I know so much of the interior discipline 
of reviewing as to have no apprehension of that. Provided we 
are once set a-going by a few dashing numbers, there would be 
no fear of enlisting regular contributors! but the amateurs must 
bestir themselves in the first instance. From the Government 
we should be entitled to expect confidential communications as 
to points of fact (so far as fit to be made public) in our 
political disquisitions. With this advantage, our good cause 
and St. George to boot, we may at least divide the field with 
our formidable competitors, who, after all, are much better at 
cutting than parrying, and whose uninterrupted triumph has as 
much unfitted them for resisting a serious attack as it has done 
Buonaparte for the Spanish war. Jeffrey is, to be sure, a man 
of the most uncommon versatility of talent but what then? 

n General Howe is a gallant commander, 

There are others as gallant as he. n 







' 






1 • 

-■ ■ V - .■ - 








- 




•? 




, 

, 




















t : 







* 






■ 












1 





















■ 

. 

, 






<■; " 





- 1 

< 










, 

. 










’ 






* 


















- 9 - 


Think of all this, and let me hear from you very soon on the 
subject. Canning is, I have good reason to know, very anxious 
about the plan. I mentioned it to Robert Dundas, who was here 
with his lady for a few days on a pilgrimage to Melrose, and he 
highly approved of it. Though no literary roan, he is judicious, 
clairvoyant , and uncommonly sound-headed, like his father. Lord 
Melville. With the exceptions I have mentioned, the thing 
continues a secret . . . Ever yours 

Walter Scott 

The "very voluminous letter" which Scott mentions he has written to 
Gifford is dated October 25, 1808, and consists of advice on the 
management of the Quarterly . ^ Scott discusses the payment of 
reviewers, the duties and authority of the editor, the times of 
publication, the selection of contributors, and particularly the 
political affiliation of the Quarterly , and what it should expect from 
the government, its independence, and its probable effect upon the 
Edinburgh . These last, which are important to an understanding of 
the literary opinions- of the Quarterly , and the influence of politics 
upon them, will be considered in the last chapter. This letter to 
Gifford is followed, during the next three months, by a series of 
letters to people interested in the review - Murray, Thomas Scott, 

Lady Abercorn, Morritt, Sharpe, Southey, and of course, Ellis. They 
parallel the letter to Ellis quoted above, Scobt giving more or less 
information about the review according to his estimate of the 
correspondents sympathy. Scott, Morritt, and Sharpe are asked for 
contributions. 

The political sympathies of the Quarterly hardly need explanation 
when one realizes that this review was established to oppose the 









. 




< 






- 10 - 


whiggerv of the Edinburgh * and to support the government. There is 
sufficient evidence in Scotty letter to Ellis, quoted above, and 
elsewhere in the description of the beginnings of the Quarterly to 
show that the founders of the review were Tory, and that they were 
closely connect^with the government. ^ Scott*s serious suggestion 
in the letter to Ellis that Canning, then Foreign Minister, should 
write an article for the first number, is alone sufficient evidence of 
the sympathy of the government, J/ 

The political sympathies of the writers who are reviewed in 
The Edinburgh and in The Quarterly , and their connections with either 
review, usually become apparent in the discussion of the notices. It 
may be as well to outline briefly these sympathies and connections 
where they can be considered together. 

Of the writers discussed here, Southey, Scott, and Haslitt were 
the only ones contributing to either review. All three of them were 
important contributors. Between ISIS and 1838, Southey published 
ninety-two articles in the Quarterly , His political sympathies 
were clearly Tory, although he himself claims some independence of 
party,- In a letter to Bedford, November 9, 1808, he writes5 11 1 
despise all parties too much to be attached to any, 19 when he is asked 
to do a political article on Spain for the first number of the Quarterly , 
"I wish for reform, }f he writes, "because I cannot but see that all 
things are tending towards revolution, and nothing but reform can by 
any possibility prevent it," In another letter to Bedford, November 17, 
















? ...... 










'■r 

1 





















* '0 t 










' 5 ; •; 






l 






















11 


1808, ^ Southey states that he is twilling to travel with them [the 
ministers 1 as far as we are going the same way, and, when our roads 
separate, shall of course leave them. w Like Wordsworth and Coleridge, 
Southey had once been a revolutionary, but by the time of the found¬ 
ing of the Quarterly * we find him writing to congratulate Scott upon 
refusing to contribute to the Edinburgh ^ and carrying on a corres¬ 
pondence with Scott about the Quarterly . Conclusive evidence that 
Southey was thought of as a Tory may be found in the slashing attack 
which Jeffrey makes upon his laureateship, declaring that it is the 
bribe of a Tory government. ^ Brinton 43 writes that n the new 
century finds him about to take up a conservative position in politics” 
and that he "was chiefly blamed for their |*the hake poet e apostasy 
from the revolutionary faith. 11 

Scott is the author of some six reviews in the Edinburgh ; his 

collected contributions to the Quarterly fill nearly five volumes. • 

/ £ 

His political sympathies have already been made clear but Brinton 
leaves no doubt when he opens his essay on Scott by saying that 
fl Seott was born a Tory, and died a Tory,’ 1 and that his works ’’set 
forth a Tory view of life, 0 40 The fact that Scott refused, not 
only to write for the Edinburgh * but also to subscribe to it ^ when 
its politics ’’grew too warm” makes his political position plain. In 
contrast to Scott is Eazlitt, who contributed at least sixteen reviews 
to the Edinburgh * ^ including some of the most virulent, politically, 
and who ’’was born a radical and died a radical. ” aa He was always what 
the French call a Frondeur 9 . » For him the presumption was always 












i ■' ■ 

- .. : ■ - ; ,.q4 , .■ t; c ■ f V v^i & »v; >-1 v-f,/ :, 

' 

i 




. M ' ', . ■ ' ■ ■'■■■' ' V 





































<.--r ' ■' ■;;, .■•■" fOc ! 1 











_ 













* ._ _ 






- 12 - 


against what was established." He "expressed his rebellion by ad¬ 
hering to the ideas of the French revolution . . . when the Lake 
poets had deserted them." 

Wordsworth and Coleridge are grouped by Brinton with Southey. In 
spite of their denials, he writes, they do form a school, and, politi¬ 
cally, at least, are alike. "When they first began to write they were 
all Jacobins of one shade or another; and by the time they had entered 
old age they had become unmistakable Tories." ^ Shelley, says Brinton, 
"was a fanatic." He was "among the street orators, the ranters, 
the dispensers of social salvation who haunt parks and street corners." 
"His ideas were taken over a3.most intact from Godwin." Brinton places 
Byron and Leigh Hunt in the same category as Shelley, stating that they 
were all "making use of polite literature for * . * propaganda against 
the government in power , . » They were opposed to the system of Pitt 
and his successors, and demand as a minimum such a change in the structure 
of English government as will make that system impossible in the future." 

'^ Keats l s politics are not treated by Brinton because, says he, "Iamb 
and Keats, alone seem to have escaped the contagion [of politics!*” ^ 
Keats, however, had Hunt, Hazlitt, and Shelley for friends, and was 
tarred with their brush. The liberal ideas of poems like Endymion 
marked Keats as fair game for the Quarterly and Blackwood *s . McGillivray 
points out that Keats was an innocent bystander in the "Cockney School" 
attacks of Blackwood *s, until Hunt pushed him into the fray, 'whence he 
emerged more badly mauled than any of his fellows. ^5 











„ 

- 

- 










■ 

„ . „ 

, o , 

' 














* 








■ 




' 

, 












~ 13 - 


Notes to Chapter .I 


1, Cockburn, Lord, Life and Correspondence of Lord Jeffrey , Vol. I, 

p. 124 

Reid, Stuart, Sydney Smith , p, 50 
Holland, Lady, A Memoir of Sydney Smith , p» 33 
Russell, George W, E., Sydney Smith , p, 24 
Smith, Sydney, Works, p. v (preface; 

Brougham, Henry, Life and Times of Henry, Lord Brougham , Vol, I, 
p. 176 

Gates, Lewis E. (ed»), Selections from the Essays of Francis 
Jeffrey , p. xxx (preface) , 

2, Smith, Sydney, op, ait. , p, v (preface) 

3, Brougham, Henry, op, cit, . Vol, I, p. 176 

4, "At length a sufficient number of articles were prepared to be 
revised by Smith, and the first number came out in October, 1802," 
(Brougham, Life and Times , Vol, I, p, 180) “I consider that the 

Review owed much of its continuing success to the wise advice 
which Smith administered to Constable at the conclusion of his 
short reign as quasi editor," C Ibid , p. 181) 

5, Brougham, op, clt, « Vol, I, p. 180 

6, Reid, op, cit, , p, 51 (quoted) 

7, Reid explains the difference of opinion about the editorial 
office by saying that although there was no formally appointed 
editor, Smith, as the proposer of the scheme, was naturally elected 
to read over mss. Thus both Smith ! s and Brougham ! s statements 

are correct. One should note that Jeffrey dedicates the collection 
of his contributions to "The Reverend Sydney Smith, the original 
projector of the Edinburgh Review , long its brightest ornament , . 
(Reid, Sydney Smith , p, 53-54) 

8, Cockburn, op, cit, , Vol, I, p, 129 

9, This article by Brougham, which was responsible for Scott*s 
refusing to receive the Edinburgh or contribute to it, contends 
that the Spanish Revolution of 1808, which deprived the usurper 
Joeseph of the throne, was accomplished by the people - the mob - 
without the assistance of any of rank. This popular achievement, 
writes Brougham, will bring the words "liberty**, and w revolution", 
not only to Spain, but to England, where they have not been heard 
since the Tory administration rode in on the wave of French 
revolutionary excesses. The article is almost revolutionary in 
its tone, and heartily condemns the Tory administration. 


























c 




i 


. 


I 











I 


1 










z 


■ 










- 14 - 


10. ER, 23:225, Apr. 1808 („■) 

11. Brougham, op. cit. , Vol. I, p. 187 

12. Ibid .. Vol. I, p. 185 

13. Ibid ,. Vol. I, p. 181 

14. Ibid .. Vol. I, p. 132 

15. Ibid .. Vol. I, p. I 42 

16. Blackwood f s Edinburgh Magazine was begun in 1817 by the publisher 
William Blackwood of Edinburgh, chiefly because the Quarterly , 
well established by that date, had grown too ponderous and ponti¬ 
fical to be an effective weapon against the Whigs, The magazine 
made a name for itself, after getting off to a dismal start, by 
publishing a biblical parody, The Chaldee MS, which ridiculed 
all the more notable of the Edinburgh Whigs. This article 
established Blackwood r s notoriety, which was afterward.s effective¬ 
ly maintained by three of the most unscrupulous writers in 
reviewing, Wilson (who wrote under the name of Christopher 
North) Hogg, and Lockhart, who is generally thought to be the 
author of the articles signed n Z B , (MeGillivray, Keats 
Bibliography , preface p, xyiii) The tone of Blackwood r e re¬ 
viewing, says Chew (Baugh, Literary History of England , p. 1179) 
was one of "flippant and cruel satire”, and MeGillivray (xvii) 
terms the magazine "irresponsible and prankish. M Keats and Hunt 
receive the worst treatment at the hands of Blackwood*s . Hunt 
bore the burden of the first three attacks in October and November 
of 1817, and July of 1818, but because Endymlon appeared almost 
simultaneously with Hunt*s Foliage . and because Hunt was unwise 
enough to publish two foolish poems involving Keats by name, 

Keats was caught up in the struggle, and in the fourth article 

he and Hunt form the centre of the "Cockney Court", Hunt as 
‘Monarch of , ampstead M , Keats as his "infatuated young bardling." 
(MeGillivray, xxiv)Chew writes that "in all the editorial com¬ 
positions a Tory flavoring was maintained, but Blackwood t s 
also offered entertainment unattached to political party.” (1179) 

17. Lockhart, John G., Peter ? q Letters to his Kinsfolk . Vol® XX, 
p. 139 

18. Loc. clt, 

19. Ibid. . Vol, II, p. 146-7 

20. Loc s cit, 


The names of the reviews axe represented by ' . 7*:, 

are to numbers and pages. 


f • 






















1 


5 



! 




1 






1 

i ' ' 

o j* ; ; 





Ci 


c. - . _ _ 










- 15 - 


21. The opinion is held by some that the Edinburgh . beginning as a 
fairly impartial review, became increasingly TChig and anti¬ 
government as time went on. Charles Southey, writing of his 
father’s connections with the Quarterly , states that although 
the Edinburgh . "had commenced upon principles of ’neutrality’, 
otf something of the kind as to party politics, its Whiggery 

had gradually increased until it had become of the deepest dye." 
( Life and Correspondence of Robert Southey . Vol. Ill, p. 181) 
McGillivray (p. xviii) writes that the Edinburgh "was brilliant 
enough, but it had ceased to pretend to be impartial in 
politics and was showing a disturbing sympathy with the cause 
of parliamentary reform." Scott, in the letter to Southey 
quoted below ( Letters of Sir Walter Scott . December 15, 1807, 

Vol. I, p. 400 ) refers to "the late strain of politics which 
they have adopted . 9 .and in the letter to Lady Abercorn, 
also quoted below, states that he has ceased to write for the 
Edinburgh "since their politics became so warm." (Vol. II, 

pT ?T T 

22. Grierson, H, G. C. (ed.), The Letters of Sir 'Walter Scott , 

Vol. I, p, 400 

23. cf. Southey, C. C. (ed.), Life and Correspondence of Robert 
Southey, Vol. Ill, p. 179; Southey to Scott, Nov. 6, 1808. 

24. Grierson, op. pit .. Vol. II, p. 71 

25. Ibid .. Vol. II, p. 154, Letter to Constable 

26. Lockhart, John Gibson, Memoirs of the Life of Walter Scott , 

Vol. II, p. 86 

27. ER, 25J215, Oct, 1808, and see above note 9 

28. ER, 23:1, April 1808 

29. See notetH to Chapt. 3V below 

30. Lockhart, Life of Scott . Vol, II, p. 85 

31. Don Cevallos is in number twenty-five, not twenty-six, although 
both Lockhart and his correspondent put it in twenty-five. It 
is twenty-five which appeared in Get. 1808. 

32. In his long letter of advice to Gifford, Oct. 25, 1808, ( Scott’s 
Letters . Vol. II, p. 101) Scott mentions the " Edinburgh Review , 
in which I wrote occasionally until these last two years when its 
tone of politics became so violent," and see above, p. 6, 









































< . V ‘ * 




1 


















- 16 - 


33. Lockhart, Life of Scott . Vol. II, p. 86 (FN 1) 

34. Grierson, op. cit .. Vol. II, p. 120 ff. 


35. Scott had declined to accept the editorial post, but was willing 
to advise. Erskine, writing to Colqtthoun on Oct. 23, 1808 ( Walter 
Scotty letters , Vol. II, p. 101, FN) states that Murray, when 

he proposed the review to Scott at Ashestiel, asked him to become 
the editor. "This Scott declined, very properly as I think his 
hands are already too full for such an undertaking and if any 
assistance or countenaney is to be given by Government, the 
Editor ought to reside in London." Here, incidentally, is another 
indication of the closeness of the relations between the Quarterly 
and the government, 

36. See below, Ghapt, VI, p. 


37. Canning, who was Foreign Secretary in 1808*9, did not contribute 
to the first number, in spite of Scott f s request, and his own 
interest. He contributed only once, a humorous article on the 
bullion question, written jointly with Ellis in Feb, 1811, after 



he had 

left 

the 

ministry. (QR 

, 9*242, Feb. 

38, 

Southey, (ed.), 


cit,, Vol. 

VI, p. 400 

39. 

Ibid, * 

Vol, 

III, 

, p. 

182 


40. 

Ibid,, 

Vol. 

III 

, p. 

185 


41. 

Ibid.. 

Vol. 

II, 

p. 

17 (Bov, 6 

, 1808) 


42. ER, 52?441, June, 1816 


43. Brinton, Crane, The Political Ideas of the English Romanticists . 

p. 86. 

44. Scott, Walter, Miscellaneous Prose Forks , VoIs. XV11*1X1 

45. See above, p. 6 

46. Brinton, op, cit . , p, 108*9, 

47. See above, p, 6 

48. Home, P, P., Complete Works of William Eazlitt . Vol. XVI 

49. Brinton, op, cit ,. p. 124 

















>> r 








^ _ 






- 17 - 


50. Ibid,, p. 48 

51. Ibid .. p. 163 

52. Loc. cit. 

53. Ibid .. P . 147 

54. Ibid ., p. 4 

55. MacGillivray, J. R., Keats. A Bibliography- and Reference Guide ? 
Introduction, Keats } s Reputation . pp. XIX, XX 






IB 


Chapter II 


WORDSWORTH. COLERIDGE « AND SOUTHEY 

Before considering individual reviews, one should have some idea 
of the general method of reviewing * the physical shape of the articles* 
Generally speaking, the literary articles follow a pattern, which is 
described rather accurately by Southey in the letter to Bedford, 
cited above. ^ Southey*s way of reviewing is “that of giving a 
succinct account of the contents of the book before me, extracting its 
essence, bringing my own knowledge to bear upon the subject, and, 
where occasion serves, seasoning it with those opinions which in some 
degree leaven all my thoughts, words, and actions , n Most literary 
reviewers in both quarterlies follow this technique. The reviews 
open with general remarks on the value of the whole work, the literary, 
political, or philosophic principles upon which it is based, and the 
competence of its author. These are succeeded by an estimate of the 
characterization, versification, narrative, and description in the 
work. Then follows a brief outline of the story or circumstances of 
the poem, generally without critical comment. A great bulk of most 
articles is taken up with selections, often as long as eighty or one 
hundred lines, prefaced and follwed by critical remarks, of which the 
selections are intended to be illustrations* In some reviews, like 
that of Child© Harold , Canto I, in the Edinburgh . the short sketch 
of the story is omitted. Instead, the part of the narrative not 
















' 


. 

. 4 


- 


- 19 - 


included in the selections are told, very briefly, and sometimes very 
satirically, as in Hazlitt f s ^ review of Chrlstabel in the Edinburgh /* 
by the reviewer. At the end of the selections there is usually a 
very short summary of the reviewer’s opinion of the work. The most 
significant opinions - that is, those which identify the poet with a 
school - are usually to be found in the first section, before the 
reviewer begins to write about particular passages, and particular 
weaknesses or strengths in the poem. The Quarterly review of Coleridge 
Remorse, ' which begins with a criticism of the ’’Lake 5 * poets, is an 
example. 

The technique is subject to much variation. Articles which are 
violent in their condemnation, like Croker’s on Endymion in the 
Quarterly ^ or Gifford’s on Eazlitt’s Table Talk ^ sometimes do not 
extract any passages, but devote their entire space to a denunciation 
of the author and his work. The Endymion . review, for instance, is 
only four pages long, compared to a more usual twenty! that of Table 
Talk only five. Both are attempting to discredit the work being 
reviewed. Others, like Jeffrey’s review of Wordsworth*s White Doe . ° 
do not have a summing up of the opinions in a final paragraph, but 
simply end with the last extract. Some reviewers become obsessed with 
one particularly offensive part of the work, and devote their article 
to a denunciation of it, Jeffrey does so in his review of Southey’s 

q 

A Vision of Judgment 7 in which Southey offended by attempting to write 
in hexameters. Faced with the challenge of the hexameters, Jeffrey 
fails to criticize any other quality or absence of quality in the poem. 
















C ■ ' ' < 

' 








hcih il') 












1 




. 

















• 




■ 








- 20 - 


Wordsworth 

An accurate idea of what the reviews thought about Wordsworth 
is not easily formed, partly because, with one exception, ^ the 
small number of articles on him deals with his later and less significant 
work, and partly because Jeffreys reviewing technique, which is one 
of brilliant but misleading sarcasm, obscures his true opinion of the 
poet's worth. In spite of these difficulties, one can find parts of 
Wordsworth's work which receive praise from nearly all the reviewers, 
and other parts which are unanimously condemned. There are also 
some very obvious differences of opinion between the Quarterly and 
the Edinburgh, but these differences, because of Jeffrey's eloquent 
invective, are not so great or so numerous as they appear at first to 
be. 

The reviewers, including Jeffrey, are agreed that Wordsworth has 
ability in describing moving or pathetic scenes, and that he has 
general poetic power, Jeffrey's article on The Excursion ^ contains 
this comment, buried among pages of savage condemnations "But the 
truth is, that Mr, Wordsworth, with all his perversities, is a person 
of great powers! and has frequently a force in his moral declamations, 
and a tenderness in his pathetic narratives, which neither his pro¬ 
lixity nor his affectation can altogether defjrive of their effect," ^ 

Two parts of The Excursion appealed strongly to Jeffreys the story 

of Margaret in Book I, and that of the old chaplain in Book II, He 
selects portions of these two books, prefacing them with the observation 
quoted above, and with others in a similar veins "The bliss and 


































? 















. 




1 








1 ■ 


























J 

























- 21 ~ 


tranquillity of these prosperous years, is well and copiously described 
. . . and the effect . , . is strikingly delineated." "The following 
account of his marriage and early felicity is written with great 
sweetness - a sweetness like that of Massinger in his softer and more 
mellifluous passages.” ”The agony of mind into which the survivor 
was thrown, is described with a powerful eloquence , . 9 There is 
something peculiarly grand and terrible to our feelings in the imagery 
of these three lines • . ”... The story of a simple seduced, 

and deserted girl, told with great sweetness, pathos, and indulgence 
...” ”Many passages in a lofty and impassioned style ...” 
Elsewhere in the article, Jeffrey uses such terms as “lively and 
impressive,” “picturesque,” “animated,” “glowing and eloquent,” to 
describe parts of the poem. He employs the terms seriously in this 
article, although in others about Wordsworth (that on The White Doe , 
for instance) he usues them satirically, “There are,” he writes at 
the conclusion of the selections, “scattered up and down the book, 
and in the midst of its most repulsive portions, a very great number 
of single lines and images, that sparkle like gems in the desert, 
and startle us with an intimation of the great poetic powers that lie 
buried in the rubbish that has been heaped around them.” ^ 

The Quarterly reviewer praises these same qualities in The 
Excursion, describing the story of Margaret as “beautifully tender,” 
and stating that he might “extract powerful instances of pathos” from 
the tales, particularly that of Ellen, which are told by the Vicar. 

















•, * ' « « 

- 




; 

. 










; 

: 












- 22 - 


But there is little to be gained by citing passages, since the entire 
article is extravagant in its praise. The Quarterly article on The 
White Doe and some other poems and essays, ^ which contains more 
unfavorable criticism than does the Quarterly 'Excursion review, also 
credits Wordsworth with having ”a mind richly stored with all the 
materials from which poetry is formed] - elevation of sentiment - 
tenderness of heart , , . extraordinary fervor of imagination a . ° 

The reviewer writes about a passage from The White Doe that it 
”affords no unfavorable specimen of that peculiar tenderness of manner 
for which we think the poem is chiefly remarkable.” Another 
description is said to have ’’much merit.” Throughout these articles 
* (except Jeffrey’s on The White Do©) there is consistent recognition 
of Wordsworth’s general powers as a poet, and of his special ability 
to create scenes of great pathos*. 

There is more agreement in the unfavorable criticism* One of 
Jeffrey’s chief objections to The Excursion is the incomprehensibility 
of some passages. ’’The volume before us, n he writes, ”if we were 
to describe it very shortly, we should characterize as a tissue of 
moral and devotional ravings, in which innumerable changes are rung 
upon a few very simple and familiar ideas? but with such an 
accompaniment of long woitffe, long sentences, and unwieldy phrases - 
and such a hub-bub of strained raptures and fantastical sublimities, 
that it is often extremely difficult for the most skilful and attentive 
student to obtain a glimpse of the author’s meaning » and altogether 









■ 






! 








. 







’ 

1 








1 . J 





- 


- 23 


impossible for an ordinary reader to conjecture what he is about,” ^ 

And again? ”The doctrine which the work is intended to enforce, we 

are by no means certain that we have discovered,” One passage 

Jeffrey describes as an example of "that rapturous mysticism which 

eludes all comprehension,” The final assessment of the poem condemns 

it for being infected with “all the gorgeousness of obscure phraseology” 
20 

The same criticism appears in other articles, Jeffrey repeats it 

21 

in his review of The White Doe, ~ The Quarterly reviewer of The 
White Doe voices it in his preliminary discussion of Wordsworth*s 
poetical theories, Wordsworth, he contends, has so drawn himself off 
from men, and has made such a huge gulf between ”poetic” and ”human” 
sensibility ; that he has left the realm of even advanced human experi¬ 
ence, and may no longer be understood by thinking and sensitive readers, 
A poet must do more than write in the language of menj he must also 
feel in their language, Wordsworth, complains the reviewer, no longer 
describes universal human experience in his poetry. Some of the tiny, 
mystical, experiences of which he makes so much have no significance 
for the rest of mankind, ^ ”111 we can say,” concludes this portion 

of the article, ”is that whenever Mr. Wordsworth f s own flights are 
through *the region 3 of truth and nature, and sober sense, we accompany 
him with pleasurej but when he penetrates into the terra Australis 
beyond, then, indeed, our inclination to continue of the party, as 
well as our ability, leaves us,” ^ 


Both reviews censure Wordsworth for drawing his characters from 












■ 

■ 






r 


, 

* • ■ • • ; f ■' “ ■ .r> . . 

. 

, 

' 

1 








- 24 


the lower ranks of society, although the Quarterly article on The 
Excursion contains a defense of the choice. ^ Jeffrey disapproves 
of the characters mainly on grounds of "revolting incongruity. w It 
is thoroughly improbable, he maintains, that any pedlar would be 
capable of the wisdom and eloquence which belong to Wordsworth*s 
companion. "Did Mr. W. really imagine that his favorite doctrines 
were likely to gain anything in point of effect or authority by being 
put into the mouth of a person accustomed to higgle about tape or 
brass sleeve-buttons?" ^ The Quarterly reviewer of The White Doe 
is less forceful but more reasonable than Jeffrey on the subject of 
characters. It may or may not be true, he writes, that low-life 
people are a better poetic vehicle for conveying metaphysical ideas. 
But the issue is not a metaphysical one. The public is declining to 
read Wordsworth because he does not sufficiently please them. However 
easy low-life and rustic characters make Wordsworth f s self-assigned 
task of teaching metaphysical ideas, they are entirely unsuited to the 
delineation of the kind of common human experience in which those 
who ordinarily read poetry have an interest. The amount of pleasure 
which we derive from a poem, goes on the - reviewer, depends upon the 
amount of mental activity which full comprehension of the poem f s 
subject requires. "It requires no extraordinary degree of judgment 
and penetration-to discriminate the broad rough lines by which the 
characters of people in low life are commonly chalked outj nor can it 
require , , * any extraordinary force of imagination to enter into 
their feelings , , , M ^ 

















1 






















9 

' 






- 

1 ■ 





















' 












* ' . * 


* « 








- 25 


Besides complaining of the obscurity of some passages in Wordsworth, 
and of the unsuitability of some of his low-life characters, both 
reviews also censure the poet f s failure to be "of the world,* 1 either 
in his life or in his writing. In the Excursion article, Jeffrey 
attributes what he calls "a disproportion which seems to exist between 
this author f s taste and his genius’* to Wordsworth f s failure to make 
himself a part of, or at least familiar with, polite society. Mingling 
with those who will ultimately read and judge his poetry is the only 
way, according to Jeffrey, in which Wordsworth will rid himself of 
his unfortunate sell’-admiration and love of introspection. Jeffrey 
admits that a man may well find himself* moved or inspired by such 
solitary experiences as have prompted most of Wordsworth ? s poetry, 
but, he goes on, it is necessary that the poet know enough of the 
"few settled and permanent maxims, which form the canon of general 
taste 51 that he will avoid including in his work many things which 
"must necessarily be despised as childish, or derided as absurd in 
all . . . societies. 11 Wordsworth*s failure to meet the standard 
of public taste is attributed by Jeffrey to "long habits of seclusion 
. . . solitary musings." If Mr. Wordsworth," he writes, "instead of 
confining himself almost entirely to the society of the dalesmen and 
cottagers, and little children, who form the subjects of his book, 
and condescended to mingle a little more with the people that were to 
read and judge of it, we cannot help thinking, that its texture would 
have been considerably improved ..." The Quarterly expresses the 


same opinion in several pages of their White Doe article devoted to 







- 

1 

!' 

! - 1 




- 26 - 


Wordsworth*s theory of poetry, which defines that art as something 
apart from the normal intercourse of daily life, the vehicle which 
conveys ’’emotions which lie too deep for tears,” ^9 The function of 
poetry, writes the Quarterly reviewer, is to describe and comment 
upon human experience which is common to at least the more sensitive 
of the poet ! s readers. Wordsworth, however, has either chosen for 
his subjects experiences which are necessarily his alone, or else he 
has chosen common experiences, but raised his feelings about them to 
such a lofty and mystical level, that the ordinary reader is at a 
loss to understand ?fhat he means. H He devotes himself almost ex¬ 
clusively to the delineation of himself and his own pecular kind of 
life he leads . , » so that not only the incidents which form the 
subjects of his poetry, are such as the greater part of his readers 
take much less interest in, than he imagines, but the feelings, 
moreover, with which he usually contemplated them are often such as 
hardly any person whatever can participate * , , His feelings are 
tuned much too high for the sobriety of truth . . s he must descend 
from his supposed height, and feel as other men feel,” 

A hasty reading of the Wordsworth articles in both reviews reveals 
what seems to be a considerable difference in their two opinions of 
the poet. The sharpness of Jeffrey’s tone makes the difference 
seem greater than it is, but the two reviews 1 estimates of a number of 
qualities in 'Jordsworth f s poems are obviously at odds. The first 
major difference is one of tone. The Edinburgh is certainly more 


















' 

' 

. 




1 

' 






. 

, „ . 














. 








. 













1 -li:' 




























27 - 


vehement in its damnation of Wordsworth, and less enthusiastic in its 
praise, than is the Quarterly . The opening sentences set the tone 
of both Jeffreyls articles, 31 a tone which is continued throughout 
by such devices as comparing Wordswoithto a drunkard whose last drink 
has either made him "absolutely outrageous," or lulled him "into the 
most profound stupidity," 32 or lavishing praise on passages especially- 
selected for their dullness or obscurity, 33 The Quarterly « although 
it censures many of the same weaknesses in Wordsworth’s work, does 
so in more moderate language, attempting to point out those character¬ 
istics which are praiseworthy, as well as those which are not, "The 
productions of Mr, Wordsworth , , , exhibit a mind richly stored with 
all the materials from which poetry is formed , * , It would appear, 
however, that he has by no means turned these valuable endowments to 
their best advantage , , , n 3U Jeffrey writes substantially the same 
about Wordsworths ,f But the truth is, that Mr. Wordsworth, with all 
his perversities, is a person of great powers , , 35 but he puts 

this praise near the middle of his ariie?ie, where it cannot soften 
the effect of the harsh condemnation at either end. 

Apart from this difference of tone, there are some major differences 
in the opinions of the two reviews of individual works. That Jeffrey’s 
on The Excursion consists largely of condemnation has been shown 
already, For this same poem, the Quarterly has nothing but extra¬ 
vagant praise. "To the completion of this plan we look forward with 
a confidence which the execution of the finishedpart is well calculated 
to inspire." 3t The fact that Wordsworth planned some long additions 












1 

0 . '■ ■ ■ ' '■ ' : * 

* 

, ■ , . , 






. , . 


; 

■ ,;• 


- „ . 






• 
















- 23 - 


to The Excursion provided Jeffrey with a satirical weapon which 
he wields at length and effectively. About the description the 
Quarterly reviewer says: "The dialogue throughout is carried on in 
the very heart of the most romantic scenery which the poet *s native 
hills could supply . . .'we breathe in the fresh air, as we do while 
reading Walton f s Complete Angler." ^9 The two reviews differ so 
violently on particular parts of the poem that one suspects Jeffrey 
of writing his article as an answer to the Quarterly f s unqualified 
praise. One passage, for instance, Jeffrey condemns as "A good 
specimen ofthe author^ talent for enveloping a plain and trite 
observation in all the mock majesty or solemn verbosity. A reader 
of plain understanding, we suspect, could hardly recognize the 
familiar remark, that excessive grief for our departed friends is not 
consistent with a firm belief in their immortal felicity, in the first 
twenty liflfc© of the following passages - In the sequel we do not 
ourselves pretend to recognize anything." ^ Evidently the Quarterly 
reviewer recognized something in the sane passage, for he records that 
the finest speculation ... in the poem before us, is the notion of 
the thoughts which may sustain the spirit, while they crush the 
frame of the sufferer, who, from loss of objects of love by death, is 
commonly supposed to pine away under a broken heart." ^ ^ On the 
subject of Book UT of The Excursion , the Quarterly reviewer writes that 
he considers it to be "the most valuable portion of the poem. For 
moral grandeur, for wide scope of thought and a long train of lofty 
imagery! for tender personal appealsj and a versification which we 












1 


■ 






1 











• • 1 . ' t! 





- 







- 







■ 


































r 







- 29 


feel we ought to notice ... it stands without competition among 
our didactic and descriptive verse.” ^ Jeffrey, on the other hand, 
reports that "the fourth book is also filled with dialogues ethical 
and theological; and « . » consists of an exposition of truisms, 
more cloudy, wordy, and inconceivably prolix, than anything we ever 
met with.” Jeffrey ! s views on the humble characters of Wordsworth 
have been outlined. They are certainly not shared by the Quarterly 
reviewer of the Excursion , /+D who write si "If from living among simple 
mountaineers, from a daily intercourse with them , , , he has detected 
thoughts and apprehensions not vulgar » * , he will be deemed a man 
of perverted genius by the philanthropist who starts at finding them 
JjpeasantsJ elevated to a level of humanity with himself, having their 
own loves, entities, cravings, aspirations, etc. . * ^ The 

critic goes on to say that if those who blame Wordsworth for using 
children as the subject of his poetry had ever been children 
themselves, they would better appreciate the poet f s choice. Jeffrey 
makes specific mention of "little children” in his objection to 


Wordsworth f s characters, and the company which the poet keeps, 


48 


The Quarterly reviewer contends that characters like the Pedlar in 
The Excursion are in harmony with the rest of the poem, and that 
Wordsworth has made their wisdom and eloquence probably,by giving to 
them a certain amount of education, not inconsistent with their 
station in life, "After all,” he concludes, "if there should be 
found readers willing to admire the poem, who yet feel scandalized 












r 














- 30 - 


at a name , we would advise them, whenever it occurs, to substitute 
silently the word Palmer, or Pilgrim . . ." ^9 The two reviews deal 
in such different ways with the same passages, and seem to make such 
a point of selecting the same passages for notice, that there is some 
reason for thinking that the later reviewer wrote with the other 
article before him. 

The main difference between the two rev5.ews of The 'White Doe is, 
that although the Quarterly finds something to commend in the poem, with 
a great deal to censure, the Edinburgh finds nothing to commend. "That 
the poem contains many beauties," writes the Quarterly reviewer," . , . 
will abundantly appear from the extracts ♦ . »■ but abundantly- appear 
fr-Ui 0 " ' rbu 1 . . . but then, in other parts, it is as much dis- 

tinguifhid for obscurity and flatness." ^ Jeffrey writes that he 
could not help feeling, when he opened the volume, that seme "ill- 
natured critic" of the "lake" school of poetry had gathered together- 
all the faults of that school, "on purpose to make it ridiculous," 
in one poem, but he abandoned this idea as he read further, for 
"nothing in the nature of a joke could be so insupportably dull." J 
He describes the poet as being "in a state of low and maudlin 
imbecility," and the poem as "the very worst we ever saw imprinted 
in a quarto volume." In the Quarterly , the selections are described 
as "pleasing lines," a "specimen of . * . tenderness of manner,!' 
description a . * of much merit," "language . . * well suited . . . 
to the subject." Jeffrey selects portions of the poem which are 

especially remarkable for their dullness or feebleness, and destroys 

rA 


























0 





• * 0 

4 

5 . 









- 31 - 


them utterly by prefacing them with ironic praise, ^3 

The Quarterly is a good deal kinder to Wordsworth than is the 
Edinburgh. Even when the two reviews agree in praising some 
characteristic of Wordsworth l s work, Jeffreypraise is more reserved 
and qualified than is the Quarterly reviewers*. When they agree that 
something is bad, Jeffrey*s condemnation is invariably harsher, more 
satirical, and in greater detail. Those parts of the poems about 
which they disagree are always scoffed at by Jeffrey, praised by the 
Quarterly ; and Jeffrey not infrequently selects as a target for his 
most withering blasts the very passages which the Quarterly men select 
for their warmest commendation. There is a good possibility that 
Jeffrey*s selecting these passages is deliberate. 






- 










1 ■ t ’ 




' 




1 

t ' 











Coleridge 


Both The Edinburgh Review and The Quarterly Review thought 
Wordsworth and Coleridge cut of the same political, philosophic, 
ahd literary cloth, and from a study of their two opinions of 
Wordsworth, one can form an accurate idea of what they thought about 
Coleridge* The Quarterly noticed two of Coleridge f s works in this 
period; The Remorse * a Tragedy . ^4 and the translation of Schiller 
Wallenstein *^ The latter review is more of Schiller than of Coleridge, 
and contains only a few unrevealing comments on the quality of 
Coleridge’s translation* The Remorse article, however, makes clear 
the Quarterly attitude to Coleridge, and included a highly significant 
discussion of the ’’Lake” poets and their theory of poetry* This 
discussion is dealt with fully in the last chapter! the gist of it 
is that the ’’Lake” men are condemned, probably unfairly, for their 
philosophic, religious, and poetical theories, because their poetry 
is of a kind which does not permit of full explanation. The theories, 
writes the reviewer, would probably satisfy everyone if they were 
completely and clearly explained. The critic reproves the ’’Lake* 1 men 
for sacrificing ’’the chance of general popularity for the devoted 
admiration of a few* 1 , saying that the best poetry is ’’not too high 
for the low and simple, nor yet too low for the wise and learned’ 1 . ^ 
The criticism is very gently given, and the fault is described as 
’’excellence carried to an excess” ^ rather than as any lack of good 

















s, : 













quality. The introductory part of the review concludes with the 
statement that there are some things "of no common importance 0 9 0 
in which we scruple not to rank the lake Poets above all that have 
gone before them. 12 ^ For the Remorse . the Quarterly has high* but 
not unqualified praise. "To the merits of incident and character* 
writes the reviewer*" we have to add the charm of a rich and glowing 
poetry. Indeed in all that Mr, Coleridge writes are to be observed a 
loftiness and purity of sentiment* a picturesque conception of imagery* 
and a luxuriance of fancy , , , l! ou The selections are prefaced with 
such remarks as "the following description is highly poetical* 1 * and 
"there is something of uncommon richness and wildness of fancy in the 
following speech of Teresa." There are some objections to the plays 
it is improbable*, the poetry is "far removed from the ready 
apprehension of common minds*- 1 thermit at ions of Shakespeare are 
weak. The excellences predominate* however* concludes the review* and 
because of them* "we will venture to recommend The Remorse to our 

/r i 

readers. We are confident of its success in the closet , , «“ 

The review can hardly be called an altogether favorable one* but there 
is a definite sympathy for Coleridge* and a conviction that the play 
is a good one - although not the best of which he is capable. 

The Edinburgh articles on Christabel . The Pains of Sleep , and 

v 

Rub la Khan , ~ on Biograpfala Llterarla ^ and on one of Coleridge *s 

lay sermons* The Statesman^ Manual leave no doubt about the 


Edinburgh opinion. All three articles are particularly interesting 























i 








■ 







e 



J ' 0 ' , 


$ 








* 




td 


i 













- 34 - 


because they contain evidence of political feeling against Coleridge, 
The reviewer ! s opinion of the three poems with which he is dealing 
in the first article (that of Chris babel , Kubla Khan , and The Pains 
of Sleep ) is nearly summed up near the end of the articles "upon 
the whole, we look upon this publication as one of the most notable 
pieces of impertinence of which the press has lately been guiltyi and 
one of the boldest experiments that has yet been made on the patience 
or understanding of the public, n w , , » The thing now before us, is 
utterly destitute of value. It exhibits from beginning to end not a 
ray of geniuss and we defy any man to point out a passage of poetical 
merit in any of the three pieces which it contains," . * There is 
literally not one couplet in the publication before us which would be 
reckoned poetry, or even sense, were it found in the corner of a 
newspaper or upon the window of an inn, 11 00 The reviewer depends, in 
most of his criticism, upon satirical comment about passages whose 
lunacy he seems to think is apparent to any reader. Much is made of 
the mastiff bitch, for instance, Ghristab@X f s and Geraldine l s return 
from the wood is described in this ways 11 Lady C e is desirous of a 
little conversation on the way, but Lady G. will not indulge her 
Ladyship, saying, she is too much tired to speak. We now meet our 
old friend, the mastiff bitch, who is much too important a person to 
be slightly passed by „ , » !f The reviewer then quotes the passage 
ending; 

Perhaps it is the owlet ! s seritchs 

For what can ail the mastiff Bitch? 

and continues with "whatever it may be that ails the bitch, the ladies 
















' 


1 

.. B'.;' 













* *■ * <! nils 




. : 














, 

b 











t ■ ■ 









- 







r 


' 







. 







* 









, 






1 













- 35 - 


pass forward, and take off their shoes* and tread softly all the way 
upstairs, as Christabel observes that her father is a bad sleeper,, f,DO 
No attempt is made to show what is wrong with the passage. 

The last paragraph of this article contains one of the few 
positive evidences, in either the Edinburgh or the Quarterly * of 
political feeling in a review of a non-political work. Byron had 
written an introduction to the volume, praising it and its quthor 
highly. The reviewer evidently thinks that Byron f s recommendation 
may be seconded by the official world - perhaps by the Quarterly « 
because Coleridge had given his support to the "courtiers' 1 * "And 
are such panegyrics," he writes, "to be echoed by the mean tools of 
a political faction, because they relate to one whose daily prose is 
understood to be dedicated to the support of all that courtiers think 
should be supported? If it be true that the author has thus earned 
the patronage of Ihose liberal dispensers of bounty, we can have no 
objection that they should give him proper proofs of their gratitude! 
but we cannot help wishing, for his sake, as well as our own, that they 
would pay in solid pudding instead of empty praise| and adhere, at 
least in this instance, to the good old system of rewarding their 
champions with places and pensions, instead of puffing their bad 
poetry, and endeavouring to cram their nonsense down the throats of 
all the loyal and we11-affected," °9 This seems to be directed against 
the literary reviewing of the Quarterly and of Blackwood:*s * who, in 
the opinion of this reviewer, dole out rewards to the Tory poets. 


Tv 









* ! 












- .' 




' ■ t . . j *■.: • V 




/ r • 1 ' V w ! 1 <f 


1 






-r 

































acting on instruction from the government. 


70 


Coleridge ! s lay sermon, The Stateswan*s Manual; or the Bible 
the best guide to Political Skill and Foresight 4 Addressed to the higher 
classes of society 4 contains political and sociological views to which 
Hazlitt objects violently. For tie quality of the writing in the sermon, 
apart from the political principles which it contains, he has only 
contempt. The review begins with this passages "The privilege . . , 
of talking, and even publishing nonsense, is necessary in a free state; 
but the more sparingly we make use of it, the better. Mr. 

Coleridge has here availed himself of this privilege, - but not 
sparingly." Coleridge, writes Hazlitt, "wisely draws a metaphysical 
bandage over his eyes, sits quietly down where he was, takes his nap, 
and talks in his sleep , „ . He winks and mutters all unintelligible, 
and all impertinent things . . , like Falstaff, *babbles of green 
fields 1 . . The article goes on to say that the sermon has no 

opinion - is a mere vacuum - and that in it Coleridge shows no ability 
to follow a truth through to its conclusions. He is, according to the 
review, a fanciful dabbler. 

The gist of the sermon is that all knowledge necessary to directors 
of state affairs may be found in the Bible. Ordinary men, however, 
should perform the tasks of that station of life in which God has been 
pleased to place them, and let the statesmen, who read and understand 
the Bible, attend to the great affairs whose government is explained 
therein. Coleridge explains that he has directed the sermon ad clermru 



















I 






- 












a. 









t ■ ■'* 


5 






, 

51 

t. 







37 


because only those with education are likely to have sympathy with 
such unusual ideas. It is unfortunate, goes on Coleridge, that 
everyone can read because a written sermon may no longer be addressed 
to the educated with any hope that only they williead it. "For 
our readers," writes Coleridge, "have in good truth multiplied exceed¬ 
ingly, and have waxed proud," These undemocratic sentiments Hazlitt 
finds extremely distasteful, "The truth is," he 'writes, "... that 
the whole of this sermon is written to sanction the principle of 
Catholic dictation, and to reprobate that diffusion of free inquiry - 
that difference of private, and ascendancy of public opinion, which has 
been the necessary consequence, and the great benefit of the reforma¬ 
tion. That Mr, Coleridge himself is as squeamish in guarding his 
Statesman *s Manual from profanation as any Popish priest can be in 
keeping the scriptures from the knowledge of the Laity, will be seen 
from the following delicate moreeau , a # n ^ Then follows the passage 
outlined above, in which Coleridge expresses his views on universal 
reading, "There is something," writes the reviewer, "worse than 
occasional error, - systematic imposturej something worse than the 
collision of differing opinions, - the suppression of all freedom of 
thought and independent love of truth, under the torpid.sway of an 
insolent and selfish domination, which makes use of truth and falsehood, 
equally as tools of its own aggrandizement and the debasement of its 
vassals, and always must do so, without the exercise of public 
opinion, and freedom of conscience, as its control and counter-check." 


. 

* 

■ 

. 

- . 

; 

,_ ' 

^ . 

* „ „ :• i ■ 

i ■ 

- , 

■■ - .. r. \ / ) ; V ‘ ' < I ", ' CvO 

\ 









- 38 - 


Thus the reviewer objects to the politics of Coleridge r s sermon mainly 
on the grounds that they are dangerous tc freedom, and undemocratic. 

He takes Coleridge to task for criticizing Hume f s ’’most judicious, 
profound, and acute of all historical compositions,” on the grounds 
of its scepticism. One statement about Hume he describes as a 
"gratuitous poetical fabrication, as mean as it is malignant.” l ' 

The notes are described as "laborious foolery,” 

Hazlitt r s review of Biagraphia Literal-la adds very little to what 
the other two articles reveal about the Edinburgh opinion of Coleridge 
Hazlitt speaks very disperagingly of Biographia . Coleridge, he writes 
"keeps up that ’pleasurable poetic fervor 1 • , a by indulging his 
maudlin egotism and his mawkish spleen in fulsome eulogies of his 
own virtues, and nauseous abuse of his contemporaries . . 

There is one passage of some political significance. Hazlitt quotes 
from Biographia part of the section dealing with Southey, in which 
Coleridge explains how Southey, Lamb, Wordsworth, and others were 
sharply criticized and ridiculed in the days of their liberal politics 
Coleridge accuses the "party" - the government party - of having 
allowed this uncalled-for abuse to go on, and gives credit to himself 
and to his friends for following their convictions and going over to 
the party in spite of abuse. Hazlitt is contemptuous, saying that 
the party not only allowed the calumny to go on, but actually perpet¬ 
rated it, and that Coleridge and his friends did not go over to the 
"party" by conviction, in spite of these attacks, but merely because 
they feared the slander, and coveted the reward. 











t . ■ 1 

"t , . 


t ■ 




1 


* n e ^ 


« , * 

t 

~ 

• ' ' - . . 







- 39 - 


,r . . . Mr. Coleridge thinks it necessary to apologise in the name of 
all good men, for having remained so long adverse to a party which 
recruited upon such a bounty; and seems not obscurely to intimate that 

cx 

they had effectual means of propagating their slanders against those 
good men who differed with them, that most of the latter found there 
was no other way of keeping their good name but by giving up their 
principles, and Joining in the same venal cry against all those who 
did not become apostates or converts, ministerial Editors, and 
1 laurel-honoring laureates* like themselves. 1 - !! Evidently Hazlitt 
believed that the relations between the Quarterly and the government 
were not altogether innocent. 

The rest of the review consists of comments upon those who form 
the subject of Biograshia Literaria - Southey, Wordsworth, and Burke 
are discussed, with many philosophers. Towards all of them, Hazlitt 
is of course hostile. Coleridge is rapped particularly vigorously for 
his praise of Burked consistency in politics. 

Quite plainly, both reviews think much the same of Coleridge as 

they do of Wordsworth. One reason for their doing so is that they 

classed the two poets in the same ^Lake* 1 school, and, liking or 

disliking the principles of the school, liked or disliked its members 
79 

as well. The Quarterly review of Remorse and the Edinburgh review 
of Chrisfabel both speak at some length about the f, 'Lake ,? School, That 
the reviewers, particularly those in the Edinburgh , were very much 
aware of the political differences between themselves and Coleridge, 














* ’ ' 


- 1 1 1 

ii.. 








. -, . , . . 0 ’ i 

• •' •' : ;1 

* • 1 

0 J . «. 

. 

<, s. 

_ 

» ■ 

<* 1 









- 40 - 


is made clear by the closing political outburst in the Christabel 
article, and by the contempt which characterizes the article on the 
lay sermon. How much this awareness of political difference actually 
affected the reviewing of non-political works in the Edinburgh will 
be the subject of conjecture in the last chapter. 





- 41 - 


Southey 

The two reviews seldom agree in their opinions of Southey f s 
work. CJhen the reasons for their reviewing as they do are discussed 
in Chapter VI, this difference of opinion will be of particular 
significance, because if political prejudice were to show itself in 
any reviewing, it would surely do so in the Edinburgh reviews of 
Southey, who was /a Tory, a "turncoat”, a contributor to the Quarterly , 
and a member of the "Lake” school, about which Jeffrey was so insistent. 

It is important that about a few characteristics of Southey and 
his writing, the Edinburgh and the Quarterly agree. Both believe that 
he has some general abilities as a poet • The Edinburgh . for 
instance, writes in the reivew of The'Curse of Kehama that "not 
many poets, dead or living, have given proof of a finer fancy, or 
drawn more copiously from the stores of a rich and cultivated 
imaginations still fewer have maintained a siiblimer tone of sentiment, 

- or pictured, in more enchanting colors, the simple and innocent 

go 

affections of our nature. . The Edinburgh article on Madoc 

states that n Mr, Southey, we think, has great talents for poetryi 
and more learning and industry than commonly fall to the lot of those 
who dedicate themselves to the service of the muses ...” J There 
is no shortage in the Quarterly of expressions of confidence in 
Southey f s general abilities. The reviewer of The Curse of Kefaama ^ 
contends that n . « a no bard of modern days possesses a more abundant 

gr 

share of imagination, the highest of poetic qualities,” ^ and about 
Roderick that "the critic * . * has little to do but to point out in 

































c: 


T 
















- 42 


the mass of admirable matter those things which strike him as most 
worthy of admiration." 

Not only do the reviews agree that Southey has general poetic ability* 
but both of them admit readily and frequently that his powers of 
description are very great. The Quarterly distinguishes a selection 
from The Curse of Kehama as "rich and brilliant description," ^ 
and later notes that Southey ! s work has a "glow, and exuberancy even 
in his descriptions," The reviewer commends the oriental background 
of The Curse, stating that it remains oriental throughout the poem, 
and that nowhere does Southey betray his English connections. Southey*s 
description, goes on this same review, "hovers between that of Dante 
and Milton; not exhibiting the tedious particularity of the former, 
yet more detailed than that of the latter." ^ The picture of the 
"sub-marine" city in The Curse is highly recommended in the Quarterly ? 

"The obscure yet wondrous remains of this sub-marine city are displayed 
in the most glowing and romantic colors," and "the screams and 
torments of the damned are described with all the gloomy power of 

O'! 

Dante," ' The Edinburgh is almost as enthusiastic about Southey f s 
descriptions. The underwater city, writes the reviewer, is "very 
finely described"; ^2 another passage shows "great power of coloring, 1 * 
and a third, in Canto XV, is "beautiful description." The entire poem 
is described as "another pile of splendid images with , 8 * greater 
beauties than are to be found in much of our remembered poetry," 

The opening scene, which the Quarterly terms a "rich and brilliant 
description," 


is considered by the Edinburgh writer to be "a very 






































■ 
















































. 














1 - 







































' D 














* 




















! 















' 

! - 




• 



a 

























' 

< • 



• 

> * 

' ; d' 



















• 










. 














7 . r . 







- 43 - 


good specimen * * * of the author*s powers of picturesque representa¬ 
tion . » . n ^ The Edinburgh article on Madoc prefaces a selection 
with the following; ” , * . the truth of the following description 
will give the most exquisite gratification," ' and another with; 

"the following description , * , is marked * . • with all the characters 
of genuine and fine poetry," ^' 

There is some recognition by both reviews of the fantastic 
improbability of Madoc and The Curse , The quarterly defends this 
improbability on the grounds that the greatest English writers have 
conveyed their meaning through a supernatural medium; the Edinburgh 
condemns it as "childish," The Quarterly reviewer writes that "the 
poem The Curse being entirely mythological, add the agents, generally 
speaking, having little in common with humanity, it must at first 
sight seem difficult to preserve that interest in the action of the 
piece which forms-the principal charm of narrative," However, goes 
on the review, the character of Kailyal lends interest to "the 
adventures of the persecuted pair, remote as they are from all 
resemblance to possibility;- n y The Quarterly also mentions a few 
of the most extravagant- details in The Curse , asserting that their 
wildness is harmful to the poem, ", , , while plunging into such an 
abyss of monstrous and outrageous fictions, the poet, perhaps, became 
more familiarized with the eastern style than was quite consistent with 
the necessary severity of selection, and we have been not a little 
startled at some of the topics which he-has, chosen to celebrate, ie 















- 






o 










* 





































have already stated our objections to the eight days combat 

of Ladurlad with thf sea monster, and to the self-multiplication 

99 

of Kehama, on his storming Padaion 77 , . .A globe * . a composed 
of the pupils of human eyes, we must condemn without mercy. We would, 
also send to the Remise a certain infernal car, which, as it only 
moved on one wheel, must have been a precarious vehicle , . ..we can¬ 
not reconcile ourselves to Camdeo ! s bowfiring, which being compsed of 
live bees, must have been singularly ill-adapted to the purposes of 
archery; nor are we at all pleased with the bees breaking off on one 
occasion, and hiving upon Kailyal’s head.* ' w ' The Edinburgh is brief¬ 
er and more severe in its criticism of the same passages in The 
Curse, This remarkable canto, writes the reviewer, n brings in the 
Indian Cupid riding on a lory, to shoot vainly at them with a bow of 
sugarcane strfitng with a row of living bees. This section contains 
more childishness than any we have yet noticed, and is full of namby- 
pamby and affectation, intermixed with a. sort of amiable and pretty 

1 Q2 

silliness.” ~ The Edinburgh sums up its attitude to Southey*® ex- 
travangances by saying that n it[the poem] possesses the interest of 
a fairy tale for children . , . the fictions of which it consists, 
are so utterly extravagant as to lose the power even of producing 
astonishment . , « if he gives us a giant a hundred feet high, w© 
think we should have one of a thousand , . . the familiar use of 

10? 

prodigies makes us impatient of any ordinary occurrences . , » n 












/ 

, } « 
















1 


* 


; 

( 







- 45 - 


Although the reviews show some agreement in their recognit¬ 
ion of Southey’s general abilities, arid of his powers of descript¬ 
ion, and although they are both aware of the improbability of some 
of his incidents and characters, they disagree entirely in most of 
their opinions of him. The overall, general tone of the Edinburgh 
articles is invariably slighting (the later reviews, like those of 
Carmen Triumphale , A Vision of Judgment, and The Lay of the 
Laureate consist exclusively of harsh condemmtion and sharp ridicule) 
but the tone of the Quarterly reviews is consistently favorable to 
Southey. The Edinburgh finds Southey’s characters empty and unlikely; 
the Quarterly praises them for their humanity and probability. The 
Edinburgh condemns ail the bizarre incidents as destructive to the 
poems; the Quarterly defends Southey’s use of them. The Edinburgh 
believes Southey’s attempts at novel versification to be childish 
and unsuccessful; the Quarterly is refreshed by them. The failure of 
Southey’s poems is attributed by the Edinburgh to the poet’s disregard 
of the precepts and examples of older poets; to this disregard the 
Quarterly gives the credit for Southey’s success. The Edinburgh 
complains of tedious wordiness and prolixity in Southey’s work; the 
Quarterly makes no mention of excessive length. 

The tone of the Edinburgh articles is set by such sweeping 
criticisms as these from the reviews of Thalaba and ' Madco s ’’The 

subject of this poem is almost as ill-chosen as the diction; and 

103 

the conduct of the fable as disorderly as the versification.” 




















' 

. i ■ 

r ' 

- 

T 

. 

■ 

. 





















- 46 - 


"Tales of this sort may amuse children . * . but the interest 

expires with the novelty; and attention is frequently exhausted* 

even before curiosity has been gratified." "Its excessive 

length* together with a want of interest in the story* and a 

considerable failure in the delineation of character* will render 

it tedious, we are afraid, to ordinary readers* and communicate an 

105 

air of heaviness to the whole composition." Carmen Triumphs.la , 

writes the Edinburgh , is "a strange farrago of bad psalmody and 

stupid newspapers . . . a base imitation of Sternhold and the daily 
106 

advertiser ..." 'A Vision of Judgment is described as "a flat 
and heavy eulogy on kings and ministers* and on the poet himself and 
his admirers - enlivened* in a sickly way* but the perpetual out- 
breakings of a puny spite at those who dissent from his present creed 
in politics* and of a lamentable soreness at the success of those who 
v have laughed at^fhis affectations* or eclipsed* by their superior tal¬ 
ents* his former fame as a poet." 

The generalized criticisms at the beginning and end of the 
Quarterly articles (and it is these generalisations whbh set the tone 
of the articles) give Southey nothing but praise. The beauties of 
The Curse* writes the reviewer* "are infinite* and it possesses that 

high qualification for popularity* the power of exciting a painful 

10 S 

and sustained interest." Roderick is "original in its plan* true 

in its fundamental elements, and consistent in its parts; it rouses 









































1 






































- 47 


the feelings, and stimulates those powers of the imagination, 
which rejoice in the consciousness of exertion,, When we rise 
from . . . (thejwork , * . we are made to feel that our intel¬ 
lectual and moral existence is enlarged,” ~ ' r ' In tone, there¬ 
fore, the two reviews are greatly different, 

Southey T s characters are the subject of another marked dif¬ 
ference of opinion. The Quarterly regards them as one of the 
great strengths of his verse, the Edinburgh as one of the great 
weaknesses. The improbability of The Curse, writes the Quarterly , 

is quite justified by ”a beautiful picture of filial affection ex- 

110 

hibited in the amiable and beautiful Kailyal.” The Quarterly 

article on Roderick contains a review of several of Southey’s poems 
answering criticisms that his characters are improbable. The review 
concludes by saying that ”whether he has drawn from the inexhaustible 
sources of his own imaginations and created both his personages and 
the world which he has given them to inhabit, or set before us pic¬ 
tures of elevated humanity, his principle has been true to nature, 
and his application of it consistent , , , he has planted a divinity 
in the very breasts of men, and through the invisible agency of pas¬ 
sion, moved them by springs at once more natural and more powerful 

than have ever been obtained from the inconsistent and treacherous 

111 

aid of classical fictions,” The Roderick article concludes with 

three paragraphs (one devoted to each of the three principal charac¬ 
ters) in which the characterisation is praised without reserve, both 



























I ' 
















4 


* 






’ 

1 































# ' 

. *> 













- 4S - 


for its accuracy and probability, and for its contribution to 
the effectiveness of the poem. 

The Edinburgh shares none of this enthusiasm for Southey’s 
handling of his characters, ’’All his interesting personages,” 
writes the Edinburgh reviewer of The Curse t ’’lisp like sucklings,” 
and the unsympathetic ones he describes as such monsters ”as nur- 
ses imagine to frighten naughty boys into obedience.” 1 There 
is no interplay of great minds or clash of great emotion, com¬ 
plains the Edinburgh, in Southey’s work. The reviewer compare*; 
Southey to Scott, who keeps his readers ’’perpetually engaged with 
events and persons that bear a character of historical importance; 
instead of soothing them, like the author before us, with the vir¬ 
tues and affections, as well as the marvels and legends of the nur¬ 
sery.” Madoc is said by the Edinburgh to possess ”a consid¬ 


erable failure in the delineation of character, will render 

it tedious,” Lx & The most violent condemnation of Southey’s char¬ 



acterization comes in the review of A Vision of Judgment , where 
’’five or six of the English monarchs fare) characterized in the 


most feeble, jejune and spiritless manner,” ’’The elder worthies, 
of inferior rank ,[an with as fine and vigorous a pencil 

... no sixpenny biography for the use of preparatory schools. 



indeed, could be more flat or meagre than the whole of this puer- 
116 

ile phantasmagoria . 11 ' 











* 




















- 








' 









' . « . . 

' 




- 49 - 


The extraordinary and supernatural events of which Madoc , 

The Curse of Kehama, and Thalaba are largely composed are rec- 

116 

ognized by the Quarterly as bizarre, but their inclusion 

in the poems is warmly defended. The Edinburgh , on the other 

hand., heaps ridicule on what it terms a "perversity of the author 

[which will]meet the derision of the fastidious, and the neglect 

117 

of the sober part of the public ... In The Curse of Kehama , 

for instance, Kehama, enraged because he is unable to destroy 
Ladurlad, whom he himself has cursed to painful immortality, 
orders ten thousand of his own troops destroyed by way of comp¬ 
ensation, Their destruction is "described with all the dreadful 
graces of poetry,JancTjthe consequences of this horrible massacre 
are painted with equal truth and sublimity, 5 ’ reports the Quarterly 
writer, "* ^ The Edinburgh is of a different mind about the same 
M incident." "This tame-told butchery," writes the reviewer, 
"instead of being Impressive or terrible, is absolutely ridiculous 

- and the whole canto, indeed ... is heavy, tedious, and prep- 
119 

osterous." 

In the earlier Edinburgh reviews, where some attempt is made 
to explain Southey’s failures, frequent reference is made to his 
innovation, and to his lack of reverence for earlier writers. The 
Quarterly seems quite oblivious to this fault, although the Quart ¬ 
erly review of The Curse opens with general comments on origin¬ 
ality in poetry, stating that although some poets deviate too far 



















- 50 - 


from the recognized rules of good taste, they are outnumbered 
by critics who accuse them wrongly of such deviations. The 
Edinburgh article on Thalaba takes Southey (and all the "Lake" 
poets) to task for their straining after novelty and effect. 

"The disciples of this school," writes the reviewer, "boast much 
of its originality, and seem to value themselves very highly, 
for having broken loose from the bondage of ancient authority, 
and reasserted the independence of genius. Originality, how¬ 
ever, we are persuaded, is rarer than mere a3_terationj and a 
man may change a good matter for a bad one, without finding 
himself at all nearer to independence. That our new poets have 
abandoned the old models, may certainly be admitted, but we have 
not been able to discover that they have yet created any models 
of their own , , , They constitute . . . the most formidable 
conspiracy that has lately been formed against sound judgment in 
matters poetical," The Quarterly reviewer of Roderick an¬ 

swers this accusation. Southey r s many critics, he writes, "when 
they saw him enlarging the range of his art beyond their con¬ 
ception, solaced themselves with an opinion of his having dev¬ 
iated from its rules. If poetry has any fundamental rules but 
those which best exhibit the feelings of the human heart, we 
confess that we are strangers to them . , , Whether he lays 

his scene in heaven or earth, his business is with human sym- 
121 

pathies." The review goes on to outline several of 


















- 













« ’ 






, 










• 






* , 



« - - 

















, 




' 

, 







- 

- , , 








.♦ 









Southey’s poems, shoeing how they all deal with ’’human 
sympathies,” and concludes with what seems to be a conscious 
reply to the Edinburgh article on Thalaba , quoted above* ”It 
is not surprising that minds educated in the habit of clas¬ 
sifying should confine their notions of poetry within certain 
limits, which, because they had not been passed, had bee n 
deemed impassable, or that they should censure as transgres¬ 
sions any deviations from the beaten path . . . Without de¬ 
tracting from the merits of the ancients, we may yet hesitate 
to pronounce that no other models can be produced * * * real 

.genius must have felt with indignation the pressure of the 

122 

fetters which art had forged and prescription rivetted.” 

The Edinburgh is consistent in condemming Southey for innovation. 
The article on Madoc censures him for refusing to look ”at first 
with veneration to those who have previously attained the heights 
of fame,{venturing]by degrees to follow their footsteps . * 

”He,” goes on the review, ”affects to follow the footsteps of no 
predecessor, and to acknowledge the supremacy of no chief or trib¬ 
unal. ” ^3 

One of Southey’s innovations about which the Edinburgh is 
most insistent is his versification. In the review of The Curse, 
Southey’s diction is condemned as ”loose and verbose, and neg¬ 
lected, and the irregularities of his measure seem to be . . , 














* » « 


i 










' 

- 


; 


















: • 0 







1 


a 






- 52 - 


x 

adopted because they enabled him to emply the first unweighed 
expression that occurred to him ... He has introduced a great 
number of very unharmonious metres, and combined them very un- 
harmoniously ... We have a great variety of tottering and 
slovenly measures, that were either never introduced into 

124 

English poetry, or have been long discarded from it ... ” 

The versification of some passages is described as ’’extremely 
offensive to our ears, 1 ’ ’’detestable in rhythm, style and 
conception,” harsh and noisy.” The metre of Thalaba is 

termed ”a jumble of all the measure$that are known in English 
(and a few more), without rhyme, and without any sort of reg- 

12*7 ipg 

ularity in their arrangement.” ' The reviewer of Carmen 

Triumphale, instead of telling his readers about Southey’s bad 
versification, writes several stanzas of the poem in prose form, 
and challenges anyone to find poetry in the result. The art" 
icle on A Vision of Judgment consists almost exclusively of a 
biting satire about Southey’s attempt to use hexameters, and 
his complete failure in this attempt. 

The Quarterly is of quite a different opinion. The verse 
of The Purse of Kehama« it records, ’’may be best compared to 
the pindarics of Donne and Cowley, a measure which, if it some¬ 
times disappoints the ear, does at others unexpectedly form the 
















































































1 






■ 




















pay " : ^ 











- 53 - 


happiest and most beautiful combinations of harmony, and is, 

upon the whole, by its very wildness, excellently suited to 

the strange and irregular magnificence of the descriptions 

129 

which it is employed to convey. 11 7 About Roderick , the 
Quarterly reviewer writes that ’’the variety of its cadences 
gives a spirit which relieves its grandeur, and the redundant 
syllable at the end of many of the lines prevents the majesty 
of its tone from oppressing the ear, 1 * ^0 

The difference in the tone of the two reviews, and the 
difference of opinion on such fundamentals as Southey ! s 
•characters, his versification, and the probability of his sit¬ 
uations, is increased by the deploring in the Edinburgh of 
several characteristics of his work not mentioned in the Quart- 

13 

erly . Thus the Edinburgh complains of wordiness and prolixity, - 

of a constant straining after effect (’’perpetual artifice and 

effort’*) and of the so-called simple or humble language 

affected by all the ’’Lake” poets - !i an infantine innocence and 
133 

simplicity.” " The Quarterly mentions none of these. The dif¬ 
ferences between their two opinions are very great, and some¬ 
times seem tc have been consciously created by the later reviewer 




































' 












- . 


- 


















Notes to Chapter II 


1. Southey (ed), ojg. cit . . Voi. Ill, p. 183, Nov. 9, 1808. 

2. ER, 3B;466, Feb., 1812. 

3. Since the authors of contributions in both reviews will be 
referred to frequently throughout the dissertation, some¬ 
thing should be said about my authority for identifying them 
as I have. Because reviewing was not an altogether gentle¬ 
manly pursuit at the beginning of the nineteenth century, 
the articles are unsigned, and the authors of many of them 
have never been identified. One Important source of in¬ 
formation about authorship is the lists and collections of 
the contributors; Jeffrey, Southey, and Smith, for instance, 
are among those who have either complied lists of their cont¬ 
ributions, or collected and published the contributions them¬ 
selves. A second source is the modern editions of the works 
of contributors - Hazlitt, for example - where reliable ed¬ 
itorial scholarship has disclosed which articles belong to a 
particular author. The editors are often obliged to rely for 
their information upon characteristics of style. A third way of 
determining authorship is by an examination of the letters or 
other ?jorks of the author being reviewed. Thus Hazlitt, in 

his Letter to Gifford (Howe, "Torks of Hazlitt , Vol. XVI) attrib¬ 
utes the Quarterly reviews of his publications to Gifford, and 
Coleridge, in a footnote to Biographia Literaria (see below, 
p. h\ ) identifies an article in the Edinburgh as Jeffrey’s. 

The last, and least reliable, source, is a curious little book 
by W. A. Copinger, called On The Authorship Of The First One 
Hundred Numbers of E.R . The book was privately printed, and is 
now very hard to obtain. Copinger gives an author for sev¬ 
eral (not all) of the articles in each number, but does not 
give the slightest indication of how he Identified them. There 
are some authors about whom he is definitely mistaken if one 
may trust more recent and thorough scholarship. 

4. ER, 53s 58, Sept., 1816. 

5. QR, 21: 177, Apr., 1814. 

6. QR, 37; 204, Apr., 1818, 


7. QR, 51; 103, Oct., 1822. 





























£ 






it , 







- 55 - 


8. 

ER, 

50: 355, 

Apr., 

1815. 

9. 

ER, 

70; 422, 

Jul., 

1821 


10. The only article in either review which deals directly 
with what is now considered to be Wordsworth^ most 
important work is in No, 21. Oct. 1807, and is written 
by Jeffrey. (ER, 21s 214, Oct., ISO?) This article 
contains a significant criticism of the H Lak.e H school, 
and a frank statement by Jeffrey of why he dislikes the 
poetry of that school. For these reasons, the article 
will not be discussed in the chapter on Wordsworth, 
where it would only add to the large amount of evidence 
of the Ed in. burgh 's low opinion of Wordsworth, but will 
be reserved for the last chapter, where it will be use¬ 
ful in evalidating the Edinburgh 1 s opinion. 

11. ER, 47i 1, Nov. 1814. 

12. Ibid., p. 16, 

13. Ibid,, p. 28. 

14. QH, 23! 100, Oct. 1814. 

15. QR, 27s 201, Oct,, 1815. 

16., Loc , cit, 

17. Ibid *j P. 215. 

18. ER, 47i4, Nov., 1814. 

19. Ibid ,, p, 5. 

20. Ibid,, p. 30, 

21. In consequence of ail which, re are assured by Mr. Wordsworth, 
that she is approved by Earth and Sky, in their benignity! 
and moreover, that the old Priory itself takes her for a daugh¬ 
ter of the Eternal Prime - which we have no doubt is a very great 
compliment, though we have not the good luck to understand what 
it means. (SR, 50; 363 , Oct,, 1815.) 






- 56 - 


22. Jeffrey, in the Excursion article, also mentions these 
small and apparently irrelevant experiences. He cites 
a description of a grotto in Book II as one such: 

“ . . .The useless and most tedious minuteness with 
which the author so frequently details circumstances 
of no interest in themselves, - of no importance to 
the story, - and possessing no graphical merit whatever 
as pieces of description. tt (ER, 27s 15 Nov., 1814) 

23. QR, 27: 210, Oct. 1815 

24. See below, p. 

25. ER, 47: 30, Nov. 1814. 

26. OR, 27: 204, Oct., 1815. 

27. ER, 47: 3, Nov. 1814. 

28. Loc. cit. 

29. QR, 27: 208, Oct. 1815. 

30. Loc . cit. 

31. "This will never do." (Review of The Excursion , ER, 
47:1, Nov., 1814.) "This, we think, has the merit of 
being the very worst poem we ever saw imprinted in a 
quarto volume; and though it was scarcely to be ex¬ 
pected, we confess that Mr. Wordsworth, with all his 
ambition, should so soon have attained to that dist¬ 
inction, the wonder may perhaps be diminished, when 
we state, that it seems to us to consist of a happy 
union of all the faults, without any of the beauties, 
which belong to his school of poetry." (Review? of 
The White Doe . ER, 50: 355, Oct., 1815} 


32. 


review of The White Doe, ER, 50: 355, Oct., 1815. 





* • « 








. 












- 57 - 


33. For instance, Wordsworth is said to tell his stories 
"in sweet nursery phrases." One passage is described 
as H an ingenious fancy which the poet thus gently 
reproveth: 

Ah, pensive scholar/ think not so/ 

But look again at the radiant doe/ 

One point "the poet very briefly and ingeniously in¬ 
timates in the following fine lines: 

Their flight the fair moon may not see; 

For, from mid-heaven, already she 

Hath witnessed their captivity/" 

Of one part of the poem Jeffrey writes as follows: 
"There is something so truly forlorn and tragical in 
his situation, that we should really have thought it 
difficult to have given an account of it without ex¬ 
citing some degree of interest or emotion. Mr. Word¬ 
sworth, however, reserves all his pathos for describ¬ 
ing the whiteness of the pet doe, and disserting about 
her perplexities, and her high communion, and part¬ 
icipation of heaven’s grace ..." See also above, 
note 21. 

34. Review of The ^hite Doe , QR, 27s 201, Oct., 1815. 

35. Review of The Excursion , SR, 47s 16, Oct., 1815. 

36. See above, p.2.2. 

37. or, 23s 100, Oct., 1814. 

38. Ibid .. p. 101, 

39. Compare Jeffrey on the same subjects "His effusions 
on what may be called the physiognomy of external 
nature, or its moral and theological expression, are 
eminently fantastic, obscure, and affected." (The 
Excursion s SR, 47s 6, Wov, 1814) 


40. ER, 47s 11, Oct., 1815. 



















' 







■ 




















1 . 





a ■ 














- 











- 53 - 


41. QR, 23: 104, Oct., 1814. 

42. The sequfcl in which Jeffrey says he recognizes nothing 
is as follows, 

- and if there be whose tender frames have drooped 
Even to the dust; apparently, through weight 
Of anguish unrelieved, and lack of power 
An agonizing sorrow to transmute. 

Infer not hence a hope from those with-held 
When wanted most; a confidence impaired 
So pitiably, that, having ceased to see 
With bodily eyes, they are borne down by love 
Of what is lost, and perish through regret. 

Oh,* no, full oft the innocent sufferer sees 
Too clearly; feels too vividly; and longs 
To realize the vision with intense 
And overconstant yearning - there - there lies 
The excess, by which the balance is destroyed. 

Too, too contracted are these walls of flesh, 

This vital warmth too cold, these visual orbtts. 

Though inconceivably endowed, too dim 
For any passion of the soul that leads 
To ecstasy; and, all the crooked paths 
Of time and change disdaining, takes its course 
Along the line of limitless desires, 

I, speaking now from such disorder free, 

Nor sleep, nor craving, but in settled peace, 

I cannot doubt that they whom you deplore 
Are glorified. 

43. QR, 23: 106, Oct,,.1814, 

44. SR, 47; 8, Oct. 1815. 

45. See above p, 24. Jeffrey thought low-life characters 
inappropriate for the illustration of important met¬ 
aphysical or moral ideas, 

46. But the Quarterly review of The Jhite Doe contains an 

opinion much like Jeffrey *s about characters. See 
above, p. 

QR, 23: 110, Oct,, 1814, 


47, 

































1 
















* *. • 1 











. 










' 




- 59 - 


• 

to 

xf 

See above p. 


49* 

QR, 23J 111, Oct., 

1814. 

50. 

r - . * 1 

article appeared in Nov., 1814, a 


month after the Quarterly T s notice of the same poem, 
and is the first article in No, 47. Jeffrey may have 
given the review such a prominent place in order to 
make it clear to his readers that he was answering the 
Quarterly. 


51. 

QR, 

27? 

211, Oct. 

, 1815. 

52. 

bh* 

50: 

355, Apr, 

, 1815. 

53 . 

See 

above p. 27, 

FN 2. 

54. 

QR 

21 : 

177, Apr., 

1814. 

55. 

QR 

70: 

518, Mar. 

1827. 

56. 

See 

vj. 


2 / • 

QR 

21 : 

179. Apr., 

1814. 

58. 

Ibid., 

p. 181. 


59. 

Ibi 

d,, 

p. 182 


60. 

Ibi 

d., 

p, 160 


61. 

Ibid., 

p. 190 . 


62 . 

ER. 

53? 

58, Sept, 

, 1816 . 

63. 


56 s 

488 , lug. 

, 1817. 

64. 

ER, 

54? 

444 ^ Dec 

1816. 


65* Hazlitt was the author of the articles on Biogranhia 

Literarla and the lay sermon, hut not of that on Christ- 
abel . flee Howe, Complete Harks of Hazlitt * Vol. XVI, 
p. 420, Note 3) The authorship of the Christabel review 













- 60 - 


is attributed by Howe to Jeffrey, in spite of his having 

disclaimed it. 

66 . ER, 53i 66, Sept., 1316. 

67. There is a brief attack upon the metre, which Col¬ 
eridge said was "founded upon a new principle 11 . The 
reviewer denies any possibility of a new principle 
in metre, and accuses Colderidge’s metre of being 
founded upon no principle at all. 

68 . ER, 53: 63, Sept., 1816. 

69. Ibid., p. 67. 

70. There is evidence that the Quarterly still had close 
connections with the government in 1816. Southey, 
writing to Grosvenor C. Bedford on Sept, 8 of that 
year, believes that the government wishes him to 
apply his efforts in another constitutional review, 
but, he writes, "I can exert myself only in one place 
at a time, and Government would gain nothing by trans¬ 
ferring me from the Quarterly to anything else which 
they might be willing to launch. It may be said that 

the 1narterIp Review is established! that this engine is at 
work, and will go on, and that it is desirable to have more 
engines than one." ( Southey*s Life and Correspondence 
Vol. TJ, p. 203) ‘ ” 

In another letter, written three days later to 
the same man, Southey states that "upon mature deliberation, 

I am clearly of opinion that it would be very imprudent and 
impolitic for me to receive anything in the nature of em¬ 
olument from Government at this time, in any shape whatso- 
ever. Such a circumstance would lessen the worth of my ser¬ 
vices . . .for whatever might come from me would be received 
with suspicion ..." (209) 

In his introduction to Chapter XXIII of the Life and 
Correspondence . Souther’s son explains that his father had 
understood several requests from the government to go to 
London for discussion to mean that he was being considered 
as the founder of a new Tory review, When he finally went 
to town, explains the son, he found that "they were by no 











- 61 - 


means so anxious that he should write *ex proprlo motu ’ 
as under their own especial influence; and he was urged 
to employ the Quarterly Review as a vehicle for his opin¬ 
ions and arguments, in preference to a separate and in¬ 
dependent publication”. (Vol IV, p. 291) 

71. SR, 54«* 444, Sec. 1816. 

72. Ibid., p. 445. 

73. Ibid., p. 449 - 450. 

74. Ibid., 451. 

75. Ibid., 454. 

76. EE, 56s 515, Aug., 1817. 

77. Shawcross, J. (ed), Coleridge ’s w Biographia 
Literaria”, Vol. I, p. 49, FN. 

78. ER, 56s 492-3, Aug. 1817. 

79. There is no lack of evidence that Jeffrey thought of 
the ”Lake” poets as a conscious and deliberate ’’school”. 

The best of the evidence is contained in one of Col¬ 
eridge’s footnotes to Chapter 3 of Biographia Literaria 
(p.36) in which he writes that ”... he (Jeffrey)~was 

, . . informed . . . how utterly unfounded was the sup¬ 
position that we considered ourselves as belonging to any 
common school , . . yet among the first articles which this 
man wrote after his return from Keswick, we were characterised 
as n the school of whining and hypochondriacal poets that haunt 
the Lakes.” 

80. The Edinburgh reviewers say nothing of their belief, if 
they still held to it, after Southey’s appointment as 
Poet Laureate. See the reviews of Carmen Triurnphale 
(EH, 44!447, Jan., 1814) and A Vision of Judgment (SR, 

70:442, July, 1821) 



















1 

















- 




» o , 

, „ „ ■ : ti - 








■ 









- 62 - 


81. ER, 34:429, Feb., 1811. 

82. Loc . cit . 

83. ER, 13: 1, Oct., 1805. 

84. QR, 9:40, Feb., 1811. 

85. Ibid., p. 55. 

86 . QR, 25:110, Apl., 1815. 

87. QR, 9:45, Feb., 1811. 

88 . Ibid., p. 55. 

89. Ibid ., p. 60. 

90. Ibid ., p. 51. 

91. Ibid., p. 53. 

92. ER, 34:446, Feb., 1811. 

93. Ibid ., p. 437 - 438. 

94. QR, 9:45, Feb., 1811. 

95. ER, 34:439, Feb., 1811. 

96. ER, 13:22, Oct., 1805. 

97. The Edinburgh is not consistent in its praise of Southey*s 
descriptions. In the general remakrs at the beginning of 
The Curse article, the reviewer has it that "his taste in 
description is . . . remarkably childish. , . Everything, in 
his pictures, is gaudy and glittering and fantastically ex¬ 
aggerated and contrasted,” (ER, 34:433, Feb,, 1811) later in 
the same review, Southey ? s descriptions are called " a kind 
of rhetorical exaggeration,” and censured for their length 
and uncalled details^ in another place they are referred to 
as “ostentatious and elaborate,” ( ibid ., p. 438) 

98. QR, 9: 56-7, Feb,, 1811. 















t ■ . • t 


- 

. , , . . . 

. 

■ ' ■ 










m 










- 63 - 


99. He had turned himself into eight men, and entered the 
city through eight streets, returning to his original 
shape at the meeting of the streets. 

100. QR, 9:53, Feb., 1811. 

101. ER, 34:444, Feb., 1811. 

102 . Ibid., p. 451. 

103. ER, Is74, Oct., 1802. 

104. Ibid ., p. 75. 

105. ER, 13:4-5, Oct., 1305. 

106. ER, 44:448, Jan., 1814. 

107. ER, 70:442, JU1., 1821. 

108. Ibid., p. 61. 

109. Ibid . . p. 110. 

110. QR, 9:57, Feb., 1811. 


111. QR, 25:37, Apr., 1815. 

112. ER, 34:433, Feb., 1811. 

113. Ibid ., p, 434. 

114. ER, 13:4-5, Oct., 1805. 

115. ER, 70:436, Jul,, 1821. 

116. See above, p, 

117. Review of Curse of Kehama . ER, 34:437-8, Feb,, 1811. 
113. QR, 9:49, Feb., 1811. 

119. ER, 34:443, Feb,, 1811. 






- 64 - 


120. EH, 1:63-4, Oct., 1802. 

121. QR, 25:83, Apl., 1815. 

122. Ibid ., p. 86 - 7 

123. ER, 13:1, Oct., 1805. 

124. ER, 34:433, Feb., 1811. 

125. Ibid., p. 454. 

126. Ibid ., p. 455. 

127. SR, 1:72, Oct., 1802. 

128. The review of Madoc , however, attributes to Southey 
"copiousness of diction, and facility of smooth v@r~ 
sification," 

12.9. QR, 9:44, Feb., 1811. 

130. QR, 25: 112, Apr., 1815. 

131. " Instead of that diffuse and interminable redundancy 
by which his style is now chiefly distinguished, we 
might have had a nervous and concise expression . . , M 

"If he would write in the measure of Bryden or Pope, 
however, we conceive that he would be sooner struck 
with his own exuberance and prolisity." (Review of 
Madoc, ER, 13:4, Oct., 1805.) 

132. Review of Keharna , SR, 34:434 ff. Feb., 1811. 

133. ER, 1313, Oct., 1805. 







- 65 - 


Chapter III 


BYRON 


The only criticism in either the Quarterly Review or 
the Edinburgh Review which denies Byron f s genius, and which 
finds nothing but fault with his work, is that of Hours of 
Idleness in the Edinburgh , written by Brougham in January, 
1808, ”We must beg leave seriously to assure him, rf says 
Brougham in this article, n that the mere rhyming of the 
final syllable, even when accompanied by the presence of a 
certain number of feet, - nay, although (which does not 
always happen) those feet should scan regularly, and have 
been all counted accurately upon the fingers -■ is not the 
whole art of poetry.” 1 11 But whatever judgment may be 

passed on the poems of this noble minor, it seems we must 
take them as we find them and be content$ for they are the 
last we shall ever have from him.” All the other reviews of 
Byron within the period at least acknowledge his greatness, 
even though they find much to criticize in particular works. 

Most of the articles on Byron contain recurring themes 
of praise and criticism. From the first article (1812) after 

























■ 4 . r ' 






• 
























































. 

t / 


. 












- 

















- 66 - 


that of Hours of Idleness, to the last in this period (1823), 
the standard criteria of judgement seemed to require, in both 
reviews, that certain characteristics of Byron’s work should 
be praised and certain others censured. Byron’s powers of 
description are celebrated in nearly every article. The 
Quarterly , speaking of Canto IV of Childe Harold, has great 
praise for stanzas 66 and 67? ’jjlhere arejno verses in our 
language of happier descriptive power thanjthesejtwo stanzas.” ^ 
The landscaping of Canto III is similarly praised by the 

3 

Quarterly reviewer, who says that Byron knew proportion 

and perspective, and was alive to the value of significant 

details. Jeffrey, writing of Cantos I and II of Childe 

Harold, ~ compares Byron’s descriptions to those of Scott, 

but decides that Byron has more ’’Vigor.” He likens parts 

of Childe Harold to the work of Dryden and Crabbe, and else- 
5 

where ' writes that Byron’s descriptions in The Giaour are 

as powerful as Crabbe’s, but better, because they are not 

6 

Y/eakened by ”coarseness and detail,” Not only Byron’s 

physical descriptions, but his imagination and delineation 

of strong passions too receive universal praise. The 

7 

quarterly reviewer of Childe Harold , Canto III, commends 
the haste and lack of attention of some passages, saying 



























j ft 






















. 













. 


















1 . 






n 



t 






























- 67 - 


that it is better to produce a great deal while "the genius 
is up," the imagination working, and the passions excited, 
than to labor long without inspiration. These unpolished 
parts, coming at points of great passion, heighten the 
effect, says the reviewer. Commenting on The Frisoner of 

g 

Chilion , the Quarterly J decides that the poem is not 
pleasing," but concedes that it is powerfully done, the 
spiritual and mental throes of Bonnivard accurately and strik¬ 
ingly represented. But the most enthusiastic commendations of 
Byron*s sensibility to human e-motion comes from Wilson, rev¬ 
iewing Canto I\T of Childe Harold in the Edinburgh , Byron*s 
characters, he says, have the same qualities which distinguish 
their creator; " a high and audacious conception of the power 
of the mind, an intese sensibility of passion, an almost 
boundless capacity of tumultuous emotion, - a haunting admira¬ 
tion of the grandeur of disordered power - and above all, a- 

o 

soul-felt, blood-felt, delight in beauty," ' Jeffrey, in a 
review of The Corsair , outlines his theory of Romantic poetry 
(see below, p, 12), showing that the summit of poetic achieve¬ 
ment is to display the great human passions, not only in their 
outward manifestation, but in their beginnings and development 
within the mind, Byron, says Jeffrey, has fulfilled this poetic 
end better than any other modern poet, Te must have, he writes. 




















t 


, 







■ 

< , 


* 




t 




i 






. 









- 68 - 


11 a 11 the anatomy of their throbbing bosoms laid open to our 
gaze. It is chiefly by these portraitures of the interior 
of human nature, that the poetry of the present day is dist¬ 
inguished from all that preceded it.” J '^ 

There is no question about what the reviews did not 
like in Byron T s work. Almost universally they condemn his 
characters and the moral tone of most of his poems and plays. 
Byron*s heroes are the main object of criticism, partly because 
they are distinguished by qualities which make them unsympathetic 
or even repulsive, and partly because they are all the same man 
- Lara, the Corsair, Childe Harold, Selim, Manfred and Cain are 
all drawn from the same model. The Quarterly reviewer, "speaking 
of Childe Harold . Canto IV writes that much of the popular¬ 
ity of this poem is a result of the pilgrim f s dissociation from 
the world, and of his ”contempt for ordinary human pursuits,” 
which contempt and dissociation make a great impression on the 
public. Such an impression, asserts the reviewer, is not hon¬ 
estly come by. Foetry can only be called good when it is in and 
of the world. The last and strongest criticism in this review 
is of Childe Harold *s profound introspection, which, writes the 
Quarterly , reveals to us only misery and futility and error, 
adding nothing to our pleasure or to our stock of knowledge. The 
idea that Byron 5 s heroes are really all one man is first expressed 
in the Quarterly article on Canto III of Childe Harold. The re- 










- 69 * 


viewer wonders why Byron should ant to have himself ident¬ 
ified with such unsympathetic characters as Lara and The 
Corsair , and he commends Byron on his ability to keep a 

reading public in spite of these disagreeable heroes. Jef- 

12 

frey, in the article on Chiide Harold , Cantos I and II 

finds the same fault with Byron's leading characters. He 

expresses surprise, as does the Quarterly reviewer, that a 

poem with such a disagreeable principal figure should have 

13 

such success. In the review of Canto III " he condemns 
Byron for the misanthropy of his'heroes, finding them con¬ 
tinually 6 lccmy. Bills, reviewing The Corsair and Lara in 

14 

the quarterly , condemns the character of Conrad because it 
is that of a thoroughly depraved man who does nothing but 
good. Te sympathize with him, yet we should not, writes 
Ellis, sympathize with vice and depravity. The most in¬ 
dignant protest against both the sameness of Byron's people, 
and their unattractiveness, comes from Brougham in an article 
on Sardanapalus * The Two Foscari , and Cain . He first com¬ 
plains, as did the Quarterly reviewer of ChiIda Harold Canto 
III, that Byron's heroes are all drawn from the same un¬ 
sympathetic model. He then goes on to show how this model has 
a "varnish of voluptuousness on the surface - - -/ajeanker of 
misanthropy at the core." 3yron, says Brougham, does not realize 
that the strength of our greatest dramatists (Shakespeare, for 







































_ 




- 


■■ 














.... v. 

- „ < 

, 1 . 





.. 








’ c 














- 70 - 


instance) lies partly in their ability to deal with a character, 
and then to lay him aside. There is only one Hamlet, one Othello, 
one Lear, but there are a dozen Childe Harold’s, all disguised 
under different names, This criticism of the uniformity of 
Byi'on's leading characters, ana of their repulsiveness, is the 
most recurrent of all the criticisms of Byron in both reviews. 

The most common objection is to the ethical thinking and 
practice of the heroes. The Quarterly reviewer of Cantos I 
and II of Childe Harold approaches his task more prudently than 
do some other reviewers. Instead of giving vent to his in¬ 
dignation at the depravity of Byron’s principals, he points 
out that a man like Childe Harold cannot possibly succeed as 
the leading figure of a dramatic poem, because his immorality 
makes him inconsistent. He is supposed to be a childe - a 
knight - and yet ’’Childe Harold, if not absolutely craven and 
recreant, is at least a mortal enemy to all martial exertions, 
a scoffer at the fair sex, and apparently disposed to consider 
all religions as different modes of superstition.” ^ The re¬ 
viewer criticizes this unknightly person on two counts? first that 
he is inconsistent, and second that he is unsympathetic. We may 
sympathize with one who hates women because he has been crushed 
or jilted in love, but we are not likely to find a place in our 
affections for a hero who is so ”sated with passion” that he shuns 
all female company. Furthermore, Childe Harold, who is being 
presented to us as one whom we should like, is a despiser of 







- 71 - 


religion* For moral reasons, heroes must not despise religion, 
writes the reviewer, unless the "hero" is being held up to us 
as M an example of debauchery. " Other reviewers concern them¬ 
selves solely with the moral issue, not attempting to show, as 
the Quarterly reviewer does, how the immorality weakens the 

poem. Tilson, in the article on Chi Id e Harold, Canto IT, in- 
17 

the Sdinburgh concludes an otherwise favorable criticism by 

saying that Byron places too much emphasis on the intellectual, 
and not enough on the moral, admiring M power” before “simple 
virtue.” Jeffrey, writing about The Giaour « finds a similar 
moral fault. Such energy and intensity of passion, presented 
together with guilt, is not morally sound. “The poetry of 
Lord Byron,” he goes on, “is full of this perversion . . . 

We wish to see it employed upon subjects less gloomy and rev¬ 
olting than those to which it has hitherto been almost ex- 
18 

clusively devoted.” ” One of the most sweeping and harsh con¬ 
demnations of the moral tone of Byron l s work appeax-s in the 
Quarterly review of Marino FaHero , Cardanapains „ The Two 
Foscari , and Cain . The article opens with an explanation of 
the Quarterly*s long silence on Byron and his work (the last 
article had been on Canto IT of Chllde Harold in number 37, 
April 1818, four years earlier.^ Since Chllde Harold « writes 
the reviewer, nothing has come from the pen of Byron but works, 
"wave after wave, redundant as that ocean which Lord Byron 
loves to describe, but with few exceptions little less 
























c 































v 




























»■ 









- 72 - 


monotonous, - and stained, in succession with deeper and yet 

deeper tokens of those pollutions, which, even in the full 

tide of genius, announce that its ebb is near. We. knew not 

any severity of criticism which could reach the faults or 

20 

purify the taste of Don Juan . . , ,r Throughout the art¬ 
icle, the reviewer misses no opportunity of reprimanding 
Byron for a moral fault. He attacks, for instance, a speech 
by Myrrha in Sardanapalus , in which she comforts Sardanapalus, 
about to die, by assuring him that there is nothing beyond 
death. Cain , which the reviewer believes to contain Manieh- 
eistic ideas, receives a sharp criticism, particularly since 
this play appeared in a cheap edition which might influence 
the impressionable public. Brougham, reviewing Cain in The 
Edinburgh has a similar opinion of the play. Although he 
admits that ”it abounds in heavenly passages,” he condemns 
it on moral grounds; the ’’whole argument a * . is directed 
against the goodness or the power of the deity, and against 
the reasonableness of religion in general , . The play, 
writes Brougham, has only the most specious arguments, but 
they are so brilliantly put forward that they may deceive those 
unable to detect their falseness, and thereby do great harm. 
Such writing, he continues, is harmful and dishonest. Several 
pages of the review are devoted to a careful refutation of 
Byron’s Manicheism, At the end of this article, Brougham deals 










- 



„ 
















' 






- 73 - 


with Byron’s complaint, voiced in the appendix to The Two 
Foscari, that the world has received him badly. Brougham 
asserts that the Edinburgh has always regarded Byron as a 
genius, but that they must join the rest of the nation in 
naming his writings "immoral and pernicious, ,T It is not 
vileness or obscenity which mar Byron’s work, says Brough¬ 
am, for others have been worse in that respect, but rather 
an habitual showing of persons of great virtue in acts of 
great vice, thus destroying all faith in virtue. Byron 
attempts, says Brougham, "to convince his readers . . , 
that all ennobling pursuits, and disinterested virtues, 
are mere deceits and illusions - hollow and despicable 
mockeries. » . laborious follies." He cites Don Juan as 
the best example of such immoral writing, claiming as the 

great weakness of that poem its sudden changes in mood and 

21 

tone, from devotion to levity, from virtue to vice. 

Plainly, then, all the reviewers of the periodicals are 
agreed on several important issues in Byron’s work. They 
agree that his powers of description are very great, and that 
his revelations of human passions are well done; they agree 
also that his heroes are faulty, partly because they are all 
alike, partly because their moral characters are unsound, and 
they agree that his work is immoral and therefore dangerous. 
In spite of this coincidence of opinion, however, one can 
















' 



























1 




c 













- 74 - 


detect an appreciable difference between the two reviews in 
their treatment of Byron. 

The Edinburgh is definitely kinder to Byron than is the 
luarterly » and the key to the difference is Byron's politics. 

The article which reveals most about this subject is Brougham f s 
on Rardanapalus « The Two Foscarl , and Cain . In this article, 
Brougham comments on the prose appendix to The Two Foscari . 
in which Byron complains of the harsh treatment he has had, 
particularly from Southey. Interspersed with these com¬ 
plaints are "some political reflections of great weight and 
authority . . , They appear to us to. contain . . . some of 
those great fundamental truths as to the condition and pros¬ 
pects of the country, which every man, not blinded by faction, 
ought continually to bear in mind » . . n The tenor of these 
"political reflections" is that revolutions (Byron specifies 
the French Revolution and the Great Rebellion of 1642) are 
brought about, not by anything which an author writes, but by 
tyrannical acts of government. This precept, contends Byron, 
applies to the coming troubles in England, Revolution, he 
writes, is "inevitable." "I look upon such as inevitable, 
though no revolutionist: I wish to see the English constitution 
restored, and not destroyed. Born an aristocrat, and naturally 
one by temper, with the greater part of my present property in 






























That 


the funds, what have I to gain by a revolution? . . . 
a revolution is inevitable, I repeat.” ' ”!£hese,” ^ comments 

Brougham, ”are weighty and memorable words.” Brougham then 
goes on to deal with Byron 1 s complaint of the harsh recep¬ 
tion which his work has received. He reproves the poet for 
wasting his invective on such an impotent creature as Southey, 
and for attributing the world T s lack of cordiality to his own 
nobility. n The party that Lord B. has offended,” says Brougham, 
“bears no malice to Lords and Gentlemen. Igainst its rancor, 
on the contrary, these qualities have undoubtedly been his best 
protection; and had it not been for them, he may be assured that 
he would, long ere now, have been shown up in the pages of the 
Quarterly . . ^ In a word, the politics of Byron were re¬ 

garded with favor by the Edinburgh , and with disfavor by the 
Quarterly . This difference has produced a noticeable difference 
in the attitude of the two reviews towards Byron ! s work, but 
what would probably have been harsh condemnation from the 
Quarterly was considerably tempered, as Brougham points out, 
by the fact of Byron’s nobility. ^ Evidence that the Edinburgh 
treated Byron more generously throughout the period may be found 
in an examination of some general differences which appear in 
several articles, and in an examination of individual articles. 
In the first place, the Quarterly reviewers frequently (but not 
invariably - see the review of The Giaour , ^ show an ability to 










- 





























> ' 











- 


■ 




5 ' 

, 











' 
















- 












smile at Byron’s most strained performances. The reviewer of 

the.first two cantos of ChiIde Harold writes; "We are then 

informed, that the island of Goaa was once the abode of 

Calypso; that it possesses a safe harbor; but that it is still 

as dangerous as ever to tender-hearted travellers, being the 

residence of a certain fascinating female, called Florence, 

whose attractions even Childe Harold, steeled as he was against 

the charms of beauty and coquetry, was scarcely able to resist.” (Li And. again, 

’’The fascinations of young females are, naturally enough, the 

d, 

favorite theme of young poets; but the minstrel of Chile Harold, 
aware that some of his readers may possibly be older than him¬ 
self, has very judiciously suspended his description of the ’dark 

glancing daughters ’ of Andalusia, for the purpose of saying a few 

28 

words to Mount Parnassus, , There seems to be a distinct 

awareness in these passages of the extravagance of the tale, 

Ellis T s Quarterly review of The Corsair has an even plainer tone 
of mild irony about it. The hero and his followers are engaged in 
& desperate struggle. l! His success would have been certains but at 
this critical moment the piercing cry of female voices apprized 
him that the flames had reached the inner recesses of the haram, 
and the lover of Medora forgot in an instant his own peril and that 
of his followers. Leading those followers through the flames, 
from which the guardians of the haram had fled with dismay, he 
rescues the imprisoned beauties from their fate, and conveys them 








. 










































■ 




- 






- 77 - 


to a place of security." No such levity distinguishes the 
parallel articles in the Edinburgh . For ChiIde Harold Cantos 
I and II, Jeffrey has little but praise: "Its chief excellence 
is a singular freedom and boldness, both of thought and expres¬ 
sion, and a great occasional force and felicity of diction, which 
is the more pleasing that it does not appear to be the result 
either of long labor or of humble imitation. There is, indeed, 
a tone of self-willed independence and originality about the 
whole composition - a certain manliness and strength of manner," 30 
Such unqualified praise is a second characteristic whose presence 
in many of the Edinburgh articles distinguishes the two reviews, 

The Quarterly is very sparing of sweeping praise like this from 
the Edinburgh article on Canto IV of ChiIde Harold by Wilson: 

"It is most assuredly in his power to build up a work that shall 
endure among the most august fabrics of the genius of England, 

It(this agejhas no Lear - no Macbeth - no Othello, Some such 
glory as this Byron may yet live to bring over his own generation," 

The Corsair Jeffrey warmly recommends. To it he applies such terms 
"imposing," 

as "grand,"/"magnificent," "original," "natural," "pathetic," 
"characteristic and harmonious, eminently sweet and beautiful in 
itself," It has, he writes, "unparalleled rapidity of narrative, 
and condensation of thoughts and images - a style always vigorous 
and original , , , a diction and versification invariably spirited 


31 


. , harmonious and emphatic: nothing diluted. 


in short, or 


























- 




























-- 


- , - 



diffused into weakness, but full of life, and verve, and 
activity . . . concise, energetic, and impetuous . . 

Jeffrey’s final excess is to liken The Corsair * particularly 
in its use of the couplet, to the work of Dryden and Pope. 
Their efforts, he concludes, are not as good as Byron’s. 

Besides these differences in tone, which are common to 
most of the articles, particular pairs of articles show a 
significantly greater warmth on the part of the Edinburgh . 

One such pair is that in which Ellis and Jeffrey review The 
Corsair ^ Jeffrey’s article outlines a theory of romantic 
poetry. Literature, he says, travels a chronological cycle, 
beginning with a period of description of the rough passions 
of man. Later, he writes, these realistic descriptions are 
moderated, refined, and civilised, and later still, by 
reaction, poets return to the first stage of the description 
of the passions, but instead of merely describing the outward 
signs - the results - they probe into the breast to show the 
passion in its inception and development. This last stage, 
contends Jeffrey, is that at which English poetry has now 
arrived, and that of which Byron is the supreme master, 
n Instead of ingenious essays, elegant pieces of gallantry, 
and witty satires all stuck over with classical allusions, 
we have, in our own popular poetry, the dreams of convicts, 




















; 















* 






- 79 - 


and the agonies of gypsy women, » . ♦ the exploits of buc¬ 
caneers , , . pictures ... of remorse, revenge, insanity 

f 

. . . n A modern poet, says Jeffrey, must not merely des¬ 
cribe the actions as the primitives did, but must investigate 
their inward causes, and have "all the anatomy of their throb¬ 
bing bosoms laid open to our gaze ♦ . . It is chiefly by these 
portraitures of the interior of human nature that the poetry 
of the present day is distinguished from all that preceded it." ^4 
At "portraiture of the interior of human nature," says Jeffrey, 
Byron is the first English poet. He cites The Corsair as an 
example of his work* Ellis, reviewing the same poem three months 
later, attacks the theory, and with it attacks Byron, The whole 
review is an unfavorable one, "It is contended," writes Ellis, 

"on one hand, that for the purpose of suiting,the poetical taste 
of the present times, f the minds of the great angents must be 
unmasked for us - and all the anatomy of their throbbing bosoms 
laid open to our gaze* T We think, on the contrary, that this 
anatomical operation is essentially unpoeticalj and that therefore 
Lord Byron, who is emphatically styled *the searcher of dark 
bosoms, * is least attractive, and least popular, whenever he 
attempts to execute this special office," i writer must 
describe not the nature and origin of the passions, but the 
outward manifestations only, Ellis has clearly based his 




' 


. ' . 

T 


t ' ' v 





- 80 - 


review on Jeffrey’s, and has deliberately set to work to des¬ 
troy the basis of Jeffreys praise of Byron. 

The reviews of the dramas (Marino Faliero . Sardanapalus i 
The Two Foscari , Caln )-^ show the same difference in attitude. 

The Quarterly article i g s with a condemnation of Byron for 
insisting on the need for the unities in drama, and for writing 
that the rule of the unities is one "which, not very long ago, 
was the law of literature throughout the world, and is still so 
in the more civilized parts of it,” 37 At tedious length, the 
reviewer undertakes a refutation of Byron’s claim, and caps his 
argument by pronouncing that ” Marino Faliero has, we believe, been 
pretty generally pronounced a failure by the public voice, and we 
see no reason to call for a revision of their sentence.” 3& The 
only good passages, he goes on, are those in which the unities 
are ignored. About the same play the Edinburgh is much more 
generous, saying nothing about Byron’s insistence upon the unities 
(although Brougham, reviewing Sardanapalus . The Two jbscari, and 
Cain takes Byron to task on that account, but a good deal less 
harshly than does the Quarterly) but speaking of the ’’lofty 
standard” which Byron’s drama has established, and attributing 
the undeniable fact of the play’s failure to a poor choice of 
subject. "His great gifts, as all the world knows, are ex¬ 
quisite tenderness and demoniacal sublimity s , . but he has 


chosen a story which, in great measure, excludes the agency of 





















* ■ 




. 

1 















. 






















81 - 


either , , , as though a swift-footed racer were to tie 
his feet . . ."39 "Lord Byron," concludes the reviewer, 
n is a poet of the very first order, and has talents to 
reach the very highest honors of the drama." ^ The play 
he describes as "bizarre and extraordinary." This is high 
praise beside the Quarterly ? s final judgment? "... all the 
requisites of tragedy; sublimity, terror and pathos - all but 
that without which the rest are unavailing - interest. 1 . . . 
We rise from his work with the same feeling as if we had been 
reading a translation." The reviewer labels the poetry as 
constrained and stiff, and condemns "the resolution of its 
author rather to forego success than to succeed after the 
manner of Shakespeare." 




- 82 - 


Notes to Chapter III 

1. ER, 22:286, Jan,, 1808. 

2. QR, 37:224, Apr., 1818. 

3. QR, 31:181, Oct., 1816. 

4. ER, 38:468, Feb., 1812. 

5. In the review of The Giaour . ER, 42:301, Jul,, 1813. 

6. Both reviews are warm in their praise of stanzas 
XXI - XXVIII of Canto III of Childe Harold . ("There 
was a sound"), (QR,31s 194-5, Oct., 1816. 

ER, 54s 295-6, Dec,, 1816.) 

7. QR, 31:178 - 9, Oct., 1816, 

8. Ibid ., p. 203. 

9. ER, 59:95, Jan., 1815. 


10. 

ER, 

45*203, Apr,, 1814. 

11. 

QH, 

37!220, Apr., 1818. 

TO 

-UC • 

ER, 

38:467, Feb., 1812. 

13. 

ER, 

54! 279, Dec,, 1816. 

14. 

QR, 

22:454, Jul., 1814. 

15., 

ER, ; 

72:420-421, Feb., 1822 

16. 

■QR, 

13:194, Mar., 1812. 

17. 

iL.n, 

59:117-120, June, 1818. 

18. 

ER, 

42:309, Jul., 1813. 

19. 

Qrc, 

54:476, Jul,, 1822 

20. 

Ibid 

•, p. 477. 

21. 

ER, 

72:449, Feb., 1822. 

22. 

Ibid 

p. 444 











- 83 - 


23. Ibid ,, p. 445. 

24. Ibid., p. 447. 

25. The bast indication of the Quarterly ’s attitude to 
Byron’s politics is contained in the otherwise fav¬ 
orable review of Childe Harold , Canto III. 

"That Lord Byron’s sentiments do not correspond 
with ours is obvious, and we are sorry for both our 
sakes. For our own, - because we have lost that note 
of triumph with which his harp would otherwise have 
rung over a field of glory such as Britain never re¬ 
aped before; and on Lord Byron’s account, - because 
it is melancholy to see a man,, of genius duped by the 
mere cant of words and phrases, even when facts are 
most broadly confronted with them. If the poet has 
mixed with original, wild and magnificent creations 
of his imagination, prejudice,s which he could only 
have caught by the contagion which he most professes 
to despise, it is he himself must be the loser. If 
his lofty muse has soared in all her brilliancy over 
the fields of Waterloo without dropping even one 
leaf of laurel on the head of Wellington, his merit 
can dispense even with the praise of Lord Byron." 

(QH, 31?191, Oct. 181&) 

"We would willingly avoid mention of the pol¬ 
itical opinions hinted at by Childe Harold, and more 
distinctly expressed in other poems of Lord Byron; 

- the more willingly, as we strongly suspect that 
these effusions are rather the sport of whim and sin¬ 
gularity, or at best the suggestion of sudden starts 
of feeling and passion, than the expressions of any 
serious or fixed opinion.” (ibid -5 p. 192,) 

The review then quotes from a French author to 
the effect that a poet’s political sentiments are of 
no importance, having no ground in reason, and con¬ 
cludes with this; "Dangerous as prophecies are, we 
could almost hazard a prediction that, if Lord Byron 
enjoys that length of life which we desire for his sake 
and our own, his future writings may probably shew that 


























































* 



















- 84 - 


he thinks better of the morals, religion, and constitution 
of his country, than his poems have hitherto indicated. w 
(Ibid. p. 194) 


The --dinbur>;h article on the same canto, while it raps 
Byron for such apparent folly as hailing Napoleon a -warrior 
in the cause of freedom, shows no concern at his failure to 
celebrate Wellington, or the victory at Waterloo, 


26 , 


20s 

331 , 

Jan. 

1814. 

27. 

QR, 

13: 

188, 

Mar, 

, 1812, 

28, 

Ibid 

;* 3 

P- 1 

83-4. 


29. 

QH, 

22 s 

435, 

Jul, 

, 1814, 

30. 

ER, 

38s 

467, 

Feb. 

, 1812, 

31. 

Jill, 

59 s 

118, 

June 

, 1818, 

32, 

ER, 

45: 

205, 

Apr. 

, 1814< 

33. 

<-} 

22 s 

428, 

Jul. 

, 1814, 


ER, 

45 s 

r?o, 

Apr, 

, 1814, 

34. 

Ibid 


p. 1 

99 - 

203. 

35. 

nr? 

' I *- U J 

% 

455“ 

457, 

jui., : 

36. 

. OR ' 

54 s 

476, 

Jul. 

, 1822, 


ET? 

— , 

70s 

271, 

Jul. 

, 1821, 

37, 

f~-T> 

} 

54: 

478, 

Jul. 

1822. 

38. 

Ib5 c 

l.i 

p« 487 . 



ER, 

— , 

70s 

■271- 

272, 

Jui., : 

40. 

Ibid., 

p. 285. 


41.. 

QR, 

54: 

490- 

91, Jul., li 







Chapter 1V 

SCOTT 

The articles on Scott’s poems reveal practically nothing 
about either political or literary prejudice in the reviews. 

With the exception of Jeffrey’s review of Marmion (a mild 
piece of reproval beside Jeffrey’s of Wordsworth and Col¬ 
eridge, or Croker’s of Endymion ) the opinions advanced by both 
reviews are cautious, polite, and well substantiated. The 
reviewers rarely discuss Scott'himself$ they rarely include 
him in a ”school’- which they can censure or commend as a whole. 
Most of the criticism, and most of the praise, is carefully 
limited to the poem being reviewed, and harsh remarks are 
always balanced with a good deal of praise, even in the two 
most disapproving revieifs. 

The Scott articles would probably have yielded more in¬ 
teresting information but for two facts* first, that both the 
reviewers (Jeffrey in the Edinburgh, Ellis in the Quarterly ) 
were personal friends of Scott, and second, that Scott’s pop¬ 
ularity was so immense when most of the reviews were written 
(1805 - 1815) that only a foolhardy reviewer Would write an 
article of unrelieved censure. Had it not been for these two 
circumstances, Scott’s close connection with the 1 uarterly a 
and his friendship with Southey, Hordsworth and Coleridge, might 


have exposed him to the full force of Jeffrey’s criticism,, 



























■ 

















- 

■„ 






























! 





















- 86 - 


The Edinburgh article on Marmion is the most significant 
of the seven reviews of Scott ? s poems. 1 The two Edinburgh 
articles which followed that on Marmion speak more severely 


of Scott than the one which precedes it, perhaps because of 
Jeffrey’s indignation at Scott’s complicity in founding the 
Quarterly . The Marmion article also provides evidence that 
the two reviews were sensitive to each other’s criticism, 
for the Quarterly article which appeared next after the 
Edinburgh ’s on Marmion consists of a spirited defence of 
both Marmion and of the poem under review ( The Lady of the 
Lake ) and of a sharp reprimand to Jeffrey for his criticism. 


The Edinburgh’s first review is of The Lay of the Last 
Minstrel . 11 A beautiful -and entertaining poem” is Jeffrey’s 
verdict. Whatever faults it has, he feels, are quite out¬ 
weighed by ’’the spirit and force” of Scott's verses, by the 
’’fire and animation of his whole composition, and the brilliant 

coloring and prominent features of the figures with which he 
o 

has enlivened it.” Strangely enough, Jeffrey, in select¬ 
ing particular stanzas for praise, chooses those which are 
imitated from Chrigtabel, although his opinion of them in 
Coleridge *-s poem was very low* ^ The ^osabelle stanzas are 
selected for quotation in full, and of one selection Jeffrey 
says that ’’not many passages in English more impressive 






















1 






t 



















0 


! 








. 






! 1 














- 87 - 


than some parts of this extract.” The few things which 
Jeffrey does not like about the poem he mentions very briefly. 

The narrative, he writes, is weak, consisting of barely-con¬ 
nected events, and the supernatural events and characters, 
particularly the dwarf, are a blemish in the poem. There are 
many "heavy passages’ 1 , and much detail of interest only to 
students of the period. The faults of the poem, however, are 
quite outweighed by its merits, in the opinion of Jeffrey. 

The Edinburgh review of Marrnion appeared in 1808, 

shortly before the appearance of the first quarterly . There 
is some evidence that Jeffrey suspected the quarterly scheme, 
and Scott’s complicity in it. His suspicions may have led him 
to write the much less cordial Marrnion review. ^ The heart of 
the criticism is a list of five serious weaknesses which Jeffrey 
detects, or pretends to detect, in Marrnion * First, he says, the 
poem consists of a series of detached episodes rather than of 
one sweeping narrative. Second, the plot is badly constructed, 
and badly untied. The improbability of some parts of the poem is 
the subject of Jeffrey’s third complaint, and the worthlessness 
of most of the characters that of his fourth. The fifth crit¬ 
icism is rather a curious one. Jeffrey objects to the title of 
the poem on the grounds that it does not suit the narrative, which 
has very little to do with Bosworth Field, and that it is insuf¬ 
ficiently Scottish. Besides these five, there are other criticisms 
of individual passages. Comparing the poem with The La.v . Jeffrey 









writes that it has ’'more tedious and flat passages, and more 
Q bat ion of historical and ant* . lore ... .** One 
passage is described as "a redundancy of minute description”/' 
another as being "unchastised by any great delicacy of taste, 
or elegance of fancy.” ^ The subject he terms ,! an obsolete 
extravagance". Some parts are called "tedious, hasty and in- 

g 

judicious composition”. The long, detailed, descriptions of 

medieval life, dress, and manners are, according to Jeffrey, 

drawn from ’’mouldy monkish illuminations, and mutilated 

9 

fragments of painted glass.” The specialized antiquarian 
information with which Jeffrey thinks Marmion is overburdened 
elicits this comments ’’Poetry which is designed for immortality, 
should treat only of feelings and events which can be conceived 
and entered into by readers of all descriptions”. Mar mi on 
is just good enough, writes Jeffrey, that it will stimulate the 
imitation of many bad writers, and the presses will be clogged 
with a mass of hopelessly bad romantic verse. The review ends 
on a political note. In the preface to Canto. I Scott praises 
Nelson, Pitt, and Fox. Jeffrey assures his readers that he does 
not wish to quarrel with Scott on political grounds, but that 
this political praise is both inaccurate and in bad taste. 

The review is not uniformly unsympathetic. It attributes 
to Marmion ’’greater richness and variety, both of character and 




















\ 











- 89 - 


incident” than The Lay . The poem is said to have "A general 
tone of spirit and animation, unchecked by timidity or af¬ 
fectation". The warmest praise comes at the end of the sel¬ 
ections. Marmion , writes Jeffrey, "is superior to all that 

this author has hitherto produced£and] equal to anything that 

11 

has ever been written upon similar subjects." One extract 

is described as part of "five or six-hundred lines ... in 

which he never stoops his wing, nor wavers in his course; but 

carries the reader forward with a more rapid, sustained and 

lofty movement than any epic bard that we can at.present rem- 
12 

emoer." 

The Marmion review, whether or not it was inspired by 
Jeffrey’s indignation at Scott’s part in the Quarterly scheme, 
certainly marks the beginning of a less friendly attitude to 
Scott’s poems on the part of the Edinburgh . The next Edinburgh 
notice of Scott’s work is in August, 1810, The Lady of the 
lake . This article contains rather less actual criticism of the 
work itself than does the Marmion article, but in it Jeffrey 
concentrates his efforts upon showing how Scott’s tremendous 
reading public is a consequence of the poet’s having used 
devices appealing to a mob, but not to the small group of 
really discriminating judges. The review is polite, and in 
many places has warm praise for The Lady , but the insinuation 










. 




















. i 



















' : ■' ! 



















- 90 - 


that Scott is a vulgar seeker after applause is more dev¬ 
astating than all the vitriol of the Wordsworth and Coleridge 
articles. Jeffrey makes no attempt to stretch the truth rid¬ 
iculously. He admits that Scott used the ordinary literary 
devices more skilfully than have seme other popular writers, 
but nevertheless, writes Jeffrey, the wise and the experienced 
will detect the subterfuge. The "devices” of which Jeffrey 
writes are using narrative as a means of gaining attention - 
instead of gaining it by the intensity of the human passions 
displayed; using stock-in-trade characters such as kings and 
knights rather than the humble folk of Cowper and Crabbe, and 
gaining effect by a brilliant abundance of richness and variety 
rather than by a ''great elevation of passion." Scott, writes 
Jeffrey, has taken "the popular, and comparatively easy course." ^4 
The warm praise which ends the article is considerably diluted with 
the final assertion that "the fastidious will make great objections." 

There is a good deal of praise for the poem, most of it tempered 
by a reference to Scott*s seeking after a popular reception. 

,{ . . . He has made more use of common topics, images and ex¬ 
pressions," writes Jeffrey, "than any original poet of later times; 
and, at the same time, displayed more genius and originality than 
any recent author who has worked in the same materials." The 
verse, according to Jeffrey, has vigor, power, spirit, intrepidity, 
















. 


* - 


5 




















■i 5 

- 

' * , . 










- 















- 91 - 


and is never dull or crabbed. The descriptions are vivid; 
some of the characters have "freedom and nature,” In one 
place Jeffrey goes so far as to call The Lady "one of the 


17 


most attractive poems in the language." 


All the praise 


is made empty, however, by Jeffrey’s insistence that Scott 
is motivated by a desire for popularity, and that his work 
will never succeed with, those really capable of judging, 
or with posterity. 

The last Edinburgh review of Scott’s poetry is that 
of Lord of the Isles , w which, while it acknowledges the 
hand of genius in the poem, finds it a weak performance, 
rather less interesting than either The Lady or Marmion . 
The article opens with a condemnation of the signs of 
haste in the poem, Scott, writes Jeffrey, "stoops but 
rarely to study the means by which they!the great ends 



jC? 

are reached." " The article consists 


of truth and effei 


largely of a list of faults; there is a mixing of incon¬ 
gruous plots; the poem is.too solemn and dignified, lack¬ 
ing the flashes of low life which enlivened Scott ! s earl¬ 
ier performances; the language is weak and poor, and the 
tone of the poem is not sufficiently national. There is 
no need, writes Jeffrey, to apologize to the English for 
writing about a battle in which they were defeated. 

Isobel and Edith are representations of "mawkish gen- 










t - 










■•3 e '- , 






HI': \ 3 ' >. ,. 










. 





92 - 


erosity" and “pious fidelity,” The poem, writes Jeffrey, 

"so far as it is fictitious, is palpably deficient , . „ 

so far as it is founded in historical truth, seems to us 

20 

to be objectionable . , , " 

Of the three Quarterly reviews of Scott’s poems, only 
one, that of The Lady of the Lake, is of real interest* 

The other two, of Koke^by ~~ and of The Lord of the Isles ^ 
are the kind of article one would expect Ellis to write 
about his friend and felloe-contributor to the Quarterly * ^ 
The first Quailerlv article on Scott ’s poetry, however, is 
of greater interest, because it shows that the reviews were 
sensitive to each otter’s criticisms* Scott was very much 
offended by the Ha ran ion review, ’and since Scott’s letters 
show that he did not keep his injured feelings to himself, 
one can assume that Ellis knew of them, and sought to relieve 
them in his review of The Lady of the Lake by answering 
Jeffrey’s criticism'point by point. Ellis may have felt that 
the criticism in the Marmion article was more a result of Jef¬ 
frey’s anger at the Quarterly plan than of impartial judgement 
because there is a definite tone of indignation in Ellis’s re¬ 
view* That this indignation is not merely a symptom of blind 


devotion to Scott is made clear by Ellis’s harsh review of The 

























. 

r _ __ 

1 

i. • t 

| 

* ’l • \ > 0 •" 

■ • 

, L J . , ■ ' f 

>0 ’ 


- 




1 

s 










Ellis *s article consists chiefly of a satirical refutation 
of the criticism in Jeffrey f s Ear ml on reyi'ew* We shall, writes 
Ellis, ”canvass our opponents arguments”. He lists Jeffrey T s 
objections to the poem ^ and attempts to destroy them, partly 
by paraphrasing or quoting them in such a way as to make them 
ridiculous* ^ When he has dealt with Jeffreys general ob¬ 
jections to poetic romances, Ellis lists the five specific crit¬ 
icisms, and attempts to prove their worthlessness by showing that 
they have no connection with Jeffrey ’s original objection to 
Easmion j that it is obsolete romance, and not epic poetry* The 
article ends with a warm recommendation of The Lady of the Lake, 
consisting of high praise for the descriptions, characters, and 
narrative in the poem, and for the passages selected for quotation* 
From the time of the Marmion review, the Edinburgh opinion of 
Scott declines. This decline may be a result of Jeffrey’s res¬ 
entment at the founding^or proposal for founding, the y "terly . 

The Quarterly review of The Lady of the Lake shows first, that 
the Quarterly supporters were highly sensitive to what was written 
about them in the Edinburgh * and second, that although Ellis’s 
sympathy with Scott about the Mamie n article may have caused 
him to write better of The lady of the Lake than he otherwise 
would have, the Quarterly review of The Lord of the Isles 
reveals that even Ellis was capable of criticizing Scott sharply. 


















- 94 - 


1 .*■ • T T 


1. The influence of this review on the founding of the 

' ter 1y has already been explained in Chapter I. 
See p. 6 

2. ER, 11:7, Apr., 1805. 

3. See ChrifctebeI , 1.54, and Lav ox the Last Minstrel , 
r’anto I, Stanaa I, and above, Chapt. II, p. 


4. ER, 11s12, Apr., 1805. 

5. In a letter to Ellis, 15 Tec, 1808 (three months 
before the Marmion article) Scott records a conversation 
he had with Jeffrey. (See p, ), In this conversation 
Jeffrey told Scott that there were four men whoto he 
feared, three of them Scott, Ellis and Southey. This 
revelation was in repljr to Scott’s statement that he 
would join against Jeffrey - ’’not against you personally, 
but against your politics”. ’’All this,” says Scott, 

’’was in great good humor , . . He has no suspicion of 
the review. 51 Jeffrey had more suspicion than Scott 
imagined, however. In a letter to Horner, written after 
the conversation with Scott, but before Scott wrote to 
Ellis, Jeffrey states that ’’Cumberland is going to start 
an anonymous rival; and what is worse I have reason to 
believe Scott, Ellis, Erere, Southey and some others are 
plotting another.” ( Halter Scott Is Letters , Vol. II, p. 
138, and F.N.) Evidently Jeffrey suspected the Quarterly 
51 conspiracy”, and perhaps his suspicions led him to adopt 
in his review of Marmion a harsher tone than he had used 
in that of The lay. 


6 . 

r7 

/ • 

8 . 

9. 


ER, 23:2, Apr,, 1808. 
Ibid,, p. 3. 

Ibid .» p. 28, 

Ibid ,, p. 31. 


10. Ibid., p. 32, 

11. Ibid., p, 27 














■ 




















. 















- 95 - 


12„ 

Ibid., d. 

28. 

13. 

ER, 32! 26 

3, Aug., 1810. 

14. 

Ibid., p. 

270 

15. 

Ibid., p. 

293. 

16. 

Ibid., p. 

270. 

£> 

rH 

Ibid. , p. 

279. 

18. 

EE, 43*273 

, Feb., 1815. 

19. 

Loc. cit. 


20. 

Ibid., p. 

281. 

21. 

QR. 16 s 435 

, Dec., 1812. 

22. 

QR, 26s287 

, July, 1815. 

23. 

The review 
some sharp 

of The Lord of the Isles, however, contains 
criticism, including the same objection as 


that voiced by Jeffrey in his review of The Lady . Scott, 
writes Ellis, has a tremendous following of ordinary 
people, above the level of whose taste he never attempts 
to rise. The charge of haste is once again laid against 
Scott in this review, and Ellis concludes that a poem "less 
calculated to keep alive the interest and curiosity of the 
reader could not easily have been contrived'*. (QH, 26s307, 
July, 1815.) 

24* Erskine, in a letter to Archibald Campbell Colquhoun, 23 
Oct. 1808, ( Walter Scott ! s letters . V-ol. II, p. 101, FN) 
discusses the editorship of the new review, and writes that, 
although Scott cannot accept the responsibility of the post, 
"as he is much hurt by Jeffrey's review of Marmion he will 
be a more strenous coadjuter than he himself is aware of," 
Scott, writing to Joanna Baillie on 31 Oct. 1808 ( Ibid ., 
VoI.^II, p» 116.) states that he has "no fault to find with 
his [Jeffrey'^expressing his sentiments frankly and freely 
upon the poem yet I think he might without derogation to 




















- 96 - 


his impartiality have couched them in language rather 
more civil to a personal friend and I believe he would 
have thought twice before he had given himself that air 
of superiority in a case where I had any chance of def¬ 
ending myself. Besides I really have often told him that 
I think he wants the taste for poetry which is essentially 
necessary to enjoy and of course to criticize it with 
justice.” In a letter to Thomas Scott* 19 Nov. 1S08* 

( Ibid . , Vol. II, p. 130) Scott mentions the ’’flap with a 
fox’s tale” which he owes Jeffrey for the Marmion review. 

25. See note 23 above. 

26. See above p. $7 

27. For example, Jeffrey, in the Marmion review, writes as 
follows; ”... We never entertained much partiality 
for this sort of composition, and ventured on a former 
occasion to express our regret, that an author endowed 
with such talents should consume them in imitations of 
obsolete extravagance, and in the representation of man¬ 
ners and sentiments in which none of his readers can be 
supposed to take much interest, except the few who can 
judge of their exactness. To write a modern romance of 
chivalry, seems to be much such a fantasy as to build a 
modern abbey, or an English pagoda. For once, however, 
it may be excused as a pretty caprice of genius; but a 
second production of the same sort is entitled to less 
indulgence, and imposes a sort of duty to drive the 
author from so idle a task, by a fair exposition of the 
faults, which are in a manner inseparable from its ex¬ 
ecution.” (ER, 23:3? Apr,, 1808.) Ellis, without men¬ 
tioning Jeffrey or the Marmion review, states that Scott, 
although he might have written an epic, has chosen in¬ 
stead to write ’’long poetical narratives, not formed on 
any classical model, but rather resembling, in the ir¬ 
regularity of their construction, the obsolete romances 

of chivalry. And. this he continued to do, notwithstand¬ 
ing the remonstrances of very acute and enlightened friends, 
who reminded him that they ’never entertained much part¬ 
iality for this sort of compositions ’ who ’ventured to 
express their regret at this abuse of his talentsj 1 who 
observed to him that f to write a modern romance of chiv¬ 
alry, seems to be much such a fantasy as to build a modern 
abbey, or an English pagoda; ’ and who declared that a sec¬ 
ond production of the same sort ’Imposed on them a sort of 
duty to drive the author from so idle a task, by a fair ex¬ 
position of the faults which are in a manner inseparable 
from its execution,’ (QR, 6:493? May, 1810.) 















* „ . 


* ■■ 4 - • ' 1 l • " ' 

- 

• t 

* 








- 97 - 


Chapter V 


HAZLITT . HUNT , KEATS . and SHELLEY 

Hazlitt, Hunt, Keats, and Shelley are the writers most 
closely connected with the violent controversy over the 
"Cockney School", a controversy which produced some of the 
periodIs most vituperative writing. Blackwood } s Edinburgh 
Magazine " was more involved in the debate than was either 
of the reviews, but the unanimity of political feeling in 
Blackvir od } p and in the 1 uarterly ^ caused much of the bat¬ 
tle to be recorded in the latter periodical. If Jeffrey wrote 
harshly of Wordsworth and Southey, Gifford and Croker wrote 
with greater virulence of Hunt and Keats. The situation was 
entirely reversedi the Quarterly showed a stronger dislike 
for the works and persons of Hunt, Shelley, and Keats than 
had the Edinburgh for those of Wordsworth, Coleridge, and 
Southey. 

Hazlitt provides a good starting point for a discussion 
of these four, because he is involved in both camps, writing 
fairly voluminously for the Edinburgh (seventeen articles) 
and being noticed with reasonable frequency in both reviews 
(twice in the Edinburgh , three times in the Quarterly ). 

Over the Edinburgh reviews of Hazlitt T s work there is no 
need to pause. They are, as one would expect, quietly 




























- 
















. 



' 













' 

















t 












1 






, 












enthusiastic. Jeffrey, who writes the review of Characters 


3 

of Shakespeare T s Flays " says briefly that Hazlitt has shown 
excellent taste, and true sensitivity to the beauties of 
Shakespeare, and devotes most of the article to discussion 
of Shakespeare, or to quotations from Hazlitt. The article 
on Lectures on the Frametic Literature of the Age of Elizabeth 
is similarly kind to Hazlitt, but it contains some interesting 
observations on the reasons for his unpopularity. He is too 
prone, says the reviewer, to let politics intrude itself into 
his non-political writings - 55 the intrusion of political vir¬ 
ulence . , . when the mind is prepared only for the delicate 

/ 

investigations of taste". 4 Hazlitt is inclined to n give up 
to party what was meant for mankind n . The review hastens to 
add, however, that Hazlitt was not one to suffer "antipathies 
in philosophy or politics to influence his. critical decisions 11 . 
The review finds a second cause of Hazlitt *s unpopularity in his 
practice of bringing personal animosities into his writings, and 
specified "personal bitterness towards Messrs. Wordsworth, 
Coleridge and Southey". ° ^ 

The Quarterly opinion of Hazlitt is represented by three 

8 

articles, all of them attributed by Hazlitt to Gifford, They 
are all violently disparaging, and are all answered, with even 
greater violence, in the Letter V Gifford . The fi t'of the 














- 99 - 


Quarterly articles on Hazlitt reviews The Ponnd Table,'-' 

Hot only does Gifford damn the literary quality of the 
essays, but he finds in them political ideas which offend 
him, and about which he takes Hazlitt sharply to task. 

The work, begins Gifford, consists u of vulgar descriptions, 
silly paradoxes, flat truisms, misty sophistry broken En- 

xo 

glish, ill-humored and rancorous abuse . . . ” To 
Hazlitt 1 a statement that the essays were meant to be in ’’the 
manner of the Spectator and Tatler 11 Gifford takes the strong- . 
est exception, Hazlitt 's intention of discussing the manners 
of the age draws sharp ridicules , the objects of his 

most sedulous care are of the softer sex. It is not indeed 
the sek in general; but it is a highly interesting and amiable 
part of it - that, namely, which passes under the denomination 
of ’washerwomen’,” After objecting to Hazlitt’s style and 
diction, Gifford turns to his politics, ”He is a sour Jacobin,” 
states Gifford, and quotes as evidence Hazlitt’s ”pathetic lam¬ 
entation over the failure of the French Revolution”, Hazlitt, . 
he says, ’’abuses all country-people . . , nor is it simply abuse; 
it is the language of Billingsgate, except that it is infinitely 
more rancorous than anything which . , , he can have 1 . in 

that school of natural civility”, “ Hazlitt T s attacks upon Pitt 
and Burke are condemned as ’’loathsome trash”, but Gifford con¬ 
fesses that ’’these passages chiefly excited us to take the trouble 














- 






100 - 


12 

of noticing the work." Gifford concludes thus? "the 
author might have described washerwomen forever; complimen¬ 
ted himself unceasingly on his own ’chivalrous eloquence 1 ; 
prosed interminably about Chaucer; written, if possible, 
in a more affected* silly* confused, ungrammatical style, 
and believed, as he now believes, that he was surpassing 
Addison - we should not have meddled with him; but if the 
creature, in his endeavors to crawl into the light, must 
take his way over the tombs of illustrious men, disfiguring 

the records of their greatness with the slime and filth which 

! ,* ^' ij 

marks his track, it is right to point him out that he may be 

flung back to the situation in which nature designed that, he 
13 

should grovel.” 

The second article, on Characters of Chaksspeare’s Flays , 

opens with an attack upon Jeffrey’s review of the same work. 

’’The peculiar excellencies of Mr. Hazlitt, 15 writes Gifford, 

11 have been pointed out by a friend and admirer,” He then 

quotes several lines from the Edinburgh article, showing 

Hazlitt f s qualities to be ”an indestructible love of f lowers 

and odors, and dews, and clear waters, and soft airs and 

sounds, and bright skies, and woodland solitudes, with moon- 

14 

light bowers.” . Much of the review is taken up with the, same 
Unreasonable criticism which characterized Hazlitt ? s own 
articles on Coleridge. Comments on Hazlitt } s language, for 








' 
















. 


















- 101 - 


instance, are all in the manner of this ones “Frequently 
he descends to that simpler style of eloquence which is in- 
use among washerwomen, the class of females with whom, as 
we learn from tie Hound Table , he and his friend Mr, Hunt 
more particularly delight to associate," ^ Hazlitt* s 
opinion of particular plays or characters is usually dis¬ 
missed in some such summary fashion as thiss "Had he not 
sat down with a declared determination to write nonsense, 

we might have been tempted from this passage to pay him the 

16 

compliment of believing that he had not read the play," 

The review concludes with the assertion that "we should not 
have condescended to notice the senseless and wicked sophistry 
of this writer . . , had we not considered him as one of the 

representatives of a class of men by whom literature is more 

17 

than at any former period disgraced." 

The last Quarterly review of Hazlitt, that of Table 
18 

Talk, is also the most abusive, and the most concerned with 
politics. Hazlitt is styled a "slang-whanger", a term which 
Gifford claims to have discovered in an American dictionary, and 
which means "one who makes use of political or other gabble, 
vulgarly called slang, that serves to amuse the rabble." 

The review is the shortest, the least objective, and the most 
vicious of those on Hazlitt. Gifford condemns the essay on 
"Genius and Common Sense" for its attacks on the cons titution 








































5 

























\ 


V « 4 


, 












' ' J 7 


j< 









102 - 


and on Pitt - an "oblique stroke, like that cf the tusk of 
the boar.*' A passage in "Paradox and Common Place" receives 
heavy censure. Hazlitt describes "the dastard, haunting, 
crew," who, once strong supporters of the "work of reg¬ 
eneration", now are returning, "with retrograde steps, like 
Cacus's oxen, dragged backwards by the heels to the den of 
legitimacy , . . with places and pensions, and the Quarterly 

Review dangling from their pockets, and shouting, "Deliverance 

19 

for mankind . . . 11 The reference is plainly to Wordsworth, 
Coleridge, Southey, and the other political "turncoats." Gif¬ 
ford dismisses the passage with contempt, but without any ef¬ 
fort at the defence of the "Lakemen." The review concludes 
with a violent denunciation of another passage from the same 
essay, this one dealing with a constitutional speech of Canning. 
Gifford makes some attempt to destroy Hazlitt ? s "crazy gabble" 
with arguments of his own. 

To these three reviews Hazlitt replies in his Letter to 
Glff:rd , sxceeding Gifford’s strong language with stronger of his 
own. Because the Letter contains one important opinion of pol¬ 
itical influence in the Quarterly ! s literary reviewing, it will 
be discussed in the last chapter. About the Quarterly reviews 
of Hazlitt, one can say only that the reviewer bares his pol¬ 
itical fangs when Hazlitt exposes himself to attack by discussing 
political subjects. Even Jeffrey, at the time friendly with Hazlitt, 








. 

' ■ < 

■ • * • 

■ ' . , « 

- t 

. 

' 



1 . 1 . . 




* 



1 

. 













. • » 

i . 









- 103 - 


admits that Hazlitt *s work is marred by the constant in- 

on 

terjection of political ideas.^ It is only when these 

ideas appear that Gifford makes a political attack. The 
extent to which this known political animosity is res¬ 
ponsible for an equal dislike of Hazlitt's non-political 
work has yet to be estimated. 

There Is little to be gained by a close examination 
of the reviews of Hunt, Shelley, and Keats. Their treat¬ 
ment at the hands of the two periodicals is almost ident¬ 
ical with that received by Hazlitt, the Edinburgh approves, 
generally speaking, all their work and all their politics^ 
the Quarterly finds nothing to commend in either the men 
or their writing. The fact that all four men knew each- 
other, and that some very close friendships existed among 
them - that between Keats and Hunt, for instance - probably 
contributed to the unanimity of opinion, within each review, 
about the four. 

The Edinburgh notice of Hunt ’s Rimini is a highly fav¬ 
orable one, although it does contain a passing criticism of 
some details of diction. The poem is described as one of 
"great grace and spirit ... of infinite beauty and delicacy." 
Hunt, writes Jeffrey, "has united something of the voluptuous 
pathos of Boccaccio with Ariosto ? s laughing graces." Jeffrey 
is careful to point out that Hunt’s poetry "is not like Mr. 


21 








I 




I ' • 




■ 


























a 




- 
















1 










- 104 - 


Wordsworth’s, which is metaphysical; nor like Mr. Coleridge’s, 

which is fantastical; nor like Mr. Southey's, which is monastical.” 

25 

The Quarterly article on Rimini is definitely Gifford’s. 

It is short and very harsh upon both Hunt and the poem. The re¬ 
viewer denies, at the beginning of the article, any prejudice ag¬ 
ainst Hunt, even though he wrote the poem while in prison for 
denouncing the Prince Regent as a rake and a liar. The int¬ 
roduction and the poem are described as "the most strange, labored, 
uncouth, and unintelligible species of prose that we ever read, 
only indeed to be exceeded in these qualities by some of the 
subsequent verses; and both the prose and the verse are the first 
eruptions of this disease with which Mr. Leigh Hunt insists upon 
inoculating mankind." The only suggestion of political feeling 
occurs in the last paragraph, where Gifford chides Hunt for his - 
familiarity with Byron in the dedication to Rimini . "A low man,’* 
writes Gifford, "conscious and ashamed of his wretched vanity, 
and laboring, with coarse flippancy, to scramble over the bounds 
of birth and education, and fidget himself into the stout-heart- 
edness of being familiar with a Lord." ‘ The review of Foliage 
contains equally harsh criticism of Hunt’s verse, but the most 
interesting part of the revie?? is that in which Hunt and Shelley 
are linked together as associates in the attempt to overthrow 
common morality and Christian belief. "We may be narrow-mind¬ 
ed,” writes the reviewer, "but we look upon it still as somewhat 
dishonorable to have been expelled from a University for the 


23 24 


































. 

- 








































■' 


































- 105 - 


monstrous absurdity of a "mathematical demonstration of the 
non-existence of a God* . . The reviewer relates the story 
of Shelley in Switzerland, where he inscribed himself "atheos" 
after regarding the beauty of the mountains. £ s against 

such breaches of decorum that the article is chiefly directed; 

Hunt f s association with Shelley, and his sharing in Shelley ! s 
incendiary ideas, are particularly deplored. 

The notices of Keats are two in number: one in the Edinburgh 
by Jeffre y, one in the Quarterly by Croker. The Quarterly art¬ 
icle is the famous one on Endymion, to which Byron and Shelley, 
with more sentiment than accuracy, attributed Keats’s death. None 
of the articles yields much political information, except that the 
treatment given Keats by the reviews indicates that both regarded 
him as belonging to the same literary school, and perhaps the 
same political one, as Hazlitt, Hunt and Shelley. Jeffrey’s re¬ 
view of Endymion, Lamia , Isabella , The Eve of St . Agnes is full 
of warm praise, and a true consciousness of the beauties of the 
poems, particularly the last three. Jeffrey does not neglect to 
mention that Keats’s work is "full of extravagance and irregularity, 

rash attempts at originality, interminable wanderings, and excessive 
30 

obscurity” ^ but the article is, altogether, very generous to Keats. 
The famous Quarterly article needs no explanation. It is under 
four pages long, and consists of the harshest ridicule and censure 
for Hunt as well as for Keats, whom Croker regards as "Hunt’s 






























1 


























. 


C 




' - » ' <. 












' 

t 




' 





- 106 - 


simple neophyte.' 1 There is no mention of politics in the re¬ 
view, although Keats is specifically named as "a disciple of 

31 32 

the new school of , . , Cockney poetry." 

Shelley is noticed in four articles: one in the Edinburgh 
33 

by Hazlitt, three in the Quarterly by John Taylor Coleridge, 
the poetfe nephew. The closeness of the She Hey-Keats- 
Hazlitt relationship is shown in Hazlitt *s article on the Pos ¬ 
thumous Poems -, which is a good instance of what has already 
been said about his impartiality, contains a tribute to Keats 
(and a longer one to Byron) with a bitter reference to the 
Quarterly review of Endymlon . The criticism is friendly to 
Shelley, and ready to admit his genius, but it finds his work 
wanting because Shelley Meals in allegories and riddles**. 

"Mr. Shelley’s mind," says Hazlitt, "was of too fiery a quality' 
to repose (for any continuance) on the probable or the true „ „ . 
All is effort, almost all is extravagant, almost all is quaint, 
incomprehensible and abortive, from aiming to be more than he is". 
There is a great tribute to Shelley’s personal integrity, but 
Hazlitt deplores his reforming spirit, which sought to advance so 
quickly as to "mar all", "to give a handle and a pretext to the 

enemy to treat all philosophy and all reform as a compost of crude, 

35 

chaotic and monstrous absurdities." 




























107 


Of the three Quarterly articles, the most significant is 
the only one published during Shelley f s lifetime - that of The 
"eve-It of Islam , or laon and Qythna. Both the other reviews 
(of Posthumous Poems and Frometheus ) are posthumous, and there 
are others beyond our period, Shelley had already been warned 
by the Quarterly of what treatment he could expect from them 
should they ever review his work. The review of Hunt f s Foliage , 
mentioned above, gives Shelley very brief and very harsh mention. 
Speaking of "the compositions of many of those with whom he 
Jkuntl has recasiijhis sympathy and agreement," the reviewer, 

John Taylor Coleridge, states in a footnote that he now has 
one such production before him, but that he doubts "whether it 

on 

would be morally right to lend it notoriety by any comments. r? 
Which work is referred to in this note is uncertain - it may be 


The Revolt of Islam , which was reviewed under a year later - 
but Shelley is positively identified on the next page as the man 
who subscribes himself “atheos”. D There is a considerable 
space devoted to an enumeration of Shelley’s transgressions, end¬ 
ing with the pious hope that “our own feeling would be pity rather 


than disgust^ but we should think it imbecility indeed to court 
that man’s friendship, or to celebrate his intellect or his 

OQ 

heart » . . " Shelley himself was very much aware of the 


,i„1: : T s attitude. In a letter to Peacock, July 25 s ISIS, 


40 


he wrote; "Their notice of me 


and their exposure of the true 




















' 






■ 


■ 
























f 




: ... .' t.. 
















. 




; vSi 















108 - 


motives for not noticing my book, shews how well understood 
>stility must subsist between me and them," and Hunt, c 
writing to Shelley, warned him of a more savage attack im¬ 
pending, but promised to “buckle on my old rusty armor, and 
give them such a carbanado as I know I am able 

The review of Laon and Cvthna, under both its: titles, 
appeared in the - Quarterly in April, 1819. It is as dev¬ 
astating as Shelley bad been warned 1 it would be. Instead of 
the usual long selections, there is a long discussion in three 
parts, the first condemning Shelley’s system, the second his 
logical method, and the third his private life, which John 
Taylor Coleridge finds, is the practical consequence of his 
philosophy* The entire work is described in this ways *A4s a 
whole, it is in support ably dull, and laboriously obscurej its 
absurdities are not of the kind which provoke laughter, the 
story is almost wholly, devoid of interest, and very meagrej 
nor can we admire Mr. Shelley’s mode of making up for this de¬ 
fect - as he has but one incident where he should have ten, he 
tells that one so intricately, that it takes the time of ten to 
comprehend it.” 44 Coleridge then attacks Shelley’s system, and 
his method of arriving at it, and concludes that “if we might 
withdraw the veil of private life, and tell what we now know 
about him, it would be indeed a disgusting picture that we should 


exhibit”. 


43 44 



























- 109 - 


The review ox Prometheus . published soon after Shelley’s 
death, is no kinder. The reviewer’s main objection to the 
poem is its obscurity. M Let any man try to ascertain what it 
really said, and he will immediately discover the imposition 
that has been practised,” Apparently the poem was not so 
obscure that the critic could not follow its revolutionary ideas, 
for these he condemns vigorously, n To his long list of demerits, 
he has added the most flagrant offences against morality and 
religion.” 4° 

Both reviews evidently thought Hazlitt, Hunt, Keats, and 
■Shelley to be members of the same school, partly because of 
their personal friendship, and partly because of the similarity 
of their political opinions. For the same reasons, both re¬ 
views tended to treat TTordsworth, Coleridge, and Southey as a 
group, and for other personal and political reasons, both re¬ 
views considered Byron and Scott to be distinct from either 
school. It will be the purpose of the next chapter to determine, 
as precisely as possible, why each review held the opinions which 


it did. 













. 



















1 


. 












110 - 


Notes to Chaster V 


1. See Chapt. I, note lb 

2. Hazlitt refers to n the filth and slime of the '.uarterl 

v Lev . or its drain, Blackwood 1 ; Edinburgh l^agazine^. 
(Letter _bo Gifford , p. 3-0 

3. EL,565472, Aug., 1817. 

4. EE, 63:438, Nov., 1320. 

5. Ibid ., p. 439. 

6. Ibid .. p. 441. 

7. Modern opinion also argues for Hazlitt*s impartiality. 
Chew (Baugh, Literary History of England , p. 1135) 
says that "more' often his political opinions were not 
allowed to warp his judgment and taste as a literary 
critic . . . ** 

3. Howe, r,?. (ed) Complete Lurks of ""1111 am Hazlitt, 
Vol. LX, p. 13, Letter to Gifford . ‘ 

9. QR, 33.-154, Apr., 1313. 

10. Ibid*? P* 155 

11. Ibid., p. 158 

12. Ibid., p. 159 

13. Loc . cit . 

14. QR, 36 s458, May, 1313. 


15. Loc . cit . 

16. Ibid .. p. 462. 

17. Ibid., p. 466 . 

18. QR, 51: 103, Oct, 1822. 

19. Ibid., p. 106 - 7. 

20. See above p. w 

21. ER, 52: 477, June, 1316, 





























0 . . % 







, 
















Ill - 


22. Loc . cit . 

23. Ibid., p. 4^2 

24. The authorship of this 'aimini article, which I have 
attributed to Jeffrey, is not certain. Howe f Life 

—2 Ha. 2 11 it . p. 203) believes that, like the Chrlstabel 
article, it was originally submitted by Hazlitt, but 
so overwitten by Jeffrey as to be more his work than 
Hazlitt T s. Jeffrey claims the review. 


25. Howe, forks of Hazlitt, Vol. IX, p. 253> note 26. 

26. QR, 36: 474, May, 1816. 

27. Ibid .. P . 481 

28. QR, 36:324, May, 1818. 

29. Baugh, Albert C. (ed), ALi rarv History of Bigland , 
p. 1234. 

30. ER, 67:203, Aug., 1820. 

31. QR, 37:204, Apr., 1819. 

32. The following are characteristic of the article f s venom: tt 

... We doubt that any man in his senses would put his 
real name to such a rhapsody 5 *; (204) H the most incongruous 

ideas in the most uncouth language 55 \ (204) 55 our author, as 

we have already hinted, has no meaning. 55 (206) 

33. Howe, Works of Hazlitt, Vol. XVI. 

34. White, Newman Ivey, Ihelley . Vol. II, p. 155. 

35. ER, 80:498, July, 1824. 

36. White, o£. cit., Vol. II, p. 27 

37. QK, 36s 324, May, ISIS, 

38. See above p. fC5" 

39. 7R, 36:329, May, 1818. 

40. White, op. cit .. Vol. II, p, 27 














-112 - 


41. Ibid . , Vol. II, p. 67. 

42. QR, 42i 463; Apr., 1819. 

43. Ibid ., p. 471. 

44. Strangely enough, the Quarterly opinion was not bared by 
Blackwood’s . . which normally followed the Quarterly lead. 
"It is not in the power of all the critics alive to blind 
one true lover of poetry to the splendor of Mr. Shelley’s 
genius," wrote Blackwood T s . (White, Shelley . Vol. II, 

p. 161.) "Do you know," wrote Shelley to Ollier on Dec. 
15, 1819; "I think the article in Blackwood could not have 
been written by a favorer of government and a religionist. 
I don’t believe any such one could sincerely like my 
writings. After all, is it not some friend in disguise, 
and don't you know who wrote it?” ( Ibid ., Vol. II, p. 
161-2.) 

45. QR, 51: 170, Oct,, 1822. 

46. Ibid., p. 177. 










- 113 - 


Chapin- Tr I 


■ c~:cHrio?T 

It remains to be seen why the reviews thought as they did 
about the writers they noticed: whether they gave praise where 
it was due on literary grounds, or where they thought it would 
do the most good on political ones. Something should be said 
also about the value of the articles in their own time, and to 
modern readers of the romantic poets. The plan of this chapter 
is to summarize the opinions of the two reviews, to show ho?/ 
their judgements on partly or wholly political articles are un¬ 
reliable, and to explain why they are unreliable. Then an 
attempt will be made, to explain the difference between the Edin ¬ 
burgh and Quarterly opinions of strictly non-political works by 
showing that the two reviews held different poetic theories. 
Finally, there will be an assessment of the value of the art¬ 
icles as literary criticism. 

Chapters II to V have established the opinions which the 
re vie?/s held of the romantic ?/riters. Of the ’’Lake” poets - 
Eordsworth, Coleridge, and Southey - the Edinburgh is generally 
contemptuous: The "hite Doe is dismissed with no word of praise ; 
The Excursion and Poems in Two v olumes receive some slight com¬ 
mendation, but are for the most part ridiculed, Thalaba , Madoc «, 
Roderick , and The Curse of Tehama are found to be largely wanting, 
although some parts are praised; A Vision of Judgement , The hay of 





















































. 



















V 























. 



































. 

I 








: ' ’ 














- 114 - 


the Laureate . and Carmen Triumphsle are held to be pieces of 
foolery beneath contempt. For this low opinion of Wordsworth 
and Southey, Jeffrey must be held responsible, since he is the 
author of all the reviews of their work. Coleridge, the third 
member of the ’’Lake' 5 school, is even more severely mauled in 
the Edinburgh : Chrlstabel , The hay Sermon , and Blograohia 
Literaria are all treated with caustic harshness, the last two 
by Hazlitt, the first by Jeffrey. 

The Edinburgh reviews of the later romantics are written by 
Hazlitt and Jeffrey, and are, in nearly every instance, friendly. 
Hunt, Hazlitt, and Keats are invariably noticed sympathetically^ 
Shelley is thought to be a man of great genius, but too wild and 
symbolical for ordinary consumption. One should note that the 
Edinburgh is nowhere incapable of giving praise where it thinks' 
it due. Some particular passages in Wordsworth and in the early 
work of Southey are firmly commended, although Hazlitt has nothing 
good to say of Coleridge. 

In the Quarterly , the Edinburgh opinions are by-and-large 
reversed. The reviewers find most of the work of the ?, Lakemen n 
to their liking, but all the later romantics displease them. Thus 
The Ercursion . The White Doe , The Lyrical Ballads, The Curse of 
Kehama, and Roderick are hailed as great j; , The He morse of 
Coleridge as a fine drama. But Hazlitt*s productions are reviled 
in language too strong to be read with comfort; Hunt is savagely 






















' 






* 










• 

















t 
























5 ■ ' - , ; . . . t 








1 












- 









- 115 - 


attacked, Shelley is marked out as a man who should not be 
at large, and Keats is given the stinging blow of the Bndymion 
review. These articles on the later romantics show an inflex¬ 
ible hatred which one suspects would appear in the review what¬ 
ever the merits of the workj but the earlier criticisms of 
Wordsworth, Coleridge, and Southey, while they are generally 
warm in their praise, are not without an awareness of weakness 
- the ridiculousness of some of Southey, for instance, or the 
obscurity of Wordsworth. 


PV 


Before beginning the discussion of the reviews’ reasons 
■for thinking as they did in literary matters, it is necessary 
to show that articles on works containing political ideas can¬ 
not help reflecting the political bias of the reviewer, and that 
the literary judgements in these articles are not to be trusted. ^ 
The political works whose reviews have been discussed in earlier 
chapters are these? 


In the Edinburgh ; Coleridge’s Lay Sermon 

Southey’s Lav of the Laureate 
Southey’s A Vision of Judgement 

In the Quarterly ? Hazlitt’s Wound Table ; Table Talk 
Shelley’s Posthumous Poemss The 

Lf- : -volt cUlan - Prometheus . 

The reviews of these works all show some political feeling, and 
are clear indications that the two periodicals had political 
principles, or prejudices, which might not be attacked ?v r ith 
impunity, and which were held with sufficient conviction that 



















- 116 - 


any denial of them in a poem or essay blinded the critic to 
whatever literary merit the poem or essay might possess. 
Because the important romantic writers, with the exception 
of Lamb and Keats, were all involved in the politics of their 
day, the proportion of their works which contains political 
ideas, and receives political criticism, is certain to be 
high. It is impossible to study the biography or the poetry 
of Wordsworth, Coleridge, Southey, Byron, Scott, Kazlitt, 
Shelley, Hunt, Landor, or Crabbe, without studying something 
about the effect of the French Revolution on their thinking 
and writing, their attitude towards the Spanish usurpation, 


and to the agitation for Roman Catholic emancipation, or their 
views on the reform bills, 'Brinton, in the introduction to his 
valuable book on the political ideas of the English romanticists, 
wri'-s that n it is seldom , . , that a whole generation devotes 
itself '-.a-politics as fervently as did that of 1800 in England. n ^ 
There is not much need, then, to explain why the two reviews speak 
as they do of political works. Men like Jeffrey, Scott, Hazlitt, 
Brougham, and Southey took their politics very seriously indeed. 

One would not expect such an honest, thorough-going constitution¬ 
alist as was Southey by 1815 to greet with cries of joy works of 
Shelley, Hunt, or Hazlitt, which gnawed at the very fabric of 
the English constitution. For would one expect Jeffrey or Hazlitt, 
both of whom had a deep and abiding conviction that only rapid 



- 117 - 


improvement of social conditions would prevent in England a 
repetition of the French revolution, to regard with equanimity 
writing, whatever their merit as literature, which prevented or 
tended to prevent such improvement, and thereby threatened the 
nation with bloody calamity. The fear was not foolish or idle. 
Byron, no mean judge in political matters, thought revolution 
"inevitable,” and even Southey, before his Toryism over- 
whelmed him, writes to his friend Bedford, on Nov. 9, ISOS, 
as follows; "I am an enemy to any further concessions to the 
Catholics; I am a friend to the Church establishment. y3utj 
I wish for reform, because I cannot but see that all things are 
tending towards revolution, and nothing but reform can by any 
possibility prevent it." ^ Something has already been said in 
Chapter I to indicate the party connections of the two reviews. 
To explain their strong feelings in the articles on political 
or partly political works, some more complete information about 
their party sympathies must be provided. Accusations of polit¬ 
ical bias were often levelled at the reviews, particularly at 
the quarterly . There cannot be the smallest doubt that the 
Quarterly government connection was intimate and useful. Per¬ 
haps the most heart-felt indictment of the Quarterly f s supposed 
dishonesty comes from Hazlitt in his Letter to Gifford , where 
he answers Gifford’s savage reviews of The Px>und TabIs . The 
-j_ur£ct- : .-.-£ f r - . . -u ■ • flays , and Lectures on the English 

Poets , " Hazlitt tells Gifford at the beginning of the letter 











. 




* 

. 


’ 











118 - 


that "your clandestine connexion with persons high in office 
constantly influences your opinions, and alone gives importance 
to them. You are the Government Critic . a character nicely 
differing from that of a government spy - the invisible link, 
that connects literature with the police. It is your business 
to keep a strict eye over all writers who differ in opinion with 
his Majesty’s Ministers, and to measure their talents and at¬ 
tainments by the standard of their servility and meanness . . . 

The distinction of truth and falsehood you make no account of; 

6 

you mind only the distinction between Whig and Tory." 1 And 
so on for nearly three pages, all to the effect that "your 
praise or blame has nothing to do with the merits of a work, 
but with the party to which the writer belongs . . . w 1 and 
all in the most scurrilous tone imaginable. 

There is other evidence, more reliable than Hazlitt r s^to 
show the intimacy of the relationship between the Quarterly 
and the government. Scott’s letter to Ellis, Nov, 2, 1808, 
quoted above in Chapter I, provides some certain information, . 
"From the government," writes Scott, "we should be entitled to 
expect confidential communications as to points of fact (so far 

“N 

as fit to be make public; in our political disquisitions." 

The letter to Gifford of Oct. 25, 1808, which gives several. 


pages of advice on the editing of the Quarterly , contains a 
similar statement; "On this ground j that the proposed review 












1 


. 

. 

' 

' ' 

■ 

. . r. • - ^ 

1 


% 


. , ' ' < 

- 

£ • 

t « 











- 119 - 


willing to launch." ~ 4 Three days later, in another letter 
to Bedford, he writes that he feels it "imprudent and im¬ 
politic" to receive money from the government for his writ¬ 
ing, because "whatever might come from me would be received 

with suspicion." The same unwillingness to accept remun- 

15 

eration appears in a letter to Hickman, Sept. 20, 1816. J 
At the time of the establishment of the Quarterly . Southey 
wrote to Bedford, expressing his unwillingness to write 
political articles. xo The reason for this unwillingness, 
according to Southey’s son, who edits the letters, is that 
"the circumstance of there being reason to expect ’political 
information to be communicated from authentic sources, 7 
seemed to him to imply that silence would be observed on 

such points as it might be unpleasing to the ministry to have 

17 

strongly animadverted upon . a 

Evidence of any definite connection between the Edinburgh 
and the official opposition party is scarce, but to show that 
such a connection existed is not really necessary, for the 
Whiggery of the Edinburgh needed no stimulus from members of 
parliament. Certainly the Edinburgh, at its establishment, 
was not supported by official party Ehigs to the extent that 
the quarterly was by government members or ministers. Trie 


only certain piece of evidence that the Edinburgh was bound 








* 

- 


: t 

t ' . ' \ . 

.. V r-. ; L‘V : .i. ' L." 

■ (,• . 5 ; • ' ' k ■ : • -■ • 

■ 1 , 


_• 


< v. \ v - •• . •« ’■ : '• 



1 






. 








120 - 


to the official party appears in Scott’s invaluable letter 
to Gifford, Oct. 25, 180S, already several times referred to. 

roott Gif f jn i p, ! .»i ! ■:io ' "-^j- < t * ftgn .. l Mff i,j 'al ’ pa - W 

a g p w aw ■ in *s ipiTaaa t gl y lu Igt ' tei tu GlffUxO., Col. ;*5, ""ISO ' S , 

l 

a k v' "' ftO ' y ■■ a■, DraZ.M^ i Mfl < j . fe > » . Scott tells Gifford how 

important it is to the Quarterly that its editor and cont¬ 
ributors should be provided by the government with accurate 
information about state affairs, which could be made public 
first in the pages' of the Quarterly , In defence of this sug¬ 
gestion, Scott writes that "the opposition have regularly 
furnished the Edinburgh review with this command of facts so 
far as they themselves possessed them." ^ Scott, of course, 
was in a position to know, since he had been a contributor to 
the Edinburgh until the appearance of the Marmlon and Don 
Cevallos articles, and continued to be a close friend of Jef¬ 
frey even after his break with the review. A second clear in¬ 
dication of the strong party feeling of the Edinburgh appears 
in the preface to Jeffrey’s Contributions . The significant pas¬ 
sage is discussed in another connection elsewhere in this 
chapter; it is enough for the present to say that Jeffrey 
avows the political purpose of the Edinburgh , and emphasises 
the fact that by "politics" he "could mean nothing but party 


politics.» 


In the letter to Ellis which has been quoted 


21 














1 


ilriSSi s 




■ 

■ 

' : : 'X'& :l- ''f- 







'1 










-in¬ 


complete in Chapter I, Scott shows the alarm which he feels 
over the Ehiggery of the Edinburgh . He deplores the "flashy 
and bold character of the work," and the fact that very few 
have the sense to "separate the literature from the politics." ^ 

To this point, all the evidence indicates convincingly the 
presence of genuine party prejudice in both reviews. The Whig 
paper damns the reactionary romantic poets, and lauds the lib¬ 
eral ones; the Tory paper praises the "JLakemen" through thick 
and thin, but has no good word to say for the second generation 
of romantics. Both reviews acknowledge their political pred¬ 
elict ions. The Quarterly is so closely connected with the 
government that it can demand advance state information, and 
request the foreign secretary to contribute an article; the 
Edinburgh receives from the official opposition whatever in¬ 
formation it can provide. Each review accuses the other of 
prejudiced writing. Yet in spite of this overwhelming evidence, 
it is almost certain that, during this period, the great majority 
of the literary articles in both reviews were written without any 
conscious attempt to destroy an author solely because of his pol¬ 
itical attachments, and with a perfectly sincere desire to appraise 
his work, as a literary production, justly and impartially. 

To prove that the reviews had such a desire for impartiality, 
it will be necessary to show that the Edinburgh ? s poetic prin¬ 
ciples required its reviewers (chiefly Hazlitt and Jeffrey) to 
condemn the "Lakemen" and to praise the second generation of rom- 












I 






















. 




















. 

























- 122 - 


antics. It will also be necessary to show that the quarterly f s 
literary theories re-uired its reviewers to do the reverse. 

re launching on these two undertakings, it may be worthwhile 
to present a body of evidence which points to the reviews* in¬ 
dependence of outside influence, either of politicians or of 
booksellers. Publications which show such independence in their 
political reviewing, in spite of party attachments, are even more 
likely to have minds of their own in literary reviewing. 

The Edinburgh and the Quarterly were established, contrary to 
all periodical reviewing precedent, on principles of the strict¬ 
est independence. Scott describes the condition of reviewing, 
before the founding of the Edinburgh, in a letter to Ellis, Ifov, 
IS, ISOS, “The common Reviews, before the appearance of the 
Edinburgh, 1 * he writes, “had become extrei I 3 Lsh$ and unless 

when prompted by the .malice of the bookseller or reviewer, gave 
a dawdling, maudlin sort of applause to everything that reached 
even mediocrity. H ^ In the letter of advice to Gifford, Scott 
writes as j&Llowst “The reputation of the Edinburgh Review is 
chiefly owing to two circumstances. First that it is entirely 
uninfluenced by the booksellers who have continued to make most 
of the other reviews mere vehicles for advertising and puffing 
off their own publications or running down those of their rivals.” 
Scott recommends to Gifford that the f carter by maintain an in¬ 
dependence of bookseller like that of the Edinburgh . Brinton 
writes that “the reviews which the Edinburgh swept out of 





























' 0 












































- 123 - 


existence had been for the most, part dictated by the bookseller, 
and were mere puffs to produce a larger sale of their books." 

, ' is introduction to a collection of Jeffrey's con¬ 

tributions, states that earlier reviews than the Edinburgh, 
like the Monthly Review and the Critical Review - "were booksellers 1 
organs, under the strict supervision of booksellers and often 
by booksellers. They were used persist. _ v d 
lly, gh, of course, discreetly, to further the bookseller's 
business schemes, to quicken the sale in the case of a slow market, 
and to damage the publications of rivals," Gates describes these 
periodicals to explain the success of the Edinburgh > wh;‘ b. abandoned 
principles, or lack of ' 1 em,, f r 1 , Cockbur 

•ecords that "itjthe EdinburgEJwas distinguished in its outset 
from similar publications by its being kept quite independent of 

27 

booksellers, and by the high prices soon paid for the articles." ' 
Sydney Smith, in an undated letter to Constable, writes as follows 
to the doubting publisher? "I find everybody here . . , unanimous 
the Idea of its success ... It is notorious that all the • 
review^are the organs either of party or of booksellers. I have 
no manner of doubt that an able, intrepid, and independent re¬ 
view would be as useful to the public as it would be profitable 
to those who are engaged in it," 












Now two reviews which have made such an effort to free 
Ives of the influence of bookseller , . 
to allow themselves to fall under the equally pernicious in¬ 
fluence of party, not, at least, to the extent of bee or. ting 
vulgar party tools. Brougham writes that "from the charge of 
being a party tool . . , it 
Scott insists again and again that the Quarterly , although it 
must try to. counteract the i the Edinburgh, must 

not be bound within the narrow confines of party politics. To 
Murray, the A . ‘ li 1 f Quarterly , ' Nov, 2, 

ISOS; "The points on which I chiefly insisted with Mr, Gifford 
were that the review should be independent both as to book¬ 
selling and ministerial influences - meaning that we are not to 
be advocates of party through thick and thin, but to maintain 
constitutions,! principles." ■ To Ellis he writes in the same 
vein, Nov. IS, ISOS; "The political character of the Review 
, . , should be of a liberal and enlarged nature, resting upon 
principles - indulgent and conciliatory as far as possible 
upon mere party questions - but stern in detecting and ex- 
posing all attempts to sap our constitutional fabric." 

Southey too is insistent upon his independence in reviewing, 

Charles Southey writes of doubts crossing his father’s mind 
"as to the projected Revie?/ being sufficiently independent in its 

32 

politics for him to contribute to it with perfect satisfaction," 


Jthe Edinb ur 




was always free. 


oc 














- 125 - 


and elsewhere of his fathers n His views on most subjects, while 
from this time they gradually drew nearer to the Tory party, 
yet occasionally differed widely from them, and most certainly 
were never those of a blind, time-serving, and indiscriminating 
allegiance. In his contributions to the Quarterly these dif¬ 


ferences of opinion were broadly stated, and measures often 
recommended of a very different character to those which that 
party adopted,” 33 34 Southey himself, in a letter to Bed¬ 

ford, Nov, 17, ISOS, states that he will travel with the min¬ 
isters until ”our roads separate,” when he will leave them. 

Thus those who had most to do with establishing the principles 
upon which the reviews were to be operated - Jeffrey, Smith, 
and Brougham in the Edinburgh, Scott, r outhey, Gifford, and 
Murray in the Quarterly - all knew of the need for independ¬ 
ence, the Edinburgh men because they were interested in sup¬ 
porting the idea of universal liberalism - but not necessarily 
party Whiggerv - the Quarterly men because they had to fight 
fire with fire, and a great independent review with even great¬ 
er independence. 

The reviews were clearly established on principles of 
independence. It remains to be seen whether they practised 
these principles, and had good literary reasons for judging 


as they did. 














. 











' 













' 




126 - 


There is no difficulty about establishing Jeffrey T s reasons 
for disliking the "Lake” poets; he states them at length on at 

ies.£t four occasions* and inva iably bases his judgements on them, 

axr 

^exclusively literary, e 

them several times, and makes them his critical standard, one is 
convinced that they are a result of his mature consideration, and 
the authentic reason for his reviewing as he does. 

Jeffrey was a romantic; his delight was in the color and glow 
of poetry rather than in its form or design; he preferred stirring 
descriptions of great human passion to poetical discussions, how¬ 
ever well done, of metaphysical or moral ideas. Yet with his 
romanticism went a violent hatred of obscurity, mysticism, in¬ 
trospection, or anything which smacked of sentimentality (yet 
he gave favorable notice to Books I and II of ChiIde Harold ), Re 
constantly looked for example to Shakespeare and Milton, and re¬ 
sented most innovation in versification, diction, or subject. 

Any trifling with what he regarded as the inconsequential, or 
any exposition of an emotional or intellectual experience with 
which he himself was not familiar, he regarded as a travesty on 
poetical precept and literary law, and condemned heartily. 
Obscurity infuriated him; lengthy dissertation on psychological 
subtleties was to him mere prolixity, and generally hypocrisy. 

He liked the great, broad, brush strokes, and appreciated twenty- 



' 

, ■ 1 ‘ ■ • ’ i, ■. 1 .. . , 1 ' ’ : ■ '- 1 

, 0. * 'J r J-* -.V.-pIu' 1 ' ’ ' 1 ' 


5 0 .1 




0 






fi ^ : D.' 


0 


' 


<> 


4 


o 


J 


lok'.h ''i'r "o % m:s.o'y 





,tr. 


c 


* ■■ 3 , ^ :..i\' .i. 0 0 - ) » ■ ■ J 










r 


’ 


fox?!' 


! "S;\S ;X>. X 


/!-, 


OX" Xlrol 


d r 






, i ■ '■ : o ': < * 


nix' 0'/ 


1 . t ,i : 





- 127 - 


foot murals. Miniatures and delicate arabesques he did not 
understand, and, not understanding them, despised them. 

It is in the review of The Corsair that Jeffrey des¬ 
cribes his romantic theory of poetry. The passage has al- 
ready been discussed in some detail ^ but will bear re¬ 
capitulation. In Jeffrey’s view, the world’s literature 
has travelled, a not quite perfect circle, ending in the pre¬ 
sent day at a point somewhere near that at which it commenced 
its development. The first poetry, says Jeffrey, described 
the rough, rude, passions of men, which are the stuff of which 
real poetry is made. These descriptions, however, were not of 
the inner workings of the heart, but merely of the outward man¬ 
ifestations of its workings. As civilization progressed, 
(Jeffrey shares the idea of inevitable progress with other nine¬ 
teenth century ’Thigs) the rather coarse descriptions of early 
poets were abandoned, and replaced by a more refined and far 
less realistic kind of description. In recent times, though, 
these artificial descriptions have given place to something 
like the original ones of men’s fundamental passions - with 
this difference, that the modern poetry, instead of simply 
describing the outward signs, the visible passions, probes into 
the very hearts of men, and gives us ”ali the anatomy of their 
throbbing bosoms laid open to our gaze.” ”It is chiefly by 






j'„r■}':■ f.* 0 0 '/huf..: o‘v 

: ' ; (. ' 

'; .. ,! , i ■■ ■[. ; :■ . ' 1 r,: .tv ■ 


0‘/.iKlr 




_ 

• 1 ; - ■ • . ■■ ! ' • -■ 


j; ■ <, Po '■ 'o " 




: 0 >■ : : V : ■ 




’ 1 t ' - ' * V 




. • <■,: - - : ‘ . ■" 'i r 


5 


t .’! ' '■ <■ ’ ■ ' ’ •' * : " ’ '' 

m_[- j 0 ’ : - .) wrod.t ('"-Mao- 


uol' o- 




f r :" y; -H:t 


K ' ■ , ' ' . J ' . ' " 0 


. . ' 


:j- GD vj:•' j.1 'iOK V f i>U 0.HJ .Hr. i-MW 1 - 


! ! ' - 


. 






r ■■. '. '> ;.!■ ; * i n.<%f ' h dP ( oo.n ■ m 

■ '■■■■,! ' r >, v ■ r 1 jHI ■Hr H: 


. 





128 - 


these portraitures of the interior of human nature that the 

poetry of the present day is distinguished from all that 

preceded it," writes Jeffrey, The poetry of the preceding 

age he describes thus: ”... ingenious essays, elegant 

pieces of gallantry, and witty satires all stuck over with 

classical allusions , , , n Instead of these, he writes, we 

now have, n in our own popular poetry, the dreams of convicts, 

and the agonies of gypsy women , . , the exploits of buccaneers ; 

, , . pictures ... of remorse, revenge, insanity." The Corsair , 

which it is Jeffrey f s purpose in this review to praise, he cites as 

an example of the modern poetry which he describes, Jeffrey jud- 

Ir-Aduf, 

ged h - y. - ly about The Core air a but one can understand how a man 
who despised the niceness of the eighteenth century, and looked 
for magnificent descriptions of the interiors of throbbing 
bosoms, and, as he was to show later, was insensitive to the 
most penetrating of Wordsworth T s psychological and metaphysi¬ 
cal poetry, one can understand how such a man might be attract¬ 
ed to the sensationalism of Byron*s early work. 

The obvious question is why, if Jeffrey was a romantic in 
several of the essentials of romanticism, he did not like the 
work of Wordsworth, Southey> and Coleridge, Jeffrey is at some 
pains to answer this question fully; the first number of the 
Edinburgh contains, in the review of Thalaba , a systematic 











' r 


,ty.uJ“ Jj> r 'f • ri'vr.cj !.7> ::J: \f. 

r 


. 4 . 

T ,'v 1 , i . ;('D i': ; JJ j* ■f, [ j- - V.td *r ‘f 0;.':' ; 3. r 'i'O : •; «--0 ?“ .1 

v ; ; ; ' : t «*.r;' .: " i ■ ’ • , , , v.v >.'! 1 - •. • 





^ i 


Mo . 


XVr~-< x. ' 


t 




V, o'T't ! i;;-/3 f t£>.fi£f it 1 0 •. fi 
. ‘u ■ , ; r >•" m 


j 

' . y x'xX' . > 








S 1 i ; 


-* ;• \ ■ '■ ! f ' 

-y:,< ■. , ! / ,/ ’• ; ' r ; r"* \ c. > 0" ?■; ", h ■ ■:' J . ' 1 i !i: ir.; !. ■■0 

" ’ 

" 0,' ‘ MM"'"' ' <L , 

v . 


* : " r :. ; V'' Mi;' m ' ‘W 

. -am. 



- 129 - 


explanation of his aversion to the "Lakemen." Most of his 
objections are a natural outcome of his theory of romantic 
poetry, outlined above. The main fault in the work of the 
romantics, writes Jeffrey, and the fault which will prevent 
them from becoming poets as long as they continue to prac¬ 
tise it, is their insistence upon drawing their characters 
from low life, and on using the language of these vulgar 
people. It simply is not possible, he says, for persons of 
low degree to experience the great passions which it is the 
business of poetry to delineate, nor, even if they could 
experience them, is it possible for the language which they 
normally use to describe them. If one is thinking, as Jef¬ 
frey was, in terms of the ’‘great passions” of Byron's early 
heroes, then one must admit that Jeffrey is right. Moreover, 
believing that n low-bred heroes, interesting rustics” are in¬ 
capable of the feelings which he looked for in poetry, Jef¬ 
frey could hardly be expected to like ^ordsworth f s work, which 
was based on the theory that the passions appear in their most 
natural state in ordinary men, and are best described in the 
language of ordinary men. ” Their simplicity does nc^t consist, 
by any means,” writes Jeffrey, tt in the rejection of glaring or 
superfluous ornament 0 . . it consists, on the contrary, in a 
very great degree, in tl i ' bona a * : 'e rejection of' 




o : ; ;r.|i \Y ' V' i- ( "• ■. It. Xio r . : ' ' 

li; -K ; “ ' ' ' ' * • " • r •- I .0 <, : 

• i 'o' ■ ' r-:‘ - ■ < -'.V". . ■ 

~0 ’ 0 

■ : ' ; ' . !■■■:■ ■■ o r/ - i ‘ ■ 

: • : ' : i - ^ 

' • .f : ' * • • ' < 

I ;'v r;j ir,j l» ; A :^r " iW' (-:0V. (•■ ?' W\: :• '‘r-.O 

■■■> r o ■ ■■ " ’ v x i ■' '' ' •" . ■ * 

•o : : '■ ’ ' ' 1 * 


r 1 c £• t 

^ ■ ' ‘ ; r v * . ■■■''■. ' ■ t 

- " • ■ ,;)• . * : \ ' J. > : :'' 

- r j; • i r 'o“ 

1 1 O'. > ' JO 

rii o : < t . 


.1-i.r-v.oo 


; rv ’ : 




. c.i i: ro 


:■ : ; o.. ~ w1:8 ^«r-T M %am ■ ‘ip .• 

'-if: ! 'O t c' ' \ ■ 

« ■' ■/ , . , i’ ■: 

.... o - ! ■ \ 




art altogether." "The truth is," he writes, summing up his 
argument," that it is impossible to copy their diction or their 
sentiments correctly, in a serious composition; and this, not 
merely because poverty makes men ridiculous, but because just 
taste and refined sentiment are rarely to be met with among the 
uncultivated part of mankind; and a language, fitted for their 
expression, can still more rarely form any part of their 1 or- 

*■> rt 

dinary conversation T ." "The love, or grief, or indignation 
of an enlightened or refined character, is not only expressed 
in a different language, but i*s in itself a different emotion 
from the love, or grief, or anger of a clown, a tradesman, or 
a market ■ each," he writes elsewhere. Then the "Lakemen" try 
tc ring high passion from a low character, they must either 
fail altogether, or turn the low character into one who has 
"no sort of affinity to the real vulgar of this world . . . 

imaginary beings, whose characters and language are in cont- 

39 

rast with their situation." 

The fact is that Jeffrey did not believe that high pas¬ 
sion could be shown by low characters, whereas Wordsworth be¬ 
lieved that it could be .shewn best by them. Jeffrey did not 
think the language of simple men a good, vehicle for describing 

~w' d. 1 h'^ stated in writing, 

and Southey showed himself sympathetic tc the idea, that they 
could not be described in any other. 

There is enough in these differences of opinion to account 





- 






■ ■ ' ^ ' "< 

■ < ■ ■'.! • ' ' ■ c : o R.t ■ M.tt .. H 

,!' r ; ' Or'Sj *0 X ,i ’ .< < XlBlfl. • •; f ^ '' :0 " ' ht 

; ! . < • . " ■ ■; . v, : v; hr<' 

1 ' • ■' >' ' n , •: ' ■ 

r \ " ' ' • ' 


) ••r.. 










’ : r. 








■o 

,/o : I j 

'o r ’ ’ ’ 

- . . 

■ ■' - ‘■' ' ' :) 


' i t $ : 


‘ 


'• r .r;oo ' j. 


f 

' D< 


• ' 

,! t ' , ' ~ . 








0 


- 131 - 


for Jeffrey*s dislike of the w Lakefnem‘ w on purely literary 
grounds, but Jeffrey has further reason for his animosity* 

The •Lake” poets, he writes, strive constantly for effect, 
for dramatic intensity throughout their work. Since it is 
impossible to have “uncommon force and animation" equally 
parts of a poem, the "Lakemen" use i 
ideas, and wrap them "in a veil of mysterious and unintel¬ 
ligible language, which flows past with so much solemnity, 
that it is difficult- to believe it conveys nothing of any 
value." ^ Mystery and unintelligibility infuriated Jef¬ 
frey always, and brought down his sharpest censure. 

These criticisms of the "Lake" poets are in the review 
of Tbs h , yet Jeffrey makes it clear that his remarks are 
not directed exclusively at Southey. He writes at the begin¬ 
ning of the article that he is concerned with the whole shcool 
of poetry; later he states that Southey is not a serious of- 
languag which is simple to the point of 
affectation, and he finally reveals that "if we were in want 
of examples to illustrate the preceding observations, we 
should certainly look for them in the effusions of that'fpost 
who commemorates, with so much effect, the chattering of 
Harry Gill T e teeth . a ." Evidently Jeffrey was thinking chief¬ 
ly of fford swortb. To Shut hey *s' work he has another objection, 




') J 


% 


t ' o 










r > i, 0- 


0 0 


f 




1 


' o 




’ 








f. 1L o 


r; 



<, ■ " ° 





which he describes in the review of Ladcc. It is essentially 


the same objection which is still made to "outhey’s poetry. 

Southey, writes Jeffrey, is ambitious for renown, and goes to 

any lengths to gain it. His usual device is to innovate in 

subject, metre, and diction, to the point of ig paring all 

the precepts of poetry (which Jeffrey believes have been long 

established and are unchangeable). ”In matters of taste,” he 

3 S, ”we conceive that there are no discoveries to 

Mr. Southey would write incomparal ' tter, ays, 

possible to make him feel a little more respect for those who 

42 

have written before him with the most universal applause.” 
Jeffrey disliked Coleridge ’s work for the same reasons that he 

disliked Wordsworth’s. Christabftl , . the only poem of 

' 

Coleridge reviewed in the Edinburgh , is condemned for two 
reasons, both mentioned by Jeffi y Lr the Thalaba 
first, that it conceals an utter poverty of ideas under a cloak 
of bizarre, or, as Byron called it, ’’Wild and singularly origi 
language, and second, that it pretends to be mysterious and in¬ 
scrutable. There is no better instance of mystery arousing Jef¬ 
frey’s wrath; in his world there are no inexplicable influences 
or undiseoverable mysteries like the one which pervades Christ - 
abel . Looking for a moving description of human passion, Jeffrey 
finds only a mastiff bitch uttering significant but unexplained 
al d ilc 3k. tl beautie f the language he is quite 







_r; 


':: - v ..... "O' 












r i . 




) 




i . 




0 




deaf, and the poem to him is a ridiculous imposture. 


• Jeffrey objects to practically every one of the poetic 
theories advanced by Wordsworth in the preface to the Lyrical 
Ballads . and by Coleridge in Biograuhta Literaria . He objects 
he characters, the diction, the subjects, and the ver¬ 
sification of their poetry; he objects with particular vigor 
to the psychological and metaphysical obscurity of their work. 

In Southey’s early romances he dislikes the innovation which 
disregards all the principles of poetic composition. One can¬ 
not say that Jeffrey pronounced against the purely literary 
productions of the early romantic writers on any other grounds 
than purely literary ones, or that his criteria for judgement were 
in any way different from the literary principles which he ex¬ 
plains so often and so completely. 

The reviews in the Edinburgh of the later romantics are done 
either by Jeffrey or Hazlitt, and because the productions of 
these later men contain the sweeping descriptions of grand human 
passions which Jeffrey sought in poetry, both men write generally 
sympathetic reviews, Jeffrey leaves no doubt, in his review of 
Mdymion , that he still has before him the principles which guided 
his criticisms of Wordsworth, Coleridge, and c outhey. The poem 

is praised because it has adhered to poetical precept, because it 
is like the work of Fletcher, Jonson, Milton, and Shakespeare, and 










0 








■30 




f'.o'.rrj; Cipl 






c.. 

o.riri.: 


von;:: 


O': o 


Of!!);? 







: 0 '" '1 








- 134 - 


above all, because it has n created and imagined an entire 
new set of characters, and brought closely and minutely 
before us the loves and sorrows and perplexities of beings, 
with whose names and supernatural attributes we had long 
been familiar.” ^ It is similarly the "deep pathos" which 
appeals to him in lamia . The article contains a good deal 
of adverse criticism, all of the same qualities to which 
Jeffrey objected in the earlier romantics. Prolixity, ex¬ 
travagance, originality , i 

they are in Southey, “interminable wanderings, and excessive 
obscurity" as in Wordsworth and Coleridge. In writing of 
Hunt's Him! i , Jeffrey states that he likes the poem because 
"it is not like Mr. Wordsworth’s, which is metaphysical; nor 
like Mr..Coleridge’s, which is fantastical; nor like Mr. 
Southey’s, which is monastical.” ^ "Tiat Jeffrey likes 
about the poem is its union of "the voluptuous pathos of 
Boccaccio and Ariosto’s laughing graces." ^ Jeffrey looked 
for pathos in poetry; he despised metaphysics, fantasy, or 
monasticism. 

Hazli'tt is certainly responsible for only one article 
on the later romantics, and two on the earlier. (Shelley’s 
Posthumous Poems, Coleridge’s Lay Sermon 3 and Biorraphia 
literaria ) It is not necessary to discuss Hazlitt’s literary 








' : •: ^ ’ ’ 50 n ■ 

"•; : ‘ i ; *,; v;' ■" ■ r .K ;‘i '■ : : ^‘‘ ri ■ ' 0 ,"J ;0 ' it’ v. 

. 

I' o j' > n . . r .i 

r 

rfoI; i.’ 1 " o & rv; j'/l. 1 . t r’t II .. <•••? ? : •' : ' 

. , . ' 'os’, 

5 ■ : C, 




, 

t, 




• 





0! 0 




■■ «: :: 

' ' ' 



: 

: 





•'J- ’ 

t ' 1 

- 





. 









■ • : s . • ;• ’ I 


0 : o : I'v '.n ' ;o f 1 I■ I’ ' o' ' 

•I : f : ■ "■ : - . ' ' , j - * : 

; • ! ' . 





- 135 - 


opinions, because, had they not been much, like Jeffrey’s, 
Hazlitt would not have been contributing to the Edinburgh , 
and, we know that when Hazlitt submitted an article con¬ 
taining ideas with which Jeffrey did not agree, Jeffrey 
had no scruples about overwriting Hazlitt’s work to the 
point where modern editors include it among Jeffrey’s, and 
not Hazlitt’s productions. Hazlitt's review of Chrlstabel 
received this treatment, as did that of Hunt’s Rimini , 

Moore’s La 11a .1 kh, B; ' Sard ana pa lus . ’s anc 

Byron’s two poems, Loves of the Lngels . and Heaven and Earth . 
Thus the purely literary reviews of the romantics, both early 
and late, in the Edinburgh ■ a 

theories* That they are in any way influenced by his pol¬ 
itical theories there is no evidence. 

Evidently it was possible for Jeffrey to be a romantic in 
a good many parts of his literary taste, and at the same time 
to dislike some of the principal romantic poets on purely lit¬ 
erary grounds. In exactly the same way, it was possible for the 
Quarterly reviewers to be romantic in part of their taste, and 
yet object to the work of some of the romantic poets* To show 
why the luarterly men gave favorable notice to Hordsworth, 
Southey, and Coleridge, is not too difficult, but their treat¬ 
ment of Hazlitt, Hunt, Shelley, and Keats is a thornier problem. 












Vc .0 ■ •)' T r ' 4 

. ,! \ ; 

i : : o! • - ' i 

■'2 ' 1 ■ > .' :d ’ 

? v . 

X 

b r ■ | .I, . \ ■ * ' ' $ |t&& ■■.- ;1 ' ’ 

; ' <i 

j■ ’ ■ . ■: .■■ 

1 

o 


.' o, ■; 


D 




■■■or-v':" j. ■ 

t 

... -tv - , : ' ■’ -■ - c! 

■: .-■• ■ . v, .;■• , . ■ • ' 

, t : .<■ , : .' ■ ,;••• i .1 0.'.'- ; ■' ; 

■ '■ ' ' <. ;■ ' 

■ :. < 1 ^ . t : v' 





In the first place, it has already been shown that works 
which expressed political views were often criticized on 
political grounds, and that even the literary judgements 
in these reviews are unreliable. The articles in this 
category are Gifford’s on Hunt’s Foliage . Gifford’s on 
Hazlitt ! s Round Table , Table Talk , and Characters of 
Shakespeare , and John Taylor Coleridge Is on The Revolt ox 
Islam , and on Prometheus . The judgements in these must not 
be taken as a true indication of the quarterly position in 
literature. ^ The articles on purely literary works remain: 

Gifford’s on Hunt’s Rimini . Crcker’s on Keats’s Tndymion . 
and John Taylor Coleridge’s on Shelley’s Posthumous Foems . 
From these three one must decide whether the quarterly men 
had literary reasons for dismissing the later romantics as 
they did, or whether their harsh criticism was the result of 
a wish to destroy influential writers whose politics they 
thought to be harmful. 

Gifford’s Rimini article, and J. T. Coleridge’s on the 
:>st humous Poems are soon des.lt with. The first, although it 
is perhaps unnecessarily harsh, investigates the faults of' 
Hunt’s poem to the very bottom. There are quotations, long 
and short, with a most thorough tenting of faults of diction, 
even extending to a list of words which Hunt manufactured him* 
self, and of others which he has used incorrectly, ("an 

































•.' r . ; " ; '0 .£■: 

:/7 7 7 :v;,l ;j ‘ ! 


i :>■ *: "■' 

. O J .5'.’ '7 

t r,l:!j..uyr £ ,D. ? 77; 


3* n 


t 


, 












I . 

. 

i!.■ -■ o : ;.u<J 


r;. I 




,t rsi-, f? 

7 - ? 


•* .7 


■ ’ 1 

f: 7 7 j‘<i'7v sai 0 or ; .'V e.".r ; 7 

. 71- , " 777 n ’ ; r . 7 7b)< '■ t v 7 7 V T - 


, r; ' o t; .1 


■ 7 


t 

' 


* lin* 


;o7 f i;7; 





T 

7‘ r( ( fi;!7" ; t .>. 7" • : 7 4 7,iv.; 77'".v k- "" '''7- 7 7.7.777717,.LllS 

■v- J- 7:, ' ■■ r ' ’ ■' "7 ■ 7 : 7 „ 7,: ; . ■■ .,77 

T 

t C , ; ,-i-o : ' 7 ■ ' 7.' • 7 : 7 . iV ';( «■; 77/ <■ '' 




;• i: . r. i ' ' 0 !'■ ' • <. 










ungrammatical, unauthorized, chaotic jargon, such as we 
believe was never before spoken,'much less written") ^ 

The exposition of the poem f s weaknesses is complete, and 
entirely convincing. That the language of the poem is both 
slovenly and inept is a fact which no modern reader will 
deny. Nor can Gifford be accused of selecting passages 
which are particularly bad, because he quotes at great length - 
almost half the article consists of quotations - and one has no 
difficulty in finding many examples of the faults he mentions 
in the long passages which he quotes, quite apart from the 
shorter instances which he isolates for illustration. Hunt 
prefaces his poem with the assertion that it will possess 
" a great freedom of versification „ , . which neither Pope 
nor Johnson possessed, and of which 'they knew less than any' 
poets perhaps who ever-wrote f . M 51 Surely a challenge to any 
lively critic, J random example of the diction of 'Rimini 
which Gifford, found bad is the word "heave, B used by Hunt in 
the following ways: 

The deep talk heaves 

With heav ! d out tapestry the windows glow 
Then heave the croud 

And after a rude heave from side to side 
?■ e marble bridge comes heavina f 


’orth below 









■ t 


o' • o < 


j0p. 


5 


d 


0 


1 




i .''o t r 


o 


- i. ,t 1 


■O' c ■ ■ 


o - ! ’o'J 



,+ 


, 


' 


0 


1 




r 


. i 


JR 


V 


r<i 


o r 









Gifford saw, as readers of Hunt still see, that Himini is a 
bad poem. He said so, briefly and succinctly, and gave good 
reasons for his opinion. Gifford certainly did not like Hunt T s 
-es, e his , o\ 2d 

the dislike on sound literary grounds which posterity has sub¬ 
stantiated* There is no reason whatever for £ Latin/ 
literary dislike with the political one. Gifford had valid 
and distinct reasons for entertaining them both* 

J. T. Coleridge’s review of Shelley ! s posthumous poems 
is very short, and deals only with the translation of Faust . 

The critic suspects Shelley T s knowledge of German to have 
been ’’imperfect, 11 but he has some praise for the translation 
and the translator, who, 1 says, e better 

guid 1, The review is not a sharp one by any 
. •, and shows ly that the „ tart 1 ; 

capa f seeing some beauties in Shelley as Jeffrey was of 
seeing some in Wordsworth and Southey. 

Croker’s 2 I f ' „ V ■- is ot a fair oj e, b cause 
it is insensible to the beauties of the poem. But the art¬ 
icle does consist largely of an exposition of faults which 
really do exist in the poem. Thus Groker, if he did not fully 
app ciate Fndymion , Sid appreciate its shortcomings, just as 
Jeffrey ’as capable of perceiving much of the worst in Word¬ 
sworth, but only a small part of the best. McGill! } 11s 










’ !• • I f . l-p 


hrr ,• . ' r y ■' 




t 




. ''0 


< ! <■ 




ll- r w 




. 




d-i-is. 


doin' 




■ina ; d 


i. 


' 0 


c 1, 


0 


’0 ■ J'Vj: 


o 

. 


nldnunO an' 



* 



_ . ytical 

52 

m - ty,” and co 1 11 .. It i. \ E 

:’ n Blackwood ’c , which was "a supreme example of snobbish con¬ 
tempt and malevolence*" The reviewer cannot be accused of dis- 
honesty when he has produced sound reasons for daring the poem. 
There are no grounds Fox thinking that Croker d* lil 3 Endvmi m 

" ith his .lack of perception of the poem’s good equalities. The 
nndymion article is typical of the luarterlw fpinions of the 
d l e . Then Quarterly 

viewed a .on-political work of these romantics, they did not 
fail to produce sound reasons for their decisions, although 
they sometimes failed to perceive the good qualities of the 
work. 

Having shown that the 1uarterly had literary grounds for 
most of its literary judgements, it now remains to show exactly 
what these grounds were - why the Quarterly reviewers, by-and- 
large, held the reverse opinion to that held in the Tq inburyh 
men* This must be accompliJed by an examination of the Quarterly 
theory of poetry, which pj ear, . lid, 5. 

of the early romantics. Coleridge is almost excluded from the 
discussion, since the only notice of any significance which the 
‘ • • g-fv ’ ,n : The Remorse . f it is 




















! 


c '0 * 






)■■£"!: : • ■ ;:>jf X o; 


iloi tiilj 


- 140 - 


occupied with a treatise on the "Lake" school generally, The 
generalization of the Quarterly T s literary principles is further 
complicated by their being, not the principles of one man, as in 
the Edinburgh. but of several - and those of v a stly different 
temperament. 

The reasons for the Quarterly r s thinking as it does of 
Southey - apart from the obvious one that he was a voluminous 
contributor himself - are laid down clearly in the reviews of 
his work. There is no need to attribute the difference between 
' - - ar.3 Edinburgh pini f hi • " ‘ ‘ 

erary tastej both reviews have good evidence to support their 
likes and dislikes. Jeffrey’s main objection to Southey* 
was its novelty. Southey, he maintains, has departed far from 
the canons of good taste, and from the principle 3 try. 

It is precisely this novelty and innovation which the Quarterly 
writers find particularly attractive ii they* ’k. In the 
review of The three of Eehama , written by Scott, a long dis¬ 
cussion of the critics* insistence on the universal rules of 
try, and the poets’ refusal to acknowledge any such, is fol¬ 
lowed by a tacit acknowledgement that the poets are in the right, 
as follows; r, That nothing in this extraordinary poem might re- 
semble what had been, written before, the measure is of a kind 
ab solutely new in narrative poetry. It resembles that of 1 "• .alaba 











1 , ‘{If v , I: 0(:y'.0 : 

I 

, I ■ ' ' . : 1 ■ : < 


*f 1 B flit tp ' popo 
' ->fT.:t .‘16 Ve 

1 ;' , i:j OP J“; D j r '0 


J, - 


„ . ]■ ■. ' 

> _ ' 

r ■ •" 't n;, ■- " ' ' 1 ‘O 1 .: ' •' 

’ / - '' : ' '■ ° 


.U" •" ,t i 


n. or»Ai 


; : ■: : r-,- ; h.:,. -I'-t 

V :' V • , ; '.t ■ l "t r : V ' '■ 


. ‘ 


>f . i'd '.d v,nj:o : yf( 

i 


' 


■',£}.( : . 0 


■ 'J/i: ' r ,.0.’ t-'.. ' ■ 


- ■ . < I . <' o'' :? '.»*' t .I.;-*/'-":. M f ! " 

1 

; ^■ v: j oj '■ 

,.a " :,!■ J ytorJ 

,Vf ■". . v ' " <•? : ' ’ >1 ’ ■ ..£*.1':CiJ'* ; t mV : '‘ a ' ■ O.L 

I'M ft .' ' C 1 .J :P,t.! Uf>ot f ,".r! J'.rJ ■ . .'I 












in structure; but being in rhyme, although the coincidences are 
of irregular occurrence, it may be best compared to the pindarics 

hich, if it sometimes disappoints 
the ear, does at others unexpectedly form the happiest and most 
ul combinations of harmony, and is, 
its very wildness, excellently suited to the strange and ir¬ 
regular magnificence of the descriptions which it is employed 

r o 

to convey, 1 ' ^ 

In the review of Roderick , the Quarterly critic not only 
explains his views on novelty, but he contrasts them in an in¬ 
teresting way with views on the same subject expressed in the 
Edinburgh, Rome minds, he says, which 11 are in the habit of' 
classifying , n cannot comprehend that limits, because they never 
have boon passed, never will be. To the eye of the poet, nature 
is a wonderfully rich mine of material, and the poet’s genius 
has the power ?} to create and to people a world from his own 
imagination, 11 Tie writer goes on to say that “critics who ex- 
rcise their trade according to precedent only, and who would 
exclude all models but those sanctioned by antiquity and use, 
may deny the existence of this powerj or censure the employment 
of it, 'Such critics, he writes, belong to a school dom- 
the Lnl lerance.” The restrictions have 

not bothered those without imagination or enterprise, but “real 





DJ' \Q 






:;.l - ■■ i ; •' 















4 






■ : i ' \:0- 


f ' >0 C /" '/ 

... f 

JO[ s ~ ' 

- 'o' ’ 4 \ 4 

. -/,■ r , ' ' •) ; ' ’ 

' . • ' V ’ 

1 . • 7- 

nVv -io.‘ to ! -t-cU' - c7- r.n ' ' - ■/# . n ^cJ:, 

o. J ' . - ‘ . ■ 7: ■ ’ ' : " 


, 


, 


r -"!■ • '• .o •. '<•••. ■" -' '7 '1 • -•' .■ a : / v .• v, 

• 7 ' 4 : ’ ’ 4 0 • 

V, ■ - • sJ h'j "' ' h ' !o ’ ’ ’’or 1 • -■ ■> ; J'Q ■ 




' 





genius must have felt with indignation the pressure of the 

55 

fetters which art had forged and prescription rivetted,” 
w Real geniuscourse, is Southey, who was galled by Jef¬ 
frey’s strictures on innovation. Here, then, we have the 
Quarterly .oraisina 0outhey for the very reason the Edinburgh 
damns him. One review thought that there is still much to be 
learned about poetry, the other that the principles have all 
been discovered, whichever is right, it cannot be denied that 
both had sound and reasonable grounds for their opinion of 
Southey. c 'outhey definitely innovated. Scott and Ellis liked 
innovation; Jeffrey did not. Both reviews have examined 
Southey’s works carefully and both support their opinions 
with batteries of quotations and clear explanations. One 
cannot charge either periodical with not having good and 
sufficient literary grounds for its opinion. 

One of the lx literary principles is that in¬ 

novation and experimentation are not only desirable, but 
necessary, in poetry. As well as in the places mentioned 
above, this principle is expounded in the review of The 
Excursion ! ’’The causes which have prevented the poetry of 
Ivlr. "’’ordsworth from attaining its full share of popularity 
are to be found in the boldness and originality of his 
genius. The times are past when a poet could securely follow 










j. o. l[r ' ij' [ ! 


' 


:I „ v.''' -r- ; " r-' : ,:oi, - ' Ut ■ . ‘ r.«■ :t\ o" , ■ '-‘or ■'). 

; f ; 4 ■■■■'''■ \ ■ ■ 1 

<. t ^ ' 3 '• 

i. 

' r j; r • ;_c ' ‘ 1 . 

f" ■- \f : 

' ,v,' o ! -' ? • ’ ' ' - " . '■ ' 

' ; ' ' : "C ’’ •: ‘' ' 

■ :' r „i> ■’ ' 

. 




• . ' ' ' T ' oJ 

. r: * , ’;■/ I. 1 OfiJU'-'C ’ r r 1 0 : " 1 ’ 

~ ' v ' : r ■" ■' ’' ■ .. 1 . <L ,. 

ch ' t ' . ') ' r i i‘.<' ■ . ; i > ' :.: > i 

r^.r'f.r.r . ■>, . :C ■<< > (>r ; T' • 1 

- . . • ! £ J j h. 1 ’ * ■ - ■ ■ 

^ w.Kivv- ' v ' " .0 cr : 

* 

- •'., v rr . • 


v.[‘ :o <; . MjJOO .+ ~»0< .* i MI '• l '” . r •' 











- 143 - 


the direction of his own mind into whatever tracts it might 
lead.” It is expounded again in the review of Byrdn f s 
Corsair , where Byron is said to "possess, to a degree which 
must always command admiration, that originality which is the 
sure attribute of genius." ^ It is this acceptance of what 
is new which permits the Quarterly to receive, almost without 
murmur, ' such an extraordinary idea as Wordsworth ! s that the 
best poetical characters must be drawn from loo life, and that 
the best language of poetry is that of common people, Jeffrey 
rejected this novelty along with all others, but the Quarterly , 
having admitted that novelty generally is good, were well on the 
way to admitting the value of this particular one. The admis¬ 
sion finally comes, clear and distinct, in the review of The 
Excursion . "One objection," writes the reviewer, "it 
sible not to foresee. It will be asked, why put such eloquent 
discourse in the mouth of a pedlar? It might be answered that 
Mr. Wordsworth T s. plan required a character in humble life to be 
the organ of his philosophy. It was In harmony with the system 
and scenery of his poem, le read Fierce Plowman f s Creed, and the 
lowness of the tea her seems to add a simple dignity to the dec¬ 
ides, the poet has bestowed an unusual share of ed¬ 


ucation upon him. Is it too much to suppose that the author, at 







r 


! 


i i 


'3 






,f: 


C)' 


V 




t -f ' o : ' '■ .J ; ii'; 


* 


' 


oO v- ; i) r -o ’ 


r :f ... no , o 






..to 






. 


t 


rj> 




iTOf 



I 








- ■ 





V ! i I I 






some early period, of his lifd, may himself have known such 

his si ; 

another Burns; and that the dignified strains which he has 

attributed to the wanderer may be no more than r collections 

of his conversation, heightened only by the amplification 

59 

natural to poetry . 0 In like vein the reviewer defends 
Wordsworth’s frequent choice of children as subjects of poerns 
(this choice bore the brunt of an attack from Jeffrey) and 
censures thus those who blame Wordsworth for his vulgar 
characters: ,! If from living among simple mountaineers, from 
a daily intercourse with them, not upon the footing of a pat¬ 
ron, but in the character of an equal, he has detected, or 
imagines that he has detected, through the cloudy medium of 
their unlettered discourse, thoughts and apprehensions not 
vulgar; traits of patience and constancy, love unwearied and 
an heroic endurance, not unfit (as he may judge) to be made 
the subject of verse, he will be deemed a man of perverted 
genius ...” C/U The Quarterly reviewer admits as a literary 
principle that humble men and humble language may be the sub¬ 
jects and the vehicle of elevated pofctry. The Edinburgh does 
not admit such men and such language. Here,.then, is a. second 
reason why the Tuart• rly praises T-o^dsnorth when the ~dinburgh 
condemns him. Jeffrey, to be true to his poetical theories. 


cannot praise any poem which employs humble characters or simple 






r: on- 



* 

. i' ' %; • )0 r 









. 


; 'vi'X ■ 







’ 

i’ ru n 

• ’ r 1 .jo* 


1 o.’i ' 

' 





j: X 


V •' V r !U, , 

t 




. 


■.<‘:vo* : 





i d* 


- '0 . - ; 1 - 
: ■ ( .. . ;|r'‘ ' '• M H ' r X ' ' ?/’• ' 0‘/. 'c 


* i"i i ir 'i 1 ' rX • • ii: • . : ■ 

. 

, o ' t ! ; ' • ' > ’ ■'' '0 • r'-t i ' ' ; ^ : 

. . ' • r o r 1 1 ■ t .!• • o : 

* 

t 

^ - ! 'P . ' 

! __ r « * » ■ 

< ; ' - ■■ ' • -o' ' ' o-t • : '- r tXGiV.&l ,.f h! r.: c 

' 




language, nor does he do so. The Quarterly « believing in 
their poetical usefulness, can and does praise poems in which 
they appear. 

Wot only does the Jiarterly insist upon the need for 
innovation, and admit the use of low characters and simple 
language, but it is not at all dismayed by what Jeffrey con¬ 
demned in Wordsworth as mystical nonsense, nor does it condemn 
as inconsequential Wordsworth f s reflections upon apparently 
unimportant mental or emotional experiences, or as hypocritical 
his lengthy rnusings upon common natural objects. "To a mind 

E_cu axon 

, "the stream, the torrent, and the stirring le 
seem not merely to suggest associations of deity, but to.be 
a kind of speaking communication with it. He walks through, 
every forest, s ’ gl some Dodonaj and every bird that 
flits among the lea.ves, like that miraculous one in Tasso, 
but in language more intelligent, reveals to him far higher 
love-lays. In his poetry nothing ' ture is dead, lotion 

... To such a mind re say - call 
- if weal , *edly a fortunate one - 
the visible and audible things of creation present, not dim 
symbols, or curious emblems, which they have done at all times 
to those who have been gifted with the poetical faculty, but . 





1 






' 0 


r 


o i ' .. U< SCO 3' 




t 


* ' ‘ ' ” ''' ■* 

p our:. 










r *o 


■ ")i\ o' „ * p'\*-'' 


r v ^ 

. ? . r 'i- :o .. . i 

^sor^: l6'o'Jd : '^U';-o Mferd few&cf :p 



revelations and quick insights into the life within us, the 
pledge of immortality. n ' ^ These insights, says the reviewer, 
"cannot be lasting: it is enough for the purpose of the poet, 
if they are felt." Faith has grown up in Wordsworth, he goes 
on, '’fostered by meditation nd 3 -nely communion with Nature - 
an internal principle of lofty consciousness, which stamps upon 
his opinions and sentiments - - - the character of an expanded 
and generous Quakerism." This criticism of swcrth is 
remarkably modern. It finds in what Jeffrey dismisses as 
ysticism his g 

insight: it finds in those passages which Jeffrey calls prolix 
and hypocritical the truly elevated consciousness, and recognizes 

1 ! 3,. 1 cl ceded it, 

after metaphysical truth. 

Finally, the ' -rmlr .1: del i - = phati . lly " t T 

, ' 1 , y truth, 

thereby makes it clear that its poetical theories and thos« 
the Tdlrburph have :thing in common. Poetry does not travel 
cycle, 1 fcl Duarte ?ly revi P Tj 

is no more taste for the "unbridled passion" of mankind no. 
than there was in the last century. The operation which Jef¬ 
frey ccnsideres to be the height of poetry - the laying open of 
bing bos - 








r 









0ji 


5 


a 


:i'0 


* 



’ ■ 


4 .':o' •, : -o ' n ' 


v r x ..r i>; 


’o 






ox 




% 


1 





t 


; ; \lO 


i’;;: D 






?'6‘| 


.d'oi: i; 


3fJ| 







"the searcher 


ur;.oetical.Jeffrey fir.dt Byron at his best as 
of dark bosoms;" the Quarterly writer thinks him "least at¬ 
tractive, and least popular, whenever he attempts to execute 
this special office." No writer can probe into the seat and 
•■rigin of the passions, because in poetry, the passion is 
not in the bosom of the poetic character, but in that of 
, it ipti 

' mani .. .. 

Jeffrey contended that innovation in poetry is baa; 
the Jisnterly thought it indispensable. Jeffrey refused 
vulgar persons and vulgar language a place in poetry, and 
condemned work in which they appeared; the quarterly admitted 
the fr< ly. Jeffi „ al 11 hieh seemed to him 

obscure, mystical, or inconsequential; the Quarterly found 
the best of modern poetry in this verse. Jeffrey base® his 
criticisms of peetry on a cyclic theory; this theory the 
quarterly holds to be rubbish. One need look no further for 
an explanation of the' great differences between the two reviews. 
In the light of what constituted their two sets of poetical 
principles, it is manifestly absurd to say that the reviews 
j ed a man for his quaiitic Lg ... . ry, 

for what they thought to be his qualities as a poet. 










, 0 ' 

- 

"■ ■)! ■ i ■ ' .tr? r 'T 

" r O' : 






,.! • o o m 










l 




* 




. 'u, *0. f 

r ;■ ; .0 

. 

! ?.:i: 'V J 

. 

'" r ci : • o ■ '. u; > } - t '£ r[ 1* ■' vj i. ’. 

-;u ' ov..:I ;oo ihi r ::o Jr: 1' '".I 


o. 




7 !'7j r . ■; '!■ VK '• ■: 





It has now been shown v/hat opinions the two reviews held 
e | iced, how the opinions expressed in re¬ 
lit leal le, nd Leal 

attachment the review? had to cause this unreliability# r "omc 
external evidence of the reviews* political independence has 
produced, and the poetic theories of the Edinburgh and 
' Quarterly ’ Lned, showing 

explain, on purely literary grounds, the marked difference in 
opinion between the two reviews. The last task is to show 
what value these two reviews had in their own time, and what 
value they have to modern students of romantic poetry. 

The ~dinburgh arid the ^uarturly were distinguished in 
their own day by being the first literary reviews independent 
of the booksellers 1 influence. Instead of praising works which 
ing badly on the market, and revili 

1 ;ii , he Bdinl irgh ... the Q.ua . erly prai c 

blamed where their editors saw fit. The Edinburgh , which as 
...oboe by Constable, was not averse to writing the moderately 
vharp notice of Marnlon . also one of Constable, r s publications. 

1either did the Quarterly hesitate to write harshly of some of 
byron*s n rk, which, like the quarterly , was published by 
Murray of London.- 















<Zi ' a 




0 


o 


-id- 


i 







> 




t 


t. 


t 


d i: 



! 










It is the independence of the reviews, both of booksellers 


and Df , Lch Important in their own day, 

■ ’ wrote in ISOS that the Edinburgh was V 

literary opinion in Britain, and that the Aurterly must make 
a second. All the romantic writers - Scott, Wordsworth, 

‘idge, Keats, Shelley, and even Byron, in spite of his 
assumed indifference - waited expectantly for their works to 
ticed, for they knew that the 

honesty, and that the - popularity of the work hinged to a large 
extent on the favor bestowed upon it by them. The Edinburgh 
and the Quarterly mark the beginning of modern periodical 
reviewing. Now, as in their own day, they are worth notice 
because they acknowledged no limitations on their opinion, 
except the limitation imposed by those literary and political 
principles which they believed to be correct. 

It is doubtful if literary reviews like those in the 
Ddin hurgh and the Quart or 1- ould be much read if they appeared. 

.1. They are, in the first place, 
far too long for the modern taste; their pages of quotations 
alone would try the patience of present-day readers, moreover, 
there is y 1ittle ”impressionism” in the reviews. Jeffrey, 
Hazlitt, Brougham, Scott, Southey, and the rest are very little 
cone wi h iribing their personal reaction to a poem. T 








0 


r, s ,: v.r ,h 


X: o.* ■J"X :!■>' ii 


ojj : 


,D.r : V0 J , '.'0 




?T V P 


Xmv,- 


V o o 




- 150 - 


Tb-ay are more interested in how well the poem measures up to 
a set of literary principles - or political principled, if 
poem be pci'' leal - fhich they hold to be gc dj thus one can 
predict with fair accuracy what any of them will think of a 
poem. This style of reviewing, while it may want interest 
for an age nurtured in psychoanalysis, at least has the merit 
of some objectivity and consistency. 

Whether or not they would now receive popular applause, 
many of the reviews are tremendously rewarding reading. They 
are rewarding first becaus< tl „ cc tain the opinions of rom¬ 
anticism of men like Scott and -Southey who understood best 
its doctrine and discipline. They are also rewarding, even 
though they sometimes show a complete lack of sympathy with 

t, because their critical method is usually so soupd, \ 
and their style so attractive. One certainly cannot road 
article through without having a very good idea of the poem 
which it notices; the quotations are long, carefully chosen, 
and generally well supported by passages of explanation or 
summarisation; characteristic devices of style are isolated and 
illustrated with great discernment; the plan of the poem is 
always criticized in detail, and comments are made on the worth 
of the subject. Whatever one may think of the reviewer's opin¬ 
ion of the work, one is always provided with sufficient knowledge 



% 




O' 


d- 





0 ‘o' r! !■ o o' '. •' o 







0 




■ . 



o 


r 


4 


f 


4 


I ■ 


o V.r : : ,t- . 0 »' 


„• >v o'o: 


) 



4 


1 ! i,0 



o « 


00 


. ,1: 


> 






y 






4 




- 151 - 


to make one ’s own decision. There are very few signs in the 
reviews of conclusions reached on sketchy evidence. There is 
something very refreshing in Jeffrey’s sturdy reliance on his 
own mind and imagination. True, this reliance served him ill 
when he wrote of Wordsworth, but it enabled him to expose much 
of Touthey’s poetry for the nonsense that it is, and it was 
responsible for his pointing out the real weaknesses of many 
poems to whose beauties he was blind. 

Even in articles whose main purpose is to hack a writer 
with the political edge of the sword, there is s 
sound literary criticism. Gifford, does not fail to point out 
the reasons,,si to be good, why Hunt cannot be a 

groat poet, even though the critic is more concerned with Hunt’s 
T T higgery than with his poetry. The "d dymion article of Croker, 
blind and deaf though it is to the poem’s real merits, damns only 
on the grounds of real demerits* There are many, who, reading 
Jeffrey’s contemptuous review of Christabel , cannot but feel that 
the critic is to a point justified in what he says of the poem, 
even though posterity has reversed his decision. 

Deny as e may the accuracy of Jeffrey’s opinion of Christabel . 
and those of other reviewers whose opinions have been ’’proved” 
wrong by later critics and popular vote, we cannot deny that most 








I'.*. 

: 0 

r’off.'- "' ■ ' 


' ' ' D 


. o V .) 1 1 'Y/iO.i 


> . o. 




* 

<1 









*i,! 








}' 0 ’ ;■ 


■■ . ; a 

; : •' ; : IV‘ ; 

'■ " ' r r - ! 

v"" 


* ■ : 

"i.0 0' '••• \ {,- 

■' 


. 

b ■ -vo ‘ •' ' '0 "■ ; 


rTfO 1 '':: 


' ..as "■ N■ '"0 






,o 

;i.r . 


- 151 “ 


of the reviews are lively and. provocative reading. There is not much in 
the period to compare with Jeffrey*s and Hazlitt *s brilliant satires, 
Scott ! s quiet good humor, or Southey f s carefully worked-out analyses. 

The Edinburgh and the lua.-'.erly had to sell to a largely non-academic 
public. They were always at pains tc be J • : erasM g, or c 1o; 
often fail. Considering the number of works which they noticed during 
these twenty-sight years, and the large proportion of those works whose 
value and durability they estimated with what has since proven to 

acy, t admit fcl Edinburgh th< Qus _b_ ly 

men into the very highest order of reviewers. Firmly attached to 
political parties, often holding to narrow and rigid literary theories, 
not infrequently reviewing poets who were their personal friends, or 
particular enemies, they yet managed, more often than not, to judge 


with impartiality and discernment. They need no other praise. 






1 ' 

" T <• ' '■ ■; ' : '- rr 3* ' 



■ ■ . - ' 

' 

• : ; ■ . 1 t ' ’ ; 

' 1 1 . ' t 

\ : ■ ,s-i,y • ;■ ": ■ -- ./ v . ' : ! ; 

■ ' C r : 





- 153 - 


. S to Ohs j, ter c 


1. Jeffrey, Scott, and Brougham, and pc , to 

regard the literary part of the reviews as a thing quite 
apart from the political. Scott, writing to Ellis on Dec* 

15, 1808, (Scottfts Letters * Vol, II, p. 139) reports a con¬ 
versation which he had with Jeffrey: "Jeffrey, 11 he writes, 

"has offered terms of pacification, engaging that no party 
politics should again appear in his Review.' Jeffrey, in 
the preface to his contributions to the Edinburgh . compiled 
in 1843, denies that be ever offered such terms. (He had 
read the letter in Lockhart’s Life Scott. ) He denies also 
any recollection of the conversation, and writes that, 
although it may well have taken place, he certainly could not 
have made such a statement about the political tone of the 
Edinburgh . As editor, he says, he had no power so to restlet 
his contributors, and as a good party man, it would have been 
quite impossible for him to make a promise which might com¬ 
promise hi abi] itj to work for his j arty. Jeffrey insists 
that in 1808 he ould never have contemplated buying Scott’s 
neutrality at the price of excluding politics from the Ediniurgh . 
The significant part of the controversy is Scott’s further 
request to Jeffrey that the content of the review be made 
preponderantly literary. ”1 perfectly remember,” writes 
Jeffrey, 11 that, where urging upon me the expediency of 
making literature our great staple, and only indulging 
occasionally in those more exciting discussi s,ftl 
of party politics]I have repeat dly told him tha', with 
the political influence we had already acquired, this 
was not to be expected - and that by such a course the 
popularity and authority of Review would be fatally 
impaired, even for its literary judgements: - and upon 
one of these occasions, I am quite certain that I made 
use of this expression to him - *The Revie , 
has but two legs to stand on. Literature no doubt is 
one of them: But its Bight Leg is Politics. ’ Of this 

I have the clearest recollection. ,T (p. viii) Evidently 
both Jeffrey and Scott regarded articles on literary sub- 
those on political subjects as entirely distinct 
parts of reviewing, and Scott seemed to think that his 
purpose, which as to reduce the political influence of 
the Idjxdirgh,- ould best 1 accc nplis^ l by pea 
Jeffrey to concentrate his efforts and those of his con¬ 
tributors, on literary subjects. Jeffrey’s reply to Scott’s 
request indicates that he felt the heart of the review to be 
its expression of political opinion, and that literary articles 













15 / - 


were not a suitable vehicle for this expression. 

In his letters| ’' hows the same inclination 

.to distinguish between literary and political articles. 

In the letter of advice to Gifford he writes that the charge 
of the review ! s being conducted under ministerial influence 
"may be parried first by laboring the literary articles with 
as much pain as the political . . . The respect of the pub¬ 
lic may be maintained b± the impartiality of our criticism,” 
(Vol. II, p. 109) In the letter to Ellis of ? T ov. 2, 1808, 

(Se Chapt. I, p. J sott £ ... Ills thai 

the Edinburgh I •• 

dependent of its politics, it giv s the only valuable lit- 
iticisra which can be met with.” (Vol. II, p. 121) 

In t’ r same letter he contends that t-*.e ~- , h.rt 'i-Ip should 
1 n exc3 i ■ r | Lnc ' : ' ical, ” 1 li h 

a "work of c iticism conducted v.-ith equal talent, but upon 
sounder prise Ip lee that:, the* Edinburgh .” ... letter to bunny, 

• 2, 1808, ai ’ 1 art - 

■ f the work should be as sedulously attended to as the pol¬ 
itical, " (Vol. II, p. 124) and in another letter to Ellis, 

: 18, 1808, " ott - £ y thi pari 

religion, and its literature. T3 
reviews, he maintains, must be unprejudiced and inder 
c fchal the ' . I • ill acq ii a good putati 

circulation, and thereby a large audience for the political 
- ’ 5 ci , hich j II, p. 12?) 

Brougham emphasizes the distinction between the political and 
the literary by writing that "when itQihe Ed inburgh ] became as 
' politi ' literary, Ii rfctltud priglii 

less . . . C I , : lines , Y 1. I, p. 181.) 

seems to be a feeling that a review? properly has two parts: 

literary, tl lattei ri foi 

:..er. It argues for the’honesty of the literary reviewing that 
’r hh .t’ • IdInbureh and the heart r]p fished to male the.:’ »- 1 \t 
stive aking it i . b, botl liers 

party politics, 

i-nton, ... le English j . 

3. * above, Chapt. *”11, p, 

4. r outhey, C.C., Life...sad Go:.--.- m rlttcr^.f _ E ofaert . 

’ T oi. ii“:, i-t 11 

5. Zee Chapt, ’ T , p. 

6. Howe, P.F., The Complete ~orl:s of — l llam Hazlltt , v 0 l. Ih, 

P- 13 













a 






:: o 


«r 







0 











^ - 


















155 - 


7. 

TMri 

- ■ ~ * ) V* 

14 






Grierson, 

H 

c„ c., 

(cd.), 

The 

Letters 


Vol. II, 

r • 

122 




o 

To id., ,T 

bl. 

II, p. 

105 



10. 

Ibid., V 

bl. 

ii, p. 

106 



11.. 

Ibid., " 

bl. 

IT, P . 

127 



10 

• 

See Chapt 

. I 

, P. to 




13. 

See Chapt 

. T , tore 

7o. 



H. 

1 

q n 

cit., 

Vol. I 

V, p. 

203 

15. 

Ibid., Vol. 

r’, p. 

211 



16. 


bl. 

in, p 

. 132 > 

Nov. 

9, 1308 

17. 

Ibid, , 

bl. 

hi, p 

. 134 



13. 

See the description 

of their founding. 

19. 

- , 


. cit,., 

Vol. 

ii, p 

■. 105 

20. 

Note 1. 






rrl 

CM 

Jeffrey, 

Fra 

ncisContributions 

i to the 


p. viii 






22. 

Grierson, 

op 

. cit., 

Vol. 

ii, 

P- 121 

23. 

Ibid», Vo 

1. 

II, P . 

128 



24. 

Ibid., Vol. 

II, p. 

102 •- 3 




25. Brinton, op. nit . , p. 203 

, Lewi (ed,) , Select5 
Jeffrey, r, xxxiv 












% 




1 




1 ' 


i 


% 


C('i.t _ : r o 







t 


0 



r 


.« ■ * ! - t * 














•~7. CocVburn, "W- ui d Ch r iih'rce i I . urd Jef frt ,v , 
v 1. T; p. 133 

28. Ibid* 3 TT ol. I, p. 134 

29. Brougham, Lift- and T*/-, of rl»-.nry, Lord ] ••■.•:•, , ' T 1. I, 

p. 188 

30. Grierson, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 124 

31. Ibid., Vol. II, p. 127 

32. Southey, op . cit ., Vol. Ill, p, 184 

33. Ibid., Vol. Ill, p. 185 

34. Charles Southey goes on to explain, however, that 
Gifford exercised his editorial office vigorously in some 
of Southey’s articles. 

35. Ibid., Vol. Ill, p. 186 

36. See Chapt. Ill 

37. W, 1:65, Oct., 1802 

38. Ibid., p. 66-7 

39. hoc, cit, 

40 . rbid ., p. 70 

41. } 13»^, Oct., 1805 

The articles on Southey indi 

judg ed principles. Jeffrey is rather kind 

to Southey in the first, revie , that of Thalaba . but each 
Sd * burp;h article is progressively more violent in its den¬ 
unciation , until the last Oi.es on rT lslon ■•■■Z Judgement , Q'_ 
lav 3 the Laureate , and 3..- ; o- - ur-h ; ulo are mere snorts of 
contempt. The Inai^h; rly , significantly enough, after not¬ 
ic 3 g Lti od at( thi sis m The Curse of Kehama d Roderick, 
’ bhd if ‘ bry, 

fines itself to the safer realm of his prose, where he Was com¬ 
petent. The choice which faced the "uauteriy editors was 
either to damn one of their own contributors and main props, 




















■t 






v 


■ /*< *•-, r : 

C • ' ! < * t 


;;,!■ .? ; "jj;,V ue aa 1 '& t;,> 

) 

/■"■ ;■,•'■ • , i ■ 1 '' ' 




o;:.a 


* < 


* 

- 




,!..!■ : ’70,■ i 

V- 

s\-.'Ao ;l r V 







or to be dishonest, and praise what was manifestly bad 
poetry. They chose to do 'either, and instead turned to 
doing articles on The T T leV.ry nf r.ra-~ : l , mr ■ Ilf- • i 

]h L ey , d Tl_ r ' : • fjb] end.a r Wa r. E r c' 

ly the Quarterly saw, as tbe Edinburgh had seen, that 

: rl \ ing , . 

j ' ic i bl Edinburgh f s c a . It if 1 rue 
that Touthey’s increasing Toryism might * - . ■ ted 

for the Edinburgh T s increasingly bad opinicn of him, but 
it certainly does not account for the jurat r I;/ t u ceas¬ 
ing to notice him altogether. 

Southey himself did not seem to feel that the Edin¬ 
burgh was discriminating against him because of his pol- 
ttei . I, , 2 , 

( j^iie and Correspondence , Vol, II, p. 196 - 7) V com¬ 
ments on the Edinburgh article on THalaba . He feels, of 
cours , that he has been mistreated and misrepresented iu 
the reviev;, but he attributes the injustice to a perversion 
of taste in the reviewer, not to any political malice. ”1 
believe we are both classic* in our taste; n he writes, n Lut 
mine is of the Greek, theirs of the Latin school I am for 
the plainness of Hesiod and Homer, they for the richness and 
ornaments of Virgil. They want periwigs placed upon bald 
ideas, a narrative poem must have its connecting parts; it 
cannot be all interest and incident . . . 11 

aria , C c a 

b at ut the Christabel . tide, which, were it 
accurate, would prove fairly conclusively the presence of 
monstrous political prejudice in the literary reviewing 
of the Edinburgh, 

Chapter . ? Biographia hiterarla contains this in- 

formation about - Christabel : "In the ErV^L/urgh v rylow it t as 
assailed with a malignity and a spirit of personal hatred 
t to have injured only the work in which such a 
tirade appeared; and this review was generally attributed 
(whether rightly or no I know not) to a man, who both in 
my presence and in my absence has repeatedly pronounced it 
the finest poem in the language . v Coleridge is referring 
in this passage to Hazlitt, whom he thought wrote the re- 
t 

L 

Edinburgh! was, I am assured, written by Hazlitt,” (Letters 
;-p " , t, c. 7 ; Yol, II, p, 669) J , I t 




























:■ oi'*' - c : 'v:, ! vr.' '0 





159 - 


assumed that the passage was intended for him, and 
appended a long footnote to the review of Biograpbia 

Literaria in ' 1 _gh, 1 ing prai 

fh.rists.bel , and denying the authorship of its review. 

Had Coleridge been correct in thinking that Hazlitt 
- rote the review, his evidence that Hazlitt had praised 
the poem highly until the appearance of the review would 
indicate that political expedience caused Hazlitt to 
change his opinion of the poem so suddenly. However, 
e denies the possibility of Hazlitt f s authorship, 
and attributes the review to Jeffrey, in spite of his 
disclaimer. (Ho- - , Torks of Hazlitt . Vol. XVI, p. 420, 
te 3.) Since Jeffrey never prais 1 poem, no pol¬ 
itical implication may be drawn. 

Opinion on the authorship of the Chrislabel art¬ 
icle is not unanimous. Hartley Coleridge, editing hi 
father’s letters, seems to believe that Hazlitt was the 
author, "Not content with commissioning Hazlitt to re- 
■ book,” he writes in a footnote to Vol. 

669, ”Jeffrey appended a long footnote signed with his 
own initials, in which he indignantly repudiates the 
charge of personal animus , . . 31 But even this editor 
admits that ’’apart from internal evidence, there is nothing 
to prove that this article , , , was written by Hazlitt.” 

, i l d to above, states that internal 

evidence is lacking. 

See also the note on the authorship of the Cbristabsl 
article, Chapter II, p, 2, above. 

44. B t 

that ”he disliked Wordsworth’s-politics., and in those days 
that was a very powerful motive.” ( Political Ideas of the 
hi: IIeh l h- ■ >• > , p, 210) The absurdity of this 

statement is manifest in the light of Jeffrey’s avowed lit¬ 
erary principles. 

45. ER, 67s207, Aug., 1820 

. 40 . - , 52 • 4^^, Jure, 1816 

47. Ibid., p. 477 

48. See Howe, ™orks c-f Hazlitt , Vol. hVI, p. 420, cotes 2-6 
















160 - 


Even in the articles which show extreme political rancor, 
there are some signs of literary objectivity. Gifford's re- 

Hunt's Foliage, for instance, contains a not inconsid¬ 
erable amount of praise. One passage is ’’entitled to praise," 
another "must com© home, we think to the feelings of every 
father." (QR, 36:330, May, 1818) 

ft, 28; '.77, Jan., 1816 

Loc. cit. 

5 - cG1111 vray , J. R ., TR-t s , a B ib 11 ovra if- RnP- v< : nee OnV*: 
p. xxiv 

QR, 9:44, Feb., 1811 
QR, 25s86, Apr., 181.6 
Ibid*, P* S7 

QR, 23:110, Oct., 1814 
22:255, July, 18U 

The review ■ f Lyr-icel Ballads and The ^b.ito "oe contains 
a mild criticism of some of Rordsworth'a theories, 

QR, 23:111, Oct., 1814. 


Ibid,, 

P* no 

Ibid. 9 

p. 103 

Ibid. , 

P* 104 

See p. 

a7 

See p. 

7 










erreo 


Bibllorrap • ,v Of T?c c l- ■_ And _ ticL 


Teg t Totes 


ill rt C. (ed), et. al., 


:ra3 


" "ng 1 •> 0 , 


Tork, Appleton-Certury-Crofts Inc,, 1943. 

nton, C , T] _ 3 _l ij Id _e_ _C t]_ I Komi _ 

London, Oxford University Press, 1926. 

, I y, Life_ l Ti__ 1_y, Lord B_i. 1_, T York, 

Harper and Bros., 1371. 

Cockburn, Life and Co _sj ndence _ 4 ££ ~~ ~ , ' ' gh, 

Adam and Charles Black, 1852. 

t Hartley (ed.), Letters of 2:.4 Tj_1_; " ' 1 

Boston, Houghton, Mifflin and Col, 1895. 

Tj Edinburgh • (tl f 3 1 Lng bid ) 

Southey, Tholaba . Is63, Oct., 1302 

Scott, The Lay of the Last Minstr el. 11s 1, Apr,, ,1305 


Southey* hadoc , 13:1, Oct., 1805 

th, 1: ‘ m , Volumes, 23 14, Oct., 3 307 

Byron, Hours of Idleness, 22:182, Jan,, 1803 
Scott, Marmjxy, 23s 1, Apr., 1308 
Scott, - Ixl 7 1 ' L-' , 32s1, July, 1810 
y lit... , 34 * 429 9 Feb. t 

: cott, ^ TT * -lex : 2 Lor. " ^x--yy , 36 • 379 } Aig., 1 oil 
Byrcv, Oh lice Haro 3.1 ■, 381468, Feb,, 1812 
Byrcn, The Qlaour , 42s299 3 July, 1313 

• 1 , 44*447, J , 

Byi • , 0 X:-air ? 'x' ~ Br M - of Jl~~ 2 - ■ , £5 198, ., 183 , 


irdg rth, 


site 


no: 


/Ct. 


'818 


?f the Laureate : 3—_ 5n Huptiale . 52s 1, , 













































- 



' 










5 . 

















- 162 - 


Col Ldge, Christabel : X_ ' K1 - , 2 58, 

, C. Cani 

1c., 1816 

Coleridge, Lay ~ roan ., 5 x :444, Tec,, 1816 

.litt, Chi r c ' rs of " j 1 ■ 1 

Idge, Bic_ phia literaria. 56 s i88. 


b., 1816 


11 illo 


; Si i72, • B 
u £ , 3 1817 


" 3 


r i , «■} ryry 

77, 


1817 


8: , " ‘ . '88 , Canto r r , 59:87, June, 1818 

Keats, Lncbmon : Lamia; XvA • "la : P-. ..4 , , ' X 'V., 

Aug., 1820 


X a_ 1111, Lecture s on iV; Lra. atlc Literature of the Age of 
Elizabeth .. 68:438, ’"ov., 1820 

'4 - > Marion' Faliero : X' .. „ :X , 70:271, J 1y, 

y, A Vision of Juds _ t, 70*422, July, 18 

Fyron, "arcar-.apalus : X'- ?^ X’scxxrl x C ain , 72:413, X ’ ., 1822 

3yi j Axav a. . X. Lari'. , 75:27, Feb., 1823 
Shelley, + or’ bum a Pcc 80:494, July, 1824 


.), £ frc 

OiTr-rj » Poston, Linn and Co., 1834 

Grierson, H. G. C. (ed.), Tax Labors ,2 Ala ""alto Scott . 
London, Constable and Co., 1932 


Lady Holland, A Memoir of the XIo Sydney Smith . London, 

, Green, and Co., undated 

, P. P. (ed.), - "2 .;i X'lii.La -n.„ V ' ' } 

London, J. L. Lori and Sons, 1933 


, P, P., XX-. „AX , .... "'is: 2. XL^Illl , Lc do , Mi 

Seeker, 1928 





























- 163 - 


y, Fran i , : ■ H bc^fcl Sdin bi_j_ *, , 

Philadelphia, A. Hart, 1854 

J gs, Louis J., ' _• - . London, .. 

Hurray, 1884 


Lang, Andrew, The LIT and Le' : rs + J Gib pn Lockha ' , 
London, John C, Niiwno, 1897 

, John Gibson, M ■ f the Life of H.H’,: . ,H: rbt , 

Cambridge, Riverside Press, 1901 

Lc khart , John G., 1 a . .a H 1 . . - ' „ 'a KinsfoH , 

Tm. Blackwood, 1819 

HaeGillivray, J. R., II-a Is, a 8H-ll^yraHy - 1 re : Guile , 

Toronto, Uriversity Press, 1949 

The Quarterly Review : (the following articles) 

Southey, History of Rraall , 8s454, Hov., 1810 
Southey, Tl ! .: Hy;-a- cl' IHHama v 9140, b., I 
Scott, TH-: ^lol j•. of lc : ?..■ HoHck i 11:221, Oct., 1811 
Byron, Chiide Harold , 13:178, Mar., 1812 
Scott, Rokeby . 16:485, Lee., 1812 
Byron, The Giaour , 20;331* Jan., 1814 
Coleridge, The Remorse * 21:177, Apr., 1814 
Byron, The Corsair : La a , 22:428, July, 1814 
71 ordsworth, The Recursion , 23 s 100, Oct., 1814 
7 a it hoy. Is.I prick , 25: 8?, Apr., 1815 
Scott, The Ijord of the Isles , 26:2 87, July, 1815 
~crd•.rtIi, Lyrical Ballads ; TV. • Is , 27:201, C :■ t., 18If 

Hunt, The Story of IhH R i , 28:473, Jar,., 


1816 


























- 164 ~ 


Byron, ChiIdo Harold . Canto III, 311172, Dot., 1816 
Hazlitt, The Hound Table . 33s 154, Apr., 1817 
Hunt, Foliage, 3b:324, Jan, 1818 

Hazlitt, Characters if Shah ? neare 's flays . 31-458, Jan., 1816 

Keats, Endymion . 37:204, Apr., 1818 

Byre. , Chllde Harold , Car bo TJ , 37:215, Apr., 1818 

Hazlitt, Lectures on the Larltsh Poets . 38:424, July, 1818 

, l' 1 - !'• of 1' ~4 ' . 3, ., 

Hazlitt, Political Essays , 43:158, July, 1819 

Southey, Life of Fesley . 47s1, Oct., 1820 

Hazlitt, Table Talk . 51:103, Oct., 1821 

Shelley, Prometheus Unbound , 51:168, Oct., 1821 

M a ' ' . ' ' - ■-.'.-'-■.■a.-i.l ■ - L:T . ~ > 

54:476, July, 1822 

Southey, History- or the Peninsular Far . 57:53, Apr., 1823 

Shelley, Posthumous Poems , 67:136, June, 1826 

Coleridge, "Wallenstein , 70:518, Mar., 1827 

Held, Stuart, Sydney Smith , London, Sampson Low, Marston and Co., 
1396 

£ 11, G g W. E., 4. P- ? -LIP , Londo , Ma Mill - .1 Co., 

1905 

£ tt, Falter, .uior.s to Periodic. ,. 5.-P 

XVII XXI of . ■ P .a - •- ’ f rg , 

Cade11, 1834 

, 4 4 ,4 Sol idg r Bi ■_ . ’ 4. IP’ 1- j Lc don, 

Henry Frowde, 1907 



























m 












s 



i 





l 3 it 



% 



<t 




it 


I 




s 




Lth, Sydney, orks , London, Longmans, Green, Reader, and 
Dyer, 1869 

ut! v , C. C* ( 1.), • Li£® and _ ■. ~ 

5 o ,/ 1 ' don, I , Brown, Greei Longmans, 

1849 

White, Newman Ivey, Shelley » New York, Alfred ... 


Knopf, 1940 


































